Moonchild (Liber LXXXI, The Butterfly Net) (Aleister Crowley, 1929; public domain)
===============================================================================
Crowley's occult novel of a magical war over an unborn child — a roman-a-clef of the Golden Dawn and O.T.O. milieu, his major work of fiction. Source: Internet Archive.

MOONCHILD

(LIBER LXXXI - THE BUTTERFLY NET)

A PROLOGUE

by ALEISTER CROWLEY

AUTHOR'S NOTE

This book was written in 1917, during such leisure as my efforts to bring America into the War on
our side allowed me. Hence my illusions on the subject, and the sad showing of Simon Iff at the
end. Need | add that, as the book itself demonstrates beyond all doubt, all persons and incidents
are purely the figment of a disordered imagination?

London, 1929. A.C.
CONTENTS
CHAPTER. PAGE.
I. A CHINESE GOD 9
i A PHILOSOPHICAL DISQUISITION UPON 31
THE NATURE OF THE SOUL
iI TELEKINESIS: BEING THE ART OF MOVING 34
OB] ECTS AT A DISTANCE
iV LUNCH, AFTER ALL; AND A LUMINOUS 51
ACCOUNT OF THE FOURTH DIMENSION
V OF THE THING IN THE GARDEN; AND OF 6A
THE WAY OF THE TAO

OF A DINNER, WITH THE TALK OF DIVERS 79
GUESTS

Vi.

VIL.

VIII.

Xl.

Xl.

XIll.

XIV.

OF THE OATH OF LISA LA GIUFFRIA; AND
OF HER VIGIL IN THE CHAPEL OF
ABOMINATIONS

OF THE HOMUNCULUS; CONCLUSION OF THE
FORMER ARGUMENT CONCERNING THE
NATURE OF THE SOUL

HOW THEY BROUGHT THE BAD NEWS FROM
ARAGO TO QUINCAMPOIX; AND WHAT
ACTION WAS TAKEN THEREUPON

HOW THEY GATHERED THE SILK FOR THE
WEAVING OF THE BUTTERFLY-NET

OF THE MOON OF HONEY, AND ITS EVENTS;
WITH SUNDRY REMARKS ON MAGICK;

THE WHOLE ADORNED WITH MORAL
REFLECTIONS USEFUL TO THE YOUNG

OF BROTHER ONOFRIO, HIS STOUTNESS AND
VALIANCE; AND OF THE MISADVENTURES
THAT CAME THEREBY TO THE BLACK LODGE

OF THE PROGRESS OF THE GREAT EXPERIMENT;

NOT FORGETTING OUR FRIENDS LAST SEEN IN
PARIS, ABOUT WHOSE WELFARE MUCH ANXIETY

MUST HAVE BEEN FELT

AN INFORMATIVE DISCOURSE UPON THE
OCCULT CHARACTER OF THE MOON, HER
THREEFOLD NATURE, HER FOURFOLD
PHASES, AND HER EIGHT-AND-TWENTY
MANSIONS; WITH AN ACCOUNT OF THE
EVENTS THAT PRECEDED THE CLIMAX OF
THE GREAT EXPERIMENT, BUT ESPECIALLY
OF THE VISION OF ILIEL

91

104

117

132

145

157

171

185

XV.

XVI.

XVII.

XVIII.

XIX.
XX.

XX.

XXII.

OF DR. VESQUIT AND HIS COMPANIONS,
HOW THEY FARED IN THEIR WORK OF
NECROMANCY; AND OF A COUNCIL OF WAR
OF CYRIL GREY AND BROTHER ONOFRIO
WITH CERTAIN OPINIONS OF THE FORMER
UPON THE ART OF MAGICK

OF THE SPREADING OF THE BUTTERFLY-NET;

WITH A DELECTABLE DISCOURSE CONCERNING

DIVERS ORDERS OF BEING; AND OF THE
STATE OF THE LADY ILIEL, AND HER
DESIRES, AND OF THE SECOND VISION
THAT SHE HAD IN WAKING

OF THE REPORT WHICH EDWIN ARTHWAIT
MADE TO HIS CHIEF, AND OF THE DELIBERA-
TIONS OF THE BLACK LODGE THEREUPON;
AND OF THE CONSPIRACIES THEREBY CON-
CERTED; WITH A DISCOURSE UPON SORCERY

THE DARK SIDE OF THE MOON
THE GRAND BEWITCHMENT
WALPURGIS-NIGHT

OF THE RENEWAL OF THE GREAT ATTACK;
AND HOW IT FARED

OF A CERTAIN DAWN UPON OUR OLD FRIEND
THE BOULEVARD ARAGO; AND OF THE
LOVES OF LISA LA GIUFERIA AND ABDUL

BEY, HOW THEY PROSPERED. OF THE CON-
CLUSION OF THE FALSE ALARM OF THE
GREAT EXPERIMENT, AND OF A CONFER-
ENCE BETWEEN DOUGLAS AND HIS SUB-
ORDINATE

201

215

235

250
264
277

292

307

OF THE ARRIVAL OF A CHINESE GOD UPON
THE FIELD OF BATTLE; OF HIS SUCCESS
WITH HIS SUPERIORS: AND OF A SIGHT
WHICH HE SAW UPON THE ROAD TO PARIS.
ALSO OF THAT WHICH THEREBY CAME UNTO
HIM, AND OF THE END OF ALL THOSE
THINGS WHOSE EVENT BEGAT A CERTAIN
BEGINNING

XXIII. 322

MOONCHILD

CHAPTER |

A CHINESE GOD

LONDON, in England, the capital city of
the British Empire, is situated upon the
banks of the Thames. It is not likely that
these facts were unfamiliar to J ames Abbott
McNeill Whistler, a Scottish gentleman born
in America and resident in Paris but it is
certain that he did not appreciate them. For
he settled quietly down to discover a fact
which no one had previously observed;
namely, that it was very beautiful at night.
The man was steeped in Highland fantasy,
and he revealed London as Wrapt in a soft
haze of mystic beauty, a fairy tale of
delicacy and wistfulness.

It is here that the Fates showed
partiality; for London should rather have
been painted by Goya. The city is monstrous
and misshapen; its mystery is not a
brooding, but a conspiracy. And these truths
are evident above all to one who recognizes
that London's heart is Charing Cross.

For the old Cross, which is, even
technically, the centre of the city, is so in
sober moral geography. The Strand roars
toward Fleet Street, and so to Ludgate Hill,
crowned by St. Paul's Cathedral; Whitehall
sweeps down to Westminster Abbey and the

Houses of Parliament. Trafalgar Square,
which guards it at the third angle, saves it
to some extent from the modern banalities
of Piccadilly and Pall Mall, mere Georgian
sham stucco, not even rivals to [9] the
historic grandeur of the great religious
monuments, for Trafalgar really did make
history; but it is to be observed that Nelson,
on his monument, is careful to turn his gaze
upon the Thames. For here is the true life of
the city, the aorta of that great heart of
which London and Westminster are the
ventricles. Charing Cross Station, moreover,
is the only true Metropolitan terminus.
Euston, St. Pancras, and King's Cross merely
convey one to the provinces, even, perhaps,
to savage Scotland, as nude and barren to-
day as in the time of Dr. | ohnson; Victoria
and Paddington seem to serve the vices of
Brighton and Bournemouth in winter,
Maidenhead and Henley in summer.
Liverpool Street and Fenchurch Street are
mere suburban sewers; Waterloo is the
funereal antechamber to Woking; Great
Central is a "notion" imported, name and all,
from Broadway, by an enterprising kind of
railway Barnum, named Yerkes; nobody ever
goes there, except to golf at Sandy Lodge. If
there are any other terminals in London, |
forget them; clear proof of their
insignificance.

But Charing Cross dates from before the
Norman Conquest. Here Caesar scorned the
advances of Boadicea, who had come to the
station to meet him; and here St. Augustin
uttered his famous mot, "Non Angli, sed
angel."

Stay: there is no need to exaggerate.

Honestly, Charing Cross is the true link with
Europe, and therefore with history. It
understands its dignity and its destiny; the
Station officials never forget the story of
King Alfred and the cakes, and are too
wrapped in the cares of -- who knows what? -
- to pay any attention to the necessities of
would-be travellers. The speed of the trains
iS adjusted to that of the Roman Legions:
three miles per hour. And they are always
late, in honour of the immortal Fabius, "qui
cunctando restituit rem." [10]

This terminus is swathed in immemorial
gloom; it was in one of the waiting-rooms
that J ames Thomson conceived the idea for
his City of Dreadful Night; but it is still the
heart of London, throbbing with a clear
longing towards Paris. A man who goes to
Paris from Victoria will never reach Paris!
He will find only the city of the demi-
mondaine and the tourist.

It was not by appreciation of these facts,
it was not even by instinct, that Lavinia King
chose to arrive at Charing Cross. She was, in
her peculiar, esoteric style, the most
famous dancer in the world; and she was
about to poise upon one exquisite toe in
London, execute one blithe pirouette, and
leap to Petersburg. No: her reason for
alighting at Charing Cross was utterly
unconnected with any one of the facts
hitherto discussed; had you asked her, she
would have replied with her unusual smile,
insured for seventy-five thousand dollars,
that it was convenient for the Savoy Hotel.

So, on that October night, when London
almost shouted its pity and terror at the

poet, she only opened the windows of her
Suite because it was unseasonably hot. It
was nothing to her that they gave on to the
historic Temple Gardens; nothing that
London's favourite bridge for suicides
loomed dark beside the lighted span of the
railway.

She was merely bored with her friend
and constant companion, Lisa la Giuffria,
who had been celebrating her birthday for
twenty-three hours without cessation as Big
Ben tolled eleven.

Lisa was having her fortune told for the
eighth time that day by a lady so stout and
so iron-clad in corsets that any reliable
authority on high explosives might have
been tempted to hurl her into Temple
Gardens, lest a worse thing come unto him,
and so intoxicated that she was certainly
worth her weight in grape-juice to any
Temperance lecturer. [11]

The name of this lady was Amy Brough,
and she told the cards with resistless
reiteration. "You'll certainly have thirteen
birthday presents," she said, for the hundred
and thirteenth time, "and that means a
death in the family. Then there's a letter
about a journey; and there's something
about a dark man connected with a large
building. He is very tall, and | think there's a
journey coming to you -- something about a
letter. Yes; nine and three's twelve, and
one's thirteen; you'll certainly have thirteen
presents." "I've only had twelve,"
complained Lisa, who was tired, bored, and
peevish. "Oh, forget it! "snapped Lavinia
King from the window, "you've got an hour

to go, anyhow!" "| see something about a
large building," insisted Amy Brough, "I think
it means Hasty News." "That's
extraordinary!" cried Lisa, suddenly awake.
"That's what Bunyip said my dream last night
meant! That's absolutely wonderful! And to
think there are people who don't believe in
clairvoyance!"

From the depths of an armchair came a
sigh of infinite sadness "Gimme a peach!"
Harsh and hollow, the voice issued
cavernously from a lantern-jawed American
with blue cheeks. He was incongruously clad
in a Greek dress, with sandals. It is difficult
to find a philosophical reason for disliking
the combination of this costume with a
pronounced Chicago accent. But one does.
He was Lavinia's brother; he wore the
costume as an advertisement; it was part of
the family game. As he himself would
explain in confidence, it made people think
he was a fool, which enabled him to pick
their pockets while they were preoccupied
with this amiable delusion.

"Who said peaches?" observed a second
sleeper, a young | ewish artist of uncannily
clever powers of observation.

Lavinia King went from the window to
the table. [12] Four enormous silver bowls
occupied it. Three contained the finest
flowers to be bought in London, the tribute
of the natives to her talent; the fourth was
brimmed with peaches at four shillings a
peach. She threw one apiece to her brother
and the Knight of the Silver Point.

"| can't make out this J ack of Clubs,"

went on Amy Brough, "it's something about a
large building!"

Blaustein, the artist, buried his face and
his heavy curved spectacles in his peach.

"Yes, dearie," went on Amy, with a
hiccough, "there's a journey about a letter.
And nine and one's ten, and three's thirteen.
You'll get another present, dearie, as sure as
I'm sitting here."

"| really will?" asked Lisa, yawning.

"If | never take my hand off this table
again!"

"Oh, cut it out!" cried Lavinia. "I'm going
to bed!"

"If you go to bed on my birthday I'll never
speak to you again!"

"Oh, can t we do something?" said
Blaustein, who never did anything, anyhow,
but draw.

"Sing something!" said Lavinia's brother,
throwing away the peach-stone, and settling
himself again to sleep. Big Ben struck the
half hour. Big Ben is far too big to take any
notice of anything terrestrial. A change of
dynasty is nothing in his young life!

"Come in, for the land's sake!" cried
Lavinia King. Her quick ear had caught a
light Knock upon the door.

She had hoped for something exciting,
but it was only her private tame pianist, a

cadaverous individual with the manners of
an undertaker gone mad, the morals of a
stool-pigeon, and imagining himself a
bishop. [13]

"| had to wish you many happy returns,"
he said to Lisa, when he had greeted the
company in general, "and | wanted to
introduce my friend, Cyril Grey."

Every one was amazed. They only then
perceived that a second man had entered
the room without being heard or seen. This
individual was tall and thin, almost, as the
pianist; but he had the peculiar quality of
failing to attract attention. When they saw
him, he acted in the most conventional way
possible; a smile, and a bow, and a formal
handshake, and the right word of greeting.
But the moment that introductions were
over, he apparently vanished! The
conversation became general; Amy Brough
went to sleep; Blaustein took his leave;
Arnold King followed; the pianist rose for
the same purpose and looked round for his
friend. Only then did anyone observe that
he was seated on the floor with crossed
legs, perfectly indifferent to the company.

The effect of the discovery was
hypnotic. From being nothing in the room,
he became everything. Even Lavinia King,
who had wearied of the world at thirty, and
was now forty-three, saw that here was
something new to her. She looked at that
impassive face. The jaw was square, the
planes of the face curiously fiat. The mouth
was small, a poppy-petal of vermilion,
intensely sensuous. The nose was small and
rounded, but fine, and the life of the face

seemed concentrated in the nostrils. The
eyes were tiny and oblique, with strange
brows of defiance. A small tuft of
irrepressible hair upon the forehead started
up like a lone pine-tree on the slope of a
mountain; for with this exception, the man
was entirely bald; or, rather, clean-shaven,
for the scalp was grey. The skull was
extraordinarily narrow and long.

Again she looked at the eyes. They were
parallel, [14] focussed on infinity. The
pupils were pin-points. It was clear to her
that he saw nothing in the room. Her
dancer's vanity came to her rescue; she
moved in front of the still figure, and made
a mock obeisance. She might have done the
Same to a stone image.

To her astonishment, she found the hand
of Lisa on her shoulder. A look, half
shocked, half pious, was in her friend's eyes.
She found herself rudely pushed aside.
Turning, she saw Lisa squatting on the floor
opposite the visitor, with her eyes fixed
upon his. He remained apparently quite
unconscious of what was going on.

Lavinia King was flooded with a sudden
causeless anger. She plucked her pianist by
the arm, and drew him to the window-seat.

Rumour accused Lavinia of too close
intimacy with the musician: and rumour
does not always lie. She took advantage of
the situation to caress him. Monet-Knott,
for that was his name, took her action asa
matter of course. Her passion satisfied alike
his purse and his vanity; and, being without
temperament -- he was the curate type of

ladies' man -- he suited the dancer, who
would have found a more masterful lover in
her way. This creature could not even
excite the jealousy of the wealthy
automobile manufacturer who financed her.

But this night she could not concentrate
her thoughts upon him; they wandered
continually to the man on the floor. "Who is
he?" she whispered, rather fiercely, "what
did you say his name was?" "Cyril Grey,"
answered Monet-Knott, indifferently; "he's
probably the greatest man in England, in his
art." "And what's his art?" "Nobody knows,"
was the surprising reply, "he won't show
anything. He's the one big mystery of
London." "| never heard such nonsense, "
retorted the dancer, angrily; "anyhow, I'm
from Missouri!" The pianist stared. [15] "I
mean you've got to show me," she
explained; "he looks to me like One Big
Bluff! "Monet-Knott shrugged his shoulders;
he did not care to pursue that topic.

Suddenly Big Ben struck midnight. It
woke the room to normality. Cyril Grey
unwound himself, like a snake after six
months' sleep; but in a moment he was a
normal suave gentleman, all smiles and
bows again. He thanked Miss King for a very
pleasant evening; he only tore himself away
from a consideration of the lateness of the
hour---

"Do come again!" said Lavinia
sarcastically, "one doesn't often enjoy so
delightful a conversation."

"My birthday's over," moaned Lisa from
the floor, "and | haven't got my thirteenth

present. "

Amy Brough half woke up. ‘It's something
to do with a large building," she began and
broke off suddenly, abashed, she knew not
why.

"I'm always in at tea-time," said Lisa
suddenly to Cyril. He simpered over her
hand. Before they realized it, he had bowed
himself out of the room.

The three women looked at each other.
Suddenly Lavinia King began to laugh. It was
a harsh, unnatural performance: and for
some reason her friend took it amiss. She
went tempestuously into her bedroom, and
banged the door behind her.

Lavinia, almost equally cross, went into
the opposite room and called her maid. In
half-an-hour she was asleep. In the morning
she went in to see her friend. She found her
lying on the bed, still dressed, her eyes red
and haggard. She had not slept all night.
Amy Brough on the contrary, was still asleep
in the arm-chair. When she was roused, she
only muttered: "something about a journey
in a letter." Then she suddenly shook herself
and went off without a word to her place of
business in Bond [16]

Street. For she was the representative of
one of the great Paris dressmaking houses.

Lavinia King never knew how it was
managed; she never realized even that it
had been managed; hut that afternoon she
found herself inextricably bound to her
motor millionaire.

So Lisa was alone in the apartment. She
sat upon the couch, with great eyes, black
and lively, staring into eternity. Her black
hair coiled upon her head, plait over plait;
her dark skin glowed; her full mouth moved
continually.

She was not surprised when the door
opened without warning. Cyril Grey closed it
behind him, with swift stealth. She was
fascinated; she could not rise to greet him.
He came over to her, caught her throat in
both his hands, bent back her head, and,
taking her lips in his teeth, bit them bit
them almost through. It was a single
deliberate act: instantly he released her,
Sat down upon the couch by her, and made
some trivial remark about the weather. She
gazed at him in horror and amazement. He
took no notice; he poured out a flood of
small-talk -- theatres, politics, literature,
the latest news of art ---

Ultimately she recovered herself enough
to order tea when the maid knocked.

After tea -- another ordeal of small-talk --
she had made up her mind. Or, more
accurately, she had become conscious of
herself. She knew that she belonged to this
man, body and soul. Every trace of shame
departed; it was burnt out by the fire that
consumed her. She gave him a thousand
opportunities; she fought to turn his words
to serious things. He baffled her with his
shallow smile and ready tongue, that
twisted all topics to triviality. By six o'clock
she was morally on her knees before him;
she was imploring him to stay to dinner with
her. He refused. He was engaged' to dine

with a [17] Miss Badger in Cheyne Walk;
possibly he might telephone later, if he got
away early. She begged him to excuse
himself; he answered -- serious for the first
time -- that he never broke his word.

At last he rose to go. She clung to him.
He pretended mere embarrassment. She
became a tigress; he pretended innocence,
with that silly shallow smile.

He looked at his watch. Suddenly his
manner changed, like a flash. "I'll telephone
later, if | can," he said, with a sort of silky
ferocity, and flung her from him violently on
to the sofa.

He was gone. She lay upon the cushions,
and sobbed her heart out.

The whole evening was a nightmare for
her -- and also for Lavinia King.

The pianist, who had looked in with the
idea of dinner, was thrown out with
obj urgations. Why had he brought that cad,
that brute, that fool? Amy Brough was
caught by her fat wrists, and sat down to
the cards; but the first time that she said
"large building," was bundled bodily out of
the apartment. Finally, Lavinia was
astounded to have Lisa tell her that she
would not come to see her dance -- her only
appearance that season in London! It was
incredible. But when she had gone,
thoroughly huffed, Lisa threw on her wraps
to follow her; then changed her mind before
she had gone half way down the corridor.

Her evening was a tempest of

indecisions. When Big Ben sounded eleven
she was lying on the floor, collapsed. A
moment later the telephone rang. It was
Cyril Grey -- of course -- of course -- how
could it be any other?

"When are you likely to be in?" he was
asking. She could imagine the faint hateful
smile, as if she had Known it all her life."
Never!" she answered, [18] "I'm going to
Paris the first train to-morrow." "Then I'd
better come up now." The voice was
nonchalant as death -- or she would have
hung up the receiver. "You can't come now;
I'm undressed!" "Then when may | come?" It
was terrible, this antinony of persistence
with a stifled yawn! Her soul failed her.
"When you will," she murmured. The
receiver dropped from her hand; but she
Caught one word - the word "taxi."

In the morning, she awoke, almost a
corpse. He had come, and he had gone -- he
had not spoken a single word, not even
given a token that he would come again.
She told her maid to pack for Paris: but she
could not go. Instead, she fell ill. Hysteria
became neurasthenia; yet she knew that a
single word would cure her.

But no word came. Incidentally she
heard that Cyril Grey was playing golf at
Hoylake; she had a mad impulse to go to
find him; another to kill herself.

But Lavinia King, perceiving after many
days that something was wrong -- after
many days, for her thoughts rarely strayed
beyond the contemplation of her own
talents and amusements -- carried her off to

Paris. She needed her, anyhow, to play
hostess.

But three days after their arrival Lisa
received a postcard. It bore nothing but an
address and a question-mark. No signature;
she had never seen the handwriting; but she
knew. She snatched up her hat, and her
furs, and ran downstairs. Her car was at the
door; in ten minutes she was knocking at
the door of Cyril's studio.

He opened.

His arms were ready to receive her; but
she was on the floor, kissing his feet.

"My Chinese God! My Chinese God!" she
cried. [19]

"May | be permitted," observed Cyril,
earnestly, "to present my friend and master,
Mr. Simon Iff?"

Lisa looked up. She was in the presence
of aman, very old, but very alert and
active. She scrambled to her feet in
confusion.

"lam not really the master," said the old
man, cordially, "for our host is a Chinese
God, as it appears. | am merely a student of
Chinese Philosophy." [20]

CHAPTER Il

A PHILOSOPHICAL DISQUISITION UPON THE
NATURE OF THE SOUL.

"THERE is little difference - barring our
Occidental subtlety -- between Chinese
philosophy and English," observed Cyril
Grey. "The Chinese bury a man alive in an
ant heap; the English introduce him to a
woman."

Lisa la Giuffria was startled into
normality by the words. They were not
spoken in jest.

And she began to take stock of her
surroundings.

Cyril Grey himself was radically
changed. In fashionable London he had
worn a Claret-coloured suit, an enormous
grey butterfly tie hiding a soft silk collar. In
bohemian Paris his costume was diabolically
clerical in its formality. A frock coat, tightly
buttoned to the body, fell to the knees; its
cut was as severe as it was distinguished;
the trousers were of sober grey. A big black
four-in-hand tie was fastened about a tall
uncompromising collar by a cabochon
Sapphire so dark as to be hardly noticeable.
A rimless monocle was fixed in his right
eye. His manner had changed to parallel his
dress. The supercilious air was gone; the
smile was gone. He might have been a
diplomatist at the crisis of an empire: he
looked even more like a duellist.

The studio in which she stood was
situated on the Boulevard Arago, below the
Sante' prison. It was reached from the road
through am archway, which [21] opened
upon an oblong patch of garden. Across
this, a row of studios nestled; and behind
these again were other gardens, one to
each studio, whose gates gave on to a tiny
pathway. It was not only private -- it was
rural. One might have been ten miles from
the city limits.

The studio itself was severely elegant --
simplex munditiis; its walls were concealed
by dull tapestries. In the centre of the room
stood a square carved ebony table, matched
by a sideboard in the west and a writing-
desk in the east.

Four chairs with high Gothic backs stood
about the table; in the north was a divan,
covered with the pelt of a Polar bear. The
floor was also furred, but with black bears
from the Himalayas. On the table stood a
Burmese dragon of dark green bronze. The
smoke of incense issued from its mouth.

But Simon Iff was the strangest object in
that strange room. She had heard of him, of
course; he was known for his writings on
mysticism and had long borne the
reputation of a crank. But in the last few
years he had chosen to use his abilities in
ways intelligible to the average man; it was
he who had saved Professor Briggs, and,
incidentally, England when that genius had
been accused of and condemned to death
for, murder, but was too preoccupied with
the theory of his new flying-machine to
notice that his fellows were about to hang

him. And it was he who had solved a dozen
other mysteries of crime, with apparently
no other resource than pure capacity to
analyse the minds of men. People had
consequently begun to revise their opinions
of him; they even began to read his books.
But the man himself remained unspeakably
mysterious. He had a habit of disappearing
for long periods, and it was rumoured that
he had the secret of the Elixir of Life. For
although he was known to be over eighty
years of age, [22] his brightness and activity
would have done credit to a man of forty;
and the vitality of his whole being, the fire
of his eyes, the quick conciseness of his
mind, bore witness to an interior energy
almost more than human.

He was a small man, dressed carelessly
in a blue serge suit with a narrow dark red
tie. His iron-grey hair was curly and
irrepressible; his complexion, although
wrinkled, was clear and healthy; his small
mouth was a moving wreath of smiles; and
his whole being radiated an intense and
contagious happiness.

His greeting to Lisa had been more than
cordial; at Cyril's remark he took her
friendlily by the arm, and sat her down on
the divan." I'm sure you smoke," he said,
"never mind Cyril! Try one of these; they
come from the Khedive's own man."

He extracted an immense cigar-case
from his pocket. One side was full of long
Partagas, the other of cigarettes. "These
are musk scented the dark ones; the
yellowish kind are ambergris; and the thin
white ones are scented with attar of roses."

Lisa hesitated; then she chose the
ambergris. The old man laughed happily.

") ust the right choice: the Middle Way! Now
| Know we are going to be friends." He lit
her cigarette, and his own cigar. "l know
what is in your mind, my dear young lady:
you are thinking that two's company and
three's none; and | agree; but we are going
to put that right by asking Brother Cyril to
study his Qabalah for a little; for before
leaving him in the ant-heap -- he has really
a shocking turn of mind -- | want a little
chat with you. You see, you are one of Us
now, my dear."

"| don't understand," uttered the girl,
rather angrily, as Cyril obediently went to
his desk, pulled a large square volume out
of it, and became immediately engrossed.
[23]

Brother Cyril has told me of your three
interviews with him, and |! am perfectly
prepared to give a description of your mind.
You are in rude health, and yet you are
hysterical; you are fascinated and subdued
by all things weird and unusual, though to
the world you hold yourself so high, proud,
and passionate. You need love, it is true; so
much you know yourself; and you know also
that no common love attracts you; you need
the sensational, the bizarre, the unique.
But perhaps you do not understand what is
at the root of that passion. | will tell you.
You have an inexpressible hunger of the
soul; you despise earth and its delusions;
and you aspire unconsciously to at higher
life than anything this planet can offer.

"| will tell you something that may

convince you of my right to speak. You were
born on October the eleventh; so Brother
Cyril told me. But he did not tell me the
hour; you never told him; it was a little
before sunrise. "

Lisa was taken aback; the mystic had
guessed right.

"The Order to which | belong," pursued
Simon Iff," does not believe anything; it
knows, or it doubts, as the case may be;
and it seeks ever to increase human
knowledge by the method of science, that Is
to say by observation and experiment.
Therefore you must not expect me to
satisfy your real craving by answering your
questions as to the existence of the Soul;
but | will tell you what | know, and can
prove; further, what hypotheses seem
worthy of consideration; lastly what
experiments ought to be tried. For it is in
this last matter that you can aid us; and
with this in mind | have come up from St.

J ean de Luz to see you."

Lisa's eyes danced with pleasure. "Do
you know," she cried, "you are the first man
that ever understood me?" [24]

"Let me see whether | do understand you
fully. | know very little of your life. You are
half Italian, evidently; the other half
probably Irish."

"Quite right."
"You come of peasant stock, but you

were brought up in refined surroundings,
and your nature developed on the best lines

possible without check. You married early."

"Yes; but there was trouble. | divorced
my husband, and married again two years
later."

"That was the Marquis la Giuffria?"
"Ves. ll

"Well, then, you left him, although he
was a good husband, and devoted to you, to
throw in your lot with Lavinia King."

"| have lived with her for five years,
almost to a month."

"Then why? | used to know her pretty
well myself. She was, even in those days,
heartless, and mercenary; she was a
sponger, the worst type of courtezan; and
she was an intolerable poseuse. Every word
of hers must have disgusted you. Yet you
stick to her closer than a brother."

"That's all true! But she's a sublime
genius, the greatest artist the world has
ever seen."

"She has a genius," distinguished Simon
Iff. "Her dancing is a species of angelic
possession, if | may coin a phrase. She
comes off the stage from an interpretation
of the subtlest and most spiritual music of
Chopin or Tschaikowsky; and forthwith
proceeds to scold, to wheedle, or to
blackmail. Can you explain that reasonably
by talking of “two sides to her character’? It
iS nonsense to do so. The only analogy is
that of a noble thinker and his stupid,

dishonest, and immoral secretary. The
dictation is taken down correctly, and given
to the world. The last person to be
enlightened by it is the secretary [25]
himself! So, | take it, is the case with all
genius; only in many cases the man is in
more or less conscious harmony with his
genius, and strives eternally to make
himself a worthier instrument for his
master's touch. The clever man, so-called,
the man of talent, shuts out his genius by
setting up his conscious will as a positive
entity. The true man of genius deliberately
subordinates himself, reduces himself to a
negative, and allows his genius to play
through him as It will. We all know how
stupid we are when we try to do things.
Seek to make any other muscle work as
consistently as your heart does without your
silly interference -- you cannot keep it up
for forty-eight hours. (| forget what the
record Is, but it's not much over twenty-
four.) All this, which is truth ascertained
and certain, lies at the base of the Taoistic
doctrine of non-action; the plan of a doing
everything by seeming to do nothing. Yield
yourself utterly to the Will of Heaven, and
you become the omnipotent instrument of
that Will. Most systems of mysticism have a
similar doctrine; but that it is true in action
Is only properly expressed by the Chinese.
Nothing that any man can do will improve
that genius; but the genius needs his mind,
and he can broaden that mind, fertilize it
with knowledge of all kinds, improve its
powers of expression; supply the genius, in
short, with an orchestra instead of a tin
whistle. All our little great men, our one-
poem poets, our one-picture painters, have
merely failed to perfect themselves as

instruments. The Genius who wrote The
Ancient Mariner is no less sublime than he
who wrote The Tempest; but Coleridge had
some incapacity to catch and express the
thoughts of his genius -- was ever such
wooden stuff as his conscious work? -- while
Shakespeare had the knack of acquiring the
knowledge necessary to the expression of
every conceivable harmony, and his
technique was sufficiently fluent [26] to
transcribe with ease. Thus we have two
equal angels, one with a good secretary,
the other with a bad one. | think this is the
only explanation of genius -- in the extreme
case of Lavinia King it stands out as the one
thing thinkable."

Lisa la Giuffria listened with constantly
growing surprise and enthusiasm.

"| don't say," went on the mystic, "that
the genius and his artist are not inseparably
connected. It may be a little more closely
than the horse and his rider. But there is at
least a distinction to be drawn. And here is
a point for you to consider: the genius
appears to have all knowledge, all
illumination, and to be limited merely by
the powers of his medium's mind. Even this
is not always a bar: how often do we see a
writer gasp at his own work? 'l never knew
that,' he cries, amazed, although only a
minute previously he has written it down in
plain English. In short, the genius appears
to be a being of another plane, a soul of
light and immortality! | know that much of
this may be explained by supposing what |
have called the genius to be a bodily
substance in which the consciousness of the
whole race (in his particular time) may

become active under certain stimuli. There
is much to be said for this view; language
itself confirms it; for the words ‘to know,
‘gnosis,' are merely sub-echoes of the first
cries implying generation in the physical
sense; for the root GAN means ‘to know'
only in the second place; its original sense
iS ‘to beget.’ Similarly ‘spirit’ only means
‘breath’; ‘divine' and most other words of
identical purport imply no more than
shining.’ So it is one of the limitations of
our minds that we are fettered by language
to the crude ideas of our savage ancestors;
and we ought to be free to investigate
whether there may not be something in the
evolution of language besides a monkey-
trick of metaphysical [27] abstractions;
whether, in short, men have not been right
to sophisticate primitive ideas; whether the
growth of language is not evidence of a true
growth of knowledge; whether, when all is
said and done, there may not be some valid
evidence for the existence of a soul."

"The soul!" exclaimed Lisa, joyfully. "Oh,
| believe in the soul!"

"Very improper!" rejoined the mystic;
"Belief is the enemy of knowledge. Skeat
tells us that Soul probably comes from SU,
to beget."

"| wish you would speak simply to me,
you lift me up, and throw me down again all
the time."

"Only because you try to build without
foundations. Now | am going to try to show
you some good reasons for thinking that the
soul exists, and is omniscient and immortal,

other than that about genius which we have
discussed already. | am not going to bore
you with the arguments of Socrates, for,
although, as a member of the Hemlock
Club, which he founded, | perhaps ought
not to say so, the Phaedo Is a tissue of the
silliest sophistry.

"But | am going to tell you one curious
fact in medicine. In certain cases of
dementia, where the mind has long been
gone, and where subsequent examination
has shown the brain to be definitely
degenerated, there sometimes occur
moments of complete lucidity, where the
man Is in possession of his full powers. If
the mind depended absolutely on the
physical condition of the brain, this would
be difficult to explain.

"Science, too, is beginning to discover
that in various abnormal circumstances,
totally different personalities may chase
each other through a single body. Do you
know what is the great difficulty with
regard to spiritualism? It is that of proving
the identity of the dead man. In practice,
since we [28] have lost the sense of smell
on which dogs, for instance, principally
rely, we judge that a man is himself either
by anthropometric methods, which have
nothing to do with the mind or the
personality, or by the sound of the voice, or
by the handwriting, or by the contents of
the mind. In the case of a dead man, only
the last method is available. And here we
are tossed on a dilemma. Either the ‘spirit’
says something which he is known to have
known during his life, or something else. In
the first case, somebody else must have

known it, and may conceivably have
informed the medium; in the second case,
it is rather disproof than proof of the
identity!

"Various plans have been proposed to
avoid this difficulty; notably the device of
the sealed letter to be opened a year after
death. Any medium divulging the contents
before that date receives the felicitations
of her critics. So far no one has succeeded,
though success would mean many thousands
of pounds in the medium's pocket; but even
if it happened, proof of survival would still
be lacking. Clairvoyance, telepathy,
guesswork-there are plenty of alternative
explanations.

"Then there is the elaborate method of
cross-correspondences: | won't bore you
with that; Brother Cyril will have plenty of
time to talk to you at Naples."

Lisa sat up with a shock. Despite her
interest in the subject, her brain had tired.
The last words galvanized her.

"| shall explain after lunch, " continued
the mystic, lighting a third Partaga;
"meanwhile, | have wandered slightly from
the subject, as you were too polite to
remark. | was going to show you how a soul
with a weak hold on its tenant could be
expelled by another; how, indeed, half-a-
dozen personalities could take turns to live
in one body. That they are [29] real,
independent souls is shown by the fact that
not only do the contents of the mind differ --
which might conceivably be a fake but their
handwritings, their voices, and that in ways

which are quite beyond anything we know
in the way of conscious simulation, or even
possible simulation.

"These personalities are constant
quantities; they depart and return
unchanged. It is then sure that they do not
exist merely by manifestation; they need no
body for existence."

"You are coming back to the theory of
possession, like the Gadarene swine," cried
Lisa, delighted. she could hardly say why.

Cyril Grey interrupted the conversation
for the first time. He swung round in his
arm chair, and deliberately cleared his
throat while he refixed his eyeglass.

"In these days," he observed, "when
devils enter into swine, they do not rush
violently down a steep place. They call
themselves moral reformers, and vote the
Prohibition ticket." He shut up with a snap,
swung his chair round again, and returned
to the study of his big square book.

"| hope you realize," remarked Simon Iff,
"what you have let yourself in for?"

Lisa blushed laughingly. "You have set
me at my ease. | should certainly never
know how to talk to him."

"Always talk," observed Cyril Grey,
without looking up. "Words! Words! Words!
It's an awful thing to be Hamlet when
Ophelia takes after Polonius. She wants to
know how to talk to me! And | want to
teach her to be silent -- even as the friend

of Catullus turned his uncle into a statue of
Harpocrates. "

"Oh yes! | know Harpocrates, the
Egyptian God of Silence," gushed the Irish-
Italian girl. [30]

Simon Iff gave her a significant glance,
and she was wise enough to take it. There
are subjects which it is better to drop.

"You know, Mr. Iff," said Lisa, to lighten
the sudden tension, "I've been most
fearfully interested in all you have said, and
| think | have understood quite a part of it;
but | don't see the practical application. Do
you want me to get messages from the
Mighty Dead?"

"| ust at present," said the mystic, "I
want you to digest what you have heard,
and the dejeuner which Brother Cyril is
about to offer us. After that we shall feel
better able to cope with the problems of
the Fourth Dimension."

"Dear me! And poor little Lisa has to do
all that before she learns the reason of your
leaving St. J ean de Luz?"

"All that, and the whole story of the
Homunculus!"

"Whatever is that?"
"After lunch."
But as it turned out, it was a very long

while before lunch. The bell of the studio
rang brusquely.

Cyril Grey went to the door; and once
again Lisa had the impression of a duellist.
No: it was a sentinel that stood there. Her
vivid power of visualization put a spear in
his hand.

It was his own studio, but he announced
his visitors as if he had been a butler.
"Akbar Pasha and Countess Helena Mottich."
Simon Iff sprang to the door. It was not his
studio, but he welcomed the visitors with
both hands outstretched.

"Since you have crossed our threshold, "
he cried, "l am sure you will stay to
dejeuner." The visitors murmured a polite
acceptance. Cyril Grey was frowning
formidably. It was evident that he knew and
detested his guests; that he feared their
[31] coming; that he suspected -- who could
Say what? He acquiesced instantly in his
master's words; yet if silence ever spoke,
this was the moment when it beggared
curses.

He had not given his hand to his guests.
Simon Iff did so: but he did it in such a way
that each of them was obliged to take a
hand at the same moment as the other.

Lisa had risen from the divan. She could
see that some intricacy was on foot, but
could form no notion of its nature.

When the newcomers were seated, Lisa
found that she was expected to regale them
with the news of Paris. It was rather a relief
to her to get away from the mystic's
theories. The others left everything to her.

She rattled off some details of Lavinia King's
latest success. Then suddenly noticed that
Cyril Grey had laid the table. For his eager
cynical voice broke into the conversation. "I
was there," he said, "I liked the first
number: the Dying Grampus Phantasy in B
flat was extraordinarily realistic. | didn't
care so much for the ‘Misadventures of a pat
of butter’ Sonata. But the Tschaikowsky
symphony was best: that was Atmosphere;

it put me right back among the old familiar
scenes; | thought | was somewhere on the
South-Eastern Railway waiting for a train."

Lisa flamed indignation. "She's the most
wonderful dancer in the world." "Yes, she is
that," said her lover, with affected heavy
sadness. "Wonderful! My father used to say,
too, that she used even to dance well when
she was forty."

The nostrils of la Giuffria dilated. She
understood that it was a monster that had
carried her away; and she made ready for a
last battle.

But Simon Iff announced the meal. "Pray
you, be seated!" he said. "Unfortunately, to-
day is a [32] fast-day with us; we have but
some Salt fish with our bread and wine."

Lisa wondered what kind of a fast-day it
might be: it was certainly not Friday. The
Pasha made a wry face. "Ah!" said Iff, as if
he had just remembered it, "but we have
some Caviar." The Pasha refused coldly. "I
do not really want dejeuner," he said. "I
only came to ask whether you would care
for a seance with the Countess. "

"Delighted! Delighted!" cried Iff, and
again Lisa understood that he was on the
alert; that he sensed some deadly yet
invisible peril; that he loathed the visitors,
and yet would be careful to do every thing
that they suggested. Already she had a sort
of intuition of the nature of "the way of the
Tao." [33]

CHAPTER Ill

TELEKINESIS: BEING THE ART OF MOVING
OBJ ECTS AT A DISTANCE

THE Countess Mottich was far more
famous than most Prime Ministers or
Imperial Chancellors. For, to the great
bewilderment of many alleged men of
science, she had the power of small objects
to move without apparent physical contact.
Her first experiments had been with a
purblind old person named Oudouwitz, who
was in love with her in his senile way. Few
people swallowed the published results of
his experiiments with her. If convinced
they would have been very much startled.
For she was supposed to be able to stop
clocks at will, to open and close doors
without approaching them -- and other
feats of the same general type. But she had
sobered down since leaving the Professor --
which she had done, just as soon as she had
acquired enough money to get married to
the man she wanted. Her power had left
her instantly, strange to say; and many
were the theories propounded connecting
these circumstances. But her husband had
displeased her; she had flown off in a rage --
and her power had returned! But most of
her sensational feats were relegated to the
bad mad old days of wild and headstrong
youth; at present she merely undertook to
raise light small objects, such as tiny
celluloid spheres, from the table, without
touching them. [34]

So Cyril explained, when Lisa asked
"What does she do?"

(The Countess was supposed to know no
English. She spoke it as well as anyone in
the room, of course. )

"She moves things," he said; "manages to
get hold of a couple of hairs when we're
tired of looking at foolishness for hours
together, twists them in her fingers, and,
miracle of miracles! the ball rises in the
air. This is everywhere considered by all
rightly-disposed people to be certain proof
of the immortality of the soul."

"But doesn't she challenge you? ask you
to search her, and all that?"

"Oh yes! You've got the same chance as
a deaf man has to detect a mistake ina
Casals recital. If she can't get a hair, she'll
pull a thread from her silk stockings or her
dress; if you get people that are really too
clever for her, then 'the force is very weak
this afternoon,’ though she keeps you
longer than ever in the hope of tiring your
attention, and perhaps to pay you out for
baffling her!"

Grey said all this with an air of the most
hideous boredom. It was evident that he
hated the whole business. He was restless
and anxious, too, with another part of his
brain; Lisa could see that, but she dared
not question him. So she went on the old
track.

"Doesn't she get messages from the

dead?"

"It's not done much now. It's too easy to
fake, and the monied fools lost interest, as
a class. This new game tickles the vanity of
some of the sham scientific people, like
Lombroso; they think they'll make a
reputation like Newton out of it. They dont
know enough science to criticize the
business on sensible lines. Oh, really, |
prefer your fat friend with the large
building and the letter about a journey!"
[35]

"You mean that the whole thing is
absolute fraud?"

"Can't say. Hard to prove a negative, or
to affirm a universal proposition. But the
onus of proof is on the spiritualists, and
there are only two cases worth considering,
Mrs. Piper, who never did anything very
striking, anyhow, and Eusapia Palladino. "

"She was exposed in America some time
ago," said the girl, "but | think it was only in
the Hearst newspapers. "

"Hearst is the American Northcliffe, "
explained Cyril for the benefit of the
Pasha. "And so is Northcliffe," he added
musingly and unblushingly!

"I'm afraid | don't know who Northeliffe
is," said Akbar.

"Northcliffe was Harmsworth." Cyril's
voice was caressing, like one soothing a
fractious child.

"But who was Harmsworth?" asked the
Turk.

The young magician, in a hollow tone:
"Nobody."

"Nobody?" cried Akbar. "I don't
understand!"

Cyril shook his head solemnly and
sadly." "There ain't no such person." Akbar
Pasha looked at Grey as if he were a ghost.
It was a horrible trick of the boy's. He
would invite confidence by a sensible, even
possibly a bright, remark; then, in an
explanatory way, he would lead his
interlocutor, with exquisite skill, through
quaking sands of various forms of insanity,
only to drop them at the end into the bog
of dementia. The dialogue suddenly
realized itself as a nightmare. To Cyril it
was probably the one genuine pleasure of
conversation. He went on, in a brisk
professional manner, with a suave
persuasive smile; "Il am trying to affirm the
metaphysical dogma enunciated by
Schelling in his philosophy of the relative,
emphasizing in particular [36] the lemma
that the acceptation of the objective as
real involves the conception of the
individual as a tabula rasa, thus correlating
Occidental theories of the Absolute with
the Buddhist doctrine of Sakyaditthi! But
confer in rebuttal the Vagasaneyi-Samhita-
Upanishad!" He turned brusquely to Lisa
with the finality of one who has explained
everything to the satisfaction of everybody.
"Yes, you do right to speak in defence of
Eusapia Palladino; we will investigate her
when we reach Naples."

"You seem determined that | should go
to Naples?"

"Nothing to do with me: the master's
orders. He'll explain, by-and-by. Now let's
prove that this lady, whose locks are bushy
and black as a raven's, has no hairs
concealed upon her person!"

"| hate you when you're cynical and
Sarcastic."

"Love me, love my dog!" ---

Simon Iff arrested his attention with an
imperious gesture.

"Come into the garden, Maud," said Cyril
suddenly; "For the black bat, Night, hath
flown." He took her by the arm.

"Girl," he said, when they were among
the flowers with his long arms about her,
and a passionate kiss still flaming through
every nerve of both their bodies, "I can't
explain now, but you're in the most deadly
danger from these people. And we simply
can't get rid of them. Trust us, and wait!
Till they're gone, keep away from them:
make any excuse you like, ‘if it's necessary;
sham a hysterical attack and bolt if the
worst comes to the worst -- but don't let
either of them manage to scratch you! It
might be your death."

His evident earnestness did more than
convince her. It reassured her on her whole
position. She realized that he loved her,
that his manner was merely [37] an

ornament, an affectation like his shaved
head and his strange dress. And her own
love for him, freed from all doubt, rushed
out as does the sun from behind the crest
of some cold pyramid of rock and ice, in
mountain lands.

When they returned to the studio, they
found that the simple preparations for the
seance had been completed. The medium
was already seated at the table, with the
two men one on either side of her. Before
her, between her hands, were some small
spheres of celluloid, a couple of pencil-
ends, and various other small objects.
These had been "examined" with the utmost
care, as who should examine the tail of a
dog to find out whether he would bite. The
history of spiritualism is that of blocking up
every crack in a room with putty, and then
leaving the door wide open.

It may well be doubted whether even
the most tedious writer could describe a
seance with success. People generally have
an idea that there is something exciting
and mysterious about it. In reality, people
who boast of their ability to enjoy their
third consecutive sleepless night have been
known to pray their Maker for sudden death
at least two hours before the occurrence of
the first "phenomenon." To be asked to
keep the attention unceasingly on things of
not the slightest intrinsic interest or
importance is absolutely maddening to
anyone above the mental level of a limpet.

"Observe how advantageously we are
placed," whispered Cyril to Lisa as they
took seats on the divan, toward which the

table had been drawn. "For all we know,
one or both those men are in collusion with
Mottich. I'd stake my life Simple Simon
isn't; but | wouldn't expect my own twin
brother to take my word for it, in a matter
like this. Then the curtains have been
drawn; why? To [38] help the force along.
Yet it is supposed to be kinetic force; and
we Cannot even imagine how light could
interfere with it. Otherwise, it is that the
light ‘distresses the medium in her peculiar
state.'J ust as the policeman's bull's-eye
distresses the burglar in his peculiar state!
Now look here! These arguments about
‘evidential’ phenomena always resolve
themselves into questions of the conditions
prevailing at the time; but the jest is that
it always turns out that the argument is
about conjuring tricks, not about ‘forces’ at
all."

"Won't she mind us talking?"

"Mediums alway's encourage the sitters
to talk. The moment she sees us getting
interested in what we are saying, she takes
the opportunity to do the dangerous,
delicate part of the trick; then she calls our
attention, says we must watch her very
carefully to see that the control is good and
no cheating possible, because she feels the
force coming very strong. Everybody
disguises himself as a cat at a mousehole --
which you can keep up, after long training,
for about three minutes; then the attention
slackens slightly again, and she pulls off the
dear old miracle. Listen!"

Simon Iff was engaged in a violent
controversy with the Pasha as to the

disposition of the six legs at their end of
the table. On the accurate solution of this
problem, knotty in more than one sense,
depended the question as to whether the
medium could have kicked the table and
made one of the balls jump. If it were
proved that it was impossible, the question
would properly arise as to whether a ball
had jumped, anyhow.

"Isn't it the dullest thing on earth?"
droned Cyril. But, even without what he
had said in the garden, she would have
known that he was lying. For all his
nonchalance, he was watching very
acutely; for all his bored, faded voice, she
could feel [39] every tone tingling with
suppressed excitement. It was certainly not
the seance that interested him; but what
was it?

The medium began to moan. She
complained of cold; she began to twist her
body about; she dropped her head suddenly
on the table in collapse. Nobody took any
particular notice; it was all part of the
performance. "Give me your hands!" she
said to Lisa, "I feel you are so sympathetic."
As a matter of fact, the girl's natural
warmth of heart had stirred her for a
moment. She reached her hands out. But
Simon Iff rose from the table and caught
them. "You may have a hair or a loose
thread," he said sharply. "Lights up, please,
Cyril!"

The old mystic proceeded to make a
careful examination of Lisa's hands. But
Cyril watching him, divined an ulterior
purpose. "| say," he drawled, "I'm afraid |

was In the garden when you examined the
Countess. Oughtn't | to look at her hands if
this is to be evidential?" Simon Iff's smile
showed him that he was on the right track.
He took the medium's hands, and inspected
them minutely. Of course he found no
hairs; he was not looking for them. "Do you
know," he said, "I think we ought to file off
these nails. There's such a lot of room for
hairs and things. "

The Pasha immediately protested. "I
don't think we ought to interfere with a
lady's manicuring," he said indignantly.
"Surely we can trust our eyes!"

Cyril Grey had beaten lynxes in the
Open Championship; but he only
murmured: "I'm so sorry, Pasha; | can't trust
mine. I'm threatened with tobacco
amblyopia. "

The imbecility of the remark, as
intended, came near to upset the Turk's
temper.

"I've always agreed with Berkeley," he
went on, completely changing the plane of
the conversation, [40] while maintaining its
original subject, "that our eyes bear no
witness to anything external. | am afraid
I'm only wasting your time, because | don't
believe anything | see, in any case."

The Turk was intensely irritated at the
magician's insolence. Whenever Cyril was
among strangers, or in any danger, he
invariably donned the bomb-proof armour
of British aristocracy. He had been on the
"Titanic"; a second and a half before she

took the last plunge, he had turned to his
neighbour, and asked casually, "Do you
think there is any danger?"

Half an hour later he had been dragged
into a boat, and, on recovering
consciousness, took occasion to remark that
the last time he had been spilt out of a
boat was in Byron's Pool -- "above
Cambridge, England, you know" -- and
proceeded to relate the entire story of his
adventure. He passed from one story to
another, quite indifferent to the tumult on
the boat, and ended by transporting the
minds of the others far from the ice of the
Atlantic to the sunny joys of the May Week
at Cambridge. He had got everybody
worked up as to what would happen after
"First shot just before Ditton, and missed
by half a blade; J esus washed us off, and
went away like the devil! Third were
coming up like steam, with Hall behind
them, and old T.J. cursing them to blazes
from his gee; it was L for leather all up the
Long Reach; then, thank goodness, Hall
bumped Third just under the Railway
Bridge: Cox yelled, and there was J esus ---"
But they never heard what happened to the
first boat of that excellent college, for
Grey suddenly fainted, and they found that
he was bleeding slowly to death from a
deep wound over the heart.

This was the man who was frightened
out of his life at the possibility of a chance
scratch from an exquisitely clean and
polished finger-nail.[41]

The Turk could do nothing but bow.
"Well, if you insist, Mr. Grey, we can only

ask the lady."

He did so, and she professed most
willing eagerness. The operation was a
short one, and the seance recommenced.

But in a few minutes the Countess
herself wearied. "I know | shall get nothing;
it's no use; | do wish Baby were here; she
could do what you want in a minute."

The Pasha nodded gleefully. "That's
always the way we begin," he explained to
Simple Simon. "Now I'll have to hypnotize
her and she'll wake up in her other
personality."

"Very, very interesting," agreed Simon;
curiously enough, we were just discussing
double personalities with Madame la
Giuffria when you honoured us with your
visit. She has never seen anything of the
kind."

"You'll he charmed, Marquise," the old
Turk assured Lisa; “it's the most wonderful
thing you ever saw." He began to make
passes over the medium's forehead; she
made a series of convulsive movements,
which gradually died away, and were
succeeded by deep sleep. Cyril took Lisa to
one side. "This is really great magic! This is
the old original confidence trick. Pretend
to be asleep yourself, so that all the others
may go to sleep in reality. It is described at
no length whatever by Frazer in his book on
sympathetic magic. For that most learned
doctor, vir praeclarus et optimus, omits the
single essential of his subject. It is not
enough to pretend that your wax image is

the person you want to bewitch; you must
make a real connexion. That is the whole
art of magic, to be able to do that; and it is
the one point that Frazer omits."

The Countess was now heaving horribly,
and emitting a series of complicated snorts.
The Pasha [42] explained that this was
"normal," that she was "waking up into the
new personality." Almost before he
finished, she had slid off her chair on to the
floor, where she uttered an intense and
prolonged wail. The men removed the
table, that her extrication might become
more simple. They found her on her back,
smiling and crowing, opening and closing
her hands. When she saw the men she
began to cry with fright. Then her first
articulation was "Mum--Mum--Mum--Mum--
Mum."

"She wants her mother," explained
Akbar. "I didn't know a lady was to be
present; but as we are so happy, would you
mind pretending to be her mother? It would
help immensely."

Lisa had quite forgotten Cyril's warning,
and would have accepted. She was quite
willing to enter into the spirit of the
performance, whether it was a serious
affair, a swindle, or merely an idiotic
game; but Simon Iff interfered.

"Madame is not accustomed to seances, "
he said; and Cyril darted a look at her
which compelled her obedience, though she
had no idea in the world why she should, or
why she shouldn't, do any given thing. She
was like one in a strange country; the only

thing to do is to conform to the customs as
well as one can; and to trust one's guide.

"Baby" continued to yell. The Pasha,
prepared for the event, whipped a bottle of
milk out of his pocket, and she began to
suck at it contentedly.

"What ridiculous fellows those old
alchemists were!" said Cyril to his beloved.
"How could they have gone on fooling with
their athanors and cucurbites and alembics,
and their Red Dragon, and their Caput
Mortuum, and their Lunar Water? They
really had no notion of the Dignity of
Scientific Research. "

There was no need to press home the
bitterness of [43] his speech; Lisa was
already conscious of a sense of shame at
assisting at such degrading imbecilities.

"Baby" relinquished the bottle, and
began to crawl after one of the celluloid
balls, which had rolled off the table when
they moved it. She found it in a corner, sat
up, and began to play with it.

All of a sudden something happened
which shocked Lisa into a disgusted
exclamation.

"It is all part of the assumption of baby-
hood," said Cyril, coldly "and a bad one; for
there is no reason why obsession by a
baby's soul or mind should interfere with
adult reflexes. The real reason is that this
woman comes from the lowest sewers of
Buda-Pesth. She was a common prostitute
at the age of nine, and only took up this

game as a better speculation. It is part of
her pleasure to abuse the licence we allow
her by such bestialities: it isa mark of her
black envy; she does not understand that
her foulness does not so much as soil our
shoe-heather. "

Despite her years of practice in the art
of not understanding English, "Baby "
winced momentarily. For her dearest
thought was the social prestige which she
enjoyed. It was terrible to see that the
Real Thing was not under the slightest
illusion. She did not mind a thousand
"exposures" as a fraud; but she did want to
keep up the bluff of being a Countess. She
was past thirty-five; it was high time she
found an old fool to marry her. She had
designs on the Pasha; she had agreed to
certain proposals in respect of this very
seance with a view to getting him into her
power.

He was apologizing for her in the
conventional way to Simon Iff. She had no
consciousness or memory of this state at
all, it appeared. "She will grow up ina little
while; wait a few moments only."

And so it happened; soon she was
prattling to [44] the Pasha, who
thoughtfully produced a doll for her to play
with. Finally, she came over on her knees
to Lisa, and began to cry, and simulate
fear, and stammer out a confession of some
kind. But Lisa did not wait to hear it; she
was hot-tempered, and constitutionally
unable to conceal her feelings beyond a
certain point. She dragged her skirts away
roughly, and went to the other end of the

room. The Pasha deprecated the action,
with oriental aplomb; but the medium had
already reached the next and final stage.
She went to the Pasha, sat on his knee, and
began to make the most violent love to
him, with wanton kisses and caresses.

"That's the best trick of the lot,"
explained Cyril; "It goes wonderfully with a
great many men. It gets their powers of
observation rattled; she can pull off the
most obvious 'miracles,' and get them to
swear that the control was perfect. That's
how she fooled Oudouwitz; he was a very
old man, and she proved to him that he was
not as old as he thought he was. Great
Harry Lauder! apart from any deception, a
man in such circumstances might be willing
to swear away his own reputation in order
to assure her a career!"

"It's rather embarrassing," said the
Pasha, "especially to a Mohammedan like
myself; but one must endure everything in
the cause of Science. In a moment now
she'll be ready for the sitting."

Indeed, she changed suddenly into
Personality Number Three, a very decorous
young Frenchwoman named Annette, maid
to the wife of a J ewish Banker. She went
with rather stiff decorum to the table --
she had to lay breakfast for her mistress, it
appeared -- but the moment she got there,
she began to tremble violently all over,
sank into the chair, and resumed the "Baby"
personality, after a struggle. "Det away,
bad Annette -- naughty, naughty!" was the
[45] burden of her inspiring monologue for
a few minutes. Then she suddenly became

absorbed in the small objects before her --
the Pasha had replaced them -- and began
to play with them, as intently as many
children do with toys.

"Now we must have the lights down!"
said the Pasha. Cyril complied. "Light is
terribly painful and dangerous to her in this
state. Once she lost her reason for a month
through some one switching on the current
unexpectedly. But we shall make a close
examination, for all that." He took a thick
silk scarf, and bound it over her eyes.
Then, with an electric torch, he swept the
table. He pulled back her sleeves to the
shoulder and fastened them there; and he
went over her hands inch by inch, opening
the fingers and separating them, searching
the nails, proving, in short, to
demonstration, that there was no
deception.

"You see," whispered Cyril, "we're not
preparing for a scientific experiment; we're
preparing for a conjuring trick. It's the
psychology of trickery. Not my idea; the
master's. "

However, the attention of Lisa la
Giuffria, almost despite herself, was drawn
to the restless fingers on the table. They
moved and twisted into such uncanny
shapes; and there was something in the
play of them, their intention towards the
frail globe on which they converged, that
fascinated her.

The medium drew her fingers swiftly
away from the ball; at the same instant it
jumped three or four inches into the air.

The Turk purred delight. "Quite
evidential, don't you think, sir?" he
observed to Simon.

"Oh, quite," returned the old man, but
in a tone that would have made any one
who knew him well continue the
conversation with these words "Evidential
of WHAT?" But Akbar was fully satisfied.
[46] As a matter of form, he turned the
torch on again, and made a new
examination of the medium's fingers; but
no hairs were to be discovered.

From this moment the phenomena
became continuous. The articles upon the
table hopped, skipped and danced like
autumn leaves in a whirlwind. For ten
minutes this went on, with constantly
increasing energy.

"The fun is fast and furious," cried Lisa.

Cyril adjusted his monocle with
immense deliberation. "The epithet of
which you appear to be in search," he
remarked, "is, possibly, ‘chronic.™

Lisa stared at him, while the pencils and
balls still pattered on the table like dancing
hail.

"Doctor J] ohnson once remarked that we
need not criticize too closely the
performance of a whistling cabbage, or
whatever it was," he explained wearily,
"the wonder being in the fact of the animal
being able to do it at all. But | would
venture to add that for my part | find

wonder amply satisfied by a single
exhibition of this kind; to fall into a habit
appears to me utterly out of accord with
the views of the late J ohn Stuart Mill on
Liberty."

Lisa always found herself whirled about
like a Dervish by the strange twists which
her lover continued to give to his
conversation.

Monet-Knott had told her in London of
his famous faux pas at Cannon Street
Station, when the railway official had
passed along the train, shouting "All
change! All change!" only to be publicly
embraced by Cyril, who pretended to
believe that he was a Buddhist Missionary,
on the ground that one of the chief
doctrines of Buddhism is that change is a
principle inherent in all component things!

And unless you knew beforehand what
Cyril was thinking, his words gave you no
clue. You could never tell whether he were
serious or joking. He had [47] fashioned his
irony on the model of that hard, cold,
cruel, smooth glittering black ice that one
finds only in deep gullies of the loftiest
mountains; it was said in the clubs that he
had found seventy-seven distinct ways of
calling a man, to his face, something which
only the most brazen fish-wives of
Billingsgate care to call by its name,
without his suspecting anything beyond a
well-turned compliment.

Fortunately his lighter side was equally
prominent. It was he who had gone into
Lincoln Bennett's -- Hatters to his Majesty

since helmets ceased to be the wear -- had
asked with diffidence and embarrassment
to see the proprietor on a matter of the
utmost importance; and, on being
deferentially conducted to a private room,
had enquired earnestly: "Do you sell hats?"

The mystery of the man was an endless
inquietude to her. She wished to save
herself from loving, him, but only because
she felt that she could never be sure that
she had got him. And that intensified her
determination to make him wholly and for
ever hers.

Another story of Monet-Knott's had
frightened her terribly. He had once put
himself to a great deal of trouble to obtain
a walking-stick to his liking. Ultimately he
had found it, with such joy that he had
called his friends and neighbours together,
and bidden them to a lunch at the Carlton.
Alter the meal, he had walked down Pall
Mall with two of his guests -- and
discovered that he had forgotten the
walking-stick. "Careless of me!" had been
his only remark; and nothing would
persuade him to stir a step towards its
recovery.

She preferred to think of that other side
of his character which she knew from the
"Titanic" episode, and that other of how his
men had feared to follow him across a
certain snow-slope that hung above a
Himalayan precipice -- when he had
glissaded [48] on his back, head foremost,
to within a yard of the brink. The men had
followed him then; and she knew that she
too would follow him to the end of the

world.

Lost in these meditations, she hardly
noticed that the seance was over. The
medium had gradually fallen "asleep" again,
to wake up in her Number One personality.
But as the others rose from the table, Lisa
too rose, more or less automatically, with
them.

The foot of Akbar Pasha caught in the
edge of a bearskin; and he stumbled
violently. She shot out an arm to save him;
but the young magician was quicker. He
caught the Turk's shoulder with his heft
hand, and steadied him; at the same
moment she felt his other hand crushing
her wrist, and her arm bent back with such
suddenness that she wondered that it did
not snap.

The next moment she saw that Cyril,
with his hand on the Pasha's arm, was
begging permission in his silkiest tones to
examine a signet-ring of very beautiful
design "Admirable!" he was saying, "but isn't
the edge too sharp, Pasha? One could cut
oneself if one drew one's hand across it
sharply, like this." He made a swift gesture.
"You see?" he remarked. A stream of blood
was already trickling from his hand. The
Turk looked at him with sudden black rage,
of which she could not guess the cause.
Cyril had expressly told her that a scratch
might be death. Yet he had courted it; and
now he stood exchanging commonplaces,
with his blood dripping upon the floor.
Impulsively she seized his hand and bound
it with her handkerchief.

The Countess had wrapped her furs
about her; but suddenly she felt faint "l
can't bear the sight of blood," she said, and
collapsed upon the divan. Simon Iff
appeared at her side with a glass of brandy.
[49] "| feel better now; do give me my hat,
Marquise!" Again Cyril intervened. "Over my
dead body!" he cried, feigning to be a
jealous lover; and adjusted it with his own
hands.

Presently the visitors were at the door.
The Turk became voluble over the seance.
"Wonderful!" he cried; one of the most
remarkable | was ever present at!"

"So glad, Pasha!" replied Grey, with his
hand on the door; "one can't pick a winner
every time at this game, can one?"

Lisa ha Giuffria saw that (somehow) the
courteous phrase cut like a whip of
whalebone.

She turned as the door closed. To her
surprise she saw that Simon Iff had sunk on
the divan, and that he was wiping the
sweat from his brows.

Behind her, her lover took a great
breath, as one who comes out of deep
water.

And then she realized that she had been
present not at a seance, but at a battle.
She became conscious of the strain upon
herself. and she broke into a flood of tears.

Cyril Grey, with a pale smile, was
bending upon her face, kissing away the

drops even as they issued; and, beneath
her, his strong arm bore her whole weight
without a tremor. [50]

CHAPTER IV

LUNCH, AFTER ALL; AND A LUMINOUS
ACCOUNT OF THE FOURTH DIMENSION

"| CONFESS to hunger," said Simon Iff,
after afew moments. Cyril kissed Lisa on
the mouth, and walked with his arm still
circling her, to the sideboard. "You are
hostess here now you know," he said quite
simply. All his affectations dropped from
him at that moment, and Lisa understood
that he was just a simple-minded, brave,
and honest man, who, walking in the midst
of perils, had devised a formidable
armament both for attack and defence.

She felt a curious pang of pain
simultaneously with a sense of exaltation.
For she was no longer merely his mistress;
he had accepted her as a friend. It was no
longer a purely sexual relation, which is
always in the nature of a duel; he might
cease to love her, in the crude savage
sense; but he would always be a pal -- just
as if she were a man. And here was the
pang: was he sure to return to the mood
that her whole body and soul were even at
that moment crying out for?

The story of his "| udgment of Paris," as
they called it, came into her mind. Some
years before, he had had three women in
love with him at once. It seemed to each
that she was the only one. But they
discovered the arrangement -- he never

took pains to hide such things -- and they
agreed to confront him. They called at his
studio together, and [51] told him that he
must choose one of them. He smoked a full
pipe before replying; then went to his
bedroom and returned with a pair of socks --
in need of attention. "Simon, Son of J onas,
lovest thou me? -- Yea, Lord, thou knowest
that | love thee. Mend my socks," he
misquoted somewhat blasphemously, and
threw the socks to the one he really loved.

Lisa meant to lay the table in that sense
of the word, so to speak. She remembered
that the only words spoken by Kundry after
her redemption were "Dienen! Dienen!"

"Is this your fast? "she cried gaily,
discovering the contents of the sideboard.
For her gaze fell upon a lobster salad of
surprising glory flanked by a bowl of caviar
in ice on one side, and one of those foie
gras pies -- the only kind really worth eating
-- which you have to cut with a spoon
dipped in hot water. On an upper shelf was
a pyramid of woodcock, prepared for the
chafing dish which stood beside them; there
was a basket of pears and grapes of more
value than a virtuous woman -- and we know
that her price is above rubies! In the
background stood the wines in cohorts.
There was hock from the cellars of Prince
Metternich; there was Burgundy -- a
Chambertin that could have given body to a
ghost, and hardly lost its potency; there was
a Tokay that really was Imperial; there was
1865 brandy made him 1865 -- which is as
rare as radium in pitchblende.

Simon Iff took it upon himself to explain

his apparent lack of hospitality toward the
visitors.

"Akbar Pasha came here for blood: a
drop of your blood, my dear; Cyril's and
mine are not in his power -- you saw how
contemptuously the boy played up to his
trick! So | persisted in offering him salt, and
nothing but salt." [52]

"But why should he want my blood? And
why should you give him salt?"

"If he accepts salt it limits his powers to
injure the house where he accepts it, or its
inmates; and it exposes him to a terrible
riposte. Why he should want your blood --
that is another question, and a very serious
one. Unfortunately, it implies that he knows
who you are, and what we purpose for you.
If he had it, he could influence you to do his
will; we only wish that you should be free to
do your own. | won't insult you by telling
you that you can go scatheless by the simple
process of returning to your ordinary life.
I've been watching you, and | know you
would despise me for suggesting it. | know
that you are ignorant of what may lie before
you, but that you judge it to be formidable;
and that you embrace the adventure with
both hands."

"| mustn't contradict time famous expert
in psychology!" she laughed back at him. "I
ought to deny it indignantly. And | surely am
crazy to leap in the dark -- only it isn't dark
when Love is the lamp."

"Be careful of love!" the old magician
warned her. "Love is a] ack o' Lantern, and

hovers over bogs and graves; it's but a
luminous bubble of poisonous gas. In our
Order we Say ‘Love is the law, love under
will.’ Will is the iron signal staff. Fix love on
that, and you have a lighthouse, and your
ship comes safe to harbour!"

"| may now apologize," remarked Cyril,
as they seated themselves at the table, "for
leaving you the other night to dine at Miss
Badger's. | had given my word to her, and
nothing but physical inability would have
stopped me from going. | didn't want to go,
any more than | wanted to drown myself;
and that is a great compliment to you, for
she is one of the two nicest women in
London; but | would have faced a thousand
deaths to get there." [53]

"It is right to be so stern about a trifle?"

"Keeping one's word is no trifle. False in
one, false in all. Can't you see how simple it
makes life for me, never to have to worry
about a decision, always to be able to refer
everything to a simple standard, my Will?
And can't you see how simple it makes life
for you, to know that if | once say a thing,
I'll do it?"

"Yes. | do see. But, oh, Cyril, what agony
| passed through that evening!"

"That was ignorance," said Simon Iff, "the
cause of all suffering. You failed to read
him, to be assured that, just as he was
keeping his word to Miss Badger about the
dinner, he would keep his to you about the
telephone."

"Now, tell me about the Battle. | see
that | am in the thick of the fight; but |
haven't got a ghost of a notion why!"

"I'm sorry, dear child, but this Knowledge
is unsuited to your exalted grade," he
answered playfully. "We must get up to it
slowly by telling you exactly what we want
to do, and why. Then you will see why
others should try to thwart us. And | deeply
regret to have to inform you that our road
lies through somewhat hilly country. You
will have to listen to a lecture on the Fourth
Dimension. "

"Whatever in the world is that?"

"| think we had better talk of simpler
matters until hunch is over."

They began to discuss their private
affairs. There was no reason at all why Lisa
should not take up her residence with Cyril
from that moment. She had merely to
telephone her maid to pack, and come
along. She offered to do so when Simon Iff
said that he thought they ought to leave
Paris without a day's delay. But he said: "I
don't think it quite fair on the girl. It'sa
battle, and no call for her to [54] fight.
Besides" -- he turned to Cyril -- "she would
probably be obsessed in twenty-four hours. "

| shouldn't be surprised to learn that they
were after her already. Let's try! Call her,
Lisa, and say you'll not be back to-night; tell
her to wait further instructions. "

Lisa went to the telephone. Instead of
getting her room, she was connected with

the manager of the hotel. "Il much regret to
have to tell you, madame, that your maid
was seized with epileptic fits shortly after
you left this morning. "

Lisa was too stunned to reply. She
dropped the receiver. Cyril crossed to her
instantly, and told the man that his news
had upset Madame; she would telephone
again later.

Lisa repeated what the manager had
sald.

"| thought as much," said Cyril.

"| didn't," said Iff frankly, "and it worries
me. I'm not guessing, like you are -- and it's
no credit to guess right, my young friend,
but a deceit of the devil, like winning at
roulette. I'm deducing from what | know.
Therefore, the fact that I'm wrong proves
that there is something | don't know -- and it
worries me. But, clearly, we must get into a
properly protected area without a moment
wasted. That is, you must. I'll watch at the
front. There must be somebody big behind
that clumsy fool Akbar Pasha."

"Yes; I've been guessing," admitted Cyril,
with some shame. "Or, perhaps worse, I've
let my ego expand, and taken the largest
possible view of the importance of our
project."

"Well, tell me the project!" said Lisa.
"Can't you see | can hardly bear this any
more?"

"You're safe within these walls," said

Simon, "now that there is no enemy within
the gates; and to-night we shall take you
under guard to a protected area. To-morrow
the fun will begin in [55] good earnest.
Meanwhile, here is the preliminary
knowledge with regard to the project.
Before you start, you have to take a certain
vow; and we cannot allow you to do that in
ignorance of all that it implies, down to the
tiniest iota."

"lam ready."

"lam going to make everything as simple
as | possibly can. You have a good
imagination, and | think you should be able
to follow.

"See here: | take a pencil and a piece of
paper. | make a point. It stays there. It
doesn't go in any direction. In mathematics
we Say: ‘It is extended in no dimension.' Now
| draw a straight line. That goes in one
direction. We say, it is extended in one
dimension.

"Now | make another line to cross it at
right angles. That is one extension ina
second dimension. "

"| see, And another line would make a
third dimension."

"Don't go too fast. Your third line is no
use. If | want to show the position of any
point on the paper, | can do it by reference
to these two lines only. Make a point, and
I'll show you."

She obeyed.

"Now, | draw lines from your point to
make right angles with my lines. | say your
point is so far east of the central point, and
so far north. You see? | determine the
position by only two measurements. "

"But if | made my point right in the air
here?"

"Exactly. We need a third line, but it
must be at right angles to the other two;
sticking straight up, as you might say. Then
we can measure in three directions, and
determine the point. It is so far east, so far
south, and so high."

"Yes, ll

"Now I'll go over that again in another
way. [56]

"Here iS a point, not long nor broad nor
thick: no dimension.

"Here is a line, long but neither broad
nor thick one dimension.

Here is a surface, long and broad, but
not thick: two dimensions.

"Here is a solid, long and broad and
thick: three dimensions."

"Now | quite understand. But you said:
four dimensions.

"| will say it presently. But just now | am
going to hammer at two.

"Observe: | make a triangle. All the sides
are equal. Now | draw a line through it from
one angle to the middle of the other side. |
have two triangles. They are exactly alike,
as you see; same size, same shape. But --
they point in opposite directions. Now we
will cut them out with scissors.

He did so.

"Slide them about, so that one lies
exactly to cover the other!"

She tried and failed: then, with a laugh,
turned one over, when it easily fitted.

"Ah, you cheated. | said, ‘slide them."
"I'm sorry."

"On the contrary, you have acted
divinely, in the best sense! You took the
thing that wouldnt fit out of its world of
two into the world of three, put it back, and
they all lived happy ever after!

"The next thing is this. Everything that
exists -- everything material -- has these
three dimensions. These points and lines
and surfaces have all a minute extension in
some other dimension, or they would be
merely things in our imagination. The
surface of water, for instance, is merely the
boundary between it and the air.

"Now | am going to tell you why some
people [57] have thought that another
dimension might exist. Those triangles, so
like, yet so unlike, have analogies in the
world of what we call real things. For

example there are two kinds of sugar,
exactly alike in every way but one. You
know how a prism bends a ray of light? Well
if you take a hollow prism, and fill it with a
solution of one of these kinds of sugar, the
ray bends to the right; use the other kind,
and it bends to the left. Chemistry is full of
these examples.

"Then we have our hands and feet;
however we move about, we can never
make them fill exactly the same place. A
right hand is always a right hand, however
you move it. It only becomes a left hand in
a looking-glass -- so your mirror should in
future afford you a superior sort of
reflection! It should remind you that there is
a looking-glass world, if you could only get
through!"

"Yes, but we cant get through!"

"Don't let us lose our way! Enough to say
that there might be such a world. But we
must try to find a reason for thinking that
there is one. Now the best reason of all isa
very deep one; but try to understand it."

Lisa nodded.

"We know that the planets move at
certain rates in certain paths, and we know
that the laws which govern them are the
Same as those which made Newton's apple
fall. But Newton couldn't explain the law,
and he said that he found himself quite
unable to imagine a force acting at a
distance, as gravitation it, (so called)
appears to do. Science was hard put to it,
and had finally to invent a substance called

the ether, of which there was no evidence,
only it must be there! But this ether had so
many contradictory and impossible
qualities, that people began to cast about
for some other explanation. And it was
found that by supposing an extension of the
universe (thin but uniform) in a fourth
dimension, that the law would hold good.

"| know it's hard to grasp the idea; let me
put it to you this way. Take this cube. Here
iS a point, a corner, where the three
bounding lines join. The point is nothing,
yet it is part of the lines. To imagine it at
all asa reality, we must say that it has a
minute extension in these lines.

"Now take a line. It has a similar minute
uniform extension in the two surfaces which
it bounds. Take the surface; it is similarly
part of the one cube.

"Go one step further; imagine that the
cube is related to some unknown thing as
the surface is to the cube. You can't? True;
you can't make a definite image of it; but
you can form an idea -- and if you train
yourself to think of this very hard, presently
you will get a little closer to it. I'm not
going to bother you much longer with this
dry theoretical part; I'll only just tell you
that a fourth dimension, besides explaining
the difficulties of gravitation, and some
others, gives us an idea of how it is that
there is only a definite fixed number of
kinds of things, from which all others are
combined.

"And now we can get down to business.
Brother Cyril, who obliged with the cube,

will be so good as to produce a wooden cone
-- and a basin of water."

Brother Cyril complied.

"| want you to realize," went on the old
man, "that all the talk about the Progress of
Science is cheap journalism. Most of the
boasted progress is mere commercial
adaptation of science, as who should say
that he is Experimenting with Electricity
when he rides in an electric train. One hears
of Edison and Marconi as 'men of science’;
neither of them ever discovered a single
fact; they merely exploited facts already
known. The real men Science are in
absolute agreement that the advance in our
[59] knowledge, great as it has been, leaves
us as ignorant of ultimate truth and reality
as we were ten thousand years ago. The
universe guards its secret: Isis can still boast
that no man hath lifted her veil!

"But, Suppose our trouble were due to
the fact that we only received our
impressions in disconnected pieces. A very
simple thing might seem the maddest
jumble. Ready, Cyril?"

"Quite ready."

"A. ALI. UL 1. AL"

MR Pe Ge be Sa

"What were we saying?"

Lisa laughed rather excitedly. Her vivid

mind told her that these instructions were
going to take sudden shape.

"Only your very pretty name, my dear!
Now, Cyril, the cone." He took it in his
hand, and poised it over a bowl of water.

"We are now going to suppose that this
very simple object is going to try its best to
explain its nature to the surface of the
water, which we will imagine as endowed
with powers of observation and reasoning
equal to our own. All that the cone can do Is
to show itself to the water, and it can only
impress the water by touching it.

"So it dips its point, thus. The water
perceives a point. The cone goes on dipping.
The water sees a circle round where the
point was. The cone goes on. The circle gets
bigger and bigger. Suddenly, as the cone
goes completely through, snap!

"Now, what does the water know?

"Nothing about any cone. If it got any
idea that the various commotions were
caused by a single object, which it would
only do if it compared them carefully, noted
a regularity of rate of increase in the size of
the circle, and so on -- in other words, used
the scientific method - it would not evolve a
theory of a [60] cone, for we must
remember that any solid body is to it a thing
as wildly inconceivable as a fourth --
dimensional body is to us.

"The cone would try again. This time, we
dip it obliquely. The water now perceives a
totally different set of phenomena; there
are no circles, but ellipses. Dip again, first
at this angle, then at that. One way we get
curious curves called parabolas, the other

way equally curious curves called
hyperbolas.

"By this time the water would be nearly
out of its mind, if it insisted on trying to
refer all these absolutely different
phenomena to a single cause!

"It might work out a geometry -- our own
plane geometry, in fact -- and it would
perhaps get some extraordinary poetic
conception of a Creator who manifested in
his universe such marvellous and beautiful
relations. It would get all sorts of fantastic
theories of this Creator's power; what it
would never get -- until it produced a J ames
Hinton -- would be the idea that all this
diversity was caused by seeing, disjointedly,
different aspects of one single simple thing

"| purposely took the easiest case.
Suppose that instead of a cone we used an
irregular body -- the series of impressions
would seem to the water like absolute
madness!

"Now slide your imagination up one
dimension! Do you not see at once how
parallel is our situation to that of the
surface of the water?

"The first impression of the savage about
the universe is of a great mysterious jumble
of things which come upon him without rime
or reason, usually to smite him down.

"Long later, man developed the idea of
connecting phenomena, at least a few at a
time.

"Centuries elapse; he begins to perceive
law, at first operating only in a very few
matters. [61]

"More centuries; some bold thinker
invents a single cause for all these diverse
effects, and calls it God. This hypothesis
leads to interminable disputes about the
nature of God; in fact, they have never
been settled. The problem of the origin of
evil, alone, has quite baffled Theology.

"Science advances; we now find that all
things are subject to law. There is no need
of any mysterious creator, in the old sense;
we look for causes in the same order of
nature as the effects they produce. We no
lounger propitiate ghosts to keep our fires
alight.

"Now, at last, | and a few others are
asking whether the whole universe be not
illusion, in exactly the same way as a true
surface is an illusion.

"Perhaps the universe is a four-
dimensional object, or collection of objects,
quite sane, and simple, and intelligible,
manifesting itself in diversity, regular or
irregular, just as the cone did to the water."

"Of course | can't grasp all this; | will ask
Cyril to tell me again and again till | do. But
what is this fourth-dimensional universe?
Can't you give me something to cling to?"

"| ust So. Here this long lecture links up
with that little chat about the soul!"

"O--0--oh!"

"And the double personality, and all the
rest of it!

"It's perfectly simple. |, the fourth-
dimensional reality, am going about my
business in a perfectly legitimate way. | find
myself pushing through to my surface, or let
us say, | become conscious of my surface,
the material universe, much as the cone did
as it went through the water. | make my
appearance with a yell. | grow. | die. There
are the same phenomena of change which
we all perceive around us. My three-
dimensional mind thinks all this 'real,'a
history; where at most it is a geography, a
partial [62] set of infinite aspects. | say
infinite, for the cone contains an infinite
number of curves. Yet this three-
dimensional being is actually a part of me,
though such a minute one; and it rather
amuses me, now | have discovered a little
bit more of myself, to find that mind think
that he, or even his yet baser body, is the
one and only."

"I'm understanding you with a part of me
that | didn't know was there."

"That's the way, child. But I'm going ona
little. | want you to consider how nicely this
explains the psychology of crowds, for
example. We may suppose an Idea to be a
real four-dimensional thing. |, when | know
myself more fully, shall probably turn out to
be a pretty simple kind of a thing,
manifesting in perhaps one person only. But
we can imagine abstract 'Individuals' who
come to the surface in hundreds or
thousands of minds at the same time.
Liberty, for example. It begins to push

through. It is noticed by one or two men
only at first; that is like the point of the
cone. Then it spreads gradually -- or it
breaks out suddenly, just as the circle
would, if, instead of a cone, you dropped a
spiked shield upon the water. And that is all
the lesson for this afternoon, child. Think it
over, and see if you have it all clear, and if
you can find any other little problems to
straighten out. The next lesson will be of a
more desperate sort -- the kind that leads
directly to action.

Cyril broke in on the word. "We have a
great deal to do," he said sharply, "even
before we leave this house. It's pretty dark --
and there's a Thing in the garden." [63]

CHAPTER V

OF THE THING IN THE GARDEN; AND OF THE
WAY OF THE TAO

"OH, little Brother!" said the old mystic
sadly.

"How long will it take you to work
through this wretched business?"

"| have omnipotence at my command,
and eternity at my disposal," smiled the
boy, using Eliphaz Levi's well-known
formula.

"| ought to explain," said Simple Simon,
turning to Lisa. "This boy is a desperate
magician confined within the circle of this
forest. His plan is Action; he is all for
Magick; give him a Wand and a host of
Demons to control, and he is happy. For my
part, | prefer the Way of the Tao, and to do
everything by doing nothing. | know it
sounds difficult; one day | will explain. But
the practical result is that | lead a placid
and contented life, and nothing ever
happens; he, on the contrary, makes
trouble everywhere, excites the wrath of
Turks, and worse, if | am right; he thereby
brings about a situation where perfectly
competent ladies' maids have epileptic fits,
mediums endeavour to procure blood from
bewitching damozels -- and now there's a
Thing in the Garden." His voice had a wail
of comic disgust.

"However, this is Cyril's funeral, not
mine. He called me in; | must say | approve
of his general plan, on the whole, and |
dare say much of the opposition is
unavoidable. In any case he is the [64]
magician; Principal Boy in a Pantomime. |
merely hold the sponge; and we have to use
his formula throughout, not mine. If it ends
in disaster," he added as a cheerful
afterthought, "perhaps it will teach him a
lesson! A Chinese God, indeed! He would be
better as a Chinese coolie, smoking opium
at the feet of Chwangtze!"

"He tells me that | stand in my own way,
that | love struggle and adventure, and that
this is weakness and not strength."

"This girl is in danger: quite unnecessary
danger."

"| am going to ask my master to show
you his method; you will see plenty of mine
in the next few weeks; and | should like you
to have a standard of comparison. Maybe
you'll want to choose one day!"

"I'm afraid |, too, like danger and
excitement!" cried Lisa.

"I'm afraid you do! However, since
Brother Cyril asks it, the Way of the Tao
shall be trodden so far as this is possible:
What would Brother Cyril do?"

"| should take the Magic Sword, make
the appropriate symbols, and invoke the
Names Divine appurtenant thereto: the
Thing, shrivelled and blasted, would go

back to those that sent it, screaming in
agony, cursing at the gods, ready to turn
even on its employers, that they might wail
with it in torment."

"One of the best numbers on the
programme," said Simon Iff. "Now see the
other way!"

"Yes: if your way is better than that!"
cried the girl, her eyes gleaming.

"It isn't my way," said the mystic, witha
sudden inflection of solemnity. His voice
rose ina low monotonous chant as he
quoted from "The Book of the Heart girt
with the Serpent."

"|, and Me, and Mine were sitting with
lutes in [65] the market-place of the great
city, the city of the violets and the roses.

"The night fell, and the music of the
lutes was stilled.

"The tempest arose, and the music of
the lutes was stilled.

The hour passed, and the music of the
lutes was stilled.

"But Thou art Eternity and Space; Thou
art Matter and Motion; and Thou art the
Negation of all these things. For there is no
symbol of Thee."

The listeners were thrilled to the
marrow of their bones. But the old man
merely gathered a handful of dittany leaves
from the chased golden box where they

were kept, and led the way to the garden.

It was very dark; nothing could be
distinguished but the outlines of the shrubs
and the line of the fence beyond.

"Do you see the Thing?" said Iff.
Lisa strained her eyes.

"You mustn't look for anything very
definite," said the mystic.

"It seems as if the darkness were
somehow different in that corner," said Lisa
at last, pointing. "A sort of reddish tinge to
the murk."

"Oh dear me! if you will use words hike
‘murk'! I'm afraid you're all on Cyril's side!
Look now! "And he put his hand on her
head. With the other he offered her the
dittany. "Chew one of these leaves!" he
said.

She took one of the silver-grey heaves,
with its delicate snow-bloom, between her
teeth.

"| can see a sort of shapeless mass, dark-
red," she said after a pause.

"Now watch!" cried Iff. He took several
steps into the garden, and raised his right
hand. "Do what thou wilt shall be the whole
of the Law!" [66] he proclaimed in such a
voice as once shook Sinai.

Then he threw the rest of the dittany in
the direction of the Thing.

"By all the powers of the Pentagram!"
shouted Cyril Grey; "he's deliberately
making a magical link between it and Lisa."
He bit his lip, and cursed himself in silence;
he knew he had been startled out of
prudence.

Simon Iff had not noticed the outburst.
He quoted "The Book of the Law," "Be
strong!" he cried. "Enjoy all things of sense
and rapture! There is no god that shall deny
thee for this!"

The Thing became coherent. It
contracted slightly. Lisa could now see that
it was an animal of the wolf type,
couchant. The body was as big as that of a
small elephant. It became quite clearly
visible. It was a dull fiery red. The head
was turned toward her, and she was
suddenly shocked to see that it had no
eyes.

The old man advanced towards it. He
had abandoned his prophetic attitude. His
whole gait expressed indifference -- no,
forgetfulness. He was merely a quiet old
gentleman taking an evening stroll.

He walked right into the Thing.
Suddenly, as it enveloped him, Lisa saw
that a faint light was issuing from his body,
a pale phosphorescence which kindled
warmly as he went. She saw the edges of
the Thing contract, as if they were sucked
inwards. This proceeded, and the light
became intense. About a burning ovoid core
dawned and vibrated the flashing colours of
the rainbow. The Thing disappeared

completely; at the same moment the light
went out. Simon Iff was once again merely
an old gentleman taking an evening stroll.

But she heard a soft voice, almost as
faint as an echo; it murmured: "Love is the
law, love under will." [67]

"Let us go in," said he as he rejoined
them. "You must not catch a chill."

Lisa went to the divan. She said nothing;
she was stupefied by what she had seen.
Perhaps she even lost full consciousness for
a moment; for her next impression was of
the two men arguing.

"| agree," Cyril was saying, "it is very
neat, and shows the restraint of the great
artist; but | am thinking of the Man behind
the gun. | should have struck terror into
him."

"But fear is failure!" protested Iff mildly,
as If surprised.

"But we want them to fail!"
"Oh no! | want them to succeed."

Cyril turned rather angrily to Lisa. "He's
impossible! | fancy myself at paradox, you
know; but he goes beyond my
understanding every time. I'm an amateur,
and a rotten amateur at that."

"Let me explain!" said Simple Simon. "If
everybody did his Will, there would be no
collision. Every man and every woman isa
star. It is when we get off our orbits that

the clashes come. Now if a Thing gets off
its orbit, and comes into my sphere of
attraction, | absorb it as quietly as possible,
and the stars sing together again."

"Whew!" said Cyril, and pretended to
wipe the sweat from his brow.

"But weren't you in danger from that
devilish Thing?" asked Lisa, with the
memory of a great anxiety. She had
trembled like an aspen during the scene in
the garden.

"The rhinoceros," quoted Simon Iff,
"finds no place in him into which to thrust
its horn, nor the tiger a place in which to
fix its claws, nor the weapon a place to
admit its point. And for what reason?
Because there is in him no place of death."

"But you did nothing. You were just
acting [68] like an ordinary man. But | think
it would have been death for any one but
you."

"An ordinary man would not have
touched the Thing. It was on a different
plane, and would no more have interfered
with him than sound interferes with light. A
young magician, one who had opened a
gate on to that plane, but had not yet
become master of that plane, might have
been overcome. The Thing might even have
dispossessed his ego, and used his body as
its own. That is the beginner's danger in
magick."

"And what is your secret?"

"To have assimilated all things so
perfectly that there is no longer any
possibility of strungle. To have destroyed
the idea of duality. To have achieved Love
and Will so that there is no longer any
object to Love, or any aim for Will. To have
killed desire at the root; to be one with
every thing and with Nothing.

"Look!" he went on, with a change of
tone, "why does a man die when he is
struck by lightning? Because he has a gate
open to lightning; he insists on being an
electrical substance by possessing the
quality of resistance to the passage of the
electric current. If we could diminish that
resistance to zero, lightning would no
longer take notice of him.

"There are two ways of preventing a rise
of temperature from the sun's heat. One is
to oppose a shield of non-conducting and
Opaque material: that is Cyril's way, and at
the best it is imperfect; some heat always
gets through. The other is to remove every
particle of matter from the space which
you wish to be cold; then there is nothing
there to become hot; and that is the Way
of the Tao."

Lisa put an arm round Cyril's neck, and
rested her head on his shoulder. "I shouldn't
know how [69] to begin!" she said: “and -- |
know it would mean giving up Cyril."

"It would mean giving up yourself, "
retorted the mystic, "and you'll have to do
it one day: But be reassured! Everybody has
to go through your stage -- and unless I'm
mistaken, you are about to go through it in

a particularly acute form."

"I've tried the Tao," said Cyril, half
regretful, "but | can't manage it."

The old man laughed. "You're like the
old man in the storm who realized that he
would be warmer elsewhere. So he decided
to diminish the amount of himself by
removing his clothes, and only found it
colder. It gets worse and worse till the
moment when you vanish utterly and for
ever. But you have only tried half-
measures. Naturally, you have found your
will divided against itself -- the will to live
against the will to Nirvana, if | may call it
so -- and that is not even good magick."

The boy groaned inwardly. He could
understand just enough to realize how far
the heights reached above him. His heart
almost failed him at the thought -- which
was Instinctive knowledge -- that he must
scale them, whether he would or no.

"Take care!" suddenly cried Simon Iff.

At almost the same instant a terrible
scream shrilled out from a neighbouring
studio.

"It is my fault," murmured the old man,
humbly. "I divided his will. | have been
talking like an old fool. | must have been
identified with Simon Iff for a moment. Oh,
pride! Oh, pride!"

But Cyril Grey had understood the
warning. He rose to his full height, and
made a curious gesture. Then, with a grim

face, he ran out of the studio. In a moment
he was battering at the door of his
neighbour. It burst open under the
momentum of his shoulder. [70]

A woman lay upon the floor. Over her
stood the sculptor, a blood-stained hammer
in his hand. He seemed absolutely dazed.
Grey shook him. He looked round stupidly."
What have | done?" he said. "Nothing!"
snarled Cyril. "I did it, |. Quick! can't we
save her?" But the sculptor burst into
lamentation: he was incapable of anything
but tears. He flung himself upon the body
of his model, and wept passionately. Cyril
gritted his teeth; the girl was on the
borderland. "Master!" he cried, in a terrible
voice.

"In a case of this kind," said Simple
Simon, who was standing unperceived
within a foot of him, "where Nature has
been outraged, an attempt made to
interfere violently with her laws, it is
permissible to act -- or rather, to
counteract just so much as is necessary to
restore equilibrium. There was a seed of
quarrel in the hearts of these young
people; the blow aimed at you, when your
own will became divided, struck aslant;
their own division attracted the murder-
force to them.

"| will administer The Medicine." He took
a flask from his pocket, put a drop of the
contents on the lips of the girl, and one in
each nostril. He then sprinkled a little upon
a handkerchief, and put it to the wound on
her head.

Suddenly the sculptor rose to his feet
with a great cry. His hands were covered in
blood, which streamed from his own scalp.

"Quick! back to the studio!" said Simon.
"We don't want to make explanations.
They'll both be all right in five minutes, and
they'll think it all a dream. As, indeed, like
the rest of things, it is!"

But Cyril had to carry la Giuffria. The
rapid successions of these mysterious
events had ended by throwing her
consciousness completely out of gear. She
lay in a deep trance. [71]

"A very fortunate circumstance!"
remarked Simon, when he observed it. "This
is the time to take her over to the Profess-
House." Cyril wrapped her in her furs;
between them they carried her to the
boulevard, where Simon Iff's automobile
was In waiting.

The old mystic held up his left hand,
with two of the fingers crossed. It was a
signal to the chauffeur. In another moment
they were running on easy speed up the
Boulevard Arago.

Lisa came to herself as the car, crossing
the Seine, pointed at the heights of
Montmartre; and she was perfectly
recovered as it stopped before a modest
house of quite modern type, which was set
against the steepest part of the hill.

The door opened, without alarm being
given. Lisa learnt later that in this house no
orders needed to be issued, that simplicity

had reached so serene a level that all
things operated together without question.
Only when unusual accidents took place
was there need for speech; and little, even
then.

The door stood open, and a quite
ordinary butler presented himself, bowing.
Simon Iff returned the salute, and walked
on, when a second door opened, also
spontaneously. Lisa found herself in a small
lobby. The man who had opened the inner
door was clad from neck to knee in a single
black robe, without sleeves. From his belt
hung a heavy sword with a cross-hilt. This
man held up three fingers. Simon Iff again
nodded, and led his guests to the room on
the left.

Here were the three guests indicated by
the gesture of the guard. Lord Antony
Bowling was a familiar friend of the old
mystic. He was a stout and strong man of
nearly fifty years of age, with a gaze both
intrepid and acute: His nose was of the
extreme aristocratic type, his mouth
sensual and strong. [72]

Cyril Grey had nicknamed him "The
Merman of Mayfair" and claimed that Rodin
got the idea for his "Centaur" the day that
he met him.

He was the younger brother of the Duke
of Flint, his race probably Norman in the
main: but he gave the impression of a
Roman Emperor. Haughtiness was here, and
great good-nature; the intellect was
evidently developed to the highest possible
pitch of which man as man is capable; and

one could read the judicial habit on his
deep wide brows. Against this one could
see the huge force of the man's soul, the
passionate desire for knowledge which
burnt in that great brain. One could
conceive him capable of monstrous deeds,
for he would let no man, no prejudice of
men, stand in his way. He would certainly
have fiddled while Rome was burning if it
had been his hobby to play the violin.

This man was the mainstay of the
Society for Psychical Research. He was the
only absolutely competent man in it,
perhaps; at least, he stood well above all
others. He had the capacity for measuring
the limits of error in any investigation with
great accuracy. J] ust as the skilful climber
can make his way on rotten chalk by
trusting each crumbling fragment with just
that fraction of his weight which will not
quite dislodge it, so Lord Antony could
prepare a sound case from worthless
testimony. He knew the limits of fraud. He
might catch a medium in the act of
cheating a dozen times in a seance, and yet
record some of the phenomena of that
seance as evidential. He used to say that
the fact of a medium having his hands free
did not explain the earthquake at Messina.

If this man had ever caused people to
distrust his judgment -- nobody but an
imbecile could have doubted his sincerity --
the cause lay in his power to fool the
mediums he was investigating to the top of
their bent. He would enter into every phase
of their [73] strange moods as if he had
been absolutely one with them in spirit;
then, when they were gone, he would

withdraw and look at the whole course of
events from without, as if he had had no
share in them.

But people who saw him only in the first
phase thought him easily hoodwinked.

The second of the guests of Simon Iff,
or, rather, of the Order to which he
belonged, was a tall man bowed with ill-
health. A shock of heavy black hair
crowned a face pallid as death itself; but
his eyes blazed formidably beneath their
bushy brows. He had just returned from
Burma, where he had lived for many years
as a Buddhist monk. The indomitable moral
valour of the man shone from him; one
could see in every gesture the marks of his
fierce fight against a dozen deadly
sicknesses. With hardly a week of even
tolerable health in any year, he had done
work that might have frightened the staff
of a great University. Almost single-handed,
he had explored the inmost doctrine of the
Buddha, and thrown light on many a
tangled grove of thought. He had
reorganized Buddhism as a missionary
religion, and founded societies everywhere
to study and practise it. He had even found
time and strength, amid these labours, to
pursue his own hobby of electrical
research. Misunderstood, thwarted,
hampered in every way, he had won
through; and he had never violated the
precepts of his Teacher by raising his voice
to denounce error. Even his enemies had
been compelled to recognize him as a
saint. Simon Iff had never met him, but he
went to greet Cyril with the affection of a
brother. The boy had been the greatest of

his pupils, but the Mahathera Phang, as he
was now Called in his monastery, had long
ago abandoned magick for a path not very
different from that of Simon Iff.

The third man was of very inferior
calibre to [74] either of the others. He was
of medium height and good build, though
somewhat frail. But in him was no great
development. One divined a restless
intelligence fettered to mere cleverness, a
failure to grasp the distinction between
genius and talent. He was an expert
conjurer, had all the facts of psychic
research at his finger's end, was up in all
the modern theories of psychology, but was
little more than a machine. He was
incapable of refuting his own logic by an
appeal to his common sense. Some one
having once remarked that we all dig our
graves with our teeth, Wake Morningside
had started to prove scientifically that
eating was the direct cause of death; and
that, consequently, absolute fasting would
confer immortality. This was of course easy
to prove -- in America.

He had continued with experiments in
weighing souls, photographing thoughts,
and would probably have gone fishing for
the Absolute if he had only thought of it!
He was a prop to the editors of the New
York Sunday Newspapers, and was at
present engaged on writing a scenario for
moving pictures in which he was to
incorporate the facts of psychical research.
Nobody in the world was better aware than
he that everything reliable could be packed
into a single reel, and rattle, but he had
undauntedly contracted for a series of fifty

five-part pictures. He chewed his chocolate
-- his latest specific for averting the perils
of more complex nutrition -- with no idea
that these activities might damage his
reputation as a research student. And he
was really a very clever man, with a quick
eye and brain. If he had possessed moral
force, he might have been saved from many
of his follies. But his belief in his own fads
had impaired his health and made him
somewhat hysterical; as a result of this,
and of his tendency to exploit his
knowledge in second-rate ways, people had
begun to [75] doubt the value of his
testimony even in serious matters. For
instance. Some years before, he had been
one of the signatories to a favourable
report on a medium named J ansen; the
following year he had brought the man over
to America, and made a great deal of
money out of the tour. The action
destroyed both J ansen and the earlier
report. In New York the Scandinavian
medium had been exposed, and when
Morningside had objected that this did not
invalidate the earlier report, his opponent
retorted: "No: Your presence there does
that!"

But Bowling, with whom he had just
crossed from England, knew him better
than to think venality of him, and still
valued his co-operation in the
investigations of alleged spiritualistic
phenomena for his extraordinary skill in
conjuring, and his practically complete
knowledge of every trick that ever had
been played, or could be played. In fact, he
was Bowling's expert witness on the
question of the limits of possible fraud.

Until Simon Iff and his party entered,
these three men had been entertained by a
woman. She was dressed in a plain purple
robe, made ina single piece. It fell to her
feet. The sleeves were long and widening
towards the wrist. A red rose, upon a cross
of gold, was embroidered on the breast.
Her rich brown hair was coiled over her
ears.

The face of this woman was of extreme
beauty, in a certain esoteric fancy. Like her
whole body, it was sturdy and vigorous, but
there was infinite delicacy, surprising in so
strong a model. Her eyes were clear and
fearless and true; but one could see that
they must have served her ill indeed often
enough, for they were evidently incapable
of understanding falsity, and evil. The nose
was straight and broad, full of energy; and
the mouth passionate and firm. The lips
were somewhat thick, but they were
mobile; [76] and the whole expression of
the face redeemed any defect of any
feature. For while its general physical
aspect was severe, even Savage -- she
might have been a Tartar beauty, the bride
of a Gengis Khan, or a South Sea Island
Queen, tossing her lovers into the crater of
Mauna Loa after killing them in the excess
and fantasy of her passion -- yet the soul
within shone out and turned the swords to
plowshares. There was pride, indeed, but
only of that kind which is (as it were) the
buckler on the arm of nobility; the woman
was incapable of meanness, of treachery,
or even of unkindness.

There were terrible fires in the depths
of that volcano; but they had been turned

to human service; they had been used to
heat the forge of art. For this woman was a
great singer; and no one outside the Order
knew of her secret aspirations, or that she
retired from time to time to one or the
other of the Profess-Houses of the Order,
there to pursue a mightier transmutation of
her being.

She greeted Cyril with peculiar warmth --
indeed, it had been she to whom he had
once thrown a pair of socks. In a way, it
was he that had made her a great artist;
for his personality had broken down her
dykes; not till she met him had she ever let
herself go. And it was by a magical trick
that he had shown her how to use her art as
a vehicle for her soul.

Later, he had brought her into the
Order, realizing the inestimable value of
her virtue; and if she was not its most
advanced member she was its most
beloved.

They called her Sister Cybele. [77]

CHAPTER VI

OF A DINNER, WITH THE TALK OF DIVERS
GUESTS

SIMON IFF and Cyril Grey had slipped
out of the reception-room to clothe
themselves according to their dignity in the
Order.

They returned in a few moments. The
old man was in a robe of the same pattern
as Sister Cybele's -- all the robes of the
Order were thus fashioned -- but it was of
black silk, and on the breast was
embroidered a golden eye within a radiant
triangle.

Cyril Grey was in a similar robe, but the
eye was enclosed in a six-pointed star, and
swords with undulating blades issued from
each re-entrant angle.

Their return broke up the conversation,
and Sister Cybele led the way, with Lisa on
her arm, to the lobby.

There the wonder of the house began.
The wall facing the front door was masked
by a group of statuary of heroic size.

It was a bronze, and represented
Mercury leading Hercules into Hades. In the
background stood Charon in his boat, one
hand upon his oar, the other stretched to
receive his obolus.

Sister Cybele waited until all the guests
were in the boat. Then she made pretence
to place the coin in Charon's hand.

In reality she touched a spring. The wall
parted; the boat moved slowly through; it
took its place beside another wharf.

They were in a vast hall; and Lisa
realized that [78] the hill behind the house
must have been profoundly hollowed out.
This hall was lofty, narrow and long. In the
midst, a circular table awaited the guests.
Behind each chair stood one of the
Probationers of the Order in a white robe,
on whose breast was a scarlet Pentagram.
Neck, sleeves, and hem were trimmed with
gold. Beyond this table, at which a number
of other members, in variously coloured
robes, were already seated, though they
rose to salute the newcomers briefly and in
silence, was a triangular slab of black
marble, the points truncated for
convenience. Around this there were six
seats, made of ebony inlaid with silver
discs.

Sister Cybele left the others to take her
seat as president of the circular table.
Simon Iff himself sat at the head of the
triangle, placing Cyril Grey and the
Mahathera Phang at the other corners. Lord
Antony Bowling was at his left, Lisa at his
right; Morningside faced him from the base.

When all were seated, Sister Cybele
rose, struck a bell that stood at her hand,
and said:

"Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of
the Law. O Master of the Temple, what is
thy will?"

Simon Iff rose in his place. "It is my will
to eat and drink," said he.

"Why shouldst thou eat and drink?"
"To sustain my body in strength."

"Why is it thy will that thy body may be
sustained in strength?"

"That it may aid me in the
accomplishment of the Great Work."

At this word all rose, and chanted
solemnly in chorus, "So mote it be."

"Love is the law, love under will," said
Sister Cybele softly, and sat down.

"Of course it's a most absurd
superstition," remarked Morningside to
Simon Iff, "to think that Food [79] sustains
the body. It is sleep that does that. Food
merely renews the tissues.

"| agree entirely," said Cyril, before Iff
could answer, "and | am about to renew my
tissues to the extent of a dozen of these
excellent Cherbourg prawns -- to begin
with!"

"My dear man," said Lord Antony,
"orawns are much better at the end of a
dinner -- as you'd know if you had been to
Armenia lately."

When Morningside said something
absurd, it merely meant that he was airing
his fads; when Lord Antony did so, it meant
a story. And all his stories were good ones.
Simon Iff jumped at the opening. He turned
immediately, and asked for the yarn.

"It's rather long," said Bowling, a little
dubiously. "But it's very, very beautiful."

Unacknowledged quotations gave a
curious fascination to his narrative style.
People became interested through the
psychological trick involved. They
recognized, yet could not place, the
remark, and they were stirred by the
magick of association, just as one becomes
interested in a stranger who reminds one of
-- one can't quite think who.

"At the close of a dark afternoon, "
pursued Lord Antony, "a huntsman of
sinister appearance might have been seen
approaching the hamlet of Sitkab in
Armenia. This was myself -- or | should
hardly think it worth while to tell the story.
Why detain you with a lesser potentate? |
was in pursuit of the most savage, elusive,
and dangerous wild beast, with the
exception of woman," (he smiled at Lisa so
delightfully that she could only take it asa
compliment) "that infests this globe. Need |
say that | refer to the Poltergeist?"

"You must do more," laughed Lisa. "You
must tell me what my rival is!"

"A Poltergeist is a variety of spook
distinguished by its playful habit of
throwing furniture about, and [80]

otherwise playing practical jokes of the
clown-in-the-pantomime order. The
particular specimen whose hide -- if they
have hides -- | was anxious to add to my
collection of theosophical tea-cups, spirit
cigarettes, and other articles of vertu was
an artist of singular refinement, for he
performed upon only one instrument, asa
rule; but of that instrument he had
acquired the most admirable mastery. It
was a common broomstick. This genial
spectre -- or rather non-spectre, for the
are but rarely seen, only heard, conditions
precisely opposed, | beg you to note, to
those that we require in little boys -- this
Poltergeist, then, was alleged to be the
guest of the local lawyer in the aforesaid
hamlet. It had annoyed him considerably
for some two years; for while claiming,
through an excellent medium in the
locality, to be the spirit of a deceased
Adept, it had merely thrown broomsticks at
him as he went about his daily task of
making mischief between the citizens of
that deplorably peaceful corner of the
earth, or misappropriating funds intrusted
to him for investment. He was an honest
lawyer, as lawyers go -- | was called to the
Bar myself in my unregenerate days -- and
he resented the interference, the more so
as no writ of habeas broomstick seemed to
abate the nuisance.

"The amiable creature, however, had
recently taken pity upon his host, and
sought to establish a claim upon his
gratitude by saving him from death. For
one day, as the lawyer was about to drive
across the village bridge he saw the
broomstick fall from the sky and stand

erect, precisely in his path. His horse
reared; a moment later the bridge was
swept away by the torrent. (This Is really
excellent Bortsch, Mr. Iff.) Well, | had been
called in to investigate this matter, and
there | was, installed in the house of my
brother brigand. The results of my stay of
six weeks or SO were inconclusive. | was
[81] convinced of the man's entire belief in
his story, and the broomstick certainly
moved in various ways for which | could not
account; but | was not fortunate enough to
observe anything of the kind when he was
not somewhere in the offing. And one is
bound to strain one's theories of the limits
of fraud as far as it is humanly possible --
especially when one is dealing with a
lawyer or a broomstick. So | returned from
the parts of the tribes even unto the
modern Babylon, where | abode for a
season. A little while later | received a card
announcing my friend's marriage to the
heiress of Sitkab, and, a year later again, in
response to kind enquiries, he had the
honour to announce that the manifestations
of the Poltergeist had totally ceased since
time day of the wedding. Some of these
Adepts are of course fearfully particular on
the sex-question, as we all know. Fall for
an hour from the austerities of a Galahad,
and devil a cigar will precipitate itself into
your soup, nor will you be interrupted at
billiards by the arrival of an urgent message
from Tibet, written on notepaper of the
kind you purchase in Walham Green if you
are areal lady, to the effect that the
secret Wisdom is beyond the Veil, or some
other remark evidential of Supreme
Enlightenment in too much of a hurry to
use the regular post.

"No, the story does not end here; in
fact, the above has been but the prelude to
a mightier theme. Once more a year passed
by. By a singular, and, in view of what
happened later, | think an ominous, train of
circumstance, it occupied exactly twelve
calendar months in the process.

"| now received another letter from the
lawyer. Whether love's moon had waned or
no he did not say; but he announced the
resumption of the phenomena, with
additions and improvements. One
encouraging point was that in the previous
series nothing had ever happened outside
his house, except in the case of [82] the
bridge incident; now the broomstick was
ubiquitous indeed, and followed him about
like Mary's lamb. His wife, too, had
developed the most surprising powers of
mediumship and was obtaining messages
from Herr P. Geist, which seemed of
unusual importance. A new world was open
to our view. | have always fancied myself
as a Columbus; and, as! had recently made
a considerable sum of money by a fortunate
speculation in oil, | did not hesitate to go
to the expense of atelegram. | have always
fancied myself as a Caesar, and |
endeavoured to emulate his conciseness.
‘Come stay winter' was the expression
employed. A week later those simple and
pious souls, escaping the perils of the
journey to Constantinople, were safely
cloistered, if | may use the term, in the
Orient Express. They were extricated from
Paris by a friend whom | had thoughtfully
sent to meet them; and the following day
my heart was gladdened by the realization
of my dreams -- the actual physical

presence of my loved ones in my ancestral
halls in Curzon Street -- those which |
rented two years ago from Barney Isaacs; or
rather from his heirs, for the poor fellow
was hanged, as you remember.

"Well, the conclusions of science appear
to indicate that a Poltergeist of the better
classes takes a fortnight or more to
accustom himself to a new domicile; from
which circumstance learned men have
written many treatises to suggest that it
may be of the cat tribe; though others
equally learned have contended with great
plausibility that its touching attachment to
this lawyer shows its nature to conform
rather with that of the dog.

To me it has seemed possible that the light
is not altogether withheld from either party
to the discussion; | have in fac diffidently
put forward the theory that the Poltergeist,
for all its German name, is of an ambiguous
nature, like [83] the animals of Australia;
and | have ventured to rely upon the
analogy between the broomstick employed
in this case and the throwing-stick of the
aborigines of that continent. However this
may be, friend Poltergeist began to
rehearse exactly fourteen days after the
arrival of the lawyer and his wife, and was
so kind as to oblige with a full recital --
Scherzo in A flat, or more accurately A
house -- three days later. | never really
valued the Sevres vase which was offered
on this occasion to the infernal gods.

The mediumistic powers of the lady
began to develop at the same time. The
spirit had devised an ingenious method of

communication, known to science as
Planchette. This instrument is probably
familiar to you all; it is am inconvenient
way of writing, but otherwise exhibits no
marked peculiarity. Now that we have
accepted ‘automatic wrriting' as automatic,
there is really no reason why mediums
should pretend that a planchette is not
under control.

"This planchette gave us much
invaluable information as to the habits,
mode of life, social and other pleasures, of
various parties deceased; and added, free
of all charge, advice which, followed out,
would undoubtedly tend to make me an
even better man than | am. It is, however,
with regret that | find myself obliged to
confess that scientific truth is an even
dearer object of my heart than moral
beauty, and at the moment | was wholly
absorbed in the desire to verify the latest
facts about the Poltergeist, for these lent
great weight to the theory that it was some
kind of dog. Under the inspiring intuition of
its charming mistress, it had developed
those qualities which we associate with the
spaniel or the retriever.

"Even in Armenia it had been wont,
when weary of its solos upon the
broomstick, to gladden and instruct
humanity by putting small articles in places
[84] where they should not be. | would
occasionally find my socks stuffed tightly
into my trousers’ pockets, or my razor
poised upon a mirror, when | realized that
morning in the bowl of night had flung the
stone that puts the stars to flight, and that
the Hunter of the East had caught the

Sultan's Turret in a noose of light. But in
the second series of phenomena the
faithful and intelligent animal had done far
more than this, bringing into the house
various objects from afar. It was evidently
appreciated in the Beyond that a
Poltergeist's reach should exceed his grasp.

"One day, in the wonderful month of
May with all its flowers a-blossom, the
planchette produced an exceedingly
mysterious message. So far as we could
understand him, he would bring more
evidence of his presence. 'Proof' was one of
the words used, | remember; yes, |
remember that very distinctly. And the
message ended, with a sudden transition,
‘Look out for game!' There could hardly
have been a more superfluous injunction so
far as | was concerned!

"| must now describe my dining-room. It
is very like any other room of the sort, |
dare say; the point is that there is a big
table, over which is suspended a cluster of
electric lamps, a flat shade covering these
from above. The top of this shade is j ust
about on the level of the eyes of a fairly
tall man, standing. | can see clear over it
from the edge of the table without
straining.

"Well, we went down to dinner, and the
Poltergeist was exceptionally active all
through the meal. The medium was
exceedingly distressed by his insistence on
the mysterious injunction to look out for
game. It was only at dessert that the
problem was solved. The medium screamed
out suddenly, ‘Oh! he's pinching my neck!’ --

and a second later - [85] lightning in a clear
sky -- a large quail fell from the empyrean
upon my humble mahogany.

"| only wished | could have had Rear
Admiral Moore, Sir Oliver Lodge, Colonel
Olcott, Sir Alfred Turner, Mr. A. P. Sinnett,
and Sir Arthur Conan Doyle present on that
sublime occasion. There could have been
no dissentient voice to say that this was not
‘evidential’ -- save, possibly, what is
negligible, my own. A poor thing, but mine
own!

"| wonder if you have ever reflected
upon the halo of excitement and romance
which must gild the lives of the members of
the worshipful Company of Poulterers. They
are the true sportsmen of our times; theirs
to beard the turkey in his den, theirs to
grapple the lordly pheasant, to close in
deadly combat with the grouse, to wrest
the plover's egg from its lonely nest upon
the moors, to dare a thousand deaths in
their grim heroism, the fulfilment of their
oaths to supply us with sparrow, cat or
rabbit. Think, too, of their relations with
the mysterious bazaars of Baghdad; their
traffickings with wily orientals, the
counting-out of secret gold by moonlight in
the shadow of the mosques; think of Mason,
as he painfully deciphers the code
cablegram from Fortnum, burns the
message, and armed with a dagger and a
bag of uncut rubies, plunges from the
Ghezireh Palace Hotel to his rendezvous
with Achmet Abdullah in the Fishmarket,
where, with no eye to see, the hideous
bargain is concluded, and, handing over his
rubies, Mason sallies from that dreadful

alley, clutching beneath his gaberdine -- a
quail.

"You have not thought such thoughts?
Nor, until now, had |. But | knew that quails
were cold storage products of the burning
East, and | knew that the number of
poulterers in my vicinity was limited. Early
the next morning | visited in turn these
respectable tradesmen, the third of whom
[86] remembered the sale of a quail toa
lady on the previous day. Both quail and
lady answered to the descriptions | had in
mind.

"It had been the custom of my guests to
walk abroad in the afternoons, now singly,
now together, now with one or another of
the members of my household.

"On this particular day, | begged the
medium to permit me the honour of
escorting her. She agreed with
characteristic amiability; and, once in the
street, | pleaded with her, like a child, to
tell me a story. | said that | was sure she
had a nice story to tell me. But no; it
appeared not.

"In the course of our ambulation, we
came -- surely led by some mysterious
Providence -- to the very poulterer whom |
had seen in the morning. | led her to that
worthy man. ‘Yes, my lord,' he replied to
my urbane question with affable
obsequience, ‘this is the lady to whom |
sold the quail.' She contradicted the
statement brusquely; she had never been in
the shop in her life. We proceeded on our
walk. Tell me,'| said, ‘exactly what you did

do when you were out yesterday.' 'Nothing
at all,'she answered. 'l went and sat in the
park for a little. Presently my sister came
and sat down with me, and we talked for a
little. Then she went away, and came back
in about half-an-hour. We talked some
more, and them | came away back to
Curzon Street.’

"On our return | questioned her
husband. 'Sister!' he exclaimed, 'she never
had a sister!'

"The mystery was cleared up. It wasa
case of Double Personality! There was,
however, still one small point. How did
that Spirit Quail get on to the table? It had
fallen very straight, or so it seemed to us;
and the butler said that he could hardly
believe that a quail could have been
concealed on [87] the lamp-shade; he
would have noticed it, he thought, while
laying the table.

"The experiments continued. Some time
later Brother Poltergeist permitted himself
some allusions to fish -- in the best possible
taste -- and | took my precautions
accordingly. Before dinner | slipped
downstairs and made a thorough search of
the dining room. Alas! to what treacheries
are the most virtuous of us liable to be
subj ected? That medium's saucy Sister
Second Personality had again betrayed her
to a most unjustifiable suspicion! For one
dozen prawns, of the best quality, were
distributed in most excellent symmetry
about the lamp-shade.

"A hasty reference to the dictionary not

yet published by the Society for Psychical
Research assured me that this sort of thing
was a ‘prepared phenomenon. '

"Now, if you are going to prepare a
phenomenon, you may as well prepare it
properly; and | attended -- you shall soon
learn how -- alike to decency and to
asthetics.

"Dinner was served; the Poltergeist
supplied the conversation. Never before
had he been so light, so genial, so anxious
to assure us of our future in Summerland;
but ever and anon he touched the minor
chord, spoke darkly of 'proof,' and of fish! (I
beg you all to bear witness that | have not
degraded myself by the evident pun). The
dessert arrived. And now the Poltergeist
was Imminent. The lawyer thought to touch
him and to hold him; he saw signs of him all
over the room; he ran about after him, like
a boy with a butterfly-net. But of all this |
took no heed; | was watching the lady's
face.

"Professor Freud would perhaps explain
my motive as ‘infantile psycho-sexual pre-
sexuality’; but no matter: | watched her
face.

"The lawyer, like what's his name
pursuing [88] Priam, was close on the heels
of the Poltergeist -- jam, jam' as used by
Vergil in the sense of prolonging the
Suspense -- at last he made one grab in
empty air. He overbalanced; must have
touched the lamp-shade, | suppose -- for a
shower of prawns fell upon us like the
gentle rain from heaven, blessing both him

that gives and him that takes.

"And oh! those spirit prawns were
beautiful upon the table-cloth; for each
had a bunch of blue ribbon, blue ribbon, to
tie up its bonny red hair. | had not moved
my eyes from that fair lady's face; and | am
sorry to conclude this abstract and brief
chronicle of the prawn by saying that |
cannot swear that she betrayed any guilty
knowledge!"

Lord Antony stopped with a jerk; and
lifting his liqueur glass, drained it suddenly.

Sister Cybele rose and bowed to Simon
iff.

But Cyril Grey's voice rose in a high-
pitched drawl: "Better a dinner of herbs
where love is, than a stalled prawn, and
discontentment therewith!"

The Master frowned him down.
"Gentlemen!" he said, "It is the custom of
this House that its guests pay for their
entertainment. Lord Antony Bowling has
done so by his delightful story; Mr.
Morningside by his brilliant theory upon the
function of food; and the Mahathera Phang
by his silence. | may say that | expected no
less, and no different, from any one of you;
we are overpaid; and the debt of gratitude
iS Ours.

Morningside was pleased; he thhought
the compliment sincere Bowling understood
something of the soul which had escaped
him until that moment; the Mahathera
Phang remained in his superb indifference.

Lisa addressed the Master: "I'm afraid |
haven't paid; and I've had a perfectly
wonderful dinner!"

Simon Iff replied with weight: "My dear
young lady, you are not a guest -- you area
candidate." [89]

Suddenly conscious of herself, she
blanched, and became rigid in her chair.

Simon Iff bade farewell to the three
guests; Cyril and Sister Cybele conducted
them to the boat, and bade them God-
speed. The other brethren of the Order
dispersed, one to one task, one to another.

Presently Simon and Cyril, Cybele and
Lisa were together alone. The old man led
the way to a cell cunningly hidden in the
wall. There they took seats.

Lisa la Giuffria recognized that the
critical moment of her life was come upon
her. [90]

CHAPTER VII

OF THE OATH OF LISA LA GIUFFRIA; AND OF
HER
VIGIL IN THE CHAPEL OF ABOMINATIONS

"BEFORE we go further," began Cyril
Grey, "I think it right to express a doubt as
to the advisability of our procedure. We
have already seen the most determined
opposition to our plans; and for my part, |
would say frankly that it might be wiser,
certainly safer, to abandon them."

Lisa turned on him like a tigress. "I dont
know what your plans are, and don't care.
But | didn't think you'd go back on them."

"Impulsive ladies," returned Cyril, "rush
in where angels fear to tread."

"I'll go," said she. "I'm sorry for all that
has happened -- all!" and she fixed her lover
with a look of infinite contempt.

Cyril shrugged his shoulders. "If you feel
like that, of course, we can continue. But
when the pinch comes, don't squeal! | have
warned you."

"Brother Cyril could not draw back if he
wished," put in Sister Cybele. "He is bound
by his oath -- as, ina little while, you will
be,"

Lisa read upon the woman's face a smile,

as of triumphant malice. It disturbed her far
more than Cyril's protest. Was she indeed in
a trap? It might be so; then, Cyril, who had
tried to save her, was in the trap too. She
must go on, if only to be able to save him
when opportunity occurred. At present [91]
she was wholly in the dark. She could feel
the atmosphere of constraint, of subtle and
terrible forces in the abyss which she was
treading blindfold upon some razor-edge
whose supports she could not even imagine;
the adventure was to her a supreme
excitement, and she lived first and last for
that. Had she known herself better, she
would have understood that her love for
Cyril was little more than a passion for the
bizarre. But at the moment she was J oan of
Arc and J uliet in one.

Moreover, she had the instinctive feeling
that wherever these people might be going
it was certainly somewhere. They were
engineers building a bridge to an unknown
land, just as methodically and purposefully
as the builders of an earthly bridge. There
was no doubt as to the validity of their
knowledge or their powers. She perceived
that Lord Antony Bowling had spent his life
in the investigation of disjointed,
purposeless items of mostly plain fraud;
while under his very nose the Brethren of
this Order were proceeding calmly with
some stupendous task, not troubling even to
acquaint the world with their results. And
she could dimly guess why this was so, and
must be so. They did not wish to be dragged
into foolish controversies with the ignorant.

And just then Simon Iff took up the
conversation with a remark in tune with

that thought.

"We shall not ask you for any pledge of
secrecy, he said, "for you have only to say
what you see and hear to be laughed at for
a liar. If this be our last meeting, we are
quits. You will be taken to a little chapel
leading from this room. There you will find
a circle, which you must enter, being
careful not to touch it, even with your
dress; for that would be dangerous. Within
that circle you must remain until we send
for you, unless you wish to leave, in [92]
which case you have only to pass through
the white curtains in the north. You will
find yourself in a lighted passage; open the
dooor at the end, you will be in the street,
where my automobile awaits your orders.
Your use of this exit will, however, close
your career in magick; in any future
relations we should merely be good friends --
or | hope so -- but we should not consider
any proposal to reconstruct the present
situation. "

"| will wait until you send for me," cried
Lisa. "I swear it."

Simon Iff placed his hand upon her brow;
in another instant he was gone from the
room.

Sister Cybele rose and took her by the
hand. "Come!" said she; "but you had better
bid farewell to your lover." The girl once
again thrilled to the undertone of malice in
the voice. But Cyril took her fondly in his
arms, and crushed her to him.

"To-morrow," he said, "brave heart, true

heart! To-morrow we Shall be alone
together!"

Trembling, la Giuffria returned to Sister
Cybele, and followed her to the door of the
chapel. She threw a last look over her
shoulder: to her amazement Cyril was
regarding her with a cynical smile of
amusement. Her heart went deadly cold;
she felt the pull of Sister Cybele's hand,
suddenly grown iron and inexorable. The
door shut behind her with a monstrous
clang; and she found herself in a room at
once obscure and menacing.

She wondered why they called it a
chapel. It was a bell-shaped cave. She dimly
saw the white curtains of which Iff had
spoken; there was nothing else in the room
but a square thin altar whose surface was of
polished silver, around whose base ran a
broad copper band, evidently the circle
referred to, and ten lamps, set in little
stars of iron, which gave a faint blue light.
The entire chamber was cut out of the solid
rock. [93] Only that part of it which lay
within the circle had been dressed; the rest
of the floor, and the walls, which bent over
to meet in a point, were rough.

She stepped carefully into the circle,
raising her dress. Sister Cybele faced her
squarely. In the woman's face Lisa read a
thousand evil purposes, a cruelty devilishly
hot as Cyril's was devilishly cold, and the
assurance in those grey eyes that she had
fallen into the power of creatures utterly
abominable. Sister Cybele suddenly broke
into a short harsh laugh, then stepped
aside, and Lisa, turning quickly, only saw

the door close behind her. Heedless of
caution, she leapt after her in the impulse
of self-preservation -- but the door was
entirely smooth on the inside. She beat
against it, uttering a horrible, fierce cry:
but only silence answered her.

The impulse passed as quickly as it had
come. Mechanically she stepped back into
the circle. And as she did so the thought of
Simon Iff came to calm her. The other two
might puzzle her, but she felt that Iff
would neither do nor suffer wrong.

During dinner, too, she had fixed her
gaze, fascinated, upon the Mahathera
Phang. She knew that he was more than
friendly to the Order, though not a member
of it; and his face, coupled with the fact
that he had not spoken even once in her
presence, redoubled that confidence.

In front of the little altar, she
discovered, as her eyes accommodated
themselves to the dimness, a curiously-
shapen stool covered with leather. She
squatted on it, and found it a very Paradise
of ease. And then it dawned upon her that
she had to wait. To wait!

There was no sound or movement to fix
her attention; presently she began to amuse
herself by making faces at herself in the
polished silver of the [94] altar. It was not
long before she tired of that; and once
again she found herself waiting.

Her imagination soon began to people
the little room with phantoms; the memory
of the Thing in the Garden began to obsess

her. Once again Simon Iff came to the
rescue. She knew that her imagination was
at work, and that, even had the shapes
about her been real, they could not harm
her. She heard herself repeating the old
mystic's words: "Because there is in him no
place of death."

She became perfectly calm; for a little
while her thoughts occupied her. Suddenly
they fled, and she found herself (so to
Speak) in a small open boat, without
provisions, in the midst of a limitless ocean
of unutterable boredom.

She had a period of fidgets; that over,
she became listless, and merely prayed for
sleep.

Then she noticed that a square pencil of
light had entered from the apex of the
chapel, and was casting glory upon the top
of the altar. She rose instantly -- and
gasped in amazement, for figures were
moving on the silver.

Three men, with strange musical
instruments, species respectively of flute,
viol, and drum, were walking across a room.
This room was hung with rose-coloured
curtains, and lit with silver candelabra. At
one end was a dais, and on this the men
took their seats. They began to tune their
instruments, and so strong was her fancy,
that she thought she heard them. It was a
fantastic Oriental dance-music. Presently a
small boy, a negro, dressed in a yellow
tunic and baggy breeches of pale blue,
entered the room. He carried a salver, on
which were a great flask of wine and two

goblets of gold.

Then, to her utter amazement, Cyril
Grey stepped into the room with Sister
Cybele. They took the wine from the boy,
and, each placing the left hand on the [95]
left shoulder of the other, they touched
their goblets, and, throwing their heads
back, drained them. The boy took the
empty cups and disappeared.

She saw Cyril and Cybele draw together;
they gave a laugh which (once again) she
fancied she could hear. It rang demoniac in
her very inmost soul. An instant more, and
their mouths met in a kiss.

Lisa felt her knees give way. She caught
the altar, and saved herself from falling;
but she must have lost consciousness for a
second or two, for when her eyes opened
she saw that they had discarded their
robes, and were dancing together. It was
wild and horrible beyond all imagination;
the dancers were locked so closely that
they appeared like a single monster of
fable, a thing with two heads and four legs
which writhed or leapt in hideous ecstasy.

She was so shaken that she did not even
ask herself the nature of the vision,
whether it was a dream, an hallucination, a
picture of the past, or an actual happening.
The bacchanal obscenity of it was
overwhelming. Again and again she turned
her eyes away; but they always returned to
the gaze, and every gesture shot a pang of
agony to her soul. She understood the
ambiguities of her lover; his strange
behaviour seemed like an open book to her;

and the malice of Sister Cybele, her elfin
laughter, her satanic sneer, sank into her
bleeding heart like acid, burning, fuming.

The revel did not diminish; instead, it
took novel and more atrocious forms. All
that she had ever conceived of sensuality of
bestiality, was a thousandfold surpassed. It
was an infinite refinement of abomination
joined with an exaggeration of grossness
that might have turned Georges Sand to
stone. The light went out.

The thought of flight from that
abominable chapel never came to her. It
was Cyril -- the man to whom [96] she had
given herself utterly at the first touch --
who was plunging this poisoned dagger into
her soul. And she could not even die; it was
ferocity and madness that awoke in her.
She would wait until the morning -- and she
would find a way to be avenged. Yet she
felt that she was slowly bleeding to death;
it did not seem that any morning could ever
come to her. She would not be able to face
Cyril; it seemed somehow as if the shame
were hers.

And then she screamed aloud -- a soft
hand was on her shoulder. "Hush! Hush!"
came a gentle voice in her ear. It was the
girl who had waited on her at dinner. Even
at the time Lisa had noticed that she was
very different to the others; for they were
of most cheerful countenance, and this girl's
eyes were red with weeping. "Come away!"
Said the girl, "come away while it is time.
This is the first chance | have ever had to
escape; | was set to watch the chapel door
to-night; and | found the spring. Oh, come

away quickly! They're criminals; they
corrupt you and they torture you. Oh do
come, sister! | can't escape without you;
the man in the automobile would stop me.
But if you come, | can slip away. It's only a
step through the passage. Oh God! Oh God!
if | had only gone when | was as you are!"
Lisa's whole soul went out in sympathy to
the gentle creature." Look what they've
done to me!" "Feel all down my back!" The
girl winced with pain even at Lisa's gentle
finger-tips. Her back was a mass of knotted
weals; she must have been beaten savagely
with a sjambok or a knout.

"And see my arms!" The girl lifted her
hands, and the loose sleeves of her robe fell
back. From wrist to elbow she was a mass
of parallel cuts. "| wouldn't do what they
wanted," she moaned, "it was too horrible.
You'd think no woman would; [97] but they
do. Sister Cybele's the worst. O come! do
come from this abominable house!"

Lisa had touched the summit of the
mountain of hysteria. Her feelings were far
beyond all expression; she was living ina
world deeper than feeling. She gained the
consciousness of her own nature, something
far deeper than anything she had ever
known, and she expressed its will in words
of absolute despair. "I can't leave Cyril
Grey."

"I'm afraid of him more than all the
others," whispered the girl." | loved him
too. And when | came to him two days ago,
thinking that he still loved me -- he laughed
-- and he had me whipped. Oh come away!"

"| can't," said Lisa, brokenly. "But you
Shall go. Here, take my dress; give me your
robe. The chauffeur won't know the
difference. Tell him to drive to the Grand
Hotel; ask for Lavinia King; I'll get word to
you to-morrow, and money if you need it.
But - | - cant - go."

The last words dripped out icily from the
frozen waters of her soul. Quickly the girl
dressed herself in Lisa's clothes: then she
threw the white robe over her -- La Giuffria
never thought of the symbolism of the
action; she would have rather stood naked
before a thousand men than appear in that
garment of infamy ---

The girl pressed one soft kiss upon her
forehead: then was gone headlong through
the curtains. Lisa heard the clang of the
outer door, and a breath of cold air swept
round the room.

It dizzied her, as if she had been drunk;
she remembered no more; probably she
slept.

At last, she came to consciousness again
in a most strange state of being. A peculiar
smell was in the air, something as of the
sea; she felt a physical exhilaration
incomparable. Her mind was still quite [98]
blank as to the past; she was not even
surprised at her surroundings. She rose and
began to stretch her arms in a dozen
physical exercises. J ust as she touched her
toes for the tenth time the door behind her
opened. Sister Cybele was standing there.
"Come, Sister!" she cried, “it will be dawn in
three minutes; first we must make the

Adoration of the Sun, and then comes
breakfast!"

The horror of the night returned to Lisa
in a flash. But somehow it had receeded
into a deeper stratum of her being; when it
came to a question of any possible action,
she seemed remote. She had the horrible
fancy that she had died in the night. She
followed Sister Cybele as she would have
followed her executioner to the block.

Together they went up a spiral staircase.
They came to a large room, circular in
shape; it was full of the members of the
Order, in their robes. At the East, where an
oriel opened toward the dawn, she could
see the figure of Simon Iff, his eyes fixed,
awaiting the rising of the Sun.

A beam touched his face; and he began:

"Hail unto thee that art Ra in thy rising;
even unto thee that art Ra in thy strength,
that travellest over the Heavens in thy Bark
in the uprising of the Sun! Tahuti standeth
in his splendour at the prow, and Ra-Hoor
abideth at the helm; hail unto thee from
the abodes of night!"

It seemed to her that the whole
assembly, uniting in the singular gesture
with which Simon Iff accompanied his
words, was uplifted in some subtle way
beyond her understanding. The crowd-
psychology assailed her; and she gritted her
teeth to curse this hypocrisy of devilry.

But at that moment the crowd broke like
a wave upon the beach; and she saw a girl

running upon her. [99]

"Oh, you were splendid, sister!" cried a
voice, and two scarred arms were thrown
about her neck. It was the girl of the night
before!

"Didn't you escape?" babbled Lisa,
incoherent.

But the child's ringing laughter silenced
her. "| forgive you for spoiling my record,"
she bubbled over. "You know, I'm supposed
to get them five times in six."

Lisa stood bewildered. But Sister Cybele
was wringing her hands and kissing her, and
Cyril Grey was telling the child that he had
first claim on the strangle-hold ---

And then they all suddenly melted from
her. Simon Iff was walking toward her, and
his hand was open.

"| congratulate you, sister," he said
solemnly, "upon your initiation to our holy
Order. You have well earned the robe in
which you stand, for you have paid its price -
- service to others without thought of the
consequence to yourself. Let us break our
fast!"

And he took Lisa's arm; presently they
came to the refectory. As ina well-
rehearsed play, every one fell into his
place; and before Lisa realized the utter
subversion that had taken place in her
being, Sister Cybele was on her feet,
proclaiming:

"Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of
the Law."

Lisa thought that breakfast the most
delicious she had ever tasted in her life.

A great reaction from the strain of the
previous twenty-four hours was upon her.
She had lived a lifetime in that period; and
in a sense she had most surely died and
been reborn. She felt like a little child. She
wanted to climb on to everybody's knee,
and be hugged! She had regained at a single
[100] stroke the infant's faith in human
nature; she looked at the universe as simply
as a great artist does. (For in him too lives
and rejoices the Eternal Babe).

But her greatest surprise was in her
physical health and energy. She had passed
through a fierce and furious day, a night of
infernal torture; yet she was unaccountably
buoyant, eager, assiduous in every act,
from her smiled word of pleasure to the
drinking of her coffee.

Everything at that meal seemed matter
of intoxication. She had not previously
realized that toast, properly understood,
was a superior stimulant to brandy.

When breakfast ended, she could not
have walked across the room. It was
dancing or nothing, so she said to herself.

Somehow she found herself once more in
the Chapel of Abominations. On the altar
was laid a sprig of gorse, and the sunlight,
streaming through the apex of the vault,
made its thorny bloom of the very fire and

colour of day.

Simon Iff stood behind the altar; Cyril
Grey was on her right hand, Sister Cybele
on her left. They joined their hands about
her.

"| will now complete the formality of
your reception," said the old man. "Say
after me: ‘I (your name).

"|, Lisa la Giuffria ---"

"Solemnly promise to devote myself" She
repeated the phrase.

To the discovery of my true purpose in
this life."

She echoed in a lower tone.

All three concluded "So mote it be." "I
receive you into this Order," which Simon
Iff, "| confirm you in the robe which you
have won; | greet you with [101] the right
hand of fellowship; and | induct you to the
Gate of the Great Work." Still holding the
hand which he had grasped, he led her from
the chapel.

They passed through the refectory, and
entered a room on Its other side. This room
was furnished as a library; there was
nothing in it to suggest magick.

"This is the Hall of Learning," said Simon
Iff "Here must your work begin. And,
innocent as it seems, it is a thousandfold
more dangerous than the chapel from which
you have come forth with so much credit."

Lisa seated herself, and prepared to
listen to the exposition of her task in life
which she expected to follow.

But she could not know why the old
mystic was at so great pains (as he
afterwards proved) to make every syllable
of his discourse intelligible; for she had not
heard his conference with Cyril Grey at the
moment when Sister Cybele had called her.

"Brother Cyril!" the old mystic had said,
"| shall go on -- | shall even put more than
the necessary care into the work -- as if this
were victory and not defeat.

"| tell you that you will never do
anything yourself, still less anything for
others, so long as you rely on women. This
victory of the woman's is only the chance
resultant of a chaos of emotional states.
She's in it for the fun of the thing; she's not
even an artist; she's merely the female of
the species; and | do not alleviate the
situation by one further precision -- your
Species!"

"Are women no use? Why were they
made?" asked Cyril, angry He did not know
that his question was prompted by a desire
yet unconquered in [102] himself. But
Simon Iff answered him with mock humility.

"lam unskilled to unravel the mysteries
of the Universe. Like Sir Isaac Newton, | am -
--" But seeing the muffled rage in the boy's
eyes, he spared him the conclusion. [103]

CHAPTER VIII

OF THE HOMUNCULUS; CONCLUSION OF THE
FORMER ARGUMENT CONCERNING THE
NATURE OF THE SOUL

"| AM going to be perfectly horrid," said
Simon Iff, leaning over to Lisa, and
measuring his words with the minutest
care. "| am going to do everything possible
to damp your enthusiasm. | would rather
have you start from cold and spark up well
as you go, than have you go off with a
spurt, and find yourself without petrol in
the middle of the big rise.

"| want you to take up this research
because of your real love of knowledge, not
because of your passion for Brother Cyril.
And | tell you honestly that | am mortally
afraid for you, because you live in
extremes. It is good for a swift push to have
that sudden energy of yours; but no
research in science is to be taken by storm.
You need infinite patience, nay, even
infinite indifference to the very thing on
which your heart ts set:

"Well, | have prated. The old man must
utter his distrust of fiery youth. So we'll go
on.

"I'm going to talk to you about the soul
again. Remember our conception of it, the
idea that seemed to do away with all the
difficulties at a blow. We had the idea of a

soul, of a real physical substance, one of
whose surfaces, or rather boundary-solids,
was what we call body and mind. Body and
mind are real, too, and truly belong to the
soul, but are only minute aspects of it, just
as any ellipse or hyperbola is an aspect of
the section of a cone. [104]

"We'll take just one more analogy in the
lower dimensions as we pass.

"How do solids know one another? Almost
entirely by their surfaces! Except in
chemistry, which we have reason to believe
to be a fourth-dimensional science, witness
the phenomena of polarization and
geometrical isomerism, solids only make
contact superficially.

"Then, shifting the analogy as we did
before, how do fourth-dimensional beings
know one another? By their bounding solids.
In other words, my soul speaks to yours
through the medium of our minds and
bodies.

"That is the common phrase? Quite so;
but | am using it in an absolute physical
sense. A line can only be aware of another
line at a point of contact; a plane of
another plane at the line where they cut; a
cube of another cube at the surface
common to both; and a soul of another soul
where their ideas are in conjunction.

"| do want you to grasp this with every
fibre in your being; | believe it to be the
most important thesis ever enunciated, and
you will be proud to learn that it is wholly
Brother Cyril's, with no help from me.

Hinton, Rouse Ball, and others, laid the
foundations; but it was he that put it in
such a Clear light, and correlated it with
occult science.

"You must give the honour to the
Mahathera Phang!" interjected Cyril. "| was
proving to him the metaphysical nature of
the soul -- and he regarded me with so
amused a smile that | perceived my
asininity. Of course there can be but one
order of Nature!"

"In any case," continued Iff, "this theory
of Cyril's wipes the slate clean of every
metaphysical speculation. Good and evil
vanish instantly, with Realism and
Nominalism, and Free will and [105]
Determinism -- and all the ‘isms’ and all the
‘ologies'! Life is reduced to mathematical
formulae, indeed, as the Victorian
scientists rightly wished to do; but at the
Same time mathematics is restored to her
royal pre-eminence as not only the most
exact, but the most exalted of the
sciences. The intelligible order of things,
moreover, becomes natural and inevitable;
and such moral problems as the cruelty of
organic life return to their real
insignificance. The almost comic antinomy
between man's size and his intelligence is
reduced; and although the mystery of the
Universe remains unsolved, at least it isa
rational mystery, and neither senseless nor
intolerable.

"Let us now come down to a simple
practical point. Here is a soul anxious to
communicate with other souls. He can only
do it by obtaining a mind and body. Now

you'll notice, taking that cone image of ours
again, that any section of it is always one of
three regular curves. It would not fit into a
square, for example, however you turned

it. And so our soul has to look about for
some mind which will fit one of his
sections. There is a great deal of latitude,
no doubt; for the mind grows, and Is at first
very plastic. But there must be some sort of
relation. If | am a wandering soul, and wish
to communicate with the soul now
manifesting a section of itself as Professor
of Electricity at Oxford, it is useless for me
to take the mind of a Hottentot. (Cyril
sighed a doubt. )

"I'm going to digress for a moment. Look
at the finished product, the soul
‘incarnated,'as we may call it. There are
three forces at work upon it; the soul itself,
the heredity and the environment. A clever
soul will therefore be careful to choose the
embryo which seems most likely to be fairly
free in the two latter respects. It will look
for a healthy stock, for parents who will,
and can, give the child every chance [106]
in life. You must remember that every soul
is, from our point of view, a ‘genius, ' for its
world is so incalculably greater than ours
that one spark of its knowledge Is enough to
kindle a new epoch in mankind.

"But heredity and environment usually
manage to prevent any of this coming to
light. No matter how full of whisky a flask
may be, you will never make it drunk!

"SO we may perhaps conceive of some
competition between souls for possession of
different minds and bodies; or, let us say,

to combine the ideas, different embryos. |
hope you notice how this theory removes
the objection to reincarnation, that one's
mind does not remember ‘the last time.’
Why should our cone make connexion
between its different curves? Each is so
unimportant to it that it would hardly think
of doing so. Yet there might be some
similarity between successive curves (in our
case, lives) that might make an historian
suspect that they were connected; just asa
poet's style would be constant in some
respects, whether he wrote a war-story or
a love-lyric.

"You see, of course, by the way, how
this theory does away with all the nonsense
about ‘Are the planets inhabited? with its
implication of idiotic waste if they be not.
To us every grain of dust, every jet of
hydrogen on the sun's envelope, is the
manifestation of a section of some soul:

"And here we find ourselves quite
suddenly and unexpectedly in line with
some of the old Rosicrucian doctrines.

"This brings us to the consideration of
certain experiments made by our
predecessors. They had quite another
theory of souls; at least, their language was
very different to ours; but they wanted
very much to produce a man who should
not be bound up [107] in his heredity, and
should have the environment which they
desired for him.

"They started in paraphysical ways; that
is, they repudiated natural generation
altogether. They made figures of brass, and

tried to induce souls to indwell them. In
some accounts we read that they
succeeded; Friar Bacon was credited with
one such Homunculus; so was Albertus
Magnus, and, | think, Paracelsus.

"He had, at least, a devil in his long
sword ‘which taught him all the cunning
pranks of past and future mountebanks,' or
Samuel Butler, first of that dynasty, has
lied.

"But other magicians sought to make this
Homunculus in a way closer to nature. In all
these cases they had held that environment
could be modified at will by the application
of telesmata or sympathetic figures. For
example, a nine-pointed star would attract
the influence which they called Luna -- not
meaning the actual moon, but an idea
similar to the poets' ideas of her. By
surrounding an object with such stars, with
similarly-disposed herbs, perfumes, metals,
talismans, and so on, and by carefully
keeping off all other influences by parallel
methods, they hoped to invest the original
object so treated with the Lunar qualities,
and no others. (1 am giving the briefest
outline of an immense subject.) Now then
they proceeded to try to make the
Homunculus on very curious lines.

"Man, said they, is merely a fertilized
ovum properly incubated. Heredity is there
even at first, of course, but in a feeble
degree. Anyhow, they could arrange any
desired environment from the beginning, If
they could only manage to nourish the
embryo in some artificial way -- incubate it,
in fact, as is done with chickens to-day.

Furthermore, and this is the crucial point,
they thought that by performing this [108]
experiment in a specially prepared place, a
place protected magically against all
incompatible forces, and by invoking into
that place some one force which they
desired, some tremendously powerful
being, angel or archangel -- and they had
conjurations which they thought capable of
doing this -- that they would be able to
cause the incarnation of beings of infinite
knowledge and power, who would be able
to bring the whole world into Light and
Truth.

"| may conclude this little sketch by
saying that the idea has been almost
universal in one form or another; the wish
has always been for a Messiah or Superman,
and the method some attempt to produce
man by artificial or at least abnormal
means. Greek and Roman legend is full of
stories in which this mystery is thinly
veiled; they seem mostly to derive from
Asia Minor and Syria. Here exogamic
principles have been pushed to an amusing
extreme. | need not remind you of the
Persian formula for producing a magician,
or of the Egyptian routine in the matter of
Pharaoh, or of the Mohammedan device for
inaugurating the Millenium. | did remind
Brother Cyril, by the way, of this last point,
and he did need it; but it did him no good,
for here we are at the threshold of a Great
Experiment on yet another false track!"

"He is only taunting me to put me on my
mettle," laughed Cyril.

"Now I'm going to bring all this to a

point," went on the old mystic. "The
Greeks, as you know, practised a kind of
eugenics. (Of course, all tribal marriage
laws are primarily eugenic in intention). But
like the mediaeval magicians we were
speaking of, with their Homunculus, the
Greeks attached the greatest possible
importance to the condition of the mother
during gestation. She was encouraged to
look only on beautiful statues, to read only
[109] beautiful books. The Mohammedans,
again, whose marriage system makes
Christian marriage by comparison a thing
for cattle, shut up a woman during that
period, keep her perfectly quiet and free
from the interference of her husband.

"This is all very good, but it falls short of
Brother Cyril's latest lunacy. As |
understand him, he wishes indeed to
proceed normally in a physical sense, but to
prepare the way by making the heredity,
and environment as attractive as possible to
one special type of soul, and then -- to go
soul-fishing in the Fourth Dimension!

"Thus he will have a perfectly normal
child, which yet is also a Homunculus in the
mediaeval sense of the word!

"And he has asked me to lend you the
villa of the Order at Naples for the
purpose. "

Lisa had lent forward; her face,
between her hands was burning.

Slowly she spoke: "You know that you
are asking me to sacrifice my humanity?"
She was not silly enough to pretend to

misunderstand the proposal and Simon liked
her better for the way she took it.

He thought a moment. "I see now; |
never thought of it before, and | am foolish,
The conservatism of woman calls this sort
of thing a ‘heartless experiment. ' Yet
nothing Is farther from our thoughts. There
will be no action to annoy or offend you on
the contrary. But | understand the feeling --
it is the swift natural repugnance to discuss
what is sacred."

"Tut--tut--my memory Is always failing
me these days," muttered Cyril; "I've quite
forgotten the percentage of children that
were born blind in 1861."

Lisa started to her feet. She did not
know what he meant, but in some way it
stung her like a serpent. [110]

Simon Iff intervened. "Brother Cyril, you
always use strong medicine!" he said,
shaking his head; "| sometimes think you're
too keen to see your results."

"| hate to beat about the bush. | say the
thing that can never be forgotten,"

"Or forgiven, sometimes," said the old
man in gentle reproof.

"But come, my dear, sit down; he meant
truth, after all, and truth cuts only to cure.
It's a brutal fact that children used to be
born blind, literally by the thousand,
because it wasn't quite nice to publish the
facts about certain diseases; and
precautions against them were called

‘heartless experiments.’ What Cyril is asking
you to do is no more than what your whole
heart craves for; only he wants to crown
that with a gift to humanity such as has
never yet been given. Suppose that you
succeed, that you can attract a soul to you
who will find a way to abolish poverty, or
to cure cancer, or to -- oh! surely you glow
with vision, a thousand heights of human
progress thrusting their sunlit snows
through the clouds of doubt!"

Lisa rose again to her feet, but her
mood was no longer the same. She put her
hands in Simon Iff's. "I think you're a very
noble man," she said, "and it's an honour to
work in such a cause." Cyril took her in his
arms. "Then you will come with me to
Naples? To the Master's own villa?"

She looked at Iff with a queer smile.
"May | make a joke?" she said. "I should like
to rechristen the villa -- The Butterfly-Net!"

Simple Simon laughed with her like a
child. It was just the delicate humour that
appealed to him; and the classical allusion
to the Butterfly as allegorical of the Soul
showed him a side of the girl that he had
hardly suspected. [111]

But Cyril Grey swerved instantly to the
serious aspect of the problem. "We have
merely been discussing an A.B. case," he
said; "we have forgotten where we stand.
Somewhere or other | have made a blunder
already, mark you! -- and we have the
Black Lodge on our trail. You may possibly
recall some of the events of yesterday?" he
concluded, with a touch of his old airy

manner.

"Yes," said Simon, "I think you had better
get to business."

"We discussed the thing on general lines
during your vigil last night," said Cyril. “Our
first need is defence. The strongest form of
defence is counter-attack; but you should
arrange for that to take shape as far as
possible from the place you are defending,
In this game you are keeping goal, Lisa; |
am full back; Simple Simon is the captain
playing at half-back; and | think we have a
fairly fit eleven! So that’s all right. There is
reason to believe that the enemy's goal is in
Paris itself. And if we can keep the ball in
their half all through the game, you and |
can spend a very quiet year in Italy."

"| can't follow all that football slang; but
do explain why anyone should want to
interfere with us. It's too silly."

"It's only silly when you get to the very
distant end of a most abstruse philosophy.
On the surface it's obvious. It's the
objection of the burglar to electric lights
and bells. You can imagine him having
enough foresight to vote against a town
councillor who proposed an appropriation
for the study of science in general.
Something might turn up which would put
him out of business. "

"But what is their business?"
"Ultimately, you may call it selfishness --

only that's a dreadful word, and will
mislead you. We're [112] just as selfish;

only we realize that other things beyond
Our Own consciousnesses are equally
ourselves. For instance, | try to unite
myself as intimately as 1 can with every
other mind, or body, or idea, that comes in
my way. To take that cone simile, | want to
be all the different curves | can, so as to
have a better chance of realizing the cone.
The Black Lodge magician clings to his one
curve, tries to make it permanent, to exalt
it above all other curves. And of course the
moment the cone shifts, out he goes: pop!"

"Observe the poet!" remarked Simon Iff.
"He values himself enormously; but his idea
of perpetuating himself is to make the
beauty that is inherent in his own soul
radiate beyond him so as to illumine every
other mind in the world. But your Black
Magician is secret, and difficult of access;
he isn't going to tell anyone anything, not
he! So even his knowledge tends to
extinction, in the long run."

"But you are yourselves a secret
society!" exclaimed Lisa.

"Only to secure freedom from
interruption. It is merely the same idea as
that which makes every householder close
his doors at night; or, better, as public
libraries are guarded by certain regulations.
We can't allow lunatics to scrawl over our
unique manuscripts, and tear the pages out
of all our books. Shallow people are always
chattering about science being free to all;
the truth is that it is guarded as no other
secret ever was In all history, by the simple
fact that, with all the help in the world, it
takes half a lifetime to begin to master

even one small section of it. We guard our
magick just as much and as little as our
other branches of physics; but people are
so stupid that, though they know it requires
years of training to use so simple an
instrument as a [113] microscope, they are
indignant that we cannot teach them to use
the Verendum tn an hour."

"Ah, but they complain that you have
never proved the use of the Verendum at
all."

"Only those who have not learnt its use.
| can read Homer, but | can only prove the
fact to another man by teaching him Greek;
and he is then obliged to do the same to a
third party, and so on. People generally
acquiesce that some men can read Homer
because -- well, it's their intellectual
laziness. A really stout intelligence would
doubt it.

"Spiritualism and Christian Science,
which are either fraud or bluff or
misinterpretation of facts, have spread all
over the Anglo-Saxon world because there
IS no true critical spirit among the half-
educated. But we are not willing to have
our laboratories invaded by reporters and
curiosity-mongers; we are dealing with
delicate forces; we have to train our minds
we with an intensity which no other study
in the world demands. Public indifference
and incredulity suit us perfectly. The only
object of advertisement would be to get
Suitable members; but we have methods of
finding them without publicity. We make no
secret of our methods and results, on the
other hand; but only the right man knows

how to discover them.

"It is not as if we were working in an old
field where all the terms were defined, and
the main laws ascertained. In Magick, even
more than in any other science, the student
must keep his practice level with his
theory."

"Don't you ever do magick under test
conditions?"

"Unfortunately, my child, creative
magick, which is the thaumaturgic side of
the business, depends on a peculiar
excitation which objects to test conditions’
very strongly. You might as well ask Cyril to
prove his poetic gift, or even his manhood,
before a set of [114] fools. He will produce
you poems, and infants, and events, as the
case may be; but you have more or less to
take his word for it that he did the acts
responsible primarily for them. Another
difficulty about true magick is that it is so
perfectly a natural process that its
phenomena never excite surprise except by
their timeliness -- so that one has to record
hundreds of experiments to set up a case
which will even begin to exclude
coincidence. For instance, | want a certain
book. | use my book-producing talisman.
The following day, a bookseller offers me
the volume. One experiment proves
nothing. My ability to do it every time is the
proof. And | can't even do that under ‘test
conditions’ for it is necessary that | should
really want the book, in my
subconsciousness, whose will works the
miracle. It is useless for me to think, or
pretend, that | want it. Any man may fluke

a ten-shot at billiards, but you call him a
player only when he can average a _ break of
thirty or so every time he goes to the table.

But in some branches of magick we can
give proof on the spot; in any branch, that
is, where the female, and not the male,
part of us is concerned. The analogy is
quite perfect. Thus, in my guess at your
birth-hour -- was not that a test?! will do it
all day, and be right five times in six.
Further, in the event of error, | will show
exactly why | was wrong. It's a case where
one is sometimes right to be wrong, as I'll
explain one day. Then again, your own
clairvoyance; | did not tell you that sort of
a Thing to look for; yet you saw it under the
Same form as | did. You shall practice these
things daily with Cyril if you like, always
checking your results in a way which he will
show you; and in a month you will be an
expert. Then, if you feel you want to
advertise, do. But you won't.

Besides, the real trouble is that not one
person in a thousand cares for [115] any
form of science whatever; even such base
applications of science as the steam-engine
and all its family, from the telegraph to the
automobile, were only thrust upon the
unwilling people by bullies who knew that
there was money in them. Who are your
‘men of science’ in the popular notion of to-
day? Edison and Marconi, neither of whom
ever invented anything, but were smart
business men, with the capacity to exploit
the brains of others, and turn science to
commercially useful and profitable ends.
Heigho!"

"We're a long way from our subject,"
said Cyril. "l have had a delightful morning --
| have felt like Plato with the Good, the
True, and the Beautiful in contemplating
you three -- but we have work before us. |
propose in this emergency to copy the
tactics of Washington at Valley Forge. We
will make a direct and vehement attack on
the Black Lodge: they will expect me to be
in my usual position in the van -- | will slip
away with Lisa while the fires blaze
brightest."

"A sound plan," said Simon. "Let us break
up this conference, and put it immediately
into execution. You had better not attract
attention by collecting luggage, and you
must certainly take no person outside the
Order into your circle. So after dinner you
will put on your other clothes, walk down
to the Metro, cross to the Gare de Lyon,
and jump into the Rome rapide. Wire me
when you arrive at The Butterfly-Net!"
[116]

CHAPTER IX

HOW THEY BROUGHT THE BAD NEWS FROM
ARAGO TO QUINCAMPOIX: AND WHAT
ACTION WAS TAKEN THEREUPON

J UST as Lord Antony Bowling turned into
the Grands Boulevards from the Faubourg
Montmartre, Akbar Pasha was leaving them.
The Turk did not see the genially flourished
cane; he was preoccupied -- and perhaps he
did not wish to be recognized. For he
dodged among the obscure and dangerous
streets of "The Belly of Paris" with many a
look behind him. To be sure, this is but a
reasonable precaution in a district so
favourable to Apache activities. At last he
came out into the great open square of the
markets; and, crossing obliquely, came to a
drinking den of the type which seeks to
attract foreigners, preferably Americans. It
bore the quite incongruous name "Au Pere
Tranquille." Akbar mounted the stairs. It
was too early for revellers; even the
musicians had not arrived; but an old man
sat in one corner of the room, sipping a
concoction of gin, whisky and rum which
goes in certain circles by the name of a
Nantucket Cocktail.

This individual was of some sixty years
of age; his hair and beard were white; his
dress was that of a professional man, and
he endeavoured to give dignity to his
appearance by the assumption of a certain
paternal or even patriarchal manner. But

his eye was pale and cold as a murderer's,
shifty and furtive as a thief's. His hands
trembled continually [117] with a kind of
palsy; and the white knuckles told a tale of
gout. Self-indulgence had bloated his body;
unhealthy fat was everywhere upon him.

The trembling of his hands seemed in
sympathy with that of his mind; one would
have said that he was in deadly fear, or the
prey to a consuming anxiety.

At the Turk's entrance he rose clumsily,
then fell back into his chair. He was more
than half intoxicated.

Akbar took the chair opposite to him.
"We couldn't get it," he said; in a whisper,
though there was nobody within earshot.
"Oh, Dr. Balloch, Dr. Balloch! do try to
understand! It was impossible. We tried all
sorts of ways."

The doctor's voice had a soft suavity.
Though a licensed physician, he had long
since abandoned legitimate practice, and
under the guise of homeopathy pursued
various courses which would have been but
ill regarded by more regular practitioners.

His reply was horrible, uttered as it was
in feline falseness, like a caress. "You foul
ass!" he said. "Il have to take this up with
S.R.M.D., you know! What will he say and
do?"

"| tell you | couldn't. There was an old
man there who spoilt everything, in my
idea."

"An old man?" Dr. Balloch almost
dropped his hypocritical bedside voice in
his rage. "Oh curse, oh curse it all!" He
leant over to the Turk, caught his beard,
and deliberately pulled it. There is no
grosser insult that you can offer to a
Mussulman, but Akbar accepted it without
resentment. Yet so savage was the assault
that a sharp cry of pain escaped him.

You dog! you Turkish swine!" hissed
Balloch. "Do you know what has happened?
S.R.M.D. sent a Watcher -- a bit of himself,
do you understand what that means, you
piece of dirt? -- and it hasn't returned. It
must have been killed, but we can't find
out how, [118] and S.R.M.D. is lying half
dead in his house. You pig! Why didn't you
come with your storry at once? | know now
what is wrong."

"You know | don't know your address, "
said the Turk humbly. "Please, oh please,
leave go of my beard!"

Balloch contemptuously released his
victim -- who was a brave enough man in an
ordinary way, and would have had the
blood of his own Sultan, though he knew
that the guards would cut him to pieces
within the next ten seconds, for the least
of such words as had been addressed to
him. But Balloch was his Superior in the
Black Lodge, which rules by terror and by
torture; its first principle was to enslave its
members. The bully Balloch became a
whimpering cur at the slightest glance of
the dreaded S.R.M.D.

"Tell me what the old man was like," he

said. "Did you get his name?"

"Yes," said Akbar, "I got that. It was
Simon Iff."

Balloch dashed his glass upon the
ground. "Oh hell! Oh hell! Oh hell!" he said,
not so much as a curse but as an
invocation. "Hear, oh hear this creature!
The ignorant, blind swine! You had him --
Him! -- under your hand; oh hell, you fool,
you fool!"

| felt sure he was somebody," said
Akbar, "but | had no orders."

"And no brains, no brains," snarled the
other. "Look here; I'll tell you how to get
your step in the Lodge if you'll give me a
hundred pounds."

"Do you mean it?" cried Akbar, entirely
his own man in a moment, for abject fear
and obsessing ambition combined to make
his advancement the tyrant of his whole
tormented mind. "Will you swear it?" [119]

Balloch made an ugly face. "By the black
sow's udder, | will."

His whole frame trembling with
excitement, Akbar Pasha drew a cheque-
book from his pocket, and filled in a blank
for the required sum.

Balloch snatched it greedily. "This is
worth your money," he said. "That man Iff is
in the second grade, perhaps even the first,
of their dirty Order; and we sometimes
think he's the most powerful of the whole

damned crew. That fool Grey's a child to
him. | Know now how the Watcher was
destroyed. Oh! S.R.M.D. will pay somebody
for this! But listen, man -- you bring that
old beast's head on a charger -- or Grey's,
either! -- and you can have any grade you
dare ask for! And that's no lie, curse it!
Why," he went on with increasing
vehemence, "the whole thing's a plant of
ours. Monet-Knott's one of us; we use him
to blackmail Lavinia King -- about all he's fit
for, the prig! And we got him to drag that
dago woman in front of Master Grey's dog
nose! And now they bring in Simon Iff. Oh,
it s too much! We've even lost their trail.
Ten to one they're safe in their Abbey to-
night. Be off! No, wait for me here; I'll
bring back orders. And while I'm gone, get
that son of yours here -- he's got more
sense than you. We'll have to trace Grey
somehow -- and astral watchers won't do
the trick when Simon Iff's about."

Balloch rose to his feet, buttoned his
coat around him, put on a tall silk hat, and
was gone without wasting another word
upon his subordinate.

The Turk would have given his ears to
have dared to follow him. The mystery of
S.R.M.D.'s personality and abode were
shrouded in the blackest secrecy. Akbar
had but the vaguest ideas of the man; he
was a formless ideal of terrific power and
knowledge, a sort of incarnated Satan, the
epitome of successful [120] iniquity. The
episode of the "Watcher" had not
diminished the chief's prestige in his eyes;
it was evidently an "accident"; S.R.M.D. had
sent out a patrol and it had been ambushed

by a whole division, as it were. So trivial a
"regrettable incident" was negligibly
normal.

Akbar had no thought but of S.R.M.D. as
a Being infinitely great in himself; he had
no conception of the price paid by the
members of the Black Lodge. The truth is,
that as its intimates advance, their power
and knowledge becomes enormously
greater; but such progress is not a mark of
general growth, as it is in the case of the
White Brotherhood; it is like a cancer,
which indeed grows apace, but at the
expense of the man on whom it feeds, and
will destroy both him and itself in the long
run. The process may be slow; it may
extend over a series of incarnations; but it
is sure enough. The analogy of the cancer is
a close one; for the man knows his doom,
suffers continual torture; but to this Is
added the horrible delusion that if only the
disease can be induced to advance far
enough, all is saved. Thus he hugs the
fearful growth, cherishes it as his one
dearest possession, stimulates it by every
means in his power. Yet all the time he
nurses in his heart an agonizing certainty
that this is the way of death.

Balloch knew S.R.M.D. well; had known
him for years. He hoped to supplant him,
and while he feared him with hideous and
unmanly fear, hated him with most hellish
hatred. He was under no delusion as to the
nature of the Path of the Black Lodge.
Akbar Pasha, a mere outsider, without a
crime on his hands as yet, was a rich and
honoured officer in the service of the
Sultan; he, Balloch, was an ill-reputed

doctor, living on the fears of old maids, on
doubtful and even criminal services to
foolish people from the supply of morphia
to the suppression of [121] the evidence of
scandal, and on the harvest of half-
disguised blackmail that goes with such
pursuits. But he was respectability itself
compared to S.R.M.D.

This man, who called himself the Count
Macgregor of Glenlyon, was in reality a
Hampshire man, of lowland Scottish
extraction, of the name of Douglas. He had
been well educated, became a good
scholar, and developed an astounding taste
and capacity for magic. For some time he
had kept straight; then he had fallen,
chosen the wrong road. His powers had
increased at a bound; but they were solely
used for base ends. He had established the
Black Lodge far more firmly than ever
before, jockeyed his seniors out of office by
superior villainy, and proceeded to forge
the whole weapon to his own liking. He had
had one terrible set-back.

Cyril Grey, when only twenty years of
age, a free-lance magician, had entered
the Lodge; for it worked to attract innocent
people under a false pretence of wisdom
and of virtue. Cyril, discovering the trick,
had not withdrawn; he had played the
game of the Lodge, and made himself
Douglas's right-hand man. This being
achieved, he had suddenly put a match to
the arsenal.

The Lodge was always seething with
hate; Theosophists themselves might have
taken lessons from this exponent; and the

result of Cyril's intervention had been to
disintegrate the entire structure. Douglas
found his prestige gone, and his income
with it. Addiction to drink, which had
accompanied his magical fall, now became
an all-absorbing vice. He was never able to
rebuild his Lodge on its former lines; but
those who thirsted for knowledge and
power and these he still possessed in ever
increasing abundance as he himself
decayed -- clung to him, hating and envying
him, as a young ruffian of the [122] streets
will envy the fame of some robber or
murderer who happens to fill the public
eye.

It was with this clot of perverse feelings
that Balloch approached the Rue
Quincampoix, one of the lowest streets in
Paris, and turned in at the den where
Douglas lodged.

S.R.M.D. was lying on a torn soiled sofa,
his face white as death; a mottled and
empurpled nose, still showing trace of its
Original aggressive and haughty model,
alone made for colour. For his eyes were
even paler than the doctor's. In his hand
was a bottle half full of raw whisky, with
which he was seeking to restore his vitality.

"| brought you some whisky," said
Balloch, who knew the way to favour.

"Put it down, over there. You've got
some money."

Balloch did not dare to lie. S.R.M.D. had
spotted the fact without a word.

Only a cheque. You shall have half to-
morrow when I've cashed it."

"Come here at noon.

Despite the obvious degradation of his
whole being, S.R.M.D. was still somebody.
He was a wreck, but he was the wreck of
something indubitably big. He had not only
the habit of command, but the tone of fine
manners. In his palmy days he had
associated with some very highly placed
people. It was said that the Third Section of
the Russian Police Bureau had once found a
use for him.

"Is the Countess at home?" asked
Balloch, apparently in courtesy.

"She's on the Boulevard. Where else
should she be, at this time of night?"

It was the vilest thing charged against
that vile parody of a man, his treatment of
his wife, a young, beautiful, talented, and
charming girl, the sister of [123] a famous
Professor at the Sorbonne. He had
delighted to reduce her to the bedraggled
street-walker that she now was.

Nobody knew what Douglas did with his
money. The contributions of his Lodge were
large; blackmail and his wife's earnings
aided the exchequer; he had probably a
dozen other sources of income. Yet he
never extricated himself from his
sordidness; and he was always in need of
money. It was no feigned need, either; for
he was sometimes short of whisky.

The man's knowledge of the minds of
others was uncanny; he read Balloch at a
gesture.

"Grey never struck the Watcher," he
said; "it was not his style; who was it?"

"Simon Iff."
"| shall see to that."

Balloch understood that, though
S.R.M.D. feared Iff and loathed him, his
great preoccupation was with Cyril Grey.
He hated the young magician with a perfect
hatred; he would never forget his ruin at
those boyish hands. Also, he forgave
nothing, from a kindness to an insult; he
was malignant for the sake of malice.

"They will have gone over to their house
on Montmartre," continued Douglas, ina
voice of absolute certitude. "We must have
the exits watched by Abdul Bey and his
men. But | know what Grey will do as well
as If he had told me; he will bolt
somewhere warm for his damned
honeymoon. You and Akbar watch the Gare
de Lyon. Now, look here! with a bit of luck,
welll finish off this game; I'm weary of it.
Mark me well!"

Douglas rose. The whisky he had drunk
was impotent to affect him, head or legs.
He went over to a small table on which
were painted certain curious figures. He
took a saucer, poured some [124] whisky
into it, and dropped a five-franc piece into
the middle. Then he began to make weird
gestures, and to utter a long conjuration,

harsh-sounding, and apparently in
gibberish. Lastly, he set fire to the whisky
in the saucer. When it was nearly burnt
through, he blew it out. He took the coin,
wrapped it in a piece of dark-red silk, and
gave it to his pupil.

"When Grey boards a tralin," he ordered,
"go up to the engine-driver, give him this,
and tell him to drive carefully. Let me
know what the fellow looks like; get his
name, if you can; say you want to drink his
health. Then come straight here in a cab."

Balloch nodded. The type of magic
proposed was familiar enough to him. He
took the coin and made off.

At the Sign of the Tranquil Father,
Akbar was awaiting him with his son Abdul
Bey. The latter was in charge of the Turkish
Secret Service in Paris, and he did not
hesitate to use the facilities thus at his
disposal to his own magical advancement.
All his resources were constantly at the
service of Balloch. Now that S.R.M.D.
himself was employing him, he was beside
himself with pride and pleasure.

Balloch gave his instructions. An hour
later the house where Lisa was even then
undergoing her ordeal would be surrounded
by spies; additional men would be placed at
all the big terminals of Paris; for Abdul Bey
meant to do the thing thoroughly. He would
not take a chance; for all his fanatical faith
in Douglas, he thought it prudent to provide
against the possibility of an error in the
chief's occult calculations. Also, his action
would prove his zeal. Besides, Cyril might

deliberately lay a false trail -- was almost
sure to play some trick of the sort.

Balloch and Akbar Pasha were stationed
in a[125] restaurant facing the Gare de
Lyon, ready to answer the telephone at any
moment." Now," said Abdul, "Have you
photographs of these people to show my
men?"

Balloch produced them.

"I've seen this man Grey somewhere, "
remarked the young Turk casually. And
then he gave a sudden and terrible cry. In
Lisa he recognized an unknown woman
whom he had admired the year before at a
dance -- and whom he had craved ever
since. "Tell S.R.M.D.," he roared, "that I'm
in this thing for life or death; but | ask the
girl for a trophy."

"You'll get that, or anything else," said
Balloch, "if you can put an end to the
activities of Mr. Cyril Grey."

Abdul Bey rushed off without another
word spoken; and Balloch and the Pasha
went to the rendezvous appointed. They
passed that night and the next day in
alternate bouts of drink and sleep. About
half-past eight on the following evening the
telephone rang. Douglas had judged rightly;
the lovers had arrived at the Gare de Lyon.

Balloch and his pupil sprang to life --
fresh and vigorous at the prick of the
Summons to action.

It was easy to mark the tall figure of the

magician, with the lovely girl upon his arm;
at the barrier their distinction touched the
humanity of the collector. Tickets through

to Rome -- and no luggage! Most evidently

an elopement!

With romantic sympathy, the kind man
determined to oppose the passage of
Balloch, whom he supposed to he an angry
father or an outraged husband. But the
manner of the Englishman disarmed him;
besides, he had a ticket to Dijon.

Concealing himself as best he could, the
doctor walked rapidly to the head of the
train. There, assuming the character of a
timid old man, he [126] implored the
driver, with the gift of the bewitched "cart-
wheel," to be sure to drive carefully. He
would drink the good fellow's health, to be
sure -- what name? Oh! Marcel Dufour. "Of
the furnace -- that is appropriate!" laughed
the genial passenger, apparently reassured
as to his security.

But he did not enter the train. He
dashed out of the station, and into a motor-
cab, overjoyed to return to Douglas with so
clean a record of work accomplished.

He never gave the Turk another
thought.

But Akbar Pasha had had an idea.
Balloch had taken a ticket for Dijon -- he
would take one, too. And he would go -- he
would retrieve his error of yesterday. He
was not in the least afraid of that cub Grey,
when Simon Iff was not there to back him.
It would go hard, but he should get a drop

of Lisa's blood -- if he had to bribe the
wagon-lit man. Then -- who knows? -- there
might even be a chance to kill Grey. He
waited till the last moment before he
boarded the train.

The train would stop at Moret-les-
Sablons; by that time the beds would be
made up; he would have plenty of time to
act; he could go on to Rome if necessary.

Cyril Grey, away from the influence of
Simon Iff, had become the sarcastic sphinx
once more. He was wearing a travelling suit
with knickerbockers, but he still affected
the ultra-pontifical diplomatist.

"The upholstery of these cars is
revolting," he said to Lisa, with a glance of
disgust. And he suddenly opened the door
away from the platform and lifted her on to
the permanent way; thence into a stuffy
compartment in the train that was standing
at the next "Voie."

"A frosty moonlight night like this," he
said, pulling a large black pipe from his
pocket and filling [127] it, “indicates (to
romantic lovers like ourselves) the
propriety of a descent at Moret, a walk to
Barbizon through the forest, a return to
Moret by a similar route in a day or so, and
the pursuance of our journey to Naples. See
Naples and die!" he added musingly,
"decidedly a superior programme."

Lisa would have listened to a
proposition to begin their travels by
Swimming the Seine, on the ground that the
day after to-morrow would be Friday; so

she raised no objection. But she could not
help saying that they would have reached
Moret more quickly by the rapide.

"My infant child!" he returned; "the
celebrated Latin poet Quintus Horatius
Flaccus has observed, for our edification
and behoof, ‘Festina lente.' This epigram
has been translated by a famous Spanish
author, 'manana.' Dante adds his testimony
to truth in his grandiose outburst, 'Domani.'
Also, an Arab philosopher, whom |
personally revere, remarks, if we may trust
the assertion of Sir Richard Francis Burton,
K.C.M.G. -- and why should we not? --
‘Conceal thy tenets, thy treasure, and thy
travelling!’ This | do. More so," he
concluded cryptically, "than you imagine!"

They were still waiting for their local
funeral (which the French grandiloquently
describe as a train) to start when Dr.
Balloch returned radiant to the Rue
Quincampoix.

Douglas was on the alert to receive him.
The news took only a second to
communicate.

"Marcel Dufour!" cried S.R.M.D. "We
shall drink for him, as he may not drink on
duty.”

He carefully opened two bottles of
whisky, mixed the stale spirit in the magic
saucer with their contents, and bade
Balloch join him at the table.

"Your very good health, Marcel Dufour!"
cried Douglas. "And mind you drive

carefully!" [128] Balloch and he now set to
work steadily to drain the two bottles -- a
stiff nip every minute -- but the stuff had
no effect on them. It was far otherwise
with the man on the engine.

Almost before he had well left Paris
behind him, he began to fret about the
furnace, and told his fireman to keep up
the fullest head of steam. At Melun the
train should have slackened speed; instead,
it increased it. The signalman at
Fontainebleau was amazed to see the
rapide rush through the station, eight
minutes ahead of time, against the signals.
He saw the driver grappling with the
fireman, who was thrown from the foot-
plate a moment after, but escaped with a
broken leg.

"My mate went suddenly mad," the
injured man explained later. "He held up a
five-franc piece which some old gentleman
had given him, and swore that the devil
had promised him another if he made Dijon
in two hours. (And, as you know, it is five,
what horror!)."

He grew afraid, saw the signals set at
danger, and sprang to the lever. Then that
poor crazed Dufour had thrown him off the
train.

The guard was new to that section of
the line, and so, no doubt, too timid to
take the initiative; he certainly should have
applied the brakes, even at Melun.

An hour later Cyril Grey and Lisa and all
their fellow passengers were turned out at

Fontainebleau. There had been a terrible
disaster to the Paris-Rome rapide at Moret.
The line would be blocked all night.

"This contretemps," said Cyril, as if he
had heard of a change of programme at a
theatre, "will add appreciably to the length
-- and, may | add, to the romance -- of our
proposed walk.

When they reached Moret more than
three hours [129] later, they found the
rapide inextricably tangled with a heavy
freight train. It had left the line at the
curve and crashed into the slower train.
Cyril Grey had still a surprise in store. He
produced a paper of some sort from his
pocket, which the officer of the police
cordon received in the manner of the infant
Samuel when overwhelmed by the gift of
prophecy. He made way for them with
proud deference.

They had not to walk far before the
magician found what he was seeking.
Beneath the ruins of the rear compartment
were the remains of the late Akbar Pasha.

"| wonder how that happened," he said.
"However, here is a guess at your epitaph:
‘a little learning is a dangerous thing.’ |
think, Lisa, that we should sup at the
Cheval Blanc before we start our walk to
Barbizon. It isa long way, especially at
night, and we want to cut away to the west
so as to avoid Fontainebleau, for the sake
of the romance of the thing."

Lisa did not mind whether she supped at
the White Horse, or on one. She realized

that she had hold of a man of strength,
wisdom, and foresight, far more than a
match for their enemies.

He stopped to speak to the officer in
charge of the cordon as they passed him.
"Among the dead: Mr. and Mrs. Cyril Grey.
English people. No flowers. Service of the
minister."

The officer promised to record the lie
officially. His deference was amazing. Lisa
perceived that her lover had been at the
pains to arm himself with more than one
kind of weapon.

Lisa pressed his arm, and murmured her
appreciation of his cleverness.

"It won't deceive Douglas for two
minutes, if he be, as! suspect, the
immediate Hound of the Baskervilles, but
he may waste some time rejoicing [130]
over my being such an ass as to try it; and
that's always a gain."

Lisa began to wonder whether her best
chance of ever saying the right thing would
not be to choose the wrong. His point of
view was always round the corner of her
street! [131]

CHAPTER X

HOW THEY GATHERED THE SILK FOR THE
WEAVING OF THE BUTTERFLY-NET

CYRIL GREY made the midnight
invocation to the Sun-God, Khephra, the
Winged Beetle, upon the crest of the Long
Rocher; and he made the morning
invocation to the Sun-God, Ra, the Hawk,
upon the heights that overlooked the
hamlet of Barbizon.

Thence, like Chanticleer himself, he
woke the people of the Inn, who, in
memory of the days Stevenson had spent
with them, honour his ashes by emulating
the morality of Long J ohn Silver.

They were prepared for the breakfast
order; but Cyril's requirement, a long-
distance call to Paris, struck them as
unseasonable and calculated to disturb the
balance of the Republic. They asked
themselves if the Dreyfus case were come
again. However, Cyril got his call, and
Simon Iff his information, before seven
o'clock. Long before Douglas, who had
waited until midnight for the news of his
triumph, had recovered from the sleep
following its celebration, Iff in his fastest
automobile had picked up the lovers at an
agreed spot in the forest, the Croix du
Grand Maitre, whirled them to Dijon, and
put them into the train for Marseilles.
There they took ship, and came to Naples

by sea, without adventure.

The enemy, in one way or another, had
been thrown utterly off the track. [132] It
was early in the morning when they landed;
at three o'clock they had visited such local
deities as commanded their more urgent
piety; the Museum, Vergil's Tomb, also
Michaelsen the bookseller and vendor of
images of the Ineffable. At four they
started, hand in hand, along the shore,
towards their new home.

An hour's walk brought them to the foot
of along stairway, damp stonework,
narrow, between high walls, that led
vertical and steep to the very crest of
Posilippo. One could see the old church
amid its cluster of houses. Cyril pointed to
a house a couple of hundred yards north of
the church. It was the most attractive
building on the hillside.

The house itself was not large, but it
was built like a toy imitation of one of
those old castles that one sees everywhere
on difficult heights, throughout most of
Southern and even Central Europe; ina
word, like a castle in a fairy-story. It
looked from below, owing to
foreshortening, as if it were built over a
sheer rampart, like the Potala at Lhassa;
but this was only the effect of merging a
series of walls which divided the garden by
terraces.

"Is that the Butterfly-net?" cried Lisa,
Slapping her hands with delight.

"That," he dissented, "is The Net."

Once again Lisa felt a pang of something
like distrust. His trick of saying the simplest
things as if they bore a second meaning,
hidden from her, annoyed her. He had been
strangely silent on the voyage, and wholly
aloof from her on those planes where she
most needed him; that was a necessary
condition of the experiment, of course; but
none the less it tended to disturb her
happiness. Such talks as they had had were
either purely educative, Magick in Six Easy
Lessons, he called it, or Magick without
Tears, or else they were conventional
lover's chats, which she [133] felt sure he
despised. He would tell her that her eyes
were like the stars; and she would think
that he meant: "What am | to say to this
piece of wood?" Even nature seemed to stir
his contempt in some way. One night she
had noticed him rapt in a poetic trance
leaning over the bows watching the foam.
For a long while he remained motionless,
his breast rising quickly and falling, his lips
trembling with passion -- and then he
turned to her and said in cold blood: "Ought
that to be used to advertize a dentifrice or
a shaving soap?" She was sure that he had
rehearsed the whole scene merely to work
her up in order to have the fun of dropping
her again. Only the next morning she woke
early, to find a pencilled sonnet on his
table, a poem so spiritual, so profound, and
of such jewelcraft, that she knew why the
few people whom he had allowed to read
his work thought him the match of Milton.
So apt were the similes that there could be
no doubt that he had thought it out line by
line, in that trance which he had marred,
for her, by his brutal anti-climax.

She had asked him about it.

"Some people," he had said quite
seriously, "have one brain; some have two.
| have two." A minute later: "Oh, | forgot.
Some have none."

She had refused to be snubbed. "What
do you mean by your having two brains?"

"| really have. It seems as if; in order to
grasp anything, | were obliged to take its
extremes. | see both the sublime and the
ridiculous at once, and | can't imagine one
existing apart from the other, any more
than you can have a stick with only one
end. So | use one point of view to
overbalance the other, like a child starting
to swing itself. | am never happy until |
have identified an idea with its opposite. |
take the idea of murder -- just a plain,
horrid idea. But | don't stop there. |
multiply [134] that murder, and intensify it
a millionfold, and then a millionfold again.
Suddenly one comes out into the sublime
idea of the Opening of the Eye of Shiva,
when the Universe is annihilated in an
instant. Then | swing back, and make the
whole thing comic by having the hero
chloroform Shiva in the nick of time, so
that he can marry the beautiful American
heiress.

"Until | have been all round the clock
like that, | don't feel that | have the idea at
all. If you had only let me go on about the
shaving soap, | should have made it into
something lovely again -- and all the time |
should have perceived the absolute identity
of even the two contradictory phases. "

But it was beyond her still, in each case
as it came up "That is the Net!" a riddle? It
might mean a thousand things; and to a
woman of her positive and prosaic
temperament (which she had, for all her
hysteria and romanticism) doubt was
torture. Love itself always torments women
of this type; they want their lovers under
lock and key. They would like love itself to
be a more substantial commodity, a thing
that one could buy by the pound, and store
in a safe or an ice-chest.

Doubt and jealousy, those other hand-
maidens of love, are also the children of
imagination. But people wrongly use the
word "imagination" to mean abstraction of
ideas from concrete facts. And this is the
reverse of the truth. Imagination makes
ideas visible, clothes Being in form. It is, in
short, very much like the "faith" of which
Paul speaks. When true imagination makes
true images of the Unseen, we have true
love, and all true gods; when false
imagination makes false images -- then
come the idols, Moloch, J ahveh, J aganath,
and their kindred, attended by all shapes of
vice, of crime, of misery.

Lisa was thinking, as she climbed the
apparently unending staircase, that she had
taken pretty long [135] odds. She had not
hesitated to buck the Tiger, Life. Simon Iff
had warned her that she was acting on
impulse. But -- on the top of that -- he had
merely urged her to be true to it. She
swore once more that she would stick to
her guns. The black mood fell from her. She
turned and looked upon the sea, now far

below. The sun, a hollow orb of molten
glory, hung quivering in the mist of the
Mediterranean; and Lisa entered for a
moment into a perfect peace of spirit. She
became one with Nature, instead of a being
eternally at war with it.

But Cyril turned his face again to the
mountain; she knew that he wanted to
perform the evening adoration from the
terrace of the house itself.

At last they came out from their narrow
gangway to the by-street behind the
church. It was an old and neglected
thoroughfare, far from the main
automobile road that runs along the crest.
It was a place that the centuries had
forgotten. Lisa realized that it was a haven
of calm -- and in a sense she resented the
fact. Her highly-coloured nature demanded
constant stimulus. She was an emotion-
fiend, if one may construct the term by
analogy with another branch of pathology.

The lovers turned to the left through
the village; in a few minutes the road
opened, and they saw the villa before
them. It stood on a spur of rock, separated
from the main hill by a sharply-cut chasm.
This was spanned by an old stone bridge, a
flying arch set steeply from the road to the
house. It almost gave the effect of a frozen
cascade Issuing from the great doorway.

Cyril led Lisa across the bridge. This
house was not served like that they had left
behind them in Paris. Visitors were not
expected or desired at any time, and the
inmates rarely left the grounds, except on

duty. [136]

It was therefore some time before an
answer to the summons reached them.
Cyril's hand, dragging down an iron rope,
had set swinging a great bell, deep and
solemn, like a tocsin, in the turret which
overlooked the chasm. Not until its last
echo was dumb did a small J udas in the
door slide back. Cyril held up his left hand,
and showed his seal-ring. Immediately the
door swung open; a man of fifty odd years
of age, dressed in black, with a great
sword, like his brother guard at the Profess-
House in Paris, stood bowing before them.

"Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of
the Law. | enter the house."

With these words Cyril Grey assumed
possession. "Lead me to Sister Clara." The
man turned and went before them down a
long corridor which opened upon a stone
terrace, flagged with porphyry. A circular
fountain in the middle had, for its centre a
copy of the Venus Callipyge in black
marble. The parapet was decorated with
Statues of satyrs, fauns, and nymphs.

The woman who came to meet them
was assuredly kin to that ancient company.
She was about forty years of age, robust
and hardy, burnt dark with years of outdoor
life, her face slightly pitted with smallpox,
her eyes black, stern, and true. Her whole
aspect and demeanour expressed devoting
Capacity and determination. It was she who
ruled the house in the absence of Simon Iff.

A brief colloquy between this woman

and Cyril Grey followed their first
greetings, whose austere formality
inexplicably conveyed the most cordial
kindness. He explained that he wished her
to continue in full control of the house,
only modifying its rules so far as might be
necessary for the success of a certain
experiment in magick which he had come
to carry out. Sister Clara acquiesced with
the [137] slightest of nods; then she raised
her voice, and summoned the others to the
evening adoration of the Sun.

Cyril performed this as leader; the duty
done, he was free to meet his new brothers
and sisters.

Sister Clara was assisted by two young
women, both of the slender willowy type --
rather babyish even, one might say, with
their light brown fluffiness and their full,
red soft lips. They remained standing apart
from the men, who numbered five. First in
rank came the burly Brother Onofrio, a man
of some thirty-five years, strong as a bull,
with every muscle like iron from constant
physical toil. Two men of thirty stood
beside him, and behind them two lads of
about sixteen.

They were all devoted -- so far as the
outer world was aware -- to the healing of
humanity in respect of its physical ills. The
men were doctors, or students, the women
nurses; though in fact Sister Clara was
herself the most brilliant of them all, a
surgeon who could have held her own
against any man in Europe.

But it was contrary to the rule of the

house for any sick person to lodge there;
the private hospital which was attached to
it was situated some three hundred yards
further back from the hillside.

At a glance Lisa perceived that she had
come into a circle where discipline was the
first consideration.

Every one moved as if a Prussian
sergeant had been in charge of him from
infancy. Every one looked as if his
responsibility were ever present to his
mind. These manners sat naturally enough
upon Clara and Onofrio; on the others the
idea was hardly yet assimilated. But there
was no evidence of any outward constraint;
even the youngest of the boys was proud to
take himself so seriously as he did.

A touch of frost was in the air; Cyril led
Lisa within. A special set of rooms had been
prepared [138] for their reception; but Lisa
was displeased to find that they had been
arranged entirely with reference to
feminine tastes and requirements. A single
scheme of colour embraced the whole
suite; white, blue and silver. The
tapestries, the carpets, the very ceilings,
were wholly in these and no other lights.

The pictures and statues were of
Artemis, no other goddess; the very objects
in the apartment were crescent shaped,
and the only metal in evidence was silver.
Where the crescent could not serve the
purpose, the surfaces had been engraved
with stars of nine points.

Only three books lay upon the table;

they were the Endymion of Keats, the
Atalanta in Calydon of Swinburne, and one
other. But in a small bookshelf were several
other volumes; and Lisa found later that
each one described, suggested, or had been
more or less directly inspired by the moon.
In a silver censer, too, burnt an incense
whose predominating ingredient was
camphor. Everything present was designed
or chosen so that it might turn the girl's
mind to the earth's satellite. Subsequently
she discovered that this plan extended
even to her diet -- she was to live
exclusively on those foods which wise men
of old classified as lunar in nature, on
account either of their inherent qualities,
or because they are traditionally sacred to
Diana.

After the beginning of the experiment,
no male was to enter that apartment.

She was a little frightened on grasping
the fact that Cyril must have forseen her
perfect compliance from the beginning. He
noticed it with a slow smile, and began to
explain to her why he had chosen the moon
as the type of "butterfly" they were going
to snare.

"The moon is the most powerful
influence in your horoscope," he said. "She
Stands, in her own sign Cancer, in the mid-
heaven. The Sun and [139] Mercury are
rising in square to her, which Is not
specially good; it may bring trouble of a
certain kind; But Neptune is sextile to her,
J upiter and Venus trine. It is about as good
a horoscope as one could hope for in such a
case. The worst danger is the conjunction

of Luna and Uranus -- they are much too
close to be comfortable. My own nativity
goes well with yours, for | am primarily
solar by nature, though (Heaven knows!)
Herschel in the ascendant modifies it; and
so | make the complement to you. But | am
not to influence you or associate with you
too much. | shall sleep with the men in the
square tower yonder, which is kept
magically separate from the rest of the
house. We shall all be working constantly to
invoke the moon's influence and to keep off
intruders. Sister Clara is egregiously
powerful in work of this special kind; she
has made a particular study of it for twenty
years; and during the past ten she has
never spoken to a man, except in strict
necessity. Her pupils have taken a similar
resolution. There is no question of vows,
which imply self-distrust -- fear of
weakness and of vacillation; the women of
our order execute their own wills, with no
need of external pressure. Go thou and do
likewise!" Suddenly he had become stern
and gloomy; and she felt how terrible
would be his anger or contempt.

The morning broke brilliant; and Lisa
found, not for the first time, that the most
bracing influence resulted from the routine
peculiar to the Profess-houses. To rise
before dawn; to make a ceremonial
ablution with the intention of so purifying
both body and mind that they should be as
it were new-born; then the joyous outburst
of adoration as the sun rose to sight: this
was a true Opening of the Day. Insensibly
the years slipped from her; she became like
a maiden in thought and in activity.

About a week was to elapse before the
new moon, [140] at the moment of which
the operation was timed to commence; but
it was a busy week for Cyril Grey. With
Brother Onofrio, for whom he had taken an
immense liking, he inspected every inch of
the defences of the house. It was already a
kind of fortress; the terraces were bounded
by ramparts angled or rounded so as to
suggest that old-fashioned pattern of
military work of which Fort William in
Calcutta is said to be the most perfect
example.

But the defence of which the magicians
were thinking was of a different order; the
problem was to convert the whole place as
it stood into an impregnable magical circle.
For years, of course, the place had been
defended, but not as against its present
dangers. It had been hitherto sufficient to
exclude evil and ignorant beings, things of
the same class as Douglas’ watcher; but
now a far more formidable problem was in
view, how to dissuade a Soul, a being
armed with the imperial right to enter,
from approaching. Demons and elementals
and intelligences were only fractions of
true Entities, according to the theory; they
were illusions, things merely three-
dimensional, with no core of substance in
themselves. In yet another figure, they
were adjectives, and not nouns. But a
human soul is a complete reality. "Every
man and every woman is a star."

To repel one such from its demand to
issue into the world of matter was a serious
difficulty -- and, also, possibly involved no
mean responsibility. However, Cyril's main

hope was that any passing souls would be
reasonable, and not try to force themselves
into uncongenial company, or plant
themselves in unsuitable soil. He had
always held that incarnation was balked
when the soul discovered that the heredity
and environment of the embryo it had
chosen were too hostile to allow the
desired manifestation; the soul would then
withdraw, with the physical result of [141]
miscarriage, still-birth, or, where the
embryo, deserted by the human soul,
becomes open to the obsession of some
other thing, such as a Vampire or what the
Bible calls a "dumb spirit," the production
of monsters or idiots.

Cyril Grey, by insisting upon constant
devotion to the human ideal, hoped to
ward off all other types of soul, just as the
presence of a pack of wolves would frighten
away alamb; and he further trusted to
attract potent forces, who would serve as a
kind of lighthouse to his harbour. He
imagined his desired Moon-soul, afloat in
Space, vehemently spurred towards the
choir of sympathetic intelligences whom it
could hardly fail to perceive, by reason of
the intensity of the concentration of the
magical forces of the operators upon the
human idea.

Two days before the beginning of the
operation, a telegram from Paris reached
him. It stated that, as he suspected,
Balloch and Douglas were the forces behind
the attack; further, that Grey's presence in
Naples was known, and that three members
of the Black Lodge had left Paris for Italy.

He thought it undesirable to
communicate the news to Lisa.

But he renewed his general warnings to
her.

"Child!" he said, "you are now ready for
our great experiment. On Monday, the day
of the New Moon, you take the oath of
dedication; and we shall be able to resume
those relations which we temporarily
renounced. Now let me say to you that you
are absolutely guarded in every way but
one. The weak spot is this: we cannot
abolish unsuitable thoughts entirely from
your mind. It is for you to do that, and we
have done our best to make the conditions
as favourable as possible; but | warn you
that the struggle may be bitter. You will be
amazed at the possibilities of your own
mind, its fertility of [142] cunning, its
fatally false logic, its power of blinding you
to facts that ought to be as clear as
daylight -- yes, even to the things before
your very eyes. It will seek to bewilder you,
to make you lose your mental balance --
every trick is possible. And you will be so
beaten and so blind that you have only one
Safe -- guard; which is, to adhere
desperately to the literal terms of your
oath.

"Do that, and ina little while the mind
will clear; you will understand what empty
phantoms they were that assailed you. But
if you fail, your only standard is gone; the
waters will swirl about you and carry you
away to the abyss of madness. Above all,
never distinguish between the spirit and
the letter of your oath! The most exquisite

deceit of the devil is to lure you from the
plain meaning of words. So, though your
instinct, and your reason, and your common
sense, and your intelligence all urge you to
interpret some duty otherwise than in the
plain original sense; don't do it!"

"| don't see what you mean."

"Here's a case. Suppose you swore ‘not
to touch alcohol.' The devil would come
with a sickness, and an alcholic medicine;
he would tempt you to say that of course
your oath didn't mean 'medicinally.' Or you
would wish to rub your skin with eau-de-
cologne; of course 'touch' really meant
‘drink. ™

"And | should really be right to be
stupidly literal, like that?"

"Yes, in a case where the mind, being
under a magical strain, becomes unfit to
judge. It's the story of Bluebeard; only you
must alter it so that the contents of the
fatal chamber exist only in the woman's
imagination, that she had so worked herself
up by what she thought she might see that
she also thought she saw it. So be on your
guard!" [143]

On the last day of the old moon he gave
her an idea of the main programme.

First, the honeymoon; their normal
relations were to endure until there was
evidence of the need to emphasize the
crucial point of the operation. From that
moment she was to see nothing of Cyril
Save in the ceremonies of invocation; all

other relations were to cease. The lover
would become the hermit. The magician
had calculated the probable moment of
incarnation as about six months before the
day of birth. Once it became certain that
the soul had taken possession of the
embryo, the hermit would become the
elder brother.

It was clearly the middle period that
was critical; not only because of the
magical difficulties, but because Lisa
herself would be under intense strain, and
isolated from her lover's active sympathy.
But Cyril thought it best to dare these
dangers rather than to allow his own soul to
influence her atmosphere, as his solar
personality might possibly drive away the
very "butterfly" which they wished to
collect. In fact, his human individuality was
one of the things that had to be banished
from her neighbourhood. She must know
nothing of him but the purely magical side,
when, clothed in robes suitable to the
invocations of Luna and with word and
gesture concentrated wholly upon the
work, he sank Cyril Grey utterly in the
Priest of Artemis -- "thy shrine, thine
oracle, thine heat of pale-mouthed prophet
dreaming." [144]

CHAPTER XI

OF THE MOON OF HONEY, AND ITS EVENTS;
WITH SUNDRY REMARKS ON MAGICK; THE
WHOLE ADORNED WITH MORAL
REFLECTIONS USEFUL TO THE YOUNG

THE many-terraced garden of the villa
was planted with olive and tamarind,
orange and cypress; but in the lowest of
them all, a crescent over whose wall one
could look down upon one of the paths that
threaded the hillside, there was a
pavement of white marble. A spring wept
from the naked rock, and fell into a
circular basin; from this small streamlets
issued, and watered the terrace in narrow
grooves, between the slabs. This garden
was Sacred to lilies; and because of its apt
symbolism, Cyril Grey had chosen it for the
scene of Lisa's dedication to Artemis. He
had set up a small triangular altar of silver;
and it was upon this that Sister Clara and
her disciples came thrice nightly to make
their incantations. The ritual of the moon
might never be celebrated during daylight.

Upon the evening of Monday, after the
adoration of the setting sun, Sister Clara
called Lisa aside, and led her to this
garden.

There she and the hand-maidens
unclothed her, and washed her from head
to foot in the waters of the sacred spring.
Then she put upon her a solemn oath that

she would follow out the rules of the ritual,
not speaking to any man except her
chosen, not leaving the protection of the
circle, not communicating with the outer
and uninitiated world; but, on the other
[145] hand, devoting herself wholly to the
invocation of the Moon.

Then she clothed her in a specially
prepared and consecrated garment. It was
not of the same pattern as those of the
Order; it was a loose vestment of pale blue
covered with silver tissue; and the secret
sigils of the moon were woven cunningly
upon its hem. It was frail, but of great
volume; and the effect was that the wearer
seemed to be wrapped in a mist of
moonlight.

In a languid and mysterious chant Sister
Clara raised her voice, and her acolytes
kept accord on their mandolines; it was an
incantation of fervour and of madness, the
madness of things chaste, remote, and
inscrutable. At the conclusion she took Lisa
by the hand, and gave her a new name, a
mystic name, engraved upon a moonstone,
set in a silver ring which she put upon her
finger. This name was lliel. It had been
chosen on account of its sympathy of
number to the moon; for the name is
Hebrew, in which language its characters
have the value of 81, the square of 9, the
sacred number of the moon. But other
considerations helped to determine the
choice of this name. The letter L in Hebrew
refers to Libra, the sign under which she
had been born; and it was surrounded with
two letters, I, to indicate her envelopment
by the force of creation and chastity which

the wise men of old hid in that hieroglyph.

The final "EL" signified the divinity of
her new being; for this is the Hebrew word
for God, and is commonly attached by the
sages to divers roots, to imply that these
ideas have been manifested in individuals
of angelic nature.

This instruction had been given to Lisa
in advance; now that it was ceremonially
conferred upon her, she was struck to the
heart by its great meaning. Her passion for
Cyril Grey had been gross and vehement,
[146] almost vulgar; he had translated it
into terms of hunger after holiness, of
awful aspiration, of utter purity. Nor Rhea
Silvia, nor Semele, nor any other mortal
virgin had ever glowed to inherit more
glorious a destiny, to feel such infinite
exaltation of chastity. Even the thought of
Cyril himself fell from her like a stain. He
had become no more than a necessary evil.
At that moment she could have shaken off
the trammels of humanity itself, and joined
Sister Clara in her ecstatic mood, passed
on, imperial votaress, in maiden meditation
fancy-free. Only the knowledge of her
sublime task inured her to its bitter taste.
From these meditations she was awakened
by the voice of Sister Clara.

"Oh, Iliel! Oh, Iliel! Oh, Iliel! there is a
cloud upon the sea."

The, two girls chimed in with the music
of their mandolins.

"It is growing dark. | am afraid," cried
Sister Clara.

The girls quavered in their melody.

"We are alone in the sacred grove. Oh,
Artemis, be near us, protect us from all
evil!"

"Protect us from all evil!" echoed the
two children.

"There is a shape in the cloud; there isa
stirring in the darkness; there is a stranger
in the sacred grove!"

"Artemis! Artemis! Artemis!" shrilled the
girls, their instruments fierce and agitated.

At that moment a great cry arose from
the men, who were in waiting on the upper
Terrace. It was a scream of abject fear,
inarticulate, save for the one word "Pan!"
They fled shrieking in every direction as
Cyril Grey, clad in a rough dress of
goatskins, bounded from the topmost
terrace into their midst. In another
moment, leaping down the garden, he
[147] reached the parapet that overlooked
the little terrace where the girls crouched,
moaning.

He sprang down among them; Sister
Clara and her disciples fled with cries like
startled sea-birds; but he crushed lliel to
his breast, then flung her over his shoulder,
and strode triumphant to the house.

Such was the magical ceremony devised
by the adept, a commemoration or
dramatic representation of the legend of
the capture of Diana by Pan. It is, of

course, from such rites that all dramatic
performance developed. The idea is to
identify oneself, in thought by means of
action, with the deities whom one desires
to invoke.

The idea of presenting a story
ceremonially may have preceded the ritual,
and the Gods may have been mere
sublimations of eponymous heroes or
personifications of abstract ideas; but
ultimately it is much the same. Admit that
the genius of man is divine, and the
question "Which is the cart, and which the
horse?" becomes as pointless as if one asked
it about an automobile.

The ensuing month, from the middle of
November until the week before Christmas,
was a honeymoon. But animal appetite was
scarce more than an accidental adjunct;
the human love of Cyril and Lisa had been
raised to inconceivable heights by the
backbone of spirituality and love of
mankind that hay behind its
manifestations. Moreover, everything was
attuned to it; nothing detracted from it.
The lovers never lost sight of each other for
an hour; they had their fill and will of love;
but in a way, and with an intensity, of
which worldly lovers never dream. Even
sleep was to them but as a veil of many
colours cast upon their rapture; in their
dreams they still pursued each other, and
attained each other, beneath bluer skies,
upon seas that laughed more [148]
melodiously than that which lay between
them and Capri, through gardens of more
gladness than their own, and upon slopes
that stretched eternally to the palaces of

the Empyrean.

For four weeks no word came from
outside; with one exception, when Sister
Clara brought a telegram to Cyril. It was
unsigned, and the message curt. "About
August First" was all its purport. "The
better the day, the better the deed!" cried
Cyril gaily. lliel questioned him. "J ust
magick!" he answered. She did not pursue
the subject: she divined that the matter
did not concern her, and she regretted
even that microscopical interruption.

But although Iliel was kept from all
knowledge of external events, it was by
dint of steel. The Black Lodge had not been
idle; Brother Onofrio, in charge of the
garrison, had found his hands full. But his
manoeuvres had been successful; the
enemy had not even secured their first
point of vantage, a material link with the
Brotherhood.

It is a law of magick that causes and
effects lie on the same plane. You may be
able to send a ghost to frighten someone
you dislike, but you must not expect the
ghost to use a club, or steal a pocket
handkerchief. Also, most practical magick
starts on the material plane, and proceeds
to create images on other planes. Thus, to
evoke a spirit, you first obtain the objects
necessary for its manifestation, and create
subtler forms of the same nature from
them.

The Butterfly-net was worked on
exactly the same lines. Morality enters into
magick no more than into art or science. It

is only when the effects react upon the
moral nature of man that this question
arises. The Venus de Medici is neither good
nor bad; it is merely beautiful; but its
reaction on the mind of an Antony
Comstock or a harry Thaw may be
disastrous, owing to the nature of such
minds. One can settle [149] the details of a
murder over the telephone; but one should
not blame the telephone.

The laws of magick are closely related
to those of other physical sciences. A
century or sO ago men were ignorant of a
dozen important properties of matter;
thermal conductivity, electrical resistance,
opacity to the X-ray, spectroscopic
reaction, and others even more occult.
Magick deals principally with certain
physical forces still unrecognized by the
vulgar; but those forces are just as real,
just as material -- if indeed you can call
them so, for all things are ultimately
spiritual -- as properties like radio-activity,
weight and hardness. The difficulty in
defining and measuring them lies
principally in the subtlety of their relation
to life. Living protoplasm is identical with
dead protoplasm in all but the fact of life.
The Mass is a magical ceremony performed
with the object of endowing a material
substance with divine virtue; but there is
no material difference between the
consecrated and the unconsecrated wafer.
Yet there is an enormous difference in the
moral reaction upon the communicant.
Recognizing that its principal sacrament is
only one of an infinite number of possible
experiments in talismanic magic, the
Church has never denied the reality of that

Art, but treated its exponents as rivals. She
dare not lop the branch on which she sits.

On the other hand, the sceptic, finding
it impossible to deny the effects of
ceremonial consecration, is compelled to
refer the cause to "faith"; and sneers that
Faith is the real miracle. Whereupon the
Church smilingly agrees; but the magician,
holding the balance between the
disputants, and insisting upon the unity of
Nature, asserts that all force is one in
origin. He believes in the "miracle," but
maintains that it is exactly the same kind
of miracle as charging a Leyden J ar with
electricity. You must use a moral [150]
indicator to test one, an electrical
indicator to test the other; the balance and
the test-tube will not reveal the change in
either.

The Black Lodge Knew well enough that
the weak strand in the Butterfly-net was
Lisa's untrained mind. Its white-hot flame
of enthusiasm, radiating passionate love,
was too active to assail directly, even could
they have succeeded in communicating
with it.

But they were content to watch and
wait for the reaction, should it come, as
they knew it must ultimately do. Eros finds
Anteros always on his heels; soon or late,
he will be supplanted, unless he have the
wit to feed his fire with the fuel of
Friendship. In the meanwhile, it was the
best chance to work upon the mind through
the body. Had they been able to procure a
drop of lliel's blood, she might have been as
easy a prey as that unlucky engine-driver of

the Paris-Rome rapide.

But Sister Clara saw to it that not so
much as a nail-paring of lliel escaped
careful magical destruction; and Brother
Onofrio organized a nightly patrol of the
garden, so that no physical breach of the
circle should be made.

The man in charge of the mission of the
Black Lodge was one Arthwait, a dull and
inaccurate pedant without imagination or
real magical perception. Like most Black
Magicians, he tippled habitually; and his
capacity for inflicting damage upon others
was limited by his inordinate conceit. He
hated Cyril Grey as much as he hated any
one, because his books had been reviewed
by that bright spirit, in his most bitterly
ironical strain, in the Emerald Tablet, the
famous literary review edited by J ack
Flynn; and Grey had been at particular
pains to point out elementary blunders in
translation which showed that Arthwait was
comically ignorant of the [151] languages in
which he boasted scholarship. But he was
not the man for the task set him by
Douglas; his pomposity always stood in his
way; aman fighting for life is exceptionally
a fool if he insists on stopping every
moment to admire himself. Douglas had
chosen him for one of the curious back-
handed reasons which so often appeal to
people of perverse intelligence: it was
because he was harmless that he was
selected to work harm. A democracy often
chooses its generals on the same principle;
a capable man might overthrow the
republic. It apparently prefers to be
overthrown by a capable enemy.

But Douglas had backed him with a
strong executive.

Abdul Bey knew no magic, and never
would; but he had a desperate passion for
Lisa, and a fanatical hatred of Grey, whom
he credited, at the suggestion of Balloch,
with the death of his father. He had almost
unlimited resources, social and financial;
there could hardly have been a better man
for the external part of the work.

The third commissioner was the brains
of the business. He was a man highly skilled
in black magic in his own way. He was a
lean, cadaverous Protestant-Irishman
named Gates, tall, with the scholar's stoop.
He possessed real original talent, with now
and then a flash of insight which came
close to genius. But though his intellect
was keen and fine, it was in some way
confused; and there was a lack of virility in
his make-up. His hair was long, lank and
unkempt; his teeth were neglected; and he
had a habit of physical dirt which was so
obvious as to be repulsive even to a
stranger.

But there was no harm in him; he had
no business in the Black Lodge at all; it was
but one of his romantic phantasies to pose
as a terribly wicked fellow. Yet he took it
seriously enough, and was [152] ready to
serve Douglas in any scheme, however
atrocious, which would secure his
advancement in the Lodge. He was only
there through muddle-headedness; so far as
he had an object beyond the satisfaction of
his vanity, it was innocent in itself -- the

acquisition of knowledge and power. He
was entirely the dupe of Douglas, who
found him a useful stalking-horse, for Gates
had a considerable reputation in some of
the best circles in England.

Douglas had chosen him for this business
on excellent points of cunning; for he
neither hated nor loved his intended
victims, and so was likely to interpret their
actions without passion or prejudice. It was
this interpretation that Douglas most
desired. Douglas had seen him personally --
rare privilege -- before he left for Naples
and explained his wishes somewhat as
follows.

The fool Arthwait was to blunder
pedantically along with the classical
methods of magical assault, partly on the
chance of a hit, partly to keep Grey busy,
and possibly to lead him to believe that the
main attack lay there. Meanwhile he,
Gates, was to devote himself, on the quiet,
to divining the true nature of Grey's
purpose. This information was essential;
Douglas knew that it must be something
tremendous; that the forces which Cyril
was working to evoke were cosmic in
scope. He knew it not only from his own
divinations, but deduced it from the fact of
the intervention of Simon Iff. He knew well
that the old Master would not have lifted a
finger for anything less than a world-war.
Douglas therefore judged that if he could
defeat Grey's purpose, it would involve the
triumph of his own. Such forces, recoiling
upon his head who had evoked them, would
shatter him into a thousand fragments.
Douglas, still weak from the destruction of

his "watcher," was particularly clear on this
point! [153]

Arthwait was to be the nominal head of
the party in all things, and Abdul Bey was
to be urged to support him vigorously in all
ways that lay in his power; but if necessary
Gates was to thwart Arthwait, and secure
the allegiance of the Turk, bound to
secrecy on the matter, by showing hima
card which Douglas then and there duly
inscribed and handed over.

Louis XV tried a double-cross game of
this sort on his ambassadors; but Douglas
was not strong on history, and knew
nothing of how those experiments resulted.

Nor, apparently, had he taken to heart
the words of the gospel: "If Satan be
divided against Satan, how shall his
kingdom stand?"

Still less did he realize that this
ingenious plan had been suggested to him
by Simon Iff! Yet it was so: this was the
head of the counter-attack which the old
mystic had agreed to deliver on behalf of
Cyril Grey. It was only a quarter of an
hour's work; the Way of the Tao is the
easiest as it is the surest.

This is what "Simple Simon" had done.
Since all simple motion is one-pointed, and
its enemy is inertia, the swordsmith brings
his sword to a single sharp edge; the
fletcher grinds his arrow-barb to a fine
point. Your Dum-Dum bullet will not
penetrate as does your nickel tip; and you
cannot afford to use the former unless the

power of penetration is so great as to reach
the soft spots before the bullet expands
and stops. This mechanical principle is
perfectly applicable in magick. Therefore,
when there is need to resist a magical
attack, your best method will be to divide
your antagonist's forces.

Douglas had already lost a pawn in the
game, Akbar Pasha having gone to his
destruction through setting up an idea of
his own, apart from, and inconsistent with,
the plan of his superior. The defect is
inherent in all Black Magic, because that
art is itself [154] a thing set up against the
Universal Will. If it were not negligibly
small, it would destroy the Universe, just
as the bomb-throwing Anarchist would
succeed in destroying society if he
amounted to, say, a third of the
population.

Now Simple Simon, at this time, did not
know Douglas for the enemy General; but
he was in the closest possible magical
touch with him. For he had absorbed the
Thing in the garden into himself and that
Thing had been a part of Douglas.

So he set himself to the complete
assimilation of that Thing; he made certain
that it should be part of himself for ever.
His method of doing this was as simple as
usual. He went over the Universe in his
mind, and set himself to reconcile all
contradictions in a higher Unity. Beginning
with such gross things as the colours of the
spectrum, which are only partialities of
white light, he resolved everything that
came into his mind until he reached such

abstractions as matter and motion, being
and form; and by this process worked
himself up into a state of mind which was
capable of grasping those sublime ideas
which unite even these ultimate
antinomies. That was all.

Douglas, still in magical touch with that
"watcher," could feel it being slowly
digested, so to say, by some other
magician. This (incidentally) is the final
fate of all black magicians, to be torn
piecemeal, for lack of the love which grows
by giving itself to the beloved, again and
again, until its "I" is continuous with
existence itself. "Whoso loveth his life shall
lose it" is the corresponding scriptural
phrase.

So Douglas, who might at that moment
have saved himself by resignation, was too
blind to see the way -- an acquired
blindness resulting from repeated acts
whose essence was the denial of the unity
of himself with the rest of the universe.
And so he [155] fought desperately against
the assimilation of his "watcher." "It's mine,
not yours!" he raged. To the steady and
continuous affirmation of true unity in all
diversity which Simon Iff was making, he
opposed the affirmation of duality. The
result was that his whole mind was aflame
with the passion of contrasting things, of
playing forces off against each other. When
it came to practical decisions, he divided
his forces, and deliberately created
jealousy and hatred where co-operation
and loyalty should have been the first and
last consideration.

Yet Simon Iff had used no spell but
Love. [156]

CHAPTER XIl

OF BROTHER ONOFRIO, HIS STOUTNESS AND
VALIANCE; AND OF THE MISADVENTURES
THAT CAME THEREBY TO THE BLACK LODGE

THE ecclesiastic is a definite type of
man. The Italian priest has changed his
character in three thousand years as little
as he has his costume.

Brother Onofrio's father happened to be
a free-thinking Anti-clerical, a pillar of
Masonry; otherwise, his son would assuredly
have been a bishop. The type is perfectly
pagan, whatever the creed; it is robust and
subtle, spiritual and sensual, adroit in
manipulation of inferiors and superiors
alike. It has the courage which vigorous
health and the consciousness of its own
validity combine to give; and where courage
will not serve the turn, astuteness deftly
takes its place.

A stupid pedant like Edwin Arthwait is
the very feeblest opponent for such a man.

Brother Onofrio, while successfully
practising magick, was quite ready at a
moment's notice to throw the whole theory
overboard with a horse laugh -- and at the
Same time to reckon his action in so doing a
branch of magick also. It was the beginning
of the duplicate brain-development which
Cyril Grey had cultivated to so high a point
of perfection.

But Arthwait was in the fetters of his
own egoism; while he pronounced himself
father and grandfather [157] of all spiritual
science, in language that would have
seemed stilted and archaic to Henry | ames,
or Osric, and presumptuous in the mouth of
an archangel, he was the bondslave of
utterly insignificant writers, fakers of
magical "grimoires " of the fourteenth
century, hawkers of spells and conjurations
to a benighted peasantry who wished to
bewitch cows or to prevent their neighbours
from catching fish. Arthwait had published a
book to show the folly of such works, but in
practice they were his only guide. In
particular, he swore by the "Black Pullet,"
which seemed to him less dangerous than
the "Grand Grimoire," or the forgery
attributed to Pope Honorius. He wanted to
evoke the devil, but was terrified lest he
should be successful. However, nobody
could be more pedantically pious than he in
following out the practical prescriptions of
these absurd charm-books.

This individual might usually have been
discovered during that honeymoon in the
Naples villa, seated in the arm-chair of the
apartment which he had rented in the
Galeria Vittoria. He would be clad ina
frockcoat of City cut, for he affected the
"orofessional man," and his air would be
preoccupied. The arrival of his colleagues
for consultation would apparently startle
him from a profound speculation upon the
weightier matters of the law.

It would be only by an effort that he
spoke in English; the least distraction would
send him back into Latin, Greek, or Hebrew,

none of which languages he understood. He
was a peddler of words; his mind was a rag-
and-bone shop of worthless and disjointed
mediaevalism.

After a severe struggle, he would
"oroceed to an allocution." He never
"spoke"; he "monologized."

The first formal conference took place
when they had been about a week in
Naples.

"My fathers learned in Art Magic," he
began, [158] addressing Gates and Abdul,
"venerable and archetypal doctors of the
Hermetic Arcanum, it hath been
Sacramentally imposed upon our sophistic
Tebunah by the monumentally aggregated
psycho-mentality of Those whose names in
respect of known dedications must here --
juxta nos -- be heled ob Danaos (as | should
adumbrate advisedly, for is it not script,
concerning cowans, in the archives of the
Clermont Harodim?) that a term, in fine,
should mete the orbit and currency of the
heretic and apostate, quem in Tartarum
conjuro, hight Grey, in his areopagus of the
averse hierarchy. | exiterate, clam populo,
that all warrants of precursors falt no
ratification, peradventure, in the actual
concatenation, sed, me judice, it is
meliorated that by virtue and
cosmodominicy of Satanas -- cognomen
ineffabile, quod reverentissime proloquor! --
the opus confronts the Sir Knights of the
Black Chapter -- in via sua propria -- in the
authentic valley and this lucus tenebrosa
Neapolitanensis, as the near -- nay, the
next! -- conflagration of barbaric pilum

against retiarial ludibry. Worthy Fathers and
reverend in the doctrine, salutatio in summo
imperio -- per totam orbem -- in the
Supranominal Donner of Orcus and of
Phlegethon -- sufficit!"

The Turkish diplomat spoke nine
languages, but not this one. Gates, who had
known Arthwait for many years, explained
that these remarks, formidable in
appearance, meant only that Grey ought to
be killed at any time, on general principles,
but that as they were specially charged with
that task by their leaders, so much the
better.

The conference, thus prosperously
inaugurated, proved a lengthy one. How,
indeed, could it be otherwise? For Arthwait
was naturally slow of thought and speech; it
took him some time to warm up to real
eloquence; and then he became so [159]
long-winded, and lost himself so completely
in his words and phrases, that he would
speak for many hours without conveying a
single idea of any kind to his hearers, or
even having one to convey.

But the upshot of his conversation upon
this occasion was that an attempt should be
made to poison the household magically by
bewitching the food supplied to them from
the market. Certain succulent shell-fish,
called vongole, very popular in Naples, were
selected as a material basis, "because their
appurtenance and charter was be-Yekl
Klippoth," as Arthwait explained.

Into these molluscs, therefore, might be
conjured a spirit of Mars "of them that bear

witness unto Bartzabel," in the hope that
those who partook of them might be
stricken with some type of fever, fevers and
all acute diseases being classified as Martial.

It was unfortunate for these plans that
Brother Onofrio habitually took the
precaution to purify and consecrate all food
that came into the house before it reached
the kitchen; and further, anticipating some
such attempt, he had everything tested
psychometrically by one of his acolytes,
whom he had trained especially in
sensitiveness to all such subtle impressions.

The shell-fish were consequently
discovered to be charged with the Martial
current; Brother Onofrio smiled hugely and
proceeded to call upon the divine forces of
Mars, before which even Bartzabel
"trembles every day," and, thus having
converted himself into a high-power engine
of war, sat down to a Gargantuan banquet,
eating the entire consignment himself. The
result was that the unfortunate Arthwait
was seized with violent and intractable
colic, which kept him twisted in agony on
his bed for forty-eight hours.

Gates had taken no part in this
performance; [160] he knew how dangerous
it was, and how likely to recoil upon the
rash practitioner. But he did some genuinely
useful work. He had been to the church in
the village, near Posilippo, whose tower
overlooked the Butterfly-net; and he had
persuaded the priest to allow him continual
access to that tower, on the pretext of
being an artist. And indeed he had a pretty
amateur talent for painting in water-

colours: some people thought it stronger
than his verses. For ten days he watched the
Butterfly-net with extreme care, and he
wrote down the routine of the inhabitants
hour by hour. Nothing escaped him of their
doings in the garden; and (as it happened)
the preponderating portion of their work lay
out-of-doors. He could make nor head nor
tail of the fact that the most important
people were apparently doing no magick of
any kind, but, careless lovers, enjoying the
firstfruits of their flight to the South.

But Douglas put two and two together
very cleverly, even from the first report; he
noted, also, the intelligence and ability of
Gates, and made a memorandum to use him
up quickly and destroy him.

Without divining the exact intention of
Cyril Grey, he rightly concluded that this
"honeymoon" was not so simple as it
seemed; in fact, he recognized it as the
core of the apple. He telegraphed Gates to
redouble his watch upon the lovers, and to
report instantly if any marked change
occurred in their habits.

Meanwhile, Edwin Arthwait was busy
with the "Black Pullet." There is a method of
describing a pentagram upon a doorstep
which is infallible. The first person who
crosses it receives a shock which may drive
him insane, or even kill him. A magician
would naturally be suspicious if he found
anything of this kind on his front doorstep,
so Arthwait cleverly determined to paint the
pentagram in Gum Arabic, which would
hardly be visible. Accordingly he went [161]
to the Butterfly-net at dead of night, armed

with this means of grace, and set to work by
the light of a candle-lamp. He was careful
to make the pentagram so large that it was
impossible to cross the bridge without
stepping over it. Absorbed in his inspiring
task, he did not notice, until the last stroke
was in place, that he was himself hemmed
in between his pentagram and the door of
the villa. He crouched in terror for the best
part of an hour; then a hint of daylight
made him fearful of discovery. He was
forced to make a move of some sort; and he
found that by careful sidling he could
escape to the parapet of the bridge. But he
was no climber; he overbalanced and fell
into the chasm, being lucky to escape with a
severe shaking. On his limping way back to
Naples he was overtaken by an icy shower of
rain; and as he got into bed, too late to
avoid a nasty chill, which kept him in bed
for a week, he had the irritating reflexion
that his pentagram must have been washed
away.

But he had not become known as the
most voluminous of modern pedants without
perseverance. His literary method was that
of the "tank." It was not agile, it was not
versatile, it was exposed to artillery attack;
but it proceeded. He was as comprehensive
as the Catalogue of the British Museum --
and almost as extensive. But he was not
arranged. Such a man was not to be
deterred by two failures, or forty-two.
Indeed, but for the frank criticism of Gates,
he would have counted them successes.

For his third experiment he chose "The
Wonder-working Serpent," whose possession
confers the power of attracting love. The

appeal lay in the failure of Abdul to make
any impression upon Lisa, whom he had
courted in characteristically local manner
by appearing, guitar in hand, below the
terrace where she had been dedicated to
the moon. He caught her [162] there alone,
and called her by her name. She recognized
him instantly; she had been violently
attracted to him at the ball where they had
Originally met; and, until she had seen Cyril,
regretted constantly that she had missed
the opportunity. The memory of that
thwarted desire sprang vehement upon her;
but she was at the white heat of her passion
for Cyril. Even so, she half hesitated; she
wanted to keep Abdul on ice, so to speak,
for a future occasion; such action was as
instinctive with her as breathing. But her
obligation was still fresh in her mind; she
was pledged not to communicate with the
outer world. She ignored him; she turned
and left the garden without so much as a
gesture; and he went back to Naplesina
black fury against her. "The Wonder-working
Serpent" was, therefore, an operation
entirely to his taste. Gates thought the line
of attack hopeful; he was totally sceptical
of Lisa's virtue, or any woman's; and he had
lived on women long enough to make his
view arguable, within the limits of his
experience. He bade Abdul try again. Good --
then let magic aid!

In order to possess "The Wonder-working
Serpent," it is necessary, in the words of the
Grimoire, "to buy an egg without haggling, "
which (by the way) indicates the class of
person for and by whom the book was
written. This egg is to be buried ina
cemetery at midnight, and every morning at
sunrise it must be watered with brandy. On

the ninth day a spirit appears, and demands
your purpose. You reply "l am watering my
plant." This occurs on three successive days;
at the midnight following the egg is dug up,
and found to contain a serpent, with a
cock's head. This amiable animal answers to
the name of Ambrosiel. Carry it in your
bosom, and your suit inevitably prospers.

Arthwait put this scheme into careful
rehearsal, [163] and having got the
conjurations and ceremonies perfect -- for
the egg must be buried with full military
honours, as it were -- he reached the third
day without mishap. But at this point a
Spirit appeared -- a guardian of the
cemetery -- and, dissatisfied with his
answers, took him to the police-station as a
wandering lunatic. A less other-worldly
master of the dark sciences might have
bribed the official; but Arthwait's self-
importance once again stood in his way. He
got in deeper, and in the end it was Gates
who offered to be responsible for him, and
persuaded the British Consul to use
influence for his release.

As so many workers of magic have done,
from the Yukon and Basutoland to Tonga
and Mongolia, Arthwait attributed his
defeats to the superior cunning and
wickedness of his opponents.

Gates himself had varied his pleasures by
a much more serious attempt to create a
magical link with the garrison. From his
tower he had observed many pigeons upon
the hillside, and he began to tame these,
Spreading corn upon the tower. In three
days they were eating out of his hand. He

then trained them to recognize him and
follow him from place to place. A week
later he found a moment when the garden
was deserted save for a single patrol, and
threw his grain over the wall. The pigeons
flocked to it and fed. Now it so happened
that the patrolling magician was
unsuspicious. He was aware that the benign
influence of the house made its gardens
attractive. There flowers bloomed brighter
than elsewhere; and all Nature's wanderers
seemed to look to it as their refuge. They
felt instinctively the innocence and goodwill
of the inhabitants, and thronged those
hospitable terraces.

When Gates moved on, the pigeons
followed his next throw; round the first
corner, he placed the remains of his supply
of corn ina small heap on the [164] ground;
the pigeons unsuspectingly approached, and
he threw a net over half a dozen of them.

This was a great point gained; for the
Black Lodge was in possession of living
things that had come from within the
guarded precinct; it would be easy to attack
the inmates by means of sympathetic magic.
As it chanced, two of the birds were male;
but pigeons being of the general nature of
Venus, it was decided to try to identify
them with the least male persons of the
garrison, namely the four women and the
two boys. Accordingly, ribbons were tied to
the necks of the birds, and the names of the
intended victims inscribed upon them.
Magical ceremonies were now made, Gates,
who took a real interest in the experiment,
being the leader.

When he considered the identification
adequate, he placed red pepper on the
tongues of the birds; and was rewarded the
following morning by seeing Sister Clara
turn upon one of her girls with a gesture of
rage; he could even hear faintly the tones of
anger in her voice.

But Brother Onofrio had not failed to
observe the same thing; and he divined
instantly that a breach had been made in his
circle. He went immediately to Sister Clara,
and compelled her attention by a sign of
such authority that no initiate dare overlook
it.

"Sister," he said very gently, "you do not
speak with man; what cause, then, can
there be for bitterness?"

She answered him, still angrily. "The
house is upside down," she said. "Iliel is as
irritable as an eczema; the boys have both
made insulting faces at every one they have
seen this morning; and the girls are
absolutely impudent."

"This is a matter for me, as in charge of
the defence of the circle." [165]

Sister Clara uttered a sharp exclamation.
It had not occurred to her to think of it in
that way.

"| should be obliged," continued Brother
Onofrio, "if you could see your way to
impose a rule of silence for seven days from
sunset to-night. Excepting, of course, in the
invocations. | will warn the boys; do you
take up the matter with Iliel and the girls."

"It shall be done."

Brother Onofrio went off to the private
room where he did his own particular
magick. He saw that a serious inroad had
been made; but his divination, on this
occasion, failed to enlighten him. His
favourite device was the Tarot, those
mysterious cards with their twenty-two
hieroglyphic trumps; and as a rule he was
able to discover all kinds of unknown
matters by their use. But on this attempt he
was baffled by the monotony of his answer.

However he used the cards, they always
reverted to a single symbol, the trump
numbered XVI, which is called "The Blasted
Tower," and has some reference to the
legend of Babel.

"| Know," he muttered, himself irritated
by the persistence of the card, "I know it's
Mars" -- which is the planet signified by that
particular hieroglyph. "But | wanted a lot
more than that. | asked 'What is the
trouble? 'From whom is the trouble?’ ‘Where
is the trouble?’ ‘What shall | do? And the
Same card answers all the questions!"

The next day Gates found that the
tongues of the birds were shrivelled up, and
he divined that his mode of attack had
been detected, and precaution taken. He
proceeded by drugging the pigeons with the
vapour of ether.

In the house the result was immediate.
The six people affected showed signs of
intoxication and dizziness, coupled with a
strong feeling of suffocation. [166] Sister

Clara was less troubled than the others, and
she recognized the magical cause of the
symptoms. She ran quickly to Brother
Onofrio; he saw instantly that a new attack
was in progress, and gave the sign agreed
upon for retirement to a specially
consecrated room in the square tower, a
sort of inner circle, or citadel. The victims
gathered in this room within a few minutes,
and their symptoms abated on the instant.

But Brother Onofrio had a glimpse of
light, as he assisted one of the two boys,
who was almost choking, to reach the
refuge. The tower caught his eye, and it
flashed upon him that perhaps the Tarot
was referring to an actual tower. It was only
one step to think of the tower of the
church; and, running into the garden, he
saw that a man was standing there,
evidently engaged in watching the house of
the magicians. Brother Onofrio's quick
insight decided him instantly upon the
course to follow.

The Tarot Trump in question represents
a tower struck by lightning, from which
figures of men are seen falling.

He laughed joyously; his favourite
method of divination had vindicated itself
supremely. His four questions had indeed a
single answer.

W. S. Gilbert informs us that "a deed of
blood, and fire, and flames, was meat and
drink to Simple J ames"; and to find himself
approached upon the plane of Mars was like
mother's milk to Brother Onofrio.

For he was himself of the strongest
Martial type, having been born with Scorpio,
the night house of Mars, rising, and the
planet himself conjoined with Herschel in
the mid-heaven in the sign of the Lion, with
the Sun rising in trine and J upiter conjoined
with Saturn making an additional trine from
the sixth house, which governs secret things
such as magick [167] It was as formidable a
combination as Mars could make ina
thousand years.

He happened also to belong to that
grade of the Order -- Adeptus Major -- which
specializes in Mars; Arthwait and Company
had unwittingly come to meet him where he
was strongest.

To invoke Mars is to establish a
connection with that order of nature which
we class as martial. It may be remembered
how a man once came to a doctor, suffering
internal pangs of no mean order from having
swallowed by mistake some pills intended
for a horse. Asked how it came to happen,
he explained that he had been administering
them to the horse by blowing them down its
throat through a tube; but the horse had
blown first.

This is of course the danger in every
magical experiment; and this constitutes
the evergreen glory of every man who
adventures upon it; for at each new portal
he enters, naked and new-born, to confront
he knows not what malignant enemies. The
sole excuse for the existence of our
miserable species lies not in intelligence,
but in this masterful courage, this aspiration
to extend the empire of the spirit. Even the

blackest of magicians, like Douglas, or the
stupidest, like Arthwait, is a higher type of
being than the bourgeois who goes along
with his nose on the ground picking up gold
bricks in the mire.

Now when Brother Onofrio found Gates
perched upon the campanile, he saw the
Martial symbol complete -- only awaiting
the lightning-flash. There was no need for
him to produce a thunderstorm, as it would
have been if Gates had been an ordinary
man, accessible only to coarse influences;
no, Brother Onofrio knew how to assimilate
the church tower to The Blasted Tower of
the Tarot without appealing to the material
forces of nature, so-called, as if "matter"
were not comprehensive as "nature" [168]
herself; but the English language is full of
these booby-traps.

He went to his laboratory, took out the
Tarot card XVI and set it up on the altar. He
lighted the fire upon the tripod, and he
kindled the incense of dragon's blood that
stood ready in the iron censer. He then put
upon his head the steel crown of Mars,
thorny with its four flashing pentagrams,
and he took in his hands the heavy sword, as
long as himself, with a two-edged blade
tapering from a width, at the junction of
the hilt, of no less than five inches.

Chanting the terrible conjurations of
Mars, fierce war-songs of the olden peoples
of the world, invocations of mighty deities
throned upon the thunder -- "He sent out his
arrows and scattered them; he sent forth his
lightnings, and consumed them" -- Brother
Onofrio began the war-dance of the

Serpent, the invoking dance of Mars. Close
coiled about the altar at first, he took
gradually a wider sweep, constantly
revolving on himself but his feet tracing a
complex spiral curve. On reaching the door
of the room, he allowed the "Serpent" to
stretch out its length, and, ever twisting on
himself, came out upon the terrace.

Gates was still at his post upon the
Campanile; he had been about to go, but
this new feature of the routine of the house
riveted him to his place. This was just what
Douglas needed to know! He leant upon the
parapet of the tower, watching with infinite
eagerness and minuteness the convolutions
of the adept.

Once upon the terrace, Brother Onofrio
proceeded to coil up his "Serpent" after him,
diminishing the sweep of his spirals until he
was at zero, merely rotating on himself.

Then he began the second part of his
work, the Dance of the Sword. [169]

Slowly he began to cause his feet to
trace a pentagram, and he allowed the
Sword to leave his body as he quickened his
pace, Just as one sees the weights of the
ball-governor of a steam-engine fly
outwards as pressure and speed leap higher.

Gates was altogether fascinated by the
sight. In the sunlight, this scarlet figure with
lights darting from every brilliance of its
steel was a magnificent spectacle, almost
bewildering in its intensity.

Faster and faster whirled the adept, his

sword swaying about him like a garment of
light; and his voice, louder and fiercer with
every turn, assumed the very majesty of
thunder.

Gates watched with open mouth; he was
learning much from this man. He began to
perceive the primaeval energy of the
universe, under a veil, the magical clang
and rush of blazing stars in the blind
emptiness of space. And suddenly Brother
Onofrio stopped dead; his voice snapped
short into a silence far more terrible than
any word; and his long sword was still,
fearfully still, stretched out like a shaft of
murderous light -- the point towards the
tower.

Gates was suddenly aware that he had
all along been the object of the dance; and
then his brain began to reel. Had the
whirling flashes hypnotized him? He could
not think; the world went black for him.
Automatically he clutched at the parapet;
but he pitched headlong over it, and
crashed upon the ground a hundred feet
below.

On the terrace Brother Onofrio was
beginning the banishing spirals of Mars, with
songs of triumph into which stole, as if
surreptitiously, some hint of that joy of love
which, from the beginning of time, has
welcomed the victorious soldier. [170]

CHAPTER Xill

OF THE PROGRESS OF THE GREAT
EXPERIMENT; NOT FORGETTING OUR
FRIENDS LAST SEEN IN PARIS, ABOUT

WHOSE WELFARE MUCH ANXIETY MUST
HAVE BEEN FELT

EARLY in J anuary Cyril Grey received a
letter from Lord Antony Bowling. "My good
Grey," it began, "may the New Year bring
you courage to break your resolutions
early! My own plan is to swear off every
kind of virtue, so that | triumph even when
| fall!

"Morningside is off to America with his
New Discovery in Science. It is that all
crime is due to breathing. Statistics show
(a) that all convicts are guilty of this
disgusting habit; (b) it is characteristic of
all the inmates of our insane asylums.

"On the other hand, neither crime nor
insanity has ever been proved against any
person who was not an habitual breather.
The case, as you see, is complete.
Morningside has gone even farther, and
shown that breathing Is akin to drug-habits;
he has made numerous experiments upon
addicts, and finds that suppression leads to
mental and physical distress of an even
more acute type than that which follows
the removal of morphia or cocaine from
their slaves. There is little doubt that
Congress will take immediate action to

penalize this filthy vice as it deserves, and
Fresh Air will be included among the drugs
to which the Harrison Law applies. Hot Air,
as the natural food of the People, will of
course be permitted.

"| saw Sister Cybele the other day. She
was [171] passing through London to visit
friends in Scotland. | tried to alleviate that
dreadful destiny by asking her to dinner,
and we had an amusing seance with my
new toy, a youth named Roger Blunt, who
is controlled by a spirit called Wooloo, has
eight secondary personalities, and causes
pencils to adhere to walls. It cannot be
that this is varnish, or surface tension, ora
little of both; it would be too, too cruel!

"The Mahathera Phang has vanished
from our gaze; he has probably gone to the
Equator to correct the obliquity of the
Ecliptic in the interest of the Law of
Righteousness. I'm sorry; | believe in that
man; | know he's got something that |
haven't, and | want it. However, Simple
Simon has been nice to me; only he won't
talk Phenomena -- says that, like a certain
Pope, he has seen too many miracles to
believe in them. Which is my own case,
only he is referring to genuine ones. Hence
difficulty in comprehension of his attitude.

"| hope you're having a great time with
the devil; | envy your blue skies; London is
wrapped in fog, and even on fine days |
have to go to the War Office. But isn't it a
pity those wicked bad naughty men know
where you are? | have my doubts about
magick; but | Know Balloch, and he's the
rottenest egg in London. | gather he's at the

back of it. Some blackmailing articles on
you, again; but as Morningside would say,
you should worry. Come along and see me
before, ina moment of madness and
despair, you plunge into Vesuvius in the
hope of exciting a future Mathew Arnold to
immortalize you.

"Well, here's the best to you!
"ANTONY BOWLING."

There was a brief note, too, from Simon
Iff. "It's to be supposed all's well; rumours
of disaster to enemy offensive current in
Paris. You had better [172] worry along on
your own now; there's other fish frying in
this kitchen. An old man may possibly drop
in on you early in August; you may
recognize him -- with a strong pair of
glasses -- as your old friend, -- SIMON IFF."

Simple Simon never spoke of himself as
"I" in a letter; he only used the pronoun in
conversation as a concession to custom.

The Black Commissioners had also heard
from headquarters; Gates was replaced, as
quick as rail could carry, by a man of
Superior advancement in the Black Lodge.

This was the celebrated Dr. Victor
Vesquit, the most famous necromancer of
his age. There was really little harm in the
man beyond his extraordinary perversion in
the matter of corpses. His house in
Hampden Road was not only a rendezvous
of spiritualists, but a Home for Lost
Mummies. He based all his magical

operations upon dead bodies, or detached
portions of the same, believing that to
endow dead matter with life -- the
essential of nearly all magick, as he quite
rightly saw -- it was best to choose matter
in which life had recently been manifest.
An obvious corollary is that the best bodies
are those that have met a violent death,
rather than those which have been

subj ected to illness and decay. Also, it
followed that the best corpses of all were
those of executed murderers, whose
vitality may be assumed as very great --
though on this last point Cyril Grey, for
one, would have disagreed with him, saying
that the most vital people would have too
much respect for the principle of life to
commit murder in cold blood.

However, Dr Vesquit had obtained an
appointment as coroner in the most
murderous district of London; and uncanny
were the rumours that circulated among
occult sympathizers. [173]

His career had nearly been ruined on
two occasions by scandal. The notorious
Diana Vaughan, it had been said, was his
mistress; and he had become her
accomplice in the introduction of the
frightful sect of the Palladists.

The rumour was not widespread, and
Vesquit need not have suffered; but he
took alarm, and had the unlucky thought of
employing Arthwait to write a book
clearing him from all suspicion, by which it
naturally was fixed on him for ever.

The second trouble was his little quarrel

with Douglas. Vesquit was Senior in the
Black Lodge, and Douglas overthrew him by
"carelessly" leaving, in a hansom cab, some
documents belonging to the Lodge, with
Vesquit's name and address attached to
them, which made some exceedingly grim
revelations of the necromantic practices
carried on in Hampden Road.

The honest cabby had turned over the
papers to Scotland Yard, as his duty was;
and the police had sent them on to those in
authority over coroners; and Vesquit
received, with his documents, an
intimation that he must drop that sort of
thing at once.

To be chief in the Lodge seemed less
than to be always in a Paradise of corpses;
so he resigned office, and Douglas pushed
his advantage by making him an abject
tool, under the perpetual threat of
exposure.

No sooner did Douglas learn of the
death of Gates than he telegraphed to
Arthwait to get the inquest adjourned "so
that the relatives of the deceased in
England might attend, and take possession
of the body," and to Vesquit to attend the
same. On this occasion the coroner needed
no threat -- the job was after his own
heart.

Douglas met him in Paris in high glee,
for he was not sorry to be rid of Gates;
and, on the other hand, the man had died
in full tide of battle, and should be the
very corpse that Vesquit most needed; as
Douglas himself said, with a certain grim

humour in which he excelled, he was,
morally speaking, an executed criminal;
while, being in actual magical contact with
Grey and his friends, so much so that he
had evidently been killed by them, he was
an ideal magical link.

Vesquit's task was, if possible, to learn
from Gates exactly what had happened,
and so expert a necromancer had no fear of
the result. He was also to create a semi-
material ghost of Gates from the remains,
and send it to the person who had dealt out
death to that unlucky wizard.

On his arrival at Naples, there was no
difficulty in the way of the Black Lodge;
the authorities were only too glad to return
a formal verdict of death by misadventure,
and to hand over the corpse to the
rej oicing Vesquit.

Gates had fortunately left memoranda,
a rough diary of the various procedures
hitherto adopted; so that Vesquit was not
committed to the task of acquiring
information from Arthwait, which might
easily have occupied a season; and from
these notes the old necromancer came to
the conclusion that the enemy was to be
respected. Gates had done pretty well in
the matter of the pigeons, at first; his
procedure was not to be compared with his
colleague's pedantic idiocies; but the first
touch of riposte had been indeed deadly.
Gates had been the clairvoyant of the
party; he had gauged clearly enough the
result of his operation; but naturally he had
left no note of the last act, and neither
Arthwait nor Abdul Bey had been able to do

anything. Arthwait had been scared badly
until his pompous vanity came to the
rescue, and showed him that accidents of
that kind must be expected when one is
handicapped with an assistant of inferior
ability.

Vesquit decided that the battle should
be properly [175] prepared, and no trouble
spared to make it a success. His fondness
for corpses had not gone to the length of
desiring to become one.

In him there had been the makings of a
fairly strong man; and, with Douglas to
push him on, he was still capable of acting
with spirit and determination. Also, he had
the habit of authority. He set Arthwait to
worrk on the Grimoire; for, in a operation
of this importance, one must make all one's
instruments.

Beginning with a magic knife, which one
is allowed to buy, one cuts the magic wand
from a hazel, the magic quill from a goose,
and so on. The idea is to confirm the will to
perform the operation by a long series of
acts ad hoc. It is even desirable to procure
parchment by killing a consecrated animal
with the magic knife, and making ready the
skin with similarly prepared utensils; one
might for instance, cut and consecrate
even the pegs which stretched the skin.
However, in this case Arthwait had plenty
of "Virgin parchment" in stock, with quills
of a black vulture, and ink made by burning
human bones, and mixing the carbonized
products with the soot of the magic dark-
lantern, whose candles were prepared with
human fat.

But the Grimoire of any great operation
must be thought out and composed;
according to elaborate rules, indeed, but
with the purpose of the work constantly in
mind. Even when all this is done, the
Grimoire is hardly begun; for it must be
copied out in the way above indicated; and
it should be illuminated with every kind of
appropriate design. This was an ideal task
for Arthwait; he was able to wallow in dog-
latin and corrupt Greek-Coptic; he made
sentences so complicated that the
complete works of George Meredith,
Thomas Carlyle, and Henry J] ames, tangled
together, would have seemed in
comparison like a word of three letters.
[176]

His Grimoire was in reality excellent for
its purpose; for the infernal hierarchy
delights in unintelligible images, in every
kind of confusion and obscurity. This
particular lucubration was calculated to
drag the Archdemon of Bad Syntax himself
from the most remote corner of his lair.

For Arthwait could not speak with
becoming unintelligibility; to knot a
sentence up properly it has to be thought
out carefully, and revised. New phrases
have to be put in; sudden changes of
subject must be introduced; verbs must be
shifted to unsuspected localities; short
words must be excised with ruthless hand;
archaisms must be sprinkled like sugar-
plums upon the concoction; the fatal
human tendency to say things
straightforwardly must be detected and
defeated by adroit reversals; and, if a

glimmer of meaning yet remain under close
scrutiny, it must be removed by replacing
all the principal verbs by paraphrases in
some dead language.

This is not to be achieved in a moment;
it is not enough to write disconnected
nonsense; it must be possible for anyone
acquainted with the tortuosities of the
author's mind to resolve the sentence into
its elements, and reproduce -- not the
meaning, for there is none, but the same
mental fog from which he was originally
suffering. An illustration is appended.

Pneumaticals

Omnient

(spirits) (all)

Tabernacular
Subinfractically

(dwelling)
(Below)

Homotopic
hermeneutical

(this)
(magic)

Ru-
volvolimperipunct,
suprorientalize,

(circle)
(arise)

factote
kinematodrastically,

(move) (soon)

overplus
phenomenize!

(and)
(appear) [177]

Upon this skeleton, a fair example of his
earlier manner, for no man attains the
summit of an art in a day, he would build a
superstructure by the deft introduction of
parentheses, amplifying each word until
the original coherence of the paragraph
was diluted to such an extent that the true
trail was undiscoverable. The effect upon
his public was to impress them with the
universality of his learning.

Arthwait being thus well out of harm's
way, Vesquit and Abdul set to work on the
less arduous of the preparations. Four black
cats were needed for the four points of the

compass, and it was desirable to massacre
a goat upon the altar, which would be no
less than the corpse itself. Vesquit,
declaring that the body was to be sent to
England, had a dummy shipped off ina
coffin, and kept Gates on ice, which may or
may not have been a great comfort to him.

Abdul had no difficulty in procuring the
cats which, much to their dissatisfaction,
were caged in Arthwait's study, and fed on
human flesh, which Vesquit easily procured
from the dissecting-rooms of the local
hospitals.

But the goat was a more serious matter.
An ordinary goat will not do; it had to
qualify in certain respects; Abdul
succeeded in his quest only after a series of
intrigues with the lowest ruffians in Naples,
which brought him into more vulgar and
unpleasant dangers than he had
contemplated "when he first put that
uniform on." It was, however, at least
temporarily, a very amusing situation for
the goat. The requisite bat, which must be
fed on a woman's blood, was easily
arranged for, a courageous country girl
offering to accommodate with a toe, fora
consideration. The nails from a suicide's
coffin, and the skull of the parricide, were
of course no trouble; for Vesquit never
travelled without these household
requisites.

There were many other details to
arrange; the consideration of a proper
place for the operation gave rise to much
mental labour. It is, generally speaking,
desirable to choose the locality of a recent

battle; and the greater the number of slain
the better. (There should be some very
desirable spots in the vicinity of Verdun for
black magicians who happen to flourish
after the vulgar year 1917). But the
Grimoires were written in other times with
other manners; now-a-days there is risk of
disturbance if one sets up one's
paraphernalia of goats and cats at a cross-
roads, in the hope of helping oneself out
with a recently-interred suicide, ora
ceremonially annihilated vampire; where
the peasant of the fourteenth century
would have fled shrieking, the motorist of
the twentieth century stops to observe, or,
more likely, runs you over; so that unless
your property includes a private
battlefield, it is a point of valour to choose
a more retired site for one's necromancy
than the stricken field of the Marne. Cross-
roads, again, are not so thickly planted
with suicides and vampires as in happier
days. Reflecting solidly and ably upon these
points of modern degeneracy, Vesquit
made up his mind to compromise, and
accept the most agreeable substitute, a
profaned chapel; it was easy to rent a villa
with a chapel attached, and, to a man of
Vesquit's ability, the work of a moment to
profane it.

This he accordingly arranged through
Abdul Bey.

The mind of this youth was very forcibly
impressed by the preparations of the old
coroner. He had been brought up in the
modern school, and could laugh at
superstition with the best of us; but there
were traces of hereditary faith in Islam,

and he was not sceptical enough to spoil
the magic of Vesquit.

No man knew better than the
necromancer that all this insane
ceremonial was irrational. But it [179] so
happens that everything on this planet is,
ultimately, irrational; there is not, and
cannot be, any reason for the causal
connexion of things, if only because our use
of the word "reason" already implies the
idea of causal connexion. But, even if we
avoid this fundamental difficulty, Hume
said that causal connexion was not merely
unprovable, but unthinkable; and, in
shallower waters still, one cannot assign a
true reason why water should flow down
hill, or sugar taste sweet in the mouth.
Attempts to explain these simple matters
always progress into a learned lucidity, and
on further analysis retire to a remote
stronghold where every thing is irrational
and unthinkable.

If you cut off a man's head, he dies.
Why? Because it kills him. That is really the
whole answer. Learned excursions into
anatomy and physiology only beg the
question; it does not explain why the heart
is necessary to life to say that it is a vital
organ. Yet that is exactly what is done, the
trick that is played on every inquiring mind.
Why cannot | see in the dark? Because light
is necessary to sight. No confusion of that
issue by talk of rods and cones, and optical
centres, and foci, and lenses, and
vibrations is very different to Edwin
Arthwait's treatment of the long-suffering
English language.

Knowledge is really confined to
experience. The laws of Nature are, as
Kant said, the laws of our minds, and, as
Huxley said, the generalization of observed
facts.

It is, therefore, no argument against
ceremonial magic to say that it is "absurd"
to try to raise a thunderstorm by beating a
drum; it is not even fair to say that you
have tried the experiment, found it would
not work, and so perceived it to be
"impossible." You might as well claim that,
as you had taken paint and canvas, and not
produced a Rembrandt, it was evident that
the pictures attributed to his painting were
really produced in quite a different way.

You do not see why the skull of a
parricide should help you to raise a dead
man, as you do not see why the mercury in
a thermometer should rise and fall, though
you elaborately pretend that you do; and
you could not raise a dead man by the aid
of the skull of a parricide, just as you could
not play the violin like Kreisler; though in
the latter case you might modestly add
that you thought you could learn.

This is not the special pleading of a
professed magician; it boils down to the
advice not to judge subjects of which you
are perfectly ignorant, and is to be found,
stated in clearer and lovelier language, in
the Essays of Thomas Henry Huxley.

Dr. Victor Vesquit, to whom the whole
of these ideas was perfectly familiar,
proceeded with his quaint preparations
unperturbed by the least doubt of their

efficacy.

He had found that they worked; and he
cared no more for the opinion of those
who, whatever their knowledge in other
branches of science might be, were not
experts in necromancy, than does Harry
Vardon when it is proved to him, with the
utmost scientific precision, that he cannot
possibly hit a golf ball so long as he swings
as he does, and uses that mechanically
defective grip.

It is also to be remarked that the
contrary holds good; no method of doing
anything has yet been found which cannot
be bungled by the inept.

So, as the Persian poet says: "Who hath
the How is careless of the Why."

It was early in the course of Dr.
Vesquit's preliminaries that (what Arthwait
called the "antilan-thanetical
douleskeiarchy") the secret service which
had been established reported to hima
complete [181] change in the routine of the
people of the Butterfly net. On the seventh
of J anuary lliel reported that the first point
of the work was in all probability attained;
all that was now necessary was to
concentrate upon the real crux of the case,
the catching of the Butterfly.

The household was reorganized
accordingly; Cyril Grey withdrew himself
completely from the company of lliel, and
joined the Church Militant Here On Earth;
while lIliel herself came under the direct
care of Sister Clara, the point within the

triangle of women. She took part in their
invocations, as the focus to which they
were directed; while the men were wholly
busied in watching over the safety of the
fortress, their faces turned inexorably
outward, their sole business to assure the
security of the three women and their
treasure.

Upon these facts being brought to the
notice of Edwin Arthwait, he smiled. He
had redeemed his earlier failures -- due to
the incapacity of his assistants -- by a
sweeping SUCCESS.

For to his magic, evidently, was due the
observed change in nature! Shortly after
the arrival of Vesquit, he had completed his
latest operation, the bewitchment of three
nails in such a manner that, if struck into
the door of a room of a house, the
occupants would be thereby debarred from
the enjoyment of conjugal felicity. And
here was the result, shining before him,
beautiful with banners. Even the pretence
of amity had been abandoned. As a matter
of fact, Brother Onofrio had discovered the
nails, and taken the proper measures to
return the current to its sender; but on this
occasion it was as " tae tak' the breeks aff a
Hielan' mon"!

Arthwait was totally insensible to the
malice of his adversary, and remained in
the enjoyment of his supposed victory. He
resolved to steal a match on [182] Vesquit.
Why should he share his glory with another?
He had the enemy on the run; he had
better pursue them forthwith. Vesquit's
slow methods would only give them time to

recover.

So he resolved upon the chivalrous if
perilous course of Cat's Cradle. This
magical operation, the relics of which are
familiar even to the most unspiritually-
minded children, is exceedingly
widespread, especially among nations
which live principally by fishing, as, for
example, the South Sea Islanders. Many
most intricate and beautiful patterns have
been devised, and of these the wayfaring
man may partake by a perusal of Dr. W. W.
R. Ball's monograph upon the subject.[1]
That able mathematician, however,
neglects unpardonably the magical side of
the matter.

The theory is apparently based upon the
fact that the most elusive objects, birds,
butterflies, and fishes, may be taken by
means of a net. It is argued, therefore,
that anything whatever, no matter how
elusive, such as the ghost of one's father or
the soul of one's enemy, may be caught
similarly, though of course the net must be
adapted to the special game that one is
after.

With these things Arthwait was familiar,
and it occurred to him that it should be
easy to identify string, or, preferably, cat-
gut, with the viscera of his victims. There
could then be no difficulty in knotting up
the cords in such a pattern, for example, as
the Many Stars, or the Owl, or the Zigzag
Lightning; and assuredly the magicians thus
assailed would find similar re-arrangements
of the contents of their peritonea.

After various preliminary exercises,
annoying to the objects of this solicitude,
Arthwait proposed to proceed to the grand
operation of all, tying up his gut in the
Elusive Yam pattern, which, from the [183]
greatest complexity, dissolves like a dream
at a single last twist; the persons thus
sympathetically treated would obviously
perish no less miserably than did Eglon,
King of Moab, or J udas Iscariot.

The advantage of this operation is
evidently its extreme simplicity and
economy; while, if it works at all, it surely
leaves nothing to be desired in such
Teutonic qualities as thoroughness and
frightfulness.

Whether from any difficulty in
identification or otherwise, it was some
little while before Arthwait began to feel
that his plan was working out. The trouble
with all these operations was in the
absence of a direct link with the principals;
the currents invariably struck the outer
defences, in the person of Brother Onofrio,
before penetrating. When, therefore,
Arthwait's efforts began to show results,
they were first noticed by that sturdy
warrior. And he, considering the situation,
argued that the observed phenomena were
due to Nature or to Magick, and that in
either case the remedy lay in opposing no
resistance to the forces, but allowing them
to operate in a laudable manner.
Accordingly, he took a large dose of a
medicine known to the pharmacist as
Hydrarg.Subchlor, adding the remark "If
this be nature, may it do me good; and if
this be magic, may it do him good!"

This occurred just as Arthwait reached
his final operation, the evisceration of his
enemy.

That night both parties were successful
in causing things to happen; and the
morning after Arthwait was securely
incarcerated in the Quarantine Hospital of
the city, and the newspapers were
paragraphing a suspected case of Asiatic
Cholera.

However, in five days the symptoms
abated; the case was declared non-
infectious; and the pallid shadow of the
disconcerted sorcerer was restored to the
more congenial atmosphere of his
Grimoire. [184]

[1] Mathematical Recreations and
Essays.

CHAPTER XIV

AN INFORMATIVE DISCOURSE UPON THE
OCCULT CHARACTER OF THE MOON, HER
THREEFOLD NATURE, HER FOURFOLD
PHASES, AND HER EIGHT-AND-TWENTY
MANSIONS; WITH AN ACCOUNT OF THE
EVENTS THAT PRECEDED THE CLIMAX OF THE
GREAT EXPERIMENT, BUT ESPECIALLY OF
THE VISION OF ILIEL

THE Ancients, whose wisdom is so much
despised by those who have never studied
it, but content themselves with a pretence
of understanding modern science which
deceives nobody, would have smiled to
observe how often the "latest discoveries"
are equivalent to some fancy of Aristotle, or
some speculation of Heracleitus. The
remoter Picay-universities of America,
which teach farming or mining, with a little
"useless" knowledge as a side-course, for
show, are full of bumptious little professors
who would not be allowed to sweep out a
laboratory in London or Berlin. The ambition
of such persons is to obtain an illustrated
interview in a Sunday supplement, with a
full account of their wonderful discoveries,
which have revolutionized the art of sucking
eggs. They are peculiarly severe upon back
numbers like Charles Darwin. Their
ignorance leads them to believe the
bombast of democracy-flatterers, who
scream weekly of Progress, and it really
appears to them that anything more than six
months old is out-of-date. They do not know

that this is only true of loud-shouted
mushroom rubbish such as they call truth.
[185]

The fundamental difference between
ancient and modern science is not at all in
the field of theory. Sir William Thomson was
just as metaphysical as Pythagoras or
Raymond Lully, and Lucretius quite as
materialistic as Ernst Haeckel or Buchner.

But we have devised means of accurate
measurement which they had not, and in
consequence of this our methods of
classification are more quantitative than
qualitative. The result has been to make
much of their science unintelligible; we no
longer know exactly what they meant by the
four elements, or by the three active
principles, sulphur, mercury, and salt. Some
tradition has been preserved by societies of
wise men, who, because of the
persecutions, when to possess any other
book than a missal might be construed as
heresy, concealed themselves and
whispered the old teaching one to another.

The nineteenth century saw the
overthrow of most of the old ecclesiastical
tyranny, and in the beginning of the
twentieth it was found once more possible
to make public the knowledge. The wise
men gathered together, discovered a
student who was trustworthy and possessed
of the requisite literary ability; and by him
the old knowledge was revised and made
secure; it was finally published in a sort of
periodical encyclopedia (already almost
impossible to find, such was the demand for
it) entitled The Equinox.

Now in the science of antiquity, much
classification depended upon the planets.
Those things which were hot and fiery in
their nature, lions, and pepper, and fevers,
were classed under the Sun or J upiter or
Mars; things swift and subtle under Mercury;
things cold and heavy under Saturn, and so
forth.

Yet the principles of most of the planets
appeared in varying proportions in almost
everything; and the more equally these
proportions were balanced and combined,
the more complete was anything supposed
to be, the nearer modelled on the divine
perfection. Man himself was called a
microcosm, a little universe, an image of
the Creator. In him all the planets and
elements had course, and even the Signs of
the Zodiac were represented in his nature.
The energy of the ram was in his head; the
bull gave the laborious endurance to his
shoulders; the lion represented the courage
of his heart, and the fire of his temper; his
knees, which help him to spring, are under
the goat -- all works in, and is divided and
subdivided in, beauty and harmony.

In this curious language the moon
signifies primarily all receptive things,
because moonlight is only reflected
sunlight. Hence "lunar" is almost a synonym
of "feminine." Woman changes; all depends
upon the influence of the man; and she is
now fertile, now barren, according to her
phase. But on each day of her course she
passes through a certain section of the
Zodiac; and according to the supposed
nature of the stars beyond her was her
influence in that phase, or, as they called

it, mansion. It was in order to bring Iliel into
harmony with every quality of the moon
that her daily routine was ordered.

But beyond such minuteness of detail is
the grand character of the Moon, which is
threefold. For she is Artemis or Diana, sister
of the Sun, a shining Virgin Goddess; then
Isis-initiatrix, who brings to man all light
and purity, and is the link of his animal soul
with his eternal self; and she is Persephone
or Proserpine, a soul of double nature, living
half upon earth and half in Hades, because,
having eaten the pomegranate offered her
by its lord, her mother could not bring her
wholly back to earth; and thirdly, she is
Hecate, a thing altogether of Hell, barren,
hideous and malicious, the queen of death
and evil witchcraft. [187]

All these natures are combined in
woman. Artemis is unassailable, a being fine
and radiant; Hecate is the crone, the
woman past all hope of motherhood, her
soul black with envy and hatred of happier
mortals; the woman in the fullness of life is
the sublime Persephone, for whose sake
Demeter cursed the fields that they brought
forth no more corn, until Hades consented
to restore her to earth for half the year. So
this "moon" of the ancients has a true
psychological meaning, as sound to-day as
when the priest of Mithras slew the bull; she
is the soul, not the eternal and undying sun
of the true soul, but the animal soul which
iS a projection of it, and is subject to
change and sorrow, to the play of all the
forces of the universe, and whose
"redemption" is the solution of the cosmic
problem. For it is the seed of the woman

that shall bruise the serpent's head; and this
is done symbolically by every woman who
wins to motherhood.

Others may indeed be chaste unto
Artemis, priestesses of a holy and ineffable
rite; but with this exception, failure to
attain the appointed goal brings them into
the dark side of the moon, the cold and
barren house of Hecate the accursed.

It will be seen how wide is the range of
these ideas, how sensitive is the formula of
woman, that can touch such extremes,
Springing often from one to the other ina
moment -- according to the nature of the
influence then at work upon her.

Cyril Grey had once said, speaking at a
Woman's Suffrage Meeting:

"Woman has no soul, only sex; no morals,
only moods; her mind is mob-rule; therefore
she, and she only, ought to Vote."

He had sat down amid a storm of hisses;
and received fourteen proposals of marriage
within the next twenty-four hours. [188]

Ever since the beginning of the second
Stage of the Great Experiment, Iliel had
become deffinitely a Spirit of the Moon
While Cyril was with her, she reflected him,
she clung to him, she was one with him, Isis
to his Osiris, sister as well as spouse; and
every thought of her mind being but the
harmonic of his, there was no possibility of
any internal disturbance.

But now she was torn suddenly from her

support; she could not even speak to her
man; and she discovered her own position as
the mere centre of an Experiment.

She knew now that she was not of
scientific mind; that her aspirations to the
Unknown had been fully satisfied by mere
love; and that she would have been much
happier in a commonplace cottage. It says
much for the personality of Sister Clara, and
the force of her invocations, that this first
impulse never came to so much as a word.
But the priestess of Artemis took hold of her
almost with the violence of a lover, and
whisked her away into a languid ecstasy of
reverie. She communicated her own
enthusiasm to the girl, and kept her mind
occupied with dreams, faery-fervid, of
uncharted seas of glory on which her galleon
might sail, undiscovered countries of spice
and sweetness, Eldorado and Utopia and the
City of God.

The hour of the rising of the moon was
always celebrated by an invocation upon the
terrace consecrated to that planet. A few
minutes earlier lliel rose and bathed, then
dressed herself in the robes, and placed
upon her head the crescent-shaped tiara,
with its nine great moonstones. In this the
younger girls took turns to assist her. When
she was ready, she joined the other girl, and
together they went down to the terrace,
where Sister Clara would be ready to begin
the invocations. [189]

Of course, owing to the nature of the
ceremony, it took place an hour later every
day; and at first Iliel found a difficulty in
accommodating herself to the ritual. The

setting of the moon witnessed a second
ceremony, directly from which she retired
to her bed. It was part of the general theory
of the operation thus to keep her concealed
and recumbent for the greater part of the
day; which, as has been seen, really lasted
nearer 25 hours than 24.

But with soft singing and music, or with
the recital of slow voluptuous poetry, her
natural disinclination to sleep was
overcome, and she began to enjoy the
delicious laziness of her existence, and to
sleep the clock round without turning in her
bed. She lived almost entirely upon milk,
and cream, and cheese soft-curded and
mild, with little crescent cakes made of rye
with white of egg and cane sugar; as for
meat, venison, as sacred to the huntress
Artemis, was her only dish. But certain shell-
fish were permitted, and all soft and
succulent vegetables and fruits.

She put on flesh rapidly; the fierce,
active, impetuous girl of October, with taut
muscles and dark-flushed mobile face, had
become pale, heavy, languid, and
indifferent to events, all before the
beginning of February.

And it was early in this month that she
was encouraged by her first waking vision of
the Moon. Naturally her sleep had already
been haunted by this idea from the
beginning; it could hardly have been
otherwise with the inveterate persistence of
the ceremonies. The three women always
chanted a sacred sentence, Epelthon
Epelthon Artemis[1] continuously for an
hour after her couching; and then one of

them went on while the others slept. They
would each take a shift of three hours. The
words were rather droned than sung, to an
old magical chant, which Sister Clara, who
was half Greek, half [190] Italian, born of a
noble family of Mitylene, had inherited from
some of the women of the island at her
initiation as a young girl into some of their
mysteries. They claimed that it had come
down unaltered from the great singers of
history. It was a drowsy lilt, yet in it was a
current of fierce heat like that of the sun,
and an undertone of sobbing like the sea.

So lIliel's dreams were always of the
moon. If the watcher beheld trouble upon
her face, as if disturbing influences were
upon her, she would breathe softly in her
ear, and bring her thoughts back to the
infinite calm which was desired for her.

For Cyril Grey in devising the operation
had by no means been blind to the dangers
involved in choosing a symbol so sensitive as
Luna. There is all the universe between her
good and evil sides; in the case of a
comparatively simple and straightforward
planet like Saturn, this is not the case. And
the planets with a backbone are far easier
to control. If you once get Mars going, so to
Speak, it is easy to make him comply with
Queensberry rules; but the moon is so
passive that the slightest new influence
throws her entirely out.

And, of course, the calmer the pool the
bigger the splash! Hence, in order to draw
down to lliel only the holiest and serenest of
the lunar souls, no precaution could be too
great, no assiduity too intense.

The waking vision which came to her
after about a month of the changed routine
was of good cheer and great
encouragement.

It was an hour after sunset; the night
was curiously warm, and a soft breeze blew
from the sea. It was part of the duty of lliel
to remain in the moonlight, with her gaze
and her desire fixed upon the orb, whenever
possible. From her room a stairway led [191]
to a tall turret, circular, with a glass dome,
So as to favour all such observations. But on
this night the garden tempted her. Nox erat
et caelo fulgebat Luna sereno inter minora
sidera. The moon hung above Capri, two
hours from her setting. Iliel held her vigil
upon the terrace, by the side of the basin of
the fountain. When the moon was not
visible, she would always replace her by
looking upon the sea, or upon still water,
for these have much in common with the
lunar influence.

Something -- she never knew what --
drew her eyes from the moon to the water.
She was so placed that the reflexion
appeared in the basin, at the very edge of
the marble, where the water flowed over
into the little rivulets that coursed the
terrace. There was a tremulous movement,
almost like a timid kiss, as the water
touched the edge.

And, to the eye of Iliel, it seemed as if
the trembling of the moon's image were a
stirring of vitality.

The thought that followed was a
mystery. She said that she looked up, as if

recalled to her vigil, and found that the
moon was no longer in the sky. Nor indeed
was there any sky; she was in a grotto
whose walls, fantastically draped with
stalactites, glimmered a faint purplish blue --
very much the effect, she explained, of
luminous paint. She looked down again; the
basin was gone; at her feet was a young
fawn, snow-white, with a collar of silver.
She was impelled to read the engraving
upon the collar, and was able to make out
these words:

Siderum regina bicornis audi,

Luna, puellas.

lliel had learnt no Latin. But these words
were not only Latin, but the Latin of
Horace; and they were exactly appropriate
to the nature of the Great [192]
Experiment, "Luna" she had heard, and
"regina"; and she might have guessed
"ouellas" and even "siderum"; but that is one
thing, and an accurate quotation from the
Carmen Saeculare is another. Yet they stood
in her mind as if she had always known
them, perhaps even as if they were innate
in her. She repeated aloud:

"Siderum regina bicornis audi,

Luna, puellas.

"List, 0 moon, o queen of the
stars, two-horned,

List to the maidens!"

At the time, she had, of course, no idea
of the meaning of the words.

When she had read the inscription, she
stroked the fawn gently; and, looking up,
perceived that a child, clad ina kirtle, with
a bow and quiver slung from her shoulders,
was standing by her.

But the vision passed in a flash; she drew
her hand across her brow, as if to auscultate
her mental condition, for she had a slight
feeling of bewilderment. No, she was
awake; for she recognized the sacred oak
under which she was standing. It was only a
few paces from the door of the temple
where she was priestess. She remembered
perfectly now: she had come out to bid the
herald blow his horn. And at that moment
its mountainous music greeted her.

But what was this? From every tree in
the wood, from every blade of grass, from
under every stone, came running little
creatures in answer to the summons. They
were pale, semi-transparent, with oval (but
rather flattened) heads quite
disproportionately large, thin, match-like
bodies and limbs, and snake-like tails
attached to the base of their skulls. They
were extraordinarily light and active on

their feet, [193] and the tails kept up a
lashing movement. The whole effect was
comic, at the first sight; one might have
said tadpoles on stilts.

But a closer inspection stayed her
laughter. Each of these creatures had a
single eye, and in this eye was expressed
such force and energy that it was terrifying.
The effect was heightened by the sagacity,
the occult and profound knowledge of all
possible things, which dwelt behind those
fiery wills. In the carriage of the head was
something leonine as well as serpentine;
there was extraordinary pride and courage
to match the fierce persistency.

Yet there seemed no object in the
movements of these strange beings; their
immense activity was unintelligible. It
seemed as if they were going through
physical exercises -- yet it was something
more than that. At one moment she fancied
that she could distinguish leaders, that this
was a body of troops being rallied to some
assault.

And then her attention was distracted.
From her feet arose a swan, and took wing
over the forest. It must have been there for
a long time, for it had laid an egg directly
between her sandalled feet. She suddenly
realized that she was dreadfully hungry. She
would go into the temple and have the egg
for breakfast. But no sooner had she picked
it up than she saw that it, like the collar of
the fawn in her dream, was inscribed with a
Latin sentence. She read it aloud: the words
were absolutely familiar. They were those
of the labarum of Constantine "In hoc signo

vinces." "In this sign thou shalt conquer." But
her, eyes gave the lie to her ears; for the
word "signo" was spelt "Cygno"! The phrase
was then a pun -- "In this Swan thou shalt
conquer." At the time she did not
understand; but she was sure of the
spelling, when she came afterwards to
report her vision to Sister Clara. [194]

It then came into her mind that this egg
was a great treasure, and that it was her
duty to guard it against all comers; and at
the same moment she saw that the
creatures of the wood -- "sons of the oak"
she called them instinctively -- were
advancing toward her.

She prepared to fight or fly. But, with a
fearful crackling, the lightning -- which was,
in the strange way of dreams, identical with
the oak -- burst in every direction,
enveloping her with its blaze; and the crash
of the thunder was the fall of the oak. It
struck her to the ground. The world went
out before her eyes, dissolved into a
rainbow rush of stars; and she heard the
shouts of triumph of the "sons of the oak" as
they dashed forward upon her ravished
treasure. "Mitos ho Theos!" they shouted --
Sister Clara did not know, or would not tell,
its meaning.

As the iridiscent galaxy in which she was
floating gradually faded, she became aware
that she was no longer in the wood, but ina
strange city. It was crowded with men and
women, of many a race and colour. In front
of her was a small house, very poor and
squalid, in whose doorway an old man was
sitting. A long staff was by his side, leaning

against the door; and at his feet was a
lantern -- was it a lantern? It was more like
the opposite of one; for in the full daylight
it burned, and shed forth rays of darkness.
The ancient was dressed in grey rags; his
long unkempt hair and beard had lacked a
barber for many a day. But his right arm was
wholly bare, and around it was coiled a
serpent, gold and green, with a triple crown
Sparkling with ruby, sapphire, and with it he
was engraving a great square tablet of
emerald. [195]

She watched him for some time; when
he had finished, he went away with the
staff, and the lamp, and the tablet, to the
sea shore. Along the coast he proceeded for
some time, and came at last to a cave. lliel
followed him to its darkest corner; and
there she saw a corpse lying. Strangely, it
was the body of the old scribe himself. It
came to her very intensely that he had two
bodies, and that he always kept one of them
buried, for safety. The old scribe left the
tablet upon the breast of the dead man, and
went very quickly out of the cave.

But lliel remained to read what was
written.

It was afterwards translated by Cyril

Grey, and there is no need to give the
original.

"Utter the Word of Majesty and Terror!

True without lie, and certain without
error,

And of the essence of The Truth. | know

The things above are as the things
below,

The things below are as the things
above,

To wield the One Thing's Thaumaturgy --
Love.

As all from one sprang, by one
contemplation,

So all from one were born, by
permutation.

Sun sired, Moon bore, this unique
Universe;

Air was its chariot, and Earth its nurse.
Here is the root of every talisman

Of the whole world, since the whole
world began.

Here is the fount and source of every
soul.

Let it be spilt on earth! its strength is
whole.

Now gently, subtly, with thine Art
conspire

To fine the gross, dividing earth and fire.

Lo! it ascendeth and descendeth, even

And swift, an endless band of earth and
heaven;

Thus it receiveth might of duplex Love,

The powers below conjoined with those
above,

So shall the glory of the world be thine

And darkness flee before thy SOVRAN
shrine.

This is the strong strength of all
strength; surpass

The subtle and subdue it; pierce the
crass

And salve it; so bring all things to their
fated

Perfection: for by this was all created.
[196]

O marvel of miracle! O magic mode!
All things adapted to one circling code!

Since three parts of all wisdom | may
claim,

Hermes thrice great, and greatest, is my
name.

What | have written of the one sole Sun,

His work, is here divined, and dared, and
done."

In this obscure and antique oracle, so
Simon Iff himself subsequently agreed, the
secret of the Universe is revealed to those
who are worthy to partake of it.

lliel could not understand a word of what
was written, but she realized that it must
be valuable, and, taking the tablet, she hid
it in her robe and came out of the cave.
Then she saw that the coast was changed: it
was the familiar Posilippo which hung above
her, and she could see Vesuvius away to the
right. She turned to breast the steep slope
between her and the road, when she found
herself confronted by something that she
could not see. She had only a feeling that it
was black, that it was icy cold, and that it
wished to take the tablet from her. Her first
sentiment was that of acute hatred and
repulsion; but the thing, whatever it was,
seemed so wretched, that she felt she
would like to help it. Then she suddenly
glowed hot -- the arms of Abdul Bey were
round her, and his face was looking into
hers. She dropped the tablet hastily; she
was back again in a ball-room somewhere,
thousands of miles and thousands of years
away. And then she saw the moon, near her
setting, over Capri; she was on the terrace,
seated on the ground, perfectly awake, but
with the silver crescent from her hair lying
upon the marble before her.

Sister Clara, on her knees beside her,
was trying to decipher the scratches that
she had made.

"That is the writing on the tablet," said

lliel, as if Sister Clara already knew all
about it, "that the old man hid in the cave."
[197]

It was now the hour for her to cradle her
limbs in slumber; but, while the monotonous
chant of her hand-maidens wooed the soft
air, Cyril Grey and Brother Onofrio were at
work upon the inscription.

Almost until dawn they toiled; and, down
in another villa, another labour reached its
climax. Arthwait had finished his Grimoire.
He was just in time. For the great operation
of necromancy should properly begin on the
second day of the waning of the moon, and
there were nine previous days of most
arduous preparation, no longer of the
materials, but of the sorcerers themselves.

They must eat dog's flesh, and black
bread baked without salt or leaven, and
they must drink unfermented grape-juice --
the vilest of all black magical concoctions,
for it implies the denial of the divine
beatitude, and affirms God to be a thing of
wood. There were many other precautions
also to be taken. The atmosphere of the
charnel must be created about them; they
must abstain from so much as the sight of
women; their clothing might not be changed
even for an hour, and its texture was to be
that of cerements, for, filching the grave-
clothes from corpses of the unassoiled, they
must wrap themselves closely round in
them, with some hideous travesty of the
words of the Burial Service.

A visit to the J ewish graveyard put them
in possession of the necessary garments; and

Arthwait's palinode upon the "resurrection
unto damnation" left in each mind due
impression of the ghastliness of their
projected rite.

And, in Paris, Douglas, smashing the neck
of a bottle of whisky on the edge of the
table, was drinking the good health of his
visitor, an American woman of the name of
Cremers.

Her squat stubborn figure was clad in
rusty-black clothes, a man's except for the
Skirt; it was [198] surmounted by a head of
unusual size, and still more unusual shape,
for the back of the skull was entirely flat,
and the left frontal lobe much more
developed than the right; one could have
thought that it had been deliberately
knocked out of shape, since nature, fond, it
may be, of freaks, rarely pushes asymmetry
to such a point.

There would have been more than idle
speculation in such a theory; for she was the
child of hate, and her mother had in vain
attempted every violence against her before
her birth.

The face was wrinkled parchment,
yellow and hard; it was framed in short,
thick hair, dirty white in colour; and her
expression denoted that the utmost cunning
and capacity were at the command of her
rapacious instincts. But her poverty was no
indication that they had served her; and
those primitive qualities had in fact been
swallowed up in the results of their
disappointment. For in her eye raved bitter
a hate of all things, born of the selfish envy

which regarded the happiness of any other
person as an outrage and affront upon her.
Every thought in her mind was a curse --
against God, against man, against love, or
beauty, against life itself. She was a
combination of the witch-burner with the
witch; an incarnation of the spirit of
Puritanism, from its sourness to its sexual
degeneracy and perversion.

Douglas put the broken glass to his
mouth, and gulped down a bumper of
whisky. Then he offered the bottle to his
visitor. She refused by saying that it "played
hell with the astral body," and asked her
host to give her the price of the drink
instead. Douglas laughed like a madman -- a
somewhat disgusted madman, for in him
was some memory of his former state, and
even his fall had been comparatively
decent, the floor of his hell a ceiling to her
heaven. [199] But he had a use for the hag,
and he contemptuously tossed her a franc.
She crawled over the floor, like some foul
insect, in search of it, for it had rolled toa
corner; and, having retrieved it, she forgot
her mannish assumptions in her excitement
at the touch of silver, and thrust it into her
stocking. [200]

[1] The spelling is in Greek. Translations
courtesy of Mbabwa. Italics are mine...

"Appeared Appeared alt no"

CHAPTER XV

OF DR. VESQUIT AND HIS COMPANIONS,
HOW THEY FARED IN THEIR WORK OF
NECROMANCY; AND OF A COUNCIL OF WAR
OF CYRIL GREY AND BROTHER ONOFRIO;
WITH CERTAIN OPINIONS OF THE FORMER
UPON THE ART OF MAGICK.

THE Neapolitan winter had overpassed
its common clemency; save for a touch of
frost, kindly and wholesome, on a few
nights, it had no frown or rigour. Day after
day the sun had enkindled the still air, and
life had danced with love upon the hills.

But on the night of her fullness, the
moon was tawny and obscure, witha
reddish vapour about her, as if she had
wrapped herself in a mantle of anger; and
the next dawn broke grey with storm, the
wind tearing its way across the mountain
spine of Italy, as if some horde of demon
bandits were raiding the peasantry of the
plains. The Butterfly-Net was sheltered
from its rage by the crest of Posilippo; but
it was bitter cold in the house, and Iliel
bade her maidens pile the brazier with
hazel and white sandalwood and birch.

Across the ridge, the villa which Dr.
Vesquit had taken for the winter was
exposed to the senseless madness of the
blast; and he too heaped his braziers, but
with cypress and bituminous coal.

As the day passed the violence of the
storm increased; the doctor even began to
fear for the safety of his operation when,
about an hour after noon, [201] a window
of the villa was broken by a torn branch of
olive that came hurtling against it.

But a little later the speed of the
hurricane abated; the sky was visible,
through the earth-vapours, as a wrack of
wrathful clouds -- one might say the flight
of Michael before Satan.

Though the gale was yet fierce, its
heart broke in a torrent of sleet mixed with
hail; for two hours more it drove almost
horizontally against the hillside, and then,
steadying and steepening, fell as a flood, a
cataract of icy rain.

The slopes of Posilippo roared with their
foaming load; gardens were washed clear
of soil; walls broke down before the
impetuosity of the waves they strove to
dam; and the streets of lower Naples stood
in water to the height of a man's thigh.

The hour for the beginning of the work
of the necromancers was that of sunset;
and at that moment the rain, after a last
burst of vehemence, ceased entirely;
nightfall, though black and bitter, was
silent as the corpse of Gates itself.

In the chapel a portion of the marble
floor had been torn up; for it was desired
to touch the naked earth with the bare
feet, and draw her powers directly up from
their volcanic stratum.

This raw earth had been smeared with
mire brought from the swamps of the
Maremma; and upon this sulphur had been
sprinkled until it formed a thick layer. In
this sulphur the magick circle had been
drawn with a two-pointed stick, and the
grooves thus made had been filled with
charcoal powder.

It was not a true circle; no figure of
sanctity and perfection might enter into
that accursed rite; it had been made
somewhat in the shape of an old-fashioned
keyhole, a combination of circle and
triangle. [202]

In the centre the body of Gates, his
head toward the north, was laid; Arthwait
stood on one side with the Grimoire in one
hand, and a lighted taper of black wax in
the other. On the opposite side was Abdul
Bey, holding the goat in leash, and bearing
the sickle which Vesquit was to use as the
principal magical weapon of the ceremony.

The doctor was himself the last to enter
the circle. In a basket he had the four black
cats; and, when he had lighted the nine
small candles about the circle, he pinned
the four cats, at the four quarters, with
black arrows of iron. He was careful not to
kill them; it was important that their agony
should frighten away any undesirable
spirits.

All being now ready, the necromancers
fell upon their knees; for this servile
position is pleasing to the enemies of
mankind.

The forces which made man, alone of
all animals, erect, love to see him thank
Them for that independence by refusing to
surrender it.

The main plan of Dr. Vesquit's ceremony
was simple; it was to invoke the spirit of a
demon into the goat, and slaying the
animal at that moment of possession upon
the corpse of Gates, to endow that corpse
with the demoniac power, in a kind of
hideous marriage.

The object was then identical with that
of spiritism, or "spiritualism," as it is
commonly and illiterately called; but Dr.
Vesquit was a Serious student, determined
to obtain results, and not to be duped; his
methods were consequently more efficient
than those of the common or parlour
medium.

Arthwait opened the Grimoire and
began his conjurations. It would be
impossible to reproduce the hideous
confusion and complexity of the manner,
and undesirable to indicate the
abomination of the matter. But every name
of opposition to light was [203] invoked in
its own rite; the fearful deities of man's
dawn, when nature was supposed to be a
personal power of cruelty, delighting in
murder, rape, and pillage, were called by
their most secret names, and
commemoration made of their deeds of
infamy.

Such was the recital of horror that,
cloaked even as it was in Arthwait's
unintelligible style, the meaning was

salient by virtue of the tone of the
enchanter, and the gestures with which
Vesquit accompanied him, going in dumb
show through all the gamut of infernal
discord, the music of the pit. He showed
how children were cast into the fire, or
thrown to bears, or offered up in sacrifice
on bloody altars; how peaceful nations
were uprooted by savage tribes in the name
of their demon, their men slain or
mutilated and enslaved, their women
butchered, their virgins ravished; how
miracle testified to the power of the evil
ones, the earth opening to swallow heretic
priests, the sun stopped in the sky that the
hours of massacre might be prolonged.

It was in short one interminable recital
of treachery and murder and revenge;
never a thought of pity or of kindliness, of
common decency or common humanity,
struck a false note in that record of
vileness; and it culminated in the ghastliest
atrocity of human history, when the one
man in all that cut-throat race who now
and then showed gleams of a nobler mind
was chosen for torture and death as a final
offering to the blood-lust of the fiend.

With a sort of hellish laughter, the
second conjuration continued the recital;
how the demon had brought the corpse of
his victim to life, and mocked and profaned
his humanity by concealing himself in that
man-shape, thence to continue his reign,
and extend his empire, under the cloak of
hypocrisy. The crimes that had been done
openly in the fiend's name, were now to be
carried on with fresh device [204] of shame
and horror, by those who called themselves

the priests of his victim.

By this commemoration was concluded
the first part of the ceremony; the
atmosphere of the fiend, so to speak, was
brought into the circle; in the second part
the demon was to be identified with the
goat; in the third part the two first were
joined, and the goat as he died was to
repeat the miracle wrought in long ages
past upon that other victim, by coming to
life again humanized by the contact of the
ghost of the sorcerer.

It is not permissible to describe this
ritual in detail; it is too execrably efficient;
but the Turk, brought up in a merciful and
cleanly religion, with but few stains of
Savagery upon it, faltered and nigh fainted;
only his desire for Lisa, which had become
a soul-tempest, held him to the circle.

And indeed the brains of them all were
awhirl. As Eliphaz Levi says, evil
ceremonies are a true intellectual poison;
they do invoke the powers of hallucination
and madness as surely as does hashish. And
who dare call the phantoms of delirium
"unreal?" They are real enough to kill a
man, to ruin a life, to push a soul to every
kind of crime; and there are not many
"real" "material" things that have such
weight in work.

Phantoms, then, were apparent to the
necromancers; and there was no doubt in
any of their minds that they were dealing
with actual and malignant entities.

The hideous cries of the tortured cats

mingled with the triumphant bleating of
the goat and the nasal monotone of
Arthwait as he mouthed the words of the
Grimoire. And it seemed to all of them as
though the air grew thick and greasy; that
of that slime were bred innumerable
creeping things, monsters misshapen,
abortions of dead paths of evolution, [205]
creatures which had not been found fit to
live upon the earth and so had been cast
off by her as excrement. It seemed as if the
goat were conscious of the phantoms; as if
he understood himself as demon-king of
those regions; for he bounded under the
manipulations of Vesquit with such rage
and pride that Abdul Bey was forced to use
all his strength hold him. It was taken as a
sign of success by all the necromancers;
and as Vesquit made the final gesture,
Arthwait turned his page, and Abdul struck
home with a great knife to the brute's
heart.

Now, as the blood stained their grave-
clothes, the hearts of the three sorcerers
beat heavily. A foul sweat broke out upon
them. The sudden change -- psychological
or magical? -- from the turgid drone of
Arthwait to the grimness of that silence in
which the howls of the agonizing cats rose
hideous, struck them with a deadly fear. Or
was It that they realized for the first time
on what a ship they had embarked?

Suppose the corpse did move? Suppose
Gates rose in the power of the devil, and
strangled them? Their sweat ran down, and
mingled with the blood. The stench of the
slain goat was horrible, and the body of
Gates had begun decomposition. The

sulphur, burning in little patches here and
there, where a candle had fallen and
kindled it, added the reek of hell to that of
death. Abdul Bey of a sudden was taken
deathly sick; at the end he pitched
forward, prone upon the corpses. Vesquit
pulled him roughly back, and administered
a violent stimulant, which made him
master of himself.

Now Arthwait started the final
conjuration. It can hardly be called
language; it was like the jabber of a
monkey-house, and like the yells of a
thousand savages, and like the moaning of
damned souls.

Meanwhile Vesquit proceeded to the
last stage of his task. With his knife he
hacked off the goat's head, [206] and thrust
it into a cavity slashed in the abdomen of
the other body. Other parts of the goat he
thrust into the mouth of Gates, while the
obscene clamour of the cats mingled with
the maniac howls of his colleague.

And then the one thing happened which
they none of them expected. Abdul Bey
flung himself down upon the carcasses, and
began to tear them with his teeth, and lap
the blood with his tongue. Arthwait
shrieked out in terror that the Turk had
gone mad: but Vesquit understood the
truth. Abdul was the most sensitive of the
party, and the least developed; it was in
him that the spirit of Gates, demon-
inspired, would manifest.

A few minutes of that scene, and then
the Turk sat up. His face expressed the

most extreme pleasure. It was the release
of a soul from agony that showed itself. But
he must have known that his time was
short, for he spoke rapidly and earnestly,
with febrile energy. And his words were
commanding and convincing: Vesquit had
no doubt that they were in presence of
knowledge vastly superior to anything that
he had yet found.

He wrote down the speech upon the
tablets that he had prepared for the
purpose. "They are working by the moon
towards the Sun.

"Hecate will come to help you. Attack
from within, not from without.

"An old woman and a young man bring
victory.

"All the powers are at your service; but
they are stronger. Treachery shall save
yOu.

"Abandon the direct attack; for even
now you have called down your death upon
you. Quick! snap the cord. Conceal
yourselves awhile. Even so, you are nigh
death. Oh haste! Look yonder who is
standing ready to smite!"

The voice dropped. Well was it for
Vesquit that he kept his presence of mind.
The necromancers [207] looked round over
their shoulders, and in the East was a blue
mist shaped like an egg. In the midst of it,
standing upon two crocodiles, was the
image of Brother Onofrio, smiling, with his
finger upon his lips. Vesquit realized that

he was in contact with a force a thousand
times greater than any at his disposal. He
obeyed instantly the command spoken
through Abdul Bey. "| swear," he cried,
raising his right hand to heaven, "! swear
that we intend you no manner of hurt." He
flushed inwardly, knowing it for a lie, and
therefore useless to avert the blow which
he felt poised above him. He sought a new
form of words. "I swear that we will not
seek to break through your defences." This,
he thought, should satisfy the captain of
the gate, and yet permit him to do as he
intended in the matter of trying to attack
from within. Abdul Bey gasped out that it
was well, that no more could be done, that
the link with the White Lodge was broken.
"But now our own blow strikes us to the
earth." He fell backwards, as one dead. In
another moment Arthwait, with a yell, a
last invocation of that fiend whom he really
believed to be omnipotent, entered into
spasmodic convulsions, like a man poisoned
with strychnine, or dying of tetanus.
Vesquit, appalled at the fate of his
companions, gazed on the figure of Brother
Onofrio in an agony of fear and horror. It
retained the infant smile, and Vesquit
reached his arms toward it. "Mercy!" he
cried, "oh, my lord, mercy!"

Arthwait was writhing upon the corpses,
horribly twisting, foaming black blood from
his lungs.

And the old man saw that his life had
been an imbecility, that he had taken the
wrong path.

Brother Onofrio still smiled. "Oh my

lord!" cried Vesquit, rising to his feet,
"twere better | should die."

The formula of humanity is the willing
acceptance [208] of death; and as love, in
the male, is itself of the nature of a
voluntary death, and therefore a
Sacrament, so that he who loves slays
himself, therefore he who slays himself
that life may live becomes a lover. Vesquit
stretched out his arms in the sign of the
cross, the symbol of Him who gives life
through his own death, or of the instrument
of that life and of that death, of the Holy
One appointed from the foundation of the
world as its redeemer.

It was as if there had come to hima
flash of that most secret Word of all
initiated knowledge, so secret and so
simple that it may be declared openly in
the market-place, and no man hear it. At
least he realized himself as a silly old man,
whose weakness and pliability in the hands
of evil men had made him their
accomplice. And he saw that death,
grasped now, might save him.

Brother Onofrio still smiled.

"| invoke the return of the current!"
cried Vesquit aloud; and thus, uniting
justice with self-sacrifice, he died the
death of the righteous.

The image of Brother Onofrio faded
away.

The great operation of necromancy had
come to naught.

Yet the writing remained; and, nearly a
day later, when Abdul Bey came to himself,
it was the first thing that caught his eye.
He thrust it into his shroud, automatically;
then stumbled to his feet, and sought his
colleagues. At his feet the old coroner lay
dead; Arthwait, his convulsions terminated
by exhaustion approximating coma, lay
with his head upon the carrion, his tongue,
lolling from his mouth, chewed to a bloody

pulp.

The Turk carried him from the chapel to
the villa. His high connexions made it easy
for him to secure a silent doctor to certify
the death of Vesquit, and to attend to
Arthwait, who passed from one [209]
convulsion to another at frequent intervals.
It was almost a month before he could be
considered out of danger, but a week after
that he was his own man again. They
repaired immediately to Paris to lay the
case before Douglas; for even Arthwait was
compelled to recognize some elements in
the business which were not satisfactory,
incidents which he could not but regard as
indicating that he had fallen appreciably
short of his high standard of success.

The day succeeding the exploit of the
necromancers dawned gay and bright. The
earth dried up again, but breathed
refreshment. A light mist hung over the
walled garden where lliel stood upon her
terrace.

The moon sank large and pale over the
ocean as sunrise awoke the waves, and
lliel, her vigil almost ended, prepared for

the ceremony that ended her day.

But no sooner had she gone to the care
of her hand-maidens than Cyril Grey came
down the garden with Brother Onofrio.
Their arms were crossed upon their breasts
in the stately fashion of the Order; and
Brother Onofrio's scarlet robe contrasted
magnificently with the soft green silk of
Brother Cyril's.

In the eyes of the Italian was a
passionate reverence for the younger, but
more gifted, man, coupled with a human
affection which was almost more than
friendship; there was in it the devotion,
selfless and unsleeping, which is only
possible to those of immense singleness of
heart. He understood that Brother Cyril was
of a finer mould than himself; he seemed
to be rather a flame of fire than a man, so
subtle and so keen was he. For in every
talk, whenever he thought that he had
sounded Cyril's guard, he suddenly found,
on the riposte, that he had lost touch of his
blade without knowing it. But he burned
with constant ardour to know more of his
idol; and this morning the young man had
awakened him softly with a whisper,
smiling, with a finger pointed to the
terrace: "Let's go over [210] there, where
the Chancellor of the Exchequer can't hear
us." So they had risen and come down to
the lily-pool, after the morning adoration
of the Sun, and their daily exercise of
meditation.

Brother Cyril proved to be in his airiest
mood,

"Do you remember who said * Surtout,
pas de zele'?" he began. "Whoever it was
then, I'm saying it now. Brother Onofrio,
big brother, strong brother, clever brother,
it won't do. You're doing much too well.
Think you're a Russian General, if that will
assist your feeble intelligence; but what
you think doesn't matter, so long as you
understand that to win too many victories
is as bad as to eat toujours perdrix. You
have not merely defended this excellent
citadel, for which | formally tender you the
thanks of the Republic. You may kiss my
hand. But you have pursued the defeated
enemy; you have annihilated their
strongest regiments; and, after last night, |
am afraid that they will abandon the attack
altogether. The situation is lamentable."

"But they invoked the death-current
themselves," objected Brother Onofrio.
"How could | tell that they would send for
poor old Vesquit, and prepare an operation
so formidable that something definite was
bound to happen, one way or the other?"

"But you failed to deal gently with the
young man Gates! "

"| know I'm liable to be carried away by
a Tarot divination; but he was himself
attempting a magical murder. You can't
work things except on their own plane. He
who taketh the sword shall perish by the
sword."

"| dare say you're right; but I'm terribly
afraid you've scared the game. | wanted to
have Douglas and Balloch down here; then
was the moment to turn loose those

engines of destruction."
"You might have told me." [211]
"Ah, if | had only known!"

Brother Onofrio gave a savage gesture.
Once again he was being eluded.

"| only realized just now how fit and
final were your labours. And now we are
going to eat our hearts out in enervating
peace and Capuan luxury. Alas! Think of
the fate of Hannibal and of Napoleon.
Always the same story -- too much victory!"

Brother Onofrio bounded again in his
amazement. "Peace! Luxury!" he cried.
"Haven't we got the Great Experiment?"

"Have we?" sighed Cyril, languidly.
"Isn't the crisis in a month?"
"There are twelve months in a year."

Brother Onofrio rose in indignation. He
hated to be played with in this manner; he
could see no point in the jest, if it were
one; or excuse for the rudeness, in the
alternative.

"Sit down, sit down!" said Cyril
dreamily. "You say yourself the crisis is not
for a month. What a wonderful way is
Ocean, girdling the five continents like a
mother with her children. | should like to
sail out westward, past the Pillars of
Hercules, and up into the stormy reaches of
the Bay, and -- ah well! it may not be. We

are held here by our stern duty; we are the
chosen warriors of the Final Battle to
decide whether men shall mould their own
destiny, or remain the toys of Fate; we are
the pioneers of the Great Experiment. To
arms, Brother Onofrio! Be diligent! Be
courageous! The crisis is upon us -- a
month, no more! Return to me with your
shield, or upon it!

Dulce et decorum est pro patria mori."

"Ah! now | understand you!" cried
Onofrio warmly, clasping him in the
impulsive Italian fashion.

"That's splendid of you," he said
brightly. "| do appreciate that." [212]

Brother Onofrio wriggled again.

"| half think," he said "that you know the
Great Experiment will be a failure, and
that for some reason you don't care!"

"The bluntness of the British diplomat
was no match for the subtlety of the
ambitious, wily, and astute Italian."

"Confound it! Is there anything real or
true to you?"

"Wine, spirits, and cigars."

"You wontt be serious You jest about
everything most vital; and you make
solemnities of merest wisps of fancy. You
would make drumsticks of your father's
bones, and choose a wife by blowing a puff-
ball!"

"While you would go without music for
fear of disturbing your father, and choose a
wife by the smell of a powder-puff."

"Oh, how can you do it?"
Brother Cyril shook his head

"| must explain myself more carefully, "
he said. "Let me ask you, in the first place,
what is the most serious thing in the
world."

"Religion."

"Exactly. Now, what is religion? The
consummation of the soul by itself in divine
ecstasy. What is life but love, and what is
love but laughter? In other words, religion
isa joke. There is the spirit of Dionysus and
there is the spirit of Pan; but they are twin
phases of laughter. Religion is a joke. Now
what is the most absurd thing in the world?"

"Woman."

"Right again. And therefore she is the
only serious island in this ocean of
laughter. While we hunt and fish, and fight,
and otherwise take our pleasure, she is
toiling in the fields and cooking, and
bearing children. So, all the serious words
are jests, [213] and all the jokes are
earnest. This, oh my brother, is the key to
my light and sparkling conversation."

"But ae ul

"| Know what you are going to say. You

can reverse it again. That is precisely the
idea. You keep on reversing it; and it gets
funnier and more serious every time, and it
spins faster and faster until you cannot
follow it, and your brain begins to whirl,
and presently you become That Spiral Force
which is of the Quintessence of the
Absolute. So it is all a simple and easy
method of attaining the summit of
perfections, the stone of the Wise, True
Wisdom and Perfect Happiness."

"Listening to you," reflected Brother
Onofrio, with a whisk of the rapier,
"oroduces something of this effect!"

"Then praise the Father of All for
making me, and let us go to break our
fast!"

In the refectory a telegram awaited
Cyril Grey. He read it carefully, destroyed
it, and, looking with quaint spieglish eyes
at Brother Onofrio, refrained ostentatiously
from a prolonged fit of laughter. His face
grew exceedingly grave, and he spoke with
the weightiest deliberation. "| deeply
regret to be obliged to inform you," he said
at last, "that the exigencies of the situation
combine to make it incumbent on me to
proceed to instant action by asking you to
pass the sugar."

With sullen grace Brother Onofrio
complied. "What saith the Scripture?"
asked Cyril, still more portentous. "Ornithi
gluku -- a little bit of sugar for the bird!"
[214]

CHAPTER XVI

OF THE SPREADING OF THE BUTTERFLY-
NET; WITH A DELECTABLE DISCOURSE
CONCERNING DIVERS ORDERS OF BEING;
AND OF THE STATE OF THE LADY ILIEL, AND
HER DESIRES, AND OF THE SECOND VISION
THAT SHE HAD IN WAKING.

A GREAT peace brooded on the Villa.
Daily sun gathered the strength; and the
west wind told the flowers that a little bird
had whispered to him that the spring was
coming.

The results of the magical invocations
began to peep through the veil of matter,
like early crocuses. The atmosphere of
house and garden was languid and
romantic, so that a stranger could not have
failed to feel it; yet with this was a timid
yet vigorous purity, a concentration of the
longing of the magicians.

The physical signs were equally
unmistakable. By night a faint blue
luminosity radiated from the whole
enclosure, visible to the natural eye; and to
one seated in the garden, darting
scintillations, star-sparkles, would appear,
flitting from flower to flower, or tree to
stone, if he kept as still and sensitive as
one should in such a garden. And on the
rightly tuned and tempered ear might fall,
now and again, vague snatches of some far-
off music. Then there were pallid perfumes

in the air, like suggestions of things cool,
and voluptuous, and chaste and delicate,
and lazy, of those soft tropical loves which
satisfy themselves with dreams. [215]

All these phenomena were of a peculiar
quality. It will be well to recite the fact,
and to suggest an explanation.

These sights and sounds are conveyed
clearly enough; but they disappear the
moment the full attention is turned upon
them. They will not bear inspection; and
the fact has been used by shallow thinkers
as an argument against their reality. It isa
foolish point to take, as will now be
proved.

The range of our senses is extremely
limited. Our sensorial apparatus only works
properly with reference to a very few of
very many things. Every child knows how
narrow is the spectrum, how confined the
range of musical tone. He has not yet been
drilled properly to an understanding of
what this may mean, and he has not been
told with equal emphasis many similar facts
relating to other forms of perception. In
particular, he has not learnt the meaning of
diluted impression, in spite of an admirable
story called The New Accelerator by Mr. H.
G. Wells.

Our vision of things depends upon their
speed; for instance, a four-bladed electric
fan in motion appears as a diaphanous and
shining film. Again, one may see the wheels
of automobiles moving backwards in a
cinematograph; and, at certain distances,
the report of a cannon may be heard before

the order to fire is given. Physics is packed
with such paradoxes. Now we know of
living beings whose time-world is quite
different to ours, only touching it over a
short common section. Thus, a fly livesina
world which moves so fast that he cannot
perceive motion in anything with a speed of
less than about a yard a second, so that a
man may put his hand upon it if he can
restrain the impulse to slap. To this fly,
then, the whirling fan would look quite
different; he would be able to distinguish
the four blades.

We have thus direct evidence that there
are [216] "real" "material" beings whose
senses are on a different range to ours.

We also have reason to believe that this
total range is almost inconceivably great. It
is not merely a question of the worlds of
the microscope and the telescope; these
are mere extensions of our gamut. But we
now think that a molecule of matter is a
universe in most rapid whirl, a cosmos
comparable to that of the heavens, its
electrons as widely separated from each
other, in proportion to their size, as the
stars in space. Our universe, then, in its
unmeasured vastness, is precisely similar in
constitution to one molecule of hydrogen;
and we may suppose that it is itself only a
molecule of some larger body; also that
what we call an electron may itself be a
universe -- and so on for ever. This
suggestion is supported by the singular
fact, that the proportion in size of electron
to molecule is about the same as that of
sun to cosmos, the ratio in each case being
as 1 to 10,000,000, 000,000, 000, 000, 000.

Suppose a drop of water, 1/8 inch in
diameter, to be magnified to the size of
the earth, there would be about 30
molecules in every cubic foot of it, each
molecule being about the size of a golf-
ball, or a little more.

However, the point involved is a simpler
one, so far as our argument is concerned; it
is this -- that there is no question of
"illusion" about any of these things.
Electrons are quite as elusive as ghosts; we
are only aware of them as the conclusion to
a colossal sorites. The evidence for ghosts
is as strong as that for any other
phenomenon in nature; and the only
argument, for a horse-laugh is not
argument, which has been adduced against
their existence is that you cannot catch
them. But, just as one can catch the fly by
accommodating oneself to the conditions of
its world, one might (conceivably) catch
the ghost by conforming with its conditions.
[217]

It is one magical hypothesis that all
things are made up of ten different sorts of
vibrations, each with a different gamut,
and each corresponding to a "planet." Our
own senses being built up similarly, they
only register these when they are
combined. Hence, a "lunar" being, purified
of other elements, would be imperceptible.
And if one, by emphasizing the lunar
quality in oneself, began to acquire the
power of perceiving similar beings, one
would begin by perceiving them as tenuous
and elusive; just, in fact, as is observed to
be the case.

We are therefore justified in regarding
the phenomena of the magicians as in all
respects "real," in the same sense as our
own bodies; and all doubt on the subject is
removed by consideration of the fact, to
which all magicians testify, that these
phenomena can be produced at will, by
using proper means.

It is no criticism to reply that it should
be possible to show them "in the
laboratory," because laboratory conditions
happen not to suit their production. One
does not doubt the reality of electrical
phenomena either, because electricity is
not perceptible directly by any of the
senses, or because its ultimate nature is
unknown, or because the electrician
refuses to comply with your "test
conditions" by his irrational and evidently
felonious habit of insulating his wires.

So far as Iliel was concerned, the result
of the operation was almost too evident.
Simon Iff might have thought that things
were being overdone.

For she had become extremely fat; her
skin was of a white and heavy pallor; her
eyes were almost closed by their perpetual
droop. Her habit of life had become
infinitely sensuous and languid; when she
rose from recumbency she lolled rather
than walked; her lassitude was such that
she hardly cared to feed herself; yet she
managed to consume five or [218] six times
a normal dietary. She seemed always half
asleep. A cradle, shaped like a canoe had
been arranged for her on the Terrace of the
Moon; and most of her waking hours were

spent there, drinking milk, and munching
creams flavoured with angelica. Her soul
seemed utterly attracted to the moon. She
held out her body to it like an offering.

J ust before the new moon of February,
Abdul Bey, before leaving Naples,
determined to seek a last sight of his
adored Lisa. He had found her easily, and
was amazed at the physical changes in her.
They increased his passion beyond all
measure, for she was now the very ideal of
any Turkish lover. She appeared hardly
conscious of his presence upon the wall
beyond the little lane that wound below
the Terrace of the Moon, but in reality she
absorbed his devotion with a lazy hunger,
like a sponge. For her activity and
resistance had been reduced to zero; she
reflected any impression, feeling it to the
utmost, but incapable of response He
understood that she could not have
repulsed him, yet could have taken no step
towards him; and he cursed the vigilance of
the patrol. Help he must have; and though
it was agony to drag himself from Naples,
he knew that without Douglas he could do
nothing more.

From the new moon of February, the
invocations of Artemis had become
continuous. Brother Onofrio and his two
henchmen devoted their time and energy
to the rituals which banish all other ideas
than the one desired; but the boys had
joined Sister Clara and her maidens in an
elaborate ceremony in which the four
represented the four phases of the moon.
This ceremony was performed thrice daily;
but the intervals were fully occupied.

During the whole of the twenty-five hours
one or the other of the enchanters kept up
their conjurations by spells, by music, and
by dances. Every day witnessed some new
[219] phenomenon, ever more vivid and
persistent, as the imminence of the lunar
world increased, and as the natures of the
celebrants became more and more capable
of appreciating those silvern vibrations.

Cyril Grey alone took no active part. He
represented the solar force, the final
energy creatrix of all subordinate orbs; his
work had been done when he had set the
system in motion. But since Brother Onofrio
represented so active a force as Mars, he
made himself a silent partner to the
Italian, an elasticity to buffer the reactions
of his vehemence. Thus he became a
shadow to the warrior, giving him the
graceful ease which was the due reward of
fatigues so exhausting as were involved in
the Keeping of the Circle. For the labour of
banishing became daily more arduous; the
preponderance of lunar force within the
circle created a high potential. All the
other forces of Nature wished to enter and
redress the balance. It is the same effect as
would be seen were one to plunge a globe
full of water beneath the sea, and
gradually withdraw the water from the
globe. The strain upon the surface of the
globe would constantly increase. It may be
remarked in parenthesis that the Laws of
Magick are always exactly like those of the
other natural forces. All that Magick lacks
to put it on a footing with hydrostatics or
electricity is a method of quantitative
estimation. The qualitative work is
admirably accomplished.

The moon was waxen beyond her first
phase; she set well after midnight. The
nights were yet cold; but lliel's cradle had
been made like a nest in cloudland with
fleece of camels -- for they are sacred to
the moon; and she was covered with a quilt
of silver fox. Thus she could lie in the open
without discomfort, and yearn toward her
goddess as she moved majestically across
heaven.

Now that the climax of the Experiment
was upon [220] her, the exaltation of
wonder seized her wholly; she was in
precisely the state necessary to the magical
plan. She remained in a continuous reverie
of longing and expectancy for the marvel
which was to come to her.

It was now the night of the full moon.
She rose over the crest of Posilippo soon
after sunset, and lliel greeted her from her
cradle on the Terrace with a hushed song of
adoration.

She was more languid than ever before,
that night. It seemed to her as if her body
were altogether too heavy for her; she had
the feeling so well known to opium-
smokers, which they call "clou’e ‘a terre." It
is as if the body clung desperately to the
earth, by its own weight, and yet in the
same way asa tired child nestles to its
mother's breast. In this sensation there is a
perfect lassitude mingled with a perfect
longing. It may be that it is the counterpart
of the freedom of the soul of which it is the
herald and companion. In the Burial Service
of the Church, we read "earth to earth,
dust to dust," coupled with the idea of the

return of the spirit to the God that gave it.
And there is in this state some sister-
similarity to death, one would not say
sleep, for the soul of the sleeper is usually
earth-bound by his gross desires, or the
memory of them, or of his recent
impressions. But the smoker of opium, and
the saint, self-conscious of their nature
celestial, heed earth no more, and on the
pinions of imagination or of faith seek
mountain-tops of being.

It was in this state or one akin to it that
lliel found herself. And gradually, as comes
also to the smoker of opium, the process of
bodily repose became complete; the earth
was one with earth, and no longer troubled
or trammelled her truer self.

She became acutely conscious that she
was not the body that lay supine in the
cradle, with the moon [221] gleaming upon
its bloodless countenance. No; she was
rather the blue mist of the whole circle of
enchantment, and her thoughts the
sparkling dew- spirits that darted hither
and thither like silvery fire-flies. And, as if
they were parts of herself, she saw Sister
Clara and her pages and her hand-maidens
under the image of stars. For each was a
radiant world of glory, thrilling with most
divine activities, yet all in azure orbits
curling celestially, their wake of light like
comets' tails, wrapping her in a motion that
was muSIC.

A flaming boundary to her sphere, the
fires of the circle blazed far into the night,
forked swords of scarlet light in everlasting
motion, snakes of visible force extended

every way to keep the gates of her garden.
She saw the forms of Brother Onofrio and
his captains, of the same shape as those of
Sister Clara and her companions, but
blazing with a fierce and indomitable heat,
throwing off coruscations into the
surrounding blackness. She was reminded
of a visit that yonder idle carcass in the
cradle had once made to an observatory,
where she had been shown the corona of
the sun.

And then, instinctively, she looked for
Cyril Grey. But all that she could find of
him was the green-veiled glory that
surrounded the sphere of Brother Onofrio;
and she understood that this was a mere
projection of part of his personality.
Himself she could not find. He should have
been the core of all, the axis on which all
swung; but she could feel nothing. Her
intuition told her, in a voice of cogency
beyond contradiction, that he was not
there.

She began to argue with herself, to
affirm that she held a part of him by right
of gift; but, looking on it, she beheld only
an impenetrable veil. She knew and
understood that not yet was the Butterfly
in the Net, and in that she acquiesced; but
the absence of her [222] lover himself from
her, at this moment of all moments, was
mystery of horror so chill that she doubted
for a time of her own being. She thought of
the moon as a dead soul -- and wondered --
and wondered ---

She would have striven to seek him out,
to course the universe in his pursuit; but

she was incapable of any effort. She sank
again into the receptive phase, in which
impressions came to her, like bees to a
flower, without eliciting conscious
response.

And it was then that her bodily eyes
opened. The action drew her back into her
body; but the material universe held her
only for a second. She saw the moon,
indeed, but in its centre was a shape of
minute size, but infinite brightness. With
the speed of a huntress the shape neared
her, hid the moon from her, and she
perceived the buskined Artemis, silver-
sandalled, with her bright bow and her
quiver of light. Leaping behind her came
her hounds, and she thought that she could
hear their eager baying.

Between heaven and earth stood the
goddess, and looked about her, her eyes a-
sparkle with keen joy. She unslung her
baldric, and put her silver bugle to her lips.

Through all the vastness of heaven that
call rang loud; and, in obedience, the stars
rushed from their thrones, and made
obeisance to their mistress. It was a gallant
hunting-party. For she perceived that these
were no longer stars, but souls. Had not
Simon Iff once said to her: "Every man and
every woman is a star"? And even as she
understood that, she saw that Artemis
regarded them with reverence, with awe
even. This was no pleasure chase; he who
won the victory was himself the quarry.
Every soul was stamped with absolute
heroism; it offered itself to itself, like
Odin, when nine windy nights he hung in

space, his own spear thrust into his side.
What [223] gain might be she could not
understand; but it was clear enough that
every act of incarnation is a crucifixion.
She saw that she had been mistaken in
thinking of these souls as hunters at all;
and at that instant it seemed to her as
though she herself were the huntress. For a
flash she saw the fabled loadstone rock
which draws ships to it, and, flashing forth
their bolts by the might of its magnetism,
loosens their timbers so that they are but
waifs of flotsam. It was only a glimpse; for
now the souls drew near her. She could
distinguish their differences by the colour
of the predominating rays. And as they
approached, she saw that only those whose
nature was lunar might pass into the
garden. The others started back, and it
seemed to her that they trembled with
surprise, as if it were a new thing to them
to be repelled.

And now she was standing on the
Terrace of the Moon with Artemis,
watching the body of Lisa la Giuffria, that
lay there in its cradle. And she saw that the
body was a dead thing, as dead as the
cradle itself; it was unreal; all "material"
things were unreal, shells void of meaning,
geometrical abstractions, as Simon Iff had
explained to her on their first meeting. But
this body was different to the other husks
in one respect, that it was the focus of a
most startling electrical phenomenon. (She
could not think of it but as electrical.) An
incandescent cone was scintillating before
her. She could see but the tip of it, but she
knew intuitively that the base of it was in
the sun itself. About this cone played

curious figures, dancers wreathed with vine
leaves, having all sorts of images in their
hands, like toys, houses, and dolls, and
ships and fields, and woods, little soldiers
in their uniforms, little lawyers in their
wigs and gowns, an innumerable multitude
of replicas of every-day things. And lliel
watched the souls as they came into the
[224] glow of the cone. They took human
shape, and she was amazed to see among
them the faces of many of the great men of
the race.

There was one very curious feature
about the space in which this vision took
place: this, that innumerable beings could
occupy it at once, yet each one remain
distinct from all the rest as the attention
happened to focus it. But it was no
question of dissolving views; for each soul
was present equally all the time.

With most of the faces there was little
attachment, scarce more than a vague
wreath of a mist that swirled purposelessly
about them. Some, however, were more
developed; and it seemed as if more or less
definite shapes had been formulated by
them as adjuncts to their original
personalities. When it came to such men as
lliel remembered through history, there
was already a symbolic or pictorial
representation of the nature of the man,
and of the trend of his life, about him. She
could see the unhappy Maximilian, once
Emperor of Mexico, a frail thing struggling
in an environment far too intense for him.
He was stifled in his own web, and seemed
afraid either to stay where he was, or to
attempt to approach the cone.

Less hampered, but almost equally the
prey of hideous vacillation, lack of
decision, was General Boulanger, whose
white horse charged again an again through
Space toward the cone, only to be caught
up each time by the quick nervous snatch
at his rein.

Next him, a gracious girlish figure[1]
was the centre of sparkling waves of music,
many-hued; but one could see that they
were not issuing from her, but only through
her. Aman of short stature[2], with a pale
face, stood before her, very similar in the
character of his radiations; but they were
colder, and duller, and less clear and
energetic. [225]

And now all gave way to a most
enigmatic figure[3]. It was an insignificant
face and form; but the attributions of him
filled all heaven. In his sohere was
primarily a mist which Iliel instinctively
recognized as malarious; and she got an
impression, rather than a vision, of an
immense muddy river rushing through
Swamps. And then she saw that from this
man's brain issued phantoms like pigeons.
They were neither Red Indians nor
Israelites, yet they had something of each
in their bearing. And these poured like
smoke from the head of this little man. In
his hand was a book, and he held it over his
head. And the book itself was guarded by
an angelic figure whose face was
extraordinarily stern and unbeautiful, but
who scattered with wide hands the wealth
of life, children, and corn, and gold. And
behind all these things was a great

multitude; and about them were the
symbolic forms of exile and death and
every persecution, and the hideous
laughter of triumphant enemies. All this
seemed to weigh heavily upon the little
man that had created it; Iliel thought that
he was seeking incarnation for the sake of
its forgetfulness. Yet the light in his eyes
was So pure and noble and magnetic that it
might have been that he saw in a new birth
the chance to repair his error.

And now her attention was drawn toa
yet nobler and still more fantastic form[4].
It was a kingly figure, and its eyes blazed
bright with an enthusiasm that was tinged
almost with madness. His creations, like
those of the last seen, were something
vague and unsubstantial. They lacked clear
draughtsmanship. But they made up for this
by their extravagance and brilliance. It was
a gorgeous play of dream; yet Iliel could
see that it was only dream.[226] Last of
this company came a woman[5] proud,
melancholy, and sweet. Her face was noble
and intelligent; but there was a red line
about her throat, and the eyes were
suffused with horror, and about her heaved
rolling mists of blood. And then the greater
pageant spread its peacockry.

In this great group not only the men but
all their soheres were clean-cut and
radiant; for here was direct creation, no
longer the derivative play of fancy upon
existing themes. And first came one[6]
"with branded and ensanguined brow," a
mighty figure, although suffering from a
deformity of one foot, virile, herculean,
intense but with a fierce sadness upon him.

He came with a rush and roar as of many
waters, and about him were a great
company of men and women, almost as real
as he was himself. And the waves (which
lliel recognized as music) surged about him,
a stormy sea; and there were lightnings,
and thunders, and desolations!

Behind him came another not unlike
him, but with less vehemence; and instead
of music were soft rays of light, rosy and
harmonious; and his arms were folded upon
his heart and his head bowed. It was clear
that he understood his act as a sacrament.

Then came a strange paradox of a
man[7] -- utter violence and extreme
gentleness. A man at war within himself!
And in his ecstasy of rage he peopled space
with thousands of bright and vigorous
phantasms. They were more real than those
of all the others; for he fed them
constantly with his own blood. Stern
savagery, and lofty genius, hideous cruelty
and meanness inexplicable, beauty, and
madness, and holiness, and loving-kindness;
these followed him, crying aloud with the
exultation and the passion of their fullness
of life. [227]

Close upon him came one[8] who was all
music, fierce, wild, mystical, and most
melancholy. The waves of his music were
like pines in the vast forest, and like the
undulations of frozen steppes; but his own
face was full of a calm glory touched with

pity.

Behind him, frowning, came a hectic,
ape-like dwarf[9]. But in his train were

many people of all climes, soft Indians,
fierce Malays and Pathans and Sikhs, proud
Normans, humble Saxons, and many a frail
figure of woman. These were too self-
assertive, lliel thought, to be as real as
those of the other man. And the figure
himself was strained, even in his pride.

Now came a marvellous person[10] --
almost a god, she thought. For about him
were a multitude of bones that built
themselves up constantly into the loveliest
living forms, that changed from one into
another, ever increasing in stature and in
glory. And in his broad brow she read the
knowledge of the Unity of Things, and in
these eyes the joy unspeakable which that
knowledge gives. Yet they were insatiable
as death itself; she could see that every
ounce of the man's giant strength was
strained toward some new attainment.

And now came another of the sons of
music[11]. But this man's waves were fiery
flames like snakes contorted and terrible.
It seemed to lliel as if all heaven were torn
asunder by those pangs. Wave strove with
wave, and the battle was eaten up by fresh
swords of fire that burst from him as he
waved onward those battalions to fresh
wrath. These waves moreover were
peopled with immense and tragic figures;
lliel thought that she could recognize
Electra, and Salome, daughter of Herodias.

Next, amid a cloud of angels bearing
silver trumpets, came one[12] with great
height of brow, and eyes of golden flashes.
In him the whole heaven [228] rocked with
harmonious music, and faint shapes formed

up among the waves, like Venus born of
ocean foam. They had not substance, like
sO many lliel had seen; they were too
great, too godlike, to be human. Not one
was there of whom it could not be said
"Half a woman made with half a god." And
these, enormous and tragic, fiery, with
wings and sandals of pure light,
encompassed him and wooed him.

Last of this company -- only a few of the
visions are recorded here -- came the
greatest of them all[13]. His face was
abrupt and vehement; but a veil was woven
over it, because of the glory of his eyes,
and a thick scarf, like a cloud, held over his
mouth, lest the thunder of it destroy men's
hearing. This man was so enormous that his
stature spanned all heaven; and his
creatures, that moved about him, were all
godlike -- immensely greater than the
human. Yet were they human; but so
patriarchal, so intense, that they almost
overwhelmed lliel. On him she dared not
look. He had the gift of making every thing
a thousand times larger than its natural
size. She heard one word of his, a mere call
to a pet: "Tiger, tiger!" But the beast that
broke through the mazes of heaven was so
vast that its claws spanned star and star.
And with all that he smiled, and a million
babe-children blossomed before him like
new-budded flowers. And this man
quickened as he came nigh to lliel; he
seemed to understand wholly the nature of
the Great Experiment.

But every soul in all that glorious cohort
of immortals, as it touched the cone, was
whirled away like a pellet thrown upon a

swiftly moving fly-wheel. And presently she
perceived the cause of this.

The tip of the cone was sheathed in
silver. So white and glittering with fierce
heat was that corselot, and so mighty its
pulse of vibration that she had [229]
thought it part of the cone. She understood
this to be the formula of the circle, and
realized with a great ache, and thena
sudden anger, that it was by this that she
was to be prevented from what might have
been her fortune, the gaining of the
wardenship of a Chopin or of a Paul
Verlaine.

But upon the face of Artemis was gaiety
of triumph. The last of the souls whirled
away into the darkness. Humanity had tried
and failed; it was its right to try; it was its
fate to fail; now came the turn of the
chosen spirits, proved worthy of the fitted
fastness.

They came upon the Terrace in their
legions, Valkyrie-brave in silver arms, or
like priestesses in white vestments, their
hair close bound upon their brows, or like
queens of the woodland, swift for the
chase, with loose locks and bright eyes, or
like little children, timid and gracious.

But amid their ranks were the black
hideous forms of hags, bent and wrinkled;
and these fled instantly in fear at the vision
of the blazing cone. There were many
other animal shapes; but these, seeing the
cone, turned away indifferent, as not
understanding. Only the highest human-
seeming forms remained; and these

appeared as if in some perplexity.
Constantly they looked from Artemis to the
cone, and back again to Artemis. Iliel could
feel their thought; it was a child-like
bewilderment, "But don't you understand?
This is a most dangerous place. Why did
you bring us here? Surely you know that to
touch the cone is certain death to us?"

lliel understood. The human souls had
long since made themselves perfect, true
images of the cosmos, by accepting the
formula of Love and Death; they had made
the great sacrifice again and again; they
were veterans of the spiritual world-war,
and asked nothing better than to go back to
the trenches. But these others were partial
souls; they had not yet [230] attained
humanity; they had not understood that in
order to grow one must assimilate oneself
with another being, the death of two to
create the life of one, in whom the two live
once more, transmuted and glorified, the
corruptible having put on incorruption. To
them incarnation was death; and they did
not know that death was life. They were
not ready for the Great Adventure.

So they stood like tall lilies about the
coruscating cone of Light, wondering,
doubting, drooping. But at the last came
one taller than all the rest, sadder of mien,
and lovelier of features; her robes were
stained and soiled, as if by contact with
other colours. Artemis drew back with
quick repulsion.

For the first time the maiden goddess
spoke.

"What is thy name?" she cried.

"lam Malkah of the tribe of the Sickles."
"And thy crime?"

"| love a mortal."

Artemis drew back once more.

"Thou, too, hast loved," said Malkah.

"| drew my mortal lovers unto me; | did
not sully my life with theirs; | am virgin
unto Pan!"

"| also am virgin; for whom | loved is
dead. He[14] was a poet, and he loved thee
above women, — And haply the Queen-Moon
is on her throne clustered around by all her
starry fays whereof | being one, loved him
that he loved Thee! But he died in the city
of Mars and the Wolf, before | could make
him even aware of me. | am come hither to
seek immolation; | am weary of the pale
beauty of Levanah; | will seek him, at the
price of death. | deny our life; | crucify
myself unto the God we dare not name. |
go. Hail and farewell!"

She flung up her arm in a wild gesture
of renunciation, and came closer to the
Cone. She would not [231] haste, lest her
will prove but impulse; she poised her
breast deliberately over the Cone. Then,
with fierce zest, so that the one blow
might end all, she thrust herself
vehemently down upon the blazing spike.

At that moment Iliel swooned. She felt

that something had happened to her,
something tremendous; and her brain
turned crazily in her. But as she lost
consciousness she was still aware of the
last phase of the vision: that the sacrifice
of Malkah had created a void in the ranks of
the Amazon armies of the Moon; and she
saw them and their mist of blue, licked up
in the swirl of the vortex. The whole of the
invoked forces were sucked up into her as
Malkah in her death-agony took possession
of that basis of materialization. Heroic --
and presumptuous; for of all the qualities
that go to make humanity she had but one,
and she would have to shift, for the rest,
with orts of inheritance. Among mankind
she would be a stranger, a being without
conscious race-experience, liable to every
error that a partial view of life can make.
Ill indeed for such a one who is without the
wardenship of high initiates! It was for Cyril
Grey to keep her unspotted from the world,
to utilize those powers which she wielded
in pre-eminence from her inheritance in
the white sphere of Levanah!

When Sister Clara came to summon lliel,
she found her still in swoon. They carried
her to her room. At noon she recovered
consciousness.

Cyril Grey was seated by her bed. To
her surprise, he was dressed in mundane
attire, an elegant lounge suit of lavender.

"Have you seen the papers?" he cried
gaily. "Neapolitan Entomologists capture
rare butterfly, genus Schedbarshamoth
Scharthathan, species Malkah be-
Tharshishim ve-Ruachoth ha-Sche-halim!"

[232]

"Don't talk nonsense, Cyril!" she said,
lazily, a little uncertain whether this
unexpected apparition were not a dream.

"Perfect sense, | assure you, my child.
The trick is turned. We have caught our
Butterfly!"

"Yes, yes," she murmured; "but how did
you know?"

"Why, use your eyes!" he cried. "Use
your br --- | should say your sensory organs!
Look!"

He waved at the window, and lliel idly
followed with her eyes.

There could be no mistake. The garden
was normal. Every vestige of magical force
had disappeared.

"Couldn't have gone better," he said.
"We don't know where we're going, but we
know we're on the way. And, whatever
we've got, we've got it."

Suddenly her mind ran back to her
vision. "Where were you last night, Cyril?"

He looked at her for a moment before
replying.

"| was where | always am," he said
slowly.

"| looked for you all over the house and
the garden."

"Ah! you should have sought me in the
House of my Father."

"Your father?"

"Colonel Sir Grant Ponsonby Grey,
K.C.M.G., K.C.S.1., G.C.I.E. Born in 1846 at
the Round Tower, Co. Cork; educ.
Winchester and Balliol; Lieutenant Royal
Artillery 1868; Indian Political Department
1873; in 1880 m. Adelaide, only d. of the
late Rt. Hon. Lord Ashley Lovell, P.C.; one
s., Cyril St. John, q.v. Residence, The
Round Tower, Co. Cork; Bartland Barrows,
Wilts.; 93, Arlington Street. W. Clubs.
Carlton, Athenaeum, Travellers’, Hemlock,
etc. Amusements: Hunting, talking shop."
[233]

"You dear incorrigible boy!"
He took her hand and kissed it.
"And am | to see something of you now?"

"Oh, we're all penny plain humans from
now on. It's merely a question of defending
you from the malice of Douglas and Co.; a
much simpler job than blocking out nine-
tenths of the Universe! Apart from that, we
are just a jolly set of friends; only | see less
of you than anyone else does, naturally."

"Naturally!"

"Yes, naturally. You have to be saved
from all worry and annoyance; and if
there's one thing in the world more
annoying and worrying than a wife, it'sa

husband! With the others, you have nothing
to quarrel about; and if you try it on
Brother Onofrio, in particular, he simply
sets in motion a deadly and hostile current
of will by which you would fall slain or
paralyzed, as if blasted by the lightning
flash! Click!"

lliel laughed; and then Sister Clara
appeared with the rest of the garrison, the
boys and maidens burdened with the means
of breakfast; for this was a day of festival
and triumph.

But, as he shook hands with her, Iliel

discovered, with a shock, that she hated
Brother Onofrio. [234]

[1] Georges Sand.

[2] Chopin.

[3] Joseph Smith.

[4] Ludwig I of Bavaria.

[5] Marie Antoinette.

[6] Byron.

[7] Tolstoi.

[8] Tschaikowsky.

[9] Kipling.

[10] Huxley.

[11] Strauss.

[12] Swinburne

[13] Blake

[14] Keats

CHAPTER XVII

OF THE REPORT WHICH EDWIN ARTHWAIT MADE TO HIS CHIEF, AND OF THE
DELIBERATIONS OF THE BLACK LODGE THEREUPON; AND OF THE
CONSPIRACIES THERE- BY CONCERTED; WITH A DISCOURSE UPON SORCERY

"EXORDIUMATICALLY, deponent precateth otity orient exaudient, dole
basilical's assumpt. Pragmatics, ex Ventro Genesiaco ad umbilicum
Apocalypticum, determinated logomachoepy's nodal puncts, genethliacally
benedict, eschatologically --- kakoglaphyrotopical! Ergmoiraetic, apert
parthenorhododactylical, colophoned thanatoskianko-morphic!

Footnote Translation:

"Exordiumatically -- First
genethliaeally -- at first

deponent precateth -- | beg
benedict -- fortunate

otity -- hearing
esehatologically -- later

orient --
increasingly kakoglaphyrotopical --
in a bad hole

exaudient -- favourable
erg -- work

dole basilical's -- a royal gift*s
moiractic -- fatal

assumpt -- assumption
apert -- opened

Pregmatics --
Facts parthenorhododactylical --
like the

ex ventro Genesiaco ad umbilicum
rosy fingers of a maid

Apocalypticum -- from beginning
colophoned -- closed

to end
tbanatoskiankomorphic -- in the

determinate -- mark
shape of the valley of

the shadow

logomachoepy's -- (my) story's
of death

nodal puncts -- limits

With these striking words the official Report of Douglas’ chief
commissioner began. It would be tedious to quote the 488 folio pages in
full. Douglas himself did not read it; the transcript made by Vesquit of
Abdul Bey's "inspiration," with a few [235] practical questions to the latter,
told him all that he needed.

Audience over, he dismissed Arthwait and his companion with orders to
hold themselves in readiness for a renewal of the campaign.

Douglas had many a moment of bitter contemplation; his hatred of Cyril
Grey fed upon repulse; and it was evident that his assistants had met more
than their match. He would have to act personally -- yet he feared to
expose himself in open battle. His plan hitherto had been to bribe or dupe
some of the jackal journalists of London to attack him; but Grey had not so
much as troubled to bring libel actions.

But he would not give in. He studied Vesquit's transcripts attentively,
and with indecision. He did not know how far to trust the oracle, and he did
not understand how Vesquit had come to die, since on that point even
Arthwait had been silent. The demons whom he consulted were emphatic in
favour of the document, but failed to explain how the fortress was to be
reduced from the inside.

He was Clear in his mind as to the nature of Grey's operation; he saw
perfectly that Lisa herself was the weak point in it; but he did not see how
to get at her.

He continued in his bitter mood until the early hours, and he was
interrupted by the return of his wife from her miserable night's trudging.
She put two francs on the table without a single word as soon as she
entered.

"Is that all?" snarled Douglas. "You ought to be getting fives again now
spring's coming. Though you're not as pretty as you were."

He garnished this greeting with garlic of low abuse. Rarely to any other

person did he use even mild oaths; he affected the grand manner; but he
[236] knew that foulness of speech emphasized his wife's degradation. He
had no need of the vile money that she earned; he had a thousand better
means of buying whisky; but he drove her to the streets as no professional
souteneur would have dared do. By extreme refinement of cruelty he never
struck or kicked her, lest she should think he loved her. To him, she was a
toy; a means of exercising his passion for torture; to her, he was the man
she loved.

Pitifully she pleaded that the cold rain of the night -- she was wet
through -- had driven all Paris from the boulevard to the cafe; and she
added an excuse for her unattractiveness which should have sent her
husband to his pistol for very shame had a spark of manhood, or a memory
of his mother, been alive within him.

Instead, he promised to change all that the next time Dr. Balloch came
to Paris.

He had systematically degraded and humiliated her, corrupted her,
branded her with infamy, for many a year; yet there was still in her a
motion of revolt against the crime. But even as she made her gesture of
repulsion, Douglas leapt to his feet, with the light of hell burning in his
eyes. "I have it!" he shouted, "get to your straw, you stinking slut. And you
may thank your stars that as you can't be ornamental, you're going to be
useful."

It was dawn before Douglas turned into bed, for his great idea brought
with it a flood of imagination, and a million problems of detail. The servant
girl was already half dressed for the day's work; and he made her fetch him
a final whisky before he slept.

Late in the following afternoon he woke, and sent Cremers, whom he
had turned into a drudge, to telegraph to Balloch to come over, and to
bring her friend Butcher to see him.

Douglas had previously refused to see this man, [237] who was a Chicago
semi-tough. He ran a fake Rosicrucian society in America, and thought that
Douglas could give him power over the elusive dollar. But Douglas had
found no use for him; he rather insisted on respectability in his neophytes;
it was only in the higher grades that one found the disreputable. It was an
obvious point of policy. But Douglas had now remembered one little fact
about this person; he fitted the Great Idea so nicely that his presence in
Paris Seemed as apt as an answer to prayer.

It was a rare, if doubtful, privilege to visit Douglas in his home. He
never allowed the visit of any but those high in his confidence; the locality
was hardly inspiring to an inquiring duchess. He had two other places in
Paris, which he used for two types of interviewer; for although he
discouraged knowledge of his authority in the Black Lodge, he did a good
deal of the fishing himself, especially with rich or highly-placed people. For
his subordinates had sticky fingers.

One of these places was a discreet apartment in the very best quarter of
Paris. Here he was the Scottish Nobleman of the Old School. The
decorations were rich but not gaudy; even the ancestors were not

overdone. The place of honour was occupied by Rob Roy's claymore,
alleged. One of his claims was that the Highland Cateran was his ancestor,
owing to a liason with a fairy. Another claim was that he himself was J] ames
IV of Scotland, that he had survived the Battle of Flodden Field, become an
adept, and immortal. Despite what to a profane mind might seem the
incompatibility of these two legends -- to say nothing of the improbability
of either -- they were greedily swallowed by the Theosophist section of his
following.

In this apartment he received the credulous type of person who is
impressed by rank; and no man [238] could play the part of stateliness
better than this old reprobate.

His other place was of the hermit's cell model, a tiny cottage with its
well-kept garden; such abound all over Paris in the most unexpected spots.

He actually imposed upon the old lady who kept this house for him.
Here he was the simple old man of utter holiness, the lonely recluse, the
saintly anchorite, his only food bruised herbs or pulse, his only drink the
same as quenched the thirst of Father Adam. His long absences from this
sacrosanct abode were explained by the fact of his absorption in trance, in
which he was supposed to indulge underground. Of course he only visited
the place when he had to receive a certain type of visitor, that loftier type
which has enough rank and wealth to know that they are not necessary to a
search after Truth, and is impressed by simplicity and saintliness.

It was at the former address that the Count received Mr. Butcher. He
was dressed in severe and refined broadcloth, with the rosette of the
Legion of Honour -- to which he was well entitled -- in his buttonhole.

In presence of this splendour the American was ill at ease; but Douglas
knew how to make a man his own by giving him a good conceit of himself.

"| am proud to meet you, Mr. Butcher," he began, affably. "May | beg of
you to take the trouble to be seated! The chair is worthy of you," he added,
with a smile; "it was at one time the property of Frederick the Great."

The servant, who was dressed as a Highland Gillie in gala costume,
offered cigars and whisky.

"Say, this is sure some whisky, Count! This is where | fall off the wagon,
one time, J ohn. You watch my batting average!" observed Mr. Butcher,
settling himself by placing his legs upon the table. [239]

"It is from the private stock of the Duke of Argyll," returned Douglas.
"And you, Mr. Butcher? | knew a Count Butcher many years ago. You are a
relation?"

Mr. Butcher had only the vaguest notion as to his ancestry. His mother
had broken down under cross-examination.

"Search me!" he replied, biting the end off his cigar, and spitting it out.
"We Rosicrucians are out for the Hundred Years Club Dope, and the Long
Green Stone; we should worry. We're short on ancestors in Illinois. "

"But these matters are important in magic," urged Douglas. "Heredity
goes for much. | should be glad indeed to hear that you were one of the
Dorsetshire Butchers, for example, or even the Shropshire branch. In both
families second sight is an appanage."

Here the conversation was interrupted by the gillie. "l crave your
pardon, my lord," he said, bowing; "but his Grace the Duke of Hants is at
the door to beg your aid in a most urgent matter which concerns his family
honour."

"| am engaged," said Douglas. "He may write." The man withdrew with a
solemn bow.

"| must apologize for this disturbance," continued Douglas. "The
importunity of one's clients is exceedingly distressing. It is one of our
penalties. | venture to suppose that you are yourself much annoyed in
similar ways.

Butcher would have liked to boast that J. P. Morgan was always trying to
borrow money from him, but he dared not attempt to bluff his host. Nor did
he suspect that Douglas was himself engaged in that diverting and
profitable pastime.

"To come to business," went on Douglas, eyeing his guest narrowly, and
assuring himself that his [240] scheme had borne fruit in due season, "What
is it that you require of me? Frankly, | like you; and | have long admired
your noble career. All that | can do for you -- in -- honour -- pray count it
done!"

"Why, Count," said Mr. Butcher, spitting on the floor; "Buttinsky's in
Kalamazoo. But to come down to brass tacks, | guess I'd like to sit into the
game."

"| pray you to excuse me," replied Douglas, "but my long residence in
Paris has almost deprived me of the comprehension of my mother tongue.
Could you explain yourself further?"

"Why, this Black Lodge stunt, Count. It's a humdinger. | guess it's a hell
of a favour, but | see a dollar at the end of it, and old Doc. Butcher buys a
one-way ticket."

Douglas grew portentous. "Are you aware of what you ask?" he
thundered. "Do you understand that the ineffable and Sacrosanct Arcanum
is not to be touched by profane hands? Must | inform you that Those who
may not be named are even now at the Gate of the Abyss, whetting their
fangs upon the Cubical Stone of the Unutterable? Oh ye magistral
ministrants of the Shrine of the Unspeakable Abomination! Hear ye the
Word of Blasphemy!" He spoke rapidly and thickly in a tongue unknown to
Butcher, who became alarmed, and even took his legs off the table.

"Say!" he cried. "Have a heart! Can the rough dope, Count! This is a
straight proposition, honest to God!"

"| am already aware of your sincerity," answered the other. "But infinite
courage is required to confront those formidable Entities that lie in wait for

the seeker even at the first Portal of the Descending Staircase!"

"Oh, I'm wise to Old Dog Cerberus. Ish [241] Kabibble. Gimme an upper
berth in the Chicawgo, Saint Lewis, and Hell Limited, if it busts the roll. Do
you get me, Steve?"

"| understand you to say that you persist in your application."

"Sure. Andrew P. Satan for mine."

"| shall be pleased to place your name before the Watchers of the Gate."
"How deep do | have to dig?"

"Dig? | did not quite catch your remark."

"In the wad. Weigh the dough! What does it set me back? Me for the
bread-line?"

"The initiation fee is one thousand francs."
"| guess | can skin that off without having to eat at Childs."

"You will remit the amount to the Comptroller of my Privy Purse. Here is
the address. Now be so good as to sign the preliminary application-form."

They went over to the bureau (Douglas was prepared to derive it from
the library of Louis XIV), on which lay a private letter from the Kaiser, if
one might believe the embossed arms and address, and a note asking
President Poincare to dinner, "quite informally, my dear friend," which
Butcher could not fail to see. The preliminary application form was a
document which might have served for an exceptionally solemn treaty. But
Douglas was above the charlatanism of requiring a signature in blood:
Butcher signed it with an ordinary fountain pen.

"And now, Mr. Butcher," said Douglas, "I will ask you in your turn to
render me a small service."

"Bat it up!" said Mr. Butcher. "Il would buy an Illustrated Edition of O.
Henry in nineteen parts. "

Douglas did not know that Americans dread book agents more than
rattlesnakes; but he gathered [242] that his guest would acquiesce in any
reasonable suggestion.

"| am informed that you are -- or were -- a Priest of the Roman Church.

"Peter is my middle name," admitted the 'Rosicrucian,' “and that's no
jolly."

"But -- apart from questions of nomenclature for the moment, if you will
pardon me -- you are a priest of the Roman Church?"

"Yep: | took a chance on Pop Dago Benedict. But it's a con game; I'm
from Missouri. Four-flushing gold brick merchants! Believe me, some bull! |

took it like playing three days in Bumville. Them boobs got my goat for fair,
babe. No pipe!"

"You were interdicted in consequence of some scandal?"

"| ran a sporting house on the side, and | guess they endorsed my license
for speeding."

"Your Bishop took umbrage at some business activity which he judged
incompatible with your vows?"

"Like Kelly did."

"Oh, Bishop Kelly. Far too severe a disciplinarian, in my judgment. But
you are still a priest? Your orders are still valid? A baptism or a marriage
performed by you would hold good?"

"It's a cinch. The Hallelujah Guarantee and Trust Company, St. Paul.
Offices in the J ames D. Athanasius Building."

"Then, sir, | shall ask of you the favour to hold yourself in readiness to
baptize two persons at nine of the evening precisely, the day after to-
morrow. That ceremony will be followed by another, in which you will
marry them."

"| swan."
"| may rely on your good offices?"
"I'll come in a wheelbarrow." [243]

"Suit yourself, Mr. Butcher, as to the mode of transit; but pray be
careful to attend punctually, and in canonical costume."

"I'll dig the biretta out of the ice-box."
After a further exchange of courtesies the new disciple took his leave.
The same evening witnessed a very different interview.

Lord Antony Bowling was being eentertained at dinner by Simon Iff, and
their conversation turned upon the favourite subject of the old mystic --
the Way of the Tao.

"In view of what you have been saying about the necessity of dealing
with mediums on their own ground," remarked the host, "let me tell you of
a paradox in magick. Do you remember a certain chapter in the Bible which
tells one, almost in consecutive verses, firstly to answer a fool according to
his folly, and secondly, not so to answer him? This is the Scriptural version
of a truth which we phrase otherwise. There are two ways of dealing with
an opponent; one by beating him on his own ground, the other by
withdrawing to a higher plane. You can fight fire with fire, or you can fight
fire with water.

"It is, roughly speaking, legitimate magick to resolve a difficult situation

in either of these two ways. Alter it, or withdraw to higher ground. The
black magician, or as! prefer to call him, sorcerer, for the word magick
should not be profaned, invariably withdraws to lower planes. Let us seek
an analogy in the perfectly concrete case of the bank cashier.

"This gentleman, we will assume, finds his salary inadequate to his
outgoings. Now he may economize, that is, withdraw himself to a kind of
life where money is no longer needed in such quantity, or he [244] may
devote himself day and night to his business, and so increase his salary. But
there is no third course open to a man of self-respect. The sorcerer type of
man appeals to lower planes of money-making. He begins by gambling;
beaten there, he resorts to the still viler means of embezzlement; perhaps,
finally, he attempts to cover his thefts by murdering his mother for the
insurance money.

"Notice how, as his plane becomes debased, his fears grow greater. At
first, he is merely annoyed about his creditors; in the next stage, he fears
being sharped by his fellow-gamblers; then, it is the police who loom
terrible in his mind; and lastly the grim form of the executioner threatens
him."

"Very nicely Hogarthed," said Lord Antony. "Reminds me of how the
habit of lying degenerates into unintelligible stupidity. We had a case in the
War Office last month, a matter of supplying certain furs. As you know, the
seal furnishes a valuable fur. Less valuable, though superficially similar, is
that of the rabbit. Now in trade, so it appears, it is impolitic to say rabbit,
which sounds cheap and nasty, so the Scriptural equivalent, coney, is
employed, thus combining Piety with Profit. Having caught your coney, you
proceed to cook him, until he resembles seal. So you have a dyed rabbit-
skin, and you call it seal coney. But there are by-ways that stray further yet
from the narrow lane of truth. The increasing demand for rabbits has
reduced the profit on seal coney, and it becomes desirable to find a
cheaper substitute. Reckless of the susceptibilities of the ancient
Egyptians, this is found in that domesticated representative of the lion
family which consoles our spinsters. Having disguised the skin as far as may
be, they next disguise the name; some buyer must be made to pay the
price of seal coney, and think that he is getting it; so 'cat' becomes “trade
seal coney' [245] -- and unless one has the whole story there is no
possibility of derivation. The lie has become mere misnomer."

"It is the general case of Anglo-Saxon hypocrisy," returned Simon Iff. "I
had an amusing example the other day in an article that | wrote for the
Review -- rather prudish people. My little essay ended: “So Science offers
her virgin head to the caress of Magick.' The editor thought * virgin' rather a
‘suggestive' word, and replaced it by 'maiden’."

"You remind me of a curate we had over at Grimthorpe Ambrose. ‘Leg’
has for many years been a not quite proper word; when the terrible
necessity of referring to it arose, the polite ass replaced it by ‘limb.’

"The refined sensibility of our curate perceived the indelicacy of saying
‘limb,' since every one knew that it meant ‘leg’; so he wrapped it up in the
decent obscurity of the Latin language, and declined to play croquet one
afternoon on the ground that, the day before, in visiting old Mrs.
Postlethwaite, he had severely strained his member."

"The wicked fall into the pit that they have digged," said Iff. "All this
applies to the question of magick. It is a question of debasing coinage. |
have great sympathy with the ascetics of India and their monkish imitators
in Europe. They held spiritual gifts to be of supreme value, and devoted
their lower powers to the development of the higher. Of course mistakes
were made; the principle was carried too far; they were silly enough to
injure their lower powers by undue fasting, flagellation, and even
mutilation. They got the false idea that the body was an enemy, whereas it
is a servant -- the only servant available. But the idea was right; they
wanted to exchange dross for gold. Now the sorcerer [246] offers his gold
for dross, tries to exchange his highest powers for money or the
gratification of envy or revenge. The Christian Scientist, absurdly so-called,
is a sorcerer of the basest type, for he devotes the whole wealth of religion
to the securing of his bodily health. It is somewhat stupid, too, as his main
claim is that the body is only an illusion!"

"Am | right in suggesting that ordinary life is a mean between these
extremes, that the noble man devotes his material wealth to lofty ends,
the advancement of science, or art, or some such true ideal; and that the
base man does the opposite by concentrating all his abilities on the
amassing of wealth?"

"Exactly; that is the real distinction between the artist and the
bourgeois, or, if you prefer it, between the gentleman and the cad. Money,
and the things money can buy, have no value, for there is no question of
creation, but only of exchange. Houses, lands, gold, jewels, even existing
works of art, may be tossed about from one hand to another; they are so,
constantly. But neither you nor | can write a sonnet; and what we have, our
appreciation of art, we did not buy. We inherited the germ of it, and we
developed it by the sweat of our brows. The possession of money helped us,
but only by giving us time and opportunity and the means of travel.
Anyhow, the principle is clear; one must sacrifice the lower to the higher,
and, as the Greeks did with their oxen, one must fatten and bedeck the
lower, so that it may be the worthier offering. "

"And what happens when you go on the other tack?"

"When you trade your gold for pewter you impoverish yourself. The
sorcerer sells his soul for money; spends the money, and finds he has
nothing else to sell. Have you noticed that Christian Scientists [247] are
hardly ever in robust health? They have given up their spiritual forces for a
quite imaginary standard of well-being; and those forces, which were
supporting the body quite well enough without their stupid interference,
are debilitated and frittered away. | pray daily for a great war, that may
root out the coward fear of death and poverty in the minds of these
degenerate wretches. Death should be, as it used to be in the middle ages,
even, and yet more in pagan times, the fit reward and climax of a life well
spent in risking it for noble causes; and poverty should be a holy and
blessed state, worthy of the highest minds and the happiest, and of them
alone.

"To return to our sheep -- | mean our sorcerer. He has not much against
him to begin with, but he chooses to trade his sword for gold. The
barbarian, having the sword, naturally uses it to recover the gold. In other
words, the devil, having bought the soul, regains the price, for the sorcerer

spends it in the devil's service. The next stage is that the sorcerer resorts to
crime, declares war on all humanity. He uses vulgar means to attain his
ends, and the price may be his liberty. Ultimately, he may lose life itself in
some last desperate effort to retrieve all at a blow. When | was young and
had less experience, | had many a fight with sorcerers; and it was always
the end of the fight when Mr. Sorcerer broke the law. He was no longer
fighting me, but the consolidated will of humanity; and he had no time to
attack me when he was busy building breakwaters.

"And that reminds me. We have a young friend at bay -- with the worst
pack of devils in the world at him. | wonder if | have done wrong to leave
him so much to himself. But | wanted the boy to gain all the laurels; he's
young enough to like them."

"| think | Know who you mean," said Lord Antony, smiling; “and | don't
think you need be [248] very much afraid. | never saw any one much better
fitted to take care of himself."

"For all that, he's in urgent danger at this very moment. He has incurred
the greatest possible risk; he has gained a victory. But it has been only a
clash of outposts; the enemy is coming up now, horse, foot, and artillery,
with lust of revenge and desperate fear to enflame the original hatred;
and, unfortunately, the boy made some fundamental errors in his plan of
campaign."

"Ah, well, Napoleon did that. J ena was the result of his own blundering
miscalculations; so, to a certain extent, was Austerlitz. Don't fret! The
bigger they are, the harder they fall, as my father's pet pugilist used to say.
And now | must run away; there is a seance with a lady who materializes
demon slugs. Do not forget to inscribe my name among the martyrs!"

CHAPTER XVIII

THE DARK SIDE OF THE MOON

THE spring gathered her garments
together, then flung them wide over the
Bay of Naples. Hers is the greatest force in
Nature, because her clarion sounds the
summons of creation. It is she that is the
Vicegerent of the All-Father, and of His
spirit hath He dowered her with a triple
essence.

In southern lands, even before the
Equinox opens Its gates before her
conquering armies, one feels her imminent.
Her light-armed troops swarm over the
breached ramparts of the winter, and their
cry is echoed in the dungeons of the soul by
those whom she has come to Save.

Yet in her hands is nothing but a sword.
It is a disturbance of the equilibrium to
which the dying year has attained after its
long Joy and agony; and so to the soul
which is at ease she comes with alarum and
tocsin. A soul like Iliel's, naturally apt to
receive every impulse, to multiply it, and to
transform it into action, is peculiarly
sensitive, without knowing It, to cosmic
forces so akin to its own inborn turbulence.

In her idlest moods, Lisa la Giuffria
would have started for China at the least
provocation, provided that she could start
within the hour.

She could take a lover, or throw one
away, a dozen times in a year, and would
have been indignant and amazed if any one
had called her fickle. She was not insincere;
but she believed with her whole soul [250]
that her immediate impulse was the true
Will of her whole Self. One night at the
Savoy Hotel with Lavinia King, just before
Christmas, the talk had turned on the
distress then prevailing in London. Instantly
she had dragged the whole party
downstairs, provided it with the entire
supply of silver money that the hotel
happened to have on hand, and rushed it to
the Embankment to rescue the
unemployed. That night she was a super-
Shaftsbury; she formulated a dozen plans to
solve the problem of poverty, root, branch,
and leaf; and the next morning her
dressmaker found her amid a sheaf of
calculations.

But a new style of costume being
displayed, she had plunged with equal
ardour into a cosmopolitan scheme of dress
reform.

To such an one a thwarted impulse
involves almost a wreckage of the soul. lliel
began openly to chafe at the restrictions to
which her own act had bound her. She had
never been a mother, and the mere
physical disabilities of her condition were
all the more irritating because they were so
unfamiliar.

The excitement of the Butterfly-chase
had kept her toe to the mark, and the
strange circumstances with which she was

surrounded had aided to make it easy for
her. It flattered her vanity that she was the
keystone of so great an arch, destined to
Span earth and heaven. Her new conditions,
the relaxation of the tension, threw down
her exaltation. The experiment was over;
well, then, it ought to be over -- and she
had months of boredom before her which
must be endured with no stimulus but that
of normal human duty. She was one of
those people who will make any sacrifice at
the moment, beggar themselves to help a
friend, but who are quite incapable of
drawing a weekly cheque for a trifling sum
for no matter how important a purpose.
[251]

In this March and April she was one mass
of thwarted impulse. The mere necessity,
demanded by safety, of remaining within
the circle, was abhorrent to her. But,
though she did not know it, she was held in
Subj ection by the wills of her guardians.

In Astrology, the moon, among its other
meanings, has that of "the common people, "
who submit (they know not why) to any
independent will that can express itself
with sufficient energy. The people who
guillotined the mild Louis XVI died gladly
for Napoleon. The impossibility of an actual
democracy is due to this fact of mob-
psychology. As soon as you group men, they
lose their personalities. A parliament of the
wisest and strongest men in the nation is
liable to behave like a set of schoolboys,
tearing up their desks and throwing their
inkpots at each other. The only possibility
of co-operation lies in discipline and
autocracy, which men have sometimes

established in the name of equal rights.

Now lliel was at present a microcosm of
the Moon, and her resentments were either
changed into enthusiasms by a timely word
from Sister Clara or one of the others, or
else ignored. The public is a long-suffering
dumb beast, an ass crouching beneath
heavy burdens, and it needs not only
unendurable ill-treatment, but leadership,
before it will revolt. All Iliel's impulses were
purposeless, negative things, ideas rather
of escape than of any definite programme.
She wanted to jump out of the frying-pan,
neither fearing the fire nor having any clear
idea of how to act when she got there. She
lacked so much as a day-dream of any
alternative Future; hers was the restless
wretchedness of a morphineuse deprived of
the drug.

She was, as it were, the place where
four winds met; and such a place is
dangerous for a ship that is without internal
means of propulsion. She sagged, [252] a
dismasted derelict, in tow of Cyril Grey;
and the rope of love which held her to him
strained her creaking timbers.

The first evidence of these very
indefinite feelings was shown by her
unreasonableness. Under the rigid discipline
of the ceremonies, she had been too well
schooled, too absorbed, too directly under
the influence of the forces invoked, to feel
or express constraint; the mere human
hygiene of her present position served only
to make her more discontented. A similar
phenomenon has been observed also with
democracies; they are happiest when most

thoroughly cowed and bullied.

Once or twice she treated Cyril to an
outburst of temper; but he was very young,
so he was tactless enough to refuse to be
angry, and made every allowance for her.
Such treatment insults women like Lisa;
their rage smoulders in them. A blow and a
caress would have tripled her passion for
him. "What is the use of being a Chinese
god," she might have asked, "if you do not
gratify your worshippers by inflicting
Chinese tortures?"

But the principal manifestation of her
moral instability was in her whims.

These were in some degree, no doubt,
due to her physical condition; but the
mental stress exaggerated them to an
abnormal height, like a glacier cramped
between two mountain chains. It is
necessary, in this world, to be made of
harder stuff than one's environment. But
lliel had no ambition to any action; she was
reflex; simple reaction to impression was
what she thought her will. And so she
inflicted phantasies upon the patient fold
about her; one day she was all for dressing
herself strangely; another day she would
insist upon a masque or a charade; but she
took no true pleasure in any of these
things. Cyril Grey was assiduous in meeting
her desires; [253] there were but two
prohibitions left of all the elaborate
restrictions of the second stage of the
experiment; she might not be unduly
Intimate with him, and she might not in any
way communicate with the outside world.
In other words, the citadel and the

ramparts must be kept intact; between
these was a wide range for whim. Yet she
was not content; it was just those two
forbidden things that haunted her. (The
serpent is a later invention in the story of
the Fall!) Her unconscious wish to violate
these rules led to a dislike for those who
personified their rigidity; namely Cyril Grey
and Brother Onofrio. And her febrile mind
began to join these separate objects ina
common detestation.

This shewed itself in a quite insane
jealousy of their perfectly natural and
necessary intimacy. Sometimes, as they sat
sunning themselves upon the wall of one of
the terraces she would come flaming down
the garden with some foolish tale, and
Brother Onofrio at least could not wholly
hide his annoyance. He was naturally
anxious to make all he could out of the
presence of the more advanced adept; and
his inborn ecclesiastical contempt for
women showed through the tissue of his
good manners. Cyril's most admirable
patience tried her even more sorely. "Are
you my lover or my grandfather?" she
screamed at him one night, when he had
been more than usually tactful.

Had the matter rested there, it had
been ill enough with her. But the mind of
man is a strange instrument. "Satan finds
some mischief still for idle hands to do" isa
rattling good piece of psychology. lliel had
nothing to occupy her mind, because she
had never trained herself to concentrate
the current of her thoughts on one thing,
and off all others. A passion for crochet-
work has saved many a woman from the

streets or the river. And as on marshes
[254] methane forms, and Will o' th' Wisp
lures peasants to their oozy doom, so in the
idle mind monsters are bred. She began to
suffer from a real insanity of the type of
persecution-mania. She began to imagine
that Cyril and Brother Onofrio were
engaged in some mysterious plot against
her. It was lucky that every one in the
house possessed medical knowledge and
training, with specialization in psychology,
so that they knew precisely how to treat
her.

Yet in the long run that very knowledge
became a danger. The extraordinary powers
of mind -- in certain limited directions --
which insanity often temporarily confers,
enabled her to see that she was regarded as
in a critical mental state. She accepted the
situation as a battle, instead of co-
operating in frank friendship, and began to
manoeuvre to outwit her guardians. Those
who have any experience of madness, or its
congeners, drug-neuroses, know how
infernally easy was her task. Many's the
woman who, with her pocket handkerchief
to her face, and the tears pouring from her
eyes, has confessed all to the specialist,
and begged him to break her of the whisky
habit, the while she absorbed a pint or so of
the said whisky under cover of the said
pocket handkerchief.

lliel simply noted the states of mind
which they thought favourable, and
simulated them. Peaceful absorption in
nature, particularly in the moon when she
was shining, pleased them; and she
cultivated these states, knowing that the

others never disturbed her at such times;
and, thus secured, she gave herself over to
the most hideous thoughts.

They were in fact the thoughts of
madness. It is a strange fact that the most
harmless states of mind, the most correct
trains of idea, may accompany a dangerous
lunacy. The difference is that the madman
makes a secret of his fancies. Lord
Dunsany's [255] stories are the perfect
prose jewels of a master cutter and
polisher, lit by the rays of an imagination
that is the godlike son of the Father of All
Truth and Light; but if he kept them to
himself, they would be the symptoms of an
incurable lesion of the brain. A madman
will conceal the Terrible Secret that "today
is Wednesday," perhaps "because the devil
told him to do so." "| am He who Is Truth"
was the boast of a great mystic, Mansur,
and they stoned him for it, as they stone all
men who speak truth; but had he said
"Hush! | am God!" he would have been
merely a maniac.

So Iliel acquired the habit of spending a
great part of the day in her cradle, and
there indulging her mind in every possible
morbidity. The very fact that she could not
go on to action served to make the matter
worse. It is a terrible error to let any
natural impulse, physical or mental,
Stagnate. Crush it out, if you will, and be
done with it; or fulfil it, and get it out of
the system; but do not allow it to remain
there and putrefy. The suppression of the
normal sex instinct, for example, is
responsible for a thousand ills. In Puritan
countries one inevitably finds a morbid

preoccupation with sex coupled with every
form of perversion and degeneracy.
Addiction to excess of drink, and to the
drug habits, which are practically unknown
in Latin countries, increase one's admiration
at the Anglo-Saxon temperament.

Thus also Iliel's stagnant mind bred
fearsome things. Hour after hour, the
pageant of diseased thoughts passed
through the shadowy gulfs of her chaotic
spirit. Actual phantoms took shape for her,
some seductive, some menacing; but even
the most hideous and cruel symbols had a
fierce fascination for her. There was a stag-
beetle, with flaming eyes, a creature as big
as an elephant, with claws in constant
motion, that threatened her continually.
[256] Horribly as this frightened her, she
gloated on it, pictured its sudden plunge
with those ghastly mandibles upon her
flanks. Her own fatness was a source of
curious perverse pleasure to her; one of her
favourite reveries was to imagine herself
the centre of a group of cannibals, watch
them chop off great lumps from her body,
and seethe them in the pot, or roast them
on a spear, hissing and dripping blood and
grease, upon the fire. In some insane or
atavistic confusion of mind this dream was
always recognized as being a dream of love.
And she understood, in some sub-current of
thought, why Suffragettes forced men to
use violence upon them; it is but a
repressed sexual instinct breaking out in
race-remembrance of marriage by capture.

But more dangerous even than such
ideas were many which she learned to
group under a name which one of them

gave her. It was not a name that one can
transcribe in any alphabet, but it was
exactly like a very short slight cough, hardly
more than a clearing of the throat, a quite
voluntary cough of the apologetic type. She
had only to make this little noise, and
immediately a certain landscape opened
before her. She was walking on a narrow
ribbon of white path that wound up a very
gentle slope. On either side of her were
broad rough screes, with sparse grass and
scrub peeping between the stones. The
path led up to a pass between two hills,
and near the crest of the ridge were two
towers, one on either side of the path, as if
for defence. These towers were squat and
very ugly, with no windows, but mere slits
for archery, and they had no sign of
habitation. Yet she was quite sure that
Something lived there, and she was
conscious of the most passionate anxiety to
visit whoever it might be. The moon,
always in her wane, shone bright above the
path, but little of her illumination extended
beyond those narrow limits. [257] Upon the
screes she could see only faint shadows,
apparently of some prowling beast of the
jackal or hyena type, for she could hear
howling and laughing, with now and again
fierce snarls and cries as though a fight
were in progress "in that fell cirque." But
nothing ever crossed the path itself, and
she would walk along it with a sense of the
most curious lightness and pleasure. It was
often her intention to go to the towers; but
always she was deterred from doing so by
the Old Lady.

It was at a sharp turn of the path round
an immense boulder that this individual

usually appeared, coming from a cleft in its
face. On the first occasion she had herself
greeted the Old Lady, asking if she could
assist her. For the Old Lady was seated on
the ground, working very hard.

"May | help you?" said Iliel, "in whatever
you are doing?"

The Old Lady sighed very bitterly, and
said that she was trying to make a fire.

"But you haven't got any sticks."

"We never use sticks to make a fire -- in
this country."

The last three words were In sing-song.
"Then what do you burn?"

Anything round, and anything red, and
anything ripe -- in this country."

"And how do you kindle it? Have you
matches, or do you rub sticks together, or
do you use the sun's rays through a burning-
glass?"

"Hush! there is no phosphorus, nor any
sticks, nor any sun -- in this country."

"Then how do you get fire?"
"There is no fire -- in this country. "
"But you said you were making a fire!"

"Trying to make a fire, my dear; we are
always trying, and never succeeding -- in

this country." [258]

"And how long have you been trying?"

"There is no time -- in this country."

lliel was half hypnotized by the
reiteration of that negation, and that final
phrase. She began to play a game.

"Well, Old Lady, I've something round,
and something red, and something ripe to
make your fire with. I'll give it to you If you
Can guess what it is."

The Old Lady shook her head. "There's
nothing round, and there's nothing red, and
nothing ripe -- in this country."

"Well, I'll tell you: it's an apple. If you
want it, you may have it."

"We never want anything -- in this
country."

"Well, I'll go on."
"There's no going on -- in this country."
"Oh, but there is, and I'm off."

"Don't you know what a treasure we
have -- in this country?"

"No -- what is it?"

The Old Lady dived into the cleft of the
rock, and came out again in a moment with
a monkey, and a mouse-trap, and a
mandolin.

"| began," she explained, "with an arrow,
and an adder, and an arquebus; for there
are terrible dangers in the beginning -- in
this country."

"But what are they good for?"

"Nothing at all -- in this country. But I'm
changing them for a newt, and a narwhal,
and a net, hoping that one day | may get to
the end, where one needs a zebra, a zither,
and a zarape', and one can always exchange
those for something round, and red, and
ripe -- in this country.

It was really a sort of child's fairy story
that Iliel was telling herself; but the teller
was independent of her conscious mind, so
that she did not know what was coming
next. And really the Old Lady was quite a
[259] personality. On the second occasion
she showed lIliel how to use her treasure.
She made the monkey play the mandolin,
and set the mouse-trap; and sure enough
the newt and the narwhal, attracted by the
music Swam up and were duly caught. As
for the net, the Old Lady bartered her three
treasures for Iliel's hair-net.

"I'm afraid it isn't very strong to catch
things with," she said.

"| only need an orange, and an oboe, and
an octopus; and they are easy enough to
catch -- In this country."

Little by little the Old Lady beguiled
lliel, and one day, while they were setting a
trap to catch a viper, and a vineyard, anda

violin with their unicorn, and their
umbrella, and their ukulele, she suddenly
stopped short, and asked lliel point-blank if
she would like to attend the Sabbath on
Walpurgis-night -- the eve of May-day -- for
"there's a short cut to it, my dear, from this
country."

lliel revolted passionately against the
idea, for she scented something
abominable; but the Old Lady said:

"Of course we should disguise you; It
would never do for you to be recognized by
Cyril, and Brother Onofrio, and Sister Clara;
they wouldn't like to know you live -- in this
country."

"| dont," said Iliel, rather angrily, "I only
come out here for a walk."

"Ah, my dear," chuckled the Old Lady,
"but a walk's as good as a whale -- in this
country. And you remember that the whale
didn't put out J onah where he wanted to
go, but where somebody else wanted him.
And that's the breed of whale we have -- in
this country."

"How do you know they'll be there on
Walpurgis-night?" [260]

"A how's as good as a hen -- in this
country. And what a hen doesn't know you
may ask of a hog, and what a hog doesn't
know you may ask of a horse, and what a
horse doesn't know isn't worth knowing -- in
this country."

lliel was in a black rage against her

friends -- why had they not asked her to
come with them? And she went back that
day in a vile temper.

This adventure of the Old Lady was only
one of many; but it was the most vital,
because the most coherent. Indeed, it led
in the end to results of importance. For lliel
agreed to go to the Sabbath on Walpurgis-
night. The Old Lady was very mysterious as
to the method of travel. Iliel had expected
conventionality on that point; but the Old
Lady said:

"There are no goats, and no broomsticks -
- in this country."

Most of her visions were simply formless
and incoherent horrors. Her foolish
thoughts and senseless impulses took shape,
usually in some distortion of an animal
form, with that power of viscosity which is
to vertebrates the most loathsome of all
possibilities of life, since it represents the
line of development which they have
themselves avoided, and is therefore to
them excremental in character. But to Iliel's
morbidity the fascination of these things
was overpowering. She took an unnatural
and morose delight in watching the cuttle-
fish squeeze itself slowly into a slime as
black and oozy as the slug, and that again
send trickling feelers as of leaking motor-
oil, greasy and repulsive, with a foul scum
upon its surface, until the beast looked like
some parody of a tarantula; then this again
would collapse, as if by mere weariness of
struggle against gravitation, and spread
itself slowly as a pool of putrefaction,
which was yet intensely vital and personal

by reason of its power to suck up [261]
everything within its sohere of sensation. It
Struck her that such creatures were images
of Desire, a cruel and insatiable craving
deprived of any will or power to take a
single step towards gratification; and she
understood that this condition was the most
hideous and continual torture, agony with
no ray of hope, impotence so complete as
even to inhibit an issue in death. And she
knew, too, that these shapes were born of
her own weaknesses; yet, so far from
rousing herself to stamp them out in her
mind, she gloated upon their monstrosity
and misery, took pleasure in their anguish,
which was her own, and fed them with the
substance of her own personality and will.
It was this, a spiritual "Nostalgie de la
boue," which grew upon her like a cancer or
a gangrene; treacheries of the body itself,
so that the only possible remedy is instant
extirpation; for once the flesh abandons its
will to firmness, to organization, and to
specialized development, its degeneration
into formless putrefaction becomes an
accelerating rush upon a steepening slope.

How tenuous Is the thread by which man
climbs to the stars! What concentration of
the sub-conscious will of the race, through
a thousand generations, has determined his
indomitable ascent! A single slackness, a
single false step, and he topples into the
morass wherein his feet still plash!
Degeneration is the most fatally easy of all
human possibilities; for the fell tug of
cosmic inertia, that pressure of the entire
universe which tends to the homogeneous,
IS upon man continuously; and becomes
constantly more urgent the more he

advances upon his path of differentiation. It
is more than a fable, Atlas who supports the
Universe upon his shoulders, and Hercules,
the type of the man, divinely born indeed,
who must yet regain Olympus by his own
fierce toil, taking upon himself that infinite
load. [262]

The price of every step of progress is
uncounted, even in myriads of lives self-
sacrificed; and every man who Is unfaithful
to himself is not only at war with the sum
of things, but his own comrades turn upon
him to destroy him, to crush out his
individuality and energy, to assimilate him
to their own pullulating mass. It is indeed
the power of the Roman Empire which
erects the Cross on Calvary; but there must
needs be Calaphas and Herod, so blind that
they crush out their own one hope of
Salvation from that iron tyranny; and also a
traitor among those who once "left all and
followed" the Son of Man.

And who shall deny true Godhead to
humanity, seeing that no generation of
mankind has been without a Saviour,
conscious of his necessary doom, and
resolute to meet it, his face set as a flint
towards J erusalem? [263]

CHAPTER XIX

THE GRAND BEWITCHMENT

THE Operation planned by the Black
Lodge was simple and colossal both in
theory and in practice. It was based on the
prime principle of Sympathetic Magic, which
is that if you destroy anything which is
bound up with anybody by an identifying
link that person also perishes. Douglas had
adroitly taken advantage of the fact of the
analogy between his own domestic situation
and that of Cyril Grey. He had no need to
attack the young magician directly, or even
Lisa; he preferred to strike at the weakest
point of all, that being whose existence was
as yet but tentative. He had no need to go
beyond this; for if he could bring Cyril's
magick to naught, that exorcist would be
destroyed by the recoil of his own exorcism.
The laws of force take no account of human
prejudices about "good" or "evil"; if one is
run over by a railway engine, it matters
nothing, physically, whether one is trying to
commit suicide or to save a child. The
difference in the result lies wholly ona
superior plane.

It is one mark of the short-sightedness of
the sorcerer that he is content with his own
sorceries; and if he should think that he can
escape the operation of that superior law
which does take account of spiritual and
moral causes, he is the greater fool. Douglas
might indeed wipe his enemy off the planet,

but only with the result of fortifying the
immortal and divine self which was within
his victim, so that [264] he would return
with added power and wisdom; while all his
success in aggrandizing himself -- as he
foolishly called it -- would leave his better
part exhausted and disintegrated beyond
refreshment or repair. He was like a man
who should collect all his goods about him,
and set fire to his house; while the true
adepts beggar themselves (to all
appearances) by transforming all their
wealth into a shape that fire cannot touch.

The sorcerer never sees thus clearly. He
hopes that at the last his accumulation of
corruptible things will outweigh the laws of
Nature; much as a thief might argue that if
he can only steal enough, he can corrupt
the judges and bribe the legislature, as is
done in America. But the laws of nature
were not made by man, nor can they be set
aside by man; they were not made at all.
There are no laws of Nature in the usual
sense of the word "law"; they are but
statements, reduced to a generalized form
in accordance with reason, of the facts
observed in nature; they are formulae of
the inherent properties of substance. It is
impossible to evade them, or to suspend
them, or to counteract them; for the effort
to do so is itself in accordance with those
laws themselves, and the compensation,
though it be invisible for a time, is adjusted
with an exactitude absolute because
independent of every source of error. No
trickery, no manipulation, can alter by the
millionth of a milligramme the amount of
oxygen ina billion tons of water. No
existing thing is ever destroyed or magnified

or lessened, though it change its form as it
passes from one complexity to another. And
if this be true of an atom of carbon, which
is but one of the ideas in our minds, how
much more is it true of that supremely
simple thing which stands behind all
thought, the soul of man? Doubt that? The
answer comes: Who doubts? [265]

The sorcerer is perhaps -- at best --
trying to create a permanence of his
complexities, as who should try to fashion
gold from the dust-heap. But most sorcerers
do not go so deeply into things; they are set
upon the advantage of the moment. Douglas
probably did not care a snap of the fingers
for his ultimate destiny; it may be that he
deliberately avoided thinking of it; but
however that may be, there is no doubt that
at this moment he was ruthlessly pursuing
his hate of Cyril Grey.

For great operations -- the "set pieces"
of his diabolical pyrotechnics -- the sorcerer
had a place set apart and prepared. This
was an old wine-cellar in a street between
the Seine and the Boulevard St. Germain.
The entrance was comparatively reputable,
being a house of cheap prostitution which
Douglas and Balloch -- screened behind a
woman -- owned between them. Below this
house was a cellar where the apaches of
Paris gathered to dance and plot against
society; so ran the legend, and two burly
sergents de ville, with fixed bayonets and
cocked revolvers lying on the table before
them, superintended the revels. For in fact
Douglas had perceived that the apache
Spent no money, and that it would pay
better to run the cellar as a show place for

Americans, Cockneys, Germans, and country
cousins from the provinces on a jaunt to
Paris, on the hunt for thrills. No one more
dangerous than a greengrocer had crossed
that threshold for many a long year, and the
visible Apaches, drinking and swearing,
dancing an alleged can-can and occasionally
throwing bottles and knives at each other,
were honest folk painfully earning the
exiguous Salary which the "long firm" paid
them.

But beneath this cellar, unknown even to
the police, was a vault which had once
served for storing spirits. It was below the
level of the river; rats, damp, and stale
alcohol gave it an atmosphere happily
peculiar [266] to such abodes. There is no
place in the world more law-abiding than a
house of ill-fame, with the light of police
Supervision Constantly upon it; and the
astuteness of the sorcerer in choosing this
for his place of evocation was rewarded by
complete freedom from disturbance or
suspicion. Any one could enter at any hour
of day or night, with every precaution of
secrecy, without drawing more than a laugh
from the police on guard.

The entrance to the sorcerer's den was
similarly concealed -- by cunning, not by
more obvious methods.

A sort of cupboard-shelf, reached by a
ladder from the dancing cellar and by a few
steps from one of the bedrooms in the
house above, was called "Troppman's
refuge," it being said that that celebrated
murderer once had lain concealed there for
some days. His autograph, and some bad

verses (all contributed by an ingenious
cabaret singer) were shown upon the walls.
It was therefore quite natural and
unsuspicious for any visitor to climb up into
that room, which was so small that it would
only hold one man of average size. His non-
reappearance would not cause surprise; he
might have gone out the other way; in fact,
he would naturally do so. But in the
moment of his finding himself alone, he
could, if he knew the secret, press a
hidden lever which caused the floor to
descend bodily. Arrived below, a corridor
with three right-angled turns -- this could,

incidentally, be flooded at need, in a few
moments, -- led to the last of the defences,
a regular door such as is fitted to a strong
room. There was an emergency exit to the
cellar, equally ingenious; it was a sort of
torpedo-tube opening beneath the water of
the Seine. It was fitted with a compressed
air-chamber. Any one wishing to escape had
merely to introduce himself into a shell
made of thin cork, and shoot into the river.
Even the worst of swimmers [267] could be
sure to reach the neighbouring quay. But
the secret of this was known only to Douglas
and one other.

The very earliest steps in such
thoroughgoing sorcery as Douglas practised
require the student to deform and mutilate
his humanity by accustoming himself to such
moral crimes as render their perpetrator
callous and insensible to all such emotions
as men naturally cherish; in particular,
love. The Black Lodge put all its members
through regular practices of cruelty and
meanness. Guy de Maupassant wrote two of

the most revolting stories ever told; one of
a boy who hated a horse, the other of a
family of peasants who tortured a blind
relative that had been left to their charity.
Such vileness as is written there by the
divine hand of that great artist forbids
emulation; the reverent reference must
suffice.

Enough to say that stifling of all natural
impulse was a preliminary of the system of
the Black Lodge; in higher grades the pupil
took on the manipulation of subtler forces.
Douglas’ own use of his wife's love to
vitriolize her heart was considered by the
best judges as likely to become a classic.

The inner circle, the fourteen men about
Douglas himself and that still more
mysterious person to whom even he was
responsible, a woman known only as "Annie"
or as "A.B.", were sealed to him by the
direst of all bonds. Needless are oaths in
the Black Lodge; honour being the first
thing discarded, their only use is to frighten
fools. But before joining the Fourteen,
known as the Ghaaghaael, it was obligatory
to commit a murder in cold blood, and to
place the proofs of it in the hands of
Douglas. Thus each step in sorcery is also a
step in slavery; and that any man should put
such power in the hands of another, no
matter for what hope of gain, is one of the
mysteries [268] of perverse psychology. The
highest rank in the Lodge was called
Thaumiel-Qeretiel, and there were two of
these, "Annie" and Douglas, who were alone
in possession of the full secrets of the
Lodge. Only they and the Fourteen had keys
to the cellar and the secret of the

combination.

Beginners were initiated there, and the
method of introducing them was
satisfactory and ingenious. They were taken
to the house in an automobile, their eyes
blinded by an ordinary pair of motor-
goggles, behind whose glass was a steel
plate.

The cellar itself was arranged as a
permanent place of evocation. It was a far
more complex device than that used by
Vesquit in Naples, for in confusion lay the
safety of the Lodge. The floor was covered
with symbols which even the Fourteen did
not wholly understand; any one of them,
crossed inadvertently, might be a magical
trap for a traitor; and as each of the
Fourteen was exactly that, in fact, had to
be so to qualify for supreme place, it was
with abject fear that this Unholy of Unholies
was guarded.

At the appointed hour Mr. Butcher
presented himself at the Count's apartment,
was furnished with the necessary
spectacles, and conducted to the Beth Chol,
or House of Horror, as the cellar was called
in the jargon of the Sorcerers.

Balloch, Cremers, Abdul Bey and the
wife of Douglas were already present.

The first part of the procedure consisted
in the formal renunciation by Mrs. Douglas
of the vows taken for her in her baptism, a
ceremonial apostacy from Christianity. This
was done in no spirit of hostility to that
religion, but to permit of her being

rebaptized into it under Lisa's maiden name.
The Turk was next called upon to renounce
Islam, and baptized by the name of the
Marchese la Giuffria.

The American priest next proceeded to
confirm [269] them in the Christian religion,
and to communicate the Sacrament.

Finally, they were married. In this long
profanation of the mysteries of the Church
the horror lay in the business-like simplicity
of the procedure.

One can imagine the Charity of a devout
Christian finding excuses for the Black Mass,
when it is the expression of the revolt of an
agonizing soul, or of the hysteria of a half-
crazed debauchee; he can conceive of
repentance and of grace following upon
enlightenment; but this cold-blooded abuse
of the most sacred rites, their quite casual
employment as the mere prelude to a crime
which is tantamount to murder in the
opinion of all right-minded men, must seem
even to the Freethinker or the Pagan as an
abomination not to be forgiven.

No pains had been spared by Douglas to
make all secure. Balloch and Cremers had
sponsored both "infants," and Douglas
himself, as having most right, gave his wife
in marriage to the Turk.

A brutally realistic touch was needed to
consummate the sacrilege; it was not
neglected.

Much of the pleasure taken by Douglas in
this miserable and criminal farce was due to

his enjoyment of the sufferings of his wife.
Each new spurt of filth wrung her heart
afresh; and withal she was aware that all
these things were but the prelude to an act
of fiendish violence more horrible than
them all.

Mr. Butcher, Cremers, and Abdul Bey,
their functions ended, were led out of the
cellar. Balloch remained to perform the
operation from which the bulk of his income
was derived.

But there was yet much sorcery of the
more secret sort to be accomplished.
Douglas who, up to now, had confined
himself to intense mental concentration
upon the work, forcing himself to believe
that the ceremonies he was witnessing were
real instead of [270] mockery, that his wife
was really Lisa, and Abdul really the
Marchese, now came forward as the heart
and brain of the work. The difficulty -- the
crux of the whole art -- had been to
introduce Cyril Grey into the affair, and this
had been overcome by the use of a
specimen of his signature. But now it was
necessary also to dedicate the victim to
Hecate, or rather, to her Hebrew
equivalent, Nahema, the devourer of little
children, because she also is one aspect of
the moon, and Lisa having been adopted to
that planet, her representative must needs
undergo a similar ensorcelment.

In the art of evocation Douglas was
profoundly skilled. His mind was of a
material and practical order, and distrusted
subtleties. He gladly endured the immense
labour of compelling a spirit to visible

appearance, when a less careful or more
fine-minded sorcerer would have worked
upon some other plane. He had so far
mastered his art that in a place, such as he
now had, long habitated to similar scenes,
he could call up a visible image of almost
any demon required in a period of not more
than half an hour. For place-association is
of great importance, possibly because it
favours concentration of mind. Evidently, it
iS difficult not to feel religious in King's
College Chapel, Cambridge, or otherwise
than profoundly sceptical and Pagan in St.
Peter's, at Rome, with its "East" in the West,
its adaptation of a statue of J upiter to
represent its patron saint, and the emphasis
of its entire architecture in bearing witness
that its true name is Temporal Power.
Gothic is the only mystic type; Templar and
Byzantine are only religious through
sexuality; Perpendicular is more moral than
Spiritual -- and modern architecture means
nothing at all.

In the Beth Chol there was always a bowl
of fresh bull's blood burning over a charcoal
brazier. [271]

Science is gradually being forced round
once more to the belief that there is
something more in life than its mere
chemistry and physics. Those who practise
the occult arts have never been in doubt on
the subject. The dynamic virtue of living
substance does not depart from it
immediately at death. Those ideas,
therefore, which seek manifestation in life,
must do so either by incarnation or by
seizing some still living matter which the
idea or soul in possession has abandoned.

Sorcerers consequently employ the fumes of
fresh blood as a vehicle for the
manifestation of the demons whom they
wish to evoke. The matter is easy enough;
for fiends are always eager to take hold on
the sensory life. Occasionally, such beings
find people ignorant and foolish enough to
offer themselves deliberately to obsession
by sitting in a dark room without magical
protection, and inviting any wandering
ghost or demon to take hold of them, and
use their bodies and minds. This loathsome
folly is called Spiritualism, and successful
practitioners can be recognized by the fact
that their minds are no use for anything at
all any more. They become incapable of
mental concentration, or a connected train
of thought; only too often the obsessing
Spirit gains power to take hold of them at
will, and utters by their mouths foulness
and imbecility when the whim takes him.
True souls would never seek so ignoble a
means of manifesting in earth-life; their
ways are holy, and in accord with Nature.

While the true soul reincarnates as a
renunciation, a sacrifice of its divine life
and ecstasy for the sake of redeeming those
who are not yet freed from mortal longings,
the demon seeks incarnation as a means of
gratifying unslaked lusts.

Like a dumb beast in pain, the wife of
Douglas watched her husband go through his
ghastly ritual, with averted face, as is
prescribed; for none may look [272] on
Hecate, and remain sane. The proper
conjurations of Hecate are curses against all
renewal of life; her sacrament is deadly
night-shade or henbane, and her due

offering a black lamb torn ere its birth from
a black ewe.

This, with sardonic subter-thought,
pleasing to Hecate, the sorcerer promised
her as she made her presence felt; whether
they could have seen anything if they had
dared to look, who can say? But through the
cellar moved an icy sensation, as if some
presence had indeed been called forth by
the words and rites spoken and
accomplished.

For Hecate is what Scripture calls "the
second death." Natural death is to man the
greatest of the Sacraments, of which all
others are but symbols; for it is the final
and absolute Union with the creator, and it
is also the Pylon of the Temple of Life, even
in the material world, for Death is Love.

Certainly the wife of Douglas felt the
presence of that vile thing evoked from
Tartarus. Its chill struck through to her
bones. Nothing had so torn her breast as the
constant refusal of her husband to allow her
to fulfil her human destiny. Even her
prostitution, since it was forced upon her by
the one man she loved, might be endured --
if only -- if only --

But always the aid of Balloch had been
summoned; always, in dire distress, and
direr danger, she had been thwarted of her
life's purpose. It was not so mucha
conscious wish, though that was strong, as
an actual physical craving of her nature, as
urgent and devouring as hunger or thirst.

Balloch, who had been all his life high-

priest of Hecate, had never been present at
an evocation of the force that he served. He
shuddered -- not a little -- as the sorcerer
recited his surgical exploits; the credentials
of the faith of her servant then present
before her. He had committed his dastardly
crimes [273] wholly for gain, and asa
handle for blackmail; the magical
significance of the business had not
occurred to him at all. His magical work had
been almost entirely directed to the
gratification of sensuality in abnormal and
extra-human channels. So, while a fierce
pride now thrilled him, there was mingled
with it a sinking of the spirit; for he realized
that its mistress had been sterility and
death. And it was of death that he was most
afraid. The cynical calm of Douglas appalled
him; he recognized the superiority of that
great sorcerer; and his hope to supplant him
died within his breast.

At that moment Hecate herself passed
into him, and twined herself inextricably
about his brain. He accepted his destiny as
her high-priest; in future he would do
murder for the joy of pleasing her! All other
mistresses were tame to this one! The thrill
of Thuggee caught him -- and in a very
Spasm of maniacal exaltation, he vowed
himself again and again to her services. She
should be sole goddess of the Black Lodge --
only let her show him how to be rid of
Douglas! Instantly the plan came to him; he
remembered that "Annie" was high-priestess
of Hecate in a greater sense than himself;
for she was notorious as an open advocate
of this kind of murder; indeed, she had
narrowly escaped prison on this charge; he
would tempt Douglas to rid himself of

"Annie" -- and then betray him to her.

So powerful was the emotion that
consumed him that he trembled with
excitement and eagerness. To-night was a
great night: it was a step in his initiation to
take part in so tremendous a ceremony. He
became nervously exalted; he could have
danced; Hecate, warming herself in his old
bones, communicated a devilish glee to
him.

The moment was at hand for his
renewed activity.

"Hecate, mother only of death, devourer
of all [274] life!" cried Douglas, in his final
adjuration; "as | devote to thy chill tooth
this secret spring of man, so be it with all
that are like unto it! Even as it is with that
which | shall cast upon thine altar, so be it
with all the offspring of Lisa la Guiffria!"

He ended with the thirteenth repetition
of that appalling curse which begins
Epikaloume se ten en to keneo pnevmati,
deinan, aoratan, Pantokratora, theropoian
kai eremopoian, e misonta, oikian
efstathousan[1] calling upon "her that
dwelleth in the void place, the inane,
terrible, inexorable, maker of horror and
desolation, hater of the house that
prospereth," and devoting "the signified and
sealed, named and unnamed" to
destruction.

Then he turned to Balloch, and bade him
act. Three minutes later the surgeon gave a
curse, and blanched, as a scream, despite
herself, burst from the bitten lips of the

brave woman who lay upon the altar.

"Why couldn't you let me give an
anaesthetic?" he said angrily.

"What's wrong? Is it bad?"

"It's damned ugly. Curse it; not a thing
here that | need!"

But he needed nothing; he had done
more even than he guessed.

Mrs. Douglas, her face suddenly drawn
and white, lifted her head with infinite
effort towards her husband.

"I've always loved you," she whispered,
"and | love you now, as -- | -- die."

Her head dropped with a dull crack upon
the slab. No one can say if she heard the
reply of Douglas:

"You sow! you've bitched the whole
show!"

For she had uttered the supreme name
of Love, in love; and the spell dissolved
more swiftly than a dream. There was no
Hecate, no sorcerer even, for [275] the
moment; nothing but two murderers, and
the corpse of a martyr between them.

Douglas did not waste a single word of
abuse on Balloch.

"This is for you to clear up," he said,
with a simplicity that cut deeper than sneer
or snarl, and walked out of the cellar.

Balloch, left to himself, became
hysterical. In his act he recognized the first-
fruits of the divine possession; his offering
to the goddess had been stupendous indeed.
All his exaltation returned: now would
Hecate favour him above all men.

Well, he had but to take the body
upstairs. The old woman understood these
things; he would certify the death; there
would be no fuss made over a poor
prostitute. He would return at once to
London, and open up the negotiations with
"A.B." [276]

[1] The spelling isin Greek. Translations
courtesy of Mbabwa. Italics are mine...

"| call upon you who is in the empty Spirit,
someone, invisible, Almighty, who creates
Summer and desert, who hates a house that
is Stable."

CHAPTER XX

WALPURGIS-NIGHT

THE spring in Naples had advanced with
eager foot; in her gait she revealed the
truth of her godhead; and by the end of
April there was no wreath of snow on
Apennine, or Alban, or Apulian Hill.

The last day of the month was hot and
still as midsummer; the slopes of Posillippo
begged a breath from Ocean, and were
denied. So heavy a haze hung on the sea
that not only Capri, not only the blue spur
that stabs the sunset, but Vesuvius itself,
were hidden from the Villa where lliel and
her friends were nested.

Sunset was sombre and splendid; the
disc itself was but a vague intensity of angry
Indian red. His agony spilt a murky saffron
through the haze; and the edges of the
storm-clouds on the horizon, fantastically
Shapen, cast up a veritable mirage,
exaggerated and distorted images of their
own scarred crests, that shifted and
changed, so that one might have sworn that
monsters -- dragons, hippogriffs, chimaerae -
- were moving in the mist, a saturnalia of
phantasms.

lliel impatiently awaited the moment of
darkness, when she could meet the Old
Lady and start for the Sabbath. She had
noticed a long conference that day between

Sister Clara and the two men; and she was
sure that they were themselves arranging
for their departure. The suspicion was
confirmed when, one after the other, they
came to wish her a good night. [277] She
was more than ever determined to follow
them to the Sabbath.

By nine o'clock everything was still in
the garden, save for the tread of Brother
Onofrio's patrol, who paced the upper
terrace, chanting in the soft and low, yet
stern, tones of his well-modulated voice,
the exorcism that magical guardians have
sung for so many ages, with its refrain: "On
them will | impose my will, the Law of
Light."

lliel gave her little cough, and found
herself immediately upon the path she
Knew so well. It only took her a few minutes
to reach the rock, and there was the Old
Lady waiting for her.

"| must tell you at once, my dear," she
began without any preliminary, "that you
must be very careful to do exactly as | say --
in that country."

It was the same sing-song, with the one
change of word.

"First of all, you must never speak of
anything by its name -- in that country. So,
if you see a tree On a mountain, it will be
better to say 'Look at the green on the
high’; for that's how they talk -- in that
country. And whatever you do, you must
find a false reason for doing it -- in that
country. If you rob a man, you must Say it is

to help and protect him: that's the ethics --
of that country. And everything of value has
no value at all -- in that country. You must
be perfectly commonplace if you want to be
a genius -- in that country. And everything
you like you must pretend not to like; and
anything that is there you must pretend is
not there -- in that country. And you must
always say that you are sacrificing yourself
in the cause of religion, and morality, and
humanity, and liberty, and progress, when
you want to cheat your neighbour -- in that
country."

"Good heavens!" cried lliel, "are we
going to England?" [278]

"They call the place Stonehenge -- in
that country." And without another word
the Old Lady dragged lliel into the cleft of
the rock. It was very, very dark inside, and
she tripped over loose stones. Then the Old
Lady opened a little door, and she found
herself standing on a narrow window-ledge.
The door shut fast behind her, almost
pushing her out. Beyond the ledge was
nothing but the Abyss of Stars. She was
seized with an enormous vertigo. She would
have fallen into that cruel emptiness, but
the Old Lady's voice came: "What | said
outside was nonsense, just to put the
Gwalkins off the trail, my dear; there Is
only one rule, and that is to take things as
they come -- in this country."

She pushed Iliel deliberately from the
window-sill; with a scream she flew through
the blackness. But the chubby little old
clergyman explained to her that she must
go into the castle on the islet. It was only a

little way to walk over the ice of the lake,
but there was no sign of an entrance. The
castle was fitted cunningly to the
irregularities of the rock, so that one could
see nothing but the masonry; and there was
no trace of any door, and the windows were
all very high in the wall. But as Iliel came to
it she found herself inside, and she never
knew how she got there. It was easy to
scramble along the ladder to the golf
course, but the main deck of the galleon
was slippery with the oil that spurted from
its thousand fountains. However, she came
at last to the wardrobe where her hairbrush
was hanging, and she lost no time in digging
for the necessary skylarks. At last the way
was clear! The pine-woods on the left; the
ant-hills on the right; straight through the
surf to the heathery pagoda where the
chubby clergyman and the Old Lady had
already arrived, and were busy worshipping
the Chinese God.

Of course! It was Cyril, with Brother
Onofrio [279] and Sister Clara all the time --
how stupid she had been!

But for all that the toads were a
nuisance with their eternal chatter and
laughter; and they wore their jewels much
too conspicuously and profusely.

And then she perceived that Cyril and
his two companions formed but one
triangle, out of uncounted thousands; and
each triangle was at a knot upon the web of
an enormous spider. At each knot was such
a group of three, and every one was
different. There must have been millions of
such gods, each with its pair of

worshippers; every race and clime and
period was represented. There were the
gods of Mexico and of Peru, of Syria and
Babylon, of Greece and Rome, of obscure
swamps of Ethiopia, of deserts and
mountains. And upon each thread of the
web, from knot to knot, danced incredible
insects, and strange animals, and hideous
reptiles. They danced, sang, and whirled
frantically, so that the entire web was a
mere bewilderment of motion. Her head
swam dizzily. But she was now full of a
Curious anger; her thought was that the Old
Lady had betrayed her. She found it quite
impossible to approach the triangle, for one
thing: she was furious that it should be
Sister Clara herself who had led her into
this Sabbath, for another; and she was
infinitely disgusted at the whole vile revel.
Now she noticed that each pair of
worshippers had newborn children in their
arms; and they offered these to their god,
who threw them instantly towards the
centre of the web. Following up those cruel
meshes, she beheld the spider itself, with
its six legs. Its head and body formed one
black sphere, covered with moving eyes
that darted rays of darkness in every
direction, and mouths that sucked up its
prey without remorse or cessation, and cast
it out once more in the form of fresh
strands of that vibrating web. [280]

lliel shuddered with the horror of the
vision; it was to her a dread unspeakable,
yet she was hypnotized and helpless. She
felt in herself that one day she too must
become the prey of that most dire and
demoniac power of darkness.

As she gazed, she saw that even the
gods and their worshippers were morsels for
its mouths. Ever and anon she beheld one of
the legs crooked round a triangle and draw
it, god, shrine, and worshippers, into the
blackness of the spider's bloated belly. Then
they were thrown out violently again, in
some slightly altered form, to repeat the
Same uncanny ritual.

With a strong shudder she broke away
from that infernal contemplation. Where
was the kindly earth, with all its light and
beauty? In God's name, why had she left
Lavinia King to explore these dreadful
realms -- of illusion? of imagination? of
darker and deadlier reality than life? It
mattered little which; the one thing needful
was to turn again to humanity, to the
simple sensible life that she had always
lived. It was not noble, not wonderful; but
it was better than this nightmare of
phantoms, cruel and malignant and hideous,
this phantasmagoria of damnation.

She wrenched herself away; for a
moment she lost consciousness completely;
then she found herself in her bed at the
Villa. With feverish energy she sprang from
the couch, and ran to the wardrobe to put
on her travelling dress. It would be easy to
drop from the wall of the terrace into the
lane; in an hour she would be safe in
Naples. And then she discovered that the
dress would have to be altered before she
could wear it. With vehemence she set
instantly to work -- and just as she was
finishing, the door opened, and Sister Clara
stood beside her.

"Come, lliel," she said, “it is the moment
to salute May Morn!"

The indignant girl recoiled in anger and
disgust; [281] but Sister Clara stood smiling
gently and tenderly. Iliel looked at her,
almost despite herself; and she could not
but see the radiance of her whole being, a
physical aura of light playing about her, and
the fire of her eyes transcendent with
seraph happiness.

"They are waiting for us in the garden,"
she said, taking Iliel by the arm, like a
nurse with an invalid. And she drew over
her shoulders the great lunar mantle of blue
velvet with its broidered silver crescents,
its talismans of the moon, and its heavy
hanging tassels of seed pearls; and upon her
head she set the tiara of moon-stones.

"Come, they are waiting."

So Iliel suffered herself to be led once
more into the garden. In the east the first
rays of the sun gilded the crest of Posilippo,
and tinged the pale blue of the firmament
with rosy fingers. The whole company was
gathered together, an ordered phalanx, to
salute the Lord of Life and Light.

lliel could not join in that choir of
adoration. In her heart was blackness and
hate, and nausea in her mouth. What
vileness lay beneath this fair semblance!
Well, let it be; she would be gone.

Cyril came to her with Brother Onofrio,
as the last movement of their majestic
chant died away upon the echoing air. He

took her in his arms. "Come! | have much to
tell you." He led her to a marble seat, and
made her sit down. Brother Onofrio and
Sister Clara followed them, and sat upon
the base of a great statue, a copy of the
Marsyas and Olympas in green bronze, hard

by.

"Child!" said Cyril, very gravely and
gently, "look at the eastern slope of
Posilippo! And look at the stars, how
brightly they shine! And look at that shoal
of gleaming fish, that swim so deep beneath
the waters of the bay! And look at your left
ear! What shapeliness! What delicate pink!"
[282]

She was too angry even to tell him not
to be an idiot. She only smiled disdainfully.

He continued. "But those things are
there. You cannot see them because the
conditions are not right. But there are other
things that your eye sees indeed, but you,
not; because you have not been trained to
see them for what they are. See Capri in
the morning sun! How do you know it is an
island, not a dream, or a cloud, or a sea-
monster? Only by comparison with previous
knowledge and experience. You can only
see things that are already in your own
mind -- or things so like them that you can
adjust yourself to the small percentage of
difference. But you cannot observe or
apprehend things that are utterly unfamiliar
except by training and experience. How
does the alphabet look to you when you
first learn it? Don't you confuse the letters?
Arabic looks ‘fantastic’ to you, as the Roman
script does to the Arab; you can memorize

one at a glance, white you plod painfully
over the other, letter by letter, and
probably copy it wrong after all. That's
what happened to you last night. | know you
were there; and, knowing you were not an
initiate, | can guess pretty well what you
must have seen. You saw things ‘accurately,’
so far as you could see them; that is, you
Saw a projection into your own mind of
something really in being. How right such
vision can be, and yet how wrong! Watch
my hand!" He suddenly raised his right

hand. With the other he held a book
between it and her eyes.

"| cant see it!" she cried petulantly.
"Look at its shadow on the wall!"
"It's the head of the devil!"

"Yet | am only making the gesture of
benediction." He lowered the book. She
recognized at once the correctness of his
statement. [283]

She looked at him with open mouth and
eyes. He was always stupefying her by the
picturesqueness of his allegories, and his
trick of presenting them dramatically.

"What then?"

"This is what really happened last night --
only there's no such thing as time. This is
what you should have seen, and what you
will see one day, if you cling to the highest
In you."

He drew a note-book of white vellum

from his pocket, and began to read.

"The whirlwind of the Eagle and the
Lion!

The Tree upon the Mountain that is
Zion!

The marriage of the Starbeam and the
Clod!

The mystic Sabbath of the Saints of
God!

Bestride the Broomstick that is God-in-
man!

Spur the rough Goat whose secret
name is Pan!

Before that Rod Heaven knows itself
unj ust;

Beneath those hoofs the stars are
puffs of dust.

Rise up, my soul! One stride, and space
IS spanned;

Time, like a poppy, crushed in thy
left hand,

While with thy right thou reachest out to
grip

The Graal of God, and tilt it to thy

lip?

Lo! all the whirring shafts of Light, a
web

Wherein the Tides of Being flow and
ebb,

One heart-beat, pulsing the Eternal
stress,

Extremes that cancel out in
Nothingness.

Light thrills through Light, the spindle of
desire,

Cross upon Cross of elemental Fire;

Life circles Life, the Rose all flowers
above,

And in their intermarriage they are
Love.

Lo! on each spear of Splendour burns a
world

Revolving, whirling, crying aloud;
and curled

About each cosmos, bounding in its
course,

The sacred Snake, the father of its
force,

Energized, energizing, self-sustained,

Man-hearted, Eagle-pinioned, Lion-

maned,
Exulting in its splendour as it lashes

Its Phoenix plumage to immortal
ashes

Whereof one fleck, a seed of spirit spun,

Whirls itself onward, and creates a
SUN.

Light interfused with Light, a sparkling
spasm

Of rainbow radiance, spans the
cosmic chasm;

Light crystallized in Life, Life
coruscating

In Light, their mood of magick
consummating

The miracle of Love, and all the awe

Of Need made one with Liberty's
one law;

A fourfold flower of Godhead, leaf and
fruit

And seed and blossom of one
radiant root,

Resolving all the being of its bloom
Into the rapture of its own perfume.

Star-clustered dew each fibre of that

light

Wherein all being flashes to its
flight!

All things that live, a cohort and a choir,

Laugh with the leapings of that
fervid fire;

Motes in that sunlight, they are drunken
of

The wine of their own energy of
love.

Nothing so small, so base, so
incomplete,

But here goes dancing on diviner
feet;

And where Light crosses Light, all loves
combine

Behold the God, the worshippers,
the shrine,

Each comprehensive of its single soul

Yet each the centre and fountain of
the whole;

Each one made perfect in its passionate
part,

Each the circumference, and each
the heart!

Always the Three in One are interwoven,

Always the One in Three sublimely
cloven,

Their essence to the Central Spirit
hurled

And so flung forth, an uncorrupted
world,

By That which, comprehending in one
whole

The universal rapture of Its soul,
Abides beyond Its own illumination,

Withdrawn from Its imperishable
Station,

Upholding all, an arm whose falchion
flings

With every flash a new-fledged Soul
of Things;

Beholding all, with eyes whose flashes
flood

The veins of their own universe with
blood;

Absorbing all, each myriad mouth aflame
To utter the unutterable Name

That calls all souls, the greatest and the
least,

To the unimaginable marriage-

feast:

And, in the self-same sacrament, is
stirred

To recreate their essence with a
Word:

This All, this Sire and Lord of All, abides

Behind the unbounded torrent of Its
tides, [285]

In silence of all deed, or word, or
thought,

So that we name It not, or name It
Naught.

This is the Truth behind the lie called
God;

This blots the heavens, and indwells
the clod.

This is the centre of all soheres, the
flame

In men and stars, the Soul behind
the name,

The spring of Life, the axle of the
Wheel,

All-mover, yet the One Thing
immobile.

Adore It not, for It adoreth thee,

The shadow-shape of Its eternity.

Lift up thyself! be strong to burst thy
bars!

For lo! thy stature shall surpass the
stars. "

Cyril put away his book. "Language," said
he, "has been developed from its most
primitive sources by persons so passionately
concentrated upon the Ideal of selling
cheese without verbal infelicity that some
other points have necessarily been
neglected. One cannot put mystic
experience into words. One can at best
describe phenomena with a sort of cold and
wooden accuracy, or suggest ecstasy by
very vagueness. You know that line 'O windy
Star blown sideways up the sky!' It means
nothing, if you analyse it; but it gives the
idea of something, though one could never
say what. What you saw, my beloved lliel,
bears about the same ratio to what | have
Said as what | have said does to what Sister
Clara saw: or, rather, was. Moral: when
Sister turns we all turn. | have now
apologized, though inadequately, for
inflicting my bad verses upon you; which
will conclude the entertainment for this
morning. Brother Onofrio will now take up
the collection. He that giveth to the poor
lendeth to the Lord; details of rate of
interest and security on application to the
bartender. The liberal soul shall be made
fat; but | am Banting, as the hart banteth
after the water brooks. He that watereth
Shall be watered also himself: | will take a
cold shower before the plunge. The Mother's

Meeting will be held as usual at 8.30 on
Thursday [286] evening. Those who are not
yet Mothers, but who wish to become so,
kindly apply to me in the Vestry at the
conclusion of the service. Sister Clara,
please play the people out quickly!"

Cyril babbled out this nonsense in the
tones of the Sweet Young Thing type of
Curate; it was his way of restoring the
superficial atmosphere.

lliel took his arm, and went smiling to
breakfast; but her soul was yet ill at ease.
She asked him about the identification of
Sister Clara and her Old Lady.

"Yes," he said, "it was best to have her
on the watch outside -- on the Astral Plane --
to keep you from getting into too great
mischief. But you can never come to any
real harm so long as you keep your vow and
Stay inside the circle. That's the one
important point."

She was quite satisfied in her upper
conscious self, which was usually her better
self, because of its rationality, and its
advantage of surface training, which saved
her from obeying her impulses on every
occasion. She was glad, she was proud, of
her partnership with the adepts. Yet there
was a subconscious weakness in her which
hated them and envied them the more
because of their superiority to her. She
knew only too well that the price of their
attainment had been the suppression of just
such darknesses of animal instinct and
Savage superstition as were her chief
delight. The poet speaks of "the infinite

rage of fishes to have wings"; but when you
explain to the fish that it will have to give
up pumping water through its gills, it is apt
to compromise for a few million
generations; though the word may rankle if
you call it a flying-fish, when swimming-bird
is evidently a properer and politer name.

She was permanently annoyed with
Sister Clara; her motive for making
excursions on that path had [287] been to
get rid of the idea of Cyril and his magick;
and he had not even come himself to
welcome her, but set this woman to
disguise herself and spy upon her thoughts!
It was disgusting.

Cyril had certainly done his best to put
the matter in the proper light. He had even
told her a story. "A charming lady, wife of a
friend of Bowling's, whom her physical and
mental characteristics induce me to
introduce as Mrs. Dough-Nut, was once left
lorn in the desert island of Manhattan,
while her husband was on a spook-shikar
with Lord Antony in this very Naples, which
you see before you. (Slightly to the left,
child!) Mrs. Dough-nut was as virtuous as
American women sometimes are, when
denied opportunity to be otherwise; and the
poor lady was far from attractive. But in
the world of spirits, it appears, the same
Standards are not current as in Peacock
Alley or Times Square; and she was soon
supplied with a regular regiment of ‘spirit
lovers.' They told her what to do, and how
to do it; eating, drinking, reading, music,
whatever she did, all must be done under
Spirit control; and one day they told her
that they had a great and wonderful work

for her to do -- the regeneration of
humanity and so forth, | think it was;
anyhow, something perfectly dotty. She was
now quite without power to criticize her
actions by reason or good sense; the voice
of the 'Spirits' was for her the voice of God.
So they sent her to the Bank for money, and
to the Steamship office for a passage to
Europe; and when she got to Liverpool they
sent her to London, from London to Paris,
from Paris to Genoa. And when she came to
Genoa they told her which hotel to choose;
and then they sent her out to buy a revolver
and some cartridges; and then they told her
to cock it and put the muzzle to her
forehead; and then to pull the trigger. The
bullet made little impression on that [288]
armour-plate of solid bone; and she escaped
to tell her story. She had not even sense
enough to tell it different. But that, my
child, is why it is better to have a kind
friend to look after you when you start a
flirtation with the gay if treacherous
Lotharios of the Astral World."

"| hope you dont think I'm a woman like
that!"

"All women are like that."

She bit her lips; but her good sense
showed her that his main principle was
right. If she had only been able to stifle the
formless promptings which were so alluring
and so dangerous! But as she could not live
wholly on the heights of aspiration, so also
she could not live on the safe plains of
earth-life. The voices of the swamp and the
cavern called to her continuously.

And so the external reconciliation had
no deep root. For a few weeks she was
better and healthier in body and mind.
Then she slipped back into her sulks, and
went "fairy-tale-ing" as she called it, with a
very determined mind to be on guard
against the interference of Sister Clara. She
had begun to familiarize herself with the
laws of this other world, and could
distinguish symbols and their meanings to
some extent; she could even summon
certain forms, or banish them. And she set
a mighty bar between herself and Sister
Clara. She kept herself to the definite
creations of her own impulses, would not
let herself go except upon some such
chosen lines.

In her earth-life, too, she became more
obviously ill-tempered; and, as to a woman
of her type revenge only means one thing,
she amused the garrison exceedingly by
attempting flirtations. The rule of the
Profess-House happened to include the
virtue of chastity, which is an active and
positive thing, a passion, not that mere
colourless abstinence and stagnation which
passes In Puritan countries by that [289]
name, breeds more wickedness than all the
vice on the planet, and, at the best, is
Shared by clinkers.

She was clever enough to see in a few
hours that she was only making herself
utterly ridiculous; but this again did not
tend to improve her temper, as many
devout ladies, from Dido to Potiphar's wife,
have been at the pains to indicate to our
psychologists.

The situation grew daily more strained,
with now and then an explosion which
cleared the air for a while. The discipline of
the Profess-House prevented the trouble
from spreading; but Cyril Grey confided to
Brother Onofrio that he was angrier than
ever at the efficient way in which Edwin
Arthwait and his merry men had been put
out of business.

"I'd give my ears," said Cyril, "to see
Edwin, arm in arm with Lucifuge Rofocale,
coming up from the bay to destroy us all by
means of the Mysterious Amulet of Rabbi
Solomon, conferring health, wealth and
happiness, with bag complete; also lucky
moles and love-charms, price two eleven
three to regular subscribers to The Occult
Review."

But with J une a great and happy change
came over lliel. She became enthralled by
the prospect of the miracle that was so
soon to blossom on her breast. Her sulkiness
vanished; she was blithe and joyous from
the day's beginning to its end. She bore
fatigue and discomfort without a murmur.
She made friends with Sister Clara, and
talked to her for hours while she plied her
needle upon those necessary and now
delightful tasks of making tiny and dainty
settings for the expected jewel. She clean
forgot the irksomeness of her few
restrictions; she recovered all the gaiety
and buoyancy of youth; indeed, she had to
be cautioned in the mere physical matter of
activity. No longer did she indulge morbid
fancies, or take unwholesome pleasure in
the contemplation of evil ideas. She was at
home in her heaven of romance, [290] the

heroine of the most wonderful story in the
world. Her love for Cyril showed a tender
and more exalted phase; she became alive
to her dignity and responsibility. She
acquired also a sense of Nature which she
had never had before in all her life; she felt
a brotherhood with every leaf and flower of
the garden, told herself stories of the loves
of the fishermen whose sails dotted the
blue of the bay, wondered what romances
were dancing on the decks of the great
white liners that steamed in from America
to tour the Mediterranean, laughed with joy
over the antics of the children who played
on the slopes below the garden, and glowed
with the vigour of the sturdy peasants who
bore their baskets of fish, or flowers, or
their bundles of firewood, up or down the
lanes which her terraces overlooked. There
was one wrinkled fish- wife who was
perfectly delightful: old and worn with a
lifetime of toil, she was as cheerful as the
day was long; bowed down as she was by
her glittering burden, she never failed to
stop and wave a hand, and cry "God bless
you, pretty lady, and send you safe and
happy day!" with the frank warmth of the
Italian peasant.

The world was a fine place, after all,
and Cyril Grey was the dearest boy in it,
and herself the happiest woman. [291]

CHAPTER XxXI

OF THE RENEWAL OF THE GREAT ATTACK;
AND HOW IT FARED

DOUGLAS had been decidedly put out by
the death of his wife. After all, she had
been a sort of habit; a useful drudge, when
all was said. Besides, he missed, acutely,
the pleasures of torturing her. His suspicions
of the bona fides of Balloch were conjoined
with actual annoyance.

It was at this painful moment in his
career that Cremers came to the rescue. A
widowed friend of hers had left a daughter
in her charge: for Cremers had the great
gift of inspiring confidence. This daughter
was being educated in a convent in
Belgium. The old woman immediately
telegraphed for her, and presented her to
Douglas with the compliments of the
season. Nothing could have been more
timely or agreeable. She was a gentle
innocent child, as pretty and charming as he
had ever seen. It was a great point in the
game of the astute Cremers to have pleased
the sorcerer; and she began insensibly to
gain ascendancy over his spirit. He had at
first suspected her of being an emissary of
his colleague, "A.B." who might naturally
wish to destroy him. For the plan of the
sorcerer who wishes to be sole and supreme
is to destroy all rivals, enemies, and
companions; while the magician attains
Supremacy in Unity by constantly uniting

himself with others, and finding himself
equally in every element of existence. It is
the difference between hate and love. [292]
He had been careful to examine her
magically, and found no trace of "A.B." in
her "aura." On the contrary, he concluded
that her ambition was to supplant "A.B. ";
and that went well with his own ideas. But
first he must get her into his Fourteen, and
have a permanent hold over her.

She, on the other hand, appeared singly
desirous of making herself a treasure to
him. She knew the one torment that
gnawed continually at his liver, the hate of
Cyril Grey. And she proposed to herself to
win him wholly by offering that gentleman's
scalp. She sharpened her linguistic
tomahawk.

One fine day in April she tackled him
openly on the subject.

"Say, great one, you ‘n'l gotta have
another peek at that sperrit writing. Seems
t'me that was a fool's game down there."
She jerked her head towards the river. "And
| don't say but what you done right about
Balloch."

Douglas glanced at her sharply in his
most dangerous mood. How much did she
know of a certain recent manoeuvre? But
she went on quite placidly.

"Now, look ‘e here. We gotta get these
guys. An' we gotta get them where they
live. You been hitting at their strong point.
Now | tell you something. That girl she live
five years with Lavinia King, durn her! | see

that bright daughter of Terpsichore on'y five
minutes, but she didn't leave one moral
hangin' on me, no, sir. Now see here, big
chief, you been beatin' the water for them
fish, an’, natural, off they goes. For the
land's sake! Look ‘e here, | gotta look after
this business. An’ all | need is just one hook
an' line, an'a pailful o' bait, an' ef | don’
land her, never trus'me no more. Ain't |
somebody, all ways? Didn'! down ole
Blavatzsky? Sure | did. An’ ain't this like
eatin’ pie after that?" [293]

The sorcerer deliberated with himself a
while. Then he consulted his familiar
demons. The omens were confusing. He
thought that perhaps he had put his
question ambiguously, and tried again in
other words. He had begun by asking
vaguely "whether Cremers would succeed in
her mission," which had earned him a very
positive "yes," flanked by a quite
unintelligible message about "deception,"
"the false Dmitri" and "the wrong horse, "
also some apparent nonsense about
Scotland and an island. This time he asked
whether Cremers would succeed in luring
Lisa to her destruction. This time the
answer was more favourable, though
tremulous. But ever since his wife's death,
his demons had behaved very strangely.
They seemed the prey of hesitation and
even of fear. Such as it was, however, their
voice now jumped with his own convictions,
and he agreed to her proposal.

They spent the evening merrily in
torturing a cat by blinding it, and then
squirting sulphuric acid on it from a syringe;
and in the morning Cremers, with Abdul Bey

for bait, set out upon her journey to Naples.
Arrived in that favoured spot, she bade
Abdul Bey enjoy the scenery, and hold his
peace. She would warn him when the hour
struck. For Cremers was a highly practical
old person. She was not like St. J ames'
devils, who believe and tremble; she
disbelieved, but she trembled all the same.
She hated Truth, because the Truth sets
men free, and therefore makes them happy;
but she had too much sense to shut her eyes
to it; and though she doubted the causes of
magick, and scoffed at all spiritual theory,
she could not deny the effects. It was no
idle boast of hers that she had destroyed
Madame Blavatzsky. Together with another
woman, she had wormed her way into the
big-hearted Theosophist's confidence, and
betrayed her foully at the proper moment.
She [294] had tried the same game on
another adept; but, when he found her out,
and she knew it, he had merely continued
his kindnesses. The alternative before her
was repentance or brain fever; and she had
chosen the latter.

Her disbelief in magick had left her with
its correlate, a belief in death. It was the
one thing she feared, besides magick itself.
But she did not make the mistake of being
in a hurry, on that account. The strength of
her character was very great, in its own
way; and she possessed infinite reserves of
patience. She played the game with no
thought of the victory; and this is half the
secret of playing most games of importance.
To do right for its own sake is
Righteousness, though if you apply this
obvious truth to Art the Philistine calls you
names, and your morals in question.

Cremers was a genuine artist in malice.
She was not even glad when she had harmed
a friend and benefactor, however
irreparably; nothing could ever make her
glad -- but she was contented with herself
on such occasions. She felt a sort of sense
of duty done. She denied herself every
possible pleasure, she hated happiness in
the abstract in a genuinely Puritan spirit,
and she objected to eat a good dinner
herself as much as to consent that anyone
else should eat it. Her principal motive in
assisting Abdul Bey to his heart's desire was
the cynical confidence that Lisa was
capable of pouring him out a hell-broth at
least forty per cent above proof.

The summer was well begun. The sun
had turned toward the southern hemisphere
once more; he had entered the Sign of the
Lion, and with fierce and noble heat scarred
the dry slopes of Posilippo. Iliel soent most
of her time on the Terrace of the Moon at
her needlework, watching the ships as they
Sailed by, or the peasants at their labour or
their pastimes. [295]

It was a little before sunset on the first
of August. She was leaning over the wall of
the Terrace. Sister Clara had gone up to the
house to make ready for the adoration of
the setting of the sun. Up the uneven
flagstones of the lane below toiled the old
fishwife with her burden, and looked up
with the usual cheery greeting. At that
moment the crone slipped and fell. "I'm
afraid I've hurt my back," she cried, with an
adj uration to some saint. "I can't get up."

lliel, whether she understood the Italian

words fully or no, could not mistake the
nature of the accident. She did not
hesitate; in a moment she had lowered
herself from the wall. She bent down and
gave her hand to the old woman.

"Say," sald the woman in English, "that
boy's just crazy about you; and he's the
loveliest man on God's earth. Won't you say
one word to him?"

Lisa's }aw dropped in amazement.
"What? Who?" she stammered.

"Why, that perfectly sweet Turk, Abdul.
Sure, you know him, dearie!"

Cremers was watching Lisa's face; she
read the answer. She gave a low whistle,
and round the corner Abdul Bey came
running. He took Lisa in his arms, and
rained kisses passionately on her mouth.

She had no thought of resistance. The
situation entranced her. The captive
princess; the intrigue; the fairy prince;
every syllable was a poem.

"I've longed for you every hour for
months," she cried, between his kisses;
"why, oh why didn't you come for me
before?" She had no idea that she was not
telling the truth. The past was wiped clean
out of her mind by the swirl of the new
impulse; and once outside the enchanted
circle of the garden, her vow in tatters,
there was nothing to remind her.

"I'm -- here -- now. "The words burst,
like [296] explosions, from his lips. "Come.

I've got a yacht waiting."

"Take me -- oh, take me -- where you
will."

Cremers was on her feet, spry and
business-like. "We're best out of here," she
said. "Let's beat it!" Taking Lisa's arms, she
and Abdul hurried her down the steps which
led to the Shore-road.

Brother Onofrio's. patrol witnessed the
scene. He took no notice; it was not against
that contingency that he was armed. But at
the summons to the Adoration he reported
the event to his superior.

Brother Onofrio received the news in
silence, and proceeded to perform the
ceremony of the Salutation.

An hour later, aS supper ended, the
sound of the bell rang through the House.
The visitor was Simon Iff.

He found Cyril dressed in every-day
clothes, no more in his green robe. The boy
was smoking a cigar upon the Terrace where
he had read his poem on the day after
Walpurgis Night.

He did not rise to greet his master. "Tell
the Praetor that you have seen Caius Marius
a fugitive seated upon the ruins of
Carthage!" he exclaimed.

"Don't take it so hardly, boy!" cried the
old mystic. "The man who makes no
mistakes makes nothing. But it is my duty to
reprove you, and we had better get it over.

Your whole operation was badly conceived;
in one way or another it was bound to fail.
You select a woman with no moral strength -
- not even with that code of convention
which helps so many weak creatures
through their temptations. | foresaw from
the first that soon or late she would throw
up the Experiment."

"Your words touch me the more deeply
because | also foresaw it from the first."

"Yet you went on with it." [297]
"Oh no!" Cyril's eyes were half closed.

"What do you mean -- Oh, no!" cried the
other sharply. He knew his Cyril like a book.

"| never even began," murmured the boy,
dreamily.

"You will be polite to explain yourself."

Simon's lips took a certain grimness of
grip upon themselves.

"This telegram has consoled me in my
grief," said Cyril, taking with languid grace a
Slip of paper from his pocket. "It came last
week."

Simon Iff turned it towards the light.
"Horatil," he read. "A code word, | suppose.
But this is dated from lona, from the Holy
House where Himself is!" "Himself" was the
word used in the Order to designate its
Head.

"Yes," said Cyril, softly, "| was fortunate

enough to interest Himself in the
Experiment; so Sister Cybele has been
there, under the charge of the Mahathera
Phang!"

"You young devil!" It was the first time
that Simple Simon had been startled in forty
years. "So you arranged this little game to
draw the enemy's fire?"

"Naturally, the safety of Sister Cybele
was the first consideration."

"And 'Horatil'?"

"It's not a code word. | think it must be
Roman History."

"Three Boys!"
"Rather a lot, isn't it?"

"They'll be needed," said Simon grimly. "I
have been doing magick too."

"Do tell me."

"The Quest of the Golden Fleece, Cyril.
I've been sowing the Dragon's Teeth; you
remember? Armed men sprang to life, and
killed each other." [298]

"But | don't see any armed men."

"You will. Haven't you seen the papers?"

"| never see papers. I'm a poet, and | like

my lies the way mother used to make
them."

"Well, Europe's at war | have got your old
commission back for you, with an
appointment as Inteelligence Officer on the
Staf of General Cripps."

"It sounds like Anarchism. From each
according to his powers; to each according
to his needs, you know. By the way, what's
it about? Anything?"

"The people think it's about the violation
of solemn treaties, and the rights of the
little nations, and so on; the governments
think it's about commercial expansion; but |
who made it know that it is the baptism of
blood of the New Aeon. How could we
promulgate the Law of Liberty in a world
where Freedom has been strangled by
industrialism? Men have become such slaves
that they submit to laws which would have
made a revolution in any other country
since the world began; they have
registration cards harder to bear than iron
fetters; they allow their tyrants to bar them
from every pleasure that even their poverty
allows them. There is only one way to turn
the counter-j umper into a Curtius and the
factory girl into a Cornelia; and | have taken
it." "How did you work it?"

"It has been a long business, But as you
know. Sir Edward is a mystic. You saw that
article on fishing, | suppose?"

"Oh yes; | knew that. But | didn't know it
was more definite."

It was he did it. But he'll lose his place;
he's too fair-minded; and in a year they'll
clamour for fanatics. It's all right; they'll

butt each other's brains out; and then the
philosophers will come back, and build up a
nobler type of civilization." [299]

"| think you accused me recently of using
strong medicine."

"| was practising British hypocrisy on
you. | had to see the Prime Minister that
week. Excuse me if | answer a humourist
according to his humour. | want to show you
how necessary this step has been. Observe:
the bourgeois is the real criminal, always."

"I'm with you there."

"Look at the testimony of literature. In
the days of chivalry our sympathies go with
the Knight-errant, who redresses wrongs;
with the King, whose courage and wisdom
deliver his people from their enemies. But
when Kingship became tyranny, and
feudalism oppression, we took our heroes
from the rebels. Robin Hood, Hereward the
Wake, Bonnie Prince Charlie, Rob Roy; it
was always the Under Dog that appealed to
the artist. Then industrialism became
paramount, and we began -- in Byron's time -
- to sympathize with brigands and corsairs.
Presently these were wiped out, and to-day
or rather, the day before yesterday, we
were reduced to loving absolute scoundrels,
Arsene Lupin, Raffles, Stingaree, Fantomas,
and a hundred others, or the detectives who
(although on the side of society) were
equally occupied in making the police look
like fools. That is the whole charm of Pere
What's-his-name in Gaboriau, and Dupin,
and Sherlock Holmes. There has never been
a really sympathetic detectlve in fiction

who was on good terms with the police! And
you must remember that the artist always
represents the subconscious will of the
people. The literary hack who panders to
the bourgeois, and makes his heroes of
millionaires’ sons, has never yet created a
character, and never will. Well, when the
People love a burglar, and hate a judge,
there's something wrong with the j udges."

"But what are you doing here, in a world-
crisis?" [300]

"I'm over here to buy Italy. Bowling
bought Belgium, you know, some time back.
He was thick with Leopold, but the old man
had too much sense to deal. He knew he
would be the first to go smash when the war
came. But Albert pocketed the good red
gold without a second thought; that's partly
what the trouble is over. Germany found
out about it."

"And why buy Italy? To keep Austria
busy, | suppose? These Wops can hardly
hope to force the line, especially with the
Trentino Salient on the flank."

"That's the idea. It would have been
better and cheaper to buy Bulgaria. But
Grey wouldn't see it. There's the eternal
fear of Russia to remember. We're fighting
against both sides in the Balkans! And that
makes Russia half-hearted, and endangers
the whole Entente. But it doesn't matter so
long as enough people are killed. The
survivors must have elbow-room for their
souls, and the memory of heroic deeds in
the lives of them and theirs to weigh
against the everlasting pull of material

welfare. When those men come back from a
few years in the trenches, they'll make
short work of the pious person that informs
them of the wickedness of smoking, and
eating meat, and drinking beer, and being
out after eleven o'clock at night, and kissing
a girl, and reading novels, and playing
cards, and going to the theatre, and
whistling on the Sabbath!"

"| hope you're right. You're old, which
tends, | suppose, to make you optimistic. In
my young ears there always rings the
scream of terror of the slave when you offer
to strike off his fetters."

"All Europe will be scream and stench for
years to come. But the new generation will
fear neither poverty nor death. They will
fear weakness; they will fear dishonour."
[301]

"It is a great programme. Qui vivra verra.
Meanwhile, | suppose | report to General
Cripps. "

"You will meet him, running hard, |
expect, somewhere in France. It will be a
fluke if Paris is saved. As you know, it
always takes England three years to put her
boots on. If we had listened to the men who
knew -- like 'Bobs' -- and fixed up an army of
three millions, there could have been no
war -- at least, not in this particular tangle
of alliances. There would have been a Social
Revolution, more likely, an ignoble business
of greed against greed, which would have
left men viler and more enslaved than ever.
As it is, the masses on both sides think they
are fighting for ideals; only the

governments know what hypocrisy and sham
it is; so the ideals will win, both in defeat
and victory. Man! only three days ago
France was the France of Panama, and
Dreyfus, and Madame Humbert, and
Madame Steinheil, and Madame Caillaux;
and to-day she is already the France of
Roland and Henri Quatre and Danton and
Napoleon and Gambetta and J oan of Arc!"

"And England of the Boer wars, and the
lrish massacres, and the Marconi scandals,
and Tranby Croft?"

"Oh, give England time! She'll have to be
worse before she's better!"

"Talking of time, | must pack up if I'm to
catch the morning train for the Land of
Hope and Glory."

"The train service is disorganized. | came
from Toulon in a destroyer; she'll take you
back there. J ack Manners Is in command.
Report at Toulon to the O.C.! You'd better
start in half-an-hour, I'll see you safe on
board. My car's at the door. Here s your
commission!"

Cyril Grey thrust the document into his
pocket, and the two men went up into the
house.

An hour later they were aboard the
destroyer; [302] they shook hands in
silence. Simon Iff went down the gangway,
and Manners gave the word. As they raced
northward, they passed under the lee of
Abdul's yacht, where Lisa, up to the eyes in
champagne, was fondling her new lover.

Her little pig-like eyes sparkled through
their rolls of fat; her cheeks, the colour and
consistency of ripe Camembert cheese,
Sagged pendulous upon a many-chinned
neck which looked almost goitrous; and the
whole surmounted one of those figures dear
to engineers, because they afford endless
food for speculation as to the means of
support. The moon was now exercising her
full influence, totally unchecked and
unbalanced; and the woman's nature being
wholly of the body, with as little brain in
proportion as a rhinoceros, the effect was
seen mostly on the physical plane. Her mind
was a mere swamp of succulent luxury. So
she sat there and swayed and wallowed
over Abdul Bey. Cremers thought she looked
like a snow man just beginning to melt.

With a sardonic grin, the old woman
waved her hand, and went on deck. The
yacht was now well out in the open sea on
her way to Marseilles. Here Cremers was to
be landed, so that she might return to Paris
to report her success to Douglas, while the
lovers went on their honeymoon. The wind
blew fresh from the south-west, and
Cremers, who was a good sailor, came as
near as she ever could to joy as she felt the
yacht begin to roll, and pictured the tepid
ice-cream heroine of romance in the saloon.

Meanwhile, the destroyer, her nose
burrowing into the sea hike a ferret slipped
into a warren, drove passionately towards
Toulon. The keenness and ecstasy of Cyril's
face were so Intense that Manners rallied
him about it.

"| thought you were one of the all-men-

are- [303] brothers crowd," he said. " Yet
you're as keen as mustard to slay your
cousin-German. "

"Puns," replied Cyril, "are the torpedo-
boat destroyers of the navy wit. Consider
yourself crushed. Your matchless
intelligence has not misled you as to my
views. All men are brothers. As a magician,
| embrace, | caress, | slobber over the
cheeks of Bloody Bill. But fighting in the
army is not a magical ceremony. It is the
senseless, idiotic, performance of a
numskull, the act, in a word, of a
gentleman; and as, to my lasting shame, |
happened to be born in that class, | love to
do it. Be reasonable! It's no pleasure to me,
as an immortal God, to sneeze; | refuse to
render myself a laughing-stock to the other
Olympians by such indignity; but when my
body has a cold in its head, it is proper for
it to blow its nose. | do not approve, much
less participate; and my body is therefore
the more free to act according to its
nature, and it blows its nose much harder
than it would if | took a hand. That is the
advantage of being a magician; all one's
different parts are free to act with the
utmost possible vigour according to their
own natures, because the other parts do not
interfere with them. You don't let your
navigators into the stoke-hole, or your
stokers into the chart-house. The first art in
adeptship is to get your elements sorted out
and specialized and organized and
disciplined. Here endeth the first lesson. |
think I'll turn in."

"It's a bit beyond me, Cyril. All | know is
that I'm willing to risk my life in a good

Cause. "

"But it's a rotten bad cause! We have
isolated Germany and hemmed her in for
years exactly as we did a century ago with
Napoleon; Wilhelm, who wanted peace,
because he was getting fat on it, knew us
for his real enemy. In “ninety-nine he came
within [304] an ace of uniting Europe
against us, at the time of the Fashoda
incident. But we baffled him, and since
then he has been getting deeper in every
moment. He tried again over the Boer war.
He tried threats, he tried diplomacy, he
tried everything. The Balkan War and the
Agadir incident showed him his utter
helplessness. The kingdom of Albania! The
war In Tripoli proved that he could no
longer rely on Italy. And when Russia
resorted to so shameless an assassination as
that of Sarajevo -- my dear good man!
England has been a pirate as she always
was. From Hengist and Horsa, and the
Vikings, she first learnt the trick. William
the Conqueror was a pirate; so was Francis
Drake. Look at Morgan, whom we knighted,
and all the other buccaneers! Look at our
system of privateering! Ever hear of the
‘Alabama’? We learnt the secret of sea-
power; we can cut the alimentary canal of
any nation in Europe -- bar Switzerland and
Russia. Hence our fear of Russia! It's the
J olly Roger you should fly, | ack Manners!
We stood all Germany's expansion; we said
we were her cousins -- but when she,
started a Navy, that was another barrel of
fish!

"| don't think | can bear this, you know!"

"Cheer up! I'm one of the pirate crew!"
"Oh, you're Captain Kidd!"

"| have already stated my opinion as to
the conversational value of puns. I'm going
to turn in; you get busy, and find a neutral
ship to rob."

"| shall do my best to maintain the law of
the sea."

"Made by the pirate to suit his game.
Good God! | can't see why we shouldn't be
sensible. Why must we invoke Law and
Gospel every time we want to do a dirty
act? My character's strong enough to let me
kill all the Germans | can without
persuading myself that I'm saving them from
Prusian Tyranny! Good-night!"

"The youth is unintelligible or immoral,"
thought Manners, as he turned his face to
the spindrift; "but | bet he kills a lot of
Germans!" [305]

CHAPTER XxIl

OF A CERTAIN DAWN UPON OUR OLD FRIEND
THE BOULEVARD ARAGO; AND OF THE LOVES
OF LISA LA GIUFFRIA AND ABDUL BEY, HOW
THEY PROSPERED. OF THE CONCLUSION OF
THE FALSE ALARM OF THE GREAT
EXPERIMENT, AND OF A CONFERENCE
BETWEEN DOUGLASS AND HIS
SUBORDINATES.

LORD ANTONY BOWLING was one of
three men in the War Office who could
speak French perfectly; despite this
drawback, he had been selected to confer
with the French headquarters in Paris. Here
he met Cyril Grey, busy with his tailor. The
young magician had once held a captaincy in
a Hussar regiment, but a year of India had
developed his native love of strange places
and peoples. He had been tempted to resign
his commission, and yielded. He had gone
exploring in Central Asia, and the deadly
districts beyond Assam. He could not stand
gymkhanas, polo, and flirtation. Simon Iff
had given him a hint now and again of what
magick might effect if a war came, and the
boy had profited. He had formed provisional
plans.

He encountered Lord Antony by chance
one evening on the Boulevard des Italiens,
dined him, and on finding that all
amusements, even that of watching the
world from the terrace of a cafe, were to
end by order of the Military Governor of

Paris, at eight o'clock, suggested that they
should spend the evening smoking opium
"chez Zizi," a delightful girl who lived with a
brilliant young English journalist [307] on
the Boulevard M Marcel. At midnight,
serenely confident that God was in his
heaven, as asserted by the late Robert
Browning, they decided to finish the night
at Cyril's studio. Here the young magician
"reconstructed the crime" of the jumping
balls of the mysterious countess, and
recounted the episode of the Thing in the
Garden, to the delectation of the "Merman
of Mayfair." He then offered to amend
Bowling's coat of arms by the introduction
of twelve prawns couchant, gules, gartered
azure, and the substitution of Poltergeists
for the Wild Men of the ducal escutcheon.

Modestly disclaiming these heraldic
glories, Lord Antony regaled his host with an
ingenious account of a Swedish gentleman
who materialized the most voluminous
spectres from -- as subsequently appeared
in circumstances which can only be
qualified as dramatic -- the contents of a
steel cylinder measuring twelve inches in
length and three in diameter, which a
search of the medium, stripped to the buff,
had at first failed to disclose.

But neither was honestly interested in
his own remarks; the subconscious
excitement of the War made all
conversation on any other topic sound
miserably artificial. Bowling's story made
them both distrait; they fell into a heavy
silence, pondering methods of concealing
dispatches or detecting spies. Investigation
of spiritualism makes a capital training-

ground for secret service work; one soon
gets up to all the tricks.

Presently Cyril Grey began to preach
magick.

"Germany is on a pretty good wicket," he
Said. "She is at war; we have only taken a
holiday to go fighting. The first condition of
success In magick is purity of purpose. One
must let no other consideration interfere
with the business in hand. But we are
hypocrites in England; consequently, [308]
we compromise and fumble. When a
magician does get in charge of an affair, all
goes pretty well; look how Simple Simon has
isolated Germany! Even there he has been
thwarted by the Exchequer; five millions in
the right place would have bought the
Balkans. How much do you think that little
economy will cost us before we're through?
As for the foolishness of leaving Turkey
doubtful, it's beyond all words!"

"Yes," agreed Bowling "we ought to have
supported Abdul Hamid from the first. The
best kind of Englishman is blood brother to
the best kind of Mussulman. He is brave,
just, frank, manly and proud. We should
always be in alliance Islam against the
servile Hindus and so-called Christians.
Where is the spirit of the Paladins and the
Templars and the Knights of the Round
Table? The modern Christian is the
Bourgeois, whose character is based on fear
and falsehood."

"There are two kinds of animals, mainly:
one whose defence Is obscurity, shunning
death, avoidance of danger; the other

whose defence is attack."

"Yes; we're all right so long as we make
ourselves feared. But Victorian prudery
turned our tigers into oxen; we found that it
was wrong fight dangerous to drink beer,
wicked to love; presently it was cruel to eat
beef, immoral to laugh, fatal to breathe.
We went in terror of the omnipresent germ.
Hence we are fat, cowardly slaves. | hear
that Kitchener is hard put to it to get his
first 100,000 men. Only the public schools
respond. Only gentlemen and sportsmen
really love England -- the people that have
been cursed these last few years as tyrants
and libertines.

"Only the men."

"And few there are, in the crowd of
canaille, old women, slackers,
valetudinarians, eaters of nuts!" [309]

"God rest the soul of Edward Seventh! |
thought all would be well when Victoria
died; but now ---"

"This is no hour of the night to lapse into
poetry! Anyhow, Germany is nearly as bad,
with her Social Democratic Party. "

"Do you think that?" cried Cyril, sharply,
sitting up. His gesture was indecipherably
intense; it seemed utterly disproportionate
to Bowling's casual commonplace.

"| know it. It's one of the chief causes of
the war. The Zabern incident showed the
J unkers that they were safe only for a year
or two; after that the people would start

out to be too proud to fight," replied Lord
Antony, anticipating a transpontine
chameleon.

"And so?" Cyril's voice trembled. A tense
thrill ran through his body. He had become
sober in an instant.

"The Court Party wanted war, to bring
back the manly spirit to the nation, and
incidentally to keep their place in the sun."

The boy sank with a large sigh into his
seat. His tone changed to its old
supercilious slurring.

"Bloody Bill was afraid for his dynasty?"
"Scared green."

"Don't talk for five minutes, there's a
good chap! I've a strange feeling come over
me -- almost as if | were going to think!"

Lord Antony obliged with silence. The
five minutes became twenty. Then Cyril
spoke.

"| had better get to Cripps double quick,"
Said he; "I'm his Intelligence Officer, and |
think it my duty to inform him of the plans
of the German Great General Staff!"

"Yes, you should certainly do that!"
answered Lord Antony, laughing. [310]

"Then let's stroll up the Boulevard.
Dawn's breaking. We'll get a cafe-brioche at
the Rotonde, and then I'll tyrannize my
tailor, and get off."

They went out into the cold morning air.
Three hundred yards away, outside the
Sante prison, a small crowd had collected.
The centre of attraction seemed to be a
framework, two narrow uprights crowned
with a cross-bar where a triangular piece of
metal glittered in the pale twilight.

"Peace hath her victories no less
renowned than war!" drawled Cyril,
cynically. "Confess that | have entertained
you royally! Here is a choice savoury to wind
up our feast."

Lord Antony could not conceal his horror
and repulsion. For he knew well enough
what sight chance had prepared for them.
But the fascination drew him far more
surely than if his temperament had
resembled that of his friend. They
approached the crowd. A ring was kept
about the framework by a cordon of police.

J ust then the gates of the prison opened,
and a little procession came out. All eyes
were drawn instantly to its central figure,
an old, old man whose jaw was dropped,
and from whose throat issued a hoarse
howling, utterly monotonous and inhuman.
His eyes were starting from his head, and
their expression was one not to be
described. His arms were bound tightly to
his sides. Two men were half supporting
him, half pushing him. Save for his horrible
cry, there was no sound. There was no
movement in the crowd -- no whisper. Like
automata the officials did their duty. Ina
trice the prisoner was thrown forward on to
a board, thrust up toward the framework.
His caterwaul suddenly ceased. A moment

later a sharp order rang out in the voice of
one of the prison officials. The knife fell.
From the crowd burst a most dreadful sound
-- an "Ah!" so [311] low, so fierce, that it
had no human quality. Lord Antony Bowling
could never be sure whether it was after
that or before it that he heard the head
tumble into the basket.

"Who was it?" asked Cyril of a bystander.

"Un anglais," answered the man. "Le
docteur Balloch."

Cyril started back. He had not
recognized his old enemy.

But even at that moment he was
accosted by one whom he would never fail
to know, even dressed as he was in the
uniform of French colonel -- Douglas. On his
arm was a child whose eyes were blear
already with debauchery, who staggered,
her eyes rolling, her hair dishevelled, her
mouth loose and wet, laughing with
indecent and profane intoxication.

"Good morning, Captain Grey; well met,
well met indeed!" began Douglas, urbane in
his triumph.

"| trust you passed a pleasant time in
Naples. "

"Very pleasant," returned Grey.
"Dr. Balloch," continued Douglas,

"crossed my path. | am glad you should have
seen the end of him."

"lam glad," said Cyril.

"And what end do you think | have
reserved for you?" said the sorcerer, with
sudden foam of ferocity.

"Something charming, | am sure," said
Cyril, silkily. “I always admired your work,
you know. That translation of The Book of
the Sacred Magick of Abramelin the Mage, '
in particular. You remember the passage
about the wicked Antony of Prague," he
went on, with sudden force and solemnity,
"the marvellous things he did, and how he
prospered -- and how he was found by the
roadside, his tongue torn out, and the dogs
at feast upon his bowels! Do you know what
has saved you so far? Only one [312] bar
between you and destruction -- the love of
your wife, whom you have murdered!" With
that Cyril cried aloud three words ina
strange tongue, and giving the other no
chance to reply, marched rapidly away with
his friend.

Douglas could not have recovered, in any
case. He was as one stunned. How did this
boy know of the death of his wife? Well,
that might be understood; but how did he
know his most secret fear, the fact that
since the crime his demons had lost their
courage? He shook the feeling off, and
turned again to gloat over the death of
Balloch.

"Who was that?" asked Bowling.
"The Grand Panjandrum himself, with

the little round button on top! That's
Douglas!"

"The Black Lodge man?"
"Ex-man. "

"| see daylight. Balloch was condemned,
you know, for a crime done twenty years
ago. Douglas must have known about it and
betrayed him."

"That's the regular thing. "

"How does he come to be a colonel in
the French Army?"

"Don't know. He was close in with one or
two ministers; Becasseux, | think, in
particular. There's a lot of politics in
Occultism, as you know."

"I'll think that over. | might ask the
minister this morning. But | tell you it's no
time for trifles. Ever since all the
mobilization plans were scrapped by the
failure of Liege and Namur to hold out,
distraction has reigned supreme, no casual
mistress, but a wife, and procuress to the
Lords of Hell at that!"

"Do not quote Tennyson, even mixed,
under the shadow of the Lion de Belfort! As
to trifles, there are none in war. Ask the
Germans if you don't believe me." [313]

A little later, after the Rotonde Cafe’ in
the Boulevard Montparnasse had refreshed
them with its admirable coffee, and those
brioches which remind one of boyhood's
earliest kisses, they walked down to the
Place de la Concorde, and parted.

Cyril went on to the Opera, to his tailor
in the Rue de la Paix. His mind was full of
meditations upon the details of the great
idea that had come to him, the divination of
the enemy's objective. His suggestion had
made Lord Antony laugh. He himself had
never felt less like laughing; he was on fire
with creative genius -- and terrified lest his
work should fall upon barren soil. Well he
knew how hard it is to get Power to listen to
Reason!

At the corner of the Place de |'Opera he
lifted his eyes to assure himself of a free
crossing.

The mind of Abdul Bey was in turmoil.
His first night upon the yacht had been
mere wallowing in debauch; but he woke
with a clear head, acutely alive to the
complexity of his situation. He was
personally triumphant; there was nothing in
his private affairs to worry him. But in
charge, as he was, of the Turkish Secret
Service in Paris, he knew the political
situation well enough. He knew that Turkey
would throw in her lot with Germany,
sooner or later; and he was doubtful as to
the wisdom of returning to France. On the
other hand, duty called him with clarion
voice; and he wanted to have as many
fingers as possible in the pie. After much
consideration, he thought he would land at

Barcelona, and get through with his
American passport -- for he had papers from
most nations -- as a distracted millionaire.
His companions -- both American citizens --
would aid the illusion. Supposing that there
was already trouble or suspicion, this
subterfuge [314] would serve; once in Paris,
he could find out how the land lay, and act
accordingly.

He gave orders to the captain to make
for Catalonia. The voyage was uneventful,
save for the brief visit of a cruiser which
discovered nothing contraband; in fact,
Abdul and Lisa remained drunk the whole
time. Only, just off the Spanish coast, a
capful of wind once again interfered with
Lisa's enjoyment of the honeymoon. It had
another consequence, more serious. No
sooner had they landed at Barcelona, than
Lisa became suddenly and terribly ill. After
a week, the doctors decided upon a radical
remedy-operation. The next day a girl child
entered the world, very much alive, despite
the irregularity of her entrance. No ordinary
child, either. She was a beautifully made
baby, with deep blue eyes; and she was
born with four teeth, and with hair six
inches long, so fair as to be silvery white.
Like a tattoo-mark, just over the heart, was
a faint blue crescent.

Lisa recovered rapidly from her illness,
but not too quickly for the amorous Turk;
though he was surprised and annoyed to find
that she had recovered her early grace and
activity. The fat had gone from her in the
three weeks of illness; and when she began
to be able to move about, and drive in the
city, she looked once more almost as she

did on the night when Cyril first saw her, a
gay, buxom, vigorous woman. The change
cooled Abdul's ardour, and her own feelings
altered with it. Her lover's sloppiness began
to disgust her. As to the child, it was a
source of irritation to both of them.
Cremers, again, was hardly a boon
companion; she would have depressed a
hypochondriac going to the funeral of a
beloved uncle who had left him nothing.
Before Lisa had been out of bed three days,
a crisis arose; she felt instinctively that
Paris would be "no fun," and [315] wanted to
go to America. Abdul felt that he must lose
no time in getting to Paris. Cremers, for
some reason, had changed her mind about
reporting to Douglas; she was homesick for
West 186th Street, so she said. The
explosion came at lunch, the Spanish nurse
having failed to muffle the baby with due
adequacy.

"Oh hell!" said Abdul Bey.

"God knows, | don't want the little
beast!" said its proud mother.

"Look'e here!" remarked Cremers. "I do
want it. Sure some baby!"

"Oh hell!" repeated Abdul Bey.

"Look'e here! You gimme the rocks, an’
I'll take her across the pond. There's ships.
Gimme three thousand bucks and expenses,
and three thousand every year, and I'll fix
it. You folks get off and paint Paree pink. Is
it a go?"

Abdul Bey brightened immediately. Only

one thought chilled him. "What about
Douglas?" he said.

"I'll “tend to that."
"It's a good scheme," muttered Lisa.

"Let's get away to-night; I'm sick of this
hole." She caressed the Turk warmly.

But Paris was no longer the Paris of her
dreams, no longer the Paris of idleness and
luxury "where good Americans go when they
die"; it was a Paris of war, of stern
discipline, of patriotic enthusiasm, nothing
less than a nightmare for the compatriots of
the lady who didn't raise her boy to bea
soldier. She blamed Abdul, who shrugged his
shoulders, and reminded her that she was
lucky to get dinner at all, that the Germans
were likely to be in the city in a week or so.
She taunted him; he let loose his ancestral
feelings about women, those which lie deep-
buried in all of us who are at least not
utterly [316] degenerate in soul, however
loose morality may have corrupted us upon
the surface. She rose in the automobile,
just as they crossed the Place de I'Opera,
and broke her parasol over his head; then
turned her nails loose on his eyes. He fisted
her in the abdomen, and she collapsed into
the seat of the car with a scream. It was
this that diverted the attention of Cyril Grey
from his contemplation of the designs of
Germany.

The boy made a leap, and had Abdul by
the throat ina moment, dragging him out of
the car, and proceeding to administer
summary castigation with his boot. But the

police interfered; three men rode up with
drawn sabres, and put an end to the affair.
They arrested all parties, and Cyril Grey
only escaped by the exhibition of that paper
which had won him such respect months
earlier on the shambles of Moret railway
Station.

"| have to go to my tailor: service of the
minister," he remarked with a cynical smile;
and was dismissed with the profoundest
respect.

"After all, it was no business of mine," he
muttered as he wriggled into his new tunic,
to the immense admiration of the tailor, a
class whose appreciation of manly beauty
depends so largely upon the price of the
Suit. "Tis better to have loved and lost than
never to have loved at all. The trouble
comes when you can't lose “em. Poor old
Lisa! Poor old Abdul! Well, as| said, it's
none of my business. My business is to divine
the thoughts of the enemy, and -- oh Lord!
how long? -- to get the powers that be to
understand that | am right. Considering that
they needed eight million marching men to
persuade them that Bloody Bill meant war, |
fear that my task may be no sinecure."

He went to the barracks, where a
military automobile was waiting for him,
and told the chauffeur, with bitter wit, to
go out to meet General Cripps. [317] As to
Lisa and the Turk, it was twenty-four hours
before they were set at liberty. The sight of
Cyril, his prompt intervention in her
defence, relit the flames of her half crazy
passion. She rushed over to the studio to
see him; it was shut up, and the concierge

could give her no news. She drove wildly to
the Profess-House in Montmartre. There
they told her that he had gone to join the
British army. Various excited enquiries in
official quarters led her at last to Lord
Antony Bowling. He was genuinely
sympathetic: he had liked the girl at first
sight; but he could hold out no hopes of
arranging for her to see him.

"There's only one way for you to get to
the front," said he. "| oin the Red Cross. My
sister's here forming a section. I'll give you a
note to her, if you like."

Lisa jumped at the suggestion. She saw,
more vividly than if it were actual, the
obvious result. Cyril would be desperately
wounded, leading the last victorious charge
of the dragoons against the walls of Berlin;
she would interestingly nurse him back to
life, probably by means of transfusion of
blood; then, raised to the peerage, Marshal
Earl Grey of Cologne (where he had swum
the Rhine, and, tearing the keys of the city
from the trembling hands of the astonished
burgomaster, had flung them back across
the river to his hesitating comrades) would
lead her, with the Victoria Cross in gold and
diamonds on his manly bosom, to the altar
at St. Margaret's, Westminster.

It was worth while learning magick to
become clairvoyant like this! She dashed
off, still at top speed, to enroll herself with
Lady Marcia Bowling.

She gave no further thought to Abdul. He
would never have attracted her, had she not
perceived a difficulty in getting him.

As to that gentleman himself, if grief
tore at his [318] heart strings, he showed it
that night in an unusual way. It may have
been but simulation of philosophical
fortitude; there is no need to enquire. His
actions are of more interest: they consisted
of picking up a cocotte on the Boulevard des
Italiens, and taking her to dinner at the
Cafe de Paris. At the conclusion of a meal
which would have certainly been prescribed
as a grief-cure to any but a dyspeptic, the
maitre d'hotel approached their table, and
tendered, with a bow, an envelope. Abdul
opened it -- it was a summons from Douglas
to appear immediately in his presence at
the apartment in the Faubourg St. Germain.

The Turk had no choice but to comply.
He excused himself to his fair guest, at the
cost of a hundred-franc note, and drove
immediately to the rendezvous.

Douglas received him with extreme
heartiness.

"A thousand congratulations, dear young
man, upon your brilliant victory! You have
succeeded where older and more learned
men failed badly. | called you here to-night
to tell you that you are now eligible for a
place in the Fourteen, the Ghaagaael, for a
seat is vacant since this morning. "

"They executed Balloch?"
Douglas nodded with a gloating smile.
"But why did you not save him, master?"

"Save him! It was | that destroyed him

when he tried to betray me. Candidates
take notice!"

Abdul protested his loyalty and devotion.

"The supreme test," continued Douglas,
"cannot conveniently be imposed in time of
war. There is too much to do just now. But --
as a preliminary -- ?" how do you stand with
Germany?"

Abdul shrank back, startled out of his
presence of mind.

"Germany!" he stammered at last. "Why,
[319] Colonel," (he emphasized the title) "I
know nothing. | have no instructions from
my Government."He met the eye of his
master, and read its chill contempt. "l--er--
er--"

"Dare you play with me?"

The young man protested that no such
thought had crossed his mind.

"In that case," pursued the sorcerer, "you
won't know what that means?"

Douglas took from his pocket a fifty-
franc note. The Turk caught it up, his eyes
grown momentarily wider with surprise.

"Examine it!" said Douglas, coldly.

The Turkish agent held it to the light. In
the figures numbering the note were two

small pinpricks.

"Allah!" he cried. "Then you are ---"

"lam. You may as well know that my
colleague in the Lodge, 'A.B.', is going to stir
up trouble for the British in India. Her
influence with certain classes of Hindus is
very great. For your part, you may try
discreetly to tamper with the Mussulman
section of the French troops, the Africans.
But be careful -- there is more important
work to your hand, no less than the
destruction of the French armies in the
field. Now let us see what you can do. | am
going to send you to my little garden
hermitage, where | occasionally appear in
the character of a great ascetic; there is an
old lady there, devoted to me. Have your
best man there to play Yogi. In the garden --
here's the plan -- is the terminal of a wire.
There's another in that house where you got
baptized and married -- remember? Thence
there's a cable up Seine to another cottage
where that old Belgian mystic lives -- the
friend of Maeterlinck! ha! ha! He's really von
Walder, a Dresdener. And he is in charge of
another cable -- underground three hundred
[320] miles, thanks to Becasseux, who
helped us with the road squads, to a place
which by now Is firmly in the hands of the
Crown Prince. So all you have to do is to tell
your man to sit and pretend to meditate --
and tap. | shall send you plenty of
information from the front. You will know
my agents by a nick filed in a trouser-
button. Each message will have a number,
so that you will know if any go astray. All
clear?"

"Admirable. | need not say how proud |
am to find that we are on the same side. |
was very frightened of that uniform!"

"L'habit ne fait pas le moine," replied
Douglas gaily. "And now, sir, let us spend
the night discussing our plans in detail --
and some very excellent whisky which |
happen to have by me."

The spies pursued their double task, with
pitiless energy, till morning was well
broken. Later in the day Douglas left for
Soissons. He was attached to the French
army as chief of a corps of signallers --
thanks, once again, to the good offices of
Becasseux. His plans were perfect: they had
been cut and dried for over fifteen years.
[321]

CHAPTER Xxill

OF THE ARRIVAL OF A CHINESE GOD UPON
THE FIELD OF BATTLE; OF HIS SUCCESS WITH
HIS SUPERIORS AND OF A SIGHT WHICH HE
SAW UPON THE ROAD TO PARIS. ALSO OF
THAT WHICH THEREBY CAME UNTO HIM, AND
OF THE END OF ALL THOSE THINGS WHOSE
EVENT BEGAT A CERTAIN BEGINNING

UNMATCHED in history is the Retreat of
the British Army from Mons. It was caught
unprepared; it had to fight three weeks
before it was ready; it was outnumbered
three to one by a triumphant enemy; it was
not co-ordinated with the French armies,
and they failed to support it at critical
moments; yet it fought that aweful dogged
fight from house to house, and field to field,
through league on league of Northern
France. The line was forced to lengthen
constantly as the retreat continued; it was
attenuated by that and by its losses to
beyond any human breaking-point; but
luckily for England, her soldiers are made of
such metal that the thinner the wire is
drawn the tougher it becomes.

However, there is a point at which "open
order" is like the word "decolletee" used to
describe a smart American woman's dinner
dress; and General Cripps was feeling it at
the moment when his new Intelligence
Officer presented himself. It was about six
o'clock at night; Cripps and his staff were
bivouacked in the mairie of a small village.

They were contemplating a further retreat
that night.

"Sit down, Captain Grey," said the chief
kindly. [322] "J oin us at dinner -- just as
Soon as we can get these orders out -- listen
and you'll pick up the outlines -- we'll talk
after dinner -- on the road."

Cyril took a chair. To his delight, an aide-
de-camp, Lord J uventius Mellor, an
exquisite young dandy with a languid lisp,
who, in time of peace, had been pupil and
private secretary of Simon Iff, came to
greet him.

"|u, dear boy, help me out. I've got to
tell Cripps something, and he'll think I'm
mad. It's bluff, too; but it's true for all that --
and it's the one chance in the world."

"Right O!"
"Are we retreating again?"

"All through the night. There's not a dog's
chance to save Paris, and the line stretches
every hour."

"Don't worry about Paris -- it's as safe as
Bordeaux. Safer, because the Covernment is
at Bordeaux!"

"My poor friend, wouldn't you be better
in a home?"

The British Army had no illusions about
its situation. It was a thin, drab line of
heroes, very thin and very drab, but there
was no doubt about the heroism, and no

uncertainty about what would happen to it
if the Germans possessed a leader with
initiative. So far the hostile legions had
moved according to the rules, with all due
scientific precaution. A leader of
temperament and intuition might have
rushed that tenuous line. Still, science was
as sure as it was as slow -- and the whole
army knew it. They prepared to die as
expensively as possible, with simplicity of
manhood. They had not yet heard that Press
and Pulpit had made them the laughing-
stock of the world by the invention of the
ridiculous story of the "Angels of Mons."
[323] Lord J uventius Mellor was something
of a hero-worshipper. From Simon Iff he
would have taken any statement with
absolute respect, and Grey's remark had
been somewhat of the Simon Iff brand. It
was, therefore, almost as much an
impertinence as it was an absurdity. Paris
was as certain to fall as the sun to set. It
was in rotten bad taste to joke about it.

"Look here!" said Cyril, "I'm serious."

"All the worse!" retorted Mellor. "You
really would be better in a home."

"You wouldn't talk like that if we were
discussing magick."

"True."

"Then you are an ass. | am talking
magick. If you had only ears to hear!"

"How?"

"Everything's a magical phenomenon, in

the long run. But war's magick, from the
word jump. Come now therefore and let us
reason together, saith the Lord. | have done
a divination by the Tarot, by a method
which | cannot explain, for that it
pertaineth to a grade so much more exalted
than yours that you have never even heard
the name of it; and | know the plans of the
German General Staff in detail." Cyril's tone
transformed his asinine utterance into
something so Sybilline, Oracular, Delphic,
Cumaean, that his interlocutor almost
trembled. Verus incessu patuit Deus -- when
Cyril thought it necessary to impress the
uninitiate. To the majority of mankind gold
looks like dross unless it be wrapped up in
tinsel, and tenfold the proper price marked
on it in plain figures, with the word
"Sacrifice." Hence it is that the most
successful merchants omit the gold
altogether.

"Oh; | didn't understand. "

"You'll observe that | can't explain this to
[324] Cripps,; | shall have to spin some sort
of a yarn."

"Yes, yes."

In point of fact the "yarn" was already
spun; Cyril had not been divining by any
means more occult than his innate sagacity;
but Lord J uventius was one of those people
who bow only before the assumption of
authority supported by mystery and
tomfoolery, since their reason is
undeveloped. Such people make excellent
secondary figures in any campaign; for their
confidence in their leaders impresses the

outsider, who does not know how mentally
abject they are. It is said that no man isa
hero to his valet. On the contrary, every
man is a God to his secretary -- if not, he
had better get rid of the secretary!

Lord J uventius could not have followed
Cyril's very astute calculations -- those
which he meant to lay before General
Cripps; but he would have staked his life on
the accuracy of a Tarot divination so
obscure that he was not allowed even to
hear its nature, and which in fact had not
been performed. Indeed, it did not even
exist, having been invented on the spur of
the moment by the unscrupulous magician.

"| shall tell him that the military
situation is inextricably bound up with
political and dynastic considerations; | shall
drop a word about Anschauung and Welt-
politik; you know!"

Lord J uventius giggled adorably.

"By the way," continued Cyril "have you
any influence -- personal, | mean -- with the
old man?"

Lord J uventius bent forward with
lowered eyelids, and sank his voice toa
confidential whisper.

"The day we crossed," he murmured.

"Great. But | thought -- "

"Prehistoric. It's perfectly Cocker." [325]

Such conversations lack the merit of

intelligibility to the outsider; but then the
outsider is particularly to be kept from
understanding. Dialogues of this curious sort
determine most important events in English
society and "haute politique."

"Then see to it that | get taken
seriously."

"Surely, Kurille!"
"Precetur oculis mellitis!"
"Kurille, Catulle!"

When Englishmen return to the use of
the dead languages, it is a sign of that moral
State which is said by the Psalmist to
resemble the Holy Oil that flowed down
upon the head of Aaron, even unto the
Skirts of his garments.

The orderly called the Staff to dinner.
Cyril, as the guest of the evening, was on
the Commander-in-Chief's right hand.

"You have been very highly
recommended to me," said the old Cavalry
leader, when the time came to smoke, "and
| look to you to distinguish yourself
accordingly. You will be under the orders of
Colonel Mavor, of course; you should report
to him at once."

"May | give you some information direct?"
asked Cyril. "The matter hardly brooks
delay, as | see it: you should know it at
once, and -- to be frank -- | think this my
best chance of your ever hearing it."

"A damned funny beginning," growled the
general. "Well, get on!" The permission was
not very gracious; but an irregularity is a
serious thing in the British Army. General
Cripps made bad worse.

"Unofficially, mind, absolutely
unofficially," he added, before Cyril could
begin.

This is the English expedient for listening
to anything without hearing it, or saying
anything without meaning it. An official
conversation cannot [326] be thus sterile; it
involves notes, memoranda, dockets,
recommendations, reports, the appointment
of commissions, interminable deliberations,
more reports, questions in Parliament, the
introduction of bills, and so on. Nothing is
done in the end, exactly as in the case of an
unofficial conversation; so you can take
your choice, sir, and be damned to you!

"Unofficially, of course, General!" agreed
Cyril. "My object is merely to disclose the
plans of the German General Staff."

"Thank you, Captain Grey," replied the
great man, sarcastically;" this will indeed be
a service. To save time, begin from Von
Kluck's occupation of Paris, about four days
hence."

"Impossible, General! Von Kluck will
never capture Paris. Why, the man is
actually of plebeian origin!"

"After dinner -- but only then -- such
observations are in perfectly good taste.
Proceed!"

"| am not joking in the least, General.
Von Kluck will not be allowed to try to
capture Paris."

"It is at least curious that he is marching
Straight upon the city!"

"Only to thin out our line, sir. Do you
observe that the Germans have driven a
salient to St. Mihiel?"

"| have. What of it? "

"The object, sir, | submit, is to cut off
Verdun from the South."

"Yes?"

"Why Verdun? Because the Crown Prince
is at the head of the army which threatens
it. Paris will never be taken but by that
modern Caesar!"

"Something in that, | admit. The little
beast is certainly unpopular."

"They are bound to make him the
national hero, at any cost."

"And where do we come in?" [327]

"What could be clearer? Their right wing
will break through somewhere, or roll us up.
Verdun will be isolated. Der Kronprinz (God
bless his noble heart!) will walk through,
and goose-step all the way to Paris. It is the
only chance for the Hohenzollern dynasty. "

"It is military madness. "

"They think they have enough in hand to
risk it. But see, sir, for God's sake see the
conclusion! If I'm right, Von Kluck is bound
to swerve East, right across our front -- and
we'll smash him!"

"He couldn't risk such a crazy
manoeuvre."

"Mark my word, sir, he will."

"And what do you suggest that | should
do about it? Unofficially, Captain Grey,
quite unofficially!"

"Get ready to lam it in, sir -- quite
unofficially. "

"Well, sir, | congratulate you -- on having
talked the most amusing nonsense that I've
heard since my last talk with General Buller!
And now perhaps you had better report to
Colonel Mavor as Intelligence Officer." The
general's tone was contemptuous. "Facts are
required in this army."

"Psychological facts are facts, General."

"Nonsense, sir; you are not in a debating
society or at a scientific tea-party."

"That last, sir," replied Cyril coldly "is my
unavailing regret."

But Lord J uventius Mellor frustrated the
effect of this impolitic speech. He fixed his
languid eyes upon the red face of the
veteran, and his voice came in a soft
caressing whisper.

"Pardon me; do let us be unofficial for
five minutes more!"

"Well, boy?"

"| think it's only fair to let General Foch
enjoy the joke. | hear he has been
depressed lately."

"He might not take it so easily. The
French do [328] not care to be played with
when their country is at stake."

"He can only shoot poor Cyril, mon vieux!
J ust give him two days leave, so that he can
run over before reporting to Mavor."

"Oh well, | dare say the Intelligence
Department can get on without its champion
guesser for a day or so. Trot along, Grey;
but for your own sake | advise you to think
up a fact or two."

Cyril saluted, and took his leave.
J uventius came to see him into the car. "I'll
wheedle the old ass," he whispered to his
friend, "I'll get him to make such
dispositions as he can without disturbing the
line too much; so that if Foch should see
any sense in your scheme, by any chance,
we shan't be too backward in coming
forward."

"Good for you. So long!"
"Ta. ll
Cyril drove off. It was a terrible and

ominous journey to the headquarters of
General Foch. The line sagged hideously

here and there so that long detours were
necessary. The roads were encumbered not
only with every kind of military supply, all
in disorder, but with fugitive soldiers and
civilians, some burdened with their
household goods, some wounded, a long
trail of agony lumbering to the rear. The
country was already patrolled by herds of
masterless and savage dogs, reverted, ina
month of war, to the type of the coyote and
the dingo. But Cyril shouted in his joy. His
confidence rose as he went; he had thought
out one of General Cripps's "facts" which he
felt sure would carry conviction to the mind
of the French commander.

Arrived at the chateau where the
general was quartered, he found no trouble
in gaining audience. The Frenchman,
splendidly built, his eyes glittering with
restless intelligence, concentrated all his
faculties [329] instantly on his visitor. "You
have come from General Cripps?"

"Yes, my General, but on my own
responsibility. | have an idea ---"

Foch interrupted him.

"But you are in an English uniform!" he
could not help saying with brisk Gallic
surprise.

"Cuchullus non facit monachum, "
retorted Cyril Grey. "l am half Scotch, half
Irish."

"Then pray give yourself the trouble to
continue."

"| may premise that | have told my idea
to General Cripps. It convinced him that |
am an imbecile or a joker."

That was his "fact," his master-argument.
It told heavily. The face of Foch grew
instantly keen and eager with all
expectation.

"Let me hear it!" The General reached
for a memorandum.

Grey laughed. In a few words he
repeated his theory of the German plans.

"But it is certain!" cried Foch. "One
moment; excuse me; | must telephone."

He left the room. In five minutes he was
back.

"Rest easy, Captain Grey," he said, "we
Shall be ready to catch Von Kluck as he
turns. Now, will you do me the pleasure to
take this note back to your chief? The
British must be ready to strike at the same
moment. | won't ask you to stay; but -- | beg
of you to come to dine with me after the
victory."

It is impossible to give any idea of how
the word "victoire" sounds in the mouth of a
French soldier. It has in it the ring of a
sword thrust home to the hilt, and the cry
of a lover as he seizes his mistress, and the
exultation of a martyr who in the moment
of his murder reaches conclusively to God.

Cyril went back to the British
Headquarters, and [330] handed in General

Foch's request, through Colonel Mavor,
officially.

The events of the next week are of the
very spine of history. The cruel blow was
definitely parried. More still, that first great
victory not only saved France for all time,
but showed that the men of Bonaparte had
come into their own moral sublimity again.
It proved 1870 to have been but a transient
weakness like our own year of shame when
Van Tromp swept our ships from the seas.

General Cripps summoned Cyril Grey to
his quarters.

"I'm afraid," said the old man, "that
nothing can be done to recognize your
services. That your crazy theory should have
proved correct is only one more example --
we have many such every day -- of the
operation of the laws of Chance. The
weather forecasters themselves cannot
guess wrong every time. But even if your act
had merited reward, we should still have
been powerless; for, as you remember, our
conversation was strictly unofficial.

"Unofficially, however, you get your step
and the K.C.B. Favouritism, sir, rank
favouritism! Now go across to General Foch,
Major -- he wishes to present you to two
gentlemen named respectively | offre and
Poincar'e. Boot and saddle! No time to
waste," he said hastily, to check any
expression of gratitude. But as the two men
gripped hands, their eyes were dim -- they
were thinking of England.

So off went Cyril on the road to Paris,

where his rendezvous was fixed.

The victory had changed the aspect of
the country in the rear of the armies as by
stage-craft. There were no more fugitives,
no more disorder. Still the long trains of
wounded clogged the roads, here and there,
but the infection of glory had spread like
sunlight over a sky swept clear of storm.
The supply [331] trains radiated confidence.
Always the young man met new guns, new
wagons, new horses. At every turn of the
road were fresh regiments, gaily singing on
their way to the front. Cyril was enchanted
at the aspect of the troops. Their elasticity
and high spirits were overwhelming. Once
he came upon a regiment of Turcos being
transferred to another sector -- every man
of them with a trophy of the great battle.
His intense love for all savage men, true
men unspoilt by civilization, almost
mastered him: he wanted to embrace them.
He saw life assurgent, the menace of the
enemy thwarted, and his joy flooded his
heart so that his throat caught fire, and
song leaped to his lips.

And then chill caught him as he came
suddenly upon a dreadful sight.

Before him on the road stood a sign-post,
the lance of a Spahi, thrust into the bank of
a ditch; nailed to it was a placard on which
was Coarsely chalked the one word ESPION.
A fatal curiosity drew him to the spot; as he
approached, the wild dogs that were
fighting around the sinister signal fled in
terror from their ghastly meal.

A sword had been thrust through the

belly of the corpse; the tongue had been
torn out. One could recognize at a glance
the work of Algerian troops -- men who had
lost a third of their effectives through the
treacheries of the German spies. But,
despite all mutilation, he recognized more
than that: he recognized the carcass. This
carrion had once been Douglas.

Cyril Grey did a strange thing, a thing he
had not done for many years: he broke into
a strong sobbing.

"| Know now," he murmured, "that Simon
Iff is right. The Way of the Tao! | must
follow that harder path, the Path where he
who would advance draws back." [332]

He put spurs to his horse; half-an-hour
later he saw the sunset glint upon the Eiffel
Tower, and on the wings of one of those
gallant birds that circled about it to keep
watch and ward on Paris.

The next morning he reported himself to
the British authorities; and it was Lord
Antony Bowling who presented him to the
President and Commander-in-Chief.

At the banquet he found himself an
Officer of the Legion of Honour; but his
brilliancy and buoyancy were gone. He
dined in dull decorum. His thoughts still
turned to the shameful corpse in the ditch
by the wayside. He excused himself early,
and left the Elysee. At the gate stood an
automobile. In it sat Lisa la Giuffria. She
jumped out and caught him by the
Shoulders. She poured out the tale of her
madness, and its result, and its cure, her

careful tracking of his movements, her
determination to recover him at any cost.
He listened in silence -- the silence of
incurable sadness. He shook his head.

"Have you no word for me?" she cried
impetuously, torn by her agony.

"Have you no gift for me?" he answered.

She understood. "Oh, you are human!
you are human!" she cried.

"| do not know what | am," he answered.
"Yesterday | saw the end of the game -- for
one!"

He told her in a few words of the horror
on the roadside.

"Go!" he said, "take that girl, Douglas's
last victim, for your maid. Go to America;
find the Child of the Moon. There may, or
there may not be, other tasks for us to do; |
know not -- time will show."

"| will, | will," she cried, "I will go now,
quickly. Kiss me first!"

Once again the tears gathered in the
magician's [333] eyes; he understood, more
deeply than he had ever done, the Sorrow of
the Universe. He saw how utterly
incompatible are all our human ideals with
the Laws of Life. He took her slowly and
gently in his arms; and he kissed her. But
Lisa did not respond; she understood that
this was not the man whom she had loved:
this was a man that she had never known,
one whom she dared not love. A man set

apart, an idea to adore! She knew herself
unworthy, and she withdrew herself.

"| go," she said, "to seek the Child. Hail
and farewell!"

"Hail and farewell!"

The girl mounted unsteadily into her car.
Cyril Grey, his head bowed upon his breast,
plunged into the wooded pleasaunce of the
Champs Elysees.

An ineffable weariness came upon him as
he walked. He wondered dully if he were
going to be ill. He came up against the
Obelisk in the Place de la Concorde with a
shock of surprise. He had not noticed that
he had left the trees. The Obelisk decided
him; its shape smote into his soul the
meaning of the Mysteries of Egyptian
Magick. It was as invigorating as a cold
plunge. He strode away towards
Montmartre.

The Profess-House of the Order had been
converted into a hospital. But who should
come to greet him if not Sister Cybele?

Beside her stood the severe figure of
Simon Iff. There were two others in the
background. Cyril was not surprised to see
his old master, the Mahathera Phang; but
the other? It was Abdul Bey.

"Come forward and shake hands," cried
Simon Iff. "| have not been inactive, Cyril,"
added the old man. "I have had my eye on
our young friend for a long time. | put my
hand on him at the right moment. | showed

him that spying was a dog's [334] game, with
a dog's death at the end of it. He has
renounced his errors, and he is now a
Probationer of our Holy Order."

The young men greeted each other, the
Turk stammering out an appeal for pardon,
the other laughing off his embarrassment.

"But you are ill, Cyril!" cried Sister
Cybele. And in truth the boy could hardly
stand.

"Action and reaction are equal and
opposite," explained Simon Iff, cheerily.
"You will sleep, Brother Cyril, and you will
then pass seven days in meditation, in one
of the high trances. | will see to the
extension of your leave."

"There is a meditation," said Cyril firmly,
"given by the Buddha, a meditation upon a
corpse torn by wild beasts. | will take that."

Simon Iff acquiesced without
comprehending. He did not know that Cyril
Grey had understood that the corpse of
Douglas was his own; that the perception of
the identity of himself with all other living
things had come to him, and raised him to a
great Adeptship.

But there was one to comprehend the
nature of that initiation. As Cyril walked,
leaning on the arm of Sister

Cybele, to the room appointed for his
prescribed solitude, he beheld a great light.
It shone serenely from the eyes of the
Mahathera Phang.
