Book 4, Part I: Mysticism (Aleister Crowley (with Mary D'Este Sturges), 1912; public domain)
===============================================================================
Part I of Crowley's great magical textbook — the systematic A.'.A.'. manual of mysticism, from asana to samadhi. Source: Internet Archive.

THERE are seven Keys to the great gate,

Being eight in one and one in eight.

First, let the body of thee be still,

Bound by the cerements of will,

Corpse- rigid; thus thou mayst abort

T he fidget- babes that tease the thought.

N ext, let the breath- rhythm be low,

Easy, regular, and Sow;

So that thy being bein tune

W ith the great sea’s Pacific swoon.

Third, let thy life be pure and calm,

Swayed softly asa windless palm.

Fourth, let the will-to-live be bound

To the one love of the profound.

Fifth, let the thought, divinely free

From sense, observe its entity.

W atch every thought that springs; enhance

H our after hour thy vigilance!

Intense and keen, turned inward, miss

N o atom of analysis!

Sixth, on one thought securely pinned

Still every whisper of the wind!

So like a flame straight and unstirred

Burn up thy being in one word!

N ext, still that ecstasy, prolong

T hy meditation steep and strong,

Slaying even God, should H e distract

T hy attention from the chosen act!

Last, all these things in one o’erpowered,

Time that the midnight blossom flowered!

The oneness is. Y et even in this,

My son, thou shall not do amiss

If thou restrain the expression, shoot

T hy glance to rapture’s darkling root,

Discarding name, form, sight, and stress

Even of this high conscioumess;

Pierce to the heart! | leave thee here:

Thou art the M aster. | revere

T hy radiance that rolls afar,

O Brother of the Silver Star!
CROWLEY “AHA!”

Book Four

by Frater Perdurabo and Soror V irakam

PART Il

MAGICK

PRELIMINARY REMARKS

Issued by order of
theGREAT WHITE
BROTHERHOOD
known as the A.’.A.’.

W itness our Seal,
eee
Praemonstrator-G eneral.

ALEISTER CROWLEY

THE MAGICIAN

IN HIS ROBE AND CROWN, ARMED WITH WAND, CUP, SWOKD,
PANTACLE, BELL, BOOK, AND HOLY OIL.

CEREMONIAL MAGICK,

footnote: T heold spellingM AGIC K hasbeen adopted throughout in order to distinguish the Saenceof theM agi
from all its counterfeits.

THE TRAINING FOR MEDITATION
PRELIMINARY REMARKS

HITHERTO wehave spoken only of the mystic path; and we have kept particularly to the practical exoteric
gde of it. Such difficulties as we have mentioned have been purely natural obstacles. For example, the great
question of the surrender of the self, which bulksso largely in most mystical treatises, has not been referred to
at all. W e have said only what aman must do; we have not considered at all what that doing may involve. The
rebellion of the will against the terrible discipline of meditation has not been discussed; one may now devote
afew wordsto it.

There is no limit to what theologians call “wickedness.” O nly by experience can the student discover the
ingenuity of the mind in trying to escape from control. H eis perfectly safe so long ashe sticksto meditation,
doing no moreand no lessthan that which we have prescribed; but the mind will probably not let him remain
in that simplicity. T his fact is the root of all the legends about the “Saint” being tempted by the ‘“Devil.”
Consider the parable of Christ in the Wilderness, where he is tempted to use his magical power, to do
anything but the thing that should be done. T hese attacks on the will are as bad asthe thoughts which intrude
upon Dharana. It would almost seem as if one could not succesfully practice meditation until the will had
become so strong that no force in the U niverse could either bend or break it. Before concentrating the lower
principle, the mind, one must concentrate the higher principle, the W ill. Failure to understand thishas destroyed
the value of all attempts to teach “Y oga,” “M enticulture,” “N ew Thought,” and the like.

T here are methods of training the will, by which it is easy to check one’s progress.

Every one knows the force of habit. Every one knows that if you keep on acting in a particular way, that
action becomes easier, and at last absolutely natural.

All religions have devised practices for this purpose. If you keep on praying with your lipslong enough, you
will one day find yourself praying in your heart.

T he whole question hasbeen threshed out and organized by wise men of old; they have made a Science of Life
complete and perfect; and they have given to it the name of MAGICK. It isthe chief secret of the Ancients,
and if the keys have never been actually lost, they have certainly been little used.

footnote: T he holders of those keys have always kept very quiet about it. T his has been espedally necessary in
Europe, because of the dominance of persecuting churches.

Again, the confuson of thought caused by the ignorance of the people who did not understand it has discredited
the whole subject. It isnow our task to re-establish this science in its perfection.

To do thiswe must criticize the Authorities, some of them have made it too complex, othershave completely
failed in such Smple matters as coherence. M any of the writers are empirics, still more mere scribes, while by
far the largest class of all is composed of stupid charlatans.

We shall consider a ample form of magick, harmonized from many systems old and new, describing the
various weapons of the M agician and the furniture of his temple. We shall explain to what each really
corresponds, and discuss the construction and the use of everything.

The M agician worksin aT emple the U niverse, which is (be it remembered!) conterminous with himself.
footnote: By “yourself” you mean the contents of your consaousness. A II without does not exist for you.

In this temple a C irde is drawn upon the floor for the limitation of his working. This circle is protected by
divine names, the influenceson which he reliesto keep out hostile thoughts. W ithin the circle stands an A Itar,
the solid bass on which he works, the foundation of all. Upon the Altar are his W and, C up, Sword, and
Pantade, to represent his Will, hisU nderstanding, his R eason, and the lower parts of his being, respectively.
On the Altar, too, isaphial of 0 il, surrounded by aScourge, aD agger, and aC hain, while above the Altar hangs
aLamp. The M agician wears aC rown, asingle R obe, and aLamen, and he bears a Book of C onjurationsand a
Bell.

T he oil consecrates everything that istouched with it; itishis aspiration; all acts performed in accordance with
that are holy. T he scourge tortures him; the dagger wounds him; the chain binds him. It is by virtue of these
three that his aspiration remains pure, and is able to consecrate all other things. H e wearsacrown to affirm his
lordship, his divinity; a robe to symbolize silence, and a lamen to declare his work. The book of spells or
conjurations is his magical record, his Karma. In the East isthe M agick Fire, in which all burns up at last.

footnote: H e needs nothing else but the apparatus here described for invocation, by which he alls down that which
is above him and within him; but for evocations, by which he alls forth that which is below him and without him,
he may place a triangle without the arde.

We will now consder each of these mattersin detail.

CHAPTER |
THE TEMPLE

THE Temple represents the external U niverse. The M agician must take it as he finds it, so that it is of no
particular shape; yet we find written, Liber VII, vi, 2: “We made usaT emple of stones in the shape of the
U niverse, even as thou didst wear openly and | concealed.” T his shape is the V esica Piscis; but it isonly the
greatest of the M agicians who can thus fashion the T emple. T here may, however, be some choice of rooms,
this refers to the power of the M agician to reincarnate in a suitable body.

THE CURE LE

CHAPTER Il
THE CIRCLE

THE Circle announces the N ature of the Great W ork.

T hough the M agician hasbeen limited in hischoice of room, he ismore or less able to choose what part of the
room he will work in. He will consider convenience and possbility. His circle should not be too small and
cramp his movements; it should not be so large that he has long distances to traverse. O nce the circle is made
and consecrated, the M agician must not leave it, or even lean outside, lest he be destroyed by the hostile
forces that are without.

H e chooses a circle rather than any other lineal figure for many reasons; €.g.,
1. He affirms thereby hisidentity with the infinite.

2. He affirms the equal balance of his working; since all points on the circumference are equidistant from the
centre.

3. H eaffirmsthe limitation implied by hisdevotion to the Great W ork. H eno longer wanders about aimlessly
in the world.

T he centre of thiscircle isthe centre of the T au of ten squareswhich isin the mids, asshown in the illustration.
The T au and the circle together make one form of the R osy Cross, the uniting of subject and object which is
the Great W ork, and which issymbolized sometimes as this cross and circle, sometimes as the Lingam-Y oni,
sometimesasthe Ankh or Crux Ansata, sometimesby the Spire and N ave of achurch or temple, and sometimes
as a marriage feast, mystic marriage, spiritual marriage, “chymical nuptials” and in a hundred other ways.
W hatever the form chosen, it isthe symbol of the Great W ork.

This place of his working therefore declares the nature and object of the W ork. T hose persons who have
supposed that the use of these symbols implied worship of the generative organs, merely attributed to the
sages of every time and country minds of a calibre equal to their own.

The T au iscomposed of ten squares for the ten Sephiroth.

footnote: T heT en Sephiroth are theT en U nits. In one system of dassification (see “777” ) these are so arranged,
and various ideas are so attributed to them, that they have been made to mean anything. T he more you Know, the
more these numbers mean to you.

About this T au is escribed a triangle, which is inscribed in the great Circle; but of the triangle nothing is
actually marked but the three corners, the areas defined by the cutting of the lines bounding thistriangle. T his
triangle is only vidble in the parts which are common to two of the sides; they have therefore the shape of the
diamond, one form of the Y oni. The significance of this is too complex for our smple treatise; it may be
studied in Crowley’s “Berashith.”

T he gze of the whole figure is determined by the size of one square of the T au. And the ge of this square is
that of the base of the Altar, which is placed upon M aukuth. It will follow then that, in spite of the apparent
freedom of the M agician to do anything he likes, he isreally determined absolutely; for asthe Altar must have
a base proportionate to its height, and as that height must be convenient for the M agician, the size of the
whole will depend upon hisown stature. It is easy to draw amoral lesson from these considerations. W e will

merely indicate this one, that the scope of any man’s work depends upon his own original genius. Even the
gze of the weapons must be determined by necessary proportion. T he exceptions to this rule are the Lamp,
which hangsfrom the roof, above the centre of the Circle, above the square of Tiphereth; and the O il, whose
phial isso small that it will suit any altar.

On the Circle are inscribed the N amesof God; the Circle isof green, and the namesare in flaming vermilion,
of the same colour as the T au. W ithout the Circle are nine pentagrams equidistant,

footnote: Some magidans prefer seven lamps, for the seven Spirits of G od that are before the T hrone. E ach stands
in aheptagram, and in each angle of the heptagram is a letter, so that the seven names (see “Equinox VII”) are
spelt out. But thisis a rather different symbolism. O f coursein ordinary spedalised working the number of lamps
depends on the nature of the work, “eg.,” three for works of Saturn, eight for works M erauial, and so on.

in the centre of each of which burnsa small Lamp; these are the “F ortresses upon the Frontiers of the Abyss.”
See the eleventh Aethyr, Liber 418 (“Equinox V”). They keep off those forces of darkness which might
otherwise break in.

The names of God form a further protection. The M agician may consder what names he will use; but each
name should in some way symbolise this W ork in its method and accomplishment. It is impossible here to
enter into this subject fully; the discovery or construction of suitable names might occupy the most learned
Q abalist for many years.

T hese nine lamps were originally candles made of human fat, the fat of enemies
footnote: O r sometimes of “ birth-strangled babes,” “i.e,” of thoughts slain ere they could arise into consdousness.

dain by the M agician; they thus served as warningsto any hostile force of what might be expected if it caused
trouble. T o- day such candles are difficult to procure; and it is perhaps smpler to use beeswax. T he honey has
been taken by the M agician; nothing is left of the toil of all those hosts of bees but the mere shell, the fuel of
light. T his beeswax is also used in the construction of the Pantacle, and this forms a link between the two
symbols. T he Pantacle isthe food of the M agus; and some of it he givesup in order to give light to that which
is without. For these lights are only apparently hostile to intrugon; they serve to illuminate the Circle and the
N ames of God, and so to bring the first and outmost symbols of initiation within the view of the profane.

T hese candles stand upon pentagrams, which symbolize Geburah, severity, and give protection; but also
represent the microcosm, the four elements crowned by Spirit, the W ill of man perfected in its aspiration to
the H igher. T hey are placed outside the C ircle to attract the hostile forces, to givethem the first inkling of the
Great W ork, which they too must some day perform.

THE ALTAR. SIDE DESIGNS FROM DR. DEE, AS IN KQUEROX Wii.

CHAPTER III
THE ALTAR

THE Altar represents the solid basis of the work, the fixed W ill

footnote: It represents the extension of W ill. W ill istheD yad (see section on theW and); 2 x 2 = 4. So thealtar
is foursquare, and also its ten squaresshow 4.10 =1+2+3+4.

of the M agician; and the law under which he works. W ithin this altar everything is kept, since everything is
Subject to law. Except the lamp.

According to some authorities the Altar hhould be made of oak to represent the tubbornness and rigidity of
law; others would make it of Acacia, for Acaciaisthe symbol of resurrection.

TheAltar isadouble cube, which isarough way of symbolizing the G reat W ork; for the doubling of the cube,
like the squaring of the circle, wasone of the great problems of antiquity. T he surface of thisA Itar iscomposed
of ten squares The top is Kether, and the bottom M alkuth. T he height of the Altar is equal to the height
above the ground of the navel of the M agician. T he Altar is connected with the Ark of the C ovenant, N oah’s
Ark, the nave (“navis,” a ship) of the Church, and many other symbols of antiquity, whose symbolism has
been well worked out in an anonymous book called “T he Cannon,”

WEH footnote written by W illiam Stirling
(Elkin M athews), which should be studied carefully before constructing the Altar.

For this Altar must embody the M agician’s knowledge of the laws of N ature, which are the laws through
which he works.

He should endeavour to make geometrical constructions to symbolize cosmic measurements. For example,
he may take the two diagonals as (say) the diameter of the sun. T hen the side of the altar will be found to have
alength equal to some other cosmic measure, avesicadrawn on the sde some other, a“rood cross’ within the
vesica yet another. Each M agician should work out hisown system of symbolism — and he need not confine
himself to cosmic measurements. He might, for example, find some relation to express the law of inverse
squares.

The top of the Altar shall be covered with gold, and on this gold should be engraved some such figure as the
H oly O blation, or the N ew Jerusalem, or, if he have the skill, the M icrocosm of Vitruvius, of which we give
illustrations.

On the sides of the Altar are also sometimes drawn the great tablets of the elements, and the sigils of the holy
elemental kings, asshown in T he Equinox, N o. VII; for these are syntheses of the forces of N ature. Y et these
are rather special than general symbols, and thisbook purportsto treat only of the grand principles of working.

THE SCOURGE, THE DAGGER, AND THE CHAIN) ENCLOSING THE MHIAL FOR THE HOLY (11.

CHAPTER IV
THE SCOURGE, THE DAGGER, AND THE CHAIN

THE Scourge, the Dagger, and the C hain, represent the three alchemical principles of Sulphur, M ercury, and
Salt. T hese are not the substances which we now call by these names, they represent “principles,” whose
operations chemists have found it more convenient to explain in other ways. But Sulphur represents the
energy of things, M ercury their fluidity, Salt their fixity. T hey are analogous to Fire, Air and W ater; but they
mean rather more, for they represent something deeper and subtler, and yet more truly active. An almost
exact analogy is given by the three Gunas of the Hindus; Sattvas, R ajas, and T amas. Sattvas is M ercury,
equable, calm, clear; R ajasisSulphur, active, excitable, even fierce; T amasis Salt, thick, Suggish, heavy, dark.

footnote: T here is a long desaiption of these three G unas in the B hagavadgita.

But Hindu philosophy is so occupied with the main idea that only the Absolute is worth anything, that it
tends to consider these Gunas (even Sattvas) as evil. This is a correct view, but only from above; and we
prefer, if we are truly wise, to avoid this everlasting wail which characterizesthe thought of theI ndian peninsula:
“Everything issorrow,” etc. Accepting their doctrine of the two phases of the Absolute, we must, if we are to
be consstent, class the two phases together, either as good or as bad; if one is good and the other bad we are
back again in that duality, to avoid which we invented the A bsolute.

T he Christian idea that sin wasworth while because salvation wasso much more worth while, that redemption
isso solendid that innocence was well lost, ismore satisfactory. St. Paul says: “W here sin abounded, there did
grace much more abound. T hen shall we do evil that good may come? God forbid.” But (clearly!) it isexactly
what God Himself did, or why did H e create Satan with the germ of his “fall” in him?

Instead of condemning the three qualities outright, we should consider them as parts of a sacrament. T his
particular aspect of the Scourge, the Dagger, and the Chain, suggests the sacrament of penance.

T he Scourge is Sulphur: its application excites our Suggish natures, and it may further be used asan instrument
of correction, to castigate rebellious volitions. It is applied to the Nephesh, the Animal Soul, the natural
desires.

The Dagger is M ercury: it isused to calm too great heat, by the letting of blood; and it isthis weapon which
is plunged into the side or heart of the M agician to fill the H oly Cup. T hose faculties which come between
the appetites and the reason are thus dealt with.

The Chain is Salt: it serves to bind the wandering thoughts, and for this reason is placed about the neck of the
M agician, where D aath is Stuated.

T hese instruments also remind us of pain, death, and bondage. Students of the gospel will recollect that in the
martyrdom of Christ these three were used, the dagger being replaced by the nails.

footnote: T his is true of all magical instruments. T heH ill of G olgotha isa drde, and theC ross the T au. C hrist
had robe, crown, sceptre, etc; this thesis should one day be fully worked out.

T he Scourge should be made with ahandle of iron; the lash iscomposed of nine strands of fine copper wire, in
each of which are twisted small pieces of lead. Iron represents severity, copper love, and lead austerity.

T he Dagger is made of steel inlaid with gold; and the hilt is also golden.

The chain{Sic} is made of soft iron. It has 333 links.
footnote. See T he Equinox, No. V, “The Vision and the V oie”: X th A ethyr.

It isnow evident why these weapons are grouped around the phial of clear crystal in which is kept the H oly
Oil.

T he Scourge keeps the aspiration keen: the D agger expresses the determination to sacrifice all; and the C hain
restricts any wandering.

We may now consder the H oly Oil itself.

CHAPTER V
THE HOLY OIL

THE Holy Oil isthe Aspiration of the M agician; it is that which consecrates him to the performance of the
Great W ork; and such isits efficacy that it also consecrates all the furniture of the T emple and the instruments
thereof. It isalso the grace or chrism; for thisaspiration isnot ambition; itisa quality bestowed from above. For
this reason the M agician will anoint first the top of his head before proceeding to consecrate the lower centres
in their turn.

Thisoil isof apure golden colour; and when placed upon the xin it should burn and thrill through the body
with an intensity asof fire. It isthe pure light trandated into terms of desire. It isnot the W ill of the M agician,
the desre of the lower to reach the higher; but it is that spark of the higher in the M agician which wishes to
unite the lower with itself.

U nless therefore the M agician be first anointed with thisoil, all hiswork will be wasted and evil.

T hisoil iscompounded of four substances. T he bass of all isthe oil of the olive. T he olive is, traditionally, the
gift of Minerva, the Wisdom of God, the Logos In this are dissolved three other oils oil of myrrh, oil of
cinnamon, oil of galangal. The M yrrh isattributed to Binah, the Great M other, who isboth the understanding
of the M agician and that sorrow and compassion which results from the contemplation of the U niverse. The
Cinnamon representsT iphereth, the Sun — theSon, in whom Glory and Suffering are identical. The Galangal
represents both K ether and M alkuth, the First and the Last, the O ne and the M any, since in this O il they are
One.

T hes oils taken together represent therefore the whole T ree of Life. The ten Sephiroth are blended into the
perfect gold.

This Oil cannot be prepared from crude myrrh, cinnamon, and galangal. T he attempt to do so only givesa
brown mud with which the oil will not mix. T hese substances must be themselves refined into pure oils
before the final combination.

This perfect O il is most penetrating and subtle. Gradually it will spread itself, a glistening film, over every
object in the Temple. Each of these objects will then flame in the light of the Lamp. This Oil is like that
which was in the widow’s curse: it renews and multiplies itself miraculously; its perfume fills the whole
Temple; it isthe soul of which the grosser perfume is the body.

The phial which contains the O il should be of clear rock crystal, and some magicians have fashioned it in the
Shape of the female breast, for that it isthe true nourishment of all that lives For this reason also it has been
made of mother- of- pearl and toppered with a ruby.

THE WAND, CUP, SWORD, AND DISK OR PANTACLE (lrawn to scale).

CHAPTER VI
THE WAND

THE M agical Will isin its essence twofold, for it presupposes a beginning and an end; to will to be athing is
to admit that you are not that thing.

H ence to will anything but the supreme thing, isto wander still further from it — any will but that to give up
the self to the Beloved is Black M agick — yet this surrender isso Smple an act that to our complex mindsit
isthe mos difficult of all acts; and hence training is necessary. Further, the Self surrendered must not be less
than the All-Self; one must not come before the altar of the M ost High with an impure or an imperfect
offering. Asit iswritten in Liber LX V, “T 0 await T hee isthe end, not the beginning.”

T his training may lead through all sorts of complications, varying according to the nature of the student, and
hence it may be necessary for him at any moment to will all sorts of things which to others might seem
unconnected with the goal. Thusit isnot “apriori” obvious why a billiard player should need a file.

Since, then, we may want “anything,” let us see to it that our will is strong enough to obtain anything we
want without loss of time.

It istherefore necessary to develop the will to its highest point, even though the last task but one isthe total
surrender of this will. Partial surrender of an imperfect will isof no account in M agick.

The will being a lever, a fulcrum is necessary; this fulcrum is the main aspiration of the student to attain. All
willswhich are not dependent upon this principal will are so many leakages; they are like fat to the athlete.

The majority of the people in this world are ataxic; they cannot coordinate their mental muscles to make a
purposed movement. T hey have no real will, only aset of wishes, many of which contradict others. The
victim wobblesfrom one to the other (and it isno lesswobbling because the movements may occasionally be
very violent) and at the end of life the movements cancel each other out. N othing has been achieved; except
the one thing of which the victim is not conscious: the destruction of his own character, the confirming of
indecidon. Such an one istorn limb from limb by Choronzon.

H ow then isthe will to be trained? All these wishes, whims, caprices, inclinations, tendencies, appetites, must
be detected, examined, judged by the standard of whether they help or hinder the main purpose, and treated
accordingly.

Vigilance and courage are obviously required. | was about to add self-denial, in deference to conventional
speech; but how could | call that self-denial which is merely denial of those things which hamper the self? It
isnot suicide to kill the germs of malaria in one’s blood.

N ow there are very great difficulties to be overcome in the training of the mind. Perhaps the greatest is
forgetfulness, which is probably the worst form of what the Buddhidts call ignorance. Special practices for
training the memory may be of some use asa preliminary for personswhose memory isnaturally poor. In any
case the M agical R ecord prescribed for Probationers of the A.’.A.’. is useful and necessary.

Above all the practicesof Liber II must be done again and again, for these practices develop not only vigilance
but those inhibiting centres in the brain which are, according to some psychologists, the mainspring of the
mechanism by which civilized man has raised himself above the savage.

So far it has been spoken, as it were, in the negative. Aaron’s rod has become a serpent, and swallowed the
serpents of the other M agicians; it isnow necessary to turn it once more into arod.

footnote: A s everyone Knows, the word used in E xodus for a R od of Almond is {{H ebrew letters: M em-tet-H ay
H ay-Shin-Q of-D alet

}, adding to 463. N ow 400 isT au, the path leading from M alkuth to Y esod. Sixty isSamekh, the path leading
leading {{sic}} from Y esod to T iphereth; and 3 isGimel, the path leading thence to K ether. The whole rod
therefore gives the paths from the Kingdom to the C rown. }

T hisM agical W ill isthe wand in your hand by which the Great W ork isaccomplisned, by which the D aughter
isnot merely set upon the throne of the M other, but assumed into the Highest.

footnote In one, the best, system of M agick, theA bsoluteis called theC rown, G od is alled theF ather, the Pure
Soul is called the M other, the H oly Guardian Ange is called the Son, and the N atural Soul is called the
D aughter. The Son purifies the D aughter by wedding he; she thus becomes the M other, the uniting of whom
with the F ather absorbs all into the C rown. SeeLiber CD XVIII.

The M agick W and is thus the principal weapon of the M agus; and the “name” of that wand is the M agical
Oath.

T he will being twofold isin C hokmah, who isthe Logos, the word; hence some have said that the word isthe
will. Thoth the Lord of M agic {sic} isalso the Lord of Speech; H ermes the messenger bears the C aduceus.

W ord should express will: hence the M ystic N ame of the Probationer is the expression of his highest W ill.

T here are, of course, few Probationerswho understand themselves sufficiently to be able to formulate thiswill
to themselves, and therefore at the end of their probation they choose anew name.

It isconvenient therefore for the tudent to express his will by taking M agical O aths.

Since such an oath isirrevocable it should be well considered; and it isbetter not to take any oath permanently;
because with increase of understanding may come a perception of the incompatibility of the lesser oath with
the greater.

Thisis indeed almost certain to occur, and it must be remembered that as the whole essence of the will isits
one- pointedness,

footnote: T he T op of the W and is in K ether — which is one; and the Q liphoth of K ether are the T haumid,
opposing heads that rend and devour each other.

a dilemma of this sort is the worst in which the M agus can find himself.

Another great point in thisconsideration of M agick Vowsisto keep them in their proper place. T hey must be
taken for a clearly defined purpose, a clearly understood purpose, and they must never be allowed to go
beyond it.

It isa virtue in a diabetic not to eat sugar, but only in reference to his own condition. It is not a virtue of
universal import. Elijah said on one occasion: “| do well to be angry;” but such occasions are rare.

M oreover, one man’s meat is another man’s poison. An oath of poverty might be very useful for aman who
was unable intelligently to use his wealth for the single end proposed; to another it would be smply stripping

himself of energy, causing him to waste his time over trifles.

T here isno power which cannot be pressed in to the service of the M agical W ill: it isonly the temptation to
value that power for itself which offends.

O ne doesnot say: “Cut it down; why cumbereth it the ground?” unless repeated prunings have convinced
the gardener that the growth must always be a rank one.

“If thine hand offend thee, cut it off!” isthe scream of aweakling. If one killed adog the first time it misbehaved
itself, not many would pass the stage of puppyhood.

T he best vow, and that of most universal application, isthe vow of H oly O bedience; for not only doesit lead
to perfect freedom, but isa training in that surrender which is the last task.

WEH footnote: 0 f all C rowley’s views, this is the most controversial. It appears to fly in the face of T helena.
T hereis high merit in a vow of obedience, and necessity; but the merit is to be found in the “small print.” To
receive a vow of obedience from another implies perfection in the teacher, a thing impossible to mortals but possible
to roles. To make a vow of obedience to a mortal is foolish unless conditions of draumstance and duration are
involved.

It has this great value, that it never gets rusty. If the superior to whom the vow istaken knows hisbusiness, he
will quickly detect which things are really displeasing to his pupil, and familiarize him with them.

Disobedience to the superior is a contest between these two willsin the inferior. The will expressed in his
vow, which isthe will linked to hishighest will by the fact that he hastaken it in order to develop that highest
will, contends with the temporary will, which is based only on temporary considerations.

The T eacher should then seek gently and firmly to key up the pupil, little by little, until obedience follows
command without reference to what that command may be; as Loyola wrote: “perinde ac cadaver.”

N o one has understood the M agical W ill better than Loyola; in his system the individual was forgotten. T he
will of the General was instantly echoed by every member of the O rder; hence the Society of Jesus became
the most formidable of the religious organizations of the world.

T hat of the Old M an of the M ountains was perhaps the next best.

T he defect in Loyola’ssysttem isthat the General wasnot God, and that owing to various other considerations
he was not even necessarily the best man in the O rder.

To become General of the O rder he must have willed to become General of the O rder; and because of thishe
could be nothing more.

To return to the question of the development of the W ill. It is always something to pluck up the weeds, but
the flower itself needs tending. H aving crushed all volitionsin ourselves, and if necessary in others, which we
find opposing our real Will, that Will itself will grow naturally with greater freedom. But it is not only
necessary to purify the temple itself and consecrate it; invocations must be made. H ence it is necessary to be
constantly doing things of a postive, not merely of a negative nature, to affirm that Will.

R enunciation and sacrifice are necessary, but they are comparatively easy. T here are ahundred waysof missing,
and only one of hitting. T 0 avoid eating beef is easy; to eat nothing but pork is very difficult.

Levi recommends hat at times the M agical W ill itself should be cut off, on the same principle as one can

always work better after a “complete change.” Levi is doubtless right, but he must be understood as saying
this “for the hardness of men’s hearts.” The turbine is more efficient than a reciprocating engine; and his
counsel is only good for the beginner.

U Itimately the M agical W ill so identifies itself with the man’s whole being that it becomes unconscious, and
isas constant a force as gravitation. O ne may even be surprised at one’sown acts, and have to reason out their
connection. But let it be understood that when the W ill has thus really raised itself to the height of Destiny,
the man isno more likely to do wrong than he is to float off into the air.

O ne may be asked whether there is not a conflict between this development of the W ill and Ethics.
T he answer is Y es,

In the Grand Grimoire weare told “to buy an egg without haggling”; and attainment, and the next step in the
path of attainment, is that pearl of great price, which when aman hath found he straightway selleth all that he
hath, and buyeth that pearl.

With many people custom and habit — of which ethics is but the social expression — are the things most
difficult to give up: and it isa useful practice to break any habit just to get into the way of being free from that
form of Savery. H ence we have practices for breaking up Seep, for putting our bodies into strained and
unnatural postions, for doing difficult exercises of breathing — all these, apart from any special merit they
may have in themselvesfor any particular purpose, have the main merit that the man forces himself to do them
despite any conditionsthat may exist. H aving conquered internal resistance one may conquer external resstance
more easily.

In asteam boat the engine must first overcome its own inertia before it can attack the resistance of the water.

W hen the will has thus ceased to be intermittent, it becomes necessary to consider its size. Gravitation gives
an acceleration of thirty-two feet per second on thisplanet, on the moon very much less. And aW ill, however
gngle and however constant, may still be of no particular use, because the circumstances which oppose it may
be altogether too strong, or because it is for some reason unable to get into touch with them. It is useless to
wish for the moon. If one does so, one must consider by what means that W ill may be made effective.

And though aman may have atremendous W ill in one direction it need not always be sufficient to help him
in another; it may even be stupid.

T here isthe story of the man who practised for forty yearsto walk across the Ganges, and, having succeeded,
was reproached by his H oly Guru, who said: “Y ou are a great fool. All your neighbours have been crossing
every day on araft for two pice.”

Thisoccursto mos, perhaps to all, of usin our careers. W e spend infinite painsto learn something, to achieve
something, which when gained does not seem worth even the utterance of the wish.

But thisisa wrong view to take. The discipline necessary in order to learn Latin will stand usin good stead
when we wish to do something quite different.

At school our masters punished us, when we leave school, if we have not learned to punish ourselves, we have
learned nothing.

In fact the only danger is that we may value the achievement in itself. The boy who prides himself on his
school knowledge isin danger of becoming a college professor.

So the Guru of the water- walking H indu only meant that it was now time to be dissatisfied with what he had
done — and to employ his powers to some better end.

And, incidentally, ance the divine W ill isone, it will be found that there isno capacity which isnot necessarily
subservient to the destiny of the man who possesses it.

One may be unable to tell when athread of a particular colour will be woven into the carpet of Destiny. It is
only when the carpet is finished and seen from a proper distance that the postion of that particular strand is
geen to be necessary. From this one is tempted to break alance on that most ancient battlefield, free- will and
destiny.

But even though every man is “determined” so that every action is merely the passive resultant of the sum-
total of the forces which have acted upon him from eternity, so that hisown Will isonly the echo of the W ill
of the U niverse, yet that consciousness of “free- will” is valuable; and if he really understands it as being the
partial and individual expression of that internal motion in aU niverse whose sum is rest, by so much will he
feel that harmony, that totality. And though the happiness which he experiences may be criticised asonly one
scale of abalance in whose other scale is an equal misery, there are those who hold that misery consists only in
the feeling of separation from the U niverse, and that consequently all may cancel out among the lesser feelings,
leaving only that infinite bliss which is one phase of the infinite consciousness of that ALL. Such speculations
are somewhat beyond the scope of the present remarks. It is of no particular moment to observe that the
elephant and flea can be no other than they are; but we do perceive that one is bigger than the other. T hat is
the fact of practical importance.

W edo know that personscan be trained to do thingswhich they could not do without training — and anyone
who remarks that you cannot train a person unless it ishis destiny to be trained is quite unpractical. Equally it
isthe destiny of the trainer to train. T here isa fallacy in the determinist argument similar to the fallacy which
isthe root of all “systems” of gambling at R oulette. T he odds are just over three to one against red coming up
twice running; but after red has come up once the conditions are changed.

WEH footnote: E xadly four to one before and even after.

It would be useless to insist on such a point were it not for the fact that many people confuse Philosophy with
Magick. Philosophy is the enemy of M agick. Philosophy assures us that after all nothing matters, and that
“che sara sara.”

In practical life, and M agick isthe most practical of the Arts of life, this difficulty does not occur. It is useless
to argue with aman who isrunning to catch a train that he may be destined not to catch it; he just runs, and
if he could spare breath would say “Blow destiny!”

It has been said earlier that the real M agical W ill must be toward the highest attainment, and thiscan never be
until the flowering of the M agical U nderstanding. The W and must be made to grow in length as well asin
gtrength; it need not do so of itsown nature.

The ambition of every boy isto be an engine-driver. Some attain it, and remain there all their lives.

But in the majority of cases the U nderstanding grows faster than the Will, and long before the boy isin a
position to attain his wish he has already forgotten it.

In other casesthe U nderstanding never growsbeyond acertain point, and the W ill persstswithout intelligence.

T he business man (for example) has wished for ease and comfort, and to this end goes daily to his office and

gaves under amore cruel taskmaster than the meanest of the workmen in his pay; he decides to retire, and
finds that life in empty. T he end has been swallowed up in the means.

Only those are happy who have desired the unattainable.
All possessions, the material and the spiritual alike, are but dust.

Love, sorrow, and compassion are three ssters who, if they seem freed from this curse, are only so because of
their relation to T he U nsatisfied.

Beauty isitself so unattainable that it escapes altogether; and the true artist, like the true mystic, can never rest.
To him the M agician is but a servant. H is wand isof infinite length; it isthe creative M ahalingam.

T he difficulty with such an one isnaturally that hiswand being very thin in proportion to its length isliable to
wobble. Very few artists are conscious of their real purpose, and in very many cases we have this infinite
yearning supported by so frail a constitution that nothing is achieved.

TheM agician must build all that he hasinto his pyramid; and if that pyramid isto touch the stars, how broad
must be the base! T here isno knowledge and no power which is useless to the M agician. O ne might almost
say there isno scrap of material in the whole U niverse with which he can dispense. H isultimate enemy isthe
great M agician, the M agician who created the whole illusion of the U niverse; and to meet him in battle, so
that nothing is left either of him or of yourself, you must be exactly equal to him.

At the same time let the M agician never forget that every brick must tend to the summit of the pyramid —
the sdes must be perfectly snooth; there must be no false summits, even in the lowest layers.

This isthe practical and active form of that obligation of a M aster of the T emple in which it is said: “I will
interpret every phenomenon asa particular dealing of God with my soul.”

In Liber CLX XV many practical devices for attaining this one- pointedness are given, and though the subject
of that book isdevotion to aparticular Deity, itsinstructions may be easily generalized to suit the development
of any form of will.

T his will isthen the active form of understanding. T he M aster of the T emple asks, on seeing adug: “W hat is
the purpose of this message from the U nseen? H ow shall | interpret this W ord of God Most High?” The
M agusthinks: “H ow shall | usethissug?” And in thiscourse he must persist. T hough many things useless, so
far as he can see, are sent to him, one day he will find the one thing he needs, while his U nderstanding will
appreciate the fact that none of those other things were useless.

So with these early practices of renunciation it will now be clearly understood that they were but of temporary
use. T hey were only of value astraining. T he adept will laugh over his early absurdities — the disproportions
will have been harmonized; and the structure of his soul will be seen as perfectly organic, with no one thing
out of its place. H e will see himself asthe positive T au with its ten complete squares within the triangle of the
negatives; and this figure will become one, assoon asfrom the equilibrium of opposites he has attained to the
identity of opposites.

In all thisis will have been seen that the mosx powerful weapon in the hand of the student isthe V ow of H oly
O bedience; and many will wish that they had the opportunity of putting themselves under a holy Guru. Let
them take heart — for any being capable of giving commandsisan efficient G uru for the purpose of thisV ow,
provided that he isnot too amiable and lazy.

The only reason for choosing aGuru who has himself attained is that he will aid the vigilance of the Seepy
Chela, and, while tempering the W ind to that shorn lamb, will carefully harden him, and at the same time
gladden his ears with holy discourse. But if such a person isinaccessible, let him choose any one with whom
he has constant intercourse, explain the circumstances, and ask him to act.

The person should if possible be trustworthy; and let the C helaremember that if he should be ordered to jump
over a cliff it is very much better to do it than to give up the practice.

And it is of the very greatest importance not to limit the vow in any way. Y ou must buy the egg without
haggling.

In acertain Society the members were bound to do certain things, being assured that there was “nothing in
the vow contrary to their civil, moral, or religious obligations.” So when any one wanted to break hisvow he
had no difficulty in discovering a very good reason for it. The vow lost all its force.

WEH footnote: C rowley expressly dtes this dause in the G olden D awn initiations as the third defense for his
publishing the G olden D awn rituals. See Equinox |, 4, page5, “Editorial”.

W hen Buddha took his seat under the blessed Bo-T ree, he took an oath that none of the inhabitants of the
10,000 worlds should cause him to rise until he had attained; so that when even M ara the great Arch-D evil,
with his three daughters the arch- temptresses appeared, he remained still.

N ow it isuseless for the beginner to take so formidable a vow; he has not yet attained the strength which can
defy M ara. Let him estimate hisstrength, and take avow which iswithin it, but only just within it. T husM ilo
began by carrying anew-born calf; and day by day asit grew into a bull, his strength was found sufficient.

Again let it be said that Liber III isamost admirable method for the beginner,

footnote: T his book must be carefully read. Its essence is that the pupil swears to refrain from a certain thought,
word, or deed; and on each breach of the oath, cuts his arm sharply with a razor. T his is better than flagellation
because it can be done in public, without attracting notice. It however forms one of the most hilariously exating
parlour games for the family drde ever invented. F riends and relations are always ready to do their utmost to trap
you into doing the forbidden thing.

and it will be best, even if heisvery confident in his strength, to take the vow for very short periods, beginning
with an hour and increasing daily by half-hours until the day isfilled. T hen let him rest awhile, and attempt a
two-day practice; and so on until he is perfect.

He should also begin with the very easiest practices. But the thing which he is sworn to avoid should not be
a thing which normally he would do infrequently; because the strain on the memory which subserves his
vigilance would be very great, and the practice become difficult. It isjust aswell at first that the pain of hisarm
Should be there “at the time when he would normally do the forbidden thing,” to warn him against its
repetition.

T here will thus be aclear connection in hismind of cause and effect, until he will be just as careful in avoiding
this particular act which he has conscious determined, as in those other things which in childhood he has
been trained to avoid.

Just as the eyelid unconsciougy closes when the eye is threatened,

footnote: If it were not so there would be very few peoplein the world who were not blind.

so must he build up in conscioumess this power of inhibition until it snks below consciousmess, adding to his
store of automatic force, so that he is free to devote his conscious energy to a yet higher task.

Itisimpossible to overrate the value of thisinhibition to the man when hecomesto meditate. H e has guarded
hismind against thoughtsA, B, and C; he has told the sentriesto allow no one to passwho isnot in uniform.
And it will be very easy for him to extend that power, and to lower the portcullis.

Let him remember, too that there isa difference not only in the frequency of thoughts— but in their intensty.

T he worst of all isof course the ego, which isalmost omnipresent and almost irresistible, although so deeply-
seated that in normal thought one may not always be aware of it.

Buddha, taking the bull by the horns, made this idea the first to be attacked.

Each must decide for himself whether this is a wise course to pursue. But it certainly seems easier to strip off
first the things which can easily be done without.

WEH footnote: A mong those who might find the ego an unwise first choiceto attack are those who confuse it with
a sense of private property. M any petty thieves use denial of the ego as an excuse. T hree book- thieves and any
number of shop-lifters come to mind.

The majority of people will find most trouble with the Emotions, and thoughts which excite them.

But isis both possible and necessary not merely to suppress the emotions, but to turn them into faithful
gervants. Thus the emotion of anger is occasionally useful against that portion of the brain whose slackness
vitiates the control.

If there isone emotion which is never useful, it is pride; for this reason, that it is bound up entirely with the
Ego...

N o, there is no use for pride!

The destruction of the Perceptions, either the grosser or the subtler, appears much easier, because the mind
not being moved, is free to remember its control.

It is easy to be so absorbed in a book that one takes no notice of the most beautiful scenery. But if tung by a
wasp the book is immediately forgotten.

TheT endencies are, however, much harder to combat than the three lower Shandhas put together — for the
gmple reason that they are for the most part below consciousness, and must be, asit were, awakened in order
to be destroyed, so that the will of the M agician isin asense trying to do two opposte things at the same time.

Consciousness itself is only destroyed by Samadhi.

One can now se the logical process which beginsin refusing to think of afoot, and ends by destroying the
sense of individuality.

Of the methods of destroying various deep-rooted ideas there are many.

T he best isperhapsthe method of equilibrium. Get the mind into the habit of calling up the opposite to every
thought that may arise. In conversation always disagree. See the other man’s arguments, but, however much
your judgment approves them, find the answer.

Let this be done dispassionately; the more convinced you are that a certain point of view isright, the more
determined you should be to find proofs that it is wrong.

If you have done thisthoroughly, these points of view will cease to trouble you; you can then assert your own
point of view with the calm of amaster, which is more convincing than the enthusiasm of a learner.

Y ou will cease to be interested in controversies; politics, ethics, religion will seem so many toys, and your
M agical W ill will be free from these inhibitions.

In Burmathere isonly one animal which the people will kill, R ussell’s Viper; because, asthey say, “either you
must kill it or it will kill you”; and it isa question of which sees the other first.

N ow any one idea which isnot T he |dea must be treated in this fashion. W hen you have killed the snake you
can use its Kin, but aslong asit is alive and free, you are in danger.

And unfortunately the ego-idea, which is the real snake, can throw itself into a multitude of forms, each
clothed in the most brilliant dress. T hus the devil is said to be able to disguise himself as an angel of light.

U nder the strain of a magical vow thisis too terribly the case. No normal human being understands or can
understand the temptations of the saints.

An ordinary person with ideas like those which obsessed St. Patrick and St. Antony would be only fit for an
asylum.

T he tighter you hold the nake (which waspreviously asleep in the sun, and harmless enough, to all appearance),
the more it truggles, and it isimportant to remember that your hold must tighten correspondingly, or it will
escape and bite you.

Just as if you tell achild not to do athing — no matter what — it will immediately want to do it, thought
otherwise the idea might never have entered its head, so it iswith the saint. W e have all of us these tendencies
latent in us; of most of them we might remain unconsciousall our lives— unlessthey were awakened by our
M agick. T hey liein ambush. And every one must be awakened, and every one must be destroyed. Every one
who signs the oath of a Probationer is stirring up ahornets nest.

A man has only to affirm his conscious aspiration; and the enemy is upon him.

It seems hardly possible that any one can ever pass through that terrible year of probation — and yet the
aspirant isnot bound to anything difficult; it almost seemsasif he were not bound to anything at all — and yet
experience teaches us that the effect is like plucking aman from his fireside into mid-Atlantic in agale. The
truth is, it may be, that the very smplicity of the task makes it difficult.

The Probationer mus cling to his aspiration — affirm it again and again in desperation.

H e has, perhaps, almost lost sght of it; it has become meaningless to him; he repeats it mechanically as he is
tossed from wave to wave.

But if he can stick to it he will come through.

And, oncehe “is” through, thingswill again assume their proper aspect; he will see that mere illusion were the
things that seemed so real, and he will be fortified against the new trials that await him.

But the unfortunate indeed ishe who cannot thusendure. It isuselessfor him to say, “|! don’t likethe Atlantic;

| will go back to the fireside.”

Once take one sep on the path, and there isno return. Y ou will remember in Browning's “Childe R oland to
the dark T ower came”:

For mark! no sooner was! fairly found

Pledged to the plain, after a pace or two,

Than, pausing to throw backwards a last view

O’er the safe road, ’twas gone: grey plain all round,
N othing but plain to the horizon’s bound.

| might go on; naught else remained to do.

And thisisuniversally true. T he statement that the Probationer can resign when he choosesisin truth only for
those who have taken the oath but superficially.

A real M agical O ath cannot be broken: you think it can, but it can’t.
T hisisthe advantage of areal M agical O ath.

H owever far you go around, you arrive at the end just the same, and all you have done by attempting to break
your oath isto involve yourself in the most frightful trouble.

It cannot be too clearly understood that such is the nature of things: it does not depend upon the will of any
persons, however powerful or exalted; nor can T heir force, the force of Their great oaths, avail against the
weakest oath of the most trivial of beginners.

The attempt to interfere with the M agical W ill of another person would be wicked, if it were not absurd.

One may attempt to build up a Will when {sic} before nothing existed but a chaos of whims, but once
organization hastaken place it issacred. AsBlake says: “Everything that livesisholy”; and hence the creation
of life isthe most sacred of tasks. It doesnot matter very much to the creator what it is that he creates; there is
room in the universe for both the spider and the fly.

It isfrom the rubbish-heap of C horonzon that one selects the material for a god!

T hisisthe ultimate analysis of the M ystery of R edemption, and is possibly the real reason of the existence (if
existence it can be called) of form, or, if you like, of the Ego.

It is astonishing that this typical cry — “Il am |” — isthe cry of that which above all isnot.

It was that M aster whose Will was 0 powerful that at its lightest expression the deaf heard, and the dumb
spake, lepers were cleansed and the dead arose to life, that M aster and no other who at the supreme moment
of his agony could cry, “Not my Will, but Thine, be done.”

CHAPTER VII
THE CUP

AS the Magick Wand is the Will, the Wisdom, the W ord of the M agician, so is the Magick Cup his
U nderstanding.

T hisisthe cup of which it waswritten: “Father, if it be T hy W ill, let thiscup passfrom M e!” And again: “Can
ye drink of the cup that | drink of?”

And it isalso the cup in the hand of OUR LADY BABALON, and the cup of the Sacrament.

This Cup is full of bitterness, and of blood, and of intoxication.

The U nderstanding of the M agusishislink with the Invisible, on the passive side.

His Will errs actively by opposing itself to the U niversal W ill.

H isU nderstanding errs passively when it receives influence from that which is not the ultimate truth.

In the beginning the Cup of the student is almost empty; and even such truth as he receives may leak away,
and be lost.

T hey say that the V enetians made glasses which changed colour if poison was put into them; of such a glass
must the student make his C up.

Very little experience on the mystic path will show him that of all the impressions he receives none is true.
Either they are false in themselves, or they are wrongly interpreted in his mind.

T here isone truth, and only one. All other thoughts are false.

And as he advances in the knowledge of his mind he will come to understand that its whole structure is so
faulty that it is quite incapable, even in its most exalted moods, of truth.

H e will recognize that any thought merely establishes a relation between the Ego and the non-Ego.

K ant has shown that even the laws of nature are but the conditions of thought. And asthe current of thought
isthe blood of the mind, it issaid that the M agick Cup isfilled with the blood of the Saints. All thought must
be offered up as a sacrifice.

The Cup can hardly be described asa weapon. It isround like the pantacle — not straight like the wand and
the dagger. R eception, not projection, isits nature.

footnote. As theM agidan isin the position of G od towards the Spirit that he evokes, hestandsin theC irde, and
the spirit in the T riangle; so the M agian isin the T riangle with respect to his own G od.

So that which isround isto him asymbol of the influence from the higher. T his circle symbolizes the Infinite,
as every crossor T au represents the Finite. T hat which is four square shows the Finite fixed into itself; for this
reason the altar is foursquare. It isthe solid basis from which all the operation proceeds. O ne form

footnote: An ugly form. A better is given in the illustration.

of the magical cup has a sohere beneath the bowl, and is supported upon a conical base.

This cup (crescent, sohere, cone) represents the three principles of the M oon, the Sun, and Fire, the three
principles which, according to the H indus, have course in the body.

footnote: T hese “ prindples” are seen by the pupil when first he succeeds in stilling his mind. T hat one which
happens to be in course at the moment is the one seen by him. T his is so marvellous an experience, even for one
who has pushed astral visions to a very high point, that he may mistake them for the E nd. See chapter on D hyana.

T he H ebrew letters corresponding to these prindples are G imel, R esh, and Shin, and the word formed by them
means “a flower” and also “expelled,” “ cast forth.”

Thisisthe Cup of Purification; as Zoroaster says:

“So therefore first the priest who governeth the worksof fire must sprinkle with the lustral water of the loud-
resounding sea.”

It isthe sea that purifiesthe world. And the “Great Sea” isin the Q abalah aname of Binah, “U nderstanding.”
It is by the Understanding of the M agus that his work is purified.
Binah, moreover, isthe M oon, and the bow! of this cup is shaped like the moon.

This moon is the path of Gimel through which the influence from the Crown descends upon the Sun of
Tiphereth.

And thisis based upon the pyramid of fire which symbolizes the aspiration of the student.
In Hindu symbolism the Amrita or “dew of immortality”
footnote: A— , the privative partide; “mrita,” mortal.

drips constantly upon aman, but is burnt up by the gross fire of his appetites. Y ogis attempt to catch and so
preserve this dew by turning back the tongue in the mouth.

Concerning the water in thisC up, it may be said that just asthe wand should be perfectly rigid, the ideal solid,
go should the water be the ideal fluid.

The W and iserect, and must extend to Infinity.
T he surface of the water is flat, and must extend to Infinity.
One isthe line, the other the plane.

But as the W and is weak without breadth, so is the water false without depth. The U nderstanding of the
M agus must include all things, and that understanding must be infinitely profound.

H.G. W ellshassaid that “every word of which aman isignorant represents an idea of which he isignorant.”
And it isimpossible perfectly to understand all things unless all things be first known.

U nderstanding is the structuralization of knowledge.

All impressions are disconnected, asthe Babe of the Abyss is so terribly aware; and the M aster of the T emple

must sit for 106 seasonsin the City of the Pyramids because this coordination isa tremendous task.
T here is nothing particularly occult in this doctrine concerning Knowledge and understanding.

A looking- glass receives all impressions but coordinates none.

T he savage has none but the most smple associations of ideas.

Even the ordinary civilized man goes very little further.

All advance in thought is made by collecting the greatest possible number of facts, classifying them, and
grouping them.

The philologis, though perhaps he only speaks one language, has a much higher type of mind than the
linguist who speaks twenty.

This T ree of Thought is exactly paralleled by the tree of nervous structure.

Very many people go about nowadays who are exceedingly “well-informed,” but who have not the dightest
idea of the meaning of the facts they know. T hey have not developed the necessary higher part of the brain.
Induction isimpossible to them.

This capacity for storing away facts is compatible with actual imbecility. Some imbeciles have been able to
tore their memories with more knowledge than perhaps any sane man could hope to acquire.

T hisis the great fault of modern education — achild is stuffed with facts, and no attempt is made to explain
their connection and bearing. T he result is that even the facts themselves are soon forgotten.

Any first-rate mind isinsulted and irritated by such treatment, and any first- rate memory isin danger of being
spoilt by it.

N o two ideas have any real meaning until they are harmonized in a third, and the operation is only perfect
when these ideas are contradictory. T hisis the essence of the H egelian logic.

The M agick Cup, as was Shown above, is also the flower. It isthe lotus which opens to the sun, and which
collects the dew.

T hisLotusisin the hand of |ssthe great M other. It isasymbol smilar to the C up in the hand of OUR LADY
BABALON.

T here are also the Lotusesin the human body, according to the H indu system of Physology referred to in the
chapter on D harana.

footnote: T hese L otuses are all situated in the spinal column, which has three channals, Sushumna in the middle,
Ida and Pingala on either side(“ cf.” theT reeof Life). T he central channd is compressed at the base by K undalini,
the magical power, a sleeping serpent. A wake her: she darts up the spine, and the Prana flows through the
Sushumna. See “R aja-Y oga” for more details.

T here is the lotus of three petals in the Sacrum, in which the K undalini liesasieep. T hislotusisthe receptacle
of reproductive force.

T here is also the six- petalled lotus opposite the navel — which receives the forces which nourish the body.

T here isalso alotusin the Solar plexus which receives the nervous forces.

T he gx- petalled lotusin the heart correspondsto T iphereth, and receivesthose vital forceswhich are connected
with the blood.

T he sxteen- petalled lotus opposite the larynx receives the nourishment needed by the breath.

T he two- petalled lotus of the pineal gland receives the nourishment needed by thought, while above the
junction of the cranial tructuresisthat sublime lotus, of athousand and one petals, which receivesthe influence
from on high; and in which, in the Adept, the awakened K undalini takes her pleasure with the Lord of All.

All these lotuses are figured by the M agick Cup.

In man they are but partly opened, or only opened to their natural nourishment. In fact it is better to think of
them as closed, as secreting that nourishment, which, because of the lack of sun, turns to poison.

The Magick Cup must have no lid, yet it must be kept veiled most carefully at all times, except when
invocation of the H ighest is being made.

This cup must also be hidden from the profane. The W and must be kept secret lest the profane, fearing it,
Should succeed in breaking it; the C up lest, wishing to touch it, they should defile it.

Y et the Sprinkling of its water not only purifiesthe T emple, but blesseth them that are without: freely must
it be poured! But let no one know your real purpose, and let no one Know the secret of your strength.
R emember Samson! R emember Guy Fawkes!

Of the methodsof increasing U nderstanding those of the H oly Q abalah are perhapsthe best, provided that the
intellect is thoroughly awake to their absurdity, and never allowsitself to be convinced.

footnote: See the “Interlude” following.

Further meditation of certain sorts is useful: not the strict meditation which endeavours to still the mind, but
such ameditation as Samasati.

footnote See Equinox V, “TheT raining of the M ind”; Equinox II, “T he Psychology of H ashish” : E quinox
VII, “Libea DCCCCXII.”

On the exoteric side if necessary the mind should be trained by the study of any well- developed science, such
as chemistry, or mathematics.

T he idea of organization is the first tep, that of interpretation the second. T he M aster of the T emple, whose
grade corresponds to Binah, issworn to “interpret every phenomenon asa particular dealing of God with his
soul.”

But even the beginner may attempt this practice with advantage.

Either a fact fitsin or it does not; if it does not, harmony is broken; and asthe U niversal harmony cannot be
broken, the discord must be in the mind of the student, thusshowing that he isnot in tune with that U niversal
choir.

Let him then puzzle out first the great facts, then the little; until one summer, when he is bald and lethargic
after lunch, he understands and appreciates the existence of flies!

This lack of Understanding with which we all begin isso terrible, so pitiful. In this world there isso much
cruelty, so much waste, so much stupidity.

The contemplation of the U niverse must be at first almost pure anguish. It isthis fact which isresponsble for
most of the speculations of philosophy.

M ediaeval philosophers when hopelessly astray because their theology necessitated the reference of all things
to the standard of men’s welfare.

T hey even became stupid: Bernardin de St. Pierre (wasit not?) said that the goodness of God was such that
wherever men had built a great city, H e had placed ariver to assist them in conveying merchandise. But the
truth isthat in no way can weimagine the U niverse as devised. If horseswere made for men to ride, were not
men made for wormsto eat?

And s we find once more that the Ego-idea must be ruthlessly rooted out before U nderstanding can be
attained.

There is an apparent contradiction between this attitude and that of the M aster of the T emple. W hat can
possibly be more selfish than this interpretation of everything as the dealing of God with the soul?

But it isGod who is all and not any part; and every “dealing” must thus be an expansion of the soul, a
destruction of its separateness.

Every ray of the sun expands the flower.
T he surface of the water in the M agick Cup isinfinite; there isno point different from any other point.

footnote: “If ye confound the space marks, saying: T hey are one; or saying, T hey are many ... then expect the
direful judgments of R aH oor K huit... {{sic error of capitalization, should be: “if ye confound the space- marks

"SH

T his shall regenerate the world, the little world my sster.” T hese are the words of NUIT, Our Lady of the
Stars, of whom Binah is but the troubled reflection. }

T hus, ultimately, as the wand isa binding and alimitation, so isthe Cup an expansion — into the Infinite.

And thisis the danger of the C up; it must necessarily be open to all, and yet if anything is put into it which is
out of proportion, unbalanced, or impure, it takes hurt.

And here again we find difficulty with our thoughts. The grosmess and stupidity of “simple impressions”
cloud the waters, “emotions” trouble it; “perceptions” are still far from the perfect purity of truth; they cause
reflections, while the “tendencies” alter the refractive index, and break up the light. Even “consciousness”
itself isthat which distinguishes between the lower and the higher, the waters which are below the firmament
from the waters which are above the firmament, that appalling stage in the great curse of creation.

Since at the best this water

footnote: T he water in this C up (the latter is also a heart, as shown by the transition from the andent to the
modern T arot; the suit “H earts” in old packs of cards, and even in modern Spanish and Italian cards, is alled
“C ups”) isthe letter “M em” (the H ebrew word for water), which has for its T arot trump the H anged M an. T his
H anged M an represents the A dept hanging by one heel from a gallows, which isin the shape of the letter D aleth
— the letter of the E mpress, the heavenly V enusin theT arot. H is legs form a qoss, his armsa triangle, as if by

his equilibrium and self-saqifice he were bringing the light down and establishing it even in the abyss.

Elementary as thisis, itis a very satisfactory hieroglyph of theG reat W ork, though the student is warned that the
obvious sentimental interpretation will have to be discarded as soon as it has been understood. It is a very noble
illusion, and therefore a very dangerous one, to figure one’s self as the R edeemey. F or, of all the illusions in this
Cup — thesubtle and purer they are, the more diffialt they are to detect.

is but a reflection, how tremendously important it becomes that it should be still!
If the cup is shaken the light will be broken up.

T herefore the C up is placed upon the Altar, which is foursquare, will multiplied by will, the confirmation of
the will in the M agical O ath, its fixation in Law.

It iseasy to see when water ismuddy, and easy to get rid of the mud; but there are many impurities which defy
everything but distillation and even some which must be fractionated unto 70 times 7.

There is, however, auniversal solvent and harmonizer, acertain dew which is 0 pure that asingle drop of it
cast into the water of the Cup will for the time being bring all to perfection.

T his dew is called Love. Even asin the case of human love, the whole U niverse appears perfect to the man
who isunder its control, so isit, and much more, with the Divine Love of which it isnow spoken.

For human loveisan excitement, and not astilling, of the mind; and asit isbound to the individual, only leads
to greater trouble in the end.

This Divine Love, on the contrary, is attached to no symbol.

It abhors limitation, either in its intensity or its scope. And thisis the dew of the stars of which it is spoken in
the H oly Books, for NUIT the Lady of the Stars is called “the Continuous O ne of H eaven,” and it is that
Dew which bathes the body of the Adept “in a sweet-smelling perfume of sweat.”

footnote: See Liber L egis. Equinox VII. {{SIC to the quote, corredly: “.. bathing his whole body in a sweet-
smelling perfume of sweat: O N uit, continuous one of H eaven, let...

In this cup, therefore, though all things are placed, by virtue of this dew all lose their identity. And therefore
thisC up isin the hand of BABALON , the Lady of the C ity of the Pyramids, wherein no one can be distinguished
from any other, wherein no one may st until he has lost hisname.

Of that which isin the Cup it is also said that it is wine. T hisis the Cup of Intoxication. Intoxication means
poisoning, and in particular refers to the poison in which arrows are dipped (Greek

W EH: herein G reek letters: tau-omicon-xi-omicon-nu

,abow”). Think of the Vison of the Arrow in Liber 418, and look at the passages in the H oly Books which
speak of the action of the spirit under the figure of a deadly poison.

For to each individual thing attainment means first and foremost the destruction of the individuality.

Each of our ideas must be made to give up the Self to the Beloved, so that we may eventually give up the Self
to the Beloved in our turn.

It will be remembered in the History Lection

footnote: Liber LX 1, the book given to those who wish to become Probationers of A.’.A.’.

how the Adepts “who had with smiling faces abandoned their homes and their possessions — could with
gteady calm and firm correctness abandon the Great W ork itself; for this is the last and greatest projection of
the Alchemist.”

The M aster of the T emple has crossed the A byss, has entered the Palace of the King’s D aughter; he has only
to utter one word, and all is dissolved. But, instead of that, he isfound hidden in the earth, tending a garden.

This mystery is all too complex to be elucidated in these fragments of impure thought; it is a suitable subject
for meditation.

An Interlude

Every nursery rime contains profound magical secrets which are open to every one who has made a study of
the correspondences of the H oly Q abalah. To puzzle out an imaginary meaning for this “nonsense” sets one
thinking of the M ysteries; one entersinto deep contemplation of holy thingsand God Himself leads the soul
to areal illumination. H ence also the necessity of Incarnation; the soul must descend into all falsity in order to
attain All-T ruth.

For instance:

Old M other H ubbard

W ent to her cupboard

To get her poor dog abone;
W hen she got there,

T he cupboard was bare,

And the poor dog had none.

Who is this ancient and venerable mother of whom it is spoken? Verily she is none other than Binah, as is
evident in the use of the holy letter H with which her name begins.

N or isshe the sterile M other Ama but the fertile Aima; for within her she bears V au, the son, for the second
letter of her name, and R , the penultimate, isthe Sun, Tiphareth, the Son.

T he other three letters of her name, B, A, and D, are the three paths which join the three supernals.

To what cupboard did she go? Even to the most secret caverns of the U niverse. And who isthisdog? Isit not
the name of God spelt Q abalistically backwards? And what is this bone? T he bone is the W and, the holy
Lingam!

The complete interpretation of the rune is now open. This rime is the legend of the murder of O sris by
T yphon.

The limbs of O sris were scattered in the N ile.

Ids sought them in every corner of the U niverse, and she found all except his sacred lingam, which was not
found until quite recently (vide Fuller, T he Star in the W est).

Let us take another example from this rich storehouse of magick lore.
Little Bo Peep

She lost her sheep,

And couldn’t tell where to find them.

Leave them alone!

And they'll come home,

Dragging their tails behind them.
“Bo” isthe root meaning Light, from which spring such words as Bo-T ree, Bodhisattva, and Buddha.

And “Peep” is Apep, the serpent Apophis. T his poem therefore contains the same symbol as that in the
Egyptian and H ebrew Bibles.

The make isthe serpent of initiation, asthe Lamb is the Saviour.

T hisancient one, the W isdom of Eternity, sitsin itsold anguish awaiting the R edeemer. And thisholy verse
triumphantly assures us that there isno need for anxiety. T he Saviours will come one after the other, at their
own good pleasure, and as they may be needed, and drag their tails, that isto say those who follow out their
holy commandment, to the ultimate goal.

Again we read:

Little M iss M uffett

Sat on a tuffet,

Eating of curds and whey,

Up came abig spider,

And sat down beside her,

And frightened M iss M uffett away.

Little M iss M uffett unquestionably represents M alkah; for she is unmarried. She is seated upon a “tuffet”; id
est, tne isthe unregenerate soul upon T ophet, the pit of hell. And she eatscurdsand whey, that is, not the pure
milk of the mother, but milk which has undergone decompostion.

But who isthe spider? Verily herein isa venerable arcanum connoted! Like all insects, the spider represents a
demon. But why aspider? W ho isthisspider “who taketh hold with her hands, and isin King’sPalaces’? T he
name of this spider is Death. It is the fear of death which first makes the soul aware of its forlorn condition.

It would be interesting if tradition had preserved for us M iss M uffett’s subsequent adventures.
But we must proceed to consder the interpretation of the following rime:

Little Jack H orner

Sat in acorner,

Eating a Christmas pie.

He stuck in his thumb,

And pulled out aplum,

And said, “W hat agood boy am |!”

In the interpretation of this remarkable poem there is a difference between two great schools of Adepts.

One holds that Jack is merely a corruption of John, lon, he who goes-H ermes, the M essenger. T he other
prefersto take Jack Smply and reverently asl acchus, the spiritual form of Bacchus, But it doesnot matter very
much whether we insist upon the swiftness or the rapture of the H oly Spirit of God; and that it ishe of whom
itishere spoken isevident, for the name H orner could be applied to none other by even the most casual reader
of the H oly Gospels and the works of Congreve. And the context makes this even clearer, for he sts in a
corner, that isin the place of Christ, the C orner Stone, eating, that is, enjoying, that which the birth of Christ
assures to us. H eisthe C omforter who replaces the absent Saviour. If there was still any doubt of H isidentity
it would be cleared up by the fact that it isthe thumb, which isattributed to the element of Spirit, and not one
of the four fingers of the four lesser elements, which he sticks into the pie of the new dispensation. He plucks
forth one who isripe, no doubt to send him forth as a teacher into the world, and rejoices that he is so well
carrying out the will of the Father.

Let us pass from this most blessed subject to yet another.
Tom, Tom, the piper’s son,

Stole a pig and away he run.

T he pig was eat,

And T om was beat,

And Tom went roaring down the street.

T hisisone of the more exoteric of these rimes. In fact, it isnot much better than asun-myth. Tom isT oum,
the God of the Sunset (called the Son of Apollo, the Piper, the maker of music). The only difficulty in the
poem concernsthe pig; for anyone who haswatched an angry sunset in the T ropicsupon the a, will recognize
how incomparable a description of that sunset is given in that wonderful last line. Some have thought that the
pig refersto the evening sacrifice, others that she is H athor, the Lady of the W eg, in her more sensual aspect.

But it is probable that this poem is only the frst stanza of an epic. It has all the characteristic marks. Someone
said of the Iliad that it did not finish, but merely topped. T hisisthe same. W e may be sure that there ismore
of this poem. It tells ustoo much and too little. H ow came this tragedy of the eating of amerely stolen pig?
U nveil this mystery of who “eat” it!

It must be abandoned, then, as at least partially insoluble. Let us consider this poem:
Hickory, dickory, dock!

The mous ran up the clock;

The clock struck one,

And the mouse ran down,

Hickory, dickory, dock!

H ere we are on higher ground at once. The clock symbolizes the spinal column, or, if you prefer it, Time,
chosen as one of the conditions of normal consciousness. T he mouse is the Ego; “M us,” amouse, being only
Sum, “| am,” spelt Q abalistically backwards.

This Ego or Prana or Kundalini force being driven up the spine, the clock strikes one, that is, the duality of

consciousness is abolished. And the force again subsides to its original level.

“Hickory, dickory, dock!” is perhaps the mantra which was used by the adept who constructed this rime,
thereby hoping to fix it in the minds of men; so that they might attain to Samadhi by the same method.
Others attribute to it a more profound signifance-which it is impossible to go into at this moment, for we
must turn to:-

Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall;

H umpty Dumpty got a great fall;

All the king's horses

And all the king’s men

Couldn't set up Humpty Dumpty again.

T hisisso smple ashardly to require explanation. H umpty D umpty isof course the Egg of Spirit, and the wall
isthe Abyss— his “fall” istherefore the descent of spirit into matter; and it isonly too painfully familiar to us
that all the king's horses and all his men cannot restore us to the height.

Only The King Himself can do that!

But one can hardly comment upon a theme which has been so fruitfully treated by Ludovicus C arolus, that
most holy illuminated man of God. H is masterly treatment of the identity of the three reciprocating paths of
Daleth, T eth, and Pe, isone of the most wonderful passages in the H oly Q abalah. H is resolution of what we
take to be the bond of slavery into very love, the embroidered neckband of honour bestowed upon usby the
King himself, is one of the most sublime passages in this class of literature.

Peter, Peter, pumpkin eater,
H ad awife and couldn’t keep her.
He put her in a peanut shell;
Then he kept her very well.

This early authentic text of the H inayana School of Buddhism is much esteemed even to-day by the more
cultured and devoted followers of that school.

T he pumpkin is of course the symbol of resurrection, asis familiar to all students of the story of Jonah and the
gourd.

Peter is therefore the Arahat who has put an end to his series of resurrections. T hat he is called Peter isa
reference to the symbolizing of Arahats as stonesin the great wall of the guardians of mankind. H is wife is of
course (by the usual symbolism) his body, which he could not keep until he put her in a peanut shell, the
yellow robe of a Bhikkhu.

Buddha said that if any man became an Arahat he must either take the vowsof aBhikkhu that very day, or die,
and it isthis saying of Buddha's that the unknown poet wished to commemorate.

T affy was a W elshman

T affy wasa thief;

T affy came to my house
And stole a leg of beef.

| went to T affy’s house;
T affy wasin bed.

| took acarving knife,
And cut off T affy’s head.

T affy ismerely short for T aphthatharath, the Spirit of M ercury and the God of W elshmen or thieves. “M y
house” is of course equivalent to “my magick circle.” N ote that Beth, the letter of Mercury and “The
M agus,” means “a house.”

T he beef isa symbol of the Bull, Apisthe R edeemer. T hisis therefore that which is written, “Oh my God,
disguise thy glory! Come asathief, and let us steal away the sacraments!”

In the following verse we find that T affy is “in bed,” owing to the operation of the sacrament. T he great task
of the Alchemist has been accomplished; the mercury is fixed.

One can then take the H oly Dagger, and separate the C aput M ortuum from the Elixir. Some Alchemists
believe that the beef represents that dense physical substance which is imbibed by M ercury for his fixation;
but here as always we should prefer the more spiritual interpretation.

Bye, Baby Bunting!

D addy’s gone a hunting.

H e’sgone to get arabbit- skin
To wrap my Baby Bunting in.

T hisis mystical charge to the new-born soul to keep still, to remain steadfast in meditation; for, in Bye, Beth
is the letter of thought, Y od that of the H ermit. It tells the soul that the Father of All will clothe him about
with Hisown majestical slence. For isnot the rabbit he “who lay low and said nuffin’” ?

Pat-a-cake, pat-a cake, baker’s man!
Bake me acake as fast as you can!

Pat it and prick it and mark it with P!
Bake it in the oven for baby and me!

T hisrimeisusually accompanied (even to-day in the nursery) with aceremonial clapping of hands-the symbol
of Samadhi. Compare what is said on this subject in our comment on the famous “Advent” passage in
Thessalonians.

T he cake is of course the bread of the sacrament, and it would ill become F rater P. to comment upon the third

line-though it may be remarked that even among the Catholics the wafer has always been marked with a
phallus or cross.

CHAPTER VIII
THE SWORD

“THE word of the Lord is quick and powerful, and sharper than a two- edged sword.”

Asthe W and isC hokmah, the Will, “the Father,” and the Cup the U nderstanding, “the M other,” Binah; so
the M agick Sword isthe R eason, “the Son,” the sx Sephiroth of the R uach, and we shall see that the Pantacle
corresponds to M alkuth, “the D aughter.”

The M agick Sword isthe analytical faculty; directed against any demon it attacks his complexity.

O nly thesimple can withstand the sword. Asweare below the Abyss, thisweapon isthen entirely destructive:
it divides Satan against Satan. It isonly in the lower formsof M agick, the purely human forms, that the Sword
has become so important a weapon. A dagger should be sufficient.

But the mind of man is normally so important to him that the sword is actually the largest of his weapons,
happy ishe who can make the dagger suffice!

The hilt of the Sword should be made of copper.

T he guard iscomposed of the two crescents of the waxing and the waning moon — back to back. Spheres are
placed between them, forming an equilateral triangle with the sphere of the pommel.

T he blade is straight, pointed, and sharp right up to the guard. It is made of steel, to equilibrate with the hilt,
for steel isthe metal of M ars, as copper is of Venus

Those two planets are male and female — and thus reflect the W and and the Cup, though in amuch lower
sense,

The hilt is of Venus, for Love isthe motive of this ruthless analyss— if thiswere not so the sword would be
a Black M agical weapon.

The pommel of the Sword isin Daath, the guard extends to C hesed and Geburah; the point is in M alkuth.
Some magi make the three spheres of lead, tin, and gold respectively; the moons are silver, and the grip
contains quicksilver, thusmaking the Sword symbolic of the seven planets. But thisisa phantasy and affectation.

“W hoso taketh the sword shall perish by the sword,” isnot amystical threat, but amystical promise. It isour
own complexity that must be destroyed.

H ere is another parable. Peter, the Stone of the Philosophers, cuts off the ear of M alchus, the servant of the
H igh Priest (the ear isthe organ of Spirit). In analysisthe spiritual part of M alkuth must be separated from it by
the philosophical tone, and then Christus, the Anointed O ne, makesit whole once more. “Solve et coagula!”

It isnoticeable that this takes place at the arrest of Christ, who isthe son, the R uach, immediately before his
crucifixion.

The Calvary Cross should be of 9x squares, an unfolded cube, which cube is this same philosophical stone.
M editation will reveal many mysteries which are concealed in this symbol.

The Sword or Dagger is attributed to air, all-wandering, all- penetrating, but unstable; not a phenomenon

subtle like fire, not achemical combination like water, but a mixture of gases.
footnote: T he O xygen in the air would be too fierce for life; it must be largely diluted with the inert nitrogen.

T herational mind supports life, but about seventy-nine per cent. of it not only refuses itself to enter into combination,
but prevents the remaining twenty-one per cent. from doing so. E nthusiasms are checked; the intellect is the great
enemy of devotion. O neof the tasks of the M agidan is to manage somehow to separate theO xygen and N itrogen
in his mind, to stifle four-fifts so that he may burn up the remainder, a flame of holiness. B ut this cannot be done
by the Sword.

The Sword, necessary asit isto the Beginner, is but a crude weapon. Its function isto keep off the enemy or
to force a passage through them — and though it must be wielded to gain admission to the palace, it cannot be
worn at the marriage feast.

One might say that the Pantacle is the bread of life, and the Sword the knife which cutsit up. One must have
ideas, but one must criticize them.

The Sword, too, is that weapon with which one strikes terror into the demons and dominates them. O ne
must keep the Ego Lord of the impressions. O ne must not allow the circle to be broken by the demon; one
must not allow any one idea to carry one away.

It will readily be seen how very elementary and false all thisis— but for the beginner it is necessary.

In all dealingswith demonsthe point of the Sword iskept downwards, and it should not be used for invocation,
as is taught in certain schools of magick.

If the Sword is raised towards the Crown, it is no longer really a sword. The Crown cannot be divided.
Certainly the Sword hnould not be lifted.

The Sword may, however, be clasped in both hands, and kept steady and erect, symbolizing that thought has
become one with the single aspiration, and burnt up like aflame. T hisflameisthe Shin, theR uach Alhim, not
the mere R uach Adam. The divine and not the human consciousness.

The M agician cannot wield the Sword unless the Crown ison his head.

T hose M agicians, who have attempted to make the Sword the sole or even the principal weapon, have only
destroyed themselves, not by the destruction of combination, but by the destruction of division.

footnote: It should be noted that this ambiguity in the word “destruction” has been the cause of much
misunderstanding. “Solve” is destruction, but so is “coagula.” The aim of the M agus is to destroy his partial
thought by uniting it with the U niversal T hought, not to makea further breach and division in the W hole.

W eakness overcomes strength.

T hemos stable political edifice of history hasbeen that of C hina, which wasfounded principally on politeness,
and that of India has proved strong enough to absorb its many conquerors.

footnote: The Brahmin caste is not so strict as that of the “heaven-born” (Indian C ivil Service).

T he Sword has been the great weapon of the last century. Every idea has been attacked by thinkers, and none
has withstood attack. H ence civilization crumbles.

N o settled principlesremain. T o- day all constructive sttatesmanship isempiricism or opportunism. It hasbeen
doubted whether there is any real relation between M other and Child, any real distinction between M ale and
Female.

The human mind, in despair, seeing insanity imminent in the breaking up of these coherent images, has tried
to replace them by ideals which are only saved from destruction, at the very moment of their birth, by their
vagueness,

T he W ill of the K ing wasat least ascertainable at any moment; nobody hasyet devised ameansfor ascertaining
the will of the people.

All conscious willed action is impeded; the march of events is now nothing but inertia.

Let the M agician consider these matters before he takes the Sword in his hand. Let him understand that the
R uach, thisloose combination of 6 Sephiroth, only bound together by their attachment to the human will in
Tiphereth, must be rent asunder.

The mind must be broken up into a form of insanity before it can be transcended.
David said: “| hate thoughts.”

The Hindu says: “T hat which can be thought is not true.”

Paul said: “T he carnal mind is enmity against God.”

And every one who meditates, even for an hour, will soon discover how this gusty aimless wind makes his
flame flicker. “T he wind bloweth where it listeth.” T he normal man is less than a straw.

footnote But as itis said, “Similia similibus urantur,” we find this R uach also thesymbol of theSpirit. RV Ch
ALHIM, theSpirit of G od, is 300, thenumber of the holy letter Shin. Asthisis the breath, which by its nature
isdouble, the two edges of the Sword, the letter H symbolises breath, and H isthe letter of A ries— theH ouse of
M ars, of the Sword: and H isalso the letter of the M other; this is the link between the Sword and the C up.

T he connection between Breath and M ind hasbeen supposed by some to exist merely in etymology. But the
connection isa truer one.

no no

footnote: It is undoubted that R uach means primarily “that which moves or revolves,” “a going,” “a wheel,”
“the wind,” and that its seandary meaning was mind because of the observed instability of mind, and its
tendency to a draular motion. “Spiritus” only came to mean Spirit in the modern technical sense owing to the
efforts of the theologians. W e have an example of the proper use of the word in the term: Spirit of W ine— the
airy portion of wine. But the word “inspire” was perhaps derived from observing the derangement of the breathing
of persons in divine ecstasy.

In any case there isundoubtedly aconnection between the respiratory and mental functions. T he Student will
find this out by practising Pranayama. By this exercise some thoughts are barred, and those which do come
into the mind come more Sowly than before, so that the mind hastime to perceive their falsity and to destroy
them.

On the blade of the M agick Sword is etched the name AGLA, aN otariqon formed from the initials of the
sentence “Ateh Gibor Leolahm Adonai,” “To thee be the Power unto the Ages, O my lord.”

And the acid which eats into the steel should be oil of vitrol. Vitrol isa N otarigon of “VisitalnterioraT errae

R ectificando Invenies O ccultum Lapidem.” T hat is to say: By investigating everything and bringing it into
harmony and proportion you will find the hidden stone, the same stone of the philosophers of which mention
has already been made, which turnsall into gold. T his oil which can eat into the steel, isfurther that which is
written, Liber LXV, i, 16: “Asan acid eats into steel... so am! unto the Spirit of M an.”

N ote how closely woven into itself is all this symbolism!

T he centre of R uach being the heart, it is seen that this Sword of the R uach must be thrust by the M agician
into hisown heart.

But there is a subsequent task, of which it issooken — Liber VII, v, 47. “He shall await the sword of the
Beloved and bare histhroat for the troke.” In the throat isD aath — the throne of R uach. D aath isknowledge.
Thisfinal destruction of knowledge opens the gate of the City of the Pyramids.

Itisalso written, Liber CCX X, ili, 11: “Let the woman be girt with asword before me.” But thisrefersto the
arming of V edana with Sanna, the overcoming of emotion by clarity of perception.

Itisalso spoken, Liber LX V, v, 14, of the Sword of Adonai, “that hath four blades, the blade of the T hunderbolt,
the blade of the Pylon, the blade of the Serpent, the blade of the Phallus.”

But this Sword isnot for the ordinary M agician. For thisisthe Sword flaming every way that keepsE den, and
in this Sword the W and and the Cup are concealed — so that although the being of the M agician is blasted by
the Thunderbolt, and poisoned by the Serpent, at the same time the organs whos union is the supreme
sacrament are left in him.

At the coming of Adonai the individual is destroyed in both senses. H eis shattered into athousand pieces, yet
at the same time united with the smple

footnote: C ompare the first set of verses in Liber XVI. (XVI in theT aro is Pe, M ars, the Sword.)

Of thisit isalso spoken by St. Paul in his Epistle to the C hurch in T hessalonica: “For the Lord shall descend
from H eaven, with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of God; and the dead in
Christ shall rise first. Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them into the
clouds to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we be for ever with the Lord.”

T he stupid interpretation of this verse as prophetic of a “second advent” need not concern us; every word of
it is, however, worthy of profound consideration.

“The Lord” isAdonai — which isthe H ebrew for “my Lord”; and H e descends from heaven, the supernal
Eden, the Sahasrara C akkrain man, with a “shout,” a “voice,” and a“trump,” again airy symbols, for it is air
that carries sound. T hese sounds refer to those heard by the Adept at the moment of rapture.

This is most accurately pictured in the T arot Trump called “The Angel,” which corresponds to the letter
Shin, the letter of Spirit and of Breath.

The whole mind of man is rent by the advent of Adonai, and is at once caught up into union with Him. “In
the air,” the R uach.

N ote that etymologically the word {greek letters here: S3gma-upslon-nu}, “together with,” is the Sanskrit
“Sam;” and the H ebrew ADN| isthe Sanskrit ADH I.

The phrase “together with the Lord,” isthen literally identical with the word Samadhi, which isthe Sanskrit

name of the phenomenon described by Saint Paul, thisunion of the ego and the non-ego, subject and object,
this chymical marriage, and thus identical with the symbolism of the R osy Cross, under a slightly different
aspect.

And since marriage can only take place between one and one, it is evident that no idea can thus be united,
unless it is simple.

H ence every idea must be analysed by the Sword. Hence, too, there must only be a single thought in the
mind of the person meditating.

One may now go on to consider the use of the Sword in purifying emotions into perceptions.

It was the function of the C up to interpret the perceptions by the tendencies, the Sword freesthe perceptions
from the W eb of emotion.

The perceptions are meaningless in themselves, but the emotions are worse, for they delude their victim into
supposing them significant and true.

Every emotion is an obsession; the most horrible of blasohemies is to attribute any emotion to God in the
macrocosm, or to the pure soul in the microcogn.

H ow can that which is self- existent, complete, be “moved?” It iseven written that “torson about a point is
iniquity.”

WEH footnote See M aqobius, |amblichus, Plotinus and sayings attributed to P ythagoras for these views
But if the point itself could be moved it would cease to be itself, for position isthe only attribute of the point.
The M agician must therefore make himself absolutely free in this respect.

It isthe constant practice of Demons to attempt to terrify, to shock, to disgust, to allure. Against all this he
must oppose the Steel of the Sword. If he has got rid the ego- idea this task will be comparatively easy; unless
he has done 0 it will be almost impossible. So says the D hammapada:

M e he abused, and me he beat, he robbed me, he insulted me;
In whom such thoughts find harbourage, hatred will never cease to be.
And this hatred isthe thought which inhibits the love whose apotheosis is Samadhi.

But it is too much to expect of the young M agician to practise attachment to the distasteful; let him first
become indifferent. Let him endeavour to see facts as facts, as smply as he would see them if they were
historical. Let him avoid the imaginative interpretation of any facts Let him not put himself in the place of the
people of whom the facts are related, or if he does 0, let it be done only for the purpose of comprehension.
Sympathy,

footnote: It is true that sometimes sympathy is necessary to comprehension.
indignation, praise and blame, are out of place in the observer.

No one has properly considered the question as to the amount and quality of the light afforded by candles
made by waxed Christians.

Who has any idea which joint of the ordinary missionary is preferred by epicures? It is only a matter of
conjecture that C atholics are better eating than Presbyterians.

Y et these points and their kind are the only ones which have any importance at the time when the events
occur.

N ero did not consder what unborn posterity might think of him; it is difficult to credit cannibals with the
calculation that the recital of their exploits will induce pious old ladies to replenish their larder.

Very few people have ever “seen” a bull-fight. O ne set of people goes for excitement, another set for the
perverse excitement which real or Smulated horror affords Very few people know that blood freshly spilled
in the sunlight is perhaps the most beautiful colour that isto be found in nature.

It isanotoriousfact that it is practically impossible to get a reliable description of what occursat a spiritualistic
“seance;” the emotions cloud the vision.

Only in the absolute calm of the laboratory, where the observer is perfectly indifferent to what may happen,
only concerned to observe exactly what that happening is, to measure and to weigh it by meansof instruments
incapable of emotion, can one even begin to hope for a truthful record of events. Even the common physical
bases of emotion, the senses of pleasure and pain, lead the observer infallibly to err. This though they be not
sufficiently excited to disturb his mind.

Plunge one hand into a basin of hot water, the other into abasin of cold water, then both together into a basin
of tepid water; the one hand will say hot, the other cold.

Even in instruments themselves, their physical qualities, such as expansion and contraction (which may be
called, in away, the roots of pleasure and pain), cause error.

M ake a thermometer, and the glass is so excited by the necessary fusion that year by year, for thirty years
afterwards or more, the height of the mercury will continue to alter; how much more then with so plastic a
matter as the mind! There is no emotion which does not leave a mark on the mind, and all marks are bad
marks. H ope and fear are only opposite phases of a Sngle emotion; both are incompatible with the purity of
the soul. W ith the passons of man the case is somewhat different, as they are functions of hisown will. T hey
need to be disciplined, not to be suppressed. But emotion isimpressed from without. It isan invasion of the
circle.

Asthe Dhammapada says:

An ill-thatched house is open to the mercy of the rain and wind;

So passion hath the power to break into an unreflecting mind.

A well-thatched house is proof against the fury of the rain and wind;
So passion hath no power to break into arightly-ordered mind.

Let then the Student practise observation of those things which normally would cause him emotion; and let
him, having written acareful description of what he sees, check it by the aid of some person familiar with such
gghts.

Surgical operations and dancing girls are fruitful fields for the beginner.

In reading emotional books such asare inflicted on children, let him always endeavour to see the event from
the standpoint opposte to that of the author. Y et let him not emulate the partially emancipated child who
complained of a picture of the C olosseum that “there was one poor little lion who hadn't got any Christian,”
except in the first instance. Adverse criticism is the first tep; the second must go further.

H aving sympathized sufficiently with both the lionsand the C hristians, let him open hiseyesto that which his
sympathy had masked hitherto, that the picture isabominably conceived, abominably composed, abominably
drawn, and abominably coloured, asit is pretty sure to be.

Let him further study those masters, in science or in art, who have observed with minds untinctured by
emotion.

Let him learn to detect idealizations, to criticize and correct them.

Let him understand the falsehood of R aphael, of W atteau, of Leighton, of Bouguereau; let him appreciate the
truthfulness of John, of R embrandt, of Titian, of O’C onor.

Similar studies in literature and philosophy will lead to smilar results. But do not let him neglect the analysis
of hisown emotions, for until these are overcome he will be incapable of judging others.

This analyss may be carried out in various ways, one is the materialistic way. For example, if oppressed by
nightmare, let him explain: “T his nightmare is a cerebral congestion.”

T he strict way of doing this by meditation is M ahasatipatthana,
footnote See C rowley, “C olleced W orks,” vol. li, pp. 252-254.

but it should be aided in every moment of life by endeavouring to estimate occurrences at their true value.
T heir relativity in particular must be carefully considered.

Y our toothache does not hurt any one outsde avery gmall circle. Floodsin C hina mean to you nothing but a
paragraph in the newspaper. T he destruction of the world itself would have no significance in Sirius. O ne can
hardly imagine even that the astronomers of Sirius could perceive so trifling a disturbance.

N ow considering that Sirius itself is only, as far as you know, but one, and one of the leat important, of the
ideas in your mind, why should that mind be disturbed by your toothache? It is not possible to labour this
point without tautology, for it isa very Smple one; but it should be emphasised, for it isa very dmple one.
W augh! W augh! W augh! W augh! W augh!

In the question of ethicsit again becomes vital, for to many people it semsimpossible to consider the merits
of any act without dragging in anumber of subjects which have no real connection with it.

The Bible has been mistrandiated by perfectly competent scholars because they had to consder the current
theology. The mos glaring example is the “Song of Solomon,” a typical piece of O riental eroticism. But
gnce to admit that it wasthiswould never do for acanonical book, they had to pretend that it was symbolical.

T hey tried to refine away the grossness of the expressions, but even their hardihood proved unequal to the
task.

T his form of dishonesty reaches its climax in the expurgating of the classics. “T he Bible isthe W ord of God,
written by holy men, asthey were inspired by the H oly Ghost. But we will cut out those passages which we
think unsuitable.” “Shakespeare is our greatest poet — but, of course, he is very dreadful.” “No one can

surpass the lyrics of Shelley, but we must pretend that he was not an atheist.”

Some translators could not bear that the heathen C hinese should use the word Shang Ti, and pretended that it
did not mean God. O thers, compelled to admit that it did mean God, explained that the use of the term
showed that “God had not left himself without a witness even in this most idolatrous of nations. T hey had
been mysteriously compelled to use it, not knowing what it meant.” All this because of their emotional belief
that they were better than the C hinese.

The mog dazzling example of this is shown in the history of the study of Buddhism.

T he early scholars smply could not understand that the Buddhist canon denies the soul, regards the ego asa
delusion caused by a special faculty of the diseased mind, could not understand that the goal of the Buddhist,
Nibbana, was in any way different from their own goal, Heaven, in spite of the perfect plainness of the
language in such dialogues as those between the Arahat N agasena and King M elinda; and their attempts to
square the text with their preconceptions will always stand as one of the great follies of the wise.

Again, it isalmost impossble for the well-mannered Christian to realize that Jesus C hrist ate with his fingers.
T he temperance advocate makes believe that the wine at the marriage feast of C ana was non-alcoholic.

It isasort of mad syllogism.

“N obody whom | respect does this.”

“| respect So- and- so.”

“T herefore, So-and-so did not do this.”

The moralist of to-day is furious when one points to the fact that practically every great man in history was
grossly and notoriously immoral.

Enough of this painful subject!

Aslong aswetry to fit factsto theoriesinstead of adopting the scientific attitude of altering the theories (when
necessary) to fit the facts, we shall remain mired in falsehood.

T he religious taunt the scientific man with this open- mindedness, with this adaptability. “T ell alie and stick
to it!” is“their” golden rule.

CHAPTER IX
THE PANTACLE

AS the M agick Cup isthe heavenly food of the M agus, so isthe M agick Pantacle his earthly food.
The W and washis divine force, and the Sword his human force.
The Cup is hollow to receive the influence from above. T he Pantacle is flat like the fertile plains of earth.

T hename Pantacle impliesan image of the All, “omnein parvo;” but thisisby amagical transformation of the
Pantacle. Just as we made the Sword symbolical of everything by the force of our M agick, so do we work
upon the Pantacle. T hat which ismerely a piece of common bread shall be the body of God!

The W and was the will of man, his wisdom, his word; the Cup was his understanding, the vehicle of grace;
the Sword was his reason; and the Pantacle shall be his body, the temple of the H oly Ghost.

W hat isthe length of this T emple?
From N orth to South.

W hat is the breadth of this T emple?
From East to W est.

W hat is the height of this T emple?
From the Abyssto the Abyss.

There is, therefore, nothing movable or immovable under the whole firmament of heaven which is not
included in this pantacle, though it be but “eight inchesin diameter, and in thickness half an inch.”

Fire isnot matter at all; water isa combination of elements, air almost entirely a mixture of elements; earth
contains all both in admixture and in combination.

So must it be with this Pantacle, the symbol of earth.
And as this Pantacle is made of pure wax, do not forget that “everything that lives is holy.”

All phenomena are sacraments. Every fact, and even every falschood, must enter into the Pantacle; it is the
great storehouse from which the M agician draws.

“In the brown cakes of corn we shall taste the food of the world and be strong.”

footnote: W e have avoided dealing with the Pantade as the Paten of the Sawament, though spedal instrudions
about it are given in Liber Legis. It is composed of meal, honey, wine, holy oil, and blood.

W hen speaking of the Cup, it was shown how every fact must be made significant, how every stone must
have its proper place in the mosaic. W oe were it were one stone misplaced! But that mosaic cannot be
wrought at all, well or ill, unless every stone be there.

T hese stones are the smple impressions or experiences, not one may be foregone.

Do not refuse anything merely because you Know that it isthe cup of Poison offered by your enemy; drink it
with confidence; it is he that will fall dead!

W EH footnote: M etaphor. N ot for reading by children!

How can | give Cambodian art its proper place in art, if | have never heard of Cambodia? H ow can the
Geologist estimate the age of what lies beneath the chalk unless he have a piece of knowledge totally
unconnected with geology, the life-history of the animals of whom that chalk is the remains?

Thisthen isavery great difficulty for the M agician. H e cannot possibly have all experience, and though he
may console himself philosophically with the reflection that the U niverseisconterminouswith such experience
as he has, he will find it grow at such apace during the early years of hislife that he may almost be tempted to
believe in the possibility of experiences beyond his own, and from a practical standpoint he will seem to be
confronted with so many avenues of knowledge that he will be bewildered which to choose.

T he asshesitated between two thistles; how much more that greater ass, that incomparably greater ass, betw een
two thousand!

Fortunately it does not matter very much; but he should at least choose those branches of knowledge which
abut directly upon universal problems.

H e hhould choose not one but several, and these should be as diverse as possible in nature.

It isimportant that he should strive to excel in some sport, and that that sport should be the one best calculated
to keep this body in health.

H eshould have athorough grounding in classics, mathematics and science; also enough general knowledge of
modern languages and of the shifts of life to enable him to travel in any part of the world with ease and
security.

H istory and geography he can pick up ashe wantsthem; and what should interest him most in any subject is
its links with some other subject, so that his Pantacle may not lack what painters call “composition.”

H e will find that, however good hismemory may be, ten thousand impressions enter his mind for every one
that it is able to retain even for aday. And the excellence of amemory liesin the wisdom of its selection.

T he best memories so select and judge that practically nothing isretained which hasnot some coherence with
the general plan of the mind.

All Pantacles will contain the ultimate conceptions of the circle and the cross, though some will prefer to
replace the cross by apoint, or by aT au, or by atriangle. T he V esica Pisces is sometimes used instead of the
circle, or the circle may be glyphed as a serpent. Time and space and the idea of causality are sometimes
represented; so also are the three stagesin the history of philosophy, in which the three objects of tudy were
successively N ature, God, and M an.

T he duality of consciousness is also sometimes represented; and the T ree of Life itself may be figured therein,
or the categories. An emblem of the Great W ork should be added. But the Pantacle will be imperfect unless
each idea is contrasted in a balanced manner with its opposite, and unless there is a necessary connection
between each pair of ideas and every other pair.

The Neophyte will perhaps do well to make the first sketches for his Pantacle very large and complex,

subsequently amplifying, not so much by exclusion as by combination, just asa Zoologist, beginning with
the four great Apes and M an, combinesall in the single word “primate.”

It isnot wise to smplify too far, since the ultimate hieroglyphic must be an infinite. T he ultimate resolution
not having been performed, its symbol must not be portrayed.

If any person were to gain accessto V.V.V.V.V.,
footnote T he M otto of theC hief of theA.’.A.’., “theLight of the W orld H imself.”

and ask Him to discourse upon any subject, there is little doubt that H e could only comply by an unbroken
glence, and even that might not be wholly satisfactory, snce the T ao T eh King saysthat the T ao cannot be
declared either by silence or by speech.

In thispreliminary task of collecting materials, the idea of the Ego isnot of such great moment; all impressions
are phases of the non-ego, and the Ego serves merely asareceptacle. In fact, to the well regulated mind, there
isno question but that the impressions are real, and that the mind, if not a “tabula rasa,” isonly not so because
of the “tendencies” or “innate ideas” which prevent some ideas from being received as readily as others.

footnote: It does not ocur to a newly-hatched chicken to behave in the same way as a new-born child.

T hese “tendencies” must be combated: distasteful facts should be inssted upon until the Ego is perfectly
indifferent to the nature of its food.

“Even asthe diamond shall glow red for the rose, and green for the rose-leaf, so halt thou abide apart from the
Impressions.”

This great task of separating the self from the impressions or “vrittis’ is one of the may meanings of the
aphorism “solve,” corresponding to the “coagula” implied in Samadhi, and this Pantacle therefore represents
all that we are, the resultant of all that we had atendency to be.

In the Dhammapada we read:

All that we are from mind results; on mind is founded, built of mind;

W ho acts or speaks with evil thought him doth pain follow sure and blind.

So the ox plants his foot, and so the car wheel follows hard behind.

All that we are from mind results; on mind is founded, built of mind;

W ho acts or speaks with righteous thought him happiness doth surely find.

So failing not the shadow falls for ever in its place assigned.

T he Pantacle is then in a sense identical with the K arma or Kamma of the M agician.

The K arma of aman ishis “ledger.” T he balance has not been struck and he doesnot know what it is; he does
not even fully know what debts he may have to pay, or what isowed him; nor does he know on what dates
even those payments which he anticipates may fall due.

A business conducted on such lines would be in a terrible mess; and we find in fact that man isin just such a
mess, W hile he is working day and night at some unimportant detail of his affairs, some giant force may be

advancing “pede claudo” to overtake him.

M any of the entriesin this “ledger” are for the ordinary man necessarily illegible; the method of reading them
is given in that important instruction of the A.’.A.’. called “T hisharb,” Liber CM XIII.

N ow consder that this K arma is all that aman hasor is. His ultimate object isto get rid of it completely —
when it comes to the point of surrendering

footnote T o surrender all, one must give up not only the bad but the good; not only weakness but strength. H ow
can the mystic surrender all, while he dings to his virtues?

the Self to the Beloved; but in the beginning the M agician is not that Self, he is only the heap of refuse from
which that Self isto be built up. The M agical instruments must be made before they are destroyed.

T hisidea of K arma has been confused by many who ought to have know better, including the Buddha, with
the ideas of poetic justice and of retribution.

We have the story of one of the Buddha's Arahats, who being blind, in walking up and down unwittingly
killed a number of insects. [The Buddhist regards the destruction of life as the most shocking crime.] His
brother Arahats inquired as to how this was, and Buddha spun them along yarn as to how, in a previous
incarnation, he had maliciously deprived awoman of her sight. T hisis only afairy tale, abogey to frighten the
children, and probably the worst way of influencing the young yet devised by human stupidity.

K arma does not work in this way at all.

In any case moral fableshave to be very carefully constructed, or they may prove dangerousto those who use
them.

Y ou will remember Bunyan’s Passion and Patience: naughty Passion played with all thistoysand broke them,
good little Patience put them carefully aside. Bunyan forgets to mention that by the time Passion had broken
all his toys, he had outgrown them.

K armadoesnot act in thistit- for-tat- way. An eye for an eye isa sort of savage justice, and the idea of justice in
our human sense is quite foreign to the constitution of the U niverse.

Karma isthe Law of C ause and Effect. There isno proportion in its operations. O nce an accident occurs it is
impossible to say what may happen; and the U niverse is a tupendous accident.

W e go out to teaa thousand times without mishap, and the thousand- and- first time we meet some one who
changes radically the course of our lives for ever.

T here isa sort of sense in which every impression that ismade upon our mindsisthe resultant of all the forces
of the past; no incident isso trifling that it has not in some way shaped one’s disposition. But there is none of
thiscrude retribution about it. O ne may kill ahundred thousand lice in one brief hour at the foot of the Baltoro
Glacier, as Frater P. once did. It would be stupid to suppose, asthe T heosophist inclines to suppose, that this
action involves one in the doom of being killed by a louse a hundred thousand times.

This ledger of Karma is kept separate from the petty cash account; and in respect of bulk this petty cash
account is very much bigger than the ledger.

If we eat too much salmon we get indigestion and perhaps nightmare. It is slly to suppose that a time will
come when asalmon will eat us, and find us disagree.

On the other hand we are always being terribly punished for actions that are not faults at all. Even our virtues
rous insulted nature to revenge.

K arma only grows by what it fees on: and if K armaisto be properly brought up, it requiresavery careful diet.

W ith the majority of people their actionscancel each other out; no sooner iseffort made than it iscounterbalanced
by idleness. Eros gives place to Anteros.

N ot one man in a thousand makes even an apparent escape from the commonplace of animal life.
Birth is sorrow;

Life is sorrow;

Sorrowful are old age, disease, and death;

But resurrection is the greatest misery of all.

“Oh what misery! birth incessantly!” as Buddha said.

One goes on from day to day with alittle of this and a little of that, a few kind thoughts and a few unkind
thoughts; nothing really getsdone. Body and mind are changed, changed beyond recall by nightfall. But what
“meaning” has any of this change?

H ow few there are who can look back through the years and say that they have made advance in any definite
direction? And in how few isthat change, such asit is, avariable with intelligence and consciousvolition! T he
dead weight of the original conditions under which we were born has counted for far more than all our
griving. T he unconscious forces are incomparably greater than those of which we have any knowledge. T his
isthe “solidity” of our Pantacle, the K armaof our earth that whirls uswill he nill he around her axis at the rate
of athousand milesan hour. And athousand isAleph, acapital Aleph, the microcosm of all- wandering air, the
fool of the T aro, the aimlesmess and fatality of things!

It isvery difficult then in any way to “fashion” this heavy Pantacle.

W ecan engrave characters upon it with the dagger, but they will scarcely come to more than did the statue of
Ozymandias, King of Kings, in the midst of the unending desert.

W ecut afigure on the ice; it iseffaced in amorning by the tracks of other skaters; nor did that figure do more
than scratch the surface of the ice, and the ice itself must melt before the sun. Indeed the M agician may despair
when hecomesto make the Pantacle! Everyone hasthe material, one man’spretty well asgood ashisbrothers,
but for that Pantacle to be in any way fashioned to a willed end, or even to an intelligible end, or even to a
known end: “Hoc opus, Hic labor est.” It isindeed the toil of ascending from Avernus, and escaping to the
upper air.

In order to do it, it is most necessary to understand our tendencies, and to will the development of one, the
destruction of another. And though all elements in the Pantacle must ultimately be destroyed, yet some will
help us directly to reach a postion from which this task of destruction becomes possible; and there is no
element therein which may not be occasionally helpful.

And so — beware! Select! Select! Select!

T his Pantacle is an infinite storehouse; things will always be there when we want them. We may see to it

occasionally that they are dusted and the moth Kept out, but we shall usually be too busy to do much more.
R emember that in travelling from the earth to the stars, one dare not be encumbered with too much heavy
luggage. N othing that isnot a necessary part of the machine should enter into its compostion.

N ow though this Pantacle is composed only of shams, some shams somehow seem to be more false than
others.

The whole U niverse is an illusion, but it is an illusion difficult to get rid of. It is true compared with most
things. But ninety-nine out of every hundred impressions are false even in relation to the thingson their own
plane.

Such distinctions must be graven deeply upon the surface of the Pantacle by the H oly Dagger.

T here is only one other of the elemental Instruments to be considered, namely the Lamp.

CHAPTER X
THE LAMP

IN Liber A. vel Armorum, the official instruction of the A.’.A.’. for the preparation of the elemental weapons,
it issaid that each symbolic representation of the U niverse isto be approved by the Superior of the M agician.
To thisrule the Lamp isan exception; it is said:

“A Magical Lamp that shall burn without wick or oil, being fed by the Aethyr. This shall he accomplish
secretly and apart, without asking the advice or approval of hisAdeptus M inor.”

This Lamp is the light of the pure soul; it hath no need of fuel, it is the Burning Bush incomsumable that
M oses saw, the image of the M ost H igh.

T hisLamp hangeth above the Altar, it hath no support from below; itslight illuminesthe whole T emple, yet
upon it are cast no shadows, no reflections It cannot be touched, it cannot be extinguished, in no way can it
change; for it is utterly apart from all those things which have complexity, which have dimension, which
change and may be changed.

W hen the eyes of the M agus are fixed upon this Lamp naught else exists.

The Instruments lie idle on the Altar; that Light alone burns eternally.

The Divine W ill that was the W and isno more; for the path has become one with the Goal.

The Divine U nderstanding that was the Cup isno more; for the subject and O bject of intelligence are one.
The Divine R eason that was the Sword isno more; for the complex has been resolved into the Simple.
And the Divine Substance that was the Pantacle isno more; for the many has become the O ne.

Eternal, unconfined, unextended, without cause and without effect, the H oly Lamp mysterious burns.
W ithout quantity or quality, unconditioned and sempiternal, is this Light.

It isnot possible for anyone to advise or approve; for thisLamp isnot made with hands; it exists alone for ever;
it hasno parts, no person; it isbefore “| am.” Few can behold it, yet it isalwaysthere. For it thereisno “here”
nor “there,” no “then” nor “now;” all parts of speech are abolished, save the noun; and thisnoun isnot found
either in human speech or in Divine. It isthe Lost W ord, the dying music of whose sevenfold echo is! A O
and A U M. Without this Light the M agician could not work at all; yet few indeed are the M agicians that
have know of it, and far fewer T hey that have beheld its brilliance!

The T emple and all that isin it must be destroyed again and again before it is worthy to receive that Light.
H ence it so often seems that the only advice that any master can give to any pupil isto destroy the T emple.

“W hatever you have” and “whatever you are” are veils before that Light.

Y et in so great ~a matter all advice is vain. There isno master so great that he can see clearly the whole
character of any pupil. W hat helped him in the past may hinder another in the future.

Y et since the M aster is pledged to serve, he may take up that service on these simple lines. Since all thoughts
are veils of this Light, he may advise the destruction of all thoughts, and to that end teach those practices

which are clearly conductive to such destruction.
T hese practices have now fortunately been set down in clear language by order of theA.’.A.’..

In theseinstructionsthe relativity and limitation of each practice isclearly taught, and all dogmatic interpretations
are carefully avoided. Each practice isin itself ademon which must be destroyed; but to be destroyed it must
first be evoked.

Shame upon that M aster who shirks any one of these practices, however distasteful or useless it may be to him!
For in the detailed knowledge of it, which experience alone can give him, may lie hisopportunity for crucial
assistance to apupil. H owever dull the drudgery, it should be undergone. If it were possible to regret anything
in life, which is fortunately not the case, it would be the hours wasted in fruitful practices which might have
been more profitably employed on sterile ones: for NEMO

footnote NEMO istheM aster of the T enple, whose task it is to develop the beginne. See Liber CD XVIII,
Aethyr XIII.

in tending hisgarden seeketh not to Single out the flower that shall beN EM O after him. And wearenot told
that NEMO might have used other things than those which he actually does use; it seems possible that if he
had not the acid or the knife, or the fire, or the oil, he might misstending just that one flower which was to be
NEMO after him!

CHAPTER XI
THE CROWN

THE Crown of the M agician represents the A ttainment of his W ork. It isa band of pure gold, on the front of
which stand three pentagrams, and on the back a hexagram. T he central pentagram contains a diamond ora
great opal; the other three symbols contain the T au. Around this C rown istwined the golden U reaus serpent,
with erect head and expanded hood. U nder the Crown is a crimson cap of maintenance, which falls to the
Shoulders.

Instead of this, the Ateph C rown of T hoth issometimesworn; for T hoth isthe God of T ruth, of Wisdom, and
the T eacher of M agick. The Ateoh Crown has two ram’s horns, showing energy, dominion, the force that
breaks down obstacles, the sgn of the spring. Between these horns is the disk of the sun; from this springs a
Lotus upheld by the twin plumes of truth, and three other sun- disks are upheld, one by the cup of the lotus,
the others beneath the curving feathers.

T here is ill another Crown, the Crown of Amoun, the concealed one, from whom the H ebrews borrowed
their holy word “Amen.” T hisC rown consstssmply of the plumesof truth. But into the symbolism of these
it isnot necessary to go, for all this and more isin the C rown first described.

T hecrimson cap impliesconcealment, and isalso symbolical of the flood of glory that poursupon the M agician
from above. It is of velvet for the softness of that divine kiss, and crimson for that it isthe very blood of God
which is its life. The band of gold is the eternal circle of perfection. The three pentagrams symbolize the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, while the hexagram represents the M agician himself. Ordinarily,
pentagrams represent the microcosm, hexagrams the macrocosm; but here the reverse is the case, because in
this C rown of Perfection, that which is below has become that which is above, and that which is above had
become that which is below. If a diamond be worn, it is for the Light which is before all manifestations in
form; if an opal, it isto commemorate that sublime plan of the All, to fold and unfold in eternal rapture, to
manifest as the M any that the M any may become the O ne U nmanifest. But this matter is too great for an
elementary treatise on M agick.

T he Serpent which iscoiled about the C rown meansmany things, or, rather, one thing in many ways. Itisthe
symbol of royalty and of initiation, for the M agician is anointed King and Priest.

It also represents H adit, of which one can here only quote these words. “| am the secret serpent coiled about
to spring; in my coiling there isjoy. If | lift up my head, | and my N uit are one; if | droop down mine head and
Shoot forth venom, there is rapture of the earth, and | and the earth are one.”

T he serpent is also the K undalini serpent, the M agical force itself, the manifesting ade of the Godhead of the
M agician, whose unmanifested side is peace and silence, of which there is no symbol.

In the Hindu system the G reat W ork isrepresented by saying that thisserpent, which isnormally coiled at the
base of the spine, rises with her hood over the head of the Y ogi, there to unite with the Lord of all.

T he serpent is also he who poisons. It is that force which destroys the manifested U niverse. T his is also the
emerald snake which encirclesthe U niverse. T hismatter must be studied in Liber LX V, where thisis discussed
incomparably. In the hood of thisserpent are the six jewels, three on each side, R uby, Emerald, and Sapphire,
the three holy elements made perfect, on both sidesin equilibrium.

CHAPTER XII
THE ROBE

THE R obe of the M agician may be varied according to his grade and the nature of his working.

T here are two principal R obes, the white and the black; of these the black ismore important than the white,
for the white hasno hood. T hese R obesmay be varied by the addition of varioussymbols, but in any case the
Shape of the R obe is aT au.

T he general symbolism which we have adopted leads us, however, to prefer the description of aR obe which
few dare wear. T hisR obe isof arich alk of deep pure blue, the blue of the night sky: it isembroidered with
golden stars, and with rosesand lilies. Around thehem, itstail in its mouth, isthe great serpent, while upon the
front from neck to hem falls the Arrow described in the Vision of the Fifth Aethyr. T his R obe is lined with
purple silk on which is embroidered a green serpent coiled from neck to hem. T he symbolism of this R obe
treats of high mysteries which must be studied in Liber CCX X and Liber CDX VIII; but having thus dealt
with special R obes, let us consider the use of the R obe in general.

The R obe is that which conceals, and which protects the M agician from the elements, it is the slence and
secrecy with which he works, the hiding of himself in the occult life of M agick and M editation. Thisisthe
“going away into the wilderness’ which we find in the lives of all men of the highest types of greatness. And
it isalso the withdrawing of one’s self from life as such.

In another sense it is the “Aura” of the M agician, that invisble egg or sheath which surrounds him. This
“Aura” must be shining, elastic, impenetrable, even by the light, that is, by any partial light that comes from
one side.

The only light of the M agician isfrom the Lamp which hangs above his head, ashe standsin the centre of the
Circle, and the R obe, being open at the neck, opposes no obstacles to the passage of this light. And being
Open, and very wide open, at the bottom, it permits that light to pass and illumine them that st in darkness
and in the shadow of death.

CHAPTER XIll
THE BOOK

THE Book of Spells or of C onjurationsisthe R ecord of every thought, word, and deed of the M agician; for
everything that he has willed is willed to a purpose. It isthe same as if he had taken an oath to perform some
achievement.

N ow thisBook mus be aholy Book, not ascribbling- book in which you jot down every piece of rubbish that
comes into your head. It iswritten, Liber VII, v, 23: “Every breath, every word, every thought, every deed
isan act of love with T hee. Be this devotion a potent spell to exorcise the demons of the Five.”

T hisBook must then be thus written. In the first place the M agician must perform the practice laid down in
Liber CM XIII so that he understands perfectly who heis, and to what hisdevelopment must necessarily tend.
So much for the first page of the Book.

Let him then be careful to write nothing therein that isinharmoniousor untrue. N or can he avoid thiswriting,
for thisisaM agick Book. If you abandon even for an hour the one purpose of your life, you will find anumber
of meaningless scratches and scrawls on the white vellum; and these cannot be erased. In such a case, when
you come to conjure ademon by the power of the Book, he will mock you; he will point to all this foolish
writing, more like hisown than yours. In vain will you continue with the subsequent spells; you have broken
by your own foolishness the chain which would have bound him.

Even the calligraphy of the Book must be firm, clear, and beautiful; in the cloud of incense it ishard to read the
conjurations. W hile you peer dimly through the smoke, the demon will vanish, and you will haveto write the
terrible word “failure.”

And yet there is no page of this Book on which this word is not written; but so long as it is immediately
followed by anew affirmation, all is not lost; and as in this Book the word “failure” is thus made of little
account, so also must the word “success” never be employed, for its is the last word that may be written
therein, and it isfollowed by a full stop.

T his full stop may never be written anywhere else; for the writing of the Book goes on eternally; there is no
way of closing the record until the goal of all hasbeen attained. Let every page of thisBook be filled with song
— for it isa Book of incantation!

CHAPTER XIV
THE BELL

THE M agical Bell isbest attached to the chain. In some systemsof M agick anumber of bellshave been worn,
sewn upon the hem of the robe with the idea of symbolizing that every movement of the M agician should
make music. But the Bell of which we shall speak isa more important implement. This Bell summons and
alarms, and it is also the Bell which sounds at the elevation of the H ost.

It isthus also the “Astral Bell” of the M agician.

footnote: D uring certain meditation- practices the Student hears a bell resound in the depths of his being. It is not
Subjective, for it is sometimes heard by other people. Some M agidans are able to call the attention of those with
whom they wish to communicate at a distance by its means, or, so it is said.

The Bell of which we speak isadisk of some two inchesin diameter, very slightly bent into ashape not unlike
that of acymbal. A hole in the centre permits the passage of a short leather thong, by which it may be attached
to the chain. At the other end of the chain isthe striker; which, in T ibet, is usually made of human bone.

The Bell itself is made of electrum magicum, an alloy of the “seven metals’ blended together in a special
manner. First the gold is melted up with the slver during a favourable aspect of the sun and moon; these are
then fused with tin when Jupiter is well dignified. Lead is added under an auspicious Saturn; and so for the
quicksilver, copper, and iron, when Mercury, Venus, and M ars are of good augury.

The sound of thisBell isindescribably commanding, solemn, and majestic. W ithout even the minutest jar, its
gngle notes tinkle fainter and fainter into slence. At the sound of thisBell the U niverse ceasesfor an indivisible
moment of time, and attendsto the W ill of the M agician. Let him not interrupt the sound of thisBell. Let this
be that which iswritten, Liber VII, v, 31: “There isasolemnity of the silence. T here isno more voice at all.”

As the Magical Book was the record of the past, so is the M agick Bell the prophecy of the future. The
manifested shall repeat itself again and again, alwaysaclear thin note, alwaysasimplicity of music, yet ever less
and less disturbing the infinite silence until the end.

RXAMPLE OF DESIGN FOR A LAMEM

CHAPTER XV
THE LAMEN

THE breastplate or Lamen of the M agician isavery elaborate and important symbol. In the} ewish sytem we
read that the High Priest wasto wear a plate with twelve stones, for the twelve tribes of I sael (with all their
correspondences), and in this plate were kept the U rim and T hummin.

footnote: Scholars are uncertain as to what these really were, though apparently they were methods of divination.

The modern Lamen is, however, asimple plate which (being worn over the heart) symbolizesT iphereth, and
it should therefore be a harmony of all the other symbols in one. It connects naturally by its shape with the
Circle and the Pentacle; but it isnot sufficient to repeat the design of either.

T he Lamen of the spirit whom one wishesto evoke is both placed in the triangle and worn on the breast; but
in thiscase, Snce that which we wish to evoke in nothing partial, but whole, we shall have but asingle symbol
to combine the two. T he Great W ork will then form the subject of the design.

footnote. Some writers have actually confused the L amen with the Pantade, usually through a misunderstanding
of the nature of the latter. Dr. D ee’s “ Sigillum D & A math” makesa fine pantade, but it would be useless as a
lamen, E liphas L evi made several attempts to draw one or the other, he never seemed sure which. F ortunately he
knows better now. T helamens given in the L esser and G reater K eys of “Solomon” arerather better, but we know
of no perfect example. T he design on the cover of “T he Star in the W est” represents an early effort of Fra. P.

In thisLamen the M agician must place the secret keys of his power.

The Pentacle is merely the material to be worked upon, gathered together and harmonized but not yet in
Operation, the parts of the engine arranged for use, or even put together, but not yet set in motion. In the
Lamen these forces are already at work; even accomplishment is prefigured.

In the system of Abramelin the Lamen isa plate of slver upon which the H oly Guardian Angel writesin dew.
T his is another way of expressing the same thing, for it is He who confers the secrets of that power which
should be herein expressed. St. Paul expresses the same thing when he says that the breastplate is faith, and can
withstand the fiery darts of the wicked. “This “faith” is not blind self-confidence and credulity; it is that self
confidence which only comes when self is forgotten.

It isthe “Knowledge and Conversation of the H oly Guardian Angel” which confers this faith. T he task of
attaining to thisK nowledge and C onversation isthe sole task of him who would be called Adept. An absolute
method for achieving this is given in the Eighth Aethyr (Liber CD X VIII, Equinox V).

¥'S PATENT PATTERN).

THE CRNSER (CROWLE

CHAPTER XVI

THE MAGICK FIRE; WITH CONSIDERATIONS OF THE
THURIBLE, THE CHARCOAL, AND THE INCENSE

INTO theM agick Fire all things are cast. It symbolizesthe final burning up of all thingsin Shivadarshana. It is
the absolute destruction alike of the M agician and the U niverse.

The T hurible stands upon a small altar. “M y altar isof open brass work: burn thereon in silver or gold!”
WEH footnote: quotation corrected

T his altar stands in the East, asif to symbolize the identity of H ope and Annihilation. T his brass contains the
metals of Jupiter and Venus fused in a homogeneous alloy. T his is then symbolical of divine love, and it is
“open brasswork” because thislove isnot limited in direction or extent; it isnot particularized, it is universal.

U pon this altar stands the C enser proper; it has three legs symbolical of fire.
footnote: B ecause Shin the H ebrew letter of Fire, has three tongues of flame, and its value is 300.

Its cup isa hemisphere, and supported from its edge is a plate pierced with holes. T his censer is of silver or
gold, because there were called the perfect metals; it is upon perfection that the imperfect is burned. U pon
this plate burns a great fire of charcoal, impregnated with nitre. T his charcoal is (as chemists now begin to
surmise) the ultimate protean element: absolutely black, because it absorbsall light; infusible by the application
of any known heat; the lightest of those elements which occur in the solid state in nature; the essential
constituent of all known forms of life.

It hasbeen treated with nitre, whose potassium hasthe violet flame of Jupiter, the father of all, whose nitrogen
is that inert element which by proper combination becomes a constituent of all the most explosive bodies
known; and oxygen, the food of fire.

WEH footnote T hat is to say, this nitre is Potassium N itrate or “Salt Peter”. Such char@al impregnated with
Potash is now @mmonly sold for incense burning in the form of disks with an indentation in the top, “T hree
K ings C harcoal” is a popular brand, but some “ self-starting” barbeqe brickettes are also of this composition and
much less ex pensive.

T hisfireis blown upon by the M agician; thisblaze of destruction hasbeen kindled by hisword and by hiswill.

Into this Fire he casts the Incense, symbolical of prayer, the gross vehicle or image of his aspiration. O wing to
the imperfection of this image, we obtain mere smoke instead of perfect combustion. But we cannot use
explosives instead of incense, because it would not be true. O ur prayer isthe expression of the lower aspiring
to the higher; it is without the clear vision of the higher, it does not understand what the higher wants. And,
however sweet may be its smell, it is always cloudy.

In this smoke illusions arise. W e sought the light, and behold the T emple is darkened! In the darkness this
smoke seems to take strange shapes, and we may hear the crying of beasts. T he thicker the smoke, the darker
grows the U niverse. W e gasp and tremble, beholding what foul and unsubstantial things we have evoked!

Y et we cannot do without the Incense! U nless our aspiration took form it could not influence form. T his also
isthe mystery of incarnation.

T his Incense is based upon Gum O libanum, the sacrifice of the human will of the heart. T his olibanum has
been mixed with half itsw eight of storax, the earthly desires, dark, sweet, and clinging; and this again with half
its weight of lignum aloes, which symbolizes Sagittarius, the arrow,

footnote: N ote that there are two arrows: the D ivine shot downward, the human upward. T he former is the 0 il,
the latter the Incense, or rather the finest part of it. SeeLiberC D XVIII, Fifth A ethyr.

and so represents the aspiration itself; it isthe arrow that cleaves the rainbow. T hisarrow is“T emperance” in
the T aro; it isa life equally balanced and direct which makes our work possible; yet this life itself must be
sacrificed!

In the burning up of these things arise in our imagination those terrifying or alluring phantasms which throng
the “Astral Plane.” T hissmoke represents the “A stral Plane,” which liesbetween the material and the spiritual.
One may now devote a little attention to the consderation of this “plane,” about which a great deal of
nonsense has been written.

W hen aman shuts his eyes and beginsto look about him, at first there isnothing but darkness. If he continues
trying to penetrate the gloom, anew pair of eyes gradually opens.

Some people think that these are the “eyes of imagination.” T hose with more experience understand that this
truly represents things seen, although those things are themselves totally false.

Asfirst the seer will perceive gray gloom; in subsequent experiments perhaps figures may appear with whom
the seer may converse, and under whose guidance he may travel about. T his“ plane” being quite aslarge and
varied asthe material U niverse, one cannot describe it effectively; we must refer the reader to Liber O and to
Equinox II, pages 295 to 334.

This“Astral Plane” has been described by H omer in the O dyssey. H ere are Polyohemusand the Laestrygons,
here C alypso and the Sirens. H ere, too, are those things which many have imagined to be the “spirits” of the
dead. If the student once take any of these things for truth, he must worship it, since all truth is worshipful. In
such acase he islost; the phantom will have power over him; it will obsess him.

As long as an idea is being examined you are free from it. There is no harm in man’s experimenting with
opium-smnoking or feeding on nuts; but the moment he ceases to examine, to act from habit and without
reflection, he isin trouble. We all of us eat too much, because people, liveried and obsequious, have always
bustled up five times daily with sx months provisions, and it waslesstrouble to feed and be done with it, than
to examine the question whether we were hungry. If you cook your own food, you soon find that you don’t
cook more or less than you want; and health returns. If, however, you go to the other extreme and think of
nothing but diet, you are almost sure to acquire that typical form of melancholia, in which the patient is
convinced that all the world isin league to poison him. Professor Schweinhund has shown that beef causes
gout; Professor N aschtikoff proves that milk causes consumption. Sir R uffon W ratts tells us that old age is
brought on by eating cabbage. By and by you reach the state of which Mr. H ereward Carrington make his
proud boast: your sole food is chocolate, which you chew unceasingly, even in your dreams. Y et no sooner
have you taken it into you than you awake to the terrible truth demonstrated by Guterbock Q . H osenscheisser,
Fourth Avenue, Grand R apids, that chocolate is the cause of constipation, and constipation of cancer, and
proceed to get it out of you by means of an enema which would frighten a camel into convulsions.

A similar madness attacks even real men of science. M etchnikoff studied the diseases of the colon until he
could see nothing else, and then calmly proposed to cut out every one’s colon, pointing out that a vulture
(who has no colon) is avery long-lived bird. As a matter of fact the longevity of the vulture is due to its

twisted neck, and many thoughtful persons propose to experiment on Professor M etchnikoff.

But the worst of all phantasms are the moral ideas and the religious ideas. Sanity consists in the faculty of
adjusting ideasin proper proportion. Any one who accepts amoral or religioustruth without understanding it
isonly kept out of the asylum because he doesnot follow it out logically. If one really believed in Christianity,

footnote “O newould go mad if one took the Bible seriously; but to take it seriously one must be already mad.”
— “Crowley.”

if one really thought that the majority of mankind was doomed to eternal punishment, one would go raving
about the world trying to “save” people. Sleep would not be possible until the horror of the mind left the
body exhausted. O therwise, one must be morally insane. W hich of uscan deep if one we love isin danger of
mere death? W e cannot even see adog drown without at least interrupting all our business to look on. W ho
then can live in London and reflect upon the fact that of its seven million souls, all but about a thousand
Plymouth Brethren will be damned? Y et the thousand Plymouth Brethren (who are the loudest in proclaiming
that they will be the only ones saved) seem to get on very well, thank you. W hether they are hypocrites or
morally insane isa matter which we can leave to their own consideration.

All these phantoms, of whatever nature, must be evoked, examined, and mastered; otherwise we may find
that just when we want it there is some idea with which we have never dealt; and perhaps that idea, soringing
on us by surprise, and as it were from behind, may strangle us. T hisisthe legend of the sorcerer strangled by
the Devil!

GLO SSAR Y

ONLY words nowhere explained in the preceding pages are given in this list. Several others, mentioned in
passing in the early part of the book, are sufficiently dealt with later on. In these cases the references in the
Index should be turned up.
A.A.

T he Great W hite Brotherhood which is giving this M ethod of Attainment to the world. See Equinox |.
Adeptus M inor.

A grade of adeptship. See Equinox III.

Aethyrs.

See Equinox V and VII.
Aima.

T he Great Fertile M other N ature.
Ama.

T he Great M other not yet fertile.
Amoun.

The God Amen = Zeus = Jupiter, etc., etc.
Ankh.

The Symbol of “Life.” A form of the R osy Cross. See Equinox III.
Apophis.

T he Serpent-God who dew Osiris. See Equinox III.
Babalon, O ur Lady.

See Equinox V, The Vision and Voice, 14th Aethyr.
Babe of the Abyss.

See Equinox VIII, Temple of Solomon.
Bhagavadgita.

Scared H ymn of India, transiated by Sir Edwin Arnold in the “Song C elestial.”
Binah.

U nderstanding, the 3rd “emanation” of the Absolute.
Caduceus.

The W and of M ercury. See Equinox II and III.
Chela.

Pupil.
Chesed.

Mercy, the 4th “emanation” of the A bsolute.
Chokmah.

Wisdom, the 2nd “emanation” of the Absolute.
Choronzon.

See Equinox V, The Vision and the Voice, 10th Aethyr.
City of the Pyramids.

See Equinox V, The Vision and the Voice, 14th Aethyr.

Crux Ansata.

Same as Ankh, q.v.
Daath.

K nowledge, child of Chokmah and Binah in one sense; in another, the home of C horonzon.
D hammapada.

A sacred Buddhist book.

Elemental K ings.

Se 777.
Geburah.

Strength, the 5th “emanation” of the Absolute.
Gunas.

Three principles. See Bhagadvadgita, {sic} 777, etc.
Guru.

T eacher.
H adit.

See “Liber Legis,” Equinox VII. Also “Liber 555.”
H athayoga Pradipika.

A book on physical training for spiritual purposes.

Hod.

Splendour, the 8th “emanation” of the Absolute.
Kamma.

Pali dialect of K arma, q.v.
Karma.

“T hat which is made,” “The law of cause and effect.” See “Science and Buddhism,” Crowley, Coll.
W orks, Vol. II.
K ether.
The Crown, 1st “emanation” of the A bsolute.
Lao T ze.
Great C hinese teacher, founder of T aoists. See T ao T eh “King.
Liber Legis.
See Equinox VII for facdmile reproduction of M S.
Lingam
The U nity or M ale Principle. But these have many symbols, e.g., sometimesY oni isO or 3 and Lingam 2.
Lingam-Y oni.
A form of the R osy Cross.

M acrocosm.
T he great U niverse, of which man is an exact image.
M agus.
A magician. Technically, also, aM aster of the grade 9{degree} = 2{square}.
See
Equinox VII, “Liber |,” and elsewhere.
M ahalingam.
See Lingam. M aha means great.
M aha Sattipatthana.

A mode of meditation. See “Science and Buddhism,” Crowley, Coll. W orks, Vol. II, for a full account.
M alkah.
A young girl. The “bride.” T he unredeemed soul.
M alkuth.
“The kingdom,” 10th “emanation” of the Absolute.
M antrayoga.
A practice to attain union with God by repetition of a sacred sentence.
M aster of the T emple.
O ne of grade 8{degree} = 3{square}. Fully discussed in Equinox.

Microcosm.
M an, considered as an exact image of the U niverse.

N ephesch.

The “animal soul” of man.
N etzach.

Victory, the 7th “emanation” of the Absolute.
N ibbana.

T he state called, for want of a better name, annihilation. T he final goal.
Nirvana.

See N ibbana.
N uit.

See “Liber Legis.”
Paths.

See 777, and Equinox || and elsewhere.
Perdurabo, Frater.

See Equinox I-X , “The T emple of Solomon the King.”
Prana.

See “R aja Y oga.”
Q abalah.

See “T he tradition of secret wisdom of the H ebrews,” Equinox V.
Qliphoth.

“Shells’ or demons. T he excrement of ideas.
R aH oor-K huit.

See “Liber Legis.”

R uach.

The intellect and other mental qualities. See 777, etc.
Sahasrara C akkra.

“The T emple of Solomon the King.” See Equinox IV.
Sammasati.

See “T he training of the M ind,” Equinox V, and “The T emple of Solomon,” Equinox VIII.
Also

“Science and Buddhism,” Crowley Coll. Works, Vol. II
Sankhara.

See “Science and Buddhism.”
Sanna.

See “Science and Buddhism.”
Sephiroth.

See “Temple of Solomon,” Equinox V.
Shin.

“A tooth.” H ebrew letter = Sh, corresponds to Fire and Spirit.
Shiva Sanhita.

A Hindu treatise on physical training for spiritual ends.
Skandhas.

See “Science and Buddhism.”
T a0.

See Konx Om Pax, “Thien T ao.” 777, etc.
Tao Teh King.

Chinese C lassic of the T ao.

T aro.

See 777, Equinox III and VIII, etc., etc.
T au.

A “cross,” H ebrew letter = Th corresponds to “”"Earth.” See 777.
T haumiel.

T he demons corresponding to K ether. T wo contending forces.
T heosophis..

A person who talks about Y oga, and does no work.
Thoth.

The Egyptian god of Speech, M agick, Wisdom.
Tiphereth.

“Beauty” or “Harmony,” the 6th “emanation” of the Absolute.
Typhon.

The destroyer of O sris.
U dana.

O ne of the imaginary “nerves” of Hindu pseudo- physiology.”
Vedana.

See “Science and Buddhism,” Crowley, Coll. W orks, Vol. II.
Vesica, V esica Piscies.
See Y oni. The oval formed by the intersection of the circlesin Euclid 1, 1.
Virakam, Soror.
A chelaof Frater Perdurabo.
Vrittis.
“Impressions.”
Y esod.
“Foundation,” the ninth “emanation” of the Absolute.
Y ogi.
Onewho seeks to attain “U nion” (with God). A Hindu word corresponding to the M ohammedan word
Fakir.
Y oni.
The D yad, or Female Principle. See Lingam.
Zohar.
Splendour, a collection of bookson the Q abalah. See “T he T emple of Solomon the King,” Equinox V.

NOTICE

The A.’.A.’. iS an organization whose heads have obtained by personal experience to the summit of this
science. T hey have founded a system by which every one can equally attain, and that with an ease and speed
which was previousy impossible.

The first grade in Their system is that of
STUDENT.
A Student must possess the following books:
The Equinox,
TAL:
Konx Om Pax.
Collected W orks of A. Crowley; T annhauser, T he Sword of Song, Time, Eleusss. 3 vols.
R aja Y oga, by Swami Vivekananda.
T he Shiva Sanhita, or the H athayoga Pradipika.
The T ao T eh King and the writings of K wang T ze: S.B.E. xxxix, xl.
The Spiritual Guide, by M iguel de M olinos.
R ituel et Dogme de laH aute M agie, by Eliphas Levi, or its transition by A. E. Waite.
T he Goetia of the Lemegeton of Solomon the K ing.

T hese books should be well studied in any case in conjunction with the second part — M agick — of this
Book IV.

Study of these books will give athorough grounding in the intellectual side of T heir system.

After three months the Student is examined in these books, and if hisknowledge of them isfound satisfactory,
he may become a Probationer, receiving Liber LX | and the secret holy book, Liber LX V. The principal point
of this grade is that the Probationer has a master appointed, whose experience can guide him in his work.

H e may select any practices that he prefers, but in any case must keep an exact record, so that he may discover
the relation of cause and effect in hisworking, and so that the A.’.A.’. may judge of hisprogress, and direct his
further studies.

After a year of probation he may be admitted a N eophyte of the A.’.A.’., and receive the secret holy book
Liber VII.

T hese are the principal instructions for practice which every probationer should follow out:

LibriE,A,O,1I,XXX,CLXXV,CC,CCVI,CMXIII.
