Treatises Attributed to Cyprian on Questionable Authority (Cyprian of Carthage)
Ante-Nicene Fathers, 1885. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library (https://ccel.org/ccel/schaff/anf05.iv.vii.html).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

 Treatises Attributed to Cyprian on Questionable Authority

  Treatises Attributed to Cyprian on Questionable Authority

 Translator's Introduction

 to

 Treatises Attributed to Cyprian on Questionable Authority.

 ------------------------

 The treatises which follow are usually classed under the doubtful works
 of Cyprian.  Baluzius, however, gives the two first, On the Public
 Shows, and On the Glory of Martyrdom, among the genuine Opuscula, and
 says: "I have not thought it fit to prejudice any one amid the
 diversity of opinions on the subject, but have refrained from
 separating the following from the genuine works of the blessed martyr,
 especially since many have observed that there is no such difference of
 style in these writings as to justify the denial of their authorship to
 Cyprian."

 Of course the question is one almost entirely of criticism, and the
 translator leaves the discussion of it to abler hands. He ventures,
 however, to record his impression, that the style of the following
 writings throughout is more pretentious and laboured, and far more
 wordy and involved, than that of Cyprian's undoubted works. With a more
 copious vocabulary, there is manifested less skill in the use of words;
 and if the text be not in some places most elaborately and
 unintelligibly corrupt, the accumulation of epithets, as well as their
 collocation, seems the very wantonness of rhetoric. The text, however,
 is undoubtedly far less to be depended upon than in the case of the
 genuine works.

 The treatises On the Discipline and Benefit of Chastity and the
 Exhortation to Repentance are generally placed under the Opuscula
 dubia. The former was first edited by Baluzius, with the title "Epistle
 of an Unknown Author." Its Cyprianic authorship was maintained by
 Bellarmin, Pamelius, and others; while Erasmus, Tillemont, and others
 have rejected it as spurious. The second treatise was first published
 by Joannes Chrysostomus Trombellius (in 1751), who regarded it as a
 genuine work of Cyprian's. And indeed, as far as internal evidence
 goes, the treatise, consisting merely of a collection of quotations
 from Scripture, in the manner of the Testimonies against the Jews, may
 probably be attributed to him with as much reason as the Testimonies.

 It is, however, right to add, that Professor Blunt quotes from the
 Treatise on the Glory of Martyrdom as being Cyprian's, without
 referring to any doubts on the subject. [4815]

 [4815] [A strong testimony in its favour. It is quite possible that the
 less worthy portions are corrupt interpolations.]

 Treatises Attributed to Cyprian on Questionable Authority.

 ------------------------

 On the Public Shows. [4816]

 Argument. [4817] --The Writer First of All Treats Against Those Who
 Endeavoured to Defend the Public Exhibitions of the Heathens by
 Scriptural Authority; And He Proves That, Although They are Never
 Prohibited by the Express Words of Scripture, Yet that They are
 Condemned in the Scriptural Prohibition of Idolatry, from the Fact that
 There is No Kind of Public Show Which is Not Consecrated to Idols.
 [4818]

 1. Cyprian to the congregation who stand fast in the Gospel, sends
 greeting. As it greatly saddens me, and deeply afflicts my soul, when
 no opportunity of writing to you is presented to me, for it is my loss
 not to hold converse with you; so nothing restores to me such
 joyfulness and hilarity, as when that opportunity is once more afforded
 me. I think that I am with you when I am speaking to you by letter.
 Although, therefore, I know that you are satisfied that what I tell you
 is even as I say, and that you have no doubt of the truth of my words,
 nevertheless an actual proof will also attest the reality of the
 matter. For my affection (for you) is proved, when absolutely no
 opportunity (of writing) is passed over. However certain I may be,
 then, that you are no less respectable in the conduct of your life than
 faithful in respect of your sacramental vow; [4819] still, since there
 are not wanting smooth-tongued advocates of vice, and indulgent patrons
 who afford authority to vices, and, what is worse, convert the rebuke
 of the heavenly Scriptures into an advocacy of crimes; as if the
 pleasure derived from the public exhibitions might be sought after as
 being innocent, by way of a mental relaxation;--for thereby the vigour
 of ecclesiastical discipline is so relaxed, and is so deteriorated by
 all the languor of vice that it is no longer apology, but authority,
 that is given for wickedness,--it seemed good in a few words not now to
 instruct you, but to admonish you who are instructed, lest, because the
 wounds are badly bound up, they should break through the cicatrix of
 their closed soundness. For no mischief is put an end to with so much
 difficulty but that its recurrence is easy, so long as it is both
 maintained by the consent, and caressed by the excuses [4820] of the
 multitude.

 2. Believers, and men who claim for themselves the authority of the
 Christian name, are not ashamed--are not, I repeat, ashamed to find a
 defence in the heavenly Scriptures for the vain superstitions
 associated with the public exhibitions of the heathens, and thus to
 attribute divine authority to idolatry. For how is it, that what is
 done by the heathens in honour of any idol is resorted to in a public
 show by faithful Christians, and the heathen idolatry is maintained,
 and the true and divine religion is trampled upon in contempt of God?
 Shame binds me to relate their pretexts and defences in this behalf.
 "Where," say they, "are there such Scriptures? where are these things
 prohibited? On the contrary, both Elias is the charioteer of Israel,
 and David himself danced before the ark. We read of psalteries, horns,
 [4821] trumpets, drums, pipes, harps, and choral dances. Moreover, the
 apostle, in his struggle, puts before us the contest of the Cæstus, and
 of our wrestle against the spiritual things of wickedness. Again, when
 he borrows his illustrations from the racecourse, he also proposes the
 prize of the crown. Why, then, may not a faithful Christian man gaze
 upon that which the divine pen might write about?" At this point I
 might not unreasonably say that it would have been far better for them
 not to know any writings at all, than thus to read the Scriptures.
 [4822] For words and illustrations which are recorded by way of
 exhortation to evangelical virtue, are translated by them into pleas
 for vice; because those things are written of, not that they should be
 gazed upon, but that a greater eagerness might be aroused in our minds
 in respect of things that will benefit us, seeing that among the
 heathens there is manifest so much eagerness in respect of things which
 will be of no advantage.

 3. These are therefore an argument to stimulate virtue, not a
 permission or a liberty to look upon heathen error, that by this
 consideration the mind may be more inflamed to Gospel virtue for the
 sake of the divine rewards, since through the suffering of all these
 labours and pains it is granted to attain to eternal benefits. For that
 Elias is the charioteer of Israel is no defence for gazing upon the
 public games; for he ran his race in no circus. And that David in the
 presence of God led the dances, is no sanction for faithful Christians
 to occupy seats in the public theatre; for David did not twist his
 limbs about in obscene movements, to represent in his dancing the story
 of Grecian lust.  Psalteries, horns, pipes, drums, harps, were used in
 the service of the Lord, and not of idols. Let it not on this account
 be objected that unlawful things may be gazed upon; for by the artifice
 of the devil these are changed from things holy to things unlawful.
 Then let shame demur to these things, even if the Holy Scriptures
 cannot. For there are certain things wherein the Scripture is more
 careful in giving instruction. Acquiescing in the claim of modesty, it
 has forbidden more where it has been silent. The truth, if it descended
 low enough to deal with such things, would think very badly of its
 faithful votaries. For very often, in matters of precept, some things
 are advantageously said nothing about; they often remind when they are
 expressly forbidden. So also there is an implied silence even in the
 writings of the Scripture; and severity speaks in the place of
 precepts; and reason teaches where Scripture has held its peace. Let
 every man only take counsel with himself, and let him speak
 consistently with the character of his profession, [4823] and then he
 will never do any of these things. [4824] For that conscience will have
 more weight which shall be indebted to none other than itself.

 4. What has Scripture interdicted?  Certainly it has forbidden gazing
 upon what it forbids to be done. It condemned, I say, all those kinds
 of exhibitions when it abrogated idolatry--the mother of all public
 amusements, [4825] whence these prodigies of vanity and lightness came.
 For what public exhibition is without an idol? what amusement without a
 sacrifice? what contest is not consecrated to some dead person? And
 what does a faithful Christian do in the midst of such things as these?
 If he avoids idolatry, why does he [4826] who is now sacred take
 pleasure in things which are worthy of reproach? Why does he approve of
 superstitions which are opposed to God, and which he loves while he
 gazes upon them? Besides, let him be aware that all these things are
 the inventions of demons, not of God. He is shameless who in the church
 exorcises demons while he praises their delights in public shows; and
 although, once for all renouncing him, he has put away everything in
 baptism, when he goes to the devil's exhibition after (receiving)
 Christ, he renounces Christ as much as (he had done) the devil.
 Idolatry, as I have already said, is the mother of all the public
 amusements; and this, in order that faithful Christians may come under
 its influence, entices them by the delight of the eyes and the ears.
 Romulus was the first who consecrated the games of the circus to Consus
 as the god of counsel, in reference to the rape of the Sabine women.
 But the rest of the scenic amusements were provided to distract the
 attention of the people while famine invaded the city, and were
 subsequently dedicated to Ceres and Bacchus, and to the rest of the
 idols and dead men. Those Grecian contests, whether in poems, or in
 instrumental music, or in words, or in personal prowess, have as their
 guardians various demons; and whatever else there is which either
 attracts the eyes or allures the ears of the spectators, if it be
 investigated in reference to its origin and institution, presents as
 its reason either an idol, or a demon, or a dead man.  Thus the devil,
 who is their original contriver, because he knew that naked idolatry
 would by itself excite repugnance, associated it with public
 exhibitions, that for the sake of their attraction it might be loved.

 5. What is the need of prosecuting the subject further, or of
 describing the unnatural kinds of sacrifices in the public shows, among
 which sometimes even a man becomes the victim by the fraud of the
 priest, when the gore, yet hot from the throat, is received in the
 foaming cup while it still steams, and, as if it were thrown into the
 face of the thirsting idol, is brutally drunk in pledge to it; and in
 the midst of the pleasures of the spectators the death of some is
 eagerly besought, so that by means of a bloody exhibition men may learn
 fierceness, as if a man's own private frenzy were of little account to
 him unless he should learn it also in public?  For the punishment of a
 man, a rabid wild beast is nourished with delicacies, that he may
 become the more cruelly ferocious under the eyes of the spectators. The
 skilful trainer instructs the brute, which perhaps might have been more
 merciful had not its more brutal master taught it cruelty. Then, to say
 nothing of whatever idolatry more generally recommends, how idle are
 the contests themselves; strifes in colours, contentions in races,
 acclamations in mere questions of honour; rejoicing because a horse has
 been more fleet, grieving because it was more sluggish, reckoning up
 the years of cattle, knowing the consuls under whom they ran, learning
 their age, tracing their breed, recording their very grandsires and
 great-grand-sires! How unprofitable a matter is all this; nay, how
 disgraceful and ignominious! This very man, I say, who can compute by
 memory the whole family of his equine race, and can relate it with
 great quickness without interfering with the exhibition--were you to
 inquire of this man who were the parents of Christ, he cannot tell, or
 he is the more unfortunate if he can. But if, again, I should ask him
 by what road he has come to that exhibition, he will confess (that he
 has come) by the naked bodies of prostitutes and of profligate women,
 by (scenes of) public lust, by public disgrace, by vulgar
 lasciviousness, by the common contempt of all men. And, not to object
 to him what perchance he has done, still he has seen what was not fit
 to be done, and he has trained his eyes to the exhibition of idolatry
 by lust: he would have dared, had he been able, to take that which is
 holy into the brothel with him; since, as he hastens to the spectacle
 when dismissed from the Lord's table, and still bearing within him, as
 often occurs, the Eucharist, that unfaithful man has carried about the
 holy body of Christ among the filthy bodies of harlots, and has
 deserved a deeper condemnation for the way by which he has gone
 thither, than for the pleasure he has received from the exhibition.

 6. But now to pass from this to the shameless corruption of the stage.
 I am ashamed to tell what things are said; I am even ashamed to
 denounce the things that are done--the tricks of arguments, the
 cheatings of adulterers, the immodesties of women, the scurrile jokes,
 the sordid parasites, even the toga'd fathers of families themselves,
 sometimes stupid, sometimes obscene, but in all cases dull, in all
 cases immodest.  And though no individual, or family, or profession, is
 spared by the discourse [4827] of these reprobates, yet every one
 flocks to the play. The general infamy is delightful to see or to
 recognise; it is a pleasure, nay, even to learn it. People flock
 thither to the public disgrace of the brothel for the teaching of
 obscenity, that nothing less may be done in secret than what is learnt
 in public; and in the midst of the laws themselves is taught everything
 that the laws forbid. What does a faithful Christian do among these
 things, since he may not even think upon wickedness? Why does he find
 pleasure in the representations of lust, so as among them to lay aside
 his modesty and become more daring in crimes? He is learning to do,
 while he is becoming accustomed to see. Nevertheless, those women whom
 their misfortune has introduced and degraded to this slavery, conceal
 their public wantonness, and find consolation for their disgrace in
 their concealment. Even they who have sold their modesty blush to
 appear to have done so. But that public prodigy is transacted in the
 sight of all, and the obscenity of prostitutes is surpassed.  A method
 is sought to commit adultery with the eyes. To this infamy an infamy
 fully worthy of it is super added: a human being broken down in every
 limb, a man melted to something beneath the effeminacy of a woman, has
 found the art to supply language with his hands; and on behalf of
 one--I know not what, but neither man nor woman--the whole city is in a
 state of commotion, that the fabulous debaucheries of antiquity may be
 represented in a ballet. Whatever is not lawful is so beloved, that
 what had even been lost sight of by the lapse of time is brought back
 again into the recollection of the eyes.

 7. It is not sufficient for lust to make use of its present means of
 mischief, unless by the exhibition it makes its own that in which a
 former age had also gone wrong. It is not lawful, I say, for faithful
 Christians to be present; it is not lawful, I say, at all, even for
 those whom for the delight of their ears Greece sends everywhere to all
 who are instructed in her vain arts. [4828] One imitates the hoarse
 warlike clangours of the trumpet; another with his breath blowing into
 a pipe regulates its mournful sounds; another with dances, and with the
 musical voice of a man, strives with his breath, which by an effort he
 had drawn from his bowels into the upper parts of his body, to play
 upon the stops of pipes; now letting forth the sound, and now closing
 it up inside, and forcing it into the air by certain openings of the
 stops; now breaking the sound in measure, he endeavours to speak with
 his fingers, ungrateful to the Artificer who gave him a tongue. Why
 should I speak of comic and useless efforts?  Why of those great tragic
 vocal ravings? Why of strings set vibrating with noise? These things,
 even if they were not dedicated to idols, [4829] ought not to be
 approached and gazed upon by faithful Christians; because, even if they
 were not criminal, they are characterized by a worthlessness which is
 extreme, and which is little suited to believers.

 8. Now that other folly of others is an obvious source of advantage to
 idle men; and the first victory is for the belly to be able to crave
 food beyond the human limit,--a flagitious traffic for the claim to the
 crown of gluttony: the wretched face is hired out to bear wounding
 blows, that the more wretched belly may be gorged. How disgusting,
 besides, are those struggles! Man lying below man is enfolded in
 abominable embraces and twinings. In such a contest, whether a man
 looks on or conquers, still his modesty is conquered. Behold, one naked
 man bounds forth towards you; another with straining powers tosses a
 brazen ball into the air. This is not glory, but folly. In fine, take
 away the spectator, and you will have shown its emptiness.  Such things
 as these should be avoided by faithful Christians, as I have frequently
 said already; spectacles so vain, so mischievous, so sacrilegious, from
 which both our eyes and our ears should be guarded. We quickly get
 accustomed to what we hear and what we see. For since man's mind is
 itself drawn towards vice, what will it do if it should have
 inducements of a bodily nature as well as a downward tendency in its
 slippery will? What will it do if it should be impelled from without?
 [4830] Therefore the mind must be called away from such things as
 these.

 9. The Christian has nobler exhibitions, if he wishes for them. He has
 true and profitable pleasures, if he will recollect himself. And to say
 nothing of those which he cannot yet contemplate, he has that beauty of
 the world to look upon and admire. [4831] He may gaze upon the sun's
 rising, and again on its setting, as it brings round in their mutual
 changes days and nights; the moon's orb, designating in its waxings and
 warnings the courses of the seasons; the troops of shining stars, and
 those which glitter from on high with extreme mobility,--their members
 divided through the changes of the entire year, and the days themselves
 with the nights distributed into hourly periods; the heavy mass of the
 earth balanced by the mountains, and the flowing rivers with their
 sources; the expanse of seas, with their waves and shores; and
 meanwhile, the air, subsisting equally everywhere in perfect harmony,
 expanded in the midst of all, and in concordant bonds animating all
 things with its delicate life, now scattering showers from the
 contracted clouds, now recalling the serenity of the sky with its
 refreshed purity; and in all these spheres their appropriate
 tenants--in the air the birds, in the waters the fishes, on the earth
 man. Let these, I say, and other divine works, be the exhibitions for
 faithful Christians. What theatre built by human hands could ever be
 compared to such works as these? Although it may be reared with immense
 piles of stones, the mountain crests are loftier; and although the
 fretted roofs glitter with gold, they will be surpassed by the
 brightness of the starry firmament. [4832] Never will any one admire
 the works of man, if he has recognised himself as the son of God. He
 degrades himself from the height of his nobility, who can admire
 anything but the Lord.

 10. Let the faithful Christian, I say, devote himself to the sacred
 Scriptures, [4833] and there he shall find worthy exhibitions for his
 faith. He will see God establishing His world, and making not only the
 other animals, but that marvellous and better fabric of man. He will
 gaze upon the world in its delightfulness, righteous shipwrecks, the
 rewards of the good, and the punishments of the impious, seas drained
 dry by a people, and again from the rock seas spread out by a people.
 He will behold harvests descending from heaven, not pressed in by the
 plough; rivers with their hosts of waters bridled in, exhibiting dry
 crossings.  He will behold in some cases faith struggling with the
 flame, wild beasts overcome by devotion and soothed into gentleness. He
 will look also upon souls brought back even from death. Moreover, he
 will consider the marvellous souls brought back to the life of bodies
 which themselves were already consumed. And in all these things he will
 see a still greater exhibition--that devil who had triumphed over the
 whole world lying prostrate under the feet of Christ. How honourable is
 this exhibition, brethren! how delightful, how needful ever to gaze
 upon one's hope, and to open our eyes to one's salvation! This is a
 spectacle which is beheld even when sight is lost. This is an
 exhibition which is given by neither prætor nor consul, but by Him who
 is alone and above all things, and before all things, yea, and of whom
 are all things, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
 and honour for ever and ever. I bid you, brethren, ever heartily
 farewell. Amen. [4834]

 [4816] [See Ben Jonson, Volpone, Ep. Dedicatory.]

 [4817] Obviously imitating Tertullian's treatise De Spectaculis. [See
 vol. iii. p. 79.]

 [4818] He then prosecutes the subject, by going through the several
 kinds of public exhibitions, and sets forth, a little more diffusely
 than in the Epistle to Donatus, what risks are incurred by the
 spectators, and especially in respect of those exhibitions wherein, as
 he says, "representations of lust convey instruction in obscenity."
 Finally, he briefly enumerates such exhibitions as are worthy of the
 interest of a Christian man, and in which he ought rightfully to find
 pleasure. [For Epistle to Donatus, see p. 275, supra.]

 [4819] "In sacramento."

 [4820] Elucidation I.

 [4821] "Nabla."

 [4822] [In Edin. trans. needlessly "the writings of the Scriptures."]

 [4823] "Cum persona professionis suæ loquatur."

 [4824] Baluzius reads with less probability "indecorum," "anything
 unbecoming." The reading adopted in the text is, according to Fell,
 "inde eorum."

 [4825] Vid. Ovid's Fasti, lib. v.

 [4826] The Oxford text here has the reading, "Why does he speak of it?
 why does he," etc.

 [4827] [It is painful to recognise, in the general licence of the press
 in our country, this very feature of a corrupt civilization,--a delight
 in scandal, and in the invasion of homes and private affairs, for the
 gratification of the popular appetite.]

 [4828] [Compare Clement, vol. ii. p. 248, note 5, and p. 249, notes 2,
 11.]

 [4829] [This touches a point important to the modern question.  It is
 said, "Oh! but these Fathers denounced only those heathen spectacles of
 which idolatry was part," etc. The reply is sufficiently made by our
 author.]

 [4830] There is much confusion in the reading of this passage, which in
 the original runs, according to Baluzius: "Nam cum mens hominis ad
 vitia ipsa ducatur, quid faciet, si habuerit exempla naturæ corporis
 lubrica quæ sparta corruit? Quid faciet si fuerit impulsa?"

 [4831] [Compare Clement, vol. ii. p. 256, and note 1.]

 [4832] [De Maistre, who is a Christian, with all his hereditary
 prejudice and enslavement, has a fine passage in the opening of his
 Soirées de St. Pétersbourg, which the reader will enjoy. It concludes
 with this saying:  "Les coeurs pervers n'ont jamais de belles nuits ni
 de beaux jours." P. 7. vol. i. See vol. iv. p. 173, this series.]

 [4833] [Always the sacred Scriptures are held up as capable of yielding
 delight as well as profit to the believer. The works of God and His
 word go together. Col. iii. 16.]

 [4834] [There is much in the above treatise which is not unworthy of
 Cyprian. As to questions of authenticity, however, experts alone should
 venture upon an opinion. Non nobis tantas componere lites.]

 On the Glory of Martyrdom. [4835]

 ------------------------

 Argument.--The Glory of Martyrdom,--Namely, What Martyrdom Is, How
 Great It Is, and of What Advantage It is. By Similitudes, and by
 Argument Deduced from the Daily Deaths, the Author Exhorts to a Joyous
 Submission to Death for Christ's Sake. [4836] Among the Benefits of
 Martyrdom He Maintains that Without Experience of the Universal
 Suffering that Prevails, the Propitiation of Christ Crowns Martyrs in
 Such a Way that His Saying About the Very Last Farthing is Not
 Applicable to Them.

 1. Although, beloved brethren, it is unfitting, while my speaking to
 you receives this indulgence, to profess any trepidation, and it very
 little becomes me to diminish the glory of so great a devotion by the
 confession of an incipient doubt; yet at the same time I say that my
 mind is divided by that very deliberation, being influenced by the
 desire of describing the glory, and restrained from speaking by the
 magnitude of the virtue (to be described); since it is either not
 becoming to be silent, or it is perilous to say too little, save that
 to one who is tossing in doubt this consideration alone is helpful,
 that it would appear easy for him to be pardoned who has not feared to
 dare. Wherefore, beloved brethren, although my mental capacity is
 burdened by the importance of the subject in such a way, that in
 proportion as it puts itself forth in declaring the dignity of
 martyrdom, in that degree it is overwhelmed by the very weight of the
 glory, and by its estimation of all those things concerning which, when
 it speaks most, it fails, by its address being weakened, and broken,
 and self-entangled, and does not with free and loosened reins display
 the might of such glory in the liberal eloquence of discourse; yet, if
 I am not mistaken, some power there will be in my utterance, which,
 when fortified by the appeal of the work itself, may here and there
 pour forth what the unequal consciousness of my ability withheld from
 my words. Since, therefore, beloved brethren, involved as we are in
 affairs so many and important, we are endeavouring with all eagerness
 and labour to confirm the excellent and most beautiful issues of
 salvation, I do not fear being so deterred by any slothful dread as to
 be withheld or rendered powerless; since, if any one should desire to
 look into that of which we are considering, the hope of devotion being
 taken into account, and the very magnitude of the thing being weighed,
 he would rather wonder that I could have dared at all, in a matter
 wherein both the vastness of the subject oppressed me, and the
 earnestness of its own desire drove my mind, confused with its joy,
 into mental difficulties. For who is there whom such a subject would
 not alarm? who is there whom it would not overthrow with the fear of
 its own wonder!

 2. For there is indeed, unless I am mistaken, even in the very power of
 conscience, a marvellous fear which at once disturbs and inflames us;
 whose power, the more closely you look into, the more the dreadful
 sense of its obligation is gathered from its very aspect of venerable
 majesty. For assuredly you ought to consider what glory there is in
 expiating any kind of defilement of life, and the foulness of a
 polluted body, and the contagions gathered from the long putrefaction
 of vices, and the worldly guilt incurred by so great a lapse of time,
 by the remedial agency of one stroke, whereby both reward may be
 increased, and guilt may be excluded. Whence every perfection and
 condition of life is included in martyrdom. This is the foundation of
 life and faith, this is the safeguard of salvation, this is the bond of
 liberty and honour; and although there are also other means whereby the
 light may be attained, yet we more easily arrive at nearness to the
 promised reward, by help of these punishments, which sustain us.

 3. For consider what glory it is to set aside the lusts of this life,
 and to oppose a mind withdrawn from all commerce with nature and the
 world, to all the opposition of the adversary, and to have no dread of
 the cruelty of the torturer; that a man should be animated by the
 suffering whereby he might be believed to be destroyed, and should take
 to himself, as an enhancement of his strength, that which the punisher
 thinks will aggravate his torments. For although the hook, springing
 forth from the stiffening ribs, is put back again into the wound, and
 with the repeated strokes of the whip the returning lash [4837] is
 drawn away with the rent portions of the flesh; still he stands
 immoveable, the stronger for his sufferings, revolving only this in his
 mind, that in that brutality of the executioners Christ Himself is
 suffering [4838] more in proportion to what he suffers. For since, if
 he should deny the Lord, he would incur guilt on His behalf for whom he
 ought to have overcome, it is essential that He should be seen to bear
 all things to whom the victory is due, even in the suffering.

 4. Therefore, since martyrdom is the chief thing, there are three
 points arising out of it on which we have proposed to ourselves to
 speak: What it is, how great it is, and of what advantage it is. What,
 then, is martyrdom? It is the end of sins, the limit of dangers, the
 guide of salvation, the teacher of patience, the home of life, on the
 journey to which those things moreover befall which in the coming
 crisis might be considered torments. By this also testimony is borne to
 the Name, and the majesty of the Name is greatly enhanced: not that in
 itself that majesty can be diminished, or its magnitude detracted from,
 by the guilt of one who denies it; but that it redounds to the increase
 of its glory, when the terror of the populace that howls around is
 giving to suffering, fearless minds, and by the threats of snarling
 hatred is adding to the title whereby Christ has desired to crown the
 man, that in proportion as he has thought that he conquered, in that
 proportion his courage has grown in the struggle. It is then,
 therefore, that all the vigour of faith is brought to bear, then
 facility of belief is approved, when you encounter the speeches and the
 reproaches of the rabble, [4839] and when you strengthen yourself by a
 religious mind against those madnesses of the people,--overcoming, that
 is, and repelling whatever their blasphemous speech may have uttered to
 wrong Christ in your person; as when the resisting breakwater repels
 the adverse sea, although the waves dash and the rolling water again
 and again beats upon it, yet its immoveable strength abides firm, and
 does not yield even when covered over by the waves that foam around,
 until its force is scattered over the rocks and loses itself, and the
 conquered billow lying upon the rocks retires forth into the open
 spaces of the shore.

 5. For what is there in these speeches other than empty discourse, and
 senseless talk, and a depraved pleasure in meaningless words? As it is
 written:  "They have eyes, and they see not; ears have they, and they
 hear not." [4840] "Their foolish heart is made sluggish, lest at any
 time they should be converted, and I should heal them." [4841] For
 there is no doubt but that He said this of all whose hardened mind and
 obstinate brutality of heart is always driven away and repugnates from
 a vital devotion, folly leading them, madness dragging them, in fine,
 every kind of ferocity enraging them, whereby they are instigated as
 well as carried away, so that in their case their own deeds would be
 sufficient for their punishment, their guilt would burden the very
 penalty of the persecution inflicted.

 6. The whole of this tends to the praise of martyrdom, the whole
 illuminates the glory of suffering wherein the hope of time future is
 beheld, wherein Christ Himself is engaged, of whom are given the
 examples that we seek, and whose is the strength by which we resist.
 And that in this behalf something is supplied to us to present, is
 surely a lofty and marvellous condescension, and such as we are able
 neither mentally to conceive nor fully to express in words. For what
 could He with His liberal affection bestow upon us more, than that He
 should be the first to show forth in Himself what He would reward with
 a crown in others? He became mortal that we might be immortal, and He
 underwent the issue of human destiny, by whom things human are
 governed; and that He might appear to have given to us the benefit of
 His having suffered, He gave us confession. He suggested martyrdoms;
 finally, He, by the merits of His nativity, imputed all those things
 whereby the light (of life) may be quenched, to a saving remedy, by His
 excellent humility, by His divine strength. Whoever have deserved to be
 worthy of this have been without death, have overcome all the foulest
 stains of the world, having subdued the condition of death.

 7. For there is no doubt how much they obtain from the Lord, who have
 preferred God's name to their own safety, so that in that judgment-day
 their blood-shedding would make them better, and the blood spilt would
 show them to be spotless.  Because death makes life more complete,
 death rather leads to glory. Thus, whenever on the rejoicing
 wheat-stalks the ears of corn distended by rains grow full, the
 abundant harvests are forced [4842] by the summer; thus, as often as
 the vine is pruned by the knife from the tendrils that break forth upon
 it, the bunch of grapes is more liberally clothed. For whatever is of
 advantage by its injury turns out for the increase of the time to come;
 just as it has often been of avail to the fields to let loose the
 flames, that by the heat of the wandering conflagration the blind
 breathing-holes of the earth might be relaxed. It has been useful to
 parch the light stalks with the crackling fire, that the pregnant
 corn-field might raise itself higher, and a more abundant grain might
 flourish on the breeding stems. Therefore such also is first of all the
 calamity, and by and by the fruit of martyrdom, that it so contemns
 death, that it may preserve life in death.

 8. For what is so illustrious and sublime, as by a robust devotion to
 preserve all the vigour of faith in the midst of so many weapons of
 executioners? What so great and honourable, as in the midst of so many
 swords of the surrounding guards, again and again to profess in
 repeated words the Lord of one's liberty and the author of one's
 salvation?--and especially if you set before your eyes that there is
 nothing more detestable than dishonour, nothing baser than slavery,
 that now you ought to seek nothing else, to ask for nothing else, than
 that you should be snatched from the slaughters of the world, be
 delivered from the ills of the world, and be engaged only as an alien
 from the contagion of earth, among the ruins of a globe that is
 speedily to perish? For what have you to do with this light, if you
 have the promise of an eternal light? What interest have you in this
 commerce of life and nature, if the amplitude of heaven is awaiting
 you? Doubtless let that lust of life keep hold, but let it be of those
 whom for unatoned sin the raging fire will torture with eternal
 vengeance for their crimes. Let that lust of life keep hold, but let it
 be of those to whom it is both a punishment to die, and a torment to
 endure (after death). But to you both the world itself is subjected,
 and the earth yields, if, when all are dying, you are reserved for this
 fate of being a martyr. Do we not behold daily dyings? We behold new
 kinds of death of the body long worn out with raging diseases, the
 miserable results of some plague hitherto unexperienced; and we behold
 the destruction of wasted cities, and hence we may acknowledge how
 great is to be considered the dignity of martyrdom, to the attainment
 of the glory of which even the pestilence is beginning to compel us.
 [4843]

 9. Moreover, beloved brethren, regard, I beseech you, this
 consideration more fully; for in it both salvation is involved, and
 sublimity accounted of, although I am not unaware that you abundantly
 know that we are supported by the judgments of all who stand fast, and
 that you are not ignorant that this is the teaching handed down to us,
 that we should maintain the power of so great a Name without any dread
 of the warfare; because we whom once the desire of an everlasting
 remembrance has withheld from the longing for this light, and whom the
 anticipations of the future have wrenched away, and whom the society of
 Christ so longed for has kept aloof from all wickedness, shrink from
 offering our soul to death except it be in the way of yielding to a
 mischief, and that those benefits of God must no longer be retained and
 clung to by us, since beyond the burning up of these things the reward
 is so great as that human infirmity can hardly attain sufficiently to
 speak of it. Heaven lies open to our blood; the dwelling-place of
 Gehenna gives way to our blood; and among all the attainments of glory,
 the title of blood is sealed as the fairest, and its crown is
 designated as most complete.

 10. Thus, whenever the soldier returns from the enemy laden with
 triumphant spoils, he rejoices in his wounds.  Thus, whenever the
 sailor, long harassed with tempests, arrives at safe shores, he reckons
 his happiness by the dangers that he has suffered. For, unless I am
 mistaken, that is assuredly a joyous labour whereby safety is found.
 Therefore all things must be suffered, all things must be endured; nor
 should we desire the means of rejoicing for a brief period, and being
 punished with a perpetual burning. For you ought to remember that you
 are bound, as it were, by a certain federal paction, out of which
 arises the just condition either of obtaining salvation, or the merited
 fearfulness of punishment. You stand equally among adverse things and
 prosperous, in the midst of arms and darts; and on the one hand,
 worldly ambition, on the other heavenly greatness, incites you.

 11. If you fear to lose salvation, know that you can die; and,
 moreover, death should be contemned by you, for whom Christ was slain.
 Let the examples of the Lords passion, I beseech you, pass before your
 eyes; let the offerings, and the rewards, and the distinctions prepared
 come together before you, and look carefully at both events, how great
 a difficulty they have between them. For you will not be able to
 confess unless you know what a great mischief you do if you deny.
 Martyrs rejoice in heaven; the fire will consume those who are enemies
 of the truth. The paradise of God blooms for the witnesses; Gehenna
 will enfold the deniers, and eternal fire will burn them up. And, to
 say nothing of other matters, this assuredly ought rather to urge us,
 that the confession of one word is maintained by the everlasting
 confession of Christ; as it is written, "Whosoever shall confess me on
 earth before men, him also will I confess before my Father, and before
 His angels." [4844] To this are added, by way of an enhancement of
 glory, the adornments of virtue; for He says, "The righteous shall
 shine as sparks that run to and fro among the stubble; they shall judge
 the nations, and shall have dominion over the peoples." [4845]

 12. For it is a great glory, beloved brethren, to adorn the life of
 eternal salvation with the dignity of suffering: it is a great
 sublimity before the face of the Lord, and under the gaze of Christ, to
 contemn without a shudder the torments inflicted by human power. Thus
 Daniel, by the constancy of his faith, overcame the threats of the king
 and the fury of raging lions, in that he believed that none else than
 God was to be adored. Thus, when the young men were thrown into the
 furnace, the fire raged against itself, because, being righteous, they
 endured the flames, and guarded against those of Gehenna, by believing
 in God, whence also they received things worthy of them: they were not
 delayed to a future time: they were not reserved for the reward of
 eternal salvation. God saw their faith; that what they had promised to
 themselves to see after their death, they merited to see in their body.
 For how great a reward was given them in the present tribulation could
 not be estimated. If there was cruelty, it gave way; if there was
 flame, it stood still. For there was one mind to all of them, which
 neither violence could break down nor wrath could subvert; nor could
 the fear of death restrain them from the obedience of devotion. Whence
 by the Lord's grace it happened, that in this manner the king himself
 appeared rather to be punished in those men (who were slain), whilst
 they escape whom he had thought to slay.

 13. And now, beloved brethren, I shall come to that point whence I
 shall very easily be able to show you how highly the virtue of
 martyrdom is esteemed, which, although it is well known to all, and is
 to be desired on account of the insignia of its inborn glory, yet in
 the desire of its enjoyment has received more enhancement from the
 necessity of the times. Because if any one be crowned at that season in
 which he supposes himself to be crowned, if perchance he should die, he
 is greatly rewarded. Therefore, sublime and illustrious as martyrdom
 is, it is the more needful now, when the world itself is turned upside
 down, and, while the globe is partially shattered, failing nature is
 giving evidence of the tokens of its final destruction. For the
 rain-cloud hangs over us in the sky, and the very air stretches forth
 the mournful rain (curtain); and as often as the black tempest
 threatens the raging sea, the glittering lightning-flashes glow
 terribly in the midst of the opening darkness of the clouds. Moreover,
 when the deep is lashed into immense billows, by degrees the wave is
 lifted up, and by degrees the foam whitens, until at length you behold
 it rush in such a manner, that on those rocks on which it is hurled, it
 throws its foam higher than the wave that was vomited forth by the
 swelling sea. You read that it is written, that we must pay even the
 uttermost farthing. But the martyrs alone are relieved of this
 obligation; because they who trust to their desires for eternal
 salvation, and have overcome their longings for this life, have been
 made by the Lord's precepts free from the universal suffering. [4846]
 Therefore from this especially, beloved brethren, we shall be able to
 set forth what great things the virtue of martyrdom is able to fulfil.

 14. And, to pass over everything else, we ought to remember what a
 glory it is to come immaculate to Christ--to be a sharer in His
 suffering, and to reign in a perpetual eternity with the Lord--to be
 free from the threatening destruction of the world, and not to be mixed
 up with the bloody carnage of wasting diseases in a common lot with
 others; and, not to speak of the crown itself, if, being situated in
 the midst of these critical evils of nature, you had the promise of an
 escape from this life, would you not rejoice with all your heart? If, I
 say, while tossing amid the tempests of this world, a near repose
 should invite you, would you not consider death in the light of a
 remedy? Thus, surrounded as you are with the knives of the
 executioners, and the instruments of testing tortures, stand sublime
 and strong, considering how great is the penalty of denying, in a time
 when you are unable to enjoy, the world for the sake of which you would
 deny, because indeed the Lord knew that cruel torments and mischievous
 acts of punishment would be armed against us for our destruction, in
 order that He might make us strong to endure them all. "My son," says
 He, "if thou come to serve God, stand fast in righteousness, and fear,
 and prepare thy soul for temptation." [4847] Moreover, also, the
 blessed Apostle Paul exclaimed, and said, "To me to live is Christ, and
 to die is gain." [4848]

 15. Wherefore, beloved brethren, with a firm faith, with a robust
 devotion, with a virtue opposed to the fierce threatenings of the
 world, and the savage murmurs of the attending crowds, we must resist
 and not fear, seeing that ours is the hope of eternity and heavenly
 life, and that our ardour is inflamed with the longing for the light,
 and our salvation rejoices in the promise of immortality. But the fact
 that our hands are bound with tightened bonds, and that heavy links
 fastened round our necks oppress us with their solid weight, or that
 our body strained on the rack hisses on the red-hot plates, is not for
 the sake of seeking our blood, but for the sake of trying us. [4849]
 For in what manner should we be able to recognise even the dignity of
 martyrdom, if we were not constrained to desire it, even at the price
 of the sacrifice of our body? I indeed have known it, and I am not
 deceived in the truth of what I say, when the cruel hands of the
 persecutors were wrenching asunder the martyr's limbs, and the furious
 torturer was ploughing up his lacerated muscles, and still could not
 overcome him. I have known it by the words of those who stood around.
 [4850] "This is a great matter. Assuredly I know not what it is--that
 he is not subdued by suffering, that he is not broken down by wearing
 torments." Moreover, there were other words of those who spoke: "And
 yet I believe he has children: for he has a wife associated with him in
 his house; and yet he does not give way to the bond of his offspring,
 nor is he withdrawn by the claim of his family affection from his
 stedfast purpose. This matter must be known, and this strength must be
 investigated, even to the very heart; for that is no trifling
 confession, whatever it may be, for which a man suffers, even so as to
 be able to die."

 16. Moreover, beloved brethren, so great is the virtue of martyrdom,
 that by its means even he who has wished to slay you is constrained to
 believe. It is written, and we read: "Endure in suffering, and in thy
 humiliation have patience, because gold and silver are tried by the
 fire." [4851] Since, therefore, the Lord proves us by earthly
 temptations, and Christ the Judge weighs us by these worldly ills, we
 must congratulate ourselves, and rejoice that He does not reserve us
 for those eternal destructions, but rejoices over us as purged from all
 contagion. But from those whom He adopts as partners of His
 inheritance, and is willing to receive into the kingdom of heaven, what
 else indeed does He ask than a walk in integrity? He Himself has said
 that all things are His, both those things which are displayed upon the
 level plains, and which lift themselves up into sloping hills; and
 moreover, whatever the greatness of heaven surrounds, and what the
 gliding water embraces in the circumfluent ocean. But if all things are
 within His ken, and He does not require of us anything but sincere
 actions, we ought, as He Himself has said, to be like to gold. Because,
 when you behold in the glistening ore [4852] the gold glittering under
 the tremulous light, and melting into a liquid form by the roaring
 flames (for this also is generally the care of the workmen), whenever
 from the panting furnaces is vomited forth the glowing fire, the rich
 flame is drawn away from the access of the earth in a narrow channel,
 and is kept back by sand from the refluent masses of earth. Whence it
 is necessary to suffer all things, that we may be free from all
 wickedness, as He has said by His prophet: "And though in the sight of
 men they have suffered torments, yet is their hope full of immortality;
 and being vexed in a few things, they shall be well rewarded in many
 things, because God has tried them, and has found them worthy of
 Himself, and has received them as a sacrifice of burnt-offering."
 [4853]

 17. But if ambitious dignity deter you, and the amount of your money
 heaped up in your stores influence you--a cause which ever distracts
 the intentions of a virtuous heart, and assails the soul devoted to its
 Lord with a fearful trembling--I beg that you would again refer to the
 heavenly words.  For it is the very voice of Christ who speaks, and
 says, "Whosoever shall lose his life for my name's sake, shall receive
 in this world a hundred fold, and in the world to come shall possess
 eternal life." [4854] And we ought assuredly to reckon nothing greater,
 nothing more advantageous, than this. For although in the nature of
 your costly garments the purple dye flows into figures, and in the
 slackening threads the gold strays into a pattern, and the weighty
 metals to which you devote yourselves are not wanting in your excavated
 treasures; still, unless I am mistaken, those things will be esteemed
 vain and purposeless, if, while all things else are added to you,
 salvation alone is found to be wanting; even as the Holy Spirit
 declares that we can give nothing in exchange for our soul. For He
 says, "If you should gain the whole world, and lose your own soul, what
 shall it profit you, or what exchange shall a man give for his soul?"
 [4855] For all those things which we behold are worthless, and such as
 resting on weak foundations, are unable to sustain the weight of their
 own mass. For whatever is received from the world is made of no account
 by the antiquity of time. Whence, that nothing should be sweet or dear
 that might be preferred to the desires of eternal life, things which
 are of personal right and individual law are cut off by the Lord's
 precepts; so that in the undergoing of tortures, for instance, the son
 should not soften the suffering father, and private affection should
 not change the heart that was previously pledged to enduring strength,
 into another disposition. Christ of His own right ordained that truth
 and salvation alone must be embraced in the midst of great sufferings,
 under which wife, and children, and grandchildren, under which all the
 offspring of one's bowels, must be forsaken, and the victory be
 claimed.

 18. For Abraham also thus pleased God, in that he, when tried by God,
 spared not even his own son, in behalf of whom perhaps he might have
 been pardoned had he hesitated to slay him. A religious devotion armed
 his hands; and his paternal love, at the command of the Lord who bade
 it, set aside all the feelings of affection. Neither did it shock him
 that he was to shed the blood of his son, nor did he tremble at the
 word; nevertheless for him Christ had not yet been slain. For what is
 dearer than He who, that you might not sustain anything unwillingly in
 the present day, first of all Himself suffered that which He taught
 others to suffer? What is sweeter than He who, although He is our God
 and Lord, nevertheless makes the man who suffers for His sake His
 fellow-heir in the kingdom of heaven? Oh grand--I know not
 what!--whether that reason scarcely bears to receive that
 consciousness, although it always marvels at the greatness of the
 rewards; or that the majesty of God is so abundant, that to all who
 trust in it, it even offers those things which, while we were
 considering what we have done, it had been sin to desire.  Moreover, if
 only eternal salvation should be given, for that very perpetuity of
 living we should be thankful. But now, when heaven and the power of
 judging concerning others is bestowed in the eternal world, what is
 there wherein man's mediocrity may not find itself equal to all these
 trials? If you are assailed with injuries, He was first so assailed. If
 you are oppressed with reproaches, you are imitating the experience of
 God. Whence also it is but a little matter whatever you undergo for
 Him, seeing that you can do nothing more, unless that in this consists
 the whole of salvation, that He has promised the whole to martyrdom.
 Finally, the apostle, to whom all things were always dear, while he
 deeply marvelled at the greatness of the promised benefits, said, "I
 reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be
 compared to the glory that is to follow, which shall be revealed in
 us." [4856] Because he was musing in his own mind how great would be
 the reward, that to him to whom it would be enough to be free from
 death, should be given not only the prerogative of salvation, but also
 to ascend to heaven: to heaven which is not constrained into darkness,
 even when light is expelled from it, and the day does not unfold into
 light by alternate changes; but the serene temperature of the liquid
 air unfolds a pure brightness through a clearness that reddens with a
 fiery glow.

 19. It now remains, beloved brethren, that we are bound to show what is
 the advantage of martyrdom, and that we should teach that especially,
 so that the fear of the future may stimulate us to this glorious title.
 Because those to whom great things are promised, seem to have greater
 things which they are bound to fear. For the soldier does not arouse
 himself to arms before the enemy have brandished their hostile weapons;
 nor does a man withdraw his ship in an anchorage, unless the fear of
 the deep have checked his courage. Moreover also, while eager for his
 wealth, the considerate husbandman does not stir up the earth with a
 fortunate ploughshare, before the crumbling glebe is loosened into dust
 by the rain that it has received. Thus this is the natural practice of
 every man, to be ignorant of what is of advantage, unless you recognise
 what has been mischievous. Whence also a reward is given to all the
 saints, in that the punishment of their deeds is inflicted on the
 unrighteous. Therefore what the Lord has promised to His people is
 doubtful to none, however ignorant he is; but neither is there any
 doubt what punitive fires He threatens. And since my discourse has led
 me thus to argue about both these classes of things in a few words, as
 I have already spoken of both, I will briefly explain them.

 20. A horrible place, of which the name is Gehenna, with an awful
 murmuring and groaning of souls bewailing, and with flames belching
 forth through the horrid darkness of thick night, is always breathing
 out the raging fires of a smoking furnace, while the confined mass of
 flames is restrained or relaxed for the various purposes of punishment.
 Then there are very many degrees of its violence, as it gathers into
 itself whatever tortures the consuming fire of the heat emitted can
 supply. Those by whom the voice of the Lord has been rejected, and His
 control contemned, it punishes with different dooms; and in proportion
 to the different degree of deserving of the forfeited salvation it
 applies its power, while a portion assigns its due distinction to
 crime. And some, for example, are bowed down by an intolerable load,
 some are hurried by a merciless force over the abrupt descent of a
 precipitous path, and the heavy weight of clanking chains bends over
 them its bondage.  Some there are, also, whom a wheel is closely
 turning, and an unwearied dizziness tormenting; and others whom, bound
 to one another with tenacious closeness, body clinging to body
 compresses: so that both fire is devouring, and the load of iron is
 weighing down, and the uproar of many is torturing.

 21. But those by whom God has always been sought or known, have never
 lost the position which Christ has given them, where grace is found,
 where in the verdant fields the luxuriant earth clothes itself with
 tender grass, and is pastured with the scent of flowers; where the
 groves are carried up to the lofty hill-top, and where the tree clothes
 with a thicker foliage whatever spot the canopy, expanded by its
 curving branches, may have shaded. There is no excess of cold or of
 heat, nor is it needed that in autumn the fields should rest, or, again
 in the young spring, that the fruitful earth should bring forth. All
 things are of one season: fruits are borne of a continued summer, since
 there neither does the moon serve the purpose of her months, nor does
 the sun run his course along the moments of the hours, nor does the
 banishment of the light make way for night. A joyous repose possesses
 the people, a calm home shelters them, where a gushing fountain in the
 midst issues from the bosom of a broken hollow, and flows in sinuous
 mazes by a course deep-sounding, at intervals to be divided among the
 sources of rivers springing from it. Here there is the great praise of
 martyrs, here is the noble crown of the victors, who have the promise
 of greater things than those whose rewards are more abundant. And that
 either their body is thrown to wild beasts, or the threatening sword is
 not feared, is shown as the reason of their dignity, is manifested as
 the ground of their election. Because it would have been inconsistent,
 that he who had been judged equal to such a duty, should be kept among
 earthly vices and corruptions.

 22. For you deserve, O excellent martyrs, that nothing should be denied
 to you who are nourished with the hope of eternity and of light; whose
 absolute devotion, and whose mind dedicated to the service of heaven,
 is evidently seen.  Deservedly, I say deservedly, nothing to you is
 forbidden to wish for, since by your soul this world is looked down
 upon, and the alienated appearance of the time has made you to shudder,
 as if it were a confused blindness of darkness; to whom this world is
 always regarded in the light of a dungeon, its dwellings for
 restraints, in a life which has always been esteemed by you as a period
 of delay on a journey. Thus, indeed, in the triumph of victory he is
 snatched from these evils, whom no vain ambition with pompous step has
 subdued, nor popular greatness has elated, but whom, burning with
 heavenly desire, Christ has added to His kingdom.

 23. There is nothing, then, so great and venerable as the deliverance
 from death, and the causing to live, and the giving to reign for ever.
 This is fitting for the saints, needful for the wretched, pleasing to
 all, in which the good rejoice, the abject are lifted up, the elect are
 crowned. Assuredly God, who cares for all, gave to life a certain
 medicine as it were in martyrdom, when to some He assigned it on
 account of their deserving, to others He gave it on account of His
 mercy. We have assuredly seen very many distinguished by their faith,
 come to claim this illustrious name, that death might ennoble the
 obedience of their devotion. Moreover, also, we have frequently beheld
 others stand undismayed, that they might redeem their sins committed,
 and be regarded as washed in their gore by His blood; and so being
 slain they might live again, who when alive were counted slain.  Death
 assuredly makes life more complete, death finds the glory that was
 lost. For in this the hope once lost is regained, in this all salvation
 is restored. Thus, when the seed-times shall fail on the withering
 plains, and the earth shall be parched with its dying grass, the river
 has delighted to spring forth from the sloping hills, and to soothe the
 thirsty fields with its gushing streams, so that the vanquished poverty
 of the land might be dissolved into fruitful wheat-stems, and the
 corn-field might bristle up the thicker for the counterfeited showers
 of rain.

 24. What then, beloved brethren, shall I chiefly relate, or what shall
 I say? When all dignified titles thus combine in one, the mind is
 confused, the perception is misled; and in the very attempt to speak
 with brilliancy, my unworthy discourse vanishes away. For what is there
 to be said which can be sufficient, when, if you should express the
 power of eternal salvation, its attending glories come in your way; if
 you would speak of its surroundings, its greatness prevents you? The
 things at the same time are both in agreement and in opposition, and
 there is nothing which appears worthy to be uttered. Thus the instances
 of martyrdom have held in check the impulses of daring speech, as if
 entangled and ensnared by an opponent. What voice, what lungs, what
 strength, can undertake to sustain the form of such a dignity? At the
 confession of one voice, adverse things give way, joyous things appear,
 kingdoms are opened, empires are prepared, suffering is overcome, death
 is subdued, life is preferred, and the resisting weapons of a
 mischievous enemy are broken up. If there is sin, it perishes; if there
 is crime, it is left behind.  Wherefore I beseech you, weigh this in
 your minds, and from my address receive so much as you know that you
 can feel.

 25. Let it present itself to your eyes, what a day that is, when, with
 the people looking on, and all men watching, an undismayed devotion is
 struggling against earthly crosses and the threats of the world; how
 the minds in suspense, and hearts anxious about the tremblings of
 doubt, are agitated by the dread of the timid fearfulness of those who
 are congratulating them! What an anxiety is there, what a prayerful
 entreaty, what desires are recorded, when, with the victory still
 wavering, and the crown of conquest hanging in doubt over the head
 while the results are still uncertain, and when that pestilent and
 raving confession is inflamed by passion, is kindled by madness, and
 finally, is heated by the fury of the heart, and by gnashing threats!
 For who is ignorant how great a matter this is, that our, as it were,
 despised frailty, and the unexpected boldness of human strength, should
 not yield to the pangs of wounds, nor to the blows of tortures,--that a
 man should stand fast and not be moved, should be tortured and still
 not be overcome, but should rather be armed by the very suffering
 whereby he is tormented?

 26. Consider what it is, beloved brethren: set before your perceptions
 and your minds all the endurance of martyrdom. Behold, indeed, in the
 passion of any one you will, they who are called martyrs rejoice as
 being already summoned out of the world; they rejoice as being
 messengers of all good men; they rejoice in like manner as elected.
 Thus the Lord rejoices in His soldier, [4857] Christ rejoices in the
 witness to His name. It is a small matter that I am speaking of,
 beloved brethren; it is a small matter, so great a subject in this kind
 of address, and so marvellous a difficulty has been undertaken by me;
 but let the gravity of the issue, I beseech you, not be wanting for my
 own purpose, knowing that as much can be said of martyrdom as could be
 appreciated. Whence also this alone has been the reason of my
 describing its glory, not that I judged myself equal and fitted for its
 praise, but that I saw that there was such a virtue in it, that however
 little I might say about it, I should profess that I had said as much
 as possible. For although the custody of faith may be preferred to the
 benefit of righteousness, and an immaculate virginity may recognise
 itself as better than the praises of all; yet it is necessary that even
 it should give place to the claim of blood, and be made second to a
 gory death. The former have chosen what is good, the latter have
 imitated Christ.

 27. But now, beloved brethren, lest any one should think that I have
 placed all salvation in no other condition than in martyrdom, let him
 first of all look especially at this, that it is not I who seem to
 speak, that am of so great importance, nor is the order of things so
 arranged that the promised hope of immortality should depend on the
 strength of a partial advocacy. But since the Lord has testified with
 His own mouth, that in the Father's possession are many dwellings, I
 have believed that there is nothing greater than that glory whereby
 those men are proved who are unworthy of this worldly life. Therefore,
 beloved brethren, striving with a religious rivalry, as if stirred up
 with some incentive of reward, let us submit to all the abundance and
 the endurance of strength.  For things passing away ought not to move
 us, seeing that they are always being pressed forward to their own
 overthrow, not only by the law proposed to them, but even by the very
 end of time. John exclaims, and says, "Now is the axe laid to the root
 of the tree;" [4858] showing, to wit, and pointing out that it is the
 last old age of all things.  Moreover, also, the Lord Himself says,
 "Walk while ye have the light, lest the darkness lay hold upon you."
 [4859] But if He has foretold that we must walk in that time, certainly
 He shows that we must at any rate walk.

 28. And to return to the praise of martyrdom, there is a word of the
 blessed Paul, who says:  "Know ye not that they who run in a race
 strive many, but one receiveth the prize? But do ye so run, that all of
 you may obtain." [4860] Moreover also elsewhere, that he may exhort
 us to martyrdom, he has called us fellow-heirs with Christ; nay, that
 he might omit nothing, he says, "If ye are dead with Christ, why, as if
 living in the world, do ye make distinctions?" [4861] Because, dearest
 brethren, we who bear the rewards of resurrection, who seek for the day
 of judgment, who, in fine, are trusting that we shall reign with
 Christ, ought to be dead to the world. For you can neither desire
 martyrdom till you have first hated the world, nor attain to God's
 reward unless you have loved Christ. And he who loves Christ does not
 love the world. For Christ was given up by the world, even as the world
 also was given up by Christ; as it is written, "The world is crucified
 unto me, and I unto the world." [4862] The world has been an object of
 affection to none whom the Lord has not previously condemned; nor could
 he enjoy eternal salvation who has gloried in the life of the world.
 That is the very voice of Christ, who says:  "He that loveth his life
 in this world, shall lose it in the world to come; but he that hateth
 his life in this world, shall find it in the world to come." [4863]
 Moreover, also, the Apostle Paul says: "Be ye imitators of me, as I
 also am of Christ." [4864] And the same elsewhere says: "I wish that
 all of you, if it were possible, should be imitators of me." [4865]

 29. He said this who suffered, and who suffered for this cause, that he
 might imitate the Lord; and assuredly he wished us also to suffer for
 this cause, that through him we might imitate Christ. If thou art
 righteous, and believest in God, why fearest thou to shed thy blood for
 Him whom thou knowest to have so often suffered for thee? In Isaiah He
 was sawn asunder, in Abel He was slain, in Isaac He was offered up, in
 Joseph He was sold into slavery, in man He was crucified. And I say
 nothing of other matters, such as neither my discourse is able to tell
 nor my mind to bear. My consciousness is overcome by the example of His
 humility; and when it considers what things befell when He suffered, it
 marvels that He should suffer on whose behalf all things quaked. The
 day fled into the night; the light gave up all things into darkness;
 and, its mass being inclined backwards and forwards, the whole earth
 was jarred, and burst open; the dead [4866] were disturbed, the graves
 were laid bare, and as the tombs gaped open into the rent of the earth,
 bodies returning to the light were restored; the world trembled at the
 flowing of His blood; and the veil which hung from the opening of the
 temple was rent, and all the temple uttered a groan. For which cause it
 is a great matter to imitate Him who, in dying, convicted the world.
 Therefore when, after the example of the Lord's passion, and after all
 the testimony of Christ, you lay down your life, and fear not to shed
 your blood, everything must absolutely give way to martyrdom.
 Inestimable is the glory of martyrdom, infinite its measure, immaculate
 its victory, invaluable its title, immense its triumph; because he who
 is presented to Him with the special glory of a confessor, is adorned
 with the kindred blood of Christ.

 30. Therefore, beloved brethren, although this is altogether of the
 Lord's promise and gift, and although it is given from on high, and is
 not received except by His will, and moreover, can neither be expressed
 in words nor described by speech, nor can be satisfied by any kind of
 powers of eloquence, still such will be your benevolence, such will be
 your charity and love, as to be mindful of me when the Lord shall begin
 to glorify martyrdom in your experience. That holy altar [4867]
 encloses you within itself, that great dwelling-place of the venerable
 Name encloses you within itself, as if in the folds of a heart's
 embrace: the powers of the everlasting age sustain you, and that by
 which you shall ever reign and shall ever conquer. O blessed ones! and
 such as truly have your sins remitted, if, however, you who are
 Christ's peers ever have sinned! [4868] O blessed ones! whom the blood
 of the Lord has dyed from the beginning of the world, and whom such a
 brightness of snowy clothing has deservedly invested, and the whiteness
 of the enfolding robe has adorned!  Finally, I myself seem to myself to
 behold already, and, as far as is possible to the mind of man, that
 divine and illustrious thing occurs to my eyes and view. I seem, I say
 to myself, already to behold, that that truly noble army accompanies
 the glory and the path of their Christ. The blessed band of victors
 will go before His face; and as the crowds become denser, the whole
 army, illuminated as it were by the rising of the sun, will ascribe to
 Him the power. And would that it might be the lot of such a poor
 creature as myself to see that sight! But the Lord can do what He is
 believed not to deny to your petitions. [4869]

 [4835] [Erasmus doubts as to the authorship, judging from the style.
 Pamelius is sure it is Cyprian's.]

 [4836] In place of reward, he sets before them not only security from
 the fear of Gehenna, but also the attainment of everlasting life,
 describing both alternatives briefly in a poetical manner. He points
 out, that to some, martyrdom serves as a crown, while to others who are
 baptized in their own blood, it serves as redemption. Finally, when
 from the Scriptures he has stirred up his readers to confession of the
 name of Christ, he asks them to remember him when the Lord begins to
 honour martyrdom in them, since the Lord is known not to deny such as
 they when they ask Him for anything.

 [4837] "Habena;" but according to Baluzius "avena," "an oatstraw."

 [4838] [Acts ix. 5. The principle is recognised in the words, "Ye did
 it unto me," where Christ identifies Himself with members of His body.
 Oh, the condescension!  Heb. ii. 11.]

 [4839] [Ps. lxiv. 3. The revilings of the multitude are reckoned by the
 Psalmist among the most cruel tortures of Christ; and we cannot doubt
 that the early Christians found the like cruelty of the heathen a daily
 martyrdom, before they came to their crowning passion. Compare
 Tertullian, vol. iii. p. 712.]

 [4840] Ps. cxiii. 13.

 [4841] Isa. vi. 10.

 [4842] "Coguntur," or "coquuntur,"--"are matured."

 [4843] [The heathen attributed this pestilence to the "atheism" of
 Christians, and hence persecuted them the more fiercely; and, as it was
 better to die by martyrdom than by the pestilence, he thus speaks.
 Death an advantage. Shaks., Hen. V., act. iv. sc. 1.]

 [4844] Luke xxii. 8.

 [4845] Wisd. iii. 7.

 [4846] [The sufferings of this life are here supposed to be retributive
 in the case of those who must be weaned from the world. Martyrs have
 weaned themselves, and go gladly to their rest.]

 [4847] Ecclus. ii. 1.

 [4848] Phil. i. 21.

 [4849] [The terrible pictures in S. Stefano Rotondo (see p. 288, supra)
 might seem to have been taken from this graphic treatise. Can our faith
 and love be compared with that of these sufferers?]

 [4850] [To me, these dramatic narrations of what was going on among the
 crowds that gazed upon the tortures of Christ's witnesses, are very
 suggestive of the whole scene. Compare pp. 295-296, supra.]

 [4851] Ecclus. ii. 4.

 [4852] Or, "earth."

 [4853] Wisd. iii. 4.

 [4854] Matt. x. 39.

 [4855] Matt. xv. 26.

 [4856] Rom. viii. 18.

 [4857] [The adoption of "the sign of the cross," after the immersion of
 baptism, is referable to this martyr-age. It was meant to impress the
 idea of soldiership.]

 [4858] Matt. iii. 10. [Elucidation II.]

 [4859] John xii. 35.

 [4860] 1 Cor. ix. 24.

 [4861] Col. ii. 20; "decernitis."

 [4862] Gal. vi. 14. [Compare Ep. xxv. p. 303, supra.]

 [4863] Matt. x. 39.

 [4864] 1 Cor. vi. 4.

 [4865] 1 Cor. vii. 7.

 [4866] Or, "Manes."

 [4867] [Rev. vi. 9; also vol. i. p. 486, note 10, this series.]

 [4868] ["Si tamen qui Christi compares estis aliquando peccastis;" not
 very happily translated, but extravagant at best.]

 [4869] [Think, I say again, of three hundred years of such "fiery
 trial," so marvellously sustained, and we shall gain new views of
 Christ's power to perfect His own strength in human weakness. The life
 of these Christians was a conscious daily warfare against "the world,
 the flesh, and the devil;" and we must recognise this in all judgments
 of their discipline and their modes of thought.]

 Of the Discipline and Advantage of Chastity. [4870]

 ------------------------

 1. I do not conceive that I have exceeded any portions of my duty, in
 always striving as much as possible, by daily discussions of the
 Gospels, to afford to you from time to time the means of growth, by the
 Lord's help, in faith and knowledge. For what else can be effected in
 the Lord's Church with greater advantage, what can be found more
 suitable to the office of a bishop, than that, by the teaching of the
 divine words, recommended and commented on by Him, believers should be
 enabled to attain to the promised kingdom of heaven? This assuredly, as
 the desired result day by day of my work as well as of my office, I
 endeavour, notwithstanding my absence, to accomplish; and by my letters
 I try to make myself present to you, addressing you in faith, in my
 usual manner, by the exhortations that I send you. I call upon you,
 therefore, to be established in the power of the Root [4871] of the
 Gospel, and to stand always armed against all the assaults of the
 devil. I shall not believe myself to be absent from you, if I shall be
 sure of you. Nevertheless, everything which is advantageously set
 forth, and which either defines or promises the condition of eternal
 life to those who are investigating it, is then only profitable, if it
 be aided in attaining the reward of the effort by the power of the
 divine mercy. We not only set forth words which come from the sacred
 fountains of the Scriptures, but with these very words we associate
 prayers to the Lord, and wishes, that, as well to us as to you, He
 would not only unfold the treasures of His sacraments, but would bestow
 strength for the carrying into act of what we know.  For the danger is
 all the greater if we know the Lord's will, and loiter in the work of
 the will of God.

 2. Although, therefore, I exhort you always, as you are aware, to many
 things, and to the precepts of the Lord's admonition--for what else can
 be desirable or more important to me, than that in all things you
 should stand perfect in the Lord?--yet I admonish you, that you should
 before all things maintain the barriers of chastity, as also you do:
 knowing that you are the temple of the Lord, the members of Christ, the
 habitation of the Holy Spirit, elected to hope, consecrated to faith,
 destined to salvation, sons of God, brethren of Christ, associates of
 the Holy Spirit, owing nothing any longer to the flesh, as born again
 of water, that the chastity, over and above the will, which we should
 always desire to be ours, may be afforded to us also, on account of the
 redemption, that that which has been consecrated by Christ might not be
 corrupted. For if the apostle declares the Church to be the spouse of
 Christ, I beseech you consider what chastity is required, where the
 Church is given in marriage as a betrothed virgin. And I indeed, except
 that I have proposed to admonish you with brevity, think the most
 diffuse praises due, and could set forth abundant laudations of
 chastity; but I have thought it superfluous to praise it at greater
 length among those who practise it. For you adorn it while you exhibit
 it; and in its exercise you set forth its more abundant praises, being
 made its ornament, while it also is yours, each lending and borrowing
 honour from the other. It adds to you the discipline of good morals;
 you confer upon it the ministry of saintly works. For how much and what
 it can effect has on the one hand been manifest by your means, and on
 the other it has shown and taught what you are wishing for,--the two
 advantages of precepts and practice being combined into one, that
 nothing should appear maimed, as would be the case if either principles
 were wanting to service, or service to principles.

 3. Chastity is the dignity of the body, the ornament of morality, the
 sacredness of the sexes, the bond of modesty, the source of purity, the
 peacefulness of home, the crown of concord. [4872] Chastity is not
 careful whom it pleases but itself. Chastity is always modest, being
 the mother of innocency; chastity is ever adorned with modesty alone,
 then rightly conscious of its own beauty if it is displeasing to the
 wicked. Chastity seeks nothing in the way of adornments: it is its own
 glory. It is this which commends us to the Lord, unites us with Christ;
 it is this which drives out from our members all the illicit conflicts
 of desire, instils peace into our bodies: blessed itself, and making
 those blessed, whoever they are, in whom it condescends to dwell. It is
 that which even they who possess it not can never accuse; it is even
 venerable to its enemies, since, they admire it much more because they
 are unable to capture it. Moreover, as mature, it is both always
 excellent in men, and to be earnestly desired by women; so its enemy,
 unchastity, is always detestable, making an obscene sport for its
 servants, sparing neither bodies nor souls. For, their own proper
 character being overcome, it sends the entire man under its yoke of
 lust, alluring at first, that it may do the more mischief by its
 attraction,--the foe of continency, exhausting both means and modesty;
 the perilous madness of lust frequently attaining to the blood, the
 destruction of a good conscience, the mother of impenitence, the ruin
 of a more virtuous age, the disgrace of one's race, driving away all
 confidence in blood and family, intruding one's own children upon the
 affections of strangers, interpolating the offspring of an unknown and
 corrupted stock into the testaments of others. And this also, very
 frequently burning without reference to sex, and not restraining itself
 within the permitted limits, thinks it little satisfaction to itself,
 unless even in the bodies of men it seeks, not a new pleasure, but goes
 in quest of extraordinary and revolting extravagances, contrary to
 nature itself, of men with men.

 4. But chastity maintains the first rank in virgins, the second in
 those who are continent, the third in the case of wedlock. Yet in all
 it is glorious, with all its degrees. For even to maintain the
 marriage-faith is a matter of praise in the midst of so many bodily
 strifes; and to have determined on a limit in marriage defined by
 continency is more virtuous still, because herein even lawful things
 are refused. [4873] Assuredly to have guarded one's purity from the
 womb, and to have kept oneself an infant even to old age throughout the
 whole of life, is certainly the part of an admirable virtue; only that
 if never to have known the body's seductive capacities is the greater
 blessedness, to have overcome them when once known is the greater
 virtue; yet still in such a sort that that virtue comes of God's gift,
 although it manifests itself to men in their members.

 5. The precepts of chastity, brethren, are ancient. Wherefore do I say
 ancient? Because they were ordained at the same time as men themselves.
 For both her own husband belongs to the woman, for the reason that
 besides him she may know no other; and the woman is given to the man
 for the purpose that, when that which had been his own had been yielded
 to him, he should seek for nothing belonging to another. [4874] And in
 such wise it is said, "Two shall be in one flesh," [4875] that what had
 been made one should return together, that a separation without return
 should not afford any occasion to a stranger. Thence also the apostle
 declares that the man is the head of the woman, that he might commend
 chastity in the conjunction of the two. For as the head cannot be
 suited to the limbs of another, so also one's limbs cannot be suited to
 the head of another: for one's head matches one's limbs, and one's
 limbs one's head; and both of them are associated by a natural link in
 mutual concord, lest, by any discord arising from the separation of the
 members, the compact of the divine covenant should be broken. Yet he
 adds, and says: "Because he who loves his wife, loves himself. For no
 one hates his own flesh; but nourishes and cherishes it, even as Christ
 the Church." [4876] From this passage there is great authority for
 charity with chastity, if wives are to be loved by their husbands even
 as Christ loved the Church and wives ought so to love their husbands
 also as the Church loves Christ.

 6. Christ gave this judgment when, being inquired of, He said that a
 wife must not be put away, save for the cause of adultery; such honour
 did He put upon chastity. Hence arose the decree: "Ye shall not suffer
 adulteresses to live." [4877] Hence the apostle says: "This is the
 will of God, that ye abstain from fornication." [4878] Hence also he
 says the same thing: "That the members of Christ must not be joined
 with the members of an harlot." [4879] Hence the man is delivered over
 unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, who, treading under foot
 the law of chastity, practises the vices of the flesh. Hence with
 reason adulterers do not attain the kingdom of heaven. Hence it is that
 every sin is without the body, but that the adulterer alone sins
 against his own body. Hence other authoritative utterances of the
 instructor, all of which it is not necessary at this time to collect,
 especially among you, who for the most part know and do them; and you
 cannot find cause for complaint concerning these things, even though
 they are not described. For the adulterer has not an excuse, nor could
 he have, because he might take a wife.

 7. But as laws are prescribed to matrons, who are so bound that they
 cannot thence be separated, while virginity and continency are beyond
 all law, there is nothing in the laws of matrimony which pertains to
 virginity; for by its loftiness it transcends them all. If any evil
 undertakings of men endeavour to transcend laws, virginity places
 itself on an equality with angels; moreover, if we investigate, it even
 excels them, because struggling in the flesh it gains the victory even
 against a nature which angels have not. What else is virginity than the
 glorious preparation for the future life? Virginity is of neither sex.
 Virginity is the continuance of infancy. Virginity is the triumph over
 pleasures. Virginity has no children; but what is more, it has contempt
 for offspring: it has not fruitfulness, but neither has it bereavement;
 blessed that it is free from the pain of bringing forth, more blessed
 still that it is free from the calamity of the death of children. What
 else is virginity than the freedom of liberty? It has no husband for a
 master. Virginity is freed from all affections: it is not given up to
 marriage, nor to the world, nor to children. It cannot dread
 persecution, since it cannot provoke it from its security.

 8. But since the precepts of chastity have thus briefly been set forth
 to us, let us now give an instance of chastity. For it is more
 profitable when we come in the very presence of the thing; nor will
 there be any doubt about the virtue, when that which is prescribed is
 also designated by illustrations. The example of chastity begins with
 Joseph.  A Hebrew youth, noble by his parentage, nobler by his
 innocence, on account of the envy excited by his revelations exposed
 for sale by his brethren to the Israelites, had attained to the
 household of a man of Egypt. By his obedience and his innocence, and by
 the entire faithfulness of his service, he had aroused in his favour
 the easy and kindly disposition of his master; and his appearance had
 commended itself to all men, alike by his gracious speech as by his
 youthfulness. But that same nobility of manner was received by his
 master's wife in another manner than was becoming; in a secret part of
 the house, and without witnesses,--a place high up, and fitted for
 deeds of wickedness, the unrestrained unchastity of the woman thought
 that it could overcome the youth's chastity, now by promises, now by
 threats. And when he was restrained from attempting flight by her
 holding his garments, shocked at the audacity of such a crime, tearing
 his very garments, and able to appeal to the sincerity of his naked
 body as a witness of his innocence, the rash woman did not shrink from
 adding calumny to the crime of her unchastity. Dishevelled, and raging
 that her desire should be despised, she complained both to others and
 to her husband that the Hebrew youth had attempted to use that force to
 her which she herself had striven to exercise. [4880] The husband's
 passion, unconscious of the truth, and terribly inflamed by his wife's
 accusation, is aroused; and the modest youth, because he did not defile
 his conscience with the crime, is thrust into the lowest dungeon of the
 prison. But chastity is not alone in the dungeon; for God is with
 Joseph, and the guilty are given into his charge, because he had been
 guiltless. Moreover, he dissolves the obscurities of dreams, because
 his spirit was watchful in temptations, and he is freed from chains by
 the master of the prison. He who had been an inferior in the house with
 peril, was made lord of the palace without risk; restored to his noble
 station, he received the reward of chastity and innocence by the
 judgment of God, from whom he had deserved it.

 9. But not less from a different direction arises to us another similar
 instance of chastity from the continence of women. Susanna, as we read,
 the daughter of Chelcias, the wife of Joachim, was exceedingly
 beautiful--more beautiful still in character. Her outward appearance
 added no charm to her, for she was simple: chastity had cultivated her;
 and in addition to chastity nature alone. With her, two of the elders
 had begun to be madly in love, mindful of nothing, neither of the fear
 of God, nor even of their age, already withering with years. Thus the
 flame of resuscitated lust recalled them into the glowing heats of
 their bygone youth. Robbers of chastity, they profess love, while they
 really hate. They threaten her with calumnies when she resists; the
 adulterers in wish declare themselves the accusers of adultery. And
 between these rocks of lust she sought help of the Lord, because she
 was not equal to prevailing against them by bodily strength. And the
 Lord heard from heaven chastity crying to Him; and when she,
 overwhelmed with injustice, was being led to punishment, she was
 delivered, and saw her revenge upon her enemies. Twice victorious, and
 in her peril so often and so fatally hedged in, she escaped both the
 lust and death. It will be endless if I continue to produce more
 examples; I am content with these two, especially as in these cases
 chastity has been defended with all their might.

 10. The memory of noble descent could not enervate them, although to
 some this is a suggestive licence to lasciviousness; nor the comeliness
 of their bodies, and the beauty of their well-ordered limbs, although
 for the most part this affords a hint, that being, as it were, the
 short-lived flower of an age that rapidly passes away, it should be fed
 with the offered opportunity of pleasure; nor the first years of a
 green but mature age, although the blood, still inexperienced, grows
 hot, and stimulates the natural fires, and the blind flames that stir
 in the marrow, to seek a remedy, even if they should break forth at the
 risk of modesty; nor any opportunity afforded by secrecy, or by freedom
 from witnesses, which to some seems to ensure safety, although this is
 the greatest temptation to the commission of crime, that there is no
 punishment for meditating it. Neither was a necessity laid upon them by
 the authority of those who bade them yield, and in the boldness of
 association and companionship, by which kind of temptations also
 righteous determinations are often overcome. Neither did the very
 rewards nor the kindliness, nor did the accusations, nor threats, nor
 punishments, nor death, move them; nothing was counted so cruel, so
 hard, so distressing, as to have fallen from the lofty stand of
 chastity. They were worthy of such a reward of the Divine Judge, that
 one of them should be glorified on a throne almost regal; that the
 other, endowed with her husband's sympathy, should be rescued by the
 death of her enemies. These, and such as these, are the examples ever
 to be placed before our eyes, the like of them to be meditated on day
 and night.

 11. Nothing so delights the faithful soul as the healthy consciousness
 of an unstained modesty. [4881] To have vanquished pleasure is the
 greatest pleasure; nor is there any greater victory than that which is
 gained over one's desires. He who has conquered an enemy has been
 stronger, but it was stronger than another; he who has subdued lust has
 been stronger than himself. He who has overthrown an enemy has beaten a
 foreign foe; he who has cast down desire has vanquished a domestic
 adversary. Every evil is more easily conquered than pleasure; because,
 whatever it is, the former is repulsive, the latter is attractive.
 Nothing is crushed with such difficulty as that which is armed by it.
 He who gets rid of desires has got rid of fears also; for from desires
 come fears.  He who overcomes desires, triumphs over sin; he who
 overcomes desires, shows that the mischief of the human family lies
 prostrate under his feet; he who has overcome desires, has given to
 himself perpetual peace; he who has overcome desires, restores to
 himself liberty,--a most difficult matter even for noble natures.
 Therefore we should always meditate, brethren, as these matters teach
 us, on chastity. That it may be the more easy, it is based upon no
 acquired skill. For the right will that is therein carried to
 perfection--which, were it not checked, is remote (scil. from our
 consciousness)--is still our will; so that it is not a will to be
 acquired, but that which is our own is to be cherished. [4882]

 12. For what is chastity but a virtuous mind added to watchfulness over
 the body; so that modesty observed in respect of the sexual relations,
 attested by strictness (of demeanour), should maintain honourable faith
 by an uncorrupted offspring?  Moreover, to chastity, brethren, are
 suited and are known first of all divine modesty, and the sacred
 meditation of the divine precepts, and a soul inclined to faith, and a
 mind attuned to the sacredness of religion: then carefulness that
 nothing in itself should be elaborated beyond measure, or extended
 beyond propriety; that nothing should be made a show of, nothing
 artfully coloured; that there should be nothing to pander to the
 excitement or the renewal of wiles.  She is not a modest woman who
 strives to stir up the fancy of another, even although her bodily
 chastity be preserved. Away with such as do not adorn, but prostitute
 their beauty. For anxiety about beauty is not only the wisdom of an
 evil mind, but belongs to deformity. Let the bodily nature be free, nor
 let any sort of force be intruded upon God's works. She is always
 wretched who is not satisfied to be such as she is. Wherefore is the
 colour of hair changed? Why are the edges of the eyes darkened? Why is
 the face moulded by art into a different form? Finally, why is the
 looking-glass consulted, unless from fear lest a woman should be
 herself? Moreover, the dress of a modest woman should be modest; a
 believer should not be conscious of adultery even in the mixture of
 colours. To wear gold in one's garments is as if it were desirable to
 corrupt one's garments. What do rigid metals do among the delicate
 threads of the woven textures, except to press upon the enervated
 shoulders, and unhappily to show the extravagance of a boastful soul?
 Why are the necks oppressed and hidden by outlandish stones, the prices
 of which, without workmanship, exceed the entire fortune [4883] of many
 a one? It is not the woman that is adorned, but the woman's vices that
 are manifested. What, when the fingers laden with so much gold can
 neither close nor open, is there any advantage sought for, or is it
 merely to show the empty parade of one's estate? It is a marvellous
 thing that women, tender in all things else, in bearing the burden of
 their vices are stronger than men.

 13. But to return to what I began with: chastity is ever to be
 cultivated by men and women; it is to be kept with all watchfulness
 within its bounds. The bodily nature is quickly endangered in the body,
 when the flesh, which is always falling, carries it away with itself.
 Because under the pretext of a nature which is always urging men to
 desires whereby the ruins of a decayed race are restored, deceiving
 with the enticement of pleasure, it does not lead its offspring to the
 continence of legitimate intercourse, but hurls them into crime.
 Therefore, in opposition to these fleshly snares, by which the devil
 both obtrudes himself as a companion and makes himself a leader, we
 must struggle with every kind of strength. Let the aid of Christ be
 appropriated, according to the apostle, and let the mind be withdrawn
 as much as possible from the association of the body; let consent be
 withheld from the body; let vices be always chastised, that they may be
 hated; let that misshapen and degraded shame which belongs to sin be
 kept before our eyes. Repentance itself, with all its struggles, is a
 discreditable testimony to sins committed. Let not curiosity be
 indulged in scanning other people's countenances. Let one's speech be
 brief, and one's laughter moderate, for laughter is the sign of an easy
 and a negligent disposition; and let all contact, even that which is
 becoming, be avoided. [4884] Let no indulgence be permitted to the
 body, when bodily vice is to be avoided. Let it be considered how
 honourable it is to have conquered dishonour, how disgraceful to have
 been conquered by dishonour.

 14. It must be said, moreover, that adultery is not pleasure, but
 mutual contempt; nor can it delight, because it kills both the soul and
 modesty. Let the soul restrain the provocations of the flesh; let it
 bridle the impulses of the body. For it has received this power, that
 the limbs should be subservient to its command; and as a lawful and
 accomplished charioteer, it should turn about the fleshly impulses when
 they lift themselves above the allowed limits of the body, by the reins
 of the heavenly precepts, lest that chariot of the body, carried away
 beyond its limits, should hurry into its own peril the charioteer
 himself as well as it. But in the midst of these things, nay, before
 these things, in opposition to disturbances and all vices, help must be
 sought for from the divine camp; for God alone, who has condescended to
 make men, is powerful also to afford sufficient help to men. I have
 composed a few words, because I did not propose to write a volume, but
 to send you an address. Look ye to the Scriptures; seek out for
 yourselves from those precepts greater illustrations of this matter.
 [4885] Beloved brethren, farewell.

 [4870] [Not reckoned by Erasmus as worthy of Cyprian. Pamelius thinks
 otherwise.]

 [4871] [This illustrates pp. 322 and 389, note 7.]

 [4872] ["So dear to Heaven is saintly Chastity, etc."--Milton, Comus,
 455.]

 [4873] [Holy men have generally recognised this rule as ennobling the
 estate of matrimony. See Jeremy Taylor, Holy Living, cap. ii. sec. 3.]

 [4874] [This natural law, renewed in Christ, is part of the honour
 which He has restored to womanhood; honouring His mother therein as the
 second Eve. Matt. xix. 8; Gen. ii. 24.]

 [4875] Matt. xix. 5.

 [4876] Eph. v. 28, 29.

 [4877] Lev. xx. 10.

 [4878] 1 Thess. iv. 3.

 [4879] 1 Cor. vi. 15.

 [4880] "Irrogare."

 [4881] [Tertullian, vol. iv. pp. 74, 97, etc.]

 [4882] This passage is allowed by all to be corrupt. If we were to
 punctuate differently, to insert "nisi" before "consummata," and change
 "longe est" into "non deesset," we get the following sense:  "Therefore
 we should always meditate, brethren, on chastity, as circumstances
 teach us, that it may be more easy for us. It depends on no arts; for
 what is it but perfected will, which, if it were not checked, would
 certainly not fail to arise? And it is our own will, too: therefore it
 has not to be acquired, but we have to cherish what is already our
 own."

 [4883] ["Kalendarium cujusvis excedunt." The kalendaria were tablets of
 monthly accounts, in which the monthly interest due, etc., were set
 down.  "Exceed the entire monthly income" would be better.  Tertullian
 uses the same word, "exhaust thekalendarium," rendered by our Edinburgh
 translator (vol. iv. p. 18), a "fortune." In this treatise Tertullian
 is constantly copied and quoted.]

 [4884] [Laughter, vol. ii. p. 249, and contact p. 291.]

 [4885] [Everything in antiquity breathes this spirit of "searching the
 Scriptures." Compare Hippol., p. 219, note 4, supra.]

 Exhortation to Repentance. [4886]

 ------------------------

 That all sins may be forgiven him who has turned to God with his whole
 heart.

 In the eighty-eighth Psalm: "If his children forsake my law, and walk
 not in my judgments, and keep not my commandments, I will visit their
 iniquities with a rod, and their sins with stripes; nevertheless my
 loving-kindness will I not scatter away from them." [4887]

 Also in Isaiah: "Thus saith the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, When thou
 shalt turn and mourn, then thou shalt be saved, and shalt know where
 thou wast." [4888]

 Also in the same place: "Woe unto you, children of desertion, saith the
 Lord! ye have made counsel not by me, and my covenant not by my Spirit,
 to add sin to sin." [4889]

 Also in Jeremiah: "Withdraw thy foot from a rough way, and thy face
 from thirst. But she said, I will be comforted, I am willing; for she
 loved strangers, and went after them." [4890]

 Also in Isaiah: "Be ye converted, because ye devise a deep and wicked
 counsel." [4891]

 Also in the same place: "I am He, I am He that blotteth out thy
 iniquities, and will not remember them; but do thou remember them, and
 let us be judged together; do thou first tell thine unrighteousnesses."
 [4892]

 Also in the same: "Seek the Lord; and when ye shall have found Him,
 call upon Him. But when He has drawn near to you, let the wicked
 forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let him be
 converted to the Lord, and mercy shall be prepared for him, because He
 does not much [4893] forgive your sins." [4894]

 Also in the same: "Remember these things, O Jacob and Israel, because
 thou art my servant. I have called thee my servant; and thou, Israel,
 forget me not. Lo, I have washed away thy unrighteousness as,...and thy
 sins as a raincloud. Be converted to me, and I will redeem thee."
 [4895]

 Also in the same: "Have these things in mind, and groan. Repent, ye
 that have been seduced; be converted in heart unto me, and have in mind
 the former ages, because I am God." [4896]

 Also in the same: "For a very little season I have forsaken thee, and
 with great mercy I will pity thee. In a very little wrath I turned away
 my face from thee; in everlasting mercy I will pity thee." [4897]

 Also in the same: "Thus said the Most High, who dwelleth on high, for
 ever Holy in the holies, His name is the Lord, the Most High, resting
 in the holy places, and giving calmness of mind to the faint-hearted,
 and giving life to those that are broken-hearted: I am not angry with
 you for ever, neither will I be avenged in all things on you: for my
 Spirit shall go forth from me, and I have made all inspiration; and on
 account of a very little sin I have grieved him, and have turned away
 my face from him; and he has suffered the vile man, and has gone away
 sadly in his ways. I have seen his ways, and have healed him, and I
 have comforted him, and I have given to him the true consolation, and
 peace upon peace to those who are afar off, and to those that are
 near.  And the Lord said, I have healed them; but the unrighteous, as a
 troubled sea, are thus tossed about and cannot rest. There is no joy to
 the wicked, saith the Lord." [4898]

 Also in Jeremiah: "Shall a bride forget her adornment, or [4899] a
 virgin the girdle of her breast? But my people has forgotten my days,
 [4900] whereof there is no number." [4901]

 Also in the same: "For a decree, I will speak upon the nation or upon
 the kingdom, or I will take them away and destroy them. And if the
 nation should be converted from its evils, I will repent of the ills
 which [4902] I have thought to do unto them. And I will speak the
 decree upon the nation or the people, that I should rebuild it and
 plant it; and they will do evil before me, that they should not hearken
 to my voice, and I will repent of the good things which I spoke of
 doing to them." [4903]

 Also in the same: "Return to me, O dwelling of Israel, saith the Lord,
 and I will not harden my face upon you; because I am merciful, saith
 the Lord, and I will not be angry against you for ever." [4904]

 Also in the same: "Be converted, ye children that have departed, saith
 the Lord; because I will rule over you, and will take you one of a
 city, and two of a family, and I will bring you into Sion: and I will
 give you shepherds after my heart, and they shall feed you, feeding you
 with discipline." [4905]

 Also in the same: "Be converted, ye children who are turning, and I
 will heal your affliction." [4906]

 Also in the same: "Wash thine heart from wickedness, O Jerusalem, that
 thou mayest be healed: how long shall there be in thee thoughts of thy
 sorrows?" [4907]

 Also in the same: "Thus saith the Lord, Does not he that falleth arise?
 or he that turns away, shall he not be turned back? Because this people
 hath turned itself away by a shameless vision, and they have persisted
 in their presumption, and would not be converted." [4908]

 Also in the same: "There is no man that repenteth of his iniquity,
 saying, What have I done? The runner has failed from his course, as the
 sweating horse in his neighing." [4909]

 Also in the same: "Therefore let every one of you turn from his evil
 way, and make your desires better.  And they said, We will be
 comforted, because we will go after your [4910] inventions, and every
 one of us will do the sins which please his own heart." [4911]

 Also in the same: "Pour down as a torrent tears, day and night give
 thyself no rest, let not the pupil of thine eye be silent." [4912]

 Also in the same: "Let us search out our ways, and be turned to the
 Lord. Let us purge our hearts with our hands, and let us look unto the
 Lord who dwelleth in the heavens. We have sinned, and we have provoked
 Thee, and Thou hast not been propitiated." [4913]

 Also in the same: "And the Lord said to me in the days of Josias the
 king, Thou hast seen what the dwelling of the house, [4914] the house
 of Israel, has done to me. It has gone away upon every lofty mountain,
 and has gone under every shady [4915] tree, and has committed
 fornication there; and I said, after she had committed all these
 fornications, Return unto me, and she has not returned." [4916]

 Also in the same: "The Lord will not reject for ever; and when He has
 made low, He will have pity according to the multitude of His mercy.
 Because He will not bring low from His whole heart, neither will He
 reject the children of men." [4917]

 Also in Ezekiel: "And the righteous shall not be able to be saved in
 the day of transgression. When I shall say to the righteous, Thou shalt
 surely live; but [4918] he will trust to his own righteousness, and
 will do iniquity: all his righteousnesses shall not be remembered; in
 his iniquity which he has done, in that he shall die. And when I shall
 say to the wicked, Thou shalt surely die, and he turns himself from his
 sin, and doeth righteousness and judgment, and restoreth to the debtor
 his pledge, and giveth back his robbery, and walketh in the precepts of
 life, that he may do no iniquity, he shall surely live, and shall not
 die; none of his sins which he hath sinned shall be stirred up against
 him:  because he hath done justice and judgment, he shall live in
 them." [4919]

 Also in the same: "I am the Lord, because I bring low the high tree,
 and exalt the low tree, and dry up the green tree, and cause the dry
 tree to flourish." [4920]

 Also in the same: "And thou, son of man, say unto the house of Israel,
 Even as ye have spoken, saying, Our errors and our iniquities are in
 us, and we waste away in them, and how shall we live? Say unto them, I
 live, saith the Lord: if I will the death of a sinner, only let him
 turn from his way, and he shall live." [4921]

 Also in the same: "I the Lord have built up the ruined places, and have
 planted the wasted places." [4922]

 Also in the same: "And the wicked man, if he turn himself from all his
 iniquities that he has done, and keep all my commandments, and do
 judgment, and justice, and mercy, shall surely live, and shall not die.
 None of his sins which he has committed shall be in remembrance; in his
 righteousness which he hath done he shall live. Do I willingly desire
 the death of the unrighteous man, saith Adonai the Lord, rather than
 that he should turn him from his evil way, that he should live?" [4923]

 Also in the same: "Be ye converted, and turn you from all your
 wickedneses, and they shall not be to you for a punishment. Cast away
 from you all your iniquities which ye have wickedly committed against
 me, and make to yourselves a new heart and a new spirit; and why will
 ye die, O house of Israel? For I desire not the death of him that
 dieth, saith Adonai the Lord." [4924]

 Also in Daniel: "And after the end of the days, I Nabuchodonosor lifted
 up my eyes to heaven, and my sense returned to me, and I praised the
 Most High, and blessed the King of heaven, and praised Him that liveth
 for ever: because His power is eternal, His kingdom is for generations,
 [4925] and all who inhabit the earth are as nothing." [4926]

 Also in Micah: "Alas for me, O my soul, because truth has perished from
 the earth, and among all there is none that correcteth; all judge in
 blood. Every one treadeth down his neighbour with tribulation; they
 prepare their hands for evil." [4927]

 Also in the same: "Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy, because I have
 fallen, but I shall arise:  because although I shall sit in darkness,
 the Lord will give me light:  I will bear the Lord's anger, because I
 have sinned against Him, until He justify my cause." [4928]

 Also in Zephaniah: "Come ye together and pray, O undisciplined people;
 before ye be made as a flower that passeth away, before the anger of
 the Lord come upon you, before the day of the Lord's fury come upon
 you, seek ye the Lord, all ye humble ones of the earth; do judgment and
 seek justice, and seek for gentleness; and answer ye to Him that ye may
 be protected in the day of the Lord's anger." [4929]

 Also in Zechariah: "Be ye converted unto me, and I will be turned unto
 you." [4930]

 Also in Hosea: "Be thou converted, O Israel, to the Lord thy God,
 because thou art weakened by thine iniquities. Take many with you, and
 be converted to the Lord your God; worship Him, and say, Thou art
 mighty to put away our sins; that ye may not receive iniquity, but that
 ye may receive good things." [4931]

 Also in Ecclesiasticus: "Be thou turned to the Lord, and forsake thy
 sins, and exceedingly hate cursing, and know righteousness and God's
 judgments, and stand in the lot of the propitiation of the Most High:
 and go into the portion of life with the living, and those that make
 confession. Delay not in the error of the wicked. Confession perisheth
 from the dead man, as if it were nothing. Living and sound, thou shalt
 confess to the Lord, and thou shalt glory in His mercies; for great is
 the mercy of the Lord, and His propitiation unto such as turn unto
 Him." [4932]

 Also in the same: "How good is it for a true heart to show forth
 repentance! For thus shalt thou escape voluntary sin." [4933]

 Also in the Acts of the Apostles: "But Peter saith unto him, thy money
 perish with thee, because thou thinkest to be able to obtain the grace
 of God by money. Thou hast no part nor lot in this faith, for thy heart
 is not right with God.  Therefore repent of this thy wickedness, and
 pray the Lord, if haply the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee.
 For I see that thou art in the bond of iniquity, and in the bitterness
 of gall." [4934]

 Also in the second Epistle of the blessed [4935] Paul to the
 Corinthians: "For the sorrow which is according to God worketh a
 stedfast repentance unto salvation, but the sorrow of the world worketh
 death." [4936]

 Also in the same place of this very matter:  "But if ye have forgiven
 anything to any one, I also forgive him; for I also forgave what I have
 forgiven for your sakes in the person of Christ, that we may not be
 circumvented by Satan, for we are not ignorant of his wiles." [4937]

 Also in the same: "But I fear lest perchance, when I come to you, God
 may again humble me among you, and I shall bewail many of those who
 have sinned before, and have not repented, for that they have committed
 fornication and lasciviousness." [4938]

 Also in the same: "I told you before, and foretell you as I sit
 present; and absent now from those who before have sinned, and to all
 others; as, if I shall come again, I will not spare." [4939]

 Also in the second to Timothy: "But shun profane novelties of words,
 for they are of much advantage to impiety. And their word creeps as a
 cancer: of whom is Hymenæus and Philetus, who have departed from the
 truth, saying that the resurrection has already happened, and have
 subverted the faith of certain ones. But the foundation of God standeth
 firm, having this seal, God knoweth them that are His. And, Every one
 who nameth the name of the Lord shall depart from all iniquity. But in
 a great house there are not only vessels of gold and silver, but also
 of wood and of clay; and some indeed for honour, and some for
 contempt.  Therefore if any one shall amend [4940] himself from these
 things, he shall be a vessel sanctified for honour, and useful for the
 Lord, prepared for every good work. Moreover, flee youthful lusts: but
 follow after righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with them that call
 upon the Lord from a pure heart. But avoid questions that are foolish
 and without learning, knowing that they beget strifes.  And the servant
 of the Lord ought not to strive; but to be gentle, docile to all men,
 patient with modesty, correcting those who resist, lest at any time God
 may give them repentance to the acknowledgment of the truth, and
 recover themselves from the snares of the devil, by whom they are held
 captive at his will." [4941]

 Also in the Apocalypse: "Remember whence thou hast fallen, and repent;
 but if not, I will come to thee quickly, and remove thy candlestick out
 of its place." [4942]

 [4886] [Almost wholly made up of Scripture, and useful in any age to
 all Christians. Whatever its origin, it breathes a truly primitive
 spirit. Compare Tertullian, vol. iii. p. 657.]

 [4887] Ps. lxxxix. 30.

 [4888] Isa. xxx. 15, LXX.

 [4889] Isa. xxx. 1, LXX.

 [4890] Jer. ii. 25, LXX.

 [4891] Isa. xxxi. 6, LXX.

 [4892] Isa. xliii. 25, LXX.

 [4893] Non multum remittit--probably a misprint for "permultum."

 [4894] Isa. lv. 6, 7, LXX.

 [4895] Isa. xliv. 21, 22, LXX.

 [4896] Isa. xlvi. 8, LXX.

 [4897] Isa. liv. 7, 8, LXX.

 [4898] Isa. lvii. 15 et seq., LXX.

 [4899] It is taken for granted that the "ut" of the original is a
 misprint for "aut."

 [4900] Otherwise, "has forgotten me days without number."

 [4901] Jer. ii. 32, LXX.

 [4902] Here also the emendation of "quæ" for "quod" is obviously
 necessary.

 [4903] Jer. xviii. 7.

 [4904] Jer. iii. 12, LXX.

 [4905] Jer. iii. 14, LXX.

 [4906] Jer. iii. 22, LXX.

 [4907] Jer. iv. 14, LXX.

 [4908] Jer. viii. 4, LXX.

 [4909] Jer. viii. 6, LXX.

 [4910] Otherwise "our."

 [4911] Jer. xviii. 12, LXX.

 [4912] Lam. ii. 18, LXX.

 [4913] Lam. iii. 40.

 [4914] There is evident confusion here, and no place can be found for
 the word "vocem."

 [4915] It has been taken for granted that "numerosum" is a misprint for
 "nemorosum."

 [4916] Jer. iii. 6, LXX.

 [4917] Lam. iii. 31, LXX.

 [4918] Trombellius suggests "if" instead of "but."

 [4919] Ezek. xxxii. 12, etc., LXX.

 [4920] Ezek. xvii. 24, LXX.

 [4921] Ezek. xxxiii. 10, LXX.

 [4922] Ezek. xxxvi. 36, LXX.

 [4923] Ezek. xviii. 21, LXX.

 [4924] Ezek. xviii. 30, LXX.

 [4925] "In generatione."

 [4926] Dan. iv. 34.

 [4927] Mic. vii. 1, 2, 3, LXX.

 [4928] Mic. vii. 8, LXX.

 [4929] Zeph. ii. 1, LXX.

 [4930] Zech. i. 3.

 [4931] Hos. xiv. 2.

 [4932] Ecclus. xvii. 26.

 [4933] Ecclus xx. 3.

 [4934] Acts viii. 20, etc.

 [4935] The original has only "ben," which Trombellius reasonably
 assumes to be meant for "benedicti."

 [4936] 2 Cor. vii. 10.

 [4937] 2 Cor. ii. 10.

 [4938] 2 Cor. xii. 21.

 [4939] 2 Cor. xiii. 2.

 [4940] "Emendaverit," probably a mistake for "emundaverit," "shall
 purge," as in the Vulg.; scil. ekkathare.

 [4941] 2 Tim. ii. 16. [On true penitence see Epistle xxv. p. 304
 supra.]

 [4942] Rev. ii. 5. [This selection of texts seems made on the same
 principle which dictated the compilation of texts against the Jews: a
 breviarium, the author calls it,--quædam utilia collecta et
 digesta,--to be read with readiness, and frequently referred to.]

 Elucidations.

 ------------------------

 I.

 (Maintained by consent, and caressed by excuses, p. 557.)

 The severer discipline of early Christianity must not be discarded by
 those who claim it for the canon of Scripture; for modes of baptism,
 confirmation, and other rites; for Church polity, in short; and for the
 Christian year.  Let us note that the whole spirit of antiquity is
 opposed to worldliness. It reflects the precept, "Be not conformed to
 this world," and in nothing more emphatically than in hostility to
 theatrical amusements, which in our days are re-asserting the deadly
 influence over Christians which Cyprian and Tertullian and other
 Fathers so solemnly denounced. If they were "maintained by consent, and
 caressed by excuses," even in the martyr-age, no wonder that in our
 Laodicean period they baffle all exertions of faithful watchmen, who
 enforce the baptismal vow against "pomps and vanities," always
 understood of theatrical shows, and hence part of that "world, the
 flesh, and the devil" which Christians have renounced.

 II.

 (Now is the axe laid to the root, p. 586.)

 Matt. iii. 10. "Securis ad radicem arboris posita est," says Cyprian,
 quoting the Old Latin, with which the Vulgate substantially agrees.
 [4943] A very diligent biblical scholar directs attention to the vulgar
 abuse of this saying, [4944] which turns upon a confusion of the active
 verb to lay, with the neuter verb to lie. [4945] It is quoted as if it
 read, Lay the axe to the root, and is "interpreted, popularly, as of
 felling a tree, an incumbrance or a nuisance....Hence it often makes
 radical reformers in Church and State, and becomes the motto of many a
 reckless leader whose way has been to teach, not upward by elevating
 the ignoble, but downward by sinking the elevated....There is something
 similar in Latin:  jacio to hurl; and jaceo, to lie, recline, or remain
 at rest. Beza follows the Vulgate (posita est); but the original is
 clear,--keitai, [4946] is laid, or lieth....It means, The axe is ready;
 it lieth near the root, in mercy and in menace....The long-suffering of
 God waiteth as in the days of Noah...waiteth, i.e., for good fruit."

 Compare Luke xiii. 9: "If it bear fruit, well: and if not, then after
 that thou shalt cut it down." Such is the argument of Cyprian, in view
 of the approaching "end of time."

 III.

 (General Note.)

 Let me here call attention to the mischievous use of words common among
 modern Latins, even the best of them. Thus, Pellicia [4947] mentions
 Cyprian as referring his synodical judgment to "the supreme chair of
 the Church of Rome." No need to say that his reference proves nothing
 of the kind. "Supremacy," indeed! Consult Bossuet and the Gallicans on
 that point, even after Trent. The case cited is evidence of the very
 reverse. Cyprian and his Carthaginian colleagues wished, also, the
 conspicuous co-operation of their Italian brethren; and so he writes to
 "Cornelius, our colleague," who, "with very many comprovincial bishops,
 having held a council, concurred in the same opinion." It is an
 instance of fraternal concurrence on grounds of entire equality; and
 Cyprian's courteous invitation to his "colleague" Cornelius and his
 comprovincials to co-operate, is a striking illustration of the maxim,
 "Totus apellandus sit orbis, ubi totum orbem causa spectat." Compare
 St. Basil's letters to the Western bishops, in which he reminds them
 that the Gospel came to them from the East. This is a sort of primacy
 recognised by St. Paul himself, [4948] as it was afterwards, when
 Jerusalem was recognised as "the mother of all the churches" [4949] by
 a general council, writing to Damasus, bishop of Rome, himself.

 [4943] It has arborum, however, instead of the singular.

 [4944] Theopneuston, by Samuel Hanson Cox, D.D., New York, 1842.

 [4945] Note, an extraordinary instance, Childe Harold, Canto iv. st.
 180.

 [4946] Lexicographers give keimai = jaceo.

 [4947] Polity, etc., p. 416 (translation). This valuable work,
 translated and edited by the Rev. J. C. Bellett, M.A. (London, 1883),
 is useful as to mediæval usages, and as supplementing Bingham. But the
 learned editor has not been sufficiently prudent in noting his author's
 perpetual misconceptions of antiquity.

 [4948] 1 Cor. xiv. 36.

 [4949] Theodoret, book v. cap. ix. a.d. 382. The bishops say "last
 year" (a.d. 381), speaking of the council in session.

  Caius

 Caius.

 [Translated by the Rev. S. D. F. Salmond, M.A.]

 Introductory Notice

 to

 Caius, Presbyter of Rome.

 ------------------------

 [a.d. 180-217.] During the episcopate of Zephyrinus, Caius, one of his
 presbyters, acquired much credit by his refutation of Proclus, a
 Montanist. He became known as an eloquent and erudite doctor, and to
 him has often been ascribed the Philosophumena of Hippolytus, and also
 The Labyrinth. He wrote in Greek, and finally seems to have been
 promoted to an episcopal See, possibly among the Easterns. [4950] To
 him also has been ascribed the celebrated "Muratorian Canon," which is
 therefore given in this volume, with other fragments less dubiously
 associated with his name. He has been supposed by some to have been a
 pupil of Irenæus, but of this there is no conclusive evidence. If his
 reputation suffers somewhat from his supposed rejection of the
 Apocalypse, it is apologized for by Wordsworth, in a paragraph that
 deserves to be quoted entire:  "Let it be remembered that the church of
 Rome was not eminent for learning at that time. It was induced, by fear
 of erroneous consequences, to surrender another canonical book,--the
 Epistle to the Hebrews. The learning of the Church was then mainly in
 the East. It was by the influence of the East, in the West, that the
 church of Rome was enabled to recover that epistle. It was also the
 influence of the Apocalyptic churches of Asia that preserved the
 Apocalypse as an inspired work of St. John to the church of Rome." By
 the deference with which the author of the Refutation speaks of the
 Apocalypse, we are able, among other evidences, to decide that it is
 not the work of Caius.

 In an interesting chapter of his Hippolytus, Bishop Wordsworth
 considers the possibility of the authorship of that work as his, and
 discusses it with ability and learning. Nearly all that is known or
 conjectured concerning Caius is there condensed and elucidated. But
 Lardner devotes a yet more learned chapter to him; and to that the
 inquirer is referred, as a sufficient elucidation of all that was known
 or conjectured about him before the present century. He is quoted by
 Eusebius; [4951] and the traveller is reminded, when he visits the
 gorgeous Church of St. Paul on the Ostian Road, that so early an author
 as Caius may be cited as evidence that it probably stands very near the
 spot where St. Paul fulfilled his prophecy, "I am now ready to be
 offered, and the time of my departure is at hand." We can only
 conjecture the time of his birth by the age he must have attained in
 the time of Zephyrinus; but of his death, the secret is with the Master
 in whom he believed, as we may trust, until he fell asleep.

 Here follows, from the Edinburgh series, the learned editor's
 Introductory Notice:--

 Eusebius states that Caius lived in the time of Zephyrinus. [4952] He
 speaks of him as a member of the Catholic Church, [4953] and as being
 most learned. And he mentions that a dialogue of his was extant in his
 time, in which he argued with Proclus, the leader of the Cataphrygian
 heresy; and that Caius in this dialogue spoke of only thirteen epistles
 of the Apostle Paul, "not counting the Epistle to the Hebrews with the
 rest." [4954]

 Eusebius mentions no other work of Caius. He makes extracts from a work
 against the heresy of Artemon in the fifth book of his Ecclesiastical
 History, but he states distinctly that the work was anonymous. He
 evidently did not know who was the author. Theodoret and Nicephorus
 affirm that the work from which Eusebius made these extracts bore the
 title of The Little Labyrinth. Photius has the following notice of
 Caius:  "Read the work of Josephus on the universe, bearing in some
 manuscripts the inscription On the Cause of the Universe, and in
 others, On the Substance of the Universe....But I found that this
 treatise is not the work of Josephus, but of one Gaius a presbyter, who
 lived in Rome, who they say composed The Labyrinth also, and whose
 dialogue with Proclus, the champion of the Montanistic heresy, is in
 circulation....They say also that he composed another treatise
 specially directed against the heresy of Artemon." [4955] Photius
 here ascribes four works to Caius: 1. On the Universe; 2. The
 Labyrinth; 3. The Dialogue between himself and Proclus; 4. The Treatise
 against the Heresy of Artemon. He does not say that he read any of them
 but the first. This treatise is now assigned to Hippolytus. The
 information of Photius in regard to the other three, derived as it is
 from the statements of others, cannot be trusted.

 ------------------------

 Note by the American Editor.

 It is to be observed that the Fragment of Muratori proves that the
 Apocalypse was received in the church at Rome in the times of Pius,
 a.d. 160. It is quoted in Hermas freely.  Also, see the Epistle of
 Roman clergy to Cyprian (p. 303, note 5, supra), about a.d. 250. But
 the Fragment aforesaid is the earliest direct evidence on the subject.
 Note, that its author says, "We receive the Apocalypse," etc. "Some
 amongst us will not have," etc. (see p. 602, infra). Thus, the
 comprovincials have a voice, as in the cases cited by Hippolytus.  See
 (pp. 157, 159, supra) Elucidations VI. and XI. The Bishop of Rome
 seems, by this Fragment, to have received the Apocalypse of Peter
 (Eusebius, H. E., book iii. cap. 25), but it was thrown out as spurious
 by the Church nevertheless.

 [4950] The ingenious conjecture of Wordsworth, who surmises that kai
 ethnon episkopon, in Photius, should be read kai heothinon.
 Hippolytus, p. 30. Another conjecture is 'Athenon. For the originals of
 these Fragments and learned notes, see Routh, Reliquæ Sacræ, ii. p.
 127.

 [4951] Eusebius quotes him in several places (book ii. cap. xxv., book
 iii. capp. xxviii. and xxxi.), and cites him in proof that St. Peter
 suffered on the Vatican, and St. Paul on the Via Ostiensis. See
 Lardner, Credib., vol. ii. pp. 394, 410.

 [4952] Hist. Eccl., ii. 25, vi. 20.

 [4953] ekklesiastikos aner.

 [4954] Hist. Eccl., vi. 20.

 [4955] Cod. 48.

 Fragments of Caius.

 ------------------------

 I.--From a Dialogue or Disputation Against Proclus. [4956]

 I.

 (Preserved in Eusebius' Eccles. Hist., ii. 25.)

 And I can show the trophies of the apostles. [4957] For if you choose
 to go to the Vatican or to the Ostian Road, [4958] you will find the
 trophies of those who founded this church.

 II.

 (In the same, iii. 28.)

 But Cerinthus, too, through revelations written, as he would have us
 believe, by a great apostle, brings before us marvellous things, which
 he pretends were shown him by angels; alleging that after the
 resurrection the kingdom of Christ is to be on earth, and that the
 flesh [4959] dwelling in Jerusalem is again to be subject to desires
 and pleasures. And being an enemy to the Scriptures of God, wishing to
 deceive men, he says that there is to be a space of a thousand years
 for marriage festivals.

 III.

 (In the same, iii. 31.)

 And after this there were four prophetesses, daughters of Philip, at
 Hierapolis in Asia. Their tomb is there, and that, too, of their
 father. [4960]

 [4956] A defender of the sect of the Cataphrygians.

 [4957] So Jerome, in the Epistle to Marcellus, says: "There, too, is a
 holy church; there are the trophies of the apostles and martyrs."

 [4958] The mss. and the Chronicon of Georgius Syncellus read Vasican,
 Basikanon.  The reference is to the Vatican as the traditional burial
 place of Peter, and to the Ostian Road as that of Paul.

 [4959] [Vol. i. pp. 351-352, 416.]

 [4960] This extract is taken from the Disputation of Caius, but the
 words are those of Proclus, as is shown by the citation in Eusebius.

 II.--Against the Heresy of Artemon. [4961]

 I.

 (In Eusebius' Eccl. Hist., v. 28.)

 For they say that all those of the first age, and the apostles
 themselves, both received and taught those things which these men now
 maintain; and that the truth of Gospel preaching was preserved until
 the times of Victor, who was the thirteenth bishop in Rome from Peter,
 and that from his successor Zephyrinus the truth was falsified. And
 perhaps what they allege might be credible, did not the Holy
 Scriptures, in the first place, contradict them.  And then, besides,
 there are writings of certain brethren older than the times of Victor,
 which they wrote against the heathen in defence of the truth, and
 against the heresies of their time: I mean Justin and Miltiades, and
 Tatian and Clement, and many others, in all which divinity is ascribed
 to Christ. For who is ignorant of the books of Irenæus and Melito, and
 the rest, which declare Christ to be God and man? All the psalms, too,
 and hymns [4962] of brethren, which have been written from the
 beginning by the faithful, celebrate Christ the Word of God, ascribing
 divinity to Him. Since the doctrine of the Church, then, has been
 proclaimed so many years ago, how is it possible that men have
 preached, up to the time of Victor, in the manner asserted by these?
 And how are they not ashamed to utter these calumnies against Victor,
 knowing well that Victor excommunicated Theodotus the tanner, [4963]
 the leader and father of this God-denying apostasy, who first affirmed
 that Christ was a mere man? For if, as they allege, Victor entertained
 the very opinions which their blasphemy teaches, how should he have
 cast off Theodotus, the author of this heresy?

 II.

 (In Eusebius, as above.)

 I shall, at any rate, remind many of the brethren of an affair that
 took place in our own time,--an affair which, had it taken place in
 Sodom, might, I think, have been a warning even to them. There was a
 certain confessor, Natalius, [4964] who lived not in distant times, but
 in our own day. He was deluded once by Asclepiodotus, and another
 Theodotus, a banker. And these were both disciples of Theodotus the
 tanner, the first who was cut off from communion on account of this
 sentiment, or rather senselessness, by Victor, as I said, the bishop of
 the time. [4965] Now Natalius was persuaded by them to let himself be
 chosen [4966] bishop of this heresy, on the understanding that he
 should receive from them a salary of a hundred and fifty denarii a
 month. Connecting himself, therefore, with them, he was on many
 occasions admonished by the Lord in visions. For our merciful God and
 Lord Jesus Christ was not willing that a witness of His own sufferings
 should perish, being without the Church. But as he gave little heed to
 the visions, being ensnared by the dignity of presiding among them, and
 by that sordid lust of gain which ruins very many, he was at last
 scourged by holy angels, and severely beaten through a whole night, so
 that he rose early in the morning, and threw himself, clothed with
 sackcloth and covered with ashes, before Zephyrinus the bishop, with
 great haste and many tears, rolling beneath the feet not only of the
 clergy, but even of the laity, and moving the pity of the compassionate
 Church of the merciful Christ by his weeping. And after trying many a
 prayer, and showing the weals left by the blows which he had received,
 he was at length with difficulty admitted to communion.

 III.

 (In Eusebius, as above)

 The sacred Scriptures they have boldly falsified, and the canons of the
 ancient faith [4967] they have rejected, and Christ they have ignored,
 not inquiring what the sacred Scriptures say, but laboriously seeking
 to discover what form of syllogism might be contrived to establish
 their impiety. [4968] And should any one lay before them a word of
 divine Scripture, they examine whether it will make a connected or
 disjoined form of syllogism; [4969] and leaving the Holy Scriptures of
 God, they study geometry, as men who are of the earth, and speak of the
 earth, and are ignorant of Him who cometh from above. Euclid, indeed,
 is laboriously measured [4970] by some of them, and Aristotle and
 Theophrastus are admired; and Galen, [4971] forsooth, is perhaps even
 worshipped by some of them. But as to those men who abuse the arts of
 the unbelievers to establish their own heretical doctrine, and by the
 craft of the impious adulterate the simple faith of the divine
 Scriptures, what need is there to say that these are not near the
 faith? For this reason is it they have boldly laid their hands upon the
 divine Scriptures, alleging that they have corrected them. And that I
 do not state this against them falsely, any one who pleases may
 ascertain. For if any one should choose to collect and compare all
 their copies together, he would find many discrepancies among them. The
 copies of Asclepiades, [4972] at any rate, will be found at variance
 with those of Theodotus. And many such copies are to be had, because
 their disciples were very zealous in inserting the corrections, as they
 call them, i.e., the corruptions made by each of them.  And again, the
 copies of Hermophilus do not agree with these; and as for those of
 Apollonius, [4973] they are not consistent even with themselves. For
 one may compare those which were formerly prepared by them [4974] with
 those which have been afterwards corrupted with a special object, and
 many discrepancies will be found. And as to the great audacity implied
 in this offence, it is not likely that even they themselves can be
 ignorant of that. For either they do not believe that the divine
 Scriptures were dictated by the Holy Spirit, and are thus infidels; or
 they think themselves wiser than the Holy Spirit, and what are they
 then but demoniacs? Nor can they deny that the crime is theirs, when
 the copies have been written with their own hand; nor [4975] did they
 receive such copies of the Scriptures from those by whom they were
 first instructed in the faith, and they cannot produce copies from
 which these were transcribed. And some of them did not even think it
 worth while to corrupt them; but simply denying the law and the
 prophets for the sake of their lawless and impious doctrine, under
 pretexts of grace, they sunk down to the lowest abyss of perdition.
 [4976]

 [4961] Two fragments of an anonymous work ascribed by some to Caius.
 Artemon and his followers maintained that Christ was mere (psilon) man.

 [4962] [Elucidation, I.]

 [4963] [See cap. xxiii. p. 114, supra, and Euseb., iii. cap. 28.]

 [4964] This may, perhaps, be the Cæcilius Natalis who appears in the
 Octavius of Minucius Felix, as maintaining the cause of paganism
 against Octavius Januarius, and becoming a convert to the truth through
 the discussion. Name, time, and profession at least suit. [A painful
 conjecture, and quite gratuitous.  See the Octavius, cap. xvi. note 6,
 p. 181, vol. iv., this series.]

 [4965] [tou tote episkopou, "the then bishop." Text of Routh.]

 [4966] There is another reading--named (klethenai) instead of chosen or
 elected (klerothenai).

 [4967] [Thus early, primitive canons are recognised as in force.]

 [4968] [Here we have an early foreshadowing of the schoolmen, whose
 rise was predicted by St. Bernard in his protest against Abelard. See
 Bernard, Opp., tom. i. p. 410, et alibi.]

 [4969] The connected form here is the hypothetical, as e.g., "If it is
 day, it is light." The disjoined is the disjunctive, as e.g., "It is
 either day or night." The words admit another rendering, viz., "Whether
 it, when connected or disjoined, will make the form of a syllogism."

 [4970] There is a play in the original on the word geometry.

 [4971] Galen composed treaties on the figures of syllogisms, and on
 philosophy in general. This is also a notable testimony, as proceeding
 from a very ancient author, almost contemporary with Galen himself. And
 from a great number of other writers, as well as this one, it is
 evident that Galen was ranked as the equal of Aristotle, Theophrastus,
 and even Plato. [Galen died circa a.d. 200.]

 [4972] In Nicephorus it is Asclepiodotus, which is also the reading of
 Rufinus.

 [4973] It appears from Theodoret (Hæret. Fab., book ii. ch. v.), as
 well as from Nicephorus and Rufinus, that we should read Apollonides
 for Apollonius.

 [4974] There is another reading--by him.

 [4975] This paragraph, down to the word "transcribed," is wanting in
 the Codex Regius.

 [4976] [Note the care and jealousy with which the integrity of the
 codices was guarded. Comp. Uncan. and Apoc. Scriptures, by Churton,
 London, 1884.]

 III.--Canon Muratorianus. [4977]

 (In Muratori, V. C. Antiq. Ital. Med. æv., vol. iii. col. 854.)

 I....those things at which he was present he placed thus. [4978] The
 third book of the Gospel, that according to Luke, the well-known
 physician Luke wrote in his own name [4979] in order after the
 ascension of Christ, and when Paul had associated him with himself
 [4980] as one studious of right. [4981] Nor did he himself see the Lord
 in the flesh; and he, according as he was able to accomplish it, began
 [4982] his narrative with the nativity of John. The fourth Gospel is
 that of John, one of the disciples. When his fellow-disciples and
 bishops entreated him, he said, "Fast ye now with me for the space of
 three days, and let us recount to each other whatever may be revealed
 to each of us." On the same night it was revealed to Andrew, one of the
 apostles, that John should narrate all things in his own name as they
 called them to mind. [4983] And hence, although different points [4984]
 are taught us in the several books of the Gospels, there is no
 difference as regards the faith of believers, inasmuch as in all of
 them all things are related under one imperial Spirit, [4985] which
 concern the Lord's nativity, His passion, His resurrection, His
 conversation with His disciples, and His twofold advent,--the first in
 the humiliation of rejection, which is now past, and the second in the
 glory of royal power, which is yet in the future.  What marvel is it,
 then, that John brings forward these several things [4986] so
 constantly in his epistles also, saying in his own person, "What we
 have seen with our eyes, and heard with our ears, and our hands have
 handled, that have we written." [4987] For thus he professes himself to
 be not only the eye-witness, but also the hearer; and besides that, the
 historian of all the wondrous facts concerning the Lord in their order.

 2. Moreover, the Acts of all the Apostles are comprised by Luke in one
 book, and addressed to the most excellent Theophilus, because these
 different events took place when he was present himself; and he shows
 this clearly--i.e., that the principle on which he wrote was, to give
 only what fell under his own notice--by the omission [4988] of the
 passion of Peter, and also of the journey of Paul, when he went from
 the city--Rome--to Spain.

 3. As to the epistles [4989] of Paul, again, to those who will
 understand the matter, they indicate of themselves what they are, and
 from what place or with what object they were directed. He wrote first
 of all, and at considerable length, to the Corinthians, to check the
 schism of heresy; and then to the Galatians, to forbid circumcision;
 and then to the Romans on the rule of the Old Testament Scriptures, and
 also to show them that Christ is the first object [4990] in
 these;--which it is needful for us to discuss severally, [4991] as the
 blessed Apostle Paul, following the rule of his predecessor John,
 writes to no more than seven churches by name, in this order: the first
 to the Corinthians, the second to the Ephesians, the third to the
 Philippians, the fourth to the Colossians, the fifth to the Galatians,
 the sixth to the Thessalonians, the seventh to the Romans. Moreover,
 though he writes twice to the Corinthians and Thessalonians for their
 correction, it is yet shown--i.e., by this sevenfold writing--that
 there is one Church spread abroad through the whole world. And John
 too, indeed, in the Apocalypse, although he writes only to seven
 churches, yet addresses all. He wrote, besides these, one to Philemon,
 and one to Titus, and two to Timothy, in simple personal affection and
 love indeed; but yet these are hallowed in the esteem of the Catholic
 Church, and in the regulation of ecclesiastical discipline. There are
 also in circulation one to the Laodiceans, and another to the
 Alexandrians, forged under the name of Paul, and addressed against the
 heresy of Marcion; and there are also several others which cannot be
 received into the Catholic Church, for it is not suitable for gall to
 be mingled with honey.

 4. The Epistle of Jude, indeed, [4992] and two belonging to the
 above-named John--or bearing the name of John--are reckoned among the
 Catholic epistles. [4993] And the book of Wisdom, written by the
 friends of Solomon in his honour. We receive also the Apocalypse of
 John and that of Peter, though some amongst us will not have this
 latter read in the Church. The Pastor, moreover, did Hermas write very
 recently in our times in the city of Rome, while his brother bishop
 Pius sat in the chair of the Church of Rome. And therefore it also
 ought to be read; but it cannot be made public [4994] in the Church to
 the people, nor placed among the prophets, as their number is complete,
 nor among the apostles to the end of time. Of the writings of Arsinous,
 called also Valentinus, or of Miltiades, we receive nothing at all.
 Those are rejected too who wrote the new Book of Psalms for Marcion,
 together with Basilides and the founder of the Asian Cataphrygians.
 [4995]

 [4977] An acephalous fragment on the canon of the sacred Scriptures,
 ascribed by some to Caius. This very important fragment [vol. ii. pp. 4
 and 56, this series] was discovered by Muratori in the Ambrosian
 Library at Milan, and published by him in his Antiquitates Italicæ in
 1740. This manuscript belongs to the seventh or eighth century.
 Muratori ascribed it to Caius, Bunsen to Hegesippus; but there is no
 clue whatever to the authorship. From internal evidence the writer of
 the fragment is believed to belong to the latter half of the second
 century. The fragment has been much discussed. For a full account of
 it, see Westcott's General Survey of the History of the Canon of the
 New Testament, 2d ed. p. 184 ff., and Tregelles' Canon Muratorianus;
 [also Routh, Rel., i. pp. 394-434].

 [4978] The text is, "quibus tamen interfuit et ita posuit."  Westcott
 omits the "et." Bunsen proposes "ipse noninterfuit." The reference
 probably is to the statement of Papias (Euseb., Histor. Eccles., iii.
 39) as to Mark's Gospel being a narrative not of what he himself
 witnessed, but of what he heard from Peter.

 [4979] The text gives "numine suo ex opinione concriset," for which we
 read "nomine suo ex ordine conscripsit" with Westcott.

 [4980] Reading "secum" for "secundum."

 [4981] The text gives "quasi ut juris studiosum," for which "quasi et
 virtutis studiosum," ="as one devoted to virtue," has been proposed.
 Bunsen reads "itineris socium" ="as his companion in the way."

 [4982] "Incepit" for "incipet."

 [4983] Or as they revised them, recognoscentibus.

 [4984] Principia.

 [4985] Principali, leading. [Note this theory of inspiration.]

 [4986] Singula.

 [4987] 1 John i. 1.

 [4988] The text is, "semote passionem Petri," etc., for which Westcott
 reads "semotâ." [A noteworthy statement.]

 [4989] Reading "epistolæ" and "directæ" instead of "epistola" and
 "directe," and "volentibus" for "voluntatibus."

 [4990] Principium.

 [4991] The text is, "de quibus singulis necesse est a nobis disputari
 cum," etc. Bunsen reads, "de quibus non necesse est a nobis disputari
 cur" ="on which we need not discuss the reason why."

 [4992] Sane.

 [4993] The text is "in catholica," which may be "in the Catholic
 Church." Bunsen, Westcott, etc., read "in catholicis."

 [4994] Reading "sed publicari" for "se publicare." [Vol. ii. p. 3.]

 [4995] [For remarks of my own on the Muratorian Canon, see vol. ii. p.
 56, this series.]

 Elucidations.

 ------------------------

 I.

 (Psalms and hymns, p. 601.)

 I subjoin as an elucidation, to which I have suffixed references of my
 own, a valuable note of the Edinburgh editor, [4996] which is found on
 p. 156 of vol. ix. in that series: "From this it appears that it was a
 very ancient custom in the Church to compose hymns and psalms in honour
 of Christ. Pliny, in his letter to Trajan, also states that the
 Christians were accustomed to meet together and sing hymns to Christ.
 [4997] Hippolytus also may be understood to refer to these hymns and
 psalms towards the close of his oration on the end of the world, [4998]
 where he says: Your mouth I made to give glory and praise, and to utter
 psalms and spiritual songs.' A hymn of this kind in honour of Jesus
 Christ, composed by Clement of Alexandria, is extant at the end of his
 books entitled Pædagogi." [4999]

 II.

 (The Dialogue between himself and Proclus, p. 600.)

 I have been unable to get a copy of the work of John de Soynes on
 Montanism, which possibly throws some light upon the Dialogue with
 Proclus, attributed to him by Photius. It is praised by Adolf Harnack,
 and highly spoken of by English critics. It was a Hulsean prize essay,
 published Cambridge, 1878.

 [4996] The Rev. S. D. F. Salmond, M. A.

 [4997] "Soliti essent Christiani, stato die, ante lucem convenire,
 carmenque Christo, quasi Deo, dicere secum invicem. Compare (Greek)
 Eph. v. 19 and Col. iii. 16.  Lardner gives Pliny's letter entire, vol.
 vii. p. 22.

 [4998] Sec. xlvi. p. 254, supra.

 [4999] Vol. ii. p. 295, this series.

  Novatian

 Novatian.

 [Translated by the Rev. Robert Ernest Wallis.]

 Introductory Notice

 to

 Novatian, a Roman Presbyter.

 ------------------------

 [a.d. 210-280.] When we reflect upon the history of Solomon, and his
 marvellous contributions to the sacred canon of Scripture, we must not
 be surprised to find a Tatian, a Tertullian, and a Novatian among the
 Fathers. We deplore the lapse of such characters, but after death they
 are not subject to human judgment. Let us cherish the gratitude we owe
 to them for their good works, and use their testimony so far as it was
 faithful; covering their shame with the mantle of charity, and praying
 for grace never to imitate their faults.  "If any teacher have wandered
 from the faith, it is permitted," says St. Vincent of Lerins [5000] ,
 "by Divine Providence for our trial, whether we love God or not, with
 all our heart and with all our soul."

 We find Novatian apparently exercising jurisdiction, sede vacante, in
 Rome, with his co-presbyters, and as vicar-general (to use a later
 term) corresponding with Cyprian. This was about a.d. 250, after the
 death of Fabian. His marked abilities and real services had fitted him
 to preside thus over the Roman presbytery, and to be their "secretary
 for foreign affairs." But he laboured under the impediment of clinic
 baptism, and had not an unblemished record, if we credit Eusebius,
 [5001] in his conduct during persecution.

 He was not called, therefore, to the episcopate. Cornelius was made
 bishop June 4, a.d. 251; and, apparently, disappointed ambition soon
 bore its thorny fruits. "Emulation of the episcopal office is the
 mother of schisms," said Tertullian; [5002] even in that period when to
 be a bishop was so often to be a martyr. And we find Novatian grasping
 a shadowy titular bishopric, which, wholly irregular and universally
 disowned, could have been to such a man the source of nothing but
 misery. I say, "to such a man," for, without hearing the other side, I
 cannot accept what was unquestionably supposed to be fact amid the
 excitements of the times. And Novatian was not a common or a vulgar
 character. The arguments of Lardner [5003] teach us at least to be
 Christians,--to accept the facts, but "forbear to judge," seeing, as
 that writer observes, "we have not one remaining line of his in
 self-defence or against his adversaries."

 Now as to his orthodoxy, so far as his extant writings are concerned, I
 think any scholar, not anxious to make out a case, will abide by the
 candid judgment of Bull, who defends his reputation against Petavius.
 [5004] "By no means," he says, "should we tolerate that injustice of
 the Jesuit Petau towards the ancient writers, against their manifest
 mind and purpose; twisting, as he everywhere does, their sound and
 Catholic sayings into a sense alien and heretical."

 The work upon the Trinity, which is a most valuable contribution to
 ante-Nicene theology, is said by Cave to have been written about a.d.
 257; and that upon the Jewish meats seems to have been composed during
 the Decian persecution. His heresy, such as it was, turned upon
 unrelenting discipline, and was a sin against charity, which is greater
 than faith itself. It violated the "seventy times seven" maxim of our
 Lord, and the comprehensive precept, "Forgive, and ye shall be
 forgiven." It wounded Christian unity at a perilous period, and when
 every breach in the wall of the fold was sure to let in the wolves.

 "He may have aspired to the papal chair," says a contemporary writer
 [5005] of no mean repute, adding, "to which he had the best claim."
 Then he says, "Novatian was elected anti-pope by a minority, and
 consecrated by three Italian bishops." Is this history? What impression
 must it give to the young student? The learned writer whom I quote
 shows clearly enough that there was no "papacy" in primitive times, as
 that word is universally understood. Why, then, put a face upon
 Antiquity so utterly misleading? Neither Novatian, nor his
 consecrators, nor Cornelius, against whom he rebelled, ever dreamed of
 anything more than of an episcopal chair; venerable, indeed, for its
 succession of pastors from the times of SS. Peter and Paul, but as yet
 hardly felt in the Christian brotherhood; which for two centuries had
 produced many pious but few eminent men, and in which Novatian himself
 was the earliest contributor to the "Latin Christianity," already
 founded and flourishing, not in Italy, but in Northern Africa.

 The following is the Introductory Notice of the Edinburgh translator,
 the Rev. Dr. Wallis, who, I am glad to observe, is tender towards our
 author's memory:--

 The biography of Novatian belongs to the ecclesiastical history of the
 third century. He was, or is reputed to have been, the founder of a
 sect which claimed for itself the name of "Puritan" [5006] (katharoi).
 For a long time he was in determined opposition to Cornelius, bishop of
 Rome, in regard to the admission of the lapsed and penitent into the
 Church; but the facts of the controversy and much of our information in
 regard to Novatian are to be got only from his enemies, the Roman
 bishop and his adherents. Accordingly, some have believed all the
 accusations that have been brought against him, while others have been
 inclined to doubt them all. [5007]

 It is not known where Novatian was born.  Some have appealed to
 Philostorgius [5008] in behalf of the opinion that he was a Phrygian;
 but others maintain that, supposing this to be a statement of the
 historian, it is a mere conjecture of his, based on the character of
 Novatian's teaching. It is also stated by Cyprian, that he was a Stoic
 before he passed over to the Christian Church; but this also has been
 doubted. While amongst the catechumens, he was seized by a violent
 disease, attributed to demoniac agency; and, being near death, he
 received baptism. He was ordained presbyter by Fabian, bishop of Rome,
 against the wishes of the rest of the clergy, who objected thereto
 because he had received clinic baptism. [5009] The subsequent
 circumstances of his schism and his contest with Cornelius, are stated
 at length with no friendly spirit in a letter to Antonianus by Cyprian.
 [5010] Socrates [5011] states that he suffered martyrdom; but his
 authority, amid the silence of all others, is not sufficient to
 guarantee the fact.

 Novatian composed many works. The following are extant:--

 I. De Trinitate, formerly attributed by some to Tertullian, by others
 to Cyprian; but now on all hands allowed to be the work of Novatian, to
 whom Jerome expressly assigns it. [5012] It was written after the
 heresy of Sabellius, which appeared 256 a.d.

 II.  De Cibis Judaicis: at first also attributed by some to Tertullian
 or Cyprian; but now assigned to Novatian on the testimony of Jerome. It
 was written during the time of the Decian persecution, about 250 a.d.

 III. Novatian was the author of the letter [5013] addressed by the
 Roman clergy to Cyprian. So Cyprian himself states. [5014] Some have
 also attributed to him Ep. xxix. without any authority.

 IV. Jerome attributes to him writings on Circumcision, on the Sabbath,
 on the Passover, on the Priesthood, on Prayer, on Attalus, on the
 Present Crisis, and Letters.

 The best editions of Novatian are by Welchman, Oxford, 1724; and by
 Jackson, London, 1728.

 [5000] In his Commonitory, cap. xix. p. 57, ed. Baltimore, 1847. This
 useful edition contains the text, and a translation, with valuable
 notes, by the Late Bishop Whittingham of Maryland.

 [5001] H. E., vi.

 [5002] Vol. iii. cap 17, p. 677, this series.

 [5003] His elaborate chapter (xlvii. and the note) must be read by all
 students who wish to understand the matter, or even to read Cyprian
 advantageously.

 [5004] Defensio Fid. Nicæn., Works, vol. v. p. 374.

 [5005] Dr. Schaff; History of Christian Church, vol. ii. p. 851.

 [5006] [This is again putting a false face upon Antiquity.  Purists,
 rather; i.e., in morals.]

 [5007] See the last portion of Section Second of Neander's Church
 History.

 [5008] Hist. Eccl., lib. viii. c. 15. The text of Valesius has Ouaton,
 not Novatus or Novatian.

 [5009] [See p. 400, note 5, supra.]

 [5010] Ep. li. p. 327, supra. [How could it be stated truly and yet
 seem friendly?  The unfortunate man had violated discipline, and broken
 his most sacred obligations to the Christian flock, at a time when the
 heathen persecutions made all such scandals little less than mutiny
 against Christ Himself. Consult Matt. xviii. 7 and Luke xvii. 1. We owe
 to such discipline the sure canon of Scripture.]

 [5011] Hist. Eccl., lib. iv. c. 28.

 [5012] De viris Illustribus, c. 70.

 [5013] Ep. xxx. p. 308, supra.

 [5014] Ep. li. 5, p. 328, supra. [Also, see Ep. xli. 2, p. 320, supra.]

 A Treatise of Novatian Concerning the Trinity.

 ------------------------

 Preface.

 Novatian's treatise concerning the Trinity is divided into thirty-one
 chapters. He first of all, from chapter first to the eighth, considers
 those words of the Rule of Truth or Faith, [5015] which bid us believe
 on God the Father and Lord Almighty, the absolutely perfect Creator of
 all things.  Wherein among the other divine attributes he moreover
 ascribes to Him, partly from reason and partly from the Holy
 Scriptures, immensity, eternity, unity, goodness, immutability,
 immortality, spirituality; and adds that neither passions nor members
 can be attributed to God, and that these things are only asserted of
 God in Scripture anthropopathically. [5016]

 [5015] Which we call the Creed.

 [5016] From the ninth chapter to the twenty-eighth he enters upon the
 diffuse explanation also of those words of our creed which commend to
 us faith in the Son of God, Jesus Christ, the Lord our God, the Christ
 promised in the Old Testament, and proves by the authority of the old
 and new covenant that He is very man and very God. In chapter
 eighteenth he refutes the error of the Sabellians, and by the authority
 of the sacred writings he establishes the distinction of the Father and
 of the Son, and replies to the objections of the above-named
 heresiarchs and others. In the twenty-ninth chapter he treats of faith
 in the Holy Spirit, saying that finally the authority of the high
 admonishes us, after the Father and the Son, to believe also on the
 Holy Spirit, whose operations he recounts and proves from the
 Scriptures. He then labours to associate the unity of God with the
 matters previously contended for, and at length sets forth the sum of
 the doctrines above explained. [Anthropopathy, see cap. v. p. 615.]

 Chapter I. Argument.--Novatian, with the View of Treating of the
 Trinity, Sets Forth from the Rule of Faith that We Should First of All
 Believe in God the Father and Lord Omnipotent, the Absolute Founder of
 All Things. The Works of Creation are Beautifully Described. Man's
 Free-Will is Asserted; God's Mercy in Inflicting Penalty on Man is
 Shown; The Condition After Death of the Souls of the Righteous and
 Unrighteous is Determined.

 The Rule of truth requires that we should first of all things believe
 on God the Father and Lord Omnipotent; that is, the absolutely perfect
 Founder of all things, who has suspended the heavens in lofty
 sublimity, has established the earth with its lower mass, has diffused
 the seas with their fluent moisture, and has distributed all these
 things, both adorned and supplied with their appropriate and fitting
 instruments. For in the solid vault of heaven He has both awakened the
 light-bringing Sunrisings; He has filled up the white globe of the moon
 in its monthly [5017] waxings as a solace for the night; He, moreover,
 kindles the starry rays with the varied splendours of glistening light;
 and He has willed all these things in their legitimate tracks to circle
 the entire compass of the world, so as to cause days, months, years,
 signs, and seasons, and benefits of other kinds for the human race. On
 the earth, moreover, He has lifted up the loftiest mountains to a peak,
 He has thrown down valleys into the depths, He has smoothly levelled
 the plains, He has ordained the animal herds usefully for the various
 services of men. He has also established the oak trees of the woods for
 the future benefit of human uses. He has developed the harvests into
 food. He has unlocked the mouths of the springs, and has poured them
 into the flowing rivers. And after these things, lest He should not
 also provide for the very delights of the eyes, He has clothed all
 things with the various colours of the flowers for the pleasure of the
 beholders. Even in the sea itself, moreover, although it was in itself
 marvellous both for its extent and its utility, He has made manifold
 creatures, sometimes of moderate, sometimes of vast bodily size,
 testifying by the variety of His appointment to the intelligence of the
 Artificer. And, not content with these things, lest perchance the
 roaring and rushing waters should seize upon a foreign element at the
 expense of its human possessor, He has enclosed its limits with shores;
 [5018] so that when the raving billow and the foaming water should come
 from its deep bosom, it should return again unto itself, and not
 transgress its concealed bounds, but keep its prescribed laws, so that
 man might the rather be careful to observe the divine laws, even as the
 elements themselves observed them. And after these things He also
 placed man at the head of the world, and man, too, made in the image of
 God, to whom He imparted mind, and reason, and foresight, that he might
 imitate God; and although the first elements of his body were earthly,
 yet the substance was inspired by a heavenly and divine breathing. And
 when He had given him all things for his service, He willed that he
 alone should be free. And lest, again, an unbounded freedom should fall
 into peril, He laid down a command, in which man was taught that there
 was no evil in the fruit of the tree; but he was forewarned that evil
 would arise if perchance he should exercise his free will, in the
 contempt of the law that was given. For, on the one hand, it had
 behoved him to be free, lest the image of God should, unfittingly be in
 bondage; and on the other, the law was to be added, so that an
 unbridled liberty might not break forth even to a contempt of the
 Giver. So that he might receive as a consequence both worthy rewards
 and a deserved punishment, having in his own power that which he might
 choose to do, by the tendency of his mind in either direction: whence,
 therefore, by envy, mortality comes back upon him; seeing that,
 although he might escape it by obedience, he rushes into it by hurrying
 to be God under the influence of perverse counsel. Still, nevertheless,
 God indulgently tempered his punishment by cursing, not so much
 himself, as his labours upon earth. And, moreover, what is required
 does not come without man's knowledge; but He shows forth man's hope of
 future discovery [5019] and salvation in Christ. And that he is
 prevented from touching of the wood of the tree of life, is not caused
 by the malignant poison of envy, but lest, living for ever without
 Christ's previous pardon of his sins, he should always bear about with
 him for his punishment an immortality of guilt.  Nevertheless also, in
 higher regions; that is, above even the firmament itself, regions which
 are not now discernible by our eyes, He previously ordained angels, he
 arranged spiritual powers, He put in command thrones and powers, and
 founded many other infinite spaces of heavens, and unbounded works of
 His mysteries; so that this world, immense as it is, might almost
 appear rather as the latest, than the only work of corporeal things.
 And truly, [5020] what lies beneath the earth is not itself void of
 distributed and arranged powers. For there is a place whither the souls
 of the just and the unjust are taken, conscious of the anticipated
 dooms of future judgment; so that we might behold the overflowing
 greatness of God's works in all directions, not shut up within the
 bosom of this world, however capacious as we have said, but might also
 be able to conceive of them beneath both the abysses and the depths of
 the world itself. And thus considering the greatness of the works, we
 should worthily admire the Artificer of such a structure.

 [5017] "Mensurnis," or otherwise "menstruis."

 [5018] [Jer. v. 22. Compare sublime page with paganism.]

 [5019] "Inventionis." "Redemptionis" is a reasonable emendation.

 [5020] Or probably, "Neither indeed is," etc. [Vol. iii. p. 428.]

 Chapter II.  Argument.--God is Above All Things, Himself Containing All
 Things, Immense, Eternal, Transcending the Mind of Man; Inexplicable in
 Discourse, Loftier Than All Sublimity.

 And over all these things He Himself, containing all things, having
 nothing vacant beyond Himself, has left room for no superior God, such
 as some people conceive. Since, indeed, He Himself has included all
 things in the bosom of perfect greatness and power, He is always intent
 upon His own work, and pervading all things, and moving all things, and
 quickening all things, and beholding all things, and so linking
 together discordant materials into the concord of all elements, that
 out of these unlike principles one world is so established by a
 conspiring union, that it can by no force be dissolved, save when He
 alone who made it commands it to be dissolved, for the purpose of
 bestowing other and greater things upon us.  For we read that He
 contains all things, and therefore that there could have been nothing
 beyond Himself. Because, since He has not any beginning, so
 consequently He is not conscious of an ending; unless perchance--and
 far from us be the thought--He at some time began to be, and is not
 above all things, but as He began to be after something else, He would
 be beneath that which was before Himself, and would so be found to be
 of less power, in that He is designated as subsequent even in time
 itself. For this reason, therefore, He is always unbounded, because
 nothing is greater than He; always eternal, because nothing is more
 ancient than He. For that which is without beginning can be preceded by
 none, in that He has no time. He is on that account immortal, that He
 does not come to an end by any ending of His completeness. And since
 everything that is without beginning is without law, He excludes the
 mode of time by feeling Himself debtor to none. Concerning Him,
 therefore, and concerning those things which are of Himself, and are in
 Him, neither can the mind of man worthily conceive what they are, how
 great they are, and what they are like; nor does the eloquence of human
 discourse set forth a power that approaches the level of His majesty.
 For to conceive and to speak of His majesty, as well all eloquence is
 with reason mute, as all mind poor. For He is greater than mind itself;
 nor can it be conceived how great He is, seeing that, if He could be
 conceived, He would be smaller than the human mind wherein He could be
 conceived.  He is greater, moreover, than all discourse, nor can He be
 declared; for if He could be declared, He would be less than human
 discourse, whereby being declared, He can both be encompassed and
 contained.  For whatever could be thought concerning Him must be less
 than Himself; and whatever could be declared must be less than He, when
 compared in respect of Himself. Moreover, we can in some degree be
 conscious of Him in silence, but we cannot in discourse unfold Him as
 He is. For should you call Him Light, you would be speaking of His
 creature rather than of Himself--you would not declare Him; or should
 you call Him Strength, you would rather be speaking of and bringing out
 His power than speaking of Himself; or should you call Him Majesty, you
 would rather be describing His honour than Himself. And why should I
 make a long business of going through His attributes one by one? I will
 at once unfold the whole.  Whatever in any respect you might declare of
 Him, you would rather be unfolding some condition and power of His than
 Himself. For what can you fittingly either say or think concerning Him
 who is greater than all discourses and thoughts? Except that in one
 manner--and how can we do this? how can we by possibility conceive how
 we may grasp these very things?--we shall mentally grasp what God is,
 if we shall consider that He is that which cannot be understood either
 in quality or quantity, nor, indeed, can come even into the thought
 itself. For if the keenness of our eyes grows dull on looking at the
 sun, so that the gaze, overcome by the brightness of the rays that meet
 it, cannot look upon the orb itself, the keenness of our mental
 perception suffers the same thing in all our thinking about God, and in
 proportion as we give our endeavours more directly to consider God, so
 much the more the mind itself is blinded by the light of its own
 thought. For--to repeat once more--what can you worthily say of Him,
 who is loftier than all sublimity, and higher than all height, and
 deeper than all depth, and clearer than all light, and brighter than
 all brightness, more brilliant than all splendour, stronger than all
 strength, more powerful [5021] than all power, and more mighty than all
 might, and greater than all majesty, and more potent than all potency,
 and richer than all riches, more wise than all wisdom, and more
 benignant than all kindness, better than all goodness, juster than all
 justice, more merciful than all clemency? For all kinds of virtues must
 needs be less than Himself, who is both. God and Parent of all virtues,
 so that it may truly be said that God is that, which is such that
 nothing can be compared to Him. For He is above all that can be said.
 For He is a certain Mind generating and filling all things, which,
 without any beginning or end of time, controls, by the highest and most
 perfect reason, the naturally linked causes of things, so as to result
 in benefit to all.

 [5021] Viritior. [See Robert Hall on French Atheism.]

 Chapter III. Argument.--That God is the Founder of All Things, Their
 Lord and Parent, is Proved from the Holy Scriptures.

 Him, then, we acknowledge and know to be God, the Creator of all
 things--Lord on account of His power, Parent on account of His
 discipline--Him, I say, who "spake, and all things were made;" [5022]
 He commanded, and all things went forth: of whom it is written, "Thou
 hast made all things in wisdom;" [5023] of whom Moses said, "God in
 heaven above, and in the earth beneath;" [5024] who, according to
 Isaiah, "hath meted out the heaven with a span, the earth with the
 hollow of His hand;" [5025] "who looketh on the earth, and maketh it
 tremble; who boundeth the circle of the earth, and those that dwell in
 it like locusts; who hath weighed the mountains in a balance, and the
 groves in scales," [5026] that is, by the sure test of divine
 arrangement; and lest its greatness, lying unequally, should easily
 fall into ruins if it were not balanced with equal weights, He has
 poised this burden of the earthly mass with equity. Who says by the
 prophet, "I am God, and there is none beside me." [5027] Who says by
 the same prophet, "Because I will not give my majesty to another,"
 [5028] that He may exclude all heathens and heretics with their
 figments; proving that that is not God who is made by the hand of the
 workman, nor that which is feigned by the intellect of a heretic. For
 he is not God for whose existence the workman must be asked. And He has
 added hereto by the prophet, "The heaven is my throne, and the earth is
 my footstool: what house will ye build me, and where is the place of my
 rest?" [5029] that He may show that He whom the world does not contain
 is much less contained in a temple; and He says these things not for
 boastfulness of Himself, but for our knowledge. For He does not desire
 from us the glory of His magnitude; but He wishes to confer upon us,
 even as a father, a religious wisdom. And He, wishing moreover to
 attract to gentleness our minds, brutish, and swelling, and stubborn
 with cloddish ferocity, says, "And upon whom shall my Spirit rest, save
 upon him that is lowly, and quiet, and that trembleth at my words?"
 [5030] --so that in some degree one may recognise how great God is, in
 learning to fear Him by the Spirit given to him: Who, similarly wishing
 still more to come into our knowledge, and, by way of stirring up our
 minds to His worship, said, "I am the Lord, who made the light and
 created the darkness;" [5031] that we might deem not that some
 Nature,--what I know not,--was the artificer of those vicissitudes
 whereby nights and days are controlled, but might rather, as is more
 true, recognise God as their Creator. And since by the gaze of our eyes
 we cannot see Him, we rightly learn of Him from the greatness, and the
 power, and the majesty of His works. "For the invisible things of Him,"
 says the Apostle Paul," from the creation of the world, are clearly
 seen, being understood by those things which are made, even His eternal
 power and godhead;" [5032] so that the human mind, learning hidden
 things from those that are manifest, from the greatness of the works
 which it should behold, might with the eyes of the mind consider the
 greatness of the Architect. Of whom the same apostle, "Now unto the
 King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only God, be honour and glory."
 [5033] For He has gone beyond the contemplation of the eyes who has
 surpassed the greatness of thought. "For," it is said, "of Him, and
 through Him, and in Him are all things." [5034] For all things are by
 His command, because they are of Him; and are ordered by His word as
 being through Him; and all things return to His judgment; as in Him
 expecting liberty when corruption shall be done away, they appear to be
 recalled to Him.

 [5022] Ps. cxlviii. 5.

 [5023] Ps. ciii. 24.

 [5024] Deut. iv. 39.

 [5025] Ps. ciii. 32.

 [5026] Isa. xl. 22, 12.

 [5027] Isa. xlv. 22.

 [5028] Isa. xlii. 8.

 [5029] Isa. lxvi. 1. [No portable or pocket god.]

 [5030] Isa. lxvi. 2.

 [5031] Isa. xlv. 7. [A lesson to our age.]

 [5032] Rom. i. 20. ["So that they are without excuse."]

 [5033] 1 Tim. i. 17.

 [5034] Rom. xi. 33.

 Chapter IV. Argument.--Moreover, He is Good, Always the Same,
 Immutable, One and Only, Infinite; And His Own Name Can Never Be
 Declared, and He is Incorruptible and Immortal.

 Him alone the Lord rightly declares good, of whose goodness the whole
 world is witness; which world He would not have ordained if He had not
 been good. For if "everything was very good," [5035] consequently, and
 reasonably, both those things which were ordained have proved that He
 that ordained them is good, and those things which are the work of a
 good Ordainer cannot be other than good; wherefore every evil is a
 departure from God. For it cannot happen that He should be the
 originator or architect of any evil work, who claims to Himself the
 name of "the Perfect," both Parent and Judge, especially when He is the
 avenger and judge of every evil work; because, moreover, evil does not
 occur to man from any other cause than by his departure from the good
 God. Moreover, this very thing is specified in man, not because it was
 necessary, but because he himself so willed it. Whence it manifestly
 appeared also what was evil; and lest there should seem to be envy in
 God, it was evident whence evil had arisen. He, then, is always like to
 Himself; nor does He ever turn or change Himself into any forms, lest
 by change He should appear to be mortal. For the change implied in
 turning from one thing to another is comprehended as a portion of a
 certain death.  Thus there is never in Him any accession or increase of
 any part or honour, lest anything should appear to have ever been
 wanting to His perfection, nor is any loss sustained in Him, lest a
 degree of mortality should appear to have been suffered by Him. But
 what He is, He always is; and who He is, He is always Himself; and what
 character He has, He always has. [5036] For increasing argues
 beginning, as well as losses prove death and perishing. And therefore
 He says, "I am God, I change not;" [5037] in that, what is not born
 cannot suffer change, holding His condition always. For whatever it be
 in Him which constitutes Divinity, must necessarily exist always,
 maintaining itself by its own powers, so that He should always be God.
 And thus He says, "I am that I am." [5038] For what He is has this
 name, because it always maintains the same quality of Himself. For
 change takes away the force of that name "That I Am;" for whatever, at
 any time, is changed, is shown to be mortal in that very particular
 which is changed. For it ceases to be that which it had been, and
 consequently begins to be what it was not; and therefore, reasonably,
 there remains always in God His position, in that without any loss
 arising from change, He is always like and equal to Himself. And what
 is not born cannot be changed: for only those things undergo change
 which are made, or which are begotten; in that those things which had
 not been at one time, learn to be by coming into being, and therefore
 to suffer change by being born. Moreover, those things which neither
 have nativity nor maker, have excluded from themselves the capacity of
 change, not having a beginning wherein is cause of change. And thus He
 is declared to be one, having no equal. For whatever can be God, must
 as God be of necessity the Highest. But whatever is the Highest, must
 certainly be the Highest in such sense as to be without any equal. And
 thus that must needs be alone and one on which nothing can be
 conferred, having no peer; because there cannot be two infinites, as
 the very nature of things dictates. And that is infinite which neither
 has any sort of beginning nor end. For whatever has occupied the whole
 excludes the beginning of another. Because if He does not contain all
 which is, whatever it is--seeing that what is found in that whereby it
 is contained is found to be less than that whereby it is contained--He
 will cease to be God; being reduced into the power of another, in whose
 greatness He, being smaller, shall have been included. And therefore
 what contained Him would then rather claim to be God. Whence it results
 that God's own name also cannot be declared, because He cannot be
 conceived. For that is contained in a name which is, in any way,
 comprehended from the condition of His nature. For the name is the
 signification of that thing which could be comprehended from a name.
 But when that which is treated of is such that it cannot be worthily
 gathered into one form by the very understanding itself, how shall it
 be set forth fittingly in the one word of an appellation, seeing that
 as it is beyond the intellect, it must also of necessity be above the
 significancy of the appellation? As with reason when He applies and
 prefers from certain reasons and occasions His name of God, we know
 that it is not so much the legitimate propriety of the appellation that
 is set forth, as a certain significancy determined for it, to which,
 while men betake themselves, they seem to be able thereby to obtain
 God's mercy. He is therefore also both immortal and incorruptible,
 neither conscious of any kind of loss nor ending.  For because He is
 incorruptible, He is therefore immortal; and because He is immortal, He
 is certainly also incorruptible,--each being involved by turns in the
 other, with itself and in itself, by a mutual connection, and prolonged
 by a vicarious concatenation to the condition of eternity; immortality
 arising from incorruption, as well as incorruption coming from
 immortality.

 [5035] Gen. i. 31.

 [5036] In other words, God is always the same in essence, in
 personality, and in attributes.

 [5037] Mal. iii. 6.

 [5038] Ex. iii. 14. [The ineffable name of the Self-Existent.]

 Chapter V. Argument.--If We Regard the Anger, and Indignation, and
 Hatred of God Described in the Sacred Pages, We Must Remember that They
 are Not to Be Understood as Bearing the Character of Human Vices.

 Moreover, if we read of His wrath, and consider certain descriptions of
 His indignation, and learn that hatred is asserted of Him, yet we are
 not to understand these to be asserted of Him in the sense in which
 they are human vices. For all these things, although they may corrupt
 man, cannot at all corrupt the divine power. For such passions as these
 will rightly be said to be in men, and will not rightly be judged to be
 in God. For man may be corrupted by these things, because he can be
 corrupted; God may not be corrupted by them, because He cannot be
 corrupted. These things, forsooth, have their force which they may
 exercise, but only where a material capable of impression precedes
 them, not where a substance that cannot be impressed precedes them. For
 that God is angry, arises from no vice in Him. But He is so for our
 advantage; for He is merciful even then when He threatens, because by
 these threats men are recalled to rectitude. For fear is necessary for
 those who want the motive to a virtuous life, that they who have
 forsaken reason may at least be moved by terror. And thus all those,
 either angers of God or hatreds, or whatever they are of this kind,
 being displayed for our medicine,--as the case teaches,--have arisen of
 wisdom, not from vice, nor do they originate from frailty; wherefore
 also they cannot avail for the corruption of God. For the diversity in
 us of the materials of which we consist, is accustomed to arouse the
 discord of anger which corrupts us; but this, whether of nature or of
 defect, cannot subsist in God, seeing that He is known to be
 constructed assuredly of no associations of bodily parts. For He is
 simple and without any corporeal commixture, being wholly of that
 essence, which, whatever it be,--He alone knows,--constitutes His
 being, since He is called Spirit. And thus those things which in men
 are faulty and corrupting, since they arise from the corruptibility of
 the body, and matter itself, in God cannot exert the force of
 corruptibility, since, as we have said, they have come, not of vice,
 but of reason.

 Chapter VI.  Argument.--And That, Although Scripture Often Changes the
 Divine Appearance into a Human Form, Yet the Measure of the Divine
 Majesty is Not Included Within These Lineaments of Our Bodily Nature.

 And although the heavenly Scripture often turns the divine appearance
 into a human form,--as when it says, "The eyes of the Lord are over the
 righteous;" [5039] or when it says, "The Lord God smelled the smell of
 a good savour;" [5040] or when there are given to Moses the tables
 "written with the finger of God;" [5041] or when the people of the
 children of Israel are set free from the land of Egypt "with a mighty
 hand and with a stretched out arm;" [5042] or when it says, "The mouth
 of the Lord hath spoken these things;" [5043] or when the earth is set
 forth as "God's footstool;" [5044] or when it says, "Incline thine ear,
 and hear," [5045] --we who say that the law is spiritual do not include
 within these lineaments of our bodily nature any mode or figure of the
 divine majesty, but diffuse that character of unbounded magnitude (so
 to speak) over its plains without any limit. For it is written, "If I
 shall ascend into heaven, Thou art there; if I shall descend into hell,
 Thou art there also; and if I shall take my wings, and go away across
 the sea, there Thy hand shall lay hold of me, and Thy right hand shall
 hold me." [5046] For we recognise the plan of the divine Scripture
 according to the proportion of its arrangement. For the prophet then
 was still speaking about God in parables according to the period of the
 faith, not as God was, but as the people were able to receive Him. And
 thus, that such things as these should be said about God, must be
 imputed not to God, but rather to the people. Thus the people are
 permitted to erect a tabernacle, and yet God is not contained within
 the enclosure of a tabernacle. Thus a temple is reared, and yet God is
 not at all bounded within the restraints of a temple. It is not
 therefore God who is limited, but the perception of the people is
 limited; nor is God straitened, but the understanding of the reason of
 the people is held to be straitened. Finally, in the Gospel the Lord
 said, "The hour shall come when neither in this mountain nor in
 Jerusalem shall ye worship the Father;" [5047] and gave the reasons,
 saying, "God is a Spirit; and those therefore who worship, must worship
 in spirit and in truth." [5048] Thus the divine agencies are there
 [5049] exhibited by means of members; it is not the appearance of God
 nor the bodily lineaments that are described. For when the eyes are
 spoken of, it is implied that He sees all things; and when the ear, it
 is set forth that He hears all things; and when the finger, a certain
 energy of His will is opened up; and when the nostrils, His recognition
 of prayers is shown forth as of odours; and when the hand, it is proved
 that He is the author of every creature; and when the arm, it is
 announced that no nature can withstand the power of His arm; and when
 the feet it is unfolded that He fills all things, and that there is not
 any place where God is not. For neither members nor the offices of
 members are needful to Him to whose sole judgment, even unexpressed,
 all things serve and are present. For why should He require eyes who is
 Himself the light? or why should He ask for feet who is everywhere? or
 why should He wish to go when there is nowhere where He can go beyond
 Himself? or why should He seek for hands whose will is, even when
 silent, the architect for the foundation of all things?  He needs no
 ears who knows the wills that are even unexpressed; or for what reason
 should He need a tongue whose thought is a command?  These members
 assuredly were necessary to men, but not to God, because man's design
 would be ineffectual if the body did not fulfil the thought. Moreover,
 they are not needful to God, whose will the works attend not so much
 without any effort, as that the works themselves proceed simultaneously
 with the will. Moreover, He Himself is all eye, because He all sees;
 and all ear, because He all hears; and all hand, because He all works;
 and all foot, because He all is everywhere. For He is the same,
 whatever it is. He is all equal, and all everywhere. For He has not in
 Him any diversity in Himself, being simple. For those are the things
 which are reduced to diversity of members, which arise from birth and
 go to dissolution. But things which are not concrete cannot be
 conscious of these things. [5050] And what is immortal, whatever it is,
 that very thing is one and simple, and for ever. And thus because it is
 one it cannot be dissolved; since whatever is that very thing which is
 placed beyond the claim of dissolution, it is freed from the laws of
 death.

 [5039] Ps. xxxiv. 15. [Anthropopathy, p. 611.]

 [5040] Gen. viii. 21.

 [5041] Ex. xxxi. 18.

 [5042] Ps. cxxxvi. 12.

 [5043] Isa. i. 20.

 [5044] Isa. lxvi. 1. [Capp. v. and vi. are specimens of vigorous
 thought.]

 [5045] 2 Chron. xix. 16.

 [5046] Ps. cxxxix. 8, 9, 10.

 [5047] John iv. 21.

 [5048] John iv. 24.

 [5049] sc. in the Old Testament.

 [5050] That is to say, "of Birth and dissolution." [He is the Now.]

 Chapter VII.  Argument.--Moreover, that When God is Called a Spirit,
 Brightness, and Light, God is Not Sufficiently Expressed by Those
 Appellations.

 But when the Lord says that God is a Spirit, I think that Christ spoke
 thus of the Father, as wishing that something still more should be
 understood than merely that God is a Spirit.  For although, in His
 Gospel, He is reasoning for the purpose of giving to men an increase of
 intelligence, nevertheless He Himself speaks to men concerning God, in
 such a way as they can as yet hear and receive; although, as we have
 said, He is now endeavouring to give to His hearers religious additions
 to their knowledge of God. For we find it to be written that God is
 called Love, and yet from this the substance of God is not declared to
 be Love; and that He is called Light, while in this is not the
 substance of God.  But the whole that is thus said of God is as much as
 can be said, so that reasonably also, when He is called a Spirit, it is
 not all that He is which is so called; but so that, while men's mind by
 understanding makes progress even to the Spirit itself, being already
 changed in spirit, it may conjecture God to be something even greater
 through the Spirit. For that which is, according to what it is, can
 neither be declared by human discourse, nor received by human ears, nor
 gathered by human perceptions. For if "the things which God hath
 prepared for them that love Him, neither eye hath seen, nor ear hath
 heard, nor the heart of man, nor even his mind has perceived;" [5051]
 what and how great is He Himself who promises these things, in
 understanding which both the mind and nature of man have failed!
 Finally, if you receive the Spirit as the substance of God, you will
 make God a creature. For every spirit is a creature. And therefore,
 then, God will be made. In which manner also, if, according to Moses,
 you should receive God to be fire, in saying that He is a creature, you
 will have declared what is ordained, you will not have taught who is
 its ordainer. But these things are rather used as figures than as being
 so in fact. For as, in the Old Testament, [5052] God is for this reason
 called Fire, that fear may be struck into the hearts of a sinful
 people, by suggesting to them a Judge; so in the New Testament He is
 announced as Spirit, that, as the Renewer and Creator of those who are
 dead in their sins, He may be attested by this goodness of mercy
 granted to those that believe.

 [5051] 1 Cor. ii. 9.

 [5052] [Ex. iii. 2. Not consuming. Heb. xii. 29, "consuming."]

 Chapter VIII.  Argument.--It is This God, Therefore, that the Church
 Has Known and Adores; And to Him the Testimony of Things as Well
 Visible as Invisible is Given Both at All Times and in All Forms, by
 the Nature Which His Providence Rules and Governs.

 This God, then, setting aside the fables and figments of heretics, the
 Church knows and worships, to whom the universal and entire nature of
 things as well visible as invisible gives witness; whom angels adore,
 stars wonder at, seas bless, lands revere, and all things under the
 earth look up to; whom the whole mind of man is conscious of, even if
 it does not express itself; at whose command all things are set in
 motion, springs gush forth, rivers flow, waves arise, all creatures
 bring forth their young, winds are compelled to blow, showers descend,
 seas are stirred up, all things everywhere diffuse their fruitfulness.
 Who ordained, peculiar to the protoplasts of eternal life, a certain
 beautiful paradise in the east; He planted the tree of life, and
 similarly placed near it another tree of the knowledge of good and
 evil, gave a command, and decreed a judgment against sin; He preserved
 the most righteous Nöe from the perils of the deluge, for the merit of
 His innocence and faith; He translated Enoch: He elected Abraham into
 the society of his friendship; He protected Isaac: He increased Jacob;
 He gave Moses for a leader unto the people; He delivered the groaning
 children of Israel from the yoke of slavery; He wrote the law; He
 brought the offspring of our fathers into the land of promise; He
 instructed the prophets by His Spirit, and by all of them He promised
 His Son Christ; and at the time at which He had covenanted that He
 would give Him, He sent Him, and through Him He desired to come into
 our knowledge, and shed forth upon us the liberal stores of His mercy,
 by conferring His abundant Spirit on the poor and abject. And, because
 He of His own free-will is both liberal and kind, lest the whole of
 this globe, being turned away from the streams of His grace, should
 wither, He willed the apostles, as founders of our family, to be sent
 by His Son into the whole world, that the condition of the human race
 might be conscious of its Founder; and, if it should choose to follow
 Him, might have One whom even in its supplications it might now call
 Father instead of God. [5053] And His providence has had or has its
 course among men, not only individually, but also among cities
 themselves, and states whose destructions have been announced by the
 words of prophets; yea, even through the whole world itself; whose end,
 whose miseries, and wastings, and sufferings on account of unbelief He
 has allotted.  And lest moreover any one should think that such an
 indefatigable providence of God does not reach to even the very least
 things, "One of two sparrows," says the Lord, "shall not fall without
 the will of the Father; but even the very hairs of your head are all
 numbered." [5054] And His care and providence did not permit even the
 clothes of the Israelites to be worn out, nor even the vilest shoes on
 their feet to be wasted; nor, moreover, finally, the very garments of
 the captive young men to be burnt. And this is not without reason; for
 if He embraces all things, and contains all things,--and all things,
 and the whole, consist of individuals,--His care will consequently
 extend even to every individual thing, since His providence reaches to
 the whole, whatever it is. Hence it is that He also sitteth above the
 Cherubim; that is, He presides over the variety of His works, the
 living creatures which hold the control over the rest being subjected
 to His throne: [5055] a crystal covering being thrown over all things;
 that is, the heaven covering all things, which at the command of God
 had been consolidated into a firmament [5056] from the fluent material
 of the waters, that the strong hardness that divides the midst of the
 waters that covered the earth before, might sustain as if on its back
 the weight of the superincumbent water, its strength being established
 by the frost. And, moreover, wheels lie below--that is to say, the
 seasons--whereby all the members of the world are always being rolled
 onwards; such feet being added by which those things do not stand still
 for ever, but pass onward. And, moreover, throughout all their limbs
 they are studded with eyes; for the works of God must be contemplated
 with an ever watchful inspection: in the heart of which things, a fire
 of embers is in the midst, either because this world of ours is
 hastening to the fiery day of judgment; or because all the works of God
 are fiery, and are not darksome, but flourish. [5057] Or, moreover,
 lest, because those things had arisen from earthly beginnings, they
 should naturally be inactive, from the rigidity of their origin, the
 hot nature of an interior spirit was added to all things; and that this
 nature concreted with the cold bodies might minister [5058] for the
 purpose of life equal measures for all. [5059] This, therefore,
 according to David, is God's chariot. "For the chariot of God," says
 he, "is multiplied ten thousand times;" [5060] that is, it is
 innumerable, infinite, immense. For, under the yoke of the natural law
 given to all things, some things are restrained, as if withheld by
 reins; others, as if stimulated, are urged on with relaxed reins. For
 the world, [5061] which is that chariot of God with all things, both
 the angels themselves and the stars guide; and their movements,
 although various, yet bound by certain laws, we watch them guiding by
 the bounds of a time prescribed to themselves; so that rightly we also
 are now disposed to exclaim with the apostle, as he admires both the
 Architect and His works: "Oh the depth of the riches of the wisdom and
 knowledge of God! how inscrutable are His judgments, and His ways past
 finding out!" And the rest. [5062]

 [5053] [Madame de Staël has beautifully remarked on the benefit
 conferred upon humanity by Him who authorized us to say," Our Father."
 "Scientific" atheism gives nothing instead.]

 [5054] Matt. x. 29, 30.

 [5055] [Ezek. i. 10 and Rev. iv. 7.]

 [5056] [The science of the third century had overruled the Pythagorean
 system, and philosophers bound the Church and the human mind in the
 chains of false science for ages. The revival of true science was due
 to Copernicus, a Christian priest, and to Galileo, and other
 Christians. Let this be noted.]

 [5057] "Vigent," or otherwise "lucent."

 [5058] "Ministraret" seems to be preferable to "monstraret."

 [5059] [Our author's genius actually suggests a theory, in this
 chapter, concerning the zoa, or "living creatures," which anticipates
 all that is truly demonstrated by the "evolutionists," and which
 harmonizes the variety of animated natures. Rev. v. 13, 14.]

 [5060] Ps. lxviii. 18.

 [5061] [The universe is here intended, as in Milton, "this pendent
 world." Parad. Lost, book ii. 1052.]

 [5062] Rom. xi. 33. "Note also the rest of the text" is our author's
 additional comment.

 Chapter IX.  Argument.--Further, that the Same Rule of Truth Teaches Us
 to Believe, After the Father, Also in the Son of God, Jesus Christ Our
 Lord God, Being the Same that Was Promised in the Old Testament, and
 Manifested in the New.

 The same rule of truth teaches us to believe, after the Father, also on
 the Son of God, Christ Jesus, the Lord our God, but the Son of God--of
 that God who is both one and alone, to wit the Founder of all things,
 as already has been expressed above. For this Jesus Christ, I will once
 more say, the Son of this God, we read of as having been promised in
 the Old Testament, and we observe to be manifested in the New,
 fulfilling the shadows and figures of all the sacraments, with the
 presence of the truth embodied. For as well the ancient prophecies as
 the Gospels testify Him to be the son of Abraham and the son of David.
 Genesis itself anticipates Him, when it says: "To thee will I give it,
 and to thy seed." [5063] He is spoken of when it shows how a man
 wrestled with Jacob; He too, when it says: "There shall not fail a
 prince from Judah, nor a leader from between his thighs, until He shall
 come to whom it has been promised; and He shall be the expectation of
 the nations." [5064] He is spoken of by Moses when he says: "Provide
 another whom thou mayest send." [5065] He is again spoken of by the
 same, when he testifies, saying: "A Prophet will God raise up to you
 from your brethren; listen to Him as if to me." [5066] It is He, too,
 that he speaks of when he says: "Ye shall see your life hanging in
 doubt night and day, and ye shall not believe Him." [5067] Him, too,
 Isaiah alludes to: "There shall go forth a rod from the root of Jesse,
 and a flower shall grow up from his root." [5068] The same also when he
 says: "Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son." [5069] Him he
 refers to when he enumerates the healings that were to proceed from
 Him, saying:  "Then shall the eyes of the blind be opened, and the ears
 of the deaf shall hear: then shall the lame man leap as an hart, and
 the tongue of the dumb shall be eloquent." [5070] Him also, when he
 sets forth the virtue of patience, saying: "His voice shall not be
 heard in the streets; a bruised reed shall He not destroy, and the
 smoking flax shall He not quench." [5071] Him, too, when he described
 His Gospel: "And I will ordain for you an everlasting covenant, even
 the sure mercies of David." [5072] Him, too, when he foretells that the
 nations should believe on Him: "Behold, I have given Him for a Chief
 and a Commander to the nations. Nations that knew not Thee shall call
 upon Thee, and peoples that knew Thee not shall flee unto Thee." [5073]
 It is the same that he refers to when, concerning His passion, he
 exclaims, saying: "As a sheep He is led to the slaughter; and as a lamb
 before his shearer is dumb, so He opened not His mouth in His
 humility." [5074] Him, moreover, when he described the blows and
 stripes of His scourgings: "By His bruises we were healed." [5075] Or
 His humiliation:  "And we saw Him, and He had neither form nor
 comeliness, a man in suffering, and who knoweth how to bear infirmity."
 [5076] Or that the people would not believe on Him: "All day long I
 have spread out my hands unto a people that believeth not." [5077] Or
 that He would rise again from the dead: "And in that day there shall be
 a root of Jesse, and one who shall rise to reign over the nations; on
 Him shall the nations hope, and His rest shall be honour." [5078] Or
 when he speaks of the time of the resurrection: "We shall find Him, as
 it were, prepared in the morning." [5079] Or that He should sit at the
 right hand of the Father: "The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou at my
 right hand, until I shall place Thine enemies as the stool of Thy
 feet." [5080] Or when He is set forth as possessor of all things: "Ask
 of me, and I will give Thee the heathen for Thine inheritance, and the
 boundaries of the earth for Thy possession." [5081] Or when He is shown
 as Judge of all: "O God, give the King Thy judgment, and Thy
 righteousness to the King's Son." [5082] And I shall not in this place
 pursue the subject further: the things which are announced of Christ
 are known to all heretics, but are even better known to those who hold
 the truth.

 [5063] Gen. xvii. 8.

 [5064] Gen. xlix. 10.

 [5065] Ex. iv. 13.

 [5066] Deut. xviii. 15.

 [5067] Deut. xxviii. 66.

 [5068] Isa. xi. 1.

 [5069] Isa. vii. 13.

 [5070] Isa. xxxv. 3-6.

 [5071] Isa. xiii. 2, 3.

 [5072] Isa. lv. 3.

 [5073] Isa. lv. 4, 5.

 [5074] Isa. liii. 7.

 [5075] Isa. liii. 5.

 [5076] Isa. liii. 2.

 [5077] Isa. lxv. 2.

 [5078] Isa. xi. 10.

 [5079] Hos. vi. 3.

 [5080] Ps. cx. 1, 2.

 [5081] Ps. ii. 8.

 [5082] Ps. lxxii. 1.

 Chapter X.  Argument.--That Jesus Christ is the Son of God and Truly
 Man, as Opposed to the Fancies of Heretics, Who Deny that He Took Upon
 Him True Flesh.

 But of this I remind you, that Christ was not to be expected in the
 Gospel in any other wise than as He was promised before by the Creator,
 in the Scriptures of the Old Testament; especially as the things that
 were predicted of Him were fulfilled, and those things that were
 fulfilled had been predicted. As with reason I might truly and
 constantly say to that fanciful--I know not what--of those heretics who
 reject the authority of the Old Testament, as to a Christ feigned and
 coloured up from old wives' fables: "Who art thou? Whence art thou? By
 whom art thou sent? Wherefore hast thou now chosen to come? Why such as
 thou art? Or how hast thou been able to come? Or wherefore hast thou
 not gone to thine own, except that thou hast proved that thou hast none
 of thine own, by coming to those of another?  What hast thou to do with
 the Creator's world? What hast thou to do with the Creator's man? What
 hast thou to do with the image of a body from which thou takest away
 the hope of resurrection? Why comest thou to another man's servant, and
 desirest thou to solicit another man's son? Why dost thou strive to
 take me away from the Lord? Why dost thou compel me to blaspheme, and
 to be impious to my Father? Or what shall I gain from thee in the
 resurrection, if I do not receive myself when I lose my body? If thou
 wishest to save, thou shouldest have made a man to whom to give
 salvation. If thou desirest to snatch from sin, thou shouldest have
 granted to me previously that I should not fall into sin. But what
 approbation of law dost thou carry about with thee? What testimony of
 the prophetic word hast thou? Or what substantial good can I promise
 myself from thee, when I see that thou hast come in a phantasm and not
 in a bodily substance? What, then, hast thou to do with the form of a
 body, if thou hatest a body? Nay, thou wilt be refuted as to the hatred
 of bearing about the substance of a body, since thou hast been willing
 even to take up its form. For thou oughtest to have hated the imitation
 of a body, if thou hatedst the reality; because, if thou art something
 else, thou oughtest to have come as something else, lest thou shouldest
 be called the Son of the Creator if thou hadst even the likeness of
 flesh and body. Assuredly, if thou hatedst being born because thou
 hatedst the Creator's marriage-union,' thou oughtest to refuse even the
 likeness of a man who is born by the marriage of the Creator.'"

 Neither, therefore, do we acknowledge that that is a Christ of the
 heretics who was--as it is said--in appearance and not in reality; for
 of those things which he did, he could have done nothing real, if he
 himself was a phantasm, and not reality. Nor him who wore nothing of
 our body in himself, seeing "he received nothing from Mary;" neither
 did he come to us, since he appeared "as a vision, not in our
 substance." Nor do we acknowledge that to be Christ who chose an
 ethereal or starry flesh, as some heretics have pretended. Nor can we
 perceive any salvation of ours in him, if in him we do not even
 recognise the substance of our body; nor, in short, any other who may
 have worn any other kind of fabulous body of heretical device. For all
 such fables as these are confuted as well by the nativity as by the
 death itself of our Lord. For John says: "The Word was made flesh, and
 dwelt among us;" [5083] so that, reasonably, our body should be in Him,
 because indeed the Word took on Him our flesh. And for this reason
 blood flowed forth from His hands and feet, and from His very side, so
 that He might be proved to be a sharer in our body by dying according
 to the laws of our dissolution. And that He was raised again in the
 same bodily substance in which He died, is proved by the wounds of that
 very body, and thus He showed the laws of our resurrection in His
 flesh, in that He restored the same body in His resurrection which He
 had from us. For a law of resurrection is established, in that Christ
 is raised up in the substance of the body as an example for the rest;
 because, when it is written that "flesh and blood do not inherit the
 kingdom of God," [5084] it is not the substance of the flesh that is
 condemned, which was built up by the divine hands that it should not
 perish, but only the guilt of the flesh is rightly rebuked, which by
 the voluntary daring of man rebelled against the claims of divine law.
 Because in baptism and in the dissolution of death the flesh is raised
 up and returns to salvation, by being recalled to the condition of
 innocency when the mortality of guilt is put away.

 [5083] John i. 14. [Of fables and figments, see cap. viii. p. 617.]

 [5084] 1 Cor. xvi. 50. [Vol. iii. p. 521, this series.]

 Chapter XI.--And Indeed that Christ Was Not Only Man, But God Also;
 That Even as He Was the Son of Man, So Also He Was the Son of God.

 But lest, from the fact of asserting that our Lord Jesus Christ, the
 Son of God, the Creator, was manifested in the substance of the true
 body, we should seem either to have given assent to other heretics, who
 in this place maintain that He is man only and alone, and therefore
 desire to prove that He was a man bare and solitary; and lest we should
 seem to have afforded them any ground for objecting, we do not so
 express doctrine concerning the substance of His body, as to say that
 He is only and alone man, but so as to maintain, by the association of
 the divinity of the Word in that very materiality, that He was also God
 according to the Scriptures. For there is a great risk of saying that
 the Saviour of the human race was only man; that the Lord of all, and
 the Chief of the world, to whom all things were delivered, and all
 things were granted by His Father, by whom all things were ordained,
 all things were created, all things were arranged, the King of all ages
 and times, the Prince of all the angels, before whom there is none but
 the Father, was only man, and denying to Him divine authority in these
 things. For this contempt of the heretics will recoil also upon God the
 Father, if God the Father could not beget God the Son.  But, moreover,
 no blindness of the heretics shall prescribe to the truth. Nor, because
 they maintain one thing in Christ and, do not maintain another, they
 see one side of Christ and do not see another, shall there be taken
 away from us that which they do not see for the sake of that which they
 do. For they regard the weaknesses in Him as if they were a man's
 weaknesses, but they do not count the powers as if they were a God's
 powers. They keep in mind the infirmities of the flesh, they exclude
 the powers of the divinity; when if this argument from the infirmities
 of Christ is of avail to the result of proving Him to be man from His
 infirmities, the argument of divinity in Him gathered from His powers
 avails to the result also of asserting Him to be God from His works.
 For if His sufferings show in Him human frailty, why may not His works
 assert in Him divine power? For if this should not avail to assert Him
 to be God from His powers, neither can His sufferings avail to show Him
 to be man also from them. For whatever principle be adopted on one or
 the other side, will be found to be maintained. [5085] For there will
 be a risk that He should not be shown to be man from His sufferings, if
 He could not also be approved as God by His powers. We must not then
 lean to one side and evade the other side, because any one who should
 exclude one portion of the truth will never hold the perfect truth. For
 Scripture as much announces Christ as also God, as it announces God
 Himself as man. It has as much described Jesus Christ to be man, as
 moreover it has also described Christ the Lord to be God.  Because it
 does not set forth Him to be the Son of God only, but also the Son of
 man; nor does it only say, the Son of man, but it has also been
 accustomed to speak of Him as the Son of God. So that being of both, He
 is both, lest if He should be one only, He could not be the other. For
 as nature itself has prescribed that he must be believed to be a man
 who is of man, so the same nature prescribes also that He must be
 believed to be God who is of God; but if he should not also be God when
 he is of God, no more should he be man although he should be of man.
 And thus both doctrines would be endangered in one and the other way,
 by one being convicted to have lost belief in the other. Let them,
 therefore, who read that Jesus Christ the Son of man is man, read also
 that this same Jesus is called also God and the Son of God. For in the
 manner that as man He is of Abraham, so also as God He is before
 Abraham himself. And in the same manner as He is as man the "Son of
 David," [5086] so as God He is proclaimed David's Lord. And in the same
 manner as He was made as man "under the law," [5087] so as God He is
 declared to be "Lord of the Sabbath." [5088] And in the same manner
 as He suffers, as man, the condemnation, so as God He is found to have
 all judgment of the quick and dead. And in the same manner as He is
 born as man subsequent to the world, so as God He is manifested to have
 been before the world. And in the same way as He was begotten as man of
 the seed of David, so also the world is said to have been ordained by
 Him as God. And in the same way as He was as man after many, so as God
 He was before all. And in the same manner as He was as man inferior to
 others, so as God He was greater than all. And in the same manner as He
 ascended as man into heaven, so as God He had first descended thence.
 And in the same manner as He goes as man to the Father, so as the Son
 in obedience to the Father He shall descend thence.  So if
 imperfections in Him prove human frailty, majesties in Him affirm
 divine power. For the risk is, in reading of both, to believe not both,
 but one of the two. Wherefore as both are read of in Christ, let both
 be believed; that so finally the faith may be true, being also
 complete. For if of two principles one gives way in the faith, and the
 other, and that indeed which is of least importance, be taken up for
 belief, the rule of truth is thrown into confusion; and that boldness
 will not confer salvation, but instead of salvation will effect a great
 risk of death from the overthrow of the faith.

 [5085] Scil. in its alternative.

 [5086] Matt. xxiii. 42 et seq.

 [5087] Gal. iv. 4.

 [5088] Luke vi. 5.

 Chapter XII.  Argument.--That Christ is God, is Proved by the Authority
 of the Old Testament Scriptures.

 Why, then, should we hesitate to say what Scripture does not shrink
 from declaring? Why shall the truth of faith hesitate in that wherein
 the authority of Scripture has never hesitated? For, behold, Hosea the
 prophet says in the person of the Father: "I will not now save them by
 bow, nor by horses, nor by horsemen; but I will save them by the Lord
 their God." [5089] If God says that He saves by God, still God does not
 save except by Christ. Why, then, should man hesitate to call Christ
 God, when he observes that He is declared to be God by the Father
 according to the Scriptures? Yea, if God the Father does not save
 except by God, no one can be saved by God the Father unless he shall
 have confessed Christ to be God, in whom and by whom the Father
 promises that He will give him salvation: so that, reasonably, whoever
 acknowledges Him to be God, may find salvation in Christ God; whoever
 does not acknowledge Him to be God, would lose salvation which he could
 not find elsewhere than in Christ God. For in the same way as Isaiah
 says, "Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and ye shall
 call His name Emmanuel, which is, interpreted, God with us;" [5090] so
 Christ Himself says, "Lo, I am with you, even to the consummation of
 the world." [5091] Therefore He is "God with us;" yea, and much rather,
 He is in us. Christ is with us, therefore it is He whose name is God
 with us, because He also is with us; or is He not with us? How then
 does He say that He is with us? He, then, is with us. But because He is
 with us He was called Emmanuel, that is, God with us. God, therefore,
 because He is with us, was called God with us. The same prophet says:
 "Be ye strengthened, ye relaxed hands, and ye feeble knees; be
 consoled, ye that are cowardly in heart; be strong; fear not. Lo, our
 God shall return judgment; He Himself shall come, and shall save you:
 then shall the eyes of the blind be opened, and the ears of the deaf
 shall hear; then shall the lame man leap as an hart, and the tongue of
 the dumb shall be eloquent." [5092] Since the prophet says that at
 God's advent these should be the signs which come to pass; let men
 acknowledge either that Christ is the Son of God, at whose advent and
 by whom these wonders of healings were performed; or, overcome by the
 truth of Christ's divinity, let them rush into the other heresy, and
 refusing to confess Christ to be the Son of God, and God, let them
 declare Him to be the Father. For, being bound by the words of the
 prophets, they can no longer deny Christ to be God.  What, then, do
 they reply when those signs are said to be about to take place on the
 advent of God, which were manifested on the advent of Christ? In what
 way do they receive Christ as God? For now they cannot deny Him to be
 God. As God the Father, or as God the Son? If as the Son, why do they
 deny that the Son of God is God? If as the Father, why do they not
 follow those who appear to maintain blasphemies of that kind? unless
 because in this contest against them concerning the truth, this is in
 the meantime sufficient for us, that, being convinced in any kind of
 way, they should confess Christ to be God, seeing they have even wished
 to deny that He is God. He says by Habakkuk the prophet: "God shall
 come from the south, and the Holy One from the dark and dense
 mountain." [5093] Whom do they wish to represent as coming from the
 south? If they say that it is the Almighty God the Father, then God the
 Father comes from a place, from which place, moreover, He is thus
 excluded, and He is bounded within the straitnesses of some abode; and
 thus by such as these, as we have said, the sacrilegious heresy of
 Sabellius is embodied. Since Christ is believed to be not the Son, but
 the Father; since by them He is asserted to be in strictness a bare
 man, in a new manner, by those, again, Christ is proved to be God the
 Father Almighty. But if in Bethlehem, the region of which local
 division looks towards the southern portion of heaven, Christ is born,
 who by the Scriptures is also said to be God, this God is rightly
 described as coming from the south, because He was foreseen as about to
 come from Bethlehem.  Let them, then, choose of the two alternatives,
 the one that they prefer, that He who came from the south is the Son,
 or the Father; for God is said to be about to come from the south. If
 the Son, why do they shrink from calling Him Christ and God? For the
 Scripture says that God shall come. If the Father, why do they shrink
 from being associated with the boldness of Sabellius, who says that
 Christ is the Father? unless because, whether they call Him Father or
 Son, from his heresy, however unwillingly, they must needs withdraw if
 they are accustomed to say that Christ is merely man; when compelled by
 the facts themselves, they are on the eve of exalting Him as God,
 whether in wishing to call Him Father or in wishing to call Him Son.

 [5089] Hos. i. 7.

 [5090] Isa. vii. 14.

 [5091] Matt. xxviii. 20.

 [5092] Isa. xxxv. 3, etc.

 [5093] Heb. iii. 3. [See English margin, and Robinson, i. p. 552.]

 Chapter XIII.  Argument.--That the Same Truth is Proved from the Sacred
 Writings of the New Covenant.

 And thus also John, describing the nativity of Christ, says: "The Word
 was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we saw His glory, the glory as
 of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth." [5094]
 For, moreover, "His name is called the Word of God," [5095] and not
 without reason. "My heart has emitted a good word;" [5096] which word
 He subsequently calls by the name of the King inferentially, "I will
 tell my works to the King." [5097] For "by Him were made all the works,
 and without Him was nothing made." [5098] "Whether," says the
 apostle, "they be thrones or dominations, or powers, or mights, visible
 things and invisible, all things subsist by Him." [5099] Moreover, this
 is that word which came unto His own, and His own received Him not. For
 the world was made by Him, and the world knew Him not." [5100]
 Moreover, this Word "was in the beginning with God, and God was the
 Word." [5101] Who then can doubt, when in the last clause it is said,
 "The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us," that Christ, whose is
 the nativity, and because He was made flesh, is man; and because He is
 the Word of God, who can shrink from declaring without hesitation that
 He is God, especially when he considers the evangelical Scripture, that
 it has associated both of these substantial natures into one concord of
 the nativity of Christ? For He it is who "as a bridegroom goeth forth
 from his bride-chamber; He exulted as a giant to run his way. His going
 forth is from the end of the heaven, and His return unto the ends of
 it." [5102] Because, even to the highest, "not any one hath ascended
 into heaven save He who came down from heaven, the Son of man who is in
 heaven." [5103] Repeating this same thing, He says: "Father, glorify me
 with that glory wherewith I was with Thee before the world was." [5104]
 And if this Word came down from heaven as a bridegroom to the flesh,
 that by the assumption of flesh He might ascend thither as the Son of
 man, whence the Son of God had descended as the Word, reasonably, while
 by the mutual connection both flesh wears the Word of God, and the Son
 of God assumes the frailty of the flesh; when the flesh being espoused
 ascending thither, whence without the flesh it had descended, it at
 length receives that glory which in being shown to have had before the
 foundation of the world, it is most manifestly proved to be God. And,
 nevertheless, while the world itself is said to have been founded after
 Him, it is found to have been created by Him; by that very divinity in
 Him whereby the world was made, both His glory and His authority are
 proved.  Moreover, if, whereas it is the property of none but God to
 know the secrets of the heart, Christ beholds the secrets of the heart;
 and if, whereas it belongs to none but God to remit sins, the same
 Christ remits sins; and if, whereas it is the portion of no man to come
 from heaven, He descended by coming from heaven; and if, whereas this
 word can be true of no man, "I and the Father are one," [5105] Christ
 alone declared this word out of the consciousness of His divinity; and
 if, finally, the Apostle Thomas, instructed in all the proofs and
 conditions of Christ's divinity, says in reply to Christ, "My Lord and
 my God;" [5106] and if, besides, the Apostle Paul says, "Whose are the
 fathers, and of whom Christ came according to the flesh, who is over
 all, God blessed for evermore," [5107] writing in his epistles; and if
 the same apostle declares that he was ordained "an apostle not by men,
 nor of man, but by Jesus Christ;" [5108] and if the same contends that
 he learned the Gospel not from men or by man, but received it from
 Jesus Christ, reasonably Christ is God. Therefore, in this respect, one
 of two things must needs be established. For since it is evident that
 all things were made by Christ, He is either before all things, since
 all things were by Him, and so He is justly God; or because He is man
 He is subsequent to all things, and justly nothing was made by Him. But
 we cannot say that nothing was made by Him, when we observe it written
 that all things were made by Him. He is not therefore subsequent to all
 things; that is, He is not man only, who is subsequent to all things,
 but God also, since God is prior to all things. For He is before all
 things, because all things are by Him, while if He were only man,
 nothing would be by Him; or if all things were by Him, He would not be
 man only, because if He were only man, all things would not be by Him;
 nay, nothing would be by Him. What, then, do they reply? That nothing
 is by Him, so that He is man only? How then are all things by Him?
 Therefore He is not man only, but God also, since all things are by
 Him; so that we reasonably ought to understand that Christ is not man
 only, who is subsequent to all things, but God also, since by Him all
 things were made. For how can you say that He is man only, when you see
 Him also in the flesh, unless because when both aspects are considered,
 both truths are rightly believed?

 [5094] John i. 13. [For Sabellius, see p. 128, supra.]

 [5095] Rev. xix. 13.

 [5096] Ps. xlv. 1.

 [5097] Ps. xlv. 1.

 [5098] John i. 3.

 [5099] Col. i. 16.

 [5100] John i. 10, 11.

 [5101] John i. 1.

 [5102] Ps. xix. 6, 7.

 [5103] John iii. 13.

 [5104] John xvii. 5. [Note this exposition.]

 [5105] John x. 30.

 [5106] John xx. 28.

 [5107] Rom. ix. 5.

 [5108] Gal. i. 1 and 12

 Chapter XIV. Argument.--The Author Prosecutes the Same Argument.

 And yet the heretic still shrinks from urging that Christ is God, whom
 he perceives to be proved God by so many words as well as facts. If
 Christ is only man, how, when He came into this world, did He come unto
 His own, since a man could have made no world? If Christ was only man,
 how is the world said to have been made by Him, when the world was not
 by man, but man was ordained after the world? If Christ was only man,
 how was it that Christ was not only of the seed of David; but He was
 the Word made flesh and dwelt among us? For although the Protoplast was
 not born of seed, yet neither was the Protoplast formed of the
 conjunction of the Word and the flesh. For He is not the Word made
 flesh, nor dwelt in us. If Christ was only man, how does He "who cometh
 from heaven testify what He hath seen and heard," [5109] when it is
 plain that man cannot come from heaven, because he cannot be born
 there? If Christ be only man, how are "visible things and invisible,
 thrones, powers, and dominions," said to be created by Him and in Him;
 when the heavenly powers could not have been made by man, since they
 must needs have been prior to man? If Christ is only man, how is He
 present wherever He is called upon; when it is not the nature of man,
 but of God, that it can be present in every place? If Christ is only
 man, why is a man invoked in prayers as a Mediator, when the invocation
 of a man to afford salvation is condemned as ineffectual? If Christ is
 only man, why is hope rested upon Him, when hope in man is declared to
 be accursed? If Christ is only man, why may not Christ be denied
 without destruction of the soul, when it is said that a sin committed
 against man may be forgiven? If Christ is only man, how comes John the
 Baptist to testify and say, "He who cometh after me has become before
 me, because He was prior to me;" [5110] when, if Christ were only man,
 being born after John, He could not be before John, unless because He
 preceded him, in that He is God? If Christ is only man, how is it that
 "what things the Father doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise,"
 [5111] when man cannot do works like to the heavenly operations of God?
 If Christ is only man, how is it that "even as the Father hath life in
 Himself, so hath He given to the Son to have life in Himself," [5112]
 when man cannot have life in him after the example of God the Father,
 because he is not glorious in eternity, but made with the materials of
 mortality? If Christ is only man, how does He say, "I am the bread of
 eternal life which came down from heaven," [5113] when man can neither
 be the bread of life, he himself being mortal, nor could he have come
 down from heaven, since no perishable material is established in
 heaven? If Christ is only man, how does He say that "no man hath seen
 God at any time, save He which is of God; He hath seen God?" [5114]
 Because if Christ is only man, He could not see God, because no man has
 seen God; but if, being of God, He has seen God, He wishes it to be
 understood that He is more than man, in that He has seen God. If Christ
 is only man, why does He say, "What if ye shall see the Son of man
 ascending thither where He was before?" [5115] But He ascended into
 heaven, therefore He was there, in that He returned thither where He
 was before. But if He was sent from heaven by the Father, He certainly
 is not man only; for man, as we have said, could not come from heaven.
 Therefore as man He was not there before, but ascended thither where He
 was not. But the Word of God descended which was there,--the Word of
 God, I say, and God by whom all things were made, and without whom
 nothing was made. It was not therefore man that thus came thence from
 heaven, but the Word of God; that is, God descended thence.

 [5109] John iii. 31.

 [5110] John i. 15.

 [5111] John v. 19.

 [5112] John v. 26.

 [5113] John vi. 51.

 [5114] John vi. 46.

 [5115] John vi. 62.

 Chapter XV. [5116] Argument.--Again He Proves from the Gospel that
 Christ is God.

 If Christ is only man, how is it that He says, "Though I bear record of
 myself, yet my record is true:  because I know whence I came, and
 whither I go; ye know not whence I came, and whither I go. Ye judge
 after the flesh?" [5117] Behold, also He says, that He shall return
 thither whence He bears witness that He came before, as being sent,--to
 wit, from heaven. He came down therefore from whence He came, in the
 same manner as He goes thither from whence He descended. Whence if
 Christ were only man, He would not have come thence, and therefore
 would not depart thither, because He would not have come thence.
 Moreover, by coming thence, whence as man He could not have come, He
 shows Himself to have come as God. For the Jews, ignorant and untaught
 in the matter of this very descent of His, made these heretics their
 successors, seeing that to them it is said, "Ye know not whence I come,
 and whither I go: ye judge after the flesh." As much they as the Jews,
 holding that the carnal birth of Christ was the only one, believed that
 Christ was nothing else than man; not considering this point, that as
 man could not come from heaven, so as that he might return thither, He
 who descended thence must be God, seeing that man could not come
 thence. If Christ is only man, how does He say, "Ye are from below, I
 am from above; ye are of this world, I am not of this world?" [5118]
 But therefore if every man is of this world, and Christ is for that
 reason in this world, is He only man? God forbid! But consider what He
 says: "I am not of this world." Does He then speak falsely when He says
 "of this world," if He is only man? Or if He does not speak falsely, He
 is not of this world; He is therefore not man only, because He is not
 of this world. But that it should not be a secret who He was, He
 declared whence He was:  "I," said He, "am from above," that is, from
 heaven, whence man cannot come, for he was not made in heaven. He is
 God, therefore, who is from above, and therefore He is not of this
 world; although, moreover, in a certain manner He is of this world:
 wherefore Christ is not God only, but man also. As reasonably in the
 way in which He is not of this world according to the divinity of the
 Word, so He is of this world according to the frailty of the body that
 He has taken upon Him. For man is joined with God, and God is linked
 with man. But on that account this Christ here laid more stress on the
 one aspect of His sole divinity, because the Jewish blindness
 contemplated in Christ the aspect alone of the flesh; and thence in the
 present passage He passed over in silence the frailty of the body,
 which is of the world, and spoke of His divinity alone, which is not of
 the world: so that in proportion as they had inclined to believe Him to
 be only man, in that proportion Christ might draw them to consider His
 divinity, so as to believe Him to be God, desirous to overcome their
 incredulity concerning His divinity by omitting in the meantime any
 mention of His human condition, and by setting before them His divinity
 alone. If Christ is man only, how does He say, "I proceeded forth and
 came from God," [5119] when it is evident that man was made by God, and
 did not proceed forth from Him? But in the way in which as man He
 proceeded not from God, thus the Word of God proceeded, of whom it is
 said, "My heart hath uttered forth a good Word;" [5120] which, because
 it is from God, is with reason also with God. And this, too, since it
 was not uttered without effect, reasonably makes all things: "For all
 things were made by Him, and without Him was nothing made." [5121] But
 this Word whereby all things were made (is God). "And God," says he,
 "was the Word." [5122] Therefore God proceeded from God, in that the
 Word which proceeded is God, who proceeded forth from God. If Christ is
 only man, how does He say, "If any man shall keep my word, he shall not
 see death for ever?" [5123] Not to see death for ever! what is this but
 immortality? But immortality is the associate of divinity, because both
 the divinity is immortal, and immortality is the fruit of divinity. For
 every man is mortal; and immortality cannot be from that which is
 mortal.  Therefore from Christ, as a mortal man, immortality cannot
 arise.  "But," says He, "whosoever keepeth my word, shall not see death
 for ever;" therefore the word of Christ affords immortality, and by
 immortality affords divinity. But although it is not possible to
 maintain that one who is himself mortal can make another immortal, yet
 this word of Christ not only sets forth, but affords immortality:
 certainly He is not man only who gives immortality, which if He were
 only man He could not give; but by giving divinity by immortality, He
 proves Himself to be God by offering divinity, which if He were not God
 He could not give. If Christ was only man, how did He say, "Before
 Abraham was, I Am?" [5124] For no man can be before Him from whom he
 himself is; nor can it be that any one should have been prior to him of
 whom he himself has taken his origin. And yet Christ, although He is
 born of Abraham, says that He is before Abraham. Either, therefore, He
 says what is not true, and deceives, if He was not before Abraham,
 seeing that He was of Abraham; or He does not deceive, if He is also
 God, and was before Abraham. And if this were not so, it follows that,
 being of Abraham, He could not be before Abraham. If Christ was only
 man, how does He say, "And I know them, and my sheep follow me; and I
 give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish?" [5125] And
 yet, since every man is bound by the laws of mortality, and therefore
 is unable to keep himself for ever, much more will he be unable to keep
 another for ever. But Christ promises to give salvation for ever, which
 if He does not give, He is a deceiver; if He gives, He is God. But He
 does not deceive, for He gives what He promises. Therefore He is God
 who proffers eternal salvation, which man, being unable to keep himself
 for ever, cannot be able to give to another. If Christ is only man,
 what is that which He says, "I and the Father are one?" [5126] For how
 can it be that "I and the Father are one," if He is not both God and
 the Son?--who may therefore be called one, seeing that He is of
 Himself, being both His Son, and being born of Him, being declared to
 have proceeded from Him, by which He is also God; which when the Jews
 thought to be hateful, and believed to be blasphemous, for that He had
 shown Himself in these discourses to be God, and therefore rushed at
 once to stoning, and set to work passionately to hurl stones, He
 strongly refuted His adversaries by the example and witness of the
 Scriptures. "If," said He, "He called them gods to whom the words of
 God were given, and the Scriptures cannot be broken, ye say of Him whom
 the Father sanctified, and sent into this world, Thou blasphemest,
 because I said, I am the Son of God." [5127] By which words He did not
 deny Himself to be God, but rather He confirmed the assertion that He
 was God. For because, undoubtedly, they are said to be gods unto whom
 the words of God were given, much more is He God who is found to be
 superior to all these. And nevertheless He refuted the calumny of
 blasphemy in a fitting manner with lawful tact. [5128] For He wishes
 that He should be thus understood to be God, as the Son of God, and He
 would not wish to be understood to be the Father Himself.  Thus He said
 that He was sent, and showed them that He had manifested many good
 works from the Father; whence He desired that He should not be
 understood to be the Father, but the Son. And in the latter portion of
 His defence He made mention of the Son, not the Father, when He said,
 "Ye say, Thou blasphemest, because I said, I am the Son of God." Thus,
 as far as pertains to the guilt of blasphemy, He calls Himself the Son,
 not the Father; but as pertaining to His divinity, by saying, "I and
 the Father are one," He proved that He was the Son of God. He is God,
 therefore, but God in such a manner as to be the Son, not the Father.

 [5116] According to Pamelius, ch. xxiii.

 [5117] John viii. 14, 15.

 [5118] John viii. 23.

 [5119] John viii. 42.

 [5120] Ps. xlv. 1.

 [5121] John i. 3.

 [5122] John i. 1.

 [5123] John viii. 51.

 [5124] John viii. 58.

 [5125] John x. 27, 28.

 [5126] John x. 30.

 [5127] John x. 35, 36.

 [5128] "Dispositione," scil. oikonomia .--Jackson.

 Chapter XVI. [5129] Argument.--Again from the Gospel He Proves Christ
 to Be God.

 If Christ was only man, how is it that He Himself says, "And every one
 that believeth in me shall not die for evermore?" [5130] And yet he who
 believes in man by himself alone is called accursed; but he who
 believes on Christ is not accursed, but is said not to die for
 evermore. Whence, if on the one hand He is man only, as the heretics
 will have it, how shall not anybody who believes in Him die eternally,
 since he who trusts in man is held to be accursed? Or on the other, if
 he is not accursed, but rather, as it is read, destined for the
 attainment of everlasting life, Christ is not man only, but God also,
 in whom he who believes both lays aside all risk of curse, and attains
 to the fruit of righteousness. If Christ was only man, how does He say
 that the Paraclete "shall take of His, those things which He shall
 declare?" [5131] For neither does the Paraclete receive anything from
 man, but the Paraclete offers knowledge to man; nor does the Paraclete
 learn things future from man, but instructs man concerning futurity.
 Therefore either the Paraclete has not received from Christ, as man,
 what He should declare, since man could give nothing to the Paraclete,
 seeing that from Him man himself ought to receive, and Christ in the
 present instance is both mistaken and deceives, in saying that the
 Paraclete shall receive from Him, being a man, the things which He may
 declare; or He does not deceive us,--as in fact He does not,--and the
 Paraclete has received from Christ what He may declare. But if He has
 received from Christ what He may declare to us, Christ is greater than
 the Paraclete, because the Paraclete would not receive from Christ
 unless He were less than Christ. But the Paraclete being less than
 Christ, moreover, by this very fact proves Christ to be God, from whom
 He has received what He declares: so that the testimony of Christ's
 divinity is immense, in the Paraclete being found to be in this economy
 less than Christ, and taking from Him what He gives to others; seeing
 that if Christ were only man, Christ would receive from the Paraclete
 what He should say, not the Paraclete receive from Christ what He
 should declare. If Christ was only man, wherefore did He lay down for
 us such a rule of believing as that in which He said, "And this is life
 eternal, that they should know Thee, the only and true God, and Jesus
 Christ, whom Thou hast sent?" [5132] Had He not wished that He also
 should be understood to be God, why did He add, "And Jesus Christ, whom
 Thou hast sent," except because He wished to be received as God also?
 Because if He had not wished to be understood to be God, He would have
 added, "And the man Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast sent;" but, in fact,
 He neither added this, nor did Christ deliver Himself to us as man
 only, but associated Himself with God, as He wished to be understood by
 this conjunction to be God also, as He is. We must therefore believe,
 according to the rule prescribed, [5133] on the Lord, the one true God,
 and consequently on Him whom He has sent, Jesus Christ, who by no
 means, as we have said, would have linked Himself to the Father had He
 not wished to be understood to be God also: for He would have separated
 Himself from Him had He not wished to be understood to be God. He would
 have placed Himself among men only, had He known Himself to be only
 man; nor would He have linked Himself with God had He not known Himself
 to be God also. But in this case He is silent about His being man,
 because no one doubts His being man, and with reason links Himself to
 God, that He might establish the formula of His divinity [5134] for
 those who should believe. If Christ was only man, how does He say, "And
 now glorify me with the glory which I had with Thee before the world
 was?" [5135] If, before the world was, He had glory with God, and
 maintained His glory with the Father, He existed before the world, for
 He would not have had the glory unless He Himself had existed before,
 so as to be able to keep the glory.  For no one could possess anything,
 unless he himself should first be in existence to keep anything. But
 now Christ has the glory before the foundation of the world; therefore
 He Himself was before the foundation of the world. For unless He were
 before the foundation of the world, He could not have glory before the
 foundation of the world, since He Himself was not in existence. But
 indeed man could not have glory before the foundation of the world,
 seeing that he was after the world; but Christ had--therefore He was
 before the world. Therefore He was not man only, seeing that He was
 before the world. He is therefore God, because He was before the world,
 and held His glory before the world. Neither let this be explained by
 predestination, since this is not so expressed, or let them add this
 who think so, but woe is denounced to them who add to, even as to those
 who take away from, that which is written.  Therefore that may not be
 said, which may not be added. And thus, predestination being set aside,
 seeing it is not so laid down, Christ was in substance before the
 foundation of the world. For He is "the Word by which all things were
 made, and without which nothing was made." Because even if He is said
 to be glorious in predestination, and that this predestination was
 before the foundation of the world, let order be maintained, and before
 Him a considerable number of men was destined to glory. For in respect
 of that destination, Christ will be perceived to be less than others if
 He is designated subsequent to them. For if this glory was in
 predestination, Christ received that predestination to glory last of
 all; for prior to Him Adam will be seen to have been predestinated, and
 Abel, and Enoch, and Noah, and Abraham, and many others. For since with
 God the order of all, both persons and things, is arranged, many will
 be said to have been predestinated before this predestination of Christ
 to glory. And on these terms Christ is discovered to be inferior to
 other men, although He is really found to be better and greater, and
 more ancient than the angels themselves. Either, then, let all these
 things be set on one side, that Christ's divinity may be destroyed; or
 if these things cannot be set aside, let His proper divinity be
 attributed to Christ by the heretics.

 [5129] According to Pamelius, ch. xxiv.

 [5130] John xi. 26.

 [5131] John xvi. 14.

 [5132] John xvii. 3.

 [5133] [That is, "the prescribed rule" of our Catholic orthodoxy
 reflects the formula of our Lord's testimony concerning Himself. Here
 is a reference to testimony of the early creeds and canons.]

 [5134] [That is, "the prescribed rule" of our Catholic orthodoxy
 reflects the formula of our Lord's testimony concerning Himself. Here
 is a reference to testimony of the early creeds and canons.]

 [5135] John xvii. 5.

 Chapter XVII. [5136] Argument.--It Is, Moreover, Proved by Moses in
 the Beginning of the Holy Scriptures.

 What if Moses pursues this same rule of truth, and delivers to us in
 the beginning of his sacred writings, this principle by which we may
 learn that all things were created and founded by the Son of God, that
 is, by the Word of God? For He says the same that John and the rest
 say; nay, both John and the others are perceived to have received from
 Him what they say. For if John says, "All things were made by Him, and
 without Him was nothing made," [5137] the prophet David too says, "I
 tell my works to the King." [5138] Moses, moreover, introduces God
 commanding that there should be light at the first, that the heaven
 should be established, that the waters should be gathered into one
 place, that the dry land should appear, that the fruit should be
 brought forth according to its seed, that the animals should be
 produced, that lights should be established in heaven, and stars. He
 shows that none other was then present to God--by whom these works were
 commanded that they should be made--than He by whom all things were
 made, and without whom nothing was made.  And if He is the Word of
 God--"for my heart has uttered forth a good Word" [5139] --He shows
 that in the beginning the Word was, and that this Word was with the
 Father, and besides that the Word was God, and that all things were
 made by Him. Moreover, this "Word was made flesh and dwelt among us,"
 [5140] --to wit, Christ the Son of God; whom both on receiving
 subsequently as man according to the flesh, and seeing before the
 foundation of the world to be the Word of God, and God, we reasonably,
 according to the instruction of the Old and New Testament, believe and
 hold to be as well God as man, Christ Jesus. What if the same Moses
 introduces God saying, "Let us make man after our image and likeness;"
 [5141] and below, "And God made man; in the image of God made He him,
 male and female made He them?" [5142] If, as we have already shown, it
 is the Son of God by whom all things were made, certainly it was the
 Son of God by whom also man was ordained, on whose account all things
 were made. Moreover, when God commands that man should be made, He is
 said to be God who makes man; but the Son of God makes man, that is to
 say, the Word of God, "by whom all things were made, and without whom
 nothing was made." And this Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us:
 therefore Christ is God; therefore man was made by Christ as by the Son
 of God. But God made man in the image of God; He is therefore God who
 made man in the image of God; therefore Christ is God: so that with
 reason neither does the testimony of the Old Testament waver concerning
 the person of Christ, being supported by the manifestation of the New
 Testament; nor is the power of the New Testament detracted from, while
 its truth is resting on the roots of the same Old Testament. Whence
 they who presume Christ the Son of God and man to be only man, and not
 God also, do so in opposition to both Old and New Testaments, in that
 they corrupt the authority and the truth both of the Old and New
 Testaments. What if the same Moses everywhere introduces God the Father
 infinite and without end, not as being enclosed in any place, but as
 one who includes every place; nor as one who is in a place, but rather
 one in whom every place is, containing all things and embracing all
 things, so that with reason He can neither descend nor ascend, because
 He Himself both contains and fills all things, and yet nevertheless
 introduces God descending to consider the tower which the sons of men
 were building, asking and saying, "Come;" and then, "Let us go down and
 there confound their tongues, that each one may not understand the
 words of his neighbour." [5143] Whom do they pretend here to have been
 the God who descended to that tower, and asking to visit those men at
 that time? God the Father? Then thus He is enclosed in a place; and how
 does He embrace all things? Or does He say that it is an angel
 descending with angels, and saying, "Come;" and subsequently, "Let us
 go down and there confound their tongues?" And yet in Deuteronomy we
 observe that God told these things, and that God said, where it is
 written, "When He scattered abroad the children of Adam, He determined
 the bounds of the nations according to the number of the angels of
 God." [5144] Neither, therefore, did the Father descend, as the
 subject itself indicates; nor did an angel command these things, as the
 fact shows. Then it remains that He must have descended, of whom the
 Apostle Paul says, "He who descended is the same who ascended above all
 the heavens, that He might fill all things," [5145] that is, the Son of
 God, the Word of God. But the Word of God was made flesh, and dwelt
 among us. This must be Christ. Therefore Christ must be declared to be
 God.

 [5136] According to Pamelius, ch. xxv.

 [5137] John i. 3.

 [5138] Ps. xlv. 1.

 [5139] Ps. xlv. 1. [As understood by the Father passim. See Justin,
 vol. i. p. 213; Theophilus, ii. 98; Tertullian, iv. 365; Origen, iv.
 352, 421; and Cyprian, v. p. 516, supra.]

 [5140] John i. 14.

 [5141] Gen. i. 26.

 [5142] Gen. i. 27.

 [5143] Gen. xi. 7.

 [5144] Deut. xxxii. 8. [estesen oria ethnon kata arithmon allelon
 Theou, Sept.]

 [5145] Eph. iv. 10.

 Chapter XVIII. [5146] Argument.--Moreover Also, from the Fact that He
 Who Was Seen of Abraham is Called God; Which Cannot Be Understood of
 the Father, Whom No Man Hath Seen at Any Time; But of the Son in the
 Likeness of an Angel.

 Behold, the same Moses tells us in another place that "God was seen of
 Abraham." [5147] And yet the same Moses hears from God, that "no man
 can see God and live." [5148] If God cannot be seen, how was God seen?
 Or if He was seen, how is it that He cannot be seen? For John also
 says, "No man hath seen God at any time;" [5149] and the Apostle Paul,
 "Whom no man hath seen, nor can see." [5150] But certainly the
 Scripture does not lie; therefore, truly, God was seen. Whence it may
 be understood that it was not the Father who was seen, seeing that He
 never was seen; but the Son, who has both been accustomed to descend,
 and to be seen because He has descended. For He is the image of the
 invisible God, as the imperfection and frailty of the human condition
 was accustomed sometimes even then to see God the Father in the image
 of God, that is, in the Son of God. For gradually and by progression
 human frailty was to be strengthened by the image to that glory of
 being able one day to see God the Father. For the things that are great
 are dangerous if they are sudden. For even the sudden light of the sun
 after darkness, with its too great splendour, will not make manifest
 the light of day to unaccustomed eyes, but will rather strike them with
 blindness.

 And lest this should occur to the injury of human eyes, the darkness is
 broken up and scattered by degrees; and the rising of that luminary,
 mounting by small and unperceived increments, gently accustoms men's
 eyes to bear its full orb by the gentle increase of its rays. Thus,
 therefore, Christ also--that is, the image of God, and the Son of
 God--is looked upon by men, inasmuch as He could be seen. And thus the
 weakness and imperfection of the human destiny is nourished, led up,
 and educated by Him; so that, being accustomed to look upon the Son, it
 may one day be able to see God the Father Himself also as He is, that
 it may not be stricken by His sudden and intolerable brightness, and be
 hindered from being able to see God the Father, whom it has always
 desired. [5151] Wherefore it is the Son who is seen; but the Son of God
 is the Word of God:  and the Word of God was made flesh, and dwelt
 among us; and this is Christ. What in the world is the reason that we
 should hesitate to call Him God, who in so many ways is acknowledged to
 be proved God? And if, moreover, the angel meets with Hagar, Sarah's
 maid, driven from her home as well as turned away, near the fountain of
 water in the way to Shur; asks and learns the reason of her flight, and
 after that offers her advice that she should humble herself; and,
 moreover, gives her the hope of the name of mother, and pledges and
 promises that from her womb there should be a numerous seed, and that
 she should have Ishmael to be born from her; and with other things
 unfolds the place of his habitation, and describes his mode of life;
 yet Scripture sets forth this angel as both Lord and God--for He would
 not have promised the blessing of seed unless the angel had also been
 God. Let them ask what the heretics can make of this present passage.
 Was that the Father that was seen by Hagar or not?  For He is declared
 to be God. But far be it from us to call God the Father an angel, lest
 He should be subordinate to another whose angel He would be. But they
 will say that it was an angel.  How then shall He be God if He was an
 angel? Since this name is nowhere conceded to angels, except that on
 either side the truth compels us into this opinion, that we ought to
 understand it to have been God the Son, who, because He is of God, is
 rightly called God, because He is the Son of God. But, because He is
 subjected [5152] to the Father, and the Announcer of the Father's will,
 He is declared to be the Angel of Great Counsel. [5153] Therefore,
 although this passage neither is suited to the person of the Father,
 lest He should be called an angel, nor to the person of an angel, lest
 he should be called God; yet it is suited to the person of Christ that
 He should be both God because He is the Son of God, and should be an
 angel because He is the Announcer of the Father's mind. And the
 heretics ought to understand that they are setting themselves against
 the Scriptures, in that, while they say that they believe Christ to
 have been also an angel, they are unwilling to declare Him to have been
 also God, when they read in the Old Testament that He often came to
 visit the human race. To this, moreover, Moses added the instance of
 God seen of Abraham at the oak of Mamre, when he was sitting at the
 opening of his tent at noon-day. And nevertheless, although he had
 beheld three men, note that he called one of them Lord; and when he had
 washed their feet, he offers them bread baked on the ashes, with butter
 and abundance of milk itself, and urges them that, being detained as
 guests, they should eat. And after this he hears also that he should be
 a father, and learns that Sarah his wife should bring forth a son by
 him; and acknowledges concerning the destruction of the people of
 Sodom, what they deserve to suffer; and learns that God had come down
 on account of the cry of Sodom. In which place, if they will have it
 that the Father was seen at that time to have been received with
 hospitality in company with two angels, the heretics have believed the
 Father to be visible. But if an angel, although of the three angels one
 is called Lord, why, although it is not usual, is an angel called God?
 Unless because, in order that His proper invisibility may be restored
 to the Father, and the proper inferiority [5154] be remitted to the
 angel, it was only God the Son, who also is God, who was seen by
 Abraham, and was believed to have been received with hospitality. For
 He anticipated sacramentally what He was hereafter to become. He was
 made a guest of Abraham, being about to be among the sons of Abraham.
 And his children's feet, by way of proving what He was, He washed;
 returning in the children the claim of hospitality which formerly the
 Father had put out to interest to Him. Whence also, that there might be
 no doubt but that it was He who was the guest of Abraham on the
 destruction of the people of Sodom, it is declared: "Then the Lord
 rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrha fire and brimstone from the Lord
 out of heaven." [5155] For thus also said the prophet in the person of
 God: "I have overthrown you, as the Lord overturned Sodom and
 Gomorrha." [5156] Therefore the Lord overturned Sodom, that is, God
 overturned Sodom; but in the overturning of Sodom, the Lord rained fire
 from the Lord.  And this Lord was the God seen by Abraham; and this God
 was the guest of Abraham, certainly seen because He was also touched.
 But although the Father, being invisible, was assuredly not at that
 time seen, He who was accustomed to be touched and seen was seen and
 received to hospitality. But this the Son of God, "The Lord rained from
 the Lord upon Sodom and Gomorrha brimstone and fire." And this is the
 Word of God. And the Word of God was made flesh, and dwelt among us;
 and this is Christ. It was not the Father, then, who was a guest with
 Abraham, but Christ. Nor was it the Father who was seen then, but the
 Son; and Christ was seen. Rightly, therefore, Christ is both Lord and
 God, who was not otherwise seen by Abraham, except that as God the Word
 He was begotten of God the Father before Abraham himself. Moreover,
 says the Scripture, the same Angel and God visits and consoles the same
 Hagar when driven with her son from the dwelling of Abraham. For when
 in the desert she had exposed the infant, because the water had fallen
 short from the pitcher; and when the lad had cried out, and she had
 lifted up her weeping and lamentation, "God heard," says the Scripture,
 "the voice of the lad from the place where he was." [5157] Having told
 that it was God who heard the voice of the infant, it adds:  "And the
 angel of the Lord called Hagar herself out of heaven," saying that that
 was an angel [5158] whom it had called God, and pronouncing Him to be
 Lord whom it had set forth as an angel; which Angel and God moreover
 promises to Hagar herself greater consolations, in saying, "Fear not;
 for I have heard the voice of the lad from the place where he was.
 Arise, take up the lad, and hold him; for I will make of him a great
 nation." [5159] Why does this angel, if angel only, claim to himself
 this right of saying, I will make of him a great nation, since
 assuredly this kind of power belongs to God, and cannot belong to an
 angel? Whence also He is confirmed to be God, since He is able to do
 this; because, by way of proving this very point, it is immediately
 added by the Scripture: "And God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of
 running water; and she went and filled the bottle from the well, and
 gave to the lad: and God was with the lad." [5160] If, then, this God
 was with the Lord, who opened the eyes of Hagar that she might see the
 well of running water, and might draw the water on account of the
 urgent need of the lad's thirst, and this God who calls her from heaven
 is called an angel when, in previously hearing the voice of the lad
 crying, He was rather God; is not understood to be other than angel, in
 like manner as He was God also. And since this cannot be applicable or
 fitting to the Father, who is God only, but may be applicable to
 Christ, who is declared to be not only God, but angel also, [5161] it
 manifestly appears that it was not the Father who thus spoke to Hagar,
 but rather Christ, since He is God; and to Him also is applied the name
 of angel, since He became the "angel of great counsel." [5162] And He
 is the angel, in that He declares the bosom of the Father, as John sets
 forth. For if John himself says, that He Himself who sets forth the
 bosom of the Father, as the Word, became flesh in order to declare the
 bosom of the Father, assuredly Christ is not only man, but angel also;
 and not only angel, but He is shown by the Scriptures to be God also.
 And this is believed to be the case by us; so that, if we will not
 consent to apprehend that it was Christ who then spoke to Hagar, we
 must either make an angel God, or we must reckon God the Father
 Almighty among the angels. [5163]

 [5146] According to Pamelius, ch. xxvi.

 [5147] Gen. xii. 7.

 [5148] Ex. xxxiii. 20.

 [5149] 1 John iv. 12.

 [5150] 1 Tim. vi. 16.

 [5151] [This leading up and educating of humanity to "see God" is here
 admirably put. Heb. i. 3.]

 [5152] [De subordinatione, etc.: Bull, Defensio, etc., vol. v. pp. 767,
 685. The Nicene doctrine includes the subordination of the Son.]

 [5153] [Isa. ix. 6, according to the Seventy.  Ex. xxiii. 20. See Bull,
 Defensio, etc., vol. v. p. 30. Comp. Hippol., p. 225, supra; Novatian,
 p. 632, infra.]

 [5154] [De subordinatione, etc.: Bull, Defensio, etc., vol. v. pp. 767,
 685. The Nicene doctrine includes the subordination of the Son.]

 [5155] Gen. xix. 24.

 [5156] Amos iv. 11.

 [5157] Gen. xxi. 17, etc.

 [5158] [See note 2, p. 628, supra.]

 [5159] Gen. xxi. 18.

 [5160] Gen. xxi. 20.

 [5161] [See vol. i. p. 184.]

 [5162] Isa. ix. 6, LXX.

 [5163] [Among the apparitions are noted Gen. xxxii. 24; Ex. iii.; Num.
 xxii. 21; Josh. v. 13; 1 Kings xxviii. 11.]

 Chapter XIX. [5164] Argument.--That God Also Appeared to Jacob as an
 Angel; Namely, the Son of God.

 What if in another place also we read in like manner that God was
 described as an angel? For when, to his wives Leah and Rachel, Jacob
 complained of the injustice of their father, and when he told them that
 he desired now to go and return into his own land, he moreover
 interposed the authority of his dream; and at this time he says that
 the angel of God had said to him in a dream, "Jacob, Jacob. And I
 said," says he, "What is it? Lift up thine eyes, said He, and see, the
 he-goats and the rams leaping upon the sheep, and the she-goats are
 black and white, and many-coloured, and grizzled, and speckled: for I
 have seen all that Laban hath done to thee. I am God, who appeared to
 thee in the place of God, where thou anointedst for me there the
 standing stone, and there vowedst a vow unto me: now therefore arise,
 and go forth from this land, and go unto the land of thy nativity, and
 I will be with thee." [5165] If the Angel of God speaks thus to Jacob,
 and the Angel himself mentions and says, "I am God, who appeared unto
 thee in the house of God," we see without any hesitation that this is
 declared to be not only an angel, but God also; because He speaks of
 the vow directed to Himself by Jacob in the place of God, and He does
 not say, in my place. It is then the place of God, and He also is God.
 Moreover, it is written simply in the place of God, for it is not said
 in the place of the angel and God, but only of God; and He who promises
 those things is manifested to be both God and Angel, so that reasonably
 there must be a distinction between Him who is called God only, and Him
 who is declared to be not God simply, but Angel also. Whence if so
 great an authority cannot here be regarded as belonging to any other
 angel, that He should also avow Himself to be God, and should bear
 witness that a vow was made to Him, except to Christ alone, to whom not
 as angel only, but as to God, a vow can be vowed; it is manifest that
 it is not to be received as the Father, but as the Son, God and Angel.
 [5166] Moreover, if this is Christ, as it is, he is in terrible risk
 who says that Christ is either man or angel alone, withholding from Him
 the power of the divine name,--an authority which He has constantly
 received on the faith of the heavenly Scriptures, which continually say
 that He is both Angel and God. To all these things, moreover, is added
 this, that in like manner as the divine Scripture has frequently
 declared Him both Angel and God, so the same divine Scripture declares
 Him also both man and God, expressing thereby what He should be, and
 depicting even then in figure what He was to be in the truth of His
 substance. "For," it says, "Jacob remained alone; and there wrestled
 with him a man even till daybreak. And He saw that He did not prevail
 against him; and He touched the broad part of Jacob's thigh while He
 was wrestling with him and he with Him, and said to him, Let me go, for
 the morning has dawned. And he said, I will not let Thee go, except
 Thou bless me. And He said, What is thy name? And he said, Jacob. And
 He said to him, Thy name shall no longer be called Jacob, but Israel
 shall be thy name; because thou hast prevailed with God, and thou art
 powerful with men." [5167] And it adds, moreover: "And Jacob called the
 name of that place the Vision of God: for I have seen the Lord face to
 face, and my soul has been made safe. And the sun arose upon him.
 Afterwards he crossed over the Vision of God, but he halted upon his
 thigh." [5168] A man, it says, wrestled with Jacob. If this was a mere
 man, who is he? Whence is he? Wherefore does he contend and wrestle
 with Jacob? What had intervened? What had happened?  What was the cause
 of so great a dispute as that, and so great a struggle? Why, moreover,
 is Jacob, who is found to be strong enough to hold the man with whom he
 is wrestling, and asks for a blessing from Him whom he is holding,
 asserted to have asked therefore, except because this struggle was
 prefigured as that which should be between Christ and the sons of
 Jacob, which is said to be completed in the Gospel? For against this
 man Jacob's people struggled, in which struggle Jacob's people was
 found to be the more powerful, because against Christ it gained the
 victory of its iniquity: at which time, on account of the crime that it
 committed, hesitating and giving way, it began most sorely to halt in
 the walk of its own faith and salvation; and although it was found the
 stronger, in respect of the condemnation of Christ, it still needs His
 mercy, still needs His blessing. But, moreover, the man who wrestled
 with Jacob says, "Moreover, thy name shall no longer be called Jacob,
 but Israel shall be thy name;" and if Israel is the man who sees God,
 the Lord was beautifully showing that it was not only a man who was
 then wrestling with Jacob, but God also. Certainly Jacob saw God, with
 whom he wrestled, although he was holding the man in his own struggle.
 And in order that there might still be no hesitation, He Himself laid
 down the interpretation by saying, "Because thou hast prevailed with
 God, and art powerful with men." For which reason the same Jacob,
 perceiving already the force of the Mystery, and apprehending the
 authority of Him with whom he had wrestled, called the name of that
 place in which he had wrestled, the Vision of God. He, moreover,
 superadded the reason for his interpretation being offered of the
 Vision of God:  "For I have seen," said he, "God face to face, and my
 soul has been saved." Moreover, he saw God, with whom he wrestled as
 with a man; but still indeed he held the man as a conqueror, though as
 an inferior he asked a blessing as from God.  Thus he wrestled with God
 and with man; and thus truly was that struggle prefigured, and in the
 Gospel was fulfilled, between Christ and the people of Jacob, wherein,
 although the people had the mastery, yet it proved to be inferior by
 being shown to be guilty. Who will hesitate to acknowledge that Christ,
 in whom this type of a wrestling was fulfilled, was not man only, but
 God also, since even that very type of a wrestling seems to have proved
 Him man and God? And yet, even after this, the same divine Scripture
 justly does not cease to call the Angel God, and to pronounce God the
 Angel. For when this very Jacob was about to bless Manasseh and
 Ephraim, the sons of Joseph, with his hands placed across on the heads
 of the lads, he said, "The God which fed me from my youth even unto
 this day, the Angel who delivered me from all evils, bless these lads."
 [5169] Even to such a point does he affirm the same Being to be an
 Angel, whom he had called God, as in the end of his discourse, to
 express the person of whom he was speaking as one, when he said [5170]
 "bless these lads." For if he had meant the one to be understood as
 God, and the other as an angel, he would have comprised the two persons
 in the plural number; but now he defined the singular number of one
 person in the blessing, whence he meant it to be understood that the
 same person is God and Angel. But yet He cannot be received as God the
 Father; but as God and Angel, as Christ He can be received. And Him, as
 the author of this blessing, Jacob also signified by placing his hands
 crossed upon the lads, as if their father was Christ, and showing, from
 thus placing his hands, the figure and future form of the passion.
 [5171] Let no one, therefore, who does not shrink from speaking of
 Christ as an Angel, thus shrink from pronouncing Him God also, when he
 perceives that He Himself was invoked in the blessing of these lads, by
 the sacrament of the passion, intimated in the type of the crossed
 hands, as both God and Angel.

 [5164] According to Pamelius, ch. xxvii.

 [5165] Gen. xxxi. 11-13.

 [5166] [Eccles. v. 6. A striking text when compared with the "Angel of
 the Covenant" (Angelus Testamenti, Vulgate), Mal. iii. 1.]

 [5167] Gen. xxxii. 24-27. [Vol. iv. 390, this series.]

 [5168] Gen. xxxii. 30, 31.

 [5169] Gen. xlviii. 14, 15.

 [5170] Benedicat.

 [5171] [A very beautiful patristic idea of the dim vision of the cross
 to which the Fathers were admitted, but which they understood not, even
 when they predicted it. 1 Pet. x. 11.]

 Chapter XX. [5172] Argument.--It is Proved from the Scriptures that
 Christ Was Called an Angel. But Yet It is Shown from Other Parts of
 Holy Scripture that He is God Also.

 But if some heretic, obstinately struggling against the truth, should
 persist in all these instances either in understanding that Christ was
 properly an angel, or should contend that He must be so understood, he
 must in this respect also be subdued by the force of truth. For if,
 since all heavenly things, earthly things, and things under the earth,
 are subjected to Christ, even the angels themselves, with all other
 creatures, as many as are subjected to Christ, are called gods, [5173]
 rightly also Christ is God. And if any angel at all subjected to Christ
 can be called God, and this, if it be said, is also professed without
 blasphemy, certainly much more can this be fitting for Christ, Himself
 the Son of God, for Him to be pronounced God. For if an angel who is
 subjected to Christ is exalted as God, much more, and more
 consistently, shall Christ, to whom all angels are subjected, be said
 to be God. For it is not suitable to nature, that what is conceded to
 the lesser should be denied to the greater. Thus, if an angel be
 inferior to Christ, and yet an angel is called god, rather by
 consequence is Christ said to be God, who is discovered to be both
 greater and better, not than one, but than all angels. And if "God
 standeth in the assembly of the gods, and in the midst God
 distinguisheth between the gods," [5174] and Christ stood at various
 times in the synagogue, then Christ stood in the synagogue as
 God,--judging, to wit, between the gods, to whom He says, "How long do
 ye accept the persons of men?"  That is to say, consequently, charging
 the men of the synagogue with not practising just judgments. Further,
 if they who are reproved and blamed seem even for any reason to attain
 this name without blasphemy, that they should be called gods, assuredly
 much more shall He be esteemed God, who not only is said to have stood
 as God in the synagogue of the gods, but moreover is revealed by the
 same authority of the reading as distinguishing and judging between
 gods. But even if they who "fall like one of the princes" are still
 called gods, much rather shall He be said to be God, who not only does
 not fall like one of the princes, but even overcomes both the author
 and prince of wickedness himself. And what in the world is the reason,
 that although they say that this name was given even to Moses, since it
 is said, "I have made thee as a god to Pharaoh," [5175] it should be
 denied to Christ, who is declared to be ordained [5176] not to Pharaoh
 only, but to every creature, as both Lord and God? And in the former
 case indeed this name is given with reserve, in the latter lavishly; in
 the former by measure, in the latter above all kind of measure:  "For,"
 it is said, "the Father giveth not to the Son by measure, for the
 Father loveth the Son." [5177] In the former for the time, in the
 latter without reference to time; [5178] for He received the power of
 the divine name, both above all things and for all time. But if he who
 has received the power of one man, in respect to this limited power
 given him, still without hesitation attains that name of God, how much
 more shall He who has power over Moses himself as well be believed to
 have attained the authority of that name?

 [5172] According to Pamelius, ch. xv.

 [5173] [Ps. xcvii. 7; John x. 36; Hippol., p. 153, supra.]

 [5174] Ps. lxxxii. 1, 2, etc.

 [5175] Ex. vii. 1.

 [5176] [The full meaning of which only comes out in the Gospel and in 2
 Pet. i. 4. The lie of Gen. iii. 5, is made true in Christ.]

 [5177] John iii. 34, 35.

 [5178] [Rev. xi. 15.]

 Chapter XXI. [5179] Argument.--That the Same Divine Majesty is Again
 Confirmed in Christ by Other Scriptures.

 And indeed I could set forth the treatment of this subject by all
 heavenly Scriptures, and set in motion, so to speak, a perfect forest
 of texts concerning that manifestation of the divinity of Christ,
 except that I have not so much undertaken to speak against this special
 form of heresy, as to expound the rule of truth concerning the person
 of Christ. Although, however, I must hasten to other matters, I do not
 think that I must pass over this point, that in the Gospel the Lord
 declared, by way of signifying His majesty, saying, "Destroy this
 temple, and in three days I will build it up again." [5180] Or when, in
 another passage, and on another subject, He declares, "I have power to
 lay down my life, and again to take it up; for this commandment I have
 received of my Father." [5181] Now who is it who says that He can lay
 down His life, or can Himself recover His life again, because He has
 received it of His Father? Or who says that He can again resuscitate
 and rebuild the destroyed temple of His body, except because He is the
 Word who is from the Father, who is with the Father, "by whom all
 things were made, and without whom nothing was made;" [5182] the
 imitator [5183] of His Father's works and powers, "the image of the
 invisible God;" [5184] "who came down from heaven;" [5185] who
 testified what things he had seen and heard; who "came not to do His
 own will, but rather to do the will of the Father," [5186] by whom He
 had been sent for this very purpose, that being made the "Messenger of
 Great Counsel," [5187] He might unfold to us the laws of the heavenly
 mysteries; and who as the Word made flesh dwelt among us, of us this
 Christ is proved to be not man only, because He was the son of man, but
 also God, because He is the Son of God? And if by the apostle Christ is
 called "the first-born of every creature," [5188] how could He be the
 first-born of every creature, unless because according to His divinity
 the Word proceeded from the Father before every creature? And unless
 the heretics receive it thus, they will be constrained to show that
 Christ the man was the first-born of every creature; which they will
 not be able to do. Either, therefore, He is before every creature, that
 He may be the first-born of every creature, and He is not man only,
 because man is after every creature; or He is man only, and He is after
 every creature. And how is He the first-born of every creature, except
 because being that Word which is before every creature; and therefore,
 the first-born of every creature, He becomes flesh and dwells in us,
 that is, assumes that man's nature which is after every creature, and
 so dwells with him and in him, in us, that neither is humanity taken
 away from Christ, nor His divinity denied? For if He is only before
 every creature, humanity is taken away from Him; but if He is only man,
 the divinity which is before every creature is interfered with. Both of
 these, therefore, are leagued together in Christ, and both are
 conjoined, and both are linked with one another. And rightly, as there
 is in Him something which excels the creature, the agreement of the
 divinity and the humanity seems to be pledged in Him: for which reason
 He who is declared as made the "Mediator between God and man" [5189] is
 revealed to have associated in Himself God and man. And if the same
 apostle says of Christ, that "having put off the flesh, He spoiled
 powers, they being openly triumphed over in Himself," [5190] he
 certainly did not without a meaning propound that the flesh was put
 off, unless because he wished it to be understood that it was again put
 on also at the resurrection. Who, therefore, is He that thus put off
 and put on the flesh? Let the heretics seek out. For we know that the
 Word of God was invested with the substance of flesh, and that He again
 was divested of the same bodily material, which again He took up in the
 resurrection and resumed as a garment. And yet Christ could neither
 have been divested of nor invested with manhood, had He been only man:
 for man is never either deprived of nor invested with himself. For that
 must be something else, whatever it may be, which by any other is
 either taken away or put on. Whence, reasonably, it was the Word of God
 who put off the flesh, and again in the resurrection put it on, since
 He put it off because at His birth He had been invested with it.
 Therefore in Christ it is God who is invested, and moreover must be
 divested, because He who is invested must also likewise be He who is
 divested; whereas, as man, He is invested with and divested of, as it
 were, a certain tunic of the compacted body. [5191] And therefore by
 consequence He was, as we have said, the Word of God, who is revealed
 to be at one time invested, at another time divested of the flesh. For
 this, moreover, He before predicted in blessings: "He shall wash His
 garment in wine, and His clothing in the blood of the grape." [5192] If
 the garment in Christ be the flesh, and the clothing itself be the
 body, let it be asked who is He whose body is clothing, and garment
 flesh? For to us it is evident that the flesh is the garment, and the
 body the clothing of the Word; and He washed His bodily substance, and
 purified the material of the flesh in blood, that is, in wine, by His
 passion, in the human character that He had undertaken. Whence, if
 indeed He is washed, He is man, because the garment which is washed is
 the flesh; but He who washes is the Word of God, who, in order that He
 might wash the garment, was made the taker-up of the garment. Rightly,
 from that substance which is taken that it might be washed, He is
 revealed as a man, even as from the authority of the Word who washed it
 He is manifested to be God.

 [5179] According to Pamelius, ch. xvi.

 [5180] John ii. 19.

 [5181] John x. 18.

 [5182] John i. 3.

 [5183] [John v. 19. The infirmities of language are such that cunning
 men like Petavius can construct anti-Nicene doctrine out of Scripture
 itself; and the marvel is, that the Christian Fathers before the
 Council of Nicæa generally use such precision of language, although
 they lacked the synodical definitions.]

 [5184] Col. i. 15.

 [5185] John iii. 31, 32.

 [5186] John iv. 38.

 [5187] Isa. ix. 6.

 [5188] Col. i. 15. [But not a creature, for the apostle immediately
 subjoins that He is the Creator and final Cause of the universe.
 Moreover, the first-born here seems to mean the heir of all creation,
 for such is the logical force of the verse following. So, prototokeia
 (in the Seventy) = heirship. Gen. xxv. 31.]

 [5189] 1 Tim. ii. 5.

 [5190] Col. ii. 15.

 [5191] Perhaps the emendation homine instead of homo is right. "He puts
 on and puts off humanity, as if it were a kind of tunic for a compacted
 body."

 [5192] Gen. xlix. 11.

 Chapter XXII. [5193] Argument--That the Same Divine Majesty is in
 Christ, He Once More Asserts by Other Scriptures.

 But why, although we appear to hasten to another branch of the
 argument, should we pass over that passage in the apostle: "Who,
 although He was in the form of God, did not think it robbery that He
 should be equal with God; but emptied Himself, taking up the form of a
 servant, being made in the likeness of men; and found in fashion as a
 man, He humbled Himself, becoming obedient even unto death, even the
 death of the cross. Wherefore also God hath highly exalted Him, and
 hath given Him a name which is above every name; that in the name of
 Jesus every knee should be bent, of things in heaven, and things in
 earth, and things under the earth; and every tongue should confess that
 Jesus is Lord, in the glory of God the Father?" [5194] "Who, although
 He was in the form of God," he says.  If Christ had been only man, He
 would have been spoken of as in "the image" of God, not "in the form"
 of God. For we know that man was made after the image or likeness, not
 after the form, of God. Who then is that angel who, as we have said,
 was made in the form of God? But neither do we read of the form of God
 in angels, except because this one is chief and royal above all--the
 Son of God, the Word of God, the imitator of all His Father's works, in
 that He Himself worketh even as His Father. He is--as we have
 declared--in the form of God the Father. And He is reasonably affirmed
 to be in the form of God, in that He Himself, being above all things,
 and having the divine power over every creature, is also God after the
 example of the Father. Yet He obtained this from His own Father, that
 He should be both God of all and should be Lord, and be begotten and
 made known from Himself as God in the form of God the Father. He then,
 although He was in the form of God, thought it not robbery that He
 should be equal with God. For although He remembered that He was God
 from God the Father, He never either compared or associated Himself
 with God the Father, mindful that He was from His Father, and that He
 possessed that very thing that He is, because the Father had given it
 Him. [5195] Thence, finally, both before the assumption of the flesh,
 and moreover after the assumption of the body, besides, after the
 resurrection itself, He yielded all obedience to the Father, and still
 yields it as ever.  Whence it is proved that He thought that the claim
 of a certain divinity would be robbery, to wit, that of equalling
 Himself with God the Father; but, on the other hand, obedient and
 subject to all His rule and will, He even was contented to take on Him
 the form of a servant--that is, to become man; and the substance of
 flesh and body which, as it came to Him from the bondage of His
 forefathers' sins according to His manhood, He undertook by being born,
 at which time moreover He emptied Himself, in that He did not refuse to
 take upon Him the frailty incident to humanity. Because if He had been
 born man only, He would not have been emptied in respect of this; for
 man, being born, is increased, not emptied. For in beginning to be that
 which He could not possess, so long as He did not exist, as we have
 said, He is not emptied, but is rather increased and enriched. But if
 Christ is emptied in being born, in taking the form of a servant, how
 is He man only? Of whom it could more truly have been said that He was
 enriched, not emptied, at the time that He was born, except because the
 authority of the divine Word, reposing for awhile in taking upon itself
 humanity, and not exercising itself with its real strength, casts
 itself down, and puts itself off for the time, in bearing the humanity
 which it has undertaken? It empties itself in descending to injuries
 and reproaches, in bearing abominations, in experiencing things
 unworthy; and yet of this humility there is present at once an eminent
 reward. For He has "received a name which is above every name," which
 assuredly we understand to be none other than the name of God. For
 since it belongs to God alone to be above all things, it follows that
 the name which is that God's who is above all things, is above every
 name; which name by consequence is certainly His who, although He was
 "in the form of God, thought it not robbery for Him to be equal with
 God."  For neither, if Christ were not God, would every knee bend
 itself in His name, "of things in heaven, and things in earth, and
 things under the earth;" nor would things visible and invisible, even
 every creature of all things, be subjected or be placed under man, when
 they might remember that they were before man. Whence, since Christ is
 said to be in the form of God, and since it is shown that for His
 nativity according to the flesh He emptied Himself; and since it is
 declared that He received from the Father that name which is above
 every name; and since it is shown that in His name "every knee of
 things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth, bend
 and bow" themselves; and this very thing is asserted to be a
 furtherance of the glory of God the Father; consequently He is not man
 only, from the fact that He became obedient to the Father, even to
 death, yea, the death of the cross; but, moreover, from the
 proclamation by these higher matters of the divinity of Christ, Christ
 Jesus is shown to be Lord and God, which the heretics will not have.

 [5193] According to Pamelius, ch. xvii.

 [5194] Phil. ii. 6-11.

 [5195] [Not "a seipso Deus." See Bull, Defens., vol. v. p. 685.]

 Chapter XXIII. [5196] Argument.--And This is So Manifest, that Some
 Heretics Have Thought Him to Be God the Father, Others that He Was Only
 God Without the Flesh.

 In this place I may be permitted also to collect arguments from the
 side of other heretics. It is a substantial kind of proof which is
 gathered even from an adversary, so as to prove the truth even from the
 very enemies of truth. For it is so far manifest that He is declared in
 the Scriptures to be God, that many heretics, moved by the magnitude
 and truth of this divinity, exaggerating His honours above measure,
 have dared to announce or to think Him not the Son, but God the Father
 Himself. [5197] And this, although it is contrary to the truth of the
 Scriptures, is still a great and excellent argument for the divinity of
 Christ, who is so far God, except as Son of God, born of God, that very
 many heretics--as we have said--have so accepted Him as God, as to
 think that He must be pronounced not the Son, but the Father. Therefore
 let it be considered whether He is God or not, since His authority has
 so affected some, that, as we have already said above, they have
 thought Him God the Father Himself, and have confessed the divinity in
 Christ with such impetuosity and effusion--compelled to it by the
 manifest divinity in Christ--that they thought that He whom they read
 of as the Son, because they perceived Him to be God, must be the
 Father. Moreover, other heretics have so far embraced the manifest
 divinity of Christ, as to say that He was without flesh, and to
 withdraw from Him the whole humanity which He took upon Him, lest, by
 associating with Him a human nativity, as they conceived it, they
 should diminish in Him the power of the divine name. [5198] This,
 however, we do not approve; but we quote it as an argument to prove
 that Christ is God, to this extent, that some, taking away the manhood,
 have thought Him God only, and some have thought Him God the Father
 Himself; when reason and the proportion of the heavenly Scriptures show
 Christ to be God, but as the Son of God; and the Son of man, having
 been taken up, moreover by God, that He must be believed to be man
 also. Because if He came to man, that He might be Mediator of God and
 men, it behoved Him to be with man, and the Word to be made flesh, that
 in His own self He might link together the agreement of earthly things
 with heavenly things, by associating in Himself pledges of both
 natures, and uniting God to man and man to God; so that reasonably the
 Son of God might be made by the assumption of flesh the Son of man, and
 the Son of man by the reception of the Word of God the Son of God. This
 most profound and recondite mystery, destined before the worlds for the
 salvation of the human race, is found to be fulfilled in the Lord Jesus
 Christ, both God and man, that the human race might be placed within
 the reach of the enjoyment of eternal salvation.

 [5196] According to Pamelius, ch. xviii.

 [5197] [The Noetians, Hippol., p. 148, supra.]

 [5198] [Irenæus, vol. i. p. 527.]

 Chapter XXIV. [5199] Argument.--That These Have Therefore Erred, by
 Thinking that There Was No Difference Between the Son of God and the
 Son of Man; Because They Have Ill Understood the Scripture.

 But the material of that heretical error has arisen, as I judge, from
 this, that they think that there is no distinction between the Son of
 God and the Son of man; because if a distinction were made, Jesus
 Christ would easily be proved to be both man and God. For they will
 have it that the self-same that is man, the Son of man, appears also as
 the Son of God; that man and flesh and that same frail substance may be
 said to be also the Son of God Himself. Whence, since no distinction is
 discerned between the Son of man and the Son of God, but the Son of man
 Himself is asserted to be the Son of God, the same Christ and the Son
 of God is asserted to be man only; by which they strive to exclude,
 "The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us." [5200] "And ye shall
 call His name Emmanuel; which is, interpreted, God with us." [5201] For
 they propose and put forward what is told in the Gospel of Luke, whence
 they strive to maintain not what is the truth, but only what they want
 it to be: "The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and the power of the
 Highest shall overshadow thee; therefore also the Holy Thing which is
 born of thee shall be called the Son of God." [5202] If, then, say
 they, the angel of God says to Mary, "that Holy Thing which is born of
 thee," the substance of flesh and body is of Mary; but he has set forth
 that this substance, that is, that Holy Thing which is born of her, is
 the Son of God. Man, say they, himself, and that bodily flesh; that
 which is called holy, itself is the Son of God. That also when the
 Scripture says that "Holy Thing," we should understand thereby Christ
 the man, the Son of man; and when it places before us the Son of God,
 we ought to perceive, not man, but God. And yet the divine Scripture
 easily convicts and discloses the frauds and artifices of the heretics.
 For if it were thus only, "The Spirit shall come upon thee, and the
 power of the Highest shall overshadow thee; therefore that Holy Thing
 which is born of thee shall be called the Son of God," perchance we
 should have had to strive against them in another sort, and to have
 sought for other arguments, and to have taken up other weapons, with
 which to overcome both their snares and their wiles; but since the
 Scripture itself, abounding in heavenly fulness, divests itself of the
 calumnies of these heretics, we easily depend upon that that is
 written, and overcome those errors without any hesitation. For it said,
 not as we have already stated, "Therefore the Holy Thing which shall be
 born of thee;" but added the conjunction, for it says, "Therefore also
 that Holy Thing which shall be born of thee," so as to make it plain
 that that Holy Thing which is born of her--that is, that substance of
 flesh and body--is not the Son of God primarily, but consequently, and
 in the secondary place; [5203] but primarily, that the Son of God is
 the Word of God, incarnate by that Spirit of whom the angel says, "The
 Spirit shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall
 overshadow thee." For He is the legitimate Son of God who is of God
 Himself; and He, while He assumes that Holy Thing, and links to Himself
 the Son of man, and draws Him and transfers Him to Himself, by His
 connection and mingling of association becomes responsible for and
 makes Him the Son of God, which by nature He was not, so that the
 original cause [5204] of that name Son of God is in the Spirit of the
 Lord, who descended and came, and that there is only the continuance of
 the name in the case of the Son of man; [5205] and by consequence He
 reasonably became the Son of God, although originally He is not the Son
 of God. And therefore the angel, seeing that arrangement, and providing
 for that order of the mystery, did not confuse every thing in such a
 way as to leave no trace of a distinction, but established the
 distinction by saying, "Therefore also that Holy Thing which shall be
 born of thee shall be called the Son of God;" lest, had he not arranged
 that distribution with his balances, but had left the matter all mixed
 up in confusion, it had really afforded occasion to heretics to declare
 that the Son of man, in that He is man, is the same as the Son of God
 and man. But now, explaining severally the ordinance and the reason of
 so great a mystery, he evidently set forth in saying, "And that Holy
 Thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God;" the
 proof that the Son of God descended, and that He, in taking up into
 Himself the Son of man, consequently made Him the Son of God, because
 the Son of God associated and joined Him to Himself. So that, while the
 Son of man cleaves in His nativity to the Son of God, by that very
 mingling He holds that as pledged and derived which of His own nature
 He could not possess. And thus by the word of the angel the distinction
 is made, against the desire of the heretics, between the Son of God and
 man; yet with their association, by pressing them to understand that
 Christ the Son of man is man, and also to receive the Son of God and
 man the Son of God; that is, the Word of God as it is written as God;
 and thus to acknowledge that Christ Jesus the Lord, connected on both
 sides, so to speak, is on both sides woven in and grown together, and
 associated in the same agreement of both substances, by the binding to
 one another of a mutual alliance--man and God by the truth of the
 Scripture which declares this very thing.

 [5199] According to Pamelius, ch. xix.

 [5200] John i. 14.

 [5201] Matt. i. 23.

 [5202] Luke i. 35.

 [5203] "The miraculous generation is here represented as the natural,
 but by no means as the only cause for which He who had no human father
 was to receive the name of God's Son."--Oosterzee, in loco, on
 Luke.--Tr.

 [5204] Principalitas.

 [5205] The edition of Pamelius reads:  ut sequela nominis in Filio Dei
 et hominis sit. The words Dei et were expelled by Welchman, whom we
 have followed.

 Chapter XXV. [5206] Argument.--And that It Does Not Follow Thence,
 that Because Christ Died It Must Also Be Received that God Died; For
 Scripture Sets Forth that Not Only Was Christ God, But Man Also.

 Therefore, say they, if Christ is not man only, but God also--and
 Scripture tells us that He died for us, and was raised again--then
 Scripture teaches us to believe that God died; or if God does not die,
 and Christ is said to have died, then Christ will not be God, because
 God cannot be admitted to have died. If they ever could understand or
 had understood what they read, they would never speak after such a
 perilous fashion. But the folly of error is always hasty in its
 descent, and it is no new thing if those who have forsaken the lawful
 faith descend even to perilous results. For if Scripture were to set
 forth that Christ is God only, and that there was no association of
 human weakness mingled in His nature, this intricate argument of theirs
 might reasonably avail something. If Christ is God, and Christ died,
 then God died. But when Scripture determines, as we have frequently
 shown, that He is not only God, but man also, it follows that what is
 immortal may be held to have remained uncorrupted. For who cannot
 understand that the divinity is impassible, although the human weakness
 is liable to suffering?  When, therefore, Christ is understood to be
 mingled and associated as well of that which God is, as of that which
 man is--for "the Word was made flesh, and dwelt in us"--who cannot
 easily apprehend of himself, without any teacher and interpreter, that
 it was not that in Christ that died which is God, but that in Him died
 which is man? For what if the divinity in Christ does not die, but the
 substance of the flesh only is destroyed, when in other men also, who
 are not flesh only, but flesh and soul, the flesh indeed alone suffers
 the inroads of wasting and death, while the soul is seen to be
 uncorrupted, and beyond the laws of destruction and death? For this
 also our Lord Himself said, exhorting us to martyrdom and to contempt
 of all human power: "Fear not those who slay the body, but cannot kill
 the soul." [5207] But if the immortal soul cannot be killed or slain in
 any other, although the body and flesh by itself can be slain, how much
 rather assuredly could not the Word of God and God in Christ be put to
 death at all, although the flesh alone and the body was slain! For if
 in any man whatever, the soul has this excellence of immortality that
 it cannot be slain, much more has the nobility of the Word of God this
 power of not being slain. For if the power of men fails to slay the
 sacred power of God, and if the cruelty of man fails to destroy the
 soul, much more ought it to fail to slay the Word of God. For as the
 soul itself, which was made by the Word of God, is not killed by men,
 certainly much rather will it be believed that the Word of God cannot
 be destroyed. And if the sanguinary cruelty of men cannot do more
 against men than only to slay the body, how much more certainly it will
 not have power against Christ beyond in the same way slaying the body!
 So that, while from these considerations it is gathered that nothing
 but the human nature in Christ was put to death, it appears that the
 Word in Him was not drawn down into mortality. For if Abraham, and
 Isaac, and Jacob, who, it is admitted, were only men, are manifested to
 be alive--for all they, [5208] says He, "live unto God;" and death in
 them does not destroy the soul, although it dissolves the bodies
 themselves: for it could exercise its power on the bodies, it did not
 avail to exercise it on the souls: for the one in them was mortal, and
 therefore died; the other in them was immortal, and therefore is
 understood not to have been extinguished: for which reason they are
 affirmed and said to live unto God,--much rather death in Christ could
 have power against the material of His body alone, while against the
 divinity of the Word it could not bring itself to bear. For the power
 of death is broken when the authority of immortality intervenes.

 [5206] According to Pamelius, ch. xx.

 [5207] Matt. x. 28.

 [5208] [Luke xx. 38. A solemn admonition is found in the parallel
 Scripture, Matt. xxii. 29, which teaches us how much we ought to find
 beneath the surface of Holy Writ.]

 Chapter XXVI. [5209] Argument.--Moreover, Against the Sabellians He
 Proves that the Father is One, the Son Another.

 But from this occasion of Christ being proved from the sacred authority
 of the divine writings not man only, but God also, other heretics,
 breaking forth, contrive to impair the religious position in Christ; by
 this very fact wishing to show that Christ is God the Father, in that
 He is asserted to be not man only, but also is declared to be God. For
 thus say they, If it is asserted that God is one, and Christ is God,
 then say they, If the Father and Christ be one God, Christ will be
 called the Father. Wherein they are proved to be in error, not knowing
 Christ, but following the sound of a name; for they are not willing
 that He should be the second person after the Father, but the Father
 Himself. And since these things are easily answered, few words shall be
 said. For who does not acknowledge that the person of the Son is second
 after the Father, when he reads that it was said by the Father,
 consequently to the Son, "Let us make man in our image and our
 likeness;" [5210] and that after this it was related, "And God made
 man, in the image of God made He him?" Or when he holds in his hands:
 "The Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrha fire and brimstone from the
 Lord from heaven?" [5211] Or when he reads (as having been said) to
 Christ: "Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten Thee. Ask of me, and
 I will give Thee the heathens for Thine inheritance, and the ends of
 the earth for Thy possession?" [5212] Or when also that beloved writer
 says: "The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou on my right hand, until I
 shall make Thine enemies the stool of Thy feet?" [5213] Or when,
 unfolding the prophecies of Isaiah, he finds it written thus: "Thus
 saith the Lord to Christ my Lord?" [5214] Or when he reads: "I came not
 down from heaven to do mine own will, but the will of Him that sent
 me?" [5215] Or when he finds it written: "Because He who sent me is
 greater than I?" [5216] Or when he considers the passage: "I go to my
 Father, and your Father; to my God, and your God?" [5217] Or when he
 finds it placed side by side with others: "Moreover, in your law it is
 written that the witness of two is true. I bear witness of myself, and
 the Father who sent me beareth witness of me?" [5218] Or when the voice
 from heaven is: "I have both glorified Him, and I will glorify Him
 again?" [5219] Or when by Peter it is answered and said: "Thou art the
 Son of the living God?" [5220] Or when by the Lord Himself the
 sacrament of this revelation is approved, and He says:  "Blessed art
 thou, Simon Barjona, because flesh and blood hath not revealed this to
 thee, but my Father which is in heaven?" [5221] Or when by Christ
 Himself it is expressed: "Father, glorify me with that glory with which
 I was with Thee before the world was made?" [5222] Or when it was said
 by the same: "Father, I knew that Thou hearest me always; but on
 account of those who stand around I said it, that they may believe that
 Thou hast sent me?" [5223] Or when the definition of the rule is
 established by Christ Himself, and it is said: "And this is life
 eternal, that they should know Thee, the only and true God, and Jesus
 Christ, whom Thou hast sent. I have glorified Thee upon the earth, I
 have finished the work which Thou gavest me?" [5224] Or when, moreover,
 by the same it is asserted and said: "All things are delivered to me by
 my Father?" [5225] Or when the session at the right hand of the Father
 is proved both by apostles and prophets?  And I should have enough to
 do were I to endeavour to gather together all the passages [5226]
 whatever on this side; since the divine Scripture, not so much of the
 Old as also of the New Testament, everywhere shows Him to be born of
 the Father, by whom all things were made, and without whom nothing was
 made, who always has obeyed and obeys the Father; that He always has
 power over all things, but as delivered, as granted, as by the Father
 Himself permitted to Him. And what can be so evident proof that this is
 not the Father, but the Son; as that He is set forth as being obedient
 to God the Father, unless, if He be believed to be the Father, Christ
 may be said to be subjected to another God the Father?

 [5209] According to Pamelius, ch. xxi.

 [5210] Gen. i. 26.

 [5211] Gen. xix. 24.

 [5212] Ps. ii. 7, 8.

 [5213] Ps. cx. 1.

 [5214] Isa. xlv. 1. Some transcriber has written Kurio for Kuro, "the
 Lord" for "Cyrus," and the mistake has been followed by the author.

 [5215] John vi. 38.

 [5216] John xiv. 28.

 [5217] John xx. 17.

 [5218] John viii. 17, 18.

 [5219] John xii. 20.

 [5220] Matt. xvi. 16.

 [5221] Matt. xvi. 17.

 [5222] John xvii. 5.

 [5223] John xi. 12.

 [5224] John xvii. 3, 4.

 [5225] Luke x. 22.

 [5226] [Cap. xxi. p. 632, supra.]

 Chapter XXVII. [5227] Argument.--He Skilfully Replies to a Passage
 Which the Heretics Employed in Defence of Their Own Opinion.

 But since they frequently urge upon us the passage where it is said, "I
 and the Father are one," [5228] in this also we shall overcome them
 with equal facility. For if, as the heretics think, Christ were the
 Father, He ought to have said, "I and the Father are one." [5229] But
 when He says I, and afterwards introduces the Father by saying, "I and
 the Father," He severs and distinguishes the peculiarity of His, that
 is, the Son's person, from the paternal authority, not only in respect
 of the sound of the name, but moreover in respect of the order of the
 distribution of power, since He might have said, "I the Father," if He
 had had it in mind that He Himself was the Father. And since He said
 "one" thing, let the heretics understand that He did not say "one"
 person. For one placed in the neuter, intimates the social concord, not
 the personal unity. He is said to be one neuter, not one masculine,
 because the expression is not referred to the number, but it is
 declared with reference to the association of another. Finally, He
 adds, and says, "We are," not "I am," so as to show, by the fact of His
 saying "I and the Father are," that they are two persons. Moreover,
 that He says one, [5230] has reference to the agreement, and to the
 identity of judgment, and to the loving association itself, as
 reasonably the Father and Son are one in agreement, in love, and in
 affection; and because He is of the Father, whatsoever He is, He is the
 Son; the distinction however remaining, that He is not the Father who
 is the Son, because He is not the Son who is the Father. For He would
 not have added "We are," if He had had it in mind that He, the only and
 sole Father, had become the Son. In fine, the Apostle Paul also
 apprehended this agreement of unity, with the distinction of persons
 notwithstanding: for in writing to the Corinthians he said, "I have
 planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the increase. Therefore neither
 is he that planteth anything, nor he that watereth, but God who gives
 the increase.  Now he that planteth and he that watereth are one."
 [5231] And who does not perceive that Apollos is one person and Paul
 another, and that Apollos and Paul are not one and the same person?
 Moreover, also, the offices mentioned of each one of them are
 different; for one is he who plants, and another he who waters. The
 Apostle Paul, however, put forward these two not as being one person,
 but as being "one;" so that although Apollos indeed is one, and Paul
 another, so far as respects the distinction of persons, yet as far as
 respects their agreement both are "one." For when two persons have one
 judgment, one truth, one faith, one and the same religion, one fear of
 God also, they are one even although they are two persons: they are the
 same, in that they have the same mind. Since those whom the
 consideration of person divides from one another, these same again are
 brought together as one by the consideration of religion. And although
 they are not actually the self-same people, yet in feeling the same,
 they are the same; and although they are two, are still one, as having
 an association in faith, even although they bear diversity in persons.
 Besides, when at these words of the Lord the Jewish ignorance had been
 aroused, so that hastily they ran to take up stones, and said, "For a
 good work we stone thee not, but for blasphemy; and because thou, being
 a man, makest thyself God," [5232] the Lord established the
 distinction, in giving them the principle on which He had either said
 that He was God, or wished it to be understood, and says, "Say ye of
 Him, whom the Father sanctified, and sent into this world, Thou
 blasphemest; because I said, I am the Son of God?" [5233] Even here
 also He said that He had the Father. He is therefore the Son, not the
 Father:  for He would have confessed that He was the Father had He
 considered Himself to be the Father; and He declares that He was
 sanctified by His Father. In receiving, then, sanctification from the
 Father, He is inferior to the Father. Now, consequently, He who is
 inferior to the Father, is not the Father, but the Son; for had He been
 the Father, He would have given, and not received, sanctification.
 Now, however, by declaring that He has received sanctification from the
 Father, by the very fact of proving Himself to be less than the Father,
 by receiving from Him sanctification, He has shown that He is the Son,
 and not the Father. Besides, He says that He is sent: so that by that
 obedience wherewith the Lord Christ came, being sent, He might be
 proved to be not the Father, but the Son, who assuredly would have sent
 had He been the Father; but being sent, He was not the Father, lest the
 Father should be proved, in being sent, to be subjected to another God.
 And still after this He added what might dissolve all ambiguity, and
 quench all the controversy of error: for He says, in the last portion
 of His discourse, "Ye say, Thou blasphemest, because I said I am the
 Son of God." Therefore if He plainly testifies that He is the Son of
 God, and not the Father, it is an instance of great temerity and
 excessive madness to stir up a controversy of divinity and religion,
 contrary to the testimony of the Lord Christ Himself, and to say that
 Christ Jesus is the Father, when it is observed that He has proved
 Himself to be, not the Father, but the Son.

 [5227] According to Pamelius, ch. xxii.

 [5228] John x. 30; scil. "unum," Gr. hen.

 [5229] Original, "unas." Scil. person.

 [5230] Neuter.

 [5231] 1 Cor. iii. 6, 7, 8 ( scil. hen).

 [5232] John x. 33.

 [5233] John x. 36.

 Chapter XXVIII.  Argument.--He Proves Also that the Words Spoken to
 Philip Make Nothing for the Sabellians.

 Hereto also I will add that view wherein the heretic, while he rejoices
 as if at the loss of some power of seeing special truth and light,
 acknowledges the total blindness of his error. For again and again, and
 frequently, he objects that it was said, "Have I been so long time with
 you, and do ye not know me, Philip? He who hath seen me, hath seen the
 Father also." [5234] But let him learn what he does not understand.
 Philip is reproved, and rightly, and deservedly indeed, because he has
 said, "Lord, show us the Father, and it sufficeth us." [5235] For when
 had he either heard from Christ, or learnt that Christ was the Father?
 although, on the other hand, he had frequently heard, and had often
 learned, rather that He was the Son, not that He was the Father. For
 what the Lord said, "If ye have known me, ye have known my Father
 also:  and henceforth ye have known Him, and have seen Him," [5236] He
 said not as wishing to be understood Himself to be the Father, but
 implying that he who thoroughly, and fully, and with all faith and all
 religiousness, drew near to the Son of God, by all means shall attain,
 through the Son Himself, in whom he thus believes, to the Father, and
 shall see Him. "For no one," says He, "can come to the Father, but by
 me." [5237] And therefore he shall not only come to God the Father, and
 shall know the Father Himself; but, moreover, he ought thus to hold,
 and so to presume in mind and heart, that he has henceforth not only
 known, but seen the Father. For often the divine Scripture announces
 things that are not yet done as being done, because thus they shall be;
 and things which by all means have to happen, it does not predict as if
 they were future, but narrates as if they were done. And thus, although
 Christ had not been born as yet in the times of Isaiah the prophet, he
 said, "For unto us a child is born;" [5238] and although Mary had not
 yet been approached, he said, "And I approached unto the prophetess;
 and she conceived, and bare a son." [5239] And when Christ had not yet
 made known the mind of the Father, it is said, "And His name shall be
 called the Angel of Great Counsel." [5240] And when He had not yet
 suffered, he declared, "He is as a sheep led to the slaughter." [5241]
 And although the cross had never yet existed, He said, "All day long
 have I stretched out my hands to an unbelieving people." [5242] And
 although not yet had He been scornfully given to drink, the Scripture
 says, "In my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink." [5243] And although
 He had not yet been stripped, He said, "Upon my vesture they did cast
 lots, and they numbered my bones: they pierced my hands and my feet."
 [5244] For the divine Scripture, foreseeing, speaks of things which it
 knows shall be as being already done, and speaks of things as perfected
 which it regards as future, but which shall come to pass without any
 doubt. And thus the Lord in the present passage said, "Henceforth ye
 have known and have seen Him." Now He said that the Father should be
 seen by whomsoever had followed the Son, not as if the Son Himself
 should be the Father seen, but that whosoever was willing to follow
 Him, and be His disciple, should obtain the reward of being able to see
 the Father. For He also is the image of God the Father; so that it is
 added, moreover, to these things, that "as the Father worketh, so also
 the Son worketh." [5245] And the Son is an imitator [5246] of all the
 Father's works, so that every one may regard it just as if he saw the
 Father, when he sees Him who always imitates the invisible Father in
 all His works.  But if Christ is the Father Himself, in what manner
 does He immediately add, and say, "Whosoever believeth in me, the works
 that I do he shall do also; and greater works than these shall he do;
 because I go to my Father?" [5247] And He further subjoins, "If ye love
 me, keep my commandments; and I will ask the Father, and He will give
 you another Comforter." [5248] After which also He adds this: "If any
 one loveth me, he shall keep my word:  and my Father will love him; and
 we will come unto him, and will make our abode with him." [5249]
 Moreover, also, He added this too: "But the Advocate, that Holy Spirit
 whom the Father will send, He will teach you, and bring all things to
 your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you." [5250] He utters,
 further, that passage when He shows Himself to be the Son, and
 reasonably subjoins, and says, "If ye loved me, ye would rejoice
 because I go unto the Father: for the Father is greater than I." [5251]
 But what shall we say when He also continues in these words:  "I am the
 true vine, and my Father is the husbandman. Every branch in me that
 beareth not fruit He taketh away; and every branch that beareth fruit
 He purgeth, that it may bring forth more fruit?" [5252] Still He
 persists, and adds: "As the Father hath loved me, so also have I loved
 you: remain in my love. If ye have kept my commandments, ye shall
 remain in my love; even as I have kept the Father's commandments, and
 remain in His love." [5253] Further, He says in addition: "But I have
 called you friends; for all things which I have heard of my Father I
 have made known unto you." [5254] Moreover, He adds to all this: "But
 all these things will they do unto you for my name's sake, because they
 know not Him that sent me." [5255] These things then, after the former,
 evidently attesting Him to be not the Father but the Son, the Lord
 would never have added, if He had had it in mind, either that He was
 the Father, or wished Himself to be understood as the Father, except
 that He might declare this, that every man ought henceforth to
 consider, in seeing the image of God the Father through the Son, that
 it was as if he saw the Father; since every one believing on the Son
 may be exercised in the contemplation of the likeness, so that, being
 accustomed to seeing the divinity in likeness, he may go forward, and
 grow even to the perfect contemplation of God the Father Almighty. And
 since he who has imbibed this truth into his mind and soul, and has
 believed of all things that thus it shall be, he shall even now see, as
 it were, in some measure the Father whom he will see hereafter; and he
 may so regard it, as if he actually held, what he knows for certain
 that he shall one day hold. But if Christ Himself had been the Father,
 why did He promise as future, a reward which He had already granted and
 given? For that He says, "Blessed are they of a pure heart, for they
 shall see God," [5256] it is understood to promise the contemplation
 and vision of the Father; therefore He had not given this; for why
 should He promise if He had already given? For He had given if He was
 the Father: for He was seen, and He was touched. But since, when Christ
 Himself is seen and touched, He still promises, and says that he who is
 of a pure heart shall see God, He proves by this very saying that He
 who was then present was not the Father, seeing that He was seen, and
 yet promised that whoever should be of a pure heart should see the
 Father. It was therefore not the Father, but the Son, who promised
 this, because He who was the Son promised that which had yet to be
 seen; and His promise would have been superfluous unless He had been
 the Son. For why did He promise to the pure in heart that they should
 see the Father, if already they who were then present saw Christ as the
 Father? But because He was the Son, not the Father, rightly also He was
 then seen as the Son, because He was the image of God; and the Father,
 because He is invisible, is promised and pointed out as to be seen by
 the pure in heart. Let it then be enough to have suggested even these
 points against that heretic; a few words about many things. For a field
 which is indeed both wide and expansive would be laid open if we should
 desire to discuss that heretic more fully; seeing that bereaved, in
 these two particulars, as it were of his eyes plucked out, he is
 altogether overcome in the blindness of his doctrine.

 [5234] John xiv. 9.

 [5235] John xiv. 8.

 [5236] John xiv. 7.

 [5237] John xiv. 6.

 [5238] Isa. ix. 6.

 [5239] Isa. viii. 3.

 [5240] Isa. ix. 6, LXX. [See pp. 628, 632, supra.]

 [5241] Isa. liii. 7.

 [5242] Isa. lxv. 2.

 [5243] Ps. lxix. 21.

 [5244] Ps. xxii. 18, 17.

 [5245] John v. 17.

 [5246] [Cap. xxi. note 5, 632, supra.]

 [5247] John xiv. 12.

 [5248] John xiv. 15, 16.

 [5249] John xiv. 23.

 [5250] John xiv. 26.

 [5251] John xiv. 28.

 [5252] John xv. 1.

 [5253] John xv. 9, 10.

 [5254] John xv. 15.

 [5255] John xv. 21.

 [5256] Matt. v. 8.

 Chapter XXIX. Argument.--He Next Teaches Us that the Authority of the
 Faith Enjoins, After the Father and the Son, to Believe Also on the
 Holy Spirit, Whose Operations He Enumerates from Scripture.

 Moreover, the order of reason, and the authority of the faith in the
 disposition of the words and in the Scriptures of the Lord, admonish us
 after these things to believe also on the Holy Spirit, once promised to
 the Church, and in the appointed occasions of times given. For He was
 promised by Joel the prophet, but given by Christ. "In the last days,"
 says the prophet, "I will pour out of my Spirit upon my servants and my
 handmaids." [5257] And the Lord said, "Receive ye the Holy Ghost: whose
 sins ye remit, they shall be remitted; and whose ye retain, they shall
 be retained." [5258] But this Holy Spirit the Lord Christ calls at one
 time "the Paraclete," at another pronounces to be the "Spirit of
 truth." [5259] And He is not new in the Gospel, nor yet even newly
 given; for it was He Himself who accused the people in the prophets,
 and in the apostles gave them the appeal to the Gentiles. For the
 former deserved to be accused, because they had contemned the law; and
 they of the Gentiles who believe deserve to be aided by the defence of
 the Spirit, because they earnestly desire to attain to the Gospel law.
 Assuredly in the Spirit there are different kinds of offices, because
 in the times there is a different order of occasions; and yet, on this
 account, He who discharges these offices is not different, nor is He
 another in so acting, but He is one and the same, distributing His
 offices according to the times, and the occasions and impulses of
 things. Moreover, the Apostle Paul says, "Having the same Spirit; as it
 is written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken; we also believe,
 and therefore speak." [5260] He is therefore one and the same Spirit
 who was in the prophets and apostles, except that in the former He was
 occasional, in the latter always. But in the former not as being always
 in them, in the latter as abiding always in them; and in the former
 distributed with reserve, in the latter all poured out; in the former
 given sparingly, in the latter liberally bestowed; not yet manifested
 before the Lord's resurrection, but conferred after the resurrection.
 For, said He, "I will pray the Father, and He will give you another
 Advocate, that He may be with you for ever, even the Spirit of truth."
 [5261] And, "When He, the Advocate, shall come, whom I shall send unto
 you from my Father, the Spirit of truth who proceedeth from my Father."
 [5262] And, "If I go not away, that Advocate shall not come to you; but
 if I go away, I will send Him to you." [5263] And, "When the Spirit
 of truth shall come, He will direct you into all the truth." [5264] And
 because the Lord was about to depart to the heavens, He gave the
 Paraclete out of necessity to the disciples; so as not to leave them in
 any degree orphans, [5265] which was little desirable, and forsake them
 without an advocate and some kind of protector. For this is He who
 strengthened their hearts and minds, who marked out the Gospel
 sacraments, who was in them the enlightener of divine things; and they
 being strengthened, feared, for the sake of the Lord's name, neither
 dungeons nor chains, nay, even trod under foot the very powers of the
 world and its tortures, since they were henceforth armed and
 strengthened by the same Spirit, having in themselves the gifts which
 this same Spirit distributes, and appropriates to the Church, the
 spouse of Christ, as her ornaments.  This is He who places prophets in
 the Church, instructs teachers, directs tongues, gives powers and
 healings, does wonderful works, offers discrimination of spirits,
 affords powers of government, suggests counsels, and orders and
 arranges whatever other gifts there are of charismata; and thus make
 the Lord's Church everywhere, and in all, perfected and completed. This
 is He who, after the manner of a dove, when our Lord was baptized, came
 and abode upon Him, dwelling in Christ full and entire, and not maimed
 in any measure or portion; but with His whole overflow copiously
 distributed and sent forth, so that from Him others might receive some
 enjoyment of His graces: the source of the entire Holy Spirit remaining
 in Christ, so that from Him might be drawn streams of gifts and works,
 while the Holy Spirit dwelt affluently in Christ. For truly Isaiah,
 prophesying this, said: "And the Spirit of wisdom and understanding
 shall rest upon Him, the Spirit of counsel and might, the Spirit of
 knowledge and piety; and the Spirit of the fear of the Lord shall fill
 Him." [5266] This self-same thing also he said in the person of the
 Lord Himself, in another place, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me;
 because He has anointed me, He has sent me to preach the Gospel to the
 poor." [5267] Similarly David:  "Wherefore God, even Thy God, hath
 anointed Thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows." [5268] Of
 Him the Apostle Paul says: "For he who hath not the Spirit of Christ is
 none of His." [5269] "And where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is
 liberty." [5270] He it is who effects with water the second birth as a
 certain seed of divine generation, and a consecration of a heavenly
 nativity, the pledge of a promised inheritance, and as it were a kind
 of handwriting of eternal salvation; who can make us God's temple, and
 fit us for His house; who solicits the divine hearing for us with
 groanings that cannot be uttered; filling the offices of advocacy, and
 manifesting the duties of our defence,--an inhabitant given for our
 bodies and an effector of their holiness. Who, working in us for
 eternity, can also produce our bodies at the resurrection of
 immortality, accustoming them to be associated in Himself with heavenly
 power, and to be allied with the divine eternity of the Holy Spirit.
 For our bodies are both trained in Him and by Him to advance to
 immortality, by learning to govern themselves with moderation according
 to His decrees. For this is He who "desireth against the flesh,"
 because "the flesh resisteth against the Spirit." [5271] This is He who
 restrains insatiable desires, controls immoderate lusts, quenches
 unlawful fires, conquers reckless impulses, repels drunkenness, checks
 avarice, drives away luxurious revellings, links love, binds together
 affections, keeps down sects, orders the rule of truth, overcomes
 heretics, turns out the wicked, guards the Gospel. Of this says the
 same apostle:  "We have not received the spirit of the world, but the
 Spirit which is of God." [5272] Concerning Him he exultingly says: "And
 I think also that I have the Spirit of God." [5273] Of Him he says:
 "The Spirit of the prophets is subject to the prophets." [5274] Of
 Him also he tells: "Now the Spirit speaketh plainly, that in the last
 times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing
 spirits, doctrines of demons, who speak lies in hypocrisy, having their
 conscience cauterized." [5275] Established in this Spirit, "none ever
 calleth Jesus anathema;" [5276] no one has ever denied Christ to be the
 Son of God, or has rejected God the Creator; no one utters any words of
 his own contrary to the Scriptures; no one ordains other and
 sacrilegious decrees; no one draws up different laws. [5277] Whosoever
 shall blaspheme against Him, "hath not forgiveness, not only in this
 world, but also not in the world to come." [5278] This is He who in the
 apostles gives testimony to Christ; in the martyrs shows forth the
 constant faithfulness of their religion; in virgins restrains the
 admirable continency of their sealed chastity; in others, guards the
 laws of the Lord's doctrine incorrupt and uncontaminated; destroys
 heretics, corrects the perverse, condemns infidels, makes known
 pretenders; moreover, rebukes the wicked, keeps the Church uncorrupt
 and inviolate, in the sanctity of a perpetual virginity and truth.

 [5257] Joel ii. 28; Acts ii. 17.

 [5258] John xx. 22, 23.

 [5259] John xiv. 16, 17.

 [5260] 2 Cor. iv. 13.

 [5261] John xiv. 16, 17.

 [5262] John xv. 20.

 [5263] John xvi. 7.

 [5264] John xvi. 13.

 [5265] [John xiv. 18, Greek.]

 [5266] Isa. xi. 2, 3.

 [5267] Isa. lxi. 1.

 [5268] Ps. xlv. 7.

 [5269] Rom. viii. 9.

 [5270] 2 Cor. iii. 17.

 [5271] Gal. v. 17.

 [5272] 1 Cor. ii. 12.

 [5273] 1 Cor. vii. 40.

 [5274] 1 Cor. xiv. 32.

 [5275] 1 Tim. iv. 1.

 [5276] 1 Cor. xii. 3.

 [5277] [To commit any one of these errors, he thinks, is to prove one's
 self "sensual, having not the Spirit." Jude 19; Rom. viii. 7.]

 [5278] Matt. xii. 32.

 Chapter XXX.  Argument.--In Fine, Notwithstanding the Said Heretics
 Have Gathered the Origin of Their Error from Consideration of What is
 Written: [5279] Although We Call Christ God, and the Father God,
 Still Scripture Does Not Set Forth Two Gods, Any More Than Two Lords or
 Two Teachers.

 And now, indeed, concerning the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
 Spirit, let it be sufficient to have briefly said thus much, and to
 have laid down these points concisely, without carrying them out in a
 lengthened argument. For they could be presented more diffusely and
 continued in a more expanded disputation, since the whole of the Old
 and New Testaments might be adduced in testimony that thus the true
 faith stands.  But because heretics, ever struggling against the truth,
 are accustomed to prolong the controversy of pure tradition and
 Catholic faith, being offended against Christ; because He is, moreover,
 asserted to be God by the Scriptures also, and this is believed to be
 so by us; we must rightly--that every heretical calumny may be removed
 from our faith--contend, concerning the fact that Christ is God also,
 in such a way as that it may not militate against the truth of
 Scripture; nor yet against our faith, how there is declared to be one
 God by the Scriptures, and how it is held and believed by us. For as
 well they who say that Jesus Christ Himself is God the Father, as
 moreover they who would have Him to be only man, have gathered thence
 [5280] the sources and reasons of their error and perversity; because
 when they perceived that it was written [5281] that "God is one," they
 thought that they could not otherwise hold such an opinion than by
 supposing that it must be believed either that Christ was man only, or
 really God the Father. And they were accustomed in such a way to
 connect their sophistries as to endeavour to justify their own error.
 And thus they who say that Jesus Christ is the Father argue as
 follows:--If God is one, and Christ is God, Christ is the Father, since
 God is one. If Christ be not the Father, because Christ is God the Son,
 there appear to be two Gods introduced, contrary to the Scriptures. And
 they who contend that Christ is man only, conclude on the other hand
 thus:--If the Father is one, and the Son another, but the Father is God
 and Christ is God, then there is not one God, but two Gods are at once
 introduced, the Father and the Son; and if God is one, by consequence
 Christ must be a man, so that rightly the Father may be one God. Thus
 indeed the Lord is, as it were, crucified between two thieves, [5282]
 even as He was formerly placed; and thus from either side He receives
 the sacrilegious reproaches of such heretics as these. But neither the
 Holy Scriptures nor we suggest to them the reasons of their perdition
 and blindness, if they either will not, or cannot, see what is
 evidently written in the midst of the divine documents. For we both
 know, and read, and believe, and maintain that God is one, who made the
 heaven as well as the earth, since we neither know any other, nor shall
 we at any time know such, seeing that there is none. "I," says He, "am
 God, and there is none beside me, righteous and a Saviour." [5283]
 And in another place: "I am the first and the last, and beside me there
 is no God who is as I." [5284] And, "Who hath meted out heaven with a
 span, and the earth with a handful? Who has suspended the mountains in
 a balance, and the woods on scales?" [5285] And Hezekiah: "That all
 may know that Thou art God alone." [5286] Moreover, the Lord Himself:
 "Why askest thou me concerning that which is good? God alone is good."
 [5287] Moreover, the Apostle Paul says: "Who only hath immortality, and
 dwelleth in the light that no man can approach unto, whom no man hath
 seen, nor can see." [5288] And in another place: "But a mediator is not
 a mediator of one, but God is one." [5289] But even as we hold, and
 read, and believe this, thus we ought to pass over no portion of the
 heavenly Scriptures, since indeed also we ought by no means to reject
 those marks of Christ's divinity which are laid down in the Scriptures,
 that we may not, by corrupting the authority of the Scriptures, be held
 to have corrupted the integrity of our holy faith. And let us therefore
 believe this, since it is most faithful that Jesus Christ the Son of
 God is our Lord and God; because "in the beginning was the Word, and
 the Word was with God, and God was the Word. The same was in the
 beginning with God." [5290] And, "The Word was made flesh, and dwelt in
 us." [5291] And, "My Lord and my God." [5292] And, "Whose are the
 fathers, and of whom according to the flesh Christ came, who is over
 all, God blessed for evermore." [5293] What, then, shall we say?  Does
 Scripture set before us two Gods? How, then, does it say that "God is
 one?" Or is not Christ God also?  How, then, is it said to Christ, "My
 Lord and my God?" Unless, therefore, we hold all this with fitting
 veneration and lawful argument, we shall reasonably be thought to have
 furnished a scandal to the heretics, not assuredly by the fault of the
 heavenly Scriptures, which never deceive; but by the presumption of
 human error, whereby they have chosen to be heretics. And in the first
 place, we must turn the attack against them who undertake to make
 against us the charge of saying that there are two Gods. It is written,
 and they cannot deny it, that "there is one Lord." [5294] What, then,
 do they think of Christ?--that He is Lord, or that He is not Lord at
 all? But they do not doubt absolutely that He is Lord; therefore, if
 their reasoning be true, here are already two Lords. How, then, is it
 true according to the Scriptures, there is one Lord? And Christ is
 called the "one Master." [5295] Nevertheless we read that the Apostle
 Paul also is a master. [5296] Then, according to this, our Master is
 not one, for from these things we conclude that there are two masters.
 How, then, according to the Scriptures, is "one our Master, even
 Christ?" In the Scriptures there is one "called good, even God;" but in
 the same Scriptures Christ is also asserted to be good. There is not,
 then, if they rightly conclude, one good, but even two good. How, then,
 according to the scriptural faith, is there said to be only one good?
 But if they do not think that it can by any means interfere with the
 truth that there is one Lord, that Christ also is Lord, nor with the
 truth that one is our Master, that Paul also is our master, or with the
 truth that one is good, that Christ also is called good; on the same
 reasoning, let them understand that, from the fact that God is one, no
 obstruction arises to the truth that Christ also is declared to be God.

 [5279] "There is one God."

 [5280] Scil. from Scripture.

 [5281] [Gal. iii. 20; Deut. vi. 4.]

 [5282] ["Non semper pendebit inter latrones Christus:  aliquando
 resurget Crucifixa Veritas."--Sebastian Castalio.]

 [5283] Isa. xliii. 11.

 [5284] Isa. xliv. 6, 7.

 [5285] Isa. xl. 12.

 [5286] Isa. xxxvii. 20.

 [5287] Matt. xix. 17.

 [5288] 1 Tim. vi. 16.

 [5289] Gal. iii. 20.

 [5290] John i. 1, 2.

 [5291] John i. 14.

 [5292] John xx. 28.

 [5293] Rom. ix. 5.

 [5294] Deut. vi. 4.

 [5295] Matt. xxiii. 8-10.

 [5296] didaskalos.

 Chapter XXXI. Argument.--But that God, the Son of God, Born of God the
 Father from Everlasting, Who Was Always in the Father, is the Second
 Person to the Father, Who Does Nothing Without His Father's Decree; And
 that He is Lord, and the Angel of God's Great Counsel, to Whom the
 Father's Godhead is Given by Community of Substance.

 Thus God the Father, the Founder and Creator of all things, who only
 knows no beginning, invisible, infinite, immortal, eternal, is one God;
 to whose greatness, or majesty, or power, I would not say nothing can
 be preferred, but nothing can be compared; of whom, when He willed it,
 the Son, the Word, was born, who is not received [5297] in the sound of
 the stricken air, or in the tone of voice forced from the lungs, but is
 acknowledged in the substance of the power put forth by God, the
 mysteries of whose sacred and divine nativity neither an apostle has
 learnt, nor prophet has discovered, nor angel has known, nor creature
 has apprehended. To the Son alone they are known, who has known the
 secrets of the Father. He then, since He was begotten of the Father, is
 always in the Father. And I thus say always, that I may show Him not to
 be unborn, but born. But He who is before all time must be said to have
 been always in the Father; for no time can be assigned to Him who is
 before all time. And He is always in the Father, unless the Father be
 not always Father, only that the Father also precedes Him,--in a
 certain sense,--since it is necessary--in some degree--that He should
 be before He is Father. Because it is essential that He who knows no
 beginning must go before Him who has a beginning; [5298] even as He is
 the less as knowing that He is in Him, having an origin because He is
 born, and of like nature with the Father in some measure by His
 nativity, although He has a beginning in that He is born, inasmuch as
 He is born of that Father who alone has no beginning. He, then, when
 the Father willed it, proceeded from the Father, and He who was in the
 Father came forth from the Father; and He who was in the Father because
 He was of the Father, was subsequently with the Father, because He came
 forth from the Father,--that is to say, that divine substance whose
 name is the Word, whereby all things were made, and without whom
 nothing was made. For all things are after Him, because they are by
 Him. And reasonably, He is before all things, but after the Father,
 since all things were made by Him, and He proceeded from Him of whose
 will all things were made. Assuredly God proceeding from God, causing a
 person second to the Father as being the Son, but not taking from the
 Father that characteristic that He is one God.  For if He had not been
 born--compared with Him who was unborn, an equality being manifested in
 both--He would make two unborn beings, and thus would make two Gods. If
 He had not been begotten--compared with Him who was not begotten, and
 as being found equal--they not being begotten, would have reasonably
 given two Gods, and thus Christ would have been the cause of two Gods.
 Had He been formed without beginning as the Father, and He Himself the
 beginning of all things as is the Father, this would have made two
 beginnings, and consequently would have shown to us two Gods also. Or
 if He also were not the Son, but the Father begetting from Himself
 another Son, reasonably, as compared with the Father, and designated as
 great as He, He would have caused two Fathers, and thus also He would
 have proved the existence of two Gods. Had He been invisible, as
 compared with the Invisible, and declared equal, He would have shown
 forth two Invisibles, and thus also He would have proved them to be two
 Gods. If incomprehensible, [5299] if also whatever other attributes
 belong to the Father, reasonably we say, He would have given rise to
 the allegation of two Gods, as these people feign. But now, whatever He
 is, He is not of Himself, because He is not unborn; but He is of the
 Father, because He is begotten, whether as being the Word, whether as
 being the Power, or as being the Wisdom, or as being the Light, or as
 being the Son; and whatever of these He is, in that He is not from any
 other source, as we have already said before, than from the Father,
 owing His origin to His Father, He could not make a disagreement in the
 divinity by the number of two Gods, since He gathered His beginning by
 being born of Him who is one God. In which kind, being both as well
 only-begotten as first-begotten of Him who has no beginning, He is the
 only one, of all things both Source and Head. And therefore He declared
 that God is one, in that He proved Him to be from no source nor
 beginning, but rather the beginning and source of all things. Moreover,
 the Son does nothing of His own will, nor does anything of His own
 determination; nor does He come from Himself, but obeys all His
 Father's commands and precepts; so that, although birth proves Him to
 be a Son, yet obedience even to death declares Him the minister of the
 will of His Father, of whom He is. Thus making Himself obedient to His
 Father in all things, although He also is God, yet He shows the one God
 the Father by His obedience, from whom also He drew His beginning. And
 thus He could not make two Gods, because He did not make two
 beginnings, seeing that from Him who has no beginning He received the
 source of His nativity before all time. [5300] For since that is the
 beginning to other creatures which is unborn,--which God the Father
 only is, being beyond a beginning of whom He is who was born,--while He
 who is born of Him reasonably comes from Him who has no beginning,
 proving that to be the beginning from which He Himself is, even
 although He is God who is born, yet He shows Him to be one God whom He
 who was born proved to be without a beginning. He therefore is God, but
 begotten for this special result, that He should be God. He is also the
 Lord, but born for this very purpose of the Father, that He might be
 Lord. He is also an Angel, but He was destined of the Father as an
 Angel to announce the Great Counsel of God. And His divinity is thus
 declared, that it may not appear by any dissonance or inequality of
 divinity to have caused two Gods. For all things being subjected to Him
 as the Son by the Father, while He Himself, with those things which are
 subjected to Him, is subjected to His Father, He is indeed proved to be
 Son of His Father; but He is found to be both Lord and God of all else.
 Whence, while all things put under Him are delivered to Him who is God,
 and all things are subjected to Him, the Son refers all that He has
 received to the Father, remits again to the Father the whole authority
 of His divinity. The true and eternal Father is manifested as the one
 God, from whom alone this power of divinity is sent forth, and also
 given and directed upon the Son, and is again returned by the communion
 of substance to the Father. God indeed is shown as the Son, to whom the
 divinity is beheld to be given and extended. And still, nevertheless,
 the Father is proved to be one God; while by degrees in reciprocal
 transfer that majesty and divinity are again returned and reflected as
 sent by the Son Himself to the Father, who had given them; so that
 reasonably God the Father is God of all, and the source also of His Son
 Himself whom He begot as Lord. Moreover, the Son is God of all else,
 because God the Father put before all Him whom He begot. Thus the
 Mediator of God and men, Christ Jesus, having the power of every
 creature subjected to Him by His own Father, inasmuch as He is God;
 with every creature subdued to Him, found at one with His Father God,
 has, by abiding in that condition that He moreover "was heard," [5301]
 briefly proved God His Father to be one and only and true God.

 [5297] As the Word formed. [He expounds Ps. xliv. (xlv.), Sept.]

 [5298] ["In a sense;" i.e., in logic, not time.]

 [5299] [Compare the Athanasian Confession.]

 [5300] [As in the Athanasian Confession.]

 [5301] There is apparently some indistinct reference here to the
 passage in Heb. v. 7, "and was heard in that He feared"--apo tes
 eulubeias.  [For the Angel of Great Counsel, see p. 629, supra.]

 Two Notes by the American Editor.

 ------------------------

 P. 609. The author's elucidation of the figure, anthropopathy, is an
 enlargement of Clement's casual remarks in the Stromata (cap. xvi. vol.
 ii. p. 363, this series). Consult On the Figurative Language of Holy
 Scripture, Jones of Nayland, Works, vol. iv. ed. 1801.

 P. 630, note 5. Compare Waterland, vol. ii. p. 210, ed. 1823; also Life
 of Bishop Bull, by Robert Nelson, p. 260. For the extraordinary history
 of Bull's work in France, see the said Life, pp. 327-333. For Petavius,
 Waterland, vol. ii. p. 277, and Bull's Life, p. 243. Petavius seems to
 have had a crafty design to sustain the Council of Trent by arguing
 that the Council of Nicæa also made new dogmas. Bull proves that it
 only bore witness to the old. To the honour of the assembled bishops of
 the Gallican Church, they sustained Bull against the Jesuit.
