00031147
UOUUVULIUA UU MVMAHT
00031147
Digitized with financial assistance from
Shri Brinad Bhartiya Samaj
on 31 October, 2019
‘The Turks of Central Asia
‘in History and at the Present Day
An Ethnological Inquiry into the Pan-Turanian
Problem, and Bibliographical Material relating
to the Early Turks and the present Tyrks of
Central Asia
By
M. A. CZAPLICKA
Mary Ewart Lecturer in Ethnology in the School of Anthropology,
University of Oxford; sometime holder of the Mary Ewart
Travelling Scholarship, Somerville College, Oxford;
Author of ‘ Aboriginal Siberia’,
© My Siberian Year’, &c.
31447
yaa ae ra - Lf
OXFORD
AT THE CLARENDON’ PRESS ©
1918
God
Ysé/
C2a/Tar
PNGTZ
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON EDINBURGH GLASGOW —s NEW YORK
TORONTO MELBOURNE CAPE TOWN BOMBAY
HUMPHREY MILFORD
PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY
PREFATORY NOTE
I woutp gratefully acknowledge my debt to the
Trustees of the Mary Ewart Trust, as also to the
Principal and Council of Lady Margaret Hall, for
enabling me to carry on at Oxford the research of
which the present work is a by-product. It is also
my pleasant duty to thank Mr. Henry Balfour, Curator
of the Pitt-Rivers Museum, Oxford, and Sir E. Denison
Ross, Director of the School of Oriental Studies,
London, for the kind interest with which they read
_ this work in manuscript, and gave me their valuable
suggestions. To Mr. Arthur Thomson, Professor of
Human Anatomy iin the University of Oxford, I owe
all the facilities which his Department afforded me.
Mr. Henry Balfour was also kind enough to read the
work in proof.

Miss B. M. Blackwood, of Somerville College, has
rendered me most useful assistance in preparing the
manuscript for the press.


TO


R. R. MARETT


CONTENTS


PAGE

1. Tue Pan-Turanian MoveMENT . . % . 9

2, Tye TERM TURANIAN . So Sts . . . J8

3. Division or THE TuRKIC-sPEAKING PEOPLES . . 20

4. Tue Eastern Turks. : : - ‘ . at

5. LaNGUAGE  . * . . : % : . 23

6. RELIGION ‘ : : ‘ ; j . . 28

9. Erunocrapuy. Tue [Ranian Turks . *  - 33

8&8 .C,, ~ Tue Turanian Turks : oe

9. History. i ; ‘ ; : . § . 61

Io. ARCHAEOLOGY ‘ ‘ oo Be . : ; 80
Ir, Some ConcLusions : ‘ ‘ i * - x08


APPENDICES :
A . . OS a. 44 . . : . : » «12


BB. . : ; é ; ‘ ‘ - . 118


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL RELATING TO THE
®ARLY TURKS AND THE PRESENT TURKS OF
CENTRAL ASIA . ‘ . 7 . < . 21


INDEX . . . . ; . ‘ . + 235


Mar i . F 3 ‘ . (facing page) 33


THE TURKS OF CENTRAL. ASIA:
IN HISTORY AND AT THE PRESENT DAY?


AN ETHNOLOGICAL INQUIRY INTO THE
PAN-TURANIAN PROBLEM


The Pan-Turantan Movement.


Tue Pan-Turkic-or Pan-Turanian movement, sup-
ported by the most aggressive portion of Turkish and
German public opinion, is a diplomatic activity, the object
uf which is to subjugate to the Osmanly Turks directly,
and to the Germans indirectly, all these countries in
which various Turkic languages are spoken. Although
its purpose is probably strategical and economic—
the acquisition of the cotton of Turkestan, the gold of
the Altai, and Central Asian riches in general *—this is
hidden beneath the cloak of fostering the supposititious.
desire of various peoples between Thrace and Mongolia
for racial and national unity. Only a close study of
the peoples whose tongues belong to the Turkic
linguistic family can throw light on the moral side of
this activity, and show whether the Pan-Turanian pro-
gramme involves merely a desire for aggrandizement
or whether it covers any other relationship, more

» The present work is an enlargement of a lecture delivered in
the School of Oriental Studies in London on October 24, 1917.

3 See Appendix A. :

2103 B


10 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


essential than the linguistic one, uniting Central Asia
with Constantinople.) © =

A brief review of the Pan-Turanian programme will
be necessary before approaching the main: object of this
essay, i.e. the study of the Eastern or Central Asiatic
Turks. The term Central Asia, in accordance with
Humboldt’s definition, embraces the area lying between |
the Himalayas and the- Altai. Mountains, the Caspian
Sea and Khingan Range. As far as the Western or
Osmanly Turks are concerned, they are dealt with in
several recent publications, namely, Sir William Ramsay’s
The Intermixture of Races in Asia Minor.(Oxford Uni-
‘versity Press, 1916), Professor, H. A. Gibbon’s The
Foundation of the Ottoman Empire (Oxford: University
Press, 1916), Lord Eversley’s The Turkish Empire:
tts Growth and Decay (Fisher Unwin, 1917), and Le
Probleme Ture, by Count‘Léon Ost¥orog.? Though not
dealing primarily with the racial question,‘these books
give a vivid picture of the variety of,races living under
Osmanly (Ottoman) governmént, and. of the artificiality
of. the ties, that unite them, Sir William Ramsay further
tells us how’ thé Osmanly’ government has tried to
develop, feelings | of unity and “patriotism among its
subjects on the ground. of the,comror participation in
the Islamic ‘religion.’ Bug ' ‘Pan-Islamism—Islam_ not
being exclusively ‘the ‘property, of the’ Turks—would in:
itself hardly serve te Strengthtn the position of - the
Turkic elements of the empire against Arabian and
. ? Since these pagés were written “thé- Béitish advance in
Asiatic Turkey, together with the situation produced by the
Russia? Revolution, has led the German-Osmarily diplomatists
to. revise, some ‘details’ of their programme. See Appendix B.

* An English version of this work, entitled The Turkish Enigma,


in Winifred Stephens’s translation, has just been’ announced by
Messrs. Chatto & Windus.


IN HISTORY AND -AT PRESENT DAY 11


,other alien Mahometans. .To give promirencé to the
‘Turkic element was not so simple, considering that five
centuries of residence in Europe have influenced the
ruling classes of the Osmanly in-such a way that they

. have completely lost contact ‘with the Turkic masses
subject to their rule ; while these, again, by mixture and
contact with the races of Asia Minor.and south-eastern
Europe, have lost the Asiatic character, that they once
‘possessed. Yet the upper classes of the Osmanly did
not become thoroughly Europeanized, as the Hungarians
did under similar conditions, and heneé their chances

of assimilating the Jands. and peoples that they con-
quered in Europe were almost non-existent even before
the Balkan War. After that war; there was nothing

- left to the Osmanly but to‘turn to Asia, upon which
they look as a land of expansion and of compensation
for what they have lost in Europe. Hence, a justification
for this change of policy ‘was necessary, and this was
easily found.*jn+,the so-called principle of the self-
determination of nationalities. The Osmanly thereupon

proclaimed themselves to ‘be of. one nationality with

the people ‘of the -far Asiatic: Jands , of Turkestan;

‘Jungaria, and the. ‘Siberian steppes.

.' It may, be” argued that ” there is “something in’ the
political atmosphere of our céntury which-makes people
revert, as it were, ‘te past ages. ne" AIL who have affitiities,
with both Europe’ and “Asia Seem to be ready, now to:
claim. their Asiatic, blood, as.jve see that the Bulgarians,
the Hungarians, and, thé Siberian Russians are doing.

But iia the ¢ case of the Osmanly. the sincerity, of such

_a movement becomes: doubiful, -when we consider that
the Osmanly intelligentsia have so far nevér felt them-
selves at oné even with their own Osmanly common

people. Thus they -have never passed, ‘as have the


12 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


educated classes of the European countries, through
a stage of ‘folklorization’ and ‘nationalization’ due to
contact with the masses, who through their backward-
ness preserve more of their national traditions. Even
the Revolution of the ‘Young Turks’ did not bring
about the breakdown of the caste distinction, and it
was, in fact, like all other events in the political history
of the Osmanly, a mere imitation of the Western nations,
rather than a spontaneous outbreak of national feeling
against imperialistic government. There is no doubt
that such a truly national movement did begin when
some years before the Balkan War a literary attempt
led by .Ziya Bey, Ahmed Shinassy Bey,.and Namyk |
Kemal Bey, was made to purify the Osmanly language
from its Arabian and Persian admixture. It is note-
worthy that two of those leaders, Ziya Bey (later
Pasha) and Kemal Bey, when exiled from Turkey
by Sultan Abd-ul-Aziz for their political ideas, found
refuge in London. But, before their brilliant writings
brought about any literary revival or social revolution,
the movement was checked by the subsequent political
action of the ‘Young Turks’, or strictly speaking
by the Committee of Union and Progress (Ittikhad), -
after they successfully abolished the influence of the
more sound rival group, the Committee of Unity
_and Freedom (Ittilaf). The Pan-Islamic propaganda—
bound up as it is with the Arabic language and cil-
ture—when carried on by that party in non-Turkic
Istamie countries, ran contrary to the attempts of the
literary reformers to free themselves from foreign
culture. Meanwhile, the political and economic de-
* pendence on Germany imposed by the ruling classes
on the Osmanly country did not favour the further
-development of linguistic and other internal reforms.


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 33


And so it happened that before Turkey had succeeded
itt emancipating herself from her obligations to Europe,
-Persia, and Arabia, she fell a victim to ambitions? the
extent of which nothing but the outcome of the war
and the fate of the peace settlement will decide.’

When, after the Young Turks’ Revolution, various
European institutions arose in the Ottoman State, there
was set up the Academy of Turkish Science (‘Turk
Bilji Dernayi’), which utilizes the researches of English,
French, German, Russian, and other European scientists
to further the political plans of the Osmanly. Thus all
attempts at finding what the culture of the Turks was
like in their original home and in pre-Mahometan times,
and, what survivals of that culture and of the old race
exist, are being interpreted by the Young Turks in such
a way as to support the hypothesis of the racial identity
.of the Osmanly with the Eastern Turks. It seems
almost cruel that the process of nationalization started
among the educated classes of the Osmanly should be
checked by a new ‘revival’, which, through its very
artificiality, is disturbing the natural development of the
Osmanly. Just as the first movement !ed to the sub-
Stitution of the name ‘Turk’ for that of ‘Osmanly’,
$o now, with the rise of political dredms concentrated
on Central Asia, the name ‘Turk’ is being abandoned
in its turn for a name with a more Asiatic sound, viz.
‘Turanian’. By using this word, the Osmanly intend
‘to emphasize their claim te descent in the direct tine


* Tekin Alp, The Turkish and Pan-Turkish Ideal, English trans-
lation, London, 1916; M. Hartmann, Unpolitische Briefe aus der
Tiirkei, Leipzig, 1910; J. Germanus, Turk Darnay, K. S., 1909, X,
Budapest; V. A. Gordlewski, ‘Note on the “Turk Darnay”
in Constantinople’ (Russ.), Eastern Antiquities, Trans. E, Sect.
i, R. Arch, S., IV, 1913; A. Tyrkova, Old Turkey and the Young
Turks (Russ.), Petrograd, 1916; H. M. A. Sarron, La Jeune.
Turquie et la revolution, Paris, tora.


14 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA:


from the people who left behind the old archaeological
remains in Turan (Central Asia).

In many instances this propaganda assumes naive
form. Half-legendary kings and leaders of the Turks
in Asia'have been set up by the propagandists before
the Turkish soldiers as hero-ancestors—to say nothing
of such historical personages as Attila and Timur!
Then again, a legend found by European investigators
-among many Asiatic Turks, to the effect that they
originated from a she-wolf, has now provided an
occasion for the abandonment on Turkish standards
of the Mahometan crescent in favour of the pre-
Mahometan Turkish wolf. The legend, of which there
are several versions current among the’ Turks and
Mongols of Central Asia, relates that a white she-
wolf—or perhaps a woman with the name Zena (some-
times Bura), which means ‘ she-wolf’—found and reared
an abandoned man-child, who became the ancestor of
the Turks (or in the Mongol version—of the Mongols).
This explains the appearance of that animal on the war
standards of the early Central Asiatic Turks, par-
ticularly the Tu-kiu branch, a design imitated by the
Osmanly during the present war. Though the Osmanly
took up this legend as having been originally Asiatic,
the latest researches seem to support the theory of
de Guignes that it had a European origin, and was
imported into Asia by the Huns. Assuming that
the Huns were of Turkic stock, de Guignes thinks
that when they were defeated in Europe and retired
by ‘way of the Volga, the Urals, and the Altai into
Turan, they brought with them the Roman legend of
Romulus and Remus, and gave it a Turkic setting by
associating it with local Turkic traditions, so that


IN HISTORY AND AT: PRESENT DAY 15_


subsequently it was accepted as if it had been of local
origin.!

Such is the story of one of the ‘historic heritages’
claimed by the Osmanly. But, as a matter of fact, the
more current version of the origin of the Turks'is that
which derives: their tribes from Ogus-Khan, son of
Kara-Khan, grandson of Dik-Bakui, great-grandson of
Abuldji-Khan, who was a direct descendant of Noah.
Such at least is the version given in one of the first
attempts at recording the Turkic myths relating to
their. origin.”

If from the realm of canons we turn to the physical
or racial side, we are in perplexity as to why the
drafters of the Pan-Turanian propaganda entirely dis-
regard the fact that the Osmanly have now more
Albanian, Slavonic, Thracian, and Circassian blood in
their veins than they have Turkic; that their culture
is more Persian, Arabian, and European than Central
Asiatic ; and that even in language there are divergences
no less wide than are to be found among the languages of
theGermanic family. All differences are disregarded,and
linguistic similarity is magnified into linguistic identity.

‘Had the Turks and their allies, the Central Powers,
been successful in their military plans, their intentions as
regards Central Asia were as follows: ‘ Thirty to forty
millions of Turks will become independent, and together
with the ten millions of Ottoman Turks, will form a nation
of fifty millions, which may perhaps be compared with
that of Germany tn that it will have the strength and


1 J. de Guignes, Histoire générale des Huns, vol. I, pt. ii, Book I,
PP. 371-3.

* Recorded by Rashid al-Din, quoted by Radloff, Concerning the
Viguyr, p. t.


16 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


energy to rise even higher”' It should be noted that the
total number of the Turks is here exaggerated by sortie
twenty -million, and that the term ‘nation’ is used
somewhat vaguely.

It is pretty certain that the: several Turkic nations
which the author has had the opportunity of meeting
in, Asia ‘would’ be surprised if any one proposed to
unite them i in one local group on the ground of some
remote tradition. Thus “they would not understand
‘any reason for a voluntary union, even with the Turks
of European Russia, not to speak of still less known
people. One cannot disregard the local national awaken-
ing of some of these groups, as for instance that of the
progressive ‘Young Sarts’, or retrogressive Usbegs of
Bokhara, or even the Kaizak solidarity which may
develop into national feeling, but there is now no moral
link which would unite these groups, in opposition to |
-a Democratic Russia. Apart from conquest, the only
thing that would effectively bring them together would
be identity of religion, language, and education, and
some economic organization under which they would
retain their lands, and be encouraged to a more pro-
gressive mode of life—not too rapidly introduced.
Identity of religion does not exist at present, for within
the Mahometan world—-to say nothing of others—
there are as many distinctions as among the Christians ;
nor do they know any common language except the
Russian.

Since the Chinese and Russian Reyolutions the con-
fiscation of lands belonging to these Turkic natives is
less likely to occur on the part of Russia? and China.


! Tekin Alp, of. cit, Foreword, p. 5. ‘a
2 On June 25, 1916 (old style), there appeared a Ukaz from the


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 17


On the other hand, the Russian collapse has left the
Way open to the activity of the Pan-Turanian propa-
gandists, who seem to have been successfully checked
by the Revolution at its first stage—warmly greeted as
it was in Siberia and Central Asia. The ‘Second
Revolution, with its Marxian spirit foreign to Asiatic
people, had in this region adherents almost entirely’
composed of Russian colonists. It would seem -that


Tsar calling all the male natives of the Caucasus, Turkestan,
the. Caspian Steppe country, Siberia, and the Astrakhan. and
Stavropol steppes, for service connected with the ‘war, a pro-
ceeding contrary to the fundamental law relating to the native
population, under which these natives were definitely exempt
from any form of military service. This order came at a time
when the natives were all occupied with the cotton-fields of
Turkestan, the wheat-fields of Siberia, or with reindeer-breeding
in the mountains. The President of the Mussulman Party of
the Duma, K. B. Tevkeleff, made a vigorous protest to the then
Prime Minister, M. Stirmer, against the coercive measures
employed in calling up the natives. In spite of this, the ruthless
behaviour and corrupt methods of the local administration of some
parts of Turkestan brought about a rising of the population,
especially of the Kara-Kirghis and the Sart. The most terrible
conflicts occurred at Djizak in the Samarkand district, and in
other parts of Semirechie, as a result of which the local adminis-
tration confiscated all the land and property of the natives,
took away forcibly all. men of military age, and sent what
remained of the population (about 20,000), chiefly women, to
die of starvation in the bare mountain region. General Kuro-
patkin, then Governor-General of the country, decided that the
shores of Lake Issyk-kul, the valley of the River Tekes and of
the River Keben, and the eastern part of the River Chuya, were
to be cleared of the Kara-Kirghis and colonized only by Russians.
See the official publications, Turkestan News, No. 185, 1916, and
Semtrechie District News, Nos. 201-15, 1916. The question was
brought before the Duma, and the Investigation Committee, guided
by M. Kerensky, was sent to Semirechie and Samarkand. But it
was only after the First Revolution, and by order of the Pro-
visional Government, that the natives were allowed to return to‘
their country.
2108 c


18 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


the prolongation of the Russian chaos would encourage
the congregation of the Turkic elements, if the dis-
association from the other people of the once Russian
Empire was their aim. But so far. neither the ‘ All-
Russian Mahometan Congress” nor ‘Mahometan Re-
gional Councils’ separate themselves from the general
problems of Russia, even though they express interest
in the Mahometans abroad, and the majority favour
some kind of federal form of government. The
Turkic: population of Russia is not more uniform in
political opinion than the Slavonic or Finnic branches ;
and so, the reactionary portion of them guided by
Mullahs, and on the whole less affected by the Russian
and more by the Central Asian culture, form an
opposition to the Mahometan federalists.


The term Turanian.


The term ‘Turan’, from which Turanian is derived,
is so Asiatic that we do not find it in the Greek authors,
though the fact that it occurs in the Aveséa in the form
Tura points to its ancient origin.

It is said in the Avesta that. Thraetona had three
sons, Airya (Arya), who received as his portion Iran ;
Sairima, who received the western lands; and Tura,
to whom fell the oriental lands. Again, Tuirya (Turya)
is used in the Avesta as an epithet applied to the
countries now called Turanian.! The people of Tuirya
are spoken of as enemies of the people of Airya. Another
reference is found in the epic of the Persian poet
Firdusi, the Shah Naméh dating from the tenth century


 E. Blochet, ‘Le Nom de Ture dans P’Avesta’, J. R. A. S., 1915,
PP. 395-9-


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 19


A.D.; a prominent figure in this work, the Turkic Khan
Afrasiyab, is said to have reigned over Tura in the
sixth century B.c., and to have been the great foe of
Iran. In this poem Turan is placed in the north of
Tran.

The name Turan is very often given to the region
otherwise called Tartary. Neither of these names is
known to the Asiatic Turks, but curiously enough
Turan occurs as a clan-name among the Turkic tribe
of Sagai, the tribe least mixed with Finnic and Samo-
yedic people of all the so-called ‘Tatars’ of Siberia.
The Turkic state of Siberia, conquered by the Khan
Kuchum in the sixteenth century, is often called also
the Turan state, but this name is derived from the
name ofthe River Turu, on the banks of which the
town Chingi-Tura (now Tiumien) was erected by the
Beg Chingi in the fourteenth century?

Like the term Aryan, ‘Turanian’ is used chiefly as
a linguistic term, equivalent to ‘ Ural-Altaic’ linguistic
‘group. The use of this linguistic term for the desig-
nation of a racial group is no more satisfactory than the
use of the linguistic term ‘Aryan’ in the same sense.
But still more unscientific is it to apply this adjective
to things Turkish, for the Tungusic and the Mongolic
languages have just as much right to be called Turanian
as the Turkic. However, ‘Turanian’, not unlike


1 Skrine and Ross, The Heart of Asia, p. 115.

2 P, M. Golovacheff, Siberia, Moscow, 1914, Pp. 35-

8 Although the term Turanian is now generally applied to the
Ural-Altaic languages (Turkic, Tungusic, Mongolic, Samoyedic,
and Finnic), it will be remémbered that some linguists, for instance
Max Miller, give to the Ural-Altaic group the name of North
Turanian as against the South Turanian group {Tamulic, Gangetic,
Lohitic, Taic, and Malayic) (Max Miller, Lectures on the Science of
Language, London, 1861, p. 322).


20 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


another vague term, ‘Tatar’, has become so deeply
rooted in European books on Asia, that there seems to
be no hope of either of them ever being abandoned
for thé names by which the tribes of Central Asia call
themselves.?


‘Division of the Turkic-speaking peoples.


The ethnological evidence must now be examined,
and to make what follows intelligible, it is necessary to
preface some, explanation of the broad division into
.Western and Eastern Turks which is here proposed.

By the term Western Turks is understood all the
Turks—or people speaking Turkic languages, most of
them subject to the Ottoman Empire—as far east as
Persia and Afghanistan. Their number is 8-9 millions.

The term Eastern Turks is used to embrace the people
| of Turkestan and Central Asia as far as Mongolia and
China. Their number is about 10 millions.

There are also Turks*in European Russia, viz. in the
Crimea, in the Caucasus, and along the Volga, especially
round Kazan and Astrakhan. These number 33-4
millions, including some of the Turkicized Finnic tribes
of the Volga. Linguistically and politically they form
one group with the Fastern Turks, with the exception
of the “Azerbeijan, who speak a Western Turkic

‘language. But in physical type and culture they are,
all now mixed with Eastérn Europeans, to a slightly.
less degree than the Osmanly are with the South-
Eastern Europeans. The Pan-Turanian programme


1 It must be noted that, according to M. JéSeph Halévy, the
Turanians of Avesta and of Shah Naméh were the Semites of
Syria, because Syria was called Althura... Tura (C. E. Ujfalvy,
Les Aryens, p. 49)-


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY ax


includes these people, and there is some linguistic excuse
for this in the case of the Azerbeijan. Before the present
war representatives of many Russian Mahometans could
be found at the Pan-Islamic Conferences in Turkey,
and within Russia they formed a ‘Russian Mussulman
Party’ in the Duma, but so far they have never been
united on ground of racial or national community.
Although these East European Turks will play an
important réle in the politics of the near future, and
have already played their part in the Caucasus, they
will not be dealt with here, since they are not typically
representative of the Eastern Turks. Besides, the
problems relating to them are beyond the boundary
of Asia.

The classification here proposed differs from that
given by Vambéry' in 1885, in that his first four groups,
viz. Siberian Turks, Central Asiatic Turks, Volga Turks,
and Pontus Turks, are grouped together under the
name Eastern Turks, leaving his fifth group, Western
Turks, unaltered.


The Eastern Turks.


Before tracing the Eastern Turks in history, some
account must be given of them as they are at the present
day. Politically, almost all of them are dependent on
Russia; only some 13-2 millions are subject to China. °
Culturally and ethnically they fall into two groups,
differing widely from each other.

The first group consists of the Turks of Turkestan
and some of the Turks of the Caspian Steppe country.
Since their appearance in this region they have been
constantly under Iranian influence, and hence have


1 A. Vambéry, Das Tiirkenvolk, Leipzig, 1885, pp. 85-6.


22 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL. ASIA


physically and culturally become Iranized. Considering
also that they settled in the country which already in
the time of the Avesta bore the name Iran (as opposed
to Turan), there is ample justification for calling them
the lranzan Turks. —

The other group consists of the Turks—many of them
called Tatars—of the Steppe country, Southern Siberia,
Jungaria, and Northern Mongolia, including the Altai
and Sayan Mountains. Thanks to the geographical
structure of the country, these Turks have been more
shut off from foreign influence than the first group,

‘though they have always been to a certain extent under
obligations to the culture of China, and lately to that
of Russia also. These may be called the Turanian
Turks.

The Eastern Turks in Asiatic Russia number al-
together some eight millions,! of which the Iranian
Turks account for about six millions. The Iranian
Turks form g2 per cent. of the population of Turkestan.
Out of the 60 per cent. of Turkic population in the
Caspian Steppe country, about one-third may be re-
garded as Iranized.

The Turanian Turks form an unimportant percentage
among the Russian, Mongols, and Chinese in the midst
of whom they live; their number in south-western

‘ The statistics here given concerning the Turks of the Russian
State are based on the census of 1897 and an additional local
census of 1911. See Asiatic Russia, edited by the Immigration:
Committee, St. Petersburg, 1914, vol. I. It should be noted, how-
ever, that the later census shows an increase over the earlier one
greater than can be accounted for by a natural increase in the
birth-rate. This is probably due to the fact that the census of 1911
was carried out by more careful observers. It is more reliable as
far as linguistic grouping goes, but its estimates of the number
of people professing Russian Orthodoxy are less correct.


IN.HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 23


Siberia scarcely reaches half a million, and yet this is
_the region which has been a centre of gravity for the
old Turkic culture. So if for political interest we must
look to the Iranian Turks, for ethnological problems
ewe turn chiefly to these other Turks, who are the
truest Turanians.

Language.

Preparatory to dealing with the separate nations of
which these two groups are composed, it will be neces-
sary to pass in review the linguistic and religious position
of all the Eastern Turks in Asia, for it seems that in
many cases these two factors are the only guides by
which we can arrive at the definition of a Turk.

According to Professor Beresin and the Turkic-Tatar
‘scholar Mirza Kasem Beg,' the Turkic or Turko-Tatar
languages may be divided as follows:

1. Jagatai (Chagatai),
2. Tatar,
3. Turkish.

The Jagatai and Tatar languages, with their many.
dialects, have ‘closer resemblances between themselves
than either of them have with the Turkish. The Turkish
language is used by the Western Turks, and consists
of the following dialects:

(a) Derbent,

(0) Aberdjan (Azerbeijan),

(c) Crimean,

(2) Anatolian,

(ec) Rumelian (Constantinople).

Of the other two, Jagatai appears to be the older, and


i [Osmanly,]


1 Mirza A. Kasem Beg, transl. Dr. J. T. Zenker, Allgemeine Gram-
mattk der Tirkisch-Tatarischen Sprache, Leipzig, 1848, pp. xi-xiii.


24 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL. ASIA


it includes the most‘classical Turkic dialect, namely
‘Uigur. The dialects of Jagatai are:
(a) Uigur, . (d) Usbeg,
-(4) Koman, (e) Turkoman,!
() Jagatai (Chagatai), (4) Kazan.
The dialects of Tatar are:


(a) Kirghis, * (e&) Karachai,
(6) Bashkir, (/) Kara-Kalpak,
() Nogai, (g) Meshcherak,
(d) Kuman, (2) Siberian.


The first mention in Chinese documents of the fact
that the Uigur, the Tu-kiu, and the Kirghis use the
same character, occurs in a passage relating to the
fourth century a.p. The earliest specimens known to
us of the Turkic-Uigur language and characters are
the inscriptions on the burial mounds in the Yenisei
valley, dating from about the seventh century a.p. The
late’ Professor Donner, who has left us a study of |
the origin of this alphabet, suggests that some early
phases of old Turkic writing are still missing, and may
possibly be found west or south of the Minusinsk
inscriptions, for the inscriptions found to the east of
Minusinsk along the River Orkhon in Northern Mon-
golja are later than those of the Yenisei. The reason
for such a supposition rests on the fact that the script
adopted by the old Uigur Turks was of Aramaean or
Proto-Pehlevi origin, of the type employed during the
dynasty of Arsasides in Parthia (third century B.c. to
third century a.p.). It is not clear, pending further


1 According to some scholars Turkoman belongs to the Western
Turkic linguistic branch, and thus stands nea to Azerbeijan and
Osmanly. See A. Vambéry, Das Terkenvolk, p. 86.

2 Q. Donner, ‘ Sur Porigine de Palphabet turc du Nord de l’Asie’,
J. Soc. Fin,Ougr., 1896, XIV, pp. 1-7, 21-71.


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY: 25


discoveries, who used the Aramaean characters during
the three or four centuries which divide the time. of
Arsasides “(whose power was destroyed by -Ardashir,
founder of the Sassanian Empire in 220 a.p.) from that
,of the Yenisei inscriptions. The assumption is that in
some remote parts of the Sassanian Empire the’ Ara-
maean. characters still continued to exist for some time,
and that the earliest Turkic writings are still undis-
covered. In any case, Professor Donner was disposed
to take the Aramaean rather than the Indo-Bactrian or
Kharosthi as the prototype of the Yenisei writing. The
popular opinion current until*recently, however, was
that the Uigur obtained their written character from the
Nestorian monks, who exercised considerable influence
in Turanian lands from the fifth century a.p. onwards,
. and who themselves used a.Syriac language. Though
the influence of the Nestorian missionaries was doubtless
very profound, and though their language was probably
: known to some of the Turks, especially to the Uigur
and the Kirei, the Yenisei inscriptions seem to have
been modelled on a Semitic writing more primitive
than the Syriac of the fifth century a.p., or even than
the character in use during the latter part of the Arsasides
dynasty, i.e. the third century a.p.?

Here must be mentioned a suggestion coming from .


1 Professor F. W. K. Miller, of Berlin, advances a theory that
the Uigur character, especially in its most archaic form, is an
adaptation of the Soghdian (‘Uigurica’, Abh. Akad., Berlin,
1908-10). M. Gauthiot, accepting this, says that the distinctive
character of the Uigur inscriptions is due to the adaptation to the
old Turkic language of the phonetic system of a. quite different
type of language, viz. North Iranian and Soghdian (R. Gauthiot,
‘De Alphabet Sogdien’, J. A., Jan.-Feb., 1911, p. 90).

2 O. Donner, of. cét., p. 67.

2103 D


26 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


the Russian and Sibiriak ethnographers of Central
Asia." They would derive the old Turkic character
from the clati-crests, called ¢amgas. There is no doubt
that some letters of the Yenisei and Orkhon inscriptions
bear 4 close resemblance to various /amgas, but the
influence may equally well be regarded as reciprocal,
until it is proved that the Turkic samgas are more
ancient than the Aramaean character.

But, on the other hand, it is quite obvious that the
pisanitsy, or pictographic writings found in various parts
of Turan, are to be connected with the /amgas, and that
they represent the direct influence of environment rather
than that of an imported culture.

Until the discovery of the Yenisei inscriptions thé
oldest Turkic-Uigur document was the famous Kudatku
Bilik, translated as ‘The Art of Reigning’ (L. Cahun ’)
or as ‘The Book of Joy-giving Knowledge’ (A. Vam-

béry’). Its an ancient poem, imbued with the spirit of
Islam, written in 1069 (or perhaps in,1076), that is to
say during the dynasty of the Ilekids, and ascribed
to, Yusuf Khass Hajib. It was found in Semirechie.
The Turkic-Uigur writing was in use sporadically among
the Volga and Bokhara Turks until the fifteenth century,

As monuments in Jagatai proper, a dialect akin to
Uigur, may be cited the Memoirs of Baber the Moghul
in the sixteenth century, and the History of Abul Ghazi
in the seventeenth. The Memoirs of Baber have been


\


iN. A, Aristoff, Auempt at an Explanation of the Ethnic Com-
position of the Kirghis-Kaizak, &c., pp. 410 ff.; N. Mallitski, Ov °
the connexion between the Turkic ‘tamga’ and the. Orkhon characters,
1897-8, pps 43-7.

2 L. Cahun, L’Introduction a Vhistoire de P Asie, p. 45:

* A. Vambéry, of. cié., p. 322.


IN HISTORY .AND. AT PRESENT DAY 27


frequently translated into many European languages.’
The poet who perhaps most enriched the Jagatai litera-
ture was Mir Ali Shir Navai, who lived during the
Timurid dynasty.

It is interesting to note that among the latest docu-
ments in the older form of the Uigur written character
are some létters sent by the Mongol Khans of Persia
in the thirteenth century to the Pope of Rome, Philip le
Bel King of France, and Edward I King of England,
the object of which was to arrange an offensive alliance
against the Saracens. There were as many as Six
Embassies exchanged. A number of the letters were
written in Uigur with Latin translations, and the original
Uigur manuscripts of some of these were found by
M. Abel Rémusat in Paris It is possible that the


1 The translations in English are as follows:

‘Memoirs of Zehir-ed-Din Muhammed Baber, Emperor of
Hindustan, written by himself, in the Jaghatai Turkic, and trans-
lated partly by the late John Leyden, partly by William Erskine’,
- London, 1826.

‘The Memoirs of Babur ;'a new translation of the Babur-nama,
incorporating Leyden and Erskine’s of 1826 a.p.’, by Annette S.
Beveridge, London, 1912.

‘Memoirs of Baber, Emperor of India, First of the Great
Meghuls, being an abridgement with an introduction, supple-
mentary notes, and some account of his suecessors’, by Lieut.-Col.
F. G. Talbot, London, 1909.

? Abel Rémusat, ‘Mémoires sur les relations politiques des:
princes chrétiens et particuli¢rement des rois de France avec les
empereurs mongols’, Mém. de Acad. des inscr. et Belles-Lettres,
Pt. I, vol. vi, pp. 396-469; Pt. II, vol. vii, pp. 335-431. See also
T, Hudson Turner, ‘ Unpublished Notices of the Times of Edward I
and of his Relations with the Moght! Sovereign of Persia’, 4rch.
Jour., VIII, London, 1851, pp. 47-50; 1. J. Schmidt, Philologisch-
hritische Zugabe zu den von H, Abel Rémusat behannt gemachten in
den konighch-franzdsischen Archiven befindlichen zwei mongolischen
Original-Briefen der Kénige von Persien Argun und Oeldshaitu an
Philipp den Schénen, St. Petersburg, 1824.


28 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


originals of those sent to England may yet be found
-in some British collection. Some of the envoys were
Uigur priests.of Nestorian religion.
Religion.

Among the Iranian Turks in Turkestan the almost
universal religion is Mahometanism. Its, adherents
form g9 per cent. of the Turks in Ferghana (Kokand),
93 per cent. in Samarkand, 96 per cent. in Syr Daria,
and 88 per cent. in Transcaspia (1897). They are
mostly Sunnites, and of the Hanifite rite. It is.recog-
nized in the Mahometan world that nowhere else is
there such strict adherence to the Koran and the Sunna
as in this region, nowhere else are there so many
religious orders and so many saints. This contemporary
religious fanaticism, however, does not play the cultural
réle which it did when Mahometanism was introduced
into this region in the tenth and eleventh centuries, as
a rival to the earlier influences of Buddhism, Christianity,
and the well-developed local animistic religion. At that
time, under the influence of Iranian culture, Mahometan-
ism meant also the development of science and art,
literature and architecture. The present theologians of
Turkestan have banished from their religion everything
which is not in accordance with strict devotion and

* The Uigur manuscripts known to exist in European, libraries
are: ;

Kudatku Bilik (copy made in Herat in 1439) (Wiener Hof-
bibliothek).

Légende de Oghus Chan (Library of Charles Schefer of Paris).

Teskere-i-ewlija (Biblioth¢que Nationale).

Miradj nameh (Berliner Bibliothek).

Yarlyk of Teniir Kutlug (Wiener Hofbibliothek).

Yarlyk of Toktamysh (Moscow Library).

Application of the envoy of Chami, Babeke, to the Chinese
Emperor, with Chinese translation (Asiatic Museum, Petrograd).


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 29


asceticism! In a way, they play the réle of Calvinists
in the Mahometan world; on the other hand, the in-
fluence of Buddhism still remains in the towns, while
in the mountains and steppes there still lives a strong
animistic cult, sometimes intermixed with Mahometanism.

Mahometanism, though introduced among the upper
classes in the tenth century, did not spread among the
masses of Turkestan until the thirteenth to fifteenth
centuries, and it is now known that in the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries Christianity, especially Nestorian
Christianity, was a great rival of Mahometanism in the
western part of Turkestan.

The people of the eastern part of Turkestan, especially
the Kirghis and various descendants of the Uigur, were
never great adherents of Mahometanism. In general, it
is the Sarts, the Usbegs, and the Tadjik who are the
most devoted Mussulmans. Still, if we compare the
number of Mahometans in Russian Central Asia in 1911
(8,223,982) with their number in 1897 (6,996,654), it appears
that Mahometanism is still spreading inTurkestan, though
its increase in Siberia is negligible (128,403 in 1911, against
126,587 in 1897). The nomads of the north-east—i.e.
of Semirechie, Semipalatinsk, Akmolinsk, and Uralsk—
have been but slightly affected by Mahometanism, and
it is curious to know that some of the most Turkic
sections of all the Eastern Turks, the Kaizak and the
Kirghis, accepted it only after the Russian conquest
in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, assisted by
the Russian officials!) They still follow their customary
law, zang (‘adat in Arabian), and if they give it up it
is to accept, not the Mahometan written law, sheriat,


¥ A. Vambéry, ‘Muhammadanism in Asiatic Turkey’, E.R. E.,
1915, pp. 885-8.


30 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


but the Russian law. The Turanian Turks are affected
by Mahometanism about as much as they are by Russian
Orthodoxy. It would be misleading to give the official
estimate,' but about two-thirds of them still adhere to
the form of animistic religion known as Shamanism.
As far as the Turanian Turks are concerned, therefore,
Mahometanism fails .as a guide for identifying the
Turk,

The religion of the Turks who were responsible for
the inscriptions found in the Yenisei and Orkhon valleys,
seems to have been the same Shamanism which is still
to be found in a comparatively vital state among many
Turanians, especially the Altai ‘Tatars’ and the Yakut.
If we take Shamanism as a form of animistic religion
which originated in Asia, and which differs from the
animistic religions of other parts of the world in its
conception of the gods and in the nature of its pro--
pitiatory ceremonies, then we-shall not find in any other
part of Central and Northern Asia a more typical and
more highly developed form of it than among these
people. At the same time it must be remembered that
Shamanistic conceptions underlie many of the high
religious systems of the Asiatic continent.

A strongly marked dualism is present, the good and
the evil deities being comparable in the various tribes,
though known under different names. Taking the Altai
‘Tatars’ as typical Shamanists, their chief benevolent
god at the present time, as in the seventh century, and
possibly earlier,? is Ulgen. The chief malevolent god
is Erik. The sphere of activity of the former, and all


1 See note to p. 22.
2 J. P.Melioranski, ‘On the Orkhon and Yenisei Memorial insets
tions’, J. Min. Educ., June, 1898, St. Petersburg.


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY ) 31


the spirits dependent on him, is the region above the
earth, and of the latter the region below the earth.
Their realms meet ov the earth. Erlik is sometimes
represented as a bear, e.g. among the Altaians.!
, Generally speaking there is no animal worship, but
some animals are venerated. The greatest veneration
is shown to the bear, occasionally to the wolf, and of
birds, to the eagle, the hawk, and the goose. These
creatures, as well as some fish, play an important ‘part
in the Shamanistic ceremonies, for when the Shaman’s
Spirit-assistants appear at his call, they are supposed to
assume the forms of animals.? It is, however, not in
this veneration, but rather in the use of the clan-crests
.or famgas, that any approach to totemism among these
people must be sought. —

The sky, sometimes called Tengri, is venerated as
being the home of the good spirits, and they themselves
are sometimes called Tengri also. To ward off the
destructive power of the malevolent god, and to ensure
the protection of his benevolent rival, a caste of priests,
called Shamans (the name varying according to the
tribe), performs religious ceremonies in which the sacred
drum (#ungur) plays an important réle. In.some tribes,
e.g. the Yakut, there is a white Shaman who pro-
pitiates the good power, and a black Shaman who has
to deal with the dark power. All these tribes believe in
various lesser gods, among them a female deity who
‘presides over birth. She is called Umaz by the Altaians,
Ayisit by the Yakut.?


1 N. N. Kosmin, Chern, p. 102.

2M. A. Czaplicka, Aboriginal Siberia, Oxford, 1914, pp. 277-82.
«3M. A. Czaplicka, of. cét., p.141, and Chaps. VII and VIII. See

also ‘ The Influence of Environment upon the Religious Ideas and


32 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


To show. the persistence of the Shamanistic cere-
monial, it is interesting to find that the rites connected
with the éult of the sky, as practised at the present day,
are strikingly similar to those of the eighth century.?
The ceremony of sacrificing to the sky is called among
the Turks of the Minusinsk District 77 gir Tayt., Xt is
-held every third year, usually towards the end of June.
Among most of these-Turks, for instance the Beltir and
Kachints, it has the. character of a, strictly clan cere-
monial. -Women are not allowed to take part’in it, nor
even to help with the. ‘preparations. The spot chosen
is usually the top,of the highést mountain in the neigh-
bourhood on which] birches‘are growing. Some of these
birches are sacred, and near them two fires are lighted,
one called ulug of; “theySenior fire’, and the other ichig
of, ‘the: junior fire’.” No one dares to. approach the
‘junior fire’ from the east, and even from other directions
only the leaders of the ceremony are sallowéd access.
A ram or.a he-goat is then saérificed, care being taken
that no blood should be shed, and no cry heard from.
the sacrificial animal, Similar precautions are taken, in
the sacrifice of the horse to Ulgen among the Altaians,
Then ther fore-quarters of the beast are boiled on the
‘senior fire’ while thé hind- -quarters, together -with the
flesh ‘of various non-sacrificial animals, are boiled on
the ‘junior fire’. Meanwhile. each head of.a ‘family ties
his . ttldirba, that is, *a- long thread of flax with eagle
feathers attached to it, to the sacred birches. The ends
of these threads vare kept iri the hand, and the master of
_ the, ceremonies ‘begins the song ‘to the, sky, while the


Practices of the Aborigines of Northern Asia’, Folk- Lore, March 31,


1914. ;
1 J, P. Melioranski, of. cil., pp- 264-5- .


IN HISTORY. AND AT PRESENT DAY 33


others form a chorus. The feathered thread is the road,
-by which the song rises to the sky. The meat which
has been prepared on the ‘senior fire’ is taken out and
carried round in a circle, in the direction of the sun.
‘After that the meat, with all the articles used in its
preparation, is burnt on“the ‘senior firé’ , and if the
smoke goes straight to the sky it is a good omen for
the clan.. Then only is the meat-which was prepared
.on the ‘junior fire’ ceremonially eaten, after which all.
the bones and remains “of the feast have to be burnt on
the ‘ senjor fire’


Ethnography.,
The Iranian Turks.


The question. now arises, ‘What Turkic nations go. to
form the group of Iranian ‘Turks?

Tue Turxomans. Their number in Persia, Khiva,

,and BokHara-is about 600,000. Of these 290,000 (in
I9iI, aS against 248,000 in 1897) are in Transcaspian
territory of Turkestan. Among the Turkomans subject
to Russia must also be reckoned the Caucasian Turk6-
mans, some 1f,000.?

The Turkomans of Turkestan were subjugated by the
Russians in 1881 after a stubborn resistance. The
Russians put a stop to their slave trade, and from that
time they began to be more settled and to take up
agriculture. But even now a large proportion are stilt
nomadic horse-breeders, adhering to the customary law

1S, D. Maynagasheff, ‘ Sacrifice to the ‘Sky among the Beltir’,
Literary Collection of the Anthropological Museum of the Acad. of
Science, Petrograd, 1915, vol. III, pp. 93-102.


2 The Turkomans of the Ottoman Empire, commonly called
Turkmen or Avshahr, are not dealt with here.


2108 “E


34 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA:


(adat). In religion they are now all Mahometans, in
language they belong to the Jagatai Turks. Clan
division is still fairly strict among them, and migrations
are tusually carried out in clans. Their custom of
endogamy may be regarded as having as its object the
preservation of the purity of their race from foreign
admixture. - Since the women are inferior in numbers
to the-men, the alym or bride-price is very high, and.
-in some places the unmarried men form 27 per cent.
of the. population. Their clans are nine in number,
two of them, however, being almost extinct. The chief
clans are:

Chaudor, between Khiva and the Caspian ;

Yomut, on the south shore of the Caspian, and in

south-west Khiva ; °

Goklan, on Persian soil ;

Abkhal and Merv Tekkes,in the Akhal and Merv oases;

Sarik, on the middle Murgab ;

Salor, round Merv and in northern Persia ;

Ersari, on the middle Amu Daria, and near Khoya

Salih.

Though linguistically and politically classified as
Turks, in all these people the Iranian type predominates,
in culture as well as in physique.

THE Sarts (1,847,000 in 1911, as against 1,458,000 in
1897) live in the Ferghana and Syr Daria territories,
and are also to be found sporadically in other parts
of Turkestan,

They are a mixture of the original Iranian inhabitants,
the Tadjiks, with their Turanian conquerors, the Usbegs.
In physical type they approach neafer to the Iranians.
They live in villages, called Arsh/ak, and their houses,
called sak/a, are made of a compound of wood and clay.


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 35


Though engaged chiefly in commerce, they are also
successful agriculturists. They know the use of aryk
or irrigation canals, and are reputed to be the best
cultivators of cotton and fruit plantations. On the
whole there is only one people who surpass them as
agriculturists, namely the Tadjiks,! who are sei aac
to be pure Iranians.

The Sarts are Mahometans, Sunnites, many of them
followers of the Sufi order. They adhere to the
Mahometan written law (sheria/). They keep their
women more strictly in seclusion than is the case among
any other Turkic tribe. This is probably connected
with the high degree of organization shown ‘in their
religious culture, which exceeds that of the other tribes.
They have a great reverence for the Mussulman educa-
tional institutions usually to be found in connexion with
the Sufi religious orders, and supported by public
donations. There are three of these orders in Central
Asia, the most ancient of them being in Ferghana.
The educational institutions are divided into higher
(Medresse) and lower (Mekiab). Besides instruction in
religious and legal subjects, the students are given
some general knowledge based on mediaeval concep-


‘tions; thus Sart geography represents the world as


being flat, and surrounded by mountains. In the lower


! The Tadjiks are the remnants ot the old Aryan population of
Central Asia, living chiefly in the Samarkand and Ferghana districts.
In 1915 they numbered about 400,000, i. e. 67 per cent. of the total
population. The Tadjiks living in the valleys and engaged in
agriculture are now scarcely distinguishable in language and
physique from their neighbours the Sarts, but the Mountain
Tadjiks, or Galcha, are still using their Iranian language, and differ
from the dark Turanians around them by reason of their light-
coloured hair and skin.


36 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


classes some Arabic is taught; in the higher Persian
is the language used, but neither of these languages
is really mastered.1. The Russian schools have had
less success among the Sarts than among the Kaizak
‘or the Kirghis.

Tue Tarancur or Ixt-Tatars (83,000 in 1911 as
against 70,000 in 1897) live in Semirechie and in the
Transcaspian Territory, having migrated to Russian
Turkestan from Eastern Turkestan at the same time’
‘as the Dungans, that is to say, when Kulja passed
under Chinese rule.

In physical type, culture, language, and religion the
Taranchi stand very near to the Sarts; the only dif-
ference seems to be in regard to the treatment of their
women, who have much greater freedom than among
the Sarts, and do not cover their faces. The Taran-
-chi are agriculturists, cultivating especially vegetable
gardens, but some of them incline towards commerce.

The Turkomans, Sarts, and Taranchi may be grouped
together as the least Turkic of all the Iranian Turks,
‘being now strongly under Persian, as they were in the
past’ under Arabian, influence. And of course it must
be remembered that all of them form as it were a
stratum overlying’ the original ‘Aryan’ population,
whose culture was of an Irano- Gréek type. But of the
three* the Taranchi have the closest connexion with
the Turanian Turks, being probably the descendants of
the old Uigur in Easterh Turkestan.

The next to be considered are the Usbegs, and their
kindred tribes the Kipchak, the Kaizak (Kaizak-Kirghis),
and the Kara-Kalpak.

THe Uspecs (592,150 in 1911 as against 534,825 in

1 Asiatic Russia, vol. 1, p. 170.


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 37


1897) live in the Samarkand, in some parts of Syr
Daria and Ferghana Territories, and in the Khanates
of, Khiva and Bokhara. With them can be classed the
Kipcnak (60,000 in IgII as against 45,000 in 1897), who
live in the Ferghana Territory. The word Kipchak is
found as the name of a clan, or perhaps a moiety, among
various Siberian and Turkestan Turks, such as the
Altaians, the Telengit, the Kaizak of the Middle Orda,
and the Usbegs.

The Usbegs form the ruling class in" Bokhara, Khiva,
and Kokand, occupying much the same position as do
the Osmanly in Turkey. Some groups of Usbegs’ are
to be found in Northern Afghanistan, and in the west
of Eastern Turkestan. The name Usbeg is political,
and is probably derived from Usbeg Khan of the Golden
Horde (1312-40). The Usbegs are a mixture’ of three
elements, Turkic, Iranian, and Mongol, but the Turkic -
element and Turanian traditions are predominant, except
in the case of the Usbegs of Khiva, where the Iranian
type predominates.

Since the Usbegs are in process of exchanging their’
nomad life for a sedentary one, their customary law
(‘adat) is being replaced by the written law (sheriad).
Father- “right is very strong, but the women are freer
than among the Tadjiks or the Sarts. ‘Though they now
live in clay and wood houses (sak/a), their old felt tents
(yurta) are still to be seen, especially in summer.

There is much ethnological evidence that the Usbegs
belong to the same ethnic group as that people who are
called by the Russians Kaizak-Kirghis, but who call:
themselves Kaizak. Both names—Kaizak and Usbeg—
came into use only in the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries, and even now Usbegs and Kaizak have many


38 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


clan, or perhaps moiety, names in common (Jalair,
Kangli, Kipchak, ‘ Kereit, Konkrat, Naiman, Tabyn,
Arghyn, Tama, and Tilaou’). If the name Usbeg is
derived from beh, ‘master of oneself’, and the name
Kaizak from the Turkic dz, ‘steppe goose’, and the
Persian zagh, ‘steppe crow’,? with the metaphorical
meaning, ‘wanderers free as steppe birds’, it seems
possible that the origin of both names involves the same
idea. Another derivation of Kaizak from kdzmak, ‘to
dig’, fails to commend itself, as the meaning of the
word has no direct. connexion with their mode-of life,
the Kaizak never appearing as agriculturists. _

The Kaizak-Usbegs were probably bands of people
‘who escaped from the strong state organization of the
Turkic Empires of the thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries, and reverted to a nomadic life and a nomadic
culture, under conditions which led to their mixing
freely with such nomads as the Western Mongols. In
seeking for rich pastures they were obliged to livé
in a state of constant war with the people who inhabited
the steppes before them. Historical evidence supports
this hypothesis. Their warlike disposition seems to
have given rise to a Fadjik proverb, referring to the
Kataghan, a tribe of Usbegs of the Kundar district:
‘Where the hoof of the Kataghan’s horse arrives, there
the dead find no grave-cloth and the living no home ’*#


1 P. Kuznietsoff, La Lutte des Civilisations et des Langues dans
P Asie centrale, Paris, 1912, p. 60.

2 In this part of the world a Turkic-Persian hybrid is not
uncommon.

5 V. V. Velyaminoff-Zernoff, The Eenpen® and Princes of the
line of Kasim, 1860.

4 R. B. Shaw, A Sketch on the Turki Language as spoken in
Eastern Turkistan, Calcutta, 1880, p. 139-


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 39


In contrast to the origin of the Usbegs and the Kaizak
is the origin of the real Kirghis, by which is meant the
Eastern or Yenisei Kirghis, called by the Russians the
Burut-Kirghis and the Kara-Kirghis. These have more
Tight to be called Turanian Turks than the Kaizak, who
may be said to stand between the two groups. They
will therefore be dealt with under that head (Turanian).

Tue Kaizak live in the northern and eastern part of
the Aral-Caspian basin, and in the Orenburg Steppes.
Together with the Kara-Kirghis and some of the
Yenisei Kirghis—i. e. all the people whom the Russians
call Kirghis, and so include under one head in their
census—they numbered 4,700,000 in IgII as against
4,100,000 in 1897. Out of this total the non-Kaizak
element may be reckoned at between 500,000 and 800,000
(in 1911).

The Kaizak say that they are sprung from the Usbegs,
and that the Kara-Kirghis are sprung from: dogs, but:
the Kara-Kirghis call themselves brothers of the Kaizak,
and are in fact probably related to them, since the
Kaizak have recruited themselves not only from the
Usbegs but also from other Turkic states.

The Kaizak were divided by their Khan Tiavka in
the thirteenth century into three ‘hordes’, called Ordas.
This was done for administrative purposes, but since
the death of Tiavka the history ef each orda runs
independently.

The ordas are:

1. Ulugh-yiz (Ulu-jus) or Great Orda, living in the
neighbourhood of the rivers Chu and Talas, and
subdivided into the Abdan and Dolat tribes.

2. Urta-yiz (Urta-jus) or Middle Orda, living between
the rivers Tobol and Irtish and the Syr Daria,


40 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA.


and subdivided into the Arghyn, Naiman, Kip-
chak, and Konkrat tribes. .
3. Kichik-yiiz (Kichik-jus) or Little Orda, living between
the Aral Sea and the lower Volga, and sub-
divided into the Alchin and Yabbas tribes.

At the present time the ‘hordes’ of the Kaizak inter-
mingle to a great extent, but class distinctions within
the hordes are still upheld. The nobility, called Tiuri
or Ak-sék, i.e. ‘White Bones’, trace their ancestry
from Jinghis Khan, notwithstanding that the latter was
a Mongol. All the other people are called Kara-sik,
i.e. ‘Black Bones’. Some old legal customs still dis-
regard the Russian law, as e.g. that of baranta, or
revenge for a wrong inflicted on one tribesman or clans-
man, by carrying away the culprit’s or. his clansmen’s
herd.

Like the other Turks, the Kaizak base their social
structure upon a patriarchal system. It is very difficult —
to define what should be called a clan among the Turks
of Central Asia, in the sense in which that term is used
‘in dealing with Africa and Australia. There seems to

be a conception of a political group, called among both
the Kirghis and the Kaizak uruk or ru, with its head,
bey, bi, or serdar (possibly a confederation of such clans
was ence called e/), while a group of families affiliated
‘ by blood is called by the Kaizak ¢aypas or tayfa (by the
Kirghis kyrk). The head of such a sub-clan, based on
blood relationship, is called ak-sakal. An amalgamation
of several sub-clans forms a sdk (clan).
Hf a clan ‘sdk’ increases in size, and wishes to divide
or to migrate, the departive group sometimes takes as a
‘name the word for the number of the sub-clans of which
it is composed, e.g. On (‘ten’), Yur (‘a hundred’); or


”


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY gr


choose some characteristic trait. of their group, €, g.
Kaizak, ‘Wanderers free as steppe birds’, Kara- Sakal,
‘Black Beards’, Kara-Kalpak, ‘ Black Cane? Some-
times they may adopt the name of their leader, e. g.
Usbegs, Seljuk, or that of the most influential sub-clan,
e.g. Sakhalar (the name of the nation 'talled by the
Russians the Yakut), though not .all the members of
this nation belong to the Sakhalar sub-clan. The clan-
name Sakhalar (sing. Sakky) is to be found among
many Turkic people of the Abakan and upper Yenisei,
and it was probably only with the Russian advance at
the end of the sixteenth and beginning of the seven--
teenth centuries that one group of the Sakhalar clan
migrated towards Lake Baikal, and then northwards
along the Lena, while a smaller group. went directly


‘ northwards along the Yenisei. This would be about


the time when the Burut-Kirghis migrated from the
upper Yenisei to Jungaria.’

Thus in the case of these migrations the clan names
are not sufficient guide in tracing the racial affinity of
the people. More assistance is obtained from a study
of their sub-clan crests, or éamgas (sing. tamga, tamaga,
tamka, dam-k’a, ?amga), and their war-cries (urany,
sing. uran). It is curious that these two most interesting
sources of ethnological evidence have so far been only
partly investigated, though considering the numerous
divisions and subdivisions existing among the Turkic
peoples, and the fact that the national names are, as has
been seen, accidental and variable, any permanent means _


1;
2. N. N. Kosmin, D. A. Klements and the Historical and Ethno-
graphical Investigation of the Minusinsk Country, Irkutsk, 1916,


PP- 13-15.
2108 F


42. THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


of throwing light on: théir racial relationships ought to
be welcomed..

How complicated their tribal and clan subdivisions
are is seen in the following table given .by the Kaizak
ethnologist Mustafa . Chokayeff, to-.explain his own
~ standing in the Kaizak nation, ~ He belongs to—

Turkic race, _

Kaizak nation,

Middle orda,

Kipchak tribe;

Toru-aibgyr clan,

Shashli sub-clan,.

Boshai branch (in Russian ko/zeno),
Janay sub-branch (podkolieno).

The famga may be regarded as the symbol of a sub-’
clan (¢ayfa among the Kaizak, kyrk among the Kirghis),
a group of families affiliated by blood, because it is
such ‘groups which usually live together, and whose. -
live stock, whether reindeer, horses, or dromedaries,
are marked by this symbol. The ¢amga appears also
. on their various belongings, as well as on the graves
of deceased members of the clan.

The antiquity of these symbols can be judged from
the fact that they are to be seen on the old Nestorian
monuments, and on the monument to Khan Kul-Tegin
in the valley of the Orkhon, on which the inscriptions
are in old. Turkic characters, dating from 732 a.D.”
Those who boldly “derive the old Turkic written,


1 A. N. Samoylovich, ‘Prohibited words in the vocabulary of
a married woman among the Kaizak’, LZ. A. 7, vols. I-II, 1915,
p. 162.

3.N. A. Aristoff, Attempt at an Explanttion of the Ethnic Com-
position, &c., 1894, p. 410; N. Mallitski, On the connection between
the Turkic ‘ lamga ’ and the Orkhon characters, 1897-8, p+ 43.


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 43


character ftom ‘the clan éamgas would. of course ‘claint
greater antiquity than that of Orkhiowt and Yéniset
inscriptions.

According’. to + ‘tradition, thé famga was -introduced
among the Kaizak by their Khan Tiavka, because the
Kaizak of his time’ were’ $0 rich im cattle that some
device of this kind was necessary for the identification
of the various herds. | Some think that the origin ‘of the
tamga is to be sought in “Mongolia, but as a matter
of fact it occurs anjong tle Turks’ no les8 frequently
than among the..Mongols and Tungus, because the
custom of marking cattle is natural and “common to
most pastoral people. As may be expected, the pastoral
Turks, such as the Kaizak and some of the Kirghis,
have the amga system much more highly developed
than have the sedentary part of the Kirghis, the
Altaians, and the forest and mountain Turks generally.
Being either hunters or agriculturists, they have less
need of the ¢amga for practical purposes. The study.
of the samgas. gives in many cases a clue to the com-
position of the tribe; for example, among the Kaizak
theré are to be found ¢amgas of various Turkic tribes
of Asia, either in their original form or as composite
signs, thus proving conclusively the mixed origin of
that people.?

It is difficult to ascertain how far the ¢amga corre-
sponds to a totem. Some ¢amgas seem to represent
merely geometric designs: the Naiman clans had as
their favourite samga an angle, the Kirei use a square.
Some of the Kaizak of the Middle Orda have famgas
representing a ‘bird’s rib’ (urdas 672), a comb (¢arak),
and a forkedi stick (selak). Sometimes, however, the

» Aristoff, of. cif., Pp. 421.


44 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


tamga plays more obviously the réle of a totem. Among
the Turks of the Minusinsk country there exist sur-
vivals of public clan sacrifices to the. spirit-owner of the
clan, for instance -the horse, which appears also to be
the clan ¢amga.

At the present time the /amga is usually cut or
branded on the left side of the animal, i.e. the side
from which the rider mounts, but the exact place
‘where the mark is made differs among the various
« tribes. ;

The fact that the same ¢amgas are used on graves
belonging to the same clan is of assistance in tracing
the migration of clans, but it is only by considering the
tamga on the one hand, and the wrau or war-cry on
the other, that the origin of a group can be traced. The’
uran was originally the common property of a political
group, a larger unit than the group of blood-relations
who owned the ¢amga. It often consists of the name
of a well-known chief or hero, but since the Turkic
tribes have ceased to lead a warrior’s life the new-

. generation scarcely remember the battle-cry of the clan,
and hence the wvaz"is more difficult of discovery than
the ¢amga. Grodekoff,! perhaps the most successful
of all the investigators along these lines, found that the
chief uvan of the Great Orda, namely, of the clans Jalair
and Dulat, was ‘ Bahtyar’, the name of one of the Kaizak
heroes; the Kangli have a uran ‘ Bayterek’, which is.
probably a corrupt form of the same name. This com-
munity of the wrvan confirms what is now known about
the relationship between the Kangli and the Jalair.
Sometimes the name of the clan ig used as a uran, as+


1 The Kirghis and Kara-Kirghis of the Syr Daria Territory,
1829, pp. 2-3.


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 45


among the Seykym clan of the Kaizak, whose uran
is also ‘Seykym”..,

Though the Kaizak belong geographically to the
Iranized Turks, -culturally they have on the whole
much affinity with the Mongols. The majority are still
‘nomadic cattle and horse breeders. Their method of
cattle-keeping is a most luxurious one. They leave the
cattle on the pastures the whole year round, hence
their only care is to find a fresh pasture every season.
The spring and autumn pastures may be the same. ~ It:
is only recently, since more of the land has been claimed
by the Russian Imnxigration Committee, that the Kaizak
have begun to lay up winter stores for their cattle.
Each clan has defined limits to its pasture lands. Under
the old Russian system the pasture land used by the
Kaizak belonged to the State, and they were granted
the use of it, dividing it at their communal gatherings
according to the number of people, cattle, and’ vehicles
in each class. The permanent houses, gardens, arable
. land, and irrigation canals are hereditary.

, It is curious to note that the Kaizak, whose dwellings
are so light and portable, bury théir dead in solid struc-
tures of wood, clay, and brick. This custom also exists
among the Kara-Kirghis, and was known to the old
Yenisei-Kirghis. As it is not found among the non-
Turkic population of Central Asia, it seems to indicate
that those who praetise it now are perhaps the nearest
relatives of the people who built the old burial mounds
of the Yenisei, called Aurgans.

THE Kara-Karpax (‘ Black Caps’), another Turkic
tribe of the same group (134,313 in: I9Q1I as against

111,799 in 1897), live in the Amu Daria district of the
' Asiatic Russia, vol. 1, p. 159.


46 -THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Syr Daria Territory, inthe Kokand district of the
Ferghana Territory, and some -20,006 in the Khanate
of Khiva.

Half of them are ‘settled agriculturists, ‘the rest are
still nomad cattle-breeders, their pasture lands being,
however, more strictly fixed than among the Kaizak.
Some of them are also engaged in trading. Of all the
Kirghis group their language is: the most nearly related
to that of the Western Turks. .

This may be explained by the fact that they belong
to the stream of Turks who participated im the west-
ward migration some ten centuries ago.

Speaking of the origin of the Kara-Kalpak or
Chornyie Klobuki, as they were called in Kieff-Russia,
P. Golubowski? says that they were a. mixture of
Ghuz Turks, Pyechenyeg, and others, and that they
formed that remnant of the Ghuz Turks who remained
in Russia when the new wave of Turkic invaders from
Asia—the Polovtsy—drove the other part of their tribe
across the Danube. The remnants of the Ghuz,
‘ together, possibly, with other Turks, settled on the
Russian borderlands, accepted Christianity, and were
known as the Kara-Klobuk (Kara-Kalpak), while some of
them moved back to Asia, and, according to V. Moshkoff,
about 70,000 of them live until now in Bessarabia under
the name of Ghaghauzy (Gagauzy).3 Whether the Kara-
Kalpak not living in Asia are the same as the Kara-.


tT A. Maksimoff, ‘The Kara-Kalpak’, vol, XXII, p. 454, rae the
Excyclopaedic Dictionary, ed. Jeleznoff, -

2 The Pyechenyegi, the Torki and the yaloulsy. until the Tatar
Invasion, Kieff, 1884, p. 15%.

SV, Moshkoff, Examples of the Folk-Literature of the Turkie
Tribes, St. Petersburg, 1904, p. xxii.


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY « 47


Kalpak who in the eleventh century were the borderland
population of Southern Russia, it is difficult to ascertain,
but possibly they re-migrated to Asia from European
Russia jn the eightéénth cefitury, where Howorth
thinks they formed one tribe of the Nogai- -Pyechenyeg
on the Yaik River.


The Turanian Turks.


It is impossible to draw a well-defined line between
the Iranian and the Turanian groups of the Eastern
Turks. Thus the Kaizak, who are here reckoned among
the Iranian Turks, are in many respects closely allied
to the Kara-Kirghis, who may be called the descendants
of the Yenisei Kirghis. They have also affinities with
the Turks of Eastern Turkestan, of Northern Mongofia,
and of Siberia, all of whom might be called Turanian.

}t is important to bear ‘in mind that at present the
adjective ‘Turanian’, as applied to these people, really
means that they are under Mongolian, Chinese, and
Tibetan cultural influences, while they have also re-.
tained to some extent the original traits of their pre-
Mahometan Turkic culture. The Iraniai group has
fewer traits of this old Turkic culture left, owing to
' the predominance of Persian and Arabic cultural ele-
ments, and when we pass to the Western Turks, the
infiltration of Mediterranean and Central European
influence leaves few points of resemblance, other than
language, between them and the Turanian Turks living
oné on each side of the main mass of Turkic-speaking
peoples.

Tue Kireuis, as has been said, are to be distinguished

1 H. H. Howoerth, History of the Mongols, vol. II, p. 5.


48 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


from the people erroneously called Kirghis, namely
the Kaizak, who weré dealt with among the Iranian
Turks. The Kirghis,.or:‘Eastern Kirghis’, are as a
matter of fact, together with the Altai ‘Tatars’ and the
Kirei, the truest representatives of the Turanian Turks.
The name seems to be derived? from &ir (n), ‘ cultivated’
field’, and shows that these people were. originally
agriculturists, as indeed we know they were during
at least the period from the sixth century up to the
time when the occupation of the upper Yenisei, first by
the Mongol Altyn Khan, and then by the- Russians,
forced many of them to migrate farther south, and to take
up a pastoral life. Even now part of them are agri-
culturists and hunters, and it is only that section which
was subjected to the most frequent migrations that have’
adopted what may be called horse-culture. This may
be defined as a mode of life dependent on cattle and,
especially horse breeding, hence their nomadic habits.
They use the horse for riding, he provides them with.
food, and to a certain extent with clothing, while for
heavy draught work it is the dromedary which is
chiefly used.

The Kirghis are called by. the Russians ‘Eastern’ ;
‘Burut’, ‘Black.’ (Kara), or ‘Mountain’ Kirghis; the
latter is used to distinguish them from the Kaizak
Kirghis of the plains. Their home was since. the
beginning of our era in the valley of the Yenisei,
whence they moved south under the advance of; the


1 Another derivation of the name is kyrk kys, meaning ‘forty |
girls’, and the legend tracing the Kirghis from forty women from
China who married forty men of U-si seems to uphold: this
(Schott, ‘ Uber die achten Kirgisen’, Abhanal. Berliner Akad., 1865,
p- 432). But as a matter of fact the name by which they call
themselves is not Kirghis but Krgyz.


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 49


_Russians. Some few of them. still live in the upper
Yenisei valley, where they are :mixed with the Abakan
‘Tatars’, but the majority of ttiem are now to be found
south of Yarkand, reund by Pamir and Alai, to the
north of Kashgar and Aksu (the Issyk-kul district).
Many of them are known under their clari:names, others
form the nation.of the Kara-Kirghis.

The Kara‘Kirghis fall into two branches, a right
branch, called Ong, and a left, called Sol. The Ong
branch is divided into two groups, Edigzne and Tagai.
The Tagai group is composed of seven clans:1

1. Bugu (Stag), near the River’ Tekes, and to the

east of Lake Issyk-kul.

2. Sary Bagish (Yellow Elk), to the south and west of

Lake Issyk-kul.

3 Solto, south of the River Chu.

4. Sayak.

5; Cherik (Army) in Ferghana.

6. Cheng Bagish (Great Elk), west of Kashgar.

7. Bassyz.

The Sol branch is less numerous, and lives chiefly
along the River Talas. It includes three clans, Saru,
- Koshi, and, Munduz.

All these Kirghis clans are related by intermarriage
to the Naiman and the Kipchak, who, however, are
reckoned to be quite a different nation.

It must be noted that Kirghis occurs also as a clan-
name among the Usbegs and the Altaians.

The Kara-Kirghis have clan samgas like the Kaizak,
but the headship of their clan is a hereditary office, in
contradistinction to the custom of the .Kaizak, whose
heads are elected. The head of the Kara-Kirghis clan
is called manap, and the head of a confederation of

1 Aristoff, of. cit, p. 430.

2103 G


50 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


clans is called aga-manap. A comparison of the social
structure of the Kara-Kirghis with that of the Kaizak
shows that the former is of a type more suited to the
needs of a sedentary people, and the latter to those
of nomads.

The comparative isolation of the Kirghis from any
but Turkic tribes gives some assurance that their
customs have more right than those of many other
tribes to be taken as typically Turkic. A picture of
their marriage ceremony may be of interest in this
connexion.

In general the wife is purchased, but as the bride-
price (kalym) is usually paid in instalments there exists
a special vite de passage between the arrangement of the
marriage and the final wedding ceremony. After the
first part of the ‘bride-price is paid, the bridegroom and
his companions, bringing rich presents to the bride’s
family and to the match-makers, drive to the aud (village)
of the bride, in the neighbourhood of which he halts.
Meanwhile the djinai (female match-makers) prepare
a special tent, to which they lead the bridegroom, while
the bride is carried away from her parents to another
tent belonging to some-relative. Then a feast is held
by the bride’s parents, at which neither the bridegroom.
nor the bride is present. Eate at night the djimat
conduct the bride and bridegroom from their separate
tents to the house of the bride’s parents. The bride —
resists ceremonially, while the bridegroom is cere-
monially hindered from reaching the house by the djixaz,
one of whom pretends to be a fierce dog, another a wild
cow, and so on.

- Early in the morning the bridegroom goes away, and
for the whole day he must avoid his parents-in-law.
This goes on for about a fortnight, after which “the


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY | 51


bridegroom leaves the aul. Some time after, when the
whole kalym is paid, he returns to fetch his wife, who
again pretends to defend herself, and to be loath to
leave her parents’ au/. There is a show of taking her
away by force. The first stage of the marriage, when
the bridegroom lives in the house of the bride’s parents,
in regard to whom he must observe the custom of
avoidance, cannot be dispensed with even if the whole
kalym is paid at once.

Among some other Turks, such as the Turkomans
and the Kazan ‘Tatars’, the period during which the .
bride remains with her people after the first marriage
ceremony extends over several months, or even a couplé
of years.

The Kirghis are strictly exogamous aS far as the
blood-clan is concerned. Before marriage a young
woman is allowed a good deal of freedom with the men
of her own clan, but custom forbids her to meet men of
other clans.’ .

Tue Siperian Turks? fall into two groups, one
consisting of the nation of the Yakut, the other of a
conglomerate of clans and tribes known as the ‘ Siberian
Tatars’; various branches of them are called aecording _

» P., ‘The Customs of the Kirghis of the Semipalatinsk Terri-
tory’, Russian Messenger, 1878, No. 9, pp. 32-7; A. Levshin,
Description of the Kirghis-Kaizak Hordes and Steppes, 1832, pp. 100-
102; P, E. Makovyetski, Materials for the Study of the Juridical
Customs of the Kirghis, 1890, pp. 16-19; N. Grodekoff, The Kirghis
and the Kara-Kirghis of the Syr Daria Territory, pp. 63-5,

? To be distinguished from these Siberian Turks, who have
been settled in the country since the very beginning of our era,
are the ‘Tatars’ who migrated back from European Russia fairly
recently. In 1897 the number of these in Asiatic Russia was
94,000, in 1911 they numbered 124,000. They are partly Nogai
of the northern Caucasus, and partly Kazan ‘Tatars’, and many


of them differ from the Russian colonists only in their Mahometan
religion.


52 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


to their geographical distribution: the ‘ Baraba Tatars
the ‘ Altaians’, the ‘Abakan Tatars’, and so on.

The Yakui, who are now the northernmost branch of
Turkic-speaking people, live along the River Lena right
up to theArctic shore, and in the region between the Lena
and the Yenisei as far south as Lake Baikal. They are
superior in numbers to all the ‘ Siberian Tatars’ taken
together. In 191z they numbered 245,000, as against
225,000 in 1897, while the ‘ Tatars’ numbered 208,000
in 1911, plus some 4,000 people classed by the Russian
officials as ‘Turks of undefined nationality’, as against
175,000 in 1897, plus some 3,000 ‘Turks of undefined ©
nationality ’.1

Under the influence of their n new environment® the
Yakut have been ‘driven to take up reindeer-breeding
and a. nomadic tundra life, but in their social and
religious institutioris survivals of the more settled con-
ditions of their southern home are still to be seen?

Of all the Turks of Asia the Yakut are the most
typical representatives of what may be spoken of as |
‘reindeer-culture’.t The reindeer is to this region what -
the horse. is to the Central Asian steppe-nomads. It
supplies food, clothes, bone-iinplements, and is used’ for
draught work. But while the people who have been
living for a long time at the stage of reindeer-culture,
such as the Koryak of the north-east of the Samoyed
of the north-west, never use reindeer for riding, the
Yakut ride their reindeer as their ancestors rode the
horse, a practice which is looked upon with disfavour


1 Asiatic Russia, vol. 1, pp. 79-80.

2 See p. 41.

8 M. A, Czaplicka, Aboriginal Siberia, 1914, pp. 107, 277, 207. »

4 B. Laufer, ‘The Reindeer and its Domestication’, Mem. of the
Amer, Anthrop. Assoc. vol. IV, No. 2, 1917.


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 53


by their neighbours. It must be remembered that
while the reindeer is not known to the Turks of Tian-
Shan and the upper Yenisei, the latter people have
several other species of deer, especially the elk (Cervus
alces) and the maral (Cervus elephas). The domesticated
deer is rare.

Forming.,a wedge- between the Tungusic and the
Palaeo-Siberian tribes, the Yakut impose their language,
together ‘with many of their customs, on both these
groups, as well as on the Russian eters In religion
they are typical Shamanists.

On meéting a Yakut among the various Mongoloid
peoples of the north, one is at once struck with the
difference in his physiognomy. His hair and eyes are
darker, his nose narrower and better marked, and on
the whole he gives the impression of possessing
Southern, and one might almost say Semitic, character-
istics. And yet he can hardly be suspected of having
any Arabic strain.

The Siberian Tatars live chiefly in the Tomsk and
Yeniseisk Governments. In the Tomsk Government,
7o per cent. of them do, not know any language but
their own; the remainihg”30 per cent. speak Russian
also. In the Yeniseisk Government only 12 per cent.
speak the Russian language besides their own.

’ As to their religion some of them are Mahometans,
namely :

t. Tobolsk Tatars and ‘Siberian Bokharians’ of the

Tobolsk district.

2. The Baraba Tatars of the Kainsk district.

3. The Tomsk Tatars of the Mariinsk district.

4. The Kuznietsk Tatars of the Kuznietsk and Barnaul

district.
Others are still Shamanists or ‘Christian-Shamanists’,


54 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


people who mix their pagan practices with some of the
Russian Orthodox Church beliefs. Those are:

5 The Forest (Chern) Tatars of the Biisk district.

6. The Teleut.and Telengit of the Biisk and Kuznietsk

districts.

7. The Kumandits (or ‘White Kalmucks’) of the

Kuznietsk and Biisk districts.

8. The Shortes and Lebyedints of the Kuznietsk

district.

9. The Kyzyl and Chulim natives of the Achinsk

district.

1o. The Abakan Tatars (Kachints, Koibal, Beltir,

and Sagai) of the Minusinsk district.

11. The Karagass of the Nijneudinsk district of the

government of Irkutsk.

12. The Kamashints of the Kansk district.

The Teleut of the Kuznietsk district are perhaps the
most Russified, while the Telengit, along the rivers
_ Biya and Katun, are very much mixed with the Mongols.
The following tribes are said to be mixed with the
Ugrian-Ostyak, the Yenisei-Ostyak, and the Samoyed,
though in culture, language, and tradition they are now
Turkic:

1, The Kamashints; 2, the ae 3, the, Koibal ;
4, the Beltir; 5, the Kyzyl; 6, the Shortes; 7, the
Kumandints.

The racial origin of these tribes has been defined,
often superficially, merely judging from the names of
their clans. Thus the Kyzyl (Kysz, ‘man’) are com-
posed of ten classes: Kyzyl, Malo-Achin, Bolshe-Achin,
Agy, Bassagar, Kamnar, Argyn, Kalmak, Kurchik,-
- Shui. Of these, Argyn clan is said to be the remnant
of the Kaizak of the Middle Orda, because those people
have also had a clan of this name. Kalmak clan is also |


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 55


found among the Teleut, and Shui among Yenisei
Ostyak, hence the admixture of the two races is attri-
buted to Kyzyl by Radloff2

Most of the Siberian Tatars, as well as Northern
Uriankhai, call themselves Tuba, either exclusively or
alongside: with their tribal name, Tuba being the name
of one of their clans. This name Tuba, Tubas, Tupo
or Doubo, like the word Zatar, should be used with
great caution, until its origin and meaning have been
more clearly defined. It seems to have been adopted
by the Chinese as a collective term for the people_
living in the Southern Yenisei Region, probably along
the river of this name, the right tributary of the Yenisei.
~ The Russian historians of Siberia, Miller? and Fischer,*
mention the people of Tuba as paying tribute to the
Mongol Altyn Khan, and opposing for a long time
Russian conquest, but it is not clear whether this name
had a racial meaning, designating, e.g., the extinct
Arine, Kottes, &c., or the Samoyed, or was used only
as a geographical term for all peoples living near the
River Tuba. Now at any rate it does not seem to be
limited entirely to the tribes whom one can suspect
of having some Samoyed blood in them, for it is found
among the Altaians, whom even Castrén and Kostroff
with all their ‘Pan-Samoyedic’ theory could not call
‘Tatarised Samoyed’. It is found moreover among the
Kachinis, who, according to Katanoff,* were Kuchum-
Khan people, who moved to the River Kacha, near
Krasnoyarsk, after the defeat of Kuchum, and farther


1 A. A. Yariloff, The Kyayl and their Industry, 1899, P. 1

> G. F. Miller, Description of the Tsardom of Siberia (1750).

8 J. E. Fischer, Sibtrische Geschichte (1768).

4 “Legends relating to old deeds and old people among the
tribes. living near the Sayan Mountains’, Mem. 1. R.G. S., vol.
XXXIV, 1909, p. 280. .


56 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


south later on. But its distribution is still wider: the
eastern: neighbours. of the Uriankhai, the Darkat and
the Ugur, living on the shores of Lake Kossogol, have
a clan called Tuba, though no tribe here uses this name
for itself as a whole. The Darkat now speak a Mon-
golian language, but in tradition they seem to have
more in common with the Turks than with the.
Mongols.

The Tuba is not the only clan-namg so widely spread ;
there are others, such as Kirghis, "Sokka, Oirat Ari,
&c., while some clan-names, such as Kaska among the
Kachints, are peculiar to one tribe. On the whole,
the Siberian Tatars cannot be compared to the Kaizak
with regard to their memory of the tribal and clan past.
Katanoff! found that this lack of tradition seems to
characterize all the Turks known as ‘Tatars’. The
Kazan Tatars do not have any written or oral record
relating to the important fact of the fall of Kazan, under
the pressure of Ivan the Terrible, and the Tobolsk.

‘Tatars scarcely have any records giving accounts of
the Tsar Kuchum and his wars with the Russians.
But perhaps the fault rests more with Kuchum’s
personality, for it is not so much the events which are
important in history as the personality of heroes that
inspire the oral tradition. Thus a certain hero Kangza,
unknown in history, has very many tales devoted to
him among the Teleut (Radloff), the Altaians (Vyerbitski),
and the Abakan Tatars (Katanoff).

Of all the Siberian Tatars the most interesting ethno-
logically are the .Chern (in Russien) or Black Forest
‘Tatars’, also known as Alfaians, though the name
Altaians is wider and includes also some other Tatars,
such as the Kumandints. The Altaians call themselves


1 Op. cit, p. 267;


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY. 57


lish Kyst (Tish, ‘black forest’, ‘chern’; Kysi, ‘men’).
In language and religion they keep free from foreign
admixture, they are therefore typical Turanian, Turks.
Their mode of life is sedentary whenever the. environ-
ment allows them to practise agriculture. In religion
they are Shamanists.

Tue Turks or NortTH-WESTERN MONGOLIA AND
Eastern Turkestan. While the Altaians or Chern
- ‘Tatars? occupy the. Northern Altai, there lives in the
Southern, so- -called’ Little Altai, along the Black Irtish,
in Jungaria and in. Eastern Turkestan, another Turkic
tribe, a rival of the Altaians as representative of the -
pure Turanian type. This is the tribe called Kire:,
Kerrit, Kerrait, or Kirai. The chief distinction between
the Kirei and the Altaians is now a religious one, the
Kirei being Mahometans. We know that from the
eleventh to the thirteenth centuries they were adherents
of Christianity in the form of Nestorianism, and it is
among them that the fabulous Christian king Prester
John (probably the native king Ouang-Khan, a con-
temporary of Jinghis Khan) is said to have lived. In
mode of life they are at present nomads, and are well
known as hunters.?

The Kirei arevsometimes called Kivrei-Kirghis, and
it is possible that in the period from the beginning of
-our era till the sixth century, when the Kirghis were
spreading in the basin of the upper Yenisei, one clan,
the Kirei, were left behind, and settled in the Kemchik
valley. Again, when in the seventeenth century thé
Yenisei-Kirghis were retiring before the Russian ad-
vance, from the Minusinsk steppes southwards to
Jungaria and Mongolia, some of them may have settled


* D. Carruthers, Unknown Mongolia, vol. Il, pp. 351-5.
2108 H


58 - THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA.


among the Kirei, who had meanwhile become to some
extent Mongolized.?

To the south-west of the Kirei, in Kulja and in the
western part of Chinese Turkestan, on the slopes of
the Tian-Shan, live remnants of various Turanian
Turks, sometimes called Kashgarians, many of whom
are perhaps the direct descendants of the old Uigur,
and possibly have also a strain of the pre-Turkic Aryan
population of which traces are still to be found in
Central Asia. In language, and probably in physical
type, they are among the purest Turanians. Most of
them, especially those who are Chinese subjects, are
Mahometans. They are chiefly cattle-breeders. Such
are the Yerhk, the Kashgarlik, and the Yetisherlik.
Those subject to Russia number some 54,000 (in 1911).
Since the great upheaval caused by the conquests of
Jinghis Khan, and the migrations which followed, these
people have remained stationary to a degree impossible
anywhere but in the heart of the Asiatic continent, but
it is not impossible that under a helpful and sympathetic ©
government all of them, whether Russian or Chinese
subjects, might awake to play their part in the future
history of Asia. .

The country to the east of the region occupied by
the Chern ‘Tatars’ or Altaians, and to the south: of
that occupied by the Abakan ‘Tatars’, i.e. that ' part,
of the Yeniseisk Government between the Sayan Moun-
tains and the Tannu Ola range, is called Uriankhai, and:
its I00,000 inhabitants are usually grouped together
under the same name, Uriankhai, sometimes in its
Chinese form, Uriangut. The northern part of the
country, along the River Ussa, began to be colonized


? While Vambéry and Cahun reckon the Kirei as Turks, Skrine
and Ross reckon them as Mongols. See note to p. 72.


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY .59


by the Russians in 1856, and-was practically annexed

by them in 1886. The whole country became almost

independent of China after Mongolia declared its inde-

pendence in 1914, and. the old Russian Government,

intending to occupy this rich pasture land, had begun

to colonize it energetically. This aroused some opposi-
tion among the natives, who, having scarcely felt their
dependence on China, were not prepared to give up
their best lands to the Russian Colonization Committee.
Many Uriankhai have for the last three years been
moving in clan order, with all their herds, into the
steppes of Northern Mongolia. This is, in fact, the-
most recent e masse migration in Central Asia. It
has ceased, however, since the Russian Revolution,
owing to the influence exercised by Siberian scholars
and public men, such as G. Potanin and A. Adrianoff,
in the protection of the rights of the natives.

The Uriankhai are sometimes called Soyof (sing.
Soyan, from the clan-name Saya). But it is not certain
whether this name ought to be applied to all of them.
The name by which they call themselves in the North
is Tuba. °

According to the East Turkic scholar Katanoff, the
language of the Uriankhai is Turko-Tatar,? but of
course they are now mixed to a great extent with the
Mongols. It must be remembered that Castrén and
some of his followers are inclined to see in the Uriankhai
members of the original Samoyed-Yeniseian race, who
mixed with the Turks and adopted a Turkic language:*

1 See articles in Sibirskaya Jisn, Feb. 26, 1916, May 3, 1917.

* E. K. Yakovieff, Ethnographical Survey of the Native Population
of the Vailey of Southern Yenisei, Minusinsk, 1900, p. 18.

3M. A. Castrén, Nordische Reisen und Forschungen, vol. IV,
pp. 83-6; BD. Carruthers, of. ¢74, vol. 1, pp. 20, 52-5, 200; vol. V,
pp. 116-17.


60 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA .


That at one timea Samoyed group might have migrated.
to the Soyot (Uriankhai) is not out. of the. question,
since many clan-names of the Samoyed and ‘the Urian-
khai are alike. But no other signs .of this ‘relationship
can be found now, and the southernmost, Turks, who
may have been originally Samoyed, are the Kamashints,
some of whom, at the time of Castrén’s travels (1840-
50), were speaking a Samoyedic dialect. When Radloff.
visited them, however (about 186s), all signs of Samo-
yedic speech had disappeared, and only a Turkic dialect
was in use.

Radloff thinks that the Uriankhai are the forefathers
of the present Yakut,! which, however, sounds im-
probable, if only because the Uriankhai are almost the
most successful reindeer-breeders known, whilst the
Yakut learnt that art only after their migration to
the north.

The number of the Uriankhai is some 100,000, Until
recently they formed one azmak or province of China.
They are subdivided into nine local groups’ (khoshun
or kopun), which again are divided into sumo or tribes.
The sumo is further subdivided into. sék, clans, or
perhaps moieties. The clan-names are mostly of Turkic
origin, many of them being found also among other
Turanian Turks, e.g. Irgit, Soyan, Kirghis, Kaizak,
Koeluk, Uigur, &c.

The Uriankhai living in the steppe country are mostly
cattle-breeders ; some of them, however, depend chiefly,
on hunting and fishing. It is only in this region thiat
we find the breeding of horse, yak, and reindeer for


+ Radfoff, ‘Die Jakutische Sprache’, Bull, I.A.S., 1908, pp. 54-6.
For opposite opinion see I. P. Silinich, ‘On the question of the
physical type of the population of North-west Siberia’, Russ.
Anthr. J., Nos. 3-4, 1916, pp. 5t-3.


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 61


draught purposes carried-on. together, and in a way
‘it characterizes the Uriankhai, for they seem to combine
the traits of | the Mongol horse-nomads, the Turkic
hunters and. cattle:breeders, and the Tungus reindeer-
breeders.


History.


The history of the Turks in Central Asia falls roughly

into the.following periods:

I. From the first vague mention of them in the
Chinese annals of the Tang and Yu dynasties
(2356-2200 B.c.), and the no less vague mention *
in the Avesia (if it is right to identify ‘Tura’
with Turks), toe the middle of the sixth century

’ a.D., when the name Tu-kiu (Turks) appears for
the first time.

Il. From the rise of the Tu-kiu, through the period
of rapid independent development, to the Mon-
golian invasion in the thirteenth century.

III. From the thirteenth century through the period
of the great migrations started by the. Jinghis
Khan conquests, and of the still independent
Turkic states under Mongolian dynasties, to the
beginning of the Russian advance in the seven-
‘teenth century.

IV. From the seventeenth century, through the period
of the wars with Russia and of subsequent
Russian rule, to the Russian Revolution of 1917.

First Period. The probable ancestors of the Turks

lived to the north of China, and were mentioned by the

Chinese chroniclers as long ago as the third millennium

- B.C. on account of their raids on China, but of course

scarcely any mention is made by the Chinese of the

Turks living to the far north and far west of China.


62 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


The first name now identified as that of the ancestors
of the Turks is Hiung-nu. According to Professor
Parker,’ there exists ‘a Hiung-nu tradition that about
1200 B.C. a (Chinese) royal personage who had most
probably been misconducting himself fled to the nomads
of the north and founded among them a sort of
dynasty’. The Chinese are concerned with their
neighbours on the north-west, the Hiung-nu, and on
' the north-east, the Zung-hu (subsequently Tungus), only
so far as these barbarians annoyed them. The Emperors
of the Tsin dynasty (255~209 B.c.) built the Great Wall
to protect their northern frontiers, and this’ directed
the strategic movements of the Hiung-nu in the second
century B.c. towards the.west. It is possible that some
branches of them may have migrated westwards before
the construction of the Great Wall, and then continued
to develop quietly in their new home, otherwise it is
hard to understand the high degree of organized culture
in which we find them in the Altai and Yenisei region
- about 200 B.c.,? when we hear that the Kirghis and the.
Usuni were already there, and had found some remnants
of still earlier Turkic immigrants. They may possibly
have been in possession of this region already in the
Bronze Age, unless, of course, we assume -the inde-
pendent origin of the Altai and Yenisei Turks, ‘and take


1 ¥, H. Parker, A Thousand Years of the Tartars, 189%, p- 3.
Another Chinese translator, Father Jakinth Bichurin, gives a
different version of the origin of the Hiung-nu dynasty: Shurt-wei,
son of the last emperor of the Hia dynasty, went in 7464 B. ¢.t
Mongolia, and there started the Hiung-nu dynasty. Bichurin
considers the Hiung-nu to be Mongols. (Collection of Information
concerning Peoples living in Central Asta, 1851, vol. 1.)

2N. A. Aristoff, Atfempt at an Explanation us the Ethnic Com-
position, &c., p. 460.


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 63


the Hiung-nu as representing a stage when the
easternmost Turks were not yet differentiated rom
the Mongols.

A more clearly defined stage is that of the ‘Hun- nu
Empire (possibly a form derived from Hiung-nu), which
united under its domination most of the Turkic tribes
of Central Asia. The reign of Mété (209-179 B.C.)
seems to mark the climax of their power in Asia. The
information gathered from the Chinese annals gives us
the geographical distribution of the Turks of that time,
who were divided into two hostile groups, Western and
Eastern, both subject to Mété. The Eastern Turks"
were composed of the Uigur, between Tannu Ola and
the Yellow River, and between the Tian-Shan and the
basin of the Tarim. To the north of them lived the
Din-lin (Telengit?), near Tannu Ola. The Kirghis
(Khakas) lived along the Yenisei, and the Karluk and
Tu-kiu in the Altai, and as far south as Tarbagatai.

The Western Turks comprised the Usun (Usuni),
who lived to the south of Lake Balkash; the Kangli
(Kan-giu), farther west as far as Amu Daria; the
Yie-Chi,' ‘still- farther to the south-west as far as the
Caspian Sea; and the Yao-Chi, to the north of the last-

_ named.
The Usun power in the western part of Turan
‘(rivers Iti and Chu) dates chiefly from the end of the
second century B.c. to the first century a.p. Since
they found on their arrival the Kangli (Kan-giu) Turks
settled in the Tian-Shan, it was with them that they
struggled for the predominance, and both sides called
for help either to the Chinese or to the Hun-nu.? But


1 W. W. Radloff, Concerning the Oiae 1893; p. 126.
® Aristoff, of. cit., p- 461.


6, THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ‘ASIA


when both of them were subdued by the Hun-nu, their
two tribes intermingled, and a part of them migrated to
the northern outskirts of their territory, to escape the
deSpotic rule of their. conquerors, the Hun-nu. It is
possible to look upon these groups as the earliest
Kaizak organization, later imitated by the Cossacks.

All these probably Turkic tribes, and many remnants
of ‘Aryan’ peoples and states in Central Asia, were
under the rule of Mété,! who divided his empire into
twenty-four parts, governed by six princes and six
administrators. Within each part a strictly military
organization prevailed, with units of 10, 106, 1000, and
10,000 men.

Nineteen of these twenty-four groups were composed:
of Uigur. Ten of them formed a confederation called
On-Uigur, and nine another.confederation called Togus-
Vigur. The latter lived to the north of the On-Uigur.
Professor Radloff thinks that as the, bulk of the Hun-nu
Empire was composed of On-Uigur, it is possible that
_,the name Hun-nu is only a corrupt form of On-Uigur,
On-Ui? ;

The Chinese feared the power of the Hun-nu so
much that about the middle of the second century B.c.
they tried to make a defensive alliance with the Yiie-
Chi,who, at the end of the pre-Christian era and the
beginning of our own, formed one of the most powerful
empires of Central Asia. Though that attempt failed,
we hear that the Hun-nu, after having defeated the


} Though Professor Radloff reckoned the Yte-Chi as a Turkic
tribe, it is more probable that they were a Tung-hu, tribe sur-,
rounded by Turkic people, with whom the Chinese confused
them. They are later known as Kushan.

* Radloff, of. cit., p: 127.


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 65


Wusun (Usuni) near Ili in 176 B.c., and the Ytie-Chi
near the Tarim valley, were subsequently conquered by
‘the Yiie-Chi at the end of the first century B.c., and
that in the same century a Hun-nu prince submitted
to China.) "

‘Subsequently the eastern half of the Hun-nu Empire
- was divided into northern and southern parts, both of
which had finally fallen by a:p. 215. The downfall of

the Hun-nu Empire was thus due to the combined
” efforts of the Chinese and the Tung-hu, and indeed
a Tung-hu power (Sien-pi, Toba, and Moyun) was then
arising between China and the Turks.

It would seem as if the Hun-nu, their power in Asia ,
ruined by all these defeats, migrated westwards in the
second and third centuries, particularly the On-Uigur
' branch of them. Taking these to be the Huns who:
‘terrified Europe in the fifth century, we know that ‘in
.A-D. 275 they were on the Volga, afterwards advancing
farther west. At the same time another stream of the
Hun-nu directed its course towards Transoxania, where
they were known as the White Huns of Ephthalites.
From there they successfully advanced on Persia and
India, until in a. D. 528 their movement was checked by
a confederation of Hindu princes.

Some of the tribes who entered into the composition
of the Hun-nu Empire of Mété, and already at that
period had. a marked individuality, were the Khakas,
. later called Kirghis, and the Kiao-Che (‘ High-Carts ’),
later called Uigur. The Chinese historians say that
the Kirghis and the Uigur (both of whom they call
sometimes Ting-ling, sometimes Kankalis) use the same
2s Ro

1 E. Chavannes, Les Documents chinois découverts par Aurel


Stein dans les sables du Turkestan oriental, Oxford, 1913, p. vii.
2103 I ‘


66 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA’


language, and Professor Parker makes the suggestion |
that all the cart-using people of Hiung-nu origin north
of the desert region of Issyk-Kul and Syr Daria were
once called Ting-ling.

How far the other tribes of Central Asia prominent
towards the end of the pre-Christian era, for instance
the Saka, were related to the Hun-nu it is difficult to
ascertain, but in any case the ‘Aryan’ population of'
West Central Asia must have been considerably long
after the Graeco-Bactrian kingdoms were destroyed
by.the Yue-Chi. The lack of information about the
linguistic affinities of these people makes it difficult to
define them in the very early centuries of our era. It
is known, for instance, that the Hun-nu used the Turkic -
language in the fourth century a. v.,? but whether. it was
their original language is not clear.

We hear that the Usuni (Wusun) of Ili and Balkash,
and the Khakas (later Kirghis), were fair-haired and
blue-eyed. This may be explained either by their
,, contact with some ‘Aryan’ people, or by attributing
to them, an ‘Aryan’ origin. In 95 B.c. the Chinese _
said that the Khakas lived in the regions of the Kem:
and the upper Yenisei. Then again in the third century
A.D. we hear about the ‘blond Kirghis’ (Kien-kun) as
being very powerful and providing 20,000 men in time
of war? Of course, we have no proof that the fair
Khakas of that time;and their kin the Uigur, were
Turkic-speaking people, except that, some names of
objects and of the months mentioned by the Chinese

1 Parker, of. cit., p. 265.

? Barthold, review of Aristoff’s Altempf at an Explanation of the
Ethnic Composition, &c., P. 343-

5 Q. Donner, ‘Sur Porigine de |’alphabet ture du Nord de l’Asie’,
J: Soc. Fin.-Ougr., Helsingfors, 1896, X1V, p. 7°.


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 67


in connexion with the Khakas are in a Turkic language.’
After the ninth century the Chinese no longer speak
of them as Khakas, but as Kili-ki-dze, which, according
to Klements, is a Chinese pronunciation of the name
Kirghis. The time of the ‘greatest development of the
Kirghis belongs to the seventh to ninth centuries, i.e.
to the second period of Turkic history.

The Uigur are first heard of about the second century
B.c., and the Chinese had conStant relations with them
from that time till the sixteenth century, so that the
history of the Uigur runs through all the first three
periods of Turkic history. But as the evolution of this
important tribe is an essential part of the history of
the Turks in Central Asia it will be useful to give here
a consecutive account of them in some detail,

The Uigur were known to the Chinese under the
names Hao-Hui, Kao-Che, Kan-Hui, Vei-He, U-He,
U-Hu, Hon-He, and Hu. It was through the various
Asiatic transliterations of the name Uigur that European.
writers came across it. The first mention of it is found
in Ptolemy.? In its present form the name seems first
to have been used in the Mahometan histories. at the
beginning of the thirteenth century. Rashid al-Din
says that in his time the name Uigur was applied to
a large group of Turkic tribes living between the
sources of the Yenisei and the Selenga. But after
this, in fact until the seventeenth century, most of the
Eastern Turks were known under this name.

While most Turkic scholars, such as Rashid al-Din,


1 N.N. Kosmin, D. 4. Klements and Historical and Ethnographical
Research in the Minusinsk Country, Irkutsk, 1916, p. 7-

2 Serica, Liber IV, p. 16, 3-

8 Skrine and Ross, of. cit., p. 96.


68 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA
o


Abul Ghazi, Kasem Beg, Vambéry, Klaproth, and
Schott, derive the name Uigur. from a Turkic root,
J. 1. Schmidt refers it to the Mongolian language, and
plates the origin of the Uigur people in Tibet.t If we
accept Professor Radloff’s view that the bulk of the
Hun-nu, or rather the southern branch of them, were
the On-Uigur, then we know that most of them moved
towards the west along the steppes lying north of Tian-
Shan. But the people who played their part in the
history of Central Asia were those of the On-Uigur
who remained behind in Eastern Turkestan, especially
in the basin of the Tarim, and the Togus-Uigur in the
northern part of the present Mongolia. That branch
of them who were already established near the Aral
Sea in the second century a. D. are often-called by their
neighbours simply. Oz or Onlar (‘Ten’)? Later, when
after. the death of Attila the Hunnic Empire broke into
‘separate tribes, they'again assumed their tribal namés,
viz. On-Uigur, Utigur, Sary-Uigur, Kotrigur, while the
. name Hun almost disappears. Of these tribes, the On-
Uigur are known to have been in the north of the
Caucasus in the seventh century, on their way back
to Asia.®

It is difficult to follow the exact fate of these remnants
of the Hun-nu Empire. Presumably a part of them
settled among the Finnic tribes of the steppe forest
near the Urals, but there is so far very little proof in
support of the somewhat vague assumption .that the

1 Forschungen auf dem Gebiete der Volker Mittelasiens, St. Peters-
burg, 1824, p. 95.

2 Among the Turks a confederation of ffibes very often has as
its name the number of the tribes composing it, e.g. Uz, 399)
probably the same as Ghuz. Radloff, of. cit., p. 128. .

3 Radloff, of. cit. p. 128.


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 69


powerful Finnic state of Ugra, which in the tenth and
eleventh centuries stretched between the Volga and the
Urals, owes its name to the Uigur.

Of the Uigur who stayed in Asia, i.e. the Togus
Uigur, we ‘know that in the fifth century they emanci-
pated themselves from the power of the Jwen-Jwen,
and created an independent state called by the Chinese
Hao-fu. At the time of the hegemony of the Tu-kiu
the Uigur also were subdued to them. When in turm
the leading réle among the Turks of Central Asia
passed to the Uigur dynasty (a. D. 744-847), the name
of the state was again ‘Togus-Uigur (‘Nine Tribes’);
though it was composed of more. than that number of
tribes. The capital of the Khagan of the Togus-Uigur
was Karakorum on the River Orkhon. Some fourteen
Khagans ruled during the period of Uigur power.
When, in consequence of the intrigues of the Chinese
with the other Turkic tribes, the Uigur dynasty and’
political power were undermined and finally overthrown

~at the hands-of the Kirghis (a. p. 847), the Uigur culture,
‘which was of a high order, still flourished in Western
China, Eastern Turkestan, and the district of. Hami.
It was in that district that the later Uigur state, under
the dynasty of the Arslan Khans, continued its exist-
ence, and curiously enough it enjoyed an independent
and influential position, since its civilization spread
among the nomadic Mongols, and even in Transoxania.
This position the Uigur ,owed solely to. their great
ability, and to their sedentary agricultural mode of life,
which raised them, as it did the Yenisei Kirghis, above
their romadic neighbours, They came under the in-
_ fluence of Buddhism, of Christianity, and later on. of
Islam. In the western part of the Uigur country


yo THE TURKS OF CENTRAL. ASIA


a new political power, that of the Islamic Uigur dynasty
of Ilek Khan, arose, and its domination spread as far
as Bokhara. But the advance of the Kara-Kidan once
more overthrew: the power of the Uigur, who were
obliged to recognize the suzerainty of the Kara-Kidan.
These in their turn succumbed before Jinghis Khan:
Yet even in the times of the Mongolic rule of Jinghis
Khan the Uigur culture did not fail to make itself felt,
_and still later it was able to produce the well-known
Nestorian patriarchs, Rabban Cauma and Jabalaha.?

Second Period. It is not easy to trace the history
of any,other Turkic tribe with the same continuity.
Turning to the Tu-kiu, with whom begins the second
period of the history of the Turks in Central Asia, we
meet with them first about a.D. 550, at the time when
the Sassanides were reigning in Persia, when we find
theni living, under the name of BBSEOS, between the’
“Altai and the Syr Daria.

. Professor Parker derives the word Tu- kiu from the
Turkic word durké, meaning ‘helmet’, from the shape
of the mountain to which the Turkic tribe of Assena
migrated to escape from the despotic rule of the Sien-pi
(Tung-hu). ‘They seem, however, not to have been
independent even there, since they had to serve the
then powerful Jwen-Jwen as workers in iron. They


1 J. B. Chabot, Histoire du Patriarche Mar Jabalaha III et du
Moine Rabban Cauma, traduite du Syriaque, 1893, vol. I, p. 578.

2 The Jwen-Jwen (Zhu-Zhu) are possibly the ancestors of the.
Avars, who appeared in Europe in the sixth century, and forming
a wedge between the Eastern and Western,Slavs, soon amalga-
mated with them. Blochet identifies the name Jwen-Jwen with
Ib-Ib, Ibim, Ibil, Ibir, from which he derives Sybir, Siberia, and
he believes the Jwen-Jwen to be of Tungus stock, and identical
with the Sien-pi (‘Le Nom des Turcs dans l’Avesta’, J.R.A.S.,


1915, P- 305).


“IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 71


adopted the name of the mountain Durké as a tribal
name.

There seems to. be some confusion as to the geo-
graphical position of the mountain thus connected with
the rise of the Durké, Tu-kiu, or Turks. Professor
Parker? places it not far from the city of Shan-tan in
the modern _ province of Kan-su, which in the sixth
century was called Kin-shan, i.e. ‘Golden Mountains’.
But the birthplace of the Turks is usually held to be
the Altai Mountains, which are also called Kin-shan.
Since when we first hear of the Turks they are expert
metal-workers, it would seem that the Altai, with its
incomparable mineral wealth, is more likely to be the
Kin-shan of the Chinese sources. All modern archato-
logical and ethnological investigations support this view.

At the end of the fifth century the Tu-kiu became
very prosperous, probably thanks to their metal industry ™
and the richness of the mountains near which they’,
settled, and in a.p. 530 their prince Tumen (Tumin)
threw off the yoke of the Jwen-Jwen and soon sub-
jugated all the Turkic states of Central Asia to himself,
adopting the title of Il-Khagan.* For a short time—


1 Parker, of. cit., p. 178.

2 It would seem that the title Khagan (Khan), usually so closely
associated with the Turks, and occurring in the Turkic inscriptions
of the Orkhon, is not Turkic, but Tungus, But this hypothesis of
Blochet holds good only if it be assumed that the Jwen-Jwen were
Tungus, and that Tumen used their title after taking the hegemony
in Central Asia from them. The title used by the chiefs of the
Huns was Chab-gu, and at the time when the Huns were at the
height of their power the chiefs of the Jwen-Jwen Tungus adopted
the title Chab-gu, until at the beginning of the fifth century they
were strong enough to impose on other people their own title of
Khagan, which was taken up by Tuimien in 552 (Blochet, of. cit,
P» 305).


72 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


from the middle of the sixth to the middle of the
seventh centuries—the Turks of Central Asia -were
again united and independent, as at the time of Mété.
Soon, however, the eastern part of the empire passed
under Chinese domination: .Them it again became in-
dependent under the Uigur. dynasty (A: D. 744-847).

The: western part of the .Tumen Empire escaped the
domination of the Chinese only: to fall under Arabian
influence, and subsequently under the intellectual
supremacy of Iran, during the renaissance of Iranian
culture under the dynasty of the Samanides in the
tenth century. Thus the splendour of Transoxania at
that time was obviously the work of the Persians, not
of the Turks, who must be judged rather by the civili-
zation of the Eastern Empires. It was from these
Eastern Empires that the main migrations of the Turks
of that epoch originated. ‘

From the tenth to the thirteenth centuries the Turks
under Karluk' and Seljuk advanced into Turkestan,
iticreasing the Turkic population there and destroying
the Iranian culture. Some of them pushed on farther
towards Asia Minor, while others followed a northern
route via the Caspian and Black Sea steppes.

Four main groups of Turkic invaders of Southern
Russia can be distinguished between the ninth and the
thirteenth centuries: the Pyechenyeg or Kangli, the
Khazar (possibly the plural of Khazak, Kaizak), the.Uz
(Ghuz) or Turki, and the Kuman (Kipchak) or Polovtsy.?

"1 A. Vambéry identifies the people of Karluk with the tribe of
Naiman, and says that they were Turks (of:*ci#,, p.15). Cahun
would also class the tribe of Naiman, as well as the other Christian.
tribe, the Kirei, as Turks (of. c#/., pp. 208-9), while Skrine and


Ross class both Kirei and Naiman as Mongols (of. cit, p. 152).
2 P, Golubowski, of. cit, p. 56. See p. 46.


IN HISTORY AND AT.PRESENT DAY. 73.


When the Khazar appeared in Eastern Europe at the
end of the ninth century they pushed the Pyechenyeg,
whe had already been there for about half a century,
towards’ the. west. “Again, the _Pyechenyeg, as ‘they:
were forced westwards; : drove -before theni, into, the
Danube region, the: Magyars, the Asiatic people who
preceded the Pyechenyeg ‘in their westward migration.

The Kirghis appear. agaih in this second -period.
During the supremacy of the Karluk (from the middle
of the eighth to the middle of the twelfth centuries)
they occupied the country stretching from the Yenisei —
to the westernmost part of Tian-Shan. Here they
.developed almost independently of the Karluk. When
in the twelfth century the Kara-Kidan extended their
power over Tian-Shan, they had great trouble in sub-
jugating the Kirghis.

Third Period. A new era in the history of the
Turks begins with the Jinghis Khan invasions at the
very beginning of the thirteenth century. It is still
a disputed point whether the Jinghis Khan invasions
can be called Mongol, or whether they were largely
Turkic, but carried out under the military supremacy
of a handful of Mongolian steppe nomads. . It began,
as Professor Parker says, ‘in the humblest way, grew
as it rolled over the plains like a huge snowball,
absorbing almost everything in its way’.

Until then the main struggles of China had been
with ‘the two neighbouring races, the Hiung-nu and the
Tung-hu, and it. is somewhat obscure what position
the Mongols occupied towards these races. One thing
is certain, however, that culturally the Mongols were
the most backward people, since the Tung-hu were

* Parker, of. ci/., p. 303.
2103 K


74 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


always influenced by Chinese civilization and the
Hiung-nu by Chinese plus Iranian.!_ This will explain
why: Jinghis Khan himself and all his dynasty were
under obligations to Turkic culture. We hear that
Jinghis Khan had as preceptor for his sons a Uigur
Turk named Tatatungo,? and in the religious and
cultural toleration he is known to have shown to the
‘conquered countries the preference was given to the
Turks. Two Turkic sovereigns contemporary with
Jinghis Khan, Ouang Khan (‘Prester John’) of the
Kirei and Tai-Yang-Khan of the Naiman, were devoted
Nestorian Christians.

Thanks to the researches.of Rashid al-Din, it is


1 Such would be the view obtained from as independent a
standpoint as possible. It must be remembered, however, that
Mongolian scholars would be ready to find a much larger Mongol
element present in pre-Jinghis Khan times, and would attribute
the Jinghis Khan conquests to the genius of the Mongolic race.
There are tribes, such as the ancient ‘Tatars’—some of them,
namely the Otui and Tokus ‘Tatars’, mentioned in the inscriptions
‘of Bilghe Khan in the Orkhon valley as dependent on Turkic e/a
(confederacy)—whom Mongolian schelars such as Father Jakinth
Bichurin would reckon with the Mongols, while the Turkic
scholar N. A. Aristoff reckons them with the Turks. And if a
- Tungus scholar cared to trace the origin of the name Tatar (a sub-
division of Tatan) in the Chinese annals as translated by Bichurin,
he would find that the name Tatan was adopted in’ the ninth
century by a branch of the Mo-ho (Mokho) whe were descendants
of Sushen and Ilu, now recognized as being of Tungus race. In
the twelfth century the Tatan confederacy was composed of
Mongol, Khere, Taigut, and Tatar tribes. Bichurin gives Jinghis
Khan as one of the four princes belonging to it. (W. Thomsen,
‘On the Orkhon and’ Yenisei Monuments with Inscriptions’,
J. Min. Educ., June, 1898; J. Biehurin, Notes on Mongolia, vol. U,
pt. iii, pp. 174-7; N. A. Aristoff, ‘ Notes on the Ethnic Composition
of the Turkic Tribes and Nations’, L. A. 7., 1896, HI and IV,
PP. 277-456.)

? Skrine and Ross, of. cit, p. 155.


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 75


possible to obtain a clear idea of the tribes inhabiting
Central Asia in his time, From his knowledge of them,
and the information he collected, he divides them into
three groups : (1) the Ogus Turks and their kindred, of
purely Turkic blood; (2) the tribes which were taken
for Mongols in the thirteenth century, but who were
in fact Mongolized Turks; (3) the tribes of purely
Mongol blood, who lived on the eastern and northern
outskirts of the Turkic lands.!_ Hence the tribes called
pure Turks by Rashid al-Din probably inhabited the
fands which are known to have recovered their Turkic ”
features after the death of Jinghis Khan.

Of the states that arose after the death of Jinghis
Khan in 1227 the most Turkic were the Middle Empire
(Eastern and Western Turkestan), ruled over by his son
Jagatai and his descendants, and Dasht-i-Kipchak, 1.e.
the country of the lower Volga, the North Caspian
Steppes, the Aral Steppes, and Western Siberia, ruled
over by another son, Juji, and his descendants.

Turkic in feeling and in culture as were Jagatai and
his line, they were succeeded in 1360 by Timur, a, chief
of Moghulistan, purely Turkic in blood as in sympathies,
who founded the brilliant Timurid dynasty.*. ‘The
annals of this house were rendered illustrious by the
names of poets, philosophers, and theologians which are
still household words throughout the East.’* Among
its famous members was the great general, philosopher,
and writer Mirza Baber, whose Memoirs still remain
as a monument in the Jagatai language.’


1 Radloff, Concerning the Uigur, p. 1.

3 L. Cahun (of. cit.) takes Timur to be a descendant: of Jagatai.
8 Skrine and Ross, of. ci¢., p. 180.

4 See p. 27.


76 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


The splendour of the Timurids was checked by the
advance of the Kaizak-Usbegs at the end of the fifteenth
and the beginning of the sixteenth centuries. These
brought new blood, partly Turanian, partly Mongol,
into a region which was becoming Iranized. The
Usbegs, who claimed descent from Jinghis Khan through
his son Juji, appeared in Transoxania about the time
when the Turko-Tatars were losing their dominion
over Muscovite Russia, forming, as it were, a returning
wave of Turks, whose three hundred years of mastery
in Eastern Europe proved a failure, in that they neither
entirely subdued their Russian foes, nor entirely
assimilated themselves with them.

The history of the Usbegs in Transoxania is the
history of three separate Khanates, those of Bokhara,
Khiva, and Kokand, for the Usbeg conquerors were
never strong enough ‘to form an empire equal to that
of the Timurids or of Jinghis Khan, or perhaps had not -
enough of the spirit of unity and the power of organiza-
tion so strongly developed among the Timurids to
achieve such a task.

The Turks of the Altai and Western Siberia, who
had succumbed to the power of Jinghis Khan after but
slight resistance, became independent after the fall of
the Golden Horde. Their western branch started an
independent state along the River Ishim. In the middle
of the fourteenth century they divided into two, one
with its capital at Chingi-Tura (now Tiumien), and later .
at Isker (Sybir), and the other along the River Ishim.
In the fifteenth century Khan Kuchum moved with his
Kaizak from the: Aral-Caspian steppes and overran
both empires, creating a great Siberian Khanate from.

the Urals to the left tributaries of the Ob. In 1583"


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 77


his capital Isker fell into the hands of the Cossacks
under Yermak.

- Another Turkic state, which had also become inde-
pendent after the death of Jinghis Khan, offered more
resistance to the Russians than did the Khanate of
Kuchum.” This was-a state of the Kirghis, or rather
a confederacy of four states! including among its
- kyshtymy (subjects, slaves) many Finnic and Samoyedic
peoples.

Very little is heard of the Kirghis from the thirteenth
to the fifteenth century. They appear again in the ~
fifteenth century at the time of the fall of the Jagatai
dynasty, when it is recorded that the Kaizak population
was enlarged by new additions from the Kangli and
Kipchak tribes. In the seventeenth century the Kirghis,
emancipated from the rule of the Jagatai, were employ-
ing the Kaizak in their fights against the Mongol
-Kalmuck. It was probably then that the Kirghis and
the Kaizak began to intermix, and as the result of this
struggle with the Kalmuck part of the Kirghis and the
Kaizak migrated to Ferghana.

At the end of the sixteenth and the beginning of the
seventeenth centuries the Kirghis state on the Yenisei,
though its position was not to be compared with what
it was in the most flourishing period from the seventh
to the tenth centuries, still carried on the tradition. of
the old Khakas, and was an agricultural state, highly
organized politically, if. not strong in a military sense.
The first Russians to invade the Kirghis state in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, namely the Cossacks
from Tomsk, made-a distinction between these Kirghis


} The four states were Altir, Altisar, Isar, and Tuba or Tubiu.
{N. N. Kosmin, of. cit., Pp, 14-21. See also Historical Documents,
published by the Imperial’ Archaeological Commission.)


78 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


and the Kaizak whom they came across in their conquest
of the Kuchum Khanate.t It was only subsequently
that the Kaizak were named by the Russians Kirghis-
Kaizak, and that the Kirghis of Yenisei, after their
migration southwards before the Russian advance,
became known as the Burut-Kirghis and the Kara-
Kirghis.

Fourth Period. The fourth and last epoch in the-
history of the Turks in Central Asia begins with the
Russian conquest of a more regular character than
the exploits of the Volga Cossacks. In the north it
began with the foundation of Tomsk (1604) on land
wrung from the Kuchum Khanate, and it ended in 1647
with the foundation of Okhotsk’ on the Pacific. In the
south the first milestone of the Russian advance was
the destruction of the Khanate of Kazan in 1552; the
Khanate of Astrakhan shared its fate in 1556. For
a moment the Russian success was checked by the
rising of the Yaik Cossacks, to whose efforts the pre-
vious advance was largely due. After the suppression
of their rising these Cossacks, renamed the Ural
Cossacks, again became a Russian weapon, moving
against the Kaizak and the Turkic tribes of the steppes.
Although the Kaizak were nominally subjugated in 1734
they were not really conquered until Russia became
master of Turkestan, and there was a great rising
against Russia in 1840, when Kenissari, the Sultan of
the Great Orda, made another attempt to unite the
Kaizak into one great independent nation. In 1864
the Russians succeeded in encircling the Kaizak terri-
‘tories with a line of military defences, thus cutting them


1 See M. A. Czaplicka, ‘The Evolution of the Cossack Com--
munities ’, J, Cexir. As. S., May, 1918.


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 79


off from the other Central Asiatic powers, just as in
the eighteenth century they succeeded in encircling the
Finno-Turkic nation of the Bashkir neeween the Volga
and the Urals.

The first Turkic intellectual centre to fall into Russian
hands was Tashkent in 1865, and three years later the
capital of the Iranian Turks, Samarkand (known to
the Greeks as Marakanda, and captured by Alexander
the Great in the fourth century B.c.), lost its inde-
pendence. This decided the fate of Bokhara, which
became a dependent state, and a little later, in 1875,
Khiva succumbed also. The Khanate of Kokand, con-
quered in 1875, was renamed the Ferghana Territory.
The next tribe to be subdued was the Turkomans,
whose courageous and obstinate defence was broken
by the fall of Gheok-Tepe in 1881. In 1895 the eastern
boundary of Russian territory was fixed af the Pamir.

The Central Asiatic territories were never colonized
to the same extent as Siberia, or even the Caspian
Steppe country; they might be called dependencies
rather than:.colonies. Economically.during the last two
decades these provinces have begun to increase their
output of cotton, fruit, and other local products, but
intellectually the Iranian Turks have vegetated in the
antiquated remnants of the Arabo-Persian civilizations,
influenced gradually by the slow, heavy progress of
Russian culture. The Turanian Turks, in much greater
political subjection than the Iranian, and economically
entirely dependent on Russian colonization, have kept
their primitive culture from spurious elements, either
Arabo-Persian or Chinese, but they are, of all the
Turks, the most amenable to the influence of Russian
peasant life,


80 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Arihaeology.


Special attention is now ‘being: given by scholars to
the archaeological remains of Turan, especially to those
of Southern Siberia and Northern Mongolia. Although
it is only recently that organized investigations have
been carried out, they. were already known to the early
Russian travellers, for some mention of them is made
by Witsen, who visited this region in 1692; while the
next traveller, Dr. Messerschmidt (1729), speaks of the
existence among the Russian settlers of the ‘industry’
of plundering the old graves for the: sake. of the iron,
bronze, and particularly gold objects found in them.
The men engaged in this, called bugrovshchiki, would
organize parties of between two and three hundred, and
start on their expedition in the ‘season of the hunter’,
i.e. in the-spring, and return with their plunder in the,
autumn, living during the winter on the proceeds.

The fame of this old metal-work: reached Peter the
Great—the same emperor who, as the legend runs,
used to summon Siberian shamans to his court. He.,
issued a Ukaz prohibiting plundering, and ordered the
local officials to purchase such objects. Though a
certain number of them have thus been saved for
European museums, plundering had not ceased even
in the summer of 1915, when the author saw old bronze
and iron in common use among the Russian settlers.

The early travellers give merely descriptive accounts,
and archaeological investigations did not begin until
the nineteenth century. Among those. whose energies
have been thus. employed are such earnest workers
as Radloff, Aspelin, Klements, Yaduantsett Adrianoff,
Taligren, and Grand.


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT .DAY. .8r


To pass now to a short. review of these antiquities.
Though they consist chiefly of metal cultures, some
mention must be made of thé pre-metal remains.

There are remnants of Stone Age stations along the
southern Yenisei and its tributaries, between Krasno-
yarsk and’ Minusinsk, but nearer to .Krasnoyarsk than
to Minusinsk. According to Adrianoff! they ‘may be
ascribéd to -the Neolithic period, but another Russian
scholar, ‘Satyerikoff, -would place’ them in the Palaeo-
lithic period.” It seems, however, fairly ,certain that
alttiough some of the implements found by Savyenkoff ©
in Bazaikha, on Mount Afontova near Krasnoyarsk,
_and in’ other places,'may be of Palaeolithic type (ac-
cording to the catalogue of the Peter the Great Museum.
im Petrograd, they are of Mousterian and Aurignacian
types),. the stations are more accurately described as
Neolithic. Many of them. might be called kitchen-
middens. In any case_the Stone Age. remains lie
outside the scope of this essay, though stone implements
have been found together with the bronze, copper, and
gold objects of the succeeding age; and even. with
objects of the Iron Agé.

Burial-mounds, called kurgans, are spread in hundreds
and thousands from the River Irtish to the River
Orkhon. Judging from the objects found in these
kurgans they belong either to the Bronze or to the
Iron Age. Connected with the kurgans are the stone
figures called by the Russians dady (sing. baba), and:
, by the Turkic natives oyotash, and also the stone


1ALV. Adrianoff, Sketches of the Minusinsk Country, 1904.

2 I. T. Savyenkoff, The Stone Age in the Minusinsk Country, 1896,°
and’ The Palaéolithic- Epoch in the Nee of Krasnoyarsk,
1892.


a108 L


82 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


memorial tablets covered with inscriptions in the Old
Turkic language, called Uigur, many of which have
now been deciphered. Independently of these inscrip-
tions, there are on the cliffs and rocks of this region
traces of pictographic writings, so far uninterpreted.t
Russian investigators call the Old Turkic characters
‘runic inscriptions’ A and the pictographs pisanitsy. In,
addition to all this, there are remnants of jrrigation:
canals, copper-mines, and fortresses, these last called
by the natives shzbe. ‘
Generally speaking, all these antiquities of the Metal
Ages, known by the Russians under the vague appella-
tions ‘of. ‘Chud’ or ‘Tuba’ remains, fall into two
groups:
1. Remains of the Bronze Age, including copper and
gold objects, the burial masks, the remnants
‘of mines, and: some of the pictographs.

2. Remains of the Iron Age, with which must be
reckoned the stone memorial tablets with in-
scriptions, the stone figures, and the remnants
of fortresses.


The Bronze Age of this region is divided by Tallgren ?
into the following periods :


I. Period dating (possibly from About 3000 B.C.) to
tooo B.c. No kurgans of this. period are yet
known. Chief implements: daggers, dight


1 .N. S. Voronyeis, ‘Rock Pictures found on the frontier ‘of
Turgai-and Syr Daria Territories along the River Lack-Pay’,
Russ. Anthr. J., 1916, Nos. iii and iv, pp. 57761; A. V. Adrianoff,
‘Preliminary Information regarding the Pisanitsy collected in the
Minusinsk Country in summer 1907’, Bull, Russ. Committee, 1908,
No. viii, p. 37

? A. M. Tallgren, Collection Tovostine, Helsingfors, 1917, p. 20-


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 83


spears, and socketed celts. Ornament purely

‘geometric.

II. Period dating between 1000 and 500 B.c. No
kurgans of this period are yet known. Chief
implements: socketed double-looped celts,
daggers, knives in great number. Ornament
partly geometric, partly zoomorphic. Figures

_ . xof animals as handles of daggers.

IIL. Period after 500 B.c. Kurgans, or burial-places
surrrounded by quadrangular stones. Orna-
ment chiefly zoomorphic ; towards the end of
the period vegetable ornament appéars. Con-
tact with Scythian art is strongly noticeable. .

The majority of the bronze objects found in this
region belong to the third period. Here also must
be placed the collection of knives of ‘various shapes
almost unknown in Scythia. A: common type is a knife
with a well-formed ring at the end, recalling the Chinese
knife which degenerated into the round copper ‘cash’,
but to the same period belongs a type of dagger with
a heart-shaped guard, reminiscent of the Ps dagger
of Eastern Europe.

As far as the Iron Age is concerned, its place is
usually defined ‘by the dates of the historical. events
mentioned in the inscriptions. The greater number
of the graves of this period are estimated to belong to
the time between the sixth’and seventh centuries a. p.
But the Iron Age must have started much earlier, as
we know from the Chinese histories that in the second
century B.c, the Hiung-nu, then living to the north of
.the Chinese, were using iron implements! Judging
from the forms of the implements, the early Iron Age

1 A. V. Adrianoff, Sketches of the Minusinsk Country, p. 5.


84 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA:


of this region seems to be a continuation of the Bronze
Age in another material. It is only in the late Iron
period that new forms appear,' and hence it is probable
that while the early Iron was evolved by the people
responsible for the Bronze culture, the late Iron culture
may have been brought by some new-comers, possibly,
though not necessarily, of another race.

The honour of having first deciphered the Old Turkic’
‘inscriptions belongs to the Danish scholar Professor
‘Vilhelm Thomsen, of Copenhagen,? working in 1893, and
the investigation was continued by Professor Wilhelm
Radloff of Petrograd 5 from 1894 onwards.

The Yenisei i inscriptions are chiefly funeral tributes to
deceased Khans or 'Khagans of the ‘ Kyrgys’ (Kirghis) ;
those of the River khon in North-West Mongolia,
which, judging from the more finished form of the’
writing, are of later date,. contain historital and ethno-
graphical information, and ‘are ascribed to the Tu-kiu.
Thus our knowledge of the Myranian Turks, which-has
‘been obtained by analysing thexpften confusing annals


1W. W. Radloff, ‘Siberian’ Antiquities’, Materials’ for’ the
Archaeology of Russia, St. Petersburg, 1888, 1891, 1894, 1902; Aus -
Sibirien, vol. Il, chap. vii; F. R. Martin, L’Age du bronze au musée
de Minoussinsk, Stockholm, 1893; D. A. Klements, Antiquities of
the Minusinsk Museum. The Remains of the ‘Metal Ages, Tomsk,
1886; I. P. Kuznietsoff-Krasnoyarski, The Minusinsk Antiquities,
Copper, Bronze, and Transitional Periods, Tomsk, 1908; J. R.
Aspelin, Antiguités du Nord Finno-Ougrien, Helsingfors; 1877.

* Inscriptions de UIénissei recueillies et publites par la Société
Finlandaise d’ Archéologie, 1889; Inscriptions de l’Orkhon recueillies
par l'expédition finnoise 1890: et publiées parla Société Finno-
Ougrienne, 1892; V. Thomsen, ‘InscriptionS de l’Orkhon déchif-
frées’, Mém. Soc. Fin.-Ougr., V; N. Xgdrintseff, Ancient Monuments
and Inscriptions in Siberia, Literary €ollection, 1885.

5 -W. W. Radloff, P. Melioranski, &c., Collection of Documents of «
the Orkhon Expedition, 1897,


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 85


‘of Chinese historians, has been amplified, and difficult
‘points to some extent cleared up, by the interpretation
of these inscriptions.

The older type of inscriptions - is engraved ; the later
type is written on the stone, in some cases even in
colours, but the-art of using colours was apparently
introduced by the Mongols and the Chinese. The
Orkhon.inscriptions are bilingual, the second language ~
being Chinese.

The richest collections of objects of both Bronze and_
Iron cultures are to be found in the Minusinsk Museum,
and in the Petrograd and Moscow Myseums. Next to
these come the Museums of Tomsk:jand Krasnoyarsk.
The beginning of the excavation of the kurgans dates
from about 1881'; ‘among the last shorough investigations
are those of A. M. Tallgren. £918) in the: Minusinsk
region, and of'A. V. Adrianoff in the Uriankhai country:

Several attempts have, een made to classify the
various types .of kurgans Radloff? distinguishes as
many as ten types; thgée, However: are not sufficiently
clearly differentiated to admit of their being referred to
ten distinct cultures? A broader division, based on the
more apparent external differences between them, is
into two’ groups. The graves of the first group have
their surface level with the surface of the ground, and
are surrounded by: quadrangular stone slabs. They
are usually associated with the Bronze culture, and the
implements they contain are such as’ would be character-
istic of a more or less settled population. The graves
of the second group are covered with a raised mound,
and are often stirroundéd by high slabs of stone re-
sembling monoliths, which: sometimes reach a height

1 W. W. Radloff, Aus'Sibirien, yol; IL,-pp. 68-143.


- 86 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


of ten feet. These graves are usually associated with
the Iron Age, and contain a large number of weapons
of war. To the former type may be added the large
mounds, called by the local natives Chaa-tas, which are
collective graves, but usually contain one grave situated
a little apart from the others, and showing much more
finished workmanship. Graves of the first type are
_ found especially on the banks of the upper Yenisei, and
‘in the Abakan and Minusinsk Steppes. Graves of the
second type occur in the basins of the Irtish and the
Tobol, and also side -by side with those of the first type -
in the Abakan and Minusinsk Steppes, so that the
classification cannot be pressed too far. Until further
investigations provide sufficient ground for making a
more detailed division, Tallgren, following Castrén and
Aspelin, proposes to keep to this dual grouping.

It is not possible in this essay to go into further
details’ with régard, to the archaeology of this region,
but, accepting the conclusions of the archaeologists, an
‘endeavour will be made to trace the course of culture
contact during the Bronze and Iron Ages, beginning
with a consideration of the question how far the Siberian
culture can be compared with similar cultures of corre-
sponding periods elsewhere..

As we know, the kurgans of the later, i.e. the Iron
Period, are not confined to these regions, but-stretch
all along Southern and Central Russia, Lithuania, and
Poland, as far as the Vistula. Yet the kurgans-of the
Irtish-Orkhon region have. their own characteristic’
features, which permit of their being “treated separately.

As to the other centres of the Bronze culture, the
Kama-Ural centre is sometimes considered. to be the,
prolongation of the Minusinsk centre. But Tallgren,

' 1 Tallgren, of. cit, p. 14.


IN HISTORY AND AT.PRESENT DAY 87


after comparing the objects found in both regions,
comes: to the conclusion that the two groups are quite
independent, and that what features they have in common
are due to the fact that they were both: influenced by
the same civilization from the south and west! E. H.
Minns lays stress on the resemblance between the
Bronze culture of Minusinsk and that of the Scythians?
While agreeing with Minns that the resemblance is con-
siderable, Tallgren sees also a-great difference, namely,
that the Iranian influence coming from Turkestan at
that time was stronger in Turan than in Scythia. In
any case it is not the Scythian bronze that influenced
the Minusinsk bronze, but rather the reverse.’

Just.as the late Professor Donner looked upon the
region of the ancient Sogdia, Bactris, and Iran as
possibly hiding the earliest form of the Yenisei inscrip-,
tions, Tallgren looks upon it as the place where the
Bronze culture of Minusinsk originated.. From this
archaeological evidence. it would seem’ that the people
of Turan took their pnawledee, of bronze-working from

' Tallgren, of. cit. p. 9. 7

2 Ellis H. Minns, Seyihians and Greeks, p. 241: ‘The resem-
blances between the culture I have called Scythic and that of the
early inhabitants of Siberia... are so great that it is impossible
to treat the archaeology of South’ Russia without touching that of
Siberia.” Thus Minns approaches the question of the Siberian
remains from the study of Scythic remains, while Tallgren adopts
the opposite method of taking the Minusinsk culture as the
standard and comparing the other with it. This is the method
that I have tried to follow in ethnographical questions, for it is
always safer to define the Asiats in Asia before attempting to
define the Asiats who invaded Europe. Recently a book appeared
(J. Strzygowski, Alai-Iran und Vélkerwanderung, Leipzig, 1917)
which on its purely archaeological merit deserves to be placed next
to Tallgren’s and Minns’s valuable contributions, but the tendency
of the author is strikingly Pan-German, and this prevents him


from confining the subject within its proper geographical limits.
5 Tallgren, op. c#f., p. 11.


88- THE, TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Iranian Turkestan, and developed it-themselves. The
Chinese influence, which was so powerful in the Iron
Age, is not-so noticeable in.the Bronze Age. Thus, for
instance, zinc, which énters into the composition of the
bronze implements of Minusinsk,! does fot occur in
the bronze of China.2 One of the most remarkable
resemblances emphasized by Tallgren is that between
the Minusinsk bronze and the products of the La Teéne
Celtic. civilization. This is especially significant in the
decorative motives, such as the geometrical patterns
and the form of the handles of daggers.®

A few words must be said about the attempts at the
representation of human figures in this old culture of
the Minusinsk ‘region. While geometric, zoomorphic,
and, later on, plant ornament reaches a high stage of
development, representations of the human form are
rare and obscure. In the Bronze Age we find scarcely
any. One of the few which were found forms the
handle of a knife, and recalls a human figure now in
‘the collection of the British Museum. Perhaps the
most successful attempts at giving an idea of the human
face are the burial masks found in some kurgany
associated with the late Bronze Age, especially the
gypsum casts.

Even during the Iron Age little progress is made in
this form of ornamentation, but from this era onwards we
have numerous stone figures, whose object is probably
the same as that of the masks of the earlier period,


1H. Struwe, ‘Analyse verschiedener antiken Brosfzen. und
Eisen aus Abakan und Jenissei’, Bull, I-d. S., St. Petersburg,
1866, X, pp. 282-9; ‘Brandenburg and Ivanowski, Transactions of
the Commission for the Chemical Technical Analysis of Ancient
Bronze, St. Petersburg, 1882,

? Tallgren, of. cit., p. 34-

8 [bid., p. 11.


IN HISTORY. AND AT“PRESENT DAY °89


namely, to picture the dead person. The figures, soitie
of which reach a height of three ‘to four feet, are-made’
_of rude stone blocks, and almost all of them are
characterized by the curious position of the hands,
clasping in front a cup, or cup-like object. While ‘tthe
general appearance of the figure is highly conventional-
ized, the faces differ greatly. They are of ‘both sexes;
in fact the female sex predominates. Only some of them
show Mongolian traits. Stone figures of similar-appear-
ance are found in Southern Russia, where they coincide
with the belt known for its Scythic remains. These,
however, are of much later date, since we know that
-some of the Turkic tribes who invaded Russia before
the time of Jinghis Khan, such, for instance, as the
Polovtsy(Cumans), were in the habit of erecting such
figures.1 Though the custom of placing a small wooden |
figure of the deceased on the grave is known to many
Turkic and Finnic tribes in Siberia, these old stones
are taken by the modern natives for images of gods,
and sacrifices are often offered to them.
The burial masks have, so far as is known at present,

a very limited distribution. They have been found on
Tagara Island quite close to Minusinsk, and at a spot
about sixty versts to the south-east (Salt Lake).? Alto-
gether not more than twenty masks are known from
this region. But some have been found also in the
Graeco-Scythic tombs of the Crimea at Glinishche.
The masks are either white or coloured, and are
found associated with the skull, or, in cases where the


1 Minns, of. cit., p. 240.

aK Goroshchenko, ‘Burial masks of gypsum and a special
type of trepanation in the Kurgans of the Minusinsk District’,
Bull. of Tenth Arch, Congress in Riga, 1896, p. 4.

2193 M


90 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA.


skull is missing, separately on a specially erected stone’
slab. In some cases it seems likely that the masks had
been broken or partially burnt, together with other
objects belonging to the dead person. In one kurgan
at Salt Lake we find, besides the plaster covering the
skull, clay and gypsum covering the first five vertebrae
also; in this case the mask has not been taken from
the face of the deceased, but covers the skull ona
foundation of clay moulded to imitate the features.
Thus we have to deal with two fypes of mask’ in this
region. One is a plaster cast of gypsum, taken from
the face of the deceased by the modern method of
making a mould and taking a cast from it, Such masks
are typical of the kurgans of Tagara Island, and are
associated with the custom of burning the body and
burying the ashes, or of burying the whole corpse in
a standing position. The ashes are often buried along-
side of the skull and the mask, and obviously the mask
must have been taken immediately after death.

The other type, found in the kurgans called Chaa-tas,
or communal kurgans, near the Salt Lake, is, properly
speaking, not a mask but an artificial reconstruction
of the face of the deceased superimposed upon the
skeleton. This type is connected with the custom of
burying the skeleton in'a standing position,’ and it
must be supposed, therefore, that after death the corpse
was left either outside the kurgan or in a temporary
grave until the flesh had completely disappeared from
the bones.? And.indeed this custom corresponds to
what we know from Chinese and Greek writers about
the burial customs of the old Turks. ‘If a man die
in spring or summer they wait for the leaves to. fall,

1 Goroshchenko, of. cié., P. 3. 2 [bid., p. 9.


-IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY or


if in autumn or winter they wait for leaves and flowers
to come out. Then they dig a ditch and bury him.’?
In fact, in the difficult task of disentangling the Hiung-
nu (Turks) and the Tung-hu (Tungus) tribes in the
Chinese annals, one of the safest guides is the burial
customs of these peoples, since the Tung-hu buried
their dead, as they do sometimes now, on a high
platform, while the Hiung-nu left the body in the tent
or outside the tent for a long time. To this custom
is due the fact that so-few kurgans include the complete
skeleton. The frequent absence of the skull, where -
the mask replaces it, may, however, be explained by
the custom of keeping the skull among the living as
a memento,

Moreover, the fact that some of the skulls found in
the same communal kurgans have undergone post-
humous trepanning in the region of the temple suggests’
that the skull was not left for the flesh on it to decay
naturally, but that artificial means were employed to
prepare ‘it for the final burial ceremony. After the
skull had been thus cleaned of all its soft tissues, all
the openings were plugged with clay, and then the
features of the face were reconstructed. In most cases
a layer of clay covers the calvaria also. Sometimes a
coating of gypsum is put on the top of the clay.

The artificial method of cleaning the skull and then
reconstructing the features, so well known among
various primitives of Melanesia and, as has been
pointed out to me by Mr. Henry Balfour, also of
Mexico, might very well be taken for the genuine
custom of the aborigines of the ‘country, which were
doubtless of Turkic .race, while the more refined

* Minns, of, cit., P. 94-


92 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


gypsum casts niay have been introduced by the people
who brought the Bronze culture to this region. In
support of the first part of this statement it is worthy
of mention that Father Bichurin, whose translations of
the Chinese annals have been made use of extensively
in this investigation, says that a people living in
Southern Mongolia, and possibly contemporary with
the construction of these kurgans, had the custom of
‘tearing off the skin from the dead’, which seems to
be a direct reference to this second mode of burial as
being prevalent in Central Asia."

Goroshchenko, the Siberian anthropologist to whose
thorough study of the osteology of the kurgans the
author is indebted, thinks that the masks of the Chaa-
tas type developed out of the casts of the Tagara type.
But if we consider the archaeological remains there
seems to be very little to show the difference in age
between these two groups of kurgans, both of them
differing from other Bronze Age kurgans in this, that
_ they include both bronze and iron implements.2 They
should therefore be ascribed to the late Bronze Age type.

There is no doubt that the clear and refined features
of the masks of the Tagara type, some of which can
be seen in the Helsingfors and Moscow Museums,
approach the ‘ Aryan’ type—to retain this unsatisfactory
but convenient term—while the masks of the Chaa-tas,
with broader face and coarse features, approach the
Mongolian type. But it is possible that the difference
is merely superficial, and is explained by the different


1 Father Jakinth Bichurin, Collection of Information concerning
Peoples living in Central Asia, vol. II, pp. 197-9.
* KI. Goroshchenko, Skulls from the Kurgans of the Minusinsk


District, 1900, pp. 8-9.


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 93.


method of construction. The face as reconstructed on
a skull would naturally be coarser than the mask taken
from a face, unless of course the constructor were a-
master more skilled in the moulding of human features
than was the man of the Bronze Age of Minusinsk.

It is noteworthy that the craniometric measurements
of skulls found in these kurgans do not give us evidence .
to support the theory of two distinct physical races.
The results of these measurements are summed up by
Goroshchenko as follows:' that the type of these skulls
shows great uniformity with that of other Bronze Age.
skulls, that they resemble the skulls of the older kurgans
of the Moscow Government, and that they do not
correspond with any measurements of skulls on living
people of the modern population of this region, whether
Mongol or Turk. The most striking feature of these
skulls is their long-headedness. Out of 96 skulls of the
kurgans of the Minusinsk region, 42 were dolicho-
cephalic and 21 sub-dolichocephalic.?

This brings us to this most unsettled problem: the
definition of the physique of the Turks of Central Asia.


1 Goroshchenko, of. céf., pp. 7-8.

2 Ibid., p. 30. The measurements of the male skulls of the two
groups of kurgans where the masks were found give the following
result (Table IT):


Cephalic Index,

Tagara Kurgans .. . 7 74.6 (16 measurements)
Chaa-tas ....... 73-2 (13 2 )
Horizontal Circumference.

Tagara Kurgans . . . . 522 (18 measurements)


Chaa-tas . . 2... «© 527 (14 ” )
Altitudinal (Height) Index.
Tagara Kurgans . . . . 76 (6-measurements)


Chaa-tas . , « 4 + + + 9725 (10 4 )-


94 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


As has been said in dealing with the history and,
archaeology, the mention of fair-haired and blue-eyed
people leads us to the conclusion that this type must
have entered into the composition of the modern Turk
of Central Asia. Besides, nothing else was’ to. be
expected in the region of Altai and Sayan, considering
how close this region is to the Amu-Daria (Oxus) and
Tarim valleys, where it is fairly certain that the brachy-
cephalic Alpine type of Western Europe ‘originated.
Whoever studies the altogether insufficient -anthropo-
metric data of Central Asia must necessarily wonder
with Joyce ‘whether indeed the race is not the result
of an admixture in varying proportion, according to
locality, of Aryan and Mongol stocks’.* Even if we ~
agree that the Central Asiatic Turks have their indi-
viduality historically and ethnologically, this is not
necessarily associated with a distinct physical race.
And yet, although the amount of research as yet
accomplished, and perhaps also the present state of
anthropology, is not such as to justify us in speaking
of a separate Turkic race or sub-race, there seems to
be some national type, or types, which we can distin-
guish in the Turks when we meet them outside their
proper territory. Thus, the Yakut, who have now
inhabited the Arctic region for several hundred ‘years,
stand out amongst the other Arctic peoples on account
of what might’ be called their Southern type. The
admixture of the ‘Tatar’ blood of Southern Yenisei in
the Samoyed of the Ob is also clearly apparent.


1 A. V. Adrianoff, Sketches of the Minusinsk Country, p. 73 ; GE.
Grum-Grzymailo, Description of Travels in Western China, ch. viii,
1896-7.

* T, A. Joyce, ‘On the Physical Anthropology of the Oases of
Khotan and Keriya’, J. A. I, 1903, vol. XXXIII, p. 315:


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY - 95


Among the earliest investigators of the ‘anthro-
‘pology of Central Asia is the well-known Hungarian
scholar Ujfalvy.1 Then there should be mentioned
Grenard,? Troll,’ Shishoff,* and Goroshchenko.. The
Russian anthropologist Ivanowski,’ who is responsible
for a compilation containing a greater number of
anthropometric data than that of any other living anthro-
pologist, distinguishes what he calls the Central Asiatic
anthropological type. He defines its characteristics as
follows: dark-coloured hair and eyes, light hair and
eyes being exceptional ; stature of the majority medium, ~
with a tendency towards high stature among the Kaizak
of the Middle Orda, the town Taranchi, and some Sarts ;
the head is brachycephalic (broad-headed) or hyper-
brachycephalic ; the nose among the majority is leptor-
rhine (narrow), broad noses being met with chiefly
among the Kaizak of the Middle Orda; the trunk is
long and the chest dimensions are medium, with a
tendency to very small. Taking this as the standard,
we see that the Kara-Kirghis differ from it’ by being


1C, E, Ujfalvy, Essai d’une Carte ethnographique de l'Asie
centrale; Les Aryens au nord et au sud de l'Hindou Kouch, 1896;
Expédition sctenti ifique en Russie, Sibérie et dans le Turkestan, 1878.

2 F, Grenard, ‘Le Turkestan et le Tibet’, in Méssion scientifique
dans la Haute Asie, 1890-5; J. L. Dutrueil de Rhins, pt. IT.

* Troll, ‘ Individual-Aufnahmen central-asiatischer Eingeborner’,
Z.fE. 3890, pt. iii.

“ A. Shishoff, The Saris, vol. I1I, Anthropology, 1905.’

5 K. I, Goroshchenko and A. A. Ivanowski, ‘The Natives of the
Yenisei’, Russ. Anthr. J., 1907, Nos. i, ii; K. I. Goroshchenko,
‘Materials for the anthropology of Siberia’, Bull. Krasn. S. E.
Sib. Sect. I. R. G. S., vol. I, No. ii, 1905,

® A. A. Ivanowskti, Axthropological Composition of the Population.
of Russia, 1904, pp. 207-8; ‘and Population of the World, 1911,
PP. 391-2.


96 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


less dark in colouring, taller, with a longer face; the:


Yakut approach nearer in type to the Mongol- Buriat ;
while the ‘Tatars’ of Southern Yenisei stand nearer
to' the Samoyed. This similarity must naturally: be
attributed ta, later admixture.


There are no anthropometric data regarding -the.


various Altaian Turks (namely, the Chern ‘Tatars’,


Kumandints, Teleut, Teles, Altaian Oirot, same as Altai.
Kalmuck, and the Chu Telengit). We have, however, :


most valuable observations about their physical type
by the late Siberian scholar Yadrintseff. In an essay


1 Some of the chief measurements of the Turks of Central Asia,


based on the work of Ivanowski (Population i the World) and
Joyce (op. cit.) :


_Ivanowski


Joyce


Stature Height | Full-face| Nasal


Au-


Tribe. (medium). Ceph. Ind.| Index. Index. Index. | thority.
Taranchi (374) 1646 | (368) 86-4 | (107) 74-5| 2 Ujf.
Blag.
Sarts (238) 1677 | (223) 83-6 g (104) 61-5 coeet
ga Tro
Kaizak and os Tr.
Kipchak (418) 1644 | (405) 87-0 : 7 a (172) 68-9 } oie
‘*:..8 . Tr.
Usbegs (292) 1675 | (282) 86.1 8 8 (13) 69-0 Ujf.
ae Tr.
Kara-Kirghis | (83) 1676] (78) 85-9 _ ‘< (47) 15°9 } Ujt
9 * Goros
Soyot ° (72) 1597 (74) 70-4 2° (78) 10-2} } Tran.
Sagai (60) 1620| (60) 80.8 d (60) 73-0 ioe
. Si = oT Ss
Kachints (42) 1619 | (34) 82-4 (34) 78-0 oan,
Beltir (78) 1607 | (74) 79°5 "1 (gg) 78.0] } Gores
Khotanese (19) 1645 | (22) 84-4 (23) 87-4 | (a3) 71-7} Stein
Keriyans (15) 1589 | (16) 86-9 (16) 82-4 | (16) 81-1] Steir


For the measurements of the Yakut see ‘Report of the Ex-
pedition to the Yenisei’, by M. A. ae and H. U. Hall (to be
published shortly).


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 097


on the Altaians, published in 1881,! he says that many
Altaians who ‘have as yet had no contact’ with the
colonists resemble in their type the Caucasians (Aryans).
Blue eyes, chestnut and fair hair, and non-prominent
cheek-bones’ are often met with, especially: among the
Kumandints.2 And yet no record is known. that the
Aryans ever spread as far as the Altai Mountains; on
the other hand, we know of the close association of
‘the Turkic race with this region. The only plausible
suggestion, therefore, is that the prehistoric contact of
the Turks and Aryans, which brought the knowledge ..
-of bronze to Turan, affected the physical type of the
Asiatic Turks just as it affected their nomad life, leading
them to settle down to agriculture.

When remains of two archaeological periods are
found in one place the popular conclusion is that the
later culture was brought to that place by the later

, comers. For a long time the archaeology of the
Minusinsk district was treated in accordance with this
rule. The Bronze period of the region was ascribed to
‘some local autochthonous people. They were said to
be peaceful, since there are hardly any weapons among
the remains of this period. From.the abundant remains
of implements connected with agriculture and mining
they were put down as agriculturists and miners, and
finally they were described as democratic, because we
find at thaf time communal graves and graves of common
people generally, while in the Iron Age it is mostly the
chiefs who enjoyed the privilege of burial in a kurgan.
On the other hand, the Iron Age people were supposed


“sN. M. Yadrintseff, ‘On the Altaians and the Chern Tatars’,
Buil. I. RB. G. S., 1881.
2 Ibid. pp. 5-7-


2103 N


98 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


to have been warlike nomads, who left behind them
many weapons of war, who lived on their horses, and
who were more or less like the nomad Scythians of the
Gteeks. The Bronze Age people are often set down
as Finno-Samoyedic, or vaguely as Palaeo-Yeniseians,
while the Iron Age people are set down as Turks.
But a closer study of the region shows that the problem
is not yet solved, and it may be stated as follows: Were
the Bronze Age people quite different from the Iron
Age people, and what is the relation of either or both
of them to the remnants of the Turanians now living
in this region ? ,

The solution of this problem has usually been sought |
by the historical method of investigation, that is to say,
by quoting disconnected facts obtained from free trans-
lations of the Chinese writers, who could not, of course,
have a very intimate acquaintance with regions so far
away. Again, in dealing with the present natives it
has usually been linguistic considerations that have
been taken as a basis for determining racial affinities.
But with all respect to the Chinese annals (which may
perhaps one day be given to Europe in a full and
authoritative translation), it would seem that as we are
now able to read the history of these people from their
archaeology and from their own inscriptions, it is
possible to adopt an_archaeological method, and to
compare the results thus obtained with those arrived
at by ethnological research. This provides a means of
checking the work done by the historical method.

We have no direct information from the Chinese or
any other sources as to the Bronze Age people of this


1 This has been the case especially since the famous linguistic
researches of Castrén some fifty years ago. ™


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 99


region having been overrun by steppe nomads belonging
to the Age of Iron. Archaeological evidence proves
that the first period of the Iron Age evolved naturally
out of the Age of Bronze, while the fact that the second
period of the Iron Age is, as it were, ‘interrupted by
a new influx of Iron civilization—possibly owing to an
invasion—does not necessarily mean that the invaders
were of quite different race; they may have been of
the same race but of more pastoral habits, and this may
also account for the fact that the invasion escaped the
comments of foreign historians. Since it is established.
that the late Iron Age is to be ascribed to the Turks,
and that the early Iron Age does not differ sufficiently
from it to warrant the assumption that these two stages
of the Iron Age are the product of two different races,
it follows that the Bronze Age people may well have
been of Turkic, or at least Turkic-Iranian (Turkic-
Aryan ?) origin. However, even if we go so far as to
assume an association between the Old Turkic race
and the Bronze remains, it is necessary at the same
time to remember that the knowledge of bronze-
working and the types of implements produced were
obtained from some centre of ‘Aryan’ culture, just as
the characters of the inscriptions were borrowed from
Semitic.

The ability of the old Turks to develop these borrowed
arts is surprising, in view of the fact that no later Turks in
Central Asia have reached so high a standard of civiliza-
tion, but the explanation may possibly be that the Turks
of that time were freer from Mongolian admixture than
they have been since the thirteenth century, and that
the ‘Aryan’ element in Central Asia was, at the time of
this old culture, very considerable.


too ‘THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


In his recent book on the archaeology of this region
Tallgren says: ‘The people who developed the Bronze
Age civilization of the Upper Yenisei might have been
Ture or else Indo-European.’ He rejects the idea that
they may ‘have been some Palaeo-Siberian people of
the same stock of the Ostyak of the Yenisei, who still
live in this region, since, as he very rightly- says, they
could only produce ‘une civilisation des non-civilisés’,
and even if it were right to call them autochthones of
the country they could never play any part in its history.
The author’s personal knowledge of these people cor-
roborates Tallgren’s opinion.

The forests of Altai have been regarded by many
prominent scholars of Siberia? as a natural environment
for the beginning of settled life. Whether as cattle-
breeders, as agriculturists, or as miners and smiths,
.the Altaians must always have been more settled than
the people of the Caspian-Aral steppe. A study of the
implements, both ancient and modern, bears out the
hypothesis that we have here to do with a continuous
sedentary culture. Furthermore, the continuation of
the pictographs through both Bronze and Iron Ages
points in the same direction, and the ¢amga or tribal
(clan ?) marks found on the implements and gravestones
of both periods may still be seen at the present day on
the reindeer and implements of the modern natives.

But though the passing of the Bronze Age into the
fron Age may have been a process of natural evolution


® Of. cit, p. 30. =

* N. N. Kosmin, ‘Chern’, Sibirskiya Zapiski, Aug. 1916, No. 3,
pp. 95-112; D. A. Klements and Historical and Ethnographical
Research in the Minusinsk Country; N. M. Yadrintseff, On ‘the
Altaians and the Chern Tatars. .


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 101


of the same people, this does not exclude the fact that
about the middle of the Iron Age some invasion took
place, which gave rise to wars, and to a correspondingly
great development of implements of war. There is,
however, as has been said, no proof that these invaders
were of..different race from the men of the Bronze
and early dron Ages, but as they came from a steppe
environment they may quite well have brought other
customs with them. Some fall in the scale of culture
may also have occurred as a result of a decrease in,
or perhaps entire absence of, contact with the people-
(probably Aryan) who must have influenced the Yenisei
Bronze culture. But though changes there were, they
were not fundamental, since the general culture was
never destroyed, as it was after the Kalmuck of the
Russian conquests.

The Yenisei and Orkhon inscriptions so far known
were written at the time when the supposed Turkic
invaders were settling in the land they had conquered
from the autochthones, but they certainly do not show
the spirit of unacclimatized new-comers. The Turks
of that time speak of themselves as inhabitants of the
forest, not of the steppe. It is the dense forest yish
(the same as Chern, ‘black forest’) that is constantly
referred to in the Orkhon inscriptions.. The Orkhon
Tu-kiu, when describing their fights with the Kirghis
or other Turks, always say that these took place in
the zsh, and that their.country, as well as the country
of the Kirghis, is the y#sh. Judging from the original
names of the rivers flowing in the forest regions of the
upper Yenisei, they were all named by the Turks.


1 The present Altaian ‘Tatars’ call themselves‘ Tuba’, ‘Tubalar’,
or  Yish-kis’,


102 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


The Russidns who first colonized this country from
the north took up the name Yenisei from the Tungus,
whom they met first; they came in contact with
the: Southern Turks only after they had subjugated
the Tungus. But even now, in the upper Yenisei
region, the Yenisei is known as the Ulu-Kem, which
again is formed by the junction of two streams with
Turkic names, Bii-Kem (Bei-Kem) and Kha-Kem
.(Hua-Kem). These names recall the terms for the
two chief rivers of the Altai, Biya (Bi) and .Katun
(Khatun), which were probably also. named by the
Turks.

The dense forests of this region made communication
between various tribes more difficult than it would have —
been in the open steppe. Hence arose the necessity
of making on the bark of trees, or the flat surface of
the rock, signs conveying various kinds of information.
These signs, called by the Russians myety, gave rise
to the pictographic writings called pzsanztsy. Some of
them seem to have been a means of. conveying tribal
information and a chronicle of events, others to have
been connected with the religious cult, and these latter
are very much like some of the pictures on the modern
shaman’s drum. Still others may be nothing more
than tribal samgas. Great numbers of such .engraved
or painted pictographs are met with in the forest region
uf the northern Altai arid upper Yenisei, while they are
never found in the open steppes, where communication
can be carried on much more easily by means of '
messengers on horseback or by smoke signals, and
where chronicles are handed down by word of mouth.


1N, M. Yadrintseff, The Ancient Monuments and Inscriptions in
Siberia, pp. 456, 476.


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 103


Curiously enough, it is recorded in the otd Russian
Cossack reports of the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries, made accessible of late years, that the
Kirghis, who were then fighting with the Mongolians
of Jungaria, tried to communicate with the Cossacks,
and to show them tracks through the forest, by means
of such pictographic signs.?

In comparing the life of the old inhabitants of this
region with that of the modern population it is natural
to begin by considering the form of their dwellings.
Unfortunately there are no indications as to the type.
of habitation of the people of the Bronze or the Iron
Ages. The region furnishes, however, such a collection
of various types of dwelling, that it is not fanciful to
assume a long evolutionary development. First there
is the very primitive tent, suyulia, or alenchek if covered
with birch bark. Then there are quadrangular wooden
dwellings called ada, still without windows. Next
come wooden structures covered with earth, and pro-
vided with a window. These are called Auzenek, and
in them a clay stove, chuvad, has already replaced the
smoke-hole of the more primitive types. There is an
elaborated. form, called séa, in which the whole structure
is raised higher from the ground, and given a hexagonal
shape, with a sloping roof. Within, it has a kind: of
small vestibule. The tent also has its line of develop-
ment, for the use of such of the population as devote
their attention to cattle-breeding, and hence are seasonal

1 Memoirs of Siberian History, Seventeenth Century, vol. 1, No. 58.
N. N. Kosmin, in one of his recent journeys in the Amy! Taiga of
the Minusinsk country, records that his Tatar guide, on striking

_camp left behind a notched stick, the notches on which indicated :.


‘ Five of us slept here one night and went away in two boats’
(N. N. Kosmin, Chern, p. 99).


104 * THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA.


nomads: This, in its most elaborate form, is’ spherical:
and resembles to some extent the so-called Kirghis, or
properly speaking Kaizak, tent, from which, however, -
it differs in having a conical top instead of being built
round a ¢ircular frame. There also exist hexagonal,
octagonal, and polygonal varieties. These are usually
covered with felt, and are called yurta.!

As. regards the botanical environment, more data are
available for comparison. There are certain forest
plants, very plentiful in the Altai and Sayan Mountains,
whose roots are much esteemed as food by the modern
Turks, as they seem to have been by the ancient.
‘Among them are sarana (Lilium Martagon), kandyk
(Erithronium dens canis),and cheremsha(Allium ursinum).
So characteristic are these roots as articles of food
among the present-day Turks that the names fof the
different times of the year are taken from the plants
that are then in season: Thus Bes-ai is ‘the month
of kandyk’ (May), and Ak-sep-ai is ‘the month of sarana’
(June).

The agriculture carried on in the clearings of the
forest was in the olden days similar to what it was at
the time when the Russians first occupied the country.
Barley seems to have been the chief product. On spots
wheré the cattle have been pastured for some time the
modern Altaians grow hemp. The vegetable ornament
found in the late Bronze Age, and in abundance in the
Iron Age, proves that the ancient inhabitants knew and
used the same plants as are utilized by the present
natives.

Among the agricultural implements found in the


1 N. M. Yadrintseff, On the Allaians and the Chern Tatars, p. 8.


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 105


we 4 3 : . .

‘kurgans are somé which are in use up to the present
time among the Tatars. Such are the ozyf, a kind .of
_hoe used for digging up roots, and the obyl, a kind
of primitive plough, which, if it has’ shafts, is called
andazyn, Instead of a harrow they now’ use the trunk
of a_small tree with stumps of the branches , left pro-
jecting. Many of the present Tatars, for instance those
along the River Chu, reap their corn by tearing . it
off in handfuls; only in some places is a knife with
a-curved handle used for this purpose. No threshing
implement occurs either in the graves or among the
present inhabitants, but possibly in the olden days, as
in some places up to modern times, there existed the
practice of singeing the straw in order to dry it, when
the grain can be separated by stirring it with a stick.
There are not found, either in the graves or among
the Southern Altaians, the typical mill-stones which are
used by the Chern Tatars, but flat slabs of stone are
met with between which the grain is rubbed. The
remains of the irrigation canals, called aryk, show that
they were more elaborate in the Bronze and Iron
periods than their modern substitutes, sometimes called
sugak. It is not known in what way land was fertilized
in the olden days, but at the time. of the arrival of the
Russians, and to a certain extent until now, the natives

chose old camping sites on which to sow their grain.
While some Turkic tribes, for instance the Kaizak,
even now do not trouble to lay up winter stores for
their cattle, the Altaians twist up straw into rolls, and
store it in that way, which is also convenient for
carrying? Among the forest Tatars‘ hay is prepared
1 Yadrintseff, of. cif, p. 11.

2 Ibid.
21038 (9)


1066 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA.


by being hung in bundles from the branches of:
‘trees.

As for the animal world, there is a récord that the
Céssack Ataman Vasili Tumenets,? who passed through
the land of Tuba on his way to Mongolia in 1616, found

.these people in possession of: horses and: reindeer, but
without cattle or sheep. It is interesting’ to note that
in all the archaeological remains both of the Iron and
of the Bronze periods, a great many different species of
deer.are represented. Among the present Turkic tribes
the deer, syn, is still the most popular animal. The
horse and the goat are also favourite motives in the
bronze zoomorphic ornament, and the mountain eagle
and the swan are the most frequently represented birds.
All .this seems to prove that the metal-workers must
have lived in the -same environment as the modern
inhabitants. But we find in the Bronze Age also
representations of animals not known to frequent the
upper Yenisei, such as. the dromedary and the donkey.
. This would point to Southern influence, or at least to
contact with a Southern people during the Bronze
Age.

Thus it becomes clear that the people who were
responsible for the early pictographs, and possibly for
the bronze implements, as well as the people-responsible
for the Uigur inscriptions and the iron implements, are
connected with the present remnants of the local Turkic
population in the way in which they reacted to their
botanical and zoological environment. No sugh’ simi-
larity can be traced between the ancient inhabitants


1 N. N. Kosmin, Chern, p. 98.
2 A. V. Adrianoff, Sketches of the Minusinsk Country, 1904, P- 5-
3 Kosmin, bd.


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 107


and other. sections .of the modern population such as
the Ostyak or the ‘Sainoyed..

Finally, it is curious that among the many primitive
races of Northern and Central Asia only two tribes
havea reputation. as iron-workers, the’ Yakut and the
Kuznietsk..{Tatars’—from kuzniels (Russian), ‘smith’,
At the time of the ‘Russian conquest the latter were
paying tribute, to China with iron implements of their
own manufacture. It seems impossible to dissociate
these people, whose original home was in the region
of the Iron Age remains, from the ancient iron-workérs,,
Of course, it is more difficult to trace their ancestry
further back, though there is no evidence to prove that
the Bronze Age people were of a different race from
the people of the Iron Age.

The presence of rich mineral deposits in the country
of the old Turks gave rise to an extensive mining
industry, the high value of which, added to the richness
of the animal and vegetable world, made the population
of the yish self-satisfied, and disinclined to leave their
lands. The Orkhon inscriptions contain many allusions
to ‘the benevolent earth and waters of the Turks’, and
unfriendly comments on the people who migrate from
the forests and mountains to the open plain, take up
Chinese trade, and develop the war instinct. I will
allow myself to quote one ‘of the most instructive
passages of the Orkhon inscriptions. The author
addresses his tribesmen: ‘Whence came your lust for
warfare? Ye went away, ye people of Utukan Yish,
somé to the west and some to the east, but all that ye
found there, in the place to which ye came, amounts
to this, that your blood was shed like water, and your
bones heaped up in mountains; yeur strong sons are


108 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


now serfs, and your clean daughters are fallen into
slavery.’ Surely this quotation does not bear out the
idea cherished by some scholars, that the Turanian
Turks, at the time when they enter history, were very
similar to the Mongols, that is, were warlike nomads
of the steppes. Such a description would to a great
extent be applicable to the border population of the
Kirghis, the nomadic Kaizak. But to judge the old
Turks by the Kaizak would be equivalent to estimating
the culture of modern Russia by that of the European
Kaizaks or Cossacks.

Even if we find among some Turkic tribes of the
present day a tradition of their having been originally
steppe nomads, this notion may be classified with
another fictitious Turkic tradition, namely, that which
provides them with a descent from the Mongol Jinghis
Khan.

Some Conclusions.

From this review of the archaeological, historical,
and ethnological evidence, it seems obvious that the
Turanian Turks may be considered to be a remnant
of the old Turkic race which has passed through
various changes in Central Asia, having been originally _
known as Hiung-nu. The Turks, who are here called
Iranian, have lost to a much greater extent than the
Turanians the line of genealogical continuity with the
Hiung-nu, or even the Tu-kiu. Still more is this
the case with those Turks who have passed through
several more ‘racial filtrations’ and environmental in-
fluences, namely, the Azerbeijan and the Osmanly
Turks, In fact, were it not for their Turkic language,
the Osmanly would have to be classified among the

1 Kosmin, op. cét., p. 106.


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 109


Europeans ‘by adoption’,.like the Hungarians or the
Bulgarians.

It is not the author’s aim to append a political moral
to a work whose’ object is to show the unscientific
character of one of those high-sounding terms that
begin with ‘Pan-’. To wish for conquest and expansion
‘is one thing; to claim a land on grounds of ethnical
and traditional continuity is quite another. Linguistic
relationship has often been used—and abused—as a
plea for subjugating a weaker race to a stronger. The
'fact remains, however, that if there is no other com- .
‘munity than a distant relationship in language, there
‘need be no community of interest at all. Of course, the
Turkic people of Central Asia, who, though numerous,
lare divided into small nations, may be at the mercy
of a stronger invader; and, should the course of this
war or of the Russian Revolution bring about such a
Situation, they may be subdued to such a power in
a political way. But to speak of the Osmanlis and the
Turanian Turks as a racial and cultural unity would
be by a stroke of the pen, or by means of a propagandist
pamphlet, to wipe away all the invasions, migrations,
massacres, and fusions which for twenty centuries have
played havoc with that part of the world.

_ It is now clear that Asia cannot in the future be
‘artificially divided from her peninsula Europe, and that
she will rapidly return to conditions similar to those
which existed before our era, when the White and.
Yellow races met on the heights of Turan. Of course, .
the plan for a ‘ Middle-Asia’ involves fewer practical
difficulties than that for a ‘ Mittel-Europa’, in so far
as the national consciousness of the Central Asiatic |
Turks is weaker than that of the Central European


110 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


neighbours of Germany. . But. is it feasible that any
single power or any single European culture should
have the monopoly of Central Asia? Before such a
state of affairs could disturb the balance of Europe, it
would surely disturb the balance of the power that
made the attempt. For the utmost effort on the part
of a highly organized European or Asiatic Government
would be needed in order to bring about any permanent
unity of feeling throughout that vast continent; and
until this consummation is reached no economic advan-
tage can follow either for the aboriginal people or for
any others.

Throughout its whole history, except perhaps for
a period between the fourteenth and seventeenth cen-
turies, Central Asia has been the scene of the mingling
of various cultural and political influences. The scientific
investigations carried on there of late years give an
excellent illustration of this. An example is afforded
by the monumental explorations of Sir Aurel Stein.
. Though the explorations themselves were carried on
under the British flag, yet in the preparation of the
results for publication men of almost every European
nationality have been engaged. The archaeological
trophies brought home at various times by: ‘Sir Aurel
Stein are as rich and varied as the influences to which
Central Asia has in the course of its history been
subjected. Hence no single man, not even a single
nation, would be qualified to undertake a thorough
digest of this material. And we see here a wonderful
collaboration of European scholars; a Dane, Professor
Thomsen of Copenhagen; Frenchmen, MM. Chavannes,


1 Sylvain Lévi, ‘Central Asian Studies’, /.R.A.S., 1914, PP-
953-64.


IN HISTORY AND AT PRESENT DAY 111


Gauthiot,! Pelliot; a Belgian, M. La Vallée Poussin ;
Germans, Professors von Le Coq and F. W. K. Miller ;
a’ Russian, Professor Radloff; and Englishmen, Sir
Aurel Stein, Dr. Hoernle, and Dr. Cowley. Will any
League of Nations bring about a harmony more com-
plete than this, which has been proved to be possible
among scientific men of all nationalities in their work
on Central Asia? Could the voice of such unbiased
scholars be heard in the Council Chambers of the
diplomatists, it might not be too much to hope that
the same international collaboration which has proved
of such benefit in the sphere of scientific research
may likewise become possible in the politics of the
future.


1 Whose most regrettable death at the Front was announced
some time ago.


APPENDIX A


Wuen speaking of ‘Central Asian riches’, it is understood
to mean all the natural resources found in what is called
Russian Central Asia. In particular, one stretch of land
deserves the reputation of possessing a value surpassing
all known colonial possessions. This is the part inhabited
by various Turkic-speaking people, stretching from the mouth
of the Ob on the Arctic, through the forest, agricultural and
cattle-breeding regions of Western Siberia, the Steppe country
and Turkestan, as far south as the frontiers of Persia.

In commercial value this area represents—rich fishing in
the sub-Arctic region ; rare fur animals in the forest region ;
valuable timber, of which in Western Siberia alone some
tro million dessiatins were registered by the Russian
Government; rich cornfields, almost half of which are
_ occupied by wheat ; steppes swarming with cattle, and lakes
abundant in fish ; mountains rich in minerals; and finally, the
irrigated fields of Turkestan covered with cotton plantations,
not to mention such promising industries as butter and eggs,
fruit and vegetables.

As to the minerals, the ‘Golden’ or Altai Mountains, as
well as the Northern Steppes are equally rich in gold, sfiver,
iron, coal, copper, and almost all known mineral resources.
However, in the production of gold it is Eastern Siberia~
which occupies first place in the Russian Empire (in 19104,
it produced 2,828 puds; in 1914, 2,729 puds); the second
. place belongs to the Ural Mountains (in 1910, 642 puds;
in 1914, 299 puds), and Western Siberia stands third (in
1910, 416 puds; in 1914, 133 puds). This can be accounted
for chiefly by the lack of enterprise and capital, The chief
deposits of gold in Western Siberia are in the folloWing


APPENDIX A 113
districts: 1, Tomsk; 2, Krasnoyarsk-Achinsk; 3, Southern
Steppes; 4, Yenisei; 5, Altai; 6, Minusinsk; 7, Northern
Steppes. Probably some gold deposits could be found in
Bokhara and Turkestan.

The silver deposits are found in great nymber in the Altai
and north of Semipalatinsk. The richest deposits of coal,
iron, and copper are found in the distriét between Novo-
Nikolaevsk, Tomsk, Barnaul, and Kuznietsk ; also in the
region of Semipalatinsk. The Kuznietsk basin alone occupies
some 15,000 sq. kIm.

The best-known oilfields are situated on the’western Coast
of the Caspian. But it is possible that the Transcaspian
oilfields, now almost entirely limited to Chikishliar and some
other points along the railway, may prove to be no less
abundant. In Ferghana the oilfields are being exploited
in four regions: 1, Shar-Su; 2, Maili-Su; 3, Chimionand;
4, Sel-Kokko, but so far the export is fairly limited ; in 1914
it amounted to some 2,000,000 puds.

But it is cereals that form the most important product: of
export from Western Siberia, and go per cent. of the popula-
tion is devoted to agriculture. Agriculture is found chiefly
between 60° of N. lat. and 50° of S. lat. Beyond these limits
the country is only half agricultural ; while fishing, shooting,
and cattle-breeding is carried on alongside. Out of some
12 million dess. occupied by cornfields in Asiatic Russia in
IgtI, some 4% millions were situated in Western Siberia,
23 millions in the Steppe country, and 33 millions in Turkestan.
The chief centres of the corn export are Novo-Nikolaevsk,

Omsk, Kurgan, Pyetukhovo, Barnaul, and Semipalatinsk.
: In 1906-10 average early export = 93,014-4 thousand puds.

Closely connected with agriculture is sheep-breeding, which
is especially carried on in the Kirghis Steppes. While in
European Russia at the outbreak of war for a hundred
inhabitants there were only 32 sheep, in Russian Central
Asia it amounted to some 200. The area of pasture land in
Western Siberia amounted to some six million dess.; in the
Steppe country some three million, and in Turkestan half

2103 P


114 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


amillion. Next to sheep in importance is the breeding 01
horses and cows. In the cattle-breeding area the butter
industry is very successfully carried on, especially in the
governments of Tomsk and Tobolsk, and the chief centres
of its export are Barnaul, Omsk, and Kurgan. In 1913 the
exports equalled 4-9 million puds as against 1-7 million puds
in 1903. Closely allied to these industries is the export ot
live stock, bacon, game, wool, hair, skins and furs. But
although they occupy a considerable place, itis the corn which
comes first in quantity and cotton first in value among all
Central Asiatic products. The pre-war: export along the
railway shows the :following proportion between the various
goods: Corn, 35-6 per cent. (of all exported goods); cotton,
4-3 per cent. ; butter, 1-5 per cent. ; fish, 1-2 per cent. ; meat,
I-o per cent.

In the production of corn Western Siberian ranks first ;
7 per cent. of the native population scarcely take any part
in this industry; while out of 93 per cent. of European
population, 87 per cent. is composed of Great Russians, on
whom agriculture chiefly depends. The cattle- and especially
sheep-breeding depend to a great extent on the Kirghis and
other Turkic tribes, forming 50 per cent. of the population
‘in the Akmolinsk and 85 per cent. in the Semipalatinsk
territories. But it is the cotton industry which almost
entirely rests upon the native (Sarts and other Turkic tribes).
labour. . .

The cotton industry is closely connected with irrigation,
aiid again the irrigation canals form the most valuable
possession of the natives. The canals seem to have been
much more numerous in ancient times, and the remnants ot
them are found even in such barren deserts as Kizyl-Kumakh .
or Gary-ishek-otran. The native law codes (shariat as well
as ‘adat) recognize that the water is common property, which’
cannot be sold or bought, and that the land belongs to him
who irrigates it. To look after the equal use of the irrigation
canals, called aryka, an elder, called mrab, is chosen from
among one settlement, and over several mirabs an aryk-


¢


APPENDIX A 115


aksakala is elected, looking after the whole system of the

chief canal. The lands irrigated by the natives in Turkestan

(including Transcaspia), Bokhara, and Khiva equal 4,758,000

dess., or 26 per cent. of all the area. Since the Russian-
occupation, many attempts were made at reconstructing some

of the ancient canals on modern lines. As the result of this,

in the last few years before the war the Murgab canals were
accomplished, irrigating some 25,000 dess., and the Romanoff
canal, irrigating some 65,000 dess., in the north-eastern part
of the Golodnaya (‘Hunger’) Steppe. A plan for irrigating
a further four million dess. has been drafted.

No doubt this. energy of the Russian administration was
guided by appreciation of the immense value of the cotton
industry. In 1913 some 550,000 dess., including the vassal
Khanates, was under cotton plantations, realizing about
13% million puds of cotton fibre (in 1914. some 675,000 dess.,
realizing some 13-9 million puds). Ferghana, which, it must
be remembered, is the best-irrigated province, produced
75 per cent. of all cotton. Next comes the Tashkent district
of Syr-Daria territory; the Katta-Kurgan, Khojent, and
Samarkand districts of Samarkand territory; and the
Merv and Tejent districts of the Transcaspian territory.
It is owing to Russian influence that the old Central Asian
specie of cotton (Gossypium herbaceum, L.) was almost entirely
replaced by the American specie (Gossypium hirsutum, L.).
The cotton plantations form a chief revenue of the Central
Asiatic people, and were designated almost entirely for
export. At the outbreak of war Russia occupied fifth place’
in cotton production (after U.S.A., Great Britain, Egypt, and
China), and fourth-place in cotton manufacture (after Great
Britain, U.S.A., and Germany), and only one-fifth of her
cotton was grown outside Central Asia (in Transcaucasia).

Other industries which might have a prosperous future are
the rice and tobacco plantations and the rearing of silk-worms
(at present Turkestan produces about 100,000 puds of dry
cocoons per annum).

It has been said that this rich area has no communication


116 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA -


with the world outside, and difficult communications within.
It is true that the only sea-outlet is through the mouths of
the Ob and the Yenisei; but with the recent re-opening
of the Kara Sea route the northern river-ways have a great
commercial value. This will especially be the case when, on
the completion of the Ob—Arctic Ocean Railway, there will be
no necessity to cross the Kara Sea with its dangerous straits.

“Within this region the communication is carried on—

(a) By means of natural roads, of which there are some
109,000 versts in Siberia, and 58,000 versts in Russian
Central Asia, not counting the secondary roads.

(6) By means of river-ways, in which especially Western
Siberia is very well endowed. The basin of the River Ob
alone is navigable for a distance of some 15,000 versts, while


some 16,000 more is passable for floating. Turkestan, with —


its two chief rivers Syr-Daria and Amu-Daria, has much more
limited river communications; Amu-Daria is navigable for
a distance of some 1,400 versts, but for steam-ships only
800 versts. Syr-Daria could be made navigable for a distance
_of 1,200 versts, but at present the river is more importdnt
for irrigation purposes. The southern rivers are free from
ice for about six months in the year, while the rivers north
‘of the Altai Mountains are navigable from three to four
months a year.

(c) The railway is, of course, the most important means


_of communication, and each new line causes a great industrial


and social upheaval in the district. The Trans-Siberian has
only a relative value, and much greater importance is attached
to the southern line of the Trans-Siberian (Chelyabinsk-Omsk)
and the new branches }-the Altai (Novo-Nikolaevsk—Biisk—
Semipalatinsk) and the Minusinsk (Achinsk-Minusinsk). The
Central Asiatic (Krasnovodsk—Andijan), covering 2,368 versts,
and the Tashkent Railway (Orenburg+Tashkent), ,covering
some 1,756 versts, unite to some extent Russian Central Asia


with Western Siberia. A line between Semipalatinsk and’


some point on the Tashkent Railway will be of enormous


importance for the further development of Western Siberia,


+.


APPENDIX A 117


the Steppe country and Inner Turkestan, and would thus '
help the communications between the northern and southern
part of this rich area, which so far is carried on partly by
means of river-ways (Ob, Irtish), and chiefly above the old
caravan route. Out of two most important old roads in
Central Asia, the first one—Orenburg-Tashkent—was utilized
for the Tashkent Railway; the second—Tashkent-Semi-
palatinsk—is awaiting the same fate. It is the most lively
route along which the post, the passenger and goods traffic
is carried on. It starts at Kabul-Sai (some 120 versts north
of Tashkent), and passes through Chimkent, Aulieata,
Pishnek, Viernyi, Kopal, and Sergiupol (the latter lies 272
versts south-east of Semipalatinsk). Branches of smaller
roads connect this big route with Pjevalsk and Kulja.

The last plan of the old Russian administration was to
connect European Russia with Turkestan by a second line —
parallel to the Tashkent line, i. e. along the River Amu-Daria.

Western Siberia has gained enormous experience during
the present war. At the first stage of the war she was the
chief storing-place for army supplies. After the Russian
retreat many industries from Poland and Western Russia
were transferred here owing to the abundance of coal and
other cheap raw products in Western Siberia.


See:
: Statistical Year Book, edited by the Minister of the ‘Interior

(Russ, Petregrad, 1910-16).

Torgovo-Promyshlennaya Gazeta (Russ. Petrograd, 1910-17).

Asiatic Russia, edited by the Immigration Committee (Rus:
St. Petersburg, 1914). ;

Siberia, by P. M. Golovacheff (Russ. Moscow, 1914).

Economic Geography of Siberia, by P. M. Golovacheff (Russ.
Moscow, 1914).

Russian Year Book, edited by N. Peacock (London, 1910-16)..

Times Russian Supplement (1914-16).

Department of Customs. Revue of the foreign trade of Russia
through her European and Asiatic Frontiers (Russ, St. P., 19t2).

Malakhowski, N. Statistics concerning transport of goods on the
Central-Asiatic and the Tashkent Railways (Russ. St. P., rgz4).


APPENDIX B


Tue ambitious plans of the Germans for the conquest of
the East had as their first aim the plan of the Berlin-Bagdad
railway. When the British ‘successes cut short this plan
and Southern Russia became the prey of German influence,
the Berlin—Bagdad was put aside by some, in favour of a plan
to revive the ancient route through the highlands of Central
Asia: Berlin-Bokhara-Pekin. Whatever the ultimate fate
of the German activity in the East may: be, it has at least
served to force the Pan-Turanian question upon the attention
of the British public. See ‘articles in The Round Table,
No. 29, December 1917; in The Times, January 3rd, 5th, and
7th, 1918; in The Quarterly Review, No. 455, April 1918;
in The Round Table, No. 31, June 1918; and in Land and.
Water, July 4, 1918.

Meanwhile, the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, which ceded to
Turkey the territories of Ardahan, Batum, and Kars (belong-
ing to Russia since 1877), was thé -first step" towards the
realization of the Pan-Turanian dream. The population of the
district—Armenians (two millions), Georgians (two millions),
Tatars (two millions), and Russians (one: ‘million)—refused to
recognize the Treaty (see The New Europe, July 25,* 1918).
However, the Caucasian Tatars soon deserted the cause of
the ‘Transcaucasian Republic’ for that oft: ‘the advancing
Osmanly. The GeorgiamArmenian forces were defeated, and
the country was split into ‘independent’ Georgia (May 26,
1918) with its capital in Tiflis, ‘independént’ Armenia, con- ,
sisting of the Armenian lands round' Erivan, and an ‘inde-
pendent’ North Azerbeijan, the capital af which, Tabriz, was
occupied by the Turks.

This easy success inflamed ‘the dctire for conquest of
the Turkic militarists. The popular paper of the Com:
mittee ‘of: Union and Progress, Tasyir-¢- Efkiar, on’ April 15
éontained. the following pagbage® (quoted in The Cambridge
Magiazine, August 24, 1918):


‘To penetrate in one direction into Egypt, and to open.
the road to the 300,000,000 (sic)'of our co-religionists, on


APPENDIX B 119


the other side to advance to Kars and Tiflis, to liberate
the Caucasus from Russian barbarism, and to occupy
Tabriz and Teheran, to open a road to those Mussulman

- countries such as Afghanistan and India—this is the task we
have assumed. This task, with the aid of Allah, with the
assistance of our Prophet, and thanks to the union ete
on us by our religion, we will carry through to the end .


It ‘is noteworthy that the Turkish desire for expansion in
the East was supported in the Press of opposite political
opinions. Thus 7asvir-t-Efkiar, Sabah, and the Government
organ Zanin supported it just as much as the papers of the
Opposition, Jkdam and Zeman, though the latter Press was
not so particular as to whether they would use the Central.
Powers or the Allies’ support in carrying out their designs
(see The New Europe, August fs, 2918). The German-Russian
Supplementary Treaty added to the clash between the Qsmanly
and German Eastern policy (The Times, Sept. 10, 1918). Ger-
many. is aware that her political and commercial interests in
the East depend to some extent on the goodwill of the non-
Turkic inhabitants of Transcaucasia, Persia, and Turkestan,
whom the Osmanly'tend to disregard. Also, it was against her
aims to distract the <Osmanly armies from the re-conquest of
Arabia, Mesopotamia, Syria, and Palestine. This accounts for
the warm protection which Berlin has shown towards the new
Georgian Republic (gee The’ Times, June ro, 1918), and the
indignation of the German Press with ‘the growing démands
of the’Pan-Turks® (Minchener Post, June 19,1918; Deutsche’
Tageszeitung, ‘June: 5, "1918 ; and Kreuzsettung, July 16,
1918). The Frankfurter Zeitung (May 28, 1918, quoted by the
Cambridge Magazine, ‘July 27, 1918) argues that ‘the Bagdad
Railway is of infinitesimal value compared to the traffic which
needs organizing from the Black Sea into the interior of
Asia. These routes are destined to revolutionize the trade-

ap of the world.’

There is ho doubt that, the ‘presence of British * forces
n'Near Asia was the only ¢ obstacle to the German play for
onnecting Berlin with Bagded,’or even with Simla. _ But*:

while the German * papers Played about with- such schemes as.
Berlin-Bagdad and Hamburg-Herat—schemés which under
the circumstances. sound most fantastic=-tReir «cofrfiertial |


120 APPENDIX B


agents were fully awake to the opportunities afforded to them,
by the Brest-Litovsk Treaty.

The immediate danger of Pan-Turanianism has dispersed
with the collapse of Turkey. The character of the Allies’
armistice with Turkey announced by the Press Bureau on
November 1, 1918, shows complete military collapse, as the
result of which the Ottoman Empire falls out of the Great
“War. Still, it is doubtful whether the mischief done by the
spoken and written word will be remedied as rapidly as
that of military action, so there yet remains a great need
for making clear the true ethnological facts of the problem.

Then only the Osmanly and Pan-Turanian designs
will be discredited in Central Asia, just as the Pan-
Mahometan propaganda which Osmanly have carried on in
Egypt and Arabia was exposed by the subsequent British
successes, However, the greatest military and political
successes of the Allies will not bring peace to the life of
the Turks of Central Asia as long as the Russian element
of the East is in a ferment. For it must be remembered
that Bolshevism, Social-Revolutionism, Monarchism, and
other propagandas have been at work there, and though the
social upheaval in Central Asia does notjreach such tragic
expression as it does in Russia, no military or political
settlement can be final before the social revolution has its
dénouement. One can even prophesy that the Pan-Turanian
problem will remain one of the burning questions long after
the ‘peace settlement is achieved in Europe.and Asia. It
is possible that with the great economic changes which
can'be expected in that part of the world, Central Asia
will become part of a large confederate state before its
peoples develop a feeling of national unity in the European’
sense of the word, thus exchanging their tribal fora republican
mode of life.’


1 I take the opportunity of thanking my ‘friend Mr. Harold
Williams, Ph.D., for his kindness in reading the ae oh the
Pan-Turanian Movement and Appendix B.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL


RELATING TO THE EARLY TURKS AND THE
PRESENT TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Tus bibliography is to the author’s knowledge the first attempt to
bring together a list of works relating to the origin of the Turks and
their life in Central Asia from the earliest times up to the present day,
and covering their history, ethnology, and archaeology. A some-
what vague suggestion of a work of this kind was made as far back,
as 1879 by the great Central Asian scholar Ujfalvy, who, in the
second volume of his Expédition scientifique francaise en Russie,
en Sibérie et dans le Turkestan, says, ‘On pourrait écrire un livre
sur Ja bibliographie de cette contrée, et il est bien mature! que ‘les
auteurs russes occupent dans cette bibliographie Ja place la plus
importante’ (p. xii). As will be seen from the bibliography, the
scientific data has jacreased since that time both in quality and
quantity.

Chinese, Parsan: and Turkish sources are given only so far as
they have been: translated into English or some other European
language. Exjsting bibliographies dealing with special aspects
of the subject have been laid under contribution, and the data
verified so far as the books are available in this country.

The greatest debt is due to A. N. Samoylovich’s AZaterials for
an Index of the Literature relating to the Fentset-Orkhon Inscription
(19121; in Russian), from which some two hundred titles’ were
taken and revised, and, to a certain extent, also to Inostrantseff
and Smirnoff’s Materials for the Bibliography of the Mussulman
Archaeology (1906 ; in Russian).

The author is fully aware of the shortcomings of the present


1 This bibliography, again, is to some extent based on Orientalische
Bibliographie, begriindet von F., A. Miiller, bearbeitet und heraus~-
gegeben von Dr. L, Scherman, Berlin, 1888-1915.


2108 . Q


122 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


collection, the probable omission of some valuable works on’ this
subject, and the arrangement of the material merely in alphabetical
order. At the present stage of research it is often difficult to
isolate the Turks from other peoples in Central Asia without
injuring the subject. It is, moreover, impossible to define which
works are historical, which ethnological, and which archaeological.
However, even in this crude form these bibliographical materials
may serve as a starting-point for further research.

The following abbreviations have been used throughout the
bibliography :


Bab. Orient. Rec. = Babylonian and Oriental Record. London.

J.R.G.S. = Journal of the Royal Geographical Society. London.

J.R.A.S.= Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. London.

J-R.A.1, = Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute. London.

J. Centr. As. S. = Journal of the Central Asian Society, London.

A. R. = The Asiatic Review (formerly ‘The Asiatic Quarterly
Review’). London.

E. R. E, = Hastings’ Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics.
Aberdeen.
Bull. Soc. Antiqu. = Bulletins de la Société Antiquarienne de France.

Paris.
Rev. Or. = Revue Orientale pour les Etudes Oural-Altaiques.
Paris.
J. A. = Journal Asiatique. Paris.
M. O. = Le Monde Oriental. Paris.
Le Muséon = Le Muséon. Paris.
-La Géographie = La Géographie. Paris.
Rev, Numis. = Revue Numismatique. Paris.
Bull. Ec. Frang. = Bulletins de 1’Ecole frangaise de l’Extréme Orient.
Paris. . :
N.E. = Notices et Extraits des Manuscrits de la Bibliothéque du
Roi, Ac. des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres. Paris.
E. I. = The Encyclopaedia of Islam. Leyden and London.
O. B. = Orientalische Bibliographie. Berlin.
L, Z. = Literarischer Zodiacus. Leipzig.
Z.D. M.G. = Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesell-
schaft. Leipzig.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 123


W. Z. K. M. = Wiener Zeitschrift ftir die Kunde des Morgenlandes.
Vienna.


Z, f, E. == Zeitschrift fiir Ethnologie. Berlin.
T.P. = T’oung Pao. Leyden.
K.S. = Keleti Szemle. Budapest.


J. Soc. Fin.-Ougr. = Journal de la Société Finno-Ougrienne.
Helsingfors.


Mém. Soc. Fin.-Ougr. = Mémoires de la Société Finno-Ougrienne.
Helsingfors.

L. A. T. = Living Ancient Times. ‘dupan Crapuua. Petrograd.

Russ. Anthr. J. = Russian Anthropological Journal. Pyccxiii Aurpo-
noxormueckift KypHarp. Petrograd.

Mess. I. R.G. S. = Messenger of the Imperial Russian Geographical
Society. Bbermmcs Wsmeparopcraro Pyccraro Teorpaduyeckaro
OGmecrsa. Petrograd.


Ethn. Rev. = Ethnographical Review. 9Srmorpaduseckoe Odosphxic.
Moscow.

Government News (preceded by the name of the Government in
question). Ty6epucxia Bépzomocra.

Oren. Gov. News = Orenburg Government News. Opeu6yprexis
Ty6epucxia Bhnomocru. Orenburg.

Tob. Gov. News = Tobolsk Government News. ToGomtcxia TyGepa-
cxin Bbjomoctu. Tobolsk.

Semip. Terr. News = Semipalatinsk Territory News. Ceminazamm-
cxia OGuacratia Bipzomocra. Semipalatinsk.

Turk. News = Turkestan News. Typxecranctia Biyomocm.
Tashkent.

J. Min. Int. = Journal of the Ministry of the Interior. Kypsaxr
Muuucrepersa Bayrpennuxs [ibrp. Petrograd.

J. Min. Educ. = Journal of the Ministry of Education. Kypsarp
Manncrepersa Hapoxnaro Tipocstmesia. Petrograd. :

J. Min. Prop. State = Journal of the Ministry of the Property of the


State. IKypsars Munncrepersa Tocyzapcrsenstixt Vuymecrss.
Petrograd.


Mem. I. A.S. = Memoirs of the Imperial Acsashay of Science.
Sanmuctkn Hamepatopcxolt Axagzemin Hayep. Petrograd.


124 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Bull.I. A.S. = Bulletins of the Imperial Academy of Science./
VUszkcria Usmepatopexolt Axagemin Hayes. Petrograd.

Bull. Soc. F. S. Anthr. E. = Bulletins of the Society of the Friends of

} Science, Anthropology and Ethnography at the Imp. University
of Moscow. Msskeria O6mecrsa Jhoarexeii Ecrecrsosnanis, An-
Tponoxoria u SrHorpapin upa Umnep. Mockoscxows Yausepcuters.
Moscow.

Bull. Russ. Committee = Bulletins of the Russian Committee for the
Study of Central and Eastern Asia with regard to its history,
archaeology, linguistics and ethnography. WUsskeria Pyccraro
Kosmtera ya usysenia Cpeqpelt u Bocrosnoli Asiv,-Bb ucropade-
CKOM, APXCONOTWIECKOME, IMETBUCTHICCKOME MU STHOrpadpmyeckows
oTHomleniax’. Petrograd.

Proc. Turk. Circle F. Arch. = Proceedings of the Turkestan Circle
of the Friends of Archaeology. Iporoxom1 Typxecrancnaro
Kpyana Jko6ureneit Apxeonorin. Tashkent.

Mem. Ural S. F.S. = Memoirs of the Ural Society of Friends of
Science. Sanucna Ypastcraro OOmecrsa Io6urencit Ecrecrsos- -
Hania. Ekaterinburg.

Bull. S, Arch. H. E. I. Univ. Kaz. = Bulletins of the Society’ of
Archaeology, History and Ethnography at the Imperial
University of Kazan. Wepbcria OOmectpa. Apxeonorin, Uctopin
Mu OrHorpadin Ipx Uamepatopcxomh Hasauckows Yuupepcurers.:
Kazan.

Rep. L. Russ. Hist. Museum = Reports of the Imperial Russian His-
torical Museum, Oraersi Unneparopexaro Pyccraro Meropmueckaro *
Mysen. Moscow.

Rep. I. Areh. Commission = Reports of the Imperial Archaeological
Commission of the Russian Historical Museum: the Moscow
Popular and Rumyantseff Museums. Oruetst Mameparopcxoik
Apxeonormyecko Hommuccin Mocxoscxaro Iy6amanaro a Pynsan-
yesckaro Myseesn, Hmmep. Pocciiicxaro ee Mysex.
Moscow.

Bull I. Arch. Commission = Bulletins of the-Imperial Archsebiogical
Commission of the Russian Historical Museum : the Moscow
Popular and Rumyantseff Museums. Mspberia Uumeparopexoti
Apxeonormueckoi Koumuccia Mocxoscraro y6mmumaro a Pyman-


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 125


epckaro Myseest, Wmep. Poccilicxaro Ueropmueckaro Mysea.
Moscow.

Mem. I. R. Arch. S. = Memoirs of the Imperial Russian Archaeo-
logical Society. Sanacxa Uameparopcxaro Pyccxaro Apxeoxo-
rayeckaro Odmectsa. Petrograd. ’

Bull. 1. R. Arch. S. = Bulletins of the Imperial -Russian Archaeo-
logical Society. Wepkcria Ixmepatopcxaro Pyccxaro Apxeoxo-
rayeckaro OGmectpa. Petrograd.

Trans. E. Sect. I, R. Arch. S, = Transactions of the Eastern Section
of~the Imperial Russian Archaeological Society. Tpymtt
Bocrowaro Orybua Vinmepatopexaro Pyccxaro Apxeoxormueckaro
Oomectsa. Petrograd.

Mem. E. Sect.I. R. Arch. S. = Memoirs of the Eastern Section
of the Imperial Russian Archaeological Society. Samncna
Bocrowaro Onrba Uneparopcvaro Pycckaro Apxeorormueckaro
OGmectsa. Petrograd.

Mem. Russ. and Slav. Arch. Sect. I. R. Arch. S. = Memoirs of the
Russian and Slavonic Archaeology Section of the Imperial
Russian Archaeological Society. Samacxa Onrbaa Pyccnoii
u Caanancuoli Apxeonoria Wunepatopcxaro Pycckaro Apxeonorme-
ckaro O6mectsa. Petrograd.

Trans, I. Moscow Arch. S. = Transactions of the Imperial Moscow
Archaeological Society. Tpygtt Uamepatopcxaro Mockorcraro
Apxeorormseckaro OGmectsa. Moscow.

Trans. E.Comm. 1. Moscow Arch. S, = Transactions of the asteti
Commission of the Imperial Moscow Archaeological Society.
Tpyatt Bocrosnoit Kommaccia Yimeparopcrard Mockosckaro Apxeo-
norayeckaro OGmectpa. Moscow. ‘

Mem. I. R.G. S. = Memoirs of the Imperial Russian Geographical
Society: section of Ethnography. Sanucka Dsmeparoperaro
Pycexaro Teorpaduyeckaro O6mecrsa: no orbuenin Oraorpacin.
Petrograd.

Bull. I. R.G.S. = Bulletins of the Imperial Russian Geographical
Society: section of Ethnography. Ussbcria Wsmepatopcraro
Pyccraro Teorpaduseckaro OGmectsa: no omrbaenin Draorpadin.
Petrograd.

Mem. Sib. Sect. 1. R. G. S. = Memoirs of the Siberian Section of


126° THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


the Imperial Russian Geographical Society. 3anucka Cu6up-,;
cxaro Orrba Usmepatopexaro PyccraroTeorpapaueckaro O6mectsa.
Petrograd. :

Bull. Sib. Sect. I. R. G. S. = Bulletins of the Siberian Section of
the Imperial Russian Geographical Society. Mspberia Cu6up-
cxaro Orrbia Unnepatopcexaro Pyccxaro Teorpaduueckaro O6mectsa,
Petrograd.

Mem. W. Sib. Sect. I. R.G.S. = Memoirs of the West Siberian
Section of the Imperial Russian Geographical Society. 3anucku
Sanaguo-Cu6upcxaro Orxbaa Mmepatopcxaro Pyccxaro Teorpacu-
geckaro O6mectsa. Omsk.

Bull. W. Sib. Sect. I. R. G.S. = Bulletins of the West Siberian
Section of the Imperial Russian Geographical Sotiety. Uspheria
Sanaquo-Cu6upcxaro Orxbaa Viamepatopcraro Pyccxaro Teorpada-
yeckaro OGmiectza. Omsk.

Mem. Semip. S. W. Sib. Sect. I. R.G.S, = Memoirs of the Semi-_
palatinsk Sub-section of the West Siberian Section of the
Imperial Russian Geographical Society. Samacku Cempnaza-
Tauckaro Iogormbia Sanagxo-Cudupexaro Orxbia Umneparopexaro
Pyccxaro Teorpapusecaro OOmecrza. Semipalatinsk. :

Mem. E. Sib. Sect. I. R. G. S. = Memoirs of the East Siberian Section
of the Imperial Russian Geographical Society. Sanncxa
Bocrowi0-Cadupexaro Orgbia Visreparopexaro Pyccxaro Teorpa-
puyecraro OOmectsa. Irkutsk.

Bull. E. Sib. Sect. 1. R. G. S. = Bulletins of the East Siberian Section
of the Imperial Russian Geographical Society. Wspberis
Bocrowo-Cu6upexaro Orgbia Vamepatopcexaro Pyccraro Teorpa-
(pusecxaro OOmectsa. Irkutsk.

Trans. E. Sib. Sect. I. R. G.S. = Transactions of the East Siberian
Section of the Imperial Russian-Geographical Society. Tpyzut
Boeromno-Cu6upexaro Orrbaza Vamepatopcxaro Pyccxaro Teorpa-
usecxaro OOmectsa. Irkutsk.

Mem. Krasn. S. E. Sib. Sect. 1.R. G.S, = Memoirs of the Kras-
noyatsk Sub-section of the East Siberian-Section of the Imperial
Russian Geographical Society. Sanncxm Kpacwospcxaro Iloy-
ombia Becrowo-Cudupexaro Onrbaa Vimnepatopcraro Pyccraro
Teorpafauecraro OGmecrsa. . Irkutsk.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 127


Trans. T.-K.S, Amur Sect. I. R.G. S.=Transactions of the Troits-
kosavsk-Kiakhta Sub-section of the Amur Section of the
Imperial Russian Geographical Society. Typyet Tpommnocascko-
Kaxrmacraro Ifejorrbia Amyperaro Ombra Vameparopcraro
Pyccxaro Teorpatbayeckaro OOmecraa. Troitskosavsk.

Mem. Cauc. Sect. I. R. G.S, = Memoirs of the Caucasian Section
of the Imperial Russian Geographical Society. Sanacxa

" Kaprascraro Orgbaa [unepatopcxaro Pyecraro Teorpaduaecraro
O6mectsa. Tiflis.

Bull. Turk. Sect. I. R, G.S. = Bulletins of the Turkestan Section
of the Imperial Russian Geographical Society. Uspberia
Typrecrancnaro Orrbaa Vinmepatopcraro Pyccxaro Teorpadute-
cxaro O6mecrsa. Tashkent. .

Mem. Oren. Sect. I. R. G.S.= Memoirs of the Orenburg Section
of the Imperial Russian Geographical Society. Sannckn
Open6yprexaro Orgbaa Wameparopexaro Pyccxaro Feorpadayecnaro
OGmecrza. Orenburg.

The abbreviations of other publications used throughout al
bibliography need no further explanation. | ;


To facilitate the use of the bibliography relating to the Turkic
tribes at present inhabiting Central Asia, a table is appended giving
the main existing groups and the names of modern authorities
on each of them. The titles of the works will be found in the
bibliography.

Altaians (including the Telengit, the Kyzyl, and the ‘Chulim
natives).—Adrianoft, Aristoff, Castrén, Gorokhoff, Kalacheft,
Korsh, Kosmin, Kostroff, Lutsyenko, Radloff, Shchukin, Shvet-
soff, Shvetsova, Vambéry, Vyerbitski, Yadrintseff, Yariloff;

. Beltir.—Adrianoff, Goroshchenko, Kostroff, Katanoff, Yakovleff.

Kachints.—Adrianoff, Castrén, Goroshchenko, Karatanoff, Kata-
noff, Kostroff, Ostrovskikh, Yakovleff, Stepanoff.

Kaizak,—Alektoroff, Aristoff, Castrén, Czaplicka, Daulbaeff, Geins,
Grodekoff, Ibrahimoff, Kazantseff, Kharusin, Krassovski,
Kustanaeff, Kittary, Levanewski, Levshin, Medvyedski, Meyer,
Mikhailoff, Nazaroff, Nikolski, Potanin}Radloff, Reypolski,
Schmidt, Troll, Ujfalvy, Velyaminoff-Zernoff, Wulfson, Ya-
drintseff, Yevreinoff, Zeeland, Zelenin.


128° THE ’TURKS OF CENTRAL’ASIA |


Kamashints.—Castrén, Kostroff, Donner, Radloff, Stepanoff. j

Karagass. —Katanoff, Prelovski, Radloff, Shtubendorf, Vasilyeff,
Zaleski. ;

* Kdrakalpak.—Maksimoff, Radloff, Castrén.

Kashgarians.—Ujfalvy.

Khotanians.— Joyce (Stein).

Kirei (Kerians, Kerraits)—Carruthers, Joyce (Stein), Kohn.

Kirghis (Kara-Kirghis, Burut).—Alektoroff, Aristoff, Castrén,
Chermak, Czaplicka, Divayeff, Geins, Golubyeff, Grodekoff,
Ivanowski, Kharuzin, Kosmin, Krasnoff, Nazaroff, Nikolski,
Potanin, Radloff, Shkapski, Troll, Tronoff, Ujfalvy, Vambéry,
Valikhanoff, Venyukoff, Wulfson, Yadrintseff, Yastreboff,
Zagrajski.

Koibal.-—Castrén, Goroshchenko, Kostroff, Radloff, Yakovleff,

Kumandints.—Radloff, Sherr.

Sagai.—Adrianoff, Castrén, Goroshchenko, Radloff, Yakovleff.

Sarts.—Mayeff, Nalivkin, Ostroumoff, Shishoff, Sorokin; Troll,
Ujfalvy, Vambéry, Wulfson, Yaworski.

Soyot (Uriankhai)—Adrianoff, , Africanoff, Carruthers, Castrén,
Fabritsius, Goroshchenko, Ivanowski, Katanoff, Maltseff, Olsen,
Ostrovskikh, Shishmaryeff, Silinich, Yadrintseff.

Taranchi.—Geins, Gorbachoff, Khoroshkhin,

Tatars (Siberian Turks).—Adrianoff, Castrén, Czaplicka (and Hall),
Golovacheff, Goroshchenko, Katanoff, Kosmin, Kostroff,
Kuznietsoff, Maloff, Middendorff, Radloff, Stepanoff, Ujfalvy,
Yadrintseff, Yakovleff, Yushloff.

Turkomans.—Arkhipoff, Bode, Galkin, Ilyenko, -Ivanowki,

’ Kuropatkin, Lessar, Neboksin, Tarnowski, Ujfalvy, Yaworski.

Usbegs.—Bogdanoff, Grebyenkin, Khoroshikhin, Malyeff, Radloff,
Troll, Ujfalvy, Vambéry, Velyaminoff-Zernoff, Zaborovski.

Yakut,—Clark, Jochelson-Brodsky, Jochelson, Maak, Middendorff,
Piekarski, Priklonski, Shchukin, Sieroszewski, Troshchanski,
Wrangell.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 129


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Abercromby; J: Note oii’ the Yenisei’ Inscriptions. Bab. Orient.
Rec., 1891, V, pt. ii, pp. 25-30; pt. iii, p.72.

Abramoff, N.A. ‘Ancient Settlements:in the Yalutoroff District

of the Tobolsk Government. ‘Mess. I.R.G.S., 1854, X, pt. v,
p. 77- —- A6panoes, H. A. Tpessia ropoyuma Bb Aaryropos-
CKOME oxpyr’, Toompcxott ry6.

— Short description of a burial monument in icoaakurnvedke in
the Kirghis Steppe under Siberian administration. Bull, I. R. .
‘Arch. S., 1859, I, p. 247. — Kpatxoe onucanie HayMOTHUHATO
uamarnuva Kosy-Kypnew Bb Kupruscxoti crema | CaGupesaro
Bbponcrsa,


—— Kurgans and Settlements in the Tiumien, Yalutoroff and
Kurgan Districts of the Tobolsk Government. Bull. I. R.
Arch, S., 1861, Il, PP: 220-28. — Kypranht o Tropoymma Bb |
‘TroMeHECiom, AxytopoBcKoare u Kyprancwob oxpyraxb, To6cs-
cxoik ry6.

——- On ancient stone structures. Tob. Gov. News, 1864,
Nos. 44, 45. —~ O crapuHHbixh kaMeHHLIXh CTpoeHiax.

—— Ancient -fortress along the River Chingilda. Tob. Gov.
" News, 1867, No. 50. — > ences ykpbnoiesie upu phar
Yuarmsb.

-——- Ancient kurgans and fortresses in Semipalatinsk and Semi-
rechensk Territories. Bull. I. R. Arch. S., 1872, VI, pp. 190-
298; 1877, VIII, pp. 60-63. — [penne xypranti u yxpbusenia
Bb Cexmmazamuckolt u Cemmpbyenckol oGuacraxs.

Abu-Halib-Hussein : see Timur.


Abul-Gazy-Bahadur Khan (Aboulgasi Bahadour Chan), His-
toiré des Mongols et des Tartares, publiée, traduite et annotée
par Je baron Desmaisons. St. P., 1871-4.
English trans. by Col. W. Miles, London, 1838.
Latin trans. by C. M. Fraehn, Kazan, 1825.
German trans. by D. G. Messerschmidt, Gottingen, 1780.
2to3 R


130° THE TURKS OF CENTRAL-ASIA


Abu-Takhir-Hadja. ‘Samaria’, description of the antiquities ,

and of Mussulman churches of Samarkand. Translated by

V. L. Vyatkin. A reference book of the Samarkand Territory,

« 1898. Repr. Samarkand, 1899. —. Aéy- Taxups- Xodoca.

», Camapin “, -omucanie jpesnocteli 1 MYCYIEMA@HCKEXS CBATLIHE
Caxapxanya, Depesors B. I. Barema.


—— ‘Samaria’, Tadjik text prepared for publication by. N. I.
Veselovski. -St. P., r904. — ,, Canapin“, Tajaunnili rexcrs,
purorosrenHEiti xb neaTa H. VW. Becezoscxuws.

A. Ch. ‘Mezar’. Picturesque Russia, I, 1901. A. UY. Mornaa
» Masapb “.

Adler, B. Der Nordasiatische~Pfeil. Beitrag zur Kenntnis der
Anthropogeographie des asiatischen Nordens. Suppl. Intern.
Arch. f. Ethnol., SIV. ‘


Adrianoff, A.V. Travels in the Kuznietsk Country. Bull.
1.R.G.S., 1881, XVII. — Adpianoes, A. B. Tytemectsie Bb
” Kysnenkiii «pat.
——~ Travels to the Altai and beyond-the Sayan Mountains in
1881. Omsk, 1888. — Tlyremeorsie na Antal a 3a Cassbl Bb
1881.
Extracts from the diaries of the excavations of the Kurgans.
‘Minusinsk, 1900, — pt oes H3b JHOBHEKOBL KyprakHbixb
PackOnOKE.


—— Sketches of the Minusinsk Country. Tomsk, 904: — Ovepkn-
_ Munyeancraro Kpasi.


- Preliminary information about the investigation into -the
‘pisanitsy’ of the Minusinsk Country in 1894. Bull. Russ.
Committee, No. 4; 1904, pp. 25-34. — Upensapmreatnnin
‘cpbybaia o coOmpanin nucanmm BE Manycuuckoms Kpab xbromp
1904 KOMOEEpOBaHEEIME KomuToToMS A. B. Anpianossinrs.


—— ‘Pisanitsa Boyarskaya’ from the report of A.V. Adrianoff.
Bull. Russ. Committee, No.6, 1906, pp. 53-9. — IIncamma
Bosperan 235 orsera A, B, Anpianopa.


“Investigations into the ‘ pisanitsy’ of the Minusinsk Country
in summer 1907. Bull. Russ. Committee, No. 8, 1908,


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 131


Pp. 37~47. — OGcrbponabie nEcaHHth Bb Munycnucxows  xpab
whrowb 1907. :

-——~ Report on the excavation of .the cave in Mt. Tepsea in
1908. Bull.Russ.Committee, No.0, 1910, pp. 34~40.— Oraerb
0 packouKh nemeps Bb ropb Tenceb 1908.


—— Report on the investigation of the ‘ pisanitsy” of the Achinsk
‘District .of the Minusinsk Country. Bull. Russ. Committee,
No, 10, 1910, pp. 41-53. — Oruer no oSerbaoBanin nmcanmm
Axmacxaro oxpyra (Munycunckaro Kpas).

—— The ‘Pisanitsy’ along the R. Mana. Mem. Russ. and Slav.


Arch. Sect. I. R. Arch. S., IX,” PP. 1-34. — TIncanmmpi no
pbrb Mags. ;


Afanasieff, F. Contribution to the prehistoric archaeology ‘of
Siberia. Archaeological Bulletins and Notices, VI, p.56.—_
Aganacvees, &. Kx youctopuyeckoit apxeonorin Ca6npn.


Afrikanoff, A. M.. The Uriankhai Country and its Inhabitants.
Bull. E. Sib. Sect. I. R. G. S., XXT, No. 5, 1890. — Agpu-
xanoes, A, M.. Ypanxalickad senaa 0 es oonTaTeli.


- Ahmed Arabshah : see Vattier. ,
Akmed Ibn Yusuf (Abul Abbas): see Rasmussen, J. L.-


Aksy. Antiquities from the ruins of the city of Aksy, in the
Chutsk district of the Ferghana Territory. Mem. 1.,A. S.,
XXXVIII, 1881, p.81.— Anxcw. T[pernocm W8b, PasBUHTb
r. Axctips, Tyrckomp ybsxb Pepranckoii obsacta.


Alberts, O. Der tiirkische Text der bilingualen Inschtiften, der
Mongolei. Halle, 1900..


Aleksandroff. Concerning the ruins of the city of Jankent.


“Turk. News, 1885, IV, pp. 45-6. — sites ia O pas-
BamHaxt rop, [iaxankenta. :


-Alektoroff, A. EH. Sketches’ of the Middle Orda of the Kirghis
(Kaizak). Bull. Oren, Sect. I. R. G. S., 1893, II; 1894, II]. —


Anexmopost, A. E. Ouepxa Dayrpomet Kaprascxoii [Haficargcoii]
Opal.


132 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Alektoroff, A. E. Index of books, articles and notes on the-Kirghis.,
Bull. S. Arch. H. E.1. Univ. Kaz., 1900, X VI-XX. — Yragaters
HALTS, KYPHAIEHLIXD W TaseTHblxb crareli u sambroxn o Kuprusaxe. -


‘

—— Baksa. From the Kirghis (Kaizak) superstitions. Bull. S.
‘Arch, H. E.I. Univ. Kaz., 1900, XVI. — Baxca. Us mipa a
PHSCKEXb cyeBbpiil..


A.M.L. Expeditions to the Orkhon. Ency. of Andreevski,-1st ed.,
1897, XLII, p. 227; dealing with the expeditions of Paderin
(1871); Yadrintseff (1889); Heikel (1890); Radloff (1891). —
‘A, M. J. Opxoncria oxcnequnin.


Aminoff, Baron. Remains of sedentary life in the Jizako-Chinask
Golodnaya Steppe. Turk, News, No. 27, 1873. — Amunoes,
6apons. Tamataaxu Ortemett ookyeocrs Bb Tpensao-“mascroh
ToxoyHoit crenu.

_ Ancions caractéres. Anciens caractéres, trouvés sur des pierres

de taille et des monuments au bord de l’Orkhon dans la


-Mongolie orientale par l’expédition de M. N. Jadrinteeff ¢ en
‘1889. Ed. by the I.R. Arch. S., St. P., 1890.


Andreas, F.C. Zwei soghdische Exkurse zu Vilhelm Thomsen:
Sitab. K. Preuss. Ak. Wiss., 1910, pp. 307-14.


Andree, R. Spielzeugparallelen. Globus, 1893, 64, p. iii.


Andreyeff, M. 8. Places of archaeological interest in Turkestan.
Proc. Turk. Circle F. Arch., 1895-6, I. — Andpeees, M. C.
Mécrnocmm Typkectana MATopecHbia BL APKeOLOLMIeCKOM OTHOMeHIN.


-. Translation of the inscriptions from the burial monuments
brought by N. F. Sitnyakowski from Shakhrisab and Khitab.
Proc. Turk, Circle F. Arch., 1899-1900, V, pp. 104—1g. —
Tlepesoxb cimckoBb cb HafrpoOHLIxh Hayiuceli IpaBesenHEXb
H. ®. Carasxoscrums u3b Ilaxpuca6sa a Kura6a,.


Angren, Places -of archaeological interest in the valley of the
river Angren, in the Fashkent district. Bull. S, Arch. H. E. I.
Univ. Kaz., 1893, XI, pp. 568-9. — Ampens. Mbernocma Bb
“jommb p. Axrpexa, HETCPOCHbIA Bh apXe0NOrHYeCKOM OMOIeHiM -”
(BE Tammenteroms yhoqB).


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 133


Anichkoff, I. Archaeological journey to the village of ‘Biish-
Agach, of the Aulieata district, Proc. Turk. Circle F. Arch,


1895-6, I, pp. 1-11. — Anuxxoss, H. Apxeonormeckan DobsaKa
Bb cenenio Banrp-Ararp, Aymiearanckaro yhsna.


—— Concerning places of archaeological interest in the Kazalinsk
district. Proc. Turk. Circle F. Arch., 1897-8, III, pp. 51-5.
— 0 mbxoropsxn wbersocraxs Kasasmackaro yhana, HBTepecHiNx®
Bb apxeolOrWyeCkomb OTHOMEHID,


—— Court in Khazaraspa.: ‘Proc. Turk. Circle F. Arch.; 1898-9,
_IV, pp. 9-14. — J[popens Bb Xasapacrb.


Anikovski, A. Excav ions of the ancient kurgan burial in the
Turgai Territory, Aktyubin District, Proc. Turk. Circle-F.
Arch., 1902-3, VIII, pp. 98-105. — Anunxoecniit, A. Packonkn
APCBHUX, Kyprav0Bb-MOLMILHBKOBS. Bb Typralickoli oOaacma Bb
_ AwnoGanckoms ybsxb.


—— Ancient burial-kurgans in the Kustanai district of the Turga;
Territory. Proc. Turk. Circle F. Arch., 1902—3, VIII, pp.8 4-94,
— J[pessie xyprouei-Mormasnoxn eb Kycranalickorn ybonb
Typraiicxoit o6zacra. :


Annau. Mosque in Annau. ‘Annual’ for 1883, p.329. St. P.,
1883.— Aunay. Mevyerb Bb Annay.


Anuchin, D. On ancient bows and arrows. Trans. of the Fifth
Arch. Congress in Tiflis, 1881. — Anyuuns, J... O xpesnews
aye a crpbraxs. ,


—— On some remarkable stone objects in Siberia. ‘Trans. of the
Sixth Arch. Congress in Odessa, 1884, I. —- 0 mbxoroprixs’
CEceoOpasHbixh KaMeHHLIXh uerbriaxb ub Cu6upa.


—— Notice sur quelques épées anciennes en bronze, trouvées
dans la Russie méridionale et en Sibérie. Compte-rendu du
Congr. Intern. Arch. A Moscou, 345, 1892.


Appelgren-Kivalo, Hj. Vogelkopf und Hirsch als Ornaments-
motive in der Vorzeit Sibiriens. Finnisch-Ugrische Forsch-
ungen, 1912, XII.


134 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Arandarenko, A. The kurgan of Chulak in the Turkestan
Territory. Year-book of the Turkestan Statistical Committee.
St. P., 1873. — Apandapenno, A. ynaxb ‘ypu (Typkec-
\tantcnot O6aacm).

Archaeology in the Transcaspian Country. Proc. Turk. Circle
F. Arch, 1899-1900, V, pp. 66-8. — Apxeonoria Bb Saxac-
nifickomn Kpab.


Aristoff, N. A. Attempt at an explanation of the ethnic com-
position of the Kirghis- Kaizak of the Great Orda, and of the
Kara-Kirghis based on clan traditions and on the existing clan
divisions, on the clan ‘ tamga’, and also on historical documents
and on the anthropological investigations. L.A.T., 1894, d,
Pp. 391-486. — Apucmoes, H. A. Onur BbiacHeHin STHITI-
cxaro cocrapa Kaprust-Kasaxost Borpmoli Opysr a Kapakuprusopb
Ha OCHOBAHIN: POROCHOBALIXE ckasanili n cphyrhuiti o CYMeCCTBYIONIUX -
POMOBLLXE AEACHIAXE UO POMOBEIXS TAMTAXS, & TAKE HCLOPHICCKUX
TAHHLIXE W ABTPONOAOTAyeCKUX BscrbAopanilt.

——— Notes on the Ethnic Composition of the Turkic tribes and
nations, and information about their number. L.A. T., 1896, |
III-IV, repr: St.P., 1897, see Barthold, V. V. — 3amiren 06
STHHICCKOMS CcocTanh TIOPKCKUXD DeMeHb H napomHocteli un cabybsia -
006 BX WCIeHHOCTH. ‘


Arkhipoff, A. P. Three days i in the aul of Yusup-Kadi. Geo-
graphical News, 1848, pp. 193-203. AEN OES, A. I. Tpu
nus Be ayah Wcyms-Kann.

———. Ethnographic sketch of the Nogai and Turkomans. Cauca-
sian Calendar, 1859, pt. iii. — Onaorpaduseckili orepr Horatiness
au Typrmers.


Arne, T. J. La Suéde et ’Orient. Archives d’études orientales,
publiées par J. A. Lundell, vol. VIII. Upsala, rg14.


Arnold, T. W.: see-Houtsma.

Asiatic Russia. Edited by the Immigration Committee of the
“Department of Agriculture. St. P., rg14. — Asiamcnan
Poceiz. VUsjanie Iepeceseniecraro Ynpapiesit Faapnaro Yupa-

* paenia Semaeyerpoticrsa a Semaerbais.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 135


Aspelin, J.B. Surl’4ge du Bronze Altai-ouralien. Compte-rendu du
Congres intérnational-d’ Archéologie’ Stockholm, 1874, I, p. 562.

Antiquités du Nord Finno-Ougrien, Helsingfors, 1877-84.

.——+ Suomalais-ugrilaisen muinaistutkinnon alkeita, Helsinki, 1875.


——~ Anteckningar om den finska hastens ursprung. Kalender for
-finsk trafsport 1887.


—— Fels- und Stein-Inschriften am oberen Jenisei. Z. f. E.,
1887, XIX, pt. vi, pp. §29—31.

—— Die Jenisei-Inschriften. Z.f. Ey, 1889, XXI, pt. vi, pp. 744-6.

-——— Inscriptions de I’Yénissei recueillies et publiées par la Société
Finlandaise d’Archéologie. Helsingfors, 1889.

—— Types de peuples de lancienne Asie Centrale. Souvenir ‘de


l'Iénisséi, dédié & la Société Impériale WArcheologie de Moscou.
“Helsingfors, 1890. -


—— Die Steppengraber im Kreise Minssinsk am Jenissei. Finnisch-
"Ugrische Forschungen, XII, 1. Helsingfors, 1912.


Asret, a Mohammedan church in Turkestan. ‘Reference sheet
of the. town of Kazan’, 1867, No. 5. — Aspems, MATCMOTANGEAS
cBATEIHA BE Typrectars,


Atkinson, J.: see Firdausi.

Atkinson, T. W. Oriental and Western Siberia. London, 1858.

Aulya, a Kirghis temple ‘ Aulya’ near Lake Jektybay. Bull. S.
Arch. H. E.1. Univ. Kaz., 1893, XI, p.295.— A4yaea, Kuprascras
caatbiag ,, Aysba  Bomusn [ertiOalicnaro osepa.

Auteroche, C.J a’. Voyage en Sibérie fait par ordre du roi en
1761. Paris, 1768.

Avvakum (Archimandrite). On an inscription found on a rock
at the cave of Mangut. Mem, Sib. Sect. I. R.G.S., 1856, II,
pp. 87-9. — Aesanyns, Apeunandpums.. O Hapiicy, Haxons-
melica na cKarb y Manrytckoli nemepst.

-—- On an inscription on a gravestone situated on the banks of
the Amur, not far from its mouth. Mem. Sib. Sect. I.R.G.S,
1856, II; pp. 78-9.—O nagnucn Ha KaM@HHOMD TaMATHHKS, Haxoja-
memea Ha Gepery pbxa Auypa, HemAeKO OFH Buajeuin ef Bb Mope.


4
«


1336 THE TURKS ‘OF CENTRAL ASIA
B.M., Review of V:Thomsen’s' Inscriptions.de l’Orkhon déchiffrées’, ,
1894, L Journ: des.Savants, 1900, p. 443.
Baber +'see Vyatkin,V.. L.; Erskine, W.; Beveridge, A. S.; Talbot,
' A,S.; and Courteille, de: P.
Babinger, Fr. . Ein schriftgeschichtliches Ratsel: Rev. Or., 1913,
XIV, pp. 4-19.


Bang, W. Review-of V. Thomsen’s « Inscriptions ‘de YOrkhon
déchiffrées’ (1894). Litt. Centralblatt, 1900, pp- 537-9.


Zu den kéktiirkischen, Inschriften und den ttirkischen’ Turfan-
Fragmenten. W.Z.K.M., 1909, XXIII, pp. 415-19.


—— Review of W. W. Radloff ’s ‘Die alttiirkischen Inschriften der
_ Mongolei’, Neue Folge, 1897. T.P., 1897, Vil, P- 533


——}Turkologische Epikrisen. Heidelberg, 1910,
——— Zur koktirkischen Inschrift I. E. 19-21. T.P., 1896, VII,
p. 6rt.
——_ Zur Erklarung der kéktiirkischen Inschriften. W. Z. K.\M.,
1898, XII, pp. 34-54.
— Zu den kéktiirkischen Inschriften. T.P., 1898, IX, pp. 117-41.


—— Uber die kéktiirkische Inschrift auf der Siidseite des Kiil-Tagin
Denkmals. Leipzig, 1896.

—— Zu dén Kok-Tiitk-Inschriften’ der Mongolei. T.P., 1896,
‘VII, pp. 325-55:

~— Koktiirkisches. W.Z.K. M., 1897, XI,"pp. 192-200. °

Barshchevski, L. 8. Collection of antiquities from Afrosyab
and other places in Central Asia. ‘Archaeological: Bulletins .
and Notes, 1898, III, pp. 19-20. St. P. —Bapweecsit, I. C.
Koaéxmia qpepnocreli u3p Adpociaba u Apyruxt where Cpenuelt
Asin:


Barthold, V. V. Christianity in Turkestan in the pre-Mongol
period. H. P. 1893. — Bapmossds, B. B. ‘O Xpuctiancrsh-
Bb Typxeeran’ Bb 70-MonrompKiii aepioxt.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL, 137


Report. of the ‘Commission to Central, Asia. Men E.

Sect. I. R: Arch.-$., 1894, VIL, - pp. 33044 y- 1904) txy,

pp.173 ff. + Oriers 0 Kowamgponit Bb Cpenmor Asin,

—— Report of a journey. to Central J Asia’ with a scientific object,
in 1893-4. Mem:1. A. S:, 1897, VIL, 1, "No. 4. — Orsers.
0 aobsayh BL Coast 4 Asia, oh map jon nian, 1893-4.


7 Die higtorische, Bedeutung. der altttirkischen Inschriften. In


‘Die altitifkisghen Inschriften der Mongoleiy of W. W.sRadloff.
Neue Folge, 18¢7.


7 Gravestone inscription of 660 a.H, (=1262 A.D.) in -Aulie-Ata
* in: the Semirechie ‘territory. Mem, E. Sect. I. R. Arch. S.
XII, “pt. V, p- 189. —_— Haprpcuaa HajyuHCh 660 r. X. (=1262 00
P.X.) USB I. -Ayzie-Ata Commphuencroii 06a.


— Review of Samaria’ _by Abu-Takhir-Hadja.. Mem. E. Sect,
I.R. Arch. S., 1899, XII, pp. 0123~0125. — Penensia sure
A6y-Taxmps-Xonaa », Camapia “

— Die alttiirkischen Inschriften und die arabischen 4Quellen.


« Djé altttirkischen Inschriften der Mongolei’ of W. W. Radloff.
Zweite Folge, 1899.


mer 3 Mosque in Bibi*7Khanym. « ‘Russian (Turkestan ry 189%
No. 34- ~~. Mevers heed
— “Review of Aristoff’s ‘ Notes of the Ethnic Conipasitiort of the
‘ Tiirkic tribes and nations, and information abott their number
Mem’ E. Sect. I. R. Arch. S.; 1899, XI, 1-4, pp! syt- —60, —
Pénensia gnura Apuctopa: ,, Sambran 06 aTameckom goctaph
TIOPKGKUXE 4 WieMeHb M ‘Hapoynoctell eoknbaia o6n fxn
wncwenHocTy “.
—— Vilhelm Ludwig Peter Thomsen. Ency. Andreevski, 1st


ed. Vol. LXVI, 1901, p. 482. — Buabrexems-Jorzpure-Heteps
Tomcens.


Merverrud. Mem.-E. Sect.J. R. Arch. S. 1902, XIV,
pp. 028-038. —- Mepseppyms.


——~ New investigation into the Orkhon inscriptions. J. Min. Educ.,


1902, pp. 231-325. — Hostia nmscrbgonania 06m OpxoHcKaxs
HayRUCAXD.


2108 s


138 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Barthoid,V.V. Review of E.Chavannes’ ‘Documents sur les Tou-
Kiue occidentaux’. Collection of Documents of the Orkhon
Expedition, VI, 1903, in Mem. E. Sect. I. R. Arch. S., XV,

0162-0185. — Penensia kaura Chavannes, E.: Documents sur
les Tou-Kiue (Turks) occidentaux.

——+Thie system of numerals of the Orkhon inscriptions used in
the modern dialect. Mem.E. Sect.I.R. Arch. S., 1906, pt.
XVII, pp. 0171-3. — Cuctema camerenin Opxouckaxs naquuceii

Bb COBPeMCHHOMD WiareKTh.

——-., Turkestan at the time of the Mongol invasion. I, 1896;
II, 1900, St. P. — Typrectrant Bb S10Xy MOBTOIECKANO saBoeBaHis.

—— History of the study of the East in Europe and in Russia.
Man. Orient. Stud. St. Pet. Univ., 1911, No. 38. — Ucropia
usysenian Bocroxa Bb Espon’ u Bb Poccin.


Bartholomew, J. G. Literary and Historical Atlas of Asia. -
London, 1912.
Basset, R.: see Houtsma.


Baye, Baron de. Rapport sur les découvertes faites par
M. Savenkov dans la Sibérie Orientale. Paris, 1894.

Bayer, Th. 8. Vetus inscriptio prussica. Commentarii Academiae
Scient. Imp. Petropolitanae, 1729, II, pp. 470-81.

Bayjumuroff, D. The Kyzyl-Gyanch Court (in the Karkalinsk
district), Proc. Turk. Circle F. Arch., 1899~1900, V, pp. 90-3.
— Batiocynyposs, J. Kutspire-Taricnili pope (Bb Kapkapa-
auEcKom ybazb).

Beauvois,&, Review of V. Thomsen’s ‘Inscriptions de l’Orkhon dé-
chiffrées’ (1894). In Revue critique, 1897, XLIII, pp. 268-70.

Bekcburin, Mir Salikh..- Ancient mosque of Asret situated in
Turkestan. Collection of Military Essays, 1866, No. 8,
Pp. 209-19. — Bexuypuns, Mups Canuxs. Onncanie mevern
Aspera naxoqmmetics Bb Typkecrans.

Bell, M.S. The great Central Asian trade route from Pekin to
Kashgar. Proc. R.G.S., 1890, XII, pp. 57-93.

Bellew, H.W. The History of Kashgaria. Calcutta, 1875.

—— Kashmir and Kashgar. London, 1875.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 139


Bergeron, P. Voyages faits principalement en Asie dans les xn®,
xin®, xiv et xve siécles. [Benjamin de Tudelle, Jean ‘de
Plancarpin, Pére Ascelin, Guillaume de Rubruquius, Marco
Polo, Hayton, Jean de Mandeville.] La Haye, 1735.


Bergmann, B. F. B. Nomadische Streifereien unter den Kal-
muken in den Jahrén 1802 und 1803, Riga, 1804-5. *


Besthorn, R. Review of V. Thomsen’s ‘Déchiffrement des
inscriptions de POrkhon et de Jéniss¢i’ (1894). National-
tidende, 1894, No. 6393.

~—— Review of V. Thomsen’s ‘Inscriptions de l’Orkhon déchif-
frées’ (1894). Nationaltidende, 1896, No. 7126.

Beveridge, A.S. The Memoirs of Babur; a new translation
of the Babur-nama, incorporating Leyden and Erskine’s of

- a.D. 1826. London, 1912.

Bichurin (Father Jakinth). Notes on Mongolia. St. P., 1828. —
Buuypuns, Omeus Iaxunes. Samucxa 0 Monrosin.

~——— Collection of information concerning peoples living in Central
Asia in ancient days. St. P., 1855. — Codpamnie cpbybniti o
Haponaxt o6arannmx Bt Cpegueti Asi Bb Apepnia Bpemena.

—-— see Klaproth, H. J. von.

Biddulph, J. Tribes of the Hindoo-Koosh. Calcutta, 1880.


Blagovyeshchenski, Y. Die wirtschaftliche Entwicklung Tutt
kestans. ‘Rechts- und Staatswiss, Studien’, Heft 46. .


Blanc, EB. Antiquités de Samarkande. Revue des Deux Mondes,
15 février 1893.

~—— Mausolée de Tamerlan 4 Samarkande. Comptes-rendus de
PAcad. des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres, 1896, pp. 272-303.
Paris,

~~ Sur les inscriptions des principaux sarcophagues dans le
Mausolée de Tamerlan & Samarkande. Comptes-rendus de
YAcad. des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres, 1896, XXIV, p. 272.


Blochet, EB. Les inscriptions de Samarkande, Le Gofr-i-mir ou
Tombeau de Tamerlan. Revue Archéologique, sér. 3, 1897,
XXX, pp. 67 ff., 202 ff. ;


1440 THE TURKS OF.CENTRAL ‘ASIA


Blochet,"B. Le nom des Turcs dans l’Avesta, J.R. A.S., 1918;
PP: 305-9. .
-—— Lesinscriptionsturques del’Orklion. Revue Archéologique, sér. 3,

pt. XXXI1(1898), pp. 356-82; pt. XXXII (1898), pp. 352-65.
see Rashid al-Din Tabib.


Bobrinski, Count A. A. ‘Colleétion of archaeological essays
presented to Count A. A. BoBrinski on the twenty-fifth anniver-
sary of his presidency of the Imperial Archaeological Com- ~

‘ mission. St. P., 1911. — BoOpuncniti, [pagis A. A. 'Coopames
APKeoNOTMIeCKEXE crateli, noqHecenHEHi Tp. A. A. BoOpancxomy
BB nen 25 xbris upetchratemcrsa ero Bb VL. Apx. Kouamecin.

Bode, Baron K. On the Turkoman clans of Yamud and Goklan.

Mem. 1.R.G:S., 1847, II, pp. 203-32. — Bode, Bapons EK.
' @ Typxuencxaxs nokorbsiaxs SIygaxt o Torfnaxs.


—— Sketches of the land of the Turkomans and the south-eastern
shore of the Caspian Sea. Otechestvyennya Zapiski, 1856,
cv. Oseprku Typkmenckoi sem uw 10ro-BocTouHaro Npa6pexkeA
Kacnificraro MODAL.


Bahilingk, ©. Ueber die Sprache der Jakuten. See Middendorff.
ae in den dussersten Norden.

‘Bogdanoff, A. P., and Deniker, J. Notes anthropométriques
sur les Indigénes du Turkestan. L’Anthropologie, 1891.


Bogdanoff, A. P. The skulls from the kurgans of the Tarsk district,
obolsk Government. Russ. Anthr. J., 1917, XXXI, pts. 1-6,

«- Bordanoss, A. 1. Kypratmsie yepena Tapcxaro oxpyra,
‘ToComcrott T'yepxin. ;

Bogolubski, I. 8. Investigation into the antiquities of the Minu-
sinsk distrigf in 188r/ Bull. E. Sib. Sect. I. R. G.S.,, XIII,
PP. 43-6. —- Bovonobcxit, H.C. Usexbaosanie mpognocreti -
Munycunckaro oxpyra BE 1881,

Bonaparte, Prince Roland. Documents de |’époque «mongole
des xu? et xive siécles. (Lithographed) Paris, 1895;

Bonin, Charles-Eudes. Voyage de Pékin au Turkestan Russe -
par la Morigoliegle Koukouenor, fe Lop-nor et la Dzoungatie.
La Géographie, eb, vol. IIF (1991), pp. 15-22, 169-80.”


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 141


Bonvalot, G. Les ruines de. la vallée du Sourknane. Revue
d’Anthropologie,. 1883; Ii, ) pp- 385 ff.
.—. En Asie centrale. “De Moscou 3 Bactriane. Paris, 1884.


: Du, Kehistan lA Gaspienne. Paris, 1885.


N)
— Du Caucase aux Indes‘a travers le ‘Pamir. Paris, 1888.


Borg, K. F. yon der. Denkwiirdigkeiten tiber die Mongolei.
Translation of Bichurin’ s Notes on Mongolia. Berlin, 1822.


Borrodgile, A.A. Notes of a Journey in Northern Mongolia
in 1893. Geogr. Journ., Nov. 1903, XXII.


Bouillane de Lacoste: sce Lacoste.


Boyer. Discovery of a buried town built by Afrosyab in the
district of Shakh-yara in Turkestan. Novorogsiiski , Telegraph,
1891, No. 5083. — Bovteps. ‘Ornpsitie BB Typxecranh, BB
oxpectaoctaxh JIlaxt-spa, oysemHaro ropoja, ocrpoeHHaro
Adpociasons.


Bretschneider, E. Notes on’ Chinese mediaeval travellers tg*
the West. Shanghai, 1875.


~—— Notes on the mediaeval geography and. history of Cenital
and Western Asia. Journ. of the North Chiria Branch of the
ee A.S., 1876, pp. 190 ff.

Mediaeval researches from Eastern Asiatic sources, fragments
pee the knowledge of the geogiaphy and history of i
Central and,Western Asia from the 13th to the 17th centuries.
Truebner’ s Oriental Series, London, 1888.


Brown, RB. The Yenisei i inscriptions. Bab. Orient. Rée, 4889-90.
IV, pp. 231-8.

——,The Yénisei inscriptions. Academy, 1890, XXXVII,
pp. 103, &c.; XXXVIII, p. 2g1.

Bruce, C.D. Chinese Turkestan. J. Centr. As. S., 1907.

Brunnhoffer, H. Aichaeological objects and aims of Russia in.
Central Asia." Bull. S. Arch. H. E. I. Univ. Kaz., 1892, X,,
Pp. 240-2, _—Bpynmopeps, I. \ /Apxeonoiiyexist sayaim 1 yb
~Pocein Hb Henrpaabuoli Asi.


1442 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Bryanoff, A. Excavations in Kishlak-Aksa. Turk. News, 1882,
No. 26. — Bpanoes, A. Pacxorka sb Kouaakh-Axcst.

—— Traces of the ancient town of Kasan in the Ferghana district.
Proc. Turk, Circle F. Arch., 1898-9, IV, pp. 142-53. —- O
crbyaxb ApeBEaro ropoya Kacaua Bb Depranckoli oGaacta. *


Burana. A column on the R. Burana in the Tokmak district,
and legends of the Kirghis and Sart relating to it. Transactions
of the Fourth Archaeological Congress, 1884, I, p. Ixiv. —
Bypana, Koxosna upa p. Bypanh sp Toxmaxcnomb yhsyb a ce-
@7MHCHEEIA Cb STUMS HaMATHHKOMG aerenmEt Haprusos u Capross.

Burns, A. Travels into Bokhara.,. 1831-2. London, 1835.

Byelkin, D. Z.: see Obrucheff.


Cahun, L. Formation territoriale de J’Asie. Timour et le Second
Empire Mongol. In L’Histoire générale, edited by E. Lavisse
and A. Rambaud.

—— Origine des nations turques— Tchingiz-Khan et Empire
Mongol. In L’Histoire générale, edited by E. Lavisse and
A. Rambaud.

~—— Introduction & I’Histoire de l’Asie. Turcs et Mongols des
Origines & 1405. Paris, 1896.

Campbell, C. W. Report by C. W. Campbell, His. Majesty’s
Consul at Wuchow, on a journey in Mongolia. Blue Book,

. Series China, 1904, No. 1,

Campbell, J. Siberian inscriptions, Transactions of the Canadian
Institute, III, p. 20.

Capus. | Le Toit du Monde. Paris, 1890.

Carpini, John of Plano: see Yule. ;

Carruthers, D. Unknown Mongolia. London, 1913.

Castagné, J. A. Antiquités des steppes Kirghises et en pays
d’Orenburg. Paris, 1910.

Castrén, M.A. ‘Nordiska Resor och Forskningar. Helsingfors,
1852-70.

— Nordische Reisen und Forschungen. I. Reiseerinnerungen
aus den Jahren 1838-44 (1853). II. Reiseberichte u. Briefe
aus d. J. 1845-8 (186). III. Vorlesungen tiber Finnische


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 143


Mythologie (1853). IV. Ethnologische Vorlesungen (1857).
V. Kleinere Schriften (1862). VI. Versuch einer Ostjakischen
Sprachlehre (1849). VII. Grammatik der Samojedischen
Sprachen (1854). VIII. Wérterverzeichniss aus den Samo-
jedischen Sprachen (1855). IX. Grundziige einer Tungusischen
Sprachlehre (1836). X. Versuch einer Burjatischen Sprachlehre
(1887). XI. Versuch einer Koibalischen und Karagassischen
Sprachlehre nebst Wérterverzeichnissen aus den Tatarischen
Mundarten des Minussinschen Kreises (1857). XII. Versuch
einer Jenissei-Ostjakischen und Kottischen Sprachlehre (1858).
St. Petersburg.

. Chabot, J.B. Histoire du Patriarche Mar Jabalaha III et du
Moine Rabban Cauma, Traduite du Syriaque. Revue de
YOrient Latin, 1893, I and II.


Chaffanjou, J. Rapport sur une mission scientifique dans l’Asie
centrale et la Sibérie. Archives des missions scientifiques,
1899, sér. 4, 1X, pp. 1-101. Paris.

Chalon, P. F. En Mongolie: le pays des Saiotes. Revue de
Géographie, 1904, LIV.

Chardin, J. Voyage en Perse et autres lieux de I’Orient.

* Amsterdam, 1711.

Chavannes, E. Review of V. Thomsen’s ‘ Inscriptions de l’Orkhon
déchiffrées’ 1894,I. J. A., 1895, IX, vol. vi, pp. 191-3.

—— Mémoires historiques. Paris, 1895-1905.


—— Dix inscriptions chinoises de l’Asie centrale d’aprés les
»  estampages de M. Ch.-E. Bonin. Paris, 1902.


~—— Documents sur les Tou-Kiue (Turcs) occidentaux. Collection
of Documents of the Orkhon Expedition, VI. St. P., 1903.

Review of A. von Le Coq’s ‘ Koktiirkisches aus Turfan’.
T. P., 1908, sér. II, vol. X, p. 727.


Review of V. Thomsen’s ‘Ein Blatt in tiirkischer Runen-
schrift aus Turfan’. T. P., 1910, sér. II, vol. XI, p. 303.


——— Les Documents chinois découverts par Aurel Stein dans les
sables du Turkestan. Oxford, 1913.


144 THEsTURKS OFICENTRAL ASIA


Chavannes, E., and Pelliot, B. Un Traité Manichéen_retrouvé
en Chine. J. A., fort, IL

Chazaud, Bertaud du. La mission de Lacoste dans la Mongolie
septentrionale. Bull. Soc, anthr. de- Paris, 1919, sér. VI,, pt.-i,
Pp. 127-33.

Cherkassoff, A. Journey to- the yuins of, Otrar - Proc, Turk,,
Circle F. Arch., 1902-3, VI, pp: qer74- +, Fepnacoss, A.
Tlobsaxa Ha, paspaniHel Orpapa.

Chermak, L. The Sedentary Kirghis ae, aati on the R
Chu. Mem. W. Sib. Sect. 7, R..GZ5., 1900," XXVIL —
Yepnans, I. Ockraid Kuprissi-seuterbanyy Bap. Oy. ;

Chertoff, V. I. The ancient kurgans i in the Khttd-Kurgan- district,
. Annual Book of the Samarkand Territory, ‘1897, V: ; ‘yPP- 247-51.
— Yepmose, B.H. Mpexuie xyprantt pb Karra-Hypraiigxoar Ybanb.

Chirol, Sir V. The Far Eastern Question. flondpn and New
York, 1896.

—— The Middle Eastern Question; or some political problems
of Indian Defence. London, 1903.

Chupin, N. On some ancient roads from European Russia into
Siberia. News-sheet from the Irbit Fair, 1872, pp. 16-25. —
Tynuns, H., O wbxoroprrxt JpeBauxb Aoparax U3b Exponeticxoft
Poccin’ Bb Camps.


Church, P.W. Chinese Turkestan, with caravan and_ rifle.
London, 1901.


Cigny, F. de: see Levshin, A.

Cohn,‘L. Die Ruinen des alten Merw. Petermann’s Mitteilungen,
1894, pp. 68 ff.

Compte-rendu des travaux de la Société Finno-ougrienne du
2/xii 1906 au 2/xii 1907. J.Soc. Finno-ougr. XXV, pt. v,
PP. 35-70.

Cordier: sce Yule.

Courant, M. L’Asie centrale aux xvu® et xvme siécles. An.
Univ. Lyon, N,5S. 1912, II, pp. 1g1 ff.

Courteille, P. de, and Vambéry, A.V. Jagataische Sprach-
studien. Leipzig, 1867.


—— Mémoires de Baber. Paris, 1871.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 145


Cowley, A Another unknown language from Eastern Turkestan.
J. R.A-S., rgtt, pp. 189-277.
.Croizier. Les’ monuments du. Samarcande de I’époque des
Timourides. Paris, 1891.
Cuinet, V La Turquie d’Asie. ~ Paris, 1890-5.
Cuno, J G.. Forschungen im , Gebiete der alten Volkerkunde,
1. Theil, Dié Skyihéh. Berlin, 1871;
Curtin,. J.. The Mongols :. a History. London, 1908.
A journey in S. Siberia. Boston, 1909.
Curtis, W. ¢. Turkestan : ¥e the heart of Asia’. London, 1911.
Curgon, Lord G@.!'N. Russia in Central Asia in 1889 and the
Anglo-Russian question. London, 1889.
—. Problems ofthe Far East. London, 1894.
——+ The Pamirs and the source of the Oxus. London, 1898.


Czaplicka, M.A. The influence of environment upon the religious
ideas and practices of the aborigines of Northern Asia. Folk-
lore, March, 1914.

—— Aboriginal Siberia. Oxford, 1914.

“———, Review of E. H. Minns’s ‘Scythians and Greeks’, Man
*x917, No. 108.

-——- The evolution of the Cossack communities. J. Centr. As. S.,
1918, V, pt. 2.

—— The Samoyed. E.R.E.

—— and Hall, H. U. ‘Report of the Expedition to the Yenisei,
1914-1915. [To be published shortly. |


‘D. Review of W. Radloff’s ‘ Proceedings of the Orkhon Expedition.
Atlas of the Mongolian Antiquities’, 1892-9. Bull. E. Sib. Sect.
IR.G.S., XXVI, vol. iv, pp. 247-8. — J. Pen, Pagzosa B. B.
Tpyant Opxonckols Oxcnegunin. Ariact Apesxocreli Mouronzin.

Daulbaeff, B,D. Account of the life of the Kirghis of the
Nikolaeff district, Turgai -territory, from 1830 to 1880.
Mem. Oren. Sect. I. R. G. S., 1881, IV, pp: 98-117. —
Aayn6aess, B. ZT, Pascuasd 0 xusna Kuprusons Haxonaerckaro
yhona Typraiicroli Odsacta ch 1830-1880.


2103 T


1446 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Davy, Major: see Timur.


Davydoff, S.A. Home industry in Central Asia. Tashkent,
1890. — Jaendoes, C. A.


Kycrapuad MpoMbMieHHocts Bh
Cpequeli Asin,


——— On the ancient monuments and burial remains of the aborigines
of the Transbaikal territory, Verkhneudinsk district. Mem.
Sib. Sect. I. R.G.S., II, 1856, pp. 89-101. — O Apesnnxs
TAaMATHEKAXD W MOTBAbHLIXD OCTATHAX aGopHrenowh 3adatikarbcKoli
o6aactu, BepxneyquncKaro oKpyra.

’ Deasy, H. H. P. In Tibet and Chinese Turkestan. London,

190.
Defrémery, C., and Sanguinetti: see Ibn Batoutah.


Demidoff, EB. After Wild Sheep in the Altai and Mongolia.
London, 1900.


Deniker, J. Notes sur les inscriptions du Yénissei, T.P., 1891,
; II, 3» pp. 232 ff. ‘


—— and Yadrintseff, N. M. Discoveries in Mongolia: the
travels of Yadrintseff ahd Radloff, 1889-91. Bab. Orient. Rec.,'
1892-3, VI, pp. 43-8.


—— Expédition Radlov. T.P., 1892, III, pp. 98-100.


——— Articles on ‘ Tatars’ and ‘ Turks’ in the Dict. Univ. de Géogr.
of Vivien de Saint-Martin and Rousselet, vol. VI, 1894.


~—— Les explorations russes en Asie centrale. Ann. de Géogr.,
189%, VI, pp. 408-30.

Desideri, I.: see Puini, C.

Desmaisons, Baron. Abul-Gazy-Bahadur Khan.

Devéria, @. Inscriptions sibériennes: Comptes-rendus de l’Aq, des
Inscript., 1890, XVIII, pp. 448-58. Paris.

—— Observations sur I’écriture turque-altaique, la stéle de Gueuk
Téghin et emplacement de Kara-Korum. Comptes-rendus
de l’Ac. des Inscript., 1891, XIX, pp. 365-8. Paris.

—— Inscriptions recueillies 4 Kara-Korum. Relevé des différents
signes figurant dans les copies rapportées par M. Yadrintseff.
T.P., 1890, I, pp. 275-6. Leyden.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 147


-—— Transcription, analyse et traduction des fragments chinois du
second et du troisitme monument. Inscriptions de l’Orkhon,
p- Xxviii, 1892.

La stéle funéraire de Kinéh Teghin. Notice de Ye-lu-tchou

" (xe siécle). Extraite de l’ouvrage intitulé Choang-ki-tsoue-

intsi. T.P., 1891, II, pt. 3, pp. 229-37.


—— Notes on the Venisei and Karakorum script. Bab. Orient.
Rec., 1891, V, pt. 6, pp. 121-7.

Diez, EB. Die Kunst der islamischen Volker.

Divayeff, A. A. Information about the ancient sites in the village
of Akjar in the Tashkent district. Proc. Turk. Circle F. Arch.,
1895-6, I, pp. 36-8. — ueaeess, A. Coo6menie o apeBanxn
ypommax, Bb AKpkapcKoil Bonocta Tamkentcxaro ybsqa.

—— and Akhmeroff, P. N. Inscription in the mosque of
Akhmed Asavi. Bull. S. Arch. H. E. I. Univ. Kaz., 1896, XIII,
pp. 538-51. — Jusaess, A. A, u 1 damepos®, i. H, Haguncn
meyer AxMeya Scanu.

——- Note on the grave of St. Khorkhut-At. Mem. E. Sect. I. R.
Arch. S., 1897, X, pp. 193-4. — H&bckoxbxo caopp 0 mormxb
cs. Xopxyrb-Ata.

—— Old Kirghis burial customs. Bull. S. Arch. H.-E, I. Univ.
Kaz., 1897-8, XIV, pp: 181-7. — [penne-Kuprascxie noxo-
PouHble obbrian.

——- Tradition about the origin of the Asiatic town of Tashkent.
Proc. Turk. Circle F. Arch., 1899-1900, V, pp. 145-51. —
Tiperanie 0 Bosnuxnosenin Asiatckaro ropora Tammkeuta.


—— Additional note on the grave of St. Khorkhut-At. Mem.
E. Sect. I. R. Arch. S., rg00, XII, pp. 039-040. — Ene 0
Morus cp. Xopxyrp-Ata.

Concerning the Kirghis cattle-breeding. Dromedary, horse,

cow, ram, goat. Tashkent, 1906. — Us» o6aacta Kyprascraro

CKOTOBOATecKaro xosulicrBa. Bepbawyxb, A0Mlayb, KOpowa, OapaHt,

KOSeIb.


Djelaleddin, Mustapha. Les Turcs anciens et modernes.
Constantinople, 1869. *


148 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Dm.; N. Asiatic Bibliography, Supplement to Mejoff’s Biblio-
graphy. Turk. News, 1895, Nos. 15, 16, 18, 26, 28.— JIm., H.
Asintcxan Ou6aiorpapia. lo nonozy xaura Mexxopa, ch joa
HeHism Kb Heli.


Dmitrowski, N. V. Bibliographical index of the Essays on
Central Asia printed in Russia and in the Russian language
from 1692-1870. Year-book of the Turkestan Country, 1874,
pt. TI, St. P. — xumposcuit, H. B.  BuGaiorpadmrectitt
ykasatexs cownenit o Cpemneit Asin, nanevatanHEb BE Poccin
Ha PYCCKOMb A3bIKb ch 1692 ropa (m0 1870).

Dmitryeff, A. A. Isker. on the Irtysh; a town of Kuchum.
Bull. S. Arch. H. E. I. Univ. Kaz., 1900, XVI, pp. 2847-72. —
Auumpiess, A. A. Kysymopp Uckepb na Uprmmeb.,


Dmitryeff-Kavkaski, L. E. Through Central Asia. Notes of
an artist.. St.P., 1895. — [mumpiees- Kaexascnit, a E.
Ilo Cpemueit Asia. Sanucxm xynoauuna.,


Dobrosmuisloff, A. I. Towns of Syr-Daria territory: Kazalinsk,
Perovsk, Turkestan, Aulieata, and Chimkient. Tashkent, '
1912. — Jo6pocuyucaoss, A. H. Topona Crrpp-Japsunckolt -

| odaacra: Kasamauces, Teposcxs, Typrecranb, Ayzieara ua
Unenre.


Donner, O. Die Felseninschrift bei Suljek. Ofversigt af Finska
Vetenskaps-Societetens Férhandlingar, XXXI, pp. 9-13.
Helsingfors, 18809..

Les Inscriptions en caracttres de VJénisséi. Systeme


décriture. Langue. Inscriptions de !’Orkhon, p. xxxix.
Helsingfors, 1892. -


Ly
——- Worterverzeichniss zu den ‘ Inscriptions de I’'Jénisséi’. Mém.
Soc. Fin.-Ougr., IV, p. 69. Helsingfors, 1892.


Sur Yorigine de Valphabet ture du Nord de l’Asie.~ J. Soc.
Fin.-Ougr., 1896, XIV, p.1.


-—— Ueber Ausgrabungen und alttiirkische wie uigurische In-
schriften aus Turkestan. Verhandlungen des 13. Orientalisten-_
Kongresses. Hamburg, 1902 (Leiden, 1904), pp. 159-60.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL’ MATERIAL 149


—— Voyage en Turkestan et en Dzonngarie en 1898. Fennia,
1901, XVIII, No. 4, p. 53.

‘Dorn, B. Muhammedanische Quellen zur Geschichte der stid-

, lichen Kiistenlander des Kaspischen Meetes. Petrograd and

Leipzig, 1850-58.

~——- Forschungen in der Pehlewy-Miinzkunde. Mélanges Asia-
tiques tirés du Bull. I. A. S. St. Pétersbourg, IV, pt. 1, pp. 22—4.
St. P., 1860.

Drouin, E. La numismatique araméenne -sous les Arsacides.
J. A. 1889, p. 377.

Review of V. Thomsen’s ‘Inscriptions de l’Orkhon déchiffrées’,

I, 1894. J. A. 1894, Sér. IX, vol. iv, pp. 871-5.

—— Review of W. W. Radloff’s ‘ Die’ alttiirkischen Inschriften
der Mongolei’, Neue Folge, 1897. J. A., 1898, XII, p. 341.

—— Review of J. Marquart’s ‘Die Chronologie der alttiirk.
Inschriften’, 1898. Revue critique, 1899, IV, pp. 61-3.


—— Sur quelques monnaies turco-chinoises. Revue numismatique,
1891, IX, pp. 459-73.
Les inscriptions sibériennes. J. A., 1893, Sér. IX, vol.-i,
pp. 171-7. ;
Dudin, 8. M.: see W. W. Radloff’s ‘Collection of Documents of:
the Orkhon Expedition, +892~—1903 ’, vol. I,. pp. 24-7.


——— The ornament and the. state of preservation of the mosques

of Samarkand. Bull. I. Arch. Commission, 1903, VII, pp. 49-73.
_ St. P. — Tyduns, C. M. Opnamentuxa 4 coppemesuoe cocronuie

CTAaPHHHLIXh CaMapkanACKux® Mevereli.

Duhousset, Colonel. Etude sur les populations de la Perse.
Paris, 1863. :

Dutreuil de Rhins, J. L. Mission scientifique dans la Haute
Asie, 1890-1895, ed. F. Grenard. Paris, 1897-8.

Dyachkoff, P. A.. Issyk-Kul lake and its northern shore. Bull.
Turk. Sect. I. R.G. S.,.1898, I, pp. 1-14. —- oaunoes, I. A.
Osepo Hecrncn-Kyab 4 ero ckpepubilt 6eperb.


150 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Egnatius (Jo. Baptista). De origine Turcarum. Paris, 1539.

Elias, N. Narrative of a Journey through West Mongolia. J.R.G.S.,
vol. XLII, pp. 184 ff. London.

and Ross, B.D. Muhammad, Haidar. The Tarikh i

Rashidi.... A history of the Moghuls of Central Asia. An

English version, edited, with commentary, notes and. map, by

N. Elias, .. . The translation by E. D. Ross. London, 1895.

Re-issue 1898.

Eliot, Sir C. N. E. Turks. Ency. Brit., ruth ed., XXVII,
pp. 468-73.

Ellesmere, Earl of: sce Major, R. H.


Erckert, E. von. Forschungsreise nach dem Oberlauf des Flusses
Orchon zu den Ruinen von Karakorum durch N. M. Jadrinzeff,
1889. Deutsche Rundschau f.'Geogr. u. Stat., 1891, XIII,
pt. ii, pp. 516 ff.

Erdmann, F. von. Vollstandige Ubersicht der altesten T iirkischen,
Tartarischen und Mogholischen Vélkerstémme nach Rashid-


ed-dins Vorgange, bearbeitet von F. von Erdmann. Kazan,
1841.


~~. Temudschin der Unerschiitterliche. Leipzig, 1862.
Erman, A. Travels in Siberia. London, 1878.


Erskine, W. (and Leyden, J.). Memoirs of -Zehir-ed-Din
Muhammed Baber, Emperor of Hindustan, written by himself,
in the Jaghatai Turkic, and translated partly by the late John
Leyden, partly by William Erskine. London, 1826.

Etherton, P.T. Across the Roof of the World. London, 1 g1t.

Evarnicki, D. I. Guide to ‘Central Asia from Baku to Tashkent
with reference to archaeology and history. Tashkent, 1893. —
Ieapnuynit, J. H. Wyresoqutes no Cpexueli Asin orp Bary yo *
Taurkenta Bb APXCOAOPHYeCKON H HCTOPWIECKONS OTHOMICHIM.,

-—— Archaeological Investigation in the Turkestan country .
(Samarkand). Bulletins and Notes from the gazette ‘ Border-
land’, 1893, I, p. 29. Moscow, — Apxeonoruseckia wsambyo-
BaHia Bb Typkectanckom Kpab (Camapranyts).


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 151


Expeditions.

Expeditions (1875-88) of Przewalski, N. M.: see Morgan, E. D.;
also Przewalski, N. M. :

Expeditions of Roborovsky to Central Asia (1880-95):. see

» Roborovsky.

Finnish Expedition to the Orkhon in 1890; see Inscriptions ; see
also Heikel, A. O.

Russian Expedition to Orkhon. A. Collection of Documents of
the Orkhon Expedition: vol. I, 1892 (see Radloff); vol. II,
1895 (see Klements, Obrucheff); vol. ITI, 1897 (see Vasilyeff) ;
vol. IV, 1897 (see Radloff and Melioranski) ; vol. V, 1901 (see
Yadrintseff); vol. VI, 1903: (see Chevannes). B. Atlas of
Mongolian Antiquities: vol. I, 1892; vol. 1I, 18933; vol. II,
1896; vol. IV, 1899 (see Radloff).

Expedition ‘of Brothers Grzymailo, (Grijimailo), (1892-96) : see
Morgan, E. D.; a/so Grum-Grzymailo, G. E.

Expeditions of Obrucheff, V: A. (1892-1906) : see Obrucheff,V, A.

Expedition to Mongolia (1892~93): see Posdnyeff, A. M.

Expedition to Turfan, 1893 (Imp. Acad. of Science, St. Petersburg):
see Klements, D, A., and Radloff, W. W.; see a/so Turfan.

I. R. G. S. Expedition to Mongolia, 1899—1901 : see Kozloff, P. K.

Danish Expedition to Pamir: see Olufsen, O.

Expedition of Monck and Donner to Chinese Turkestan, 1898 :
see Sénart, E.

German Expeditions to Turkestan : (1) in 1902-3 : see Griinwedel.
(2) in 1904-5: see Le Cog. (3) in 1906-7: see Griinwedel
and Le Coq.

Expedition to Mongolia in 1903: see Rudnyeff.

Expeditions of Pumpelly, 1903 and 1904: see Pumpelly, R.

Notice of Japanese Expedition (Zuicho Tachibana) to Chinese
Turkestan and Mongolia. J. R.G.S., Jan. to June, 1gr10,
XXXV, p. 448. London.

‘Fabricius, M. P. The Sayan Country. Bull.I. R.G:S., 1899,
XXXV. — PGabpuutycs, M; TT. Casucxilt xpait.
Faddeyeff. Collection of antiquities from Afrosyab. Trans. I.
«Moscow Arch. S., 1894, XV, pt.i, p. 10g. — Baddness. Kax-
“genta mpesxocrell nab Adpocia6ga.


132 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Farrer, R. The Moslem Problem in China. J. Centr. As. S.,
1918, vol. V, pp. 59-71.

Favicki, P. G. The discovery of the ancient ruins near Khojent.
Bull. I.R,.G.S., 1867, III, pt.ii, No. 7, p. 200. — Dasuuxit,
IZ. P. Onepsirie apernuxs pasbaTHHe OTSb Xoypxenta.

Ferganyets. The Transcaspian Territory with reference to its
Archaeology. Turk. News, 1888, Nos, 24 and 25.— Semaneys.
Sakachifiexaa o61acth Bb apXeoxOrMIeCHOM OTHOMeHIA,

Finsch, O. Reise nach West-Sibirien im Jahre 1876, Berlin,
1879.

Firdousi (Abul Casim). The Sh4h Naméh. Transl. from Persian
hy J. Atkinson. London, 1886; another ed. 1892. Other
transl. by A. S. Werner, 1905; by A. Rogers, 1907.


—— Schahnameh ; le livre des rois. Traduit et commenté par
Jules Mohl. Paris, 1838-78.

Fischer, J.B. Sibirische Geschichte von der Entdeckung Sibiriens
bis auf die Eroberung dieses Landes durch die russischen
Waffen. St. P., 1768. \


Fischer, H. Ueber Timur’s (Tamerlan’s) Grabstein aus Nephrit.
' Archiv fiir Anthropologie, 1880, XII, pp. 469—74, mit 3 Abbild.


Flinders Petrie, W. M. Review of Tallgren’s ‘Collection Tovo-
stine des Antiquités préhistoriques de Minoussinsk’. Man,
1917, No. 134

— Review of Tallgren’s ‘Collection Zaoussailov au Musée -
historique de Finlande & Helsingfors’. Man, 1917, No. 86.

FPiorinski, V. M. On the stone ‘ baba’ and Siberian inscriptions.
Archaeological Museum of Tomsk University. Tomsk, 1888,
pp- 166-75. — Dropuncnit, B. M. Kamenutia 6a6et u Cadaperia
DECBMeHA.

Fromm, E. Deciphering of Orkhon and Yenisei Inscriptions.
Globus, 1894, pt. 66, p. 325. ha

Foy, K: Die Sprache der tiirkischen TFurfanfragmente in mani:

chaischer Schrift, . I. Sitzungsber. d. k. Berl. Akad. d. Wiss
15, 1904, XII. .


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 153


~— Tiirkische Vocalstudien, besonders das Kéktiirkische und
Osmanische betreffend. Mitth. Seth. Orient. Spr. zu Berlin,

1900, III, 2, pp. 180 ff.
Forke, A. Review of E. Chavannes’s ‘Documents sur les Tou-,
» Kiue (Tures) « occidentaux’, 1903. LL. Z., 1909, pp. 1128-30.


Forsyth. Report of a mission to Yarkand. Calcutta, 1875.


Franke, O. Beitriige aus chinesischen Quellen-zur Kenntniss der
Ttrkvolker und Skythen Zentralasiens. K,’ P, Ak. Wiss.,:
1904, Abh. I, Bp. I-III.

~—— Eine chinesische Tempelinschrift aus IdikutSahri bei Turfan,
K. P. Ak. Wiss., 1907, Abh. I, pp. 92 ff.

Fraser, M.F, A. Translation of N. M. Yadrintseff’s ‘A journey
to the upper waters of the Orkhon and the ruins of Karakorum’.
J. China Br. R. A.S.S.N.S., XXVI, pp. 190-207.

Fressl, J. Die Skythd-Saken die Urvater derGermanen. Munich, —
1886.

Friederichsen, Max. Review of J. G. Grani's ‘ Reiseerinner-
‘ungen aus Westsibirien und der Mongolei’, 1907. Petermann’s
Mittheilungen 56, II, L, p. 38.

Futterer, EK. “Durch Asien. Berlin, 1901-1909.

G. Notes on the ancient sites of the Turkestan country. Turk.
News, 1879, No, 12. — I. Sawbria 0 Apesamx ypouwtmaxs
Typrectaucraro kpas.

G@. V. Journey to the basin of Lake Issyk-Kul. (Its antiquities.)
Semip. Terr. News, 1890, Nos. 31 and 33, ~ I. B. Tobsara
Bb Jomny o3epa Mecncs-Kyaa (0 Apepnocraxs).

G. G. Notes on the antiquities of the Kirghis-Kaizak Steppe.
Extract from the ‘Review of the Kirghis-Kaizak Steppe’.
Siberian News, 1822, XXX, pp. 321-8. — I. EF. Sawbaasia
0 Apesuoctaxt BE Kapruss-Katicankoli cremm, Wsraeyenie usb
» OGospbuia Kuaprass-Katicankolt cremm “.

Gabelentz, A.v.d. L’inscription chinoise du premier monument.
Inscriptions de lOrkhon, pp. xxv-vi. Helsingfors, 1892,
Galkin, A. On the subject of the antiquities from Issyk-Kul.

Turk. News, 1891, No. 40. — Taanuns, 4. Ka Bompocy o0b


Veciins-Kyancnnxs ApeBHOCTAX.
2103 U


154 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Galkin, M.N. Ethnographical Materials relating to Central Asia
and the Orenburg country. Mem. I. R. G.S., 18647, pt. i,
pp. 1-250. — Taanuns, M. H. 9Oraorpaduieckie marepianzi no
Cpbaneii Aain 1 Open6yprexosry Kpaio.

Gardner, P. Coins of the Greek and Scythic kings of Bactria
and India. London, 1886.

Garteveld, V. N. Among the shifting sands and decapitated
heads. St. P., 1913. — Fapmecenods, B. H. Cpoxum chimywxt
T€CKOBb HW OTPYO1eHHEIXS TOIOBS.

Gaubil, A. Abrégé de l'histoire chinoise de la grande dynastie
Tang. Mémoires concernant l'histoire des Chinois, XV-XVI.

——— Histoire de Gentchiscan et de toute la dynastie des Mongols.
Paris, 1739.

—— Traité de la chronologie Chinoise, publié par Silvestre de Sacy.
Paris, 1814.

Gauthiot, R. Review of E.C. Andreas’s‘ Zwei sogdische Exkurse
zu Wilhelm Thomsen’ (1910). J. A., 1910, X, p. 5404,

Review of V.Thomsen’s ‘Ein Blatt in tiirkischer Runenschritft '

aus Turfan’ (1910). J.A., 1910, XV, pp. 538-54.

Note sur la langue et l’écriture inconnues des documents

Stein-Cowley. J. R.A.S., 1911, pp. 496-508.

—— Del’Alphabet Sogdien, J. A., XVIII, pp. 81-96. Paris, 1911.

Gedroyé, K. I.: see Obrucheff.

Geins, A.K, A sketch of the Kirghis. Mililary Essays, 1866,

XLVII-XLIX, Nos. 1, 6, 7. — Denes, A. K. Kupruscxie
Ouepkn.

Georgi, J. G. Bemerkungefi einer Reise im Russischen Reich in
den Jahren 1773 und 1774. St. P., 1775.

Gertsulin, M.Y. Kishlak-Tadjik in the Ferghana Territory,
‘Niva’, 1898, pp.991,994,995- = Nepny eas, Mt. A, Kumare-
Taran Bb Pepranckolt o6zactu,

Geyer, I. I, Account of the ruin of Termez. Proc, Turk. Cirele
F. Arch. 1896, p. 29. — Fedeps, HW. H. Coo6menio o pas-
BadHax Tepmesa, "


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 155


Giles, H. A. Chung Tzti. 1889.
—— China and the Chinese. New York, 1912.


—— Tun Huang Lu. Notes on the district of Tun-Huang.
» J.RAS., rorg.


4 i

Gins, G. K. The Taranchi and the Dungan. Sketches from

a journey to Semirechie. Historical News, 1911, No. 8,,
pp. 672-708. — Tuncs, I. A. — uw jlysrane.' Ovepru

H3b DobszKn BE Cemapbubio.

Gmelin, J. G. Reise durch Sibirien von dem Jahr 1733 bis 1743.
Géttingen, 1751-2.

Golovacheff, P.M. Siberia. Moscow, 1914. — Dowosauees,
I. M. Cu6upp.


Golubowski, P. The Pyechenyegi, the Térki, and the Polovtsy
until the Tatar invasion. History of Southern’ Steppes of
Russia in IX-XIII cent. Kieff, 1884. — Tory6oecutt, IH.
Teventru, Topxa u Jlonopnet 70 Hamectsin Taraps. <a
JOxno-Pyccxuxe crenett IX—XIIT 3.


Golubyeff, A. Episode from travels in Central Asia in the
Trans-Ili country. Mem.I. R.G.S., 1861, No. 3. — Tony6eas,
A, OrperBokb usb nyremectsia BE Cpequmn Asi, Sanuilicnili
kpaii.

Gordlewski, V. A. Note on the ‘Turk Darnay’ in Constanti-
nople. Eastern Antiquities. Trans. E. Comm. I. Moscow
Arch. S., 1913, IV, Moscow. — Topdnescxiti, B.A. Sanbrea
o ‘Typexxoms Co6pasia’ pb Koucranranononb.


Gorodtsoff, V. A. Description of the collection of Siberian .
antiquities belonging to O. B. Egerski-Strumillo. Rep.I.R.
Hist. Mus., 191g. Petrograd, 1915. —- Topodyoes, B. A.
Onucanie Kommexuiu cnu6upcKux xpesuocrelt r. O. B. Brepcxaro-
Crpymmaao.

Gorokhoff. A short ethnographical description of the Kalmuck

_ Of Biisk or Altai, J. M. Int., 1840,sX XXVIII, pp. 201-28. —
Topowoss. Kparsoe sraorpaduseckoe onncanie Biticxuxs wan
Aagraiicruxt Kaannixoss.


156 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Goroshchenko, K. red Burial-masks of gypsum and a special
type of trepanation in the Kurgans of the Minusinsk district.
Trans. of the Tenth Arch. Congress in Riga, 1896. Repr. 1898.
—iTopowenno, KH. H. Tuucoppia norpetaibunia Macka 2 ocobnili
BUNb Tpelananin Bb Kypranaxs Munycuncwaro oxpyra.

Skulls from the Kurgans of the Minusinsk district. Description
of the collection in the Minusinsk Museum, II. Minusinsk,

1900. — Kypranusie yepena Munycuuckaro oxpyra.


—— Materials for the anthropology of Siberia. Mem. Krasn. S.W.
Sib. Sect. I. R. G. S., 1905, I, pt. ii. — Marepiaasr no anrpono-
xoria Cu6upa.

and Ivanowski, A.A. The Natives of the Yenisei. Russ.
Anthrop. Journ., 1907, I, II. — Topoujenno, H. H., u Hea-
noecxit, A. A. Enuceticrie Waopoqusi.


Gramionyecki, D. Notes on the ancient sites of the Turke-
stan country. Proc. Turk. Circle F. Arch., 1897-98, III,
Pp. 150-57. — Tpameneyxit, Z. Sawbrea o — ypo-
imMmaxb TypkectancKaro Kpas.


Grand, J. G. Reiseerinnerungen aus Westsibirien a der Mon-
golei. Medd. af Ger. Foreningen i Finland, 1907-9, VIII,
pp. 1-104. :

—— Archidologische Beobachtungen von meinen Reisen in den
nordlichen Grenzgegenden Chinas 1906, 1907. _Helsingfors,
1909.

—— Archiologische Beobachtungen von meiner Reise in Siid-
sibitien und der Nordwest-Mongolei im Jahre 1909. Hel-
singfors, 1910. :

~—— Ueber die geographische Verbreitung und die Formen,der
Altertiimer in der Nordwest-Mongolei. J. Soc. Fin.-Ougr.,
r9x2, XXVIII. Helsingfors.

—— Matkakertomus. J. Soc. Fin.-Ougr, 1908, XXV, pt. y,
pp. 18-19. Helsingfors.

—— Bericht] tiber eine Reise J. G. Grané’s nach Uranhai zur
Aufnahme alttiirkischer Inschriften. J. Soc. Fin.-Ougr., 1907,
XXIV, pt. v, pp. 17, 29. Helsingfors.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 157


Grebyenkin, A. D. The Usbegs. Russian Turkestan. Moscow,
1872. — Ipe6enxuns, A. J. YaGena. Pyccniii Typrectaus.


_Grenard, F.: see Dutreuil de Rhins.


Grenman, H.- Zur Frage der ostsibirischen Inschriften. Ofvers.
Finska Vetenskaps Soc. Férhandl., XXXI, pp. 14-17.
Helsingfors.


Grigoryeff, V. V. Description of the Khanate of Khiva and of
the road thither from the fortress of Saraychik. Mem.1.R.G.S.,
1861, pt. ii, pp. 255-89. — Ipuzopeess, B. B. Onncanie Xupnu-
ckaQo XaHCTBA H Joporu tTy7a us% CapaiiwkoscKoli Kpbuocrn.


- Eastern or Chinese Turkestan; being Chapter V of Ritter’s
‘Erdkunde’, translated and completed. St. P., 1869. —
Bocrounstt na Kuraticxiti Typxecrans. IHepesogs Tuas V
» dexmenbybaia “ K. Partepa cb upncopokynicnienb KpUTAIGCKEXD
upumbuanili 1 yonomenifi,


—- The Scythian Nation of Saka. St. P., 1871. — O Crnecnows
Hapon’s CaKaxs.


—— The Karakhanids in Maveraannagr. Trans. E. Sect.3.R. Arch.
S., 1874, XVII, pp. 198 ff. — Kapaxanuyer Bb Masepaaunarps.

‘Grodekoff, N. I. The Kirghis and the Kara-Kirgliis of the Syr-
Daria Territory. Tashkent, 1889. — Ipodexoss, H. H.
Kuprustt 9 Kapa-Kupraspt Cups-fappuackolt o6aactu.

Grotenfelt, K. Review of W. Radloff’s ‘Proceedings of the
Orkhon Expedition’. Atlas of the Mongolian Antiquities.
1892-99. Valvoja (Helsingfors), 1892, pp. 631-8.

—— Review of V. Thomsen’s ‘Inscriptions de l’Orkhon déchiffrées’,
I (1894-6). Valvoja, 1896, pp. 240-48,

~——— Review of W. Radloff’s ‘Die alttiirkischen Inschriften der
Mongolei’ (1894). Valvoja, 1896, pp. 240-48.

Gruleff, M.V. Some geographical-statistical information relating to
the Amu-Daria district between Char-Jui and Patta-Gissar. Bull.
Turk, Sect.I.R.G. S., 1900, II, pt. i, p. 184. —— Ipy.rees, M. B.
Héxorophia reorpadwxko-cratucraueckin MaAWHEld, OTHOCAINIACH Kb
ysactky Any-Jlapsu Meany Uapmxyems u Marra Taccapoms.


158 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Grum-Grzymailo, G. E., and Grum-Grzymailo, M. E.
Description of Travels in Western China. St, P., 1896-9. —
Ipyxs-Tpacunaiao, I. E., u Ipyns-Dpocunatiao, M. E.
Onftcanie uytemecrsia Bb SanagnEii Korali, cocrapreno I. E.
Tpymus-T'pxumatino upu ysacrin M. E. Tpyn-T paxmmatino.

Grum-Grzymailo, G. E. The historical past of Béy-Shan in
connexion with the history of Central Asia. St, P., 1898. —
Ipyxs-Cpoacunatao, IF. £. VWUcropuseckoe opomsoe Beit-IMana
Bb cBi3H Cb ucropielt Cpeanelt Asin.

Materials for the Ethnology of Amdo and the district of
Kuku-Nor. Bull. I. R.G.S., 1903, XXXIX, pp. 437-80. —
MarepiambI D0 oraonoria Asso u o6aactn Kyxy-Hopa.

—— Western Mongolia and the Uriankhai country. St. P., 1914.
— Sanayuaa Monrozia u Ypsuxaticnitt xpaii.


Griinwedel, A. Bericht iiber archdologische Arbeiten in Idikut-
schari und Umgebung im Winter 1902-1903. Abh. K. Ak. d.
Wiss. der philos.-philol, Classe, 1906, Bd. 24, Abt. 1. Munich.

—— Some critical remarks concerning the archaeological work of
Professor Dr. Albert Griinwedel in Chinese Turkestan. Bull.
of the Russ. Committee for the Study of Eastern and Central

. Asia, 1903, No. 1, pp. 20-29. — Iproneedens, A. Hbcromko
KpOTHYeCKHXE sambianif{ OTHOCHTeENEHO apxeodOrMyecKUxh pasorb
Bb Kuralicxous Typxectan’ upod. pa Aa6epra T’pronpejera.

—— Altbuddhistische Kultstatten in Chinesisch-Turkistan. Bericht
iiber archiologische Arbeiten von 1906 bis 1907 bei Kuia,
Qaragahbr und in der Oase Turfan. Berlin, 1912.

Guignes, J. de. Histoire générale des Turcs, des Mongols et des
autres Tartares occidentaux. Paris, 1756-8.

Gulayeff, 8S. Antiquities in course of discovery in the Kirghis
Steppe. Mess. I. R. G, S., 1853, VII and VIII, pp. 22-5. —
Ty nness, C. Tpesnocra orkpripaeniia BE Kupruscoti cron.

Gutmann, B, ‘The Smith and his, Craft in Animistic Thought.
Z. f. E., 1912, 44, pp. 81 ff.

Gutschmid, A. von. Die Skythen. In KI. Schriften, IV. Leipzig,
1892.


rf


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 159


Hakluyt. The Journey of Friar William of Rubruck. Hak. Soc.
Publ., Second Series, t900, No. IV.
see Yule, H.; Major, R. H.; Herbertstein, S.

Halde, J. B. du. Description géographique, historique, chrono-
logique, politique et physique de l’empire de la Ghine et de
la Tartarie chinoise. Paris, 1735.

Halévy, J. Review of O. Donner’s ‘Sur l’origine de alphabet
turc du Nord de'l’Asie’, 1896. Revue Sémitique, 1896, IV,
pp. 378-9. Paris.

Hall, H. U., and Czaplicka, M. A.: sce Czaplicka.

Haller, O. Dr. W. Radloff’s ‘ Vorliufiger Bericht iiber die Resultate °
der mit Allerhdchster Genehmigung von der K. Akademie der
Wissenschaften ausgeriisteten Expedition zur archaologischen
Erforschung des Orchon-Beckens’. Aus dem Russischen
tibersetzt. Bull. I. A. S., N.S. III (XXXV, 1892), pp. 383-98.


Hammer-Purgstall, J. von. Fundgruben des Orients, bearbeitet
durch eine Gesellschaft von Liebhabern. Vienna, 1809-10.


——- Geschichte des Osmanischen Reiches. Vienna, 1827-35.
~—— Geschichte der Goldenen Horde. Buda-Pest, 1840.


Hartmann, M. Zu der Sprache der Fragmente in Runenschrift.
W. Z.K. M.,. 1910, XXIV, pp. 124-5.


~——— Mudammadanism (in China). E.R. E., 1915, VIII, p. 889.


—— Der Islamische Orient. Berlin, 1905.


Hedin, 8S. A. Through Asia. London, 1898.

—— Central Asia and Tibet. London, 1903.

~— Scientific results of a journey in Central Asia, 1899-1902.
Stockholm, 1904-4.

——— Overland to India. London, 1910.

Heger, F. Review of ‘Inscriptions de YOrkhon recueillies par

' YExpédition finnoise 1890...’ Helsingfors, 1892. Mitth,

Anthrop. Ges. Wien, 1892, XXII, pt, 6, p. 224.


160 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Heger, F. Review of W. Radloff’s “Vorlaufiger Bericht tiber die
Resultate der mit Allerhéchster Genehmigung von der K.
Akademie der Wissenschaften ausgertisteten Expedition zur
archdologischen Erforschung des Orchon-Beckens’. - Mittheil.
Anthrop. Ges, Wien, 1892, XXII, pp. 222-4. ;


~+- Review of W. Radloff’s ‘ Proceedings of the Orkhon Expedition. '
Atlas of the Mongolian Antiquities’, 1892-9. Mittheil. Anthrop.
Ges. Wien, 1892, XXII, pt. 6, pp. 222-4.


Reisen im Kaukasus, in Transkaspien und Russisch-Turkestan.
Annalen des K. K, Naturhist. Hofmuseums, Bd V, Heft IV.
Wien, 1890, Notizen, pp. 115-42.

Heikel, A. O. A notice. Eastern Review, 1891, pp. 13-14.

Tetixens, A.O. Sambrra.


—— Antiquités de la Sibérie occidentale conservées dans les
Musées de Tomsk, de Tobolsk, de Tiumien, d’Ekatérinbourg,
de Moscou et d’Helsingfors. Mém. Soc, Fin.-Ougr., VI.
Helsingfors, 1892. .

—— Les Ouigours et le troisitme monument Kharakorum. In-
scriptions de l’Orkhon, p. xxi. Helsingfors, 1892.


Les Toukioux et les deux premiers monuments. Inscriptions
de l’Orkhon, p. xvii. Helsingfors, 1892.


—— Antiquités diverses dans la Transbaikalie. Inscriptions de
YOrkhon, p. xiii. Helsingfors, r892.

—— Les monuments prés de l’Orkhion, Inscriptions de l’Orkhon,
p. vii. Helsingfors, 1892.

—— Voyage jusqu’s l’Orkhon. Inscriptions de l’Orkhon, pp. i-vi.
Helsingfors, 1892.


—— Review of V. Thomsen’s ‘Inscriptions de YOrkhon .dé-,
chiffrées’, I, 1894 and 1896. Hufrudstads bladet, r1th Feb.
1896.

—— Die Grabuntersuchungen und Funde bei-Tascheb4. «Soc.
Finl. d’Archéol,, 1912, XXVI.


Hekker# N. A. Materials for a description of the physical
characteristics of the Yakut. Mem. E. Sib. Sect, I. R.G,S.,


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 161


1896. — Tenxept, H. A. Ks xapaxtepnermeb busniecraro mma
STKYTOBS.


Herbelot, Ba’. Bibliothéque Orientale, ou Dictionnaire Universel

caqntenant généralement tout ce qui regarde Ja connoissance

' des peuples de 'l’Orient. Paris, 1867. Another edition with

supplement entitled ‘ Bibliothéque orientale de MM. Visdelou

et Galaud,’contenant les observations sur ce que les historiens

arabes et persiens rapportent de la Chine et de Ja Tartarie,

dans la Biblioth¢que Orientale de M. d’Herbelot’. Maestricht,

1776-82.

— Orientalische Bibliothek. Translated from the French ‘by

JT. C. F. Schulz. Halle, 1785-90.


Herberstein, Baron von 8. Notes upon Russia; being a
translation of the earliest account of that country, entitled
Rerum Moscoviticarum Commentarii by the Baron Sigismund
von Herberstein, translated i R. H. Major. Hakluyt Society.
London, 1851-2.


Herrmann, A. Alte Geographie des unteren Oxusgebiets. Abh.

Kon, Ges, Wiss., Bd. 15, N.F. Gdttingen, 1914.
Herzfeld, E, Zur Islamischen Archaeologie. Berlin, 1907.
Hirth; F. China and the Roman Orient, Leipzig, 1885.
5

—— Uber dén Verfasserr und Abschreiber der chinesischen
Inschrift am Denkmal_ des K6l-Tagin, T.P., 1896, VII,
pp. 151-7.

—— Nachworte zur Inschrift des Tonjukuk. Die alttiirk. In-


schriften der Mongolei von W. W. Radloff. Zone Folge.
St. P., 1899.


Neue Forschungen tiber das Geschlecht Attila’s. Beilage zur
Allg. Ztg., 1900, VIII, vol. iv, No. 477.
—~- Uber Wolga-Hunnen und Hiung-nu. Sitz. der philos.-phitol.


und hist. Classe der K. B. Ak, d,Wiss., 1g00, Bd. IL, pp. 245-78.
Munich.


_— The Ancient History of China. Leipzig, 1908.
31038 x


i62 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


History. Momentous events in Siberian history of the eighteenth
cent. St. P., 1882. —— [amsrauxa Cua6upcxoit ucropia soces-
Hamartoro BEKA.

Historical Records of Seventeenth Century, edited by I. P.
Kuznietsoff - Krasnoyarski, 1890. Tomsk. —Hcropiectie
AQTHI, XVII CT.


Hoernle; A. F. R. The ‘Unknown Languages’ of Eastern
Turkestan. J.R.A.S., 1910, pp. 834-9, 1283-13013 IgII,
" pp. 477-8.
—— A Report on the British Collection of Antiquities from Central
, Asia. London, 1914.
Houdas, O.: see Mohammed-en-Nesavi.


Houtsma, T. Ein tiirkisch-arabisches Glossar nach der Leidener
Handschrift. Leyden, 1894.


~—— Review of J. Marquart’s ‘Die Chronologie der altttirk.
Inschriften’, 1898. Gelehrte Anzeigen, 1899, No. 5,
PP- 384-90.

——— Die Ogusen-Stamme. W. Z. K. M., Bd. IT.

—— The Encyclopaedia of Islam. Edited by Th. Houtsma, T. W.
- Arnold, R. Basset, and H. Bauer (A—H) 1908-14. Leyden and
London. :

Howorth, Sir H.H. The western drifting of nomades, from the
fifth to the nineteenth century. J. A.L, 1872, I, ‘PP 2267545
1874, Il, 452-72.

‘—__ The Avares, or Eastern Huns. J.A.1., 1873, II, pp. 114724.

Introduction to the Translation of the Han Annals. J.-A.I.,

1874, I[I, pp. 396-401. é

——- History of the Mongols from the ninth to the nineteenth
centuries. Part I. The Mongols proper and the Kalmuks
(1876). Part II. The so-called Tartars of Russia and Central
‘Asia (1880). Part III. The Mongols“of Persia (£888).
London.

Hue, &.R. Travels in Tartary and Tibet, London, 1852.

—— The Chinese Empire. 1855.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 163


—— Christianity in China and Tartary and Tibet. London, 1857.

Huntington, E. The pulse of Asia. London, 1907.

‘ Problems in Exploration: Central Asia. Geog. Journ., 1910,
XXXV, sas

Hiising, G. Vdlkerschichten in Iran. Mitt. Anthr. Ges., 1916,
XXXVI. Vienna,

Huth, G. Die Inschrift von Karakorum, Eine Untersuchung tiber
ihre Sprache und die Methode ihrer Entzifferung. Berlin, 1892.

Ibn-Batoutah [Abu Abdullah]. Voyages. Texte et traduction
par C. Défrémery et le Dr. Sanguinetti. Paris, 1853-9.-

Ibrahimoff, I.. Account of the life of the Kirghis. In ‘ Ancient
and Modern Russia’, pt. iii. 1876. — Hoéparunoes, H.
Ouepxu Orta, Kuprasoss. . .

Ignatieff, R.G. Remains of the antiquities of the Kurgan district,
Tobolsk Government. Tob. Gov. News, 1873, Nos. 18-22, 24,
25. —- Minameess, P. I. Tlamatanxn [[pesnocreli Kyprancrare
okpyra, ToGombckoik ry6,

Ilkin, B. A journey undertaken for the purpose of* collecting
information about Uljikent. Proc. Turk. Circle F. Arch.,,.


1899-1900, V, pp. 152-6. — Harxuns. B. Tobsmra, conep-
WeHHaA Cb Wb coOpars cBbybuia 065 Yabmenrsh.


Tlyenko, I, The Transcaspian territory. Moscow, 1902. —
Havenxd, 1. Saxacuiiicuaa o6aacts.

Infantyeff, P. P. Ethnographical narratives from the life of the
Tatars, Kirghis... St. P., 1910. — Huganmeees, I, IL
Srnorpaduyeckie pasckashi usb ausH Taraps, Kaprusope . . .

Tniostrantseff, K. A., and Smirnoff, Y,I.: see Smirnoff.

Inscriptions.

Inscriptions de I’Jénisséi recueillies et publiées par la Société
Finlandaise d’Archéologie. Helsingfors, 1889. See. also
Heikel, A. O. °

A marble plate with Arabian inscription found thirty versts from
Tashkent. Rep. I. Arch. Commission, 1890, pp. 113-47.
St. P. — Hadnucu. Bmogo mpamopHoe ca apa6ckoli wayTHCEW
HaligeHHoe Bb 30 BepeTaxb Orb Tamenta.


164 THE TURKS.OF CENTRAL ASIA


Old Turkish inscriptions in Mongolia. ‘Nature, LX, p. 262.

Orkhon inscriptions. Encycl. of Andreevsky, Fst ed., 1897,
vol. Saree: p. 226. —; Opxoncxia naquucn.

Inscriptions de l’Orkhon recueillies par l’Expédition finnoise r890
et publi¢es par la Société Finno-Ougrienne. Helsingfors,
1892, See Heikel, A. O. <=

Die: Orkhon-Inschriften. Umschau, Ill, pp. 775 ff.

The Orkhon inscriptions. Academy, XLII, p. 242.


Irkibay. Ancient temple situated seven versts from Irkibay,
a former fortress of Turkestan, Bull. I.R.G.S., 1874, X,
pt. i, p. 361. — ApanGat. [[pesniti xpamp Bp 7-MM Beperaxd |
orb Uprndas, Srrsmaro yxphuszenia Bp Typxecranb. a

Irtish. Old settlements along the R. Irtish, Mem.1. A.S., 1877,
XXX, No. 2, pp.9-10. — Hpmmws. Topommma no pbb
Uprony.

Iske-toy-tyube. Archaeological discoveries in Iske-toy-tyube.
‘Turk. News, 1875, No. 21. — Hexe-mot-mo6e. Apxeoso-
rmveckist HaxomtH Bb UcKe-roli-moGe.

Issyk-Kul.

Three stones with Arabic inscriptions found in a temple between

~ the station of Kurumdu and Sazonovka at Lake Issyk-Kul.
Archeolog, Bulletins and Notes, 1894, II, p. 409. St. P. —
Hecnns-Kyav, Tp KaMHa cb apaOcKHMH HaqINCHMH, Bb
MOMeILHS MexAY CT. Kypymay H CasoHoBKoli Ha 03. Wecpikn-Hyab.

Archaeological discoveries at Lake Issyk-Kul. Semip. Terr. News,
1896, Nos. 31 and 33. — Apxeoqormueckia Haxoyka y ozepa
*Mecenen-Kya.

Ruins at the bottom of Lake Issyk-Kul. ‘Caucasus’, 1891,
No. 273. — Pasraamntt na au osepa Uccrirn-Kyis.

Ivanin, M. Roads and means of transport in Central Asia. Coll.
of Milit. Essays, 1869, No. 8. — Heanunt, M,- Tym Bp Cpeq-
Heft Asi 1 TepeBos0wHLIA CpencrBa. “

Ivanoff, D. L. Concerning some Turkestan antiquities, Bull.
ILR.G,S., 1885, XXI, 162-77. — Heanoes, J. I. To wosony
HBKOTOpLIXE Typkecravekuxn qpeBuocteli,


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 165


Ivanowski; A. A. Memorial stones. Trans: of the Eighth
Archaeological Congress in Moscow, 1890, IV, p. 185. —
Aeanoéeniitt, A. A. Q HaMOLHIbHEIXD KAMHAXE,

Periodical publications in-Siberia and Central Asia. Essays

on Ethnography. Bibliographical Notes, 1892, No. 7. —

‘Tepionwseckia uamauin CuOupn -n Cpenaett Asin. Yuasatexp

* erateli m0 otuorpadin.


Anthropological composition of the population of Russia.
Bull. Soc. F.S. Anthr. E., 1904, CV.— OG» anrpononornyeckomb
cocraph Hacenenia Poccin.


Population of the world, Attempt at an -anthropological
classification.. Bull..Soc. F. S. Anthr. E., 1911, CXXI. —
Hacenenie Semnoro Ilapa. Onbirh antponoxormeckolt K1ac-
cabaKanin.
—— - see Wulfson, E.
—— and Goroshchenko, K. I.: see Goroshchenko, K. I.
Jankent.
of Jankent on the left bank of Syr-Daria. Bull. I. R. Arch.
S., 1872, VII, pp. 286-90. — forcannxenms.  Paspanuusi
Ayxankenta na xbBomME Sepery Cups-Japsa.
Ruins of Jankent. Year-book of the Turkestan country. III.
St. P., 1874. — Pasnaanan Jixankenta.
Legends relating to Jankent. Proc. Turk. Circle F, Arch., 1897-8,
TIE, pp. 58-62. — Jerenya o Taxankenrh.
Essays about Jankent. Proc. Turk. Circle F, Arch., Hei, Ill,
pp. 62+8. — Cratsa o [xannenth.
Jensen, Kr. Sandfeld. Review of V. Thomsen’s ‘Inscriptions
de l’Orkhon déchiffrées’, 1894. Nordisk Tidskr. f. Filol. Rekke
3, IV, 4, 179-83. ;
Jespersen, O. Tydningen af Orkhon-Indskrifierne. . Tlustr.
Tidefde, 1894, XXXV, pp. 387-8.
Jochelson-Brodsky, D. L. Contribution to the anthropology
of the women of the North-eastern Siberian tribes. Russ.
Anthr, J., 1907, Moscow. — Ioxenvcons-Bpodcxan, J. I. Kp
Aprponosorin xeHmuHD Dement Kpalisnro cbrepo-BocroKa CadapH.


166 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Jochelson, W.. Kumiss. festivals of the Yakut. Boas Anniversary
Volume, New York, 1906.


Johansson, K. F. Om de fornturkiska inskrifterna fran Orkhon
och Jenissei samt Prof. Vilh. Thomsens dechiffrering och
tolkning darom, Ymer, 1896, XVI, pp. 151-9.


Joyce, T. A. On the physical anthropology of the oases of
Khotan and Keriya. J. R.A.1I., July, 1903, XXXIII.


Jukowski, 8. V. Relations between Russia, Bokhara, and Khiva
for the last 300 years. Petrograd, 1915. — Mynoscniti, C. B.
Cuomenia Poccin ch Byxapoti a Xupoli sa nocabquee 300 rb.

Jukowski,V. A. Investigations in the Transcaspian territory. Rep.
I. Arch. Commission, 1890, pp: 79-86, and 1896, pp. 104-5.
Mynoecnia, B. A. Vscxbropatia Bb Saxacnilicxoi obxacra.


—— Antiquities of the Transcaspian country. Novoye Vremya,
1891, No. 5301. — O Apesnoctaxb Saxacmifickaro kpas.


—— The antiquities of the Transcaspian country. Ruins of old
Merv. Materials for the Archaeology of Russia. I.R. Arch.
S., No. 16, St.P., 1894. — [pesnocm Baxacnificxaro xKpas.
Passaanasi craparo Mepza,


——— see Tisenhausen, Baron.


Julien, 8. A. Documents historiques sur les Toukioue (Tures).
J. A., Série VI, vols. iii-iv. Paris, 1864.

—— Mémoires sur les Contrées Occidentales, traduits du Sanscrit
en Chinois ... par Hiouen-Thsang ... et du Chinois par
S.A. Julien. Voyages des Pélerins Bouddhistes, Paris, 1853-8.

—— Histoire de la vie de Hiouen-Thsang et de ses voyages dans
YInde ... par Hoei-Li ef Yen-Thsong, trad. du Chinois par
S. A. Julien. Voyages, des Pélerins Bouddhistes, Paris, 1853-8.


Jung, J.. Die Schriftzeichen von Orkhon. Sitzb. d. Gele Estn.
Ges., 1898, pp. 34-41.

Junge, R. Das Problem der Europiisirung orientatischer Wirt-
schaft dargestellt an den Verhaltnissen der Sozialwirtschaft
von Russisch-Turkestan. Arch. f. Wirtsch. im Niheren Orient,
1915. ;


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 167


Juwayni, Ala’u’d-Din ‘Ata Malik-i. The Ta’rikh-i Jahanfusha,
edited from seven MSS. by Mirza Muhammad of Qagwin.
Vol. I, 1912; vol. II, 1916 (E. W. J. Gibb).

. &


K.D. Review of the book by Y. Y. Trusman, ‘ The Chud Script’.
‘Mem. E. Sect. I. R, Arch. S., 1899, XI, 1-4, pp. 367-8. —
Ki. J. = Pevensia xaura 10. 10. Tpycmana ,, Tyackin uicpuena “.


Kal, E. F. Persian, Arabic and Turkic MSS. in the Turkestan
Library. Tashkent, 1889. — Kan», E. &. Tepengcsia, apa6-
ckia w TopKcKia pyxonucn Typxecranckolt Budsiorern.


—— Erections in the Aulieata district of the Syr-Daria territory.
Rep. I. Arch. Commission, 1890, pp. 76-7. — Ilocrpoiixn sp
Ayaieatnuckomy yhaxb, Coipp-Bapinuckoli o6zacra.


Kalacheff, A. Excursion to the Telengit of the Altai L.A. T.,


1896, VI, Nos. 3-4, pp. 477-88. — Hanauees, A. Tlobaana
kb Terenrurab na Aarali.


Kallaur, V. A. Ancient sites in the Aulieata district on the old
caravan route from Taras (Talas) to Eastern Turkestan.
Proc, Turk, Circle F. Arch., May 5, 1897. — Kannaypo, B. A.
Apesuin ubernocru Ayziearaackaro ybsya na crapoN KapaBaHHOM'b
gym wet Tapasa [Taxaca}] Bb Boctor. Typkecrars.


——_ Photograph of a Kirghis grave containing various implements
and inscriptions. Proc. Turk. Circle F. Arch., 1899-1900; V,
p. 38. — Wororpadia Kuprasckaro Haqrpobia ch B30Bpaxeniend
PASTWIELIXE BHACTPYMeHTOB. H HafMUChlo.


—— A stone with old Turkic inscription from the Aulieata district.
Mem. E. Sect. I. R. Arch. S., 1899, XI, 1-4, pp. 79-85. —
Kamens cb Apesue-nlopKckoli HaqnucEIo usb AyaieatmacKaro ybsya.


—— A new archaeological discovery in the Aulieata district.
Mem. E. Sect. I. R. Arch. S., 1899, XI, 1-4, pp. 265-71. —~
Hopas apxeonormieckan naxomna BB AysieaTaEcKonb ybosb.


——— Ruins of SyrlieTam in the Perovsk district. Proc. Turk. Circle
F. Arch., 1900-1, VI, pp. 14-17. — Paspaamunt ,, Cerpasi-Tam “,
Bb Hepescxomn ybsab.


168 _THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Kalleur, Ve A. The ruins of ancient: towns and villages in the
Perovsk district i in the valley of Syr-Daria and Yani-Daria.
Proc. Turk. Circle F. Arch., 1902-3, VILL, pp. 49—69.—JIpesnie
ropdya u eenenia (pasnarmst] BE IeponcKowb ybank, Bb yom
P. p. Cemps-apea a Sasr-Japeu.


_—— Mausoleum of Kok-Kesene in the Perovsk district. Proc.
Turk. Circle F7Arch., 1900-1, VI, pp. 98-101. — Mansozeti
Kors-Hecere 3b Teposcxomws yhorb,


On the traces of the old town of Jend on the lower Syr-
Daria. Proc. Turk. Circle F. Arch., 1899~1900, V, pp. 78-89.
— O cxbraxs aperuaro ropora ,, xenh“, Bb HEB3OBbAX, Pp.
Crrps-Jlapea.
——— Contribution to the history of the town of Aulieata. Proc.
Turk. Circle F. Arch., 1902-3, VII, pp. 11-18. —~ Hp neropin
rop. Ay.tieata.


~——— The ancient towns of Saganak (Sunak) Ashnas or Eshnas
(Asanas) and others in the Perovsk district destroyed by Jinghis
Khan in 1219. Proc. Turk. Circle F. Arch., 1899-1900, V,
pp. 6-16. — [penuie ropona Caranaxs [Cynaxs], Aumact nan
Ouruace [ Acanace] u apyrie Bb Ieposcioms yhayxb, paspymensbie
Unernsh~XaHomb Bb 12191.


—— Antiquities from the valley of the R, Talas. Proc. Turk.
Circle F. Arch., 1888-9, IV, pp. 73-80. — einen Bb
HIBOBLAXE p. Tasaca.


a ‘Akyr-Tash. Proc. Turk. Circle F. Arch., 1895-6, I, pp. see:
Tashkent. — Axerpp-Taurs.


and Panoff, V.P. Information about Kara-Khan and mazar of
Aulieata, Aysha-bibi. Proc. Turk, Circle F. Arch., May 5, 1897,
pp. 6-9. — 2# Ilanoes, B. IT, Coo6menie o Kapaxan H
masapb Ayaiera, Alima-On6n.


Kamyshta. Remains of ancient fortress between the steppe
rivers Kamyshta and Syrali. Sib. Mess., 1886, No. 61. —
Kaxewma. Octaru crapnunaro yKpbosenia meapy crenaEnat
phirasa Kamemmroit a Crrpanz.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL. ., 169.


Karatanoff, I. "Sketches of the home life of the Kachinsk Tatars. _
Bull. I. R.G.S., 1884, XX..-—- Hapamanoes, H, “Lepr
BHbmuaro Orira Kagunckaxs Tarap.

Karutz, R. Unter Kirgisen und Turkmenen. Leipzig, : I9II.


Kasan in the Ferghana territory. Inscriptions: on the graves
of Jafar, son of Alya Kasan and of Alauddin, khodja of Kasan.
Proc. Turk. Circle F. Arch., 1898-9, IV, p. 153. — Kacans 66
Bepancnot o6.2. Hated Ha Mormiaxb Jxadapa, china Ania
Kacaucxaro a Amayruna xox HKacagcraro.


Kasem Beg, Mirza A., transl. J. T. Zenker, ‘ Allgemeine Gram-
matik der Tiirkisch-Tatarischen Sprache’. Leipzig, 1848.


Katanoff, N.T. Ethnographical survey of the Turco-Tatar tribes.
Kazan, 1879. — Kamanoes, H. T. Sraorpapmuectiti Odsopp
Typento-Tarapckuxb m1eMeH.


—— Review of P. M. Melioranski’s ‘On the Orkhon and Yenisei
monuments with inscriptions’ (1898). Bull. I. R. Arch. S.,
XIV, p. 699. — Penensin TL. M. Mesiopancraro, ,,06b opxoHcknx’
 ewncelicknx’b HAM POOHEXS HAMATHHKAX HW HaHcax’ “ (1898).


—— Attempt at an investigation of the Uriankhai language.
Kazan, 1903. — Onerrs uscrbjopania ypsnxalicaro Asbika.


—- Review of P. M. Melioranski’s ‘Monument in memory of
Kiul Tegin’. Bull. S. Arch. H. E. I. Univ. Kaz., XVI, pp. 117 ff.
— Penensia Il. M. Mexiopancxaro, ,, Tamatunxa Bb uectb Kiorp
Ternaa “, .


—— A journey to the Karagass in 1890. Mem. L R.G.5S., 1891,
XVHU, pt. ii. — Tlobsyna xp Kaparaccam BE 1890 rony.


—=- Review of W. W. Radloff’s ‘Die alttiirk. Inschriften der
, Mongolei’, 3te Lfr. (1893). Bull. E. Sib. Sect. I. R. G.5., 1896,
* XXVI, pt. iv, pp. 241 ff. — Penensia B. B. Payaoga, ‘Die alt-
titrkischen Inschriften der Mongolei’, 3te Lfr. (1895).


——- On burial ceremonies among the Turkic tribes of Central
and Eastern Asia. I, Kazan, 1894. — O worpe$adbHExb
oOpaax, Y TOpKcKUXE utemens Wentpasnolt u Bocromolt Asin.

3108 Y


170 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


4

Katanoff, N.T. Bibliography. Information about the Turks of
the Yeniseisk Government. Eastern Review, 1887, pp. 278-
86.— Bu6siorpadix. Cabrbsia 0 nopkaxt Enaceiickoii ry6epnin.

— Review of J. Marquart’s ‘Die Chronologie der alttiirk. In-
schriften’ (1892). Bull. I. R., Arch. S., X1V, pp. 698 ff. —
Pevensia J. Marquart: ‘ Die Chronologie der alttiirk. Inschriften’
(1892).

—— Report on the journey to the Minusinsk district of the Yeniseisk
Government in summer of 1896 and 1899. Scientific Bull. of
Kazan Univ., 1897 and 1900. — Orserb 0 nobaykh pb Muny-
cuucKili yb3xb Ennceticxoit rysepuiu abrom 1896 w 1899.


Traditions relating to ancient deeds and people among the.
tribes living near the Sayan mountains. Anniversary Book of
Potanin. Mem.I.R.G.S., 1909, XXXIV, pp. 265-88. —
TIpenania Ipacasicknx'’s DeMeHb 0 Upe:xtHux TbAXb M WOMAXD.
Kazantseff, I, Description of the Kirghis-Kaizak. St. P., 1867.—
HKaszanuess, H. Onucanie Kuprush-Katicaxons.

Keane, A. M. Asia. Vol. 1, London, 1906.

Kerki. Submerged towns on the bank of the R. Amu-Daria, near
Kerki. Novoye Vremya, 1891, No. 5483. — Kepxu. Ionsem-
HbIe ropoya Ha Oepery pbk Amy-Japeu,-6ausb Kepra.

Khanikoff, N. de, Samarkand. Bull. de la Société de Géographie,
1896, Vme Série, T. xvii.

Khanykoff, N. Description of the Khanate of Bokhara. St. P.,
1843. — Xanvwxoes, H. Onucanie Byxapcraro xancrea., ,

Kharuzin, A. N. The Kirghis of the Bukeyeff Orda. Bull. Soc.
F.S. Anthr. E., vols. LXIII, LXIV, and LXXII. Mascow,
1889-91. — Xapysuns, A. H, Kupruant Byreescrol Opmtt.

—— Bibliography of the ethnographical essays on the Kirghis and
the Kara-Kirghis. Ethn. Rev., 1891, vol. LX, No. 2. — Bu6aio-
rpadaieckili yrasaterb cratell, KacatomuxcH stuorpadin Kaprasons
u Kapa-Kuprasoss.

«Concerning the evolution of dwellings found among the

nomad and semi-nomad Turkic and Mongolic tribes of Russia. “


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 171


Moscow, 1896. — O pa3Birin awa y KoveBbIXE HM DOyKOye-
BEIX'b TIOPECKEX H MOBTOILCKUXS HapomHocteli Pocciu.
Khiva. Traces of an ancient commercial route from Astrakhan to
Khiva. Turk. News, 1870, Nos. 7-14. — Xuea. Crbypr
™  ClapuHHaro ToproBaro nyTH OT Acrpaxaun Kb Xupb.,


Khojent. Discovery of ancient ruins near Khojent. Bull.
LR.G.S., 1867, p. 200. — Xodocenms. Onxprrie 7peBHEXS
PashatnEb S1asb XopKenta.

—— Antiquities found in Khojent. Bull. I. R. Arch. S., 1872,
VII, p. 475. — Tpesnocra saiiqenabia BE Xomxenrb.


Khondemir. Habib Essher. L’Histoire des Mongols. Trad. par
V. V. Grigorieff. St. P., 1834.

Khoroshkhin, A. P. The nations of Central Asia, Year-book
of the Turkestan Country, 1874, III, pp. 303-30. — Xopow-
cuns, A. IZ, Haponp: Cpequeit Asin.


——- Samarkand. Turk. News, 1872, No. 2. — Canaprany.


—— Sketches of Semirechie (Taranchi, Dungan, Sibo, Kalmuck).
Turkestan News,. 1875, Nos. 4-23. — Oveprm Cennphuna
(Tapani, [lynrane, Cu6o, Karmen).

—— Collection of essays relating to the Turkestan country.
St. P., 1876. — Coopnuns crateli, xacalomuxca Typrecrancraro
Kpad,

—— Itinéraires de l’Asie centrale; recueil d’itinéraires et de
voyages dans I’Asie centrale et l"Extréme-Orient. Paris, 1878.


Khoroshkhin, N. Keneges Usbegs. Turk. News, 1873, No. 13.
— Ys6exn Keneresn,


+

Kingsmill, T. W. On the inscriptions of the Upper Jenisei.
Journ, of the China Br. R. Asiat. Soc., 1892-93, N. Series
XXVII, pp. 198-205.

—— Notice in China Review, 1899-1900, XXIV, p. 200.


Kirghis. Kirghis structures over the graves. Bull. S. Arch. H. E.
Univ. Kaz., 1893, XI, p. 389. — Kupruaw. Kupruscria naz-
TpodHEia coopyzxenis,


172 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


4

Kirghis Steppe. Inscriptions found on the walls of Kirghis
stone structures called ‘astany’. Suppl. to Orenb. Gov. News,
1853, No. 5. — Kupwusexan Cmens. - Hagmmch naanamh 0
(patazaa mvbionumcn Bb Kuprush-Kaiicanxolt opxb ,, acranams “
T. @. KAMCHHEINE CTpocHinn.

Kittary, M. Y. The Kirghis ‘tui’, J. Min. Int., 1845, XXV.—
Kummapw, M. A. Kauprascriii Tyit.

—— Headquarters of the Khan of the Middle Orda of the Kirghis-
Kaizak. J. Min. Int., 1849, XXVIII. — Crapna xana Brayrpenneii
Kaupruscroti Opan.

Klaproth, H. J. von. Abhandlung tiber die Sprache und Schrift

der Uiguren. Berlin, 1812.

Traité sur la langue et ’écriture des Ouigours. Paris, 1820.


—— Asia polyglotta. Paris, 1822, 2nd ed., 1829; 3rd ed., 1831.


—— Sur quelques antiquités de la Sibérie. Jee A., II, pp. 1-14.
Paris, 1823.

-—— Mémoires relatifs 4 Asie. Paris, 1824-8. -

—— Mémoires sur Videntité des Thoukhiu et des Hioung-nou ,
avec les Turcs. Paris, 1825 and 184100 ”

Tableaux historiques de P Asie, depuis la monarchie de Cyrus

_' jusqu’d nos jours, accompagnés de Techeaches histor. et géogr.

sur cette partie du monde. Paris, #346.


—— Rapport sur les ouvrages du Pére Bichurin relatifs x Phistoire
des Mongols. J. A., 1830.


——— Description du Tibet, traduite partiellement du chinois en
russe par le P, Hyacinthe Bitchourin et du russe en frangais
par M..... » accompagnée de notes par M. Klaproth.
Paris, 1831. ”


——— Description de la Chine sous le régne de- 1a dynastie mongok,
traduite du persan de Rachid-eddin et accompagnée de notes.
Paris, 1833.


—— Uigurisches Worterverzeichnis. Paris, r839.
—— Catalogue des livres imprimés, des manuscrits et des ouvrages
chinois, tartares et japonais, Paris, 1839.

see Timkowski.


‘BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 1173


Klark, P. Viluisk and its district. Mem. Sib. Sect. L+R. G. S.,
1864, VII, pt. i, pp. 91-165. — Kaapxs,. 0. Bumoiicxs a


eF0 OKpyrb.


Klements, D. A. Antiquities of the Minusinsk Museum. Tomsk,
= 1886. — Huaenenys, Z. A. [pessocma Munyenuckaro Myses.


—— Archaeological diary of a journey to Central Mongolia in
1891. Coilection of documents of the Orkhon Expedition,
1892~1903. Vol. II, 1895. — Apxeouornseckiti [nesauKp
Tlobsyna_pp Cpeqnioi Moxroxin pp 189% rogy..

—— Short report of a journey of D. A. Klements to Mongolia in


1894. Bull. I. A.S., 1895, Il, No. 3. St. P.— Kparniii orverh
0 uytemectBin JI, A. Kaemenna no Monroain sa 1894.


—— Independent journey into Eastern Mongolia. Bull. I. A. S.,
1896, IV, No. 1. — Omtbapnan oxckypcia Bb Bocromyio
Mosroain.


—— Preliminary information about the archaeological results of
the expedition to Turfan. Mem. E. Sect. I. R. Arch. Soc.,

899, XII, pt. i,pp. 6-13. — THpespapmreanusia ciskrbria 06%

APXCOMOTHIECKEXE pesyrETataxs TypihaucKoli okcnemain.

Turfan und-seine Alterthiimer. Nachrichten tiber die von


der K. Akad. det Wiss. zu St. Petersburg im Jahre 1893
ausgeriistete Expedition nach Turfan. Heft I. .St. P., 1899.


see Radloff’s Collection of documents of the Orkhon Ex-
pedition. 1892-1903, I, pp. 13-23. ve |


—— Voyages de Dmitri Klementz en Mongolie occidentale 1888-
"1894. Bull. Soc. Géogr., 1899, XX, pp. 308-29. Paris.


see Veselovski. .

Kobeko, D. The knowledge of Merv among the Ancient
Russians. Mem. E. Sect. I. R. Arch. S., 1889, III, pp. 115-
19. — Ko6exo, J. Crapo-pycckoe uspherie 0 Mepph (1669).

Komaroff, A. V. Antiquities of the Trans-Caspian country.

Turk. News, 1888, Nos. 24 and 25, — Homapoas, A. B.

O qpepuoctaxt Saxacuifickaro Kpas. .


174 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Knolles, R. The general historie of the Turkes from the first
beginning ... London, 1603.


K6ébke, P. Prof. Vilh. Thomsens tydning af Orkhon-indskrifterne.
pp! 756-70. Tilskueren, 1896.


——— Die Orkhon-Inschriften, ein Ereigniss auf dem Gebiete d.
Sprachwissenschaft. Nord und Siid, XC, pp. 376-89.


Koch, E. On two stones with Chinese inscriptions, Mem. E.
Sect. I. R. Arch. S., 1891, V, pp. 147-56. —- Hows, 2.
O 7ByxS KaMHAXD Cb Kataficka Hay CcAMH.


see Lemosoff, M. P.


Kohn, F. Preliminary report on the expedition to the Uriankhai
country. Bull. E. Sib. Sect. ILR.G.S., 1903, XXXIV.— Kons, B.
TIpeqsapurerpneni orierb no okcneq_unin BL Ypanxalicxyi0 3ex-n0.


—— Historical sketch of the Minusinsk Local Museum, during
the 25 years of its existence. Kazan, 1902. — Hcropmueckili
ovepiktb Munycnacnaro whersaro Mysea 3a 25 Ibrs.


Kolosovski, V. In the Karatavsk Mountains of the ‘Chimkent
district. Archaeological Notes. Proc. Turk. Circle F. Arch.,
1goo-1, VI, pp. 89-97. — HKoxnocosexit, B. Ba Kapa-
rapcKuxh Topaxb, Tnunentckaro yhaja, ~


Kolpakowski, G. A. Concerning the traces of ancient dwelling
discovered in the Lake of Issyk-Kul. Bull. I. R. G.S., 1870,
pt. vi, No. 3, pp. 101-5. — Koanaxoecxrt, I. A. O Apepunxh
noctpoiixaxn HaligeHHEIXh Bb oseph Wecsrcn-Kysxh.


Konshin, N. Memorials of the past in the Semipalatinsk terri-
tory. Mem. Semip. S, W. Sib. Sect. I. R. G. S., 1903, pt. i,
pp. 1-32. — Konwunt, H. O namarankax. crapoutl Bb Cemn-
nanaTaucKolt oOnacra. .


Kopal. Description of-ancient monuments found by Engineer-
Lieutenant Nyegotin, near the town of Kopat. Mess. I. R.G..S.,
1857, XIX, p. 81. — Konaas. Onncanie naMaraoKonp Apes-


HOCTH, HalijenHExE Omisb rop. Konana wakeneph-lopyikoMb
Herormuzis,


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 195


Kopyloff. Ancient monuments in the Kirghis Steppe. Mem.
Ural S. F. Sc., 1892, XIII, pt. i. — Konmnoes. Tanaraku
cTapaHtl Bb Kuprusckoil crema.


Korniloff, I; P. Reminiscences of Eastern Siberia. The town
of Achinsk, and the journey to the Bojii Lakes in 1848.
Geographical Collection, edited by N. Froloff, III, pp. 605-58.
Moscow, 1854. — Kopnuroes, H. I. Bocnonmmania 0 Boc-
TouHoit Cadupa. I. Aamucks uo nobsyka Bb 1848 r. na Boan
osepa.


Korsh, T. E. The most ancient folk-poems of the Turkic tribes.
Mem. E. Sect. I. R. Arch. S. 1909, XIX, pp. 139 ff. — |
Kopws, 0. E. [pesrbinmiii saponzusii cruxt typenkaxt Devers.


Kosmin, N. N. D. A. Klements and historical and ethnographical
research in the Minusinsk country, Bull. E. Sib. Sect. LR.G.S.,
XLV. Irkutsk, 1916. — Kosomuns, H. H. TI. A. Knenenus
H lictopuke-ororpapaseckia uscrbjepania Bb Munycnuckoms Kpab.

——— ‘Cherng  Sibirskiya Zapiski, Aug. 1916, No. 3, PP. 95-112.
— ,, Tepap.“

-~—— Historical sketch of the activity of the East Siberian Section
of the Imp. Russ. Geog. Soc. Bull. Sib. Sect. I. R. G.&,

» XXXV, pt. ii, pp. 1-43. — HWeropuueckili oveprn abaterbHocra
Boer. Cn6upex. Org. UW. P. Teorp. 6m.

Kostyenko, ls. Central Asia and its subjection to the Russian
state organization. St. P., 1871. —- Hocmenxo, J. Cpequna
Asia 4 BoyBopenie Bb Heit pyccKoli rpaxyancTBeHHOCTH.


Kostroff, Prince N. A. The Koibal. Mem. Sib. Sect. 1. R.G.S.;
1863, VI, pp. rog—18. — Koempoes, xx. H. A. Kotidaat,


-—— The Chulim Natives. Tomsk Gov. News, 1867, Nos. 7~9-
— Yyasmcrie Wuopognst.

——— The Beltir. Mem. Sib. Sect. I. R. G.S., 1857, IV, pt ti,
pp. 4-10. — Beaprapst.


-—~ The Kachinsk Tatars. Kazan Gov. News, 1852, Nos. 32-
40. — Kasuucnie Tarapet.


176 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Kostroff, Prince N. A. The customary law of the Yakut.
Mem. I. R.G. S., 1878. — lOpmassecnic o6tisan Akytoss.


—— List of stone figures situated in the Minusinsk district of the
Yeniseisk Government. Mem. Sib. Sect. I. R. G. S., 1863,
VI, pp. 75-84. Cnucokb KaMenHEIXt u3pasHili HaxO,ABMUXed
Bb Munycnuckomb oKpyrs, Euncetickoit T'yGepuin.


—— The Kamashints. Moskvityanin, 1851, XVIII, pt. v, pp. 100—
10. — Hamamunne. ’


—— The Natives of the Kainsk district. J. Min. Int., 1858,
XXX, No. s, pp. 9-13. — Kaunncxie nnopomunt.


—— Sketches of the life of the Minusinsk. Tatars. Trans.’ of
the Fourth Archaeological Congress in Kazan, 1877, vol. 1.
— Ovepxu 6rrra Munycuncknxs Taraps.


—— Ethnographical notes on the Kyzyl Tatars. Mem, Sib. Sect.
I. R. G. S., 1865, VIII, pt. ii, pp. 97-121. — Sraorpauseckia
sawbTEG o Kusarecknxh Tarapax..


—— The Natives of the Kuznietsk district... J. Min. Int., 1888,
XXX, No. 5, pp. 13-16. — Kyssennie mnoponupt.


Kotwicz, W. L. Communication on the author’s expedition to
Mongolia and the discovery, in conjunction with C, Jamtsarano,
of a new monument with Orkhon inscriptions, Mem. E. Sect.
I.R. Arch. S., XXII, Proceedings. — Komeuus, B. I. Co06-
menie 0 coOcrseHHod okcnequnin Bb Moxronin u o6b orKpErrin
Eos, copmbcTHo ch I, Kasmapavo HoBaro NaMsATHHKA Cb OPXOHCKAMM

—— In Khusho-Tsaidam. Trans. T.-K.5. Amur Sect. 1.R.G.S.,
XV, pt. i. — Bs Xymo-Hatigamh,


Kozloff, P. K. Mongolia and Kam. Works of the Imperial
Russian Geographical Society’s Expedition in 1899-1901,
under the leadership of P. K. Kozloff. Petrograd, 1965-11.
Summaries in ‘La Géographie’, III (1901), pp. 41-6, and
V (1902), pp. 273-8. — Kosnoes, I. K. Monroxia uw: Kans.
_Tpyapt oxenemunia VW. P.T. 0., copepmenHolt BB 1899-1901 TOKE
pykonorcreoxwn JI. I. Koszona.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 177


Krafft, H. A travers le Turkestan russe. Paris, 1902.


Kraft, I. I. The ancient times of the Kirghis. Orenburg, 1900,
— Kpagms, H. H. Ws5 Kupruscroti Crapuuet.


Krasnoff, A. N. Account of the life of the Kirghis of Semirechie.
Bull. I. R.G.S., XXIII, 1887, pp. 436-81. — Hpacnoss, A. H.
Oxeprs Gita Cemmphuenckaxs Kupruss.


Krasnoyarsk. The twenty years of existence of the Krasnoyarsk


town museum, 1889-1914. « Krasnoyarsk, 1915. — Hpac"
nonpexs.. Jipaguatansrarbrie Kpacnoapcexaro Topogeroro Mysea,
1889-1914. ‘


Krasovski. The territory of the Kirghis-Kaizak. Geographical
and statistical materials collected by the,officers of the general
staff. 3 vols. St. P., 1868. — Rpacosexit. Odaacts Kup-
rusckax ‘Kasakopb. Matepiaatt aq reorpadiu u crTaTucrmke,
cobpanupie odmmepaun Texepansuaro Ilra6a.


Kriloff, R. N. Journey to the Uriankhai region, 1892. Bull.
I.R.G.S., 1893, XXIX, pp. 274-91. —- Kpu.oes, P. H.
Ilyremecrsie Bb Ypanxalicnyio crpany 1892 r.

Krug, Ph. Inscriptiones Sibiriacae: de antiquis quibusdam
sculpturis et inscriptionibus in Sibiria repertis: Scripsit
Gregorius Spassky, Petropoli, 1822.

Kulakoff, P. E., and Kuznietsova, A. A.: see Kuznietsova, A. A.


Kuija. The mosque of the Tardnchi.. Niva, 1879, No.-50,
pp. 1009 ff. — Kynrvdoca. Meverb Tapanseti.


Kun, A. A. Plan and description of the ruins found between
Kazalinsk and Tashkent. Bull. I. R. Arch. S., 1872, VII,
Pp. 452. — Kyns, A.A. Tlaarp n onmcasie mrp cocranieHHBie,
pasBamuEy, xaxomimaxca Meaty Kasammuckoms H Tamertoms.


~—— Cultural remains in an oasis of the lower Amu-Daria. Year-
book of Stat-Mater, relating to the Turkestan country, 1876,
IV, pp. 203-59. — Kyasrypa oasaca nusopbers Amy-Japsn.
——— The ruins of Ak-Saray palace of Timur in Shakhrisebz.
Mem. I. R.G.S., 1880, IV, pt. i, pp. 22 4-8. — Octarsat 6nrsmaro
apopua Tanypa Axn-Capas Bb rop: Iaxpucetsh. .
Z


21084


178 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Kuropatkin, A. Turkomania and the Turkomans. Collection
of Military Essays, 1879, vols. I-IX, Nos. 9-10, pp. 128-339.
—, Kyponamnuns, A. Typrmesia a Typxaer.

Kushakyevich. Description of the Khodjent district. Turk.
News, 1872, No. 4. — Kywaneouus. Osepka Xopxenrckaro
ybom.  -

Kustanaeff, H. Ethnographical account of the Kirghis of the
Perovsk and Kazalinsk districts, Tashkent, 1894. — Kyc-
manaees, X. ODrsorpapuieckie oyepKa Kaprusp Tleposcraro
u Kasammucraro yhsxops.

Kuun, Graf Géza von. Review’of W. Bang’s ‘Zur Erkidrung
der kékttirkischen Inschriften’, Z.D.M.G., 1899, LIII,
PP: 544-9- :

—— Kritische Beitrage z. uralaltaischen Philologie. Westdstliche
Rundschau, ITI, pp. 268-85.

——— Review of V. Thomsen’s ‘ Inscriptions de l’Orkhon déchiffrées’
(1894), Z.D.M.G., 1897, XXI, p. 339.

~—— Review of V.Thomsen’s ‘ Inscriptions de ?Orkhon déchiffrées ¢
(1894). Westéstliche Rundschau, 1897, II, pp. 268-85.

Review of W. Radloff’s ‘ Inscriptions de POrkhon déchiffrées '

I (1894). Westdstliche Rundschau, 1897, III, pp. 268-85.

—— Review of W. Bang’s ‘Zu den kéktiirkischen Inschriften
Z.D.M.G., 1899, pp. 544-9.


—— Gardézi, Kézirati munkajanak. [Passages from the Zayn-ul-
Akhbar of Gardizi (circ. a.p. 1051) dealing with the Turks.]
Budapest, 1903.


Das ttirkische Sprachmiaterial des Codex Comanicus. Buda-

pest, 1880.

Kuznietsoff-Krasnoyarski, I. P. Ancient graves of the Minu-
sinsk district. Tomsk, 1889. — Kyaneuoss-Kpacnonpexit,
-Hf, 1. JIpesnia mormat: Musycuucxaro okpyra.

—— Minusinsk Antiquities, Copper-bronze and _ -transitional


periods. Tomsk, 1908. — Munycanckia xpessoern. Mbyq0-
Oponsopsiit H DepexonHEii mepiojel.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 179


Kuzgnietsoff, 8S. K. Report on the archaeological investigations
in the neighbourhood of the town of Tomsk. Bull. of Tomsk
Univ., No. 2. Tomsk, 1890. — Kysneyoes, C. K. Oruers
‘Ob aPXCOMOLMIeCKNXL pasbicKabinxh BE oKxpectHoctaxb r. Toxcra.

‘Kugnietsova, A, A., and Kulakoff, P. E. The natives of
Minusinsk and Achinsk. Krasnoyarsk, 1898. — Kysneyoea,
A, A,, u Hyaanoes, I. E. Munycuucrie a Aumackie auopoymet.

Kuznietsoff, P. La Lutte des Civilisations et des Langues dans
l'Asie centrale. Paris, 1912.

Kuzu-Kiurpech. Memorial stones of Kuzu-Kiurpech and Bayan-
Sulu and legends relating to them. Trans, Fourth Arch.
Congress, 1884, I, p. xlvi. — Hysy-Koopnevs. Tamutamecp
Kysy-Kiopnew u Banws-Cyry u ornocamasica Kb Hemy wereaya.

Lacoste, de (Commandant Bouillane), E. A. H. Une lettre
adressée de Kobdo le 27 septembre 1909 par le Commandant
de Lacoste & Senart. T.P., II, 1908, vol. X, p. 731. Also
J. A., vol. X, pt. xiv, p. 552.

—— Exploration en Mongolie septentrionale. La Géographie,
1909, XX, p. 2513 1910, XXI, pp. 375-84.

—— Au pays sacré des anciens Turcs et des Mongols. Paris,
Torr.

Lacouperie, T. de, Decipherment of the Siberian inscriptions.
Bab. Orient. Rec., 1893-4, VII, p. 94.

—— Additional notes on the Yenisei and Karakorum script. Bab.
Orient. Rec., 1891, V, 6, pp. 127-31.

Lane-Poole, S. The Mohammadan dynasties. London, 1894.


Langlés, G. Notice de Histoire de Djenguyz-Khan, contenue
dans le Manuscrit Persan No. 104 de la Bibliotheque
Nationale. Notices et Extraits, V, pp. 192-230.

Lansdell, H. Through Siberia. London, 1882.

-—— Russian Central Asia. London, 1885.

—— Chinese Central Asia. London, 1893.

Lapin, 8. A. Shakh-Zinda and his tombstone, Reference-book
of the Samarkand territory, IV, pp. 39-45. — Januns, C. A.
Iilaxu-Sunza om ero HaMOTHAbAbI DaNATHHKD,


18 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Laufer, B. The Reindeer and its domestication. Mem. of the
Amer. Anthrop. Assoc., April-June 1917, IV, No. 2, pp. 91-
147.

Lavrentioff, V. Short account of the Kurgans in the district of
Aulieata. ‘Proc, Turk. ,Circle F. Arch., 1899-1900, V,
PP. 39-45. — Maspexmeess, B. Kparili Tepevent OYrpoBh
(KypraHOBh) Haxo_AMuxca Bb yeprh rop. Ayaie-ara.

Lhe Coq, A. von. Bericht iiber Reisen und Arbeiten in Chinesisch-
Turkistan. Z. f. E., 1907, Hefte 4 u. 5.


—— A short account of the origin, journey, and results of the
First Royal Prussian (Second German) Expedition to Turfan
in Chinese Turkistan. J. R. A. S., 1909.

—— Ein christliches und ein manichdisches Manuskript-fragment
in tiirkischer Sprache aus Turfan. Sitz. K. P. Akad. Wiss.,
1909, p. 1206 ff.

—— KoOktiirkisches aus Turfan, Sitz. K. P. Akad. Wiss., 1909,
pp. 1047 ff. :

—— Sprichworter und Lieder aus der Gegend von Turfan, mit

einer dort aufgenommenen Worterliste. Baessler-Archiv. Bei- -

triage zur Vélkerkunde, herausgegeben aus Mitteln des Baessler-'

Institutes.. Unter Mitwirkung der Direktoren der Ethnologischen

Abteilungdes k. Museums fiir Vélkerkunde in Berlin, redigiert '

von P. Ehrenreich. Beiheft I. Leipzig and Berlin, 1911.


— Tiirkische Manichaica aus Chotscho I. Abh. K, P. Akad.
Wiss., Berlin, 1911.


—— Chotscho [I. Facsimile-Wiedergaben der wichtigeren Funde
der ersten K. P. Expedition nach Turfan in Ost-Turkistan.
Ergebnisse der K. P. Turfan-Expeditionen. Berlin, 1913.


Leclerq, Jules. Les Monuments de Samarcande. Société Royale
Belge de Géographie, Bulletin XIII, 1890, No. 6, pp. 613-32.

Leder, H. Ueber alte Grabstatten in Sibirien und der Mongolei.
Mitth. Anthr. Ges. Wien, 1895, XXV, pp. 9-16.

—— Reise an den oberen Orchon und zu den Ruinen von Kara-
korum. Mitt. Geogr.. Ges. Wien, 1894, XXXVII, pp. 407-36.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 181


‘Eine Sommerreise in der nérdlichen Mongolei, 1892. Mitt.
d. K. K. Geog. Ges: in Wien, 1895, XXXVILIL, pp. 26-87,
,85-118.


Lemosoff, M.P. Deux pierres avec iniscriptions chinises. T.P.;
II, pp. 113-24.

Lepitre, A. Review of V. Thomsen’s ‘ Inscriptions de !Orkhon
déchiffrées’ (1894). L’ Université Catholique, N.S. 51, pp. 288-
go. Paris.

Lerkh, P.I, Archaeological journey. Bull. I. R.G.S., 186s, I,

pp. 196-7. — Jepxs, I. H. Apxeonoruseckoe nytemectsie.

Archaeological researches in Turkestan in 1867. Rep. I.
Arch, Commission, 1867,” pp. xxii-xxxi. — Apxeonormuecnia
uscrbyonania BB Typkectan’ Bb 1876 r.


-— Archaeological investigations of the ruins of the ancient town
of Jankent. Bull. I. R. G..S., 1867, II, pt. i, p. 1993 1869,
V, p. ii, pp. 371-3. — Apxeonormeckia uscrbronania Bb pasBa-
dUHAXb ApPeBHATO Topora [wankenra.

——— Concerning the ruins of Jankent. ‘Syn Otyechestva,’ 1868,
No. 6. —= O paspammmax JIsxankenta,


—— Archaeological journey to the Turkestan country in 1867.
St. P., 1870. — Apxeozormeckan nobsaka Bh Typkecrancniit
Kpaii Bb 1867.

Lessar, P. M. South-western Turkomania. The Land of the
Saryk and the Salor. ,Bull. I. R.G,S., 1885, XXI, pp. 1-80.
— Heccaps, I. M. Wro-sanayuaa Typrmenia. Sexm Caprixoss
u CanopoBs.


Levanewski, M. A. Account of the Kirghis Steppes of the
Embensk district. Zemlevyedenye, 1894, I, No. 2, pp. 99-
114; No. 3, pp. 39-84; No. 4, pp. 111-36 ; 1895, No. 2,
pp. 67-100. — Hesaneecnitt, M. A. Oxepxu Kapruscnaxb
Creneii Du6exckaro ybaya.


Lévi, 8. Central Asian Studies. J. R. A.S., 1914, pp. 953-64.


Levin, N. P.: see W. W. Radloff. Collection of documents of
the Orkhon Expedition. 1892—1903, vol. I, pp. 41-50.


182 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Levshin, A. Information about the ancient town Saraychik.
Northern Archives, 1824, pt. 9, No. 4, pp. 179-90. —
Teswunz, A. Viseberian 0 apesnem ropomb Capatiumrs.

Description of the Ordas and Steppes of the Kirghis-Kaizak.

St. P., 1832. — Onucanie Kuprusn-Katicankaxn opr u crenel.

——- Description des hordes et des steppes des Kirghiz-Kazaks,
Trad. par Cigny de F. Paris, 1840.

Lidski, S. Materials for the bibliography of Central Asia and
the neighbouring countries. Russian Turkestan. Collections
of essays, vol. I. Tashkent, 1899. — Judenit, C. Mare-
pbaabt qd Gubaiorpaia Cpenueti Asin u cockyunx, crpau'p.

Likoshin, N. S. An account of archeological investigation in
the Turkestan country before the foundation of the Turkestan
Circle of Friends of Archaeology. Proc. Turk. Circle F. Arch.
Supplement, 1895-6. — Jtexowuns, H. C. Oueprs apxeoio-
THYeCKUXD usbicKaniti BE Typkecranckom, kpab yo yupeajenin
Typrectancaro Kpyaa sLio6urexeti Apxeonorili.

Liiders. Die Sakas und die ‘nordarische’ Sprache. K. P. Ak.
der Wiss., Phil.-Hist. Abhandlung, 1912. :

Lutsyenko, E. I, Excursion to. the Telengit of the Altai.

‘ Preliminary account of a. journey to the Altai with. an
anthropological object. Zemlevyedenye, 1898, I-II, pp. 1-377.
— SHyyenno, E. H. Tokbsnxa xp Aaraiicnmme Teaenrerams.
Tipeqwapnremutii orserh o nobsmh pp Aarail eb antponozora-
¥ECKOIO. IrbuLbIo,

Lyall, A.C. Asiatic Studies. London, 1899.

Lloyd, H. B.: see Timkowski.

M - off, N. From Samara to Tashkent. Turk. News, 1873. —~
M ~ 63, H. Ors Camapst yo Tamenta. ;
Maak, R. The Vilui district of the Yakutsk -territory. St. P.,

1887. —- Maaxs, P. Bumoiicxili oxpyrs, sucyrcxoti oOaacrn.


'


Macartnay, G. Eastern Turkestan: the Chinese as rulers over

__analien race. J. Centr. As. S., rgog9.

Major, R. H. History of’the two Tartar conquerors of ‘China,
including the two journeys into Tartary of Father F. Verbiets °


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 183


. From the French of Pére J. d’Orléans ... To which is
added Father Pereira’s journey into Tartary. From the Dutch
_of N. Witsen, Translated and edited by the Earl of Ellesmere :
‘with an introduction by R. H, Major. Hakluyt Society’s
Publications. London, 1854.


see Herbertstein.


Makovyetski, P. EB. Materials for the study of the juridical
customs of the Kirghis. St. P., 1860. — Maxoseunit, IT. E.
Marephaxnl Att usytenia lopaymiecknxb o6traenn Knprasors.

—— The Yurta (summer dwelling of the Kirghis). Mem. W. Sib.
- Sect.I. R. G.S., 1893, XV, pt. iii, pp. 1-16. — TOpra Paes
KIEIAE Knprnsa’}.

Maksheyeff, A. I. Description of the valley of the lower Syr-
Daria. Collection of essays on naval subjects, 1856, XXIII,
No. 9, pp. 448-527. — Manweees, A. H. Onncanie nn3onrenp
Crrpb-Japen.

~— Additional information on,.the ruins of Jankent. Russian


Invalid, 1867, No. 87. — Eme HbcKomBKe CHOBL 0 PASBANUHAXD
Jixankenta.


Remains of ancient towns along Syr-Daria. St. Petersburg
News, 1867, Nos. 58, 60. — Ocratka crapaHHaro roepoma na
Crrpt-Japsb.
-—— Geographical, ethnographical, and statistical materiats relating ©
to the Turkestan country. Mem.1. R.G.S., 1871, I, pp. 1-60.
—— Teorpaaseckie, otaorpadmuectie Hu ctaTucTimeckie matepiaati
o TypkectancKoma Epa’.


Maksimoff, A. N. The Kara-Kalpak. Encyclopaedic Dictionary,
ed, Jeleznoff, XXIII, p. 24.— Maxeuaoes, A. H. Kapakannaxn.


Malakhoff, B. Graves of the Semipalatinsk territory. Bull. Soc.
F. 5S, Anthr. E., 1886, XLIX, pt. iii, pp. 24-7. — Manqaoes, E. .
Morgast Cesmmanarnucroit o6nacTH.


Mallitski, N, Fourteenth-century inscriptions on ibe memorial
stones at Khodjo. Proc. Turk. Circle F. Arch., 1897, Supple-
ment, pp. 10-91,— Mannuynxit, H. Xomnonentckia waqrpoounssa
HOyMMCH xiv crorbris.


184 THE TURKS.OF CENTRAL ASIA


Mallitski, N. On the connexion between the Turkic ‘tamga
and the Orkhon’ éharacters. Proc. Turk. Circle F, Arch.,
1897-8, Pp. 43-7. — O cBagit TOPKCKMX TAMIb Cb OpXOHCKEMIT
nuchéMenaim.

—— Inscription from Rushan (a.p. 1764). Proc. Turk. Circle F.
Arch., 1899, pp. 69-71. — Hagnnen ites Pymana (1 764 no P. X,),

Maloff, C. B. A few words about Shamanism among the Turkic
population of the Kuznietsk district. of the Tomsk Government.
L. A: F., 1909, Nos.’2-3, pp498-41. —-. Manoes, C. E.
Hbckonsxo cxopb 0, Hamancrs’ y Typeitaro nacerenia Kysienkaro
yisqa Tomcrolt ryOepuin,

Maltseff. Letters about the Soyot, the neighbours of, ihe Yeniseisk
Governmeht. Reference sheet of the Yeniseisk Govérnmerit,
1890, Nos. 1, 3. — Manvijess. Tinepua -0 Cottotaxs, cocbrax
Exnceticroti ryOepain.


Mangyshlak. Antiquities of the Peninsula of Mangyshlak. “Mem
ILR.G.S., 1849, pts. idi, pp. 333-5. — *Mamowaans.
Apesnocta Manriminakcxaro nomyocrpora.

Markoff, A. Towns of Northern Mongolia, The-Scottish Geog.
Mag., Feb. 1896.

Markoff, E. Russia in Central Asia. Account of. travels in
Trans-Caucasia, Turkmania, Bokhara, Samarkand, Tashkent,
and Ferghana territories, along the Caspian Sea and the Volga.
St. P., 1901. — Mapxoes, E. Poccia pp Cpenneli Asin. Ovepxu
nyremectsia no 3akapKasii0, Typraeniu, Byxapb, Camapxangcnol,
Tamnenreroit ®eprancxoti obsactas, Kacnilickomy Mopro u
Boars.


Martianoff, N. M. The Minusinsk Public Museum. Tomsk,


1881. — Mapmoanoes, H. M. Munycnucriti UWydanusntt
Mébcratit Myseit.

Martin, R. L’Age du bronze au.musée de ‘Minoussinsk. Stock-
holm, 1893.


_— Sibirische Sammlung (Sibirica). Stockholm, 189g.


—— Review of J. Campbell’s ‘ Siberian inscriptions Arch. fir
Anthr.,. XXII, p. 143.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 185


Marquart, J. ‘Historische Glossen zu denaalttiirkischen Inschriften.
WrZK. MY, 4898, XU, Pp. 157-200:


—=~, Die Chionologie sder alitiirkisched Inschriften. : ,» Mit einem
Varwort und Anhang*von W.Bang. Leipzig, 1898.


——and Bang, W: “Osttiirkische Dialektstudieny Abh. K. Ges.
Wiss. Gottingen, Phil.-Hist, KI,NE,, 1914, Bd. 13. Gdttingen.


Maslovski, 8. d. The Galcha: aboriginal population of Turkestan.
Russ, Anthr, J." igor No.*2. — Macnosewiti, C: JE, , Tama,
TepBobErrH0e nacenentié Typkectana.

Matseyevski' and Poyarkoff, yShort ethnographic notes on the
natives Of thesdistriet formerly called Kulja. Omsk, 1883..—
Maujveecnit ‘u Honpxoes. * Kpatia pTHOrpaprieckia saarbrki
0-TYSCMIAX' 6xrfimaro Kyabipenucraro pationa.


Mauling, Minha}-ud-din, ‘Abi-’umar-i-’usman: see Raverty,


Mayeff, N.. Onéthe investigations of the Samarkand antiquities
of architecturef » Novosti, 1895. Tr. in ‘Beiblatt zur All-
gemeinen’ Zeitung’, 1895, No. 231, p. 7. — Maees; H. O0n
BsyIeHia CaMaApKAHACKAXD APXUTEKTYPHLIXS APoBrocteli.

— Sketches on the highland principalities of the Khanate of
Bokhara. Turk. News, 1878, Nos. 46-9; 1879, No. 1. —
Ovepkn ropatixt GexcrBb Byxapcraro xanctpa.


—— Tashkent in Asia, Year-book of the Turkestan country,
pt. iv, pp. 260-311. St. P., 1876. — Asiareniii Tammenrs.

Mayendorff, G. dg, Voyage 4 Boukhara. Paris, 1826.

Maynagasheff, 8.D. The life beyond the grave as conceived by
the Turkic tribes of the Minusinsk country. L.A. T., 1915,


uXXIV, pp. 277-92. — Matinarauess, a A. SarpoOsas xa3Hb
No tipescrapieniar BIYPCUKEXD Neen Munyenucraro Kpas.


Sacrifice to: the sky among the Beltir. Collection of essays
of the Anthr. Museum of the Imp. Russ. Academy of Science,


* vol. Ill. Petrograd, 1915. — epreonpuuomtenie Heby y
Beabraposs.


Meakin, A. M.B. In Russian Turkestan. London, ro15.
2108, Aa


18 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Medvyedski, P. The Middle Orda of the Kirghis, from an in-
dustrial and statistical aspect. J. Min. Prop. State, 1862,
LXXX, LXXXI.— Medendcxit, I. Buayrpenuaa Knprascran

‘Opa Bb XO3slicTBeNHO-CTATHCTHYECKOME OTHOMeHIN.


Mejoff, V. I. Bibliography of Asia. List of books and articles
on Asia in Russian and other languages. ‘StLP., 1891. —
Meocoss, B. H. BuaGsziorpapia Asin. Yrasaterb rnurh & crateli
o6n A3ia Ha pycckowh H HNOCTPaBAbIXh ASkIKAXd. :


——— Siberian bibliography. Index to the books and essays on
Siberia in the Russian language, and books alone in other
languages. St. P., 1891-4. —- CuOmpcxaa OnOxiorpadias Yxa-
BaTeIL KEES ut crateli o CnOupn Ha pyccKomb asbich, n”onHbxb
TOAbKO KHWTS HA WHOCTPAHOLIXb ASbIKAXS,


Melioranski, P.M. Concerning the new archaeological discovery
in the Aulieata district. Mem. E. Sect. I. R. Arch. S., 1899,
XI, 1-4, pp. 271-3. — Meaiopancnit, I. M. lo noxogy
HOBO apxeoLorMTecKolt NaxoqKu Bb AyrieaTHHCKOM yhonb..


On the Orkhon and Yenisei monuments with inscriptions.
J. Min. Educ., June 1898. St. P. — O68 opxoncknx® a ennceii-
CKEX HAT POOHEIXE NAMATIOKAXE WH HayUWCAXs.

On the Kudatku Bilik of Jinghis Khan. Mem.E. Sect. I. R.
Arch.S., 1900, XIII, pt. i, pp. o1g-023. — O Kyzarky Bannih
Unarush Xana.

—— Monument in memory of Kiul-Tegin. Mem. E. Sect. I. R.
Arch. S., 1899, XII, pp. 1-144. — Tamatanee Bb 4ecth Kion-
‘Ternna. ,


- __— Short Orkhon inscription on a silver vessel in the Rumyantseff


Museum, Mem. E.’Sect. 1. R. Arch. S., XV, pp. 034 ff. —
He6ornmas opxouckan Haynuch Ha cepeOpsnoli KpHAKK Pyman-
nesckaro Myses. ; ;

—— Two silver vessels with Yenisei inscriptions. Mem. E. Sect.
I. R. Arch. S., XIV. — [pa cepeOpattixn cocyyza cb enucelickuma
HayUHCAMIE.


—— Review of Vambéry’s ‘ Noten za den alttiirkischen Inschriften
der Mongolei und Sibiriens’ (1899). Mem. E. Sect. I. R.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 187


Arch. S,, XII, No. 275. — Penensia kaura Banéepn ‘ Noten
zu den alttiirkischen Inschriften der Mongolei und Sibiriens’
"(1899).


——~ and Radloff, W. W. Collection of documents of the Orkhon
Expedition, vol. IV,


see Radloff.


Merzbacher, Dr. G. Vorliufiger Bericht tiber eine in den Jahren
1go2 und 1903 ausgefiihrte Forschungsreise in den zentralen
Tian-Schan. Gotha, rgo04.


—— Wissenschaftliche Ergebnisse der Reise von G. Merzbacher

.im zentralen und dstlichen Tian-Schan, 1907-8. Abh.

d. k. bayer. Akad. d. Wiss., math.-physik. Klasse, Bd. XXVI,
Abh. 3-5, 8. Miinchen, 1913.


—— Exploration in the Tian-Shan mountains. Geog. Journal,
1909, XXXIII.


Messerschmidt, D. G. Siberian Antiquities. Part I., Materials
for the Archaeology of Russia. No. 3. Abstract of a Diary in
MS. in the Library of the I. R. Ac. Sc. St. P., 1888. —
Meccepummudms, J. L. Cu6apexia Tpessocr,


Meyendorf, Baron G.de. Voyage d’Orenbourg 4 Boukhara
fait en 1820. Paris, 1826,


Meyer, L. The Kirghis steppe in the Orenburg territory. St. P.,
1865.— Meiieps, J. Kupruscxan creas Openbyprexaro pbyonctha.


Middendorff, A. T. von. Reise in den dussersten Norden und
Osten Sibiriens wahrend der Jahre 1843-4. St. P., 1847-74.


—— Einblicke in das Ferghana-Thal. Mem.I. R.A. S., 1859,
VII série, vol. 29.


—— Die Barabé. Mem. 1. R. A,S., 1839, VILI¢ série, vol. 14,


Mikhsiloff, T. A. The natives of the Transcaspian territory and
their life. Askhabad, 1900. — Mn«atinoes, 0. A. Tysemupt
Saracnilickol o6wacta W BX wu3Hb.


188: THE, TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Minayeff, I. P. The aceaay for the excavation of the-Afrosyab'
ruins, by a person familiar with the.archaeology of the country.
Mem. I. R. Arch, S., 1886, vol.-I,-pp.-25 ff. — Munaees, H. II.
O neoSxoqunocm packonkn Adpocin6osa roponuma anno, cueri-
HULHO SHAKOMBINE Cb apxeororiell Kpas.


. ft
Minns, B. H. Scythians and Greeks. Cambridge, 1913.
Mohammed-en-Nesavi. Histoire du/Sultan Djelaledin, prince
du Kharezm. Arab., tr. par O. Houdas. Paris, 1891-5.
Mohl, J. : see Firdousi.


Montelius, O. Orienten och Europa. Antiq. Tidskrift, XIII.
Stockholm.


Moore, B. B. From Moscow to the Persian.Gulf. New York,
1915.
Mordovtseff, D. In the capital of Tamerlan. Picturesque Russia,

1901, I. — Mopdoeyecss, ZX. Bs ctomm Tamepzana.
Morgan, B. D. Prjevalsky’s journeys and discoveries in Central
Asia. Proc. R.G.S., April, 1887. vi


Expedition of the Brothers Grijimailo to the Tian-Shan oases
and Lob-nor. Translated with notes and introductory remarks.
Proc. R. Geog. Soc., 1891, XIII, pp. 208-26.


Moser, H. A travers l’Asie centrale. Paris, 1885.


Moshkoff, V. The Gagauzy. Examples of the folk-literature
of the Turkic tribes. Vol. X, ed. by Radloff. St. P., 1904.
— Mowxoes, B. Tarayst:. O6pasnti Hapognoll auteparypet
TIOPECKUXD W1eMeHb.

Moule, A. C. Documents relating to the mission of thé Minor
Friars to China in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.
J.R.A.S., r9%4, I, pp. 533-600.


Mukhin, D. Memorial stones of the Kirghis. Orenburg sheet,


1881, Nos. 34, 35- — Myxuns, J. Kupruscnie nanarannn
Ha, MOTHIAX®.


MiiMenhoff, K. Uber die Herkunft und Sprache der Jontischen.
Skythen und Sarmathen, Deutsche Altertumskunde, HI,
pp. 101 ff. Berlin, 1870-1900.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL ° 189


Miiller, B. Fouilles aux environs de Tachkend. Revue d’Ethno-
graphie, 1887, VI, ‘Nos. 5~6, ‘pp, 516-18.

Miiller, F. Unter Tungusen ufd Jakuten. Leipzig, 1882.

Miiller, F. W. K. e soedieche Texte, I, K. P. Akad. der Wiss.,

,, 1912. ,

— Ein iranisches Sewdiiaen aus der nérdlichen Mongolei.
K. P. Akad. der Wiss., 1909.

—— Ein Doppelblatt aus einem Manichaischen Hymnenbuch
(Mahrnamag). K. P. Akad. der Wiss., 1912.

Handschriften-Reste in Estrangeloschrift aus Turfan, Chine-

sisch-Turkestan. K. P. Ak. d. Wiss., Phil.-Hist. K1., Abh. I,

1904, pp. 1-117.

—— Die Sprache der tiirkischen ‘ Turfan-Fragmente i in manichii-
‘scher Schrift’. I. Sitzung d. K. P. Akad. d. Wiss., 1904,
LUI.

——~ ‘Uigurica.” I, K.P. Akad. d. Wiss., Phil.-Hist. Kl.; Abh. IT,
1908, pp. 1-60. II. K. P. Akad. d. Wiss., Phil.-Hist. Kl., Abh.
III, 1910, pp. 1-110.

Murgab. Ruins of ancient towns on the Murgab. Bull. S, Arch.:
H. E. I. Univ, Kaz. 1893, XI, pp. 295 ff. — Mypra6s.
Pasbamunl (pesHUX ropososs wa Mypra6s.

Murray, H. Discoveries and travels in Asia. Edinburgh, 1820.


Muskjetoff,-I. V. Concerning the monolite on Tamerlane’s
grave in Samarkand. ‘Trans. of the Fifth Archaeological
Congress, 1886, pp. 24-6. — Mywxemoss, H. B. 0 Hehpu-
TOBOM MOHOWHTS Ha Tpobuaws Tanepzana BE Canapraumb.

—— see Obrucheff. ;

Nadjib Asim. Pek Eski Turk Yazysy. Ed. by Soc. ‘Turk

. Dernayi’, 2nded. Stamboul, 1909.

Yenisei ‘Furk Yazysy. Constantinople, 1897.

Nalivkin, V. P. History of the Khanate of Kokand. Kazan,
1886. — Haanuexuns, B. 1. Wcropia xanara Koxauza.
_— and Nalivkina, M. A sketch of the life of the women
of the sedentary population of Ferghana. Kazan, 1886. —
— u Haaussuna, M. Ovxepe, Onira menmMEE ockyiaro

TysenHaro Hacouedia Deprausl.


190 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Nansen, F. Through Siberia. London, 1914.


Narshakhy (Abou Bekr Mohammed ibn Jafer). Description
topegraphique et historique de Boukhara, par Mohammed
Nerchakhy, suivie de textes relatifs 4 la Transoxiane; texte
persan publ. par C. Schéfer. Paris, 1892.


Nazaroff, F. Notes on some peoples and lands of Central Asia’
St. P., 1821. — Hasapoes, ®. Sanuckn o HLKOTOpLIxE Hapomax
H SeMIaxb cpesuell yactu Asin.
Nebolsin, P. The Turkomans. J. Min.Int., 1852, XXXIX,
Pp- 50-71. — Hebonrscuns, 1. Typrensi.
- Nemeth, J. Die tiirkisch-mongolische Hypothese. Z.D. M-G.,
1912, LXVI, pp. 549-76.
Neumann, K. Die Hellenen im Skythenlande. Berlin, 1855.
Niazi Mohammed. Tarihi Shanrohi, Ed. by Pantusoff, N. N.
Kazan, 1885.
Niebuhr, B. G. A dissertation on the geography of Herodotus,


and researches into the history of the Scythians, Getae, and
Sarmatians. Oxford, 1830.


Niegotin : sce Kopal.

Nikitin, V. Ancient remains of Karkaralinsk district in the
Semipalatinsk territory. Mem.1.R. Arch. S., 1896, VII,
pt. 1-2, pp. 211-18. — Huxumuns, B. Tamatanka apesyocti
Kaprapamucxaro yhsja, Ceamasammackol 06x. _

Nikolski, M.V. The Nestorian inscriptions on the memorial
stones from “‘Pishnek and Tokmak. ‘Eastern Antiquities.’
Trans. E, Comm. I. Moscow Arch. S., 1896, II, 1, pp. 59-60. —
Hunonvceniti, M. B. O necropiaycknx'’b BayTpoOHLIxX® HaMULICHXL
u3b Immnera a Toxmana.”

Nizam-oul-Moulk. Siasset Naméh. Traduit en frangais par
C. Schéfer. Paris, 1893.

Nocentini, L. Review of W. W. Radloff’s ‘Die alttiirkischen'
Inschriften der Mongolei’, 1899, ate Folge. Giorn. della Soc.
asiat. ital., 1899, XII, p. 242.

Obrucheff, V. A. Central Asia, Northern China, and Nian-Shan,
Report of the expedition of 1892-4. Edited by I. V. ~
Mushkietoff. St. P., 1899-1901. — O6pyxuess, B. A. Tlen-


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL IgI


Tpwibpan Asin, Cheepyiit Kaurati, n Hans-IDanp. Orserp o
lyremectsin coBepHieHHoMb BL 1892-94 nox pemarmiel WH. B.
Mymmrerora.


—— List of ancient graves noticed on the way from Kyakhta to
Urga and Kalgan. Extract from letter of V. A. Obrucheff to
the Administrator of the East Sib. Sect. Imp. Russ. Geog. Soc.
in 1892... Collection of documents of the Orkhon Expedition,
1902, vol. II. St. P., 1897. — Cumcoxs a~peBHEX’ MOrHTE,
3awbieHHEXh Ha Nyt 036 Kaxtet Bb Ypry u Kaarags.

—— Preliminary report of an expedition to the Barlik and Tarba-
gatai, Tomsk, 1907. Also Petermann’s Mitt., 1908, pt. i,
Pp. 24-39. —- Upeqsapmrempaniit orierh o uyrTemectsin Ha
Bapmrs u Tapéararaii.

—. Byelkin, D. Z.; Trigoroff, A. V.; Gedroyé, K. I.; and
Shiraeff, fT. G. Systematic index of the publications of the
East-Siberian Section of the IL R.G.S., 18s1-1911. Irkutsk,
1912.— Bnanuns, I. 3.; Touroposs, A. B.; Tedpotus,
KL; u upaess, 0. L.. Cucrexarmseciti yrazaTeb H3laHilt
Bocrowo-CuOnpexaro Ombaa UW. P. T, O., 1851-1911.

. Ohsson, Baron M. d’. Tableau historique de YOrient. Paris,
1804.

———. Histoire des Mongols depuis Tchinguiz-Khan jusqu’A Timour
Bey ou Tamerlan, La Haye and Amsterdam, 1834-38,
repr. 1852.

Oldenburg, 8.: see Veselovski.

Olsen, O. Et primitivt folk de Mongolske Ronnomader, Christiania,
1915.

Olufsen, O. The second Danish Pamir Expedition. Old and
new architecture in Khiva, Bokhara, and Turkestan. Copen-
hagen, 1904, 26 pp. with 24 pl.

Muhamedanske Gravminder in Transcaspien, Khiva, Bokhara,
Turkestan og Pamir. Geograf. Tidskrift, Kjgbenhavn, XVII,
Ppp. 110-20, 146-59.

Orkhon. Orkhon discoveries, Collection of essays on Siberia.

: 1894, V-WVI, pp. 55-9. — Opxons. Opxoucria orkpuiria.
»» CuOnpcKit COopaurs. “

Orléans, Pére J. d’,: see Major, R. H.


192 «©69©THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Ostrovskikh, P. E. Ethnographical notes on the Turks of the ,
Minusinsk country. Report on a journey in 1894. L.A. T.,
1895, V, Nos. 3, 4, pp. 297-348 — Ocmpoecnuxs, I. £.
Orsorpapuseckia saubrka 0 TOpKaxb Manycuuckaro kpas. Orgert
o nobsrKb 1894 ©.


—— Short report of a journey to the Todjin Khoshun of the
Uriankhai country. Bull. I. R. G. S,, 1898, XXXIV. —
Kparniit oveprs o nobsaKh Bp Toxanackiit Xomyn Ypanxaiicroti
SeMIH.

—— The importance of the Uriankhai region to Southern Siberia.
Bull. I. R. G. S., 1899, pp. 321-53. — Sxasenie Ypsiuxaticroti
semi jit IOanoti Cudupu.


Ostroumoff, N. P. A Tatar-Russian Dictionary. Kazan, 1892.
Ocmpoyxoss, H. IT. Tara pexo-pyccrii cmonape. 4


—— The Sarts, Tashkent, 1890; ard ed., 1908, — Caprtt.


@strup, J. Review of V. Thomsen’s ‘Inscriptions de l’'Orkhon
déchifirées’, I (2894), PP. 325-30. Nordisk for Vetenskap, &c.
Tidskrift, 1896,


Review of V. Thomsen’s ‘Inscriptions de l’Orkhon déchifirées
I (1894). Norsk Aftenposten, 18th Feb., 1896.


—— Review of V. Thomsen’s ‘Inscriptions de l’Orkhon déchiffrées
I (1894). Berlingske Tidende, 1896, No. 35.


Otrar. Remains of ruins of the town of Otrar. Proc. Turk.
¥ Circle F. Arch., 1897-8, III, pp. 236-8. — Ompaps. Pasna-
_ HBEBI Tepona Orpapa. :
Pe_ff, N. Weights and measures in Central Asia. Turk. News,
1874, No. 33; 1875, No. 16. — JI—«es, H. Bhen 1 ebpex Bb
Chennett Asin.


Palladius (avehansasidiae). Travelling notes on a journey in
Mongolia. With a preface by E. V. ‘Bretschneider. Bull.
LR.G.S., 1892, XX. — MTHaaanadii [Apxrunandpums |.
Aopoxaiia sanbrku Ha WyTa no Monrozia. Ca prejenicn, E. B.
Spermnatizepa.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 193


Pallas, P.S. Reise,durch verschiedene Provinzen des Russischen

Reichs. St. P., 1771-6.

Sammlungen historischer Nachrichten tiber die mongolischen

Volkerschaften. St. P., 1776.

»—— Travels through Siberia and Tartary. Vol. II of ‘TheHabitable
World described’, edited by J. Trusler, 20 vols. London, 1788.


—— Von einér in Sibirien gefundenen unbekannten Steinschrift.
Neue Nordische Beitrage zur physikalischen und geographi-
schen Erd- und Vélkerbeschreibung, Naturgeschichte und
Oekonoinie. V, pp. 237-45. St. P., 1793.


Pilsi, 8. Mongolian matkalta. Helsingissi, rorr.

Pantusoff, N. N. Ferghana according to the memoirs of Baber.
Mem.I R.G.S., 1880, IV, pt. i, pp. 151-99. — Hanmycoes,
H. H. epraua no sanackaws Cyrtana Babypa.


—— The war between the Musulman and the Chinese. Kazan,
1881, — Boitna Mycyazatrs npotust Kuratiness.

—— Tomb of Ak-Tash, near Jarkent. Proc. Turk. Circle F. Arch.,
tgoo-1, VI, pp. 6 ff. — Moruaa Axs-Taurb Oauap Jpxaprenta.

——-- Concerning the ruins of Tash-Rabat. Proc. Turk. Circle F. .
Arch., r901+2, VI, pp. 5 ff. — Coo6menie o pasnaaunaxb Tanrs-

Paoarn.

Tash-Rabat. Bull. I. Arch. Gominission, 1003; pt. iv, pp. 1g—23.
——— Taurh:Padars.

----—- Antiquities of Central Asia: Memorial Dengek in the Lepsin
district. Memorials Kuzu-Kurpech and Bayan-Salu in the
Lepsin district. Kazan, 1902. — /[pesnocta Cpeaueti: Asim:
Tlauarauxe Jlenrers Bb Jencnackows yhsrs. Tanstanxn Kysy-
Kypuers a Banrs-Cary sb Dencuackown ybsxs.

Christian influence traced from the Kirghis memorial stones
along the R. Kokshal'in Kashgar. Mem.W. Sib. Sect. I. R.G.S.,
1903, XXX, pp. 231-6. — Carbaur xpucriqucrea Bb HayMOTHab~
HEIXS RAPTHSCKUXS WAMATHOKAXS no p. Koxmaay Bb Kamvapig. ¢

—— see Niazi Mohammed.

Paquet, Dr. A. Siidsibirien und die Nordwest-Mongolei. Mitt.
der Geog. Ges. in Jena, 1909, XXVII, pp. 1-127.

2108 Bb


194 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


5

Parker, E.H. Review of V. Thomsen’s ‘Déchiffrement des
inscriptions de l’Orkhon et de I’Jénisséi’. Notice préliminaire
(1894). The Academy, 1894, XLVI, No. 1133.

——'Review of W. W. Radloft’s ‘Die altttirkischen Inschriften der
Mongolei’, 2te Folge, 1899. Progress in Old Turkish dis-
coveries. China Review, 1899, XXIV, pp. 21-38.

—— The origin of the Turks. Eng. Hist. Review, 1896, pp. 431-45.

Review of W. W. Radloff’s ‘ Die alttiirkischen Inschriften der -
Mongolei’ (1899), 2te Folge. Eng. Hist. Review, 1901, XV,
PP- 149-52.

-—— Inscriptions de VOrkhon, déchiffrées par Vilh. Thomsen.
Journ. China Br. R. A. S., 1896-8, XXXI, pp. 1-38.

——- Progress in Old Turkish discoveries, China Review, 1899-
1900, XXIV, pp. 21-38.

—— The Orkhon inscriptions. Academy, 1895, XLVIII,
Pp. 547-51.

—— A Thousand Years of the Tartars. Shanghai, 1895.


—— History of the Wu-wan or Wu-Woan Tunguses of the first
century. China Review, XX, pp. 71-100.


| —— China, Past and Present. London, 1903.


Patkanoff, S. Statistical data for the racial composition of the
population of Siberia, its language and tribes. St. P., 1912. —
Hamxanoes, C. Cramicrayeckia yanAbia, noKasbipaomlia u10e-
MeHHOH coctaBh Hacexeuin Cubupu, ASKIN U port! HHOPOATEBD.

Pauthier, G.: see Polo, Marco.

Paye, de. Review of ‘Inscriptions de 1’Jénisséi recueillies et
publiges par la Société Finlandaise d’Archéologie’ (1889).
Bull. Soc. Antiq., 1889, IV, pp. 273 ff.

Pelliot, Paul. Les Influences iraniennes en Asie central et
en Extréme-Orient. Revue de I’Histoire et de la Littérature
yeligicuses.

—— La Mission Pelliot en Asie centrale. Ann. de la Soc. de
Géog. Commerciale. See Indo-Chinoise Map. Hanoi, 1909.


and Chavannes, B.: see Chavannes.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 195


Pereira, Father: see Major, R. H.

Pétis de la Croix, -F. Relation de Doury Efendy, ambassadeur
de la Porte Othomane auprés du roi de Perse; traduite du
ture et suivie de l’extrait des voyages de F. Pétis de la Croix.

Petri, B. EB. Guide to the Peter the Great Museum of Anthropo-
logy and Ethnography : Archaeology. Petrogtad, 1916. —
Hempi, B..E. Tytesonuterb no myser anTpongiorin 0 sTaorpadin
nvent Terpa Bernkaro. Apxeonorin.


—— Neolithic finds on the shore of Lake Baikal. Publication of the
Museum of Anthropology and Ethnography. I. A, S., vol. III.
Petrograd, 1916. —- Heonutaueckia naxonku na Oepery Batiraza.

Piassetsky, P. Russian travellers in Mongolia and China,
Translated by J. Gordon-Cumming. London, 1884.

Piekarski, E, A Yakut Dictionary. St. P., 1899. — He-
xapceKit, 9. Cxopaph Axytcraro ssbika.

—— and Vasilyeff, P. The Coat and Drum of the Yakut
Shaman. Materials for the Ethnography of Russia, I, pp. 93~
116. St. P., 1910. — u Bacuavess, I. Tnaurs u 6y6ert
ARYTcKaro Maman. :

Pietroff-Borzna, D. O. Concerning archaeological documents,
collectors of antiquities and excavators in Central Asia. Trans.
Fourth Archeol. Congress, 1884, vol. I, pp. Ixv—Ixvi. — IHe-
mpoes-.Bopsna, A. O. O BemecTBeHHEIXh foKasaTeabCTBaxb
apxeos0ris, a TakoKe 0 coOMpaTeIAX Apeswocreii 1 KTOMCKATEASINS
BD cpenueli Asin.

Pietrowski, N. T. The Tower of Burana, near Tokmak. Mem.
E. Sect. I. R. Arch. S., [X., pp. 145-55. — Hempoecniti, H. 0.
Bama Bypana, 6ausb Toxaxa.

Polferoff,A. Among the graves of the Kirghis, Turgai Gazette, 1896,
Nos. 1, 6,16, — LlonGepoes, A. Cpeya Kupruscraxs morars.

Polo, Marco. Le Livre de Marco Polo, citoyen de Venise (1298),
ed. by Pauthier, M.G. Paris, 1865. English, ed. H. Yule.
London, 1875.

Popoff, N. I. Concerning the ‘pisanitsy’ of the Minusinsk
country. Bull. Sib. Sect. IL.R.G.S., 1856, III, pp. 223~84 ; V,
P. 49. — Honoes, H. WH. O macanmmaxt Munycuacxaro Kpas.


196 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Popoff, N. I. On the Runic writing of the Minusinsk country.
Bull. Sib. Sect. I. R. G.S., V, No.2, pp. 1 ff. — O pyauaeckuxp
TRIcbMeHaxb Bb Manycnuckons Kpab.


—— Short historical review of the various phonetic writings of
the people of Northern and Central Asia. Bull. Sib. Sect.
1.R.G. S, V, No. 2, pp. 12~28. — Kparniti uctopmueckiii
O00Pb PaSMMIHLIXh pofoRh onerayeckaro MNCbMA Y HAPOAOBS
Chsepnolt u Cpequefi Asin.

Popoff, P, 8S. Notes concerning a new translation of the inscrip-
tion on the monument Tsue-Tegin. Bull. I. A. S., 1894,
LXXV, pt. i, pp. 1 ff. — Ionoss, 7. C. Sanbuania m0 noposy
HoBarO Nepenosa Hayiucn Ha HamaraaKt Ioo-Tormny,

Posdnyeff, A. M. Mongolia and the Mongols. Results of
the journey to Mongolia in 1892-3. St. P., 1896-8. —
ITosduness, A. M. Monroxin a Monroaut. Pesyanrarer nobeyKn
Bb Monromin, ucnomenHoli Bb 1892-3 IT.

Poslawski, I. Concerning the ruins of Termez, ‘Sredne-
asiatskii Vyestnik’, December, 1896.—Hocaaeentti, H, O pas-
BammHaxn Tepmesa. :

Potanin, G. N. Materials for the history of Siberia. Moscow,
1865. — omanuns, 1°. H. Matepiami gt neropin Cuonpa.

——- Winter excursion to Lake Zaysan in® 1863-4. Mem.
I. R.G. S., 1867, I, pp. 429-61. — Sumuaa n6bsrKa Ha ozepo
Salican 3uMoli 1863-4. "

, Sketches of North-Western Mongolia. The results of the

expeditions, of 1876-7 and 1879-80. St. P., 1881-5. —

Oxuepxa Chpepo-Sanagsoit Monromin. Pesynanrarey mnytemectsia

HCHONHeHHaLO BL 1876-7 HW 1879-80.


—-— Survey of G. N. Potanin’s journey in N.W. Mongolia, 1876-7,
and map. Petermann’s Mitt. 1881, XXVII, pt. 5. —

“L_— The Tangut-Tibet borderland of China. Travels in'#8$4-6.
St. P., 1892. — Tanryrcxo-Tadercratr oxpauna Kuraa a Ien-
qpaabHad Mourozia. Iyremectsie 1884-6.

~—— Review of W. Radloff’s ‘Die alttiirkischen Inschriften der
Mongolei’ (1894). Ethn. Rev., XXI, pp. 189-99.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 1097


——-— Anniversary book of Potanin; on the occasion of his seventieth
birthday. Edited by Rudnyeff, A. D. Mem. I. R. G. S.,
XXXII. St. P., r909. — C6opHuxt Be sects cemmpecatarbria
Tpuropia Hikoxaepuya Tlorannna.


Poulsen, F. Der Orient und die friihgriechische Kunst: Leipzig,
Igt2.


Poyarkoff and’ Matseyevski : see Matseyevski.


Prelovski, P. The Karagass of the Nijne-Udinsk district. Mem.
‘and Trans. of the Irkutsk Government Statistical Committee,
1868-9, IV, pp. 1-30. — Hpenoscxit, 7. Hiaxne-Yruuckie
Kaparaccn.


Price, M. P. Siberia. London, 1912.


_Priklonski, V. A. Materials for the ethnography of the Yakut
of the Yakutsk territory. Bull. E. Sib. Sect. I. R.G.S.,
1884, XVIH, p. 143. — Hpunaonexit, B. A, Matepiaant yaa
atnorpadin Sxyropn Akyrekoi oO1actH.


—— Materials for a bibliography of the Yakutsk territory. Eastern
Review, 1893, pt. i, p. 183, — Marepiamst yaa OnOziorpadia ,
SLxyrerott oOaaemn. .

Przewalski, N, “M. Mongolia and the country of the Tangut.
Three years travels in Eastern High Asia, St. P., 1875-6.
— Tpoecanccnit, H. M. Monrosia u crpana Tanryross.
Tpexxbraee Ilyremecrsie Bb Bocrounoti Haropsot Asin. Trans- -
lated by E. D. Morgan, with introduction and notes by H. Yule.
London, 1876,


From ‘Kulja across the Tian-Shan to Lob- Nor. Travels...

in 1876-7. St. P., 1878. — Ors Kyapmen 3a Tap-Mlanp na
_ Ho6n-Hops. Tiyremeemio Bb 1876-7. Translated by E: D.
Morgan, including notices of the lakes of Central Asia, with
introduction by Sir T. D. Forsyth. London, 1879.


—— Third journey to Central Asia. From Zaysan through Hami
and Tibet to the sources of the Yellow River. St. P., 1883.
— Tperse nyremecrsie BB Ilenrpamnoli Asin. Van Baticana
yepesb Xana Bb TuGerb a na Bepxonsa Shertott Phra.


198 ‘THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Przewalski, N.M. Fourth journey to Central Asia. From Kiakhta
to the sources of the Yellow River; investigation of the northern
part of Tibet and of the route through Lob-Norand Tarim valley.
StiP. ,1888.— Yerseproe Iyremectsic st Tentrpaasnott Asin, Orn
Kastor Ba ncroxn derroli Phxn; narbropanie chaepHoli oxpannn
Tudera 0 nym yepe3b Mo6n—Hops no Gaccetiny Tapana.


Puini, C. Il Tibet. Secondo la relazione del viaggio del Ippolito
Desideri (1715-21). Mem. della Soc. Geogr. Ital, vol. X,
1904.


Pumpelly, R. Explorations in Turkestan, with an account of
the basin of Eastern Persia and Sistan. Expedition of 1903,
under the direction of R. Pumpelly. Carnegie Institution,
No. 26. Washington, 1905.


——— Explorations in Turkestan ; ‘expedition of 1904. Prehistoric
civilization of Anau. Origins, growth, and influence of
environment. Carnegie Institution Publications, No. 73.
Washington, 1908.


Pyennina, Z. M. Trans-Caspian country. Collection of the
bibliographical data relating to books and essays on the
Trans-Caspian country and neighbouring countries. St. P.,
1865-85. — Henuuna, 3. M. Baxacniticriii kpati. Cuerema-
Taseckitt cOopamen OuGaiorpaduseckux yrazanili Kuh H crateli
© Saxacnilickous Kpak u conpeybieHHENrh crpanaxt.


Pyevtsoff, M. V. Description of a journey to Mongolia. Omsk,
1883. — Hneyoss, M. B. Ovepr nytemectsia no Mosronzin.


Radde, G. Reisen im Siiden von Ost-Sibirien in den Jahren
1855-9. 2 vols. St. P., 1862-3.


Radloff, W. W. Examples of the folk-literature of the Turkic

tribes who inhabit Southern Siberia and Jungarian Steppes.

Ed. by Radloff. I, 1866; II, 1868; III, 180; IV, 1842;

V, 1885 ; VI, 1886 ; VII, 1896 ; VIM, 1899; X, 1904. Imp.

A. Sc, St. P. — Padsoes, B. B. O6pasnet naponnoti aurepa-

* TYpbI TropRcrnxs, DleMeHb, xkKHBYRXE BE WOanoli CuOupn a
Asynrapcrolt- erent. Iisq. Pagropent.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 199


——~ Itinéraire de la vallée du Moyen Zérafshan. Recueil d'itiné-
raires et de voyages dans !’Asie centrale, pp. 260-356. Paris,
1878.

"—— Ancient architectural remains (medressé, mosques, and grave-
stones) in Samarkand. Mem. I. R. G.S., 1880, VI, pt. i,
pp. 23-5. — Octarim crapuauaro soqyectsa [megpece, MeveTH, U
MOTHABHbIe TAMATHOKU] BE CanapKagyrb.


—— Die alten Graber in Sibirien. Z. f. E., 1882, XIV, pp. 430 ff.


—_— Vergleichende Grammatik der nérdlichen Tiirksprachen, I.
Leipzig, 1882.


~—— Aus Sibirien. Lose Blatter aus dem Tagebuche eines reisenden
Linguisten. Leipzig, 1884.


—— Zur Sprache der Komanen. Intern. Zeit. f. allg. Sprachwiss.;
Pt. I, 1884, pp. 377-82 ;“pt. II, 1885, pp. 13-42.


—— Bericht iiber die Ausgabe des Sprachmaterials des Codex
Comanicus. Bull. I. R.A. S., 1866, XXX, pp. 121-4.


—— Ethnographical survey of the Turkic tribes of Southern Siberia
and Jungaria. Translated [from the German ] by D. A. Klements.
Tomsk, 1887, — 9raorpapnseckili obsopp TiopKcKuxh DeMeHb
YOunok CuOupr uo JIsynrapin.

~—— Siberian antiquities. Materials for the archaeology of Russia,
ed. by the I. Arch. Commission, Nos. 3, 5,15, 27. St. Pet.,
1888, 1891, 1894, 1902. — Cu6upcxia apesuocta. Mar. 00 apx.
Poccin. Way. HW. Apx. Koumucciet.


——~ The Yarlyks of Tokhtamysh and Temir-Kutlug. Mem. E.
Sect. 1. R. Arch. S., 1888, IIL St. P, — Spaema Torramsnua 1
Temupn-Kyrayra.

—-— Attempt at a vocabulary of the Turkic dialects. I, 1888
(1-320); II, 1889 (321-640) ; III, 1889 (641-960); IV, 1890
(961-1280) ; V, 1892 (1281-1600) ; VI, 1893 (1601—-¥914).
Vowels: VII, 1895 (1-320); VIII, 1896 (321-640); IX,
1897 (641-960); X, 1898 (961-1280); XI, 1898 (1281-
1600); XII, 1899 (1601-1814). Consonants : XIII, rgo0o
(1-320); XIV, 1901 (321-640); XV, 1902 (641-960); XVI,


zoo §=©6 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


1903 (961-1280); XVII, 1903 (1281-1600); XVIII, 1903
(1601-2204) ; XIX, 1903 (1-320); XX, 1906 (321-629).
St, P. — Onsirp crosapa TMopKcKuxt Hapbaili.

Radloff, W.W. Uber alttiirkische Dialekte. Die Geldschuki-
schen Verse im Rebab-Nameh., Bull: I. A. S., 1889, XXILI,
Ppp. 291-351.

—— Kudatku Bilik. Facsimile der uigurischen Handschrift der
K. K. Hofbibliothek in Wien. Im Auftrage der K, Ak. d.
W. herausgegeben. St. P., 1890.

—— Das Kudatku Bilik des Jusuf Chass-Hadschib aus Bilasagun.
TheilII. Der Textin Transscriptionherausgegeben. St.P., 1891.


—— Titles and names of the Uigur Khans. Mem. E. Sect.
I, R. Arch. S., 1891, V, pp. 265 ff. — Turyat u uMena
yiirypcKUxb xaHOBB.


— Collection of documents of the Orkhon Expedition. Vol. I.
St. P., 1892. — Coopsuxs Tpyzopn OpxoucKolt Sxcnequnin.

Radlof, W. W. 1+12. Preliminary report of the results of the
archaeological expedition. for the investigation of the basin of
the R. Orkhon, — Pad.zoss, B. B. Tpexsapmrexnauiti orerb
O pesyAbTaTaxbh cHapa sxennoli cb BbIcovalimero consBoreHia
YW. Akay. Hayks oxcnequaia ama apxeoxormuecnaro uscrbronanin
6acceiina pbxa Opxona.

Klements, D. A. 13-23. Letter. — Kaenenys, JE A. Tocpso.

Dudin, S. M. 24-27. Preliminary report of a journey from
Erdeni-Tsu to Kyakhta. — Jyduns, C. M. penpapnrerseniti
omerh nobsqKe usb Spresu-Lsy Bb Kaxry.

Vadrintsef, N. M. 24-40. Preliminary report of the investiga-
tions along the Rivers Tola and Orkhon and in Southein
Khangai. — Hdpunyess, H. M. Tpexnapurercusii orierh ob
uscrbq0baninxh To p. Tor, Opxouy a Bb lOxHowE Xanrab.

Levin, N. P. 41-50. Preliminary report. — Jeeuns, H. Il.
Tpexeaparexbublt orers. es

Vadrintseff, N. Md. 51-113. Preliminary report of an expedi-
tion to the Orkhon undertaken in 1889 by request of the East
Siberian Imp. Geog. Soc. — Mdpunyess, H. M. Orserb
oKcHeTEn Ha OpxoHb copepiienHoll BE 1889. 7


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL _— 2or


~—— Atlas der Alterthimer der Mongolei, Arbeiten der Orchon-
Expedition. St. P., Lfg. I, 1892; Lfg. II, 1893; Lfg. III,
1896; Lfg. IV, 1899.

——— Eine neue Methode zur Herstellung von Abklatschen von
Steininschriften. Translated from Russian. Bull. I. A. S.,
1892-4, New Series III (XXXV), pp. 153-66; and Mél.
Asiat, 1892, X. 2, pp. 257-70.

—— Uber eine neu aufgefundene uigurische Inschrift. Bull. I.A.S.,

1892, New Series III (XXXV), pp. 327-9; and Meél. Asiat.,

1892, X. 2, pp. 387 ff.

On the question of the Uigur. From the foreword to the
author’s edition of ‘Kudatku Bilik’,. Supplement Bull I. A. S.,
1893, LX XII, No. 2. — Ke sonpocy 06% Viirypaxp. Hs_ npe-

AUCHOBIA Kb H3AaHiIO KynaTKy-Buaukb.

~— Radloff’s Untersuchung des Orchon-Beckens. Review of
W. Radloff’s ‘ Vorlaufiger Bericht’ (1892). Globus, 1893,
LXIV. 5, pp. 69-72.

——— Das Denkmal zu Ehren des Prinzen Kiil Tegin. Die alt-
tiirkischen Inschriften der Mongolei, I. St. P., 1894.

—— Die Denkmiler von Koscho-Zaidam. ‘Text, Fransscription


und Ubersetzung. Die alttitekischen Inschriften der Mongolei.
iste Lieferung. St. P., 1894.


Verbesserungen, Zusdtze und Bemerkungen zu den Denk-,
malern von Koscho-Zaidam; die iibrigen Denkmiler des
Orchon-Beckens und die Denkmialer im Flussgebiete des
Yenissei. Die alttiirkischen Inschriften der Mongolei. 3te Lfr.
St. P., 1895.


——— Die alttiirkischen Inschriften der Mongolei. Neue Folge,.
1897. See Barthold, V. V.

and Melioranski, P. M. The old Turkic monuments in
Kosho-Tsaidam. Collection of documents of the Orkhon
Expedition, vol. IV. St, P., 1897, — u Mentopancnit, I. M.
Alpesneropkenie namsaTauKu BE Kono-Latiqanh.


——— Eine neu aufgefundene altttirkische Inscbrift. Vorlaufiger
Bericht. Bull. I. A.S., Jan. 1898, VIII, No.1, pp. 74-6.
atos cc ,


2022 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Radloff, W. W., and Melioranski, P. M. Zum Kudatku-Bilik.
Z. D. M. G., 1898, LI, pp. 7128 ff. -


— Uber eine in Kairo aufgefundene zweite Handschrift des


Kudatku-Bilik. Bull. I. A, S., 1898, 4th ser., IX, pp. 309-19.
S&P.


—— Decipherment of the Old Turkic inscription on a stone found
in the Airtam-Oi in the.village of Kenkolsk in the Aulieata
district. Mem. E. Sect. I. R. Arch. S., 1899, XI. 1-4, pp. 85-6.
— Pas6opp ApesHeriopKcKol naquuca Ha Kamuh naliyeHHoME Ha
ypowme Auprarp-Off Bb Kentoneckolt Bonocm Aymiearmucsaro
yhsqa.

— Die Inschtift des Tonjukuk. Die alttiirkischen Inschriften der
Mongolei. Zweite Folge. St. P., 1899. See also Hirth, F.;
Barthold, V. V.*


—— Altuigurische Sprachproben aus Turfan. Nachrichten tiber
die von der K. Akad. d. Wissenschaft zu St. Petersburg im
Jahre 1893 ausgeriistéte Expedition nach Turfan. Heft I.

St. P., 1899.

Researches of Dr. Hirth on the genealogy of Attila. Mem.

E. Sect. I. R. Arch. S., rg00, XIII. 1, pp. xx-xxi. — Hserbyo-

BaHia ypa Tupra o poqocaosHoit Arrant.

— Das Kudatku-Bilik des Jusuf Chass-Hadschib aus Balasagun.
Theil II. Text und Ubersetzung nach den Handschriften von
Wien und Kairo herausgegeben. 1. Lfg. St. P., 1900.

—— Zur Geschichte des tiirkischen Vokalsystems: Bull. I. A. S.,
1go1, 4th series, XIV. 4, pp. 425-62. St. P.j

—— Einleitende Gedanken zur Darstellung der Morphologie der
Tirksprachen. Mem. I. A. S., 1905, 8th ser. 7.

—— Die Jakutische Sprache in ihrem Verliltnisse zu den Ttirk-
sprachen. Mem. I. A. S., 1907.

——— Die vorislamitischen Schriftarten der Tiirken und ihr Ver-
haltniss zu der Sprache derselben. Bulk-I. A.S., 1908. St. P.

—— Alttiirkische Studien. Bull. I. A. S., 1909, p. 1213. St. P.


—— Ein Fragment in tiirkischer Runenschrift. Bull. I. A. S.,
1910, III, p. 1025. St. P.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 203


—— Einleitende Gedanken zur Untersuchung der alttiirkischen
Dialecte. Bull. I: A. S., rgt1, IV, p. 305.

—— Die alttiirkischen Dialecte. Bull. I. A. S., rgtr, V, p. 427.
St. P. .

4—— For the seventieth birthday of Wasily Wasilyevich Radloff,
1907. See Salemann, — Ko amo Cewmecarartria Bacnain
Bacnatenma Paynona,

Ramstedt, G. J. Etymology of the word ‘ Oirat’. Anniversary
book of Potanin. Mem. I. R. G. S., 1909, XXXIV,

- pp. 847-58. — Panemedms, I. H. Srmwosoria nena Otipars.

—— Mongolische Briefe aus Idigur-Schahri bei Turfan. Abh. K.
P. Akad. der Wiss., 1909.

—— How the ‘Selenginsk Stone’ was found. Trans, T.-K. S.
"Amur Sect. I. R. G. S., tora, XV, pt. i. — Karp Onnrp ©
natyjent ,, Cexenrancnili Kamen “.

—— Translation of the inscription, on the Selenginsk Stone.
Trans. T.-K. S. Amur Sect. I. R. G. S., 1913, XV, pt. i. —
Tlepesox naguucn na Ceaenrunckom Kap.

—— Zwei uigurische Runeninschriften in der Nord-Mongolei. |
J. Soc. Fin.-Ougr., 1913.


Rashid al-Din Tabib (Fazl Allah). Introduction 4 I’Histoire
des Mongols de Fadh Allah Rashid ed-Din. Translated by
E. Blochet. E. J. W. Gibb Memorial, vol. XII. Leyden and
London, 1910. ,


—— Histoire des Mongols de la Djami el-Tevaikh, Vol. II,
contenant I’histoire des Fricasseurs de Schinkkiz Khaghan.
Ig1t. E. J. W. Gibb Memorial. :


see Erdmann, F. von; Klaproth, H. J. von.


‘Rasmussen, J. L. Annales islamismi, sive tabulae synchronisto-
chronologicae Chaliforum et regum orientis et occidentis.
Includes trans, of chaps. 45-53 of Ahmed Ibn Yusuf’s
Universal History. Copenhagen, 1825.


Raverty, H. G. Tabakat-i-Nasiri: A general history of the
Muhammadad dynasties of Asia, including Hindistan, from


204 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


_AsH. 194 (A.D. 810) to A.H. 658 (A.D. 1260) and the irruption
of the Infidel Mughals into Islam. By the Maulana, Minhaj-
ud-din, Abii-’umar-i-’usman. Translated from original Persian
mahuscripts. Bibliotheca Indica. A collection of Oriental
works published by the Asiatic Society of Bengal, vol. 78.
(Published in parts, 1873-81.) London, 1881.


Read, Sir C. H. Siberian Bronzes and Chinese Jade. Man,
January 1917, No. 1.


Reclus, BE. L’Asie russe. Paris, 1881.


Reinach, S. La Représentation du Galop dans V’art ancien et
moderne. Rev. Arch., 1901, XXXVIII, pp. 27 ff.


Reinecke, P. Ueber einige Beziehungen der Altcrttimer China’s
zu denen des skythisch-sibirischen Vélkerkreises. Z. f. E.,
1897, XXIX, pp. 140 ff.


—— Aus der russischen archiologischen Litteratur. Mainzer
Zeitschrift, 1906, p. 42 f.

Rémusat, H. H. ‘Mémoires sur les relations politiques des
prinees chrétiens et particulitrement des rois de France avec
les empereurs mongols. Mém, de l’Acad. des Inscrip. et
Belles-Letires, Pt. I, vol. vi, pp. 396-469; Pt. II, vol. vii,
PP- 335-431.


-—— Nouveaux mélanges asiatiques, ou Recueil de morceaux de
critique... Paris, 1829.


-— Review of ‘Inscriptiones Sibiriacae’, by Gr. Spassky. Jour.
des Savants, Oct. 1822, pp. 595-602.

—— Histoire de la ville de Khotan. Paris, 1820.

—— Recherches sur les langues tartares, ou Mémoires ‘sur
différents points de la grammaire et de la littérature des
Mandchous, des Mongols, des Ouigours et des Tibétains,
Paris, 1820.

Reypolski, A. F, The Middle Orda of the Kirghis. Proc. of
the All-Russian Congress of Medical Men in St. Petersburg
in 1874-5. — Petinoavenit, A. ®. Kaprascnaa Baytpesaaa
Opza.


- BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 205


Rialle, G. de.. Mémoire sur l’Asie centrale. Paris, 1875.

Riekmers, W. R. The Duab of Turkestan. Cambridge, 1913.

Ritter, C. Die Erdkunde im Verhiltniss zur Natur und zur
Geschichte des Menschen, oder Allgemeine Vergleichende
Geographie. Teil II, Buch ii, Asien; Bd. 1, Der Norden und
Nord-Osten von Hoch-Asien. Berlin, 1832. Teil III, Buch ii,
Asien; Bd. 2, Der Nord-Osten und der Siiden von Hoch-
Asien. Berlin, 1833.

Roborovsky, V.I. Results of the expedition to Tibet in 1888—
90. St. P., 1891-2. — Poboposexti, B. HW. Tpynet TuGercxoti
Skcneqmmin 1880-90.

~—— Works of the Imperial” Russian Geographical Society's
Expedition to Central Asia, 1893-5, under the leadership of
V. I. Roborovsky. St. P., 1899-1901. — Tpyapi oxciequmin
Minnepatopexaro Pyecxaro Teorpadprieckaro OGmectra no Tenrpann-
nott Asin, copeputennoli BB 1893-5 IT. nox Hasaanernows
B. H. Po6oposcraro.

~—— Conclusion of Roborovsky’s expedition, Note in Geog. Journ.,
1897, vol. IX. ,

—— The Russian expedition to Central Asia under Colonel
Pievisoff. Translation from letter of V. I. Roborofsky. Proc.
of the Royal Geog. Soc., 1890, XII, pp. 19-36, 161-6; 1891,
XII, pp. 99-105.

Rocca, F.de. De l'Alat & ’Amou-Darid. Paris, 1896.


Rommel. Review of G. Spassky’s ‘Inscriptiones Sibiriacae’.
Gdottingische gelehrte Anzeigen, 1823, No. 205, p. 2047.
Rosen, Baron V. R. Translation of V. Thomsen’s ‘ Déchiffre-
ment des inscriptions de !’Orkhon et de I’Jénisséi’, Notice
préliminaire, 1894. Bull. E. Sect. I. R. Arch. S., VHI,
PP- 327-37.

——— Review of ‘Inscriptions de !’ Jénisséi recueillies et publiées par
la Société Finlandaise d’Archéologie’, 1889. Bull. E. Sect.
I. R. Arch. S., 1V, p. 443. — Posens, Bapous B. P. Penensin
‘Inscriptions de I’Jénisséi recueillies et publiées par la Société
Finlandaise d’Archéologie’.


26 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Rosen, Baron V.R. Suum cuique. Concerning the decipher-
-ment of Orkhon and Yenisei ‘inscriptions, Bull. E. Sect.
I. R. Arch. S., VITE, pp. 323-5. -— Suum cuique. To nopogy
JelmudppoRKH OpXOHCKXD I enticelickuxh Hayuuceil.


Ross, Sir EB. D., and Skrine, F. B, H.: see Skrine.


—— et Gauthiot, BR. L’Alphabet Soghdien d’aprés un témoignage
dw xme sitcle. J. A, 1913.

Rostislavoff, M. Further details concerning the archaeological
researches in the Zerafshan district. Turk. News, 1876,
XLII. — Poemucaacoss, M. Eme no nopory apxeonormecknxb
HSbIcKaHili Bh SepaBmanckKomh oKpyrb.

——— Concerning archaeological researches in the Zerafshan district.
Proc. Turk. Circle F. Arch., 1897-8, III, pp. 144-9. —
OGb apxeorornieckIxh HSbICKAniAxh BL SepawwaHncKkow orpyrb.


Rubruck, William of: see Yule.


Rudanowski, K. A. Concerning the conical dwellings of Fer-
ghana. Proc Turk. Circle F, Arch., 1897-8, III, pp. 233-5. —
Pydanoecnit, K. A, O nuiommeckux, Mocrpotikaxh BB Peprant. |

Rudnyeff, A. D. Traces of old towns along the Syr-Daria.
Proce. Turk, Circle F. Arch., 1899-1900, V, pp. 57-62.

-— Pydnecs, A. XZ. Curbaet aApessnx, ropofoph uo Curph-


Tapsb.
—— Vilhelm Thomsen. Trans. T.-K. S. Amur Sect. LR.G. S.,
XV, pt. i. — Buapremx Toncens.


‘'—— Short report of a journey to the extreme . north-east of
Mongolia in summer 1903. Bull. Russ. Committee, 1904,
No. 2, pp- 7-10. — Kparkii orserp .o uobsah wa kpatinitt
chrepo-poctoka Moxroain xbromp 1903 I. Komanynporannave
Pycc., Komureromp npup. jon, A. i, Pyqnesa. Han. Pyce. Koxurrera,
1904, No. 2, pp. 7-10.

—— The expedition of Dr. G. J. Ramstedt to Mongolia. Russkia
Vyedomosti, Dec. 1909, No. 280. — Sxenequnia Mpa. T. I.
Pameremta no Monrozia.

—— A new discovery in Mongolia. Ryech, Oct. 7, 1912.
No. 2229. — Honoe orxpsirie pb Monroaia.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 207


Rybakoff, 8. G. Report of.a journey to the Kirghis in summer -
1896. L. A. T., 1897, VII, No. 2, pp. 160-217. —
Prb6anoss, C. I. Orsers o- nobsaxé xb Kuprasaws abrows
1896 roja.

Sacy, S. de: see Gaubil.


Saleman, 8. Works of W. W. Radloff in chronological order.
In ‘For ‘the Seventieth Birthday of Wasily ‘Wasilyevich
Radloff’. St. P., 1907. — Canenans, C. Tpyau B. B. Papnopa
Bb xpoHosormueckonh nopayKb. Bs ,, Ko aan Cewmecararbria
Bacuazia Bacuamepnya Pagosa “.

Saleman, K. G. Legend about Khatim-Ata. Bull. I. A. S.,
1898, IX, p. 2. — Canenans, K. J’. Tereuga upo Xaxuws-Ara.


Samarkand. The Asiatic Museum photograph of the Arabic
inscription from the grave of Timur. Bull. I. A. S., 1881,
XXXVIII, p. 86. — Canapxands, Xpanamilica pp Asiatcxow,
mysel CHIMOKS Cb apadcKoit Haytucu Ha rpodumms Tumypa.

—— Mosque of Shakh-Zinda in Samarkand. Mem. E. Sect. I. R,

Arch. S., I, 1887, pp. 9 ff. — Meyers Iaxt-3un7a Bp

Camapranmh. ,

Samarkander Alterthiimer. Bericht der archaologischen Ex-
pedition des Grafen Bobriuski im September 1895, tibersetzt
aus der russischen Zeitschrift ‘Nowosti’, p. 179. Kunstchronik,

1895-6.

Samoylovich, A. N. From the ancient days of the Turkomans,
Anniversary Book of Potanin. Mem. I. R. G. &., rgo9,
XXXIV, pp. 559-64. — Canotcocuus, A. H. Tsn Typro-
MencKolt crapmabt. COopaukb TMoramma.

——— Radtoif as Turkic scholar. Trans. T.-K. S. Amur Sect.
I, R. G.S., XV, pt. i. — Paguops, kakb TYPKONOTE.


—— Thomsen as Turkic scholar. Trans. T.-K. S. Amur Sect.
I. R. G.S., XV, pt. i. — Tomcers, raxb typkox0re. °

—— Preliminary information about the Orkhon inscription on the
monument discovered by W. L. Kotwicz. Proc. E. Sect.
I. R. Arch. S., March 1913. — IIpeqsapnrenbaoe coobntenie 065
OpxoHCKol HaznicH Ha DamaTsAK, orkpsrroms B, J. Korsayenrs,


2088 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Samoylovich, A. N. Materials for an index of the literature

‘relating to the Yenisei Orkhon inscriptions. Trans. T.-K. S.

Amur Sect. I. R. G.S., 1912, XV, pt. i, pp. gg-81.  Repr.

St. P., 1914. — Marepiaanr yaa ykazateat anmrepatypi 00 Eau-
celicko-OpxoucKolt Iucbmennocra.

—— Materials concerning the Turkic literature of Central Asia.
I. Short description of Central Asian manuscripts collected
by A. N. Samoylovich. Mem. E. Sect, I, R. Arch. S. —
Matepiaazt no cpeqneasiatcrotypenkoit anrepatyp’. I. Kparkas
OlMCh cpeyHeasiarcKUxL pykouucelt co6pauia A. H. Camoiiaopnma. -

Sanguinetti and Défrémery : see Ibn-Batoutah.


Sapojnikoff, V. V. Preliminary report of a scientific expedition
to the Semirechie territory in the summer of 1902. Bull.
LR.G.S., 1903, XXXIX, pp. 273-95. —Canoncnuxoes, B. B.
TIpeasapurerutili orserb 06% yuenoil Komanguposnh BL Cemupbuert-.
CkKylO oOaacTh TbTOMb 1902.


—— The Mongolian Altai, and the sources of the Irtish and
Kobdo. (See also. Petermann’s Mitt., 1909, LV, p. 372.)
Tomsk, 1911. — Monrosscriii Axraii sb uctoKaxb Iprenna’
u Ko6ao.


—— Roads in the Russian Altai. Tomsk, 1912. — [ym no
Pyccxomy Aaraio. .


Savelyeff, P. 8. Concerning the antiquities of the Mangyshlak
Peninsula. Trans. E. Sect. I. R. Arch. S., 1, pp. 323-7. —
Casenvess, I. C. — O mpesnocraxb Manrenuaanckaro noay-
OcTpoBa.

—— Coins of the Jujids, Jagataids, Jelarids, and other remarkable
coins used in the Golden Orda in the time of Tokhtamysh.
St. P., 1857. — Monerti Tayumoss, Jxararamoss, [xeauupn-


HOBb H APYrit OSpamasutieca Bs sor0roii opxb Bp onoxy Toxtamuua.
See Soret.


Savyenkoff, I. T. The Stone Age in the Minusinsk country.
Materials for the archaeology of the Eastern Provinces of


Russia, If. Moscow, 1896. — Casennoes, H. T. Kasenntitt —
BbKb BE Munycunckos Kpab.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL — 209


-——+ Sur les restes de l’époque néolithique, trouvés dans le gouv.
d’Enisseisk Bazaikha, Compte rendu, t. II, Congrés internat.
d’Archéol. & Moscou, 1892.

-—— The Palaeolithic epoch in the neighbourhood of Krasnoyarsk.
Krasnoyarsk, 1892. — [laneonuTmyeckan om0xa Bh OkDOCTHOCTAXE
Kpacnospera.

—— On the ancient remains of the pictographic art on the Yenisei
Trans. of the Fourteenth Archaeological Congress in Cherni-
ghov, Moscow, 1910. — O ApeBHEXS NaMATHOKaXh m306pa3H-
TeIbHaro Lckycersa Ha, Enuceb.

—— Contribution to the materials for the investigation of the
archaeology of the Middle Yenisei. Bull. E. Sib. Sect.
I. R. G.S., XVI, pts. iii-iv, pp. 26-105. — Ks paspbyowsm
MaTepiaaib 10 apxeoxorin cpetuaro Tevenin Eances.

Schéfor, C.: see Narshakhy ; Nizam-oul-Moulk.


Schiefner, A, Sprachliche Bedenken gegen das Mongolenthum
der Skythen. Mél. As., II,.p. 531. St. P., 1856.
‘Schlegel, G. S. Review of E. Koch, ‘On two stones with Chinese
- inscriptions,’ translated into French by Lemosoff. “T.P., 1891, °
Il, p. rag. ,
Review of ‘Inscriptions de l’Orkhon recueillies par l’expédition
finnoise 1890’ (1892). T.P., 1892, III, pp. 529-31.

—— Review of W. W. Radloff’s ‘Die altttirkischen Inschriften der
Mongolei’, 1895, 3te Lfr. T. P., 1894, VI, pp. §16-z25.
—— Review of Y. Thomsen’s ‘ Déchiffrement des Inscriptions de

' FOrkhon et de l’Jénisséi’. Notice préliminaire, 1894. T. P.,
1894; V, p. 171.
Review of V. Thomsen’s ‘Inscriptions de l’Orkhon déchifirées” 3
1894. T.P., 1896, VII, pp. 182-91.
~—— Review of O. Donner’s ‘Sur Yorigine de l’alphabet turc du
Nord de l’Asie’. 1896. T. P., 1896, VII, p. 596.
.——— Tagin et Tére. T. P., 1896, VII, pp. 158-61.
-_.— La stéle funéraire du Téghin-Gioghet, sés copistes et tra-
ducteurs chinois, russes et allemands. Leyden, 1896.
2103 pd


2zio THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Schmidt, I. J. Philologisch-kritische Zugabe zu den von H. Abel’:
Rémusat bekannt gemachten, in den koeniglich-franzoesischen
Archiven befindlichen zwei mongolischen Original-Briefen der
Koenige von Persien Argun und Oeldshaitu an Philipp den
Schoenen. St. P., 1824.

—— Forschungen auf dem Gebiete der Vélker Mittelasiens.

St. P., 1824.

see Ssanung Ssetsen Chungtaidschi.

Schmidt, Y. Account of the Kirghis Steppes to the south of
the Aral-Irtish river systems in the Akmolinsk territory.
Mem. W. Sib. Sect. I]. R. G. S., XVII, 2. Omsk, 1894. —
ITmudms, FO. Oxepwb Kupruscko cream Kb ory orb Apai0-
Yprenmmcnaro sozopasrbia Bb AKMommackoll o6uactu.

Schné, V. Winter settlements and other permanent dwellings
among the nomads of the Akmolinsk district. Mem. W. Sib.
Sect. I. R. G. S, XVII, pt. i. Omsk, 1894. — Ina, B.
SHMOBEH H Apyrie Doctoanubia coopy:keHia KoWeBABKOB AKMO-
aMECKOH oGuacrE. ,

Schott, W, Uber das Altaische oder Finnisch-Tatarische Sprachen-
geschlecht. Abh. Berl. Ak., 1849. :

Das Zahlwort in der Tschudeschen Sprachen-Classe wie auch

im Ttirkischen, Tungusischen und Mongolischen. Berlin, 1853.

—— Altaische Studien. Berlin, 1860.

—— Uber die achten Kirgisen. Berlin, 1865.

Schubert v. Soldern, Prof. Zdenko, Ritter. Die Baudenk-
maler von Samarkand. Architektonischer Reisebericht. Wien,
1898, pp. 1-58. Separat-Abdruck aus der ‘Allgem. Bau-

“zeitung’, Heft 2, 1898. *

Schulz, T. C. F.: see Herbelot, B. a’.

Schuyler, B. Turkistan: Notes of a journey in Russian Tur-
kistan, Khokand, Bukhara, and Kuldja. London, 1876.
Schwartz, F. v. Turkestan, die Wiege der Indogermanischen

-Volker. Freiburg-im-Breisgau, 1900...
Sedelnikoff, A. Tribes of the Kirghis country. ‘Russia,’ ed.
by V. P. Semenoff, 1903, XVIII, St. P. — Crdenonunoes, A.
Tinemena, Kuprascxaro Kpas.
Seebohm, H. Siberia in Asia. London, 1882.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 211


Selivanoff, A.I, Antiquities of the valley of Isyk-Kul. Rep.I.
Arch. Commission, 1895, pp. 47-8. — Cenusanoss, A. H.
Apessocra Mecsmp-Kyanckolt kot0BnHet.

Semenoff, A. A. Ethnographical sketches of the mountains
of Zerafshan, Karategin and Darvaz. Moscow, 1903. —
Cenenoes, A. A, Srnorpadmseckie ovepra SapapmaucKnxs Topt,
Kaparermua: u Jlapsasa.

-—— A short information concerning the method of making
weapons in Central Asia. L, A. T., 1909, Nos. 2-3, pp. 153~5.
— ]Iea cxoza 0 KosKh cpequeasiatcxaro opyain.

Semenoff, P. P. Dzungaria and the Celestial Mountains. Journ.
of R. G. S., 1865, XXXV.

-~—— Die Graber bei den Kirgisen. Mittheil. d. Geog. Gesellschaft
in Wien, 1871, p. t99.

Semenoff, V. P. Tribes of Western Siberia. ‘ Russia,’ 1907,
XVI... St. P. — Cenenoes, B. 7. Unemena Sanaguott Cudupz.


Semirechie.

Stones with Arabic inscriptions in the district of Semirechie.
Trans, E. Comm. I. Moscow Arch. S., 1889, I, pt. i, p. 20.
Cemupnure. Kasam cb apa6ckiml HayxTHCAMIT 13, Ceumptuencroit
odactH.

Archaeological remains in Semirechie and Kulja district. ‘Turk.
News, 1879, No. 43. —- Apxeomzornueckie TaMATHoKG Bb
Cemnphina a Kyapqamackonp pation’.

Sénart, BE. Note sur quelques fragments d’inscriptions du Turfan.
J. A., March-Aprit 1900, pp. 343-60. See Expedition.

Setali, E. N. Review of V. Thomsen’s ‘ Déchiffrement des
inscriptions de l’Orkhon et de l’Jénisséi’. Notice préliminaire,

1894. Uusi Suometar, 1894, No. 11.

Review of V. Fhomsen’s ‘Inscriptions | de ’Orkhon déchiffrées’.

1(1894). Uusi Suometar, 1895, No. '283; 1896, No. 50.

—— Review of V. Thomsen’s ‘ Déchiffrement des inscriptions de
YOrkhon et de I’Jénisséi’, Notice préliminaire, 1894. + Val-
voja (Helsingfors), 1894, No. 2.


212 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


.Shakhmatoff, Notes on the agriculture of the Kirghis-Kaizak '
of the Middle Orda. Jour. of Agriculture, 1832, No. 8,
pp. 614-24. — Hlaxmuamoes. Barbyanie o xabGonamectsie
Kuprasn-Katicakost Cpeneit Opapt.


Shaw, R. B. Visits to High Tartary, Yarkand, and Raehelien
London, 1871.


—— A sketch on the Turki language as spoken in Eastern
Turkistan. Calcutta, 1880.


Shchegloff, I. V. Chronological enumeration of the most im-
portant events in the history of Siberia, 1032-1882. Bull.
E. Sib. Sect. I. R. G.S. Irkutsk, 1883. — Iewwoes, H. B.
Xponomornyeckad nepeweHs Baanbiuxt 7QHHbIXb W3b ucTOpill
Cu6upa 1032-1882.


Shcherbina-Kramarenko, N. Among the Mussulman shrines
of Central Asia. ‘Reference Book of the Samarkand Territory’,
pt. iv, pp. 45-61. — MWep6una-Kpamapenno, H. To mycyab-
MAHCKHX® CBATHIEAXE Cpeqneli Asin.

Shchukin, N.S. Nations speaking Turkic languages in Southern
Siberia. J. Min. Int., 1847, XVIII, pp. 255-84. — Hapoger
TYpcKaro asia, OOuTaiomje Bb JOanolt Cu6upa.


—— The Yakut. J. Min. Int., 1854, VI, No. 7, pt. iii, pp. 1-46.
— Axyrer. 4


—— Letter to P. S. Savyelyeff about a stone with Runie inscrip-
tions found by Castrén near the village of Oznachennoye.
Bull. I. R. Arch. S., 1859, I, p. 30. — Tincemo I. C. Cape-
TRepy 0 kamih ch pyHIMeckKAMa MuchMepamu O1m3b cena Osnasennaro,
HaiinenHom Kacrpenomh H BHOCTAACTBIA CKOMMpOBAHHOM THTvREIMb.


—— Materials for the bibliography of Siberia. Annual book of the
Irkutsk government, 1865. — W[yxuns, H. C. Marepiaasi
aaa CuOnpcxot 6u6riorpadin. ;


Sherr, N. B. Journey to the Kumiandints in 1898. Altayski


Sbornik, 1903, V, pp. 81-114. — Hlepps, H. B. Hsp
nobsaka we Kymauqannana Bh 1898 r.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 213


Shetikhin. Ruins of ancient towns in Central Asia. Mesht-
Dovran; Tash-Arvat-Kola, 1876, Sf.'P., I. — Hlemuxuns,
PaskadnHbl ApeBwuxs Toposonh Bb Cpenseli Asin. Mecrs-Zonpar:.
Taurb-A prara-Koza.

Shiraeff, T. G.: see Obrucheff.


Shiratori, K. Die chinesische Inschrift auf dem Gedenkstein des
K’iie-t’e-k'in am Orkhon. Tokio, August’ 1899.

Shishmereff, Y. P. Information about the Darkhat-Uriankhi
of the districts of the Khutukta of Urga. Bull. Sib. Sect.
I. R.G.S., 1871, II, pp. 38-43. — Wuwmapess, A. HW.
Catybaia o Tapxataxt-Ypanxaxt phtomcrsa Yprunckaro XyryKrsl.


Shishoff, A. The Sarts. Ethnographical and anthropological
investigation, Tashkent, 1903. — Juwoes, A. Caprttl.
OrHorpaayeckoe H ABTpONoTOrAIecKoe HscIb OBaHie.


Shkapski, O. A. Kirghis peasants. Bull. I. R. G. S., 1905,
XLI, pp. 765-78. — Ixancnia, O. A. Kaprusii xpeerssne.
Shvetsoff, 8S. P. Primitive agriculture in the Altai. Mem. W. Sib.


Sect. I. R. G. S., 1900, XXVII, p. 128. — Leeyoss, C. 1.
Iipmmruenoe semaexbaie na Anta.


Shvetsova, M. The Altai Kalmuck. Mem. W. Sib. Sect.
I. R. G.S., 5898, XXIII, p. 134. — Hleeyoea, M. Auaraticxie
HasMbika.

Sibirische Entdeckungen, I, II, III. Die Nation, 1888, Vi 5
pp. 70-71; 6, pp. 83-53 7) PP. 103-5:

Siehe. Primitive Kultur des Tiirkenvolks. Berlin.


Sieroszewski, W. The Yakut. St. P., 1896.— Crpowescnti, B.
STkytst.

Silinich, I. P. On the question of the physical type of the
population of North-West Siberia. Russ. Anthr. J., 1916,
Nos. 3, 4. — Cununuus, H. H. Kn Bonpocy 06% antponono-
THyeckomb THIrb Hacenenia Chpepo-Sanaquoli Cadupy.


Simonyi, Zs, Esemény az urAlaltoji nyelvészet terén: Nyelvtud.
Kézlem, 1895, XXIV, pp. 1-5.


2144 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Simonyi, Zs. Review of V. Thomsen’s ‘Déchiffrement des inscrip-
tions de ’Orkhon et de I’Jénisséi’. Notice préliminaire, 1894.
Ungarische Revue, 1894, XIV, pp. 230-1.


Review of V. Thomsen’s ‘ Déchiffrement des inscriptions de
YOrkhon et de l’Jénisséi’. Notice préliminaire, 1894. Pesti
Napld, 1894, No. 37.


Sirelius, U. T. Die Handarbeiten der Ostjaken und Wogulen.
J. Soc. Fin.-Ougr., XXII.


Sitnyakowski, N. T. Concerning some antiquities near Bokhara
and along the Zerafshan. Proc. Turk. Circle F. Arch.,
1897-8, III, pp. 89-94. — Cumnnanoscxiti, H. O. O whko-
TOPHIXD ApeRnocraxs 61ush Byxapsi # no SepaBmayy.


—— Information about some antiquities in the neighbourhood of
Samarkand and Bokhara. Proc, Turk. Circle F. Arch., 1899-
1900, V, pp. 35-6. — Coodmenie o mbxoropbix jpennoerax
Bb okpecrHoctax Camapranya u Byxapst.

—— The temples of Bokhara (Bagauddin Mazar). Proc. Turk.


Circle F. Arch., 1899-1900, V, pp. 49-56. — Byxapenia
epatEind (Masapp Baraynquna).


Note on the Bokhara side of the Zerafshan valley. Bull. Turk.
Sect. I. R.G.S., 1899, I, pp. 121-78, — 3aarbrin 0 Byxapexott
waera JoxgHE SepaBniana.


Skrine, F. H. B., and Ross, E. D. The heart of Asia. A
history of Russian Turkestan and the Central Asian Khanates
-from the earliest times. London, 1899.


Skwarski, P. 8. A few-words about the antiquities of Sha-
khristan. Proc. Turk. Circle F. Arch., 1895-6, pp. 41+5.
— Cxeapcxit, HT. C. Hbekorsko caoph 0 ApeBHocraxh
Tlaxpuctana.


Slovtsoff, I. Y. Materials for the distribution of the kurgans
and the old sites in the Tobolsk government. Tomsk, 1890.
— Caosuoss, H. A. Marepiaaet o pacnpextaenin KypraHoR
urepommorn Bh Tobomckoli ry6.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL ~— 215


Slutski, 8.8. The Nestorian inscriptions in Semirechie. ‘Eastern
Antiquities.’ Trans. E. Comm. I. Moscow Arch. S., 1889, I,
No. 1, pp. 1-66. — Cayunit, C. C. Cemmpbuenscria Hecro-
piancnia Haquuce.

ww—- About a Turkic inscription on a stone figure (‘baba’).
‘Eastern Antiquities.’ Trans. E. Comm, I. Moscow Arch. S.,
1896, II,-1, No. 18, pp. 68-9. — O mopxekoii Hagquuca Ha
KamenHoll GaGb.

Smirnoff, E. T. Antiquities in the neighbourhood of Tashkent.
Collection of essays, ‘Central Asia’, St. P., 1896. — Camup-
206s, E. T. J[pesnocru Bb okpectsoctaxh r. Tamera.

~——— Antiquities on the middle and lower course of the R. Syr-
Daria. Proc. Turk. Circle F. Arch. 1897, Supplement,
pp. 1-14. — [[pepuocta Ha cpeqHeNb wu ulaHeME Teyenit p.
Crpp-Jlapin.

Smirnoff, V. D. Manuscrits turcs de |’Institut des Langues
Orientales du Ministére des Affaires Etrangéres. St. P., 1897.


Smirnoff, Y. I. Review of V. Thomsen’s ‘Inscriptions de
YOrkhon déchiffrées’ (1894). Bull. I. R. Arch. S., XII,
pp. 71-4. — Cuupnoes, A. WH. Peneusia B. Tomcena.


and Inostrantseff, K. A. Materials for the bibliography

of the Mussulman archaeology. Mem. E. Sect. I. R. Arch. S.,
1906, XVI, pt. iv. — u Muocempanyuess, K. A. Marepinms
aaa OuOxiorpapia Mycyabmanckot apxeonorin.


—— Eastern silver: album of ancient silver and gold vessels of
Eastern origin. Bull. Imp. Arch. Comm. St. P., 1909. —
Bocrownoe cepe6po : atiaeb jperneli cepeOpaHoli u soxoreli nocynEI
BOCTOYHALO NponcxokeHid.


Sokoloff, D. On the ‘tamga’ of the Bashkir. Proc. of the
Orenburg Archaeological Commission, XIII, p. 84. — Cono-
oes, JY. O Gaunkapennx, TaMraxb. :

Solunoff. Ancient ruins of towns found in the Kurgan district.
‘Otyechestvennya Zapiski’, 1824, No. 54, pp. 127-30. —
Conaynoss. Crapuanbia ropormma, cynjectbyomin Bb Kypranckom


yhsab.


21 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Sontsoff, D. P. What can we expect from the excavation of our
kurgans? Bull. Soc. F. S. Anthrop. E., I, pts. 1, 2. Moscow,
1867. — Conuoss, Z. 1. Tro ubl MokeMb OKUAATS OTS PACKODKA
HailuXxb KYPraHoBe.


Soret, F. Lettre & M. le capitaine aux gardes impériales, de
Kossikowsky, sur un essai de classification des monnaies
djoudjides (of P. S. Savel’ev). Revue de la Numismatique
Belge, 3¢ Série, Tome-IV. Brussels, 1860.


Sorokin, N.V. The grave of the Khan Tokhtamysh. Tob.
Gov. News, 1869, XXIII. — Copoxuns, H. B. Moruaa xana
ToxTaMbIa.


—— The country and the people of Central Asia. Historical
"News, 1887, No, X; 1888, No. VII; 1889, Nos. VI and VII.
— IIpupoga u ser0nbKs BE Cpeselt Asin. ,


Sosnovski, Miroshnishenko, Matussovski, and Morozof.
Recent Russian explorations in Western Mongolia. Geog.
_ Magazine, 1875, II, pp. 196-200, map ; Proc. R.G.S., 1875-6,
XX, p. 421. \
Spasski, G. I. Notes on the antiquities of Siberia. Siberian
Messenger, 1818. St. P. — Cnaccxit, I. HW. Sanncnu o
Cu6mpcKnx, ApeBHocraixs.
——+ see Krug, Ph.


——— Siberian chronicle containing information about the conquest
of Siberian lands by the Russians at the time of Tsar Ivan
Vasilyevich the Terrible; with a short exposition of the
history previous to this event. St. P., 1821. — brome,
Cn6npexan, coxepatanjan uopberponanie o xBesrin CuOupcexuxp
seman Pycexmm, apu Haph Foauwb Bacunsepath T'posnown; ca
KpaTkuMth UstOKeHie NpemMecTBOBABIXE OHOMY coObITiti.


—— Account of Mongolia. Siberian Messenger, 1913, pt. ii.
St. P. — OGospbuie Monroniz.


—— Eastern Bibliography. Translation of the article by Abel
Remusat on ‘ Inscriptiones Sibiriacae’, with the translator’s
comments. Asiatic Messenger, pt. iv, pp. 285-303. St. P.;:


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL ~ 217


1825. — Boctowaa Buésiorpapia. Tepesoxb crane AGexs
Pemioza 06% ‘ Inscriptiones Sibiriacae’, ch npmrbuaniaun nepe-
BONE.


Prominent monuments among the Siberian antiquities. Mem.
I..R. Arch. Soc., 1887, pt. xii. — Aocronpusbuarerbable naMar-
Hoku Ca6upcekaxb 7pepnoctell. .


Specht, E. Etude sur I’Asie centrale. Paris, 1890.


Spiridonoff, P. Journey to the ruins of Jankent. Proc. Turk.
Circle F. Arch., 1897-8, pt. iii, pp. 68-72. — Cnupudonoss, IT.
Tlobsyka na pasBaameet JxankenTa.

Spitsyne, A.A. Monuments of Latin culture in Russia. Bull.
I. Arch, Comm., 1904, XI. — Cnuyouns, A. 4. Tamarame
Jarencxoli KyzpTypEt BE Poccin.

—— Communal graves along the Upper Yenisei and the Chulim.
Mem. I. R. Arch. S., 1899, XI, pp. 1-2. — Koaaexmpntia
MOrHbi Bb Bepxopsaxb Enncea 1 Uyrpia.

Ssanung Ssetsen Chungtaidschi. Geschichte der Ost-Mon-
golen und ihres Fiirstenhauses, tibersetzt und mit dem Original-
texte herausg. von I. J. Schmidt. St. P., 1829. .

Staél-Holstein, Baron A. von. Siuan-Dzian, and some results
of modern archaeological investigations. St. P., 1910 —
Cmano-Ponscmetins, Gapous A. Fons. Cioanb-[[saun, A pe-
BYUbTATE! COBPCMCHHEIXS apXeoIOruVeckuxh wscrbjopanili.


Stassof, V. V. The throne of the khans of Khiva. ‘ Vyestnik
Izyashchikh Isskustv,’ 1886, IV, pp. 405-17. — Cmacoes, B.B.
Tporb XHBEHCKHXE XaHOBb.


Stebnicki, I. I, Report of a journey to the Trans-Caspian
country in 1873. Bull. Cauc. Sect. I. R. G. S., 1873~4,
H, No. 1, pt. ii. — Cme6nuynia, H. HW. Orserb 0 nytemectsin
Bb Saxachilickonn Kpab BB 1873.

Stein, Sir M. A.: see V. Thomsen, J. R. A. S., rgrz2, IJ,
pp. 181-227. . Y
—— Preliminary report on a journey of archaeological and
topographical exploration in Chinese Turkestan. London,

1gOI.
2108 Ee


218 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Stein, Sir M. A. Sand-buried ruins of Khotan. Personal
narrative of a journey of archaeological and geographical
exploration in Chinese Turkestan. London, 1903.

‘Ancient Khotan. Detailed report of archaeological explora-
tions in Chinese Turkestan carried out and described under
the orders of H. M. Indian Government. Oxford, 1907.

Explorations in Central Asia, 1906-8. Geogr. Journ., July—
September, 1909.

Ruins of desert Cathay: personal narrative of explorations
in Central Asia and Westernmost China. London, rgr2. ,
Stephens, G. The inscriptions of Yenissei. Academy, Nov. 30,

1889, XXXVI, pp. 359-60.


Stewart, C.: see Timur.

Strahlenberg, P. J. Der nédrdliche und éstliche Theil von Europa
und Asien. Stockholm, 1730.

Stremoukhoff, N. In Central Asia: Samarkand, Tashkent. . .
‘Niva’, 1879, pp. 442-83. — Cmpenoyxoss, H. Bx epeaneti
Asin: Camaprany, Tanrkenrs .


Struwe, H. Analyse verschiedener antiker Bronzen und Eisen
aus den Abakan- und a tack Bull. I. A. S., X.
St. P., 1866.


Stubendorff, U. T. The Karagass. Mem. E. Sib. Sect. I.R.G.S.,
1854, XII, pt. ii, pp. 229-46. — Imybendopgis, FO. 0.
O Kaparaccaxs. ; ,
St. Martin, V. de. Mémoire. Les Huns Blancs, ou Ephthalites
fles historiens byzantins. Paris, 1849.
Strzygowski, J. Zentralasien als Forschungsgebiet. Osterr.
Monatss. f. d. Orient, 1914, XL.


Ornamentet hos de altaiska och iranska folken, Konditisionéka.
sallskapets publikation. Stockholm, 1916.


—— Altai-Iran und Vélkerwanderung. Leipzig, 1917.

Sunak. Information about the town of Sunak. Proc. Turk. Circle
F. Arch., 1899-1900. — Cynans. Cnbrbria o rop. Cynaxb.

Swayne, H.G.C. Through the highlands of Siberia. London,
1904.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 21g


Sykes, Sir M.. The Caliph’s Last Heritage. London, 19ig,.

Sykes, Sir P.M, A history of Persia. London, 1915.

Takacs, 8S. Chinesische Kunst bei den Hunnen. Ost-As. Z.,
1915, IT; 1916, V.

Talbot, F. G. Memoirs of Baber, Emperor of India, first of the
great Moghuls, being an abridgement with an introduction,
supplementary notes, and some account of his successors.
London, 1909.

Tallgren, A. M. Die Kupfer- und Bronzezeit in Nord- und
Ostrussland. Journ. de la Soc. Finl. d’Archéol., 1911,
XXV, pt. i.

—— Minusinskin arohaudat. Suomen Museo, 1915.

—— Collection Zaoussailov au Musée Historique de Finlande, I.
Helsingfors, 1916.

—— Collection Tovostine des antiquités préhistoriques de Minous-
sinsk ‘conservées chez le Dr. Kar! Hedman 4 Vasa. Chapitres
d’Archéologie Sibérienne. Soc. Finlandaise d’Archéologie.
Helsingfors, 1917.

Talko-Hryncewicz, J. Ancient monuments of Western Trans-
baikalia. Proc. of Twelfth Archaeological. Congress in
Kharkhoff, vol. I.

——— Materyaty do Etnologji i Antropologji Luddw Adji Srod-
kowej. Bull. Acad. of Science, Cracow, 1910.

Tallqvist, K.L. Professor Vilhelm Thomsens T'ydning af de
Sibiriska Inskrifterna. Finsk. Tidskrift, 1897, XLII, pp. 173~
83, 336. a

Tashkent. Archaeological discovery near Tashkent. Turk.
News, 1886, No. 17. — Tawxenms. Apxeonormeckan HaXOAKa
O1m3b Tantkenta. 7

Tchihacheff, P.de. Voyage scientifique dans I’ Altai oriental et les
parties adjacentes de la frontitre de Chine, fait par ordre de
S. M. ’Empereur de Russie par P. de Tchihacheff. Paris, 1845.

Tarnowski, G. Badkhys and Pende. Turk. News, 1893,
Nos, 7, 18, 20, 22. — Tapnoscnit, P. Bayxsisb u Ienze.

Tekin-Alp. ‘The Turkish and Pan-Turkish Ideal.’ Engl. tr.
London, 1916.


220 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


\
Tereshchenko, A. I. Traces of Dasht-Kipchak and.the Middle
Orda of the Kaizak-Kirghis. Moskvityanin, 1853, VI,
No. 22. — Tepewenxo, A. MW. Cabasi Jemrs-Kunyara u
Buyrpenana Koprusn-Katicanxan Opna.
Thomas, E. Early Sassanian inscriptions, seals, and coins.
London, 1868. .
Thomsen, V. Une lettre méconnue des inscriptions de I’Jénisséi.
J. Soc. Fin.-Ougr., 1913, XXX, 4. Helsingfors. ;
—— Dr. M. A. Stein’s MSS. in Turkish ‘Runic’ script from
Miran and Tun-Huang. J. R. A.S., 1912, 1, pp. 181-227.
—— Ein Blatt in ttirkischer Runenschrift aus Turfan. Sitzungsber.
d. K, P. Akad. d. Wiss., 1910, pp. 296, 306.
—- Review of V. Thomsen’s ‘Inscriptions de l’Orkhon déchiffrées’,
I (1894). Beil. Allg. Ztg., LXXXIII, p. 7.
—— Inscriptions de !’Orkhon déchiffrées. I, 1894. Mém. Soc.
Fin.-Ougr., 1894, V, p. 543; 1896, I, p. 224.
~—— Sur le,systtme des consonnes dans la langue ouigoure. K.S.,
1901, No. 4, p. 241. Budapest. '
——— Déchiffrement des inscriptions de l’Orkhon et de VJénisséi.'
Notice préliminaire. Copenhagen, 1894. Bull. de ’Académie
R. des Sciences et des Lettres de Danemark, 1893, pp. 285-99.
Reprinted 1894. : eh ape *
Thonnelier, J. Dictionnaire géographique de 1’Asie centrale.
Paris, 1869. ,
Timkowski, G. Voyage 4 Pékin 4 travers la Mongolie en
1820 et 4821. Trad. du russe par M. N., publ. par J.
~Klaproth. Paris, 1827. Engl. trans. by H. E. Lloyd. London,
«1827. 7
Timur. Memoirs of Timur. Transl. from Jagatai into Persian
by Abu Halib Hussein. Trans. into English by Major Davy
(Oxford, 1783), and by Charles Stewart (London, 18g0).
Fisenhausen, Baron V. G. Review of Jukowski’s “The Anti-
quities of the Trans-Caspian Country’, Mem.E. Sect.1.R.Arch.
S., 1899, XXI, pp. 327-33. —usemaysens, Gapous B. PL.
Orstips o Kuurh UKyxoscraro ,, [pesnocra Saxacnitignaro Kpan,


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL _ 2a1


Tomaschek, W. Zentralasiatische Studien: Sogdiana. Sitzungsb.
der phil.-hist. Classe der k. Akad. d. Wiss. LXXXVII.
Vienna, 1877.

~——. Zentralasiatische Studien. I. Die Pamir-Dialekte. Vienna, 1880.

—— Kritik der altesten Nachrichten tiber den skythischen Norden.
Sitz. d, K. K. Ak. Vienna, 1888, CXVI, pp. 715~80; CXVII,
-pp. I-70. *

Tétterman, A. Studien iiber die Suljekfelsen-Inschriften.
Helsingfors, 1889.

—— Entzifferungsversuch einiger Inschriften auf einer Felsenwand
bei Suljek. Helsing‘ors, 1889.

—— Das Suljekalphabet. ¥inska Vetensk. S. Fork, XXXI,
pp. 136-63. ms

—— Entzifferungsversuch einiger Inschriften auf einer Felswand
im Kreise Minusinsk. Opfers Finska Vetensk. S, Férh., XXXI,
“pp. 1-8. .

—— Fiinf Suljekinschriften, nach ihrem Text festgestellt. ‘Helsing-
fors, 1891, p. 35.


Tovostine, I. P. Catalogue of Chud antiquities. Remains of the
-metal ages. Minusinsk, 1913. — Tosocmuns, HW. 1. Kara-
Orb YYTCKAXS ApeBswocteli, TlaMATHHKH MeTQUIMMECKUXS SM0Xh.


Toynbee, A. J.: Islam in Russia since the Revolution. J. Centr.
As. S., 1918, vol. V, pp. 73 ff.


Traneactions of the Commission for shaking chemical and
technical analyses of ancient bronze. St. P., 1882. ——- Tpydot.
Komuccia 00 MpousBoxcTBy XHMMKO-TeXHHYCCKEXE AHATNZOBh ApeB-
HEXS OpoHsB.

Treidler, H. The Scythians. Arch, f. Anthr., N.F., 1915,
pp. 41 ff.

Transcaspian Territory, with regard to its archaeology. Caucasus,
1888, Nos. 66 and 692-4 Sanacniticnan O6n2acme, Bb apxeo-
JOPAYCCKOMD OTHOMICHIT. »


Trigoroff, A. V.: see Obrucheff.


222 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Tripolitova, Z.M. Trans-Caspian country in. 1865-1885. A
bibliographical index, systematically arranged, of books and
essays relating to the Trans-Caspian country and neighbouring
lands. St. P., 1888. — Tpunonumoea, 3. M. Saxacniticnitt Kpaii
—1865-1885. Cuctemaruyecnili cOopHakn Ondmiorpauyeckuxe
yxasanili KHHIS H crateli 0 Sanacnitickows Kpab B coupes banuLx.
CTpAHAX®.

Troll, Individual-Aufnahmen central-asiatischer tne potent:
Z. f. E., 1890, pt. iii.


Tronoff, V. D. Materials for the anthropology -and ethnology of
the Kirghis. Mem. I. R. G. S., 1890, XVII, pt. ii, —
Tponoes, B. LZ. Pre TO anTpononorin a otTHoxOTia
Kupruss.

Troshchanski, V. F. The evolution - of the ‘Black Faith’ ot
the Yakut. Kazan, 1902. — Tpowancnxit, B. ®. DIsomouia
» Uepuoli Bkpsr y Arytows.

—— The Yakut in their domestic life. L.A. T., 1968, XVII,
No. 3; pt. i; PP. 332-46. — Akytst Bb ux Romaumeli.
oOcranoBKs.

Trusman, Y. Y. The Chud Script. Revel, 1896. — Tpye-

want, FO. FO. yncwia ucpmena. See K., D..


Fschepe, A. Histoire du Royaume de Ou, 1122-473 av. J.-C:
Sinolog. Var., 1896, XVII, 2, pp. 175 ff.


—— Histoire du Royaume de Tch’ Ou, 1122-223 av.-J.-C.. Sinolog.
Var., 1903, 2, pp. 402 ff.

—— Das Eingleiten der westlichen Nomaden. Ostasiat Stud.
Berlin Univ., vol. XIX.

Turfan. Report of the organizing committee of the Turfan and
Kuchu Expedition. Bull. Russ. Committee, 1904, No. 4s
pp. 4-15. — TypHans. Jloxazaxn TKowmuccin no extapsaxenito
skenequnin Bb Typhanp u Kyyy.


Turkestan. The Turkestan country and its antiquities. ‘ Pravi-
tielstvennyi Vyestnik ’, 1872, No. 126. — Typxecmans. Typ-
Kectauerili kpall 4 ero Apennocti.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 223


—— Note on the study of the Turkestan country with regard to
its archaeology, Turk. News, 1873, No. 22, — Sambria
065 usyyenin Typkecrauckaro pad, Bb apxeodormeckow,
OTHOIUCHID.

Turkomania. Discovery of the ruins of ancient towns of Meshed
and Mesteryan in Turkomania. Turk. News, 1876, No. 8. —
Typxmenia. ,OTKpLITI pagBalNHb TPEBAUXS Topoyosh Memens 0
Mecrepisrs Bb Typkwenia.

Turkomans, The Turkomans of the Yomud tribe. Military
Essays, LXXXIII, 1872. — Typxmenv. Typkmentt Iouyrcxaro
TemeHy.

Turner, T. Hudson. Unpublished notices of the times of
Edward I and of his relations with the Moghul Sovereign
of Persia. Arch. Journ., VIII. London, 1851.


Turtkul. Ruins of the Turtkul fortress in the district of Tokmak.
Trans.-of the Fourth Arch. Congress, 1884, I, p, Ixiv. —
Typmnynr. Paspanmast xpbuocra Typrkym Bb TokuakcKowrp
yhoné.

T. W. Review of V. Thomsen’s ‘Inscriptions de -!’Orkhon
déchiffrées’, I (1894). J. R.A.S., 1896, pp. 632-5.

Tychsen, O. G.: sce Pallas, P.S. Neue nordische Beitrage, V.

- St. P., 1793.

Ujfalvy-Bourdon, Mme de. De Paris 4 Samarkande, le Fer-

ghanah, le Kouldja, et la Sibérie Occidentale. Paris, 1880..


Ujfalvy de Mezé-Kévesd, C. E, Expédition Scientifique

Frangaise en Russie, en Sibérie et dans le Turkestan. Vol. I,

_ Le Kohistan, le Ferghanah et Kouldja, avee un appendice sur

la Kachgharie. Paris, 1878. ,

—— E. S. F. en R., en S. et dans Je T. Vol. II, Le Syr-Daria, le

Zérafchane, le pays des Sept-Riviéres et la Sibérie Occidentale.

Vol. IV, Atlas anthropologique des peuples du Ferghanah.
Paris, 1879. ;

_— E.S. F. en R.,en S, et dans le T, Vol. V, Atlas des étoffes

etc, de PAsie centrale, Vol. VI, Atlas atchéologique des
antiquités finno-ougriennes, Paris, 1880,


224 - THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Vjfalvy de Moezé-Kévesd,'C. BE. E, S. F.en R., en S. et dans
le T. Vol. II, Les Bachkirs, les Vépses et les antiquités
finno-ougriennes et altaiques, précédés des résultats anthro-
pologiques d’un voyage en Asie centrale. Paris, 1880.


— Aus dem Westlichen Himalaya. -Leipzig, 1884.


—— Les Anyone au nord ea au sud de l’Hindou-Kouch. Paris,
1896.


—— Essai d’une carte ethnographique de !’Asie centrale. Paris.


Vambéry, A. V. Travels and adventures in Central Asia.
London, 1864.


—— Sketches of Central Asia. London, 1867.


"—— Uigurische Sprachmonumente und das Kudatku Bilik. Inns-
bruck, 1870.


—— Geschichte Bocharas oder Transoxaniens. Stuttgart, 1872,
—— History of Bokhara. London, 1873.
——— Ursprung der Magyaren: Leipzig, 1882.


—— Das Tiirkenvolk in seinen ethnologischen und ethno-
1 graphischen Beziehungen. 1885.


— — Noten zu den alttiirkischen Inschriften der Mongolei wund -
Sibiriens. Mém. Soc. Fin-Ougr., 1899, XII, p. 119.


—— Nyugot Kulturdja Keleten. Budapest, 1906.


-_—- An approach between Moslems and Buddhists. The Nine-
teenth Century, April, 1912.


-——— Muhammadanism in-Asiatic Turkey. E. R. E, 1915;
y PP. 885-8.

——— Die primitive Cultur des Turko-Tatarischen Volkes., Leipzig. -

—— and Courteille, P. de: see Courteille,,

.Valikhanoff, C, C, Essays of Chokan Chingisovich Valikhanoff.


Mem. I. R. G. S., 1904, XXEX. — Banuxanoes, YT. Y.
Cownenia Yorana Unerucopyya Bammxauora.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL _ 225


Vasilyeff, N. The Nomads of Turkestan. An attempt at an
economic survey. Samarkand, 1890. — Bacu.vess, H.
Kouernuke Typkectana, OnsiTh dKOHOMMYeCKATO OBsOpa.


Vasilyeff, V. N. A short description of the life of the Karagass.
Ethn. Rev., r9g10, LAXXIV—LXXXV, Nos. 1-2, ,pp. 46-76.
— Bacuaess, B. H. Kparxili oveprh Gtira Kaparaccoss.


Vasilyeff, V. P. Die Denkmiler von Koscho-Zaidam. Glossar,
Index und die chinesischen Inschriften. In W. W. Radloff’s
‘Die alttiirkischen Inschriften der Mongolei’,:zte Lfr., 1894.


—— The Chinese Inscriptions on the Orkhon monuments in
Kosho-Tsaidam and Kara-Balgasun. Collection of documents
of the Orkhon Expedition, vol. III. St: P., 1897. — Bacuas- *
ess, B. 7. Kuralickin naquuch Ba OpXOHCKHXh DAMATHUKAXD Bh
Komo-Iaiiqark a Kapa-Baaracysé.


Vattier, P. Portrait du Grand Tamerlan avec la suite de son
histoire. ‘Trad. de l’arabe d’Ahmed Arabshah. Paris, 1658.


Velyaminoff-Zernoff, V. V. Historical information about the
Khariate of Kokand from the time of Muhammad Ali to
Khudayar Khan. ‘Trans. E. Sect. I. R. Arch. S., 1856,
XVIE, 2. — Bensnsunocs-Sepuoss, B. B. Weropwreckia
. Mspberia 0 Koxanckoms xaucrsé orb Myxanmenya Ann yo Xyjaspa-
XOHA. ;


—— St. Khorkhut’s grave along Syr-Daria. Trans. E. Sect. I. R.
Arch. S., 1859, IV, pp. 283-4. — O rpo6anmb ce. Xopxyra ua
Cerpt-Japst.

—-— The emperers and princes of the line of Kasim. St P., '
1860. — Tlapn a Tapesam Kacmozcrie.


—— Untersuchung iiber die Kasimofschen Zaren und Zarewitche,
aus dem Russischen tibersetzt von Dr. J. T. Zenker. Berlin,
1867.


Venyukoff, V. Asketch of the Ili and the Chu country. Mem,
1. R.G. S., 1861, No. 4, pp. 79-116. — Benroxoes, B.'Ovepry
Saunitickaro Kpaa u [pwsyticroti erpansr.

210s F f


206 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Vereshchagin, V. Concerning the reception by the Academy
of Art of fragments from the grave of Timur in Samarkand.
St: Petersburg News, 1872, No. 74. — Bepewaruns, B. To
TdBORY npuceumn Bp Axazemin Xynomecrah oGn0MKORb 13d
ypoGaugtr Tamyporoit Bb CamapKanyb.


—— Jankent: St. Petersburg News, 1886, No. 2, Jixantenrs.


—— Samarkand in 1868. In ‘Russkaya Starina’, 1888, pt. 9,
pp. 617-46. — Camapranrb BE 1868 rony.


Veselkin, ‘The Uriankhi and geographical information about the
southern frontier of the Minusinsk country, Bull. I, R.G. S.,
1871, VII, pp. 113-18. — Beceaxuns. Ypsuxu w reorpadn-
yeckia cpbybrin 0 wanoli rpanmys Munycmucraro oxpyra.


Veselowski, N. I. History of Khiva. St, P., 1877. — Bece-
nosenitt, H. MH. Wcropin Xussi.


—— Archeological researches of N. 1. Veselowski in the Turkestan
country in 1885. Rep. I. Arch. Commission, 1882-8, pp. lxi-


Ixxx, —- Apxeonormecnia uscrbjosania cro Bb 1885 r. BB,
Typkectanckomrb ipab.


-—— The excavations carried out by N. I. Veselowski in the ruins
of Afrosyab near Samarkand. Mem. I. R. Arch. S., 1884, II,


pp. xcii-civ. — O PACKONKAXE MPOUSBeACHHEIXS UMS Bb 1885 7.
BE ropommue AdpocsnGh 6msp CamapKanza.


—— A note concerning the kurgans of the Turkestan country.
Mem. E, Sect. I. R. Arch, S., 1888, II, pts. iii-iv, pp. 221-6.
— Sawhrra 0 kypranaxt Tyxectancxare Kpad.

—— Dagbid, tomb of Mahdumiaazem, near Samarkand. Mem.


E. Sect. I. R. G. S., 1889, ILI, pp. 85-95. — Janouns,
rpoGuaua Maxjymmaasena, Oansb Camaprangza.


—— Tombstone of Timur in Samarkand. . Trans. Seventh Arch.
Congress, 1891, II, pp. 67-72. — Haarpobstii namaraucb
Tumypa Bb Casapianyb,

~-— The Orkhon discoveries. J. Min. Educ:, April 1894,
vol, 292. — Opxoncnia orkpbitig, ;


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL’ 227


——— Klements, D. A., and Oldenburg, S. Note’ concerning
a scheme for an archaeological expedition to the Tarim basin. ”
Mem. E. Sect. I. R. Arch. S., 1900, vol. XIII, pt. i, pp. ix-
xviii, — Haenenys, J. A,, i Onrden6yprs, C.  Banncka,
© cHapmaxeHin excneqauin Cb apxeorornTecko10 bub Bb Gacceliti
Tapuma.

—— Particulars of the death of the Usbeg Khari Muhammed
Sheibani. His tombstone and mazar. Trans. Eighth Arch.
Congress in Moscow, vol. III, pp. 290-9. — TJogpo6uocm
cMepra ysGenkaro xaHa Myxammena IMletifanu. Ero naarpotie 1
Magaps.

—— Monument of Khodji Ahrar in Samarkand. In ‘ Vostochnya
Zamyetki’, pp. 321-36. — [lamaraan, Xoxan Axpapa Bb
Canapranms.

Virski, M. Ancient kurgans from Samarkand territory. Refer-
ence book of the Samarkand territory. Samarkand, 1897. —
Bupexit, M. [pessie xypraust Bb CaapKanycKolt oGaactu.

Visdelou, C. Notice d’un livre chinois nommé Y-king, on livre
canonique des changemens, avec des notes p. 399 de Chou-
king par Confucius. Paris, 1770. See Herbelot.

Viadimirtsoff, B. V. A visit to the Derbets of Kobdo. Bull.
I. R. G.S., 1910, XLVI. — pails ical B. B. Nobsaa
Kb Jlep6erab wa 03. Ko6bz0.

Volodin, A. A. The Trukhmen Steppe and the Trukhmen.
Collection of the materials for the description of the Caucasus.
XXXVITI, pt. i, pp. 1-98. St. P., 1908. — Bonroduns. A. A.
TpyxMenckan cre 1 TpyxMeHel.

Voronin and Nifantyeff. An account of the Kirghis called
Diko-Kamiennyie. Mem. I. R. G. S., 1851, p. 104. —"
Boponuns u Hugianmoess. Cabxbsia o Wuxo-Kanenspixp
Kuprisaxs.

Voronyets, N. 8. Rock pictures found on the frontier of Turgai
and Syr-Daria territories along the river Lack-Pay. Russ.
Anthrop. Journ., 1916, Nos. 3 and 4, pp. 57-61. — Bopo-
neus, H.C. VWsobpamenia va ckataxt, Haiiqennbin Ha rpadanaxh
Typraiicnoit o Cripp-Japbanckoli o6acteii, na pbrb Jaxn-Taii.


228 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Voytyekhowski. The Kirghis of the Kustanai district of the -
Turgai territory. Bull. S. Arch. H. E. J. Univ. Kaz, 1910,
XXVI. — Bottmexoscniii. Kuprusst Kycranaticnaro yhsaa
Typraiicxoii oOaactu.

Vyatkin, V.L. A contribution towards the historical geography
of the Tashkent district. Proc. Turk. Circle F. Arch., 1899-
1900, V, pp. 156-9. — Bamauns, B. J. Ke neropuyeckoit
reorpapin Tautkenrckaro pationa. :

-—— The past of Samarkand and its neighbourhood, according to
the memoirs of Sultan Baber Mirza. Reference book of the
Samarkand territory, 1896, vol. IV. — Camapranan u ero
OKPeCTHOCTH Bb NpPOMIOME No onucanin Cysana Ba6ypa Mupstt.

~—— Materials for the historical geography of the Samarkand
vilayet. Reference book of the Samarkand territory, 1902,
pt. vii, pp. 1-83. — Marepisatt rb aerepaueckoit reorpariil
CamapKancKaro Buaafiera.

Vyerbitski, V.I. The natives of the Akai. Moscow, 1893. —
Bep6uyxit, B. WH. — Aataiicxie HHOPONIET.

—— Dictionary of the Attai and Aladansk dialects of the Turkic
language. St. P., 1892. —~ Caonapp axtaliexaro u axajancKaro
Hapbuili TIopRCKarO A3HKa.

Viernyi district, Ancient monuments preserved in the Viernyi
district of the Semirechie territory. Trans, Fourth Arch.
Congress, 1884, I, cviii-ix. — Brpnencuit ynsds. Ipesuie
DAMATHHKH, coxpauueiiiecs BLE Bépnencrews yboxb, aus Saha
cho ob.


Wachsberger, A. Stilkritische Studien zur Wandmalerei Chine~
sisch-Turkestans. Berlin, 1916.


Wilser, L. Skythen und Perser in Asien. Berlin, 1902.


Winkler, H. Review of J. Marquart’s ‘Die Chronologie der -
aluttirk, Inschriften’, 1898. Litt. Centraiblatt, XIX, p. 662.


—— Review of W. Radloff’s ‘ Die alitiirkischen Insehriften der
Mongolei’, Neue Folge, 1897. Litt. Centralblatt, 1898,
Pp- 159-61.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 229


—— Review of V. Thomsen’s ‘ Déchiffrement des Inscriptions de
VOrkhon et de I’Jénisséi’, Notice préliminaire, 1894. Litt.
Centralblatt, 1894, -V, p. 153.

Wirth, A. Geschichte Sibiriens und der Mandschurei Bonn,

» 1899.

—— Die Turanier vosucuaies und Europas. Beil. 'z. Allg. Z.,
“1904, No. 287. Munich.

Witsen, N. Noord en Oost Tartarije. Amsterdam, 1905. See
Major, R. H. ,

Woeikof, A. Le Turkestan russe. Paris, 1914.

Wolff. Geschichte der Mongolen. Breslau, 1872.


Wolff, J. (Rev.). Narrative of a mission to Bokhara in the years
1843-1845. London, 1845.


Wood. A journey to the source of the river Oxus. and ed.,
London, 1872.


Worsaae, J.. A. A. Ruslands og det Skandinaviske Nordens
bebyggelse og zeldste ultarforbold: Aarbgger for nordisk
.Oldkyndighed. Copenhagen, 1872.

Wrangell, Baron F, P. Journey to the north coast of Siberia
and to the Arctic Sea, 1820-24. St. P., 1841. — Bpanrews,
Gapons @. H. Wyremecrsie no chaepnsime Oeperams Cudupa
H 00 Aexopuromy Mopw, cosepmtensoe BB 1829-24,


Wright, G. F. Asiatic Russia. New York, 1903.


Wulfson, B.8. How the Sarts live. Moscow, 1908. — Byasg-
cons, 9.0. Kare amisyrs Capret.

—— The Kirghis. In ‘The Country and People of Russia’, Edited
by A. A, Ivanowski. Moscow, rgo0r.-— Kuprusut. Ba tag.
» Hpupora # moma Poccin“, Tors per. A. A. Mnanopcrare.

Wylie, A. The Nestorian Monument: an ancient record of
Christianity ia China, with special reference to the expedition
of Frits V. Holm.., Ed. by Dr. Paul Carus. Containing:
Mr. Holm’s account of how the replica was procured, the original
Chinese text of the inscription, A. Wylie’s English translation,
and historical notes on the Nestorians. Chicago, 1909. ©


230 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Wylie, A. Notes on the Western Regions (Wu-Sun, Hiung-Nu,
. &c.). Trans. from the Tsin-Han-Shu, bk, 96, pt.2. J. A.I.,
1881-2, p. 83.

— * History of the Heung-noo in their relations with China.
Trans. from the Tseen-Han-Shoo. J. A. I, 1874, Ul,
Pp. 401-52.

‘Yadrintseff, N. M. Beginning of sedentary life, “Inquiry into
the history of the culture of the Ural-Altaic people. Literary
essays of the ‘Eastern Review’. ‘St. P., 1885. — Adpunyess,

- H. M. Hasano ockajocra. Uscrbyonanie- no uctopin xyxbtypEt
ypast0-anralickuxh IIeMeHb:

——— Stone graves: and stone figures in Mongolia and Siberia.
Trans. of the Eighth Archaeological Congress, Moscow,
1890, IV, p. 158. — HaMesHbis MOrmAbl B KaMecHHLIAN Oa6ti Bb
Monroain u Cu6npue-


—— The Siberian Aborigines: “their mode of life and present
condition. St. P., 1891. — Cu6uperie nnopoquti, axb OLirh H
CoBpeMeHHce Horoaenic,


r


—— see Radloff, W. W. ‘Collection of documents of the Orkhon
Expedition, 1892, I, pp. 27~40 and 51-113.

—— ~Investigation of the rune-like inscriptions in Siberia and
“Central Asia, Eastern RevieW; 1894, p. 91, — Pasraqka
PYHONO0GHEIXD Haqunceii Cadupn u Hentparuott Asin.


—— Report and diary of a journey to Orkhon and Southern
Khangai in 18§t. Collection of documents of the Orkhon
Expedition, V. St. P., 1901. — Orgerh H JHOBHEKD 0 nyTene
erin u0 Opxouy a Bb LOaenii Xanraii Bb 189% roay.


Preliminary report of a journey for archaeological and ethno-

graphical investigation in Northern Mongolia and the Upper
Orkhon. Bull. E. Sib. Sect. I. R..G. S., XX, 4, pp. 1-13. —
peypapnrexsantt oryeTh 0 nobsrkh Ch apxeoTOrMyecKoN HM dTHO-
rpapayeckow whiino*Bb cheepuylo Moxroain a Bepmumet Opxona.


—— On the Altaians and the Chern Tatars. Bull. I.R.G.S., 1881,
XVII, pp. 228-54. — Oe Axtatiuaxt u Uepueperrs Tarapaxt...


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL 231


~—— Journey along the Upper Orkhon to the ruins of Kara-Korum,
Bull. I. R. G. S., XXVI, ‘4, pp. 257-72. See translation of
Fraser, M. F. A. — Iytemtecrsie aa Bepxopba Opxona, Kb
pasnammuamE HapaKxopyma.

—— and Deniker, J. “Discoveries in ieoueollds the travels of

Yadrintseff and Radloff, 889-91, Bab. Orient, Rec., 1892-3, .

Pp. 43-8. _

Report of a journey tothe Upper Altai, the ‘Teletsk Lake,

and the Upper Katun in 1880. Mem. of the W. Sib. Sect:

I. R. G.'S.,.1882, IV, p..146. — Oriers 0 nobsyrb Bb 1880 1,

Bb ropubit Aaraii, xb Téxenkomy osepy H BE Bepmmmst Karyn.


Ancient monuments and inscriptions in Siberia. Literary -
collection of the ‘Eastern Review’, pp. 456-76. St. P., 1885.
— [[pepuie naaraako u DHcEMA BB CuOaps.


—— Résultats de son exploration archéologique dans la. Mongolie
occidentale.av sud du lac Baical et aux sources de l’Orkhon,
Bull. Soc, Ant., 1890, III, pp, 258.ff:

—— Archaeological album of M, S. Znamyenski, Eastern:Review.

” 1884, XXV, +- Apxeonornueckiii amsGowb M. C. Saanercxaro:


—— An ancient town of the Usuni on the shore of Laké Issyk-
Kul, Eastern Review, 1885, III. — Apepaili yamene “TOporb
Ha Gepery:03. Vcenncs- Kya.


~— Archaeological researches and discovéries of Dr, Poyarkoff

near Tokmak, Mem. I, A, S., 1886, LII, pp. 152-64. —
* Apxeonormueckia uabicKalia m orkpBitia 7-pa TlospKona’ Ommab
. Toxmaxa. :

—— The ancient capital of the Siberian empire, Archaeological
discoveries of M. S. Znamyenski, Eastern Review, 1884,
XXII. — [pennaa cromma Ca6apexaro naperea. Apxeoxormueckia
Haxoma M. C. Saamencxaro,


Yakovleff, BE. K. Ethnographical survey of the native population
of the valley of Southern Yenisei, Description of the
‘Minusinsk Museum, IV, Minusinsk, 1900. — Ormorpaduveckili
o6s0ph HHOpoATeckaro HaceteHin AomMMEI TOxuare Enuces. Onncanie
Munycnucraro Myses, IV,


232 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Yariloff, A. A. The past and the present of the Siberian natives.
Pt. ii: the natives of Myelyetsk. Pt. iii:’ the Kyzyl and their
farms. Yuryeff, 1899. — A[pu.oes, A. A. Betnoe w sactosmee
Cuonpermxs Huopommens. . ii: Meaemie Huoponne. Y, iii:
Keisbiibybt 8 WX XosHlicTRO.


—— In defence of learning and of those condemned to death, [Reply
to the book by Kuznietsova and Kulakoff ‘The Natives of
Minusinsk and Achinsk’.] Yurieff, 1900. — Bs 3amery Hayxn
H IpuroBopebnHLIXh Kb CMepPTH.

Yastreboff, M. The Shamans of the Kirghis. Moskvityanin,
1851, pt. ii. — McmpeGoes, M. Kuprascrie [lamanst.


Yaworski, I. L. An anthropological sketch of the Turkomans.
Trans, of the Anthropological Society of the Imp. Military
Medical Academy, 1897, IL, pp. 145-206. St. P, — Aeopeniit,
H. J, Aurponoaormuectifi ovepke Typxsens.


Yefimenko, P. Legal symbols. J. Min, Educ., 1874, X, XI,
XII. — Eqiunenxo, 7. Ypunasecsie 3uaxn,


Yermolayeff, A. Description of the collection of the Krasnoyarsk
Museum. Archaeological Section I, Krasnoyarsk,’ I9t 4. —.
Epxonaest, A. Onucanie komernin Kpacnoapexato Mysen.


4


Yevreinoff, A. The Middle or Bukeyeff Orda of the Kirghis-
Kaizak. Sovremyennik, 1851, Nos. §, 10. — Hepeunoes, 4.’
Bayrpénata un Bykeescxaa, Kuprass-Kaiicannaa Opna.

Younghusband, Col. F.C. The heart of a Continent: a narra-
tive of travels in Manchuria, across‘the Gobi Desert, through
the Himalayas, the Pamirs, and Hunza, 1884~94. London,
1896. 2

Yudin, P. A. The Kirghis : an ethnographical acs “Oren.
Gov, News, 1890, Nos. 50-2; 1891, Nos, 1~g.— LOduns, 01. A.
Kuprusit. Orxorpapwyeckili orepr.


Yuferoff, V. de. Etude sur les inscriptiéhs sibériennes. Mém.
de la Soc, des Etud. Jap.-Chin., July 1884, No. 3. Paris.


Yule, Col. Sir Henry. Travels of Marco Polo. Edited’ by
Cordier, London, 1903.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL MATERIAL — 233


—— Cathay and the Way Thither, being a collection of mediaeval
notices of China, translated and edited by H. Y. Hakl. Soc.
Pub., 1866, XXXVI, XXXVII.

Yurenski. | The cave and.the ancient inscriptions on the banks

’ of the river Mangut (in South-East Siberia). « Mem. Sib. Sect.
I. R. G. S., 186, II, pp. 80-7.-— TOpenert' Tlemepa 1
Apesuia uncsvena. wa Oeperaxe pbyxa, Maaryra (ep TOro-Bocr.
* CuOupn).

Yushkoff, I. Siberian Tatars. Tobolsk, 1861. — LOwxoas, H.
Cu6uperie Tatapur.

Zagrajski, A. G. The Kara-Kirghis. Turk. News, 1874,
Nos, 41-5. — Sarpaacenit, A. P, Kapa-Kuprasst.

——— The condition of the Nomad ‘population of the* valleys, of
Chu and Syr-Daria, Turk. ‘News, 1874, Nos. 25-32. — Burs
KOWeBOTO HaCeTeHiH jomme: Ty a Cerpp-Jlapen!

Zaleski, B. Descriptions, récits et contes. La vie des steppes
Kirghises, ‘Paris, 1865.,

Zeland, N. The Kirghis, Mem. W,' Sib,. Sect, I. R.G.S, 1885,

VII, pt: ii, pp. 1-78. — Senrands, H. Kuprussr.

- From the shore of Issyk-Kul. Turk. News, 1891, XXXV,

XXXVI. — Gp, Geperosp Uccence-Kyaa.


—— Kathgaria and the*Passes of Tian-Shan. Mem. W. Sib. Sect.
op R. G. S., IX, pp. 22-5: Orisk, 1888, — Kammapia’ n
Tlepebaibl Tws-[Maua.


‘Zelenin, D. K. Bibliographical index of the Russian ethno-
graphical literature, 1700-1910. Mem. I. R. G. S., 1913;
XL, p.1. — Benrenuns, J. K. BuGasiorpaduieckitt yrasarens
Pyccxoli staorpacbuieckolt muTepatTypbl, 1700-1900.

-——— Among the Orenburg Kaizak. Ethn. Rev., 1903, LXVII,
No. 4. — Y opexu6yprexaxt Kasaxors.


Yenker, J. T.: see Velyaminoft-Zernoff, V. V.
—— Bibliotheca Orientalis. Leipzig, 1848-61. |


see Kasem Beg.
2103 Gg


234 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Zichy, E,, Comte de. Voyages au Caucase et en Asie centrale.
La Migration de la Race Hongroise’'(Zichy, E., Comte de).
La Description des Collections (Jank6, J., et Pésta, B. de).
Budapest, 1897.


Znamyenski, M, 8. Iskier, Tobolsk, 1891. — Suamencait, M.C.
Vickeps,
~—— Cape Chuvash. An archaeological and historical sketch.


Tobolsk, 1891. — Uysammiti wsics. Wan apxeonoro-ncropa-
YECKHXB HAOpOCKOBS.


INDEX


Abakan, 41, 49, 52, 54, 58, 86,

Abdan, 39.

Abd-ul-Aziz, 12,

Abuldji-Khan, 14.

Abul Ghazi, 26, 68.

Achinsk, 54, 113, 116.

Adrianoff, A. V., 59, 80, 81, 82,
83, 85, 94, 106.

Afghanistan, 20, 37, F19.

Afontova, Mt. 81.

Afrasiyab, 19.

Africa, 4o.

Ahmed Shinassy Bey, 12.

Airya, Arya, Aryan, 18, 19, 35, 36,
58, 64, 66, 92, 94, 96, 99, 101.

Akhal, 34.

Akmolinsk, 29, 114.

Aksu, 49.

Alai, 49.

Albanian, 15.

Alchin, 40.

Alexander the Great, 79.

Alpine, 94.

Altai, Altaians, 9, 10, 14, 22, 30,
31, 37) 43, 48, 49, 52, 55) 56;
57> 58,62, 70, 71, 76, 94, 99, 97,
100, IOI, 102, 104, 105, 112,
113, 116.

Altai Railway, 116,

Althura, 20,

Altir, 77.

Altisar, 77.

Altin, Khan, 48, 55.

American, 115.

‘Amu-Daria, 34, 45, 63, 94, 117.

Amy] Taiga, 103.

Anatolian, 23:

Andijan, 116.

Arabia, Arabian, 10, 12, 13, 15,
29, 36, 47, 53s 72 E19 120:

Arabo-Persian, 79-

Aral, 39, 40, 68, 75-


2103


Aral-Caspian Steppes, 76, 100.

Aramean, 24, 25, 26, 42.

Ardahan, 118.

Ardashir, 25.

Arghyn, 38, 40.

Ari, 56.

Arines, 55.

Aristoff, N. A., 26, 42, 49, 62, 63,
66, 74. :

Armenia, Armenians, 118.

Arsasides, 24, 25.

Arslan, Khan, 69,

Aspelin, J. R., 80, 84, 86.

Assena, 70.

Astrakhan, 17, 20, 78.

Atilla, 14, 68.

Aulieata, 117.

Aurignacian, 81.

Australia, 40.

Avars, 70.

Avshahr, 33.

oe 20, 21, 23, 24, 108,
118,


Babur, Baber, 26, 27.
Bactria, 87.

Bagdad, 119.

Baikal, 41, 52.
Balfour, H., 91.
Balkan War, 11.
Balkash, 63, 66.
Baraba, 52, 53-
Barnaul, 54, 113, 114.
Barthold, V. V., 66, 111.
Bashkir, 24, 79.
Bassyz, 49.

Batum, 118,
Bayterek, 44.
Bazaikha, 81.
Belgian, 111.

Beltir, 32, 54, 96.


-| Beresin, Professor, 23.
Gg2


236 THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Berlin, 119.
Berlin-Bagdad Railway, 118, 119,


120.

Bern pocharashens Railway,
118,

Beveridge, A. S., 27.

Bichurin, J., 62, 70, 74, 92.

Bii-Kem, Bei-Kem, 102.

Biisk, 54, 116. :

Bilghe, Khan, 74.

Biya, Bi, 54, 102.

Black Sea, 72, 119.

Blagovyeshchenski, I., 96.

Blochet,-E., 18, 70, 71.

Bokhara, Bokharians, 16, 26, 33,

37s 53, 70, 76, 79, 113, 114-

Boshal, 42.

Brandenburg, 88,

Brest-Litovsk, 118, 120.

British, 28, 118.

British Museum, 88.

Buddhism, 28, 29, 69.

Bugu, 49.

Bulgarians, 11, 109.


Cahun, L., 26, 57, 72, 75.
Calvinists, 29. i.
Carruthers, D., 57, 59.
Caspian Sea, 10, 34, 63, 113-


Caspian Steppe; 17, 21, 22, 72, }-


759 79+
Castrén, 55, 59, 60, 86, 98.
Caucasus, Caucasian, 17, 20, 21,
33) 51; 68, 97, 118, 119.
Celtic, 83.
Central Asiatic Railway, 116.
Chaa-tas, 90, 92, 93.
Chab-ga, 71.
Chabot, J. B., 70.
Chandor, 34.


Chavannes, ©., 65, 110,
Chelyabinsk, 116,
. Cherik, 49.


Chikishliar, 113. .

Chimionand, 113.

Chimkent, 117.

China, Chinese, 16, 20, 21, 22, 24,
36, 47, 48, 55, 58, 59, 60, 61;
62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67; 69, 71,
72, 735 74) 79, 83, 85, 88, go,
92, 98, 107, 115.

Chingi, Beg, 19.


Chingi-Tura, 19, 76-

Chokayeff, Mustafa, 42.

Chong Bagish, 49.

Chu, Chuya, 17, 39, 49, 63, 96,
105.

Chud, 82.

Chulim, 54.

Constantinople, 10, 23-

Copenhagen, 84, 110.

Cossacks, 64, 77, 78, 193, 106,

08


108,
Cowley, A., 111.

Crimea, Crimean, 20, 23, 89.
Czaplicka, M. A., 31, 52, 78, 96.


Dane, 110.
Danube, 46.
Darkat, 55.
Dasht-i-Kipchak, 75.
Derbent, 23.
Dik-Bakui, 14.
pin lin 63.
jizak, 17.
Donner, O., 24, 25, 66; 87.


| Dulat, 39, 44-


Dungans, 36.
Diirko, 71. :
Dutreuil de Rhins, J. L., 95.


Edigzne, 49. 2

Edward the First, King of |
England, 27.

Egypt, 115, 119, 120.

English, 13, 27, 28, 111.

Ephthalites, 65. -

Erivan, 118, .

Ersari, 34.

Erskine, W;, 27-

Eversley, Lord, 10.


Ferghana, 28, 34, 35, 37, 46, 49,


771 79, 113, 335-
Finn, F innic, 18, 19, 20, 68, 69, .


77) ©9.- .
Finno-Samoyedic, 98.
Finno-Turkic, 79.
Firdusi, 18.

Fischer, I. E., 55-
France, 27.
French, 13.


INDEX 237
Galcha, 35- Ib-Ib, 70.
Gangetic, 19. Ibil, 70. ~
Gary-ishek-otran, 114. Ibim, 70.
_ Gauthiot, R., 25, 111. Ibir, 70.
Georgia, 118, 119. Ilek, Khan, 70.
Georgian-Armenian, 118. llekids, 26.


Germany, Germans, 9, 10, £2, 13,
15, 110, ILI, £15,118, 119.

Germanus, J., 1 3.

Gheok-Tepe, 79. "’

Ghuz, 46, 68, 72.

Gibbon, Professor H. A., 10.

Glinishche, 89.

Goklan, 34.

Golovacheff, P, M., 19, 117.

Gotubowski, P., 46, 72.

Gordlewski, V., 13.

Goroshchenko, K. I., 89, 90, 92,
93, 95, 96. -

Graeco-Bactrian, 66.

Graeco-Scythic, 89.

Grand, 80.

Great Britain, 115.

Greek, 90, 98.

"Grenard, F., 95.

Grodekoff, N. I., 44, 51-

Grum-Grzymailo, G, E., 94.

Grunwedel, A., £11.

Guignes, de J., 14, 15.


Halévy, J., 20.

Hall, H. U, 96.
Hamburg-Herat Railway, 120.
Hami, 69.

Hanifite, 28,

Hao-fu, 69.

Hao-Hui, 67.

Hartmann, M., 13.
Helsingfors, 92.

Hia, 62.

Himalayas, Io.

Hindu, 65.

Bene a 62, 63, 66, 73, 74, OI,


Hoernle, A. F. R., 111.
Hon-He, 67.
Howorth, H. H., 47-
Hu, 62.
Humbolt, A., 10.
ungarlans, If, 2> ¢
Hun-nu, 63, 64, 65, 66, 768, 83.
Huns, 14, 65, 68, 91.


95
: Kee UebeRs


li, 63, 65, 66.

lli-Tatars, 36.

Il-Khagan, 71.

India, 65, 119.

Indo-Bactrian, 25.

Indo-European, Ioo.

Iran, Iranian, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23,
25, 28, 33, 34, 35 36, 37. 45,
47, 72, 74, 76, 79, 87.

Irgit, 60.

Irkutsk, 54.

Irtish, 39, 59, 81, 117-

Irtish- Orkhon, 86.

Isar, 77.

Ishim, 76.

isker, 76, 77.


| Islam, Islamic, Islamism, Pan-


Islamism, 10, 12, 21, 26, 69.
Issyk-Kul, 17, 49, 66.
Ivanowski, A. A. 1., 88, 95, 96.
Ivan the Terrible, so


foes 70. ce

‘agatai, 23, 24, 26, 27,

Jali, 38, yt ’ 34, 75, 775
anay, 42-

Jeleznoff, 46.

Jinghis eee Pasi 57) 58, 61, 70,
73, 74, 75) 76s 77; 89, 108,
oyce, » 94, 96.

Uji, 755 7

Jungaria, +1, 22, 41, 57, 103,

Jwen-Jwen, 69, 70, 71. .


Kabul-Sai, 117.

Kacha, 55.

Kachints, 32, cad 55, 56, 96.
Kainsk, 53-

Kaizak, 16,7 29, 36, 37, 38,
40, 41, 42, 43; 45, 46,
£9, 50, 56, 60, 64, 72; 47, -

oe 105, 10g.) /”?


Kalmuck, 77) 96, 101.


| Kama-Ural, 8


Kamashints, 54, 60


238


Kangli, 38, 44, 63, 72, 77°
Kangza, 56.

Kan-Hui, 67.

Kankalis, 65.

Kansk,'54.

Kan-esu, 71.

Karachai, 24.

Karagass, 54.

Kara-Kalpak, 24, 36, 41, 45, 46,


47-

Kara-Khan, 14.

Kara-Kidan, 70, 73.

Kara-Klobuk, 46.

Karakorum, 69.

Kara-Sakal, 41.

Kara-Sea, 115, 116.

Karluk, 63, 72, 73-

Kasem Beg, Mirza A., 23, 68.

Kashgar, Kashgarians, 49, 58.

Kashgarlik, 58.

Kaska, 56.

Kataghan, 38.

Katanoff, N. T., 55, 56, 59.

Katta-Kurgan, 115.

Katun, 54, 102.

Kazan, 20, 24, 51, 56, 78.

Keben, 17. a

Kem, 66.

Kemchik, 57.

Kenissari, 78.

Kerensky, A. T., 17.

Khakas, 63, 65, 66, 67, 77.

Kha-Kem, Hua-Kem, 102.

Kharosthi, 25.

Khazar, 72, 73.

Khere, 74.

Khingan Range, Io.

Khiva, +33, 34, 37, 46, 76, 79, 114.

Khojent, 115.

Khotan, Khotanese, 96.

Khoya Salih, 34.

Kiao-Che, 65, 67.

Kichik-Yuz, 40.

Kieff-Russia, 46.

Kien-Kun, 66.

Kili-Ki-dze, 67.

Kin-shan, 71.

Kipchak, 36, 37, 38, 49, 42, 49
725,77, 96. | :

Kirei, Kerrait, Kereians, 25, 38,
43, 48, 57, 58, 72, 74, 96

Kirghis-Kaizak, 78.


THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Kirghis, Kara-Kirghis, Burut-
Kirghis, 17, 24, 29, 36, 39, 4°
41, 42, 43, 45, 46 47, 48, 49,
50, 51, 56, 57, 00, 62, 63, 65,
66, 67, 69, 73, 77, 96, 101, 103,
104, 108, 113, 114.

Kizyl-Kumakh, 114.

Klaproth, H. J., 68.

Klements, D. A., 67, 80.

Koeluk, 60.

Koibal, 54.

Kokand, 28, 37, 46, 76, 79.

Koman, 24. :

Konkrat, 38, 40.

Kopal, 117.

Koryat; 52.

Koshi, 49.

Kosmin, N. N., 31, 43; 67, 77)
100, 103, 106, 108.

Kossogol, 55+


| Kostro, N. A-, 55>


Poern tr, 68.

ottes, 55-

Krasnovodsk, 116.
Krasnoyarsk, 55, 81, 85, 123.
Krgyz, 48.


| Kuchum, Khan, 19, 55, 56, 76,


77; 78.
Kulja, 36, 58, 117.
Kul-Tekin, Khan, 42.
Kuman, 24, 72, 89.
Kumandints, 54, 96, 97.
Kundar, 38.
Kurgan, 113, 114.


- Kuropatkin, Gov.-General, 17.
| Kushan, 64.


Kuznietsk, $4, 107, 113.
Kuznietsoff, P., 38. .
Kuznietsoff-Krasnoyarski, ‘I. P.,


84.
Kyzyl, 54-
La Téne, 88.
Laufer, B., 52.
La Vallée Poussin, 111.,
Lebyedints, 54..
Le Coq, A, 111.
Lena, 41, 52-
Lévi, S., 110.
Levshin, A., 51.
Leyden, J., 27-
Lithuania, 36.


INDEX


Lohitic, 19.
London, 12, 27.


Magyars, 73.,

‘Mahomet, Mahometans, pee
metanism, 11, 13, 14, 16, 18, 2
28, 29, 30, 34, 35; 47; 51, 33
57, 58, 67; 70, 120.

Maili-Su, 113.

Makovyetski, P. E., 57.

Maksimoff, fod 46.

Malakhowski, N « 117.

Malayic, 17.

Mallitski, N., 26, 42.

Marakanda, 79.

Mariinsk, 53.

Martin, F. R., 84.

Marxian, 17.

Maynagasheff, S. D., 33.

Melanesia, 91.

Melioranski, I. P., 30, 32,

Merv, 34, 115.

Meshcherak,. 24.

Mesopotamia, 119.

Messerzichmidt, 80.

Mété, 63, 64, 65, 72.

Mexico, ol.

Miller, G. F., 55.

Minns, E. H, 87, 89, 91.

Minusinsk, 24, 32, 44, 54, $7, 81,
85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 93) 975 103,
113, 116.

Minusinsk Railway, 46.

Moghulistan, 75.

Moho, Mokho, 74.

Mongolia, Mongols, Mongolian,
9, 14, 19, 20, 22, 27, 37, 38, 40,
43, 45, 47, 48, 53, $4 55, 55
57, 58, 59, 61, 62, 65, 98,

79, 72, 73; 74, 75, 76, 77, 80,
84, 85, 89, 92, 93; 94, 99, 103,
106, 108.,

_Mongol-Buriat, 96.

Moscow, 85, 92, 93.

Moshkoff, V., 46,

Spenser 81.

Moyun, 65.

Miller: Professor. F, W. K., 25,
Ill.

Miller, Max, 19.

Munduwz, 49.

Murgab, 37, 115.


239


Muscovite, 76. °
Mussulman, 17, 21, 29, 35, 119.


Naiman, 38, 40, 43, 49) 72, 74.
Namyk Kemal Bay, 12.

Navai, Mir Ali Shir, a7-
Neolithic, 81.

Nestorian, 25, 28, 294, 42, 57; 70;


74.
Nijneudinsk, 54..
oah, 14. ;
Noval, 24, 47; 51.
Novo-Nikolaievsk, 113, 116.


Ob, 76, 112, 115, 116, 117.
Ob-Arctic, 116.

Ogus, 75.

Ogus-Khan, 14.

Oirat, 56, 96.

Okhotsk Sea, 78.

Omsk, uy 114, 116.


On, 49,


‘Ong, 49.


On-Ui, 64.

On-Uigur, 64, 65, 68.

Orenburg, 39, 116, 117.

Orkhon, 24, 26, 30, 43, 69, 71, 1
80, 84, 85, IOI, 107.

Osmanly, 9, Lo, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
20, 23, 24, 37; 108, 1o9, 118,
119, 120.

Ostrorég, Count Léon, ro.

Ottoman, 10, 13, 15, aie 33, 120.

Otui Tatars, 74.

OQuang-Khan, 57, 74.

Oxus, | 04.


Pacific, 78.

Palaeolithic, 81.

Palaeo-Siberians, 53, 100,

Palaeo-Yeniseians, 98,

Palestine, 119.

Pamir, 49, 79-

Paris, 27.

Parker, E. H., 62, 66, 70, 71; 73s.

Parthia, ~

Peacock, N., 117.

Pelliot, P., rin.

Persia, Persian, 12, 13, 15, 18,
20, 27, 33, 34, 36, 38, 47, 65,
70, 72, 112, 114+

Peter the Great, 80.


240


Peter the Great Museum, 81.
Petrograd, 81, 84, 85.

Philip le Bel, King of France, 27.
Pishnek, 117.

Pjevalsk, 117.

Poland, 86, 117.

Polovtsy, 46, 72, 89.

Pontus, 21.

Potanin, G., 59.

Prester, John, 57; 74-
Proto-Pehlev!, 24.

Ptolomy, 67.

Pyechenyeg, 46, 72, 73-
Pyetukhovo, 113.


Rabban Cauma, 70.

Radloff, W. W., 15, 56, 60, 63, 64,
68, 75, 80, 84, 85, IIT.

Ramsay, Sir W., 10. ,

Rashid al-Din, 15, 67, 74, 75.

Rémusat, A., 27.

Roman, 14.

Romanoff Canal, 115.

Romulus and Remus, 14.

Ross, SirE. D., 19, 57; 67; 72; 74575.

Rumelian, 23. ,

Russia, Russians, 10, §3, 16, 17,
18, 20, 21, 22, 26, 29, 30, 33,
36, 37, 39, 41, 45, 46, 47, 48,

, 4% 5s 52) 532 54, 55, 56, 57,
58, 59, 61, 72, 76, 77, 78, 79,
80, 81, 82, 86, 89, IOI, 102,
105, 107, 109g, IIo, 112, 113,
114, 115, £16, 117, 118, 117,
120.


Sagai, 19, 54, 96.

Sairima, 18.

Saka, 66.

Sakhalar, Sakky, Sokka, 41, 56.
Salt Lake, 89, 90. :
Samanides, 72.

Samarkand, 17, 28, 35, 37, 79,


115.
Samoyed, 19, 53, 54, 55, 59, 60,


77, 95, 96, 107.
Sal ceiich, A.N,, 42.


Sarik, 34.
Sarron, H. M. A,, 13.
Sarts, 16, 17, 29, 34, 35, 36, 37,


95, 114.
Saru, 49.


THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


Sary-Bagish, 49.

Sary-Vigur, 68. ;
Sassanian, Sassanides, 25, 70.
Savyenkoff, I. T., 81.

Sayak, 49.

Sayan Mts., 22, 55, 58, 94, 104.
Schmidt, J. 1., 27, 68. -
Schott, W., 48, 68.

Scythian, 83, 87, 89, 98.
Selenga, 67.

Seljuk, 41, 72.

Sel-Kokko, 113.
Semipalatinsk, 29, 113, 114, 116,


117.

Semirechie, 17, 26, 29, 36.

Semites, Semitic, 20, 25, 53, 99.

Sergiupol, 117.

Seykym, 45.

Shan-tan, 71.

Shar-Su, 113.

Shashli, 42.

Shaw, R. B., 38.

Shishoff, A., 95.

Shortes, 54.

Shun-wei, 62. :

Siberia, Siberian, Sibiriak, 11, 17,
PU 5 5h gh 58" 56 39
47; 51, 52, 53) 54, 35) 59,
72, 75, 76, 79, 80, 86, 87, 89,
92, 96, 100, 112, 113, 114, 116,
117.

Sien-pi, 65, 70.

Silinich, I. P., 60.

Simla, 119.

Skrine, V., 19, 57, 67, 72, 74,


75 ~
Slav, Slavonic, 15, 18, 70, ©
Sogdia, Sogdian, 25, 87.
Sol, 49.
Solto, 49.
Soyot, Soyan, Saya, 59, 60, 96.
Stavropol, 17. on
Stein, M. A., 96, L10, tit.
Stephens, W., 10.
St. Petersburg, 22, 27. .
Struwe, H., 88.
Strzygowski, J., 87.
Stiirmer, Prime Minister, 17.
Sufi, 35.
Sunni, Sunnites, 28.
Sushen, 74.


| Sybir, 70, 76.


INDEX


Syr-Daria, 28, 34, 37, 39, 46, 66,
70, 115, 110. .
Syria, Syrian, Syriac, 20, 25, 119.


Tabriz, nes I 19.


Tabyn, 38.

Tadjik, 29, 34) 35, 37; 38.

Tagai, 49.

Tagara, 89, 9°, 92, 93-

aac 19. a
aigut, 74-

TaieVang-Khan, 74.


+) 27.

Taligren, A. M., 80, 82, 85, 86,
87, 88, 100.

Tama, 38.

Tamulic, 19.

Tang, 61.

Tannu Ola, 58, 63.

Taranchi, 36, 95, 96.

Tarim, 63, 65, 68, 94.

Tartary, Tatars, 19, 20, 22, 23,
24, 3048, 49, 51, 52, 53, 54,
55, 56 57, 58, 74, 95,

103, 105, 107, 118.
Tashkent, 79, 115, 116, 117.
Tashkent Railway, 116, 117.
Tatan, 74.

Tatatungo, 74.

Teheran, 119.

Tejent, 115.

Tekes, 17, 34, 49.

Tekin Alp, 13, 16. ,

Telengit, 37, 54, 63, 96.

Teles, 96


eles, 96.
Teleut, 54, 56, 96.
Tevkeleff, K. B., 17.
Thomsen, V., 74, 84, 110.
Thrace, Thracian, 9, 15.
Thraetona, 18.
Tian-Shan, 53, 58, 63, 68, 73-
Tiavka, Khan, 39, 43-
Tibet, Tibetan, 47, 68.
Tiflis, 118, 119.
Tilaou, 38. .
Timur, Pansies 14, 75, 76.
Ting-Ling, 65, 90-
Tiumien, 19,-71, 7% 76.
Tiumienets, V.. 190
Toba, 65.
Tobol, 39.


y Iol, :


24.


Tobolsk, 53, ie ria

Togus-Tatars, 74.

Togus-Uigur, 64, 68, 69.

Tomsk, 53 541 77s 78, 85, 113, 114+

Toru-aibgyr, 42.

Transcaspia, 28, 33, 36, 113, 114,
115. ;

Transcaucasia, 115, 119,

Transoxania, 65, 69, 72, 76.

Trans-Siberian, 116.

Troll, 95, 96.

Tsin, 62.

Tuba, Tupo, Doubo, Tubalar, 54,
55> 56, 59) 77s 82, Iot, 106,

Tuirya, Turya, 18.

Tu-Kiu, 14, 24, 61, 63, 69, 70,
71, 84, ror, 108, ©

Tung-hu, 62, 64, 65, 70, 71, 74, 9I-

Tungus, Tungusic, 19, 43, 53, 91,
62, 70, 71, 74, 91.

Tura, 18, 20, 61.

Turkestan, 9, 11, 17, 20, 21, 22,
25, 20, 33, 34, 36, 37, 47s 575
58, 68, 69, 72, 75, 78, 87, 452,
143, 114, E15, 116, 117.

Turkey, 120.

Turkic-Aryan, 99.

Turkic-Iranian, 99.

Turkmen, 33-

Turkomania, Turkoman, 24, 33,
36, 51,79 -

Turko-Tatars, 76,

Turner, J. Hudson, 27.

Turu, River, 19.

Tyrkova, A., 13.


Ugra, 69.

Ugrian-Ostyak, 54, 107.

U-He, 67.

Uigar’ 2.4, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 36
igur, 2, 4, 25, 26, 27, 26, 29, 36,
55, 58, 60, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67,
68, 69, 70, 72, 74, 82, 106.

Ujfalvy, C. E., 20, 95, 96.

Ulugh-Yiiz, 39.

Ulu-Kem, 102.

United States of America, 115.

Ural, 14, 68, 69, 76, 78, 79% 112.

Ural-Altaic, 10, 19.

Uralsk, 29. :

Uriankhai, Uriangut, 54, 55, 58,
59, 60, 61, 85.


242


Urta-yiiz, 39.

Usbegs, 16, 24, 29, 34, 36,°373 38,
39 41; 49, 76, 9

Ussi, 48.

Ussa, §8.

Usuni, Wussum, 62, 63, 65, 66.

Utigur, 68.

Utukan Yish, 107.


Vambéry, A., 21, 24, 26, 29, 57,
72.

Vei-He, 67.
Velyaminofi-Zernoff, V. V., 38.
Viernyi, 117.

Vistula, 86.

bia 2° hi 21, 26, 40, 65, 69,

753 7%,

Venee } N. S., 82.
Vyerbitski, Vi , 56.’


Williams, Harold, 120.


Yabbas, 40.

Yadrintseff, N. M., 80, 84, 96,
100, 102, 104, 105.

Yaik, 47, 48.


THE TURKS OF CENTRAL ASIA


i Yakovleff, E, K.; 59.


Yakut, 30, 31, 41, 5%) 53, 60, 94,
96, 107.


Yao-Chi, 63.


Yarkand, 49.
Yellow River, 63.


‘Yenisei, 24, 25, 26, 30, 39, 41, 43,


45, 47, 48, pa 52, 53, 55, 37?
, 63, 6 66, 67, 73, 77, 81,
86 87, 95, 96, 100, Iol, aor
106, 113, 115, 116.
Yenisei-Ostyalk, 54, Loo.
penises, 53, 58
Yerlik, 58.
Yermak, 77.
Yetisherlik, 58.
bain hie


mut, 3. .
yueche ra 64, 65, 66.
Yu, 61.
Yur, 70.
Viisuf Khass Hajib, 26.


Zenker, J. T., 23.
Zhu-Zhu, 70.
Ziya Bey, 12.


PRINTED IN ENGLAND
AT THE OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS


UUUUUTLA A TTT NOY At
00031147


Digitized with financial assistance from
Shri Brinad Bhartiya Samaj
on 31 October, 2019


i


i
ag 3 Me
ual ie Nt


eH nt a ra ae a
\ i tr MMe WW pe Ay ; “ty
“ hi ii ha Vik My i rity et i Ul
eae tu i 1 My Hn ih * ‘
Ms Mi " ' i ( i \ ' bi {| i
tty 5 NN ARE et I
H ihe \ aha thes At
\


‘i il ir
Ne ine
HOR


Ti i ty Hid ts dal a a
Nisin shige goth na SK


i mh Ne ‘ Mt NBR it } \ ail i
NI GHA Mi Ua Mint we AN Wad mia See ‘ain
