THE GREAT SEA-SERPENT: THE DAEDALUS REPORTS
The Zoologist, Vol. VI (London, 1848) — correspondence
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): This text extracts the complete sea-serpent correspondence from The Zoologist, Vol. 6 (1848), as scanned by the Internet Archive (identifier per_the-zoologist_the-zoologist_1848_6). The 1848 publication is in the public domain. The extraction is complete: Lieut. Edgar Drummond's journal extract, Capt. Peter M'Quhae's Admiralty report (via The Times), the 'Daphne' and 'Mary Ann' accounts, Capt. Beechey's letter, the Norwegian reports, and the ensuing discussion including C. Cocksell's verse and essay.

========================================================================

The Great Sea-Serpent.—I beg to send you the following. extract from my journal. 
“H.M.S. Dædalus, August 6, 1848, lat. 25° S., long. 9° 37’ E., St. Helena 1015 
miles. In the 4 to 6 watch, at about 5 o’clock, we observed a most remarkable fish 


Reptiles. 2307 


on our lee quarter, crossing the stem in a S. W. direction: the appearance of its head, 
which, with the back fin, was the only portion of the animal visible, was long, pointed, 
and flattened at the top, perhaps ten feet in length, the upper jaw projecting consi- 
derably ; the fin was perhaps twenty feet in the rear of the head, and visible occasion- 
ally: the captain also asserted that he saw the tail, or another fin, about the same 
distance behind it: the upper part of the head and shoulders appeared of a dark brown 
colour, and beneath the under jaw a brownish white. It pursued a steady, undeviating 
course, keeping its head horizontal with the surface of the water and in rather a raised 
position, disappearing occasionally beneath a wave for a very brief interval, and not 
apparently for purposes of respiration. It was going at the rate of perhaps from twelve 
to fourteen miles an hour, and when nearest was perhaps one hundred yards distant: 
in fact it gave one quite the idea of a large snake or eel. No one in the ship has ever 
seen anything similar, so it is at least extraordinary. It was visible to the naked eye 
for five minutes, and with a glass for perhaps fifieen more. The weather was dark and 
squally at the time, with some sea running.“ Edgar Drummond, Lieut. H.M.S. De- 
dalus ; Southampton, October 28, 1848. 

The Great Sea-Serpent.— When the Dedalus frigate, Captain M’Quh, which 
arrived at Plymouth on the 4th inst., was on her passage home frem the East Indies, 
between the Cape of Good Hope and St. Helena, her captain, and most of her officers 
and crew, at four o’clock one afternoon, saw a sea-serpent. The creature was twenty 
minutes in sight of the frigate, and passed under her quarter. Its head appeared to 
be about four feet out of the water, and there was about 60 feet of its body in a straight 
line on the surface. It is calculated that there must have been under water a length 
of 33 or 40 feet more, by which it propelled itself at the rate of 15 miles an hour. 
The diameter of the exposed part of the body was about 16 inches, and when it ex- 
tended its jaws, which were full of large jagged teeth, they seemed sufficiently capa- 
cious to admit of a tall man standing upright between them.”—‘ Times, October 9, 
1848. 

The Great Sea- Serpent.“ The following very interesting report respecting the 
appearance of the extraordinary animal seen by some of the officers and crew of 


Her Majesty's ship Dedalus has been forwarded to the Admiralty by Captain 
M’Quhe :— 


Her Majesty's ship Dedalus, Hamoaze, October 11. 

“Sir, — In reply to your letter of this date, requiring information as to the truth of 
a statement published in ‘ The Times’ newspaper, of a sea-serpent of extraordinary 
dimensions having been seen from Her Majesty’s ship Dedalus, under my command, 
on her passage from the East Indies, I have the honour to acquaint you, for the infor- 
mation of my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, that at 5 o’clock, v. u., on the 
6th of August last, in latitude 24° 44’S., and longitude 9° 22/ E., the weather dark 
and cloudy, wind fresh from the N. W., with a long ocean swell from the S.W., the 


cumstance was immediately reported by him to the officer of the watch, Lieutenant 
Edgar Drummond, with whom and Mr. William Barrett, the Master, I was at the 
time walking the quarter-deck. The ship's company were at supper. 

“ On our attention being called to the object it was discovered to be an enormous 
serpent, with head and shoulders kept about four feet constantly above the surface of 


— 


ship on the port tack heading N.E. by N., something very unusual was seen by Mr. 
Sartoris, midshipman, rapidly approaching the ship from before the beam. The eir- 


— 


2308 Reptiles. 


the sea, and as nearly a could approximate by comparing it with the length of 
what our maintopsail yard would show in the water, there was at the very least 60 feet 
of the animal à fleur d’eau, no portion of which was, to our perception, used in pro- 
pelling it through the water, either by vertical or horizontal undulation. It passed 
rapidly, but so close under our lee quarter that had it been a man of my acquaintance 
I should have easily recognised his features with the naked eye ; and it did not, either 
in approaching the ship or after it had passed our wake, deviate in the slightest degree 
from its course to the S. W., which it held on at the pace of from 12 to 15 miles per 
hour, apparently on some determined purpose. 

The diameter of the serpent was about 15 or 16 inches behind the head, which 
was, without any doubt, that of a snake; and it was never, during the twenty minutes 
that it continued in sight of our glasses, once below the surface of the water: its colour 
a dark brown, with yellowish white about the throat. It had no fins, but something 
like the mane of a horse, or rather a bunch of seaweed, washed about its back. It was 
seen by the quartermaster, the boatswain’s mate, and the man at the wheel, in addition 
to myself and officers above-mentioned. 

I am having a drawing of the serpent niade from a sketch taken immediately 
after it was seen, which I hope to have ready or transmission to my Lords Commis- 
sioners of the Admiralty by to-morrow’s post. Prrer M’Qun2, Captain; to Admiral 
Sir W. H. Gage, G.C.H., Devonport.“ ' Times,’ October 13, 1848. 

The Great Sea-Serpent.—“ Mary Ann, of Glasgow, Glasgow, October 19. 

J have just reached this port, on a voyage from Malta and Lisbon, and my at- 
tention having been called to a report relative to an animal seen by the master and 
crew of Her Majesty’s ship Dedalus, I take the liberty of communicating the follow- 
ing circumstance :-— 

“ When clearing out of the port of Lisbon, on the 30th of September last, we spoke 
the American brig Daphne, of Boston, Mark Trelawney master. She signalled for 
us to heave to, which we did; and, standing close round her counter, lay-to while the 
mate boarded us with the jollyboat, and handed a packet of letters to be despatched 

first steamer for Boston on our arrival in England. The mate told me that when 

so 4° 11'S., long. 10° 15’ E., wind dead north, upon the 20tt of September, a 

t éxtraordinary animal had been seen: from his description it had the appearance 
of a huge serpent or snake, with a dragon’s head. Immediately upon its being seen, 
one of the deck guns was brought to bear upon it, which having been charged with 
spike-nails, and whatever other pieces of iron could be got at the moment, was dis- 
charged at the animal, then only distant about forty yards from the ship; it immedi- 
ately reared its head in the air, and plunged violently with its body, showing evidently 
that the charge had taken effect. The Daphne was to leeward at the time, but was 
put about on the starboard tack and stood towards the brute, which was seen foaming 
and lashing the water at a fearful rate: upon the brig nearing, however, it disappeared, 
and, though evidently wounded, made rapidly off at the rate of 15 or 16 knots an hour, 
as was judged from its appearing several times upon the surface. The Daphne pur- 
sued for some time, but the night coming on the master was obliged to put about and 
continue his voyage. 

From the description given by the mate, the brute must have been nearly 100 
feet long, and his account of it agrees in every respect with that lately forwarded to 
the Admiralty by the captain of the Dedalus. The packet of letters to Boston, 


Reptiles. 2800 


I have no doubt, contains the full particulars, which, „ — 
publie. 

There are letters from Captain Trelawney to a friend in Liverpool, which will 
probably contain some further particulars, and I have written to get a copy for the 
purpose of getting the full account. James HEennERson, Master, Broomielaw, Berth 
No. 4.”—‘ Times, October 23, 1848. 

[Doubtless the sagacious production of some self-styled philosophical naturalist, 
who is pledged to one of the hypothetical modes of explaining away the existence of a 
sea-serpent, and who hopes by a hoax of this kind to throw discredit on Captain 
M’Quhe’s statement.— FE. Newman.] 

The Great Sea-Serpent.—“ What an extraordinary creature the Dedalus seems to 
have fallen in with! The description recalls to my mind an extraordinary appearance 
we witnessed in the Blossom, in crossing the South Atlantic. I took it for the trunk 
of a large tree, and before I could get my glass upon deck it had disappeared, and I 
could find it— fresh breezes at the time. Captain Beecney to Sir Francis 
Beaufort. Illustrated London News,’ October 28, 1848. 

The — Seu - Serpent.“ 13, Great Cumberland Street, Octuber 25, 1848. 

Mv pear 81a, —I regret that I have not found the volumes referred to in our 
conversation respecting the recent authentication of the existence of the sea-serpent 
by Captain M'Quhe, of H.M. frigate Dedalus, but I will give you that part of the 
information which I remember best. Several years ago, a museum was established at 
Bergen, in Norway, the directors of which have, amongst other subjects of interest, 
turned their study to Natural History in general, and to the elucidation of some of 
its more doubtful or less known subdivisions. The question of the sea-serpent's exist- 
ence had previously attracted the attention of several scientific men in Northern Eu- 
rope; and my friend, the late Dr. Newmann, Bishop of Bergen—a man much and 
justly respected for his learning, research and energy—made it the subject of inquiry 
within the last twenty or twenty-five years among his clergy and those of the adjoining 
* dioceses. The amount of proof thus collected was sufficient to convince any one, 
however sceptical, as it is not mere hearsay evidence, but the testimony of known and 
respectable persons in various walks of life. One of the most striking statements is 
made by some fishermen, who saw the animal quite close to them, and of whom one 
more hardy than the rest struck it with a boat-hook, upon which it immediately gave 
them chase; and, had they not been very near a small island or rock, on which they 
took refuge, in all probability they would have been destroyed. 

“The size of the sea-serpents seen in the Norwegian fjords varies much; and I 
do not now remember what the dimensions of the largest are said to be. As far as I 
can tax my memory, none of them lately seen are larger than that described by Capt. 
M’Quhe. The one seen by the fishermen above alluded to was, I think, not above 
70 feet long. I have written to my colleagues in the direction of the Bergen Museum ; 
and as soon as their answer arrives I will give you a more full account. 

“ There are, I believe, several varieties of the reptile known as the enna but 
almost all the accounts agree as to the existence of a mane, and as to the great size of 
the eye. In several of the fossil reptiles somewhat approaching the sea-serpent in size 
and other characteristics, the orbit is very large; and in this respect, as well as in 
having short paws or flappers, the descriptions of the northern sea-serpents agree with 
the supposed appearance of some of the antediluvian species. A great part of the dis- 
belief in the existence of the sea-serpent has arisen from its being supposed to be the 


VI 2 2 


> 
E. 


2310 Reptiles. 


same animal as the Kraken, or rather from the names having been used indiscrimi- 
nately. 

In concluding this hurried statement, allow me to add my own testimony as to 
the existence of a large fish or reptile of cylindrical form (I will not say sea-serpent). 
Three years ago, while becalmed in a yacht between Bergen and Sogn, in Norway, I 
saw (at about a quarter of a mile astern) what appeared to be a large fish ruffling the 
otherwise smooth surface of the fjord, and, on looking attentively, I observed what 
looked like the convolutions of a snake. I immediately got my glass, and distinctly 
made out three convolutions, which drew themselves slowly through the water; the 
greatest diameter was about ten or twelve inches. No head was visible, and from the 
size of each convolution I supposed the length to be about thirty feet. The master of 
my yacht (who, as navigator, seaman and fisherman, had known the Norwegian coast 
and North Sea for many years), as well as a friend who was with me, an experienced 
Norwegian sportsman and porpoise-shooter, saw the same appearance at the same time, 
and formed the same opinion as to form and size. I mention the fact of my friend 
being a porpoise-shooter, as many have believed that a shoal of porpoises following 
each other has given rise to the fable, as they called it, of the sea-serpent. J. D. 
Morrizs Stiruine ; to Captain Hamilton, R.N., Secretary to the Admiralty.”—‘ II 
lustrated London News, October 28, 1848. 

The Great Sea-Serpent.—** With regard to the existence of the so-called sea-ser- 
pent, I would beg to remark, that, although it is highly improbable that an ophidian, 
or true snake, of the dimensions and marine habits described by our voyagers, now 
exists, yet there is nothing to forbid the supposition that there are unknown living 
forms of cartilaginous fishes, presenting the general configuration and proportions of 
the animals figured in the last Number of the Illustrated London News. — Gideon 
Algernon Mantell, in Illustrated London News,’ November 4, 1848. 

The Great Sea-Serpent.—“ I have never entertained a doubt regarding the exist- 
ence of some unknown animal of vast dimensions, whose angel-visits have astonished 
the fortunate observers or excited the incredulous smile of the authorities of science. 

No one inclined, I believe, to give due importance to the known facts of gevlogy, 
can entertain the probability of any relationship between ‘ the great sea-serpent’ and 
the extinct Plesiosauri; nor do the recorded phenomena require such an hypothesis. 

‘“‘ Reasoning from the known occurrence of a huge cartilaginous fish (Squalus) on 
our Orcadian shores, I am of opinion that when caught the sea-serpent will turn out 
to be a shark; and I conceive it is just as probable that a shark may carry the head 
for short periods out of the water, as that the flying fishes should occasionally step 
aboard to look at us land-monsters. : 

“It is always unsafe to deny positively any phenomena that may be wholly or in 
part inexplicable ; and hence I am content to believe that one day the question will 
be satisfactorily solved. Might we not obtain some information from the accurate 
Sars regarding the Norwegian tradition? Could not the surgeon of the Dedalus 
throw some light on the subject? — A. G. Melville ;* London, November 6, 1848. 

The Great Sea-Serpent.—“ Amidst the numerous suggestions of those of your cor- 
respondents who are disposed to admit the account given by Captain M'Quhe of the 


* In a private letter to Dr. Cogswell, but published with permission of both gen- 
tlemen. 


Reptiles. 2311 


marine monster seen by him and several of his brother officers, on the 6th of August 
last, as not altogether imaginary, it appears surprising that it should not have occurred 
to any one to suggest an explanation of some apparent anomalies in the account, which 
have no doubt tended to stagger the belief even of some readers who are not disposed 
to assume (any more than myself) that a number of officers in Her Majesty's navy 
would deliberately invent a falsehood, or could have been deceived in an appearance 
which they describe with such precise details. 

One of the greatest difficulties on the face of the narrative, and which must be 
allowed to destroy the analogy of the motions of the so-called ‘ sea-serpent ’ with those 
of all known snakes and anguilliform fishes, is that no less than 60 feet of the animal 
were seen advancing à fleur d’eau, at the rate of from twelve to fifteen miles an hour, 
without it being possible to perceive, upon the closest and most attentive inspection, 
any undulatory motion to which its rapid advance could be ascribed. It need scarcely 
be observed that neither an eel nor a snake, if either of those animals could swim at 
all with the neck elevated, could do so without the front part of its body being thrown 
into undulation by the propulsive efforts of its tail. 

But, it may be asked, if the animal seen by Captain M’Quhe was not allied to the 
snakes or to the eels, to what class of animals could it have belonged? To this I 
would reply, that it appears more likely that the enormous reptile in question was al- 
lied to the gigantic Saurians, hitherto believed only to exist in the fossil state, and, 
among them, to the Plesiosaurus. 

From the known anatomical character of the Plesiosauri, derived from the ex- 
amination of their organic remains, geologists are agreed in the inference that those 
animals carried their necks (which must have resembled the bodies of serpents) above 
the water, while their progression was effected by large paddles working beneath—the 
short but strong tail acting the part of a rudder. It would be superfluous to point out 
how closely the surmises of philosophers resemble, in these particulars, the description 
of the eye-witnesses of the living animal, as given in the letter and drawings of Capt. 
M’Quhe. In the latter we have many of the external characters of the former, as 
predicated from the examination of the skeleton. The short head, the serpent-like 
neck, carried several feet above the water, forcibly recal the idea conceived of the ex- 
tinct animal; and even the bristly mane in certain parts of the back, so unlike any- 
thing found in serpents, has its analogy in the Iguana, to which animal the Plesiosaurus 
has been compared by some geologists. But I would most of all insist upon the pe- 
culiarity of the animal’s progression, which could only have been effected, with the 
evenness and at the rate described, by an apparatus of fins or paddles not possessed 
by serpents, but existing in the highest perfection in the Plesiosaurus. F. G. 8.“ — 
Times, November 2, 1848. 

[Will the writer oblige me with his name ?—E£. N.] 

The Great Sea-Serpent.—“ As some interest has been excited by the alleged ap- - 
pearance of a sea-serpent, I venture to transmit a few remarks on the subject, which 
you may or may not think worthy of insertion in your columns. There does not ap- 
pear to be a single well-authenticated instance of these monsters having been seen in 
any southern latitudes; but in the north of Europe, notwithstanding the fabulous 
character so long ascribed to Pontoppidan’s description, I am convinced that they both 
exist and are frequently seen. During three summers spent in Norway I have re- 
peatedly conversed with the natives on this subject. A parish priest residing on 
Romsdal fjord, about two days’ journey south of Drontheim, an intelligent person, 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


2312 Reptiles. 


whose veracity I have no reason to doubt, gave me a circumstantial account of one 
Which he had himself seen. It rose within 30 yards of the boat in which he was, and 
swam parallel with it for a considerable time. Its head he described as equalling a 
small cask in size, and its mouth, which it repeatedly opened and shut, was furnished 
with formidable teeth ; its neck was smaller, but its body—of which he supposed that 
he saw about half on the surface of the water—was not less in girth than that of a 
moderate sized horse. Auother gentleman, in whose house I stayed, had also seen 
one, and gave a similar account of it: it also came near his boat upon the fjord, when 
it was fired at, upon which it turned and pursued them to the shore, which was luckily 
near, when it disappeared. They expressed great surprise at the general disbelief at- 
taching to the existence of these animals amongst aturalists, and assured me that 
there was scarcely a sailor accustomed to those inland lakes, who had not seen them 
at one time or another. Oxowniensis.”—‘ Times, November 4, 1848. 

[Will the writer oblige me with his name ?—E£. N.] 

The Great Sea-Serpent.—“ The sketch [this was a reduced copy of the drawing of 
the head of the animal seen by Captain M’Quha, attached to the submerged body of 
a large seal, showing the long eddy produced by the action of the terminal flippers] 
will suggest the reply to your query whether the monster seen from the Dedalus be 
anything buta Saurian?’ If it be the true answer it destroys the romance of the 
incident, and will be anything but acceptable to those who prefer the excitement of 
the imagination to the satisfaction of the judgment. I am far from insensible to the 
pleasures of the discovery of a new and rare animal, but before I can enjoy them cer- 
tain conditions, e. g., reasonable proof or evidence of its existence, must be fulfilled. 
I am also far from undervaluing the information which Captain M’Quhe has given 
us of what he saw. When fairly analysed it lies in a small compass; but my know- 
ledge of the animal kingdom compels me to draw other conclusions from the pheno- 
mena than those which the gallant captain seems to have jumped at. He evidently 
saw a large animal moving rapidly through the water, very different from anything he 
had before witnessed—neither a whale, a grampus, a great shark, an alligator, nor any 
of the larger surface-swimming creatures which are fallen in with in ordinary voyages. 
He writes, On our attention being called to the object it was discovered to be an 
enormous serpent’ (read ‘ animal’) ‘ with the head and shoulders kept about four feet 
constantly above the surface of the sea. The diameter of the serpent’ (animal) ‘ was 
about 15 or 16 inches behind the head ; its colour a dark brown, with yellowish white 
about the throat.’ No fins were seen (the captain says there were none; but from his 
own account he did not see enough of the animal to prove his negative). ‘ Something 
like the mane of a horse, or rather a bunch of sea-weed washed about its back“ So 
much of the body as was seen was ‘ not used in propelling the animal through the 
water, either by vertical or horizontal undulation.’ A calculation of its length was 
made under a strong preconception of the nature of the beast. The head, e. g., is 
stated to be ‘ without any doubt that of a snake; and yet a snake would be the last 
species to which a naturalist conversant with the forms and characters of the heads of 
animals would refer such a head as that of which Captain M’Quhe has transmitted a 
drawing to the Admiralty, and which he certifies to have been accurately copied in the 
Illustrated London News’ for October 28, 1848, p. 265. Your lordship will observe 
that no sooner was the captain’s attention called to the object than ‘ it was discovered 
to be an enormous serpent,’ and yet the closest inspection of as much of the body as 
was visible, d fleur d’eau, failed to detect any undulations of the body, although such 


Reptiles. 2313 


actions constitute the very character which would distinguish a serpent or serpentiform 

swimmer from any other marine species. The foregone conclusion, therefore, of the 

beast’s being a sea-serpent, notwithstanding its capacious vaulted cranium and stiff 
inflexible trunk, must be kept in mind in estimating the value of the approximation 

made to the total length of the animal, as at the very least 60 feet.’ This is the only 

part of the description, however, which seems to me to be so uncertain as to be inad- 

missible in an attempt to arrive at a right conclusion as to the nature of the animal. 

The more certain characters of the animal are these :—Head, with a convex, mode- 

rately capacious cranium, short obtuse muzzle, gape of the mouth not extending fur- 
ther than to beneath the eye, which is rather small, round, filling closely the palpebral 
aperture ; colour, dark brown above, yellowish white beneath ; surface smooth, without 
scales, scutes, or other conspicuous modifications of hard and naked cuticle. And the 
captain says, ‘ Had it been a man of my acquaintance I should have easily recognised 
his features with my naked eye.’ Nostrils not mentioned, but indicated in the draw- 
ing by a crescentic mark at the end of the nose or muzzle, All these are the charac- 
ters of the head of a warm-blooded mammal; none of them those of a cold-blooded 
reptile or fish. Body long, dark brown, not undulating, without dorsal or other appa- 
rent fins; but something like the mane of a horse, or rather a bunch of sea-weed 
washed about its back.’ The character of the integuments would be a most important 
one for the zoologist in the determination of the class to which the above defined 
_ creature belonged. If any opinion can be deduced as to the integuments from the 
above indication, it is that the species had hair, which, if it was too short and close to 

be distinguished on the head, was visible where it usually is the longest, on the middle 
line of the shoulders or advanced part of the back, where it was not stiff and upright 
like the rays of a fin, but washed about.’ Guided by the above interpretation of the 

‘ mane of a horse, or a bunch of sea-weed, the animal was not a cetaceous mammal, 

but rather a great seal. But what seal of large size, or indeed of any size, would be 

encountered in latitude 24° 44’ south, and longitude 9° 22’ east—viz. about 300 miles 

from the western shore of the southern end of Africa? The most likely species to be 
there met with are the largest of the seal tribe, e. g. Anson’s sea-lion, or that known to 
the southern whalers by the name of the ‘ sea-elephant,’ the Phoca proboscidia, which 
attains the length of from 20 to 30 feet. These great seals abound in certain of the 
islands of the southern and antarctic seas, from which an individual is occasionally 
floated off upon an iceberg. The sea-lion exhibited in London last spring, which was 
a young individual of the Phoca proboscidia, was actually captured in that predica- 
ment, having been carried by the currents that set northward towards the Cape, where 
its temporary resting-place was rapidly melting away. When a large individual of 
the Phoca proboscidia or Phoca leonina is thus borne off to a distance from its native 
shore, it is compelled to return for rest to its floating abode after it has made its daily 
excursion in quest of the fishes or squids that constitute its food. It is thus brought 
by the iceberg into the latitudes of the Cape, and perhaps further north, before the 
berg has melted away. Then the poor seal is compelled to swim as long as strength 
endures ; and in such a predicament I imagine the creature was that Mr. Sartoris saw 
rapidly approaching the Dedalus from before the beam, scanning, probably, its capa- 
bilities as a resting-place, as it paddled its long stiff body past the ship. In so doing, 
it would raise a head of the form and colour described and delineated by Captain 
M’Quhza, supported on a neck also of the diameter given; the thick neck passing into 


| 
| 


— D— 


2314 


— 


| Reptiles. 


an inflexible trunk, the longer and coarser hair on the upper part of which would give 

rise to the idea, especially if the species were the Phoca leonina, explained by the si- 

miles above cited. The organs of locomotion would be out of sight. The pectoral 

fins being set on very low down, as in my sketch, the chief impelling force would be 

the action of the deeper immersed terminal fins and tail, which would create a long 

eddy, readily mistakeable by one looking at the strange phenomenon with a sea-serpent 
in his mind’s eye for an indefinite prolongation of the body. 

“Tt is very probable that not one on board the Dedalus ever before beheld a gi- 
gantic seal freely swimming in the open ocean. Entering unexpectedly from that 
vast and commonly blank desert of waters it would be a strange and exciting spectacle, 
and might well be interpreted as a marvel ; but the creative powers of the human mind 
appear to be really very limited, and on all the occasions where the true source of the 
* great unknown’ has been detected—whether it has proved to be a file of sportive 
porpoises, or a pair of gigantic sharks—old Pontoppidan’s sea-serpent with the mane 
has uniformly suggested itself as the representative of the portent, until the mystery 
has been unravelled. 

“The vertebre of the sea-serpent described and delineated in the * Wernerian 
Transactions,’ vol. i., and sworn to by the fishermen who saw it off the Isle of Stronsa 
(one of the Orkneys), in 1808, two of which vertebra are in the Museum of the College 
of Surgeons, are certainly those of a great shark, of the genus Selache, and are not 

- distinguishable from those of the species called basking-shark, of which individuals 
from 30 feet to 35 feet in length have been from time to time captured or stranded on 
our coasts. 

I have no unmeet confidence in the exactitude of my interpretation of the phe- 
nomena witnessed by the captain and others of the Dedalus. I am too sensible of 
the inadequacy of the characters which the opportunity of a rapidly passing animal, 
in a long ocean swell, enabled them to note, for the determination of its species or 
genus. Giving due credence to the most prubably accurate elements of their descrip- 
tion, they do little more than guide the zoologist to the class, which, in the ‘Present 
instance, is not that of the serpent or the saurian. 

But I am usually asked, after each endeavour to explain Captain M’Quhe’s sea- 
serpent, ‘ Why there should not be a great sea-serpent ?’—often, too, in a tone which 
seems to imply, ‘ Do you think, then, there are not more marvels in the deep than are 
dreamt of in your philosophy?’ And freely conceding that point, I have felt bound 
to give a reason for scepticism as well as faith. If a gigantic sea-serpent actually ex- 
ists, the species must of course have been perpetuated through successive generations 
from its first creation and introduction into the seas of this planet. Conceive, then, 
the number of individuals that must have lived and died, and have left their remains 
to attest the actuality of the species during the enormous lapse of time from its begin- 
ning to the 6th of August last! Now, a serpent, being an air-breathing animal, with 
lung vesicular and receptacular lungs, dives with an effort, and commonly floats when 
dead ; and so would the sea-serpent, until decomposition or accident had opened the 
tough integument and let out the imprisoned gases. Then it would sink, and, if in 
deep water, be seen no more until the sea rendered up its dead, after the lapse of the 
ceons requisite for the yielding of its place to dry land—a change which has actually 
revealed to the present generation the old saurian monsters that were entombed at the 
bottom of the ocean of the secondary gevlogical periods of our earth’s history. During 


— 


Reptiles. 2315 


life the exigencies of the respiration of the great sea-serpent would always compel him 
frequently to the surface; and when dead and swollen— 
* Prone on the flood, extended long and large, 
He would 
Lie floating many a rood ; in bulk as huge 
As whom the fables name of monstrous size, 
Titanian, or Earth-born, that warr’d on Jove.’ 


Such a spectacle, demonstrative of the species if it existed, has not hitherto met the 
gaze of any of the countless voyagers who have traversed the seas in so many direc- 
tions. Considering, too, the tides and currents of the ocean, it seems still more rea- 
sonable to suppose that the dead sea-serpent would be occasionally cast on shore. 
However, I do not ask for the entire carcase. The structure of the back bone of the 
serpent tribe is so peculiar, that a single vertebra would suffice to determine the exist- 
ence of the hypothetical Ophidian ; and this will not be deemed an unreasonable re- 
quest when it is remembered that the vertebre are more numerous in serpents than in 
any other animals. Such large, blanched, and scattered bones on any sea-shore would 
be likely to attract even common curiosity ; yet there is no vertebra of a serpent larger 
than the ordinary pythons and boas in any museum in Europe. 

„Few sea coasts have been more sedulously searched, or by more acute natural- 
ists (witness the labours of Sars and Lovén) than those of Norway. Krakens and 
sea-serpents ought to have been living and dying thereabouts from long before Pon- 
toppidan’s time, to our day, if all tales were true ; yet have they never vouchsafed a 
single fragment of their skeleton to any Scandinavian collector ; whilst the other great 
denizens of those seas have been by no means so chary. No museums, in fact, are so 
rich in the skeletons, skulls, bones and teeth of the numerous kinds of whales, cacha- 
lots, grampuses, walruses, sea unicorns, seals, &c., as those of Denmark, Norway and 
Sweden; but of any large marine nondescript or indeterminable monster they cannot 
show a trace. | 

J have inquired repeatedly whether the natural-history collections of Boston, 
Philadelphia, or other cities of the United States, might pussess any unusually large 
ophidian vertebra, or any of such peculiar form as to indicate some large and unknown 
marine animal ; but they have received no such specimens. 

“ The frequency with which the sea-serpent has been supposed to have appeared 
near the shores and harbours of the United States has led to its being specified as the 
American sea-serpent; yet out of the 200 vertebre of every individual that should 
have lived and died in the Atlantic since the creation of the species, not one has yet 
been picked up on the shores of America. The diminutive snake, less than a yard in 
length, killed upon the sea-shore, apparently beaten to death, by some labouring 
people of Cape Ann, United States (see the 8vo. pamphlet, 1817, Boston, page $8), 
and figured in the ‘ Illustrated London News, October 28, 1848, from the original 
American memoir, by no means satisfies the conditions of the problem. Neither do 
the Saccopharynx of Mitchell, nor the Ophiognathus of Harwood—the one 43 feet, 
the other 6 feet long; both are surpassed by some of the congers of our own coasts, 
and, like other murenoid fishes and the known small sea-snakes (Hydrophis), swim by 
undulatory movements of the body. 

„The fossil vertebre and skull which were exhibited by Mr. Koch in New York 
and Boston as those of the great sea-serpent, and which are now in Berlin, belonged 
to different individuals of a species which I had previously proved to be an extinct 


v5*r;l;ſͥęP P 


2316 


Reptiles. 


whale ; a determination which has subsequently been confirmed by Professors Müller 
and Agassiz. Mr. Dixon, of Worthing, has discovered many fossil vertebra in the 
Eocene tertiary clay at Bracklesham, which belong to a large species of an extinct 
genus of serpent (Palzophis), founded on similar vertebre from the same formation in 
the Isle of Sheppey. The largest of these ancient British snakes was 20 feet in 
length ; but there is no evidence that they were marine. 

“The sea sauriaus of the secondary periods of geology have been replaced in the 


tertiary and actual seas by marine mammals. No remains of Cetacea have been 


found in lias or oolite, and no remains of Plesiosaur, or Iehthyosaur, or any other se- 
condary reptile, have been found in Eocene or later tertiary deposits, or recent, on the 
actual sea-shores, and that the old air-breathing saurians floated when they died has 
been shown in the Geological Transactions’ (vol. v., second series, p. 512). The in- 
ference that may reasonably be drawn from no recent carcass or fragment of such 
having ever been discovered, is strengthened by the corresponding absence of any trace 
of their remains in the tertiary beds. 

Now, on weighing the question, whether creatures meriting the name of great 
sea-serpent’ do exist, or whether any of the gigantic marine saurians of the secondary 
deposits may have continued to live up to the present time, it seems to me less proba- 
ble that no part of the carcass of such reptiles should have ever been discovered in a 
recent or unfossilized state, than that men should have been deceived ‘by a cursory 


view of a partly submerged and rapidly moving animal, which might only be strange 


to themselves. In other words, I regard the negative evidence from the utter absence 
of any of the recent remains of great sea-serpents, krakens, or Enaliosauria, as stronger 
against their actual existence than the positive statements which have hitherto weighed 
with the public mind in favour of their existence. A larger body of evidence from 
eye-witnesses might be got together in proof of ghosts than of the sea-serpent. 
RicHarp Owen, Lincoln’s Inn Fields, November 9, 1848.”—From the Times.’ 


pe 4 


The Great Sea-Serpent. By C. Cocswe.t, M. D., F.L.S., &c. 


“ The great sea-snake’s the subject of my verse : 
For though mine eyes have never yet beheld him, 
Nor ever shall desire the hideous sight, 

Yet many accounts of men, of truth unstained, 
Whose every word I firmly do believe, 
Show it to be a very frightful monster. 

* * * ** 
Methinks he seems another Behemoth, 
Or the Leviathan, who doth despise 
All arms, as swords, and guns, and glittering spears, 
For iron is to him like straw or flax, 
And copper like the twigs that bend or break, 
For thus he is described in Holy Writ.” 


Mr. John Dass, quoted by Pontoppidan. 


Ir grows more and more necessary every day to acknowledge the ewistence of a vast 
form of marine animal bearing some resemblance to a serpent. . The recent letter of 


Reptiles. 2317 


Captain M’Qube to the Admiralty (Zool. 2307), allows of no other alternative than 
either to admit the evidence, or invent some still more extraordinary hypothesis to ex- 
plain it away. The form and bearings of the stranger have been duly reported at 
head quarters, and no more deserve to be called in question, as nn 
the narrator, than the existence of any commissioned “ Snake ” or “ Anaconda,” whose 
station and appointments we find recorded in the daily press. No preteruatural mes- 
senger in “the shape that tempted Eve,”— he. passes by on the other side without 
manifesting the slightest degree of interest in human affairs; no phantom progeny of 
light and air, although affecting latterly the same hauuts as the “ Flying Dutchman,” 
—he steers himself by compass, and is the herald of no signal disaster; no herd of 
porpoises disporting all in a row, and joined together by some Daedalian process of 
imagination into the semblance of unity—his head is “ decidedly that of a snake, 
he carries it for twenty minutes at a time out of the water; and his body is seen for a 
continuous length of sixty feet on a level with the surface. From the standard jest of 
the witty, and the discarded problem of the wise, he has shown himself likely to be 
“no joke” for his physical prowess, and well deserving the gravest scientific inquiry. 
To show what a formidable and unyielding front has been heretofore opposed to 
him, I shall quote a passage from the article under the head of ‘ Serpents,’ in the last 
edition of the ‘ Encyclopedia Britannica ’ (1842): “ No proper proof has yet been ad- 
duced of any of these species (sea-serpepts) inhabiting the American Ferry, as we 
see that world of waters now named since the steaming days of the British Queen and 
Great Western. M. Schlegel characterises the statement as an assertion que je puis 
contredire avec certitude :” and the author adds, “ we shall content ourselves by stating 
that sea-serpents have not yet been observed in the Atlantic Ocean.” The following 
notice occurs in u popular compilation of the animal kingdom just issued from the 
press (1848) : “ Sea-serpent (or the Kraken). The appearance of this fabulous monster 
is thus accounted for by Mr. A. Adams. In the Sooloo seas I have often watched the 
phenomenon which first gave rise to the marvellous stories of the great sea-serpent, 
viz., lines of rolling porpoises resembling a long string of buoys oftentimes extending 
seventy, eighty, or one hundred yards. These constitute the so-named protuberances 
of the monster’s back, keep in close single file, progressing rapidly along the calm 
surface of the water,” &c. Had the fabulous serpent in Esop, who complained of 
being “a multis hominibus pessumdatus,” been aware of what was laid up in the fates 
for his aquatic relative, no doubt he would have ceased to repine at his own hard lot. 
The official corroboration of the fundamental truth of these “ marvellous stories ” 
is important, not only because the author under the circumstances must at least receive 
credit for the most entire sincerity, but from the encouragement thus given to other 
credible witnesses to bring forward their evidence. There is no reason to suppose 
dat even this would have been readily laid before the public, but for the desire ex- 
pressed by the Board of Admiralty to learn the truth of an accidental rumour. As 
regards any additional light thrown on the natural history of the animal, it is not more 
satisfactory than many of the accounts we already possess. Indeed the paragraphs 
which precede the captain’s letter in the ‘ Zoologist,’ viz., the extract from the journal 
of Lieut Drummond, and the first public rumour as it appeared in the Times,’ tend 
rather to confuse the official statement, and will no doubt be used to create suspicions 
of its accuracy. The communication which follows it, purporting to give a report of 
another specimen seen by an American captain, is supposed to be a “ hoax,” and as 
such is worthy of preservation from the ingenuity it displays. . 


VI 3A 


} 


2318 Reptiles. 


When a doctrine is assumed to be fanciful, people seldom take the trouble to in- 
quire into its history and merits. This may account for the sea-serpent being com- 
monly confounded with a very different prodigy, too exacting in its claims for the 
most extravagant credulity of modern days to regard with favour. As seen above, its 
name and that of kraken are popularly used as synonymous. And nevertheless, Pon- 
toppidan, Bishop of Bergen, whose ‘ Natural History of Norway’ (translated into 
English in 1755) is the usual standard of authority on both subjects, treats of them 
separately in appropriate sectious of his work. Of the kraken he says, I come now 
to the third, and incontestably the largest sea-monster in the world : it is called kraken, 
krasen, or, as some name it, krabben, that word being applied by way of eminence to 
this creature.” Its back or upper part he describes as truly gigantic, being a mile and 
a half or more in circumference, and it is provided with limbs so strong as to be able 
to pull boats and the smaller sailing craft under water. Some deem the original of 
this stury to have been a Sepia or Medusa of enormous size; others set it down for 
an optical illusion; Pontoppidan himself thinks that “in all probability it may be 
reckoned of the polypi or of the starfish kind.” One cannot help being reminded, on 
reading the above, of the passage in Milton where he compares Satan, “‘ prone on the 
flood,” to | 

“ That sea-beast 
Leviathan, which God of pil his works 
Created hugest that swim the ocean stream ; 
Him haply slumb’ring on the Norway foam, 
The pilot of some small night-founder’d skiff 
Deeming some island, oft, as seamen tell, 
With fixed anchor in his scaly rind 
Moors by his side under the lee, while night 
Invests the sea, and wished-for morn delays.” 


Commentators have been divided in opinion whether Milton supposed the leviathan to 
be a crocodile ora whale. The former idea derives little support from the text; the 
whale, which has only lately been divested of its “scaly rind, puts forward more 
plausible pretensions: nevertheless, the vast bulk of the creature alluded to, and its 
position, “ slumbering on the Norway foam,” suggest the inquiry whether the poet may 
not have had in his mind a tradition of the kraken. I may mention here that the 
Norwegian bishop believed that the leviathan of Job and Isaiah had been detected in the 
sea-serpent, Of the latter animal Pontoppidan says, “ The sea-ormen, the sea-snake, 
Serpens marinus magnus, called by some in this country the Aale Tust, is a wonder- 
ful and terrible sea-monster, which extremely deserves to be taken notice of. This 
creature, particularly in the North Sea, continually keeps himself in the bottom of the 
water, except in the months of July and August, which is their spawning time, and 
then they come to the surface in calm weather, but plunge into the water again as 
soon as the wind raises the least wave.” He assures us that there were hundreds of 
experienced and credible fishermen in Norway who could testify to their having an- 
nually seen such animals, and that the traders from the North were as much surprised 
to hear of any doubt being entertained of their existence as if they were asked 
„ whether there be such things as eels or cod.” 

It would serve little purpose to occupy these pages with mere copies of the pub- 
lished narratives and depositioe tevding to prove the existence of the animal under 


* 


Reptiles. 2319 


our consideration. Whatever discrepancies may perplex us with regard to subordinate 
details, it is important to remember that the one ruling form, that of a serpent, is the 
foundation of all the descriptions. The form may vary—in length, pethaps, from 
forty to a hundred feet and upwards ; in the relative dimensions of the head and dif- 
ferent parts of the body; in the presence or absence of a mane or paddles; and more 
particularly with respect to an appearance of dorsal arches or elevations, rising above 
the water like a row of casks or buoys. The greater part of the evidence on the sub- 
ject is contained, I believe, in Pontoppidan’s ‘ Natural History of Norway’ (1755), 
the Report of a Committee of the Linnean Society of New England relative to a 
large Marine Animal, supposed to be a Serpent, seen near Cape Ann, Massachusets, 
in August, 1817’ (Boston, 1817), and the last volume of ‘ The Zoologist’ (1847). Tn 
the Scandinavian work the principal witness is Captain L. de Ferry, of the Navy, who 
thus describes an individual which he saw while in a boat, rowed by eight men, within 
six miles of Molde, in a calm hot day of August, 1747. The head of the snake, 
which it held more than two feet out of the water, resembled that ofa horse. 
It had black eyes, and a long white mane that hung down from the neck to the surface 
of the water. Besides the head and neck we saw seven or eight folds or coils of the 
snake, which were very thick, and, as far as we could guess, there was about a fathom 
distance between each fold.” This declaration was attested on oath, before the civil 
functionaries, by two of the crew. A drawing is annexed, copied under the inspection 
of a clergyman, from a sketch of one seen by Governor Benstrup, representing a ser- 
pent-like form with the head raised, and a long train of arches stretching beyond the 
picture. 

The Report of the Linnean Society of New England contains the results of an 


inquiry by three of the members, concerning the existence and appearance of a sea- ig 


serpent said to have been seen in the harbour of Gloucester, near Cape Ann, about 
thirty miles from Boston. The depositions of eleven witnesses, of fair and un- 
blemished characters,” were taken and certified on oath before local magistrates, one 
of whom personally saw the object, and corroborates their statements on the material 
points. It remained under observation from the 10th to the 28th of August inclusive. 
The head is severally compared to that of a “ sea-turtle,” a “ rattle-snake, but nearly 
as large as the head of a horse,” and a “ serpent.” Five of the deponents observed 
dorsal protuberances ; two do not allude to them; while to the remaining four, whose 
experience agrees with that of the magistrate who saw the animal, the back and body 
appeared straight. The mode of progression was generally vertical, like that of a 
caterpillar, from which circumstance the magistrate believes the appearance of protube- 
rances to have arisen. The total length is variously estimated at from fifty to a hun- 
dred feet. Colour, a dark brown, and, according to some, the under part of the head 
and neck was marked with white. No mane was observed. To the above are added 
notices of sea-serpents seen by a clergyman and others on the coast of Maine for 
many previous years. The Report concludes with a description of a stake captured 
in the neighbourhood of Cape Ann, and supposed to be the young of the larger speci- 
men: from appearing to possess the like peculiarity of dorsal arches, it was included 
with its supposed parent under a new genus, and named the Scoliophis Atlanticus. 
Further research, however, seems to have shown that the two animals were not con- 
nected. 
The tenor of the late observations in Norway recorded in the Zoologist Bool. 

1604) certainly might justify the inference that these so remarkable promiuences ‘are 


— 


2820 Reptiles. 


not persistent, but depend, as suggested by the American functionary, on the mode of 
progression prurtised at the moment. Anybody that has watched the lithe and varied 
curves of an otter in the water can have no difficulty in reconciling together the dif- 
ferent kinds of undulation attributed to the sea-serpent.. There is one particular of 
rare occurrence worthy of notice, in one of these later accounts, calling to mind a pe- 
culiarity in the description of the animal seen by Mr. Egede, a Greenland missionary, 
and furnished to us, with a copy of the figure, by Pontoppidan. This creature, of 
_ the unusual length of 600 feet, “ had under its body two flaps, or perhaps two broad 
fins.” One of the recent narratives also states of the progressive movement, that it 
appeared to be produced “ by the help of two fins” (Zool. 1607). Thus is offered a 
possible solution of the difficulty occasioned by Captain M’Quhe2’s specimen having 
advanced at a rapid rate, with 60 feet of the body d fleur d'eau, without any visible 
undulation. 

Here I may refer to The Description of an Animal stranded on the Island of 
Stronsa, in the year 1808,’ given in the first volume of the ‘ Wernerian Transactions,’ 
by the late eminent Dr. Barclay. Evidently disposed to believe that this animal was 
a sea-serpent, Dr. Barclay indignantly repudiates the opinion of Mr. Home, that it 
was nothing wore than a shark (Squalus maximus). Figures of the two are shown in 
juxtaposition, for the purpose of contrasting them, and to all appearance their respect- 
ive peculiarities are quite sufficient to entitle them to distinctive appellations. The 
Orkney animal, in fact, bears a curious resemblance to a Plesiosaurus, with siz legs. 
Nevertheless, anatomists have decided that a shark it really was, the anomalies being 
accounted for by the circumstance of the drawing having been taken from hearsay 
and under the supervision of persons who only saw the original in a very imperfect 
state. The “animal of Stronsa” and the “ Scoliophis Atlanticus leave us equally 
in the dark with regard to the physical economy of the sea-serpent; that is, unless 
the solution offered by Drs. Mantell and Melville (Zool. 2310) shall prove to be correct. 

From what precedes it is evident, First, that the notion of the sea-serpent is not a 
mere growth of unlettered and credulous superstition, since it has been repeated and 
confirmed by parties than whom it would be difficult to select any more worthy of con- 
fidence, with this sole objection—that none of them have been naturalists. The 
critical eye of a Müller or an Owen would determine its true affinities in a moment. 
Secondly, that if we do the justice of rejecting all extraneous ideas, and confine our- 
selves to what strictly relates to the object in question, there is a consistent tendency 
in nearly all the different narratives to invest it with the true characters of the Repti- 
lian class. Thirdly, that if there be any truth in the idea that the animal spends most 
of its time under water, only rising to the surface in calm weather during the summer 
months, this—however difficult to conceive of an air-breathing creature—in a great 
measure accounts for the unfrequency of its occurrence. But are there no other 
forms, even of the highest stage of organization, which have been able to conceal 
themselves from the scrutiny of naturalists? Not to speak of the minor accessions of 
unknown species, coming in to adorn our collections and extend the limits of science, 
it deserves to be borne in mind that perhaps the very chief of all the Quadrumana 
(Troglodytes gorilla of Savage), the being that holds the foremost rank in the scale next 
to man, is one of the most recent contributions of the African Fauna. At the beginning 
of this century, a cetaceous animal (Physeter bidens of Sowerby), sixteen feet long, 
was cast ashore on the coast of Elginshire. The species had been previously un- 
described, and not another example is commonly believed to have since occurred. 


Reptiles. 2321 


From the difficulty of assigning it a place, it has been the subject of no fewer than 
four or five generic appellations, and is finally referred, by my friend Dr. Melville, to 
the Delphinorhynehus micropterus of Dumortier, two other specimens of which only 
exist, the one stranded at Havre, the other at Ostend. Were this animal known only 
by tradition, is it improbable that naturalists would have refused it their sanction, 
under an impression that a species of such individual magnitude could not possibly 
have escaped being captured and subjected to their criticism? And yet W 
tion of the great Physeter bidens is purely the result of an aceident: 

If the reptilian nature of this mysterious creature be supposed to have been esta- 0 
blished, it becomes an interesting speculation to consider how far the stories of terrifie 
dragons, transmitted to us by the ancients, had their origin in realities with which they 
were more conversant than ourselves. The sea-serpent, if a real existence, is of no 
modern creation. Our forefathers must have seen it. The utmost length at present 
allowed to land-snakes is twenty-five feet (Schlegel). Nevertheless, the very important 
part sustained by the serpent in the old mythologies,—its imposing magnitade and 
prowess, as celebrated by historians and poets,—and its consequence in the romantic 
annals of the middle ages, will instil a suspicion that, perhaps, not the biographers of 
snakes were mendacious, but their heroes, like those of the last minstrel,’ have | 
changed or disappeared in the progress of civilization. It is without the slightest | 
idea of attaching any overstrained importance to the following passages that I venture | 
to quote them, as proving that the idea of serpents frequenting and traversing the sea 
was at least not repugnant to ancient prejudices. The avenging ministers of Minerva, 
crossing the Egean on their mission to destroy Ladcoon, might be vindicated by an 
ardent classic as the model from which the moderns have often plagiarised their | 
descriptions of the sea-serpent. 


Ecce autem gemini a Tenedo tranguilla per alta 
(Horresco referens) immensis orbibus angues 


eo. Incumbunt pelago, pariterque ad litora tendunt : 

| Pectora quorum inter fluctus arrecta, jubeque 
Sanguine exuperant undas ; pars cetera pontum 
Pone legit, sinuatque immensa volumine terga. 


Fit sonitus spumante salo.“ Virgil. 


The poet, too, is sustained by the naturalist, for here we have Pliny (whose facts 
by the way deserve to have inspired the apophthegm that “ truth is stranger than fic- 
tion”) telling how the African dracones were wont to club together and brave the 
perils of the Red Sea, in quest of the more luxurious diet of Arabia: “ Narratur in 

maritimis eoram quaternos quinosque inter se cratium modo implexos erectis capiti- 
bus velificantes, ad meliora pabula Arabia vehi fluctibus.' ** —(Plin. Hist. Nat. 
— 


— —— 


„Auer in one of che daily papers, aſter suggesting whether the animals under 
discussion might not be full-grown specimens of the Saccopharynx flageltum of Dn 
Mitchell (described in the ‘Annals of the New York Lyceum of Natural History; for 
March, 1820, or of the Ophiognathus ampullaceus of Dr. Harwood: (Phil. Traue 
1827), gives Captain M’Quhe the benefit of a further conjecture, wiz., whether some 
land species, as the boas, among which are individuals “‘ forty feet”: in length, may 


— 


— — — — — 
— 
| 
— 


2822 Reptiles. 


On a former occasion (Zool. 1841) I took advantage of the rare opportunity afforded 
for the discussion of the subject by the conductor of this journal, for the purpose of 
showing, first, that sea-serpents as a family have long been perfectly recognized in 
science, and that therefore the name itself should inspire no sentiment of ridicule 
and next, of remarking that strange as are the properties attributed to the great sea- 
serpent, there are remains of a former world in our museums which in their perfect 
state united them all, or nearly all. Encouraged by the Editor’s referring them to the 
. Enaliosauri [Zool. LIV. Wrapper] I ventured to name the Plesiosaurus as the marine 
animal of our acquaintance to which they bear the nearest resemblance. This, al- 
though admitted at the time to be a daring breach of the Draconic laws of geology,— 
laws which, having once consigned an organized form to extinction, have very rarely 
relaxed their rigour,—seemed to be a necessary result of the argument par voie der- 
clusion : if not a Plesiosaurus what else is it likely to be, allowing the descriptions to 
be at all correct? Is it an anomalous shark? and does the “animal of Stronsa” 
after all furnish the real key to the problem? The affirmative side of the question is 
not without at least two very able supporters (see Zool. 2310); and yet how to 
reconcile the characteristics of any possible shark with the serpent-like head, curved 
neck, mane, or certainly very equivocal dorsal fin, and the protuberances so often men- 
tioned, it is difficult to imagine. A recent correspondent of the Times (Zool. 2311) 
calls attention to the striking resemblance between the sea-serpent and the Plesiosau- 
rus, and is surprised at its never having occurred to any one before. If the signature 
F.G.S. implies that the writer is a Fellow of the Geological Society, it is satisfactory 
to find a member of that particular body, whose favour was least to be expected, so 
pleased with the idea as to be willing to adopt it for his own. It had, however, been 
repeated and widely circulated by other periodicals. In the words of an elegant 
contributor in ‘Chambers’ Edinburgh Journal, who alludes to it, “ one could al- 
most suppose that among the buried learning of the earlier nations there lurked some 


not sometimes betake themselves to the sea, or even “ transport themselves from one 
continent to another.” The former question need not detain us, as neither of the spe- 
cimens exceeded six feet in length. The latter, as more likely to meet with favour, 
deserves remark. Whatever support its author can derive from the passages here 
quoted is at his disposal, and also the circumstance which he might have adduced of 
a large boa constrictor having been conveyed to the island of St. Vincent (twisted 
round the trunk of a cedar tree), carried away, as is supposed, from the banks of some 
South-American river. This occurrence is quoted by Sir Charles, Lyell from. the 
Zoological Journal of December, 1827 (‘ Principles of Geology’). Nevertheless, all 
idea of the identity of the sea-serpents in question and land-serpents is easily set at 
rest. In the first place, M. Schlegel (whose authority his translator, Professor Traill, 
esteems very highly) limits the length of the greatest known serpent to twenty, or, at 
most, twenty-five feet. Secondly, the largest snakes, as the boas and pythons, are un- 
known in Norway or the Eastern States of America, the adjoining seas of which are 
most frequented by “ the great sea-serpents.” Thirdly, the two hemispheres, whatever 
community of birds and mammals they may exhibit, never interchange their reptiles. 
„All the reptiles of the New World constantly belong to species different from those 
of the Ancient World.”—(‘ Physiognomy of Serpents’). 


Reptiles. 2328 


knowledge of geology, seeing how their ideas about dragons nr 
in some respects, with the realities of these preadamite reptiles.” 

The determination of a great marine species, however, and even a knowledge of 
its habits and influence on the other inhabitants of the deep, are not, as I conceive, 
the most obvious advantages to be desired from the settlement of this question. Let 
it be admitted that a huge unknown creature of any description, provided its general 
appearance is such as to redeem the various historians of the great sea-serpent from 
the charge of wilful deception, does “ swim the ocean stream,” and the value of the 
result cannot be too easily over-estimated. The cui bono philosopher, the bugbear of 
naturalists, will no doubt have been highly amused with the recent excitement about 
a discovery that at first sight appears of no practical consequence to the interests of 
man. I know of no subject of research he would be likely to seize upon with more 
secure self-complacency—nor of one which, though indirectly, supplies a more trium- 
phant answer. To have our failing confidence in the value of human testimony reas- 
sured (and no evidence can be more solemn than that which relates to the sea-serpent), 
is surely no trifling gain of itself. But more than this: no circumstance has tended 
so emphatically to stamp the Yankee” character with the stain of a bold and un- 
scrupulous lovc of fiction and exaggeration as the story of the sea-serpent. Perhaps, 
on the principle of Mr. Warren’s “ man about town,” who, being called a splendid 
sinner, made it bis pride to deserve the title, the thoughtless portion of our Trans- 
atlantic family (the generous tribute of an Agassiz is sufficient warrant for the savans) 
may have thence been led to indulge in a dangerous style of humour, through a spirit 
of bravado. This source of misunderstanding once removed, the American character 
may afterwards be regarded with more respect, and the people themselves—no longer 
excited to defy the ridicule they were not able to escape—may sober down to the 
legitimate standard of reason. 


C. CogsweEtut. 
November, 1848. 


Tie Great Sea-Serpent.—* Professor Owen correctly states [Zool. 2312] that I 
‘ evidently saw a large creature moving rapidly through the water very different from 
anything I had before witnessed, neither a whale, a grampus, a great shark, an alli- 
gator, nor any of the larger surface-swimming creatures fallen in with in ordinary 
voyages.’ I now assert—neither was it a common seal nor a sea-elephant, its great 
length and its totally differing physiognomy precluding the possibility of its being N 
Phoca of ay species. The head was flat, and not a ‘ capacious vaulted cranium;’ 
nor had it ‘a stiff inflexible trunk —a conclusion to which Professor Owen has 
jumped, most certainly not justified by the simple statement, that no portion of che 
60 feet seen by us was used in propelling it 1 the water, eicher by vertical or 
horizontal undulation.’ 

It is also assumed that the ‘calculation of its length was made under a strong 
preconception of the nature of the beast; another conclusion quite the contrary to 
the fact. It was not until after the great length was developed by its nearest approach 
to the ship, and until after that most important point had been duly considered and 


— — — — 
— — ſD— 
id 


232 Neptiles Fis hes. 


debated; ag well us such could de in the brief space of time allowed forse doing that 
ii w pronounced to be u serpent by all who saw it, and who are tod well accustomed 
to judge of lengths and breadths of objects in the sea to mistake a real substanec. aud 
an actual living body, coolly and dispassionately contemplated, at so short a distance 
too, for the eddy caused by the action of the deeper immersed fins and tail of a 
tapidly-moving gigantic seal raising its head above the u as Pro- 
tensor Owen imagines, in quest of its lost iceberg. bat bana 
be creative powers of the human mind may be very limited. On this occasion 
they were not called into requisition, my purpose and desire being, throughout, to 
furnish eminent naturalists, such as the learned Professor, with accurate facts, and not 
with exaggerated representations, nor with what could by any possibility proceed from 
optical ‘illusion ; and I beg to assure him that old Pontoppidan having clothed his 
sea-serpent with a mane could not have suggested the idea of ornamenting the creature 
seen from the Dedalus with a similar appendage, for the simple reason that I had 
never seen his account, or even heard of his sea-sernent, until my arrival in London. 
Some other solution must therefore be found for the very remarkable coincidence be- 
tween us in that particular, in order to unravel the mystery. 

“ Finally, I deny the existence of excitement or the possibility of optical illusion. 
I adhere to the statements, as to form, colour and dimensions, contained in my official 
report to the Admiralty, and I leave them as data whereupon the learned and scien- 
tific may exercise the ‘ pleasures of imagination’ until some more fortunate opportu- 
nity shall occur of making a closer acquaintance with the great unknown ’—in the 
present instance most assuredly no ghost. P. M’Quz2, late Captain ref Her „ 8 
ship Deda!us.”—‘ Times, November 21, 1848. 

Peculvarity in the Eyes of Frogs.—When lately examining a specimen of the 
edible frog, I unintentionally touched ene of bis eyes, on which he immediately closed 
that eye, and very soon afterwards the other, and drew them into his head until they were 
perfectly on a level with its surface: after the lapse of half a minute he slowly opened 
and projected one eye, and then the other, until both had assumed their ordinary pro- 
jecting appearance: on repeating the experiment I found that he could withdraw or 
project them at pleasure, after the manner of a snail’s horns, although of course the 
operation is a much less observable one. I am not certain that the other British frog 
has the same power, but I think it extremely improbable that a discrepancy in such a 
character should exist between two species so closely allied. Edward Newman. 


MAP 
2 Capture an enormous Trout at Drayton Manor.—A trout weighing upwards of 
2] ths. and measuring 414 inches in length, was taken, on the 4th of November, 
in a small tributary of che Trent, on the property of Sir Robert Peel, at Drayton 
Mapor. It was transmitted to London by Sir Robert, and a faithful portrait of the 
fish. has, been painted for the honorable baronet by Mr. Waterhouse Hawkins.— Ed- 


ward, Newman. 


| 
| 


Crustacea-. 2326 


 Ovewrvence of a New British Crab (Dromia vulgaris) om the: Coast of..Sussex:—As 
many as nine full-sized specimens of this remarkable crab have been dredged by fisher- 
men om the coast of Sussex: the first of these was noticed by Mr. George Ingall, 
through whose kindness I had the opportunity of showing it to Mr. Bell, who imme- 
diately recognised it as a Dromia. Mr. White, of the British Museum, informs me 
that it is the Dromia vulgaris of Milne-Edwards (Crust. ii. 173, pl. 21, Gg. 5). It is 
described in Cuvier's ‘ Régne Animal’ (iv. 69) as the type of Dromia, and Rumph 
(Mus. xi. Hand Herbst (xviii. 103) are referred to. It is the Cancer dormia of Linneus ; 
the name of.dormia perhaps referring to its extremely sedentary and lethargic habits : 
in this respect it is so remarkable that the carapace is often completely covered with 
sponges and other marine productions that have attached themselves, and these some- 
times inclose the two smaller pairs of legs which are placed on the back of the cara- 
pace. This ctab is said to be found in the seas of all temperate and tropical regions : 


Dromia vulgaris, of the natural size. 


the carapace is clothed with a uniform brown velvet down, and the legs, especially the 
larger or anterior pair, are covered with long hair, except the claws, which are per- 
fectly smooth and polished, of a beautiful rose-colour, and strongly toothed. I much 
regret that I have had no practice in describing Crustacea, and am therefore at present 
unable to furnish its technical characters with any degree of precision; but I have 
made a rough drawing of a specimen of the average size, which will give a tolerably 
correct idea of its general appearance. The first specimen was taken near Beachy 
Head: others have been taken off Hastings; and Mr. Bell infurms me he has since 
received others from near Worthing.— Edward Newman; Octobcr 20, 1848. 


VI 3B 


— 
— —
