An Historical Collection of the Several Voyages and Discoveries in the South Pacific Ocean, Vol. I
Alexander Dalrymple, 1770
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Dalrymple's 1770 collection, Vol. I — the great Terra Australis brief: the speculation Cook was sent to test, and the last full statement of the southern-continent theory. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/bim_eighteenth-century_an-historical-collection_dalrymple-alexander_1770). This 1770 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

\ 


| HISTORICAL COLLECTION 


* 


4 or THB SEVERAL. © 


1 


VOYAGES AvD DIS COVERIE 


. ; x | . 
, 


8 F 


1 
2 
44 * a ; * — 
* | 5 
8 
* 
4 
4 - o 
Feat 8 G \ - I _ 


riss u N r. 


Shortly will be publiſhed, 


A COLLECTION or VOYAGES axp OBSERVATIONS 


{ 


In the OCEA N between 


SOUTH AMERICA AND AFRICA. 


CONTAINING, 
Dr. HALLEY' $ Voyage i in 1700, from the Original 1 MSS, 


M. BOUVET's in 1738, from a MSS. Copy of the Original Journal, 


A Regiſter of WinDs and WEATHER at the FALKLAND ISLANDS, &c. 


Already Publ: lu” 


* 
9 


OF 


HALLEY any BOUVET, 


AND 
A MEM O'I R explanatory of 4 CHAR To 
4 s 0 | 
A MAP of the North Part of BORNEO, and the SOOLOO ARCHIPELAGO.. 


- 


AND 
A CHART 4 the Weſt Deen of ALA WAN. 


* CHART of this OCEAN, with the TRACKS 


A 1 oh — * ) =, 1 a n = I * . . of A 9 2 - by 
/ Er ne SE . LOL na Ea Os TD RT NE ET, 99 2 n e LE Se Oe LS b L N . = We ORE 3 we, 
5 8 WG oy Co POLLS 0 ay OE Rx 1 . e 2 n r nee RX fs — * l Lf? SITS CS Nd. = A = = 2 * 2 2 J — F e n 5 x * N = 1 3 way 5 N * C Wo 2 ASS 4, wm 4 
E rn en YH C40; F d ̃ . OR ME en ET Sy THOR / ß ß IO BT I FONT COB L ES Aber et ig . ST He Len F VVV 5 F NE 
Load E 2 8 | fey n ot OO TCC z 00 TTT Fr . c , / OTIS LICE 
th AS” {> 1 CI MATS RY C W „ / T r e / , e . . Aa I v6. r rr EAT TIOTLY YG 5 Sb FAR. 9 renne e . rn f . * . r 


ys 


* bf 1 

1 N WES mt 

Fx 9 1 * * 

F 
by IC: XS 44% 


NS 


N 
57 
mold. 


n 


2 


„ 


Ow 
rel it 6 


i 


JT RAISE 
Se Ti 


8 


NS, 


Coy gy * 5 
8 F 
n 


l *Y 
75 7 
b 2 
þ % ISHS 
Wl 


AN 


1 TY 
1 
1 


HISTORICAL COLLECTION 


— 


OF THE SEVERAL 

N VOYAGES and DISCOVERIES 
IN THE 

SOUTH PACIFIC OCEAN. 


vol y 


Being chiefly a LiTeRAL TRANSLATION from the SyõAwIs H WRITERS. 


5 By ALEXANDER DALRYMPLE, EW 


\. 


LONDON, 
Printed for the AUT H O R; 


And Sold by J. Nov 232, Bookſeller in Ordinary to His Majzsry 3 
T. Pavxz, at the Mews. gate; and P. ELMSLEY, I Southampton-ſireet, Strand, 


MDCCLXX. 


=—_ 1 


Not —to HIM WhO 
Diſcovered ſcarcely any thing 
. But 
PAT AGONIANZS. 
Not —to HI who 
From 20 South Latitude, 
Thinking it inpaſſible to go 
On DISCOVERY, 
Into 30“ South. 
Determined to come HOME round the World 
Into 50%—North. 

Nor —to Himu—who 
Infatuated with Female Blandiſhments, 
Forgot for what he went abroad 
And 
HFaſten'd back to amuſe 
The EUROPEAN WO R I D 
With ſtories of Enchantments 

In the | 
NEW T 
N But | 
TO TH MAan—who 
Emulous of MAGALHANES, 
And 
The HEROES OF FORMER TIMES, 
Undeterr d by Dir FicuLTIEs, 
| And 
 Unſeduc'd by PLEASURE, 
Shall perſiſt through every Obſtacle, 
And ; 


Not by CHANCE, : 
But 
By ViRTvuE and Goop-CoN pr 


Suc- 


Succeed in eflabliſhing an Intercourſe with 
Apt 2 


SOUTHERN CONTINENT, 
THIS HISTORICAL COLLECTION 
OF FORMER DISCOVERIES 

ES IN — 
THE SOUTH-PACIFIC OCEAN, 
IS PRESENTED 
| ET _ 
ALEXANDER DALRYMPLE, 


Jan. 1, 1779, 


PR E F © 


| BOVE two years ago I printed a few copies of a 
A tract on The Diſcoveries made in the South Pacific Ocean; 
which, however, I did not publiſb till lately, when it was 
reported that the French had diſcovered the continent. 

My plan originally was to publiſh the work in two 
parts : | 
Part I. An Hiſtorical Collection of the ſeveral Voyages to 
the Sour Paciric Ocgan, in a chronological ſeries. 

Part II. Sect. 1. Geographical Deſcription of the places 
hitherto diſcovered between AMERIica and Par UA, on the 
ſouth of the equator, comprehending, | 

1. Deſcription of the country and anchorage. 

2. Complexion, dreſs, and manners of the Indians. 

3. Signs of friendſhip amongſt them. © 

4. Habitations. | 

5. Embarkations, 

6. Arms. | 
7. Manufactures, arts, and commerce. 

8. Proviſions and refreſhments. 

Seat. 2. Examination into the conduct of the diſcoverers 
in the tracts they purſued. 

And having thus nn, every ming that had 
been done 

Beck. 3. Inveſtigation of what may be farther expected in 
this quarter from the analogy of nature, as well as from the 
deduction of paſt diſcoveries. 

Sect. 4. 


- 
i 
i 
1 
* 
5 
* 
& 
3 
of 
. 
7 
x 
:4 
1 
J. 
þ 
* 
1 


viii 


„ „ 
ect. 4. To point out the moſt eligible meaſures for ſuc- 


cceding on ſuch an undertaking, as well in the diſcovery, 


as intercourſe; at the fame time examining the conduct 
of paſt diſcoverers to the natives, at the ſeveral places they 
viſited, 

Sect. 5, and lay, It was path” to examine into the 
equipment proper for this ſervice, and into the conduct 
adapted to the nature of diſcovery voyages. 

Motives, which it is unneceſſary to lay before the pub- 
lic, induced me to print the tract above mentioned, in a 
very imperfect ſtate; it 1s not only deficient in the arrange- 
ment, but as every thing not immediately relative to a 
SOUTHERN CONTINENT was omitted, nothing is inſerted 


to the weſtward of the interſection of ScfhourEN's track 


by that of TasMan. The firſt ſection, therefore, was 
very much curtailed ; and as I found the opinions of other 
men very different from mine, on the two laſt heads, I 
thought it would have too much appearance of preſump- 
tion to lay down rules for any conduct but my own. 

J intended that this collection ſhould contain the fol- 
lowing plates : 


CEE > So bo 
1. Map of the World, on a new projection; they _ 
ſeals 20? to an inch. i hows | 1 ans 
2. Chart of the SourH PaciFic OcEAN. * 
3. Chart of New-ZELAND, the Iſlands of | 6 
AMSTERDAM, Ce. from ani 4 343 
4. Views of NEw-ZELAND, Ditto. 0 
5. MURDERER's bay, TAsMAN's road, and 
inhabitants of MEW-GTALND, — Ditto, * 
8 | 1 43 0 


R »Þ © £& © © 


| | J. 
ene over — —ͤ— I 
6. "View of THREE Kings iſland, from VALENTYN. 
7. Views of PyYLsTAART, MivDirivie: 
and AMSTERDAM iſlands h Ditto. 
8. AMSTERDAM, and natives, Ditto. 
9. ROTTERDAM, and natives, Ditto. 


10. Cocos, and TRAITOR's iſlands, from SchourEN. 
I. Bark of the Indians, Le MAIRE, and Ditto, (eſtimated) 


» NM 0 > WW 
94 88688 W K 6882 


. HoRNe iſland, - - Ditto. 
rs Inhabitants of HoRNE iſland, - Ditto. 
14. OnTHoNG Java, from VALENTYN. 
I have added a copy of Damrier's chart of Nxw- 
GUINEA, and NEw-BRITAIN, and my alterations * 1 16 
it to explain the Eſſay on the SALOMON iflands. 
Li es 


Of theſe plates, all but the 12th are already engraved. 
The map of the world is on a new projection. The ob- 
jects of general maps are © to deſcribe the ſeveral countries 
« of the world, in their true ſituations, comparative magnitude, 
« and natural figure.” The impoſſibility of deſcribing the 
ſurface of a ſphere on a plain, has induced the ingenious to 
many projections of the ſphere in plano, ſcientifically, 
though not apparently true: approximations to truth have 
been deviſed, which deſcribe. ſmall portions of the ſur- 
face of the ſphere, very accurately on a plane, but every 
attempt hitherto to deſcribe the whole globe has greatly failed 
in one or more of the Ns we ONE * in geo- 
graphy. 
Speculative geography requires alſo a comparative view 
of the land in the north and ſouth hemiſpheres, 
In the inveſtigation of the relative quantity of land and 
water on the ſurface of the globe in different latitudes, it 
24 was 


. 


J ä 
was found the quantity of land within the tropics in north 
and ſouth latitude was nearly equal; hence it occurred to 
me, that not only the geographical, but even the pbilgſo- 
phical deſcription might be had nearly true, by a new pro- 
jection of the globe, in which at once the comparative 
quantity of land in the two hemiſpheres ſhould appear; 
at the ſame time that all the known countries ſhould 
maintain their reciprocal ſituations, fize, and figure. 

This was by deſcribing the globe in three parts inſtead 


of two, as had been hitherto attempted. As the polar pro- 


jection is for all geographical purpoſes ſufficiently true, 
from the pole to 30 deg, of latitude, two circles contain, 
on a polar projection, the parts of the north and ſouth he- 


miſpheres from the poles to 30 deg. And as the plain chart 


is alſo near enough the truth from the equator to 30 deg. 
the tropical regions extending from the equinoctial to 
30 deg. on each ſide of the line, are deſcribed on a flip, 
the length whereof is equal to the circumference of the 
polar part. 

The Hiſtorical Collection is almoſt entirely a literal PA 


lation, which was preferred to a more poliſhed ſtile, leſt 


any deviation from the expreſſion of the original ſhould 
introduce ambiguity, or render the authenticity ſuſpected, 


Where the meaning appeared doubtful, or not emphati- 


cally expreſſed, the original . is generally inſerted at 


the bottom of the page. 


This plan of giving a literal tranſlation, was, at leaſt, 
as diſagreeable to me in writing, as it will be to the reader 


in his peruſal: I am not inſenſible that the undreſs and 


uncouth ſound of a literal tranſlation is enough to frighten 
al readers except the very few who take up a book mere 
for information; but it was to theſe few I have devoted my 
labours ; 

2 


P RR E M a WY. 


labours: to have made a hi/fory of the Suthern Diſco- 
veries, would not have been ſufficient ; at the ſame time 
the narratives are not circumſtantial enough for a work 
of compoſition ; perhaps, indeed no ſingle voyage can 
| give authentic memorials for ſuch a work, without fill- 


ing up by a web of conjecture what is wanting in the 


original, 
By a free tranſlation. opinions and deductions might 


have been formed without foundation in the original. 
There is no room for a reproach of failure in not effefting what 
is not attempted. This is not meant as a work of elocu- 
tion, or literary compoſition, but a collection of inſtruct- 
ing facts: although I am convinced an endeavour to have 
modelled this work as much as was conſiſtent with the 
view of preſerving the expreſſion of the original, would 
have failed in ſatisfying the reader of nice ears: the at- 
_ tempt muſt have employed much more time than I can be- 


ſtow on a ſubject in which I cannot be perſonally engaged, 


as I was not bred up in the royal navy ; and if I ever am a 
competitor for literary fame, I ſhall take up the pen on a 


topic more generally engaging: though in ſuch an age as 


this, there cannot fail of being ſome, to whom informa- 
tion, in any dreſs, will be acceptable. I am not an author 

by profeffon, and neither write for my daily bread, nor from 
lucrative views, but from the deſire, which every man ought 
to feel, of being uſeful to ſociety, and to let the PR 
ſhare in his labours and reſearches. 

I have been induced to publiſh the Spaniſh voyages be- 
fore the voyages made by the Dutch, although theſe 
voyages are ready for the preſs; becauſe I ſhall be glad 
to obtain ſome further elucidation on this intereſting ſub- 

a 2 | jet; 


1 
* 


* 
— 


9 * n " 1 ey nn —— 
PENS 4 i. LE Ca Ewan Pre EEE < 


„ 
ject; and I thought no way ſo well adapted to effect this 
purpoſe, as publiſhing the Spaniſh voyages, and a lift of 
the writers in differ ent languages, whom I have not been 


able to procure. 


At the ſame time to publiſh the Spenith voyages as a 
firſt part, would be attended with this very great incon- 
venience, that if any perſons who purchaſe the firſt, do 
not take the ſecond, the broken copies of the ſecond part 
would be uſeleſs; I have, therefore, thought it reaſon- 
able to require, that thoſe perſons who purchaſe this pub- 
lication ſhall ſubſcribe for the whole, But this makes it ne- 
ceſſary for the public to know what more they are to ex- 
pect for their money: I mean, therefore, only to print the 
voyages of SCHOUTEN and LER Mairs, of Tas MAN and 
of Roccewein. The relation of Tasman's voyage in 
VALENTYN 1s much more circumſtantial than any other I 


have ſeen ; I cannot find it has ever been tranſlated from 


the Dutch, either into French or Engliſh ; it is neceſſary 
to mention that I do not underſtand Dutch, but the tranſ- 
lation was examined by a gentleman who was ſo obliging 
to tranſlate the Dutch relation of Roccrtwrin's voyage, 
every word of which I was afterwards at the trouble to 
examine by the Dictionary. And the tranſlation of Tas- 
MaN's voyage was afterwards examined by a gentleman, 
who is complete maſter of the Dutch language. 

I ſhall nor at preſent publiſh the ſecond part, containing 
the Geographical Deſcription, Sc. This muſt be much 
enlarged, when the voyages lately made by the Engliſh. 
and French are communicated to the world; I ſhall wait 
till then before J go any farther than the Hi/forical Collection. 
50 that tac purchaſers of this tract are to expect only the 

I | voyages 


voyages of SCHOUTEN and LER Mairg, of TasMan and 
of ROGGEWEIN.— Theſe voyages will, I conjecture, be at 
leaſt as much as what is now publiſhed. 

I have prefixed to this Hiſtorical Collection ſome papers, 
which appeared to me not foreign to the ſubje& ; and ſome 


of them indeed abſolutely requiſite to make the work in- 


telligible. 
Theſe papers are, 
1, Data, on which 0 chart of the SourH Paciric 
OckAN was conſtructed. 
The fituations are ſuch, as, from a full diſcuſſion of all 
_ circumſtances mentioned in the original relations, ap- 


pear to be the moſt probable ; but no «ftronomical obſerva- 


tions of longitude having hitherto been made, to determine 


the poſition of any of theſe places, or even to regulate 
the weſtern limit, it is far from being imagined that their 


ſituations attain a minute precifion : I thought it more eli- 
gible that the reaſons for the determination of ſituations 
ſhould be given apart, than to interrupt the thread of nar- 
ration by a diſcuſſion of this kind. They who are ſolicitous 
to enter into a critical examination of the chart muſt, 
therefore, recur to this paper. One error it is neceſſary 
for me to point out: ſince the chart was engraved, I find 
 FiGVEROA, (Vide p. 76 and 87) ſays the bay of GraTiosa, 
on the ifland of STa CRUZ, was at the weſtern part of that 


iſland, which I had ſuppoſed was near the ea/tern, as they 


were failing from the e to the weft, when they diſcovered 
the iſland. This is indeed a matter of no conſequence, for 


the chart 1s not meant to repreſent the particular forms, 


but only the general fituation of the lands therein con- 
tained, 
. | | RE 2. An 


IT TE FE A © © 


2. An Eſſay on the SaLomon'ilands: this is a very dry 
diſquiſition, which, perhaps, few men will have patience 
to conſider with the attention neceſſary to make it intelli- 
gible ; however, future diſcoveries may ſhew, that NE w- 
BRITAIN is not one, but many iſlands; and then every 
body will ſee, that the old maps, which ſo deſcribed them, 


were not merely conjectural. 


2. A lit of authors conſulted in this work, as well as 
of ſome whoſe publications or relations I have not been 
able to obtain. 

The public have lately been preſented with a work pro- 
feſſedly on this ſubject: The Hi. des Navigations aux Terres 
Auſtrales, This work muſt ever be held in great eſteem, 
by men ſolicitous after real knowledge, as there is no 
where to be found ſo curious an aſſemblage of inſtructing 
materials on this important ſubject, and very few works 
of any kind, where there is ſo exact an arrangement of 
matter: having ſaid thus much, I muſt, at the ſame time, 
be allowed to explain myſelf, that my 'opinion differs, in 
many points, from the ingenious author of that work. 

Men who never go beyond the ſurface of opinions, and 
who by the acquiſition of knowledge have no other point in 
view, than for ſomething to parade upon, may ſay, what 
occaſion is there for any thing more on this ſubject, as 
there is already a tranſlation of the Hi. des Navigations aux 
Terres Auſtrales, under the title of Terra Auftralis Cognita ? 

As my motives for publiſhing this Work, are merely to 
perform what I think is due to ſociety, I ſhould deem it 


indiſpenſible in me not to intrude on the publick a Work 


which appeared uſeleſs ; but as the ingenious author of 


the Hip. des 9 aux Terres * has ſtrongly en- 


coura ged 


”F =” © N & an 
couraged me to publiſh this Collection, by declaring his 


opinion, that it will be very uſeful ; I ſhall not be deterred 


from the undertaking by the ſentiments of men, who, 
from want of requiſite knowledge, are incapable of judg- 


ing. M. DE BROssES profeſſedly gives only an abridgment 


of the ſeveral voyages, whereas mine is a full tranſlation; 
and, therefore, the two Works are entirely diſtinct in their 
nature. I confine myſelf to the diſcoveries made between 
SouTH AMERICA and ParPva: his plan comprehends all the 
countries little frequented in the ſouthern hemiſphere, 
M. DE BRossts has, in his table of voyages, made a very 


judicious arrangement under the three heads of MAGEL- 


LANICA, AUSTRAL-ASIA, and POLYNESIa ; by this means 
we ſee at once the ſituation, as well as time of the ſeveral 
diſcoveries : his tranſlator has only given, in his table of con- 
tents, a general liſt of the voyages, without diſtinguiſhing 
into what quarter they were made; although the diffe- 
rent heads have often no affinity. 

As M. DE BRossEs' table is a very valuable compendium 
of chronological diſcoveries to the ſouth, I have taken the 
liberty ro inſert it, with the authors he refers to; I have 
added ſuch voyages as he has omitted, and the authorities 


which have eſcaped his reſearch: iidingailbing them by 


an aſteriſk . I have inſerted another head of partition, 
 AvsTRALIA, comprehending the diſcoveries at a diſtance 


from AMERICA to the eaſtward. 
I have added two papers of my own; one of them has 


been already publiſhed in the Philoſophical Tranſactions ; 


and from thence in ſome of the periodical collections; 
but as it will explain the nature of many iflands mention- 
ed in this Collection, I . it Was not improper to 


i it here. 


xv 


' 
jj 


Lol 
* 
r 
. 
* 
= 
1 
= ih 
=. 
: 4 
"fl 
$1 
oh 
8 
4 mY 
# 
” 
* 
2 
5 
wo 
| 
I's 
. 
5 
10 
* 
£ 
4 
4 — 
LA 
5 
44 
33 
4 
1 
79 
+ 
21 
'ÞP; 
We: 
10 


. _ . 
TILES — wy 
2 


—— R—— . — 


r 4 © K 


The other is an account of the pearl fiſhery, and ſome 


natural curioſities at Soo Loo; what is ſaid of the pearl- 


fiſhery may be of uſe in explaining part of Quiros's Me- 
morial ; but my chief motive for printing theſe remarks 
was, that they might be preſerved; the laſt paper did not 
appear to me ſufficiently correct for the Philoſophical 
Tranſactions, at the ſame time, if it was to be printed, I 
did not chuſe to let it be altered to other mens ideas or 
opinions: errors may lead to truth, but when all mens no- 
tions are ground in one mill, they ſerve no purpoſe of inveſti- 


gation or er. 


July 1, 1769. 


ALEXANDER DALRYMPLE. 


a ny 2 & x „ . 
FE F OI T4 Snootet. 5 = ure SALT 
ag i, PD 5 F n n * an 1 

= EE 


INTRODUCTION. 


HOEVER conſiders the progreſs of ſcience and of 

commerce, within a few centuries, muſt confeſs 
that mankind are much indebted to thoſe heroes who went 
in queſt of New Lands. By an intercourſe with diſtant coun- 
tries, and the view of man under all the variety of circum- 
ſtance and climate, if the intellectual endowments of the 
human ſpecies have not been extended, their common rights, 
at leaſt, have been almoſt every where promoted, and eſta- 
liſhed in ſome countries, in which, before this zra, the 
people were mere ſlaves to an ignorant race of nobles. 

It cannot indeed be ſuppoſed the firſt adventurers had 
theſe objects in view, but, ſtimulated by a ſpirit of enter- 
prize, they became, in the hand of Providence, the inſtru- 
ments for effecting purpoſes ſo deſirable. The characters, 
however, of theſe men are not meant here to be depreci- 
ated. They muſt ever remain in the fir rank of heroes. 

True heroiſm is not the mere contempt of life, or plea- 
ſure; there is required to conſtitute this character, a ſub/;- 
mity of conception, ſupported by dountleſs and perſeverant reſo- 
lution ; whence the ſoul, : poſſeſſed with the po4/ibility of 
effecting, what it alone had energy to conceive, diſregards the 
obſtacles which little minds would think inſurmountable, and, 
though not inſenſible to difficulties and dangers, acquires a 
confidence ſuperior to them. 

This queſtion will- determine the relative dignity of any 
character, What has be done which no one elſe ever did 

b ns « before 


8 
r 


— — 
3 b 4 

N 1. 

* 


* 


. AAA eas dats. dia 5, HE 


me 


mir is 


ER RODUCTI1O N 


« before, or can do after him?” In this view nothing can 
equal the atchievements of Co.umpus and MAGALHANES! 
The one, full of the ſublime idea of circumnavigating the 
globe, made the attempt, but was ſtopped---by a New World! 
The other, catching the inſpiration, effected it ! 

Although that Genotss who, in the ſervice of 
SPAIN, attempted, and that PogTUGUEsE who, in the ſame 
| ſervice, effected, the circumnavigation of the globe, have pre- 
cluded all competition of honour in the line of Geographical 
Diſcovery; much is fl within the power of men, who 
may be rather emulous of the glorious ſpirit of that age, than 
devoted to the mercenary, or indolent diſpoſition of the preſent ; 
and who may be ſolicitous to commemorate their names to 
poſterity, amongſt the few whom hiſtory ſhall preſerve from 
the general maſs of oblivious inſignificancy. 

However, even in that age of enterprize, the proffers of 
CoLUuMBUs and MAGALHANES were undervalued at home; 
and, although they were heard with more attention abroad, 
perhaps AMErica would have remained ſtill undiſcovered, 
had not Queen ISABELLA, with unequalled public virtue, pledged 
her own jewels to equip COLUMBUS. 

In the dedication of a book, containing the Hiſtory of 
the Conqueſt of Mexico, tranſlated by THOMAS NicyoLs, in 
1578, from the Spaniſh, the tranſlator mentions. to that 
great ſtateſman, and patron of diſcovery, Sir Francis: 
WALSINGHAM, a very curious anecdote, which happened. 
to him not long before; this ſtory conveys ſo ſtriking an ex- 
ample of the heroic diſpoſition which gave ſucceſs: to the 
Spaniſh. nation in their Indian atchievements, that it cannot 
fail of being acceptable to the public. 


& Not 


TNT R 0'D p M 


« Not long fince I happened to travel from the famous 
city of ToLEDo in SrAIN, toward high Cas TILE, and by 
fortune overtook an ancient gentleman, worſhipfully ac- 
companied, unto whom I was ſo bold as to approach, be- 
ſeeching his worſhip to advertiſe me of his journey: who 
(after he had beheld my white head and beard) anſwered 
full gently, that his intent was to travel unto the King of 
Spain's court, and welcomed me into his company. In 
ſhort ſpace that we had journeyed together, and com- 
muned of each other his country, it pleaſed him to ſay as 
followeth : My good friend, if you knew my ſute unto 
the King's Majeſty, you would judge that I were a mad- 
man, and, therefore, to ſhorten our way, I will declare 
my attempted ſute unto you, You ſhall underſtand, that 
I am a gentleman of ſeventy years of age, and ſometimes 
I ſerved in the civil wars of PERU, where I was wounded 
in divers parts of my body, and am now thereby lame in 
one of my legs and ſhoulder. I have neither wife nor 
child, and at this preſent, (God be praiſed) I have in 
the Contratation-Houſe, in the city of SzviLLE, in gold 
and plate, the ſum of 30,000 ducats: and I have alſo in 
PERU, in good lands and poſſeſſions, the yearly rent of 


12,000 ducats, which rents, and ready money is ſuffici- 


ent to maintain a poor gentleman. But all this notwith- 
ſtanding, I do now ſue unto the King's Majeſty, to have 
a licence and authority to diſcover and conquer a certain 
part of INDIA, which adjoineth with BRAZIL, and is part 
of the empire of PERU. I pray you now declare what you 
think of my ſute. By my troth, Sir, (quoth I) I truſt 
your worſhip will pardon a raſh and ſudden judgment, 
which you now demand at my hand: yea truly (quoth he) 

BD 2 „ 


e 


3 a Aon as AE ea DEED . " 


* 1 
„ 


= . 2 
_—— r 


8 
; * 


ST 


6 


like to fall into. 


DU Cron 
ſay what you liſt. Then (quoth I) my opinion is, that 


you are not well in your wit, for what would you have? 


will not reaſon ſuffice you? or elſe would you now, in 
your old days, be an emperor, conſidering that your ſe- 
pulchre attendeth for you. Now truly I thank you 
(quoth he) for of your judgment are moſt men; but I ſay 


unto you, conſidering that all fleſh muſt finiſh, I ſeek for no 


quiet reſt in this tranſitory life: yea the wiſe and chriſtian 


doctors do teach and admonith, that every true chriſtian 


15 born, not for his own private wealth and pleaſure, but 
rather to help and ſuccour others his poor bretren. Like- 
wiſe do I conſider the great number of gentlemen younger 
brethren, and other valiant perſons, who, through want 
of living, do fall into many diſorders. Wherefore, to 
accomplith my duty toward God and my Prince, and to 


relieve ſuch poor gentlemen, do I now attempt this 


journey, with the adventure of my body and goods, and 


for that purpoſe I have in readineſs four tall ſhips, well 
furniſhed, in the port of ST. LUcAR DE BARRAMEDA, 


hoping aſſuredly, that before the life depart out of my 
body, to hear theſe valiant young gentlemen (whom now 
I meun to have in my company) ſay, Oh happy day, 
when old ZaRaTE for ſo is my name) brought us from 
penury, yea, and from a number of -perils that we were 
I hope alſo, that the royal eſtate of my 
Prince ſhall be by my pains and poor ſervice enlarged : 


believe you me, this is the only ſumptuous tomb that I pre- 


tend to build for my poor carcaſe. But yet I Know there 
are ſome, unto whom I may compare the boar that lieth 


wallowing in the ſtie, who will not let to ſay, what need 


we any other world, honour, or ' Kingdoms ? ler us be 
« contented 


INTRODUGEELSN: 
« contented with that we have: who may eaſily be an- 
« ſwered, Sir GLUTTON, your paunch is full, and little 
« care you for the glory of God, honour of your prince, 
« neither the need and neceſſity of your poor neighbours. 
« With this concluſion the Gentleman ended his tale.” 
Ihe ignorant and the fluggiſh are little different in any 
age; it has been alledged as an objection to New Diſcoveries 
that this kingdom has already 20 much: perhaps the i n- 
duſtrious manufacturer may not agree to this aſſertion, but 
think, with good reaſon, that there can be no object more 
intereſting to a maritime and commercial ſtate, than diſco- 
very of New Lands, to invigorate the hand of induſtry by 
opening new vents for manufactures, and by a New Trade 
to encreaſe the active wealth and naval power of the 
country. 8 | 
By a good helmſman the Rovar GroGrs is as eaſily 
guided as a cock-boat; but an inſufficient perſon will 
aſcribe to the magnitude of the ſhip, that difficulty of ſteer- 
ing which ariſes from his own incapacity. The office of mi- 
niſter conveys power and dignity, but it does not beſtow 
public virtue and abilities; the man endowed with theſe, may be 
wanting in the etiquette of a palace, and it is very rare that 
a prince, whom fate has not thrown perſonally into the 
ſcene of active life, acquires one of thoſe phenomena in 
courts, who by ſtudy and obſervation are enabled to direct 
the great machine, to the contentment of the people, the 
dignity of the crown, and the glory of the ſtate. 
The ſame motive which carried CoLUMBUs and MAGAL- 
HANES into foreign countries, in ſome meaſure, induces the 
Author of the following ſheets to publiſh them to the world. 


General 


_— : 


"Mi ob 1 Pe a . 


MP PINE 
4 PIER 


N 


1 * IL * a> A — 


— 


SX11 


bb U r i N 


General geography and diſcoveries have almoſt from in- 
fancy been the fond object of his attention. And although 


he went to the EAST IN DIEs in the ſervice of the Company, 


at an early age, neither the circumſtances of life in which 
he was placed, the diſpoſition of his companions, nor the 
want of books, could over-rule the natural ny of his 
mind. | 
Every young man enters life with a paſſion to emulate 
thoſe characters which have gained his admiration. In moſt 
men the rubs of life ſoon blunt this paſſion ; in ſome it 


prevails over all difficulties. 


The Author looking up to CoLUMBUs, to MAGALHANES, 
and thoſe immortal heroes who have diſplayed new worlds 


to our view, and extended the European name and influence 


among diſtant nations, was inflamed with the ambition to 
do ſomething to promote the general benefit of mankind, at 
the ſame time that it ſhould conduce to the glory and inte- 
reſt of his country. | 

The firſt and moſt ſtriking object of reſearch was, The 
diſcovery of a SOUTHERN CONTINENT. But, from want of 
lights to follow, though the defire was early fixed in his 
breaſt, other objects intervened, and many years paſſed with- 
out any determined purſuit towards that quarter. 

The defire of information having led him to examine the 


old records at Madraſs, he ſoon found from them, that 


the Company, in ancient times, placed a great value on the 
commerce to the Eaſtern Iflands, and were very ſolicitous to 
regain a portion of it, after they were deprived thereof by 
the intrigues of the Dutch, and the pufilanimity of our own 
court, From an examination of the Company's records, 
and from the printed accounts of our early voyages, he was 

2 led 


INTRODUCTION 


Ted to the perſuaſion, that this valuable branch of commerce: 
might not only be regained, but extended much beyond what 


it ever was, Fully convinced of the great importance of this 


object, the Author, in the beginning of 1759, declined a 


diſtinguiſhed employment at Fort ST. GgORGE (that of Se- 
_ cretary), and had the direction of a ſmall veſſel of the Com- 
pany's, intended for the ſervice he had propoſed. From that 
time, till the end of 1764, he made ſeveral voyages in diffe- 
rent veſſels. to the Eaſtern parts, through ſeas unknown, 
and amongſt people with whom we had before no inter- 
courſe. 

However warmly this object may have been purſued, the 
Author never loſt ſight of the great paſſion of his life. Above 
eight years ago he made a collection of the voyages into the 
South- Sea, of which he could find any intimation in the Engliſh 
books to be met with in INDIA. This collection was indeed 


imperfect; but an active mind, long employed on any ſub- 


ject, will acquire ideas from very faint lines. His peregri- 
nations were of uſe to him even in this purſuit ; for his at- 
tention being awake, in the reſearch ſo natural to that curi- 
oſity, he acquired, amongſt the Spaniards, ſome very valu- 
able papers, and intimations from Spaniſh e many of 
whoſe works he alſo procured. 

On the Author's return to Europe, he was induces to: 
cn every with towards objects, perhaps, more lucrative, 
though leſs magnanimous, and was ſolicitous to be engaged 
on diſcovery in the South-Sea. For which kind of under- 
taking he preſumed to think himſelf, in ſome meaſure, 
qualified from five years experience in ſuch like voyages, 
and from long attention to the ſubject. 


However, 


XXIV 


INITRODUCT/IO N. 


However, to recommend himſelf to this employment, ſo 
much wiſhed for, and conſcious, previous to any new undertaking, 
how neceſlary it was to know what had been done in former 
times, leſt on the return from a tedious and expenſive voyage, 
he ſhould betray his own ignorance, by having ory trodden in the 
ſteps of ſome diſcoverer ; he determined to make an hiſtorical 


collection of all the diſcoveries in the South-Sea; as well from 


the circumſtances he could find in old printed books, as from 
thoſe to be met with only in the Spaniſh papers he had ac- 
quired. Very fortunately, after his return to ENGLAND, he 
obtained a curious collection of Spaniſh memorials: theſe 
greatly elucidate the printed relations, which, without this 


aſſiſtance, muſt have remained unintelligible. Having 


tranſlated the ſeveral relations he could procure, and reduced 
them to a chronological order, the Author, from theſe ma- 


terials, drew up a ſummary deſcription of the places hitherto 
_ diſcovered in the South-Sea. 


The Suthern Continent having been ſeen on \ the Weſt-ſide, by 
TASMAN, in 1642, and on the eaſt by JuAN FERNANDES 
above half a century before, and by others after him, in 
different latitudes from 6 4 deg. to 40 deg. S. it is im- 
poſſible for any one at this time to diſcover it. But the coun- 


tries intermediate, equal in extent to all the civiliſed part of Ast a, 


from TurKEy to ChINA incluſive, ſtill remain unexplored. 


And although the land has been ſeen, and once. viſited, 


yet to open an intercourſe with its inhabitants, is a taſk ſtill | 


to be performed. 

Intrepidity, joined to every naval 1 is not 
adequate to this taſk. To execute it effectually, not only a 
knowledge of what has been done, and a retroſpect to what 


ever is worthy imitation, or blameable in paſt diſcoverers, 


I arc 


INTRODUCTION. 


are requiſite ; but alſo a philoſophic idea of winds and ſea- 
ſons ; a freedom from prejudice; attention to the temper and 
diſpoſition of men in their uncultivated ſtate ; ſome know- 
| ledge in the manner of treating with them, which experience 
only can beſtow ; and, perhaps, not leſs than all, a conſi- 
deration of the rights and value of man's life, to ſecure a 
patient abſtinence from the uſe of fire-arms againſt the na- 
tive Indians, who muſt be ignorant of the intentions and 


language of the ſtrangers, and therefore at firſt ſubject to 


_ apprehenſion, and often to doubts, 

Where ſo much is required, it may, perhaps, be im- 
poſſible to find the fit leader; but in ſuch circumſtances, 
the idea of fitneſs ariſes from compariſon, 

The Author is under the neceſſity to forego all thoughts 


of being employed in the manner he wiſhed, either in the 


ſervice of the government, or in that of the Eaſt-India Com- 


pany ; the former, becauſe he was not bred up in the Royal - 


Navy, and for this reaſon only: but, at the ſame time, 
the leaft he could do, in juſtice to the public and to him- 


ſelf, was to communicate to the world what lights he had 


acquired, and what deductions he had formed, on a ſub- 


ject ſo important; and he ſhall be happy if his labours may 


hereafter conduce, in the ſmalleſt degree, to the general ad- 


vantage of mankind, and to his country in particular : in- 


deed, he ſhall think his pains amply rewarded, if theſe 
ſheers are inſtrumental in ſaving the life of one Indian from 
the deſtruction occafioned by impatience. | 


It appears from the following ſheets, that not only many 
large iſlands, and ſmall ones without number, ſwarming 


with people, are ſcattered over the Sour PACIFIC OCEAN, 
but that it is more than probable another Continent will be 
there found, extending from 30 deg. S. towards the Pole. 

8 | There 


XXV1 


ENMTEO DUCTION, 


There can be no doubt that countries ſo well ſituated, fo 
extenſive, and fo full of civilized inhabitants, muſt afford a 
very beneficial commerce: ſo that conſidered, either from 
the advantages immediately to be derived from thence, or as 
a barrier to ſecure the trade of the EAST-IN DIES, the exami- 
nation of the countries fituated in the SourhH PAci FIE 
Oc AN, ſeemed to be an object of great conſequence to the 
Eaſt-India Company, within the limits of whoſe excluſive 
charter theſe countries lye: and which cannot therefore be 
reſorted to by any other ſubjects of this kingdom, without 


an infringement of that charter; but the Eaſt-India Company 


are too much engaged in territorial dominion to think * com- 
merce and diſcovery. | | 

An objection has been made to Ra from an 
opinion that it draws many ſubjects from the mother-· country 
to the colonies; whereby the former is weakened, and the 


latter, by an idea of their own encreaſing power, encouraged 


to ſtruggle for independence. Without entering into the diſ- 
cuſſion of theſe points, and examining how far the allega- 
tions have any ground, which ſeem to be a matter of much 


doubt, it muſt be obvious, that if colonies are aiming at 


independence, and endeavouring to break off all connection 
with the mother- country, the only means of preventing 
theſe intentions, and of ſecuring the power and proſperity of 
the mother · country, muſt be by extending its commerce to 
diſtant nations who can have no connexion with thoſe diſ- 


- contented colonies. No army ever demanded an increaſe of 


pay, unleſs when they thought they were indiſpenſably 
wanted ; and no colony would ever diſpute rhe due autho- 
rity. of the mother-country, unleſs it thought the mother- 
country in great meaſure depended on that colony. | 


The 


INTRODUCTION. 


The American colonies know the trade from N | 


thither i is ſo great a proportion of-the commerce of this king- 
dom, that a ſtagnation in the trade to Au ERICA would re- 
duce thouſands to a clamorous indigence, which neither 
humanity nor authority can withſtand. But ſuppoſing for 
a moment, that half of AMERICA, with its inhabitants, could 
be tranſported to Ax RICA, by which all tyes of intereſt and 


- connexion would be broke, will any one ſay, © that either | 


«* half would ſet the mother-country at defiance?” 


Diſcovery of new lands is exactly ſimilar, when new mar- 


kets can be found to' take off our manufactures ; the 
AMERICAN colonies loſing their deciſive importance, would be 
unable to compel this country to a precipitate conceſſion : 
and on the other hand the nm being leſs de- 
pendent would be leſs jealous, 


What is here ſaid, muſt not be miſconſtrued to a general 


condemnation of the conduct of the AuERICAN colo- 


nies ; it refers only to the mode adopted of entering into 


compacts not to. uſe the manufactures of ENGLAND, 
that by the diſtreſs of the induſtrious manufacturer the le- 
_ giſlature of this kingdom may be compelled to repeal thoſe 
acts of parliament which the Americans think grievous. 
The common rights of humanity entitle them to repreſent 
their grievances, and whatever is thought unjuſt is a grievance; 
the jfir/# ſtep of tyranny is to /but the ear againſt — : 
the 44. to ſout the mouth of the complainant. 

The opinion that colonies are deſtructive of population can 
be no objection to diſcoveries ; but the very poſition adds 
weight to them: colonies, whether to diſpoſſeſs the native 
inhabitants, or to people deſart wilds and woods, are as 
different from diſcoveries as day from nigbt. Diſcoveries in 

1 the 


XXVii 


EF * 


e 


j 
t 
| 
» 
il 
4 
4 


INTRODUCTION. 


the SoUTH-Sg A have in view the reſearch of extenſive and po- 


pulous countries, which have, at preſent, no communi- 


cation with Europeans. 

Whoever looks back to the Aim of AMERICA, and 
conſiders what an acceſſion of wealth and power would have 
accrued to the Spaniſh monarchy from an amicable inter- 
courſe with the potent and populous empires of Mxico and 
PERU, Will be able to form ſome idea both of the conſequence 
and probability of what is expected in the Sour Sea: and 
whoever is converſant in the hiſtory of the Spaniſh diſco- 
veries muſt be convinced, that amity and the ftricteſt alliance 
would have been eaſier attained, and would have afforded to 
Sy Alx much greater advantages of every kind, than has been 
reaped from their conqueſts. | 

Upon ſuch grounds there can be no object more impor- 
tant than diſcoveries in the SouTa SBA; diſcoveries, not 


merely of the figure of the lands; not with a view of colo- 


nizing; not with the view of * but of an e 
intercourſe for mutual benefit. 

The American colonies are generally ſuppoſed t. to contain 
two millions of people, whofe commerce with BRITAIN 1s 
thought to give them an over- ruling influence. The num- 
ber of inhabitants in the Southern Continent is probably 
more than 50 millions, confidering the extent, from the 
eaſtern part diſcovered by JuAN FERNANDEZ, to the weſtern 
coaſt feen by TASMAN, is about 100 deg. of longitude, which 


in the latitude of 40 deg. amounts to 4596 geographic, or 


5323 ſtatute miles. This is a greater extent than the whole 
civilized part of As IA, from TukkE V to the eaſtern extremity 
of China, There 1s at prefent no trade from EUROPE thither, 
19 70 pals the ſcraps from this table would be ſufficient to 


main tain 


IN TR ODU 


maintain the power, dominion, and ſovereignty of Bgrr lx, 
by employing all its manufacturers and ſhips. | 
' Whoever conſiders the Peruvian empire, where arts and 
induſtry flouriſhed under one of the wiſeſt ſyſtems of govern- 
ment, which was founded by a franger, muſt have very ſan- 
guine expectations of the Southern Continent, from whence it 
is more than probable Manco Capac, the fir IN A, was de- 
rived, and muſt be convinced that the country, from whence 

MAN GO Carac introduced the comforts of civilized life, can- 
not fail of amply rewarding the fortunate people who ſhall 
beſtow letters inſtead of quippos, and iron in place of more 
awkward ſubſtitutes. 

It is alledged the chablratics of the acts lately difco- | 
vered, do not bear any fimilitude to the civilized race of the 
Incas. In reply it may be urged, that many of the inhabi- 
tants, in parts of AMzrica adjoining to PRRU, were much 
leſs poliſhed than the natives of the iſlands here referred to. 
This is granted. But it is ſaid, „the Spaniards immediately 
« had reports of PsrU.” I have not heard that the natives 
of the iſlands lately diſcovered, were a/d after other 'coun- 
tries. But admitting that they are ignorant of any ſuch 
country, the fame kind of argument might be brought to 
prove, that there is no fuch empire as CHINA, for the na- 
tives of the BasHts iſlands, which lye between FoRMOSA and 
the PaiLiPINAs, know nothing of it. Whoever confiders at- 
tentively Ro EWEINx's defcription of EAS TER land, muſt fee 
the affinity to the Peruvian manners and religion: and when 
this is compared with Juan FERNANDEZ' report of the conti- 
nent he diſcovered, inhabited by civilized people, there will 
be little room left to doubt, that there is much to reward the 
diſcoverer, who ſhall add perſeverence to diſcretion. 

as | | The 


—— ̃ te. I, 
IS 


—— + egg ns tne 2 
= 
qv 


— ragg, 
N 


— 


A 


44 

4 
*s 
| 

1 


INTRODUCTION 


The ſubject of diſcoveries ſeems to be now reviving; as a 
member of ſociety, therefore, it deſerves an accurate diſcuſſion; 


but it demands immediate attention from every Engliſhman, 


for it may be very juſtly ſaid, the being of the Britiſh empire 
reſts on our inſular ſituation, and powerful navy. Were any 
of our competitors to gain the ſuperiority at ſea, the advan- 
tages of the fir/# would be loſt. Our navy, undoubtedly, is 
ſuperior to all others at preſent, becauſe our colonies are ſo. 
But if other nations are negligently permitted to extend their 
navigation to remote parts, and to gain ſuch an acceſſion of 
commerce and power as the diſcovery of a New World would 


afford to a liberal unbigotted people, the fabulous ſtory of 


Friar Bacon may be applied to this Wall of Braſs ; and we 
may then indeed cry, Time was----but time is paſt,” and 
in vain lament the ignorance, or worthleſſneſs of miniſters 


who were wanting in purſuing the true intereſts of their 


country. 


Octaber 7, 1769, 


MONTHLY REVIEW for MAY, 1769. 


HE Monthly Reviewers, in the Account of the Tract I pub- 
liſhed on the Southern Diſcoveries, ſay, | 

„The public has lately been gratified with a new edition of old voy- 
ages, relating to Southern Diſcoveries, in 3 vols. 8vo. under the title of 
Terra Auſtralis Cognita ; wherein the arguments in favour of profecuting 
diſcoveries in the ſouth parts of the Pacixic Ocgan, were revived, 
from the collection of voyages by HARRIS; who, with his late editor, 
are very full upon that ſubject.” Then conclude, © The voyages pro- 
miſed in a future publication, ſeem to be unneceſſary, as having already 
appeared in various forms, and particularly in the before-mentioned 
collection, expreſly on the ſame plan.” | - 

I am neither ſo humble. to ſubm't implicitly to the opinion, nor ſo 
ſelf-ſufficient entirely to deſpiſe the ſentiments of theMonthly Re- 
giſters, the profeſſed purpoſe of which is, to make a candid report of 
the books offered to the attention of the public. : 2 
As I have not acquieſced to the opinion of the Monthly Reviewers, 
« that any future publication was unneceſſary, I will give my reaſons 
for not paying any deference to their ſentiments on this head. 

It muſt be confeſſed, that it ſeems a little too precipitate for a critic 
to judge, that a publication is anneceſſary, when it impoflible to know 
what that publication will contain. Indeed I had, in the preface to 
the tract which the Monthly Reviewers give their judgment upon, 
mentioned that I was in poſſeſſion of ſome Spaniſh papers, without 
which TorRqQuEMaADA's relation of Qu iRos's voyage, in 1606, was un- 
intelligible; ſo that there was at leaſt an aſſertion of mine, which 
could not be contradicted, that ſome elucidation was to be expected 
from memorials which had never been publiſhed. _ DO 

The 3 vols. the Monthly Reviewers refer to, are, ſo far as relates to 
the ſouthern diſcoveries, a tranſlation of the H. des Navigat. aux 
Terres Auſtrales, except that the important voyage of MenDaANa, in 
1595, is omitted. Fo Hoy | BY 
M. DES BRossts, the ingenious author of the Hz. des Navigat. aux 
Terres Auſtrales, profeſſedly gives an abridgment of the Spaniſh voyages; 
my plan was to give a full tranſlation. Some of them never appeared in 
Engliſh, but in the tranſlation of M. pes BRosses' abridgment. The 
tranſlator had no recourſe to the original Spaniſh authorities; and 
MM. pes BRossES underſtanding very little Spaniſh, it is not wonderful 

many errors have crept into his abridgment, which it was impoſſible 
for the tranſlator to correct. | 5 = 

And having mentioned M. pes BRosses, I cannot avoid contraſting his 


ſentiments to the Monthly Reviewers, of the tract already publiſhed. 
f | Dijon, 


, 
1 


SH I — 


3 


r Ee par - r — — 


9 hs. - 7 


| 
1 
4 
> 
5 


5 Dijon, 8 June, 1769. 
Je J ai lu deux fois avec beaucoup d empreſſement et de plaifir. 1! eff 
rempli d'inſtruftions, d exactitude, & d'obſervations qui montrent comb ien 
vous ſraves joindre les reflextons a Fexperience.” | 


In a letter, dated Dijon, 18 Feb. 1767, he fays: 


«© Fe ſuis cliarmè d apprendre que vous travailles a raſſembler tous ce que 
nous avons de connoiſſances geographiques, hiſtoriques, et naturelles ſur le mer 
du ſud et la partie du globe que dans mon ouvrage j'ai appelle Polynefie ; j ai 
beaucoup d'empreſſement de voir votre ouvrage auſſi-tot que vous le ferez 
paroitre et de vous procurer, autant qu'il me ſera poſſible, les chaſes qui pour- 


ront vous tre utiles.“ 


Theſe are the ſentiments of a man ſolicitous to promote uſeful know- 
ledge, above all the little narrow ideas of the hackney trumpeter of a 


_ bookſeller. | 


I will refer it even to the Monthly Reviewers, whether their. ſenti- 
ments, that there is no occaſion for any future publication,” or 
the opinion of M. DES BROSs ES that there is,” deſerve moſt to be 
regarded. | | | | 

I confeſs the approbation of a man of letters, who has made the 
ſubject his particular ſtudy, weighs much more with me than the ſenti- 


ments of men who were ignorant of what they preſumed to decide upon. 


That they never examined HaRR1s, nor his modern editor, muſt, 
I think, be obvious to every one, as neither of theſe collections contain 
the Spaniſh voyages in this quarter. The modern editor, indeed, has 
abſtracted ſome part of QuiRos's memorials, and has inſerted many 
pertinent arguments in favour of proſecuting theſe diſcoveries. 'But | 
'the Monthly Reviewers cannot mean theſe arguments only, for the 
old edition of HARRIS has no arguments on the ſubject. 1 

I queſtion if the Monthly Reviewers ever read the tract they criti- 
ciſe, for Juan FERNAN DEZ diſcovery of the continent was never be- 
fore publiſhed; and as they muſt have read at leaſt the table of con- 
tents of the Terra Auſtralis Cognita, this circumſtance not mentioned 
in that work could ſcarcely have paſſed unobſerved. | 

The Work which I propoſed to publiſh, and of which this volume 
contains a part, is totally different from the plan of former collections, 
notwithſtanding the expreſs declaration of the Monthly Reviewers 
that it is on the ſame. I confine myſelf entirely to the diſcoveries 
made between SouTH-AMERICA and PAPUA, and give a literal tranſla- 
tion of the original writers. The plan of the Hit. des Navig. aux Terres 
Auſtrales comprehends all the countries little frequented in the ſouthern 
hemiſphere ; but, inſtead of a full tranſlation, it is declared to be an 


b abridgment. The tranſlator in Terra Auſtralis Cognita has only added 


a few papers, ſome of them foreign to the ſubject, as relative to the 


northern hemiſphere. 


XN 
o N WHICH THE 


CHART OF THE ' SOUTH SEA 


w A 8 R M E D. hs : 


— 


* is vhotended to e particularly the diſcoveries made 
—O__ in the voyages of 


rnb ND ARK Br NzvRa, in — 1598 


PRE DRO FERNAN DES DE QUu1R0s, | and 

Lovis VAREZ DE TokREs, of = c 1606 

Janes LE MaAiRE, and W. SCHOUTEN, = — 1617 
AkEL JansAn TasMAn, | on, 1642 
JAcos Roc EwEIx, a e 8 1722 


There are ſome leſs preciſe intimations, which, though not 
neglected, fo not admit an Cans degree of afurance as 16d 
above recited. 


ALVARO MEN DANS AD NEYRA, 5 
o -*:: 
PEDRO FERNANDES pz QUIROS, 1606. 


6 Qu1r0s favs, the Marquesas diſcovered by Man are 
1000 . leagues from LIMA, and 1000 Mari from the neareſt 
part of NRW- GulxxA. 

Daurizx places = Maxr i in 11479 26 E. longitude 


From LoNDoON 3. TASMAN in 149 48 E. the medium between 
. 8 B DAM- 


fs 


* 


. 
R 
25 
* 
. 


e 
ES. 


TREE ras 


+ 
" 
; 
3 
: 
& 
14 
1 
[ +3 
” 
| 
i 
4 
i 
7 
5 
27 
> 
: 
3 
7 
| 2 
| | 
' 


N 
| 
| 
| 
# 


25% 


DATA o nien THE CHART 


DamPitrand TasMaAN 14837 * is aſſumed as the longitude 
of cape ST. MARY. 

According to DAMPIER, the iſland of ST, Jounis 0? 44 E. 
acape ST. Mary, and is therefore i in „ 21'E. or 2109 39“ W. 
Lina being in W. long. 5 44: * 

Makes the difference of * devon 
ST. Jonn's and Lima, 85 33 55 
From LIMA to the MaRrqQuesas being 1000 leagues, or 3428', 


the difference of long. is 3492' = 589 12', which doubled for the 


diſtance from the MaRquesas to NEw-GuINEA, is 116 24 
Taken from long. of ST, Jonx's Lima, — 133 5 5 


leaves — — — 17 31 


Quixos's diſtance from LIMA to NeEw-GuinEA being ſo much 


deficient. 

It may be alledged, as Does did not go to New-Gouinza, 
that there is no proof of the MAarquesas being equi-diſtant 
from New-Gvuinta and AMERICA. But if Quiros's longitude 
of the MaRquesas be not deficient, his ſubſequent diſcovery 
of ManicoLo would contradict both ScuouTEN and TASMAN; 
for MAanicoLo cannot be farther weſt than the land of SA. 
Cruz, which Quizos reckons 1800 leagues from LIMA, not 
only from what Qui Ros inſinuates when he ſtood for that iſland 
from the bay of ST. PaiLie and ST. Jaco, but by his track 


from TAuMAco. By Quiros's reckoning * STA. CRUZ is in 


* 


* M. Pingré. (Mem. ſur le Tranſit de Venus, 4to. chez P. G. Cavelier, Paris, 
1767, p- 41.) mentions an eclipſe of the moon at Sta. Cruz: Figueroa ſays the moon 
was totally eclipſed when it appeared above the horizon [que al aſcender por el ori- 
ſonte venia ya toda eclipſada J. M. Pingre ſays the ſun ſet at Sta. Cruz at 6 hrs. 

min. and tliat the moon was then riſen 5 or 6 min. He determines the time of 
this eclipſe at Paris to have been iq hrs. 6 min. and therefore that Sta. Cruz muſt be 


at leaſt 13 hrs. 2 min. to the W. of Paris, which is equal to 164 30 E. Iong. a Paris, 


or 1665 55 E. of Pondon; but as Figueroa age, « the moon was already totally 
eclipſed 


» Tue SOUTHSEA was FORMED. 


longitude 104? 47'W.a LIMA, or 17829 E. a Lonpon; TAu- 
MAC in 109 8. lat. 98 58' W. long. a LIMA, or 1759 42 W. 
a London. From this laſt he ſtood to the ſouth-weſtward to 
ManicoLo, or TERRA DEL ESPIRITU SAN To, in 159 20'S. 
lat. ſo that Manicortois rather to the eaſtward than weſtward 
of STA. Cruz; and it is evident from ScuouTeNn, that MAni- 
coLo cannot lye to the eaſiward of HoxxRE 1SLAND in that lati- 
tude, as he ran down almoſt the whole breadth of the Paciric 
OCEAN in that parallel. Horne ISLAND, as will hereafter be 
ſhewn, is in 171? 29“ E. from London. Beſides, it appears 
evident from TorREs's route afterwards, that ManicoLo muſt * 
lye farther to the weſtward than Qu1Ros places it, for ToxREs 
ſailed along the coaſts of NEw-Guinta, &c. above 600 
| leagues = 34® whereas the longitude only from bay ST. Pui- 
LIP and ST. Jaco (if it is not more to the weſtward than 
178 29' ut ſupra), to the extremity of New-Gvuinzea, would 
be almoſt 509; although the diſtance mentioned by Torres, is 
conſonant enough to the ſituation in which I have placed Mani- 
colo, from the deduction of the Marquesas being equi- 
diſtant from New-Goinga and AMERICA. 
The exact longitude on the globe i is not the point in queſtion 3 
it is in view to reconcile the ſeveral voyages in this quarter, and 


from thence to deduce the reciprocal ſituations of their diſco- 
veries. 


eclipſed when. it roſe,” Sta. Ces is probably farther to the weſtward, though, ad- 
mitting any authority in Figueroa, it cannot be farther Hf. = de Pingre lays 


it down in 190% E. a Ferro, which is 1722 25 E. a London, or 5 4 farther eaft than 

the data in Figueroa admit, unleſs we ſuppoſe with M. Pingre (p. 41), “That by 
the moon in the horizon, Figueroa _— poſſibly mean a quarter of an hour after it 
was riſen.” 


Quiros's courſes from hence to Guam 8 that Sta. Gene | is at leaſt as far welt- 5 
ward as I have laid it down. 


B 2 From 


A 0 
* "os ä —_ Py” Re. — a} r 
— ? . 9 8 8 * L ——— 
1— bp 1 — — » —— 
nog — — — * 22 — — 


— — 


/ rs" 


r na 


ATTN 
NLA 


DATA o wacu Ti: CHART 
From the above poſition, Qu1Ros's diſcoveries in 1595 and 
1606 have been thus deduced: | +: 


W, long. 
| ' a Lima, 
| Leagues Min. D. long. 0 F 35 © , Long. a Lond, 
Max dus As 1000 23429 23492 58.12 526 4018 66.58 476.4414342. W. 
S. BEANTA Do 1400 4800 4889 81.29 795 5684 94-44 171. a8 
SOLITARY 1535 5262 5360 89.20 826 6186 103.6 270.80: 
STa. Cruz 1800 6172 6287 104.47 945 7231 120.31 162.45' E. 
The W. part g 6 6 6 
by Ficusroa 1850 0343 0401 107.41 971 7433 123.53 159-23 . 


For if 1000 leagues give 80 45 = 526' the given number of 
leagues will ſhew the deficiency in that diſtance, or 
116.24 : 133-55 :: Long. given : True Long. 


3 | Dif. long, W. long. Long. a Lond. 
Qu1iros's iſt iſland, ) Lea“. a Lima. | 


La ENCARNACI1ON, , 1000=3428'+526/=3954/=4165'=699.25 176.44. 146.9 W. 
in 25 S. lat. | 5 


G.. 11 12'S. 4018 miles. 
Taumacoin1o”S. lat. 1700 5829 893 6722 6831 113.51 


A - 


169.25 E. 
The other diſcoveries made by Qu Ros are regulated by theſe, 
and the time they were diſcovered, with ſome aſſiſtance from a 
few latitudes mentioned, and the general courſe from TauMaA- 
co to ManicoLo. ST. BERNARDO®, whoſe fituation is given 
5 | N = : a 

M. Pingre (p. 51) is certainly right in his application of the names to the firſt 13 
lands diſcovered by Quiros in 1606; but his conjectures about St. Bernardo are obvi- 
ouſly without foundation, independent of the improbability that the ſame name ſhould. 
be applied to tu iſtands nearly in the /ame latitude 3 Quiros did not ſee this iſland on 
St. Bernard's day; and if the name was not applied by him, it is clear, he not only gave 
this ifland no name, but takes no notice of it; for in one of his memorials, where he 
recites the iſlands he diſcovered in this voyage, after Sagitaria, La Fugitiva, and La del 


Peregrino, he names N*. Sen“. del Socorro, Monterrey, and Tucopia. The 4%, 
Quiros, in the ſame memorial, ſays was the iſland where the natives of Taumaco 


ſwam away from the ſhip : and Torquemada tells us, this happened at the iſland in 12 


deg. S. which was the firſt iſland they ſaw after leaving Taumaco. From hence it ap- 
pears, that Monterrey is the name Quiros gives to Taumaco, which indeed, as the 


firſt iſland they diſcovered with a port, it was very natural for him to name after the 


viceroy. | 
—Y . Between 


or Tus SOUTH SEA was FORMED. 


in MN DANA's voyage, is of great uſe in confining to ſome 
bounds of longitude the iſlands diſcovered by Quixos to the 
ſouthward, for it is obvious that the iſlands ſo called in this, were 
what he named ST. BERN AR Do in the former voyage: for neither 
were they now ſeen on ST. BERNARDo's day, nor does QUIRos, 
on the recapitulation, mention them now in the liſt of his dz/- 
coveries, as he does all the other iſlands. 

La ExcARNACION, or the 1ſt iſland, ToRQUuEMADA men- 
| wy to be in 258. | 

. Juan BayT1sTa, the ad, appears from Aras to lye 

in * S. for he tells us, when Quikos arrived at the latitude 
of 26? 8. he ſaw to the ſouthward very large hanging clouds, 
and a very thick horizon, with other known ſigns of a conti- 
nent, and a little iſland, inhabited by various kinds of birds, 
of very ſweet notes, which never breed, nor viſit Places, but 
at little diſtance from main land, 
SANnTELMo, the zd, is a lage iſland, and from thence ap- 
pears to be in 289 S. for ULTLOA, quoting DIEGO DE CorRDova 
for an account of Qu1Ros's voyage, ſays, e n they 
found a large iſland in 280 8. 
The latitude of LA DezENa, the roth iſland, 180 40' 8. 1s 
given by ToRqQueMaDa, and it muſt be nearly in the meridian 
of SANTELMO, as the difference of latitude is as much as they 


Between La del Peregrino arid Monterrey, Quiros only mentions one iſland which 
he had Wiſeavered; this he names Ne. Sen-. del Socorro: it muſt be what Torquemada 
calls Iſla de Gente Hermoſa, as there can be no doubt it is a diſcovery of Quiros. The 
name he mentions was probably given it from the ſmoaks they ſaw, when they firſt 
diſcovered it, and the hopes they thereupon entertained of obtaining refreſhments. 

From theſe circurnſtances it is clear, that the application of the name St. Bernardo 
to the iſland ſeen after La del Peregrino was not made by ſome bungling tranſcriber, as 
M. Pingre ſuppoſes, but by Quiros himſelf, And its ſituation is very effential in 
regulating the iſſands diſeovered by wy after leaving the iffand he named La En- 
carnacion. 


can 


= os 8 2 On PRI. = — - 
* 8 r 
ko - — 


DATA o wcnn Ts CHART 


van be ſuppoſed to have run in five days, the time they were from 


one to the other. | 
La SAGITARIA, ToRQUEMADA places in 179 40 8. | 
They failed from hence, February 12th, and in ꝙ days made 
ST. BERNARDO in 1029 30 S8. On the 14th they ſaw an iſland 
to the N. E., which they could not reach, and another the 
next day. They were named LA FuciTiva, and LA DEL PE- 


REGRINO. 
They were 8 days from ST. dena to ISL A DE GENTE 


HERMOSA; it appears this iſland, whoſe ſituation is not mentioned 


expreſsly, lyes rather under than above 109 S. for in the latter 
part of this voyage Quiros went into 10% 20 S. and ran in that 
parallel for STA. Cxuz. And leaving the iſland of HAx DSO E 
PEOPLE, ** He ſtood W. for STA. CRuz, being in its pa- 
rallel, and fell in with TAuMAco in 10? S. Alſo 1595, they 
kept between 10 and 11 S. from ST. BERNAR Do, and only 
ſaw SOLITARY ISLAND in 10 40'S. which they did not now 
ſee. They were 43 days between ST. BERNVA RDO and Tau- 


Z MAco, which differ 18? in longitude, that is 25'a day; and 


as they were 8 days to the iſland of Hanpsome PEOPLE, the 
diſtance is about 200 miles: it was alſo named NA. SENA. DEL 
SOCORRO, | 

They had ſigns of land all the way from ST. BERNARDo to 
TAUMACo, whoſe latitude and longitude is given by ARIAs. 

The next iſland to Taumaco was Tucoria, in 120 8. 

Na. SENI. DE La Luz, as ToRQUEMADa calls it, is in 14 8. 
but inſtead of this name, we find after TucopIA, ST. MaR- 
cos, in the memorials. | | 

Another to the weſtward was named EL VERGIL, OR THE 
GARDEN ; and 

Another larger to the fouthward, Las LAGRIMAS DE ST. 
* and 


: To 


or THB SOUTH SEA was FOR MED. 9 


To the ſouth-eaſtward another till larger, which appeared 
without end, full of great mountains, which ſeems to be part of 
ManicoLo. Quiros, after leaving the bay ST. PaiLie and 
ST, JAG, intending for the rendezvous at STA. Cruz, failed 
into 10% S. where they ſaw a ſail, which they knew to be an 
Indian embarkation ; but found they were fallen to leeward of. 
the STA. CRvuz iſlands, having loſt ground at the entrance of the 
bay of ST. PHIL Ir and Sr. Jaco, when they attempted to re- 

turn thither. From hence we have nearly the ſituation of this-. 
bay, which muſt be about the ſame meridian as STA. Cruz, 
that is 163? E. and in the latitude of 159 20 8. 

AR1As adds of this country, that the coaſt. they ſaw extends, 

from eaſt to weſt above 100 leagues (343). | 


JAMES LE MAIR E, 
AND 
WILL. SCHOUTEN, 1646, 


THE longitudes of this voyage are chiefly ubeh from 
Scho TEN's chart, admitting Juan FERNANDES to be in 789 30' 
W..aLonnon. Dos IsLAanD is by ScuouTEN's journal, g25 
German leagues = 619 4o', from the coaſtof Perv ; and by his 5 

chart 58 W. a Joan FErnaAnDEs, which is placed in his 
chart 30 40 W. from the coaſt; ſo that ScuouTen's journal 
and chart exactly agree in the Situation of Dos IsLanD from - 
the coaſt of PERU, whence ScCHouTEN reckons his diſtance, : 
though he never ſaw it. 

BaRLevs's map places the coaſt of PERU in that 1 
above 6 to the eaſtward. of Juan FERNXANDESs, and makes 
the diſtance between Dos IsLanD and Juan FERNANDESsC, 2 


— * = 
TEES . BF 6 - oy — » * FED 4 - . q 
— — . r 
2 os 2 2 2 22 7 — _ — . ——— —— prey - 2 


— — 
— — — 


e 4+ 4 2 

7 ke * . 

1 x BY bs = ES ES 9 r CS 
— KO 3 0 40 


© 
3 
a 
4 


DATA on waicu Tur C H AR T 


more than Schourx's chart, though Le MaiRe's relation. 
places Doe IsL AVD 20' nearer the coaſt than Schourx's 
journal. Indeed the maps and plates in BRL Rus, are obviouſly 
Pirated from Janson, notwithſtanding the introduction to 
BakIlrus condemns that voyage as ſurreptitious, and de- 
clares SCHoUTEN diſavowed it. However, an impartial view 
will entirely clear it of this charge, as there are few circum- 
ſtances wherein they materially "_ except 1 in the merits of 
SCHOUTEN. 

There are ſome ſituations in Ls MAIRE's voyage, omitted by 
SCHOUTEN ; theſe are deduced from the difference between the 
given diſtance, and 920, the number of German leagues Le 
MaiRE places Dos IsLanD from the coaſt of PERU, which 
gives the diſtance from Dos ISLAND. 

ScHOUTEN'S chart makes it 125 30“ from Lima to 87. 
Jokx's: which being by the former deduction 133555, gives 
89 25' for the deficiency of ScHouTEN's longitude. Then for 
the correction N | 

125.30 ; 133-55 :: long. given: true long. or 
125. 30: 8.25 :: long. given: deficiency. 
Which being added to the given longitude, is the true lon- 
gitude. | 


Long. a eoaſt | Jin a coaſt Long. a coaſt Long, a 
Lat, South of Peru. | of Peru, of Peru. Lond. 


Dos Is LAND $214: 785 1 $6 40 ee, 48 + 7450 140.8 W. 


SONDRE GROND 1.3 14. 35 '5 J 68 20 4100 275 4375 72 55 147 45 


WATERLAND 14. 46 69 20 4160 278 4438 73 58 148 48 
FLy ISLAND L. 15. 20 70 40 4240 284 4524 75 24 150 14 
Saw a Sail 15. 20 100 40 6040 405 6445 107 25 | 177 45 E* 
Cocos IsLaxp 16. 10 101 40 6100 409 6 108 29 176 41 
Per chart 40 a Doc 1s8LanD. | | 
Hoye IsLanD 103 40 6220 417 110 37 174 33 
Horns IsLAND 14. 56 106 40 6400 429 113 49 171 21 
Per chart 3* a Hoyz IsLanp. . | . . 
16. 5 106 40 >; 113 49 47121 
| | The 


—— 


r Rn FR OT Ie Tn LT: e . / —ͥÄ J ͤ RS 
EIS 


or Tus SOUTHSEA was FORMED. 9 
The ſituations from LR MAliRE are, 
+ e, Long. Long. W. Long. of Long. a 

| Lat. S. a Dog I. a coaſt Peru. | a coaſt Peru, coaſt Peru. Lond, 

19 March 17%30' 3800 E. 2340 W. 1420 95'/=I515"=25*15*+74*%F0'=100%; W. 
24 15.00 30.40 31.00 1860 124 1984 33.04 107.54 
No Var. 3 April 14.12 13.00 - 48.40 2920 195 3115 51.55 12 6.45 
3 May 15 00 25. 20 W. 87.00 5220 350 5570 92.50 10 

Vid. Schouten 16.05 42.00 103.40 6220 417 6637 110.37 174.33 E. 


So that Lx Marks places HoRNE ISLAND 3 farther eaſtward 
than SchourEN; but as he does not give the diſtance of ST. 


Jonx's from the coaſt of PERu, it is impoſſible to deduce his 
longitude truly. 


ABEL JANSAN TASMAN, 1642. 


THE various relations of TasMan's voyage differ very conſi- 
derably in the longitudes; particularly of Mauritius, which 


muſt be a ſtandard for reguigting the other fituations. 


Mauritius i is l wen fl — 1784.7 
Thevenot, 833. o8 
Campbell, 83.48 
Mauritius is by the Con. des Temps, in — — 57233 E. Long. a Lond, 


So that Taſman's firſt enn will be by Valentyn 21g W. 
Thevenot 25.35 
Campbell 26.15 


That of 3 is Amed here. 


The ſeveral relations place C. St. Mary in — 171.02 

Which by Valentyn's meridian, is — 14948 / E. a London. 
Dampier places C. St. Mary in — 147-26 E. a London. 

The medium aſſumed is — 148.37 

Which! is leſs than Taſman's account — 1.11 


According to this correction all TasMAw' s diſcoveries from 
Van Ditmen's Land and NEw-ZEALAND to C. ST. Mary 
are determined. 


For the ſatisfaction of the curious, the following table of 
comparative fituations is inſerted, the longitudes being the ſame 


as in the originals; the laſt column contains the longitude 
aſſumed from Loxpox, 


8 | 1642 


* 
"£3 


FI 
- RS ng . 0 


Rt e 
K SME 8 WLAN 


— — 
- — ore he 


DATA on wmcn Tus CH ART 


De Hondt. | Valentyn. Thevenot 2 Campbell. 
Lat. Long. | Fo Long. Lat. Lat. | Long. 


2642 LE Tod r 
5 Sept. Mauritius — | 20.20 | 78.47 . 83.08 [20.200 83.48 
22 Oct. — h | 14547] 39444 
29 wo _— 45-47 | 89-44. | 
| 49.041 14.56 [46. 


6 Nov. my | 
* — 49.04 114.56 ——— 
15 — 44-33[140-32 
21 — . . — | ; — 158.00 | 
S — 42.58 : [4 
42.25 [163.50 | 42. 3-50 [42-25|163.50 


43-10]167-55 67.55 ff; 1067.55 
6 41.341 OO |} 

7 [167-29 | 42. 29 [42-37|176-29 
Swelk fr S. W. | 
1 


13 Saw New Zeland —[42.14|189.01] 42.10 [188,28 | 42.10 [188.2 [42.10 188.28 
18 Murderer's yay —[40- 25 40.50[191.41 41 [40-50|[191.41 
4 January | wel 34+35 91.09 og [34-35|191-09 
Three King's ; Hand — 34-25 [190.40 | — 
3 32.25 192.20 } 32.25 1192.20 30. 2519. ao 


E 


—_— 


8 — 


I 1 1 * * 4 — St a * 7 — "> ö — rl — *. 
a wh. — 4 9 8 r 22 2 W 
RE EEE we — SS — 


— 


2 
Saw Van Diemens Land 
1 Dec. Fr. HenrickBa 
5 — 
9 _ 


— 1 


2" 


al = SERIES. "WY 


— 2 


—— 


4 


22 — 
16 — 


Tad Pylſtaart 
21 Amſterdam I. 
25 Rotterdam I. 
6 Feb. 


EC a Te En en 
4 2 


05 30.05 [195.27 
. 26. 99. 26.29 199.32 
204.15 . OY 22. 35 20415 


205.29 o [205.29 [21.20|205.29 2 
206.19 20. 15206. 19 
201.35 f 35 7.19201. 35 
1199-31 } 75 Po 199-31 
| 10.309335 
13-451193-35 |— 
9.489343 — 
9.110192. 46 
7. 460190. 47 
10.12 186. 14 — 
20 | ; 5-15]181.16 | 
22 Saw Onthong ym. : + 42 + 5. 5.02}178.32 | 
25 — | 35 (175. 4.35175. 10 


26 | : | 
1 April, . n we ä 1 
6 Cape St. Mary — 4-30 0 [171.02 —— Ly 


. 


* * e d i= 
2 nnn By 


1 
„ 


— 
—— = 


= 


— 
— 
— 
— 
— 


„ ates: 
3 


— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 


watts, eee,» > >> aca 8 
. — — 2 


* „ 

. * 
F 
— — — . eo 


3 


e 


— 


. 
\ 1 . 
2. 1 
2 * 
oP —— 
pb 


— 4 — 


TasMAN's diſcoveries are partly laid Has from this table, anal partly 
from the charts of his diſcoveries, publiſhed by VaALENTYN, the 
longitude in theſe charts being regulated in the amy manner. 


1 AC OR 


— 


CC 
VVV 


or rux SOUTH SEA. was FOR MED. 


JACOB ROGGEWEIN, 7722. 


5 4to. Dok r, 1728. 8vo. Hacvue, 1739. 


THE ſituations given in the Dutch relation of Ro] 't 


voyage differ very much from the French account: the firſt 
iſland ſeen after they left Eas ER I8LAND, is not taken notice 
of in the Dutch account ; but the Freneh relation ſays it was 


by ſome imagined to be the ſame Scheur zx named Dog 
ISLAND; others thought it a new diſcovery, and named it 
CaARLSHOFF. The ifland where the African galley was loſt, 
and thoſe near it, adjoin to the iſlands diſcovered by Scuop Ten; 


perhaps ſome of them may have been thoſe ſeen by SchourEN, 


but it appears to me more probable, that the iſlands diſcovered 
by RoeGgwein lye between Dos IsLAanD and SONDRE-GROND. 
The longitudes in the French relation have been conſidered 


as enigmatical ; it appears evident to me, the author, a native of 


MECKLENBuRGH, reckons his firſt meridian from his own coun- 
try; for SEBASTIAN, in BRASIL, is placed in 60 longitude z 


this place being 45 W. from Loxpox, hence his u meri- 


dian muſt be 15 E. from Lonpov. 
In 280 8. they were in 251 longitude. As they fail weſt- 
ward their longitudes increaſe ; but 251% W. from MckTEN- 


BURGH, Or 2 369 W. from Loxnpon (= 1249 E.) is the ſituation 


of NEw-H LL An, inſtead of a few days fail from Juan Fegr- 
NANDES, as they then were, reckoning the longitude 251 E. it 
it will be equal to 266 E. or 94% W. from Lox Do. 

They failed W. 129, when they diſcovered EAs TER ISLAND 
in 289 30' S. which is therefore in 1069 W. longitude. 


Cz | The 


* 
* r 


. EE aaa 


+: 6h 

1 
2 

* 

1 
* . 

EY 

7. 

= 

"i = 

wi 
7 1 

Bit 
4M 
* 
5 
i 
; * 
11 
MI 
oy 
11 
KP 
: 
1 
" 87 
1 
* - 
. 
4 
#01 

145 

. 

mM 
* 

1 

M0 
J 5 

= 

15:9 

14 

Mit 

$1 

P:} 
Ml a '? F 

L 1 
4 4 54 

0 * 
. 
, 
7” *# 
l X 
* 
0 

4, 
33 {4 4 
79 | 
* 

7 1 
1% 
, it 

* 2 1 

$24 

0 

* 

11 

5 
441 
7 
7 
53 
: 
4 
as, | 
4 
+ 
* 
4 
J 
1 
= 
q 
17 
6 


3 


* 
: = 8 
. watt; 


LSE r 
2 
= 


DATA o waricyn THE CHART 
The longitude 2399 given to EasTER IsLAND in the Hit. 
des Navig. aux Terres Auſtrales, and other authors, is not in 
the original, and is only deduced by ſubtracting 129 from 2 S's 
but the original increaſes the longitude as they go weſtward. 
The Dutch relation places EasTzR IsLAanDin 27% 8. lat. hw 


268% 9 W. The Dutch longitudes are generally reckoned: 
from TENER1FE, and conſequently it being 16* 27' W. from 


Lox pon; the ſituation of EasTER IsLAnD will be 108 27 W. 


But the chart accompanying the Dutch relation makes it only 
21 from EAST ER ISLAND to JUAN FERNANDEs; and conſe- 
quently Eas TER ISLAND is not near ſo far to the weſtward as 


above deſcri bed. 


According to this chart the firſt meridian paſſes 8 the 


GRAND Canary, which is made 1 5? 30 W. from LoxpoN: 


Joan FERNANDES is in the longitude of 289, or 719 W. add 
15 30 is 869 30 W. a LoN DON but Juan FernanDEs being 


only 78 30 W. the longitude of the chart is 8 too much. 


EAsTER Is. AND is by this chart in 2680 or 929 W. add 
+ 30' is 107 30 W. but if we deduct the 89, it is only in 


999 30 W. 


The author of the lives of the Governors of BaTAvia Gags : 
the original MSS. of admiral JacoB Ro6GEwWEIN's' voyage was 
very conformable to the relation publiſhed. at the HA uE; but 


he contradicts this relation, for he ſays EAST ER Is B Ax is in. 


27% 4 S. and in 265 42“ long. or 949 18' W. that is, (ſuppoſing 
he reckons from TENERIFE, as the Dutch generally do) in. 


11045 W. from London, He further ſays it is 658 leagues. 


to the weſt of Copi AO. If theſe are Dutch they will make 
2632 = 439 52“ diff. long. 499 15' = 1209 W. if anche 
36 56' = 108? of long. W. from LoxnnoNn.. 


or ThE SOUTH SEA was FOR MED. 


I have here ſubjoined a table ſhewing the poſition of EasTER 


IsLAND, according to the various accounts. 


Long. Lat. Long. W. aLond. 


French relationꝛq — 2639.0 280.30 VB. T 106% 0d 
Dutch relation — 268. oo 27.00 | 
Suppoſing Teneriffe 1ſt mer. EIS — J 08.27 
Suppoſing Canary, as in chart — 107. 30 
By chart a Juan Fernandes 1m —ʃ — 99. 30 
Hiſtory of Governors of Batavia 1 | 
Suppoſing Teneriffe 1ſt Mer, 265.42 27.04 „ 
65 8 Is. W. a Copiapo, if Dutch 4915 — — 120.00 
If French 36.56 — 108.0 
3 760. 12 
| Medium — 108.36 
French relation — | — ; x 1062.00, 
Dutch relation — — 108.27 
Hiſtory of Dutch governorsekꝛ⁊́æ | 110.45 
= Ns | | ; a ELLE _ $2542 
Medium — 108, 24 


The chart in the Dutch account of this voyage places Juan 
FERNANDES in 1220 E. from the eaſtern part of NEwW-BRI- 


TAIN; JUAN FERNANDEs being 25 from LIMA. The longitude: 


between NEw-BRITAIN and LIMA will be 124 according to 
ROGGREwWwEIN. This longitude having been ſuppoſed 133? 65. 
The proportion for the correction of RosGEwEIN's longitude 


will be 
124? : 133" 55 
or nearly 


124 
tion required. 


: longitude : true longitude, 


10 addition :: longitude a Juan FERNANDES : addi- 


F have in the chart placed EASTER IsLAND in 1060 30 W. 


as it agrees to the. diſcovery of Davis ; but I am not ſatisfied: 
In the following table I have 


expreſſed the ſituations according to the Dutch relation and: 


that this is the exact ſituation. 


1 chart ; 3 


13 


13.41 


The French relation is more eircumſtantial than the Dutch 
in enumerating the iſlands after leaving EASTER ISLAND, al- 


though the longitudes are obvioufly erroneous. It may be uſe- 
ful to ſee how theſe iſlands are fituated with 2 to each 


other, according to'the French relation, 


Bauman [lands 


The 


7 DATA ON WHICH THE. CHART 
chart; the iſt column contains the latitude, the 2d the date, 
the 3d the places, the 4th the longitude from Juan Frrnan- 
DEs, the 5th the addition made according to the correction 
above ftated, the 6th the longitude from Juan Fernanpes 
after this correction, the 7th the longitude from Lon pon, ad- 
mitting Juan FERNX AN DES to be in 789 30 W. the 8th is the 
longitude from EAs TER IsLAnD according to the Dutch rela- 
tion, gth the longitude from Eas TER ISLAND according to the 
Dutch chart, and f1oth, the * ancordang to the French 
| 5 | 5 
Long. Cor. lon. Long. D. relat. D. chart F. relat. 
Lat. 3 a a a a 
| Juan "al J. Fern. Lond. Eaſter I. Eaſter I, Eaſter I. 
X 5 ” . F 
28.00 A2 8 6 3 April Prince's L 14.09 +1; 1.07 — 15.07 93-37 — 7:06 E. 
27.00 8 Eaſter I. 21.00 1.41 22.41 101.11 =— , * — 
„ bg .-? 33-00 2.39 35-39 114.09 .— _ 
23. 2 8. 27 34-30 2.46 37.16 115.46 — 13. 2 
14.41 8. be May, PerniciousI. $7.00 4.35 61.35 140.05 — 36.00 17.36 
15. 00 S. per cht. 25 Fly I. of Schouten 60.30 4.52 65.22 143.52 — 39.30 — 
15.17 8. 29 Foul Iſlands 65.00 5. 14 70.14 148-44 44-00 44-00 18.51 
15.47 8. 1 June, 53 SHER 64.42 5-13 69.55 148.25 43-42 43-42 22.00 
15.16 8. 8 83.52 6.45 90.37 169.07 62.52 — — 
15.0 S. per cht. 14 Bauman Iſlands 87.30 7.03 94.33 173.3 — 66. * 8 
5 15 Single Iflaad 388.48 7:09 95:54 174.24 67.45 68. 30 1 


| | Lat. Long. Long. aEaſterT. 
Eaſter Iſland — ä ( —— 289. 300 8. 8 3 | 
Carlſhoff — 15.45 _ 280.00 199.00, 
Pernicious Iſlands, 4 iſlands —— — 17.36 
12 leagues (360) W. a Carlſhoff e ; 
Aurora 8 leagues (24 ) ns a Pernicious — — 18.00 
Veſper | 
Labyrinth 6 iſlands 25 1 (750 w. a Pernicious — 18.5 1 
zo leagues in extent 
Recreation — 16.00 283.00 22.00 
— 12.00 99.00 27.00 


or THE SOUTH SE A was FORMED. 


The French relation does not give the longitude of New- 
BRITAIN ; ſo that there is no ſtandard for correction. 
The Dutch places New-BziTain in 1669 long. and conſe- 
quently makes it 1029 oo' from the eaſtern part of Nxw-BRI- 


TAIN to EASTER ISLAND; which, admitting EAs TER ISLAND 


to be in 1069 3o', I make 104 9, the Dutch being 20 9 defi- 


cient of my calculation: therefore 


1029. 00: 209 :: long. a EAs TER ISLAND: addition required. 


According to this correction the following i is the table of the 


Dutch ſituations. The laſt column is the longitude a LoNDON, 


ſuppoſing EASTER IsLAND to be in 108? 30 W. 


Lon 5 "Cab Long. a Lo 
Lat. Eaſter. Correct. a Eaſter I 7s ag 2 on. 


; . 8 898 oO + © „ 
Eaſter Iſland 270008s— — — 106. 30 108. 30 
Carlſhoff | | ; 

Pernicious Hlands 214-41 | 

Foul Iſlands 15.17 44-00 + 0.56 44-56 151.26 152.30 
Recreation 16:47 43-428 Mee 44-37 151.07 152.12 
Bauman Iſlands 1 8 

Single Iſland 13.414 67.45 1.26 69.11 175-44 176.15 


This table is not entirely conſonant to the chart I have given 
of the Sour RH SEA; but I did not think it was neceffary to alter 
the chart, as RocGewein's diſcoveries are not fo exactly deter- 
mined, that a few degrees of longitude can be eſſential; as the 
DoLenin, in her firſt voyage, found ſome veſtiges of the Afri- 


can galley, which was loſt at PERNICIous ISLANDS, the jour- 


nal of that ſhip will, perhaps, explain Roccewein's lon- 
gitudes. | : 


O F 


15 


OF THE 


SALOMON ISLANDS. 
OT only our writers, but the Spaniards themſelves, 
have committed great errors in re-capitulating the diſco- 

veries of theſe iſlands : it is, therefore, requiſite to treat the 

ſubject with the utmoſt attention, in order to avoid the confuſion 

and perplexity which has been introduced. from the want of 4 

cautious examination of authorities. 

Dr Bxv, in his map publiſhed at FranxrorrT, in 1596, the 
very year MEN DAN A's ſhip arrived at MAxILA, and conſe- 
quently, without any information from that voyage, deſcribes 

the Sa LOMO IsL Ax ps: a minute examination of this map will 
evince that theſe iſlands are what we now call NREw-BRITAIN, 
whereof DAM IRR gives a map. The compariſon of this map 
with De Bxy's convinced me many years ago of the point here 
alledged ; and in the accompanying map I have expreſſed my 
idea of them: it may be, therefore, neceſſary to explain how it 
was conſtructed. Firſt a copy was made of DAMIER; Ds BRV 
was then examined, and as cape 8. GroRGe and cape ST. 

Mak were diſtinguiſhable points, the iſland ST. Jaco was 

eaſily determined: it cannot fail of ſtriking every one how great 

the ſimilitude is in the two maps from cape ST. Mary round 
_ cape ST. GRORORE. Damritr's low land, northward of cape 

ST. Mary's, pointed out the next channel : SLINGER's bay is 

obviouſly another; DAIER deſcribes it thus. We got 

« within the mouth of the bay, and ſounded ſeveral times, but 

had no ground, though within a mile of the ſhore, the baſon 

© of the bay was above two miles within us, in which we 


« might have gone; but as I was not aſſured of anchorage there, 
. 66 ſo 


OF THE SALOMON ISLANDS. 

« '{ thought it not prudent to run in at this time, it being near 
night, and ſeeing a black tornado riſing in the weſt.” This 
deſcription ſeems to intimate that the lands overlap ; but the 
depth implies that it was a ſtrait; the iſlands on each fide of it 

are laid down in Dz Bxy, but without names; they are the Ra- 
Mos, and ST. Juan of HERRERA. The low iſlands, to the 
northward of the largeſt of theſe, are denoted by, DAMPIER, 
and poſſibly may be what DE Bxy places to the eaſtward of 
ISABELLA 3 however theſe iſlots cannot be expected to be mi- 
nutely deſcribed in either. ST. Joun's iſland of DaMereR has 
no place in DE Bxy ; ANT. Cave's iſlands are deſcribed as one 
only, nearly in the ſituation given to them by Damerer ; his 


long nameleſs iſland is MALARTA DE AGUADA of DR BRy, and 


MarLaiTa of HERRERA; WISsHART's iſland 1 is, I conceive, the 


ATREGUADA of HERRERA; it is without name in De Bry: and 


that without name in DAMPER, to the northward of Wisnarr, 
is called by De Bxx, NomBRE DE JESUS. Cape SaLOMASWER of 
DAMpizR ſeems to be the round iſland of De Bxr to the 
northward of ISABELLA. SQUALLY iſland, &c. "0G no place 
in De Bey. 1 ; 
The ſouthern part of the iſlands is to be found in DAMeIER 
only; his two iſlands near cape ST. GeoRGE are probably STA. 


CATALINA, and SrA. ANNA, of HERRERA. The channel 


called ST. GeorGE's by DAMPIER, he deſcribes thus, The 
land from (cape ST. Grokox trends W. N. W. 10 leagues, 
c which is as far as we could ſee it, and between it and ano- 
« ther point to the weſtward, about 10 leagues diſtant, there 


<« runs in a deep bay; for 20 leagues or more we ſaw ſome ſpots 


like iſlands down in that bay at a great diſtance, but whether 


they are iſlands, or the main cloſing there, we know not.” 


Theſe ſpots, I conceive, are hills on the iſland northward of 
.'D 5 


18 


OF THE SALOMON ISLANDS. 


r. Jaco. ST.'Jaco appears in HzrRERaA's deſcription to be 
94 D BRV calls CHRISTOoVAL, & vice verſa. 

The iſland ISABELLA, north fide of Da do, as Dr BRV 
calls it, &c. are from DE Bxy. The ſmall iſlands TxES Ma- 
RIAS of HeRRERA are probably the eaſtern three adjoining to the 
long nameleſs iſland of Dameies, or MALAITA of HERRERA. 

ST. Juan of HERRERA lies between ATREGUADA and ST. 
Jaco, as he names it, or CHRISTOVAL of DER BRV which 
correſponds, as before-mentioned, to the iſland on the ſouth ſide 
of SLINGER's BAY ; that on the north fide is the Ramos of 
H&RRERA, Which, agreeable to his deſcription, lies eaſt from 


IsaRELLA. Between them he places three iſlands, BuRNA- 


VisTa, Sr. DiMas, and Froripa which I preſume are the 
three iſlands laid down in De Bry, though, according to 


HERRERA they are conſiderably larger than here deſcribed. 


ST. Marx, ARACIFEs, and GERONIMo correſpond to HER- 
RERA's deſcription, and are parts of what Dt BR calls Dacoa.. 
It is very poſſible they may be divided by channels into ſeveral | 
iſlands; port MonTaGus may be one channel, and DR BRx 
lays down an inlet, which falls betw-ꝗeen the 8. cape and cape 
ANNE Of DAMPIER. 

ST. Mark and ST. NicoLas are probably two diſtinct iſlands, 
and alſo ST. GroRGE and BoR EI other two; theſe laſt, I ima- 
gine, are the two to the ſouthward of IsABELLA. | | 

GUADALCANAL is S. W. from hence, according t to HERRERA, 
and whether we underſtand the computation to be from ISA- 
BELLA or GERONIMo, it proves this land to be NeEw-Guinea. 
Lopez Vaz ſays, they coaſted GUADALCANAL 150 leagues 
(which is 514 miles), to 18 deg. S. *; but it does not appear 
that he is preciſe enough for us to judge of the extent of this 


Probably an error of the preſs for 15 deg. 8. 
country 


OF THE SALOMON ISLANDS. 


country from his report; nor does he inform us from what 
point this diſtance is to be reckoned. . 
HEeRRERA's map, the work of ſome bungling geographer, is 
entirely diſſonant to his deſcription ; he ſays ST. Maxx, and 
ST. NicoLas are to the S. E. of ISABELLA; the map places them 
to the 8. W. with ARAcirzs between them: HrgrreRa's 
deſcription places ST. GeRonIMo, and not ST. Makk, to the 
weſtward of ARAciFEs. GUADALCANAL is to the S. and S. E. 
of ISABELLA, by the map; but by the deſcription $. W. Theſe 
inſtances are enough to ſhew no attention is due to HERRERA“s 
map. : 
All the printed accounts of the Spaniſh diſcoveries in this 


quarter before 1595, are confuſed and inconſiſtent ; this is 


owing to our not having the original journals of the navi- 


gators employed in theſe expeditions. Thus, though it will 
be found no difficult matter to trace HERRERA in the plan, 
the ſize he gives of all the iſlands is vaſtly greater than what 


DamPieR's obſervations confine us to. HERRERA's latitudes, as 
well as DE BRV's, exceed the truth by many degrees, IS A- 
BELLA being placed by them between 8 and 9 deg. S. inſtead of 
4 deg. to 5 deg. S. This error in the latitude has been the great 
ſource of the confuſion we meet with, and has prevented it from 
beingobſerved,'that the SALoMoN iſlands, diſcovered in 1567, are, 
in fact, NEw-BRITAIN, as a due compariſon of Dx Bxy's map, 
and HerreRa's deſcription with DAMPIER will plainly evince, 
The ſituation of theſe iſlands at the extremity of NEw-Guinza, 
one would have imagined, pointed this fact too clearly to have 


been overlooked by geographers, but DANvILLE has not com- 
prehended this part in his map of ASIA, and there is no other 


modern who deſerves the name. 
Not only DR BRv's, but all the d maps, i « the Aſſem- 
blage of Es adjoining to this part of New-GUINEA, the 
92 SAL o- 


19 


20 


OF THE SALOMON ISLANDS. 


SALoMoN iſlands, and it is the modern maps only which appro- 

priate this name to iſlands in the middle of the ocean. ORTE- 
Lius's maps, 1587, and 1589, lay them down at the termina- 
tion of New-Guinza, from 1 deg. to 11 deg. S. lat. The ex- 
tent eaſtward is protracted beyond all meaſure, comprehending 


20 deg. of longitude. The two draughts do not agree, and 


both ſeem to be laid down at random: of all the ancient charts, 
DE BRV's ſeems to be the beſt and moſt explanatory. 

HERRERA will help to confirm the poſition, ** that the Sa LoMON 
lands are NEwW-BRTITAIN: for after giving a detail of the coaſt 


of New-Gvinea, the firſt point whereof he places 100 leagues. 


(5 deg. 28 min.) E. a JizoLo, in little more than 1 deg. S. he 
ſays it extends from hence eaſtward to the latitude of 5 deg. or 6 
deg. S. about 300 leagues (1028 min. = 17 deg. 8 min.) which 
agrees exactly to DAMPIER's map; for cape Goop Hop be- 
ing 3 deg. to the E. of Ji.oLo, and ST. Jonx's by DAxPIER 
19 deg. 30 min. from cape Goop Hoes, places ST. Jonn's 22 


deg. 30 min. from JiLoLo; and by HERRERa, the extreme be- 


ing 17 deg. 8 min. from PRIMERA PN TA, which is 5 deg.. 
28 min. from JiLoto, the ſum 22 deg. 36 x min. is the ſituation 
of the extreme from JiLoLo. 

Although DR Bxy deſcribes Dacoa as an iſland, it was 
afterwards ſuppoſed to be part of NEw-GuiNea ; and although. 
it was probably known in the firſt voyage to be ſeparated from. 
NEw-GulN EA, the little preciſion in the reports we have of. 


that voyage, makes it not wonderful a contrary opinion ſhould. 


gain ground, till DAMP1ER put the matter out of doubt by ſail- 
ing between them. A circumſtance he ae is of great uſe 
in tracing the ſource of this ill- grounded opinion, which is to 
be found in many maps. Some years ago I ſaw a Spaniſh MS. 
chart, with Qu1Ros' s track on this coaſt; I had at that. 
time ſcarce ability, and no opportunity, to examine it mi- 
| 2 | nutely 


OF THE SALOMON ISLANDS. 
nutely ; this chart laid down. what we call NEw-BRITAIN as a 
continued land joining to the main of New-GuiNnEA, and form- 
ing a deep elbow on the north ; it continued the coaſt much 
farther ſouthward, than DamettR places N EW-BRITAIN, but. 
although Dameitk has omitted it in his chart, he faw. land to 
the ſouthward, being off ST. Grorce's bay, he ſays, © we 
<« ſaw other land to the S. E. of the weſternmoſt point, which. 
<« till then was clouded ; it. was very high land, and the ſame 
% we ſaw the day before that diſappeared in a cloud when: 
<« a-breaſt of cape ST. GeoRGcx, the weſtern point bearing W. 
< by S. 2 S. and the diſtant land 8. W. by S. 12, or 14 leagues.” 
This Iand is propably the high iſland adjoining to Burri, in 
the GEELVIxE 's voyage; and theſe iſlands probably led the: 
SPANIARDS into the error of deſcribing it as a continued coaſt. 

It has been obſerved, HzrreR A places PRIMERA PUNTA, on 


NEew-GvuiNEA, in 1 deg. S. lat. 5 f E. of JiLoLo : to underſtand. 
this it will be neceſſary to refer to the ancient charts, wherein 


PRIMERA PUNTA is placed on the eaſt ſide of a ſtrait dividing 
Nzw-GviNnea from the iſlands to the weſtward, which in gene- 
ral went under the name of Pap UA: in this ſtrait lies a large 


iſland, called MzNESsESs iſland, from D. Jokct DE MENESES, 
vho wintered ſomewhere to the northward of it in 1527. Theſe: 


maps call the large iſland of Pap uA, which forms the ſtrait on 
the weſt fide, IRA M, though it is probable this is divided into 
ſeveral by channels, as is reported in the firſt diſcovery by the: 
PorTUuGUEsE, in 1511.—- Having determined what and where 
the SALoMoN iflands are, it would be foreign to the ſubje& to 


enter into a detail of the reports concerning them and the other: 


parts of PAeUA. 


21 


*Lol1 cob s 46941 snuꝰ A 5p au of ang · ud 424Jurg ur ron: zo yreayqy 1 
*OWTI 8 ned dd d. II oA Froaod 4q —— N Jo JuawIpruqy | 
uomoſſoo $,30U2A2y 7, ur 2onandrg Jo juam3rag | | | 
gd rd 97 £191 orb pripeq our op sinbeM RN Ip euepua oxraſy £6S1 
ox} ezopuagy op oprunff rb uo ep eo roieng i op zb0reng feachn⁰jU,j,ũỹ N 
*bog1 o t D, d 9 o sruidriꝗ self op song 

810 ur wry 49 paynqnd e310] oruouuy uod 1 03 Som woaz 4230] e Jo Adoo 'SIN + 

5861 d 0A » oh · so X NL 2 


ruf ,frpepuny ewrT „„ sopfarueg A eyaoy oaanuzeg r ο op 0ap2g uod A n Jo opuryr 


9151 moqe {i2n 
% 20447 ,zopurung urnſ 221d aur aye 9s un olle) 03 paquaaje Ao 1 
55 3o inoum am pur su. XII 8 Spuryr oi poop ay IS uf: oweu _: AT uenſ 9181 moqgy 
514 eq dada spurhf "7 p242409pp Zapuruinag urn ASI ul rf $11O'F urn : 
*£191 o ? 4 


ep1aprJl Sane op oprImIH rare) uod 2p deen &eoxanIrg Ip zbreng ſeach ri | 
2 | 'ghgr ©woy ora | | 
; g "HUD Ma pe — — Soοοα uuedg 868 1 10 
£12010} sIrr1oο 8N pur poꝛuiid 30 uomollo e ur. eraowaJy Se1ry $mo'T uenſ ſ „ | 
10g d III Toa yinpPrgy ur Ze A 20d 
068 To prapryy S1 'I 7| *ryooy ydajoſ 1 
68 d I *o serpur $2] ↄp uorodiagpag H ny 
*I091 *03Þ fuopuo'T fog d 
6rapry pied 113ug uf payyriqud ©SSS1 on pjzo om 30 82332A0oRICe $OUTATEO) openeaſy pur 
r — raxneliig pururp ie 1881 
M der * p¹⁰˙ EN soοnνμν $21 op ryinbuog vſojuod r * 1 [ 
6 0 8 q cl proreo'g es op won} 
Is -oxþ oo urin pue xnope8ꝗ 
86% 1 <prapryy rufdindd sch sri ap vymbuog fardjeg 4 
gor uqju *01 © *$ qu 'S p se b— souruſe de opuruioH QUEST 
*£9S1 2a ss d I oa oynwry 5 
grU *%$222quy I D «qt t p Rana 


*uorgayoq Au ur axe qi ie ponnquod sonny 2113 pur so 


FW CT ES 
JJ ORE 


mo Re . 8 
*2Jpuodo trapondanb gajuannauoati spe 1 : J 
oyandjax 1 uobr Iod x Ip sexpur sv x ondꝗ aj onb | 
pep118an xj opueqoad op x seudrmyg op ory off þ 149 d fu0aT Ip ohUανẽI tleaqrT epmg 69 bay 7 jo 
uoo ond op opuarjez fuowojeg ap S211 sri Ip "PEE: OY 195 
uopr q 4 ryinbuog vx opuarprd An je fenoẽ˖üid. | | 880 
odo uornayur ny op 6 403 | | : 
„ ped *x +5 *1 © eaoptirg ojuory q un gg 149 d tuo op opuny — — — opnouriꝗ so tk 
e sei SY] IC | | | Io 


*aokrj 

070 20zne jo opuay rurpus IP. O oprauaſ : p Ie Ng 
-?PY Þ obi uouoſeg op seht Sex Ip ouawariq 149 * <u02T p bad 79 I ep *onoy _ cogollrg urutoff 
-najop jr nb oxawnad aſery r epeuaof x| Ip uorepy 
| *panoNuauT aa 


*$10ymy 
urriqo 01 el udoq JOU AN) ] ATA 520m my JO P17 
orb zl Ao <uonrpy yInqt 
og 668 {1 andes * nl FM — obne g Box qoorſ wit 
| dura; on 
34 FAR — aq uy 1891 
Bend Hud doo | 
Polo $,1[Pqawey | 
own], — — — ibm, uyinſ pqy 2er 
: -puoH ®d | 
iI io *uluare A * D 
90 orf Aurdiuog erpt vr qom Jo sor — wog neh N i Jo 2u0 fue 9 


et 
 *mwreprzyuy *gig1 of fuojueſ 
149 *d guoploo & -woa1G ανõ qu neg Ip oh 
ort 8191 Werde g Ado urn N 5 5 5 
ACPI * oA *8eyoIn = — 8110 L oP zor A smn pur 
—_— SD ZIA *S[eL10WaJ{ $ son nn op zopu rue oipag 9091 
gr $1o'T uenſ : 
*þg 5 ·8 7] 7x 4 Eel SHIRE +104 £ *enerpur eryaeuogy Sepewonbaog 
861 d *z7g1 fwrpizyuy uooſſop . 1 
ou 1681 d AI 10a eyang ) 


uomoiqog M pur oN o Sue 919i : 


F 


spleiog 210poatg, 668 1 


©0240) olq e uy, *oxwyanumg op erh oraſy eh ap (£2405 10) oon oapag *0Juamryng ap opuruig 
og qmos on pur $24ed 2jay} 30 SI211M SE suonugu ole SERTag | 
| 9191 0z FL9gr uf ae; awry om 4g N „ 

pur one I nei Ad ueig pur rum on 87% 
5 499 1 purnlon 03 og uon om = — _ *£4240'T 4 SexT2g oofnaueng 

one ne Aq azeuiag, woay diy om v ur ode | | ; | | . 

| | _ 8991 o 5 wo | 
toum x1 oN i nem Juryed zeuiaT, 03 oA $— 
at peut 2 ] m 203 $uonnayur pur aJeſo a 
. neN 9 RR d — — — — uen 

nem Iq ü 2y3 03 vonrBIraru u qi 30 1 ef "2.9 RN 5 wa : 


"0g · d omg — o u ̃epionog — 5 uooꝗ uenſ 


1 0 98 -d 069 ox} pd Y N 5 
c 891 uf Je rofuefſrde zg uon? — — 8 20e SEH N 
con, way 49 2% o o ↄprur ay yoTUa( aBeko fm el IP dio sexe 

- -seudyg sel op sceͤng— — 155 er enen 1 oruouy 0 
Neo ohr "SA g — — — — — — rA sexfog ohe 

, EP p J—, — eryde1g 7 3 | 
toſqeꝛou $2305 f PLOYrFF ei uo uaqry a3 vor onb sr 5 o IAH $85padpg 9g = — SM S?padpJop eres so j 

ge] sr po 3p uondrapa vf 2uod a3 apuop jecauary onaryT] ) gr d fuoo] op opuag } . | | 
-2u3oour 24597, I £9499 2yayei3oag momaay og *d fu Ip opuag *07} 980 1 hf ,t?  — ho ei Lope 
| *Jexyny eourjpaaJny — — omg _ * Sora p og 
| quayny £43217, rf op uoneui qc col g d u⁰ο Ip opuag — 9991 pound — — pry 

| n 


TY X Qu — — *LE *d 01 3m3uopq Alu . 
oui r pA op 8ER 0111 aH V0. 91 329 20): SSM Uuõup — 5 2JanJnzao 
: FS . * eq up 8 ; 


-uoparI;argy . op one G SepfDñ — 49 d o — — SM doaur dige prog 
sourijſe de ↄp uoreFraryy 19 'd uo] Ip opuag — 12 *'SIN *puay>y Pp ang 
due X — — ruiſeg 
r 90g1 wr odo s, sonO sazrpa 577 pue 1 © lens YH eunpPYy voi © 55 K raopꝛog ap 81 14 


*1 *5 <o2proueny 18 p rode og UPI e p vor uo —_ 
F Kr op vpi A ef Ip uorrpy — 149 uo op oνt — <{aeaqy reg SN SOHO Op ο,UIvͤf op 


e 109 uo] Ip Pug — 2 PPP 
wowoleg 2p seh sel Ip 4oy 18 epe que uo oN | | | | | 


EE ORR... 
NATURAL CURIOSITIES 


| A * 3 


i 


. » pe 6 þ / N 1 * . #- #6. 
* 6 * = « + 4 - 
* 
4 * CE 
» * | : S * , ; =" . 1 2 
- — 3 5 * i 1 : - WE. : - 
- . kd & . # 4.4 z - 
” - 2 _ 
* 9 * 
| * N a Ee 
. Do * * 
4 - 1 6 1 
; | OE „ 
8 4 - FR 
* of wi 5 — * - 
— 1 


8 there is little Pn that I ſhall have either ir Ieitilh 

or opportunity to publiſh the obſervations I made in'my 
late voyages, I thought the following curſory remarks of the 
Zatural curioſities at SoorToo, would be an acceptable commu- 
nication to the Public. I have not the qualificatioris of a natu- 
raliſt, either of drawing or ſcience, but the fingularity | of the 
ſubjects will entitle theſe remarks to attention, and they may 
have their uſe, in ſtimulating others to more accurate and ſci- 
entific deſcriptions of the curioſities here mentioned. | 


ACCOUNT of the SOOLOO PEARL FISHERY. 


: E HE Pearl Fiſhery at So0L00 is ſcarce any where to be ſur- 

paſſed, whether we conſider the great extent of the banks, 
or the fine colour of the pearls; the Pearl-F iſhery is a ſubje& not 
very diſtinctly treated by authors, and, in general, little under- 
ſtood: what is hereafter related is chiefly from perſonal obſer- 
vation, and I have taken care to be well ne in what is 
mentioned on report. 

I ſhall divide what is ſaid on this fabjea u. under en Aaaf⸗ 


5 derations —the oyfters, &c. in which the pearls are produced, the 
B Tm 


TS reer 
—- 


they are found. 


NATURAL CURIOSITIES. 
Panglooloorook, or divers, who find them, and the places where 


The pearl itſelf is a gem fo well hci that it would be im- 
pertinent to attempt a deſcription of it, and its receſs in the bo- 
ſom of the abyſs prevents Any rational inquiſition into its 
formation. 


However, not to he entirely ſilent on this head, the _ 
common opinions may be ſlightly mentioned. 


The Arabian fable, that the pearl is a drop of rain. This 
fantaſtie opinion is adopted by Sultan AL LAM OD, from a ſtrong 
prejudice in favour of the ian authors; and, in confirma- 
tion of it, he pretends, that during rain the Tecpye are fre- 
quently ſeen at the ſurface; the divers'pretend this happened 
antiently, . but does not now : that alone is ſufficient to over- 
throw the confirmation brought to ſupport the Arabian fable. 

2. The opinion that it is a diſeaſe in the fiſh. This con- 


| jecture ſeems to have as little foundation as the Arabian hypo- 
theſis, for the pearls are frequently found in the ſhell, ſome- 


times entirely concealed in it, and even ſometimes, it is faid,, 


in the outer part: the opinion of the Sultan, that the pearls. 


grow, and, when they get rid of the ſhell, are frallowed by the 
fiſh, is, at leaſt, equally dubious. 
3. Nor is the conjecture that the W only: detached. 
drops of the ſubſtance which forms the ſhell, better war- 
ranted: the ſhell and pearls. are very different in appear- 
ance, and the laſt are always defective, when united with the 
meg. FO 
The moſt L ſentiment, therefore, ſeems to > be, that 
the pearl is one of the perfect productions of nature, rather than 
an abortion of the leſs perfect. 
The pearls receive different denominations a the part of the 


2 e whereia they are found, thoſe i in the fiſh are called Mootya 


7. ack- 


4d £ 1 7 1 9 

by . n N 

LACK ir nd oat 4 AN vl he N e MC. 

EL Ee TS] REES ORE Nr: teh BY. E 
. 8 


4 % 1 ‚ 


Tucl-Tacb; when incloſed in the ſhell, without adhering to it, 
| Mootya. Leehoon.: of this. kind, Sultan, BADARODIN,. father. to 
the preſent Sultan, once, got a ſhell, containing in one hole, 
twelve pearls ; ſome pretty large and well ſhaped, but, this. is. 
very rare: che. pearls -adbering to the ſhell are named  _. 
Pearls found, in the exterior rim. are. yellowiſh, even the ſhell 
there having a tint from the brown. part without it : thoſe found 
in the part of the oyſter, adhering to the. ſhell, are. always 
very ill ſhaped: the beſt pearls are found in the white part of 
| the. oyſter, or in. the head of the ſhell, near the joint, where 
it is of the eveneſt ſurface, and beſt colour. The ſame holds, 
good with other parts; ; for although the, pearl” in the fiſh are 
generally the beſt, the degrees of perfection of thoſe found in 
the different parts of the ſhell, . correſpond. to thoſe of the 


different parts of the fiſh. 
The ſhell-fiſh from whence the $001.00s obtalh pearls, are of 


different kinds, but the Teepye is the chief. 

The proper Teepye are of various ſizes, though ſeldom leſs 
than 8, or more than 12 inches in diameter. The outſide is 4 
rough white coat, commonly encruſted with coral, ſea plants, 


and /bell-fjh-: ſometimes they have young Teepye adhering by a 
beard of green hair. The inſide of the Teepye ſhells is of aſmooth 


lucid ſurface, having an infinite variety of colours, as expoſed 
to different lights ; it is much uſed by the Chineſe, not only in 
inlayed works, but for counters, and other toys, chaſed dreſſing- 
boxes, &c. as well as for making falſe pearl, which are no- 
thing but ſmall beads of this ſhell. It is on this account a va- 
luable article of commerce; ſo that the fiſhery, excluſive of the 
pearls, is an object of very conſiderable importance. The ex- 
terior rim of theſe ſhells is of an olive brown, about two inche 
extent nearly i in all ſhells, the ſmall ones having a much greater 
proportion than the On it is thin and brittle, ſo that they 
"BD are 


NATURAL CURIOSITIES 
are confiderably diminiſhed in weight by this being broke off, 
but the valuable part of the ſhell is not liable to injury from 
common accidents, though the Teepye are much heavier when 
firſt gathered, than afterwards ; loſing in their weight by de- 
grees, till they are perfectly dry: very ſoon after they are taken 
up, the ſhells open a little, but it is very difficult to tear the two. 
ſhells aſunder, without cutting the oyſter. 
It is ſaid the Chineſe grind off the outer coat, and then the 
ſmooth body is free from all impurities ; it is difpoſed in lamina, 
and has, from nature, a perfect poliſh on the outſide, after 
taking off the coat; though within there are frequently ex 
creſcences and inequalities. 
The Teepye yield the beſt pearls, but, perhaps, not one of 
a thouſand ſhells have any pearls at all; on the other hand, ſe- 
veral are frequently found in the ſame ſhell. Although the 
Teepye have more rarely pearls, than any other pearl-oyſters, what 
they have are -generally larger : this is the reaſon why large 
pearls are more common, and ſmall leſs frequent in the Sooloo 
fiſhery than in others, as the Soor oos only fiſh for the Teepye. 
The great variety in the pearl i is, perhaps,. as great. a curiofity 
as the gem itſelf ; ſome. of the Teepye pearls are jet black : 
theſe, when conſiderable in ſize, are very rare. There is a 
pearl at SooL oo, exactly of the ſhape and figure of a bit of gin- 
ger- root, of a very lucid, though yellowiſh, colour: others re- 
ſemble the cat g- eye in the ns light; which is ſometimes in 
a ſpiral line. 
Here, perhaps, it ought to * obſerved, that the SooLoos. 
hoſe the art of improving pearls; though this is contradictory 
to the criterion generally alledged of pearls. All foulneſs 
they take away with great facility by a very 6mple proceſs. | 
The Teepye ſeem, in ſome meaſure, gregarious, for gene- 
rally where the divers find any, there are ſeveral: this is pro- 
: bably 


A T $:@0 0 KG. 


bably owing to the ſpawn being lodged together. The gene- 


ration of all teſtaceous animals, is one of the arcana of nature, 


which remain hitherto uninveſtigated, though none can afford 


a fairer proſpect of a ſucceſsful nn than the large 
ſhell-fiſh. found in the Sooloo ſeas. 

It is remarkable every Teepye has two ſmall Jobfters in its 
body, evidently male and female: ſome, it is ſaid, contain four 
lobſters, but I have not obſerved more than two, and ſeveral 
of the divers have aſſured me they never ſaw more. The fe- 
male is about an inch in length, the male is rather leſs ; each 
has two large claws: in the female theſe claws are little different 


from each other; in the male, one is much larger than the 


other: ſometimes the right, ſometimes the left. The bodies of 
thoſe lobſters are very beautiful, being tranſparent, withe many 
red ſpots. The female has alſo white ſpots, and it is the moſt 
ſpotted : ſome of the females have ſmaller ſpots than others, 
and theſe, having moſt in number, are the darkeſt. The eyes 


are placed near the extremity, one on each fide ; the eyes of 


the female are of a pearl colour ; of the male, tranſparent : both 
have a bunch of horns at-the extremity of the head. Their 
bodies are contracted about. the middle; that of the female in- 


creaſes much from thence, ſo that the lower part of the body is 
larger than the upper; that of the male very little, and termi- 


nates in a tail like a lobſter : the female has a tail alſo, but 
| ſhort, extending abruptly from the body, not deſcending gra- 
dually as that of the male. The female has a red ſubſtance 
within its body of this figure , the upper part blackiſh: 
the male has a black ſpot not very regular in figure Y, and 
of leſs extent. The female has under the tail and beRy many 


eggs; theſe examined in a microſcope, appeared to be Teepye 


ſhells, and ſome red ſpots were alſo viſible, which may be the 
lobſters, 


ATURAL CURITOSETIES 
| lobſters, or, perhaps, of the outer rim of the oyſter, — in 
ſome is orange- coloured. 
There is from hence room to conjecture that hell. Gli in ge⸗ 
neral are generated by ſuch /ob/ters, for the ſeveral ſpecies com- 
mon in the Sooloo ſeas, as Manangcy, Teepye Bato, Capees, 
Beelong, Bincong, Seedap, &c. I have been aſſured always have two 
tobfters, though every ſpecies of /he/l-#/þ has a diſtin: ſpecies 
of the /ob/ters. It was obvious to all the SooLoos, who ſaw. 
the egg of the Teepye hobfier, that it was a proper Tecpye; and 
they were from thence convinced, that theſe fiſh are generated in 
this manner. The Sultan on this occafion mentioned a fable 
they have amongſt them. A monkey ſitting very penſive on the 
ſhore, with his arms croſſed, as they often do, being aſked 
what was was the matter? Replied, << He was conlidering ho -w 
thy Manangcy are produced.“ 
Beſides the Teepye there are many kinds of ſhell. 72 POS 
whence the SooLoos obtain pearls. 
 Tezzyye BATO. They are found about $601.00, at BALANM- 
BAN GAN, and ſome of the adjoining iſlands: they are 
generally ſmaller than the Teepye, they are found amongſt 
rocks; from whence its name: the ſhell is of a blueiſh 
caſt, and the rim black: it yields very fine pearls, but 
rarely are any found in theſe ſhells. | 
| Carers. Theſe ſeem to be the Perſia peart-oyfter, and are 
little different from the Teepye, but in ſize; they are only 
about four inches in diameter, they are alſo deeper in pro- 
portion, that is one ſhell, for the other is almoſt quite 
flat. Few are without pearls, moſt have ſeveral, which, 
in general are perfectly round, though commonly ſmall. 
The colour is different from the Teepye pearls ; generally 
they are of a fire colour, not yellow, but of a vivid 


| tranſparency. Amongſt a parcel Os to SooLoOO by 
. ſome 


AT 0 
ſome Bugueſe from MAL LoODOO0, in 1764, there was 
one Capees pearl, of a very ſine white water, round, and 
prettty large, but ſuch are very rare: in the ſame parcel 
there Was above ſixty fire- coloured, perfectly round, and 
extremely fine, Tg mottly from 1 to 7 2 grains 
weight. 

Some aſcribe the colour of the Capees A'S to the 

muddineſs of the bottom: others to the ſhallowneſs of 

the water: it is more probable that it is the nature of the 
;Capees, than occaſioned by either, for the people of 
Mar roopoo bay, where they are in great plenty, aſſured 
me they are chiefly. found in the ſand. 

The Capees are not common to all: parts of the Sooloo 
ſeas, as the other kinds of fiſn, but are confined chiefly 
to ManLTOODOO bay, though they are found alſo at Au- 
Box, and it is ſaid in ſome parts. of TiRoon. At MaAL= 
\/L©ODOO! the Capees are not got as the Teepye at:SooLoOO, by 
divers, but at low water by the women, who, it is ſaid, look. 
after them more for the ſake of the fiſh than pearl: they 
are found chiefly in the ſand, which is full of them, and 
thoſe found in ſand have many pearls. They ſeek for 
them from the depth of a man's middle to breaſt under 
water, though they have them alſo, even in fa deep wa- 
ter as ſix fathom. 
The SYSEEP is what is 8 called the „ 
whereof the windows are made: they yield alſo many 
pearls, but of an inferior quality. Theſe ſhells are com- 
mon over-almoſt the whole Sooloo: ſeas. 


BzzLONG, in figure, ſomewhat reſembles the PS: : it is 


a purpliſh ſhell, of very little capacity; frequently 
diſtorted like a thin cake by the heat of an oven; the 
young ſhells are very tranſparent, and of a beautiful con- 

* texture, 


| 8 NATURAL .CURIOSETTIES 

texture, in fret-work filaments; but the old have a 

rough whitiſh coat without. It is not be doubted theſe 

ſhells might alſo be put to ſome uſe. The fiſh of this, 
as well as of the other kinds, is good food; but the pearls 
are very ſmall, commonly of a bad ſhape, and ill colour, 
though I have ſeen ſome round ones of a lead colour, 
taken from theſe ſhells, which are common in all parts 

J of the Sooloo ſeas. 

i Ef Bincons is a ſpecies of muſcle, within of a blueiſh colour, 

| | flat, and ſhaped ſomething like a pick-axe. It is found 

M amongſt the iſlands of SooLoo, BALAMBANGAN, &c. 

0 | SEEDAP is alſo a ſpecies of muſcle, ſhaped like a battle-axe. 

i I ̃ he pearls from it are as fine as thoſe of the Teepye, 
and are frequently found. The ſhell is blackiſh like a 
muſcle on the outſide, and within like the 7. _ with 
a yellowiſh tinge. 

| Mananccr, or KEEMA, called Humba by the Chineſe, is a 

! _ _ ſhell-fiſh, generally denominated cock/es by our voy- 

aagers: they are common in many parts of India, and 
are, without queſtion, what DAMPIER deſcribes in his 

NEwW- GUINEA expedition. Some of them are of an 

amazing magnitude; it is ſaid on the weſt coaſt of Suu Aa- 
' TRA they have been found ſo large as to contain fifty gal- 

lons in the two ſhells. I brought to ENGLAND a pair 

fiſhed at BALamBANnGan, each of which meaſured 2 feet 

. Sinches. Some SooLoos pretend to have ſeen them infinitely 

larger, particularly one in the ſea, near the weſtern part of 
TAvITAvEE, of an incredible magnitude. There is un- 
doubtedly ſomething there that reſembles a Manangcy, but 
the extraordinary ſize inclines me to imagine it is a rock 
in this figure, though the divers inſiſt it is a Manangcy. 
However theſe ſhells ſeldom excecd four feet long. | 


— 


: bd AER 


- 
— 


| Theſe 


A T/ O 

Theſe ſhells are ſcalloped; the interior part of a perfect 
milk white, and finely poliſhed, but without it is rough, 
like a cockle-ſhell. The ſhell does not lye flat on the 
on the ground like the Teepe, but ſtands on-edge. The 
fiſh is very ſingular; the lips, which are ſom=times brown, 

| ſometimes green, appearing to be full of eyes, when the 
ſhell is opened; the fiſh is much eſteemed by the Chineſe, 
and has the advantage over the ſea-ſug in keeping 
a long time when dried. They abound in many places 
of the 8001 oO diſtricts, particularly about the iflands 
at the northern point of BoRNEO. The SooLoos make 
lime of the ſhell, which they eat with their Seetle; 
but it is very hot, and therefore not ſo much eſteemed as 
the lime made of coralines. The large ones, in general, 
yield pearls very various in appearance: the moſt beautiful 
of them I have ever ſeen of that ſize is Lord Pr6oT's, 
which weighs 8 dwt. 17 grs. and. is 38 of an inch long, 

and 24 of an inch in diameter. | 

Lord Proor had one of the Manangey * 3 through 
the middle; it was very dull, and indeed quite opake on the 
outſide, but in the centre was found one of the cat's-eye kind, 
about the ſize of a pea; it is, therefore, probable all the 
 Manangcy pearls have ſuch a centre. 

It is no eaſy matter to diſtinguiſh the proper names for the 
different ſpecies of ſhell-fiſh at SooLoo, ſearge.any. two perſons 
agreeing in the application of the ſame name, The Teepye, 
Teepye Bato, Capees, and Manangry are known by all, but the 
names of the others are leſs determinate ; and, therefore, tho 
the names have been applied from what appeared the beſt autho- 
rity, it is far from being maintained that they are right: at the 
| ſame time ſome perſons, expreſſing them otherwiſe, does not 

ſhew the names here given them to be wrong. 


x 8 


» 1 * 
1 

} 
WW 
WT + 
= 
- 1 
: 
3 
? 

My 
WH 
5 


10 


NATURAL eURIOSITIE S 


It is, perhaps, impoſſible to account for the origin of pearls: 
many bodies in the Soo oo diſtricts, beſides the ſhell-fiſh above- 
mentioned, yield them. It is hard to ſay, whether this ſingu- 
larity be owing to the water, to the air, or to what; but I have 
been informed of twenty fpecies of pearl, beſides the con- 
cretions in beaſts, which paſs under the general denomination: 
of goolega, and are of various kinds and appearances. Theſe con- 
cretions are not confined to Ze/taceous animals; vegetables, &c. 
have them alſo : that found in the beezle-nut is extremely beau- 


tiful ; but that from the Z/a-7//a, a ſea-bird, is. reported to. 


ſurpaſs all the others, being finely an. Some have a re- 


ſemblance ta the cat 5-CFC. = 


The ſeveral concretions which the SooLoos reckon under the. 
denomination of pearls, are 


Moor vA TREPVYE. 

TEEPYE BA ro, 7. e. Rock Trrrrz. 
CAPEEs. | 
SYSEEP.. 

BEELONG. 

SEE DAP. 

BINcoNG. 

LAskEN. 
MANANG=CY.. 

GAMAT, a-ſpecies of cui or BECHA DE Man 
K AIT AN, Shark. 

TILLA-TILLA, a ſea- bird: 

Box BON, in the froth of the ſea. 

| SANNAM, 7. e. ant-pearl ; _ ſeems to be a mineral. 
BAre, tone c 
Ooxk AN, 1. e. rain- pearl. 


Cakok, wood- pearl. 


AT $:0 Loo. 


Canvees, jeſſamine- pearl. 
Boox GA, beetle-nut- pearl. 
Booa, coconut- pearl. 


The greateſt part of the divers are ſlaves to the Sultan, &c. 


They are entitled to their freedom in conſideration of their find- 


ing a very large pearl for their maſters, who alſo receive all 


weighing above four choochook *. Formerly the ſtandard was 


fix or eight, but now the Lords have reduced the privilege of 
the divers, though it is but ſeldom they deliver any pearls 


without receiving a compenſation. All pearls under four choo- 


chook belong to the finder. 
No perſon can receive or purchaſe a pearl due to the Lord 


from his vaſſal, without ſubjecting himſelf to loſe the pearl and 


money given for it: this is the ſource of infinite diſputes. To 
evade the right of the Lord, the Panglooloorooꝶs frequently rub 
off the outer coats of the pearl, till they reduce them to the ſize 
to which they are entitled. 

The beſt divers are thoſe of Pa RANG and M MBOOM, called 
SAMAR-LI1PIT, and of SEEKOOBOOM: antiently SMoNOR was 
famous for divers, but is not now. At other places there may 


be here and there ſome expert divers, but in general they are 


inferior to thoſe above-mentioned. At Samar Lavr, which 
comprehends the iflands to the N. E. of SooLoo, they have 
introduced the uſe of on 85 and have almoſt relinquiſhed 
diving. 

The divers never afe any expedient to faoilieate their conti- 
nuing under water, but drawing up their breath in the hollow 
of their hands; and even this ſcarce ever is practiſed by profeſſed 
divers, who commonly go down in the depths of 7 or 8, to 12 
or 15 fathom; but though a few can dive in 20 fathom, that is 


* About 1 Pennyweight, 
Ca too 


| - Ip 


„„ e 


too great a depth for the fiſnery. They ſwim to the bottom, 
tumbling when they firſt plunge into the water, and then making 
long ſtrokes, get out of ſight in three or four. They riſe a con- 
ſiderable diſtance from the place where they go down, but this 
diſtance is merely accidental, from the direction they go along 
the bottom, their fortune in finding ſhells, and the time the 
diver continues under water; they generally remain from one to 
two minutes, but in warm ſunſhine they can ſtay, perhaps, 
longer. There is one, now an old man, his name BAN TARA, 
who cut down the main-maſt of a large Chineſe junk under 
water, though this was not at once diving ; the time of his 
continuance under water, he deſcribed to me to be * ſo long 
as is required to make a diſh of chocolate.” But he is reckoned 
the beſt diver that ever was at SooLoo; 

The fame effect attends the firſt attempt here as in other 
places: and even profeſſed divers have, after diving, their eyes 
much inflamed ; in ſome this goes off, but in others it always 
remains. Many are deſtroyed by the fiſhes, particularly. by the 
ſharks, and poggyes, or ſea-devrls, which are common here in 
calm weather. It is difficult to deſcribe theſe monſters, ſome 
of which equal a ſmall boat in fize, and are often ſeen in moſt 
parts of the SooLoo ſeas. It is ſaid the beſt time for diving is 
the night, when the luminous appearance of the water frightens 
away the fiſh; but then the divers cannot ſee. The Pangloo- 
hoorook do not chuſe to open the ſhells, till they have finiſhed 
their days fiſhing, from a ſuperſtitious notion that the Teepye, 
on knowing their fellows are killed, will hide themſelves. | 

Some of the pearl-fiſhers make uſe of a kind of creeper, which 
they call palit, in fiſhing for the 7. eepye. Some alſo have in- 
ſtruments to tear them from the ground, but moſt do this with 
their hands only. 


A boat, 


AT. $'00 L #&© 


A boat, with two or three perſons will, in a day, get about 
40 or 50 ſhells, ſometimes even 100, and ſometimes ſcarce 
any. In calm weather they have beſt ſucceſs, as they can 
then ſee the Teepye on the ſand before they dive ; but at other 
times, or'in deep water, they muſt depend much on chance. 

There are two proper ſeaſons for the fiſhery, three months at 
the termination of the S. W. and four months at the expiration 
of the N. E. winds. Theſe ſeaſons alter according to the conti- 
nuance of the monſoons ; but in general the firſt may be reck- 
oned from the middle September, to the middle of December ; 


and the laſt contains February, March, April, and May. But 


at TaviTavee, ſurrounded with an infinity of ſhoals, and at 
ſuch like places they can fiſh at all times, except when the 
current is very ſtrong : this objection, the want of water, and 
_ diſtance from SooLoo, make the PREL As bank almoſt uſeleſs to 
them. I 

The pearl banks ſeem inexhauſtible, not. only as no dimi- 
nution is found in the quantity by fiſhing, but as they extend. 
almoſt over the whole SooLoo dominions, particularly from 
SANGBOY to TAvITAVEE, a track with little interruption, about 
150 miles long, and, in ſome places, full half that in breadth. 
However, theſe banks are in. many parts too deep for diving, 
though the Panglooloorook are excellent in their profeſſion, 
The Teepye are found alſo at MARATUA, above 200 miles to: 
the ſouthward of TaviTavet; at BALABAC, about 200 to 
the weſtward, and in many of the intermediate places. Indeed 
it is imagined, by the moſt intelligent Sooloos, that PALawan,. 
&c. have Teepye banks, but from the want of divers, they re- 
main unexamined. | 

There are many places where „ are ſeldom found in the 
Teepye, and others where they are more frequent, as particu- 
larly TEOMABAL ; however, this ſeems to be an opinion not 


9 juſt, and to ariſe — the greater plenty of Teepye in- 
ſome 


4 


14 


Edible birds- 
neſt, 


NATURAL CURIOSITTIES 


ſome places than in others, particularly at TRoMABAIL they are 
in very great plenty, but of 1540 Teepye caught by the preſent 
Sultan (ALLAMoDIN) at a fiſhing party there, he did not get the 
value of one dollar in pearls. Perhaps in deep water there may 
be a greater number of pearls, in proportion to the Teepye, but 
then the difficulty of getting the ſhells is ſo much greater. No 
place in the SooLoo feas equals PREL As, and the iſlands adjoin- 
ing to SANGBOY ; the water is not deep, generally from ſeven 
to eight fathom, and the ſhells fo large, that the white part of 
ſome is a foot in diameter; of theſe fourteen weigh a pecul ; 
of what are found about SooLoo generally 40 or 50. Tacoor 
PABANOOWAN has alſo great plenty of fine Teepye, but there 
they find many ſharks. The PEREL As fiſhery has two inconve- 
niencies, one is the diſtance from SooLoo and the inhabited 


iſlands ; the other the ſtrong tides, which greatly impede their 


RES, - | 

Antiently the pearl banks were conſidered as family poſſeſſi- 
ons, but fince the univerſal admiſſion of the Mahometan Law, 
the ſea being deemed incapable.of ſuch a proprietary, the banks 
are free to all perſons, even ſtrangers. 


The ED1BLE B1RDS-NEST is no where found in greater abun- 


dance or excellence than in ſome of the SooLoo diſtricts. 
Various accounts have been given of its formation; ſome pre- 
tend very poſitively that on the coaſt of Cocnin Carina the birds 


have been perceived to pick up a particular ſpecies of ſea-ſnate, 


common on that coaſt, from which they form the ſubſtance at 


preſent under conſideration. I have indeed ſeen the nefts on 


this coaſt, and even with the broken egg-ſhells in them; but 


I never ſaw any ſuch ſnakes there, though I was on the coaſt of 


Cochix ChixA from the beginning of June, to the end of 


Auguſt, 1760. Snakes are indeed common in the ſeas around 
| | | SOOLOO, 


AT S$@ om =: 5 
Soo oo, Wherever there are ſoundings: ſome report theſe neſts. 
to be formed of a vegetable production, which is moſt probably 
the agal-agal hereafter mentioned. The natives of Soor oo can 
give no account of the compoſition of the birds-neft ; paſſing, 
therefore, over the origin of theſe neſts. for the future 1 
Gtion of the naturaliſt, it is to be obſerved : 

The bird. to which the neſt belongs very much reſembles a 
martin, though ſmaller: it is alledged, with ſeeming good 
reaſon, that there are three ſpecies of this ſwallow, having 
white, red, and black breaſts, and that they communicate to 
their neſts the nature of their feathe rs. 

The Tixoo diſtricts, on the eaſt coaſt of W have 
ſcarce any but white; red is found at the iſlands of MAN T AN- 

NANF, adjoining to the N. W. coaſt of Borneo, and the black. 

almoſt every where in the SooLoo dominions. The laſt is very 
much mixed with feathers, but ſeems in. nothing elſe different 
from the white; but the other, even where clear from feathers, 
has a tinge of red. If the neſts are not annually removed, the 
birds make uſe of them again, ſo that by age, and acceſſion of 
dirt, they loſe their whiteneſs and purity. 
The birds form. their neſts chiefly in ſubterrancous caves, 
ſome whereof are very difficult of acceſs, particularly at Mac- 
LOOMBA, a ſmall iſland, or rock, to the S. W. of Soor.oo : the 
perſons who go in queſt of the neſts, are obliged to dive under 
water to enter it, the hole in the top of the iſland being too 
ſmall to admit a man. 

The neſts formed on the main, or on large iſlands, ſuch as. 
Bok NEO, are more eſteemed by the Chineſe, who are the chief. 
admirers of this luxury, than what is got on ſmall iſlands. In 
general, the whiter it is, the higher the value; but that from 
the 800LOO dominions on BoRNEO, though not ſo white as what 


i found in the CALAMIANES, is more valuable by a fourth. 
part. 


n 1 N a 1 AR TY FT —_—_ _— n ** 
_ : a N * nn T ˖ EO LIP? <— IRS 2 3 F or ings 
x WW s , e ” r Ry ww a —— 3 * + —. 9 2 5 2 4 2 3 27 3 4. „ ” I 
% C20 he HF, ——t Re — — * Us Ve GR rg ON 1 1 8 5 MER * on * — 7 r r ? F N _—_ . PALE at >. Pe 2 
. 6 7 — : _—_— 3 = S * So 252 R 4 — . 5 ne 7 4 * ve 
ee dhe ww ap Tat e TERS -” 0 ä 8 — | * 3 A” RT: FLY - - : : 
= p an as BE. e ar e „„ ²˙ͤ "OY IO CIT OS — — _ IRS" a b 
= 
© 


— 


ee — 
ä OE 


— * _ 
r 
> 
- 


16 


wo gal-Agal. 


Coralines and 
Black-Coral. 


TT ATHRAL CURIOSTTIES 
part; this preference is, by ſome, aſcribed to its ſwelling much 
in boiling; by others, to a faltneſs 1 in the birds-neſt found 1 in 
ſinall iſlands. 

Theſe neſts are not eaſily deſcribed ; they are flat on the ſide 
towards the rock to which they are aftixed ; in general the out- 
ward extremity is nearly ſemi-circular, bending upwards, how- 
ever, ſo as to form a hollow cup, as a receptacle for the eggs. 
The neſt is compoſed of a glutinous ſubſtance, very compact, 
diſpoſed in even filaments without, but within in very rugged 
fretwork,. fomewhat reſembling the inſide of bones, the com- 


ponent threads, as they appear, being very unequal in ſize. 


Generally the part towards the rock is foul and moiſt, but the 


exteriour part, when dry, is extremely brittle. 


The Agal-Agal is a ſea plant ; there are ſeveral ſpecies, all 


diſſolvable in water, by which it is reduced to a glutinous 


ſubſtance, like congee. The Chineſe uſe it for gumming their 
filks and paper, and they ſay nothing equals it for paſte, as it is 
not liable to be eat by vermin, ſo that probably it may be ad- 


vantageouſly applied in book-binding, and to many other uſes: 


the Chineſe alſo eat it, and hold it in great eſtimation: The Chi- 
neſe, who are in nothing more remarkable than in their whim- 
ſical manufactures, make of it a very extraordinary kind of 
lanterns; they are formed of netted thread, waſhed over with 
this gum, they are extremely light, and very tranſparent. 


The Coralines of SooLoo are very various in kind, and it is 
reported there are in the SooLoo ſeas: ſome extraordinary 
coral-trees ; I have ſeen ſome ſtalks of Mack coral, above twelve 
feet long, but the SooLoos mention others of very great mag- 
nitude. A tree at BASSEELAN, one at PooLoo Gaya, on the 

2 | | | N. W. 


» oE. $00L00. 


N. W. fide of Boxwzo, and another at TAMBALOOLAN, near 
the north end, if conſonant to the deſcription, muſt be very 
ſingular curioſities ; they pretend the laſt is 20 or 3o feet high, 
with many large branches. I have the handle of a erg 2 
of black coral, which! is full 1 inch broad. | 


There is a reinarkable plant- which grows wild at Soo- 
Loo, though it is cultivated at Bass EELAN and TAvz- 


TAvEE; I have never ſeen it grow, but it has been deſcribed to 


be a ſmall buſh; it is called Tublee, and has the quality of 


inebriating fiſh by a milky juice. In the ſtate in which it is 


uſed, it reſembles ſmall black twigs tied together, and one or 
both ends being beat, diving under water, they thruſt it under 
the coral rocks, or hollows, where the fiſh haunt ; the effect 


is moſt ſenſible in ſtill water, but even in the open ſea I have 


ſeen its effects in inebriating the fiſh, which preſently float on 
the ſurface half dead, and ſome even totally without life: the 
uncultivated is not ſo ſtrong as that from BAssEELAN and 


Tavet TA VER. The effect alſo is conſequent to circumſtances - 
of place, as, in deep water, or where there is a free circulation, 


the fiſh will be often perceived under water to have loſt their 
poize, without being brought up to the ſurface. They are not 


the leaſt obnoxious, or ill- taſted, from this manner of catching. 


| Amongſt the vegetables none appears to be more an ob- 
ject of curioſity than the Ippoo, which is the tree from whence 
the famous Borneon poiſon is extracted; but as I can ſay 


nothing from my own een, or obſervation, 1 ſhall 


paſs it over. 


One of the moſt ſingular curioſities here is the Tindeok ; 
tis is a ſpecies of plantane, and has its name from the ſimilitude 
the fruit bears in figure and fize to a bufalee's horn: it is. well 


known the trunk of the Plantane- tree is formed of coats, whoſe 
> i com po- 


Tublee. 


Ippoo. 


Tindook. 


5 . 
% 5 
” * 
* 
3} 
* 
7* 
4 
LV 
8 
” : 
1 
14 
2 
18 
= © 
+ 
: 
1 ! 
7 
* 5 
nl 
18 
,. 
. 
0 
. 
— 
'EY 
25 
* 
4 
1 
4 4 
. + 
: 
5 '$ 
3 „ 
4 9 
f Y 
4 
EE. 
7 8 
1 "21 
1 
U 
Wt 
- 
| 
vw. 
apt 
,- d 
: 
vg. 
5 
4 
14 
f * 
1 
T 
4 d 
Pro 
: 
1 
3-8 
* 2 
"0 
** 
„ 
11 
2 
: 
Fr 
* 
1 * 
alt 
vs 
K 
** 
” 
= 
* 4 - 
8 
$. 4 
WY l 
N 
e 
(35 
* 1 
15 


1 
1 
{ 
1 


A 


1 1 nat Set nh — 
e 


2 E e Ne 
2 


NATURAL CURIOSITIES 


component parts-are fine threads, the length of the tree, bound in 
with a pulpy ſubſtance. They extract theſe. threads, and having 
aſſorted them according to their fineneſs, they fabricate of them 
a dehcate cloth, reſembling cambrick : it is exceeded by no- 


thing in coolneſs, though it is always of a brownith colour. 


This manufacture is the work of the women, who form the 
loom of a few ſticks, and fix the woof round their waiſts. 


There is one vegetable production in the SooLoo dominions 


of great conſequence, though it is not confined to theſe parts; 


I mean the fago; this ſubſtance is the pith of a tree, and is found 


in almoſt all the eaſtern iſlands; it s collected from ſeveral ſpe- 


cies of the palm, but that which yields the beſt is called particu- 
larly the /ago-zree ; the leaves much reſemble the coconut, but 


ute ſhorter and ſtiffer, ſo that the tree has not the eaſy graceful 
figure of the coconut, neither does the tree grow ſo high. No 


place has a greater abundance, or more excellent ſago- trees than 


the coaſt of TiROON; the land to the ſea, I am aſſured, is co- 


vered with them, and the natives, who entirely ſubſiſt upon the 


ago, eating no grain, ſupply the place of the numbers they 
fell annually, by planting others in their ſtead. The trees. be- 


Ang cut 'down and ſplit, the pith is beaten, till freed from the 


ſtringy fubſtance of the tree, and then it is ſtrained with water 


through a cloth: the ſubſtance left at bottom is white, and 


ſomewhat clammy, reſembling damp hair powder; in this tate 
the natives generally eat it; but it cannot be long fo. preſerved, 
for this reaſon they toaſt it over the fire in pans, by which 
igperation” it becomes granulated. That of TrROON is in re- 
markable ſmall grains, the /ago made on the N. W. coaſt of 
BorNEo is in very large. 
There is a great variety of the palm-trees,)and ſeveral of them 


-yithd-a proportion of ſago, though neither in fueh plenty nor ſo 


good as the proper age. Vegetables of every Kind are difficult 


. 10 


* 


xx T S NM em: 

to be deſeribed, and none more ſo than the palms. I do not 

mean to attempt a deſcription of the ſeveral kinds of palm, but 

as ſome of them are of great importance, a few words in regard 
to them may be excuſed, 

The Tuach, Gumatty, or Cabo-Negro (Black Head) as it is 
called by the Spaniards, not only yields a /ago, but a ſubſtance 

the moſt excellent for cables; this ſubſtance is known to few 

who have not paſſed the ſtrait of MALACCA, and ſtill to fewer 

the manner in which it is got. 

The Cabo- Negro exactly reſembles the coconut- tree in the 
figure of its leaves and trunk, but the former are of a dead dark 
green, in compariſon of the coconut leaves. The appearance 
of the tree is ſtill more different, for, like all other palms, it 
| ſhoots out its leaves at top only, and as the tree grows up, ſheds 
the loweſt. From the lower part, or ſtalks of theſe leaves 
(which form the bark of all palms) the gamatty ſhoots. out on 
both ſides, like black hair, being in fact nothing more than 
the extenſion of the fineſt fibres, whereof the talks and ribs of 
the leaves are compoſed : theſe fibres bind the dead leaves around 
the tree, ſo that the trunk has a very odd appearance, e 
confined in a rough black coat. 

Theſe leaves being taken off from the tree are tripped of the 
hair, and, tis ſaid, the gumatty muſt be beat, to free it from 
dirt, and then ſpread in the fun ; two or three days after which, 


| the larger threads, being unfit for cordage, are picked out. 


The gumatty is as black as jet, the hairs extremely ſtrong, 
and reſemble the coir (which. is the huſk of the coconut) except 
that they are finer, and longer than the. fibres of the coir. 
The fineſt hairs make the beſt cordage, which me” not to 
be too hard laid. 

The great advantage of this ſubſtance for cables, f is its buoy- 
ancy and elaſticity ; although theſe qualities are, in ſome mea- 
ſure, common with the cor, yet the « coir is extremly liable to- 

"DF " rot, 


„ NATURAL CURIOSITIES 


rot, whereas nothing can hurt the gumatty ; whence an opi- 
nion prevails, that dirt nouriſhes it. Cables of theſe ſubſtances 
are, when dry, fo light, that they will float on the ſurface of 
the water, and they have a very great ſpring, which is a great 
relief, as well to the cable as to the ſhip. The Chineſe have a 

| ſpecies of gumarty, which ſeems to differ only in colour from 
that above deſcribed, the Chineſe is brown; the cables made 
of it are extremely good, as I have found by Experience, and 
one of them would wear out three hempen cables. 

The Aneebon, called by navigators the cabbage-tree, appears 
to be almoft univerſal within the tropics. This tree has ſome | 
reſemblance to the coconut- tree in the leaves, which are not, 
however, ſo large or green as the coconut ; the ſtem, or trunk 
is much ſmaller than the coconur, and grows vaſtly higher in 
proportion to its fize : they ſeldom grow fingle, but commonly 
im clumps of three or four to ten or twelve in a cluſter ; they are- 
found chiefly in moiſt places. The tree, when full grown, is 
very tall, and the outſide extremely hard; indeed in the old 
ones ſcarce to be cut with a hatchet. This is uſed for rafters of 
houſes, and it is ſaid will laſt fifty or fixty years; when they are 
dried, they are ſunk in ſalt water for about a month, to prevent 
the worm getting into them ; the heart, as in all palms, is a 

ſoft, ſpongy ſubſtance, intermixed with hard fibres. The An- 
neebon grows like the beetle-nut, or arecka-tree, in rims on the 
outſide, gradually diminifhing in fize from the root to the top; 
between theſe rims the tree is covered with prickles, of a black, 
horny fubſtance, as ſharp as needles, ſome of them three or four 
inches long; the prickles alfo are ſmaller towards the top of 
the tree. From about- ten or twelve feet above the root, till 
near the top there are few or no prickles. At the top the leaves 
grow out; the bottom part hard and prickly, encircling the 
tree, fold within fold; and this being lit down on one fide, 


comes off whale with its leaf: the infide, which is white and 
: Hani 


Ar $:0"0 196 


ſmooth, will bear to be written on, though it becomes brown, 


| when dried; it is very tough, and if not cut all the way down, 
remains in hoops, which' bind very faſt round the inner folds : 
the outſide is full of prickles. The fruit grows in two cluſters 
below the leaves, one a berry about the ſize of a black cherry; 
on the outſide it is covered with a green huſk, which grows 
black, when ripe, the inſide is exactly like the Areckka in ap- 
pearance and taſte. The other cluſter is extremely ſmall : 


whether theſe fruit are of the different ſexes or not, the natu- 


raliſt muſt decide. The lower leaves are ſhed like all other 
palms, and make the Anneebon clumps troubleſome of acceſs 
from. the many prickles. 


The Rattan has a greater Condi to the Anneebon in leaf, 


than it has to the coconut; at top ſhoot out two long horns full 
of prickles ; the Rattan is the root, and the leaves with the under 
part, or ſtem, which is rough and prickly, mount up the ad- 
joining trees, the Rattan running from one to another, up here, 
down there, to a great length. 

Beſides various kinds of the Nepenthes, 83 1 are e very 
beautiful, there are ſeveral other vegetable fountains, as they may 
be called; one is a kind of cane, or rattan, about the thickneſs 
of a man's wriſt, it is named Toongal ; a_piece of about a fa- 
thom will give a ſneaker of water, it is rte pure aa! lim 
pid, without taſte. 1 . 


Another is a creeper, named Nabe it is Lone ties 


larger than a man's leg, the back very rough, with deep ſcores, 
like the Scotch elm ; the water is gummy, but generally clear 
and good: the creeper muſt be cut above, or the water retires. 
They are found in great plenty about the ſouthern harbour of 
 BaLAMBANGAN ; the leaves are acid, and are uſed in currys, 


&c. They are found even on the tops of the higheſt hills, en-- 


twined with the upper branches of the tree, and hanging down. 
from thence. . Thoſe found in moiſt ground have. moſt water, 
thoſe i in dry places very little. | 


AN 


217 


£2) AN | | 
E Wo. R 2; 

| INTO THE . 
FORMATION or ISLANDS; 


HIS is a ſubje& not only curious in itſelf, but very 

uſeful to a navigator; I do not mean to. examine into 
the origin of iſlands in general, but of the low flat iſlands found 
in the ocean. Moſt of thoſe hitherto diſcovered in the vaſt 
South-Sea are of this nature. 

Theſe iſlands are formed by a narrow bank of land incloſing | 
the ſea within it ; they have commonly, perhaps always, an 
opening for the ingreſs of the tide; this channel is generally 
capable of receiving a canoe, and frequently ſufficient to admit 
even large veſſels. | 8 

An obſervation of AB DVL. Roonix, a Solo vhs « that | 

e all the iſlands lying off the N. E. coaſt of Borneo had: ſhoals 
« to the eaſtward of them,” firſt led me to Arcs the origin 
of ſuch iſlands as are here the ſubject of diſcuſſion. 
The iſlands mentioned by AB DL RooBIN having Bokneo 
adjoining to the weſtward of them, are not expoſed to a violent 
attaek from the winds in that quarter; but there being an open 
ſea to the N. E. the winds from thence heap up the coral with 
which thoſe ſeas are filled. 

It is wonderful to ſee the coral banks in all the W ſeas ; 
theſe banks are-found of all depths, at all diſtances from ſhore, 
entirely unconnected with the land, and detached from each 
other: although it often happens _ are divided by « a narrow 
gut without. bottom. 

1 have ſeen theſe coral hanke i in all the ſtages; . in deep 
water; others with a few rocks appearing above the ſurface; 
ſome juſt ſormed into iſlands, without the leaſt appearance of 

vege- 


. 


An ENQUIRY INTO THE FORMATION or ISLANDS. 


vegetation ;_ others with a few weeds on the higheſt part ; and, . 


laſtly, ſuch as are covered with large timber, with a bottomleſs 
ſea, at a piſtol-ſhot diſtance ; though I think in general they 
are filled up in the centre when they have large timber. 

After ſtorms it is frequently obvious, that the force of the 
waves has thrown up a bed of coral; this is, perhaps, at all 
times imperceptibly effected, though only obvious after ſtorms: 
coral banks alſo grow by a quick increaſe towards the ſurface; 
but the billows heaping up the coral from deeper water, chiefly 


accelerate the formation of theſe into ſhoals, and ſoon after into 


iſlands. The banks become gradually ſhallower ; and when 


once the ſea meets with reſiſtance, the coral is quickly thrown 
up by the force of the wave breaking againſt the bank ; and 


hence it is, that in the open ſea there is ſcarce an inſtance of a 
coral bank with ſo little water as 3 fathom, but it is alſo ſo 
| ſhallow, that a boat would ground on it: the looſe coral rolled 
inwards by the billows in large pieces will firſt ground, and the 
reflux being unable to carry them away, they become a bar to 
coagulate the ſand, always found intermixed with coral, which 
ſand, being eaſieſt raiſed, will be lodged a- top. When the 
ſand- bank is raiſed by violent ſtorms beyond the reach of com- 
mon waves, it becomes a reſting- place to vagrant birds, whom 
the ſearch of prey draws thither. The dung, feathers, &c. 


_ Increaſe the ſoil, and prepare it for. the reception of accidental 


roots, branches and ſeed, caſt up by the waves, or brought | 


_ thither by birds. = hus iſlands are formed ; the leaves and 
rotten branches, intermixing with the ſand, form in time a 
light black mould, of which in general theſe iſlands conſiſt, 


more. ſandy. as leſs woody, and when full of large trees, with a 
greater proportion of mould. 


Cocoa- nuts continuing long in the ſea, without loſing their 
vega powers, are commonly to be found in ſuch iſlands, 
| parts- 


23 


74 


matter in greater quantities there than towards the extremities ; 


and is ſomewhat pungent as well as acid to the taſte. 


the places to expect ſoundings, and they commonly have a 
; ſhallow ſpit running out from each point. | 


' which may be uſeful to navigators, by conſideration of the 


view which fide has the ſhoals, an idea. may be formed nn 
winds rage with moſt violence. as 


AN ENQUIRY inTo Tax FORMATION or ISLANDS. 
particularly as they are opens to all ſoils, whether ſandy, rich, 
or rocky. 

The violence of the waves 1 the tropics muſt generally 
be directed to two points, according to the monſoons. 
Hence the iſlands formed from coral banks muſt be long and 
narrow, and lie nearly in a meridional direction: for even ſup- 
poſing the banks to be round, as they ſeldom are when large, the 
ſea meeting moſt reſiſtance in the middle, muſt heave up the 


and by the ſame rule the ends will generally be open, or at leaſt 
loweſt. They will alſo commonly have ſoundings there, as the 
remains of the bank, not accumulated, will be under water. 
Where the coral banks are not expoſed to the common mon- 
ſoon, they will alter their direction, and be either round, ex- 
tend in the parallel, or be of irregular forms, according to acci- 
dental circumſtances. | 
The interior parts of theſe ride being ſea, bandits form 
harbours capable of receiving veſſels of burthen, and I be- 
lieve always abound greatly with fiſh, and ſuch as I have ſeen 
with turtle-graſs, and other ſea-plants, particularly one ſpecies, 
called by the SooLoos gammye, which grows in little globules, 


It need not be repeated that the ends of theſe iſlands only are 


Az pul RooBIN's obſervation points out another circumſtance, 


winds to which any iſlands are moſt expoſed, to form a pro- 
bable conjecture which ſide has deepeſt water, and from a 


ELED 
_ Ea 


ey. 
HISTORICAL COLLECTION 
OF THE SEVERAL 
VOYAGE) 


IN THE 


SOUTH PACIFIC OCEAN. 


HE voyages made in the early period of the Spaniſh 
diſcoveries, are not handed down to us with much pre- 
cifion : more diſtinct accounts may, perhaps, remain 
in the archives of Sp AIN: but from the printed relations none, 
previous to the voyage of ALVARO MENDANA DE NEYRA, in 
159 5, can be traced ſtep by ſtep. However, it will at leaſt 
be curious, if not uſeful, briefly to recite the antecedent expe- | 
ditions. 

The jr 8 of this vaſt ocean, was the immortal 
MAGALHANES: though this man was ſlighted by his own court, 
his memory ſhall be revered in every age; whilſt, after a few 
centuries, even the EMANUELSs fink into oblivion. 

The Portugueſe hiſtorians have, with the utmoſt aſperity 
of invective, attacked the character of Macarnants: ; the 

| Oy Heophants of a court, chameleon like, muſt form their 


B' © ſentiments 


—— — 


— ov 
—— 


6 


. 
I 
* 
ET 
, 
IV 
"FR 
| 
ſ 
ﬆ&] 
. 4 
J 
5 
2 
$2: 
br „ _ 
— 4 
J 
$ 
c 
5 
bo 
4 
E 


7 gn" 


RAS... 
W 6 


- 
——— — 


WI SY * >. pf 2 * < 95S pH 
— — — IEG ard ot ot — — 


15 20. 


MAGALHANES' VOYAGE. 


ſentiments to the countenance of a ſuperior : : it is not, therefore, 


wonderful ſuch men ſhould endeavour to blaſt that fame, which 
muſt ever reproach them who overlooked, or contemned, the 
tranſcendant merit from whence it ſprings. The obſervation of 
FRAY GasPAR, in his Conquiſta de las Philtþinas, That it 
was not fit to leave ſo great an enterprize unattempted for want 
of aſſiſtance, is a full reply to the Portugueſe charge of diſ- 
loyalty, and recoils the reproach where it ought fo——their king, 
and to his minifters. Every public-ſpirited Portugueſe muſt 
lament, that ohlivion has concealed the names of thoſe mi- 
niſters, who merit the eternal execration of their country, for 
being inftrumental in depriving it of the ſervices of ſo great a 
man as MAGALHANES. The commentator of CAMokNs further 


obſerves, © That had Macarnanes died without communi- 


cating his noble plan, it would have been a high miſdemeanour 
againſt the good of mankind.” 
Although the voyage of MaGATHANESs contains no impor- 
tant diſcoveries in the South Pacific ocean; the circumnavigation 
of the globe is ſo very remarkable an event in the hiſtory of man- 
kind, that a particular diſcuſſion of the 4% and character of that 
great hero who accompliſhed it, cannot fail of being acceptable; 
particularly as FRay GASPAR's hiſtory * is little known, and 
has never appeared in Englith, although he is, on this ſubje&, 
much more diſtinct and circumſtantial than any other author I 
have ſeen. F 
I ſhall therefore tranſlate his Exordium to Macarnanes's 
voyage; at the ſame time, I mean to introduce all the circum- 
ſtances I can find recorded by HxRRERA and BaRRos; the pub- 
lic, uninfluenced by the malevolent infinuations in the laſt 


author, will do juſtice to the memory of MaGALManes. 


* Conquiſta de las Iflas Philipinas por Fr. Gaſpar de San Auguſtin, fol. Madrid, 
1698. 


«ce On 


MAGALHANES's VOYAGE, 


* On the twenty-fifth of September, 1513, Basco Nunzz 
p BAL Boa got ſight of the South-Sea, from the, top of the 
mountains of PAncas, in the province of PANAMA. 

„ On the twenty-ninth he waded into it up to his middle, 
and took. poſſeſſion. 

The reports of this diſcovery made a great noiſe in Euxorx, 
and raiſed a ſtrong deſire in many to navigate it; but the queſ- 
tion was, Whether it communicated with the North-Sea or 

not? Although this engaged the attention of the curious in coſ- 
mography, hydrography, and navigation, none thought of offer- 
ing themſelves for the diſcovery, and much leſs of giving any rea- 
ſons relative to a ſtrait communicating, till Divine Providence 
_ diſpoſed HeRNANDO MAGALHANES, a noble Portugueſe, to 
attempt the diſcovery of the South-Sea on many preſump- 
tions | for he was a very intelligent man in the mathematics 
and the nautic art, and of great experience in the navigation of 
the EasT-InDIEs, where he had ſerved, and gained great honour 
under the ſtandard of that famous Captain ALFonso DE ALBUR- 
QUERQUE. He had particularly fignalized himſelf in the expe- 
dition againſt MaLacca, which was ſubdued in Auguſt, 1511, 
as he had al ſo done in the wars againſt the Alarbes of ArRIcA. 


Having acquired great knowledge in the affairs of this 
Archipelago, by means of theſe eaſtern nations, and through 


the intimate friendſhip which he always had with FrxAancisco 


SERRANO, who was ſent with ANTONIO px ABREU, the ſame 
year 1511, to diſcover the iſlands of Cloves, named Marvcos; 
FRANCISCO SERRANO having diſcovered the MALvucos, ſent a 
diſpatch to the King of PoxTuGaL, by PRDRO FERNANDEZ, 

_ adviſing him of the riches and opulence of the MAarLucos, and 
adjoining iſlands; informing alſo his friend MAG ALHANESG of 

every thing that had happened to him: ſome time after Fran- 

5 + Con muchas veras. 25 
| B 2 | CISCO 


3 


15 20. 


4 
1 
. 
1 


4 
g 
4 
: 
4 
4 


— tg 2 n 8 
9344 2 2 i . ] üg ˙—ôEçèAÃ ̃² QQ Ps 4 


—— — 
n 


> 


3 
K 


4 


1520, 


 MAGALHANES's VOYAGE 
CISCO SERRANO returned to MALACCA, and having embarked 
for PokTuGaL, died in the paſſage. 

„When FRRNAN DEZ arrived in PoRTUGAL with the news of 
the diſcovery of the Marucos, he found Macarnanes in Lis- 
BON, who was then come from MaL Acc, to ſolicit ſome re- 
ward for his ſervices. He received there the letters of FRan- 
CISCO SERRANO, in Which he gave great intimation of his' diſco- 
veries. Whereupon, inflamed with the noble ardour to acquire 
fame, and be no leſs than his friend SERRANo, profiting by the 
intelligence he had received, he determined to undertake his 
diſcovery : for which he received great aſſiſtance from the 
charts and inſtructions of MARTIN DE BoHEMIA, a famous 
aſtrologer and Portugueſe coſmographer, native of the iſland 
FAYAL, to whom is aſcribed the ingenious invention of the aſtro- 
labe, and from a connexion with another Portugueſe aſtro- 
loger, named Ruy FAL ERO. : 

* In, concert with this Ruy Fal ERo, 6 ſet on 
foot his new diſcovery, and having firſt propoſed it to the King, 


Don MANUEL of PogTuGAL, he did not chuſe to hear it, nor 


to give it any confidence, but diſmiſſed him with a frown, and 


| ſingular diſgrace, very different from what was due to the pro- 
poſal of MaGarnyanes, and to the reputation he had acquired for 


his valour. MacaLnanes thus diſmiſſed, chagrined at finding 
his own prince.fo ill requite his loyalty and good faith, deter- 
mined to go to:the Spaniſh court, which was then at VALLA- 
DOLID, to enter into the ſervice of CHARLES V. and to execute 
for him the diſcovery he had projected. 

« MAGALHANES arrived at court in 1517; and as the emperor 
was not there, he communicated his intention to Dow Juan 
Ropk1Guez DE Fonstca, biſhop of Bux os, who, at that time, 
had charge of the affairs of the Ix DIES. He was heard with atten- 


tion, and referred to the grand chancellor, who, approving of i it, 
informed 


MAGALHANE S's VOYAGE. 
informed the emperor and Monſieur DE GER RES, of the inten- 


tion of the two Portugueſe, and how they offered to demon- 
ſtrate that the MAL ucos, and the other iflands, from whence the 


Portugueſe got the ſpices, appertained to the Spaniſh limit, 


according to the partition of Pope ALEXANDER VI. and that they 
offered to fearch a paſſage thither by the Weſtern Ocean, with- 
out purſuing the track uſed by the Portugueſe in the route 
to IxpIA, paſſing for this purpoſe to the South-Sea, "ON a ſtrait, 
at that time undiſcovered.” | 


HzRRERA * ſays © MacALHaNnes brought a globe finely 


painted, whereon he well deſcribed all the land, and delineated 
the track he meant to purſue, but carefully left the ſtrait blank, 
that they might not be able to pirate it. | 

« Many diſcourſes and queſtions were had hereon; and the 


chief miniſters, of whom he had nothing to fear, aſking him | 


what courſe he meant to hold? he replied, that he meant to go 
to C. Sax TA MARIA on the river Plate, and thence to purſue 
the coaſt till he fell in with the ſtrait. 

They then aſked, how he thought to paſs to the other ſea, 
if he did not find a ſtrait ? He replied, that he would go by the 


Portugueſe route, ſince, if it could be proved that the Maru- 


cos fell within the Spaniſh demarcation, he might well go by 
their route, without injury; but that he went Re certain of 
finding a ſtrait.” | 
Before we return to FRay GasPaR's relation, it will be 
proper to recite particularly what BARROs ſays of this event. 
He tells us + © That FRancisco-SeERRANo wrote ſome let- 
ters. from the Marucos to MaGALnaNntes, who had been his. 
intimate companion from the time they both went to InD1a,, 
eſpecially at the taking of MALACCA, giving an account of theſe: 
eaſtern iſlands. | 
Herrera D. 2. L. 2. C. 19. #+D. 1 L. 5.6 8. fol 139. Edit. 1628. 

| „ SERRANO'S 


F520, 


— 


* we Cn akin Hay G oo . ** 3 1 9 * D po - — > * — 
— * > = : Y - Y 
n a Et Th n SS + Ayu compre — — 
2 N 
U 


e 


* 
q 

$4 

1% 


1 8 6 


i} 15 20. 


2 


rr 


e 


Dee 


MAGALHANES's VOYAGE. 


* SERRANO'S principal aim was to recommend himſelf to 
EMANUEL ; he, therefore, repreſented the MALucos to be twice 
as far diſtant as MALacca, and exaggerated his ſervices in ſuch 
a manner, that, according to. his expreſſions, people would 
think he was writing from the Antipodes ; and that he had 
done more ſervice to the King than Vasco DE GAMMA, in the 


| diſcovery of InDia. 


< In the mean while, MaGALHanes appeared to be very * | 


of the friendſhip of SERRAN o, and therefore made no difficulty 


of ſhewing his letters, and highly praifing him for his important 
ſervices done to the court of PorkTuGaArL ; which, at the ſame 
time, he thought, muſt greatly promote the new defign he had 
formed, as afterwards appeared from his letters, in reply to 
thoſe of SERRANO, obtained at the MALucos, after SERRANO's 
death, by ANTONIO DE BRTTO. In theſe letters Macarnanes 
acquainted SERRANoO with his intention of ſoon going to ſee 
him; and if it could not he in the Portugueſe, it ſhould be 
in the Spaniſh ſervice, for ſuch was the ſtate of his affairs: and, 
laſtly, deſired him to be perſuaded, that their old friendſhip 
would be ſtill more ſtrengthened by living together. 

« As the evil ſpirit is always perſuading men's minds to ſome 
bad action, and aſſiſting them in it; it happened that Macar- 


HAN Es was diſguſted with his king and country ; which hap- 


pened in this manner: 

« MAGALHANEs being at Az Aon, Juan SOARES, captain 
of that city, made an excurſion againſt the country of the 
neighbouring Moos, in which MAGALHANES received a wound 
in the calf of his leg, which, touching ſome nerve, made him 
limp ever after. a | | 1 

„ Soares, ſome time afterwards, ordered another expe- 
dition with horſe; and being willing to aſſiſt MAGALHANES, 


appointed. *** and ALvaro MoxrEIRO to be the chief offi- 


CETS 


MAGALHANES's VOYAGE. 
cers in that expedition ; wherein they made priſoners 890 
Moors, and took 2000 head of cattle; 400 of which the two 
chiefs immediately ſold to ſome Moors, whom they directed to 
come for them in the night, near the walls of the city : this the 
Moons did accordingly ; and when MAGALHANEs and his com- 
panion thought the Moors were no longer in danger of being in- 
tercepted, they ordered the alarm bell to be rung, and gave out, 
that the Moos had ſtolen the cattle; fo that the people next day 
went in vain to retake them: this was complained of by ſeveral 
inhabitants of that place, intereſted in the booty; however, no 
attention was paid to theſe complaints. SoARESs being called 


away by the court, was ſucceeded by PRDRO DR S6uza, who 


was afterwards made Conde de Prado; and MAaGaLnanes re- 
turned to PoRTUucaAL without leave of the new captain. 

« As MAGALHANES was a man of noble extraction, and diſtin- 
guiſhed ſervices, in which he was lamed, as ſoon as he arrived 
at court, he laid before the king an account of his ſervices ; and 
petitioned him, among other things, to increaſe his monthly 
pay. | TEES : 
The increaſe 'of pay has given to the noblemen of this 
kingdom much trouble ; it appears, amongſt the Portugueſe 
a kind of enthuſiaſm, and has brought reproach to the kings: 
for as it is a common received opinion, that the rewards of the 
prince are given in conſideration of ſervices, it is a kind of diſtri- 
butive * juſtice, which muſt be beſtowed equally on all, accord- 
ing to the merit of an individual. When any one finds his 
portion denied, although he may be diſſatisfied, he bears it with 
| temper ; but when he ſees an example of its being beſtowed on 
an equal, particularly in thoſe who avail themſelves more of arts 
and friends, than perſonal merits, then he loſes all temper ; 


* Comutativa. 
| from 


1520. 


— — A = — 72 ns > 
Er . 
2 eee e eee ee PF 3 n 2 6 4 2 * 


-T 
FE 
.E 
A 
*Y 
== 
7 


F 
* 


C d IE OT IS 8 
' 
= * * 


8 


15 20. 


MAGALHANESs VOYAGE. 


from hence ſprings indignation, then hatred, and, at laſt total 
deſperation, till he is driven to commit crimes injurious to 
himſelf and others. 

What vexed N more than me to increaſe 
his ſalary, was, that ſome people who had been with him at 
AZAMoR, ſpread the report in LisBox of his robbing them of 
the cattle ; and that his lameneſs was only feigned, as a pretence 
to get an additional ſalary. For theſe, and other reaſons, the 
king reſolved not to comply with his petition : what increaſed 
this injury to MAGALHANES was, that Souza, captain of 
Az AMoR, wrote to the king that Mad ALHANES had gone away 
without leave; and of what the inhabitants complained, begging 
his majeſty to enquire into it. MAaGALHANEs wanted to vindi- 


dicate himſelf before the king; but he would not hear him, 


and ordered him to go immediately to Az Aon, to deliver him- 
ſelf up to juſtice, as it was there he was accuſed. MAG Al- 
HANES went therefore to AZAMoR, where he was acquitted of 
the robbery, either becauſe he was not guilty, or, as others 
affirm, - becauſe the inhabitants of AZAMOR were not willing to 
charge him with it. 

« He then returned to Portis; and, notwithſtanding | 
his juſtification, the king always entertained a reſentment againſt 
him, and was not pleaſed to comply with his petition. There- 


fore Macarnanes ſet about the deſign he had OY com- 


municated to his friend SERRANo at MALuco. 

cc MAGALHANES' s leaving the court of PoRTUGAL is not to 
be entirely attributed to this diſappointment he met with in his 
petition ; becauſe before he was diſappointed, he uſed to keep 


company with pilots, look into ſea charts, and talk about fix- 


ing the rule to find the true diſtance from one meridian to an- 
other ; an enquiry which has ruined many ignorant people, and 
perplexed 


MAGALHANESs VOYAGE. 


perplexed ineffectually the learned, ſince none has yet been able 
to put it in execution. 


«© MAGALHANES, from the converſation he had with theſe i 


faring people, and alſo becauſe he had a turn for theſe things, 
and experience of them in his voyage to InDIa, ſhewed to ſome 
his friend SERRANo's letters, and inſinuated, particularly among 
the ſeamen, that the MAaLuco iſlands did lie ſo much eaſtward 


in regard to us, that they fell within the Spaniſh demarcation ; 


and to confirm theſe opinions, which he ſowed in the ears of the 
ſea-faring people, he joined Ruy FaLtRo, a PorRTUGUEsE, 
who likewiſe diſliked the king for not having been admitted into 


his ſervice as a judiciary aſtrologer. 
« They both went to SEVILLE, carrying with them ſome pilots 


alſo diſaffected to the court of Poxrud Al, and there met with 


others, that place being then very much frequented by ſea-faring 
men, on account of the fleets fitted out from thence for the 
ANTILL As. | 5 

% MAGALHANES was very kindly received at SEVILLE, by a 
PoRTUGUESE, named DIEGO BARBosa, who went to INDIA 
with JohN DE Nova, in the firſt expedition made in 1501, and 
was captain of a ſhip belonging to Don ALvaRo, brother to 
Don FERDINAND, Duke of BrRacanza: this Don ALvaRo 
had obtained for him the office of conſtable to the caſtle of 8E- 
VILLE ; and as MAGALHANES was related to BAR BOSA, he was 
courteouſly entertained by him ; and his reputation being al- 
ready eſtabliſhed at the court of SpAIN, he met with no om 
ſition in marrying BaRBosa's daughter. 

The emperor *, who was in SARAGoZA, ſeeing the propo- 
ſition of MAGALHANEs, ſent to call him, and gave him audi- 
ence in the preſence of the council, and did him many honours ; 


* Fr, Gaſpar Conq. de las Philippinas, 
C | and 


1520, 


Ae 


3 


r 
rr e eo  eEenr nw we ** gar 


dana wah 
A * 
— — K = — „ Ae coo» 


e 


g 


bb —_—_— 4 


* N / 8 WILT — * 5 - SY — 
2 —— — — 2 — — — —— „ 
" 


10 


15 20. 


MAG AL HAN E ss VOYAGE. 


and to him, and to Ruy FAL ERO, he gave the order of 8. 
Jaco, and the title of his captains. 

In the council at SARAGoZA were concluded the following 
conditions and agreements. 

«© That they engaged to diſcover the Maron and Weſtern 
Iflands, in the Spaniſh demarcation, by the ocean. | 

The emperor promiſed them, that he would not permit, for a 
term of ten years, that any ſhould go by the track they diſco- 
vered. 

«© That of all the income and profits * which ſhould accrue from 
their diſcoveries, they ſhould receive a rwentieth part, after de- 
ducting the expences. 

« And that to MAGALHANEs he world; give the title of Ade- 


lentado of what he ſhould pr to him, his children and 


heirs born in SPAIN. 

« Alſo that they might ſend in the king 8 rips one thouſand 
ducats yearly, inveſted in merchandize, and bring back the pro- 
duce, paying the King's duty. 

« And that if the iſlands which Po: ſhould diſcover were 
more than , of two they ſhould receive a #/teenth part, de- 
ducting the expences. 

« And that, for this time, they ſhould receive a Hei of all 
the ſhips brought home. 

« And for this voyage the emperor ordered five ſhips to be 
provided; two of them 130 tons each, the other two go each, 
and the other 60, with 234 people, paid and victualled for two 
years. 

« 'Theſe were his conditions made in PARAGDZA, KY | 
captain MAGALHANES. | 

„ MAGALHANES did not fail to meet with obſtructions from 


the Portugueſe — AL vARO DR Acos A, who ſeeing the 


* Rentas y ok. * | 


conſi- 


MAGALHANESs O 

conſideration * which the emperor made of MAGALHANES, and 
how his propoſition was puſhed on, ſo much to the prejudice.of 
the crown of PoRTUGaAL, he did his utmoſt to prevent it; and, on 
the other hand, did no leſs to draw over MAGALHANEs to return 
to PORTUGAL, where the King would do him greater favours, 
and diſpatch him for the diſcovery, as it had been determined in 
the council of PokTUGaAL : but MaGALHANES conducted him- 
ſelf ſo well, that ALVARO DE AcosTa could neither effect the 
firſt, nor perſuade MAGALHANESs to the ſecond. He left Sar a- 
GOA, with the neceſſary diſpatches for the caſa de contratacion at 
Seville, to forward his voyage.” 
HxERRERA ſays, The treaſurer ALonso GUTIERREzZ, and 
CnxkISTOVAL DE ARO BURGALES, to forward the diſpatch, mo- 
ney being wanted, advanced part of it on their own account; 
and, in reſpect to the biſhop of Bug os, ſome merchants of 
SEVILLE brought what was deficient. | 


„They went on forwarding the diſpatch, and wanting to 


bring one ſhip aſhore, Sancuo DE MaTlengo, treaſurer of the 
caſa de contratacion, being preſent, two flags of the King were ſent 
for, but not being done painting, they were not brought; four 
with the arms of MAGALHANES were put on the four cabreſtantes, 
where it is cuſtomary to put thoſe of the captain: this appearing 
2 new thing to a lieutenant of the admiral of CAS TIL LE, he or- 
dered them to be taken down, ſaying the arms of PoRTUGAL 
had no buſineſs there: MAGALHANES, who was told this, ſaid, 
theſe were not the arms of PORTUGAL, but his, who was a cap- 
tain and vaſſal of the King of SPAIN, and then returned to his 
buſineſs. But the alcalde ſhamefully inſiſted to take down the 
flags, and Sax cHO DE MATIExCo oppoſed it: as the diſturbance 
increaſed, MAaTIENnCo ſent to MAGALHANES, to requeſt that he 
would conſent to their being taken down, to prevent ſhame. He 
* Caſo. : 23 
| E 2 | -_— 


11 


1520. 


ee ee eee ee ee 


* 
= * 8 _ * bo — = ” * 2 — * . — 2 > 2 . 
E T ̃˙§˖,1ð6ð; 1.1 ]¼—ũut ẽͥ h méd.! OT 


12 


1520. 


— wed —z—IZj— —— RAO 
— r ps 


FEEL ESI TEC II EET. 25T 5ETIS oy Se 


6 222 
22 Al, = OO 2 d.- 


r * — 
* 8 
2 2 
_ r 8 2 e "A * 


EEC ETC 
"I" r 9 — 


Ay 


— 


* 


MAGALHANES's VOYAGE. 
did lo, though it was expected he would take it as an affront ; 
for a perſon was preſent, ſecretly ſent by the King of PoRTUGAL, 
to beg him to return to his ſervice, ſuch was his concern 
that MaGaLnyants ſhould perform the voyage. MaTl1ENnCo, 
who had called to his aſſiſtance the ſaſticias ordinarias of SE- 
VILLE, ſeeing they did not come, took the expedient of ſtriking 
the flags with Macarnanes's conſent, and gave an account to 
the King of the diſturbance which had happened; MacarL- 
HANES complained much of it; the King wrote to MAGAL- 
HANES, exprefling his concern for-what had paſſed ; declared 
his approbation to Sa cHO pe MATTENHO for what he had done, 


and reproved the ant of the city for not having united againſt 


the alcalde of the admiral, and referred it to the officers of the 
caſa de contratacion to enquire into the matter, and ſeverely to 
chaſtiſe the delinquents. 

« 'The armament being ready, and ſome difference having 
ariſen between MAdALHANES and Ruy FALERO, about who 


ſhould carry the royal ſtandard and light ; the King ordered, that 


as Ru FALERo was not in perfect health, he ſhould continue 
till another voyage; and that the treaſurer Louis pz MEN DOA, 
who had made ſome oppoſition to MAGALHANEsS, ſhould obey 
him in every thing; and that MaGaLnanes ſhould not carry 
MARTIN DE Mrz ulr A, nor PEDRo DE. ABREO, they being 
reckoned turbulent ; and that he ſhould carry in his company ten 
PoRTUGUESE, of whom there were no more in the voyage. 

« Orders were given to SavchHO MARTIN EZ DE LEyYva, who 
was the affiſtant of SeviLLE, to deliver to MacaLnants the 
royal ſtandard in the church of 8. Maria de la Vitoria de Triana, 
and to receive the oath and homage, according to the cuſtom of 


SPAIN, that he would perform the voyage with all faithfulneſs, as 


a good vaſſal of his Majeſty: and that the ſame oath-and homage 
ſhould. be received from the captains and other officers of the 


” armada. 


MAGALHANES's VOYAGE. 
armada to MAGALHANEs; and that they would follow his courſe, 
and obey him in all things : and that he ſhould give certain gra- 
tification to Donna BEATRIZ BaRBosa, MAGALHANES's wife; 
to FRaNncisco FALERo, and to Ruy FALERo, who were ſolicit- 
ing another armament to follow MAGALHANES. 

«© MAGALHANEs went in the ſhip. 
Trinidada, which was Capitana. 


The Maſter, Juan BAUTISTA DE PoNCEVERA, a GERO ESE. 
Maſter's mate, FRANcisco CAL vo. 


St. Antonio, Captain JUAN DE CARTAGENA, comptroller of the 


armada; he had an appointment of being alcalde of the firſt 


fort they ſhould find, or build, in the countries they went 


in- queſt of. 

Maſter,, JUAN DE ELLORRIAGA Vizcaino. 

Maſter's Mate, PEDRO HERNANDEZ, inhabitant of Se- 
VILLE. 


Vitoria, Captain Lu vs pz Mtnpoga, treaſurer of the armada. 


Maſter, ANTONIO SALOMON DE PALERMO. 


Maſter's Mate, MIGUEL DE RHopas, inhabitants of 


SEVILLE.. 
This ſhip is famous for being the only ſhip of the ſquadron, 
which returned after circumnavigating the globe. 
- Concepcion, Captain GASPAR DE QuEsaDA.. 
Maſter, JAN SEBASTIAN DEL Cano, inhabitant of Se-- 
VILLE, native of GUETARIA, i in the province of Guipuz- 
coa, whoſe name ſhall be immortal. 
Maſter's mate, Juan DE Acukio DE BERMEO. 
st. Jago, Captain Juan RODRIGUEZ SERRANO, who was alſo 
chief pilot. | 
Maſter, BALTHASAR, a GENOESE.. 
Maſter's mate, BaRToLOME PRIoR.. 


ANTONIO 


13 


1520. 


MAGALHANES's VOYAGE. 


% ANToNIo DE Coco was accountant. The other - pilots 
were EsTEvan GoMEz, a Portugueſe, AnDREs DR San MaR- 
TIN, Juan RopRIGUEZEZ MaAFRo, Basco GALLEGO, and CAR- 
VALLO, Portugueſe, to whom, as very beneficial, was given | 
an exemption from billeting on their houſes, although the 
court ſhould be at SEVILLE, and the privileges of knights at 
their return, and a year's pay in advance. GERONIMO GOMEZ 
DE EsPINOZ A was alguazil- mayor; LEON DEZPELETA, GERo- 
NIMO GUERRA, SANCHo DE HERE DTA, ANTONIO DE Acos TA, 
and MARTIN MEN DEZ, were clerks. 

This armada departed late, becauſe the King of es 
made urgent application to the King in BARCELONA not to 
ſend it; but he declared his inclination to keep very ſtrictly 
his capitulation with the Catholic King, and that he would in 
nothing infringe the rights of the crown of PokTuGarL, as he 
would ſooner leave unpurſued what appertained to the crown of 
SPAIN ; and that the firſt order enjoined the captains was, not to 
interfere in the Portugueſe affairs, and that he could have no doubt 
they would comply herewith. 

« The Portugueſe ſaid, that the King of Spain would loſe 
the expences, for that HRRNANDO MAGALHANEs was a chatter- 
ing fellow, and little reliance to be placed in him; and that he 
would not execute what he promiſed.” 

HERRERA adds, It is told of MAGALHANES, that two 
ſhips ſailing from the IxpIES to PoRT GAL, whereon he was: 
embarked, ran on ſome ſhoals, and were loſt ; but all the peo- 
ple, and great part of the proviſions, ſaved in the boats to a ſmall 
iſland near. From whence it was agreed to go to a certain port 
in INDIA, ſome leagues diſtant ; but as all could not go at once, 
there was great diſpute who ſhould go in the firſt trip; the 
captains and chief people wanted to go firſt ; the ſailors and the 
reſt infiſted on the contrary that He ſhould. HERNANDO 

„ Mas Al- 


MAGALHANES's VOYAGE. 


MAGALHANEs ſeeing this dangerous diſpute ſaid, Let the captains 
and gentlemen go, 1 will tay with the ſailors, provided they will ' fear 


to us upon their word, that as ſoon as they arrive they will ſend for us. 
The ſailors were ſatisfied to ſtay with HERNANDO MACGAL- 
HANES, When they were about departing, as he was in a boat, 
taking leave of his friends, a ſailor ſaid to him, O Senor Ma- 


galhanes, did not you promiſe to ſlay with us * MAGALHANES re- 
plied, I was true, and inſtantly leaping aſhore, ſaid, See, Tam 
here ! and ſtayed with them. Shewing himſelf to be a man of 
ſpirit and truth, and in his ſentiments to be fit to undertake great 
actions; and that he had reflexion and prudence, although he 


had not an advantageous perſon, being ſhort.” 
They left SEviLLE the roth of Auguſt, 1519, and, accord-- 


ing to BARRos, failed from ST. Luc the 21ſt of September; 


but GOM ARA ſays the 2oth of September 1519. The firſt place 


they touched at was TENERIT E, one of the Canary Iſlands, 


from whence they failed the 2d of October. There was a cara- 


vel came hither to them; HERR ERA ſays, it brought fiſh for 
the ſquadron ; but BaRRos mentions a report, that it was ſent. 


to MAGALHANEs to adviſe him to be on his guard, and to inform 
him of the deſign of the other captains not to ſubmit to his or- 
ders. But BARRos adds, © Although they afterwards diſobeyed 
MAGALHANES, it is more likely this diſobedience proceeded 
from his rough behaviour towards them in the courſe of the 
voyage, than from any premeditated reſolution of theirs in 
the beginning of it; becauſe, after paſſing the river Plate, 
they began to feel the cold, and. aſked MAGATHANESG what 
courſe he would follow, and what was his reſolution, fince they 


could not find any ſtrait or cape, which were what he depended. 


on. MAGALHANEs replied, that they ſhould not trouble them- 
ſelves about it; that he knew very well what he was about; and 


that he was anſwerable, not they, for what might happen.” 
| Here 


wh 


1520. 


16 


15 20. 


MAG AL HAN E Ss VOYAGE. 
Here BARR Os expoſes his malevolence; for, in the firſt place, | 

it es appear, that Luys DE MenDoga, had ſhewn a ſpirit of 
diſobedience before their departure, for which he had been 


reproved by the King : ſecondly, from BaRRos's charge it 
does not appear MAGALHANES was blameable for any rudeneſs 


in his behaviour, though their enquiries could proceed from 


nothing but a ſpirit of mutiny or deſpondency.” 

After leaving the CanaRys, ** the Capitana * ſteered ſome- 
times ſouth, and ſometimes ſouth by weſt; in the firſt watch 
they bore down to him, and aſked what courſe he ſteered ? the 
Pilot replied, ſouth by weſt. It having been determined the 
Sunday before to ſteer ſouth weſt into 24* N. latitude, as was 


contained in the route given at SEVILLE, ſigned by HERNAanDo 


MacarnANes, JUAN DE CARTAGENA aſked how he came to 


change the courſe? MaGALHANEVS ſaid, he was to follow, and 
not aff queſtions: CARTAGENA rejoined, that it appeared to him 


that council was to be taken of the pilots, maſters, and ſeamen, 
without acting ſo very precipitately ; ſince it was not right, 


having determined one thing, to do another fo ſoon; having 


agreed with the captains, &c. to ſteer a different courſe from 


what he ſteered, and having amended the ſecond route given at 


ST. Lucas, conforming it to the firſt; for he ſaid, it was an 
error of the pen in ſaying they were, on leaving TENERIFE, to 
ſteer ſouth till paſt the ſhoals of Rio GRAN DH]; and that on that 
courſe they would fall in with the coaſt of Guinea, in ſight of 
Cape BLAanco: wherefore it was "thought not convenient for 
their voyage to get ſo near that coaſt. 

„ MAGALHANES replied Hat was given amended, in caſe any 
ſhip had loſt company of the ſquadron, and for nothing more ; 
that they were to follow him, as their duty directed, Dy the flag 
in che day, and by the /;7/f at night. 


* ee 


40 On 


r 
. 


MAGALHANESs VOYAGE. 


„On the 13th December they arrived at Rio Janzio ; 
the natives preſently came off in canoes with plenty of provi- 
ſions, fowls, maize, parrots, and many other birds and fruits; 
they exchanged for a face-card ſeven or eight fowls, and offered 
2 ſlave for a hatchet; but the general ordered that none, on 
pain of death, ſhould purchaſe ſlaves, but only eatables, to 
give the Portugueſe no room to complain, nor to get ſlaves 
aboard to conſume the proviſions. 

« They failed the 27th December; they made Cape STA. 
Max, on the 11th of January, 1520, which CARAvAL Lo, the 
pilot, knew by three hills appearing like iſlands, from the rela- 


tion of . Juan DE LisBoa, a Portugueſe pilot, who had been 


there.“ 


On Monday *, the 6th of January, they failed from the 


river PLATE, and entered ST. JULIAN river on Eaſter even- 
ing +. On Eaſter-day the general ordered every body aſhore 
to hear maſs; every body went, except Luys DR MEN DOA, 
captain of the Vitoria, and GAS PAR DE QuEsADa, captain of 
the Concepcion. Ju AN DE CAR TAGEN A being in arreſt on ac- 
count of ſome inſults he had offered the captain- general. MA- 


GALHANES thought much that theſe captains did not go aſhore, 


and conſidered it as a bad ſign 4. 

Barros ſays, in this river MAGALHANEs and the other cap- 
tains, conſulted about the voyage which they had made, and 
were to make: upon this, opinions were different; but Ma- 
GALHANES gave no ear to any objection againſt proceeding. In 
conſequence, he ſaid, he would winter in the river, but that 
at the beginning of the ſummer, he would continue his courſe 
to 759, and ſeek for the expected cape, or ſtrait. MAG Al- 
HANES added, that the Norway and Iceland ſeas were as 
navigable as that of Syain, though in a higher latitude ; and 


* Gaſpar. + 2d April.— Barros. Þ Herrera. | 
* | that 


of 


_ 
— —— — 
— BD 


r 


b — "A SID” * 

e ot hay >> ve. —— : 
x 3 te del i - i * ere ——ů cunts a. IR 7 ” 
— i $ - < N Rey - | T 7 * * - y <6 
ER, » ' . 


Ae — 


— * 
4 wk —_ RY 


24 
$5! 
$ 
* 
1 
7 
" 
9 
15 
11 
TY 
18 
20 * 
5 
4 
1 1 
412 
1 
* 8Y 
| 
+4, 
338 
5 
£248 
2428 
1 
if 
1 
1 
4 b 
N 
1 
18 
Y 
om f 
434 
*44] 
3 
in 
3 
14 
= : 
oy 
14 


10 „ ON d. * 4 . 2 — * 6 4 r 7 
* — b 1 DH 4 Key . — be — — — — — — — 
, — 7 : * r 7 =} — nn pg 2 2 — ps, CONS” — ww BADSD: 1902 22.7 cats — 
N 4 * rr 2 > > Mt. whey — ” IE 2 1 5 2 — 3 1 * a 


18 


1520. 


MAGALHANES's VOYAGE. 
that he could ſee no reaſon why the ſea they were going to 
ſhould not be ſo. And becauſe MAGALHAN ESU ſhewed himſelf 


in this converſation independent *, and not ſubject to the votes 


of the other captains and pilots, there were great murmurings; 
the c/zef and molt intelligent people affirmed, that this diſcovery 
was of no value to the King of SpAlx, for any cape or ſtrait, 
even in the latitude they were then in of 509, was not in a cli- 
mate to be navigated at ſuch a diſtance. The Norway and Ice- 
land ſeas were navigable, as MaGALHaNEs had urged, but that 
they were ſo only to the people of thoſe countries, or ſo near 
them, that, in a ſpace of fifteen days, they could reach the moſt 
remote ; whereas it required no leſs than fix or ſeven months to 
fail from SPAin to ſuch remote parts of the world, through ſo 
different climates and ſeaſons. Beſides, ſuppoſing it was eaſy to 


| fail round the oppoſite ſea-coaſt, which, however, was not yet 


diſcovered, the ſmall profit ariſing from the Maluco- clove 
could not counter-balance both the loſs of men in that navi- 
gation, and 'the infinite ſums of money requiſite for it. Such 
was the diſcourſe of the moſt knowing perſons, but the reſt ima- 
gined MAGALHANES intended to reſtore himſelf to the King of 
PoxTUGaL's favour, by leaving them in ſome wild place, where 
they would unavoidably periſh ; and afterwards return nt 
to PoRTU GAL.“ 

HERRERA does not mention this confultation's z he = ſays, 


„The armada being arrived at the bay ST. JULIAN; it appear- 


ing expedient to the captain-general to winter there, he ordered 
an allowance of proviſions : whereupon the people, on account 
of the great cold, begged him, that ſince the country was found 
to extend itſelf towards the Antartick, without ſhewing a hope 
of finding the cape of this land, nor any ſtrait ; and as the winter 
was ſetting in ſevere, and ſome men dead for want, that he 


* Iſento. 
would 


MAGALHANES's VOYAGE. 


would -increaſe the allowance, or return back, alledging, 


that it was not the King's intention that they ſhould ſeek out 
what was impoſſible, and that it was enough to have got where 
none had ever been; adding, that going farther towards the 
Pole, ſome furious wind might drive them where they ſhould 
not get away, and all periſh. I; 

© MAGALHANEs, who was a ready man *, and preſently hit 
on a remedy for whatever incident occurred, ſaid, that he was 
very ready to die, or to fulfil what he had promiſed. He ſaid, 
that the King had ordered him the voyage which was to be per- 
formed; and that, at all events, he was to ſail till he found the 
end of that land, or ſome ſtrait, which they could not fail of 
doing ; and though wintering ſeemed to be attended with diffi- 
culties, there could be none, when the ſpring ſet in, to proceed 
forward, diſcovering the coaſts of the continentunder the Antartick 
Pole, being aſſured that they muſt come to a place where a day 
laſted three months: that he was aſtoniſhed that men and Spa- 
niards could have ſo much fluggiſhneſs +. That as to the diffi- 
culty of proviſions, there was nothing to complain of, ſince there 
was in the bay of ST. JULIan much wood, plenty of good fiſh, 


good water, and many wild fowl: and ſince bread and wine 


they had not wanted and would not want, if they were content to 
be put to an allowance. And conſidering that the Portugueſe, 
who fail every year to the eaſt, paſs the Tropick of Capricorn 
without difficulty, and 129 further, and that hitherto hey had 
only gone double that. And as he was determined to die rather 
than ſhamefully to return back, he was certain that, in ſuch com- 
panions as he had with him, there would not be wanting that 
valorous ſpirit which naturally 1s poſſefled by the Spaniſh nation, 
as in greater things had been ſhewn, and was ſhewn every day: 


Hombre prompto. + Flaqueza. 


2 5 and 


19 


1520. 


Fang ea 


— he om 
— 


— — 


— — — 2 — 
ps a read 


me Dr LS. "> 7 b 1:2 | 25 eee ma” * r 0 
o ... + — * ——— TER ee nn" " FA 2 — — 2 * <5 
5 N — w — — — 
@ _ 3 — * — > 2 - cage 8 
* 2 i Kd Tru ae q «vs A 


2. 
2 


— x — 
— — 


— — 
rr 


. 


8 
. 
. 
3+: 
* 
2 x3 
i 
- 
34h 
u 


20 


1520. 


MAGALHANESs VOYAGE. 
and therefore entreated them to wait patiently till the little winter 


was paſt, as they might expect greater rewards from the King, 
by ſo much as their labour was greater ; to whom, he truſted; 


they were to ſhew an und:ſcovered world, rich in gold and ſpices, 
wherewith every body would be enriched. 
« As the multitude is eaſily drawn to any fide, the people were 


| appeaſed by theſe words ; although there was not wanting ſome 


murmurings, wherefore MaGAaLHANEs ſlightly chaſtiſed ſome; 
but in the end, on account of the wretched. life they led there, 
many were induced to ſhew a mutinous diſpoſition: and MAOAL- 
HANES having ſent his ſquif to the ſhip St. Antonio, to get four 


men to go for water, a man told thoſe in the ſquif, before they 


reached the ſhip, not to come; that Gaſpar de Queſeda was captain 
there; that he had ſeized Alvaro de Meſqueta*, and the pilot, 
Juan Rodrigues Mafra ; and hanged the maſter. MAGALHANES 
hearing this news, ordered the boat to return to that ſhip, and to 
the others; and aſking for whom they were in the St. Antonio? 
GASPAR DE QUESEDA replied, for the King and for him. Lu vs 

DE MENDoga did the fame in the Vitoria, and Juan DE CaR- 
TAGENA rephied the like in the Concepcion, for he had been {et 
at liberty. Captain Juan RoDRIGUEzZ SERRANO, in the ſhip 
St. Jago, ſaid he was for the King and captain Hernando Magal- 
hanes, for he knew nothing of what had paſſed that night in the 
other three ſhips. Macarnants hearing this, and conſidering | 
that the revolt was in ſuch a ſtate, that femerity was a better 
remedy than paſſiveneſs, ordered, in haſte, all the people in the 
Capitana to arms, and provifion to be made of many darts, 
lances, ſtones, and other weapons, in the ſhip and in the tops, 
and the guns to be got ready. He ordered into the boat thirty 


* 40 We des couſin, who had been put in * of 0 St. Antonio, on 
the —— of Juan de Cartagena.” 


choſen 


2 1 fl x = 

Cod f 

F 
erer 


MA GAL HAN E Ss VOYAGE. 


choſen men, in whom he could confide, and five in the ſquif; 
and theſe he ordered to go to the Vitoria, and give a letter to 
Don Luys De MeEnpoga *, and whilſt he was reading it, 
boldly to ſtab him; and then, that the thirty men in the boat 
ſhould go aboard to their aſſiſtance. This MAGALHANES un- 


dertook, becauſe he knew that in that ſhip were many people of 


his ſide; his orders were punctually executed, and the ſhip re- 


mained in obedience to him without reſiſtance. | 
«© Underſtanding the death of Luys DE MenDoga, MaGaL- 


HANES gave orders that the people ſhould eat and drink plenti- 


fully; and that they ſhould keep a good watch, as it was mid- 


night, that the other ſhips might not get out of the river. A 
little time after, they ſaw the St. Antonio coming down upon 
the Capitana and Vitoria ; wherefore they were put in order, 


thinking they were coming to fight, but they were driving with 


the ſtrong current, as their anchors could not hold her. Ma- 
GALHANES was much on his guard, though very attentive to 
what the ſhip ſhould do; and as nobody appeared but the captain, 
GAsPAR DE QUESADA, who went on the awning Þ with a. 
lance and a target, calling the people, who would not ſtir, for 
the artillery of the Capitana was playing againſt the upper works 
of the St. Antonio: a ball truck the cabin where Juan Ro- 
DRIGUEZ MAFRA was priſoner, and paſſed between his legs 


without hurting him. MacGarnanes had now got near with 


the Capitana, and boarding with the Vitoria, the people, en- 
tering with valour and alacrity, ſeized GasPAR DE QuksAbA 
and the criminals, and carried them to the Capitana: ſetting at 
liberty ALVARO pe MesqQuiTa and Juan RODRIGUEZ MarRa.. 


* Barros FEE the perſon entruſted with the commiſſion to kill Mendoga, who 
was on board his ſhip out of the mouth of the river, was Gongalo Gomes Spi- 
noſa, apparitor of the fleet; which SPN did with a 5 

t Tolda. 


MAGdAL - 


21 


15 20. 


22 


1520. 


 MAGALHANES' VOYAGE. 

MacarnaANes ſent a boat with forty men, to enquire for whom 
was the Concepcion ?' they replied for Magalhanes ; and then 
aſking, if they might come aboard ſafely ? they replied yes ; 
and ſeized Jaan DE CARTAGENA, and brought him to the 
Capitana.“ 8 

BaRROs ſays, © The three captains Carracena, Quxs Aba, 
and MENnpDoga, conſulted together, and reſolved either to con- 
fine or to kill MAGALHANES, and to return to SPAIN, and to 
let the King know every thing they had met with in their voy- 
age; and, at the ſame time, repreſent to him the ee 
and raſhneſs of their inflexible commander.” 

«© Next day * MAGALHANEs ordered Luvs De MENnDoca, 


who was killed in the Vitoria, to be quartered ; and was em- 
ployed ſome days in examining into the bottom of the affair ; 


and although he found above forty deſerve death, he pardoned 
them, becauſe they were neceſſary for the ſervice of the armada; 


and becauſe he did not think it neceſſary to appear rigorous, 
and make himſelf diſliked, by exceſſive puniſhment. He ſen- 
tenced GAsPAR DE QuEsADA to be quartered, and a boy of his 
to be hanged; and Juan DE CARTAGENA to be left aſhore in 
that country ; and becauſe they had no executioner, the boy, 
to fave his own life, accepted of the Mee, and hung his maſter 
and quartered him. | 
Not for this did the mutiny ceaſe, for a Te rench clerigo, | 
who was in the St. Antonio, endeavoured to ſtir up the people; 


but not getting any body to join him, he was diſcovered, ſeized, 


and ſentenced to be left in the country with Juan DE Lan TA- 


GENA. 

& As the winter ths were drawing towards a concluſion, 
MAGALHANES ordered captain JuAN SERRANO tO go along 
more, to diſcover if there was a ſtrait; and that, if he did not 


* Herrera. 


find 


„ 


MA GAL HAN ESS VOYAGE. 


| find it in a certain diſtance, he ſhould return. He found at 
twenty leagues a fine river, a league broad, and becauſe it was 
the day of St. Cruz, in May, he named it 8“. Cruz: he 
ſtaid in it ſix days, fiſhing and getting ſeals, of which he killed 
one weighing nineteen arobas, without the hide, head, and feet: 
Juan SERRANo wanted to go forward; but at three leagues 
came on a gale that ſplit all his fails, and loſing his rudder, be- 
fore he got to the ſhore, the ſhip ſunk, as it was high water, 
the fore part of the ſhip was under water; all the people were 
ſaved, but the ſhip was broke to pieces, and every thing in her 
loſt. Eight days they lived upon ſhell-fiſh, which they caught 
among the rocks; and contriving to return to the ſquadron, 
they found a difficulty in paſſing the large river, but finding 


ſome planks on the coaſt, they carried them on their backs; 


and being very feeble, although it was only fix leagues by land, 
they were four days in reaching it, living on plants. There 
were thirty-ſeven men, notwithſtanding which, the plank they 
carried, was only ſufficient to make one ſmall embarkation to 
carry two perſons, becauſe, TOI feebleneſs, _ had left 
them in the way. 

Theſe two men being paſſed the rivers, they went two days 
inland, without getting good plants to eat, ſuffering great colds. 
from the ſnow, they agreed to go down to the ſea to ſeek food, 


and finding ſome ſhell-fiſh, they returned inland, for the road. 


was better that way from the river 8*. Cruz, to where the ſhips 
lay, than along the ſea ſhore; and having been detained eleven 
days, they arrived fo emaciated, that they were not known. 
MaGALHANES regretted the loſs of the ſhip, but rejoiced that 
all the people were ſaved; though the great quantity of provi- 
ſions they had loſt, diſtreſſed them much. He ſent twenty men, 
loaded with wine, bread, and other things, that thoſe people 
might paſs * land; for the ſea \ was ſo changed, it was im- 

Xx poſſible 


15 20. 


al 


15 20. 


WASALHANESS JON E. 
poſſible to go that way. Theſe people ſuffered great diſtreſſes, and 


ere obliged to melt the flakes of ice to drink. The bread being 
arrived, they gave to the people of the loſt ſhip, who had been 


_ thirty-five days without eating it: they were occupied two days 


in paſſing the river with the little boat, and being arrived at 
the ſhips, MacATRHANES made JUAN SERRANo captain of the 
Concepcion, and divided the people amongſt the other ſhips. 

That the people who were employed in repairing the ſhips, 
might continue with the greater ſecurity aſhore, although they 
had not hitherto ſeen any Indian, MaGaLyanes made them 
make a houſe of ſtone, where they had the forge ; from the 
extremities they ſuffered, three men loſt the uſe of their hands, 
for this river is in 49*%, and ſomewhat more, and the days were 
very ſhort. In the mean while, the general ordered, that four 
men ſhould go inland, and that at thirty leagues they ſhould fix 
a croſs, and that if they found the people and the country good, 
that they ſhould remain in it; but not Ct water_nor popes, 
and appearing deſert, that they ſhould return. 

« At the end of two months which the armada was in the 


bay, appeared fix Indians: but as it is foreign to the purpoſe 


of this work, to enter into a detail of any circumſtances which 


do not relate to the hiſtory of the voyage or of MAGALHANES, 


I ſhall only obſerve, that Herrera ſays, e the leaſt was larger 
and raller than the largeſt Spaniard.” : 
« Tt appearing * that the five winter 8 April, May, 
June, July, and Auguſt were paſſed, the captain- general gave 
orders, that the ſhips ſhould be got ready for the ſea. | | 
« The 21ft July, the coſmographer, AnpRes pe ST. Max- 
TIN, went aſhore with his inſtruments, and obſerved when the 
ſun was at his greateſt altitude, the ſhadow of the thread pointed 


to S. by E. 3 deg. S. (= S. 8 deg. 15 min. E.) and Sunday 22d, 


* Herrera, 


they 


MAGALHANESs VOYAGE. 


they made the ſame obſervation aboard, and had the ſame reſult. 
Taking the altitude of the ſun on ſhore, the 24th of Auguſt, they 
found it 32 deg. 40 min. the declination being 8 deg. 2 min, 
Z. D. 40 deg. 42 min. the lat. is therefore 49 deg. 18 min. 8. 

« The ſhips being ready to fail, MAGALHANES ordered JUAN 
DE CARTAGENA, and the French clerigo,” whom Barros names 
PrDRO SANCHEZ DE REINA, to be ſet aſhore, in purſuance 
of the ſentence which had been paſſed, and that they ſhould be 
given bread and wine in plenty; all the people very compaſli- 
_ onately wiſhed them farewel. 

« They left the bay of St. JULIAN the 24th of Auguſt, and 
went to the river STA. Cruz, diſcovered by Juan SERRANO, 
where they continued September and October.” 

Fray GAS PAR fays, having wooded and watered at STA. 
 Cxvz, they failed from thence in the end of October, and kept 
coaſting to the ſouthward with much trouble, on account of the 
bad weather, till they came to Cape VirGins, ſo named by 
 MAGALHANES, becauſe it was diſcovered on St. URs8uLa's day.” 

HERRERA relates, that on diſcovering this Cape, © Macar- 
HANEs ſent two ſhips apart to reconnoitre, with orders to re- 
turn within five days : they returned; thoſe of one ſhip ſaid they 
had found nothing but ſome inlets of ſhoal water, with very high 
breakers. Thoſe of the other ſaid it was a frait ; for that they 


had gone up it three days without diſcovering an end, and the | 


farther they went up the ſea ſtill followed them, they con- 
ſtantly ſounded, ſometimes they had no ground ; and becauſe it 
appeared to them the floods were greater than the ebbs, it was 
impoſſible that this arm of the ſea, or n did not proceed far- 
ther on. 

" 3 hearing the relation of the two ſhips, having 
gone about a league in the ſtrait, ordered to anchor, and that a 


ſquif with ten men ſhould go aſhore, to ſee what was to be found 
* | ©". thee.” 


— 


25 


1520. 


MAGALHANESs VOYAGE. 
there; and atone third of a league they found a houſe, wherein 
were about 200 graves of the Indians, for it is cuſtomary with 


them in ſpring, to come down to the ſea coaſt, and inter there 


thoſe who die, and in winter they go inland. Returning, they 
ſaw a very large dead whale cloſe to the ſhore, and many other 
bones of them, from whence they judged this country ſubject 
to great ſtorms. 

„On the 28th of October, in this place, being to W. of 


Cape ST. SEvERIN three leagues, they obſerved the ſun's alti- 


tude 53 deg. 30 min. declination 16 deg. 26 min. Z. D. 37 deg. 
4 min. lat. 52 deg. 56 min. S. 

« Wherefore, as MAGALHANES now FORT himſelf in the 
beginning of November, and that the nights were: not more 
than' five hours, and that the ſtrait, or arm of the ſea, which he 
had diſcovered, ran from E. to W. judging it was What he 
ſought, he was ſolicitous to reconnoitre it again, and for this 


ſent the St. Antonio. Although they went fifty leagues they 
could find no end, and judging it was a frat paſſing into the 


South Sea, they returned. The general and every one re- 
ceived much content from this news. 

% MAGALHANEs ſummoned the captains, pilots, and chief x 
people of the armada to council; he ordered an examination to 
be made of the proviſions they had, for he now looked on the 


_ paſſage to the MaLvucos ſecure : as it was found that each ſhip 


had three months proviſions, it was the general opinion, every 
body being in good ſpirits, that it was right to go on, and fulfil 
the purpoſe they were engaged on, fince it would not be well 
to return fruitleſs to SPAIN. EsTEvan Gomez, pilot of the 
St. Antonio, replied, that ſince they had found the ſtrait to paſs 
to the MaLucos they ſhould return to SPain, to carry another 
ſquadron, for that they had a great ſea to paſs ; and that if they 
met with a few days calms or tempeſts all would periſh. 

| Ma6GaL- 


MAGALHANESs VOTtAGE. 
75 MAGALHANES, with a very compoſed countenance, ſaid, 
6 That i if even he thought they could be reduced to the neceſſity of 
6 eating the hides which were on the yards, he would go on to dif 
* cover what he had promiſed the emperor, for he truſted God would 
llt them, and bring them to a good concluſion.” 
« He ordered throughout the ſhips that no one, on pain of 
death, ſhould ſpeak of the voyage, or of the proviſions, for he 
intended failing next morning, and that the ſhips ſhould be got 
ready. In this he ſhewed much prudence and conſtancy, for 
with the opinion of EsTEvan GoMez, who was held a great 
mariner, the people ſhewed a diſpoſition of changing. 
They obſerved the land here was very ragged and cold; 
and becauſe they ſaw in the night many fires, it was named 
TERRA DEL Fux. 


« Farther on finding. that hr was another branch of the 


ſea, MAGALHANEs ordered the St. Antonio to go, and diſcover 
if they could by it get to ſea, and that they ſhould return in 
three days. The ſhip went; the general failed on with the 
others one day, and anchored to wait for the St. Antonio and 
in fix days, which he ſtaid, he made a great fiſhing of /ardinas 
and ſabalos, and alſo took in wood and water; the former fo 
odoriferous, that when they burnt it, it was very refreſhing. 

After fix days he ſent the Vitoria in queſt of the St. Antonio, 
and becauſe they did not appear in three days, he went with all 
three ſhips in queſt of them; although Ax pRES DE ST. MAR 
TIN told him, that he ſhould not loſe time, for he under flood that ſhip 
was returned to Spain; notwithſtanding this, he went in queſt of 
it fix days, and was much concerned at the want of proviſions 


this occafioned. He proceeded on his voyage ; and it pleaſed 


God, that at the end of twenty days, that they navigated by 
that ſtrait, on the 27th November he failed into the Great South 
Sea, giving infinite thanks to God, that he had n him 

E to 


27 


1520. 


„ 


24 
> 
WA 
, 
#1 
4 
1 


28 


1520. 


MAGALHANES's VOYAGE. 
to find what was fo much deſired; and that he was the rt who 
had found the paſſage ſo much ſought after. Whereby the 
memory of this excellent captain ſhall be eternally celebrated.” 
BaRRos ſays, © MacaLnaANEs ſeeing the ſhip St. Antonio 
was gone, and in it ALvVaRoDeMEsqQUITaA, and ſome Portugueſe, 


and that he was only ſupported by captain BaRBosa, and a few 


others, for the reſt of the Spaniards were diſguſted with him for 
the great hardſhips they had ſuffered, he was ſo perplexed, that 
he did not know what to determine. In juſtification of him- 
ſelf, he wrote two orders of the ſame tenor, and ſent them to 
the two ſhips, not chuſing that the chief people ſhould come to 
him, leſt, when they were all collected together, ſome diſpute 
ſhould ariſe, on his not conſenting to their deſires.” BaRRos 
adds that Ax DRES DE ST. MARTIN entered in a book the 
order to the ſhip in which BARBOSA was, and the reply to it, 
that he might always be able to give an account of himſelf ; 
after his death at the MAarucos, this book, and ſome of his 
papers, came into my hands, and, as not foreign to this hiſtory, 
both. the order and reply of ANDREs DEF ST. MARTIN are here 


_ tranſlated, to ſhew, not by our but their own words, in wha® 
condition they then were, and what track Macarnangs had 


contrived to go, by our diſcovery, if he had failed in his own 
attempt. The following are the very words and expreflions of 
the writing entered by ST. MARTIN, without altering a letter. 


«« FERDINAND MAGALHANEs, knight of the order of ST. 
% Jaco, captain-general of the armada which his Majeſty ſent 
to diſcover ſpices, &c. make known to you EpwaRD BAR- 
** BOSA, captain of the ſhip Vitoria, and to the pilots, maſters, 


and mates of it, That whereas, I perceive it appears to you all 


* a hard thing that Tam determined to proceed on, as it ſeems to 
you we have little time to perform the voyage in which we 
7 ere 


cc 
66 
it 


cc 


cc 


«4 


«6 


At was notified by MARTIN Mien eſcrivano of the hip, : 


«ef 


MAGALHANES" VOYAGE. 


are engaged; and whereas I am a man, who never reject the 


opinion or advice of any one before all my affairs are executed, - 


and communicated in general to every body, without any one 
having been by me affronted; and becauſe of what happened 
at port ST. JULIAN about the death of Luys ps MenDoza,. 
and GASPAR DE QUESADA, and the baniſhment of JUAN DE 


CARTAGENA, and PEDRo SANCHEZ DE REiNo, clerigo, you 
through fear omit to ſpeak to me, and adviſe me, what appears 
to you for the ſervice of his majeſty, and ſafety of the ſaid: 


armada ; and have not ſpoken to, or counſelled me, contrary 
to the ſervice of his Imperial Majeſty, our Lord, and con- 
trary to the oath * and homage which you have done to me: 


Therefore I command you on the part of our ſaid Lord, and on 
my own part earneſtly entreat, that all which you think of, re- 


lative to our voyage, as well of going on, as of returning. 


back, you will give your opinions in writing, every one 
apart. Declaring the circumſtances and reaſons why we 


ſhould go on or return, not omitting to tell the truth from. 
any reſpect whatever. With which reaſons and opinions I 


ſhall give mine, and determine finally what we are to do. 


« Done in the channel of All-Saints, oppoſite the Rio de 
„ ILHE0, on Wedneſday, 24th November, in 539. 1 520. 


« By order of the captain-general FERDINAND 
© MAGALHANES. | 


LEON DE ESPELECE,.. 


on Thurſday, 224 November, 1 520. 


9 Pleito e menage. 


« To 


1520. 


MAGALHANES's VOYAGE. 
| 1520s ** To which order, I Ax DRES ST. MARTIN, gave and replied 
— « my opinion, which was as follows: 


; | : | „% MosT MAGNIFICENT SiR, 

«© I have ſeen the order of your worſhip, which was notified 
% to me on Thurſday, 22d November, 1520, by MARTIN 
% MENDRZ, ęſcrivano of this ſhip of his Majeſty, named the 
a Vitoria, wherein you, in effect, order me to give my opi- 
N | „ nion, concerning what I think expedient in this preſent voy- 
| % age, as well in regard to going on, as returning back, with 

« the reaſons moving us to the one as to the other, as more at 
large is expreſſed in the ſaid order. I fay, that although I 

« doubt of there being a paſſage by which we can navigate to 
7 | « the Malucos, by this channel of All-Saints where we are, 
i « nor by either of the other two ſtraits, which are within, 

& and go toward the E. and E. N.E. This, however, is no 
« objection againſt getting all the knowledge we can, taking 
„ the advantage of the ſeaſon, conſidering we are in the heart 
« of the ſpring; and it appears your worſhip ought to go on 
« by it, at preſent, ſo long as we have * the beſt of the 
« ſpring in hand, and with what we find or diſcover till 
« the middle of January next, that your worſhip ſhould deter- 


My 


5 mine to return to Spain. For thence forward the days ſhorten 
“ faſt; and on account of the ſeaſon it will become more 
1 | „ grievous than at preſent. And although we now have the 
= * days of ſeventeen hours, beſides the dawn and twilights, we 


« have the weather ſo tempeſtuous and unſettled, it muſt be 
much more expected to happen when the day ſhall be ſhort- 
« ened from fifteen to twelve hours, and ſtill more in winter, 
F « as we have ſeen in times paſt. And that your worſhip ſhould 
. | 44 get out of the ſtrait ſome time in January, and in this time 


F e 3 
* 
— 


| | - 2 
ce take 


MAGALHANES's VOYAGE. 
take in wood and water ſufficient to go for the bay of Cap1z, 


or ST. LucaR, from whence we failed. . | 
« And to determine on going farther ſouth than we are or may 


be, as your worſhip gave directions to the captains at the 


river Cruz : it does not appear to me poſſible to be done, on 
account of the ſeverity and tempeſtuouſneſs of the ſeaſon. For 
when in this we now are, we fail with ſo much trouble and 


danger, what would it be in 60 deg. and 75 deg. and farther on, 


as your worſhip ſaid was to be done in queſt of the MALucos, 
towards the E. and E. N. E. doubling the cape of Goon. 
Horx, or paſſing it: this time I think not. As well becauſe 
when we ſhall be there it will be winter, as your. worſhip 
better knows, as becauſe the people are wan, and deprived 
of their ſtrength ; and although we have at preſent provi- 
ſions enough for ſubſiſtence, they are neither ſo plenty, 


nor ſuch as will recover new ſtrength, nor. ſupport. ex- 
ceſſive fatigues, without their conſtitutions. being greatly 
impaired by it; and I obſerve that thoſe who fall ſick, are 


long in recovering. And although your worſhip has good 


' ſhips, and well fitted (thank God) yet they are in want of 


cables, eſpecially this ſhip Vitoria: and I have above ſaid the 
people are wan and feeble, and the proviſions are not ſuffici- 
ent to go by that way to the MALvucos, and from thence to 
return to SPAIN. Alſo it appears to me, your worſhip ſhould 
not navigate thoſe coaſts in the night, as well for the ſafety 
of the ſhips, as that the people may have time to reſt a 
little, having here nineteen hours clear day-light, you may 


order to lie at anchor four or five hours, which the night laſts... 


For it appears a thing conſonant to reaſon, to anchor for four 
or five hours, which the night laſts, to give (as I. have faid 
above) reſt to the people, and not jade themſelves with 
working the ſhips, and more particularly to keep clear of 

| | | % any 


31 


1520. 


15207 


MAGALHANES's VOYAGE. 


% any danger *, which ill-fortune might bring us into, from 


„ whence God deliver us; for if diſaſters happen, when ſuch 


e things are clearly ſeen, and when people are on their guard, 
« what wonder if they befal' when things are not clearly 


«© ſeen, known, or perceived, but that you anchor an hour 


« before ſun ſet, when you can ſee two leagues a-head. I have 
« mentioned what I think, and which 1 have given in compli- 
% ance to my duty to God, and to your worſhip, and what ap- 


'« pears to me ſerviceable to his majeſty and the good of the 


„ armada. Your worſhip will do what ſeems proper: and may 
* God direct you, to whom I pray to preſerve your life and ſtate 
as it deſeryes.” | | 


cc HERNANDO MAGALHANEsS having received this and the 
other opinions, as his intention was not to turn back on any 
account whatever; and only paid this compliment, as he knew 
that people were not ſatisfied with him, at the ſame time that 
they were terrified on account of thoſe who had been made a 
public example of: but to give an account of himſelf, he made 
a long reply, in which he gave circumſtantial reaſons, but all di- 
rected to go forward. And he ſwore by the order of ST. Jaco, 
hanging on his breaſt, that this appeared to him the moſt eli- 


gible method for the ſafety of the fleet; wherefore, that all 


ſhould follow truſting in the goodneſs of God, which had 
brought them to this place, and had diſcovered to them this 
channel ſo much defired, which would carry them to the end 


| of their wiſhes.” 


HERRERA ſays The St. Antonio came back to look for 


 MAGALHANES, and as they anchored at the port of SaRDIN As, 


without finding him where they left him, they diſcharged ſome 
guns, and made ſmoaks; and although they were not anſwered, 


* Reves. 


the 


MAGALHANESs VOYAGE. 


the captain, ALVARO DE MErsquiTA, wanted to go in queſt of 


the general, but the pilot EsTrEvan GoMEz, a Portugueſe, and 
the eſcrivano GERONIMO GUERRA, whom MAGALHANEs had 
made treaſurer, ſeized and ſtabbed him, on pretence that he 
had been MAGALHANEs's counſellor in the executions * he had 
made; they kept him in cloſe confinement. They made 
GERONIMO GUERRA captain of the ſhip, and purſued their voy- 
. age towards GUINEA to return to SPAIN. | 

© MAGALHANES found, on getting into the South-Sea, that 
the land turned towards the north, which appeared a good ſign, 
though the ſea was very dark and high, a mark of a great 
ocean: MAaGALHANEs ordered many thanks to God; and that 
they ſhould ſteer to the northward to get quickly out of theſe 
cold climates.. 

«© MAGALHANES thin ſteering to the northward. had great 
ſtorms till the 18th of December, when he found himſelf in 32 
deg. 30 min. S. he had not till then met with ſo much obſtruc- 
tion from the wind as from the ſea, which tore them to pieces. 
As he approached the warm climates the wind came large, and 
as they had it aft, the general ordered to ſteer N. W. and W. 
N. W. till he got to the line.“ 

In this track they diſcovered two un illands, which 
were named the DesvEnNTURADaAs. The different relations do not 
| agree in the ſituation of theſe iſlands; the firſt was named ILHA. 


 PRIMEIRA, according to BaRRos, but the Portugueſe relation in | 


Ramus1o, calls it ST. PRDRO. At the ſecond they found many 


ſharks, from whence they named it T1BuRoN. I have here given 
the different ſituations. 


| | 80 Pigafetta. Maximil. Barros. Portug. Benzon. 
Firſt iſland, or St. Pedro, 15 8. about the 1898. 189 8. ,ccording to 
tropick. 1500 leagues Ie Maire, 
from Strait's Mouth. 
Second, or Tiburon, 9 „ 15 17 
* Juſticias, 


” F | Theſe 


33 


1520. 


2 q OH ys, * 1 E 
4 ems * — 2 p ae hg An PE) r * D * 2 * ITN 
EDT” — RYE ny” en wodeecen tc i a at wh v5 Ag 5 C 


Tx 


MG ons. — Ae 


. 


— 
— 


oY 
> 
. 
64 
5 
5 


5 
4) 
50 
. 


34 
1530. 


MAGALHANESs VOYAGE. 

Theſe iſlands had nothing but birds and trees on them ; the 
ſea is very deep near the ſhore ; but affording good fiſh they 
remained at them, according to MAx1MILIAN, two days. 

As it is not the intention of this work to enter into the recital 
of MaGAaLHANEs's voyage further than is neceſſary to explain 
his track acroſs the Pacific Ocean, it will be ſufficient to add, 
that after diſcovering the Ladrone iſlands, he went to thoſe now 
named the PniLiPpinNaAs, in one of which, named MacTan, 
adjoining to ZEBU, he was killed. The ſhips afterwards viſited 
BoRNEo, and paſſed to the MALucos; from whence the Vito- 
ria returned to SPAIN by the TO. of Goop Herr on the 7m 
September, . | 

The Trinidada having ſprung a 1 returned to the MA- 
Lucos, and attempted the paſſage to NEw SPAIN, but being 
forced back from 42 deg. N. ROE was wrecked at the 
Malucos. 

Perhaps I may hereafter be induced to trace the voyage of 
Mad ATHANES and his followers through the Philipinas and 


Eaſtern Iſlands, but this is a diſquiſition totally unconnected with 


the preſent ſubject; and which would not be intelligible with- 
out more accurate charts than any hitherto publiſhed of thoſe 
parts. Ee 


* Herrera has preſerved the names of thoſe perſons who returned in the Vitoria : 
Juan Sebaſtian del Cano, Miguel de Rodas, maſter ; Martin de Infaurraga, pilot; 
Miguel de Rodas, ſeaman ; Nicolas Griego, Juan Rodriguez, Baſco Gallego, 
Martin de Judicibus, Juan de Santander, Hernando de Buſtamente, Antonio Lom 
bardo (Pigafetta), Franciſco Rodriguez, Antonio Fernandez, Diego Gallego, Juan 
de Arratia, Juan de Apega, Juan de Acurio, Juan de Zubieta, Lorenzo de Yruna, 
Juan de Ortega, Pedro de Indarchi, Ruger Carpintete, Pedro Gaſco, Alfonſo Do- 
mingo, ſeaman; Diego Garcia, Pedro de Balpueſta, Ximeno de Burgos, Juan 
3 Martin de Magallanes, Franciſco Alvo, Roldan de Argote. 


r ER DI 


FERDINAND GRIJALVA 
AND 


ALVAR A D oO 


VO Y 4 3 


HIS expedition is Srieſy mentioned by HRRRERA “*; it 
is alſo mentioned by ARGENsoLA, but more circum- 


ſtantially by Dx CouTo and GaLvano : theſe obviouſly relate 
to the different ſhips; GaLvano, who was at this period go- 
vernor of the MaLucos, to ALVARaDo's voyage, as does 
ARGENSOLA ; Dx CouTo to GRIJALVA. 


In 1536 CoRTEs, not diſcouraged by the 3 injury done him in 


ſending ANToNn1o DE MEN DOA to be viceroy of the Empire he 
had conquered, beſides an expedition to the N. W. fitted out 
two ſhips to examine the track to the Mar ucos under the line; 
but being informed of the dangerous ſituation to which Pi- 
ZARRO'S affairs in PERU were reduced, they went firſt to ST. 
Micvuer pe TANGARARA, with aſſiſtance to PizARRo, „and 
from thence to the MaLucos, all along near the line, as they 


were commanded .“ 


Herrera, D. 5. L 8 c. 10. and D. 7. L. 5. cap. 9. 
Bart. Leonardo de — Cong. de las Malucos: Folio. Madrid, 1609, L. 


2; P. 6 
De Couto, D. 5. L. 6. c. 5. Folio, Liſbon, 1612. 
Galvano Diſcoveries of the World from their firſt original, unto A. D. 155 55 


publiſhed in Engliſh by Richard Hacluit. London, quarto, 1601, P. 80. 
2 DE 


+ Galvano, P. 80. 


2. 


1537. 


36 


1537. 


PPP Vcc ——— On ES 
_ . mt +" 3 9 r + * * * * — a * , RP "£74 8b 
r —— * — rub Rs fr Ws * . — 2 


rr rere 


* 
A N ere 
l 1 3 ELIE" —__ 
— 4. \ * 7 COT — * — — * * > — < — »s 


; 
2 
* 
# 
* 
4G 
. 
* 
. 
J 
JI 
1 
2 
" 
. 
7 
2 
© 
on 
5 
v4 
; 
4 2 
I 
py”! 
1 
* 
; 


* 923 * 
8 


— * = MG ths; 1 — 
* 2 CE 


FERDINAND GRIJALVA and 


DE CouTo indeed ſays, one ſhip was to return to CoRTxs 
with diſpatches, and GRIJAL vA, with the other, to proceed on 
the diſcovery of ſome iſlands to the weſtward, which were ima- 
gined to abound in gold *, and as Cox xs kept this intention a 
profound ſecret, it gave riſe to a report that GriJaLva' had 


fled, being afraid of puniſhment for ſome miſdemeanours. 


He fays * GRijJaLva departed from PaGETA in 6 deg. N. 
the beginning of April, 1537, and ſteered W. and S. W. into 
29 deg. S. and then ſpringing his maſt, he ſtood towards the 
line, and in 2 deg. N. carried his maſt away; but having re- 


_ paired it as well as he could, he run into 25 deg. N. and 


then ſtood for the land, hoping to make CAL IToRNIA, but had 
no ſigns of it; and as the winds were E. and N. E. he reſolved 
to run for the line as he did. 

% The people on board inſiſted on his 3 away for the 
MAL ucos, which he refuſed, declaring, he did not chuſe to be 


held a traitor, and enter the Portugueſe territories ; this occa- 


ſioned a mutiny, in which GRrIiJaLva was killed, with his ne- 
phew Loro DavaLos, and the maſter elected in his ſtead. 
He immediately bore away for the Mar ucos, and met with 
ſuch calms, that he was four months going to Par uA, which 
was the firſt land they reached ; they then had only ſeven men 


alive, for all the reſt had died of hunger and fatigue. Being ar- 


rived here, the veſſel falling to pieces, having been ten months 
at ſea, they took to the boat, they coaſted along an iſland named 


* Ortelius, in his map of America 1587, lays down three ſuch iſlands in the lati- 
tude of 16 deg. S. about 10 deg. W. longitude a Callao or about 87 deg. W. a London, 
with this deſcription, Hic uſpiam inſulas efſe auro divites nonnulli volunt. Probably 
theſe are what were originally named the Salomon iſlands ; for Herrera, after giving 
an account of Mendana's Diſcovery in 1567, mentions, that in the voyage from 
Peru to the Salomon iſlands, was found an iſland named St. Paul, in 15 deg. S. 


' 700 leagues from Peru, and in 19 deg. S. 300 leagues from land, others, which 


were, perhaps, thoſe fe called the Salomon iſlands.” This implies, that the name 
had been given to ſome iſlands to the weſtward, before Mendana' s voyage in 1567, 


CREsPos, 


ALVARADO's VOYAGE. 


CrrsPos, from whence came many negroes, and ſo many came 
aboard, that they ſunk the boat, ſaving the Spaniards, whom 
they made captives aſhore, and carried them to fell about the 
iſlands, ſome being brought this year, 1538, to the MaLucos, 
whom ANTONIO ar n ranſomed, and ſupplied with _ 
thing they wanted *. | 

ANTONIO GALVANo fays, ia «© From PERU they failed: 
above 1000 leagues, without fight of land on the one fide, nor 
yet on the other of the equinoctial. And in 2 deg. N. they 
diſcovered one iſland, named As EA, which ſeemeth to be one of 
the iſlands of CLoves +; 500 leagues, little more or leſs, as they 
failed, they came to the fight of another, which. they named 
ISLA DELos PESCADORES. Going ftill inthiscourſe, they ſaw ano- 
ther iſland, called HA VME, towards the ſouth, and another named. 
AP14; and then they came to the fight of Szx1: turning towards 
the north one degree, they came to anchor at another iſland 
named CoRoa, and from thence they came to another under the 
line, named MEous u, and from 9 to BuFvu, ſtanding in 
the ſame courſe. 

«© The people of all theſe iſlands are 1 and have their 
hair frizzled, whom the people of MaLuco do call Paus. 
There is here a bird as big as a crane : he flieth not, nor hath 
any wings wherewith to fly; he runneth on the ground like a 
deer : of their ſmall feathers they do make hair for their idols. 
There is alſo an herb, which being waſhed in warm water, if 
the leaf thereof be laid on any member and licked with the 
tongue, it will draw out all the blood of a man's body: and with 
this leaf they uſe to let themſelves blood. | 


he title to the ne wherein De Couto gives this relation is, „ Ch, 5. of 
a Spaniſh ſhip which was loſt going to the Malucos,” 


+ Iſland of Cloves. As this iſland is far diſtant from the n, this probably 
means that Aſea * Cloves. 


ce Fri 


37 
1538. 


MW 
. — — — 


DD ES NT EM 3 : 8 th DCH gp "0... 3. Ho ns 
- | = 5 8 2 2 = * e 4 a” - he 
— — = = — ER - — 2 i" r "IS * ” * 4 0 Q - — 
. 


— 


— 


rr n 
— IENAED *** 


38 


1538. 


FERDINAND GRIJ ALVA any 

« From theſe iſlands they came unto others, named the 
GUELLEs *, ſtanding 1 deg. towards the north, eaſt and welt 
with the iſland TxRENATE, wherein the Portugals have a fortreſs: 
theſe men are haired like the people of the Marucos. Thoſe 
Hands ſtand 124 leagues from the iſland named Moro +, and from 
TEREN ATE between 40 and 50. From whence they went to the 
iſle of Moo and the iſlands of CLoves, going from the one unto 
the other. But the people of the country would not ſuffer them 
to come on land, ſaying unto them, Go unto the fortreſs where 
the captain Ax ToNO GALVANO is, and we will receive you 
with good will; for they would not ſuffer them to come on land 
without his licence; for he was factor of the country, as they 
named him. A thing worthy to be noted, that thoſe of the 
country were ſo affectioned to the Portugals, that they would 
venture for them lives, wives, children, and goods.“ 

This voyage, as before related, is alſo mentioned of ARGEN= 
soLA. He lays, 

« Captain ALVARADO, a Spaniſh knight, was ſent by CoRTEZ 
to TERENATE, not to let the valour he had ſhewn ſink into indo- 
lence. He diſcovered the iſlands of Pap uA, and bravely fought 

with the Barbarians: the Portugueſe attribute this diſcovery to 


 MengsEs in 1527. The great ALVARADo allo diſcovered other 
iſlands, named GELLEs, in 1 deg. N. lat. E. and W. with TRE“ 


NATE, 125 leagues diſtant from that of Moxo. The natives of 
the GEzLLEs in complexion, dreſs, and cuſtoms, are like thoſe of 
the MaLucos, except their language, which is particular to 
them.“ | 

* Theſe iſlands were ſeen in 1761 by the Warwick India-man. 


+ Argeniola ſays the eaſt fide of Jilolo is called Morotia, i. e. Moro della Tierra, 
the iſlands adjoining W 1. e. Moro del Mar. 


LAVANHA, 


1 


ALVARADO's VOYAGE. 


LAvANHA “*, in his account of Menzses' voyage, ſays, that 


* the iſlands of Papua, which were named ISL AS DE Don JoRGE 
DE MENESES, are 200 leagues to the eaſtward of the MALucos: 
coming from the IsLA VERs1JA, where he wintered, which lies 
under the equinoctial, and has a good harbour. Keeping always 
under the line, they came to an iſland, named by the natives 
| Mevnsv, and to another [which they called Burv, which is 
more to the eaft, whereto they gave the name of Dos GRaos 
(Grain iſland) for the plenty they got there.“ 

Thus we ſee collating the antient relations leads us ſtep by 
ſtep to the ſituation of places barely mentioned by ſome of them; 
but is would have been impoſſible had they not given us 
the country names. | 

One further obſervation on this voyage is to be added from 
LavaNna f, who ſays SAEVEDRA ſailing from the MALvcos 
for New-Spain, on the 14th of June, 1528, anchored at the 
iſland Hame1, 170 leagues from TipoRe, to wood and water.” 
Thus we have the ſitnation of one more iſland in AL.vAaRAaDo's 
voyage, for it cannot be doubted this is what ALvarapo calls 


Hayme. Let it be obſerved SAtvEDRA reckoned the diſtance. 


from ZivATLENEJo to the MALucos 2000 leagues. 


* Folio, Madrid 1615. P. 53. + P. 61. 


1 


1538. 


— 
£ 8 K N 

rn. * a. - " (3 

* — — — — 


- — — 


— 7 —— — 


as ON. SA” ade a 


1 * 
1 
by 

£ 

* 

. 
+ 

— 
iA 
#1 
1 
k 
i 
$4 
#1 
$ 
+8 
4. 14 
-.F 
# 
_ . 
. 
1 
1 
I 
= 
_— 7 
j 4 
= 
AT . - 
E 
<4 
5 
| ; 
* 
. _ 
11 
a 
74 
$4 
1 


THE 


SPANISH DISCOVERIES 
BEFORE MDXCV. 


N the firſt voyages of the SpantarDs from AMERICA to 

the Weſtward, the MaLucos were in view, but ſoon after 

the Peruvian affairs were reduced to order, they attempted diſ- 
coveries. 

It may be uſeful in 1 the obſcurities met with on 
this ſubject, to inſert a chronological detail of the early viceroys 
of Pero. All the writers agree in aſcribing the firſt voyage 
of this kind, and the diſcovery of the Salomon iſlands, to the 
period in which Lorez GARCIA Dr CASTRO governed Pex : 
HERRERA indeed inſinuates, that the iſlands originally named 
the Salomon Iſlands, were different from what this name was 
applied to, by MEnDana, in 1567; but as we have no record 
of that original diſcovery, ſo vague a report cannot be confi- 


dered as an accception. 
FRAncisco Piz ARRo ſet out from PANAMA i m 1325, he 


diſcovered PERU in 1526 ; went to SPAIN in 1528 was ſent 
back to PERU in 1529, and arrived there in 1530. He founded 
the city of LIMA in 1535, and was aſſaſſinated on the 26th SY 


June, 1541. 
PERU was, for ſeveral years after, in a ſtate of civil war; Pi- 


z ARRO's ſucceſſor was 
CHRIST0- 


THE SPANISH DISCOVERIES Bron 1595. 


CurisTovar Baca DE CAs T RO. | 

Brasco NuNNEZ VELA, entered LIMA in May 1544. and 

was killed in battle in January 1546. 

PR DRO DE LA GasCca left Spain in February 1546, he arrived 

at PANAMA in September following ; from thence he went to 

Prku, and having ſettled the affairs of that country, W 

to SPAIN in January 1550. | 
ANToNnlo DE MenpDoza entered LiMA in September 1551, 

and died the year following. | 
AnpRes HuRTaDo pe MENDO· A, marquis of Cannete, from 

July 1555, to April 1561. 

DIEGO Lo EZ ZuNNIGA Y i Conde de Nieva, en- 

tered LIMA in April 1561. He died W the year fol- 

lowing. 


Loyez Gander DE CASTRO, - "MA September 1564, to 5 
vember 1569. | 
. Francisco- DE Tor E Do, from None I 569, to Sep- 
tember 158 1. 

During his government S. CuRISTOVAL was diſcovered; as 
AR1as informs us, this happened in #575. Sir FRancis DRAKE 
mentions to have met the Almiranta of the SALomon illands, 
called the Capitana de Morial, or the Grand Captain of the South, 
at VALPARA180, the 5th of December 1578 * but we have 


3, 


no circumſtantial relation of any events in that voyage. 
ber 1 586. 


pardo, from November 1586, to January 1590. 
Diuring his adminiſtration Sir THomas Canpisn was in the 


relation of what paſſed in Perv from the 26th of April 1588, 


* World encompaſſed, p. 5cl. + Penelode Leon. Bibl. Orient, and Occid. p. 642. 
CG | concerning 


MARTIN HENRIQUEZ, from September 1581, to Novetiee: 


FERNANDO DE TokREs V PoRTUGAL, Conde de Villar don 


South Sea; and there is in the King of SpAlx's library + a MS. 


41 


42 


Tur SPANISH DISCOVERIES Berors 1595. 


concerning ſome veſſels fitted out againſt the Engliſh ; and to it 
are added the opinions of ſeveral men of conſideration, on what 
ought to be done on that head; and amongſt them is that of 
ALVARO MENDANA, Adelentado of the SALOMON Iſlands, who 
is the only perſon mentioned by nam. 

Garcia HuRTA DO DE MEN DOE A, fourth marquis of i 
from January 1590, to July 1596. | 

During his government MENDANA' s expedition in 1 59 5 was 
undertaken. | 

Lovis Dt VELASCO, nus of nne, from July 1596, to 
January 1604. | 

To him Qu1Ros preſented two memorials, to be furniſhed 


with veſſels, and every thing neceſſary, to continue the proſecu- 


tion of the diſcovery of the unknown ſouthern lands; the vice- 
roy pretended the defires of Quikxos exceeded the limits of his 
authority: he ſent him to SPAIN with letters ſtrongly recom- 
mending his project . 

HacLviT mentions an accidental 4 of ſome iſlands 
abounding in ſilver during this government, 

GasPAR DE ZUNNIGA V AGCEVEDo, Conde de Monterrey, 
was viceroy from January 1604 to December 1607. 

During his adminiſtration, QuiRos s famous expedition, in 
1606, was undertaken. 

Juax DE MenpDosa Y Lita, third marquis de Monte Claro, 


from December 1607, to December 1615 - His ſucceſſor 
Fg ANcCIScO DE BORIA Y ARAGON, principe Eſquilache, left 


SPAIN in 1614, and with him went QuIRos, who died at 


PANAMA, in his way to LIMA. Principe Eſquilaché entered 


LIMA in December 1615, and continued there till December 


1021. 


2 Pinge from Figueroa. 


THE SPANISH DISCOVERIES Berore 1498. 


We have no later accounts of Spaniſh expeditions to the 


weſtward of PtRv, at leaft none of ſufficient authenticity to be 
relied on. 


The firſt voyage „ on diſcovery to the weſtward of 


PERu, appears to have been that undertaken in 1567 : it is 


mentioned by many Spaniſh writers, but I have not any where 
met with a diſtin& and conſiſtent relation of it. HERRERA aſ- 
cribes the command to MN DOA; in this he is ſingular, all the 
reſt repreſenting MENDANA as chief in the expedition. HRRRERA 
appears to be in a miſtake, for not only Figueroa mentions 
1567 to be the year in which MEnDaNna's firſt expedition was 
undertaken; but Loysz Vaz, though he mentions no year, 
determines it to the ſame period, as he ſays it was during the 
viceroyalty of LoPEz GARCIA DE CASTRO, who Jef? that go- 
vernment in 1569; beſides it ſeems to be univerſally agreed 
that the SALoMoN iſlands were diſcovered in 1567; and not only 
FiG6UEROA and LoPez Vaz, but AcosTA and ARIASs, as well 


as GLE COO *, aſcribe the diſcovery of theſe iſlands to MEN 


DANA. 
The authors conſulted in the following relation of the HO 


diſcoveries before 1595, are 


ANTONIO HERRERA. Deſcripcion de las Ladies, cap. 27, 


p. 59. Folio, Amberes 1728. 
Jos pH AcosTA. L. 1. cap. 6 and 15. Quarto 1590. 
 Loeez VAZ. Hacluit, vol. III. p. 801. 
| Juan Louis Arias. Memorial, in a collection of MSS, 
and printed memorials.. | 
' OvaLLE, Churchill's Collection. 


* Penelo de Leon, p. 671. * Relation de Jornada y Viage pre ql deſcubriemento 
delas Iſlas de Salomon hico el Adelantado Alvaro de Mendana ſiendo el autor (Hernan 
Gallego) piloto mayor,” MS. in Barcia library. 


« 


G 2 CHRISTO- 


43 


44 


Tur SPANISH DISCOVERIES Brroxꝝ 1595. 


Cuxisrovar SUAREZ DE FIGUEROA. Abſtract in Coreal, 


Vol. II. p. 393. Abſtract in M. Pincs2's Mem. of Tranſit. 


1769. 

It appears MEN DANA hinafelf was very uncertain of the fitu- 
ation of the places he had diſcovered in his former voyage, ſo- 
that it is not wonderful there is a great diſcordancy in the diffe- 


rent relations, In the firſt place the various reports of ſituation 


will be recited. 

HERRERA, in the beginning of his Deſeripcion de las Indias, 
ſays The SALoMoN iſlands are 800 leagues from Pzxv ;” after- 
wards he ſays, * 1500 leagues from Lima, and from 7 deg. to 
12 deg. S. latitude ;” and, at laſt mentions one M and in 15 deg. 
8. 700 leagues, called ST. Paur; and ſome others, oe: leagues. 
from land, in 19 deg. S. 

Joseen AcosTa ſays, the $aLOMOR iſlands are about 800 


| leagues from PERu, but mentions no latitude, 


LorEZzZ VAZ ſays, they found ſome iſlands in 11 deg. S. 800: 
leagues from Lima, and eleven great iſlands between 9 deg.. 
and 15 deg. S. He afterwards ſays, they traced Guap ALCANAL 
to 18 deg S. *. 1 

OvarLE's Hiſtory of CHILI, ſays the $ALOMON iſlands are to: 
the, weſtward of PR Ru, about 7500 miles (125 deg.) and extend 
from 7 deg. to 12 deg. S. 

The fragment of FicuzRoa ſays, QuiRos reported that 


- Menpana deſcribed the SALOMON. iſlands to lie between 7 


deg. and. 12 deg. S. 1500 leagues from LIMA. 

Sir RICHARD HawKins, who ſays he ſaw a MS. of the voy- 
age at PANAMA, reports, That in. the height of SANTA, 
($ deg. S.) ſome 750 leagues to the weſtward, lye the iſlands. 
of SALOMON, of late years diſcovered.” 


Probably 18 deg. is an error of the preſs for 15 deg. S. 


Aras, 


Tur SPANISH DISCOVERIES Bxrort 1595. 


ARIAs, in his memorial, ſays, * The Adelentado ALvaRo 
pr MENDANA DE NEYRA, diſcovered NEw-GUADALCANAL, 
| which is a very large iſland, very near NEw-GvuiNntAa ; ſome 
have imagined what MN DANA called NEw-GUADALCANAL is 
part of NEw-GuiNnEa, the middle of theſe _ iſlands in 13 
deg. to 14. deg. S. 

« Afterwards MEnDana diſcovered the archipelago of 
iſlands, called the Sa LOMO iſlands, whereof, great and ſmall, 
he ſaw thirty-three of very fine proſpect, their middle in 11 
degrees S. according to his relation. 

He afterwards, in 1575, diſcovered the iſland ST. CnuR1s- 
Tov, not far from the fituation of the ſaid archipelago ; its 
middle in 7 deg. to 8 deg. S. 110 leagues in circuit.” 

It is not clear from ARr1as, whether MEN DANA had, previ- 


eus to 1575, made one or two voyages, but from other autho- 


rities it appears, he made but one. 


FIG UEROA ſays *, They failed from CALL Ao, the al of . 


January 1567, and reached the coaſt of Mzx1co, 22d of 
January 1568. They ran from CALLAO with contrary winds 
1450 leagues, when they diſcovered a ſmall iſland, inhabited +, 
in 6 deg. 45 min. S. which MEnDana named IsLA De Jesus. 
At 160 leagues from this iſland they fell in with a large ledge 
of rocks, and ſmall iſlands within them in 6 deg. 15 deg. S. 
which were named the Baxos DE La CANDALERIA , they 


lay N. E. and S W. and might be 15 e in circuit alto 


gether 8. 


® Correal's Abridgment. 

+ © By Mulattoes.” Pingre from Fi gueroa. 

1 Theſe appear tobe Onthong Java. | | 

$ © They were ſeventeen days from Iſla de Jeſus to B. de la Candaleria; at Iſla de 


Feſus they began to have contrary winds, much rain, thunder and lightning ; certain 


ſigns of great land being near.” Pingre, p. 23. 
* They 


45 


46 


Taz SPANISH DISCOVERIES Berone 1595. 


They ſaw another land, which they named STA. IsABELLA, 
very populous, at fix leagues to the S. E. of a __ in it they 
found two ſmall iſlands in 8 deg. 8.“ 

| FicvzRoA then gives an account of the reſt of the SALomox 
iſlands ;, the fartheſt ſouth he mentions, except ST. CHRIST o0- 
VAL, Which has a port in 11 deg. S. is a vulcano, named SE- 
SARGA, 8 leagues in circuit, in ꝙ deg. 45 min. S. beyond which 
is GuADALCANAL. FiGUERoa does not mention the latitude of 
GUADALCANAL, nor does he give any longitude of theſe iſlands. 
He ſays they ſtood N. from CHRI1sTovaL, into 3 deg. S. where 
they had ſigns of land, and thought it was NEw-Guinza. 

There ſeems to me no room to doubt, that what MznDana 


named SALOMoN iſlands, are what DAMpIER named Negw- 


BRITAIN. I have diſcuſſed this matter in a particular memoir, 
and ſhall therefore avoid ſaying any thing in this place on the 
ſubject; but having determined the fituation of the Saromon 
iſlands, the deſcription which follows from the Spaniſh writers 


above referred to, will be intelligible. 


It is much to be regretted that hitherto my endeavours to 
procure the original of Fi6uzrRoA have been fruitleſs. By 
CoREAL's abridgment, it is very obvious THEVvENoOT has tran- 
ſcribed from him the fragment of MEN DANA's voyage in 1595, 
which remains in ſome copies of his collection. The abridgment 
of | that voyage and of ToRQUEMADA, in CoREAL, are very 
brief and imperfect, and if the voyage in 1 567, be equally cur- 
tailed, the original of FicuzRoa muſt be extremely valuable. 

It would be uſeleſs to enter into a dry detail of names, where 
the ſituation of each particular iſland could not be determined: 
it is therefore propoſed to give the deſcription of the whole from 
the Spaniſh writers, whoſe accounts are indeed general. 


7 
_ Hexr- 


Tus SPANISH DISCOVERIES Brrors 1595. 


HERRERA fays, © The SALoMON iſlands are conſiderable in 
number and ſize ; the moſt remarkable being 18, ſome of 300 
leagues in circuit, two of 200, and of 100, and of 50, and of 
leſs ; beſides many whoſe circuits have not been diſcovered, and 
it is ſaid, that they may, perhaps, make a continent 'with 
NEw- GuixzA, and the undiſcovered land to the weſtward of 
the Strait . The whole of theſe iſlands appeared to be of a 
good climate, habitable, and fertile in proviſions and cattle : 
there was found in them ſome fruits common in Exo, hogs 
and fowls. Great many natives of a brown colour like Spani- 
ards, others white, red, and black negroes; which is a proof of 
their adjoining to NEw-GUINEA, where ſuch variety of people 
as reſort to the Spice andi might have been mixed.” 

AcosTA, who twice mentions the diſcovery of the SALoMoN 
iſlands, in the laſt place ſays, ALVARO MENDaANA, and his 
companions, failing from LIMA to the weſtward, at the end 
of three months, found the iſlands of SaLOMox, which are 
many and large: it is an opinion, well grounded, that they lye 
cloſe to NEw-GvuiNnEea, or, at leaſt, that there is a continent 
„„ | | 

Lopez Vaz, a Portugueſe, taken in 1586, by captain 
W1ITHRINGTON in the river PLATE, alſo mentions the diſco- 
very of the SaLoMo iſlands, in the hiſtory found in his poſſeſſion ; 
an abridged tranſlation whereof we have in HAcLuir, from 


whom PuRCHas has alſo copied it. According to LopEZ VAZ, 


** CASTRO, viceroy of PERU, ſent a kinſman of his, ALVAREZ 
DE MinDANIo, general of the fleet, PEDRO SARMIENTO, his 
tieutenant, and in the vice-admiral PEDRO DE ORTEGA. 

« The fleet departing from LIMA, failed 800 leagues weſt- 
ward off the coaſt of PERU, where they found certain iſlands, 
in 11 deg. S. inhabited by a kind of people of a yellowiſh com- 

ee” Of Magalhanes. 
plexion, 


47 


0 


Taz SPANISH DISCOVERIES Brroxk 1595. 


plexion, and all naked, whoſe weapons are bows and arrows, 
and darts. The heaſts they ſaw here were hogs and little dogs, 
and they found ſome hens ; here alſo they found a muſter of 
cloves, ginger, and cinnamon ; though the cinnamon was not 
of the beſt : and here appeared unto them likewiſe ſome ſhew 
of gold. The firſt iſland that the Spaniards diſcovered, they 
named STA. ISABELLA ; and here they built a ſmall pinnace, 
wherewith, and the ſhip's boat, they found out between 9 deg. 


and 15 deg. S. latitude, eleven great iſlands, being, one with 


another, 80 leagues in compaſs. The greateſt iſland they called 
after the firſt finder, GUADALCANAL, on the coaſt whereof they 
failed 1 50 leagues before they could know whether it was an iſland 


or part of the main land: and yet they knew not perfectly what 
to make of it, but think it may be part of that continent which 


ſtretches to the ſtrait of MAaGaLnaNnEs, for they coaſted it to 
18 deg. S. * and could not find the end thereof. The gold that 
they found was upon GUADALCANAL, where they landed, and | 
took a town, finding ſmall grains of gold in the houſes ; but the 
Spaniards, not underſtanding the language of the country, and 
the Indians, who were very ſtout men, continually fighting 
againſt them, they could never learn from whence that gold 
came, nor yet what ſtore there was in the land.” 

Loyez Vaz unfairly charges the Indians as the aggreſſors; he 
ſays, that fourteen Spaniards having gone aſhore to water, were, 
on a ſudden, beſet by the Indians in four canoes, who took the 
ſhip's boat, and killed all the people. But PixnGrxs, from 
FIG uE ROA, tells us, The cazique of the place had con- 
ceived a great affection for MEN DANA; but a diſpute aroſe with 
him about a young man whom the Spaniards had ſeized, and 
would not return, though the cazique demanded him back : 


* Probably an error of the preſs for 15 deg. 


hereupon 


Tur SPANISH DISCOVERIES Baroxꝝ 1505. 


hereupon nine Spaniards“ , commanded by the ſteward, going 


aſhore for water, were maſſacred by the Indians; next day re- 


venge was taken; ſeveral Indians were killed, and villages 
burnt. It was captain PEDRo SARMIENTo that MENDANA 


k 


ſent to make theſe repriſals.“ 


Lopez Vaz ſays, that upon the Indians killing the cot 
belonging to the boat, The Spaniards went aſhore in their 
pinnace, and burnt the town, and in this town they found the 
gold abovementioned. They were IN _ iſlands 
about fourteen months . 

The Indians uſe to go to ſea in great canoes, that will carry 
100 men a- piece, wherein they have many conflicts with one 


another, but to the Chriſtians they could do no great harm; for 


with a ſmall pinnace, and two falcons, a few may overcome 
100 of them. 

«« He that paſſeth the Strait of MAGALHANES, or Gaileth from 
the coaſt of CHILI directly for the MAlucos, muſt needs run in 
ſight of ſome of theſe iſlands, at which you may furniſh your- 


ſelf with plenty of victuals, as hogs, hens, excellent almonds, 


potatoes, ſugar-canes, with divers other ſorts, fit for the ſuſte- 
nance of man, in great abundance; alſo amongſt theſe iſlands, 
you ſhall have ſome quantity of gold, which the Indians will 


give you in truck for other commodities : for the Spaniards, in 


their diſcovery of theſe iſlands, not ſeeking gold, brought 


home notwithſtanding 40, ooo pezos þ with them, beſides great 


ſtore of cloves and ginger, and * cinnamon alſo, Which is 
not ſo good as in other places.“ 


* Lopez Vaz ſays fourteen. 
I This muſt mean from Peru back to Peru, for Figueroa ſays, they ſailed Sas 
Callao 1 oth of January 1567 and reached the coaſt of Mexico 22d January 1568. 

+ Dollars. 


=: | LorEZ 


49 


30 


Tur SPANISH DISCOVERIES Bros 1595. 
| Loyez Vaz adds, that when they thought to have ſent 
colonies unto theſe iſlands, captain DRAKxE entered the South 


Sea, whereupon commandment was given, that they ſhould not 
be inhabited, that the Engliſh, or others, who paſs the Strait 


of MAGALHANESs to go to the MaLucos, might have no ſuc- 


cour there, but ſuch as they got from the Indians.” 

ARIas, in his memorial, ſays, © The Adelentado ALvaro 
MenDana DE NRYRA, diſcovered Ngw-GUADALCANAL,. 
which is a very large iſland, very near NeEw-GuiNEA. Some: 
have imagined, that what MenDana called Nzw-GuanaAL- 
CANAL, is part of NEw- GUINEA. NREW-GVINEA is in the 
ſouthern hemiſphere, and was ſome time before diſcovered; and 
fiance, almoſt all has been diſcovered on. the outſide. It is a 
country encompaſſed with water *, and according to the greateſt. 
part of thoſe who have ſeen it, Spaniards, and other nations, 
it is 700 leagues in circuit: others make it much more. The 
middle of theſe large iſlands is in 13 deg. to 14 deg. 8 
1 cc Afterwards the Adelentado MEN DANA diſcovered the: 
archipelago of iſlands. called the iſlands of SA LOMOx, whereof,. 
great and ſmall, he ſaw thirty-three, of very fine proſpect, in 
11 deg. S. their middle, according to his relation.” 

In the abridgment Cox pA gives of FiGutRoa,, there are no- 


circumſtances of deſcription, except in regard to the ſituation ;; 


in M. PinGRt's we are told, that from the Baxos pe: 
LA CANDALERIA, MN DANA had: fight of land, towards: 
which he failed, and anchored in a port, which was named: 
STA. ISABELLA DE LA ESTRELLA T. They conſtructed. a: 


brigantine, in. which MEN DANA ſent PEDRO DE ORTEGA, his: 


M. de Campo, and Hernan GALL EGO, his chief pilot, with: 
18 ſoldiers and 12 ſailors, to go round the iſland, whereto- 
they gave the name of IsaBELLA, or STA. IsABELLA.. 


* /ifada. I imagine, in this place it rather ſignifies ſeparated into i/lands. 
t Coreal does not ſay Su. Iſabella was in fight from Baxos de la Candaleria. 


66 They 


Tur SPANISH DISCOVERIES Beros 1805. 


«© They failed to the S. E. as the coaſt lay, and at fix leagues 
from the port, they found two ſmall iflands, with great rows * 
of palms, in 8 deg. latitude ; and in the fame courſe ſaw many 


other iſlands. They alſo found a — bay, with eight iſlands, 


all inhabited.“ 

As it ſeems impoſlible to clear up the ſource of the very great 
diſcordance of ſituation, it would be uſeleſs to attempt it; but 
this confuſion has obſcured the early diſcoveries ſo much, that 
many have, ridiculouſſy, been led from thence, to think them 
all, ar legſt, ſupicious. There can be no doubt that the SALomon 
iſlands, diſcovered in 1567, were conſidered to be well worth 
attention ; but every new undertaking muſt be dragged up a 
very ſteep hill; and it ſeldom happens, that thoſe who from their 
ſituation are enabled, have the ability to judge of ſuch enter- 
prizes, and are inclined from ſpirit and virtue to promote them. 
It will not be amiſs to obſerve in this place, that the Spani- 
ards, to bring places within their /ine of demarcacion, reckoned 
the diſtance acroſs the Pacific Ocean much too little in their 
early voyagesÞ. | 
Having mentioned the Ine of demarcacion, it will be proper 

to explain the term, and free the ſubje& from ſome very erro- 
neous miſconſtructions, which even authors of reputation have 
been led into. | | 

When the ſpirit of diſcovery was warm in SPAIN and Po- 
TUGAL, it was foreſeen that diſputes would ariſe about limits. 
It was, therefore, referred to the pope to ſettle a line of demar- 
cacion, which ſhould determine the limits of each. This line 
may be called the firſt meridian: it was placed 370 leagues 
to the weſtward of ST. ANToN1o, ons of the Cape VERDE 


* Alas. 
+ Vide Gaetan, in Ramuſio, and Celpedes Hydrographia; the former being 
about 4⁰ deg. deficient of the true diſtance between Mexico and the Philipinas. 


H 2 | iſlands. . 


31 


_ 
— 
* 
1 — 
TE WU] 
8 
n 
= 68 
y 8 


52 Tux SPANISH DISCOVERIES BeroRE 1595: 


iſlands. All in the eaſtern hemiſphere appertaining to PoRTVu- 
GAL ; and in the weſtern to SPAIN : it was not all d; ſcoveries 
made to the weſtward by the one, and to the eaſtward by the 
other, but within the hemiſphere ; and the Spaniſh pretenſions 
to the MALuCos, was grounded on a preſumed fallacy of the 
Portugueſe, in repreſenting the longitudes of the eaſtern parts 
of INDIA much leſs than they really were. Experience of mo- 
dern times has. confirmed the Portugueſe reports, and confuted. 
the Spaniſh, who, nevertheleſs, continue to hold the Phili-- 
pinas againſt the pope's bull “. 


- r 1 „ 9 
£ n 5 . 7 


hv. 


* . 


— 


Er 


r 


LR 


TINT 
r 


re 
* 2 p: 


* Vide Ceſpedes's . where the * of the pilots is preſerved... 
F. 129 to 153, folio, Madrid 1606. 


FUANFERNANDES 


vor a ms 


UAN FERNANDEZ is better known by the iſlands 


J to which he gave his name in 1572, than by the more im- - 


portant diſcovery he made of the SOUTHERN CONTINENT. 


All I can find related of this perſonage is in ARtas's Memo- 
rial; he ſays, A pilot, named Juan FeRNANDEz, who diſco- 
vered the track from Lima to Cn1L1 by going to the weſtward 
(which till then had been made with much difficulty, as they 
kept along ſhore, where the ſoutherly winds almoſt conſtantly 
prevail), failing from the coaſt of CHILI about the latitude of 
40 deg. little more or leſs, in a ſmall ſhip, . with ſome of his 
companions, in courſes between W. and S. W. was brought in 
a month's time to a coaſt, from what he could judge of the 
continent, very fertile and agreeable, inhabited with white 
people, mighty well diſpoſed, of our ſtature,  cloathed with 
very fine cloths, and ſo peaceable and civil, that in every 
manner they could expreſs, they offered every thing in their 
power, and of the .riches and fruits of their country, which ap- 


_ peared very rich and plentiful. But (being overjoyed to have diſ- 


covered the coaſt of that GxE aAT-ConTINENT, fo much defired) 
he returned to CHILI, intending to go back properly fitted, and 
to keep it a ſecret till they and their friends could return on the 
diſcovery. It was delayed from day to day, till Juan FERNAN 
DEZ died, when, with his death, this matter, fo important, ; 


ſunk into oblivion. 


In: 


Circiter 


1576. 


. CG 


* 
$ 
* 
3 
5 
4 
= 
-B 
. 
* 
= 
I 
fo * 
1 * 
W. 
* 
T. 
. 
54 
. 
* 
„ 
5 
* 
1 
* 
1 
oF 
*: 
= 
8. 
8 
8 
* 
4 
= 
3 
_ 
. 
1 
* 
1 
F. 
7 
4 
£ 8 
11 
* 
2 
3 
5 
10 | 
1 


2 


54 
Circiter 
1576, 


JUAN FERNANDEZ” VOYAGE. 


« In regard to this, it muſt be obſerved, that many have re- 
lated this diſcovery of Juan FERNANDEZ in the following man- 
ner, affirming that they had it thus from himſelf, vi. That 


going to the weſtward from Lima, to diſcover the track to 


CH1L1, ſeeking times for it, and getting off ſhore, (where almoſt 
always the winds are ſouth) a certain ſpace of longitude (which 
he would, at a proper time, declare); and then ſtanding ſouth, 
with little deviation, to the adjoining points, he diſcovered the 
faid coaſt of the SouTHERN ConTINENT in the latitude (which 
he would alſo tell when expedient), from whence he made his 


voyage to CHILI. 
« Other relations, much worthy of belicf, place this diſ- 


covery as before related; but whether it happened in this or 


the other manner, or two different diſcoveries, it is a thing moſt 
certain that he did diſcover the coaſt of the Sou rHERN LAND; 
for ſo has been teſtified by perſons of much credit and autho- 
rity, to whom the ſaid Juan FERNAN DEZ communicated the 
account, with the above-mentioned circumſtances of the country 
and people which he diſcovered: and one of theſe witneſſes, 
whom I can here mention to your Majeſty, was Me., de Campo 
DE CoRTEs, a man extremely worthy of credit, as is known, and 
who has been employed in CH1Li near fixty years, who heard it 
from the ſaid pilot, and ſaw the deſcription he brought of the 


ſaid coaſt. 
« On this coaſt . FERNANDEZ ſaw the mouths of very 


large rivers, from whence, and from what the natives inti- 
mated, and becauſe they were people ſo white, ſo well clad, and 
in every thing ſo different from thoſe of CHILI and all Pzrv, he 
concluded it certainly the coaſt of the SoUTHERN CONTINENT, 
which appeared much better and richer than that of PERu.“ 


ISLANDS 


ISLANDS or FONTACIAS. 


\REVIOUS to the voyage of MENDANA in 1 595, a few 


words will be proper of the iſlands FonTacias, ſo named 


in the time of the marquis of Cannete ; the only mention I have 
found made of theſe iſlands, is in Lima Fundada,” a poem, 
by Dr. D. PEDRO DE PERALTA BaRnugvo RochA Y BE- 
NAI DES, printed at LIMA, 1732, 2 vols. 4to. It does not ap- 


pear when or by whom the diſcovery was made. In a note , 


 PERALTA ſays, 


« The iſlands Fox r AclAs were ſo named in the time of the 
marquis of Cannete; they extend from 12 deg. to 30 deg. S. 
to the weſt of the coaſt of PRRU; their inhabitants, it is ſaid, 
have come in canoes to trade with the towns of CHINcHA, 
Pisco, and Acari. According to the original diſpatch of the 


viceroy abovementioned, in which he appoints D. Juan Rol DAN 


DaviLAa general for the conqueſt, and ſettling them, under 
date 15th July, 1592; and two royal ſchedules 1ſt December 
1613; and iſt May 1638. This intimation is very ſurpriſing,, 


for they are not found in any map of this ſea, nor are they 
mentioned in any of the ſubſequent voyages of the Spaniards, 
or foreigners, who have cruized to the weſtward of this coaſt ; 


wherefore, it may be ſappoſed, the * was without founda- 


tion. 

The marquis of Cannete having named D. Juan ROL DAN 
DAVITA general for the diſcovery and ſettling the iſlands 
FoxTACI1As, he, for this purpoſe, equipped two ſhips at his 
own expence; but one of them was employed againſt Sir- 
RicHarRD Hawkins,” and by that means the expedition. 
dropped, 


a * Vol, I. p. 195, | 
8 1 Ido 


56 


ISLANDS or FON TACIAS. 
I do not find PeRALTA accurate in his relations, he is parti- 


cularly erroneous in his account of MEnDaANna (p. 473.) © who 
(he ſays) was ſent by the marquis of Cannete to diſcover the Sa- 


Tomo iſlands, with three ſhips, in 1580,” though the marquis 
did not come to the government till 1590. PEeRALTA jumbles 


the acts of the two mages together, and miſtakes other cir- 
cumſitances. 
It is obvious al/ the circumſtances mentioned of the iſlands 


 FanTaAcias cannot be true; but I think there muſt have been 


ſome authority for the report of ſuch iſlands. | 

PENELo DE LEoN * mentions © Don AnDREs de Minima 
Davila memorial al Rey, &c. memorial to the King, requeſting 
the conqueſt and peopling the SALOMON lands, ſailing from Acc a- 


 PULCo with the ſhips of the PHILIPINAS; and a diſcourſe, proving 


the advantages to the INDIES from this ſettlement, and a reply to all 
the inconveniencies which can be alledged againſt it, 1647. M. S. O. 


in the library of BARCIA.” 


Perhaps he may have been a deſcendant of Joan ReLDan 
DaviLa, and if ſa, probably his memorial may contain ſome- 
thing of theſe iſlands. GIMELLI calls him Ax rowIO DE M- 
DINA; and PapRE MuRILLo tells us, he was made captain of 
the galleon from Accarurco, but the governor, who was 
aboard, diſplaced him at ſea; when they got to the Prirtieinas, 
he went away in a boat, intending to go to SPAIN from CHINA, 
but was never afterwards heard of. 


„ Biblioth, orient, y ocident. p. 671. 


Adelentado Alvaro Mendana de Neyra's 


o FV 


HERE are two relations publiſhed of MEN DANA's voyage 


in 1595; the one is a letter from Quixos to Dr. Do Ax 


rovIO MoxOA, who was lieutenant-general of the PBILIPIxAs, 
at the time QuiRos arrived at MANILA, and afterwards, in 
1616, preſident of the Royal Audience of QuiTo; this letter 
Mok A has inſerted in a work he publiſhed at Mexico in 
1609 *. He there ſays, © That in April, 1595, the Adelentado 
ALVARO DE MENDANA DE NEYRA failed from CALLAao DE 
LIMA, in PERv, to ſettle the SALoMon iſlands, diſcovered many 
years before in the SoUTH SEA, and the chief of them named 
ST. CuRIisTovaL. He carried four ſhips, two large, the 
capitana and almiranta, a frigate and a galleſta, with 409 f men 
in all, his wife Donna YsAaBtr BARRETos, and three brothers- 
in-law. He diſcovered other iſlands in the voyage, whereat he 
did not tarry, as they were not what he was bound to. Having 
| parted with the almiranta, he anchored with the other ſhips at 
an iſland of negroes, near NEw-GUINEA, whereto he gave the 


name of STa. Cruz ; and there he ſettled, not much to the 


ſatisfaction of his people. The Adelentado died there, as did 
two of his brothers, and many of the crew. Donna YsABEr. 
BarRETos Withdrew the eſtabliſhment, on account of their 


* Suceſos de las Philipinas, 4to. Mexico, 1609, cap. VI. p. 29. 
+ Coreal ſays, from Figueroa, 378 men, (vol. II. p. 397). Pingre (p. 31.) alſo 


from Figueroa, ſays 368 perſons were embarked, the greater part married; 208 


were able to bear arms. 


I | | fickneſs 


1595» 


* * 


x8 


1595» 


ALVARO MENDANA. D NEYRA's 


fickneſs and wants, and embarked the people who remained, in 
the capitana, frigate, and galleſta, which got by another track to 


the river of BuTUAN on MinDaNnao *; the capitana having en- 
dured great diſtreſſes, got to ManiLa. Donna YsABEL BAR- 


RRE TOs having at MANILA married Don FERNANnDo DE CAST Ro, 
returned in his ſhip ST. GERONIMO to NEw-SPAIN in 1596, 


fuch being the end of this voyage. I have inſerted (ſays Morea) 
the relation which PEDRO FERNANDEZ DE QUIROS gave under 
his hand. 

There cannot be a more authentic teſtimony than a man of 
rank and character thus producing a letter from the diſcoverer 
himſelf, written to him at the time of the diſcovery, and pub- 
liſhed during the life of Quixos. The other relation is a frag- 
ment preſerved in THreveNorT; it is on leſs diſtinct authority, 
but it is evidently a tranſcript of FlouRROA, whoſe hiſtory of 
Garcia HukTaDo De MenDoca, fourth marquis of Cannete, 
was publiſhed in 1613 F. 

There are alſo two abridgments of F IGUEROA, one by Co- 
REAL, the other by PINGRE I have not been able to procure a 
copy of FIGUEROA. 

Quikos's relation, as might be expected i in a letter, is more 
ſuccin& ; but there are ſome circumſtances in it, which incline 
me to believe, that FIOUEROA, who ſpeaks in the third perſon, 
has taken a relation of QuIRos, as the ground-work, and added 
ſome things from the report of other perſons who were in the 


Voyage. 


* Figueroa ſays, © The frigate after leaving Sta. Cruz loſt company, and never 
« more appeared ; it was reported that it had been found with all its fails ſet, and 
« the people dead and rotten, driven aſhore upon the coaſt of a certain part; the 
e galleota got to Camiguing, near Mindanao” Fragment in Thevenot. 

+ Hechos de Don Garcia Hurtado de Mendoga, 4* marquis de Cannete, & Chriſto- 
val Suarez de Figueroa, 4to. 1613. Pingre mentions an edition, 4to. Madrid, 
1656, Pingre Memoir ſur le Tranſit de Venus 1769, 4to. Paris 1767. 


The 


FP O‚ 4&4 — 

The letter of Qui Ros informs us of ſeveral circumſtances re- 
garding the perſons employed in the expedition ; theſe it may 
be proper to mention in this place: MENDANA's brother-in-law, 
LopE DE LA VEGA, was admiral; PEDRo FERNANDEZ DE 
Qu1Ros chief pilot; and PEepRo MERRINxO MaANnRiqQuez, M“. 


de Campo. According to F IGUEROA, the capitana was 


named ST. JEROME ; the almiranta, ST. IsABELLA; the 
galleſta ST. PII IPE, captain Puitiees CoRgo; and the fri- 


gate ST. CATALINA, was, according to FiGUEROA, under 
the direction of lieutenant ALonso DE LEYLA *, but Quiros 


ſays it was commanded by captain Don LoRENzo, brother to 
MEenDANA's wife. On the eighth of October the MkE. DE 
Cameo and TrHoMas DE AMPUERo were hanged, and enſign 


Juan DE Buy beheaded, for mutinous and diſorderly behaviour 


at the iſland of STA. Cruz. The admiral's ſhip parted from the 
reſt the night they diſcovered that iſland, and was never heard 
of. The Adelentado died the 18th of. October +. Don Lo- 
RENZO, his brother-in-law, who, by the loſs of the admiral, 
had ſucceeded as captain-general, died the 24 November ; and 
before ſeven or eight days, the clerigo ANTow1o DE Serea ; 
and on the 8th November the vicar Juan DE Eseinosa. On 
the 18th, by order of the governeſs, Donna VS ABEL BarRe- 


Tos, MEnDANa's widow, they departed from theſe iſlands, 


many of their people being ſick, as they had few refreſhments, 
and were in great want of medicines: 


* Pingre from Figueroa, p. 31. 

The grief which theſe melancholy events occaſioned to | Mendans; Joined to the 
e fatigue of the voyage, and the obſtructions he continually met with, brought him in 
« a few days to his grave: he died the 18th October, at one in the afternoon, at the 
age of 54.” Pingre, p. 41, 42, from Figueroa, ſo that he was born in 1 541. 


« By his will, which he had ſcarce ſtrength to ſign, he named his wife, Donna Yſa- - 
6 bel Barretos, governeſs of the fleet, and Don Lorenzo Barretos, his brother-in- 


« law, captain-general.” Idem. 


I 2 Qulkos, 


59 
1595+ 


ery + egy Sx 9 7 9 * 

. * : 5 9 
* j F £ 1 9 , 

L. r p 

— — al 


„ — 
3 
VIE. 


60 


1595. 


S 


ALVARO MEN DANA DE NEYR A“ 


Qulkos, in the concluſion of his letter to Mok OA, ſays, 
Beſides my deſire to ſerve you, Sir, my motive for leaving 
with you this ſhort relation, is, that there may remain an ac- 
count of the voyage, in caſe God ſhould fo diſpoſe of my per- 
* ſon, or any other accident happen, that I, or what I carry 
* ſhould be loſt; and a light be left towards effecting a buſineſs 
* of much ſervice to God, and to our ſovereign : you, Sir, muſt 
be ſo kind to accept the good inclination I have to do you any 
© ſervice; if God reſtores me to port, I ſhall have room to ſhew it 
* better; and you muſt alſo forgive my being ſo brief, as the little 
time I have is the fault. The ſecret being with me, I muſt in- 


treat you that nobody know it; it is proper the F1RsT 15LAaNDs 


* remain concealed till his Majeſty is informed, and.can order 


© whatis expedient for his ſervice : for as THEY are in the inter- 


< mediate ſpace between PERU, NEw-SPAIN, and the PHIL IPI- 
© NAs, ſhould the Engliſh, on getting an account of THEM, make 
© an eſtabliſhment there, it would be of very bad conſequence.” 
AR1as gives ſome further elucidation into the view of MENn- 
DANA's voyage in 1595. He ſays, The intention was to people 
the iſland ST. CugrsTovar, from thence to diſcover the coaſt 
of the ſouthern continent. He diſcovered, a little to. the eaſt- 
ward of ST. CHRISTOVYAL, the ifland. STA. Cruz, in Io deg. 


S8. which was more than 100 leagues in circuit, very fertile and 


poputous.' ARIAsõ alſo mentions the diſputes between the Ade- 


lentado and his ſoldiers, the execution of ſome of the firſt rank, 


and his death ſoon after. 

In the following relation of Mzenpana's voyage, QviRos' 8 
letter to Mok GA, the Spaniſh fragment in THEVENOT, as well 
as the abridgments of FicurRoa by Cox RAL and PIx RE, 
have been collated, and the circumſtances redued to one con- 
nected detail; thoſe from the fragment are denoted by two in- 


verted commas , and Qu1Ros' s letter is diſtinguiſhed by a 
| ſingle 


v O-Y Ü 
ſingle inverted comma *, and where the fragment differs from 
this letter, it is expreſſed i in a note. The trandlation of both is 
almoſt literal. 

Friday, gth April, 159 5 *, the Adelentado, ALvaro MEN- 
* DANA DE NEYRA, failed from CALLao, intending to ſettle 
the SALOMON iſlands : going to the vallies of TRUxXILLo and 
SENA to collect people and proviſions; he paſſed on to PAL TA, 
where having watered and enliſted about 400 + people ; he 
' © failed + with his four ſhips from that port, which is in 5 deg. 
8. lat. to the W. S. W. in queſt of the iſlands of his diſcovery. 
In this courſe he failed to the latitude 9 + deg. S. with the 
vind at S. E. “ and 8. S. E. & from hence W. by S. to 14 
deg. 8. and then changed his courſe to W. by N. The 21ſt 
« July they obſerved the height of the ſun, and found them- 
« ſelves in 10 deg. 50 min. S. || 

« At five in the evening” they got ſight of an iſland to 
« the N. W. by N. 10 leagues diſtant “ to which the general, 
from the day, gave the name of La MAGDALEN A. Next 
day they got near ſhore ;” from a port of it (' near a moun- 
* tain) on the ſouth ſide of the iſland in 10 deg. S.” came 
out in all, above 400 Indians, in 70 veſſels **, in ſome more, 
« ſome leſs people; others ſwimming, others upon floats : they 
were white, and of a gentle diſpoſition, large, ſtout-limbed, 
and ſo well ſhaped, as greatly to ſurpaſs the Spaniards ; they 
had beautiful teeth, eyes, and mouths, delicate fine hands and 


« 


* 


* Coreal ſays 11th April. 

+ Coreal ſays 378 men, Pingre 368 perſons. 

t © 16th June,” Coreal, Vol. II. p. 397. Pingre, p. 31. 

$ Pingre, p- 3r. 

11 Idem. Quiros ſays © having in this track reached the latitude of full 10 ag 8. 
Aiſt July they got ſight,” Cc. 

I Pingré, p. 31. | 

** 70 naos en que venian de tres en tres en otras mas 6 menos. 


2 tent. 


61 


1595s: 


62 


1595 


8 


ALVARO MEN DANA PDE NE YR As 


* feet, flowing hair, and many of them were very ruddy*; and 
* amongſt them ſome of the moſt beautiful boys; all of them 
naked, and without covering to any part; and all their bodies, 


legs, and arms, and ſome of them with their faces painted in the 


* manner of the Bissay as +. Theſe people ſeemed to invite the 
* Spaniards to go to their port, © pointing with the finger to 
their iſland and port; they ſpoke very loud, and repeated very 
often ATALUT, and ANALUT. Being got to the ſhips, they 
offered coconuts, a kind of nuts, a certain meat, particularly 
« reſembling pates, folded up in leaves, good plantans, and wa- 
« ter; they took one by the hand, and hauled him into the ſhip ; 
<« the others, incited by theſe inſtances of good treatment given 
« to him,” above forty came aboard the capitana : moſt of the 
* men appeared of low ſtature compared to them, and amongſt 
them came one who was taller than any perſon in the armada . 
To ſome the general gave ſhirts and other things; theſe they 
received with much ſatisfaction, dancing with them accord- 
ing to their cuſtom, and calling to their companions. The 

© general, out of all patience with their tricks, for they were 

great thieves, © made ſigns to them to retire ; they refuſed to 


* do it, and” he gave orders to fire, with intent to frighten 


* them; when they heard this, they leaped into the water, and 
* ſwam back to the canoes F; all put themſelves on their defence, 


* Y muchas deellos muy rubios. | 

+ The Biſſayas inhabit ſome of the ſouthern Philipinas ; ; originally many were 
painted, or rather punCtuated ; the paſſage in Quiros's letter is not intelligible, viz, 
« Biflayas, que es gierto gente barbara y deſnuda, y de tan poca razon avia de verlos 
cc de que alabar mucho a Dios que los crio, y no pareſca encaregimento que es aſſi.“ 

t 40 de ellas que parecian mas hombres menos demarca junto a ellos y entre ellos 
bino uno que ſe entendio ſer mas, que el mas alto hombre de n*.*armada hombres 
de mas demarca. 

$ Pingre ſays, „One alone held faſt by the foot of a table, without their being 
& able to make him let go his hold, till a ſoldier wounded him in the hand with the 


© and 


v 0 Ya @ 
© and ſounding a ſhell *, ſome diſcharged, and others threat- 
« ened with their lances, having no other arms; from the ſhip 


they fired at them, and killed five or ſix. Some other Indians 
« threw ſtones with ſlings, one of them wounded a ſoldier after 


« jt had ſtruck the ſhip's ſide; the Spaniards would have fired, 


« but the powder would not take, becauſe it had rained. It was 


«« worth obſerving the buſtle and noiſe with which the Indians 
« came on, and how ſome, when they ſaw aim taken at them, 
« either hung by their canoes 4, or ſlunk behind their compa- 
% nions. The deſperate old fellow t was ſhot with a bullet in 
* the forehead, with which he fell down dead, and eight or 


« nine more with him; ſome being wounded; the reſt were 


« ſtopped. The ſhips continuing under fail, preſently three 

«© Indians came out in a canoe, crying aloud ; one of them 
had a green bough, and a white thing in his hand, which was 
« judged to be a ſignal of peace. It was thought they deſired 
« the Spaniards to go to their harbour, but they did nos and 
4 ſo they returned, leaving ſome coconuts.” 

* This iſland is about fix leagues in circuit ||; it has high, 2507 
cliffs to the ſea; it is mountainous, with vallies Where the In- 
dians dwell; it appears very populous, for beſides thoſe wha 
« came out in the canoes, the cliffs and beach were full of 


« point ofa ſword. The others to whom he ſhewed the wound, took him into their 
« canoes. This was the ſignal of battle; the Indians began by fixing a rope to the 


« bowſprit of the ſhip to drag her aſhore, but this was in vain ; one of them who 


& carried an umbrella of palm-leaves, drew them up in line of battle. Another old 
c fellow, remarkable for the length of his beard, threatened the Spaniards with 
« geſtures and looks (des yeux). Here the mA in Thevenot begins, 

* Caracol. 

+ Se ponian colgados de las canoas 

Viejo de las Braburas. Vide note 5 page 62. 

$ Dando voces. 

Fragment ſays, It appears to be 10 . in circuit, 


1 


64 ALVARO MEN DANA DE NE VRA's 
„ them. MenDaNna did not know this iſland, and ſaid, it 
** was not one of thoſe they were in queſt of.” .* The ſhips 
* paſſed on the ſouth fide,” © where is the harbour.“ The 
<* ſhips ſtanding on, diſcovered three other iſlands, to which 
they directed their courſe. | | 
The firſt was named ST. PEDRO; it lies 10 leagues 
N. by W. from La Macpartna, and is 3 leagues in cir- 
cuit *. It is an iſland of a good proſpect, © having much wood 
% and fine plains, it is level, and not very high: they did 
not approach near enough to know if it was inhabited. | 
* To the N. W. + of ST. PzpRo, about g leagues, is ano- 
* ther, which the general named La Dominica, it is of a very 
fine proſpect, and appears very populous; it is about 15 leagues 
in circuit; © itlies N. E. and S. W. I it appeared delightfully 
« pleaſant, with fine plains, and riſing 1 88 on Which 
« were ſeen ſpots of thick woods.” 
© To the ſouth of La Dominica, at little more than a 1 
« diſtance, is another iſland, which is 8 leagues in circuit &, 
was named ST, CHRISTINA. T hrough the channel, 3 
it and La Dominica, the ſquadron paſſed, « it is clear” with 
ſoundings; * all parts of theſe iſlands which they ſaw, are very 
« clear: the iſland ST. CHRISTINA is well peopled; it is high in 
e the middle, and has hills || and vallies where the Indians 
« dwell.” | 
„„The Adelentado named all theſe lends: together Las 
% MARQUESAS DE MEnpocA, in memory of the marquis of Can- 


. 
"IT : 3 1 2 
m RARE TY 2 
8 * r 
% — — vr — — . 
* 


L 
* 
* 

? - 
4 3 

4 Li 

bk 
F. 

4 
4 + : 
0 
£7 
15 

o 
1 

fe 

- 48 
mes 
$.” © 
l. 
* 4 
- 
Fo, 
we. 
By 
4 

7 


e eee ” 


E. Oe. 


8 — 
bro = 8 


AY * 

. 0 * 4 
—— WS. —fre NE": 
* — — —— woes 
* 


2 * Y 7 


— GAG 


1 N 2 —— 
n N 
— : — — 
SANE 
— 


v4 
. yr 


* c Four leagues in circuit.” Fragment, 

| + Quiros ſays S. E. but this is obviouſly an error, - duly 3 in the original. 
„ N.I. and S. E. with Se. Pedro.“ 

+ Pingré, p. 33, fays, (from N. W. to 8. E.“ 

$ © Nine leagues,” Fragment, 


1 Quebradas. 


ee 
2 
* 


e 
r 
ere 


J M & Gem | 65 
ee nete, and in acknowledgment for the many favours he had 1895. 
« received in his diſpatch. 
« The ſquadron failing backward and forward, ſeeking a 
harbour in the iſland Dominica, ſeveral canoes of Indians 
« came out from it, ſome of a darker colour than others*, and 
« crying ont, ſhewed the ſame inclination as thoſe they had 
« paſſed ; there came amongſt them an old man of a good coun- 
« tenance, who carried in one hand a green bough, and a white 
« thing in the other; he was calling juſt as the ſhips put about, 
% and he, believing they were going away, began a- new to cry 
« out +: he made ſigns with his own hair +, and pointed with 
his finger to his country. The Adelentado ſhewed a deſire 
to go thither, but it was impoſſible, becauſe it was to the 
& eaſt, and that wind blew freſh, and becauſe they did not ſee „„ 
« any ſafe harbour, where they might anchor, though the fri- 
« oate went cloſe in ſhore, to look for one: here they ſaid i 
« were many more people than had been ſeen from the ſhips : 
« alſo they added, that an Indian had come aboard, who, with =o 
much eaſe, lifted up a calf by the ear. | Ew. 
« At this time four handſome Indians had entered the capi- 5 
« tana, where having remained a little while, one (as it were 
« careleſly) ſnatched a favourite little bitch, and giving a ſhout, 7 
all of them leaped into the ſea, with a ſmart air 1 and ſwim- | 
«© ming, carried her to their canoes. - 
« Thenextday (which was the Apoſtle ST. fins , the „ 
« again ſent the M.. de Campo to ST. CHRISTINA, with twenty 
«© men in the boat, to ſeek water, or a harbour; he went: 
, 80 being anchored in one, Y landed with the men in good order 


« 


* 


* 
* 


* Algunos de color mas morenos que otros. 
Comenqo a dar de nuevo muchas vozes. 
4 Hazia ſennas con ſus meſmos l y con ellos y con el * 3 
Gallardo brio. ö 


* 


K „ 


+ * — 
W 


» 
2 


. . r 2 2 — = "Xx" 2 as Wo ee 7 * 2 * 17 2 
D * 2 7 n - 9 W , N 2 rg N 5 .. 1 . 
F — * © N n Y 2 17 A 9 3 2 PO I SA. *:$ N 
S — a 5 TIS - "<1 LIES — 6 22 II nt % N K * W , 
'S CIV * 2 yas 4 Q 1 SAW — e eh ck Fa = * 5 2 » 1M — 
* * 8 —_ „ © LARS r . b 


q 
} 
N 
4 


7 


N 


323 1 
eee eee 


. cv 3 a 
AY . 


DN Cote ns 


* 
* 2 
WRT 


nth tug y W e N 4 
e r EASY . 1 * 2 
: r 2 aer 


LH r 
* * N 


— 22 
2 . ls CO 
. 8 


3 


„ 
9 


* 


2 
5 
4 
2 

£4 


| 


* 
= 
o 
* 
7 
; 
5 
* 
1 
20 
9 
. 
* 


* 
xt 
£4 

* 


1 


er 
—_— 


8 nk 
"4 — - > 6 - 2 2 AO 
1 1 . * x 6 r * fn 4 
1 r = = ——= SF - - - — r 
: 


A 
A 


E 
* 


* 
cc 


ALVARO MENDANA DE NEYRA's 


to the ſound of drum. He went round a town, the Indians of 
it remaining quiet ; he halted, and called to them : about 
300 came. The Spaniards drew a line on the ground, making 
ſigns to them that they muſt not come over it; and aſking wa- 
ter, they brought it in coconuts, with other fruit. The In- 
dian women came out, many of whom, the ſoldiers affirmed, 
were extremely beautiful, and that they readily ſat down cloſe 
to them very ſociably :. The M*. de Campo told the Indi- 
ans to go and fill certain jars with water, but they made 
ſigns for the Spaniards to carry them ; flying with four of 
them, for which they were cannonaded. 

„The 28th July the Adelentado anchored with the ſqua- 
dron, in a port the M“. de Campo had found: this port they 
named MA PDRE DE Dios; it is in g + deg. S. on the weſt + fide 
of the iſland, ſheltered from all winds; the ſhape of it is like 


an horſe-ſhoe, with a narrow mouth. At the entrance there 


is thirty fathom clean ſand, twenty- four in the middle of the 
harbour, and twelve cloſe to the ſhore. The marks to know 
it, are, a hill on the ſouth ſide , ſteep to the ſea, in the higheſt 
part of it is to be ſeen a peak (although there are others), and 
on the north fide an hollow rock F. There appears five gaps 
in the trees ||, when a-breaſt of the harbour, and a hill which 
divides two ſtrands, with a ſpring of excellent water, which 


falls from the height of a fathom and a half I, as thick as a 


* Y queavian ſido faciles en ſentarſe junto a ellos en buena converſacion. 
+ Quiros ſays © Eſte,” eaſt. Probably an error of the copyiſt, omitting O; he 


gives the ſame Jatitude: he ſays, „there is a fine rivulet cloſe to the beach, of very 


fine water; it falls from a hill about twice a man's height, above four or five fingers 
broad, and cloſe to it is a uy brook of water.” Op 

t Tajada. : 

$ Roca con cava. | 

| Deſcubrenſe 5 quebradas de arboleda que vienen a conforner con el puerto. 

J Eſtado y medio. 


man's 


cc 


cc 


cc 


«cc 


cc 


66 


60 


© countenance like the firſt, but very fine women were ſeen here. 


Y O WCW ‚‚ͥ¶ ́ 

man's hand *, with a brook near it, not leſs good, it paſſes 
cloſe to a little town which the Indians have there; ſo that the 
ſpout +, town and brook are together at the beach, which is 
at the foot of the hill, on the north fide: there is in the 
other of the ſouth, ſome houſes intermixed with trees, and on 
the eaſt ſide ſome craggy rocks , whence the brook flows. 
« Moſt of the Indian men in this iſland did not ſeem ſo white 
as. thoſe of La Macparena.” 

Qu1Ros alſo ſays, that the Indian men did not look in 


I (fays he) did not ſee them, but I was aſſured by perſons who 


thought them as beautiful women as thoſe of Lima, but white, 
and not ſo roſy S8; and there are very beautiful at LIMA. 


cc 


cc 


They have the ſame manner of ſpeech ||, the ſame arms and 
canoes which ſerve them near at hand J. | 

Their town is like two ſides of a ſquare, one north and 
ſouth, the other eaſt and weſt, with the parts ** adjoin- 
ing well paved FF: the reſt like an open place, encompaſſed 
with thick trees ff. Their houſes appear communities 


they are built FF | the floor higher than the 
ſtreet; it appeared that they held many people in each of 


them, becauſe there were many fixed beds [|||]. Some had low 


doors, others had all the front 1 They are framed CC of 


* Pao. 
+ Cano. _ 
+ Riſcos con algunas quebradas, 


N Quiros' expreſſion is, © Pero blaneas, y no tan albas.” 
|| Uſo de hablar. 


Que ſe ſervan de circa. 

** Pertenencias. 

++ Empedrados. 

tt Placellana cenida con eſpeſos arboles. 


$F Hechas a modo de CORO y de dos aguas, 
||| Camas ſenaladas. 
J Armadas. 


K4 © timber 


67 
1595+ 


68 


3 


ALVARO MEN DANA ve: NE YR A's 


timber, interwoven with great canes *, whoſe Joints, as big 
as a man's arm, are five palms long. hs 

« They affirm the women are moſt beautiful in counte- 
nance +, have delicate hands, genteel body and waiſte, ex- 
ceeding much in perfection the moſt beautiful of LIMA. 


They were ſufficiently white 4. They went, from the breaſt 


downward, clad with a ſort of tunicks, artfully woven of the 
fineſt palm F. The temperament, health, ſtrength, and 
corpulency of thoſe people tell what is the climate they live 
in; cloaths || could well be born with night and day; the 
ſun did not moleſt much; there fell ſome ſmall ¶ ſhowers of 
rain. They never perceived ** lightning or dew, but great dry- 
neſs ++ ; ſo that, without hanging up, they found dry on the 
morning the things which were left wet on the ground at 
night: though they could not know if it was fo all the year. 


At a diſtance 44 from the town was an oracle, furrounded. 


with paliſades, with the entrance to the weſt, and a houſe al- 
moſt in . the middle, with the door to the north, in which 
were ſome figures of wood, ill wrought, and there were 
offered ſome eatables, amongſt which was a hog ; this the ſol- 
diers took down; and wanting to take away other things, the 
Indians hindered dd them, ſaying, by ſigns, that they ſhould not 


* Canutos. . . b 


+ Afirman ſer las mugeras belliſſimas de roſtros, de lindas manos, de gentil cuerpo 


y cintura, excediendo muchas en perfeCtion a las mas hermoſas de Lima. 


++ Gran ſequedad. 


t Baſtantamente blanca. 

$ Tegidas-ſubtilmente de menudiſſima palma. 
| La ropa. | 

Huvo algunas aguaceros no grandes. 
* Nunca ſe ſentio raio. 


tt Apartado. 
Les fueron a la mano. 


— 


v 0 T* 


* doch them, intimating *, that they reſpected that houſe and 
bs 3 
The Indians of this iſland ſeeing a negro with the Span 
« ards, made ſigns towards the ſouth, ſaying that zhere were 
* ſuch, and that they went thither to fight; and that the others 
had arrows, and that the great canoes, which they have, went 
* there; as they could not converſe with them, and had not 
much curioſity, there was no further enquiry made. But to 
me (ſays Quiros) Indians ſo far detached in the ocean ſeems. 
© impoſſible, unleſs there be a chain of land; for their veſſels, &c. 
do not indicate that they came thither by a long voyage. 
© The things for food ſeen in this harbour, were hogs and 
* fowls +, ſugar canes, very fine plantans, cocos, a fruit growing 
on large trees, each fruit about the ſize of a large pine-apple. It 
is a very good fruit (ſays Qui Ros), I have eaten much of it green, 
« roaſted and boiled, and ripe; it is ſo ſweet and good a fruit, 
that, in my opinion, there is none ſuperior, having nothing 
to throw away but a little ſhell f. There is another fruit, 
„ incloſed in prickles,” like cheſnuts; it much reſembles. 


« cheſnuts in taſte, but is much bigger than ſix cheſnuts together. 


* Dando a entender. 

+ Fragment ſays, Galinas de Caſtilla. 

+ The fragment ſays, ** The trees mentioned to be in the ſquare, yield a certain 
fruit which comes to be hke the head of a boy, whoſe colour, when ripe, is a clear 
green“, and extremely green, when unripe ;. the outſide appears with croſs rays,. 
like the pine-apple ; the figure is not quite round, it is ſomewhat narrower at the. 
point than at the foot; from hence grows a core , which reaches to the middle, and 
from this core a web . It has no ſtone nor kernel, nor any thing uſeleſs $, except: 


the outſide ||, and it is thin, the reſt is one maſs, with little juice when ripe, and leſs. 


when green. Much were eaten in every. way J. It is ſo delicious **, that they 
called it blanc manger ++. It was found to be wholſome and very nouriſhing. The 
leaves of its tree are large and very jaggedt}, in the manner of the papays. 


Verde claro, + Pezon, V del pe;on. una armadura de telas 5 Sin provecho. 
|| Caſcara, De todas maneras. ** Sabroſa, ++ Manjar blanco. If Arpadas. 


2 es It 


1595» 


70 ALVARO MENDANA vs NEYRA's 


1595. * Its figure is like a plain heart *, many of them were roaſted 
and boiled. : 
There are nuts about the ſize of ours in common, and al- 
«© moſt of the fame taſte, their ſhell + is extremely hard, 
„ and without any joining ; its kernel i is not interwoven with - 
« the ſhell, but ſo free, that when broke, it eaſily comes out 
© whole. They eat, and carried away many, diſcovering 
% at laſt, this was an oily fruit.” Many who eat them, 
ſuſpected they occaſioned fluxes. © They ſaw alſo Spaniſh 
«« pumpkins ſown on the ſhore, and amongſt them ſome flow- 
« ers, though beautiful to the eye, without any ſmell. 
« The Adelentado carried his wife, and moſt of the people, 
to hear the firſt maſs which the vicar ſaid; at which the In- 
« dians continued on their knees with great filence and atten- 
« tion, quietly doing whatever they ſaw done by the chriſtians. 
A beautiful Indian woman ſat down near Donna YSABEI, 
« with the intent to fan herſelf ꝓ; and of ſo fair d hair, that ſhe 
« endeavoured to have ſome of it cut off, but ſeeing that ſhe 
« ayoided it ||, it was forebore, not to diſguſt her. | 
The general, in the king's name, took cs of all the 
« four iſlands. 
« He walked round the town; ſowed maize before the Indi- 
« ans, and having held with them all amicable converſation, he 
«© embarked, leaving the M'. de Campo aſhore, with all the 


« military. Y | C 


A 


c 


* Corazon llano. 
+ Corteza. 

t Hacerle ayre qu hacerſe aire. 
Tan rubios cabellos. 

| Se recatava. | 
¶ Paſſeo el pueblo. 


T O M̃‚‚· G0 


« Scarce was MEN DANA gone, when they fell into diſputes 
one with another *; ſuch are the conſequences of imprudent 


management. 'The Indians diſcharged many ſtones and lances, 
wherewith they wounded a ſoldier in one foot, without do- 
ing any other harm. Upon this they fled to the woods , car- 
rying with them their children and wives. They were pur- 


ſued by our people to the woods f, firing at them continu- 
ally. They retreated & to the tops || of three high hills, and: 


fortified themſelves there with intrenchments. 
In the mornings and evenings all with one voice made a ſo- 
norous and harmonious noiſe, which reſounded in the dales I, 


and at laſt they ſhewed an inclination to do miſchief, throwing 


lances and ſtones; but all their attempts were fruitleſs. 


The M. de Campo placed guard in three poſts, to ſecure | 
the town and beach, where the women were diverting them- 


ſelves, and the ſailors getting water and wood for the ſhips. 

The Indians ſeeing the little harm they did with their 
arms, and the much they received from the muſquetry, en- 
deavoured to come to an accommodation **. They made this 
known, for the ſoldiers going by their lands r, they came out 


lovingly to them, offering them bunches of plantans and other 


fruits. They ſeemed to feel the want of their houſes, and were 


ſuppoſed to aſk by ſigns when they were to gor. Then ſome 
came to the guards with things to eat, which they gave 


Quando ſe travaron unos con otros. 

+ Al monte. 

4 Haſta emboſcarſe. 

S Salieronſe. 

Coronas de 3 altos cerros. 5 

Todos a una vos hazian un rumor ſonoro y concertado que retumbava un 


las Quebradas, reſpondianſe a gritos. 


* Procuravan amiſtad y pazes. 
++ Haziendas. | 
i Supueſto preguntavan per ſeñas, &c, 


« freely, 


1595: 


ALVARO MENDANA pet NEYRAS 

1595- 4 freely, eſpecially an Indian of good parts *, with whom 

A the chaplain contracted great friendſhip, calling one another 

_ © comrades. He was taught to bleſs himſelf, and fay IESUs 

„ Maria. The others were, in the ſame manner, in corre- 

* ſpondence with their new.friends; every one had his own, 

«© whom he ſought out when he came, ſitting down apart with 

«© him. They enquired of each other by ſigns, how they 

* called the heavens +, earth, ſea, ſun, moon and ſtars, and all 

<< other things they ſaw, and they told with demonſtration of 

“ much pleaſure. The laſt accents they uttered þ at parting, 

«© were Friends, Comrades. The Indian, mentioned above to be 

4 friend to the chaplain, came to the guard; and that the 

cc general might ſee him, he was embarked : he went very mer- 

rily 8, ae F riends, The Adelentado received him with 

much love and favour ||, he gave him ſweetmeats ¶ and wine, 

« but he neither eat nor drank. He began to take notice ** 
« of the cattle +4, and ſeemed to give them names. He ob- 
' ſerved the ſhip, and the rigging, with all the maſts and fails. 

« He went down under deck, and noted all things with more 

*« than Indian attention $f. They deſired him to ſay Jzsvs, 
© he did fo, ſhewing in every thing a good diſpoſition FF. 
«© Then he preſſed to be returned aſhore ; and, at length, 
4 ſuch was the temper |||| of this Indian, that when he ſuppoſed 


* 
— 


y — N 
* 


* Buena traqa. 
+ El cielo, 
2 Eran los ultimos accentos que formaban al deſpedirſe. 
$ Allegre. . 8 | 
| Amor y regalo. 
¶ Conſerva. 
** Mirar. 
++. Ganados. | 
tt Cuydado de mas que Indio. 
FF Buen animo. 


ul La ley. 


7 FP O0-Y A 


« the ſhips were about going, he appeared concerned, and 
« withed to follow his companions. 

„ Whilſt the general was in this iſland, he had the galleot 
« refitted ; becauſe one day, before it came to anchor, it was 
« foul of the capitana's bowſprit, and in great danger. 

«© 'The Adelentado ordered wood and water to be taken in, 
« the ſhips to be got ready, and the people to be embarked. 
<«« Before they ſet fail he erected three crofles on different places, 
% beſides another which was as on a tree, with the day 
„ and year. 

Saturday, 5th of Augaſt, has ala and << ſailed i in queſt 
* of the iſlands of his diſcovery,” W. by 8. with the winds at E. 
« and E. S. E.“ After three or four days fail, the Adelentado ſaid 
« they ſhould that day ſee the land they ſought. This news made 
* every body joyful, but though they looked all round, it was 
* not ſeen on that, or for many days after, which diſcouraged 
« the ſoldiers ; for as they lengthened the voyage, they came 
« to want water and proviſions, having come to no allowance * 
« on the news of the land. Feebleneſs and deſpondency began 
« to affect the greateſt part; nor is it to be wondered, for ſuch 
« atchievements + require perſons enured to great hardſhips, 
and very patient under them.“ 

* Running between W. by S. and W. by N. by account 400 
© leagues, on Sunday 2oth Auguſt ſaw four low iſlands, with 
45 ſandy beaches, full of palm and other trees; and on the 
8. E. round to the north, a large ſhoal of ſand. The four are 
« twelve leagues in circuit f. They did not know if there 


Se avia guſtavo largo. 

_ + Empreſas. | WE oF? f 

t The fragment ſays, 20th Aa day broke on the ſhips coſe to four ſmall 
low iſlands, with ſandy beaches, full of palms and trees [arboleda]. It appeared all 
the four were eight leagues in circuity little more or lefs ; they are almoſt in a ſquare, 


2 © were 


ALVARO MENDANA Dr NEYRA's 


were wy inhabitants, not having gone near them ; they lye 

. in 10 + deg. S. they were named ST, BERN ARDO, being diſ- 

s . on his day. | 
« Having left theſe iſlands, the wind held always at S. E. 


« and at times, with ſhort ſhowers of rain; they were not 


c without heavy and very thick clouds of various colours, 
e forming, in a ſtrange manner, many figures, which they 
«« ſpent much time in looking at. They appeared ſometimes 
fo fixed, that the whole day paſſed before they diſperſed *, 
raiſing ſuſpicions they were near land 4, as they happened 
towards that part which was unknown, They continued 
their courſe towards the W. and its two collateral points 
N. Weſtward and 8. Weſtward always in the latitude, ac- : 
cording to the directions and will of the Adelentado, which 
« was not to get up to 12 deg. nor under 8 deg. S. we Fon con- 
te ſtantly between 10 deg. and 11 deg. S. | 
© Tuefday 29th Auguſt diſcovered a ſmall nas and, 
* low and full of trees +,” about one league in circumference, 
and quite furrounded with reefs d.. © The Adelentado 
* ordered the two ſmall veſſels to go and ſeek harbour in it to 
e wood and water, of which the almiranta was in the greateſt 
« want. They anchored in 10 fathom, and called out to the ge- 


cloſe together. They have from S. W. to N. E. by the eaſt fide, ſome ſand banks, 
on which account there is no entering them on that fide. They diſcovered a rock 
[cabeza], on the reef which runs moſt to the 8. W. They wanted to ſeek a har- 
bour, but at the vicar's requeſt they deſiſted. It was not known whether they were 
inhabited or not, though thoſe in the galliot faid _ had ſeen two canoes, but itwas 


imagined to be only a fancy. They are in 10 deg. S. Long. ad Lima 1400 MEAD W. 
* Tardavon toda el dia en deſvanecerſe. 


+ Fueſſe por tierra. 
| | Copioſa de arboles. 


The fragment ſays, © Circada en tierra de bo que ſalian fuera del agua. 
i. e. The ſhore ſurrounded with coral banks, which appear above water.” 


Hp | | e mate; 


F Y* 4 8 
* neral, Keep off *, as all the bottom was of great rocks, which 

* were to be ſeen; and heaving the lead upon them, they 
* had ſometimes 10 fathom, and ſometimes no ground 100.. 
« It was frightful to ſee the ſhip over ſo many rocks; they 
* made all the haſte they could to get out, as _ did, to the 
«« open ſea.” 

This ifland they named SOLITARY, * as it was alone; it 
« isin 105 deg. S. 1535 leagues from Lima. From thence they 
continued their courſe in like manner; many people giving 
their ſentiments, ſome ſaying they did not know where they 


* were going, and other ſach things, which could not fail of 


giving pain. 
On the 7th September, with the wind aft, pretty freſh at 


« S. E. they failed due W. with only the fore fail lowered. It 
e appeared. very thick a-head, wherefore the chief pilot ſent the 


* galleot and frigate a-head, in fight of one another, and of 


© the galleon; ; ordering them, if they ſaw land or thoals, or 
* any thing to be taken notice of, to make a ſignal with two 
&« lights, and he would do the fame in anſwer : but ſo ſtrong 
was their apprehenſion +, that, as ſoon as it was dark, they 
*« dropped aftern ; with theſe fears and doubts they kept failing 
on, with the care neceſſary in ſuch a night. They ſaw the 
© almiranta about nine, and at eleven, on the larboard fide, 
* was ſeen a large and very thick cloud, which on that fide co- 


c yered the horizon: the watch were doubtful if it was not 


« land, but were ſoon convinced by a heavy 4 ſhower, which, 
« at that inſtant, burſt from the cloud 8. It being over, the 
* Jand was clearly ſeen, from which the capitana was ſcarce || a 


* Y a voz alta dixeron al-general, paſſaſſe , 
Pudo tanto et rezelo. | 

1 Crecido. 

Broto al inſtante. de aquell prenez. 


I Apenas. 


— ; 


L 2: league 


0. 


ALVARO MENDANA DE NEYRA's 
league. They announced it with the uſual joy, proclaiming 
it aloud, every one going out to ſeeit. The galleon took in 
her fail, and lay to, making ſignals to the other veſſels, 


Only two anſwered them, without any thing being ſeen of 
the other *. ” 
* This iſland which they got fight of at midnight, is in circuit 
from go to 100 leagues, and lies about E. S. E. and W. N. W. 
* and is diſtant from LIMA 1800 leagues ; it is quite covered- 
* with woods to the very higheſt hills, not a ſpot of land is to be 
* ſeen except where the Indians have cleared away for their 
* plantations. They took port on the N. ſide of this iſland, in 
To deg. 4 To the N. of this port, about 7 leagues, is a volcano 
of a very fine ſhaped hill, from the top whereof iſſues much fire, 
and the other parts of it are a high hill, about 3 leagues in 
circuit. It is ſteep to the ſhore, quite bare, and without any 
place to land ; it often made a great thundering in the inſide, 
To the N. E. of this volcano are ſome ſmall inhabited iſlands, 


Fragment ſays, Day being come, they ſaw to the 8. E. [Churchill ſays, 
8. W.] a low point, ſomewhat bluff [grueſa], and black, on account of the abun- 
dance of trees [por abundar de arboles], and turning their eyes round, the almi- 
ranta was not to be ſeen, whereat all were ſorrowful and confuſed, ſhewing that. 
concern which was proper. With the day was alſo difcovered a high hill, in figure 
of a ſugar-loaf, all ſteep [tajado] ; and the S. E. part another little hill, whoſe body 
appeared of 3 leagues : it is 8 from the iſland. It has no port, or landing-place, for it 
is all ragged and bare [cerril y pelado], without having tree, or green thing, but only a 
kind of coloured earth [ſino cierto color de tierra], and ſtones of an extraordinary dry- 
neſs.” There are ſome gaps in it, particularly two on the weſtern part, from whence, 
and from the higheſt part of the hill, there iſſued with great noiſe many ſparks and 
fire. It had a very handfome point, which, a few days after the ſhips got into har- 
bour, broke off, burſting with ſo great an earthquake, that though they were anchored 
at 10 leagues diſtant, it was heard with much dread, and ſhook the ſhip. From 
thence forward, now and then were great thunder-claps within it, and more than 
common when it vomited out fire; and when it was done, there came ſo much thick 
| ſmoak that it ſeemed to reach to the firſt heaven, then commonly leaving off the 
grumbling [quedando deſpues gruniendo ordinariamente.] 

+ Coreal ſays, at the north ſide of the iſland, in its weſtern part. 


and 


O» ‚ x a 6M 

and a vaſt many ſhoals; to theſe iſlands it is 7 or 8 leagues, and 
* the ſhoals ſtretch nearly N. W. and thoſe who were ſent to ſee, 
reported they were many. Round the great iſland are ſome 
© ſmall ones, all of them, and the large one, ſo far as it was 
* ſurrounded, were inhabited; and in fight of theſe large iſlands, 
to the S. E. was ſeen another iſland, not very large *. | 

The Adelentado having named the large iſland STA. Cruz, 
ſent the frigate © to go round the volcano,” in queſt of the 
almiranta, in caſe it ſhould have chanced to paſs on the other 
fide of it. They went twice afterwards, but to no effect, 
having found nothing but the ſhoals above-mentioned. 


® Coreal, from Figueroa, ſays, ** 7th September Mendana ſaw a great iſland, 
with a volcano ; this iſland has two ports; the volcano is ſeparated [en eſt ſepare], 
and appeared to be 3 leagues in circuit; it is at 8 leagues from the great iſland. This 
great iſland is very populous ; the general went to one of the ports, which is 10 
leagues from the yolcano, and at the N. W. of the entrance of a bay, and of a river, 
near which is a habitation. He ſent the frigate to meaſure the iſland, to know how 
far it was from N. to S. There is another good bay near this iſland. 


« They ſaw near this great iſland, two others, which appeared to them of a mean 


ſize, and well peopled. 

« At 8 leagues to the W. they ſaw another, which appeared ſmall ; at 19 leagues 
from thence, and to the W. N. W. they diſcovered land, ſtretching in a line [allant 
a bouline] ; they were three iſlands, very populous, and ſo large, that they could not 
diſcover the end. 

Mendana named this iſland Sta. Cruz; it appears to be 100 leagues in circuit, 
and ſtretches from E. to W. the land is not very high, and the coats are very po- 
pulous. 

“ 'They remained there two months and eight days, and made a ſettlement near 
a bay, which they named La Gratioſa, for its goodneſs; it might be about four 


leagues and a half in circuit. The coaſt lay N. and S. it is at the N. ſide of the 


iſland, in the weſtern part. The volcano above-mentioned is before this bay; there 

is a rock, with an iſland, to the weſt of the ſaid bay: the iſland might be 4 leagues ; it 

is inhabited, and is at a ſmall diſtance from the large iſland, from whence it is ſeparated 

by ſunken rocks, and banks of ſand, and ſome ſmall channels. At the bottom of this 

bay, cloſe to a river, is ſituated the port, of which the ground is good, in the latitude 
of x0 deg. 20 min, S. The country is very fine and plentiful.” 


2 | | | «© The 


- Of 


1595s 


ALVARO MENDANA DE NEYRA's 


The ſhips being pretty near the land, there came out à 

ſmall boat * with a fail, and after it a ſquadron of fifty more. 
The people who came in them crying out, and waving their 

hands, ſeemed to call to the people of the ſhip, who called 

them alſo, but with ſuſpicion. The veſſels being arrived, it 

was diſcovered, the people who came in them were in co- 

lour, naturally black +, and ſome more dun , all with 
% woolly hair &, and many white, red, and other colours 
(certainly dyed). The half of the head ſhorn, and other 
« diſtinctions |}, with the teeth tinged. red. They all came 
* naked, except their privities, which they covered with a kind 
« of ſoft cloth C; moſt of them were ſtained with a dye, 
„ blacker than their own colour, and with others different. 
& Their faces and bodies were marked with ſtreaks ** ; their 
« arms were bound round with many turns of black rattans, and 
« from their necks hung many ſtrings of a kind of ſmall beads: 
„ of bone, ebony, and fiſhes teeth. They carried, hanging to 
« different parts of their perſons, many plates t, ſmall and 
<6 large, made of pearl ſhell. Their canoes were ſmall, and 
« ſome. came faſtened two and two ff, Their arms were 
« bows and arrows, with very ſharp points of burnt- wOOd. 
« Others had jagged bones 989, and ſome with feathers, the 
« points anointed. with poiſon. ||| to appearance, but of little 


Canalucho. 

+ Negro atezado, 

+ Mas loros. | 

$ Cabellos friſados. 

| Quitada la mitad en la aer y hechas otras diferencias. 
Tolas blandas. 

** Rayos. 

++ Patenas. 

tt Amarradas de dos en dos, 
$5 Hueflos arpodrados. 

jj] Yerva. 


#V O X; i. a Bs 829 
= prejudice *, They brought alſo ſtones, macanas of heavy 1595+ . 

% wood (which are their ſwords), darts of hard wood F, with 
three rows of barbs, with more than a palm of point. They 
carried in the manner of ſhoulder-belts, certain budgets of 
% palm, well wrought, full of biſcuit, which they make of 
* roots, of which they all came F and of which they 
4 readily gave a part. 

«« As ſoon as the Adelentado * their colour, he took them 
« for the people he fought, ſaying, This is ſuch an ifland, or 
« ſuch a country, ſpeaking in the language he learnt in his firſt 
voyage; but he did not at all underſtand them, nor they him. 

They ſtopped to look at the ſhips, and all went, as if chat- 
« tering, around them. They never choſe to come aboard, 
although all perſuaſions were uſed. Firſt talking one with 
another, they prefently put themſelves in a warlike poſture , 
© to which it appeared they were perſuaded by an Indian, tall, 
« lean, and old, who was foremoſt. Without waiting more, 
« they bent their bows to ſhoot ; the old man talked to them, | 2 
«© and then they clapped themſelves down again. The word 
« paſſed through all &, and they were undetermined what to re- | 
« ſolve, till at laft being determined, giving a great ſhout, they | 
« let fly many arrows, which ſtuck in the fails, and other parts a 
« of the ſhips, without doing other harm or miſchief. Secing - 
cc this, the ſoldiers, who were then ſtanding ready, were or- 
* dered to fire. They killed one, and wounded many, 3 
4. upon they all fled away in a great fright. 

« They ſtood on different tacks, ſceking a harbour, fo much 
« defired by all, on account of the great fatigues they ſuf- 
« fered, thinking their refreſhment certain in e aſhore. 


„ano. + Palo rezio. 
t Se puſieron preſto en arma. | 
$ Corria la palabra por todos. 


RN 


* 
> 
1 
} 
$$ - 
8 - 
WW 
: 
__ 
20 
_ 
Mp 
7; 
7% 
* 
xe + 
7 4 
4 : 
. 
E 
1 
' 
= 
* 1 
RY 
i 
ny i 
: 
4 
5 
1 
'Y 
£ 
* 
+ : 
[es 
4 
1 
+: 
. 
* 
5 
"pi 
[is ' 
: 
1 
9 
3 
3 
: 
bo; 
3 
bl 
55 
=D 
£3 
DS 7 
by / - 
Wo 
7g : 
- *D 
+. - 
. 
1 
"| 
3 
* 
. 
4 
E 
W- « 
| 
1 
„ 
F 
B 
>> , 
5 
—_—_ 
is 
2 % 


* — O=OY — III = n K 
— .. 22 2 2 , I 4 #4", 
— — 1 * 


80 


1595» 


cc 


cc 


cc 


cc 


cc 


cc 


«c 


40 


ALVARO MEN DANA Dr NEYRAs 


The frigate came without finding the almiranta, which 


renewed their apprehenſions and uneaſineſs. 
*© The three veſſels anchored at the mouth of a bay, under 
ſhelter of ſome ſhoals. The bank was ſteep,” and with the 


flood tide the galleon drove about ten at night, with eminent 


danger of ſtriking on the ſhoals. The Adelentado went out 
to encourage the people ; the hurry and confuſion was very 
great, for the danger was certain, and the darkneſs of the 
night made it greater. At length they got up the anchors, 
and got under fail ; the W ſtood out to the clear and open 
ſea with great difficulty. 

« At day- break the Adelentado embarked in the galleot, 3 
went in queſt of a harbour. The chief pilot found one, though 
ſmall, fituated to the N. W. * of the volcano, ſheltered from 
the S. E. with 12 fathom water, with a town, river, ballaſt, 
wood, and an airy place +. As it was now late, they an- 
chored at a point. A ſerjeant, with twelve muſqueteers, 
went aſhore to ſecure the port. The Indians of a town which 
was near, came to fire arrows at them with ſuch violence, 
that they were obliged to fortify themſelves in a ſingle houſe 
they found. Two guns were fired from the ſhip, which made 
them halt, and fly away. The boat going to bring off the 


people, they kept the ſea all night, and next day the Adelen- 


tado found a port, ſtill + and ſheltered from all winds. He 
anchored in 15 fathoms mud, and cloſe to the ſhore, river and 
towns, from whence all night they perceived muſic and 
dancing, according to their cuſtom, with ſticks ſtruck againſt 
one another, and with little drums. Being anchored there, 


VN. I. of the Volcano. Pingre juſtly obſerves: this ſituation is impoſſible. He 
fuppoſes it ſhould be 8. W. I imagine rather N. W. and S. . Coreal applies 


N. W. differently. Vide note to p. 77. 


+ Parte ayroſa. 
1 Muerto. | 
% many 


TY 0 * A n 5 


ce many „A kians came to ſee the ſhips and people. Moſt of them 
4% wore red flowers in their heads and noſes. At the perſuaſion 


« of our people, ſome came aboard the Capitana, leaving their 


« arms in their canoes; amongſt the reſt came aboard a nran of 
6 good' figure and countenance, of a wheat colour, ſomewyhat lean 
tc and grey-headed. He appeared to be fixty years of age. He 
« wore on his head ſome feathers, blue, yellow, and red; and 


in his hand he had a bow and arrows, with points of wrought 


% bone. On each fide of him came an Indian of. more autho- 
« rity than the reſt. They underſtood this was ſome perſon 
«« diſtinguiſhed amongſt them, as well from tlie differetice of 
< his dreſs, as from the reſpe& ſhewn him by the reſt. 

He enquired preſently by ſigns who was chief of ths news 
* comers. The Adelentado received him with great affection, 
« and taking him by the hand, gave him to underſtand that nz 
© was. The Indian ſaid, uz was named Marorf. The Ade- 
% Jentado replied, uz, Menyana. Mort underſtood, and 
„ rejoined (applying thus the name he had heard) that HE was 
© named Mx DANA, and that the ENERAL ſhould be called 
«© MALorf. In concluding this exchange, he ſhewed he 


much prized it; and when they called him MaLoys, he ſaid 
© 70, but MENDANa ; and with his finger pointed to the Ap˖- 


«© LENTADO, ſaying that was Malorf. He alſo ſaid he was 


e called TAuR1qQue, this name appearing to be Cacique, or 


« Chief. ALVARO DE MENDANA put a ſhirt on him, and 
« gave him other trifling * things of ſmall value. The ſoldiers 
% gave the other Indians feathers, little bells, glaſs beads, bits 
« of taffaty, and cotton, and even cards. They hung all to 
their neck. They were taught to ſay Priends, Friends, 
<. crofling their hands, embracing one another, in ſign of peace. 


* Coſas ligeras. 1 | 
M 6 They 


| 
| 
| 
| 
1 
| 
| 
| 
| 


1595 · 


46 


6 


60 
ce 
cc 
66 
46 
cc 
cc 
46 
cc 
ce 
«c 
46 
46 


«c 


cc 


«cc 


66 


60 


cc 
ce 
ic 


{6c 


46 


ALVARO MEN DANA Dr NEYR A's 


They preſently learned it, and uſed it much. They ſhewed 
them looking-glaſſes, they ſhaved their beards and heads with 
razors, and with ſciſſars pared the nails of their hands and 
feet, at which they were much pleaſed ; earneſtly begging 
theſe razor and ſeiſſars. They alſo endeavoured to know 
what was beneath their cloaths, and being undeceived, did the 
ſame monkey tricks as thoſe of the firſt iſland. This laſted 
four days. They went and came ; they brought and gave 
what they had to eat. One day Marort came, who came 
ofteneſt, and expreſſed the moſt friendſhip, cloſe to whoſe 
town the ſhips were at anchor. Along with him were fifty 
canoes, wherein they all brought their arms concealed, . 
waiting their MALoet, who was aboard the capitana, from 
whence, on a ſoldier taking up a muſket in his hand, he went 
without their being able to detain him, flying to his embark- 
ations, and from thence to the ſhore, all his people follow- 
ing. There was on the ſhore another crowd * of people by 
whom he was received with particular joy, holding to ap- 
pearance amongſt them great conſultations. That ſame even- 
ing the Indians took all they had in the neareſt houſes, and 
carried them to MaLops's town. The night following great 
fires were made on the other fide of the bay, which laſted 
the greateſt part of it. It appeared to be a ſignal of war, 
and it was confirmed by the ſuſpicion which that day the 
canoes had given, going in a great hurry from town to town, 
as if to haſten, or adviſe of ſame matter. 

« The following morning they went. in the boat from the 
galleot for water, which was near, and as they were taking 
it in, ſome Indians, who were hid in the woods , attacked 
the ſoldiers with ſhouts, and ſhooting their arrows, they pur- 


* Golpe; + Emboſcados, 


« ſued 


66 


cc 


£6 


To”. 


cc 
cc 
cc 


46 


4 
cc 


«6 


-. 


ce 
* 
4 


«6 


6c 


- = E 


| £6 
cc 
66 
ce 
44 
cc 
cc 
66 


105 


| 40 


FG T.&78 3 

ſued them to the boat, whence, being fired at by the muſ- 
queteers, they halted. The wounded were taken care of 
and the general immediately ordered the M“. de Campo to 
go aſhore with thirty ſoldiers, and with fire and ſword * to 
do them all the miſchief poſſible. The Indians made a ſtand, 
whereby five were killed, and the reſt fled. The Spaniards 
retired without loſs , having cut down palm- trees, and 
burnt ſome canoes and houſes. | 


« This ſame day the Adelentado ſent in the frigate, captain 


Don Lorenzo, with twenty ſoldiers and failors, to ſeek the 
almiranta, directing that they ſhould go round that part of 
the iſland they had not ſeen, till they came to the place where 
they were benighted when they ſaw the land. And being 
there, that they ſhould go from W. to N. W. which was 
the courſe the almiranta could go different from that the 
capitana had purſued ; and that they ſhould take notice or 
what they found in that route. ; 

« He ordered alſo the M.. de Campo to be ready with Ls 
men, to go that morning early, as he did, to ſome huts, 
which were near a hill, with the intent to chaſtiſe the In- 
dians for having ſhot at his people; and to ſee, if by the 
miſchief done for theſe, greater could be prevented. He 
arrived, without being diſcovered by the Indians; got poſ- 
ſeſſion of the paſſes, ſurrounded the houſes, and ſet them on 
fire, attacking ſeven who were within. Theſe finding them- 
ſelves hard-ſet by the flames and people, endeavoured to de- 
fend themſelves with particular valour ; and that being in- 
ſufficient, they cloſed in with their enemies, and ran upon 
their weapons, without valuing their lives ; fix were left, 
and he who 2 by flight was badly wounded. The 


3 + Retiraronſe los Eſpanoles a ſu falvo. 
= T 


1595+ 


a... — — 


9 * 0 2 th 
5 5 band N 1 4 r Ms neg | * 
N . 
— 8 * bed 466 Ie * < = = 8 » 
r TEES arte ea Sh» v1 —— — Pn) 5 Tho 1. 2 — 
— » » e 
* 3 * 


Ir Er La 5 at. CR + by 2 . 
K 5 
— 


— — — —— Py 


þ 
F 
5 
"| 
i 
2 
Bl 
| F 
4 


We” 

5 
1 9 
— 


DDr 
— 


ALVARO MEN DANA Dr NEYRA's 
M*. de Campo returned with the people, of whom ſeven 
were wounded with arrows. . | 
In the evening MaLort came to the more (for the 1 towns 
and canoes which were burnt were his), and in a loud voice 
called the Adelentado by the name of Maroet, and ſmiting - 
himſelf on the breaſt, called himſelf Mendana. Then he 

« embraced himſelf, and in this manner complained, pointing 
« with his finger to the miſchief which had been done, and, by 
ſigns, ſaid, that his people had not ſhot arrows at our people, 
but the Indians of the other part of the bay, and bending 
* his bow, intimated that all ſhould go againſt them; that he 


« would aid them in taking revenge. The Adelentado called 
him, from a deſire of giving him ſatisfaction ; but he did not 


&* come till next day *, when much ran, was expreſſed on 
% both ſides. : 

« ST. MATTHEw's day they failed from this port to another, 
. larger, and more convenient, which was found at half a 


5 league within the ſame bay. And ſailing towards it, captain 


Don Lorenzo arrived, and brought for news, that failing 
round the iſland, in purſuance of his inſtructions, he ſaw in 
it N. and S. with the bay where they were at anchor, another, 
which did not appear leſs good, and appeared to have more 
people and veſſels. He related, that he had ſeen farther F 
on, cloſe to the great iſland, two other middling ones, very 
<< populous; and that, in the S. E. quarter, at eight leagues, they 


« ſaw another iſland, which ſeemed to be rlat in circuit . And 


„that nine or ten leagues about FW. N. W. from where they 
«« were benighted when they diſcovered the land, he had fallen in 


»Otro dia. 
+ Mas adelante. 


+ Que parecia tenerlas de box. 
$ Como Oefnorueſte. 


r 8 
2 — p 7 oh = Lee 
n, =, J el — WIS N 5 LOANS : W 
. Dk LE IN ES CCCP c ES 
a a „ 
- , "oo 


LI LEE TD OT d , . . e BOY RET RT, EESoN,. no I, EE n NES EL CAR or YG I EEE RT. r . MW WR. ae nl is = ES 19 ST TS -: * E — r TORE LT IEEE LES EE EE 2; 
4 ß ti ARGS ood id SES REN e . . . . ] err 2 re 2 ON EN UE OE ERS! AO hes Dy n= i WAI hy 2 
| te I „5 r TE RS IG ISAT ß e DATE 2 SIG ESI . ROE — CC EO ES GAIA CTIA AA © oe 
S * 3 — e LT TT he n 4 uy COR * . 5 * FRI FE I \ wn ed, hh TI 4 F on We e TIS 2 
8 b 2 P Wan ES a eg ET NSA AS TS AT ITO WY 4nY ES . r . 8 * R 
”- . 


46 


44 


66 


146 


16 
66 


cc 


't Reſtingas. 


CCC E. 


with three iſlands, inhabited by mulatto people, of a clear 
colour *, and full of palms, with a great many coral reefs , 


which ſtretched to the W. N. W. with their ridges + and 
channels, whereto they ſaw no end, concluding that they 
had not found any traces of the ſhip ſought for. 


« Being anchored in the ſecond port, the Indians of that 


part paſſed all the night in giving ſhouts, as if they 
. ſported $ or ſcoffed, ſaying very plainly, many times, F riends. 
The day being come, the number of 500 Indians repaired in 
a crowd to the neareſt ſhore, ſhooting at the veſſels many ar- 


rows, darts, and ſtones. Seeing that they did not reach with 


them, many puſhed in the water breaſt- high, and others 
ſwimming. They approached, ſhouting, ſo near, that 
getting hold of the buoys of the ſhips, they were going with 
them to ſhore. 

© The Adelentado perceiving their daringneſs, ſent captain 
Don Lozzxzo, with 1 5 ſoldiers. in the boat, to ſkirmiſh 
with them. The target-men covered the muſqueteers and 
rowers; but with all this they ſhot two, and there would 


“have been more, if the targets had not aaron of 1 
ͤſome were ſhot through and through. _ 


„ The Indians fought very looſely, and jumping about . 


ſhewing themſelves. ſo valiant ©, that they found they had 


met with .people who knew well to defend their houſes. 
This continued whilſt they thought our arms did not do the 
miſchief they ſaw, but Ms undeceived by the death a two 


* De gente mulata 008 clara. 
+ Areciſa. : 
$ Toreavan, 


Eſparcidos y de ſalto. 
q Brioſos, 


L Or 


1595. 


ALVARO MENDANA DE NEYRAs 


or three, and having ſome wounded, they left the ſhore, carry- 
ing them off. 
«© The following day * the M. de W being ber, pro- 
6 poſed to the ſoldiers to clear a ſpot, which was cloſe to a 
great ſpring, for the foundation of a town. The place was not 
agreeable to all the ſoldiers, becauſe it was imagined to be 
unhealthy : ſo ſome of the married people came aboard, to in- 
form the general of the M.. de Campo's determination, and to 
beg him to go aſhore, and make them be ſettled in one of the 
towns of the Indians, for there the houſes being + made, and 
the ſpot uſed, it was neceſſarily better than the place choſen. 
Hereupon the Adelentado landed, and holding a council, and 
moſt of the ſoldiers being of the ſame opinion as the M. de 
% Campo, had already ſet their hand to the work: his de- 
© ſign had been to eſtabliſh the colony on a low point, more at 
the entrance of the bay; but the ſoldiers worked with ſo 
much ſpirit and zeal, that he left them to continue their 
work. They were ſoon done, each had his houſe, and put 
« his ſhop i in the beſt order he could.” 
We learn from Quiros, . that The ſettlement was ops 
near the ring which the Indians endeavoured to defend, but 
« defiſted, on finding the fire-arms reached at a diſtance.” But 
he condemns the behaviour of the Spaniards to the Indians, par- 
cularly for killing the Indian moſt our friend (ſays QurRos), 
aud lord of that iſland, named MAaLoys, and two or three 
others, being then alſo in peace. ; | 
PincRt, from FiGuzRoa, fays, * The Spaniards ſtayed there 
« two months and ten days. Some ill-diſpoſed ſoldiers killed 
<« MEnDaANa's friend, MarLoes, the Cacique : till then the 
5 Spaniards had found friends and enemies: the firſt, — 


- tar wy ee 4 > * FE 1099404; "7 * „ = 8 - 3 8 
Wy * * Jnr. 3 =, - F 6 9 * 1 
3 W re — * ahh. > over anal 4 — N 2 2 3 n — 2 
A * 5 "7 * 8 _ mr ——__ 0 — 2 n - — . *,, 
os 4-6. 2 —— — — — — Ss 2 — . wa - 4 2 N > hs hs 
” 


. 85 n ä 1 8 
2 —— R — wy — As « 
a —— — — 


—— — 
on 


.* 23d September, (Pingre). 
$ Here the fragment in Thevenot ends ; 3 what follows is from Pangre 
ce rated 


„ T | 
ce rted by the death of their chief; were not content to lament 


« to the Spaniards ; they even determined to thwart them as 
« much as was in their power, In vain MEnDANA imagined to 
« appeaſe them by the puniſhment of the guilty, who were 
« put to death; it was not poſſible to make them return, 
«© There were ſeditions—the M. de Campo, convicted of 
having excited, or fomented them, was condemned to death, 
ze with his accomplices.” Qulkos ſays, that On Sunday, 
the 8th October, the Adelentado ordered the M. de Campo, 
and THOMAS DE AMPUER®o to be beheaded, and enſign Joun 
« DE Buy to be hanged. He was inclined to have put to death 
two other friends of the M*. de Campo, but deſiſted at our 
* requeſt : the cauſe was public; for they wanted to abandon 
the eftabliſhment, beſides other reaſons, whereof I am igno- 
rant; though I ſaw much hs ney ſhameleſs behaviour, and 
many indiſcretions. 
PIN GRE, from FIGUEROA, ſays, The bay, which the 
« Adelentado named La GRraT10sA, becauſe it was really ſuch, 
« is in circuit 4 - leagues ; it lyes N. by E. and S. by W. 
« it is in the moſt weſtern part of the iſland, on the north fide, 
« and to the ſouth of the volcano abovementioned; its entrance 


PWW 


renn arantars by = 
2 


— * 
S n þ Ro nn NS; 0 A D 
CFT ͤ dT 


1 DDr Ne 


24 
Ph, * 


n 


„ n by 
PFF LINED OTE OIL 
F 


«* the entrance is not the leſs clear. The bay is formed by an 
« iſland, which is at the weſtern part; this ifland * is four - 
« leagues in circuit, it is very fertile, and very populous, as 
« well on the ſhore, as inland: it is but little diſtant from the 
« large iſland, from which it is ſeparated by rocks and ſhoals, 
« with ſome ſmall channels, where only boats can paſs. The 
«« port is at the extremity of the bay, between a fountain of 


* This ſeems to be the iſland named afterwards La Guerta. 


- F +1! * a To Pa G21. 1 tl ru; ESCORTS So EO ACE EL IMC —— A PIC AS OL YT ARTISTS” {<> vs AO Send ES ILY ATT 2 FFT 

K Knot hrb as net id Sen a Lt Calo end ae eto Db RR LESS LA AR EF A ee Rnd OE ALE LEGS, 
: IF 7 3 r gopetrragp annoy 

; g . : 3 CCC 


« his death in public and in private, and to withold the ſupplies 


js half a league wide; it has a reef at the eaſtern part, but 


21s 


87 


1595» 


55 


1595 · 


ALVARO MEN DANA D NEYR A's 


te very clear water, which, at the diſtance of a muſquet- ſhot, 
« from thence, guſhes out amongſt the rocks, and a river of a 


% middling fize, which is about 500 paces. from the fountain. 


« The port is in 10 deg. 20 min. S. 1850 leagues from LIMA: 
«* this port is expoſed to ſome puffs from the S. E. but which 
«© cannot do much harm. The bottom is mud, the ſoundings 
& 20, 30, and 40 fathom, according to the diſtance from ſhore.” 


Qu1ros ſays, Not above three leagues round the camp 
was ſeen of the whole iſland. The people of this iſland are 


* blacks ; they have ſmall canoes of one tree, for going round to 


4 


5 


their towns, and others very large, in which they go out 


to ſea. 
© The proviſions 3 were ſeen in this bay and port were 


hogs, fowls, plantans, ſugar- canes, two or three kinds of roots 


like camotes *, which are eaten boiled or roaſted, and of them is 


made biſcuit; beetle, two kinds of good almonds, and others of 
pinones; ring-doves, turtle-doves, ducks, grey and white geeſe, 
ſwallows, plenty of greens, Spaniſh pumpkins, the fruit already 
mentioned on the firſt iſlands , cheſnuts and nuts; there is 
ſweet baſil of a very fine ſmell, red flowers, which, at this 


port, are in their gardens, and two other ſpecies alſo red. 


There are other fruit on large trees, like pippins, of a fine 
ſmell and taſte, plenty of ginger, which grows ſpontane- 
ouſly ; there is great quantities of the plant chiguilite, of 
which indigo is made; there is peta trees, much ſago, and 
many coconuts. There was ſeen marble and large ſnail- 
ftones 4, like thoſe brought to Manir a from CHINA. There 
is a vaſt fountain, beſides five or fix rivers of water, not very 
large. They ſettled cloſe to the fountain. 


* Camotes are the freet potatoes © common in the warm countries. 
1 Bread fruit. | 
4 Piedras de caracoles . 


7 e | ' Pincxs, 


y. 0 W $2 


PincRg, from Figueroa, in enamerating the productions 


cf this iſland, is more circumſtantial than Quixos. He ſays, 


cc 


«© There are plenty of hogs, fowls, like thoſe of Spal, 
chiefly white, they perch and live upon the trees; ring-doves, | 


turtle-doves of a ſmall kind, partridges like ours, geeſe, he- 
rons, grey and white, ſwallows, and other birds unknown. 


T hey found no inſets, but a kind of black lizard, and ſome 


ants ; they ſaw no muſquetoes, an extraordinary thing in ſo 
low a latitude. 

« The ſea yields many kinds of ft; the Indians catch 
them with a kind of nets made of twine, which appears to 
be pita; pieces of light wood ſerve them for floats, and ſtones 
for leads. They found at this iſland an infinite number of 
plantans, of fix or ſeven kinds; plenty of coconuts and ſugar 
canes; almonds, of which the ſhell is triangular, and the 
fruit large, and of an excellent taſte ; pine-apples as large as 
the head, encloſing a kernel of the ſize of Spaniſh almonds *; 
the leaves of the tree which bear them, are few in number, 
but very large. They alſo found the fruit mentioned at the 
MARQUESAS, the ſame kinds of nuts and cheſnuts, and 
above all, the fruit which the Spaniards called b/anc manger. 


Another fruit was named pippins, it grows on very high 


trees. Near theſe apples grew others, which were not 
equally good, and which much reſembled the pear-main. 

«© There are three or four kinds of roots uſed inſtead of bread; 
they are boiled or roaſted : the Indians make plenty of biſ- 
cuit, which they dry by the fire or ſun; it is very nouriſhing. 


Oziers ſerve theſe Indians for ropes. Ginger grows natu- 


. This ſeems to be the Caldera ; at the Nicobars it is cultivated, and grows to a 
pretty large tree; the fruit grows even larger than here deſcribed: it is the chief food 
of the inhabitants, a call it melory ; and the kernels are the fineſt almonds I ever 


taſted, 


N Fl. rally, 


1595» 


90 


1595 


4c 
6c 
6c 


«Cc 


6c 


66 


cc 


cc 


66 


cc 


- 


66 


EC 


«Cc 


cc 


«Cc 


cc 


66 


66 


ce 


46 


cc 


cc 


cc 


cc 


46 


cc 


& 


46 


ALVARO MENDANA DDE NEYRA's 
rally, rand without culture. They found curious ſnails, ſuch 


as are brought from ChixA, and various kinds of pearls. In 


a word this iſland is fertile, well cultivated, and very popu- 
lous. The temperature of the air there is ſuch as is com- 
mon in this latitude. They heard thunder, ſaw lightning, and 

experienced much ſhowery weather *, but found only little 
wind, it is not very high ; it has, however, chains of moun- 
tains, valleys, and plains. 

% Don LoRENzZo took it into his head F to ſend one morning 
twenty ſoldiers, with a chief, to ſeize ſome Indians, whom 
he propoſed ſhould learn Spaniſh. They went in a chaloup; 
the Indians oppoſed their landing, and when they were got 
aſhore they charged the Spaniards violently : Don LoRENZO 
thought himſelf obliged to come to their aſſiſtance; he was 


wounded in the thigh. The Indians purſued with fury the 


revenge of MALopf's death, and fired their arrows at the 
Spaniards without ceaſing. They took up the arrows, and 
ſtruck the points of them againſt their targets and coats of 
mail, to make the Indians think they were invulnerable.. 
The Indians made ſigns to them to do /h againſt their eyes and 
thighs, which the Spaniards did not chooſe to do. Their 
enemies from thence concluded that they muſt fire only 
at their highs and faces, and they wounded many. Don 
LoRENzZo having ſupplied, as well as he could, the wants. 


of the camp, returned aboard, and ſent a third time the 


captain of artillery, with the frigate, in ſearch of the ad- 
miral. This captain, at his return, brought eight young 
people, well made, and of good ſtature, with ſome large 
pearl oyſter-ſhells, which he had picked up at one of the 
three ſmall iſlands environed with reefs as above-mentioned... 


* Grains, +, Se mit en tete. 


* They 


166 

466 
cc 
66 


ce 


e 


«cc 


66 


V 0 Y Pe 8 Wh 


They a alſo ſeized on STA. Cava three Indian women, with : 


fix children : they meant to keep them as hoſtages, to put an 
end to the diſorders which the natives inceflantly committed. 
Their huſbands came to. viſit them feveral times; ſeveral of 
their countrymen joined them, they demanded them back, 
and they were reſtored ; the Indians departed, to all pen” 


ance fatisfied and thankfal. 
„The wound of Don Loxenzo grew worſe, he died the 2d 


of November; he was lamented, and buried with the ſame 
ceremonies as MEN DANA. 


The crew were worn out with fatigue ng ſickneſs ; twenty 


reſolute Indians would have been ſufficient to have deſtroyed 
them. It was then reſolved ta ſuſpend the enterprize. They 
took in wood and water, and all embarked the 7th No- 


vember. 


« Louis Ax DRA PDA, ſent the ſame evening to get the neceſ 
ſary proviſions, landed on a little iſland, which he named 
La GukRTA (the GARDEN), on account of its beauty and 


fertility. The chief pilot, captain Qviros, went to the 


ſame iſland after the return of AnDRADA, and had like to 
have been loſt there in the night; he returned ſafe and Saver 
the next morning to the galleon. 

« The governeſs called together the pilots, and told ho 


that her intention was to quit this iſland, to go in queſt of 


ST. CHRISTOVAL,, to ſee if they could not find the admiral; 
to ſail then for MAniLa, to get a recruit of prieſts and ſol- 
diers, and to return to put the laſt hand to this eſtabliſhment. 
She defired that each would give his opinion; they did fo, in 


writing, and ſigned it: it was conſonant to that of the go- 
 verneſs. QuiRos added to his, that he engaged not to 


abandon the governeſs, if they returned with the ſame in- 
tention of eſtabliſhing a colony at STA, Cruz. 
N 2 & Tn 


1 


1595. 


ALVARO MENDANA DE NEYRA% 


In the evening Qv1ros went aboard the frigate and galleot, 
to leave them the neceſſary proviſions, and to give them the 
proper orders, in regard to the courſe they ought to ſteer. 
At night they went aſhore to bring away the corps of MEn- 

DANA, and to carry it in the frigate to MANIL A.“ 

Quixos ſays, * Sailing from this port, Saturday 18th Novem- 
ber, we ſtood W. by S. for the iſland ST. ChRISTOVAL, or 
more properly ſpeaking to tee if we could find it, for ſo the 
governeſs ordered; and we were two days without ſeeing any 
« thing, and at the general intreaty the governeſs ordered me 
to bear away for MANILA, having, between 5 deg. S. and 
© 5 deg. N. much contrary winds and calms. In full 6 deg. N. 

we fell in with an ifland, appearing to be 25 leagues in cir- 

cuit, very woody and very populous ; the natives like thoſe . 

of the LapRoNes. 

Pix CRE, from Fi cr ROA, is more circumſtantial in his re- 
lation of the voyage from STA. Cruz. He ſays, 

The three ſhips, in very bad condition, failed the 18th 
0 November; this day and the following they ſtood W. S. W. * 
The 19th, by obſervation and account, they were in 11 
25 deg. S. they looked out carefully, but neither ſaw the ad- 
„% miral nor ST. CHRISTOVAL : QuiRos, having received an. 
order from the governeſs, ſtood for ManiLa. They ſteered: 
«© N. N. W. with the wind at S. E. They wiſhed to avoid. 
NE w-Guix RA, which was judged to be near; it was appre- 
* hended they would get embarraſſed amongſt the iſlands which 
« environ it. QuiRos was very deſirous to make this land, but 


the bad ſtate of the ſquadron did not permit to ſtop there. 


. * Quiros ſays W. by 8. 


They 


3x & Y a a 
They continued the ſame courſe till the 27th November, 
when they found themſelves in 5 deg. S. they ſaw many 
ſigns of being near land, they ſuppoſedit was NEw-GvuiNEA®. 


On the 1oth December they found themſelves in 30 


min. ſouth +. It was perceived the galleot wanted to part 
company. The governeſs Iet the captain know, that he 


' ſhould be puniſhed as a traitor if he did not keep company: 


but the galleon was in ſo bad a ſtate, that this captain thought 
it was impoſſible for her to eſcape; in conſequence whereof, 
they put about in the night, and the galleot diſappeared. 

« In the mean while ſickneſs ſwept off the people, ſcarce a. 
day paſſed but one or two, and ſometimes three or four bodies. 
were thrown over-board. The ſtate of the ſhip's rigging was 


not leſs diſtreſsful, all was uſed or rotten ; and the worſt was, 


that they had neither maſt, nor cordage, nor * other rig- 
ging to ſhift. | 

„They kept always ſtanding N. N. W. till Tueſday 19th 
December, when they were in 3 deg. 30 min. N. the frigate 
could ſcarce: keep up with them. QuiRos propoſed ſeveral 
times to abandon it, and to take the crew aboard the galleon, 
but the governeſs would not follow this. advice. At night 
they loſt fight of the frigate ; Quixos made them lay to for it 
till next evening, but, at laſt, the ſoldiers grew impatient. 
It was not time, according to them, to amuſe themſelves in 
waiting for others, when they ran a riſque of being loſt them- 
ſelves. a 
« With a wind at E. and E. N. E. which began to ſet in, 
they kept on their courſe N. N. W. till Saturday following, 
when they got ſight of an iſland, towards which they ſteered, 
intending to ſeek there a port and proviſions. Night began; 


» Coreal, from Figueroa ſays, © They ſaw New- Guinea in 5 deg. S. 
4 Coreal ſays, 1 deg. 30 min. S. 


66 Qu IRos 


1595. 


T HE ODORE GERARD Ss. 


% Qtkos was afraid of the rocks, he ordered the ſhip to be 
<« put about, he was ill obeyed, they made a thouſand repre- 
<< ſentations to him. He ſet himſelf to work, let go the ſheets, 
« ſhifted the helm, and put the ſhip's head another way. 


* It was found in the morning, that Quiras had judged - | 


« prudently ; the ſhip would have been loſt without this con- 
duct; they could not, even in the day, go near the iſland, it 
«© was ſo ſurrounded with reefs and rocks. This iſland is inha- 
4 bited, its latitude is full 6 deg. N. It is almoſt round, its cir- 
6 cuit is 30 leagues, it is not very high. At three leagues ta 


the weſt, they ſaw four low iſlands, and many others cloſe to 


* it; all are ſurrounded with reefs. The iſland appeared clearer 
£ on the ſouth fide. 
« They continued their courſe N. N. W. and on 3 


<< 1ſt of January, 1596, the latitude, obſerved was. 14 deg. 


« They then ftood due weſt, with a good freſh wind ; and 
« On Wedneſday, 3d January, at day-break, they deſcryed 
« two of the Ladrone iſlands, GuaN and SERPANA.“ 


T HE OD ORE GER AR PDS. 


HEODORE GERARDS (one of the fleet in the 
voyage wherein W. Ap Aus was pilot) being carried by 
tempeſts in 64 deg. 8. in that height, the country was moun- 
tainous, and covered with ſnow, looking like N ORWAY, and 
ſemed to extend towards the iſlands of SALOMON *. | 


„ Purchas, Vol. IV. p. 1391, note. Barleus's collecuon, p- 193. 


PE DR O 


7398 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ DE QUIROsS' 


o W a. 


HE adiſcovery of the SOUTHERN ConTinenT, whenever, 


and by whomſoever it . may be completely effected, is in 


Juſtice due to this immortal name. 


QuiRos, were not directed, at leaſt immediately, to this great 
object; but Quikos formed his plan on the obſervations he him- 
ſelf had made in MEnDANA's voyage, in 1595: and, reaſoning 
from principles of ſcience and deep reflexion, he aſſerted the 


| exiſtence of a SOUTHERN CONTINENT ;. and devoted, with un- 
wearied, though contemned diligence, the remainder of his life 


to the proſecution of this ſublime conception. 
It does not appear that MAGALHANEs had any | idea of a conti- 


nent in this quarter ; nor have we any ſcientific arguments al- 
leged in ſupport of it, prior to the memorials which Quyiros: 
preſented to Don Louis DR VELAsco, after his return from 
MEN DANA's voyage. 


Many maps repreſent a continent in this quarter, which they fs | 


was diſcovered by HERNAN GALLEGo, in 1576. It is neceſſary 
to take notice of this report, as it would leflen the character of 
Qu1Ros to ſuppoſe him ignorant of the diſcoveries made by this 
companion of MExDANA ; or worfe than ignorant, to endeavour 
by conjectures, however well grounded, to ſupport the exiſt- 
ence of what he knew had been n diſcovered. 


It 


The voyages previous to chat of PE DRO FzRNABDEZ DE | 


om 
wi 
on 


1606. 


* 
: 
CR__ Tu 


ab ay £ E 5 N 

r rr 

— e — » 
* 


8 

18 

V 
2 
2 
o 

. 

7 

q 

* 

* 

; mn 
4 > - 
1 

4 

* 

7 

1 

, 

** 
2 
3 
+ 
© 4 

* 

J 
oY 
£ 
2 
wh 
. 

1 
* 
zz 
[4 
* 

* 

* 
* 
. 


1606. 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ Dr QUIROS' 


It is unqueſtionable, that HERRN AN GALLEGo was chief pilot 
with MEN DANA in 1567, but it is impoſſible, that he did, or 


could in this voyage diſcover a continent to the ſouthward, in the 


paſſage from NR w- Gvuinea to the Strait of MAG ALHANEs, be- 


cauſe we are expreſly informed by Ficuzroa and Lor RZ VAZ, 
that, in this voyage, they returned to nen on the north of 
the equator. 

The notion of Gal LEOGO's diſcovery, common amongſt 
geographers, probably aroſe from the ſuppaſition, that GuaDar- 
CANAL extended to TIERRA DEL Fu; and the date 1576, 
perhaps from a tranſpoſition of the figures 1 567, or poſſibly 
from ſome vague report of the diſcovery made "ny Joan Fer- 
NANDEZ about this period. 

A modern Syſtem of Geography * 14058 ne GALLEGO; 
but where he met with him I cannot tell, for none of the Spaniſh 
writers I have ſeen, make mention of any work of GAL LEGO, 
except PENELo, who gives the title of a MS. Journal, by HERnan 
GaLLEtco of MEnDANna's firſt voyage, which, he ſays, remains 
in the BAR CIA library +. Neither SEIxAs nor Qu1Ros take notice 
of him, nor of his ſuppoſed diſcovery to the ſouth, which it 
can ſcarcely be believed they would have omitted, had there 


been the leaſt foundation for it; ToR NADA indeed mentions 
_ GarLLx60, but ſays not a word of any land diſcovered by him in 


a high latitude. 


-* Compleat Syſtem of Geography, vol. II. p. 587. 

+ Penelo de Leon Biblioth. Orient y Ocident. p. 67 T. 

« Relacion de jornada i viaje primero que al deſcubriemento de las Iſlas de Salo- 
mon hico el Adelentado Alvaro de Mendana, ſiendo el autor piloto major.” 

7. e. Journal of the firſt vayage which the Adelentado Alvaro de Mendana 
made for the diſcovery of the Salomon Iſlands, the author being chief pilot. * Ms. fol. 
Penelo fays it begins, Anno 1553, in the month of e &c.“ 


- 


b b 8 1 * , e 
a Bb 2 Pre et SA, 8 
rr ETA» WIEN 3 2 9 n 
r . SY ey Yo r 1 
Wo OT e 
n 

1 


* 0 * G E. 


It is ſearcely poſſible to prove a negative; and it may be al- 
ledged that Arias mentions a diſcovery of MENDANA in 1575» 
and therefore GAL LER Os diſcovery may have been made in the 
return from this voyage. The general filence of the Spaniſh 
writers is to me ſufficient reaſon to diſbelieve the diſcovery aſ- 
cribed to GAL LEGO, particularly when it is conſidered, that al - 
though the exiſtence of ſuch a land was the point QuiRos 
wanted to prove, he takes not the leaſt notice of it; and it 
ſeems to me impoſſible that this companion of MenDana could 
be ignorant of a diſcovery ſo important, which muſt be well 
known to all PzRu, had it only happened twenty years before; 
particularly as it muſt have been in-a public voyage, although it 
is not wonderful that Quixos ſhould be ignorant of the accidental 
diſcovery made by Juan FERNANDEZ, which ARIAs informs us 
was purpoſely concealed till the death of Juan FERNANDEZ, 
which probably happened many years before Qu1Ros' firſt 
voyage. | 

Upon the whale, till ſome expreſs erin is produced of 
this SouTHERN LAND of GALLEGo, I think it muſt be 
conſidered as one of thoſe blunders which geographers are con- 
tinually propagating, by abridging and abſtracting each other, 
inſtead of conſulting the original authors. 

To clear up the difficulties which occur on the ſubjea of 
Qu1Ros' diſcoveries, I propoſe to give a ſketch of the life of 
this eminent perſon: the authorities I have for this, beſides 
MEenDANa's voyage already recited, are chiefly PENELo, Tor- 
QUEMADA, ARIAs, and Quiros' memorials. 

The aſſertion of ſome, that Quizos was a Portugueſe, is 
| doubtful ; though ſome critics think they can diſtinguiſh the 
Portugueſe idiom in his writings. There appears to be as little 
foundation in what others alledge, of #wo perſons fimilar in 
name, QuiRos, a Spaniard, and Gikos, a Portugueſe, There 


3 


BEES YER DES LY 


98 ' PEDRO FERNANDEZ vs QUIROS' 
1606, 1s no trace of ſuch a perſon as this G1Ros, in any Spaniſh writer 
I have ſeen; though the country of Quikos is not particularly 
mentioned in any of them, and is a matter of very little con- 
ſequence. | 
The firſt account we have of him, is as chief pilot to MEN 
DANA in 1595, after whoſe death he conducted to ManiLa the 
ſhattered remains of the ſquadron, and from thence went to 
Acapurco, in the galleon St. Jeronimo. From Mexico he. 
proceeded to PRRu, where he made intereſt with the new vice- 
roy, Don Louis vt VELASCO, to be furniſhed with ſhips, men, 
and other neceſſaries, to continue the diſcoyery they had begun; 
and *« to plough up the waters of the unknown ſea, and to ſeek. 
% out the undiſcovered lands around the antartick pole *, the 
« centre of that horizon 8 | | | 
He preſented two memorials to the viceroy, containing the. 
motives that inclined him to on undertaking, herein he. ex- 
preſſed himſelf to this effect; 1 DE 
« Becauſe the ſhadow he. in the moon in the time of how 
« eclipſe is part of a circle, it is proved, that the form of the: 
% body of earth and water which compoſes it, is round. Ima- 
«« gining about this body a line encompaſſing it, and dividing it 
into two equal parts, calling the one north, the other. ſouth ; 
« from this equinoctial line begins the degrees,. counting from 
« 1 deg. to go deg. which is the greateſt quantity of latitude to- 
% wards either of the two poles. Of the north part is already diſ- 
covered to more than 70 deg. what remains from thence to go 
20M deg. although it ſhould be diſcovered, ſeems uninhabitable, on 
« account of the great cold, the inequality of day and night, and 
<« other inconveniencies. It is notorious, that in ſeveral parts. 


— 


* Que diviſava el polo antartico. 
+ Figueroa's fragment in Thevenot. 
4 Idem. 


G G ¶ = 
already known, the people dwell in caves, and live with much cs. 
artifice, having another bad life to paſs from the rigour of the 
climate &. Of the ſouth part is diſcovered to 55 deg. paſſing 
the Strait of MaGALHANEs, and to 35 deg. in which is the 
Cape of Goop Hoes, or 40 deg. and a little more, to which 
ſhips go in doubling it. Theſe two points of land, with 
their coaſts on each fide , are already known to all. Now 
are wanting the reſt which remain from theſe, and from 
this parallel, -and to the weſt, from a lower latitude, to go 
deg. + to know if it is land or water, or what part there is 
of both. 35 

„ The Adelentado, Al vAxO DE MEN DANA, when 1 was 
failing, in 1 59 5, towards the Hlands of SALomon S, which he 
ſaid were from 7deg. to 12 deg. S. and 1 5ooleages from thecity 
of Lia A, met with four ſmall iſlands together, inhabited by 
ſo good a people, that there is no account of any other having 
been diſcovered, that can be reckoned equal to them; but for 
the chief part, the Indians are ill- featured ſſ, and of indifferent 
figures q, and of a brown complexion *, as in PERU, Nxw- | 
Spain, TRERRA-FIRMA, NicaRacua, PHritieinas, and 
other parts. Theſe iſlands are in the latitude of 9 deg. 


and 10 deg. diſtant 1000 leagues from LIMA, 650 from the 
neareſt coaſt of NEw-SPAIN, and another 1000 from NRW- 


* Y viven con mucho artificio teniendo otra vida mala de Paſſar por el * te 


los tiempos. 

+ Con ſus coſtas y contra a coſtas. | 

+ Falta aora las demas que dellas reſtan, y del paralelo deſta y de menos altura re- 
tro ad poniente haſta go. The meaning appears to be, that the parts from the Cape 
of Good Hope, and ſouth extremity of America to 70 deg. and to the weſtward of 
theſe meridians, even from a lower latitude, to go deg, were yet to be diſcovered. 

$ Mendana, according to Arias, was then bound to St. Chriſtoval, not for the 
Salomon iſlands, 

| De malos geſtos. 

¶ De medianos talles. 

** De color moreno. 


© GUINEA. 


* 


100 


1605. 


« diſtant parts: and it is the moſt likely, that when they fail 
from a place from whence they can ſee no other land, they 


things, which may make them loſe their right way. And 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ vet: QUIROS' 
«© GUINEA. The winds there are eaſterly, for which reaſon, 
** to go from theſe iſland to PE Ru and NEw-SPAIN, it is ne- 
*« ceflary to ſtand to the northward, or ſouthward, to ſeek with- 
out the tropic thoſe winds which are called general; and for 
this are required inſtruments of navigation and veſſels of bur- 
** then *, which are two things (beſides others very neceſſary) 
** theſe people are deſtitute of. For theſe, and for other rea- 
* ſans which might be given, it remains very obvious, that it 
has never been poſſible, in any time, to communicate with the 
* two provinces above-mentioned, nor leſs with NRW-GUINEA 
* and the PriLiPPINas ; ſince, from theſe parts to the ſaid 
« iſlands, there is no navigating, on account of the winds be- 
« ing eaſt and contrary. From the four iflands no other land 
& was viſible ; the embarkations of the natives are adapted for 
& ſhort voyages +. For which reaſon it is to be ſought, what 
« could be believed to be the manner how they could go to 


„go, taking their marks by the land they are leaving, till they 
<« loſe fight of it; and then, when they can ſee it no longer, 
« they get ſight of the other whither they are bound: for in 
« loſing altogether the land, as well that from whence they 
« ſailed, as that which they are in ſearch of, it becomes ne- 
« ceſſary to underſtand at leaſt the compaſs, which they have 
« not. Not to mention the contrary winds, currents, and other 


« this is of the more weight, as the moſt experienced pilots, fur- 
t niſhed with all that theſe people want, in loſing fight for two. 
or four days of the land, do not know, nor can determine 


* Navios capazes. E 
. + Las embarcaciones de las naturales citan a brevedad de navegacion. 


<« their 


cc 


A 


* 


K 


c 


c 


Aa 


cc 
cc 
cc 
| «cc 
60 


cc 


ce 


cc 


66 


0 


cc 


46 


\ 0 þ A G 


their ſituation. Thus (ſpeaking in general terms) it may be 
affirmed, the inſtruments of navigation of theſe Indians are 
their own eyes, or their gueſs of ſmall diſtances. Since to 
what might be alledged that they direct themſelves by the 
ſun, moon, and ſtars? it may be replied, that the ſun is not 


viſible by night, the mutability of the moon is well known, 


and, in ſhort, they are not always preſent, nor in the ſame 
place, nor without clouds before ſtars, moon, and ſun. But 
were all this poſſible 3 it is not) yet their * muſt 


be ſo ſhort as has been ſaid. 
« And though it is true, that the moſt ſtupid * can goin their 


embarkations from a ſmall iſland, to feek a large country, if 


it be near, ſince if they do not hit one part, they will ano- 
ther; yet not for this can it be admitted, that from a large, 
or ſmall country, they can, without art, ſeek ſmall +, and 
far diſtant iſlands. | 

« Amongſt theſe Indians were Came nul T. which a. 


verſity of colour argues a communication with other people. 


Beſides theſe four iſlands being ſmall, it is to be attended to, 


ic 


66 


«cc 


66 


66 


cc 


e 


cc 
66 
cc 


64 


that, in the large countries men are ſcarce to be contained, 


but ever go in queſt of others, where they may live with 
more convenience, beſides thoſe who leave them on diſſentions, 
or becauſe they cannot ſubmit to maſters, or becauſe they 
wiſh to be ſuch. Thus it may be religiouſly believed, that 
there are to the S. E, 8, S. W. and more weſtward, other 
iſlands which lye in a chain, or a continent running along, 
till it joins NEw-GvuIiNEA, or approaches the PnILI PIN As, or 
the SoUuUTHERN-LAND of the Strait of MaGALHANEs, ſince 


no other places are known, whereby, they who inhabit- 


thoſe iflands could have entered them, unleſs by miracle, 


* Bocales. 1 | + Limitelns. t Amulatador. : 


101 


1606. 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ vs QUIROS' 

If it goes toward the one, or to the other part, or towards 
« both, it is likely there are many iflands, or a continent, the 
«© antipodes to the greater part of EuxorPe, AFRICA, and ASIA, 
« where from 20 deg. to 60 deg. God has made men ſo uſeful.” 

PixGRs informs us, from FiGUtRoA, that the viceroy re- 
plied, that Qu1xos' deſire exceeded the limits of his autho- 
rity ; but he diſpatched him with og recommendations to 
the court of Spain X. 


* Purchas gives ſome ground to conjecture, that a voyage was made, during the 
government of this viceroy, by the following 

Note of Auſtralia del Efpiritu Santo, written by maſter Hacluit, 

& Simon Fernandez, a pilot of Liſbon, told me, Richard Hacluit, before other 

CL Portugals, in London, the 18th March, 1604, That he having been in the city 

of Lima, in Peru, did perfectly underſtand, that four ſhips and barks departed from 

te the ſaid city of Lima about the year 1600, in the month of February, towards the 

« Philipinas. Their general was a meſtizo (ſon of a Spaniard and an Indian woman), 


and that ſeeking to make way towards the Philipinas, they were driven with ſtrong 


© northern winds to the ſouth of the equinoctial line, and fell in with divers rich 
countries and iſlands, as it ſeemeth, not far from the iſlands of Salomon. One 
chief place they called Monte de Plata, for the great abundance of filver there is 
&« like to be there. For they found two crowns- worth of ſilver in two handfuls of 
« duſt, and the people gave them for iron as much and more in quantity of ſilver. 
C They report, that this place is two months faling from Lima, and as much back 
66 2 n. 
| 1 this voyage alſo, the Lichindiads) Louis de Tribaldo, a gentleman 
t of quality in the Conde de Villa-Mediana, the Spaniſh-ambaſſador's houſe, told me, 
“Richard Hacluit, that two years paſt he ſaw at Madrid a captain of quality, ſuing 
&« for licence to conquer this place, and that he obtained the ſame ; and that divers 
t religious men and fathers were to go to convert them to chriſtianity. They ar- 
cc rived, at their return from this voyage, at Peru, in the month of Auguſt.“ 
There are ſome other circumſtances to countenance the opinion, that there was 
an expedition between Mendana's in 1 195, and Quiros in 1606. 
1. Penelo mentions an expedition in 1599. | 
2. Seixcas reports, that Quiros left derroteros of his three voyages : it is obvious 
the firſt was in 1595, the laſt in 1606 ; forhe died at Panama before he could under- 
take another. 
3. The Chronica de 8. Gregorio de las Philipinas, has this quotation from Quiees, 
« Por el camino, &c. For the route and voyage is, I know, much eaſier and ſhorter. | 
e than from Manila to New-Spain ;” ſpeaking of appointing one of the galleons to 
Peru. This is a circumſtance he could not know by experience, either in his voyage 
of 15955 or that of 1606, as in both he went to New- Spain. 


2 


Tox q 


V. 0 T 4 Gn: | 103 


ToRQUEMADA, in the introduction to Quv1Ros' expedition 1606, 
in 1606 ſays © PaiL1e III. being deſirous to complete the diſ- 
% covery of the remote SoUTHERN PARTS begun by HERNAN. 
„ GALLEGO, and ALvARo DE MENDANA at different times, in 
the reign of Pxiz1y II. *, and judging that divine Providence 
« had put the preſent occaſion in his power, he gave ſtrict or- 

% ders, that captain PzDRo-FERNANDEZ. DE QuiRos ſhould go 
<< in perſon, to give to the world a clear account. how extenſive 
e theſe hidden provinces and ſevered regions were ſouls to, 
heaven, and kingdoms to the crown of Spain. 

He gave full and ſufficient commiſſion in his name, to take: 

from the port of LIMA two. ſhips, ſuch as he ſhould pick out, 
*« beſt adapted for the ſervice intended, and alſo gave expreſs 

orders to the Condé de Monterey, his viceroy at that time, 


But in oppoſition to theſe teſtimonies. it is to be obſerved, that Penelo deſcribes. 
the expedition in 1599, to be under Mendana, which is impoſſible, as he died in 
that of 1595. He alſo refers to Chriſtoval Suarez de Figueroa for an account of this 
expedition, which points out the error in date, for Figueroa wrote the life of the 4th: 
marquis of Cannete, under whoſe orders Mendana's expedition, in 1595, was fitted 
out, Penelo alſo refers to. Morga for an account of the firſt. voyage in 1567; whereas 
Morga gives the relation not of this, but of the expedition in 1595. 

In reply to the other evidences, it can only be ſaid in general, that none of the me- 
morials give the leaſt hint of any diſcoveries made by Quiros but in 1595 and 1606; and 
therefore, although it would be improper to deny any intermediate expedition, it does. 
not appear that there is an authority. ſufficient to ſupport it ;.it alſo appears from the hi- 
ſtory of the Philipinas, that there was, at this time, no intercourſe between Peru and 
Manila. So that the voyage mentioned by Hacluit, muſt be conſidered'as doubtful; 

to this may be added, that Quiros* opinion of the facility of the paſſage to Peru, <q 
probably in. COMMIT of the winds he found i in the two voyages, of which we have: 
the relation, 

It ſeems, however, that he was the perſon: mentioned by Hacluit, to be at Ma-- 
drid in 1602. For Arias's memorial, after mentioning that Quiros carried the re- 
mains of Mendana's ſquadron to Manila, adds, Some time after Quiros came to 
* this court, being then in Valladolid, to intreat the ſame diſcovery, and was diſpatched. 
to the viceroy of Peru, to obtain the . NY 1 the e | | 

vo * Philip, from 1558 to 1598.. 


« without: 


104 
1605. 


4 #-- 
bf 
4 
HS 
1 
vo 5 
3” 
Fr 
* 
i 
N 
Vs 
l 


14 . 
= RP 


1 
NN 
— — — — — . — AAA IE ae» ns = . 
/ — 


* 


De * 


N = — 


rs 


* 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ vr QUIROS' 


&« without delay, to order the proviſion of every thing neceſſary | 
«* for Quikos' voyage and departure. * 

% QuviRos then diſpatched from court, with the moſt 605 
* nourable ſchedules which had ever paſſed the council of 
ce ſtate, and not with leſs diſpatches from the court of Rome; 
<« purſued his route till he arrived at Lima, where, after pre- 
* ſenting his papers to the viceroy, he began to enter on new 
«* labours, throwing into oblivion all that he had endured for 
eleven years in the purſuit of ſo important an object.“ 

Different views are aſcribed to the voyage: ToRQUEMADA; 
with the utmoſt affectation, ſeems to ſtuff in every place com- 


prehended within his knowledge, aſcribing as the motive of 


the voyage to circumnavigate the globe, going to Spain by 
* the Easr-IxpiIESs, firſt diſcovering, as the chief object, the 
„% unknown lands of * the South, in the route to NEw-GulNEA, 
* till they reached ChIx A, the Mar ucos, Java Major and 
« Minox, and all the other famous iſlands abounding i in ſilver, 
« gold, precious ſtones, and ſpices.” | 

' ARIAs, with much more appearance of probability and con- 
ſiſtency ſays, « Their intention was to ſettle at the iſland ' of 
« STA. CRuz, and purſue from thence the plan of the Ade- 
* lentado pe MENDANA,“ which, as before recited, was the 
% diſcovery of a SOUTHERN CONTINENT.” | 

The particular diſcoveries of QuiRos in this voyage, are to 


follow from ToxqQueEMADA, with ſome elucidation from Aras, 


who tells us, that QuiRos, after his return to New-Seain, 
« came once more to the Spanith. court to renew his application 
« to ſettle that country ; : and was ſent back to PERU (in 1614), 
40 with the viceroy, and died at PANAMA in his return to 
% LIMA.“ : 


De camino de Nueva Guinea. . 


; When 


V. :0” BF: T 1.48 

When to was this time at the court of SpAlx, he preſanted 
the many memorials we find mentioned, though two only have 
come down to us, both inſerted in PuxchaAs; one he has given 
in Engliſh, which memorial is to be found in many other books, 
and in almoſt every language; a Spaniſh . MS, of it has been 
chiefly made uſe of, though collated with Purcras, and the 
Latin copy printed at AMSTERDAM, 1613, 4to. The other 
memorial, which is in Spaniſh, though "ry: ul Eo "as 


extremely curious in itſelf. p< 
PzNxLo relates, that Quixos, aun bie continuance at 55 | 


time in SPAIN, preſented. no leſs than fifty memorials to the 
King, regarding the neceſſary meaſures for the conqueſt, and 
3 peopling the ſaid SALOMON iflands, and 'SouTHERN Lax D: 
« The 1ſt contains, the greatneſs and riches of the land men- 
* tioned, treating of all the relations, which till then had been 


£6 given to the King, regarding them. The ad, the dangers 


„ which might accrue, ſhould they be taken poſſeſſion of, by any 
« enemies to the Indians and to the IN DIES, Sc. and affirms, 
« that he had written 600 pages on this ſubject. In another 
% memorial, collecting the moſt. material for his purpoſe, he 
gives the relation which the Indians of TA uNMaco gave him 
« of more than ſixty inhabited iſlands. A ſummary relation, 
cc which he took from that given by Lic. HERNANDO Dx Los 
« ROS, Procurador DE LAS PHILIPINAS, of what happened 


« to MiduEL Roxo DE BrITo; ſummary relation which he 


«took in MaDR1D, from that given by the capitan-maior of 
« the MoLuccas, Ruy GoNGALES DE SEQUERA, of what he 
had ſeen and learnt of the LUNAR LanD, during his go- 

* 3 N. 8. cc Relation & Nn de 8 & Mo- 


« Juccas de Hernand. de los Rios Coronel.” He ſays New-Guinea, the largeſt iſland 
in the wortd, was diſcovered by Ruy * de Villa Lobos ; but — me not mention 


Roxo de Brito in that work. | _ 1 4 
Pp | by enen 


4606, 


106 


1606. 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ Dr QUIROS' 


© vernment. Printed, folio, without year or place, though it 
appears to be in Map RID, 1610, | 
PuRcnas prefixes to the two memorials he has publiſhed, 

a note of WALSINGHAM GRESLEY ; in it are many errors about 
the diſcovery of a Sou THERN CONTINENT, in the latitude of the. 
Strait of MAGALHANES, along which they ſailed 800 leagues. 
There does not ſeem to be the ſmalleſt foundation for theſe reports, 
which probably aroſe from a confuſed account of the diſcovery 
of GUuADALCANAL, which was ſuppoſed to extend from Nzw- 
Guinta almoſt to the Strait of MAGALHANES. GRESLEY being 


ſo much miſtaken in theſe circumſtances, it might be concluded 


he was ill- informed in what he afterwards. ſays, that this 
* captain Qu1Ros ſhall be preſently ſent into Pxxu, with order 
and commiſſion to take 1200 men, and ſhipping, with other 


* neceſſaries for the voyage, to inhabit; and as many more ſhall 
1 heſentthe year following from Nzw-Se ain; and for the whole 


© buſineſs he is to receive 500, ooo ducats.” But there ſeems to 
be good ground for this laſt report, as FxA Y Juan pz SILVA, 
Confeſſor of the Royal Palace, and Predicador of the Seraphic 
Order of ST. FRANC1s, in one of the memorials he gave to the: 
King of Spain about 1623, ſays, If captain PRDRO FER 
«© NANDES DE QuliRos, who with ſo much earneſtneſs ſolicited: 
* the conquſt in a military and hoſtile manner, aſked. 500, ooo 
« qucats, beſides 150,000 he ſpent in his diſcovery, without 
« having ever ſeen the firm land, but only the iſlands adjoining. 
4 to it; I, who have ſucceeded in. his place, will be content 
« with 100,000, which is much leſs than. he aſked and ex- 
“ pended.” ; 

This DE SILVA, in another memorial, directed to the pope, 
dated 2oth September, 1623, mentions to have laid before his 
Holineſs, an account of the late diſcovery of the SoUTHERN. 
REGION. He alſo mentions, in a memorial to the King of 

SPAIN» 


V -O'. XY a. a. 
SPAIN, a relation of the ſouthern diſcoveries given to the pope 
by D. SEBASTIAN CLEMENTE, clerigo preſbytero. . 

Qu1Ros, in the voyage of 1606, being unfortunately ſepa- 
rated from his companions, returned to NEw-SyAIN, from 
whence, ARIas tells us, . He came once more to the Spaniſh 
court, to renew his application to ſettle that country; was 
« ſent back with the viceroy of Pxxu, and died at PANAMA, in 
« his return to LIMA. 


«« QuiRos having employed ſome 3 in building two 


„ ſhips and a zabra, which were the ſtrongeſt and beſt armed 
of any that had been ſeen in either ſea; on the 21ſt Decems 
ber, 1605, he embarked *.“ | 

In this voyage ſix Franciſcan fathers accompanied Qu1R0s : - 
the commiſſary was Padre Fray MARTIN ps MuNILLaA, 
with him were FR. MArzo Deg Vascones, Fr. JUAN DE 
MexLo, Fr. Av roNIO QuINTERo, prieſts, and two lay bro- 
thers, FR. FRancisco Lopez, and FR. Juan PALoMAREs. 

« Then leaving the land they ſet their topſails and ſpritſail, 
failing by the gulph of our Lady of LoRxRTTO +, on their voy- 
age W. 8. W. till the 25th December, when they made illumi- 
nations in the night, and fired guns in the day, in honour of the 
feſtival. 

Thus they continued failing, though 8 WA va- 
riable winds, till the 26th January, 1606, when about 3 P. M. 
they diſcovered an iſland to the 8. W. It was ſmall, about four 
leagues in circuit, all flat, and level with the water; with few 
trees, for the greater part was ſand. It has deep water, ſo that 
when very near, they could get no ground. As it was, to all ap- 
pearance uninhabitable, and without a port, they purſued their 
voyage to the weſtward, making to this place, from the coaſt 
of PERU, juſt 1000 leagues, and in 25 deg. S. 


» Torquemada. + A name which they gave to * part of the Pacific Ocean. 
1 2 1 % They 


107 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ vs QUIROS' 


They failed thus two days, having ſome rain ; and the 
third, at day break, were near another iſland, having the eve- 
ning before ſeen many birds, a plain ſign of land: they ran along 
the ſouth ſide, and eſtimated that it might be 12 leagues. It 
was plain, and even a-top “. It was alſo without ſoundings, 
though the zabra anchored, almoſt in the ſurf, in 20 fathom, 
aſtern they had no ground with 200; for which reaſon the 
captain made them purſue their voyage till 

* The 4th of February, when they found themſelves near 
another iſland, which being of little uſe, gave them great 
concern ; for the night before they were in great danger: by 
the badneſs of the weather, being thick and ſqually from the 
N. E. with much thunder, lightning, and rain. At day light 
« they found the land was an iſland, which appeared to be 
« 20 leagues in circuit f, it was overflowed in the middle, and 
% ſurrounded with a reef of rocks , appearing to be coral: 
<« they got no ſoundings, nor port, though they ſought it care- 
fully, to provide themſelves with wood and water, which they 
began to be in want of. They agreed. fo leave it, as of no 
«* uſe to them, and purſued their courſe: and next day left 
% four other iſlands like to it in every reſpect ; and. paſſed on 
* to the W. N. W. towards another iſland, which appeared to 
« be four leagues diſtant. They reached it, and judged it to be 
ce about ten leagues in circuit; it ſtretches from N. to 8. They 
« paſſed on, for it was like the others, unfavourable to their 
« purpoſe, diſcovering another which lay to the W. N. W. 
cc They continued their voyage, for it was of the ſame kind; 


Era llana por lo alto y pareja. 

+ Ulloa quotes Diego de Cordova, for an account of Quiros' diſcovery. He fays, 
smonegſt others, they found a large iſland in 28 deg. 8. 

t Paredon de arrecifes. 


; F 4 Iflas parejas en las preſencias y partes. 


VF. oO Y- 4&4 & 


till the gth February, when, at day-break, they had fight of 


an iſland to the N. E. They paſſed on, leaving it to wind- 
ward, being in 18 deg. 40 min. S. They paſſed the day, 


with ſome rain till the next [10th February], when, from 
the topmaſt head, to the no ſmall ſatisfaction of every one, 


a ſailor cried out land a-head. But what chiefly cauſed their 
Joy was, to ſee in ſeveral places columns of ſmoak ariſing, 


which was a clear ſign of inhabitants, whence they concluded 
that all their ſufferings. were at an end. The chief pilot or- 
dered them to go to it, directing their heads to it to the N. 


but not finding a port, the capitana ſtood to fea to weather 


it “; but though they endeavoured to do ſo, they could not, 


and thus putting about +, they fetched. a-breaſt of it, or- 
dering the zabra to go to look for a port, whilſt the capi- 


' tana and almiranta kept turning to windward in ſight of it. 


The zabra getting in ſhore, came to anchor in 10 fathom 


upon Mucaras. Hereupon the captain ordered the boats a- 


ſhore with 40 ſoldiers, PEDRo LopES De SoJo, his enſign, 


and the ſerjeant PxpRo GARCIA De LUMBRERES. Being 
got to the ſurf, they ſaw on the beach ꝓ about 100 Indians, 


who joyfully made ſigns to them: but it was impoſſible to 


land, for the ſea broke with ſo much fury againſt the rocks, 
that there was no coming near, though they attempted it 
ſeveral times, with no ſmall hazard of ſinking ſome of the 


boats. Large ſeas. coming in on every fide, which wet ſome 
of their muſquets, whereby they received much damage. 
Seeing ſo little probability of getting aſhore, they reſolved to 


return aboard, with heavy hearts, for being unable to fulfil: 
the intentions they were ſent on, particularly. in. not being, 


* La capitana ſe tendio a el mar para montalla. 
+ Cacando a popa. | 


1 Enjutode las plaias. 


wy able: ; 


1606. 


TIO 
1606, 


— 
CF uh, F< 8 be - he Ma 

- Y 8 8 Ne 

X 1 — 2 — A - 436.3. l 


— — Dy 3 * : —2 — 2 
KKK re I ̃̃ ¹ò.—- . Cn OE 
* F Fr $a N ERS 
. — >: 
———————— 


* 
* 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ Dr QUIROS' 


able to carry to the ſquadron the intelligence ſo much wiſhed 


for of a harbour (for although the zabra had anchored, it was 
at a great riſque, for it was all rocky, and little ſheltered), 
as well as of water, whereof they were in great want, and of 


the behaviour of the people. They were thus returning to 


the ſhip, quite diſconſolate, when a brave ſpirited young man, 
FRANCIsCo Ponce, a native of TRIANA, ſlighting the danger, 


got up, and condemning their return without ſeeing any thing, 


immediately ſtripped, ſaying that if they ſhould thus turn 


their faces from the firſt dangers which their fate preſented, 


what hope could there be of ſucceſs in the event : that ſince, 
in countries ſo remote, ſo far from home, in places unknown, 
ſeas unnavigated, and amongſt ſavages, there was a neceſſity 
of ſuffering much ; he was determined, although he ſhould 
be daſhed to pieces againſt the rocks, to get aſhore, and 
make peace with the Indians, fince it was a matter of ſo much 
conſequence to the general good. Saying this, he threw him- 
ſelf into the ſea, and preſently got where the ſea beat furi- 
ouſly againſt the rocks, and climbing up one of them, he 
got a top of it, although cautious of the ſavages ; who, 
pleaſed with the lad's reſolution, went to receive him, em- 
bracing him with much ſhew of affection, and often kiſſing 
his forehead. The Spaniard doing the — to repay their 
good will and careſſes. 

« Some other Spaniards, infligated by this la alſo 
leaped into the ſea, and. getting to the ſhore, were received in 
like manner by the Indians. Theſe valiant ſavages carried in 
their hands lances of thick wood“, burnt at the ends, from 
25 to 3o palms long; others Fonds + of palm wood, and 


others great clubs. They dwell in thatched — on the 


i Lancas de palo atk | t 8 
| « brink 


T G NM 
brink of the ſea, amongſt the palms, whereof there is great 
abundance, their fruit ſerving them for food, and ſome fiſh 
from the ſea. They go naked, are in colour mulattoes, but 
well limbed, and of good carriage. Our people treated with 
them by ſigns well underſtood, to prevail on ſome to come to 


the ſhips, whence they ſhould be ſent back loaded with pre- 


ſents, and cloathed. Finding they were not to be prevailed 
upon, they returned to the ſea, and ſwam off to the boats, 
where they were received, and told what had paſſed. They 
returned towards the ſhips. This being perceived by the In- 
dians eight or nine of them threw themſelves into the water, 
and with ſome dread, though encouraged by our people, 


came to the boats; who, ſeing them coming, ſtaid for 
them, endeavouring to perſuade them to come aboard by 
giving them knives, and other things, with which they 


ſeemed pleaſed, but not for theſe, however, did they chuſe 
to truſt them. They returned aſhore, where their Sy 


nions waited he them. 


« Seeing night was. approaching, and little coobability of 


getting the Indians aboard, they returned to the ſhips, and. 
informed the captain, who ordered that they ſhould keep in 
the offing all * night, and next day [11th February] purſue 
whatever meaſures they ſhould find expedient. They ſpent 
the night in this manner; but when morning came, they 
found themſelves about 8 leagues from. that place, down the 


coaſt +: this gave great diſguſt to all, as it was impoſſible to 
return back, nor ſee the Indians. But diſcovering the land 
abreaſt to be the ſame they had left, it was great ſatisfaction. 


to ever one, as they knew i it was inhabited. 


* Pairaſe por la parte de fuera. 
+ 8 leas. apartados de aquel parage, Ia coſta 4 : 


Having 


111 
1606. 


112 


1606. 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ vH QUIROS' 


0 Having hoiſted out the capitana's boat, the ſhips working 


A 
* 


to windward for want of a port, 10 or 12 men went in her 
to look for water, and people, to follow their track in queſt of 
it * The boat being got to the waſh of the ſea + found 
landing ſo difficult that it could not be attempted without 
great hazard of their life : however, they leaped into the 
water, and with much trouble got the boat over the rocks, 
the tops whereof appeared at the reflux of the waves. 


Having got to a reqgueſto, which was near the ſhore, and to 


the entrance of a little wood of palms, and other trees, they 
were heſitating where they ſhould enter in queſt of water, ſo 
much deſired, and alſo of ſome town, when, looking to the 
ſea, they ſaw the almiranta's boat, rowing very briſkly to 
the ſhore, in which came 8 muſqueteers. They waited for 
their landing to enter the wood together. Theſe got aſhore 
with the ſame riſque, and were joyfully welcomed by their 
companions, and then ſet out on their way by the thick wood, 
ſome of them cutting the branches with their ſwords, till they 
came near another bay of dead water, which is'on the other 
ſide of the iſland. Within the ſame wood, they deſcried a 


round place, ſurrounded with ſmall ſtones, and in one part + 


of it were ſome larger, which were raiſed from the ground 
about a cubit and a half, adjoining to a large high tree, from 
whoſe trunk hung many woven palm-leaves, which fell upon 
the ſtones, which were raiſed in form of an altar ; where, with- 
out doubt, refided the enemy of mankind, whence he deceived 
the ſavages with his equivocal reſponſes. This being obſerved 
by our people, they ſolicitous, where the Prince of Darkneſs 
had dwelt, to place the royal ſtandard, whereby the Prince 


Para ſeguit deſde alli ſu camino en demanda de ſu 1 intento. 


+ Refluxo. 
t V en la una parte de ella. 
$ Arrimadas a un arbol. 


FS O M 087 1 

of Light gave life to us, with chriſtian zeal cut down a tree 
with their knives, which-they formed into a croſs, and fixed 
in-the middle of the place. | 
Leaving this, they went to the plain in 40 of water, and 
ſeeing another ſmall wood oppoſite to them, they went into 
it; where, in a ſmall meadow, as it was moiſt and verdant, 
they dug to find water. But their pains were to little pur- 
poſe, for what iſſued was brackiſh, leſſening the hopes they 
had till then entertained, and increaſing their thirſt. But 
they preſently alleviated it, for ſome climbing up the palms 
which were there, they cut down plenty of coconuts, drink- 
ing and eating of them. Sceing they could not find what they 
ſought, they loaded with them, and walked towards the 
ſhore with the water to their knee, about half a league; for the 
force of the ſea, after breaking upon the rocks, extends itſelf 
along the ſhore to the ſkirts of the little mountains, joining 
at high water the ſea on the other fide of the iſland, by a 
ſhallow ſandy channel, in the middle of the two little woods. 
* Then arriving at the boats, they were afraid of going to 
them, as well on account of the danger of getting out, as 
becauſe they were much loaded with coconuts and arms. 
But Providence unexpectedly pointed out to the boats a nar- 
row track, where they entered without riſque, ſo near thoſe 
who were aſhore, that they \ were enabled to embark without 
wetting a foot. _ os 
“ The capitana's boat was the firſt which put to ſea to return 
to the ſhips, for the other waited to embark ſome of their 
people that came after, though at a diſtance. For ſome be- 
ing ſeparated in the higher part of the wood, between the 
© trees, perceived ' ſomething like a perſon walking leiſurely ; 
they went up to it, and found it to be a woman, but ſo old, 
in appearance, that it was amazing ſhe could ſtand on her 


Q-- | 6s feet. 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ vs QUIROS' 
feet. She appeared to have been in her youth of a' graceful 
mien, and well made *. The features of her face, although 
wrinkled and dry, gave, notwithſtanding, tokens of no lit- 
tle beauty. They told her, by ſigns, that ſhe muſt go with 


them to the ſhips: the Indian, without ſhewing any uneaſi- 


neſs, or regret, obeyed, going with them to the boat, and 
in it to the capitana, much to the ſatisfaction of thoſe who 
carried her, and not leſs afterwards of the captain and others 
aboard, ſeeing there could not fail of being people n 


ſince they found the origin of them. 


The captain ordered the Indian to be clad, to 3 meat 


t Que venian por la otra parte del mar; 


and drink, whereat ſhe gave ſigns of being well pleaſed; and 
to be carried aſhore again, to let the natives know, he 
meant nothing but peace and friendſhip with them. 

« When they reached the ſhore, they walked with her along 
the beach to another oppoſite ; for ſhe directed them thither, 
pointing with her finger, that there were her people. Our 
people looking that way, ſaw five or ſix piraguas coming by 
the other part of the ſea +,” drying their fails, which ap- 
peared to be latine, made of palms, and they of white wood, 
well wrought, narrow and long; their ſeams joined with. 


ſtrong thongs, made of the ſame palms, which is the tree 


wherewith they ſuſtain themſelves, and. make of it their 
veſſels, cables, fails, and all kinds of arms and cloathing, 
wherewith the women adorn themſelves from the waiſts 
downwards : they alſo afford them meat and water ; and they 
underſtood, that it is this alone. they drink, for our people 


could find none in more than two. leagues of the land over 
which they 1 went. 


De talle galardo y dippueſto. ä 


7 


«6c 
is 
«cc 
66 
cc 
cc 
cc 


«c 


cc 


cc 


cc 


+6 
«6c 
CC 
cc 
=_ 
cc 
cc 
66 
66 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
ce 
ce 
66 
cc 


40 


V'. O‚ Y 
«« Being got to the beach, the ſavages, in great haſte, took 
down their ſails, and leaving their veſſels at anchor, landed, 
and came up towards our people, who alſo advanced to them. 


Scarce did they ſee the Indian woman, when they ran to em- 
brace her, wondering to ſee her clothed ; embracing alſo our 


people with ſhews of affection, at which the ſerjeant PEDRO 


GaRCiA ſtept forth, aſking by figns which of them was 


chief, or captain. He was ſhewn a robuſt man, of a graceful 
mien *, lively, well built, and ſtrong limbed, with broad 
cheſt and ſhoulders. He had on his head a kind of crown, 
made of ſmall black feathers, but ſo fine and ſoft, that they 
looked like filk. There fell down backwards a bunch of red 
hair, ſomewhat curled, the ends whereof reached to the 
middle of the back ; it cauſed in our people much admira- 
tion to ſee amongſt theſe Indians, who are not white, hair ſo 
perfectly red, although they concluded it was of his wife 
(for they ſuppoſed him married). They made ſigns for him 
to go aboard, where he would have preſents made him: he, 
ſeeming well pleaſed, accompanied with his people, went 
with ours to the beach, who embarking in the boat : he did 
the like with ſome other Indians ; but ſcarce were they em- 
barked, when, afraid of ſome treachery, they leaped into the 


water, and fled to the ſhore. Their chief wanted to do the 


ſame; but our people, perceiving his intention, held him 


faſt, rowing as faſt as they could to get off ſhore. But the 


furious barbarian, turning his arms every way, defended 


himſelf, though his trouble was to little purpoſe, and they 


preſently got to the capitana with him; but all their endea- 
vours to perſuade him to go aboard were to no effect; which 
"0 Res by thecaptain, he ordered that they ſhould there 


* Talle 1 
. * cloath 


IIS 
1606, 


——— 


2 — ow The eb 3 8 DO IS — — . 
” "my 3 2 — Tre 2 — n — £ © IR. * 
— — 2 —— Toa - 

; 


— — — RE _ 2 6 © Kh 5 7 1 —— — 
1 — _ * — — — 


TT” TERS 8 * 7 — — 
— n 
Se [OD — 


146 


1606. 


40 


cc 


(66 


66 


66 


66 


46 


cc 


46 


60 


«c 


4s 


cc 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ DE QUIROS' 


cloath him, giving him food, and aſſuring him of their good 
intentions; and in confirmation thereof, returned him 
cloathed and free, to the ſhore. His ſpeedy return was of 
no little importance ; for the Indians aſhore, who were more 
than a hundred, ſeeing their leader carried priſoner, ſur- 
rounded three or four Spaniards who had remained aſhore 
(for the reſt were embarked, ſome in the boat which carried 
the Indians, and others in that which was then aboard), and 
with lances and great ſticks threatened our people: this be- 
ing obſerved by thoſe in the boat, and ſeeing the danger their 
companions were expoſed to, four or five leaped aſhore, ſome 
with targets, and others with muſquets, and walked as faſt 
as they could to join their friends, who, with their muſ- 

quets preſented, faced the Indians with undaunted reſo- 
lution. PEDRO GARCIA, the ſerjeant, was with them. 
« At this inſtant the Indian chief landed, whereupon the 
barbarians were appeaſed, and, leaving the Spaniards, went to 
receive their lord; who, with tears of joy, advanced to em- 
brace them, informing them of the good treatment he had. 
received, telling them alſo that the Spaniards were friends, 


and came in peace. Our people who were aſhore, joyfully 


received the Indian, going altogether to the beach, where 
the veſſels lay, intimating, by ſigns, they wanted to go to 
their pwn country. Our people, by way of feſtivity, on 
learning from them, that in their route were large countries, 
fired their muſquets into the air, alarming thoſe aboard the 
ſhips, who ſuppoſed the peace was broke. At length, the 
Indians being embarked, their chief came to our people, and 
embracing the ſerjeant, with much affection, took off the 
crown from his head, and gave it to him, exprefling by 
ſigns, that he had nothing of greater eſtimation. He then 
went aboard his piragua, and ſetting ſail, navigated toward 

— {mall 


«c 


„ 66 


cc 
60 
cc 
40 
«ce 


«c 


"=> 


cc 
cc 
£c 
«c 
46 
6 
cc 
rr 


«c 


y © f NN 


a ſmall iſlot, and our people kette the boats, in which 


they went aboard the ſhips. They kept working in the offing 
all night, and next day [12th February] ran along ſhore, to 


the N. W. obſerving the ſun, in it, in 17 deg. 40 min. 8.“ 


5 Preſently leaving it, they failed till Tueſday 14th February, 
when they ſaw an iſland to the N. E. they made for it, but 
being much to leeward, could not fetch it. They left it, and 


«© Next day ſaw another to the N. E. but neither could they 


fetch it, the winds not admitting. 

<« They ſailed on till the 22ſt, when they diſcovered another 
ahead to the W. They ſtood for it, but night coming on, 
they lay to till next day, when the zabra went to look for a 
port; but although they found one, it was ſo bad, ſo open, 
and the ſoundings ſo near ſhoxe, that the ſhips durſt not an- 
chor. They hoiſted out the boats, and in them ſent fifty 
men to look for water aſhore, for now the want of it diſtreſſed 
them much. They found ſuch plenty of fiſh, that they catch- 
ed them with their hands, and birds.of different kinds, which 


they alſo caught with their hands. It was uninhabitable, and 


deſtitute of water, but had plenty of palms. At length they 
left it, as unprovided with what they wanted. They ob- 
ſerved the ſun in this iſland in ſeant 10 deg. 30 min. S. It lays 
N. and S. and is 8 or 10 leagues in circuit. It is even with 
the water, and has in the middle a placel, ar large lake of ſalt 
water, as many of thoſe they had left behind. Tay named 
it ST. BERNARDO. 


„Leaving this iſland, they ran with very little ſail during that 


cc 


6c 


66 


66 


night, the wind being aft and freſh, and fearing the land was 


near, by the many birds: they had. about them. Thus they 
were till Thurſday 24 March, when, in the morning early, 
they diſcovered land to the weſtward. They lay to till ſun-riſe, 


This ifland is called Sagitaria in the Memorial, 


6 and 


117 
1606. 


118 


1606. 


cc 


cc 


cc 


cc 


66 


[LY 


cc 


cc 


66 


66 


cc 


e 


«c 


66 


cc 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ ve: QUIROS' 


and then made fail for it. They fetched it * on the north 
ſide, the zabra going ahead. Here their melancholy left 
them; for they ſaw in the middle of the iſland ſmoaks, which 
was a certain fign of its being inhabited. The zabra diſco- 
vered near the ſhore, amongſt palms, a town of thatched 
houſes, from whence came out about 100 Indians, who were, 
in effect, cruel enemies, though they did not ſhew it in their 
countenances and appearance, for they were the genteeleſt, 
moſt beautiful, and whiteſt people they found in the whole 
voyage: they have a vaſt number of ſmall piraguas, three 
or four Indians coming in each: they are extremely fleet, 
made of one tree; they came in them along ſide of the ſhips, 
making motions to ſhew their courage and ſpirit, and bran- 
diſhing very large lances, which are the common arms they 
uſe. They were thrown from the ſhips ſome things, as well 
food as cloathing, to induce them by good offices to come 
aboard ; but they, taking what was given them, rowed off. 
Thus matters ſtood, when a narrow piragua arrived, in it 
came an arrogant Indian, crying out, and making motions 
with his hands and legs. He had on his head a tuft + made 

of the palm, and a kind of ſhirt alſo of palm, but all red. He 
came to the balcony of the capitana, where ſome ſtood ad- 
miring his daringneſs ; but he, incapable of fear, turning 
back his arm, ſeized his ſpear in both hands, and made a 
thruſt, intending to kill one of them, which was Don DIEGO 


DE ToBarR Y PRADo, getting off with his piragua at a 


great rate ; but he was lucky that they had never a muſquet 


at hand, to give him the reward he merited. Although they 
cried out, and threatened him, he did not deſiſt to approach 


now and then with the ſame intention. The captain, who 


* Tomaror . 1 Tocado. 


V 0 Y a 


was at the ſhip's ſide, endeavouring by preſents and ſigns of 
affection, to endear the Indians, and induce them to come 
aboard the galleon, being informed of what paſſed, went aft, 


admiring the Indian's aſſurance ;z and, in conſequence of what 
is above-mentioned, ordered a muſquet to be fired into the 
air, without ball, to frighten him ; this was done, but the 
Indian ſhewed no apprehenſion of the noiſe, and brandiſhing 
his lance, approached cloſe to the ſhip, with his nimble * 
piragua; but it was not long before his life paid for his 


_ daring impudence. 


They holſted out the boats, and ſent them with 60 men, 
for the defence of the zabra; for a large ſquadron of Indians 
had leaped into the water, and coming along ſide of her where 
ſhe lay in 10 fathom, they thought it would be eaſy to ſink 


her; but finding this impoſſible, they got a long rope from 


the ſhore, and making it faſt to the prow of the zabra, en- 


deavoured to drag her aſhore. Perceiving that the people - 


aboard were preparing to cut it, they got a little off, and 
made the ſame rope faſt to the cable by which the zabra was 
riding, uſing every poſſible means to annoy our people: but 


boats arriving, they fwam toward the ſhore, ſome being 
killed, and others. wounded by the balls fired amongft | 


them, and amongſt the former was the Indian, who had 
ſhewn himſelf the moſt daring. Our people not ſeeing any 
place to land, and having no orders to go aſhore, they re- 
turned to the ſhips, weighing the zabra's anchor to bring her 
near them, which were at anchor a little farther off, though 
on their guard +, on account. of the winds, which were 


veer ing every moment. 


* Ligera.. . + Aunque ſobre aviſo. 


1606. 


cc 
cc 
c 


* 


cc 


cc 


cc 


Fc 
cc 


<6 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ vs QUIROS' 


* The captain joined with the opinion of the moſt judicious, 
that next day people well armed ſhould be ſent aſhore to get 
wood and water, to enable them to put in execution the 
great deſire they had to get into a higher latitude, in queſt 
of the Mother of ſo many t/lands. | 

« Next day they accordingly ſent the boats, with the zabra 
and 60 men, carrying fifes and drums, prepared for all 
events ; and ſearching for the moſt ſecure place for the 
zabra to anchor, they rowed with it cloſe to ſome ſhoals, 
where, though the ſea beat with much fury, and gave them 
much apprehenſion, yet it was the moſt convenient place 
they could find. 


Enſign PepRo Loeez 1 DE SoJo not chuſing to loſe the 


6 


cc 


cc 


cc 


66 


honour, nor to delay, leaped into a ſmall gondola, which 


they carried in the ſquadron, with two other men, to ſearch 


for a place to drop the zabra's grapling, and having found it, 
acquainted LovisVAEZDE TokREs, captain of the almiranta, 
that he might come to anchor, which he did preſently, 
leaving the zabra at anchor, and getting the grapling aſhore in 
his own boat, and uſing the other boat as a protection. 


* Scarce were the boats aſhore, when, in a. violent hurry, 


above 150 ſavages came to the ſhore, all with ſhort “ lances, 
determined to revenge the injury they had ſuffered. Louis 
VAEZz DE ToRREs, with two other Spaniards, and the en- 
ſign Sojo, with great danger, had got aſhore up to their 


* necks in water. Our people obſerving the behaviour of the 


Indians, fired their muſquets and ſtopped their career, laying 


ſome of them dead amongſt the rocks on the ſhore, and putting 


the reſt to flight to ſave themſelves, with more ſpeed than 
their deſire of reven ge had n. them. Leaving the ſhore, 


| # Terciadas. 


« whither, 


ce 
cc 
66 
cc 


CC 


cc 
ce 
EE 
cc 


66 


cc 


cc 
cc 
cC 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
a6 
cc 
66 
66 
66 


cc 


«c 
«c 


rc 


cc 


M o Äͤ(pwĩ 9 

whither, with great danger, went 12 or 15 men, ſome wet- 
ting their muſquets, and others dropping them in the water, 
their owners having much ado to ſave their own lives; fo 
great was the ſurf which was beaten againſt the ſhoals and 
rocks, by the ſtrong winds which then blew. 

« The ſoldiers being got aſhore, drew up in a little breaſt- 
work which was on the beach, whilſt the boats went for the 
people who remained in the zabra; they, with great hazard, 
got aſhore, all being very deſirous to try their hands with the 
enemy, throwing aſide all fear, which the imminent peril they 
were expoſed to, might have produced, judging it cowardice 
to remain behind. They carried their muſquets and powder- 
horns very high, that they might not be wet ; and having 
joined their companions aſhore, marched in regular order to- 
wards the town or village, where they found 10 or 12 Indi- 


© ans, all old men, moſt of whom had reſinous ſticks, which 


they burnt as links, a.ſign amongſt them of peace and friend- 
ſhip, the others having fled into the wood, where were their 
children and wives near a large lagune, which the ſea made 
with the flood-tide *. Thither our people ſaw an Indian walk- 


ing as faſt as he could, carrying on his ſhoulders another 


wounded, who, from the deſire he had to ſave him, and the 
danger he expoſed himſelf to on that account, ought, with- 


out doubt to have been his brother, father, or friend, which, 


amongſt ſuch, are generally the end of affection f. 
« Then coming up to the Indians of the town, who waited 
for them, they found them with their lighted links in their 


hands, and ſome of thera with green boughs, which they 


gave to our people, humbling themſelves with great marks 


of fear; particularly an old Indian was ſitting, trembling at 


* Que el mar hace, quando baña la tierra. 


+ Que entre los que lo fon, ſuele de ordinaro aver finecas de amor. 


"= ce the 


121 
1606. 


ee e e e 
— — 4 7 2 


7 
. 9 
[ 
7 
\ 
4 \ 
7 
” 1 
= I 
8 
U 
#9 
Fs) 
WT _ 
$1 
'* | 
1 g 
144 
Ly J 
#7: 
*2 #4 
4 
n 
- + y 
a. 
3 
i. 
* 
4 
* 
4 
1 

7 

-, 
5 
Le 

FY 
WW} 
it 

4'Y 

we. 

2, 
4 
| 
5 
4 
* 

3 
: 
it 
4 
— 

F "I 


| 
1 
5 


—— — — 
ä - 


I22 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ or QUIROS' 


the fight of them. Amongſt the others came one Indian, 
handſome, and of large ſtature, though old; of him our 
people, by ſigns, begged water, ſhewing him a piece of taf- 
fety : he ſeemed much pleaſed, and went to conduct 14 or 15 


* Spaniards, who, with Louis VAE DE Torts, followed 


him, the ſquadron continuing drawn up in the ſame place, 
and arriving near the lagune, having paſſed by the town, they 
found a large brook, but of brackiſh water, which did not a 
little chagrin all of them, on account of their thirſt, Hi- 
ther came an Indian, with a coconut-ſhell of freſh water, 
and on being aſked whence' it was brought, replied, from 
the other fide of the lagune. Immediately Louis Varz DE 
Tokkxs ſent ſeven ſoldiers with him to know where it was; 
theſe men, the Indians ſhewing them the way, went to their 
chacaras, or gardens, where all the Indians had retired, who, 


ſeeing our people, came out to make peace, and alſo ſome 


women, of a good diſpoſition and beauty, and ſome of them are 
ſo in the laſt extreme *; and although a barbarous people, 
born and bred in theſe remote parts, expoſed to the rigour of 
the ſun, of the air, and cold (reaſon enough to be burnt up 
and black), they were exceſſively + white, principally the 
women, who, were they cloathed, would, without doubt,. 
excel our Spaniſh ladies, accompanying their gracefulneſs and 


beauty with modeſty and baſhfulneſs. They looked with 


downcaſt eyes, and very ſeldom : approaching to embrace 
our people with demonſtration of love and peace, according. 
to their cuſtom. They go covered from the waiſte down- 
wards with white mats of palm, fine, and well worked, car- 
rying others in the manner of mantles, made of the ſame 


* Y algunas la tenian con ſobrado extremo, 
+ Demaſiadamente, 5 


« palm, 


— 


0 f 4A. 6 


« palm, with which they cover their ſhoulders. Our people 


66 


cc 


Cc 


CC 


cc 


cc 
cc 
ce 
cc 
c 
66 
cc 
46 
vc 
c 
er 
c c 
ce 
cc 
ce 
ce 


«c 


- 66 


cc 
"Bs 
cc 
cc 


cc 


were much pleaſed to find the peace concluded. 

« The ſoldiers fent by the captain in queſt of water, came 
to one of the chacaras, where, guided by the Indian, they 
found a ſmall brook of freſh water, and although it formed a 
pool *, it was ſo ſmall, that it was impoſſible to water the 
ſhips with it. They returned to inform Louis Varz DE 
ToRREs of what they had ſeen, as well of the water as 
of the people, who ſent Juan GERoniMo to ſpeak to thoſe 


cloſe to the ſhore, that from thence they might acquaint the 


ſhips. The lad carried his naked ſword, without other de- 
fence or arms. As he paſſed by the houſes of the Indians, 
ten or twelve came out to him with miſſile darts, with ſharp 
burnt points, and large black clubs and macanas, and at- 
tacked him, endeavouring to kill him. An arrogant and 


angry ſavage advanced with a ſmall lance in his hand, 


threatening with it, and watching a time to employ it to 


purpoſe. But the Spaniard, throwing aſide all fear, waited 
for him with his ſword, though he had not an opportunity to 
wound him; for at this time, the other Indians came on from 


the crowd, pouring heaps + upon him, from which he could 
ſcarce defend himſelf, and not without being wounded in the 
hand and in the face. At this noiſe our people repaired thi- 
ther, as well the 15 Spaniards who had gone to the lake, as 
thoſe who remained in the ſquadron; clofing with the In- 
dians, ſome with ſwords and targets, others with muſquets, 
in the aſſault, they killed four or five ſavages, and wounded 
ſome others. Of thoſe who were killed, ſuch was the cou- 
rage and ſpirit of one, that it much diſgraced our people; for 
naked and without arms, except a club in his hand, he de- 


* Aunque manantial. + Llegaron de tropel los otros Indios tirando le golpes. 


R 2 e fended 


123 
1606. 


124 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ Dr QUIROS' 


fended himſelf againſt more than twenty ſoldiers, well armed, 
acting offenſively, as if he had equal arms, and defending 
himſelf a very long time, and making, as it were, a fort 
of his club, did not let one of his enemies come near him; 


who, enraged at the ſavage, ceaſed not to attack him with 


their ſwords, well covered by their targets. To which the va- 
liant ſavage gave furious blows ; and although they were ſnel- 
tered under them, he did not fail to annoy them. But as the 
ſoldiers were many, and the Indian alone, he funk with fa- 
tigue, though not with fear, and they advanced upon him ſo 
much, that ſome of our people could give him many wounds: 
yet not for this did the Indian give over, inflamed with rage 
to attack our people, till fatigued, and ſpent with loſs of 
blood, he dropped dead, biting the earth in horrid agonies, 


leaving all our people full of admiration to behold his valour, 


and of regret to have taken that life which he had ſo well de- 
fended againſt ſuch numbers. 


Leaving this place, they all together marched i in order from 


hence to the chacaras, in queſt of food and people, but they 
were diſappointed, for all the Indians had fled, and of the 


hindmoſt, who were getting away as faſt as they could, were 


two old people, appearing to be man and wife; who being 


* ſeen by our people, they purſued them in hopes of overtaking 


them. The old man ſeeing it was impoſſible to eſcape thoſe 
who purſued, and looking on it certain, from what had paſſed, 


that they ſhould loſe their lives, was ſolicitous, that in caſe he 


was to die, his companion ſhould eſcape, and perſuaded her 
to fly immediately into a little wood, which was hard by, 
telling her that it was more juſt for him to wait the ſeverity 
of our people. The Indian obeyed at her huſband's requeſt, 
and left him alone till our people came up, when they 
ſeized him, and carried him to the armada, though, on ac- 

5 count 


cc 


66 


— 


O Y';4 am 


count of his great age they thought he would be uſeleſs for 


their purpoſe, which was to carry him away, that they might 


get ſome information of the country. They were about 
leaving him, when the old woman who had run away, came 


out to them, ſaying ſhe: would rather die with him than live 


alone, which alſo raiſed great aſtoniſhment in our people. 


They left them together, and returned to the boats : the 
two old people: went to the town happy, and grateful for 


their deliverance. 8 
* The ſoldiers then ſet about e aboard; but they were 


never in greater danger, as well on account of the violence 


of the ſea and wind, which then blew on ſhore, as it was 
increaſing “. The almiranta's boat overſet, whoſe people 


were ſaved by ſwimming ; ſome got upon the boat's keel, but 
it ſtood them in little ſtead, as they were beat off by the vio- 


' lence of the ſea, that they were obliged to betake themſelves 


to the water again. Providentially they turned the boat 


again, though half full of water, which they preſently bailed 


out, and embarking again, proceeded to. the ſhips,. leaving 


* aſhore many palm-mats, coconuts, and other refreſhments, 
which they had brought from the houſes, for even their 


arms they could not embark without. being wet, and their 
owners were up to the head, for in. embarking they were up 


to their breaſts in the water, and in the boats the waves 
they ſhipped wet every other part, 


«© They bore away for the ſhips very weary and vexed, and 
much wounded in. the feet, with the ſharp points of the ſea- 


eggs which lay on the ſhore, between the water and the 


rocks; theſe wounds took many days to cure. 


* Como por venir creciente. 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ vp: QUIROS' 
They were joyfully received aboard, the more as not one 
had loſt his life in the fray aſhore, nor in the danger 18 | 
were expoſed to coming off. 
As there was no water, nor harbour here, they determined 
to leave the iſland, which they named IsLA DE LA GENTE 
H RMOSA (ISLAND oF HANDSOME PEOPLE). It lies N. 
and S. and is 6 leagues in circuit. | 
„Having left this iſland, they ſtood on their courſe for 
STA. CRUZ (an iſland diſcovered in a former voyage, which 
the captain made, which was fertile, had plenty of refreſh- | 
ments, and where they found a very good reception, though, 
on account of ſome diſorders of the Spaniards, ſome were 5 
killed on both ſides) ; and 1 in its latitude, they ſailed 
weſt in queſt of it. 
« March 22d, Good Friday, had a great eclipſe of the moon, 
the whole being eclipſed for three hours, till, by little and 
little, the ht was reſtored . 
« Having conſtantly kept this courſe with the ſame wind, 

till the 7th April, leaving land all theſe days on both fides, 
by the ſigns they ſaw of birds and pumice-ſtones ; and at 
laſt this day, at three P. M. from the capitana, they diſcovered 
land bearing W. N. W. high and black like a vulcano. : 
« They ſtood for it till night ſet in; and then, for fear of 
ſhoals, kept turning to windward till day-break, when they 
ſtood for it, and in midway, about two leagues from the 
land, they fell upon a bank, in which they had from 12 to 
15 fathom ; they were two hours in paſſing over it, and then 
loſt ſoundings. They got in ſhore; but being late, they 

« were obliged to lay-to till next day, gth April, when the 
zabra went a-head, and captain Lovis VAEEZ DE ToRREs, 


= 3 * ? _ e : 8 Gs = 
* 4 
2 ar — = —— — — — —U— —— —— — — - 
— ——— — — 


Ferguſon's Tables place this on the 24th March. | 
1 | | c with 


S + r 


3 


7 X 
* 4 22 


O T7. 4 a2 
with the boats, in which went z0 men; they ſtood to the 


8. W. for the middle of ſome other ſmall iſlands, which make 


a channel, at adiſtance they appeared to be one, diſcovering 
many houſes amongſt the woods, and ſome on the ſhore. 

« The armada finding a ſecure port, cloſe to the ſmall iſlands, 
which were ſeparated from the large one to the eaſt, they an- 
chored in 25 fathom. The boats went to the neareſt ſhore, 
from whence they brought ſome water, plantans, coconuts 
and roots, palmitos and ſugar-canes, with which they re- 
turned aboard, giving an account of what they had ſeen, and 
ſhewing what they had got. Herein they paſſed the day, 
till next morning, at ſunriſe, when under convoy of the 


zabra, the boats went with 50 or 60 people, with a view 


to conclude the peace ſo much deſired. At no great diſtance. 
from the ſhips, they diſcovered a ſmall iſlot, fituated within 


the reefs, a full fathom above water, made by hand of coral 


rock *, wherein were about 70 houſes, covered with palms, 
and hung with mats on the inſide. This, as they there un- 
derſtood, ſerved on occaſion as a fort, whither they retired, 
whenever any hoſtile Indians came from the adjoining coun- 
tries to make war there, They doing the like in large and 
ſtrong veſſels, wherein, with great ſafety, they can put out 
to ſea. „ 

« Arriving at the ſurf, they paſſed through it, where they 
had ſcarce a fathom water, and failing toward the fort to 
ſeek for people in it, they ſaw little gondolas, paſſing over 
to the other ſandy ſhores of the iſland, which was a- breaſt, 
at a little diſtance ; and leſt they ſhould offer to attack them, 
they prepared their muſquets, to be ready if occaſion re- 
quired, But the Indians, who did not leſs defire the peace 


* Vivas penas. 


4c than 


127 


1 606. 


— ES 
—— — 


2 * pa pr 5 8 2 — A * r 222 — — 2 — = 
2 . ... I 8 8 NE —— — 
— — 2 — 53s. l g - 2 — — — 4 
— 8 — 4 a = 2 
— > 5. * TY, b i 8 7 e — * — — DS * — 


9 PE 


> IS 
2280 20> rio mon on nd Bree eG 


PODS" ESTES. 
2 


128 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ ve QUIROS' 
than our people, came out with great joy, fome in their pi- 
raguas, and ſome in the water up to their breaſts, to receive 


us, accompanying their valiant captain, who carried his bow 
for a ſtaff, ſaluting them, and then guiding them to the fort. 


But our people conſidering ſo many robuſt Indians coming 


aboard, might fink the boat, they made ſigns for them to go 
away, which they did immediately; ſome returning to the 
fort, and others to the iſlands, leaving the ſea clear, where- 
fore they kept their arms ready till they got to the landing- 


place at the town, where one of the capitana's boats arrived 


firſt. The people in it landed, and there waited for thoſe of 
the almiranta, who were not long behind them. Being all 
together in a body, about 50 in number, for the reſt had 
been left in the zabra and boats to take care of them. Form- 
ing a ſquadron, they began to enter the town, looking care- 
fully on all ſides, being apprehenſive of an ambuſcade. But | 
they did not find a fingle perſon in it, for the Indians who had 
entered into it, as ſoon as they ſaw our people land, threw 
themſelves into the water on the other fide, without being 
perceived by our people. They returned preſently to the 
beach, and making a fignal with a handkerchief at the oppo- 
ſite ſhore, that they ſhould come in peace, the Indians, 
who waited there in hopes of ſuch an invitation, were ſatisfied 


to ſee it; ſome threw themſelves into the water, and others, 


in their boats, came to our people. Their captain ſhewed 
himſelf before the reſt with marks of affection and joy: he 
brought in his right hand a green palm cabbage, which he 
gave to Lovis VAZ after embracing, doing the ſame' to 
many others of the foremoſt; all were well pleaſed to ſee 


how eaſily they had purchaſed the peace, and in a place where 


were wood and water, ſo much deſired, to enable us to con- 
tinue our voyage. At this time arrived two old Indians, 
2 leaving 


cc 


+ 


cc 


* 


F O MY 
leaving their arms on the ſhore, and hand in hand came to 
our people, ſaluting them with great humility: they un- 
derſtood by ſigns, that it was the father or uncle of TAL1- 
QUEN (who was captain). 


« The Indians continued ſome in a very ſmall ſquare at the 
entrance of the fort, and others on high rocks *, admiring and 


gazing at our arms and things; our people not leſs aſtoniſhed 


to ſee their agility and ſtrength of limbs; and as all was 
quiet, and the captain having ſent his Indians to the other 
ſide, remained with his little ſon and two other Indians, to 


guard the fort. We took the opportunity to reſt a little after 
our fatigue, placing two guards for the greater ſecurity, one 


on the ſea-ſhore, and another in a ſquare, which was in the 
middle of the fort, where the proper guards being fixed, 


they diſarmed themſelves, fitting and lying down in the 


grove, recreating themſelves with ſome fruit brought them. 
Fhe Indians came with their embarkations, to carry aboard 
the ſhips the wood and water they were in want of. 

They made an altar in a houſe within the fort, where 


they ſaid maſs, and all the people in the armada took the 


communion, for it was then the Eaſter holidays. 

« At the end of the ſeven days, which they had continued in 
the fort, not having any thing more to do in the iſland, they 
determined to fail. But thinking that it was requiſite for their 
future voyage, to carry away ſome of the Indians, who might 


ſerve as guides and interpreters, they ſeized four, einbark- 
ing them in the boats, which being known to their chief, he, 


with great grief and concern, came to the ſhore, begging that 


he might embark in one boat, and the Indians in the other. 


They left the fort, and in a ſhort time the boat, in which 


Pena fabidas. 


8 | «© was 


129 
1606. 


* 


„ 
- 


1606, 


cc 


«cc 


«c 


=; 


6c 


«cc 


66 


left it ſtanding to the ſouth. 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ pr QUIROS' 


was the Indian chief, got to the capitana, a ſon of his going 
along with him, who had ſet out after him from the fort, 
in a gondollila ; and after having talked to the people, and 


being diſpatched by the captain, ſeeing he was denied his 


people, he was obliged to return to the ſhore with his ſon, 


At this time the other boat arrived with the four Indians, 


who, as ſoon as they ſaw their lord, they began to call him 
with lamentable bewailings. He then, deſirous to free them 
at the riſque of his life, returned in his embarkation towards 
them. But in the capitana it being ſeen what hindrance this 
might occaſion, they diſcharged a gun without a ball ; at the 
noiſe whereof, the daring Indian, making figns with his hand 
to his people as if he deſpaired of being able to obtain their 
liberty, returned towards the iſland, and the Spaniards 
looſing the foreſail, ſtood out to ſea, though with difficulty, as 
the wind was not favourable, They got off ſhore that night 
about four leagues, and next day!, about day-break, one of 
the four Indians threw himſelf overboard, obliging them to- 
be very watchful of him that remained in the capitana (for 
the almiranta carried the others). 

« Thus they failed till the 21ſt April, when, pretty late, 
they made the land to the S. E. They ſtood for it, but it being 
late, they ſtood off and on till next day T. When coaſting 


along it on the north ſide, they ſaw a long ſandy beach, and 
ſome people on it; and in the green part of the wood, 


which was oppofite, many palms and plantations; but as there 
did not appear to be any port ſheltered from the winds, they 
It is in full 12 deg..S. [and 1s 
named TucoPia.] Being got to ſea about a league, the In- 
dian thinking this a favourable ee he leaped into 


* April 16. 


+ April 22. 


« the 


2 3 W 
4 = E * ? 1 
r LA a CT 1 * 4 9 * 
FILL IEG OS r/o Aer ep fb ns OTE 
FD IN RAT WATER I 1 oak 
. 


windward of it. 


FTF O X5: TT 
the water, expecting ſoon to reach the more, as they were to 
It was thought neceſſary to adviſe the almi- 
ranta of what had happened, that care might be taken of 
thoſe aboard, but notwithſtanding one of them did the fame. 
The other they found did not, becauſe he was a ſlave to the 
others, and found our treatment was better than that of the 


Indians of TauMaco, who kept him priſoner. 
«© LLovis VAEZ DE ToRREs, to ſee the natives, and have 


ſome intercourſe with them, went nearer in ſhore ; taking a 


lead and line he went in his gondollila, and without going a- 
ſhore, talked with the Indians, who gave him a piece of 
cloth, woven of the palm, and ſome coconuts, and made alſo 
ſigns of large countries, ſaying that the inhabitants were 
whiter than thoſe we had left. He returned to the ſhips, 


' which not wanting wood nor water, made fail to the ſouthward ; 


failing on till the 25th April, although with ſome contrary 
and variable winds, when they ſaw, at day-break, land a- 
head, high and large. They failed to it, calling it Na. Sena. 
DE LA Luz; they found it was in 14 2 deg. S. lat. They ſaw 
another to the weſtward, and another larger to the ſouthward, 
and to the fouth eaſtward another ſtill larger, which ap- 
peared without end, full of great mountains ; ſeeing this 
other to the weſtward, and another very high and large 
over the firſt, whither they were direcking their courſe. 


They reached it about four in the evening, the zabra going 


a- head, which ſome Indians invited to come, ſhewing palms *. 

They ſaw in it chacaras, or gardens, where they have their 
plantations; it was very luxuriant and green, ſome large 
brooks of water falling into the ſea by ſome gaps. 


* Llamaron con palmas. 


9 


132 

1606. 
cc 
cc 
66 
«c 
46 
cc 
cc 
tc 
«c 
cc 
cc 
cc 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ DRY QUIROS' 

« This evening, on aconſultation which of the lands in fight they 
ſhould chuſe, it was agreed to ſtand for that which lay to the 
weſt of NA. Sen*. DELA Luz ; and thus next day they were 
about going on the ſouthi fide, but before they reached it, they 
ſaw another larger and higher to the ſouth eaſtward. At length 


they reached that they had determined on Wedneſday, 27th 


April. On the tops of the high mountains they perceived 
ſmoaks (ſigns amongſt them of joy and peace), which was 
confirmed by ſome Indians coming in their piraguas to the 
ſhips without arms, their only motive being to induce them 
to go to their country. This being perceived by the captain, 
he ordered the capitana's boat, with 20 ſoldiers and their offi- 


cer, to ſee if they could find a harbour and the other things, 


which at a diſtance the country promiſed. 


The ſoldiers, armed with targets and muſquets, went in 


the boats, and got to the ſhore in a ſhort time; where they 
faw, between the rocks and valleys, beautiful to the fight, 
falling headlong into the ſea, copious and large rivers, whoſe 
fources appeared to be in the tops of the mountains. They 
alſo ſaw on the ſhore ſome hogs, like thoſe of SPAIN; and 


„Indians, without number, of three different colours; a cer- 


tain ſign of the greatneſs and extent of the iſland, and of its 


being very near the main land. Some were mulattoes *, others 
quite black, and the others extremely + white, g 
* beards and red hair. 


«6 
40 


«Cc 


60 


It cauſed no ſmall aſtoniſhment in our people to ſee an In- 
dian, whereof there were many on the ſhore, calling our 
people with ſigns of peace: he had come down in a great 
hurry from the lower part of a mountain to the ſea ſhore, and 
boldly * the water, without fear * our people, he 


* Pardos.” + Grando.extremo.. | 


e ſwam 


( 
6 
ce 
” 
cc 
66 
6c 
6c 
ce 


cc 


- CE 


cc 


66 


o Y & 0 


ſwam off to the boat, where he was taken up and made a pri- 


* ſoner, from an apprehenſion that he might intend ſome milſ- 


chief, as he appeared ſo ſpirited and ſtrong, and made figns * 
with his face and arms. He brought on his arms ſome 
bracelets of wild hogs tuſks. His perſon indicated him to be 
a cazique, or chief in his country, as they afterwards found. 
At the ſame time ſome piraguas came to the zabra, which 


was near ſhore, from whence, with careſſes and coaxing, 


they decoyed one of the Indians, which came in them, in- 


* tending to carry him to the captain, who was very ſolicitous 
to ſee them, that he might make them preſents and cloath 
them; ſince by theſe means it was eaſy to conclude a peace 


with them, a thing of ſuch importance to their defign. 


The Indian being aboard the zabra, they fixed a chain up- 


on his feet, for fear he ſhould throw himſelf into the water, 
proceeding with him towards the ſhips, which were more 
than three leagues from the ſhore. The Indian ſeeing him- 
ſelf thus made a priſoner, blamed his raſh courage, and con- 


_ cluding that his impriſonment would be the prelude to his 


death, he ſeized a favourable opportunity, and broke the 


chain with his hands, leaving on his foot the padlock, with. 


ſome of the links, and without any one's endeavouring to 
prevent him, he threw himſelf into the ſea, and ſwam at a 
great rate towards his country. Our people ſeeing it would 


be labour loſt to go in purſuit of him, the night being cloſe 


and dark, they continued their route directly for. the capi- 


tana, to whom they gave intimation has what had hap- 


pened. 
*: At this time the boat which vowels the Indian arrived, 


- having rowed aboard, and getting the Indian into the ſhip, 


Ademanès. 


« the 


133 
1606. 


134 
: 1606. 


C 
cc 
60 
«c 
tc 
cc 
cc 
4e 
(0 
40 
(c 
«c 


cc 


cc 


cc 


cc 


cc 


- Bo 


cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 
«kk 


4 


cc 


cc 


cc 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ Dr QUIROS”' 


the captain came out to ſpeak to him, to endeavour to take 
away the fear he had of being a priſoner ; but on account of 
what the other had done, they ordered to put him in the 
ſtocks, leſt he ſhould do the ſame, ſecuring him that he 
might be cloathed, and returned next day to his people. They 
made fail, ſtanding along ſhore, though very ſlowly, for the 
winds were ſcant: it being now about ten at night, they who 
had the watch on the forecaſtle, called out that they heard 

voices, immediately bearing away for where they heard them, 
to know what-it was; as ſoon as they were got near, they knew 
it to be the Indian who had broke the chain, who becoming 
miſerably tired and overcome, ſeeing it was impoſſible to 
reach the ſhore, thought it better to deliver himſelf up into 
the hands of his enemies, than die in the water; and thus 
crying out, he begged in his language for help, which was 
given him, taking him in, and taking off the padlock and bit 
of chain which he had on his foot, ſhewing him, for his fur- 
ther comfort, the other Indian, leaving them together for 
the night, and giving them ſomething to eat. Day being 
come, the captain had them cloathed in coloured taffaty, 
whereof he brought many garments, to truck for proviſions 
and ſuch like purpoſes : they clipped their beards and hair, 
the captain embracing them, whereat they were well pleaſed 
and undeceived. They were returned in the boat to the ſhore : 
and one of them, who was lord and cazique, on going a- 
ſhore, in return for the good uſage he had received, gave or- 
ders to bring them hogs, plantans, and fruit, very different 
in taſte and figure from thoſe in the Indies; they are ſomething 
like figs in ſhape, very red, and of a ſweet ſcent, and others 
of different forms; and alſo potatoes and yams, which ſerve 


them for food x. 


* Comida, 
cc They 


7; 
= 
c 
cc 
(c 
c 
6c 
6c 
cc 
6c 
cc 
cc 
40 
«c 
cc 


66 


60 


«ce 


60 


7 


cc 


«ce 


«c 


cc 


cc 


, cc 
ce 


(60 


V 0 S E. 


« They were much ebe at his departure, and going 
along ſhore in the boat, cloſe to the beach, they paſſed in 
fight of many towns, very full of people *, the inhabitants 
were darker coloured + than the others, to appearance a vile 
people and uncivilized, from what they afterwards found. 
The called the boats with figns of peace, and ſending their 
women to the thickeſt part of the wood, let fly, with great 
fury, a volley of poiſoned arrows 4. Our people perceiving 
their treachery, got a little off, and gave them, with their 
accuſtomed dexterity, a diſcharge of muſquetry, killing ſome, 
and wounding others (reward well deſerved by their maleyo- 
lence). One of our people, named Francis Macnapo, 
was wounded in the face, either by his own careleſsneſs, or 
becauſe the target- men, who were in front, did not cover 
him well; though the wound was not at all dangerous, as 
well becauſe it ſtruck the cheek bone, as becauſe the arrow. 
was almoſt ſpent. | 

«« Seeing then the night was far advanced, they returned to- 
wards the armada, to inform them of what had happened. 


As they were deſirous to ſee the large countries which ap- 


peared to the 8. W. they ſtood for it, and reached it 3oth 
April, about 3 P. M. and ſeeing an open port F like a bay, 


the zabra was ſent with one of the boats to diſcover it: they 


did ſo, and ſaw all over the country many ſmoaks, as well on 
the tops, as fides of the hills : but becauſe it was late when 


they got in to diſcover it, and becauſe the capitana fired a 


gun, they returned ; waiting till next day, when ſcarce did 
it begin to dawn; before they went a ſecond time, ſounding. 
the bay in every part, the armada waiting at the entrance; 
and about 3 P. M. they came to give an account of having 


* De gran gentio. + Mas pardos. 


4 Flechas armadas con yerva. $ Puerto abierto. 


8 T1 | . « ſeen. 


735 


L "I „ F a "JED - 4 _ - a6 „ — 
8 * - 8 . - Wa To 2 ERA AL INES 
4 
2 * 2 9 15 — 2 I 1 8 . - It a — IIS 
* ” K D ms > , 


136 
1606. 


cc 


66 


66 


cc 


cc 


cc 


cc 


cc 


cc 


66 


cc 


cc 


* Grandes cuerpos. 
t Para meterlos dentro. 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ vs QUIROS' 


ſeen many people on the ſhore, of large fize *; and that the 
bay was very wide, and ſheltered from all winds, and of a 
good harbour, with ſoundings from 30 to 8 fathoms, very 
near the ſhore, and that which was ſeen from without, run- | 
ning to the S. and 8. W. had no end, but appeared lands very 
great and double. They alſo brought an account that ſome 
piraguas had come to them with ſigns of peace (though they 
afterwards had reaſon to ſee it was feigned), and that they 
gave them ſome feathers like martinets. The captain and 
pilot hearing the deſcription of this port, and that to leeward 
of it | there was the appearance of another large bay, they 
ordered to bear away, and thus ſtood for it with no ſmall joy 
to all perſons, to have ſeen the accompliſhment of their de- 
ſires; having now, within reach the moſt plentiful and 
powerful country diſcovered by Spaniards. The almiranta 
entered firſt ; the others, with the zabra, remaining near 
the mouth, for it was then night, and they had not know- 
ledge-of the entrance till next day, which being the day. of 
ST. PHiL1e and ST. JaMEs, they gave the ſame name to the 
bay. Day being come, and having & pleaſant freſh land 
breeze, they entered therewith in great ſafety. The boat 
then was ſent to ſeek a convenient port ; and returned with 
an account that they had found one with ſoundings from 40 


to 6 fathom, all ſand and clear, between two rivers. They 


were overjoyed at this news, and going up the bay, they ſaw. 
on the one fide of it, from many veſſels, the people calling 


to be taken aboard 4. But they, without doing them any 


miſchief, proceeded on, working to windward, to fetch the 
anchoring place; but as it was now late, they deferred it till 
next day, the 3d May, upon which they anchored, giving 
+ Mas a ſotavento por la e 


( the 


6 


O Y & © a, 


«© the port the name of Van A Cruz, and to the country that 


of AUSTRAL DEL ESPIRITU SANTO. 

The ſaid port is between two rivers, one whereof they 
named JoRDAN, the other SALvaDoR, which give no 
ſmall beauty to all their ſhores, for they are full of odori- 
ferous flowers and plants. The ſtrands of this bay are broad, 
long, and clear; the ſea is here ſtill and pleaſant, for although 
the winds blow ſtrong within the bay, the water is ſcarce 
moved. There is in all parts in front of the fea, pleaſant and 
agreeable groves, extending to the ſides of many mountains, 
which were in fight; and alſo from the top of one, which 
our people mounted, were perceived at a diſtance extremely 
fertile vallies, plain and beautiful; and various rivers wind- 
ing amongſt the green mountains. The whole is a country 
which, without doubt, has the advantage over. thoſe of 
AMERICA, and the beſt of the EuRoPEAN will be well if it 


1s equal. It is extremely plenteous of various and delicious 
fruits, potatoes, yams, papas, plantans, which the country 
produces in exceſſive abundance, ſince, without the help of 


plough, or fickle, or other artifice, it yields to its inhabi- 


tants at all times excellent fruit. There are alſo in the vallies, 


and hills, oranges and limes. They faw almonds larger than 
thoſe in SPAIN, Ovos, and many other fruits unknown, but 


delicious to the taſte ; there is ſweet baſil, nutmegs, ebony, 


fowls, and hogs. And according to the figns made in the 


** other iſlands they had left, alſo cattle, birds, of many kinds, 
and charming notes; they ſaw honey-bees, doves, par- 


tridges and parrots: the houſes wherein the Indians live are 


thatched and low, and they of a black complexion. There 


arc earthquakes ; fign of a main land. 


T » « Next 


137 


1606. 


| 


** n = "0 
© 2 os. pgs 
—— ͤ—E—ũ——— —— — — 


e => 4 
UN — — — —— 


1606. 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ ve QUIROS' 


Next day, when the boats got to the ſhore, the Indians, and 
their king with them, came out to the ſtrand, extremely con- 
cerned at our arrival, endeavouring with ſome preſents of fruit, 
which they gave, to procure our return; but our people leaping 
aſhore, endeavoured to make peace with them, although the 
Indian king, making a line on the ground with the point of a 


bow, ſaid, that none muſt paſs it. But Louis VAEZ, think- 


this would appear cowardly, paſſed the line: ſcarce had he done 
ſo when the barbarians, in a great hurry, let fly ſome arrows ; 
and in return for this conduct, and ill intention, our people 
killed ſome of them, and the king among the reſt, the others 
flying to the mountains. 

« Whilſt the ſhips continued here at anchor, they made ſome 
expeditions inland, in queſt of proviſions, which began to grow 
ſcant, and alſo to treat with the Indians about a peace; but 
they were ſo ill-inclined, that the Spaniards could never come 
to an agreement with them; but rather, laying ambuſcades, 
they would watch them many times in the way, though 
they never could do any harm, as the trees and leaves of 
the wood warded off the arrows that they ſhot, at the 
ſame time that the branches give little interruption to balls. 
In this manner they paſſed their time, &c. * 

« At length, when they were preparing to depart, : 25 ſoldi- 
ers went up by the fide of a mountain, in queſt of ſome freſh 


proviſions ; leaving ſome men on guard at the ſhore, and from 
the top they diſcovered a beautiful valley, to which they went 
down, and not finding a town, or fign of people, entered by 
it, and going up another mountain, which was two leagues 
- diſtant from the ſhore, they heard the noiſe of drums; and ſoli- 

citous of * the Indians, they went with the utmoſt ſilence, 5 


8 Giving an account of ſome feſtivals they kept, on } poſſeſſion of theſe 


„ in the name of Philip III. 


( till 


till they got ſo near that they could attack them. The town 


66 


46 


cs 


«c 


6s 


cc 


cc 


«6 


ec 


«c 


cc 


66 


6c 


Eh Ya em 


paſſed the day without apprehenſion, in dancing and jollity ; 


but preſently, when they found themſelves attacked, aban- 


doning the houſes, they retreated up the mountains, leaving 
their wives and children ; though, from what they after- 
wards did, it may be believed, their flight was owing to 
their being attacked by ſurprize, and without arms. Our 
people ſeeing themſelves maſter of the town, took 14 hogs 
from only one houſe which they entered ; wherewith, and 
three boys which they found in it, they returned back, dread- 
ing the return of. the offended Indians, as well becauſe 


they were ſo far from aſſiſtance, as becauſe they were be- 


coming weary. 


Already were they coming acroſs the valley, when at the 
ſound of drums, made of hollow wood, and loud ſhouts, 


which ſtruck the moſt daring breaſt with dread, they attacked 


our people; who, ſeeing the danger they were in, with all 
expedition paſſed down the fide of the hill, croſſing the val- 
ley, till getting up to the top, where they halted, on account 


of their wearineſs, and the cargo they brought, waiting 
courageouſly the determination of the Indians, who being 


poſted near them, let fly a thick ſhower of arrows, with 


loud ſhouts and noiſe ; but providentially none of our people 
were hurt. The attacked returned it with a volley of balls, 
whereon they not only retreated, but many fled wounded * ; 


returning, however, to purſue our people down the hill Fa 


the ftrand, obliging them frequently to repeat their fire to 


make them retreat and keep back : and although this was to. 


effect, it did not make them deſiſt, but made them climb 
up the ſteep precipices, where they knew the paths led 


* Conque no ſolo los retiraron ; pero huieron muchos heridos. 


* 2 v9 down, 


139 
1606. 


14 PEDRO FERNANDEZ »z: QUIROS' 


1606. down, ſrom whence they rolled down great ſtones, wound- 
ing JUAN Ocuoa DR BIL BOA in one hand and one arm. 
* In this manner our few, but valiant Spaniards, reached the 
ſea ſhore, without any one having been induced by the 
danger to forego his prize. But in the mean while that 
they were deſcending the hill, the capitana diſcharged two 
pieces, which had no ſmall effect in diſmaying the Indians. 
But rage and valour compelled them to a contempt of death. 
When they got to the ſhore the Indians left off the purſuit, 
and fled, as they could not effect their purpoſe on the beach, 
* whither they had come down in the purſuit, as they found 
here not only thoſe they had purſued, but alſo thoſe who 
had remained as a guard, and others who had come aſhore to 
their aſſiſtance; all whom they found together, and were 
obliged to retire by their firing. Our people hereupon em- 
barked, chearful and well fatisfied with that _ 8 fucceſs. 
Thus they paſſed till leaving the bay. 
« The entrance of the bay lies N. and S. and the coaft on 
the eaſt fide ſtretches 12 leagues in length to the termination 
of it. The mouth is full eight leagues, and by the coaſt on 
the weſt ſide 15 leagues. 
% They failed, but were obliged to return to port, having 
ſcarce any body to furl the fails; for two nights before, the 
boats having gone on a party of pleaſure to fiſh with hook at 
ſome rocks, as the various days they continued at anchor, 
they had fiſhed with net, and catched great plenty of different 
kinds of excellent fiſh ; it happened, that amongſt ſome par- 
gos, bringing ſome which had eaten poiſonous plants, all parts 
of the fleſh became empoiſoned ; and they were reduced to 
the greateſt extremity, and in great. danger of their life, 
and all the ſoldiers expecting to die. Nothing was to be 


cc heard but lamentations and ſupplications in favour of their 
« ſouls, 


O M 4G 


ſouls, ſince there was none for their bodies. The ſhips ap- 
peared like the hoſpital of a city which had the plague, 
there was none who could ſtand on their feet ; but by God's 
aſſiſtance, which never fails thoſe who truſt in him, and la- 


bour for the honour of his name, it luckily happened that 


the force of the poiſon abated ; the Uiligence and care of 


ALons0 SANCHEZ DE ARANDA, phyſician to the armada, 
| was of no ſmall aſſiſtance on this occaſion ; for although he 


was touched with the malady, he had the leaſt of it, for in- 
ceſſantly, day and night, he adminiſtered draughts, and being 
aſſiſted by the ſurgeon of the almiranta, DIEGO DE R1BERA,, 


all were recovered ; they returned to port, where they conti- 
nued till the 5th of June, not omitting to make ſome in- 


curſions inland, carrying the Indian boys with them, in 
hopes that they might be the inſtruments of a peace; but not 
ſucceeding, they ſet fail, deſirous of diſcovering the lands to 


windward, to found the other cities in honour of his Majeſty, 


as had been done in this bay, where they founded one named 


NEW JERUSALEM, to which were named alcades, regidores, 
royal officers, and other miniſters. of juſtice. 


They failed from this port, and immediately they met 
ſo ſtrong and contrary a wind, that conſidering its violence 
and the great ſea made them pitch forecaſtle in, they 


were obliged to uſe their endeavours to get back to port. 


The zabra and almiranta got in, anchoring in another place,, 


* farther off than where they firſt anchored, for their greater 


ſecurity. The whole ſquadron having turned to windward 


for two days in the bay with great hazard; and the third at 
night having made a better and longer board, the two an- 


chored ; but the capitana, the wind encreaſing with great 


violence, endeavoured to anchor, but could not find a place 
for this purpoſe on either fide ; they paſſed the night in great 


8 


« dan ger 


141 
1606. 


742 
1606. 


cc 


from the capitana. They made fail, but could bear very 


cc 


66 


cc 


«cc 


(16 


cc 


«Cc 


66 


66 


bee 


ce 


cc 


6 


cc 


ce 


cc 


«c 


«c 


106 


cc 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ vs QUIROS' 


danger, for it was very obſcure, and the wind on ſhore. For 
theſe, and other reaſons, they were at length obliged to 
veer, and ſtand out in queſt of the mouth of the bay, where, 
ſtriking their topmaſts, they remained the reſt of the night, 
till next day, to ſee if they could fetch the port, but it was 


Impoſſible notwithſtanding their utmoſt endeavours ; till at 


length the violence of the wind drove them from the en- 
trance, till they were a great way to leeward, where they 
paſſed three days, loſing more ground. | 

The captain ſeeing it was impoſſible to fetch the port; as 
theſe winds conſtantly prevail till April, when the weſterly winds 
ſet in, he agreed with the opinion of the pilots to purſue their 
route into 10 - deg. to ſeek the iſland of ST. Cruz, where he 
had ordered the ſhips to rendezvous, if they were ſeparated 


little, on account of the violence of the wind, till they got 


into the before-mentioned latitude, diſcovering a fail, to 


which they gave chace ; but knowing it to be an embarka- 
tion of the Indians of theſe iſlands, they left it, and being in 
10 j deg. they did not diſcover the land they expected, but 


were conſtantly going more to leeward with great concern, as 


they found they were fallen to leeward of the land, on ac- 
count of the ground _y loſt beating at the entrance of the 


bay. 


„The captain ſeeing the impoſfibility to reach it, or to re- 


Lc 


66 


cc 


64 


64 


66 


cc 


turn back, and the navigatian being long, and their proviſions 
ſcanty, he determined to take the opinions of every body, 
what could be done, to go on towards CHINA, or proceed to 
NEw-SPAIN, ſince Providence had permitted them to be 
ſeparated from their companions. All who were capable, 
gave their opinions, judging, from evident reaſons, that it 


was moſt eligible to purſue the route to NR wW-SPAINx. He 
« took 


o a 


« took theſe opinions in writing, ſigned by the perſons who 


«6 
66 


ce 


© oh 


«c 


6 


cc 


cc 


cc 


cc 


cc 


at 


66 


cc 


cc 


gave them ; and with heavy heart at their ill ſucceſs, made 


ſail for New SPAIN, a very different track from what was in 


view. 
« They met with much contrary winds and calms, and as 


well here as before, ſuffered much from the want of water. 


On the zd October they diſcovered the coaft of NEw-Se ain, 


having before ſeen many ſigns of it, as are ſeen generally by 


thoſe who go thither from CHINA. Having been from bear- 
ing away * to ſight of it 3 months, 8 days. They failed in 
ſight of it fourteen days, in great diſtreſs for proviſions and 
water, and much incommoded by calms and the heat. 

They continued along ſhore, and after a violent ſtorm they 
ſtood in ſhore for the port of NATIvI rv, which they paſſed, 
intending to CALAGUA, which is four leagues farther on, 


but returned, the wind being favourable, where they conti- 


nued refreſhing, waiting an opportunity to proceed to Aca- 
PULCo, having buried the Padre Comiſario, the day before 


ay entered the Port of NAaTiviTy.”—Here ends an, 


MA PDA's relation. 


JUAN Lovis ARIAs, in his memorial, relates ſome particu- 


lars of this voyage omitted by ToRaueMADa: he ſays, Qu1- 


66 


Ros, after having diſcovered in the voyage many ſmall iſlands 
and others of good ſize, arrived at that of TAuMAco, of 8 or 
9 leagues in circumference, in 10 deg. S. lat. about 1700 
leagues. from LIMA, which is about 80 leagues to the eaſt- 
ward of the iſland STA, Cruz; the cazique, or chief of 
TauMaco, having affirmed, in the beſt manner he could, 


that if they were in queſt of the GREAT ConTinenT, it 


was much more probably to be found by going to the ſouth, 


* Avienda eftado deſde que ſe derrotaran haſta verla 3 min. 8 deg. 
cc than 


143 
1606. 


2 2 — 3 — 3 1 * 
nb a ö —— Wu — IRS TT LI —ů— 
n a — © adi 26% WES n ** * — — 
S » „ M.A 8-4 IS Do. lis y 
ds __ $4 YR —— 
r ˙ Ie WEIrA tine ne oo ag nears. — * W * * 
+ 
* 


144 
1606. 


4 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ vs QUIROS' 


ce 


66 


cc 


than to the STA. Cruz iſland, for to the ſouth were coun- 
tries very fertile and populous, and of great depth, extend- 
ing due ſouth. | 
« Wherefore Quiros deſiſted from going to ſettle the STA. 
Cruz iſland, and ſtood to the ſouthward, a little inclining 
to the S. W. diſcovering many iſlands of good fize, others 
ſmall, very populous, and of a very agreeable proſpect, till in 
15 deg. 20 min. he diſcovered the la::d of the bay of ST. 
PnitiP and ST. James, which, on that fide they ſaw of it, 
which ſtretches from eaſt to weſt, appeared to be above 100 
leagues in diſtance: it is a country very populous; and al- 
though the natives be of brown complexions, they are very 
civilized. It is well wooded, and has ſo delightful a climate, 
that it ſeemed like a paradiſe, the air being fo wholſome, 
that in a few days all the ſick recovered. | 
« It is a country very fertile of many kinds of delicious fruits, 
and of animals and birds of various kinds ; and the bay not 
leſs abundant of fiſh of very good taſte, gf all the kinds. {Phang 
on the coaſt of SPAIN on the ocean. 

4 The Indians, inſtead of bread, eat a root of 8 er of 
a potatoe, roaſted and boiled, which the Spaniards found 
more agreeable to the ſtomach, and affording more ſuſte- 
nance than biſcuit. 


„Leaving in this bay the me and zabra, Quiros, the 
certain reaſons, which ought to be very ſtrong, though hi- 
therto they are not known to an abſolute certainty, went in 


the capitana to New-SPAin, from whence he came once 
more to this court, to renew his appheation to ſettle that 
country ; was fent back to DEED _ died at PANAMA, in 
his return to LIMA.“ | 


ME M O- 


NM E MOR I A L 


PRESENTED TO 
PHILIP II. or SPAIN, 


Publiſhed at 8B vIL ILE, and inſerted in Pu R HAS, 
Vos, IV. F. 1 - 


| | 'S 
HE Captain PRDRO FERNANDEZ DE QurRos.—I have 

informed your Majeſty, that in the ſouthern parts lies hid a 
quarter of the globe; and that the diſcovery I have made therein 
is of 23 iſlands, whoſe names are, LA ENCARNACION, ST. Joan 
 BavTisTA, SANTELMo, Los 4 CoRONADAS, ST, MIGUEL 
ARCHANGEL, LA CoxvxxsTIO DR ST. PAUto, La DEN A, 
La SaeirARTA, La FucrTiva, LA DEL PEREGRING, Na. 
SEN,. DEL SocoRRo, MonTEREY, Tuer, Sr. Marcos, 'Ex 


Veer, Las LARIMAS DEST. PEDRO, Los Pox T ALRS DE BR 


LEN, EL PILAR DE ZARAGOZA, ST. RayMunDa, and LA ISI A 
DE LAVIRGIN MARIA, and adjoining to it the three parts of the 
country, called AUsTRALIA DEL ESPIRITU SANnT0;;- in which 
land was found the bay of ST. PaiL1e and ST. Jaco, and part of 
VERA CRU, where we continued at anchor with the three ſhips 
thirty-ſix days. It is conceived that all theſe three are one large 
country, and its high double mountains, and that river JoRDAN, - 
by its greatneſs, ſeems to aſſure that it is ; as of all more at large 
is evident by an information which I made at Mgx1co, with ten 
witneſſes of thoſe who were along with me, to which I refer. 


* Parece que offeguran la de la tierra. 


U Let 


U—U— 2+ — „7 — 


146 


MEMORIAL PRESENTED TO 
Let your Majeſty give orders that it be looked at, and that a 


committee be appointed of mathematicians, pilots; and perſons. 
converſant in the ſubject *, ſince, at preſent, ſome very diſtin- 


guiſhed are in this court, and the ſubject deſerves it, and it is. 
of the utmoſt importance to your Majeſty. It is to be obſerved, 


that I would have given this information, with all thoſe who 
were returned from the voyage, if my offer for this purpoſe had: 
been accepted, and affiſtance given me, as fat as was in my 
power, if I am not called on to perform impoſlibilities,, though. 


it ſeems they are expected from me . 


I farther ſay, Sir, that in an iſland called Taumaco, which is 
reckoned 12 50 leagues diſtant from Mgx1co, we continued at 
anchor ten days; and that the Lord of that iſland, whoſe name 
is TAMA, a ſenfible. man, well made, of a good preſence, and in 
complexion. ſomewhat brown , with beautiful eyes, ſharp noſe, 
beard and hair long and.curled, and in his manner grave, aſſiſted 
us with his people, and embarkations, to get wood and water, 


of which we were then in great want. 


This perſon came an board the ſhip to ſee me, and in 11 ex- 


amined him in the following manner: 


Firſt, I ſhewed him his iſland and the ſea, and our ſhips. and 


people, and pointed to all parts of the horizon, and made other 


certain ſigns; and by them aſked him, if he had ſeen. ſhips and 
men like ours? and to this he replied 20. | 

I aſked him, if he knew of other lands far or near, inhabited, 
or uninhabited ? and as ſaon. as he underſtood me, he named. 


above ixcy iſlands, and a large country, which he called MANI 


eoro: E, Sir, wrote down all, having before me the compaſs, to 
know i in what direction. each lay, which were found to be. from. 


*. Perſonas platicas. 

+ Ofuera ayudado, o yo pudiera, que no me obligue a impeifibles, y me veo 
obligado a ellos. | 

1 Algo moreng, 


. 0 


PHILIP I OF. SEAN. 


his iſland to the S. E, S. S. E, W.* and N. E. , and to explain 
which were ſmall, he made ſmall circles, and pointed to the ſea 
with his finger, and made ſigns that it ſurrounded the land; and 
for the larger, he made large circles, and the ſame figns : and for 
that large country he opened both his arms, without joining 


them again, ſhewing that it extended without end 4; and to 


make known which were the diſtant, or were nearer, he point- 
ed to the ſun from E. to W. reclined the head on one hand, 


ſhut his eyes, and counted by his fingers, the nights which they 


ſlept on the way; and by ſigns ſhewed which people were Whites, 
Negroes, Indians, and Mulattoes, and which were mixed FS, and 
which were friends and enemies; and that in ſome iſlands they 
eat human fleſh, and for this he made ſigns of biting his arm, 


ſhewing clearly that he hated this people]; and in this, 


and by means of other ſigns, what he ſaid was underſtood, 
and it was repeated ſo often that he ſeemed to be tired; and 
pointing with his hand to S. S. E. and other points, gave them 
fully to underſtand what other lands there were. He ſhewed a 


defire of returning to his houſe, I gave him things that he 


could carry; and he took leave, en me on the cheek, with 
other marks of affection. 
Next day I went to his town, and to be the better confirmed q 


of what TuMay declared, I carried with me many Indians to 


the ſhore, and having thg, paper in my hand, and the compaſs 
before me, aſked all of them many times about the lands, of 
which TuMay gave the names; and in every thing all of them 
agreed, and gave intimation of others inhabited, all of peo- 
ple of the colours before- mentioned, and alſo of that great 


country, wherein, by proper ſigns, they ſaid that there were 


oO eſte. f Quere, if it ſhould not be N. W. inſtead of N. E. 


t Moſtrando que proſeguia. $ Mezelados, 


| Querer mal a eſta gente. 4 Enterarme, | 
| V2: 1 cows 


147 


n 
n * * 


2 Nn 


FEE ofa : 
re n 


* 
*. 
5 

4 

I 


1 
} 
* 
4 
a 
(| 


TH 
a 


145 |} 


MEMORIAL PRESENTED TO 


cows or buftaloes, and to make it underſtood that there were 
dogs, they barked ; and for cocks and hens they crowed, and 
for hogs grunted; and thus, in this manner, they told what 


they wanted, and replied to whatever they were aſked ; and be- 


cauſe they were ſhewed pearls in the taſſel of a roſario, they 
intimated that they had ſuch. All theſe queſtions and enqui- 
ries others of my companions made this day, and other times, 
of theſe and other Indians, and they always ſaid the ſame, from | 
whence it appeared they were people who ſpeak truth. 

When I failed from this iſland of Taumaco, I made them 


| ſeize four very likely Indians *, three of them ſwam away, and 


the one who remained, and was afterwards name PR DRO, declared 
at ACAPULCO, in the voyage, and in the city of Mexico (where 
he died) in preſence of the Marquis ve MonTEs CL akos, what 


follows, without ever varying, although he was aſked, at vari- 


ous times, and by many perſons, and in different manners, and 
although they denied and contradicted his ſayings. 

Firft, PzDRo ſaid, he was a native of an ifland named Cnr- 
CAYANA, larger than that of Taumaco, where we found him, 
and that, from one to the other is four days fail of their veſſels, 
and that CyicayaANa is low land, very abundant in the fruit 
above referred to, and that the natives of it are of his good Indi- 
an colour, long looſe hair, and they punctuate themſelves, as 
he was, a little in the face, arms, and hreaft ; and that there are 
alſo White people, who have their hair red, and very long; and 
that there are mulattoes, whoſe hair is not curled, nor quite 
ftreight; and that he was a weaver and a ſoldier-archer, and 
that in his tongue, he was called Luca, his wife LaAYNa, and 
his ſon Ley. 

He further ſaid, that in his iſland are many oyſters, ſuch as 
I have ſeen the ſhells of, and brought ſome, which are here of 
three ſizes: the firſt is the common of MAR GARITA;. the ſecond 


*. Gallardos. + Rafa. | ; 
| 2. 18 


PHILIP II. OF SPAIN. 


is twice as big, and the third of a palm, more or leſs in dia- 
meter, and all theſe oyſters they call zozofe, and that in them 
they find pearls, which tg call Jutiquilquil; whereupon, I 
ſhewed him the ſheils, and he took them in his hands, and 
pointed out the parts where the pearls grow; and being aſked 
how many there were, and how large, he ſaid, that in ſome were 
found more, in others leſs, and to explain the fize ſaid, that they 
were like ſand, and like falt, and like ſmall ſtones, and like 
beads of a rofario—and like buttons, ſuch as they wear on a 
waiſtcoat, and others larger, and that they fiſh them in leſs. than 


half a fathom water, rocks and ſand, and that the creeks are 
very large, and have ſhallow water; and that he himſelf, even 


without diving; took them by hand, and put them in his canoa, 


and that they only ſought them to eat the fleſh, which they call 
canofe,. and that the ſhells ſerve them to make hooks, ſpoons, 


and other things, and that the pearls are of no uſe to them. He 


further ſaid, that there is in this ſame iſland of Cuicayana, 


another kind of oyſters, which they call zaquzla, and to explain 
their ſize, he made the fign of the ſize of a large ® target: and 
as it appeared to me incredible the great quantity + he menti- 


oned of all kinds of pearls, and the ſize of theſe raguilas, I 


aſked him if they grew on the cocos, or in the trees, or in the 
rocks, or in the earth, or on the outſide of the ſhells : he re- 
plied they did not find them but at the bottom of the ſea, and 
within them the pearls; and that the oyſters, ſome were laid 


on all ſides, and others on edge, and open above, and that if in 


any of theſe oyſters the hand enters, that it ſhuts, and preſently, 
he faid, there is no hand ; and for this reaſon: . them 


* Buena ade. + Mucha cantidad. 
t Theſe taquilas are obviouſly the large cockles, as they are called by navigators. 
I have myſelf taken one of this kind, which was 2 feet 8 inches long ; the ſhells are 
now in England; and it is from ſuch ſhell-fiſh that the largeſt pearls are taken. Vid 
paper about the Sooloo pearl fiſhery. The pearl oyſters lye flat on the bottom of the 
ſea, but theſe taquilas ſtand on their edge, as I have ſeen a hundred times, That one 
with 


149 : 


MEMORIAL PRESENTED TO 


with ſticks, and with nooſes of rope ; and that they have large 
and good fleſh, which they eat; and do not make account of 
the pearls, and that whenever he wanted them, he fiſhed 
them up, and carried them to his houſe. And as in the 
Dther voyage, I myſelf ſaw the Indians of STa. Cruz, bring 
hanging at their necks many plates *, large and ſmall, all of 
mother of- pearl, I imagined PxDRNO might mean the ſame as 
theſe plates, and for this reaſon I made little account of this 
ſaying. But perceiving that he was ſometimes angry, and at 
other times with the utmoſt ſtrenuouſneſs laboured to make 


himſelf underſtood, for this reaſon I ſhewed him a pebble, black 
and round, of the ſize of an early plumb, and aſked him if i in 


his country they had pearls ſuch as that? He replied no; for 
zhat pebble was black, and the pearls white as paper ; and that 
when they looked at them to the ſun, the dazzling light ſtruck 
their eyes, and thus did he with them as if they were preſent. 
And being aſked if they were as large as the pebble above- 
mentioned ; he replied others were very ſmall as the pebble, 
and then joined the top of his thumb to the top of his fore-finger 
in form of a circle, and there, with the finger of the other hand, 
made ſigns of larger and feſs pearl, and that in each oyſter there 
was but one; and withal fearing what he ſaid was of the plates, 
as I had ſuſpected, I aſked him if they were flat or round, or of 
other figures: he did not underſtand this expreſſion. I then made 
as if I was going to roll the pebble on the ground; as ſoon as he 
ſaw this, he ſaid with ſignificant geſtures· f, that when they threw - 
them on the ground they would roll along, giving me plainly to 
underſtand, that the pearls were round, of the ſizes referred to; 
and that his ſon wore one at his neck, and that he himſelf drilled 


cloſing its ſhell on it. 
_ ©® Patenas. + Dixo con = demoſtracian. 


above-mentioned, after we had brought it aboard, ſnapped a ſtick into two parts, by 7D 


PHILIP H. 6 F 


it with a ſtone, white and ſharp; and that the depth in which they 


get them is about two fathoms, more or leſs, and that in their 
ſhells they feed their hogs. I aſked him if the large ſhells had the 
fame luſtre as the common ones, which I ſhewed him. He re- 


plied yes. All theſe, and many other queſtions I aſked in dif- 


ferent ways *; and how, in his country, they called muſquets, 
and others of our things. He ſaid, they had none, and always. 
replied in ſuch a manner, as gave no room for ſuſpicion; and 
only named, with great ſteadineſs, thoſe things which they 
have. I affirm for truth, that I did not intend to write the 
fize, nor the great number, which he mentioned to be of all 
kinds of pearls, for it ſeemed to me a thing never heard of; but 
conſidering that nature is powerful to produce, as has been ſeen, 
large pearls, and of the common ones ſo great a quantity in the: 
RIO Dz La HAchA, MARCGARITA, and CuBacua, and as I 
was ſo poſitive in enquiring into this report, it appeared to me: 
that I ought to mention what the Indian told me ſo often, and to. 


fo many other perſons who examined him with no leſs care; 


and, in ſhort, I have taken the pains + and write as a man who: 
am to die and know not when... 

He farther faid, that from the iſlandof wad at three days; 
| fail, and at two from Cnicayana, there is another iſland, larger 
than the two above-mentioned, which is called Gu Av Topo, in- 
habited by people as white as ours are in common, and that even 
ſome of the men have red hair, more or leſs, and alſo black; and 
that they alſo punctuate their bellies, and at the navel all in. a 


circle ; and that all the three iſlands are friendly people, and of 


one language, and that they uſe to ſalute on the cheeks , and that 


they tool it as a ſignof enmity when they turn their faces away © ;. 


m 7 Haga dilegencias. 


: Y que haſta los hombres tienen rubios los cabellos mas y menos y tambien negros. 


$ Todo en rueda. . Darſe la paz. y Huyen los roſtros. 


and! 


151 


MEMORIAL PRESENTED TO 


and that in this iſland there are many oyſters, of the three ſmaller 
kinds, in large creeks of the ſame depth as in Cuicayana, 
and that they have many pearls: and being aſked if he had been 
there, he ſaid no; I then returned to aſk, how he knew what he 
had told, and he gave me the following relation : That from that 
iſland a large ſhip of theirs, with more than fifty. perſons, failed 
to another inhabited iſland, named MEcayRAYLA, to ſeek tor- 
toiſe-ſhell, of which they uſe to make ear- rings and other toys, 
which they hang from their ears; that being in fight of it, they met 
a contrary wind, which obliged them to buſk for their iſland, and 
when near it, the wind again became contrary, and that going 
backwards and forwards they ſpent all their proviſions, for want 
whereof forty perſons died of hunger and thirſt; and that he was 
in the iſland of TAuua co when this ſhip arrived there with only 
ſeven. men, very white, except one, who was brown *, and with 
three women, white and beautiful as-Spaniſh, who had their hair 
red and very long, and that all three came covered from head to 
foot, with a kind of - veil, blue or black, and very fine, to 
which they give the name of 2afea; and that of all theſe ten 
perſons only remained alive the Indian Or Ax, whom our peo- 
ple, when they ſaw him in Taumaco, ſo white and fo red, 
named the FLEMING, as before-mentioned ;- and that this In- 
dian OLAN, and others, related to k:m what he had ſaid of that 
iſland GuayToPo. And that he alſo ſaw come to is iſland, 
CuicAayANA, another ſhip of theirs, of t hulls +, full of peo- 
ple, white and beautiful, and with many very handſome girls, 
and, counting on his fingers by ten and ten, he intimated that 
they were in all 110 perſons. X 
He farther ſaid, that from another iſland, called TucoplA, 
which is where the two Indians ſwam away, at five days of 
their ſailing is that great country ManicoLo, inhabited by 
* Moreno. + Navio de dos vaſos. 
many 


PHILIP IL OF SPAIN. 


many people, dun- coloured, and mulattoes, in large towns; 
and to explain their ſize, he pointed ont Acarrurco, and 
others larger: and on this I aſked him if there were towns as 
large as Mexico ? he replied no, but many people, and that 
they were his friends, and did not eat human fleſh, nor could 
their languages be underſtood ; and that it is a country of. very 
high mountains, and large rivers, and that ſome of them they 
could not ford, and only could paſs in canoes; and that to go 
from the iſland of Tucoeia to that country, when the ſun 


riſes, they keep it on the left hand, which muſt be from 8. 


towards 8. E. 

I muſt add, that if this is as he ſays, it agrees well wh the 
chain of mountains ſeen running to the weſtward, as is menti- 
oned in its place, when we were driving about. 

PE DRO much extolled the magnitude, populouſneſs, fertility, 
and other things of this country ; and that he and other Indians 


went to it in one of their embarkations, in queſt of the trunk 


of a large tree of the many which are in it, to make a piragua, 
and that he ſaw there a port, and intimated it was larger, 
and the entrance narrower, than that of the bay of ST. PHIL Ir 
and ST. JaGo; and that he obſerved the bottom was ſand, and 
the ſhore ſhingle, as the other I have deſcribed ; and that it has 
within four rivers and many people, and that along the coaſt of 
that country they went to the weſtward a greater way than from 
AcApurco to Mexico, without — the end of it, and re- 
turned to his iſland. 

It is to be obſerved, that as I had 1 that iſland Ties 
I faid artfully * that I knew there was in it many oyſters and 
pearls; and that he ſaid that there was not, but very deep water; 
and that this is truth I declare, for I cauſed it to be ſounded. 


* Adrede, 


X 225 He 


42 


9 1 
+ 
* 
ö 
* 
4 
1 
l 1 
4. 
i” 
i 


— ͤ — —— 


— —-— 


r a 


— <> — 73. —D oo EI oo 


154 


MEMORIAL PRESENTED TO 
He further ſaid, that three days fail from TauMaco, and at 
two with a freſh wind, there is another iſland called Fonotono,, 
divided into many iſlands, ſmall and flat; and on this account. 
I faid, with a deſign to enſnare him, that there were in them 
large rivers ; fince there cannot be large rivers in ſmall and low: 
lands. He ſaid no, only wells, and that all were very fertile, 


and very fully inhabited by a dun- coloured people, Indians and. 
mulattoes, very tall in ſtature, and ſo much, that although he. 


was ſomething taller than me, he ſhewed as high upon a wall as 


he could reach with his fingers, extending his arm and hand, and 
faid, that was their height, and that they were his friends, but 
had not the ſame language; and that in theſe iſlands are great: 


creeks, of little and of much depth, with beds of many oyſters, 


and that he himſelf had taken them to eat, and that they had 
pearls of ſuch ſizes as above-mentioned, except the 7agquzlas ;. 
and that there is a very good port there. | 

And he alſo ſaid, that near theſe iſlands there is another, 
called PIL EN, and another NuPaN &, and that they have the ſame 
proviſions, people, and pearls; and of ſuch as he had heard of, 
and not ſeen, he gave names to — other lands, and of all 
he ſaid the above. 

It is to be obſerved, that in all the Invizs, only in MarGa- | 
RITA, and the RIO DE La Hacha, they have got, and do get, 
the multitude of pearls as is known; not to mention the few 


indifferent ones found at PANAMA :: and I muſt obſerve, that if it 


is as above related, that great numbers may be expected from 
the places here intimated, as well becauſe the places are many, as. 


on account of the largeneſs of the ſeas, which he ſays, have little 


depth; and further, it is to. be obſerved, that he only ſpeaks 
of the oyſters. which the eye can reach, and only take up with 


* In margin Pur Ax. 


PHILIF-E-OF ĩÄĩ 155 


hand, without diving, not comprehending 2, 4, 8, and more 
fathoms as they fiſh in at MaRGARITA. 
In Mex1co I carried PE DRO twice to the houſe of a driller of 
pearls, and at my requeſt he ſhewed to him all the common 
kinds; as ſoon as he ſaw them, he was vaſtly pleaſed, and ſaid, with 
great action and extacy, that in his country are many pearls, and 
whiter than theſe. He alſo ſhewed him ſome ragged, or flat 
on one ſide, large and rotten ; he ſhook his head *, and faid, 
that they were not good, and that in his county were better. 
The alcalde mayor, of the port of AcayuLco (Don PRDRO 
FLoREZ) made a more ſtrict enquiry, for he ſhewed him a chain 
of many ſtrings of pearls, and aſked him if they had in his 
country ſuch ehains; he replied no: then he took from thence 
ſome pearls, and ſhewed them. to him in his hand, and aſked 
him if they had ſuch as that; he replied yes, but that they 
were not bored; and, as may be ſuppoſed, from the want 
of drills and barers they make no uſe of the pearls, but of the 
ſhells, as well becauſe they are larger, and of the ſame luſtre, 


as being eaſier bored. | 
He ſaid further, that in Taumaco there is an Indian, a 


great pilot, and that he knew the names of many countries 
wherein he had been many times; and that from a large 
country, which is named PouRg, very populous, whoſe inhabi- 
tants are .dun-complexioned, and Indians, ſome friends, and 
others very warlike, and at enmity among themſelves. He 
brought to his iſland of TauMaco, a loorey with a red breaſt 
and neck, and certain arrows with points, in form of a knife, 
and that theſe he. himſelf had ſeen and handled them, and 
intimated, that they wanted to kill with them more eaſily; and 
on this I ſhewed him a knife, and he ſaid it was black, in com- 
n of the points. I ſhewed him a cup of filver, and he ſaid, 


* Tm ma geſto. Io - Papagaya. | | ® 
& 2 | the | 


156 


MEMORIAL PRESENTED TO 


the points were as white as it. I often contradicted this aſſer- 


tion, and he always the more affirmed it. 

It is to be obſerved, that in the bay of ST. ParL1y and ST. 
Jaco were found in one houſe many ſtones, black and heavy, 
and that by chance they brought me two pieces, each as big as a 
nut, and that in the city of Mxxico, one Don FRancisco Pa- 
choco, proprietor of mines, and one DIEGO Gomez DR Mo- 
LIN A, ſaw them in my lodging, and the one of them they ſhewed 
me full of eyes of filver, and for this reaſon we carried it im- 


mediately to the houſe of an aſſayer, who put it in a crucible, 


and for his reaſons gave it ſo much fire, that the crucible broke, 


and thus nothing was ſeen; yet the other part remaining with 


me, the affayer melted it again, and in it was ſeen a ſmall point, 
which expanded under the hammer. He preſently touched it 
on three ſtones, and fix filver-ſmiths faid it was filver touch ; 

and for greater certainty they touched lead and tin, and other 
known ſilver cloſe to it, though there were fome who ſaid, that 


the aſſay ſhould have been made with quickfilver, and others 
with falt-petre, and certain things; and the aſſayer affirmed that 


the metal was good, and here he touched the ſmall point, and 
two ſilverſmiths ſaid that it is ſilver. ä 

Theſe ſtones having been ſhewn to PR·DRO, as ſoon as he 8 
them he ſaid, that in the mountains of Taumaco are many of 
them, and that they are called treaque, and that they are alſo in 
that large country ManicoLo, and that all the Indians want 
them, ſome to punctuate themſelves, others to deck themſelves * 
with them. 

And Pa ux ſaid the fame of his country, which is the bay of 
ST. PniIIr and ST. Jaco, from whence they were brought, 
and miners ſay where are {inuixes) there are metals, and that 
by the muixes they diſcovered the mines of ſilver and N of 


* Inuiexarſe. | : 
To 


PHILIP H. OF SPAIN: 


ST. Lovis in New SpAIN, and thoſe of quickſilver of Guan- 
CAVELICA in PERU: and it is to be obſerved, that PRDRO ſaying 
he had ſeen arrows with points of ſilver, it appears on account 
of the little which was found in the little metal brought merely 


by chance, and from the diſpoſition of the country, and its 


ſituation in the parallel of PxRu, we are obliged to believe that 
it may be ſo as he relates. 


It is further to be obſerved, that PE D RO, after he was able to ex- 


plain himſelf in our language, agreed with every thing the natives 
of TAuMAco ſaid, and this as well concerning the large country, 
as concerning the many iflands and many nations, ſome luſty, with 
bodies punctuated, and others without being ſo “, of various co- 


lours, long hair, red, black, curled, woolly-headed, of which 


they were peopled; and alſo in the great plenty of proviſions of 
the fame kind which they all have; and alſo it is to be obſerved, 
that all the above-mentioned we have ſeen this time, and that the 


country where we continued at anchor, appears to be the ſame 


which ſtretches on, and of the greatneſs which they report. In 
fhort, I muſt ſay grounded on ſtrong reaſons, that theſe nations 
are there by vicinity, and continuation to other countries, more 
to the 8, E, and W. and if there is no miracle, that in that 
hidden quarter of the globe, there are very large, great, and 
extenſive provinces, all of them full of many and various 
people T. 

It is to be obſerved, that the firſt time the adelentado AL- 
vARO DE MENDANA went and diſcovered the iſlands which he 


 * Labradas y por labrar, varios colores, &c. 

+ A ſuma digo, fundada en razones fuertes que aquellas gentes eſtan alli por 
vezindad y continuacion en otras tierras mas al Sur Leſte y Oeſte, y que fi noay mi- 
lagro que en aquella oculta quarta de globo, eſtey muy grandes y muy eſtendidas 
provincias, llenas todas de muchas y muy varias gentes, y que en todos generos aura 
ventaia, quanto mas fueren ſubiendo de quinze grados arriba, y por venderſe tan 
caro, ſe deu eſperar meiora en todo la apuntado. 


called 


157 


158 


MEMORIAL PRESENTED TO 


called of SALomon, he found in them, and brought a quan- 
tity of pearls, roaſted in the fire, for the Indians only eat the 
fleſh, roaſting the oyſters; and that the ſecond voyage which 
the ſaid adelentado made, he diſcovered the iſland ST. Cruz, 
where he died; and that in it I myſelf ſaw many ſhells, and 
the many plates of mother-of-pearl referred to. And that 
from an iſland adjoining was brought a boy, who was called 
MicveLitio, and that after he knew our language, he gave an 
account, that in his country were many pearls, with great 
proofs of its being ſo. Alſo it is to be obſerved that in this voyage 
awe ſaw in three iſlands mother-of-pearl ſhells of the three ſizes, 
and in one of them dry oyſters, wherein were found ſome ſmall - 
pearls. So that joining what PEDRO told, to what has been 
ſeen, there are fifteen iflands, of which there is an account of 
their having pearls.; and from the fight of their ſhells, it may, 


and ought to be hoped, and alſo from its low latitude, ſo proper 
to produce them. In regard to the great TaqviLas, let it be 


left to time to determine, only obſerving, that if ſince PRDRO 
ſaid there were large pearls, he alſo ſaid there were large ſhells 
.capable of them, 5 | 

PE DRo further ſaid, that they called the Devil TERUA, and 
that he talked with the Indians from a piece of wood, without 
being ſeen, and that to himſelf, and to all of them at night, 
and many times he would touch their cheeks and breaſt with 
ſomething very cold; and that wanting to know what it was, 
they would find nothing; and this he ſaid with great-reſervedneſs* 


and fear, giving clearly to underſtand, it was a bad thing, 


and amongſt them very horrible; and alſo told others, though 
not to me, that before we were at his country, the devil had 
ſaid to them, that we were going to kill them. 


* Moſtrando-.cierto recato. 


8 * = 9 
. 5 . 


PHILIP H. F 8 

He ſhewed great deſire to return to his country, to tell the 
Lord of TAuMaco all the good we had done to him; and that 
the other Indians, his companions,, had thrown themſelves 
out of the ſhip to ſwim, and that we had done them no 
harm. 

And alſo further, to ſay to all his fellow rpm, what 
a good thing it was to be a Chriſtian; and that to him, after he 
was, the devil never ſpoke, nor had he heard him, nor felt 
him at night; and to bring his ſon, and come and live with us. 

And alſo ſaid, that in his iſland. of CHI AVYANA are dogs, 
large as ours, and that they called them Ticuri; and that there 
are many fowls, like thoſe of EvuRoPs, but that they do not eat 
them; and fruit, which he ſaid were apples when he faw 
them, and much ginger, and that at one time it is pretty cold, 
notwithſtanding its low latitude. 


He further ſaid, that they hang thoſe who kill men; and 


that our horſes are om to ride upon, but not to be ſerved by 
men. 

PR DRG to appearance was twenty-five years of age, and at the 
time he gave the delaration above, he knew but little Spaniſh, 
and on this account it coſt me much trouble, for he was contra- 


dicted, andobliged to repeat it many times; and it appears, if 


he had lived, he would have given a much better than he has 
given, but I believe what he has ſaid is more worthy of credit, 
than it would had been, had he arrived to have been expert: 
from whence TI, and all, from what we ſaw of his behaviour, 
took him for a man of truth and baſhfulneſs. 
One day he entered the church of Sr. FRA NcIScO DE Mrxl- 
co, and ſeeing there many crucifixes, he aſked, how they had. 


there ſo many gods, if they told him there was none but one 
God ? He was anſwered, they were all the repreſentations of 
the true CHRIST; and with this, and what elſe was told him, he 


2: appeared 


| 5 8 $ > Ws _ - 8 <7 = 0 - N * * 25 
C4 1 1 ANY Yr bd . X r or 9 Ay be 
L Y S rr 2 boo e 
R „ 2 TS 8 r e * 5 F dy __ 8 2 hy 
p > 4 1 Arens 
7 


159 


* 
o 
N 
1 
: 
. 
mn 
4 
4 
1 


— wo > Ao ohio a — — X 


— 3 


N 
x 


wm —— — * 0 


_—_— — 
e pig? 5 


160 


MEMORIAL PRESENTED TO 


appeared ſatisfied ; and the friers who heard him were much 
pleaſed, as it was the queſtion of a man who knew how to ex- 
amine things. At laſt, on Palm Sunday, he died. 

The other Indian was named Pavur, he was a boy of eight 
years of age, of a dark colour, curled hair, he had very beautiful 
eyes, fine ſhape, and better natured, inſomuch, that every one 
was very fond of him, as he was ſo docile, and good-humoured. 
He gave account of the demon, and that he was called Hava- 
NA, and how he talked with the Indians without being ſeen. 
And alſo he gave an account of large and ſmall dogs, and of an 
animal like a cat, and of a large river near his town. That in 

his country there are many warlike people, enemies to each 
other, and that they do not eat human fleſh ; and this ought to 
be believed, for the plenty of hogs, fowls, and other proviſions: 
for eating human fleſh amongſt other people, appears to proceed 
from the barrenneſs of their countries, or the beſtiality of the 
inhabitants; and becauſe he was a boy very weak and ſickly, 


I could not learn ſo much as I wiſhed. I have a ſmall Vocabu- 


lary, which is what I could pick up of the languages of PEDRO 


and Paul; what I muſt fay is, it is very pronouncable. 


By all that is above-mentioned it appears clearly, that there 
are only two large portions of the earth ſevered from this of 
EUuRoPE, AFRICA and As IA. The fr/t is AMERica, which 
CuRISTOVAL CoLon diſcovered ; the ſecond and laſt of the 
world is that which I have ſeen, and ſolicit to people, and 
completely to diſcover for your Majeſty. This great object 
ought to be embraced, as well for what it promiſes for the ſer- 
vice of Gop, as that it will give a beginning to ſo great a work, 
and to ſo many and ſo eminent benefits, that no other of its 
kind can be more, nor ſo much at preſent, nor heretofore, as 
I can ſhew, if I may be heard and queſtioned. 


And 


[7 4 _ E * b 5 
** y 2 » * — 1 8 5 4 
TD III. ; x TH 1 I ny 
Ones * * 
4 * » N 4 
d y 0 4% 4 » 
* - 0 0 * 4 I 
4 . ' x 
7 . "# y ' A 1 
4 1 " o 16% F 5 4 5 . N 
; $ 5 Y Fi 4 n [ 4 
- * > * * 4 + 
* Þ [i \ 7 
4 1 * 9 5 
4 4 + 
* 2 * > 1 * $4 "1 * £ * 1 * 
8 PSY L ) Z "* . . 
8 7 } g 8 ; - 
. 1 J 1 8 4 * D „ 399 4 
Y IX + . = 2 
J * - 8 
f \ p N : + « EX 8 «bp $8 
* N : T * 0 p 1 
p "ly 4 þ d N : b b mb C 
Le N o 
D 8 p 7 4 * q i þ q 
* we Dich I " 5 a oy "4 0 * 9 95 
Fe i . \ Fe 2 
4 - h - o * 
« 7 Wm y F ? N 0 $ 
p * 7 » L . bo 8 4 4 y 1 
0 1 1 } 1 
8 * 7 » bh 4 N 8 n [1 0 g N J * 25 
, b - \ f RA * ö , i» 4 : 
. » . — J f - 98 its 
8 * * = 4 * oe 4 4 1 
0 : I 7 1 1 \ 4 n * 5 
f : * I . 8 8 = 5 Fe a. * ; 
£ x 4 1 bo #7 * 3 * * 1 4 © 
J 5 " as n = — * bn \ k 7 
4 J 2 U A " | 2 * * 
5 1 p | a [A 2 * i. * FF J # f 
1 8 Ls 7 * * * 3 ? bo 
q 1 y * x 0 * « » Y 9 — o 5 5 7 i 3 
p ; . 4 : on L : * in . n BY, „ 
| 1 4 7 5 p I G * 7 4 
- 1 0 4 1 x 6 y L Y EL « * x 5 8 0 , 1 4 - $ j l cy,” Ng 1 N J L SA J + 2 5 of 5, E CLIT ER & " - g Y —_ 
N 55 . , £ - d N is * . 2 43 
5 hs) 9 D i A f p R 5 Y 4 1 6 x C3 
2 j N fi 5 7 


rt r as 8 SY 
wt N WE WIEN we 
: 5 yea: 


EPL 


F 7 


Wee eb FLAKE 
a 3 N Let 


ET N 


1 
8 a 


1 


bs 
\ ae * CK 


| 5 NS 


Fo 


N 
Os — 


LILLE 


Red IDO A 
„ r 


r 


1 * * 
OPS, 


55 ö 
n 1 GS 


MOEN 


PHILIP I. OF SEAEN 


And herewith you, Sir, muſt remain well informed of how 
much value this a& is; and what rewards will be beſtowed by 
God, for having (with ſo much love and ardour) undertaken it; 
and how much higher degrees of glory your Majeſty will ac- 
quire, if an end is put to this work of ſo much piety and phi- 
lanthropy, and ſo worthy to be preſerved in ,the memory of 
the nations : conſidering that it will not be attended with ſo 
much expence of money or men, nor with that carnage, deſo- 
lation, and ſcandal, which commonly happen in ſupporting the 
rights of very ſmall ſtates ; ſince to place it under the royal pro- 
tection entirely by means very gentle and juſt, it is only requi- 
ſite for me to ſhew ſo great a part of the whole inhabited earth, 
plant in it /uch things, which, I hope in Gop, will be moſtly 
very ſweet, very rich, and very permanent : and for recompence 
I only defire ſo much as it deſerves ; that your Majeſty will be 
perſuaded of the importance of the matter, and what is requi- 
ſite I intreat ; and in every thing I ſpeak truth, and that there 
is a ſpirit to ſell all the paſt, preſent, and to come for a Price. 
With this, Sir, 1 conclude ef 


* Sino poner debaxo de la proteccion real con medios todos muy ſuaves y juſtifi. 
cados, quanto los puedo moſtrar una tan gran parte de toda la tierra poblada, para en 
ella ſembrar bienes, y coſtellos frutos que yo eſpero en Dios han de ſer muchos, 
muy dulces, muy ricos, y muy duraderos: y ſolo quiero por paga de tanto quanto 


tanto vale, que V. M. crea la i importancia del caſo, y quanto conviene loque pido, 


y que en todo trato verdad, y que es animo de vender todo lo paſſado, preſente, y 
venĩdero por un precio, y eſte es ſenor de valde. 


. 


11 


. NE UA 


161 


i, 
14 
1. 
115 
4 
1 
b 
. 
* 
7 
Ln 
" 


* 

Lf 

4 

| 
7 
ry 2 
. 


N N — 1 


. 


Ex * 
2 
_ 4 4 . 4 * 8 V: — : . 4 . 
=] — 4 3 
"e ; * 
. : 4 ' 
bY. — , N 8 ; 
x: IX IT. 
Ny - 
5 F A | 
"8 0 


FO 
9 


M E M O RIAL 


PRESENTED BY 


7 15 = TY 33 
r 


E 
1 ED 3 7 4 
bf M 


Far raus PzpRo FeRNANDEZ DE nos 


T 0 


8 NM AJ E S T v, 


4 the Settling and Diſcovery of the Fourth Part 
of the World, AvsTzaiia Incoontra. | Tts great 
* Riches and Fertility diſcovered by the ſaid Captain, 


bh 


8 I R. 725 3 
bern PzpRo Pena DE Qurton fay, That with. 
this I have preſented to your Majeſty eight Memorials, re- 
+ lative to the ſettlement, which ought to be made in the country 
which your Majeſty commanded to be diſcovered in AUsTRALIA 
IncocniTa, without, to this time, any reſolution being taken 
with me, nor any reply made me, nor hope given to aſſure me, 
that I ſhall be diſpatched; having now been fourteen months 
in this court, and having been fourteen years engaged in this: 
cauſe, without pay, or any other advantage in view, but the 


ſucceſs of it alone; wherewith, and through infinite contra- 
8 | 1 dictions, 


ee 
ee 
. * 2 wy 
1 
Mrs 
MN hw —— ls 4 
n 
2 i 


" PEDRO FERNANDEZ pt QUIRUS. © dy 
dictions, I have gone by land and ſea 20,000 leagues, ſpending” 

all my eſtate, and incommoding my perſon, ſuffering ſo many, 
and ſuch terrible things, that even to myſelf they appear incre- 
dible z and all this has come to paſs, that this work of ſo much 
goodneſs and benevolence * ſhould not be abandoned. In whoſe 
name, and all for the love of God, I moſt humbly ſupplicate - 
your. Majeſty, that you will be pleaſed not to permit, of ſo 
many and ſuch continual labours and watchings, and of ſo noble 
and determinate a perſeverance, that I ſhould fail to reap thoſe 
fruits which I ſo much deſire and ſolicit, being, as it is, ſo much 
to the honour and glory of God, and to the ſervice of your Ma- | | _=_ 
jeſty, and productive of innumerable benefits, which ſhall laſt . = 
as long as the world ſubſiſts, and then be eternal. | = 

. t:Themagnitude of theſe countries newlydiſcovered, is judged; 

of, by what I ſaw, and by what Captain Bazz [pe TorRes] my: 
admiral, informed your Majeſty on good grounds: its longitude | 

is as much as that of all Evroes, As1a-Minos, and to the CAs- . 
PIAN SEA, and PRRSsILA, with all the iſlands of the MepiTERRA- 
NEAN and OCEAN; which are in its limits embraced, including 
ENGLAND and IRELAND. That unknown part is 4 quarter of 
the whole globe, and ſo capacious, that it may contain in it 
double the kingdoms and provinees of all thoſe your Majeſty is 
at preſent Lord; and that without adjoining to Turks, or 
Moors, or others of the nations which are accuſtorhed to diſquiet ö 
and diſturb their neighbours. All the countries ſeen fall with- 
in the torrid zone, and there is part of them which toucheth the 
equinoctial, whoſe latitude + may, perhaps, be of go deg. and 
others of ſomewhat leſs, and if it comes to paſs as it promiſes, 
there will be countries, which will be antipodes to the better 


— — + on SPED 42k 2; 0 
2 5 
N l 17 W 
bay TIFF, Mes 5, e n 


* Piedad y miſericordia—Piety and compaſſion. Sport 
"9 Puede ſer, it may be. N | * 


Y 2 Em part 


MEN ng 
EIS: 


IL 


Ly 
eats 
I 9 


1 


n 
” E 
BB REES 


EOF nn 
Ip 
ee 


4 LIP 
Ps Wane. + G2 be 5 
R 


* = ha 
7 


— 
ES 


164 


25 + 2 E 
F det 
ONLY; 


MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY 


part of ArxIcA, and all Evrors, and the reſt of all Ast 
Major [and will not be inferior to them *. 

It is to be obſerved, that ſince the countries which I ſaw in 
15 deg. S. are better than SPAIN, as preſently will be ſeen ; that 
oppoſed to it in latitude, _ to be in itſelf quite. a ter- 
reſtrial paradiſe. 

The people of theſe countries are many; their colours white, 
negroes, mulattoes, Indians, and mixed of one and the other. 
The hair of ſome is black, long, and lank, the others curled 
and woolly, and of others very f red and fine, which variety is 
an indication of great commerce and intercourſe. For which 
reaſon, and for the goodneſs of the countries, and becauſe they 
have no artillery, or other fire arms for deſtruction f, and be- 
cauſe they do not work mines of filver, and for many other rea- 
ſons, it is to be believed, theſe people are extremely numerous. 
They have not the arts, great or ſmall, walls or forts, king nor 
law, nor are they but the moſt ſimple gentiles, divided into 
clans 8, and are little friends amongſt themſelves. Their arms are 
lances and darts of wood, [clubs, and bows and arrows without 
poiſon]. They cover their [obſcene] parts. They are clean, 
chearful, ſenſible, and very grateful, as I have experienced. 
For all which it ought to be expected, with the aſſiſtance of 


Divine Providence, and gentle means, that it will be extremely 
eaſy to ſettle ||, inſtruct, and ſatisfy them; which are three 


things very neceſſary in the beginning, that ee all 7 
be led to ſuch holy ends. | 
Their houſes are of wood, covered with Keb they 


uſe earthern pots: have looms * > and ner nets; ui Work 


=. 


Latin Memorial. 
+ Bien. | | | | 
4 Con que matarſe. „ . DIC BIT, $2.98 
$ Parcialidades. W 
Latin Memorial. 

q Traſmallos. 


 ftones, 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ DS QUIROS. 


ſtones, marble, flutes, drums, and ſpoons of wood varniſhed": 
they have oratories and burying places, and plantations very 


well laid out-in diviſions, and paliſaded. They benefit much by 


the mother-of-pearl ſhells, of which they make googes, chi- 
zels, formers, ſaws, hooks, [hatchets *], and plates, large and 
ſmall, which they hang in ſtrings about their necks. The 
iſlanders have their embarkations well wrought, and. ſufficient 
to navigate from one country to another, all which is a 


certain indication of their vicinity to people more civilized, and 


it is no ſmall confirmation of _ that they caſtrate their hogs, 


and make capons. 
3. The bread they have is of how different kinds of roots, 


of which there is vaſt plenty ; and they prepare them without. 


trouble, nothing more being required, than to roaſt and boil, 
them: they are ſavoury, wholſome, and nouriſhing, and keep- 
long, and there are ſome a yard long, and half that in thick-- 
neſs. The fruits are many, and very good, plantans of ſix kinds, 
[almonds four kinds +]. Large obos, which is a fruit like 
quinces, many nuts of the country , and oranges and lemons, 


which the Indians do not eat, and another excellent $ and large 


fruit, and others not leſs good, which were ſeen and eaten, 


with many and very large ſugar-canes, and intimation of apples. 


There are palms without number, of which may hereafter 
be had tuba l, of which is made ſpirits, vinegar, honey and 
whey I, and the palm cabbage is very fine. Theſe ſame palms, 
the fruit they yield are coconuts; when green, they ſerve in- 


ſtead of artichokes * and the kernel like cream, when ripe, 


* Latin Memorial. 

+ Latin Memorial. 

1 Nueſes de la tierra. 
$ Extremada. 
J. e. Toddy, as it is called by the Englith in India. 7 | 
q Sueros. . | | 

* Sjerven de cardos.— IThiſtles. 


165 


1 


—ꝛ— ns 


* 
2 
828 — - 2 -1 
5 Rr EI 4 * — al J 
5 1 IN" LE Le . ed 4 
#5 1 
1 E Ry 
D Ws og? £ N 


— 


-] nd 


EEG PEE ge eb r 


— 


n 1 2 


156 MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY 


they ſerve for meat and drink at ſea and land; when old, they 

yield oil for lamps, and wax alſo like balſam, and good to. eat 

when new. Their ſhells are cups and bottles. The coire ſerves for 

oakum to caulk ſhips, and for making all their cables, hauſers; 

and common cordage, and is the beſt, match &; of the leaves they 

make ſails for ſmall embarkations, and fine mats, and mats 

wherewith they line + and cover houſes, which they frame of 

their trunks, which are ſtreight and tall, and of them they make 

targets and lances, and other kinds of arms, with other things, 

good for common uſe; and it is to be noted that theſe coconut 

topes & are vineyards, which all the year yield fruit and wine ||, 

and that they do not require any culture ; and thus neither ex- 

pend money nor time. The garden - ſtuffs which were ſeen were 

pumkins *, large blites ++, and much purſlain ++, and they 

had intimation of beans. The fleſh are many hogs, tame like 

| ours, and fowls, capons, country partridges 58, geeſe , tur- 

- ____  tles, ringdoves, and goats, which the other captain ſaw, and 
the Indians gave us intimation of cows or buffaloes. The fiſh 
are many pargos, reyes, ſkait, ſoals, mullets, whitings, ſhads, 
macabes, ſkuttlefiſn, pampanos, ſardinas, thornback, palomeras, 
chitas viejas, eels, perezes puercos, ſhellfiſh, gurnets, muſcles, 
prawns, and other kinds, of which I do not remember the name, 
and there ought to be many more, for all the above-mentioned 
were fiſhed cloſe to the ſhips. And if it be well-confidered, -it 
* certainly be found, that beſides {6 many dan ſo Tm” 


M Y deb arcabuz Ja mejor. 
+ Afforren. 
1 Tablas. 
$ Groves 
|| .Vendinia Vintage 
4 Beneficio, 
** Calabazas. i „ 
++ Bledos. | Ends 5 
it Verdolagas. 
$$ Perdices de la tierra. 
It}: Palos reales. 


ene ON 
20) 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ pz QUIROS. 
[things], preſently may be obtained great, and many dainties, 
reckoning amongſt them fweetmeats and preſerves of many 
kinds, and that without requiring any thing from abroad ; and 
for ſea proviſions *, befides the above-mentioned, there will 
be no want of plenty of large gammons of bacon, nor of jars 


of lard +, and what elſe is had from large hogs, nor want of 


pickles f, or ſpices. It is to be obſerved, that many of the 
above-mentioned things are like ours, and that much more may 
be had; and by this the country appears to be very fit to rh 
| duce all the other things Europe produces. 

4. The riches are filver and pearls, which I ſaw, 4 gold, 
which the other captain ſaw, as he mentions in his relation, 
which are the three ſpecies moſt rich which nature brings forth. 
There is vaſt plenty} of nutmegs , mace, pepper, and ginger, 
which we both have ſeen. There is intimation of cinnamon, 
and perhaps there may be cloves, ſince there are the other ſpices, 
and the rather, becauſe theſe countries are almoſt parallel with 
TERNATE and BACHian. There is befides conveniency to 
grow and make pita, ſugar, indigo. There is good ebony, 
infinite woods for building any number of ſhips, with all their 
fails, and cordage of three kinds, one reſembling our hemp; and 
with the oil of coconut may be made galagala **, which ſerves 
inſtead of pitch, and there was ſeen a certain refin, which the 
Indians uſe for paying their piraguas ; and fince there are 
goats, and intimation of cattle, there will be cardobanes 4 , 
corambre itt tallow and fleſh in plenty ; and from the bees, 


* Matalotages. | | | 2 
7 Botijas de monteca. 

+ Agreo. | LEDs | . 
$ Criar. . | 3 
Muchiſſima. 

¶ Nuea de <lpecia, 


* Galagal is the tag uſed in "MR 5 China for all their ſhipping 


++ Goats teather.——-Spanith leather. 
it Dictionary ſays, Dicker of leather. 5. e. Ten hides. 


Which 


167 


ISS A 


r 


* 
* 


168 


MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY 


which were alſo ſeen, there will be honey and wax. And be- 
ſides all theſe riches, the ſituãtion and diſpoſition of the country 
aſſures many others, which joined with the many things which 
induſtry will afford, having, as there is ſo much ſimilarity, beſides 
its own things, conveniency togrow ours, which I intend to carry, 


together with all the other better and more beneficial, which 


are produced in Pxxu and NEw-SPain. It appears, that all 
together will make the country fo rich, that it will alone be 
able to ſupport itſelf, and alſo AMERIOA, and will aggrandize 
and enrich SPAiNn in ſuch. a manner, as I will ſhew, if Tam 
aſſiſted by others in the execution. In regard to what I have 
ſeen, ſince it was the ſea-ſhore, I ſay, we ought with good 
ground to hope of the country ſo many and ſuch great things, 
riches, and good things as are got from ours. 

It is to be obſerved, that my chief intent was only to ſeek 


out ſo large a country as I have found, and on account of my in- 


firmities *, and other things which diſpirited + me, I could not 
ſee ſo much as I wiſhed; nor can all that is deſirable be ſeen in one 
month, the year having twelve, wherein are ſhewn. the qualities 
and the fruits, which all cultivated countries produce ; and that 
the Indians muſt not be judged of by our neceſſities, taſte, wants, 
and eſtimation of things, but as men who intend to paſs life 
with the leaſt trouble, without vexing themſelves with thoſe 
things, in the purſuit whereof we fatigue ourſelves. | 
The conveniency, and pleaſures of life will be as great as can 
be found in a cultivated, pleaſant, and delightful + country, 
black and fat, and of great 9 for making here- 


8 W ſickneſs, 3 
+ Callo. 
Freſca. | | 
$ The original is y de ds migajon con barrilles p*. luego poder hacer Ladrillos 
migajon, is the crumb of bread without the cruſt—Barriles, the plural of barril, caſł; 
m”__ it alſo ſignifies an  carthern pot, with a large belly and narrow mouth. Ipreſume 


'after 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ vs QUIROS. 


after bricks, tiles, and the other things made thereof, and 
near at hand many quarries of marble, and other ſtones &, 
for building ſumptuous and curious edifices, and many woods, 
well adapted for all uſes. There are plains, valleys r, and high 
double lands, and in them rivers, brooks, and fountains, 
whence, with all conveniency, may be had plenty of water- 
mills, ſugar-mills, and other water-engines; and in the f 
ſalt marſhes, and in the places where canes grow, teſtimo- 


nies of the fertility of the country, whoſe joints are of five 


and fix palms, and leſs, and the fruit in proportion. The ſtone 
fine and hard, and fine grained 8, and as good flints as in 
MApRIPD. - : 

The bay of ST. Paitie and ST. Jaco has twenty leagues of 
ſea-ſhore ||; it is all clear, and free for entrance. by day and 
night; it has around it many towns; in them, and very diſtant, 
were ſeen by day many ſmoaks, and by night many fires. Its port 
of VERA-CRUZ 1s ſo capacious, that it will contain in it above 
1000 ſhips: its ſoundings clear, and of black ſand; worms were 
not ſeen: one may anchor in any depth from 40 to + fathom, 
between two rivers, the one as large as GuapaLquivir, at 
SEVILLE, With a bar of more than two fathom, by which good 
frigates and ſmall ſhips © may enter. At the other our boats 
went in freely, and from it was taken water, which is extreme- 
ly fine **. The landing- place is a beach of three leagues, and 
the greateſt part of it a pebble. bank ++, black, ſmall tt, and 


ſomething is omitted, and the words tranſpoſed ; and that the meaning of the paſſage 

is, That there is clay as white as the crumb of bread, of which hereafter may be made bricks 

with earthern-ware, tiles, &c. | : 
* "Doſcas. + Lomas quebradas. Broken ridges of hills. 


+ Y enlos eſſenos ſalinas, y en aquellos cana verales. 
$ Liſa la tez. I On. I Pataches. 
** Lindiſſima. ++ Guixarnal. it Menudo. 


2 


heavy, 


F 9 


r 
A 


5 
7 
+ 


aA 


o bl” . 7 * * 1 j - 4 , 

2 ” 7 0 N — 2 R Sar » y J 
be Na LY! Ys ' _ - Þ 7 5 - IR Ix ANTE E Tr) L 84 - 1 

2 22 8 SEEN e KS 8 BSA i, = Bu CS ST) OL. A A; LOTT. 1 . 
La ) ß  S Ne be Sh OLE OE WE EI OST 24 rs OL SO IS 


A. 


bs wo 
I ls A * R Nee EN. 
U L 
CO INS ITE i. 2 — » — 
— ISLES > a hes * 2 p S r 


EK; A ap. 
— w/w Cater ned co radon 


OR 
_ 


rr 
n 


© 

1 
a 
. 


MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY 

heavy, excellent for ballaſting ſhips. The ſhore, as it has not 
gaps * nor breaks, and the verdure + on its edge, was under- 
ſtood not to be beaten by the waves. And hecauſe the trees are 
all ſtreight, and without , or broken limbs S$ ; it was 
judged from thence not to have great ſtorms. This port, be- 
ſides being ſo airy ||, has another great excellence in what con- 
cerns recreation; that from the breaking of the dawn N is 
heard through all the neighbouring wood, a very great har- 
mony of thouſands of different birds, ſome to appearance night- 
ingales **, black- birds, larks ++, and gold- finches 88, and 


infinite numbers of ſwallows, and beſides them many other kinds 


of birds, and even to the 1 [1] of Oren and 
crickets. 

Every morning and evening were enjoyed let ſcents, wate- 
ed from all kinds of flowers, amongſt them that of orange- 
flowers and ſweet bafil. And for all theſe, and other good 
effects, it is judged the climate there is e and that 


nature maintains her order FC. 


This port and bay are rendered more excellent by the FRO, 
bonrhood of ſo many and ſo good iflands, eſpecially of ſeven, 
which are 200 leagues in circuit, one of them is 50, and is 


diſtant 12, it is very fertile and populous. 


< 
[0 
: 


N 4 ' 
tal. 3 . 


And, in ſhort, I fay, Sir, that in this 1 and port of 15 
deg. 20 min. S. lat. preſently may be built a very large and 
populous-city, and that the people which will inhabit it, will 
enjoy ** all the riches and conveniencies pointed out ++, 
and what my {ſmall capacity cannot explain, and what time 
will ſhew, and that there may be a communication with the 


* Ruinas. + Verdes. t Azotes. $6 Degajes. 
Ayroſo. J Rompia el alba. * Ruy ſenores. ++ Mirlas. 
tt Calandrias. §§ Sirgueros. i Chillar. 
A Ser alli clemente el cielo, y q. guarda ſu orden naturaleza. 
*  Gozara. +++ eee 


provinces 


a: r - — 
— w — · ů — 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ ps QUIROS. 


provinces of Cn1z1, PBxU, PANAMA, Nicaracva, GUuATI- 
MALA, NEgw-Spain, TERNATE, and the Priiipinas, of all 
which lands your Majeſty is Lord. | 

And if your Majeſty will be of theſe others which I offer; 
I hold them to be of ſo much importance, that beſides being as 
keys of all the above-mentioned places, I apprehend they will 
become ſuch for the commerce of curious and valuable commo- 
dities, befides other great things from CHINA, JAr Ax, and 
the other provinces of the coaſt of ASIA, with its iſlands, and 
ſhortly, according to my opinion. And I can ſhew this in a 
committee of mathematicians : nor ſhall I make many words in 
faying, that it will preſently accommodate and ſuſtain 200,000 
Spaniards. In ſhort, that this'is the globe whereof SPAIN will 


be the centre *, and where there is a body there is a nail; 4 


this point is to be well conſidered. 


The temperature and goodneſs of the air, is, Sir, as * as 


any in the whole world, and in ſo mucli that our people, being 
all ſtrangers, none fell ſick with ſuch continual ꝙ labour, ſweat- 
ing, and getting wet, without avoiding to drink water faſting, 
nor to eat every thing the country yielded, nor to keep out of 
the dews, moon or ſun, which was not very hot in the' day, 
and towards midnight + woollen cloaths were deſired, and could 
well be borne. And whereas the natives in common are cor- 
pulent, and very ſtrong, and ſome of them very old ; and as 
they live in houſes with ground floors &, which is a great indi- 
cation of much healthineſs, for if the country was unhealthy, 
they would be raiſed from the ground, as is done in the Parr- 
PINAS, and in other parts which I have ſeen. And whereas fiſh 
and fleſh keep ſound to ſalt two or more days, and whereas, the 
fruit brought from thence (as may be ſeen in two I have here) 


V en loque es cuerpo es la una y notes bien eſte punto. | 
+ Ordinario. t De media noche abaxo. $ Caſas terrenas. 


Tax are 


— * — I ag £ * dF 9 
* * p 7 3 
fy 5 n 2 8 . 1 
8 Nen * 1 7 
7 4 einn Win s 
* Nr er N r 
* I * M SENS «+41 2 2 418 
wa m 3 e <A 
A . oe 3 N * N XY. IFN 
T OE 8 * 8 2 9 PS Ak e 
* 5 2 > us 
» - 
2 Pd © + 
DE CCI NAT TESTO Os — —— INS —_— bY: 
ho 2 » — r rer * W 2 Kh ach | 5 wwe" 
* Nr 97 28 — e = 3 2 is Fel 6 * 
* = [1 ey 
4 1 
- — n 
« 3 lb 
"Abs Rr 
ES 
% % 
1 
Kin *—o 
LY VE 
5 9 
Sr 
n 
* * * 
1 N 


r 


If n r 
» 
g "IVE oe Ie INE £ EN 


by ite 


MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY 


are perfectly good, though taken from the trees out of ſeaſon; 
and as I have not ſeen any barren ſandy grounds *, nor any kind 
of thiſtles, nor prickly trees, nor ſuch as have roots. above 
ground, nor mangrovy ſwamps +, nor moraſſes, nor ſnow on 


the high mountains, nor crocodiles in the rivers, nor in the 


mountains any venemous inſects f, nor ants, which commonly 
are very deſtructive in the houſes and to the fruits, nor niguas 8, 
nor ticks ||, nor moſquitoes, which is an excellence above all 
excellencies for our advantage ¶, and fo worthy of eſtimation, 
that there are countries in the Ix DIES which for theſe plagues 
alone are uninhabitable, and others where they ſuffer very 
much from them; as I can well bear teſtimony. 

7. Theſe, Sir, are the greatneſs and goodneſs'of the countries 

which I have diſcovered, and of which I took poſſeſſion in 
your Majeſty's name, under your royal ſtandard, and ſo the 
acts declare which I have here, &c. [Giving an account of the 


ceremony of taking poſſeſſion; and concludes] All this, and 


more I have done as a loyal vaſſal to your Majeſty, and that 
your M ajeſty may ſoon add, for the greatneſs of it ſounds well *, 
the title Of Tues Aus TRATLIA DEL ESPIRITU. SANTo, for 
the greater glory of the ſame Divinity, who carried me, and who 
pointed it out to me, and who has brought me to the preſence 
of your Majeſty, where I am, with the ſame willingneſs ++ 


| which I have always had for this cauſe, to which I gave birth +2, 


and for its nobleneſs do love it, and | long. after it with infinite 


ſolicitude. | 


* Arrenales. + Manglanares anegadizos. t Sahandizas ponzonoſas. 

$ Niguas, ſmall vermin, which lie hid in the duſt, and leap like fleas, and get- 
ting between the ſkin and fleſh, breed there, and are very troubleſome. 

|| Garrapatas, N Pretenſion. * Porque ſuene eſta grandeza. 
++ Voluntad. | tt A eſta cauſa q. crie. 


8. J 


PEDRO FERNANDEZ Dr QUIROS. 


8. Iam very well convinced“ from the wiſe councils, magna- 
nimous diſpoſition, and chriſtian piety of your Majeſty, of the 
great care which will be taken, when further knowledge is had, 
towards the peopling of theſe countries now diſcovered ; the 
chief reaſon for not leaving them deſerted, being, that this will 


be the means + that in all of them the true Gop be known, be- 


lieved, and adored, the Devil having there ſo much influence. 

And further ſtill, for it will be the gate by which to ſo many 

nations under the juriſdiction of your Majeſty, will be diffuſed 
all good and relief +, and the many more cares which will 

ariſe, if to them the enemies of the church of Ro ſhould go 
to ſow their falſe doctrines, and turn the benefits I have repre- 

ſented to worſe evils, and would ſtile themſelves Lords of the 
INDIES. I alſo truſt, that your Majeſty will well conſider, that 
the doubtful remedy of an evil fo pernicious as has been pre- 
died 8, or of what other diſaſter ||, which may be expected 
now or hereafter, would coſt millions of gold, and thouſands 
of men. Acquire ©, Sir, fince you can, with a little money, 
which will be required but once *, acquire Heaven, eternal 
fame, and that New World, with all its promiſes. And fince 
there is none who ſolicit. of your Majeſty the rewards +4 
for the glad tidings of ſo great and ſignal a bleſſing of Gop, re- 
ſerved for your happy time, I, Sir, ſupplicate them, and as ſuch 
my diſpatch, for the galleons are ready, and I have many places 
to go to, and much to provide, and to do, and much ſpiritual 
and temporal loſs attends every hour's delay, which can never be 


recovered. 
* Bien creo. - + Medio. | . 
Les hade entrar todo fu bien y remedio. $ El que ſuena. 
| Deſman. Gane V. M. | 
** Y ſe puede gaſtar pr. una vez. ++ Albricias. 


9. If 


3 
5 


173 


by 2 
A 


ET 


* 
: * 
. & 5 oy 
y, Ez 7 
1 1 ö 
42 + y 2 
41 DM 9 * 
8 18 
2812 p 5 
+ 4 
13 - 4 
ne py * 3 = [vs : 2 5 2 2 * W — 0 4 5 ® ay 8 A 4 . 
« 
1 ES 


- 


174 MEMORIAL PRESENTED, Ge. 
9. If CuxisrovAL CoLon's conjectures did make him perti- 
nacious * what I have ſeen, what I have felt, and what I offer 
muſt make me ſo importunate : wherefore, let your Majeſty 
order, that of the many means which there are, ſome one be 
| adopted adequate to what is propoſed, and let it be obſerved, 


that in all I ſhall be found very ſubmiſſive to reaſon +, and wil! 
give ſatisfaction in every thing. | 


1 Le heſieron porſiado. + Reducido a la razon- 
AD VE R- 
— : ; 
* * DR - 


Sept. 5, 1969, 


ADVERTISEMEN T. 


Since MEnpana's voyage was printed, I have obtained 
from SPAIN, 


HE CHOS DER Don Garcia HURTA DO DE MENDOZA, 
Quarto Marques de Cax RTE. 


POR 


EL DocToR CHrISTOVAL SUAREzZ DE FIGUEROA, 
Mapr1D, MDCxIII. Quarto. 


5 


HERE are ſeveral circumſtances in Fi6UERoA omitted in 


1 the abridgments of his relation. In lib. 5, p. 228, by way 
of introduction to MEnDana's voyage in 1595, FiGUERoA gives 
a brief account of the firſt voyage in 1.567; of this the following 
is a tranſlation : it is to be conſidered as a more circumſtantial 
detail of this voyage, inſerted p. 45, from CoREaL, and to 
come in the place of the two laſt paragraphs of p. 45, of 


4 
” 


p. 46, and of the quotations from PIx RE, in p. 48 and 49, 


and in p. 50 and 51. 

„It will be well to recite the voyage which, in the vice- 
royalty of the marquis, and with his favour, after remaining 
many years deſtitute of hopes for want of ſuch aſſiſtance, the 


Adelentado ALVARO pt MExDANA performed, with the in- 
tention 


Los ae © 
. 
n 8 * r 


SE SAVES ES £0 1 + Cu BANE IPOS / 2 REES WG e AO in Ry  n- 83 > Ta = W's 
CEO LCC N n d e l 88 Sr, & "pf Wed WY N 
4-5 LES YE L NH Yo dE I AT IRS WEN r . 2 1 78 e BN . . * 
7 1 - St! 1 Ln Coe IO hn ESA 11 r . Ne N 1 Se 1 * e Atv), Y * v fo 
& 3 why = op Meer „ „ 0 . WE - E OI TAR TO ST OOO np. DO EE UT W 1 * 5 1 tf OT 7 n 2 TINT 
$54 . . 3 _— . N b ou 4 0 > # = þ. & 1 R n 2 w —" <P J 5 WF bf 44 0 if 3 N 1 2 o n 
ry N - A, 7 ko ET CORSETS AF N 3 % n * 5 ay £ 4 9 N ES Wo 4 N * I. As 
> $ WES > o N , F 9 * * 9 * I + ASE CRT RI IE, : 4 7; LET, "> ATE l * n 
„ 10. 0 Yn . W r Weg r * F ö c ERS, GON SY "WIS, 3 1 F 
* I K A „ L { * 12 7 0 A > 7 7 9 0 3 p 
* 5 £ . 
a * ä on — * = —ꝛ 
1 _ _ * — ==" ee ee e — - 7 * r my » * 
r 3 eeamnte nat}. er 2 5 I rn” a © 2 20 2 0 — 4 : * ha * p * 15 * 
* * rr t . a. 6-8. rol "7 2 cv. A * — * * * — r a * > _—_— p K . I * 1 4 e 4 g 
. - * 4 * bh => O — — — 2 4 1 


1 * — o 
. 2 „ #4 N. 
6 To 2 17 * SES we . 2 2 TIM 8 Py 
1 bs.” os 7s IE EEE N S EN 
. . 2 * r of 
MLT. 6-0 be gn 1 
= SPE 8 +. 
ore Woot 3 N 
1 g 5 4 2 1 1 % 
K P — . . d * 2 2 N nb-nn, wy 
F * * * "ey * * 2 8 
: . — > ? . * 


156; 


B N ee 
— —ͤ 7 
SIR A 3 

IS EST, * 


A DV ERT ISE ME N r. 


tention of ſettling the SALOMON iſlands. I deem his & diſcourſe 
important on many accounts, but above all for the notice 
which is proper to take of the diſcovery of the ſouthern un- 
known parts, which e has ſince made, whereof the preſent was 
the foundation. But it will be expedient, in the firſt place, 
briefly to mention the voyage which the Adelentado himſelf 
had made to theſe iſlands, as it will ſerve not a little to explain 
the preſent voyage. | | | ? 
"In +97 the licentiate Cas Ro. being, for want of a 
vieeroy in PzRu, preſident and governor, for reaſons which 
moved him, diſpatched his nephew, ALvaRo DE MEN DANA, 
with the title of general, and ordered him to diſcover towards 
the unknown ſouthern parts, the lands which were ſuppoſed 
to be there. | 
« He departed from Carrao January 10, . having 


gone 1450 leagues, they deſcried a ſmall iſland, with people of 


an olive colour Þ : it is in 6 deg. 45 min. S. lat. they here met 
with the firſt rains, thunder and lightning, which they had ſeen, 
and named the ifland, IsL.a DE Jesus. Diſtant from it 170 
leagues are ſome reefs, ſtretching from N. E. to S. W. with 
ſome iſlots in the middle of them. What they ſaw extended 
about 15 leagues, They named theſe Los Baxos Ds La Can- 
DALERIA. The middle of them is in 6 deg. 15 min. 8. lat. 

They were 17 days in reaching them from the firſt iſland, with 
great oppoſition of currents and winds. They got fight of 
other land, and went in queſt of it. They found a port, where 
they entered, calling it STA. YS ABEL DE LA ESTRELLA. The 
inhabitants adore ſnakes, toads, and ſuch things. They are of 


» « Fu diſcurſo.” This explains what would otherwiſe be very obſcure in the fol- 
lowing part of the ſentence. Figueroa, p. 242, tells us, he took his relation from the 
chief pilot's papers; and therefore hi refers to Quiros, whom he had not named, not 
to Mendana, as might be inferred from the expreſſion, 

+ Amulatada, 


an 


SUSE GR vu 


ADVERTISE ME MW SS. 

an olive colour, they have curled * hair, they go naked, tho' 
with their [obſcene] parts covered. Their food is coconuts and 
roots, which they name venaus. - They have no fleſh, or ſtrong 
drink +, and therefore are cleaner than others. It is under- 
ſtood as a thing certain that they eat human fleſh, the cacique 
having ſent to the general, as a preſent, a quarter of a boy, with 
his arm and hand. He ordered it to be buried in fight of thoſe 
who brought it, who apppearing offended and confuſed þ at 
what paſſed, went away hanging their heads. They are a peo- 
ple who live in ſmall communities &; they have wars with each 
other, and make ſlaves of their priſoners. The firſt maſs was 
ſaid here; a brigantine was built with which the M*. de Campo, 
captain PzDRo DE ORTEGA, accompanied by 18 ſoldiers, 12 
ſailors, and the chief pilot HERNAN GALLEGo, went on diſ- 
covery. Navigating to the S. E. as the coaſt lays, at 6 leagues 
from the port, they found two ſmall iſlands, with great palm- 
groves ||, in the latitude of 8 deg. and in the ſame courſe many 
others. They alſo ſaw a large bay, with eight ſmall iſlands, all 
inhabited by people, who have for arms wooden ſwords, bows 


and arrows. Eaſt and weſt with this bay, at 14 leagues, was 


ſeen a large iſland, named by the Indians Martairta. There is 
in mid-way two iſlots, each at a point, which is in the latitude 
of 8 deg. it was named ISI A DE Ramos, becauſe it was diſco- 
vered on that day. Coaſting the iſland STA. IsaB ET, they faw 
a port and cape in ꝙ deg. ſcant, 14 leagues from the bay before- 
mentioned, it was named CABO PRIETo (BLack Point). 


Afterwards to the S. W. of this cape, at 9 leagues diſtance, _ 


they found many iſlands. They came to the fr; it was 5 
leagues in circuit, quite ſurrounded with reefs; it was named 


"0 Creſpos | + Carecen de carnes y brebages. 
+ Sentidos y corridos del ſuceſſo. $ Es gente de parcialidades, 
Grandes palmares. 


Aa La 


L GC 


177 


178 


"7 MM! * 5 1 25 
4 4 * \ py k 4 ; PF 


S[DVERTIHSEPEMSENT. 
La GALERA, One league from this and N. W. and S. E. with 
Cazo PRIETo, at 9 leagues diſtance, is another of 12 * 


tent“; it is well peopled, it has places cultivated and den- 
cloſed +; it was named Burna VISTA, from its appearance, 


and it is extremely fertile. Its latitude is g deg. 30 min. Around 


it they ſaw many inhabited iſlands, and five others in a chain 
from E. to W. They landed in the : its inhabitants red- 
den their hair: they are much afraid of fire arms : they beat 
to arms with caracoles, and little drums, and eat human fleſh. Tt 
is 25 leagues in circuit; its latitude g deg. 30 min. it was named 


LA FLORIDA. The names of the other 7hree were ST. Dimas, 


ST. GERMAN, and GUADALUPE. To the ſouthward of theſe 
5 iſlands is another which they named SesARGa ; it is about 8 
leagues in circuit, its latitude 9 deg. 45 minutes. It lies with 
Buena VisTa N. W. and 8. E. 5 leagues diſtant; it is high, 
round, and well-peopled. It has plenty of proviſions, of yna- 
nimes, panays, and ſome hogs. In the middle of it was ſeen 
a volcano, which continually vomited out a quantity of ſmoak. 
Behind this they ſaw preſently another large one, and in it a 


copious & river. Many men, women, and boys, came out in 


canoes to ſee our people. The M. de Campo went to a town, 
where in baſkets was found a quantity of green ginger and other 
good roots, with ſome hogs. They named this iſland Gy. 
DALCANAR, and the river ORTEca. From hence the bri- 
gantine returned with all its crew, in queſt of the port 
where they had left the ſhips. They were going. round the 
iſland STA. YSABEL, for they were ſo ordered, paſling cloſe to 


Capo PrIETo. At. ſeven leagues from it to the W. 8. W. at 
the diſtance of 5 leagues, is another iſland, which they named 


, 


r. JoRGE ; it makes a channel with the iſland of STA. VSA- 


On d 14 de cuerpo. | + Lugares formados y juntos, 
2 Huyen mucho de los arcabuzes. $ Caudalofa, | 


"uw 


ADV E RT ISE M NT. 

BEL, The entrance, which is on the 8. E. part, is 6 leagues 
long, and 1 broad'to the W. They found there a port with 
ſoundings from 8 to 12 fathoms, perfectly clear, and large 
enough for a thouſand ſhips, with the entrance to the S. E. 

and the outlet to the N. W. where there is a town with more 
than three hundred houſes. They diſcovered in this iſland ſome 
pearls, of which the Indians make ſmall account. They 
gave many to redeem a canoe which had been taken from them. 
Sailing along the coaſt of the iſland STA. YsABEL, having gone 
40 leagues, they found ſome large reefs, and amongſt them 
many canoes of the Indians, who were fiſhing. They all came 
to ſhoot their arrows at the brigantine, and returned: there are; 
amongſt theſe reefs, many inhabited and uninhabited iſlots. 
And at the point, and extreme of STa. VS ABEL, which is in 
7 deg. and 30 min. they found many iſlands, all inhabited. 
This iſland is 95 leagues long, and 20 broad, it is above 200 
in circuit. They ſaw here cock/es * which from point to point 
of the ſhells are 5 feet. T urning the iſland, on the weſtern 
part, they found the ſame E. and 8. E. winds with which they 


had before navigated, Having to return to the E. in ſearch of 


the port where the ſhips remained, but not being able, the 
winds being ſo contrary, the M“, de Campo ſent in a canoe 
nine ſoldiers, with a failor, and a friendly Indian, : who 
always went with our people, to give advice to the general 
of his voyage, and of the reaſons why they did not arrive be- 
fore. They went along ſhore till the canoe was daſhed to 


pieces on ſome reefs, and ſome loſing heart F, they were all 


ſaved. All the powder was wetted; they determined to return 
back in queſt of the brigantine, walking for this purpoſe all 


night over the rocks, in fear of being aſſaulted by the Indi 


ans, "FT met with a e which they had raiſed, and left 


6 Murcielagos. I Perdiendo algunos el hato. 
Aus | 5 


179 


Pg £43 þ 


180 


e 


rere 
n f r 
* 7 


FEY ERTISE MENT. 
in a certain place when they paſſed, and having adored it, deter- 
mined to wait three days for the brigantine, and in caſe it 
ſhould not come, to make a raft. to go to the ſhips. In this. 
affliction they were, when. providentially it arrived, .giving all: 
imaginable ſatisfaction. They made figns with. a ſmall flag,, 
which were taken notice of, and embarking all the people, they 
proſecuted their voyage till they reached the ſhip, where they. 
found ſome dead, and others ſick. On this occaſion, the general. 
determined to fail out of port, between ſome reefs, which are at 
its entrance. With eaſterly winds, ſometimes freſh, he went to. 
anchor in a road * of the iſland Gu ADPALCANAR. He ſought 
a new port, and found one cloſe to a river, which they named. 
GALLEG0, and the port LA CRUZ. Next day they took. poſſeſſion: 
of the country for his Majeſty, and erected a croſs: on a little 
hillock before ſome Indians, who ſhot their arrows; two were 
killed with the muſkets, and the reſt fled. Afterwards Don. 
FernanDo ENRIQUEZ, with the chief pilot, and zo foldiers,, 
were ſent. to ſee the country, wanting, to diſcover. a river; ſo 


many of the natives came upon them, that they were obliged to 


deſiſt from their intention, and attend only to their own de- 
fence. The ſailors affirmed there is much gold in the river. At 
their return they brought two hens and a cock, which were the 
firſt they had. ſeen, whereat. the general. was much. delighted, 
ſceing they every day, diſcovered. more land with. better. things. 
He ſent Don FERNAN DO,, with the chief pilot in the brigantine.. 


They ſailed. to the E. S. E. and at the diſtance of 2 leagues found 


the river ORTEGA, and the coaſt full of habitations. They, 
continued touching 1 In. this manner at. different iſlands and ri-- 


vers, too long to recite; ſometimes meeting oppoſition, and 

ſometimes good reception: from the inhabitants.. At. laſt they- 

returned ta the ſhips, where they found the Indians had killed 
* * 

4 > 9, men, 


A DVERTISEMENC T. 


9 men, who, with the ſteward, had gone for water. The 


cacique of that diſtrict had ſhewn himſelf a friend to the gene- 


ral, but was diſguſted with him on account of a boy which 


they had taken, and would not give back, though he aſked it. 
The day after this diſgrace happened, the general ſent cap- 


tain PRDRO SARMIEN TO, who, with all the people, landed to 


ehaſtiſe the Indians, as well in their perſons as houſes. He 
killed 20, and burnt many towns, whereupon he returned. He 
landed a ſecond time, with 50 ſoldiers, and ſetting fire to- 
different habitations, found in them ſome pieces of the ſhirts, 
and jackets of the deceaſed. 
On 13th. June the ſhips ſet ſail, and two: miles to windward,. 
where they had before been with the brigantine, they ſaw many 
habitations. They went from thence to an iſland, which was 
named SAN CHRISTOVAL. They took poſt in it, the general 
going aſhore.. This being ſeen by the natives, they told our 
people by ſigns to return; but obſerving that they did not do 
ſo, it was wonderful to ſee the“ faces and motions which they 
made, ſcratching on the ſand with their feet and hands, run- 
ning to the ſea, toſſing the water up, with other ſtrange mo- 
tions. A trumpet was blown to call them aſſiſtance, and PR- 
DRO SARMIENTO came with all the people where the general. 
was. The Indians came upon them in warlike array; each 
had two or three darts, and others wooden ſwords, bows and: 
arrows. They came ſo near, that if they had. diſcharged they 
could not have miſſed; but ſeeing that it did not ſignify telling 
them ſeveral times by ſigns to be gone, the general ordered to 
fire ſome muſkets, whereby one was killed, and others 
wounded, whereupon the reſt fled, The Spaniards entered the 
town, where they found. ſuch. a quantity of coconuts and al- 
* Las Braburas, viſages y temblores q. hezieron eſcarvando en la arena con piez 
y manos corriendo al mar echando el aqua por alto in otros eſtranos ademanes. 
monds, 


392 BBY EFERTESEMEN F. 
monds as was enough to have loaded a ſhip, and ſo they did 
nothing all day but carry proviſions to. thoſe at anchor. The 
Indians did not chuſe to return again, and our people, night 
approaching, embarked with what had bcen done. - This port 
is in 11 deg. the iſland is narrow and mountainous. The bri- 
gantine failed from thence to diſcover more land. They found 
two iſlands, 3 leagues diſtance from each other; they named the 
one STA. CATALINA, and tlie other STA. ANNA: this is low 
and round, with an elevation in the middle like a caſtle. It is 
well peopled and fertile; it has hogs and fowls, and a good port 
on the eaſtern part. Here the diſcoverers went aſhore, and 
were attacked by the Indians with many darts, arrows, and 

5 | ſhouting *. They were painted of divers colours, with branches 

. : on their heads, and ſome 12 acroſs their bodies. They 

985 | fought with a daring ſpirit, wounding three of our people. 

They diſcharged a dart at the chief with ſuch fury and force 
= (for theſe people are large), that pterced the target and arm 

22 | above a palms length of the ſpear beyond. But at length 

= killing two, the reſt fled. Having coaſted the iſland ST. CHRIS“ 

- TovaL, they returned to the ſhips. The chief pilot related, 

5 £1 that they had not diſcovered more land in that quarter, but that 

to the weſtward, there muſt neceſſarily be very extenfive +. The 

general held a conſultation of all the pilots and captains, who, 

after debating many matters of conſequence, agreed to make a 

hawzer, and heave the ſhips down. They heeled them as well 

as they could, and having finiſhed, determined to return back 
to PERU by the north, without more loſs of time, that their 


proviſions ight not be expended, nor their cables rotten. They 
then ſet fail, being 7 days in clearing ST. CurisTovar. They 


failed f from thence, and with a freſh E. 8. E. wind, Pod N. E. 


3 
N 


een 
r 


N TY 
N 


* . | + "2666 Bag 
3 Mas que a la Oeſte cra fuerga la huvieſle eſpacioſiſſima. 
- | | * y 


n 
n e 
1 * Ro WES 
de At 44+ 
ALES (7 WOT, 
9 WA 

oy t * LYLE 8 if 
D 8 
. N 
: 8 8 
ond 

yoni 


Al D'V_E-R T IIS E ME N T. 

har E. They kept on with ſometimes bafflling winds from E. 
N. E to N. Between 2 deg: and 4. deg. S. they met many 
palms - k, and burnt wood, which came out of rivers, ſigns 
of land to the weſt, they conceived it to be NEw-GvuiNnxa. Being 
under the equator, the pilots defired to make a requeſt to the 
general, giving for reaſon they were going - to be loſt F, and it 
would be better to go directly to one or the other pole. They 
agreed to purſue their route, as the times would admit, between 
N. and N. W. Doing fo, in 11 days they went 25 leagues, and 
found themſelves in 5 deg. N. and this is not wonderſul, for in 
theſe low latitudes are found little winds, and not very favour- 
able. They here had rain, which they faved : they got the 
eaſterly trade, with ſome ſhowers: they ſaw land, and went 
towards it: they diſcovered natives, but they fled: they found a 
chizel made of a nail, a cock and many pieces of rope,' and a 
quantity of coconuts bored, a fign, that the inhabitants get from 
thence the water they drink: they returned without water. 
Farther on they fell in with another iſland, low, round, very 
ſandy, and woody, ſurrounded with reefs, inhabited only with 
infinite numbers of ſea-birds ; it is two leagues in circuit in 19 
deg. 3 N. it was named ST. FRancisco. They navigated to 
the N. and N. E. till they reached the latitude of 30 deg. 2, in 
which ſituation they had a chubago of ſmall rain R. Next 
day at day- break a S. S. E. wind attacked the capitana 
with ſo much fury, that the chief pilot affirmed, he had not 
ſeen the like in 45 years he had followed the ſea. They were 
obliged to cut away their main maſt, which carried with it part 
of the ſhip's ſide. They made fail with a 7razada, with which they 
| ſtood to the ſouth that night, and next day ſtood back again with 
the loſs of 50 leagues, and without fight of the almiranta. After 


* Atadas. + Andavan perdidos, | t Amayanaron. 


muck 


164 


n 
r 


„ Eb KY = FINS 5 
— 8 2 EY KY = FAS $ 
n I - = 8 
Wo Me 18 * . 
3 8 * 
8 42 2 
= 7 * CY 
* 7 Ns 1 E: þ 
Pk We 1 # ov 6 


A:DV\'ER T.1:8 E MENT; 


much bad weather, On the gth December, the wind came 
round to the S. S. E. and they ſtood E. N. E. the latitude 31 


deg. in which ſituation they ſaw a pine- tree, and other ſigns of 


land. The wind came about to the N. and next morning they 


found themſelves cloſe to the iflands, a league from the main 


land, in the latitude of 3o deg. In ſhort, they entered a large 
bay, where they anchored in 5 fathom, at the foot of a bank of 
ſand, which has two iſlands at the point, and between them 
and the main land good ground. On the 22d January, 1568, 
they entered the port of ST. Jaco, where, three days before, 
the almiranta had put in, without main maſt or boat, and 
with one caſk of water, having had as bad weather as the capi- 


tana; anchoring on the day of St. Pavur's Converſion, and at 


n 


length ſailing on the 2d March, they went to PERU; the royal 
enſign, Dow FERXA NDO HENRIGYEZ, carrying the news to 
LiMa, with which concludes this diſcovery,” 


ADDITIONS axv ELUCIDATIONS 
From F I Mi. _ A, 


To the Voyage of ALvaro Mz x NDANA DE NEYRA, 1595. 


60 H E number of thoſe who went was 378, of which 
55 280 Huld bear arms. 

Winds 8. and S. S. E. which are choſe of Perv.” 

Seventy veſſels, ©* ſmall canoes, not all equal. They are 
«© boats of one tree, with bamboe outriggers on each fide, in 
« the manner of a galley's poftigos, which reach the water, 
* wherein they ſettle that they may not overſet ; all paddling 
c with their panties; ; the feweſt they had in each was three, 
“ and the moſt ten.“ 

They were clean ſkinned *, in which it was 7 Pe they 
« were a healthy people; they had "Y hands, with long 
finger.” 

c« Their faces and bodies were 1 in blue, with the 
« figure of fiſh, and other things; their hair like women, 
*« long and flowing; ſome had it tied up and Reif, the 
«« greateſt part were ruddy. 

Pates, maſa.” 

« Some cut the meat to pieces with Knives of bamboe.” 

„Forty of them, near to whom the Spaniards appeared of 
low ſtature. Amongſt them was one taller by head and 


* ſhoulders than the talleſt man in the ſquadron, though there 


« was one of good height. 
« As they obſerved the Spaniards dreſſed in ſo many colours, 


« they appeared confounded ; the ſoldiers, to ſatisfy them, 


* De carnes limpias- + Emmaranados. 


B b 5 | c bared 


F.63, 1.8: 


12. 
21. 


61, laſt 1. 


02; 1; 4. 


1 
20. 
Note > 


186 


4 * NU 


ADDITIONS AND ELUCIDATIONS 


„ hared their boſoms, pulled down their ſtockings, and mewed 


P. 63, note 


«c 


cc 
cc 
cc 
cc 


<< 


5 
66 
cc 
40 
4 


6416 


| 70, I. 11. 


86, 1. 1% 


22 ra wh 


cc 


ct 


cc 


6 
cc 


CC 


* 


* 


4 


N 


_ 


their arms, with which ”_ were . and ſeemed much 
pleaſed.“ 


* There was amongſt them an antient perſon, with a long 


and well-diſpoſed beard ; he made remarkable threatenings * 
with his eyes; he put both hands to his beard; turned up 
his whiſkers ; ſtood up, and cried out, looking many ways +. 


They ſounded their ſhells, and ſtruck their canoes with their 
paddles.” 


«© N. E. and S. W.“ 

Omitted, by accident, the following: They alſo had 
without the town ſome piraguas (a kind of boat) long, and 
well-wrought, of one tree, with a keel, head, and ſtern, 
and joined together with plank, ſtrongly tied with Zernelas, 
made of coco; in each are held 30 or 40 rowers. Being 
aſked by figns for what they were uſed, they intimated, that 
they went in them to other parts. They work them with 
hatchets, which they make of the bones of fiſh and caracols. 
They ſharpen them on large pebbles, which they have for 
this.” 

« Of the interiour part of the iſtand, nothing can be ſaid, 
for they did not go thither; but from what they ſaw, the 


ſoldiers ſay, all their trees were fruit- trees.“ 


« Moſt of the ſoldiers being of the ſame opinion as the Me. 
de Campo, got hatchets, and other implements, with 
which they began to cut down trees, which they there have 
of clean ſtems high, and very large: MenDana was little 
ſatisfied with this determination ; for it was his intention to 
ſettle at a low point, which is more at the entrance of the 
bay. The ſoldiers, with ”—_ alacrity, cut down the trees, 


® Fierezas. + Miranda a muchas partes. 


« bringing 


FROM FIGUERO A. 


bringing ſticks, to make huts, and palm, and other branches 
to cover them. Forgetting their labour, and the little plea- 


ſure they then enjoyed, and thought no more of their native 


countries, nor of having left the province of PRRu, ſo rich 


and extenſive : all the difficulties which could offer, they 
ſurmounted for the ſervice of God, and for that of their 
King. Every thing is peſible to the ſpirit and valour of the 
Spaniards, who are not to be diſcouraged by difficulties, nor 
ill ſucceſs; and are delighted with arduous and daring 
things“. In ſhort, they built their houſes, and fitted out 
their ſhops, each in the beſt manner he was able, to be- 
gin what they were to finiſh by degrees, where they intended 
to live and die with honour and fame.” 


After peace. „ This bay, to which the Adelentado gave 


the name La Graciosa (for ſuch it is), is 4 & leagus in cir- 


cuit, it runs N. by E. and 8. by W. it is in the moſt weſtern. 


part of the iſland on the N. fide of it, and to the S. of the 
vulcano before- mentioned. Its mouth is half a league; and 
on the eaſtern part is a ſhoal, but the channel is clear enough. 
This bay is formed by an iſland + to the weſtward, whoſe 
body is four leagues. It is extremely fertile, and very well 


inhabited on the coaſts and inland. It is but a little way from 
the Great Ifland, the ſpace between them is full of rocks and 


ſhoals, with ſome ſmall channels, where nothing but boats 
and canoes can paſs. The port was found at the bottom 
of the bay, between a copious ſpring of the pureſt water, 
which at a muſket-ſhot guſhes out under ſome rocks, and a 


middling river, about 500 paces from thence. The port is 


in 10 + deg. S. 1850 leagues from LIMA. It is ſubje& to puffs 


bo Y agenos por arduos y temeroſos que ſean, 
+ This ſeems to be the iſland named afterwards La Guerta, i. e. The Cd 


'Bb2 „ from 


187 


1. 
from bot. 


. 


ktulnr 


18 ADDITIONS AND ELUCIDATIONS 


from the S. E. but this is of little conſequence x:. The bot- 
tom is mud, the ſoundings 40, 3o, and 20 fathoms, anchoring 
very near the ſhore. | 
** Here the Spaniards remained two months and eight days, 
« in which time many notable things paſſed, In the firſt place, 
« ſome ſoldiers, from a bad deſign, killed Marort, the In- 
* dian, the Adelentado's friend, from whom all had received 
© much good treatment +. His people felt extremely his 
death, and lamented it in public, and in private many days, 
attempting at various times to revenge it on our people. They 
left off coming with the many ſupplies of proviſions which 
they conſtantly brought to the camp, which occaſioned a 
« great want. MN DANA chaſtiſed the delinquents, ordering 
% the guilty to be beheaded to ſatisfy them; but this was im- 
«« poſſible. At laſt, from change of climate, food, and cuſ- 
* toms, from labour, from going in the ſun, being wet with- 
« out having any thing to ſhift themſelves, ſleeping on the 
« ground, and from other diſorders and difficulties, dangerous 
« diſeaſes attacked them. To theſe misfortunes ſucceeded the 
« want of a phyſician who underſtood the diſeaſe and the re- 
% medy to apply #. They began to die many; it being a la- 
% mentable thing to ſee them in their diſtreſs &, put in huts ; 
«© ſome delirious, and others little leſs; ſome going to the ſhips, 
„ with the imagination of getting health, and others from the 
« ſhips to the camp, thinking to get it there. From theſe cala- 
« mities fprung tumults, with ſome appearances of ſedition. 
« The M. de Campo (to whom it was attributed) paid for it 
« with his life; he was put to a violent death; with two others 


Ay en el refriegas del ſueſte coſa de poca dano. 


+ Muy buenas amiſtades. 
+ Careciendo caſi los mas de quien los ſirvieſſe y regalafſe, 


$ En las manas de ſus accidentes. 


eee 
N 
— 


cc 


£C 


cc 
cc 


cc 


+C 
cc 


La) 


ic 


c 


Lal 


En 


* 
6c 
«c 
66 
60 


«cc 


66 4 


| cc 
cc 
cc 
+5 
0 
; cc 


4 


. * 


6 
cc 


4 


F ROM FIG UE 

in like manner, Who were with certainty held to be his ac- 
complices in the ſame delinquency.“ 

After © many indiſcretions.“ | 

«© The evening of ST. LUKE, Gov took away the chaplain, 
ANTONIO DE SERPA, for whoſe death the vicar made great 
lamentations, &c. Then the general fell ill, in a ſhort 
ſpace his ſickneſs overcame him “. 

« On the 17th October there was a total eclipſe of the moon, 


which, at its riſing in the horizon, was already totally 


eclipſed. The Adelentado found himſelf ſo weak, that in 
making his will, he could ſcarce put his name to it. He left 
as univerſal heireſs, and named for governeſs, Donna Isapzr 
BERRE TO, his wife, for he had from his majeſty a particular 
cedule that he might leave in his ſtead whomever he thought 
proper. He named for captain general Don LoREnzo BEer- 
RETO, his brother-in-law ; and making them call the vicar, 
he fulfilled all his ſpiritual duties. The night being ſpent 
in this, next day the vicar ſeeing him at his laſt moment, 

he placed before him what was requiſite for a good death, 

in a perſon of condition , and good life; reminding him 
that now was the time to ſettle with Gop what was want⸗ 
ing. He ſaid other things equally holy and charitable, which 
the Adelentado heard, ſhewing (beſides attention) extreme 
contrition; which fully ſhewed that he was reſigned to the di- 
vine will: in fine, aſſiſting him in ſaying the pſalm del miſerere, 

and the Creed, he expired at one in the morning, being 54 
years of age. He died in the opinion of every body as was 
expected of him. He was known to be very eager to accom- 
pliſh whatever he put hand to. He was zealous for the ho- 
nour of Gop, and the ſervice of the king; of high mind * 


* Apravandole en corto eſpacio la enfermedad muchiſſima. 
+ Suerte. I Levantados penſamientos. 


” which 


189 


5. 


— 


190 


A 
La) 


A 
oo 


* 
* 


ADDITIONS AND ELUCIDATIONS 


which had engaged him in the former voyages and diſco- 
veries : good actions gave him pleaſure, and he deteſted 
bad; he was very courteous, and ſweet-tempered not too 
apt to give reaſons *, and therefore not deſirous of them; 
more ſolicitous of works than words. He appeared to be 
well, in regard to his own conſcience. He never paſſed for 
high, ſo that it was the opinion, that he knew more than 
he performed +. The governeſs and her friends were much 
affected with his death, others were glad of it. It is to be 
ſuppoſed theſe were the worſt people in the company, 
to whom his goodneſs gave offence; for it is impoſſible 
for one who lives in dread, to love that which occaſions 
his fear; and particularly when the wicked have the good 
to judge of their evil works. He was buried with the 
utmoſt pomp that circumſtances would admit. He was 
carried in a coffin, covered with black cloth, on the 
ſhoulders of eight principal officers. The ſoldiers, with their 
muſkets reverſed}, as is cuſtomary at the funeral of a general, 
dragging the colours along ; and on two drums, covered with 
mourning, ſtriking low and hollow ſtroaks; the fife giving 
the like ſounds. Being arrived at the church, the vicar 
took charge of him, and the others returned to comfort his 
widow, DoNNA ISABEL. 

% Don Lok EN Zo, to whoſe charge were now enn the 
ſea affairs, ſent one morning in the boat twenty ſoldiers, with 
an officer, for them to bring ſome boys, that they might be 
taught Spaniſh, as there were many inconveniencies ariſing 
from not underſtanding their language. But the Indians, 


who watched them with much caution, defended the land- 


* No largo en razones, y aſſi ſolia dezir. 
+ Nada ſe le paſſava por alto, ſi bien fue opinion que ſabia mas que hazia. 


+ Al reves. 


6 * ing 


F 80M FIG GWG I A 


ing with ſo much ſpirit, that before the Spaniards diſcovered 


them they ſhot eight with arrows, and purſuing their oppor- 
tunity, they continued following them, conſtantly ſhooting 
arrows, throwing ſtones, and ſhouting, till they came ſo near 


the camp, that it was neceſſary for Don LoRENzo to go out 


with the flag diſplayed, and with the remainder of the people 


in health to oppoſe them. They diſcharged a piece, which 


made them retire, but fix were wounded in the purſuit, and 
amongſt them Don Lorenzo in the foot. The Indians con- 
tinued in purſuit of their revenge, and every day came to 
ſeek their enemies, bringing ſome ſhields, with which they 
thought to cover themſelves from the fire-arms, as the tar- 
gets defended the Spaniards. from their arrows. They were 
exaſperated by the death of MAaroet, and with enraged va- 
lour ſhot through the branches of the trees, pointing at the 
faces and legs, as they ſaw. theſe were expoſed. This was 
the fault of the ſoldiers, for they took their arrows, and 


ſtruck with them againſt the targets, and other armour, to 


ſhew that they did no miſchief: but they told them by ſigns, 
to do the ſame to their eyes and legs, and as they did not 


chuſe to do ſo, they diſcovered the ſecret, ſhooting always at 


theſe two parts. Although with many infirmities, Down Lo- 
RENZO gave all the aſſiſtance poſſible to the maintenance and 
good of the camp. He ſent a third time the frigate, with the 
captain of artillery, to look for the Almiranta, giving him in- 
ſtructions what to do. He went, and did every thing pro- 
per on the occaſion, but returned without finding it. He 
landed on the way on one of the iſlands before- mentioned, 


which are in the reefs, and ſeized there eight boys, all of. 


them of good countenances, well made, with fine eyes, and, 


to appearance, of better capacity. He alſo brought ſome- 


large ſhells of the pearl-oyſters, which they found.in a town; 
0 | 6c. with, 


x >, Fo 
12 —— > 62% L 
7 * 
CONSE. «ET 
Wo 3. © * 
Sa =” 4 
n 
i 42 
Y of ” * 


191 


ung 


7 5 * 2 . 
— == nga th — —— 


- 7 
FFP 


RES: 


192 


9 
Ss * 8 . 
. 1 3 * 
ox on: 


eine 


ADDITIONS AND ELUCIDATIONS 


with which they returned to the ſhip. Don Lorenzo alſo ſent 


Don Diz60DE VERA with the command of a party of ſoldiers, 
who were in beſt health, to ſeek an Indian woman, to keep her 
as an hoſtage ; and by that means to make the natives deſiſt 
from the evil they were conſtantly committing, They brought 
three, with fix children, who were frequently viſited by their 
huſbands, and, with others of their people, they came to beg 
them, with much careſſes. They let them go, to ſatisfy them, 
with which they appeared very thankful. The general, Dor 
Lorenzo, who (as before-mentioned) was wounded in the 
leg with an arrow, was obliged to keep his bed, where he 
quickly grew worſe, being ſeized with deliriouſneſs *. In 
ſhort, his illneſs increaſing, he died the 2d November, being 
lamented, and buried in the ſame manner as the Adelentado a 


little before. Soon after the vicar followed him ; his diſeaſe 


was of longer continuance. This loſs was ſuch as the ſins of 
theſe unfortunate pilgrims deſerved ; it ſerved as a ſtroke to 
tell them they were diſpleaſing to Gop, when, after ſo many 
corporeal afflictions, he took from them their ſpiritual com- 
fort. The vicar, Juan Ropricuez DE EsPINOSA, was a 
man of virtuous parts, zealous for the good of the ſouls com- 
mitted to his charge. He gave, by a well regulated life, a 
good example to all, and was beloved by all. Captain PR- 
DRo FERNANDEZ DE QuIRos was his executor; he made 
him bury him in the ſea, not caring to be carried a-ſhore, 
leſt the Indians ſhould dig him up, and commit ſome inde- 
cencies with his body. 

« With ſuch continued misfortunes our people were 1 
to ſuch a ſtate, that twenty determined Indians might have 
driven them away, and deſtroyed the town, even without 


* Paſmado. 


« danger. 


FROM FIG U EAN O A 


danger. At laſt the ſick, compelled by their diſtreſſes 


(which were great, and without remedy), came aboard, and 
„„ the governeſs with them. The flag remained aſhore, with 
« the few ſoldiers, who had tolerable health, till they got 
* water and wood. 
Hogs «© which they roaſt whole upon pebbles.” 
Chiefly white . they perch on the trees, and breed there.” 
Canes many and large.” © 
Large © long.” : 
Above all, the fruit called blanc manger. This is not in 
FiGutRoa. 
Very high trees lars and high trees.” 
Reſembled the pear main . Something like pears.” 
They are boiled or roaſted. ** They eat them roaſted, or 
boiled; one kind is ſweetiſh, the other two are a little pungent 
« at firſt, A ſoldier eat one raw, from whence proceeded great 
* ſickneſs at ſtomach : but this accident paſſed off preſently. 
The Indians make of them a great deal of biſcuit, dried in 
the ſun, or by fire. Keeping it in palm leaves it is of good 
* ſuſtenance +. There is here plenty of rattans, which ſerved 
© them for cordage. They found plenty of pumpkins, and 
A ſweet baſil, of exceſſive ſtrong ſcent, with other red flowers; 
of a beautiful appearance, which the Indians prize much: 
they do not grow upon the ground +, they grow upon buſhes, 
« likechily & and they have them in flower-pots, cloſe to their 
houſes: they have great quantity of ginger, which grows ſpon- 
' taneous. The ground is covered with a plant, pretty high, 
* which is called x:quz/ite, it is from this the indigo-dye is-made. 
«© The pita trees are many and much damahagua, of which 
* A modo de peros. 


+ Y ſolo podria tener de no tal el ſer algo calido. 
No huelen, 9 Ages, 


Cc ; : they 


193 


P.89,1.3. 


4. 
var 
19. 
21. 


22. 
24. 
26. 


— 


r = y . 6g" 2 2 
— ws ee * n 
\ 5 AF . WY 7 U 
n N 


* 
« 
2 
Wh hs 
[Sd NIE 
; SITE. 
'S 7 AE 
* * n 
i Ned 
Wir IR 
yo ; 
4 rg 
. 
IL 2 1 
1 OL - 
fl *> of 
= =» kl 
7 > 
IN i 
4 
* 
* 
\ p 1 
: L 
' 1 ad 
G : — 
[ a A 
i 7 - 
7 IX 
1 4 ſ * 
; — 0 
1 * 
e 
2 
o | 8 
3 
— 4 
5 wn 
# 5 * 
90 (1 wo 
WE” 
1 3 
4 \ 3 
YL” 
q : S 
13 * 
U PSS 
: 
7 a+ F 
. Fu 
1 So 
| FED 
» Jo 
Fi, ow 
* . 
1 Wn i 
4 nds 5 
: 52 3 
j E 
= 0 x 
we "4 N of 
+ wy 7 
11 3 * 6 
5 | 3 
: ; 2 n 
xy * bh 
+ "> 4 _ 
E wel 4 2 
n 22 I 
« TOES. 1 
* = = * 
: 2 M 
8 _—_ 
— | 
ef | 3 5 
> _— 
; A oo 
lid Ls o 2 4 2 
: 5 4 * 
n 14% 
1 [ {ES 
1 + r 
: os. * _ 
oy 1 LOS 1 
* a 4 
23 38 
$ RS PS 
LETTER 
* n 
1 4 4 % MES 
11, ar 3 
e 
3 F I 
; DO) um 
r 
. * Ps by 
. 1 y 
* PIR 
/ od 
' - ; 
- YI 
44 
. 1 * 23 
I E 
1 0 Ae 
* 1 ' f _ e * 
r 
e 
y * 
: _ U 4 
4 1 5 wx” 1 hd 
: 1 4 
: 2 * 
[ 1 
; « . 
1 © Ne 
Kel 
4 = 
4 * 
4 Fs” 
"Ad {1 
7 
": EE 
*T) 7 EN 
1 1 [ 
1 1 7 
1 l 
Y N 
1 8 be 
. E 
: = 4 * 
3 p . 
p 
: oe \ WR 
x = * 
, - * J 
i {i 
/ 2 
» «BY 
| N 
is 2 v7 2 
[ALL | Fat 
— SS * 
5 3 ES 
1 2 83 
* x _—_ 
5 3 
; 2 
4 1 
5 a 
; | h N 
% # ' 
£ wm 
8 I by bs 
* r , 
} * 23 
v4 * 
+ G — 
__ 
: 4 & 
Sx 
ö 
8.4 
mt 
1 
4 | 


8 


ADDITIONS AND ELUCIDATIONS 


they make their ropes and nets. There are curious ſnail- 


ſhells *, like thoſe they bring from CHina, and many + 


pearl-ſhells. Near the place where the Spaniards ſettled, on 
the brink of the fountain, was a tree, in the trunk of which 
the natives had made a wound, from whence diſtilled a ſweet- 
ſcented liquor, which much reſembled the oil of Seto. The 
Indians make bags and pockets of palm; curious and large 
mats, which ſerve them for fails to their veſſels. They ſaw 
certain cloths &, but did not know of what they were made. 
They weave them in ſmall looms : they ſerve them for hand- 
kerchiefs, and cloaks, with which the women cover them=- 
ſelves. They much uſe a food, which is called brete, alſo 
known and much uſed in the EAST-INx DIES. It is a leaf of 
the ſhape of a heart, about the ſize of a hand : it has the 
ſmell, taſte, and colour of clove, and, together with other 
things, they chew it. They ſpit out the firſt ſpittle, and 
ſwallow the reſt. It is reckoned wholſome, and good to 
ſtrengthen the ſtomach and gums. 

<< Their towns are of twenty houſes, little more or tefs, they 


make them round, and of plank, raiſed on a ſingle ſtake of 


large wood. They have two ſtories ||, to which they go up 
by hand ladders. They are covered with palms, interwoven 
with each other. They are open all round, half man height, 
and ſurrounded with a wall of looſe ſtones, open. at the en- 
trance inſtead of a gate J. 

«« There is in each towm a large houſe as a temple *, with hu- 
man figures in bas- relief, ill wrought ; and another . houſe, 
which appears to belong to the community; and along between 
them ſome ſtages of eanes . There are ten or twelve of theſe 


* Caracoles. Varias. f Mochilas y bolſas. FX Telas, [ Sobrados. 
Paredon ſe piedras ſueltas en ſu entrada en lugar de puerta. 
Como oraculo. ++ Barbacoas de canas.. 


towns 


F ROM F'16U Bo 


towns upon the ſea-ſhore, and in each two wells, curiouſly 
made, with ſtairs to go down to them, and covered a-top 
with plank: cloſe to the ſea are ſome fiſhing weirs ſurrounded 
with ſtone ; where the tide flows, they have a device for fiſh- 
ing *, and a ſtick like a pump-ſpear. The canoes with which 
they navigate to diſtant parts are beautiful and large, for the 
ſmall ones only ſerve in the neighbourhood: of their houſes. 
Theſe are formed with the keel ſomewhat flat, with head 
and ſtern all of one piece. The well is in the middle, where 
they bale out the water which comes into it, and ſtep the 
main maſt. They fix upon them ſome ſtages , with pieces 
of wood acroſs, tied with ropes; from whence come others, 
which run along on one fide, and ſerve to ſupport it, that 
it may not overſet; ſo that the hull + only ſerves to ſuſtain 
this fabric, which holds thirty men, or more, with their 
proviſions d. The fail is of mat, broad and long above, and 
narrow below. They are very ſwift ||, and good to work to 
windward, ſo that the frigate endeavoured to take one, and 
it paſſed under her bowſprit C. 

Their grounds, fields, and gardens ** are very well laid out. 
The ſoil is black, fat and looſe. The climate is ſuch, as in 


other countries in this latitude, they had ſome thunder and 


lightning, and much rain, but not much wind. The Ade- 
lentado named this iſland ST. CRUZ: it is to appearance 100 
leagues in circuit ; all that they ſaw of it lay about E. and W. 
It is not very high land, and although it has ridges of hills; 
with vallies and plains, is clear of foreſts ++. All the ſea ſhore 


* Peſcan con cierto invencion. - + Barbacoas, 

+ Baſo. $ Hatos. Muy veleras. 

Tanto que la fragata procuro coger una y ſe le fue de debaxo del vaupres. 
** Haziendas, labrangas y frutales. ++ Is limpia de malezas. 


Cc 2 « 1s 


195 


cs 


ce 


cc 


«c 


«Cc 


cc 


66 


cc 


Jes 


cc 


«c 


«cc 


66 


«c 


16 


46 


. cc 


46 


£6 
** 
cc 


66 


cc 


46 


46 


** J 
8 N a 
a” H + 

1 4 111 LO 
r 
W . 
TJ * 


ADDITIONS AND ELUCIDATIONS 


is well peopled, of the interior part they give no account, 
for they did not go thither. 

« On the 7th November all were embarked, whereby a 
bad concluſion was put to this good undertaking *, ill managed 
in a thouſand circumſtances +, and eſpecially becauſe it was 
not ſet on foot on his majeſty's account, whoſe countenance 
is eſlential for the execution and maintenance of ſuch at- 
tempts. | | 

«© Next day a northerly wind ſet in, and as it was a little 
[freſh] they parted three cables which the ſhip held by, there 
remaining one only, and fo ſmall, that it was not thought 
ſufficient to hold a boat : but although it appeared ſo weak, 
it was, God be praiſed, ſo ſtrong, that it alone held the 
ſhip, preventing it from driving a-ſhore, to which it was very 
near. 
In the evening Lu vs DE ANDRADA. was ſent with thirty 
men to ſeek proviſions for the voyage. He went to a ſmall 
iſland, which, on account of its fertility and verdure, they 
named La GukRTA [THE GARDEN]. He found in a creek 
five of the large canoes, laden with bundles of the country- 
biſcuit, which the Indians had carried thither. He had it 


ſeized, and all ſent to the ſhip without any difficulty. He 


affirmed there was 120 dead hogs & After they had been at 
this creek they put in order the ſick, who, from their leav- 
ing PERV, had been under the care of a venerable old her- 
mitan, who in LIMA ſerved in the hoſpital of the Indians: 
his name was Juan Lear [Loyar Joan], and ſuch he was 
in all the neceſſities they ſuffered. This ſervant of Gop, of 
exemplary manners and life, with very indifferent health, 
and without the leaſt fign of reluctance (though he had much. 


Buena empreſſa. + Errada por mil caminos. t Eſpuertas. 


+ Aver muerto 120 puercos de que ſe vio parte. 


8 4 room: 


cs 


NA 


c 


«cc 


* 


c 
c c 
(c 
66 
cc 
cc 
c c 
cc 
c 
66 
c 
6 
cc 
vs 
«6c 
ce 
Ec 
«ce 
c 
«c 


\cc 


cc 
cc 
44 


16 


16 


FROM FIG U 


room for it), was conſtantly, in the camp, in the ſhips when 
at anchor, and in all the voyage employed in the care of the 
fick with a chearful countenance, ſhewing very clearly how 
fervent his diſpoſition was in charity; executing all the 
offices of bleeding, &c. making their beds, afliſting them in 
a good death, and laying. them out after they were dead; 
and, in ſhort, attending them till out of danger, or till their 
interment; but it was the divine will to call him to himſelf 
on this occaſion.— Happy death, indeed! fince it came at the 
end of ſuch good works, performed with ſo much ſweet- 
neſs of diſpoſition, that his only hope muſt have been to re- 
ceive a reward in Heaven, for his meritorions works on 
earth. He contemned the world as was fitting, ſince, when 
he happened to treat of. the moſt exalted perſons, who are 
Kings, he ſtiled them, Men brought up in deliglits, and admi- 
niſtered to by a great number of ſervants, from whom if they were 
taken, they would, without doubt, remain leſs powerful than 
other men; for not being taught to uſe their fret, their hands, 
and the other parts of their body, but to live, the greateſt part, 
in a continued ſloth, they know better to command, than to la- 
bour. He wore woollen next his ſkin, with a habit reaching 
to mid leg, with a long beard and hair; and this auſtere 
life, and in the ſervice at hoſpitals, he had ſpent many years, 
beſides thoſe which he had been a ſoldier in CHILI. 

4 On Louis DE ANDRADA'S return, the chief pilot was ſent 
to the ſame iſland with twenty men; many Indian embarka- 
tions followed them, but he, leaving fix in the boat, landed 
with the reſt. The natives feeling * the ill treatment on 
other occaſions, received them with arrows and ſhouts; made 


many wheels +. They were ſhewn a fign of peace with a 
* Eſcarmentados. + Bueltas. 
e 


197 


EE 
a ef 
JJ Uoita {SE NY 


i 
j 
| 
4 
0 


A 


3 1 ESRI 


* 
> . —— 8 n — SF ng eee S © 2004, a? — ————_— 
* rr -= EEE. S CIOS 


198 


cc 


cc 


cc 


cc 


cc 


cc 


£5 


cc 


5 


cc 


cc 


cc 


cc 


cc 


ce 


cc 


LC 


64 


«cc 


«Cc 


cc 


cc 


„ 


cc 


«cc 


cc 


«cc 


cc 


cc 


L 1 0 7 & 
—— —ů— — ne 
* . i 


ADDITIONS AND ELUCIDATIONS 


ſmall white flag, but they, without regarding, made more 
wheels and ſhouts. The chief pilot coming nearer, making 
the ſame ſignal. The way by which they paſſed was extremely 
narrow, and very woody, and ſo they began to ſhower ar- 
rows and ſtones from all quarters. The captain ordered them 
to diſcharge two muſkets in the air, which aſtoniſhed them, 
giving room for them to make a puſh into the town, in 
which they found nothing but ſome bundles of biſcuit, and 
other orange-coloured roots, from whence they make a dye 
of the ſame colour. He followed the Indians who fled to the 
hills, and coming to the top, diſcovered a delightful plain, 
exceedingly full of various fruit trees. They found there 
many and large branches of plantan, a quantity of coco- 
nuts, and in a neighbouring houſe a large number of biſ- 
cuit [bundles]. They loaded them on their ſhoulders, and 
in fight of one another (not to ſeparate); they embarked the 


whole, without the Indians receiving any injury. Having 


done this, he ordered the boat to follow them along ſhore to 
a certain place, where he went to cut palmitos, When he 
arrived there, it was not to be ſeen all they could do, where- 
upon they held a conſultation, and it was agreed they ſhould 
go to the place where they had landed on the iſland. In a 
little time, the ſun being ſet, th-y came to a place, where 
ſome rocks made a good breaſt-work ; wherefore, and as 
there was a canoe there, they adviſed the chief pilot for the 
whole to ſtay there during the night, that one might be ſent 
in the canoe to give intelligence to the ſhip of the ſtate they 
were in, that people might be ſent in queſt of them. But 
he did not follow this opinion, on account of ſome in- 
conveniencies attending it. They went on along ſhore, 


« where the trees were very thick, which from the creation had 


CT; 


remained there untouched. 'They found amongſt them ſome 
5 | 6 large 


«6 
66 
£6 
66 
6c 
cr 
64 
21 
cc 
Cc 
cc 
cc 


«cc 


cc 
(6 


6 


* 


Cc 
66 
cc 


«c 


cc. 


A 


1 


«c 


cc 


* 


c 


* $a 


«Cc. 


« 


4 


FROM FI ( 

large rocks, with ſharp edges and points, almoſt impoſſible 
to paſs in the day, much more in the night, and in the dark. 
Sometimes they plumped into the water up to the knee, and 
ſometimes to their middle. They went along climbing over 
trunks and rocks, and wandering from the ſea and to hills. 
It was paſt midnight when they heard two muſkets, and pre- 
ſently two more: the foremoſt of the company made haſte. 
to know the occaſion of this, and found it was the bott, 
which was arrived, having been detained by the contrary 
winds, and obliged to go round the iſland. The people be- 
ing embarked, they returned to the ſhip, where they arrived 
at day-break, finding their friends in the fame ſtate of ſolici- 
tude and apprehenſion for their delay. 

* This day the governeſs mentioned to the pilots her inten- 
tion of failing from this ifland, in queſt of that of ST. 


CHRISTOVAL, to ſee if they could find the almiranta there, 


to do what farther ſhould conduce to the ſervice of Gop and 
of his Majeſty ; and in caſe of not meeting it, that her de- 
termination was to go to the city of ManiLa, to bring 
prieſts and people to return to the ſettlement and accompliſh- 
ment of the diſcovery ; and for this ſhe intreated, perſuaded, 


and commanded every one preſent, to give his opinion in 


the form which he might think moſt convenient. It was the 
opinion of all to fail to the W. S. W. as far as was neceſſary 


to get into the latitude of 11 deg. and that in caſe of not 


finding the ifland, or the almiranta, to proceed to the Pui- 
LIPIN AS. This all of them gave under their hands; the 
chief pilot engaging not to abandon the governeſs, if, as ſhe 


ſaid, ſhe would return for the above-mentioned purpoſe. 
In the evening the ſaid pilot went on board the galeota and 


frigate, leaving them the neceſſary proviſions * and water, 


La harina. 
| together 


mw. 


199 


— 


-_ 


_ 
__— 


** * — k— RT SIETRS 0 


ADDITIONS AND ELUCIDATIONS 


together with inſtructions for the voyage they were about to 
undertake. At night captain Don DIEGO DE VERA, with 
ſome of his company, went aſhore, and took up the Ade- 
lentado's body, to carry in the frigate to ManiLa, not 
chuſing to conſent in the capitana, in Rs to ſome 
abuſes *. | 
The diſtance from this bay to Manrra is oo leagues. 
The three veſſels failed from thence the 18th November of 
« the ſaid year, going in queſt of the iſland of ST. CRISTo- 
* VAL. Their tackle was fo bad, that in hoiſting i in the boat, 
e it broke thrice. 
The day they departed, and the ee they ſailed to the 
W. S. W. obſerving the ſun, they made 11 deg. They then 
looked out for land, but could not ſee it . The mate and four 
other ſeamen fell ill; five or ſix others, who remained well, 
ſaid to the chief pilot, See, the ſbip is a wreck, full of fich 
people, in want of water and provisions, and that it was im- 
prfſible to keep the ſea with her. As this was the caſe, QuiRos 
told the governeſs that they were in the latitude of 11 deg. 
agreeable to the reſolution, and that he had done what he 
had been ordered. She replied, that fince they could not 
ſee the iſland ST. CHRISTOVAL, nor the almiranta, he ſhould 
purſue his route to Manila. 

„ The chief pilot made them, with the wind at S. E., fteer 
N. N. W. to avoid the coaſt of NEw-GuINEA (which they 
judged was very near), that they might not get amongſt 
iſlands. Not conſidering the tate of the ſhip, ſhe had given 
orders to go along the coaſt of that land, to know what it 
was, but they were not in a condition to do this. They 


* No le quiriendo conſentir en la capitana, reſpeto de algunos ks. 
+ El dia que partieron y el ſiguiente al oesfudueſte, peſado el ſol, y hechas cuentas, 


ſe hallaron onze grados. | 
“ conti- 


FROM FIOG UE R OA. 


* continued failing in this courſe -till the 27th of the ſaid 
«© month, and got into 5 deg. This day was ſeen in the ſea a 
* large trunk, and a great drift of ſmall branches from a river *, 
e with three almonds, like thoſe they left at GRACIOSA, much 
« graſs +, ſnakes, and the winds from S. W. with ſqualls, and 
« rain from that quarter T. By theſe ſigns they concluded 
they were near NEw-GuiNEa. They began to have a great 
« ſea from the N. W. which did the ſhip much damage, and par- 
& ticularly when they had light winds or calms, a ſign of theſe 
«© winds blowing on the other fide of the line. This continued 
« almoſt to the Lavrons iſlands. They alſo met with baffling 
« winds, without being ever ſettled in any point till they got 


e to 5 deg. N. when they had the trade wind from E. N. E. to 


de N. E. which continued the whole voyage, and if the ſun had 
«© been as near the zenith as it was to the tropic. of capricorn, 
<« jt is not known how they could have paſſed the equinoctial. 
„„ Navigating till the 10th December, they found the lati- 
«« tude o deg. 30 min. approaching the line, where they found 
e themſelves, with a clear ſky. the wind died away, and the ſea 
cc fell, without ſeeing land 5. It was ſo cool in the night, 
«© that it was neceſſary to be covered with woollen cloth; but 
«© jn the day the ſun was ſo hot, that it was ſcarce above the 
% horizon when it became inſufferable.” 

ee With an E. and E. N. E. wind, which they now got, they 
« continued their courſe N. N. W. and the Saturday following 
« got fight of an iſland, in queſt of which they went, with an 
intention of ſeeking a port and proviſions. But Quixos not 


* 


* Un grande ilero de roſuras de ri rio. 
+ Muchas pajas. 
4 EI viento ſudueſte con refregones, celages y aguageros. 
$ Halloſe altura de medio grado por llegar a la linea parage en que ſe hallaron 
eſtando claro el cielo, ſoſegado el ayre, y quieto el mar ſin verſe tierra. 


i 


201 


P. 93, I. 4. 


from bot. 


D d ce thinking | 


r Rr s * 


2 — N =% Ay x 


NSN YER 


— — —— — 2— 
4 * J bY 7 (0) 
e 7 a FRED! 8 
Wr 4 . ' 4 
”* 4Y 
I» wy *\4 £ 


— ———— 
WL 1 I. 
n 


n Th . r OTROS 

a h OPS. FR A = \ 

x q p » 8 1 TY 2 3 
J ? r MOYLES 8 Kr 


— e 
I REYES 
COST, ASS 
DE ot Bl ey EY 
2 n R Fryer * mn 
— TOY I « 8 Us ws gy 
r "a> We re 


202 


— 


—. 


60 
(c 
ce 
66 
cc 
cc 
(c 
cc 
«c 
«c 
cc 


cc 


cc 


cc 


$A * * 
OC) Ra. 
0 5 * 1 7 3 WW Wy 90 , PI . i wha 1 q 8 7 * = ANC ID; > i» * [ N 
* N 1s” ae PLC, EL N . ooo RARRAED 8 . | 0 . 
. F 4 SS E 4 * 1 
> * 
: 
ä * mn a » 
1 q — OT _ a 4 
X x : "oh 7 , . * 6 . a " . —— , 
= PO - ks 6 ; SIN * pan ms AA I 4 \ 5 & .. 1 — rr * 
en . 5 e - & 4 


cc 
66 


cc 


WIG 2 5. OE: 
* IE) N 2 5 8 ns? 
whe 4% RE 2 dag r JE: 

t 


xc 
cc 
ce 


«Cc 


* 


5 


4 


„ 


U 


£ 
NE I TL TOES 


<c 


ADDITIONS AND ELUCIDATIONS 

thinking it proper to ſtand in ſhore in the night, ordered to 
put the ſhip about. The failors, exceſſively jaded, ſaid it 
was better to ſtand on, than to fatigue themſelves ſo much. 
One of the council propoſed to Rand for a certain point, but 
notwithſtanding this contradiction Qulixos himſelf let go the 
the fore ſheet, and put the helm-a- lee, when the ſhip came 
about. It appeared to be the act of ſome guardian angel, for 
if the ſhip had not come about, it had been loſt without fail, 
as was preſently perceived. He perſiſted in what he did, and 
ſaid, that fo far as they were, they knew the ſea was clear, 
and that farther on they did not know what they _ . 
in with. 
* In the morning watch they put che mp about again, and 
at day break came to where they were at night. A man was 
ordered aloft, accordihg to cuſtom, and faĩd: that to the N. W. 
was a great ledge of ſhoals, of which he could not ſee the end. 
The wind was N. E. little of it, and en the beam; the 
ſhip did not carry topfails to keep to windward; The ſhoals 
drew the current to them in fuch a manner, that the ſhip 
came ſo near, that it was thought- ſcarce” poſſible to eſcape; 
it was on Chriſtmas-day. At three in. afternoon they: doubled 
the ſhoals almoſt miraculouſly. From the: iſlands came out 
Indians in their embarkations, with ſails, and Without. A 


7 they could not paſs the reef, they got upon it; from IgA 
they called with their hands. In the evening a ſingle Indian, 


in a ſmall canoe, came to the end of the ſhoal; as he kept to 
windward, and at a diſtance, they could not tell if he had a 
beard ; this being the fituation of the Hands of Bearded 
People. He appeared to be a man of good ſtature, naked, 
with long hair, which he wore looſe. He pointed from: . 


* Viento nordeſte, y poco y traveſia. 
* « hence 


To the Voyage of PDR FERNANDEZ DE Quizos, 1606, 


FROM FI GU FERGIE 
whence he came, and parting fomething white with his 
hands, eat it, and lifted up a coconut, as if he drank. They 
called him, but he did not chuſe to come. This iſland is in 
full 6 deg. N. it is almoſt round; 30 leagues in circuit, and 
not very high. It has much wood, and upon tlie ſides of the 
hills much graſs and plantations x. At 3 leagues on the W. 
fide, are four low iflands, and many others cloſe to it, all of 
them ſurrounded with reefs. It appeared to be cleater on the 8. 
« They continued their courſe N. N. W. and Monday, 1ſt 
January, were in the latitutle of 14 deg. They ſteered due 
W. The wind was fair and freſh, and Wedneſday, the 3d 
of that month, at day- break, they had fight of two of the 


203 


LADRONE iflands, to which they were then: bound ; ; the one 


was GU AN, the other  SERPANA,” | 2 | ö 


— 


ADDITIONS FROM FIGUER ROA, 


OD has made men ſo uſeful; read, Gor Ads made 
ce men fo addicted to letters and arms; and ſo expert in 


oy — thing poliſhed; beſtowing on them, as is known, a 


ce 


66 


cc 


cc 


4 


cc 


60 


temperament ſo well adapted. 

„ It follows, that the like ought to be expected S 
theſe parts, at leaſt that there is a good diſpoſition in country 
and men for every thing which can be deſired. Obſerve that 
the undiſcovered part is above 5000 leagues in longitude, and 
in ſome parts 70, 80, or more degrees in latitude; in ſhort, 
that it is the 4th of the globe, which is to be diſcovered. 

« But leaving many other reaſons which might be brought 
as as proof of what is affirmed, it is to be obſerved, that not oe 


* Y por fon laderas muchas roſas y ſementeras. 


Pee „ 


P. 102, l 4 


r 


A * . = Fay (TEE 1 
7 L SAL 
Z + he 4 e 


— 


af 8 
* — 


— * bl 
I 
2 LG FS 


TS 7 
r 


204 


ADDITIONS FROM FIGUEROA. 


1 of all the iſlands hitherto diſcovered in the wide ocean in all 


&« the ſeas of the world was inhabited, but deſert, and without 
«© men to tread upon them *, except the LapRoNEs; theſe, it 
is certainly known, form a chain which adjoins to Jayan, at 
« ſome ſmall diſtances from one another; for in all the voyages 
* made in that quarter, from the PHIL I PIX AS to New Seary, 
* they have fallen in with iſlands. For example, the TRERCR“ 
* RAS, the iſland of MADEIRas, thoſe of CAPE DER VERDE, 
% and others of the Atlantic, which being in the main ocean, 
« were found uninhabited; on the contrary, the Canary 


„ iſlands being ſituated in fight of the main land of AFRICA, 


« were found with people, as is known. | 

« Since theſe, notwithſtanding their being ſo near the lands 
4 of EvuRoPE and AFRICA, wherein the knowledge of. naviga- 
« gation is ſo ancient, remained ſo long unknown and were 
« diſcoyered and peopled by accident ; ; what can be ſaid of the 
* four now diſcovered in ſo wide and extenſive an ocean, inha- 
te bited by people ſo ignorant, and all thoſe of theſe parts as 
«© much without art as them? Not to mention the iſlands of 
« the Mediterranean, and all the others which adjoin to the 
« five provinces of EUROPE, Ar RICA, Asia, New-SPain, and 
« PeRv, which being in fight, or near at hand, the inhabi- 


-*< tants entered. 


« With this Quiros ſupported his 1 but they 
« yere not then complied with; notwithſtanding the viceroy, 


% Don Lovis DE VELAsco, heartily approved, he wanted the 


« King's orders to give effect to the enterprize. In ſhort, he 
6c Fent him to SPAIN, with letters to the King and miniſters, 
* ir which he ſtrongly recommended the buſineſs. 


* Que la pifaſfe, 


2 
3 


„ R A ͤĩ 


Paſſim for Mendana, read Mendafia. 
| Cannete, read Cañete. 1 


LIS T of AUTHORS. 


Loft page, I. 1. embada, read embiada. 
N. B. All the Books are in Folio, where not otherwiſe expreſſed. 


HISTORICAL COLLECTION. 
P. 13 laſt Line, Bartolem*®, read Bartoleme. | 


39 caret. 
39 J. 17. acception, read exception. 

42 —17. Pinge from Figueroa, read Figuera. 
45 — 17. Figueroa fays, &c. to the Bottom of the Page, dele. 


46 — I. 11. Dele. 
18. to end, Dele. 
50 — 22. Dele. ti | 
51 —1—5. Dele.. | 10 


Vide p. 175, for Figueroa's Relation. 


2— 4. pretenſions, read pretenſion. 

After 10. Add In the above account of the Demarcacion, I have not confined: 
myſelf merely to the Pope's Bull, but have included the ſubſequent explanations and ſti 
pulations; the:bull was granted upon Columbus's f voyage, it is dated May 4, 1493. 
Purchas [Vol. I. p. 13, &c.] has inferted the bull in Latin and Englith : the if voy = 
age of the Portugueſe to India by the Cape of Good Hope, was made by Vaſco de 
Gama, in 1497. The Malucos were not diſcovered till 1511 ; and the Spaniards did 
not viſit them till 1521.3 ſo that all the reports grounded on a ſuppoſed regulation of 
Limits between the Spaniards and Portugueſe in the Ea/t- Indies, ariſe from inatten- 
tion to chronology. | 

Three commiſſioners on the part of Spain, and a like number in behalf of Portu- 
gal, met at Tordeſillas, thoſe for Spain were, | 

Don Enrique Enriquez, Mayor-domo mayor del Rey Catolico. 

Don Gutierre de Cardenas, commendador mayor de Leon y ſu contador mayor. 

El Doctor Rodrigo Maldonado. 

The Portugueſe commiſſioners were, 

Ruy de Soſa, Senor de Sagre y Birenguel.. 

Don Juan de Sofa, his ſon, almotacen mayor. 

Licentiate Arias de Almada, Juez del deſembargo. 5 

On June 7, 1493, they agreed, “ that the line of Demarcacion, (which the pope had 
c placed one hundred leagues to the Weſt of one of the andi of Azores, or Cape Herd), 
& ſhould be removed wo hundred and ſeventy leagues farther We, from the fands of 
Cape Verde, and that from this meridian, all to the 7/27 ſhould belong to Spain, and 

& from thence to the Eaſt, ſhould belong to the navigation, conqueſt, and diſcovery of 

« the kings of Portugal; and that the navigation by the /ea of the King of Portugal, 


6. 6e fhOuld 


4 N 
2 Cs * , Ty 1 
5 > be SAT of 4 
* 10 1 i 
of TIS * 
= . 12 1 J * 
1 WET, 
1 
ln 
Ne 
1 n \ Y 
I 
3 : Th 
1 


RN » 
& ſhould be ſree to the kings of Caſtile, going a direci Courſe, but that neither ſhould 
cc ſend to trade within the limits of the other.“ 

This was put in writing, and confirmed on the 2d of July by the king of Spain; 
and on the 27th of February by the king of Portugal. 

In the council of pilots in 1524, upon the circumnavigation of the Victory, it was 
agreed, that the three hundred and ſeventy leagues ſhould be reckoned from St. Antonio, 
the moſt weſtern of the Cape de Verde Iſlands, in which, latitude they reckoned 370 
leagues to be 227. 9. and therefore they place the line of Demarcacion 22% 9 W. a St. 
Antonio or about 48 from Greenwich. 

In 1529, the Spaniards empawned the trade and iſlands of the Malucos to Portugal 
for 350, ooo ducats, without any time limited. 

In 1548, the Cortes de Caſtilla offered to repay that money for ſix years profit of that 
Trade, and to leave it afterwards to the crown, but the emperor would not admit it. 


P. 58 + Cannete a Chriſtoval, read Canete por Chriſtoval. 
«9 +. 12. Mre, read Mr*, 
61 — 8, 
12. : 
274 Vide p. 185. 
laſt line. 
62 — 4. 
ne - Vide p. 18 | i 
20. 3 
7. | 
63 — Note. Vide p. 186. 
64 — . Do. 
65 — 6. ont, read out. 
66 — IL. conformer, read conformar. 
69 — 2. Vide p. 186. 
70 — 11. . 


74 — 6. note. ad Lima, read a Lima. 
74 — note, I. 1. Churchill ſays S. W.—dele. 


6. [tayado] ; and the S. E. ¶tajado] and at the 8. E. 


80 — note, I. 2. Coreal, &c.—dele. 
81 — 16, 17, 20. Malop* „read Malope. 
84 _ fn ge reud Do. 

80 — 13—19. Dele — Vide p. 186. 


27—to end. Dele — Vide p. ag, 
87 — 1,tog. accomplices—Dele. 
180 end. Dele—Vide p. 189. 
88 — 1—7. Dele. 
89 — 1 2. Dele. 
3. hogs, add, which they roaſt ks upon pebbles,—Vide p. 193. 
perch and live, read po and breed. 
89 — — — Videp. 193. 
26. The Indians, &c,—Dele Vide 193. 
„„ 
91 Dele. 
92 — 1=— $5 Dele. 
16—to end. Dele—Vide p. 200. 
93 — 1—10. Dele. 
1 28—to end. Dele —Vide p. 201, 
94 — 1—18. Dele. 


— > Galleg®, read Gallego. 


re 


P. 98 J. 12. 


20. 
98 — 21. 


23. 
9 9. 


10. 
* note, 
1 
101 — 25. 
102 — 4. 
3 to end. 
* note. 
26. 
103 
104 — 4. 
15. 
117-17. 
_ loft line, 
143 note. 
145 Caret. 
Paſim 
13. 
147 — I. 
148—14-. 
2.3 
157 T 1. 


164 — 4. 
19. 
II. 


176—15. 
199 — bY 


N CC | 

and c to plough up, &c.” read, and as he ſaid & to go ploughing 
up, &c. ö : 

compoſes, read occaſions. 

a line incompaſſing, read a line without breadth or thickneſs 
encompaſſing. 

begins, read begin. 


parallel, &c. to the weſt, "OR a lower latitude to 90, read pa- 


rallel, from a lower latitude, looking to the welt, to 90, 
part, a parts. | 
regor, read rigor. 
reſtro an poniente, read roſtro al poniente, 

8. E, 8, 8. W. read 8 E, 8, SW. 

God has made men ſo uſeful.—Vide 20 3+. 
Dele. 

to follow p. 204. 

Seixcas, read Seixas. k 
were ſouls, read were, ſouls. . 

ſchedules, read Cedules. 

* to be placed after New-Guinea. . 
catched, read caught. 

and checked bim, read to carry him. 
min. deg, read meſes, dias.. 


Philip II. read Philip III. 

Sena, read Sen. 

8. E, S. S. E, W. and N. E. read S E, 88 E, Wand NE. 

Montes, read Monte. 

and they, read and that they. 

fundada, read fundado. 

fuertes read fuertes, 

had been, read have been. 

that, read that, 8 i 

[Clubs, &c.] — — — II 7%. 

Note dele. 

1568. This appears to be an Error of the Preſs in Figueroa for 

1507. 

from the ſea and to the hills, read from the ſea to the hills, and 

from the hills to the ſea. 


8 
— bo 
7 
=" 
* 4 
"x 
* 43 
es 
5 
IL 
a 
+ 7 Rs 
wa 
3 
| wp 
. 
* 
LU 4 
_ 


* 
n 
LI 


LO 


