Dampier's Voyages, Vol. II (William Dampier (John Masefield, ed.), 1906)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1906 Masefield edition (https://archive.org/details/dampiersvoyages01dampgoog). Dampier's voyages continued — the supplement, the discourse of trade winds, and the voyage to New Holland.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


i 


HARVARD 
COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 


THE    VOYAGES 

OF 

CAPTAIN   WILLIAM    DAMPIER 


::> 


/     <ilL  2/'/^' 


M 


ly^ 


\S^\^'^ 


8  1965 


DAMPIER'S 
VOYAGES 


Consisdng  of  a  New  Voyage  Round  the  World,  a 

Supplement  to  the  Voyage  Round  the  World, 

Two  Voyages  to  Gunpeachy,  a  Discourse 

of  Winds,  a  Voyage  to  New  Holland, 

and  a  Vindication,  in  answer  to 

the  Chimerical  Relation  of 

William  Funnell 


BY 

CAPTAIN  WILLIAM    DAMPIER 


EDITED   BY 

JOHN   MASEFIELD 


IN   TW^O  VOLUMES 
II 


LONDON 
F.    GRANT    RICHARDS 

7  CARLTON   STREET 
1906 


Printed  bf  Ballanttne,  Hanson  6*  Ca 
At  the  Ballantyiie  Presi.  Edinburgh 


CONTENTS    OF    VOL.    II 


PART  I 
Su^Ument  %f  the  Vrfage  rmmi  the  WerU^  cMtinued  fr§m  V§L  /. 


rAGS 


IV.  Of  thb  GoTumMiMT  of  ToMQum,  Kings,  Souxtits,  and 

Mandarins      .•••••••         i 

V.  Voyage  to  Tcnan.    Jou&net  by  Land  to  Cachao,  and 

OccuiJLBNCis 19 

VI.  His  RrruftN  feom  Tonquin,  with  some  Paeticulars  of 
Camiooia  and  Bsncouu,  and  Aeeital  at  Malacca 
and  achin  •  •       35 

VII.    ACWN      DBSCRIBtD;     ITS     NaTURAL     AND    PoUTICAL     StaTB» 

Customs,  Teaob,  Citil  Wars,  etc.  ...       49 

VIII.  The  Author's  Voyage  to  Malacca;  Malacca  described       75 

IX.  Return  to  Achin  ;   Voyage  to  Fort  St.  George,  and 

thence  to  Bencouu:   Bencoxh.!  described  .  91 


PART  II 

The  Campeachy  Voyagei 

I.   First   Journey  to    Campeachy,    and    Return.     Jucatan, 
Alcranes,  and  Island  of  Pines  described 

II.  Second  Voyage  to  Campeachy.    The  East  Coast  described 
its  Vegetables,  Weather,  Animals,  etc. 

III.  Logwood-Cutting,  Beef-hunting,  and  Occurrences 

IV.  The  Wist  Coast  Rivers.    The  Mountain  Cow,  Indians,  etc 

V.  The  Rivers  further  West,  the  Products  of  Campeachy 
Return  to  England        ..... 


107 

>43 

178 

198 

212 


CONTENTS   OF   VOL.   II 

PART  m 

A  Discourse  of  Windsy  Storms^  Seasons^  TideSj  and  Currents 

in  the  Torrid  Zone 

CHAP.  rAGB 

I.  Of  the  T&ue  or  General  Trade  Wind  at  Sea,  Crossing 

THE  L1NE9  ETC 229 

II.  Of  the  Coasting  and  Constant  Trade  Winds        .         •239 

III.  Of  the  Shifting  Trade  Winds  and  Monsoons         .         .     243 

IV.  Of  Sea  and  Land  Breezes 251 

V.  Of  Peculiar  Breezes  and  Winds  of  Particular  Effects, 

SUMMASENTA    WiNDS,   CaRTAGENA    BrEEZES,     PoPOGAIOS, 

Terenos,  and  Harmatans        .....     265 

VI.  Of    Storms,    Norths,    Souths,    Hurricanes,    Tuffoons, 

Stormy  Monsoons,  and  Elephantas  .         .         .     279 

VII.  Of   the    Seasons   of   the    Year,    Weather,    Rains,    and 

Tornadoes 294 

VIII.  Of  Tides  and  Currents.     Natal  described     .         .         .     305 


PART   IV 

A  Voyage  to  New  Holland 

I.  Departure  from  England.    The  Canary  Isles.    Teneriffe, 

Mayo,  and  St.  Jago  described  .         .         .         '349 

II.  Course   and  Winds   in   Crossing   the  Line.     Bahia,  the 

City  and  Country  described    .         .         .         .         '373 
III.  Winds,  Sea-reckonings  and  Variations.     Arrival  in  New 
Holland.     Description   of  the   Country.     An   Ac- 
count OF  Plants 401 

PART   V 

I.  A  Continuation  of  a  Voyage  to  New  Holland     .         •     45' 

II.  Letters  and  Papers   Relating  to   the   Voyage   of   the 

««St.  George" 575 

III.  Captain  Dampier's  Vindication 579 

IV    Captain  Dam  pier's  Vindication  Answered         .         .         •     5^5 

V.  Courts- Martial 594 

Index 607 

vi 


LIST    OF    MAPS    AND 
ILLUSTRATIONS 


A  Map  of  the  SnLim  of  Malacca  .  T^/mcefqge  48 

A  Map  of  thi  Bay  op  Campeacht    ....,,„    107 

A  Visw  OF  THt  General  and  Coasting  Teadb-winds 

IN  THE  Atlantic  and  Indian  Oceans  •         •      n         tt    »8 

A  View  of  the  General  and  Coasting  Trade-winds 

IN  the  Great  South  Ocean  •      »»         »»    >43 

Captain   Dampier's  New  Voyage  to  New  Holland, 

ETC,  IN    1699,   ETC. I.  t»      338 

Some  curious  Birds »»         tt    400 

Some  curious  Birds »»         »9    407 

Fishes  taken  near  New  Holland,  etc.  •       >»         >»    426 

Five  Tables  of  Plants      .         .         .         .  | 

»>         >f    448 
Two  Draughts,  showing  strange   Fishes,   etc.  ) 

Fishes  taken  near  New  Guinea  ....„„    475 

A  Fish,  a  strange  Bat,  a  Bird        ....„„    500 

Stiance   Fowls  of  New  Guinea  •       »         t*     S'S 

Curious  Fishes     .       | 

The  Mountain  Cow  ) 

•  • 

Vll 


VOYAGES   AND   DESCRIPTIONS 


CHAP.   IV 

Of  tht  Gtvtrnm/nt  ef  Temfui'ii.      The  twt  Kingt  Boua  an  J  Cheua  ;  iht 

RfVtll  tf  thr  Cxhinthiafse,  and  Original  af  the  pment  Cemtitu- 

lim  al   Ttn^tun.     Of  the   Boua"!   Confinement,  and  the   Choua'i 

»r    rv&ng    King'/    Prrun  and    Gtventmrnl  i    and    the    Treature^ 

Elrfiu»ti  find  Artillery.      Thtir  manner  of  making  Gun-fmvdtr. 

Of  th*  StUitrt,   thtir  Arms,   Emphyment,    &c.     Of  the  Naval 

L  f«Y/,  their  fint  Gilliei  and  Management  (f  them.      The  IVatch 

H         tf^  in  their  T»Wni,  tMeir  Jmtiee  and  punishing  of  Deblers,  and 

r  Crinunalx    if   aU  larti.       Of  the    Eunuch    Mandarins :     Their 

Pnmttian  and  />/f/MfiViVnt.     Of  their  iwearing  upon  a  draught 

af  Hens  BJotd :  and  the  Trial  iy  Utter  lyaleri  in  Guinea.     Of 

tk/  AJandarims  Enlrrtainmenti,      The  Chtp-stieh  used  at  Meals  t 

amd  tkttr  ksadtie%\  t»  Strangers, 

THIS  Kingdom  is  an  ahaoluie  Monarchy,  but  of  , 
such  a  kind  as  is  not  in  the  World  again ;  for  ^ 
it  has  two  Kings,  and  each  supreme  in  his 
particular  way :  The  one  is  called  Boua,  the 
other  Choua;  which  last  Name  I  have  been  told  signifies 
MMiter.  The  Boua  and  his  Ancestors  were  the  sole 
Monarch*  of  Tonquin ;  tho*  I  know  not  whether  as 
independent  Sovereigns,  or  as  Tributaries  to  China,  of 
which  they  have  been  thought  to  have  been  a  Frontier 
Province,  if  not  a  Colony :  for  there  is  a  great  Affinity 
ttetwccn  them  in  their  Language,  Religion,  and  Customs. 
rbeie  two  Kings  they  have  at  present,  are  not  any  way 
rrUted  in  their  Descent  or  E' ami  lies :  nor  could  I  learn 
ri'jw  long  their  Government  has  continued  in  the  present 
Knrm ;  but  it  appears  to  have  been  for  some  Successions. 
The  occasion  is  variously  reported ;  but  some  give  this 
account  of  it 

VOL.  tl.  A 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

^.  The  Bofua*s  or  anticitt  King's  of  Tooqoiii,  were  formerly 

6S8  Masters  of  Cochinchina,  2nd  kept  that  Nation  in  subjec- 
tion  by  an  Army  of  Tooquincsc  constantly  kept  there, 
under  a  General  or  Deputy,  who  ruled  them.  When 
Cochinchina  threw  off  the  Tonquinese  Toak,  the  King 
had  two  great  Generals^  one  in  Cochinduna,  and  another 
in  Tonquin  it  self.  These  two  Genends  differing,  he 
who  was  in  Cochinduna  revolted  from  his  Sovereign  of 
Tonquin,  and  by  his  Power  over  the  Army  there,  made 
himself  King  <^  Cochinchina :  since  which  these  two 
Nations  have  always  been  at  Wars;  yet  each  Nation  of 
late  is  rather  on  the  defensive  part  than  on  the  offen^ve. 
But  when  the  General  who  commanded  in  Cochinchina 
had  been  thus  successful  in  his  Revolt  from  under  the 
Boua,  the  Tonquinese  General  took  the  Courage  to  do 
so  too;  and  having  gained  the  Affections  of  his  Army, 
deprived  the  King  his  Master  of  all  the  Regal  Power,  and 
kept  it  with  all  the  Revenues  of  the  Crown  in  his  own 
Hands :  yet  leaving  the  other  the  Title  of  King ;  probably, 
because  of  the  great  Zeal  the  People  had  for  that  Family. 
And  thus  the  Kingdom  came  wholly  into  the  Power  of 
this  Tonquinese  Grcneral,  and  his  Heirs,  who  carry  the 
Title  of  Choua ;  the  Boua*s  of  the  Ancient  Family  having 
only  the  shadow  of  that  Authority  they  were  formerly 
Masters  of.  The  Boua  lives  the  Life  of  a  Idnd  of  a 
Prisoner  of  State,  within  the  old  Palace,  with  his  Women 
and  Children ;  and  diverts  himself  in  Boats  among  his 
Fish-ponds  within  the  Palace  Walls,  but  never  stirs  without 
those  Bounds.  He  is  held  in  great  Veneration  by  all  the 
Tonquinese,  and  seemingly  by  the  Choua  also ;  who  never 
offers  any  violence  to  him,  but  treats  him  with  all  imagin- 
able respect.  The  People  say  they  have  no  King  but 
Boua;  and  seem  to  have  sad  Apprehensions  of  the  Loss 
they  should  have,  if  he  should  dye  without  an  Heir :  and 
whenever  the  Choua  comes  into  his  presence,  which  is 
2  or  3  times  in  the  Year,  he  useth  abundance  of  Com- 
pliments to  him,  and  tells  him,  that  his  very  Life  is  at 
his  Service,  and  that  he  governs  and  rules  wholly  to  do 
him  a  Kindness:  and  always  gives  him  the  upper  Hand. 

2 


ana 

m 


m  DESPOTIC  POWER  OF  THE  CHO0A 

also  when  tny  Ambassadors  arc  sent  trom  the  Empcrour 

China,  the)'  will  deliver  their  Message  to  none  but  the  ' 
Boua,  and  have  ihcir  Audience  of  him.  Yet  after  all 
this  Pageantry,  the  Boua  has  only  a  few  Servants  to  attend 
him,  none  of  the  Mandarins  make  their  Court  to  him,  nor 
U  he  allowed  any  Guards :  All  the  Magistracy  and  Soldiery, 
Treasure,  and  the  ordering  of  all  Matters  of  Peace  or 
liWar,  arc  entirely  at  the  Choua's  disposal ;  all  Preferment 
from  him,  tnd  the  very  Servants  who  attend  the  Boua, 

such  only  as  the  Choua  places  about  him.  Besides  these 
Its,  none  are  ever  suffered  to  see  the  Boua,  much  less 
:  So  that  I  could  learn  nothing  as  to  his  Person. 
as  to  the  Choua,  I  have  been  informed  that  he  is  an 
angry,  ill-natured,  leprous  Person.  He  lives  in  the  second 
Palace,  where  he  has  ten  or  twelve  Wives;  but  what 
Children  I  know  not.  He  governs  with  absolute  Authority 
over  the  Sulnects,  and  with  great  Tyranny :  for  their  Lives, 
Goods,  and  rCstatcs  are  at  his  Command.  The  Province  of 
Tcnehoa  is  said  to  have  belonged  properly  to  his  Ancestors, 
who  were  great  Mandarins  before  the  Usurpation.  So  that 
be  now  seems  to  have  a  particular  value  for  it,  and  keeps 
his  Treasure  there,  which  by  report,  is  very  great.  This 
Treasure  is  buried  in  great  Cisterns  full  of  Water,  made 
purposely  for  that  use :  and  to  secure  it,  he  keeps  a  great 
many  Soldiers  there ;  and  commits  the  charge,  both  of 
tbcm  and  the  Treasure,  to  the  Governour  of  the  Province, 
who  is  one  of  his  principal  Kunuchs. 

The    Choua    has   always   a  strong  Guard   of  Soldiers 
about  his  Palace,  and  many  lai^e  Stables  for  his  Horses 
and   KIcphants.     The  Horses  are  about    13   or    14   H^nds 
high,  and  arc  kept  very  fat :  there  are  2  or  300  of  them. 
le    Elephants   are    kept    in    long   Stables   by   themselves, 
b  having  a  peculiar  Room  or  Partition,  with  a  Keeper 

dreis  and  feed  him.  The  number  of  the  King's 
Elephants  arc  about  150  or  200.  They  arc  watered  and 
waahed  every  day  in  the  River. 

Some  of  the  Elephants  are  very  gentle  and  governable, 
otbcn  arc  more  indocil  and  unruly.  When  these  rude 
ones  arc  to  pass  throtigh  the  Streets,  though  only  to  be 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  watered,  the  Rider  or  Dresser  orders  a  Gong  or  Drum 
1688  ^Q  bg  beaten  before  him,  to  warn  People  that  an  unruly 
Elephant  is  coming ;  and  they  presently  clear  the  Streets 
and  give  a  passage  for  the  Beast ;  who  will  do  Mischief 
to  any  that  are  m  the  way,  and  their  Riders  or  Keepers 
cannot  restrain  him. 

Before  the  Choua*s  Palace,  there  is  a  large  Parade, 
or  square  place  for  the  Soldiers  to  be  drawn  up.  On  one 
side  there  is  a  place  for  the  Mandarins  to  sit,  and  see 
the  Soldiers  exercise,  on  the  other  side  there  is  a  Shed, 
wherein  all  the  Cannon  and  heavy  Guns  are  lodged. 
There  be  50  or  60  Iron  Guns  from  Falcon^  to  Demy- 
Culverin,*  2  or  3  whole  Culverin  *  or  Demi-Cannon,*  and 
some  old  Iron  Mortars  lying  on  Logs.  The  Guns  are 
mounted  on  their  Carriages,  but  the  Carriages  of  these 
Guns  are  old  and  very  ill  made.  There  is  one  great 
Brass  Gun,  much  bigger  than  the  rest,  supposed  to  be 
8  or  9000  pound  weight.  It  is  of  a  taper  bore;*  of  a 
foot  diameter  at  the  Mouth,  but  much  smaller  at  the 
Britch.  It  is  an  ill-shaped  thing,  yet  much  esteemed  by 
them,  probably  because  it  was  cast  here,  and  the  biggest 
that  ever  they  made.  It  was  cast  about  12  or  13  Years 
ago,  and  it  being  so  heavy,  they  could  not  contrive  to 
mount  it,  but  were  beholding  to  the  English,  to  put  it 

^  The  falcon  was  an  M.L.  iron  gun  of  2i-inch  bore,  and  flung  a  3  lb.  ball 
to  a  distance  of  1 500  yards  when  fired  with  a  full  charge  (3  lbs.  of  powder) 
and  elevated  10°.  The  gun  weighed  about  6  cwt.,  and  measured  about 
7  feet  in  length. 

2  The  demi-culverin  corresponded  roughly  to  the  9-pounder  of  the 
Napoleonic  wars.  It  was  a  4-inch  M.L.  gun,  throwing  a  ball  of  9^  lbs. 
for  about  a  mile  and  a  half,  at  extreme  range  (200  yards  point  blank).  It 
took  a  charge  of  8  lbs.,  weighed  about  a  ton  and  a  half,  and  measured  1 1 
feet  in  length. 

^  The  culverin  was  the  forerunner  of  the  Napoleonic  i8-pounder.  It  was 
a  $  or  scinch  M.L.  gun  with  a  ball  of  17^  lbs.  and  a  range  of  2500  paces. 
It  weighed  rather  more  than  2  tons,  and  took  a  charge  of  12  lbs.  of  powder. 

*  The  demi-cannon  corresponded  to  the  32-pounder,  the  heavy  gun  with 
which  Trafalgar  was  fought.  The  ball  was  33^  lbs.,  the  range  about  a 
mile,  the  charge  18  lbs.,  and  the  weight  rather  more  than  2  tons.  There 
were  "intermediate*'  guns  between  the  falcon  and  the  demi-culverin. 
The  minion  and  saker  have  been  described  in  a  previous  note.  There 
was  also  the  bastard  culverin. 

^  With  a  bore  rather  larger  at  the  base  or  breech  than  at  the  muzzle, 
or,  vice  versd^  as  in  the  present  instance. 


:AK>NS  and  soldiery  OF  TONQHIN 


nto  tbe  Curiage ;  when:  it  now  stands  more  for  a  show   ak. 
service.     But  though   this  is  but  an  ordinary  piece  '*** 
of  Workmin^ip,  yet  the  Tonqulncsc  understand  how  to 
run  Mculs,  and  are  very  expert  in  tempering  the  Earth, 
wherewith  they  make  their  Mould. 

These  are  all  the  great  Guns,  that  I  saw  or  heard  of 
in  this  Kingdom,  neither  are  here  any  Forts,  yet  the  King 
keeps  always  a  great  many  Soldiers.  *Tis  said  that  he 
has  always  70  or  Soocxd  constantly  in  pay-  These  are 
most  Foot,  they  arc  arm'd  with  Curtans  or  Swords,  and 
Hand-Guns  of  3  foot  and  an  half  or  4  foot  in  the  Barrel. 
The  Bore  is  about  the  bigness  of  our  Horse  Pistols,  they 
arc  all  Match-locks,'  and  they  arc  very  thick  and  heavy. 
The  Soldiers  do  all  make  their  own  Powder.  They  have 
little  Kngincs  for  mixing  the  Ingredients,  and  make  as 
small  a  Quantity  as  they  please.  They  know  not  how  to 
com  it,  and  therefore  it  is  in  unequal  lumps,  some  as  big 
as  the  top  of  a  Man's  Thumb,  and  some  no  bigger  than 
a  white  Pea :  neither  have  I  seen  any  Powder  well  corn'd, 
that  has  been  made  in  any  of  these  Eastern  Nations. 

The  Soldiers  have  each  a  Cartage  Box  covered  with 
Leather,  after  the  manner  of  the  West-Indian  Rivateers; 
but  instead  of  Paper  Canagcs,  these  are  filled  with  small 
hollow  Canes,  each  containing  a  load  nr  charge  of  Powder ; 
which  ibey  empty  out  of  the  Cane  into  the  Gun ;  so  that 
each  Box  has  in  it,  as  it  were,  so  many  Bandoleers.  Their 
Anns  arc  kept  very  bright  and  clean  :  for  which  purpose 
every  one  of  them  has  a  hollow  Bambo  to  lay  over  the 
Barrel  of  his  Gun ;  and  to  keep  the  Dust  from  it  as  it 
lict  over  the  wrack  in  his  House.  When  they  march  also 
in  rainy  Weather,  they  have  another  Bambu  to  cover  their 
Guns.  This  is  large  enough  to  cover  the  whole  Barrel, 
and  very  well  lackered  ;  so  that  it  is  not  only  handsome, 
but  also  preserves  the  Gun  dry. 

The  Soldiers  when  they  march  arc  led  by  an  Officer, 
is    Leader  of  the    File ;  and   every   File  consists  of 
ho   Men :  but  as  1   have  been  informed  by  one  who  has 

*  ritcd  I17  a  matcb,  inawad  of  by  p«rcuMion. 

5 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   seen  them  march,  they  don't  keep  their  Ranks  in  marching. 

1688  j^j^^  Soldiers  are  most  of  them  lusty  strong  well-made 
Men :  for  'tis  that  chiefly  recommends  them  to  the  King's 
Service.  They  must  also  have  good  Stomachs,  for  that 
is  a  greater  recommendation  than  the  former;  neither  can 
any  Man  be  entertained  as  a  Soldier,  that  has  not  a  greater 
stroke  than  ordinary  at  eating :  for  by  this  they  judge  of 
his  Strength  and  Constitution.  For  which  Reason,  when 
a  Soldier  comes  to  be  listed,  his  Stomach  is  first  proved 
with  Rice,  the  common  Subsistence  of  the  ordinary  People 
in  this  Kingdom :  and  according  as  he  acquits  himself  in 
this  first  Tryal  of  his  Manhood,  so  he  is  either  discharged 
or  entertained  in  the  Service.  'Tis  reported,  that  at  these 
Tryals  they  commonly  eat  8  or  9  Cups  of  Rice,  each  con- 
taining a  pint,  and  they  are  ever  afterwards  esteemed  and 
advanced,  according  to  the  first  Day's  Service :  and  the 
greatest  caters  are  chiefly  employed  as  Guards  to  the  King, 
and  commonly  attend  on  his  Person.  The  Province  of 
Ngcan  breeds  the  lustiest  Men,  and  the  best  eaters :  for 
that  reason  those  of  that  Province  are  generally  imployed 
as  Soklicrs.  After  30  Years  Service  a  Soldier  may  petition 
to  l>e  disbanded  ;  and  then  the  Village  where  he  was  born 
must  send  another  Man  to  serve  in  his  room. 

The  Horsemen  are  but  few,  and  armed  with  Bows, 
ami  long  Sjxiars  or  Lances,  like  the  Moors  and  Turks. 
Both  these  and  the  Foot  Soldiers  are  very  dexterous  in 
using  their  Weapons,  and  shoot  very  well  either  with  Gun 
or  Bow ;  for  they  are  often  exercised  by  shooting  at  Marks. 
The  King  orders  a  shooting  Match  once  a  Year,  and 
rewards  the  best  Marks-man  with  a  fine  Coat,  or  about 
1000  Cash,  as  'tis  called,  which  is  a  Summ  about  the  value 
of  a  Dollar.  The  Mark  is  a  white  earthen  Cup,  placed 
against  a  Bank.  The  distance  they  stand  to  fire  at  it  is 
about  80  Yards.  He  who  breaks  the  first  Cup  has  the 
finest  Coat;  for  there  are  others  also  of  less  worth  and 
finery  for  the  rest,  that  have  the  good  Fortune  to  break 
the  other  Cups,  or  Cash  in  lieu  of  them.  This  is  all  at 
the  King's  Charge,  who  incourages  this  exercise  very  much, 
as  a  means  to  make   them  good   Marks-men;  and  they 

6 


NG   GUNS   FOR    THE    FIELD 

_  f  prT>ve  such.     They  will  laid  and  fire  the  quickest    aj« 

of  ray  People.  They  draw  the  Runnier  tt  one  Moboo,'  **® 
and  pouring  down  the  Powder  lod  Bullet,  they  nm  all 
down  at  ODc  Motion  more.  Then  they  withdraw  the 
Rammer,  and  put  it  into  its  ^cc  at  3  Motions  cdor. 
All  the  4  Motions  arc  performed  very  dexterously  and 
quick :  and  when  they  shoot  at  a  Mark,  they  level,  and 
fire  at  fir»t  Sight,  )*«  very  successfully. 

Though  the  King  r,f  Tonquin  has  no  Forts,  yet  he 
keeps  always  a  great  many  Soldiers  on  the  Frontier  Towns 
of  hit  Kingdom ;  especially  on  the  S.  W.  part  thereof,  to 
check  the  Cochinchincse,  his  implacable  Enemies:  and 
though  there  seldom  happens  a  pitch'd  Battle  between 
them,  yet  there  are  often  Skirmishings,  which  keep  the 
Soldiers  on  each  adc  upon  their  Guards :  and  sometime 
there  are  considerable  Excursions  made  by  one  or  other 
l^rty  into  the  Enemies  Territories,  where  they  kill,  spoil, 
and  bring  away  what  Booty  they  can  find.  The  King 
also  has  alwaj^s  about  30000  near  his  Person,  and  quarter 'd 
in  or  about  Cachao,  ready  on  all  Occa^ons.  The  dry 
Season  is  the  time  for  his  Armies  lo  cake  the  Field,  or 
go  against  an  Enemy :  for  in  these  Countries  there  is  no 
marching  in  the  Wet  Season.  When  he  sends  an  Army 
by  Land  on  any  Expedition,  the  General,  and  other  great 
Officers  arc  mounted  on  Elephants.  These  have  neat  little 
Ixardcd  Houses  or  Castles  fastned  on  their  hacks,  where 
the  great  Men  sit  in  State,  sccur'd  from  the  Sun  or  Rain. 
They  have  00  Field-piece*  in  their  Armies,  but  instead 
thereof  they  carry  on  Mens  Backs  Guns  that  will  carry 
a  four  ounce  Shot.  The  Barrels  of  these  Guns  are  about 
6  or  7  foot  long :  but  though  one  Man  carries  one  of 
them  on  his  Back,  yet  he  cannot  hold  it  out  to  fire,  like 
small  Guns,  but  rests  it  on  its  Carriage,  which  is  another 
Maa't  Burden,  and  they  two   manage  it  between    them. 

*  tht  EaKluh  (MBt  to  have  "dnwn'  iheir  runinen  in  three  motiani, 
*ifcari*DMd'  than  (or  pivparcd  to  ram  viih  ihen^)  in  Knolher  ihm,  ami 
"nauHcd*  iB  Iran)  four  tii  *rvcn  mora.     To  withdraw  and   man  itw   _ 
■amawT  iIk  Eojiinli  ■nmkctcei  needed  elocn  motion* ;  ihe  whole  open- 
tiBB  thai  raqinnait  rmr  Uuui  iwmly  Mpanic  movmients. 

7 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   The   Carriage   is   only   a   round    piece   of  Wood,   about 
*^^  4  Inches  thick,  and  6  or  7  foot  long.     One  end  of  the 
Carriage  is  supported  with  two  Legs,  (x*  a  Fork  of  three 
Foot  high,  the  other  rests  on  the  Ground.     The  Gun  is 
placed  on  the  top,  where  thcr^  is  an  Iron  Socket  for  the 
Gun  to  rest  in,  and  a  Swivel  to  turn  the  Muzzel  any  way. 
From  the  Britch  of  the  Gun  there  is  a  short  stock  for 
the  Man  who  fires  the  Gun   to  traverse  it^  withal,  and 
to  rest  it  against  his  Shoulder.      The  use  of  these  Guns 
is  to  clear  a  Pass,  or  to  fire  over  the  Rivers,  when  the 
Enemy  is  so  commodiously  placed,  that  there  is  no  other 
way  to   move  him;  and   they  are  carried  by  these  two 
Men   almost   with   as   much   ease  as  Muskets.     In  these 
Land-Expeditions   they   carry   but  little  Baggage,  besides 
their  necessary  Arms,  Ammunition,  and   Provender;    so 
that  if  they  are  routed  they  lightly  scamper  away;   and 
generally  in  these  Countries  the  EMspute  is  soon  over,  for 
they  will  not  long  sustain  a  smart  Onset. 

Besides  the  Soldiers  on  the  Frontiers;  and  those  who 

attend  the  King  about  Cachao,  he  has  many  others  that 

keep  Guards  in  several  parts  of  his  Kingdom,  especially  in 

the   great  Roads,  and    on   the  Rivers.     These  search  all 

exported  Goods,  to  see  that  no  prohibited  Goods  are  sent 

out  of  the  Kingdom,  especially  Arms :  and  no  prohibited 

Goods  brought  in.     They  also  look  after  the  Customs,  and 

see  that  all  Goods  have  paid,  befcn-e  they  may  pass  further. 

All  Travellers   are   also   searched    by   them,   and   strictly 

examined ;  and  if  any  Persons  are  taken  only  on  Suspicion, 

they  are  used  very  severely,  till  they  can  clear  themselves : 

so  that  no  disaffected  or  rebellious  Person  can  stir ;  without 

being  presently  known;  and  this  renders  the  King  very 

safe  in  his  Government. 

The  King's  Naval-force  consists  only  in  a  sort  of  flat- 
bottom  Gallies,  and  these  seemingly  designed  more  for 
State  than  Service,  except  to  transport  Soldiers  from  one 
Place  to  another.  These  Vessels  are  50,  60,  or  70  foot 
long,  and  about  i  o  or  12  foot  broad  in  the  waste ;  and  the 

^  To  turn  it  to  the  right  or  left  in  taking  aim. 

8 


TONQUINESE   SHIPPING    AND   ROWERS 

1  ends  near  is  many  foot  high  out  of  the  Water,  cspecUIly  ak. 
the  hinder  part  or  Stem :  but  the  waste  or  middle  of  the  '**' 
VcaecJ  b  not  above  1  foot  and  an  half  from  the  Water,  that 
being  the  place,  by  which  all  the  Men  go  in  and  out,  from 
tbcnce  towards  each  end,  it  is  gently  and  very  artificially 
rajsol  to  a  considerable  hctghth,  so  thai  the  whole  Fabrick 
jppcar«  very  graceful  and  pleasant,  as  it  moves  on  the 
"Vater.  The  Head  or  forepart  is  not  altogether  so  high  as 
:  Stem,  neither  is  there  so  much  cost  browed  on  it  for 
Mmcnt :  for  though  it  wants  neither  carv'd-work  or 
Ikinting,  yet  'tis  not  comparable  to  that  of  the  Stem,  which 
^  great  variety  of  carving,  and  is  curiously  lackered  and 
hided.  The  Place  where  the  Captain  sits  in  ts  the  Stem, 
and  is  neatly  covered  to  keep  off  the  Sun  or  the  Rain,  and  it 
being  higher  than  any  other  part  of  the  Vessel,  appears  like 
a  little  Throne,  especially  that  of  the  General's  Galley. 
This  b  more  magni6cent  than  the  rest^  tho'  all  are  built 
much  of  one  form.  From  the  Stem  to  the  waste,  it  b 
lovcred  over  with  a  si'^ht  covering,  to  shelter  the  Men  and 
Arm>  from  the  Rain  in  the  wet  Season,  and  the 
tfchiw  Sun  in  the  dry.  Before  the  waste  there  are 
taccs  for  the  Oan  on  each  side,  and  a  plain  even  [)eck 
the  Rowers  to  sund  by  their  Tackling.  Each  Galley 
TICS  a  small  Brass  Gun,  cither  Minion  or  Sakcr,  which  is 
intod  afore,  and  looks  out  through  a  Port  in  the  Bow. 
ley  have  a  small  Mast'  and  Matt  Sail,  and  they  are 
I  with  from  i6  or  so  to  24  Oars. 
The  Soldiers  arc  always  the  Men  that  row,  and  they  are 
I  naked,  except  that  they  have  a  narrow  piece  of  black 
uh  like  a  Sash  about  their  Wastes,  which  is  brought 
ween  their  Thighs,  and  tuckt  again  under  their  Waste. 
Kvery  one  stands  upright  behind  his  Oar,  which  lies  in  its 
Mch  on  the  Gunnal,  and  he  thrusts  ur  pushes  it  forward 
rith  ■  gnat  Strength  ;  and  they  plunge  their  Oars  all  at 
one  instant  into  the  Water,  keeping  exact  Time  with  each 
other;  and  that  they  may  the  better  du  this,  there  is  one 
:  strikes  on  a  small  Gong,  or  a  wooden  Instrument. 

*  "Thejt  hAve  nu  Hatu,"  according  to  Bitran. 

9 


m 


CAPTAr3f   D>3t?IZ3Lr   VOYAGES 


All.  -ytxrifft  *7er7  strrike  if  -liic  Gjt-  Ttct  :iic  Rowers  ail  at 
'^**^  once  ansspcr  Trtn  i  inrr  if  i  Jmilow  mwr.  iu'iuga:  the 
Thrvsc  and  2.  ssnin  in  thc  Dcdc  -vini  me  F<>x.  aod 
:mmedtaod^  sinner  "rrrn-  *  Jas  nrn  rm  W^het.  Tins  the 
fjr>n^  and  t^  ELiwcn  litsmatEiy  MiixHiL^  scii  irhrr,  ■"-■^'■■g 
a  ir>urui  thar  lesms  7^77  t^ieaamr  jzxd  ^vsriiks  a::  rxose  who 

These   Bcaa    inw   jncur  x   fhcc  xnii  2.  half  Water. 

Thev  ar*  ciut  serTTczanie  bi  Btv^rsL  ar  ic  5ca  near  the 
Shoar,  and  rhar  in  Terv  fair  Wearier  :dc.  Tacr  are  best 
in  die  broad  Kv*srs  near  rhe  5ea,  wier^  rnrr  aEtr  take 
the  Ad^rantage  of  the  Tides  a:  heip  them :  tbr  thoagh 
they  row  prstry  swift  when  they  ire  light;  yet  when  they 
ha^e  fe,  Sc,  or  icc  Men  on  a  Beards  as  sDmetimes  they 
hare,  ther  are  heavr  and  row  si^jwlv  a^ramst  the  Scream. 
ScrenhclcsA  when  there  is  occason  diey  must  go  against 
the  Stream  a  great  way,  tho'  they  ^■eilijcm  rt  with  great 
labour. 

The  Soldkrs  in  these  Vessels  are  equipt  with  Bows, 
.Swc^s,  and  \jsknce%,  2nd  when  many  of  them  are  sent  on 
any  Expedition,  they  are  divided  into  Squadrons.  They 
are  distinguished  by  their  several  Flags  of  different  Colours ; 
as  appeared  by  an  Expedition  they  made  up  the  River, 
against  some  fjf  their  Northern  Neighbours,  while  we  were 
tncrc.  There  were  then  about  60  of  these  Galleys  sent  out 
up  the  River;  and  they  had  from  16  to  40  Soldiers  in 
each,  all  well  armed.  Their  General  was  called  Ungee 
Comci,  who  was  a  great  Mandarin,  and  was  the  Person 
aptK/intcd  by  the  King  to  inspect  into  our  English  TrafEck ; 
l)cjng  made  Director  or  Protector  of  the  English  Factory, 
who  used  to  speak  of  him  as  a  generous  Man.  There 
were  two  more  great  Officers  under  him,  each  in  a  Vessel 
by  himself.  These  three  had  Flags  of  Distinction  :  the 
firHt  was  yellow,  the  second  blue,  the  third  red  or  green. 
They  went  away  from  Cachao  towards  the  Mountains,  but 
(lid  not  return  while  we  were  there :  but  since  we  came 
fn»ni  thence,  1  have  been  informed  that  the  Expedition 
pn»vM  fruitless,  and  that  the  General  Ungee  Comei  was 
Muich  (lisgrACcd. 

10 


WATCH  AND  WARD  KEPT  BY  SOLDIERS 

When  the  Galleys  are  not  in  Service,  they  are  draped  *». 
ashore, and  placed  in  Houses  built  for  that  purpose;  where  '^^ 
tbey  trc  set  upright  on  thdr  bottoms,  made  very  clean, 
and  kept  neat  and  dry.  These  Galley-Houses  are  50  or 
60  paces  from  the  River  side ;  and  when  they  bring  the 
Galleys  into  them,  there  is  a  strong  Rope  brought  round 
the  stem  of  the  Vessel,  and  both  ends  stretched  along,  one 
on  each  side :  then  3  or  400  Men  standing  ready  with  the 
Rope  in  their  Hands,  wait  for  the  signal ;  which  being  given 
bv  the  beat  of  a  Gong,  they  begin  to  draw  with  all  their 
Strength ;  and  making  a  great  shrieking  noise,  they  run  her 
up  in  a  trice  into  her  place.  This  also  is  their  Soldiers 
worlc,  who  having  thus  housed  all  their  Galleys,  return  to 
their  Land-Service. 

Some  of  the   Soldiers  are  employed  also  tn  keeping 

^^Vatch  and  Ward,  for  the  Security  of  private  Men,  as  welt 

^^p  in  the  King's  Business :  and  the  Tonquinese  are  observed 

^^b  keep  goc3d  order  in  the  Night  in  all  Towns  and  Villages : 

^^^t  more  particularly  in  the  great  Cities,  and  especially  at 

Cichao.    There  every  Street  is  guarded  with  a  strong  Watch, 

as  well  to  keep  Silence,  as  to  hinder  any  disorder.     The 

H  Watch-men  are  armed  with  Staves,  and  stand  in  the  Street 

Hhr  the  Watch-Houses,  10  examine  every  one  that  passeth 

^nr.     There  is  also  a  Rope  stretched  cross  the  Street  Breast 

^Hvh,  and  no  Man  may  pass  this  place  rill  he  is  examined, 

^^blcSB  be  will  venture  to  be  soundly  bang'd  by  the  Watch. 

^^vhese  Men  can  handle  their  Weapons  so  well,  that  if  they 

^^csign  Mischief,  they  will  dcxirously  break  a  Leg  or  Thigh-        ■ 

bone,  thai  being  the  place  which  they  cummunly  strike  at.       H 

There  is  a  pair  of  Slocks  by  every  Watch-Housc,  to  secure       V 

N^hi  Ramblers  in :  but  for  a  small  piece  of  Money  a  Man 

may  pass  quiet  enough,  and  far  the  most  part  only  the  poor 

are  taken  up.     These  Watch-men  are  Soldiers,  but  belong 

to  the  Govcrnour  or  some  other  Men  of  great  Power,  who 

will  hear  no  Complaints  against  them,  though  never  so  justly 

nude:  and  therefore  they  often  put  Men  in  the  Stocks  at 

their   pleasure,   and    in   the   Morning   carry  them   before  ■ 

Magistrate;   who    commonly    6nes    the    Prisoners   to    pay 

bat,  and    be    It    more   or  less,  it   falls  part  to  the 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER-S   VOYAGES 


AN.   Magistrate.     Neither  dares  asT  Msm  compfaun  of  Injustice 

'^^  upon    such    usage,    in    diis    case    espedalir;    diough    Us 

Oiuse   be  never  so  just:  and  therefore  Brtimce  is  in  this 

G>untnr  as  necessary  for  poor  People,  as  in  any  port  of  the 

World.' 

But  notwithstanding  these  Abases,  dier  have  one  Custom 
in  the  administring  Justice  that  is  pleasmg  enough.  F<X'  if 
a  difference  or  quarrel  at  any  Time  happens  between  two 
mean  Men,  and  they  are  not  to  be  reconciled  without  going 
before  a  Magistrate,  he  usually  coosadering  their  Poverty, 
lays  no  heavy  Mulct  on  the  Offender,  but  enjcnns  him  this 
as  his  Penalty,  that  he  shall  treat  the  injured  Person  with 
a  Jarr  of  Arack  and  a  Fowl,  or  a  small  Porker,  that  so 
feasting  together,  they  may  both  drown  all  Animosity  in 
good  Liquor,  and  renew  their  Friendship. 

But  if  it  be  a  Controversy  about  a  Ddit,  they  take  a 
very  different  Method.  For  the  Debtors  are  many  times 
<M-der*d  to  be  Prisoners  in  their  Creditw^'s  Houses,  where 
they  are  beaten,  or  kept  with  a  Log  of  Wood  made  fast  to 
their  Legs,  to  hinder  them  fix>m  running  away.  These  poor 
Prisoners  eat  nothing  but  Rice,  and  dnnk  Water,  and  are 
tyrannically  insulted  over  by  their  rigid  Creditors,  till  the 
Debt  is  satisfied.  Their  Corporal  Punishments  upon  Male- 
factors, and  sometimes  upon  others  are  very  severe.  Some 
are  loaden  with  Iron  Chains  fastened  to  their  Legs,  with 
Logs  also  like  the  Debtors  but  now  mentioned.  Others 
have  their  Necks  inclosed  between  two  great  heavy  Planks 
made  like  a  Pillory,  but  moveable,  for  they  carry  it  about 
with  them  where-ever  they  go,  and  even  when  they  go 
to  rest  they  are  forced  to  lye  down  and  sleep  in  it  as 
they  can. 

There  is  another  sort  of  punishing  Instrument  not  un- 
like this,  called  a  Gongo.^  This  also  is  made  to  wear  about 
the  Neck,  but  is  shaped  like  a  Ladder.  The  sides  of  it  are 
2  large  Bamboes,  of  about  lo  or  12  foot  long,  with  several 
such  rounds  or  sticks  as  Ladders  have  to  keep  the  sides 
asunder ;  but  much  shorter :   for  the  2  side  Bamboes  are 

*  The  Cangue. 
12 


■^     PUNISHMENT  FOR   CRIMINALS  ^ 

B>  farther  asunder,  than  to  admit  ot'  a  narrow  Room  tor   a<4.^ 
'He  Neck;  and  the  2  rounds  in  the  middle  are  much  at  '*** 
■.c  same  distance  from  each  other,  on  each  side  the  Neck, 
rming  a  little  Square :   through  which  the  Man  looks  as 
:    he  were  carrying  a  Ladder  on  his  Shoulders,  with  his         J 
'  icad  through  tJic  rounds.      If  either  of  these  Yokes  were  I 

-  '  tv  taken  off  in  a  short  time,  as  in  6,  9,  or  12  Hours,  it  I 
would  be  no  great  matter:  but  to  wear  one  of  them  a  I 
Month,  3,  3,  or  longer,  as  1  have  been  informed  ihey  some-  I 

timd  do,  Kerns  to  be  a  very  severe  Punishment,      Yet  'tis  I 

tome  Comfort  to  some,  that  they  have  the  Liberty  to  walk 
abroad   where  they  will :  but  others  are  l)oth  yv^ked  and 
imprbon'd  :  and  the  Prisoners  in  publick  Prisons  arc  used 
vncK  than  a  Man  would  use  a  Dog,  they  being  half  starved,         J 
and  soundly  beaten  to  boot.  I 

They  have  a  particular  Punishment  for  such  as  are  sus-  1 
-cted  to  fire  Houses,  or  who  are  thought  to  have  occa- 
ned  the  Fire  through  their  neglect.  The  Master  of  the 
House,  where  the  Fire  first  breaks  out,  will  hardly  clear 
ftimscif  from  Suspicion,  and  the  Severity  of  the  Law,  The 
Punishment  in  this  Case  is  to  sit  in  a  Chair  of  12  or  14  foot 
nigh,  bare-headed  3  whole  Days  successively  in  the  hot 
worthing  Sun  :  this  Chair  is  set,  for  his  greater  disgrace,  J 
V-fore  the  place  where  his  House  stood.  I 

Other  smaller  Crimes  arc  punished  with  Blows;  which  I 

'  J  call  Bambooing.  The  Criminal  is  laid  flat  on  his  Belly 
■r,  the  Grmind,  with  his  Breeches  pluckt  down  over  his 
I  lams :    in   which    Posture   a    lusty  Fellow   bangs   his   bare  . 

Breech  with  a  split  Bambo,  about  4  Fingers  bnad,  and  5         J 
I'iMit  long.     The  number  of  his  Blows  arc  more  or  less,         I 
-•■■■'*in;»  to  the  nature  of  the  Crime,  or  the  pleasure  of         1 
..:;strate;  yet  Money  will  buy  favour  of  the  Execu-        I 
>  ho  knows  how  to  moderate  his  Strokes  for  a  Fee         I 
-_K....[i.ind.     Otherwise  his   Blows  usually  fall   so   heavy,        I 
•.fiat  the  f>oor  Offender  may  be  lamed  a  Month  or  two.        I 
After  a  Man  has  suflfercd  any  of  these  Punishments,  he  can        I 
never  nbuin  any  publick  Favour  or  Employment.  ' 

They    have   no   Courts   of  Judicature,    but   any   single 
Magtttraie  iwues  out  his  Warrants  for  the  apprehctxling 
»3 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  of  Malefactors,  and  upon  taking  them  immediately  tries 
^^^  them :  and  as  the  Sentence  is  final,  and  without  appeal,  so 
'tis  no  sooner  past,  but  *tis  executed  also  without  more  ado. 
Their  Punishment  in  capital  Crimes  is  usually  beheading. 
The  Criminal  is  carried  immediately  from  the  Magistrate  s 
House  to  his  own :  for  there  is  no  common  place  of  Exe- 
cution, but  the  Malefactor  suffers  near  his  own  House,  or 
where  the  Fact  was  committed.  There  he  is  placed  sitting 
on  the  Ground,  with  his  Body  upright,  and  his  Legs  stretched 
out :  and  the  Executioner  being  provided  with  a  large 
Curtane  or  Back-Sword,  and  striking  a  full  Back-Blow 
on  the  Neck,  at  one  stroke  he  severs  the  Head  from 
the  Body;  the  Head  commonly  tumbling  down  into  the 
Owner's  Lap,  and  the  Trunk  falling  ^ckward  on  the 
Ground. 

Theft  is  not  thought  worthy  of  Death,  but  is  punished 
with  cutting  ofF  some  Member,  or  part  of  a  Member, 
according  to  the  degree  of  the  Offence.  For  sometimes 
only  one  Joint  of  a  Finger  is  chopt  off,  for  other  Crimes  a 
whole  Finger,  or  more,  and  for  some  the  whole  Hand. 

The  Magistrates  and  other  great  Men  of  this  Kingdom 
are  called  Mandarins.  Most  of  them  in  Office  about 
the  King  are  Eunuchs,  and  not  only  gelded,  but  also 
their  Members  cut  off  quite  flat  to  their  Bellies.  These, 
as  I  have  been  informed,  are  all  very  learned  Men  after 
their  way,  especially  in  the  Laws  of  the  Country.  They 
rise  gradually  by  their  Merit  or  Favour,  from  one  Degree 
to  another,  as  well  they  who  are  employed  in  Civil  as 
in  Military  affairs :  And  scarce  a  Place  of  Trust  or  Profit 
goes  beside  them.  No  Man  is  permitted  to  walk  familiarly 
about  the  King's  Palace  without  the  Leave  of  the  Eunuch 
Mandarins;  and  for  this  Reason  having  such  free  Access 
to  the  King  themselves,  and  excluding  whom  they  will, 
they  engross  his  Favour.  This  is  taken  so  much  to  Heart 
by  some,  that  through  Envy  and  Discontent,  they  often 
pine  away,  as  is  commonly  said,  even  to  Death :  And  I 
heard  of  such  an  one,  who  was  called  Ungee  Thuan  Ding : 
Ungee  seems  a  Title  of  Honour  among  them.  He  was 
a  Man  of  great  Learning  in  the  Laws,  extremely  Politick, 

H 


1 


A5TRATING  THRC   AMBITION 


^^b  mighty  high  S[)iritcd.  This  Man  sought  all  the  a 
lacans  imaginable  to  be  preferred,  but  could  not  for  want  '* 
of  being  an  Eunuch.  He  fretted  to  see  his  Inferiors 
raised  :  out  plainly  seeing  that  there  was  no  rising  without 
removing  that  Objection,  he  one  Day  in  a  Rage  took  up 
a  sharp  fCnife,  ancf  qualify *d  himself  effectually.  He  had 
a  Wife  and  6  or  8  Children,  who  were  all  in  great  Fear  of 
his  Life:  but  he  was  not  at  all  dismayed,  tho"  in  that 
Coodidun ;  and  the  King  advanced  him.  He  was  living 
when  1  was  there,  and  was  a  great  Mandarin.  He  had 
the  care  of  the  Armory  and  Artillery,  being  great  Master 
of  the  King's  Ordnance. 

There  was  another  Mandarin  also,  one  Ungee  Hanc, 
who  finding  himself  baffled  fay  the  Eunuchs,  was  forced 
til  make  himself  one  to  be  upon  the  level  with  them. 
I'hi*  Gentleman,  it  seems,  was  Lord  of  a  Village  or  two, 
where  both  he  and  his  Tenants  were  often  plagued  with 
the  domineering  Eunuchs;  and  having  born  their  Malice 
for  some  time,  and  seeing  no  end  of  it,  he  agreed  with 
an  expert  Gcldcr  to  castrate  him :  For  here  are  many 
in  this  Country,  who  profess  this  Art,  and  arc  so  expert 
at  it,  that  they  will  undertake  to  cut  a  Man  of  any  Age, 
for  so  many  thousand  Cash  as  the  Man  is  Years  old.  'Tis 
reported,  that  they  first  put  the  Patient  into  a  Sleep :  But 
how  long  they  arc  curing  him  after  the  Operation  is  over, 
I  know  not.  I  heard  of  but  three  Mandarins  of  any 
grandeur  in  the  G<ivemment,  who  were  not  Eunuchs.  One 
was  the  Governor  of  the  liast  Province,  whose  Daughter 
was  married  to  a  Prince  of  the  Koyal  Family.  The  other 
two,  who  were  Governors  of  Cachao,  were  also  married 
Men,  and  had  Children,  and  one  of  these  married  the 
Kill's  Daughter.  All  the  Mandarins  rule  with  absolute 
I'-nrer  and  Authority  in  their  several  Precincts,  yet  in 
i:nat  Obedience  ta  the  King ;  who  is  as  absolute  over  them, 
ti  they  are  over  the  common  People. 

These  Eunuch  Mandarins  especially  live  in  great  State. 

Many  of  these  have  command  of  the  Soldiery,  and  have 

■juards  attending  them  at  their  own  Houses;  There  being 

t  Certain  numba*  of  Soldiers  allowed  to  attend  on  each 

'5 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER^   VOYAGES 


M>»    yAiZkiasTT^  KSf/rz-sa^  Zfj  S2$  (j^saStr.     Tlinr  are  gencnlly 
^•^  vrf^/rjs  btT'jBau:   "saascrt^  aad  tctt  ssaBcioas.     Some  of 
^ikcsn   art  Gvrtraors  of  Pryriaccs,  bet  ali  are  raised  to 
Varjtk  ^A  trost  and  prote. 

On^  ^rftr%  Xtxr  the  Masdarins  receiir  an  Oath  of 
Ai'js::^3UKt  to  the  King,  from  all  the  principal  Oflkcrs 
*jndfr  them.  This  is  done  with  great  CerenHXiy:  they 
cut  the  Throat  of  a  Hen,  and  let  the  Blood  fidl  into  a 
Bav^  of  AradL  Of  this  Aiack  every  Man  has  a  small 
dnuzht  given  him  to  drink,  after  he  has  publickly  declared 
ht^  wicerity  and  readiness  to  serre  lus  Prince.  *Tis  esteemed 
the  v^lemnest  tye  by  which  any  Man  can  ingage  himself. 
This  way  of  giving  solemn  podoos  to  drink,  is  used  also 
in  ^xher  Countries,  on  different  occasions.  As  particularly 
on  the  Gold  Gxist  of  Guinea ;  where  when  Men  or  Women 
are  uxed  for  a  Crime,  be  it  of  what  Nature  it  will,  but 
especially  Adultery,  and  the  matter  cannot  be  proved  by 
Evidence,  the  Fetissero  or  Priest  decides  the  diflfcrence, 
by  giving  a  potion  of  bitter  Water  to  the  Person  accused : 
which  it  they  refuse  to  take,  they  are  supposed  to  be 
guilty  without  farther  proof:  but  if  they  drmk  it  off,  the 
event  is  said  to  be,  that  if  the  Persons  be  guilty,  this 
Water  immediately  swells  their  bodies  till  they  burst ;  but 
if  innocent,  they  are  not  hurt  thereby.  What  tricks  the 
Fctissero*s  may  play  in  compounding  this  Water,  I  know 
not ;  but  this  kind  of  Tryal  is  frequent  among  them,  and 
seems  to  be  a  remainder  of  the  old  Jewish  Tryal  ^  by  the 
Waters  of  jealousy,  spoken  of  in  the  5th  Chapter  of 
Numbers.  I  am  not  sufficiently  informed  whether  the 
Invent  of  the  Tryal  be  such  as  it  was  among  the  Jews; 
but  it  seems  they  have  a  strong  perswasion  of  it:  and  a 
guilty  Person  does  ordinarily  so  dread  the  being  brought 
to  this  Trial,  that  for  the  most  part  he  or  she  choose 
rather  to  suffer  the  punishment  of  the  Country,  which  is 
to  be  sold  to  Europeans  as  Slaves.  This  potion  is  called 
Bitter-water,  and  'tis  given  by  way  of  Trial  upon  any  light 
suspicion  even  of  a  small  injury.     This  account  I  have 

*  The  biblical  rite  is  rather  too  long  for  quotation. 

16 


FBer!^i(?cM  MANDAftlNS— CHOPSTICKS 


^^■d  from  several  vrbo  have  been  in  Guinea,'  but  especially 

^^km  Mr.  Canby. 

^^1     But  to  return  to  the  Eunuch  Mandarins,  tho'  they  are 

^^hlcr  Enemies  to  those  whom  they  take  aversion  against, 
vet  on  the  other  I'lind,  ibey  are  as  kind  to  their  Favourites, 
md  as  complacent  to  their  Visiunts,  whether  Foreigners 
"T  Others,  feasting  them  often.  They  love  mightily  to  be 
visited,  esteeming  themselves  highly  honoured  thereby. 
When  they  treat  any,  they  are  best  pleased  with  those  who 
eat  and  drink  heartily;  for  this  they  suppose  proceeds 
from  their  l»vc  and  hearty  Affection  to  them :  And  indeed 
the  Tofwjuinccrs  in  general  arc  very  free  to  their  Visitants, 
treating  them  with  the  Ijcst  Cheer  they  are  able  to  procure. 
In  their  I'jitcrtainments,  and  at  ihcir  ordinary  Eating, 
astcad  of  Forks  and  Spoons,  they  use  two  small  round 
^tick*  about  the  Length  and  Bigness  of  a  Tobacco  Pipe. 
I'hcv  hold  them  i»oth  in  the  right  Hand,  one  between  the 
[■'■•rc-Kinger  and  Thumb;  the  other  between  the  Middle- 
Finger  and  the  Fore-Finger,  as  our  Boys  do  their  Snappers. 
Ihcy  use  them  very  dcxtrously,  taking  up  the  smallest 
•rain  of  Rice  with  them;  nor  is  it  accounted  mannerly  to 
■  uth  the  Food  after  it  is  drest,  with  their  Hands:  And 
:hi'  it  he  difficult  for  Strangers  to  use  them,  being  un- 
jiC'itoni'd  to  them,  yet  a  little  use  will  overcome  that 
F):niL-uIty;  and  Persons  that  reside  here  ought  to  learn 
-IS.  as  well  as  other  Customs  of  the  Country,  that  are 
mocent,  that  so  their  Company  may  be  more  acceptable. 
All  the  Tonquincscs  keep  many  of  these  Sticks  in  their 
Houses,  as  well  for  their  own  use,  as  to  entertain  Strangers 
at  MeaU:  They  arc  as  ordinarily  placed  at  the  Table  here, 
as  Knives,  Forks,  and  Spoons  arc  m  England  :  And  a  Man 
that  cannot  dextrously  handle  these  instruments,  makes 
but  an  odd  Figure  at  their  Tables.  The  richer  sort  of 
People,  especially    the    Mandarins,    have    them    tipt   with 

'  C/  Rtdianl  Jabton'*  "  Dcscriptioa  and  bistoricall  Declaration  of  the 
(oUca  Kia^dotn  of  Ginnea,"  in  I'mchos  (ed.  Mac  L^hgse,  vol.  vi.  pp.  315, 
)i&V  "Till*  Drinkc  aanoog  then  is  as  much  a»  an  Oath,  and  is  suited 
rjKknnkeiUM  ;  which  they  nuke  of  the  aame  (jreenc  Herbs  whereof  ihey 

■~tkM  tbnr  FeiiaMt ;  and  at  thoy  uy,  11  hath  tuch  ■  force,  that  if  a  Man 

--^oketk  it  fal*cly,  ibcir  Fctitto  cauMlb  hjm  to  die." 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER^S   VOYAGES 

AN.   Silver.     In  China  also  these  things  are  constantly  used : 
1688  ^hgy  aj-g  called  by  the  English  Seamen  Chopsticks.     When 
the  Eunuch  Mandarins  dye,  all  their  Riches  fall  to  the 
King,  who  as  Heir  presently  seizeth  on  their  Estates,  and 
by  it  gets  vast  Riches:   For  there  is  but  little  Money  in 
the  Kingdom,  but  what  falls  into  the  Clutches  of  these 
Birds  of  Prey.     This  probably  may  be  one  Reason  why 
the  King  is  for  preferring  none  but  them;   for  they  are 
excellent  Spunges  for  him :  and  whatever  some  have  said 
of  their  Love  to  Justice,   I   could  never  learn  that  they 
deserve  that  Character :  But  through  their  Oppression,  and 
injurious  Dealings,  trading  is  discouraged,  and  the  Country 
is  kept  Poor,  which  otherwise  might  be  a  flourishing  King- 
dom.    After  all,  as  very  Eunuchs  as  these  Mandarins  are, 
yet  they  are  as  great  Admirers  of  the  Female  Sex  as  any 
Men,  and  not  satisfied  without  them,  but  they  all   keep 
several  handsome  young  Wenches  to  dally  and  spend  their 
time  withal.     They  also  love  to  be  courted  by  Strangers  to 
favour  them  with  a  Miss  of  their  procuring.     Nothing  will 
engage  them  more  than  to  petition  them  on  this  account; 
and  the  Person  thus  sollicited  will  not  fail  to  procure  a 
young  Damsel  for  his  Friend,  be  it  but  for  a  Night  or  two, 
or  for  4  or  5  Months.     Ever  afterwards  he  will  take  a 
more   than    ordinary   Care    of   the    Persons   he   has   thus 
brought  together,  and  their  AfFairs;  and  this  base  sort  of 
Office  is  here  accounted  very  decent  and  honourable.     Yet 
the  common  Baudy-houses,  tho'  extreamly  rife  here,  are  by 
all  of  them  accounted  hateful  and  scandalous. 


18 


CHAP.   V 


nrrtA  I 


t  Vnuh  imt  /nm  Catbas  It  Ttnan  Ic  fitch  Rice.     A  RrmeuHltr 

'I  Rebberi,     Caih,  a  jurl  ef  Cein^  and  Peorl- 

Auihtr'i   ucand  Jauntey    up    lo    Cachao :    Of  tht 

PagiJat  and  Fitntral  Tvwrr  and  Ftait  ht  met  hy  tkr  way.      The 


m^pt,\ 


Oyttm.     Tfu 


4  Mi 


t  H tatty  I 


tmltrtmnMfni  llurt,  and  ditcaune  with  one  o/lhtir  Priests.  Tkr 
itotf  if  thtir  Afiiiitn,  and  of  Chriftianity,  in  these  Idalatreui 
Cmturia.  Hit  making  tf  Gun-Pau/dtr.  He  goei  en  frem  Hren 
It  Caikaty  and  aftrr  a  ihert  stay  thrr/y  hoci  again  If  the  Shi/a.     Of 

^^_       tht  tmpmemeiiti  that  might  ie  made  af  aiir  English  Factory  here. 

^^H      Tht  4Mlh»r'i  drfartmre fi-»m  Tenfuin, 

^^'W'  HAVE  already  spoken  of  my  first  going  up  the 
■  River  to  Cachau,  and  my  returning  ^ck  again  to 
I  our  Ships  after  a  few  days.  There  I  lay  on  board 
.A-  for  a  great  while,  and  sickly  for  the  most  part ;  yet 
not  so,  but  inat  I  louk  a  boat  and  went  ashore  one  where  or 
other  almost  every  day :  and  by  this  means  I  took  as  parti- 
cular notice  as  I  could  of  the  Country,  and  have  supplied 
my  own  obsen-atlons  with  those  of  our  Merchants  residing 
there,  and  other  Persons  of  Judgment,  and  Integrity. 

During  this  interval.  Rice  being  dear  at  Cachao,  as  it 
had  been  for  some  time,  both  our  Merchants  and  Natives 
were  for  making  up  a  Fleet  of  small  Vessels,  to  fetch  Rice 
from  the  Neighbouring  Provinces,  both  for  their  own  use 
and  to  supply  the  Markets:  and  they  never  go  in  single 
VcBcls,  for  fear  of  Pirates,  who  infest  the  Coast  with  their 
•^.innas,  and  shelter  themselves  among  several  little  Islands, 
ing  at  the  edge  of  the  Hast  Province,  and  bordering  upon 
■  ic  Province  of  Tenan,  whither  these  Merchants  were 
•tund. 

Captain  Weldoo  was  one  who  concerned  himself  in  this 
'9 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

An.   expedition,  hiring  a  Vessel  and  Seamen  of  the  Tonquinese, 
^^^  and  sending  some  of  his  own  Men  with  them  as  a  Guard, 
among  whom  I  would  very  fain  have  gone,  had  I  not  been 
indbposed.      Mr.    Ludford,   who   had    liv*d  sometime   at 
Cachao  before  our  arrival,  was  another  Undertaker,  and 
went  himself  on  board  the  Bark  he  had  hired ;  but  Captain 
Weldon   staid  behind   at  the   City,  yet  took  care   to   get 
a  Commission  from  the  Govemour  of  the  East-Province 
for  his  Vessel.     In  the  Commission  'twas  exprest,  that  his 
Boat  should  be  armed  with  Guns,  or  other  Weapons,  and 
that  his  Men  should  resist  any  that  came  to  oppose  them, 
or  any  Vessels  in  their  Company ;  and  that  they  might  kill 
and  destroy  any  Robbers  that  they  met  with.     The  Passage 
to  Tenan  lay  most  within  Land,  thro'  Creeks  and  narrow 
Channels,  among  the  Islands  before-mentioned,  which  are 
so  many,  and  lye  on  the  East-side  of  the  Bay  so  thick  to- 
;ether,  and  so  nigh  the  shoar,  that  at  a  small  distance  off  at 
►ea  they  appear  to  be  part  of  the  Main.     This  little  Archi- 
pelago lies  within  the  precincts  of  the  Governour  of  the 
East-Province,  from  whom  Captain  Weldon  had  his  Com- 
mission, and  who  was  a  very  great  Man  in  the  Court  of 
Tonquin.     When  the  Fleet  came  to  this  place,  some  who 
lay  here  came  forth ;  and  they  concluded  they  must  be  the 
Pirates,  come  to  seize  their  Prey  as  at  other  times.     These 
always  choose  rather  to  take  the  outward-bound  Vessels, 
because  then  they  have  all  of  them  Cash  or  Money  aboard 
to  purchase  their  Ladings ;  but  in  their  Returns  they  would 
have  only  Rice,  which  these  People  do  not  so  much  regard. 
At  this  time  Captain  Weldon's  Dutch  Pilot,  the  chief  Man 
whom  he  sent  in  his  Bark,  was  aboard  Mr.  Ludford's :  And 
when  the  supposed  Pirates  came  up,  Mr.  Ludford  and  he 
made  the  Seamen  row  the  Bark  to  meet  them,  and   in  a 
short  time  got  so  near,  that  they  fired  at  them.     These 
Men  not  expecting  to  have  met  such  a  Reception,  for  the 
Tonquinese   have   no    Guns,   but   in   the   King's   Gallies, 
thought  to  save  themselves  by  Flight :  but  were  so  eagerly 
pursued  by  Mr.  Ludford,  that  at  last  they  yielded  to  his 
Mercy,  after  they  had  lost  one  Man  in  Fight.     He,  joyful 
of  this  Success,  secured  the  Prisoners,  and  made  the  best  of 

20 


-SOMB  SWPPOSED  PIRATES 

I  Course  io  the  next  Town  on  the  Coast  in  his  i 
:  dciivermg  up  his  Prisoners  to  the  Magistrates,  ; 
a  full  Relation  of  the  Action.  He  expected  i 
for  his  Pains,  or  at  least  to  be  highly  applauded 
but  found  himself  misukcn.  For  the  FVisoners 
obttinately  denying  what  was  atledged  against  them  by  Mr. 
Ludfbrd,  saying  they  were  poor  Fishermen,  they  v.'cre 
immcdbtely  acquitted  as  very  honest  Persons,  aniid  Mr. 
Ludford  was  accused  for  committing  a  Riot  on  Men  who 
were  about  their  lawful  Occasions.  Mr.  Ludford  brought 
many  of  the  Natives,  that  were  in  his  Company,  to  justify 
what  he  had  done,  but  to  no  Purpose;  for  he  was  fined 
looooo  Cash,  as  our  Merchants  call  it,  for  the  Man  that 
%vzi  killed.  Cash  arc  a  small  kind  of  Copper-Money  :  and 
;:*  the  only  Coin  they  have  of  their  own,  if  it  be  their 
•All,  and  not  rather  bniught  them  from  China.  They  rise 
and  fell  in  value  according  lo  the  Want  or  Plenty  of  them, 
or  as  the  Women-exchangers  can  manage  them  :  But  at  this 
Time  they  were  at  the  Rate  of  a  Dollar  a  thousand ;  so 
that  hia  Fine  was  loo  Dollars.  When  Mr.  Ludford  saw 
how  hard  it  was  Itkc  to  go  with  him,  he  thought  to  clear 
himself,  or  lessen  his  fine,  by  hringing  Captain  Wcldon  into 
the  Snare;  saying  that  he  had  no  Guns  in  his  Bark,  but 
;iade  use  nf  Captain  Weldon's,  and  that  Captain  Weldon's 
Pilot  was  aboard  his  Vessel,  and  assisted  in  the  Action. 
^t  neither  did  this  help  him :  for  upon  trying  the  matter 
t  Cachao,  whither  'twas  carried  by  Appeal,  Captain 
Ifcldoo'i  Commission  saved  him :  so  that  Mr.  Ludford 
1  to  pay  the  Money,  which  was  more  than  he  got 
Voyage.     This  might  he  a  warning  to  him,  how  he 

with   Tonquin    Pirates   again  ;    for    it    was   not 

enou^  for  him  to  plead  that  they  came  with  an  Intent  to 
ri>b  him.  Indeed  if  he  had  been  robbed,  he  might  have 
iiecn  pitied  by  the  Magistrates  on  Complaint  of  his  Mi»- 
r>r*ijnc  :  But  yet  it  is  very  probable,  that  if  he  should  have 
ukcn  them  in  the  very  Fact,  nosscst  of  his  Goods,  those 
\  crmin  would  have  had  one  Hole  or  another  to  creep  out 
K;  io  corrupt  are  the  great  Men  of  this  Kingdom.  And 
indeed  'ti*  not  improbable  that  these  Fellows  were  Fisher- 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  men,  and  going  about  their  Business:  For  there  is  good 
1688  Fishing  in  all  the  Bay  of  Tonquin  clear  round  it,  and  there 
are  many  Boats  that  go  out  a  Fishing,  and  the  Fishermen 
are  generally  very  honest  and  harmless  Men ;  except  now 
and  then,  they  attempt  to  make  a  Prize  of  some  poor 
Vessel  they  meet,  and  can  overcome  by  their  Numbers  with- 
out Fighting ;  for  such  an  one  they  board,  and  strip  all  the 
Men  naked  even  to  their  Skin.  Among  these  Islands  also, 
by  report,  there  are  Plenty  of  Pearl  Oysters,  that  have  good 
Pearls  in  them ;  but  the  Seamen  are  discouraged  from  fish- 
ing for  them  by  the  King,  for  he  seizeth  on  all  he  finds. 
But  this  by  the  way ;  nor  was  any  thing  else  observable  in 
this  Voyage  to  Tenan. 

These  vessels  were  5  or  6  weeks  in  their  Voyage  to  and 
from  Tenan :  And  at  their  return  Captain  Weldon's  Bark 
went  not  up  to  Cachao  with  the  Rice,  but  unladed  it  into 
our  Ship  to  supply  us.  Soon  after  this  I  went  a  second 
time  up  to  Cachao,  not  in  a  Boat  as  before,  but  on  Foot 
along  the  Country,  being  desirous  to  see  as  much  of  it  as 
I  could  :  and  I  hired  a  Tonquinese  for  about  a  Dollar  to 
be  my  Guide.  This,  tho'  but  a  small  matter,  was  a  great 
deal  out  of  my  Pocket,  who  had  not  above  2  Dollars  in 
all,  which  I  had  gotten  on  board,  by  teaching  some  of  our 
young  Seamen  Plain  Sailing.^ 

This  was  all  I  had  to  bear  my  own  charges  and  my 
Guides ;  and  'twas  the  worse  with  me,  because  I  was  forced 
to  make  short  Journeys  every  Day  by  Reason  of  my  Weak- 
ness :  It  was  about  the  latter  end  of  November  1688,  when 
we  set  out.  We  kept  on  the  East-side  of  the  River,  where 
we  found  the  Roads  pretty  dry,  yet  in  some  places  dirty 
enough.  We  ferryed  over  several  Creeks  and  Brooks 
running  into  the  great  River,  where  are  Ferry-Boats  always 
plying,  which  have  a  few  Cash  for  their  Fare.  The  Fever 
and  Ague  which  I  brought  with  me  from  Achin  was  gone ; 
yet  the  Fruits  I  eat  here,  especially  the  small  Oranges, 
brought  me  into  a  Flux.  However  though  I  was  but 
weak,  yet  I  was  not  discouraged  from  this  Journey,  being 

^  One  of  the  simplest  calculations  by  which  a  ship's  position  may  be 
determined. 

22 


r 

H^vory  of 


FUNERAL  TOWER   AND    FEAST 

f  of  lying  still,  and  impatient  of  seeing  somewhat  that 
might  further  gratify  my  curiosity. 

We  found  no  Houses  of  Entertainment  on  the  Road, 
yet  at  every  Village  we  came  to  we  got  House-room,  and  a 
Barbecue  of  split  Bambocs  to  sleep  on.  The  People  were 
Very  civil,  lending  us  an  earthen  Pot  to  dress  Rice,  or  any 
thing  else.  Usually  after  Supper,  if  the  Day  was  not  shut 
in.  r  took  a  ramble  about  the  Village,  to  see  what  was 
worth  taking  notice  of,  especially  the  Pagoda  of  the  place. 
These  had  the  Image  of  either  an  Horse,  an  Elephant,  or 
both,  standing  with  the  Head  looking  out  of  the  Doors : 
The  Pagodas  themselves  were  but  small  and  low.  I  still 
made  it  dark  Night  before  I  returned  ro  my  Lodging,  and 
then  I  laid  me  down  to  sleep.  My  Guide  carried  my 
Sea-Gown,  which  was  my  covering  in  the  night,  and  my 
Pillow  was  a  Log  of  Wood :  But  I  slept  very  well,  tho' 
the  weakness  of  my  Body  did  now  require  better  accom- 
modation. 

The  third  day  after  my  setting  out,  about  3  a  Clock  in 
the  afternoon,  I  saw  before  me  a  small  Tower ;  such  as  I 
mentioned  before,  as  erected  for  a  time  in  honour  of  some 
great  Person  deceased.  But  I  knew  not  then  the  meaning 
of  it,  for  I  had  not  seen  the  like  before  in  the  Country. 
As  I  came  nearer  to  it,  I  saw  a  Multitude  of  People,  most 
of  ihcm  Men  and  Boys;  and  coming  nearer  still,  I  saw  a 
grat  deal  of  Meat  on  the  Stalls,  that  were  plac'd  at  a 
imall  distance  from  the  Tower.  This  made  me  conclude 
that  it  was  some  great  Market,  and  that  the  Flesh  I  saw 
was  for  sale:  Therefore  I  went  in  among  the  Crowd,  as 
»dl  to  see  the  Tower  as  to  buy  some  of  the  Meat  for  my 
~  T,  it  being  now  between  4  and  5  a  Clock  in  the 
noon.  My  Guide  could  not  speak  English,  neither 
•uld  1  speak  the  Tooquinesc  Language :  So  I  asked  him 
*  questions  about  it ;  and  he  too  went  readily  in  with 
me;  it  may  be  not  knowing  my  intent  was  to  buy.  First 
I  wtnt  round  the  Tower  and  viewed  it :  It  was  four- 
iquare,  each  side  about  8  foot  broad  :  at  the  Ground  the 
beighth  of  it  was  about  26  foot,  but  at  the  top  somewhat 
aatrowcr  than  at  the  bottom.  I  saw  no  door  10  enter  into 
'3 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  it :  it  seemed  to  be  very  slightly  built,  as  least  covered  with 
1688  ^hj,^  boards,  which  were  all  joyned  close  together,  and 
painted  of  a  dark  reddish  colour.  I  then  went  on  to  the 
Stalls,  which  had  Sheds  built  over  them:  And  there  I 
viewed  the  Fruits  and  Flesh,  each  of  which  was  ranged  in 
order  apart.  I  past  by  Abundance  of  Oranges  packt  up 
in  Baskets,  which  I  think  were  the  fairest  I  ever  saw,  and 
for  Quantity  more  than  I  had  seen  gathered  all  the  Time 
I  was  at  Tonquin.  I  past  by  these,  and  seeing  no  other 
Fruit,  I  came  to  the  Flesh-Stalls,  where  was  nothing  but 
Pork,  and  this  also  was  all  cut  into  Quarters  and  Sides  of 
Pork:  I  thought  there  might  be  fifty  or  sixty  Hogs  cut 
up  thus,  and  all  seenled  to  be  very  good  Meat.  When  I 
saw  that  there  was  none  of  it  in  small  pieces,  fit  for  my 
use,  I,  as  was  customary  in  the  Markets  took  hold  of  a 
Quarter,  and  made  Signs  to  the  Master  of  it,  as  I  thought, 
to  cut  me  a  Piece  of  two  or  three  Pound.  I  was  ignorant 
of  any  Ceremony  they  were  about,  but  the  superstitious 
PcTiple  soon  made  me  sensible  of  my  Errour:  For  they 
assaulted  me  on  all  Sides,  buffeting  me  and  renting  my 
Cloaths,  and  one  of  them  snatched  away  my  Hat.  My 
Guide  did  all  he  could  to  appease  them,  and  dragg'd  me 
out  of  the  Crowd :  Yet  some  surly  Fellows  followed  us, 
and  seemed  by  their  Countenance  and  Gestures  to  threaten 
me ;  but  my  Guide  at  last  pacifyed  them  and  fetched  my 
Hat,  and  we  marched  away  as  fast  as  we  could.  I  could 
not  be  informed  of  my  Guide  what  this  meant ;  but  some- 
time after,  when  I  was  returned  to  our  Ship,  the  Guide*s 
Brother,  who  spoke  English,  told  me,  it  was  a  Funeral 
Feast,  and  that  the  Tower  was  the  Tomb  which  was  to  be 
burned  ;  and  some  English  Men  who  lived  there  told  me 
the  same.  This  was  the  only  Funeral  Feast  that  ever  I 
was  at  among  them,  and  they  gave  me  cause  to  remember 
it :  but  this  was  the  worst  Usage  I  received  from  any  of 
them  all  the  time  I  was  in  the  Country.  When  I  was  out 
of  this  trouble,  my  Guide  and  I  marched  forwards.  I  was 
both  weary  and  hungry,  and  I  think  my  appetite  was 
raised  by  seeing  so  much  Food :  For  indeed  at  first  sight 
of  it  I  concluded  to  have  had  a  good  Supper ;  but  now  I 

24 


THE   AUTHOR'S   ARRIVAL   AT   HEAN 

w»5  likely  to  sup  uiUy  on  Rice,  or  a  Yam  roasted,  and  two 
Eggs,  as  I  us'd  to  do.  For  tho'  there  were  Fowls  to  be  ''** 
bought  at  every  House  where  I  lay,  yet  my  Pocket  would 
not  reach  them ;  and  for  other  Flesh,  there  was  none  to  be 
^usd.  unless  my  way  had  lain  thro'  the  Town  when  it  was 
^btfarkel-day  with  them. 

^HL     Two  Days  after  this  I  got  with  much  ado  to  Hean, 

^^br  my    Flux  cncrcascd,   and    my    strength    decreased.     I 

^^Vc9cntly  made  towards  the  French  Bishops,  as  the  likeliest 

H^rlux  for  me  both  to  rest  at,  ami  get  larger  Informations 

of   the  Country,  from  the  European  Missionaries,  whose 

Seat  it  is.     The  Bishop's  Palace  is  a  pretty  neat  tow  House, 

standing  at   the  North-end  of  the  Town,  by  the  side  of 

the   River.     Tis   encompassed  with    a    pretty  high   Wall, 

and  has  a  large  Gate  to  enter  at.     The  Gate  stands  fronting 

to  the  Street,  and  runs  up  with  Houses  on  both  sides,  and 

ends  at    the    Palace.     Within    the   Wall   there  is  a  small 

Yard,  that  goes  round  the  Palace;  and  at  the  farther  End 

of  the  Yard  there  are  small  lodging-rooms  for  the  Servants, 

and    other    necessary  Offices.     The    House    it  self  is  not 

very  lai^e  nor  high ;  it  stands  not  in  the  middle  of  the 

Yard,  but  rather  nearest  the  Gate,  which  Gate  is  open  all 

day,  but  shut  in  the  Night.     That  part  that  fronts  the 

Gate,  has  a  pretty  neat  Room,  which  seems  to  be  designed 

for  ibc  reception  of  Strangers :  for  it  has  no  communica- 

tioo  with  any  other  Room  in  the  House,  tho'  joyncd  to  it 

as  one  building :   the   Door  by  which   you  enter  it,  fronts 

^mto  the  Gate,  and  this  Door  also  stands  open  all  the  day. 

^■^     When  I  came  hither  I  cntrcd  the  Gate,  and  seeing  no 

^Btoody  in  the  Yard,  I  went  into  that  Room.     At  the  Door 

^^therwif,    I    found    a    small    Line    hanging  down,  which  I 

pulled  ;  and  a  Bell  ringing  within,  gave  notice  of  my  being 

there  ;  yet  no  Body  appearing  presently,  I  went  in  and  sate 

down.     There  was  a  Table  in  the  middle  of  the  Room, 

and  handsome  Chairs,  and  several  European  Pictures  hung 

upon  the  Walls. 

It  was  ni>t  long  before  one  of  the  Priests  came  into  the 
Room  to  me,  and  received  me  very  civilly.     With  him  1 
had  a  great  deal  of  Discourse ;  He  was  a  French  Man  by 
H 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Nation,  but  spoke  Spanish  and  Portuguese  very  well.  It 
1686  ^as  chiefly  in  Spanish  that  we  entertained  each  other,  which 
I  understood  much  better  than  I  could  speak :  yet  I  ask'd 
him  Questions,  and  made  a  shift  to  answer  him  to  such 
Questions  as  he  asked  me;  and  when  I  was  at  a  loss  in 
my  Spanish,  I  had  recourse  to  Latin,  having  still  some 
smatterings  of  what  I  learnt  of  it  at  School  in  my  youth. 
He  was  very  free  to  talk  with  me,  and  first  asked  me  my 
business  thither?  I  told  him  that  my  business  was  to 
Cachao,  where  I  had  been  once  before;  that  then  I  went 
by  Water,  but  now  I  was  moved  by  my  curiosity  to  travel 
by  Land,  and  that  I  could  not  pass  by  any  Europeans 
without  a  Visit,  especially  such  a  famous  place  as  this.  He 
asked  me  many  other  Questions,  and  particularly  if  I  was 
a  Roman  Catholick  ?  I  told  him  no  ;  but  falling  then  into 
a  Discourse  about  Religion,  he  told  me  what  Progress  the 
Gospel  was  like  to  make  in  these  Eastern  Nations.  First 
he  began  with  the  Nicobar  Islands,  and  told  me  what  I 
have  related  of  that  matter,  in  the  17  Chapter  of  my 
"Voyage  round  the  World,"  page  464,  for  this  was  the 
Person  I  there  quoted,  and  from  whom  I  had  that  Relation ; 
as  he  told  me  he  had  it  from  the  Friar,  who  wrote  to  him 
from  Fort  St.  George.  But  that  Friar  having  been  a 
Passenger  in  Captain  Weldon's  Ship,  from  one  of  the 
Nicobar  Islands  to  Fort  St.  George,  I  askt  the  Captain's 
Opinion  of  that  relation  since  my  writing  that  Book,  and 
he  gave  me  a  quite  contrary  account  of  the  People  of 
Nicobar ;  that  they  were  a  very  perverse,  false  and  thievish 
People,  and  did  not  deserve  the  good  Character  the  Friar 
gave  of  them. 

But  to  proceed  with  the  discourse  I  had  with  the 
French  Priest  at  Hean.  He  told  me,  that  in  Siam  the 
Gospel  was  in  a  very  fair  way  to  receive  incouragement  by 
the  means  of  a  French  Bishop  there,  and  several  Ecclesi- 
asticks  he  had  with  him  there  to  assist  him  :  That  the 
great  Minister  of  State,  Constant  Falcon,  had  embraced  the 
Romish  Faith ;  and  that  the  King  was  very  much  inclined 
to  it,  the  Courtiers  also  seeming  well  enough  pleased  with 
it.     Insomuch  that  'twas  hop'd  that  in  a  short  Time  the 

26 


DISCOURSE  WITH  FRENCH  MISSIONARY 

irhole  N*tion  would  be  converted :  And  that  though  the  a™ 
ICountry  People  in  general  were  against  it,  yet  by  the  '^^ 
Icjamplc  of  the  King  and  his  Court,  the  rest  might  come 
by  dcgtres;  especially  because  the  Priests  had  free 
rderation  to  use  their  endeavours.  As  for  Tonquin,  he 
'i  me  that  the  People  in  general  were  inclined  to  embrace 
Christian  Faith,  but  that  the  Government  was  wholly 
averse  to  it:  that  the  Missionaries  who  lived  here  did  not 
openly  profess  to  be  Teachers  of  their  Doctrine,  but  that 
they  lived  here  under  the  notion  of  Merchants,  and  not 
as  Clergy-Mcn  ;  that  this  was  a  great  Obstacle  to  Chris- 
tianity, yet  ne^'ertheless  they  found  ways  to  draw  the 
People  from  their  Ignorance :  that  at  present  they  had 
about  14OOO  Converts,  and  more  coming  in  daily.  He 
told  me,  that  here  were  two  Bishops,  I  think  both  French 
Men;  one  of  them  was  entitled  the  Bishop  of  Ascalon, 
the  other  of  Auran ;  and  that  here  were  ten  Priests  of 
Europe,  and  three  more  of  the  Natives  of  Tonquin,  who 
had  been  ordained  Popish  Priests.  But  since  I  have  been 
informed,  that  these  French  Bishops  were  not  suffered  to 
live  at  Cachao;  neither  may  they  at  any  time  go  thither 
without  a  Licence  from  the  Govcrnour ;  and  such  a 
Licence  also  must  be  procured  by  the  Favour  of  some 
Mandarin  who  lives  at  Cachao,  for  whom  the  Bishop  or 
other  Missionary  is  to  perform  some  trivial  Work  or 
other.  For  the  MJssioncrs  living  here  are  purposely 
skilled  in  mending  Clocks,  Watches,  or  some  Mathematical 
I  Instruments,  of  which  the  Country  People  are  ignorant; 
this  gives  them  the  opportunity  of  being  often  sent 
r  to  Cachao  by  the  Mandarins  :  And  when  they  are  there, 
I  small  Job  that  would  not  require  above  5  or  6  Hours  to 
rform,  they  will  be  twice  as  many  days  about,  pretend- 
great  difficulty  in  the  work;  by  which  means  they 
£c  their  liberty  privately  to  teach  their  Disciples  that 
live  there ;  and  then  also  they  enjoy  themselves  with  the 
English  ami  Dutch  Merchants,  to  whom  they  are  always 
welcoRic. 

A*  to  the  Converts  these   People    have  made,  1    have 
_been  credibly  informed   that  they  are  chiefly  of  the  very 
27 


I 


rj'j 


J^'icaJ't   Tp^^t'.i-   V  -iTit  r^^irriiriAiat-  nir  vsrr  bond  TfarhfTS. 


'lit  '^:j'-:r.a:i  suttt.  hir.  a^  tmnr^  snmr  sr  ;■  -^  i^,  it 
>•,••: Mil  '^t  i-nizyrxjSLiuz  zisr.  Zjrrszsmrr  shrmiz  frocnfy 
'^fic'v     >  .r  5Ji   ::ti^  Z*ii^I-aT  jith  3irrr   ir  rit^  Pma  of 

Jt.*  ifiC^c^sC  fci  tTic  K'jc:a.rJBi5  trt  -ire  injx  Ma: -«riic.  cosnptss 
V*  ^^i^  ijk.uz  V.  gi.:!!  i^r-jscLvisL.  s:  "dirr  tset  aesm  to  hive 
'^j«:  Ac  •  fc':'-fc^t  V  •  ^  Pr-xtrKir:  ^Ez^sifrs  i:  ticse  liolitrous 
<yj.  ';Vf  ;ct;  •  '^r:  rr^ry  zr*:yizr,  -jrm  -irrr  s^jii  tsc  of  Objects 
f'/r  K*;  ijf^v.t  V/'/r^:p  ^^  tiktr.'  h£~*  ^ecn  :2aed  to  already: 
J"^  *r-»:  c/Arj^r^e  h  r^^c  gret-:  fr-c:  P£gzi:  Idois  to  Images 
//^  >*:?.♦  i;  wr,:'.ri  rrjty  vtr.c  HzogtrJiitT  as  ireil  for  the  poor 
V/^^t  *f^:'/  "j^jTs'^ktz^  't^T^j  art  g-idcd  only  by  Sense.  But 
\\jr,n  K'^Kti  h:rK  i;V>,  these  People  baring  been  bred  up  in 
ihr.  H'-Mrf  of  the  G<x/dn«s  of  their  own  Gods  or  Heroes, 
ih'Y  will  r/iorc  hardly  be  brought  over  to  change  their 
own  Molt»  Off  tv:w  <n\t%^  without  some  better  Arguments 
lo  iiio'/c  fhcv:  to  Ik;  more  valuable,  than  the  Missionaries 
i/i'lifurily  are  able  to  afford  them:  And  if  I  may  freely 
^ycdV.  my  ^>|>inion,  I  am  apt  to  think,  that  the  gross 
Moluf ry  of  flic  Paiii«ts  is  rather  a  Prejudice,  than  Advan- 
iiH^r  ti,  their  Miiisions,  and  that  their  first  care  should  be 
in  hriii({  iIm-  IVopli:  to  lie  virtuous  and  considerate,  and 
iluir  iM'Xi,  id  ^(\vc  them  a  plain  History  and  Scheme  of 
I  hi-  JMiMiUim-iiial  Truths  of  Christianity,  and  shew  them 
Imw  iinr»Tul»lr  they  iirc  to  natural  Light,  and  how  worthy 
III  ( fiiil. 

IImI  In  ivfurn  to  the  Krcnch  Priest;  he  at  length  asked 
IMP  il  iHiv  n(  nur  JMiglish  Shij-^  brought  Powder  to  sell? 

2« 


[AUTHOR'S    MAKING   OF   GUNPOWDER 

i>Id  him,  I  thought  mtt.  Then  he  asked  me  if  I  knew  ax. 
Composition  of  Powder  ?  I  answered  thit  1  had  '*^ 
ipti  how  to  make  cither  Cannon  or  fine  Powder,'  and 
him  the  manner  of  the  Composition.  Said  he,  I  have 
same  Receipts  from  France,  and  have  tryed  to  make 
■dcr,  but  could  not ;  and  therrforr  I  think  the  fault  is 
our  Coals.  Then  he  asked  me  many  Questions  about 
the  Coals,  what  were  proper  to  be  used,  but  that  I  could 
wrt  satisfie  him  in.  He  desired  mc  to  try  to  make  a 
'ound,  and  wiihat  lold  mc,  that  he  had  all  the  Ingredients, 
i  an  Hncinc  to  mix  them.  I  was  equally  persuaded  to 
t  my  Skill,  which  I  had  never  yet  tried,  not  knowing 
'hat  i  might  be  put  to  before  1  got  to  England ;  and 
having  drank  a  Glass  or  two  of  Wine  with  him.  I  went  to 
work;  and  it  succeeded  so  well,  that  I  pleased  Kim  ex- 
mcly,  and  satisfied  my  own  desire  of  trying  the  Receipt, 
id  the  Reader  shall  have  the  History*  of  the  Operation, 
he  piraws.  He  brought  mc  Sulphur  and  Salt-petre,  and 
weighed  a  Portion  of  each  of  these,  and  of  Coals  I 
itbcred  up  in  the  Hearth,  and  beat  to  Powder.  While 
»  Man  mixed  these  in  a  little  Engine,  I  made  a  small 
;vc  nf  Parchment,  which  [  pricked  full  of  Holes,  with  a 
■mail  Iron  nude  hot,  and  this  was  to  corn  it.  I  had  two 
large  Oxo-niiw  to  roul  in  the  Sieve,  and  work  it  thro*  the 
Holes  to  com  it.  When  it  was  dry  wc  proved  ii,  and  it 
answcr'd  our  Expectation.  The  Receipt  1  had  out  of 
Captain  Sturmcy's  MagaziH '  of  Arts. 

The  being  so  successful  in  this  put  me  afterwards  on 
._  rencwinff  of  Powder  at  Bencouli,  when  1  was  there 
lunncr  of  inai  Fort.     There  being  then  about  30  Barrels 

■  Caanm,  ordaaocc,  or  com  powder  wu  {,-eocrally  nude  .-u  fallaws : 
Ki*  In  nr  »*  p>n»  of  relliKd  uliprirc,  one  pari  of  nonA  alJcr  chatcoal, 

■^ — UDO  qoKauty  of  6n«  yellow  sulphur.  The  i n (; fed ic ills  were  fanised 
_  _  .  a  a  oMiur  whicli  wai  kept  »«t  wiUi  bnndy.  NVhcn  the  mixture 
«••  compteu  Ibe  tiaff  <rat  dried  and  aified.  Kinc  powilei,  for  priminK  or 
lMnMi&«mM,  iitcdMi  a  UrKcr  (imiponion  of  sdipctie. 

■  C^Uia  Samutl  Siurtn«y,  author  of  "  The  Manner's  MngBiinc."  The 
timd  Mbtam  ol  ibis  wock  (the  only  edition  1  have  handled)  was  published 
ta  I6I4,  with  ancDdinenu  t»y  J,  Cobon.  It  i»  an  instructive  and  eoiertain- 
■■K  wntk,  ooouinioe  ■  nombei  of  receipti  and  "  wrinkle*  m  navi^Xmn-" 

r  wa*  MMBeibtnx  of  a  poet.     H:s  portrait  ii  that  of  a  hnndiome. 
It  ii  DUtfVcd  with  a  ruriau*  mrstical  symbol. 

»9 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  damnified,  which  was  like  mud,  they  took  it  out  of  the 
"^8  Gisk,  and  put  it  into  earthen  Jars,  that  held  about  8  Barrels 
a  piece.  These  they  call  Montaban  Jars,  from  a  Town  of 
that  name  in  Pegu,  whence  they  are  brought  and  carried 
all  over  India.  In  these  *twas  intended  to  send  the  Powder 
to  Fort  St.  George,  to  be  renewed  there :  But  I  desired  the 
Govemour  to  let  me  first  try  my  skill  on  it,  because  we  had 
but  little  Powder  in  the  Fort,  and  might  have  wanted 
before  any  returns  could  be  expected  from  thence.  The 
Salt-petre  *  was  sunk  to  the  bottom  of  the  Jars,  but  I  mixt 
it  and  beat  it  all  together,  and  corned  it  with  Sieves  which 
I  made  of  my  own  old  Parchment  Draughts.  I  made  thus 
8  Barrels  full  of  very  good  Powder  before  I  went  from 
thence.  The  French  Priest  told  me  in  conclusion,  that  the 
Grandees  make  all  their  own  Powder;  and  since  I  have 
been  informed,  that  the  Soldiers  make  Powder,  as  I  have 
already  said. 

I  spent  the  remainder  of  the  Day  in  the  Palace  with 
the  Priest.  He  told  me  that  the  Bishop  was  not  well, 
otherwise  I  should  have  seen  him :  And  that  because  it 
was  a  Fish-day,  I  could  not  expect  such  Entertainment,  as 
I  might  have  had  on  another  Day ;  yet  he  ordered  a  Fowl 
to  be  broiled  for  my  Dinner,  and  I  dined  by  my  self.  In 
the  Evening  he  sent  me  out  of  the  Palace,  desiring  to  be 
excused,  that  he  could  not  entertain  me  all  Night :  yet  he 
ordered  his  Man  to  lodge  me  in  a  Tonquinese  Christian 
House  not  far  from  thence.  The  People  were  civil,  but 
very  poor,  and  my  Lodging  such  as  I  had  met  with  on  the 
Road.  I  have  since  been  told,  that  the  new  Christians 
come  to  do  their  Devotion  in  the  Palace  at  Night,  and  for 
that  Reason  probably,  I  was  so  soon  dismist. 

I  was  now  again  pretty  well  refreshed,  and  might  have 
gone  to  Cachao  City  a  foot :  but  fearing  my  strength,  I 
chose  to  go  by  Water.  Therefore  I  sent  back  my  Guide : 
yet  before  he  departed  back  to  our  Ships,  he  bargained 
with  a  Tonquinese  Waterman  for  my  Passage  to  Cachao. 
The  Tide  not  serving  presently  to  imbark,  I  walked 

'  It  had  this  property.    Aboard  ships  of  war  the  powder- casks  had  to 
be  turned  at  least  once  a  month  in  order  that  the  nitre  should  not  separate. 

30 


HE  GOES  BY  BOAT  UP  TO  CACHAO 

fabout  the  Town,  and  spent  the  Oay^  in  viewing  it :  in  the  j 
Evening  I  embarked,  and  they  choose  an  Evening  for  cool-  ' 
Dcsa,  rowing  all  Night.  The  boat  was  about  the  bigness  of 
a  Gnvesend  Wherry,  and  was  used  purposely  to  cany 
Passenger*,  having  a  small  covering  over-head  to  keep 
them  dry  when  it  rained.  There  were  4  or  5  more  of  these 
BoBti,  thai  went  up  this  Tide  full  of  Passengers.  In  our 
Boat  were  about  20  Men  and  Women,  besides  4.  or  6  that 
rowed  us.  The  Women  chose  their  Places  and  sat  by 
themselves,  and  they  had  much  respect  shewed  them :  But 
the  Men  stowed  close  together,  without  shewing  any  respect 
marc  to  one  than  to  another,  yet  all  very  Civil.  I  thrust 
in  among  the  thickest  of  them  at  first,  but  my  Flux  would 
noc  suffirr  me  to  rest  long  in  a  Place.  About  Midnight  we 
Were  set  ashore  to  refresh  ourselves  at  a  Baiting- Place, 
where  there  were  a  few  Houses  close  by  the  Rivers  Side, 
and  the  People  up,  with  Candles  lighted,  Arack  and  Tea, 
and  little  Spits  of  Meat,  and  other  Provisions  ready  drest, 
to  rectave  us.  For  these  were  all  Houses  of  Entertainment, 
and  probably  got  their  living  by  entertaining  Passengers.  We 
stayed  here  about  an  Hour,  and  then  entered  again  on  our 
Boat,  and  rowed  forwards.  The  Passengers  spent  the 
Time  in  merry  Discourse,  or  Singing,  after  their  Way,  tho* 
to  us  it  seems  like  crying;  but  I  was  mute  for  want  of  a 
Person  I  could  converse  with.  About  8  or  9  a  Clock  the 
neat  Day  1  was  set  ashore :  the  rest  of  the  Passengers 
remained  in  the  Boat,  but  whither  they  were  bound  I  know 
noe,  nor  whether  the  Boat  went  quite  up  to  Cachao.  I  was 
now  5  or  6  Mtlcs  short  of  the  City,  but  in  a  good  Path ; 
for  the  Land  here  was  pretty  high,  level  and  sandy,  and 
the  Rood  plain  and  dry,  and  1  reached  Cachao  by  Noon.  I 
presently  went  to  one  Mr.  Bowycrs  House,  who  was  a  free 
Merchant,  with  whom  Captain  Weldon  lodged,  and  staid 
with  them  a  few  Days;  but  so  weak  with  my  Flux,  which 
daily  cncrcased,  that  I  was  scarce  able  to  go  about,  and  so 
was  forced 'to  learn  by  others,  in  a  great  Measure,  several 
particulars  relating  to  this  Place.  This  my  weakness, 
joined  with  my  disappointment,  for  1  found  that  I  was  not 
like  to  be  employed  in  any  Voyage  to  the  Neighbouring 


3' 


J 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER^    VOYAGES 

A3f.    Countries,  as  it  had  been  proposed  to  mc,  made  mc  very 

'^^  desirous  of  remming  back  again,  as  soon  as  might  be :  and 

it    happened   oppjcrunely,  that    Captain  Weldon    had  by 

this  time  done  his  Business^   and  was   preparing   for   his 

Departure. 

I  went  therefore  down  the  River  again  to  our  Ships,  in 
a  Vessel  our  Merchants  had  hired,  to  carry  th^  Goods 
aboard  fn^m  Cachao.  Among  other  freight,  there  were  2 
Bells  of  abiDut  500  weight  each,  which  had  been  cast  at 
Cachao  by  the  Tonquinese,  for  my  Lord  Falcon,  the  King 
of  Siam's  chief  Minister  of  State,  and  for  the  use  of  some 
of  the  Christian  Churches  in  Siam.  The  Person  who  be- 
spoke them,  and  was  to  carry  them,  was  Captain  Brewster, 
who  had  not  very  long  before  come  from  Siam  in  a  Ship  of  that 
King's,  and  had  been  cast  away  on  the  Coast  of  Tonquin, 
but  had  saved  most  of  his  Goods.  With  these  he  traded  at 
Cachao,  and  among  other  Goods  he  had  purchased  to  return 
with  to  Siam,  were  these  2  Bells,  all  which  he  sent  down  to 
be  put  on  Board  Captain  Weldon's  Ship.  But  the  Bark 
was  no  sooner  come  to  Hean,  in  going  down  the  River,  but 
the  Governor  of  Hean's  Officers  came  on  Board  the  Bark 
and  seized  the  2  Bells  in  Behalf  of  the  chief  of  the  English 
Factory ;  who  understanding  they  were  designed  for  the  King 
of  Siam,  which  they  were  not  so  sure  of  as  to  the  rest  of  the 
Goods,  and  the  English  being  then  at  War  with  the  Siamers, 
he  made  this  his  pretence  for  seizing  them,  and  got  the 
Governor  to  assist  him  with  his  Authority :  and  the  Bells 
were  accordingly  carried  ashore,  and  kept  at  Hean.  This 
was  thought  a  very  strange  Action  of  the  chief  of  the 
Factory  to  seize  Goods  as  belonging  to  the  King  of  Siam, 
while.they  were  in  a  River  of  Tonquin :  but  he  was  a  Person 
but  meanly  qualified  for  the  Station  he  was  in.  Indeed 
had  he  been  a  Man  of  Spirit,  he  might  have  been  serviceable 
in  getting  a  Trade  with  Japan,  which  is  a  very  rich  one,  and 
much  coveted  by  the  Eastern  People  themselves  as  well  as 
Europeans.  For  while  I  was  there,  there  were  Merchants 
came  every  Year  from  Japan  to  Tonquin ;  and  by  some  of 
these  our  English  Factory  might  probably  have  settled  a 
Corcspondence  and  Traffick,  but  he  who  was  little  qualified 

32 


ibf  tJ 

Bof  Pi 


CHANCES    OF  TRADING  TO  JAPAN 

for  the  Station  he  was  in,  was  less  fit  for  any  new  Under- 
"  ig  :  and  tho'  Men  ought  not  to  run  inconsiderately  into  ' 
Discoveries  or  Undertakings,  yet  where  there  is  a  prospect 
of  Profit,  I  think  it  not  amiss  for  Merchants  to  try  for  a 
Trade,  for  if  our  Ancestors  had  been  as  dull  as  we  have  been 
of  late,  'tis  probable  wc  had  never  known  the  way  so  much 
»  to  the  East-Indies,  but  must  have  been  beholden  to  our 
Ncighboura  for  all  the  product  of  those  Eastern  Nations. 
What  care  was  formerly  taken  to  get  us  a  Trade  into  the 
East-ln>iics,  and  other  Countries  ?  What  Pains  particularly 
did  some  ukc  to  find  out  the  Muscovites  by  doubling  the 
North  Cape,  and  away  thence  by  land  Trade  into  Persia  ?  but 
now,  as  if  wc  were  cloy'd  with  Trade,  we  sit  still  contented, 
uytng  with  Cato,  No»  minsr  ai  virtus  quam  quierere  porta 
mm.  This  was  the  Saying  of  an  eminent  Merchant  of  the 
East-India  Company  to  me  :  but  by  his  leave,  our  Neigh- 
bours have  c:n<:roachcd  on  us,  and  that  in  our  times  too. 
However,  'tis  certainly  for  the  Interest  of  our  Merchants  to 
employ  fit  Men  in  their  Factories,  since  the  Reputation  of 
:he  Company  riscth  or  falls  by  the  discreet  Management, 
■  T  the  til  Conduct  of  the  Agents.  Nor  is  it  enough  for  the 
thief  of  a  Factory  to  be  a  good  Merchant,  and  an  honest 
Man  :  For  tho"  these  arc  necessary  Qualifications,  yet  the 
Govcmour,  or  chief  of  the  Factory  ought  to  know  more 
than  barely  how  to  buy,  sell,  and  keep  Accompts  :  Especially 
where  other  European  Merchants  reside  among  them,  or 
:rade  to  the  same  Places;  for  they  keep  a  diligent  Eye  on 
the  Management  of  our  Aflfairs,  and  are  always  ready  to 
take  all  Advantages  of  our  Mis-improvements.  Neither 
'jught  this  Care  to  be  neglected  where  wc  have  the  Trade 
to  our  selves,  for  there  ought  to  be  a  fair  Understanding 
betWBcii  us  and  the  Natives,  and  care  taken  that  they  should 
have  no  reason  to  complain  of  unjust  dealings,  as  I  could 
ihew  where  there  has  been  ;  but  tis  an  invidious  Subject, 
and  all  that  I  aim  at  is  to  give  a  caution.  But  to  the 
Matter  in  Hand,  it  seemed  to  me  that  our  Factory  at 
Tonquin  might  have  got  a  Trade  with  Japan  :  and  to  China 
M  much  as  they  pleased.  I  confess  the  continual  Wars 
between  Tonquin  and  Cochinchina,  were  enough  to  obstruct 
»ot.  II.  33  c 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AM.  the  Designs  of  making  a  Voyage  to  this  last:  and  those 
'^^  other  Places  of  Champa  and  Cambodia  as  they  are  less 
known,  so  was  it  more  unlikely  still  to  make  thither  any 
profitable  Voyages :  yet  possibly  the  Difficuldes  here  also  is 
not  so  great,  but  Resolution  and  Industry  would  overcome 
them;  and  the  Profit  would  abundantly  compensate  the 
Trouble. 

But  to  proceed,  we  found  there  was  no  recovering  the 
Bells :  so  we  fell  down  from  Hean  to  our  Ships :  and 
Captain  Weldon  coming  to  us  in  a  few  Days,  and  Captain 
Brewster  with  him,  to  go  as  a  Passenger  in  his  Ship,  together 
with  one  or  two  more ;  and  2  Ships  who  came  with  us  being 
also  ready  for  their  Departure,  we  all  weighed  Anchor,  and 
took  leave  of  Tonquin. 


34 


CHAP.  VI 

Thty  ut  i»i/  ma  tf  tk*  Btiy  rf  Tnfuin.  Of  the  R.  and  Cmattry  rf 
CmmUdia  :  Of  Chinru  Piratn  teltUd  itifrr,  anJ  tkf  Biggatut^  m 
MTt  tfSti£rrt  undtr  ih  Kimg  tfSiam,  ttth  rtutrJ  hj  t/u  EagSih  i« 
kii  lerokt.  Tfuj  pott  kf  PmJt  Ctmdsrt,  art  In  fiar  af  tht  King  rf 
Simm,  mid  nltr  the  Strtightt  »f  Mataaa  hj  Brntfr't  Strtights. 
Tk^  mrrivt  at  Malacca.  Tkt  Sttry  »/  Captain  Jthnitn  :  hit 
hiyimgm  Vnul  at  Malacca,  and  going  fVrr  It  BaiicalJi,  a  Trnrs  m 
ike  tpfauU  Ctcit  «f  Sumatra,  ta  hiy  Ptpptr.  Hit  Murdtr  ^ 
the  Maiayani  thrrc,  aid  the  narrttu  ticape  »/  his  Men  and  VetteL 
The  Slate  tf  Trade  in  th*u  Parti,  and  the  RettrainI  put  up»n  it. 
Captain  JshntenU  Fntel  trsught  It  Malacca  by  Mr.  Wtllu  The 
Amihtr't  Drparturi  from  Malacca,  and  arrival  at  Achin, 

IT  was  the  beginning  of  February  i68j|  when  we  left  ks. 
this  Country.  Wc  went  over  the  Bar  3  Ships  in  '^ 
Company,  the  Rainbow  Captain  Pool  Commander, 
bound  tor  London,  and  Captain  Lacy  in  the  Saphire, 
Sound  for  Fort  St.  George,  and  I  was  in  Captain  Weldon's 
Ship  the  Cartanty  bound  thither  also.  We  kept  Company 
i-ime  time  after  our  departure  from  Tonquin,  and  having 
an  Easterly  Wind  wc  kept  more  to  the  middle  of  the  Bay 
iA  Tonquin,  or  towards  the  Eastern  Side,  than  when  we 
entered :  by  which  means  we  had  ihe  Opportunity  of 
wmndinii  "  *«"  in  tbc  middle  of  the  Bay  now,  as  wc  had 
n  the  West  «dc  of  it,  at  our  coming  into  the  Bay. 

Coming  out  of  the  Bay  of  Tonquin,  wc  stotxi  away 
Southward,  having  the  Sholcs  of  Pracel  on  our  Larboard, 
»nd  the  Coasts  of  Cochinchina,  Champa,  and  Cambodia  on 
(niT  Surboard.  I  have  just  mentioned  these  Kingdoms  in 
my  former  Volume  ;  and  here  I  have  but  little  to  say  of 
them,  having  only  sail'd  by  them.  But  not  altogether  tu 
fail  die  Readers  Expectation,  I  shall  give  a  brief  Account 

I 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   of  one  or  two  Particulars  relating  to  Gtmbodia :   for  as  to 
1689  Champa  I  have  nothing  material  to  speak ;  and  Cochinchina, 
I  have  already  spoken  of  in  this  Volume,   as  I  went  to 
Tonquin. 

The  Kingdom  of  Cambodia  seems  to  be  much  such 
a  kind  of  Country  within  Land  as  the  lower  Parts  of 
Tonquin :  low  Land,  very  woody,  and  little  inhabited, 
lying  on  each  Side  a  great  River  that  comes  from  the 
North  a  great  way,  and  falls  into  the  Sea  over  against  Pulo 
Condore.  I  know  not  the  particular  Product  of  Cambodia, 
but  in  the  Vessels  mentioned  in  my  former  Vol.  p.  396. 
as  taken  at  Pulo  Ubi,  and  which  came  thither  from 
Cambodia ;  there  were  besides  Rice,  Dragons  Blood,  Lack, 
in  great  Jars,  but  it  looked  blackish  and  thick ;  and  the 
yellow  purging  Gum,  which  we  from  thence  call  Cambodia, 
in  great  Cakes,  but  I  know  not  whence  they  get  it.  This 
River  and  Kingdom  (if  it  be  one)  is  but  little  known  to 
our  Nation,  yet  some  Englishmen  have  been  there ;  parti- 
cularly Captain  Williams  and  Captain  Howel,  the  last  of 
whom  I  came  acquainted  with  some  time  after  this  at  Fort 
St.  George,  and  I  had  of  him  the  following  Account,  the 
Particulars  of  which  I  have  also  had  confirmed  by  the 
Seamen  who  were  with  them. 

These  two  Captains,  with  many  more  Englishmen,  had 
been  for  some  time  in  the  Service  of  the  King  of  Siam,  and 
each  of  them  commanded  a  stout  Frigat  of  his,  manned 
chiefly  with  English  and  some  Portuguese  born  at  Siam. 
These  the  King  of  Siam  sent  against  some  Pyratcs,  who 
made  spoil  of  his  Subjects  trading  in  these  Seas,  and  nested 
themselves  in  an  Island  up  the  River  of  Cambodia,  Captain 
Howel  told  me,  that  they  found  this  River  very  large, 
especially  at  its  Mouth ;  that  'tis  deep  and  navigable  for 
very  great  Vessels,  60  or  70  Leagues  up,  and  that  its  depth 
and  wideness  extended  much  further  up,  for  ought  we 
knew:  but  so  far  they  went  up  at  this  time  with  their 
Ships.  The  Course  of  the  River  is  generally  from  North 
to  South  :  and  they  found  the  Land  low  on  each  side,  with 
many  large  Creeks  and  Branches,  and  in  some  Places  con- 
siderable   Islands.      They    bended    their   Course   up    that 

36 


S<3 


1RATES    IN    THE  RIVER  OF  CAMBODIA 

Branch  which  seemed   most  considerable,  having  the  Tide 

of  Klood  with  them,  and  the  River  commonly  so  wide,  as  '**' 

to  give   them  room  to  turn  or  make  Angles  where  the 

bending  of  the   River  was  such  as  to  receive  a  contrary 

fast,  or  South-East  Sea-Wind.     These  Reaches  or  Bend- 

DDgs  of  the  River  East  and  West  were  very  rare ;  at  least 

as  to  make  ihdr  Course  be  against  the  Sea-wind,  which 

immonly  blew  in  their  Stem,  and  so  fresh,  that  with  it 

ley  could  stem  the  Tide  of  Ebb.     But  in  the  Night  when 

he   Land-winds   came,  they   anchored,  and    lay   still    till 

about  I o  or  II  a-CIock  the  next  Day,  at  which  time  the 

Sea-breezes  usually  sprang  up  again,  and  enabled  them  to 

■continue  ihcir  Course,  till  they  came  to  the  Island,  where 

Pirates   inhabited.      They  presently  began   to  fire  at 

m,  and  landing  their  Men  routed  them,  and  burnt  their 

]ouie«   and    Fortifications;    and    taking    many  Prisoners, 

returned  again. 

These  Kratical  People  were  by  Nation  Chinese,  who 
.when    the   Tartars    conquered   their    Country,    fled    from 
"icncc  in  their  own  Ships:  as  chosing  rather  to  live  any 
here  free,  than  to  submit  to  the  Tartars.     These  it  seems 
their  flight  bent  their  Course  towards  this  Country,  and 
I'finJing  the  River  of  Cambodia  open    before    them,  they 
bold  to  enter,  and  settle  on  the  Island  before  men- 
There  they  built  a  Town,  and   fenced  it  round 
•with  a  kind  of  Wood  pile,  or  Wall  of  great  Timber 
llid  along,  of  the  Thickness  of  3  or  4  of  these  Trees, 
itf  about  as  many  in-hcighth.     They  were  provided 
:h  all  sorts  of  Planters  Instruments,  and  the  Land  here- 
its  was  excellent  good,  as  our  Englishmen  told  me,  so 
X  it  U  like  they  might  have  lived  here  happily  enough, 
had  their  Inclinations  led  them  to  a  quiet  Life  :    but  they 
brought  Arms  along  with  them,  and  chose  to  use  them, 
rather    than    their  Instruments  of   Husbandry :    and    they 
lived  therefore  mostly  by  rapin,  pillaging  their  Neighbours, 
who  »r«re  more  addicted  to  traffick  than  fighting.     But  the 
Kingof  Siam's  Subjects  having  been  long  harrasscd  by  them 
at  Sea,  he  fint  sent  s<jme  Fiwccs  by  Land  to  drive  them  out 
of  their  Fort :    till  not  succeeding  that   way,  he  entirely 
37 


I 
I 


I 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 


A%,  routed  zhczm  by  serr^'i'^g  thse  z  Stiips  up  the  Riyer.  The 
'^  2  English  Caprz-ns  hiTing  thus  diiszt^d  their  Bu^ess,  re- 
turned out  of  the  Rirer  with  rairiT  IVisoners:  but  the 
South-Wcst  M*jnsc«ja  being  already  set  in,  they  could  not 
presently  return  to  Sbsi,  and  therefore  went  to  Macao  in 
China ;  as  well  to  w^t  for  the  N.  East  Monsoon,  as  to 
ingratiate  themselves  with  the  Tartars,  who  they  thought 
would  be  pleased  with  the  Conquest,  which  they  had  made 
over  these  Chinese  Pvrates.  Thev  were  well  entertained 
there  by  the  Tartarian  Governor,  and  gave  him  their 
Prisoners;  and  upon  the  shifting  of  the  Monsoon,  they 
returned  to  Siam.  There  they  were  received  with  great 
Applause.  Nor  was  this  the  first  successful  Expedition 
the  English  have  made  in  the  King  of  Siam*s  Service. 
They  once  saved  the  Country,  by  suppressing  an  Insurrec- 
tion made  by  the  Buggasses.  The  Buggasses  are  a  sort  of 
war-like  trading  Malayans,  and  mercenary  Soldiers  of 
India :  I  know  not  well  whence  they  come,  unless  from 
Macasser  in  the  Island  Celebes.  Many  of  them  had  been 
entertained  at  Siam  in  the  King's  Service :  but  at  last  being 
disgusted  at  some  ill  Usage,  they  stood  up  in  their  own 
Defence.  Some  Hundreds  of  them  got  together,  all  well 
armed :  and  these  struck  a  Dread  into  the  Hearts  of  the 
Siamites,  none  of  whom  were  able  to  stand  before  them ; 
till  Constant  Falcon  the  chief  Minister,  commanded  the 
English  that  were  then  in  the  King's  Service  to  march 
against  them,  which  they  did  with  Success,  though  with 
some  considerable  loss.  For  these  Services  the  King  gave 
every  Year  to  each  of  them  a  great  Silk  Coat,  on  which 
were  just  13  Buttons.  Those  of  the  chief  Commanders 
were  of  Massy  Gold,  and  those  of  the  inferior  Officers  were 
of  Silver  Plate.  This  Expedition  against  the  Chinese 
Pyrates  was  about  the  Year  1687  :  the  other  Broil  with  the 
Buggasses  was,  as  I  take  it,  some  time  before. 

But  to  proceed  with  our  Voyage,  we  still  kept  our  way 
Southward,  and  in  Company  together,  till  we  came  about 
Pulo  Condore ;  but  then  Captain  Pool  parted  from  us, 
standing  more  directly  South  for  the  Streights  of  Sundy : 
and  we  steered  more  to  the  Westward,  to  go  through  the 

38 


ENTERS   STREIGHTS   OF   MALACCA 

ireights  of  Malacca,  through  which  we  came  before. 
Captain  Brewster  and  another  of  our  Passengers  began  now  '^ 
to  be  in  fear  that  the  King  of  Siani  would  send  Ships  to 
lie  at  the  Mouth  of  the  Sireights  of  Malacca,  and  intercept 
Passage,  because  there  was  a  war  broke  out  between 
English  Easi-fndta  Company  and  that  Prince.  This 
med  the  more  likely,  because  the  French  at  this  time 
Were  cmplfiyed  in  that  King's  Service,  by  the  Means  of  a 
French  Bishop  and  irther  Ecclesiasticks,  who  were  striving 
to  convert  the  King  and  People  to  Christianity,  through 
the  Interest  they  had  got  in  Constant  Falcon.  Particularly 
they  were  afraid  that  the  King  of  Siam  would  send  the 
3  Ships  before-mentioned,  which  Captain  Williams,  and 
Captain  Howel  had  commanded  a  little  Iwfore,  to  Jie  at  the 
West-End  of  the  Streights  Mouth ;  but  probably  manned 
with  Frenchmen  and  French  Commanders  to  take  us. 
Now  though  this  made  but  little  Impression  on  the  Minds 
of  our  Commanders  and  Officers,  yet  it  so  hapned,  that  we 
had  «uch  thick  dark  Weather  when  we  came  near  the  first 
Entrance  of  the  Streights  of  Malacca,  which  was  thai  we 
came  by,  and  by  which  we  meant  to  return,  that  wc 
thought  it  not  safe  to  stand  in  at  Night,  and  so  lay  by  till 
Morning.  The  next  Day  wc  saw  a  Jonk  to  the  South- 
w2nJ,  and  chased  her;  and  having  spoke  with  her  we  made 
Sail,  and  stood  to  the  Westward  to  pass  the  Streights,  and 
nuking  the  Land,  we  found  we  were  to  the  Southward  of 
the  Streights  first  Mouth,  and  were  gotten  to  the  Souther- 
mott  Entrance,"  near  the  Sumatra  Shore :  but  Captain  Lacy, 

'ho  chose    to  go  the    old  Way,  made  sail  again  to  the 

Northward,  and  Ki  passed  nearer  the  Malacca  Shore  by  the 
icaporc,  the  way  we  went  before.     His  was  also  the  best 
*  nearest  way  :  But  Captain  Weldon  was  willing  to  satisfy 
Curiosity,   and    try    a    new    Passage :    which    we   got 

imugh,  though  wc  had  but  little  Depth  of  Water :  and 
this  Lntrance  we  past  is  called  Brewer's  Streights. 

Brewer's  Streights  are  sometimes  passed  by  small  Ships, 
that  sail  from  Batavia  to  Malacca,  because  for  them  it  is 

'  Tbnmti  ibe  Imgg*  and  Rhio  Archipeliit[oe4. 

39 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

Af-  a  natrfrz  Cut,  thin  to  rjn  so  far  as  Pulo  Tiinaon,  or  the 
'^^-^  Strc:ghts  of  Scncaponc.  In  this  Channel,  though  in  some 
Places  we  found  but  1 4  or  15  Foot  Water,  yet  the  Bottom 
was  soft  Oaze:  and  :t  lies  so  among  Islands,  that  there 
cannot  go  a  great  Sea.  Captain  Weldon  had  also  a 
Dutchman  aboard  who  had  been  this  way,  and  he  pro- 
fessing to  know  the  Channel,  encouraged  our  Captaun  to 
try  it,  which  we  eflPected  very  well,  though  sometimes  we 
had  but  little  more  Water  than  we  drew.  This  made 
us  make  but  an  easy  Sail,  and  therefore  we  were  7  or 
8  Days  before  we  arrived  at  Malacca;  but  Captain  Lacy 
was  there  2  or  3  Days  before  us. 

Here  we  first  heard  of  the  Death  of  Constant  Falcon, 
for  whom  Captain  Brewster  seemed  to  be  much  concerned. 
There  also  we  found,  besides  several  Dutch  Sloops,  and 
our  Companion  Captain  Lacy,  an  English  Vessel  of  35 
or  40  Tuns.  This  Vessel  was  bought  by  one  Captain 
Johnson,  who  was  sent  by  the  Governor  of  Bencouli,  in 
a  small  Sloop,  to  trade  about  the  Island  of  Sumatra  for 
Pepper,  but  Captain  Johnson  being  killed,  the  Sloop  was 
brought  hither  by  one  Mr.  Wells. 

Being  thus  insensibly  fallen  into  the  mention  of  this 
Captain  Johnson ;  and  intending  to  defer  what  little  I 
have  to  say  of  Malacca,  till  my  coming  thither  again  from 
Achin,  I  shall  bestow  the  rest  of  this  Chapter  in  speaking 
of  this  Man's  Tragedy,  and  other  Occurrences  relating 
to  it,  which  though  of  no  great  Moment  in  themselves, 
yet  the  Circumstances  I  shall  have  occasion  to  relate  with 
them  may  be  of  use  to  the  giving  some  small  light  into 
the  State  of  the  opposite  Coast  of  Sumatra,  which  was 
the  Scene  of  what  I  am  going  to  speak  of:  for  though 
I  shall  have  other  occasion  to  speak  of  Achin  and  Bencouli, 
yet  I  shall  not  have  Opportunity  to  say  any  thing  of  this 
Part  of  that  Island,  opposite  to  Malacca,  unless  I  do  it 
here.  To  go  on  therefore  with  his  Story,  it  seems  Captain 
Johnson  was  part  Owner  of  the  small  Bencouli  Sloop: 
but  thinking  it  too  small  for  his  turn,  he  came  to  Malacca, 
intending  to  buy  a  larger  Sloop  of  the  Dutch,  if  he  could 
light  of  a  Bargain.     He  had  the  best  Part  of  a  Thousand 

40 


OF   CAPT.  JOHNSON    AND   MR.    WELLS 

Dollars  in    Spanish    Money   aboard,    for   which    one    may 

purchase  a  good  Sloop  here :  for  the    Dutch,    as  I   have  '**' 

before  observed,  do  often  buy  Proe-bottoms  for  a  small 

Matter,  of  the  Mahiyans,  especially  of  the  People  of  Jihore, 

and   convert  them  into  Sloops,  cither  for  their  own  use, 

or  to  scU.    Of  these  sort  of  Vessels  therefore  the  Dutchmen 

of  Malacca  have  plenty,  and  can  aflfbrd  good  Penny-worths ; 

and  doubtless  it  was  for  this  Reason  that  Captain  Johnson 

afflc  hither  to  purchase  a  Sloop.      Here   he    met   with   a 

Bargain,   not  such  a   Proe-buttom  reformed,    but   an  old 

ill-shaped    thing,  yet  such  a  one   as    pleased    him.     The 

Dutchman    who   sold    him    this  Vessel,  told    him  withal, 

-that   the  Government   did    not   allow  any  such    Dealings 

rith   the  Er^lish,   though    they    might   wink  at  it :    and 

'm  therefore  the  safest  Way  for  them  both  to  keep  out 

trouble,  would  be  to  run  over  to  the  other  Side  of 

Strcighis,    lo   a   Town   called    Bcncalis,    on    Sumatra; 

pherc  they  might  safely  buy  and  sell,  or  exchange  without 

'    Notice  taken  of  them.     Giptain  Johnson    accepting 

:  Offer,   they  sailed    both   together  over   to   Bencalis,'  a 

[alayan  Town  on  that  Coast,  commanding   the  Country 

"Out  it.     There  they  came  to  an  Anchor,  and  Captain 

Johnson  paying    the  Price  agreed   on  for  the  Vessel,   he 

had  her  delivered   to  him.     The   Dutchman    immediately 

returned  over  to  Malacca  again,  leaving  Captain  Johnson 

with  2  Vessels  under  his  Command,  viz.  the  Sloop  that 

he  brought  from   Bcncouli,  and   this  new-b<iught  Vessel. 

^"be    Bcncouli  Sloop  he  sent   into  a  large  River  hanl  by, 

I  trade  with  the  Malayans  f*>r  Pepper,  under  the  Com- 

and  of  Mr.  Wells.     He  was  no  Seaman ;  but  a   pretty 

Kclligcnt  Person,    that    came  first  out    of  England  as  a 

'  4dtcr,  to  serve  the  East-India  0>mpany  In    the    Island 

at*  Helena.     He   liv'd  sometime    very  meanly  in  that 

^tland,  but  having  an  aspiring  Mind,  he    left  that  poor, 

but    healthy  Place,  to  serve    the   Company  at    Bcncouli; 

which  though  it   is  accounted    the   most    unhealthy   Place 

of  «ny  that    we  trade    to,  yet    the  hopes  of   Preferment 

*  Baofkaii. oa  ibe  mwni  shore-    It  must  not  be  confuseil  with  bcncouli 
'  ta)  oa  the  «cM  mast,  wlicrc  Dainpier  served  a>  gunnci. 

4> 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER^   VOYAGES 

A9  *r.gig*:i  h^  to  r^sD:,'Jc  tii-fas-.  After  socne  say  there, 
'^-^^  he  »«  sent  with.  Cijiafn  Jocistjci  to  asszst  him  in  this 
V^yr  ExpcditToc;  3<re  beczsse  he  could  use  lus  Pen 
than  hi  Hands  -n  Sea  Scrrtce-  He  had  3  or  4  raw 
Stamen  Trith  h:m  to  work  tbc  Sloop  up  into  the  River. 
Captain  Johnson  staved  near  Bencalxs  to  fit  his  new  Vessel : 
for  w;th  other  Necessaries  she  wanted  a  new  Boltsprit, 
which  he  intended  to  cut  here^  having  a  Gu|)enter  with 
him  for  that  purpose ;  as  also  to  repair  and  fit  her  to  his 
Mind.  He  had  also  a  few  other  raw  Seamen,  but  such 
as  would  have  made  better  Landmen,  they  having  served 
the  King  of  Siam  as  Soldiers:  and  they  were  but  lately 
come  from  thence  with  the  French,  who  were  forced  to 
leave  that  Country.  But  here  in  the  Indies  our  English 
arc  forced  for  want  of  better,  to  make  use  of  any  Seamen 
such  as  they  can  get,  and  indeed  our  Merchants  are  often 
put  hard  to  it  for  want  of  Seamen.  Here  are  indeed 
Lascars  or  Indian  Seamen  enough  to  be  hired ;  and  these 
they  often  make  use  of:  yet  they  always  covet  an  English- 
man or  2  in  a  Vessel  to  assist  them.  Not  but  that  these 
Lascars  are  some  of  them  indifferent  good  Sailors,  and 
might  do  well  enough :  but  an  Englishman  will  be 
accounted  more  faithful,  to  be  employed  on  matters  of 
Moment ;  beside  the  more  free  Conversation  that  may 
be  expected  from  them,  during  the  Term  of  the  Voyage. 
So  that  though  oft-times  their  Englishmen  are  but 
ordinary  Sailors,  yet  they  are  promoted  to  some  Charge 
of  which  they  could  not  be  so  capable  any  where  but  in 
the  l^ast-Indies.  These  Seamen  would  be  in  a  manner 
wholly  useless  in  Europe,  where  we  meet  with  more 
frequent  and  hard  Storms,  but  here  they  serve  indifferent 
well,  especially  to  go  and  come  with  the  Monsoons;  but 
enough  of  that. 

Mr.  Wells  being  gone  to  purchase  Pepper,  Capt. 
Johnson  went  ashore  about  5  or  6  Leagues  from  Bencalis 
Town  with  his  Carpenter,  to  cut  a  Boltsprit ;  there  being 
there  Plenty  of  Timber  Trees  fit  for  his  purpose.  He  soon 
chose  one  to  his  Mind,  and  cut  it  down.  He  and  his 
Carpenter  wrought  on  it  the  first  and  second  Days  without 

4a 


^KXiPT.  femrsoN  killed  by  Malayans 

^^BlAnlestation.  The  third  Day  they  were  both  set  upon  by  . 
^^K  Band  of  armed  Malayans,  who  killed  them  both.  In  the  ' 
^^Kvcning  the  Sailors  who  were  left  almard,  Irji^kt  out  for 
^^mcir  Commander  to  come  off:  but  Night  approached 
^^pithout  seeing  or  hearing  from  him.  This  put  them  in 
^^■pmc  doubt  of  his  Safety ;  for  they  were  sensible  enough, 
^■dui  the  Malayans  that  inhabited  thereabouts  were  very 
'  treacherous:  as  indeed  all  of  them  are,  especially  those  who 
have  but  little  Commerce  with  Strangers  :  and  therefore  all 

BIc  ought  to  be  very  careful  in  dealing  with  them,  so 
give  them  no  Advantage ;  and  then  they  may  trade 
mough. 
'here  were  but  4  Seamen  on  board  Captain  Johnson's 
1.      These  being  terrified  by  the  absence  of  their  Corn- 
ier, and  suspecting  the  Truth,  were  now  very  appre- 
ve  of  their  own  Safeties.     They  charged  their  Guns, 
»i.u    kept    themselves    on    their    Guard,    expecting    to    be 
a--!»aulted  by  the   Malayans.     They  had   2    Blunderbusses, 
and   5  ftr  6  Muskets:  each  Man  took  one  in  his  Hand, 
with  a  Caduce '  -box  at  his  Waste,  and  looked  out  sharp  for 
fear  of  any  Kncmy.     While  they  were  thus  on  their  Guard, 
^^(be  Malayans  in  6  tw  8  Canoas  came  very  silent  to  attack 
^HAc  Stoop.     They  were  about  40  or  50  Men,  armed  with 
^^Bjuices  and  Cressets.     The  darkness  of  the  Night  favoured 
VB^icir  Designs,  and  they  were  even  aboard  before  the  Seamen 
perceived  them.     Then  these  began  to  fire,  and  the  Enemy 
dancd  their  Lances  aboard,  and  boarding  the  Vessel,  they 
cntoW  her  over  the  Pmw,    The  Seamen  resolutely  defended 
her,  and  drove  them  over-board  again.     Of  the  4  Seamen 
2    were  desperately   wounded    in    the    lirst    attack.     The 
layans  took  fresh  Courage  and  entered  again  ;  and  the 
1  Seamen  who  were  not  wounded,  betook  themselves  to 
Quarters*  in  the  Steerage;  and   there  being  Loop- 
idIcs  to   fire  out  at,  they    repulsed  the  Malayans  again. 
thctn  into  ihcir  Canoas.     Their  Bellies  being  now 

*  Undrr  ilie  poofi,  Tbe  forward  bulkhead  of  the  cabin  was  tccncrnlly 
Md  f6(  mntLeu,  ta  that  a  few  men  suuidinK  wiihin  might  clear  the 
vdcck  ia  drcnttuUiicct  timUar  to  thai  ducribcd. 

43 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  pretty  full,  they  returned  ashore  without  hopes  of  conqucr- 
1689  jj^g  ^j^g  Sloop.  The  poor  Seamen  were  still  in  fear,  and 
kept  watch  all  Night ;  intending  to  sell  their  Lives  as  dear 
as  they  could,  if  they  had  been  attacked  again.  For  they 
might  not,  neither  did  they  expect  Quarter  from  the 
Salvage  Malayans :  but  they  were  no  more  assaulted.  These 
two  that  were  wounded  dyed  in  a  short  Time. 

The  next  Day  the  2  Seamen  got  up  their  Anchor,  and 
run  as  nigh  the  Town  of  Bencalis  as  they  could,  it  may  be 
within  half  a  Mile.  There  they  anchored  again,  and  made 
Signs  for  the  People  to  come  on  Board.  It  was  not  long 
before  the  Shabander  or  chief  Magistrate  of  the  Town  came 
off:  to  him  they  told  all  their  Misfortunes,  and  desired 
him  to  protect  them,  because  they  were  not  of  sufficient 
Strength  to  hold  out  against  another  Attack.  The 
Shabander  seemed  very  sorry  for  what  had  happened,  and 
told  them  withal,  that  he  could  not  help  what  was  past, 
for  that  the  People  that  did  it  were  wild  unruly  Men,  not 
subject  to  Government,  and  that  it  was  not  in  his  Power 
to  suppress  them :  but  as  long  as  they  lay  there  some  of 
his  Men  should  lye  aboard  to  secure  the  Ship ;  and  he  in 
the  mean  time  would  send  a  Canoa  to  their  Consort  Mr. 
Wells,  to  give  him  an  account  how  Things  went.  Accord- 
ingly he  left  10  or  12  of  his  own  Malayans  aboard  the 
Bark,  and  sent  a  Letter  written  by  the  Seamen  to  Mr. 
Wells;  who  was,  as  I  have  said,  dealing  with  the  Natives 
for  Pepper,  in  a  River  at  some  distance. 

It  was  2  or  3  Days  before  Mr.  Wells  came  to  them. 
He  had  not  then  received  the  Letter,  and  therefore  they 
suspected  the  Shabander  of  falsehood ;  though  his  Men 
were  yet  very  kind,  and  serviceable  to  the  2  Seamen.  Mr. 
Wells  had  heard  nothing  of  their  Disasters,  but  returned 
for  want  of  Trade ;  at  least  such  a  full  Trade  as  he 
expected.  For  tho*  here  is  Pepper  growing,  yet  not  so 
much  as  might  allure  any  one  to  seek  after  it :  for  the 
Dutch  are  so  near,  that  none  can  come  to  trade  among 
them  but  by  their  Permission.  And  though  the  Natives 
themselves  were  never  so  willing  to  trade  with  any  Nation, 
as  indeed  they  are,  yet  the  Dutch  could  soon  hinder  it, 

44 


Pfa 
the 


f       their 


PEPPER   TRADE   IN  THESE   PARTS 

'en  by  destroying  them,  if  in  order  to  it  they  should  set 
:m»clv€S  to  produce  such  Pepper.  Such  small  quantities  ' 
they  do  *t  present  raise  up,  or  procure  from  other  parts 
the  Island,  is  lickt  by  the  Dutch,  or  by  their  Friends  of 
Bencalis  for  them:  for  the  Town  of  Bencalis  being  the 
principal  of  these  Parts,  and  so  nigh  Malacca,  as  only 
parted  by  the  narrow  Sea  or  Streights,  'tis  visited  by  the 
Dutch  in  their  small  Vessels,  and  seems  wholly  to  depend 
on  a  Trade  with  that  Nation,  not  daring  to  Trade  with 
any  bcadcs :  and  I  judge  it  b  by  the  Friendship  of  the 
Town,  that  the  Dutch  drive  a  small  Trade  for  Pepper  in 
these  pu-u,  and  by  it  also  vend  any  of  their  own  Com- 
modities: and  these  also  trading  with  their  Neighbours 
to  the  Country,  do  bring  their  Commodities  hither,  where 
le  Dutch  come  for  them.  The  People  of  Bencalis  there- 
fore, though  they  arc  Malayans,  as  the  rest  of  the  Country, 
yet  they  arc  civil  enough,  engaged  thereto  by  Trade :  for 
the  more  Trade,  the  more  Civility ;  and  on  the  contrary, 
'ic  less  Trade  the  more  Barbarity  and  Inhumanity.  For 
'rade  hfts  «  strong  Influence  upon  all  People,  who  have 
Kjnd  the  sweet  of  it,  bringing  with  it  so  many  of  the 
Convenicnrics  of  Life  as  it  does.  And  I  believe  that  even 
the  poor  Americans,  who  have  not  yet  tasted  the  Sweetness 
of  It,  might  be  allured  to  it  by  an  honest  and  just  Com- 
merce :  even  such  of  ihcm  as  do  yet  seem  to  covet  no  more 
than  a  bare  Subsistence  of  meat  and  drink,  and  a  clout  to 
cover  their  Nakedness.  That  large  Continent  hath  yet 
Millions  of  Inhabitants,  both  on  the  Mexican  and  Peruvian 
puti,  who  arc  still  ignorant  of  Trade :  and  they  would  be 
food  of  it,  did  they  once  Experience  it ;  though  at  the 
present  they  live  happy  enough,  by  enjoying  such  Fruits  of 
the  Earth  as  Nature  hath  bestowed  on  those  Places,  where 
their  Lot  is  fallen:  and  it  may  be  they  arc  happier  now, 
they  may  hereafter  be,  when  more  known  to  the 
.varitioui  World.  For  with  Trade  they  will  be  in  danger 
_f  meeting  with  Oppression  :  Men  not  being  content  with 
a  free  Traffick,  and  a  just  and  reasonable  Gain,  especially 
in  these  remote  Countries  :  but  they  must  have  the  Current 
run  altogether  in  their  own  Channel,  though  to  the  depriv- 
45 


CAPTAIX   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 


A3f.  ing  the  pxr  Nidr^s  zhej  deal  with,  of  thdr  natural 
'^  Liberr/ :  as  -J  all  Nlariini  were  to  be  ruled  by  their  Laws. 
The  Islands  of  S:i:natra  and  Jan  can  suffidently  witness 
this :  the  Dutch  ha-s^ng  in  a  manner  ingrost  all  the  Trade 
of  those,  and  sereral  of  the  nexghbooring  Countries  to 
thcniselvcs :  not  that  they  arc  able  to  supply  the  Natives 
with  a  quarter  of  what  they  want,  but  beciuse  they  would 
have  all  the  produce  of  them  at  their  own  disposal :  Yet 
even  in  this  they  are  short,  and  may  be  still  more  disap- 
pointed of  the  Pepper  Trade  if  other  People  would  seek 
for  it.  For  the  greatest  part  of  the  Island  of  Sumatra 
propagates  this  Plant,  and  the  Natives  would  readily  comply 
with  anv  who  would  come  to  trade  with  them,  notwith- 
standing  the  great  Endeavours  the  Dutch  make  against  it : 
for  this  Island  is  so  laige,  populous,  and  productive  of 
Pepper,  that  the  Dutch  are  not  able  to  draw  all  to  them- 
selves. Indeed  this  place  about  Bencalis,  is  in  a  manner 
at  their  Devotion  ;  and  for  ought  I  know,  it  was  through 
a  Design  of  being  revenged  on  the  Dutch  that  Captain 
Johnson  lost  his  Life.  I  find  the  Malayans  in  general 
are  implacable  Enemies  to  the  Dutch ;  and  all  seems  to 
spring  from  an  earnest  desire  they  have  of  a  free  Trade, 
which  is  restrained  by  them,  not  only  here,  but  in  the 
Spice-Islands,  and  in  all  other  places  where  they  have  any 
Power.  But  'tis  freedom  only  must  be  the  means  to 
incourage  any  of  these  remote  People  to  Trade ;  especially 
such  of  them  as  are  industrious,  and  whose  Inclinations  are 
bent  this  way ;  as  most  of  the  Malayans  are,  and  the  major- 
part  of  the  People  of  the  East-Indies,  even  from  the  Cape 
of  Good  Hope  Eastward  to  Japan,  both  Continent  and 
Islands.  For  though  in  many  places  they  are  limited  by 
the  Dutch,  English,  Danes,  &c.  and  restrained  from  a  free 
Trade  with  other  Nations,  yet  have  they  continually  shewn 
what  an  uneasiness  that  is  to  them.  And  how  dear  has 
this  Restraint  cost  the  Dutch  ?  when  yet  neither  can  they 
with  all  their  Forts  and  Guard-Ships  secure  the  Trade 
wholly  to  themselves,  any  more  than  the  Barlaventa  Fleet 
can  secure  the  Trade  of  the  West-Indies  to  the  Spaniards : 
but  enough  of  this  matter. 

46 


AL'THOR    DEPARTS    FROM    MALACCA 

You  have  heard  before  that  Mr.  Wells  came  with  his 
SloTip  to  Bencalis,  to  the  great  Joy  of  the  two  Men  that 
were  yet  alive  in  Captain  Johnson's  Vessel.  These  two 
Somen  were  so  just,  that  they  put  all  Captain  Johnson's 
Paper*  and  Money  into  one  Chest,  then  lockt  it  and  put  the 
Key  of  it  into  another  Chest ;  and  locking  that,  flung  the 
Key  of  it  into  the  Sea  :  and  when  Mr.  Wells  came  aboard, 
they  offered  him  the  Command  of  both  Vessels.  He 
seemingly  refused  it,  saying,  that  he  was  no  Seaman,  and 
could  not  manage  either  of  them  :  yet  by  much  importunity 
he  accepted  the  Command  of  them,  or  at  least  undertook 
the  account  of  what  was  in  the  Sloop,  engaging  to  give  a 
faithful  account  of  it  to  Governour  Bloom. 

They  were  alt  now  so  weakened,  that  they  were  but 
ju5t  enough  to  sail  one  of  the  Vessels.  Therefore  they 
sent  tu  the  Shabandcr  of  Bencalis,  to  desire  some  of  his 
Men,  to  help  sail  the  Sloops  over  to  Malacca,  but  he 
refused  it.  Then  they  offered  to  sell  one  of  them  for  a 
small  Matter,  but  neither  would  he  buy.  Then  they 
offlaxd  to  give  him  the  smallest :  To  that  he  answered, 
that  he  did  not  dare  to  accept  of  her,  for  ft-ar  of  the 
Dutch.  Then  Mr.  Wells  and  his  Crew  concluded  to 
take  the  Pepper  and  all  the  Stores  out  of  the  small  Vessel, 
and  bum  her,  and  go  away  with  the  other  to  Malacca. 
This  they  put  in  Execution,  and  presently  went  away, 
and  opening  Captain  Johnson's  Chest  they  found  2  or  30a 
Dollan  in  Money.  This  with  all  his  Writings,  and  what 
el>e  they  found  of  value,  Mr.  Wells  took  in  his  Possession. 
In  a  very  short  Time  they  got  over  to  Malacca.  There 
they  stayed  expecting  the  coming  of  some  English  Ship,  to 
get  a  Pilot  to  navigate  the  Sloop  :  for  neither  of  them 
would  undertake  to  navigate  her  further.  Captain  Lacy 
coming  thither  first,  he  spared  Mr.  Wells  his  chief  Mate  to 
navigate  her  to  Achin :  When  we  came  thither  they  were 
ready  to  Sail,  and  went  away  two  or  three  Days  before  us. 

To  return  therefore  to  our  own  Voyage,  Captain 
Weldon  having  finished  his  Business  at  Malacca,  we  sailed 
again,  steering  ttrwards  Achin,  where  he  designed  to  touch 
in  his  way  to  Fort  St.  George.  We  overtook  Mr.  Wells 
~  47 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   about  35  Leagues  short  of  Achin  against  the  River  Pas! 

1689  jonca :  and  shortly  after  we  both  arrived  at  Achin, 
anchored  in  the  Road,  about  the  beginning  of  March  11 
Here  I  took  my  leave  of  Captain  Weldon,  and  of  j 
Friend  Mr.  Hall,  who  went  with  us  to  Tonquin, 
went  ashore,  being  very  weak  with  my  Flux,  as  I  had 
all  the  Voyage.  Captain  Weldon  offered  me  any  Kin( 
that  lay  in  his  Power  at  Fort  St.  George,  if  I  woul< 
with  him  thither :  but  I  chose  rather  to  stay  here,  hai 
some  small  Acquaintance,  than  to  go  in  that  weak 
tion,  to  a  Place  where  I  was  wholly  unknown.  But 
Hall  went  with  Captain  Weldon  to  Fort  St.  George, 
from  thence  in  a  short  Time  returned  to  England  in 
tVilliamson  of  London. 


48 


f 

I 

1 


f 

I 


« 
I 

ff 

I 


m 

^ 


* 


i 

1 


i 


I 


Ctmmtry  t/  Jshin  dturiM :  tti  Sitturitn  and  Extent. 
Afaraf,  nJ  At  mighUuring  ttln  »f  Way  a»i  G*m/x,  b'r.  ma^ng 
mtrti  Ckan»th  nJ  the  RttiJ  tf  Athin.  Th  Stif  #/  iht 
Cmwm  i  Trm  «W  Fntiti ;  ^rtkuhrly  ikt  Mangauan  and 
Pmm^-mtif.  Tfuir  RoiH,  Hrrb,^  atid  Dmgt,  th  H/ri  Gangm  w 
&«j,  aiul  Cumfhirt  :  the  Prpprr  «f  Sumatra,  and  GtU  *f  Achin. 
Tlu  BtMiti^  FttfJ  aud  Fiih.  The  Pe*f,le^  their  Temper,  Habiti, 
BmlUiip.  City  *f  Atkin,  a W  Tradn.  The  Huihandrj,  Fitherj, 
Cmrpetttert  and  Flying  Prtei.  The  Aftney  Chengen,  Cain  and 
ITnghh.  Of  thr  Gcld-Min^.  The  Merihann  »A*  ctme  li 
Achin  :  and  if  the  Chineu  Camp  w  Fair.  The  watking  med  at 
Achin,  A  Chineu  Rtnfgadc.  Puttithmtntt  fir  Theft  and  ithtr 
Crimei.  The  Gtvemmeut  tf  Achin  ;  tf  the  Queen,  Onnteyt  or 
SMn  i  and  tf  the  Slavery  »f  tht  Pe^le.  The  State  kept  iy  the 
Eatlem  Primn.  A  Civil  /far  here  uf»n  the  chtiee  »f  a  new 
Qmetn.  The  A,  and  the  tther  English  in  a  fright,  upon  a  seizure 
made  tf  a  M^r't  Shift  kf  an  EngSih  Captain.  The  IVeatker, 
Fhtdi,  and  Heal  at  Achin. 


BEING  now  arrived  at  Achin  again,  I  think  it  not   an. 
amin  to  give  the  Reader  some  short  account  of  '^^ 
what  Observation  I  made  of  that  City  and  Country. 
Thi^  Kingdom  ii  the  largest  and  best  peopled  of 
■■:any  »fiull  "ncs  that  are  up  and  down  the  Isle  of  Sumatra  ; 
ind  it  makes  the  North  West  end  of  that  Island.     It  reaches 
Eastwani  from  that  N.  W.  point  of  the  I<iland,  a  great  way 
■  long   the  Shore,  towards    the   Streights  of  Malacca,   for 
iSout  50  or  60  Leagues.      But  from  Diamond  point,  which 
ibout  4O  Leagues  from  Achin.  towards  the  Borders  of 
ii'^ic  Kingdom,  the  Inhabitants,  though  belonging  to  Achin 
E  in  lew  Subjection  to  it.     Of  these  I  can  say  but  little ; 
ither  do    I   know  the   Bounds  of  this  Kingdom,  either 
|VOL.  II.  49  o 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  within  Land,  or  along  the  West  Coast.  That  West  Side  of 
'^9  the  Kingdom  is  high  and  mountainous :  as  is  generally  the 
rest  of  the  West  Coast  of  the  whole  Island.  The  Point 
also  of  Achin,  or  extremity  of  the  Island,  is  high  Land : 
but  Achin,  it  self,  and  the  Country  to  the  Eastward,  is 
lower,  not  altogether  destitute  of  small  Hills,  and  every 
where  of  a  moderate  Heighth,  and  a  Champion  Country, 
naturally  very  fit  for  Cultivation. 

There  is  one  Hill  more  remarkable  than  ordinary, 
especially  to  Seamen.  The  English  call  it,  the  Golden* 
Mount :  but  whether  this  Name  is  given  it  by  the  Natives, 
or  only  by  the  English,  I  know  not.  'Tis  near  the  N.  W. 
end  of  the  Island ;  and  Achin  stands  but  5  or  6  Mile  from 
the  Bottom  of  it.  'Tis  very  large  at  the  Foot,  and  runs  up 
smaller  towards  the  Head ;  which  is  raised  so  high,  as  to  be 
seen  at  Sea  30  or  40  Leagues.  This  was  the  first  Land 
that  we  saw  coming  in  our  Proe  from  the  Nicobar  Islands, 
mentioned  in  my  former  Voyage.  The  rest  of  the  Land, 
though  of  a  good  Heighth,  was  then  undiscerned  by  us,  so 
that  this  Mountain  appeared  like  an  Island  in  the  Sea; 
which  was  the  Reason  why  our  Achin  Malayans  took  it  for 
Pulo  Way.  But  that  Island,  though  pretty  high  Champion 
Land,  was  invisible,  when  this  Golden  Mount  appeared  so 
plain,  though  as  far  distant  as  that  Island. 

Besides  what  belong  to  Achin  upon  the  Continent,  there 
are  also  several  Islands  under  its  Jurisdiction,  most  of  them 
uninhabited  ;  and  these  make  the  Road  of  Achin.  Among 
them  is  this  Pulo  Way,  which  is  the  Eastermost  of  a  Range 
of  Islands,  that  lye  off  the  N.  W.  end  of  Sumatra.  It  b 
also  the  largest  of  them,  and  is  inhabited  by  Malefactors, 
who  are  banisht  thither  from  Achin.  This  with  the  other 
Islands  of  this  Range,  lye  in  a  semi-circular  Form,  of  about 
7  Leagues  Diameter.  Pulo  Gomez  is  another  large  Island 
about  20  Mile  West  from  Pulo  Way,  and  about  3  Leagues 
from  the  N.  W.  point  of  Sumatra.  Between  Pulo  Gomez 
and  the  Main  are  3  or  4  other  small  Islands;  yet  with 
Channels  of  a  sufficient  breadth  between  them,  for  Ships  to 

»  The  Queen's  Peak. 
-50 


'—THE   SOIL    HERE     ^^" 

pott  through  ;  and  they  have  very  deep  Water.     All  Ships  ak. 

bound    from    Achin    to   the    Westward,    or    coming  from  '^ 

thence  to  Achin,  go  in  or  out  through  one  or  other  of  these  J 

Channels:  and    because    Shipping    comes  hither  from    the  ■ 

Coast  of  Surrat,  one  of  these  Channels  which  Is  deeper  than  H 

the   rest,    is    called    the    Surrat  Channel.      Between    Pulo  H 

Gomez  and  Pulo  Way,  in  the  bending  of  the  Circle,  there  I 

ire  other  small  Islands,  the  chief  of  which  is  called  Pulo  1 
RoodoL  This  is  a  small  round  high  Island,  not  above  2  or 
3  Mile  in  Circumference.  It  lies  almost  in  the  extremity  of 
the  bcndine  on  the  N.  E.  part  of  the  Circle,  but  nearer  Pulo 
Way  than  Pulo  Gomez.  There  are  large  deep  Channels  on 
either  side,  but  the  most  frequented  is  the  Channel  on  the 
West  side.     Which  is  called  the  Bengal  Channel,  because  it 

Ujoks  towards  that  Bay ;  and  Ships  coming  from  thence,  M 

from  the  Coast  of  Coromandcl,  pass  in  and  out  this  way.  I 

Between  Pulo  Way  and  the  main  of  Sumatra,  is  another  I 

Channel  uf  J  or  4  Leagues  wide  :  which  is  the  Channel  for  I 

.Ships  that  go  from  Achin  to  the  Streights  of  Malacca,  or  I 

any  Country  to  the  Kast  of  those  Slreights,  and  vice  versa.  I 

There  is  good  riding  in  all  this  Semi-circular  Bay  between  I 

the  Islands  and  Sumatra:  but  the  Road  for  all  Ships  that  I 

-romc  to  Achin  is  near  the  Sumatra  Shore,  within  all  the  I 

Islands.     There  they  anchor  at  what  distances  they  please,  I 

according  to  the  Monsoons  or  Seasons  of  the  Year.     There  I 

!i  a  small  navigable  River  comes  out  into  the  Sea,  by  which  ' 
^hips  transport  their  Commodities  in  smaller  Vessels  up  to 
ihe  City.     The  Mouth  of  this  River  is  6  or  7  leagues  from 

I'ulo  Kondo,  and  3  or  4  from  Pulo  Way,  and  near  as  many  . 

fr'im  Pulo  Gomez.     The  Islands  arc  pretty  high  Champion  ■ 

land,  the  Mold  black  or  yellow,  the    Soil  deep  and  fat»  I 

producing  large  tall  Trees,  fit  for  many  uses.     There  are  I 

Broolcs  of  Water  on  the  two  great  Islands  of  Way  and  I 

CKuxicz,  and  seven!  sorts  of  wild  Animals ;  especially  wild  I 

Ho^s  in  abundance.  ' 

The  Mold  of  this  Continent  is  different  according  to  the 
ratunl  position  of  it.     The  Mountains  arc  rocky,  especially 

eSijk  towsrdt  the  West  Coast,  yet  most  that  I  have  seen  seems  . 

cu  hare  <  superficUl  covering  of  Earth,  naturally  producing  ■ 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Shrubs,  small  Trees,  or  pretty  good  Grass.  The  small 
J689  Hills  are  most  of  them  cloathed  with  Woods ;  the  Trees 
whereof  seem  by  their  growth  to  spring  from  a  fruitful 
Soil :  The  Champion  Land,  such  as  I  have  seen,  is  some 
black,  some  grey,  some  reddish,  and  all  of  a  deep  Mold. 
But  to  be  very  particular  in  these  Things,  especially  in  all 
my  Travels,  is  more  than  I  can  pretend  to :  though  it  may 
be  I  took  as  much  notice  of  the  difference  of  Soil  as  I  met 
with  it,  as  most  Travellers  have  done,  having  been  bred  in 
my  Youth  in  Somersetshire,  at  a  place  called  East  Coker  ^  near 
Yeovil  or  Evil :  in  which  Parish  there  is  as  great  Variety  of 
Soil,  as  I  have  ordinarily  met  with  any  where,  viz.  black, 
red,  yellow,  sandy,  stony,  clay,  morass  or  swampy,  &c.  I 
had  the  more  reason  to  take  notice  of  this,  because  this 
Village  in  great  measure  is  let  out  in  small  Leases  for  Lives 
of  20,  30,  40,  or  50  Pound  per  An.  under  Coll.  Helliar* 
the  Lord  of  the  Mannor :  and  most,  if  not  all  these  Tenants, 
had  their  own  Land  scattering  in  small  pieces,  up  and  down 
several  sorts  of  Land  in  the  Parish :  so  that  every  one  had 
some  piece  of  every  sort  of  Land,  his  black  Ground,  his 
Sandy,  Clay,  &c.  some  of  20,  30,  or  40  Shillings  an  Acre, 
for  some  uses,  and  others  not  worth  10  Groats  an  Acre. 
My  Mother  being  possest  of  one  of  these  Leases,  and  having 
of  all  these  sorts  of  Land,  I  came  acquainted  with  them  all, 
and  knew  what  each  sort  would  produce,  (viz.)  Wheat, 
Barley,  Maslin,^  Rice,  Beans,  Peas,  Oats,  Fetches,*  Flax,  or 
Hemp :  in  all  which  I  had  a  more  than  usual  Knowledge 
for  one  so  young ;  taking  a  particular  delight  in  observing 
it :  but  enough  of  this  Matter. 

The  Kingdom  of  Achin  has  in  general  a  deep  Mold  :  It 
is  very  well  watered  with  Brooks  and  small  Rivers,  but  none 
navigable  for  Ships  of  Burden.  This  of  Achin  admits  not 
of  any  but  small  Vessels.  The  Land  is  some  part  very 
Woody,  in  other  Places  Savannah ;  the  Trees  are  of  divers 
sorts,  most  unknown  to  me  by  Name.     The   Cotton  and 

*  East  Coker  :  Dampier*s  native  village. 

"  Colonel   Helliar,  or  Hellier,  or  Helyar,  was  the  head  of  a  wealthy 
Somersetshire  family  then  resident  at  East  Coker. 

*  Maslin,  a  mixture  of  wheat  and  rye.     Rice  must  be  a  slip  for  Rye. 

*  Vetches. 

52 


CAPTAIX   DA\rPIER^  VOYAGES 

Onngc  or  a  Lemon, 
rrcnizi  !i»:c  —.'v-mz  i:^  siiT"  Pai'-Lj^cs.     TTis  of  a  pleasant 

ri  ocber  parts  of  the 

?  acrounted  the  best. 

x^rcr  Orscrsas,  azid  they  are  so 


.  A 


"-  1- 


=i-:rr  isci:;=ei«  tfrai  F-g-"^^  >fe:i  arrr  rhem  firom  hence 

-Tii,  i:ni  *-'««'*  l^jsenrs  of  them  to  their 
^  rcrer  Frrds  ssziixned  here,  are  most 

Tb;  inii^Lie  Rr^ns  :t  rrs  Gxmrrr  arc  Yams  and 
P:cir:e5,  ice.  but  tbcEr  drxfisc  bread-kmd  is  Rice-  The 
Ni£-ris  hiT^  litilT  rixursd  scci^  Quantxries  of  this  Grain, 
ini  ~^^z  Ttryi-^i  m-dt  ra^jrt  were  rher  so  disposed,  the 
Lini  Sii::^  51:  fr-itrii.  Tier  have  here  a  sort  of  Herb 
•:t  Pli=t  cillivi  GxTga^  or  Baog.^  I  never  saw  any  but 
ones,  mi  tiit  wis  xz  sosie  discince  trom  me.  It  appeared 
to  nie  like  Hesij-,  mi  I  ibought  it  had  been  Hemp,  till 
I  was  :oIi  to  the  cximry.  It  is  reported  of  this  Plant, 
that  if  it  is  irLr\isei  In  any  Liquor,  it  will  stupify  the  Brains 
of  any  Person  that  drinks  thereof ;  but  it  operates  diversly, 
according  to  the  Constitution  of  the  Person.  Some  it 
keeps  sleepy,  some  merry,  putting  them  into  a  Laughing- 
fit,  and  others  it  makes  mad  :  but  after  2  or  3  Hours  they 
come  to  themselves  again.  I  never  saw  the  EflFects  of  it 
on  any  Person,  but  have  heard  much  Discourse  of  it. 
What  other  use  this  Plant  mav  serve  for  I  know  not :  but 
I  know  it  is  much  esteemed  here,  and  in  other  Places  too 
whither  it  is  transported. 

This  Country  abounds  also  with  Medicinal  Drugs  and 
Herbs,  and  with  variety  of  Herbs  for  the  Pot.  The  chief 
of  their  Drugs  is  Camphire,  of  which  there  are  Quantities 
found  on  this  Island,  but  most  of  it  either  on  the  Borders 
of  this  Kingdom  to  the  Southward,  or  more  remote  still, 
without  the  Precincts  of  it.  This  that  is  found  on  the 
Island  Sumatra  is  commonly  sent  to  Japan  to  be  refined, 
and  then  brought  from  thence  pure,  and  transported 
whither  the   Merchants  please  afterwards.     I    know    that 

^  Bhang :  Hemp.     Its  exhibition  is  very  various.    As  a  rule  it  induces 
violent  laughter. 

54 


ONIONS— GOLD— LAND  ANIMALS 
here  *rc  s«:veral  sorts  of  Medicinaf  Herbs  made  use  of  by 
:he  Nitivet,  who  go  often  a  simpling,  seeming  to  under-  "•' 
sand  their  Virtues  much,  and  malting  great  use  of  them : 
Sut  thb  being  wholly  out  of  my  Sphere,  I  can  give  no 
iccount  of  them ;  and  though  here  are  plenty  of  Pot- 
Hcrbt,  yet  I  know  the  Names  of  none,  but  Onions,  of 
«hi£h  they  have  great  abundance,  and  of  a  very  good  sort, 
Init  small. 

There  are  many  other  very  profitable  Commodities  on 
this  Island  :  but  some  of  them  are  more  peculiar  to  other 
parts  of  ii  than  Achin,  especially  Pepper.  All  the  Island 
»bounds  with  that  Spice,  except  only  this  North  West- 
end;  at  least  so  much  of  it,  as  is  comprehended  within  the 
Kingdom  of  Achin.  Whether  this  defect  is  through  the 
negligence  or  laziness  of  these  People,  I  know  not. 

Gold  also  is  found,  by  report,  in  many  parts  of  this 
Isbuid  :  but  the  Kingdom  of  Achin  is  at  present  most 
plentifully  stored  with  ii.  Neither  does  any  place  in  the 
East-Indies,  that  I  know  of,  yield  such  Quantities  of  it  as 
this  Kingdom.  1  have  never  been  at  Japan,  and  therefore 
can  make  no  Estimate  of  the  great  Riches  of  that  King- 
dom ;  but  here  1  am  certain  there  is  abundance  of  it. 

The  Ljind  Animals  of  this  Country  arc  Deer,  Hogs, 
Ekfhantt,  Goats,  Butlocks,  Buflntloes,  Horses,  Porcupines, 
Monkeys,  Squirrils,  Guanoes,  Lizards,  Snakes,  &c.  Here 
are  also  abundance  of  Ants  of  several  sorts,  and  Wood-lice, 
called  by  the  English  in  the  East-Indies  White  Ants.  The 
Elephants  that  I  saw  here  were  all  ume :  yet  'tis  reported 
there  arc  some  wild ;  but  1  judge  not  many,  if  any  at  all. 
In  some  places  there  are  plenty  of  Hogs ;  they  are  all  wild, 
and  commonly  very  poor.  At  some  times  of  the  Year, 
when  the  wild  Fruits  fall  from  the  Trees,  they  are  indif- 
ferent fat,  or  at  least  fleshy:  and  then  they  are  sweet  and 
good :  they  »rc  very  numerous ;  and  whether  for  that 
msoo,  or  scarcity  of  Food,  it  is  very  rare  to  find  them 
fei.  i'hc  Goats  are  not  very  many,  neither  are  there 
aaay  Butlocks:  but  the  Savannahs  swarm  with  Buffaloes, 
bdon^ng  (o  some  or  other  of  the  Inhabitants,  who  milk 
tkm  and  eat  them  ;  but  don't  work  them,  so  far  as  1  saw. 

S5 


1 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AX.   The  Horses  of  this  Country  arc  but  small,  yet  sprightly ; 

1689  2nd  sometimes  they  are  transported  hence  to  the  Coast  of 
Coromaodel.  The  Porcupines  and  Squirrels  are  accounted 
good  Food  by  the  English ;  but  how  they  arc  esteemed  by 
the  Natives  I  know  not. 

The  Fowls  of  this  Country  arc  Dunghil  Fowls  and 
Ducks;  but  I  know  of  no  other  tame  Fowls  they  have. 
In  the  Woods  there  are  many  sorts  of  wild^Fowls,  viz. 
Maccaws,  Parrots,  Parakites,  Pigeons  and  Doves  of  3  or  4 
sorts.  There  arc  plenty  of  other  small  Birds;  but  I  can 
say  nothing  of  them. 

The  Rivers  of  this  Country  aflFord  plenty  of  Fish.  The 
Sea  also  supplies  divers  sorts  of  very  good  Fish,  (viz.) 
Snooks,  Mullets,  Mudfish,  Eels,  Stingrays,  which  I  shall 
describe  in  the  Bay  of  Campeachy,  Ten-pounders,  Old 
Wives,  Cavallies,  Crawfish,  Shrimps,  &c. 

The  Natives  erf"  this  Country  are  Malayans.  They  arc 
much  the  same  People  with  those  of  Queda,  Jihore,  and 
other  Places  on  the  Continent  of  Malacca,  speaking  the 
same  Malayan  Language,  with  very  little  difference :  and 
they  are  of  the  same  Mahometan  Religion,  and  alike  in 
their  haughty  Humour  and  manner  of  living :  so  that  they 
seem  to  have  been  originally  the  same  People.  They  are 
People  of  a  middle  Stature,  straight,  and  well  shaped,  and 
of  a  dark  Indian  Copper-Colour.  Their  Hair  is  black  and 
lank,  their  Faces  generally  pretty  long,  yet  graceful  enough. 
They  have  black  Eyes,  middling  Noses,  thin  Lips,  and 
black  Teeth,  by  the  frequent  use  of  Betle.  They  are  very 
lazy,  and  care  not  to  work  or  take  pains.  The  poorer  sort 
are  addicted  to  Theft,  and  are  often  punished  severely  for 
it.  They  are  otherwise  good-natured  in  general,  and  kind 
enough  to  Strangers. 

The  better  Sort  of  them  wear  Caps  fitted  to  their 
Heads,  of  red  or  other  coloured  Woollen  Cloath,  like  the 
Crown  of  a  Hat  without  any  Brims ;  for  none  of  the 
Eastern  People  use  the  Complement  of  uncovering  their 
Heads  when  they  meet,  as  we  do.  But  the  general  Wear 
for  all  Sorts  of  People  is  a  small  Turban,  such  as  the 
Mindanaians  wear,  described  in  the   12th  Chapter  of  my 

56 


HOUSES— FOOD— CITY   OF   ACHIN 

t'lB-mcr  Volume,  page  334.  They  have  small  Breeches, 
And  the  better  Sort  will  have  a  Piece  n(  Silk  thrown  loosely  ' 
over  their  Shoulders;  but  the  Poor  go  naked  from  the 
Waste  upwards.  Neither  have  they  the  use  of  Stockings 
and  Shoes,  but  a  sort  of  Sandals  are  worn  by  the  better 
Sort. 

^  Their  Houses  arc  built  on  Posts,  as  those  of  Mindanao, 
[  they  live  much  after  the  same  Fashion  :   but  by  Reason 
their  Gold  Mines,  and  the  frequent  Resort  of  Strangers, 
y  are  richer,  and  live  in  greater  Plenty.     Their  common 
mod  is  Rice,  and  the  better  Sort  have  Fowls  and  Fish,  with 
hich  the  Markets  arc  plentifully  stored,  and  sometimes 
"".loc4    Flesh,    all    which    is    drest  very    savourly    with 
■pper  and  Garlick,  and  tinctured  yellow  with  Turmerick, 
make  tc  pleasant  to  the  Eye,  as  the  East-Indians  gene- 
\y  love  to  have  their  Food  look  yellow :  neither  do  they 
;nt  good  Achats  or  Sauces  to  give  it  a  Relish. 
The  City  of  Achin  is  the  chief  in  all  this  Kingdom, 
is  seated  on  the  Banks  of  a  Kiver,  near  the  N.  W.  end  of 
Island,  and  about  two  Miles  from  the  Sea.     This  Town 
of  7  cr  8000  Houses,  and  in  it  there  are  always  a 
cat  many  Merchant-strangers,  viz.  English,  Dutch,  Danes, 
iJTtugue^  Chinese,  Guzarats,  &c.     The  Houses  of  this 
Ctiy  arc  generally  larger  than  those  t  saw  at  Mindanao, 
and  better  furnished  with   Household  Goods.      The  City 
hu  no  WalUt  nor  so  much  as  a  Ditch  about  it.     It  has  a 
great    Number   of  Mosques,  generally    square    built,  and 
oivcTcd  with  Pantile,  but  neither  high  nor  large.     Every 
Morning  a  Man  made  a  great   Noise   from  thence  :   but   I 
»w  n<»  Turrets  or  Steeples,  for  them  to  climb  up  into  for 
Purpose,    as    they    have   generally  in    Turky.      The 
n    has    a    l:irge    Palace    here,  built    handsomely   with 
;ooe:  but  I  could  not  get  into  the  Inside  of  it.     *Tis  said 
are  some  great  Guns  about  it,  four  of  which  are  of 
and  arc  said  to  have  been  sent  hither  as  a  Present 
our  K.  James  the  first. 

The  chief  Trades  at  Achin  are  Carpenters,  Blacksmiths, 
Goldsmiths,    Fishermen,    and     Money-changers  :    but    the 
Country-people  live  either  on  Breeding  Heads  of  Cattle, 
57 


J 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AX.  but  most  for  their  own  Use,  or  Fowls,  especially  they  who 
1689  liyg  ng^  r^e  Gty,  which  they  send  weekly  thither  to  sell : 
others  plant  Roots,  Fruits,  &c  and  <^  late  they  have  sown 
pretty  large  Fields  of  Rice.  This  thrives  here  well  enough ; 
but  they  are  so  proud,  that  it  b  against  their  Stomach 
to  work :  neither  do  they  themselves  much  trouble  their 
Heads  about  it,  but  leave  it  to  be  managed  by  their  Slaves ; 
and  they  were  the  Slaves  brought  lately  l^  the  English  and 
Danes  from  the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  in  the  Time  of  a 
Famine  there,  I  spoke  of  before,  who  first  brought  this 
Sort  of  Husbandry  into  such  Request  among  the  Achinese. 
Yet  neither  does  the  Rice  they  have  this  way  supply  one 
Quarter  of  their  Occasions,  but  they  have  it  brought  to 
them  from  their  Neighbouring  Countries. 

The  Fishermen  are  the  richest  working  People  :  I  mean 
such  of  them  as  can  purchase  a  Net :  for  thereby  they  get 
great  Profit ;  and  this  Sort  of  Imployment  is  managed  also 
by  their  Slaves.  In  fair  Weather  you  shall  have  eight  or 
ten  great  Boats,  each  with  a  Sain  or  haling  Net :  and  when 
they  see  a  Sholc  of  Fish,  they  strive  to  encompass  them 
with  these  Nets,  and  all  the  Boats  that  are  near  assist  each 
other  to  drag  them  ashore.  Sometimes  they  draw  ashore 
this  way  50,  60,  or  100  large  Fish,  as  big  as  a  Man's  Leg, 
and  as  long :  and  then  they  rejoyce  mightily,  and  scamper 
about,  making  a  great  Shout.  The  Fish  is  presently  sent 
to  the  Market  in  one  of  their  Boats,  the  rest  looking  out 
again  for  more.  Those  who  fish  with  Hook  and  Line,  go 
out  in  small  Proes,  with  about  one  or  two  Slaves  in  each 
Proe.  These  also  get  good  Fish  of  other  Sorts,  which  they 
carry  Home  to  their  Masters. 

The  Carpenters  use  such  Hatchets  as  they  have  at 
Mindanao.  They  build  good  Houses  after  their  Fashion : 
and  they  are  also  ingenious  enough  in  building  Proes, 
making  very  pretty  ones,  especially  of  that  Sort  which  are 
Flying-Proes ;  which  are  built  long,  deep,  narrow,  and 
sharp,  with  both  Sides  alike,  and  Outlagers  on  each  Side, 
the  Head  and  Stern  like  other  Boats.  They  carry  a  great 
Sail,  and  when  the  Wind  blows  hard,  they  send  a  Man  or 
two  to  sit  at  the  Extremity  of  the  Windward  Outlager,  to 

58 


^^■WOMEN  MONEY-CHANGERS 
^HPBe  Vessel.  They  build  also  some  Vessels  of  lo  or 
10  Tuns  Bunhco,  to  trade  from  one  Place  to  another  :  but 
I  think  their  greatest  Ingenuity  is  in  building  their  Flying- 
~  ;  which  are  made  very  smooth,  kept  neat  and  clean, 
Bd  will  sail  very  well:  for  which  Reason  they  had  that 
ffame  given  them  by  the  English. 

There  arc  but  few  Blacksmiths  In  this  Town,  neither 
they  very  skilful  at  their  Trade.  The  Goldsmiths  are 
nmonly  Strangers,  yet  some  of  the  Achinese  themselves 
how  to  work  Metals,  tho'  not  very  well.  The 
Money-changers  arc  here,  as  at  Tonquin,  most  Women. 
ThcK  lit  in  the  Markets  and  at  Corners  of  the  Streets,  with 
leaden  Money  called  Cash,  which  is  a  Name  that  is  gene- 
rally given  to  small  Money  in  all  these  Countries  :  but  the 
Cath  here  is  neither  of  the  same  Metal,  nor  Value  with 
that  at  Tonquin ;  for  that  is  Copper,  and  this  is  Lead,  or 
Block-Tin,  such  as  will  bend  about  the  Finger.  They 
have  but  two  sorts  of  Coin  of  their  own ;  the  least  sort 
I  *■  this  Leaden  Money  call'd  Cash,  and  'tis  the  same  with 
lat  they  called  Pelties  at  Bantam.  Of  these,  1500  make 
,  Mess  which  is  their  other  sort  of  Coin,  and  is  a  small 
Ilin  Piece  of  Gokl,  stampt  with  Malayan  Letters  on  each 
It  it  in  Value  15  Pence  English,  16  Mess  make  a 
pale,  which  here  is  20  Shillings  English,  5  Tale  make  a 
al,  a  Weight  so  called,  and  20  Bancal  make  a  Catty, 
r  Weight.  But  the  Gold  Coin  seldom  holds  Weight, 
r  you  shall  sometimes  have  5  Tale  and  8  Mess  over,  go 
»  make  a  Pecul,  and  tho"  1500  Cash  is  the  Value  of  a 
Men,  yet  these  rise  and  fail  at  the  Discretion  of  the 
Maaey-changcrs :  for  sometimes  you  shall  have  looo  Cash 
for  a  Mess:  but  ihcy  are  kept  usually  between  these  two 
Number*;  seldom  less  than  lOOO,  and  never  more  than 
I  500.  But  to  proceed  with  these  Weights,  which  they  use 
cither  for  Money  or  Goods,  100  Catty  make  a  Pecul,  which 
i*  13Z  Pound  English  Weight.  Three  hundred  Catty  is 
a  Bahar,  which  is  396  Pound  English  Weight ;  hut  in  some 
Plac«,  as  at  Bencouli,  a  Bahar  is  near  5CX]  English  Weight. 
Spint^  Pieces  of  Eight  go  here  also,  and  they  are  valued 
ascordiog  to  the  Pletiiy  or  Scarcity  of  them.  Sometimes  a 
59 


i 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    Piece  of  Eight  goes  but  for  4  Mess,  sometimes  for  4  and  a 

'^  half,  sometimes  5  Mess. 

They  coin  but  a  small  Quantity  of  their  Gold ;  so 
much  as  may  serve  for  their  ordinary  Occasions  in  their 
Traffick  one  with  another.  But  as  the  Merchant,  when  he 
receives  large  Summs,  always  takes  it  by  Weight,  so  they 
usually  pay  him  unwrought  Gold,  and  Quantity  for 
Quantity :  the  Merchants  chuse  rather  to  receive  this,  than 
the  coined  Gold  ;  and  before  their  leaving  the  Country  will 
change  their  Messes  for  uncoined  Gold :  perhaps  because 
of  some  Deceits  used  by  the  Natives  in  their  Coining. 

This  Gold  they  have  from  some  Mountain  a  pretty  way 
within  Land  from  Achin,  but  within  their  Dominions,  and 
rather  near  to  the  West  Coast  than  the  Streights  of  Malacca. 
I  take  Golden  Mount,  which  I  spoke  of  before,  to  lye  at  no 
great  Distance  from  that  of  the  Mines;  for  there  is  very 
high  Land  all  thereabouts.  To  go  thither  they  set  out 
Eastward,  towards  Passange  Jonca,  and  thence  strike  up 
into  the  Heart  of  the  Country.  I  made  some  Inquiry  con- 
cerning their  getting  Gold,  and  was  told,  that  none  but 
Mahometans  were  permitted  to  go  to  the  Mines :  That  it 
was  both  troublesome  and  dangerous  to  pass  the  Mountains, 
before  they  came  thither;  there  being  but  one  way,  and 
that  over  such  steep  Mountains,  that  in  some  Places  they 
were  forced  to  make  use  of  Ropes,  to  climb  up  and  down 
the  Hills.  That  at  the  Foot  of  these  Precipices  there  was 
a  Guard  of  Soldiers,  to  see  that  no  uncircumcised  Person 
should  pursue  that  Design,  and  also  to  receive  Custom  of 
those  that  past  either  forward  or  backward.  That  at  the 
Mines  it  was  so  sickly  that  not  the  half  of  those  that  went 
thither  did  ever  return  again ;  tho'  they  went  thither  only 
to  traffick  with  the  Miners,  who  live  there,  being  seasoned : 
that  these  who  go  thither  from  the  City  stayed  not  usually 
above  4  Months  at  the  Mines,  and  were  back  again  in 
about  6  Months  from  their  going  out.  That  some  there 
made  it  their  constant  Imployment  to  visit  the  Miners  once 
every  Year :  for  after  they  are  once  seasoned,  and  have 
found  the  Profit  of  that  Trade,  no  Thoughts  of  Danger 
can  deter  them  from  it :  for  I  was  credibly  told,  that  these 

60 


GOODS   BROUGHT   FROM    ABROAD 

>  per  cent,  of  whatever  they  carryed  with  there. 
I  to  the  Miners:  but  they  could  not  carry  much  by  '^ 
n  of  the  Badness  of  the  ways.  The  rich  Men  never 
_  i  thhhcr  themseUts,  but  send  their  Slaves :  and  if  3  out 
of  6  return,  they  think  they  make  a  very  profitable  Journey 
for  their  Master,  for  these  three  are  able  to  bring  Home  as 
much  Gold  as  the  Goods  which  all  six  carried  out  could 
purchase.  The  Goods  that  they  carry  thither  are  some 
4m  of  Qoathing,  and  Liquor.  They  carry  their  Goods 
from  the  City  b)-  Siea,  part  of  the  way :  Then  they  land 
somewhere  about  Passangc  Jonca,  and  get  Horses  to  carry 
their  Cargo  to  the  Foot  of  the  Mountains.  There  they 
draw  it  up  with  Ropes,  and  if  they  have  much  Goods,  one 
slip  there  with  them,  while  ihe  rest  march  to  the  Mines 
mth  their  Load  ;  and  return  again  for  the  rest.  I  had  this 
"  '■-■  -  from  Captain  Tyler,  who  lived  at  Achtn,  and 
■  Language  of  the  Country  very  well.  There  was 
-h  Renegado  that  used  that  Trade,  but  was  always 
j:  tp.l-  Minn  when  1  was  here.  At  his  Return  to  Achin 
he  constantly  frequented  an  English  Punch-house,  spending 
hi*  Gold  very  freely,  as  I  was  told  by  the  Master  of  the 
' !  I  was  told  also  by  all  that  I  discoursed  with  about 

,,  that  here  they  dig  it  nut  of  the  Ground;  and 
i.i-timcs  they  find  pretty  large  Lumps, 
It  15  the  Product  of  these  Mines  that  draws  so  many 
Merchant?  hither,  for  the  Road  is  seldom  without  10  or  15 
-jil  of  Ships  of  several  Nations.  These  bring  all  sort  of 
cndibic  Commodities,  as  Silks,  Chints,  Muzlins,  Callicoes, 
Kicc,  &c.  and  as  to  this  last,  a  Man  would  admire  to  see 
■vsat  great  Quantities  of  Ricc  are  brought  hither  by  the 
1-figlish,  Dutch,  Danes  and  Chinese :  when  any  arrives, 
•■>:  Commanders  hire  each  a  House  to  put  their  Goods  in. 
The  Silks,  Muzlins,  Callicoes,  Opium,  and  such  like  rich 
■  KKjda,  they  sell  to  the  Guzurats,  who  arc  the  chief  Men 
•^.*t  keep  Shops  here;  but  the  Rtcc,  which  is  the  Bulk  of 
•r*  Cargo,  they  usually  retail,  1  have  heard  a  Merchant 
»av,  be  has  received  60,  70,  and  80  /.  a  Day  for  Rice,  when 
:i  ha>  been  scarce;  bat  when  there  are  many  Sellers,  then 
40  or  50  Shillings  worth  in  a  Day  ts  a  good  Sale :  for  then 
61 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

A}i,  a  Mess  will  buy  14  or  15  Bamboes  of  it:  whereas  when 
1^  Rice  is  scarce,  you  will  not  have  above  3  or  4  Bamboes  for 
a  Mess.  A  Bimboe  is  a  small  scaled  Measure,  containing, 
to  the  best  of  my  Remembrance,  not  much  above  half  a 
Gallon.  Thus  it  rises  and  falls  as  Ships  come  hither. 
Those  who  sell  Rice  keep  one  constantly  attending  to 
measure  it  out;  and  the  very  Grandees  themselves  never 
keep  a  Stock  before  hand,  but  depend  on  the  Market,  and 
buy  just  when  they  have  Occasion.  They  send  their  Slaves 
for  what  they  want,  and  the  poorer  Sort,  who  have  not  a 
Slave  of  their  own,  will  yet  hire  one  to  carry  a  Mess  worth 
of  Rice  for  them,  though  not  one  hundred  Paces  A-om  their 
own  Homes,  scorning  to  do  it  themselves.  Besides  one  to 
measure  the  Rice,  the  Merchants  hire  a  Man  to  take  the 
Money ;  for  here  is  some  false  Money,  as  Silver  and  Copper 
Mess  gilt  over:  Besides,  here  are  some  true  Mess  much 
worn,  and  therefore  not  worth  near  their  Value  in  Tale. 
The  Merchants  may  also  have  occasion  to  receive  10  or 
20  /.  at  a  Time  for  other  Commodities ;  and  this  too  be- 
sides those  little  Summs  for  Rice,  he  must  receive  by  his 
Broker,  if  he  will  not  be  cheated ;  for  'tis  work  enough  to 
examine  every  Piece :  and  in  receiving  the  Value  of  10  /. 
in  Mess,  they  will  ordinarily  be  forc*d  to  return  half  or 
more  to  be  chang'd ;  for  the  Natives  are  for  putting  off 
bad  Money,  if  possibly  they  can.  But  if  the  Broker  takes 
any  bad  Money,  'tis  to  his  own  Loss.  These  Sort  of 
Brokers  are  commonly  Guzurats,  and  'tis  very  necessary 
for  a  Merchant  that  comes  hither,  especially  if  he  is  a 
Stranger,  to  have  one  of  them,  for  fear  of  taking  bad  or 
light  Money. 

The  English  Merchants  are  very  welcome  here,  and  I 
have  heard  that  they  do  not  pay  so  much  Custom  as  other 
Nations.  The  Dutch  Free-men  may  trade  hither,  but  the 
Company's  Servants  are  dcny'd  that  Privilege.  But  of  all 
the  Merchants  that  trade  to  this  City,  the  Chinese  are  the 
most  remarkable.  There  are  some  of  them  live  here  all 
the  Year  long;  but  others  only  make  annual  Voyages 
hither  from  China.  These  latter  come  hither  some  time 
in  June,  about  10  or  12  Sail,  and  bring  Abundance  of  Rice, 

62 


■  cifftWA   CAMP 

I  several  other  Commodities.  They  take  up  Houses  all 
^  one  inothcr,  at  the  end  of  the  Town,  next  the  Sea  :  and  ■ 
;  end  of  the  City  iS  cali'd  the  China  Camp,  because 
they  always  quarter,  and  bring  their  Goods  ashore 
thither  to  sell.  In  this  Fleet  come  several  Mechanicks, 
(irtz.)  Carpenters,  jiiyners.  Painters,  &c.  These  set  them- 
»cItc»  tmrnediatcly  to  work,  making  of  Chests,  Drawers, 
Cabinets,  and  all  sorts  of  Chinese  Toys ;  which  are  no 
sooner  finish 'd  in  their  Working- houses,  but  they  are 
lently  set  up  in  Shops  and  at  the  Doors  to  sale.  So 
t  for  two  Months  or  ten  Weeks  this  Place  is  like  a  Fair, 
iJl  of  ^ops  stuft  with  all  sort  of  vendible  Commodities, 
1  People  resorting  hither  to  buy :  and  as  their  Goods 
I  off",  so  they  contract  themselves  into  less  Compass,  and 
'  e  tise  of  fewer  Houses.  But  as  their  Business  decreases, 
r  Gaming  among  themselves  increases ;  for  a  Chinese,  if 
he  is  not  at  work,  had  as  licvc  be  without  Victuals  as  with- 
out Gaming ;  and  they  are  very  dexterous  at  it.  If  before 
their  Goods  arc  all  sold,  they  can  light  of  Chapmen  to  buy 
their  Ships,  they  will  gladly  sell  them  also,  at  least  some  of 
them,  if  any  Merchant  will  buy ;  for  a  Chinese  is  for 
selling  every  thing :  and  they  who  are  so  happy  as  to  get 
ChapiDcn  fur  their  own  Ships,  will  return  as  Passengers 
with  their  Neighbours,  leaving  their  Camp,  as  'tis  call'd, 
poor  and  naked,  like  other  Parts  of  the  City,  till  the  next 
Year.  They  commonly  go  away  about  the  latter  end  of 
"•rptember,  and  never  fail  to  return  again  at  the  Season: 
irwi  while  they  are  here,  they  are  so  much  followed,  that 
"ven  is  but  little  Business  stirring  for  the  Merchants  of 
*ny  other  Nations;  all  the  Discourse  then  being  of  going 
.-4own  to  the  Chitu  Camp.  Even  the  Europeans  go  thither 
their  Diversion :  the  English,  Dutch,  and  Danes,  will 
to  drink  their  Hoc-ciu,  at  some  China  Merchants 
;  who  sells  it ;  for  they  have  no  tippling  Houses. 
European  Seamen  return  thence  into  the  City  drunk 
igh,  hut  the  Chinese  arc  very  sober  themselves. 
The  Achinesc  seem  not  to  be  extraordinary  good  at 
Accounts,  at  the  Banians  or  Guzurats  are.  They  instruct 
their  Youth  in  the  knowledge  of  Lettcrsi,  Malayan  prin- 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AK.  cipally,  and  I  suppose  in  somewhat  of  AraUck,  being  all 
'^  Mahometans.  They  are  here,  as  at  Mindanao,  very 
superstitious  in  washing  and  cleansing  themselves  from 
Defilements:  and  for  that  Reason  they  delight  to  live 
near  the  Rivers  or  Streams  of  Water.  The  River  of  Achin 
near  the  City  is  always  full  of  People  of  both  Sexes  and 
all  Ages.  Some  come  on  Purpose  to  wash  themselves,  for 
the  Pleasure  of  being  in  the  Water :  which  they  so  much 
delight  in,  that  they  can  scarce  leave  the  River  without 
going  first  into  it,  if  %  they  have  any  Business  brings  them 
near.  Even  the  Sick  are  brought  to  the  River  to  wash.  I 
know  not  whether  it  is  accounted  good  to  wash  in  all  Dis- 
tempers, but  I  am  certain  from  my  own  Experience,  it  is 
good  for  those  that  have  Flux,  especially  Mornings  and 
Evenings,  for  which  Reason  you  shall  then  see  the  Rivers 
fullest,  and  more  especially  in  the  Morning.  But  the  most 
do  it  upon  a  Religious  Account :  for  therein  consists  the 
chief  Part  of  their  Religion. 

There  are  but  few  of  them  resort  daily  to  their 
Mosques;  yet  they  are  all  stiff  in  their  Religion,  and  so 
zealous  for  it,  that  they  greatly  rejoyce  in  making  a 
Proselyte.  I  was  told,  that  while  I  was  at  Tonquin,  a 
Chinese  inhabiting  here  turn*d  from  his  Paganism  to 
Mahometanism,  and  being  circumcised,  he  was  thereupon 
carry*d  in  great  State  through  the  City  on  an  Elephant, 
with  one  crying  before  him,  that  he  was  turn*d  Believer. 
This  Man  was  calPd  the  Captain  of  the  China  Camp; 
for,  as  I  was  informed,  he  was  placed  there  by  his  Country- 
men as  the  chief  Factor  or  Agent,  to  negotiate  their  Aflfairs 
with  the  People  of  the  Country.  Whether  he  had  dealt 
falsly,  or  was  only  envied  by  others,  I  know  not :  but  his 
Country-men  had  so  entangled  him  in  Law,  that  he  had 
been  ruin'd,  if  he  had  not  made  use  of  this  way  to  dis- 
ingage  himself;  and  then  his  Religion  protected  him,  and 
they  could  not  meddle  with  him.  On  what  Score  the  two 
English  Runagadoes  turn*d  here,  I  know  not. 

The  Laws  of  this  Country  are  very  strict,  and  Offenders 
are  punished  with  great  Severity.  Neither  are  there  any 
Delays  of  Justice  here ;  for  as  soon  as  the  offender  is  taken^ 

64 


PUNISHMENTS 

immediately  brought  before  the  Magistrate,  who 
^  pnaently  heirs  the  Matter,  and  according  as  he  finds  it,  so  ' 
be  either  acquits,  or  orders  Punishmeot  to  be  infiicted  oa 
the  Pany  immediately.  Small  offender*  arc  only  wtiipt  on 
the  Back,  which  sort  of  Puoishmcot  they  call  Chaubuck. 
A  Thief  for  his  first  offence,  has  his  rigbt  Hand  chopt  off 
at  the  Wrist :  for  the  second  Offence  off  goes  the  other ; 
and  sometimes  instead  of  one  of  their  Hands,  one  or  both 
their  Feet  are  cut  off;  and  sometimes  (tho'  very  rarely) 
both  Hands  and  Feet.  If  after  the  Loss  of  one  or  both 
Hands  or  Feet,  they  still  prove  incorrigible,  for  they  are 
many  of  them  such  very  Rogues,  and  so  arch,  that  they 
mil  Meal  with  their  Toes,  then  they  are  banish'd  to  Pulo 
Tfar,  during  their  Lives:  and  if  they  get  thence  to  the 
■cy,  u  sometimes  they  do,  they  are  commonly  sent  hack 
aio  ;  tho*  sometimes  ihcy  get  a  License  to  stay. 
On  Pulo  Way  there  are  none  but  this  sort  of  Cattle : 
i  tho'  they  all  of  them  want  one  or  both  hands,  yet  they 
order  Matters,  that  they  can  row  very  well,  and  do 
ny  things  to  admintion,  whereby  they  are  able  to  get  a 
livelihood :  for  if  tfacy  have  no  hands,  they  will  get  some- 
Vjdy  or  other  to  fasten  Ropes  or  Wiihes  about  their  Oan, 
-n  as  to  leave  Loop^  wherein  they  may  put  the  stumps  of 
:heir  Arms;  and  therewith  they  will  pull  an  Oar  lustily. 
They  that  have  one  hand  can  do  well  enough  :  and  of 
These  you  shall  sec  a  great  many  even  in  the  City.  This 
iort  of  punishment  is  inflicted  for  greater  Robberies;  but 
'or  small  pilfering  the  first  time  Thieves  are  only  whipt; 
lit  after  this  a  Petty  I.arceny  is  looked  on  as  a  great  crime. 
cither  is  this  sort  of  puniahmcnr  peculiar  to  the  Achinese 
nrcmroent,  but  probably,  used  by  the  other  Princes  of 
Island,  and  on  the  Island  Java  also,  especially  at 
intun.  They  formerly,  when  the  King  of  Bantam  was 
I  his  prosperity,  depriv'd  Men  of  the  right  hand  for  Theft, 
and  may  still  for  ought  I  know.  I  knew  a  Dutch-man  so 
leTv'd  :  he  was  a  Seaman  belonging  to  one  of  the  King  of 
Bantam's  Shipt.  Being  thus  punbhcd,  he  was  dismist  from 
hj»  service,  and  when  I  was  this  time  at  Achin  he  lived 
I      there.     Here  at  Achin,  when  a  member  is  thus  cut  off. 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 

Aif.  they  have  a  broad  piece  of  Leather  or  Bladder  ready  to 
^^  clap  on  the  Wound.  This  is  presently  applyed,  and  bound 
on  so  fast,  that  the  Blood  cannot  issue  forth.  By  this 
means  the  great  Flux  of  Blood  is  stop*d,  which  would  else 
ensue ;  and  I  never  heard  of  any  one  who  died  of  it.  How 
long  this  Leather  is  kept  on  the  Wound  I  know  not :  but 
it  is  so  long,  till  the  Blood  is  perfectly  stanched  ;  and  when 
it  is  taken  off,  the  clods  of  Blood  which  were  prest  in  the 
Wound  by  the  Leather,  peel  all  oflF  with  it,  leaving  the 
Wound  clean.  Then,  I  judge,  they  use  cleansing  or 
healing  Plaisters,  as  they  see  convenient,  and  cure  the 
Wound  with  a  great  deal  of  ease. 

I  never  heard  of  any  that  suffered  Death  for  Theft. 
Criminals,  who  deserve  Death,  are  executed  divers  ways, 
according  to  the  Nature  of  the  Offence,  or  the  Quality  of 
the  Offender.  One  way  is  by  Impaling  on  a  sharp  Stake, 
which  passeth  up  right  from  the  Fundament  through  the 
Bowels,  and  comes  out  at  the  Neck.  The  Stake  is  about 
the  Bigness  of  a  Man's  Thigh,  placed  upright,  one  End 
in  the  Ground  very  firm;  the  upper  sharp  End  is  about 
12  or  14  Foot  high.  I  saw  one  Man  spitted  in  this 
manner,  and  there  he  remained  two  or  three  Days :  but  I 
could  not  learn  his  Offence. 

Noblemen  have  a  more  honourable  Death;  they  are 
allowed  to  fight  for  their  Lives :  but  the  Numbers  of  those 
with  whom  they  are  to  engage,  soon  put  a  Period  to  the 
Combat,  by  the  Death  of  the  Malefactor.  The  manner 
of  it  is  thus ;  the  Person  condemned  is  brought  bound  to 
the  Place  of  Execution.  This  is  a  large  plain  Field, 
spacious  enough  to  contain  Thousands  of  People.  Thither 
the  Achinese,  armed  as  they  usually  go,  with  their  Cresset, 
but  then  more  especially,  resort  in  Troops,  as  well  to  be 
Spectators,  as  Actors  in  the  Tragedy.  These  make  a  very 
large  Ring,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  Multitude  the 
Criminall  is  placed,  and  by  him  such  Arms  as  are  allowed 
on  such  Occasions :  which  are,  a  Sword,  a  Cresset,  and  a 
Lance.  When  the  Time  is  come  to  Act,  he  is  unbound, 
and  left  at  his  Liberty  to  take  up  his  fighting  Weapons. 
The  Spectators  being  all  ready,  with  each  Man  his  Arms 

66 


|ThTe  general  slavery  at  achin 

hi  hn  Hftnd,  stand  still  io  their  Places,  till  the  Malefactor 

^bvsoces.     He   commonly   sets    out    with    a    Shriek,    and   ' 

^■li^ly  faces  the  Multitude :  but  he  is  soon  brought  to 

^Bc  Ground,  first  by  Lances  thrown  at  him,  and  afterwards 

by  their  Swords   and    Cressets.     One  was  thus  executed 

while  I  WIS  there:  I  had  not  the  fortune  to  hear  of  it  till 

ic  wat  ended  :  but  had  this  relation  the  same  evening  it 

was  done,  from  Mr.  Dennis  Driscal,  who  was  then  one  of 

the  Spectators. 

Tbit  Countr)-  is  governed  by  a  Queen,  under  whom 
there  arc  12  Oronkeys,  or  great  Lords.  These  act  in 
their  iCTcral  Prcdncts  with  great  Power  and  Authority. 
Under  these  there  are  other  inferiour  Officers,  to  keep  the 
Peace  in  the  several  parts  of  the  Queens  Dominions.  The 
prcftcnt  Shabander  of  Achin  is  one  of  the  Oronkeys.  He  is 
a  Man  of  greater  knowledge  than  any  of  the  rest,  and  sup- 
posed to  be  very  rich.  1  have  heard  say,  he  had  not  less 
than  1000  Slaves,  some  of  whom  were  topping  Merchants, 
and  had  many  Slaves  under  them.  And  even  these,  tho* 
they  are  Slaves  to  Slaves,  yet  have  their  Slaves  also ;  neither 
on  a  stranger  easily  know  who  is  a  Slave  and  who  not 
among  them :  for  they  are  att,  in  a  manner,  Slaves  to  one 
another:  and  all  in  general  to  the  Queen  and  Oronkeys; 
foe  their  Government  is  very  Arbitrary.  Yet  there  is 
nothing  of  rigour  used  by  the  Master  to  his  Slave,  except 
it  be  the  very  meanest,  such  as  do  all  sorts  of  servile  Work  : 
but  tboic  who  can  turn  their  hands  to  any  thing  besides 
Drudgery,  live  well  enough  by  their  industry.  Nay,  they 
are  encouraged  by  their  Masters,  who  often  lend  them 
Money  to  begin  some  trade  or  business  withal ;  Whereby 
the  Servant  live*  easie,  and  with  great  content  follows  what 
his  Inclination  or  Opacity  fits  him  for ;  and  the  Master 
iho,  who  has  a  share  \n  the  gains,  reaps  the  more  profit, 
Tct  wiThout  trouble.  When  one  of  these  Slaves  dies,  his 
.MisTcr  is  Heir  to  what  he  leaves;  and  his  Children,  if  he 
ha5  any,  become  his  Staves  also;  unless  the  Father  out  of 
his  own  clear  gains  has  in  his  life  time  had  wherewithal  to 
purchMe  their  Freedom.  The  Markets  are  kept  by  these 
People,  and  you  icarce  trade  with  any  other.  The  Money- 
«7 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AS.  changers  also  arc  Skrcs,  and  in  general  all  the  Women 
*^  that  you  see  in  the  streets;  not  one  erf"  them  being  free. 
So  are  the  Ftshcr-mcn,  and  others  who  fetch  Firewood  in 
Canoas  from  Pulo  Gomez,  fcH*  thence  those  of  this  Gty 
fetch  most  of  thcr  Wood,  tho*  there  b  scarce  anything  to 
be  seen  but  Woods  about  the  Gty.  Yet  tho'  all  these 
are  Slaves,  they  have  habitations  or  houses  to  themselves 
in  several  parts  of  the  Gty,  far  from  their  Masters  Houses, 
as  if  they  were  free  People.  But  to  return  to  the  Sha- 
bander  I  was  speaking  of,  all  Merchant  Strangers,  at  their 
first  arrival,  make  their  Entries  with  him,  which  is  always 
done  with  a  good  Present:  and  from  him  they  take  all 
their  dispatches  when  they  depart;  and  all  Matters  of 
Importance  in  General  between  Merchants  are  determined 
by  him.  It  seems  to  have  been  by  his  Conversion  and 
Acquaintance  with  Strangers,  that  he  became  so  knowing, 
beyond  the  rest  of  the  Great  men :  and  he  is  also  said  to 
be  himself  a  great  Merchant. 

The  Queen  of  Achin,  as  *tis  said,  is  always  an  old  Maid, 
chosen  out  of  the  Royal  Family.  What  Ceremonies  are 
used  at  the  chusing  her  I  know  not :  Nor  who  are  the 
Electors;  but  I  suppose  they  are  the  Oronkeys.  After 
she  is  chosen,  she  is  in  a  manner  confined  to  her  Palace ; 
for  by  report  she  seldom  goes  abroad,  neither  is  she  seen 
by  any  People  of  inferiour  rank  and  quality ;  but  only  by 
some  of  her  Domesticks :  except  that  once  a  Year  she  is 
drest  all  in  white,  and  placed  on  an  Elephant,  and  so  rides 
to  the  River  in  state  to  wash  herself:  but  whether  any  of 
the  meaner  sort  of  People  may  see  her  in  that  Prc^ess  I 
know  not :  for  it  is  the  custom  of  most  Eastern  Frinces 
to  skreen  themselves  from  the  sight  of  their  Subjects :  Or 
if  they  sometimes  go  abroad  for  their  pleasure,  yet  the 
People  are  then  ordered  either  to  turn  their  backs  towards 
them  while  they  pass  by,  as  formerly  at  Bantam,  or  to  hold 
their  Hands  before  their  Eyes,  as  at  Siam.  At  Mindanao, 
they  may  look  on  their  Prince :  but  from  the  highest  to 
the  lowest  they  approach  him  with  the  greatest  respect  and 
veneration,  creeping  very  low,  and  oft-times  on  their  Knees, 
with  their  Eyes  fixed  on  him :  and  when  they  withdraw, 

68 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  which  stands  on  the  West  side,  held  out  stoutly.  The 
'^  River  is  wider,  shallower,  and  more  sandy  at  the  City,  than 
any  where  else  near  it :  yet  not  fordable  at  low  Water. 
Therefore  for  the  better  communication  from  one  side  to  the 
other,  there  are  Ferry-boats  to  carry  Passengers  to  and  fro. 
In  other  places  the  Banks  are  steep,  the  River  more  rapid, 
and  in  most  places  very  muddy :  so  that  this  place,  just  at 
the  City  itself,  is  the  most  convenient  to  transport  Men  or 
Goods  from  one  side  to  the  other. 

It  was  not  far  from  this  place  the  Army  lay,  as  if  they 
designed  to  force  their  passage  here.  The  Queens  party, 
to  oppose  them,  kept  a  small  Guard  of  Soldiers  just  at  the 
Landing-place.  The  Shabander  of  Achin  had  a  Tent  set 
up  there,  he  being  the  chief  manager  of  her  Affairs :  and 
for  the  more  security,  he  had  2  or  3  small  brass  Guns  of 
a  Minion  Bore  planted  by  his  Tent  all  the  day,  with  their 
Muzzels  against  the  River.  In  the  Evening  there  were  2 
or  3  great  Trees  drawn  by  an  Elephant,  and  placed  by  the 
side  of  the  River,  for  a  Barricado  against  the  Enemy :  and 
then  the  Brass  Guns  were  drawn  from  the  Shabander*s 
Tent,  which  stood  not  far  from  it,  and  planted  just  behind 
the  Trees,  on  the  rising  Bank:  So  that  they  looked  over 
the  Trees,  and  they  might  fire  over,  or  into  the  River,  if 
the  Enemy  approached.  When  the  Barricado  was  thus 
made  and  the  Guns  planted,  the  Ferry-boats  passed  no 
more  from  side  to  side,  till  the  next  Morning.  Then  you 
should  hear  the  Soldiers  calling  to  each  other,  not  in 
menacing  Language,  but  as  those  who  desired  Peace  and 
Quietness,  asking  why  they  would  not  agree,  why  they 
could  not  be  of  one  Mind,  and  why  they  should  desire  to 
kill  one  another.  This  was  the  Tone  all  Night  long ;  in 
the  Morning  as  soon  as  Sun  was  risen,  the  Guns  were 
drawn  again  to  the  Shabander's  Tent,  and  the  Trees  were 
drawn  aside,  to  open  the  Passage  from  one  Side  to  the 
other :  and  every  Man  then  went  freely  about  his  Business, 
as  if  all  had  been  as  quiet  as  ever,  only  the  Shabander  and 
his  Guard  staid  still  in  their  Stations :  So  that  there  was 
not  any  Sign  of  Wars,  but  in  the  Night  only,  when  all 
stood  to  their  Arms :  and  then  the  Towns-people  seemed 

70 


DANCING    WOMEN 

to  be  in  fear,  and  sometimes  we  should  have  a  Rumour,  that 
the  Enemy  would  certainly  make  an  Attempt  to  come  over.  ' 

While  these  Stirs  lasted,  the  Shabander  sent  to  all  the 
Foreigners,  and  desired  them  to  keep  in  their  own  houses 
in  the  Night,  and  told  them,  that  whatever  might  happen  in 
the  City  by  their  own  civil  Broils,  yet  no  harm  should  come 
to  them.  Yet  some  of  the  Portuguese,  fearing  the  worst, 
would  every  Night  put  their  richest  Goods  into  a  Boat, 
ready  to  lake  their  Flight  on  the  first  Alarm.  There  were 
St  this  Time  not  above  2  or  3  English  Families  in  the 
Town,  and  2  English  Ships,  and  one  Dutch  Ship,  besides  2 
or  3  Moors  Ships  of  the  Moguls  Subjects,  in  the  Road. 
One  of  the  English  Ships  was  called  the  NelUgree ;  the 
Name  taken  from  Nellegrce  Hills  in  Bengal,  as  I  have 
heard.  She  came  from  the  Bay  of  Bengal,  laden  with  Rice, 
Cotton,  Sec.  the  other  was  the  Dorothy  of  London,  Captain 
Thwait  Commander,  who  came  from  Fort  St,  George,  and 
was  bound  to  Bcncouli  with  Soldiers,  but  couched  here,  as 
well  to  sell  some  Goods,  as  to  bring  a  Present  to  the  Queen 
from  our  East-India  Company.  Captain  Thwait,  according 
to  custom  went  with  his  Present  to  the  Queen,  which  she 
accepted ;  and  complemented  him  with  the  usual  Civilities 
of  the  Country ;  for  to  honour  him  he  was  set  upon  an 
Elephant  of  the  Queen's  to  ride  to  his  Lodgings,  dressed  in 
a  Malayan  Habit,  which  she  gave  him ;  and  she  sent  also 
two  Dancing  Girls  to  shew  him  some  Pastime  there :  and  I 
mm  them  at  his  Lodgings  that  Evening,  dancing  the  greatest 
Part  of  the  Night  much  after  the  same  Manner  of  the 
Danctog-women  of  Mindanao,  rather  writhing  their  Hands 
and  Bodies  with  several  Anlick  Gestures,  than  moving 
much  out  of  the  Place  they  were  in.  He  had  at  this  Time 
ibout  twenty  great  Jars  of  Bengal  Butter,  made  of  Bufl^- 
IfjcsMiik;  and  this  Butter  is  said  also  to  have  Lard  or 
Hog's  Fat  mixt  with  it,  and  rank  enough  in  these  hot 
Countries,  iho'  much  esteemed  by  all  the  Achinesc,  who 
gire  a  good  Price  for  it ;  and  our  English  also  use  it. 
Each  oftbe  Jars  this  came  in  contained  20  or  30  Gallons; 
4nd  they  were  »ct  in  Mr.  Driscal's  Yard  at  Achin :  What 
ocW  Goods  the  Captain  brought  I  know  not. 
71 


:r?T-Z>r    Z:^\L?[ZR^   VOYAGES 

3ur  7.:  r:^  irrrr  rns  le  3e-nc  inr^muad  chat  the 
•  u  7T  .f"-! — c  T^»- •-*—£:  .icrc  ^TaLi  .anrjcd  off  a  great 
r-'Hi'-Lrr  :ir.ari  nrjir  ihira^  n  jricr  "x:  rscum  with  it  to 
r-nr^.  -iTw  -T  J.mrmv  nrrnz  i«-'w  Wxcs  with  the  great 
^l^  ^L..  I-rTzin  T'r^rzi:  n  nr  Zr^^mng  irew  t^ff  all  his 
^riiiznm,  jT-i  -iiiztu  n  jne  ir  nu  Ulcers  Snrs^  where  he 
r:.  '.:^:  nz  r^-^iisur^  t::^^.  "ITiti  Ji^jsps  ie  lee  xlone :  She 
nir  .  f.::r  ::i.i  •::i  J-ir:=in  Jjiiscmr  t:::ck  bi  the  Road 
-.  :n::n:r.r  "=r  r=-  :iiu  r^^-ir:*  Tiiimiertsi  "ler.  iegXTe  her  to  the 
^»:j^:.  r  r-zr-n  m^  M»-  r^  :iju^r  ier  igiic^  The  Moors 
>  Lvjr-iirj^::^  r-»^  frr^^-  V  r:u:i  :r  rris  Arion.  ot  Captain 
7"rvr»:7,  li:.:  ::;:'■  rprsc-i:;"  iriiie  ricir  AzTiictdon  to  the 
^  j:k.*^t  -T-r  fir:^.ct:- ::.  3ur  icr  Aihirs  sz  zirs  Time  being 
:i  -uj:i  i  ?  sr.:rr:  is-  1  ncnccire-J,  iv  Rascn  of  their  in- 
-jsriie  3r*:ls.  s:v:  a;;^  iiTt:  rjuni  z^:  iccirinc  f'-'f  them- 

>  v-^  :  T-  .  I  I  vT'^i-L  nc  iiixr  Div.  before  we  who 
i"^^  irriTtn;  Ti^u^-^  :r  J^rtxn  T'l-vxts  Proceecin^s:  but 
icti:!:;!  rrc  M*  crs  'fi\:>t  rj  Ciir:.  lac  20c  kn^owing  what 
A::*^^  :::e  ■  :-.iki  rrun  r^e  Oueen*  we  roscsd  off  to  the 
Si:;.:^  r  :r  rixr  r  .*e:i:i;  :t!  rrjscnec.  is  ^cme  English  Men 
-tuc  ret:::  'vzi'.n  I  iris  iz  7 rnc-i-rr,  on  the  lie  Score. 
LtCit^^  I  t.ivi  1:  ::::<  7*  ne  ^r^-^t  Ciuse  :o  be  afraid  of  a 
Prjs.n,  re:r;c  5;c:v  :r  1  r '.  -x  5*:  riii  1  Prison  would  have 
^:r.vi  z«i-ir  : :  ru. "::  i:l_vM  -ri^  v^c  I  tirirk  ::  fired  not  much 
berr^r  -v-.zr.  zzsi^  f  t  T.'^e  5i*-.rs  I  iei  to  ittbrded  me  but 
l:r:,i  Crcir.r:.  r:r  I  c*.<::sr  -.;  Miji  xbcuni  the  Dorothy^ 
xr.i  zz'i.i  ixrec:  -. :  Crr^r:  then;.  So  I  and  the  rest 
Win:  ibtrori  rhi  .V;  .jr'-.\  sr^tTt  w^  cocli  more  reasonably 
expect  Ri'iif  tbir.  :-.  1  5bir  tb^t  cim^  f^.'^m  England :  For 
these  ^hich  co.tie  >:  1:-:^  1  ^"^^yj'^*  ^^^  j'^-^  victualled  for 
the  Service,  ir.d  :b.e  Seint^n  hive  everv  one  their  stinted 
Allowance,  ou:  ci  which  they  rjLve  little  enough  to  spare 
to   Strangers. 

But  tho'  there  were  X'ictuils  enough  aboard  the  Nelkgree^ 
yet  so  weak  as  I  then  wis,  I  had  more  mind  to  rest  my  self 
than  to  eat :  and  the  Ship  was  so  pestered  with  Goods,  that  I 
could  not  find  a  Place  to  hang  up  my  Hammock  in.  There- 
fore it  being  fair  Weather,  I  made  a  Shift  to  lye  in  the 
Boat  that  I  came  aboard  in.     My  Flux  was  violent,  and  I 

72 


A   TOTAL   ECLIPSE   OF   THE   MOON 


iHept  but  little 


»  I  had  the  Opportunity  of  observing  the  , 
Moon  totally  Eclipsed,  h»d  I  been  in  a.  Condition  lo  observe  ' 
in?  Thing.  As  soon  as  I  perceived  the  Moon  to  be  eclipsed, 
1  gazed  at  it  indeed,  as  1  lay,  till  it  was  totally  obscured, 
which  was  a  pretty  while:  but  I  was  so  little  curious,  that 
I  rrmembrcd  not  so  much  as  what  Day  of  the  Month  it 
wa» ;  and  1  kept  no  Journal  of  this  Voyage,  as  I  did  of  my 
oclier,  but  only  kept  an  Account  of  several  particular  Re- 
marks and  Observations  as  they  occurred  to  me.  I  lay  three 
or  four  Days  thus  in  this  Boat,  and  the  People  of  the  Ship 
were  so  kind  as  to  provide  me  with  Necessaries  :  and  by  this 
rime  the  Moors  had  got  a  Pass  from  the  Dutch  Captain  then 
n  the  Road,  for  4  or  500  Dollars,  as  I  was  ihcn  told,  and 
Captain  Thwait  delivered  them  their  Ship  again,  but  what 
Tcnns  he  made  with  them.  I  know  not.  Tiius  that  Fray  was 
■vcr,  and  we  came  ashore  again,  recovered  of  the  Fright  wc 
had  been  in.  In  a  short  Time  also  after  this,  the  Achinese 
jJl  agreed  to  own  the  new  Queen,  and  so  the  War  ended 
without  iny  Bloodshed. 

I  was  perswadcd  to  wash  in  the  River,  Mornings  and 
Evenings,  for  the  Recovery  of  my  Health  :  and  tho'  it 
iccmcd  strange  to  me  before  1  tried  it,  yet  I  found  so  much 
Comfort  in  the  first  Trial,  that  1  constantly  applied  my  self 
:o  it,  I  went  into  the  River  till  the  Water  was  as  high  as 
my  Waste,  and  then  1  stooped  down  and  found  the  Water 
»<'<  cool  and  refreshing  to  my  Body,  that  I  was  always  loth 
to  go  out  again.  Then  I  was  sensible  that  my  Bowels 
•ere  vcrj'  hot,  for  1  felt  a  great  Heat  within  me,  which  I 
found  rcfreaht  by  the  cool  Water.  My  Food  was  Salt-fish 
bn>ylcd,  and  boiled  Rice  mixt  with  Tire.  Tire  Is  sold 
iboui  the  Streets  there :  'tis  thick  sower  Milk,  It  is  very 
fooling,  and  the  Salt-fish  and  Rice  ts  binding:  therefore 
ihis  u  thought  there  the  proper  Food  for  the  common 
People,  when  they  have  Fluxes.  But  the  richer  Sort  will 
hx7e  Sago,  which  is  brought  to  Achin  from  other  Countries, 
ind  Milk  of  Almonds. 

But  to  return  to  the  State  of  Achin :  before  I  go  off 
Trixn  it  I  shall  add  this  short  Account  of  the  Seasons  of  Year 
'^here,  that  their  Weather  is  much  the  same  as  in  other 
73 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 

AN.  Countries  North  of  the  Line,  and  their  dry  Seasons,  Rains, 
'^  and  Land-floods  come  much  at  the  same  Time,  as  at  Ton- 
quin  and  other  Places  of  North  Latitude.  Only  as  Achin 
lies  within  a  few  D^rees  of  the  Line,  so  upon  the  Sun*s 
crossing  the  Line  in  March,  the  Rains  b^n  a  little  sooner 
there  than  in  Gauntries  nearer  the  Tropick  of  Cancer :  and 
when  they  are  once  set  in,  they  are  as  violent  there  as  any 
where.  I  have  seen  it  rain  there  for  2  or  3  Days  without 
Intermission ;  and  the  River  running  but  a  short  Course,  its 
Head  not  lying  very  far  within  Land,  it  soon  overflows, 
and  a  great  part  of  the  Street  of  the  City,  shall  on  a  sudden 
be  all  under  Water ;  at  which  Time  People  row  up  and 
down  the  Streets  in  Canoas.  That  Side  of  the  City  towards 
the  River  especially,  where  the  Foreign  Merchants  live,  and 
which  is  lower  Ground,  is  frequently  under  Water  in  the 
wet  Season :  a  Ship's  Long-boat  has  come  up  to  the  very 
Gate  of  our  English  Factory  laden  with  Goods  ;  which  at 
other  Times  is  Ground  dry  enough,  at  a  good  Distance 
from  the  River,  and  moderately  raised  above  it.  I  did  not 
find  the  Heat  there  any  Thing  difierent  from  other  Places 
in  that  Latitude ;  tho*  I  was  there  both  in  the  wet  and  dry 
Season.  *Tis  more  supportable  than  at  Tonquin ;  and  they 
have  constantly  the  Refreshment  of  Sea  and  Land-Breezes 
every  24  Hours. 


74 


CHAP.    VIII 


I 


Til  ittktr  prtparft  t»  gt  fir  Ptgu.  Among  othtri  a  Ship  arrives  hrre 
frtm  Attrge  in  Siam,  Of  iht  Maaocri  of  the  English  there. 
H,>  ininulai  Cargo  fir  Pegu.  Tht  arrival  of  other  Bn^/hh  Mtn 
frtmt  llu  City  of  fi««.  The  Author  sets  out  fir  Malaua  instead 
tf  Ptpi,  Thtj  eiri  imalmed,  and  soon  after  in  great  Danger  of 
nmKiitg  agrmmd.  The  Coast  of  Sumatra  from  Diamond  Point  to 
ikt  Rivrr  DiUy.  They  walrr  thtrt  and  at  PuU  {■'erero  ;  where 
thrj  mtri  a  Shif  of  Danes  and  Moors  from  Trangambar.  Pulo 
Jrdy  and  Puk  Pan*lere,  a  useful  Sea-mari  to  avoid  SholfS  near 
Afmiacta  Shtre.  The  Author  arrives  at  Malacca  Town.  The 
TtUm  attd  ill  Ftrii  dtttrihtd:  the  Conquest  of  it  by  the  Dutch,  from 
tk*  Partagtuu,  Chinese  and  other  Merchants  residing  here.  The 
S^Jr  *f  Flesh  and  Fish  ;  the  Fruits  and  Animals.  The  Shabander, 
StsU  tf  the  Trade,  and  Guard-Shifis.  Opium,  a  good  Commodity 
*—y  th*  Malayans.  Rattan  Cables.  They  prepare  for  their 
rtttm  t^  t*  Achin. 


f  AS  soon  as  I  was  prttty  well  recovered,  I  was  shipt  aic.! 
i^k  Mate  of  the  Sloop  that  came  from  Malacca  1689 
Jm^L  with  us,  which  Mr.  Wells  had  sold  to  Captain 
^  ^.  Tyler,  who  lately  came  from  SJam  :  and  I  was 
mc  aboard  to  take  Possession  of  her,  about  the  Beginning 
of  May,  1669.  He  who  was  designed  to  command  her 
came  to  Achin  Mate  of  the  Nellegree ;  and  we  were  now 
go  to  Pegu,  but  before  the  Middle  nf  June  he  left  the 
iploy,  being  sick,  and  loth  to  go  at  this  dead  Time  of 
Year  to  Pegu,  because  the  Westerly  Wind  was  set  in 
g,  and  the  Coast  of  IVgu  is  low  Land,  and  we  were 
unacquainted  on  the  Coast.  I  was  then  made  Com- 
9-,  and  took  in  Goods  in  order  tn  depart  for  that 
In  the  mean  time  Mr.  Coventry  arrived  in  his  Ship 
the  Coast  of  Coromandel  laden  with  Rice,  and  a 
75 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   small    Vessel    belonging  to  Capt.  Tyler  came  also   ifrom 

1689  Merga  much  about  the  same  Time. 

This  last  Ship  had  been  at  Merga  ^  a  considerable  time, 
having  been  seized  on  by  the  Siamites,  and  all  the  Men 
imprisoned,  for  some  diflFerence  that  happened  between  the 
English  and  them.  Neither  was  a  Prison  then  thought 
hard  Usage  by  them,  for  during  the  Havock  was  made  of 
the  English  there,  many  of  those  who  lived  at  Merga  were 
massacred.  Those  who  were  imprisoned,  were  kept  there 
till  all  the  English  who  lived  at  the  City  of  Siam,  on  the 
other  Side  of  the  Kingdom,  withdrew  from  thence :  and 
then  these  Men  had  their  Liberty  restored  also,  and  their 
Ship  given  them,  but  no  Goods,  nor  Satisfaction  for  their 
Losses,  nor  so  much  as  a  Compass  to  bring  with  them,  and 
but  little  Provision.  Yet  here  they  safely  arrived.  This 
being  a  better  Ship  than  I  was  gone  aboard  of.  Captain 
Tyler  immediately  fitted  her  up  for  the  Sea,  in  order  to 
send  her  to  Pegu. 

By  this  Time  my  Vessel  was  loaden,  and  my  Cargo 
was  eleven  thousand  Coco-nuts,  five  or  six  hundred 
Weight  of  Sugar,  and  half  a  dozen  Chests  of  Drawers  of 
Japan  work,  two  were  very  large,  designed  for  a  Present  to 
the  King.  Besides  this,  Capt.  Tyler,  for  so  we  used  to 
call  him,  tho'  he  was  only  a  Merchant,  said  he  intended  to 
send  a  good  Quantity  of  Gold  thither,  by  which  he  ex- 
pected to  gain  60  or  70  per  Cent ;  for  by  Report  the  King 
of  Pegu  had  lately  built  a  very  magnificent  Pagoda,  and 
was  gilding  it  very  richly  with  Gold :  besides  he  was 
making  a  large  Image  of  Massy  Gold  for  the  chief  Pagod 
of  this  Temple.  By  this  Means  Gold  was  risen  in  its 
Value  here :  and  Achin  being  a  place  abounding  in  that 
Metal,  much  of  it  had  already  been  sent  thither  from 
hence,  and  more  was  going  in  other  Vessels,  belonging  to 
the  Moors  of  Achin,  beside  what  Captain  Tyler  designed 
to  send. 

It  was  now  about  the  Middle  of  August ;  and  tho*  I 
was  ready  to  sail,  yet  I  was  ordered  to  stay  for  Captain 

1  Mergui. 

76 


NTTTMEGS   FOR   PEGU 

'ylcr's  other  Vessel,  till  she  had  taken  in  her  Lading. 
Mch  w»s  daily  sent  off.  Her  Cargo  also  was  Coco-nuts,  '' 
the  had  about  8  ur  9000  already  aboard  :  when  1  re- 
Mi  an  Order  from  Captain  Tyler  to  hale  aboard  of  her, 
put  all  my  Girgo  into  her ;  as  also  all  my  Water-cask, 
whatever  else  I  could  spare  that  they  wanted ;  but 
ui  he  desired  me  to  be  satisfied,  and  told  me  I  should 
bort  Time  be  sent  to  Sea  :  but  that  Ship  being  the 
:,  he  thought  it  more  convenient  to  dispatch  her  first, 
mily  did  as  I  was  ordered ;  and  finding  that  I  should 
>  this  Voyage,  I  sold  also  my  small  Cargo,  which 
:cd  only  of  some  Coco-nuts  and  about  too  Nutmegs, 
had  the  shells  on  as  they  grew  on  the  Trees.  I 
bought  ill  that  I  could  meet  with  in  the  Town,  and  paid 
about  3  d  a  piece,  and  expected  to  have  had  12  d.  a  Piece 
for  ihera  at  Pegu,  where  they  are  much  esteemed  if  the 
^(cIU  be  on,  for  else  they  don't  value  them. 

About  this  Time  the  George,  a  great  English  Ship 
longing  to  one  Mr.  Dahon,  arrived  here  from  the  City 
■  Stam,  coming  thro'  the  Strc^hts  of  Malacca.  He  had 
en  there  some  Years  trading  to  and  fro,  and  had  made 
Tf  profitable  Voyages :  but  the  late  Revolution  that 
ipned  there  by  the  Death  of  the  King,  and  the  unhappy 
;e  of  ray  Lord  Falcon,  caused  the  English  to  withdraw 
xn  thence.  The  French  were  til  sent  away  some  Months 
don,  being  not  suffered  to  stay  in  the  Kingdom :  but 
Tore  this  Ship  came  from  thence,  the  Broils  of  State  were 
er;  for  the  new  King  being  settled,  all  Tumults  which 
commonly  arise  in  these  Countries  at  the  Death  of  the 
King,  were  appeased.  The  English  were  then  desired  10 
ly  there,  and  those  who  had  yielded  up  their  Places  and 
haet.  were  even  intreated  to  accept  them  again,  for  they 
rned  that  they  had  at)  served  the  Nation  faithfully.  But 
C  long  before  the  Revolution,  the  Governor  of  Fort  St. 
Gmmvc  lent  for  all  the  English  from  thence  particularly, 
•ad  ^otn  the  Service  of  alt  other  Indian  Princes,  to  come 
serve  the  East-India  Company  at  the  Fort,  or  where 
tbey  should  send  them.  For  that  Reason  they  all 
:  away  with  Mr.  Dalton,  and  he.  in  kindness  to  his 
77 


4 

1 

J 


CAPTAIN  DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AN.    Country-men,  refused  to  take  in  Goods  or  Freight,  because 
^^  he  would  have  room  enough  for  their  Passage,  and  thdr 
Household  Goods :  for  here  were  some  Families  of  Men, 
Women  and  Children. 

They  were  a  long  time  coming  from  Siam  to  Achin, 
because  they  came  against  the  Monsoon;  and  in  their 
Passage  they  touch'd  at  Malacca,  and  when  they  arrived 
at  Achin,  Mr.  Dalton  went  ashore  and  hired  an  House, 
as  did  also  most  of  his  Passengers :  and  among  the  rest 
Captain  Minchin,  who  had  formerly  served  the  East-India 
Company  at  Surrat,  but  on  some  disgust  left  that  Place  and 
came  to  Siam.  There  he  was  made  Gunner  of  a  Fort,  and 
maintained  his  Wife  and  Family  very  well  in  that  Employ, 
till  the  Revolution  there,  and  the  Companies  orders  came 
and  called  him  from  thence.  He  being  now  destitute  of 
Employment,  the  Merchants  there  thought  of  making  him 
Commander  of  the  Vessel  that  I  was  in,  because  Captain 
Tyler  was  minded  to  sell  part  of  Her.  Accordingly  they 
met  about  it,  and  the  Vessel  was  divided  into  four  Parts, 
three  of  which  were  purchased  by  Mr.  Dalton,  Mr.  Coventry, 
and  Capt.  Minchin,  and  Captain  Tyler  kept  the  4th.  The 
next  Day  Capt.  Minchin  came  off  with  an  order  to  me  to 
deliver  him  the  possession  of  the  Ship,  and  told  me,  that 
if  I  liked  to  go  his  Mate,  I  might  still  keep  aboard  till  they 
had  agreed  on  a  Voyage.  I  was  forced  to  submit,  and 
accepted  a  Mate's  Employ  under  Captain  Minchin.  It  was 
not  long  before  we  were  ordered  for  Malacca  to  buy  Goods 
there.  We  carried  no  Goods  with  us,  besides  3  or  400 
pound  of  Opium. 

It  was  about  the  middle  of  September,  1689,  when  we 
sailed  from  Achin.  We  were  four  white  Men  in  the  Vessel, 
the  Captain,  and  Mr.  Coventry,  who  went  Supercargo,  my- 
self and  the  Boatswain.  For  common  Seamen  we  had  7  or 
8  Moors :  and  generally  in  these  Country  Ships  the  White- 
men  are  all  Officers.  Two  Days  after  we  left  Achin,  being 
becalmed  under  the  Shore,  we  came  to  an  Anchor.  Not 
long  after  a  Ship  coming  in  from  the  Seaward,  came  to  an 
Anchor  about  2  Mile  a-head  of  us.  Mr.  Coventry  knew 
her  to  be  a  Danish  Ship  belonging  to  Trangambar;  and 

78 


THEY  ARE  IK  DANGER  OF  SHIPWRECK 

therefore  we  hoisted  out  our  Boat,  and  thought  to  have 
spoken  with  her:  but  a  small  Breeze  springing  up,  they  ' 
weighed  their  Anchors  and  went  away;  neither  would  they 
speak  with  ua,  tho*  we  made  signs  for  them  to  stay.  We 
weighed  also  and  jogg'd  on  after  them,  but  they  sailed  better 
than  we.  We  met  little  Winds  and  Calms,  so  that  it  wa3 
seven  or  eight  Days  before  we  got  as  far  as  Diamond-point, 
which  a  about  forty  leagues  from  Achin. 

Being  about  four  leagues  short  of  that  Point,  Captain 
Minchin  desired  me  to  set  the  Land,  and  withal  prick  the 
Card,  and  sec  what  Course  we  ought  to  keep  all  Night ; 
for  it  was  now  about  6  a-Clock,  and  we  had  a  fine  gale  at 
W,  S.  W,  our  course  yet  being  E-  S-  E. 

After  I  had  set  the  Land,  I  went  into  the  Cabbin  to 
look  over  the  Draught  to  see  what  course  we  must  steer 
after  we  came  about  the  Point.  Mr.  Coventry  followed 
IDC,  and  when  I  had  satisfied  myself,  he  asked  me  what 
coarse  we  must  steer  ?  I  told  him  E.  S.  E.  till  1 2  a-Clock, 
if  the  gale  stood,  and  then  we  might  hale  more  Southerly. 
He  teemed  to  be  startled  at  it,  and  told  me,  that  the 
Csptain  and  he  had  been  pricking  the  Card,  and  thought 
•hat  S.  E,  or  S.  E.  by  S.  course  would  do  well  at  8  a-Clock. 
I  said  it  was  a  good  course  to  run  ashore ;  he  argued  a  long 
•irae  with  me,  but  I  persisted  in  my  Opinion,  and  when  I 
:  lid  Captain  Minchin  of  my  Opinion,  he  was  well  satisfied. 
IVeicntly  after  this  we  had  a  pretty  strong  Tornado  out  of 
■]ieS.  W,  which  obliged  us  to  hand  our  Top-sail.  When 
:he  «tre»  of  the  weather  was  over,  we  set  our  sails  again, 
ind  went  in  to  Supper,  and  ordered  the  Man  at  Helm  not 
:a  cotoe  to  the  Southward  of  the  E.  S.  E.  We  stayed  in 
rSe  Cabbin  till  about  8  a-Clock,  and  then  we  came  out  to 
jct  ihc  Watch.  It  was  now  very  dark,  by  reason  of  a 
Thuodcr-Cloud  that  hung  rumbling  over  the  Land  :  yet 
'■Y  the  flatbcs  of  lightning  wc  plainly  saw  the  Land,  right 
i-bead  of  us,  I  was  much  surprised,  and  ran  into  the 
^<oeridgc  to  look  on  the  Compass,  and  found  that  we  were 
y.txnag  S.  S.  E.  instead  of  E.  S.  E.  I  clapt  the  Helm  a 
Surbosrd,  and  brought  her  to  N.  E.  by  E-  and  N.E.  and 
wc  rery  narrowly  escap'd  being  cast  away. 
79 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  When  we  first  went  to  Supper  we  were  3  leagues  ofF 

1689  Land,  and  then  E.  S.  E.  was  a  good  course,  the  Land  lying 
E.  S.  E.  parallel  with  our  course. 

But  then  the  Man  at  Helm  mistaking  his  Compass 
steer'd  S.  S.  E.  which  runs  right  in  upon  the  Shore.  I 
believe  we  had  also  some  counter-current  or  Tide  that 
help*d  us  in,  for  we  were  quickly  got  into  a  Bay  within 
the  points  of  Land.  So  that  'twas  now  absolutely  necessary 
to  steer  Northerly  to  get  out  of  the  Bay ;  and  by  this  time 
Mr.  Coventry  was  satisfied  with  what  I  told  him  in  the 
Evening,  and  was  convinced  of  his  Error.  I  undertook 
to  direct  the  Man  at  Helm,  and  the  Wind  continuing,  I 
kept  ofF  till  ten  a-Clock:  then  I  steered  E.  S.  E.  till  12, 
and  then  haled  up  S.  S.  E.  and  in  the  Morning  we  were 
about  4  leagues  S.  E.  from  Diamond-point,  and  about  3 
leagues  to  the  North  of  an  Island. 

The  Land  from  hence  lying  S.  S.  E.  we  steered  so ;  but 
meeting  with  calms  again,  we  anchored  several  times  before 
we  came  to  the  River  of  Dilly,  which  is  28  leagues  from 
Diamond-point.  The  Land  between  seems  to  be  uneven, 
most  of  it  pretty  high,  and  very  woody :  and  *tis  said  that 
all  this  Country,  as  far  as  the  River  Dilly,  is  under  the 
Queen  of  Achin. 

About  a  League  before  we  came  to  that  River,  being 
within  2  Mile  of  the  Shore,  we  saw  the  Water  of  a  muddy 
grey  Colour,  and  tasting  it,  found  it  to  be  sweet.  There- 
fore we  presently  filled  some  of  our  Water  Cask ;  and  *tis 
an  ordinary  thing  in  several  places  to  take  up  fresh  Water 
at  Sea,  against  the  mouth  of  some  River  where  it  floats 
above  the  Salt-water :  but  we  must  dip  but  a  little  way 
down ;  for  sometimes  if  the  Bucket  goes  but  a  foot  deep 
it  takes  up  Salt-water  with  the  fresh. 

In  the  Evening  we  had  a  fine  Land  Breeze,  with  which 
we  ran  along  the  Shore,  keeping  on  a  wind,  and  sounding 
every  now  and  then.  At  last  we  were  got  among  the 
Sholes,  at  the  mouth  of  that  River,  and  puzzled  to  get 
out  again.  The  River  is  in  Lat.  3  d.  50  m.  N.  It  seems 
to  be  very  large,  but  it  is  not  well  known,  but  only  to  the 
Natives  who  inhabit  it ;  and  they  are  not  very  sociable ; 

80 


W         SiHiP  T^OM  TRANGAMBAR 

^pit  arc.  bj-  Report,  a  Sort  of  Pirates  living  on  Rapine.  , 
1b  the  Miming  ne  saw  a  Sail  standing  ofr  to  an  Island  ' 
called  Pulo  Vcrero,  lying  in  Lat.  3  d.  30  m.  N.  seven 
Leagues  from  the  Mouth  of  the  River  EHlly.  We  liaving 
a  fair  Wind,  stood  after  them,  intending  there  to  wood  and 
water  at  Pulo  Vcrero.  For  though  we  took  no  fresh  Water 
the  Evening  before  out  of  the  Sea,  yet  at  the  River  of  Dilly 
it  was  brackish :  for  tho'  the  fresh  Water  is  born  up  by 
the  Salt,  and  might  be  intire  without  Mixture,  yet  by 
plunging  of  the  Bucket  somewhat  too  low,  we  might  pro- 
bably take  up  some  of  the  Salt  water  with  it.  They  came 
to  an  Anchor  about  two  or  three  a-Clock  in  the  Afternoon : 
but  the  Wind  slacken 'd,  and  it  was  eight  a-Clock  at  Night 
hcforc  we  came  thither.  Wc  anchored  about  a  Mile  from 
tbcm,  and  presently  hoysed  out  our  Boat  to  go  aboard  : 
ttiT  WC  judged  that  this  was  the  Danish  Ship,  that  we  saw 
■^hcn  wc  came  first  from  Achin.  I  went  in  the  Boat,  because 
Mr.  Covcntrj-  told  me,  that  Mr.  Coppinger  was  Surgeon 
^r  ber,  the  «mc  Person  who  was  with  me  in  the  Boat  when 
I  was  set  ashore  at  the  Nicobar  Isles,  but  was  not  suffered 
T'j  stay  with  me.  Mr.  Coventry  was  now  in  the  Boat  with 
me.  mi  we  went  and  haled  the  Ship,  asking  whence  she 
came?  and  who  was  Commander?  They  answered,  they 
■*cre  Danes  from  Trangambar,  for  'twas  the  Ship  we  took 
i!  to  be.  Then  they  askt  who  we  were  ?  I  answered  English 
frvan  Achin,  and  that  Mr.  Coventry  was  in  the  Boat,  but 
they  would  not  believe  it  till  Mr.  Coventry  spoke  and  the 
Captain  knew  his  Voice :  neither  did  they  tilt  then  believe 
we  were  FriciKls;  for  they  had  every  Man  his  Gun  in  his 
Iland.  nauly  to  fire  on  us,  if  wc  had  gone  aboard  without 
baling,  as  Mr.  Coventry  would  have  done,  in  Confidence 
that  efaey  knew  him,  had  not  I  disswaded  him.  For  it 
lecms  they  were  extreamly  afraid  of  us,  insomuch  that 
the  Commander,  seeing  us  follow  them  in  the  Morning, 
«t«ikl  not  have  louchol  at  these  Islands,  though  he  was 
in  great  want  of  Water ;  and  had  not  his  Black  Merchants 
hucn  before  him  on  their  Knees,  and  even  prayed  him  to 
take  Fity  on  tbcm,  they  bad  not  anchored  here.  These 
Merchants  were  InhabitanU  of  Trangambar  on  the  Coast 

VOL.  II.  8t  F 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  of  Coromandel.  They  having  no  Ships  of  their  own,  when 
'^^9  the  Danes  fit  out  a  Ship,  on  any  Voyage  that  they  are  in- 
clined to,  these  Moors  are  obliged  to  joyn  Stock  with  them, 
and  they  first  make  an  OfFer  of  it  to  them  as  a  Kindness : 
and  the  Moors  being  generally  desirous  to  trade,  frequently 
accept  of  it  almost  on  any  Terms :  but  should  they  be  un- 
willing, yet  dare  they  not  refuse,  for  fear  of  disobliging  the 
Danes,  who  are  Lords  of  the  Place.  In  this  Ship  I  found 
Mr.  Coppinger:  and  he  was  the  first  that  I  had  seen  of 
all  the  Company  that  left  me  at  the  Nicobar  Islands.  The 
next  Morning  we  filled  our  Water  and  weighed  again ;  the 
Dane  being  gone  a  little  before.  He  was  bound  to  Jihore, 
to  load  Pepper,  but  intended  to  touch  at  Malacca,  as  most 
Ships  do  that  pass  these  Streights.  He  also  sailed  better 
than  we,  and  therefore  left  us  to  follow  him. 

We  stood  on  yet  nearest  to  the  Sumatra  Shore,  till  we 
came  in  Sight  of  Pulo  Arii,  in  Lat.  3  d.  2  m.  N.  These 
are  several  Islands  lying  S.  E.  by  E.  Easterly  from  Pulo 
Verero  about  32  Leagues  distant.  These  Islands  are  good 
Marks  for  Ships  bound  thro'  the  Streights :  for  when  they 
bear  S.  E.  at  3  or  4  Leagues  Distance,  you  may  steer  away 
E.  by  S.  for  the  Malacca  Shore,  from  whence  you  then 
may  be  about  20  Leagues.  The  first  Land  you  will  sec  is 
Pulo  Parselore,  which  is  a  high  peeked  Hill  in  the  Country, 
on  the  Malacca  Coast :  which  standing  by  it  self  amidst  a 
low  Country,  it  appears  like  an  Island  though  I  know  not 
whether  it  is  really  one ;  for  it  stands  some  Miles  within 
the  Shoar  of  the  Continent  of  Malacca.  It  is  a  very 
remarkable  Hill,  and  the  only  Sea-mark  for  Seamen  to 
guide  themselves  through  certain  Sands  that  lye  near  the 
Main;  and  if  it  is  thick  hazy  Weather,  and  the  Hill  is 
obscur'd.  Pilots,  unless  they  are  very  knowing  in  the 
Soundings,  will  hardly  venture  in :  for  the  Channel  is  not 
above  a  League  wide,  and  there  are  large  Shoals  on  each 
Side.  These  Shoals  lye  ten  Leagues  from  Pulo  Arii,  and 
continue  till  within  2  or  3  of  the  Malacca  Shoar.  In  the 
Channel  there  is  12  or  14  Fathom  Water,  but  you  may 
keep  7  or  8  Fathom  on  either  Side ;  and  sounding  all  the 
Way,  you  may  pass  on  without  Danger. 

82 


J 


MALACCA   TOWN    AND   FORT  I 

Wc  had  a  good  Gale  at  West,  which  brought  us  in  A 
'Sight  of  Pulo  Pau-selore:  and  so  we  kept  sounding  till  we  *1 
e*me  within  the  Shear,  and  then  we  had  the  Town  of  I 
Malacca  about  1 8  Leagues  distant  from  us,  to  the  S.  E.  I 
and  by  E.  Being  shot  over  to  the  Malacca  Shore,  there  is  I 
good  wide  Channel  to  sail  in,  you  having  the  Shoals  on  I 
te  Side,  and  the  Land  on  the  other ;  to  which  last  you  I 
*y  come  as  nigh  as  you  see  convenient,  for  there  is  Water  I 
snough,  and  good  anchoring.  The  Tide  runs  pretty  I 
■trong  hor;  the  Flood  sets  to  the  Eastward,  and  the  Ebb  I 
to  the  West:  and  therefore  when  there  is  little  Wind,  and  I 
Ships  cannot  stem  the  Tide,  they  commonly  anchor.  But  I 
■c  being  in  with  the  Malacca  Shoar,  had  a  westerly  Wind,  | 
Vhich  brought  us  before  Malacca  Town,  about  the  Middle 
of  October;  and  here  1  first  heard  that  King  William  and  I 
Queen  Mary  were  crowned  King  and  Queen  of  England.  J 
The  Dane  that  left  us  at  Pulo  Verero  was  not  yet  arrived :  I 
§or,  as  wc  afterwards  understood,  they  could  not  find  the  I 
Vay  diro'  the  Sands,  but  were  forced  to  keep  along  without  I 
lliera,  and  fetch  a  great  Compass  about,  which  retarded 
lieir  Passage. 

Malacca  is  a  pretty  large  Town,  of  about  2  or  300 
'amilies  of  Dutch  and  Portuguese,  many  of  which  are  a 
ffiUt  Breed  between  those  Nations.  There  arc  also  many 
of  the  Native  Malayans  inhabiting  in  small  Cottages  on  the 
Skirts  of  the  Town.  The  Dutch  Houses  are  built  with 
Stone,  and  the  Streets  are  wide  and  straight,  but  not  paved. 
:  the  North  West  of  the  Town  there  is  a  Wall  and  Gate 
pass  in  and  out :  and  a  small  Fort  always  guarded  with 
'  iiers.  The  Town  stands  on  a  level  low  Ground,  close  I 
the  Sea.  The  Lind  on  the  Backside  of  the  Town 
«enii  to  be  morassy,  and  on  the  West-side,  without  the 
WaJl,  there  arc  Gardens  of  Fruits  and  Herbs,  and  some 
fur  Dutch  Houses  :  but  that  Quarter  is  chiefly  the  Habita-  | 
liaa  of  the  Malayans.  On  the  East-side  of  the  Town,  1 
tltse  »  a  small  River  which  at  a  Spring-Tide  will  admit 
4BiaII  Barks  tn  enter.  About  icx3  Paces  from  the  Sea 
is  a  Draw-bridge,  which  leads  from  the  midst  of  the 
Tovn  to  a  strong  Fort,  built  on  the  East-side  of  the  River.      J 

83  J 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  This  is  the  chief  Fort,  and   is  built  on  a  low  level 

>689  Ground,  close  by  the  Sea,  at  the  Foot  of  a  little  steep  Hill. 
Its  Form  is  semicircular,  according  to  the  natural  Position 
of  the  adjacent  Hill.  It  fronts  chiefly  to  the  Sea,  and 
having  its  Foundation  on  firm  Rocks,  the  Walls  are  carried 
up  to  a  good  Height,  and  of  a  considerable  Thickness. 
The  lower  Part  of  it  is  washed  by  the  Sea  every  Tide.  On 
the  Back  of  the  Hill,  the  Land  being  naturally  low,  there 
is  a  very  large  Moat  cut  from  the  Sea  to  the  River,  which 
makes  the  whole  an  Island ;  and  that  back  Part  is  stocka- 
doed  round  with  great  Trees,  set  up  an  end  :  so  that  there 
is  no  entring  when  once  the  Draw-bridge  is  haled  up.  On 
the  Hill,  within  this  Fort  stands  a  small  Church  big  enough 
to  receive  all  the  Towns-people,  who  come  hither  on 
Sundays  to  hear  Divine  Service :  and  on  the  Main,  beyond 
the  Fort,  the  Malayans  are  also  seated  close  by  the  Sea. 

The  first  Europeans  who  settled  here  were  the  Portu- 
guese ;  They  also  built  the  great  Fort :  but  whether  they 
moted  round  the  Hill,  and  made  an  Island  of  that  Spot  of 
Ground,  I  know  not,  nor  what  Charges  have  been  bestowed 
on  it  since  to  make  it  defenceable ;  nor  what  other  Altera- 
tions have  been  made;  but  the  whole  Building  seems  to 
be  pretty  ancient,  and  that  Part  of  it  which  fronts  to  the 
Sea,  was  in  all  Probability,  built  by  the  Portuguese;  for 
there  are  still  the  Marks  of  the  Conquerours  shot  in  the 
Walls.  It  is  a  Place  so  naturally  strong,  that  I  even 
wonder  how  they  could  be  beaten  out :  but  when  I  consider 
what  other  Places  they  then  lost,  and  their  Mismanage- 
ments, I  am  the  less  surprized  at  it.  The  Portuguese  were 
the  first  Discoverers  by  Sea  of  the  East-Indies,  and  had 
thereby  the  Advantage  of  Trade  with  these  rich  Eastern 
People,  as  also  an  Opportunity,  thro'  their  Weakness,  to 
settle  themselves  where  they  pleased.  Therefore  they  made 
Settlements  and  Forts  among  them  in  divers  Places  of 
India,  as  here  for  one :  and  presuming  upon  the  Strength 
of  their  Forts,  they  insulted  over  the  Natives ;  and  bemg 
grown  rich  with  Trade,  they  fell  into  all  Manner  of  Loose- 
ness and  Debauchery ;  the  usual  Concomitant  of  Wealth, 
and  as  commonly  the  Fore-runner  of  Ruin.     The  Portu- 

84 


MOORS    AND   CHINESE    MERCHANTS 


:h»  Place,  by  Report,  made 


;  of  I 


Native 
Women  «t  their  Pleasure,  whether  Virgins  or  married  '^ 
Women;  such  as  they  liked  they  took  without  Controul ; 
end  it  is  probable,  they  as  tittle  restrained  their  Lust  in 
other  Places;  for  the  Breed  of  them  is  scattered  all  over 
India  ;  neither  arc  there  any  People  of  more  different  Com- 
plexions than  of  thai  Race,  even  from  the  Coal-black  to 
a  light  Tawncy.  These  Injuries  exasperated  the  Native 
Malayans  here  who  joyning  with  the  Dutch,  as  1  havu  been 
"nformed,  found  Means  to  betray  to  them  their  insolent 
Masters  the  Portuguese :  than  whom  there  are  not  a  more 
'spicabtc  People  now  in  all  the  Eastern  Nations:  and  of 
1  they  once  possest,  (hey  have  now  only  Goa  left,  of  any 
tec  of  Consequence.  The  Dutch  are  now  Masters  of 
t  of  the  Places  they  were  once  possest  of;  and  particu- 
rly  this  of  Malacca. 

Malacca   is   a   Place  of  no  great  Trade,  yet   there  are 

tevcral    Moors   Merchants   always   residing    here.       These 

have  Shops  of  Wares,  such  as  come  from  Surrat,  and  the 

Coast  of  CiiTomsndel  and  Bengal.     The  Chinese  also  arc 

voted  here,  who  bring  the  Commodities  of  their  Country 

hitho*,  especially  Tea,  Sugar-candy,  and  other  Sweet-meats. 

Some  of  ihcm  keep  Tea-houses,  where  for  a.  Stiver,  a  Man 

has  near  a  Pint  of  Tea,  and  a  little  Porrcnger  of  Sugar- 

caady,  or   other  Sweet-meats,    if  he    pleases.     Others   of 

them  arc  Butchers:  their  chief  Flesh  is  Pork,  which  you 

may  have  very  reasonably,  either  fresh  or  salted  :  Neither 

■  yoo  dented  to  take  any  particular  Piece,  but  they  will 

I  Piece  at  one  Place,  and  the  like  at  another,  either  fat 

lean,    as   you    would    have    it.      Others   among    these 

hinesc   are  Trades-people ;   and    they  arc  all   in  general 

TV  industrious,  but  withal  extraordinary  Gamesters :  and 

'  tbcy  can  get  any  to  play  with  them,  all   Bu^^incss  must 

^bmtt  to  that. 

Thb  Town  is  plentifully  stored  with  Fish  also.     When 
Fishermen  come  in,   they  all   resort  to  a  Place  built 
xU    for    the    Sale    of    them.     There    arc    Soldiers 
waitiiw,  who  take  the  best  for  the  Officers  of  the  Fort ; 
•bflho-    they  pay  for  it,  or    that  'tis  a  Toll  of  Custom 
>5 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AST.  belonging  to  the  Governor  I  know  not ;  but  after  they 
'^  are  served^  the  rest  are  sold  to  any  who  will  buy.  The 
manner  of  selling  is  thus:  The  Fish  which  every  Man 
brings  in  is  sorted,  yet  all  sold  by  the  Lump  at  once,  in 
the  manner  of  an  Outcry  or  Auction,  but  not  by  raising, 
but  lowering  the  Price:  for  there  is  one  appointed  for 
this  Sale,  who  sets  the  first  Price  higher  than  the  Value  of 
the  Fish,  and  falls  by  Degrees,  till  the  Price  seems  reason- 
able :  then  one  or  other  buys.  But  these  first  Bargains  are 
commonly  bought  by  the  Fish-wives,  who  retail  them  out 
again.  Oysters  are  in  great  Plenty  here,  and  very  good  when 
they  are  salt ;  but  sometimes  they  are  fresh  and  unsavory. 

As  for  other  Provisions,  their  Rice  is  brought  to  them 
from  abroad.  Such  Fruits  as  they  have  are  much  the 
same  as  I  have  already  described  and  are  proper  to  the 
Climate,  as  Plantains,  Bonanoes,  Pine-apples,  Oranges, 
Water-melons,  Pumple-noses,  Mango's,  &c.  but  these  arc 
only  in  their  Gardens,  in  no  great  Plenty ;  and  the  Country 
is  all  covered  with  Wood,  like  one  Forest :  and  most  of 
our  Walking-Canes  used  in  England,  are  brought  from 
thence.  They  have  also  a  few  Cattle,  Bullocks,  and 
Horses,  &c.  having,  but  little  Pasturage,  but  good  Store  of 
tame  Fowl,  Ducks,  and  Poultry.  The  principal  Person  in 
the  Town  is  the  Shabander,  a  Dutch  man,  next  in  Power 
to  the  Governour,  who  lives  in  the  Fort,  and  meddles  not 
with  Trade,  which  is  the  Shabander*s  Province,  who  seems 
to  be  chiefly  concerned  about  the  Customs  of  Goods. 

This  Town  has  no  great  Trade,  by  what  I  could  see, 
but  it  seems  to  be  designedly  built  to  command  the  Passage 
of  Shipping,  going  this  way  to  the  more  Eastern  Nations. 
Not  but  that  Ships  may  pass  far  enough  out  of  reach  of 
their  Cannon ;  but  Guard-Ships  belonging  to  the  Town, 
and  lying  in  the  Road,  may  hinder  others  from  passing. 
How  the  Portuguese  managed  their  AfFairs  I  know  not : 
but  the  Dutch  commonly  keep  a  Guard-ship  here ;  and  I 
have  been  told  they  require  a  certain  Duty  of  all  Vessels 
that  pass  this  way,  the  English  only  excepted :  for  all 
Ships  touch  at  this  Place,  especially  for  Wood,  Water,  and 
Refreshment. 

86 


MALAYANS  PROVOK£D  BY  THE  DUTCH 

Two  days  after  our  Arrival  here,  the  DanishiShip  came  av. 
also  to  an  Anchor ;  but  reporting  that  they  were  bound  to  '*^9 
Jihorc,  to  lade  Pepper,  the  Dutch  told  them  it  was  but  in 
Twn  for  them  ro  seek  a  Trade  there ;  for  that  the  King  of 
Jihorc,  had  agreed  with  the  Dutch  to  trade  only  with 
them;  and  that  to  secure  that  Trade,  they  had  a  Guard- 
ship  lying  there.  I  had  this  Account  from  the  Surgeon, 
Mr.  Coppingcr,  who  seemed  a  little  concerned  at  it :  be- 
cause when  he  told  me  this,  he  could  not  tell  whether  they 
thould  proceed  thither  or  no;  but  they  did  go  thither, 
and  found  all  this  a  Sham,  and  traded  there  to  their  own 
and  the  Natives  Satisfaction,  as  he  told  me  the  next  time  1 
met  him.  This  of  Jihore  being  but  a  small  Kingdom  on 
the  nunc  Malacca  Coast,  'tis  not  of  Strength  sufficient  to 
resist  the  Power  of  the  Dutch  :  neither  could  it  benefit 
the  Dutch  to  take  it,  should  they  attempt  It ;  for  the 
People  would  pobably  forsake  it,  and  it  would  be  too 
great  a  Charge  for  the  Dutch  to  settle  it  themselves.  And 
therefore  they  only  endeavour  to  ingross  the  Pepper  Trade; 
and  i(  is  probable  enough  that  the  Dutch  might  sometimes 
keep  a  Guard-ship  there,  as  they  do  at  other  Places,  parti- 
uUrly  at  Queda,  Pulo  Dinding,  &c.  For  where  there  is 
Dy  Trade  to  be  had,  yet  not  sufficient  to  maintain  a 
rtory ;  for  where  there  may  not  be  a  convenient  Place 
1  build  a  Fort,  so  as  to  secure  the  whole  Trade  to 
elves,  they  send  their  Guard-ships,  which  lying  at 
Mouth  of  the  Rivers,  deter  Strangers  from  coming 
hither,  and  keep  the  petty  Princes  in  awe  of  them.  They 
commonly  make  a  Shew  as  if  they  did  this  out  of  Kindness 
to  those  People ;  yet  most  of  them  know  otherwise,  but 
dare  not  openly  resent  it.  This  probably  causes  so  many 
petty  Robberies  and  Piracies  as  are  committed  by  the 
Mibyins  oa  this  Coast.  The  Malayans,  who  inhabit  on 
both  sida  the  Streights  of  Malacca,  are  in  general  a  bold 
People,  and  yet  I  do  not  find  any  of  them  addicted  to 
Robbery,  but  only  the  pilfering  poorer  Sort,  and  even  these 
Kverely  punished  among  the  trading  Malayans,  who  love 
Trade  and  Property.  But  being  thus  provokeil  by  the 
Dutch,  and  hindred  of  a  free  Trade  by  their  Guard-ships, 
87 


CAPTAIN    DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  it  is  probable,  they  therefore  commit  Piracies  themselves, 
1689  Qj.  connive  at  and  incourage  those  who  do.  So  that  the 
Pirates  who  lurk  on  this  Coast,  seem  to  do  it  as  much  to 
revenge  themselves  on  the  Dutch,  for  restraining  their 
Trade,  as  to  gain  this  way  what  they  cannot  obtain  in  way 
of  Traffick. 

But  to  return  to  our  Concerns  here.  I  have  said 
already,  that  we  had  only  three  or  four  hundred  Pound  of 
Opium  in  Goods,  the  rest  was  in  Money  to  the  Value  of 
2000  Dollars  in  the  whole :  but  we  did  not  pretend  that 
we  came  hither  purposely  to  trade,  but  that  finding  our 
Vessel  unfit  for  the  Sea,  we  put  in  here  to  mend  and  repsdr 
her.  Leave  was  granted  us  for  this;  and  I  prepared  to 
hale  our  Vessel  ashore,  at  the  West-end  of  the  Town,  not 
far  from  the  small  Fort.  It  is  there  soft  Oazy  Ground, 
near  a  Mile  off  Shore,  and  it  deepens  very  leisurely,  being 
Shole  Water  just  by  the  Shore ;  and  when  the  Tide  goes 
out,  it  leaves  the  Oaz  dry  a  Quarter  of  a  Mile  from  the 
Shore :  but  a  Mile  from  Shore,  you  have  clean  Sand,  and 
about  four  Fathom  at  Low  Water.  Our  Vessel  floated  in 
close  to  the  Fort,  and  lay  nor  twenty  Yards  from  it,  and 
at  low  Water  it  sunk  down  into  the  Mud  :  that  we  could 
not  fit  the  After-part,  as  I  would  have  done.  Opium, 
which  is  much  used  by  the  Malayans  in  most  Places,  was  a 
great  Commodity  here  at  this  Time :  but  it  is  prohibited 
Goods,  and  therefore  tho'  many  asked  for  it,  we  were  shy 
of  having  it  too  openly  known  that  we  had  any.  But  in 
short  Mr.  Coventry  found  a  Customer,  and  they  found 
means  to  get  it  ashore,  while  the  Soldiers  of  the  Fort  were 
at  Dinner.  The  Customer  was  a  Dutch  Man ;  and  the 
Price  he  was  to  pay  for  it  was  as  much  as  he  was  worth : 
and  finding  it  to  be  naught,  he  would  have  been  off  his 
Bargain ;  and  when  Mr.  Coventry  would  not  release  him, 
he  absconded.  But  Mr.  Coventry  having  an  Interest  in  the 
Shabander,  he  compell'd  the  Man's  Wife  to  pay  for  the 
Opium,  under  the  Name  of  Gold ;  for  so  Mr.  Coventry 
call'd  it.  The  Shabander  chid  Mr.  Coventry  for  smuggling 
with  an  Inferiour,  when  he  might  have  done  it  better  with 
him ;    but  stood   his  Friend   in    compelling  the  Woman, 

88 


H  HARD   BARGAIN— RATTAN   CABLES  ■ 

^BDUgh    unjustly,    to    pay    for   the   Opium.       1    saw    this    aHi' 

^Batch-man  on  board  his  own  Vessel,  when  he  had  bought  '^ 

^Bm  Opium,  and  he  was  very  pensive  and  sad.     He  had  a 

^Tiretty  fine  House  without  the  Gates,  and  a  Garden  which  . 

maintained  his  Family  with  Pot-Herbs,  Sallading,and  Fruits,  J 

bniJc*  some  for  the  Market.     This  was  managed  by  his  I 

^|Wifc,  and  he  himself  had  two  Sloops,  and  either  imployed  I 

Hmm  in  Trading  among  the  Malayans  for  Pepper,  carrying  I 

Ifcefn  such  Commodities  as  they  wanted,  especially  Opium,  I 

*ar  by  hiring  himself  and  Sloop  to  the  Dutch   East-India  ' 

Company,  to  go  whither  they  would  send  him.     It  was  not 

loTg  since  he  had  been  at  the  Spice  Islands  with  Rice,  which 

he  y>ld  at  a  profiublc  Rate :  but  he  told  me   he  was  not  . 

sufft-ed  to  bring  any  Spice  from  thence,  except  eight  or  | 

oen    K-und  for  his  own    spending ;    neither  was  there  so  I 

much  t'ofit  thai    way  for  him,  as  by  trading  at   Home  I 

^mong  the  Malayans,  cither  on  the  Coast  of  Malacca  or  I 

-■amatra.      For  though  he  and   other  free  Men  are   not  I 

iffirred  to  trade  for  themselves  to  any  Places  where  the  I 

company  have  Factories,  or  Guard-ships,  yet  they  could  I 

Tind  Trade  enough  nearer  Home,  and  by  this  Trade  the  I 

hreemen  of  Malacca  pick  up  a  good  Livelihood.     It  was  J 

>io    [his  Home  Trade  that  he  was  now  bound,  and   the  ■ 

ijrkum  had  hecn  very  beneficial  to  him,  had  it  been  good  :  I 

t*ut  be  went  away  and  ordered  his  Wife  not  to  pay  for  it,  I 

but   left    Mr.   Coventry  to   uke  it    again ;    and    upon   the  I 

Shafaandcr'k  com[Klling  her  to  take  it  and   pay  for  it,  she  I 

complained  they  were  utterly  undone,  for  the  Opium,  when  1 

It  came  to  be    examined  was  really  very  bad,  and  worth  1 

little  or  nothing.  ' 

Here   Mr.  Coventry  bought   Iron-Bars,  Arack,  Canes, 
lad  Rattans,  wherewith  we  loaded  our  Vessel,  which  was 
I      now  set  afloat  again.     The  Dutch  brought  most  of  our 

[_Goods  aboard,  atwd  were  more  kind   than   I  expected,  for  j 

icy  had  not  uicd  to  trade  with  us,  and  I  believe  the  News  I 

our    Revolution   in   England    had  sweetened   them  ;  for  ■ 

ofwn    drank    the     Konings     Health     with     us    very 

rtily.      While  we  were  here  we  made  two  new  Cables  of 

each  of   them    four  Inches  about.     Our  Captain 

89  J 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AN.  bought  the  Rattans,  and  hired  a  Chinese  to  woiiL  them, 
'^  who  was  very  expert  at  making  such  wooden  Cables. 
These  Cables  I  found  serviceable  enough  after,  in  mooring 
the  Vessel  with  either  of  them ;  for  when  I  carried  out  the 
Anchor,  the  Cable  being  thrown  out  after  me,  swam  like 
G>rk  in  the  Sea ;  so  that  I  could  see  when  it  was  tight, 
which  we  cannot  so  well  discern  in  oiu-  Hemp  Cables,  whose 
Weight  sinks  them  down :  nor  can  we  carry  them  out  but  by 
placing  two  or  three  Boats  at  some  Distance  asunder,  to 
buoy  up  the  Gible,  while  the  Long-Boat  rows  out  the 
Anchor.  To  conclude  with  Malacca,  oiu-  Goods  being  all 
aboard,  we  filfd  our  Water ;  and  got  all  in  a  Readiness  for 
our  Departure  back  again. 


90 


CHAP.    IX 

Tif  4»tk»r  Jfparti  /rwn  Malutca.  Thty  Use  a  Yard,  and  rtlurn  I 
rrfit,  Th*jf  ul  tut  again,  and  run  en  a  Shale,  hut  gel  iff  with  the 
FU»d.     PhU   Sampling,     They  lose  their  Mfzm-yard,  and  put 

PimM  Pmit  Dinding.  The  Jttand  and  Fart  described ;  The  oppasite 
Cma.  Tmtaiug,  a  Sort  »f  Tin>  The  Enmity  between  the  Dutch 
hirtf  and  the  Malayan)  en  the  Caoil.  A  Rencounter  with  them. 
They  /eav*  Pula  Dinding  and  arrive  at  Aehtn.  The  Escape  cf 
a^iu  EigSth  Priioneri  out  of  Bengal,  The  Author  sets  out  again 
frun  Aihin^  and  arrives  at  Fort  St.  George.  Its  pleaiant  Prospect, 
He  f*»  iheKe  It  Bencsuh  in  Sumatra.  Its  sight  at  Sea.  Point  of 
SiUaimr.  The  SituatUn  of  Bencouli,  Houses,  Ifealher,  Soil,  Fruits, 
Jnisitah,  and  Inhabitants.  The  Pepper  Trade  here  and  elsewhere, 
Tht  frit  SettUment  of  the  English  here.  The  Fort,  and  Usage  of 
tlu  Nmtrves.     The  Comlufion  of  the  Supplement. 


rE  departed  frnm  Malacca  towards  Achin  about  an. 
the  Middle  of  November  1689.  Mr.  Coven-  "689 
try  being  weary  of  Captain  Minchin's  Com- 
pany, had  bought  a  small  Vessel  of  7  or  8 
^utft,  and  laded  her  also  with  the  same  Kind  of  Goods. 
.  he  commanded  himself,  having  a  Portuguese  Pilot, 
I  3  or  4  Mariners  under  him,  and  we  sec  out  both  Ships 
I  Company  together.  Wc  had  now  in  Captain  Minchin's 
nf  bat  2  white  Men,  the  Captain  and  i,  the  Boatswain 
ang  gone  with  Mr.  Coventry;  but  we  took  in  as  a 
Pancnger  one  Mr.  Richards  an  Englishman,  who  having 
iatdy  marriod  ■  Dutch  Woman  at  Malacca,  came  aboard 
ta  with  ber,  to  go  as  Passengers  to  Achin  with  us. 

Wt  had  I  Land-Wind  in  the  Morning  and  about 
cleren  a  Oock  had  the  Wind  at  N.  W.  a  pretty  strong 
GUe :  and  at  rwelvc  our  Fore-yard  broke  in  the  Middle. 
We  made  sigoi  to  Mr.  Covcntr)-  tu  bear  down  to  us ;  who 


^ 


9' 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN-  weighing  before  was  a  Mile  to  Windward  of  us;  but  he 
'^^j'  kept  on,  fearing  to  return,  as  having  bought  his  Ship  there 
bv  Stealth  :  and  we  therefore  returned  alone  into  Malacca 
Road.  As  soon  as  we  anchcHied,  Mr.  Richards  was  sent 
ashore  to  buy  a  new  Yard ;  I  gave  him  the  Length  and 
Bigness.  It  was  Evening  before  he  came  aboard  again,  and 
he  brought  aboard  an  old  Yard  much  too  big  and  too 
long  for  us.  This  Piece  I  shcHtned  and  shaped  to  my 
Mind,  and  by  twelve  a  Clock  at  Night,  had  it  fixed  and 
slung,  rigg*d  and  the  Sail  bent  to  it. 

Then  we  weighed  again  having  a  small  Land  Wind; 
but  the  Tide  of  Flood  was  against  us,  and  drove  us  to  the 
Eastward.  When  the  Ebb  came  we  jogg'd  on,  and  got 
about  three  Leagues,  anchoring  when  the  Flood  came, 
because  the  Winds  were  against  us.  Thus  we  continued 
plying  with  the  Ebb,  and  anchoring  every  Flood,  till  we 
came  to  Pulo  Parselore,  where  the  Captain  told  me  he  would 
not  go  out  the  same  way  we  came  in,  as  I  would  have 
persuaded  him,  but  kept  the  Malacca  Shore  aboard,  and 
past  within  the  Sholes.  But  in  a  few  Hours  after  we  ran 
upon  a  Shole,  driven  on  it  by  the  Tide  of  Flood,  which 
here  set  to  the  Eastward,  tho'  by  our  reckoning  it  should 
have  been  half  Ebb,  and  the  Flood  should  have  set  West- 
ward, as  we  had  it  all  the  rest  of  the  way  from  Malacca: 
but  the  Sholes  probably  caused  some  whirling  about  of  the 
Tide.  However,  the  Sand  we  were  stuck  upon  was  not 
above  lOO  Yards  in  Circumference,  and  the  Flood  being 
rising  we  waited  the  Time  of  high  Water,  and  then  drove 
over  it,  having  sent  our  Boat  to  discover  how  the  Sholes 
lay,  while  our  Ship  was  a-ground :  Mr.  Richards  all  the 
while  being  in  great  Fear,  lest  the  Malayans  should  come 
off  in  their  Boats  and  attack  the  Vessel. 

We  were  now  afloat  again,  and  soon  got  without  all  the 
Sholes :  yet  we  did  not  stand  over  towards  Sumatra,  but 
coasted  along  nearest  the  Malacca  Shore,  it  being  now 
most  proper  for  us  so  to  do ;  yet  for  having  the  Winds 
westerly,  we  could  not  have  beat  under  the  other  Shore. 
2  or  3  Days  after  this  we  had  sight  of  some  Islands  called 
Pulo  Sambilong,  which  in  the  Malayan  Language  signifies 

92 


POLO   DINDING— THE    FORT 

nine  Iilimls  t}it:rc  being  so  many  of  them,  !>nng  scattering 
H  uDSfual  Distances  from  each  other.  It  was  near  one  of  '^ 
tbcK  Islands,  that  Captain  Minchln  in  a  former  Voyage 
w»  like  to  lose  his  Hand  by  a  Prick  with  a  Cai-fishes  Fin, 
u  I  tuvc  said  tn  my  former  Vol.  p.  172,  and  tho*  his 
Hand  was  cured,  yet  he  has  lost  the  use  of  it  ever  since ; 
lai  a  never  likely  to  regain  it  more. 

\Vc  stood  in  pretty  near  the  Shore,  in  Hopes  to  gain  a 
froc  Land  Wind.  About  ten  a  Clock  the  Land  Wind 
a«  off,  a  gentle  Breeze,  and  wc  coasted  along  the  Shore. 
But  1  imall  Tornado  coming  off  from  the  Shore  about 
Mitbighi,  we  broke  our  Mizcn  Yard,  and  being  near  a 
Dmch  Island  called  I'ulo  Dinding,  wc  made  in  for  ii,  and 
aadurcd  there  the  Night  ensuing,  and  found  there  a 
Owch  Sloop,  mann'd  with  about  thirty  Soldiers,  at  an 
uuhoe. 

Thii  is  a  small  Island  lying  so  nigh  the  Main,  that 
.Ship*  [asstng  by  cannot  know  it  to  b<j  an  Island.     It    is 

Getty  high  Land  and  well  watered  with  Brooks.  The 
(Mild  is  blackish,  deep  and  fat  in  the  lower  Ground  :  but 
the  HilU  arc  tomcwhat  rocky,  yet  in  general  very  woody. 
The  Trees  are  of  divers  Sorts,  many  of  which  are  good 
Timber,  and  large  enough  for  any  Use.  Here  are  also 
lome  good  for  Masts  and  Yards;  they  l)eing  naturally 
fight,  yet  tough  and  serviceable.  There  is  good  Riding 
•a  the  East-stdc.  between  the  Island  and  the  Main.  You 
nay  cuOK  in  with  the  Sea  Breeze,  and  go  out  uith  a  Land 
'A'ind,  there  is  Water  enough,  and  a  secure  Harbour. 

The  Dutch,  who  arc  the  only  Inhabitants,  have  a  Fort 

.0    ihc  Kaat-side,  close  by  the  Sea,  in  a  Bending  of  the 

md,  which  makes  a  small  Cove  for  Ships  to  anchor  in. 

:  Fort  is  built  4  square,  without  Flankers  or  Bastions, 

r  a  House:  every  Si^uare  is  about  ten  or  twelve  Yards. 

r  WalU  arc  of  a  good  Thickness,  made  of  Stone,  and 

'   '  up  to  a  good  Heighth,  of  about  thirty  Foot,  and 

i  over  Head    like  a  dwelling  House.     There  may 

r  about  twelve  or  fourteen  Guns  in  it,  some  looking  out 

it  every  Square.     These  Guns  are  mountetl    on  a  strong 

FUtftrm,  made  within  the  Walls,  about  sixteen  Foot  high 

93 


J 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  and  there  are  Steps  on  the  Outside  to  ascend  to  the  Docm* 
^^^  that  opens  to  the  Platform,  there  being  no  other  way  into 
the  Fort.  Here  is  a  Governour  and  about  twenty  or  thirty 
Soldiers,  who  all  lodge  in  the  Fort.  The  Soldiers  have 
their  Lodging  in  the  Platform  among  the  Guns,  but  the 
Governour  has  a  fair  Chamber  above  it,  where  he  lies  with 
some  of  the  Officers.  About  a  hundred  Yards  from  the 
Fort  on  the  Bay  by  the  Sea,  there  is  a  low  timbered  House, 
where  the  Governour  abides  all  the  Day  Time.  In  this 
House  there  were  two  or  three  Rooms  for  their  Use,  but 
the  chiefest  was  the  Governour's  Dining-Room.  This 
fronted  to  the  Sea,  and  the  End  of  it  looked  towards  the 
Fort.  There  were  two  large  Windows  of  about  seven  or 
eight  Foot  square ;  the  lower  part  of  them  about  four  or 
five  Foot  from  the  Ground.  These  Windows  were  wont 
to  be  left  open  all  the  Day,  to  let  in  the  refreshing  Breeze ; 
but  in  the  Night,  when  the  Governour  withdrew  to  the 
Fort,  they  were  closed  with  strong  Shutters,  and  the  Doors 
made  fast  till  the  next  day.  The  Continent  of  Malacca 
opposite  to  the  Island,  is  pretty  low  champion  Land, 
cloathed  with  lofty  Woods;  and  right  against  the  Bay 
where  the  Dutch  Fort  stands,  there  is  a  navigable  River 
for  small  Craft. 

The  product  of  the  Country  thereabouts,  besides  Rice 
and  other  Eatables,  is  Tutaneg,  a  sort  of  Tin ;  I  think 
courser  than  ours.  The  Natives  are  Malayans,  who,  as  I 
have  always  observed,  are  bold  and  Treacherous :  yet  the 
Trading  People  are  affable  and  courteous  to  Merchants. 

These  are  in  all  respects,  as  to  their  Religion,  Custom, 
and  manner  of  Living,  like  other  Malayans.  Whether 
they  are  governed  by  a  King  or  Raja,  or  what  other  manner 
of  Government  they  live  under,  I  know  not.  They  have 
Canoas  and  Boats  of  their  own,  and  with  these  they  fish 
and  traffick  among  themselves :  but  the  Tin  Trade  is  that 
which  has  formerly  drawn  Merchant  Strangers  thither.  But 
tho*  the  Country  might  probably  yield  great  quantities  of 
this  Metal,  and  the  Natives  are  not  only  inclinable,  but 
very  desirous  to  trade  with  Strangers,  yet  are  they  now 
restrained  by  the  Dutch,  who  have  monopolized  that  Trade 

94 


tOTANEG   A   SORT  OF  TIN 

p  tlieauctves.     It  was  probably  for  the  lucre  of  this  Trade 

t  the  Dutch  built  the  Fort  on  the  Island ;  but  this  not  ' 

ily  answering  their    ends,   by   reason    of  the    distance 

een  it  and  the  Rivers  mouth,  which  is  about  4  or  5 

Cla,  they  have  also  2  Guard-ship  commonly  lying  here, 

i  a  Sloop  with  20  or  30  armed  Men,  to  hinder  other 

binns   from  this  Trade.      For    this  Tutaneg  or  Tin  is 

\  nlaable  Commodity  in    the  Bay  of  Bengal,  and    here 

reasonably,  by  giving  other  Commodities  in  ex- 

je:  neither  is  this  Commodity  peculiarly  found  here- 

»cs,  but    farther   Northerly    also   on    the    Coast ;    and 

darly  in  the  Kingdom  of  Queda  there  is  much  of  it : 

E  Dutch  also  commonly  keep  a  Guard-ship,  and   have 

'c  Mme  fruitless  Essays  to  bring  that  Prince  and  his 

I  to  trade  only  with  them ;  but  here  over  against 

ding,  no  Strangers  dare  approach  to  Trade ;  neither 

Uj  any  Ship  come   in    hither  but  with    consent    of  the 

fetdi.     Thotfore  as  soon  as  we  came  to  an  Anchor  at 

It  East-end  of  the  Island,  we  sent  our  Boat  a-shore  to  the 

DOur,  to  desire  leave  to  wood,  water,  and  cut  a  new 

He  granted   our  request,   and   the   Boat   re- 

■gain    aboard,  and    brought    word    also    that    Mr. 

Ctmntry    touched    here    to    water,    and    went    out    that 

Mwning.      The  next  Morning  betimes  Captain  Minchin 

!  a-shore  to  cut  a  Yard.     I  applyed  my  self  to  the 

nur,  and  desired  one  of  his  Soldiers  might  go  with 

i  shew  me  the  best  Timber  for  that  use ;  but   he 

himself,  saying,  that    his  Soldiers  were  all  busie 

tit,  but  that  I  might  go  and  cut  any  Tree  that  1 

So  I  went  into  the  Woods,  where  I  saw  abundance 

'  fine  strait  Trees,  and  cut  down  such  a  one  as  I 

jht  fit  for  my  Turn :  and  cutting  it  of  a  just  length, 

1  fltiipping  off  the  Bark,  I  left  it  ready  to  be    fetcht 

,  and   iTtumed  to  the  Fort,  where  I  dined  with  the 

ico^our.       PreKntly   after    Dinner,   our    Captain,  with 

Richards  and    his  Wife   came    a-shorc,  and    I   went 

The  Governour  met  them  at  Landing,  and  con- 

1  them  into  the  Dining-Room  I  spoke  of,  where  they 

I  the  Governour  with  Punch,  made  of  Brandy,  Sugar, 

95 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  and  Lime-juice,  which  they  brought  with  them  from  aboard : 
'^  for  here  is  nothing,  not  so  much  as  the  Govemour  s  Drink, 
but  what  is  brought  from  Malacca:  no  Herbs  or  Fruit 
growing  here:  but  ail  is  either  fetched  from  Malacca,  or 
is  brought  by  the  Malayans  from  the  Main.  It  is  not 
through  any  sterility  in  the  Soil,  for  that  is  very  fat  and 
fruitful :  neither  is  it  through  laziness  of  the  Dutch,  for 
that  is  a  Vice  they  are  not  guilty  of:  but  it  is  from  a 
continual  fear  of  the  Malayans,  with  whom  tho'  they  have 
a  Commerce,  yet  dare  they  not  trust  them  so  far,  as  to  be 
ranging  about  the  Island  in  any  work  of  Husbandry,  or 
indeed  to  go  far  from  the  Fort,  for  there  only  they  are 
safe.  But  to  return  to  the  Governour,  he,  to  retalliate  the 
Captains  and  Mr.  Richard's  kindness,  sent  a  Boat  a  fishing, 
to  get  some  better  Entertainment  for  his  Guests,  than  the 
Fort  yielded  at  present.  About  four  or  five  a-Clock  the 
Boat  returned  with  a  good  Dish  of  Fish.  These  were 
immediately  drest  for  Supper,  and  the  Boat  was  sent  out 
again  to  get  more,  for  Mr.  Richards  and  his  Lady  to  carry 
aboard  with  them.  In  the  mean  time  the  Food  was  brought 
into  the  Dining-Room,  and  placed  on  the  Table.  The 
Dishes  and  Plates  were  of  Silver,  and  there  was  a  Silver 
Punch-Bowl  full  of  Liquor.  The  Governour,  his  Guests, 
and  some  of  his  Officers  were  seated,  but  just  as  they 
began  to  fall  to,  one  of  the  Soldiers  cried  out,  Malayans, 
and  spoil'd  the  Entertainment ;  for  immediately  the 
Governour,  without  speaking  one  word,  leapt  out  of  one 
of  the  Windows,  to  get  as  soon  as  he  could  to  the  Fort. 
His  Officers  followed,  and  all  the  Servants  that  attended 
were  soon  in  Motion.  Every  one  of  them  took  the 
nearest  way,  some  out  of  the  Windows,  others  out  of  the 
Doors,  leaving  the  3  Guests  by  themselves,  who  soon 
followed  with  all  the  haste  they  could  make,  without 
knowing  the  meaning  of  this  sudden  Consternation  of  the 
Governour  and  his  People.  But  by  that  time  the  Captain 
and  Mr.  Richards  and  his  Wife  were  got  to  the  Fort,  the 
Governour,  who  was  arrived  before,  stood  at  the  door  to 
receive  them.  As  soon  as  they  were  entred  the  Fort,  the 
Door  was  shut,  all  the  Soldiers  and  Servants  being  within 

96 


■  an  alarm    from   the   MALAYANS  | 

^■ready:    nor  was  any  Man  suffered    to   fetch    away  the    an. 
Victaals,  or  any  of  the  Plate :  but  they  fired  several  Guns  '^ 
to  give  notice  to  the  Malayans  thai  they  were  ready  for 
them;  but  none  of  them  came  on.     For  this  Uproar  was 
•ccasioncd  by  a  Malayan  Canoa  full  of  armed  Men  that  lay  I 

.itulliing  under  the  Island,  close  by  the  Shore :  and  when  I 

ux  Dutch  Boat  went  out  the    second    time    to   fish,  the  1 

MiUyins  set  on  them  suddenly,  and  unexpected,  with  their  I 

Crtsicu  and  Lances,  and  killing  one  or  two,  the  rest  leapt  I 

OTerbwrd,  and  got  away,  for  they  were  close  by  the  Shore ;  I 

tad  they  having  no  Arms  were  not  able  to  have  made  any  I 

miatncc.     It  was  about  a  Mile  from  the  Fort :  and  being  I 

luiJed.  every  one  of  them  made  what  haste  he  could  to  the 
i-iwi,  and  the  first  that  arrived  was  he  who  cried  in  that 
manner,  and  frighted  the  Governour  from  Supper.  Our 
&»i  was  at  this  time  a-shorc  for  water,  and  was  filling  it 
in  1  Mnall  Brook  by  the  Banquetting-house.     I  know  not  I 

■helher  our  Boats  Crew  took  notice  of  the  Alarm,  but  the 
Dutch  call'd  to  them ;  and  bid  them  make  haste  aboard, 
*)&ch  they  did ;  and  this  made  us  keep  good  watch  all 
N'igbl,  having  all  our  Guns  Inaden  and  primed  for  Service. 
Bui  it  rained  so  hard  all  the  night,  that  1  did  not  much  | 

'car  being  attack'd  by  any  Malayan ;  being  inform'd  by 
-■neof  our  Sea-men,  whom  we  took  in  at  Malacca,  that  the 
MiUyans  seldom  or  never  make  any  attack  when  it  rains.  i 

It  ii  what  1  had  before  observed  of  other  Indians,  both 
(■JSt  and  West  :  and  tho"  then  they  might  make  their 
Amcks  with  the  greatest  advantage  on  Men  arm'd  with 
Hind-guns,  yet  I  never  knew  It  practised  ;  at  which  I 
i»Te  wondered  ;  for  it  is  then  we  most  fear  them,  and  they 
'"'jbl  then  be  most  successful,  because  their  Arms,  which 
ft  usually  Lances  and  Cressets,  which  these  Malayans  had, 
:oul(t  not  be  damaged  by  the  Rain,  as  our  Guns  would  be. 
Bat  they  annot  endure  to  be  in  the  Rain  :  and  it  was  in  the 
Kreaing.  before  the  Rain  fell,  that  they  assaulted  the 
['-Ich  Beat.  The  next  Morning  the  Dutch  Sloop  weighed, 
■iweni  to  look  after  the  Malayans;  but  having  sailed 
■  -Jut  the  Island,  and  seeing  no  Enemies,  they  anchored 
■nin.      I  also  sent  Men  ashore  in  our  Boat  to  bring  off  the  I 

VOL    iJ.  97  o  I 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Mizen-yard  that  I  had  cut  the  Day  before :  But  it  was  so 
'^  heavy  a  kind  of  Timber,  that  they  could  not  bring  it  out 
of  the  Woods.  Giptain  Minchin  was  still  ashore,  and  he 
being  acquainted  with  it,  desired  the  Govemour  to  send  a 
Soldier,  to  shew  our  Men  what  Trees  were  best  for  our 
use :  Which  he  did^  and  they  presently  cut  a  small  Tree, 
about  the  bigness  and  length  of  that  which  I  cut,  and 
brought  it  aboard.  I  immediately  went  to  work,  and 
having  fitted  it  for  use,  bent  my  Sail,  and  hoised  it  up 
in  its  place.  In  the  Evening  Captain  Minchin  and  Mr. 
Richards  and  his  Wife  came  aboard,  having  staid  one 
Night  at  the  Fort ;  and  told  me  all  that  hapned  to  them 
ashore. 

We  now  waited  only  for  a  Land  Wind  to  carry  us  out 
The  former  part  of  the  Night  we  had  much  Rain,  with 
Thunder  and  Lightning  ;  but  no  Wind.  At  one  a-Clock 
we  had  a  small  Land  Wind,  and  got  up  our  Anchors.  We 
got  out  before  Day  clear  of  the  Island,  and  we  steered 
along  shore  to  the  Northward,  intending  to  keep  this 
shore  aboard  for  20  or  30  Leagues  farther,  if  the  Winds 
did  not  favour  us  ;  for  the  Sea  Winds  were  now  at  N.  W. 
This  Day  we  kept  near  the  shore,  and  the  Night  ensuing ; 
but  the  next  Day  the  Wind  coming  at  N.  and  N.  N.  E.  we 
stood  over  for  Sumatra,  and  the  next  Evening  we  past  by 
Diamond  Point :  And  the  Wind  coming  at  E.  N.  E.  wc 
got,  in  about  2  Days  more  to  Achin,  about  the  end  of 
November  1689. 

Here  we  found  Mr.  Coventry,  who  had  got  hither  2  or 
3  Days  before  us.  Captain  Minchin  went  ashore  with  his 
Passengers,  and  was  discharged  of  his  Command.  I  kept 
aboard  till  all  the  Goods  were  unladen,  and  then  lay 
ashore,  and  was  very  sick  for  a  Fortnight  of  a  kind  of 
Fever.  But  after  Christmas  I  was  sent  aboard  again,  by 
order  of  Mr.  Coventry,  who  had  then  bought  out  Mr. 
Dalton*s  and  Capt.  Tiler  s  Shares,  to  take  the  Charge  of 
the  Vessel,  which  he  had  then  laded  with  Pepper,  Cubebs 
(which  I  think  grow  somewhere  in  Sumatra)  and  Tutanegg, 
which  he  bought  of  an  English  Vessel  that  came  from 
Queda   to    Achin ;     and   with    these   he    had    also   some 

98 


THE   AUTHOR  SAILS   FROM   ACHIN 

■i  our  Mal»cc*  Cargo,  which  wc  kept  on  board,  viz.  ak. 
Rattwis  and  Walking-Cancs.  With  this  Car^o  we  were  ^^ 
bound  for  Fort  St.  George.  We  took  in  also  2  English 
Piisengcn,  who  had  escaped  out  of  Prison  in  the  Mogul's 
C'luntry.  The  one  bclong'd  to  the  Defence,  Capt.  Heath*s 
SVip,  which  I  came  home  to  England  in  afterwards ;  he 
»u  Pirncr  of  it :  the  other  was  a  Midshipman  in  the 
i^Ktai  jHa,  which  rctum'd  to  England  at  the  same  Time. 
But  during  our  War  with  the  Mogul  these  Ships  had  been 
:n  the  Bajr  of  Bengal,  to  fetch  away  our  Effects  from  the 
R.  rf  Hugly.  These  2  Men,  with  2  or  3  others,  went 
lihore  upon  some  Occasion,  and  were  taken  Prisoners 
t^  the  Mogul's  Subjects;  who  sent  them  a  great  way  up 
•T.Vi  the  Country,  where  they  were  kept  in  close  Custody, 
iTiA  often  ihreatned  with  Death.  The  old  Anabob,  or 
(iwtniQur  of  the  Province,  being  remov'd,  and  a  new  one 
coming  thither,  he  released  these  Men,  and  gave  them 
■ave  to  go  to  the  Sea-side,  where  finding  a  Dutch  Ship 
iwund  to  Bauvia,  these  2  and  one  more,  went  aboard  her, 
:ierest  getting  other  Passage:  But  she  meeting  with  that 
Ef^ish  Ship  coming  from  Queda,  which  brought  the 
Tutanc^  I  but  now  mentioned  to  Achin,  they  left  the 
Dutch  Ship,  and  went  to  Achin  with  the  other  English 
'  ^'okI;  and  those  2  were  now  for  going  with  us  to  Fort 
St  George. 

Twas  about  Ncw-ycare  Day,    1690,  that  wc  set  out 

I     in«i  Achin  again :  We  steered  away  toward  the  Nicobar 

■^hnds,  and   atmc    in    sight    of  that,  which    I    had    been 

^^■ncriy   set    ashore    upon.      But    leaving   it   on   our  Star- 

^^hrd,  Wc  ttood   more  Northerly   up  into  the  Bay ;  for  by 

^Hfc  Corentry  I  had  learnt  there  were  Northerly  and  North 

^^■uHy  Winds  in  the  Bay  at  this  time  of  Year.     We  stood 

WKkr  therefore  as  high  as  Pallacat ;  and  having  then  a  fair 

i^V  E.  Wind,  Wc  run  along  the  Coast  till  wc  came  before 

r  rt  St.  Gecrgc,  which  was  about  the  middle  of  January. 

1  was  much  pleased  with  the  beautiful   prospect  this 

ice  makes   off  at  Sea.     For  it   stands  in   a   plain  Sandy 

"t  of  Ground,   close  by  the  shore,  the  Sea   sometimes 

vxWiiog   its   Walls,  which|  are  of  Stone   and    high,  with 

~  99  ~ 


L. 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

An.  Half-Moons  and  Flankers,  and  a  great  many  Guns  mounted 
'^"^  on  the  Battlements :  so  that  what  with  the  Walls  and 
fine  Buildings  within  the  Fort,  the  large  Town  c^  Maderas 
without  it,  the  Pyramids  c^  the  English  Tombs,  Houses, 
and  Gardens  adjacent,  and  the  variety  c^  fine  Trees  scatter*d 
up  and  down,  it  makes  as  agreeable  a  Landskip  as  I  have 
any  where  seen. 

But  'tis  not  my  design  to  enter  into  a  Description  of  a 
place  so  well  known  to  my  Country-men  as  tlus  is.  It 
may  sufiice  to  have  mentioned  it;  and  that  after  some 
Months  stay  here,  and  meeting  with  Mr.  Moody  and  Jeoly 
the  Painted  Prince,  I  prepared  to  go  for  Sumatra  again ;  to 
Bencouli,  as  I  have  said  in  my  former  Vol.  p.  495.  I  set 
out  from  Fort  St.  Geoige  with  Captain  Howel  in  July  1 690, 
we  steered  a  pretty  way  along  the  Coast  of  Coromandel, 
before  we  stood  over  for  Sumatra;  and  then  made  the 
best  of  our  way  for  Bencouli.  I  have  in  that  Volume 
spoken  of  my  Arrival  there ;  but  having  given  no  account 
of  the  place,  I  shall  do  it  briefly  now,  and  so  shut  up  tins 
Supplement. 

Bencouli  lies  on  the  West  Coast  of  the  Island  of 
Sumatra,  in  about  4  d.  S.  Lat.  It  is  a  place  noted  enough 
at  Sea ;  by  Reason  of  a  high  slender  Hill  in  the  Country. 
It  has  a  small  Island  before  it  within  which  Ships  ride. 
The  Point  of  Sillabar  lies  2  or  3  Leagues  to  the  Southward 
of  it,  and  runs  out  farther  than  any  part  of  the  Shore, 
making  a  small  Bay  within  it.  Besides  these  marks,  when 
you  come  within  2  or  3  Leagues  of  the  Shore,  you'll  sec 
the  English  Fort  fronting  to  the  Sea,  which  makes  a  fine 
show :  On  the  N.  W.  of  the  Fort  is  a  small  River,  at  the 
Mouth  of  which  is  a  large  Store-house  to  put  Pepper  in. 
About  a  quarter  of  a  Mile  from  the  Sea  stands  a  small 
Indian  Village,  close  by  the  River,  on  the  same  side  that 
the  Fort  is  on,  and  but  a  small  distance  from  it.  The 
Houses  are  small  and  low,  all  built  on  Posts,  after  the 
Malayan  manner,  as  at  Mindanao  and  Achin ;  for  *tis  a 
Swamp  that  the  Town  stands  on :  But  the  Malayans 
usually  choose  to  build  in  such  low  places  near  Rivers,  for 
the  convenience  of  washing  themselves,  which  they  greatly 

100 


BENCOtJtl— WEATHER— SOIL 

ight   in;    as   'tis    indeed    a    part    of  their   Religion  as       

inomctans :  And  if  they  can,  they  will  have  thetr  Houses  '^ 
i  on  Po«5  over  the  River. 

■  Weather  here  is  none  of  the  pteasantcst.  There 
*n  great  Rains  chiefly  m  September,  October,  and 
November,  and  pretty  great  Heats.  But  when  the  Wind 
Hm  hard,  which  'twould  often  do,  the  Air  would  be 
drill:  And  the  Sea-breezes  in  fair  Weather  were  generally 
pretty  fresh  and  comfortable.  The  Land-winds  coming 
'KW  Swamps,  usually  brought  a  Stink  with  them.  'Tis  in 
gnitral  an  unhealthy  Place  ;  and  the  Soldiers  of  the  Fort 
^vt  ijckly  and  died  very  fast.  On  ihe  South  side  of  the 
t'oR  is  a  fair  champion  Savannah,  of  a  Mile  or  2  Square, 
olleni  Greenhii.  It  jM-oduces  long  thick  Grass:  The 
V  W.  part  of  it  fronts  the  Sea,  and  the  S.  E.  is  bounded 
»ith  lofty  Woods. 

The  Soil  of  this  0>untry  is  very  different,  according  to 
iaiilfemi  position:  For  within  Land  'tis  hilly,  yet  those 
Hilli  arc  clothed  with  Trees;  which  shews  it  to  be  fruitful 
I  awugh.  The  low  Lind,  near  the  River,  especially  near 
[  Ac  Sea,  i»  iwampy,  producing  nothing  but  Reeds,  or 
Braboes:  But  the  higher  Ground,  which  is  of  a  reasonable 
^eighth,  is  very  fruitful.  The  Mould  is  deep,  and  is 
nther  black  or  yellow ;  and  in  some  places  Clay ;  or  such 
Mould  as  is  very  proper  for  making  Bricks. 

The  Trees  in  the  WiKxis  are  mostly  large  bodied, 
«aight  and  tall :  They  arc  of  divers  sorts,  some  or  other 
■T  them  6t  for  any  uses.  The  Fruits  of  the  Country  are 
Tiuch  the  same  as  at  Achin  and  Malacca,  viz.  Limes, 
'.>ni)gcs.  Guava's,  Plantains,  Bonanoes,  Coco-Nuts,  Jacks, 
Uumns,  Mangoes,  Mangastans ;  Pomkins,  Pine-apples, 
and  Pepper.  The  Roots  are  Yams,  and  Potatoes;  Rice 
{TOWS  here  pretty  well  also;  but  whether  the  Natives  sow 
gh  for  their  own  spending  or  no,  I  know  not.  The 
:  Animals  arc  Buffaloes,  Bullocks,  Deer,  Wild  Hogs, 
upuics.  Guanoes,  Lizards,  &c.  The  tame  Fowls  are 
and  Dunghil  Fowls,  both  in  great  plenty.  The 
are  Parrots,  Parakitcs,  Pidgeons,  Turtle-Doves, 
t  ton  of  smaller  Birds. 
loi 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AS,  The  Natives  also!are  swarthy|lndian5^  like  thdr  Neigh- 

'^  boars  of  Achin.  They  are  slender,  straught,  active,  and 
industrious.  They  are  sodable  and  dearous  c^  Trade; 
but  if  they  are  affronted,  they  are  treacherous  and  revenge- 
ful. They  live  together  in  Towns,  and  speak  the  Malayan 
Language :  Conforming  themselves  in  their  Habit,  Food, 
and  Customs  to  other  Malayans;  who  are  all,  so  far  as 
I  learnt,  of  the  Mahometan  Religion.  There  are  some 
Mechanicks  among  them;  a  few  Smiths:  But  most  oi 
them  are  Carpenters,  and  let  themselves  out  to  hire  to  the 
English  at  the  Fort.  The  Hatchets  they  work  with  are 
such  as  they  use  at  Mindanao,  so  contrived  as  to  serve  also 
for  an  Adds.  Here  are  also  Fishermen,  who  get  a  liveli- 
hood by  Fishing ;  and  there  are  several  sorts  of  Fish  on 
the  Coast,  besides  plenty  of  Green  Turtle:  Such  of  the 
Malayans  as  live  near  the  English  Fort  are  usually  em- 
ployed in  the  East-India  Companies  Service,  to  work  for 
them :  but  the  Country  People  are  most  Husbandmen. 
They  plant  Roots,  Rice,  Pepper-bushes,  &c. 

Pepper  is  the  chief  vendible  CommocUty  in  this  Country, 
it  thrives  very  well  on  all  the  Coast;  but  the  greatest 
quantity  of  what  is  exported  from  hence,  is  either  brought 
down  this  River  out  of  the  Country,  or  fetched  from 
Sillabar,  or  other  places  bordering  on  the  Sea  in  small 
Vessels.  Pepper  grows  plenty  in  other  places  of  thb 
Island ;  as  at  Indrapore,  Pangasanam,  Jamby,  Bancalis,  &c. 
It  grows  also  on  the  Island  Java,  on  the  Coast  of  Malacca, 
Malabar,  Cochinchina,  &c.  The  Coast  of  Malabar  is  said 
to  produce  the  best ;  or  at  least  there  the  Natives  take 
most  care  to  have  the  best,  by  letting  it  grow  till  it  is  full 
ripe ;  for  which  reason  it  is  larger  and  fairer  than  here 
where  they  gather  it  too  soon,  to  avoid  losing  any :  for  as 
soon  as  it  grows  ripe  *tis  apt  to  shed,  and  fall  in  waste  to 
the  ground. 

It  was  the  Pepper  Trade  that  drew  our  English 
Merchants  to  settle  here.  For  after  Bantam  ^  was  lost,  our 
English,  who  were  wont  to  trade  thither  for  this  Sjrice, 

'  In  1683;   but  for  some  years  before,  the  Dutch  had  hindered  our 
merchants  in  the  English  factory  there. 

102 


PEPPER— ITS   GROWTH    AND  TRADE 

WOT  it  a  great|loss  to  regain  the  Pepper  Trade,  which  now    ailI 

wji  in  a  manner  fallen  with  the  other  sorts  of  Spice  into  '^ 

ibt  hands  of  the  Dutch :  tho'  the  Pepper  which  we  were 

»ccii  10  fetch  from  Bantam  did  not  all  grow  on  this  Island 

Jiu,  nor  perhaps  the  tenth  part  of  it ;  for  as  1  have  been 

•.fiformed  it  came  most  from  Sumatra,  particularly  from 

Bcncoftly,  and  the  adjacent  parts.     For  this  Reason  it  bc- 

homi  our  Merchants  to  get  an  Interest  here  to  prop  up 

their  declining   Trade.     Yet,   as    I    have    been    told,    the 

Kxcas  was  more  owing  to  the  Natives  of  this  place  than 

ibnuselves;    for  that  some  of  the  Kaja's  of  the  Country 

sea:  Ambassadors  to  Fort  St.  George  to  invite  the  English 

hitiier  to  take  possession,  before  the  Dutch  should  get  it; 

'  '  1  are  never  slack  to  promote  their  Interest,  and  were 

r  setting  out  on  the  same  design.     But  however  that 

i;  the  English  had  the  good  fortune  to  get  hither  first : 

igh  «>  narrowly,  that  the  Dutch  were  within  an  ace  of 

nting  them,  their  Ships  being  in  sight  before  our  Men 

(■shore.     But  the  Dutch  coming  thus  too  late,  were  put 

hf  thdr  designs;  for  the  English  immediately  got  ashore 

iomc  Guns,  and  stood  ready  to  defend  their  interest.    This 

night  happen  about  the  Year   1685,  as  I  was  informed; 

f'vr  they  told  me  it  was  5  or  6  Years  before  1  came  hither: 

ind    the   English   immediately    fortified    themselves.     The 

Fort  *  as  I  said  before,  fronts  to  the  Sea,  and  stands  about 

100  paces  from  the  River.     There  has  been  a  great  deal 

of  cost  bestowed  on  it,  but  to  little  purpose;  for  'tis  the 

most  trrcguUr  piece  1  ever  saw.     1  told  the  Governour  the 

best  my  was  to  new-model  it,  and  face  it  with  Stone  or 

Brick,  eitbcr  of  which  might  be  easily  had.     He  said  he 

'iked  my  Council,  but  being  saving  tor  the  Company,  he 

-ithcr  chose  to  repair  it,  by  the  making  some  Alterations : 


*  AJaaaia  Hamilton  tayi  thai  it  wi 
fc  umJ  Smm  WaIK  in  that  Country  ca 
«  at  the  Earth  »n  «>  fici^uent." 
TTic  Govetuor,  who 


3  called  Yurk  Fort ;  and  that 
iiioi  long  continue  firm,  because 
The  East  India  Company  paid 
aged  ihc  fort  so  "somly" 


4«HC  I>aiDfl«er'»  star,  *"  "oae  Mi.  Sowdonl*'  who  was  "not  very  fit 
te  that  Cfawn.  bKause  a(  his  intcmMmte  drinking.'  He  was  recalled 
yra^M  ts  HamilKw  aad  "citbtr  dyed  or  was  killed"  accordlnt;  to 
Dta^A  Mllar*"  Mnchuil.    Hamilton  addi  that  " another'  w-js  "sent 

103 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   but  Still  to  as  little  purpose,  for  'twas  all  made  ground,  and 
^^  having  no  facing  to  keep  it  up,  'twould  moulder  away 
every  wet  Season,  and  the  Guns  often  fall  down  into  the 
Ditches. 

What  was  possible  to  be  done  I  endeavoured  to  do 
while  I  was  there.  I  made  the  Bastions  as  regular  as  I 
could  upon  the  Model  they  were  made  by :  And  whereas 
the  Fort  was  designed  to  be  a  Pentagone,  and  there  were 
but  4  of  the  Bastions  made,  I  staked  out  ground  for  a  5  th, 
and  drew  a  Plan  of  it,  which  I  gave  the  Government ;  and 
had  I  staid  longer  I  should  have  made  up  the  other  Bastion  : 
but  the  whole  Plan  is  too  big  by  half  for  so  sorry  a  Garrison : 
and  the  best  way  of  mending  it,  is  to  demolish  all  of  it, 
and  make  a  new  one. 

The  Fort  was  but  sorrily  governed  when  I  was  there ; 
nor  was  there  that  care  taken  to  keep  a  fair  Correspondence 
with  the  Natives  in  the  Neighbourhood  as  I  think  ought  to 
be,  in  all  Trading  places  especially.  When  I  came  thither 
there  were  2  Neighbouring  Raja's  in  the  Stocks,  for  no 
other  Reason,  but  because  they  had  not  brought  down  to 
the  Fort  such  a  quantity  of  Pepper  as  the  Governour  had 
sent  for.  Yet  these  Raja's  rule  in  the  Country,  and  have 
a  considerable  number  of  Subjects ;  who  were  so  exasperated 
at  these  Insolencies,  that,  as  I  have  since  been  informed, 
they  came  down  and  assaulted  the  Fort,  under  the  Conduct 
of  one  of  these  Raja's.  But  the  Fort,  as  bad  as  it  is,  is 
Guard  enough  against  such  indifferent  Soldiers  as  they  are : 
who  tho'  they  have  Courage  enough,  yet  scarce  any  Arms 
besides  Back-swords,  Cressets,  and  Lances,  nor  Skill  to  use 
Artillery,  if  they  had  it.  At  another  time  they  made  an 
Attempt  to  surprize  the  Fort,  under  pretence  of  a  Cock- 
match  ;  to  which  they  hoped  the  Garrison  would  come  out 
to  share  in  the  Sport,  and  so  the  Fort  left  with  small 
Defence.  For  the  Malayans  here  are  great  lovers  of  Cock- 
fighting,  and  there  were  about  1000  of  them  got  together 
about  this  Match,  while  their  armed  Men  lay  in  ambush. 
But  it  so  hapned,  that  none  of  the  Garrison  went  out  to 
the  Cock-match,  but  one  John  Necklin,  a  Dane,  who  was 
a  great  Gamester  himself:  And  he  discovering  the  Ambush, 

104 


CONCLUSION 

gave  notice  of  it  to  the  Govemour,  who  was  in  disorder  an. 
enough  upon  their  Approach  :  But  a  few  of  the  great  '^ 
Guns  drove  them  away. 

I  have  nothing  more  to  add  but  what  concerns  my  self; 
which  is  not  so  material,  that  I  should  need  to  trouble  the 
Reader  with  it,  I  have  said  in  my  former  Volume,  p.  503, 
upon  what  Motives  I  left  Bencouli :  And  the  particulars  of 
my  Voyage  thence  to  England  are  also  in  that  Volume : 
So  that  I  may  here  conclude  this  Supplement  to  my  Voyage 
round  the  World. 


105 


MR.     DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 

TO   THE 

BAY    OF    CAMPEACHY 


VOL.   II.     PART   II 

ONTAINING  AN  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  BAY  OF 
CAMPEACHY  IN  THE  WEST-INDIES,  AND 
PARTS   ADJACENT. 


CHAP.   I 

Thf  jimhtt't  firtt  ping  ts  Sta,  l«  France,  ta  Ntvjfeundland^  and  after 
U  iht  Eail-lndia.  His  Ulting  tut  fir  th*  fP^tst-Iniiiei.  Of  St. 
/jKM,  ttu  Caritif-lnJiani,  and  Captain  Warner.  He  arrivet 
at  lamaiiu  ;  Hii  Abtad  and  Travels  there,  and  first  yoyagi  ft 
CamftaJtj.  The  East  and  Narth  of  Jiualan  deitriied.  Key- 
J/«<vrc,  Cape-Cainh,  and  in  Logwetd-cutling.  The  Mount  and 
itt  Salt-fetrt  Earth.  The  Indian  Towns,  the  Tarpem-Fiih, 
Frdurwuit,  and  La^huls.  Rto  dt  la  Gartts,  Sall-Pends,  Selam, 
Sim/t  '*d  Cafe  Ctndecedc,  His  first  Jrrival  at  Island  Triil,  in 
tit  Say  if  Camfiaihy.  Hit  anthoring  at  One-Bush-Key,  and 
Emiertainmnt  amang  the  Lagwood'Cutters.  Tki  escape  tf  faur 
E^Sik  Prisaturj  frtm  Afexiia,  and  Campeaehy.  He  returns  fir 
Jmrnaicat  mad  it  ihaud  hy  twa  Spanish  fisiels.  The  difficulty  ^ 
<*«r  Patiage  Ud,  and  His  folfsngfiul  af  the  Aleranes  Isles.  The 
Bmtia  amd  Egg-Birdi  there,  Uc.  Stuard-Fith,  Nurses,  Seals,  irfc 
Cf  Captain  Lutg  and  athin  Ship-vurack'd  here.  The  Saundings 
h^tmimt :  He  fatieth  thraugh  the  Celarada  Shaals,  and  anthart 

107 


CAPTAIN  DAMPIER^  TOTAGES 


fuar  Cape  Si,  Amamxa  ok  Cmv  ;  smd  *m\iimg  im  tkr  Idm 
P'tmu  anchors  at  Ae  Ulamd  sf  G^mmd  KinmmmL  Bt  ma  kac 
anchnri  at  liland  PhteSy  its  Pndmcz,  Mjomti^  Ldtmi  Crwki^ 

Croad'iiiSy  CattUj  r^c  Hm  ^tmrnis  ^m  Jmt  oigBm^  mmi.  n 
hdp  4/  a  uasanabU  Ssrtk  Wtmi^  afur  mmdt  j^EauN>  arwn 
Jamaica. 

MONG  other  Thxngs  lefeiiel  to  in  my  fo 
Volume,  I  mendoaed  an  Accoant  I  intends 
give  of  the  Bay  of  CampeachT,  where  I  \ 
first  and  last  aboat  3  Tears.  I  sitall  now 
charge  my  self  of  that  Promise ;  and  becaose  my  ( 
pcacny  Voyages  were  in  order  of  Time,  before  that  R 
the  Wrjrld,  I  shall  upon  this  occasion  go  so  far  ha< 
tri  sfHralc  briefly  of  my  first  going  to  Sea,  and  the  R^ml 
made  till  my  setting  out  for  Campeachy. 

My  Friends  did  not  originally  design  me  for  the 
but  bred  mc  at  School  till  I  came  to  Years  fit  for  a  T 
But  uprjn  the  Death  of  my  Father  and  Mother,  they 
had  the  disprjsal  of  me,  took  other  Measures ;  and  ha 
rcmrived  me  from  the  Latin  School  to  learn  Writing 
Arithmeticlc,  they  soon  after  placed  me  with  a  Mast 
a  Ship  at  Weymouth,  complying  with  the  Inclinatic 
had  very  early  of  seeing  the  World :  With  him  I  ma 
>ih(irt  Voyage  to  France:  and  returning  thence,  wen 
Newfoundland,  being  then  about  eighteen  Years  of 
In  thin  Voyage  I  spent  one  Summer;  but  so  pinched 
the  rltfour  of  that  cold  Climate,  that  upon  my  reti] 
WttH  almolutely  against  going  to  those  parts  of  the  W 
but  went  home  again  to  my  Friends,  Yet  going 
while  after  to  London,  the  offer  of  a  warm  Voyage  a: 
long  one,  both  which  I  always  desired,  soon  carried  n 
Sea  again.  Iu)r  hearing  of  an  outward-bound  East-] 
Man,  the  "John  and  Martha  of  London,  Captain  Eai 
C^onirnandcr,  I  entered  my  self  aboard,  and  was  empl 
l)cforc  the  Mast,  for  which  my  two  former  Voyages 
sonic  way  qualified  me.  We  went  directly  for  Banta 
the  IhIc  of  Java,  and  staying  there  about  two  Mo 
came  home  again  in  little  more  than  a  Year ;  touchiti 

108 


1 


THE  AUTHOR'S   FIRST   GOING   TO   SEA  I 

Sljigo  of  the  Cape  Verd  Islands  at  our  going  out,  and  at    an.  I 
Aianaon  in  our  return.     In  this  Voyage  I  gained  more  '^iJ 

Etpcricnce   in    Navigation,    but    kept    no  Journal.       We  I 

ivtd  at  Plymouth  about  two  Months  before  Sir  Robert  I 

Holmes 'went  out  to  fall  upon  the  Dutch  Smyrna  Fleet:  I 

i  the  second  Dutch  Wars '  breaking  out  upon   this,  I  I 

e  going  to  Sea  that  Summer,  retiring  to  my  Brother  I 

I  Sootcrsctshirc.     But   growing  weary   of  staying  ashore,  I 

fnttd  my  self  on  board  the  Royal  Prince,  commanded  I 

»  Sir  Edward  Sprague,'  and  served    under    him  in    the  I 

or  1673,  being  the  last  of  the  Dutch  War.     We  had  I 

Engagements     that    Summer ;     I    was    in    two    of  I 

,  but  falling  very  sick,  I  was  put  aboard  an  Hospital  I 

B[i  k  Day  or  two   before  the  third   Engagement,  seeing  I 

»t  a  distance  only ;    and   in  this  Sir    Edward  Sprague  1 

t  killed.     Soon  after  I  was  sent   to  Harwich   with  the  I 

t  of  the  Sick  and   Wounded  :    And  having  languished  I 

KK  while,  I  went  home  to  my  Brother  to  recover  my  j 

iK.  J 

B)i  this  time  the  War  with  the  Dutch  was  concluded  ;  I 

id  with  my  Health,  1  recovered  my  old  Inclination  for  J 

l«  Sea.     A  neighbouring  Gentleman,  Colonel  Hellier  of  I 

w-Cockcr  in  Somersetshire,  my  Native  Parish,  made  me  I 

kasooable  Offer  to  go  and  manage  a  Plantation  of  his  in  I 

■uca,  under  one  Mr,  Whalley  :    for  which  Place  I  set  1 

■  litb  Cipt.  Kent  in  the  Content  of  London.  I 

I  WIS  then  about   22  Years  old,  and   had  never  been   in  I 

*WeK-Indica;  and  therefore,  lest  I  might  be  trepann'd '  I 

il  told  as  a  Servant  after  my  Arrival  in  Jamaica,  I  agreed  I 

til  Captain  Kent  to  work  as  a  Seaman   for  my  Passage,  I 

ni  hid   il    under  his    Hand    to    be   cleared   at    our    first  I 

frivil,       Wc  sailed   out  of  the    River    Thames    in    the  I 

Ipflning  of  the  Year  1674,  and  meeting  with  favourable  I 

&r  Roben  Hobnea  (1611-1691}  anacked  the  "Dutch  Smyrna  Fleei"  I 

M  inh  of  March  t6;i-3  :  (tncTconTmucd  the  action  lh«  (by  follon-ins.  I 

Th>  &nt  "  Dntcb  War**  buleil  froRi  1664-j  uniil  i667.  I 

'  Sir  Edward  Sptas^t!.    Tb«  three  rneai^craenU  were  fought  on  May  2S,  ■ 

Kj^and  AttpiU  11-     Id  llw  bit  of  the  Ihrec,  Sir  Edward  Sprii|!(>e  was  ■ 

ri  M  hr  rvrtd  frnm  lt>r  f/t^  Prime  to  (he  .SV.  Gtorge,  I 

'  "                          nflered  ihif  faic.  I 

109  ■ 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AV.  Winds,  in  a  short  Time  got  into  the  Trade-vind,  anc 
'^^  went  merrily  along,  steering  for  the  Island  Barfaadoes 
When  ffe  came  in  sight  of  it  Captain  Kent  told  Ui 
Passengers,  if  they  woald  pay  his  Port-Charges  he  woulc 
anchor  in  the  Road,  and  stop  whilst  they  got  RefSrcshment 
But  the  Merchants  not  caring  to  part  with  thor  Money 
he  bore  away,  directing  his  Coune  towards  Jantuca. 

The  next  Island  that  appeared  in  our  view  was  St 
Lucia.  *Tis  distant  from  Bsurbadoes  about  30  Leagues 
and  very  wealthy  in  large  Timber  Trees  fit  for  all  uses 
For  this  Reason  *tis  often  visted  by  the  English,  who  stod 
themselves  here  with  Rollers,  &c.  They  have  endeavourec 
to  settle  an  Englbh  Colony  there,  but  hitherto  unsuccess- 
fully,  because  of  the  Caribbe-Indtans. 

The  Caribbees  are  a  sort  of  Warlike  Indians,  delighting 
to  rove  on  the  Sea  in  Periagoes  or  large  Canoas.  Theii 
chiefest  Habitations  are  on  the  Miun;  but  at  certait 
Seasons  of  the  Year  they  visit  the  Islands  for  their  Pleasure 
Barbadoes  was  formerly  much  frequented  by  them;  but 
since  the  English  settled  there  they  have  been  forced  tc 
abandon  it,  and  content  themselves  in  their  Sea- Voyages, 
or  with  such  Islands  only  as  are  not  possessed  by  the 
Europeans ;  except  where  they  have  hopes  of  conquering ; 
as  they  have  done  at  St.  Lucia. 

Near  the  Main  where  these  Indians  live,  lies  Tabago, 
which,  when  it  was  first  settled  by  the  Dutch,  was  much 
infested  by  them.  These  Indians,  as  I  have  heard,  had 
formerly  Plantations  on  most  of  the  Caribbe-Islands ;  and 
in  their  Sea-Voyages  did  use  to  remain  three  Weeks  or  a 
Month  at  a  Time  on  an  Island,  and  then  remove  to 
another ;  and  so  visit  most  of  them  before  their  return  to 
the  Main. 

St.  Vincent  is  another  of  these  Islands  lying  near  St. 
Lucia :  We  passed  between  them ;  and  seeing  a  Smoke  on 
St.  Lucia,  we  sent  our  Boat  ashore  there.  Our  Men  found 
some  of  the  Caribbe-Indians,  and  bought  of  them  Plantains, 
Bonanoes,  Pine-Apples,  and  Sugar-Canes;  and.  returning 
aboard  again,  there  came  with  them  a  Canoa  with  3  or  4  of 
the   Indians.      These   often   repeated    the   Word   Captain 

no 


CARIBBE   INDIANS 

Wjfncr,  and  seemed  to  be  in  some  disquiet  about  him. 
Wcdid  not  then  understand  the  meaning  of  it ;  but  since 
I  hive  been  informed  that  this  Captain  Warner,  whom  they 
woirioncd,  was  bom  at  Antego,'  one  of  our  English 
lilwdj,  and  the  Son  of  Governour  Warner,^  by  an  Indian 
Womin,  and  bred  up  by  his  Father  after  the  English 
bobikt;  be  learned  the  Indian  Language  also  of  his 
Mother;  but  being  grown  up,  and  finding  himself  despised 
'if  htj  English  Kindred,  he  forsook   his  Father's  House, 

Kiwiy  to  St,  Lucia,  and  there  lived  among  the  Caribbe- 
ians,  his  Relations  by  the  Mother  side.  Where  con- 
himself  to  their  Customs  he  became  one  of  their 
upoins,  and  roved  from  one  Island  to  another,  as  they 
Ml-  About  this  Time  the  Caribbees  had  done  some  spoil 
•i  our  English  Plantations  at  Antego:  and  therefore 
GoreriKnir  Warner's  Son  by  his  Wife  took  a  Party  of  Men 
tod  •wit  to  suppress  those  Indians,  and  came  to  the  Place 
•Iwre  his  Brother  the  Indian-Warner  lived.  Great  seem- 
Joy  there  was  at  their  Meeting ;  but  how  far  it  was 
ibe  Event  shewed  ;  for  the  English -Warner  providing 
of  Liquor,  and  inviting  his  half-Brother  to  be  merry 
idi  Irim,  in  the  midst  of  his  Entertainment  ordered  his 
Kn  upon  a  Signal  given  to  murder  him  and  all  his 
"fiain:  which  was  accordingly  performed.*  The  Reason 
I  ^  inhumane  Action  is  diversly  reported ;  some  say 
■t  this  Indtan-Wamer  committed  all  the  Spoil  that  was 
ke  to  the  Er^llsh ;  and  therefore  for  that    Reason  his 

' '  Old  Sir  Th.  Warner,"  the  Goremor  of  the  Caribbee  Islands, 

"G«t«faar  Wvner's  ion  bj  his  wife"  was  Colonel  Philip  Warner, 

t  of  Aatixtn.    "  After  ihe  dispurr  was  over,  Colonel  Warner 

K'tmcr  AoA  hii  Indians,  10  inc  number  of  sixty  or  seventy 

1  smI  tfciMfCfi  to  an  enlenainmcnl  at  thanks,  and  having  made 

c  with  fum,  gave  a  liKnaj,  nnd  some  of  the  English  fell  upon 

'  ■      ■  (DtjtPSt/ien  of  William  Hamlyn).     Colonel  Warner 

I  10  •tand  his  trbt.  and  remained  a  year  in  the  Tower, 

I  finm  Uie  kinn'*  service.     At  his  trial  it  appeared  that 

was  not  hi*  half'brother  :  that  the  Indians  slain  at  the 

■r*  confederates  with  (hose  thai  attacked  iisi"  thai  ihey 

I  bloody  malefocion,"  and  that  they  were  killed  in  Ihii 

lid,  and  William  Hamlyn  was  punished  for  perjury , 

W>mcr  was  K«iliy,  and  that  the  trial  was  not  rightly 


I 


HI 


air  ^H 

tly  ^H 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Brother  kiird  him  and  his  Men.  Others  that  he  was  a 
'^^^  great  Friend  to  the  English,  and  would  not  suffer  his  Men 
to  hurt  them,  but  did  all  that  lay  in  his  power  to  draw 
them  to  an  amicable  Commerce;  and  that  his  Brother 
killed  him,  for  that  he  was  ashamed  to  be  related  to  an 
Indian.  But  be  it  how  it  will,  he  was  called  in  Question  for 
the  Murder,  and  forced  to  come  Home  to  take  his  Tryal  in 
England.  Such  perfidious  Doings  as  these,  besides  the 
Baseness  of  them,  are  great  hindrances  of  our  gaining  an 
Interest  among  the  Indians. 

Putting  from  these  Islands  we  steered  away  further 
West,  and  falling  in  with  the  East-end  of  Hispaniola,  wc 
ranged  down  along  on  the  South  Side  even  to  Cape  Tiburon, 
which  is  the  West-end  of  the  Island.  There  we  lay  by 
and  sent  our  Boat  ashore ;  for  Captain  Kent  had  been 
informed  that  there  were  great  Groves  of  Orange-Trees 
near  this  Cape;  but  our  Men  not  finding  any,  he  then 
concluded  there  were  none :  But  I  have  been  since  informed 
my  self  by  several  that  have  been  there,  that  there  arc 
enough  of  them  thereabouts.^  From  hence  we  steered 
away  for  Jamaica,  where  we  arrived  in  a  short  Time, 
bringing  with  us  the  first  News  they  had  of  the  Peace 
with  the  Dutch. 

Here,  according  to  my  Contract,  I  was  immediately 
discharged ;  and  the  next  Day  I  went  to  the  Spanish  Town, 
called  Sant'  Jago  de  la  Vega;*  where  meeting  with  Mr. 
Whalley,  we  went  together  to  Colonel  Hellier*s  Plantation 
in  1 6  Mile-Walk.  In  our  way  thither  we  past  through 
Sir  Thomas  Muddiford*s  Plantation,  at  the  Angells,  where 
at  that  Time  were  Otta  and  Cacao  Trees  growing;  and 
fording  a  pretty  large  River,  we  past  by  the  side  of  it  2  or  3 
Miles  up  the  Stream,^  there  being  high  Mountains  on  each 

^  Henry  Morgan  gathered  great  numbers  here  (as  anti-scorbutics  for 
his  fleet)  a  few  days  before  he  sailed  to  take  Old  Providence. 

'  Sir  Hans  Sloane  makes  this  note  : — "  St.  Jago  dc  la  Vega,  or  St  James 
of  the  Plain,  a  Town  improving  every  day,  *tis  the  place  where  the  Governor 
usually  resides,  and  where  the  Courts  of  Justice  and  Records  of  the  Island 
are  Kept.     It  was  very  great  in  the  Spaniard's  time." 

3  "The  Road  thither  (to  Sixteen  Mile  Walk)  is  by  the  Water-side  01 
along  the  banks  of  the  Rio  Cobre,  where  there  is  a  Stone  under  which  one 
passes,  as  under  an  Arch  "  (Sir  Hans  Sloane,  Voyage^  vol.  i.). 

1X2 


MOUNT  DIABOLO 

The  way  to  1 6  Mile-walk  was  formerly  a  great 
sbout,  round  a  large  Mountain  ;  till  Mr-  Cary  Hellier  '^'*  I 
t  Coland't  Brother,  found  out  this  way.  For  being 
araus  of  making  out  a  shorter  Cut.  he  and  some  others 
tcaxiai  along  the  River,  till  they  found  it  run  between  a 
R  nk  that  stood  up  perpendicularly  sleep  on  each  side,  and 
wnh  much  difficulty  they  climbed  over  it.  But  a  Dog  that 
belonged  to  them,  finding  a  hole  to  creep  through  the 
Hutk,  luggcstcd  to  them  that  there  was  a  hollow  Passage ; 
«d  he  cleared  it  by  blowing  up  the  Rock  with  Gun-powder, 
nil  he  had  made  a  way  through  It  broad  enough  for  a 
Hiisc  with  a  Pack,  and  high  enough  for  a  Man  to  ride 
through.  This  is  called  the  Hollow  Rock.  Some  other 
Rifts  he  levelled,  and  made  it  an  indifferent  good  Passage. 
He  wai  a  very  ingenious  Gentleman,  and  doubtless  had 
iirEvcd,  he  might  have  propagated  some  advantagious  Arts 
"fi  ihat  UUnd.  He  was  once  endeavouring  to  make  Salt- 
P^-at  It  the  Angclls,  but  did  not  bring  it  to  Perfection. 
\^'h«hcr  the  Elarth  there  was  not  right,  I  know  not ;  but 
;rohihly  there  may  be  Salt-pctre  Elarth  in  other  Places, 
f^Kiiliy  about  Passage-Fort,  where,  as  I  have  been  in- 
f'Tiaed,  the  Canes  will  not  make  good  Sugar,  by  Reason  of 
'^  ^lnc»  of  the  Stril, 

I  liv'd  with  Mr.  Whalley  at  i6  Mile- Walk  for  almost 
SI  Months,  and  then  cntcr'd  my  self  into  the  Service  of 
'ne  Captain  Kcming,  to  manage  his  Plantation  at  St.  Anns, 
'C  the  North-aide  of  the  Island,  and  accordingly  rode  from 
V.  Jago  de  b  Vega  toward  St.  Anns. 

This  R(»d  has  but  sorry  Accommodations  for  Travellers, 
fbe  first  Night  I  lay  at  a  poor  Hunter's  Hut,  at  the  Foot 
y  Mount  Dubolo'  on  the  S<iuth-side  of  it,  where  for  want 
■  Qothes  to  cover  me  In  the  Night  I  was  very  cold  when 
y  Latkd-wind  sprang  up. 

f  This  Mountain  is  part  of  the  great  Ridge  that  runs 
k  length  €»f  the  Island  from  East  to  West ;  to  the  East 
Lolled  the  Blew  Mountain,  which  is  higher  than  this. 

■  to  have  iMWfi  (be  nutom  In  tlcrp  ai  ihe  foot  of  Ml.  Uiavolo, 
I  ibc  IibniL     A  resl-houM,  or  huntrt"!  hut,  provided  shelter, 
fibakviowtti.  at "  pluiuin  and  palm -leaves." 

113  H 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AX.  The   next  Day  crossing   Mount  Dkbolo,  I   got  a   hard 

'^^  Lodging  at  the  Foot  of  it  on  the  North-ade;  and  the 

third  Day  after  arrived  at  dptain  Hcming's  Plantation. 

I  was  clearly  out  of  my  Element  there,  and  therefore 
as  soon  as  dptain  Heming  ^  came  thither  I  diangaged  my 
self  from  him,  and  took  my  Passage  on  Board  a  Sloop  to 
Port-Royal,  with  one  Mr.  Statham,  who  used  to  trade 
round  the  Island,  and  touched  there  at  that  Time. 

From  PcHt-Royal  I  sailed  with  one  Mr.  Fishook,  who 
traded  to  the  North-side  of  the  Island,  and  somedmes 
round  it :  and  by  these  coasting  Voyages  I  came  acquainted 
with  all  the  Ports  and  Bays  about  Januuca,  and  with  all 
their  Manufactures ;  as  also  with  the  Benefit  of  the  Land 
and  Sea-winds.  For  our  Business  was  to  bring  Goods  to, 
or  carry  them  from  Planters  to  Port-Royal ;  and  we  were 
always  entertained  civilly  by  them,  both  in  their  Houses 
and  Plantations,  having  Liberty  to  walk  about  and  view 
them.  They  gave  us  also  Plantains,  Yams,  Potatoes,  &c. 
to  carry  aboard  with  us ;  on  which  we  fed  commonly  all 
our  Vovage. 

But  after  six  or  seven  Months,  I  left  that  Employ  also, 
and  shipt  my  self  aboard  one  Captain  Hudsel,  who  was 
bound  to  the  Bay  of  Campeachy  to  load  Logwood. 

We  sailed  from  Port-Royal  about  the  b^inning  of 
August,  1675,  in  Company  with  Captain  Wren  in  a  small 
Jamaica  Bark,  and  Captain  Johnson  Commander  of  a  Ketch 
belonging  to  New-England, 

This  Voyage  is  all  the  way  before  the  Wind,  and  there- 
fore Ships  commonly  sail  it  in  twelve  or  fourteen  Days; 
neither  were  we  longer  in  our  Passage;  for  we  had  very 
fair  Weather,  and  touched  no  where  till  we  came  to  Trist 
Island  in  the  Bay  of  Campeachy,  which  is  the  only  place 
they  go  to.  In  our  way  thither  we  first  sailed  by  littfc 
Caimanes,  leaving  it  on  our  Larboard-side,  and  Key  Mon- 
brack,*  which  are  two  small  Islands,  lying  South  of  Cuba. 
The   next   Land   we    saw   was    the    Isle   of   Pines:    and 

*  Captain  Hemings,  or  Hemmings,  owned  the  ruins  of  "  the  town  caUed 
Sevilla,"  a  fine  brick  and  stone  built  Spanish  city. 
'  Cayman  Brae. 

114 


'  CAPE  CATOCH    AND   ITS  LOGWOOD 

estUI  Westerly,  we  made  Cape  Corientes  : '  and  sailing 
BSDUth-side  of  Cuba,  till  we  came  to  Cape  Antonio,  ' 
pthe  Wcst-cnd  of  it,  we  stretched  over  towards  the 
^^  I  of  Jucatan,  and  fell  in  with  Cape  Catoch,  which 
B  ID  tKe  cxtrcam  part  of  that  Promontory  towards  the 
Eai. 

The  Land  trends  from  this  Cape  one  way  South  about 
I'onr  Leagues  till  you  come  to  the  Island  Cozumel,^  and 
trom  thence  it  runs  S.  \V.  down  into  the  Bay  of  Honduras, 
.Mfiat  ten  Leagues  from  Cape  Catoch,  between  it  and 
Cmumel,  lies  a  small  Island  called  by  the  Spaniards,  Key- 
Muger,'  or  Womcns-Island ;  because  'tis  reported  that 
•ien  they  went  first  to  settle  in  these  parts  they  left  their 
^"ivej  there,  while  they  went  over  on  the  Main  to  find  some 
Wter  Habitation :  Though  now  they  have  no  Settlement 
«ir  it,  whatever  they  have  had  formerly. 

About  three  Leagues  from  Cape  Catoch,  and  just 
ifiinst  it  is  a  small  Island  called  *  Loggerhead  Key  ;  probably 
Wiiue  it  is  frequently  visited  by  a  sort  of  Turtle  so  called  : 
'or  this  Island  we  always  find  a  great  Ripling,  which 
^icmncn  call  the  Rip-raps.  This  Cape,  though  it  appears  to 
'k  p*rt  of  the  Main,  yet  is  divided  from  it  by  a  small 
CfTck,  scarce  wide  enough  for  a  Canoa  to  pass  through, 
■ii'iugh  by  it  'tis  made  an  Island.  This  I  have  been 
-Ttdibly  informed  of  by  some,  who  yet  told  me  that  they 
"^^ide  a  ihifl  to  pass  it  in  3  Canoa. 

The  Cape  is  vct)'  low  Land  by  the  Sea,  but  somewhat 
*;^facrss  you  go  further  from  the  shore.  It  is  all  over- 
■Twn  with  Trees  of  divers  sorts,  especially  Logwood  ;  and 
:.-eforr  was  formerly  much  frequented  by  the  Jamaica 
)  came  thither  in  Sloops  to  load  with  it,  till  all  the 
I  near  the  Sea  were  cut  down  ;  but  now  'tis 
doncd,  because  the  Carriage  of  it  to  the  shore 
L  more  Labour,  than  the  cutting,  legging,  and 
Beudes  they  find  better  Wood  now  in  the  Bays 
'  and  Honduras,  and  have  but  a  little  way  to 
,  not  above  300  Paces,  when  I  was  there ;  whereas 

•  Coiumcl  retains  its  ancient  name 

*  I>eThaps  CODtoy  Ukand. 


CAFTAIX   DAMPIEU^  VOYAGES 


j^^ 


zr.   Cfcie  Qc'jin:  tirv  -w^rr  fond  id  anar  5:  351 

fr-jir  Csi^t  Ciiiicr  wt  z'jbsssz  ijoog  br  tic  shore,  on 
tit  Narir-^:*^  :c  Tiiteiex  ir^wEro^  Ck:K  Caii5coc5oL^  The 
CvE^t  Ikri  ntzTss:  W-si.     Tbt  ^f*»'n^i:y  berwoca  dicx  two 

'■^-:o*>:»t  2^T  -r'aEbit  Pocrs  or  Brnr^ngs  ia  Ac  Land.     It  b 
v'XidT  bi   tit  siof*.  2ai  f=a]  ^x  sanzj  Bits  and  lofty 

Tit  rrs:  place  of  sect  to  rbt  Ws:  ot  Capr  Catorh^  is  t 
srsaJj  HH:  br  tit  Sra,  alTi  tic  Mocint ; '  and  is  distant 
from  :t  aVjut  1 4  I  rag-ass.  It  k  tctt  reanarkahic,  beciiisc 
thtrt  2f  no  orH«r  Hogii-Land  00  al]  ilis  CoKt.  I  wis 
fttver  ashocTT  here,  bat  lure  met  with  socne  w«ll  acquainted 
with  tht  Pkce,  wiK>  arc  aU  of  Opissoo  that  this  Mount  was 
n^A  natural,  but  tht  Work  of  Men :  And  indeed  it  is  very 
probable  this  Place  has  been  inhabited  ;  for  here  wrc  a  great 
many  large  Cisten^  supposed  to  hare  been  made  for  the 
receiving  of  Rain-water,  for  there  arc  no  fresh  ^xii^  to  be 
found  ho-e,  the  Soil  being  all  sandy  and  very  salt.  So  that, 
as  I  have  been  credibly  informed  by  an  intelligent  Person, 
the  Spaniards  do  fetch  of  it  to  make  Salt-Petre.  He  also 
told  me,  that  being  once  there  in  a  Privateer,  and  landing 
some  Men  on  the  Bay,  they  found  about  100  Packs  of  this 
Karth  bound  up  in  Palmeto  Leaves ;  and  a  Spanish  Mulatto 
to  guard  it.  The  Privateers  at  first  sight  of  the  Packs. were 
in  hopes  there  had  been  Maiz  or  Indian-Corn  in  them, 
which  they  then  wanted ;  but  opening  them  they  found 
nothing  but  Earth ;  and  examining  the  Mulatto  for  what 
use  it  was,  he  said  to  make  Powder,  and  that  he  expected  a 
Bark  from  Campeachy  to  fetch  it  away.  He  further  told 
me,  that  tasting  of  it  he  found  it  very  salt ;  as  all  the  Earth 
thereabouts  was.  So  that  it  is  not  improbable  that  those 
Cisterns  were  made  for  the  carrying  on  of  Salt-Petre  Work. 
But  whatever  was  the  design  at  first,  it  is  now  wholly  laid 
aside  :  for  there  is  no  use  made  of  them ;  neither  are  there 
any  Inhabitants  near  this  Place. 

*  Pt.  Piedras.  ■  Monte  de  Cuyo. 

116 


INDIAN   FISHERMEN 

Between  the  Mount  and  Cape  Condccedo,  close  by  the   ah.  ' 
So,  IK  many  little  Spots  of  Mangrove  Trees,  which  ai  a   '^S 
tfixincc appear  like  Islands:  but  coming  nearer,  when  other 
toviT  Trees  appear,    it    shows    like    ragged   2nd    broken 
Gmnd ;  but  at   last  all  the  Land  presents  it  self  to  your 
»icw  Ttry  even. 

The  next   place  of  note  on   this  Coast  is  Rio  de  la 

'  loa,'  alnu»t  in  the  mid-way  between  Cape  Catoch  and 

«  Condccedo.     This  also  is  a  very  remarkable  Place  ;  for 

rt  ire  two  Groves  of  high  Mangroves,  one  on  each  side  the 

fv,  by  which  it  may  be  known  very  well.     The  River  is 

fn  mull,  yet  deep  enough  for  Canoas.     The  Water    is 

"tod.  and  I  know  not  any  other  Brook  or  fresh  River  on 

U  the  Coast  from  Cape  Catoch  till  within  three  or  four 

Eiguc*  of  Campcachy  Town. 

A  little  to  the  East  of  the  River  is  a  Fish-Range,  and 

i  small  Indian  Hutt  or  two  within  the  Woods ;  where  the 

fidian  Fishers  who  are  subject  to  the  Spaniards,  lye  in  the 

Failing -Seasons,    their    Habitations    and    Families    Ixring 

tinhcr  up  in  ihc  0)untr)'.     Here  arc  Poles  to  hang  their 

Ntts  00,  and  Barbecues  to  dr)-  their  Fish.     When  they  go 

if  to  Sea,  they  fish  with  Hook  and  Line  about  four  or 

■  -c  Leagues  from  the  Shore,  for  Snappers  and  Gropers, 
.".ich  I  have  already  described  in  my  Voyage  round  the 
'>\'arld.      Chap.  iv.  page  118. 

Since    the    Privateers  and    Logwood-ships  have  sailed 

'"••  w«T,  these  Fishcr-men  arc  very  shy,  having  been  often 

!iy  ihcm.     So  that  now  when  they  arc  out  at  Sea, 

•ce  a  Sail,  they  presently  sink  their  Canoas  even 

edge  of  the  Water ;  for  the  Canoas  when  they  are 

-ir  1,1   Water,  will  sink  no  lower,  and  they  themselves  lye 

it  with  their  heads  above  Water,  till  the  Ship  which  they 

■  ■  is  pass'd  by  Of  comes  nigh.  I  have  seen  them  under 
'il,  and  thcj*  have  thus  vanished  on  a  sudden.     The  Fish 

•.ich  they  take  near  the  Shore  with  their  Nets,  arc  Snooks, 
ik^-Fiih.  and  sometimes  Tarpoms. 

Tile  Tsrpom  is  a  large  scaly  Fish,  shaped  much  like  a 


Lapuu  de  LafajtOK. 

117 


^' 


'• -,r.*^r.  Tr-::.^-:   tirii  ro":    t^i?    :f  th^  Ni:  were   d 

{->/'.  *:r^:ic  i^i-.r-s:  thr  N^-  tr.i  =tit  Nlin  to  it 
V^tr.  Nt:  i.-.i  Fish  ':.-  hl=  Arms,  ir.i  zt.z  ii\  rkst  till 
'-A.r-^  '.'.  r.'.'i  AsiLsii.iit.  B^iies  :"-«e  w-  had  thrw 
ir.  i  C^r.'/i,.  :r.  v.h::h  thev  m:~'d  siie-'srivs  after  the 

m  m 

I  ir^f.  th*:  Car.oa  :  And  by  :hc5^  mear.s  we  should  take  i 

/  *T.rKK  a*  'iv^y  draught.     These  F:sh  are  found  plcn 

a.i  along  that  shore  from  Cape  Catoch  to  Trist,  especi 
i.\Kzr  Water,  n^^ar  sandv  Bavs ;  but  no  where  in  muc 
rocky  Ground.  They  arc  also  about  Jamaica,  and  s 
Coast  of  the  Main  ;  especially  near  Carthagena. 

Wr:st  from  Rio  de  la  Grartos,  there  is  a  Lookn 
Watch-tower,  called  Selam.      This  is  a  Place  close 
shon:,  contrived  by  the  Spaniards  for  their  Indians  to 
in.     There  arc  many  of  them  on  this  Coast:  Some 
frr>ni  the  (iround  with  Timber,  others  only  little  Cages 
on  a  Tree,  big  enough  for  one  or  two  Men  to  sit  in, 
I  -adder  to  go  up  and  down.     These  Watch-towers  are 
without  an  Indian  or  two  all  the  Day  long ;  the  Indiai 
live  near  any  of  them  being  obliged  to  take  their  tun 

About  three  or  four  Leagues  Westward  of  Sel 

'  Sil.'in.    There  is  a  good  spring  at  this  place. 

ii8 


LOOKOUTS    AND   SALT   PONDS 

twtber  W»tch-t>ox^[on  s   high  Tree,  called   Linchanchee 

Lookout,  from  a  Urge  Indian  Town  ot  that  Name,  four  '*?■ 

Uigues   up  in    the  Country;    and    two    Leagues    farther 

witton  Land  is  another  Town  called  Chinchanchee.     I  have 

[  lea  uhore  at  these  Lookouts,  and  have  been  cither  rowing 

iaiCanoa,  or  walldr^  ashore  on  all  this  Coast,  even  from 

L  Rio  <le  U  Gmrtos  to  Cape  Cotideccdo:  but  did  never  see 

mWf  Town  by  the  Shore,  nor  any  Houses  besides  Fishing- 

VHut)  on  ail  the  Coast,  except  only  at    Sisal.     Between 

n  and  Linchanchee  are  many  small  regular  Salt  Ponds, 

lei  from  each  other  by  little  Banks;  the  biggest  Pond 

Itibovc  ten  Yards  long  and  six  broad. 

The   Inhabitants    of    these    two    Towns   attend    these 

ids  in  the  Months  of  May,  June,  and  July  to  gather  the 

Ut,  which  supplies  all  the  Inland  Towns  of  these  Parts; 

sd  there  i^  a  skirt   of  Wood   between  the  Sea  and  the 

Pondft.  that  you  can    neither  see   them  nor  the  People   at 

work  till  you  come  ashore. 

Krom  these  Salt  Ponds  further  West,  about  three  or 
lour  Leagues,  is  the  Lookout  called  Sisal.^  This  is  the 
higben  and  most  remarkable  on  all  the  Coast;  it  stands 
clo6c  by  the  Sea,  and  it  is  built  with  Timber.  This  is  the 
tirtt  Ot^ct  that  we  make  off  at  Sea;  and  sometimes  we 
uke  It  for  a  Sail,  till  running  nearer  we  discover  the  high 
Mangrove-l'rccs  appearing  in  small  Tufts  at  several 
litstaJDoes  from  it. 

Noc  fiu-  from  hence  there  is  a  Fort  with  forty  or  fifty 
!«>klicn  to  guard  the  Coast ;  and  from  this  place  there  is  a 
Koad  through  the  Country  to  the  City  of  Merida.  This  is 
the  cfaicfcst  City  in  all  the  Province  of  Jucatan,  it  being 
nbtinted  mostly  with  S[nniards :  Yet  there  are  many 
loitan  Families  among  them,  who  live  in  great  Subjection, 
II  do  the  rest  of  the  Indians  of  this  Country.  The  Province 
c/ Jucatan,  especially  this  Northern  and  the  most  Easterly 
rmn  of  it  is  but  indifferently  fruitful,  in  comparison  of  that 
nch  Soil  farther  to  the  West :  Yet  is  it  pretty  populous  of 
,  who  all  live  together  in  Towns ;  but   none  within 


SisaL    There  it  a  lighthouse  bcrc. 
119 


^^dbaa,  who  all  live  toget 

^L  •  SisaL    Ther 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER^S  VOYAGES 

AX.  five  or  six  \Iiles  of  the  Sea,  except  (as  I  sud)  at  two  of 
'^5  three  Fishing  places ;  and  even  there  the  Indians  resort  tc 
fish  but  at  certain  Seasons  of  the  Year.  Therefore  when 
Privateers  come  on  this  Coast,  they  fear  not  to  land  and 
ramble  about,  as  if  they  were  in  their  own  Country,  seeking 
for  Game  of  any  sort,  either  Fowl  or  Deer;  of  both  ol 
which  there  are  great  plenty,  especially  of  the  latter,  though 
sometimes  they  pay  dear  for  it :  A  small  Jamaica  Privateei 
once  landed  six  or  seven  Men  at  this  Lookout  of  Sisal ; 
who  not  suspecting  any  Danger,  ordered  the  Canoa  with 
three  or  four  Men  to  row  along  by  the  shore,  to  take  them 
in  upon  their  giving  a  sign  or  firing  a  Gun :  But  within 
half  an  Hour  they  were  attack*d  by  about  forty  Spanish 
Soldiers,  who  had  cut  them  off  from  the  shore,  to  whom 
they  surrendered  themselves  Prisoners.  The  Spaniards 
carried  them  in  Triumph  to  the  Fort,  and  then  demanded 
which  was  the  Captain.  Upon  this  they  all  stood  mute, 
for  the  Captain  was  not  among  them  ;  and  they  were  afraid 
to  tell  the  Spaniards  so,  for  fear  of  being  all  hanged  for 
Straglers ;  neither  did  any  one  of  them  dare  to  assume  that 
Title,  because  they  had  no  Commission  with  them,  nor  the 
Copy  of  it ;  for  the  Captains  don't  usually  go  ashore  with- 
out a  Copy  at  least  of  their  Commission,  which  is  wont  to 

secure   both  themselves   and   their  Men. ^At   last  one 

John  Hullock  cock'd  up  his  little  cropt  Hat,  and  tdd 
them  he  was  the  Captain  ;  and  the  Spaniards  demanding 
his  Commission,  he  said  it  was  aboard ;  for  that  he  came 
ashore  only  to  hunt,  not  thinking  to  have  met  any  Enemy. 
The  Spaniards  were  well  satisfied  with  this  Answer,  and 
afterwards  respected  him  as  the  Captain,  and  served  him 
with  better  Provision  and  Lodging  than  the  rest ;  and  the 
next  day  when  they  were  sent  to  the  City  of  Merida  about 
twelve  or  thirteen  Leagues  from  thence,  Capt.  Hullock  had 
a  Horse  to  ride  on,  while  the  rest  went  on  Foot:  And 
though  they  were  all  kept  in  close  Prison,  yet  Hullock  had 
the  Honour  to  be  often  sent  for  to  be  examined  at  the 
Governour*s  House,  and  was  frequently  Regal'd  with 
Chocolate,  &c.  From  thence  they  were  carried  to  Cam- 
peachy   Town,   where   still    Captain    Hullock   was   bettei 

1 20 


ISLES   DES   ARENAS 

itmd  than  his  Comrades:  At  last,  I  know  not  how,  they 

tU  got  ihcir  Liberties,  and  Hullock  was  ever  after  called  '^51 

C^ain  Jack. 

It  a  about  eight  Leagues  from  Sisat  to  Cape  Condecedo ; 
MtBtjr  Leagues  North  of  which  lies  a  small  Island,  call'd 
^^  the  Spaniards,  Isles  des  Arenas,'  hut  the  English  Seamen, 
i  is  usual  with  them,  comipt  the  Name  strangely;  and 
hnccall  it  the  Dcsarts,  others  the  Desarcusses ;  ~  but  of 
Hi  liUnd,  having  never  seen  it,  I  can  give  no  account. 

All  this  Coast  from  Cape  Catoch  to  Cape  Condecedo, 
bknr  Land,  the  Mount  only  excepted.  It  is  most  sandy 
■y  hf  the  Sea  ;  yet  some  of  it  is  Mangrovy  Land  ;  within 
■kd  you  have  some  Spots  of  dry  Savannah,  and  small 
Trees,  with  short  thick  Bushes  among  them, 
be  Sea  deepens  gradually  from  the  shore,  and  Ships  may 
ichar  in  sandy  Ground  in  any  depth  from  seven  or  eight 
w  to  ten  or  twelve  Fathom  Water. 
In  tome  Places  on  this  Coast  we  reckon  our  distance 
^^  1  the  Shore  by  the  depth  of  the  Sea,  allowing  four 
fathom  for  the  first  League,  and  for  every  Fathom  aftcr- 
tafdi  a  League  more. 

Bat  having  got  thus  to  Cape  Condecedo,  I  shall  defer 
Ac  fiirthcr  description  of  these  Parts  from  this  Cape  South- 
"*nl  and  Westward  to  the  High-Land  of  St.  Martin,^ 
illich  is  properly  the  Bay  of  Campcachy  :  and  from  thence 
'  ftirther  Westward,  till  my  second  coming  on  this 
^^  Bt,  when  I  made  so  long  a  stay  here.  To  proceed 
■Oefore  with  my  present  Voyage ;  having  past  Cape 
Much,  the  Mount,  Rio  de  la  Gartos,  Sisal,  and  Cay>e 
'Bileccdo,  we  stood  Southward  directly  for  Trist,  the 
ea  of  our  Logwood-Cutters ;  at  which  Place  being  not 
c  60  Leagues  distant,  we  soon  arrived. 
Thsi  is  the  Road  only  for  big  Ships,  smaller  Vessels 
t  dmr  but  a  little  Water  run  3  Leagues  farther,  by 
J  over  a  great  Lagune  that  runs  from  the  Island  up 
;  a  uaar,  vtady  idei  tatae  nioMy  miles  10  ilic  N,W.  of 

,18  L^mroiindinK  ii  with  the  Aros,  and  llie 

Afc  lioular  Ulct*  lo  the  wniib  ot  Cay  Arenas. 
de  Tnula. 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   by  the  Spaniards,  was  sent  to  the  City  of  Mexico,  where 
*^75  they  remained  Prisoners  six  or  eight  Months,  but  at  last 
were  remanded  to  La  Vera  Cruz,  and  from  thence  by  Sea 
to  Campeachy :  They  were  not  imprisoned,  but  only  kept 
to  work  on  Board  the  Ship  that  brought  them,  and  soon 
found    an  Opportunity  of  making  their  Escapes   in   this 
manner.     They  had  been  employed  ashore  all  the  Day,  and 
being  sent  aboard  at  Night  they  fell  to  contrive  how  to 
run  away  with  the  Boat ;  but  considering  that  they  wanted 
Necessaries   for   their  Voyage,    they   resolved   first  to  go 
back  and  supply  themselves,  which  they  might  then  do 
the  better,  because  they  knew  there  were  none  but  a  few 
Indians  on  Board.     Accordingly  having  seized  and  bound 
the    Indians,    taking   with    them   a   Compass,    with   some 
Bread  and  Water,  they  put  off  to  Sea,  and  arrived  at  Trist 
a  Week  before  our  Departure  :  And  this  Will.  Wooders 
was   the    means   under   God   of  the  Preservation  of  our 
Ship. 

The  third  Day,  after  we  left  Trist,  about  eight  in  the 
Morning,  near  twelve  or  fourteen  Leagues  W.  S.  W.  from 
Campeachy,  we  saw  two  Sail  about  three  Leagues  to  Wind- 
ward coming  directly  towards  us,  the  Captain  supposing 
that  they  had  been  Jamaica  Vessels,  would  have  lain  by  to 
hear  some  News,  and  to  get  some  Liquor  from  them ;  for 
we  had  now  none  on  Board  but  a  few  Bottles  in  a  small 
Case,  that  the  Captain  reserved  for  his  own  Drinking.  But 
Wooders  withstood  the  Captain's  Proposal,  and  told  him, 
that  when  he  came  from  Campeachy  there  were  two  small 
Vessels  ready  to  sail  for  Tobasco  River,  which  is  not  above 
1 1  or  1 2  Leagues  Leeward  of  Trist,  and  that  it  was  more 
probable  these  were  those  two  Vessels  than  any  from 
Jamaica.  Upon  this  we  edged  off  more  to  Sea,  and  they 
also  altered  their  Course  steering  away  still  directly  with 
us ;  so  that  we  were  now  assured  they  were  Spaniards ; 
and  therefore  we  put  away ;  quartering,  and  steering 
N.  W.  and  though  they  still  fetched  on  us  a-pace,  yet  to 
make  the  more  Speed  they  turned  a  Boat  loose  that  was 
in  Tow  at  one  of  their  Sterns,  and  She  being  a  good  Sailer 
came  within  Gun-shot  of  us ;  when,  as  it  pleas^  God,  the 

124 


THE   AUTHOR   CHASED.    AND   ESCAPES 

Lind-wind   dyoj   away  of  a  sudden,  and    the  Sea  Breeze   j 
did  not  yet  spring  up.  ' 

While   the  Wind  tasted  we  thought  our  selves  but  a 
Otgrte  from  Prisoners ;  neither  had  we  yet  great  Hopes  of 
noping  ;  for  our  Ketch,  even  when   light,  was  but  a  dull 
Suler,  worse  being  deep  loaden.     However,  we  had  now 
(uiK  to  unbend  the  Foresail,  and  make  a  studding  Sail  of 
H  it,  10  put  right  before  the  Sea-Breeze  when  it  should  spring 
■  *;<■    This  WIS  accordingly  done  in  a   Trice,  and    in    less 
^■ftu  an  Hour  after  the  Breeze  sprung  up  fresh,  and    we 
Bfut  right  hefarc  the  Wind.     We  had  this  Advantage  in 
^■'R,  tlat  all  the  Sul  wc  had  did  us  Service ;  while  on  the 
^■Ctntriry,  those  who  chased  us,  being  three  Mast  Vessels, 
^Kttuki  nut   bring  all   theirs   to  draw ;   their  After-sails   be- 
^ftalmtd  their  Head-sails,  and  we  held  them  tack  for  two 
^■'tt'  three  Hours,  neither  gaining  nor  losing  Ground.     At 
^■'BS  the  Wind  freshing  on   by  the  coming   of  a  Tornado, 
H'*cgilnal  considerably  of  them;  so  they  fired  a  Gun  and 
H  kfi  iScir  Chase,  hut  we  kept  on  crouding  till  Night;  and 
f  tWclipp'd  on  a  Wind  again  and  saw  no  more  of  them. 
I  In  about  a  Fortnight  after  this,  we  were  got  as  far  to 

I  ^  Ea«  as  Rio  de  la  Gartos,  and  there  overtook  us  a 
I  BBiIt  Barmudocs  Bnat  belonging  to  Jamaica  which  had  not 
I  ^ta  above  ten  Days  come  from  Trist,  but  sailed  much 
L  wtler  than  wc  did.  Therefore  our  Merchant  went  nn 
^■*arj  of  her.  fur  he  saw  we  were  like  to  have  a  long 
^Vwiige;  and  Provision  began  to  be  scarce  already,  which 
^Bt  tould  not  so  Well  brook  as  we.  Our  Course  lay  all 
r^ig  against  the  Trade-Hind. 

I         All  the  Hopes  that  we   had    was  a  good  North,  this 

I    bang  the  only  Time  of  the  Year  for  it :  and  soon  after  wc 

I    wr  ■  black  Cloud  in  the  N.  W.  (which  is  a  Sign  of  a  North, 

I    bwt  of  this  more  in  my  Discourse  of  Winds)  for  two  Days, 

Htorning  and  Evening.     The  third  Day  it  rose  apace  and 

atae  away  very  swiftly-     Wc  presently  provided  to  receive 

:'  by  furling  all  but  our  Main-sail ;    Intending  with  that 

(0  take  the  Advantage  of  it.     Yet  this  did  us  but  little 

Mprice;  for  after  an  Hour's  time,  in  which  it  blew  fresh  at 

^Kw.    tbc  Qoud  went  away,  and  the  Wind  came  about 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  again  at  £.  N.  E.  the  usual  Trade  in  these  Parts.  We 
^^^  therefore  made  use  of  the  Sea  and  Land-Breezes,  as  we  had 
done  before ;  and  bong  now  as  high  as  the  beforementionM 
Fishing  Banks  on  the  North  of  Jucatan,  we  so  ordered  our 
Business,  that  with  the  Land-winds  we  run  over  to  the 
Banks ;  and  while  it  was  calm  between  the  Land-winds  and 
Sea-Breeze,  we  put  out  our  Hooks  and  Lines  and  fished, 
and  got  Plenty  every  Morning :  One  Time  our  Captain 
after  he  had  haled  in  a  good  Fish,  beii^  caigcr  at  his  Sport, 
and  throwing  out  lus  Lone  too  hastily,  the  Hook  hitched 
in  the  Palm  of  his  Hand,  and  the  Weight  of  the  Lead  that 
was  thrown  with  a  Jerk,  and  hung  about  six  Foot  from  the 
Hook,  forced  the  Beard  quite  through,  that  it  appeared  at 
the  Back  of  his  Hand. 

Soon  after  this  we  got  as  high  as  the  Mount,  and  then 
stood  oflF  about  30  Leagues  from  Land,  in  hopes  to  get 
better  to  Windward  there,  than  near  the  Shore;  because 
the  Wind  was  at  £.  S.  E.  and  S.  E.  by  E.  a  fresh  Gale : 
continuing  so  2  or  3  Days.  We  steered  off  to  the  North, 
expecting  a  Sea-Breeze  at  E.  N.  E.  and  the  tlurd  Day  had 
our  Desire.  Then  we  tack*d  and  steered  in  again  S.E.  for 
the  Shore  of  Jucatan.  Our  Ketch,  as  I  said,  was  a  heavy 
Sailer,  especially  on  a  Wind :  for  she  was  very  short ;  and 
having  great  round  Bows,  when  we  met  a  Head-Sea,  as 
now,  she  plunged  and  laboured,  not  going  a-head,  but 
tumbling  like  an  Egg-shell  in  the  Sea.  It  was  my  Fortune 
to  be  at  the  Helm  from  6  a  Clock  in  the  Evening  till  8. 
The  first  2  Glasses  she  steered  very  ill ;  for  every  Sea 
would  strike  her  dead  like  a  Log ;  then  she  would  fall  off 
2  or  3  Points  from  the  Wind,  though  the  Helm  was  a 
Lee;^  and,  as  she  recovered,  and  made  a  little  way,  she 
would  come^  again  to  the  Wind,  till  another  Sea  struck  her 
off  again.  By  that  Time  3  Glasses  were  out  the  Sea  be- 
came more  smooth ;  and  then  she  steered  very  well,  and 
made  [pretty  fresh  way  through  the  Water.  I  was  some- 
what surprized  at  the  sudden  Change,  from  a  rough  Sea 

^  It  may  be  necessary  to  point  out  that  when  the  helm  is  put  down,  or 
to  leeward,  the  ship  comes  up  into  the  wind.  When  it  is  put  up,  or  to 
windward,  the  ship  ^*  falls  off"  from  the  wind. 

126 


ALCRANE   ISLAND 

1  unooth ;    and  therefore  looked   over-board   2  or  3    ajj. 

for  she  stceiwi  open  on  the  Deck,'  and  it  being  '^■'5 

r  Weather,  ail  our  Men  were  lain  down  on  the  Deck 

Icn  asleep.     My  Captain  was  just  behind  me  on  the 

Qumcr  Deck    fast   asleep   too,  for   neither  he  nor   they 

Jroded  any  Danger,  we  being  about  30  Leagues  from  the 

^MaiifLami,  at  Noon,  and  as  we  thought,  not  near  any 

^B     But  while  I  was  musing  on  the  sudden  Alteration  of 

^^ptSea,  our  Vessel  struck  on  a  Rock,  with  such  Force  that 

^Hk  Mniipstaff"'  threw  me  down  on  my  Back  :  This  frighted 

Hmc  »  much  that  I  cried  out,  and  bad  them  all  turn  out, 

^^nhc  Ship  struck.     The  Surge  that  the  Ship  made  on  the 

Ri^k,  awakened  most  of  our  Men,  and  made  them  ask, 

^Tiit  the  (natter  was?     But  her  striking  a  second  Time, 

vxn  inswcrcd  the  Question,  and  set  us  all  to  work  for  our 

f-iTa.     By  good  Fortune  she  did  not  stick,  but  kept  on 

ixr  way  still,  and  to  our  great  Comfort,  the  Water  was 

'■1=7  tmooth,  otherwise  we  must  certainly  have  been  lost ; 

■'^we  very  plainly  saw  the  Ground  under  us:  so  we  let 

-' '  our  Anchor,  in  2  Fathom  Water,  clean  white  Sand  : 

IVhea  cnir  Sails  were  furled,  and  a  sufficient  Scope  of  Cable 

veered  out,  our  Captain,  being  yet  in  amaze,  went  into  his 

Cakin,  aod  most  of  us  with  him  to  view  his  Draught,  and 

we  loon  found  wc  were  fallen  foul  of  the  Alcranes.* 

The  Alcnmes  are  5  or  6  low  sandy  Islands,  lying  in 
At  Lit.  of  about  13  d.  North,  and  distant  from  the  Coast 
dfjucatui  about  25  Leagues:  the  biggest  is  not  above  a 
Mik  or  two  in  Grcuit.  They  arc  distant  from  one  another 
1  or  J  Mile,  not  lying  in  a  Line,  but  scattering  here  and 
dkre,  with  good  Channels  of  20  or  30  Fathom  Water,'  for 
I  Ship  to  p«9»  between.  All  of  them  have  good  Anchoring 
OB  the  West-sides,  where  you  may  ride  in  what  Depths 
piu   please,   from    10  to  2   Fathom   Water,  clean   sandy 

•  /^,  tbt  aritcel  wu  not  under  a  poop  or  half  deck. 

*  j^  vlupvUlT  wu  a  tar  of  iron  or  wood  used  as  it  lillcr  aboard  small 

I  j^  I  hin"''^*  '^'*  ^'^'^  thallower  ihan  Daropiei  ttai«s.    "10  or  30 
(•  •ooU  be  mot*  »ccvrete. 

127 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AX.  Ground.  On  some  there  are  a  few  low  Bushes  of  Btirton- 
1675  wood,  but  they  are  mostly  barren  and  sandy,  bearing 
nothing  but  only  a  little  Chicken-Weed ;  neither  have  they 
any  fresh  Water.  Their  Land-Animals  are  only  lai]ge 
Rats,  which  are  in  great  Plenty ;  and  of  Fowk,  Boobies  in 
vast  Abundance,  with  Men  of  War  and  Egg-Birds.  These 
inhabit  only  some  of  the  Northermost  of  them,  not  pro- 
miscuously one  among  another,  but  each  sort  within  their 
own  Precincts,  (viz.)  the  Boobies  and  the  other  two  sorts 
each  a-part  by  themselves ;  and  thus  two  or  three  of  the 
Islands  are  wholly  taken  up.  The  Boobies  being  most 
numerous,  have  the  greatest  Portion  of  Land.  The  Egg- 
Birds,'  tho'  they  are  many,  yet  being  but  small,  take  up  little' 
room  to  the  rest :  Yet  in  that  little  part  which  they  inhaUt, 
they  are  sole  Masters,  and  not  disturbed  by  their  Neigh- 
bours. All  three  Sorts  are  very  tame,  especially  the  BooUes, 
and  so  thick  settled,  that  a  Man  cannot  pass  through  thdr 
Quarters,  without  coming  within  Reach  of  their  Bills,  with 
which  they  continually  peckt  at  us.  I  took  notice  that 
they  sat  in  Pairs ;  and  therefore  at  first  thought  them  to 
be  Cock  and  Hen ;  but  upon  striking  at  them,  one  flew 
away  from  each  Place,  and  that  which  was  left  behind 
seemed  as  malicious  as  the  other  that  was  gone.  I  admired 
at  the  Boldness  of  those  that  did  not  fly  away,  and  used 
some  sort  of  Violence  to  force  them,  but  in  vain;  for 
indeed  these  were  young  Ones,  and  had  not  yet  learned 
the  use  of  their  Wings,  tho*  they  were  as  big  and  as  well 
feathered  as  their  Dams,  only  their  Feathers  were  something 
whiter  and  fresher.  I  took  notice  that  an  old  one,  either 
the  Cock  or  Hen,  always  sat  with  the  Young  to  secure 
them ;  for  otherwise  these  Fowls  would  prey  on  each  other, 
the  Strong  on  the  weak,  at  least  those  of  a  diflFercnt  Kind 
would  make  bold  with  their  Neighbours  :  the  Men-of-War- 
Birds  as  well  as  the  Boobies  left  Guardians  to  the  Young, 
when  they  went  off  to  Sea,  lest  they  should  be  starved  by 
their  Neighbours;  for  there  were  a  great  many  old  and 
lame  Men-of- War-Birds  that  could  not  fly   oflF  to  Sea  to 

*  A  sort  of  tern  common  throughout  the  West  Indies  (Hydrodulidtm 
fuliginosum\ 

128 


ITS   INHABITANTS— SHARKS,   ETC. 

t  their  own  Food-     These  did  not  inhabit  among  their    \tt\ 
rts,  but  were  cither  expelled  the  Community,  or  else  '^S 
:  to  lye  out  ai  some  Distance  from  the  rest,  and  thai 
:  altogether ;  but  scattering  here  and  there,  where  thejr 
"  1  rdb  securest :  I  saw  near  20  of  them  on  one  of  the 
ids,  which  sometimes  would  sally  into  the  Camp   to 
t  for  Booty,  but  presently  retreated  again,  whether  they 
t  any  thing  or  nothing.     If  one   of  these  lame  Birds 
1  a  young  Booby  not  guarded,  it  presently  gave  him  a 
I  Poult '  on  the  Back  with  his  Bill  to  make  him  dis- 
gorge, which  they  will  do  with  one  Stroak,  and  it  may  be 
cttt  up  a  Kish  or  two  as  big  as  a  Man's  Wrist ;  this  they 
ratih>w  in  a  Trice,  and  march  off,  and  look  out  for  another 
fnu.    The  sound  Men-of-War  will  sometimes  serve  the 
iU  Boobtcs  so  off  at  Sea.      I  have  seen  a  Man-of-War  fly 
'^iftely  at  a  Booby,  and  give  it  one  blow,  which  has  caused 
n  lu  cast    up  a   large  l-'ish,  and  the  Man-of-VVar  flying 
iywtljr  down  after  it,  has  taken  it  in  the  Air,  before  it 
■ach'd  the  Water. 

There  are  Abundance  of  Fish  at  some  Distance  from 
c  Islands,  by  which  the  Fowls  inhabiting  here,  are  daily 

f  The  Fish  near  the  Island,  are  Sharks,  Sword-Fishes,  and 
s ;  all  three  sons  delighting  to  be  near  sandy  Bays ; 
:  that  1  saw  here  were  but  of  a  small  Size,  the  Sword- 
k  not  above  a  Foot  and  a  half,  or  two  Foot  long  ;  neither 

■  the  Sharks  much  longer,  and  the  Nurses  about  the 
Length.     The  Nurse  is  just  like  a  Shark,  only  its 

I  is  rougher,  and  is  used  for  making  the  flnesi  Rasps. 

c  are  many  Seals;  they  come  up  to  sun  themselves  only 
5  or  three  of  the  Islands,  1  don't  know  whether  exactly 
i  same  kind  with  those  in  colder  Climates,  but,  as  I 
noted  in  my  former   Book,  they  always  live  where 

:  »  Plenty  of  Ftsh. 

La  cndhai  old  word  which  dnervct  to  be  rcnincd.  C/.  I'urchas, 
.  Book  6,  Chan.  &,  a»ccniing  anoihcr  Somcnclshirc  sailor.  "John 
.  .  .  lookc  «  tlw  Pumpc  brake  or  handle,  and  casi  it  10  VViUiam 
btddiRr  bin  kiMckc  him  {n  furkish  pirate)  downe,  which  he  wa&  not 

■  doiof,  bol  U^u  Bp  the  wooden  weapon  he  gave  hint  luch  a  pult 
fm*  u  SMdc  hU  bmnei  fonakc  tlic  poueuion  u(  \u»  head." 

ou  ti.  129  I 


CAPTAIN    DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 


t3  T:  tnr  Njcri:   :r  triese  Kan::^  lycs  a  long  Ledge  rf 

i  B-'*';  :*  sccais  to  be  13  or  12  Yards 


2JDr.\Li  X  L£s^j£s  I'jcg.  zad  3  Leigoes  distant 
TT'XXL  zbt  lilini-  TbsT  ITS  aboTc  Waicr,  all  joinii^  very 
clvse  :o  \jrt  i=,  'JiZ'Cr.  except  at  ^xic  or  two  Places^  where 
ar^  2ZL2.I1  Passages  al>:> ut  9  or  x  c  Yards  wide ;  *twas 
through  occ  Lf  th-isc  that  Pra«iienoe  directed  us  in  the 
Nigh: ;  tor  the  next  Morning  we  saw  the  Riff  about  half 
a  Mile  to  the  North  rA  us.  and  right  agunst  us  was  a  small 
Gap,  by  vhich  we  came  in  hither,  but  coming  to  view  it 
more  ntarlv  with  O'.ir  Boar,  we  did  not  dare  to  venture  out 
that  way  again.  One  Reas*Dn  why  we  would  have  gone  out 
to  the  Norrhward,  was,  because  from  our  NIsun-top  we  saw 
the  Islands  to  the  Southward  ^  of  us,  and  being  unacquainted, 
knew  not  whether  we  might  find  among  them  a  Channel 
to  pass  through ;  our  second  Reason  was  the  Hopes  of 
making  a  better  Slant  in  for  the  Shore,  if  we  could  weather 
the  East  end  of  the  Riff.  In  order  to  this  we  wdghed 
Anchor,  keeping  down  by  the  Side  of  the  Riff  till  we  were 
at  the  West  end  of  it,  which  was  about  a  League  from 
where  we  anchored :  then  we  stood  off  to  the  North,  and 
there  kept  plying  off  and  on  to  weather  the  East  end  of 
the  Riff,  three  Days;  but  not  being  able  to  effect  it,  by 
Reason  of  a  strong  Current  setting  to  the  N.  W.  we  ran 
back  again  to  the  West  end  of  the  Riff,  and  steered  away 
for  the  Islands.  There  we  anchored  and  lay  three  or  four 
Days,  and  visited  most  of  them,  and  found  Plenty  of  such 
Creatures,  as  I  have  already  described. 

Though  here  was  great  Store  of  such  good  Food  and 
wc  like  to  want,  yet  we  did  neither  salt  any,  nor  spend  of 
it  fresh  to  save  our  Stock.  I  found  them  all  but  one  Man 
averse  to  it,  but  I  did  heartily  wish  them  of  another  Mind, 
because  I  dreaded  wanting  before  the  end  of  the  Voyage ; 
a  Hazard  which  we  needed  not  to  run,  there  being  here 
such  Plenty  of  Fowls  and  Seals,  (especially  of  the  latter) 
that  the  Spaniards  do  often  come  hither  to  make  Oyl  dF 
their  Fat ;   upon  which  Account  it  has  been  vi^ted   by 

'  They  must  have  ran  aground  a  little  to  the  north  of  the  Isla  Destenadav 
the  most  northerly  of  the  group. 

130 


CAPTATW  LONG   SHIPWRECKED 

gli^-men    fnioi   Jamaica,    paniculzrlv  by  Capt.   Lang :    ax 
fco  having  the  Command  of  a  small  Bark,  came  hither  "^5 
ttrposciy  to  make  Scal-OyI,  and  ancfuwtd  on  the  North 
Idc  of  one  of  the  sandy  Islands,  the  most  convenient  Place, 

ar  his  Dcsgn : Having  got  ashore  his  Cask  lo  put  his 

Oyl  in,  and  set  up  a  Tcni  for  lodging  himself  ud  lus 
Gocxli,  be  began  to  kill  the  Seal,  and  had  not  wrought 
above  three  or  four  Days  before  a  fierce  Nortb-^nd  blew 
h»  Bark  ashore.  By  good  Fortune  she  was  not  damnified  : 
but  hti  Company  being  but  small,  and  so  despairii^  of 
Etting  her  afltjat  again,  they  fell  to  contriving  how  to  get 
ray ;  a  ver>'  difficult  Task  to  accomplish,  for  tt  was  24 
r  2$  Leagues  to  the  neanrst  Place  of  the  Main,  and  above 
DO  Leagues  to  Trist.  which  was  the  next  English  Settle- 
tent.  But  cootrary  to  their  Expectation,  instead  of  that, 
apt.  Long  Wd  them  follow  their  Work  of  Seal-killing 
■d  making  Oyl;  assuring  them  that  he  would  undertake 
t  hi»  own  Peril  to  carry  them  safe  to  Trist.  This  though 
I  went  much  against  the  Grain,  y«  at  last  he  so  far  pre- 
vailed by  fair  Words,  that  they  were  contented  to  go  on 
with  their  Seal-killing,  till  they  had  filled  all  their  Cask. 
But  their  greatest  Work  was  yet  to  do,  viz.  how  they 
iboold  get  over  to  the  Main,  and  then  coast  down  before 
the  Wind  to  Trist.  Their  Boat  was  not  big  enough  to 
trampcn  them,  so  they  concluded  to  cut  down  the  Barks 
Masts  and  rip  up  her  Deck  to  make  a  Float  for  that 
PurpDte. 
I  This   being   agreed    00,    the    next    Morning    betimes, 

Hfaursuant  to  their  Resolution,  they  were  going  to  break 
^■p  their  Vessel ;  but  it  happened  that  very  Night,  that 
^^bo  New-England  Ketches  going  down  to  Trist,  ran  on 
^Ac  Backside  of  the  Riff,  where  they  struck  on  the  Rocks, 
^^U  were  bulged ;  and  Captain  Long  and  his  Crew  seeing 
Pftem  ia  Distress,  presently  took  their  Boat,  and  went  off 
To  help  them  unlade  their  Goods,  and  bring  them  ashore : 
and  in  Requital  they  furnished  the  Captain  with  such 
Tackle  And  other  Necessaries  as  he  wanted,  and  assisted 
1  in  the  launching  his  Vessel,  and  lading  his  Oyl,  and 
r  went  merrily  away  for  Trist.  This  lucky  Accident 
131 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  into  the  Main-Land,  where  they  anchor  at  a  Place  called 
'^75  One-Bush-Key.  We  stayed  at  Trist  three  Days  to  fill  our 
Water,  and  then  with  our  two  Consorts  sailed  thence  with 
the  Tide  of  Flood ;  and  the  same  Tide  arrived  there.  This 
Key  is  not  above  forty  Paces  long,  and  five  or  six  broad, 
having  only  a  little  crooked  Tree  growing  on  it,  and  for 
that  Reason  it  is  called  One-Bush- Key.  It  seems  to  be 
only  a  Heap  of  Shells,  for  the  Island  is  covered  with  them. 
The  greatest  Part  are  Oyster-shells.  There  are  a  great 
many  Oyster-banks  in  this  Lagune,  and  the  adjacent 
Creeks,  but  none  aflFord  better,  either  for  Largeness  or 
Taste,  than  the  Bank  about  this  Island.  In  the  wet 
Season  the  Oysters  as  well  of  One-Bush-Key  as  other 
Places  here,  are  made  fresh  by  the  Freshes  running  out  of 
the  Country :  But  in  the  dry  Time  they  are  salt  enough. 
In  the  Creeks  they  are  smaller,  but  more  numerous ;  and 
the  Mangrove-Roots  that  grow  by  the  Sides  of  the  Creeks 
are  loaden  with  them;  and  so  are  all  the  Branches  that 
hang  in  the  Water. 

One-Bush-Key  is  about  a  Mile  from  the  Shore;  and 
just  against  the  Island  is  a  small  Creek  that  runs  a  Mile 
farther,  and  then  opens  into  another  wide  Lagune;  and 
through  this  Creek  the  Logwood  is  brought  to  the  Ships 
riding  at  the  Key.  Between  the  Oyster-Banks  that  lye 
about  the  Island  and  the  Main,  there  is  good  Riding  in 
about  12  Foot  Water.  The  bottom  is  very  soft  Oaz, 
insomuch  that  we  are  forced  to  shooe  our  Anchors  to 
make  them  hold.  The  Main  by  it  is  all  low  Mangrovy- 
Land,  which  is  overflow'd  every  Tide;  and  in  the  wet 
Season  is  covered  with  Water.  Here  we  lay  to  take  in 
our  Lading. 

Our  Cargo  to  purchase  Log-wood  was  Rum  and  Sugar ; 
a  very  good  Commodity  for  the  Log-wood-cutters,  who 
were  then  about  250  Men,  most  English,  that  had  settled 
themselves  in  several  Places  hereabouts:  Neither  was  it 
long  before  we  had  these  Merchants  come  aboard  to  visit 
us;  we  were  but  6  Men  and  a  Boy  in  the  Ship,  and  all 
little  enough  to  entertain  ithem :  for  besides  what  Rum  we 
sold  by  the  Gallon  or  Firkin,  we  sold  it  made  into  Punch, 

122 


FROLICKSOME  LOGWOOD-CUTTERS  ■ 

vhcrcwith    they   grew    Frolicksome.      We    had    none    but  aw" 

all  Arms'  to  fire  at  their  drinking  Healths,  and  there-  '*''S 
the  Nobc  was  not  very  great  at  a  Distance ;  hut   on 

1  the  Vessels  wc  were  loud  enough  till  all  our  Liquor  _ 

I  spent :  We  took  no  Money  for  it,  nor  expected  any ;  H 

Lc^-wood  was  what  we  came  hither  for,  and  we  had  H 

""  that  in  lieu  of  our  Commodities  after  the  Rate  of  five  H 

Pound  per  Ton,  to  be  paid  at  the  Place  where  they  cut  it :  H 

and  wc  went  with  our  Long-boat  to  fetch  small  Quantities.  H 

But    because  it  would   have  taken  up  a  long  time  to  load  ^| 

our  Vessel  with  our  own  Boat  only,  we  hired  a  Periago  of  H 

Ihc  Logwood -Cutters  to  bring  it  on  Board  ;  and  by  that  H 

means  made  the  quicker  Dispatch.     I  made  two  or  three  H 

Trips   to   their    Huts,  where    I  and   those  with   me  were  H 

ijwijrs   very    kindly  cnteruin'd    with  Pig    and   Pork,  and  H 

Pease,  or  Beef  and  Dough-Boys.     Their  Beef  they  got  by  H 

hunting  in  the  Savannahs.     As  long  as  the  Liquor  lasted,  H 

which  they  bought  of  us,  we  were  treated  with  it,  either  in  H 

Drams  or  Punch.      But  for  a  more  particular  Account   of  H 

the  Logwood -Cutters  I  shall  refer  the  Reader  to  my  second  ■ 

Voyage  hither,  which  1  made  shortly  after  my  Return  to  H 

Jamaica,  because  I  saw  a  great  Prospect  of  getting  Money  H 

here,  if  Men  would  be  but  diligent  and  frugal.  ■ 

But  let's  proceed  with  our  Voyage.     It  was  the  latter  V 
Old   of  September,   1675,  when  we  sailed   from  One-Bush- 
Key  with  the  Tide  of  Ebb;  and  anchored  again  at  Trist 
that  same  Tide ;  where  we  watered  our  Vessel  in  order  to 

wL     Thb  wc  accomplished  in   two  Days,  and   the  third  ■ 

D«y  sailed  from  Trist  toward  Jamaica.     A  Voyage  which  H 

proved  rcry  tedious  and  hazardous  to  us,  by  Reason  of  our  H 

Ships  being  so  sluggish  a  Sailer  that  She  would  not  ply  to  H 

Windward,  whereby  wc  were  necessarily  driven  upon  several  H 

Shoals  that  otherwise  we  might  have  avoided,  and  forced  H 

to  sperKl  thirteen  Weeks  in  our  Passage,  which  is  usually  ■ 

accomplished  in  half  that  Tmie.  I 

Wc  had  now  a  Passenger  with  us,  one  Will.  Wooders  I 

a  Jamaica  Seaman,  that  with  three  others  that  were  taken  H 

■  It  «u  Umo  the  *u<ustocn  ta  Tirr  a  f  un  wbeo  drinking  n  health.    The  ^^ 

I  MHMii  tod  to  gnat  wu»  o(  powder.  ^M 

123  ■ 


CAPTAIX   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 


»•»  '■^. 


'jr,  tic  Bet,  s»:cie    re   -p^cr  wDcjd  scudc  stir  oat 


:r  tii  TTiT  z'x   z:i^     ^^*  }r"*i  r:«2i  or  ^^M^rn  (which 
rig't  asilj  hiT*  5:re^   tbiiiii^i  Fodc  begin  to  be  si 

Months  of  June  or 


■^     —X, 


J::! J  -B^i  rrizrt  rr:ctt.r>  hzTe  gocta  Turtle,  for  they 
frfc-:irrt  tids  biji  s:cie  Years  ss  much  ss  they  do  little 
CaTTrir«.  W*  siiTci  hsn  but  3  or  4  Homs,  and  steered 
batzk  fyr  F-ts,  nteiii-g  zhcrt  to  hunt  for  Beef  or  Hog, 
^A  yji'z  which  thicri  :s  Ls  great  plenty.  The  second  day 
in  the  Morring  w*  ftrll  i=  with  the  West-end  of  Pines,  and 
mnning  al»ut  4  cr  5  Miles  Northward,  we  anchored  in 
4  fathom  Water  clean  Sa:;i,  aSyjt  2  Nfile  from  the  Shore, 
and  right  against  a  smaL  Creek  through  the  Mangroves 
into  a  wide  Lagune. 

The  Isle  of  Pines  lies  on  the  South-side,  towards  the 
West-end  of  Cuba,  and  is  distant  from  it  3  ch*  4  Leagues. 
Cape  Corientes  on  Cuba  is  five  or  six  Leagues  to  the  West- 
ward of  the  Isle  of  Pines.  Between  Pines  and  Cuba  are 
many  small  woody  Islands  scattered  here  and  there,  with 
Channels  for  Ships  to  pass  between ;  and  by  report  there 
is  good  anchoring  near  any  of  them.  Jamaica  Sloops  do 
sometimes  pass  through  between  Cuba  and  Pines,  when 
they  are  bound  to  Windward,  because  there  the  Sea  is 
always  smooth  :  They  are  also  certain  to  meet  good  Land- 
winds;  besides  they  can  anchor  when  they  please,  and 
thereby  take  the  benefit  of  the  Tides ;  and  when  they  are 
got  past  the  East-end  of  Pines,  they  may  either  stand  out 
to  Sea  again,  or  if  they  are  acquainted  among  the  small 
Islands  to  the  East  of  it,  (which  are  called  the  South  Keys 
of  Cuba)  they  may  range  amongst  them  to  the  Eastward, 
still  taking  the  greater  benefit  of  the  Land-winds  and 
Anchoring ;  besides,  if  Provision  is  scarce  they  will  meet 
Jamaica  Turtlers,  or  else  may  get  Turtle  themselves,  at 
which  many  of  them  are  expert.  There  is  also  plenty  of 
iMsh  of  many  Sorts,  but  if  they  are  not  provided  with 
Hooks,  Lines,  or  Harpoons,  or  any  other  Fishing-Craft, 
nor  meet  with  any  Turtles,  Cuba  will  afford  them  Susten- 
ance of  Hog  or  Beef.     The  great  inconvenience  of  going 

134 


in  the  inside  of  Pines  between  it  and  Cuba,  proceeds  from 
a  Spanish  Garrison  of  about  40  Soldiers  at  Cape  Corientes, 
who  have  a  large  Pcriago,  well  fitted  with  Oars  and  Sails, 
and  are  ready  to  launch  out,  and  seize  any  small  Vessel, 
and  seldom  spare  the  Lives  as  well  as  the  Goods  of  those 
that  fall  into  their  Hands  for  fear  of  telling  Tales.  Such 
VilUnics  are  frequently  practised  not  only  here,  but  also 
in  several  other  places  of  the  West-Indies,  and  that  too 
with  such  as  come  to  trade  with  their  Country-men.  The 
Merchants  and  Gentry  indeed  are  no  way  guilty  of  such 
I  Actions,  only  the  Soldiers  and  Rascality  of  the  People; 
and  these  do  commonly  consist  of  Mulatoes  or  some  other 
•ort  of  Coppcr-coloiir'd  Indians,  who  are  accounted  very 
larbarotis  and  cruel. 

The  Isle  of  Fines  is  about  1 1  or  12  Leagues  long,  and 
3  or  4  broad.  The  West-end  of  it  is  low  Mangrovy-Land  ; 
■nd  within,  which  is  a  Lagune  of  about  3  or  4  Miles  wide, 
funning  to  the  Eastward,  but  how  far  I  know  not,  with  a 
small  Creek  of  2  or  3  Foot  Water,  reaching  to  the  Sea. 
The  Lagune  it  self  is  so  shallow,  especially  near  the  Island, 
that  you  cannot  bring  a  Canoa  within  20  or  30  Paces  of 
the  shore.  The  South-side  of  the  Island  is  low,  fiat,  and 
|-rocky;  the  Rocks  are  perpendicularly  steep  towards  the 
jSca,  so  that  there  is  no  Anchoring  on  that  side ;  but  the 
West-end  very  good  in  Sandy  Ground.  The  Body  of  the 
hland  is  high  Land,  with  many  little  Hills  incompassing  a 
high  Pike  or  Mountain  standing  in  the  middle.  The  Trees 
that  grow  here  arc  of  divers  sorts,  most  of  them  unknown 
Id  mc.  Red  Mangroves  grow  in  the  low  swampy  Land 
the  Sea,  but  on  the  firm  hilly  part  Pine-Trees  are 
plentiful.  Of  these  here  are  great  groves  of  a  good 
'and  bigness,  streight  and  largccnough  to  make  Top- 
■  standing  Masts  for  small  Vessels ;  at  the  West-end 

a  pretty  big  River  of  fresh  Water,  but  no  coming 

it  near  the  Sea  for  Red  Mangroves,  which  grow  so  thick 

both  sides  of  it,  that  there  is  no  getting  in  among  them. 

The    Land-Animals    arc    Bullocks,    Hogs,    Deer,    &c. 

Here  are  small  Savannahs  for  the  Bullocks  and  Deer  to 

fced    in,  as  well  as   Frutt    in   the    Woods    for    the    Hogs: 

»3S 


:  APT  A3"    1\KM?lE?JS    VC 


J.  'zzs:rt  irt  1.5.  I  z-vn  :r  iioins  :r  iTtrar  Cxixes.  and  in 
"  i-.Tiiit  riscri  TLiin—  :f  I-uic-7::rti^  i=ii  Larrc-Oahs  of  two 
iiUnE.  Tni-r  ir^s.  ^Licx  Hiicr  :f  ■ierr:  =:akc  holes  in  the 
rri'iiiii.  2Jt±  Z  :r:tr^.  "vi^ir^  nrrr  2i«iLt:=r  rrerrselves  all  Day, 
izd  .-  'Ji:t  VjTtr  nee  m.  r:  fisc :  tier  will  eat  Grass, 
Kms.  :r  51^  rr^z  is  tire^  iic  vini-sr  tbe  Trees:  The 
^Ixr.c^iir-iiL  rTiiz.  -^nciz  zjei~er  Bcri  =or  Beast  will  taste, 
s  iT^siiil-  iiT-  cr:ii  ri  lirerr:^  vi~ocr  ixng  them  any 
'.dm.  Ttr  TTcse  titt  Crx?s  ti'u.r  fi^sd  on  NLmchaniel,  arc 
-rT'.ri' :»-?^  :•  r-  t:  NLi.-i  i.-:c  Beast  tiat  feeds  00  them, 
■::--■  u:X*  — e  :r-fir^  ir:  -irr  r:«:c  Miat;  the  white  Crabs 
irt  -.-e  -iTT^-  >:r: :  ^rrr*  :r  ther::  xrs  as  btg  as  a  Mans 
nr:  Fji3  ;:7^ei  tci^^:  ^^^J  1^  shaped  like  Sea-Crabs, 
iiiT:-^  :!3S  ^ar^i  C'j.^.  '^hiri'sith  they  will  pinch  very 
ziri^  r.ei'ih'ir  tf^II  rh-ij  I'it  r*:-  theb*  Hold,  though  you 
br-:ise  then  in  Prices,  unless  tou  break  the  Claw  too;  but 
if  iheT  :hir.;e  ::  citch  ycur  Rsgers,  the  way  is  to  lay  your 
Hani,  Crab  ani  all.  fiat  cr.  the  Ground,  and  he  will 
:n:ni*i:a:t>  I  rose  his  Hrli  ani  scamper  away.  These 
wh::e--3nes  build  ir.  wet  swampy  dirty  Ground  near  the  Sea, 
so  :ha:  -he  Tide  washes  into  their  Holes;  but  the  black 
Crab  is  more  cleanly,  delighting  to  live  in  dry  Places,  and 
makes  i3  Hr-use  in  sandy  Earth  :  black  Crabs  are  commonly 
far  and  full  of  Eggs ;  they  are  also  accounted  the  better 
Meat,  tho'  bi^th  s«:)r3  are  ver\"  good. 

Here  are  also  a  great  many  Alligators  and  Crocodiles 
that  haunc  about  this  Island,  and  are  said  to  be  the  most 
daring  in  ail  the  West-Indies.  I  have  heard  of  many  of 
their  Tricks;  as  that  they  have  followed  a  Canoa,  and 
put  their  Noses  in  over  the  Gunnal,  with  their  Jaws  wide 
open,  as  if  ready  to  devour  the  Men  in  it :  and  that  when 
they  have  been  ashore  in  the  Night  near  the  Sea,  the  Croco- 
diles have  boldly  come  in  among  them,  and  made  them 
run  from  their  Fire,  and  taken  away  their  Meat  from  them. 
Therefore  when  Privateers  are  hunting  on  this  Island,  they 
always  keep  Centinels  out  to  watch  for  these  ravenous 
Creatures,  as  duly  as  they  do  in  other  Places  for  fear  of 
Enemies,  especially  in  the  Night,  for  fear  of  being  devoured 
in  their  Sleep. 

136 


HUNTING   BEEF   AND    HOGS 

The  Spaniariis  of  Cuba  have  here  some  Craules,  i.e. 
Hcrdt  of  Hogs,  with  a  few  Indians  or  Muiatoes  to  look 
afrcr  them  :  Here  are  also  Hunters  that  gain  a  LiveHhood 
by  killing  wild  Hog  and  Beef. 

This  Island  is  reported  to  be  very  wet.  I  have  heard 
many  say,  that  it  rains  here  more  or  less  every  Day  in  the 
Vear;  but  thi«  I  suppose  is  a  Mistake,  for  there  fell  no 
Rain  about  us,  so  long  as  we  staid  here,  neither  did  I  see 
any  Appearance  of  it  in  other  Places  of  the  Island. 

Wc  were  no  sooner  at  an  Anchor,  but  five  of  us  went 

ashore,   leaving  only  the    Cook  and  Cabbin-Boy  aboard : 

We  had  but  two  bad  Fowling-Pieccs  in  the  Ship  ;  those  we 

took  with  us,  with  a  Design  to  kill  Beef  and  Hog,     We 

went  into  the  Lagune,  where  we  found  Water  enough  for 

our  Canoo,  and  in  some   Places  not   much  to  spare ;  when 

we  were  got  almost  over  it,  we  saw  eight  or  ten  Bulls  and 

Cowi  feeding  on  the  Shore  close  by  the  Sea.      This  gave 

us   great    Hopes  of  good    Success.       We    therefore   rowed 

away  aside  of  the  Cattle,  and  landed  on  a  sandy  Bay,  about 

"ilf  a  Mile  from  them:  there  we  saw  much  Footing   of 

^tcn  and  Boys;  the  Impressions  seemed  to  be  about  eight 

-  ten  Days  old,  wc  supposed  them  to  be  the  Track  of 

T^nish  Hunters.     This  troubled  us  a  little,  but  it  being 

w  their  Christmas,  wc  concluded  that  they  were  gone 

■  «■  ti»  Cuba  to  keep  it  there,  so  we  went  after  our  Game ; 

-c  Bijatswain  and   our  Passenger  Will.   Wooders  having 

r,e  Gun,  and  presuming  on   their  Skill   in  Shooting,  were 

pcnniiied  to  try  their  Fortune  with  the  Cattle  that  we  saw 

B^orc  we  landed,  while  the  Captain  and  my  self  with  our 

^■n  Gun  struck  up  directly  into  the  Woods.     The  fifth 

^kn,  whose  Genius  led  him  rather  to  fish  than  hunt,  stayed 

^■the  Canoa :  and  had  he  been  furnished  with  a  Harpoon, 

^B  might  have  gotten  more  Fish  than  we  did  Flesh,  for  the 

^■Itlc  smelling  our  two  Men  before  they  came  nigh  them, 

^B  away  ;  after  that  our  Men  rambled  up  into  the  Country 

^Hieek  for  tome  other  Game. 

^M  The  Capuin  and  I  had  not  gone  half  a  Mile  before 
He  came  among  a  Drove  of  near  40  great  and  small  wild 
I  Hogs.  The  Captain  firing,  wounded  one  of  them,  but 
■  _  '37 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AX.  they  all  ran  away;  and  though  we  followed  the  Blood  a 
'^75  good  way,  yet  did  not  come  up  with  him,  nor  with  any 
other  to  get  a  second  Shot ;  however,  because  there  was 
such  a  great  Track  of  Hogs  in  the  Woods,  we  kept  beating 
about,  being  still  in  hopes  to  meet  with  more  Game  before 
Night,  but  to  no  Purpose,  for  we  saw  not  one  more  that 
Day.  In  the  Evening  we  returned  to  our  Boat  weary  and 
vext  at  our  ill  Success.  The  Boatswain  and  his  Consort 
were  not  yet  returned,  therefore  we  stayed  *till  *twas  dark, 
and  then  went  aboard  without  them  :  the  next  Morning 
betimes  we  went  ashore  again,  as  well  to  try  our  Fortune 
at  Hunting,  as  to  recover  our  two  Men  which  we  thought 
might  now  be  returned  to  the  Place  where  they  landed ; 
but  not  seeing  them,  the  Captain  and  I  went  again  out  to 
hunt,  but  came  back  at  Night  with  no  better  Success  than 
before  ;  neither  did  we  see  one  Beef  or  Hog,  though  much 
Track  all  the  Day.  This  Day  he  that  look'd  to  the  Boat 
kilTd  a  young  Sword-fish  with  the  Boat-hook ;  there  were 
a  great  many  of  them,  as  also  Nurses  and  Dog-fish,  playing 
in  shole  Water ;  he  had  also  discovered  a  Stream  of  fresh 
Water,  but  so  inclosed  with  thick  red  Mangroves,  that 
'twas  impossible  to  fill  any  in  Cask ;  we  could  scarce  get  a 
little  to  drink.  Our  two  Men  that  went  out  the  Day 
before,  were  not  yet  returned;  therefore  when  'twas  dark 
we  went  aboard  again,  being  much  perplex'd  for  fear  of 
their  falling  into  the  Hands  of  the  Spanish  Hunters ;  if  we 
had  been  certain  of  it,  we  would  have  sailed  presently,  for 
we  could  not  expect  to  redeem  them  again,  but  might  have 
been  taken  our  selves,  either  by  them,  or  by  the  Cape 
Soldiers  before  mentioned.  Indeed  these  Thoughts  about 
their  Danger  and  our  own,  kept  me  waking  all  Night. 
However  the  next  Morning  betimes  we  went  ashore  again, 
and  before  we  got  into  the  Lagune  we  heard  a  Gun  nred, 
by  which  we  knew  that  our  Men  were  arrived ;  so  we  fired 
another  in  Answer  and  rowed  away  as  fast  as  we  could  to 
fetch  them,  designing  to  sail  as  soon  as  we  came  aboard ; 
for  by  the  flattering  South  and  S.  W.  Winds  together  with 
the  Clearness  of  the  Sky,  we  supposed  we  should  have  a 
North  ;  the  Land  intercepted  our  Prospect  near  the  Horizon 

138 


SCARCITY   OF   PROVISION 

■'■  the  N.  W.  ihcreforc  we  did  not  see  the  black  Cloud 
rcrc,  which  is  a  pure  Prt^nostic  of  a  North;  when  we  ' 
lime  »shore  w*e  found  our  two  Men.  They  killed  a  Hog 
:nc  first  Day,  but  losing  their  way,  were  forced  to  march 
like  Tigrcs  all  the  next  Day  to  get  to  us,  and  threw  away 
most  of  their  Meat  to  lighten  themselves,  yet  'twas  Night 
Vfore  thev  got  to  the  Side  of  the  Lagune  ;  and  then  being 
■.hne  or  four  Miles  still  from  us,  they  made  a  Fire  and 
-tilted  their  Meit,  and  having  fiU'd  their  Bellies,  lay  down 
■  ■  *leep,  yet  had  still  a  small  Pittance  left  for  us.  We 
presently  rctumetl  aboard,  and  feasted  on  the  Remains  of 
-c  Roast-meat,  and  being  now  pretty  full,  got  up  our 
Anchor  ami  stood  away  m  the  South,  coasting  along  by  the 
Itluid  ;  and  doubling  the  S,  W.  Point,  we  steered  away 
F.,  S.  E.  We  had  the  Wind  when  we  weighed  at  West  a 
rri'-dcntc  Gale,  but  veering  about  to  the  North,  got  at 
N.  W.  By  that  Time  we  got  to  the  South  West  Point  of 
Kin«,  and  it  now  blew  a  fierce  Gak-,  and  held  thus  two 
Days,  and  then  came  to  the  N.  N.  W.  blowing  hard  still, 
tad  from  thence  to  the  North :  then  we  edged  away  S.  E. 
t'lT  it  blew  hard,  and  we  could  not  bring  her  nearer  the 
Wind.  From  the  N,  it  came  about  to  the  N.  N.  E.  then 
"r  kocw  that  the  Heart  of  it  was  broke,  however  it  blew 
Mfd  niti  :  then  it  came  about  to  the  N.  E.  and  blew  about 
r'rur  Hours,  and  so  by  Degrees  dyed  away  and  edged  more 
I  jMcrty,  till  it  came  to  the  E.  by  N.  and  there  it  stood. 
'•Vc  were  in  good  Hopes  while  the  North  continued,  to 
Bivc  gotten  to  Jamaica  before  it  ceased,  and  were  sorry  to 
fad  our  selves  thus  disappointed  ;  for  we  could  not  see  the 
Uaad,  though  we  judged  we  could  not  be  far  from  it; 
It  Noon  We  had  a  good  Observation,  and  found  ourselves 
m  the  Latitude  of  the  Island. 

We  now  had  not  one  Bit  of  any  Kind  of  Food  aboard  ; 
therefore  the  Captain  desired  to  know  our  Opinions  what 
to  do,  and  which  way  wc  might  soonest  get  to  some  Shore, 
oAer  to  beat  for  Jamaica,  or  to  t»ear  away  before  the  Wind, 
fr  tlie  South  Keys.  All  the  Seamen  but  my' self,  were  for 
|n^  to  tbc  South  Keys,  alledging  that  our  Ship  being 
inch  a  dull  Sailer  would  never  go  to  Wmd-ward  without 
»39 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  the  Help  of  Sea  and  Land  Breezes,  which  we  could  not 
'^75  expect  at  such  a  Distance  as  we  were,  being  out  of  the 
Sight  of  any  Land :  and  that  it  was  probable  that  in  three 
or  four  Days  Time  we  might  be  among  the  South  Keys,  if 
we  would  put  for  it ;  and  there  we  should  find  Provision 
enough,  either  Fish  or  Flesh.  I  told  them  that  the  Craft 
was  in  catching  it,  and  it  was  as  probable  that  we  might  get 
as  little  Food  in  the  South  Keys,  as  we  did  at  Pines,  where, 
though  there  was  Plenty  of  Beefs  and  Hogs,  yet  we  could 
not  tell  how  to  get  any :  besides  we  might  be  six  or  seven 
Days  in  getting  to  the  Keys ;  all  which  Time  we  must  of 
Necessity  fast,  which  if  *twere  but  two  or  three  Days, 
would  bring  us  so  low,  that  we  should  be  in  a  weak 
Condition  to  hunt.  On  the  contrary,  if  they  would  agree 
to  beat  a  Day  or  two  longer  for  the  Island  Jamaica,  we 
might  in  all  Probability  see,  and  come  so  near  it,  that  we 
might  send  in  our  Boat  and  get  Provision  from  thence, 
though  we  could  not  get  in  to  anchor :  for  by  all  Likeli- 
hood we  were  not  so  far  from  the  Island,  but  that  we 
might  have  seen  it,  had  it  been  clear ;  and  that  the  hanging 
of  the  Clouds  seemed  to  indicate  to  us,  that  the  Land  was 
obscured  by  them.  Some  of  them  did  acquiesce  with  me 
in  my  Opinion  ;  however,  'twas  agreed  to  put  away  for  the 
South  Keys,  and  accordingly  we  veered  out  our  Sheets, 
trimm'd  our  Sails,  and  steered  away  N.  N.  W.  I  was  so 
much  dissatisfied,  that  I  turned  into  my  Cabbin,  and  told 
them  we  should  be  all  starved. 

I  could  not  sleep,  tho'  I  lay  down ;  for  I  was  very 
much  troubled  to  think  of  fasting  3  or  4  Days,  or  a  Week ; 
having  fared  very  hard  already.  Indeed  'twas  by  meier 
Accident  that  our  Food  lasted  so  long ;  for  we  carried  two 
Barrels  of  Beef  out  with  us  to  sell,  but  'twas  so  bad  that 
none  would  buy  it ;  which  proved  well  for  us :  for  after 
our  own  Stock  was  spent,  this  supplied  us.  We  boiled 
every  Day  two  Pieces  ^  of  it ;  and  because  our  Peas  were 
all  eaten,  and  our  Flour  almost  spent,  we  cut  our  Beef  in 

^  In  seaman's  measure  the  "piece"  of  beef  weighed  four  pounds;  the 
"piece"  of  pork  two  pounds.  In  practice,  the  pieces  weighed  rather  less 
than  this  ;  the  beef  about  3 J  lbs.  and  the  pork  i^  lbs. 

140 


4 


A  jOYFOL  SIGHT  OF  LAND 

L  Bits  after  'twas  boiled,  and  boiled  it  again  in  Water,  an. 
k'U  with  a  litcic  Klour,  and  so  eat  it  altogether  with  '^^  i 
The  little  Pieces  of  Beef  were  like  Plumbs  in  our 
dge.  Indeed  'twas  not  tit  to  be  eaten  any  other 
r  though  it  did  not  stink,  yet  it  was  very  unsavoury 
md  black,  without  the  least  sign  of  Fat  in  it :  Bread '  and 
Hour  being  scarce  with  us,  we  could  not  make  Dough- 
'-  fi'  to  eat  with  it.     But  to  proceed,  1  had  not  lain  in  my 

-  ibbin  above  three  Glasses,  before  one  on  the  Deck  cryed 
.1,  I^mJ '  l^nd!     I  was  very  glad  at  the  News,  and  we 

-  I  immediately  discerned  it  very  plain.     The  first  that  we 
_ii»  was  High-land,  which  we  knew  to  be  BIcwficIdb-Hill.* 

.  a  Bending  or  Saddle  on  the  Top,  with  two  small  Heads 

r,  each  Side.     It  bore  N.  E.  by  E.  and  we  had  the  Wind 

-•  EL  therefore  we  presently  clapp'd  on  a  Wind,  and  steered 

■1  N.  N.  E.  and  soon  after  we  saw  all  the  Coast,  being  not 

.■>.*vc  5  or  6  Leagues  from  it.     We  kept  jogging  on  all 

-c    Aftcmiwn,    nut    striving   to    get    into  any    particular 

:'Licc;  but  where  we  could  fetch,  there  we  were  resolved 

Anchor :  The  next  Day  being  pretty  near  the  Shore, 

<r*cen   Bk-wficlds   Point,  and    Point-Nigrill,  and    having 

'■ic  Wind  large  enough  to  fetch  the  latter,  we  steered  away 

directly    thither;    and    seeing  a  small    Vessel    about    two 

Leagues  N.  W.  of  us,  making  Signs  to  speak  with  us  by 

huywig  atid   lowring   her  Topsails,  wc  were  afraid  of  her, 

•ad  edged  in  nearer  the  Shore ;  and  about  there  a  Clock  in 

ibe  Aftcmixtn,  to  our  great  Joy,  we  anchored  at  Nigrill, 

■  ktviag  \xcTi  thirteen  Weeks  on  our  Passage.     I  think  never 

^>)  \cael  before  nor  since,  made  such  Traverses  in  coming 

I  of  the  Bay  as  wc  did,  having  first  hlundcr'd  over  the 

Rknny  Kiff*.  and  then  visited  those  Islands;  from  thence 

among  the  Colorado  Shoals,  afterward  made  a  Trip 

■,  Caymancs ;  and  lastly,  visited   Fines,  tho'  to  no 

In  all  these  Rambles  we  got  as  much  Exjiericnce 

■  we  had  been  sent  out  on  a  Design. 

As  won  as  we  came  to  anchor,  wc  sent  our  Boat  ashore 

'  By  "  bread  "  a  uitcx  mnns  biscuit. 

*  A  iii)ii|{b-lKi]r  i>  a  tori  nf  Mxlden  dumpling. 

»  Ob  the  S.W.  coml 


:>A\EPIER75  VOYAGES 


T— 


i.ni:    i:    ? 


1    i  'sv. 


i*A 


3«.-    1 


ir   r.    "i:Tnm   zz 


21  ^    .  rmr.c 


-ur^>  -T  icr.iuc 


irr.  .^^  x:    ?. 
V:. 


X 


^^es.«   after  our  long 
basic  goiii^  to  drink 
zinrrgtiiY   Cape    Rawlins^ 
i  Vessel,  that  wc  left 
zr,  who  had  been  in  the 
L«3gvoQii,   and   was  nov 
aboard,  and  weit 
us;  the  Bowl  hid 
^ughi  be  ox  Quarts  in 
re  by  Cape.  Rawlins,  who 
bsjznz    the   Bowl  in  lus 
2  OoHh  to  drink  but  three 
-.  arad  paning  the  Bowl  to 
I>%ughi,  and  so  making 
ci  ocr  Expectations,  till 
D£xt  Diy  havii^  a  brisk 
ct  Cbocolatto  North,^  «t 
eaded  this  trouUesome 


as  a  Oiocolatto  North. 


142 


CHAP.  II 

ImttMri  t*rmnd  Vayai^t  U  th*  Bay  »f  Camptwhy.     Hh  arrival  m 

At  hit  af  Triit,  and  utlliig  with  tfu  LaguMtd-Ctttfri.     A  Dt- 

tiri^Bm   af  tht  CtaU  fram   Capr   CenJarda  ts  Trht.     SaSmn  tr 

Sail  Ptttdi,    Salt  gathrrrdfir  th  Spaniard!  hy  ihr  Indiam,    Hlaa, 

m  rfimariaM  HilJ.    Haru-hMf-fiih.     Tkt  TriamgU  hlamdi.    Cam- 

ftatky  Tnvn  twiit  tain,     Itt  iftie/  Tradt,  Catttn.     C/iamfiftm 

tt'mtr  ;  and  iti  Lagumd,  a  rith  Ctrnmadity.    Part-Royal  Harbaur 

mmd    lUand.       Pritiiy-Grau.      SapadilU    Trea.       Trht     liland 

daeriyd.     Cf^-PUmh-huthn.     Tht    Gref>t-Trff.      Its    Anirnah, 

LtEMrdi.     LagHKa   Termina  and  its  ttrang  Tidn.     Summusnila' 

Rrvrr,  and  Chac^tbull  Tnvn.     Strlts  kit  Kiy.     Captain  Srrlti 

Im  AJwntmra.     Th*  Eatl  and  lym  Lagtuus^  with  thtir  Braachn 

zmhaiittd  by  Lagwaad-Cuttm.    Oah  graivtng  thfrtj  and  na  where 

tht  nithia  tht  Trtpicit,     Tfu  Original  af  tht  Lagwoad-Trajt. 

Tiu   Rainy  SramM,  and  grtat  FUads  accauaned  by  Norl/ii.      The 

dry  Stmam.    /Hid  Pinfplaat,    Tht  LagttMed-Tra.     Bload-fP'ead, 

ilaci-fiih   Ifaad  and  Cantvjaad,     A  Dmriptian  af  lome  Animals, 

Sfmathti,  largt  iamg-taifd  iManityi,  Ant'itari,  SUtht,  Armadilloi, 

Tigre-Cali,  Stiaift  af  thrtt  larts,  Galliuiaip*,  Huge  Spiders,  Great 

Jnti  amd  ihtir  Nttll.      Rambling  Anti,  Humming   Birds,  Blaci- 

Bmtt,    Turtlt-Drvti,   Quami,   Carretat,    Carrian    Craws,    Suhtlt 

iath.  Bill-birds,  Catiretas,  Dtuis  af  stvtral  sarts,  Curlews,  Htrans, 

Crakmukrrs,  PiRiam,  Carmaranit,  Fishing  Hawks.    Several  sorts 

af  Fiik,      Ten-fawndin,  Parieaatai,  Garr-fish,  Spanish  Mackril : 

T%t  Ray,  AlSgatars,     Cracadi/rs,  haw  thty  differ  fram  Alligaton. 

A  marram  Eitap*  af  an  Irish-man  frem  an  AUigalar. 

f  T  wu  not  long  after  our  Arrival  at  Port-Royal,  before   jun.  , 
we   were    paid    off,    and   discharged.     Now   Captain   t^s\ 
Johnson  of  Ncw-England,  being  bound  again  Into  the 
k.  Bajr  of  Campcachjr.  1  took  the  Opportunity  of  going 
luBcoger  with  him,  being  resolved  to  spend  some  Time 
the  Logwood  Trade;  and  accordingly  provided   such 
143 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIERS   VOYAGES 


\s.  Necessaries  is  wen:  rcqi;ired  about  it  (viz.)  Hatchets,  Axes, 
'^'''5  Nlachca^,  (i.^.  Long  Knives)  Saws,  Wedges,  &c.  a  Pavillion 
to  sleep  in,  a  Gun  with  Powder  and  Shot,  &c.  and  leaving 
a  Letter  of  Attorney  with  Mr.  Fleming,  a  Merchant  of 
Port-Royal,  as  well  to  dispose  of  any  thing  that  I  should 
send  up  to  him,  as  to  remit  to  me  what  I  should  order,  I 
took  leave  of  mv  Friends  and  imbarked. 

About  the  Middle  of  Feb.  75-6,  we  sailed  from 
Jamaica,  and  with  a  fair  Wind  and  Weather,  soon  got  as 
far  as  Cape  Catoch ;  and  there  met  a  pretty  strong  North, 
which  lasted  two  Days.  After  that  the  Trade  settled  again 
at  E.  N.  E.  which  speedily  carried  us  to  Trist  Island.  In 
a  little  time  I  settled  my  self  in  the  West  Creek  of  the 
West  Lagune  with  some  old  Logwood-Cutters,  to  follow 
the  Employment  with  them.  But  I  shall  proceed  no 
farther  with  the  Relation  of  my  own  Affairs,  till  I  have 
given  a  Description  of  the  Country,  and  its  Product,  with 
some  Particulars  of  the  Logwood-Cutters;  their  hunting 
for  Beef,  and  making  Hides,  &c. 

I  have  in  my  former  Voyage  described  the  Coast  from 
Cape  Catoch  to  Cape  Condecedo.  Therefore  I  shall  now 
begin  where  I  then  left  off,  and  following  the  same  Method, 
proceed  to  give  some  Account  of  the  Sea-coast  of  the  Bay 
of  Campeachy ;  being  competently  qualified  for  it  by  many 
little  Excursions  that  I  made  from  Trist  during  my  Abode 
in  these  Parts. 

The  Bay  of  Campeachy  is  a  deep  bending  of  the  Land, 
contained  between  Cape  Condecedo  on  the  East,  and  a 
Point  shooting  forth  from  the  High-Land  of  St.  Martins 
on  the  West.  The  Distance  between  these  two  Places  is 
about  1 20  Leagues,  in  which  are  many  large  and  navigable 
Rivers,  wide  Lagunes,  &c.  Of  all  which  I  shall  treat  in 
their  Order,  as  also  of  the  Land  on  the  Coast;  its  Soil, 
Product,  &c.  Together  with  some  Observations  concern- 
ing the  Trees,  Plants,  Vegetables,  Animals,  and  Natives  of 
the  Country. 

From   Cape    Condecedo  to  the  Salinas^  is   14  or  15 

1  Real  de  las  Salinas. 
144 


mmmm 


Logocs;  the  Coast  runs  in  South:  It  is  all  a  sandy  Bay   ak. 
between,  and  the  Land  also  within  is  dry  and  sandy,  pro-  '^'S 
ducine  only  sovnc  scrubbed  Trees.    Half-way  between  tiiese 
two  Places  you  may  dig  in  the  Sand  above  High-water 
Mark,  and  find  very  gocxl  fresh  Water. 

The  Salina  is  a  fine  soull  Harbour  for  Barks :  but 
there  is  not  above  6  or  7  Foot  Water;  and  close  by  the 
Sea,  a  little  within  the  Land,  there  is  a  large  Salt  Pond, 
belonging  to  Campeachy  Town,  which  fields  Abundance 
of  Salt.  At  the  Time  when  the  Salt  kerns,  which  is  in 
May  or  June,  the  Indians  of  the  Country  arc  ordered  by 
the  Spuiiards  to  give  their  Attendance,  to  rake  it  ashore, 
and  gather  into  a  great  Pyramidal  Heap,  broad  below  and 
sharp  at  the  Top,  like  the  Ridge  (if  a  House  ;  then  covering 
it  all  over  with  dry  Grass  and  Reeds,  they  set  Fire  to  it ; 
and  this  burns  the  out-side  Salt  to  a  h^il  black  Crust : 
The  hard  Crust  ts  aftcr^s■ards  a  Defence  against  the  Rains 
:hat  arc  now  settled  in,  and  preserves  the  Heap  dry  even 
~  the  wettest  Season.  The  Indians,  whose  Business  I  have 
[fdd  you,  is  10  gather  the  Salt  thus  into  Heaps,  wait  here 
by  Turns  all  the  Kerning  Season,  not  less  than  forty  or 
fiifty  Families  at  a  Time ;  yet  here  are  no  Houses  for  them 
to  lie  in,  neither  do  they  at  all  regard  it ;  for  they  are 
relieved  by  a  fresh  Supply  of  Indians  every  Week :  and 
they  alt  sleep  in  the  open  Air,  some  on  the  Ground,  but 
Ti'st  in  very  poor  Hammocks  fastened  to  Trees  or  Posts, 
!vick  into  the  Ground  for  that  Purpose.  Their  Fare  is 
'■•  better  than  their  Lodging;  for  they  have  no  other 
F'l-jd  while  they  are  here  but  Tartilloes  and  Posole. 
I'anillocs  arc  small  Cakes  made  of  the  Flour  of  Indian 
Ojfn;  and  Posole  is  also  Indian  Curn  boiled,  of  which  they 
oake  their  Drink.  But  of  this  more  hereafter,  when  I 
;rat  of  the  Natives  and  their  manner  of  Living.  When 
■Jic  Kerning  Season  is  over,  the  Indians  march  Home  to 
ihnr  lettled  Habitations,  taking  no  more  Care  of  the  Salt. 
I  Bot  the  Spaniards  of  the  Campeachy,  who  arc  Owners  of 
'  lie  PondB,  do  frequently  send  their  Barks  hither  for  Salt, 
10  loul  Ships  that  lye  in  Campeachy  Road  ;  and  afterwards 
'nsspoft  it  to  all  the  Ports  in  the  Bay  of  Mexico,  especially 

VOL.  IL  145  K 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  to  Alvarado  and  Tompeck/  two  great  Fishing  Towns :  and 
^^75  I  think  that  all  the  Inland  Towns  thereabouts,  are  supplied 
with  it;  for  I  know  of  no  other  Salt  Ponds  on  all  the 
Coast,  besides  this  and  those  before  mentioned.  This 
Salina  Harbour  was  often  visited  by  the  English  Logwood- 
Cutters  in  their  way  from  Jamaica  to  Trist.  And  if  they 
found  any  Barks  here,  either  light  or  laden,  they  made  bold 
to  take  and  sell  both  the  Ships  and  the  Indian  Sailors  that 
belonged  to  them.  This  they  would  tell  you  was  by  way 
of  Reprizal,  for  some  former  Injuries  received  of  the 
Spaniards ;  though  indeed  'twas  but  a  Pretence :  for  the 
Governours  of  Jamaica  knew  nothing  of  it,  neither  durst 
the  Spaniards  complain;  for  at  that  Time  they  used  to 
take  all  the  English  Ships  they  met  with  in  these  Parts, 
not  sparing  even  such  as  came  laden  with  Sugar  from 
Jamaica,  and  were  bound  for  England ;  especially  if  they 
had  Logwood  aboard.  This  was  done  openly,  for  the 
Ships  were  carried  into  the  Havana,  there  sold,  and  the 
Men  imprisoned  without  any  Redress. 

From  the  Salinas  to  Cam  peachy  Town,  is  about  20 
Leagues ;  the  Coast  runs  S.  by  W.  The  first  4  Leagues 
of  it,  along  the  Coast  is  drowned  Mangrove-Land,  yet 
about  two  Mile  South  of  the  Salina,  about  200  Yards 
from  the  Sea,  there  is  a  fresh  Spring,  which  is  visited  by 
all  the  Indians  that  pass  this  way  either  in  Bark  or  Canoa; 
there  being  no  Water  besides  near  it ;  and  there  is  a  small 
dirty  Path  leads  to  it  thro*  the  Mangroves ;  after  you  arc 
past  these  Mangroves,  the  Coast  riseth  higher  with  many 
sandy  Bays,  where  Boats  may  conveniently  land,  but  no 
fresh  Water  till  you  come  to  a  River  near  Campeachy 
Town.  The  Land  further  along  the  Coast  is  partly 
Mangrovy,  but  most  of  it  dry  Ground,  and  not  very 
fruitful ;  producing  only  a  few  scrubbed  Bushes :  and 
there  is  no  Logwood  growing  on  all  this  Coast,  even 
from  Cape  Catoch  to  Campeachy  Town. 

About  six  Leagues  before  you  come  to  Campeachy, 
there    is  a   small   Hill  called   Hina,  where  Privateers  do 

*  Tampico. 
146 


TORSEHOOF   FISH— CAMPEACHY  TOWN 

nmunly  anchor  and  keep  Centinels  on  the  Hill,  to  look  -an. 
for  Ships  hound  to  the  Town  :  There  is  Plenty  of  '^^5 
Fire-wood,  but  no  Water ;  and  in  the  Surf  of  the 
,  close  by  the  Shore,  you  find  Abundance  of  Shell-fish, 
call'd  by  the  English,  Horsehfjofs,  Iwcause  the  under-part 
or  Belly  of  the  Fish  is  flat,  and  somewhat  resembling  that 
Figure  in  Shane  and  Magnitude  ;  but  the  Back  is  round  like 
k  Turtle's;  the  Shell  is  thin  and  brittle,  like  a  Lobster's; 
with  many  small  Claws:  and  by  report  they  are  very 
good   Meat ;  but   I   never  tasted  any  of  them   my  self. 

There  are  three  small  Inw  sandy  Islands,'  about  25 
or  26  I^^eagucs  from  Hina,  bearing  North  from  it,  and 
30  Leagues  from  Campeachy.  On  the  South-side  of  these 
llaods  there  is  good  Anchorage;  but  neither  Wood  nor 
Vater:  and  as  for  Animals,  we  saw  none,  but  only  great 
Dfnbcrs  of  large  Rats  and  Plenty  of  Boobies,  and  Men- 
f- War- Birds.  These  Islands  arc  call'd  the  Triangles, 
om  the  Figure  they  make  in  their  Position.  There  arc 
other  at  any  distance  from  the  shore,  but  these  and 
Alcranics,  mentioned  in  the  former  Chapter,  in  all 
his  Coast  that  I  have  seen. 

From  Hina  to  Campeachy,  as  1  have  said  before,  is 
htt\n  6  Leagues.  Campeachy  is  a  fair  Town,  standing 
1  the  shore  in  a  small  bending  of  the  Land;  and  is  the 
Dly  Town  on  all  this  Coast,  even  from  Cape  Catoch  to 
'.  Vera  Cruz,  that  stands  open  to  the  Sea.  It  makes  a 
shew,  being  built  all  with  good  Stone.  The  Houses 
:  not  high,  but  the  Walls  very  strong  ;  the  Roofs  flattish, 
after  the  Spanish  Fashion,  and  covered  with  Pantile.  Thcrt 
is  a  strong  Gttadcl  or  Kort  at  one  end,  planted  with  many 
Gum,  where  the  Governor  resides  with  a  small  Garrison 
to  defend  it.  Though  this  Fort  commands  the  Town 
aad  Harbour,  yet  it  has  been  twice  taken.  First  by  Sir 
istopher  Mims;*  who  about  the  Year    1659,    having 

■  TIm  Z*m  Tranglc,  ibe  West  Tiianstc,  luid  the  Seal  Hnnk. 
*  "r  Cluittopbn  Myn^i  (i6is~i666)  ms  a  naval  commander  in  the 
*'      fnm  l6;j  for  *ercral  yean,  and  agnin  from  1663  for  a  shurt 
Bcm*  to  bBtrc  be«n  ai  Citnpcacby  in  1664  ;  but  lie  was  so  full 
i'««pruc*  and  imtjitioiiu "  that  he  may  have  taken  part  in  another, 
|l  mMr,  cvpcdituiD.    Hi*  renurk  to  Uic  privatcert  ajcrees  well  wiifa  ihe 
f  tpim  "  JUtd  pnwd  ^KjfcmK  "  (o*  wKich  b 
147 


atcd. 


CAPTAIN    DAM  PIE  R^   VOYAGES 

A^  suTimoiicd  the  Grv-mcur.  xad  afterwards  stayed  3  Days 
^^"^  for  in  Answ^s"  bef:r;:  he  Landed  his  Men,  yet  then  took 
it  bv  Sccrci,  md  zhsz  onlv  wrrii  small  Arms.  I  have  been 
told  that  when  he  wtis  idTiscd  by  the  Jamaica  Privateers, 
to  tnki  It  hy  Scratag^im  'm  the  Night,  he  replied,  that  he 
scomei  to  st^  a  \':ctonr ;  therefore  when  he  went  against 
it,  he  gave  them  warring  of  his  Approach,  by  his  Drums 
and  Trumpets:  yet  he  took  the  Fort  at  the  first  Onset, 
and  immediitely  became  Master  of  the  Place. 

It  was  raken  a  second  time  by  English  and   French 

Privateers^    about    the   Tear    1678,*    by   surprise.       They 

landed  in  the  N'^ht  about  two  Leagues  from  the  Town, 

and  marching  into  the   Country^  lighted  on  a  Path  that 

brought  them  thither.     The  next  Morning  near  Sun-rising, 

they  entered    the  Town,  when  many  of  the    Inhabitants 

were  now  stirring  in  their  Houses;  who  hearing  a  noise 

in   the  Street,   looked   out  to   know  the  Occasion;    and 

seeing  armed  Men  marching  towards  the  Fort,  supposed 

them  to  be  some  Soldiers  of  their  own  Garrison,  that  were 

returned  out  of  the  Country;  for  about  a  Fortnight  or 

3  Weeks  before,  they  had  sent  out  a  Party  to  suppress 

some  Indians^   then  in  Rebellion ;  a  thing  very  common 

in  this  Country.     Under  favour  of  this  Supposition,  the 

Privateers  marched  through  the  Streets,  even  to  the  Fort, 

without  the   least    Opposition.      Nay,  the   Towns-People 

bad   them  Good   Morrow;   and  congratulated    their  safe 

return;    not  discovering  them    to  be   Enemies,   till  they 

fired  at  the  Centinels   on   the    Fort-wall,    and    presently 

after   began   a    furious   Attack;   and    turning   two   small 

Guns,  which  they  found  in  the  Parade,  against  the  Gates 

of  the  Fort,   they  soon   made  themselves  Masters  of  it. 

The  Town  is  not  very  rich,  though  as  I  said  before,  the 

only  Sea-port  on  all  this  Coast.     The  chiefest  Manufiicture 

*  By  a  strong  company  of  several  hundreds  of  men  with  French  com- 
missions. "In  revenge  for  Spanish  injuries  they  took  Campeachy  and 
kept  it  several  days  "  in  the  summer  of  1678.  The  French  buccaneer  dc 
Grammont  captured  it  again  in  July  1686,  and  made  it  his  base  for  two 
months,  while  he  pillaged  the  district  for  dix  au  douze  lieues  d  la  rondt. 
Before  he  left  the  place  //  fU  sauter  la  Forteresse  and  brula  ginlralemeni 
toute  la  Ville. 

148 


i 


Ubbvroot),  a  rtch  coMMODi*n' 

KoT  the  Country  is  Cotton-Cloth  ;  this  serves  for  cluathing  

the  Indians,  and  even  the  poorer  sort  of  Spaniards  wear  '^5 
nothing  else.     It  is  used  also  for  making  Sails  for  Ships, 
and  remitted  to  other  parts  for  the  same  purpose. 

Beside,  Cotton-Cloth,  and  Salt  fetched  from  the  Salinas,  J 

I  know  of  no  other  vendible  Commodity  exported  hence.  ^M 
Indeed  formerly  this  place  was  the  Scale  of  the  whole  ^M 
Ijogwood-Trade ;  which  is  therefore  still  called  Palo  ^M 
(i./.  Wood)  dc  Campeachy ;  tho'  it  did  not  grow  nearer  H 
tficn  at  12  or  14  Leagues  distance  from  the  Town.  ^M 

The  place  where  the  Spaniards  did  then  cut  it,  was  at  ^| 

^^  River  called  Champcton,'  about    10  or  12  Leagues    to  ^M 

Lcxrward    of  Campeachy  Town  ;    the   Coast    from  thence  ^M 

outh,  the   Land    pretty  high    and    rocky.      TKe    Native  ^M 

dians  that  lived    hereabouts,  were    hired  to  cut   it    for  ^M 

Ryal  >    Day.  it    being    then    worth    90,    too    or    iio/.  H 

Tun.  H 

After  the  English  had   taken  Jamaica,  and    began  to  ^M 

:  in  this  Bay,  they  found  many  Barks  laden  with  it,  ^| 

ut  not  knowing  its  value  then,  they  either  set  them  adrift  H 

■  burned  them,  saving  only  the  Nails  and  Iron  work;  a  ^M 

king  now  usual  among  the  Privateers,  taking  no  notice  at  ^M 

II  of  the  Cargo,  till  Capt.  James,  having  taken  a  great  ^M 
nip  laden  with  it,  and  brought  her  home  to  England,  to  H 

hcT  for  a  Privateer,  beyond   his  Expectation,  sold    his  ^M 

l^ood  at  a  great  rate;   tho'  before  he  valued  it  so  little  ^M 

'lat  he  burned  of  it  all  his  Passage  home.     After  his  return  ^| 

►  Jamaica,  the  English  visiting  this  Bay,  found  out  the  H 

lace  where  It  grew,  and  if  they  met  no  Prize  at  Sea,  they  ^M 

ould  go  to  Champcton  River,  where  they  were  certain  to  ^M 

ad  lai^e  Piles  cut  in  their  Hand,  and  brought  to  the  Sea-  ^M 

ide  ready  to  be  shipp'd    oif.      This  was  their  Common  ^M 

JVacticc  ;  till  at  last  the  Spaniards  sent  Soldiers  thither  to  H 

nt  their  Depredations.  H 

Bat    by   this    time    the    English    knew    the    Trees,  as  H 

ring  ;  and  understanding  their  value,  began  to  rummage  H 

r  Coasts  of  the  Main,  in  search  of  it,  till,  according  to  H 

■  ChanpotoB.    To  leewnrd  is  here  to  ihe  toutli  anil  wr«I.  ^H 

)49  ■ 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AS,  their  desire,  they  found  I^rge  Groves  of  it,  first  at  Cape 
■^'  Catoch ;  (which,  as  I  have  ssud  before,  was  the  first  Place 
where  they  settled  to  Logwood-cutdng)  and  loaded  many 
Vessels  from  thence  to  Jamaica,  and  other  Places.  But  it 
growing  scarce  there,  they  found  out  the  Lagune  of  Trist 
in  the  Bay  of  Campeachy ;  where  they  followed  the  same 
Trade,  and  have  ever  since  continued  it,  even  to  the  time 
of  my  being  here :  But  to  proceed. 

From  the  River  Champeton  to  P(M^-Royal,*  is  about 
1 8  Leagues ;  the  Coast  S.  S.  W.  or  S.  W.  by  S.  Low-land 
iinth  a  sandy  Bay  against  the  Sea,  and  some  Trees  by  the 
shore,  with  small  Savannahs,  mixt  with  small  shrubby 
Woods  within  Land  all  the  way.  There  is  only  one 
River  between  Champeton  and  Port-Royal,  called  Port 
Escondedo. 

Port-Royal  is  a  broad  entrance  into  a  Salt  Lagune,  of 
9  or  ID  Leagues  long,  and  3  or  4  wide,  with  2  Mouths, 
one  at  each  end.  This  Mouth  of  Port-Royal  hath  a  Barr, 
whereon  there  is  9  or  10  Foot  Water.  Within  the  Barr  it 
is  deep  enough,  and  there  is  good  Anchoring  on  either  side. 
The  entrance  is  about  a  Mile  over,  and  two  Miles  in 
length ;  it  hath  fair  sandy  Bays  on  each  side,  iinth  smooth 
Landing. 

Ships  commonly  anchor  on  the  Weather  or  East-side 
next  Champeton,  both  for  the  convenience  of  some  Wells 
there  dug  on  the  Bays  by  the  Privateers  and  Logwood- 
Cutters,  as  also  to  ride  more  out  of  the  Tide,  which  here 
runs  very  strong.  This  Place  is  remarkable  enough, 
because  from  hence  the  Land  trends  away  West,  and  runs 
so  for  about  65  or  70  Leagues  farther. 

On  the  West-side  of  this  Harbour  is  a  low  Island, 
caird  by  Us  Port-Royal-Island ;  -  which  makes  one  side  of 
the  Mouth,  as  the  Main  does  the  other:  It  is  about  2 
Miles  wide  and  3  Leagues  long,  running  East  and  West. 

*  Port  Royal,  or  Puerto  Real,  the  entrance  to  the  Laguna  dc  Tcrminos. 
The  bar  is  of  hard  sand  and  sandstone,  with  much  such  a  depth  as  Dampier 
gives.  Within  the  bar  there  is  good  anchorage  in  from  9  to  i  fathoms, 
with  hard  sand,  and  ooze.  The  tide  runs  E.S.E.  and  W.N.W.,  from  3  to 
i^  knots. 

*  Puerto  Real  Island. 

150 


V  TRIST  ISLAND 

^ne  East-end  of  this  Island  is  sandy  and  pretty  clear  of  : 

^■ood»,  vith  some  Grass,  bearing  a  smaJl  pnckly  Bur,  no  ' 

^bgo*  than  a  Grey  Fca,  which  renders  it  very  troublesome 

^Btbose  that  walk  bare-foot,  as  the  Bay-Men  often  do. 

I  here  are  some  Bushes  of  Burton-wood  :  and  a  little  further 

to    the  West  grow  large  Sapadillo-Trees,  whose  Fruit  is 

long  and  ver)-  pleasant.     The  rest  of  the  Island  is  more 

woody,  especially  the  North-stde,  which  is   full  of  white 

Mxngrov-c  close  to  the  shore. 

On  the  West-side  of  this  Island,  is  another  small  tow 
Island,  called  Trist,  separated  from  the  former  by  a  small 
Sslt-Crcck,  scarce  broad  enough  for  a  Canoa  to  paddle 
through. 

The  Island  Trisi  is  in  some  Places  three  Miles  wide, 
ind  about  four  Leagues  in  length  ;  running  E.  and  W. 
The  East-end  is  swampy  and  full  of  white  Mangroves ;  and 
•.he  South-side  much  the  same:  The  West-part  is  dry 
^nd  sandy,  bearing  a  sort  of  long  Grass,  growing  on  Tufts 
cry  thin.  This  is  a  sort  of  Savannah,  with  some  large 
Palmcto-Trecs  growing  in  it.  The  North-side  of  the 
West-end  is  full  of  Coco-Plum  Bushes,  and  some  Grapes. 

The  Coco-Plum  Bush '  is  about  eight  or  nine  Foot 
Ktgh,  spreading  out  into  many  Branches.  Its  Rhind  black 
jnd  smooth,  the  Leaves  oval  and  pretty  large,  and  of  a 
iark  Green.  The  Frutt  is  about  the  bigness  of  a  Horse- 
Plum,  but  round ;  some  are  black,  some  white,  others 
rrddish  :  The  Skin  of  the  Plum  is  very  thin  and  smooth ; 
the  inside  white,  soft  and  woolly,  rather  fit  to  suck  than 
hite,  inclosing  in  the  Middle  a  large  soft  Stone.  This 
Fruit  grows  commonly  in  ihe  Sand  near  the  Sea ;  and  I 
have  tasted  some  that  have  been  saltish ;  but  they  are 
commonly  sweet  and  pleasant  enough,  and  accounted  very 
dbolcsome. 

The  Body  of  the  Grapc-Trce*  is  about  two  or  three 
l-'x>t  in  Circumference,  gn)wing  seven  or  eight  Foot  high, 
'Hen  tends  forth  many  Branches,  whose  Twigs  are  thick 
lod  gross;  the  Leaves  arc  shaped  much  like  an  Ivy-Leaf, 

*  TlM  coco-plum  {CkryifiiitlimMS  haco). 

•  Tfce  Knpe  tree,  a  diiub  of  iho  Konu«  Cfxrolobo. 


I'.VrCT^.T    T 


^^'^  ti:*-i  'V^^  ^^nr'njT  a  iitnnc*  ir  fTiuh.^:  ^  gmrg  the 
T'*'^  i..^  '^^"^  -le  Tr*2::  r  s  ruarc  -riet  rrrc  aai  the 
iT/iJiu!:  rrsijbt..  ▼'r:!  s.  jsr?*:  szri  inimt  ir  tic  saddle. 
7>-?t  5- -:::-■:  2X  ^*r7  z^^ggrrr  sane  ^Ttntsiimt^  hz:  off  Iittk 
^..-vy^iitAt-i.  zzi*:  ^rj-jui^  XTrnr  s'  jarri  ~ic  5:ct  jtad  Limbs 
^/  rzxK  Tr«:  ar*  ^'^'ji  ?r¥»L  T^xrr\z  *  liissr  i£^\je^  Fire, 
*ii*r»f ';r*:  'jr:*r::  iiK:i  rr  -ie:  Prrr2t2=r5  ^i  hcrrtfr:  tic 

/j^  *mK!r  ^X'mZSi  ^9^Z£SL  ?'^^,'*T- 

7  Srt:  Ariraajt  of  tis  IfTigi-:  irr.  lizsrds. 
V^itn  tTuC  r>Kr:  hwA^  tie  ru=L=>-c  sral]  Lizzni^  there 
n  ir-y/tJitr  vjt:  of  i  iirs*:  kEai,  ziTd  2  LToo-lizard: 
'Ir^n  Crtat  ;iT^  »  ibip^d  niLxh  rcr  the  odacr,  bat  almost  as 
f^;{  it  1  MaTi^i  Arr-,  and  r:  has  a  lar^  Comb  on  its  Head ; 
wfe-rw  ;r  it  a«au3tsxJ  :t  sets  :ts  C:<3ib  up  aa  cad  ;  but  other- 
v;v:  5t  fict  dcnrn  flat:  Htrt  are  two  or  three  sorts  of 
fWiakcs :  v^mc  very  large,  as  I  hare  been  told. 

At  the  West-end  of  the  Island  close  by  the  Sea,  you 
may  dijK  in  the  Sand  five  or  six  foot  deep,  and  find  good 
frcth  Water:  There  arc  commonly  Wells  ready  made  by 
Seamen  to  water  their  Ships ;  but  they  soon  fill  up,  if  not 
cleared ;  and  if  you  dig  too  deep,  your  Water  will  be  salt. 
T\\\%  Uland  was  seldom  clear  of  inhabitants  when  the  English 
vJMfc<!  the  Bay  for  Logwood ;  for  the  biggest  Ships  did 
always  ride  here  in  six  or  seven  Fathom  Water  close  by 
the  nhorc  ;  l>ut  smaller  Vessels  ran  up  three  Leagues  farther 
to  One-Bush  Key,  of  which  in  my  former  Chapter. 

The  Second  Mouth  or  Entrance  into  the  Lagune  is 
Ixttwccn  Trist,  and  Beef-Island/  and  is  about  three  Mile 
wide.  It  is  shoal  without,  and  only  two  Channels  to  come 
in  :  The  deepest  Channel  on  the  Spring-Tide,  has  twelve 
hoot  Water.  It  lies  near  the  middle  of  the  Mouth;  hard 
Sttiul  on  the  Bar;  the  West  Channel  is  about  ten  Foot 
Wtttrr,  and  lies  pretty  near  Beef-Island  :  you  run  in  with 
thr  ScR-Brccze,  and  sound  all  the  way;  taking  your 
Hounding  from  Bccf-Island  shore.  The  bottom  is  soft 
Ott/,  and  it  shoals  gradually.     Being  shot  in  within  Beef- 

*  Cnmicn  Island. 

152 


r 


LAGDNA  TERMINA 
Point,  jrou  will  have  three  Fathom ;  then  you  may 
ind  over  towards  Trist,  till  you  come  near  the  shore,  and 
Te  anchor  as  you  please :  There  is  good  anchoring  any 
ere  within  the  Bar  between  Trist  and  Beef-Island,  but 
:  Tide  is  much  stronger  than  at  Port-Royal,  This  is 
:  other  Mouth  or  Opening  to  the  Salt  Lagunc  before 
;ntioned.  This  Lagunc  is  call'd  by  the  Spaniards,  Laguna 
crmiru,  or  the  Lagunc  of  Tides,  because  they  run  very 
ang  here.  Small  Vessels,  as  Barks,  Periagoes,  or  Canoas, 
ly  sail  through  this  Lagune,  from  one  Mouth  to  the 
llier,  or  into  such  Creeks,  Rivers,  or  smaller  I^guncs,  as 
Ipty  themselves  into  this,  of  which  here  are  many  :  The 
r  of  note  on  the  East-part  of  this  Lagune,  as  you  come 
at  Port-Royal,  is  the  River  Summasenta, 
TTiis  River,  though  but  small,  yet  is  big  enough  for 
feriagues  to  enter.  It  disembogues  on  the  South-side  near 
miiidlc  of  the  Lagune.'  There  was  formerly  an  Indian 
'tllagc  named  Summasenta,  near  the  Mouth  of  the  River ; 
1  another  large  Indian  Town  call'd  Chucquebul,  seven 
eight  Leagues  up  in  the  Country.  This  latter  was  once 
:en  by  thi  Privateers;  by  whom  I  have  been  informed, 
it  there  were  about  two  thousand  Families  of  Indians  in 
zn^  two  or  three  Churches,  and  as  many  Spanish  Friars, 
_:h  iin  white  Men  beside.  The  land  near  this  River 
Ids  plenty  of  T.<^wood. 
From  Summasenta  River  to  One-Bush-Key'  is  four  or 
fe  Leagues,  the  shore  running  West.  I  have  described 
ne^Bu<h-Key,  and  the  Creek  against  it,  which,  as  I  said, 
•very  narrow,  and  not  above  a  Mile  long  before  it  opens 
|o  another  wide  Lake,  lying  nearest  N.  and  S,  called  the 
Lagune.  It  is  about  a  I.A:ague  and  a  half  wide,  and 
Leagues  long,  encompassed  with  Mangrove-Trees, 
the  S,  E.  Otrner  of  it  there  is  another  Creek  about  a 
\le  wide  at  the  Mouth,  running  six  or  seven  Miles  into 
:  Country  ;  on  both  sides  of  it  grows  plenty  of  Logwood  ; 

•  The  UMnnanDi  ha*  to  many  tnouihn  thnt  ihis  mouth  cinnr^i  he  idenii- 
L     Ttel  called  Kici  lUkhaca  apprnn  Ki  he  the  one  meanl  hcrr. 
'  Onr-Both  Key,  and  the  \afCwood  laKonni,  are  situated  at  the  tnnuth 
-T_  «_■:._  L^  1^  ii^  a.W.  uf  the  Lagunn  de  Termini* 

153 


1 


CAPTAIX    DAM  PIERS   VOYAGES 


AS.  therefort  :t  was  ir.hab-rei  by  Eagl^hmcn  who  lived  in 
'^'"^  small  Companies  from  three  to  ten  in  a  Company;  and 
settled  themselves  at  their  best  coavenicncc  for  cutting. 
At  the  head  of  the  Creek  they  made  a  Path,  leading  into 
a  large  Savannah  full  of  black  Cattle,  Horses,  and  Deer ; 
which  was  often  visited  by  them  upon  occasion. 

At  the  North-end,  and  about  the  middle  of  the  East 
Lagune,  there  is  another  small  Creek  like  that  which 
comes  out  against  One-Bush-Key,  but  less  and  shallower, 
which  dischargeth  it  self  into  Laguna  Termina,  against  a 
small  sandy  Key,  called  by  the  English  Series's  Key,  from 
one  Captain  Series,^  who  first  careen*d  his  Vessel  here,  and 
was  afterwards  killed  in  the  Western  Lagune,  by  one  of 
his  Company  as  they  were  cutting  Logwood  together. 
This  Captain  Series  was  one  of  Sir  Henry  Morgan's  Com- 
manders, at  the  sacking  of  Panama;  who  being  sent  out 
to  cruise  in  a  small  Vessel  in  the  South-Seas,  happened  to 
surprize  at  Taboca,  the  Boatsw^n  and  most  of  the  Crew 
belonging  to  the  Trinity^  a  Spanish  Ship,  on  board  which 
were  the  Friars  and  Nuns,  with  all  the  old  Gentlemen  and 
Matrons  of  the  Town,  to  the  number  of  1500  Souls, 
besides  an  immense  Treasure  in  Silver  and  Gold,  as  I  was 
informed  by  Captain  Peralta,*  who  then  commanded  her, 

'  Captain  Series  or  Searles.  Panama  was  sacked  in  January  1671.  After 
the  city  had  been  won,  Henry  Morgan  despatched  Captain  Searles  to  cruise 
for  the  Trinity^  a  galleon  '*  very  richly  laden  with  all  the  King's  plate  and 
great  ciuantity  of  riches  of  gold,  pearl,  jewels,  and  other  most  precious  goods, 
of  all  tne  best  and  richest  merchants  of  Panama.  On  board  of  this  pfalleoo 
were  also  the  religious  women,  belonging  to  the  nunnery  of  the  said  city, 
who  had  embarked  with  them  all  the  ornaments  of  their  church,  consisting 
in  great  quantity  of  gold,  plate,  and  other  things  of  great  value."  This  golden 
galleon  had  "  only  seven  guns  and  ten  or  twelve  muskets "  for  her  deifence. 
She  had  little  food  aboard  her,  and  *'  no  more  sails  than  the  uppermost  sails 
of  the  main  mast"  Her  '*  Boatswain  and  most  of  the  Crew*  were  taken 
at  Taboga,  where  they  were  trying  to  get  water.  Unfortunately  for  the 
buccaneers,  Taboga  was  stored  with  "several  sorts  of  rich  wines"  with 
which  Searles'  men  "  plentifully  debauched  themselves."  By  the  time  thcf 
had  recovered  their  wits  the  galleon  had  been  brought  to  some  safe  harbour. 

'  I)(m  Francisco  de  Peralta,  *'an  old  and  stout  Spaniard,  a  native  of 
Andaliihin  in  Spain."  He  became  a  prisoner  to  the  buccaneers  at  the 
bloody  battle  of  Perico.  His  ship  the  Trinity  became  the  buccaneei's 
cruiser,  and  as  such  she  roved  the  South  Seas  under  Bartholomew  Sharp. 
Peralta  was  released  at  Coquimbo,  December  6, 1680.  He  had  become  "  very 
frantic  through  too  much  hardship  and  melancholy,"  and  the  buccaneen 
were  afraid  to  keep  him  longer. 

154 


RISE   OF  THE  LOGWOOD  TRADE 

IS    he   did    afterwards,  when    she  was    taken    by    Captain 
Sharp ; '  all  which  he  might  have  taken  in  the  Ship  had  he  ' 
pursued  her. 

On  ihc  West-side  of  the  East-Lagune,  there  is  a  small 
Skirt  of  Mangroves,  that  separates  it  from  another  running 
twnillel  with  it,  called  the  East-Lagune,  which  is  about  the 
rngncss  of  the  former. 

Towards  the  North-end  of  this  Lagune  runs  a  small 
TLck,  coming  out  of  the  East-Lagune,  deep  enough  for 
':iail  Barks  to  pass  through. 

At  the  South-end  o(  this  Lagune,  there  is  a  Creek 
about  a  Mile  wide  at  its  Mouth;  and  half  a  Mile  from 
thence  it  divides  into  two  Branches ;  one  called  the  East, 
the  other  ihc  West  Branch,  both  deep  enough  for  small 
Barks  seven  or  eight  Miles  up.  The  Water  is  fresh  ten 
.Months;  but  in  the  midst  of  the  dry  Season  'tis  brackish. 
Four  Miles  from  the  Mouth,  the  Land  on  both  sides 
these  two  Branches  is  wet  and  swampy,  affording  only 
Mangroves  by  the  Creek's  sides;  only  at  the  Heads  of 
them,  there  arc  many  large  Oaks,  besides  which  I  did 
never  ice  any  growing  within  the  Tropicks :  but  20  Paces 
within  that  grows  plenty  of  Logwood,  therefore  the  Cutters 
settled  themselves  here  also. 

On    the  West-side  of  the  West-Branch    lyes  a  large 

PiAiure  for  Cattle  about  three  Miles  from  the  Creek,  to 

■  iich  the  Logwood-Cutters  had    made  Paths  from    their 

!'jU   to    hunt    Cattle,    which   are    always    there    in    great 

jmbcpi,  and  commonly  fatter  than   those  in  the  neigh- 

"^ring  Savannahs;  and  therefore  was  called  the  fat  Savan- 

ih ;  and  this  Wcst-Crcck  was  always  most  inhabited  by 

■gwood-Cutters. 

TTic  Logwood-Trade  was  grown  very  common  before 
iame  hither,  here  being,  as  I  said  before,  about  260  or 
;  Men  living  in  all  the  Lagune  and  at  Bcef-Island,  of 
Mch  Isle  I  shall  speak  hereafter:  This  Trade  had  its  Rise 
■tn  the  decay  of  Privateering ;  for  after  Jamaica  was  well 
•lied  by  the  Engliih,  and  a  Peace  established  with  Spain, 


t  tsAm  Irf  SawMtii.    Shaqi  » 

'55 


>I  cng;)gcd  nl  Penco. 


CAPTAIN    DA?i^?:ER5    VOYAGES 


ijf.  liii  rr:T^-:^:r-=  irn:  had  mnsrr:  3r*i  -pcxi  plundering 
-'"^-  tit  SirsrrizriL.  ir^t  ret  t:  tier-  siEfs";  for  thcv  had 
rr:iiiri.-T  Fren  vixtt-r^tr  tiiy  grc  i",i  now  wanring 
S-'rsis-jnr*-  tt^t;  f:rri:i  shiir  tc  r:  to  Pent  Guavas, 
-v'zart  tt-i  PrrritiiT-Tnd;  still  rtcTinu^d,  or  into  the  Bay 
f:r  L.:j£Tr:.:ii Tbi  nir*  Iziostrious  sort  of 


irt^  trziz*^!.  If  trty  r^isfei :  jr:  tbought  it  a  dry  Business 
t:  ::rl  it  C-rn.=:r  ^>3C.  Thcj  -srsr^  good  Marks-Men, 
gjif  «.:  t:»:i  =:-iri  isl^ht  in  Hunting;  but  neither  of 
tlt'js.*  F.Tr'-iTtrgtts  iSrctei  tltcTn  so  much  as  Privateering; 
thsref'.rt  tt^  iTztn  mlc  Sallies  out  in  small  Parties 
among  tbt  rrtarts:  Irhfiin  Towns;  where  they  plundered 
and  brought  iway  thi  Indian  Women  to  serve  them  at 
their  Huts,  and  smt  their  Husbands  to  be  sold  at  Jamaica; 
besides  they  had  not  forg-it  their  old  Drinking-bouts,  and 
would  still  spend  ^'^  cc  ^cJ.  at  a  sitting  aboard  the  Ships 
that  came  hither  from  Jamaica;  carousing  and  firing  of 
Guns  three  or  four  Days  together.  And  though  after- 
wards many  sober  Men  came  into  the  Bay  to  cut  Wood, 
yet  by  degrees  the  old  Standards  so  debauched  them  that 
they  could  never  settle  themselves  under  any  Civil  Govern- 
ment, but  continued  in  their  Wickedness,  till  the  Spaniards, 
encouraged  by  their  careless  Rioting,  fell  upon  them,  and 
took  most  of  them  singly  at  their  own  Huts ;  and  carried 
them  away  Prisoners  to  Campeachy  or  La  Vera  Cruz; 
from  whence  thev  were  sent  to  Mexico,  and  sold  to  several 
Tradesmen  in  that  City ;  and  from  thence,  after  two  or 
three  Years,  when  they  could  speak  Spanish,  many  of 
them  made  their  Escapes,  and  marched  in  by-Paths,  back 
to  La  Vera  Cruz,  and  by  the  F/o/a  conveyed  to  Spain,  and 
so  to  England.  I  have  spoke  with  many  of  them  since, 
who  told  me  that  none  of  them  were  sent  to  the  Silver 
Mines  to  work,  but  kept  in  or  near  the  City,  and  never 
suffered  to  go  with  their  Caravans  to  New  Mexico,  or  that 
way.  I  relate  this,  because  it  is  generally  suggested  that 
the  Spaniards  commonly  send  their  Prisoners  thither,  and 

'  In  1672,  when  Lord  John  Vaughan  became  Governor  of  Jamaica, 
"  with  orders  to  enforce  the  late  treaty  with  Spain." 

156 


SEASONS 


I  them  very  barbarously;  but 


luld  1 


learn   that 


.   never   I 

;  whether  for  fear  of  " 

V-jovcring   their  Weakness,  or  for  any  other  Reason,   I 

.  ..fw  not.     But  to  proceed.     It  is  most  certain  that  the 

«wood-Cuttcrs,  that  were  in  the  Bay  -vhen  1  was  there, 

e  ail  routed  or  taken ;  a  thing  1  ever  feared,  and  that 

the  reason  that    moved    me  at   last    to    come   away, 

tough   a  Place  where   a  Man    might    have   gotten   an 

Bte. 

Having  thus  given  an  Account  of  the  first  setting  of 
I  Place  by  ray  Country-men,  I  shall  next  say  something 
xmtng  the  Seasons  of  the  Year,  some  particulars  of  the 
untry,  its  Animals,  of  the  Log  wood -Trade,  and  their 
Bncr  of  Hunting,  and  several  remarkable  Passages  that 
►pcncd  during  my  stay  there. 
This  part  of  the  Bay  of  Campeachy  lies  in  about  t8  d. 
North  I^t.  The  Sea-Breezes  here  in  fair  Weather,  are 
S*.  N.E,  or  N.  The  Land-winds  are  at  S.  S.  F-  and  S. 
;  in  bad  Weather  at  f\.  S.  E,  a  hard  gale  for  two  or  three 
f9  together.  The  dry  Season  begins  in  September,  and 
ds  till  April  or  May;  then  comes  in  the  wet  Season, 
"i  b^ins  with  Tornadoes;  first  one  in  a  Day,  and  by 
cs  increasing  till  June;  and  then  you  have  set  Rains 
the  Utter  end  of  August.  This  swells  the  Rivers  so 
t  they  overflow,  and  the  Savannahs  begin  to  be  covered 
b  Water;  and  although  there  may  be  some  intermission 
dry  Weather,  yet  there  are  still  plentiful  showers  of 
>  that  as  the  Water  docs  not  increase,  neither  does 
Iccrease,  but  continues  thus  till  the  North  Winds  are  set 
strong,  and  then  all  the  Savannahs  for  many  Miles,  seem 
be  but  pan  of  the  Sea.  The  Norths  do  commonly  set 
about  the  beginning  of  October,  and  continue  by  intervals 
March.  But  of  tnesc  I  shall  speak  more  in  my  Chapter 
Winds,  These  Winds  blowing  right  in  on  the  Land, 
;  in  the  Sea,  and  keep  the  Tides  from  their  constant 
«e  u  long  as  they  last,  which  is  sometimes  two  or 
:  Days;  by  this  means  the  Freshes  are  pent  up,  and 
rtfow  much  more  than  before,  though  there  be  less 
They  blow  most  fiercely  in  December  and  January ; 
»57 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  but  afterwards  they  decrease  in  Strength ;  and  are  neither 
^^^^  so  frequent  nor  histing,  and  then  the  Freshes  b^n  to  drun 
from  off  the  low  Ground.  By  the  middle  of  February  the 
Land  is  all  dry ;  and  in  the  next  Month  perhaps  you  will 
scarce  get  Water  to  drink,  even  in  those  Savannahs  that 
but  six  Weeks  before  were  like  a  Sea.  By  the  banning 
of  April,  the  Ponds  also  in  the  Savannahs  are  all  dryed  up, 
and  one  that  knows  not  how  to  get  Water  othcrways  may 
perish  for  Thirst ;  but  those  that  are  acquainted  here,  in 
their  Necessity  make  to  the  Woods,  and  refresh  themselves 
with  Water  that  they  find  in  wild  Pines. 

The  wild  Pine  is  a  Plant  so  called,  because  it  somewhat 
resembles  the  Bush  that  bears  the  Pine :  they  are  commonly 
supported,  or  grow  from  some  Bunch,  Knot  or  Excrescence 
of  the  Tree,  where  they  take  root,  and  grow  upright 
The  Root  is  short  and  thick,  from  whence  the  Leaves  rise 
up  in  Folds  one  within  another,  spreading  off  at  the  top: 
They  are  of  a  good  thick  substance,  and  about  ten  or 
twelve  Inches  long.  The  out-side  Leaves  are  so  compact 
as  to  contain  the  Rain-water  as  it  falls.  They  will  hold  t 
Pint  and  a  half,  or  a  Quart ;  and  this  Water  refreshes  the 
Leaves  and  nourishes  the  Root.  When  we  find  these  Pines^ 
we  stick  our  Knives  into  the  Leaves  just  above  the  Root, 
and  that  lets  out  the  Water,  which  we  catch  in  our  Hats, 
as  I  have  done  many  times  to  my  great  Relief. 

The  Land  near  the  Sea  or  the  Lagunes  is  Mangrovy, 
and  always  wet,  but  at  a  little  distance  from  it,  it  is  fast 
and  firm,  and  never  overflow'd  but  in  the  wet  Season. 
The  Soil  is  a  strong  yellowish  Clay:  But  yet  the  upper 
Coat  or  Surface  is  a  Black  Mold,  though  not  deep.  Here 
grow  divers  sorts  of  Trees  of  no  great  bulk  or  height 
Among  these  the  Logwood-Trees  thrive  best,  and  arc  very 
plentiful ;  this  being  the  most  proper  Soil  for  them :  for 
they  do  not  thrive  in  dry  Ground,  neither  shall  you  see 
any  growing  in  rich  black  Mold.  They  are  much  like  our 
White-Thorns  in  England ;  but  generally  a  great  deal 
bigger :  the  Rind  of  the  young  growing  Branches  is  wlute 
and  smooth ;  with  some  Prickles  shooting  forth  here  and 
there :  So  that  an  Englishman  not  knowing  the  diflerencei 

158 


vn 


VOOD  TREES 
would   take  thcni  for  White-Thorns ;  but  the  Body  and    akJ 
"Id  Branches  arc  blackish;  the  Hind   rougher,  with    few 

r  no  Prickles.  The  Leaves  are  small  and  shaped  like 
' '.e  Common  White  •Thorn-Leaf,  of  a  palish  Green.  We 
ilways  chusc  to  cut  the  old  black-rinded  Trees;  for  these 
iavc  less  Sap,  and  require  but  little  pains  to  chip  or  cut  it. 
The  Sap  is  white,  and  the  Heart  red  :  The  Heart  is  used 
Tiuch  for  dyeing ;  therefore  we  chip  off  all  the  white  Sap, 
-\'.l  wc  ccime  to  the  Heart;  and  then  it  is  fit  to  be  trans- 

>rted   to  Europe.     After  it  has  been  chip'd  a  little  while. 

■  turns  black ;  and  if  it  lyes  in  the  Water  it  dyes  it  like 
Ink  ;  and  sometimes  it  has  been  used  to  write  with.  Some 
Trrcs  are  five  or  six  Foot  in  circumference:  and  these  we 
in  scarce  cut  into  Logs  small  enough  for  a  Man's  Burthen, 

ithout  great  Labour;  and  therefore  are  forced  to  blow 
-.rm  up.  It  is  a  very  ponderous  sort  of  Wood,  and  burns 
Tcry  well,  making  a  clear  strong  fire,  and  very  lasting. 
We  always  harden  the  Steels  of  our  Fire-Arms,  when  they 
aiT  faulty,  in  a  Log-wood  fire,  if  wc  can  get  it,  but  other- 
wayi,  as  I  said  before,  with  Burton-wood  or  the  Grape- 
Tncc,  The  true  Logwood  I  think  grows  only  in  the 
Country  of  Jucatan ;  and  even  there  but  only  in  some 
Traces  near  the  Sea.  The  chicfest  places  for  it  are  either 
"  re  or  at  Cape  Catoch,  and  on  the  South-side  of  Jucatan 

■  the  Bay  of  Honduras.  There  arc  other  sorts  of  Wood 
-  jch  like  it  in  Colour,  and  used  for  dyeing  also ;  some 

■re  esteemed,  others  of  lesser  value.  Of  these  sorts 
■'.■'x>d-wood  and  Stock -fish- wood  are  of  the  natural  growth 
f  America. 

The  Gulph  of  Nicaragua,  which  opens  sgatnst  the  Isle 
r  Providence,  is  the  only  Place  that  I  know  in  the  North- 
>-ii,  that  produces  the  Blood-wood.  And  the  Land  on 
-'X  other  side  of  the  Country  against  it  in  the  South-Seas, 
--Dduceth  the  same  sorts. 

TTiis  Wood  is  of  a  brighter  red  than  the  Log-wood. 
-■  WIS  sold  for  30/.  per  Tun,  when  Log-wood  was  but  at 
U  or  15;  and  at  the  same  time  Stock- fish- wood  went  at 
r  8.  ThU  last  sort  grows  in  the  Country  near  Rio  la 
,  to  the  East  of  St.  Martha,  by  the  sides  of  Rivers  in 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  the  Low-Land.  It  is  a  smaller  sort  of  Wood  than  the 
1676  former.  I  have  seen  a  Tree  much  like  the  Logwood,  in 
the  River  of  Conception  in  the  Samballoes ;  and  I  know  it 
will  dye ;  but  whether  it  be  either  of  these  two  sorts,  I 
know  not :  Besides  here  and  in  the  places  before-mentioned, 
I  have  not  met  with  any  such  Wood  in  America. 

At  Cherburg  near  Sierra-Leone  in  Africa,  there  is 
Camwood,  which  is  much  like  Blood- wood,  if  not  the  same. 
And  at  Tunqueen,  in  the  East-Indies,  there  is  also  such 
another  sort :  I  have  not  heard  of  any  more  in  any  part  of 
the  World.     But  to  proceed. 

The  Land  as  you  go  farther  from  the  Sea  riseth  still 
somewhat  higher ;  and  becomes  of  a  more  plantable  Mould : 
There  the  Trees  are  generally  of  another  sort  ;  growing 
higher  and  taller  than  the  Logwood-Trees  or  any  near 
them  :  Beyond  this,  you  still  enter  into  large  Savannahs  of 
long  Grass,  two  or  three  Miles  wide ;  in  some  Places  much 
more. 

The  Mould  of  the  Savannahs  is  generally  black  and 
deep,  producing  a  coarse  sort  of  sedgy  Grass  :  In  the  latter 
end  of  the  dry  Time,  we  set  fire  to  it,  which  runs  like 
Wild-fire,  and  keeps  burning  as  long  as  there  is  any  Fewel ; 
unless  some  good  shower  of  Rain  put  it  out :  Then  pre- 
sently springs  up  a  new  green  Crop,  which  thrives  beyond 
all  belief.  The  Savannahs  are  bounded  on  each  side  with 
Ridges  of  higher  Land,  of  a  light-brown  Colour;  deep 
and  very  fruitful :  producing  extraordinary  great  high 
Trees.  The  Land  for  ten  or  twenty  Miles  from  the  S«, 
is  generally  compos'd  of  many  Ridges  of  delicate  Wood- 
land, and  large  Furrows  of  pleasant  grassy  Savannahs, 
alternately  intermixed  with  each  other. 

The  Animals  of  this  Country  are.  Horses,  Bullocks, 
Deer,  Waree,  Pecary,  Squashes,  Possums,  Monkeys,  Ant- 
Bears,  Sloths,  Armadilloes,  Porcupines,  Land -turtle. 
Guanoes,  and  Lizards  of  all  kinds. 

The  Squash  is  a  four-footed  Beast,  bigger  than  a  Cat: 
Its  Head  is  much  like  a  Foxes,  with  short  Ears  and  a  loitf 
Nose.  It  has  pretty  short  Legs,  and  sharp  Claws,  by  which 
it  will  run  up  Trees  like  a  Cat.     The  Skin  is  covered  with 

160 


SQUASHES— LARGE    MONKEYS 

short  fine  yellowish  Hair.  The  Flesh  of  it  is  good,  sweet,  ab 
wholesome  Meat.  Wc  commonly  skin  and  roast  it ;  and  "^ 
•'".en  we  dll  it  Pig;  and  1  think  it  eats  as  well.     It  feeds 

n  nothing  but  good  Fruit ;  therefore  we  find  them  most 
Among  the  Sapadillo-Trees ;  This  Creature  never  rambles 
very  far :  and  being  taken  young,  will  become  as  tame  as  a 
Dug,  and  be  as  roguish  as  a  Monkey. 

The  Monkeys  that  are  in  these  Parts  are  the  ugliest  1 
ever  saw.  They  are  much  bigger  than  a  Hare,  and  have 
great  Tails  about  two  Foot  and  a  half  long.  The  under- 
side of  their  Tails  is  all  bare,  with  a  black  hard  Skin  ;  but 
the  upper-side,  and  all  the  Body,  is  covered  with  coarse, 
long,  black,  staring  Hair.  These  Creatures  keep  together 
20  or  30  in  a  Company,  and  ramble  over  the  Woods  ; 
leaping  from  Tree  to  Tree.  If  they  meet  with  a  single 
PervMi  they  will  threaten  to  devour  htm.  When  I  have 
been  alone  I  have  been  afraid  to  shoot  them,  especially  the 
first  Time  I  met  them.  They  were  a  great  Company 
dancing  from  Tree  to  Tree,  over  my  Head  ;  chattering 
and  making  a  terrible  Noise ;  and  a  great  many  grim  Faces, 
and  shewing  antick  Gestures.  Some  broke  down  dry  Sticks 
and  threw  at  me ;  others  scattered  their  Urine  and  Dung 
about  my  Ears;  at  last  one  bigger  than  the  rest,  came  to  a 
■mail  Limb  just  over  my  Head;  and  leaping  directly  at 
me,  made  me  start  back;   but  the  Monkey  caught   hold  of 

he  Bough  with  the  tip  of  his  Tail;  and  there  continued 

ringing  to  fro,  and  making  Mouths  at  me. At  last  I 

:  irt   00.    they   still   keeping    me   Company,   with    the    like 

cnacing  Postures,  till  1  came  to  our  Huts.     The  Tails  of 

■  ~  csK  Monkeys  are  as  good  to  them  as  one  of  their  Hands ; 

;  i  they  will  hold  as  fast  by  them.     If  two  or  more  of  us 

■  ar  together  they  would  hasten  from  us.     The  Females 

th  ihar  young  ones  are  much  troubled  to  leap  after  the 

'laics ;    for    they    have    commonly    two :   one    she    carries 

■Jer  one  of  her  Arms;  the  other  sits  on  her  Back,  and 

'jsp»  ber  two  Fore-Paws  about  her  Neck.  These  Monkeys 
,rr  the  most  sullen  I  ever  met  with  ;  for  all  the  An  wc 

'^U  IMC.  would  never  ume  them.     It  is  a  hard  matter  to 

'oqc  one  of  them,  so  as  to  take  it ;  for  if  it  gets  hold  with 

tfWh.  11.  t6l  L 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  its  Claws  or  Tail,  it  will  not  fall  as  long  as  one  breath  of 
1676  Ljfg  remains.  After  I  have  shot  at  one  and  broke  a  Leg  or 
an  Arm,  I  have  pitied  the  poor  Creature  to  see  it  look  and 
handle  the  wounded  Limb,  and  turn  it  about  from  side  to 
side.  These  Monkeys  are  very  rarely,  or  (as  some  say) 
never  on  the  Ground. 

The  Ant-Bear  is  a  four-footed  Beast,  as  big  as  a  pretty 
large  Dog;  with  rough  black-brown  Hair:  It  has  short 
Legs ;  a  long  Nose  and  little  Eyes ;  a  very  little  Mouth, 
and  a  slender  Tongue  like  an  Earth-worm  about  five  or  »x 
Inches  long.  This  Creature  feeds  on  Ants ;  therefore  you 
always  find  them  near  an  Ants  Nest  or  Path.  It  takes  its 
Food  thus.  It  lays  its  Nose  down  flat  on  the  Ground,  close 
by  the  Path  that  the  Ants  travel  in,  (whereof  here  arc 
many  in  this  Country)  and  then  puts  out  his  Tongue 
athwart  the  Path  :  the  Ants  passing  forwards  and  backwards 
continually,  when  they  come  to  the  Tongue  make  a  stop, 
and  in  two  or  three  Minutes  time  it  will  be  covered  all  over 
with  Ants ;  which  she  perceiving  draws  in  her  Tongue,  and 
then  eats  them  ;  and  after  puts  it  out  again  to  trapan  more. 
They  smell  very  strong  of  Ants,  and  taste  much  stronger; 
for  I  have  eaten  of  them.  I  have  met  with  these  Creatures 
in  several  places  of  America,  as  well  as  here ;  {i.e.  in  the 
Samballoes  and  in  the  South-Seas,  on  the  Mexican 
Continent). 

The  Sloth  is  a  four-footed,  hairy,  sad-coloured  Animal ; 
somewhat  less  than  the  Ant-Bear,  and  not  so  rough :  Its 
Head  is  round,  its  Eyes  small ;  it  has  a  short  Nose,  and 
very  sharp  Teeth  ;  short  Legs,  but  extraordinary  long  sharp 
Claws.  This  Creature  feeds  on  Leaves,  whether  indifferently 
of  all  sorts,  or  only  on  some  particular  kinds,  I  know  not 
They  are  very  mischievous  to  the  Trees  where  they  come^ 
and  are  so  slow  in  Motion,  that  when  they  have  eaten  all 
the  Leaves  on  one  Tree,  before  they  can  get  down  from 
that  and  climb  another,  and  settle  themselves  to  their  fresh 
Banquet  (which  takes  them  up  five  or  six  Days,  though  the 
Trees  stand  near,)  they  are  nothing  but  Skin  and  Bones, 
although  they  came  down  plump  and  fat  from  the  last 
Tree.     They  never   descend   till   they  have  stript   every 

162 


1 


SLOTHS— ARMADILLOS 

LJmb  and  Bough,  and  made  them  as  bare  as  Winter.  It 
ukcs  them  up  eight  or  nine  Minutes  to  move  one  of  their  ' 
Feet  three  Inches  forward  ;  and  they  move  all  their  four  Feet 
one  after  another,  at  the  same  slow  rate  ;  neither  will  stripes 
make  them  mend  their  pace ;  which  I  have  tried  to  do,  by 
whipping  them  ;  but  they  seem  insensible,  and  can  neither 
be  frighted,  or  provoked  to  move  faster. 

The  Armadillo  (so  called  from  its  Suit  of  Armour)  is  as 
big  u  a  small  sucking  Fig :  The  Body  of  it  pretty  long. 
This  Creature  is  inclosed  in  a  thick  Shell,  which  guards  ail 
ics  Back,  and  comes  down  on  both  Sides,  and  meets  under 
the  Belly,  leaving  room  for  the  four  Legs;  the  Head  is 
imall,  with  a  Nose  like  a  Pig,  a  pretty  long  Neck,  and  can 
put  out  its  Head  before  its  Body  when  it  walks  ;  but  on 
any  danger  she  puts  it  in  under  the  Shell ;  and  drawing 
in  her  rcet,  she  lies  stock-still  like  a  Land-Turtle  :  And 
though  you  toss  her  about  she  will  not  move  herself.  The 
Shell  is  jointed  in  the  Middle  of  the  Back  ;  so  that  she  can 
turn  the  Fore-part  of  her  Body  about  which  way  she  pleases. 
The  Kcet  arc  like  those  of  a  Land-Turtle,  and  it  has  strong 
Claws  wherewith  it  digs  holes  in  the  Ground  like  a  Coney. 
The  flesh  is  ven-  sweet,  and  tastes  much  like  a  Land-Turtle. 

The  Porcupine  being  a  Creature  well  known,  I'll  pass  it 
n  nicncc. 

The  Beasts  of  Prey  that  arc  bred  in  this  Country  are 
rigic-Ou,  and  (as  is  reported  by  our  Men)  Lions.  The 
Tigrr-Cat  is  about  the  Bigness  of  a  Bull-Dog,  with  short 
Legs,  and  a  truss  Body  shaped  much  like  a  Mastiff,  but  in 
all  things  else,  (viz.)  its  Head,  the  colour  of  its  Hair,  and 
the  manner  of  its  Preying,  much  resembling  the  Tigre,  only 
tomewhat  less.  Here  are  great  Numbers  of  them.  They 
prey  on  young  Calves  or  other  Game;  whereof  here  is 
plenty.  And  because  they  do  not  want  Food,  they  are  the 
less  to  be  feared.  But  I  have  wisht  them  farther  off,  when 
I  have  met  them  in  the  Woods ;  because  their  Aspect 
appears  so  very  stately  and  fierce.  I  never  did  see  any 
Lion  in  thii  Country ;  but  I  have  been  informed  by  two 
r  three  Persons  that  they  did  see  Lions  here ;  But  1  am 
YAired  that  ihcy  arc  not  numerous. 

.63 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Here  are  a  great   many  poisonous  Creatures   in    this 

'^76  Country;  more  particularly  Snakes  of  divers  sorts,  some 
yellow,  some  green,  and  others  of  a  dun  Colour,  with  black 
and  yellowish  Spots.  The  yellow  Snake  is  commonly  as 
big  as  the  Small  of  a  Man's  Leg ;  and  six  or  seven  Foot 
long.  These  are  a  lazy  sort  of  Creatures,  for  they  lie  still 
and  prey  on  Lizards,  Guanoes,  or  other  small  Animals  that 
come  in  their  way. 

It  is  reported  that  sometimes  they  lirk  in  Trees :  and 
that  they  are  so  mighty  in  strength,  as  to  hold  a  Bullock 
fast  by  one  of  his  Horns,  when  they  happen  to  come  so 
near  that  she  can  twist  her  self  about  the  Limb  of  the 
Tree,  and  the  Horn  at  once.  These  are  accounted  very 
good  Meat  by  some,  and  are  eaten  frequently :  I  my  self 
have  tried  it  for  curiosity,  but  cannot  commend  it.  I  have 
heard  some  Bay-men  report,  that  they  have  seen  some  of 
this  kind  here  as  big  as  an  ordinary  Man's  Waste ;  but  I 
never  saw  any  such. 

The  green  Snakes  are  no  bigger  about  than  a  Mans 
Thumb,  yet  four  or  five  Foot  long :  The  Backs  are  of  a 
very  lively  green  Colour,  but  their  Bellies  inclining  to 
yellow.  These  are  commonly  in  Bushes  among  the  green 
Leaves,  and  prey  upon  small  Birds.  This  I  have  often 
seen,  and  was  once  in  danger  to  be  bit  by  one  before  I 
saw  it :  For  I  was  going  to  take  hold  of  a  Bird  that 
fluttered  and  cried  out  just  by  me,  yet  did  not  fly  away, 
neither  could  I  imagine  the  Reason,  till  reaching  out  my 
Hand,  I  perceived  the  Head  of  a  Snake  close  by  it ;  and 
looking  more  narrowly,  I  saw  the  upper  Part  of  the  Snake, 
about  two  or  three  Inches  from  his  Head,  twisted  about 
the  poor  Bird. 

What  they  feed  on  besides  Birds  I  know  not,  but  they 
are  said  to  be  very  venomous. 

The  dun-coloured  Snake  is  a  little  bigger  than  the 
green  Snake,  but  not  above  a  Foot  and  a  half,  or  two 
Foot  long ;  these  we  should  often  see  in  and  about  our 
Huts ;  but  did  not  kill  them,  because  they  destroyed  the 
Mice,  and  are  very  nimble  in  chacing  those  Creatures. 
Besides  Snakes,  here  are  Scorpions  and  Centapees  in  abun- 

164 


■1 


^Hbncc.  Here  are  also  Gally-wasps.  These  are  Creatures 
•omcwhat  resembling  Lizards,  but  larger ;  their  Bodies  ' 
about  the  thickness  of  a  Man's  Arm,  having  four  short 
Legs,  and  small  short  Tails;  their  colour  a  dark  brown. 
These  Creatures  live  in  old  hollow  Trunks  of  Trees,  and 
»rc  commonly  found  in  wet  swampy  Ground,  and  are  said 
tn  he  very  poisonous. 

Here  are  also  a  sort  of  Spiders  of  a  prodigious  Size, 
K>me  near  as  big  as  a  Man's  Fist,  with  long  small  Legs 
like  the  Spiders  in  Kngland :  they  have  two  Teeth,  or 
rather  Horns  an  Inch  and  a  half,  or  two  Inches  long,  and 
of  a  proportionable  Bigness,  which  are  black  as  Jeti,  smooth 
as  GlasB,  and  their  small  End  sharp  as  a  Thorn ;  they  are 
not  strait  but  bending.  These  Teeth  we  often  preserve. 
Some  wrcar  them  in  their  Tobacco-pouches  to  pick  their 
Pipe*.  Others  preserve  them  for  Tooth-Pickers,  especially 
such  as  were  troubled  with  the  Tooth-ach  ;  for  by  report 
they  will  expel  that  Pain,  though  1  cannot  justify  it  of  my 
own  Knowledge.  The  Backs  of  these  Spiders  are  covered 
with  a  dark  yellowish  Down,  as  soft  as  Velvet.  Some  say 
ti»e»c  Spiders  are  venomous,  others  not ;  whether  is  true  1 
csnnm  determine. 

Though  this  Country  be  so  often  over-flown  with 
■atcr,  yet  it  swarms  with  Ants,  of  several  sorts,  viz.  great, 
ill,  black,  yellow,  &c.  The  great  black  Ant  stings  or 
I  simost  as  bad  as  a  Scorpion  ;  and  next  to  this  the 
U)  yellow  Ant's  Bite  is  most    painful  ;  for  their  Sting 

|Eke  a  Spark  of  Fire ;  and  ihcy  are  so  thick  among  the 

Boughs  in  some  Places,  that  one  shall  be  covered  with 
them  before  he  is  aware.  These  Creatures  have  Nests  on 
great  Trees,  placed  on  the  Body  between  the  Limbs : 
■'<mc  of  their  Nests  are  as  big  as  a  Hogshead  ;  this  is  their 
A'intcr  Habitation  ;  for  in  the  wet  Season  they  all  repair 
.  these  their  Cilics:  Here  they  preserve  their  Eggs. 
Antv-Eggs  arc  as  much  esteemed  by  the  Planters  in  the 
■Vesi-Indics  for  feeding  their  Chickens,  as  Great  Oat-meal 
•ith  us  in  England.  In  the  dry  Season  when  they  leave 
:-dr  Nests,  they  swarm  over  all  the  Woodland;  for  they 
■^rrtr  trouble  the  Savannahs:  You  may  then  see  great 
.6s 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Paths  made  by  them  in  the  Woods  of  three  or  four  Inches 
1676  broad  beaten  as  plain  as  the  Roads  in  England.  They  go 
out  light,  but  bnng  home  heavy  Loads  on  their  Backs,  all 
of  the  same  Substance,  and  equal  in  Bigness:  I  never 
observed  any  thing  besides  pieces  of  green  Leaves,  so  big 
that  I  could  scarce  see  the  Insect  for  his  Burthen  ;  yet  they 
would  march  stoutly,  and  so  many  still  pressing  after,  that 
it  was  a  very  pretty  Sight,  for  the  Path  lookt  perfectly 
green  with  them.  There  was  one  sort  of  Ants  of  a  black 
Colour,  pretty  large,  with  long  Legs ;  these  would  march 
in  Troops,  as  if  they  were  busie  in  seeking  somewhat ;  they 
were  always  in  haste,  and  followed  their  Leaders  exactly, 
let  them  go  whither  they  would ;  these  had  no  beaten 
Paths  to  walk  in,  but  rambled  about  like  Hunters :  Some- 
times a  Band  of  these  Ants  would  happen  to  march 
through  our  Huts,  over  our  Beds,  or  into  our  Pavilions, 
nay  sometimes  into  our  Chests,  and  there  ransack  every 
part ;  and  where-ever  the  foremost  went,  the  rest  all  came 
after :  We  never  disturbed  them,  but  gave  them  free 
Liberty  to  search  where  they  pleased ;  and  they  would  all 
march  off  before  night.  These  Companies  were  so  great, 
that  they  would  be  two  or  three  Hours  in  passing  by, 
though  they  went  very  fast. 

The  Fowls  of  this  Country  are  Humming-Birds,  Black- 
Birds,  Turtle-Doves,  Pigeons,  Parrots,  Parakites,  Quams, 
Corresoes,  Turkies,  Carrion-Crows,  Subtle- Jacks,  Bill-Birds, 
Cockrecoes,  &c.  The  Humming-Bird  is  a  pretty  little 
feather'd  Creature,  no  bigger  than  a  great  over-grown 
Wasp,  with  a  black  Bill  no  bigger  than  a  small  Needle, 
and  his  Legs  and  Feet  in  Proportion  to  his  Body.  This 
Creature  does  not  wave  his  Wings  like  other  Birds  when 
it  flies,  but  keeps  them  in  a  continued  quick  Motion  like 
Bees  or  other  Insects,  and  like  them  makes  a  continual 
humming  Noise  as  it  flies.  It  is  very  quick  in  Motion, 
and  haunts  about  Flowers  and  Fruit,  like  a  Bee  gathering 
Honey,  making  many  near  Addresses  to  its  delightful 
Objects,  by  visiting  them  on  all  Sides,  and  yet  still  keeps 
in  Motion,  sometimes  on  one  Side,  sometimes  on  the  other ; 
as  often  rebounding  a  Foot  or  two  back  on  a  sudden,  and 

166 


W        PIGEONS— QUAMS—CORRESOS 

^B  qnickJy  returns  again,  keeping  thus  about  one  Flower 
B^  or  six  Minutes,  or  more.     There  are  two  or  three  sorts  ' 
HF  them,  some   bigger  than  others,  but    all    very    smalt, 
Hnthcr  are    they    coloured    alike ;    the    largest    are   of  a 
Dbckish  Colour. 

The    Black-Bird    is   somewhat    bigger    than    ours    in 
England;  it  has  a  longer  Tail,  but  like  them  in  Colour: 
~~~    f  are  sometimes  called  Chattering  Crows,  because  they 
latter  like  a  Magpy. 
There  are  three  Sorts  of  Turtle-Doves  (viz.)  white- 
sted   Doves,  dun-coloured  Doves,  and  Ground-Doves. 
lie  while  Breast*  are  the  biggest;  they  are  of  a  blewish 
/  Colour  with  white  Breasts;  these  are  fine,  round  and 
nfflp,  and  almost  as  big  as  a  Pigeon.     The  next  sort  are 
I  over  of  a  dun,  lesser  than  the  former,  and  not  so  round. 
_  Ground-Dove  is  much  bigger  than  a  Sky-Lark,  of  a 

dull  grey,  very  round  and  plump,  and  commonly  runs  in 
Pairs  on  the  Ground,  and  probably  thence  have  their 
Name,  The  other  two  sorts  fly  in  Pairs,  and  feed  on 
"*~  ,  which  they  commonly  gather  themselves  from  the 

i  where  they  grow;  and  all  three  sorts  are  very  good 

Pigeons  are  not  very  common  here ;  they  are  less  than 

r  Wood-Quests,'  and  as  good  Food. 

The  Quam  *  is  as  big  as  an  ordinary  Hen  Turkey,  of  a 

h  dun  Colour ;  its  Bill  like  a  Turkeys  ;  it  flies  about 

the  Woods ;    feeds  on   Berries,  and  is  very  good 

The  Correso*  is  a  larger  Fowl  than  the  Quam;  The 

ick  i*  black,  the  Hen  is  of  a  dark  brown.     The  Cock 

^  a  Crown  of  black  Feathers  on  his  Head,  and  appears 

f  stately.     These  live  also  on  Berries,  and  arc  very  good 

1;  but  their  Bones  arc  said  to  be  poisonous;  therefore 

»  either  burn  or  bury  them,  or  throw  them  into  the 

r  for  fear  our  Dogs  should  eat  them. 

"  or  "  wood-<|ue»t "  (for  the  wild  pigeon)  ii 

■  Thtymm  h  a  naa.    Then  are  >ome  iixtf  varieties. 
^AaaiBM  lorn  el  die  word  curauow  {cnra^},  or  wild  liirke^. 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Carrion-Crows  are  blackish  Fowls  about  the  Bigness  of 

1676  Ravens;  they  have  bald  Heads,  and  reddish  bald  Necks 
like  Turkeys,  and  therefore  by  Strangers  that  come  newly 
from  Europe,  are  often  mistaken  for  such.  These  live 
wholly  on  Flesh,  (and  are  therefore  called  Carrion-Crows :) 
There  are  great  numbers  of  them :  They  are  heavy,  dull 
Creatures,  and  by  their  perching  long  at  one  place  they 
seem  to  be  very  lazy :  yet  they  are  quick  enough  to  find 
out  their  Prey;  for  when  we  hunt  in  the  Woods  or 
Savannahs,  as  soon  as  we  have  killed  a  Beast,  they  will 
immediately  flock  about  us  from  all  Parts,  and  in  less 
than  an  Hour's  Time  there  will  be  two  or  three  hundred, 
though  at  first  there  was  not  one  to  be  seen.  I  have 
sometimes  admired  from  whence  so  many  came  so  sud- 
denly; for  we  never  see  above  two  or  three  at  a  place, 
before  they  come  to  feast  on  a  Carkass. 

«  

Some  of  the  Carrion-Crows  are  all  over  white,  but  their 
Feathers  look  as  if  they  were  sullied:  They  have  bald 
Heads  and  Necks  like  the  rest;  they  are  of  the  same 
Bigness  and  Make  ;  without  any  Difference  but  in  Colour ; 
and  we  never  see  above  one  or  two  of  these  white  ones  at  a 
time ;  and  'tis  seldom  also  that  we  see  a  great  Number  of 
the  black  ones,  but  we  see  one  white  one  amongst  them. 

The  Logwood-Cutters  call  the  white  ones  King  Carrion- 
Crows,  and  say,  that  they  are  much  bigger  than  the  others ; 
and  that  when  a  great  Number  are  assembled  about  a 
Carcass,  if  a  King  Carrion-Crow  be  among  them,  he  falls 
on  first,  and  none  of  the  others  will  taste  the  least  Morsel, 
till  he  has  filled  his  Belly  and  is  withdrawn ;  nay,  they 
will  sit  perching  on  the  Trees  about  him,  without  approach- 
ing the  Carcass,  till  he  flies  away ;  and  then  in  an  instant 
they  fall  on  all  together.  I  have  seen  of  the  King  Carrion- 
Crows,  but  could  not  perceive  them  to  be  bigger  than  the 
rest;  neither  were  the  black  ones,  their  Companions,  so 
.unmannerly  as  to  let  them  eat  without  Company ;  they  arc 
very  voracious,  and  will  dispatch  a  Carcass  in  a  Trice: 
For  that  Reason  the  Spaniards  never  kill  them,  but  fine 
any  one  that  shall :  And  I  think  there  is  also  an  Act  in 
Jamaica  that  prohibits  their  Destruction ;  and  the  Log- 

168 


SUBTLE-JACKS— BILL-BIRDS 

Cutlers,    tho'    under   no    such    Obligation,    yet    are    i 
I  zealously   superstitious,   that   none  will   hurt  them,  for   ' 
fear  of  receiving  some  Damage  afterwards, 

Subtle-Jacks'  are  Birds  as  big  as  Pigeons;  they  are 
Mtly  blackish;  the  Tips  of  their  Wing-Feathers  are 
Pcltowtsh,  as  are  also  their  Bills.  They  have  a  peculiar 
I  wonderful  cunning  way  of  building  different  from  any 
:  Their  Nests  hang  down  from  the  Boughs  of  lofty 
I  whose  Bodies  are  clean  without  Limbs  for  a  con- 
Idcrabtc  Height :  The  Branches  to  which  they  fasten  them, 
:  those  that  spread  farthest  out  from  the  Body ;  and  the 
!  Extremities  of  those  Boughs  are  only  used  by  them. 
1  Trees  that  grow  single  by  themselves  at  some  distance 
om  cithers,  they  build  clear  round ;  but  If  they  joyn  to 
,  they  make  Choice  of  such  only  as  are  bordering 
a  Savannah,  Pond  or  Creek,  and  hang  down  their 
"Scsts  from  those  Umbs  that  spread  over  those  Savannahs, 
^ic.  n^lccting  such  as  arc  near  other  Trees :  Their  Nests 
.-.ang  down  two  or  three  Foot  from  the  Twigs  to  which 
hey  arc  fa.slned,  and  look  just  like  Cabbage-Nets  stuft 
with  Hay.  The  Thread  that  fastens  the  Nest  to  the 
Twig  is  made  of  long  Grass  (as  is  also  the  Nest  it  self) 
very  ingeniously  twisted  together :  It  is  but  small  at  the 
Twig ;  but  near  the  Nest  grows  thicker.  The  Nest  has 
a  Hole  in  the  Side  for  the  Bird  to  enter  at,  and  'tis  very 
pmty  to  sec  twenty  or  thirty  of  them  hanging  round  a 
rrec.  They  arc  all  called  by  the  English,  Subtle-Jacks, 
xcauie  of  this  uncommon  way  of  Building. 

TTicrc  are  two  or  three  sorts  of  Bill-Birds,*  so  called 
\iy  the  English,  because  their  Bills  arc  almost  as  big  as 
tbeimclves.  The  largest  I  ever  saw  arc  about  the  Size 
■-■{  English  Wood-peckers,  and  much  like  them :  There 
ire  othen  of  a  smaller  sort ;  but  they  are  not  often  met 
»ilh,  and  I  never  saw  many  of  them. 

Cockrccocs  are  short-winged  Birds,  coloured  like 
Partridge,  but  somewhat  lesser ;  neither  arc  they  so  plump 
titd  round-     They  have  long  Legs,  delighting  to  run  on 


169 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  the  Ground  among  Woods  in  swampy  Places  or  near 
1676  Creeks.  They  make  a  loud  Noise  Mornings  and  Even- 
ings, and  answer  one  another  very  prettily ;  and  they  are 
extraordinary  sweet  Meat. 

The  Water-Fowls  are  Duck  and  Mallard ;  Curlews, 
Herons,  Crabcatchers,^  Pelicans,  Cormorants,  Fishing- 
Hawks,  Men-of- War-Birds,  Boobies,  &c. 

There  are  three  sorts  of  Ducks,  viz.  The  Muscovy, 
the  Whistling  and  the  common  Duck.  Muscovy-Ducks 
are  less  than  ours,  but  otherwise  exactly  alike.  They 
perch  on  old  dry  Trees,  or  such  as  have  no  Leaves  on 
them,  and  seldom  light  on  the  Ground  but  to  feed. 
Whistling-Ducks  are  somewhat  less  than  our  common 
Duck,  but  not  difFering  from  them  in  Shape  or  Colour: 
In  flying,  their  Wings  make  a  pretty  sort  of  whistling 
Noise.  These  also  perch  on  Trees  as  the  former.  The 
other  sort  are  like  our  Common  Ducks,  both  in  Bigness 
and  Colour,  and  I  have  never  observed  them  to  pitch  upon 
Trees.     All  three  sorts  are  very  good  Meat. 

Here  are  two  sorts  of  Curlews  diflFerent  in  Bigness  and 
Colour ;  the  greater  are  as  big  as  Turkeys,  with  long  Legs 
and  long  crooked  Bills,  like  a  Snipe's,  in  Length  and 
Bigness  proportionable  to  the  Bulk  of  their  Bodies :  They 
are  of  a  dark  Colour ;  their  Wings  black  and  white ;  their 
Flesh  black,  but  very  sweet  and  wholesome :  They  arc 
caird  by  the  English  double  Curlews,  because  they  are 
twice  as  big  as  the  other  sort. 

The  small  Curlews  are  of  a  dusky  brown,  with  long 
Legs  and  Bills  like  the  former:  their  Flesh  is  most 
esteemed  as  being  the  sweetest. 

Herons  are  like  ours  in  England  in  Bigness,  Shape 
and  Colour. 

Crabcatchers  are  shaped  and  coloured  like  Herons,  but 
they  are  smaller :  They  feed  on  small  Crabs  no  bigger  than 
one's  Thumb,  of  which  there  is  great  Plenty. 

Pelicans  are  large  flat-footed  Fowls,  almost  as  big  as 
Geese,  and  their  Feathers  in  Colour  like  them :  they  have 

*  The  crab-eating  American  herons  (Butarides  virescens), 

170 


PELICANS— CORMORANTS 

^s,  long  Necks,  and  their  Bills  are  about  two  / 
Inches  broad  and  seventeen  or  eighteen  long  ;  the  fore-part  " 
of  their  Necks  or  Breasts  is  bare,  and  covered  with  a  soft, 
smooth,  yet  loose  Skin,  like  that  about  the  Necks  of 
Turkies:  This  Skin  is  of  the  Colour  of  their  Feathers, 
mixt  with  a  dark  and  light  grey,  so  exactly  interwoven  that 
it  appcari  very  beautiful.  They  are  a  very  heavy  Bird, 
and  leldom  fly  far,  or  very  high  from  the  Water :  They 
commonly  sit  on  Rocks  at  some  Distance  from  the  Shore, 
where  they  may  look  about  them.  They  seem  to  be 
very  melancholy  Fowls,  by  their  perching  all  alone:  they 
sit  as  if  they  were  sleeping,  holding  their  Heads 
upright,    and    resting    the    ends   of    their    Bills   on    their 

^ Breast ;  they  arc  better  Meat  than  Boobies  or  Mcn-of- 
Cormorants  arc  just  like  young  Ducks  in  Shape,  having 
«ich  Feet  and  Bills :  They  are  black  with  white  Breasts, 
and  live  on  small  Fish  which  they  take  near  the  Shore,  or 
on  Worm*  which  they  get  out  of  the  Mud  at  low  Water. 
They  taste  very  fishy,  yet  arc  indifl^erent  good  Meat,  they 
being  very  fat. 

Fishing-Hawks  are   like  our  smallest  sort  of  Hawks 

in  Colour  and  Shape,  with  such  Bills  and  Talons ;  They 

perch  upon  Stumps  of  Trees  or  dry  Limbs  that  hang  over 

tbe  Water  about  Creeks,   Rivers  or  against   the  Sea  i   and 

fcjppon  Sight  of  any  small  Fish  near  them,  they  skim  along 

Bbm  over  them,  and  snatching    up    the   Prey  with    their 

^Talofw,  presently  rise  again  without  touching  the  Water 

with  their  Wings,     They  don't  swallow  the  Fish  whole  as 

all    other  Fishing  Fowls,  that  ever  I  saw  do,  but  tear  it 

with  their  Bills  and  eat  it  Piece-Meal. 

The  Lagunes,  Creeks  and  Rivers  are  plentifully  stored 
with  great  Variety  of  Fish  (viz.)  Mullets,  Snooks,  Ten- 
poundcr*,'  Tarporas,  Cavallics,  Parricootas,  Gar-fish,  Sting- 
riys,  Spanish  Mackril,  with  many  others. 

Tcnpoundcrs  arc  shaped  like  Mullets,  but  are  so  full  of 


'  The  irapOBBiScr  H  EUfii   tauni, 
m  Cmnmr  tmtt/tm.-  ibe  pajrienoM  i: 
■     a  poisonoui. 


;  ihc  cuvitlly  is  the   horse  mnckeiel 
the  Sphryania  barracuda,  a  swift, 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AM.   very  small  stiflF  Bones,  intermixt  with  the  Flesh,  that  you 
'^^  can  hardly  eat  them. 

Parricootas  are  long  Fish,  with  round  Bodies  like 
Mackril :  They  have  very  long  Mouths  and  sharp  Teeth ; 
they  are  about  eight  or  ten  Inches  round,  and  three  Foot 
and  half  long.  They  commonly  haunt  in  Lagunes  among 
Islands,  or  in  the  Sea  near  the  Shore.  They  are  a  floating 
Fish,  and  greedily  take  the  Hook,  and  will  snap  at  Men 
too  in  the  Water.  We  commonly  take  them  when  we  are 
under  Sail,  with  a  Hook  towing  after  our  Stem.  They  are 
firm  well-tasted  Fish ;  but  'tis  dangerous  eating  them,  for 
some  Men  have  been  poisoned  with  them. 

Divers  Persons  are  of  Opinion  that  these  Creatures  arc 
poysonous  in  some  Places  only,  and  that  but  at  some  Times 
of  the  Year.  I  know  that  in  many  parts  of  the  West- 
Indies,  some  have  been  injured  by  eating  them,  and  that  at 
different  Seasons  of  the  Year ;  therefore  Seamen  commonly 
taste  the  Liver  before  they  venture  any  further;  and  if 
that  has  a  biting  Taste  like  Pepper,  they  esteem  the  Fish 
unwholsome,  but  if  not,  they  eat  it :  and  yet  I  have  found 
even  this  Rule  fail  too.  I  judge  the  Head  and  the  Parts 
near  it,  to  be  chiefly  venomous. 

Gar-fish  ^  are  round,  but  neither  so  big  nor  long  as  the 
former;  but  what  is  more  peculiar,  they  have  long  bony 
Snouts,  like  the  Sword-fish,  only  as  the  Sword-fish*s  Snout 
is  flat,  and  indented  like  a  Saw  on  each  side;  so  on  the 
contrary  these  have  their  Snouts  like  a  Spear,  round,  smooth 
and  sharp  at  the  end,  and  about  a  Foot  long.  These  are 
a  sort  of  floaty  or  flying  Fish  :  for  they  skip  along  a  Foot 
or  two  above  the  Water,  for  the  length  of  twenty  or  thirty 
Yards :  then  they  just  touch  the  Edge  of  the  Water,  and 
spring  forward  so  much  farther,  and  then  touch  the  Water, 
and  spring  forward  again,  a  great  many  times  before  they 
cease.  They  dart  themselves  with  such  a  Force  that  they 
strike  their  Snout  through  the  sides  of  a  Cotton-Tree 
Canoa;    and  we  often    fear   that    they  will   strike   quite 

through    our    very   Bodies. They    are    extraordinary 

sweet  Fish. 

*  The  common  hornbeak. 
172 


j 


-MANATEE 

Spanish  Mackril  are  in  Shape  and  Colour  like  our 
Mackri),  but  larger :  They  are  three  Foot  or  three  and 
half  long,  and  nine  or  ten  Inches  about,  and  they  also  are 
generally  esteemed  very  excellent  Fish. 

The  Ray  is  z  flat  Fish,  like  Skate,  and  I  have  seen 
three  sorts  of  them ;  viz.  the  Stingray,  the  Raspray  and 
the  Whipray.  The  Stingray  and  Raspray  are  much  alike 
in  shape ;  but  the  ff>rmer  has  three  or  four  strong  sharp 
Prickles,  near  two  Inches  long,  at  the  Root  of  its  Tail, 
which  are  said  to  be  very  venomous,  but  the  rest  of  his 
Skin  is  smooth.  The  Raspray  has  a  rough  knotty  Skin 
wherewith  Rasps  are  made :  the  Skins  of  the  largest  are 
so  rough,  that  the  Spaniards  in  some  Places  grate  their 
Cassavy  with  them,  which  is  a  Root  very  common  all  over 
the  West-Indies;  and  of  which  the  Spaniards  and  English 
frequently  make  their  Bread ;  but  the  fairest  Skins  are 
used  to  cover  Surgeons  Instrument  Cases,  and  other  such 
fine  Things ;  but  of  late  they  are  counterfeited.  I  have 
been  told  that  in  Turkey  Asses  Skins  are  stamped  with 
unill  hard  Seeds,  which  gives  them  Impressions  like 
Raspray. 

The  Whipray  differs  from  the  other  two  sorts,  having 

IBmall,  but  longer  Tail,  and  ending  with  a  Knob,  shaped 
pe  s  Harpoan.  Atl  these  three  sorts  are  much  about 
Foot  and  naif  broad,  There  is  yet  another  sort  of  these 
t  Fah  of  the  Whipray  kind,  but  of  a  prodigious  bigness  ; 
I.  three  or  four  Yards  square,  and  their  Tails  as  long : 
be  we  call  Sea-Devils;  they  are  very  strong  Fish,  and 
!  5ometim«  Gamcsom  ;  but  they  make  an  odd  Figure 
when  they  leap  out  of  the  Water,  tumbling  over  and  over. 
Neither  arc  Turtle  and  Manatee  wanting  in  this  Lagune. 
Here  arc  M>mc  Hawks-bill-Turtle,  but  the  green  Turtle  is 
-I*!  plentiful.  They  are  of  a  middle  size ;  yet  here  was 
■<e  a  va7  large  one  taken,  as  I  have  mentioned  in  my 
■  oytges  round  the  World. 

Here  are  abundance  of  Manatee,  which  arc  both  large 
ir.i  sweet. 

Alligators  are  also  in  great  numbers  in  all  the  Creeks, 
Kivers    and    Lagunes  in  the  Bay  of  Campcachy;    and    I 
»73 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER^S   VOYAGES 

AN.    think  that  no  part  of  the  Universe  is  better  stock'd  with 

'676  them. 

The  Alligator  is  a  Creature  so  well  known  every  where, 
that  I  should  not  describe  it,  were  it  not  to  give  an 
Account  of  the  difference  between  it  and  the  Crocodile; 
for  they  resemble  each  other  so  nearly  in  their  shape  and 
bulk,  as  also  in  their  Natures,  that  they  are  generally  mis- 
taken for  the  same  Species ;  only  the  one  supposed  to  be 
the  Male,  the  other  the  Female :  Whether  they  are  so  or 
not,  the  World  may  judge  by  the  following  Observations. 
As  to  their  Bulk  and  length,  I  never  saw  any  so  large  as 
some  I  have  heard  and  read  of;  but  according  to  my  best 
Judgment,  though  I  have  seen  Thousands,  I  never  met 
with  any  above  sixteen  or  seventeen  Foot  long,  and  as 
thick  as  a  large  Colt.  He  is  shaped  like  a  Lizard,  of  a 
dark  brown  Colour,  with  a  large  Head  and  very  long  Jaws, 
with  great  strong  Teeth,  especially  two  of  a  remarkable 
Length,  that  grow  out  of,  and  at  the  very  end  of  the 
under  Jaw  in  the  smallest  part,  on  each  side  one;  there 
are  two  holes  in  the  upper  Jaw  to  receive  these,  otherways 
he  could  not  shut  his  Mouth.  It  has  4  short  Legs  and 
Broad  Claws,  with  a  long  Tail.  The  Head,  Back  and 
Tail  is  fenced  with  pretty  hard  Scales,  joyned  together 
with  a  very  thick  tough  Skin  :  Over  its  Eyes  there  arc 
two  hard  scaly  Knobs,  as  big  as  a  Mans  Fist,  and  from 
the  Head  to  the  Tail,  along  the  Ridge  of  his  Back  'tis 
full  of  such  knotty  hard  Scales,  not  like  Fish-Scales,  which 
are  loose,  but  so  united  to  the  Skin,  that  it  is  all  one  with 
it,  and  can't  be  taken  asunder,  but  with  a  sharp  Knife. 
From  the  Ridge  of  the  Back  down  on  the  Ribs  towards 
the  Belly,  (which  is  of  a  dusky  yellow  colour  like  a  Frog) 
there  are  many  of  these  Scales,  but  not  so  substantial  nor  so 
thick  placed  as  the  other.  These  Scales  are  no  hindrance 
to  him  in  turning ;  for  he  will  turn  very  quick,  consider- 
ing his  length.  When  he  goes  on  Land  his  Tail  drags 
on  the  Ground. 

The  Flesh  smells  very  strong  of  Musk ;  especially  four 
Kernels  or  Cods  that  are  always  found  about  them,  two 
of  which  grow  in  the  Groin,  near  each  Thigh ;  the  other 

174 


■ 


ND   ALLIGATOR   DIFFER 


t  At  the  Breast,  one  under  each  Fore-leg,  and  about  the  an. 
•bigness  of  a  Pullets  Egg;  therefore  when  we  kill  an  Alii-  '*7^ 
gator,  we  take  out  these,  and  having  dried  them  wear  them 
in  our  Hats  for  a  perfume.  The  Flesh  is  seldom  eaten 
_lwt  in  case  of  Necessity,  because  of  its  strong  scent, 
^b  Now  the  Crocodile  hath  none  of  these  Kernels,  neither 
Hooth  his  Flesh  taste  at  all  Musky,  therefore  esteemed  better 
*yood.  He  is  of  a  yellow  Colour,  neither  hath  he  such  long 
Teeth  in  his  under  Jaw.  The  Crocodile's  Legs  also  are 
longer,  and  when  it  runs  on  Land,  it  bears  its  Tail  above 
the  Ground,  and  turns  up  the  tip  of  it  in  a  round  Bow, 
vid  the  Knots  on  the  Back  are  much  thicker,  higher  and 
firmer  than  those  of  the  Alligator;  and  differ  also  as  to 
the  Places  where  they  are  found.  For  in  some  Pans,  as 
berc  in  the  Bay  of  Campeachy,  are  abundance  of  Alligators, 
where  yet  I  never  saw  nor  heard  of  any  Crocodiles.  At 
the  Isle  Grand  Caymanes,  there  are  Crocodiles,  but  no 
Alligators.  At  Pines  by  Cuba,  there  are  abundance  of 
Crocodiles,  but  I  cannot  say  there  are  no  Alligators,  tho' 
I  never  saw  any  there.  Both  Kinds  are  called  Caymanes 
by  the  Spaniards ;  therefore  probably  they  may  reckon  them 
for  the  ume.  And  I  know  of  no  other  difference,  for  they 
both  lay  Eggs  alike,  which  are  not  distinguishable  to  the 
Eye ;  They  are  as  big  as  a  Goose-Egg,  but  much  longer, 
and  good  Meat ;  yet  the  Alligators  Eggs  taste  very  Musky: 
They  prey  both  alike  in  either  Element,  for  they  love  Flesh 
aa  well  ai  Fish,  and  will  live  in  either  fresh  or  salt  Water. 
Bndc  these  Creatures,  1  know  none  that  can  live  any  where, 
or  apon  any  sort  of  Food,  like  them.  'Tis  reported,  that 
they  iove  Dcc's-Fleah  better  than  any  other  Flesh  whatso- 
cTcr.  This  Ihave  seen  with  my  own  Eyes,  that  our  Dogs 
Wen  to  much  afraid  of  them,  that  they  would  not  very 
willingly  drink  at  any  great  River  or  Creek  where  those 
Creatures  might  lurk  and  hide  themselves,  unless  they 
wen:  (through  Necessity)  constrained  to  it ;  and  then  they 
would  stand  five  or  six  Foot  from  the  brink  of  the  Creek 
or  River,  and  bark  a  considerable  time  before  they  would 
AtlTcDlure  nearer;  and  then  even  at  the  sight  of  their  own 
Shadows  in  the  Water,  they  would  again  retire  to  the  Place 
'75 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   from  whence  they  came,  and  bark  vehemently  a  long  time ; 

1676  sQ  that  in  the  dry  Season,  when  there  was  no  fresh  Water 
but  in  Ponds  and  Creeks,  we  used  to  fetch  it  our  selves 
and  give  it  our  Dogs;  and  many  times  in  our  Hunting, 
when  we  came  to  a  large  Creek  that  we  were  to  pass 
through,  our  Dogs  would  not  follow  us ;  so  that  we  often 
took  them  in  our  Arms,  and  carried  them  over. 

Besides  the  fore-mentioned  difference  between  the  Alli- 
gator and  Crocodile;  the  latter  is  accounted  more  fierce 
and  daring  than  the  Alligator :  Therefore  when  we  go  to 
the  Isles  of  Pines  or  Grand  Caymanes  to  hunt,  we  are  often 
molested  by  them,  especially  in  the  Night.  But  in  the  Bay 
of  Campeachy,  where  there  are  only  Alligators,  1  did  never 
know  any  Mischief  done  by  them,  except  by  accident  Men 
run  themselves  into  their  Jaws.  I  remember  one  Instance 
of  this  Nature,  which  is  as  follows. 

In  the  very  height  of  the  dry  time  seven  or  eight  Men 
(English  and  Irish)  went  to  a  place  called  Pies  Pond,  on 
Beer-Island,  to  hunt.  This  Pond  was  never  dry,  so  that 
the  Cattle  drew  hither  in  swarms,  but  after  two  or  three 
days  Hunting  they  were  shy,  and  would  not  come  to  the 
Pond  till  Night,  and  then  if  an  Army  of  Men  had  lain  to 
oppose  them,  they  would  not  have  been  debarred  of  Water. 
The  Hunters  knowing  their  Custom,  lay  still  all  Day,  and 
in  the  Night  visited  this  Pond,  and  killed  as  many  Beefs 
as  they  could.  This  Trade  they  had  driven  a  Week,  and 
made  great  profit.  At  length  an  Irish-man  going  to  the 
Pond  in  the  Night,  stumbled  over  an  Alligator  that  lay  in 
the  Path  :  The  Alligator  seized  him  by  the  Knee ;  at  which 
the  Man  cries  out.  Help  !  help !  His  Consorts  not  know- 
ing what  the  matter  was,  ran  all  away  from  their  Huts, 
supposing  that  he  was  fallen  into  the  Clutches  of  some 
Spaniards,  of  whom  they  were  afraid  every  dry  Season. 
But  poor  Daniel  not  finding  any  Assistance,  waited  till  the 
Beast  opened  his  Jaw  to  take  better  hold ;  because  it  is 
usual  for  the  Alligator  to  do  so;  and  then  snatchM  away 
his  Knee,  and  slipt  the  But-end  of  his  Gun  in  the  room 
of  it,  which  the  Alligator  griped  so  hard,  that  he  pull'd  it 
out  of  his  Hand  and  so  went  away.     The  Man  being  near 

176 


a  snuU  Tree  climh'd  up  out  of  his  reach  ;  and  then  cried  an. 
out  to  his  Consorts  to  come  and  assist  him ;  who  being  '^7^ 
•till  within  Call,  and  watching  to  hear  the  Issue  of  the 
Alarm,  made  haste  to  him  with  Fire-brands  in  their  Hands, 
and  brought  him  away  in  their  Arms  to  his  Hut ;  for  he 
was  in  a  deplorable  Condition,  and  not  able  to  stand  on 
his  Feet,  his  Knee  was  so  torn  with  the  Alligator's  Teeth. 

His  Gun  was  found  the  next  Day  ten  or  twelve  Paces 
from  the  place  where  he  was  seized,  with  two  large  Holes 
made  in  the  Bui-cnd  of  it,  one  on  each  side,  near  an  Inch 
deep;  for  I  saw  the  Gun  afterwards.  This  spoiled  their 
jpon  for  a  time,  they  being  forced  to  carry  the  Man  to  the 
hland  Trisi,  where  their  Ships  were,  which  was  six  or  seven 
Leases  distant. 

This  Irish-Man  went  afterwards  to  New-England  to 
be  curtd,  in  a  Ship  belonging  to  Boston,  and  nine  or  ten 
Months  after  returned  to  the  Bay  again,  being  recovered 
of  bis  Wound,  but  went  limping  ever  after. 

This  was  all  the  mischief  that  ever  I  heard  was  done  in 
the  Bay  of  Campcachy,  by  the  Creatures  call'd  Alligators. 


CHAP.    Ill 

Logwood  Mem  way  of  Living.  Their  Hunting  fir  Beefs  in  Canoas, 
Alligators.  The  Author^s  setUng  with  hogwood-Men,  He  is  lost 
in  Hunting.  Captain  Hall  and  his  Mens  disaster.  The  way  of 
preserving  Bullocks  Hides.  Two  hairy  Worms  growing  in  the 
Author's  Leg.  Dangerous  L^g-worms  in  the  West-Indies,  The 
Author  strangely  cured  of  one.  A  violent  Storm,  A  Description 
of  Beef  Island :  its  Fruits  and  Animals.  The  Spaniards  way  of 
hocksing  Cattle.  Their  care  of  preserving  their  Cattle.  The 
wasteful  destruction  made  of  them  by  the  EngSsh  and  French 
Privateers.     The  Author^ s  narrow  Escape  fiom  an  Alligator. 

[HE  Logwood-Cutters  (as  I  said  before)  inhabit 
the  Creeks  of  the  East  and  West  Ls^unes,  in 
small  Companies,  building  their  Huts  close  by 
the  Creeks  sides  for  the  benefit  of  the  Sea- 
Breezes,  as  near  the  Logwood  Groves  as  they  can,  removing 
often  to  be  near  their  Business :  yet  when  they  are  settled 
in  a  good  open  Place,  they  chuse  rather  to  go  half  a  Mile 
in  their  Canoas  to  work,  than  lose  that  convenience.  The' 
they  build  their  Huts  but  slightly,  yet  they  take  care  to 
thatch  them  very  well  with  Palm  or  Palmeto  Leaves,  to 
prevent  the  Rains,  which  are  there  very  violent,  from 
soaking  in. 

For  their  Bedding  they  raise  a  Barbecue,  or  wooden 
Frame  3  Foot  and  a  half  above  Ground  on  one  side  of 
the  House ;  and  stick  up  four  Stakes,  at  each  comer  one, 
to  fasten  their  Pavilions ;  out  of  which  here  is  no  sleeping 
for  Moskitoes. 

Another  Frame  they  raise  covered  with  Earth  for  a 
Hearth  to  dress  their  Victuals :  and  a  third  to  sit  at  when 
they  eat  it. 

During  the  wet  Season,  the  Land  where  the  Logwood 

178 


^^         LOGWOOD  CUTTERS 

^Hcnrs  is  so  overflowed,    that   they   step    from    their   Beds  an. 

^Kto    the    Water    perhaps    two    Foot    deep,  and    continue  '*^* 

Btmnditig  in  the  wet  all   Day,  till  they  go  to  bed  again; 

Hbnt  oevcrthcless  account  it  the  best  Season  in   the  Year 

lor  doing  a  good  Day's  Labour  in.  ■ 

Some  fell    the  Trees,  others  saw  and  cut  them  Into  ■ 

convenient  Logs,  and  one  chips    oiF  the  Sap,  and   he  is  I 

commonly   the    principal    Man ;    and  when  a  Tree  is  so  I 

thick,  that  after  it   is    logg'd,  it  remains  still   too  great  I 

I  Burthen  for  one  Man,  we  blow  it  up  with  Gun-powder.  I 

The   Lc^wood  -  Cutters   are    generally    sturdy    strong  I 

Fellows,  and  will  carry  Burthens  of  three  or  four  hundred  I 

Weight ;    but   every   Man    is   left    to   his   choice    to   carry  I 

what  he   picaseth,  and    commonly    they    agree    very  well  I 

about  it :  For  they  are  contented  to  labour  very  hard.  I 

But  when  Ships  come  from  Jamaica  with    Rum   and  I 

Sugar,  they  are  too  apt  to  mispcnd  both  their  Time  and  ■ 

Money,     If  the  Commanders  of  these  Ships  are  Free,  and  I 

tre»t   all  that  come  the  first  Day  with  Punch,  they  will  m 
be  much  resjiectcd,  and  every  Man  will   pay  honestly  for 
what   he  drinks  afterwards;  but  if  he  be  niggardly,  they 
will  pay  him  with  their  worst  Wood,  and  commonly  they 

have  a  stock  of  such  laid  by  for  that  purpose ;  nay,  they  ■ 

will  cheat   them  with  hollow  Wood  filled  with  dirt  in   the  I 

middle  and  both  ends  plugg'd  up  with  a  piece  of  the  same  I 

drove  in  hard,  and  then  sawed  off  so  neatly,  that  it's  hard  I 

to  find  out  the  Deceit ;  but  if  any  Man  come  to  purchase  I 

with    Bills  payable  at  Jamaica,  they  will  be  sure  to  give  I 

Kim  the  best  Wood.  I 

In  some  places,  especially  in  the  West  Creek  of  the  I 

Wot    Lagune,    they    go    a    Hunting    every    Saturday    to  I 

irovide  themselves  with  Beef  for  the  Week  following.  I 

The  Cattle  in  this  Country  arc  lar^e  and  fat  in  February,  I 

March  and  April:  At  other  times  of  the  Year  they  are  I 

fleshy,   but   not  fat,   yet  sweet  enough.      When  they  have  1 

t.iird    a  Beef,  they  cut  it  into  four  Quarters,  and  taking  I 
nut  uli  the  Bones,  each  Man  makes  a  hole  in  the  middle 
"  hii  Qtuuicr,  Just  big  enough  for  his  Head  to  go  thro', 
puti  it  on  like  a   Frock,  and  trudgeth   home ;  and 
>79 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   if  he  chances  to  tire,  he  cuts  off  some  of  it,  and  flings 
"^76  it  away. 

It  is  a  Diversion  pleasant  enough,  though  not  without 
some  danger,  to  hunt  in  a  Canoa;  for  then  the  Cattle 
having  no  other  feeding  Places  than  the  Sides  of  the 
Savannahs,  which  are  somewhat  higher  Ground  than  the 
middle,  they  are  forced  sometimes  to  swim;  so  that  we 
may  easily  come  to  shoot  them,  when  they  are  thus  in 
the  Water. 

The  Beast,  when  she  is  so  hard  pursued  that  she 
cannot  escape,  turns  about  and  comes  full  tilt  at  the 
Canoa,  and  striking  her  Head  against  the  Prow,  drives 
her  back  twenty  or  thirty  Paces ;  then  she  scampers  away 
again :  But  if  she  has  received  a  Wound,  she  commonly 
pursues  us  till  she  is  knock'd  down.  Our  chiefest  Care 
is  to  keep  the  Head  of  the  Canoa  towards  her;  for  if 
she  should  strike  against  the  Broad-side,  it  would  endanger 
over-setting  it,  and  consequently  wetting  our  Arms  and 
Ammunition.  Besides,  the  Savannahs  at  this  time  swarm 
with  Alligators,  and  therefore  are  the  more  dangerous  on 
that  account. 

These  Creatures  in  the  wet  Season  forsake  the  Rivers, 
and  inhabit  the  Drowned-Savannahs  to  meet  with  Purchase, 
and  no  Flesh  comes  amiss  to  them,  whether  alive  or  dead. 
Their  chief  Subsistence  then  is  on  young  Cattle,  or  such 
Carkasses  as  we  leave  behind  us,  which  in  the  dry  Season 
feed  the  Carrion  -  Crows,  but  now  are  a  Prey  to  the 
Alligators.  They  remain  here  till  the  Water  drains  oflF 
from  the  Land ;  and  then  confine  themselves  to  the 
stagnant  Ponds;  and  when  they  are  dry,  they  ramble 
away  to  some  Creek  or  River. 

The  Alligators  in  this  Bay  are  not  so  fierce  as  they 
are  reported  to  be  in  other  Places ;  for  I  never  knew  them 
pursue  any  Man,  although  we  do  frequently  meet  them, 
nay,  they  will  flee  from  us :  and  I  have  drank  out  of  a 
Pond  in  the  dry  Time  that  hath  been  full  of  them,  and 
the  Water  not  deep  enough  to  cover  their  Backs,  and 
the  compass  of  the  Pond  so  small,  that  I  could  get  no 
Water  but  by  coming  within  two  Yards  of  the  Alligator's 

1 80 


I 


jtUTHOR  ENTERING    LOGWOOD  TRADE 
Nose ;  they  lying  with   their    Heads  towards   mine  as  I 


drinking,  and  iooklni 


"g. 


of 


any 


bit 


me  all  the  while.     Neither  '^?i 
the  Water  by  them,  tho' 


ably  should  a  Man  happen  in  their  way,  they  would 
""iozc  upon  him. 

Having  thus  given  some  Description  of  the  Country, 
I  shall  next  give  an  Account  of  my  living  with  the 
Logwood  Men,  and  of  several  Occurrences  that  happened 
during  my  Stay  here, 

Tho'  1  was  a  Stranger  to  their  Employment  and 
Manner  of  living,  as  being  known  but  to  those  few  only 
of  whom  we  bought  our  Wood,  in  my  former  Voyage 
hither ;  yet  that  little  Acquaintance  I  then  got,  encouraged 
me  to  visit  them  after  my  second  arrival  here ;  being  in 
hopes  to  strike  in  to  work  with  them.  There  were  six 
in  Company,  who  had  a  Hundred  Tuns  ready  cut,  logg'd 
and  chipp'd,  but  not  brought  to  the  Creek-side,  and  they 
expected  a  Ship  from  New-England  in  a  Month  or  two, 
to  fetch  it  away. 

When  I  came  hither,  they  were  beginning  to  bring  it  to 
the  Creek  :  And  because  the  Carri^^c  is  the  hardest  Work, 
tbcy  hired  me  to  help  them  at  the  rate  of  a  Ton  of  Wood 
per  Month;  promising  me  that  after  this  Carriage  was 
oTcr,  I  should  strike  in  to  work  with  them,  for  they  were 
all  obliged  in  Bonds  to  procure  this  lOO  Tuns  jointly 
together,  but  for  no  more. 

This  Wood  lay  all  in  the  Circumference  of  5  or  600 
Vards,  and  about  3CX3  from  the  Creek-side  in  the  middle  of 
a  very  thick  Wood,  unpassable  with  Burthens.  The  first 
Thing  We  did  was  to  bring  it  all  to  one  Place  in  the 
middle,  and  from  thence  we  cut  a  very  large  Path  to  carry 
'*.  to  the  Creek-side.  We  laboured  hard  at  this  Work  five 
Days  in  the  Week  ;  and  on  Saturdays  went  to  the  Savannahs 
lad  killed  Beeves. 

When  we  killed  a  Beef,  if  there  were  more  than  four  of 
^*,  the  Overplus  went  to  seek  fresh  Game,  whilst  the  rest 
L-a»*d  it. 

I  went  out  the  first  Sunday  and  complied  very  well 
^ith  tny  Master's  Orders,  which  was  only  to  help  drive 
181 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  the  Cattle  out  of  the  Savannahs  into  the  Woods,  where  two 
"676  Qr  three  Men  lay  to  shoot  them :  And  having  killM  our 
Game,  we  marched  Home  with  our  Burthens.  The  next 
Saturday  after  I  went  with  a  Design  to  kill  a  Beef  my  self, 
thinking  it  more  Honour  to  try  my  own  skill  in  Shooting, 
than  only  to  drive  the  Game  for  others  to  shoot  at.  We 
went  now  to  a  Place  called  the  Upper-Savannah,  going  four 
Miles  in  our  Canoas,  and  then  landing,  walked  one  Mile 
through  the  Woods,  before  we  came  into  the  Savannah, 
and  marched  about  two  Miles  in  it,  before  we  came  up 
with  any  Game.  Here  I  gave  my  Companions  the  slip, 
and  wandered  so  far  into  the  Woods  that  I  lost  my  self; 
neither  could  I  find  the  way  into  the  open  Savannah,  but 
instead  of  that  ran  directly  from  it,  through  small  spots  of 
Savannahs  and  Skirts  of  Woods.  This  was  sometime  in 
May,  and  it  was  between  ten  a  Clock  and  one  when  I  began 
to  find  that  I  was  (as  we  called  it,  I  suppose  from  the 
Spaniards)  Morooned,  or  lost,  and  quite  out  of  the  Hearing 
of  my  Comrade's  Guns.  I  was  somewhat  surprised  at  this ; 
but  however,  I  knew  I  should  find  my  way  out,  as  soon  as 
the  Sun  was  a  little  lower.  So  I  sat  down  to  rest  myself; 
resolving  however  to  run  no  farther  out  of  my  way ;  for 
the  Sun  being  so  near  the  Zenith,  I  could  not  distinguish 
how  to  direct  my  Course.  Being  weary  and  almost  faint 
for  want  of  Water,  I  was  forced  to  have  recourse  to  the 
Wild-Pines,  and  was  by  them  supplied,  or  else  I  must  have 
perished  with  Thirst.  About  three  a  clock  I  went  due 
North,  as  near  as  I  could  judge,  for  the  Savannah  lay  East 
and  West,  and  I  was  on  the  South-side  of  it. 

At  Sun-set  I  got  into  the  clear  open  Savannah,  being 
about  two  Leagues  wide  in  most  Places,  but  how  long  I 
know  not.  It  is  well  stored  with  Bullocks,  but  by  frequent 
hunting  they  grow  shy,  and  remove  farther  up  into  the 
Country.  Here  I  found  my  self  four  or  five  Miles  to  the 
West  of  the  Place  where  I  stragled  from  my  Companions. 
I  made  homewards  with  all  the  speed  I  could,  but  being 
overtaken  by  the  Night,  I  lay  down  on  the  Grass  a  good 
distance  from  the  Woods,  for  the  benefit  of  the  Wind,  to 
keep  the  Muskitoes  from  me,  but  in  vain :  for  in  less  than 

182 


THE  AUTHOR  LOST  IN  THE  WOODS 

«n  Hours  Time  I  was  so  persecuted,  that  though  I  en-  ^n. 
deavoured  to  keep  them  off  by  fanning  my  self  with  '^7' 
Boughs  ind  shifting  my  Quarters  three  or  four  Times ; 
yw  still  they  haunted  me  so  that  I  could  get  no  sleep.  At 
Day-break  I  got  up  and  directed  my  Course  to  the  Creek 
where  we  landed,  from  which  I  was  then  about  two  Leagues. 
1  did  not  see  one  Beast  of  any  sort  whatever  in  all  the  way  ; 
though  the  Day  before  I  saw  several  young  Calves  that 
could  not  follow  their  Dams,  but  even  these  were  now 

rnc  away,  to  my  great  Vexation  and  Disappointment,  for 
iras  very  hungry.  But  about  a  Mile  farther,  I  spied  ten 
twelve  Quams  perching  upon  the  Boughs  of  a  Cotton- 
Tree-  These  were  not  shy,  therefore  1  got  well  enough 
under  them  ;  and  having  a  single  Bullet  (but  no  shot)  about 
mc,  fired  at  one  of  them,  but  miss'd  it,  though  I  had  before 
often  killed  them  so.  Then  I  came  up  with,  and  fired  at 
live  or  six  Turkeys,  but  with  no  better  Success,  So  that  I 
VBs  forced  to  march  forward  still  in  the  Savannah,  toward 
the  Creek ;  and  when  I  came  to  the  Path  that  led  to  it 
thmt^h  the  Woods,  I  found  (to  my  great  Joy)  a  Hat 
Ruck  upon  a  Pole :  and  when  I  came  to  the  Creek  1  found 
another.  These  were  set  up  by  my  Consorts,  who  were 
goac  borne  in  the  Evening,  as  Signals  that  they  would 
come  and  fetch  mc.  Therefore  1  sat  down  and  waited  for 
for  although  I  had  not  then  above  three  Leagues 
by  Water,  yet  it  would  have  been  very  difficult,  if 
posnble  for  me  to  have  got  thither  over  Land,  by 
of  those  vast  unpassable  Thickets  abounding  every 
along  the  Creek  side;  wherein  I  have  known  some 
puzzled  for  two  or  three  Days,  and  have  not  advanced  half 
Mile,  though  they  laboured  extreamly  every  Day. 
leitber  was  I  disappointed  of  my  hopes ;  for  within  half 
■B  Hour  after  my  Arrival  at  the  Creek,  my  Consorts  came, 
bringing  every  Man  his  Bottle  of  Water,  and  his  Gun. 
both  to  hunt  for  Game,  and  to  give  me  notice  by  firing, 
that  I  might  hear  them ;  for  1  have  known  several  Men 
tosi  in  like  manner,  and  never  heard  of  afterwards. 

Such    an  Accident    bcfel  one  Captain   Hall  of  Ncw- 
Ef^iand,  who  came  hither  in  a  Boston  Ship,  to  take  in 

183 


1 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Logwood,  and  was  fraighted  by  two  Scotchmen,  and  one 
1676  ^j.  ^  Cane,  an  Irish-man  who  designing  to  go  with 
Goods  from  Jamaica  to  New-England  ;  for  that  reason 
when  his  Logwood  was  aboard,  tarried  at  Trist  with  the 
Ship,  and  hunted  once  in  two  or  three  Days  for  Beef  to 
lengthen  out  his  Salt  Provision.  One  Morning  the  Captain 
designing  to  hunt,  took  five  of  his  Men,  with  his  Mate, 
as  also  his  Merchant  Mr.  Cane  along  with  him.  They 
landed  at  the  East-end  of  the  Island,  which  is  low 
Mangrove-Land ;  the  Savannah  is  a  considerable  distance 
from  the  Sea,  and  therefore  troublesome  to  get  to  it. 
However,  unless  they  would  row  four  or  five  Leagues 
farther,  they  could  not  find  a  more  convenient  place; 
beside,  they  doubted  not  of  Mr.  Cane's  skill  to  conduct 
them.  After  they  had  followed  him  a  Mile  or  two  into 
the  Woods,  the  Captain  seeing  him  to  make  a  Halt  (as 
being  in  some  doubt)  to  consider  of  the  way,  told  him  in 
derision,  that  he  was  but  a  sorry  Woodsman,  and  that  he 
would  swing  him  but  twice  round,  and  he  should  not  guess 
the  way  out  again ;  and  saying  no  more  to  him  went 
forwards,  and  bid  his  Seamen  follow  him,  which  they  did 
accordingly.  Mr.  Cane,  after  he  had  recollected  himself, 
struck  off  another  way,  and  desired  them  to  go  with  him : 
But  instead  of  that,  they  were  all  for  following  the  Captain. 
In  a  short  time  Mr.  Cane  got  out  of  the  Woods  into  the 
Savannah,  and  there  killed  a  good  fat  Cow,  and  quartering 
it,  made  it  fit  for  Carriage,  supposing  the  Captain  and  Crew 
would  soon  be  with  him.  But  after  waiting  three  or  four 
Hours,  and  firing  his  Gun  several  Times,  without  hearing 
any  Answer,  took  up  his  Burden  and  returned  towards  the 
Sea-side ;  and  upon  giving  a  signal  a  Boat  came  and 
brought  him  aboard.  In  the  mean  Time  the  Captain  and 
his  Men  after  four  or  five  Hours  ranging  the  Woods, 
began  to  grow  tired,  and  then  his  Mate  happily  trusting 
more  to  his  own  Judgment,  left  him  and  the  four  Seamen, 
and  about  four  or  five  a  Clock,  being  almost  spent  with 
Thirst,  got  out  of  the  Woods  to  the  Sea-shore,  and  as  weak 
as  he  was,  fired  his  Gun  for  the  Boat  to  fetch  him,  which 
was  immediately  done. 

184 


CAPTAIN    HALL    LOST 

When  he  came  aboard  he  gave  an  Account  whereabout, 
Biid  in  what  a  Condition  he  left  the  Captain  and  his  Men ;  ' 
but  it  being  then  too  late  to  seek  him,  the  next  Morning 
Tcry  early  Mr.  Cane  and  two  Seamen  taking  Directions 
frofli  the  Mate  (who  was  so  fatigued  that  he  could  not 
Stir)  where  he  had  left  the  Captain,  went  ashore,  and  at 
length  came  within  call  of  him,  and  at  last  found  him  laid 
down  in  a  Thicket,  having  just  sense  to  call  out  sometimes, 
•It  not  Strength  enough  to  stand  ;  so  they  were  forced  to 
f  him  to  the  Sea-side.  When  they  had  a  little  refreshed 
kim  with  Bnndy  and  Water,  he  told  them  how  his 
ompany  had  fainted  for  Thirst,  and  drop'd  down  one 
Ftcr  another,  though  he  still  encouraged  them  to  be 
licarful  and  rest  themselves  a  while,  till  he  got  some 
uppties  of  Water  for  them  ;  that  they  were  very  patient, 
1  that  two  of  his  Men  held  out  till  five  a  Clock  in  the 
&ftemoon.  and  then  they  fainted  also ;  but  he  himself  pro- 
■dcd  in  quest  of  his  way  till  Night;  and  then  fell  down 
1  the  place  where  they  then  found  him. 

The   two  Seamen    carried    the    Captain  aboard,   while 
ytr.  Cane  Searched  about  for  the  rest,  but  to  no  purpose; 
he  returned  without  them,  and  could   never  hear  of 
I  aiicnrards. 
^^     This  was  a  warning  to  me  never  to  straggle  from  my 
^omons  in  our  Hunting,     But  to  proceed. 

When  my  Month's  Service  was  up,  in  which  time  we 
ITDagbc  down  all  the  Wood  to  the  Creek-side,  I  was 
Jitly  pay'd  my  Tun  of  Logwood ;  with  which,  and 
more  that  I  borrowed,  I  bought  a  little  Provision, 
tsd  ma  afterwards  entertained  as  a  Companion  at  Work 
with  some  of  my  former  Masters;  for  they  presently  broke 
■p  Consortship,  Jetting  the  Wood  lye  till  either  Mr.  West 
:  to  fetch  it,  according  to  his  Contract,  or  else  till  they 
ikould  otherwise  dispose  of  it.  Some  of  them  immediately 
to  Bccf-IsUnd  to  kill  Bullocks  for  their  Hides, 
■Inch  they  preserve  by  pegging  them  out  very  tite  on  the 
Ground.  First  they  turn  the  fleshy-side,  and  after  the 
■  upward*,  letting  them  lye  so  till  they  are  very  dry. 
TlttrtT-two  ftrong   Pegs  as  big  as  a  Man's  Arm,  arc  re- 

185 


4 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  quired  to  stretch  the  Hide  as  it  ought  to  be.  Whey  they 
"^6  are  dry  they  fold  them  in  the  middle  from  Head  to  Tail, 
with  the  Hair  outward ;  and  then  hang  them  cross  a 
strong  Pole,  so  high  that  the  ends  may  not  touch  the 
Ground,  40  or  50  one  upon  another,  and  once  in  three 
Weeks  or  a  Month  they  beat  them  with  great  Sticks,  to 
strike  off  the  Worms  that  breed  in  the  Hair,  and  eat  it  off, 
which  spoils  the  Hide.  When  they  are  to  be  ship'd  off, 
they  soak  them  in  salt  Water  to  kill  the  remaining  Worms ; 
and  while  they  are  yet  wet  they  fold  them  in  four  folds, 
and  afterwards  spread  them  abroad  again  to  dry.  When 
they  are  fully  dry,  they  fold  them  up  again,  and  so  send 
them  aboard.  I  was  yet  a  Stranger  to  this  Work,  there- 
fore remained  with  three  of  the  old  Crew  to  cut  more 
Logwood.  My  Consorts  were  all  three  Scotch-Men ;  one 
of  them  named  Price  Morrice  had  lived  there  some  Years, 
and  was  Master  of  a  pretty  large  Periago;  for  without 
some  sort  of  Boat,  here  is  no  stirring  from  one  place  to 
another.  The  other  two  were  young  Men  that  had  been 
bred  Merchants,  viz.  Mr.  Duncan  Campbell ;  and  Mr.  George 

^These  two  not  liking  either  the  Place  or  Employment, 

waited  an  Opportunity  of  going  away  by  the  first  Ship 
that  came  hither  to  take  in  Logwood.  Accordingly  not 
long  after  the  above-mentioned  Capt.  Hall  of  Boston,  came 
hither  on  that  design,  and  was  fraighted  by  them  with  40 
Tun.  It  was  agreed  that  George  should  stay  behind  to 
cut  Logwood ;  but  Campbell  should  go  to  New-England 
to  sell  this  Cargo,  and  bring  back  Flour,  and  such  other 
Commodities  that  were  proper  to  purchase  Hides  and 
Logwood  in  the  Bay.  This  retarded  our  Business;  for 
I  did  not  find  Price  Morrice  very  intent  at  Work :  for  'tis 
like  he  thought  he  had  Logwood  enough.  And  I  have 
particularly  observed  there,  and  in  other  Places,  that  such 
as  had  been  well-bred,  were  generally  most  careful  to 
improve  their  Time,  and  would  be  very  industrious  and 
frugal,  when  there  was  any  probability  of  considerable 
Gain.  But  on  the  contrary,  such  as  had  been  inur*d 
to  hard  Labour,  and  got  their  Living  by  the  sweat  of  their 
Brows,  when  they  came  to  a  Plenty,  would  extravagantly 

186 


'^                 STRANGE   LEG    WORMS  ^ 

squander  away  their  Time   and   Money  in  Drinking  and  ak.  I 
nuking  a  Bluster.  i67*l 

To  be  short,  I  kept  to  my  Work  by  my  self,  till  I  was 

hindered  by  a  hard,  red,  and  angry  Swelling  like  a  Boyl,  in  ' 
my  right  Leg  ;  so  painful  that  I  was  scarce  able  to  stand 
on  it :  but  I  was  directed  to  roast  and  apply  the  Roots  of 
White  Lillies  (of  which  here  is  great  plenty  growing  by  the 

Creek-sides)  to  draw  it  to  a  Head.     This  I  did  three  or  J 

four  Days,  without  any  Benefit.      At  last  I  perceived  two  I 

white  Specks  in  the  middle  of  the  Boil ;  and  squeezing  it,  I 

two  small  white  Worms  spurted  out :   I  took  them   both  I 

up  in  my  Hand,  and  perceived  each  of  them  to  be  invested  I 

with  three  Rows  of  black,  short,  stiff  Hair,  running  clear  I 

round   them ;   one   Row   near  each   end ;   the  other  in  the  I 

middle;  each  Row  distinct  from  other;  and  all  very  regular  I 

and  uniform.      The  Worms  were  about  the  Bigness  of  a  I 

Hen's  Quill,  and  about  three  fourths  of  an  Inch  long.  I 

I   never  saw  Worms  of  this   sort   breed   in  any  Man's  I 

Flesh.     Indeed  Guinea  Worms  '  are  very  frequent  in  some  J 

Places  of  the  West-Indies,  especially  at  Curasao;    They  I 

breed  i»  well    in  Whites  as  Negroes :    And  because  that  I 

Island    was    formerly   a    Magazin    of   Negroes,   while    the  I 

Dutch    drove    that    Trade   with    the   Spaniards,    and    the  I 

Negroes  were  most  subject  to  them ;  'twas  therefore  be-  I 

licked   that   other   People    took    them    by    Infection    from  I 

■Kem.     I  rather  judge  that  they  are  generated  by  drinking  I 

ad  Water;  and  'tis  as  likely  that  the  Water  of  the  other  I 

U!ar»d    of    Aruba    and    Bonairy    may    produce    the    same  I 

KffccM  ;  for  many  of  those  that  went  with  me  from  thence  I 

:c  Virginia  (mentioned  in  my  former  Volume)  were  troubled  I 

with  them  after  our  Arrival  there:  particularly  I  my  self  I 

had  one  broke  out  in  my  Ancle,  after  I  had  been  there  five  ' 
or  six  Months. 

These  Worms  are  no  bigger  than  a  large  brown  Thread,  J 

L     hot  (as  I  have  heard)  five   or  six  Yards  long,  and  if  it  J 

I     brcaki  in  drawing  out,  that  part  which  remains  in  the  Flesh  I 

^^liU  putrific,  and  be  very  painful,  and  indanger  the  Patient's  I 

^^■V^^he  puoM-wntm  {Ff/aria  medinensh)  is  a  whitish  ihiefldiikc  patasitF,  I 

^^BA*k  thniu  tB  iMinian  ikin,  pardcularly  io  ihc  skin  of  the  feet  .ind  ankles.  I 

■                                           "7  I 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Life ;  or  at  least  the  use  of  that  limb :  and  I  have  known 
'^"^  some  that  have  been  scarified  and  cut  strangely,  to  take  out 
the  Worm.  I  was  in  great  Torment  before  it  came  out: 
my  Leg  and  Ancle  swelFd  and  lookM  very  red  and  angry ; 
and  I  kept  a  Plaister  to  it  to  bring  it  to  a  Head.  At  last 
drawing  off  my  Plaister  out  came  about  three  Inches  of  the 
Worm ;  and  my  Pain  abated  presently.  Till  then  I  was 
ignorant  of  my  Malady;  and  the  Gentlewoman,  at  whose 
House  I  was,  took  it  for  a  Xcrve ;  but  I  knew  well  enough 
what  it  was,  and  presently  rollM  it  up  on  a  small  Stick. 
After  that  I  opened  it  every  Morning  and  Evening,  and 
strained  it  out  gently,  about  two  Inches  at  a  time,  not 
without  some  pain,  till  at  length  I  had  got  out  about 
two  Foot. 

Riding  with  one  Mr.  Richardson,  who  was  going  to  a 
Negro  to  have  his  Horse  cured  of  a  galfd  Back,  I  asked 
the  Negro  if  he  could  undertake  my  Leg :  which  he  did 
very  readily ;  and  in  the  mean  time  I  observed  his  Method 
in  curing  the  Horse;  which  was  this.  First  he  strok'd 
the  sore  Place,  then  applying  to  it  a  little  rough  Powder, 
which  looked  like  Tobacco-Leaves  dryed  and  crumbled 
small,  and  mumbling  some  Words  to  himself,  he  blew  upon 
the  part  three  times,  and  waving  his  Hands  as  often  over 
it,  said,  it  would  be  well  speedily.  His  Fee  for  the  Cure 
was  a  white  Cock. 

Then  coming  to  me,  and  looking  on  the  Worm  in  my 
Ancle,  he  promised  to  cure  it  in  three  Days,  demanding 
also  a  white  Cock  for  his  Pains,  and  using  exactly  the  same 
Method  with  me,  as  he  did  with  the  Horse.  He  bad  me 
not  open  it  in  three  Days ;  but  I  did  not  stay  so  long ;  for 
the  next  Morning  the  Cloath  being  rubb'd  ofF,  I  unbound 
it,  and  found  the  Worm  broken  off,  and  the  hole  quite 
healed  up.  I  was  afraid  the  remaining  Part  would  have 
given  some  Trouble,  but  have  not  felt  any  Pain  there  from 
that  Day  to  this. 

To  return.  I  told  you  how  I  was  interrupted  in 
following  my  Work,  by  the  Worm's  breeding  in  my  Leg. 
And  to  compleat  my  Misfortune,  presently  after  we  hii 
the  most  violent  Storm  for  above  24  Hours,  that  ever  was 

188 


i 


Hnown  in  these  Pans.     An  Account  of  which  I  shall  give 
^borc  particularly  in  my  Discourse  of  Winds,  and  shall  now  ' 
only  mention  some  Passages. 

I  have  already  said,  we  were  four  of  us  in  Company  at 
this  Place  cutting  Logwood  :  and  by  this  Storm  were  re- 
duced to  great  Inconveniences;  for  while  that  [asted  we 
could  dress  no  Victuals,  nor  even  now  it  was  over,  unless 
we  had  done  it  in  the  Canoa ;  for  the  highest  Land  near  us 
was  almost  three  Foot  under  Water:  besides  our  Provision 
too  was  most  of  it  spoiled,  except  the  Beef  and  Pork,  which 
was  but  little  the  worse. 

We  had  a  good  Canoa  large  enough  to  carry  us  all ; 
and  seeing  it  in  vain  to  stay  here  any  longer,  we  all  em- 
bvked  and  rowed  away  to  One-Bush-Key,  about  four 
Leagues  from  our  Huts.  There  were  four  Ships  riding 
here,  when  the  Storm  began :  but  at  our  Arrival  we  found 
only  ofic,  and  hoped  to  have  got  some  Refreshment  from 
it,  but  found  very  cold  Entertainment :  For  we  could 
oetthcr  get  Bread  nor  Punch,  nor  so  much  as  a  Dram  of 
Rum,  though  we  offered  them  Money  for  it.  The  Reason 
was,  they  were  already  over-charged  with  such  as  being 
distrcsaed  by  the  Storm,  had  been  forced  to  take  Sanctuary 
with  thcni.  Seeing  we  could  not  be  supplied  here,  we 
asked  which  way  the  other  three  Ships  were  driven  ?  they 
toU  us  that  Captain  Prout  of  New-England  was  driven 
towards  Trist,  and  'twas  probable  he  was  carried  out  to 
Sea,  unless  he  struck  on  a  Sand,  called  the  Middle-Ground  ; 
fJut  Captain  Skinner  of  New-England  was  driven  towards 
Betf-Island ;  and  Captain  Chandler  of  London,  drove 
jway  towards  Man-of-War  Lagune. 

Beef-Island  lies  North  from  Onc-Bush-Key ;  but  the 
I  otkcr  two  Places  lie  a  little  on  each  side :  One  to  the  East ; 
like  other  to  the  West,  So  away  we  went  for  Beef-Island  : 
l»d  coming  within  *  League  of  it,  we  saw  a  Flag  in  the 
"*  '  ,  made  fast  to  a  Pole,  and  placed  on  the  top  of  a 
h  Tree.  And  coming  stiti  nearer,  we  at  last  saw  a  Ship 
I  WcKxls,  about  200  Yards  from  the  Sea.  We  rowed 
~  [iDwardt  her;  and  when  we  came  to  the  Woods 
,  pretty  clear  Passage  made  by  the  Ship  thro" 
= -    iSa 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  the  Woods,  the  Trees  being  all  broke  down ;  and  about 
*^76  three  Foot  Water  Home  to  the  Ship.  We  rowed  in  with 
our  Canoa,  and  went  aboard,  and  were  kindly  entertained 
by  the  Seamen :  but  the  Captain  was  gone  aboard  Captain 
Prout,  who  stuck  fast  on  the  middle  Ground  before-men- 
tioned. Captain  Prout^s  Ship  was  afterwards  got  oflF  again ; 
but  the  Stumps  of  the  Trees  ran  clear  through  the  bottom 
of  Captain  Skinners,  therefore  there  was  no  hope  of  saving 
her.  Here  we  got  Victuals  and  Punch,  and  stayed  about 
two  Hours,  in  which  Time  the  Captain  came  aboard  and 
invited  us  to  stay  all  Night.  But  hearing  some  Guns 
fired  in  Man-of-War  Lagune,  we  concluded  that  Captain 
Chandler  was  there,  and  wanted  Assistance.  Therefore  we 
presently  rowed  away  thither,  for  we  could  do  no  Service 
here ;  and  before  Night  found  him  also  stuck  fast  on  a 
Point  of  Sand.  The  Head  of  his  Ketch  was  dry,  and  at 
the  Stern  there  was  above  four  Foot  Water.  Our  coming 
was  very  seasonable  to  Captain  Chandler,  with  whom  we 
stayed  two  Days  :  in  which  Time  we  got  out  all  his  Goods, 
carried  off  his  Anchor,  &c.  and  so  not  being  able  as  yet  to 
do  him  more  Service,  we  left  him  for  the  present,  and  went 
away  to  hunt  at  Beef-Island. 

At  Trist  were  four  Vessels  riding  before  this  Storm ; 
one  of  them  was  driven  off  to  Sea,  and  never  heard  of 
afterwards.  Another  was  cast  dry  upon  the  shore,  where 
she  lay  and  was  never  got  off  again  :  But  the  third  rode  it 
out.  Another  was  riding  without  the  Bar  of  Trist,  and 
she  put  to  Sea,  and  got  to  New-England ;  but  much 
shattered.  About  three  Days  before  this  Storm  began,  a 
small  Vessel,  commanded  by  Captain  Vally,  went  hence, 
bound  to  Jamaica.  This  Vessel  was  given  for  lost  by  all 
the  Logwood-Cutters;  but  about  four  Months  after  she 
returned  thither  again  ;  and  the  Captain  said  he  felt  nothing 
of  the  Storm,  but  when  he  was  about  30  Leagues  to  Wind- 
ward of  Trist,  he  had  a  fresh  Summasenta  Wind  that 
carried  him  as  high  as  Cape  Condecedo ;  but  all  the  Time 
he  saw  very  black  Clouds  to  the  Westward. 

Beef-Island  is  about  seven  Leagues  long,  and  three  or 
four  broad.     It  lies  in  length  East  and  West.     The  East- 

190 


i 


BEEF  ISLANE 

looks  totrsrds  the  IsUnd  Trist ;  and  is  low  drowned  am. 
knd  :  and  near  the  Sea  produceth  nothing  but  white  and  '^7*-- 
black  Mangrove-Trees,  The  North-side  lies  open  to  the 
Main  Sea,  running  straight  from  East  to  West.  The 
Ea&tcTinost  part  for  about  three  Leagues  from  Trist  is 
Low  and  Mangrovy ;  at  the  end  of  which  there  is  a  small 
salt  creek,  deep  enough  at  high  Water  for  Boats  to 
pus. 

From  this  Creek  to  the  West-end,  is  four  Leagues  all 
•andy  Bay,  closed  on  the  back-side  with  a  low  Sand-bank, 
abounding  with  thick  prickly  Bushes,  like  a  White-thorn ; 
bearing  a  whitish  hard  shell-Fruit,  as  big  as  a  Sloe,  much 
like  a  Gillabash.  The  West-end  is  washed  with  the  River 
St.  Peter  St.  Paul.'  This  end  is  over-grown  with  red 
MangTuvcs.  About  three  Leagues  up  from  the  Mouth 
of  this  River  shoots  forth  a  small  Branch,  running  to  the 
Eastward,  and  dividing  Becf-lsland  from  the  Main  on  the 
Stnith,  and  afterwards  makes  a  great  Lake  of  fresh  Water, 
caJlcd  Fresh-Water  Lagunc.  This  afterwards  falls  into  a 
ult  Lake,  called  Man-of-War  Lagune ;  which  empties  it 
*c!f  into  I^guna  Tcrmina,  about  two  Leagues  from  the 
Souih-East  Point  of  the  Island. 

The  inside  or  middle  of  this  Island  is  a  Savannah, 
bordered  all  round  with  Trees,  most  Mangrovy  ;  either 
black,  white  or  red,  with  some  Logwood. 

The  South-side,  between  the  Savannahs  and  the  Man- 
grorcs  ts  very  rich.  Some  of  this  Land  lyes  in  Ridges 
higher  than  the  Savannahs. 

TTic  Savannahs  produce  plenty  of  long  Grass,  and  the 
Kidgcs  curious  high  flourishing  Trees  of  divers  sorts. 

The  Fruits  of  this  Island  are  Penguins,  both  red  and 

^^kUow,  Guavers,  Sapadilloes,  Limes,  Oranges,  &c.     These 

^^■t  bat  lately  planted  here  by  a  Coluny  of  Indians ;  who 

^^polfcd  from  the  Spaniards  and  settled  here. 

^^  It  is  no  new  Thing  for  the  Indians  m  these  woody 
fVts  of  Amcrita,  to  fly  away  whole  Towns  at  once,  and 
Kuie  themselves  in  the  unfrequented  Woods  to  enjoy  their 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Freedom  ;  and  if  they  are  accidentally  discovered,  they  will 
J676  remove  again ;  which  they  easily  do ;  their  Houshold- 
Goods  being  little  else  but  their  Cotton  Hammocks,  and 
their  Callabashes.  They  build  every  Man  his  own  House, 
and  tye  up  their  Hammocks  between  two  Trees ;  wherein 
they  sleep  till  their  Houses  are  made.  The  Woods  afford 
them  some  Subsistence,  as  Pecary  and  Warree,  but  they 
that  are  thus  stroling  (or  morooning,  as  the  Spaniards  call 
it)  have  Plantain- Walks  that  no  Man  knows  but  themselves, 
and  from  thence  they  have  their  Food,  till  they  have  raised 
Plantation  Provision  near  their  new  built  Town.  They 
clear  no  more  Ground  than  what  they  actually  employ  for 
their  Subsistence.  They  make  no  Paths:  but  when  they 
go  far  from  Home,  they  break  now  and  then  a  Bough, 
letting  it  hang  down,  which  serves  as  a  Mark  to  guide 
them  in  their  return.  If  they  happen  to  be  discovered  by 
other  Indians,  inhabiting  still  among  the  Spaniards,  or  do 
but  mistrust  it,  they  immediately  shift  their  Quarters  to 
another  Place.  This  large  Country  affording  them  good 
fat  Land  enough,  and  very  Woody,  and  therefore  a  proper 
Sanctuary  for  them. 

It  was  some  of  these  fugitive  Indians  that  came  to 
live  at  Beef-Island ;  where,  besides  gaining  their  Freedom 
from  the  Spaniards,  they  might  see  their  Friends  and 
Acquaintance,  that  had  been  taken  some  Time  before  by 
the  Privateers,  and  sold  to  the  Logwood-Cutters,  with 
whom  some  of  the  Women  lived  still,  tho'  others  of  them 
had  been  conducted  by  them  to  their  own  Habita- 
tions.  It  was   these  Women  after  their  return 

made  known  the  kind  Entertainment  that  they  met  with 
from  the  English ;  and  perswaded  their  Friends  to  leave 
their  Dwellings  near  the  Spaniards,  and  settle  on  this 
Island  ;  and  they  had  been  here  almost  a  Year  before  they 
were  discovered  by  the  English :  and  even  then  were 
accidentally  found  out  by  the  Hunters,  as  they  followed 
their  Game.  They  were  not  very  shy  all  the  time  I  lived 
there ;  but  I  know  that  upon  the  least  disgust  they  would 
have  been  gone. 

The  Animals  of  this  Island  are.  Squashes  in  abundance, 

192 


HOCKSING  CATTLE 

Porcupines,  Guanoes,  Possomes,  Pccary,  Deer,  Horses,  and 
Hom-Caitle.  ' 

Thii  Island  docs  properly  belong  to  John  d'  Acosta 
a  Spaniard  of  Campcachy  Town,  who  possessed  it  when 
the  English  ftrst  came  hither  to  cut  Logwood.  His 
Habitation  was  then  at  the  Town  of  Campeachy ;  but 
in  the  dry  Season  he  used  to  come  hither  in  a  Bark, 
with  six  or  seven  Servants,  and  spend  two  or  three  Months 
in  hocksing  and  killing  Cattle,  only  for  their  Hides  and 
Tallow. 

The  English  Logwood-Cutters  happened  once  to  come 
httber,  whilst  John  d'  Acosta  was  there ;  and  he  hearing 
ibeir  Guns,  made  towards  them,  and  desired  them  to 
forbear  firing ;  because  it  would  make  the  Cattle  wild  ; 
but  told  them  that  any  Time  when  they  wanted  Beef,  if 
they  sent  to  him  he  would  hox  as  many  as  they  pleased, 
and  bring  the  Meat  to  their  Canoas.  The  English  thank- 
fully accepted  his  Offer ;  and  did  never  after  shoot  his 
Cattle ;  but  sent  to  him  when  they  wanted ;  and  he 
'according   to  his  Promise)  supplied  them.     This  created 

■  im  »o  much  Friendship,  that  they  intended  when  they 
'cfumcd  to  Jartuica  to  bring   him  a   Present,  and  Goods 

■  io  to  Trade  with  him;  which  would  have  been  very 
\Jvantagious   to  both   Parties:   but   some  of  his  Servants 

.  .quAinieii  the  Townsmen  of  it,  at  his  return  to  Campeachy. 
\nd  they  being  Jealous  of  the  English,  and  envying  him, 

impUined  to  the  Govemour ;  who  presently  cast  him 
^lo  Prison,  where  he  remained  many  Years  :  This  happened 
ibout  the  Year  71  or  72.  Thus  the  Project  of  Trading 
I  the  English  miscarried  here,  and  John  d*  Acosta  was 
kfined  to  relinquish  his  Kighi  of  this  pleasant  and  prohtable 
'lod,  leaving  it  wholly  to  the  English;  for  neither  he 
riny  other  Spaniard  ever  came  hither  afterward  to  hocks 

This  way  of  Hocksing  Bullocks  seems  peculiar  to  the 
"di;  especially  to  those  that  live  hereabouts,  who 
<  »tjy  dextrous  at  it.  For  this  Reason  some  of  them 
tooQSTmtly  employed  in  it  all  the  Year  ;  and  so  become 
Tdpert.  The  Hockser  is  mounted  on  a  good  Horse, 
'93  !» 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  bred  up  to  the  Sport ;  who  knows  so  well  when  to  advance 
1676  or  retreat  upon  Occasion,  that  the  Rider  has  no  trouble  to 
manage  him.  His  Arms  is  a  Hocksing  Iron,  which  is 
made  in  the  Shape  of  a  Half-Moon,  and  from  one  G)mcr 
to  the  other  is  about  six  or  seven  Inches ;  with  a  very  sharp 
Edge. 

This  Iron  is  fastned  by  a  Socket  to  a  Pole  about 
fourteen  or  fifteen  Foot  long.  When  the  Hockser  is 
mounted,  he  lays  the  Pole  over  the  Head  of  his  Horse, 
with  the  Iron  forward,  and  then  rides  after  his  Game ;  and 
having  overtaken  it,  strikes  his  Iron  just  above  the  Hock, 
and  hamstrings  it.  The  Horse  presently  wheels  oflF  to  the 
left ;  for  the  wounded  Beast  makes  at  him  presently  with 
all  his  Force ;  but  he  scampers  away  a  good  Distance  before 
he  comes  about  again.  If  the  Hamstring  is  not  quite  cut 
asunder  with  the  Stroke,  yet  the  Bullock  by  continual 
springing  out  his  Leg,  certainly  breaks  it:  and  then  can 
go  but  on  three  Legs,  yet  still  limps  forward  to  be 
revenged  on  his  Enemy.  Then  the  Hockser  rides  up 
softly  to  him  and  strikes  his  Iron  into  the  Knee  of  one 
of  his  fore-Legs ;  and  then  he  immediately  tumbles  down. 
He  gets  off  his  Horse,  and  taking  a  sharp-pointed  strong 
Knife,  strikes  it  into  his  Pole,  a  little  behind  the  Horns, 
so  dextrously  that  at  one  Blow  he  cuts  the  String  of  hb 
Neck ;  and  down  falls  his  Head.  This  they  call  Poling. 
Then  the  Hockser  immediately  mounts,  and  rides  after 
more  Game,  leaving  the  other  to  the  Skinners,  who  arc  at 
hand,  and  ready  to  take  off  his  Hide. 

The  right  Ear  of  the  Hocksing-Horse  by  the  Weight 
of  the  Pole  laid  constantly  over  it  when  on  Duty,  hangs 
down  always,  by  which  you  may  know  it  from  other 
Horses. 

The  Spaniards  pick  and  chuse  only  the  Bulls  and  old 
Cows,  and  leave  the  young  Cattle  to  breed;  by  which 
means  they  always  preserve  their  Stock  entire.  On  the 
contrary,  the  English  and  French  kill  without  Distinction; 
yea,  the  Young  rather  than  the  Old ;  without  r^ard  of 
keeping  up  their  Stock.  Jamaica  is  a  remarkable  Instance 
of  this  our  Folly  in  this  Particular.     For  when  it  was 

194 


wu 


EST   INDIES    STOCKED  WITH    CATTLE 

:n  by  the  English,  the  Savannahs  were  well  stockt  with    xsM 
[tie ;     but    were    soon    all    destroyed     by    our    Soldiers,   '' 
who  suffered   great    Hardships  afterwards  for  it :    and   it 
w»s    never    siock'd    again    till    Sir    Thomas    Linch  ^   was 
cmour.      He    sent    to   Cuba   for    a   Supply   of   Cattle, 
ach   arc  now  grown   very   plentiful,  because   every  Man 
iws    his   own    proper   Goods.      Whereas    before,    when 
there  was  no  Property,  each  Man  destroyed  as  fast  as  he 
could.      The  French  (I  think)  are  greater  Destroyers  than 
the  English. 

Had  it  not  been  for  the  great  care  of  the  Spaniards 
in  stocking  the  West-Indies  with  Hogs  and  Bullocks, 
the  Privateers  must  have  starved.  But  now  the  Main, 
as  well  as  the  Island,  is  plentifully  provided;  particularly 
the  Bay  of  Campcachy,  the  Islands  of  Cuba,  Pines,  His- 
paniob,  Portarica,  &c.  Where,  besides  wild  Hogs,  there 
are  Abundance  of  Crawls  or  Hog-farms ;  in  some  of 
which,  I  have  heard,  there  are  no  less  than  1500.  This 
was  the  main  Sutnlstence  of  the  Privateers. 

But  to  return  again  to  Beef-Island.  Our  English 
Hunters  have  much  lessened  the  numbers  of  the  Cattle 
there  And  those  that  are  left,  by  constant  shooting  now 
arc  grown  so  wild  and  desperate,  that  it  is  dangerous  for 
a  sngle  Man  to  6re  at  them,  or  to  venture  through  the 
Si»aimah5.  For  the  old  Bulls  that  have  been  formerly 
ihol,  will  make  at  him  :  and  they  will  all  draw  up  in 
Battalia  10  defend  themselves  upon  our  Approach ;  the 
r>Id  Bulls  in  the  Front ;  behind  them  the  Cows,  in  the 
■»me  manner ;  and  behind  them  the  young  Cattle.  And 
'f  wc  urive  to  wheel  about  to  get  in  the  Rcer,  the  Bulls 
vitl  ccruinly  face  about  that  way,  and  still  present  a 
Front  to  us.  Therefore  We  seldom  strive  to  shoot  any 
Out  of  t  great  Herd  ;  but  walk  about  in  the  Woods,  close 
the  Savannah ;  and  there  we  light  of  our  Game.  The 
makes  directly  at  the  Hunter,  if  it  be  desperately 

'  &i  Tbocnu  Lyadi,  "a  pretiy  undersunclinf;  gentleman,  and  very 
'"*  — •  bora  in  Keni  «««  1630.      He  was   Lieutenant-Governor  of 
1670-  iftTt,  »n<l  iJiraiii  'mm  i(>8i  till  1684,  in  which  year  he 
d  itM  nlaiid  during  bi*  fini  governorship. 

'95 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 

AN.  wounded  (as  I  have  experienced  my  self)  but  if  but 
1676  slightly,  they  commonly  run  away.  The  old  Hunters  tell 
us,  that  a  Cow  is  more  dangerous  of  the  two ;  because 
they  say,  she  runs  at  her  Enemy  with  her  Eyes  open; 
but  the  Bull  shuts  his,  so  that  you  may  easily  avoid  him. 
But  this  I  cannot  affirm  upon  my  own  Knowledge,  and 
rather  doubt  the  Truth  of  it;  for  I  knew  one  shrewdly 
gor'd  by  a  Bull.  He  was  a  Consort  with  Mr.  Baker,  in 
the  West  Lagune;  where  having  tir'd  themselves  with 
cutting  of  Logwood,  they  took  an  Occasion  to  go  in  their 
Canoa  to  Beer-Island,  to  refresh  themselves  there  a  Fort- 
night or  three  Weeks ;  because  here  were  several  sorts  of 
Fruits,  and  Plenty  of  Cabbage  to  eat  with  their  fresh  Beef, 
which  they  could  not  fail  to  meet  with.  They  came  to  a 
Place  call'd  the  Salt-Creek ;  and  there  built  them  a  Hut. 
About  four  a  Clock,  while  Mr.  Baker  lay  down  to  sleep, 
his  Consort  march'd  out  into  the  Savannah,  about  a  Mile 
from  their  Huts ;  and  there  coming  within  Shot  of  a  Bull, 
wounded  him  desperately ;  but  yet  the  Bull  had  still  so 
much  Strength  left  as  to  pursue  and  overtake  his  Ad- 
versary, trampling  on  him ;  and  goring  his  Thigh,  so 
that  he  was  not  able  to  rise.  The  Bull  by  this  Time  was 
spent,  and  fell  down  dead  by  him :  And  there  the  Man 
had  also  perished,  if  Mr.  Baker  had  not  come  the  next 
morning  to  seek  him ;  who  finding  him  by  the  dead  Beast, 
took  him  on  his  Back,  and  lugg*d  him  home  to  their  Hut. 
The  next  Day  he  put  him  in  his  Canoa,  and  delivered  him 
aboard  a  Ship,  into  the  Hands  of  a  Surgeon,  who  cured 
him  in  a  little  time. 

I  told  you  we  left  Capt.  Chandler,  with  a  Design  of 
going  to  Beef-Island,  to  spend  some  time  in  Hunting  at 
Pies  Pond,  before  mentioned.  But  before  we  came  thither 
we  went  ashore  to  kill  a  Beef  for  Supper;  where  I  was 
surprized  with  an  odd  Accident.  Passing  through  a  small 
Savannah,  about  two  or  three  Foot  deep,  we  smelt  a  strong 
Scent  of  an  Alligator ;  and  presently  after  I  stumbled  over 
one,  and  fell  down  immediately.  I  cry*d  out  for  Help; 
but  my  Consorts,  instead  of  assisting  me,  ran  away  towards 
the  Wood.     I  had  no  sooner  got  up  to  follow  them,  but  I 

196 


i 


AN   ESCAPE   FROM   AN   ALLIGATOR 

stumbled  on  him  a  second  time;  and  a  third  time  also;    an. 
expecting   still   when    I  fell  down    to   be  devoured.     Yet  ^^76 
at  last  I  got  out  safe ;  but  so  frighted  that  I  never  cared 
for  going  through  the  Water  again  as  long  as  I  was  in 
the  Bay. 


197 


CHAP.  IV 

The  River  St,  Peter  St.  Paul,  The  Mountain-Cow  and  Hippopotamus, 
Tobasco  Island,  Guavers,  Tobasco  River,  Manatee,  Villa  de 
Mosa,  Estapo,  Halapo,  Tacatalpo  de  Sierra,  Small  Bees, 
Indians,  Tartillos,  Posole,  Cotton  Garments,  Early  Marriages, 
Towns,     Festivals,     Shape  and  Features, 

HE  River  St.  Peter  St.  Paul  ^  springs  from  the 
high  Mountains  of  Chiapo,  about  20  Leagues 
within  the  Country,  which  are  so  called  from  a 
City  not  far  distant.  Its  first  Course  is  Easterly 
for  a  considerable  Length,  till  it  meets  with  Mountains  on 
that  Side :  then  it  turns  short  about  Northward,  till  within 
twelve  Leagues  of  the  Sea.  And  lastly,  it  divides  its  self 
into  two  Branches.  The  Western  Branch  falls  into  the 
River  Tobasco  ;  the  other  keeps  its  Course  till  within  four 
Leagues  of  the  Sea ;  then  divides  it  self  again.  The 
Eastermost  of  these  Branches  separates  Beef-Island  from 
the  Main ;  and  falls  into  Man-of-War-Lagunc,  as  is  before 
related.  The  other  keeps  its  Course  and  Name  till  it  falls 
into  the  Sea,  between  Beef-Island  and  Tobasco-Island ; 
where  it  is  no  broader  than  the  Thames  at  Gravesend. 
There  is  a  Bar  at  its  Entrance,  but  of  what  Depth  I  know 
not;  over  which  small  Vessels  may  pass  well  enough  by 
the  Benefit  of  the  Tide.  It  is  both  deeper  and  broader 
after  you  are  in ;  for  there  it  is  fifteen  or  sixteen  Foot 
Water,  and  very  good  Riding.  By  Report  of  the 
Privateers  who  have  been  up  this  River,  it  is  very  broad 
before  it  parts;  and  beyond  that  farther  in  the  Country, 
has  divers  large  Indian  Towns  built  on  its  Banks:  the 
chief  of  which  is   called  Summasenta ; '  and    many  large 

^  San  Pedro.  '  Usumasinta. 

198 


1 

1 


V  THE   MOUNTAIN   COW 

^Bicao  and  Plantain-walks:  the  Soil  on  each  Side  being  . 
wry  fruitful.  The  unmanur'd  Land  is  overgrown  with  lofty  ' 
Trees  of  many  sorts,  especially  the  Cotton  or  Cabbage; 
of  the  latter  there  are  whole  Groves ;  and  in  some  Places 
(especially  a  little  way  from  the  River's  side)  great 
Savannahs  full  of  Bullocks,  Horses,  and  other  Animals; 
amongst  which  the  Mountain  Cow  '  (called  by  the  Spaniards 
Ante)  is  most  remarkable. 

This  Beast  is  as  big  as  a  Bullock  of  two  Years  old.     It 

is  shaped  like  a  Cow  in  Body ;  but  her  Head  much  bigger. 

Her  Nose  is  shon,  and  the  Head  more  compact  and  round. 

She  has  no   Horns.      Her  Eyes  are  round,   full,  and   of  a 

prodigious  Size.     She  has  great  Lips,  but  not  so  thick  as 

^Hk  Cows  Ijps.     Her  Ears  are  in  Proportion  to  the  Head, 

^^Bthcr   broader  than    those  of  the    Common    Cow.     Her 

^^keck    is   thick  and    short.      Her    Legs    also  shorter    than 

^Hdinary.     She  has  a  pretty  long  Tail ;  thin  of  Hairs,  and 

^^b  Bob  at  the  end.     She  has  coarse  thin  Hair  all  over  her 

^^bdy.     Her  Hide  is  near  two  Inches  thick.     Her  Flesh  is 

red  ;  the  Grain  of  it  very  fine.     The  Fat  is  white,  and 

altogether  jt  is  sweet  wholsomc  Meat.     One  of  them  will 

weigh  5  or  600  Weight. 

This  Creature  is  always  found  in  the  Woods  near  some 
lar^e  River;  and  feeds  on  a  sort  of  long  thin  Grass,  or 
Mow,  which  grows  plentifully  on  the  Banks  of  Rivers  ;  but 
never  feeds  in  Savannahs,  or  Pastures  of  good  Grass,  as  all 
other  Bullocks  do.  When  her  Belly  is  full,  she  lies  down 
to  sleep  by  the  Brink  of  the  River  ;  and  at  the  least  Noise 
slips  into  the  Water:  where  sinking  down  to  the  Bottom, 
■ho'  very  deep,  she  walks  as  on  dry  Ground.  She  cannot 
run  fast,  therefore  never  rambles  far  from  the  River ;  for 
there  she  always  takes  Sanctuary,  In  aise  of  danger.  There 
;-.  DO  shooting  of  her.  but  when  she  is  asleep. 

They  are  found,  besides  this  Place,  in  the  Rivers  in  the 

•  The  tapir.  Pn^bly  ihc  mountain  tapir,  Tapims  RouUni ;  perhaps 
T.  RairdL  "  M.  W.',  in)ib**FainJruirdescnplii>riofthc  Mnsqucio  Kingdom," 
d«jaih«i  it  u  bcimc  "uf  ihc  bigncis  of  an  EngUth  calf  of  n  year  old,  having 
t  ^wm  like  Kit  efcptuint.  and  nnt  homed ;  ihey  hide  uU  day  ia  muddy 
.  t—twi  10 acjipe  ibe  tiovn,  and  in  the  ni|[h(  swim  across  the  river  to  get 
inod  :  ibcr  arc  vetT  v™  mral,  bui  scarce  or  hard  to  find." 

_  '99 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Bay  of  Honduras ;  and  on  all  the  Main  from  thence  as 
1676  i^jgh  as  the  River  of  Darien.  Several  of  my  Consorts  have 
kiird  them  there,  and  knew  their  Track,  which  I  my  self 
saw  in  the  Isthmus  of  Darien  ;  but  should  not  have  known 
it,  but  as  I  was  told  by  them.  For  I  never  did  see  one,  nor 
the  Track  of  any  but  once.  The  Impression  in  the  Sand, 
seemed  much  like  the  Track  of  a  Cow,  but  I  was  well 
assured  that  none  of  our  common  Cows  could  live  in  that 
Place,  neither  are  there  any  near  it  by  many  Miles. 

My  Consorts  then  gave  me  this  Relation,  and  since  I 
have  had  the  same  from  other  English-men  as  well  as 
Spaniards. 

Having  shewed  the  foregoing  Description  to  a  Person 
of  Honour,  he  was  pleased  to  send  it  to  a  learned  Friend  in 
Holland ;  from  whom  he  received  this  answer. 

Sir, 

THE  Account  I  have  of  this  Paper  from  the 
English  Minister  at  Leyden  is  this.  The  De- 
scription of  your  Sea-Cow,  agrees  with  the  Hippo- 
potamus kept  here  so  exactly,  that  I  take  them 
to  be  Creatures  of  the  same  kind.  Only  this  here  at  Leyden 
is  bigger  than  any  Ox.  For  the  Eyes,  Ears  and  Hair, 
nothing  can  be  said,  seeing  this  Skin  wants  all  these.  The 
Teeth  are  worth  noticing,  which  are  very  large,  and  firm, 
and  fine  as  any  Ivory. 

I  have  spoke  with  a  very  Intelligent  Person,  Kinsman  to 
the  Burgomaster  of  Leyden,  who  having  had  that  Hippo- 
potamus (as  they  call  it)  presented  to  him,  made  a  Present 
thereof  to  the  University ;  who  having  viewed  that  Skin 
very  well,  saith.  It's  much  bigger  than  you  make  yours,  and 
cannot  weigh  less  than  one  Thousand  Weight. 

Let  me  add  of  mine  own,  that  perhaps  they  are  greater, 
about  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope;  whence  that  of  Leyden 
came.  And  seeing  there  are  no  horns,  perhaps  it  may  as 
well  be  called  a  River-Horse  as  a  River-Cow :  But  for  that,  j 
it  must  bear  the  Denomination  given  it  by  the  People  of 
the  Place  where  they  are ;  which  may  be  different  in  Africa 
and  America. 

200 


I 


DIFFERS   FROM   THE   SEA-HORSE 

But  what  he  says  of  her  sinking  to  the  Bottom  in  deep 
Rivers,  and  walking  there,  if  he  adds,  what  1  think  he 
supposes,  that  she  rises  again,  and  comes  on  the  Land  ;  I 
much  question.  For  that  such  a  huge  Body  should  raise 
|«t  self  up  again  (though  1  know  Whales  and  great  Fishes 
and  do)  transcends  the  Faith  of  I.  H. 


r 


I  readily  acknowledge,  there  is  some  resemblance  between 
this  Mountain^Cow  of  America,  and  the  African  Hippo- 
potamus ;  but  yet  am  of  Opinion  that  they  must  needs 
be  of  s  different  Species;  for  the  Mountain-Cow  is  never 
known  to  swim  out  to  Sea,  nor  to  be  found  near  it ;  and  is 
not  above  half  so  big,  and  has  no  long  Teeth.  But  for 
further  Satisfaction,  1  have  here  inserted  two  Accounts  of 
the  Africin  Hippopotamus,  as  they  were  sent ;  the  one  to 
the  Honourable  Person  before-mentioned,  from  Captain 
Co\"ent  of  Porbury,  near  Bristol,  a  Gentleman  of  great 
Ability  and  Experience,  as  well  as  known  Integrity,  who 
used  to  trade  to  Angola :  The  other  to  my  self,  from  my 
worthy  Friend  Captain  Rogers,'  as  he  has  seen  them  in  the 
River  Natal,  in  the  Latitude  of  thirty,  on  the  East  side  of 
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope. 

The  Sea-Horse's  Head,  Ears  and  Nostrils  are  like  our 

Hones;  with  a  short  Tail  and  Legs.     And  his  Footsteps 

tn  the  Sand  like  a  Horse's ;  but  the  Body  above  twice  as  big. 

He  grazes  on  the  Shore,  and  dungs  like  a  Horse.      Is  of  a 

dirk-brown,  but  glistering  in  the  Water.     His  Pace  is  but 

slow  on  the  Shore;  in  the  Water  more  swift.     He  there 

■feeds  on  small  Fish  and  what  he  can  get ;  and  will  go  down 

^■b  the  Bottom  in  three  Fathom  Water.     For  I  havewatch'd 

^Hfim  ;  and  he  hath  staid  above  half  an  Hour  before  he  arose. 

He  is  very  mischievous  to  white  Men.     I  have  known  him 

"pen  his  Mouth  and  set  one  Tooth  on  the  Gunnel  of  a 

Bost,   and   another   on   the  second   Strake   from    the    Keel 

(which  was  more  than  four  Foot  distant)  and  there  bit  a 

Hole  through  the  Plank,  and  sunk  the  Boat ;  and  after  he 

iad  done,  he  went  away  shaking  his  Ears.     His  Strength  is 

Rosen :  peihao*  Capinin   Woodcs-Ro^rs,  nftcrwRrda  the 
n'  ol  ih«  Ouit  aitd  hu^Mtii  in  the  voyage  to  Die  South  Seoi. 
201 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER*S   VOYAGES 

AN.  incredibly  great ;  for  I  have  seen  him  in  the  Wash  of  the 
1676  Shore,  when  the  Sea  has  tossed  in  a  Dutch-man*s  Boat,  with 
fourteen  Hogsheads  of  Water  in  her,  upon  the  said  Beast ; 
and  left  it  dry  on  his  Back ;  and  another  Sea  came  and 
fetched  the  Boat  off,  and  the  Beast  was  not  hurt,  as  far  as 
I  could  perceive.  How  his  Teeth  grow  in  his  Mouth  I 
could  not  see ;  only  that  they  were  round  like  a  Bow,  and 
about  sixteen  Inches  long ;  and  in  the  biggest  part  more 
than  six  Inches  about.  We  made  several  Shot  at  him ;  but 
to  no  Purpose,  for  they  would  glance  from  him  as  from  a 
Wall.  The  Natives  call  him  a  Kittimpungo,  and  say  he  is 
Fetisso,  which  is  a  kind  of  a  God ;  for  nothing,  they  say, 
can  kill  him :  And  if  they  should  do  to  him,  as  the  white 
Men  do,  he  would  soon  destroy  their  Canoas  and  Fishing- 
Nets.  Their  Custom  is  when  he  comes  near  their  Canoas, 
to  throw  him  Fish  ;  and  then  he  passeth  away,  and  will  not 
meddle  with  their  Fishing-Craft.  He  doth  most  Mischief 
when  he  can  stand  on  the  Ground ;  but  when  afloat,  hath 
only  Power  to  bite.  As  our  Boat  once  lay  near  the  Shore, 
I  saw  him  go  under  her,  and  with  his  Back  lift  her  out  of 
the  Water  ;  and  overset  her  with  six  Men  aboard,  but,  as  it 
happened,  did  them  no  harm.  Whilst  we  lay  in  the  Road 
we  had  three  of  them,  which  did  trouble  this  Bay  every 
Full  and  Change,  and  two  or  three  Days  after :  the  Natives 
say,  they  go  together,  two  Males  and  one  Female.  Their 
Noise  is  much  like  the  Bellowing  of  a  large  Calf. 

This  past  Remark  was  made  of  a  Sea-Horse  at  Loango, 
in  the  Year  1695. 


Captain  R  o  o  e  r'  s  Letter. 
Sir, 

THE  Hippopotamus  or  Sea-Horse,  lives  as  well  on 
the  Land  as  in  the  Sea  or  in  the  Rivers.  It  b 
shaped  much  like  an  Ox,  but  bigger ;  weighing 
1500  or,  1600  Pound.  This  Creature  is  very 
full-bodied,  and  covered  with  Hair  of  a  Mouse-Colour; 
thick,  short  and  of  a  very  beautiful  Sleekness,  when  he  first 
comes  out  of  the  Water.     The  Head  is  flattish  on  the  Topi 

202 


SEA-HORSE 

:  hu  no  Horns:  but  large  Lips,  a  wide  Mouth,  and  ak 
J  Teeth  ;  four  of  which  are  longer  than  the  rest,  (viz.)  ''"* 
two  in  the  upper  Jaw;  one  on  each  side,  and  two  more  in 
the  under :  These  last  are  four  or  five  Inches  long ;  the 
other  two  are  shorter.  It  has  large  broad  Ears ;  great 
goggle  Eyes;  and  is  very  quick-sighted.  It  has  a  thick 
Neck,  and  Strong  Legs,  but  weak  Footlocks.  The  Hoofs 
of  his  Kcet  arc  Cloven  in  the  Middle  :  And  it  has  two 
itiaU  Hoofs  above  the  Footlock,  which  bending  to  the 
Ground  when  it  goes,  make  an  Impression  on  the  Sand  like 
four  CIaw5.  His  Tail  is  short  and  tapering  like  a  Swines; 
without  any  Bob  at  the  end.  This  Beast  is  commonly  fat 
and  very  good  Meat.  It  grateth  ashore  in  wet  swampy 
Ground  near  Rivers  or  Ponds ;  but  retires  to  the  Water,  if 
pursued.  When  they  arc  in  the  Water,  they  will  sink 
down  to  the  Bottom ;  and  there  walk  as  on  dry  Ground. 
They  will  run  almost  as  fast  as  a  man  ;  but  if  chased  hard, 
■■\cy  will  turn  about  and  look  very  fierce,  like  a  Boar;  and 
r.ght  if  put  to  it.  The  Natives  of  the  Country,  have  no 
~¥ar^  with  these  Creatures ;  but  we  had  many  Conflicts 
ith  them,  both  on  Shore  and  in  the  Rivers :  and  though 
r  commonly  got  the  better  by  killing  some,  and  routing 
i  rest ;  yet  in  the  Water  we  durst  not  molest  them,  after 
r  Bout ;  which  had  like  to  have  proved  fatal  to  3  Men 
t  went  in  a  small  Canoa  to  kill  a  single  Sea-Horsc,  in  a 
rver  where  was  8  or  10  Foot  Water.  The  Horse,  accord- 
ing to  his  Custom,  was  marching  in  the  bottom  of  the 
Rircr;  and  being  spied  by  these  Men,  they  wounded  him 
with  a  long  Ijincc;  which  so  enraged  the  Beast,  that  he 
fn»c  up  immediately,  and  giving  a  fierce  look  he  opened 
hi»  Jawi  and  bit  a  great  piece  of  the  Gunnal  or  upper  edge 
■^  the  Canna,  and  was  like  to  over-set  it,  but  presently  sunk 
iown  again  to  the  bottom  :  and  the  Men  made  away  as 
_  t'»t  as  they  could,  for  fear  he  should  come  again. 

The  West  branch  of  the  River  St.  Peter  St.  Paul,  after 
it  hu  run  8  or  9  Leagues  N.  W.  loscth  it  self  in  Tobasco 
'  about  4  Leagues  from  the  Sea,  and  so  makes  the 
i  Tobasco,  which  is  1 1  Leagues  long,  and  4  Broad  at 
203 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   the  Nonh-cnd :  for  from  the  River  St.  Peter  St,  Paul,  to 
'^^  the  Mouth  of  Tobasco  River,  is  accounted  4  Leagues ;  and 
the  Shore  lies  East  and  West. 

The  first  League  on  the  East  is  Mangrove  Land,  with 
some  sandy  Bay,  where  Turtle  come  ashore  to  lay  their 
Eggs. 

The  West-part  of  it  is  sandy  Bay  quite  to  the  River 
Tobasco.  But  because  here  is  constantly  a  great  Sea,  you 
have  no  good  Landing  till  within  the  River.  The  N.  W. 
part  of  it  is  full  of  Guaver  Trees,  of  the  greatest  variety, 
and  their  Fruit  the  largest  and  best  tasted  I  have  met 
with ;  and  'tis  really  a  very  delicious  Place.  There  are 
also  some  Coco-Plums  and  Grapes,  but  not  many.  The 
Savannahs  here  are  naturally  fenced  with  Groves  of 
Guavers,  and  produce  good  Grass  for  Pasture,  and  are 
pretty  well  stocked  with  fat  Bullocks :  and  I  do  believe  it 
is  from  their  eating  the  Guaver  Fruit  that  these  Trees  are 
so  thick.  For  this  Fruit  is  full  of  small  Seeds;  which 
being  swallowed  whole  by  the  Cattle,  are  voided  whole  by 
them  again;  and  then  taking  root  in  their  Dung,  spring 
up  abundantly. 

Here  are  also  Deer  in  great  numbers;  these  we  con- 
stantly find  feeding  in  the  Savannahs  Mornings  and  Even- 
ings. And  I  remember  an  unlucky  Accident  whilst  I 
was  there.  Two  or  three  Men  went  out  one  Evening 
purposely  to  hunt ;  when  they  were  in  the  spots  of 
Savannahs,  they  separated  to  find  their  Game,  and  at  last 
it  so  happened,  that  one  of  them  fired  at  a  Deer  and  killed 
it,  and  while  he  was  skinning  it,  he  was  shot  stark  dead  by 
one  of  his  Consorts,  who  fired  at  him,  mistaking  him  for  a 
Deer.  The  poor  Man  was  very  sorry  for  so  sad  a  mis- 
chance ;  and  for  fear  of  the  dead  Man*s  Friends,  durst 
never  go  back  again  to  Jamaica. 

The  River  of  Tobasco  is  the  most  noted  in  all  the  Bay 
of  Campeachy,  and  springs  also  from  the  high  Mountains 
of  Chiapo ;  but  much  more  to  the  Westward  than  that  of 
St.  Peter  St.  Paul.  From  thence  it  runs  N.  E.  till  within 
4  Leagues  of  the  Sea,  where  it  receives  the  fore-mentioned 
Branch  of  St.  Peter  St.  Paul,  and  then  runs  North  till  it 

204 


^i 


TOBASCO    RIVER— MANATEE 

I  into  the  Sea.      Its  Mouth   is  about   two  Miles  wide, 

I  there  is  a  Bar  of  Sand  lying  off  it,  with  not  above  1 1    '^^  I 

Kl2   foot  Water;  but  a  Mile  or  two  within  the  Mouth, 

i  nook  cr  bending  of  the  River  on  the  East-side  there 

I  three  Fathom,  and  good   Riding,  without  any  danger 

fem  the  strength  of  the  Current.     The  Tide  flows  up 

ifaout   four  Leagues  in  the  dry  Season,  but  in  the  Rains 

:  so  far ;  for  then  the  Freshes  make  the  Ebb  run  very 

l[)uring  the  Norths  it  overflows  all  the  low  Land  for 
jcr  15  Leagues  up  the  River,  and  you  may  then  take 
Itfiresh  Water  without  the  Bar. 

7  This  River,  near  its  Mouih,  abounds  with  Catfish,  with 
:  Snooks,  and  Manatee  in  great  plenty;  there  being 
HOod  feeding  for  them  in  many  of  tt5  Creeks,  especially  in 
E  place  on  the  Siarboard-side  about  2  Leagues  from  the 
Rrhicb  runs  into  the  Land  2  or  300  paces,  and  then 
(  very  wide,  and  is  so  shoal  that  you  may  see  their 
above  Water  as  they  feed ;  a  thing  so  rare,  that  I 
beard  our  Muskcto-Mcn  say,  they  never  saw  it  any 
:  else;  on  the  least  noise  they  will  all  scamper  out 
the   River:    yet    the    Musketo-mcn    seldom    miss  of 
king  them.     There  are  a  son  of  Fresh-water  Manatee, 
t  altogether  so  big  as  the  Sea-kind,  but  otherwise  exactly 
r  tn  shape  and  taste,  and  I  think  rather  fatter.     The 
by  the  Rivers,  especially  on  the  Starboard  side,  is 
py,  and  overgrown  with  Trees. 

"lere  are  also  abundance  of  Trees,  (the  largest  that  I 
law,  till  I  came  to  the  Gallapagoes  Islands  in  the  S. 
)  viz.  Mangroves,  Macaws,  and  oihcr  sons  that  I  know 
In  »omc  places  near  the  Kiver-side,  further  up  the 
Sontry,  are  Ridges  of  dry  Land,  full  of  lofty  Cabbage 
md  Cotton  Trees,  which  make  a  very  pleasant  Landskip. 
nKTc  n  no  Settlement  within  S  Leagues  of  the  River's 
^Bth,  and  then  you  come  to  a  small  Breast-work,  where 
!  h  commonly  a  Spaniard  with  8  or  9  Indians  posted 
ich  side  the  River,  to  watch  for  Boats  coming  that 
And  because  there  arc  divers  Creeks  running  in  from 
iavannahs,  some  of  these  Centinels  are  so  placed  in  the 

J05 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Woods,  that  they  may  look  into  the  Savannahs,  for  fear  of 
1676  being  surprized  on  the  back  side :  Yet  for  all  their  caution, 
these  Centinels  were  snap*d  by  Captain  Nevil,^  Commander 
of  a  small  Brigantine,  in  a  second  Expedition  that  he  made 
to  take  the  Town  called  Villa  de  Mosa.  His  first  attempt 
miscarried  by  his  being  discovered.  But  the  second  time 
he  got  into  a  Creek,  a  League  below  these  Centinels,  and 
there  dragging  his  Canoas  over  some  Trees  that  were  laid 
cross  it,  purposely  to  hinder  his  Passage,  he  came  in  the 
Night  upon  their  Backs  in  their  several  Posts ;  so  that  the 
Town,  having  no  notice  of  his  coming  by  their  firing  as 
they  should  have  done,  was  taken  without  any  resistance. 

Villa  de  Mosa  is  a  small  Town  standing  on  the  Star- 
board side  of  the  River,  4  Leagues  beyond  this  Breast-work. 
'Tis  inhabited  chiefly  by  Indians,  with  some  Spaniards: 
There  is  a  Church  in  the  middle,  and  a  Fort  at  the  West- 
end,  which  commands  the  River.  Thus  far  Ships  come 
to  bring  Goods,  especially  European  Commodities;  viz. 
Broad-cloth,  Serges,  Perpetuana's,^  Kersies,  Thread-Stock- 
ings, Hats,  Osnabrugs  white  and  blew,  Kentins,  Platilloes, 
Britannia's,  Hollandilloes,  Iron-work,  &c.  They  arrive 
here  in  November  or  December,  and  stay  till  June  or  July, 
selling  their  Commodities,  and  then  load  chiefly  with  Ocao, 
and  some  Sylvester.  All  the  Merchants  and  petty  Traders 
of  the  Country  Towns  come  hither  about  Christmas  to 
Traffick,  which  makes  this  town  the  chiefest  in  all  these 
parts,  Campeachy  excepted;  yet  there  are  but  few  Rich 
Men  that  live  here.  Sometimes  Ships  that  come  hither 
load  Hides  and  Tallow,  if  they  cannot  fraight  with  Cacaa 
But  the  chiefest  place  for  Hides  is  a  Town  lying  on  a 
Branch  of  this  River,  that  comes  out  a  League  below  the 
Breast-work,   where   Spanish   Barks   usually   lade   once  a 

^  Mentioned  in  Calendar  of  State  Papers,  West  Indian  and  Colonial 
Series,  Addenda,  p.  490,  Sir  H.  Morgan  to  various  privateers  under  French 
commissions,  telling  them  that  they  are  welcome  to  Jamaica,  and  that  Port 
Royal  is  free  to  them.     He  does  not  appear  again. 

'  Perpetuanas^  or  coarse  woollens ;  woven  chiefly  at  Sudbury.  Kerseys^ 
a  ribbed  coarse  woollen  cloth.  Osnaburgs^  or  Osnaburgh^  a  rough  linen. 
Kentin^  flne  linen,  gauze  or  muslin.  Britannias^  linen  of  medium  quality. 
Hollandilloes,  fabrics  of  unbleached  linen.    Platilloes  I  cannot  identify. 

206 


J 


Year ;  but  1  can  give  no  further  account  of  it.  Four  ak. 
Lezgucs  beyond  Villa  de  Mosa  further  up  the  River  lies  '*?* 
Estapo,  inhabited  partly  with  Spaniards,  but  most  Indians,  ' 
as  generally  the  Towns  in  this  Country  arc :  It's  said  to 
be  pretty  nch ;  stands  close  by  the  River,  on  the  South- 
vde,  and  is  so  built  between  two  Creeks,  that  th<;re  is  but 
one  Avenue  leading  to  it ;  and  so  well  guarded  with  a 
Breast-work,  that  Captain  Hewet '  a  Privateer,  who  had 
under  him  near  200  Men,  was  there  repulsed,  losing  many 
of  them,  and  himself  wounded  in  the  Leg.  In  his  way 
thither  he  took  Villa  de  Mosa,  and  left  a  Party  there  to 
^curc  his  Retreat.  If  he  had  taken  Estapo,  he  designed  to 
jaas  on  to  Halpo,  a  Rich  Town,  three  Leagues  farther  up 
the  River,  and  from  thence  to  visit  Tacatalpo,  lying  3  or 
4  League;  beyond,  which  is  accounted  the  wealthiest  of  the 
three:  the  Spaniards  call  it  Tacatalpo  de  Sierra:  whether  to 
distinguish  it  from  another  Town  of  that  Name,  or  to 
^icnote  its  ncamcs-s  to  the  Mountains,  I  know  not.  'Tis 
the  best  Town  on  this  River,  having  three  Churches, 
ind  several  rich  Merchants;  and  between  it  and  Villa  de 
Mosa  arc  many  large  Cacao  Walks  on  each  side  the  River. 

I  have  seen  a  sort  of  white  Cacao  brought  from  hence, 
which  I  never  met  with  any  where  else.  It  is  of  the 
iamc  bigness  and  colour  on  the  outside,  and  with  such  a 
thin  husky  Coat  as  the  other;  but  the  inner  Substance  is 
white,  like  fine  Flower ;  and  when  the  outward  Coat  is 
broken,  it  crumbles  as  a  lump  of  Flower  doth.  Those 
that  frequent  the  Bay  call  it  Spuma,  and  affirm  that  it  is 
much  used  by  the  Spaniards  of  those  Parts,  to  make  their 
ClwxoUtc  froth,  who  therefore  set  a  great  value  on  it. 
But  I  never  yet  met  with  any  in  England  that  knew  it, 

E'^^^yt  the  Right  Honourable  the  Earl  of  Carbery,'  who 
pleased  to  tell  me  he  had  seen  of  it. 
•■• 
- 
.01 


Ckputn  Hrwet:  be  it  mentioned  here,  and  in  two  oiher  passages  a 
bnber  tM.  I  <:»>  learn  no  uiore  of  him  than  that  he  took  part  in  the 
above,  thai  he  lost  some  handi  at  r>os  Buccas,  and  that 
lUndcd  t»id  with  Ciipuin  Rives  was  made  impossible  by  (he  rains. 

Ear)  or  Cftrbcry,  born  1640.    Governor  of  Jamaica 
_^  .  _ .  e  w»s  President  of  the  Royal  Society  rroni 

•46-4    ^cdieditii7i> 

207 


•  >alin  V»a^lMm  3*^ 

»  t«74-i.  nokOed  in  1678. 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  The   Land   on   the   South-side   of   the   River   is   low 

'676  Savannahs  or  Pasture :  The  side  where  the  Town  of  Villa 
de  Mosa  stands,  is  a  sort  of  gray  sandy  Earth;  and  the 
whole  Country,  the  Up-land  I  mean,  seems  to  be  much 
the  same :  But  the  Low-land  is  of  a  black  deep  Mold, 
and  in  some  places  very  strong  Clay ;  and  there  is  not  a 
Stone  to  be  found  in  all    the  Country.     The  healthy  dry 
Land  is  very  woody,  except  where  inhabited  or  planted. 
It  is  pretty  thick  settled  with  Indian  Towns,  who  have 
all  a  Padre  or  two  among  them,  and  a  Cacique  or  Gover- 
nour  to  keep  the  Peace.     The  Cacao  Tree  thrives  here 
very  well ;   but  the  Nuts  are  smaller  than  the  Caraccas 
Nuts;    yet   Oyly   and    Fat   whilst    new.      They   are   not 
planted  near  the  Sea,  as  they  are  on  the  Coast  of  Caraccas, 
but   at  least   8   or   10   Miles  up  in  the  Country.      The 
Cacao-walks  belong  chiefly  to  the  Spaniards;  and  are  only 
planted  and  dress'd  by  Indians,  hired  for  that  purpose ;  yet 
the  Indians  have  of  their  own,  Plantain-walks,  Plantations 
of  Maiz,  and  some  small  Cacao-walks ;  about  which  they 
spend  the  chiefest  of  their  time.     Some  employ  themselves 
to  search  in  the  Woods  for  Bees  that   build   in  hollow 
Trees ;  and  get  a  good  livelihood  by  the  Honey  and  Wax. 
These  are  of  two  sorts:  One  pretty  large;  the  other  no 
bigger,  but  longer,  than  an  ordinary  black  Fly :   in  other 
respects,  just  like  our  common  Bees;  only  of  a  darker 
Colour.     Their  Stings  are  not  strong  enough  to  enter  a 
Man's  Skin  ;    but   if  disturbed,   they  will  fly  at   one  as 
furiously  as  the  great  Bees;   and  will  tickle,  but  cannot 
hurt  you.     Their  Honey  is  white   and  clear;    and  they 
make  a  great  deal  of  it.     The  Indians  keep  of  them  tame, 
and  cut  hollow  Trunks  for  them  to  make  their  Combs  in. 
They  place  one  end  of  the  Log  (which  is  saw'd  very  even) 
on  a  Board,  leaving  a  hole  for  the  Bees  to  creep  in  at: 
and  the  upper  end  is  covered  with  a  Board,  put  close  over 
it.     The  young  and  lusty  Indians  (such  as  want  Employ- 
ment) hire  themselves  to  the  Spaniards.    They  Work  cheap, 
and  are  commonly  paid  in  such  Goods  as  the  Spaniards  do 
not  value.     And  I  have  been  told  that  they  are  obliged  to 
work  for  their  Masters,  one  Day  in  a  Week,  gratis:  But 

208 


i 


INDIAN   DRINK 

'  this  Privilcdge  belongs  only  to  the  Padres,  or  to 
rLaity  also,  I  know  not.  The  Indians  inhabiting  these  ' 
/Hbges,  live  like  Gentlemen  in  Comparison  of  those  that 
re  near  any  great  Town,  such  as  Campeachy  or  Merida  : 
or  there  even  the  poorer  and  rascally  Sort  of  People,  that 
re  not  able  to  hire  one  of"  these  poor  Creatures,  will  by 
ioknce  drag  them  to  do  their  drudgery  for  nothing,  after 
bey  have  work'd  all  Day  for  their  Masters :  nay,  they 
iftcn  take  them  out  of  the  Market  from  their  Business ; 
w  at  least  cnjoyn  them  to  come  to  their  Houses  when 
hnr  Market  b  ended :  and  they  dare  not  refuse  to  do  it. 
■  This  Country  is  very  fruitful;  yielding  plentiful  Crops 
KMaiz,  which  is  their  chiefest  Subsistence.  After  it  is 
Sled  they  bruise  it  on  such  a  Rubbing-Stone  as  Chocolate 
I  ground  on.  Some  of  it  they  make  into  small  thin  Cakes, 
ailed  Tartillocs.  The  rest  is  put  into  a  Jar  till  it  grows 
Dwr;  and  when  they  are  thirsty,  mix  a  handful  of  it  in  a 
Jlllabash  of  Water,  which  gives  it  a  sharp  pleasant  Taste, 
ben  straining  it  through  a  large  Callabash  prick'd  full  of 
Ball  Holes  to  keep  out  the  Husks,  they  drink  it  off.  If 
hejr  treat  a  Friend  with  this  Drink,  they  mix  a  little 
loficy  with  it ;  for  their  Ability  reaches  no  higher :  And 
Itti  ta  as  acceptable  to  them  as  a  Glass  of  Wine  to  us.  If 
bey  travel  for  two  or  three  Days  from  home,  they  carry 
e  of  this  ground  Maiz  in  a  Plantain  Leaf,  and  Calla- 
t  at  their  Girdles  to  make  their  Drink,  and  take  no 
r  care  for  Victuals,  till  they  come  home  again.  This 
Utcd  Pusolc :  And  by  the  English  Poorsoul.  It  is  so 
p  cttcemcd  by  the  Indians,  that  they  are  never  without 
^  of  it  in  their  Houses. 

lOihcf  Way  of  preparing  their  Drink,  is  to  parch  the 
,  and  then  grind  it  to  Powder  on  the  Rubbing-stone, 
ng  a  little  Anatta  '  to  it ;  which  grows  in  their  Planta- 
,  and  is  used  by  them  for  no  other  purpose.  They 
I  it  all  with  Water,  and  presently  drink  it  off  without 
"  ling, 
s  long  Journeys  they  prefer  this  drink  before  Posole. 

'  /lita  irrtllttMa,  a  rcddinh  ilyc. 

209  U 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  They  feed  abundance  of  Turkies,  Ducks  and  Dunghill 

1676  Fowls,  of  which  the  Padre  has  an  exact  Account ;  and  is 
very  strict  in  gathering  his  Tithe :  and  they  dare  not  kill 
any  except  they  have  his  Leave  for  it. 

They  plant  Cotton  also  for  their  Cloathing.  The  Men 
wear  only  a  short  Jacket  and  Breeches.  These  with  a 
Palmeto-Leaf  Hat  is  their  Sundays  Dress;  for  they  have 
neither  Stockings  nor  Shoes;  neither  do  they  wear  these 
Jackets  on  Week  Days.  The  Women  have  a  Cotton- 
Petticoat,  and  a  large  Frock  down  to  their  Knees;  the 
Sleeves  to  their  Wrists,  but  not  gathered.  The  Bosom  is 
open  to  the  Breast,  and  Imbroidered  with  black  or  red  Silk, 
or  Grogram  Yarn,  two  Inches  broad  on  each  side  the 
Breast,  and  clear  round  the  Neck.  In  this  Garb,  with 
their  Hair  ty'd  up  in  a  Knot  behind,  they  think  themselves 
extreme  fine. 

The  Men  are  obliged  by  the  Padres  (as  I  have  been 
informed)  to  marry  when  they  are  Fourteen  Years  old, 
and  the  Women  when  Twelve :  And  if  at  that  Age  they 
are  not  provided,  the  Priest  will  chuse  a  Virgin  for  the 
Man  (or  a  Man  for  the  Virgin)  of  equal  Birth  and  Fortune ; 
and  join  them  together. 

The  Spaniards  give  several  Reasons  for  this  Imposition, 
viz.  That  it  preserves  them  from  Debauchery,  and  makes 
them  Industrious. — That  it  brings  them  to  pay  Taxes 
both  to  the  King  and  Church;  for  as  soon  as  they  arc 
married  they  pay  to  both. — And  that  it  keeps  them  from 
rambling  out  of  their  own  Parish,  and  settling  in  another, 
which  would  by  so  much  lessen  the  Padre's  Profit.  They 
love  each  other  very  well ;  and  live  comfortably  by  the 
Sweat  of  their  Brows :  They  build  good  large  Houses,  and 
inhabit  altogether  in  Towns.  The  side  Walls  are  Mud  ot 
Watling,  plaister'd  on  the  Inside,  and  thatch'd  with  Pakn 
or  Palmeto  Leaves. 

The  Churches  are  large,  built  much  higher  than  the 
Common  Houses,  and  covered  with  Pantile;  and  within 
adorned  with  coarse  Pictures  and  Images  of  Saints ;  which  - 
are  all  painted  tawny  like  the  Indians  themselves.     Besides 
these  Ornaments,  there  are  kept  in  the  Churches   Pipe^ 

210 


PADRES— SPANISH   TYRANNY 

Hautboys,  Drums,  Vizars '  and  Perruques  =  for  their  Recrea- 
tion at  solemn  Times ;  for  they  have  little  or  no  Sport  cr  ' 
Pastime  but  in  common,  and  that  only  upon  Saints  Days, 
and  the  Nights  ensuing. 

The  Padres  that  serve  here,  must  leam  the  Indian 
Language  before  they  can  have  a  Benefice.  As  for  their 
Tithes  and  other  locomcs.  Mr.  Gage,  (an  Englishmaa) 
ith  given  a  large  Account  of  them  in  his  ''Survey  of  the 
'cst-Indics."  But  however,  this  I  will  add  of  my  own 
lowledgc,  that  they  are  ver)-  dutiful  to  their  Priests, 
-ving  punctually  their  Orders,  and  behave  themselves 
circumspectly  and  reverently  in  their  Presence. 
They  arc  generally  well-shaped,  of  a  middle  Size ; 
ighl  and  clean  Limbed.  The  Men  more  spare,  the 
'omen  plump  and  fat,  their  Faces  are  round  and  flat, 
icir  Foreheads  low,  their  Eyes  little,  their  Noses  of  a 
middle  Size,  somewhat  flattish ;  full  Lips;  pretty  full 
but  little  Mouths;  white  Teeth,  and  their  Colour  of  a 
dark  tawny,  like  other  Indians.  They  sleep  in  Hammocks 
made  with  small  Cords  like  a  Net,  fastned  at  each  End 
to  a  Post.  Their  Furniture  is  but  mean,  viz.  Earthen 
Pots  to  boil  their  Maiz  in.  and  abundance  of  Callabashes. 
They  are  a  very  harmless  Sort  of  People  ;  kind  to  any 
Strangers;  and  even  to  the  Spaniards,  by  whom  they  are 
so  much  kept  under,  that  they  are  worse  than  Slaves : 
ray,  the  very  Negroes  will  domineer  over  them  ;  and  are 
countenanced  to  do  so  by  the  Spaniards.  This  makes 
them  very  mclancholly  and  thoughtful:  however  they  are 
very  quiet,  and  seem  contented  with  their  Condition,  if 
they  can  tolerably  subsist :  But  sometimes  when  they 
are  imposed  on  beyond  their  Ability,  they  will  march  off 
whole  Towns,  Men,  Women,  and  Children  together,  as  is 
bdorc  related. 


■  Vnard*  or  mulu. 


'  "A  eounieifcii  cap  of  false  liaire." 


CHAP.   V 

The  River  of  Checapeque.  The  River  of  Dos  Bocas.  The  Towns  up 
the  Country.  Halpo.  Their  Trade,  Old  HatSj  a  good  Com- 
modity,  A  Sad  Accident  in  Hunting,  Tondelo  River.  Musketoes 
troublesom  on  this  Coast,  Guasickwalp  River,  Teguantapeque 
River,  Few  Gold  Mines  on  all  this  part  of  the  Sea-coast, 
Teguantapeque  Town.  Keyhooca  and  its  Canoa-Trade,  Vinelhs, 
Alvarado  River y  and  its  Branches,  Its  FortSy  Town  and  Trade, 
Cod-Pepper,  La  Vera  Cruz,  The  Fort  of  St,  John  £  UlUa. 
The  Barra  la  Venta  Fleet  ;  and  their  Navigation  about  the  West- 
India  Coast.  The  Town  of  Tispo.  Paunuk  River  and  Town, 
Lagune  and  Town  of  Tompeque,  Huniago  Island,  Its  Trade  in 
Shrimps.  The  Author's  Return  to  Logwood-cutting  at  Trist, 
Captain  Gibbs  killed  there  by  some  Indians  he  brought  from  New^ 
England,  The  Author^ s  setting  out  to  Jamaica  and  return  for 
England, 

AVING  given  the  Reader  an  account  of  the 
Indians  inhabiting  about  the  River  of  Tobasco ; 
I  come  next  to  describe  the  Western-Coast  of 
this  Bay,  with  its  Rivers  and  other  most  re- 
markable Particulars.  From  Tobasco  River  to  the  River 
Checapeque^  is  seven  Leagues.  The  Coast  lies  East  and 
West ;  all  woody  low  Ground,  sandy  Bay,  and  good 
Anchoring;  but  there  falls  in  a  pretty  high  Sea  on  the 
shore,  therefore  but  bad  landing  ;  yet  Canoas  may  with 
care  run  in,  if  the  Men  are  ready  to  leap  out,  as  soon  as 
she  touches  the  Ground ;  and  then  she  must  immediately 
be  dragged  up  out  of  the  Surf.  And  the  same  caution  and 
dexterity  is  to  be  used  when  they  go  off  again.  There  is 
no  fresh  Water  between  Tobasco  River  and  Checapeque. 
This  latter  is  rather  a  salt  Creek  than  a  River;  for  the 

*  Chiltepec. 
212 


CHECAPEQUE  RIVER 

Mouth  of  it  is  not  above  20  Paces  wide,  and  about  8  or  9 
Foot  Water  on  the  Bar  ;  but  within  there  b  12  or  13  Foot  ' 
at   low  Water,  and  good    riding  for  Barks,   half  a  Mile 
within  the  Mouth. 

This  Creek  runs  in  E.  S.  E.  about  two  Miles,  and 
then  strikes  away  South  up  into  the  Country.  At  its 
Mouth  between  it  and  the  Sea  is  a  bare  sandy  Pont  of 
Luid :  Where  on  the  side  next  the  River,  close  by  the 
Brink  of  it  (and  no  where  else)  you  may  scrape  up  the 
Sand  (which  is  coane  and  brown)  with  your  Hands,  and 
get  fresh  Water ;  but  if  you  dig  lower  the  Water  will  be 
salt.  Half  a  Mile  within  the  Mouth,  when  you  are  past 
the  «mdy  Point,  the  Land  is  wet  and  swampy,  bearing  only 
Mangroves  on  each  side  for  four  or  five  Leagues  up  ;  and 
after  that  firm  Land ;  where  you  will  And  a  run  of  fresh 
Water,  it  being  all  Salt  till  you  come  hither.  A  League 
beyond  that  is  a  Beef  Estantion  or  Farm  of  Cattle,  belonging 
to  an  Indian  Village.  In  the  Woods  on  each  side  this 
River  there  arc  plenty  of  Guanoes,  Land  Turtle,  and 
abundance  of  ^uams  and  Corresos,  with  some  Parrots ; 
and  there  is  no  Settlement  nearer  than  the  Beef  Estantion ; 
nor  any  Thing  else  remarkable  in  this  River  that  I  know. 

A    League    West    from    Checapeque   there  is  another 
fsiall  River  called  Dos  Boccas,  'tis  only  fit  for  Canoas  to 
enter :  It  has  a  Bar  at  its  Mouth,  and  therefore  is  some- 
what dangerous.     Yet   the    Privateers    mzde   light  of  it; 
for  they  will  govern  a  Canna  very  ingeniously.     However 
Captain    Rives   and    Captain    Hewet,   two    Privateers,'  lost 
icveral    Men   here  in  coming  out ;  for   there   had  been  a 
North,  which  had  raised  the  Bar,  and  in  going  out  most 
^jf  their  Canoas  were  overset,  and  some  Men  drowned. 
^^L     This  River  will  not  float  a  Canoa  above  a  League  within 
^^■i  Mouth,  and  so  far  is  Salt :  but  there  you  meet  with 
PVfinc  clear  Stream  of  fresh  Water,  about  a  League  up  in 
the  Country :  and  beyond  this  are  fair  Savannahs  of  long 
GnM,   fenced  in  with  Ridges  of  as  rich  Land  as  any  in 

•  Of  Cip"*"  Rive*  i  can  leant  nothiiiK  more  than  Dampier  tdU  us. 
H<   m  «(A>a   nwationed  an  p.  117.     Hi»  sMocutc,  Captain  Hcwct,  ib 
d  on  p.  »07- 

213 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   the  World.     The  Mold   such  as  is  formerly  described ; 
'^76  all  plain  and  level,  even  to  the  Hills  of  Chiapo. 

There  are  no  Indian  Towns  within  four  or  five  Leagues 
of  the  Sea;  but  further  off  they  are  pretty  thick;   lying 
within  a  League,  two  or  three  one  after  another :  Halpo 
is  the  chiefest. 

The  Indians  make  use  of  no  more  Land  than  serves 
to  maintain  their  Families  in  Maiz  ;  and  to  pay  their  Taxes : 
And  therefore  between  the  Towns  it  lies  uncultivated. 

In  all  this  Country  they  rear  abundance  of  Poultry, 
viz.  Turkeys,  Ducks  and  Dunghil  Fowls:  but  some  of 
them  have  Cacao- Walks.  The  Cacao  of  these  Parts  is 
most  of  it  sent  to  Villa  de  Mose,  and  ship*d  off  there. 
Some  of  it  is  sold  to  Carriers  that  travel  with  Mules, 
coming  hither  commonly  in  November  or  December,  and 
staying  till  February  or  March.  They  lye  a  Fortnight 
at  a  time  in  a  Village  to  dispose  of  their  Goods ;  which 
are  commonly  Hatchets,  Macheats,  Axes,  Hoes,  Knives, 
Cizars,  Needles,  Thread,  Silk  for  sowing.  Women's  Frocks ; 
small  Looking-glasses,  Beads,  Silver  or  Copper -Rings 
wash'd  with  Gold,  set  with  Glass  instead  of  Stones,  small 
Pictures  of  Saints,  and  such  like  Toys  for  the  Indians. 
And  for  the  Spaniards,  Linnen  and  Woollen  Cloaths, 
Silk-Stockings,  and  old  Hats  new  dress'd,  which  are  here 
very  valuable,  and  worn  by  those  of  the  best  Quality ;  so 
that  an  old  English  Beaver  thus  ordered,  would  be  worth 
20  Dollars ;  so  much  is  Trade  wanted  here  in  this  Country. 
When  he  has  sold  ofF  his  Goods,  he  is  generally  paid  in 
Cacao,  which  he  carries  to  La  Vera  Cruz. 

From  Dos  Boccas  to  the  River  Pal  mas  is  four  Leagues, 
low  Land  and  sandy  Bay  between. 

From  Pal  mas  ^  to  the  Halover  is  two  Leagues. 

The  Halover^  is  a  small  Neck  of  Land,  parting  the 
Sea  from  a  large  Lagune.  It  is  so  called  by  the  Privateers, 
because  they  use  to  drag  their  Canoas  in  and  out  there. 

From  the  Halover  to  St.  Anns  is  six  leagues. 

^  Now  Jalpa.  '  Palmas  would  seem  to  be  Tupilco. 

'  The  Halover  is  a  bar  of  land  shutting  the  Laguna  de  Santa  Anna  from 
the  sea. 

214 


^P       St.  Anns*  is  a  Mouth  that  opens  the  Lagune  before- 
mcntion'd  :  there  is  not  above  six  or  seven  Foot  Water,  ' 
fet  Barks  often  go  in  there  to  Careen. 

From  St.  Anns  to  Tondelo^  is  five  Leagues.  The 
CcBst  still  West ;  the  Land  low,  and  sandy  Bay  against 
the  Sea :  a  little  trithin  which  are  pretty  high  Sand-Banks, 
cloithcd  with  prickly  -  Bushes,  such  as  I  have  already 
described  at  Bcef-Island. 

Against  the  Sea  near  the  West-end,  within  the  Sand- 
Banlt,  the  Land  is  lower  again ;  the  Woods  not  very  high, 
and  fomc  spots  of  Savannahs,  with  plenty  of  fat  Bullocks; 
In  hunting  of  which  a  Frenchman  unhappily  lost  his  Life. 
For  his  Company  being  stragled  from  him  to  find  Game, 
be  anluckily  met  a  Drove  of  Cattle  flying  from  them  in 
the  WocxJs,  which  were  so  thick  that  there  was  no  passing 
but  in  these  very  narrow  Paths  that  the  Cattle  themselves 
h*d  nude ;  so  that  not  being  able  to  get  out  of  their 
way,  the  foremost  of  the  Drove  thrust  his  Horns  into 
hii  Back  and  carried  him  too  Paces  into  the  Savannah, 
where  he  fell  down  with  his  Guta  trailing  on  the 
Ground. 

The  River  Tondelo  is  but  narrow,  yet  capable  to 
receive  Barks  of  50  or  60  Tuns:  There  is  a  Bar  at  the 
Emnnce,  and  the  Channel  crooked.  On  the  West-side 
of  the  Bar  there  is  a  spit  of  Sand  shoots  out ;  therefore 
to  avoid  it  at  your  coming  in,  you  must  keep  the  East-side 
aboard;  but  when  once  entered,  you  may  run  up  for  two 
or  three  Leagues;  on  the  Hast-side  a  quarter  of  a  Mile 
within  the  Mouth,  you  may  lye  secure :  but  all  this 
Coast,  and  especially  this  River,  intolerably  swarms  with 
Muskeioes.  that  there  is  no  sleeping  for  them. 

About  four  or  five  Leagues  from  the  Mouth  this  River 
»  fordabic,  and  there  the  Road  crosses  it  ;  where  two 
French  Canoas  that  lay  in  this  River  intercepted  the 
Caravan  of  Mules  laden  with  Cacao,'  that  was  returning 
to  La  Vera  Cruz,  taking  away  as  much  as  they  could 
canry  with  them. 


ST.    ANNS— TONDELO 


215 


CAPTAIN    DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  From  Tondelo  River,  to  the  River  of  Guasickwalp/ 

"676  is  eight  Leagues  more,  the  Coast  still  West ;  all  along 
sandy  Bay  and  sand  Hills,  as  between  St.  Anns  and 
Tondelo ;  only  towards  the  West-part  the  Bank  is  lower, 
and  the  Trees  higher.  This  is  one  of  the  principal  Rivers 
of  this  Coast ;  *tis  not  half  the  Breadth  of  the  Tobasco 
River,  but  deeper.  Its  Bar  is  less  dangerous  than  any 
on  this  Coast,  having  14  foot  Water  on  it,  and  but  little 
Sea.  Within  the  Bar  there  is  much  more,  and  soft  Oasie 
Ground.  The  Banks  on  both  sides  are  low.  The  East- 
side  is  woody,  and  the  West-side  Savannah.  Here  arc 
some  Cattle ;  but  since  it  has  been  frequented  by  Privateers, 
the  Spaniards  have  driven  most  of  their  Bullocks  from 
hence  farther  into  the  Country.  This  River  hath  its  rise 
near  the  South-Sea,  and  is  navigable  a  great  way  into 
Land ;  especially  with  Boats  or  small  Barks. 

The  River  Teguantepeque,  that  falls  into  the  South- 
Seas,  has  its  Origine  near  the  Head  of  Guasickwalp ;  and 
it  is  reported  that  the  first  Naval  Stores  for  the  Manila 
Ships  were  sent  through  the  Country  from  the  North  to 
the  South-Seas,  by  the  convenicncy  of  these  two  Rivers, 
whose  Heads  are  not  above  ten  or  twelve  Leagues  asunder, 
I  heard  this  discoursed  by  the  Privateers  long  before  I 
visited  the  South-Seas ;  and  they  seemed  sometimes  minded 
to  try  their  Fortunes  this  way :  supposing  (as  many  do 
still)  that  the  South-Sea  shore  is  nothing  but  Gold  and 
Silver.  But  how  grosly  they  are  mistaken,  I  have  satisfied 
the  World  already.  And  for  this  part  of  the  Country, 
though  it  is  rich  in  Land,  yet  it  has  not  the  least  Appear- 
ance of  any  Mine,  neither  is  it  thick  inhabited  with 
Spaniards:  And  if  I  am  not  deceived,  the  very  Indians 
in  the  Heart  of  the  Country  are  scarce  their  Friends. 

The  Town  of  note  on  the  South-Sea,  is  Teguantapeque ; 
and  on  the  North-Seas  Keyhooca  ^  is  the  chiefest  near  this 
River.  Besides  these  two,  the  Country  is  only  inhabited 
by  Indians ;  therefore  it  is  wholly  unfrequented  by  Shipping. 

Keyhooca  is  a  large  rich  Town  of  good  Trade,  about 

'  Coatzocoalcos.  *  Acayuca. 

216 


J 


KETHOOa^ 

LeagQet  from  the  Rtrcr  Gaaskkwal|i^  ok  the  West- 

It    is    iahabiced    with   soane    fisv  Sparanis   and  ' 
:  of  Mubtoes.     These  keep  onar  Moles,  they 
eing  moK  Ctrrio^  and  frequently  visit  xhe  Ckso  CoKt 
iTeJ  ihe  Coiinn7  h^wtea  Vtlh  di    "  " 

ind  Lk  Vcn  Cruz. 

This  Country  is  pleasant  enough  m  xbe  dry  ! 
but  when  the  furious  North  \Vtnds  rage  on  the  Coast, 
ind  violently  drive  in  the  Sea,  it  sufev  extrcmelf,  being 
^i  much  overfiown,  that  there  is  no  travelling.  It  w«s 
-.n  the  wet  Season  when  Capnun  Rives  and  Captain  Hewet 
made  an  Expedition  in  Canoas  from  the  Island  Trist  to 
the  River  Guasickwtlp.  and  there  landed  their  Men, 
designing  to  attack  Keyhooca;  but  the  Country  was  so 
wet  that  there  was  no  marching ;  neither  wzs  the  Water 
high  enough  for  a  Canoa.  Here  are  great  plenty-  of 
Vincllcs. 

From  the  River  Guasickvalp  the  Land  runs  West  two 
or  three  Leagues,  all  low  Land  with  sandy  Bay  to  the  Sea, 
ind  very  woody  in  the  Country.  About  three  Leagues  to 
rile  West  of  it  the  Land  trends  away  to  the  North  for 
ibout  16  Leagues;  rising  higher  also  even  from  the  very 
Shore,  a>  you  go  up  within  Land,  making  a  very  high 
Promontory  called  St.  Manins  Land ;  but  ending  in  a 
pretty  bluff  point ; '  which  is  the  West  Bounds  of  the  Bay 
of  Campeachy. 

From  this  bluff  Point  to  Alvarado  is  about  twenty 
Leagues;  the  first  four  of  it  a  high  rocky  shore,  with 
^ccp  QifFs  to  the  Sea ;  and  the  Land  somewhat  woody. 
Ahcrwtrds  you  pass  by  very  high  Sand-Hills  by  the  Sea, 
W  >n  extraordinary  great  Sea  falls  in  on  the  shore,  which 
LWnders  any  Boats  from  Landing.  Within  the  Sand-hills 
jBB  the  Land  is  lower,  pretty  plain  and  fruitful  enough 
■  Urge  Trees. 
Tne  River  of  Alvarado  is  above  a  Mile  over  ai  the 
Hith,  yet  the  entrance  is  but  sholc.  there  being  Sands 
r  near  two  Mile  off  the  Shore,  clear  from  side  to  side, 

•  Punia  Morillo- 
217 


CAPTAIX    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 


-x-< 


45.  rjerx-rrheiesa  zncr^  irz  zw-z  Grazaeia  thruugh  these  Sands. 
Trji  "CSC  -v^zicz,  3  in  liii  !ricvile,  has  rwctve  or  fourteen 
F  >-x  Wi-:-r.     The  Lird  on  cacfi  iie  of  the  Mouth  is 

ThL-i  RrTiT  Ci^mes  out  or  d:e  Cjcntrr  tn  chiee  Branches, 
mccTir-g  il'^g^h^' j-^t  Trirhin  rhe  Mouth,  where  it  is  very 
wii*  2rjd  disr,  Oie  of  these  Bnzicfaes  comes  from  the 
Ea.itTrari ;  2:io»:her  froci  the  Westward ;  and  the  third, 
whrch  3  the  tmt  Rit-t  of  Alvando  and  the  biggest^  comes 
dirsctiT  OUT  of  the  C:.ui:try,  opposite  to  the  Sand-hills, 
aixjut  a  M:Ie  W-st  of  the  Rhrer's  Mouth.  This  last 
Springs  a  great  wiy  fron  the  Sea,  passing  through  a  very 
fertile  Country,  thxk  set  led  with  Towns  of  Spaniards  and 
Indians.  On  the  West-side,  and  just  against  the  Mouth 
of  the  River,  the  Spaniards  have  a  small  Fort  of  six  Gtms, 
on  the  declivity  of  the  Sand-bank,  a  great  height  above  the 
River ;  which  commands  a  small  Spanish  Town  on  the  back 
of  it,  built  in  a  Plain  close  by  the  Rhrer.  It  is  a  great 
Fishery,  chiefly  for  Snooks,  which  they  catch  in  the  Lake ; 
and  when  they  are  salted  and  dryed,  drive  a  great  Trade 
in  Exchanging  them  for  Salt  and  other  Commodities. 
Besides  salt  Fish,  they  export  from  hence  abundance  of 
dry  Cod-Pepper,  and  some  pickled  and  put  in  Jars.  This 
Pepper  is  known  by  the  Name  of  Guinea-Pepper.*  Yet  for 
all  this  Trade,  *tis  but  a  poor  Place,  and  has  been  often 
taken  by  the  Privateers,*  chiefly  to  secure  their  Ships  while 
they  should  go  up  in  their  Canoas  to  the  rich  Towns  ^thin 
Land,  which  notwithstanding  they  never  yet  attempted,  by 
reason  that  La  Vera  Cruz  bordering  so  near,  they  were  still 
afraid  of  being  attacked  both  by  Sea  and  Land  from  thence, 
and  so  never  durst  prosecute  their  Designs  on  the  Country 
Towns. 

Six  Leagues  West  from  Alvarado  there  is  another  large 
Opening  out  into  the  Sea;  and  it  is  reported  to  have  a 
Communication  by  a  small  Creek  with  this  River  of 
Alvarado ;  and  that  Canoas  may  pass  through  it  from  cme 

'  Cayenne  pepper. 

'  I  can  trace  no  record  of  any  other  capture  than  that  in  which  Damiiier 
took  part. 

2l8 


i 


XA  VERA   CRUZ 

River  to  the  other.     And  at  this  Opening  is  a  small  Fish- 
ing Viltage.     The  Land  by  the  Sea  Is  a  continued  high  ' 
Sind-bank,  and  so  violent  a  Sea,  that  it  is  impossible  to  land 
with  Boat  or  Canoa. 

From  this  River  to  La  Vera  Cruz  is  six  Leagues  more, 
the  Coast  still  West.  There  is  a  Riff  of  Rocks  *  runs  along 
the  shore  from  Alvarado  to  Vera  Cruz,  yet  a  good  Channel 
for  tmall  VesseU  to  pass  between  it  and  the  Shore.  And 
about  two  Leagues  to  the  East  of  Vera  Cruz  are  two  Islands 
called  Sacrifice  Islands.'  1  have  set  down  the  distance  between 
Alvarado  and  La  Vera  Cruz,  according  to  the  common 
Account  of  twelve  Leagues,  which  I  take  to  be  truer,  but 
-ur  Draughts  make  it  24.  The  Land  by  the  Sea  is  much 
the  same. 

La  Vera  Cruz  is  a  fair  Town  seated  in  the  very  bottom 
of  the  Bay  of  Mexico,  at  the  S.  W.  Point  or  Comer  of  the 
Bay ;  for  so  far  the  Land  runs  West ;  and  there  it  turns 
about  to  the  North.  There  is  a  good  Harbour  before  it, 
made  by  a  small  Island,'  or  Rock  rather,  just  in  its  Mouth  ; 
which  makes  it  very  commodious.  Here  the  Spaniards  have 
built  a  strong  Fort,  which  commands  the  Harbour ;  and 
there  are  great  Iron  Rings  fix'd  Jn  the  Fort-Wall  against 
the  Harbour  for  Ships  to  fasten  their  Cables.  For  the 
North  Winds  blow  so  violently  here  in  their  Seasons,  that 
Ships  are  not  safe  at  Anchors. 

This  Fort  is  called  St.  John  d'Ulloa ;  and  the  Spaniards 
!o  frequently  call  the  Town  of  Vera  Cruz  by  this  Name. 

The  Town  is  a  Place  of  great  Trade ;  being  the  Sea- 
Pon  to  the  City  of  Mexico,  and  must  of  the  great  Towns 
and  Cities  in  this  Kingdom.  So  that  all  the  European 
Commodities,  spent  in  these   Parts,  arc  landed  here,  and 

*  Tbe  Cabeia,  and  other  reels. 

■  Uiaa  SAMificiot,  Ibc  Pajaroc  Reef,  and  others. 

■  "Thii  Pon  if  a  link  Inland  of  »ionc»  not  three  foot  above  iho  water 
3  tfec  hial  pUcc,  and  hul  a  bow-shoolc  of  lenKlh  any  way.  This  Uland 
-■■rtnti  frtwn  the  maine  Und  two  bow-shonics  or  mure  (600  yards),  also, 
r  a  ki  he  orydentDod  that  there  is  not  in  all  this  coastc  any  other  place  (or 
AnnKS  to  amve  in  tafetie,  becaiue  the  north  wind  hath  there  such  violence 
cat  mlei  the  tbippes  be  very  nCely  mored  with  their  ancres  liutned  tipon 

'h>  Uand.  (bere  is  bo  remedie  for  these  North  wiodes  but  death"  (John 
H^wkna,  hi*  Iktrii  Vvymp)- 

ZI9 


CAPTAIX   DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 


zhsir  Gcods   bryc^rz   rhiacr  ini   crportcd   from    hence. 
'^■^  Air  zo  tis,  trar  at  tbc  Trascrc  farooght  from  Manila, 
in   tbe  EasC'Lidu   cccaes   hhber   through    the    Country 
frod  Acca;:ulca- 

Tic  Flota  cofrcs  cftber  crcrr  three  Years  from  Old 
Spain ;  and  besides  Goods  of  the  Product  of  the  Country, 
and  what  3  brought  frxicn  the  East-Indies  and  ship'd  aboard 
them  :  Tbe  Kii:g*s  Plate  that  is  gathered  in  this  Kingdom, 
together  with  what  belongs  to  the  Merchants,  amounts  to 
a  vast  Summ.  Here  also  comes  every  Year  the  Barrala- 
vanu  Fleet  in  October  and  November,  and  stays  till  March. 
This  is  a  small  Squadron,  consisting  of  nx  or  seven  sail  of 
stout  Ships,  from  20  to  50  Guns.  These  are  ordered  to 
visit  all  the  Spanish  Sea-Port  Towns  once  every  Year; 
chiefly  to  hinder  Foreigners  frx>m  Trading ;  and  to  suppress 
Privateers.     From  this  Port  they  go  to  the  Havana  on  the 

North-side  of  Cuba  to  sell  their  Commodities From 

hence  they  pass  through  the  Gulph  of  Florida ;  standing 
so  far  to  the  North  as  to  be  out  of  the  Trade- Winds, 
which  are  commonly  between  3od.  and  4od.  of  Lat.  and 
being  in  a  variable  Winds  way  they  stretch  away  to  the 
Eastward  till  they  may  fetch  Portarica,  if  they  have  Bu»- 
ness  there ;  if  not,  they  keep  still  to  the  Eastward  till  they 
come  to  Trinidado,  an  Island  near  the  Main,  inhabited  by 
the  Spaniards,  and  the  most  Eastern-part  of  any  Conse- 
quence in  the  North-Seas.  The  Barralaventa  Fleet  touches 
there  first,  and  from  thence  sails  to  the  Margarita,  a  con- 
siderable  Spanish-Island  near  the  Main.  From  thence  they 
Coast  down  to  Comana  and  La  Guiary,  and  passing  by  the 
Coast  of  Carraccas,  they  sail  towards  the  Gulph  of  Mericaia,^ 
from  thence  they  double  Cape  La  Veil,*  and  so  down  to 
Rio  la  Hacha,  St.  Martha  and  Carthagena.  If  they  meet 
with  any  English  or  Dutch  Trading  Sloops,  they  chace  and 
take  them,  if  they  are  not  too  nimble  for  them:  The 
Privateers  keep  out  of  their  way,  having  always  Intelligence 
where  they  are. 

From  Carthagena  they  sail  to  Portobello;  and  from 

*  Maracaibo.  *  Cape  de  Vela. 

220 


TISPO— PANUK  ^^ 

thence  to  Campeachy :  and  lastly,  to  La  Vera  Cruz :  And    an. 
th»  is  their   Annual  Navagation   about  the    Wcst-Indkn  '^ 

Coast.  J 

La  Vera  Cruz  was  taken  by  the  Privatcere,  about  the  I 

Year    85    under   the  Conduct    of    one    John    Russel    an  | 
old    Logvood-Cuttcr  that    had    formerly  been    taken    by 
the     Spaniards    and    sent    to    Mexico ;     where     Icamit^ 
Spaniih,   he  by  that    means  escaped    to    La    Vera    Cruz; 

and  being  released  from  thence,   he  afterwards  managed  J 

this  Expedition.  I 

From  hence  to  Old  Vera  Cruz  is  five  Leagues.     This  I 

was  the  first  Town  of  chat  Name ;  but  wanting  a  good  I 

Harbour  there,  it  was  removed  to  the  Place  where  it  now  I 

stands.  I 

From  Old  Vera  Cruz  to  Tispo '  is  about  fifteen  Leagues  ;  I 

the  Coast  lies  N.  and  S.     Tispo  is  a  pretty  handsome  small  I 

Town,  built  close  by  the  Sea,  and  watered  with  a  little  I 

Rivulet ;    but    wanting  a   Harbour,    'tis  destitute  of  any  I 

Maritime-Trade.  I 

From    Tispo  to   the  River    Panuk'  is   about    twenty  I 

I.eague8 :  The  Coast  lies  N.  and  S.  nearest,  it  is  a  large  I 

River,  descending  out  of  the  very  Bowels  of  the  Country,  I 

and  running  East,  falls  into  the  Gulph  of  Mexico,  in   Lat.  I 

about  si-jo  Minutes.     It  has  ten  or  eleven  Koot  Water  I 

en  the  Bar,  and  is  oflcn  visited  with  Barks  ihat  sail  up  it,  I 

a&  &r  as  the  City  Panuk,  lying  distant  from  the  Sea  about  I 

twenty  Leagues,  and  is  the  principal  of  this  Country,  being  I 

a  Btshop's  Sec.    There  arc  two  Churches,  one  Convent,  and  I 

a  Chapel;  and  about  five  Hundred  Families  of  Spaniards,  I 

Mulatoes  and  Indians.     The  Houses  arc  large  and  strong  ;  I 

with  Stone  Walls;  and  they  are  thatched  with  Palmeto  I 

One    Branch  of  this   River  comes  out  of   the  Lagunc  I 

r   Tompcque,*  and   mixes  with   this,  three  Leagues  before  | 
^^^£UK  into  the  Sea.     Therefore  it  is  sometimes  called  the 
^^■nr  of  Tompeque.     The  Lagunc  of  Tompcque  lies  on 

^^P*  Protablf  TuxfMH.     Dsiiipier'i  ilistancct  aw  mitlMtliiiK  in  ihii  in- 
'  Tanipico. 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  the  South  Side  of  the  River;  and  breeds  abundance  of 
1676  Fish,  especially  Shrimps.  There  is  a  Town  of  the  same 
Name,  built  on  its  Banks,  whose  Inhabitants  are  most 
Fishermen.  Beyond  this  Lagune  there  is  another  large 
one,  wherein  is  an  Island  and  Town  named  Haniago ;  its 
Inhabitants  most  Fishermen,  whose  chief  Employment  is  to 
take  Shrimps.  These  they  boil  with  Water  and  Salt,  in 
great  Coppers,  for  the  purpose ;  and  having  dried  them 
afterwards  in  the  Sun,  they  are  made  up  in  Packs,  and  sent 
to  all  the  chief  Towns  in  the  Country,  especially  to  Mexico, 
where,  tho'  but  a  hungry  Sort  of  Food,  they  are  mightily 
esteemed. 

The  Account  I  have  given  of  the  Campeachy  Rivers, 
&c.  was  the  Result  of  the  particular  Observations  I  made 
in  cruising  about  that  Coast,  in  which  I  spent  eleven  or 
twelve  Months.  For  when  the  violent  Storm  before- 
mentioned  took  us,  I  was  but  just  settling  to  Work,  and 
not  having  a  Stock  of  Wood  to  purchase  such  Provision  as 
was  sent  from  Jamaica,  as  the  old  Standards  had ;  I,  with 
many  more  in  my  Circumstances,  was  forced  to  range  about 
to  seek  a  Subsistence  in  Company  of  some  Privateers  then 
in  the  Bay.  In  which  Rambles  we  visited  all  the  Rivers 
from  Trist  to  Alvarado ;  and  made  many  Descents  into 
the  Country  among  the  Villages  there,  where  we  got  Indian 
Corn  to  eat  with  the  Beef,  and  other  Flesh  that  we  got  by 
the  way,  or  Manatee  and  Turtle,  which  was  also  a  great 
Support  to  us. 

Alvarado  was  the  Westermost  Place  I  was  at.    Thither 
we  went  in  two  Barks  with  thirty  Men  in  each,  and  had 
ten  or  eleven  kill'd  and  desperately  wounded  in  taking  the 
Fort ;  being  four  or  five  Hours  engag'd  in  that  Service,  in 
which  time  the  Inhabitants  having  plenty  of  Boats  and 
Canoas,  carried  all  their  Riches  and  best  Moveables  away. 
It  was  after  Sunset  before  the  Fort  yielded  ;  and  growing 
dark,  we  could  not  pursue  them,  but  rested  quietly  that    - 
Night ;  the  next  Day  we  killed,  salted  and  sent  aboard  twenty 
or   thirty   Beefs,   and  a  good  Quantity  of  Salt-fish,  and 
Indian  Corn,  as  much  as  we  could  stow  away.     Here  were 
but  few  Hogs,  and  those  eat  very  fishy ;  therefore  wc  did 

222 

.  i 


not  much  csieem   them  :   but  of  Cocks,  Hens  and   Ducks    *'*J 

were  sent  aboard  in   abundance.     The   tame    Parrots   we  '^'tI 

found  here  were  the  lai^est  and  fairest  Birds  of  their  Kind  I 

thit    I  ever  saw  in  the  West-Indies.     Their  colour   was  I 

vcUow  »nd  red,  very  coarsely  mixt ;  and  they  would  prate  ■ 

very   prettily;  and   there  was  scarce  a  Man  but  what  sent  I 

2bwil  one  or  two  of  them.     So  that  with  Provision,  Chests,  I 

Hcn-Coops    and    Parrot -Cages,    our   Ships    were    full    of  ' 

Lumber,  with  which  we  intended  to  sail :  But  the  second 

Day  after  we  took  the  Fort,  having  had  a   Westerly  Wind 

ill  the  Morning,  with  Rain,  seven  Armadllloes  that  were  i 

sent  from  La  Vera  Cruz  appeared  in  Sight,  within  a  Mile  I 

•  if  the  Bars,  coming  in  with  full  Sail ;  but  they  could  scarce  I 

item  the  Current  of  the  River ;   which  was  very  well   for  I 

us;  for  we  were  not  a  little  surprized.     Yet  we  got  under  I 

Sail,  in  order  to  meet  them ;  and  clearing  our  Decks  by  I 

heaving  all  the  Lumber  overboard,  we  drove  out  over  the  I 

Bar,  before  they  reached  it;   But  they  Iwing  to  Wind-ward,  I 

ftirccd    us   to   exchange    a    few   Shot    with    them.     Their  I 

Admiral  was  called  the  Toro.     She  had  lo  Guns  and  too  1 

Men ;  another  had  4  Guns  and  80  Men :  The  rest  having  1 

no   great   Guns,   had   only    60  or   70   Men   apiece,   armed  I 

with    Muskets,   and    the   Vessels   barricadoed    round    with  | 

Bull-hides  Breast  high.     We  had   not  above   50  Men  in 

both  Ships,  6  Guns  in  one  and  two  in  the  other.     As  soon  , 

as  wc    wtTc   over    the    Bar,   we   got    our   Larboard -Tacks 

aboard  and  stood  to  the  Eastward,  as  nigh  the  Wind  as  we 

could   lye.     The  Spaniards  came  away  quartering  on  us;  J 

and  our  Ship  being  the  Head-most,  the  Toro  came  directly  | 

luwardi  us,  designing  to  board  us.     Wc  kept  firing  at  her,  I 

in  hopes  to  have  lamed  either  Mast  or  Yard ;  but  failing,  I 

■  Wat  as  she  was  shearing  aboard,  we  gave  her  a  good  Volley,  1 

Ipad  presently  clapp'd  the  Helm  a  Weather,  wore  our  Ship,  I 

^pnd  got  our  Starboard  Tacks  aboard,  and  stood  to  the  I 

^Vncxward  :  and  so  left  the   Toro,  but  were  saluted  by  all  I 

^■Bc  small  Craft  as  we  past   by  them,   who  stood  to  the  I 

^Kistward  after  the  Ton,  that  was  now  in   Pursuit  and  close  J 

BV  oar  Consort.     Wc  stood  to  the  Westward  till  we  were  I 

H*|>iRit  the  River's  Mouth;  then  we  tackt,  and  by  the  help  I 

H                          ^^3  J 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  of  the  Current  that  came  out  of  the  River,  we  were  near 
1676  a  Mile  to  Windward  of  them  all.  Then  we  made  sail  to 
assist  our  Consort,  who  was  hard  put  to  it;  but  on  our 
Approach  the  Toro  edged  away  towards  the  Shore,  as  did 
all  the  rest,  and  stood  away  for  Alvarado  :  And  we,  glad  of 
the  Deliverance,  went  away  to  the  Eastward,  and  visited 
all  the  Rivers  in  our  Return  again  to  Trist ;  and  searched 
the  Bays  for  Munjack  to  carry  with  us  for  the  Ship's  use, 
as  we  had  done  before  for  the  use  both  of  Ships  and 
Canoas. 

Munjack  is  a  sort  of  Pitch  or  Bitumen,  which  we  find 
in  Lumps,  from  three  or  four  Pounds  to  thirty  Pounds  in 
a  Lump ;  washed  up  by  the  Sea,  and  left  dry  on  all  the 
Sandy-Bays  on  all  this  Coast :  It  is  in  Substance  like  Pitch, 
but  blacker ;  it  melts  by  the  Heat  of  the  Sun,  and  runs 
abroad  as  Pitch  would  do  if  exposed,  as  this  is,  on  the 
Bays :  The  smell  of  it  is  not  so  pleasant  as  Pitch,  neither 
does  it  stick  so  firmly  as  Pitch,  but  it  is  apt  to  peel  oflF 
from  the  Seams  of  Ships  Bottoms ;  however  we  find  it  very 
useful  here  where  we  want  Pitch;  and  because  it  is 
commonly  mixed  with  Sand  by  lying  on  the  Bays,  we  melt 
it  and  refine  it  very  well  before  we  use  it ;  and  commonly 
temper  it  with  Oyl  or  Tallow  to  correct  it;  for  though 
it  melts  by  the  Heat  of  the  Sun,  yet  it  is  of  a  harsher 
Nature  than  Pitch.  I  did  never  find  the  like  in  any  other 
Part  of  the  World,  neither  can  I  tell  from  whence  it 
comes. 

And  now  the  Effects  of  the  late  Storm  being  almost 
forgot,  the  Lagune  Men  settled  again  to  their  Imployments ; 
and  I  among  the  rest  fell  to  work  in  the  East  Lagune, 
where  I  remained  till  my  Departure  for  Jamaica. 

I  will  only  add  as  to  this  Logwood-Trade  in  general, 
that  I  take  it  to  be  one  of  the  most  profitable  to  England, 
and  it  nearest  resembles  that  of  Newfoundland ;  since  what 
arises  from  both,  is  the  Product  of  bare  Labour ;  and  that 
the  Persons  imployed  herein  are  supported  by  the  Produce 
of  their  Native  Country. 

It  is  not  my  Business  to  determine  how  far  we  might 
have  a  right  of  cutting  Wood  there,  but  this  I  can  say, 

224 


IE  AUTHOR'S  RETURN  TO  ENGLAND 


Hhe 

^Hat  the  Spaniards  never  receive    less  Damage    from    the 
^^trsons  who  generally  follow  that  Trade,  than  when  they   ' 
are  employed  upon  that  Work. 

While  I  was  here  the  last  time,  Capt.  Gibbs  arriv'd  in  a 
Ship  of  about  lOO  Tons,  and  brought  with  him  20  stout 
New-England  Indians  that  were  taken  in  the  Wars  there, 
designing  to  have  sold  them  at  Jamaica,  but  not  finding  a 
cood  Market,  brought  them  hither  to  cut  Logwood,  and 
nired  one  Mr.  Richard  Dawkins  to  be  their  Overseer,  who 
auricd  them  to  work  at  Summasenta ;  But  it  so  happened 
that  about  a  Week  after,  the  Captain  came  thither  in  his 
Bom  from  One-Bush-Key  where  his  Ship  lay,  and  the 
Overseer  having  some  Business,  desired  leave  to  be  absent 
for  two  or  three  Days:  But  as  soon  as  he  and  the  Seamen 
were  gone,  the  Indians  taking  their  Opportunity  killed  the 
Captam  and  marched  off,  designing  to  return  to  their  own 
Country  by  Land  :  They  were  seen  about  a  Month  after- 
w»rd,  and  one  of  them  was  taken  near  the  River  Tondeio. 

After  I  had  spent  about  ten  or  twelve  Months  at  the 
Logwood-Trade,  and  was  grown  pretty  well  acquainted 
with  the  way  of  Traffick  here,  I  left  the  Imployment,  yet 
with  a  design  to  return  hither  after  I  had  been  in  England  ; 
and  accordingly  went  from  hence  with  Captain  Chambers 
of  Loodon,  bound  to  Jamaica.  We  sailed  from  Trist  the 
Banning  of  April,  1678,  and  arrived  at  Jamaica  in  May, 
where  I  remained  a  small  Time,  and  then  return'd  for 
England  with  Captain  Loader  of  London.  1  arriv'd  there 
•he  beginning  of  August  the  same  Year:  and  at  the  Be- 
.- naing  of  the  followmg  Year  I  set  out  again  for  Jamaica, 
order  to  have  gone  thence  to  Campeachy ;  but  it  proved 

■  '  be  a  Voyage  round   the  World  ;  of  which   the   Publick 

■  i^  already  had  an  Account  in  my  former  Volume,  and 
-.c  Fint  Part  of  This, 


CAP.    DAMPIER 

HIS 

DISCOURSE 

OF  THE 

TRADE -WINDS,  BREEZES,  STORMS,  SEASONS 
OF  THE  YEAR,  TIDES  AND  CURRENTS 
OF  THE  TORRID  ZONE  THROUGHOUT 
THE   WORLD 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 


A  Scheme  of  the  following  Treatise. 


{ 


In  or  near 
the  Torrid 
Zooe. 


Trade 
windty 
p.  229 


Breezes 


'True,  or  General  at  Sea,  230. 

{Constant,  239. 
[Oblique  Po 
Shifting  to    \  Opposite  P( 
y     in  the  E. 
Sea,  252. 


'  General,  254. 

n      r  (Suramasenta 

Peculiar  to       lr»  _^. 

^     ^      A  Carthagena- 
some  Coasts.    |  n  • 

IPopogaios, 


Land 


Producing 
particular 
^  Effects; 


Terrenos, 
or  hot 
winds  of 


Harmatans, 
renos  of 


In  the 

West 

Indies. 


Storms  and 
their  Pre-  < 
sages. 


In  the 

East 

Indies. 


'  Norths,  280, 

and  Chocolatta  North,  2 

(Jamaica,  li 
Campeachy, 
,  Hurricans  of  the  Caribbee  I 

'  Tuffoons,  290. 

Stormy  Monsoons,  291  ; 
and  Elephanta,  292. 


Seasons  of  the  Year,  dry,  wet.  Tornadoes,  &c.,  2* 

Tides,  305. 

V  Currents,  314. 

An  Account  of  the  Country  of  Natal,  321. 

228 


MR.    DAMPIER^S    VOYAGES 

VOL.  II.    PART  III 

K  DISCOURSE  OF  WINDS,  BREEZES,  STORMS, 
TIDES,  AND  CURRENTS 

CHAP.   I 

0/  M^  Genera/  Trade-^ind 
THE    INTRODUCTION 

Gnural  Trade-mnd  at  Sea.  Of  the  htst  Time  of  the  Year  ta 
(Tfii  tht  Ejuinactiai.  The  IVindi  near  the  Lint  iommonly  un- 
ttriatH,  and  attended  with  Caims  arid  Tcrnadoes,  A  Reason  of  the 
f^tndi  hlawiig  South  near  the  Line,  in  the  /ftJanlici  Sea.  Haw 
Shft  htmnuard-ttand  fram  ike  Bite  of  Guinea,  should  cross  the 
Lin*.  Of  the  Tradt-lVind  in  the  Soulh-Sea,  and  in  the  Easl- 
■IndiaH  Ocean, 

SHALL  reduce  what  I  have  to  say  on  this  Subject  to 
some  General  Heads;  beginning  with  the  Tradu- 
winds  as  being  the  most  rcmarlcablc. 

Trade-winds  are  such  as  do  blow  constantly  from 
Point  or  Quarter  of  the  Compass,  and  the  Region  of 
"World   most  peculiar  to  them,  is  from  about  30  d. 

,  to  30  d.  South  of  the  liquator. 

rhere  are  divers  sorts  of  these  Winds;  some  blowing 

I  E»st  to  Wcit,  some  from  South  to  North,  others  from 

to  East,  &c.     Some  arc  constant  in  one  Quaner  all 

^ear;  some  blow  one  half  the  Year  one  way,  and  the 

ux  Months  quite    contrary ;    and    others    blow  six 

la   one   my,  and    then    shifting    only   eight    or  ten 

229 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

Points,  continue  six  Months  more,  and  then  return  again 
to  their  former  Stations,  as  all  these  shifting  Trade-winds 
do;  and  so  as  the  Year  comes  about,  they  alternately 
succeed  each  other  in  their  proper  Seasons. 

There  are  other  sorts,  called  Sea- Winds  and  Land- 
winds,  difFering  much  from  any  of  the  former,  the  one 
blowing  by  Day,  the  other  by  Night,  constantly  and 
regularly  succeeding  each  other. 

Within  the  Torrid  Zone  also  are  violent  Storms,  as 
fierce,  if  not  fiercer,  than  any  are  in  other  Parts  of  the 
World.  And  as  to  the  Seasons  of  the  Year,  I  can  dis- 
tinguish them  there,  no  other  way  than  by  Wet  and  Dry ; 
and  these  wet  and  dry  Seasons  do  as  successively  follow 
each  other,  as  Winter  and  Summer  do  with  us. 

Here  are  also  strong  Currents,  sometimes  setting  one 
way,  sometimes  another ;  which  though  it  is  hard  to 
describe,  with  that  Accuracy  which  is  desirable,  yet  I  shall 
give  as  particular  an  Account  of  them,  as  also  of  the 
several  sorts  of  Winds,  as  my  own  Observations,  and  the 
judicious  Informations  from  others,  will  afFord  me  Matter 
to  do. 

Of  the  General  Trade- IVind. 

Of  all  Winds  before- mentioned,  I  shall  endeavour 
to  treat  distinctly ;  beginning  with  the  True  Trade- Wind 
first,  which  I  call  the  General  Trade- Wind  at  Sea ;  because 
all  other  Trade- Winds,  whether  constant  or  shifting,  seem 
to  have  their  Dependance  on  some  accidental  Cause; 
whereas  the  Cause  of  these,  be  it  what  it  will,  seems  uniform 
and  constant. 

These  General  Trade- Winds  are  only  in  the  Atlantick 
Ocean  which  parts  Africa  from  America,  in  the  East-Indian 
Ocean,  and  in  the  Great  South-Sea. 

In  all  these  Seas,  except  just  under  or  near  the  Line, 
they  constantly  blow  without  Intermission,  as  well  to  the 
South,  as  to  the  North  of  the  Equator,  but  not  with 
equal  Force  at  all  Times,  nor  in  all  Latitudes;  Neither 
do  these   constant   Trade-Winds   usually   blow   near  thfe 

230 


OF  THE  GENERAL  TRADE-WIND 
9tore,  but  only  m  the  Ocean,  at  least  30  or  40  Leagues 
off  at  Sea,  clear  from  any  Land  ;  especially  on  the  West 
Coast,  or  Side  of  any  Continent :  For  indeed  on  the  East- 
ode,  the  Easterly  Wind  being  the  true  Trade-Wind, 
blows  almost  home  to  the  Shore ;  so  near  as  to  receive 
a  Check  from  the  Land-Wind,  and  oft-times  to  admit  of 
the  Sca-Brecze,  by  which  it  is  drawn  from  its  Course 
ftwjucntly  four  or  five  Points  of  the  Compass :  But  of 
the  Sca-Brcczc  I  shall  speak  in  its  Place.  In  some  Places, 
and  particularly  the  South  Seas,  in  South  Lat,  the  true 
Eastern  Trade  is  not  found  to  blow  within  150  or  near 
200  Leagues  of  the  Coast,  but  in  North  Lat.  in  those 
Seas,  it  comes  within  30  or  40  Leagues  distance  of  the 
Sliore:  And  this  I  shall  give  as  a  general  Rule,  that  in 
North  Lat.  these  Winds  are  commonly  at  E.  N.  E.  in 
South  Ut.  at  E.  S.  E. 

When  we  go  from  England,  and  are  bound  to  the 
East  or  West-Indies,  or  to  Guinea,  we  commonly  find 
these  Winds  in  the  Lat.  of  30  d.  sometimes  sooner,  as  in 
the  Latitudes  of  32  or  35.  And  it  may  so  happen  that 
wc  may  meet  with  an  Easterly  Wind  in  40  d.  or  go  out 
of  our  Channel  with  a  Norih-East  Wind,  which  sometimes 
also  fails  us  not  till  wc  come  into  a  true  Trade-Wind  ;  but 
ihk  b  only  accidental,  therefore  is  not  the  Wind  that  I 
vpeak  of;  but  between  32  and  2S  I  did  never  know  nor 
hear,  that  the  true  Trade-Wind  failed. 

If  in  coming  from  England,  we  have  a  North-Easterly 
Wind  that  brings  us  hither,  (i.e.  into  the  true  Trade-wind) 
it  aometimes  suys  at  North-East,  especially  if  we  keep 
near  the  African  Shore,  as  Guinea  Ships  do,  till  we  are 
near  the  Tropjck  of  Cancer,  and  then  comes  to  the 
E.  N.  E.  where  it  settles;  but  commonly  it  settles  there 
in  28  d.  if  wc  are  so  far  off  Shore  as  to  receive  the  true 
Trade  When  the  Wind  is  thus  settled,  we  have  commonly 
hir  Weather,  and  a  clear  Sky,  especially  if  the  Sun  is  in 
L  y>J  Southern  Sign  ;  but  if  in  a  Northern  Sign,  the  Weather 
h   iiBiMlly  cloudy. 

^ft  On  the  contrary,  when  we  are  in  South  Lat.  in  the 
^■AdiDbck,  if  the  Sun  is  in  Northern  Signs,  the  Sky  is  clear, 
■  231 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

but  if  in  Southern  Signs,  the  Sky  is  cloudy.  This  I  once 
experienced  to  my  Sorrow,  in  my  return  from  Bantam,  in 
the  Year  1 67 1 .  We  had  cloudy  Weather  and  brisk  Winds, 
while  we  were  crossing  the  East-India  Ocean,  and  had  a 
very  good  Passage  also  about  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope ; 
where  we  had  fair  clear  Weather;  And  steering  from 
thence,  for  the  Island  of  St.  Hellena,  where  we  thought  to 
water  and  refresh,  as  all  our  English  East-India  Ships  do, 
we  mist  it  for  want  of  an  Observation.  For  before  wc 
came  to  the  Tropick  of  Capricorn,  the  Sky  was  again 
clouded,  so  that  we  seldom  saw  the  Sun  or  Stars,  till  we 
were  quite  past  the  Island.  However  we  found  the  Isle 
of  Ascention,  where  we  struck  two  Turtle,  (for  this  was 
not  the  laying  Time,  but  the  beginning  of  the  Cooting  or 
Ingendring  Season;  therefore  some  few  only  were  drawn 
hither.)  This  was  the  latter-end  of  November.  From  the 
time  that  we  thought  our  selves  to  the  West  of  St.  Hellena, 
we  had  our  Water  measured  out  to  us,  two  Pints  a  Man 
per  Day,  till  we  came  into  our  Channel.  This  was  the 
first  time  that  I  began  to  know  the  Value  of  fresh  Water ; 
for  we  took  in  none  in  all  our  Way  home  from  Bantam. 
But  so  much  for  this  Digression. 

The  Winds,  as  I  said  before,  as  we  run  to  the  South* 
ward  from  England,  do  first  settle  in  the  E.  N.  E.  about 
the  Lat.  of  28  d.  or  be  sure  between  that  and  24  d. 
especially  when  the  Sun  is  to  the  Southward  of  the  Line ; 
but  in  May,  June,  and  July  you  will  find  the  Winds  at  E. 
by  S.  or  E.  S.  E. 

These  Winds,  whether  we  meet  them  to  the  North 
of  the  East,  or  to  the  South  of  it,  we  find  blowing  a 
moderate  Gale  from  our  first  meeting  them  in  30  or  28  d. 
till  we  come  to  the  Tropick,  there  we  find  the  Trade 
stronger :  It  commonly  blows  a  good  Top-sail  Gale,  as 
we  sail  large :  And  if  we  were  to  sail  on  a  Wind,  .our 
lower  Sails  would  be  enough. 

These  brisk  Gales  blow  in  the  Atlantick  Ocean,  and 
North  of  the  Equator,  from  the  Lat.  of  23  to  12  or  14 
constantly,  between  the  E.  N.  E.  and  the  E.  but  between 
10  to  12  degrees  and  the  Line,  they  are  not  so  fresh  ncM* 

232 


OF  THE  GENERAL  TRADE-WIND 

cnnsnni,  to  that  Point ;  for  in  the  Months  of  July  and 
August,  the  South-Winds  do  oft-times  blow  even  to  1 1  d. 
or  IZ  d.  of  Nonh  Lit.  keeping  between  the  S.  S.  E.  and 
the  S.  S.  W.  or  S.  W,  but  in  December  and  January  the 
true  Trade  blows  between  3  d.  or  4  d.  of  the  Equator. 
And  as  the  Sun  returns  again  to  the  Northward,  so  the 
Southerly  Winds  do  increase  and  draw  more  to  the 
Northward  of  the  Line,  till  July,  and  then  gradually 
withdraw  back  again  towards  the  Line :  When  the  Sun 
15  in  Southern  Signs,  'tis  the  best  time  of  the  Year  to 
cross  the  Line,  if  bound  to  the  Southward ;  for  besides 
the  Benefit  of  the  true  Trade,  to  bring  2  Ship  near 
the  Line,  the  Wind  is  then  more  constant  and  fresh,  the 
Weather  clearer,  and  the  Winds  which  at  other  Times  are 
between  the  S.  S.  E.  and  S.  S.  W.  are  now  at  S.  E.  or  S,  E. 
and  by  E.  but  in  our  Summer  Months  we  find  nothing  but 
Calmt  and  Tornadoes ;  and  tho'  Tornadoes  do  usually 
rise  against  the  settled  Wind  ;  yet  but  few  Commanders 
will  endeavour  to  take  the  Advantage  of  the  Winds  that 
come  from  them,  but  rather  furl  their  Top-sails,  haul  up 
their  Corws,^  and  lye  still  till  the  Gust  of  Wind  is  past, 
except  Necessity  requires  haste ;  for  the  sudden  Tornadoes 
do  not  continue  long ;  and  besides  often  very  violent  and 
fierce,  so  that  a  Ship  with  her  Sails  loose,  would  be  in 
danger  to  be  over-set  by  them,  or  at  least  lose  Masts  or 
Yards,  or  have  the  Sails  split ;  besides  the  Consternation 
that  all  Men  must  needs  be  in  at  such  a  Time,  especially 
if  the  Ship,  by  any  unforeseen  Accident,  should  prove 
unruly,  as  by  the  Mistake  of  the  Man  at  Helm,  or  he 
that  Conns,'  or  by  her  broaching  to*  against  atl  Endeavours, 
which  often  happens  when  a  fierce  Gust  comes;  which  the' 
it  docs  not  last  long,  yet  would  do  much  Damage  in  a 
ihon  Time;  and  tho'  all  things  should  fall  out  well,  yet 
the  Benefit  of  it  would  not  compensate  the  Danger:  For 
'tis  much  if  a  Ship  sails  a  Mile  before  either  the  Wind 
dyea  wholly  away,  or  at  least   shifts  about  again    to  the 

*  Tlw  lo««M  uU>  on  the  fore  and  mftin  ma 

MS- 

b-to  n  la  Sr  op  inio  the  wind. 

233 


A   DISCOURSE  OF   WINDS 

South.  Nor  arc  we  sure  that  these  Winds  will  continue 
three  Minutes  before  they  shift;  and  sometimes  they  fly 
round  faster  than  the  Ship  will,  tho*  the  Helm  lies  for 
it;  and  all  Seamen  know  the  Danger  of  being  taken 
a-back  ^  in  such  Weather. 

But  what  has  been  spoken  of  the  Southerly  Winds, 
Calms,  and  Tornadoes  is  to  be  understood  of  the  East-side 
of  the  Atlantick  to  as  far  West  as  the  Longitude  of  359  d. 
or  thereabouts;  for  farther  Westerly  we  find  the  Winds 
commonly  at  S.  E.  even  in  crossing  the  line,  and  a  very 
brisk  Gale ;  'tis  for  that  Reason  our  experienced  Guinea 
Commanders  do  keep  to  the  Southward  of  the  Line,  till 
they  are  about  that  Longitude.  Some  run  over  nearer 
the  American  Shore  before  they  cross  the  Line ;  Our  East- 
India  Commanders  do  also  cross  the  Line,  coming  from 
India  near  the  American  Coast,  and  find  brisk  Gales  at  S.  E. 
all  the  times  of  the  Year ;  but  going  to  the  Indies,  they 
steer  away  South,  from  the  Island  St.  Jago,  where  they 
commonly  water,  and  meet  the  Winds  in  that  Longitude. 
But  of  this  enough. 

The  Winds  near  the  Line  in  the  Indian  Ocean  and 
South-Sea  are  different  from  this,  yet  there  the  Winds  arc 
also  Southerly,  and  therefore  different  from  what  they  are 
farther  off;  for  2  d.  or  3  d.  on  each  side  the  Line,  the 
Winds  are  commonly  very  uncertain,  and  oftentimes  there 
are  perfect  Calms,  or  at  least  very  small  Winds  and  some 
Tornadoes  in  the  East-Indian  Sea.  In  the  South-Seas,  near 
and  under  the  Line,  the  Winds  are  at  South  130  Leagues 
off  from  the  Shore,  but  how  farther  ofF  I  know  not ;  there 
the  Winds  are  but  small,  yet  constant,  and  the  Weather 
clear  from  March  till  September ;  but  about  Christmas 
there  are  Tornadoes ;  yet  in  both  the  East-Indian  Sea,  and 
the  South  Sea,  the  Winds  near  or  under  the  Line,  are  often 
at  South ;  yet  these  Winds  do  not  blow  above  2  or  3  d.  to 
the  North  or  South  of  the  Line,  except  near  some  Land ; 
but  in  the  Atlantick  Sea,  as  I  have  said  before,  the  South 
and  South-West  Winds  do  sometimes  blow  even  to  10  or 

^  So  that  the  wind  presses  the  sails  against  the  masts  and  rigging. 

234 


OF  THE  GENERAL  TRADE-WIND 

12  d.  Norih  of  the  Line.  And  for  the  South  Winds  to 
blow  constantly  near  the  Line  in  the  Atlantick,  between 
Cape  Verd  in  Africa,  and  C.  Blanco  in  Brazil,  is  no 
wonderful  thing,  if  a  Man  will  but  consider  those  Pro- 
montories that  shoot  out  from  the  Continents  on  each  side 
the  Sea ;  one  on  the  North,  the  other  on  the  South-side  of 
the  Equator,  leaving  but  a  small  space  clear  for  the  Winds 
to  blow  in;  where  there  is  always  a  pretty  brisk  Gale, 
especially  on  the  American  side.  And  as  within  2  or  3  d. 
of  the  Equator,  it  is  moat  subject  to  Calms  and  Tornadoes, 
and  small  faint  Breezes  in  other  Seas  not  pent  up  as  this  is. 
So  this  Sea,  except  just  in  the  very  Opening  between  both 
Promontories,  is  much  more  subject  to  it  than  any  other, 
espeaally  on  the  East-side;  that  is,  from  the  Bite  or  the 
Inland  Corner  of  the  Coast  of  Guinea  to  28  or  30  d. 
distance  West :  But  this  seems  not  to  be  altogether  the 
Efiects  of  the  Line,  but  owing  partly  to  the  nearness  of  the 
Land  to  the  Line,  which  shoots  out  from  the  Bite  of 
Guinea,  even  to  Cape  St.  Anns,  almost  in  a  Parallel  with 
the  Equator  (allowing  for  the  Bays  and  Bendtngs)  and  this 
is  23  or  24  d.  of  Longitude,  and  not  above  80  Leagues 
from  the  Line  in  some  Places:  So  that  this  part  of  the 
Sea  between  the  Coast  of  Guinea,  and  the  Line  or  2  d. 
South  of  it,  lying,  as  it  were,  between  the  Land  and  the 
Line,  n  seldom  free  from  bad  Weather;  especially  from 
April  to  September  ;  but  when  the  Sun  is  withdrawn  towards 
the  Tropick  of  Capricorn,  then  there  is  something  better 
Weather  there. 

And   in   the  Sea   under   the   Line  between   the  African 

Promontory  and  the  American,  it  is  free  from  Tornadoes 

and  Calms,  and   more  subject  to  fair  Weather  and   fresh 

Breezes.      Therefore  both   our  English   and  Dutch  East- 

indii  Ships,  when  outward-bound,  endeavour  to  cross  the 

LitK  ts  near  as  they  can  in  the  mid-Channel,  between  both 

KfWxnontories ;  and  although  they  meet  the  Winds  some> 

^pnd  at  S.  S.  E.  or  at  S.  S.   W.  or   farther  Easterly  or 

^Westerly;  yet  will   they  not  run  above  a  degree  to  the 

^Etst,  or  a  degree  to  the  West  of  the  mid-Channel,  before 

^Hicy  uck   again,  for    fear   of  meeting  with    the  soaking 

■  235 


A    DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

Current  on  the  West/  or  Calms  on  the  East-side ;  either  of 
which  would  be  alike  prejudicial  to  their  Course. 

The  Portuguese  in  their  Voyages  to  Brazil,  take  the 
same  method,  and  get  to  the  South  of  the  Line  before  they 
fall  in  with  the  Land,  for  fear  of  falling  to  leeward  of  Cape 
St.  Augustine,^  for  there  are  so  many  things  which  make 
that  a  difficult  Cape  to  pass,  that  hardly  any  Man  would 
try  to  do  it,  but  at  a  distance. 

But  our  Guinea  Ships  do  generally  pass  on  to  their 
Ports  on  the  Coast  of  Guinea,  at  any  time  of  the  Year, 
without  using  such  Methods;  because  their  Business  lies 
mostly  on  the  North  of  the  Line,  where  they  always  find  a 
fair  Westerly  Wind.  But  in  their  returns  from  thence, 
they  cross  the  Line,  and  run  3  or  4  d.  to  the  Southward  of 
it,  where  they  meet  the  Wind  between  the  S.  S.  E.  and  the 
S.  S.  W.  and  a  brisk  gale :  with  this  Wind,  they  run  away 
in  the  same  parallel  35  or  36  d.  before  they  cross  the  Line 
again  to  the  Northward,  which  is  about  mid-way  between 
the  Extreams  of  both  Promontories,  there  they  find  a  brisk 
gale,  which  carries  them  to  the  West-Indies,  or  where  they 
please.  Some  run  West  40  d.  before  they  cross  the  Line, 
and  find  strong  Gales;  whereas  should  they  come  from 
Old  Callabar,  or  any  other  Place  in  the  Bite,'  on  the  North 
of  the  Line,  and  steer  away  West,  thinking  to  gain  their 
Passage  the  sooner  because  it  is  the  nearest  way,  they  would 
doubtless  be  mistaken,  as  many  Men  have  been :  For  if 
they  keep  near  the  Line,  they  meet  with  great  Calms ;  and 
if  they  keep  near  the  Land,  they  meet  with  Westerly 
Winds;  and  if  they  keep  in  the  middle  between  both, 
they  must  of  necessity  meet  with  both  Inconveniencies,  as 
also  with  Tornadoes,  especially  in  May,  June,  July  and 
August. 

By  which  means  some  Ships,  if  they  go  any  of  these 
three  ways  now  cautioned  against,  spend  more  time  in 
going  from  the  Bite  to  Cape  Verd,  than  another  Ship  will 

*  The  Brazil  current,  setting  to  the  SW.  at  the  rate  of  nearly  one 
mile  an  hour. 

*  Santo  Agostinho,  near  Pernambuco. 

*  The  Bight,  or  loop,  of  Benin. 

236 


W    OF  THE  GENERAL  TRADE-WIND 

PEkiif  it  cross  the  Line  in  the  right  Places,  before-mentioned, 
Tn  gotr^  to  the  Barbadocs. 

Sometimes  unexperienced  Guinea  Masters  in  their  return 
from  thence,  after  they  have  cross 'd  the  Line  from  N.  to  S. 
and  are  in  a  fair  way  to  gain  a  speedy  Passage,  will  be  so 
obstinate  in  their  Opinions,  after  they  have  run  26,  28  or 
30  d.  West  from  Old  Callabar  (with  a  fair  Wind)  to 
Keer  away  W.  by  N.  or  W.  N.  W.  it  being  the  directest 
Coarse  they  can  steer  for  Barbadoes,  then  they  must  of 
Necessity  keep  within  a  Degree  of  the  Line,  while  they 
are  running  2  or  300  Leagues,  which  may  prove  to  be  a 
long  time  in  doing,  because  of  the  Uncertainty  of  the 
Winds  near  the  Equator;  therefore  they  that  cross  it  near 
the  Middle,  between  both  Promontories,  or  near  the 
American  Coast,  when  they  are  minded  to  fall  away  to  the 
Northward,  steer  away  N.  W.  or  N.  W,  by  N.  and  so 
depress  or  raise  a  degree  in  running  28  Leagues  at  most; 
tbereforc  (which  is  b^t)  they  are  but  a  short  time  near  the 
Ef]UStor:  And  besides,  in  thus  crossing  it  in  the  middle 
between  both  Promontories,  they  seldom  miss  of  a  Wind : 
for  the  Wind  in  these  Seas  has  no  other  Passage,  but 
between   these  two  Promontories. 

What    I    have   said    already  on   this  Head,  has    been 

chicfiy  of  the  Allantick,  and  of  that  too  mostly  about  the 

Line,  bccau%  it  is  the  most  difficult  Place  to  pass  in  going 

to  the  Southward.     In  other  Seas,  as  in  the  East-India  Sea, 

and  the  Great  South-Sea  there  is  no  such  Difficulty  to  pass 

jny  way,  because  there  is  Sea-room  enough,  without  coming 

into  »uch  Inconveniences  as  we  meet  with  in  the  Atlantick ; 

and  as  to  the  Winds  between  the  Line  and  the  Tropicks, 

in  the  East-Indian  Sea  and  the  South-Sea,  they  arc  in  their 

^^^titudes,  as    I    said    before,  viz.    in    South   Latitude,  at 

Hd.  S.  E.  and  in  North  Lat.  at  E.  N.  E.  blowing  constantly 

^Rcsh    Breezes,   especially    in    the    South-Seas,    even    from 

^hithin  a  Degree  or  two  of  the  Line,  on  each  side  to  the 

^pTDpick,  or  to  30  Degrees  of  Lat.     And  this  I  may  truly 

^ViT>  that  neither  the  Atlantick   nor  the  East-Indian  Seas 

^Vivc  the  true  Trade-Winds  so   constant   nor  brisk  at  all 

^■^mo  of  the  Year,  and  in  all  Latitudes,  as  they  arc  here. 

■  237 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

For  being  once  got  in  the  Trade,  I  mean  without  the 
Verge  of  the  coasting  Trade-Wind,  it  blows  a  very  brisk 
Gale  all  over  the  Ocean.  Capt.  Eaton  experienced  this  in 
sailing  from  the  Gallapagos'  Islands  to  the  Ladrones,  in  the 
latter  end  of  the  Year  1685.  We  had  the  like  Experience, 
sailing  from  Cape  Corientes  to  Guam  the  Year  after  (as 
appears  by  my  Journal  of  that  Run,  in  my  "  Voyage  round 
the  World,"  Chap.  10.  Pag.  297.)  And  as  for  the  Wind 
to  the  Southward  of  the  Line,  I  had  great  Experience  of  it 
in  my  Ramble  there  with  Captain  Sharp ;  and  since  that 
Capt.  Davis,  in  his  Return  out  of  the  South-Sea,  had 
greater  Experience,  because  he  took  his  Departure  from  the 
Gallapagos  Islands  also,  and  steering  W.  S.  W.  from  thence 
till  he  met  the  true  Trade  at  E.  S.  E.  he  steered  directly 
South,  clear  from  the  Line,  till  he  got  to  the  Southward  of 
the  Tropick  of  Capricorn,  and  so  quite  without  the  Trade. 
In  the  East-Indian  Sea,  between  the  Lat.  of  30  d.  and 
4  degrees  South  of  the  Equator,  the  true  Breeze  is  at 
E.  S.  E.  or  S.  E.  by  E.  yet  not  so  constant  nor  brisk  as 
in  the  South-Seas;  besides  that  part  of  it  which  lyes  to 
the  Northward  of  the  Line,  has  not  such  a  constant  steady 
Breeze,  but  is  more  subject  to  Calms,  and  near  the  Shore  to 
shifting  Winds,  according  to  the  Seasons  of  the  Year. 


238 


CHAP.   II 

Of  the  constant  coasting    Trade- IVimis 

J  Parttlhl  »f  Ikf  Seuth-Pari  of  Africa  and  Pent.  The  Trade-fVindt 
iirw  tvilh  an  acute  Angle  an  any  Ctail.  The  IVindi  aieiit  Angola 
anei  in  the  Somth-Seas  aliie  ;  as  ah  at  Mexico  and  Guinea.  The 
ff^mdi  fhift  n»t  in  Mmt  Places.  Sand  blown /rum  the  Shore  abaut 
Ctipt  Blanco  in  Guinea.  An  Account  of  the  Trade- Winds  frov< 
^L  tkentf  H  Cafie  L«goK 

^y"~B~^HE  Trade-winds  which  blow  on  any  Coast,  are 
I  cither  Constant  or  Shifting. 

I  The  Coasts  that  are  subject  to  Constant  Trade- 

•J^        winds,  are  the  South-Coast  of  Africa  and  Peru, 
and  P»n  of  the  Coast  of  Mexico,  and  Part  of  Guinea. 

The  South*part  of  Africa  and  Peru,  are  in  one  Lat. 
both  Coasts  trending  North  and  South  ;  both  on  the  West- 
tide  of  their  Continents;  both  in  South  Lat.  and  tho'  they 
do  n<K  )ye  exactly  parallel,  by  Reason  of  some  Capes  or 
Bendings  in  the  Land,  yet  are  the  Winds  much  alike  on 
both  Coasts,  all  the  Year  long. 

On  the  Coast  nf  Angola  the  Winds  are  between  the 
S,  W.  and  S.  And  on  the  Coast  of  Peru,  we  reckon  them 
between  the  S.  S.  W.  and  S.  S.  E.  But  this  the  Reader 
rauit  take  notice  of:  That  the  Trade-Winds  that  blow  on 
»ny  Coast,  except  the  North  Coast  of  Africa,  whether  they 
*Te  constant,  and  blow  all  the  Year,  or  whether  they  arc 
tiufiing  Winds,  do  never  blow  right  in  on  the  Shore,  nor 
<^t  along  Shore  ;  but  go  slanting,  making  an  acute  Angle 
"ibout  22  d^roes.  Therefore  as  the  Land  trends  more 
E«tcrly  or  Westerly  from  the  North  or  South  on  these 
^<*«s,  4o  the  Winds  do  alter  accordingly  ;  as  for  example, 
^  ■*««:  the  Land  lies  N.  and  S.  the  Wind  would  be  at 
139 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

S.  S.  W.  but  where  the  Land  lies  S.  S.  W.  the  Trade  would 
be  at  S.  W.  But  if  the  Land  lies  S.  S.  E.  then  the  Wind 
would  be  at  South.  This  is  supposed  of  Coasts  lying  on 
the  West-side  of  any  Continent,  and  on  the  South-side  of 
the  Equator,  as  the  two  Coasts  of  Africa  and  Peru  are ;  but 
the  North  part  of  Africa  has  the  Trade  blowing  ofF  from 
the  Shore,  two  or  three  Points. 

These  Southerly  Winds  do  blow  constantly  all  the 
Year  long,  on  both  the  Coasts  of  Peru  and  Africa;  they 
are  brisk,  and  blow  farther  off  from  the  Coasts  than  any 
shifting  Winds. 

On  the  Coast  of  Peru,  these  Winds  blow  140  or  150 
Leagues  off  Shore,  before  you  can  perceive  them  to  alter : 
But  then  as  you  run  farther  off,  so  the  Wind  will  come 
about  more  Easterly,  and  at  about  200  Leagues  distance 
it  settles  at  E.  S.  E.  which  is  the  true  Trade. 

Between  Angola  and  Brazil  the  Winds  are  much  as 
they  are  in  the  South-Seas,  on  the  West-side  of  the  Peruvian 
Coast ;  only  near  the  Line,  within  4  degrees  of  it,  in  South 
Lat.  the  Wind  holds  in  the  S.  S.  W.  or  S.  W.  for  28  ot 
30  d.  of  Longitude,  and  so  it  may  in  the  same  Lat.  in  the 
South-Seas,  for  ought  I  know ;  for  it  was  at  South,  as  far 
as  any  of  us  were,  which  was  200  Leagues. 

As  the  Coasts  of  Peru  and  Angola  have  their  constant 
Trade-winds,  so  has  the  Coast  of  Mexico  and  Guinea. 
And  as  the  Coast  of  Peru  lies  North  and  South,  so  those 
lye  nearer  East  and  West.  Accordingly  to  the  Course  of 
the  General  Trade,  the  Winds  should  be  Easterly  on  these 
Coasts ;  but  here  we  meet  with  the  quite  contrary ;  for 
from  the  Lat.  of  10  d.  North  to  20  d.  North  on  the  Coast 
of  Mexico,  the  Winds  are  constantly  near  the  West  on  all 
the  Coast,  except  check'd  sometimes  with  Tornadoes,  which 
do  commonly  rise  against  the  Wind ;  the  same  is  observed 
on  the  Coast  of  Angola,  where  there  are  Tornadoes  also : 
But  the  Coast  of  Peru  is  not  subject  to  any,  yet  on  that 
Coast  there  are  sometimes  Calms  two  or  three  Days 
together  off  of  the  Bay  of  Arica,  between  the  Lat.  of  16 
and  23.  In  the  Lat.  of  19  you  shall  have  Calms  30  or  40 
Leagues  off  Shore,  but  not  so  far  on  either  side  the  Bay, 

240 


JASTING  TRADE-WINDS 

neither  zrc  such  Calms  usual  on  the  Coasts  of  Angola  and 
Mexico  only  after  a  Tornado,  as  is  common  in  other  Places. 
As  the  Coasts  of  Angola  and  Peru,  do  in  most  things 
run  parallel  each  with  other;  so  do  the  Coasts  of  Mexico 
and  Guinea  :  And  if  1  am  not  mistaken,  the  Winds  on 
both  these  Coasts  are  much  alike ;  Both  these  Coasts  do 
begin  at  the  Bite  or  Bending  of  the  Land,  where  the  other 
two  parallel  Lands  do  end  ;  for  as  the  Mexican  Continent 
begins  at  or  near  Panama,  which  is  eight  or  nine  degrees 
North  of  the  Equator ;  so  that  part  of  Guinea,  which  I 
speak  of,  begins  about  Old  Callabar,  In  about  four  or  five 
Degrees  of  North  Lat. 

The  Land  trends  away  Westerly  from  both  these  Places 
some  hundreds  of  Leagues;  and  tho'  not  on  one  Point  of 
the  Compass,  because  of  the  small  Points,  Bays  and  Bending 
in  the  LJnd,  yet  the  Winds  that  on  more  regular  Shores, 
keep  their  constant  Course,  and  blow  in  upon  the  Shore, 
about  two  Points  from  the  Sea,  do  also  here  on  the  Guinea 
Coast,  blow  on  the  Shore  from  the  West  Quarter,  and  as 
:V.c  Land  lies  pointing  in  on  the  Shore,  even  from  Cape 
Mount  to  Old  Callabar,  which  is  above  400  Leagues;  and 
■■r.iz  with  such  Constancy  that  the  East-part  of  that  Coast 
IS  called  the  Leeward  Coast;  and  the  West-part  the  Wind- 
ward Coast;  And  yet  this  is  so  contrary  to  the  general 
Opinion  of  Seamen,  concerning  the  Course  of  the  Winds, 
that  nothing  but  their  own  Experience  will  convince  them 
of  the  Truth  of  it;  for  thus  they  generally  reason;  Barba- 
does  is  the  Easter-mosi  of  the  Caribbe-ls lands,  therefore 
:  rest  arc  said  to  be  Leeward  of  it,  and  so  of  any  other 
bnd  ;  as  indeed  it  usually  holds  true,  because  the  Winds 
are  commonly  at  East;  but  this  Counter-Wind  on 
c  Coast  of  Guinea  astonishes  most  Seamen  that  have  seen 
jihing  like  what  they  meet  with  here.  There  are  other 
sts  where  the  Winds  shift  very  little,  as  on  the  Coast  of 
raccos,  and  the  South-side  of  the  Bay  of  Mexico,  i.e. 
'■a  the  Bay  of  Campeachy,  and  all  the  Caribbe  Islands. 
Indeed  there  may  be  sometimes  some  small  Flurts  of  a 
Westerly  Wind  on  these  Coasts,  but  neither  constant, 
■atain,  or  lasting. 

vol-  11.  241  Q 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

And  indeed  this  was  the  great  Stumbling-Block 
met  with  in  running  from  the  Gallapagos  Islands 
Island   Cocos,  mentioned  in   my  former   Book,  CI 
Pag.  136. 

But  that  part  of  Africa,  which  lies  between  Cape? 
in  14  d.  North,  and  Cape  Bayedore^  in  27,  has  coi 
Northerly  Winds ;  or  between  the  N.  and  N.  E.  vci 
Gales ;  therefore  our  Guinea  Ships  bound  to  Guinea 
to  keep  near  that  Shore,  and  oft-times  make  the 
And  being  to  the  Southward  of  Cape  Blanco,  which 
Lat.  about  21,  they  are  sometimes  so  troubled  with 
which  the  Wind  brings  off  Shore,  that  they  are  s< 
to  see  one  another :  Their  Decks  are  also  strewed 
and  their  Sails  all  red,  as  if  they  were  tanned  with 
that  sticks  to  them,  it  being  of  a  reddish  Colour. 

From  Cape  Verd  to  Cape  St.  Anns,  which  is 
degrees  North,  the  Trade  is  between  the  E.  and  S. 
Cape  St.  Anns,  to  Cape  Palmas,  in  about  4  d.  N< 
Trade  is  at  S.  W.  from  Cape  Palmas  to  the  Bite  of 
which  is  at  the  bending  of  the  Coast,  the  Wind  is  at: 
W.     From  this  Bending  the  Land  begins  to  turn 
the  South ;  and  from  thence  to  Cape  Logos,*  whu 
the  South  of  the  Line,  the  Trade  is  at  S.  W.  as  it  11 
that  Coast,  even  to  30  degrees  South. 

This  last  Account  1  had  from  Mr.  Canby, 
made  many  Voyages  to  Guinea. 


^  Bojadore. 


*  Cape  Lopez. 


242 


CHAP.   Ill 

Of  the   Coasting    Triuie-lVinds   that  shift 

t  C<*ff  v/htTt  iht  IVindi  ihift.  Of  the  IVinds  bttwern  Gratia  dt 
Din,  and  Capi  La  Vila.  Of  thou  on  the  Coast  of  Bra2.ii :  At 
Pamama  :  Ahoui  Natal :  And  Cafie  Corintn  ;  And  the  Red-Sra  : 
Frm  iht  Gulfih  ef  Persia  to  CajK  Cemorin.  Of  thi  Momaom  in 
tmdia  :  Thfir  Benifil  for  lai/ing  from  P/au  to  Plau.  Sta  and 
Land  Brentt  irrviteatU  fir  the  samt  furpoit.  By  what  helps 
hag  Vtyagtt  art  madt  in  an  eptn  Sea. 

THE  Coast  where  the  Winds  do  usually  shift,  are 
some  in  the  West-Indies,  as  that  part  of  the 
Coast  between  Cape  Gratia  de  Digs,  and  Cape 
La  Vela  chiefly  :  The  Coast  of  Brazil ;  the  Bay 
of  Panama  in  the  Soiith-Scas,  and  all  the  Coast  of  the 
East-Indies,  even  from  the  River  Natal,  which  is  in  the 
Lat.  of  30  d.  South,  on  the  East-side  of  Africa,  beyond  the 
Cape  of  good  Hope,  to  the  North-East  Parts  of  China, 
comprehending  all  the  Bays  between.  The  Islands  also 
have  their  Annual  Changes ;  Of  all  these  I  shall  treat  in 
their  order,  beginning  first  with  that  Coast  which  lyes 
between  Cape  Gratia  dc  Dios  and  Cape  La  Vela  :  And  1 
he  rather  begin  with  this  part  first,  because  this  part  of 
he  Wc^t-Indies  is  all  that  is  subject  to  change  ;  neither 
i  the  change  altogether  so  orderly,  or  certain  as  the 
Monsoons  in  the  East-Indies,  or  the  shifting  Winds  on  the 
Coast  </  Brazil. 

The  Common  Trade-Wind  on  this  Coast  is  between  the 
N.  E.  and  the  East:  This  Trade  blows  constantly  from 
March  til!  November,  but  is  often  check'd  with  Tornadoes 
in  the  Months  of  May,  June,  July,  and  August,  especially 
benvcen  the  River  of  Etarien  and  Costarica  ;  but  to  Wind- 
243 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

ward  there  is  a  more  serene  Air,  and  a  brisker  Wind : 
From  October  till  March  there  are  Westerly  Winds,  not 
constant,  nor  violent,  but  blowing  moderately,  sometimes 
two  or  three  Days  or  a  Week ;  and  then  the  Breeze  may 
blow  again  as  long.  These  Winds  are  most  in  December 
and  January ;  before  and  after  these  two  Months  the 
Trade- Wind  is  only  checked  a  Day  or  two  near  the  full  or 
change  of  the  Moon  ;  and  when  the  Westerly  Winds  blow 
longest  and  strongest  on  the  Coast,  the  Easterly  Trade- 
Wind  blows  off  at  Sea,  as  at  other  Times.  Near  Cape  La 
Vela,  the  true  Trade  blows  within  eight  or  ten  Leagues  off 
the  Shore,  when  the  Westerly  Winds  blow  on  the  Coast, 
except  in  a  strong  North,  which  turns  the  Trade-Wind 
back,  and  on  the  Costarica,  and  between  it  and  the  River 
Darien,  the  Westerly  Winds,  as  they  are  more  frequent 
and  lasting  than  towards  Cape  La  Vela,  so  also  they  blow 
farther  off  at  Sea,  sometimes  as  far  as  to  twenty  or  thirty 
Leagues  from  the  Shore. 

Therefore  Ships  bound  to  Windward,  if  they  have  far 
to  go,  either  take  the  Opportunity  of  the  Westerly  Wind- 
Season,  or  else  go  through  the  Gulph  of  Florida,  and 
stretch  away  to  the  North,  till  they  get  into  a  variable 
Wind's  way,  and  then  run  to  the  Eastward  as  far  as  they 
think  convenient  before  they  stretch  to  the  Southward 
again.  All  that  are  bound  from  the  West-Indies  to 
Guinea  must  take  this  Course,  if  they  sail  from  Jamaica 
(because  they  must  pass  through  the  Gulph  of  Florida) 
but  from  other  Islands  they  may  stretch  away  directly  to 
the  North,  and  use  the  same  Method. 

But  if  Ships  have  only  a  small  way  to  sail  to  Windward, 
they  make  use  of  the  Sea  and  Land-Breezes,  making  no 
account  of  the  Time  of  the  Year. 

The  Winds  on  the  Coast  of  Brazil,  are  from  September 
till  March  at  E.  N.  E.  and  from  March  till  September 
again  they  are  at  South. 

The  Winds  in  the  Bay  of  Panama  are  from  September 
till  March  Easterly,  and  from  March  till  September  again 
they  are  at  South  and  S.  S.  W. 

From  the  Cape  of  good  Hope  Eastwards,  as  far  as  tlie 

244 


i 

1 


i 


5f  the  coasting  trade-winds,  etc. 

River  Natal,  which  lies  in  30  d.  South  Latitude,  and  Cape 
hcntes  m  Lat.  of  24  degrees  South,  the  Winds  from 
lay  to  October  are  constantly  from  the  West  to  the  North 
Vest,  within  thirty  Leagues  of  the  Shore :  They  blow 
hardest  at  North  West.  When  the  Wind  comes  to  North 
West,  it  19  commonly  stormy  and  tempestuous  Weather, 
attended  with  much  Rain,  and  then  the  Weather  is  cold  and 
chilly.  From  October  till  March  the  Winds  are  Easterly 
from  the  E.  N.  E.  to  the  E.  S.  E.  you  have  then  very  fair 
Weather:  The  E.  N.  E.  Winds  are  pretty  fresh,  but  the 
Winds  at  E.  S.  £.  are  small  and  faint,  sometimes  affording 
some  drops  of  Rain. 

From  Cape  Corientes  to  the  Red-Sea,  from  October  till 
the  middle  of  January  the  Winds  are  variable,  but  most 
times  Northerly,  and  oft  shifting  round  the  Compass :  The 
strongc«  Winds  are  at  North ;  these  are  often  very  violent 
and  stormy,  and  accompanied  with  much  Rain,  and  thus  it 
blom  about  the    Island  of  Madagascar  and  the  adjacent 


These  Storms  arc  commonly  preceeded  by  a  great  Sea 
out  of  the  North.  From  January  till  May  the  Winds  are 
at  N-  E,  or  N.  N.  E.  fine  fresh  Gales  and  fair  Weather. 
From  May  till  October  the  Winds  are  Southerly,  in  July, 
Augiut,  and  September,  there  are  great  Calms  in  the  Bay 
oi  Pate  and  Melcnde,  and  a  strong  Current  setting  into  the 
Bay:  Therefore  Ships  that  have  occasion  to  pass  this  way 
in  those  three  Months,  ought  to  keep  at  least  a  hundred 
Leagues  from  the  Coast  to  avoid  being  driven  by  the 
Current  into  the  Bay ;  for  these  Calms  do  sometimes  last 
six  Weeks,  yet  off  at  Sea,  at  the  distance  of  a  hundred 
Leagues  the  Winds  are  fresh  at  South.  At  the  entrance 
into  the  Rcd-Sca  near  Cape  Guardcfuer  there  are  commonly 
▼cry  hard  Gales  and  turbulent  Weather,  even  when  the 
Calms  are  so  great  in  the  Bay  of  Melende,  and  not  above 
~  1  or  twelve  Leagues  at  Sea  from  the  said  Cape,  there  is 
3  very  fair  Weather,  and  pretty  fresh  Gales. 
In  the  Rcd-Sca  from  May  till  October,  the  Winds  are 
I  at  S.  W.  and  the  Current  setting  out  strong,  so  that 
B  u  no  entering  into  that  Sea  in  those  Months,  except 
»45 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

you  keep  close  to  the  South-shore,  there  you  have  Land- 
Winds,  and  an  eddy  Current.  In  the  Months  of  September 
or  October,  the  Wind  shuffles  about  to  the  North,  and  at 
last  settles  at  N.  E.  then  comes  fair  Weather  on  this  Coast ; 
and  so  continues  till  the  Monsoon  shifts,  which  is  in  April  or 
May ;  then  it  first  takes  one  flurry  at  North,  and  from  thence 
it  veers  to  the  East,  and  so  about  to  the  South,  and  there  it 
settles. 

The  Account  of  this  Coast  from  the  Cape  of  good 
Hope  hither,  I  had  from  Captain  Rogers. 

And  as  this  hither-most  part  of  the  East-Indies,  even 
from  the  Cape  of  good  Hope  to  the  Red-Sea,  which  Coast 
lies  nearest  N.  E.  and  S.  W.  hath  its  shifting  Seasons,  so 
the  other  parts  of  India,  from  the  Gulph  of  Persia  to  Cape 
Comorin,  has  its  constant  Annual  change,  and  from  Comorin, 
clear  round  the  Bay  of  Bengal,  the  change  is  no  less ;  and 
even  from  thence,  through  the  Streights  of  Malacca,  and 
Eastwards  as  far  as  Japan,  the  shifting  Trade-Winds  do 
alternately  succeed  each  other  as  duly  as  the  Year  comes 
about. 

It  cannot  be  supposed  that  the  Trade  Wind  in  all  these 
Places,  should  be  exactly  on  one  Point  of  the  Compass :  For 
I  have  already  shown,  that  these  Trade-Winds  on  any  Coast 
do  commonly  blow  slanting  in  on  the  Shore  about  two  or 
three  Points;  therefore  in  Bays  where  the  Land  lies  on 
several  Rombs,  the  Winds  must  alter  accordingly.  Though 
that  Rule  does  not  hold  altogether  true  in  Bays  that  are 
deep,  but  is  chiefly  meant  for  a  pretty  streight  Coast,  which 
lies  near  alike ;  allowing  for  Points  of  Land  and  small 
Coves,  which  make  no  alteration :  But  on  the  sides  and  in 
the  bottom  of  large  Bays,  such  as  the  Bay  of  Bengal,  the 
Bay  of  Siam,  &c.  the  Wind  difl^ers  much  on  one  side  of  the 
Bay  from  what  it  does  on  the  other ;  and  both  sides  difier 
from  the  constant  Trade  on  the  open  Coast :  yet  all  shift 
in  the  shifting  Seasons,  which  are  April  and  September,  at 
one  and  the  same  Time,  to  their  opposite  Points :  I  mean  on 
the  open  Coast,  for  in  some  Bays  there  is  a  little  alteration 
from  that  general  Rule. 

These   shifting   Winds   in  the  East-Indies,  are  called 

246 


i 


OF  THE  COASTING  TRADE-WINDS 

Monsoons;  one  is  called  the  East-Monsoon,  the  other 
the  Wcsi-Monsoon.  The  East-Monsoon  sets  in  about 
September,  and  blows  till  April ;  then  ccaseth,  and  the 
Wcst-Monsoon  takes  place  and  blows  til!  September  again. 

And  both  the  East  and  West-Monsoons  blow  in  their 
Seasons  slanting  in  on  the  Coast,  as  is  before  described  :  The 
East-Monsoon  brings  fair  Weather ;  the  West  brings 
Torrudocs  and  Rain.  For  (as  I  said  before  in  the  first 
Chap,  of  the  General  Trade- Wind  at  Sea)  when  the  Sun 
comes  to  the  North  of  the  Line  then  all  Places  North  of 
the  Equator,  within  the  Tropicks,  are  troubled  with  Clouds 
and  Rain,  but  when  the  Sun  is  in  Southern  Signs  then  the 
^y  is  clear.  And  as  most  of  the  Trading-Countries  in  the 
East-Indies,  especially  those  on  the  Main  Continent,  do  lye 
between  the  Line  and  the  Tropick  of  Cancer :  So  these 
Countries  arc  all  subject  to  the  Changes  and  Seasons  already 
described.  But  the  Islands  lying  under  the  Line,  and  to 
the  South  between  the  Line  and  the  Tropick  of  Capricorn, 
have  contrary  Seasons  to  these.  Yet  do  they  change  at 
the  self-same  Time. 

The  difference  berwecn  the  Monsoons  on  the  North  of 
the  Line,  and  the  Monsoons  on  the  South  of  the  Line 
is  that  in  April,  when  the  West-Monsoon  sets  in  to 
the  North  of  the  Line,  the  S.  S.  W.  Wind  sets  into  the 
South  of  the  Lat.  and  is  called  the  S,  S.  W.  Monsoon. 
And  in  September  when  the  East  Monsoon  sets  into  the 
North  of  the  Line,  the  N.  N.  E.  Wind  blows  in  South  Lat. 
and  is  called  the  N.  N.  E.  Monsoon.  And  whereas  the 
West-Monsoon  ts  accompanied  with  Tornadoes  and  Rain  in 
North  Lat.  the  S.  S.  W.  Monsoon,  which  blows  at  the  same 
Tune  in  South  Lat.  is  accompanied  with-  fair  Weather. 
And  as  the  East-Monsoon  is  attended  with  fair  Weather 
in  North  Lat.  thp  N.  N.  E.  Monsoon,  which  blows  at  the 
nme  Time  in  South  Lat.  is  attended  with  Tornadoes  and 
rery  bad  Weather.  And  though  these  Winds  do  not  shift 
exactly  at  one  Time  in  all  Years;  yet  September  and  April 
ire  always  accounted  the  turning  Months,  and  do  commonly 
[■rtldpate  of  both  sorts  of  Winds.  For  these  Monsoons 
do  as  constantly  shift  by  turns,  as  the  Year  comes  about. 
247 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

And  by  means  of  this  change  of  Wind,  Ships  have  the 
benefit  to  sail  from  one  part  of  India,  with  one  Wind, 
and  return  with  the  contrary :  So  that  most  of  the  Naviga- 
tion in  India  depends  on  the  Monsoons.  And  Ships  do 
constantly  wait  for  these  Changes ;  and  the  Merchants  fit 
out  to  any  Place  according  as  the  Season  of  the  Year  draws 
on :  And  wheresoever  they  go  they  certainly  dispatch  their 
Business  so  as  to  return  back  again  with  next  or  con- 
trary Monsoon :  For  here  is  no  sailing  to  and  from  any 
Place,  but  with  the  Monsoon :  One  carries  them  out,  the 
other  brings  them  back.  Neither  do  I  know  how  it  were 
possible  for  Merchants  in  these  Parts  to  trade  by  Sea 
from  one  Country  to  another,  were  it  not  for  these  shifting 
Monsoons.  For  as  I  have  said  before,  most  of  the  trading 
Kingdoms  in  India  do  lye  between  the  Line,  and  the 
Tropick  of  Cancer.  And  the  Land  lies  so  to  the  North,  that 
Ships  cannot  go  to  the  North  of  the  Tropick,  and  by  that 
means  get  into  variable  Winds  way,  as  they  may  and  do  in 
the  West-Indies,  when  they  are  bound  far  to  the  Eastward. 
Neither  could  it  be  any  Advantage  to  stand  ofF  to  Sea,  as 
they  may  in  the  South-Sea;  for  that  would  be  of  little 
Moment,  because  they  would  then  come  so  near  the  Line, 
that  they  would  be  always  lyable  to  Tornadoes  and  Calms ; 
and  should  they  cross  the  Line  and  run  to  the  Southward 
of  it,  thinking  that  way  to  gain  their  Passage,  it  is  likely 
they  might  succeed  no  better  there :  For  that  part  of  the 
Sea  which  lies  to  the  Southward  of  the  Line  is  open  and 
free  to  the  true  Trade,  which  seldom  fails :  But  indeed  that 
Wind  would  carry  them  to  the  Southward  quite  beyond  the 
Trade  into  a  variable  Winds-way.  But  the  Sea  is  not  open 
there,  for  Ships  to  pass  so  far  to  the  Eastward  as  to  gain 
their  Ports. 

For  our  East-India  Ships  that  are  bound  to  Siam, 
Tunqueen,  China,  &c.  cannot  get  thither  but  in  the  Season 
of  the  West-Monsoon,  though  they  go  directly  from 
England ;  and  though,  after  they  are  past  the  Cape,  they 
have  the  convenience  to  stretch  to  the  Eastward,  as  far  as 
the  Land  will  permit,  yet  they  cannot  go  so  far  as  is  con- 
venient before  they  will  be  obliged  to  steer  down  within 

248 


J 


OF  THE  COASTING   TRADE-WINDS 

the  Course  of  the  Trade-Winds,  which  would  obstruct 
their  Passage,  if  they  were  as  constant  here  as  in  other 
Places.  And  therefore  if  these  Anniversary  Monsoons  did 
not  constantly  succeed  each  other.  Ships  could  not  pass  but 
one  way;  they  might  sail  to  the  Westward,  but  there  they 
must  lye  up,  or  be  three  or  four  Years  in  their  return  from 
t  pUcc  which  may  be  sailed  in  six  Weeks,  yet  1  say  that  to 
Places  near  each  other.  Ships  may  and  do  very  often  sail 
against  the  Monsoon,  and  that  with  success:  For  here  are 
Sea  and  Land-Brcczes  under  the  shore,  and  in  many  Places 
good  Anchoring,  by  which  means  Ships  may  stop  when 
they  find  the  Current  against  them  :  But  Voyages  of  a 
neat  distance  cannot  be  made  only  with  Land  and  Sea- 
Winds  without  some  other  helps. 

In  the  West-Indies  we  have  these  helps  of  Land-winds 
and  Sca-Breezes  by  which  we  sail  from  one  Place  to 
another,  provided  they  are  no  great  distance  asunder,  and 
perform  our  Voyages  well  enough;  but  when  we  are  to 
Silt  a  great  way  to  the  Eastward  against  the  Trade-wind, 
then  we  arc  forced,  as  is  said  before,  either  to  pass  thro' 
the  Gulph  of  Florida,  if  we  are  far  to  Leeward,  or  else  to 
pus  between  the  Islands,  and  so  stretch  away  to  the  North- 
ward, till  we  arc  clear  out  of  the  Trade,  and  so  get  our 
Longitude  that  way.  So  in  the  South-Seas  also,  and  on 
the  Coast  of  Guinea,  the  Coast  of  Brazil,  and  the  Coast  of 
Africa,  between  the  Cape  of  good  Hope  and  the  Red-Sea, 
rhcrc  arc  Sea  and  Land-Breezes,  which  may  be  made  use 
'i(  to  sail  against  the  Trade,  if  the  Voyages  be  short :  But 
when  wc  are  to  sail  a  great  way  against  the  Trade-wind, 
we  must  not  wholly  depend  on  the  Sea  and  Land-Breezes; 
for  then  we  should  be  a  long  Time  in  accomplishing  such 
Voyages.  In  such  Cases  we  have  recourse  to  other  helps, 
vuch  as  Providence  has  supplied  these  Seas  with,  which 
seems  to  be  wanting  in  the  East-Indies:  as  for  example, 
in  the  South-Seas  and  on  the  Coast  of  Peru  where  the 
Southerly  Winds  blow  constantly  all  the  Year,  there  Ships 
ihat  are  bound  to  the  Southward  stretch  off  to  the  West- 
ward till  they  are  out  of  the  Coasting  Trade-Wind,  and 
there  meet  with  the  true  Trade  at  E.  S.  E.  with  which  they 
_  249 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

sail  as  far  as  they  please  to  the  Southward,  and  then  steer 
in  for  their  Port.  So  on  the  Coast  of  Mexico,  where  the 
Coasting  Trade  is  westerly,  there  they  run  ofF  to  Sea,  till 
they  meet  the  true  E.  N.  E.  Trade;  and  then  stretch  away 
to  the  Northward,  as  far  as  their  Port;  and  Ships  that 
come  from  the  Phiiipines,  bound  for  the  Coast  of  Mexico, 
stretch  away  to  the  North,  as  far  as  40  Degrees,  to  get  a 
Wind  to  bring  them  on  the  Coast. 

Thus  also  all  Ships  bound  to  the  East-Indies  after  they 
have  past  the  Line  in  the  Atlantick  Ocean,  stretch  away 
to  the  Southward  beyond  the  Trade,  and  then  stand  over 
to  the  Eastward,  towards  the  Cape  ;  so  in  returning  home, 
after  they  have  crost  the  Line  to  the  Northward,  they  steer 
away  North,  with  the  Wind  at  E.  N.  E.  till  they  are  to 
the  Northward  of  the  Trade-Wind,  and  then  direct  their 
Course  Easterly.  All  Guinea  Ships  and  West-India  Ships 
do  the  same  in  their  Returns :  And  this  is  the  Benefit  of  an 
open  Sea.     But  to  return. 

The  Monsoons  among  the  East-India  Islands  that  lie 
to  the  Southward  of  the  Line,  as  I  said  before,  are  dther 
at  N.  N.  E.  or  S.  S.  W.  These  also  keep  time,  and  sluft, 
as  the  Monsoons  do,  to  the  North  of  the  Line,  in  the 
Months  of  April  and  September,  but  near  the  Line,  as  a 
Degree  or  two  or  each  side,  the  Winds  are  not  so  constant. 
Indeed  there  they  are  so  very  uncertain,  that  I  cannot  be 
particular  so  as  to  give  any  true  Account  of  them :  Only 
this  I  know,  that  Calms  are  very  frequent  there,  as  also 
Tornadoes  and  sudden  Gusts ;  in  which  the  Winds  fly  in 
a  Moment  quite  round  the  Compass. 


250 


CHAP.   IV 

Of  Sea  and  Land-Breezes 

Htwr  SM-BrtfXti  ^iffir  from  eemman  Tradi-Windi.  The  Time  and 
Mamner  «f  their  Rise  j  drid  pariieularly  at  Jamaica.  Of  the 
Lmnd-Breexes.  The  Time  and  Manner  sf  their  Rise :  As  on 
A*  lithnau  ff  Darien  and  at  Jamaica.  The  places  mkerr  these 
IVindt  ihw  tirengeit  or  slackest ;  as  at  Capes  and  Head-Lands, 

»4*tp  Bays,  Lapints  and  Islands.     Stal-Skin  Bladders  used  instead 
rfBsri.L>ggi. 

SKA-Brcczes,  generally  speaking,  arc  no  other  than 
the  Common  Trade-Wind  of  the  Coasts  on  which 
they  blow,  with  this  difFerence,  that  whereas  all 
Trade-Winds,  whether  they  are  those  that  I  call 
the  general  Trade-Winds  at  Sea,  or  coasting  Trade- Winds, 
either  constant  or  shifting,  do  blow  as  well  by  Night  as 
by  Day,  with  an  equal  briskness,  except  when  Tornadoes 
happen ;  so  contranly  Sea-Winds  are  only  in  the  Day,  and 
ceue  in  the  Night;  and  as  all   Trade-Winds  blow  con- 
stantly near  to  one  Point  of  the  Compass,  both  where  the 
constant  Trade-Winds  are,  or  where  they  shift;  on  the 
contrary,  these  Sea-Winds  do  differ  from   them  in   this, 
that  in  the  Morning  when  they  first  spring  up,  they  blow 
ccmmonly  as  the  Trade-Winds  on  the  Coast  do,  at  or  near 
the  lamc  Point  of  Compass;  but  about  Mid-day  they  fly 
off  two,  three  or  four  Points  further  from  the  Land,  and 
•0  Wow  almost  right  in  on  the  Coast,  especially  in  fair 
Weither ;    for    then    the    Sea-Breezes   are   truest ;    as   for 
L      luuncc,  on  the  Coast  of  Angola   the  Land    lies   almost 
B      North  and    South,    there    the   Trade-Wind    is    from    the 
^L  ^  S.  W.  to  the  Sl  W.  the  true  Sca-Breezes  near  the  Shore 
^^•K  tt  W.  by  S.  or  W.  S.  W.  and  so  of  any  other  Coast. 
.H^ 1 lit 


A    DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

These  Sea-Breezes  do  commonly  rise  in  the  Morning 
about  Nine  a-Clock,  sometimes  sooner,  sometimes  later: 
they  first  approach  the  Shore  so  gently,  as  if  they  were 
afraid  to  come  near  it,  and  oft-times  they  make  some 
faint  Breathings,  and  as  if  not  willing  to  offend,  they 
make  a  halt,  and  seem  ready  to  retire.  I  have  waited 
many  a  time  both  Ashore  to  receive  the  Pleasure,  and 
at  Sea  to  take  the  Benefit  of  it. 

It  comes  in  a  fine,  small,  black  Curie  upon  the  Water, 
when  as  all  the  Sea  between  it  and  the  Shore  not  yet 
reached  by  it,  is  as  smooth  and  even  as  Glass  in  comparison ; 
in  half  an  Hour's  time  after  it  has  reached  the  Shore  it 
fans  pretty  briskly,  and  so  increaseth  gradually  till  Twelve 
a-Clock,  then  it  is  commonly  strongest,  and  lasts  so  till 
Two  or  Three  a  very  brisk  Gale ;  about  Twelve  at  Noon 
it  also  veers  off  to  Sea  two  or  three  Points,  or  more  in 
very  fair  Weather.  After  Three  a-Clock  it  b^ins  to 
die  away  again,  and  gradually  withdraws  its  force  till  ill 
is  spent,  and  about  Five  a-Clock,  sooner  or  later,  accordii^ 
as  the  Weather  is,  it  is  lulFd  asleep,  and  comes  no  more 
till  the  next  Morning. 

These  Winds  are  as  constantly  expected  as  the  Day 
in  their  proper  Latitudes,  and  seldom  fail  but  in  the  wet 
Season.  On  all  Coasts  of  the  Main,  whether  in  the  East 
or  West-Indies,  or  Guinea,  they  rise  in  the  Morning,  and 
withdraw  towards  the  Evening,  yet  Capes  and  Head-Lands 
have  the  greatest  Benefit  of  them,  where  they  arc  highest, 
rise  earlier,  and  blow  later. 

Bays  contrarily  have  the  Disadvantage,  for  there  they 
blow  but  faintly  at  best,  and  their  continuance  is  but 
short.  Islands  that  lie  nearest  East  and  West,  have  the 
Benefit  of  these  Winds  on  both  sides  equally ;  for  if  the 
Wind  is  at  S.  W.  or  S.  W.  and  by  S.  on  the  South-side 
of  any  Island,  then  on  the  North-side  it  would  be  at 
N.  W.  or  N.  W.  by  N.  i.e.  in  fair  Weather;  but  if 
turbulent  Weather,  it  would  be  E.  S.  E.  on  the  South-^e, 
and  E.  N.  E.  on  the  other :  But  this  true  Sea-Breeze  does 
not  veer  so  far  out,  except  only  near  the  Shore,  as  about 
three  or  four  Leagues  distant ;  for  farther  than  that,  you 

252 


W        OF  SEA   AND   LAND   BREEZES 

Hnll  find  only  the  right  Coasting  Trade-Wind.  This  I 
naTe  experienced  in  several  Parts  of  the  World,  particularly 
U  Jamaica ;  about  which  1  have  made  many  Voyages, 
both  on  the  North  and  the  South-side,  where  I  have 
experienced  the  Sea-Breczes  very  much  to  diiFer ;  for  on 
the  South-side  1  have  found  the  true  Sea-Wind  after 
Twelve  a-Clock,  and  in  very  fair  Weather  at  S,  or  S.  S.  E. 
though  it  sprung  up  in  the  Morning  at  E.  S.  E.  or  S,  E. 
And  on  the  North-side  I  have  found  the  Sea-Breeze  at 
N.  or  N.  N.  E.  though  it  rose  in  the  Morning  at  E.  N.  E. 
but  whether  there  may  be  the  like  difference  about  smaller 
Islands,  as  at  Barbadoes,  &c.  I  cannot  determine,  though 
I  am  apt  to  believe  there  is  not.  So  much  for  the  Sea- 
Winds,  next  of  the  Land-Breezes, 

Land-Brcczcs  are  as  remarkable  as  any  Winds  that  1 
have  yet  treated  of;  they  are  quite  contrary  to  the 
Sea-Brcczes ;  for  those  blow  right  from  the  shore,  but 
the  Sea  •  Breeze  right  in  upon  the  shore ;  and  as  the 
Sea-Breczes  do  blow  in  the  Day  and  rest  in  the  Night ; 
so  on  the  contrary,  these  do  blow  in  the  Night  and  rest 
io  the  Day,  and  so  they  do  alternately  succeed  each  other. 
For  when  the  Sea-Breezes  have  performed  their  Offices 
of  the  Day,  by  breathing  on  their  respective  Coasts,  they 
in  the  Evening  do  cither  withdraw  from  the  Coast,  or 
lie  down  to  rest :  Then  the  Land-Winds,  whose  Office 
a  to  breathe  in  the  Night,  moved  by  the  same  Order  of 
divine  Impulse,  do  rouzc  out  of  their  private  Recesses, 
and  gently  fan  the  Air  till  the  next  Morning;  and  then 
tfacir  Task  ends,  and  they  leave  the  Stage. 

There  cm  be  no  proper  time  set  when  they  do  begin 
in  the  Evening,  or  when  they  retire  in  the  Morning,  for 
they  do  not  keep  to  an  Hour;  but  they  commonly  spring 
up  between  six  and  twelve  in  the  Evening,  and  last  tiU 
six.  eight  or  ten  in  the  Morning.  They  both  come  and 
fO  away  again  earlier  or  later,  according  to  the  Weather, 
tile  Season  of  the  Year,  or  some  accidental  Cause  from 
:  Land  :  For  on  some  Coasts  they  do  rise  earlier,  blow 
,  and  renuin  later  than  on  other  Coasts,  as  I  shall 

■  hereafter. 

253 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

They  are  called  Land- Winds,  because  they  blow  ofF 
shore  contrary  to  the  Sea-Breeze,  which  way  soever  the 
Coast  lies :  Yet  I  would  not  so  be  understood,  as  if  these 
Winds  are  only  found  to  breathe  near  the  Shores  of  any 
Land,  and  not  in  the  Inland  Parts  of  such  Countries 
remote  from  the  Sea;  for  in  my  Travels  I  have  found 
them  in  the  very  Heart  of  the  Countries  that  I  have 
passed  through ;  as  particularly  on  the  Isthmus  of  Darien, 
and  the  Island  of  Jamaica:  Both  which  Places  I  have 
travelled  over  from  Sea  to  Sea;  yet  because  these  arc 
but  small  Tracts  of  Land  in  comparison  with  the  two 
main  Bodies  of  Land  of  Mexico  and  Peru,  and  those  vast 
Regions  in  Asia  and  Africa  lying  within  the  Tropicks, 
I  cannot  determine  whether  the  Land- Winds  arc  there, 
as  I  have  found  them  in  my  small  Travels:  therefcM^  I 
shall  only  confine  this  particular  Discourse  to  these  and 
other  Places  within  my  own  Observations.  I  shall  b^in 
first  with  the  Isthmus  of  Darien ;  there  I  have  found  the 
Land-Winds  in  the  middle  of  the  Country  blowing  all 
Night,  and  till  ten  or  eleven  a-Clock  in  the  Morning, 
before  I  could  perceive  the  Sea-Breeze  to  arise,  and  that 
not  discernable  many  times,  but  by  the  flying  of  the 
Clouds,  especially  if  I  was  in  a  Valley;  and  it  was  in 
Vallies  that  I  did  chiefly  perceive  the  Land- Winds,  which 
blew  in  some  Places  one  way,  in  others  contrary,  or 
side-ways  to  that  according  as  the  Vallies  lay  pent  up 
between  the  Mountains;  and  that  without  any  respect 
to  either  the  North  or  the  South-Seas,  but  indeed  near 
either  side  of  the  Land,  they  always  bent  their  Course 
towards  the  nearest  Sea,  unless  there  was  any  Hill  between 
them  and  the  Sea,  and  then  they  took  their  Course  along 
in  the  Vallies;  but  from  both  Shores,  as  well  from  the 
North  as  the  South,  they  blow  right-forth  into  the  Sea. 

In  the  Island  of  Jamaica  these  Land-Winds  are  in  the 
middle  of  the  Country;  also  I  have  found  them  so,  as 
I  travelled  from  one  side  of  the  Island  to  the  other,  having 
lain  two  Nights  by  the  way,  as  I  had  before  observed  them, 
when  I  liv'd  at  sixteen  Miles  walk,  where  I  continued 
about  six   Months;  but  there  and  in   other  Islands  the 

254 


OF  SEA   AND  LAND  WINDS 


^Pand^rinds  do  blow  towards  the  nearest  Shores,  and  so 
fiwm  thence  off  to  Sea,  whether  the  Shores  lie  East,  West, 
North  or  South. 

These  Winds  blow  off  to  Sea,  a  greater  or  less  Distance, 
iccording  as  the  Coast  lies  more  or  less  exposed  to  the 
Sca-wtni^ :  For  in  some  Places  we  find  them  brisk  three 
or  four  Leagues  off  shore  ;  in  other  Places  not  so  many 
Miles ;  and  in  some  Places  they  scarce  peep  without  the 
Rocks,  or  if  they  do  sometimes  in  very  fair  Weather  make 
a  *illy  out  a  Mile  or  two,  they  are  not  lasting,  but  suddenly 
vanish  away,  though  yet  there  are  every  Night  as  fresh 
Land-winds  ashore  at  those  Places  as  in  any  other  Part 
of  the  World. 

Places  most  remarkable  for  the  fewest  or  faintest 
Land-winds,  are  those  that  lie  most  open  to  the  Common 
Trade-winds,  as  the  East-ends  of  any  Islands  where  the 
Trade-winds  do  blow  in  upon  the  Shore,  or  the  Head- 
Landa  on  Islands  or  Continents  that  are  open  to  the 
Sa-Brcezc,  especially  where  the  Trade-wind  blows  down 
side-ways  by  the  Coast ;  for  there  such  Head-Lands  as 
-trctch  farthest  out  to  Sea  are  most  exposed  to  Winds  from 
•he  Sea ;  and  have  the  less  Benefit  of  the  Land-Breezes. 

I  shall  give  a  few  Instances  of  either.  And  first  of  all 
begin  with  the  N.  E.  and  S.  E.  Points  of  the  Island  of 
Jamaica:  These  Points  are  at  the  East-end  of  the  Island, 
line  is  at  the  very  Extreme  of  the  North-side  towards  the 
hjst,  the  other  on  the  South  Extreme  towards  the  same 
pMnt;  at  these  two  Places  we  seldom  light  of  a  Land- 
wind  ;  nor  very  often  at  the  End  of  the  Island  between 
them,  except  near  the  Shore.  For  that  reason  the  Sloop- 
men  of  Jamaica  that  Trade  round  the  Island  are  com- 
monly put  to  their  Trumps,  when  they  come  there  in 
their  Voyages;  For  if  they  meet  no  Land-wind,  they  are 
obliged  lo  Deal  about  by  turning  to  Windward  against  the 
Sca-Brecze  in  the  Day  time ;  they  then  curse  these  Points 
of  Land,  and  arc  foolishly  apt  to  believe  that  some  Dsmon 
fuunts  there. 

And  if  tbcy  arc  two  or  three  Days  in  beating  about  (as 
tometunes  they  arc]  when  they  return  to  Port-Royal,  they 
^55 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

will  talk  as  much  of  their  Fatigues,  as  if  they  had  been 
beating  a  Month  to  double  the  dpe  of  Good  Hope, 
though  indeed  the  Men  are  brisk  enough,  and  manage 
their  Sloops  very  well ;  which  also  are  generally  very  good 
Boats  to  sail  on  a  Wind.  I  think  they  are  the  best  small 
Trading-Boats  in  the  King's  Dominions. 

Point  Pedro  on  the  South-side  of  the  Island,  is  another 
very  bad  Point  to  double,  if  a  Ship  come  from  the  West- 
end  of  the  Island ;  This  Point  runs  out  far  into  the  Sea, 
and  is  not  only  destitute  of  the  Common  Land-winds :  But 
if  there  is  any  Current  setting  to  Leeward,  here  the  Sloop- 
men  meet  it.  Therefore  they  are  many  times  longer  beating 
about  it,  than  about  the  two  former  Points  of  the  South- 
East  and  the  North-East,  and  not  without  bestowing  some 
Curses  upon  it.  Nay  some  Captains  of  Privateers,  when 
they  have  been  beating  about  it,  have  stood  close  into  the 
Point,  and  fired  their  Guns  to  kill  the  old  Daemon  that 
they  say  inhabits  there  to  disturb  poor  Seamen.  I  have 
related  these  odd  Passages  to  shew  how  ignorant  Men  are 
that  cannot  see  the  Reason  of  it.  And  because  I  am  not 
willing  to  leave  my  Reader  in  the  dark,  I  shall  give  a  few 
Instances  more  on  this  Subject.  The  NcM-th-side  of  Jucatan, 
at  the  Entrance  into  the  Bay  of  Campeachy,  gives  us  an- 
other Instance  of  bad  Land-winds;  and  commonly  where 
the  Land-winds  are  scanty,  the  Sea-Breezes  are  but  in- 
different neither.  This  will  partly  appear  by  what  I  have 
observed  of  them  on  this  Coast,  between  Cape  Catoch, 
and  Cape  Condecedo,  at  the  Entrance  of  the  Bay  of  Cam- 
peachy,  which  two  Places  are  about  eighty  Leagues  distant ; 
for  there  the  Land  trends  East  and  West.  It  is  a  streight 
Coast,  and  lies  ail  of  it  equally  exposed  to  the  Trade-wind, 
which  is  commonly  there  at  E.  N.  E.  To  the  W.  of  these 
Places  the  Sea  and  Land-winds  do  as  duly  succeed  each 
other,  as  on  any  other  Coast,  but  here  they  are  each  of 
them  of  a  Bastard  Kind ;  for  the  Sea-Breezes  are  at  N.  E. 
by  E.  which  is  no  better  than  a  Coast  Trade-wind,  and  the 
Land- Wind  is  at  E.  S.  E.  or  S.  E.  by  E.  whereas  if  the 
Winds  were  as  true  there  as  on  other  Coasts,  the  Sea- 
Breeze  would  be  at  N.  N.  E.  sometimes  at  N.  and  the 

256 


OF  SEA  AND  LAND  BREEZES 
Land-Winds  would  be  at  S.  S.  E,  and  S,  as  they  are  indeed 
close  under  the  Shore  ;  which  if"  they  do  at  any  time  come 
off  from,  they  arc  very  faint.^  The  Land  on  this  Coast 
a  low  and  even,  and  the  Land-Winds  ashore  are  pretty 
brisk. 

The  Capes  on  the  Peruvian  Coast  in  the  South-Seas, 
will  more  fully  make  it  appear,  that  Head-Lands  do  seldom 
affoni  any  Land-Winds.  I  shall  only  Instance  in  Cape 
Pasao,  in  Lat.  8  Minutes  South,  Cape  St.  Laurence,  in 

Lat.  I  d. South,  and  Cape  Blanco,  in  3  d. South. 

I  have  pass'd  by  them  all  several  Times  and  at  different 
Seasons ;  yet  did  never  find  any  Land-winds  there,  though 
between  these  Places  there  are  very  good  Land-winds. 
Therefore  Ships  that  sail  to  the  Southward  against  the 
Breeze,  must  beat  it  about  by  hard  Labour,  especially 
about  Cape  Blanco,  for  that  lies  more  exposed  than  the 
other  two:  and  if  there  is  any  Current,  as  commonly,  the 
%>antards  arc  a  long  Time  getting  about,  sometimes  a 
Fortnight  or  three  Weeks  ;  and  when  they  have  split  their 
Stib,  which  are  seldom  very  good,  they  run  back  to  Guia- 
qotll  to  mend  them  again.  We  found  it  hard  glutting 
about,  iho'  our  Sails  were  good;  and  1  think  we  could 
work  our  Ships  better  than  the  Spaniards  are  ever  able  to 
do  in  those  Seas. 

I  have  already  given  several  Instances  of  such  Places, 
as  have  no  Land-winds,  or  at  least  but  very  ordinary  ones ; 
I  shall  next  proceed  in  order  to  shew  where  the  strongest 
or  best  Land-winds  are  met  with;  and  then  I  shall  speak 
of  these  Places  where  there  blows  a  moderate  and  in- 
different Gale  between  both  Extremes :  That  so  any  one 
n»ty  ju(^  by  the  Lying  of  the  Land,  whether  it  may  afford 
1  good  Land-wind  or  no. 

The  briskest  Land-winds  arc  commonly  in  deep  Bays, 
m  great  Lakes  within  Land,  and  among  great  Ranges  of 
bwids  or  small  Keys  that  lye  near  the  Shore  :  I  shall  give 
loHaoces  of  all  these.  And  as  for  Bays,  I  shall  first  pitch 
On  the  Bay  of  Campeachy,  which  lies  between  Cape  Con- 

'  Ms  land-tnnd  bm  much  force  unless  ihe  Und  from  which  it  blo»s  is 
^■ttuBoas  •ome  miles  Irom  the  sea. 

roL.  II.  157  n 


A   DISCOURSE  OF  WINDS 

decedo  and  the  High-Land  of  St.  Martin ;  between  both 
these  Places  the  Land-winds  are  as  brisk  two  or  three 
Leagues  ofF  at  Sea,  as  in  any  Place  that  I  know.  In  the 
Cod  or  Middle  of  the  Bay,  the  Land  trends  from  East  to 
West,  there  the  Sea-breezes  are  at  North,  and  the  Land- 
winds  at  South ;  they  commonly  begin  to  blow  at  seven  or 
eight  a  Clock  in  the  Evening,  and  continue  till  eight  or 
nine  the  next  Morning,  in  the  dry  Season  especially.  In 
that  Bay  there  is  an  Island,  caird  by  the  English  Bccf- 
Island  from  the  Multitude  of  Bulls  and  Cows  that  inhabit 
it.  The  Smell  of  these  wild  Cattle  is  driven  ofF  to  Sea,  by 
the  Land-winds  so  fresh,  that  by  it  Masters  of  Ships  sailing 
in  the  Night  on  this  Coast  have  known  where  they  were, 
and  have  presently  anchored  that  Night,  and  come  into  the 
Island  of  Trist  the  next  Day ;  whereas  they  would  other- 
wise have  past  farther  to  the  Westward  quite  out  of  their 
way,  if  they  had  not  smelFd  the  strong  Scent  of  these 
Cattle. 

So  all  the  Bottom  of  the  Bay  of  Mexico,  even  from  the 
High-Land  of  St.  Martin  down  to  La  Vera  Cruz,  and  from 
thence  Northerly  towards  the  River  Meschasipi^  affords 
good  Land-winds  and  Sea-breezes.  The  Bay  of  Honduras 
also,  and  almost  all  the  Coast  between  it  and  Cape  La  Vela, 
affords  the  like,  allowing  for  the  Capes  and  Points  of 
Land,  which  lye  between ;  where  it  fails  more  or  less,  as 
the  Points  do  lye  more  or  less  exposed  to  the  Sea-Breezes. 

So  in  the  South-Seas,  the  Bays  of  Panama,  Guiaquil, 
Paita,  &c.  have  their  fresh  Land-winds  and  Sea-breezes. 
But  in  some  Places,  as  particularly  at  Paita,  the  Land-winds 
do  not  spring  up  till  twelve  a  Clock  in  the  Night,  but 
then  are  always  very  fresh,  and  last  till  seven  or  eight  the 
next  Morning;  and  they  are  constant  all  the  Year  long; 
Whereas  in  the  Bay  of  Panama,  and  also  in  all  the  Bayi 
and  Coasts  of  the  other,  or  North-side  of  America  already 
described,  they  are  not  so  constant  in  the  wet  Season  as  th^ 
are  in  the  dry. 

The  Bay  of  Campeachy  will  also  afford  us  Instances  of 

^  Mississipi. 
258 


OF  SEA  AND  LAND   BREEZES 

the  Land-winds  ihat  blow  in  Lagunes :  As  for  Instance, 
ihc  Lsgune  of  Trist,  which  is  about  nine  or  ten  Leagues 
long  and  three  broad,  is  barricadoed  from  the  Sea  by  the 
IsUnd  of  Trist.  There  the  Land-winds  blow  in  the  dry 
Season  from  five  or  six  a  Clock  in  the  Evening,  till  nine  or 
ten  in  the  Morning.  There  are  two  other  Lagunes  lying 
within  that,  and  paned  from  it  by  low  Mangrove-Land  : 
there  the  Land-winds  arc  fresher  and  the  Sca-Breeze  duller, 
and  of  a  less  Continuance,  than  in  the  Lagune  of  Trist. 
Nay,  sometimes  the  Land-wind  blows  all  Day ;  so  in  the 
Lagune  of  Maracabo  to  Windward  of  Cape  Alta  Vela,  the 
Land-winds  are  very  fresh  and  lasting.  The  like  may  be 
said  of  the  Lagune  of  Venizueila  or  Comana. 

Sometimes  in  the  fore- mentioned  Lagunes,  the  Land- 
winds  do  blow  for  three  or  four  Days  and  Nights  together, 
scarce  suffering  the  Sea-Breeze  to  breathe  there ;  though 
ai  the  same  time  the  Sea-Breeze  may  blow  fresh  out  at 
Sea:  and  if  the  Sea-Brccze  at  such  times  should  make  a 
bold  Sally  into  these  Lagunes,  it  would  be  but  of  a  Short 
Continuance.  On  the  other  Hand  at  Capes  and  Head- 
lands more  exposed  to  Sea-Breezes,  the  Land-winds  are 
fhycr  of  coming  there,  than  the  Sea-winds  are  into  Lagunes. 
Neitbcr  may  we  forget  the  Harbour  of  Jamaica,  for  there 
are  very  good  Land-winds.  It  is  compassed  in  on  one  side 
'  'i  a  long  Neck  of  Sand,  and  many  small  Islands  at  the 
uth  of  It,  and  within  there  is  a  pretty  deep  Lake,  in 
Uch  are  constant  Sea  and  Land-winds,  by  which  the 
f-men  run  with  full  sail,  both  to  Legany '  or  Passage 
t,*  from  the  Town  and  back  again.  They  go  away 
the  Sca-Breeze,  and  return  with  the  Land-wind. 
cfbrc  Passengers  that  have  occasion  to  go  either  way, 
w»t  for  the  coming  of  these  Winds,  except  their  Business 
nqoircs  haste  :  for  then  they  are  rowed  against  the  Breeze  ; 
1  tho'  the  Land-winds  do  sometimes  fail  or  come  very 
,  yet  the  Wherries  seldom  stay  beyond  their  constant 
s  of  Kvcn  or  eight  a  Clock,  and  sometimes  the  Land- 
i  do  come  by  three  or  four,  but  when  they  come  so 


'  Tb  Ui£  wot  oC  the  harbour,  on  ihe  westeni  aide  of  H  unt  Bay . 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

early   it  is  commonly  after  a  Tornado   from  the  Land. 
This  may  suffice  as  to  the  Land-winds  in  Lakes  or  Bays. 

As  to  what  may  be  spoken  concerning  the  Land-winds 
among  Islands,  I  shall  only  mention  two  Places,  both  of 
them  in  the  West-Indies ;  the  first  are  the  Keys  of  Cuba, 
which  are  Abundance  of  small  Islands  bordering  on  the 
South-side  of  Cuba,  reaching  in  length  from  East  to  West, 
or  near  those  Points  as  the  Island  lies,  about  seventy 
Leagues  ;  and  in  some  Places  reaching  near  twenty  Leagues 
from  the  said  Island.  Among  these  Islands,  even  from  the 
outermost  of  them,  quite  home  to  Cuba,  there  are  very 
brisk  Land-winds.  They  spring  up  early  in  the  Evening, 
and  blow  late  in  the  Morning.  The  Jamaica  Turtlers  visit 
these  Keys  with  good  Success  for  Turtle  all  the  Year  long, 
and  from  thence  bring  most  of  their  Turtle  wherewith  the 
Market  of  Port-Royal  is  served.  The  other  Islands  I  shall 
mention  are  the  Sambaloe  Islands  betwixt  Cape  Samblass^ 
and  Golden  Island,  tho'  they  are  not  so  large  a  Rai^e  as 
the  Keys  of  Cuba,  yet  do  they  afford  very  good  Land- 
winds  ;  near  as  good  as  the  Keys  of  Cuba  do.  And  thus 
much  for  the  Places  where  the  best  as  well  as  where  the 
scantiest  or  faintest  Land-winds  are  found.  I  shall  next 
give  some  Instances  of  the  Medium  between  both  Extremes. 

I  have  already  shown  that  Capes  and  such  Head-Lands 
as  lye  out  farthest  from  the  rest  of  the  Shore,  are  thereby 
most  exposed  to  the  Sea- Winds,  and  consequently  the 
Land-winds  are  there  much  fainter  than  in  other  PlaceSi 
especially  in  deep  Bays  or  Lagunes  within  Land,  or  among 
Islands  and  small  Keys  near  the  Land :  All  which  is  no 
more  than  my  own  Experience  has  taught  me.  I  shall  nofw 
shew  how  the  Land-winds  blow  on  Coasts  that  do  lye  more 
level.  As  all  Coasts  have  their  Points  and  Bendings,  so 
accordingly  the  Land-winds  are  fresher  or  fainter,  as  yoa 
come  either  towards  these  Bendings  or  towards  intermitting 
Points  or  Head-Lands. 

I  shall  give  an  Instance  of  this  by  shewing  how  the 
Winds  are  on  the  Coast  of  Curaccos.     It  is  as  streight  a 

^  San  Bias. 
260 


■         OF   SEA    AND   LAND   BREEZES 

Vborc  as  I  can  pitch  on,  yet  full  of  small  Bays,  divided 
from  each  other  by  a  like  number  of  Ridges  of  High-Land, 
that  shoot  forth  their  Heads  a  little  way  without  the  Bays 
on  each  side.  There  in  the  Night  or  Morning,  while  the 
Land-wind  blows,  we  find  fresh  Gales  out  of  the  Bays : 
but  when  we  come  abreast  of  the  Head-Lands,  we  find  it 
calm ;  yet  see  the  Breeze  curling  on  the  Water  on  both 
9ides  of  us,  and  sometimes  get  a  Spurt  of  it  to  help  us 
forward ;  and  having  recovered  the  Wind  out  of  the  next 
Bay,  we  pass  by  the  Mouth  of  it  presently,  till  we  come  to 
the  next  Head ;  and  there  we  lye  becalmed  as  before. 

These  Bays  are  not  above  half  a  Mile  or  a  Mile  wide ; 
neither  are  the  Heads  much  wider;  but  these  Heads  of 
the  Ridges  lying  in  between  the  Bays,  have  steep  Cliffs 
against  the  Sea;  and  where-ever  I  have  met  the  like  steep 
Qiflfs  against  the  Sea,  I  have  seldom  found  any  Land-winds. 
But  in  all  other  Places  where  the  Bays  strike  deeper  into 
the  Land,  there  we  find  the  Land-winds  more  lasting  and 
strong;  and  where  the  Points  are  farther  out,  there  are 
still  the  less  Land-winds,  and  the  Brisker  Sea-Breezes.  For 
the  Capes  and  unaltcr  Points  on  all  Shores  seem  to  be  so 
many  Barricadoes  to  break  off  the  Violence  of  the  Sca- 
Brcczes;  for  this  we  always  find  when  we  are  turning  to 
Windward  being  to  Leeward  of  a  Cape,  that  the  Breeze  is 
moderate,  especially  if  we  keep  very  near  the  Shore  ;  but 
when  once  we  come  within  a  Mile,  more  or  less  of  the 
Cape  and  stand  off  to  Sea,  as  soon  as  we  get  without  it,  wc 
6nd  such  a  huffing  Breeze,  that  sometimes  we  are  not  able 
to  ply  against  it,  but  in  the  Night  we  find  a  fresh  Land- 
wind  to  Leeward ;  tho'  when  wc  come  to  the  Cape  we  find 
ii  calm  ;  or  perhaps  sometimes  meet  with  a  Sea-wind.  The 
l.ud-Brcezcs  on  the  Coast  of  Guinea  between  Cape  St. 
.\ans  and  Cape  Palmas,  (mentioned  in  the  second  Chapter 
rfthis  Discourse),  arc  at  E.  blowing  brisk  four  Leagues  off 
Short:  the  Sea-winds  there  are  at  S.  W.  The  Land-winds 
ot  the  Coast  of  Angola  are  at  E.  N.  E.  the  Sea-winds  at 
I  W.  S.  W,  these  arc  very  true  Winds  of  both  kinds, 
I  The  I^nd-winds  on  the  Coast  of  Peru  and  Mexico  in 
I  Ac  South-Seas,  arc  in  most  Places  right  off  from  the  Shore, 
261 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

else  the  Fisher-men  could  never  go  out  to  Sea,  as  they  do, 
on  Bark-Loggs.  And  as  the  Land-winds  are  true  there,  so 
are  the  Sea-Breezes  also ;  for  with  the  Land-wind  they  go 
out  to  fish,  and  return  in  again  with  the  Sea-winds.  In 
some  Places  they  use  Seals-Skins  instead  of  Bark-Loggs; 
they  are  made  so  tight  that  no  Bladder  is  tighter.  To 
these  they  have  long  Necks  like  the  Neck  of  a  Bladder, 
into  which  they  put  a  Pipe  and  blow  them  up  as  we  do 
Bladders ;  two  of  these  being  fastned  together,  a  Man  sets 
a-stride  them,  having  one  before  and  the  other  behind  him ; 
and  so  sits  firmer  than  in  a  Trooper's  Saddle.  His  Paddle 
is  like  a  Quarter-staff,  with  a  broad  Blade  at  each  end; 
with  this  he  strikes  the  Sea  back,  first  on  one  side  and 
then  on  the  other,  with  each  end  of  his  Paddle,  and  so 
gives  himself  fresh  way  through  the  Water. 

In  the  East-Indies  also  there  are  true  Sea-Breezes,  as 
well  on  the  Islands,  as  on  the  Main.  On  Islands,  as  at 
Bantam  in  the  Island  Java,  and  at  Achin  in  the  Island 
Sumatra,  and  in  many  Places  on  the  Island  Mindanao: 
And  on  the  Main  also,  as  particularly  at  Fort  St.  George  on 
the  Coast  Coromandel.  There  the  Land-winds  blow  right 
off  from  the  Shore,  and  the  Sea-winds  right  in ;  but 
sometimes  they  come  slanting  in ;  and  about  Christmas 
they  blow  from  the  N.  E.  or  N.  N.  E.  I  found  them  so 
when  I  came  on  the  Coast,  and  being  advised  of  it  by  Mr. 
Coventry,  in  whose  Sloop  I  then  was,  I  fell  in  with  the 
Land  ten  or  twelve  Leagues  to  the  Northward  of  the  Fort, 
and  had  a  brisk  Northerly  Sea-wind  to  bring  me  into  the 
Road. 

I  think  these  Instances  are  enough  to  shew  how  these 
Land-winds  do  usually  blow  in  most  parts  of  the  World ; 
should  I  be  very  particular,  'tis  not  a  larger  Treatise  than  I 
intend  this  to  be,  would  hold  a  quarter-part  of  it.  But  I 
have  been  more  particular  in  the  West-Indies  and  South- 
Seas,  because  these  Land-winds  are  of  more  use  there  than 
in  the  East-Indies :  For  though  sometimes  Men  in  the 
East-Indies  do  turn  against  the  Monsoons,  yet  they  do 
generally  tarry  for  them  before  they  budge. 

Indeed  these  Winds  are   an  extraordinary  Blessing  to 

262 


OF  SEA   AND  LAND   BREEZES 

those  that  use  the  Sea  in  any  part  of  the  Worid,  within  the 
Tpopicks ;  for  as  the  constant  Trade-winds  do  blow,  there 
could  be  no  sailing  in  these  Seas :  But  by  the  Help  of  the 
Sea  and  Land-Breezes,  Ships  will  sail  2  or  300  Leagues; 
as  particularly  from  Jamaica,  to  the  Lagune  of  Trist,  in  the 
Bay  of  Campeachy ;  and  then  back  again,  all  against  the 
Trade-wind ;  And  1  think  this  is  one  of  the  longest 
Voy^es  that  is  used  of  this  kind.  If  any  of  our  Jamaica 
Sloops  do  go  to  Trist,  and  design  to  carry  their  Wood  to 
Curasao,  then  they  put  through  the  Gulph  of  Florida. 

The  Spaniards  also  that  come  from  any  part  of  the  Bay 
of  Mexico,  and  are  bound  to  any  Place  to  Windward  of 
the  Itdand  Cuba,  are  wont  to  put  through  the  Gulph,  and 
to  stretch  away  to  the  Northward,  till  they  come  clear  of 
the  Trade,  and  then  stand  away  as  far  as  they  please  to  the 
Han-ward  ;  This  is  also  the  usual  way  from  Jamaica  to 
Barbadoes,  thnugh  sometimes  they  turn  up  by  the  Caribbee 
Islands,  only  taking  the  Benefit  of  these  Sea  and  Land- 
winds.  So  also  Ships  may  and  do  pass  from  Portobello  to 
Carthagcna,  or  to  St.  Martha,  or  to  any  other  Place,  by  the 
help  of  these  Breezes,  if  the  distance  is  not  too  far.  So  by 
takmg  the  Advantage  of  these  Winds,  Sloops  in  the  West- 
Indies  sail  clear  round  the  Islands,  or  to  any  part  of  them, 
in  a  short  time. 

In  the  South  Seas  also  the  Spaniards  in  their  Voyages 
from  Panama  to  Lima,  by  taking  the  Advantage  of  these 
Winds,  do  sail  as  high  as  Cape  Blanco;  but  in  all  their 
Voyages  to  the  Southward  of  that  Cape,  they  stand  quite 
off  to  Sea  into  the  Trade.  Thus  you  see  the  Use  and 
Advantage  of  them. 

The  Seamen  that  sail  in  Sloops  or  other  small  Vessels 
\n  the  West-Indies,  do  know  very  well  when  they  shall 
meet  a  brisk  Land-wind,  by  the  Fogs  that  hang  over  the 
land  before  Night ;  for  it  is  a  certain  sign  of  a  good  Land- 
wind,  to  see  a  thick  Fog  lye  still  and  quiet,  like  Smoak 
over  the  Land,  not  stirring  any  way;  and  we  look  out  for 
iuch  Sens  when  wc  are  plying  to  Windward.  For  if  we 
sec  no  Fog  over  the  land,  ihc  Land-wind  will  be  but  faint 
ind  short  that  Night.  These  Signs  arc  to  be  observed 
263 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

chiefly  in  fair  Weather :  for  in  the  wet  Season  Fogs  do 
hang  over  the  Land  all  the  Day,  and  it  may  be  neither 
Land-wind  nor  Sea-Breeze  stirring.  If  in  the  Afternoon 
also  in  fair  Weather,  we  see  a  Tornado  over  the  Land,  it 
commonly  sends  us  forth  a  fresh  Land-wind. 

These  Land-winds  are  very  cold,  and  though  the  Sca- 
Breezes  are  always  much  stronger,  yet  these  are  colder  by 
far.  The  Sea-Breezes  indeed  are  very  comfortable  and 
refreshing ;  for  the  hottest  Time  in  all  the  Day  is  about 
nine,  ten  or  eleven  a  Clock  in  the  Morning,  in  the  Interval 
between  both  Breezes :  For  then  it  is  commonly  calm,  and 
then  People  pant  for  Breath,  especially  if  it  is  late  before 
the  Sea-Breeze  comes,  but  afterwards  the  Breeze  allays  the 
Heat.  However,  in  the  Evening  again  after  the  Sea- 
Breeze  is  spent,  it  is  very  hot  till  the  Land-wind  springs 
up,  which  is  sometimes  not  till  twelve  a  Clock  or  after. 

For  this  Reason  Men  when  they  go  to  Bed  uncloath 
themselves  and  lye  without  any  thing  over  them :  Nay,  the 
ordinary  sort  of  People  spread  Mats  at  their  Doors,  or  else 
in  their  Yards,  in  Jamaica,  and  lye  down  to  sleep  in  the 
open  Air. 

In  the  East-Indies  at  Fort  St.  George,  also  Men  take 
their  Cotts  or  little  Field-Beds,  and  put  them  into  the 
Yards,  and  go  to  sleep  in  the  Air :  And  Seamen  aboard 
Ships  in  these  hot  Countries  lye  on  the  Deck,  till  the  Land- 
wind  comes. 

The  Inhabitants  of  Jamaica  or  Fort  St.  George,  have 
somewhat  to  cover  themselves  when  the  Land-Wind  comes, 
beside  a  Pillow  on  their  Breast,  or  between  their  Arms* 
But  Seamen  who  have  wrought  hard  all  Day  lye  naked  and 
exposed  to  the  Air,  it  may  be  all  Night  long,  before  they 
awake,  without  any  Covering,  especially  if  they  have  had 
their  Dose  of  Punch.  But  next  Morning  they  are  scarce 
able  to  budge,  being  stiff  with  cold,  that  brings  them  to 
Fluxes,  and  that  to  their  Graves ;  and  this  is  the  Fate  of 
many  stout  and  brave  Seamen :  and  it  is  a  great  Pity  that 
Masters  of  Ships  have  so  little  Regard  for  their  Men,  as 
not  by  some  good  Orders,  to  prohibit  this  dangerous 
Custom  of  lying  abroad  and  naked  in  the  Nights. 

264 


I 

^ 


CHAP.   V 

Of  Land-mndi  art  J  Sea- Breezes,  peculiar  lo  some  Coasts  at  some 
particular  Seasons  of  the  Tear  ;  as  also  of  some  IVinds  thai 
produce  strange  Effects 

Of  tkt  SuMmaMnta'IVtndi  In  thi  Bay  of  Camp*achy.  Of  the  IVindi 
fttvBar  l»  ihr  Ceaiti  of  Carthagtna,  lyirtds  on  the  Mexican 
Ctaili,  laltd  Ptpagaioi.  Othtri  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandil, 
all'd  Terrtntf  :  The  same  about  Malabar^  but  at  a  different 
Smmii  .-  At  alsa  in  the  Persian  Gulph.  And  of  the  Hermatans 
n  th  Cms!  of  Guinea. 

I  SHALL  begin  with  the  Summasenta- Winds,  as  they 
are  called,  which  blow  in  the  Bay  of  Campeachy. 
These  arc  Winds  that  come  in  the  Months  of  February, 
March  and  April,  and  they  blow  only  in  that  Bay 
between  the  High-Land  of  St.  Martin  and  Cape  Condecedo  ; 
which  Places  arc  about  r20  Leagues  asunder.  They  are, 
properly  speaking,  neither  Sca-Breezes  nor  true  Land-winds, 
yet  in  Rcsp«ct  of  ihcir  blowing  in  some  Measure  from  the 
Shore,  they  are  in  that  somewhat  of  kin  to  the  Land-winds. 
These  Winds  are  commonly  at  E.  S.  E.  in  the  Cod  or 
Middle  of  the  Bay  where  the  Land  lies  E.  and  W.  and 
the  true  Land-winds  there  are  at  S.  S.  E.  but  from  thence 
towards  Cape  Condecedo,  the  Land  trends  away  N.  E.  and 
N.  N.  E-  and  N.  So  that  they  become  Land-winds  there 
respecting  the  Land  from  whence  they  blow ;  but  then 
they  diflfer  both  from  Sea  and  Land-Breczcs  tn  Respect  to 
their  Duration :  For  these  Summasenta- Winds  blow  three 
or  four  Days,  sometimes  a  Week,  both  Night  and  Day 
before  they   cease.     They  are   commonly   dry   Winds  and 

J  blow  very  fresh,  and  Ships  that  go  from  Trist  with  Log- 
Wood  at   the  Time  when   these   Winds  blow,  will  be  at 
26s 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

Cape  Condecedo  in  three  or  four  Days  ;  whereas  if  they  go 
at  any  other  Time,  it  will  take  up  eight  or  ten  Days,  tho' 
seldom  more  than  that :  For  here  are  good  Land-winds 
and  Sea-Breezes  at  other  times. 

These  Winds  are  commonly  colder  than  the  Sea*winds, 
though  not  so  cold  as  the  Land-winds,  yet  stronger  than 
either.  I  never  could  perceive  that  these  Winds  did  make 
any  Alteration  on  our  Bodies  different  from  other  Winds. 
But  the  Tides  when  these  Winds  blow  on  that  Coast,  are 
very  small  especially  in  the  Lagunes  of  Trist :  so  that  the 
Logwood-Barks  that  bring  the  Wood  aboard  of  the  Ships, 
are  then  forced  to  lye  still  for  want  of  Water  to  float  them 
over  some  Flats  in  the  Lagunes. 

On  the  Coast  of  Carthagena  there  are  a  peculiar  sort 
of  Winds  that  blow  in  the  Months  of  April,  May  and 
June  so  very  fierce,  that  Ships  are  not  able  to  ply  to 
Windward  on  that  Coast  while  these  Winds  last.  These 
Winds  blow  about  forty  or  fifty  Leagues  to  Windward  of 
Carthagena  Town,  and  about  ten  to  Leeward  of  it.  They 
are  very  fierce  from  the  Middle  of  the  Channel  between  it 
and  Hispaniola,  and  so  continue  almost  to  the  Coast  of 
Carthagena.  Tho*  they  are  sometimes  a  little  fainter  within 
two  or  three  Leagues  of  the  Shore,  especially  Mornings 
and  Evenings.  They  commonly  rise  in  the  Morning  before 
Day,  sometimes  at  3  or  4  a  Clock,  and  so  continue  till  9, 
10  or  II  at  Night,  and  thus  they  will  blow  10  or  11  Days 
together  very  fiercely.  At  this  time  the  Land-winds  besides 
their  short  Continuance  are  very  faint  and  blow  but  a  little 
way  off  Shore :  So  that  from  i  o  or  1 1  at  Night  till  3  in 
the  Morning  *tis  quite  calm  and  not  one  Breath  of  Wind 
from  a  League  distant  off  the  Shore ;  tho*  3  or  4  further 
off  you'll  find  the  Breeze,  and  nearer  a  small  Land-wind. 
These  Winds  are  at  E.  N.  E.  as  the  common  Trade  is; 
whereas  the  Sea-Breezes  are  at  N.  E.  by  N.  or  N.  N.  E. 

While  these  fierce  Winds  stay,  the  Sky  is  commonly 
clear  without  any  Cloud  to  be  seen;  tho*  doubtless  'tis 
imperceptibly  hazy,  for  then  the  Sun  does  not  give  a  true 
black  Shade  on  the  Ground,  but  very  faint  and  dusky. 
The  Horizon  too  looks  very  dusky,  thick  and  hazy,  and 

266 


OF  WINDS  PECULIAR  TO  SOME  COASTS 

while  the  Sun  is  near  the  Horizon,  either  in  the  Morning 
or  Kvcning,  it  looks  very  red.  Sometimes,  tho'  but  seldom, 
when  these  Winds  blow  the  Sky  is  over-cast  with  small 
Clouds,  which  afford  some  drizling  small  Rain.  But  though 
these  Winds  arc  so  fierce  on  the  Coast  of  Carthagena,  yet 
both  to  Windward  and  to  Leeward  at  the  distances  before- 
mentioned,  the  Breezes  blow  moderate  as  at  other  Times. 
For  the  Sea  and  Land-winds  do  there  keep  their  constant 
and  regular  Courses.  Neither  are  the  Coasts  of  Hispaniola 
or  Jamaica  troubled  with  these  fierce  Winds,  any  nearer 
than  half  Channel  over  as  was  said  before. 

It  has  not  been  my  Fortune  to  have  been  on  this  Coast 
when  these  Winds  have  blown,  yet  I  have  had  the  Relation 
of  it  so  often,  and  from  so  many  Persons,  that  I  am  very 
Well  satbfied  of  the  Truth  of  it:  Nay,  it  is  so  generally 
known  among  the  Jamaica  Seamen  and  Privateers  that  they 
call  a  Talkative  Person  in  Derision,  a  Carthagenc-Breeze. 
I  remember  two  or  three  Men  that  went  by  that  Name, 
and  I  knew  them  by  no  other,  tho'  I  was  in  the  same  Ship 
with  them  several  Months. 

Some  of  our  English  Frigots  that  have  been  sent  to 
Jamaica  have  experienced  these  Breezes  when  the  Governour 
hu  sent  ihem  upon  Business  to  that  Coast :  For  plying 
between  PoriobcIIo  and  Carthagena,  when  they  have  been 
within  lO  Leagues  of  Carthagena,  they  have  met  with  the 
Sea-Breeze  bo  strong  that  they  have  been  forced  to  riff 
their  Topsail,  which  even  then  they  could  not  maintain, 
but  have  been  obliged  to  furl  it  quite  up  ;  and  so  with 
only  their  lower  Sails,  which  sometimes  they  have  been 
forced  to  riff  too,  have  been  beating  eight  or  ten  Days,  to 
get  mly  so  many  Leagues ;  which  tho'  at  last  they  have 
acme,  yet  has  it  been  with  much  Trouble,  and  not  without 
Damage  to  their  Sails  and  Rigging-  Neither  can  I  foi^et 
a  Squadron  of  French  Frigots,  commanded  by  the  Count 
dc  Esirecs,  that  came  to  Jamaica,  and  demanded  leave  of 
the  Governour  to  wood  and  water  there  ;  which  because 
!t  seemed  strange  that  they  should  want  in  coming  only 
from  Petit  Guavas;  it  was  demanded  of  them  why  they 
came  from  thence  so  ill  provided  ?     They  said  they  went 

267 


L 


A   DISCOURSE  OF  WINDS 

from  Petit  Guavas  over  to  the  Coast  of  Carthagena,  with 
a  Design  to  have  plyed  to  Wind-ward  under  that  Shore, 
but  met  the  Breezes  so  hard  on  the  Coast,  that  they  were 
not  able  to  hold  up  their  sides  against  it,  and  for  that 
Reason  stood  back  again  towards  Petit  Guavas ;  but  not 
being  able  to  fetch  it,  therefore  they  came  to  wood  and 
water  at  Jamaica,  designing  to  go  from  thence  thro*  the 
Gulph  :  And  tho*  the  Pilots  of  Jamaica  did  all  conclude 
that  the  Breeze-time  was  past  by  more  than  a  Month,  yet 
the  Governour  gave  them  leave  to  wood  and  water  at 
Blewfields  Bay,  and  sent  one  Mr.  Stone  to  be  their  IHlot 
thither.  This  was  in  1679  and  in  one  of  our  Summer 
Months,  but  I  can't  tell  which,  tho'  I  was  there. 

In  the  South-Seas  on  the  Mexican  Coast,  between  Cape 
Blanco  in  the  Lat.  of  9  D.  56  M.  North  and  Realeja,  in 
Lat.  II  North,  which  two  Places  are  about  80  L^igues 
Distance,  there  are  Winds  which  blow  only  in  the  Months 
of  May,  June,  and  July,  calFd  by  the  Spaniards  Popoguos. 
They  blow  Night  and  Day  without  Intermission,  sometimes 
3  or  4  Days  or  a  Week  tc^ether.  They  are  very  Inisk 
Winds,  but  not  violent :  I  have  been  in  one  of  them  when 
we  went  from  Caldera  Bay,  bound  to  Realeja  mentioned 
in  my  "  Voyage  round  the  World,"  Chap.  5,  Pag.  144,  which 
blew  at  North. 

In  the  East-Indies  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  there 
are  Winds  call'd  by  the  Portuguese  Terrenos,  because  they 
blow  from  the  Land.  These  are  not  those  Land-Winck 
that  I  have  already  treated  of ;  for  these  blow  only  in  June, 
July  and  August,  and  are  in  several  respects  quite  contrary 
to  them.  For  whereas  the  true  Land- Winds  blow  only  in 
the  Night,  including  Evenings  and  Mornings;  on  the 
contrary,  these  blow  3  or  4  Days  without  intermis»on; 
nay  sometimes  a  Week  or  10  Days  together :  and  as  the 
true  Nocturnal  Land-Winds  are  very  cold,  on  the  contrary 
these  are  the  hottest  of  all  Winds  I  ever  heard  of :  They 
come  with  hot  Blooms,  such  as  I  have  mentioned  in  my 
"Voyage  round  the  World,"  Chap.  20,  Pag.  511.  These 
Winds  are  at  West,  and  they  blow  only  in  the  Months  of 
June,  July  and  August,  which  is  the  West  Monsoon-Season, 

268 


■J 


OF  WINDS  PECULIAR  TO  SOME  COASTS 

tho'  the  proper  Monsoon  then  on  this  Coast  is  S.  W.  When 
these  hot  Winds  come,  the  better  sort  of  People  at  Fort  St. 
George  keep  close:  They  also  shut  up  their  Windows  and 
Doors  to  keep  them  out ;  and  I  have  heard  Gentlemen  that 
lived  there  say,  that  when  they  have  been  thus  shut  up 
within  Doors,  they  have  been  sensible  when  the  Wind 
Rifled  by  the  Change  they  have  feit  in  their  Bodies.  And 
notwithstanding  that  these  Winds  are  so  hot,  yet  the  In- 
habiunts  don't  sweat  while  they  last,  for  their  Skins  are 
h«rd  and  rough,  as  if  they  had  been  parched  by  the  Fire, 
especially  their  Faces  and  Hands,  yet  does  it  not  make 
them  sick.  The  Sands  which  are  raised  by  these  Winds  arc 
a  great  annoyance  to  those  whose  business  lyes  abroad,  and 
who  can't  keep  their  Houses.  For  many  times  they  wheel 
ibout  and  raise  the  Sands  so  thick,  that  it  flies  like  smoak 
:n  Peoples  Eyes;  and  the  Ships  also  that  lye  in  the  road  at 
that  time  have  their  Decks  covered  with  this  Sand. 

On  ihc  Coast  of  Malabar  they  have  of  these  sorts  of 
Winds  also,  but  not  at  the  same  time  of  the  Year.  For  as 
these  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandel  blow  in  the  months  of 
June,  July  and  August,  when  the  West  Monsoon  reigns ; 
on  the  contrary  on  the  Malabar  Coast  they  blow  in  the 
Months  of  December,  January  and  February,  when  the 
Eist  or  North-East  Monsoon  blows :  for  then  the  Easterly 
Wind,  which  is  then  the  true  Monsoon,  comes  from  over 
the  Land  of  this  Coast;  This  being  the  West-side,  as  the 
Ca«st  of  Coromandel  is  the  East-side  of  this  long  East- 
lodian  Promontory. 

The  Persian  Gulph  is  as  remarkable  for  these  hot  Winds 
as  either  of  the  former;  they  come  there  in  the  Months  of 
June,  July  and  August  in  the  West  Monsoon  time ;  and 
the  heal  there  by  all  Accounts  does  by  far  exceed  that  on 
the  other  two  Coasts. 

The  European  Merchants  that  are  imployed  in  the 
Ports  within  the  King  of  Persia's  Dominions,  do  leave  their 
Coast,  Habitations  and  Business  there,  during  these  hot 
Months,  and  spend  their  time  at  Ispahan  till  the  Air  is 
man  agreeable  to  thdr  Bodies;  but  their  Servants  must 
mdure  it.  And  if  any  Ships  arc  there,  then  the  Seamen 
369 


A   DISCOURSE   OF  WINDS 

also  must  do  as  well  as  they  can.  *Tis  reported  the  Com- 
manders do  keep  Bathing-Troughs  full  of  Water  to  lye  and 
wallow  in,  and  hide  their  Bodies  from  the  noisom  hot 
Blooms.  I  was  never  in  any  of  these  hot  Winds,  for  I 
went  from  Fort  St.  George  before  they  came  on  the  Coast. 
On  the  Coast  of  Guinea  there  are  a  particular  Sort  of 
Land-winds,  which  are  very  remarkable;  not  for  thdr 
Heat,  as  those  last-mentioned,  but  for  their  exceeding  Cold 
and  searching  Nature.  They  are  called  Harmatans.  I 
have  had  an  Account  of  them  from  several  who  have  traded 
to  Guinea;  but  more  especially  from  a  very  sensible  and 
experienced  Gentleman,  Mr.  Greenhill,  Commissioner  of 
His  Majesty's  Navy  at  Portsmouth ;  who  upon  my  Request, 
was  pleased  to  send  me  the  following  Account :  which  the 
Reader  cannot  have  better  than  in  his  own  Words.  Where 
together  with  the  Harmatans,  he  gives  an  Account  also  of 
all  the  Winds  on  that  Coast. 


Mr.  Gr££NHill*s  Letter. 
Sir, 

I  HAVE  been  very  ill  since  my  return  Home  with  the 
Gout ;  so  that  I  have  not  been  capable  of  answering 
your  Expectation  :  But  being  a  little  better  recovered, 
I  shall  make  as  good  a  Return  to  your  Enquiry  of  the 
Harmatans  on  the  Coast  of  Guinea,  as  my  Circumstances 
will  permit.  The  usual  time  of  their  blowing  is  between 
the  latter  part  of  December,  and  the  beginning  of  February; 
before  and  beyond  which  Seasons,  they  never  exceed. 
They  are  of  so  very  cold,  sharp  and  piercing  a  Nature,  that 
the  Seams  of  the  Floors  of  our  Chambers  and  the  Sides  and 
Decks  of  our  Ships  (as  far  as  they  are  above  Water)  will 
open  so  wide,  as  that  with  Facility  you  may  put  a  Caullung- 
Iron  a  considerable  way  into  them ;  in  which  Condition 
they  continue  so  long  as  the  Harmatan  blows,  (which  is 
sometimes  two  or  three,  and  very  rarely  five  Days,  which  is 
the  very  utmost  I  ever  observed  or  heard  of)  and  when 
they  are  gone,  they  close  again  and  are  as  tight  as  if  it  never 
had  been.     The  Natives  themselves  and  all  Persons  who 

270 


p 


OF  WINDS  PECTJLTAR  TO  SOME  COASTS 

Inhabit  those  parts  (during  that  short  Season)  to  prevent 
their  pernicious  Effects,  are  obliged  to  confine  themselves 
within  Doors;  where  they  endeavour  their  own  security, 
by  rendering  their  Habitations  as  close  and  impenetrable  as 
possible:  Neither  will  they  once  stir  abroad,  unless  induced 
thereto  by  a  more  than  ordinary  Occasion.  It  is  as  de- 
simctivc  to  the  Cattle  also  ;  whose  safe  Guard  consists  in 
their  Proprietors  Care,  who  against  this  Season  ought  to 
provide  some  such  like  place  for  them  :  Otherwise  they 
must  expect  but  a  pitiful  Account  when  the  Season  is 
over;  for  it  most  certainly  destroys  them,  and  that  in  a 
very  short  time. 

This  I  accidentally  experimented  by  exposing  a  couple 
of  Gouts  to  the  Asperity  thereof;  which  in  four  Hours 
Space  or  thereabouts,  were  depriv'd  of  Life.  Nay  we  our 
■elves  (unless  assisted  by  the  like  Convenicncy  and  the 
benefit  of  some  sweet  Oyls  to  correct  the  Air)  cannot  fetch 
our  Breath  so  freely  as  at  other  times;  but  are  almost 
suffocated  with  too  frequent  and  Acid  Respirations.  They 
gencnliy  blow  between  the  E.  and  E.  N.  E.  to  the  North- 
ward of  which  they  never  exceed,  being  the  most  settled 
and  steddy  (but  fresh)  Gales  1  ever  observed ;  coming 
without  Thunder,  Lightning  or  Rain  ;  but  close  gloomy 
Weather;  the  Sun  not  shining  all  the  time:  And  when 
they  expire,  the  Trade-wind  (which  constantly  blows  on 
that  Coast  at  W.  S.  W.  and  S.  W.)  returns  with  the  accus- 
tomary  scasonablcncss  of  Weather. 

The  Coast  of  Africa  from  Cape  Palmas  to  Cape 
Formasa,  lies  E.  and  E.  by  N.  and  near  those  Points  the 
Latkd  Breezes  blow  on  that  Coast,  which  commonly  begin 
about  seven  in  the  Evening,  and  continue  all  Night,  till 
near  that  time  the  next  Morning:  During  which  interval. 
We  are  trimblcd  with  stinking  l-t^s  and  Mists  off  Shore, 
which  by  return  of  the  Sca-Breezes  upon  the  opposite 
Points  are  all  driven  away ;  and  we  have  the  benefit  of 
them,  in  a  curious  fresh  Gale,  till  about  5  in  the  After- 
aooB. 

And  here   let  me   note   it    for  a  general    Observation, 
I  That  in  these  and  all  other  Places  within  the  Tropicks  (as 
271 


A   DISCOURSE   OF  WINDS 

far  as  ever  I  took  Notice)  the  Wind  is  drawn  by  the  Land. 
For  if  an  Island  or  Head-Land,  were  inclining  to  a  circular 
Form,  the  Sea  and  Land-Breezes  fall  in  diametrically 
opposite  to  that  part  where  you  are.  So  that  if  you  are  on 
the  South-side,  the  Sea-Breeze  shall  be  at  South,  and  the 
Land-Breeze  (when  it  comes  in  its  Season)  at  North. 

In  getting  on  the  Coast,  we  indeavour  to  fall  in  with 
Cape  Mount  or  Cape  Miserada,  which  is  about  1 8  Leagues 
to  the  E.  S.  Eastward  thereof ;  and  after  that  wc  double 
Cape  Palmas  (whence  as  aforesaid,  the  Land  trends  away 
E.  by  N.)  the  Current  near  the  shore  sets  upon  that  Pcnnt 
down  into  the  Bite.  But  in  getting  off,  we  as  much 
attempt  (if  possible)  to  lay  hold  of  St.  Thomas ;  and 
thence  to  run  to  the  Southward  of  the  Line,  perhaps  3  or 
4  Degrees ;  for  the  further  Southerly  we  go,  the  stroi^^er 
we  find  the  Gales,  and  more  beneficial  for  getting  ofF  the 
African  Coast ;  but  those  who  keep  to  the  Northward 
thereof,  generally  meet  with  more  Calms ;  and  consequently 
longer  Voyages  ensue.  In  or  about  those  Latitudes  we 
continue,  till  we  are  got  between  25  and  30  Degrees  to  the 
Westward  of  Cape  Lopez  de  Gonsalvo,  and  then  wc  cross 
again  to  go  either  for  England  or  the  West-Indies.  But 
by  the  way  let  me  observe  to  you,  that  when  once  we  arc 
to  the  Westward  of  the  said  Cape,  and  in  South  Latitude, 
the  Current  sets  Northerly,  and  the  Wind  to  20  Degrees 
of  Latitude,  is  at  E.  S.  E.  as  (to  the  like  number  of 
Degrees)  on  the  North-side  of  the  Line  it  blows  at  E.  N.  E. 
Neither  did  I  ever  observe  any  Mutation  of  the  Cur- 
rents, unless  in  the  Tornado-Season,  when  during  their 
blowing,  they  commonly  set  to  Wind-ward ;  tho*  perhaps 
the  Moon  upon  Full  and  Change,  may  have  the  like 
Influence  there,  as  in  other  Places ;  but  I  never  took  any 
particular  notice  thereof. 

The  said  Tornadoes  usually  come  in  the  Beginning  of 
April,  and  seldom  relinquish  the  Gold  Coast  till  July 
commences,  and  with  frequent  Visits  make  us  sensible  of 
their  Qualities.  We  have  sometimes  three  or  four  in  a 
day ;  but  then  their  Continuance  is  but  short ;  perhaps  not 
above  two  Hours,  and  the  Strength  or  Fury  (it  may  be) 

272 


OF  WINDS  PECULIAR  TO  SOME  COASTS 

About  a  quarter  or  half  an  Hour  ;  but  accompanied  with 
prodigious  Thunder,  Lightning  and  Rain ;  and  the 
Violence  of  the  Wind  so  extraordinary,  as  that  it  has  some- 
times rolled  up  the  Lead  wherewith  the  Houses  are  cover 'd, 
ms  close  and  compactly,  as  possible  it  could  be  done  by  the 
An  of  Man.  The  Name  implies  a  Variety  of  Winds  :  But 
the  Strength  of  ihem  is  generally  at  S.  E.  and  by  Ships 
thai  arc  bound  off  the  Coast,  they  are  made  use  of  to  get 
lo  Windward, 

I  shall  conclude  with  that  most  worthy  Observation  of 
the  Season  wherein  the  Rains  begin  ;  which  on  the  Gold 
Coast  is  about  the  lOth  of  April  and  this  may  be  generally 
remarked,  from  13  d.  N.  to  15  d.  South  Latitude,  that 
they  follow  the  Sun  within  5  or  6  d.  And  so  proceed  with 
him  till  he  has  touched  the  Tropick,  and  returns  to  the 
like  Station  again.  This  I  shall  illustrate  by  the  following 
FLxample,  viz.  Cape  Corso  Castle  lies  in  4  d.  55  North. 
.■\bout  the  10th  of  April  the  Sun  has  near  12  degrees  N. 
Oecltnation.  At  that  Time  the  Rains  begin,  and  continue 
with  the  Inhabitants  of  that  Place,  untill  he  has  performed 
his  Course  to  the  greatest  Obliquity  from  off  the  Equator, 
and  rcturocd  to  the  tike  Position  South.  The  same  I 
suppose  may  be  observed,  and  understood  of  other  Places 
•tthin  the  Tropicks. 

The  Variation  (of  which  in  the  Year  1680,  I  made 
frequent  Observations)  was  2d.  14  m.  Westerly  :  And  it 
generally  flows  at  the  aforesaid  place  S.  S.  E.  and  N.  N.  W. 
upon  the  Full  and  Change.  The  Water  rising  upon  Spring 
itdes  about  six  or  seven  Foot  up  and  down.  I  remain. 
Sir. 

Your  Humble  Servant, 

Henry  Greenhill. 


'-j-'r 


yb,  1698. 


Upon  the  Receipt  of  this  from  the  Gentleman  aforesaid, 
I  Wrote  to  him  again,  to  have  his  Opinion  about  what  I 
■We  said  conccmmg  the  particular  Longitude,  in  which 
1^  hest  to  cross  the  Line,  in  going  from  Guinea  to  the 

»ot.  u.  273  s 


A   DISCOURSE   OF  WINDS 

West-Indies  :  And  so  much  of  his  Answer  as  concerns  this 
Matter  was  in  these  Words. 


Mr.  Greenhill's  second  Letter. 
Sir, 

I  DO  not  dissent  from  Crossing  the  Line  at  35  or  36  d. 
Longitude,  Westward  of  Cape  Lopes,  and  it  may  as 
well  be  done  at  30  provided  the  Breezes  continue 
fresh.  But  if  we  have  but  little  Winds,  we  generally 
run  on  the  South-side  of  the  Line,  till  we  reach  the  distance 
West :  And  then  crossing  we  steer  away  West  North  West, 
and  West  by  North  for  Barbadoes. 

And  this  you  may  observe,  (as  I  have  already  hinted  to 
you,)  that  the  further  we  keep  to  the  Southward  of  the 
Line,  the  fresher,  and  consequently  more  advantageous  the 
Breezes  are. 
I  remain  Sir, 

Your  obliged  Friend, 

And  most  humble  Servant, 

Henry  Greenhill. 

And  here  I  judge  it  will  not  be  unacceptable  to  the 
Reader  to  insert  two  other  Letters  from  an  Experienced 
Captain  of  a  Ship,  because  they  have  a  general  Relation  to 
the  Subject  I  am  now  upon,  as  well  as  to  the  Coast  of 
Guinea  in  particular. 

Part  of  two  Letters  from  Captain  John  Covant  ofPorthurj^  t$ 

a  Gentleman  in  London. 

LETTER  I 

Honoured  Sir, 

I  HAVE  sent  Mr.  Dampier^s  Book,  which  you  were 
pleased  to  send  me,  to  Captain  S — I  have  gone 
through  it,  and  find  it  very  well  worth  my  time,  being 
very  delightsome,  and  I  believe  true. 
I  have  made  some  Remarks  on  it,  as  having  found  tbe 
like  of  what  he  asserts,  in  other  places.    At  p.  94,  meodoD 

274 


OF  WINDS  PECULIAR  TO  SOME  COASTS 

»  made  of  the  Sucking-Fish,  or  Rcmora  (as  Mr.  Dampier 
calls  it).  These  arc  mighiy  plenty  on  the  Coast  of  Angola 
and  at  Madagascar,  and  between  Cape  Lopes  de  Gonsalvas 
and  the  River  Gabon.  They  are  shaped  as  he  describes 
them. 

As  to  what  he  saith,  p.  loi,  1  have  found  the  Indians  in 
the  Gulph  of  Florida,  offering  false  Ambergreece  to  sale, 
and  particularly  in  Lat.  25  d.  where  in  the  Year  1693, 
several  of  our  Men  were  cheated  with  it. 

What  Mr,  Dampier  saith  of  the  Laziness  of  the 
People  of  Mindanao,  p.  333,  the  very  same  may  be  said 
oif  the  People  of  Loango  on  the  Coast  of"  Guinea  exactly. 

Their  manner  of  Worship,  mentioned  p.  345,  is  the 
very  sunc  with  what  I  have  seen  at  Algier,  on  the  Coast 
of  Barbary. 

The  Nocturnal  Dancings  used  by  the  Hottantotts  at 
the  Cape  of  good  Hope  every  Full  and  New  Moon,  p.  521, 
are  also  practised  by  the  Inhabitants  of  Loango,  Molinbo 
and  Cabcndo. 

I  shall  give  you  the  trouble  of  a  small  Relation  of  a 
Pauage  to  Loango  in  the  Year  1693.  When  we  came  so  far 
to  the  Southward  as  2  d.  40  m.  N.  Lat.  and  8  d.  25  m. 
Long.  Westward  from  the  Meridian  of  Lundy,  it  being 
3i«  of  March,  we  had  small  Wind  at  S.  S.  W.  and  S.  W. 
with  showers  of  Rain.  There  we  met  with  prodigious 
ho»Is  of  Fish,  consisting  chiefly  of  Albicores  and  Bonetoes. 
r?)crr  were  also  great  numbers  of  Sharks;  some  10  or  12 
!oot  long.  For  diversion  we  catched  above  100  of  them 
u  times.  The  other  Fish  we  took  as  we  had  Occasion, 
&esh  and  fresh :  and  one  day  we  caught  a  Barrel  of 
them  with  empty  Hooks.  These  shoals  of  Fish  kept 
u  Company  till  we  were  under  the  Equator  in  Long. 
4  d.  3  m.  Eastward  of  the  Meridian  of  Lundy.  This 
I  April  27.  Wc  had  the  Winds  at  S.  E.  and  S.  E.  by 
.  fresh  Gales  and  clear  Weather,  but  a  mighty  Leeward 
At  the  Fishes  parting  with  us  that  Day,  I 
I  an  Albicore  that  weighed  75  /.  It  is  a  mighty 
I  Fish,  so  that  the  Fishing-Craft  must  be  very  strong 
•  tike  them. 

27s 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

The  City  of  Loango  I  find  to  lye  in  Lat.  4  d.  30  m. 
S.  and  Longi.  18  d.  8  m.  Eastward  from  the  Meridian  of 
Lundy:  from  whence  I  took  my  departure,  bound  for 
Jamaica,  Oct.  7,  1693. 

When  we  find  the  Winds  South,  S.  by  W.  and  S.  S.  W. 
fresh  Gales;  veerable  to  S.  W.  and  back  to  South,  we 
stand  ofF  to  the  Westward  with  Larboard  Tacks  on  Board, 
till  we  get  14  d.  Long,  to  the  Westward  of  Loango.  And 
there  we  find  the  Winds  veerable  from  S.  S.  E.  to  S.  E. 
fresh  Gales.  When  we  get  34  d.  to  the  Westward  of 
Loango,  we  are  then  16  d.  Westward  from  the  Meridian 
of  Lundy :  and  there  we  find  the  Winds  veerable  from 
S.  E.  by  E.  to  E.  by  S.  and  East :  and  so  they  continue 
blowing  fresh  as  we  will  still  run  to  the  Westward  between 
the  Lat.  of  3  and  4  d.  South,  till  we  make  the  Island 
Fernande  Noronho,  which  I  find  to  lye  in  Lat.  3  d.  54  m. 
30  s.  South.  And  by  the  Experience  of  two  Voyages  have 
found  its  Long.  40  d.  59  m.  Westward  from  Loango, 
and  22  d.  51  m.  from  the  Meridian  of  Lundy.  Tins 
Island  appears  with  a  very  high  Pyramid.  And  when  wc 
come  close  to  it,  the  Pyramid  looks  like  a  large  Cathedral. 
On  the  N.  W.  side  is  a  small  Bay  to  anchor  in.  But 
Ships  must  come  pretty  near  the  Shore,  because  it  is  deep 
Water.  Here  is  Plenty  of  Fish.  And  on  the  Island  is 
some  fresh  Water,  and  low  Shrubs  of  Trees.  We  could 
see  no  living  Creature  on  it  but  Dogs.  It  was  formerly 
inhabited  by  the  Portuguese,  but  the  Dutch  having  then 
War  with  them,  took  it,  and  carried  the  Portuguese  all 
away.  The  Body  of  the  Island  I  judge  to  be  about  4 
Miles  long,  lying  N.  E.  and  S.  W.  near  on  the  North-adc 
are  some  Rocks,  pretty  high  above  Water ;  and  many  Birds, 
as  Sea-GuUs  and  Man-of- War-Birds  (which  are  something 
like  our  Kites  in  England).  I  find  the  Current  sets  strong 
to  the  N.  W.  The  Variation  very  little.  From  thence  i 
steered  N.  W.  with  fresh  Gales  S.  E.  and  at  E.  S.  E.  in 
order  to  cross  the  Equator,  and  designing  to  make  the 
Island  Tobago:  which  by  my  Run  from  the  aforesaid 
Island,  I  find  to  lye  in  Lat.  11  d.  33  m.  North  Long. 
Westward  of  Fernando,  28  d.  19  m.  ^.     The  MeriditB 

276 


OF  WINDS  PECULIAR  TO  SOME  COASTS 

disance  from  Fernando  1721  Miles  ■^.  And  by  my 
RecTsoning  or  Journal  Tobago  is  West  from  the  Meridian 
of  the  Isle  of  Lundy  51  d.  10  m.  ■^.  In  this  Passage 
between  the  said  Islands  we  find  strange  Ripling  and 
Cockling  Seas,  ready  to  leap  in  upon  the  Ship's  Deck ; 
which  makes  us  think  the  Current  to  be  strong :  And  it 
seems  to  be  occasioned  by  the  great  River  on  the  main 
Land ;  which  is  not  far  from  us  in  this  Passage.  Tobago 
is  an  high  Island  with  a  brave  sandy  Bay  on  the  S.  W. 
adc,  where  the  Dutch  had  formerly  a  great  Fort,  till 
molested  by  the  English  in  the  last  Dutch  War.  From 
this  Island  I  shaped  my  Course  for  Jamaica,  and  found  the 
N.  E.  Corner  to  lye  in  Lat,  18  d.  North;  and  in  Long. 
West  from  Tobago  13  d.  The  Meridian  distance  from 
Tobago  is  749  Miles  West,  In  our  Passage  we  saw  no 
Land  or  Island,  till  we  made  the  N.  E.  end  of  Jamaica: 
which  lyeth  in  Long.  West  from  the  Meridian  of  Lundy 
64  d.  10  m.  and  West  from  the  City  of  Loango  82  d. 
t8  m.  I  shall  only  add  that  I  am  of  Opinion  that  the  Gallo- 
pagos  Islands  do  lye  a  great  deal  farther  to  the  Westward 
than  our  Hydrographers  do  place  them,  according  as  Mr. 
Dampier  hints,  p.  1I7  of  his  "  Voyage  round  the  World." 
I  im, 

Sir, 

Your  most  humble  Servant, 

John  Covant. 
Pvtborr,  Oti*i.  10.  1698. 


Pgrt  tf  a  Kftnd  Lrtter  fr»m  Captain  Covant  ;  dattd from  Br'tUal, 
Deitmb,  10.  1697. 


1 


^Hntani 


LETTER   II 

Sm. 

OURS  of  the  6th  Instant  came  to  my  Hands, 
with    the  inclosed   Queries,  which    1  shall   en- 
deavour to  answer  in  part,  as  far  as  my  memory 
will  assist  me,  being  now  from  home,  and  at  a 
from  my  Journals,  &c. 


MR. 

Y 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

ANSWERS  TO  THE  QUERIES 

1 .  The  common  Trade- Winds  on  the  Coast  of  Angola, 
blow  from  the  S.  W.  to  South,  till  about  1 2  d.  Long,  from 
the  Meridian  of  the  Isle  of  Lundy. 

2.  I  have  found  them  always  in  the  same  Quarter,  and 
not  subject  to  shift  in  all  the  Time  I  have  used  this  Coast, 
except  that  at  a  small  Distance  off  the  Shore,  they  are 
sometimes  a  Point  more  to  the  Westward. 

3.  The  Dry  Season  on  this  Coast  I  observed  to  be  from 
the  latter  end  of  April  to  September;  tho*  sometimes 
intermix'd  with  some  pleasant  Showers  of  Rain.  I  cannot 
be  so  punctual  as  to  the  Time  of  the  Wet  Seasons. 

4.  The  true  Sea-Breeze  I  have  commonly  found  here 
to  be  from  W.  S.  W.  to  W.  by  S.  if  it  be  fair  Weather : 
and  the  Land-Breeze  is  at  E.  by  N.  But  if  a  Tornado 
happens,  it  causes  the  Winds  to  shift  all  round  the 
Compass,  and  at  last  it  settles  at  S.  W.  which  is  the 
former  true  Trade- Wind. 

I  am  yours 

John  Co v ant. 


278 


CHAP.    VI 

Of  Stormj 

•f  tut  mart  fiera  hrtwten  thr  Tropickt.  Presages  of 
thf  awing  •f  Ntrlhs^  the  Times  and  Plates  where  they  blew  : 
Signs  tf  their  Apfrtath  :  N.  Banks.  A  Chscalatta  North,  A 
Svrth  ktneficial  t»  Ships  going  from  Campeacky  to  Jamaica,  A 
vtrj  uit(»tmm«ii  way  of  wearing  a  Ship  in  a  North.  Of  Souths, 
tk*  Timet  and  Plattt  where  they  blow,  A  Description  of  a  South 
€l  JaniAM,  anJ  at  the  Bay  of  Campeachy  :  Muih  Fish  iHPd  by 
that  Sttrm,  Of  Hurricanes.  A  Description  of  a  terrible  one  at 
jtntegoa,  where  Abundance  of  Fish  and  Sea-Fowls  were  destroyed  by 
it.  The  £ffrrence  between  North-Banks^  and  the  Clouds  before  an 
Hstrricane  :  the  latter  adorned  with  radiant  Colours.  Tuffhons  in 
tfu  Eeist'Miei  the  same  with  Hurricanes  in  the  fVest.  Of 
AfwuMNj  in  the  Eatl-Indies,  A  Storm  called  by  the  Portuguese, 
the  EJ/phanta,  which  is  the  violenteit  Monsoon  of  that  Season. 

•^TORMS  within  the  Tropicks  are  generally  known 
to  us  hy  some  Name  or  other,  to  distinguish  them 
I  from  other  common  Winds:  and  though  Storms 
arc  rot  so  frequent  there,  as  they  are  in  Latitudes 
acirer  the  Poles;  yet  are  they  nevertheless  expected  yearly 
m  their  proper  Months;  and  when  they  do  come,  they 
Mow  exceeding  fierce,  though  indeed  some  years  they  do 
WK  come  at  all,  or  at  least  do  not  blow  with  that  Fierce- 
oot  as  at  other  times.  And  as  these  Winds  are  commonly 
*«y  fierce,  so  are  they  but  of  a  short  Continuance,  in 
Comparison  with  Storms  that  we  meet  with  in  higher 
latitudes. 

In  the  West-Indies  there  are  three  sorts,  viz.  Norths, 
Somhs,  and  Hurricanes :  In  the  East-Indies  there  are  only 
^•ore,  viz.  Monsoons  and  TufFoons. 
279 


A    DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

All  these  sorts  of  violent  Storms,  except  the  Norths, 
are  expected  near  one  time  of  the  Year :  and  this  is  taken 
notice  of  by  those  that  have  been  in  any  of  them;  that 
they  give  certain  Presages  of  their  being  at  hand,  several 
Hours  before  they  come.  Norths  are  violent  Winds,  that 
frequently  blow  in  the  Bay  of  Me»co  from  October  till 
March  :  They  are  chiefly  expected  near  the  Full  or  Change 
of  the  Moon,  all  that  Time  of  the  Year,  but  they  are  most 
violent  in  December  and  January.  These  Winds  arc  not 
confined  to  the  Bay  of  Mexico  only,  but  there  they  arc 
most  frequent,  and  Rage  with  the  greatest  Violence.  They 
blow  on  the  North-side  of  Cuba  very  fierce  too,  and  in 
the  Gulph  of  Florida :  as  also  about  Hispaniola,  Jamaica, 
&c.  and  in  the  Channel  between  Jamaica  and  Portabel ;  and 
in  all  the  West-Indian  Sea  between  the  Islands  and  the 
Main  as  high  as  the  Island  Trinidado.  But  from  Jamaica 
Eastward,  except  on  the  North-side  of  the  Island  His- 
paniola, they  blow  no  harder  than  a  pretty  brisk  Sea  Wind. 
They  are  here  at  W.  N.  W.  or  N.  W.  though  in  the  Bay 
of  Mexico  they  blow  strongest  at  N.  N.  W.  and  this  b  the 
Season  of  Westerly  Winds  in  these  East-parts  of  the  West- 
Indies,  as  I  have  before  noted  in  the  third  Chapter  of 
this  Discourse.  I  shall  be  most  particular  of  them  that 
blow  in  the  Bay  of  Mexico,  and  what  Signs  they  give  us 
beforehand. 

Commonly  before  a  North  the  Weather  is  very  serene 
and  fair,  the  Sky  clear,  and  but  little  Wind,  and  that  too 
veering  from  its  proper  Point,  or  the  common  Trade- Wind 
of  the  Coast ;  and  breathing  gently  at  S.  at  S.  W.  and 
West  a  Day  or  two  before  the  North  comes.  The  Sea  also 
gives  notice  of  a  Storm,  by  an  extraordinary  and  long  Ebb. 
For  a  Day  or  two  before  a  North,  there  will  be  hardly  any 
discernable  Flood,  but  a  constant  ebbing  of  the  Sea.  And 
the  Sea-Fowls  also  before  a  Storm,  do  commonly  hover 
over  the  Land,  which  they  do  not  at  other  times  use  to  do, 
in  such  great  Flights  and  Numbers.  All  these  Signs  con- 
curring, may  give  any  Man  notice  of  an  approaching  Storm, 
but  the  greatest  and  most  remarkable  Sign  of  a  North,  is 
a  very  black  Cloud  in  the  N.  W.  rising  above  the  Horizon 

280 


OF  STORMS 

>  about  loor  12  degrees;  the  upper  Edge  of  the  Cloud 
i  very  even  and  smooth,  and  when  once  the  upper 
of  the  Cloud  is  6,  8,  jo  or  12  degrees  high,  there 
t  remains  in  that  even  form  parallel  to  the  Horizon  with- 
out any  Motion ;  and  this  sometimes  2  or  3  Days  before 
the  Siorm  comes:  At  other  times  not  above  12  or  14 
Hours,  but  never  less. 

This  Cloud  lying  so  near  the  Horizon,  is  not  seen  but 
in  the  Mornings  or  Evenings,  at  least  it  does  not  appear 
so  bUck  as  then  ;  this  is  called  by  Englif^h  Seamen  a  North 
Bank,  and  whenever  we  see  such  a  Cloud  in  that  part 
of  the  World,  and  in  the  Months  before-mentioned,  we 
certainly  provide  for  a  Storm ;  and  tho'  sometimes  it  may 
happen  that  such  a  Cloud  may  appear  several  Mornings 
and  Evenings,  and  we  may  not  feel  the  Effects  of  it,  or  but 
very  little ;  yet  we  always  provide  against  it ;  for  a  North 
never  comes  without  such  a  foreboding  Cloud.  But  if  the 
Winds  also  whiffle  about  to  the  South,  with  fair  flattering 
_Weather,  it  never  fails.  While  the  Wind  remains  at 
L  S.  W.  or  any  thing  to  the  South  of  the  West,  it  blows 
/  faint ;  but  when  once  it  comes  to  the  North  of  the 
^est,  it  begins  to  be  brisk  and  veers  about  presently  to  the 
Torth-West,  where  it  blows  hard  ;  yet  does  it  not  stay 
lere  long  before  it  veers  to  the  N.  N.  W.  and  there  it 
w»  strongest  and  longest.  Sometimes  it  continues  24 
or  even  48  Hours,  and  sometimes  longer.  When  the 
Wind  first  comes  to  the  N.  W.  if  the  black  Cloud  rises  and 
comes  away,  it  may  chance  to  give  but  one  Flurry,  like 
that  of  a  Tornado;  and  then  the  Sky  grows  clear  again; 
>nd  either  the  Wind  continues  at  N.  W.  blowing  only  a 
Siisk  Gale,  which  the  Jamaica  Seamen  call  a  Chocolatta 
North,  or  else  it  veers  about  again  to  the  East,  and  settles 
there  But  if  when  the  Wind  comes  to  the  N.  W.  the 
Qood  still  remains  settled,  the  Wind  then  continues  blow- 
■■"5  Very  fierce  even  so  long  as  the  black  Bank  continues 
far  the  Horizon.  It  is  commonly  pretty  dry  and  clear, 
hot  Moietimcs  much  Kain  falls  with  a  North :  and  tho' 
tke  Qouds  which  bring  Rain,  come  from  the  N.  W.  and 
N.  N,  W,  yet  the  black  Bank  near  the  Horizon  seems  not 
z8l 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

to  move  till  the  Heart  of  the  Storm  is  broke.  When  the 
Wind  starts  from  the  N.  N.  W.  to  the  N.  *tis  a  sign  that 
the  Violence  of  the  Storm  is  past,  especially  if  it  veers  to 
the  East  of  the  North ;  for  then  it  soon  flies  about  to  the 
East,  and  there  settles  at  its  usual  Point  and  brings  fsiir 
Weather :  But  if  it  goes  back  from  the  N.  to  the  N.  W.  it 
will  last  a  day  or  two  longer,  as  fierce  as  befcn^ ;  and  not 
without  a  great  deal  of  Rain. 

When  our  Jamaica  Logwood-ships  are  coming  loaden 
out  of  the  Bay  of  Campeachy  in  the  North-Season,  they 
are  glad  to  have  a  North.  For  a  good  North  will  bring 
them  almost  to  Jamaica ;  neither  have  any  of  our  Vessels 
miscarried  in  one  of  these  Storms  that  I  did  ever  hear  of, 
though  sometimes  much  shattered ;  but  the  Spaniards  do 
commonly  suflFer  by  them,  and  there  is  seldom  a  Year  but 
one  or  more  of  them  are  cast  away  in  the  Bay  of  Gim- 
peachy  in  this  Season :  for  they  don't  work  their  Ships  as 
we  do  ours.  They  always  bring  their  Ships  too  under  a 
Fore-sail  and  Mizen,  but  never  under  a  Main-sail  and 
Mizen,  nor  yet  under  the  Mizen  alone ;  but  we  generally 
bring  too  under  Main-sail  and  Mizen;  and  if  the  Wind 
grows  too  fierce  we  bring  her  under  a  Mizen  only ;  and  if 
we  cannot  maintain  that,  then  we  balast  our  Mizen :  which 
is  by  rifling  and  taking  up  great  Part  of  the  Sail.  If  after 
all  this,  the  Winds  and  Seas  are  too  high  for  us,  then  we 
put  before  it,  but  not  before  we  have  tryed  our  utmost, 
especially  if  we  are  near  a  Lee-Shore.  On  the  contrary, 
the  Spaniards  in  the  West-Indies,  (as  I  said  before)  l3rc 
under  a  Fore-sail  and  Mizen :  But  this  must  needs  be  an 
extraordinary  Strain  to  a  Ship,  especially  if  she  be  long. 
Indeed  there  is  this  Convenience  in  it,  when  they  arc 
minded  to  put  away  before  it,  *tis  but  hailing  up  the 
Mizen,  and  the  Fore-Sail  veers  the  Ship  presently :  and  I 
judge  it  is  for  that  Reason  they  do  it.  For  when  the 
Wind  comes  on  so  fierce  that  they  can  no  longer  keep  on 
a  Wind,  they  put  right  afore  it,  and  so  continue  till  the 
Storm  ceaseth,  or  the  Land  takes  them  up  (/.  e.  till  they 
are  run  a-shore).  I  knew  two  Spaniards  did  so,  while  I 
was   in   the   Bay.      One   was   a   King's  Ship,    called  the 

282 


OF  STORMS 

PistatUre.  She  run  ashore  on  a  sandy  Bay,  a  Mile  to  the 
Westward  of  the  River  Tobasco.  The  other  was  come 
within  four  or  five  Leagues  of  the  Shore,  and  the  Storm 
ceasing,  she  escaped  Shipwreck,  but  was  taken  by  Captain 
Hcwet,  Commander  of  a  Privateer,  who  was  then  in  the 
Bay.  Her  Main-mast  and  Mizen  were  cut  down  in  the 
StcB-m.  Both  these  ships  came  from  La  Vera  Cruz,  and 
were  in  the  North-side  of  the  Bay  when  first  the  Storms 
took  them.  And  tho'  we  don't  use  this  Method,  yet  we 
find  means  to  wear  our  Ships  as  well  as  they ;  for  if  after 
the  Mizen  is  hall'd  up  and  furled,  if  then  the  Ship  will 
not  wear,  we  must  do  it  with  some  Head-sail,  which  yet 
•ometimes  puts  us  to  our  Shifts-  As  I  was  once  in  a  very 
violent  Storm,  sailing  from  Virginia,  mentioned  in  my 
"Voyage  round  the  World,"  we  scudded  before  the  Wind 
and  Sea  some  time,  with  only  our  bare  Poles ;  and  the  Ship 
by  the  mistake  of  him  that  con'd,  brochcd  too,  and  lay  in 
the  Trough  of  the  Sea  ;  which  then  went  so  high  that  every 
Wave  threatned  to  overwhelm  us.  And  indeed  if  any 
one  of  them  had  broke  in  upon  our  Deck,  it  might  have 
foundrcd  us.  The  Master,'  whose  Fault  this  was,  rav'd 
tike  a  mad  Man,  and  called  for  an  Axe  to  cut  the  Mizen 
Shrotujs,  and  turn  the  Mizen  Mast  over  Board :  which 
indeed  might  have  been  an  Expedient  to  bring  her  to  her 
Course  again.  Captain  Davis  was  then  Quarter-master, 
and  a  more  experienced  Seaman  than  the  Master.  He  bid 
him  hold  his  Hand  a  little,  in  hopes  to  bring  her  some 
other  way  to  her  Course :  The  Captain  also  was  of  his 
Mind.  Now  our  Main-yard  and  Fore-yard  were  lowered 
down  a  Port  last,  as  we  call  it,  that  is,  down  pretty  nigh 
the  Deck,  and  the  Wind  blew  so  fierce  that  we  did  not 
dare  to  loose  any  Hcad-sait,  for  they  must  have  blown 
away  if  we  had,  neither  could  all  the  Men  in  the  Ship  have 
furled  them  again ;  therefore  we  had  no  hopes  of  doing 
it  that  way.  I  was  at  this  time  on  the  Deck  with  some 
ochert  of  our  Men;  and  among  the  rest  one  Mr.  John 
Smallhone,  who  was  the  main  Instrument  at  that  Time  of 

•  Tha  m>Mtr  ("•rhoic  Fault  this  was")  witi  Ambrose  Cowley.     The 
cspuiB  ■«•  John  Cook. 

J83 


i 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

saving  us  all.  Come !  said  he  to  me,  let  us  go  a  little  way 
up  the  Fore-shrouds,  it  may  be  that  may  make  the  Ship 
wear;  for  I  have  been  doing  it  before  now.  He  never 
tarried  for  an  Answer,  but  run  forward  presently,  and  I 
followed  him.  We  went  up  the  Shrouds  Half-mast  up, 
and  there  we  spread  abroad  the  Flaps  of  our  Coats,  and 
presently  the  Ship  wore.^  I  think  we  did  not  stay  there 
above  three  minutes  before  we  gwi'd  our  Point  and  came 
down  again,  but  in  this  time  the  Wind  was  got  into  our 
Main-sail,  and  had  blown  it  loose ;  and  tho*  the  Mwi-yard 
was  down  a  Port-last  and  our  Men  were  got  on  the  Yard 
as  many  as  could  lye  one  by  another,  besides  the  Deck  full 
of  Men,  and  all  striving  to  furl  that  Sail,  yet  could  wc  not 
do  it,  but  were  forced  to  cut  it  all  along  by  the  Head-rope, 
and  so  let  it  fall  down  on  the  Deck. 

Having  largely  treated  of  Norths,  I  shall  next  give 
some  Account  of  Souths. 

South  Winds  are  also  very  violent  Winds.  I  have  not 
heard  any  thing  of  these  sorts  of  Storms,  but  at  Jamaica  or 
by  Jamaica  Sailors.  The  Time  when  they  blow  at  Jamaica 
is  about  June,  July  or  August,  Months  that  Norths  never 
blow  in.  The  greatest  Stress  of  Wind  in  these  Storms  is 
at  South,  from  whence  it's  probable  they  are  named  Souths. 
In  what  they  differ  from  the  Hurricanes  that  rage  among 
the  Caribbee  Islands,  I  know  not,  unless  in  this,  that  they 
are  more  constant  to  one  Point  of  the  Compass,  or  that 
they  come  sooner  in  the  Year  than  Hurricanes  do,  but 
those  Storms  call'd  Hurricanes,  had  never  been  known  at 
Jamaica  when  I  was  there.  Yet  since  I  have  heard  that 
they  have  felt  the  Fury  of  them  several  Times.  But  I  was 
at  Jamaica  when  there  happened  a  violent  South.  It  made 
great  Havock  in  the  Woods;  and  blew  down  many  great 
Trees ;  but  there  was  no  great  Damage  done  by  it.  Port 
Royal  was  in  great  Danger  then  of  being  washed  away,  for 
the  Sea  made  a  Breach  clear  through  the  Town ;  and  if  the 
Violence   of  Weather   had   continued    but   a   few  Hours 

*  Cf.  Anson's  voyage :  "  As  we  dared  not  venture  any  sail  abroad,  wt 
were  obliged  to  make  use  of  an  expedient  which  answered  our  purpose ; 
this  was  putting  the  helm  a-weather,  and  manning  the  fbre-shrouds." 

284 


OF  STORMS 

longer,  many  of  the  Houses  had  been  washed  away :  For 
the  Point  of  l^nd  on  which  that  Town  stands,  is  Sand  ; 
which  began  to  wash  away  apace :  but  the  Storm  ceasing, 
there  was  no  further  Damage.  This  was  in  July  or  August 
in  the  Year  1674. 

1  was  afterwards  in  the  Bay  of  Campeachy,  when  we 
had  a  much  more  violent  Storm  than  this,  called  also  by 
the  Logwood-cutters  a  South.  It  happened  some  time  in 
June  1676. 

I  was  then  cutting  Logwood  in  the  Western  Creek  of 
the  West  Lagune.  Two  days  before  this  Storm  began,  the 
Wind  whiffled  about  to  the  South,  and  back  again  to  the 
East,  «nd  blew  very  faintly.  The  Weather  also  was  very 
(air,  and  the  Mcn-of-War-Birds  came  hovering  over  the 
Land  in  great  Numbers ;  which  is  very  unusual  for  them  to 
do.  This  made  some  of  our  Lc^wood-Cutters  say,  that 
we  should  have  some  Ships  come  hither  in  a  short  Time ; 
for  they  believed  it  was  a  certain  Token  of  the  Arrival  of 
Ships,  when  these  Birds  came  thus  hovering  over  the  Land. 
And  Ktme  of  them  said  they  had  lived  at  Barbadoes,  where 
it  was  generally  taken  Notice  of:  and  that  as  many  of 
these  Birds  as  they  saw  hovering  over  the  Town,  so  many 
Ship*  there  were  coming  thither.  And  according  to  that 
Rule  they  foolishly  guess'd  that  here  were  a  great  many 
Ships  coming  hither  at  that  Time;  tho'  'tis  impossible  that 
they  could  imagine  there  could  be  the  hundredth  part  of 
the  Ships  arrive,  that  they  saw  Birds  fly  over  their  Heads. 
But  that  which  I  did  most  admire  was,  to  see  the  Water 
keep  ebbing  for  two  Days  together,  without  any  Flood,  till 
the  Creek,  where  we  lived,  was  almost  dry.  There  was 
commonly  at  low  Water  seven  or  eight  Foot  Water;  but 
now  not  above  3,  even  in  the  middle  of  the  Creek. 

About  4  a  Clock  the  2d  Day  after  this  unusual  Ebb, 
the  Sky  looked  very  black,  and  the  Wind  sprung  up  fresh 
at  S,  E.  and  increasing.  In  less  than  two  Hours  time  it 
blew  down  all  our  Huts,  but  one;  and  that  with  much 
Labour  we  propt  up  with  Pt«ts,  and  with  Ropes  cast  over 
the  Ridge,  and  fasining  both  ends  to  stumps  of  Trees,  we 
secured  the  Roof  from  flying  away.     In  it  we  huddled  all 

285 


A    DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 


TcigtthfT  t£]:  zht  Scorm  rrayii  It  rmed  tot  hard  the 
ZTGLVtst  "part  of  the  Scorm,  and  aboot  rvo  Hours  after  the 
Wind  first  spring  up,  rhc  Watfxs  Aowcz  raj  fast  in.  The 
next  Morning  it  was  as  high  as  the  Banks  of  the  Creek : 
which  was  higher  than  I  had  ctct  sees  it  before. 

The  Flood  stili  increased,  and  run  faster  up  the  Creek 
than  ever  I  saw  it  do  in  the  greatest  Sprii^-Tide ;  which 
was  somewhat  strange,  because  the  Wind  was  at  South, 
which  is  right  off  the  Shore  on  this  Coast.  Nathcr  did 
the  Rain  any  thing  abate,  and  by  ten  a  Clock  in  the 
Morning  the  Banks  of  the  Creek  were  all  overflown. 
About  twelve  at  Noon  we  brought  our  Canoa  to  the  side 
of  our  Hut,  and  fastned  it  to  the  Stump  of  a  Tree  that 
stood  by  it ;  that  being  the  only  Refuge  that  we  could  now 
expect ;  for  the  Land  a  little  way  within  the  Banks  of  the 
Creek  is  much  lower  than  where  we  were :  So  that  there 
was  no  walking  through  the  Woods  because  of  the  Water. 
Besides,  the  Trees  were  torn  up  by  the  Roots,  and  tumbled 
down  so  strangely  a-cross  each  other,  that  it  was  almost 
impossible  to  pass  through  them. 

The  Storm  continued  all  tins  Day  and  the  Night 
following  till  ten  a  Clock :  then  it  b^n  to  abate,  and  by 
two  in  the  Morning  it  was  quite  calm. 

This  Storm  made  very  strange  work  in  the  Woods  by 
tearing  up  the  Trees  by  the  Roots :  The  Ships  also  riding  at 
Trist  and  at  One-Bush-Key,  felt  the  Fury  of  it  to  Adr 
Sorrow;  for  of  four  that  were  riding  at  One-Bush-Key, 
three  were  driven  away  from  their  Anchors,  one  of  which 
was  blown  into  the  Woods  of  Beef-Island.  And  of  the 
four  Ships  that  were  at  Trist,  three  also  were  driven  from 
their  Anchors,  one  of  which  was  cast  up  about  twenty  Paces 
beyond  High-Water-Mark  on  the  Island  of  Trist.  The 
other  two  were  driven  off  to  Sea;  and  one  of  them  was 
never  heard  of  since. 

The  poor  Fish  also  suffered  extremely  by  this  Storm, 
for  we  saw  Multitudes  of  them  either  cast  on  the  Shore,  or 
floating  dead  on  the  Lagunes.  Yet  this  Storm  did  not 
reach  30  Leagues  to  Wind-ward  of  Trist,  for  Captiun 
Vaily  of  Jamaica,  went  hence  but  three  Days  before  the 

286 


OF  STORMS 

^^_  jan,  and  was  not  past  30  Leagues  off  when  we 
t  tt  so  6erce,  yet  be  felt  none  of  it ;  but  only  saw  very 
black  dismal  Clouds  to  the  Westward,  as  he  reported  at 
hit  Return  from  Jamaica  to  Trist  four  Months  after. 

tl  shall  speak  next  of  Hurricanes. 
These  arc  violent  Storms,  raging  chiefly  among  the 
ibbce  Islands;  though,  by  Relation,  Jamaica  has  of  late 
been  much  annoyed  by  them ;  but  it  has  been  since  the 
Time  of  my  being  there  They  are  expected  in  July, 
August  or  September. 

t These  Storms  also  as  well  as  the  Norths  or  Souths,  give 
te  Signs  of  thdr  Approach  before  they  come  on,  I 
e  not  been  in  any  one  of  them  my  self,  but  have  made 
Enquiry  of  many  Men  that  have,  and  they  all  agree  that 
cither  they  arc  preceded  by  flattering  unusual  small  Winds 
tad  very  fair  Weather,  or  by  a  great  Glut  of  Rain,  or  else 
both  Rains  and  Calms  together. 

I  shall  give  an  Instance  of  one  that  gave  such  Warning, 
happened  at  Antegoa  in  August  1681,  I  had  the  Relation 
it  from  Mr,  John  Smallbone,'  before-mentioned,  who 
I  Gunner  of  a  Ship  of  120  Tons  and  10  Guns,  com- 
loded  by  Capt.  Gadbury. 
Before  this  Storm  it  rained  two  Days  excessively,  then 
held  up  two  or  three  Days  more:  but  the  Sky  was 
Boded  and  appear'd  to  be  much  troubled,  yet  but  little 
^Tnd.  The  Planters  by  this  were  certain  of  a  Hurricane, 
warned  the  Ship- Commanders  to  provide  for  it,  especi- 
Capt.  Gadbury;  who  had  careen'd  his  Ship  in  Muskito 
■e  in  St.  John's  Harbour  but  a  little  before,  and  by  this 
ixning  given  him  by  the  Planters,  had  gotten  hts  Goods 
Board  again,  which  though  all  he  had,  yet  was  but 
ut  half  his  lading  of  Sugar,  Molosses  and  Rum.  He 
I  moored  his  Ship  as  secure  as  he  could,  with  all  his 
ties  and  Anchors,  besides  some  Cables  which  he  had 
)c  fast  ashore  to  great  Trees.  And  about  7  a  Clock 
[  Ercning  that  the  Storm  came,  he  dreading  it,  went 
with  all  his  Men,  and  retired  into  a  poor  Planter's 

'  Tbii  fohn  Smallbone  afterwards  accompanied  Uampiet  r>n  his  voyage 
^  Fmaetl  10  ibe  South  Seas. 

187 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

House  about  half  a  Mile  from  the  Shore.  By  that  Time 
he  and  his  Men  were  arrived  at  the  House,  which  was 
before  8  a  Clock ;  the  Wind  came  on  very  fierce  at  N.  E. 
and  veering  about  to  the  N.  and  N.  W.  settled  there,  bring- 
ing with  it  very  violent  Rains.  Thus  it  continued  about 
four  Hours,  and  then  fell  flat  calm,  and  the  Rain  ceased. 

In  this  Calm  he  sent  3  or  4  of  his  Men  down  to  the 
Cove  to  see  what  Condition  the  Ship  was  in,  and  they 
found  her  driven  ashore  dry  on  the  Sand,  lying  on  one 
side,  with  the  Head  of  her  Mast  sticking  into  the  Sand ; 
after  they  had  walk'd  round  her  and  view*d  her  a-while, 
they  returned  again  to  the  Capt.  to  give  him  an  Account 
of  the  Disaster,  and  made  as  much  haste  as  they  could, 
because  the  Wind  began  to  blow  hard  at  S.  W.  and  it 
blew  so  violently  before  they  recovered  the  House,  that 
the  Boughs  of  the  Trees  whipt  them  suflicientiy  before 
they  got  thither;  and  it  rained  as  hard  as  before.  The 
little  House  could  scarce  shelter  them  from  the  wet ;  for 
there  was  little  beside  the  Walls  standing:  For  the  ist 
Northerly  Gust  blew  away  great  part  of  the  Ridge  and 
most  of  the  Thatch.  Yet  there  they  staid  till  the  next 
Morning,  and  then  coming  to  the  Ship  found  her  almost 
upright ;  but  all  the  Goods  that  were  in  the  Hold  were 
wash'd  out,  and  the  Sugar  was  wash'd  out  of  the  Cask. 
Some  of  the  Rum  they  found;  a  Cask  in  one  place  and 
a  Cask  in  another :  some  on  the  Shore,  and  some  half  a 
Mile  in  the  Woods;  and  some  stav'd  against  the  Trees 
and  leek'd  out;  for  it  seems  there  had  been  a  violent 
Motion  in  the  Sea,  as  well  as  in  the  Air.  For  in  the 
Beginning  of  the  Night  when  the  N.  E.  Gust  raged,  the 
Sea  ebb'd  so  prodigiously,  or  else  was  driven  oflF  the  Shore 
by  the  Violence  of  the  Wind  so  far,  that  some  Ships 
riding  in  the  Harbour  in  3  or  4  Fathom  Water,  were 
a-ground,  and  lay  so  till  the  S.  W.  Gust  came,  and  then 
the  Sea  came  rowling  in  again  with  such  prodigious  Fury, 
that  it  not  only  set  them  a-float,  but  dash'd  many  of 
them  on  the  Shore.  One  of  them  was  carried  up  a  great 
way  into  the  Woods :  another  was  strangely  hurrd  on 
two  Rocks  that  stood    close  by  one   another;    with   her 

288 


OF  STORMS 

id  resting  on  one  Rock,  and  her  Stern  on  the  other : 
J  thus  she  lay  like  a  Bridge  between  the  two  Rocks, 
ut  ten  or  eleven  Foot  above  the  Sea,  even  In  the  highest 
Ics;  f<x  the  Tides  do  usually  rise  here  but  little,  not 
ve  two  or  three  Foot,  but  in  these  Hurricanes  it 
lys  d>bs  and  flows  again  prodigiously. 
Ji  was  not  the  Ships  only  that  felt  the  Fury  of  this 
rm,  but  the  whole  Island  suffered  by  it ;  for  the  Houses 
c  blown  dawn,  the  Trees  tore  up  by  the  Roots,  or 
,  their  Heads  and  Limbs  sadly  shattered,  neither  was 
re  any  Leaves,  Herbs  or  green  Thing  left  on  the 
,  but  all  look'd  like  Winter.  Insomuch  that  a  Ship 
ling  thither  a  little  after,  that  used  that  Trade,  could 
■cc  believe  it  to  be  the  same  Island.  Neither  did  the 
■y  of  this  Storm  light  only  here,  for  Nevis  and 
Christopher's  had  their  Shares  also ;  but  Mounisurat 
little  of  it,  tho'  not  above  a  Fortnight  after  there 
incd  another  Storm,  as  violent  as  this,  and  raged 
remcly  there,  but  did  little  Damage  at  Nevis  and 
Christophers.  Antegoa  had  a  great  Share  of  this 
.  Capt.  Gadbury's  Ship,  that  lay  a-ground  before  It 
K,  was  by  it  hurled  over  to  the  opposite  part  of  the 
rbour,  and  there  thrown  dry  on  the  Sand. 
The  Day  after  the  Storm,  the  Shore  was  strew'd  with 
b  of  divers  sorts,  as  well  great  as  small ;  such  as 
Sharks,  Sec.  and  Abundance  of  Sea-Fowls  also 
c  destroyed  by  it. 

I  would  not  have  any  Man  think  that  these  Hurricanes, 
any  other  Storms,   do   always    give  warning  of  their 
ling  exactly  alike:  For  there  may  be  some  Difference 
those  Signs,  the'  all  of  them  be  plain  enough  if  well 
Besides  sometimes  they  arc   duplicated,   some- 
only  single  Signs,  and  sometimes  the  Signs  may  be 
visible   and   plain    than   at  other  Times:   when   by 
accidental  Cause  those  Signs  may  be  less  visible  by 
B    of  some    high    Hill    or    Mountain    that    may  be 
I'd    between    you    and    the    Horizon,    especially    if 
ill  lies  N.  E.  from  you,  which  is  the  Quarter  that 
fcancs  do  commonly  rise  in. 
..  II.  289  T 


'g:, 


A   DISCOURSE   OF  WINDS 

The  Clouds  that  precede  a  Hurricane  are  difierent 
from  the  North-Banks,  in  this,  that  whereas  the  Clouds 
preceding  Norths  are  uniform  and  regular;  of  an  exact 
Blackness  even  from  the  Horizon  to  the  upper  Edge  of 
it,  and  that  as  streight  and  even  as  a  Line  stretched  out. 
On  the  contrary,  the  Hurricane-Clouds  tower  up  their 
Heads,  pressing  forwards  as  if  they  all  strove  for  Pre- 
cedency ;  yet  so  linked  one  within  another,  that  all  move 
alike.  Besides,  the  Edges  of  these  Clouds  are  gilded  with 
various  and  afrighting  Colours,  the  very  Edge  of  all  seems 
to  be  of  a  pale  fire-colour,  next  that  of  a  dull  yellow, 
and  nearer  the  Body  of  the  Cloud  of  a  Copper-Colour, 
and  the  Body  of  the  Cloud  which  is  very  thick  appears 
extraordinary  black:  and  altogether  it  looks  very  terrible 
and  amazing  even  beyond  Expression.  Tho*  I  have  never 
been  in  any  Hurricane  in  the  West-Indies,  yet  I  have 
seen  the  very  Image  of  them  in  the  East-Indies,  and  the 
Effects  have  been  the  very  same ;  and  for  my  part  I  know 
no  Difference  between  a  Hurricane  among  the  Caribbee- 
Islands  in  the  West-Indies,  and  a  TufFoon  on  the  Coast 
of  China  in  the  East-Indies,  but  only  the  Name :  And  I 
am  apt  to  believe  that  both  Words  have  one  Significatiofi, 
which  is,  a  violent  Storm. 

I  have  given  a  large  Account  of  one  of  these  in  my 
"Voyage  round  the  World,"  Chapter  XV,  Page  409. 
That  gave  warning  by  flattering  Weather  beforehand,  and 
a  very  dismal  Cloud,  set  out  with  such  Colours  as  I  have 
before  described,  rising  in  the  N.  E.  from  whence  the 
Violence  of  the  first  Gust  came,  which  was  wonderful 
fierce  and  accompanied  with  extraordinary  hard  Rain; 
then  it  afterwards  fell  calm  about  an  Hour,  and  then 
the  Wind  came  about  at  S.  W.  and  blew  as  fierce  as  it 
did  before  at  N.  E.  which  is  much  like  the  Hurricane 
before-mentioned  at  Antegoa,  but  of  a  longer  Continu- 
ance than  that :  Besides,  in  both  places  they  blow  at  one 
time  of  the  Year,  which  is  in  July,  August  or  Sep- 
tember ;  and  commonly  near  the  Full  or  Change  of  the 
Moon. 

Another  thing  that  we  must  also  take  notice  of,  is, 

290 


W  OF  STORMS 

phit  both  Places  arc  North  of  the  Equator,  though  not 
exactly  in  one  Latitude. 

But  of  these  Tuffbons  I  shall  say  no  more  now,  having 
described  them  particularly  in  my  Voyage  to  Tonquin, 
Chap.  II.  Fag.  586. 

The  Monsoons  in  the  East-Indies  are  the  next  to  be 
treated  of;  by  which  I  do  not  mean  the  Coasting  Trade- 
wind,  so  called,  which  I  have  already  described  in  Page  243 
of  this  Discourse ;  for  though  Monsoon  is  a  general  Word 
for  the  Wind  there,  distinguished  by  East  or  West,  accord- 
ing to  the  Points  from  whence  they  blow;  yet  it  sometimes 
also  signifies  a  Storm,  as  I  now  take  it.  And  it  is  easie 
to  be  understood,  when  it  is  used  in  Reference  to  the 
Trade-wind,  or  when  spoken  of  a  Storm  ;  for  if  applied 
to  a  Storm,  'tis  cxpress'd  by  some  Epithet  going  before : 
As  Violent,  Terrible,  &c.  without  any  Distinction  of  East 
or  West,  which  is  commonly  used  in  speaking  of  the 
Trade-Wind. 

These  Monsoons  or  Storms  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandel 
ire  expected  either  about  April  or  September,  which  are 
accounted  the  two  shifting  Months.  For  in  these  two 
Months  the  Winds  begin  to  shift  and  turn  from  that  Point, 
on  which  they  have  blown  several  Months  before  to  the 
contrary  Points  of  the  Compass ;  as  from  East  to  West,  or 
the  contrary :  but  commonly  this  Shift  is  attended  with  a 
turbulent  Sky,  which  ends  in  a  violent  Storm  of  Wind,  or 
excessive  Rains,  or  both  :  And  this  is  called  also  the  break- 
ing up  of  the  Monsoon.  It  was  in  one  of  these  that  I 
put  from  Nicohar  to  Sumatra,  mentioned  in  my  *'  Voyage 
round  the  World,"  Chap.  XVIII.  Page  479.  This  was  the 
April  Monsoon. 

The  September  Monsoons  are  generally  more  violent 
than  these  last:  yet  by  the  Account  I  have  lately  had  from 
Fort  St.  George,  they  have  suffered  very  much  by  one  of 
the  April  Monsoons  (if  it  may  be  so  called)  for  it  came 
before  its  usual  time,  even  before  it  could  be  expected. 

As  for  the  September  Monsoons,  ihn'  the  time  of  the 
Year  is  so  well  known,  and  the  Warnings  of  their  Approach 
almost  certain ;  yet  our  East-India  Merchants  have  had 
291 


A    DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

very  considerable  Losses  there ;  for  the  Stress  of  the  Winds 
blows  right  in  upon  the  Shore,  and  often  hurries  the  Ships 
from  their  Anchors,  and  tosses  them  in  a  Moment  on  the 
sandy  Bay. 

Indeed  the  want  of  a  secure  Place  to  ride  in,  is  the 
greatest  Inconvenience  of  that  Factory,  a  Place  doubtless 
designed  by  the  English  from  its  Original  to  be  the  Center 
of  the  Trade  of  these  Parts.  For  all  our  Factories,  and 
the  Trade  in  general.  East  from  Cape  Comorin,  are  now 
subordinate  to  this. 

The  Dutch  had  once  a  place  of  Consequence,  called 
Pallacat,  on  this  Coast,  about  twenty  Leagues  to  the  North 
of  it ;  but  they  withdrew  most  of  their  Families  and  Effects 
from  thence  in  the  Year  1691,  mentioned  in  my  "Voyage 
round  the  World,'*  Chap.  XX.  Page  505.  And  it  is  very 
probable  that  these  rageing  Winds  might  be  one  Cause  of 
this  their  deserting  it,  whatever  was  the  Motive  of  settling 
here ;  for  they  have  secure  Harbours,  and  Roads  enough 
in  India,  which  we  to  our  great  Disadvantage  very  much 
want. 

But  to  return  to  the  Monsoons. 

These  (as  I  have  told  you)  blow  fiercest  in  September, 
and,  as  I  have  been  informed,  blow  on  several  Points  of 
the  Compass. 

The  stormy  Monsoons  on  the  Mallabar  Coast  differ 
from  these  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  in  that  they  are 
more  common,  and  last  even  from  April  to  September, 
which  is  as  long  as  the  common  West-Monsoon  lasts, 
though  not  so  frequent  and  lasting  in  the  Beginning  of  the 
Monsoon,  as  towards  the  latter  end. 

The  Months  of  July  and  August  aflFord  very  bad 
Weather,  for  then  there  is  hardly  any  Intermission,  but  a 
continued  troubled  Sky  full  of  black  Clouds  which  pour 
down  excessive  Rains,  and  often  very  fierce  Winds.  But 
towards  the  breaking  up  of  the  Monsoon,  they  have  one 
very  terrible  Storm  called  by  the  Portuguese  the  Eliphanta, 
which  concludes  the  bad  Weather.  For  after  that  they 
put  to  Sea  without  fear  of  any  more  Storms  that  Season. 

These  violent  Winds  blow  directly  in  upon  the  Shore ; 

292 


OF  STORMS 

and  they  dam  up  the  Harbours  on  this  G)asty  especially  that 
of  Goa,  so  that  no  Ships  can  go  in  or  come  out  then ;  but 
after  the  violent  Winds  are  past,  the  Channel  opens  again, 
and  so  continues  till  the  next  Season. 

This  Relation  I  had  from  a  very  ingenious  Gentleman 
who  was  at  Goa  during  the  bad  Weather. 

I  shall  only  take  notice  that  these  Storms  are  also  at 
the  same  Time  of  the  Year,  when  the  Hurricanes  and 
Souths  are  in  the  West-Indies,  and  the  Tuffoons  on  the 
Coasts  of  China,  Tunqueen,  Cochinchina  and  Cambodia  in 
the  Eastern  Parts  of  the  East-Indies,  and  that  all  these 
Places  arc   to  the  North  of  the  Equator. 


293 


CHAP.   VII 

Of  the  Seasons  of  the  Tear 

The  Wet  and  Dry  Seasons  on  the  North-side  of  the  Equator  ;  and  on 
the  South  of  it.  Places  famous  for  much  dry  Weather  ;  as  part 
of  Peruy  and  Africa.  A  Comparison  between  those  Coasts.  Of 
raining  Coasts ;  as  Guinea,  Why  Guinea  more  subject  to  Rains 
than  the  opposite  Coast  of  Brazil.  The  time  of  Sugar-making. 
Of  the  Seasons  at  Suranam.  Bays  more  subject  to  Rain  than 
Head-Lands,  Several  Instances  of  thisj  as  at  Campeachy^  Panama^ 
Tunqueen^  Bengahy  &c.  Mountains  more  subject  to  Rains  than 
Low  Land :  An  Instance  of  this  at  Jamaica.  The  Isle  of  Pines 
near  Cuba,  a  wet  Place,  So  is  also  Gorgonia  in  the  Sauth-Seas. 
The  manner  how  Tornadoes  arise. 

^S  Summer  and  Winter  are  the  two  most  difFerent 

/^L  Seasons  in  our  Climate;  so  the  Dry  and  the 
/  ^  Wet  are  within  the  Torrid  Zone;  and  arc 
X.  ]^  always  opposite  to  each  other.  They  are  often 
called  by  Europeans  Winter  and  Summer,  but  more  gene- 
rally, Dry  and  Wet. 

The  Seasons  on  each  side  of  the  Equator,  are  as  difi^rent 
as  the  Seasons  of  Summer  and  Winter  are  in  temperate 
Climates,  or  near  each  Pole.  For  as  'tis  Summer  near  the 
North-Pole,  when  'tis  Winter  near  the  South-Pole,  and 
the  contrary ;  so  when  'tis  fair  and  dry  Weather  North  of 
the  Equator,  'tis  blustering  and  rainy  Weather  South  of  it ; 
and  the  contrary,  except  within  a  few  degrees  of  the  Line, 
and  that  in  some  places  only. 

There  is  also  this  difference  between  the  Torrid  and 
Temperate  Zones,  either  North  or  South  of  the  Equator; 
that  when  it  is  fair  and  dry  Weather  in  the  one,  it  is 
Winter  in  the  other :  and  when  it  is  wet  in  the  one,  it  is 

294 


J 


■      OF   THE  SEASONS   OF  THE   YEAR 

raammcr  in  the  other,  I  speak  now  of  Places  I>'tng  on  the 
same  side  of  the  Equator :  For  as  the  Sun  when  it  passes 
ifie  Equinox,  and  draws  towards  either  of  the  Tropicks, 
begins  to  warm  their  respective  Poles,  and  by  how  much 
the  nearer  he  approaches,  by  so  much  is  the  Air  without  the 
Tropicks  clear,  dry  and  hot ;  on  the  contrary,  within  the 
I'orrid  Zone  (though  on  the  same  side  of  the  Line)  the 
farther  the  Sun  is  off,  the  dryer  is  the  Weather.  And  as 
the  Sun  comes  nearer,  the  Sky  grows  more  cloudy  and  the 
Weather  more  moist:  for  the  Rains  follow  the  Sun,  and 
begin  on  cither  side  of  the  Equator,  within  a  little  while 
after  the  Sun  has  crost  the  Equinox,  and  so  continue  till 
after  his  return  back  again. 

The  wet  Season  on  the  North  side  of  the  Equator  in 
the  Torrid  Zone,  begins  in  April  or  May,  and  so  continues 
till  September  or  October. 

The  dry  Weather  comes  in  November  or  December, 
and  continues  till  April  or  May. 

In  South  Latitudes  the  Weather  changes  at  the  same 
times,  but  with  this  difference,  that  the  dry  Months  in 
South  Latitude,  are  wet  Months  in  North  Latitude,  and 
the  contrary,  as  I  have  said  before.  Yet  neither  do  the 
wet  or  dry  Seasons  set  in  or  go  out  exactly  at  one  time,  in 
all  Yeare;  neither  are  all  places  subject  to  wet  or  dry 
Weather  alike.  For  in  some  places  it  rains  less  than  in 
oihd*;  and  consequently  there  is  more  dry  Weather. 
But  generally  Places  that  lye  under  the  Line,  or  near  it, 
h«TC  their  greatest  Rains  in  March  and  September. 

Hcad-l^nds  or  Coasts  that  lye  most  exposed  to  the 
Trade-winds  have  commonly  the  best  share  of  dry  Weather. 
On  the  contrar>\  deep  Bays  or  Bcndings  of  the  Land, 
opectally  tuch  as  lye  near  the  Line,  are  most  subject  to 
Kains.  Yet  even  among  Bays  or  Bendings,  there  is  a  great 
deal  of  diflferencc  in  the  Weather  as  to  dry  or  wet ;  for  the 
Weather,  as  well  as  the  Winds  seem  to  be  much  influenced 
by  accidental  Causes;  and  those  Causes  themselves,  what- 
ever they  are.  seem  to  be  subject  to  great  variation. 

But  to  proceed  with  Matter  of  Fact ;  I  shall  begin 
with  the  driest  Coasts ;  and  first  with  that  of  Peru,  from 
295 


A    DISCOURSE   OF   \%TXDS 

3  d-  South  to  3c  d.  Soath-  There  it  nercr  Rains,  neither 
at  Sea  f:r  a  g»i  distajrice  off  shore,  as  for  250  or  300 
Leagues ;  r.o  ::  or  oc  the  shore  for  a  cocsidcrafalc  way  witlun 
Land ;  thc::gh  eiactiv  how  far  I  know  not ;  yet  there  are 
small  Nlists  sonted^es  in  a  Morning  for  two  or  three 
Hours,  but  seldom  coritinaing  afcer  10  a-Qock  ;  and  there 
arc  Debars  also  :n  the  Night- 

Tris  Coast  I^  N.  and  S  it  has  the  Sea  open  to  the 
West,  and  a  Chain  of  very  high  Mountains  running  along 
shore  on  the  East,  and  the  Winds  constantly  Southerly,  as 
I  said  before  in  the  second  Chapter  of  Winds. 

In  which  Head  I  have  made  a  Comparison  as  well  of 
the  Winds  on  the  Coast  of  Africa  in  the  same  Latitude,  as 
of  the  lying  of  the  Coasts.  Only  there  is  this  diflference, 
that  the  coasting  Trade-winds  on  the  American  side  do 
blow  further  from  the  Land  than  those  on  the  African 
side.  Which  difference  may  probably  arise  ^m  the  dis- 
proportion of  the  Mountains  that  are  in  the  two  Continents ; 
for  *tis  known  that  the  Andes  in  America  are  some  <^  the 
highest  Mountains  in  the  World,  but  whether  there  are  any 
on  the  Continent  of  Africa  in  those  Latitudes  so  high,  I 
know  not.  I  have  not  heard  of  any,  at  least  none  such  are 
visible  to  Seamen. 

I  come  now  to  speak  of  the  Weather  on  the  Aiiican 
Coast,  which  though  *tis  not  so  dry  as  the  Coast  of  Peru, 
yet  is  it  the  next  to  it.  The  Weather  there  is  very  dry 
from  March  till  October,  which  is  the  dry  Season. 

The  rainy  Season,  which  is  from  October  till  March,  is 
moderate,  without  that  excess  that  is  in  most  other  Places 
in  those  Latitudes ;  so  that  the  wettest  Season  can  only  be 
called  so  from  some  gentle  showers  of  Rain. 

There  are  some  Tornadoes,  but  not  so  many  as  arc  in 
many  other  Places,  both  of  the  East  or  West  Indies,  the 
Peruvian  Coast  excepted.  And  if  the  height  of  the  Andes 
are  the  cause  that  the  true  East-Breeze  does  not  take  place 
in  the  Pacifick-Sea,  within  200  Leagues  distance  from  the 
shore,  when  yet  the  Trade  blows  within  40  Leagues  of  the 
African  Coast;  that  Coast  may  perhaps  be  supposed  to 
want    such    high   Mountains.      And   if   those   American 

296 


OF  THE  SEASONS  OF  THE  YEAR 

Lintains  do  stop  the  Winds  from  their  Career,  why  may 
jjr  not  as  well  break  the  Clouds  before  they  reach  near 

shore,  and  be  the  cause  of  the  dry  Weather  there  ?  And 

txg  both  Coasts  do  lye  alike,  and  the  Wind  is  alike ; 

f  should  not  the  Weather  be  the  same ;  were  it  not  for 

dbproportinn  between  the  Mountains  of  these  Coasts? 

■  the  East-side  of  those  Mountains  are  supplied  with 
\b  enough,  as  may  be  known  by  the  great  Rivers  that 

mbogue  from  thence  into  the  Atlantick  Sea;  whereas 

Rivers  on  the  South-Sea  Coast  are  but  very  few  and 

■il  ;  some  of  which  do  wholly  dry  away  for  a  good  part 

the  Year;  but  yet  they  constantly  break  out  again  in 
tr  Seasons,  when  the  Rains  in  the  Country  do  come, 
ich  always  fall  on  the  West-side  of  those  Mountains, 
I  this  is  about  February. 

As  I  have  spoken  before  of  dry  Coasts,  so  now  I  shall 
ik  of  rainy  ones.  I  shall  begin  with  the  Coast  of 
inea,  from  Cape  Lopes,  which  lies  one  degree  South, 
big  in  the  Bite  or  Bending  of  the  Land,  and  all  the 
at  West  from  thence,  as  far  as  Cape  Paimas. 

Thi«  B  a  very  wet  Coast,  subject  to  violent  Tornadoes 
.  excessive  Rains,  especially  in  July  and  August:  In 
K  Months  there  is  scarce  any  fair  Day.  This  Coast  lies 
of  it  very  near  the  Equator,  and  no  where  above  6  or  7 
es  Distance ;  so  that  from  its  nearness  to  the  Equator 

',  wc  might  probably  conjecture  that  it  is  a  rainy  Coast ; 

moM  places  lying  near  the  Line  are  very  subject   to 

is:  yet  some  more  than  others;  and  Guinea  may  be 
koaed  among  the  wettest  Places  in  the  World.  There 
f  he  P]accs  where  the  Rains  continue  longer,  but  none 

mcffc  violent  while  they  last. 

And  as  its  nearness  to  the  Line  may  be  a  great  cause  of 
Moisture;  so  by  its  situation  also  one  would  guess  that 
boold  be  subject  to  a  great  deal  of  Rain  ;  because  there 
I  great  Bite  or  Bending  in  of  the  Land,  a  little  to  the 
rcn  of  the  Ljnc;  and  from  thence  the  Land  stretcheth 

(  parallel  with    the  Line.     And   these    circumstances 

ly  taken,  according  to  my  Observations  do  seldom  fail, 

mcPTC  especially  where  they  both  meet.     Yet  there  may 
297 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

be  other  causes  that  may  hinder  those  Effects,  or  at  least 
serve  to  allay  the  violence  of  them,  as  they  <io  on  some 
other  Coasts.  I  shall  only  instance  in  the  opposite  Coast 
of  America  between  the  North  Cape,  which  lies  North  of 
the  Equator,  and  Cape  Blanco  on  Brazil,  in  South  Latitude. 
Now  this  Land  lies  much  after  the  Form  of  the  Coast  of 
Guinea,  with  this  diff^erence,  that  one  Coast  lies  in  South 
Lat.  the  other  lies  North  of  the  Equator,  both  of  these 
Promontories  lay  parallel  with  the  Equator,  and  there's  not 
much  difference  in  their  distance  from  it ;  but  that  which 
makes  the  difference  is,  that  one  juts  out  Westward,  the 
other  Eastward ;  and  so  one  is  the  very  Westermost  Land 
of  the  Continent  of  Africa,  the  other  is  the  Eastermost 
Land  of  the  Continent  of  America :  The  one  has  only  an 
eddy  Wind,  which  seems  to  me  to  be  the  Effect  of  two 
contrary  Winds :  The  other  Coast  lies  open  to  the  Trade, 
and  never  wants  a  Breeze.  And  the  former  is  troubled 
with  Tornadoes  and  violent  Rains  during  the  wet  Season, 
which  is  May,  June,  July,  August  and  September :  But  the 
extremest  wet  Months  are  July  and  August ;  when  it  rains 
in  a  manner  continually.  April  and  October  also  some- 
times are  wet  Months. 

The  other  Coast  on  the  American  Continent,  which  lies 
open  to  the  E.  and  N.  E.  or  S.  E.  and  which  enjoys  the 
freer  Trade-Wind,  is  less  subject  to  Rain ;  only  as  it  lies 
near  the  Line,  it  has  its  part,  but  not  to  Excess,  nor  in  any 
Comparison  with  Guinea.  And  as  the  Line  is  to  the  N.  of 
it,  so  its  wet  Months  are  from  October  till  April,  and  the 
dry  Season  from  April  to  October.  And  these  Seasons 
reach  even  to  six  or  seven  Degrees  North  of  the  Line: 
Which  I  do  not  know  to  be  so  in  any  other  part  of  the 
World  again.  Indeed  Cape  Lopes  in  Guinea,  is  in  one 
degree  South,  yet  participates  of  the  same  Weather  that 
the  rest  of  Guinea  has,  which  lies  to  the  North  of  the  Line. 

Now  the  Reason  why  Europeans  do  account  the  dry 
Season  Summer,  and  the  wet  Season  Winter ;  is  because  the 
dry  Season  is  their  Harvest  time,  especially  in  our  Planta- 
tions, where  we  chiefly  make  Sugar ;  for  then  the  Canes 
are  as  yellow  as  Gold.     They  have  then  indeed  less  Juice, 

298 


j 


W    OF  THE   SEASONS   OF   THE   YEAR 

Hlut  that  little  there  is,  is  very  sweet.  Whereas  in  the  wet 
Seavin,  tho'  the  Canes  are  ripe,  and  come  to  their  Maturity ; 
yet  do  they  not  yield  such  Quantities  of  Sugar,  neither  is  it 
so  good,  tho'  the  Pains  in  boiling  it  be  also  greater. 
Therefore  in  Northern  Climates,  as  all  our  Plantations  are 
in,  they  commonly  begin  to  work  about  making  of  Sugar  at 
Christmas;  after  the  dry  Season  has  brought  the  Canes  to 
1  good  Perfection.  But  in  South  Climates,  as  on  the  Coast 
ot  Brazil,  they  begin  to  work  in  July.  Some  Places  there 
are  in  the  North  Latitudes  also  near  the  Line,  where  the 
Weather  bears  Time  with  the  Seasons  in  South  Lat.  as  at 
Sor«iam,  which  though  it  is  in  North  Lat.  yet  are  the 
Seasons  there  the  same  as  in  South  Latitudes ;  but  I  know 
not  such  another  Instance  any  where.  And  tho'  the  dry 
Scas<m  i*  the  Time  to  gather  in  the  Canes,  and  the  wet 
Season  to  plant ;  yet  arc  they  not  so  limited  as  to  make  use 
only  of  these  Seasons  for  cither;  but  do  it  chiefly  for  their 
best  Convenience;  for  they  may  plant  at  any  Time  of  the 
Year,  and  that  with  good  Success :  especially  after  a 
moderate  Shower  of  Rain,  which  often  happens  even  in 
the  dry  Seasons. 

But  1  must  proceed. 

f  have  said  before  that  Bays  have  greater  Quantities  of 
Rain  than  Head-I^nds. 

The  Bay  of  Campcachy  is  a  good  Instance  of  this;  for 
the  Rains  are  very  great  there,  especially  in  the  Months  of 
July  and  August.  On  the  contrary,  the  Coast  from  Cape 
Cstoch  to  Cape  Condecedo,  which  lies  more  exposed  to  the 
Trade,  has  not  near  the  Rains  as  the  Bay  of  Campeachy 
hath. 

The  Bay  of  Honduras  also  is  very  wet,  and  all  that 
bending  Coast  from  Cape  Gratia  de  Dios,  even  to  Cartha- 
ecna.  But  on  the  Coast  of  Caraccjs,  and  about  Cape  La 
Vela,  where  the  Breezes  are  more  brisk,  the  Weather  is 
mure  moderate.  Whereas  in  those  little  Bays  between, 
there  is  still  a  Difference :  For  in  the  Bay  of  Mericaya, 
which  lies  a  little  to  the  I^ast  nf  Cape  La  Vela,  there  is 
much  more  Rain  than  at  or  near  the  Cape. 

The  Bay  of  Panama  also  will  furnish  us  with  a  Proof 


L 


199 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

of  this,  by  its  immoderate  Rains ;  especially  the  South-side 
of  it,  even  from  the  Gulph  of  St.  Michael,  to  Gipe  St. 
Francis;  the  Rains  there  are  from  April  till  November; 
but  in  June,  July,  and  August,  they  are  most  violent. 

There  are  many  small  Bays  also  West  from  the  Bay  of 
Panama,  which  have  their  Shares  of  these  wet  Seasons,  as 
the  Gulph  of  Dulce,  Caldera  Bay,  Amapalla,  &c.  but  to 
the  West  of  that,  where  the  Coast  runs  more  plain  and 
even,  there  are  not  such  wet  Seasons;  yet  many  times  very 
violent  Tornadoes. 

The  East-Indies  also  has  many  Bays  that  are  subject  to 
very  violent  Rains,  as  the  Bay  of  Tonqueen,  that  or  Siam, 
the  Bottom  and  the  East-side  of  the  Bay  of  Bengali.  But 
on  the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  which  is  the  West-side  of 
that  Bay,  the  Weather  is  more  moderate ;  that  being  an 
even,  plain,  low  Coast.  But  on  the  Coast  of  Mallabar, 
which  is  on  the  West-side  of  that  Promontory,  the  Land  is 
high  and  mountainous,  and  there  are  violent  Rains.  Indeed 
the  West-sides  of  any  Continents  are  wetter  than  the  East- 
sides,  the  Coast  of  Peru  and  Africa  only  excepted ;  in  the 
former  of  which  the  Dryness  may  be  occasioned  (as  is  said 
before)  by  the  Height  of  the  Andes.  And  *tis  probable 
that  the  Violence  of  the  Rains  near  those  Mountains  falls 
chiefly  on  the  East-sides  of  them,  and  seldom  reaches  to 
their  Tops  :  which  yet  if  the  Rains  do,  they  may  there  be 
broke  in  pieces,  and  reach  no  further.  For,  among  other 
Observations,  I  have  taken  Notice  that  Mountains  are 
supplied  with  more  Rains  than  low  Lands,  I  mean  the  low 
Land  bordering  on  the  Sea.  As  for  Instance,  the  South- 
side  of  Jamaica  beginning  at  Leganea,  and  from  thence 
away  to  the  Westward,  as  far  as  Black  River,  including  all 
the  plain  Land  and  Savannahs  about  St.  Jago  de  la  V^o, 
Old  Harbour  and  Whithy-wood  Savannahs.  This  is  a 
plain  level  Country  for  many  Miles  lying  near  East  and 
West,  having  the  Sea  on  the  South,  and  bounded  with 
Mountains  on  the  North. 

Those  Mountains  are  commonly  supplied  with  Rsun 
before  the  low  Lands.  I  have  known  the  Rains  to  have 
begun  there  three  Weeks  before  any  has  fallen  in  the  plain 

300 


5ASONS   OF   THE   YEAR 

Country,  bordering  on  the  Sea ;  yet  every  Day  1  have 
obscrvol  vcr)'  black  Clouds  over  the  Mountains,  and  have 
hard  it  thunder  there.  And  those  very  Clouds  have 
seemed  by  their  Motion  to  draw  towards  the  Sea,  but  have 
been  checlc'd  in  their  Course,  and  have  either  returned 
towards  the  Mountains  again,  or  else  have  spent  themselves 
before  they  came  from  thence,  and  so  have  vanished  away 
again  to  the  great  Grief  of  the  Planters,  whose  Plantations 
and  Cattle  have  suffered  for  want  of  a  little  Moisture. 
Nay,  these  Tornadoes  have  been  so  nigh,  that  the  Sea 
Breeze  has  died  away,  and  we  have  had  the  Wind  fresh  out 
of  the  Clouds,  yet  they  have  vanished,  and  yielded  no  Rain 
to  the  low  parch'd  Lands. 

And  I  think  that  the  want  of  seasonable  Showers  is  one 

of  the  greatest  Inconveniencies  that  this  part  of  the  Country 

suffers,  for  I  have  known  in  some  very  dry  Years,  that  the 

Grsais  in  the  Savannahs  has  been   burned  and   wither'd   for 

want  of  Rain,  and    the  Cattle   have  perished   thereby  for 

want  of  Food.     The  Plantations  also  have  suffered   very 

much  by  it ;  but  such  dry  Seasons  have  not  been  known  on 

the   North-side   of  the    Island    where    the    Mountains   are 

bordering  on  the  Sea,  or  at  least  but  a  little  Distance  off  it. 

For  there  they  are  supplied  with  seasonable  Showers  almost 

ill  the  Year,  and  even  in  the  dry  time  it  self  near  the  Full 

md  Change  of  the  Moon.     But   in  the  wet  Season,  the 

^JiAiBs  are  more  violent,  which  is  their  Inconvenience. 

^L     As    for    the    Valleys    in    the    Country,  they    are    not 

^HAtjcct  to  such  Droughts  as  the  plain  Land  by  the  Sea, 

PVt  least  I  hare  not  observed  it  my  self,  nor  have  I  heard  it 

mentioned  by  others. 

TTic  Isle  of  Pines  near  Cuba  is  so  noted  a  Place  for 
Rain  that  the  Spaniards  inhabiting  near  it  on  Cuba,  say 
that  it  rains  more  or  less  every  day  in  the  Year,  at  one 
Place  or  another.  It  is  generally  spoken  also  and  bcliev'd 
by  Privateers,  for  it  has  been  oft  visited  by  them.  I  have 
been  there  my  self,  but  cannot  confirm  that  Report.  How- 
ever, it  is  well  known  to  be  a  very  wet  and  rainy  Place. 
Island  of  about  r" 


;  and  three  or  four  broad  ;  and  i 
301 


the 


lidst 


Leagues 
high 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

peeked  Mountain,  which  is  commonly  clouded;  and  the 
Privateers  say  that  this  Hill  draws  all  the  Clouds  to  it; 
for  if  there  is  not  another  Cloud  to  be  seen  any  where 
else,  yet  this  Hill  is  seldom  or  never  clear. 

Gorgonia  in  the  South-Seas  also  has  the  same  Report. 
It  is  much  smaller  than  Pines.  I  have  mentioned  it  in 
my  "Voyage  round  the  World,*'  Chap.  VII.  Page  193. 

This  Isle  lies  about  four  Leagues  from  the  Main :  but 
the  Isle  of  Pines  not  above  two,  and  is  a  great  deal  bigger 
than  it.  The  Main  against  Gorgonia  is  very  low  Land; 
but  Cuba  near  Pines  is  pretty  high,  and  the  Mountain  of 
Pines  is  much  bigger  and  higher  than  the  Hill  of  Gorgonia, 
which  yet  is  of  a  good  Height,  so  that  it  may  be  seen 
sixteen  or  eighteen  Leagues  off;  and  tho'  I  cannot  say 
that  it  rains  every  day  there,  yet  I  know  that  it  rains  very 
much  and  extraordinary  hard. 

I  have  been  at  this  Isle  three  Times ;  and  always  found 
it  very  rainy,  and  the  Rains  very  violent.  I  remember 
when  we  touched  there  in  our  Return  from  Captain  Sharp, 
we  boiled  a  Kettle  of  Chocolate  before  we  cleanM  our 
Bark ;  and  having  every  Man  his  Callabash  full,  we  began 
to  sup  it  off,  standing  all  the  Time  in  the  Rain;  but  I 
am  confident  not  a  Man  among  us  all  did  clear  his  Dish, 
for  it  rained  so  fast  and  such  great  Drops  into  our  Calla- 
bashes,  that  after  we  had  sup'd  off  as  much  Chocolate  and 
Rain- Water  together  as  sufficed  us,  our  Callabashes  were 
still  above  half  full;  and  I  heard  some  of  the  Men  swear 
that  they  could  not  sup  it  up  so  fast  as  it  rained  in,  at 
last  I  grew  tir*d  with  what  I  had  left,  and  threw  it  away : 
and  most  of  the  rest  did  so  likewise. 

As  Clouds  do  usually  hover  over  Hills  and  Mountsuns, 
so  do  they  also  keep  near  the  Land.  I  have  mentioned 
something  of  this  in  my  "Voyage  round  the  WcM-ld," 
Chap.  X.  Page  296,  where  I  have  said,  that  in  maldng 
Land  we  commonly  find  it  cloudy  over  the  Land,  tho'  *tis 
clear  every  where  beside:  And  this  may  still. confirm  what 
I  have  said  in  the  foregoing  Discourse,  that  Hills  are 
commonly  clouded ;  for  high  Land  is  the  first  discerned 
by  us,  and  that,  as  I  said   before,  is  commonly  clouded. 

302 


ASONS   OF  THE   YEAR  ^ 

But  now  1  shall  speak  how  we  find  the  Clouds,  when  we 

arc  but  a  little  way  trom  Land,  either  coasting  along  the 

Shore,  or  at  an  Anchor  by  it.      I  hope  the  Reader  will  not 

imagine  that  I  am  going   to  prove  that  it  never  rains  at 

Sea,  or  but  very  little  there;  for  the  contrary  is  known 

^k)  every  Body,  and  I  have  already  said  in  this  Discourse 

^Bf  Winds  in  my  first  Chapter,  That  there  are  very  frequent 

^■"omaJoes  In  several  Seas  especially  near  the  Equator,  and 

^^■orc  particularly  in  the  Atiantick  Sea.     Other  Seas  are  not 

^^B  much  troubled  with  them ;  neither  is  the  Atiantick  so 

^B>  the    North    or  South  of  the   Line ;   especially  at  any 

considerable    Distance    from    the    Shore,   but   yet   'tis  very 

probable  however,  that  the  Sea  has  not  so  great  a  Portion 

of  Tornadoes  as  the  Land  hath.     For  when  we  are  near 

:hc  Shore  within  the  Torrid   Zone,  we  often  see  it  rain  on 

the  Land,  and  perceive  it  to  be  very  cloudy  there,  when  it 

is  fair  at  Sea,  and  scarce  a  Cloud  to  be  seen  that  way.     And 

tho'  we  have  the  Wind  from  the  Shore,  and  the  Clouds 

seeming  to  be  drawing  off,  yet  they  often  wheel  about  again 

to  the  Land,  as  if  they  were  magnetically  drawn  that  way : 

Sometimes  indeed  they  do  come  off  a  little  ;  but  then  they 

uMially  cither  return  again  or  else  insensibly  vanish;  and 

that's  the  Reason  that  Seamen  when  they  are  sailing  near 

the  Shore  and  see  a  Tornado  coming  off,  they  don't  much 

miod  it,  but  cry,  "  The  Land  will  devour  it  :  "  But  however, 

•omcttmcs   they   fly   off  to   Sea ;    and    'tis   very   rare    that 

Tornadoes  arise  from  thence ;  for  they  generally  rise  first 

over  the  Land,  and  that  in  a  very  strange  manner;  for 

even  from  a  very  small  Clnud  arising  over  the  top  of  a 

Hill,  I  have  often  seen  it  inaease  to  such  a  Bulk,  that  I 

have  known   it  rain  for    two  or  three   Days   successively. 

This  I   have  obscr\'cd  both  in  the  East  and   West-Indies, 

and  in  the  South  and  North-Seas.     And  'tis  impossible  for 

me  to  forget  how  oft  I  have  been  disturbed  by  such  small 

Clouds    that    appeared    in    the    Night.       Tis   usual    with 

Seamen  in  those  parts  to  sleep  on  the  Deck,  especially  for 

Privateers;  among  whom   I   made  these  Observations.      In 

^Snntecn,  especially  when  we  are  at  an  Anchor,  the  Deck 

^blfirad  with  Mats  to  lie  on  each  Night.     Every  Man  has 

■  303 


A    DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

one,  some  two ;  and  this  with  a  Pillow  for  the  Head  and  a 
Rug  for  a  Covering,  is  all  the  Bedding  that  is  necessary  for 
Men  of  that  Employ. 

I  have  many  times  spread  my  Lodging,  when  the 
Evening  has  promised  well,  yet  have  been  forced  to  with- 
draw before  Day;  and  yet  it  was  not  a  little  Rain  that 
would  afright  me  then ;  neither  at  its  first  coming  could  I 
have  thought  that  such  a  small  Cloud  could  afFord  so  much 
Rain :  And  oftentimes  both  my  self  and  others  have  been 
so  deceived  by  the  Appearance  of  so  small  a  Cloud,  that 
thinking  the  Rain  would  soon  be  over,  we  have  lain  till  wc 
were  dropping  wet,  and  then  have  been  forced  to  move  at 
last.     But  to  proceed. 

I  have  constantly  obseived,  than  in  the  wet  season  we 
had  more  Rain  in  the  Night  than  in  the  Day :  for  tho* 
it  was  fair  in  the  Day,  yet  we  seldom  escaped  having  a 
Tornado  or  two  in  the  Night.  If  we  had  one  in  the  Day, 
it  rose  and  came  away  presently,  and  it  may  be  we  had  an 
Hour's  Rain,  more  or  less;  but  when  it  came  in  the 
Night,  though  there  was  little  Appearance  of  Rain;  yet 
we  should  have  it  three  or  four  Hours  together;  but 
this  has  commonly  been  nigh  the  Shore;  and  we  have 
seen  thick  Clouds  over  the  Land,  and  much  Thunder  and 
Lightning,  and  to  our  Appearance,  there  was  more  Rain 
there  than  we  had ;  and  probably  out  farther  oflF  at  Sea, 
there  might  be  still  less :  For  it  was  commonly  pretty  clear 
that  way. 


304 


CHAP,  vin 

Of  Tiaes   and   Currents 

T%4  Difrrmtf  httiMtn  Tidn  and  Currenti.  Ne  Place  in  tbt  Octan 
u/itkml  Tidn,  tVhtrt  tht  Tidfi  are  grtateitf  and  where  smalUit. 
O/"  iht  Tidet  in  iht  Harhour  and  Lagunei  of  Triit ,-  in  the  Bay 
tf  Campteiehj.  Of  these  between  the  Cafei  af  Virginia,  The 
Tidrt  lit  th  Gi//)h  af  St.  Michaei  i  and  iht  River  of  Guia^ui/y 
im  iht  Stulh-Sea.  A  mtilaien  Opinion  of  a  Subterranean  Cam- 
■Miiwu'wr  ietuiten  the  North  and  Seuih-Seas,  under  the  Jiikmiis 
•f  Darim.  Of  the  Tidet  at  the  Gallapagoi  Islands ;  at  Guam, 
»m  tftht  Ladronii  :  jfiout  Panama  ;  In  the  Gulph  of  Dulce  and 
Nietyo  River  ;  on  ikt  Coast  of  Peru,  in  the  West-Indies  ,  and  at 
Ttmfiutn  f  Uiiifrff  and  al  Nrui-Hol/and,  they  are  very  irregular, 
A  Giuu  al  the  Reason  of  so  great  an  Irregularity.  Of  the  Tides 
ittween  ilu  Cape  of  Goad  Hope  and  the  Red-Sea.  Of  Currents. 
Tkty  are  inflneneed  ty  the  Trade-IVind.  Instances  of  them  at 
BariadtfSy  i^e.  al  Cape  La  Vela  ;  and  Gratia  de  Dies.  Cape 
Human,  hie  Trinidado,  Surinam  ;  Capt  Blanco  ;  between  Africa 
and  Brazil.  Of  Ceunter'Currenls.  Of  Currents  in  the  Bay  of 
Campeachj  ;  and  of  Mestica  ;  in  the  Gulph  af  Florida.  Of  tht 
Caemei.  A'«  tirange  thing  for  ike  Surface  of  the  Water  to  run 
CMimltr  to  ill  hwer  Parts.  Of  the  Currents  on  the  Coast  of 
Angtla,  Bast  of  the  Cape  af  Good  Hope:  On  the  Coast  of  India , 
North  of  tht  line  :  And  in  the  Soulh-Sea. 

f  AVING  treated  of  the  Winds  and  Se^suns  of 
the  Year  in  the  Torrid  Zone,  1  now  come  to 
speak  of  the  Tides  and  Currents  there. 
And  by  the  way  Note.  That, 
By  Tides  I  mean  Flowings  and  Ebbings  of  the  Sea,  on 
r  off  from  any  Coast.  Which  Property  of  the  Sea  seems 
>  be  univenal ;  though  not  regularly  alike  on  all  Coasts, 

I  to  Time  nor  the  Height  of  the  Water. 
\  ¥OL.  IL  305  tr 


A  DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

By  Currents  I  mean  another  Motion  of  the  Sea,  which 
is  different  from  Tides  in  several  Respects ;  both  as  to  its 
Duration,  and  also  as  to  its  Course. 

Tides  may  be  compared  to  the  Sea  and  Land-Breezes, 
in  respect  to  their  keeping  near  the  Shore ;  tho*  indeed 
they  alternately  flow  and  ebb  twice  in  24  Hours.  Con- 
trarily  the  Sea-Breezes  blow  on  the  Shore  by  Day»  and  the 
Land-Winds  oflF  from  it  in  the  Night ;  yet  they  keep  this 
Course  as  duly  in  a  manner  as  the  Tides  do.  Neither  arc 
the  Tides  nor  those  Breezes  far  from  the  Land. 

Currents  may  be  compared  to  the  Coasting  Trade- 
Winds,  as  keeping  at  some  farther  Distance  from  the 
Shore,  as  the  Trade-winds  do;  and  *tis  probable  they  arc 
much  influenced  by  them. 

*Tis  a  general  Belief,  especially  among  Seamen,  That 
the  Tides  are  governed  by  the  Moon  :  That  their  Increase 
and  Decrease,  as  well  as  their  diurnal  Motions,  are  influ- 
enced by  that  Planet ;  tho'  sometimes  accidental  Causes  in 
the  Winds  may  hinder  the  true  Regularity  thereof. 

We  are  taught,  as  the  first  Rudiments  of  Navigation, 
to  shift  our  Tides ;  i.e.  to  know  the  time  of  full  Sea  in 
any  Place ;  which  indeed  is  very  necessary  to  be  known  by 
all  English  Sailors,  because  the  Tides  are  more  regular  in 
our  Channel,  than  in  other  parts  of  the  World. 

But  my  subject  being  to  speak  of  the  Tides  within  or 
near  the  Tropick,  I  leave  those  in  places  nearer  England, 
to  be  discoursed  on  by  Coasters,  who  are  the  only  knowing 
Men  in  this  Mystery :  They  having  by  experience  gained 
more  Knowledge  in  it  than  others ;  and  that  is  always  the 
best  Master. 

I  have  not  been  on  any  Coast  in  the  World,  but  where 
the  Tides  have  ebb'd  and  flow'd,  either  more  or  less ;  and 
this  I  have  commonly  observed,  that  the  greatest  Indraughts 
of  Rivers  or  Lagunes,  have  commonly  the  strongest  Tides. 
Contrarily  such  Coasts  as  are  least  supplied  with  Rivers  or 
Lakes  have  the  weakest  Tides  ;  at  least  they  are  not  so 
perceptible.  Where  there  are  great  Indraughts  either  of 
Rivers  or  Lagunes,  and  those  Rivers  or  Lagunes  are  wide, 
though  the  Tide  runs  very  strong  into  the  Mouths  of  such 

306 


TIDES   AND    CURRENTS 


Bvers  or  Laguncs,  yet  ii  docs  not  flow  so  high,  as  in  such 

&  where  the  Rivers  or  Lakes  are  bounded  in  a  narrow 

Room,  though  the  Tides  dn  run  of  an  equal  strength  at  the 
Mouths  or  Entrances  of  either.  Neither  do  the  Tides  flow 
•o  much  on  or  about  Islands  remote  from  the  Main  Land, 
u  they  do  on  the  Coasts  of  it. 

1  shali  first  give  some  Instances  of  these  general  Obser- 
vations and  then  proceed  to  Particulars. 

The  Places  that  I  shall  mention  shall  be  such  as  1  have 
been  in  my  self,  and  where  I  have  made  the  Observations 
before-mentioned;  I  shall  begin  with  the  Lagune  of  Trist, 
in  the  Bay  of  Campeachy. 

This  Place  is  very  remarkable,  in  that  it  has  two 
Mouths  of  a  considerable  bigness;  the  one  is  about  a  Mile 
and  half  wide,  and  about  two  Mile  through,  before  you 
come  to  a  Lagune,  which  is  seven  or  eight  Leagues  long, 
and  three  wide.  The  other  Mouth  is  7  Leagues  from  it, 
ind  i^  about  2  Miles  and  half,  or  3  Miles  wide,  and  about 
;  Miles  long,  before  it  opens  into  the  Lagune:  Besides, 
farther  within  Land  there  are  3  or  +  more  Lagunes  less 
than  the  former. 

The  Tides  that  flow  or  ebb  in  all  the  Lagunes  pass  in 
or  out  at  the  two  Mouths  before-mentioned,  which  makes 
•hem  run  very  swift,  insomuch  that  the  Spaniards  have 
named  that  great  Lagune,  Laguna  Termina,  or  (he  Lake 
of  Tides ;  because  the  Tides  arc  so  very  strong  in  those 
two  Mouths.  Yet,  though  the  Tides  do  run  so  swift  at 
the  Mouth  of  the  Lagune,  they  do  not  rise  in  height  pro- 
portionable to  that  swiftness ;  for  the  greatest  Tides  here 
io  not  riie  or  fall  above  6  or  7  Foot,  except  forced  by 
extraordinary  Causes,  as  Storms,  or  the  like  :  Of  which  1 
have  spoken  before. 

I  could  also  instance  in  the  Channel,  between  the  2 
Capes  of  Virginia,  where  the  Tides  do  run  very  swift ;  yet 
The  Floods  and  Ebbs  are  not  proportionable  to  the  swiftness 
■if  the  Tides  between  the  Capes.  There  are  not  indeed 
tuch  Lagunes,  as  at  Trist  in  the  Bay  of  Campeachy  ;  but 
many  wide  Rivers,  and  abundance  of  smaller 
Besides,  in  some  places  there  is  low  Land,  which 
307 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

is  over-flown  by  the  Tides ;  so  that  all  the  Water  that  runs 
in  with  such  swiftness  within  the  Capes  is  insensibly 
swallowed  up  there. 

These  are  instances  of  strong  Tides,  occasioned  by 
great  Indraughts ;  yet  where  there  is  but  little  rising  and 
falling  of  the  Water  in  comparison  with  the  strength  of 
the  Tides  at  the  Mouths  of  those  Indraughts.  I  shall 
next  give  some  Instances  of  the  great  Indraughts,  where 
the  Tides  flow  and  ebb  much  more  than  in  the  former 
Places ;  though  the  Tide  at  the  Mouths  of  those  Indraughts 
does  not  run  swifter  than  in  those  Places  before-mentioned. 

I  shall  only  mention  two  Rivers  in  the  South-Sea,  that 
I  have  taken  notice  of  in  my  "  Voyage  round  the  World," 
(viz.)  the  Gulph  of  St.  Michael ;  and  the  River  of  Guia- 
quil. 

In  the  Gulph  of  St.  Michael  there  are  many  large 
Rivers,  which  all  disembogue  into  a  Lagune  of  2  or  3 
Leagues  wide.  This  Lagune  is  barricadoed  from  the  Sea 
with  some  small  low  Mangrovy  Islands,  and  between  them 
are  Creeks  and  Channels,  through  which  the  Tides  make 
their  daily  passes  into  the  Lagune ;  and  from  thence  into 
the  Rivers,  and  so  back  again ;  many  times  over-flowing 
the  said  Islands,  and  leaving  the  tops  of  the  lower  Trees 
above  Water. 

The  Rivers  that  run  into  this  Lagune  are  pretty 
narrow,  and  bounded  on  each  side  with  steep  Banks,  as 
high  as  the  Floods  use  to  rise,  and  but  very  little  higher. 
For  at  High-water,  and  on  a  Spring-tide,  the  Water  is 
almost,  or  altogether  even  with  the  Land. 

The  Lagune  at  the  Mouth  of  the  Rivers  is  but  small, 
neither  is  there  any  other  way  for  the  Water  to  force  it 
self  into,  beside  the  Lagune  and  Rivers ;  and  therefore  the 
Tides  do  rise  and  fall  here  1 8  or  20  Foot. 

The  River  of  Guiaquil,  in  this  respect,  is  much  the 
same  with  the  Gulph  of  St.  Michael ;  but  the  Lagunes 
near  it  are  larger.  Here  the  Tide  rises  and  falls  i6  Foot 
perpendicular. 

I  don't  know  of  any  other  such  Places  in  all  the  South- 
Seas  ;  yet  there  are  other  large  Rivers  on  the  Coast,  between 

308 


W  OF  TIDES   AND   CURRENTS 

hfacsc  Places ;  but  none  so  remarkable  for  high  Tides.  The 
great  Tides  in  the  Gulph  of  St.  Michael  have  doubtless 
been  the  occasion  of  that  Opinion,  which  some  hold,  that 
there's  a  subterranean  Communication  between  the  N.  and 
the  South-Seas ;  and  that  the  Isthmus  of  Darien  is  like  an 
Arched  Bridge,  under  which  the  Tides  make  their  constant 
Courses,  as  duly  as  they  do  under  London- Bridge.  And 
more  to  confirm  this  Opinion  some  have  said,  that  there 
»rc  continual  and  strange  Noises  made  by  those  Subter- 
nocan  Fluxes  and  Refluxes;  and  that  they  are  heard  by 
the  Inhabitants  of  the  Isthmus ;  and  also  that  Ships  sailing 
in  the  Bay  of  Panama  are  toss'd  to  and  fro  at  a  prodigious 
rmtc :  Sometimes  (say  they)  they  are  by  the  boiling  of  the 
Water,  dash'd  against  Islands ;  and  in  a  moment  left  dry 
there,  or  staved  in  pieces ;  at  other  times  they  are  drawn 
or  suck'd  up,  as  'twere,  in  a  Whirl-Pool  and  ready  to  be 
carried  under  Ground  into  the  North-Seas,  with  all  Sails 
standing.  They  have  said  also,  that  when  the  Tide  flows, 
especially  on  a  Spring,  the  Islands  in  the  Bay  are  all  over- 
flown ;  nay,  and  even  the  Country  for  a  great  way  together : 
snd  then  nothing  is  to  be  seen,  but  the  tops  of  Trees. 
But  if  ihis  were  so,  'tis  much  that  I  and  those  that  I  was 
with,  should  not  have  heard  or  seen  something  of  it :  For 
I  pa&s'd  the  Isthmus  twice  and  was  23  Days  in  the  last 
Trip  that  I  made  over  it ;  but  yet  did  I  never  hear  of  any 
Noises  under  Ground  there.  I  sailed  also  in  the  South- 
Seas  (taking  in  both  times  that  I  was  there)  near  3  Years: 
and  several  Months  of  it  I  was  in  the  Bay  of  Panama. 
And  after  I  went  away  those  of  our  Crew  that  remained 
there,  spent  a  great  deal  more  time  in  that  Bay.  Yet  did 
xbey  never  meet  with  such  strange  Whirl-Pools,  but  found 
ts  pleasant  sailing  there,  as  any  where  in  the  World. 
Neither  did  I  ever  hear  any  of  the  Spaniards  or  Indians 
make  mention  of  any  such  thing  in  all  my  Converse  with 
them ;  which  certainly  they  would  have  done,  if  they  had 
ever  experienced  it,  had  it  been  only  to  terrific  us,  and 
ware  us  away  from  their  Coasts. 

I  remember  indeed  our  Country-man  Mr.  Gage,  gives 
iome  hints  of  these  strange  Currents  in  this  Bay,  in  his 
3°9 


A    DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

Book,  called,  "  A  New  Survey  of  the  West-Indies,"  from 
P.  538  to  440,  but  I  am  afraid  he  took  most  of  it  upon 
trust  from  others;  or  else  he  was  Sea-sick  all  that  little 
Voyage :  for  he  gives  a  very  imperfect  and  lame  Account 
of  that  Business,  as  if  he  understood  not  what  he  wrote. 
I  should  dislike  his  whole  Book  for  that  one  Story's  sake, 
if  I  did  not  know  that  he  has  written  candidly  upon  other 
Matters;  but  I  think  I  have  said  enough  of  this:  To 
proceed  then. 

As  to  the  great  Tides,  which  are  reported  to  be  in 
these  Seas,  I  have  given  Instances  of  them,  but  they  are 
not  so  great  as  is  reported ;  neither  do  they  ebb  and  flow 
so  much  any  where  as  in  the  Gulph  of  St.  Michael  only : 
where  indeed  they  flow  over  those  small  low  Mangrove 
Islands,  at  the  Mouth  of  the  Lagune,  and  leave  only  the 
tops  of  the  low  Trees  above  Water;  for  those  Islands 
are  very  low,  neither  do  they  aflFord  any  high  Trees.  But 
however,  the  Islands  at  the  Mouth  of  the  Gulph,  before 
you  come  to  these  low  ones,  are  near  over-flown ;  yet  arc 
they  very  small  and  low,  in  comparison  with  other  Islands 
in  the  Bay  of  Panama.  And  indeed  should  the  Islands 
in  that  Bay  be  over-flown,  the  City  of  Panama  would  soon 
be  many  Yards  under  Water.  But  so  far  is  this  from 
being  true,  that  the  Pearl  Islands  which  are  very  flat  and 
low,  are  yet  never  overflown.  For  there  the  Tide  riseth 
and  falls  not  above  10  or  11  Foot  on  a  Spring,  at  the 
Southermost  end  of  them,  which  is  almost  opposite  to  the 
Gulph  of  St.  Michael,  and  not  above  12  or  14  Leagues 
distant  from  it.  And  yet  there  it  flows  more  than  it  docs 
at  or  near  Panama,  or  any  other  Place  in  the  Bay  (except 
just  at  the  Mouths  of  Rivers)  by  2  or  3  Foot.  Therefore 
all  that  report  is  wholly  groundless. 

But  to  go  on. 

I  have  also  observed,  that  Islands  lying  afar  oflF  at  Sea, 
have  seldom  such  high  Tides  as  those  that  are  near  the 
Main,  or  as  any  Places  on  the  Main  it  self;  as  for  example, 
at  the  Gallapagos  Islands,  which  lie  about  icxD  Leagues 
from  the  Main ;  the  Tides  don't  rise  and  fall  above  a  Foot 
and  half,  or  two  Foot,  which  is  less  than  they  do  on  the 

310 


OF  TTOES   AND   CURRENTS 


of  the  Main.     For  i 


:  Plac 


of  the  Mai 


most  ] 
nscs  and  tails  2  or  3  hoot,  more  or  less  according  as  the 
Coa&t  is  more  or  less  exposed  to  Indraughts  or  Rivers. 

Guam,  one  of  the  Ladrone  Islands,  is  also  another 
instance  of  this.  There  the  Tide  riscth  not  above  2  or  3 
Foot  at  roost.  In  the  Bay  of  Panama  the  Tides  do  keep  a 
more  constant  and  regular  Course  than  on  other  Places  on 
the  Onsts  of  Peru  and  Mexico ;  it  was  for  that  reason  1 
called  them  Currents  in  some  Places  (mentioned  in  my 
"Voyage  round  the  World,"  as  particularly  near  Guatuico,  on 
the  Mexican  Continent,  in  Chap.  IX.  Page  255)  but  it 
w«  truly  a  Tide  (which  there  I  called  a  Current)  and  it 
acu  to  the  Eastward  as  the  Ebb  doth  to  the  West.  The 
Tides  there  do  rise  and  fall  about  5  Foot,  as  they  do  on 
most  part  of  that  Coast. 

At  Rio  Lcja  they  rise  and  fall  about  eight  or  nine 
Fom. 

At  Amapalla  they  also  rise  and  fall  about  8  or  9  Foot, 
and  the  Flood  there  runs  to  the  East,  and  the  Ebb  to  the 
West. 

In  the  Gulph  of  Dulce  and  Nicoya  River,  they  rise  to 
10  or  1 1  Foot;  but  on  the  Coast  of  Peru  they  don't  rise 
10  high,  especially  on  all  the  Coast  between  Cape  St.  Francis 
and  the  River  Guiaquil ;  there  the  Flood  runs  to  the  South, 
and  the  Ebb  to  the  North. 

At  the  Island  Plata  the  Tide  rises  and  falls  3  or  4 
Foot ;  but  from  Cape  Blanco,  in  about  3  d.  South,  to  30  d. 
South,  the  Tides  arc  smaller;  there  they  rise  and  fall  not 
above  a  Foot  and  a  half,  or  2  Foot.  The  Flood  on  this 
Coast  sets  to  the  South,  and  the  Ebb  to  the  North. 

In  all  my  Cruisings  among  the  Privateers,  1  took  notice 
of  the  Risings  of  the  Tides;  because  by  knowing  it,  I 
always  knew  where  we  might  best  haul  ashore  and  clean 
fiur  Ships:  which  is  also  greatly  observed  by  all  Privateers. 

In  most  Places  of  the  West-Indies,  the  Tide  flows 
but  little  over  what  it  docs  in  our  Channel. 

In  the  East-Indies  also  the  Tides  are  but  small  on 
moat  Coasts,  neither  arc  they  so  regular  as  with  us. 

The  most  irregular  Tides  that  I  did  ever  meet  with, 
3" 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

are  at  Tonqueen  in  about  20  d.  North  Latitude,  and  on 
the  Coast  of  New-Holland,  in  about  17  d.  South.  In 
both  these  Places,  the  neap  Tides  are  scarce  discemable. 
Those  of  Tonqueen  are  described  at  large  by  Mr.  Daven- 
port, who  was  imployed  by  Mr.  James  when  he  was 
Chief  of  the  English  Factors  there,  to  observe  them :  And 
the  whole  Discourse  is  published  in  "The  Philosophical 
Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  '* :  whither  I  refer  you. 

At  New-Holland  I  had  two  Months  time  to  observe 
the  Tides.  There  the  Flood  runs  E.  by  N.  and  the  Ebb 
W.  by  S.     And  they  rise  and  fall  about  five  Fathom. 

In  all  the  Springs  that  we  lay  here,  the  highest  were 
three  Days  after  the  Full  or  Change,  and  that  without 
any  perceptible  Cause  in  the  Winds  or  Weather.  I  must 
confess  we  were  startled  at  it ;  and  though  some  of  us 
had  observed  it  in  the  Springs,  that  happened  while  wc 
lay  on  the  Sand  to  clean  our  Ship,  (as  I  have  mentioned 
in  my  former  Volume,  Entituled,  "  A  new  Voyage  round 
the  World,"  Ch.  XVI.  Page  457),  yet  in  that  Spring  that 
we  designed  to  haul  off,  in  order  to  be  gone  from  thence, 
we  did  all  take  more  particular  Notice  of  it  than  in  the 
preceding  Springs;  for  many  had  not  taken  notice  of  it 
before :  And  therefore  the  Major-part  of  the  Company, 
supposing  that  it  was  a  Mistake  in  us  who  made  those 
former  Observations,  expected  to  haul  off  the  Ship  the 
third  Tide  after  the  Change ;  but  our  Ship  did  not  float 
then,  nor  the  next  Tide  neither,  which  put  them  all  into 
an  Amazement,  and  a  great  Consternaticfn  too :  For  many 
thought  we  should  never  have  got  her  off  at  all,  but  by 
digging  away  the  Sand ;  and  so  clearing  a  Passage  for 
her  into  the  Sea.  But  the  sixth  Tide  cleared  all  those 
Doubts;  for  the  Tide  then  rose  so  high,  as  to  float  her 
quite  up ;  when  being  all  of  us  ready  to  work,  we  haulM 
her  off;  and  yet  the  next  Tide  was  higher  than  that,  by 
which  we  were  now  all  throughly  satisfied,  that  the  Tides 
here  do  not  keep  the  same  time  as  they  do  in  England. 

This  I  must  also  observe.  That  here  was  no  River, 
nor  Lagune,  nor  any  other  Indraught  on  the  Land  near 
us,  that  might  occasion  these  great  Tides;  tho*  'tis  very 

312 


E 


OF  TIDES   AND   CURRENTS 

that  the  great  Bending  between  New-Holland 
and  New-Guinea,  may  have  both  Rivers  and  Lagunes, 
which  may  cause  these  great  Tides;  or  else  there  may 
be  1  Passage  of  the  Sea  between  both  Places;  as  it  is  laid 
down  in  some  Draughts :  Or  if  neither  of  these,  there 
may  be  at  least  a  large  and  deep  Sound, 

This  is  the  more  probable,  because  of  the  extraordinary 
'lood  that  sets  to  the  East-ward  in  all  that  Sea,  between 
few-Holland,  and   the   Islands    lying    North   of  it,   which 

most  sensibly  perceived,  when  we  were  near  New- 
olUnd :  And  such  a  Tide  as  this  must  of  Necessity 
hive  a  greater  Indraught  than  barely  a  River  or  Lagune; 
and  'tis  the  more  likely  still,  that  this  Tide  should  have 
a  Passage  through  between  New-Holland  and  New-Guinea, 
<ir  at  least  a  deep  Sound  there;  because  it  keeps  along 
by  the  Main,  and  doth  not  run  in  among  the  Islands  to 
the  North  of  it.  And  besides,  the  Northermost  Promon- 
tory of  New-Holland  shoots  down  almost  to  the  Litte, 
which  seems  tn  be  a  Barrier  to  it  on  that  side ;  therefore 
it  may  in  Reason  be  supposed  to  have  its  Passage  some 
other  way  ;  but  of  this  guess,  I  have  said  enough. 

In  the  Sireights  of  Malacca  the  Flood  sets  to  the 
East,  and  the  Ebb  to  the  West. 

I  have  found  the  Tides  at  Malacca  Town,  to  rise  and 
fall  about  six  Foot  on  a  Spring.  I  had  the  Experience  of 
two  Spring-Tides,  when  I  was  Captain  Minchin's  Mate,  as 
is  before-mentioned  in  my  Voyage  from  Achin  to  Malacca. 

On  the  East-side  of  the  African  Coast,  between  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope  and  the  Red-Sea ;  the  Tide  keeps 
its  constant  Course.  The  Flood  runs  to  the  Southward ; 
the  Ebb  to  the  Northward.  And  at  a  Spring-tide  in  the 
Kjvcn  on  that  Coast,  the  Tide  rises  and  falls  six  Foot, 
especially  in  the  River  of  Natal,  in  Lat.  30  d.  South. 

1  have  this  Relation  from  Capt.  Rogers,  who  is  a  very 
ingenious  Person,  and  well  experienced  on  that  Coast ; 
and  is  now  gone  Commander  of  a  small  Vessel  thither 
to  trade. 

Having  already  largely  treated  of  Tides,  I  come  now 
to  speak  somewhat  of  Currents. 
313 


A    DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

Currents  and  Tides  differ  many  ways;  for  Tides  run 
forward,  and  back  again,  twice  every  twenty  four  Hours: 
on  the  contrary  Currents  run  a  Day  a  Week,  nay,  some- 
times more,  one  way:  and  then,  it  may  be,  run  another 


In  some  particular  Places  they  run  six  Months  one 
wav,  and  six  Months  another. 

In  other  Places  they  constantly  run  one  way  only  t 
day  or  two,  about  full  Moon,  and  then  they  run  stroi^ 
against  the  former  Course;  and  after  that,  return  the 
same  way  again. 

In  some  Races  they  run  constantly  one  way,  and  never 
shift  at  all. 

The  Force  of  Tides  is  generally  felt  near  the  Shore ; 
whereas  Currents  are  at  a  remote  Distance;  neither  are 
the  Effects  of  them  sensibly  discerned  by  the  rising  or 
falling  away  of  the  Water  as  those  of  the  Tides  are ;  for 
these  commonly  set  along  Shore. 

*Tis  generally  observed  by  Seamen,  that  in  all  Places 
where  Trade-winds  blow,  the  Current  is  influenced  by 
them,  and  moves  the  same  way  with  the  Winds;  but 
*tis  not  with  a  like  Swiftness  in  all  Places;  neither  is  it 
always  so  discemable  by  us  in  the  wide  Ocean,  as  it  is  near 
to  some  Coast;  and  yet  it  is  not  so  discemable  neither, 
very  near  any  Coast,  except  at  Capes  and  Promontories, 
that  shoot  far  forth  out  into  the  Sea;  and  about  Islands 
also  the  Effects  of  them  are  felt  more  or  less,  as  they 
lye  in  the  way  of  the  Trade-Winds. 

I  shall  Instance  Barbadoes  for  one,  and  all  the  Caribbees 
may  as  well  be  included. 

The  greater  Islands,  as  Hispaniola,  Jamaica  and  Cuba 
have  only  some  particular  Capes  or  Head-Lands,  exposed  to 
Currents,  as  Cape  Tiberoon  on  Hispaniola,  Point  Pedro,  and 
the  N.  E.  Point  of  Jamaica,  Cape  de  Cruz,  Cape  Corientes, 
and  Cape  Antonios  on  Cuba :  But  of  ail  the  Islands  in  the 
West-Indies  there  are  none  more  sensible  of  Currents  than 
Corrisao  and  Aruba,  nor  any  Capes  on  the  Continent  so 
remarkable  for  Currents  as  Cape  Roman,  which  shoots  out 
against  the  Sea,  between  those  two  Places,  as  also  Cape 

3H 


^^"     OF  TIDES    AND   CURRENTS 

Coquibzco  and  Cape  La  Vela  to  Leeward,  all  three  on  the 
«ainc  Head-Land,  which  shoots  forth  far,  without  any 
other  Land  on  the  Coast. 

There  is  no  such  Head-Land  till  you  come  to  Cape 
Gratia  dc  Dios,  which  is  about  260  Leagues  to  Lee- 
ward. Indeed  to  the  Eastward  there  is  Land  that  trends 
out  almost  so  far,  within  1 50  Leagues  of  it :  (Viz.) 
The  Island  Trinidado  and  the  Land  against  it ;  and 
there  also  are  great  Currents.  But  I  shall  first  speak  of 
the  Currents  between  Cape  La  Vela  and  Cape  Gratia  de 
Dio». 

The  Currents  at  Cape  La  Vela  do  seldom  shift,  there- 
fore Ships  that  ply  to  Windward  to  get  about  it,  do  not 
ply  near  the  Shore,  but  stand  off  to  Sea,  till  they  come  in 
Sight  of  Hispaniola,  and  then  back  again,  till  within  about 
six  or  eight  Leagues  of  the  Cape,  but  not  nearer.  But  in 
the  Westerly  Wind-Season,  which  is  from  October  till 
March,  Ships  often  meet  Westerly  Winds  that  last  two  or 
three  Days  with  which  they  may  run  to  the  Eastward, 
without  any  Trouble. 

Between  Cape  La  Vela  and  Cape  Gratia  de  Dios,  the 
Currents  are  much  different  from  what  they  arc  against 
the  Cape  :  and  this  seems  to  proceed  from  the  Make  of  the 
Land  ;  for  the  Shore  between  the  two  Capes,  runs  into  the 
Southward,  making  the  great  Bay  :  And  this  Bay  affords 
more  Varieties  of  Winds  and  Currents,  than  any  one  part 
of  the  West-Indies  besides. 

Here,  in  the  Westerly  Wind-Season,  the  Current  sets 
to  the  Westward  constantly ;  but  sometimes  stronger  than 
at  other  times.     At  about  four  Leagues  off  Shore,  you  find 

it,  and  $0  it  continues  till  you  are  20 25, or  30 

Leagues  off.  Beyond  that  you  meet  with  an  Easterly 
Wind ;  and  if  there  is  any  Current  it  runs  also  to  the 
Westward  :  therefore  Ships  that  are  bound  to  the  Wcst- 
*»rd,  must  run  off  to  Sea  thirty  or  forty  Leagues  to  get  a 
'•^'ind,  or  else  if  they  have  but  a  little  way  to  go,  they  must 
:1t  close  under  the  Shore,  that  so  they  may  anchor  when 
:    Otherwise  they  will   be  carried  ; 


away  1 


,  fourteen  or  sixteen  Leagues  in  a  Night's  time ; 
3"5 


A    DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

and  that  too,  though  they  have  a  faint  Easterly  Wind,  as 
frequently  they  meet  with,  though  *tis  the  Westerly  Wind- 
Season. 

To  the  East  of  Cape  Roman,  as  high  as  the  Island 
Trinidado,  you  meet  only  a  soaking  faint  Current,  setting 
to  the  Westward,  except  only  near  such  places  as  shootout 
farthest  into  the  Sea,  as  about  the  Testcgos,  which  arc 
small  Islands  lying  to  Wind-ward  of  the  Island  Margarita. 
Between  those  Islands  and  the  Main,  you  meet  with  a 
pretty  strong  Current :  therefore  it  is  hard  getting  to  the 
Eastward  there  ;  but  on  all  the  Coast,  between  Cape  Roman 
and  the  Head-Land,  shooting  out  towards  the  Testcgos, 
you  may  ply  up  with  the  Land  and  Sea-Breezes. 

From  thence,  till  you  come  as  high  as  the  East-end  of 
Trinidado  Isle,  you  meet  with  an  extraordinary  strong 
Current. 

From  the  East-end  of  Trinidado,  till  you  come  to 
Surinam,  though  you  meet  an  Easterly  Current,  yet  'tb 
possible  to  beat  it  up  with  the  Land  and  Sea-Breezes. 

From  Surinam  also  to  Cape  Blanco,  you  may  turn  it 
up,  though  to  be  sure  youMl  meet  with  Currents  setting 
to  the  West ;  except  near  the  Full  of  the  Moon ;  and  then 
on  all  the  Coasts  before  mentioned,  we  commonly  meet 
with  Currents,  setting  to  the  Eastward ;  at  least  then  it 
slackens  and  stands  still,  if  it  doth  not  run  to  the  Eastward 
But  when  you  are  come  as  far  to  the  East  as  Cape  Blanco, 
on  the  North  of  Brazil,  you  meet  with  a  Current  always 
against  you  ;  and  so  from  thence  Southerly,  as  far  as  Cape 
St.  Augustine. 

There  is  no  dealing  with  this  Promontory;  for  it 
shoots  out  so  far  into  the  Sea,  and  thereby  lies  so  exposed 
to  the  Sea-Breezes  and  the  Currents,  that  soak  down 
between  Africa  and  Brazil,  that  it  is  quite  contrary  to 
Reason  to  think  there  should  not  always  be  a  strong 
Current  setting  to  the  N.  W. 

I  have  before  hinted.  That  in  all  Places  where  the 
Trade  blows,  we  find  a  Current  setting  with  the  Wind, 
which  is  not  so  perceptible  in  the  wide  Sea  as  nearer  the 
Shores  :  yet  even  there  the  Force  of  the  Winds  constandy 


OF  TIDES  AND   CURRENTS 

Iring  one  way,  may,  and  probably  does,  move  the 
ftce  aS  the  Water  along  with  It. 
From  hence  it  may  be  inferred,  that  the  Southerly 
ds  on  the  Coast  of  Africa,  and  the  true  Trade  between 
id  Brazil,  gently  move  the  surface  of  the  Sea  with  it, 
the  Trade  being  mostly  at  S,  E.  drives  the  Sea  to  the 
thward,  slanting  in  on  the  Coast  of  Brazil ;  which  being 
;  stopp'd  by  the  Land,  bends  its  Course  Northerly 
rds  Cape  St.  Augustine:  And  after  it  has  doubled 
:  great  Promontory,  it  falls  away  more  gently  towards 
Coast  of  Surinam;  and  from  thence  towards  the  West- 
.  For  after  it  has  doubled  that  Promontory,  it  has 
room  to  spread  it  self,  and  thereby  becomes  weaker 
Motion,  being  agitated  by  the  Trade-winds,  which  to 
North  of  the  Line,  we  find  commonly  blowing  at 
N.  E.  and  this  still  bears  the  Sea  slanting  down  along 
Coast  to  the  Westward.  And  probably  'tis  for  this 
ion,  that  wc  find  the  Current  setting  strongest  near 
e  Head-Lands  before-mentioned.  Whereas  at  Barba- 
\,  and  other  of  the  Caribbee-Islands,  we  find  only  a 
ing  Current,  such  as  seems  to  arise  only  from  the 
stancy  of  the  Trade-winds  blowing  there,  and  not  from 
Original  Current,  from  the  South-part  of  the  Atlantick  : 
ich,  as  1  said  before,  doubles  about  Cape  St.  Augustine, 
,  fo  coasts  along  pretty  nigh  the  Shore. 
The  Currents  about  the  Island  Trinidado,  and  at 
and  Aruha  as  also  between  them  and  Cape  Roman 
B  to  indicate  as  much.  The  Currents  also  between 
ic  Roman,  and  Cape  La  Vela  indicate  the  same. 
From  Cape  La  Vela  the  Currents  set  still  to  the  West- 
d,  towanls  Cape  Gratia  de  Dios;  but  in  a  direct  Line, 
not  borrowing  or  slanting  in  towards  the  Shore.  For, 
«aid  before,  ic  is  a  large  Bay,  and  Currents  commonly 
from  one  Head-Land  to  another ;  so  that  Bays  have 
Uxn  any;  or  if  they  have,  they  arc  only  Counter- 
treats.  And  these  Counter-Currents  too  do  set  from 
!  Point  to  another,  without  interfering  with  the  little 
between.  And  'tis  also  very  probable  that  these 
itcr-CarrcniB,  such  as  we  meet  with  in  this  Bay,  in 
317 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

their  Seasons,  after  they  have  surrounded  the  Bay,  and  arc 
got  as  far  to  the  East  as  Cape  La  Vela,  wheel  ofF  there,  and 
turn  about  again  with  the  Stream  to  the  Westward,  like  an 
Eddy  in  a  River. 

From  Cape  Gratia  de  Dios  the  Current  sets  awayN.W. 
towards  Cape  Catoch,  and  so  passes  away  to  the  Northward, 
between  Cape  Catoch  on  Jucatan,  and  Cape  Antonio  on 
Cuba. 

In  the  Channel  between  those  two  Capes,  wc  commonly 
find  a  strong  Current  setting  to  the  Northward  :  And  here 
I  have  found  them  extraordinary  strong. 

On  the  North-side  of  Jucatan,  as  you  pass  into  the  Bay 
of  Campeachy,  you  meet  with  a  small  soaking  Current  to 
the   Westward,  even  down  to  the  bottom  or  the  Bay  of 
Mexico ;  but  on  the  North-side  of  the  Bay  of  Meidco  the 
Current  sets  to  the  Eastward :  And  'tis  probable  that  is  the 
reason,  that  the  Spaniards,  coming  from  La  Vera  Cruz, 
keep  that  shore  aboard.     And  'tis  as  probable  that  the 
Current,  which  sets  to  Leeward,  on  all  the  Coast  from 
Cape  St.  Augustine  to  Cape  Catoch,  never  enters  the  Bay 
of  Mexico ;    but  bends  still    to  the  Northward,   till  'tis 
check'd  by  the  Florida  shore;  and  then  wheels  about  to 
the  East,  till  it  comes  nearer  the  Gulph's  Mouth,  and  there 
joyning  with  the  soaking  Current  that  draws  down  on  the 
North-sides  of  Hispaniola  and  Cuba,  passes  altogether  with 
great  strength  through  the  Gulph  of  Florida,  which  is  the 
most  remarkable  Gulph  in  the  World  for  its  Currents ;  be- 
cause it  always  sets  very  strong  to  the  North.     Yet  near  the 
shores  on  each  side  this  Gulph,  there  are  Tides,  especially 
on  the  Florida  shore ;  and  Ships  may  pass  which  way  they 
please,  if  they  are  acquainted. 

It  has  formerly  been  accounted  very  dangerous  to  meet 
with  a  North  in  this  Gulph ;  and  for  that  Reason  our 
Jamaica  Ships  to  avoid  them,  have  rather  chosen  to  go  to 
the  Eastward,  and  pass  through  the  Cacuses  ^  in  the  Season 
that  the  Norths  do  blow.  The  Cacuses  are  Sands  that  lye 
oflF  the  N.  W.  end  of  Hispaniola.     Those  that  went  from 

*  Caicos. 

318 


W         OF  TIDES  AND  CURRENTS 

Brt-Royal  in  Jamaica  had  gooct  Reason  for  this;  for  if  a 
Inforth  took  them  at  their  going  out,  it  would  help  them 
forward  in  ihcir  way,  which,  should  they  have  been  going 
towarJs  the  Gulph,  it  would  obstruct  them.  Then  besides, 
if  a  North  take  a  Ship  in  the  Gulph,  the  Wind  blowing 
against  the  Current  makes  an  extraordinary  Sea,  and  so 
thick  come  the  Waves  one  after  another  that  a  Ship  can't 
possibly  live  in  it ;  yet  of  late  they  go  through  at  all  times 
of  the  Year,  and  if  a  North  takes  them  in  the  Gulph,  they 
put  away  right  before  the  Wind  and  Sea,  with  a  small 
Head-Sail ;  yet  the  Current  is  then  as  strong  or  stronger 
then  at  other  times ;  and  forces  them  back,  stern  foremost 
against  both  Wind  and  Sea  :  For  tho'  the  surface  of  the 
Sea  is  raised  in  Waves  and  driven  violently  with  the  Winds 
to  the  Southward,  yet  the  Current  underneath  runs  still  to 
the  Northward ;  neither  is  it  any  strange  thing  to  see  two 
difiercnt  Currents  at  one  place  and  time,  the  superficial 
Water  running  one  way,  and  that  underneath  running  a 
quite  contrary :  For  sometimes  at  an  Anchor,  I  have  seen 
tile  Cable  carryed  thus  by  two  different  Streams,  the  under 
part  having  been  doubled  one  way,  and  the  upper  part  the 
contrary.  But  'tis  ccruin,  in  all  other  pans  of  the  World, 
ihe  Current  shifts  at  certain  times  of  the  Year;  As  in  the 
East-Indies  they  run  from  East  to  West  one  part  of  the 
Year,  and  from  West  to  East  the  other  part :  Or  as  in  the 
West-Indies  and  Guinea,  where  they  shift  only  near  a  Full 
Moon.  This  is  meant  of  parts  of  the  Sea  near  any  Coast ; 
Wl  there  are  strong  Currents  in  the  wide  Ocean  also, 
fc"*«g  contrary  to  the  Rules  before-going  :  I  mean  against 
^B  Trade ;  but  'tis  not  common. 

B  On  the  Coast  of  Guinea  the  Current  sets  East,  except 
tt  or  near  a  full  Moon  ;  but  to  the  South  of  the  Line  from 
Louigo,  to  25  or  30  d.  the  Current  sets  with  the  Wind 
ttoat  5.  to  N.  except  near  the  Full. 

To  the   PUstward   of  the   Cape   of  good    Hope,   from 
,  South,  to  24  d.  South,  the  Currents  from  May  till 

i  aa  E.  N-  E.  and  the  Winds  then  are  at  W,  S.  W.  or 
.  bur  from  Oct,  till  May,  when  the  Winds  arc  between 

E.  N.  E.    «nd  E.  S.  E.  the  Currents  run  to  the  West. 
3'9 


A   DISCOURSE   OF   WINDS 

These  Currents  are  thus  found  from  5  or  6  Leagues  off 
the  shore  to  about  50.  Within  5  Leagues  off  the  Shore 
you  have  the  Tide,  and  not  a  Current ;  and  being  past  50 
Leagues  off  Shore,  the  Current  either  ceaseth  quite,  or  is 
imperceptible. 

On  the  Coast  of  India,  North  of  the  Line,  the  Current 
sets  with  the  Monsoon,  but  does  not  shift  altogether  so 
soon,  sometimes  not  by  3  Weeks  or  more,  and  then  never 
shifts  again  till  after  the  Monsoon  is  settled  in  the  contrary 
way.  As  for  Example,  the  West  Monsoon  sets  in  the 
middle  of  April,  but  the  Current  does  not  shift  till  the 
beginning  of  May  :  So  when  the  East  Monsoon  sets  in 
about  the  middle  of  September,  the  Current  does  not  shift 
till  October. 

In  the  South-Seas  on  the  Coast  of  Peru,  the  Current 
sets  from  South  to  North,  even  from  30  d.  to  the  line, 
and  to  3  or  4d.  North  of  it. 

At  the  Gallapagos  Islands  we  found  a  soaking  Current, 
not  very  strong,  but  so  strong  that  a  Ship  could  get  very 
little  by  turning ;  and  'tis  probable  that  nearer  the  Main, 
they  are  stronger  because  of  the  constant  Southerly  Winds. 

The  most  remarkable  Places  for  Currents  in  the  South- 
Seas  ;  are  Cape  St.  Francis,  Cape  Passao,  Cape  St.  Laurence 
and  Cape  Blanco.  This  last  has  commonly  very  strong 
Currents  setting  to  the  N.  W.  which  hinders  Ships  mightily; 
and  the  more  because  it  is  a  very  windy  place;  so  that 
many  times  Ships  are  not  able  to  carry  their  To{>-saiIs ;  and 
then  it  is  but  bad  plying  to  Windward  against  a  Current 
I  had  not  so  much  Experience  of  the  Mexican  Coast,  be- 
cause we  commonly  kept  within  the  Verge  of  the  Tides. 
But  on  the  Coast  of  Guatamala,  in  the  Lat.  of  I2d.  50  m. 
and  13  d.  we  had  a  Current  setting  S.  W.  and  it  is  prd>able 
that  there  also  the  Current  sets  with  the  Winds.  For,  as 
it  is  before  noted,  the  Currents  on  all  Coasts  sets  as  the 
coasting  Trade  does. 

And  thus  have  I  finished  what  my  own  Experience,  or 
Relations  from  my  Friends,  have  furnished  me  with  on  this 
useful  Subject  of  Winds,  Tides,  Currents,  &c-  which  I 
humbly  offer,  not  as  a  compleat  and  perfect  Account,  but 

320 


OF   NATAL   IN    AFRICK 
a  rude  and  imperfect  Beginning  or  Specimen  of  what 
lay  better  be  done  by  abler  Hands  hereafter.     And  1  hope 
bis  may  be  useful  so  far  as  to  give  a  few  Hints  to  direct 
c  more  accurate  Observation  of  others. 


-  ftBe^/itf  Pafcr,  eoniam'mg  a  ihcrl  DtKnfi/hn  of  a  part  af  Africl  that  ir 
moi  vrdi  ktuKun  le  Eun^ani,  I  ibau^hi  loeulil  not  he  maeteptable  lo  thf 
rarwui  Rrai/rr,  /  have  iherrfore  annfxitt  !l,  at  I  rrcnved  U  from  my 
iagtuitmi  Friaui  Caft.  Ragtri,  vibo  it  laltlj  gone  lo  thai  Place :  and 
bMk  ittn  liere  te^ral  timei  before. 

rHb  Cotmuy  ofNaul  titM  about  3  d.  and  half  of  Lai.  Trom  N.  to 
S.  lying  betwwo  th<r  Lat.  of  3 1  d.    jo  m.   South  and   18   N.     'Tis 
Msdcd  on  the  S.  by  a  Country  inhabited  by  a  small  Nation  of  Savage 
'r»pk,  ulkd  by  out   Engli>h,  Wild-bush   Men.  that  live  in   Cave»  and   in 
lok*  of  Rocki,  and  ha*e  no  other  House),  but  tuch  as  are  formed  by 
laOffr :     Thry  vc  of  >  low  Stature,  uuoy-colour'd,  with  crisped  Hair  : 
?b«y  are  accounted  »ery  cruel  to  iheir   Enemies.     Their  Weapons  are 
!»*•  wd  Poiaoncd  Arrowt.     These  People  have  for   their  Neighbours  on 
&  fhe  Hotiantou.      Delhgoa  is  a  Navigable  River  in   L.tt.   iS.   S.   that 
d*  Natal  on  the  N.     The  Inhabitaois  of  (his  Rivet  have  a  Commerce 
ifec  Pinngucae  uf  Muumbique,  who  oft  viiit  them  in  small  Barks,  and 
;  lfc«r  fix   Ulqihanti  Tieth;   which   they  have   great   Plenty.      .Some 
Ui  too  have   Utrly  hrcn  there  to  purchase  I'ecth,   paiticularly  Caiit. 
k,'  jnM  iDCBtion'd  in  my  former  Volume,  Ch.  1 8,  P.  494,  who  aner 
■1  beco  ID  the  River  of  Dellagoa,  aiui  purchased  H  or    10  Tun  of 
Ik  IcMt  hi*  Ship  OD  a  Rock   near   Madag^ucar.     The  Country  of  Naul 
ipcB  to  tbe  lodiaa  Sea  on  the   East,  but  how  far  back   it  runs  to  the 
Hnfd  b  iK>t  y«  known. 

fbtf  p«t  of  tbe  Country  which  respects  the  Sea  ii  plain  Champion  and 
Ij  I  b«  within  Land  it  a|>pears  more  uneven,  by  reaion  of  many  Hills 
h  mt  b  DDei]ual  Height!  above  each  other.  Yet  it  is  interlaced  with 
Mt  Valley*  and  large  Plains,  and  'tis  checker'*]  with  Natural  Groves 
hwwaha.  Neither  is  there  any  want  of  Water  ;  for  every  Hill  affordi 
Bnolu,  which  glide  down  several  ways  \  some  of  which  after  several 
IIM  and  Windings,  meet  by  degrees  and  make  up  the  River  of  Natal, 
fc  Mcfaatjtcth  it  self  into  the  Eait-Indiao  Ocean  in  the  Lat.  of  30  d. 
"u  Tbde  it  opens  pretty  wide  and  is  deep  enough  for  small  Vetseli. 
I  tte  Movth  of  the  River  is  a  Bar  which  has  not  above  ten  or  eleven 
Water  on  it  in  a  Spring-tide  ;  though  within  there  is  Water  enough. 
River  it  ibc  Principal  of  the  Cnuntry  of  Natal,  and  has  been  lately 
aud  bjr  tome  of  out  Ivnglish  Shi[i«  particularly  by  a  amall  Vessel  that 
b  VLofga*,  formerly  meDtioned,  commaaded. 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

There  are  also  other  Streams  and  Rivers,  which  beod  their  Coursei 
Northerly,  especially  one  of  a  considerable  Bigness  about  lOO  Mile  within 
Land,  and  which  runs  due  North. 

The  Woods  are  composed  of  divers  sorts  of  Trees ;  many  of  which  are 
very  good  Timber,  and  fit  for  any  uses,  they  being  tall  and  large.  The 
Savannahs  also  are  cloathed  with  kindly  thick  Grass. 

The  Land- Animals  of  this  Country  are  Lyons,  Tygers,  Elephants, 
Buffaloes,  Bullocks,  Deer,  Hogs,  Conies,  &c.  Here  are  also  Abandance  of 
Sea^Horses. 

Bu&loes  and  Bullocks  only  are  kept  tame,  but  the  rest  are  all  wild. 

Elephants  are  so  plenty  here  that  they  feed  together  in  great  Troops; 
looo  to  I  jcx>  in  a  Company ;  Mornings  and  Evenings  they  are  seen  grazing 
in  the  Savannahs,  but  in  the  Heat  of  the  Day,  they  retire  into  the  Woods, 
and  they  are  very  peaceable  if  not  molested. 

Deer  are  very  numerous  here  also.  They  feed  quietly  in  the  Savanoabs 
among  the  tame  Cattle,  for  they  are  seldom  disturbed  by  the  Natives. 

Here  are  Fowls  of  divers  sorts ;  some  such  as  we  have  in  England,  viz. 
Duck  and  Teal,  both  tame  and  wild:  and  plenty  of  Cocks  and  Heos* 
Besides  Abundance  of  wild  Birds,  wholly  unknown  to  us. 

Here  are  a  sort  of  large  Fowls  as  big  as  a  Peacock,  which  have  many 
fine  coloured  Feathers.     They  are  very  rare  and  shy. 

There  are  others  like  Curlews,  but  bigger.  The  flesh  of  these  is  black, 
yet  sweet  and  wholesome  Meat. 

The  Sea  and  Rivers  also  do  abound  in  Fish  of  divers  Sorts;  yet  the 
Natives  do  but  seldom  endeavour  to  take  any,  except  Tortoises ;  and  tbat 
is  chiefly  when  they  come  ashore  in  the  Night  to  lay  their  Eggs.  Though 
they  have  also  another  very  odd  way,  which  they  sometimes  make  use  of  to 
catch  Turtle  or  Tortoises.  They  take  a  liviog  sucking  Fish  or  Reoiora, 
and  fastning  a  couple  of  strings  to  it,  (one  at  the  Head  and  the  other  at  the 
Tail)  they  let  the  sucking  Fish  down  into  the  Water  on  the  Turtle  Ground, 
among  the  half-grown  or  young  Turtle :  and  when  they  find  that  the  Fish 
hath  fastned  himself  to  the  back  of  a  Turtle,  as  he  will  soon  do,  they  then 
draw  him  and  the  Turtle  up  together:  This  way  of  Fishing  (as  I  have 
heard^  is  also  used  at  Madagascar. 

The  Natives  of  this  Country  are  but  of  a  middle  Stature,  yet  have  nfj 
good  Limbs :  The  Colour  of  their  Skins  is  black ;  their  Hair  crisped:  thej^ 
are  oval  visaged:  their  Noses  neither  flat  nor  high,  but  very  well  pro* 
portioned :  their  Teeth  are  white,  and  their  Aspect  is  altogether  gracefbl. 

They  are  nimble  People,  but  very  lazy :  which  probably  is  for  want  w 
Commerce.  Their  chief  Employment  is  Husbandry.  They  have  a  great 
many  Bulls  and  Cows,  which  they  carefully  look  after;  for  every  Mao 
knows  his  own,  though  they  run  all  promiscuously  together  io  tbdr 
Savaonahs,  yet  they  have  Pens  near  their  own  Houses,  where  they  make 
them  gentle  and  bring  them  to  the  Pail.  They  also  Plant  Corn,  and  tenet  in 
their  Fields  to  keep  out  all  Cattle  as  well  tame  as  wild.  They  have  Guinea 
Corn,  which  is  their  Bread ;  and  a  small  sort  of  Grain  no  bigger  than 
Mustardseed,  with  which  they  make  their  Drink. 

Here  are  no  Arts  nor  Trades  professed  among  them,  hot  every  one 

322 


OF  NATAL  IN   AFRICK 

•  lor  hinMcIf  luch  Neccwiritt,  m  Need  or  Oroameat  requires,  the  Men 
!■(  to  ilirir  IlmpJoTnicoi,  and  the  Women  to  [hcir«. 
~'   '    Men   build   Knutn,   Hum,   Plant,   and   do   what    is   lo   be   done 
And  ilie  Women  Milk   ihc  Cow.,  drew  the  Victuali,  &c.  and 
;  ill  Mmich  wiihio  Doori.     Their  Houks  are  not  great  not  richly 
i  but  tbcy  ue  nude  clo*e  and  well  thatched,  that  nrithet  Winds 
fr  "Wrttbft  an  hurt  ihcm. 

F  They  wear  but  few  Cloithi,  and  those  extraordinary  mean.  The  men 
I  I>  a  RBHier  naked,  (heir  common  Garb  being  only  a  square  piece  of 
;  with  Sdk^Grau,  or  Moho-Rind,  and  wrought  in  form  of  a 
fcMt  Aproo.  Ai  the  upper  Coram  it  has  iwo  itrapt  lo  lye  round  iheir 
Wmm  i  mmJ  the  lowet-eiid  being  finely  fringed  with  the  same  hingi  down 
■Arir  Knao. 

^■Thrv  bMC  CajM  made  with  Beef  Tallow  of  about  nine  or  ten  Inches 
Bb  Thry  art  ■  great  while  of  making  thcte  Capa ;  for  [he  Tallow  must 
mwnie  wtrj  pore,  before  'lis  fit  for  ihit  use.  Besides  they  lay  on  but  a 
Eldr  at  a  tune  and  mis  it  finely  among  the  Hair  ;  and  so  it  nrver  afterwards 
BMHa  off  tbdi  Hcidi.  When  they  go  a  hunting,  which  is  but  seldom,  they 
fU»  at  ikrM  or  four  Inche*  from  the  lop  of  it,  that  ki  it  may  lit  the 
H  the  next  Day  ihry  begin  to  build  it  up  again,  and  so  they  do 
""l  'tis  of  *  decern  and  fashionable  height. 

t  bt  ■  mo«  ridiculous  thi^  for  a  Mao  here  to  be  seen  without 
^_^ "_        But   Boyi   arc   not   luflcted   to  wear  any,  till  they  come  lo 
^^aad  then  they  begin  to   build   upon  their  Heads.      The  Women 
ka>c  o^  tbort  Petticoats,  which  reach  from  the   Wasie   lo  the    Knee. 
VhcB  k  raia*  they  cover  their  Bodies  with  a  simple  Cows-hide,  thrown 
r  tbdr  Shoulders  like  a  Blankri. 

u  Snhfitiencc  of  these  People  is  Bread  made  of  Guinea  Corn, 
I.  Milk,  Ducks,  Hens,  Rggs,  &c.     They  also  drink   Milk  olteo 
It  ihnr  Thirst :  aad  this  sometimes  when  it  is  sweet,  but  commonly 
•  tower  first. 

Qk,  which  is  the  common   Drink,  they  make  a  belter  son  of 

t  mcDlioned,  purposely  to  be  merry  with.     And  when 

h  Occaiioni,  the  Men  make  themscUcs  extraordinary  line, 

t  stuck  into  their  Caps  tcry  thick.     They  make  use  of  the  long 

1  of  Cocki  TaiU,  and  none  else. 

tbrsr  Hrad-Orn.tntents  ihry  wear  a  piece  of  Cow-hide,  made 
1  'lis  fasteneil  behind  ilirra  as  a  Tail,  reachmg  Irom  their 
I  GrnuMl.  This  piece  of  Hide  it  about  six  Indies  broad,  and 
ia  adoraed  with  little  Iiuo  Rin>;9  of  their  own  making. 
f  are  thus  attired,  ihcir  Heads  a  liillc  intoxicated  and  ihe 
,  they'll  skip  abuui  mrrril*,  and  shake  their  TjiU  ti>  some 
T  very  inaoccnt  in  their  Mirth. 

nay  hare  as  many  Wives  as  he  can  purchase  and  maintain : 
t  faayiag  bere  are  dodt  to  be  had:  neither  is  there  any 
**  y  to  b»  bought  or  aold  but  Women. 

I  of  by  their   Fathers,  Brothers,  or  nearest 
TIm  prict  ii  according  to  the  Deiiity  of  the  Damsel. 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

They  have  no  Money  in  this  Country,  bat  give  Cowt  in  exchange  for 
Wives :  And  therefore  he  is  the  richest  Man  that  has  roost  Daughters  or 
Sisters :  for  to  be  sure  he  will  get  Cattle  enough. 

They  make  merry  when  they  take  their  Wives ;  but  the  Bride  cries  all 
her  Wedding  Day.  They  live  together  in  small  Villages,  and  the  oldest 
Man  governs  the  rest ;  for  all  that  live  together  in  one  Village  are  a-kin, 
and  therefore  willingly  submit  to  his  Government. 

They  are  very  just  and  extraordinary  civil  to  Strangers;  This 
remarkably  experienced  by  two  English  Seamen  that  lived  aoKNig  them  fivi 
Years;  their  Ship  was  cast  away  on  the  Coast,  and  the  rest  of 
Consoru  marched  to  the  River  of  Dellagoa;  but  they  stayed  here 
Captain  Rogers  accidentally  came  hither  and  took  them  away  with  hii^^ 
They  had  gained  the  Language  of  the  Country :  and  the  Natives  ^e^.^ 
gave  them  Wives  and  Cows  too.  They  were  beloved  by  all  the  Pra^l^ 
and  so  much  reverenced  that  their  Words  were  taken  as  Laws.  And  wKei] 
they  came  away,  many  of  the  Boys  cried  because  they  would  not  take  them 
with  them. 


FINIS 


324 


FERS     AND    PAPERS    RELATING    TO 
THE   NEW    HOLLAND    VOYAGE 

UDCiD  PKOM  Tilt  Originals  in  the  Public  Record  Office) 


TAIN     DAMPIER'S     PROPOSALS     OF    HIS     PRO- 
CEEDING  ON   THE  INTENDED   VOYAGE,     n.  d. 

.  Mt  Lov\ — Yoor  l.'ibip  haa  been  pleased  to  order  me  lo  make  a 
e  TOjagc  whrrcin  I  might  be  serviccjble  to  my  Nation.  I 
r  thm  ut  tin»\  placu  which  mighi  probably  be  viiiied  with  good 
ruge:  but  m  there  u  no  larger  Tract  of  Land  hjtherio  undiscovered 
w  Ttrra  jfmrtraSi  (if  that  «Ml  apace  lurrounding  ye  South  Pole,  and 
w  bt  iaio  ft  warmer  Climilc  be  a  continued  Land,  ai  a  great 
^1  of  ii  M  kmim  to  be)  ao  'ti*  reaionable  to  cooceive  yt  so  great  a  part 
'At  World  M  not  without  verif  valluable  commoditiei  lo  incourage  ye 
'•■i.iiHij,  and  peat  variety  of  ym  according  to  ye  variouE  Latitudca  in 
"*  ««ch  Counireyt  are  (cited,  whether  ihcy  be  comenent  or  iiland  ;  and  of 
Jc4  ye  nroc  kiadeti  probiblv,  a>  are  produced  in  Conntryea  of  yftla, 
9^%J,or  ,4mttita  of  ye  aame  Latitude).  An  attempt  upon  ye  unknown 
I^^Oiaf  }1  pun  of  ye   World,  haa  y*  1u  recommend  it,   yt   none  of  our 

r  shall  we 

•  wheatlicr  ye 

5  be  onde  toward*  ye  Eaai  or  WcM  of  ye  meridian  there  being  a 

VOcna  etthn  wit. 

I  Aid  for  aich  a  DucoTtry  aa  ihii   1    mjy  he  more  panicularly  <]uali(ied 

perimce   I    hare  already  gainrd   In  former  Voyageii:    the 

Mafwtikti  haa  lain  much  among  unknown  thorei  ami  tavage  nation*. 

I  be  pitcbrd  d«  fw  an  Kxpedition  of  thia  kinde  I  would  deaite  to  hate 

'am  nnlimiied  ai  might  be  W*^  rcipect  either  to  Ttmr  or  Ptact : 

1  attempt  to  full  of  ditficnlriei,  'tit  impouibie 

d  Accideoli  w**  may  rrquire  ye  goeing  aomewhat  aiide 

t  IVindpkU  Desipwt  aod  nuy  at  the  aame  time  offer  a  yet  more 

k  Ofcrtaaity  of  aomc  Collaierall   OneoTery.     I  would  deiire  but  i 

I  whI  provided  of  all  Deceatariea:  and  coniidriing  ye  Temptationi 

SMtn  lia>r  lud  af  W  ta  break   looae  and  iuid  pirate  when  they 

r  imo  J*  Btiber  pan*  of  ye  World   I   thould  be  glad   yt  tome  good 

It  nfhl  be  i^opoacd  lO  tbote  whoe  ihould  {oe  in  thi*  Voyage 

r  renuo.     But  tbcae  thinga  and  otlier  oecetaary  Cjrcumatancc*  I 


jT'wiiai  jtmtnta  oi  yr  lamc  i^aiiiuue).  n.n  aiiempi  upon 
^"^naof  yt  un  of  ye  World,  haa  y*  1u  recommend  it,  yt 
^^UfMH  Ne^hboor*  Ca«  think  ihemielTca  injured  thereby  :  i 
!^i  M  mttfnt  with  any  of  ym  eren  in   ye  piiuge  thither, 


J  hthi^  UhiiliiK  M  ■>>«  niilaiii  ol  ib>  pita 
■«■  awmy  wtib  iW  «hlp  at  atiaai  ihli  lime. 

3»5 


'.  ATCI7,  who  dtpoar^  hli  explain 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

would  leaye  to  yo'  Lordships  further  consideration,  if  in  the  meantime  the 
Expedition  it  self  be  approved  of:  and  as  to  yt  alsoe  and  ye  panicukn 
relating  to  it  I  may  be  better  able  to  satisfie  your  L^ship  by  word  of  moath. 
(No  signature,  no  endorsement.) 

2.  My  Lou>, — I   formerly  acquainted  yo'  L^hip  that  the  Discoferj 
I  would  chuse  to  goe  uppon  should  be  to  ye  remoter  part  of  the  Eiut  InSa 
Islands  and  the  neighbouring  Coast  of  Terra  Austra&s^  and  that  for  this 
purpose  I   would  be  furnished  with  two  small   Ships,  a  Commissioo  u 
unlimmetted  as  might  be,  and  the  Seamen  assured  of  good  Incouragemeot 
upon  their  return  etc. :  I  cannot  expect  to  return  to  England  in  less  than 
three  yeares,  therefore  it  would  not  only  be  convenient  to  carry  out  as  much 
proTision  as  is  possible  in  our  own  Ship,  but  it  would   be  well  if  thoie 
Ships  also  that  are  to  return  again  after  the  expedition  is  over  should  cany 
some  provision  extraordinary  purposely  for  us  as  much  at  least  as  wooki 
last  us  six  monethes  :  there  is  indeed  good  store  of  Beef  at  Madagascar^  if 
the  Pirats  have  not  made  it  scarce  and  dear,  and  we  might  expect  to  life 
on  fresh  meat  while  wee  are  there  and  salt  som  if  we  should  have  ocasion. 
And  if  we  may  be  suplyed  either  with  Engtuh  provision  out  of  our  own 
Squadron  or  els  with  beef  and  rice  from  Madagascar,     I  should  (runn,or 
range)  ^  over  directly  from  thence  to  the  northermost  part  of  New  HoRad 
where  I  would  water  if  I  had  occasion,  and  from  thence  I  would  range 
toward  New  Guinnia.     There  are  many  islands  in  that  sea  between  New 
No/land  and  New  Guinnia  which  are  not  frequented  by  any  Europeans,  and 
it  is  probable  that  we  may  light  upon  some  or  other  that  are  not  without 
Spice ;  should  I  meet  with  nothing  on  any  of  these  Islands  I  would  range 
along  the  Main  of  New  Guinia  to  see  what  that  aforded ;  and  from  theme  I 
would  cross  over  to  the  East  side  of  the  Is/and  Gilolo  where  I  may  be  in- 
formed of  the  state  of  these  parts  by  the  Natives  who  speak  the  MalmoM 
language  :  From  Gilolo  I  would  range  away  to  the  Eastward  of  New  Gnak 
and  so  direct  my  course  southerly  coasting  by  the  land,  and  where  I  founds 
harbour  or  river  I  would  land  and  seek  about  for  men  and  other  AoimaU) 
Vigetables,  Mineralls,  etc.,  and   haveing  made  what  discovery  I  could  I 
would  (two  words  erased)  return  home  by  the  way  of  Terra  del  fitega 

This  is  the  course  I  would  take  if  I  can  be  suplyed  with  provision  from 
ye  Squadron  or  from  Madagascar ;     But  if  I  should  be  forced  to  goe  to 
any  of  ye  Factoryes  in  In£a  to   recruit  and  victuall;    Fort  St,  Geerp 
(Madras)  is  the  place  where  we  may  best  be  provided  with  beef  and  porkCf 
if  I  might  touch  there  without  any  troublesome  examination,  and  as  ftwr  rice 
I  could  supply  myself  with  that  in  my  way.     From   Fort  St.  George  I 
must  pass  the  Streights  of  Malacca  and  then  I  would  stretch  to  the  Eait- 
ward  as  far  as  the  Bashee  Islands  where  I  could  furnish  myself  with  porl^ 
which  must  be  purchased  with  iron,  from  thence  I  would  sail  to  the  Eait  of 
Luconia  and  all  the   Philipine  Islands  and  soe  to  Meangis  Island^  and  froo 
thence  I  would  bend  my  cours  toward  New  Guinnia  and  Terra  Jtutrvt} 
and  soe  home  as  before,  this  is  much  the  longer  way  ; 

If  I  should   happen  to  come  where  Spice  is  to  be  had  it  mutt  be 
purchased  with  East  India  comodityes  (viz.)  long  cloath,  Chints,  Ginghaffli 

1  Word  illegible. 
326 


LETTERS   AND    PAPERS 

:  Tbe  Curope  coaiodityn  y*  [  thoutd  want  tn  thi)  *oy>gc  ii  chiefly 
bun  bnt(lc«ix«,hitcheiu,  knitc*  rtc.  and  iImc  brads,  looking  gbun, 
nch  like  utyt*  ill  whkh  are  cOTctcd  u  well  by  people  uted  (o  trade  tt 

(So   niBaiurc.     Auio);nph   throughout.      Eodortcd    Capt   Dampkr'i 
of  hi*  Proceeding  on  hi»  intended  Voyage.) 

Om  lie  jci  Jmu,  i6<jS,  Dampter  wrote  a  hurried  Krawl  to  the  Secrr- 
M  **  m  y«  Ri  boa"*  the  Lordi  of  ihe  Admiralty,"  telling  them  that 
had  hcca  oo  board  the  Ja^  Pme,  and  had  itrictly  lUfTcyrd  her ;  but  did 
'  tUnk  her  "any  way  fin  for  the  icrtice  intended  "  ;  adding  that  he  meant 
■tarn  10  town  "  to  give  ray  Lordi  further  latiifaction  in  thii  aifair." 

Ji^  6,  1698.  A  note  10  the  Secretary  to  the  Lordi  CommissiunerB 
IIn  Adaibaliy  uving  that  he  had  riewrd  the  Jo/Ij  Prite,  and  "  found 
■hocetber  nnfittt  *he  '*  being  >u  imill  that  the  cannot  itow  proviiion* 
■gfc  far  «Dch  oumbrr  of  men  ai  will  be  required  to  navigate  her,  neither 
bnr  coovcBicace  in  bcr  for  many  Lodging!  and  (xhrr  accoratnodjtioiu." 


Cw/Mu,  11,/.  448:    tV~- Damfacr'i  catixry  fattf^J 
iir  tinart.     "  After  oui  liearty  Comcodaconi  ^^  heccat  "W"-  Damfner 
ua  That  be  it  an  t^xtriot'''  Land  Carriage  Man  in  ye 
Loadoa  lod  U  Ordered  10  Sc.i  upon  publick  Srrvice,  And  therefore 
Ua  lallary  may  be  continued  and  paid  to  his  Wife,  Which  retjuett 
■Bf  willing  to  comply   w***,  Thrse  arc  to  pray  and   require    you   to 
he  Sallary  of  ye  S^  W*-  Dampirr  to  be  continued  for  him  on  yc 
lent  and  paid  quarieiljr  to  bii  A'lignei  notwiihtianding  hii  intendri. 
Be*  for  which  ibit  ahall  be  your  Warr*. 

"([mtialled)C.  M.     J.S.     T.  L. 
■Cbckritt  Treaty  Chimb"  16th  Aug  '98." 

^^ptt  37>  ifiyS.  A  letter  to  the  nine  itattng  that  the  maMcr  appointed 
he  Ttttmri  wa>  "  a  very  Old  man  and  therefore  iocap;tt>le  of  performing  k> 
■  Wfgt,"  whereu  *'  one  Jn°  Knight  Gun'  of  ye  Dunweh  "  would  be 
■  far  ye  taid  Employ."  He  anki  that  the  uid  Knight  may  be 
'froia  ibe  Dmatifah.  "The  Ship  (the  ftetlud)  it  now  almod 
cxprct  tbe  Carv"  will  have  done  aboard  her  thi*  day,  and  ahall 
liona  Is  tale  10  proiUiua  10  aoon  at  we  have  gott  our  Iron 
I  bare  gott  fonrty  Six  mtn."      Lelltr  in  lie  eltri't  hanJ. 

(Signed)     »'-■  Dampitr. 

1696.     A  letter  to  the  lamc,  complaining  that  the  complement 

(  the /fofjwi  ("bring  but  fiflv")  will   not  be  lufficirnt :  but  that 

iBtn  am)  abooi  twenty  guni'    would  enable  thrtn  "to  m^ke  lome 

t  in  cake  of  any  oppotitioo."      J^llrr  in  a  ilrri'i  hand.      M  vtry 

(Slgntd)      #'-■  Damfirr. 

\Stflfmiir  j,  ifetfM.   ToMy  Lard(Orfer>l?}   Dampier baa imw  "gott"  hii 

3»7 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

iltjnen;  bat  ttill  dank*  them  too  few,  aiid  therefore  hopet  hii  Lordihip  will 
coiMinur  hii  care  **  and  order  me  tTcaty  men  and  zo  Gobs."  The  matter 
he  desred  (John  Knight)  **iM  come  to  town  in  order  to  be  examio'd" 
**  The  Carp*"  hawe  alfanoa  done  their  work  aboard  and  I  hope  to  ha?e  in  my 
Iron  ballast  and  aome  Frorisioo  this  week,"  at  anyrate  ^  I  shaU  me  all 
diligence  to  be  goeing."     LxtUr  m  clerk* s  bamiL 

(Signed)     W^  Damfier. 

S£ptamieris,i6gS.  **  Rodmci'*  ai  DrpifonL  To  the  Secretary  of  the 
Admiralty.  Dampier  will  obaenre  his  direction  touching  officers'  •erfantk 
The  ship  still  wants  some  iron  work,  and  Dampier  awaits  instructions  as  to 
the  taking  in  of  sea  prcmsions  before  dropping  down  the  riyer.  He  has 
got  his  complement  of  men.     Clerk* s  letter.      (Signed)      /F***  Damfier, 

Sifieader  22,  1698.  «"  RoAmck,**  DeptfanL  To  the  same.  Acknow- 
ledges receipt  of  an  CMtler  of  the  i6th  instant,  **  touching  Mareen  Souldien,*' 
which  Dampier  will  ''take  care  to  comply  with  so  soon"  as  he  has  any  of  them 
on  board.  He  has  taken  in  ten  tunas  of  sea  beer,  most  of  his  boatswaini'  and 
carpenter's  stores,  is  now  filling  his  water,  and  awaits  the  rest  of  hb 
provision.  <<The  wind  is  at  W.S.W."  Cierk^s  bmuL  DamfUi't 
ligmatmr. 

Septamker  27,  1698.  To  the  same.  Reminds  the  Secretary  how  the 
Lords  of  the  Admiralty  had  been  pleased  (''upon  my  mencooing  the 
Lowness  of  my  present  circumstances  ")  to  promise  they  would  order  bin 
some  money  for  the  contingencies  of  his  intended  yoyage.  Asks  that  their 
.\«ordships  be  reminded  of  this,  and  acquainted  that  "a  hundred  pound  "will 
be  required.  Is  "  allroost  ready  to  fall  down  ye  riyer  "  haying  all  bis  beer  and 
water  aboard.  Has  been  promised  that  by  Thursday  he  will  have  **t 
proportion  of  other  proyision  for  1 2  months."     Letter  in  clerk* i  band. 

(Signed)     JV'^  Damfier. 

October  I,  1698.  "  Roebuck^**  Deftford.  To  the  Secretary.  Acbow- 
ledges  letter  of  the  29th  inst.,  containing  orders  "  for  my  say  ling  to  the  Hope 
and  thence  to  the  Downes."  Will  obey  "so  soon  as  the  ship  shall  be  ins 
condition."  Has  "  gott  aboard  all  the  Beer  and  water  casque  and  beef  and 
pork  for  twelve  months."  Expects  "  the  other  species  "  daily.  Can  stow 
some  eight  months'  more  provision.  Returns  humble  thanks  to  their  Lord- 
ships "  for  their  care  of  me  in  ordering  the  Navy  Board  to  Imprest  mc  an 
hundred  pound  for  the  contingencies  on  my  Voyage."  Hopes  he  will 
answer  their  Lordships'  expectation.     Letter  in  clerks  bcmdwriting, 

(Signed)      IT--  Damfier, 

Note. — The  orders  *'  for  my  sayling  "  may  be  seen  in  Adm.  Sec.  Ottt- 
Lctters,  25,  p.  147. 

October  6,  1 698.    "  Roebuck  "  In  the  Hofe.   Advises  the  Honourable  lod 
that  this  day  "  between  eleven  and  twelve  a  clock  we  sett  sail  from  Deptford 
and  are  now  got  safe  here.     Has  sent  his  gunner  for  his  guns  and  stor^* 
and  his  purser  for  his  eight  months'  provision.     Hopes  to  have  all  aboard  ii> 

328 


LETTERS   AND   PAPERS 

will  then  proceed  lo  the  Down».     He  hat  ^ll  hi*  mrn  aboard 
provtnoo  for  IwtIt*  monthf.  (Sigaed)      W"  Dumpier. 

Ratbatl "  in  tht  hojx.  To  the  same.  Has  been 
\  bia  2<MU  c*er  liocc  hii  letter  of  the  6th  ;  but  owing  to  ihr  blowing 
■  bu  obI^  ju>t  recciTed  them.  "  My  Gunner  ii  getting  down  our 
;,  eic."  1  hii  cTcniog  the  ihip  habtUa,  "  lying  about  half  a  mile 
Ii  vcfjhcd,  but  befote  she  could  get  her  anchor  up,  the  s:reDgtb  of 
r  fwced  her  aboiid  of  u*.  Some  part  of  the  Cuttwater,  ihc  iprit 
and  fud,  lad  ye  railet  oo  the  Quarter  Deck,  hate  been  destroyed, 
ao  a*  pouible.  (Signed)      IV"  Dampiir. 

—Will  hi*e  the  thip  surTcyed  if  their  Lorp«.  think  fiit," 
IV.  D. 

8,  tSoB-    /"  tf>r  Hop*.    To  (he  mme.    Aiki  that  an  allowance 
CwklnvD  I   Electiury  ajainit  Dyienterie*  be  tent  to  him  in  the 
Wn  bt  ready  lo  oil  to-morrow  ;  fair  frotty  weather. 

(Signed)     »■-  DflB^Vr. 

>■  SI,  tAoS.    "  Rorbtuk"  in  tht  Dowu.    To  the  nrae.      Report! 
nl  in  ihc  Doviu,  where  he  iwaiu  further  ordcri. 

(Signed)      ly-  Dampier. 

19,  1698.  /a  iltf  /)ewn/.  To  (he  *ame.  Acknowledge* 
«  Mqipljr  of  Dr.  Cockbum's  medicine,  and  aiates  that  the 
I  Cvpnt«r  ha*  not  yet  artined.  Hii  boatiwain,  Robert  W.trreD, 
iHf  W  |0  on  the  TOyage.  Hopei  he  may  have  another  in  hi)  itead, 
iiodkl  be  very  >orry  to  carry  any  with  me  that  are  not  very  free  and 
Hai  one  aua  tick  aihore.  (Signed)  fi^"^  Damfitr. 
note*  arri**!  of  veucli. 

iw  7.  1698.  /»  iki  Daiimi.  To  the  »ime.  Sir  Cloiidetiey 
I  laMadraB  Hiltd  hence  yettrrJay  for  Holland.  Ha*  hoi«ted  the 
rmatM,  bring  the  otily  King'*  *hip  in  the  Road.  Hope*  Sir 
■*  ha*  made  hii  lepoit  to  iheir  Lorp*.  of  ihe  luHiciency  of  ye 
rmrtri,  and  am  lonT  that  any  ill  affected  penon  ihould  hare 
nr  Lorpt.  tlut  I  had  entertained  any  not  Srrficrablc." 

(Signed)      iy~   Damfitr. 

(TIJ, 16914.  /alkrDt^ni.  To  the  ume.  Ha*  t:iken  in  twelve 
b(«f  ■■  liea  of  tkai  he  li«*  expended.  Ha*  endeavoured  to  execute 
f  State  upoo  (he  body  of  Capt.  Richaid  Strattan,  commander  of 
iJwmA  mow  lyiag  in  thii  Road.  Sent  hii  lieutenant  aboard  the 
bu  hiitd  to  ftnd  Capt.  Stratiua.     Preiume*  thai  a  new  carpenter 

in  will  Mioa  arrive  aboard.      CItri'i  tanJ. 

(Signed)      IV-   Damfiir. 

17,  1698.     In  Uft  /Jmnu.     To  the  laffle.    The  new  carpenter 


J 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

has  come  aboard ,  **  but  no  other  Boatsw^"  The  present  boatiwsuo  ii 
''very  negligent,"  and  has  disobeyed  the  lieutenant's  orders.  Only 
yesterday  the  yeoman  of  his  store-room  was  caught  selling  **  about  sereotj 
pound  of  Rope  yarns  "  to  a  shore  boat.  **  He  said  the  Boatsw*  had  giitn 
him  leave  so  to  doe.''  "  Boatsw"  is  now  confined  to  his  Cabbin."  He  bopn 
that  the  Admiralty  will  be  pleased  to  rid  him  of  this  officer  who,  be 
believesy  is  very  mutinously  inclined.  (Signed)     fV*^  D/u^ier, 

A  postscript  suggests  that  John  Knight,  chief^  master's  mate,  be 
appointed  boatswain.  *<He  is  very  well  qualified  for  it,  and  a  lober 
careful!  man." 

Letter  enclosed  from  Robert  Warren^  the  offending  Boati^vmn*  Wanes 
admits  that  he  has  **  Cometted  an  Earrer,  and  humbly  Bags  Captain  Daropier'i 
pardon  and  likewise  the  Leftenancs.  Hopes  that  what  messe-undarstaoding 
thare  is  in  this  Besnes  he  will  be  pleased  for  to  Judge  Charetteabell,  and 
not  wilfully  go  for  to  Reueing  a  famely.  Remains  his  sarrant  to  Com- 
mand Whills.  Robert  Warren  (17  Nw,  1698)."  He  was  tried  aboard 
H.M.S.  Plymouth  on  December  1,  1698,  and  sentenced  to  be  dismissed  hit 
ship  and  <*  rendered  uncapable  of  his  Maj^.  Service  for  the  future."  Robert 
Eddlington,  his  yeoman,  was  acquitted. 

November  2 1 , 1 698.  In  the  Downs,  To  the  same.  Acknowledges  letter 
of  the  19th.  Has  sent  the  offending  boatswain  (with  the  evidence)  aboard 
the  Commander-in-Chief  in  the  Medway.  Has  had  rough  weather,  so  that 
the  boatswain's  stores  have  not  been  surveyed.  <'So  soon  as  We  haie 
moderate  Weather  I  shall  over  hawle  them."     (Signed)     JV*^-  Danger, 

To  the  Rt.  Hon.  the  Earl  of  Orford^  first  Commissioner  for  execvta^  tk 
Office  of  Lord  High  Admiral  of  England.  Has  had  a  letter  from  Mr.  Bor- 
chet  asking  '*  what  I  would  propose  to  have  put  into  my  Instructioot.'' 
Has  answered  that  he  had  once  hoped  **  to  have  been  goeing  out  of  England 
by  ye  midie  of  September,"  in  which  case  he  would  have  sailed  round  tbe 
Horn  and  fallen  in  with  Terra  Australis  on  the  E.  coast,  and  coasted  north- 
ward along  it  till  he  came  to  New  Guinea.  He  hints  his  regrets  at  hafiog 
no  more  men  allowed  him.  It  is  now  too  late  in  the  year  to  go  round  tbe 
Horn.  He  will  have  to  go  round  the  Cape.  He  has  desired  that  hii 
Instructions  may  be  as  unlimited  as  possible,  so  that  he  may  alter  his  conrie 
if  need  arise.  He  asks  that  he  may  be  permitted  to  take  aboard  some 
natives,  *'  in  case  I  shall  see  any  probability  of  a  Comerce  with  tbein. 
Thinks  he  ought  to  have  a  supply  of  '<  Iron  barrs,  with  some  axes,  hatcheti, 
matcheats,  etc.,  and  some  other  trifles,  as  looking  glasses,  beads,  etc.,  to  deal 
with  the  Pore  natives."  He  asks  that  if  any  of  his  hands  prove  mutioooi 
he  may  be  allowed  to  take  in  more,  or  exchange  them  with  any  of  Hit 
Majesty's  or  subjects'  ships.  Thinks  that  a  small  gratuity,  or  eves  a 
<<  promise  of  somewhat  at  our  return  "  would  raise  the  spirits  of  his  crew 
•*  to  a  generous  resolution  of  hazarding  their  persons."  Hopes  their  Lord- 
ships will  pardon  him  if  he  has  been  '*  to  bould  "  in  his  demands.  He  ii 
"  much  a  stranger  to  his  Majesty's  service,"  but  he  will  comply  with  hii 
Instructions  ^*in  ye  strictest  sense."     Has  had  trouble  with  his  boatswain, 

330 


F 


^ccu  *  orw  nun  dtity.  jlutagraph  thrDughoul.  (Signed)  Your 
■KM  oblidgrd  humble  tervDt,  (SigDcd)      fV"^  Damjafr. 

Utrifl. — I  cxpectrd  before  this  time  lo  hare  preteoted  jour  Lordship 
t  ttitnuA  ^»n  of  laj  Vojrage*,  but  the  genileman  that  I  employed  to 
I  ta  Index  hu  occasioned  the  delay,  but  I  hope  in  ten  days'  time  it 
^"*     '  (Sigtled)      W-- Dampicr. 


E. 


LETTERS  AND   PAPERS 


of  tbii  Inter  (waDtiog  the  poiticripl  and  other  perianal  details)  % 
.  .      ..  ......  ^^^^    . 


pier  to  the  Setretwy  of  the  Admiralty  on  NoTcmber  ii,  1698. 
r*'  Imtmctimu  (Record  Office,  Adm.  Sec.  Out-Letteri,  35)  are 
ltd  Notember  30,  iM>  *^  »Sae<l  H.  P(riMtmai]),  G.  Rfusiell), 
I  S.  K(po<lall). 

^  direct  him  to  proceed  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  "  and  from 
B  (Oetch  awiy  towards  New  Holland,  and  then  to  New  Guinea  and 
hoftnJti."  They  gtii:  him  permiMion  "  to  ilcer  any  other  Courie  " 
Pr  fiti  but  rcmicd  him  llut  the  King  hjs  been  at  great  charge  in 
'Kperiiiion,  and  thai  he  mu«i  "  take  especial  care  "  to  use  hii 
to  diicoter  any  "luch  thingi"  a*  may  letul  to  the  good  of 
ion.  He  is  to  take  (pccimcni  of  the  produce  of  the  lands  at  which 
be*.  He  is  to  bring  borne  "  some  of  the  Natives,  provided  they  shall 
pg  to  come  along."  He  has  been  supplied  with  trifles  with  which 
\  widi  die  DitiTrt. 

ijp  of  hi*  men  should  die,  or  prove  ditorderly,  he  is  empowered  to 
titt  hands  from  any  Kidb's  ship  he  may  meet  with.  Any  mutinous 
Htlcily  hands  may  be  discharged  aboard  any  King's  ihip  he  may 
Ui,  and  "  the  Comand>r  of  any  luch  Shipp  or  Vciiell  of  his  Ma'*  it 
■squred  to  take  them  on  board  and  give  you  other  Men  in  their 
"  At  tbe  same  lime,  he  is  to  make  it  publicly  known  to  all  the 
tnen  of  ihr  Rorhud  "that  such  of  them  as  shall  behare  them- 
kII,  and  Cheerfully  performe  their  Duty  in  this  Alfaire,  which  'tii 
ttj  tnd  to  the  advmtage  of  the  Nation,  shall  at  their  rcturoe  receive 

R reward  and  Encourage  meat." 
I  ibe  *iiya|;i  be  is  10  keep  an  '*  Exact  Joumall "  of  his  proceeding*, 
ill  thiols  rematkabte.  At  hii  return  this  journal  is  to  be  given  to 
baaed  "and  to  no  other."  He  is  to  conform  to  the  "Gencrall 
■floexed  to  his  Comitsion,  except  as  lo  what  relates  10 
•id."  When  he  shall  find  that  he  can  m->ke  no  further 
^  Ibc  Uir  food  of  tbe  naiioo,  he  is  noi  to  stay  ahroad  ;  but  to  leiuro 
■oods  for  ardrf*.  If  no  orders  lie  there,  he  is  to  proceed  to  the 
fnm  whence  he  shall  sciid  the  Board  an  account  of  hii  ptoceedingi. 
■sjra  te  take  especial  care  not  to  annoy  the  King's  subjects  or  allies, 
Khcr  to  live  tJiem  what  assistance  he  can." 

for  tbe  better  leni^lhening  out  his  Provisions,  he  i)  to  put  the 
ter  his  Comand  (when  he  comes  out  of  the  Channcll)  to  six  to  four 
lUawance,  atsuieing  ihrm  that  they  shall  be  punctually  paid  fol  the 
the  t«d  of  tbe  Voyage." 

698.     /a  the  Oavmi.     To  the  Secretary.     A   letter 
ledgiag  ochet  liettcei,  aad  recapitulaltDg  former  siatements.     The  ikew 

33' 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

boatswain  (Norwood)  has  arriYcd  aboard,  and  his  stem  are  bdng  sorfcycd. 
Two  men  are  sick  ashore,  and  five  have  gone  to  Robert  Warren's  court- 
martial.     The  wind  is  at  W.  by  S.,  blowing  weather. 

(Signed)      W^  Bamfur. 

December  i .  In  the  Dtm/iu,  To  the  same.  Aboat  £zo  wfll  equip 
him  with  Trifles,  such  as  looking-glasses,  beads,  &c.  Desires  that  he  may 
have  six  dozen  of  hatchets,  six  dozen  of  axes,  and  eight  dozen  of  matchetti. 
One  man  sick  ashore.  (Signed)     W^ 


December  2.  In  the  Domni.  To  the  same.  Has  received  his  tailing 
orders,  but  thinks  that  he  cannot  be  required  to  sail  without  his  Trifles  and 
axes ;  and  without  the  ^re  men  at  the  court-mirdal,  one  of  whom  is  hb 
lieutenant.  (Signed)      /F"* 


December  7,  1698.  In  the  Datum,  To  the  same.  Acknowledges 
their  Lordships'  bounty  in  the  matter  of  the  trifles,  hatchets,  &c  Wkk 
those  aboard  he  would  be  ready  to  sail.  (Signed)      /F"*>  Dandier. 

December  6,  1698.  In  the  Downs.  To  the  same.  Has  receifed  the 
axes,  hatchetts  and  macheatts  and  ;^20,  with  which  to  purchase  Trifles. 
Has  bought  the  latter  and  ^*  now  am  ready  to  Sayle."  He  waits  a  bat 
wind.  (Signed)     IV^  Damfkr. 

December  31,  1698.  In  the  Downs,  To  the  same.  Is  now  unmooring 
in  order  to  sail ;  "  having  the  wind  att  N. W.  by  N." 

(Signed)     W'^  Damfn, 

January  9,  1 698/9.  In  the  Downs,  To  the  same.  While  unmooring 
on  the  3i8t  last,  the  wind  changed  to  S.S.W.  **  before  we  could  heafe  «p 
our  Anchor."     The  wind  has  been  westerly  ever  since. 

(Signed)      W'^  Dan^, 

January  30,  98/9.  In  S*-  Cruce  harbour  In  the  Island  Teneriff,  To  the 
Lords  of  the  Admiralty.  Advises  the  Board  that  on  Saturday  the 
14th  inst.,  he  sailed  from  the  Downs.  Has  had  fair  winds  ever  since.  Htf 
anchored  to  buy  wine,  but  finds  none  fit  to  keep.  Will  sail  hence  to-morrow. 
All  hands  well.  Sends  this  by  "Capt^  Trever  of  his  Maj^.  ship  the 
Experiment^  bound  for  Cadiz,  who  is  now  under  Sayle.'* 

(Signed)     W^  Dampier. 

January  31,  1698/9.  In  S^'  Cruce  harbour.  To  the  same.  A  copy 
of  the  above  letter  **  committed  to  the  care  of  Mr.  Hopper,  an  Engliih 
merchant  of  this  island,  to  be  transmitted  by  the  first  ship  bouod  ^ 
England,"  Little  news  here  "save  that  several  Sally  rovers  hate  latdy 
been  seen  off  these  islands."  (Signed)     Z^*  Damfter. 

(Note. — He  left  Santa  Cruz  on  February  4th.) 

332 


LETTERS   AND    PAPERS 

O,  1698,  O.S.  jfi  Aiuhor  in  the  English  roade  af  ihi  Jila 
To  ilir  Mine.  Anircd  here  the  1  lih  ioit.,  for  ull.  Is  read7  to 
St.  Jtga  for  wMct.  I'clU  of  the  Lnglith  ahipi  io  the  Road,  some 
A  taikd  with  him  fiom  the  Downi.  .Sendi  tlii»  by  Capt.  Gwin. 
■kGod  all  TCty  hndthy."  (iiigncd)      W*  Dampier. 

19.   1699,  O.S.     Aa  St.  J^9.     To  the  Mine.      Hai  come 
Cm  miUr.     Letter  a  i^iumtf  of  the  iwo  preceiling  tettcn.      l^xpccti 
t  gfmt  bcnce  ia  two  tbjn.  (Signed)      If"   Dampirr. 

ifyril  itml,  1699,  O.S.  /■  Baina  harl'  on  ^^  ComI  „J  BraiiU.  To  the 
;  Saikd  I'rvoi  St.  Jjga  on  iiit  Febrmry,  arrived  here  March  i;th. 
■cnbhrd,  cMilkrd  and  watered,  and  ia  now  ready  10  Mil.  Discusses  the 
ikjud  cofhlilion  oi  the  provitiufls  remaining  10  him,  and  the  manner 
Uch  t'hrj  hate  been  (and  will  be)  supplied  to  the  crew.  Has  had  good 
ker,  aad  the  crew  aie  healthy. 

■  Aad  yeti  all  theie  happy  circumitance*  were  not  suAicicnt  to  our  case 

^Met,  while   I  was  d,iyly  plagued  by  ibc  iniolcoce  of  my  Lieut.  Georg 

r.     At  my  &m  coming  abooid,    I   was  importuned  by  Lieut.    Fisher 

Imle  hoys  m  officer's  scrvaois,"     On  refusing  this  request 

their  Lordship'*  order*)  he  "  cetwd  not  to  impotiune  me," 

qoarrrll    with    toy   Puraer."      At  the  Canary   Islands  "he 

Boisacfoa*  J  "  and  asked  me  "  why  I  suHered  none  to  goe 

I  toU  him   I   had  commanded   otherwise   for   fear   of 

■ttch,  then  he  (baked  hi*  Fist  ait  me,  Grind  in  my  Face, 

he  cared  not for  me."      However,  on  bcine 

coB&ienicat,    be     apologised     in    "  my    Cabhin,"    .md 

br  guilty  of  the  Like  for  the  future." 

St  Jago  **  I   licard  him   .   .  .  com;>IainiRg  in   I'ublick  of 

ibe  Bfead,  and  that  itt  wai  not  lilt  for  men  to  Late."     On 

I  .  .  .  couLl  not  lind  one  Bitt  not  litt  to  Eate,  att 

■h  Diapleated  and  Muttered  his  mind  to  some  of  his 

Oa  yc  9^  March  La*%  he  sat  in  the  Stecridge  and  there 

about  the  Deer  .  .   .  and  Likewise  sjid  that  it  was 

thfiD  (the  band*)  Drink  it  within  seven  inches  of  the 


It  up 


for  I 


tlie  broaching  of  a  "caaque"  of  beer,  "  he  grind  ait  me 

Maaer  and  I  thougbl  he  would  Collar  mr.     [lui  hi*  frequent 

)  b«flad  my  Patience,  ih^t   1   pretented  him  by  striking  him 

CiM,  vbtdi  I  liad  then  io  my  hands,  ait  which  he  turned  to  me, 

Old  Oof.  Old  Villain,  and  told  my  men  Gents  take  care  of  that 

Do(  lor  be  detign*  to  Run  away  with  yon  and  the  Kind's 

cooaaed  bins   to   hia   cabin,   and    called    all    bands   aft    "to 

Obedsenor,"  but  while  "  I  "  spoke,  "  he  interrupted  me 

wa  Doctrine  .   .   .   loading  mr  with  all  the  Crimes  that 

-^:U  imawm  mtj  nen  Again«  me  as  Piracy  and  Murther."     He  continued 

■K  Srnrall  hours  uignhcT,"  and  behaird  so  outrageously  that 

J33 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S  VOYAGES 

**On  the  i6  I  was  forced  to  put  him  in  Irons  lest  he  should  came  my 
men  to  mutiny/'     After  **I "  anchored  here  (in  Bahia  Bay)  **his  Curiei 
and  scurrilous  Language"  continued  daily*  although  he  was  a  prisfmer;  so 
that  **  I  was  oblidged  either  to  retume  home  or  gett  rid  of  him.''    **  I  went 
to  the  Governor,"  who  ''had  heard  of  my  Misfortune  (which  any  body 
could  tell  him  of  that  had  once  been  aboard  here,  such  unusuall  noise  the 
L^  made")  and  ''he  prevented  my   Request  by  proffering  to  secure  my 
L^  ashore."     So  "  on  ye  28th  I  sent  him  ashoare  where  he  was  pott  in 
prison  till  this  fleet  sayles  for  Lisbon."     At  Lisbon,  Mr.  Fisher  will  be 
deliyered  to  Mr.  (Paul)  Methuen,  his  Majesty's  Envoy  "to  whom  I  writtto 
send  him  home."    " I     have  sent  ashore  four  months'  provision  for  Mr.  Fisher 
and  his  servant,  "  because  the  Portuguese  are  loth  to  part  with  any  provinoo." 
Mr.  Fisher  is  no  quieter  in  prison  than  he  was  aboard.     He  has  tried  ''to 
incense  some  Dutch  merchants  against  me,  telling  them  I  was  a  pirate,  hid 
taken  a  Dutch  ship,  tyd  the  men  back  to  back  and  hove  them  overboard." 

tThis  would  seem  to  refer  to  the  exploit  at  Sierra  LeoneJ     Since  then  he 
las  been  working  on  the  Priests  and  Friars,  and  the  "Ghostly  Padrei" 
have  given  him  a  writ  against  me.     The  Governor  of  Bahia  has  asked  where 
we  are  bound,  "  so  told  him  I  was  bound  to  Benculi  on  the  Island  Sumatra." 
There  are  three  of  Captain  Avery's  men  [Avery  was  a  pirate  of  some 
notoriety  at  this  time]  in  this  place.     "  I  would  have  brought  them  away 
with  me  had  it  not  been  for  these  unhappy  differences  which  made  dread  inch 
infectious  company."     His  men  have  made  depositions  against  the  trio  "so 
that  I  hope  they  may  be  sent  for  Lisbon."     Sends  with  this  hb  officer^ 
evidences  against  Fisher,  "  only  my  pursers  and  chirurgeons  I  have  not  aent 
because  the  Lieutenant  and  they  were  at  difference,  and  they  might  be 
partiall."     Letter  in  clerk* i  band, 

(Signed)     U^  Dampier. 

June  ^rJf  1 699.  Off'  Cape  Bon  Rsperance  hearing  from  us  N,E,  by  E. 
Distant  twenty  Leagues,  To  the  same.  Having  met  the  ship  Antelofe^ 
thinks  fit  to  report  that  he  sailed  from  Bahia  on  the  23rd  April  last 
Mentions  the  dispatch  of  the  preceding  letter.  All  aboard  very  healthy,  and 
the  ship  in  good  condition.  Will  not  touch  anywhere  till  he  comes  to 
"  ye  Place  I  design  for."     Clerk's  band.  (Signed)     W'^-  Dampier. 

Tbe  following  letters  are  to  be  seen  in  tbe  Navy  Board  Papers  at  tbe 

Record  Office  {No.  516). 

August  17/^,  1699.  To  the  Navy  Board.  Recommends  John  Knight, 
now  gunner  of  the  Dunwicb^  as  a  suitable  master  for  the  Roebuck^  "I 
having  known  him  for  severall  ycares  to  be  a  sober,  diligent  and  knowing 
man,  has  been  Mas'*  of  severall  ships  in  ye  West  Indies."  Does  not  doubt 
that  he  "  will  approve  himself  upon  Examination "  to  be  worthy  this 
character.  (Signed)      IV*^-  Damper. 

October  3,  1699.  To  the  same.  Does  pray  that  the  promised  "one 
hundred  pounds  for  contingencies  on  the  Service  "  may  be  paid  soon.  Asks 
also  for  eighteen  barrecoes,  or  small  hand  casks,  for  filling  of  water  while 

334 


LETTERS   AND    PAPERS 

HU  c)unir{>eaii  hai  drugs  for  twcWr  manihs,  but  the  ship  may  be 
>  jean,  therefore  hope*  you  will  give  btm  neceasarics  accordJog. 
(Signed)     ti^  Dampier. 

II,  1699.     Totheume.     Rraorti  his  arrival  in  the  Downs,  and 
Bf  ■  carpcnur.     Wind  N.  W.  W.  a  freeh  gale. 

(Signed)      ;*'"   Damfier. 

,  1699.  To  the  ume.  On  the  zind  lost  "all  my  Oarcs 
/  Ya«^  being  orenett  by  »  Ship's  tide  in  coming  olf  from  Deale 
Cuuwx  procnre  Mrs  or  any  other  acccsiary  in  Deal  without 
!<»•"  order*."  Desires  that  the  Deal  Btorckerper  may  be  caused  to 
Ui  bo«u«&iD  with  til  yawlt'  oars,  and  his  Carpenter  with  one  Iron 
r  Kocks,  on*  To|>  maul  *od  half  a  pound  of  Futnp  Nailet. 
I  piaa  for  the  Top  Uoclt."  (Signed)      IV-  Damfier. 

irr  I  J,  1699.     To  the  ume.     Gires  a  resuine  of  other  letters. 
1  the  bill  (or  £iOt  *^  "o^*  waiti  for  the  hatchets. 

(Signed)      /*^  Dampitr. 

Hat  had  bad  weather.     Aiks  for 
ring  boll  for  the  stoppers,  two 

from  rising." 
IV~   Dampier. 

last  to  mend  the 
trouble  them   no 
IV.  D. 


r  15,  1699.     To  ihe  r 

t  ibc  Deal  storekeetirr 

■  for  ye  Whelps  of  the  Ccer  Capton  (captcaa)  which 
beiTiag,  and  two  other  bolts  to  keep  the  Capsoni 
(Signrf) 
rrifl. — If  he  may  have  "a  do^en  nf  Pcins  of 
ia  tVf  Cabbio  which  arc  broke"  he  hopes  U 
hw  Rctantc. 


-  30t   1699.    To  the  ume. 
laace  whii  bii  re^oMt. 


Returns  hearty  thankx  for  their 
(Signed)     #"•  Daw^. 


335 


»     f    • 


% 


)\ 


VOYAGE 

TO 

NEW-HOLLJND,  &c. 
In    the    Year    1699. 

Wherein  are  dcLcribed, 
The  Cnffdr;*-! Hands,  the  Iflcs  of  Mayo  and  St.  J'tgo. 
The  Bay  of  All-Saints,  with  the  Forts  and  Town 
of  Bahia  in  Brazil.  Cape  Sal-vadore,  The  Winds 
on  the  Braftlian  Coaft.  Abrohlo  Shoals.  A  Table 
of  all  ^c^VarianoHi  obfcrv'd  in  this  Voyage.  Oc- 
currences near  the  Cape  of  Good-Hope.  The 
Courfc  to  New-Holland.  Shark's  Bay.  The  Ifles 
and  CoaA,  6?c.  of  New-Holland. 

heir  Inhabiiants,  Manners,  Cuftoms,  Trade,  iic. 
Their  Harbours,  Soil.  Bcatts,  Birds,  Fifh,  i£c. 
Trees,  Plants,  Fruits,  &i*f. 


utintted  with  fevcral  Maps  and  Drauohi's  :  Alfo  divers 
Birdi,  Filha  and  PUntt  not  found  in  this  Pan  of  ihc 
WofU,  Cunoufljr  Ingraven  on  Copper-Plates, 


VOL.    III. 


By  Captain  William  Dampier. 


inted  for  James  <iWJohk  Knapton,  at  the 
Crown  in  St.  PauPs  Church- Yard. 


lii' 


9  ■ 

ij 


I    t 


B 


.1 
1 


;  i 


••  I 


n 


I  t 


^ 


V 


TO  THE   RIGHT  HONOURABLE 

THOMAS 

EARL    OF    PEMBROKE, 

LORD  PRESIDENT  OF   HER  MAJESTY'S   MOST 

HONOURABLE   PRIVY-COUNCIL,   Ac. 

My  Lord, 

THK  Honour  1  had  of  being  employed  in  the  Ser- 
vice of  his  late  Majesty  of  Illustrious  Memory, 
at  the  time  when  Your  Lordship  presided  at  the 
Admiralty,  gives  me  the  Boldness  to  ask  Your 
Protection  of  the  following  Papers.  They  consist  of  some 
Remarks  made  upon  very  distant  Climates,  which  1  should 
have  the  Vanity  to  think  altogether  new,  could  I  persuade 
my  self  they  had  cscap'd  Your  Lordship's  Knowledge. 
However  I  have  hcen  so  cautious  of  publishing  any  thing 
in  my  whole  Book  that  is  generally  known,  that  1  have 
deny'd  my  self  the  Pleasure  of  paying  the  due  Honours  to 
your  Lordship's  Name  in  the  Dedication.  I  am  asham'd, 
my  Lord,  to  offer  You  so  imperfect  a  Present,  having  not 
time  to  »et  down  all  the  Memoirs  of  my  last  Voyage :  But 
as  the  particular  Service  I  have  now  undertaken,  hinders  me 
frotn  nnithing  thin  Volume,'  so  I  hope  it  will  give  me  an 
Opportunity  of  paying  my  Respects  to  Your  Lordship  in  a 
aew  one. 

The  World  is  apt    to  judge  of  every  thing  by   the 
;    and    whoever    has    ill    Fortune    wilt    hardly    be 


He  nltn  to  hii  intFodcd  crubc  in  command  of  tlic  S/.  Ctiirg*,  then 

(  OMt,  with  the  Fault,  fnr  a  vi>yaj^  lo  Ihc  South  Srai.     Itoth  thipi  trcic 

B36c«B», *nd  lao men.    The  ftnt  nliiion  of  thi*  volume  end*  ai  or  about 
K 1->^  of  llie  *n]ra][e ;  lu  l6aBd  fui|{e  (p.  444  in  this  cdilioa). 

339 


DEDICATION 

allow'd  a  good  Name.     This,  my  Lord,  was  my  Unhappy 
ness    in    my    late    Expedition    in    the    Roe-Buck^    whi^ 
foundered  thro*  perfect  Age  near  the  Island  of  Ascensior 
I  suffered  extreamly  in  my  Reputation  by  that  Misfortune  j 
tho'  I  comfort  myself  with  the  Thoughts,  that  my  EnemJes 
could  not  charge  any  Neglect  upon  me.     And  since  I  have 
the  Honour  to  be  acquitted  by  your  Lordship*s  Judgment, 
I  should  be  very  humble  not  to  value  my  self  upon  so 
compleat   a   Vindication.     This,    and   a   World   of  other 
Favours,  which  I  have  been  so  happy  as  to  receive  from 
Your  Lordship's  Goodness,  do  engage  mc  to  be  with  an 
everlasting  Respect, 

My  Lord, 

Your  Lordship's 

Most  Faithful  and 

Obedient  Servant, 

Will.  Dampiir. 


340 


THE    PREFACE 


^HE  favourable  Reception '  my  two  former 
Volumes  of  Voyages  and  Descriptions  have 
already  met  with  in  the  World,  gives  me  Reason 
to  hope,  That  notwithstanding  the  Objections 
which  have  been  raised  against  me  by  prejudiced  Persons,' 
this  'I'hird  Volume  likewise  may  in  some  measure  be 
■cccptabic  to  Candid  and  Impartial  Readers,  who  are 
curious  to  know  the  Nature  of  the  Inhabitants,  Animals, 
Plant*,  Soil,  ficc.  in  those  different  Countries,  which  have 
cither  seldom  or  not  at  all  been  visited  by  any  Euro[>cans. 

It  has  almost  always  been  the  Fate  of  those  who  have 
made  new  Discoveries,  to  be  disesteemed  and  slightly 
spoken  fd,  by  such  as  cither  have  had  no  true  Relish  and 
V*iluc  for  the  Things  themselves  that  are  discovered,  or 
have  had  some  Prejudice  against  the  Persons  by  whom  the 
Discovcrica  were  made.  It  would  be  vain  therefore  and 
unrctaonable  in  mc  to  expect  to  escape  the  Censure  of  all, 
or  to  hope  for  better  Treatment  than  far  Worthier  Persons 
bare  met  with  before  me.  But  this  Satisfaction  I  am  sure 
tJ  having,  that  the  Things  themselves  in  the  Discovery 
of  which  I  have  been  imploycd,  arc  most  worthy  of  our 
<ji ligenidt  Search  and  Inquiry ;  being  the  various  and 
--roodcrful  W(«-ks  of  God  in  different  Parts  of  the  World : 
And  however  unfit  a  Person  I  may  be  in  other  respects  to 
have  undertaken  this  Task,  yet  at  least  I  have  given  a 
inthinX  Account,  and  have  found  some  Things  undis- 
covered by  any  before,  and  which  may  at  least  be  some 


■  They  lud  run  tkraoch  *oid«  three  or  four  ediiioai  when  ihi 
Fnbei  mni  kii  tupporten. 
34' 


J 


THE   PREFACE 

Assistance  and  Direction  to  better  qualified  Persons  who 
shall  come  after  me. 

It  has  been  objected  against  mc  by  some,  that  my 
Accounts  and  Descriptions  of  Things  are  dry  and  jejune, 
not  filled  with  variety  of  pleasant  Matter,  to  divert  and 
gratify  the  Curious  Reader.  How  far  this  is  true,  I  must 
leave  to  the  World  to  judge.  But  if  I  have  been  exactly 
and  strictly  careful  to  give  only  True  Relations  and 
Descriptions  of  Things  (as  I  am  sure  I  have ;)  and  if  my 
Descriptions  be  such  as  may  be  of  use  not  only  to  my  self 
(which  I  have  already  in  good  measure  experienced)  but 
also  to  others  in  future  Voyages;  and  likewise  to  such 
Readers  at  home  as  are  more  desirous  of  a  Plain  and  Just 
Account  of  the  true  Nature  and  State  of  the  Things 
described,  than  of  a  Polite  and  Rhetorical  Narrative:  I 
hope  all  the  Defects  in  my  Stile,  will  meet  with  an  easy 
and  ready  Pardon. 

Others   have   taxed    me   with    borrowing    from    other 
Men's  Journals;    and  with  Insufliciency,  as  if   I  was  not 
myself  the  Author  of  what  I  write,  but  published  Things 
digested  and  drawn  up  by  others.     As  to  the  first  Part  of 
this  Objection,  I  assure  the  Reader,  I  have  taken  nothing 
from  any  Man  without  mentioning  his  Name,  except  some 
very  few   Relations  and   particular   Observations   received 
from  credible  Persons  who  desired  not  to  be  named ;  and 
these  I  have  always  expressly  distinguished  in  my  Books, 
from  what  I  relate  as  of  my  own  observing.     And  as  to  the 
latter ;  I  think  it  so  far  from  being  a  Diminution  to  one 
of  my  Education  and  Employment,  to  have  what  I  write, 
Revised  and  Corl-ected  by  Friends ;   that  on  the  contrary, 
the  best   and  most  eminent  Authors  are  not  ashamed  to 
own  the  same  Thing,  and  look  upon  it  as  an  Advantage. 

Lastly,  I  know  there  are  some  who  are  apt  to  slight 
my  Accounts  and  Descriptions  of  things,  as  if  it  was  an 
easie  Matter  and  of  little  or  no  Difficulty  to  do  all  that  I 
have  done,  to  visit  little  more  than  the  Coasts  of  unknown 
Countries,  and  make  short  and  imperfect  Observations  of 
Things  only  near  the  Shore.  But  whoever  is  experienced 
in  these  Matters,  or  considers  Things  impartially,  will  be 

342 


■  THE   PREFACE 

Ef  a  very  different  Opinion.  And  any  unc  who  is  sensible, 
how  backward  and  rcfractnry  the  Seamen  are  apt  to  be  in 
long  Voyages  when  they  know  not  whither  ihcy  are  going, 
how  ignorant  they  are  of  the  Nature  of  the  Winds  and  the 
shifting  Seasons  of  the  Monsoons,  and  how  little  even  ihe 
Officer*  themselves  generally  are  skilled  in  the  Variation  of 
the  Needle  »nd  the  Use  of  the  Aiimuth  '  Compass ;  besides 
the  Hazard  of  all  outward  Accidents  in  strange  and  un- 
known Seas :  Any  one,  I  say,  who  is  sensible  of  these 
KiBcultics,  will  be  much  more  pleased  at  the  Discoveries 
uid  Obscr^'attons  1  have  been  able  to  make,  than  displeased 
with  me  that  I  did  not  make  more. 

Thus  much  I  thought  necessary  to  premise  in  my  own 
Vindication,  against  the  Objections  that  have  been  made  to 
my  former  Performances.  But  not  to  trouble  the  Reader 
lay  funhcr  with  Matters  of  this  Nature;  what  I  have  more 
to  oiAer  shall  be  only  in  relation  to  the  following  Voyage. 

For  the  better  apprehending  the  Course  of  this  Voyage, 
Mod  the  Situation  of  the  Plates  mentioned  in  it,  I  have  here, 
as  in  the  former  Volumes,  caused  a  Map  to  be  Ingraven, 
with  a  prick'd  Line,  representing  to  the  Eye  the  whole 
Thread  of  the  Voyage  at  one  View ;  besides  Draughts  and 
Figures  of  particular  Places,  to  make  the  Descriptions  I 
have  sivcn  of  them  more  intelligible  and  useful. 

Morrovcr,  which  I  had  not  the  opportunity  of  doing  in 
my  fiirmcr  Voyages  ;  having  now  had  in  the  Ship  with  me 
a  Penon  skill'd  in  Drawing,'  I  have  by  this  means  been 
enabled,  for  the  greater  Satisfaction  of  the  Curious  Reader, 
to  present  him  with  exact  Cuts  and  Figures  of  several  of 
the  principal  and  must  remarkable  of  those  Birds,  Beasts, 
I-'Uhn  and  Plants,  which  arc  described  in  the  following 
Narrative;  and  also  of  several,  which  not  being  able  to 
Hivc  any  better  or  so  good  an  Account  of,  as  by  causing 
them  to  be  exactly  Ingraven,  the  Reader  will  not  lind  any 
further  Dcacriptton  of  them,  but  only  that  they  were  found 
in  such  or  web  priicular  Countries.     The  Plants  them- 

'  TIw  aainnlh  nmpau  is  an  in«iiumeni  employed  ai  tea  to  detcnnine 
H  of  ibc  nufneiicm)  variaiion. 


THE   PREFACE 

selves  are  in  the  Hands  of  the  Ingenious  Dr.  Woodward/ 
I  could  have  caused  many  others  to  be  drawn  in  like 
manner,  but  that  I  resolved  to  confine  my  self  to  such 
only,  as  had  some  very  remarkable  difierence  in  the  Shape 
of  their  principal  Parts  from  any  that  are  found  in  Europe. 
I  have  besides  several  Birds  and  Fishes  ready  drawn,  which 
I  could  not  put  into  the  present  Volume,  because  they  were 
found  in  Countries,  to  the  Description  whereof  the  follow- 
ing Narrative  does  not  reach.  For,  being  obliged  to 
prepare  for  another  Voyage,*  sooner  than  I  at  first  ex- 
pected ;  I  have  not  been  able  to  continue  the  ensuing 
Narrative  any  further  than  to  my  Departure  from  the 
Coast  of  New  Holland.  But,  if  it  please  God  that  1  return 
again  safe,  the  Reader  may  expect  a  Continuation  of  this 
Voyage  from  my  departure  from  New  Holland,  till  the 
foundring  of  my  Ship  near  the  Island  of  Ascension. 

In  the  mean  time,  to  make  the  Narrative  in  some 
measure  compleat,  I  shall  here  add  a  Summary  Abstract 
of  that  latter  part  of  the  Voyage,  whereof  I  have  not  had 
time  to  draw  out  of  my  Journals  a  full  and  particular 
Account  at  large.  Departing  therefore  from  the  Coast  of 
New  Holland  in  the  beginning  of  September,  1699  (for 
the  Reasons  mentioned  Page  444)  we  arrived  at  Timor, 
Sept.  15,  and  anchored  off  that  Island.  On  the  24th  we 
obtain'd  a  small  Supply  of  fresh  Water  from  the  Governor 
of  a  Dutch  Fort  and  Factory  there ;  we  found  also  there  a 
Portuguese  Settlement,  and  were  kindly  treated  by  them. 
On  the  3rd  of  December  we  arrived  on  the  Coast  of  New 
Guinea;  where  we  found  good  fresh  Water,  and  had 
Commerce  with  the  Inhabitants  of  a  certain  Island  call'd 
Pulo-Sabuti.  After  which,  passing  to  the  Northward,  wc 
ranged  along  the  Coast  to  the  Eastermost  Part  of  New 
Guinea  ;  which  I  found  does  not  join  to  the  main  Land  of 
New  Guinea,  but  is  an  Island,^  as  I  have  described  it  in  my 
Map,  and  call'd  it  New-Britain. 

*  Dr.  John  Woodward  (1665-1728),  a  botanist  and  geologist  on  the 
Council  of  the  Royal  Society.  The  Herbarium  of  which  Dampier  speaks 
is  now  at  Oxford. 

■  See  ante^  note  to  Dedication. 

'  New  Pomerania.     Sabuti  is  Dampier  Island. 

344 


THE   PREFACE 

this  Island  may  afFord  many  rich  Com- 

1,  and  the  Natives  may  be  easily  brought  to  Com- 

But  the  many  Difficulties  I  at  this  time  met  with, 

want  of  Convenience  10  clean  my  Ship,  the  fewness  of 

Men,  their  Desire  to  hasten  home,  and  the  Danger  of 

inuing  in  these  Circumstances  in  Seas  where  the  Shoals 

Coasts  were  utterly  unknown,  and  must  be  searched  out 

I  much  Caution  and  length  of  Time  ;  hindred  me  from 

ecuting   any   further   at  present  my  intended  Search. 

It  I  have  been  able  to  do  in  this  Matter  for  the  Publick 

rioc,  will,  I  hope,  be  candidly  rccciv'd  ;  and  no  Difficulties 

discourage  me  from  endeavouring  to  promote  the  same 

whenever  I  have  an  Opportunity  put  into  my  Hands. 

May  18,  in  our  Return,  we  arrived  at  Timor.     June  21, 

pttt  by  part  of  the  Island  Java.     July  4,  we  anchored 

BatBvia-Rood ;   and  I  went    ashore,  visited    the    Dutch 

nl,  and  desired    the  Privilege  of  buying  Provisions 

1  wanted,  which  was  granted  mc.     In  this  Road  we 

till  the  17th  of  October  following;  when,  having  fitted 

Ship,  recruited  my  self  with  Provisions,  filled  all  my 

ler,  and  the  Season  of  the  Year  for  returning  towards 

Pope  being  come ;  I  set  Sail  from  Batavia,  and  on  the 

"h  of  December  made  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  ;  whence 

■rting  Jan.  1 1,  we  made  the  Island  of  Santa  Hellena  on 

J  1st;  and  February  the  2ist,  the  Island  of  Ascension; 

r  to  which  my  Shin,  having  sprung  a  Leak  which  could 

__  be  stopped,  foundered  at  Sea ;  with  much  difficulty  we 

p*  ashore,  where  wc  liv'd  on  Goats  and  Turtle;  and  on 

-  26th  of  February  found,  to  our  great  Comfort,  on  the 

:    fi..  Side  of  a  high  Mtiuntain,  about  half  a  Mile  from  its 

1 -p,  a  Spring    of  fresh  Water.      I  returned  10  England 

D   the   Canurhury   East-India-Ship.      For  which  wonderful 

Mivemncc  from  so  many  and  great  Dangers,  1  think  my 

Elf  bound  to  return  continual  Thanks  to  Almighty  God  ; 

rfaoK  Divine  Providence  if  it  shall  please  to  bring  mc  safe 

eun  to  my  Native  Country  from   my  present    intended 

foftac ;  I  hope  to  publish  a  particular  Account  of  alt  the 

Batcnal  Things  I  observed  in  the  several  Places  which  I 

MTc  now  but  barely  mentioned. 

345 


THE    CONTENTS 
CHAP.  I 


■^     Or«£eWattaMladwrCaanM««tt«(tfT(«Mnff*,J««. 

mi  Ae  Gonmon  st  Laf^aa  ud  S*nta  Cnu.  Oi  the  \Vin>l» 
m  tkoc  Satt>  Tbc  A-'<  Anti^  u  Mam  Of  thr  C.  Vcnl 
bhsAk ;  it»  Ssh-pon4.  compar'd  with  that  ol'  Skit  Timtuc*  ;  tt> 
I  Tnfc  far  Salt,  and  Fnpc-bcMn.  Its  Vrj:etaMrs  Sl[k-)^M^ut, 
I  Ac>  In  Sod,  Mil  Towns ;  its  Ga>nca-Hcn\  and  m  hvt  K^iwh, 
Bcvta^wtd  Fah.  OF  the  So-Turtio,  A:c.  Laving  ju  the  Wet 
S^no.  Of  tbc  Natives  tl>«r  Trade  and  l.hclihtwd.  Tht 
A.'t  Amral  ai  J.  St.  Ja^i  Pn<^  and  St.  Jaco  I'uwn.  Of 
I  tbc  Inlabiants,  and  their  ComtnodiiMa.  Ot  the  CuMBrd* 
ffe.    Sc  Jago  RowL     J.  Fago. 


CHAP.  II 

:  A.*»  Detibcmtion  on  the  Sequel  of  hit  Vojrkp,  and  Dcfwrturo 
ftma  St.  Jaicn.  Ha  Coune,  and  the  Winds,  &c.  in  t:riM*iii|{  llie 
He  namk  awajr  for  the  Itajr  or  All-Saiitti  in  Uraail ) 
and  whv.  Hit  Atrivti  on  that  Coait  and  in  the  Ila)'.  Of  the 
I  «c«et«l  Forts  the  Rood,  Situation,  Town,  and  HttiMlnei  of 
hia.  Of  it*  Go»ctnout,  Shi|*.  and  Mi-ichant«  i  ami  Cnm- 
idiiica  to  and  from  Kiirope.  CUym^  of  Su(:ai.  Ttic  Sramii 
[  (ipr  the  EuTOfwan  Ships  and  Ciirr  Cnbli-«  :  (>(  their  (iiiinM* 
Ifsde,  and  of  the  Cuaitintt-trade,  and  Whalc-kithnu.  0(  tho 
Inhabiunn  of  Bahia:  their  cairying  in  Mammocu :  Their 
ArTt6cets  Ctanc  for  Goods  and  Nc(cro-Slate^  Of  the  Oninirj 
.  about  Bahis  in  Soil  and  Product.  It»  Timber-tree*  i  the 
SapicfB,  Vcrmtatko,  CummrMctic,  Guiltcba,  Settle,  and  Man- 
347 


THE  CONTENTS 

groves.  The  Bastard-Coco,  its  Nuts  and  Cables ;  and  the  Silk- 
Cotton-trees.  The  Brasilian  Fruits,  Oranges,  &c.  Of  the 
Sour-sops,  Cashew's,  and  Jennipah*s.  Of  their  peculiar  Fruits, 
Arisah's,  Mericasah's,  Petango*s,  Petumbo*s,  Mungaroo's, 
Muckishaw%  Ingwa's,  Otees,  and  Mustenui  de  Ova's.  Of 
the  Palm-berries,  Physick-nuts,  Mendibee*s,  &c.  and  their  Roots 
and  Herbs,  &c.  Of  their  Wild-Fowl,  Maccaw's,  Parrots,  &c 
The  Yenuna,  Carrion-Crow  and  Chattering-crow,  Bill-bird, 
Curreso,  Turtle-dove  and  Wild-pigeons  ;  the  Jenctec,  Clocking- 
hen,  Crab-catcher,  Galden,  and  black  Heron  :  The  Ducb, 
Widgeon  and  Teal ;  and  Ostriges  to  the  Southward,  and  of  the 
Dunghil-fowls.  Of  their  Cattle,  Horses,  &c.  Licopards  and 
Tiger's.  Of  their  Serpents ;  the  Rattle-Snake,  small  Green- 
Snake,  Amphisbaena,  small  Black  and  small  Grey-snake;  the 
great  Land,  and  the  great  Water-snake ;  and  of  the  Water-dog. 
Of  their  Sea-fish  and  Turtle  ;  and  of  St.  Paul's  Town. 


CHAP,  in 

The  A.'s  Stay  and  Business  at  Bahia :  Of  the  Winds,  and  Seasons 
of  the  Year  there.  His  departure  for  N.  Holland.  C.  Salva- 
dore.  The  Winds  on  the  Brasilian  Coast ;  and  Abrohlo  Shoal ; 
Fish,  and  Birds :  The  Shear-water  Bird,  and  Cooking  of  Sharks. 
Excessive  number  of  Birds  about  a  dead  Whale  ;  Of  the 
Pintado  Bird,  and  the  Petrel,  &c.  Of  a  Bird  that  shews  the  C. 
of  G.  Hope  to  be  near  :  Of  the  Sea-reckonings,  and  Variations; 
And  a  Table  of  all  the  Variations  observ'd  in  this  Voyage. 
Occurrences  near  the  Cape ;  and  the  A.'s  passing  by  it  Of 
the  Westerly  Winds  beyond  it :  A  Storm,  and  its  Presages. 
The  A.'s  Course  to  N.  Holland  ;  and  Signs  of  approaching  it 
Another  Abrohlo  Shole  and  Storm,  and  the  A.'s  Arrival  on 
part  of  N.  Holland.  That  part  describ'd ;  and  ShaHc's  Bar, 
where  he  first  anchors.  Of  the  Land  there.  Vegetables,  Birw, 
&c.  A  particular  sort  of  Guano  :  Fish,  and  b«uitiful  Shelb; 
Turtle,  large  Shark,  and  Water-Serpents.  The  A.'s  removing 
to  another  Part  of  N.  Holland  :  Dolphins,  Whales,  and  more 
Sea-Serpents :  And  of  a  Passage  or  Streight  suspected  here : 
Of  the  Vegetables,  Birds,  and  Fish.  He  anchors  on  a  third 
Part  of  N.  Holland,  and  digs  Wells,  but  brackish.  Of  the 
Inhabitants  there,  the  great  Tides,  the  Vegetables  and 
Animals,  &c. 


348 


DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 
VOL.   Ill 

A    VOYAGE   TO   TERRA    AUSTRALIS 


CHAP.   I 

Tif  A.'i  Dff*rtmrf  Jrtim  tht  Dtumt.  A  CavtUn  t»  thou  wht  sail  in 
ikf  Cha*nfl.  Hit  Jrrivol  at  th*  Canary- 1 ilandt.  Santa  Cruz 
M  "Tmtrigi ;  l/u  Rtad  ami  Tnun,  and  Sfmnith  ff^rrci.  Laguna 
T.  Ukt  anJ  Ctmntry  j  anJ  Oratavia  T.  and  Road.  Of  thi 
ffina  and  tthtr  Ctmmtditits  »f  Ttmtrifft,  &c,  and  tht  Govemonn 
mt  Lngmiu  and  Santa  Crux.  Of  iht  ff'inds  in  that  Stas.  Tht 
jfi  Arrival  at  Maj9y  tni  of  tht  C,  Vtrd  Ulands ;  its  Salt-fend, 
ctmpmr'd  with  that  of  Salt-Tortuga  ;  iti  Tradt  for  Salt,  and 
Fraft-htatt.  Itt  ffgrtaiUi,  Silk-Collon,  isfc.  In  Soil,  and 
Tmnitf  I'/t  Gninfu-Hrn'i,  and  athtr  fowli,  Beastt  and  Fiih,  Of 
tlu  Sta-TurtU'i  (itfr.)  laying  in  tht  wtt  Staton.  Of  tht  Nativtt, 
lAtir  Tradf  end  Uvtlihotd,  The  A.'i  Arrival  at  J,  St.  JagOy 
fd  St.  Jap  Trtcw.  Of  tht  Inhabitants^  and  thfir  Commoditiri. 
Oflh  Cnaard-Apflty  and  tht  Pap«h.     St.  Jago  Road,  J.  Fogo. 

SAIL'D  from  the  Downs  early  on  Saturday,  Jan-  14,    ^ 
169;,  wiih  a   fair   Wind,  in   his   Majesty's  Ship  the  1699 
Roe-iuei ;'  carrying  but  12  Guns  in  this  Voyage,  and 
50  Men  and  Boys,  with  20  Month's  Provision.     We 

I  Kattud,  a  »hi|i  of  390  tons.      Her   cnptain  wai,  of  courae, 

Dampicf ;  h«T  muter,  John  Hughes;  her  li«uteniin1,  Gcoive  Fisher; 

Btlip  P>ine  ;  her  mate-i.  R.  ChAtlwitk  and  John  Kni|(hL    "Th« 

Ml  C«ptMB'i  cleirk  vcrc  two  Scoicti  dojcs"  ^^'illiam  Bonhwkk 

k  BrsBd  by  Mme.     She  Icfi  Drprford  on  ibc  Mh  On-  1A98.    On 

,  ma  ibc  lay  at  Tilbury,  the  Imtitla  Pink  cnllifird  with  her,  and 

I  bcr  beau)  and  tpHt  topmatl.    On  the  iind  ihe  anchored  to  the 

e  abe  ttayvd  till  January  14th.     Husliet  (the  tnasiet'*)  lo|[bnok 

349 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER^S  VOYAGES 

AN.   had  several  of  the  King's  Ships  in  Company,  bound  for 

'^  Spit-head    and    Plimouth;    and    by    Noon    we    were  off 

Dungencss.     We  parted  from  them  that  Night,  and  stood 

down  the   Channel,  but  found  our  selves  next  Morning 

nearer  the  French  Coast  than  we  expected ;  C.  de  Hague 

bearing  S.  E.  and  by  E.   6   L.     There  were  many  other 

Ships,  some  nearer,  some  farther  off  the  French  Coast,  who 

all  seem'd  to  have  gone  nearer  to  it  than  they  thought 

they  should.     My  Master,^  who  was  spmewhstt  troubled  at 

it  at  first,  was  not  displeas'd  however  to  find  that  he  had 

Company  in  his   Mistake :  Which,  as  I  have  heard,  is  a 

very  common  one,  and  fatal  to  many  Ships.     The  Occasion 

of  it  is  the  not  allowing  for  the  Change  of  the  Variation 

since  the    making  of  the  Charts;  which  Captain   Hally* 

An  Ad-      has   observed  to  be   very  considerable.     I  shall  refer  the 

vertise-      Reader  to  his  own  Account  of  it  which  he  causM  to  be 

cessary^    published    in    a    single   Sheet   of   Paper,    purposely  for  a 

to  be  ob-    Caution  to  such  as  pass  to  and  fro  the  English  Channel : 

thrNavi-  ^^^  Title  of  it  is  in  the  Margin.    And  my  own  Experience 

gation  up  thus  confirming  to  me  the  Usefulness  of  such  a  Caution, 

T^ch^"  I  was  willing  to  take  this  Occasion  of  helping  towards  the 

nei  of        making  it  the  more  publick. 

England.  Not  to  trouble  the  Reader  with  every  Day*s  Run,  nor 

with  the  Winds  or  Weather  (but  only  in  the  remoter 
Parts,  where  it  may  be  more  particularly  useful)  standing 
away  from  C.  la  Hague,  we  made  the  Start  about  5  that 
Afternoon  ;  which  being  the  last  Land  we  saw  of  England, 
we  reckon'd  our  Departure  *  from  thence  :  Tho'  we  had 
rather  have  taken  it  from  the  Lizard,  if  the  hazy  Weather 
would  have  suflFer'd  us  to  have  seen  it. 

The  first  Land  we  saw  after  we  were  out  of  the 
Channel  was  C.  Finisterre,  which  we  made  on  the  rgth; 
and  on  the  28  th  made  Lancerota,*  one  of  the  Canary 
Islands  ;  of  which,  and  of  Allegrance,*  another  of  them,  I 

*  John  Hughes. 

*  E.  Halley  (1656- 1742),  astronomer,  author  of  the  "General  Chart  of 
the  Variation,"  published  after  a  long  cruise  in  command  of  the  Paratnoitr 
Pink. 

'  Having,  until  then,  had  the  land  dose  aboard  to  define  their  position. 

*  Lanzerote.  ^  Alegranze. 

350 


W  AtLECRANCE,  TENERIFFE,  ETC.  1 

■K  here  given  the  Sights,'  as  they  both  appeared  to  us  at    an,  | 
■O  several  Bearings  and  Distances.  '^  ' 

m  We  were  now  standing  away  for  the  Island  Teneriffe, 
Kere  1  intended  to  take  in  some  Wine  and  Brandy  for  my 
Wyage.  On  Sunday,  half  an  hour  past  3  in  the  Afternoon, 
K  made  the  Island,  and  croudcd  in  with  all  our  Sails  till 
m  when  the  N.  E.  Point  of  the  Isle  bore  W.  S.  W.  dist. 
V leagues:  But  being  then  so  far  off  that  I  could  not 
■Beet  to  get  in  before  Night,  I  lay  by  till  next  Morning, 
pwbcrating  whether  I  should  put  in  at  Santa  Cruz,^  or  at 
Oraizvia,'  the  one  on  the  E.  the  other  on  the  W.  side  of 
the  Island ;  which  liea  mostly  North  and  South  ;  and  these 
tre  the  principal  Ports  on  each  Side.  I  chose  Santa  Cruz 
■  the  better  Harbour  (especially  at  this  Time  of  the  Year) 
Bid  as  best  fumish'd  with  that  Sort  of  Wine  which  I  had 
■BCasion  to  take  in  for  my  Voyage  :  So  there  I  come  to 
»n  Anchor  Jan.  30ih,  in  33  Fathom-water,  black  slimy 
Ground;  about  half  a  Mile  from  the  Shore;  from  which 
IXltance  I  took  the  Sight  of  the  Town. 
L  In  the  Koad,  Ships  must  ride  in  30,  40,  or  50  Fathom- 
er,  not  above  half  a  Mile  from  the  Shore  at  farthest; 
1  if  there  arc  many  Ships,  they  must  ride  close  one  by 
iher.  The  Shore  is  generally  high  Land,  and  in  most 
cci  steep  too,*  This  Road  lies  so  open  to  the  East, 
[  Winds  from  that  Side  make  a  great  Swell,  and  very 
goii^  ashore  in  Boats  :  The  Ships  that  ride  here  are 
B  often  forced  to  put  to  Sea,  and  sometimes  to  cut  or 
I  their  Anchors,  not  being  able  to  weigh  them.  The 
:  and  smoothest  Landing  is  in  a  small  sandy  Cove,  about 
Mile  to  the  N.  E.  of  the  Road,  where  there  is  good 
ith  which  Ships  that  lade  here  are  supply'd  ;  and 
ly  Times  Ships  that  lade  at  Oratavia,  which  is  the  chief 
t  for  Trade,  send  their  Boats  hither  for  Water.  That 
worse  Port  for  Westerly  than  this  is  for  Easterly  Winds  ; 
then  all  Ships  that  are  there  put  to  Sea.     Between  this 

ThcM  hate  htwn  omilted  ftum  ihe  present  edition  a>  no  )on|[cr  uMful. 
In  Ibe  isUm)  uf  Tcnerifiit  There  ii  aooihor  (own  of  this  nainc  in 
tUod  of  ratma.  I 

Omuva.  a  lown  of  lomc  iinfMniance  at  the  foot  of  the  Peak.  i 

lUainsabtuptlffnxnUtcica,  with  great  depth  of  water  cloM  to  the  ahore.  I 

3S>  J 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AR.   Watering-place  and  Santa  Cruz  are  two  little  Forts ;  which 
i^  with  some  Batteries  scattered  along  the  Coast  command 
the  Road.     Santa  Cruz  its  self  is  a  small  unwalled  Town 
fronting  the  Sea,  guarded  with  two  other  Forts  to  secure 
the  Road.     There  are  about  200  Houses  in  the  Town,  all 
two  Stories  high,  strongly  built  with  Stone,  and  covered 
with   Pantile.     It  hath   two   Convents   and    one   Church, 
which  are  the  best   Buildings  in  the  Town.     The  Forts 
here  could  not  secure  the  Spanish  Galleons  from  Admiral 
Blake,^   tho*   they   haird    in   close  under  the  main  Fort 
Many  of  the  Inhabitants  that   are  now    living  remember 
that  Action ;  in  which   the  English  battered   the   Town, 
and  did  it   much  Damage;  and  the  Marks  of  the  Shot 
still   remain   in   the   Fort-Walls.      The    Wrecks   of  the 
Galleons   that  were  biu-nt  here,  lie  in  15   Fathom-water: 
And  'tis  said  that  most  of  the  Plate  lies  there,  tho*  some 
of  it  was  hastily  carried  ashore  at  Blake's  coming  in  Sight. 
Soon  after  I  had  anchored  I  went  ashore  here  to  the 
Governour  of  the  Town,  who   received  me  very  Undly, 
and  invited  me  to  dine  with  him  the  next  Day.     I  returnM 
on  Board  in  the  Evening,  and  went  ashore 'again  with  two 
of  my  Officers  the  next  Morning ;  hoping  to  get  up  the 
Hill  Time  enough  to  see  Laguna,  the  principal  Town,  and 
to  be   back  again  to  dine  with  the  Governour   of  Santa 
Cruz ;  for  I  was  told  that  Laguna  was  but  3  Miles  off. 
The  Road  is  all  the  way  up  a  pretty  steep  Hill ;  yet  not 
so  steep  but  that  Carts  go  up  and  down  laden.     There  are 

^  Admiral  Blake  arrived  ofT  Santa  Cruz  on  the  i8th  April,  1657,  in  seardi 
of  some  treasure  galleons.  The  galleons  had  been  hauled  in  *'  close  under 
the  main  Fort,"  as  Dampier  says,  while  the  men-of-war  which  convoyed 
them  had  anchored  in  a  line  outside  them,  so  that  their  batteries  could 
bear  upon  an  enemy  entering  the  Road.  Some  of  the  gold  and  silver  vas 
hastily  landed  ;  but  Blake  attacked  before  the  ships  were  cleared.  On  the 
20th  April,  Blake  had  a  fair  wind,  and  sailed  into  the  Road  in  two  divisions. 
One,  under  Captain  Stayner,  attacked  the  galleons,  the  other,  under  Blake, 
engaged  the  forts.  All  the  Spanish  ships  were  burnt  and  sunk,  and,  as 
Dampier  says,  "  the  English  batter'd  the  Town  and  did  it  much  Damage." 
Blake  sailed  from  Santa  Cruz  that  same  evening,  as  soon  as  the  land-breeie 
began  to  blow.  The  English  lost  some  50  killed,  and  about  twice  that 
number  wounded.  Clarendon  says  that  "the  Spaniards  comforted  them- 
selves with  the  belief  that  they  were  Devils  and  not  Men  who  had  thus 
destroyed  them." 

352 


LAGUNA  TOWN  AND  GARDENS 

>)ick  Houses  scattering  by  the  Way-side,  where  we  got 
Wine.  The  Land  on  each  Side  seemed  to  be  but 
Eky  and  dry;  yet  in  many  Places  we  saw  Spots  of  green 
urishing  Corn.  At  farther  Distances  there  were  small 
■eyards  by  the  Sides  of  the  Mountains,  intermixt  with 
londancc  of  waste  roclcy  Land,  unfit  for  Cultivation, 
•ch  aflfurdcd  only  Dildo-bushes.  It  was  about  7  or  8 
the  Morning  when  we  set  out  from  Santa  Cruz ;  and 
Icing  fair  clear  Weather,  the  Sun  shone  very  bright  and 
rtned  us  sufficiently  before  we  got  to  the  City  Laguna  ; 
kh  wc  reached  about  10  a  Clock,  all  sweaty  and  tired, 
were  glad  to  refresh  our  selves  with  a  little  Wine  in  a 
■  Tipling-housc :  But  we  soon  found  out  one  of  the 
glUh  Merchants  that  resided  here ;  who  entertained  us 
dsomely  at  Dinner,  and  in  the  Afternoon  shew'd  us 
t  Town. 

Ljguoa  is  a  pretty  large  well-compacted  Town,  and 
ikes  a  very  agreeable  Prospect.  It  stands  part  of  it 
a  Hill,  and  part  in  a  Level.  The  Houses  have 
axly  strong  Walls  built  with  Stone  and  covered  with 
Itiie.  They  are  not  uniform,  yet  they  appear  pleasant 
gh.  There  arc  many  fair  Buildings;  among  which 
2  Parish-Churches,  2  Nunneries,  an  Hospital,  4 
rcDti,  and  some  Chapels;  besides  many  Gentlemens 
9CS.  Tbe  Convents  arc  those  of  St.  Austin,  St. 
ninick.  St.  Francis,  and  St.  Diego.  The  two  Churches 
pretty  high  square  Steeples,  which  top  the  rest  of 
Buildings.  The  Streets  are  not  regular,  yet  they  are 
itly  »ptciou8  and  pretty  handsome;  and  near  the  middle 
"  E  Town  is  a  large  Parade,  which  has  good  Buildings 
:  it.  There  is  a  strong  Prison  on  one  Side  of  it ; 
which  is  a  targe  Conduit  of  good  Water,  that  supplies 
the  Town.  They  have  many  Gardens  which  are  set 
with  Oranges,  LJmcs,  and  other  Fruits:  In  the 
of  which  arc  Pot-herbs,  Sallading,  Flowers,  &c. 
I  indeed,  if  the  Inhabitants  were  curious  this  way,  they 
kt  have  very  pleasant  Gardens:  For  as  the  Town  stands 
I  from  the  Sea,  on  the  Brow  of  a  Plain  thai  is  all  open 
;  East,  and  hath  consequently  the  Benefit  of  the  true 
Dt.  u.  353  z 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AN.   Trade- wind,  which  blows  here,  and  is  most  commonly  fair ; 

'699  so  there  are  seldom  wanting  at  this  Town,  brisk,  cooling, 
and  refreshing  Breezes  all  the  Day. 

On  the  Back  of  the  Town  there  is  a  large  Plain  of 
3  or  4  Leagues  in  length  and  2  Miles  wide,  producing  a 
thick  kindly  Sort  of  Grass,  which  lookt  green  and  very 
pleasant  when  I  was  there,  like  our  Meadows  in  England 
in  the  Spring.     On  the  East-side  of  this  Plain,  very  near 
the  Back  of  the  Town,  there  is  a  natural  Lake  or  Pond 
of  fresh  Water.     It  is  about  half  a  Mile  in  Circumference; 
but  being  stagnant,  'tis  only  us'd  for  Cattle  to  drink  of. 
In  the  Winter-time  several  Sorts  of  wild  Fowl  resort  hither 
affording  Plenty  of  Game  to  the  Inhabitants  of  Laguna. 
This  City  is  called  Laguna  from  hence ;  for  that  Word  in 
Spanish  signifies  a  Lake  or  Pond.     The  Plain  is  bounded 
on  the  W.  the  N,  W.  and  the  S.  W.  with  high  steep 
Hills;  as  high  above  this  Plain  as  this  is  above  the  Sea; 
and  'tis  from  the  Foot  of  one  of  these  Mountains  that  the 
Water  of  the  Conduit  which  supplies  the  Town,  is  con- 
veyed over  the  Pljun,  in  Troughs  of  Stone  rais'd  upon 
Pillars.     And,   indeed,    considering   the   Situation   of  the 
Town,  its  large  Prospect  to  the  East  (for  from  hence  you 
see  the  Grand  Canary)  its  Gardens,  cool  Arbors,  pleasant 
Plain,  green  Fields,  the  Pond  and  Aqueduct,  and  its  re- 
freshing Breezes ;  it  is  a  very  delightful  Dwelling,  especially 
for  such  as  have  not   Business  that    calls    them  far  and 
often  from  Home :  For  the  Island  being  generally  moun- 
tainous, steep  and  craggy,  full  of  Risings  and  Fallings,  'tis 
very  troublesome  Travelling  up  and  down  in  it,  unless  in 
the  Cool  of  the  Mornings  and  Evenings :  And  Mules  and 
Asses  are  most  us'd  by  them,  both  for  Riding  and  Carriage, 
as  fittest  for  the  stony,  uneven  Roads. 

Beyond  the  Mountains,  on  the  S.  W.  side,  still  further 
up,  you  may  see  from  the  Town  and  Plain  a  small  peeked 
Hill,  overlooking  the  rest.  This  is  that  which  is  called 
the  Pike  of  TenerifFe,  so  much  noted  for  its  Heighth:^ 

*  The  Peak  is  "like  unto  a  sugar-loaf,  and  continually  covered  with 
snow,  and  placed  in  the  middest  of  a  goodly  vallie."  Its  height  is  about 
12,000  feet. 

354 


WINES— ORATAVIA—VERDONA   WINE 

But  wc  saw  it   here  at  so  great  a  Disadvanlage,  by  Reason 
of  the  Nearness  of  the  adjacent  Mountains  to  us,  that  it  ' 
looked  inconsiderable  in  Respect  to  its  Fame. 

The  true  Malmesy  Wine  grows  in  this  Island;  and 
this  here  is  said  to  be  the  best  of  its  Kind  in  the  World.' 
Here  is  also  Canary-Wine,  and  Verdona,  or  Green-wine. 
The  Canu-y  grows  chiefly  on  the  West-side  of  the  Island ; 
lod  ihcrefore  is  commonly  sent  toOratavia;  which  being 
the  chief  Sca-pori  for  Trade  in  the  Island,  the  principal 
Eogli&h  Merchants  reside  there,  with  their  Consul ;  because 
wc  have  a  great  Trade  for  this  Wine.  I  was  told,  that 
thit  Town  is  bigger  than  Laguna;  that  it  has  but  one 
Church,  but  many  Convents :  That  the  Port  is  but  ordinary 
at  best,  and  is  ver>'  bad  when  the  N.  W.  Winds  blow. 
These  Norwcsters  give  notice  of  their  Coming,  by  a  great 
Sea  thai  tumbles  in  on  the  Shore  for  some  Time  before 
they  come,  and  by  a  black  Sky  in  the  N.  W.  Upon  these 
%gR9  Ships  cither  get  up  their  Anchors,  or  slip  their 
Ctbles  and  put  to  Sea,  and  ply  oflT  and  on  till  the  Weather 
■.  Sometimes  they  arc  forced  to  do  so  2  or  3 
before  they  can  take  in  their  Lading ;  which  'tis 
1  do  here  in  the  fairest  Weather:  And  for  fresh 
they  send,  as  I  have  said,  to  Santa  Cruz.  Verdona 
:n,  Mrong-bodicd  Wine,  harsher  and  sharper  than 
Tis  not  so  much  esteemed  in  Euroiw,  but  is 
to  the  West-Indies,  and  will  keep  best  in  hot 
I ;  for  which  Reason  I  touch'd  here  to  take  in 
it  for  my  Voyage.  This  Sort  of  Wine  is  made 
\j  on  the  East-side  of  the  Island,  and  shipt  off  at 
Cruz. 

aides  these  Wines,  which  arc  yearly  vended  in  great 
from  the  Canary  Islands  (chiefly  from  Grand 
Tencrifli,  and  Palnia)  here  is  Store  of  Grain,  as 
Barly  and  Maiz,  which  they  often  transport  to 
Places.  They  have  also  some  Beans  and  Peas,  and 
a  Sort  of  Grain  much  like  Maiz,  sow'd  mostly  to 
Land.     They    have    Papah's,  which   I    shall  speak 

'  tha  be«  *  Malimey,"  oi  Madeira,  ome  bom  Madeira. 

355 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AK.  more  of  hereafter;  Apples,  Pears,  Plumbs,  Cherries,  and 
'^  excellent  Peaches,  Apricocks,  Guava's,  Pomegranates, 
Gtrons,  Oranges,  Lemons,  Limes,  Pumpkins,  Onions  the 
best  in  the  World,  Cabbages,  Turnips,  Potato's,  &c. 
They  are  also  well  stocked  with  Horses,  Cows,  Asses, 
Mules,  Sheep,  Goats,  Hogs,  Conies,  and  Plenty  of  Deer. 
The  Lancerot  Horses  arc  said  to  be  the  most  mettlesome, 
fleet,  and  loyal  Horses  that  are.  Lastly,  here  are  many 
Fowls,  as  Cocks  and  Hens,  Ducks,  Pidgeons,  Partridges, 
&c.  with  Plenty  of  Fish,  as  Nfackril,  &c.  All  the  Canary 
Islands  have  of  these  Commodities  and  Provisions  more  or 
less:  But  as  Lancerota  is  most  fam'd  for  Horses,  and 
Grand  Canary,  Teneriffe,  and  Palma  for  Wines,  Teneriflfc 
especially  for  the  best  Malmesy,  {for  which  Reason  these 
3  Islands  have  the  chief  Trade)  so  is  Fortcventura  for 
Dunghil-Fowls,  and  Gomera  for  Deer.  Fowls  and  other 
Eatables  are  dear  on  the  Trading  Islands;  but  very 
plentiful  and  cheap  on  the  other;  and  therefore  *tis  best 
for  such  Ships  that  are  going  out  on  long  Voyages,  and 
who  design  to  take  in  but  little  Wine,  to  touch  rather  at 
these  last;  where  also  they  may  be  supply*d  with  Wine 
enough,  good  and  cheap :  And  for  my  own  Part,  if  I  had 
known  before  I  came  hither,  I  should  have  gone  rather  to 
one  of  those  Islands  than  to  Teneriffe :  But  enough  of  this. 
*Tis  reported  they  can  raise  12000  armed  Men  on 
this  Island.  The  Governor  or  General  (as  he  is  calfd)  of 
all  the  Canary  Islands  lives  at  Laguna :  His  Name  is 
Don  Pedro  de  Ponto.  He  is  a  Native  of  this  Island,  and 
was  not  long  since  President  of  Panama  in  the  South  Seas; 
who  bringing  some  very  rich  Pearls  from  thence,  which  he 
presented  to  the  Queen  of  Spain,  was  therefore,  as  'tis  said, 
made  General  of  the  Canary  Islands.  The  Grand  Canary 
is  an  Island  much  superiour  to  Teneriffe  both  in  Bulk  and 
Value ;  but  this  Gentleman  chuses  rather  to  reside  in  this 
his  native  Island.  He  has  the  Character  of  a  very  worthy 
Person ;  and  governs  with  Moderation  and  Justice,  being 
very  well  beloved. 

One  of  his  Deputies  was  the  Governor  of  Santa  Cruz, 
with  whom  I  was  to  have  dinM;  but  stajring  so  long  at 

356 


GOVERNOR   AT  SANTA   CRUZ 

n«,  1  cune  but  Time  enough  to  sup  with  him.  He  ak. 
civil,  discreet  Man.  He  resides  in  the  main  Fort  '^ 
by  the  Sea.  There  is  a  Centinel  stands  at  his  Door ; 
a  few  Servants  to  wait  on  him.  I  was  treated  in 
lower  Room,  which  has  but  one  small  Window, 
about  20O  Muskets  hung  up  against  the  Walls, 
ISkes;  no  Wainscot,  Hangings,  nor  much  Furni- 
Therc  was  only  a  small  old  Table,  a  few  old  Chairs, 
I  1  or  3  pretty  long  Forms  to  sit  on.  Having  supp'd 
h  him,  I  invited  htm  on  Board,  and  went  off  in  my  Boat. 
c  next  Morning  he  came  aboard  with  another  Gentleman 
his  Company,  attended  by  2  Scn>'ants :  But  he  was 
icntly  Sea-sick,  and  so  much  out  of  order,  that  he  could 
nee  eat  or  drink  any  Thing,  but  went  quickly  ashore 
in. 

Having  rcfresh'd  my  Men  ashore,  and  taken  in  what  we 
I  occasion  for,  I  sail'd  away  from  Santa  Cruz  on  Feb.  4 
the  Afternoon;  hastening  out  all  J  could,  because  the 
E.  Winds  growing  stormy  made  so  great  Sea.  that  the 
I  scarce  safe  in  the  Road  ;  and  I  was  glad  to  get  out, 
left  behind  several  Goods  we  had  bought  and  paid 
:  For  a  Boat  could  not  go  ashore ;  and  the  Stress  was  so 
u  in  weighing  Anchor,  that  the  Cable  broke.  I  design'd 
t  fof  the  I.  of  Mayo,  one  of  the  C.  Verd  Islands;  and 
away  with  a  strong  N.  E.  Wind,  right  afore  it,  all  that 
1^1  aiid  the  next  Day,  at  the  Rate  of  10  or  11  Miles  an 
it;  when  it  slackened  to  a  more  moderate  Gale.  The 
ary  blands  are,  for  their  Latitude,  within  the  usual 
jc  of  the  true  or  general  Trade-Wind;  which  I  have 
rv'd  to  be,  on  this  Side  the  Equator,  N.  Easterly: 
then  lying  not  far  from  the  African  Shore,  they 
roo«<  subject  to  a  N.  Wind,  which  is  the  Coasting 
constant  Trade,  sweeping  that  Coast  down  as  low  as  to 
Verd  ;  which  spreading  in  Breadth,  taking  in  mostly  the 
Islands ;  tho*  it  be  there  interrupted  frequently  with 
true  Trade-Wind,  N.  West-Winds,  or  other  Shifts  of 
Islands  arc  subject  to;  especially  where  they  lie 
•.  The  Pike  of  TencrifFe,  which  had  generally 
while  we  lay  at  Santa  Cruz,  appear *d  now  all 
3J7 


1 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AK.  white  with  Snow,  hovering  over  the  other  Hills ;  but  their 
1699  Height  made  it  seem  the  less  considerable;  for  it  looks 
most  remarkable  to  Ships  that  are  to  the  Westward  of  it. 
We  had  brisk  N.  N.  E.  and  N.  E.  Winds  from  Tencriflfe ; 
and  saw  Flying-fish,  and  a  great  deal  of  Sea-thistle  Weed 
floating.  By  the  9th  of  Feb.  at  Noon  we  were  in  the  Lat. 
of  1 5  d.  4  m.  so  we  steered  away  W.  N.  W.  for  the  I.  of 
Mayo,  being  by  Judgment,  not  far  to  the  E.  of  it,  and  at 
8  a  Clock  in  the  Evening  lay  by  till  Day.  The  Wind  was 
then  at  W.  by  South,  and  so  it  continued  all  Night, 
fair  Weather,  and  a  small  easy  Gale.  All  these  were 
great  Signs,  that  we  were  near  some  Land,  after  having 
had  such  constant  brisk  Winds  before.  In  the  Morning 
after  Sun-rise,  we  saw  the  Island  at  about  4  Leagues 
distance.  But  it  was  so  hazy  over  it,  that  we  could  sec 
but  a  small  Part  of  it ;  yet  even  by  that  Part  I  knew  it 
to  be  the  Isle  of  Mayo.  See  how  it  appearM  to  us  at 
several  Views,  as  we  were  compassing  the  E.  the  S.  E. 
and  the  S.  of  it,  to  get  to  the  Road,  on  the  S.  W.  of  it, 
[Table  omitted,]  and  the  Road  it  self. 

I  got  not  in  till  the  next  Day,  Feb.  1 1 ,  when  I  come  to 
an  Anchor  in  the  Road,  which  is  the  Lee-ward  Part  of  the 
Island ;  for  'tis  a  general  Rule,  never  to  anchor  to  Wind- 
ward of  an  Island  between  the  Tropicks.     We  anchored  at 
II  a  Clock  in    14  Fathom  clean  Sand,  and  very  smooth 
Water,  about  three  quarters  of  a  Mile  from  the  Shore,  in 
the  same  Place  where  I  anchorM  in  my  Voyage  round  the 
World  ;  and  found  riding  here  the  Newport  of  London,  a 
Merchant   Man,   Captain  Barefoot  Commander,  who  wel- 
comed me  with  3  Guns,  and  I  returned  one  for  Thanks. 
He  came  from|Fayal  one  of  the  Western  Islands^ ;  and  had 
Store  of  Wine  and  Brandy  aboard.     He  was  taking  in  Salt 
to  carry  to  New-found-land,  and  was  very  glad  to  sec  one 
of  the  King's  Ships,   being  before  our  coming  afi-aid  of 
Pyrates ;  which,  of  late  Years,  had  much  infested  this  and 
the  rest  of  the  Cape  Verd  Islands.* 

I  have  given  some  Account  of  the  Island  of  Mayo,  and 

*  The  Azores. 

•  Sec  Johnson's  "  History  of  the  Pyrates,"  the  Life  of  Captain  Halsey. 

358 


COASTS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OF  MAYO 
f  other  of  these  Islands,  in  my  "  Voyage  round  the  World  " 
p^ol.  I.  p.  99],  but  1  shall  now  add  some  further  Observa-  '^ 
tions  that  occurr'd  to  mc  in  this  Voyage.  The  I-  of  Mayo 
is  about  7  Leagues  in  Circumference,  of  a  roundish  Form, 
with  many  small  rocky  Points  shooting  out  into  the  Sea  a 
Mile,  (IT  more.  Its  Lat.  is  i  j  d,  N,  and  as  you  sail  about 
the  ls!e,  when  you  come  pretty  nigh  the  Shore,  you  will  see 
the  Water  breaking  off  from  those  Points  ;  which  you  must 
eivc  a  Birth  to,  and  avoid  them.  I  sail'd  at  this  Time  two 
Parts  in  three  round  the  Island,  but  saw  nothing  dangerous 
besides  these  Points;  and  they  all  shew'd  themselves  by 
the  Breaking  of  the  Water :  Yet  'tis  reported,  that  on  the 
N.  and  N.  N.  W.  Side  there  are  dangerous  Sholcs,  that  lye 
farther  off  at  Sea  ;  but  I  was  not  on  that  Side.  There  are 
J  Hills  on  this  Island  of  a  considerable  Heighth ;  one 
pretty  bluff,  the  other  pecked  at  top.  The  rest  of  the 
bland  is  pretty  level,  and  of  a  good  Heighth  from  the  Sea. 
The  Shore  clear  round  hath  sandy  Bays,  between  the  rocky 
Points  I  spake  of;  and  the  whole  Island  is  a  very  dry  Sort 
of  Soil. 

On  the  WcM-sidc  of  the  Isle  where  the  Road  for  Ships 
U,  there  is  a  large  sandy  Bay,  and  a  Sand-bank,  of  about  40 
Pices  wide  within  it,  which  runs  along  the  Shore  3  or  3 
Miles;  within  which  there  is  a  large  Salina  or  Salt-pond, 
CDottiaed  between  the  Sand-bank  and  the  Hills  beyond  it. 
The  whole  Silina  is  about  2  Miles  in  length,  and  half  a 
Mile  wide;  but  above  one  half  of  it  is  commonly  dry. 
Tbe  North  End  only  of  the  Pond  never  wants  Water, 
producing  Salt  from  November  till  May.  which  is  here  the 
dry  Season  of  the  Year.  The  Water  which  yields  this  Salt, 
works  in  from  out  of  the  Sea  through  a  hole  in  the  Sand- 
btnk  before-mentioned,  like  a  Sluce,  and  that  only  in 
Spring-tides;  when  it  Alls  the  Pond  more  or  less,  according 
to  the  Height  of  the  Tides.  If  there  is  any  Salt  in  the 
Ponds  when  the  Flush  of  Water  comes  in,  it  presently 
dteolves :  But  then  in  2  or  3  Days  after  it  K-gins  to  kern ; 
and  so  continues  kerning  tilt  cither  all,  or  the  greatest  part 
of  the  Salt-water  is  congeal'd  or  kcrn'd  ;  or  tilt  a  fresh 
Supply  of  it  comes  in  again  from  the  Sea.  This  Water  is 
3S9 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  known  to  come  in  only  at  that  one  Passage  on  the  N.  part  of 
*^  the  Pond ;  where  also  it  is  deepest.  It  was  at  a  Spring  of 
the  New  Moon  when  I  was  there ;  and  I  was  told  that  it 
comes  in  at  no  other  Time  but  at  the  New  Moon  Spring- 
tides :  But  why  that  should  be  I  can't  guess.  They  who 
come  hither  to  lade  Salt  rake  it  up  as  it  kerns,  and  lay  it 
in  Heaps  on  the  dry  Land,  before  the  Water  breaks  in 
anew :  And  this  is  observable  of  this  Salt-Pond,  that  the  Salt 
kerns  only  in  the  dry  Season,  contrary  to  the  Salt-ponds  in  the 
West-Indies,  particularly  those  of  the  Island  Salt-Tortuga, 
which  I  have  formerly  mentioned  [Vol.  I.  p.  85]  for  they 
never  kern  there  till  the  Rains  come  in  about  April ;  and 
continue  to  do  so  in  May,  June,  July,  &c.  while  the  wet 
Season  lasts ;  and  not  without  some  good  Shower  of  Rain 
first :  But  the  Reason  also  of  this  Difference  between  the 
Salt-ponds  of  MayOj^  and  those  of  the  West-Indies,  why 
these  should  kern  in  the  wet  Season,  and  the  former  in  the 
dry  Season,  I  shall  leave  to  Philosophers. 

Our  Nation  drives  here  a  great  Trade  for  Salt,  and 
have  commonly  a  Man  of  War  here  for  the  Guard  of 
our  Ships  and  Barks  that  come  to  take  it  in ;  of  which 
I  have  been  informed  that  in  some  Years  there  have  not 
been  less  than  100  in  a  Year.  It  costs  nothing  but  Men's 
Labour  to  rake  it  together,  and  wheel  it  out  of  the  Pond, 
except  the  Carriage :  And  that  also  is  very  cheap ;  the 
Inhabitants  having  Plenty  of  Asses,  for  which  they  have 
little  to  do  besides  carrying  the  Salt  from  the  Ponds  to 
the  Sea-side  at  the  Season  when  Ships  are  here.  The 
Inhabitants  lade  and  drive  their  Asses  themselves,  being 
very  glad  to  be  imployed ;  for  they  have  scarce  any  other 
Trade  but  this  to  get  a  Penny  by.  The  Pond  is  not  above 
half  a  Mile  from  the  Landing-place,  so  that  the  Asses 
make  a  great  many  Trips  in  a  Day.  They  have  a  set 
Number  of  Turns  to  and  fro  both  Forenoon  and  Afternoon, 
which  their  Owners  will  not  exceed.  At  the  Landing- 
place  there  lies  a  Frape-boat,  as  our  Seamen  call  it,  to 
take  in  the  Salt.  'Tis  made  purposely  for  this  Use,  with 
a  Deck  reaching  from  the  Stern  a  third  Part  of  the  Boat ; 
where  there  is  a  kind  of  Bulk-head  that  rises,  not  from 

360 


FR APE-BOATS    DESCRIBED 

the  Boat's  Bottom,  but  from  the  Edge  of  the  Deck,  to  *». 
about  I  Foot  in  Hcighth;  all  calk'd  very  tight.  The  '*99 
Uie  of  it  is  to  keep  the  Waves  from  dashing  into  the 
Boat,  when  it  lies  with  its  Head  to  the  Shore,  to  take 
in  Sail:  For  here  commonly  runs  a  great  Sea;  and  when 
the  Boat  lies  so  with  its  Head  to  the  Shore,  the  Sea  breaks 
in  over  the  Stem,  and  would  soon  fill  it,  was  it  not  for 
thti  Bulk-head,  which  stops  the  Waves  that  come  flowing 
apon  the  Deck,  and    makes  them  run  off  into  the   Sea 

each  Side.      To  keep  the  Boat  thus  with   the  Head 

the  Shore,  and  the  Stern  to  the  Sea,  there  are  two 
■trong  Stantions  set  up  in  the  Boat;  the  one  at  the  Head, 
the  other  in  the  Middle  of  it,  against  the  Bulk-head,  and 
■  Foot  higher  than  the  Bulk-head.  There  is  a  large 
KoCch  cut  in  the  Top  of  each  of  these  Stantions  big 
enough  for  a  small  Hazer  or  Rope  to  lie  in ;  one  End 
of  which  is  fastenM  to  a  Post  ashore,  and  the  other  to 
Gnpling  or  Anchor  lying  a  pretty  way  off  at  Sea :  This 
Kope  servelh  to  hale  the  Boat  in  and  out,  and  the  Stantions 
wm  to  keep  her  fast,  so  that  she  cannot  swing  to  either 
Side  when  the  Rope  is  hal'd  tight:  For  the  Sea  would 
dw  fill  her,  or  toss  her  ashore  and  stave  her.  The  better 
to  prevent  her  staving  and  to  keep  her  the  tighter  together, 
cbov  are  two  Sets  of  Ropes  more  :  The  first  going  athwart 
iirom  Gunnal  to  Gunnal,  which,  when  the  Rowers  Benches 

laid,  bind  the  Boats  Sdes  so  hard  against   the  Ends 
of  the  Benches  that  they  cannot  easily  fall  asunder,  while 
ihe  Benches   and    Ropes    mutually  help  each  other;  the         h 
Aopca  keeping  the  Boat's  Sides  from  flying  ofl;  and  the       ■ 
Benches  from  being  crush'd   together  inwards.     Of  these       V 
Jtopea  there  are  usually  but  two,  dividing  ihc  Boat's  length, 
they  go  across  the  Sides,  into  three  equal  Parts.     The 
ter  Set  of  Ropes  arc  more  in  Number,  and  are  so  plac'd 
to  keep  the  Ribs  and  Planks  of  the  Btiat  from  starting 
'.     For  this  Purpose  there  are  Holes  made    at  certain 
Distances  through  the  Edge  of  the  Keel  that  runs  along 

the  Imtdc  of  the  Boat ;  through   which    these  Ropes 
nog  are  laid  along  the  Ribs,  so  as  to  line  them,  or  be 

■ves  as  Ribs  upon  them,  being  made  fast  to  them 
361 


I  them 

3 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   by  Rattan's  brought  thither,  or  small  Cords  twisted  close 
'^  about  both  Ropes  and  Ribs,  up  to  the  Gunnal :  By  which 
Means  tho'  several  of  the  Nails  or  Pegs  of  the  Boat  should 
by  any  Shock  fall  out,  yet  the  Ropes  of  these  two  Sets 
might  hold  her  together :  Especially  with  the  Help  of  a 
Rope  going  quite  round  about  the  Gunnal  on  the  out-side, 
as  our  Long-boats  have.     And  such  is  the  Care  taken  to 
strengthen    the   Boats;    from   which    girding    them  with 
Ropes,  which   our   Seamen  call  Fraping,*   they  have  the 
Name  of  Frape-boats,     Two  Men  suffice  to  hale  her  in 
and  out,  and  take  in  the  Salt  from  Shore  (which  is  brought 
in   Bags)  and   put  it  out  again.     As  soon  as  the  Boat  is 
brought  nigh  enough  to  the  Shore,  he  who  stands  by  the 
Bulk-head  takes  instantly  a  turn  with  the  Hazer  about 
the  Bulk-head-Stantion ;    and  that   stops   her   fast  before 
the  Sea  can  turn  her  aside :  And  when  the  two  Men  have 
got  in  their  Lading,  they  hale  off  to  Sea,  till  they  come 
a   little  without  the  Swell;   where  they  remove  the  Salt 
into   another    Boat   that   carries    it   on   board    the  Ship. 
Without  such  a  Frape-boat  here  is  but  bad  Landing  at 
any  Time :  For  tho'  'tis  commonly  very  smooth   in  the 
Road,   yet  there  falls  a  great  Sea  on  the  Shore,  so  that 
every  Ship  that  comes  here  should  have  such  a  Boat,  and 
bring,  or  make,  or  borrow  one  of  other  Ships  that  happen 
to  be  here ;  for  the  Inhabitants  have  none.     I  have  been 
thus  particular  in    the  Description    of  these  Frape-boats, 
because  of  the  Use  they  may  be  of  in  any  Places  where 
a  great  Sea  falls  in  upon  the  Shore :  as  it  doth  especially 
in  many  open  Roads  in  the  East  and  West-Indies ;  where 
they  might  therefore  be  very  serviceable ;  but  I  never  saw 
any  of  them  there. 

The  Island  Mayo  is  generally  barren,  being  dry,  as  I 
said ;  and  the  best  of  it  is  but  a  very  indifferent  Scnl. 
The  sandy  Bank  that  pens  in  the  Salt-pond  hath  a  Sort 
of  Silk  Cotton  growing  upon  it,  and  a  Plant  that  runs 
along  upon  the  Ground,  branching  out  like  a  Vine,  but 
with   thick   broad   Leaves.      The   Silk-Cotton   grows  on 

^  Frapping ;  to  frap  is  to  wrap  about  with  rope. 

362 


■  SILK   COTTON  ■ 

^koder  Shrubs,  3  or  4  Foot   high,  in  Cods  as  big  as  an    MtM 

^Rpple,  but  of  a  long    Shape ;  which  when  ripe  open  at  '^ 

^■tac  Knd,  parting   leisurely  into  4  (Quarters;  and  at  the 

^^Bit  opening  the  Cotton  breaks  forth.     It  may  be  of  use 

^■pr  stuffing  of  Pillows,  or  the  like ;  but  else  is  of  no  Value, 

^Bnjr  more  than  that  of  the  great  Cotton-tree.     1  took  of 

^Bbese  Cods  before  they  were  quite  ripe,  and  laid  them  in 

^Biy  Chest ;  and   tn   2   or  3   Days   they  would   open  and 

^■irow   out  the  Cotton.     Others  I  have  bound  fast  with 

^Btrings,  so  that  the  Cod  could  not  open;  and  in  a  few 

^Bkys   after,    as    soon   as   1   slackned   the   String   never   so 

^^Rtk,    the    Cod    would    burst,    and    the    Cotton    fly    out 

^^prceably,  at  a   very  little   Hole,  just   as  the  Pulp  out   of 

^B  roasting  Apple,  till  all  has  been  out  of  the  Cod.     I  met 

^Bnth   this  Sort  of  Cotton   afterwards  at   Timor  (where   it 

^^ms   ripe   in    November)  and    no    where   else    in    all    my 

^H'nvcls;  but  I  found  two  other  Sorts  of  Silk-cotton  at 

^Brazil,  which  1  shall  there  describe.     The  right  Cotton- 

^^rtirub  grows  here  also,  but   not  on  the  Sand-bank.      I  saw 

»ome  Bushes   of  it    near  the  Shore ;  but   the  most  of  it 

is  planted  in  the  Middle  of  the  Isle,  where  the  Inhabitants 

^^irc.    Cotton-cloth    being    their    chief   Manufacture ;    but 

^Ketther  is  there  any  great  Store  of  this  Cotton.     There 

^BPw  are  some  Trees  within  the   Island,  but   none  to  be 

^Te«n  near  the  Sea-side ;  nothing  but  a  few  Bushes  scattering 

up  and  down  against  the  Sides  of  the  adjacent  Hills ;  for, 

as  I  said  before,  the  Land  is  pretty  high   from  the  Sea. 

The  Soil  is  for  the  most  part  cither  a  Sort  of  Sand,  or 

loose   crumbling   Stone,  without  any  fresh  Water  Ponds 

or  Strtams,  to  moisten  it ;  but  only  Showers  in  the  Wcl- 

leuon,  which  run  nflF  as  fast  as  they  fall ;  except  a  small 

Spring  in  the  Middle  of  the  Isle,  from  which   proceeds 

a    little   Stream    of  Water    that    runs    through    a    Valley 

between  the  Hills.     There  the  Inhabitants  live  in   three 

small  Town*,  having  a  Church  and   Padre  in  each  Town : 

And   these  Towns,  as  I  was  inform'd,  arc  6  or  7   Miles 

the   Koad.     Pinose  is   said   to  be  the  chief  Town, 

to  have   2  Churches :  St.  John's  the  next ;    and  the 

Lagoa.      The  Houses   are  very   mean ;   small,  low 

3«3 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER^S   VOYAGES 

AK.   Things.     They  build   with   Fig-tree;    here   being,   as  I 
>699  was  told,  no  other  Trees  fit  to  build  with.     The  Rafters 
are  a  Sort  of  wild    Cane.     The  Fruits  of  this  Isle  arc 
chiefly  Figs,  and  Water-Melons.     They  have  also  Calla- 
vances  (a  Sort  of  Pulse  like  French  Beans)  and  Pumpkins, 
for  ordinary   Food.     The   Fowls   are   Flamingo's,   Great 
Curlews,  and  Guinea-Hens ;  *  which  the  Natives  of  those 
Islands  call  Gallena  Pintata^  or  the  Painted  Hen ;  but  in 
Jamaica,  where  I  have  seen  also  those  Birds  in  the  dry 
Savannah's  and  Woods,  (for  they  love  to  run  about  in 
such   Places)  they  are    call'd   Guinea-Hens.     They  seem 
to  be  much  of  the  Nature  of  Partridges.     They  are  bigger 
than  our  Hens,  have  long  Legs,  and  will  run  ap)ace.     They 
can  fly  too,  but  not  far,  having  large  heavy  Bodies,  and 
but  short  Wings  and  short  Tails:   As   I  have  generally 
observed  that  Birds  have  seldom  long  Tails  unless  such 
as  fly  much ;  in  which  their  Tails  are  usually  serviceable 
to  their  turning  about,  as  a  Rudder  to  a  Ship  or  Boat 
These  Birds  have  thick  and  strong,  yet  sharp  Bills,  pretty 
long  Claws,  and  short  Tails.     They  feed  on  the  Ground, 
either  on  Worms,  which   they  find   by  tearing  open  the 
Earth;    or    on    Grashoppers,    which    are    plentiful    here. 
The  Feathers  of  these  Birds  are  speckled  with  dark  and 
light  Grey ;  the  Spots  so  regular  and  uniform,  that  they 
look  more  beautiful  than  many  Birds  that  arc  deck'd  with 
gayer  Feathers.     Their  Necks  are  small  and   long;  their 
Heads  also  but  little.     The  Cocks  have  a  small  Rising 
on    their  Crowns,   like  a  Sort  of  a  Comb.     *Tis  of  the 
Colour  of  a  dry  Wallnut-shell,   and   very   hard.      They 
have  a  small  red  Gill  on  each  side  of  their  Heads,  like 
Ears,  strutting  out  downwards ;  but  the  Hens  have  none. 
They  are  so  strong  that  one  cannot  hold  them ;  and  very 
hardy.     They   are   very   good    Meat,  tender,   and   sweet; 
and  in  some  the  Flesh  is  extraordinary  white ;  tho'  some 
others  have  black  Flesh:  But  both  Sorts  are  very  good. 
The  Natives  take  them  with  Dogs,  running  them  down 
whenever  they  please;  for  here  are  Abundance  of  them. 

'  Numida  meleagris. 


BIRDS  AND   BEASTS— FISH 

fou  shall    sec    2  or  3G0  in  2  Company.     1  had   several    ah^ 
xjught  aboard  alive,  where  they  throve  very  well ;  some  '^ 

chcm    16  or    18   Months;  when  they  began  to  pine. 

Vhen  they  are  taken  young  they  will  become  tame  like 

Hens.     The  Flamingo's  1  have  already  describ'd  at 

■  [Vol.  I.  p.  99].     They  have  also  many  other  Sort 

Fowls,  viz.  Hdgcons  and  Turtle-doves ;  Mtniota's,   a 

of   Land-fowls  as  big  as  Crows,  of  a  grey  Colour, 

good  Food  ;  Crusia's,  another  Sort  of  grcy-colour'd 

wl  almost  as  big  as  a  Crow,  which  are  only  seen  in 

the  Night  (probably  a  Sort  of  Owls)  and  are  said  to  be 

good  for  consumptive  People,   but    eaten    by  none    else. 

_ikabek*s,   a  Sort  of  lai^e  grey  eatable  Fowls  with    long 

i  and   Legs,   not   unlike    Herons;    and  many  Kinds 

'  small  Birds. 

Of  Land-Animals,  here  are  Goats,  as  I  said  formerly, 

I  Abcs  good  Store.     When  I  was  here  before  they  were 

1  to  have  had  a  great  many  Bulls  and  Cows:  Bui  the 

'mtei,  who  have  since  miserably  infested  all  these  Islands, 

much    Icsscn'il    the   Number   of  those;   not    having 

r'd   the  Inhabitants  themselves:   for  at  my  being  there 

s  Time  the  Governor  of  Mayo  was  but  newly  rctum'd 

from  being  a  Prisoner  among  them,  they  having  taken  him 

away,  and  carried  him  about  with  them  for  a  Year  or  two. 

The  Sea  is  plentifully  stock'd  with  Fish  of  divers  Sorts, 
.-iz.  Dolphins,  Boneta's,  Mullets,  Snappers,  Silver-fish,  Gar- 
lish.  &C.  and  here  is  a  good  Bay  to  hale  a  Sain  or  Net  in. 
I  hml'd  mine  several  Times,  and  to  good  Purpose ;  dragging 
iihore  at  one  Time  6  Dozen  of  great  Fish,  most  of  them 
large  Mullets  of  a  Foot  and  a  half  or  two  Foot  long. 
Here  are  also  Porposes,  and  a  small  Sort  of  Whales,  that 
:oaimonly  visit  this  Road  every  Day.  I  have  already  said, 
'Vol.  I.  p.  104]  That  the  Months  of  May,  June,  July 
iiid  August,  (that  is,  the  wet  Season)  are  the  Time  when 
'he  green  Turtle  come  hither,  and  go  ashore  to  lay  their 
Fggs.  I  look  upon  it  as  a  Thing  worth  taking  Notice 
>^  that  the  Turtle  should  always,  both  in  North  and 
South  Latitude,  lay  their  Eggs  tn  the  wet  Months.  It 
tnigbt  be  thought,  considering  what  great  Rains  there  are 

36J 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   then  in  some  Places  where  these  Creatures  lay,  that  their 
1699  Eggs   should    be   spoiled  by  them.     But   the  Rain,  tho' 
violent,  is  soon  soaked  up  by  the  Sand,  wherein  the  Eggs 
are  buried ;  and  perhaps  sinks  not  so  deep  into  it  as  the 
Eggs  are  laid  :  Aiid  keeping  down  the  Heat  may  make  the 
Sand  hotter  below  than   it  was   before,   like   a  Hot-bed. 
Whatever  the  Reason  may  be  why  Providence  determines 
these  Creatures  to  this  Season  of  laying  their  Eggs,  rather 
than  the  dry,  in  Fact  it  is  so,  as  I  have  constantly  observ'd ; 
and  that  not  only  with  the  Sea-Turtle,  but  with  all  other 
Sorts  of  amphibious  Animals  that  lay  Eggs ;  as  Crocodib, 
Alligators,  Guano's,  &c.     The  Inhabitants  of  this  Island, 
even  their  Govemour  and  Padre's,  are  all  Negro's,  Wod- 
pated  like  their  African-Neighbours ;  from  whom  'tis  like 
they  are  descended ;  tho'  being  Subjects  to  the  Portuguezc, 
they  have  their  Religion  and  Language.     They  are  stout, 
lusty,  well-limb'd  People,  both  Men  and  Women,  fat  and 
fleshy ;  and  they  and  their  Children  as  round  and  plump  as 
little  Porposes;  tho'   the  Island  appears  so  barren  to  a 
Stranger   as  scarce  to  have  Food  for  its  Inhabitants.    I 
inquired  how  many  People  there  might  be  on  the  Isle ;  and 
was  told  by  one  of  the  Padre's  that  here  were  230  Souls 
in    all.     The  Negro-Governour   has   his  Patent  from  the 
Portugueze  Governour  of  St.  Jago.     He  is  a  very  civil  and 
sensible  poor  Man ;  and  they  are  generally  a  good  Sort  of 
People.     He  expects  a  small  Present  from   every  Com- 
mander that   lades  Salt   here;  and  is  glad   to  be  invited 
aboard  their  Ships.     He  spends  most  of  his  Time  with  the 
English  in  the  Salting  Season,  which  is  his  Harvest ;  and 
indeed,  all  the  Islanders  are  then  fully  employed  in  getting 
somewhat ;  for  they  have  no  Vessels  of  their  own  to  trade 
with,  nor  do  any  Portugueze- Vessels  come  hither:  scarce 
any  but  English,  on  whom  they  depend  for  Trade:  and 
tho'  Subjects  of  Portugal,  have  a  particular  Value  for  us. 
We  don  t  pay  them  for  their  Salt,  but  for  the  Labour  of 
themselves  and  their  Beasts  in  lading  it :  for  which  we  give 
them  Victuals ;  some  Money,  and  old  Cloaths,  viz.  Hats, 
Shirts,  and  other  Cloaths :  By  which  Means  many  of  them 
are  indifferently  well  rigg'd  ;  but  some  of  them  go  almost 

366 


M^MMteMflMAAi^iriyBS. 


EMPLOYMENTS  OF  THE  NATIVES 

;cd-     When  the  Turtle-season  comes  in  they  watch  the   aw.  ' 

y-bays  in  the  Night  to  turn  them ;  and  having  small  '^ 

its  at  particular  Places  on  ihe  Bays  to  keep  them  from 

:  Rain,  and  to  sleep  in:  And  this  is  another  Harvest 

ry  have  for  Food ;    for  by  Report  there  come  a  great 

iny  Turtle  lo  this  and  the  rest  of  the  Cape  Verd  Islands. 

hen  the  Turtle  Season  is  over  they  have  little  to  do,  but 

hum  for  Guinea-Hens,  and  manage  their  small  Planta- 

ns.     But  by  these  Means  they  have  all  the  Year  some 

nploymeni   or  other;    whereby  they  get  a  Subsistence, 

>'  but  little  else.     When  any  of  them  are  desirous  to  go 

a  to  St.  Jago  they  get  a  Licence  from  the  Governour,  and 

Bre  Passage  in  any  English  Ship  that  is  going  thither: 

indeed  all  Ships  that  lade  Salt  here  will  be  obliged  to 

at  St.  Jago  for  Water,  for  here  at  the  Bay  is  none, 

ao  much  as  for  drinking.     'Tis  true  there  is  a  small 

ell  of  brackish  Water  not  half  a  Mile  from  the  Landing- 

,  which  the  Asses  that  carry  Salt  drink  at ;  but  'tis 

bad  Water.     Asses  themselves  are  a  Commodity  in 

of  these  Islands,  several  of  our  Ships  coming  hither 

ily  to  freight  with  them,  and  carry  them  to  Bar- 

and  our  other  Plantations.     1  stay'd  ac  Mayo  6  Days, 

got  7  or  8  Ton  of  Salt  aboard  for  my  Voyage  :   In  which 

ae  there  came  also  into   this  Road  several  Sail  of  Mer- 

nts  Ships  for  Salt;  all  bound  wiih  it  for  Newfoundland, 

The   19th  Day  of  February,  at  about  One  a  Clock  in 

Morning  I    weighed    from   Mayo-Road,  in    order   to 

:cr  at  St.  jago,  whith  was  about  5  or  6  Leagues  to  the 

'cttward.      We  coasted  along  the   Island  St.  Jago.  and 

ft  by  the  Port  on  the  East  of  it,  I  mention'd  formerly 

'oL.    I.   p.    104]   which  they  call    Praya ; '    where  some 

Iglish  outward-bound  East-India  Men    still    touch,  but 

I  so  many  of  them  as  heretofore.      We  saw  the   Fort 

ion  the  Hill,  the  Houses  and  Coco-nut  Trees:    But  I 

nld  not  go  in  to  anchor  here,  because  1  expected  better 

>ter  on  the  S-  W.  of  the  Island,  at  St.  Jago  Town.     By 

*  Porto  Prmia,  "was  Mwnc  three  tcagut 

plafMi  on  hiitli,  witb  a  ifoodly  baf." 


■  tB  November,  158$. 


367 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    8  a  Clock  in  the  M(»-ning  we  saw  the  Ships  in  that  Rood, 
*^  being  within  3  Leagues  of  it :    But  were  forc*d  to  keep 
Turning  many  Hours  to  get  in,  the  Flaws  of  Wind  coming 
so   uncertain;   as  they  do   especially  to  the  Leeward  d 
Islands  that  are  high  Land.     At  length  two  Portugueze 
Boats  came  off  to  help  tow  us  in ;  and  about  3  a  Clock 
in  the  Afternoon  we  came  to  an  Anchor ;  and  took  the 
Prospect   of  the   Town.      We   found    here,    besides  two 
Portugueze    Ships    bound    for    Brazil,   whose  Boats   had 
tow*d  us  in,   an  English  Pink   that  had  taken  in  Asses 
at   one   of  the  Cape    Verd    Islands,   and   was   bound  to 
Barbadoes   with    them.      Next    Morning   I   went   ashore 
with  my  Officers  to  the  Govemour,  who  treated  us  with 
Sweet-meats :  I  told  him,  the  Occasion  of  my  coming  was 
chiefly  for  Water ;  and  that  I  desired  also  to  take  in  some 
Refreshments  of  Fowls,  &c.     He  said  I  was  welcome,  and 
that  he  would  order  the  Townsmen  to  bring  their  Com- 
modities to  a  certain  House,  where  I  might  purchase  what 
I  had   occasion   for :    I  told  him  I  had  not  Money,  but 
would  exchange  some  of  the  Salt  which  I  brought  from 
Mayo  for  their  Commodities.     He  reply*d,  that  Salt  was 
indeed  an  acceptable  Commodity  with  the  poor  People,  but 
that  if  I  designed  to  buy  any  Cattle,  I  must  give  Money 
for  them.     I  contented  my  self  with  taking  in  Dunghill 
Fowls :  The  Govemour  ordering  a  Cryer  to  go  about  the 
Town    and   give  Notice   to  the   People,  that  they  might 
repair  to  such  a  Place  with  Fowls  and  Maiz  for  feeding 
them,  where  they  might  get  Salt  in  Exchange  for  them: 
So  I  sent  on  Board  for  Salt,  and  ordered  some  of  my  Men 
to  truck  the  same  for  the  Fowls  and  Maiz,  while  the  rest 
of  them  were  busy  in  filling  of  Water.     This  is  the  Efiect 
of  their  keeping  no  Boats  of  their  own  on   the  several 
Islands,  that  they  are  glad  to  buy  even  their  own  Salt  of 
Foreigners,  for  want  of  being  able  to  transport  it  them- 
selves from  Island  to  Island. 

St.  Jago  Town  ^  lies  on  the  S.  W.  part  of  the  Island,  in 

'  The  town  of  St.  lago,  or  Santiago,  is  figured  in  Bigges's  *'  Summarie 
and  True  Discourse "  of  Sir  Francis  Drake's  "  Indies  Voyage."  Drake 
sacked  and  burned  it  November  17,  1585,  it  being  then  a  fine  town  of  600 

368 


ST.  JAGO  TOWN— NATIVES  1 

Lat.  about  15  Dcg.  N.  and  is  the  seat  of  the  General  ah.  9 
Govcrnour,  and  of  the  Bishop  of  all  the  Cape  Verd  '^ 
Islands.  This  Town  stands  scattering  against  the  Sides 
of  two  Mounuins,  between  which  there  is  a  deep  Valley, 
which  is  about  200  Yards  wide  against  the  Sea ;  but  within 
a  quarter  of  a  Mile  it  closes  up  so  as  not  to  be  40  Yards 
wide.  In  the  Valley,  by  the  Sea,  there  is  a  straggling 
Street,  Houses  on  each  Side,  and  a  Run  of  Water  in  the 

Bottom,  which  empties  it  self  into  a  fine  small  Cove  or  I 

sandy  Bay,  where  the  Sea  is  commonly  very  smooth ;  so  I 

that    here    is   good  Watering   and    good  Landing  at  any  I 

Time ;  iho'  the  Road  be  rocky  and  bad  for  Ships.     Just  I 

by  the  Landing-place  there  is  a  small  Fort,  almost   level  I 

with  the  Sea,  where  is  always  a  Court  of  Guard  kept.     On  I 

the  Top  of  the  Hill,  above  the  Town,  there  is  another  I 

FoTT  ;  which,  by  the  Wall    that    is    to  be  seen   from  the  I 

Koad,  seems    to  be   a    large  Place.      They   have  Cannon  I 

mounted  there,  but  how  many  know  I  not :  Neither  what  I 

use  that  Fort  can  be  of,  except  it  be  for  Salutes.     The  I 

Town  may  consist  of  2  or  300  Houses,  all  built  of  rough  I 

StOQc;  having  also  one  Convent,  and  one  Church.  I 

The  People  in  general  arc  black,  or  at  least  of  a  mixt  1 
Colour,  except  only  some  few  of  the  better  Sort,  viz.  the 
Govcrnour,  the  Bt^op,  some  Gentlemen,  and  some  of  the 

Padret;    fcr  some  of  these   also  are  black.     The  People  J 

about  Praya  arc  Thievish;  but  these  of  St.  Jago  Town,  I 

living  under  their  Govcrnour 's  Eye,  are  more  orderly,  tho'  I 

lerally  poor,  having   little  Trade:   Yet   besides  chance  I 

>  of  other  Nations,  there  come  hither  a  Portugueze  I 

or  two  every  Year,  in  their  way  to  Brazil.     These  I 

I  among  them  a  few  Kuropcan  Commodities,  and  lake  I 

•--rir  pnncipal  Manufactures,  viz.  striped  Cotton-cloth,  I 

they    carry    with    them    to    Brazil.      Here    is  also  I 

her  Ship  comes  hither  from  Portugal  for  Sugar,  their  I 

Manufacture,  and    returns  with  it  directly  thither :  I 

'tis  reported  that  there  are  several  small  Sugar-works  I 

.    .       Dnlu/f  mm  found  no  treasure  llicrc,  for  "a  Poningall"  I 

h  a  flan  of  Frcitrhmcn,  hud  mnfacktrd  it  but  three  jciin  before  I 

dacun  in  IS96,  by  Sir  Anihony  ^hcrley,  I 

369                                    2  A  I 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  on  this  Island,  from  which  they  send  home  near  lOoTon 
*^  every  Year ;  and  they  have  plenty  of  Cotton  growing  up  in 
the  Country,  wherewith  they  cioath  themselves,  and  send 
also  a  great  deal  to  Brazil.  They  have  Vines,  of  which 
they  make  some  Wine;  but  the  European  Ships  furnish 
them  with  better ;  tho*  they  drink  but  little  of  any.  Their 
chief  Fruits  are,  (besides  Plantains  in  Abundance)  Oranges, 
Lemons,  Citrons,  Melons,  (both  Musk  and  Water-melons) 
Limes,  Guava*s,  Pom^ranates,  Quinces,  Custard-Appies, 
and  Papah*s,  &c. 

The  Custard-Apple  ^  (as  we  call  it)  is  a  Fruit  as  big  as  a 
Pomegranate,  and  much  of  the  same  Colour.  The  out- 
side Husk,  Shell  or  Rind,  is  for  Substance  and  Thickness 
between  the  Shell  of  a  Pomegranate,  and  the  Peel  of  a 
Sevil-Orange ;  softer  than  this,  yet  more  brittle  than  that 
The  Coat  or  Covering  is  also  remarkable  in  that  it  is  beset 
round  with  small  regular  Knobs  or  Risings ;  and  the  Inside 
of  the  Fruit  is  full  of  a  white  soft  Pulp,  sweet  and  very 
pleasant,  and  most  resembling  a  Custard  of  any  Thing, 
both  in  Colour  and  Taste ;  from  whence  probably  it  is 
called  a  Custard-Apple  by  our  English.  It  has  in  the 
Middle  a  few  small  black  Stones  or  Kernels ;  but  no  Core, 
for  *tis  all  Pulp.  The  Tree  that  bears  this  Fruit  is  about 
the  Bigness  of  a  Quince-tree,  with  long,  small,  and  thick- 
set Branches  spread  much  abroad :  At  the  Extremity  of 
here  and  there  one  of  which  the  Fruit  grows  upon  a  Stalk 
of  its  own  about  9  or  lo  Inches  long,  slender  and  tough, 
and  hanging  down  with  its  own  Weight.  A  large  Tree  of 
this  Sort  does  not  bear  usually  above  20  or  30  Apples; 
seldom  more.  This  Fruit  grows  in  most  Countries  within 
the  Tropicks.  I  have  seen  of  them  (tho*  I  omitted  the 
Description  of  them  before)  all  over  the  West-Indies,  both 
Continent  and  Islands ;  as  also  in  Brazil,  and  in  the  East- 
Indies. 

The  Papah  too  is  found  in  all  these  Countries,  tho'  I 
have  not  hitherto  described  it.  It  is  a  Fruit  about  the 
Bigness  of  a  Musk-Melon,  hollow  as  that  is,  and  much 

*  Anona  reticuiata, 

370 


PAPAH— ANIMALS  OF  ST.  JAGO 

it  in  Shape  2nd  Colour,  both  Outside  and  Inude :    1 

le  Middle,  instead  of  flat  Kernels,  which    the  '' 

re,  these  have  z  hand/ul  of  small  blackish  Seeds, 

ligncss  of  Pepper-corns ;  whose  Taste  is  also  hot 

00  the  Tongue  somewhat  like  Pepper.     The  Fruit  it  self 

is  tweci,  soft  and   luscious,  when  ripe;   but  while  green  'tis 

lurd    and    unsavory :    tho'   even    then    being   boiled    and 

^hten  with  Salt-pork  or  Beef,  it  serves  instead  of  Turnips, 

^^fad  is  as  much  esteemed.     The  Papah-Tree  is  about  10  or 

^D2  Foot  high.     The  Body  near  ihe  Ground  may  be  a  Foot 

'     ind  an  half  or  2  Foot  Diameter  ;  and  it  grows  up  tapering 

to  the  Top.     It  has  no  Branches  at  all,  but  only  large 

Leaves  growing  immediately  upon  Stalks  irom  the  Body. 

The  Leaves  arc  of  a  roundish  Form  and  jagg'd  about  the 

Edge5,  having  their  Stalks  or  Stumps  longer  or  shorter  as 

tbcy  grow  near  to  or  further  from  the  Top.     They  b^tn 

to  spring  from  out  of  the  BoJy  of  the  Tree  at  j^ut  6  or 

7  Foot  hcighih   from  the  Ground,  the  Trunk  being  bare 

below  •  But  above  that  the  Leaves  grow  thicker  and  larger 

idit    towards    its  Top,  where  they  are   clo&e   and    broad. 

The  Fruit  grows  only  among    the    Leaves;   and    thickest 

among  the  thickest  uf  them;  insomuch  that  towards  the 

Top  of  the  Tree  the  Papahs  spring  forth  from  its  Body  as 

ttuck  as  they  can  stick  one  by  another.     But  then  lower 

jlown,  where   the   Leaves  art   thinner,   the  Fruit  is  larger, 

id  of  the  Size  I  have  dcscrib'd ;  And  at  the  Top,  where 

key  arc  thick,  they  are  but  small,  and   no  bigger  than 

dinary  Turnips;  yet  tasted  like  the  rest. 

Their  chief  Land-Animals  arc  their   Bullocks,  which 

E  taid  to  be  many ;  tho'  they  ask  us  20  Dollars  apiece  for 

They  have  also  Horses,  Asses,  and  Mules,  Deer, 

Hogs,  and  hiack-fac'd    long-tail'd  Monkeys.      Of 

powis  they  have  Cocks  and   Hens,  Ducks,  Guinea-Hens, 

Jth  umc  and  wild,  Parrakitcs,  Parrots,  Pidgeons,  Turtie- 

«s.  Herons,  Hawks,  Crab-catchers,  Galdens  (a  larger 

of  Crab-catchers)  Curlews,   &c.     Their   Fish   is  the 

ne  as  at  Mayo  and  the  rest  of  these  Islands,  and  for  the 

ifit  part  these  Islands  have  the  same   Beasts  and  Birds 

,  But  some  uf  the  Isles  have  Pasturage  and  Kmploy- 

371 


4 


'"^1  I 


*^. 


'ill    • 

1' 


I;  - 1 1 


CHAP.    II 

J*A*  j/.'j  DtUltrathn  tn  tht  Sr/p4tl  of  his  Fayagty  and  Dtparturt  from 
St.  Jup.  fill  Ctursff  and  tht  JVmdi,  iffc.  in  trsning  tht  Line, 
Hf  itanJi  away  for  tht  Bay  ef  All-Sainti  in  Brazil;  and  why. 
Hit  Arrival  tn  that  Ceait  and  In  the  Bay.  Of  tht  several  Forit, 
tht  Read,  Situatian,  Tetvn^  and  Buildings  ef  Bahia.  Of  its 
Gevrrtteur,  Shifts  and  Merchants ;  and  Cammaditits  to  and  from 
EtH-tpt.  Claying  of  Sugar.  The  Season  for  the  European  Ships, 
mmd  Ceire  Cat/rt  :  Of  their  Guinea-trade,  and  ef  the  Coasting' 
tratie,  and  It^ha/e-ii/ling.  Of  the  Inhabitants  of  Bahia  ,-  thtir 
earrying  in  Hammocks ;  their  Artificers,  Crane  for  Goods,  ami 
Negn-Slavei,  Of  the  Country  ahout  Bahia,  its  SoiJ  and  Product. 
Its  Timker  trees  ,■  the  Sapiera,  Fermiatico,  Csmtsserie,  Guitleta, 
Strrie,  and  Maugrmes.  The  Bastard-Coco,  its  Nuts  and  Cables  ; 
and  the  Silt-Cction-trets,  Tht  Brazilian  Fruits,  Oranges,  i^c. 
Of  ih*  Stttr-s^ps,  Casheuj's,  and  Jeanipoh's.  Of  their  peculiar 
Frmili,  Arisah's,  Mtricasah's,  Peiange's,  Petumio's,  Mungaroe's, 
Mmkishau/'sy  Ingwa's,  Olre's,  and  Afuileran  de  ma's.  Of  tht 
Palm-ttrriei,  Phyilci-nuti,  Mendiiee's,  Ufc.  and  their  Roots  and 
Herts,  ijc.  Of  their  Ifild-Fowl,  Afaccaw's,  Parrots,  i:fc.  Tht 
frmma,  Carritit-erotv,  and  Chaltering-crnv,  Bill-hird,  Curreu, 
Tmrtit-JfVf  and  tfild-pigeons ;  the  Jenetee,  ClocHng-hen,  Crab- 
tKtfhrr,  Gulden,  and  black  Heron  :  The  Duetts,  It^igton  end  Teal  { 
mitd  Ostriches  to  tht  Southward,  and  of  the  Dunghill-fowls.  Of 
their  Cattle,  Htritt,  ifc.  Ltopards  and  Tiger's.  OJ  their  Sir- 
faa* ;  tht  Rattle-Snake,  small  Green-Snake,  Jmphisbtrna,  small 
hhtk  and  small  Grey-Snake  ,-  the  great  Land,  and  the  great 
ff^ater-Sfuie  :  And  of  the  ffattr-dog.  Of  their  Sea-fish  and 
Tmrtte  ;  and  if  St.  Paufs-Tnm. 


H 


AVING   dispatched    my  small    Affairs  at   the 
C.  Verd  Islands,  I  meditated  on  the  Process  ' 
of  my  Voyage.    I  thought  it  requisite  to  touch 
once  more  at  a  cultivated  Place  in  these  Seas,  \tM 
ly   Meo   might  be  rcfrcsh'd,  and    might   have  a  )'| 
373 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AW.  Market  wherein  to  furnish  themselves  with  Necessaries: 
1699  For  designing  that  my  next  Stretch  should  be  quite  to 
N.  Holland,  and  knowing  that  after  so  long  a  Run  nothing 
was  to  be  expected  there  but  fresh  Water,  if  I  could  meet 
even  with  that  there,  I  resolved  upon  putting  in  first  at 
some  Port  of  Brazil,  and  to  provide  my  self  there  with 
whatever  I  might  have  further  Occasion  for.  Beside  the 
refreshing  and  furnishing  my  Men,  I  aim*d  also  at  the 
inuring  them  gradually  and  by  Intervals  to  the  Fatigues 
that  were  to  be  expected  in  the  Remainder  of  the  Voyage, 
which  was  to  be  in  a  part  of  the  World  they  were  alto- 
gether Strangers  to ;  none  of  them,  except  two  young  Men, 
having  ever  crossed  the  Line.  * 

With  this  Design  I  sailed  from  St.  Jago  on  the  2  2d  of 
February,  with  the  Winds  at  E.  N.  E.  and  N.  E.  fur 
Weather,  and  a  brisk  Gale.  We  steered  away  S.  S.  E.  and 
S.  S.  E.  half  East,  till  in  the  Lat.  of  7  deg.  50.  min.  we 
met  with  many  Riplings  in  the  Sea  like  a  Tide  or  strong 
Current,  which  setting  against  the  Wind  caus*d  such  a 
Ripling.  We  continu  d  to  meet  these  Currents  from  that 
Lat.  till  we  came  into  the  Lat.  of  3  deg.  22  N.  when  they 
ceased.  During  this  Time  we  saw  some  Boneta*s,  and 
Sharks ;  catching  one  of  these.  We  had  the  true  general 
Trade-Wind  blowing  fresh  at  N.  E.  till  in  the  Lat.  of  4 
deg.  40  min.  N.  when  the  Wind  varied,  and  we  had  small 
Gales,  with  some  Tornadoes.  We  were  then  to  the  East 
of  St.  Jago  4  deg.  54  min.  when  we  got  into  Lat.  3  d^. 
2  min.  N.  (where  I  said  the  Ripling  ceas'd)  and  Long,  to 
the  East  of  St.  Jago  5  deg.  2  min.  we  had  the  Wind 
whiffling  between  the  S.  by  E.  and  E.  by  N.  small  Gales, 
frequent  Calms,  very  black  Clouds,  with  much  Rain.  In 
the  Lat.  of  3  deg.  8  min.  N.  and  Long.  E.  from  St.  Jago 
5  deg.  8  min.  we  had  the  Wind  from  the  S.  S.  E.  to  the 
N.  N.  E.  faint,  and  often  interrupted  with  Calms.  While 
we  had  Calms  we  had  the  Opportunity  of  trying  the 
Current  we  had  met  with  hitherto,  and  found  that  it  set 
N.  E.  by  E.  half  a  Knot,  which  is  12  Mile  in  24  Hours: 
So  that  here  it  ran  at  the  Rate  of  half  a  Mile  an  Hour, 
and  had  been  much  stronger  before.     The  Rains  held  us 

374 


THE  AUTHOR  CROSSES  THE  LINE 
nervals  till  the  Lat.  of  r  deg.  o  min.  N.  with  small 
Gxics  of  Wind  between  S.  S.  E.  and  S.  E.  by  E.  and  some-  ' 
times  calm  :  Afterwards  we  had  the  Wind  between  the  S. 
,  S,  S.  E.  till  we  cross 'd  the  Line,  small  Winds,  Calms, 
pretty  fair  Weather,  We  saw  but  few  Fish  beside 
3 ;  but  of  them  a  great  many,  and  struck  one  of 

It  was  the  lOth  day  of  March,  about  the  Time  of  the 
Iquinox,  when  we  cross'd  the  Equator,  having  had  all 
J  from  the  Lat.  of  4  deg.  40  min.  N.  where  the  true 
rsdc-wind  icft  us,  a  great  Swell  out  of  the  S.  E.  and  but 
all  uncertain  Gales,  mostly  Southerly,  so  that  we  crept 
I  the  Southward  but  slowly.  I  kept  up  against  these  as 
dl  as  I  could  to  the  Southward,  and  when  we  had  now 
then  a  Flurry  of  Wind  at  E.  I  still  went  away  due 
■outb,  purposely  to  get  to  the  Southward  as  fast  as  I  could  ; 
for  white  near  the  Line  1  expected  to  have  but  uncertain 
Winds,  frequent  Calms,  Rains,  Tornadoes,  &c.  which 
"  ",  not  only  retard  my  Course,  but  endanger  Sickness 
►  among  my  Men :  especially  those  who  were  ill  pro- 
with  Cloalhs,  or  were  too  lazy  to  shift  themselves 
they  were  drcnch'd  with  the  Rains.  The  Heat  of 
:  Weather  made  them  careless  of  doing  this;  but  taking 
■am  of  Brandy,  which  I  gave  them  when  wet,  with  a 
■gc  to  shift  themselves,  they  would  however  lye  down 
leir  Hammocks  with  their  wet  Cloaths ;  so  that  when 
tum'd  out  they  caus'd  an  ill  Smell  whcrc-cver  they 
.and  their  Hammocks  would  stink  sufficiently;  that 
,  the  remedying  of  this  is  worth  the  Care  of  Com- 
3  that  cross  the  Line  ;  especially  when  they  arc,  it 
,  a  Month  or  more  e'er  they  get  out  of  the  Rains, 
times  of  the  Year,  as  in  June,  July,  or  August. 

I   have  here  said  about  the  Currents,  Winds, 

flee,    in    this  Passage,    is    chiefly    for    the    farther 

"ation  of  what  I  have  heretofore  obscrv'd  in  general 

t  these  Matters,  and  especially  as  to  crossing  the  Line, 

my  •'  Discourse  of  the  Winds.  &c.  in  the  Torrid  Zone  "  : 

;  Vol.  I[,  Part  3.  p.  235].     Which  Observations  I  have 

irery    much  confinn'd  to  me  in  the  Course  of  this 

375 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Voyage;  and  I  shall  particularize  in  several  of  the  chief 
1699  of  them  as  they  come  in  my  Way.  And  indeed  I  think 
I  may  say  this  of  the  main  of  the  Observations  in  that 
Treatise,  that  the  clear  Satisfaction  I  had  about  them,  and 
how  much  I  might  rely  upon  them,  was  a  great  Ease  to 
my  Mind  during  this  vexatious  Voyage ;  wherein  the 
Ignorance,  and  Obstinacy  withal,  of  some  under  me, 
occasioned  me  a  great  deal  of  Trouble :  Tho*  they  found 
all  along,  and  were  often  forc*d  to  acknowledge  it,  that  I 
was  seldom  out  in  my  Conjectures,  when  I  told  them 
usually  beforehand  what  Winds,  &c.  we  should  meet  with 
at  such  or  such  particular  Places  we  should  come  at. 

Pernambuc  was  the  Port  that  I  designed  for  at  my  first 
setting  out  from  St.  Jago ;  it  being  a  Place  most  proper  for 
my  Purpose,  by   Reason  of  its  Situation,   lying  near  the 
I  Extremity  of  C.  St.  Augustine,  the  Easternmost  Promontory 
of  Brazil ;  by  which  means  it  not  only  enjoys  the  greater 
Benefit   of    the    Sea-breezes,   and    is    consequently    more 
healthy  than  other  Places  to  the  Southward,  but  is  withal 
less  subject  to  the  Southerly  Coasting-Trade-winds,  that 
blow  half  the  Year  on  this  Shore ;  which  were  now  drawing 
on,  and  might  be  troublesome  to  me :  So  that  I  might  both 
hope   to  reach  soonest  Pernambuc,  as  most  directly  and 
nearest  in  my  Run ;  and  might  thence  also  more  easily  get 
away   to  the  Southward  than  from  Bahia  de  Todos  los 
Santos,  or  Ria  Janeira. 

But  notwithstanding  these  Advantages  I  proposed  to 
my  self  in  going  to  Pernambuc,  I  was  soon  put  by  that 
Design  through  the  Refractoriness  of  some  under  me,  and 
the  Discontents  and  Backwardness  of  some  of  my  Men. 
For  the  Calms  and  Shiftings  of  Winds  which  I  met  with, 
as  I  was  to  expect,  in  crt)ssing  the  Line,  made  them,  who 
were  unacquainted  with  these  Matters,  almost  heartless  as 
to  the  Pursuit  of  the  Voyage,  as  thinking  we  should  never 
be  able  to  weather  Cape  St.  Augustine :  And  though  I  told 
them  that  by  that  Time  we  should  get  to  about  three 
Degrees  South  of  the  Line,  we  should  again  have  a  true 
brisk  general  Trade-Wind  from  the  North-East,  that 
would  carry  us  to  what  part  of  Brazil  we  pleas'd,  yet  they 

376 


WHY    HE   QUITTED   HIS   DESIGN 


found 


This 


pith 


It  so. 
not    necessary   to    be 


would   not  believe  it  till  they 
iCitnc   other   unforeseen   Accidents, 

mention "d  in  this  Place,  meeting  with  the  Aversion  of  my 
Men  to  a  long  unknown  Voyage,  made  me  justly  appre-  I 
hensivc  of  their  Revolting,  and  was  a  great  Trouble  and  i 
Hindrance  to  me.  So  that  I  was  obliged  partly  to  alter 
my  Measures,  and  met  with  many  difficulties,  the  Par- 
ticulars of  which  I  shall  not  trouble  the  Reader  with :  But 
]  mention  thus  much  of  it  in  general  for  my  own  necessary 
Vindication,  in  my  taking  such  Measures  sometimes  for 
prosecuting  the  Voyage  as  the  State  of  my  Ships  Crew, 
rather  than  my  own  Judgment  and  Experience,  determin'd 
me  lo.  The  Disorders  of  my  Ship  made  me  think  at 
present  that  Pcmambuc  would  not  be  so  fit  a  Place  for 
me ;  being  told  that  Ships  ride  there  2  or  3  Leagues  from 
the  Town,  under  the  Command  of  no  Forts;  so  that 
whenever  I  should  have  been  ashore  it  might  have  been 
easy  for  my  discontented  Crew  to  have  cut  or  slipt  their 
ibles,  and  have  gone  away  from  me:  Many  of  them 
Ting  already  an  Intention  to  return  to  England,  and 
nc  of  them  declaring  openly  that  they  would  go  no 
rther  onwards  than  Brazil.  I  alter'd  my  Course  therc- 
*,  and  stood  away  for  Bahio  de  todos  los  Santos,  or  the 
Uy  of  all  Saints,  where  1  hop'd  to  have  the  Governour's 
Help,  if  need  should  require,  for  securing  my  Ship  from 
any  such  mutinous  Attempt ;  being  forced  to  keep  my 
self  all  the  way  upon  my  Guard,  and  to  lie  with  my 
Officers,  such  as  I  could  trust,  and  with  small  Arms  upon 
the  Quancr-Dcck ;  it  scarce  being  safe  for  me  to  lie  in 
my  Cabbin,  by  Reason  of  the  Discontents  among  my  Men.   1 1 

On  the  23d  of  March  we  saw  the  Land  of  Brazil; 
hiving  had  thither,  from  the  lime  when  we  came  into  the 
tnie  Trade-wind  ^ain  after  crossing  the  Line,  very  fair 
Weather  and  brisk  Gales,  mostly  at  K.  N.  E.  The  Land 
we  saw  was  about  20  Leagues  to  the  North  of  Bahia ;  so 

i coasted  along  Shore  to  the  Southward.  This  Coast 
rather  low  than  high,  with  Sandy-Bays  all  along  by 
'*^  -      , 

A    little  within    Land  are   many  very  whiU^^DOC^J^^ 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   Sand,   appearing   like   Show ;    and   the  Coast   looks  very 

^^  pleasant,    being    checkered   with   Woods    and   Savannahs. 

j  The  Trees  in  general  are  not  tall ;    but  they  arc  green 

and  flourishing.     There  are  many  small  Houses  by  the 

Sea-side,  whose  Inhabitants  are  chiefly  Fishermen.     They 

[~come  ofF  to  Sea  on  Bark-logs,  made  of  several  Logs  fasten*d 

I^Side  to  Side,  that  have  one  or  two  Masts  with  Sails  to  them. 

•"  There  are  two  Men  in  each  Bark-log,  one  at  either  End, 

\^  having  small  low  Benches,  raised  a  little  above  the  Logs, 

I    to  sit  and  fish  on,  and  two  Baskets  hanging  up  at  the  Mast 

or  Masts;    one  to  put  their  Provisions  in,  the  other  for 

their  Fish.     Many  of  these  were  a-fishing  now,  and  2  of 

them  came  aboard,  of  whom  I  bought  some  Fish.     In  the 

Afternoon   we   sailed   by   one   very   remarkable  Piece  of 

Land,  where,  on  a  small  pleasant  Hill,  there  was  a  Church 

dedicated  to  the  Virgin  Mary.     See  a  Sight  of  some  Parts 

of  this  Coast  [Table  omitted]  and  of  the  Hill  the  Church 

stands  on. 

I  coasted  along  till  the  Evening,  and  then  brought  to, 
and  lay  by  till  the  next  Morning.  About  2  Hours  after 
we  were  brought  to,  there  came  a  Sail  out  of  the  Offin 
(from  Seaward)  and  lay  by  about  a  Mile  to  Windward  rf 
us,  and  so  lay  all  Night.  In  the  Morning  upon  speaking 
with  her,  she  proved  to  be  a  Portugueze  Ship  bound  to 
Bahia;  therefore  I  sent  my  Boat  aboard  and  desired  to 
have  one  of  his  Mates  to  Pilot  me  in  :  He  answer  d,  thit 
he  had  not  a  Mate  capable  of  it,  but  that  he  would  sail  in 
before  me,  and  shew  me  the  way ;  and  that  if  he  went  into 
the  Harbour  in  the  Night,  he  would  hang  out  a  Light  for 
me.  He  said  we  had  not  far  in,  and  might  reach  it  before 
Night  with  a  tolerable  Gale;  but  that  with  so  small  an 
one  as  now  we  had  we  could  not  do  it :  So  we  joggM  on 
till  Night,  and  then  he  accordingly  hung  out  his  Light, 
which  we  steered  after,  sounding  as  we  went  in.  I  kept  til 
my  Men  on  Deck,  and  had  an  Anchor  ready  to  let  go  on 
occasion.  We  had  the  Tide  of  Ebb  against  us,  so  that  wc 
went  in  but  slowly ;  and  it  was  about  the  Middle  of  the 
Night  when  we  anchor'd.  Immediately  the  Portugueze 
Master  came  aboard  to  see  me,  to  whom  I  returned  Thanks 

378 


THE  AUTHOR  ANCHORS 

Civilities;  and  indeed  I  found  much  Respect,  not 
only  from  this  Gentleman,  but  from  ail  of  that  Nation  ' 
both  here  and  in  other  Places,  who  were  ready  to  serve  me 
on  all  Occasions.  The  Place  that  we  anchored  in  was  about 
two  Miles  from  the  Harbour  where  the  Ships  generally 
ride;  but  the  Fear  1  had  lest  my  People  should  run  away 
with  the  Ship,  made  mc  hasccn  to  get  a  Licence  from  the 
G*ivcmor,  to  run  up  into  the  Harbour,  and  ride  among 
their  Ships,  close  by  one  of  their  Forts.  So  on  the  2jth 
of  March  about  lo  a  Clock  in  the  Morning,  the  Tide 
serving,  I  went  thither,  being  piloted  by  the  Super-intend- 
»nt  there,  whose  Business  it  is  to  carry  up  all  the  King  of 
Tonugal's  Ships  that  come  hither,  and  to  see  them  well 
ioor(5.  He  brought  us  to  an  Anchor  right  against  the 
1  viwn,  at  the  outer  Part  of  the  Harbour,  which  was  then 
:  -.1  of  Ships,  within  150  Yards  of  a  small  Fort  that  stands 
1  a  Rock  half  t  Mile  from  the  Shore.  See  a  Prospect  of 
:e  Harbour  and  the  Town,  as  it  appear 'd  to  us  while  wc 
lay  at  Anchor  [omitted]. 

Bahia  de  todos  los  Santos  lies  in  Lat.  13  deg.  S.     It 

h  the  most  considerable  Town  in  Brazil,  whether  in  Respect 

f  the  Beauty  of  its  Buildings,  its  Bulk,  or  its  Trade  and 

K-wmuc     It  has  the  Convenience  of  a  good  Harbour  that 

:  capable  of  receiving  Ships  of  the  greatest  Burthen  :  The 

j»ce  of  which  is  guarded  with  a  strong  Fort  standing 

hout  the  Harbour,  call'd  St.  Antonio  :  A  Sight  of  which 

■ve  given   [I'ablc  omitted]  as  it   appeared  to  us  the 

"noon  before  we  came  in ;  and  its  Lights  (which  they 

;  out  purposely  for  Ships)  we  saw  the  same   Night. 

:  are  other  smaller  Forts  that  command  the  Harbour, 

:  of  which  sunds  on  a  Rock  in  the  Sea,  about  half  a 

lie  from  the  Shore.     Close  by  this  Fort  all  Ships  must 

i  that  anchor  here,  and  must  ride  also  within  half  a 

lie  o(  it  at  farthest  between  this  and  another  Fort  (that 

I  a  Point  at  the  inner  part  of  the  Harbour  and  is 

I  the  Dutch  Fort)  hut  must  ride  nearest  to  the  former, 

■long  against  the  Town :  Where  there  is  good  holding 

ouod,  and   less  exposed  to  the  Southerly  Winds  that 

r  very  hard  hcrr.     They  commonly  set  in  about  April, 

379 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AX.   but  blow  hardest  in  May,  June,  July  and  August :  But  the 
'^  place  where  the  Ships  ride  is  exposed  to  these  Winds  not 
above  3  Points  of  the  Compass. 

Beside  these,  there  is  another  Fort  fronting  the  Harbour, 
and  standing  on  the  Hill  upon  which  the  Town  stands. 
The  Town  it  self  consists  of  about  2CXX)  Houses;  the 
major  part  of  which  cannot  be  seen  from  the  Harbour; 
but  so  many  as  appear  in  Sight,  with  a  great  Mixture  of 
Trees  between  them,  and  all  placed  on  a  rising  Hill,  make 
a  very  pleasant  Prospect ;  as  may  be  judgM  by  the  Draught, 
[Table  omitted]. 

There  are  in  the  Town  1 3  Churches,  Chapels,  Hospitals, 
Convents,  beside  one  Nunnery ;  viz.  the  Ecclesia  Major  or 
Cathedral,  the  Jesuits  College,  which  arc  the  chief,  and 
both  in  Sight  from  the  Harbour :  St.  Antonio,  Sta.  Barbara, 
both   Parish-Churches;   the  Franciscans  Church,  and  the 
Dominicans ;  and  2  Convents  of  Carmelites  ;  a  Chapel  for 
Seamen  close  by  the  Sea-side,  where  Boats  commonly  land, 
and  the  Seamen  go  immediately  to  Prayers  ;  another  Chapel 
for  poor  People,  at  the  farther  End  of  the  same  Street, 
which  runs  along  by  the  Shore;  and  a  third  Chapel  for 
Soldiers,  at  the  Edge  of  the  Town  remote  from  the  Sea; 
and  an  Hospital  in  the  Middle  of  the  Town.    The  Nunnery 
stands   at   the  outer-edge  of  the  Town  next  the  Fields, 
wherein  by   Report    there   are    70  Nuns.     Here  lives  an 
'  Arch-bishop,  who  has  a  fine  Palace  in  the  Town  ;  and  the 
Governor's  Palace  is  a  fair  Stone-building,  and  looks  hand- 
some to  the  Sea,  tho'  but  indifferently  furnished  within: 
Both  Spaniards  and  Portugueze  in  their  Plantations  abroad, 
as  I  have  generally  observed,  affecting  to  have  large  Houses; 
but  are  little  curious  about  Furniture,  except  Pictures  some 
of  them.     The  Houses  of  the  Town  are  2  or  3  Stories 
high,  the  Walls  thick  and  strong,  being  built  with  Stone, 
with  a   Covering  of  Pantile;    and   many   of  them  have 
Balconies.     The  principal  Streets  are  large,  and  all  of  them 
pav'd  or  pitched  with  small  Stones.    There  are  also  Parades 
in    the    most   eminent   Places   of  the    Town,    and    many 
Gardens,  as  well  within  the  Town  as  in  the  Out-parts  of 
it,  wherein  are  Fruit-trees,  Herbs,  Salladings  and  Flowers 

380 


SOLDIERS  AND   MERCHANTS 

great    Variety,   but    ordcr'd    with    no   great    Care   nor 
Art.  _  ' 

The  Governor  who  resides  here  is  ctll'd  Don  John  de 
Lancastrio,  being  descended,  as  they  say,  from  our  English 
Lancuter  Family ;  and  he  has  a  Respect  for  our  Nation  on 
thai  Account,  calling  them  his  Counir>'-men.  1  waited  on 
him  Kvcral  Times,  and  always  found  him  very  courteous 
and  civil.  Here  are  about  400  Soldiers  in  Garrison.  They 
commonly  draw  up  and  exercise  in  a  lai^e  Parade  before 
the  Govcrnour's  House;  and  many  of  them  attend  him 
ben  he  goes  abroad.  The  Soldiers  are  decently  clad  in 
wn  Linncn,  which  in  these  hot  Countries  is  far  better 
Woollen ;  but  I  never  saw  any  clad  in  Linnen  but 
|ly  these.  Beside  the  Soldiers  in  Pay,  he  can  soon  have 
ne  Tliousands  of  Men  up  in  Arms  on  occasion.  The 
ne  is  on  the  Skirts  of  the  Town,  on  a  small  Rising 
1  the  Nunnery  and  the  Soldiers  Church.  'Tis  big 
ugh  to  hold  2  or  3000  Barrels  of  Powder;  but  I  was 
1  It  seldom  has  more  than  icx),  sometimes  but  80. 
There  are  always  a  Band  of  Soldiers  10  guard  it,  and 
Ceotinels  looking  out  both  Day  and  Night. 

A  great  many  Merchants  always  reside  at  Bahia  ;  for 

'til  a  Place  of  great  Trade :  I  found  here  above  30  great 

Ship*  from  Europe,  with  2  of  the  King  of  Portugal's  Ships 

War  for  their  Convoy  ;  beside  2  Ships  that  traded  to 

tfrica  only,  either  to  Angola,  Gamha,  or  other  Places  on 

;  Coui  of  Guinea ;  and  Abundance  of  small  Craft,  that 

Illy  run  to  and  fro  on  this  Coast,  carrying  Commodities 

Dm  one  Pan  of  Brazil  to  another. 

The  Merchants  that  live  here  arc  said  to  be  rich,  and 

t  have  many  Negro-Slaves  in  their  Houses,  both  of  Men 

1  Women.    Themselves  arc  chiefly  Portuguezc,  Foreigners 

fios  but  little  Commerce  with  them ;  yet  here  was  one 

Ir.  Cock  an  English  Merchant,  a  very  civil  Gentleman 

and  of  good  Repuie.     He  had  a  Patent  to  be  our  English 

Consul,  but  did  not  Care  to  take  upon  him  any  publick 

■actcr,  because  English  Ships  seldom  come  hither,  here 

nng  been  none  in  1 1  or  1 2  Years  before  this  Time.    Here 

i  also  a   Dane,  and  a  French  Merchant  or  two ;  but  all 

38" 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 

AN.  have  their  EfFects  transported  to  and  from  Europe  in  Portu- 
'^  gueze  Ships,  none  of  any  other  Nation  being  admitted  to 
trade  hither.  There  is  a  Custom-house  by  the  Sea-side, 
where  all  Goods  imported  or  exported  are  entred.  And  to 
prevent  Abuses  there  are  5  or  6  Boats  that  take  their 
Turns  to  row  about  the  Harbour,  searching  any  Boats  they 
suspect  to  be  running  of  Goods. 

The  chief  Commodities  that  the  European  Ships  bring 
hither,  are   Linnen-Cloaths,  both   coarse  and  fine;  some 
Woollens  also,  as  Bays,  Searges,  Perpetuana*s,  &c.     Hats, 
Stockings,  both  of  Silk  and  Thread,  Bisket-bread,  Wheat- 
flower,  Wine  (chiefly  Port)  Oil-Olive,  Butter,  Cheese,  &c. 
and  Salt-beef  and  Pork  would  there  also  be  good  Com- 
modities.    They  bring  hither  also  Iron,  and  all  Sorts  of 
Iron-Tools ;  Pewter- Vessels  of  all  Sorts,  as  Dishes,  Plates, 
Spoons,    &c.     Looking-glasses,    Beads,    and    other  Toys; 
and  the  Ships  that  touch  at  St.  Jago  bring  thence,  as  I 
said,  Cotton-Cloath,  which  is  afterwards  sent  to  Angola. 
/         The  European  Ships  carry  from  hence  Sugar,  Tobaao, 
either  in  Roll  or  SnufF,  never  in  Leaf,  that  I  know  of: 
These  are  the  Staple  Commodities.     Besides  which,  here 
are  Dye-woods,  as  Fustick,^  &c.,  with  Woods  for  other 
Uses,  as  speckled  Wood,    Brazil,  &c.     They  also  carry 
home  raw  Hides,  Tallow,  Train-oil  of  Whales,  &c.    Here 
are   also   kept    tame   Monkeys,    Parrots,    Parrakites,  &c 
which  the  Seamen  carry  home. 

The  Sugar  of  this  Country  is  much  better  than  that 
which  we  bring  home  from  our  Plantations :  For  all  the 
Sugar  that  is  made  here  is  clay*d,  which  makes  it  whiter 
and  finer  than  our  Muscovada,  as  we  call  our  unrcfin'd 
Sugar.  Our  Planters  seldom  refine  any  with  Clay,  unless 
sometimes  a  little  to  send  Home  as  Presents  for  their 
Friends  in  England.  Their  way  of  doing  it  is  by  talung 
I  some   of   the  whitest  Clay   and    mixing   it   with  Water, 

*  Bois  Jaune,  or  Dyer's  Mulberry,  a  tall  tree  with  yellow  wood,  fro© 
which  a  rather  sober  yellow  dye  is  obtained.  The  tree  bears  a  small  fruiti 
much  sought  after  by  birds.  It  is  common  in  most  tropical  countries. 
'*  Speckled  wood  "  may  be  the  famous  Brazilian  rose-wood  which  has  beeo 
exported  in  large  quantities  ever  since  the  country  was  settled.  **  Biaifl*' 
(Ccesaipifiia  Braziliensis)  is  a  sort  of  logwood  used  in  dyeing. 

382 


m  CLAYING   OF  SUGAR  ^ 

JhI  'tis  like  Cream.  With  ihis  they  fill  up  the  Pans  of  ah.^ 
Sug»r,  that  arc  sunk  2  or  3  Inches  below  the  Bnm  by  '^ 
the  dnining  of  the  Molosses  out  of  it :  First  scraping 
off  the  thin  hard  Crust  of  the  Sugar  that  lies  at  the  Top, 
and  would  hinder  the  Water  of  the  Clay  from  soaking 
through  the  Sugar  of  the  Pan.  The  refining  is  made  by  this  I 
PercoTatioo.  For  10  or  12  Days  Time  that  the  clayish  I 
Liquor  lies  soaking  down  the  Pan,  the  white  Water  whitens  I 
the  Sugar  as  it  passes  thro*  it ;  and  the  gross  Body  of  the  I 
Clay  it  self  grows  hard  on  the  Top,  and  may  be  taken  J 
off  at  Pleasure;  when  scraping  off  with  a  Knife  the  very  ■ 
upper-part  of  the  Sugar,  which  will  be  a  little  sullied,  that  I 
which  is  underneath  will  be  white  almost  to  the  Bottom  :  I 
And  such  as  is  called  Brazil  Sugar  is  thus  whitened.  When  I 
I  wu  here  ihis  Sugar  was  sold  for  50s.  per  too  lb.  And  I 
the  Bottoms  of  ihe  Pots,  which  is  vcnr"  coarse  Sugar,  for  I 
about  20s.  per  100  lb.  both  Sorts  being  then  scarce;  for  1 
here  was  not  enough  to  lade  the  Ships,  and  therefore  some  I 
of  them  were  to  lye  here  till  the  next  Season.  ' 

The  European  Ships  commonly  arrive  here  in  February 
or  March,  and  they  have  generally  quick  Passages;  finding 
at  that  Time  of  the  Year  brisk  Gales  to  bring  them  to  the 
~~iae,  little  Trouble,  then,  in  crossing  it,  and  brisk  E.  N.  E.        J 
Vinds  afterwards  to  bring  them  hither.     They  commonly       I 
etum  from   hence  about  the  latter  End  of  May,  or  in       1 
*Twas  said  when  I  was   here  that  the  Ships  would 
1  hence  the  20th  Day  of  May ;  and  therefore  they  were 
very  busy,  some  in  taking  in  their  Goods,  others  in 
wning  and  making  themselves  ready.     The  Ships  that       J 
nme    hither    usually  careen  at    their  first  coming;    here       I 
eing  I  Hulk  belonging  to  the  King  for  that   Purpose.       " 
■*  '  i  Hulk  is  under  the  Charge  of  the  Superintendent  I 
:  of,  who  has  a  certain  Sum  of  Money  for  every  Ship 
tat  careens  by  her.     He  also  provides  Firing'  and  other 
Kcccsaries  for  that  Purpose  :  And  the  Ships  do  commonly 
■  of  the  Merchants  here  each  2  Cables  to  moor  by  all 
:  Time  they  lye  here,  and  so  save  their  own  Hempen 

'  Bnuhwoo'l  and  tbc  like,  which,  IkIiik  kindleiJ  on  ih«  eipoMil  bend* 
■IV  Mp,  bomt  off  the  banvadc*  and  other  Bccumutalioiu. 

tit 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   Cables ;  for  these  are  made  of  a  Sort  of  Hair/  that  grows 

"^  on  a  certain  Kind  of  Trees,  hanging  down  from  the  Top  of 

their   Bodies,   and    is  very  like  the  black  Coyre*  in  the 

East-Indies,  if  not  the  same.     These  Cables  are  strong  and 

lasting  :  And  so  much  for  the  European  Ships. 

The  Ships  that  use  the  Guinea-Trade  are  small  Vessels 
in  comparison  of  the  former.  They  carry  out  from  hence 
Rum,  Sugar,  the  Cotton-cloaths  of  St.  Jago,  Beads,  &c 
and  bring  in  Return,  Gold,  Ivory,  and  Slaves ;  making  very 
good  Returns. 

The  small  Craft  that  belong  to  this  Town  are  chiefly 
imployed  in  carrying  European  Goods  from  Bahia,  the 
Center  of  the  Brasilian  Trade,  to  the  other  Places  on  this 
.  Coast;  bringing  back  hither  Sugar,  Tobacco,  &c.  They 
are  sailed  chiefly  with  Negro-Slaves ;  and  about  Christmas 
these  are  mostly  imployed  in  Whale-killing;  For  about 
that  Time  of  the  Year  a  Sort  of  Whales,  as  they  call  them, 
are  very  thick  on  this  Coast.  They  come  in  also  into  the 
Harbours  and  inland  Lakes,  where  the  Seamen  go  out  and 
kill  them.  The  Fat  of  them  is  boiled  to  Oil ;  the  Lean  is 
eaten  by  the  Slaves  and  poor  People :  And  I  was  told  by 
one  that  had  frequently  eaten  of  it,  that  the  Flesh  was  very 
sweet  and  wholsome.  These  are  said  to  be  but  small 
Whales ;  yet  here  are  so  many,*  and  so  easily  killed,  that 
they  get  a  great  deal  of  Money  by  it.  Those  that  strike 
them  buy  their  Licence  for  it  of  the  King :  And  I  was 
inform'd  that  he  receives  3CX)00  Dollars  per  Annum  for 
this  Fishery.  All  the  small  Vessels  that  use  this  Coasting 
Traffick  are  built  here ;  and  so  are  some  Men  of  War  also 
for  the  King's  Service.  There  was  one  a  building  when  I 
was  here,  a  Ship  of  40  or  50  Guns :  And  the  Timber  of 
this  Country  is  very  good  and  proper  for  this  Purpose.  I 
was  told  it  was  very  strong,  and  more  durable  than  any  we 
have  in  Europe ;   and  they  have  enough  of  it.     As  for 

^  The  Piassava  palm. 

*  Coir.  Piassava  cables  are  supposed  to  be  thrice  the  strength  of  those 
made  of  the  true  coir  (cocoa-nut  fibre)  and  less  subject  to  dry-rot  than 
cables  of  hemp,  either  Indian  or  Manila. 

'  This,  like  several  other  famous  whale-fisheries,  is  now  abandoned. 

384 


CARRIAGE   IN    HAMMOCKS 

T  Ships  thai  use  the  European  Trade,  some  of  them  Atf.I 
:  1  saw  there  were  English  built,  taken  from  us  by  the  '^' 
«ich,  (luring  the  Ute  War,'  and  sold  by  them  to  the 
rtuguczc. 

B>sidcs  Merchants  and  others  that  trade  by  Sea  from 
i  Port,  here  are  other  pretty  wealthy  Men,  and  several 
tificcrs  and  Trades-men  of  most  Sorts,  who  by  Labour 
Industry  maintain  themselves  very  well  ;  especially 
1  as  can  arrive  at  the  Purchase  of  a  Negro-Slave  or 
.  And  indeed,  excepting  people  of  the  lowest  Degree 
all,  here  are  scarce  any  but  what  keep  Slaves  in  their 
scs.  The  richer  Sort,  besides  the  Slaves  of  both 
i  whom  they  keep  for  servile  Uses  in  their  Houses, 
Men  Slaves  who  wait  on  them  aboard,  for  State; 
r  running  by  their  Horse-sides  when  they  ride  out,  or 
carry  them  to  and  fro  on  their  Shoulders  in  the  Town 
m  they  make  short  Visits  near  Home.  Every  Gentle- 
1  or  Merchant  is  provided  with  Things  necessary  for 
I  Sort  of  Carriage.  The  main  Thing  is  a  pretty  large 
tton  Hammock  of  the  West-India  Fashion,  but  mostly 
d  blue,  with  large  Fringes  of  the  same,  hanging  down  on 
1  Side.  This  is  carried  on  the  Negro's  Shoulders  by  the 
Ip  of  a  Bambo  about  I2  or  14  Foot  long,  to  which  the 
nmock  b  hung ;  and  a  Covering  comes  over  the  Pole, 
^ng  down  on  each  Side  like  a  Curtain  :  So  that  the 
on  >o  cirry'd  cannot  be  seen  unless  he  pleases ;  but 
/  cither  lye  down,  having  Pillows  for  his  Head  ;  or  may 
up  by  being  a  little  supported  with  these  Pillows,  and 
letting  both  his  Legs  hang  out  over  one  Side  of  the 
nmock.  When  he  hath  a  Mind  to  be  seen  he  puts  by 
I  Curtain,  and  salutes  every  one  of  his  Acquaintance 
he  meets  in  the  Streets ;  for  they  take  a  Piece  of 
^^  in  greeting  one  another  from  their  Hammocks,  and  . 
U  hold  long  Conferences  thus  in  the  Street :  But  then 
'r  a  Slaves  who  carry  the  Hammock  have  each  a  strong 
il-madc  Staff,  with  a  fine  Iron  Fork  at  the  upper  End, 
I  a  fharp  Iron  below,  like  the  Rest  for  a  Musket,  which 

'  The  war  of  1689- 1697. 

385  2 « 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   they  stick  fast  in  the  Ground,  and  let  the  Pole  or  Bambo 
'^  of   the   Hammock   rest   upon    them,   till    their  Master's 
Business  or  the  Complement  is  over.     There  is  scarce  a  Man 
of  any  Fashion,  especially  a  Woman,  will  pass  the  Streets 
but  so  carried   in   a  Hammock.     The   Chief  Mechanick 
Traders  here,  are  Smiths,  Hatters,  Shoemakers,  Tanners, 
Sawyers,  Carpenters,  Coopers,  &c.     Here  are  also  Taylors, 
Butchers,  &c.  which  last  kill  the  Bullocks  very  dexterously, 
sticking  them  at  one  Blow  with  a  sharp-pointed  Knife  in 
the  Nape  of  the  Neck,  having  first  drawn  them  close  to 
'     a  Rail ;  but  they  dress  them  very  slovenly.     It  being  Lent 
when  I  came  luther,  there  was  no  buying  any  Flesh  till 
Easter-Eve,  when  a  great  Number  of  Bullocks  were  kill'd 
at  once  in  the  Slaughter-houses  within  the  Town,  Men, 
Women  and  Children  flocking  thither  with  great  Joy  to  buy, 
and  a  Multitude  of  Dogs,  almost  starved,  following  them ; 
for  whom  the  Meat  seemM  fittest,  it  was  so  lean.    All 
these  Trades- men  buy  Negroes,  and  train  them  up  to  their 
several  Employments,  which  is  a  great  Help  to  them ;  and 
they  having  so  frequent  Trade  to  Angola,  and  other  Parts 
of  Guinea,  they  have  a  constant  Supply  of  Blacks  both  for 
their  Plantations  and  Town.     These  Slaves  arc  very  useful 
in  this  Place  for  Carriage,  as  Porters ;  for  as  here  is  a  great 
Trade  by  Sea,  and  the  Landing-place  is  at  the  Foot  of  a 
Hill,  too  steep  for  drawing  with  Carts,  so  there  is  great 
need  of  Slaves  to  carry  Goods  up  into  the  Town,  especially 
for  the  inferiour  Sort :  But  the  Merchants  have  also  the 
Convenience  of  a  great  Crane  that  goes  with  Ropes  or 
PuUies,  one  End  of  which  goes  up  while  the  other  goes 
down.     The  House  in  which  this  Crane  is,  stands  on  the 
Brow  of  the  Hill  towards  the  Sea,  hanging  over  the  Preci- 
pice ;  and  there  are  Planks  set  shelving  against  the  Bank 
from  thence  to  the  Bottom,  against  which  the  Goods  lean 
or  slide  as  they  are  hoisted  up  or  let  down.     The  Negro- 
Slaves  in  this  Town  are  so  numerous,  that  they  make  up 
the  greatest  Part  or  Bulk  of  the  Inhabitants :  Every  House, 
as  I  said,  having  some,  both  Men  and  Women,  of  them. 
Many  of  the  Portugueze,  who  are  Batchelors,  keep  of  these 
black  Women  for  Misses,  tho*  they  know  the  Danger  they 

386 


THE   COUNTRY   ABOUT   BAHIA 

in  of  being  poyson'd  by  them,  if  ever  they  give  them '  ah.  , 
Occasion  (^Jealousy.     A  Gentleman  of  ray  Acquain-  '^9* 
who   had    been    familiar  with   his  Cook-maid,  lay 
some    such    Apprehensions  from    her   when  I  was 
These   Slaves  also   of  either   Sex   will   easily   be         J 
^agcd  to  do  any  Sort  of  Mischief;  even  to  Murder,  if        I 
are  hired  to  do  it,  especially  in  the  Night ;  for  which         1 
on,  I  kept  my  Men  on  board  as  much  as  1  could ;  for 
of  the  French  King's  Ships  being  here,  had  several 
:n  murther'd  by  them  in  the  Night,  as  I  was  credibly 
arm'd. 

Having  given  this  Account  of  the  Town  of  Bahia,  I 

Jl  next  say  somewhat  of  the  Country.     There  is  a  Sati- 

ter    Like   runs   40    Leagues,    as    I    was   totd,    up    the 

untry,  N.    W.   from   the   Sea,    leaving  the   Town   and 

Itch    Fori    on    the   Starboard    Side.     The    Country  all 

ind   about    is    for   the  most    part    a    pretty  flat    even 

und,  not  high,  nor  yet  very  low:    It  is  well  water'd 

kh    Rivera,  Brooks  and    Springs;    neither    wants   it  for 

od    Harbours,    navigable    Creeks,    and    good    Bays   for 

ip>  to  ride  in.     The  Soil  in  general  is  go^^Kl,  naturally 

'ucing  very  large  Trees  of  divers  Sorts,  and  fit  for  any 

Th. 


he  Savannahs  also  are  loaden  with  Grass,  Herbs, 
k1  many  Sons  of  smaller  Vegetables ;  and  being  culli- 
ited.  produce  any  Thing  that  ts  proper  for  those  hot 
buntries,  as  Sugar-Canes,  Cotton,  Indico,  Tobacco,  Maiz, 
it-Trees  of  several  Kinds,  and  eatable  Roots  of  all 
Is.  Of  the  several  Kinds  of  Trees  that  arc  here,  I  shall 
ive  an  Account  of  some,  as  I  had  it  partly  from  an 
'labitant  nf  Bahia,  and  partly  from  my  Knowledge  of 
m  otherwise,  viz.  Sapiera,'  Verniiatico,*  Comesscric," 
itlcba,*  Serrie,*  as  they  were  pronounc'd  to  me,  three 
of  Mangrove,  speckled  Wood,  Fustick,  Cotton-Trees 
3  SoTtt,  &c.  together  with  Fruit-Trccs  of  diveis  Sorts 
It  grow  wild,  beside  such  as  arc  planted. 
Of  Timber-Trees,  the  Sapiera  is  said  to  be  large  and 

I  Sapopm.  '  Vinhxico  de  Bahia :  PJii/Aymtm'aim  rttiailatum. 

'  CnitieiMhe,  Ayitfmdrwi  Sfi.,  a  red  wood  lued  Id  ihipbuiMiBK- 
'  Cnpiabaf  *  Seie?  Couratari  mfmtetns. 

387 


I 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  tall ;  it  is  very  good  Timber,  and  is  made  use  of  in  build- 
1699  ing  of  Houses ;  so  is  the  Vermiatico,  a  tall  streight-bodicd 
Tree,  of  which  they  make  Plank  2  Foot  broad  ;  and  they 
also  make  Canoa's  with  it.  Comesserie  and  Guitteba  are 
chiefly  used  in  building  Ships ;  these  are  as  much  esteem'd 
here  as  Oaks  are  in  England,  and  they  say  either  Sort  is 
harder  and  more  durable  than  Oak.  The  Serrie  is  a  Sort 
:  of  Tree  much  like  Elm,  very  durable  in  Water.  Here  are 
also  all  the  three  Sorts  of  Mangrove  Trees,  viz.  the  Red, 
the  White,  and  the  Black,  which  I  have  described  [Vol.  I. 
p.  84].  The  Bark  of  the  Red  Mangrove,  is  here  us*d  for 
tanning  of  Leather,  and  they  have  great  Tan-pits  for  it. 
The  black  Mangrove  grows  larger  here  than  in  the  West- 
Indies,  and  of  it  they  make  good  Plank.  The  white 
Mangrove  is  larger  and  tougher  than  in  the  West-Indies ; 
of  these  they  make  Masts  and  Yards  for  Barks. 

There  grow  here  wild  or  bastard  Coco-Nut  Trees, 
neither  so  large  nor  so  tall  as  the  common  ones  in  the  East 
j  or  West-Indies.  They  bear  Nuts  as  the  others,  but  not  a 
.  quarter  so  big  as  the  right  Coco-Nuts.  The  Shell  is  full 
of  Kernel,  without  any  hollow  Place  or  Water  in  it ;  and 
the  Kernel  is  sweet  and  wholsome,  but  very  hard  both 
for  the  Teeth  and  for  Digestion.  These  Nuts  are  in  much 
Esteem  for  making  Beads  for  Pater  noster's,  Boles  of 
Tobacco-Pipes,  and  other  Toys:  and  every  small  Shop 
here  has  a  great  many  of  them  to  sell.  At  the  Top  of  these 
Bastard  Coco-Trees,  among  the  Branches,  there  grows 
a  Sort  of  long  black  Thread  like  Horse-hair,  but  much 
longer,  which  by  the  Portugueze  is  called  Tresabo.^  Of 
this  they  make  Cables  which  are  very  serviceable,  strong 
and  lasting ;  for  they  will  not  rot  as  Cables  made  of 
Hemp,  tho'  they  lye  exposed  both  to  Wet  and  Heat. 
These  are  the  Cables  which  I  said  they  keep  in  their 
Harbours  here,  to  let  to  hire  to  European  Ships,  and 
resemble  the  Coyre-Cables. 

Here  are  3  Sorts  of  Cotton-Trees  that  bear  Silk-Cotton. 
One  Sort  is  such  as  I  have  formerly  described  [  Vol.  I.  p. 

^  Pia9aba. 

388 


B'  COTTON-TREE   OF    BRAZIL 

^^86]  by  the  Name  of  the  Cotton-tree.    The  other  2  Sorts  ' 

I  never  saw  any  where  but  here.     The  Trees  of  these  latter  ' 

Sorts  arc  but  small  in  Comparison  of  the  former,  which  are 

—  jeckoa'd  the  biggest  in  all  the  West-India  Woods;  yet  arc 

MJWwcver  of  a  good  Bigness  and  Heighth.     One  of  these 

Hki  Sorts  is  not  so  full  of  Branches  as  the  other  of  them ; 

'writhcr  do  they  produce  their  Fruit  the  same  Time  of  the 

Year :     For  one  Sort    had    its    Fruit  just    ripe,  and    was 

shedding  its  Leaves  while  the  other  Sort  was  yet  green, 

and  its  Fruit  small  and  growing,  having  but  newly  done 

bloBOniing ;  the  Tree  being  as  full  of  young  Fruit  as  an 

Applc-Trce  ordinarily  in   England.      These   last  yield  very 

large  Pods,  about  6  Inches  long,  and  as  big  as  a  Man's  Arm. 

It  IS  ripe  in  September  and  October  ;  then  the  Pod  opens, 

and  the  Cotton  bursts  out  in  a  great  Lump  as  big  as  a 

Man's  Head.     They  gather  these  Pods  before   they  open  ; 

otherwtys  it  would  fly  all  away.     It  opens  as  well  after  'tis 

gathered ;  and  then  they  take  out  the  Cotton,  and  preserve 

tto  fill  Pillows  and  Bolsters,  for  which  use  'lis  very  much 
ecmcd  :  But  'tis  fit  for  nothing  else.'  Iwing  so  short  that 
cannot  be  spun.  'Tis  of  a  tawncy  Colour ;  and  the 
;ds  are  black,  very  round,  and  as  big  as  a  white  Pea. 
l"hc  other  Sort  is  ripe  in  March  or  April.  The  Fruit  or 
Pod  is  like  a  large  Apple,  and  very  round.  The  out-side 
Shell  \i  as  thick  as  the  Top  of  one's  Finger.  Within  this 
therr  is  a  very  thin  whitish  Bag  or  Skin  which  incloseth 
the  Cotton.  When  the  Cotton-Apple  is  ripe,  the  outer 
thick  green  Shell  splits  it  self  into  5  equal  Parts  from  Stcmb 
to  Tail,  and  drops  off,  leaving  the  Cotton  hanging  upon 
the  Stcmb,  only  pent  up  in  its  fine  Bag.  A  Day  or  two 
afterwards  the  Cotton  swells  by  the  Heat  of  the  Sun, 
breaks  the  Bag  and  bursts  out,  as  big  as  a  Man's  Head  : 
And  then  as  the  Wind  blows  'tis  by  Degrees  driven  away, 
a  little  at  a  Time,  out  of  the  Bag  that  still  hangs  upon  the 
Stcmb,  and  is  scattered  about  ihc  Fields;  the  Bag  soon 
following  the  Cotton,  and   the  Stcmb  the    Bag.     Here  is 

*  Tbc  mimjntM  >iid  the  Munminu.     I'hc  ton  "tucb  u  1  have  fonncrly 
d«Mmbcd  '  n  AowVoj-  fiemtaibirum.  a  iaH,  (horny  tne  with  digitnied  leaves. 

*  li  is  MNDClimet  ti»ed  in  live  niali<R|t  of  fdi. 

389 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   also  a  little  of  the  right  West-India  Cotton  Shrub :  but 
'^  none  of  the  Cotton  is  exported,  nor  do  they  make  much 
Cloth  of  it. 

This  Country  produces  great  Variety  of  fine  Fruits,  as 
very  good  Oranges  of  3  or  4  Sorts ;  (especially  one  Sort 
of  China  Oranges;)  Limes  in  Abundance,  Pomegranates, 
Pomecitrons,  Plantains,  Bonano's,  right  Coco-Nuts,  Guava's, 
Coco-plumbs  (called  here  Munshcroo*s)»  Wild-grapes,  such 
as  I  have  described  [Vol.  11.  Part  2,  p.  151]  beside  such 
Grapes  as  grow  in  Europe.  Here  are  also  Hc^-plumbs, 
Custard- Apples,  Sour-sops,^  Cashews,*  Papah*s*  (called 
here  Mamoons)  Jennipah*s*  (called  here  Jenni-Pappah's) 
Manchineel-Apples  and  Mango's.  Mango's  are  yet  but 
rare  here :  I  saw  none  of  them  but  in  the  Jesuit's  Garden, 
f  which  has  a  great  many  fine  Fruits,  and  some  Cinnamon- 
L  Trees.  These,  both  of  them,  were  first  brought  from  the 
[__  East-Indies,  and  they  thrive  here  very  well :  So  do  Pumple- 
musses,  brought  also  from  thence ;  and  both  China  and 
Sevil  Oranges  are  here  very  plentiful  as  well  as  good. 

The  Sour-sop  (as  we  call  it)  is  a  large  Fruit  as  big  as 
a  Man's  Head,  of  a  long  or  oval  Shape,  and  of  a  green 
Colour ;  but  one  Side  is  yellowish  when  ripe.  The  out- 
side Rind  or  Coat  is  pretty  thick,  and  very  rough,  with 
small  sharp  Knobs ;  the  Inside  is  full  of  spongy  Pulp, 
within  which  also  are  many  black  Seeds  or  Kernels^  in 
Shape  and  Bigness  like  a  Pumpkin-seed.  The  Pulp  is  very 
juicy,  of  a  pleasant  Taste,  and  wholesome.  You  suck  the 
Juice  out  of  the  Pulp,  and  so  spit  it  out.  The  Tree  or 
Shrub  that  bears  this  Fruit  grows  about  10  or  12  Foot 
high,  with  a  small  short  Body ;  the  Branches  growing 
pretty  strait  up;  for  I  did  never  see  any  of  them  spread 
abroad.  The  Twigs  are  slender  and  tough  ;  and  so  is  the 
Stcmb  of  the  Fruit.  This  Fruit  grows  also  both  in  the 
East  and  West-Indies. 

The  Cashew  is  a  Fruit  as  big  as  a  Pippin,  pretty  long, 
and  bigger  near  the  Stemb  than  at  the  other  End,  growing 

'  Anona  maxima,  '  Acaju,  or  acajou  {Anacardium  occidentak)* 

*  Papahs  :  Fafia  major, 

^  Genipapdhs  :  Genipa  Americana  or  Surinam  marmalade  box. 

390 


THE  JENNIPAH    AND   ARISAH    FRUIT 

ipcnng.  The  Rind  is  smooth  and  thin,  of  a  red  and  ah.  1 
cllow  Colour.  The  Seed  of  this  Fruit  grows  at  the  End  '*~* 
f  it ;  'tis  of  an  Olive  Colour  shaped  like  a  Bean,  and 
bout  the  same  Bigness,  but  not  altogether  so  flat.  The 
'rcc  b  as  big  as  an  Applc-Tree,  with  Branches  not  thick, 
et  spreading  off.  The  Boughs  are  gross,  the  Leaves  broad 
nd  round,  and  in  Substance  pretty  thick.  This  Fruit  is 
oft  and  spongy  when  ripe,  and  so  full  of  Juice  that  in 
iting  it  the  Juice  will  run  nut  on  both  Sides  of  one's 
4outh.  It  is  very  pleasant,  and  gratefully  rough  on  the 
Tiwigue;  and  is  accounted  a  very  wholesome  Fruit.  This 
TOWS  both  in  the  East  and  West-Indies,  where  I  have  seen 
nd  eaten  of  it. 

The  Jennipah  or  Jcnnipapah  is  a  Sort  of  Fruit  of  the  ' 

'alabosh   or  Gourd-kind.     It  is  about  the  Bigness  of  a 

3uck-^g,  and  somewhat  of  an  Oval  Shape ;  and  is  of  a 

ty  Colour.     The  Shell  is  not  altogether  so  thick  nor  hard 

a  Calabash ;  'Tis  full  of  whitish  Pulp  mixt  with  small 

Seeds:  and  both   Pulp  and  Seeds  must  be   taken  into 

Mouth,  where  sucking  out  the  Pulp,  you  spit  out  the 

Ls.     It   is  of  a  sharp  and  pleasing  Taste,  and  is  very 

iccnt.     The  Tree  that  bears  it  is  much   like  an  Ash, 

right  bodied,  and  of  a  good  Height ;  clean  from  Limbs 

near  ihe  Top,  where  there  Branches  forth  a  small  Head. 

le  Rind  is  of  a  pale  grey,  and  so  is  the  Fruit.     We  us'd 

this  Tree  to  make  Helves  or  Handles  for  Axes   (for 

tich  it  is  very  proper)  in  the  Bay  of  Campcaehy ;  where 

ivc  seen  of  them,  and  no  where  else  but  here. 

Benda  these,  here  are  many  Sorts  of  Fruits  which  1 

c   not    met   with   any    where    but    here ;    as   Arisah's, 

inicasah's,    Petango's,  &c.       Arisah's'    arc   an  excellent 

"  ,    not    much    bigger    than    a    large   Cherry;    shaped 

a   Catherine- Pear,    being   small    at    the    Stemb,    and 

elHng  bigger  towards  the  End.     I'hey  are  of  a  greenish 

itour.  and   have  small  Seeds  as  big  as  Mustard  Seeds; 

w  arc  somewhat  lart,  yet  pleasant,  and  very  wholsomc, 

d  may  be  eaten  by  sick  People. 

'  The  antfk :  fsi^um  lUtpraie  ind  P.  mavtelnu. 


'     CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

A3C.  Mericasah's,^  arc  an  excellent  Fruit,  of  which  there  are 

*^  2  Sorts ;  one  growing  on  a  »nall  Tree  or  Shrub,  which  is 
counted  the  best ;  the  other  growing  on  a  Kind  of  Shrub 
like  a  Vine,  which  they  plant  about  Arbours  to  make  a 
Shade,  having  many  broad  Leaves.  The  Fruit  is  as  big 
as  a  small  Orange,  round  and  green.  When  they  are  ripe 
they  are  soft  and  fit  to  eat ;  full  of  white  Pulp  mixt  thick 
with  little  black  Seeds,  and  there  is  no  separating  one  from 
the  other,  till  they  arc  in  your  Mouth ;  when  you  suck  in 
the  white  Pulp  and  spit  out  the  Stones.  They  are  tart, 
pleasant,  and  very  wholesome. 

Petango's,*  arc  a  small  red  Fruit,  that  grow  also  on 
small  Trees,  and  are  as  big  as  Cherries,  but  not  so  globular, 
having  one  flat  Side,  and  also  5  or  6  small  protuberant 
Ridges.  *Tis  a  very  pleasant  tart  Fruit,  and  has  a  pretty 
large  flattish  Stone  in  the  Middle. 

Petumbo's,'  are  a  yellow  Fruit  (growing  on  a  Shrub 
like  a  Vine)  bigger  than  Cherries,  with  a  pretty  large  Stone : 
These  are  sweet,  but  rough  in  the  Mouth. 

Mungaroo's,^  are  a  Fruit  as  big  as  Cherries,  red  on  one 
Side  and  white  on  the  other  Sde :  They  are  said  to  be  full 
of  small  Seeds,  which  are  commonly  swallowed  in  eating 
them. 

Muckishaw*s,'  are  said  to  be  a  Fruit  as  big  as  Crab- 
Apples,  growing  on  large  Trees.  They  have  also  small 
Seeds  in  the  Middle,  and  are  well  tasted. 

Ingwa's,*  are  a  Fruit  like  the  Locust-Fruit,  4  Inches 
long,  and  one  broad.     They  grow  on  high  Trees. 

Otee,"  is  a  Fruit  as  big  as  a  large  Coco-Nut.  It  hath 
a  Husk  on  the  outside,  and  a  large  Stone  within,  and  is 
accounted  a  very  fine  Fruit. 

Musteran-de-ova*s,®  are  a  round  Fruit  as  big  as  large 
Hazel-Nuts,  covered  with  thin  brittle  Shells  of  a  blackish 
Colour :  They  have  a  small  Stone  in  the  middle,  inclosed 
within  a  black  pulpy  Substance,  which  is  of  a  pleasant 

'  Protium  a/h'ssima.  *  Pitanga :  Myrda  rubella. 

'  Pittombera  :  Sapindus  esculentus.  *  Philodendron  arboreum. 

*  Macacao  ?  •  Inga-louro. 

^  0'\\\  {Couvfpt'a  advn),  •  iMCumaprocerat 

392 


PALM-BERRY— PHYSICK-NUTS,   ETC.  ^ 

Tistc.     The  outside  Shell  is  chevfcd  with  the  Fniii,  and  Air.1 

spit  out  with   the  Stone,  when  the  Pulp  is  suck'd  from  '^ 
them.     The  Tree  that  bears  this  Fruit  is  tall,  large,  and 
very  harJ  Wood.     I  have  not  seen  any  of  these  five  last 

named   Fruits,  but  had  them  thus  described  to  me  by  an  3 

Imh  Inhabitant  of  Bahta ;  tho'  as  to  this  last,  I  am  apt  to  I 

beltcvc,  I  may  have  both  seen  and  eaten  of  them  in  Achin  ■ 

in  Sumatra.  I 

Palm-berries'   (called   here  Dendccs)  grow  plentifully  \  I 

about   Bahia;  the   largest  are  as  big  as  Wall-nuts;  they  I 

grow  in  Bunches  on  the  top  of  the  Body  of  the  Tree,  I 

among  the  Roots  of  the  Branches  or  Leaves,  as  all   Fruits  I 

of  the  Palm-kind  do.     These  arc  the  same  kind  of  Berries  i  ■ 

or  Nuts  as  those  they  make  the   Palm-Oyl  with  on   the  I 

Coast  of  Guinea,  where  they  abound :  And  I  was  told  that  I 

tbcy   make  Oyt   with    them    here   also.     They  sometimes  I 

roast  and  eat  them;  but  when  I  had  one  roasted  to  prove  I 

it,  1  did  not  like  it.  I 

Pbysick-Nuts,'  as  our  Seamen    call    them,  are   called  ■ 
'crc    Pmcon;  and   Agnus  Castus  is   called   here  Carrepat : 
I  hex   both  grow  here :    So  do  Mcndibees,  a    Fruit   like 

I'hysick-Nuts.     They  scorch  them  in  a  Pan  over  the  Fire  _ 

before  they  eat  them.  M 

Here    arc    also  great    plenty    of  Cabbage-Trees,'  and  I 

other  Fruits,  which  I  did  not  get  information  about,  and  ' 
which  I  had  not  the  Opportunity  of  seeing ;  because  this 
was  not  the  Season,  it  being  our  Spring,  and  consequently 

their  Autumn,  when  their  best  Fruits  were  gone,  tho'  some  . 

were    left.      However  I  saw  abundance  of  wild    Berries  in  ■ 

the  Woodland  Fields,  but  1  could  not  learn  their  Names  I 

or  Nature.  I 

They   have   withal   good    plenty    of   ground    Fruit,   as  I 

Callavanccs,  Pme-Apples,  Punikins,  Water-Mclons,  Musk-  I 

Melons,    Cucumbers,    and     Roots ;     as    Yams,     Potato's,  I 

Cassava's,    &c.     Garden-Herbs  also   good  store;    as  Cab-  I 

lagcs.  Turnips,  Onions,    Leeks,  and    aliundance  of   other  I 

Saftarding,  and   for  the  Pot.     Drugs  of  several  sorts,  viz.  M 

*  Cmfmt  diitiikmi.                                '  From  the  catlor-oU  plaDti.  H 

■  EuttTpe  tdulU.  ■ 

393  m 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Sassafras,^  Snake-Root,*  &c.  Beside  the  Woods  I  mcn- 
'^  tioned  for  Dying,  and  other  Uses,  as  Fustick,  Speckled- 
wood,  &c. 

I  brought  home  with  me  from  hence  a  good  Number 
of  Plants,  dried  between  the  Leaves  of  Books ;  of  some  of 
the  choicest  of  which,  that  are  not  spoifd,  I  may  give  a 
Specimen  at  the  End  of  the  Book. 

Here  are  said  to  be  great  plenty  and  variety  of  Wild- 
Fowl,  viz.  Yemma*s,  Maccaw's  (which  are  called  here 
Jackoo*s,  and  a  larger  sort  of  Parrots,  and  scarcer)  Parrots, 
Parakites,  Flamingo's,  Carrion-Crows,  Chattering  Crows, 
Cockrecoes,  Bill-Birds  finely  painted,  Corresoes,  Doves, 
Pidgeons,  Jenetees,  Clocking-Hens,  Crab-Catchers,  Galdens, 
Currecoo's,  Muscovy  Ducks,  common  Ducks,  Widgeons, 
Teal,  Curlews,  Men  of  War  Birds,  Booby's,  Noddy's, 
Pelicans,  &c. 

The  Yemma  is  bigger  than  a  Swan,  grey-feathered, 
with  a  long  thick  sharp-pointed  Bill. 

The  Carrion-Crow  and  Chattering- Crows,  are  called 
here  Mackeraw's,  and  are  like  those  I  described  in  the 
West-Indies,  [Vol.  II.  Part  II.  p.  i68.]  The  Bill  of  the 
Chattering-Crow  is  black,  and  the  Upper-Bill  is  round, 
bending  downwards  like  a  Hawks-Bill,  rising  up  in  t 
Ridge  almost  Semi-circular,  and  very  sharp,  both  at  the 
Ridge  or  Convexity,  and  at  the  Point  or  Extremity :  The 
Lower-Bill  is  flat  and  shuts  even  with  it.  I  was  told  by  a 
Portuguese  here,  that  their  Negro- Wenches  make  Love- 
Potions  with  these  Birds.  And  the  Portuguese  care  not 
to  let  them  have  any  of  these  Birds,  to  keep  them  from 
that  Superstition :  As  I  found  one  Afternoon  when  I  was  in 
the  Fields  with  a  Padre  and  another,  who  shot  two  of 
them,  and  hid  them,  as  they  said,  for  that  Reason.  They 
are  not  good  Food,  but  their  Bills  are  reckoned  a  good 
Antidote  against  Poison. 

^  The  "  useful  Sassafras/'  or  sassafras  laurel,  a  handsome  aromatic  tree 
yielding  a  valuable  drug,  and  a  scented  wood,  much  used  by  AmericaD 
furniture  makers. 

*  Poly  gala  Senega  y  a  drug  much  used  at  one  time  in  gargles  and 
emetics. 

394 


IBILI^BIRD—CURRESO— CLOCKING-HENS 


The    Bill-Birds' 


by 


called 
"  their  monstrous  Bills,  which  are  as  big  as  their  fiodies.  I  ' 
saw  none  of  these  Birds  here,  but  saw  several  of  the  Breasts 
Bea'd  off  and  dried,  for  the  Beauty  of  them ;  the  Feathers 
were  curiously  colour'd  with  Red,  Yellow,  and  Orange- 
colour. 

fcThe  Currcso's  (called  here  Mackeraw's')  are  such  as 
in  the  Bay  of  Campeachy  [Vol.  II.  Part  2,  p.  167]. 
Turtle-Doves  arc  in  great  plenty  here ;  and  two  sorts 
Wild  Pidgeons ;  the  one  sort  Blacltish,  the  other  a  light 
vjrcy  :  The  Blackish  or  dark  Grey  are  the  Bigger,  being  as 
large  as  our  Wood-Quests,  or  Wood-Pidgeons  in  England. 
Boch  sorts  are  very  good  Meat ;  and  arc  in  such  plenty 
firom  M»y  till  September,  that  a  Man  may  shoot  8  or  10 
Dozen  in  several  Shots  at  one  standing,  in  a  close  misty 
Morning,  when  they  come  to  feed  on  Berries  that  grow  in 
the  Woods. 

The  Jcnetee  is  a  Bird  as  Ing  as  a  Lark,  with  blackish 
Feathers,  and  yellow  Legs  and  Feet.  'Tis  accounted  very 
wholesome  Food. 

Clocking- Hens,  are  much  like  the  Crab-catchers,  which 
I  have  described  [Vol.  II.  Part  2,  p.  170]  but  the  Legs 
ire  not  altogether  so  long.  They  keep  always  in  swampy 
wet  Places,  tho*  their  Claws  arc  like  Land-Kowls  Claws. 
They  nuke  a  Noise  or  Cluck  like  our  Brood-Hens,  or 
Dunghil-Hens,  when  they  have  Chickens,  and  for  that 
Reason  they  are  called  by  the  English,  Clocking-Hens. 
■There  are  many  of  them  in  the  Bay  of  Campeachy  (tho'  I 
lilted  to  speak  of  them  then:)  and  elsewhere  in  the 
KTest-Indics.  There  are  both  here  and  there  four  sorts 
these  long-lcgg'd  Fowls,  near  a-kin  to  each  other,  as  so 
.ny  Sub-Species  of  the  same  Kind ;  viz.  Crab-catchers, 
Docking-Hens,  Galdens  (which  three  are  in  shape  and 
""Alour  like  Herons  in  England,  but  less ;  the  Galden,  the 
M  of  the  three,  the  Crab-catcher  the  smallest;)  and  a 

a  deep 


*  KAt*  Amfritatui,  at  kriel  toucan, 
rid  twcuii  with  puiirif-btack  bai:k  and  win^s. 
■  Maracc*  U  the  Bntilian  name  for  the  wild  duck.    The  curauow  {Mitti 
w)  is  kaown  u  ilw  irioium. 

395 


\ 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   fourth  sort  which  are  Black,  but  shaped  like  the  other, 
'^  having  long  Legs  and  short  Tails ;    these  are  about  the 
bigness  of  Crab-catchers,  and  feed  as  they  do. 

Currecoos,  are  Water  Fowls,  as  big  as  pretty  large 
Chickens,  of  a  bluish  Colour,  with  short  Legs  and  Tail; 
they  feed  also  in  swampy  Ground,  and  are  very  good  Meat. 
I  have  not  seen  of  them  elsewhere. 

The  Wild-Ducks  here  are  said  to  be  of  two  sorts,  the 
Muscovy,  and  the  common-Ducks.  In  the  wet  Sason 
here  are  abundance  of  them,  but  in  the  dry  Time  but  few. 
Wigeon  and  Teal  also  are  said  to  be  in  great  plenty  here  m 
the  wet  Season. 

To  the  Southward  of  Bahia  there  are  also  Ostridgcs  m 
great  plenty,  tho'  'tis  said,  they  are  not  so  large  as  those  of 
Africa :  They  are  found  chiefly  in  the  Southern  Parts  of 
Brazil,  especially  among  the  large  Savannahs  near  the  River 
of  Plate ;  and  from  thence  further  South  towards  the 
Streights  of  Magellan. 

As  for  Tame  Fowl  at  Bahia,  the  chief  beside  their 
Ducks,  are  Dunghil-Fowls,  of  which  they  have  two  sorts; 
one  sort  much  of  the  size  of  our  Cocks  and  Hens ;  the  other 
very  large :  And  the  Feathers  of  these  last  are  a  long  time 
coming  forth  ;  so  that  you  see  them  very  naked  when  half 
grown ;  but  when  they  are  full  grown  and  well  feathered, 
they  appear  very  large  Fowls,  as  indeed  they  are ;  neither 
do  they  want  for  Price ;  for  they  are  sold  at  Bahia  for  half 
a  Crown  or  three  Shillings  apiece,  just  as  they  are  brought 
first  to  Market  out  of  the  Country,  when  they  are  so  lean 
as  to  be  scarce  fit  to  eat. 

The  Land  Animals  here  are  Horses,  black  Cattle,  Sheep, 
Goats,  Rabbits,  Hogs,  Leopards,  Tygers,  Foxes,  Monkeys, 
Pecary  (a  sort  of  wild  Hogs,  called  here  Pica)  Armadillo, 
Alligators,  Guano's  (called  Quittee)  Lizards,  Serpents, 
Toads,  Frogs,  and  a  sort  of  amphibious  Creatures  called 
by  the  Portugueze  Cachord's  de  agua^  in  English  Watcr- 
Dogs. 

The  Leopards  and  Tygers  of  this  Country  are  said  to 
be  large  and  very  fierce :  But  here  on  the  Coast  they  arc 
either  destroyed,  or  driven  back  towards  the  Heart  of  the 

396  ( 


SERPENTS— AM  PH I  SB^N  A 

Atry ;  inii  therefore  are  seldom  found  but  in  the  a». 
Borders  and  Out-plan taiions,  where  ihey  oftentimes  do  '^ 
Mischief.     Here  are  three  or  four  sorts  of  Monkeys,  of 

PTcnt  Sizes  and  Colours,  One  sort  is  very  large  ;  and 
Jicr  sort  is  very  small :  These  last  are  ugly  in  Shape 
Feature,  and  have  a  strong  Scent  of  Musk- 
Here  are  several  sorts  of  Serpents,  many  of  them  vastly 
|rcat,  atKt  most  of  them  very  venomous :  As  the  Raitle- 
Duke  for  one:  And  for  Venom,  a  small  Green  Snake'  is 
bid  enough,  no  bigger  than  the  Stemb  of  a  Tobacco-pipe, 
■d  about  1 8  Inches  long,  very  common  here. 
B  They  have  here  also  the  Amphisbsna,'  or  Two-headed 
KUec,  of  a  grey  Colour,  mixed  with  blackish  Stripes, 
irhose  Biie  is  reckon'd  to  be  incurable.  'Tts  said  to  be 
blind,  tho'  it  has  two  small  Specks  in  each  Head  like 
Eyes:  But  whether  it  sees  or  not  I  cannot  tell.  They  say 
it  lives  like  a  Mole,  mostly  under  Ground  ;  and  that  when 
it  u  found  above  Ground  it  is  easily  kill'd,  because  it 
Biovcs  but  slowly :  Neither  is  its  Sight  (if  it  hath  any)  so 
Mod  as  to  discern  any  one  that  comes  near  to  kill  it:  as 
few  of  these  Creatures  fly  at  a  Man,  or  hurt  him  but  when 
H  comes  in  their  way.  'Tis  about  14.  Inches  long,  and 
ibout  the  bigness  of  the  inner  Joint  of  a  Man's  middle 
?iii0cr;  being  of  one  and  the  same  bigness  from  one  End 
Ki  tAc  other,  with  a  Head  at  each  End,  (as  they  said  :  for 
I  cannot  vouch  it,  for  one  I  had  was  cut  short  at  one  End) 
both  alike  in  shape  and  bigness ;  and  'tis  said  to  move 
S  cither  Head  foremost,  indifferently  ;  whence  'tis  called 
he  Portugucze,  Cobra  de  dos  Cabesai,  the  Snake  with 
J  Heads. 

^The  small  black  Snake  is  a  very  venomous  Creature. 
I  here  is  also  a  grey  Snake,  with  red'  and  brown  Spots 
iver  its  back.     '  Tis  as  big  as  a  Man's  Arm,  and  about 
t  long,  and  is  said  to  be  venomous.    I  saw  one  of  these. 

^C«tr0  vtrdiu. 

ilutboiu,  a  ton  of  iloir^orm,  with  a  blunl  tail  The  creaiure 
k  arrigitte*  tiackwardt,  which  accounts  for  the  dory  of  the  two 
Henunda  givei  a  fearvime  cut  of  the  iwo-hciuled  mnkc,  in  which 
*'  ""    H  between  the  eyes,  rutving  outward*. 

397 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Here  are  two  sorts  of  very  large  Snakes  or  Serpents: 

'^  One  of  *em  a  Land-snake,^  the  other  a  Water-snake.    The 

Land-snake  is  of  a  grey  Colour,  and  about  1 8  or  20  Foot 

long :  Not  very  venomous,  but  ravenous.     I  was  promised 

the  sight  of  one  of  their  Skins,  but  wanted  Opportunity. 

The  Water- snake  ^  is  said  to  be  near  30  Foot  long. 
These  live  wholly  in  the  Water,  either  in  large  Rivers,  or 
great  Lakes,  and  prey  upon  any  Creature  that  comes  within 
their  Reach,  be  it  Man  or  Beast.  They  draw  their  Prey  to 
them  with  their  Tails :  for  when  they  see  any  thing  on  the 
Banks  of  the  River  or  Lake  where  they  lurk,  they  swing 
about  their  Tails  10  or  12  Foot  over  the  Bank ;  and  what- 
ever stands  within  their  Sweep  is  snatchM  with  great 
Violence  into  the  River,  and  drowned  by  them.  Nay  'tis 
reported  very  credibly  that  if  they  see  only  a  shade  of  any 
Animal  at  all  on  the  Water,  they  will  flourish  their  TjuIs 
to  bring  in  the  Man  or  Beast  whose  Shade  they  see,  and  arc 
oftentimes  too  successful  in  it.  Wherefore  Men  that  have 
Business  near  any  Place  where  these  Water-Monsters  arc 
suspected  to  lurk,  are  always  provided  with  a  Gun,  whidi 
they  often  fire,  and  that  scares  them  away,  or  keeps  them 
quiet.  They  are  said  to  have  great  Heads,  and  strong 
Teeth  about  6  Inches  long.  I  was  told  by  an  Irish  Man 
who  lived  here,  that  his  Wife*s  Father  was  very  near  being 
taken  by  one  of  them  about  this  Time  of  my  first  Arrival 
here,  when  his  Father  was  with  him  up  in  the  Country: 
For  the  Beast  flourished  his  Tail  for  him,  but  came  not 
nigh  enough  by  a  Yard  or  two;  however  it  scared  him 
sufficiently. 

The  amphibious  Creatures  here  which  I  said  are  ailed 
by  the  Portugueze  CachoriCs  de  Agua^  or  Water-Dogs,  arc 
said  to  be  as  big  as  small  MastifFs,  and  are  all  hairy  and 
shaggy  from  Head  to  Tail.  They  have  4  short  Legs,  a 
pretty  long  Head  and  short  Tail ;  and  are  of  a  bladcish 
Colour.  They  live  in  fresh  Water-ponds,  and  oftentimes 
come  ashore  and  Sun  themselves ;  but  retire  to  the  Water 

^  The  boa-constrictor. 

'  The  anaconda  {Eunectes  murinus).    It  sometimes  attains  to  a  length 
of  40  feet. 

398 


r  SHELI^FISH— TURTLE 

iCssaulted.     They  are  eaten,  and  said  to  be  good  Food.    ah. 
rcnl  of  thc9c  Creatures  which  1  have  now  spoken  of  '^ 
live  not  seen,  but  inform'J  my  self  about  ihcm  while  I 
a  here  at  Bahia,  from  sober  and  sensible  Persons  among 
t  Inhabitants,  among  whom  I  met  with  some  that  could 
cak  English. 

In  the  Sea  upon  this  Coast  there  is  great  Store  and 
ivcrsity  of  Fish,  viz.  Jew-fish,  for  which  there  is  a  great 
kci  at  Bahia  in  Lent :  Tarpom's,  Mullets,  Groopers, 
iks.  Gar-fish  (called  here  Goolions),  Gomsses,  Barrama's, 
[uinda's,  Cavallie's,  Cuchora's  (or  Dog-fish),  Conger-Eels, 
ings  (as  I  was  told),  the  Serrew,  the  Olio  de  Boy  (1 
:e  and  spell  them  just  as  they  were  named  to  me), 
lalcs,  &c. 

Here  is  also  Shell-fish  (tho'  in  less  Plenty  about  Bahia 

on  other  Paris  of  the  Coast),  viz.  Lobsters,  Craw-fish, 

imps,    Crabs,    Oysters    of  the    common    Sort,    Conchs, 

liks.    Cockles,    Muscles,    Pcrriwinkles,    &c.       Here   are 

c   Sorts   of  Sca-Turtle,    viz.    Hawksbill,   Loggerhead, 

Green;  But  none  of  them  are  in  any  esteem,  neither 

lianii  nor  Portugiicze  loving  them  :  Nay  they  have  a 

t  Antipathy  against  them,  and  would  much  rather  cat 

Porpoise,  tho'  our  KngUsh  count   the  green  Turtle  very 

tnordiiury  Food,     The  Reason  that  is  commonly  given 

ihc  West-Indies  for  the  Spaniards  not  caring  to  eat  of 

ttn,  i%  the  Fear  they  have  lest,  being  usually  foul-bodied, 

J  many  of  them  pox'd  (lying,  as  they  do,  so  promiscu- 

lly  with  thctr  Ncgrines  and  other  Shc-SIavcs)  they  should 

ak  out  loathsomely  like  Le}>:rs;   which  this  Sort  of  Food, 

I  said,  does  much  enclinc  Men  to  do,  searching  the  Body, 

II  driving  out  any  such  gross  Humours :  For  which  Cause 
toy    of    our    English    Valetudinarians   have    gone    from       V 

(tho'    there    they    have    also    Turtle)    to    the    I. 
at  the  Laying-time,  to  live  wholly  upon  Turtle 
then  abound  there;  purposely  to  have   their  Bodies 
r'd  by  this  Food,  and   their  Distempers  driven  out ; 
hive  been  said   to  have  found  many  of  them  good 
EM  in   it.     But    this  by  the  way.     The  Hawks-bill- 
BTtlc  on  this  Coast  of  Brazil  is  most  sought  after  of  an 
399 


ill-      M 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   for  its  Shell ;  which  by  Report  of  those  I  have  conversed 
1699  with  at  Bahia,  is  the  clearest  and  best  clouded  Tortoise- 
shell  in  the  World.     I  had  some  of  it  shewn  me,  wiuch 
was  indeed  as  good  as  I  ever  saw.     They  get  a  pretty  deal 
of  it  in  some  Parts  on  this  Coast ;  but  'tis  very  dear. 

Beside  this  Port  of  Bahia  de  todos  los  Santos,  there 
are  2  more  principal  Ports  on  Brazil,  where  European 
Ships  Trade,  viz.  Pernambuc  and  Ria  Janeira ;  and  I  was 
told  that  there  go  as  many  Ships  to  each  of  these  Places 
as  to  Bahia,  and  2  Men  of  War  to  each  Place  for  thdr 
Convoys.  Of  the  other  Ports  in  this  Country  none  is  of 
greater  Note  than  that  of  St.  Paul's,^  where  they  gather 
much  Gold ;  but  the  Inhabitants  are  said  to  be  a  Sort  of 
Banditti,  or  loose  People  that  live  under  no  Government: 
But  their  Gold  brings  them  all  Sorts  of  Commodities  tbt 
they  need,  as  Clothes,  Arms,  Ammunition,  &c.  The  Town 
is  said  to  be  large  and  strong. 

^  Santos. 


400 


rtd    &.  tktr^in.  dtfftrsjrvm 


.A  CotHOn^^fifJAy    -?*<Jp- 


3itt  A  Zaj^  of  -thu  Strdan  ^a.  Srtf/i-t  'B.id. 


CHAP.    Ill 


I 


A^t  Stay  and  Buanas  at  Bahla :  Of  the  W'tndi  and  Seasant  ef 
ikt  Ytar  there.  His  Dtparlure  for  N.  Halliinil.  C.  Salvadore. 
The  IVinds  sn  the  Braiilian  Coatt ;  and  Abrohio  Shaal ;  Fiih, 
and  Birdi  :  The  Shear-waltr  Bird,  and  Caaking  of  Sharis,  Ex- 
emivf  Sumber  tf  Birdi  ahut  a  dead  ff^haJe  ;  of  the  Pintiida-hird, 
and  the  Petrel,  i^e.  Of  a  Bird  that  ihewi  the  C.  of  G.  Hope  la 
tf  mar  :  Of  the  Sea-reehmngi,  and  f^ariaticns  :  And  a  Table  of 
all  the  Fariatitm  tlnerv'd  in  this  f^eyoge.  Occurrences  near  the 
Cap*  ;  and  the  v/.'i  pasting  by  it.  Of  the  ff^esterly  IVindt  htyand 
it ;  A  Stvrm,  a^  its  Presages.  The  A.'i  Course  to  N.  Holland ; 
amd  Signs  af  appraaehing  it.  Another  Abrohlo  Shole  and  Storm, 
mad  tht  A.'t  Arrival  an  part  of  N.  Holland.  That  part  descried  ; 
a»d  Sharfs  Bay,  where  he  first  anchan.  Of  the  Land  there, 
ytgetahitt.  Birds,  We.  A  partsailar  Sort  of  Guano ;  fish,  and 
ktmatifiil  Shelh  ;  Turtle,  large  Sheri,  and  IVater-Serpents.  The 
A.'t  removing  to  antther  part  of  N.  Holland  :  Dolphins,  If  hales, 
tfW  lasre  Sea»Serptnli  ;  and  of  a  Patsage  or  Sireight  suspected  here  : 
Of  tht  yegelahlety  Birds,  and  Fish.  He  anchors  on  a  third  Part 
^S.  Holland,  and  digs  fVells,  hut  iraciish.  Of  the  Inhabitants 
thfTf,  tht  great  Tides,  the  Vegetables  and  Animals,  He, 

FY  Stay  here  at  Bahia  was  about  a  Month  ;  during 
which  Time  the  Vice-Roy  of  Goa  came  hither  ''"^ 
from  thence  in  a  great  Ship,  said  to  he  richly 
laden  with  all  Sorts  of  India  Goods;  but  she 
,  not  break  Bulk  here,  being  bound  Home  for  Lisbon ; 
by  the  Vicc-Koy  intended  to  refresh  his  Men  (of  whom 
:  hftd  lost  many,  and  most  of  the  rest  were  very  sickly, 
having  been  4  Months  in  their  Voyage  hither)  and  so  to 
take  in  Water,  and  depart  for  Europe,  in  Company  with 
the  other  Portugueze  Ships  thither  hound  ;  who  had  Orders 
'o  be  ready  to  sail  by  the  twentieth  of  May.  He  dcsir'd 
roi^  II.  401  2  c 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  me  to  carry  a  Letter  for  him,  directed  to  his  Successor  the 
1699  new  Vice-Roy  of  Goa ;  which  I  did,  sending  it  thither  after- 
wards by  Captain  Hammond,  whom  I  found  near  the  Cape 
of  Good  Hope.  The  refreshing  my  Men,  and  taking  in 
Water,  was  the  main  also  of  my  Business  here ;  beside  the 
having  the  better  Opportunity  to  compose  the  Disorders 
among  my  Crew ;  Which,  as  I  have  before  related,  were 
grown  to  so  great  a  Heighth,  that  they  could  not  without 
great  Difficulty  be  appeased;  However,  finding  Oppor- 
tunity, during  my  Stay  in  this  Place,  to  allay  in  some 
Measure  the  Ferment  that  had  been  raised  among  my 
Men,  I  now  set  my  self  to  provide  for  the  carrying  on  of 
my  Voyage  with  more  Heart  than  before,  and  put  all 
Hands  to  work,  in  order  to  it,  as  fast  as  the  Backwardness 
of  my  Men  would  permit ;  who  shewed  continually  their 
Unwillingness  to  proceed  farther.  Besides,  their  Heads 
were  generally  filfd  with  strange  Notions  of  Southerly 
Winds  that  were  now  setting  in  (and  there  had  been 
already  some  Flurries  of  them)  which,  as  they  surmis'd, 
would  hinder  any  farther  Attempts  of  going  on  to  the 
Southward,  so  long  as  they  should  last. 

The  Winds  begin  to  shift  here  in  April  and  September, 
and  the  Seasons  of  the  Year  (the  Dry  and  the  Wet)  alter 
:'  with  them.  In  April  the  Southerly  Winds  make  their 
\  Entrance  on  this  Coast,  bringing  in  the  wet  Season,  with 
violent  Tornado's,  Thunder  and  Lightning,  and  much  Rain. 
In  September  the  other  Coasting  Trade,  at  East  North- 
East  comes  in,  and  cleans  the  Sky,  bringing  fair  Weather. 
This,  as  to  the  Change  of  Wind,  is  what  I  have  observ'd, 
Vol.  II.  Part  3.  p.  244,  but  as  to  the  Change  of  Weather 
accompanying  it  so  exactly  here  at  Bahia,  this  is  a  par- 
ticular Exception  to  what  I  have  experienc'd  in  all  other 
Places  of  South  Latitudes  that  I  have  been  in  between  the 
Tropicks,  or  those  I  have  heard  of;  for  there  the  dry 
Season  sets  in,  in  April,  and  the  Wet  about  October  or 
November,  sooner  or  later  (as  I  have  said  that  they  are,  in 
South  Latitudes,  the  Reverse  of  the  Seasons,  or  Weather, 
in  the  same  Months  in  N.  Latitudes,  Vol.  II.  Part  3* 
p.  298)  whereas  on  this  Coast  of  Brazil,  the  wet  Season 

402 


OF  THE  WINDS  AND  SEASONS 
Bes  in  in  April,  at  the  same  Time  that  it  doth  in  N. 
Studcs,  and  the  dry  (as  I  have  said  here)  in  September  ;  ' 
Kiins  here  not  lasting  so  far  in  the  Year  as  in  other 
Ce&;  For  in  September  the  Weather  is  usually  so  fair, 
t  in  the  latter  part  of  that  Month  they  begin  to  cut 
ir  Sugar-Cancs  here,  as  I  was  told  ;  for  I  enquired  par- 
llarty  about  the  Seasons:  Though  this,  as  to  the  Season 
cutting  of  Canes,  which  I  was  now  assur'd  to  be  in 
tember,  agrees  not  very  well  with  what  I  was  formerly 
i  [Vol.  II.  Part  3.  p.  299]  that  in  Brazil  they  cut  the 
les  in  July.  And  so,  as  to  what  is  said  a  little  lower 
the  same  Page,  that  in  managing  their  Canes  they  are 
;  con6n'd  to  the  Seasons,  this  ought  to  have  been  ex- 
as'd  only  of  planting  them ;  for  they  never  cut  them 
;  in  the  dry  Season. 

But  to  return  to  the  Southerly  Winds,  which  came  in 
I  expeacd  they  would)  while  I  was  here  :  These  daunted 
Ship's  Company  very  much,  tho'  I  had  told  them  they 
IC  to  look  for  them :  But  they  being  ignorant  as  to 
It  I  told  them  farther,  that  these  were  only  Coasting- 
nds,  sweeping  the  Shore  to  about  40  or  50  Leagues  in 
idth  from  it,  and  imagining  that  they  had  blown  so  all 
Sea  over,  between  America  and  Africa ;  and  being 
irm'd  in  this  their  Opinion  by  the  Portuguezc  Pilots 
the  European  Ships,  with  whom  several  of  my  Officers 
versed  much,  and  who  were  themselves  as  ignorant  that 
Ic  were  only  Coasting  Trade-Winds  (themselves  going 
Vy  before  them,  in  their  Return  homewards,  till  they 
W  the  I-ine.  and  so  having  no  Kxperience  of  the  Breadth 
them)  being  thus  possess'd  with  a  Conceit  that  we  could 
tail  from  hence  till  September;  this  made  them  still 
more  remiss  in  their  Duties,  and  very  listless  to  the 
^g  Things  in  a  Readiness  for  our  Departure.  How- 
■  J  was  the  more  diligent  my  self  to  have  the  Ship 
ibb'd,  and  to  send  my  Water-Casks  ashore  to  get  them 
un'd.'  my  Beer  being  now  out.  I  went  also  to  the 
lOur  to  get  my  Water  fill'd  ;  for  here  being  hut  one 

Scmped,  Hn«cd,  .ind  biitncd.  10  llul  ihcy  ihniild  nol  iinpart  a  Ivmni; 
ID  tlK  «Wcr  mb*a|oenilf  >tarc<l  in  ih«in. 

403 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

• 

AN.   Watering-place  (and  the  Water  running  low,  now  at  the 
'^  End  of  the  dry  Season)  it  was  always  so  crouded  with  the 
European  Ships  Boats,  who  were  preparing  to  be  gone,  that 
my  Men  could  seldom  come  nigh  it,  till  the  Govemour 
f"    very  kindly  sent  an  Officer  to  clear  the  Water-place  for  my 
Men,  and  to  stay  there  till  my  Water-Casks  were  all  full, 
whom  I  satisfied  for  his  Pains.     Here  I  also  got  aboard 
9  or  lo  Ton  of  Ballast,  and  made  my  Boatswain  fit  the 
Rigging  that  was  amiss :  And  I  enquired  also  of  my  par- 
ticular Officers  whose  Business  it  was,  whether  they  wanted 
any  Stores,  especially  Pitch  and  Tar ;  for  that  here  I  would 
supply  my  self  before  I  proceeded  any  farther;  but  they 
said  they  had  enough,  tho'  it  did  not  afterwards  prove  so. 
I  commonly  went  ashore  every  Day,  either  upon  Business, 
or   to   recreate    my  self  in    the  Fields,   which  were  very 
pleasant,  and  the  more  for  a  Shower  of  Rain  now  and  then, 
that    ushers  in  the  wet  Season.      Several   Sorts  of  good 
Fruits  were  also  still  remaining,  especially  Oranges,  which 
were  in  such  Plenty,  that  I  and  all  my  Company  stock'd 
our  selves  for  our  Voyage  with  them,  and  they  did  us  a 
great  Kindness ;  and  we  took  in  also  a  good  Quantity  of 
Rum  and  Sugar :  But  for  Fowls  they  being  here  lean  and 
dear,  I  was  glad  I  had  stock'd  my  self  at  St.  Jago.    But 
by  the   little  Care    my  officers  took  for  fresh  Provisions, 
one  might   conclude,  they  did  not  think  of  going  much 
farther.     Besides,  I  had  like  to  have  been  imbroiled  with 
the  Clergy  here  (of  the  Inquisition,  as  I  suppose)  and  so 
my  Voyage  might  have  been  hindred.     What  was  said  to 
them  of  me,  by  some  of  my  Company  that  went  ashore,  1 
know  not ;  but  I  was  assured  by  a  Merchant  there,  that  if 
they  got  me  into  their  Clutches  (and  it  seems,  when  I  was 
last  ashore  they  had  narrowly  watched  me)  the  Governor 
himself  could  not  release  me.     Besides  I  might  either  be 
murther'd  in  the  Streets,  as  he  sent  me  Word,  or  poisoned, 
if  I  came  ashore  any  more;  and  therefore  he  advised  me 
to  stay  aboard.     Indeed  I  had   now   no  further  Business 
ashore  but  to  take  leave  of  the  Governor,  and  therefore 
took  his  Advice. 
r  Our  Stay  here  was  till  the  23d  of  April.     I  would  have 

'  404 


AUTHOR'S   DEPARTURE   FROM    BAHIA         | 

gone  before  if  I  could  sooner  have  fitted  my  self;  but  was  ahJ 
now  earnest  to  be  gone,  because  this  Harbour  lies  open  to  "*'^ 
the  S.  and  S.  S.  W.  which  arc  raging  Winds  here,  and  now  j 

was  the  Season  for  them.  We  had  2  or  3  Touches  of  1 
them;  and  one  pretty  severe,  and  the  Ships  ride  there  so  ' 
near  each  other,  that  if  a  Cable  should  fail,  or  an  Anchor 
start,  you  are  instantly  aboard  of  one  Ship  or  other:  And  1 
1  was  more  afraid  of  being  disabled  here  in  Harbour  by  ]| 
thc5c  blustring  Winds,  than  discouraged  by  them,  as  ray  (  I 
People  were,  from  prosecuting  the  Voyage ;  for  at  present  '  I 
I  even  wish'd  for  a  brisk  Southerly  Wind  as  soon  as  I  'J 
should  be  once  well  out  of  the  Harbour,  to  set  me  the  V 
fooncr  into  the  true  General  Trade-Wind.  j 

The  Tide  of  Flood  being  spent,  and  having  a  fine 
Land-Brccze  on  the  J^d,  in  the  Morning,  I  went  away 
from  the  Anchoring  place  before  'twas  light ;  and  then 
lay  by  till  Day-light  that  we  might  see  the  better  how  to 
out  of  the  Harbour.  I  had  a  Pilot  belonging  to  Mr. 
:k,  who  went  out  with  me,  to  whom  I  gave  3  Dollars; 
1  found  I  could  as  well  have  gone  out  my  self,  by  the 
indings  I  made  at  coming  in.  The  Wind  was  E.  by  N. 
fair  Wcaihcr.  By  10  a  Clock  I  was  got  past  all 
and  then  sent  away  my  Pilot.  At  12  Cape  Sal- 
lore  bore  N.  distant  6  Leagues,  and  we  had  the  Winds 
:n  the  K.  by  N.  and  S,  E.  a  considerable  Time,  so 
that  we  kept  along  near  the  Shore,  commonly  in  Sight  of 
it.  The  Southerly  blasts  had  now  left  us  again  ;  for  they 
come  at  first  in  short  Flurries,  and  shift  to  other  Points 
(for  10  or  1 2  Days  sometimes)  before  they  are  quite  set  in  : 
And  we  had  uncertain  Wind*,  between  Sea  and  Land-Breezes, 
the  Coasting-Trade,  which  was  its  self  unsettled. 
I  The  Easterly- Winds  at  present  made  mc  doubt  I 
Id  not  weather  a  great  Shoal  which  lies  in  Lat. 
'cen  18  dec.  and  19  dcg.  S.  and  runs  a  great  Way 
the  Sea,  directly  from  the  Land,  Easterly.  Indeed 
Weather  was  fair  (and  continued  so  a  good  while) 
^that  I  might  the  better  avoid  any  Danger  from  it: 
if  the  Wind  came  to  the  Southward  I  knew  I  could 
;ch  off  to  Sea;  so  that  I  jo^'d  on  couragiousty.  The 
405 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 

AN.    27th  of  April  we  saw  a  small  Brigantine  under  the  Shore 
1699  plying  to   the  Southward.     We  also   saw   many  Men  of 
War-birds  and  Boobies,  and  Abundance  of  Albicore-Fish. 
Having  still  fair  Weather,  small  Gales,  and  some  Calms, 
I   had  the  Opportunity  of  trying    the  Current,  which  1 
found  to  set  sometimes  Northerly  and  sometimes  Southerly: 
And  therefore  knew  I  was  still  within  the  Verge  of  the 
Tides,     Being  now  in   the  Lat.   of  the  Abrohlo  Shoals, 
which  I  expected  to  meet  with,  I  sounded,  and  had  Water 
lessening   from   40  to    33,  and  so  to   25    Fathom:  But 
then   it  rose  again  to    33,  35,   37,  &c.  all  Coral  Rocks. 
Whilst  we  were  on  this  Shoal  (which  we  crossed  towards 
the  further  part  of  it  from  Land,  where  it  lay  deep,  and 
so  was  not  dangerous)  we  caught  a  great  many  Fish  with 
Hook   and    Line :    and   by   evening   Amplitude   we  had 
6  deg.   38  min.  East  Variation.     This  was  the  27th  of 
April ;    we  were  then  in   Lat.    1 8  deg.    1 3   min.  S.  and 
East  Longitude  from    Cape  Salvadore  31    min.     On  the 
29th,  being  then  in  Lat.  18  deg.  39  min.  S.  we  had  small 
Gales  from  the  W.  N.  W.  to  the  W.  S.  W.  often  shifting. 
The  30th  we  had  the  Winds  from  W.  to  S.  S.  E.  Squalls 
and  Rain :    And  we  saw  some  Dolphins  and  other  Fish 
about  us.     We  were  now  out  of  Sight  of  Land,  and  had 
been  so  4  or  5   Days:    But  the  Winds  now   hanging  in 
the  South  was  an  apparent  Sign  that  we  were   still  too 
nigh  the  Shore  to  receive  the  true  General  East-Trade; 
as  the  Easterly  Winds  we  had  before  shewM  that  we  were 
too  far  off  the  Land  to  have  the  Benefit  of  the  Coasting 
South-Trade:    and  the   Faintness   of  both    these    Winds, 
and  their  often  shifting  from  the  S.  S.  W.  to  the  S.  E. 
with  Squalls,  Rain  and  small  Gales,  were  a  Confirmation 
of  our  being  between  the  Verge  of  the  S.  Coasting-Trade, 
and  that  of  the  true  Trade ;  which  is  here,  regularly,  S.  E. 
The  3d  of  May  being  in  Lat.  20  deg.  00  min.  and 
Merid.  distance   West   from  Cape  Salvadore    234    Miles, 
the  Variation  was  7  deg.  00  min.     We  saw  no  Fowl  but 
Shear-waters,^  as  our  Sea-men  call   them,   being  a    small 

^  The  dusky  puffin. 
406 


\RKS   COOKED— A    DEAD   WHALE 
=  Ic  Fowl  th»t  sweep    the  Water  as  they  fly,  and  are 
*<::h  in  the  Seas  that  lie  without  either  of  the  Tropicks :  '^ 
r    ^^   arc    not    eaten.      We  caught    3   small  Sharks,  each        ~ 

■^  oot  4  Inches  long;  and  they  were  very  good  Food  for 

1^-        The  next  Day  we  caught  3  more  Sharks  of  the  same 

B^^,  and  we  eat  ihcm  also,  esteeming  them  as  good  Fish 

B^'^l'd  and  press'd,  and  then  stew'd  with  Vinegar  and  Pepper. 

H         We    had    nothing    of   Remark  from   the   3d  of  May 

^^  the    loth,  only   now   and  then   seeing  a  small  Whale 

spouting  up  the  Water.     We  had  the  Wind  Easterly,  and 

*c  ran  with  it  to  the  Southward,  running  in   this  Time 

from  the  Lat.  of  20  dcg.  00  m.  to  29  deg.  5   min.  S. 

and  having  then  7  d.  3  m.  E.  Long,  from  C.  Salvadore; 

the  Variation  increasing  upon  us,  at  present,  notwithstand- 

ii^  we  went  East.     We  had  all  along  a  great  Difference 

between  the  Morning  and  Evening  Amplitudes;  usually 

I  Degree  or  two,  and    sometimes  more.     We  were   now 

in  the  true  Trade,  and  therefore  made  good  Way  to  the 

Southward,    to   get    without    the    Verge    of    the   General 

Trade-Wind  into   a    Westerly    Wind's    way,    that    might        ^^J 

carry  u«  towards  the  Cape  of  Goud  Hope.     By  the   12th       ^^H 

of  May,  being  tn  Lat.  31  deg.  10  min.  we  began  to  meet       ^^H 

with  Westerly  Winds,  which  freshned  on  us,  and  did  not       ^^H 

leave  as  till  a  little  before  wc  made  the  Cape.     Sometimes  '. 

h  blew  so  hard  that  it  put  us  under  a  Fore-course ;  cspc-  ' 

\     rally  in  the  Night ;  but  In  the  Day-time  we  had  commonly        ^1 

Kour  Main  Top-sail  rifL    Wc  met  with  nothing  of  Moment;       ^^H 

Bonly  we  past   by  a  dead  Whale,  and  saw  Millions  (as  I       ^^H 

■  nuy  «ay)  of  Sca-Fowls  about  the  Carcass  (and  as  far  round       ^^^ 

about  it  as  we  could  see)  some  feeding,  and  the  rest  flying  , 

about,  or  sitting  on  the  Water,  waiting  to  take  their  Turns,  , 

We  first  discovered  the  Whale  by  the  Fowls ;  for  indeed  I 

I  did  never  see  so  many  Fowls  at  once  in  my  Life  before, 

their  Numbers  being  inconceivably  great :  They   were  of  j 

diren  Sorts,  in   Bigness,  Shape  and  Colour.     Some  were  I 

ilinost  as    big   as   Geese,    of  a  grey  Colour,   with    white 

Breasts,  and    with  such   Bills,    Wings,  and  Tails.     Some 

:  Pintado  '-Birds,  as  big  as  Ducks,  and  speckled  black 


'  Dc^i«m  Mfitmiii,  or  Pinudo  petrel. 
407 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 

AN.   and  white.     Some  were  Shear-waters;  some  Petrels •/  and 
*^  there  were  several  Sorts  of  large  Fowls.     We  saw  of  these 
Birds,  especially  the  Rntado-birds,  all  the  Sea  over  from 
about  200  Leagues  distant  from  the  Coast  of  Brazil,  to 
within  much  the  same  Distance  of  New-Holland.    The 
Pintado  is  a  Southern  Bird,  and  of  that  temperate  Zone; 
for   I   never   saw   of  them  much  to  the    Northward  of 
30  deg.  S.     The  Pintado-bird  is  as  big  as  a  Duck;  bat 
appears,  as  it  flies,  about  the  Bigness  of  a  tame  Fidgeoo, 
having  a  short  Tail,  but  the  Wings  very  long,  as  most 
Sea-Fowls  have ;  especially  such  as  these  that  fly  far  from 
the  Shore,  and  seldom  come  nigh  it;   for  their  Resting 
is  sitting  afloat  upon  the  Water;  but  they  lay,  I  suppose, 
ashore.     There  are  three  Sorts  of  these  Birds,  all  of  the 
same  Make  and  Bigness,  and  are  only  different  in  Colour. 
The  first  is  black  all  over:    The  second  Sort   are  grey, 
with  white  Bellies  and  Breasts.      The  third  Sort,  which 
is  the  true  Pintado,  or  Painted-bird,  is  curiously  spotted 
white  and  black.     Their  Heads,  and   the  Tips  of  thdr 
Wings  and  Tails,  are  black  for  about  an  Inch ;  and  thdr 
Wings  are  also  edg*d  quite  round  with  such  a  small  black 
List ;  only  within  the  black  on  the  Tip  of  their  Wings 
there  is  a  white  Spot  seeming  as  they  fly  (for  then  thdr 
Spots  are  best   seen)  as   big  as  a  Half-crown.     All  tlus 
is  on  the  Outside  of  the  Tails  and  Wings ;  and  as  there 
is  a  white  Spot  in  the  black  Tip  of  the  Wings,  so  there 
is  in  the  Middle  of  the  Wings  which  is  white,  a  black 
Spot ;    but   this,    towards   the   Back   of  the   Bird,   turns 
gradually  to  a  dark  grey.      The  Back  it  self,  from  the 
Head  to  the  Tip  of  the  Tail,  and  the  Edge  of  the  Wings 
next  to  the  Back,  are   all  over-spotted  with   fine  small, 
round,  white  and  black  Spots,  as  big  as  a  Silver  Two- pence, 
and  as  close  as  they  can  stick  one  by  another :  The  Belly, 
Thighs,  Sides,  and  inner-part  of  the  Wings,  are  of  a  light 
grey.     These  Birds,  of  all  these  Sorts,  fly  many  together, 
never  high,  but  almost   sweeping    the  Water.     We  shot 
one  a  while  after  on  the  Water  in  a  Calm,  and  a  Water- 

^  Procellaria  pelagica, 
408 


THE    PETREL— VARIATION 

:l  we  had   with   us  brought  it   in :  I   have  given    a    an. 

of  it  [Sec  Birds,  Fig.   i]  but  it  was  so  damaged,  "^ 

i,thc  Picture  doth  not  shew  it  to  Advantage  ;  and  its 

tre  best  seen  when  the  Feathers  are  spread  as  it  flies. 

'he   Petrel  is  a  Bird  not  much   unlike  a  Swallow,  but 

er,  and  with  a  shorter   Tail.     'Tis  all    over    black, 

a  white  Spot  on  the  Kump.     They  fly  sweeping  like 

ws,  and  very  near  the  Water.    They  are  not  so  often 

I  fair   Weather;    being  Foul-weather  Birds,  as  our 

I  call  them,  and  presaging  a  Storm  when  they  come 

a  Ship;  who  for  that  Reason  don't  love  to  see  them. 

:orm  they  will  hover  close  under  the  Ship's  Stern,  in 

ITake  of  the  Ship  (as  'tis  call'd)  or  the  Smoothness 

the  Ship's  passing  has  made  on  the  Sea :  And  there 

By  fly   (gently  then)   they   pat  the  Water  alternately 

their  Feet,  as  if  they  walk'd  upon  it ;  tho'  still  upon 

Wing.      And  from  hence  the  Seamen  give  them  the 

K  of  Petrels,  in  Allusion  to  St.  Peter's  walking  upon 

|jdce  of  Genncsareth. 

iKTe  also  saw  many  Bunches  of  Sea-weeds  in  the  Lat.  of 
S2.  and  by  Judgment,  near  the  Meridian  of  the  Island 
Un  d'  Aeon  ha :  And  then  we  had  about  z  d.  20  min. 
Vuialion :  which  was  now  again  decreasing  as  we  ran 
I  Eastward,  till  near  the  Meridian  of  Ascention;  where 
nnd  little  or  no  Variation  :  Bui  from  thence,  as  we 
ttber  to  the  East,  our  Variation  increased  Westerly. 
iro  Days  before  I  made  the  Cape  of  G.  Hope,  my 
tion  was  7  dcg.  58  min.  West.  I  was  then  in  43 
17  min.  East  Longit,    from   C.    Salvador,  being  in 

E5  dcg-  30  min.  this  was  the  first  of  June.  The 
of  June  I  saw  a  large  black  Fowl,  with  a  whitish 
RJI,  fly  by  us ;  and  took  great  Notice  of  it,  because  in 
Sast-Ind'ta  Waggoner,  or  Pilot-book,  there  is  mention 
r  of  large  Fowls,  as  Wg  as  Ravens,  with  white  flat 
land  black  Feathers,  that  fly  not  above  30  Leagues 
the  Cape,  and  are  look'd  on  as  a  Sign '  of  ones  being 

)C  thm  Vojrijge  at  Thonuu  Steven*  to  Gtxt  (the  Hnktuifl  of  ijSq); 
MduBf  oar  Gni  »iga%,  the  n  '      ' 


*  it  fowb  Bpp«iiiic<1.  . 
♦09 


.  Some  (tbey  call)  fiifvtt 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  near  it.  My  Reckoning  made  me  then  think  my  self 
'^  above  90  Leagues  from  the  Gipe,  according  to  the  Longi- 
tude which  the  Cape  hath  in  the  common  Sea-Charts:  So 
that  I  was  in  some  doubt,  whether  these  were  the  rig^ 
Fowls  spoken  of  in  the  Waggoner ;  or  whether  those  Fowl 
might  not  fly  farther  off  Shore  than  is  there  mendooed; 
or  whether,  as  it  prov*d,  I  might  not  be  nearer  the  Ofe 
than  I  reckoned  my  self  to  be ;  for  I  found,  soon  ffto^ 
that  I  was  not  then  above  25  or  30  Leagues  at  most  fm 
the  Cape.  Whether  the  Fault  were  in  the  Charts  b!pt% 
down  the  Cape  too  much  to  the  East  from  Bruil|  or 
were  rather  in  our  Reckoning,  I  could  not  tell :  But  of 
Reckonings  are  liable  to  such  Uncertainties  from  Steeng^ 
Log,  Currents,  Half-Minute-Glasses ;  and  sometimes  vnt 
of  Care,  as  in  so  long  a  Run  cause  often  a  Difference  cf 
many  Leagues  in  the  whole  Account. 

Most  of  my  Men  that  kept  Journals  imputed  it  to  dx 
Half-Minute  Glasses :  and  indeed  we  had  not  a  good 
Glass  in  the  Ship  beside  the  Half-watch  or  Two-Hou^ 
Glasses.  As  for  our  Half-Minute- Glasses  ^  we  tried  thea 
all  at  several  Times,  and  we  found  those  that  we  had  used 
from  Brazil  as  much  too  short,  as  others  we  had  used 
before  were  too  long :  which  might  well  make  great  Errort 
in  those  several  Reckonings.  A  Ship  ought  therefore  to 
have  its  Glasses  very  exact ;  and  besides,  an  extracxtliniry 
Care  ought  to  be  used  in  heaving  the  Log,  for  fear  rf 
giving  too  much  Stray-Line  ^  in  a  moderate  Gale ;  and  ibo 
to  stop  ^  quickly  in  a  brisk  Gale,  for  when  a  Ship  runs  8, 
9  or  10  Knots,  half  a  Knot  or  a  Knot  is  soon  run  out,  and 
not  heeded :  But  to  prevent  Danger,  when  a  Man  thinb 
himself  near  Land,  the  best  way  is  to  look  out  betimes,  and 
lye  by  in  the  Night,  for  a  Commander  may  err  cafllf 

Sleez'cs^  because  they  have  wings  of  the  colour  of  velvet,  and  boweth  the© 
as  a  man  boweth  his  elbow.  This  bird  is  always  welcome  for  he  appeal*^ 
nearest  the  Cape."  The  **  Waggoner,  or  Pilot-Book,"  is  vol.  iil  of  **'n* 
English  Pilot." 

*  The  glasses  used  at  the  heaving  of  the  log. 

•  A  few  yards  of  log-line  allowed  at  each  heaving  of  the  log  to  cnabk 
the  log-ship  to  float  clear  of  the  **  dead  water"  under  the  vessel's  counter. 

'  To  check  the  running  of  the  log-line  at  the  instant  the  sand  ka*cs 
the  half-minute  glass. 

410 


MFFICULTIES  IN  TAKING   VARIATION 

isclf ;  beside  the  Errors  of  those  under  him,  tho'  never   am. 
carefully  eyed.  '^ 

Another  Thing  that  stumbled  me  here  was  the  Varia- 
t,  which,  at  this  Time,  by  the  last  Amplitude  i  had  I 
pnd  to  be  but  7  Ucg.  58  min.  W.  whereas  the  Variation 
the  Cape  {from  which  1  found  my  self  not  30  Leagues 
ant)  was  then  computed,  and  truly,  about  1 1  deg.  or 
PC :  And  yet  a  while  after  this,  when  I  was  got  10 
^uc3  to  the  Eastward  of  the  Cape,  I  found  the  Variation 
10  dcg.  40  min.  W,  whereas  it  should  have  been  rather 
re  than  at  the  Cape.  These  Things,  1  confess,  did 
tik  mc  :  Neither  was  I  fully  satisfied  as  to  the  Exactness 
the  taking  the  Variation  at  Sea  :  For  in  a  great  Sea, 
ich  we  often  meet  with,  the  Compass  will  traverse  with 
B  Motion  of  the  Ship;  besides  the  Ship  may  and  will 
viate  somewhat  in  steering,  even  by  the  best  Helmsmen : 
id  then  when  you  come  to  take  an  Azimuth,  there  is 
:n  some  Difference  between  him  that  looks  at  the 
npass,  and  the  Man  that  takes  the  Altitude  heighth  uf 
Sun;  and  a  small  Error  in  each,  if  the  Error  of  both 
Ould  be  one  way,  will  make  it  wide  of  any  great  Exact- 
But  what  was  most  shocking  to  me,  I  found  that 
Variation  did  not  always  increase  or  decrease  in  I'ro- 
■tion  10  the  Degrees  of  Longitude  East  or  West ;  as  I 
*  a  Notion  ihcy  might  do  to  a  certain  Number  of  Degrees 
Variation  East  or  West,  at  such  or  such  particular 
ridians.  But  finding  in  this  Voyage  that  the  Difference 
Variation  did  not  bear  a  regular  Proportion  10  the 
tcc  of  Longitude,  1  was  much  pleas'cl  to  see  it  thus 
rv'd  in  a  Scheme  shewn  mc  after  my  Return  home, 
ncin  are  represented  the  several  Variations  in  the 
Jitick  Sea,  on  both  Sides  the  Equator ;  and  there,  the 
:  o(  no  Variation  in  that  Sea  is  not  a  Meridian  Une, 
goc»  very  oblique,  as  da  those  also  which  shew  the 
ease  of  Variation  on  each  Side  of  it.  In  that  Draught 
B  is  «o  large  an  Advance  made  as  well  towards  the 
counting  for  those  seemingly  irregular  Increases  and 
Kreascs  of  Variation  towards  the  S.  K.  Coast  of  America, 
towards  the  fixing  a  general  Scheme  or  System  of  the 
4'l 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AM.  Variation  every  where,  which  woald  be  of  sach  great  Use 
'^  in  Navigation^  that  I  cannot  but  hope  that  the  ingenious 
Authw,  Capt.  Haliy,^  who  to  his  prc^oand  Skill  in  aO 
Theories  of  these  kinds,  hath  added  and  is  adding  cod- 
tinually  Personal  Elxpenments,  will  e*er  long  oblige  the 
World  with  a  fuller  Discovery  of  the  Course  of  the 
Variation,  which  hath  hitherto  been  a  Secret.  For  fflf 
Part  I  profess  my  self  unqualified  for  offering  at  anf 
thing  of  a  General  Scheme ;  but  since  Matter  of  Fact, 
and  whatever  increases  the  History  of  the  Variation,  mj 
be  of  use  towards  the  settling  or  confirming  the  Theory  of 
it,  I  shall  here  once  for  all  insert  a  Table  of  all  the 
Variations  I  observed  beyond  the  Equator  in  this  Voyage, 
both  in  going  out,  and  returning  back ;  and  what  Enois 
there  may -be  in  it,  I  shall  leave  to  be  corrected  by  the 
Observations  of  others. 


A  Table  of  Variations 


D.  M. 

S.  Lat. 


D.  M. 
Longit. 


6 

12 

14 
18 

'9 

19 

20 

22 
24 

26 

28 


'5 
45 
49 

^3 

00 

22 
I 

47 
23 
44 
47 
9 


I 
12 

00 
00 

2 

3 
3 
3 
3 
3 

4 

5 


47  fl 

9 
10  b 

3> 

20 

51 
40 

48 

53 

53 

35 

50 


D.  M. 
Variat. 


3 

3 

7 
6 

6 


27  E 

27 
o 

38 
30 


8     15 

7       o 


9 
7 


40 
36 


10     15 

7     »4 
9     45 


a  W.  from  St.  Jagb. 

h  £.  from  C.  Salvador  in  BraziL 


'  His  theory  of  the  variation  of  the  compass  was  based  on  the  supposition 
that  there  existed  four  magnetic  poles,  two  of  which  were  movable. 

412 


A  TABLE   OF   VARIATIONS 


1 

1 

1699. 

1 

D.  M. 
S.  Lat. 

D.  M. 
Longit. 

D.  M. 

Variat. 

AN. 

1699 

May. 

10 

29   s 

7   3 

II  41  H 

II 

29  23 

7  38 

12  47 

17 

34  S» 

i8  43 

5  40 

18 

34  54 

19  06 

6  19 

«9 

35  48 

'9  45 

5   6 

*3 

39  4* 

27   I 

»  5$ 

*S 

39  »« 

3«  35 

2   0 

June. 

I  ■ 

35  30  1 

43  *7 

7  58W 

s  . 

35   8 

00  23  r 

ID   40 

6  1 

36   7 

3   6 

II   10 

8  i 

f 

36  17 

10   3 

15  CO 

9  : 

35  59 

12   0 

«9  38 

12 

35  *o 

20  18 

21  35 

14 

35   5 

26  13 

23  so 

»5 

34  5» 

*?  *1 

25  56 

>7 

34  *7 

36   8 

*4  54 

1            '9 

34  «7 

39  *4 

25  29 

t            zo 

t 

34  «5 

42  25 

24  22 

1                22 

33  34 

45  41 

22   15 

*5 

35   « 

45  28 

24   30 

;             '  *8 

36  40 

49  33 

22   50 

1            *9 

36  40  ' 

53  12 

22   44 

=      ..5° 

36  15 

56  22 

21   40 

Jmfy.              I 

35  35 

5«   44 

«9  45 

4 

33  32 

66  22 

16  40 

6 

3«  30 

68  34 

12  20 

7 

3«  4S 

69  00 

12   2 

10  ; 

32  39 

70  21 

13  36 

II 

33   4 

72  00 

12  29 

'3  , 

21  17 

74  43 

10   0 

'5  i 

29  20 

75  25 

10  28 

18 

28  16 

78  29 

9  5« 

23  : 

26  43 

84  19 

9  '« 

24 

26  28 

85  20 

8   9 

25 

26  14 

85  52 

8  40 

.  26 

25  3^ 

86  21 

8   20 

27 

26  43 

86  16 

7   0 

!            '   29 

27  3« 

87  25 

8   20 

3> 

26  54 

88    1 

9   0 

^-'^-     5 

25  30 

*  E.  from  C. 

86   3 
0.  Hope. 

7   24 

413 

CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 


A  ^T 

1699. 

D.  M. 

D.  M. 

D.  M.     ' 

AN. 
1699 

S.  Lat. 

Longit 

Variat 

Aug. 

«5 

24     41 

86       2d 

6      6W 

17 

23       2 

00     22 

7       6     ' 

20 

19     37 

3     00 

7    00 

24 

19     52 

4     41 

7      7 

25 

>9    45 

5     'o 

6    40 

27 

19     24 

6     II 

5     «8 

28 

18     38 

6     57 

6     12 

Sept. 

6 

17     16 

9     18 

4       3 

7 

16      9 

8     57 

2       7      ' 

8 

15     37 

9     34 

2     20      1 

10 

13     55 

10     55 

I     47      ' 

II 

13     12 

II     42 

I     47 

Dec. 

29 

5       « 

6     3^  ' 

I       2  E 

1 700.     Jan. 

3 

I     32 

6     53 

4       8 

Feb. 

13 

0      9 

2     48/ 

4       0 

16 

0     12 

7     3< 

6    26 

21 

0     12 

15     23 

8     45 

23 

0    43 

18     00 

8    45 

27 

*     43 

19     41 

9     50     ' 

Mar. 

10 

5     10 

00      5^ 

I       0 

13 

5     35 

00    44  i& 

9      0 

30 

5     15 

6      4 

8     25W 

Apr. 

6 

3     32 

8     25 

7     16 

22 

I     32 

00     37  i 

3    00    ; 

May. 

I 

3    00 

i 

2     15  E 

24 

9     59 

cx)     25  / 

0           I5W 

27 

H    33 

3     30 

I           25 

June, 

2 

19     44 

8       7 

5    38     1 

3 

19     51 

9     58 

6     10 

4 

19     46 

II       6 

6     20 

5 

20    00 

12     22 

4     58 

6 

20    00 

14     17 

7     20 

9 

19     59 

16     01 

6     32 

II 

9     57 

17     42 

8       I 

12 

19     48 

19       0 

6      0 

( 

Nov. 

7 

21     26 

m 

9      0 

14 

27       1 

35     35 

16     50 

1 
1 

15 

27     10 

36     34 

18     57 

1 

16 

27     11 

37     54 

17     24 

1 

1 

19 

28     14 

41     40 

19     39 

d  £.  from  Sharks-Bay  in  N.  Holland.  e  £.  from  Babao-Bay  in  J.  Timor. 

f  E.  from  C.  Mabu  in  N.  Guinea. 

g  E.  from  C.  St.  George  on  I.  N.  Brittannia.  A  W.  from  ditto. 

i  W.  from  C.  Mabu.  i  At  Anchor  off  I.  Cerain. 

/  W.  from  Babao-Bay.  m  W.  from  Princes  Iile  bj  Ja?a-Head. 

414 


A  TABLE   OF   VARIATIONS 


V  flW^V^^ 

D.  M. 

D.  M. 

D.  M. 

1700. 

S.  Lat. 

Longit. 

Variat. 

Nov. 

21 

29  24 

44  47 

20  50  W 

*3 

29  42 

47   34 

21   38 

24 

30  16 

49  26 

26  00 

*s 

30  40 

51  24 

22  38 

27 

3'  SI 

55   5 

22  40 

29 

32  55 

56  28 

27   ID 

30 

31  55 

57  *5 

27   ID 

Dec, 

I 

31  57 

58  17 

24   30 

2 

31  57 

59  33 

27  57 

4 

3*   3 

61  45 

24   50 

6 

3*  15 

66  00 

23   30 

7 

37  2« 

68  36 

24  48 

8 

33  49 

64  38 

21  53 

9 

32  49 

70  09 

24  00 

II 

32  50 

71  45 

21  15 

13 

31  55 

72  32 

20  16 

14 

3«  35 

73  39 

20  00 

'5 

32  21 

75  ^2 

20  00 

17 

33   5 

79  39 

18  42 

18 

33   0 

80  39 

17  15 

21 

34  39 

82  46 

16  41 

22 

34  36 

83  19 

14  36 

23 

34  *i 

«3  42 

14  00 

*5 

34  3» 

84  21 

14  00 

D I .  Jam. 

15 

3>  ^5 

2  32  « 

10  20 

16 

30   5 

4   42 

9  36 

»7 

28  46 

6   8 

8  25 

18 

27  26 

7  32 

7  40 

19 

26  II 

9   9 

7  30 

20 

25  00 

10  49 

7   9 

21 

23  42 

12  34 

6  55 

22 

22  51 

14  10 

5  5^> 

*3 

2!   48 

15   17 

5  ^l 

24 

21   24 

IS  SI 

4   S^    , 

26 

>9  S7 

16  48 

4   20   i 

27 

19  10 

17  22 

3  24   1 

28 

18  13 

18  23 

4  00   1 

29 

17  22 

19  29 

2  00 

Feb, 

16 

12  52 

3   80 

I   50 

i 

17 

««  55 

4   42 

I   10 

18 

II  17 

s   30 

0  20 

>9 

10  22 

6  32 

I  10 

( 

21 

\Vc  made  t 

he  I.  Ascemi 

on. 

on  the  Table 

Land  at 

C.  G.  Hope. 

•  W.  f 

rom  Santa  Helen 

AN. 

1699 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  But    to    return    from   this    Digression :    Having  fair 

1699  Weather,  and  the  Winds  hanging  Southerly,  I  jog'd  on 
to  the  Eastward,  to  make  the  Czpc.  On  the  third  of 
June  we  saw  a  Sail  to  Leeward  of  us,  shewing  English 
Colours.  I  bore  away  to  speak  with  her,  and  found  her 
to  be  the  Antelope  of  London,  commanded  by  Captan 
Hammond,  and  bound  for  the  Bay  of  Bengal  in  the  Service 
of  the  New-East-India  Company.  There  were  many 
Passengers  aboard,  going  to  settle  there  under  Sir  Edward 
Littleton,  who  was  going  Chief  thither:  I  went  aboard, 
and  was  known  by  Sir  Edward  and  Mr.  Hedges,  and 
kindly  received  and  treated  by  them  and  the  Commander; 
who  had  been  afraid  of  us  before,  tho*  I  had  sent  one  of 
my  Officers  aboard.  They  had  been  in  at  the  Cape,  and 
came  from  thence  the  Day  before,  having  stocked  them- 
selves with  Refreshments.  They  told  me  that  they  were 
by  Reckoning,  60  Miles  to  the  West  of  the  Cape.  While 
I  was  aboard  them,  a  fine  small  Westerly  Wind  sprang  up ; 
therefore  I  shortned  my  stay  with  them,  because  I  did 
not  design  to  go  into  the  Cape.  When  I  took  leave  I 
was  presented  with  half  a  Mutton,  12  Cabbages,  12 
Pumkins,  6  Pound  of  Butter,  6  Couple  of  Stock-fish, 
and  a  quantity  of  Parsnips ;  sending  them  some  Oatmeal, 
which  they  wanted. 

From  my  first  setting  out  from  England,  I  did  not 
design  to  touch  at  the  Cape  ;  and  that  was  one  Reason 
why  I  touch'd  at  Brazil,  that  there  I  might  refresh  my 
Men,  and  prepare  them  for  a  long  Run  to  New  Holland. 
We  had  not  yet  seen  the  Land ;  but  about  2  in  the  After- 
noon we  saw  the  Cape-Land  bearing  East,  at  above  16 
Leagues  distance;  And  Captain  Hammond  being  also 
bound  to  double  the  Cape,  we  jog*d  on  together  this 
Afternoon  and  the  next  Day,  and  had  several  fair  Sights 
of  it ;  which  may  be  seen  [Table  IIL  omitted]. 

To  proceed :  Having  still  a  Westerly  Wind,  I  jog'd 
on  in  company  with  the  Antelope^  till  Sunday  June  the  4th 
at  4  in  the  Afternoon,  when  we  parted  ;  they  steering 
away  for  the  East-Indies,  and  I  keeping  an  E.  S.  E.  Course, 
the  better  to  make  my  way  for  New  Holland :  For  tho' 

416 


■                  COLOURED   CLOUDS  I 

Hew  Holliind  lies  North-Easterly  from  the  Cape,  yet  all    an.  J 
%ip6  bound  towards  that  Coast,  or  the  Streights  of  Sundy,  '^1 

cxight  to  keep  for  a  while  in  the  same  Parallel,  or  in  a  I 

L«c.  between  35  and  40,  at  least  a  tittle  to  the  S.  of  the  I 

Ernst,   that  they  may  continue  in  a  variable  Winds  way;  I 

uid  not  venture  too  soon  to  stand  so  far  to  the  North,  as  I 

to  be  within    the   Verge  of  the  Trade-Wind,  which  will  I 

put  them  by  their  Easterly  Course.     The  Wind  increased  I 

npon  us;  but  we  had  yet  sight  of  the  Antelope,  and  of  the  I 

Land  too,  till  Tuesday  the  6th  of  June  :  And   then  we  I 

Mw  also  by  us  an  innumerable  Company  of  Fowls  of  divers  I 

fOrts ;  so  that  we  look'd   about  to  see  if  there  were  not  I 

teothcr  dead  Whale,  but  saw  none.  I 

^B  The  Night  before,  the  Sun  set  in  a  black  Cloud,  which  I 

^Beared  just    like  Land  ;  and   the   Clouds  above   it    were  I 

HBed  of  a  dark  red  Colour.     And  on  the  Tuesday,  as  the  I 

Son  drew  near  the  Horizon,  the  Clouds  were  gilded  very  I 

ettiJy  to  the  Eye,  tho'  at  the  same  time  my  Mind  dreaded  I 

K  Consequences  of  it.     When  the  Sun  was  now  not  above  I 

g.  high,  it  entered  Into  a  dark  Smoaky-coloured  Cloud  I 

lay  parallel  with  the  Horizon,  from  whence  presently  I 

li'd  to    issue  many  dusky  blackish  Beams.     The  Sky  I 

t  at  this  time  covered   with  small   hard   Clouds  (as  we  I 

I  such  M  lye  scattering  about,  not  likely  to  Rain)  very  -I 

dc  one  by  another ;  and  such  of  them  as  lay  next  to  I 

E  Bank  of  Clouds  at  the  Horizon,  were  of  a  pure  Gold  I 

Colour  to  3  or  4  deg.  high  above  the  Bank :  P'rom  these  1 

toibout  10  deg.  high  they  were  redder,  and  very  bright ;  I 

ibove  them  they  were  of  a  darker  Colour  still,  to  about  I 

60  or  70  deg.  high  ;  where  the  Clouds  began  to  be  of  their  I 

HMumon  Colour.     1  took  the  more  particular  Notice  of  all  I 

tliH,  because  I  have  generally  observed  such  colour'd  Clouds  I 

i;o  appear  before  an  approaching  Storm :  And  this  being  I 

tier  here,  and  the  time  for  bad  Weather,   I  expected  I 

provided  for  a  violent  blast  of  Wind,  by  riffing  our  I 

Kuls,  and  giving  a  strict  charge  to  my  Officers  to  hand  I 

I  or  take  them  in,  if  the  Wind  should  grow  stronger.  I 

the  Wind  was  now  at   W.   N.    W.    a    very  brisk    Gale.  I 

Uboui  12  a  Clock  at  N'ight  we  had  a  pale  whitish  Glare  \ 


fOL.  II. 


417 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 

AN.  in  the  N.  W.  which  was  another  Sign,  and  intimated  the 
'^  Storm  to  be  near  at  hand  ;  and  the  Wind  increasing  upon 
it,  we  presently  handed  our  Top-sails,  furled  the  Main- 
sail, and  went  away  only  with  our  Fore-sail.  Before  2  in 
the  Morning  it  came  on  very  fierce,  and  we  kept  r^ht 
before  Wind  and  Sea,  the  Wind  still  encreasing :  But  the 
Ship  was  very  governable,  and  steered  incomparably  wclL 
At  8  in  the  Morning  we  settled  our  Fore-yard,  lowering 
it  4  or  5  Foot,  and  we  ran  very  swiftly ;  especially  when 
the  Squalls  of  Rain  or  Hail,  from  a  black  Cloud,  came  over 
Head,  for  then  it  blew  excessive  hard.  These,  tho*  thcf 
did  not  last  long,  yet  came  very  thick  and  fast  one  aftff 
another.  The  Sea  also  ran  very  high ;  But  we  rutuiing « 
violently  before  Wind  and  Sea,  we  ship*d  little  or  no  Water; 
tho'  a  little  wash*d  into  our  upper  Deck-Ports ;  and  with 
it  a  Scuttle  or  Cuttle-Fish  was  cast  upon  the  Carriige 
of  a  Gun. 

The   Wind   blew   extraordinary  hard    all  Wcdncsdiy, 
the  yth  of  June,  but  abated  of  its  fierceness  before  Night; 
Yet  it  continued  a  brisk  Gale  till  about  the  1 6th,  and  stiB 
a  moderate   one   till   the    19th  Day;  by   which  time  ire 
had  run  about  600  Leagues :  For  the  most  part  of  which 
time  the  Wind  was  in  some  point  of  the  West,  viz.  from 
the  W.  N.  W.  to  the  S.  by  W.     It  blew  hardest  when  at 
W.  or  between  the  W.  and  S.  W.  but  after  it  veered  moff 
Southerly  the  foul  Weather  broke  up :  This  I  observed  at 
other  times  also  in  these  Seas,  that  when  the  StcMins  at 
West  veered  to  the  Southward  they  grew  less ;  and  that 
when  the  Wind  came  to  the  E.  of  the  S.   we  had  sdll 
smaller   Gales,    Calms,   and    fair    Weather.      As  for  the 
Westerly  Winds  on  that  side  the  Gipe,  we  like  them  never 
the  worse  for  being  violent,  for  they  drive  us  the  faster  to 
the  Eastward  ;  and  are  therefore  the  only  Winds  coveted 
by  those  who  Sail  towards  such  parts  of  the  East-Indies, 
as  lye  South  of  the  Equator ;  as  Timor,  Java,  and  Sumatra; 
and  by  the  Ships  bound  for  China,  or  any  other  that  arc  to 
pass  through  the  Streights  of  Sundy.     Those  Ships  having 
once  past  the  Cape,  keep  commonly  pretty  far  Southerly, 
on  purpose  to  meet  with  these  West-winds,  which  in  the 

418 


WINDS   AND   COURSE 

S^intcr  Season  of  these  Climates  they  soon  meet  with  ;  for   Air 
ien  the  Winds  arc  generally  Westerly  at  the  Cape,  and  '*99 

B>ccially  to  the  Southward  of  It  :  But  in  their  Summer 
onths  they  get  to  the  Southward  of  40  deg.  usually  e'er 
bey  meet  with  the  Westerly  Winds.  1  was  not  at  this 
imc  in  a  higher  Lat.  than  36  deg.  40  min.  and  oftentimes 
ISS  more  Northerly,  altering  my  Latitude  often  as  Winds 
nd  Weather  required ;  for  in  such  long  Runs  'tis  best  to 
^pc  one's  Course  according  to  the  Winds.  And  if  in 
Beerij^  10  the  East,  we  should  be  obliged  to  bear  a  little 
9  the  N.  or  S.  of  it,  'tis  no  great  Matter ;  for  'tis  but 
kilii^^  2  or  3  Points  from  the  Wind,  when  'tis  either 
lortherly  or  Southerly  ;  and  this  not  only  easeth  the  Ship 
rom  straining,  but  shortens  the  way  more  than  if  a  Ship 
rM  kept  close  on  a  Wind,  as  some  Men  are  fond  of  doing. 
I  The  19th  of  June,  we  were  in  Lat.  34  deg.  17  min.  S. 
nd  Long,  from  the  Cape  39  deg.  24  min.  IL.  and  had 
mall  Gales  and  Calms.  The  Winds  were  at  N.  K.  by  E. 
nd  continued  in  some  Part  of  the  t^.  till  the  27th  Day. 
Vhen  it  having  been  some  time  at  N.  N.  E.  it  came 
bout  at  N.  and  then  to  the  W.  of  the  N.  and  continued 
B  the  West-board  (between  the  N.  N.  W.  and  S.  S.  W.) 
ill  the  4th  of  July;  in  which  Time  wc  ran  782  Miles; 
ben  the  Winds  came  about  again  to  the  East,  we  reckoning 
Kir  selves  to  be  in  a  Meridian  1  lOO  L.  East  of  the  Cape ; 
nd  having  fair  Weather,  sounded,  but  had  no  Ground. 

Wc  met  with  little  of  Remark  in  this  Voyage,  besides 
icing  accompanied  with  Fowls  all  the  way,  es[x:cially 
Kniado-Birds,  and  seeing  now  and  then  a  Whale :  But  as 
re  drew  nighcr  the  Coast  of  New-Holland,  we  saw  fre- 
uently  3  or  4  Whales  together.  When  we  were  about  90 
.agues  from  the  Land  we  began  to  see  Sea-weeds,  all  of 
DC  Sort ;  and  as  wc  drew  nighcr  the  Shore  we  saw  them 
Korc  frequently-  At  about  30  Leagues  distance  we  began 
D  sec  some  Scutttc-boncs '  floating  on  the  Water  ;  and  draw- 
■g  still  nighcr  the  Land  we  saw  greater  Quantities  of  them. 
July  25,  being  in  Lat.  26  d^.  14  min.  S.  and  Longi- 
citnle-bnne,"  the  daru]  piece  of  the  coimnoD 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  tude  E.  from  the  C.  of  Good  Hope  85  deg.  52  min.  wc 
'^  saw  a  large  Gar-fish  leap  4  Times  by  us,  which  seemed  to 
be  as  big  as  a  Porpose.  It  was  now  very  fair  Weather,  and 
the  Sea  was  full  of  a  Sort  of  very  small  Grass  or  Moss, 
which  as  it  floated  in  the  Water  seemM  to  have  been  some 
Spawn  of  Fish ;  and  there  was  among  it  some  small  Fry. 
The  next  Day  the  Sea  was  full  of  small  round  Things  like 
Pearl,^  some  as  big  as  white  Peas ;  they  were  very  clear  and 
transparent,  and  upon  crushing  any  of  them  a  Drop  of 
Water  would  come  forth :  The  Skin  that  contained  the 
Water  was  so  thin  that  it  was  but  just  discemable.  Some 
Weeds  swam  by  us,  so  that  we  did  not  doubt  but  we  should 
quickly  see  Land.  On  the  27th  also,  some  Weeds  swim 
by  us,  and  the  Birds  that  had  flown  along  with  us  all  the 
way  almost  from  Brazil,  now  left  us,  except  only  2  or  3 
Shear-waters.  On  the  28th  we  saw  many  Weeds  swim  by 
us,  and  some  Whales,  blowing.  On  the  29th  we  had  dark 
cloudy  Weather,  with  much  Thunder,  Lightning,  and 
violent  Rains  in  the  Morning ;  but  in  the  Evening  it  grew 
fair.  We  saw  this  Day  a  Scuttle-bone  swim  by  us,  and 
some  of  our  young  Men  a  Seal,  as  it  should  seem  by  their 
Description  of  its  Head.  I  saw  also  some  Boneta's,  and 
some  Skipjacks,  a  Fish  about  8  Inches  long,  broad  and 
sizeable,  not  much  unlike  a  Roach ;  which  our  Seamen  caD 
so  from  their  leaping  about. 

The  30th  of  July,  being  still  nearer  the  Land,  we  saw 
Abundance  of  Scuttle-bones  and  Sea-weed,  more  Tokens 
that  we  were  not  far  from  it ;  and  saw  also  a  Sort  of  Fowls, 
the  like  of  which  we  had  not  seen  in  the  whole  Voyage,  all 
the  other  Fowls  having  now  left  us.  These  were  as  big  as 
Lapwings ;  of  a  grey  Colour,  black  about  their  Eyes,  with 
red  sharp  Bills,  long  Wings,  their  Tails  long  and  forked 
like  Swallows ;  and  they  flew  flapping  their  Wings  like 
Lapwings.  In  the  Afternoon  we  met  with  a  Ripling  like 
a  Tide  or  Current,  or  the  Water  of  some  Shoal  or  Over- 
fall ;  but  were  past  it  before  we  could  sound.  The  Birds 
last  mention*d  and  this  were  further  Signs  of  Land.     In  the 

*  The  minute  sea-jellies  and  medusae  are  found  in  great  abundance  in 
these  waters. 

420 


BROLHO  SHOAL  NEAR  N.  HOLLAND 

fair  Weather,  and  a  small  Gale  at  West. 
\t  8  a  Cl<xk  wc  sounded  again  ;  but  had  no  Ground-  ' 

\Vc  kept  on  still  to  the  Eastward,  with  an  easy  Sail, 
--iking  out  sharp:  For  by  the  many  Signs  we  had,  I  did 

L  cct  that  wc  were  near  the  Land.  At  I2  a  Clock  in  the 
^ht  I  sounded,  and  had  45  Fathom,  coarse  Sand  and 
,null  white  Shells.  I  presently  clapt  on  a  Wind  and  stood 
:o  the  &>uth,  with  the  Wind  at  W,  because  I  thought  we 
nrcrc  to  the  South  of  a  Shoal  cali'd  the  Abrohles  (an 
Appellative  Name  for  Shoals,'  as  it  seems  to  me)  which  in 
I  Draught  I  had  of  that  Coast  is  laid  down  in  27  deg.  28 
niin.  l^t.  stretching  about  7  Leagues  into  the  Sea.  I  was 
the  Day  before  in  27  deg.  38  min.  by  Reckoning.  And 
iftcrwards  steering  E.  byS.  purposely  to  avoid  it,  I  thought 
I  must  have  been  to  the  South  of  it  :  But  sounding  again, 
at  I  1  Clock  in  the  Morning,  Aug.  the  first,  wc  had  but 
15  Fathom,  Coral  Rocks;  and  so  found  the  Shoal  was  to 
the  South  of  us.  Wc  presently  tack'd  again,  and  stood  to 
■}:■■  Nonh,  and  then  soon  deepncd  our  Water;  for  at  2  in 
Morning  we  had  26  Fathom  Coral  stilt :  At  3  we  had 

-  Coral-ground :  At  4  wc  had  30  Fathom,  coarse  Sand, 
with  some  Corai :  At  5  wc  had  45  Fathom,  coarse  Sand 
and  Shells;  being  now  off  the  Shoal,  as  appear'd  by  the 
Sand  and  Shells,  and  by  having  left  the  Coral.  By  all  this 
I  knew  we  had  fallen  in  to  the  North  of  the  Shoal,  and 
that  it  was  laid  down  wrong  in  my  Sea-Chart :  For  I  found 
it  lyc  in  about  27  deg.  Lat.  and  by  our  Run  tn  the  next 
Day,  I  found  that  the  Outward-edge  of  it,  which  1  sounded 
00,  lies  16  Ixagucs  off'  Shore.  When  it  was  Day  wc 
ttecrcd  in  E.  N.  E.  with  a  fine  brisk  Gale;  but  did  not  see 
the  Land  till  9  in  the  Morning,  when  we  saw  it  from  our 
Topmast-head, and  were  distant  from  it  about  to  Leagues; 
having  then  40  Fathom-water,  and  clean  Sand.  About  3 
Huur»  after  we  saw  it  on  our  Quarter-Deck,  being  by 
Judgment  about  6  Leagues  off,  and  we  had  then  40  Fathom, 
dean  Sand.     As  wc  ran  in,  this  Day  and  the  next,  we  took 

■  Tb*  AbronuN  iboal  is  in  lat.  17*  iff  S.  It  it  •omeiimc*  known  ai 
Ac  HodiiruB  RtKkLor  Houtman'i  Abrolhm,  ihc  word  "abrolhai"  mean- 
liiV  "  Look  «wt  ■  «r  "  Mind  younelt." 


k 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    several  Sights  of  it,  at  different  Bearings  and  Distances; 

'^  from  which  it  appeared  as  you  see  in  [Table  IV.  omitted]. 
And  here  I  would  note  once  for  all,  that  the  Latitudes 
markM  in  the  Draughts,  or  Sights  here  given,  are  not 
the  Latitude  of  the  Land,  but  of  the  Ship  when  the 
Sight  was  taken.  This  Morning,  August  the  first,  as  we 
were  standing  in  we  saw  several  large  Sea-fowls,  like  our 
Gannets  on  the  Coast  of  England,  flying  3  or  4  together; 
and  a  Sort  of  white  Sea-Mews,  but  black  about  the  Eyes, 
and  with  forked  Tails.  We  strove  to  run  in  near  the 
Shore  to  seek  for  a  Harbour  to  refresh  us  after  our  tedious 
Voyage ;  having  made  one  continued  Stretch  from  Bnail 
hither  of  about  114  deg.  designing  from  hence  also  to  be^ 
the  Discovery  I  had  a  Mind  to  make  on  N.  Holland  and 
N.  Guinea.  The  Land  was  low,  and  apjDear'd  even,  and 
as  we  drew  nearer  to  it,  it  made  (as  in  Table  IV.  omitted) 
with  some  red  and  some  white  Clifts ;  these  last  in  Lat 
26,  10  S.  where  you  will  find  54  Fathom,  within  4  Mifcs 
of  the  Shore. 

About  the  Lat.  of  26  deg.  S.  we  saw  an  Opening,  and 
ran  in,  hoping  to  find  a  Harbour  there :  But  when  we 
came  to  its  Mouth,  which  was  about  2  Leagues  wide,  we 
saw  Rocks  and  foul  Ground  within,  and  therefore  stood 
out  again  :  There  we  had  20  Fathom-water  within  2  Mik 
of  the  Shore.  The  Land  every  where  appeared  pretty  low, 
flat  and  even ;  but  with  steep  Cliflfs  to  the  Sea ;  and  when 
we  came  near  it  there  were  no  Trees,  Shrubs  or  Grass  to 
be  seen.  The  Soundings  in  the  Lat.  of  26  deg.  S.  fit>m 
about  8  or  9  Leagues  off  till  you  come  within  a  League  of 
the  Shore,  are  generally  about  40  Fathom ;  differing  but 
little,  seldom  above  3  or  4  Fathom.  But  the  Lead  brings 
up  very  different  Sorts  of  Sand,  some  coarse,  some  fine; 
and  of  several  Colours,  as  Yellow,  White,  Grey,  Brown, 
Blueish  and  Reddish. 

When  I  saw  there  was  no  Harbour  here,  nor  good 
anchoring,  I  stood  off  to  Sea  again,  in  the  Evening  of  the 
second  of  August,  fearing  a  Storm  on  a  Lee-shore,  in  a 
Place  where  there  was  no  Shelter,  and  desiring  at  least  to 
have  Sea-room :  For  the  Clouds  began  to  grow  thick  in 

422 


ARRIVAL   AT   SHARKS   BAY 

:  Wcstcm-hoard,  and   the  Wind  was  already  there,  and 
began  to  blow  fresh  almost  upon  the  Shore ;  which  at  this 
Place  lies  along  N.  N-  W.  and  S.  S.  E.     By  9  a  Clock  at 
Night  we  had  got  a  pretty  good  Offin  ;  but  the  Wind  still 
iocreasing,  t  took  in  my  Main  Top-sail,  being  able  to  carry 
no  more  Sail  than  two  Courses  and  the  Mizen.     At  2  in 
the  Morning,  Aug.  3,  it  blew  very  hard,  and  the  Sea  was 
much  raised;  so  that  1  furled  all  my  Sails  but  my  Main- 
ail.     Tho"  the  Wind  blew  so  hard,  we  had  pretty  clear 
Weather  till  Noon  :  But  then  the  whole  Sky  was  blackned 
with  thick  Clouds,  and  we  had  some  Rain,  which  would 
last  a  Quarter  of  an  Hour  at  a  Time,  and  then  it  would 
BW   very  fierce  while  the  Squalls  of  Rain  were  over  our 
id»;  but  as  soon  as  they  were  gone  the   Wind  was  by 
:h  abstcd,  the  Stress  of  the  Storm   being  over.     We 
ttltded  several  Times,  but  had  no  Ground  till  8  a  Clock 
J.  the  4th  in  the  Evening ;  and  then  had  60  Fathom- 
:r.  Coral-ground.     At  10  we  had  56  Fathom  fine  Sand. 
II  wc  bad    55   fathom,   fine  Sand,  of  a  pale  blueish 
llour.     It    was  now    pretty   moderate    Weather ;    yet    I 
ide   no  Sail  till    Morning;  but  then,  the  Wind  veering 
mt  to  the  S,  W.  1  made  Sail  and  stood  to  the  North : 
id  at  ti  a  Clock  the  next  Day,  Aug.   5,  we  saw  Land 
Rn,  at  about  10  Leagues  distance.     This  Noon  we  were 
Lat.  25  dcg.  30  min.  and   in  the  afternoon  our  Cook 
d,  an  old  Man,  who  had  been  sick  a  great  while,  being 
before  wc  came  out  of  England. 
The  6th  of  August  in  the  Morning  we  saw  an  Opening 
the  i.and,  and  we  ran  into  it,  and  anchored  in  7  and  a 
If  Kaihom-watcr,  2  Miles  from  the  Shore,  clean  Sand. 
waa  somewhat  difficult  getting  in  here,  by  Reason  of 
many  Shoals  we  met  with:  But  I  sent  my  Boat  sounding 
before   mc.     The   Mouth   of  this    Sound,  which   1   catl'd 
^rk's  Bay,'  lies  in  about  25  deg.  S.  Lat.  and  our  Reckoning 

flMHnri; 


SlHuIn  Btj  is  in  t«l.  ij"  10'  S.,  long.  1  tj"  40'  E,     II  retains  ihe  natn« 

'  g»Te  if.    Hf  stwni)  to  have  entrrrd  ihc  Sound  by  ihe  "  Nnturaliile 

,*  aith  Dirk  lUiXog't  t«land  on  hi*  iiarboard  tide.    The  benh 

be  ancbuml  nould  term  to  lie  Dumpier  May,  lo  the  NE.  of  the  Pcruo 

Uifk  Hartng'*  iiLind  is  nutned  after  ihe  Amslcrdam  tkippor, 

OclDber,  1616, 


423 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  made  its  Longitude  from  the  C.  of  Good  Hope  to  be 
'^  about  87  Degrees;  which  is  less  by  195  Leagues  than  is 
usually  laid  down  in  our  common  Draughts,  if  our  Reckon-  | 
ing  was  right,  and  our  Glasses  did  not  deceive  us.  As  I 
soon  as  I  came  to  anchor  in  this  Bay  (of  which  I  have  given 
a  Plan,  Table  omitted)  I  sent  my  Boat  ashore  to  seek 
for  fresh  Water:  But  in  the  Evening  my  Men  returned, 
having  found  none.  The  next  Morning  I  went  ashore 
myself,  carrying  Pick-axes  and  Shovels  with  me,  to  d^ 
for  Water ;  and  Axes  to  cut  Wood.  We  tried  in  scvenl 
Places  for  Water,  but  finding  none  after  several  Trials,  nor 
in  several  Miles  Compass,  we  left  any  farther  Search  for  it, 
and  spending  the  rest  of  the  Day  in  cutting  Wood,  we 
went  aboard  at  Night. 

The  Land  is  of  an  indifferent  Heighth,  so  that  it  may 
be  seen  9  or  10  Leagues  off.  It  appears  at  a  Distance  very 
even ;  but  as  you  come  nigher  you  find  there  are  many 
gentle  Risings,  tho'  none  steep  nor  high.  *Tis  all  a  stcq) 
Shore  against  the  open  Sea :  But  in  this  Bay  or  Sound  we 
were  now  in,  the  Land  is  low  by  the  Sea-side,  rising  gradu- 
ally in  within  the  Land.  The  Mould  is  Sand  by  the  Sea- 
side, producing  a  large  Sort  of  Sampier,^  which  bears  a 
white  Flower.  Farther  in,  the  Mould  is  reddish,  a  Sort 
of  Sand  producing  some  Grass,  Plants,  and  Shrubs.  The 
Grass  grows  in  great  Tufts,  as  big  as  a  Bushel,  here  and 
there  a  Tuft :  Being  intermixed  with  much  Heath,  mudi 
of  the  kind  we  have  growing  on  our  Commons  in  England. 
Of  Trees  or  Shrubs  here  are  divers  Sorts ;  but  none  above 
10  Foot  high :  Their  Bodies  about  3  Foot  about,  and  5  or 
6  Foot  high  before  you  come  to  the  Branches,  which  arc 
bushy  and  composed  of  small  Twigs  there  spreading  abroad, 
tho'  thick  set,  and  full  of  Leaves ;  which  were  mostly  long 
and  narrow.  The  Colour  of  the  Leaves  was  on  one  Side 
whitish,  and  on  the  other  green ;  and  the  Bark  of  the 
Trees  was  generally  of  the  same  Colour  with  the  Leaves, 
of  a  pale  green.  Some  of  these  Trees  were  sweet-scented, 
and   reddish  within  the  Bark,   like  Sassafras,  but  redder. 

^  Samphire,  the  edible  Crithmnm  maritimum, 

424 


W           VEGETABLES   AND   BEASTS  I 

Most  of  the  Trees  and  Shrubs  had  at  this  Time  either    an.  1 
Blossoms  or  Berries  on  them.    The  Blossoms  of  the  different  '^1 

Sort    of   TrcL-s    were    of  several    Colours,    as    red,   while,  I 

yclluw,  &c,   but   mostly  blue:   And    these  generally  smelt  I 

Very   sweet   and   fragrant,  as  did    some  also  of  the  rest.  I 

There  were  also  beside  some  Plants,  Herbs,  and  tall  Flowers,  I 

very  small   Flowers,  growing  on  the  Ground,  that  I 

:  sweet  and  beautiful,  and  for  the  most  part  unlike  any  I 

■d  seen  elsewhere.  I 

There  were  but  few  Land-Fowls;  we  saw  none  but  I 

gles,  of  the  larger  Sorts  of  Birds ;  but  5  or  6  Sorts  of  I 

lall  Birds.     The  biggest  Sort  of  these  were  not  bigger  I 

9hin  [jrks;  some  no  bigger  than  Wrens,  all  singing  with  I 

great  Variety  of  fine  shrill  Notes  ;  and  we  saw  some  of  their  I 

Nests  with  young  Ones  in  them.     The  Water-Fowls  are  I 

Kicks,  (which  had  young  Ones  now,  this  being  the  Begin-  I 

IB    of   the   Spring   in    these    Parts;)    Curlews,   Galdens,  I 

■b-  catchers.    Cormorants,    Gulls,    Pelicans  ;    and    some  1 

IUer-l*"owl,  such  as  I  have  not  seen  any  where  besides.  J 

lave  given  the  Pictures  of  4  several  Birds  on  this  Coast.  I 

BcBird*:  Fig.  2,  3,4.5-]  I 

The  Land-Animals  that  we  saw  here  were  only  a  Sort  I 

Raccoons,'   different    from    those  of  the  West-Indies,  I 

icfiy  as  to  their  Legs;  for  these  have  very  short  Fore-  I 

p;  but  go  jumping  upon  them  as  the  others  do,  (and  I 

X  them  arc  very  good  Meat :)  And  a  Sort  of  Guano's,  I 

'  the  same  Shape  and  Size  with  other  Guano's,  dcscrih'd  ' 
^ol.  L  p.  87],  but  differing  from  them  in  3  remarkable 
rticalara :  F'or  these  had  a  larger  and  uglier  Head,  and 
i  no  Tail:  And  a(  the  Rump,  instead  ot  the  Tail  there. 
By  had  a  Slump  of  a  Tail,  which  appcar'd  like  another 
,  but  not  really  such,  being  without  Mouth  or  Eyes: 
K  this  Creature  secm'd  by  this  Means  to  have  a  Head  at 
•b  End  ;  and.  which  may  be  rcckon'd  a  fourth  Difference, 
S  Legs  also  secm'd  all  4  of  them  to  be  Fore-legs,  bci 
i  alike  in  ShajK  and  Length,  and  seeming  by  the  Joints 

I  Tbi*  tes  beta  rc^rdcd  as  ■  dcKfiixlon  of  ihe  kan^^roo ;  but  it  u 
~t  KIcbIT  ^  tav9  been  the  IcanKaroo-rat,  which  is  birly  coiumon  i 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AN.  and  Bending  to  be  made  as  if  they  were  to  go  indificraitiy 
"^  either  Head  or  Tail  foremost.  They  were  speckled  black 
and  yellow  like  Toads,  and  had  Scales  or  Knobs  on  thdr 
Backs  like  those  of  Crocodiles,  plated  on  to  the  Skin, 
or  stuck  into  it,  as  part  of  the  SIdn.  They  arc  yery 
slow  in  Motion ;  and  when  a  Man  comes  nigh  them  they 
will  stand  still  and  hiss,  not  endeavouring  to  get  iwiy. 
Their  Livers  are  also  spotted  black  and  yellow:  Aod 
the  Body  when  opened  hath  a  very  unsavory  Smell. 
I  did  never  see  such  ugly  Creatures  any  where  but  hot. 
The  Guano*s  I  have  observed  to  be  very  good  Mat: 
And  I  have  often  eaten  of  them  with  Pleasure;  but 
tho*  I  have  eaten  of  Snakes,  Crocodiles  and  Allegators, 
and  many  Creatures  that  look  frightfully  enough,  and 
there  are  but  few  I  should  have  been  afnid  to  eat  of, 
if  prest  by  Hunger,  yet  I  think  my  Stomach  would 
scarce  have  served  to  venture  upon  these  N.  HoUand 
Guano*s,  both  the  Looks  and  the  Smell  of  them  bdng 
so  offensive. 

The  Sea-fish  that  we  saw  here  (for  here  was  no  Kvcr, 
Land  or  Pond  of  fresh  Water  to  be  seen)  are  chiefly  Sharks. 
There  are  Abundance  of  them  in  this  particular  Sound, 
that  I  therefore  give  it  the  Name  of  Shark's  Bay.    Here 
are  also  Skates,  Thornbacks,  and  other  Fish  of  the  Ray- 
kind  ;  (one  Sort  especially  like  the  Sea-Devil)  and  Gar-fish, 
Boneta*s,   &c.     Of  Shell-fish  we  got  here  Muscles,  Peri- 
winkles, Limpits,  Oysters,  both  of  the  Pearl- kind  and  also 
Eating-Oysters,  as  well  the  common  Sort  as  long  Oysters; 
beside    Cockles,    &c.     The    Shore   was   lined    thick  with 
many  other  sorts  of  very  strange  and  beautiful  Shells,  for 
variety  of  Colour   and    Shape,   most  finely  spotted  with 
Red,  Black,  or  Yellow,  &c.  such  as  I  have  not  seen  any 
where  but  at   this   place.     I  brought  away  a  great  many 
of  them ;   but   lost  all,  except  a  very  few,  and  those  not 
of  the  best. 

There  are  also  some  green  Turtle  weighing  about 
200  ft.  Of  these  we  caught  2  which  the  Water  Ebbing 
had  left  behind  a  Ledge  of  Rock,  which  they  could  not 
creep  over.     These  served  all  my  Company  2  Days ;  and 

426 


-TttAffrnk  rftfh. 


,i  A emora  txktn  sticKin^  to  Sharkj  Ifuckj 


a 


^^■CREAT  SHARK— NO   WATER 
I^^Rr  indificrent    sweet   Meat.     Of   the    Sharks   we    an. 
p^t  a  great  maoy,  which  our  Men  eat  very  savourily.   '^ 
bong  them   we  caught  one  which   was    1 1    Hoot  long. 
■e  space  between  'tis  two  Eyes  was  20  Inches,  and    18 
Ucs  from  one  Comer  of  his  Mouth  to  the  other.     Its 
BV  was  like  a  Leather  Sack,  very  thick,  and  so  tnugh 
kt  a  sharp  Knife  could  scarce  cut  it :  In  which  we  found 
•  Head  and  Boans  of  a   Hippopotomus ;  the  hairy   Lips 
fcwhich  were  still  sound  and  not   putrified,  and  the  Jaw 

■  also  firm,  out  of  which  we  pluckt  a  great  many  Teeth, 

■  them  8  Inches  long,  and  as  big  as  a  Man's  Thumb, 
mil  at  one  end,  and  a  little  crooked  ;  the  rest  not  above 
if  so  long.  The  Maw  was  full  of  Jelly  which  stank 
■eamly:  However  I  saved  for  a  while  the  Teeth  and 
E Sharks  Jaw:  The  Ftcsh  of  it  was  divided  among  my 
■D  ;  and  they  took  care  that  no  waste  should  be  made 

JTwas  the  7th  of  August  when  we  came  into  Shark's 
w;  in  which  we  Anchor*d  at  three  several   Places,  and 
•'d  at  the  first  of  them  (on  the  W.  side  of  the  Bay)  till 
i  lith.     During  which  time  we  searched  about,  as  I  said, 
r  fresh  Water,  digging  Wells,  but  to  no  purpose.     How- 
|r,  wc  cut  good  store  of  Fire-wood  at  this  first  Anchor- 
place  ;    and    my   Company   were    all    here    very    well 
shed  with  Raccoons,  Turtle,  Shark  and   other   Fish, 
;  Fowlcs;  so  that  we  were  now  all  much  brisker 
I  when  we  came  in  hither.     Yet  still  I  was  for  standing 
into  the  Bay,  partly  because  I  had   a  Mind   to  in- 
my  Slock  of  fresh  Water,  which  was  began  to  be 
partly  for  the  sake  of  Discovering  this  part  of 
t.     I  was  invited  to  go  further,  by  seeing  from 
I  Anchoring-placc  all  open  before  me;  which  therefore 
'gned  to  search  before  I  left  the  Bay.     So  on  the  1 1  th 
t  Noon,  I  steer 'd  farther  in,  with  an  easic  Sail,  because 
but    shallow  Water:    We    kept  therefore   good 
out    for   fear   of  Sholcs ;    sometimes   shortning, 
Rimes  deepning  the  Water.     About  2  in  the  Afternoon 
f  the  Land  a  Head  that  makes  the  S.  of  the  Bay,  and 
Kighi  we   had  again  Sholdings  from  that  Shore : 

427  ^M 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  And  therefore  shortned  Sail  and  stood  ofF  and  on  all  Night, 
'^  under  2  Topsails,  continually  sounding,  having  never  more 
then  lo  Fathom,  and  seldom  less  than  7.  The  Water 
deepned  and  sholdned  so  very  gently,  that  in  heaving  the 
Lead  5  or  6  times  we  should  scarce  have  a  Foot  difFerencc. 
When  we  came  into  7  Fathom  either  way,  we  presently 
went  about.  From  this  S.  part  of  the  Bay,  we  could  not 
see  the  Land  from  whence  we  came  in  the  Afternoon: 
And  this  Land  we  found  to  be  an  Island  of  3  or  4  Leagues 
long,  as  is  seen  in  the  Plan,  [Table  omitted]  but  it 
appearing  barren,  I  did  not  strive  to  go  nearer  it ;  and  the 
rather  because  the  Winds  would  not  permit  us  to  do  it 
without  much  Trouble,  and  at  the  Openings  the  Water 
was  generally  Shole.  I  therefore  made  no  farther  attempts 
in  this  S.  W.  and  S.  part  of  the  Bay,  but  steered  away  to 
the  Eastward,  to  see  if  there  was  any  Land  that  way,  fot  as 
yet  we  had  seen  none  there.  On  the  12th  in  the  Morning 
we  pass*d  by  the  N.  Point  of  that  Land,  and  were  con- 
firm'd  in  the  Persuasion  of  its  being  an  Island,  by  seeing  an 
Opening  to  the  East  of  it,  as  we  had  done  on  the  W. 
Having  fair  Weather,  a  small  Gale  and  smooth  Water,  we 
stood  further  on  in  the  Bay,  to  see  what  Land  was  on  the 
E.  of  it.  Our  Soundings  at  first  were  7  Fathom,  which  held 
so  a  great  while,  but  at  length  it  decreased  to  6.  Then  we 
saw  the  Land  right  a-head,  that  in  the  Plan  makes  the  E. 
of  the  Bay.  We  could  not  come  near  it  with  the  Ship, 
having  but  Shole  water :  and  it  being  dangerous  lying  there, 
and  the  Land  extraordinarily  low,  very  unlikely  to  have 
fresh  Water,  (though  it  had  a  few  Trees  on  it,  seemingly 
Mangroves)  and  much  of  it  probably  covered  at  High- 
water,  I  stood  out  again  that  Afternoon,  deepning  the 
Water,  and  before  Night  anchored  in  8  Fathom,  clean 
white  Sand,  about  the  middle  of  the  Bay.  The  next  day 
we  got  up  our  Anchor ;  and  that  Afternoon  came  to  an 
Anchor  once  more  near  two  Islands,  and  a  Shole  of  Corral 
Rocks  that  face  the  Bay.  Here  I  scrubbed  my  Ship :  ^^^ 
finding  it  very  improbable  I  should  get  any  thing  further 
here,  I  made  the  best  of  my  way  out  to  Sea  again,  sounding 
all  the  way :  but  finding  by  the  shallowness  of  the  Water 

428 


WATER-SERPENTS 

il  there  was  no  going  out  to  Sea  to  the  East  of  the  two 
mds  that  face  the  Bay,  nor  between  them,  1  return'd  to  '^'1 
:  West  Entrance,  going  out  by  the  same  Way  1  came  in 
only  on  the  East  instead  of  the  West-side  of  the  small 
lie  to  Ik  seen  in  the  Plan  :  in  which  Channel  we  had 
,  13,  and  13  Fathom-water,  still  deepning  upon  us  till 
were  out  at  Sea.  The  day  before  we  came  out  1  sent 
Boat  ashore  to  the  most  Northerly  of  the  Two  Islands, 
ich  is  the  least  of  them,  catching  many  small  Fish  in 
mean  while  with  Hook  and  Line.  The  Boat's  Crew 
iming,  told  me,  That  the  Isle  produces  nothing  but  a 
C  of  green,  short,  han.i,  prickly  Grass,  aiFording  neither 
"ood  nor  fresh  Water;  and  that  a  Sea  broak  between  the 
Islands,  a  Sign  that  the  Water  was  shallow.  They 
a  lai^e  Turtle,  and  many  Skates  and  Thornbacks,  but 
neht  none. 
It  was  August  the  14th  when  1  sail'd  out  of  this  Bay 
Sound,  the  Mouth  of  which  lies,  as  I  said,  in  25  deg.  5 
ji.  designing  to  coast  along  to  the  N,  E.  till  I  might 
mmodiriusly  put  in  at  some  other  prt  of  N.  Holland, 
pas&ing  out  we  saw  three  Water-Serpents  swimming 
But  in  the  Sea,  of  a  yellow  Colour,  spotted  with  dark, 
nrn  Spots.  They  were  each  about  four  Foot  long,  and 
out  the  bigness  of  a  Man's  Wrist,  and  were  the  first  I 
w  on  this  Coast,  which  abounds  with  several  sorts  of 
em.  We  had  the  Winds  at  our  first  coming  out  at  N. 
d  the  Land  lying  North-Easterly.     We  plied  off  and  on, 

Ktttng  forward  but  little  till  the  next  day:  When  the 
ind  coming  at  S.  S.  W,  and  S.  wc  began  to  Coast  it  along 
B  Shon  to  the  Northward,  keeping  at  6  or  7  Leagues  off 
nd  sounding  often,  we  had  between  40  and  46 
;hom-water,  brown  Sand,  with  some  white  Shells.  This 
th  of  August  we  were  in  Lat.  24  deg.  4 1  min.  On  the 
Ch  Day  at  Noon  we  were  in  23  deg.  22  min.  The  Wind 
Mning  at  E.  by  N.  wc  could  not  keep  the  Shore  aboard, 
were  forced  to  go  farther  off',  and  lost  sight  of 
L^nd.  Then  sounding  wc  had  no  Ground  with  80 
Khom-line;  however  the  Wind  shortly  after  came  about 
Co  the  Southward,  and  then  wc  jogg'd  on  again 
429 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   to   the   Northward,  and   saw  many  small   Dolphins  and 

1699  Whales,   and    abundance   of   Scuttle-shells   swimming  on 

the  Sea ;  and  some  Water-snalces  every  day.      The  17th 

we  saw  the  Land  again,  and  took  a  Sight  of  it.    [Table 

omitted.] 

The  1 8  th  in  the  Afternoon,  being  3  or  4  Leagues  off 
Shore,  I  saw  a  Shole-point,  stretching  from  the  Land  into 
the  Sea,  a  League  or  more.  The  Sea  broke  high  on  it ;  bjr 
which  I  saw  plainly  there  was  a  Shole  there.  I  stood 
farther  off,  and  coasted  along  Shore,  to  about  7  or  8  Leagues 
distance :  And  at  1 2  a  Clock  at  Night  we  sounded,  and 
had  but  20  Fathom,  hard  Sand.  By  this  I  found  I  wis 
upon  another  Shoal,  and  so  jpresently  steered  off  W.  half 
an  Hour,  and  had  then  40  Fathom.  At  One  in  tlie 
Morning  of  the  i8th  Day  we  had  85  Fathom :  By  two  we 
could  find  no  Ground ;  and  then  I  ventur  d  to  steer  along 
Shore  again,  due  N.  which  is  two  Points  wide  of  the  Coast 
(that  lies  N.  N.  E.)  for  fear  of  another  Shoal.  I  would 
not  be  too  far  off  from  the  Land,  being  desirous  to  seardi 
into  it  where-ever  I  should  find  an  Opening  or  any  Con- 
venience of  searching  about  for  Water,  &c.  When  iw 
were  off  the  Shoal-point  I  mentioned,  where  we  had  but  20 
Fathom-water,  we  had  in  the  Night  Abundance  of  Whales 
about  the  Ship,  some  a-head,  others  a-stern,  and  some  on 
each  side  blowing  and  making  a  very  dismal  Noise;  but 
when  we  came  out  again  into  deeper  Water  they  left  us. 
Indeed  the  Noise  that  they  made  by  blowing  and  dashing 
of  the  Sea  with  their  Tails,  making  it  all  of  a  Breach  and 
Foam,  was  very  dreadful  to  us,  like  the  Breach  of  the 
Waves  in  very  Shoal-water,  or  among  Rocks.  The  Shoal 
these  Whales  were  upon  had  Depth  of  Water  sufficient,  no 
less  than  20  Fathom,  as  I  said  ;  and  it  lies  in  Lat.  22  deg. 
22  min.  The  Shore  was  generally  bold  all  along;  we  had 
met  with  no  Shoal  at  Sea  since  the  Abrohlo-shoal,  when  we 
first  fell  on  the  N.  Holland  Coast  in  the  Lat.  of  28,  till 
Yesterday  in  the  Afternoon,  and  this  Night.  This  Morn- 
ing also  when  we  expected  by  the  Draught  we  had  with  us 
to  have  been  1 1  Leagues  off  Shore,  we  were  but  4 ;  so  thit 
either  our  Draughts  were  faulty,  which  yet  hitherto  and 

430 


COASTING   ALONG   N.   HOLLAND  \ 

mnrds  wc  found  true  enough  as  to  the  lying  of  the  an. 
it,  or  else  here  was  a  Tide  unknown  to  us  that  deceived  '^ 
tho'  wc  had  found  very  little  of  any  Tide  on  this 
It  hitherto.  As  to  our  Winds  in  the  Coasting  thus  far, 
e  had  been  within  the  Verge  of  the  general  Trade  (tho' 
Tuptcd  by  the  Storm  1  mention'd)  from  the  Lat.  of 
when  we  first  fell  in  with  the  Coast ;  And  by  that 
we  were  in  the  Lat.  of  25,  wc  had  usually  the 
J'radc-wind  (which  is  here  S.  S,  E.)  when  we  were 
■ny  Distance  from  Shore :  But  we  had  often  Sea  and 
-Breezes,  especially  when  near  Shore,  and  when  in 
;'»-bay ;  and  had  a.  particular  N.  West  Wind,  or 
n,  that  set  us  in  thither.  On  this  i8ih  of  August 
coasted  with  a  brisk  Gale  of  the  true  Trade-wind  at 
E.  very  fair  and  clear  Weather ;  but  haling  off  in  the 
ening  to  Sea,  were  next  Morning  out  of  Sight  of  Land  ; 
i  the  Land  now  trending  away  N.  Easterly,  and  we 
g  to  the  Norward  of  it,  and  the  Wind  also  shrinking 
n  the  S.  S.  E.  to  the  E.  S.  E.  (that  is,  from  the  true 
de-Wind  to  the  Sea-breeze,  as  the  Land  now  lay)  we 
Id  not  get  in  with  the  Land  again  yet  a-while,  so  as  to 
it,  tho'  we  trim'd  sharp  and  kept  close  on  a  Wind, 
were  this  19th  day  in  l^t.  21  deg.  42  min.  The  20th 
BTcre  in  Lat.  19  deg.  37  min.  and  kept  close  on  a  Wind 
get  Sight  of  the  l^nd  again,  but  could  not  yet  see  it. 
had  very  fair  Weather;  and  tho'  we  were  so  far  from 
I  Land  as  to  be  out  of  Sight  of  it,  yet  we  had  the  Sea 
"  Land -Breezes.  In  the  Night  wc  had  the  Land-Breeze 
S.  S.  K.  a  small  gentle  Gale  ;  which  in  the  Morning 
t  Sun-ming  would  shift  about  gradually  (and  withal 
ling  in  Strength)  till  about  Noon  wc  should  have  it 
E.  S.  E.  which  is  the  true  Sea-breeze  here.  Then  it 
old  blow  a  brisk  Gale,  so  that  we  could  scircc  carry  our 
Ip-satls  double  rift :  And  it  would  continue  thus  till  3  in 
Afternoon,  when  il  would  decrease  again.  The  Weather 
fair  all  the  while,  not  a  Cloud  to  be  seen  ;  but  very 
ly,  cspedally  nigh  the  Horizon.  Wc  sounded  several 
ics  this  20th  Day,  and  at  first  had  no  Ground  ;  but 
afterwards  from  52  to  +5  Fathom,  coarse  brown  Sand, 

43'  J 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER^S    VOYAGES 

AN.    mi3ct  with  small  brown  and  white  Stones,  with  Dints  besides 
'^  in  the  Tallow.^ 

The  list  Day  also  we  had  small  Land-breezes  in  the 
Night,  and  Sea-breezes  in  the  Day :   And  as  we  saw  some 
Sei-«nakcs  every  Day,  so  this  Day  we  saw  a  great  many, 
of  two  different  Sorts  or  Shapes.     One  Sort  was  yellow, 
and  about  the  Bigness  of  a  Man's   Wrist,  about  4  Foot 
long,  having  a  fiat  Tail  about  4  Fingers  broad.     The  other 
Sort  was   much  smaller  and  shorter,   round  and  spotted 
black  and  yellow.     This  Day  we  sounded  several  Times, 
and  had  +5  Fathom  Sand.     We  did  not  make  the  Land 
till  Noon^  and  then  saw  it  first  from  our  Topmast-head. 
It  bore  S.   E.  by  E.  about   9   Leagues  distance;  and  it 
appeared  like  a  Cape  or  Head  of  Land.     The  Sea-breeze 
this  Day  was  not  so  strong  as  the  Day  before,  and  it  veered 
out  more ;  so  chat  we  had  a  fair  Wind  to  run  in  with  to 
the  Shore,  and  at  Sunset  anchored  in  20  Fathom,  clean 
Sand,  about  5  Leagues  from  the  bluflF  Point ;  which  was 
not  a  Cape  (as  it  appeared  at  a  great  EHstance)  but  the 
Eastermost  End  of  an  Island,  about  5   or  6  Leagues  in 
length,  and    I   in   breadth.     There  were    3    or  4  Rocky 
Islands  about  a  League  from  us  between  us  and  the  bluff 
Point;  and  we  saw  many  other  Islands  both  to  the  East 
and  West  ot  it,  as   far  as  we  could  sec  either  way  from 
our  Topmast-head :  And  all  within  them  to  the  S.  there 
was  nothing  but  Islands  of  a  pretty  Heighth,  that  may 
be  seen  3  or  9  Leagues  off.     By  what  we  saw  of  them  they 
must  have  been  a  Range  of  Islands  of  about  20  Leagues 
in  length,  stretching  from  E.  N.  E.  to  W.  S.  W.  and  for 
ought  I  know,  as  far  as  to  those  of  Shark VBay ;  and  to 
a  considerable  Breadth  also,  (for  we  could  see  9  or  lO 
Leagues  in  among  them)  towards  the  Continent  or  main 
Land  of  N.  Holland,  if  there  be  any  such  Thing  here- 
abouts :  And  by  the  great  Tides  I  met  with  a  while  after- 
wards, more  to  the  N.  East,  I  had  a  strong  Suspicion  that 
here  might  be  a  kind  of  Archipelago  of  Islands,  and  a 
Passage  possibly  to  the  S.  of  N.  Holland  and  N.  Guinea 

*  The  tallow,  or  ^^  arming,"  in  a  hole  at  the  end  of  the  leaden  plummet 
used  in  sounding. 

432 


W                  TASMAN'S    DRAUGHT  I 

nto  the  great  S.  Sea  Eastward  ;   which  I   had  Thoughts   ah.  I 
■Iso   of  attempting  in  my  Return    from  N.  Guinea  (had  '^1 

Circumsunccs  jicrmittcd)  and   told  my  Officers  so:   But  I 

I  would  not  attempt  it  at  this  Time,  because  we  wanted  I 

Witcr,  and  could  not  depend  upon  finding  it  there.     This  I 

Place  is  tn  the  Lat.  of  20  deg.  21  min.  but  in  the  Draught  I 

thai  1  had  of  this  Coast,  which  was  Tasman's,'  it  was  laid  I 

down  in  19  deg.  50  min.  and  the  Shore  is  laid  down  as  all  I 

Kitmg  joining  in  one  Body  or  Continent,  with  some  Open-  I 

tngs  appearing  like  Rivers  ;  and  not  like  Islands,  as  really  I 

they  are.      This  Place    lies   more    Northerly  by  40  min.  1 
than    is    laid    down    in    Mr.    Tasman's    Draught :    And 

beside  its  being  made  a  firm,  continued  Land,  only  with  I 

•ome  Oi>cnings  like  the  Mouths  of  Rivers,  I    found  the  I 
Soundings  also  different  from   what   the  prick'd    Line  of 

hi5  Course  shews  them,  and  generally  shallower  than  he  I 

aukes  them ;    which  inclines  me  to  think   that  he  came  I 

not  M)  near    the   Shore    as  his    Line   shews,  and  so    had  I 

deeper  Soundings,  and   could  not  so   well   distinguish  the  I 

lllaitds.     His    Meridian  or  Difference  of  Longitude  from  1 

ShftrleVBay  agrees  well  enough  with  my  Account,  which  I 
is  13a  Leagues,  tho'  wc  differ  in   Lat.     And  to  confirm 
my  Conjecture  that  the  Line  of  his  Course  is  made  too 
near  the  Shore,  at  least  not  far  to  the  East  of  this  Place, 

^B  Water  is  there  so  shallow   that    he    could    not    come  I 

wre  so  nigh.  I 
1^    But  to  proceed :  in  the  Night  we  had  a  small  Land- 
Ofctzc,  and  in  the  Morning  I  weighed  Anchor,  designing 

to  run  in  among  the  Islands,  for  they  had  large  Channels  I 
between  them,  of  a  League  wide  at  least,  and  some  2  or  3 
gues  wide.     I  sent  in  my  Boat  before  to  sound,  and  if 

/  found  Shoal-water  to  return  again ;  but  if  they  found  I 
■fitter  enough,  to  go  ashore  on  one   of  ihe   Islands,   and 

f  till  the  Ship  came  in :  where  they  might  in  the  mean  I 

;  search  for  Water.     So  wc  followed  after  with   the  I 

,  sounding  as  we  went  in,  and   had  20  Fathom,  till  I 

I  z  Leagues  of  the  Bluff-head,  and  then  we  had  shoal  I 

f '•  Abell  Tatnian,    Tlie  "  Uraugfai "  here  mt^ntinnrd  wmi  pmbabljr  a  copy  I 

n  Kkndke'*  AUju,  i>T  in  the  mup  by  Vankegtcn.  I 

l»oL.  II.                               433                              2  E  I 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 

AN.  Water,  and  very  uncertain  Soundings :  Yet  we  ran  in  still 
1699  with  an  easy  Sail,  sounding  and  looking  out  well,  for  this 
was  dangerous  Work.  When  wc  came  abreast  of  the 
BlufF-head,  and  about  2  Mile  from  it,  we  had  but  7 
Fathom :  Then  we  edg*d  away  from  it,  but  had  no  more 
Water;  and  running  in  a  little  farther,  we  had  but  4 
Fathoms ;  so  we  anchored  immediately ;  and  yet  when  wc 
had  veered  out  a  third  of  a  Cable  we  had  7  Fathom  Water 
again;  so  uncertain  was  the  Water.  My  Boat  came 
immediately  aboard,  and  told  me  that  the  Island  was  very 
rocky  and  dry,  and  they  had  little  Hopes  of  finding  Water 
there.  I  sent  them  to  sound,  and  bad  them,  if  they  found 
a  Channel  of  8  or  10  Fathom  Water,  to  keep  on,  and  we 
would  follow  with  the  Ship.  We  were  now  about  4 
Leagues  within  the  outer  small  rocky  Islands,  but  still 
could  see  nothing  but  Islands  within  us ;  some  5  or  6 
Leagues  long,  others  not  above  a  Mile  round.  The  large 
Islands  were  pretty  high ;  but  all  appeared  dry,  and  mostly 
rocky  and  barren.  The  Rocks  look'd  of  a  rusty  yellow 
Colour,  and  therefore  I  despaired  of  getting  Water  on  any 
of  them ;  but  was  in  some  Hopes  of  finding  a  Channel  to 
run  in  beyond  all  these  Islands,  could  I  have  spent  Time 
here,  and  either  get  to  the  Main  of  New  Holland,  or  find 
out  some  other  Islands  that  might  afford  us  Water  and 
other  Refreshments  :  Besides,  that  among  so  many  Islands, 
we  might  have  found  some  Sort  of  rich  Mineral,  or 
Ambergreece,  it  being  a  good  Latitude  for  both  these. 
But  we  had  not  sailed  above  a  League  farther  before  our 
Water  grew  shoaler  again,  and  then  we  anchored  in  6 
Fathom  hard  Sand. 

We  were  now  on  the  inner  Side  of  the  Island,  on  whose 
out-side  is  the  BlufF-point.  We  rode  a  League  from  the 
Island,  and  I  presently  went  ashore,  and  carried  Shovels  to 
dig  for  Water,  but  found  none.  There  grow  here  2  or  3 
Sorts  of  Shrubs,  one  just  like  Rosemary ;  and  therefore  1 
caird  this  Rosemary  Island.  It  grew  in  great  Plenty  here, 
but  had  no  Smell.  Some  of  the  other  Shrubs  had  blue 
and  yellow  Flowers ;  and  we  found  2  Sorts  of  Grain  like 
Beans :  The  one  grew  on  Bushes ;  the  other  on  a  Sort  of 

434 


EGETABLES  ON    ROSEMARY   ISLAND  I 

ceping  Vine  that  runs  along  on   the  Ground,  having   an.  I 
thick    broad    Leaves,  and   the   Blossom    like  a   Bean  '^B 

IBom,   but    much    larger,    and    of   a    deep    red    Colour,  I 

mg    very  beautiful.     We  saw  here   some  Cormorants,  I 

lIU,   Crahcatchers,    &c.  a  few  small  Land-Birds,  and  a  I 

of  white  Parrots,  which  flew  a  great  many  tngcther.  I 

found  some  Shell-fish,  viz.  Limpils,  Perriwinklcs,  and  I 

Rindancc  of  small  Oysters  growing  on  the  Rocks,  which  I 

(e  very  sweet.     In   the  Sea  we  saw  some  green  Turtle,  a  I 

tty  many  Sharks,  and  Abundance  of  Water-Snakes  of  I 

ral   Sorts  and    Sizes.     The  Stones  were    all  of  rusty  I 

lur,  and  ponderous.  I 

Wc  saw  a  Smoak  on  an  Island  3  or  4  Leagues  oflF;  and  1 

also  the  Bushes  had  been  burned,  but  we  found  no  I 

Sign  of  Inhabitants :    'Twas   probable  that  on  the  I 

id  wnerc  the  Smoak  was  there  were  Inhabitants,  and  I 

ih  Water  for  ihem.      In  the  Evening  I  went  aboard,  and  I 

iultcd   with   my  Officers   whether  it    was   best    to  send  I 

icr,  or  to  search  among  any  other  of  these  Islands  with  I 

Boat;  or  else  go    from    hence,   and   coast  along  Shore  I 

ih  the  Ship,  till  we  could  find  some  better  Place  than  I 

I  was   to  ride  in,  where  we   had  shoal   Water,  anti    lay  I 

os'd  to  Winds  and  Tides.     They  all  agreed  to  go  from  I 

ce;  so  I  gave  Orders  to  weigh  in  the  Morning  as  soon  I 

t  should  be  light,  and  to  get  out  with  the  Land-breeze.  I 

Accordingly,  August  the  23d,  at  5  in  the  Morning  wc  I 

out,  having  a  preiiy  fresh  Land-breeze  at  S.  S.  E,     By  I 

Clock  we  were  got  out,  and  very  seasonably  ;  for  before  I 

be  Sea-breeze  came  on  us  very  strong,  and  increasing,  we  I 

lie  in  our  Top-sails  and  stood  off  under  2  Courses  and  a  I 

IKcn,  this  being  as  much  Sail  as  we  could  carry.     The  I 

was  clear,  there  being  not  one  Cloud  to  be  seen ;  but  I 

Horizon  appeared  very  hazy,  and  the  Sun  at  setting  the  I 

;ht  before,  and  this  Morning  at  rising,  ap(>earcd  very  I 

.     The  Wind  continued  very   strong  till    I3,   then    tt  I 

to  abate  :  1  have  seldom  met  with  a  stronger  Breeze.  I 

strong  Sca-Breezcs  lasted  thus  in  iheir  Turns  3  or  4  I 

They  sprung  up  with  the  Sun-rise ;  by  9  a  Clock  I 

very  strong,  and  so  continued  tilt  Noon,  when  1 

43$  I 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  they  began  to  abate;  and  by  Sun-set  there  was  little 
1699  Wind,  or  a  Gilm  till  the  Land-breezes  came ;  wWch  wc 
should  certainly  have  in  the  Morning  about  i  or  2  a  ClocL 
The  Land-breezes  were  between  the  S.  S.  W.  and  S.  S.  E. 
The  Sea-breezes  between  the  E.  N.  E.  and  N.  N.  E.  In  the 
Night  while  Gilm,  we  fish'd  with  Hook  and  Line,  and 
caught  good  Store  of  Fish,  viz.  Snappers,  Breams,  Old- 
Wives,  and  Dog-fish.  When  these  last  came  we  seldom 
caught  any  others ;  for  if  they  did  not  drive  away  the  other 
Fish,  yet  they  would  be  sure  to  keep  them  from  taking  our 
Hooks,  for  they  would  first  have  them  themselves,  tJtii^ 
very  greedily.  We  caught  also  a  Monk-fish,  of  which  I 
brought  Home  the  Picture.     See  Fish,  Fig.  L 

On  the  25  th  of  August,  we  still  coasted  along  Shore, 
that  we  might  the  better  see  any  Opening ;  kept  sounding, 
and  had  about  20  Fathom  clean  Sand.     The  26th  Day,  bang 
about  4  Leagues  off  Shore,  the  Water  began  gradually  to 
sholden  from  20  to  14  Fathom.     I  was  edging  in  a  little 
towards  the  Land,  thinking  to  have  anchored  ;  but  presently 
after  the  Water  decreased  almost  at  once,  till  we  had  but 
5   Fathom.     I   durst  therefore  adventure  no  farther,  but 
steer'd  out  the  same  way  that  we  came  in ;  and  in  a  short 
Time  had  i  o  Fathom  (being  then  about  4  Leagues  and  a 
half  from  the  Shore)  and  even  Soundings.     I  steer*d  away 
E.  N.  E.  coasting  along  as  the  Land  lies.     This  Day  the 
Sea-breezes  began  to  be  very  moderate  again,  and  wc  made 
the  best  of  our  way  along  Shore,  only  in  the  Night  edging 
off  a  little  for  Fear  of  Sholes.     Ever  since  we  left  Sharks- 
Bay  we  had  fair  clear  Weather,  and  so  for  a  great  while  still. 
The  27th  Day,  we  had  20  Fathom  Water  all  Night, 
yet  we  could  not  see  Land  till  i  in  the  Afternoon  from  our 
Topmast-head.     By  3  we  could  just  discern  Land  from 
our  Quarter-deck;  we  had  then   16  Fathom.     The  Wind 
was  at  N.  and  we  steer*d  E.  by  N.  which  is  but  one  Point 
in  on  the  Land  ;  yet  we  decreased  our  Water  very  fast ;  for 
at  4  we  had  but  9  Fathom ;  the  next  Cast  but  7,  which 
frighted  us;  and  we  then  tackt  instantly  and  stood  off: 
But  in  a  short  Time  the  Wind  coming   at    N.  W.  and 
W.  N.  W.  we  tackt  again,  and  steerM  N.  N  E    and  then 

436 


NODDY    BIRDS 
•  Water  again,  and  had  all  Night  from  15  to  20   am. 


'^1 


The  28th  Dxy  we  had   between   20  and  40  Fathom, 
c  saw  no  Land  this  Day,  but  saw  a  great  many  Snakes 
*  some  Whales.     We  saw  also  some  Boobies,  and  Noddy- 
Is  ;  and  in  the  Night  caught  one  of  these  last.     It  was 
tnoiher  Shape  and  Colour  than  any  I  had  seen  before, 
had  a  small  long  Bill,  as  all  of  them  have,  flat  Feet  like 
:k.s  Feet;  its  Tail  forked  like  a  Swallow,  but  longer  and 
,dcr,  and  the  Fork  deeper  than  that  of  the  Swallow, 
I  very  long  Wings ;  the  Top  or  Crown  of  the  Head  of 
Noddy  was  Coal-black,  having  also  small  black  Streaks 
ind    about  and    close    to    the   Eyes  ;  and    round    these 
on  each  Side,  a  pretty  broad  white  Circle.     The 
M,  Belly,  and  under  part  of  ihe  Wings  of  this  Noddy 
:  white  ;  and  the   Back  and   upper  part  of  its  Wings  of 
nt  black  or  smoak  Colour.     Sec  a  Picture  of  this,  and 
the  common  one,  Birds,  Fig.  5,  6.     Noddies  are  seen  in 
St  Places  between  the  Tropicks,  as  well  in  the  East- 
tics,  and  on  the  Coast   of  Brazil,  as  in  the  West-Indies. 
ley  rest  ashore  a  Nights,  and  therefore  we  never  see  them 
at  Scs^  not  above  20  or  30  Leagues,  unless  driven  off  in 
<orm.     When  they  come  about  a  Ship  they  commonly 
■ch  in  the  Night,  and  will  sit  still  till  ihey  are  taken  by 
t  Seamen.      They  build  on  Cliffs  against  the  Sea,   or 
cks,  as  1  have  said  Vol.  I.  p.  83. 

The  30th  day,  being  in  Lat.  18  deg.  2i  min.  we  made 
t  Land  again,  and  saw  many  great  Smokes  near  the 
xe ;  and  having  fair  Weather  and  moderate  Breezes,  1 
er'd  in  towards  it.  At  4  in  the  Afternoon  I  anchor'd  in 
Fathom  Water,  clear  Sand,  about  3  Leagues  and  a  half 
•n  the  Shore.  I  presently  sent  my  Boat  to  sound  nearer 
and  they  found  10  Fathom  about  a  Mile  farther  in;  and 
■It  thence  still  farther  in  the  Water  decreased  gradually 
9,  8,  7,  and  at  2  Mile  distance  to  6  Fathom.  This 
etiing  wc  saw  an  Eclipse  of  the  Moon,  but  it  was  abating 
ore  the  Moon  appear 'd  to  us;  for  the  Horizon  was  very 
ty,  so  that  we  could  not  see  the  Moon  till  she  had  been 
fan  Hour  above  the  Horizon  :  And  at  2  hours,  22  min. 
437 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   after  Sun-set,  by  the  Reckoning  of  our  Glasses,  the  Eclipse 
1699  was  quite  gone,  which  was   not    of   many  Digits.     The 
Moon's  Center  was  then  33  deg.  40  min.  high. 

The  31st  of  August  betimes  in  the  Morning  I  went 
ashore  with  10  or  11  Men  to  search  for  Water.  We  went 
armed  with  Muskets  and  Cutlasses  for  our  defence,  expect- 
ing to  see  people  there ;  and  carried  also  Shovels  and  Rck- 
axes  to  dig  Wells.  When  we  came  near  the  Shore  wcsaw 
3  tall  black  naked  Men  on  the  sandy  Bay  a  head  of  us: 
But  as  we  rowM  in,  they  went  away.  When  wc  were 
landed,  I  sent  the  Boat  with'  two  Men  in  her  to  lie  a  littk 
from  the  Shore  at  an  Anchor,  to  prevent  being  seiz'd; 
while  the  rest  of  us  went  after  the  3  black  Men,  who 
were  now  got  on  the  top  of  a  small  Hill  about  a  quarter  of 
a  Mile  from  us,  with  8  or  9  Men  more  in  their  Company. 
They  seeing  us  coming,  ran  away.  When  we  came  on  the 
top  of  the  Hill  where  they  first  stood,  we  saw  a  plain 
Savannah,  about  half  a  Mile  from  us,  farther  in  from  the 
Sea,  There  were  several  Things  like  Hay-cocks,^  staning 
in  the  Savannah ;  which  at  a  distance  we  thought  were 
Houses,  looking  just  like  the  Hottentot's  Houses  at  the 
Cape  of  G.  Hope :  but  we  found  them  to  be  so  many  Rodcs. 
We  searched  about  these  for  Water,  but  could  find  none, 
nor  any  Houses;  nor  People,  for  they  were  all  gone. 
Then  we  turned  again  to  the  Place  where  we  landed,  and 
there  we  dug  for  Water. 

While  we  were  at  work  there  came  9  or  10  of  the  Natives 
to  a  small  Hill  a  little  way  from  us,  and  stood  there  menacing 
and  threatning  of  us,  and  making  a  great  Noise.  At  last  one 
of  them  came  towards  us,  and  the  rest  followed  at  a  distance. 
I  went  out  to  meet  him,  and  came  within  50  Yards  of  him, 
making  to  him  all  the  Signs  of  Peace  and  Friendship  I  could; 
but  then  he  ran  away,  neither  would  they  any  of  them  stay 
for  us  to  come  nigh  them  ;  for  we  tried  two  or  three  Times. 
At  last  I  took  two  Men  with  me,  and  went  in  the  After- 
noon along  by  the  Sea-side,  purposely  to  catch  one  of  them, 
if  I  could,  of  whom  I  might  learn  where  they  got  their 

*  Flinders  suggests  that  these  were  ant-hills,  of  the  kind  seen  by  Pclsart 
in  1629. 

438 


■         NATIVES   OF   NEW   HOLLAND  | 

■Esh  Water.     There  were   lo  or  12  of  the  Natives  a  little    an.  J 

■By  off,  who  seeing  us  three  going  away  from  the  rest  of  '^1 

mtr  Men,  followed  us  at  a  distance.     1  thought  they  would  1 

ImIow  us  :   Bui  there  being  for  a  while  a  Sand-bank  between  I 

us  and  them,  that  they  could  not  then  see  us,  we  made  a  I 

halt,  and  hid  our  selves  in  a  bending  of  the  Sand  bank.  I 

fbcy  knew  we  must  be  thereabouts,  and  being  3  or  4.  times  I 

^'—  Number,  thought  to  seize  us.     So  they  dispers'd  them-  I 

some   going    to   the  Sea-shore,  and  others  beating  I 

ut  the  Sand-hills.    We  knew  by  what  Rencounter  we  had  I 

1  with  them  in  the  Morning  that  we  could  easily  out-run  I 

m.     So  a  nimble  young  Man  '  that  was  with  me,  seeing  I 

M  of  them  near,  ran  towards  them  ;  and  they  tor  some  I 

e,  ran  away  before  him.     But  he  soon  over-taking  them,  I 

f  faced  about  and  fought  him.     He  had  a  Cutlass,  and  I 

y  had  wooden  Lances ;  with  which,  being  many  of  them,  I 

f  were  too  hard  for  him.     When  he  first  ran  towards  I 

nt  I  chas'd  two  more  that  were  by  the  Shore :  But  fear-  I 

how  it  might  be  with  my  young  Man,  I  turn'd  back  | 

ckly.  and  went   up  to  the   top  of  a  Sandhill,  whence  I  I 

'  him  near  me,  closely  engag'd  with  them.     Upon  their  I 

ing  me,  one  of  them  threw  a  Lance  at  me,  that  narrowly  I 

B*d   mc.     I   discharg'd    my   Gun    to  scare    them,    but  I 

Otded  shooting  any  of  them;  till  finding  the  young  Man  I 

Kfcat  danger  from  them,  and  my  self  in  some  ;  and  that  I 

D  the  Gun  had  a  little  frighted  them  at  first,  yet  they  I 

d  soon  learnt  to  despise  it,  tossing  up  their  Hands,  and  1 

ying  Pooh,  Pooh,  Pooh  ;  and  coming  on  afresh  with  a  great  I 

'ye,  I  thought  it  high  time  to  charge  again,  and  shoot  I 

of  them,  which  I  did.     The  rest,  seeing  him  fall,  made  I 

Kand  again;  and  my  young  Man  took  the  Opportunity  to  I 

■engage  himself,  and  come  off  to  me  ;  my  other  Man  I 

was  with  me,  who  had  done  nothing  all  this  while,  I 

;  out  unarm'd ;  and  1  rcturn'd  tiack  with  my 

ling  to  attempt  the  Natives  no  farther,  being 

what  had  happened  already.     They  took  up 


be  yoaaf  Ri*n  was  Aleundrr  Bcale.    Bale  received  a  wooden  lance 
li  hn  dun  i  but  "«ilh  hit  CuiUcc  did  to  cleave  one  pari  of  hin  oppU' 


J 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    their  wounded  Companion ;  and  my  young  Man,  who  had 

*^  been  struck  through  the  Cheek  by  one  of  their  Lances,  was 

afraid  it  had  been    poisoned :  But    I    did   not  think  that 

likely.     His  Wound  was  very  painful  to  him,  being  made 

with  a  blunt  Weapon :  But  he  soon  recovcrM  of  it 

Among  the  N.  Hollanders,  whom  we  were  thus  engag'd 
with,  there  was  one  who  by  his  Appearance  and  Carnage, 
as  well  in  the  Morning  as  this  Afternoon,  secm*d  to  be 
the  Chief  of  them,  and  a  kind  of  Prince  or  Captain  among 
them.  He  was  a  young  brisk  Man,  not  very  tall,  nor  so 
personable  as  some  of  the  rest,  tho'  more  active  and 
couragious :  He  was  painted  (which  none  of  the  rest  were 
at  all)  with  a  Circle  of  white  Paste  or  Pigment  (a  sort  of 
Lime,  as  we  thought)  about  his  Eyes,  and  a  white  streak 
down  his  Nose  from  his  Forehead  to  the  tip  of  it.  And 
his  Breast  and  some  part  of  his  Arms  were  also  made  white 
with  the  same  Paint ;  not  for  Beauty  or  Ornament,  one 
would  think,  but  as  some  wild  Indian  Warriors  are  said  to 
do,  he  secm'd  thereby  to  design  the  looking  more  Terrible; 
this  his  Painting  adding  very  much  to  his  natural  D^ 
formity;  for  they  all  of  them  have  the  most  unpleasant 
Looks  and  the  worst  Features  of  any  People  that  ever  I 
saw,  though  I  have  seen  great  variety  of  Savages.  These 
New-Hollanders  were  probably  the  same  sort  of  People 
as  those  I  met  with  on  this  Coast  in  my  '*  Voyage  round 
the  World  "  ;  [See  Vol.  I.  p.  453,  &c.]  for  the  Place  I  then 
touched  at  was  not  above  40  or  50  Leagues  to  the  N.  E. 
of  this  :  And  these  were  much  the  same  blinking  Creatures 
(here  being  also  abundance  of  the  same  kind  of  Flesh-flics 
teizing  them)  and  with  the  same  bla^k  Skins,  and  Hair 
frizled,  tall  and  thin,  &c.  as  those  were :  But  we  had  not 
the  Opportunity  to  see  whether  these,  as  the  former,  wanted 
two  of  their  Fore-Teeth. 

We  saw  a  great  many  places  where  they  had  made 
Fires;  and  where  there  were  commonly  3  or  4  Boughs 
stuck  up  to  Windward  of  them ;  for  the  Wind  (which  is 
the  Sea-breeze)  in  the  day-time  blows  always  one  way  witn 
them ;  and  the  Land-breeze  is  but  small.  By  their  Rrc- 
places  we  should  always  find  great  heaps  of  Fish-shells,  of 

440 


R 


NATIVES   OF   NEW    HOLLAND— TIDES 

eVCTsl  sorts ;  and  'tis  probable  that  these  poor  Creatures 
src  iiveii  chiefly  on  the  Shell-fish,  as  those  I  before  1699 
escrib'd  did  on  small  Fish,  which  they  caught  in  Wire 
r  Holes  in  the  Sand  at  Low-water.  These  gather'd  their 
tiell'fish  on  the  Rocks  at  Low-water;  but  had  no  Wires 
:hat  wc  saw)  whereby  to  get  any  other  sorts  of  Fish  :  As 
Dong  the  former  I  saw  not  any  heaps  of  Shells  as  here, 
lough  I  know  they  also  gather'd  some  Shell-fish.  The 
«nccs  also  of  those  were  such  as  these  had  ;  however  they 
ing  upon  an  Island,  with  their  Women  and  Children,  and 
in  nur  Power,  they  did  not  there  use  them  against  us, 
here  on  the  Continent,  where  we  saw  none  but  some  of 
E  Men  under  Head,  who  come  out  purposely  to  observe 
Wc  saw  no  Houses  at  either  Place;  and  I  believe 
cy  have  none,  since  the  former  People  on  the  Island  had 
ne,  tho"  they  had  all  their  Families  with  them. 

Upon  returning  to  my  Men  I  saw  that  though  they 
d  dug  8  or  9  Foot  deep,  yet  found  no  Water.  So  1 
ra  aboard  that  Evening,  and  the  next  day,  being 
ibcr  1st,  1  sent  my  Boatswain  ashore  to  dig  deeper, 
id  »ent  the  Sain  with  him  to  catch  Fish.  While  I  staid 
^oord  I  observed  the  flowing  of  the  Tide,  which  runs  very 
'ift  here,  so  that  our  Nun-buoy '  would  not  bear  above 
:  Water  to  be  seen.  It  flows  here  (as  on  that  part  of 
Holland  I  described  formerly)  about  5  Fathom :  And 
■e  the  Flood  runs  S.  E.  by  S.  till  the  last  Quarter ;  then 
lets  right  in  towards  the  Shore  (which  lies  here  S,  S.  W. 
■d  N.  N.  E.)  and  the  Ebb  runs  N.  W.  by  N.  When  the 
idcs  slackned  wc  fish'd  with  Hook  and  Line,  as  we  had 
Ircmdy  done  in  several  Places  on  this  Coast ;  on  which  in 
'1  Voyage  hitherto,  wc  had  found  but  little  Tides:  Bi2t 
f  the  Hcighth,  and  Strength,  and  Course  of  them  here- 
touts,  it  should  seem  that  if  there  be  such  a  Passage  or 
reight  going  through  Eastward  to  the  Great  South-Sea, 
I  said  otie  might  suspect,  one  would  expect  to  find  the 


'  Tbc  DitD-tnMy  it  «  broad  ryliiidcr  in  iis  middle  p.in  and  iiipera  to  » 
K  ai  eSiCh  c)m1.  In  ibc  day*  of  hemp  c;ibln  lurh  a  buoy  waa  £asten»d 
I  rape  lo  llu  anrhnr  "  to  dcteimine  the  place  where  the  amrhnr  lay," 
;  the  ibip  might  not  coone  too  near  it  10  enianKle  her  cable  about  the 


J 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

^^    Mouth  of  it  somewhere  between  this  Place  and  Rosemary 
1699  island,  which  was  the  part  of  New  Holland  I  came  last 
rom. 

Next  Morning  my  Men  came  aboard  and  brought  a 
Rundlet  of  brackish  Water  which  they  got  out  of  another 
Well  that  they  dug  in  a  Place  a  mile  off,  and  about  half  as 
far  from  the  Shore ;  but  this  Water  was  not  fit  to  drint 
However  we  all  concluded  that  it  would  serve  to  boil  our 
Oatmeal,  for  Burgoo,^  whereby  we  might  save  the  Remains 
of  our  other  Water  for  drinking,  till  we  should  get  more; 
and  accordingly  the  next  Day  we  brought  aboard  4  Hogs- 
heads of  it :  But  while  we  were  at  work  about  the  Well 
we  were  sadly  pestcr'd  with  the  Flies,  which  were  more 
troublesome  to  us  than  the  Sun,  tho'  it  shone  clear  and 
strong  upon  us  all  the  while,  very  hot.  All  this  while  wc 
saw  no  more  of  the  Natives,  but  saw  some  of  the  Smoab 
of  some  of  their  Fires  at  2  or  3  miles  distance. 

The  Land  hereabouts  was  much  like  the  part  of  New 
Holland  that  I  formerly  described  [Vol.  I.  p.  452],  'tis 
low,  but  seemingly  barricado*d  with  a  long  Chain  of  Sand- 
hills to  the  Sea,  that  let's  nothing  be  seen  of  what  is  farther 
within  Land.     At  high  Water  the  Tides  rising  so  high  as 
they  do,  the  Coast  shews  very  low ;  but  when  *tis  low  Water 
it  seems  to  be  of  an  indifferent  height h.     At  low  Water- 
mark the  Shore  is  all  Rocky,  so  that  then  there  is  no  Landing 
with  a  Boat ;  but  at  high  Water  a  Boat  may  come  in  over 
those  Rocks  to  the  Sandy  Bay,  which  runs  all  along  on  this 
Coast.     The  Land  by  the  Sea  for  about  5  or  6cx)  yards  is 
a  dry  Sandy  Soil,  bearing  only  Shrubs  and  Bushes  of  divers 
sorts.     Some  of  these  had  them  at  this  time  of  the  Year, 
yellow  Flowers  or  Blossoms,  some  blue,  and  some  white; 
most  of  them  of  a  very  fragrant  Smell.     Some  had  Fruit 
like  Peascods ;  in  each  of  which  there  were  just  ten  small 
Peas :   I   opened  many  of  them,  and  found  no  more  nor 
less.     There  are  also  here  some  of  that  sort  of  Bean  which 
I  saw  at  Rosemary-Island :  And  another  sort  of  small,  red, 
hard  Pulse,  growing  in  Cods  also,  with  little  black  Eyes 

'  Porridge.    The  word  is  still  in  use  at  sea. 

442 


THEIR    BEASTS    AND    FOWLS 

I  know  not  their  Names,  but  have  seen  them  am.  ' 
often  in  the  East-Indies  for  weighing  Gold  ;  and  they  '*99j 
ce  the  same  use  of  them  at  Guinea,  as  I  have  heard, 
rrc  the  Women  also  make  Bracelets  with  them  to  wear 
ut  their  Arms.  These  grow  on  Bushes ;  but  here  are 
(  a  Fruit  like  Beans  growing  on  a  creeping  sort  of 
ub-likc  Vine.  There  was  a  great  plenty  of  all  these 
3  of  Oxl-fruit  growing  on  the  Sand-hills  by  the  Sea- 
I,  some  of  them  green,  some  npe,  and  some  fallen  on 

Ground :  But  1  could  not  perceive  that  any  of  them 
been  gathered  by  the  Natives;  and  might  not  probably 
wholesome  Food. 

The  Land  farther  in,  that  is  lower  than  what  borders 
the  Sea,  was  so  much  as  we  saw  of  it,  very  plain  and 
Ji ;  partly  Savannahs,  and  partly  Woodland.  The 
innahs  bear  a  sort  of  thin  coarse  Grass.  The  Mould  is 
a  a  coarser  Sand  than  thai  by  the  Sea-side,  and  in  some 
ce»  'tis  Clay.  Here  are  a  great  many  Rocks  in  the  large 
taniuh  wc  were  in,  which  are    5   or  6  Foot  high,  and 

ad  at  top  like  a  Hay-cock,  very  remarkable;  some  red, 
some  white.      The    Woodland    lies  farther  in  still  ; 

re  there   were  divers  sorts  of  small  Trees,  scarce   any 

:c  Foot  in  circumference;  their  Bodies  12  or  14  Foot 
)i,  with  I  Head  of  small  Knibs  or  Boughs.  By  the 
s  of  the  Creeks,  especially  nigh  the  Sea,  there  grow  a 
'  small  black  Mangrove-Trees. 

There  are  but  few  Land-Animals.  I  saw  some  Lizards ; 
,  my  Men  saw  two  or  three  Beasts  like  hungry  Wolves,' 
1  like  so  many  Skeletons,  being  nothing  but  Skin  and 
ics:  *Tis  probable  that  it  was  the  Foot  of  one  of  those 
sts  that  I  mention 'd  as  seen  by  us  in  N.  Holland,  [Vol, 
P'  45  j}'  ^^  ^^  ^  Rackoon*  or  two,  and  one  small 
ickJed  Snake. 

The  Land-fowls  that  we  saw  here  were  Crows  (just 
■h  as  ours  in  E\ngland)  small  Hawks,  and  Kites;  a  few 
each  sort:  But  here  arc  plenty  of  small  Turtle-Doves, 
t  are  plump,  fat  and  very  good  Meat.     Here  are  2  or  3 


>  Pn)t«bt]r  diOK''' 


'  I'crliapt  bandicooU. 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    sorts  of  smaller  Birds,  some  as  big  as  Larks,  some  less ;  but 
^^  not   many  of  cither   sort.      The   Sea-Fowl  arc  Pelicans, 
Boobies,  Noddies,  Curlews,  See-pies,  &c.  and  but  few  of 
these  neither. 

The  Sea  is  plentifully  stock'd  with  the  largest  Whales 
that  I  ever  saw ;  but  not  to  compare  with  the  vast  ones  of 
the  Northern  Seas.  We  saw  also  a  great  many  Green 
Turtle,  but  caught  none ;  here  being  no  place  to  set  a 
Turtle-Net  in ;  here  being  no  Channel  for  them,  and  the 
Tides  running  so  strong.  We  saw  some  Sharks,  and 
Parracoots;  and  with  Hooks  and  Lines  we  caught  some 
Rock-fish  and  Old-Wives.  Of  Shell-fish,  here  were  Oysters 
both  of  the  common  kind  for  Eating,  and  of  the  Pearl 
kind :  And  also  Wilks,  Conchs,  Muscles,  Limpits,  Perri- 
winkles,  &c.  and  I  gathered  a  few  strange  Shells ;  chiefly  a 
sort  not  large,  and  thick-set  all  about  with  Rays  or  Spikes 
growing  in  Rows. 

And  thus  having  ranged  about,  a  considerable  time, 
upon  this  Coast,  without  finding  any  good  fresh  Water,  or 
any  convenient  Place  to  clean  the  Ship,  as  I  had  hop'dfor: 
And  it  being  moreover  the  heighth  of  the  dry  Season,  and 
my  Men  growing  Scorbutick  for  want  of  Refreshments, 
so  that  I  had  little  incouragement  to  search  further;  I 
resolved  to  leave  this  Coast,  and  accordingly  in  the  begin- 
ning of  September  set  sail  towards  Timor. 


444 


AN     ACCOUNT 

OF  SEVERAL 

PLANTS 

COLLECTED    IN 

ASIL,  NEW  HOLLAND,  TIMOR,  AND  NEW 
GUINEA,  REFERRING  TO  THE  FIGURES  EN- 
GRAVEN ON   THE  COPPER  PLATES 

AB.     I.    Fig.    I.    Cotton-flower    from    Baya '    in 

Brazil.     1  he  Flower  consists  of  a  great  many  ' 

Filaments,  almost  as  small  as  Hairs,  betwixt  three 

and  four  Inches  long,  of  a  Murrey-colour;'  on 

Top  of  them  stand  small  ash-colour'd  Apices.     The 

Icule  of  the  Flowur  is  inclos'd  at  the  Bottom  with   5 

iw  stiff  Leaves,  about  6  Inches  long.     There  is  one  of 

Genus  in  Mr.  Ray's  Supplement,  which  agrees  exactly 

lih  this  in  every  Respect,  only  that  is  twice  larger  at  the 

t.     It  was  sent  from  Surinam  by  the  Name  of  Momoo. 

Tab.    I,    Fig.    2.   Jasminum    Brasilianum    luleum,   tna/i 

tmi^  folio  Htrvosn,  pelalis  crassis. 

Tib.  I.  Fig.  3.  Crista  Pavonis  Brasiiiana  Bardan^  foliii. 
K  Leaves  are  very  tender  and  Hkc  the  top  Leaves  of 
lama  majtr,  both  as  to  Shape  and  Texture :  In  the 
jure  they  arc  represented  too  stiff  and  too  much  serrated. 
T»b.  I.  Fig.  4.  Fi/ix  Brasiiiana  Osmuna^  minori  serrate 
I,  This  Fern  is  of  that  Kind,  which  bears  its  Sced- 
•eb  in  Lines  on  the  Edge  of  the  Leaves. 

*  B«hift.  *  or  tfve  rolout  u(  A  mulberry. 

445 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Tab.  2.  Fig.  i.  Rapuntium  Nova  Hollandist^floremaffiQ 

>699  coccineo.  The  Perianthium  compos'd  of  five  long-pointed 
Parts,  the  Form  of  the  Seed- Vessel  and  the  Smallncss  of 
the  Seeds,  together  with  the  irr^ular  Shape  of  the  Flower 
and  Thinness  of  the  Leaves,  argue  this  plant  to  be  a 
Rapuntium. 

Tab.  2.  Fig.  2.  Fucus  foltis  capillaceis  brevissimis^  vesiculis 
minimis  donatis.  This  elegant  Fucus  is  of  the  Erica  Marina 
or  Sargoza  kind,  but  has  much  finer  Parts  than  that.  It 
was  collected  on  this  Coast  of  New  Holland. 

Tab.  2.  Fig.  2.  Ricinoides  Nova  Hollandiie  anguhso  crasse 
folio.  This  Plant  is  shrubby,  has  thick  woolly  Leaves, 
especially  on  the  under  side.  Its  Fruit  is  tricoccous,  hoary 
on  the  out-side  with  a  Calix  divided  into  5  Parts.  It 
comes  near  Ricini  fructu  parvo  frucosa  Curassavica^  fiSs 
Phylli,  P.  B.pr. 

Tab.  2.  Fig.  2.  Solatium  spinosum  Nova  Hollandia  PkjB 
foliis  subrotundis.  This  new  Solanum  bears  a  blueish  Flower 
like  the  others  of  the  same  Tribe ;  the  Leaves  are  of  a 
whitish  Colour,  thick  and  woolly  on  both  Sides,  scarce  an 
Inch  long  and  near  as  broad.  The  Thorns  arc  very  sharp 
and  thick  set,  of  a  deep  Orange  colour,  especially  towards 
the  Points. 

Tab,  3.  Fig.  i.  Scabiosa  {forte)  Nova  Hollandia^  staica 
foliis  subtus  argenteis.  The  Flower  stands  on  a  Foot-stalk 
4  Inches  long,  included  in  a  rough  Calix  of  a  yellowish 
Colour.  The  Leaves  are  not  above  an  Inch  long,  very 
narrow  like  Thrift,  green  on  the  upper  and  hoary  on  the 
under  side,  growing  in  Tufts.  Whether  this  Plant  be  a 
Scabious,  Thrift  or  Helichrysum  is  hard  to  judge  from  the 
imperfect  Flower  of  the  dry*d  Specimen. 

Tab.  3.  Fig.  2.  Alcea  Nova  Hollandia  foliis  augusus 
utrinque  villosis.  The  Leaves,  Stalk,  and  under  side  of  the 
Perianthium  of  this  Plant  are  all  woolly.  The  Petala  arc 
very  tender,  5  in  Number,  scarce  so  large  as  the  Calix :  In 
the  Middle  stands  a  Columella  thick  set  with  thrummy 
apiculae,  which  argue  this  Plant  to  belong  to  the  Malvaceous 
Kind. 

Tab.  3.  Fig.  3.     Of  what  Genus  this  Shrub  or  Tree  is, 

446 


AN   ACCOUNT   OF    PLANTS 

Uncertain,  agreeing  with  none   yet  described,  as    far  as    an,    ' 
be  judg'd  by  the  State  it  is  in.     It  has  a  very  beautiful  '^ 
pfcr,  of  a  red  Colour,  as  far  as  can  be  guess'd  by  the  dry 
:imcn,  consisting  of    lO    large    Petala,  hoary  on    both  i 

s,  especially  umlerneath  ;  the  Middle  of  the  Flower  is 
k  set  with  Stamina,  which  are  woolly  at  the  Bottom,  I 

Length  of  the  Petala.  each  of  them  crown'd  with  its  I 

3t.     The  Calix  is  divided  into   5  round  pointed  Parts.  I 

e  Leaves  are  like  those  of  Amelanchier  Lob.  green  at  Top 
,  very  woolly  underneath,  not  running  to  a  Point,  as  is  1 

unon  in  others,  but  with  an  Indenture  at  the  upper-end. 
T»b.  3.  Fig,  4.  Dammam  ax  Nova-HollnnJia,  Sanamund,^ 
mdx  Cftysii  film.  This  new  Genus  was  first  sent  from 
iboyna  by  Mr.  Rumphius,  by  the  Name  of  Dammara, 
irhich  he  transmitted  2  Kinds ;  one  with  narrow  and 
g  stiff  Leaves,  the  other  with  shorter  and  broader.  The 
t  of  them  is  mention'd  in  Mr.  Petivcr's  Ceniuria,  p.  350.  ' 

the  name  of  Arbor  Horlensis  Jai^anorum  fo/iis  viite  augus- 
ihui  aromaijcis  fioribus,  spicans  siamlneis  luusceni'ihus ;  Mus. 
As  also  in  Mr.  Ray's  Supplement  to  his  History  of 
Its  now  in  the  Press.  This  is  of  the  same  Genus  with 
1,  agreeing  both  in  Flower  and  Fruit,  tho'  very  much 
ring  in  Leaves,  The  Flowers|are  stamineous  and  seem 
be  of  an  herbaceous  Colour,  growing  among  the  Leaves, 
ich  are  short  and  almost  round,  very  stiff  and  ribb'd  on 
;  under  side,  of  a  dark  Green  above,  and  a  pale  Colour 
ftcmeath,  thick  set  on  by  Pairs,  answering  one  another 
■sways,  so  that  they  cover  the  Stalk.     The  Fruit  is  as  ' 

as  a  Pepper-corn,  almost  round,  of  a  whitish  Colour, 
and  tough,  with  a  Hole  on  the  top,  containing  small 
i*.  Any  one  thai  sees  this  Plant  without  its  Seed- 
■cls,  would  take  it  for  an  Erica  or  Sanamunda.  The 
ffcs  of  this  Plant  are  of  a  very  aromatick  Taste. 
Tab.  4.  Kig,  l.  E^uiseiam  Nov^  IhllanM^  fruiesceus feliis 
pssimis.  'I'ts  doubtful  whether  this  be  an  Exjuisetum  or 
;  the  Textures  of  the  Leaves  agree  best  with  that 
lus  of  any,  being  articulated  one  within  another  at  each 
It,  which  is  only  proper  to  this  Tribe.  The  longest  of 
D  arc  about  9  Inches.  j 

447 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Tab.  4.  Fig.  2.  Colutea  Nova  Hollandiie  flmbus  ampRs 

'^  coccineis^  umbellatim  dispositis  macula  purpurea  notatis.  There 
being  no  Leaves  to  this  Plant,  'tis  hard  to  say  what  Genus 
it  properly  belongs  to.  The  Flowers  are  very  like  to  the 
Colutea  Barba  Jovis  folio  flore  coccineo  Breynii ;  of  the  same 
Scarlet  Colour,  with  a  large  deep  Purple  Spot  in  the  Vcxil- 
lum,  but  much  bigger,  coming  all  from  the  same  Point  after 
the  Manner  of  an  Umbel.  The  Rudiment  of  the  Pod  is 
very  woolly,  and  terminates  in  a  Filament  near  2  Inches  long. 

Tab.  4.  Fig.  3.  Conyza  Nova  Hollandia  angusiis  Raris- 
marini  foliis.  This  Plant  is  very  much  branched  and  seems 
to  be  woody.  The  Flowers  stand  on  very  short  Pedicules, 
arising  from  the  Sinus  of  the  Leaves,  which  are  exactly 
like  Rosemary,  only  less.     It  tastes  very  bitter  now  dry. 

Tab.  4.  Fig.  4.  Mohoh  Infula  Timor.  This  is  a  very 
odd  Plant,  agreeing  with  no  described  Genus.  The  Leaf  is 
almost  round,  green  on  the  upper  side  and  whitish  under- 
neath, with  several  Fibres  running  from  the  Insertion  of 
the  Pedicule  towards  the  Circumference  'tis  umbilicated  as 
Cotyledon  aquatica  and  Faba  MgyptiH.  The  Flowers  are  white, 
standing  on  single  Foot-stalks,  of  the  Shape  of  a  Stramonium, 
but  divided  into  4  Points  only,  as  is  the  Perianthium. 

Tab.  5.  Fig.  i.  Fucus  ex  Nova  Guinea  uva  marina 
dictus^  foliis  variis.  This  beautiful  Fucus  is  thick  set  with 
very  small  short  Tufts  of  Leaves,  which  by  the  Help  of  a 
magnifying  Glass,  seem  to  be  round  and  articulated,  as  if 
they  were  Seed- Vessels ;  besides  these,  there  are  other  broad 
Leaves,  chiefly  at  the  Extremity  of  the  Branches,  serrated 
on  the  Edges.  The  Vesiculae  are  round,  of  the  Bigness 
expressed  in  the  Figure. 

Tab.  5.  Fig.  2.  Fucus  ex  Nova  Guinea  Fluviatilis  Pisani 
J,  B.  foliis.  These  Plants  are  so  apt  to  vary  in  their 
Leaves,  according  to  their  different  States,  that  *tis  hard  to 
say  this  is  distinct  from  the  last.  It  has  in  several 
Places  (not  all  express'd  in  the  Figure)  some  of  the  smal' 
short  Leaves,  or  Seed- Vessels  mention*d  in  the  former; 
which  makes  me  apt  to  believe  it  the  same,  gathered  in  * 
different  State ;  besides  the  broad  Leaves  of  that  and  this 
agree  as  to  their  Shape  and  Indentures. 

448 


ant/  fhunJ  tn  J^u^  ^vUand.  3c  J'tm  a 


V 


i 


i 


«      M^ 


i 

nyjiit  nur  ,  ^ 

X,. 

tf  jt?S 

f 

Jf ! 


kiiili 


'1 


AN   ACCOUNT  OF  SOME  FISHES  THAT  ARE 
FIGURED   IN  PLATE   2   &   3. 

See  Plate  3,  Fig.  5. 

THIS  is  a  Fish  of  the  Tunny-kind,  and  agrees 
well  enough  with  the  Figure  in  Tab.  3.  of  the 
Appendix  to  Mr.  Willughby's  History  of  Fishes 
under  the  Name  of  Gurabuca ;  it  differs  some- 
thing, in  the  Fins  especially,  from  Piso's  Figure  of  the 
Guarapucu. 

See  Plate  3,  Fig.  4. 

This  resembles  the  Figure  of  the  Guaperva  maxima 
candata  in  Willughby*s  Ichthyol.  Tab.  9,  23,  and  the 
Guaperva  of  Piso,  but  does  not  answer  their  Figures  in 
every  particular. 

See  Plate  2,  Fig.  2. 

There  are  2  sorts  of  Porpusses:  The  one  the  long- 
snouted  Porpuss,  as  the  Seamen  call  it ;  and  this  is  the 
Dolphin  of  the  Greeks.  The  other  is  the  Bottle-nose 
Porpuss,  which  is  generally  thought  to  be  the  Phaecena 
of  Aristotle. 

See  Plate  2,  Fig.  7. 

This  is  the  Guaracapema  of  Piso  and  Marcgravc,  by 
others  called  the  Dorado.      'Tis  figured   in  Willughby's 
Ichthyol.  Tab.  O.  2.  under  the  Name  of  Delphin  Belgis. 
VOL.  II.  449  2  F 


:i  !i:-;lll. 


CONTINUATION 

OF     A 

VOYAGE 

TO 

NEW-HOLLAND,  &c. 
In   the  Year    1699. 

Wbertin  arc  defcribed. 
The  Iflands  Timor,  Rotee  and  Anabao.  A  Paffage 
between  the  IHands  Timor  and  Anabao.  Copang 
ind  Laphao  Bays.  The  Iflands  Omba,  Feller, 
Bande  and  Bird.  A  Defcrlption  of  the  Coaft  oi" 
New-GHiHea.  The  lilands  Pulo  Sabuda,  Cockle, 
King  H^illiam'i,  Providence,  Garret  Dennis,  Ant. 
Cave's  and  St.  John's.  Alfo  a  new  Paffage  be- 
tween A'.  Guinea  and  Nova  Britannia.  The  Iflands 
Ceram,  Bonao,  Bouro,  and  feveral  Iflands  before 
unknown.  The  Coaft  of  Java,  and  Strcights 
of  Sunda.  Author's  Arrival  at  Balavia,  Cape 
of  Good  Hope,  St.  Helens,  I.  Afenfion,  &c. 
Their  Inhabitants,  Cuftoms,  Trade,  6?c.  Har- 
bours, Soil.  Birds,  Fifh,  &?f.  Trees,  Plants, 
Fruits,  i£c. 


Nnftntcd  with  Maps  and  Draughts:  Alfo  divers  Birds, 
Fitbet,  Sft.  not  (bund  in  this  Part  of  the  World,  Ingraven 
Eighteen  Copper-Plates. 

By  Captain  William  Dampier. 


L    O    N    !>     O    N, 

IPrintcd  for  Jamks  umi/John  Knapton,  at  the 
Cratiw  in  St.  /*<w(/'s  Church-Yard.  Mdccxxix. 


ITHE    CONTENTS 


CHAP.    I 

*HE  A.*s  Departure  from  the  Coast  of  New    Holland, 

with   the   Reasons  of  it,     Water-Snakes.     The   A.'s 

rival  at  the  Island  Timor.     Search  for  fresh  Water 

on  the  South-side  of  the  Island,  in  vain.     Fault  of  the 

Charts.     The  Island  Rotee.     A  Passage  between  the 

1  Timor  and  Anabao.     Fault  of  the  Charts.     A    Dutch 

,   called    Concordia.       Their    Suspicion    of    the    A.     The 

nd  Atiabao  described.     The  A.'s  Parly  with  the  Governour 

fuhe  Dutch  Fo(t.     They,  with  great  Difficulty,  obtain  leave 

[.water.     Copang   Bay.     Coasting   along   the   North-side   of 

They  find  Water  and  an  Anchoring- place,     A  Dcscrip- 

I  of  a  utial)  Island,  seven  Leagues  East  from  the  Watering 

Laphao  Bay.      How  the  A,  was  treated  by  the  Portugueze 

Designs  of  making  further  Searches  upon  and  about  the 

Port  Sesial.     Return  to  Babao  in  Copang  Bay.     The 

I  Entertainment  at  the  Fort  of  Concordia.      His  stay  seven 

t  Babao. 


CHAP.     II 

licubif  Description  of  the  Island  Timor.  It!t  Coast.  The 
Ind  Anabao.  Fault  of  the  Draughts.  The  Channel  between 
Itouif  and  Anabao.  Copang>bay.  Fort  Concordia.  A  par- 
Description  of  ihc  Bay.  The  Anchoring-place,  called 
The  Malayans  here  kill  all  the  Europeans  (hey  can. 
,  a  Ponugueze  Settlement,  described.  Port  Ciccale. 
Hills,  Water,  Low-lands,  Soil,  Woods,  Metals  <n  the 
knd  Timor.  Its  Trees.  Can  a  •fistula  •tree  described.  Wild 
Street  dcKribed.  Two  new  Sorts  of  Palm-trees  described. 
I  Fniin  of  (he  Island.  The  Herbs,  Its  I-and  Animals. 
■rU.  The  Ringing  Bird,  It^  Fiih.  Cockle-merchants  and 
Cockles  a«  big  as  a  Man's  Head.  Its  original  Natives 
453 


THE  CONTENTS 

described.  The  Portugueze  and  Dutch  Settlements.  The 
Malayan  Language  generally  spoken  here.  L'  Orantuca  on  the 
Island  Ende.     The  Seasons,  Winds,  and  Weather  at  Timor. 


CHAP.   Ill 

Departure  from  Timor.  The  Islands  Omba  and  Fetter.  A  burning 
Island.  Their  missing  the  Turtle-Isles.  BandeJsIes.  Bird- 
Island.  They  descry  the  Coast  of  New-Guinea.  They  anchor 
on  the  Coast  of  New-Guinea.  A  Description  of  the  Place,  and 
of  a  strange  Fowl  found  there.  Great  Quantities  of  Mackerel 
A  white  Island.  They  anchor  at  an  Island  called  by  the 
Inhabitants  Pulo  Sabuda.  A  Description  of  it,  and  i5 
Inhabitants  and  Product.  The  Indians  manner  of  Fishing  there. 
Arrival  at  Mabo,  the  North  West  Cape  of  New-Guinea.  A 
Description  of  it.  Cockle-Island.  Cockles  of  seventy-eight 
Pound  Weight.  Pidgeon-Island.  The  Wind  hereabouts.  An 
empty  Cockle-shell  weighing  two  hundred  fifty-eight  Pound. 
King  William's  Island.  A  Description  of  it.  Plying  on  the 
Coast  of  New-Guinea.  Fault  of  the  Draughts.  Providence 
Island.  They  cross  the  Line.  A  Snake  pursued  by  Fish. 
Squally  Island.     The  Main  of  New-Guinea. 


CHAP.   IV 

The  main  Land  of  New-Guinea.     Its  Inhabitants.     Slfngers  Bar. 
Small  Islands.     Garret  Dennis  Isle  described.     Its  Inhabitants. 
Their  Proes.     Anthony  Cave's  Island.     Its  Inhabitants.    Trees 
full  of  Worms  found  in  the  Sea.     St.  John's  Island.     The  main 
Land  of  New-Guinea.     Its  Inhabitants.   The  Coast  described. 
Cape  and  Bay  St.  George.     Cape  Orford.     Another  Bay.    The 
Inhabitants  there.     A  large  Account  of  the  Author's  Attempts 
to  trade  with  thent     He  names  the   Place   Port    Mountague. 
The  Country  thereabouts  described,  and  its  Produce.     A  Burn- 
ing Island  described.     A  new  Passage  found.     Nova  Britannia. 
Sir  George  Rook's  Island.     Long  Island  and    Crown   Island, 
discovered  and   described.     Sir  R.   Rich's  Island.     A  Burning 
Island.     A   strange   Spout.     A  Conjecture  concerning  a  new 
Passage   Southward.     King  William's  Island.     Strange  Whirl- 
pools.    Distance  between   Cape  Mabo  and    Cape  St.    George 
computed. 

454 


THE  CONTENTS 


CHAP.  V 

he  A/s  Return  from  the  Coast  of  New-Guinea.  A  deep  Channel. 
Strange  Tides.  The  Island  Ceram  described.  Strange  Fowls. 
The  Islands  Bonao,  Bouro,  Misacombi,  Pentare,  Laubana,  and 
Potoro.  The  Passage  between  Pentare  and  Laubana.  The 
Island  Timor.  Babao  Bay.  The  Island  Rotee.  More  Islands 
than  are  commonly  laid  down  in  the  Draughts.  Great  Currents. 
Whales.  Coast  of  New-Holland.  The  Tryal-Rocks.  The 
Coast  of  Java.  Princes  Isle.  Streights  of  Sunda.  Thwart-the- 
way  Island.  Indian  Proes,  and  their  Traffick.  Passage  through 
the  Streight.     Arrival  at  Batavia. 


CHAP.   VI 

*hc  A.  continues  in  Batavia-Road  to  refit,  and  to  get  Provisions. 
English  Ships  then  in  the  Road.  Departure  from  Batavia. 
Touch  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  And  at  St.  Helena.  Arrival 
at  the  Island  of  Ascension.  A  Leak  Sprung.  Which  being 
impossible  to  be  stopped,  the  Ship  is  lost,  but  the  Men  saved. 
They  find  Water  upon  the  Island  :  And  are  brought  back  to 
England. 


455 


DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 

VOL.    III.     PART   II. 


CHAP.   I 

I  A't  Dtparlurtfrsm  iht  Ceait  of  Nnv  Holland,  %vilh  tht  Reasont 
»/  it.  It^alfT-Snaitu  Tht  A.U  Arrival  at  the  Is/and  Timor. 
Starth  ftr  frnh  IVairr  en  tht  Soulh-fide  of  the  lilend,  in  vain. 
FamJt  if  tht  CharU.  The  liland  Riltt.  A  Pauagt  heiween  tht 
ItJamdi  Timtr  and  Anabaa.  Fault  of  tht  Chartu  A  Dutch  Fort, 
lalUd  Ctnttrdia.  Thrir  Suifiicitn  of  tht  A.  Tht  Island  Anabae 
dturiM.  The  A.'i  Parly  with  tht  Govtrnour  of  the  Dutch  Fori. 
Thty,  with  gftat  Difficulty,  obtain  Itavt  to  wattr.  Cepang  Bay. 
Coatting  along  the  Ntrth-tidt  of  Timor.  Thry  find  IVatrr  and  an 
Amluring-flafr.  A  Dncriptien  of  a  tmall  Island,  srvtn  Ltaguts 
Emit  from  the  IVatrring  Bay.  Lafihao  Bay.  How  the  A.  mai 
Irmti^  hj  tht  Portugueze  thert.  Dtiigns  of  making  further 
Starchti  Mfan  and  ahoul  tht  Iilaad.  Port  Srsial.  Return  to 
Bmho*  in  Cofaitg  Bay.      The  A.'s  Fnttrlainmrnt  at  the  Fort  of  ' 

Cncvrdia.     Hit  Stay  leven  tVieit  at  Baiat. 

kHAD  spent  about  5  Weeks  in  ranging  off  and  on    an. 
the  Coast  of   New-Holland,  a   length   of  about  30O  "^ 
Leagues:    and  had  put  in  at  3  several  Places,  to  sec 
what  there  tnight  be  thereabouts  worth  discovering ; 
It  the  same  Time  to  recruit  ray  Stock  of  fresh  Water 
Pmvisions  for  the  further  Discoveries  I  purposed  to 
-iifc.Tipt  on  the  Terra  Auatralis.     This  large  and  hitherto 
almost  unknown  Tract  of  Land  is  situated  so  very  advan- 
musly  in  the  richest  Climates  of  the  World,  the  Torrid 
Temperate   Zones;    having  in    it    especially  all   the 
Hvmtagcs  of  the  I'onid  Zone,  as  being  known  to  reach 
457 


NEW    HOLLAND 

neccs^tated  to  go  Eastward  by  the  Cape  of  Good 
ope ;  and  when  I  should  be  past  it,  'twas  requisite  I  ' 
iDuld  keep  in  a  pretty  high  Latitude,  to  avoid  the 
■ai  Trade-winds  that  would  be  against  me,  and  to  have 
■  Benefit  of  the  variable  Winds:  By  all  which  I  was  in 
danncr  unavoidably  dctermin'd  to  fall  in  first  with  those 
of  New  Holland  I  have  hitherto  been  describing, 
r  should  it  be  ask'd  why  at  my  first  making  that  Shore, 
jdid  not  coast  it  to  the  Southward,  and  that  way  try  to 
I  round  to  the  East  of  New  Holland  and  New  Guinea  ; 
nnfcss  I  was  not  for  spending  my  Time  more  than  was 
in  the  higher  Latitudes;  as  knowing  that  the 
ind  there  could  not  be  so  well  worth  the  discovering,  as 
'.  Parts  that  lay  nearer  the  Line,  and  more  directly  under 
E  Sun.  Besides,  at  the  Time  when  I  should  come  first 
New  Holland,  which  was  early  in  the  Spring,  I  must, 
I  I  stood  Southward,  have  had  for  some  Time  a  great 
mi  of  Winter-weather,  increasing  in  Severity,  though  not 
I  Time,  and  in  a  Place  altogether  unknown ;  which  my 
,  who  were  heartless  enough  to  the  Voyage  at  best, 
uld  never  have  born,  after  so  long  a  Run  as  from  Brazil 

For  these  Reasons  therefore  I  chose  to  coast  along  to 
the  Northward,  and  so  to  the  East,  and  so  thought  to 
come  round  by  the  South  of  Terra  Australis  in  my  Return 
back,  which  should  be  in  the  Summer-season  there :  And 
this  Panagc  back  also  I  now  thought  I  might  possibly  be 
able  to  shorten,  should  it  appear,  at  my  getting  to  the  East 
Cfast  of  New  Guinea,  that  there  is  a  Channel  there  coming 
■ut  into  these  Seas,  as  I  now  suspected  near  Rosemary 
Uland  :  Unless  the  high  Tides  and  great  Indraught  there- 
about should  be  occasion'd  by  the  Mouth  of  some  large 
River ;  which  hath  often  low  Lands  on  each  Side  of  its 
Outlet,  and  many  Islands  and  Sholes  lying  at  its  Entrance. 
But  I  rather  thought  it  a  Channel  or  Strcight,  than  a 
River :  And  I  was  afterwards  confirmed  in  this  Opinion, 
when  by  coasting  New  Guinea,  I  found  that  other  Parts  of 
this  great  Tract  of  Terra  Australis,  which  had  hitherto  been 
represented  u  the  Shore  of  a  Continent,  were  cenainly 
459 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 

AN.   Islands;  and  'tis  probably  the  same  with  New  Holland: 
1699  Though  for  Reasons  I  shall  afterwards  shew,  I  could  not 
return  by  the  way  I  proposM  to  my  self,  to  fix  the  Dis- 
covery.    All  that  I  had  now  seen  from  the  Latitude  of 
27  d.  South  to  25,  which  is  Shark's  Bay;  and  again  from 
thence  to  Rosemary  Islands,  and  about  the  Latitude  of  20; 
seems  to  be  nothing  but  Ranges  of  pretty  large  Islands 
against  the  Sea,  whatever  might  be  behind  them  to  die 
Eastward,  whether  Sea  or  Land,  Continent  or  Islands. 

But  to  proceed  with  my  Voyage.     Though  the  Lmd  I 
had  seen  as  yet,  was  not  very  inviting,  being  but  bantn 
towards  the  Sea,  and  affording  me  neither  fresh  Water,  nor 
any  great  Store  of  other  Refreshments,  nor  so  much  as  a  fit 
Place  for  careening;  yet  I  stood  out  to  Sea  again  widi 
Thoughts  of  coasting  still  along  Shore  (as  near  as  I  could) 
to  the  North  Eastward,  for  the  further  Discovery  of  it: 
Perswading  my  self,  that  at  least  the  Place  I  anchored  at  in 
my  Voyage  round  the  World,  in  the  Latitude  of  16  dcg. 
1 5  min.  from  which  I  was  not  now  far  distant,  would  not 
fail  to  afford  me  sweet  Water  upon  digging,  as  it  did  then; 
for  the  brackish  Water  I  had  taken  in  here,  though  it 
serv'd  tolerably  well  for  boiling,  was  yet  not  very  wholsomc. 
With  these  Intentions  I  put  to  Sea  on  the  5th  of  Sep- 
tember 1699,  with  a  gentle  Gale,  sounding  all  the  way; 
but  was  quickly  induced  to  alter  my  Design.     For  I  had 
not  been  out  above  a  Day,  but  I  found  that  the  Sholcs 
among  which  I  was  engaged  all  the  while  on  the  Coast,  and 
was  like  to  be  engaged  in,  would  make  it  a  very  tedious 
Thing  to  sail  along  by  the  Shore,  or  to  put  in  where  I 
might  have  occasion.     I  therefore  edged  farther  oflF  to  Sea, 
and  so  deepned  the  Water  from  11  to  32  Fathom.    The 
next   Day,  being  September  the    6th,  we  could  but  just 
discern  the  Land,  though  we  had  then  no  more  than  about 
30  Fathom,  uncertain  Soundings ;  For  even  while  we  were 
out  of  Sight  of  Land,  we  had  once  but  7  Fathom,  and  had 
also  great  and  uncertain  Tides  whirling  about,  that  made 
me  afraid  to  go  near  a  Coast  so  shallow,  where  we  might  be 
soon  a-ground,  and  yet  have  but  little  Wind  to  bring  us 
ofF:    For  should  a  Ship  be  near  a  Shoal,   she  might  be 

460 


WATER   SNAKES 

"d  upon  it  unavoidably  by  a  strong  Tide,  unless  there 

lid  be  a  good  Wind  to  work   her  and  keep   her  ofF.  '^ 

IS  also  on  the  7th  Day  wc  saw  no  Land,  though  our 

:cr  dccreas'd  again  to  26  Fathom  :  for  we  had  deepned 

B  I  said,  10  30. 

This  Day  wc  saw  two  Water-snakes,  different  in  Shape 

auch  as  we  had  formerly  seen.     The  one  was  very 
though  long ;  the  other  long  and  as  big  as  a  Man's 

having  a  red   Head ;  which    I  never  saw  any  have, 
lire  or  since.     Wc  had  this  Day,  Lat.    16  d.  9  m.  by 

ition. 
I  WM  by  this  Time  got  to  the  North  of  the  Place  I  had 
ight  to  have  put  in  at,  where  I  dug  Wells  in  my 
aer  Voj-agc;  and  though  I  knew  by  the  Experience  I 
of  it  then,  that  there  was  a  deep  Entrance  in  thither 
a  the  Eastward ;  yet  by  the  Shoals  I  had  hitherto  found 
IT  Mretcht  on  this  Coast,  1  was  afraid  I  should  have  the 
E  Trouble  to  coast  all  along  afterwards  beyond  that 
c:  And  besides  the  Danger  of  running  almost  con- 
ally  imongst  Shoals  on  a  strange  Shore,  and  where  the 
a  were  strong  and  high ;  I  began  to  bethink  my  self, 
I  great  Part  of  my  Time   must  have   been   spent    in 

P  about  a  Shore  I  was  already  almost  weary  off,  which  I 
I  employ  with  greater  Satisfaction  to  my  Mind,  and 
T  Hopes  of  Success  in  going  forward  to  New  Guinea, 
to  this  the  particular  Danger  I  should  have  been  in 
I  a  Lee-Shore,  such  as  is  here  dcscrib'd,  when  the  North- 
t  Monsoon  should  once  come  in ;  the  ordinary  Season 
'htch  was  not  now  far  off^,  though  this  Year  it  staid 
the  common  Season ;  and  it  comes  on  storming  at 
with  Tornadoes,  violent  Gusts,  &c.  Wherefore 
ing  the  Thoughts  of  putting  in  again  at  New  Holland, 
lolv'd  to  steer  away  for  the  Island  Timor;  where, 
les  getting  fresh  Water,  I  might  probably  expect  to 
furnished  with  Fruits,  and  other  Refreshments  to  re- 
[  my  Men,  who  began  to  droop;  some  of  them  being 
idy  to  my  great  Grief,  afBicted  with  the  Scurvy,  which 
likely  to  increase  upon  them  and  disable  them,  and  was 
inotcd   by   the  brackish  Water  they  took   in    last  for 

♦61 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AH.   boiling  their  Oatmeal.     Twas  now  also  towards  the  latter 
*^  end  of  the  dry  Season ;  when  1  might  not  probably  have 
found  Water  so  plentifully  upon  digging  at  that  Part  of 
New  Holland,   as  when   1  was  there   before  in  the  wet 
Season.      And   then,   considering    the   Time   also  that  I 
must  necessarily  spend  in  getting  in  to  the  Shore,  through 
such  Sholes  as  I  expected  to  meet  with ;  or  in  gcnng  aboot 
to  avoid  them;  and  in  digging  of  Wells  when  I  should 
come  thither:  I  might  very  well  hope  to  get  to  Timor, 
and  find  Aresh  Water  there,  as   soon  as  I    could  expctX 
to  get  it   at  New  Holland;  and  with  less  Trouble  ind 
Danger. 

On  the  8th  of  September  theref(»-e,  shaping  our  Course 
for  Timor,  we  were  in  Lat.   15  d.  37   m.     We  had  26 
Fathom,  coarse  Sand ;  and  we  saw  one  Whale.     We  found 
them  lying  most  commonly  near  the  Shore,  or  in  Shoil 
Water.     Thb  Day  we  also  saw  some  small  white  Clouds; 
the  first  that  we  had  seen  since  we  came  out  of  Shark's 
Bay.     This  was  one  Sign  of  the  Approach  of  the  N(»th- 
North-West  Monsoon.     Another  Sign  was  the  shifting  of 
the  Winds;  for  from  the  Time  of  our  coming  to  our 
last  Anchoring  place,  the  Sea-Breezes  which  before  were 
Easterly  and  very  strong,  had  been  whiffling  about  tnd 
changing  gradually  from  the  East  to  the  North,  and  thcna 
to  the  West,  blowing  but  faintly,  and  now  hanging  mostly 
in  some  Point  of  the  West.     This  Day  the  Winds  were  at 
South-West  by  West,  blowing  very  faint ;  and  the  9th  Day 
we  had  the  Wind   at  Nort^-West  by  North,  but  then 
pretty  fresh ;   and  we  saw  the  Clouds   rising    more  and 
thicker  in  the  North-West.     This  Night  at  1 2  we  lay  by 
for  a  small  low  sandy  Island,  which  I  reckoned  my  self  not 
far  from.     The  next  Morning  at  Sun-rising  we  saw  it  from 
the  Top-mast-head,  right  a-head  of  us ;  and  at  Noon  were 
up  within  a  Mile  of  it :  When,  by  a  good  Observation,  I 
found  it  to  lye  in  13  d.  55  m.    I  have  mentioned  it  in  my 
first  Vol.  pag.  450,  but  my  Account  then  made  it  to  lye  m 
13  d.  50  m.     We  had  Abundance  of  Boobies  and  Man  of 
War  Birds  flying  about  us  all  the  Day ;  especially  when  wc 
came  near  the  Island ;  which  had  also  Abundance  of  them 

462 


THE   ISLAND  TIMOR 

m  it ;  though  it  was  but  a  little  Spot  of  Sand,  scarce  a    an.  I 
Ic  round.  '^1 

I  did  not  anchor  here,  nor  send  my  Boat  ashore ;  there 
Kg  no  appearance  of  getting  any  Thing  on  that  Spot  of 
id,  besides  Birds  that  were  good  for  little :  Though  had 
ot  been  in  haste,  I  would  have  taken  some  of  them.  So 
nadc  the  best  of  my  way  to  Timor;  and  on  the  nth 
the  Afternoon  we  saw  lO  small  Land-birds,  about  the 
pess  of  Larks,  that  flew  away  North  West.  The  13th 
saw  a  great  many  Sea-snakes.  One  of  these,  of  which 
iw  great  Numbers  and  Variety  in  this  Voyage,  was  large, 
1  bII  black:  I  never  saw  such  another  for  his  Colour. 
Wc  had  now  had  for  some  Days  small  Gales,  from  the 
mh-Souih-West  to  the  North-North-West,  and  the  Sky 
U  more  cloudy  especially  in  the  Mornings  and  Evenings. 
K  14th  it  look'd  very  black  in  the  North-West  all  the 
ly;  and  a  little  before  Sun-set  we  saw,  to  our  great  Joy, 
S  Tops  of  the  high  Mountains  of  Timor,  peeping  out  of 
)  Clouds,  which  had  before  covered  them,  as  they  did 
U  the  lower  Parts. 

Wc  were  now  running  directly  towards  the  Middle  of 
B  Uland,  on  the  South-side :  But  I  was  in  some  doubt 
lethcr  I  should  run  down  along  Shore  on  this  South-side 
.5  the  East-end  ;  or  pass  about  the  West-end,  and  so 
along  on  the  North-side,  and  go  that  way  towards 
East-end :  But  as  the  Winds  were  now  Westerly,  1 
lUght  it  best  to  keep  on  the  South-side,  till  I  should  see 
¥  the  Weather  would  prove  ;  For,  as  the  Island  lies,  if 
Westerly  Winds  continued  and  grew  tempestuous,  I 
luld  be  under  the  Lee  of  it,  and  have  smooth  Water, 
i  so  could  go  along  Shore  more  safely  and  easily  on  this 
(oth-sidc:  I  could  sooner  also  run  to  the  East -end,  where 
iTt  is  the  best  Shelter,  as  being  still  more  under  the  Lee 
the  Island  when  those  Winds  blow.  Or  if,  on  the  other 
le,  the  Winds  should  conic  about  again  to  the  Eastward, 
could  but  turn  back  again  (as  I  did  afterwards) ;  and 
Ming  about  the  West-end,  could  there  prosecute  my 
arch  on  the  North-side  of  the  Island  for  Water,  or 
ihabttants,  or  a  good  Harbour,  or  whatever  might  be 
+63 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    useful  to  me.     For  both  Sides  of  the  Island  were  hitherto 
>699  alike  to  me,  being  wholly  unacquainted  here ;  only  as  I  hid 
seen  it  at  a  Distance  in  my  former  Voyage.     [See  Vol.  L 
pag.  450.] 

I  had  heard  also,  that  there  were  both  Dutch  and 
Portugueze  Settlements  on  this  Island ;  but  whereabouts,  I 
knew  not :  However,  I  was  resolved  to  search  about  till 
I  found,  either  one  of  these  Settlements,  or  Water  in  some 
other  place. 

It  was  now  almost  Night,  and  I  did  not  care  to  run 
near  the  Land  in  the  dark,  but  clapt  on  a  Wind,  and  stood 
off  and  on  till  the  next  Morning,  being  September  15th, 
when  I  steered  in  for  the  Island,  which  now  appeared  very 
plain,  being  high,  double  and  treble  Land,  very  remarkable, 
on  whatever  Side  you  view  it.  A  Sight  of  it  in  2  Partt^ 
Table  V.  [omitted].  At  3  in  the  Afternoon  we  anchored 
in  14  Fathom,  soft  black  oasy  Ground,  about  a  Mile  from 
the  Shore.  See  2  Sights  more  of  the  Coast,  in  Tabic  V. 
[omitted],  and  the  Island  it  self  in  the  Particular  Mip; 
which  I  have  here  inserted,  to  shew  the  Course  of  the 
Voyage  from  hence  to  the  Eastward ;  as  the  General  Map, 
set  before  the  Title  Vol.  III.  Par.  I.  shews  the  Course  of 
the  whole  Voyage.  But  in  making  the  Particular  Map,  I 
chose  to  begin  only  with  Timor,  that  I  might  not,  by 
extending  it  too  far,  be  forced  to  contract  the  Scale  too 
much  among  the  Islands,  &c.  of  the  New  Guinea  Coast; 
which  I  chiefly  designed  it  for. 

The  Land  by  the  Sea,  on  this  South-side,  is  low  and 
sandy,  and  full  of  tall  Streight-bodied  Trees  like  Fines, 
for  about  200  Yards  inwards  from  the  Shore.  Beyond 
that,  further  in  towards  the  Mountains,  for  a  Breadth  of 
about  3  Miles  more  or  less,  there  is  a  Tract  of  swampy 
Mangrovy  Land,  which  runs  all  along  between  the  sandy 
Land  of  the  Shore  on  one  Side  of  it,  and  the  Feet  of  the 
Mountains  on  the  other.  And  this  low  Mangrovy  Land 
is  overflown  every  Tide  of  Flood,  by  the  Water  that  flows 
into  it  through  several  Mouths  or  Openings  in  the  outer 
sandy  Skirt  against  the  Sea.  We  came  to  an  Anchor  right 
against  one  of  these  Openings  ;  and  presently  I  went  in  my 

464 


•S' 


THE   ISLAND   TIMOR 

t  to  search  for  fresh  Water,  or  get  Speech  of  the 
ivcs ;  for  we  saw  Smoaks,  Houses,  and  Plantations  '^  j 
inst  [he  Sides  of  the  Mountains,  not  far  from  us.  It 
cbtnng  Water  before  we  got  ashore,  though  the  Water 
still  high  enough  to  float  us  in  without  any  great 
table.  After  we  were  within  the  Mouth,  we  found  a 
|e  Salt-Watcr  Lake,  which  we  hoped  might  bring  us 
through  the  Mangroves  to  the  fast  Land :  But  before 
went  further.  I  went  ashore  on  the  sandy  Land  by  the 
ide,  and  look'd  about  me ;  but  saw  there  no  Sign  of 
Water.  Within  the  sandy  Bank,  the  Water  forms 
:  Lake :  Going  therefore  into  the  Boat  again,  we 
up  the  Lake  towards  the  firm  Land,  where  no  doubt 
was  fresh  Water,  could  we  come  at  it.  We  found 
jy  Branches  of  the  Lake  entring  within  the  Mangrove 
td,  but  not  beyond  it.  Of  these  we  left  some  on  the 
ht-hand,  and  some  on  the  Left,  still  keeping  in  the 
rest  Channel ;  which  still  grew  smaller,  and  at  last  so 
row,  that  we  could  go  no  farther,  ending  among  the 
imp«  and  Mangroves,  Wc  were  then  within  a  Mile 
lome  Houses  of  the  Indian  Inhabitants,  and  the  firm 
id  by  the  Sides  of  the  Hills ;  But  the  Mangroves  thus 
IfMng  our  way,  we  return 'd  as  we  came  :  But  it  was 
Mt  dark  before  wc  rcach'd  the  Mouth  of  the  Creek. 
ns  with  much  ado  that  we  got  out  of  it  again  ;  for  it 
now  low  Water,  and  there  went  a  rough  short  Sea 
the  Bar;  which,  however,  wc  past  over  without  any 
liage,  and  went  aboard. 

The  next  Morning  at  five  wc  weighed,  and  stood  along 
•c  to  the  Kastward,  making  use  of  the  Sea  and  Land- 
xci.  Wc  found  the  Sea-Breezes  here  from  the  S.  S.  E. 
&  S.  W,  the  Ijnd-Brcczcs  from  the  N.  to  the  N.  E. 
coasted  along  about  20  Leagues,  and  found  it  all  a 
tahty  bold,  even  Shore,  without  Points,  Creeks  or 
C5  for  I  Ship:  And  there  is  no  anchoring  till  within 
Rie  or  ft  Mile  and  an  half  of  the  Shore.  Wc  saw  scarce 
Opening  fit  for  our  Boats;  and  the  fast  Land  was  stilt 
icmdo'd  with  Mangroves:  So  that  here  was  no  hope  to 
Water ;  nor  wis  it  likely  that  there  should  be  hcre- 

OL.  tl.  465  2  U 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 

AN.   abouts  any  European  Settlement,  since  there  was  no  Sign 
*^  of  a  Harbour. 

The  Land  appeared  pleasant  enough  to  the  Eye:  For 
the  Sides  and  Tops  of  the  Mountains  were  cloath'd  with 
Woods  mix'd  with  Savannahs ;  and  there  was  a  Plantation 
of  the  Indian  Natives,  where  we  saw  the  Coco-Nuts  growing, 
and  could  have  been  glad  to  have  come  at  some  of  them. 
In  the  Draught  I  had  with  me,  a  Shoal  was  laid  down 
hereabouts;  but  I  saw  nothing  of  it,  going,  or  coming; 
and  so  have  taken  no  Notice  of  it  in  my  Map. 

Weary  of  running  thus  fruitlessly  along  the  South-«de 
of  the  Island  to  the  Eastward,  I  resolv'd  to  return  the 
way  I  came ;  and  compassing  the  West-end  of  the  Island, 
make  a  search  along  the  North-side  of  it.  The  rather, 
because  the  North-North-West  Monsoon,  which  I  hid 
designed  to  be  sheltered  from  by  coming  the  way  I  did,  did 
not  seem  to  be  near  at  Hand,  as  the  ordinary  Season  of 
them  required ;  but  on  the  contrary  I  found  the  Winds 
returning  again  to  the  South-Eastward ;  and  the  Weather 
was  fair,  and  seemM  likely  to  hold  so;  and  consequendy 
the  North-North- West  Monsoon  was  not  like  to  come  in 
yet.  I  considered  therefore  that  by  going  to  the  North- 
side  of  the  Island,  I  should  there  have  the  smooth  Water, 
as  being  the  Lee-side  as  the  Winds  now  were ;  and  hoped 
to  have  better  riding  at  Anchor  or  Landing  on  that  Sde, 
than  I  could  expect  here,  where  the  Shore  was  so  lined 
with  Mangroves. 

Accordingly,  the  i8th  about  Noon  I  altered  my  Course, 
and  steered  back  again  towards  the  South- West-end  of  the 
Island.  This  Day  we  struck  a  Dolphin ;  and  the  next 
Day  saw  two  more,  but  struck  none :  We  also  saw  a 
Whale. 

In  the  Evening  we  saw  the  Island  Rotee,^  and  another 
Island  to  the  South  of  it,  not  seen  in  my  Map ;  both  lying 
near  the  South- West-end  of  Timor.  On  both  these  Islands 
we  saw  Smoaks  by  Day,  and  Fires  by  Night,  as  we  had 
seen  on  Timor  ever  since  we  fell  in  with  it.      I  was  told 

»  Rotti, 

466 


THE   ISLAND   TIMOR 

erw»rds  by  ihe  Portugucze,  that  they  had  Sugar-works    am.1 

the  Island  Rotcc ;  but  1  knew  nothing  of  that  now;  '*99 
the   Coast   appearing   generally   dry  and   barren,  only 

e  and  there  a  Spot  of  Trees,  I  did  not  attempt  anchoring 

re,  hut  stood  over  again  to  the  Timor  Coast. 

September  the  2ist,  in  the  Morning,  being  near  Timor, 

iW  a  pretty  large  Opening,  which  immediately  I  entered 

h  my  Ship,  sounding  as  I  went  in :  But  had  no  Ground 
I  came  within   the  East  Point  of  the  Mouth  of  the 

ening,  where  1  anchored  in  9  Fathom,  a  League  from 
Shore.     The  distance  from  the  East-side  to  the  West- 

:  of  this  Opening,  was  about  5  Leagues.      But  whereas 

lought  this  was  only  an  Inlet  or  large  Sound  that  ran 
It  way  into  the  Island  Timor,  1  found  afterwards  that 

was  a  Passage  between  the  West  End  of  Timor  and 
other  small  Island  called  Anamabao  or  Anabao : '  Into 
bich  Mistake  I  was  led  by  my  Sea-Chart,  which  repre- 
Bied  both  Sides  of  the  Opening  as  Parts  of  the  same 
Hst,  and  called  all  of  it  Timor:  See  all  this  rectified, 
d  s  View  of  the  whole  Passage,  as  I  found  it,  in  a  smalt 
bip  I  have  made  of  it.  {Table  omitted.] 
I  designed  10  sail  into  this  Opening  till  I  should  come 

6rni  und ;  for  the  Shore  was  all  set  thick  with  Man- 
OVcs  here  by  the  Sea,  on  each  Side ;  which  were  very 
ten,  as  were  also  other  Trees  more  within  Land.  We 
id  now  but  little  Wind  ;  therefore  1  sent  my  Boat  away, 

sound,  and  to  let  me  know  by  Signs  what  Depth  of 
'•tcr  they  met  with,  if  under  8  Fathom ;  but  if  more,  I 
dcr'd  them  to  go  on,  and  make  no  Signs.  At  1 1  that 
[oming,  having  a  preiiy  fresh  Gale,  I  weighed,  and  made 
il  *fta  my  Boat ;  but  cdg'd  over  more  to  the  West 
because  I  saw  many  smaller  Openings  there,  and  was 

Hopes  to  find  a  good  Harbour  where  1  might  secure 
F  Ship;  for  then  I  could  with  more  Safety  send  my  Boats 

icck  for  fresh  Water.  I  had  not  sailed  far  before  the 
Ind  came  to  the  South-East  and  blew  so  strong,  that  I 
bid  not  with  Safety  venture  nearer  that  Side,  it  being  a 

'  +67"' 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Lee-shore.  Besides,  my  Boat  was  on  the  East-^de  of  the 
1699  Timor  Coast ;  for  the  other  was,  as  I  found  afterwards,  the 
Anabao  Shore ;  and  the  great  Opening  I  was  now  in,  wis 
the  Streight  between  that  Island  and  Timcn*;  towards 
which  I  now  tack*d  and  stood  over.  Taking  up  my  Boit 
therefore,  I  ran  under  the  Timor  Side,  and  at  3  a  Qosk 
anchored  in  29  Fathom,  half  a  Mile  from  the  Shore.  That 
Part  of  the  South-West  Point  of  Timor,  where  we  anchored 
in  the  Morning,  bore  now  South  by  West,  distance  3 
Leagues:  And  another  Point  of  the  Island  bore  North- 
North-East,  distance  2  Leagues. 

Not  long  after,  we  saw  a  Sloop  coming  about  the  Pobt 
last  mentioned,  with  Dutch  Colours ;  which  I  found,  upoo 
sending  my  Boat  aboard,  belonged  to  a  Dutch  Fort  (the 
only  one  they  have  in  Timor)  about  5  Leagues  from  hence, 
caird  Concordia.     The  Governour  of  the  Fort  was  m  the 
Sloop,  and  about  40  Soldiers  with  him.     He  appeared  to  be 
somewhat  surprised  at  our  coming  this  way ;  which  it  seems 
is  a  Passage  scarce  known  to  any  but  themselves ;  as  be 
told  the  Men  I  sent  to  him  in  my  Boat.     Neither  did  be 
seem  willing  that  we   should  come   near  their  Fort  for 
Water.     He  said  also,  that  he  did  not  know  of  any  Water 
on  all  that  Part  of  the  Island,  but  only  at  the  Fort;  and 
that  the  Natives  would  kill  us,  if  they  met  us  ashore.    By 
the  small  Arms  my  Men  carried  with  them  in  the  Boat, 
they  took  us  to  be  Pirates,  and  would  not  easily  believe 
the  Account  my  Men  gave  them  of  what  we  were,  and 
whence  we  came.     They  said   that  about  2  Years  before 
this,  there  had  been  a  stout  Ship  of  French  Pirates  here; 
and  that  after  having  been  suffered  to  Water,  and  to  refresh 
themselves,  and  been  kindly  used,  they  had  on  a  sudden 
gone  among  the  Indians,  Subjects  of  the  Fort,  and  piundcr'd 
them  and  burnt  their  Houses.     And  the  Portugueze  here 
told  us  afterwards,  that  those  Pirates,  whom  they  also  had 
entertained,  had   burnt  their  Houses,  and   had   taken  the 
Dutch   Fort    (though   the   Dutch    car*d    not    to   own  so 
much),  and  had  driven  the  Governour  and  Factory  among 
the  wild  Indians  their  Enemies.     The  Dutch  told  my  Men 
further,  that  they  could  not  but  think  we  had  of  several 

468 


THE   ISLAND   ANABAO 

itions  (as  is  usual  with  Pirate  Vessels)  in  our  Ship,  and 
trticularly  some  Dutch  Men,  though  all  the  Discourse  ' 
i  in  French ;  (for  I  had  not  one  who  could  speak 
Itch :)  Or  else,  since  the  common  Draughts  make  no 
issage  between  Timor  and  Anabao,  but  lay  down  both  as 
le  Island;  they  said  they  suspected  we  had  plundered 
x  Dutch  Ship  of  their  particular  Draughts,  which  they 
forbid  to  part  with. 

With  these  Jealousies  the  Sloop  returned  towards  their 

t,  and  my  Boat  came  back  with  this  News  to  me  :  But 

ta  not  discouraged  at  this  News;  not  doubting  but  I 

lould  perswade  them  better,  when  1  should  come  to  talk 

Kh  them.     So  the  next  Morning  I  weighed,  and  stood 

rmnis  the  Fort.     The  Winds  were  somewhat  against  us, 

that  wc  could  not  go  very  fast,  being  obliged  to  tack  2 

3  Times.     And  coming  near  the  farther  End  of  the 

je  between  Timor  and  Anabao,  we  saw  many  Houses 

cadi  Side  not  far  from  the  Sea,  and  several  Boats  lying 

the  Shore.     The  Land  on  both  Sides  was  pretty  high, 

rpearir^  very  dry  and  of  a  reddish  Colour,  but  highest  on 

Timor  Side.     The  Trees  on  either  Side  were  but  small. 

Woods  thin,  and  in  many  Places  the  Trees  were  dry 

Id  withered. 

The  Ishiui  Anamabao  or  Anabao,  is  not  very  big,  not 
Iceeding  lO  Leagues  in  length,  and  4  in  Breadth  ;  yet  it 
Z  Kingdoms  in  it,  viz,  that  of  Anamabao  on  the  East- 
towardx  Timor,  and  the  North-East-end  ;  and  that  of 
which  contains  the  South-West-cnd  and  the  West- 
le  of  the  Island  ;  but  I  know  not  which  of  them  is  biggest. 
be  Natives  of  l)oth  are  of  the  Indian  kind,  of  a  swarthy 
Opper-colour,  with  black  lank  Hair.  Those  of  Anamabao 
c  in  League  with  the  Dutch,  as  these  afterwards  told  me, 
id  with  the  Natives  of  the  Kingdom  of  Copang  in  Timor, 
■against  them,  in  which  the  Dutch  Fort  Concordia 
lads:  But  they  are  said  to  be  inveterate  Enemies  to  their 
c^hboun  of  Anabao.  Those  of  Anabao,  besides  manag- 
thdr  small  Plantations  of  Roots  and  a  few  Coco-nuts, 
fish,  strike  Turtle,  and  hunt  Buffalo's;  killing  them 
ith  Swords,  Darts,  or  Lances.     But  1  know  not  how  they 


469 


y 

A 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   get  their  Iron ;  I  suppose,  by  Traffick  with  the  Dutch  or 
1699  Portugueze,  who  send   now  and   then  a  Sloop  and  trade 
thither,  but  well-arm'd ;  for  the  Natives  would  kill  them, 
could  they  surprize  them.     They  go  always  armed  them- 
selves; And  when  they  go  a  fishing  or  a  hunting,  they 
spend  4  or  5  Days  or  more  in  ranging  about,  before  thcj 
return  to  their  Habitation.     We  often  saw  them,  after  this, 
at  these  Employments ;  but  they  would  not  come  near  us. 
The  Fish  or  Flesh  that  they  take,  besides  what  serves  for 
present  spending,  they  dry  on  a  Barbacue  or  wooden  Grate, 
standing  pretty  high  over  the  Fire,  and  so  carry  it  home 
when  they  return.     We  came  sometimes  afterwards  to  the 
Places  where  they  had  Meat  thus  a  drying,  but  did  not 
touch  any  of  it. 

But  to  proceed ;  I  did  not  think  to  stop  any  where  till 
I  came  near  the  Fort ;  which  yet  I  did  not  see :  But  coming 
to  the  End  of  this  Passage,  I  found  that  if  I  went  any 
farther  I  should  be  open  again  to  the  Sea.     I  therefofe 
stood  in  close  to  the  Shore  on  the  East-side,  and  anchored 
in  4  Fathom  Water,  sandy  Ground ;  a  Point  of  Land  soil 
hindring  me  from  seeing  the  Fort.     But  I  sent  my  Boat 
to  look  about  for  it ;  and  in  a  short  Time  she  returned, 
and  my  Men  told  me  they  saw  the  Fort,  but  did  not  go 
near  it ;  and  that  it  was  not  above  4  or  5  Miles  from  hence. 
It  being  now  late,  I  would  not  send  my  Boat  thither  till 
the  next  Morning:  Mean  while  about  2  or  300  Ind'uns, 
Neighbours  of  the  Fort,  and  sent  probably  from  thence, 
came  to  the  sandy  Bay  just  against  the  Ship ;  where  they 
staid  all  Night,  and  made  good  Fires.     They  were  armed 
with  Lances,  Swords  and  Targets,  and  made  a  great  NcMse 
all  the  Night :  We  thought  it  was  to  scare  us  from  landing, 
should  we  attempt  it:  But  we  took  little  Notice  of  them. 

The  next  Morning,  being  September  the  23d,  I  sent 
my  Clerk  ashore  in  my  Pinnace  to  the  Governour,  to  satisfy 
him  that  we  were  English  Men,  and  in  the  King's  Ship, 
and  to  ask  Water  of  him ;  sending  a  young  Man  with  him, 
who  spake  French.  My  Clerk  was  with  the  Govcmoar 
pretty  early ;  and  in  Answer  to  his  Queries  about  me,  and 
my  Business  in  these  Parts,  told  him  that  I  had  the  King 

470 


PARLEY    WITH   THE   DUTCH 

England's  Commission,  and  desired  to  speak  with  him. 

:  bcckncd  to  my  Clerk  to  come  ashore ;  but  as  soon  as  ' 

saw  some  small  Arms  in  the  Stern-Sheets  of  the  Boat, 

commanded  him  into  the  Boat  again,  and  would  have 

n  be  gone.     My  Clerk  sollicited  him  that  he  would  allow 

n  to  speak  with  him  ;  and  at  last  the  Governour  consented 

It  he  should  come  ashore  ;  and  sent  his  Lieutenant  and  3 

U'chants,  with  a  Guard  of  about  a  hundred  of  the  Native 

iians  to  receive  him.     My  Clerk  said  that  we  were  in 

ich  want  of  Water,  and  hop'd  they  wou'd  allow  us  to 

DC  to  their  Watering-place,  and  fill.    But  the  Governour 

liied,  that  he  had  Orders  not  to  supply  any  Ships  but 

:ir  own  East-India  Company;   neither  must  they  allow 

J  Europeans  to  come  the  Way  that  we  came  ;  and  wondred 

m  we  durst  come  near  their  Fort.     My  Clerk  answered 

m,  that  had  we  been  Enemies,  we  must  have  come  ashore 

long  them  for  Water  :   But,  said  the  Governour,  you  are 

Hne  to  inspect  into  our  Trade  and  Strength ;  and  I  will 

VK  jfou  therefore  be  gone  with  all   Speed.     My  Clerk 

isweml  him,  that  I  had  no  such   Design,  but,  without 

Mntng  nearer  them,  would  be  contented  if  the  Governour 

lid  send  Water  on  Board  where  we  lay,  about  2  Leagues 

tn  the  Kort ;  and  that  I  would  make  any  reasonable  Satis- 

aon  for  it.     The  Governour  said  that  we  should  have 

It  Water  we  wanted,  provided  we  came  no  nearer  with 

^p  :  And  ordered,  that  as  soon  as  we  pleased,  we  should 

d  our  Boat  full  of  empty  Casks,  and  come  to  an  Anchor 

h  it  off  the  Fort,  till  he  sent  Slaves  to  bring  the  Casks 

hore,  and  fill  them  ;  for  that  none  of  our  Men  must  come 

ion.     The  same  Afternoon  i  sent  up  my  Boat  as  he  had 

with  an  Officer,  and  a  present  of  some  Beer  for 

lOur;  which  he  would  not  accept  of;  but  sent 

a  Ton  of  Water. 

the  24th  in  the  Morning  1  sent  the  same  Officer 

I  my  Boat;  and   about   Noon   the   Boat  returned 

in  with  the  two  principal    Merchants  of  the   Factory, 

I  the  Lieutenant  of  the  Fort ;  for  whole  Security  they 

t  my  Officer  and  one  of  my  Boat's-crew  as  Hostages, 

liog  them  to  the  Governour's  Garden  all  the  Time: 

47» 


Spang  bay  in  the  i.  timor 

omising  this  way,  I  did  not  doubt  finding  Water  in  a 
on  Time.     But  my  Officer  who  occasion'd  these  Fears  ' 

us    by   his  own   Forgeries,  was  himself  for  going   no 
irthcr;  having  a    Mind,  as  far  as   I   could  perceive,  to 
kc  every  Thing  in  the   Voyage,   to  which   he   shew'd 
nself  averse,  seem  as  cross  and  discouraging  to  my  Men 
i  possible,  that   he  might  hasten  our  Return  ;  being  very 
Igligent  and  backward  in  most  Businesses  I  had  occasion 
B  employ  him  in;  doing  nothing  well  or  willingly,  though 
did  all  I  could  to  win  him  to  it.     He  was  also  industrious 
I  stir  up  the  Sea-men  to  Mutiny;  telling  them,   among 
Tier  Things,  that  any  Dutch  Ship  might   lawfully  take 
.  in  these  Seas;  but  I  knew  better,  and  avoided  every 
htng  that  could  give  just  Offence. 
'  The  rest  of  my  Officers  therefore  being  resolved   to  go 

from  hence,  and  having  bought  same  Fish  of  some  Anama- 
beans,  who,  seeing  our  Ship,  came  purposely  to  sell  some, 
pusing  to  ami  fro  every  Day;  I  sail'd  away  on  the  26th 
about  5   in  the  Afternoon,     We   pass'd   along  between  a 
^unall  low  sandy  Island  (over  against  the  Fort),  full  of  Bays 
^KkI  pretty  high  Trees;  sounding  as  wc  went  along;  and 
^^Md  from  25  to  35  Fathom,  oasy  Ground.     See  the  little 
PVibp  of  this  Passage,  Table  VI.  [omitted]. 
'  The  27th  in  the  Morning  we  anchored  in  the  Middle 

of  the  Bay,  called  Copang'  Bay,  in  12  Fathom,  soft  Oaxe, 
about  4  Leagues  above  the  Dutch  Fort.  Their  Sloop  was 
riding  by  the  Fort,  and  in  the  Night  fired  a  Gun ;  but  for 
what  Reason  I  know  not :  and  the  Governor  said  after- 
wards, 'twas  the  Skipper's  own  doing,  without  his  Order. 
Proently  after  wc  had  anchored,  I  went  in  the  Pinnace  to 
icarch  about  the  Bay  for  Water,  but  found  none.  Then, 
returning  a-boartl,  I  weighed,  and  ran  down  to  the  North- 
l\ntrancc  of  the  Bay,  and  at  7  in  the  Evening  anchored 
jgiin,  in  37  Fathom,  soft  Oaze,  close  by  the  sandy  Island, 
and  about  4  Leagues  from  the  Dutch  Fort.  The  2Sth  I 
sent  both  my  Boats  ashore  on  the  sandy  Island,  to  cut 
Wood  ;  and  by  Noon  they  both  came  back  laden.     In  the 


473 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AX.  Afternoon  I  sent  my  Pinnace  ashore  on  the  North  G)ast 
*^  or  Point  of  Copang  Bay,  which  is  call'd  Babao.  Late  in 
the  Night  they  returned,  and  told  me  that  they  saw  great 
Tracks  of  Bufialo's  there,  but  none  of  the  Bufl^lo*s  them- 
selves ;  neither  did  they  find  any  fresh  Water.  They  also 
saw  some  green  Turtle  in  the  Sea,  and  one  Alligator. 

The  29th  I  went  out  of  Copang  Bay,  designing  to 
Coast  it  along  Shore  on  the  North-side  of  Timor  to  the 
Eastward ;  as  well  to  seek  for  Water,  as  also  to  acquaint 
my  self  with  the  Island,  and  to  search  for  the  Portugueze 
Settlements;  which  we  were  informed  were  about  forty 
Leagues  to  the  Eastward  of  this  Place. 

We  coasted  along  Shore  with  Land  and  Sea-Breezei 
The  Land  by  the  Shore  was  of  a  moderate  height,  with  high 
and  very  remarkable  Hills  farther  within  the  Country; 
their  Sides  all  spotted  with  Woods  and  Savannahs.  But 
these  on  the  Mountain  Sides  appeared  of  a  rusty  Colour 
not  so  pleasant  and  flourishing  as  those  that  we  saw  on  the 
South-side  of  the  Island ;  for  the  Trees  seemed  to  be  small 
and  withering ;  and  the  Grass  in  the  Savannahs  also  look*d 
dry,  as  if  it  wanted  Moisture.  But  in  the  Valleys,  and  by 
the  Sea-side,  the  Trees  look'd  here  also  more  green.  Yet 
we  saw  no  good  Anchoring-place,  or  Opening,  that  gave  us 
any  Incouragement  to  put  in;  till  the  30th  Day  in  the 
Afternoon. 

We  were  then  running  along  Shore,  at  about  4  Leagues 
distance,  with  a  moderate  Sea-breeze ;  when  we  opened  a 
pretty  deep  Bay,  which  appeared  to  be  a  good  Road  to 
anchor  in.  There  were  two  large  Valleys,  and  one  smaller 
one,  which  descending  from  the  Mountains  came  all  into 
one  Valley  by  the  Sea-side  against  this  Bay,  which  was  full 
of  tall  green  Trees.  1  presently  stood  in  with  the  Ship,  till 
within  two  Leagues  of  the  Shore ;  and  then  sent  in  my 
Pinnace  commanded  by  my  chief  Mate,  whose  great  Care, 
Fidelity,  and  Diligence,  I  was  well  assured  of;  ordering 
him  to  seek  for  fresh  Water;  and  if  he  found  any,  to 
sound  the  Bay,  and  bring  me  Word  what  anchoring  there 
was ;  and  to  make  haste  aboard. 

As  soon  as  they  were  gone,  I  stood  off  a  little,  and  lay 

474 


fTHE  ISLAND  TIMOR 

_hiy  was  now  far  spent;  and  ihcreforc  it  was    an, 

ifore  they  got  ashore  with  the  Boat ;  so  that  they  did  ^^ 
'tnc  aboard  again  that  Night.  Which  1  was  much 
n*d  at;  because  in  the  Evening,  when  the  Sea-Breezc 
Mc  and  the  Weather  calm,  1  perceived  the  Ship  to 
back  again  to  the  Westward.  I  was  not  yet  ac- 
ed  with  the  Tides  here ;  for  I  had  hitherto  met  with 
otig  Tides  about  the  Island,  and  scarce  any  running 
:rcani,  to  set  me  along  Shore  either  way.  But  after 
Iroe,  I  had  pretty  much  of  them ;  and  found  at 
t  the  Flood  set  to  the  Eastward,  and  the  Ebb  to  the 
rard.  The  Ehb  (with  which  I  was  now  carried)  sets 
rang,  and  runs  8  or  9  Hours.  The  Flood  runs  but 
and  at  most  lasts  not  above  4  Hours;  and  this  too  is 
'cd  only  near  ihe  Shore ;  where  checking  the  Ebb,  it 
the  Seas,  and  makes  the  Water  rise  in  the  Bays  and 
8  or  9  Foot.  I  was  afterwards  credibly  informed 
ic  Portuguezc,  that  the  Current  runs  always  to  the 
-ard  in  the  Mid-Channel  between  this  Island  and 
that  face  11  in  a  Range  to  the  North  of  it,  viz. 
Dmba  (or  Omba)'  Pintare,*  Laubana,'  Ende,'  &c. 
c  were  driven  4  Leagues  back  again,  and  took  par- 
Notice  of  a  Point  of  Land  that  looked  like  Flam- 
;h-hcad,  when  we  were  cither  to  the  East  or  West 
and  near  the  Shore  it  appeared  like  an  Island.  Four 
.«agucs  to  the  East  of  this  Point,  is  another  very 
cable  bluff  Point,  which  is  on  the  West-side  of  the 
It  my  Boat  was  In.  See  two  Sights  of  this  Land, 
VI.  [omitted].  We  could  not  stem  the  Tide,  till  ' 
3  I  Clock  in  the  Afternoon  ;  when  the  Tide  running 
a,  we  soon  got  abreast  of  the  Bay,  and  then  saw  a 
Island  to  the  F^astward  of  us.  See  a  Sight  of  it, 
VI.  [omitted].  About  6  we  anchored  in  the  Bottom 
Bay.  in  15  Fathom,  soft  Oazc,  half  a  Mite  from  the 

made  many  ^Ise  Fires  in  the  Night,  and  now  and 
red  a  Gun,  that  my  Boat  might  find  me ;  but  to  no 

*  Panur. 

*  Not  Andonare,  but  Floro. 

475 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Purpose.  In  the  Morning  I  found  my  sdf  driven  again  by 
*^  the  Tide  of  Ebb  3  or  4  Leagues  to  the  Westward  of  the 
Place  where  I  left  my  Boat.  I  had  several  Men  looking  out 
for  her  :  but  could  not  get  a  Sight  of  her :  Besides,  I  con- 
tinued still  driving  to  the  Westward  ;  for  we  had  but  litdc 
Wind,  and  that  against  us.  But  by  10  a  Clock  in  the 
Morning  we  had  the  Comfort  of  seeing  the  Boat ;  and  at 
1 1  she  came  aboard,  bringing  2  Barrecoes  ^  of  very  good 
Water. 

The  Mate  told  me  there  was  good  Anchoring  close  by 
the  Watering-place;  but  that  there  ran  a  strong  Tide, 
which  near  the  Shore  made  several  Races;  so  that  they 
found  much  Danger  in  getting  ashore,  and  were  afraid  to 
come  off  again  in  the  Night,  because  of  the  Riplings  the 
Tide  made. 

We  had  now  the  Sea-breeze,  and  steered  away  for  this 
Bay ;  but  could  hardly  stemm  the  Tide,  till  about  3  in  the 
Afternoon ;  when  the  Tide  being  turned  with  us,  we  went 
along  briskly,  and  about  6  anchored  in  the  Bay,  in  25 
Fathom,  soft  Oaze,  half  a  Mile  from  the  Shore. 

The  next  Morning  I  went  ashore  to  fill  Water,  and 
before  Night  sent  aboard  8  Tons.  We  fiUM  it  out  of  a 
large  Pond  within  50  Paces  of  the  Sea.  It  look*d  pale,  but 
was  very  good,  and  boiled  Pease  well.  I  saw  the  Tract  of 
an  Alligator  here.  Not  far  from  the  Pond,  we  found  the 
Rudder  of  a  Malayan  Proe,  3  great  Jars  in  a  small  Shed 
set  up  against  a  Tree,  and  a  Barbacue  whereon  there  had 
been  Fish  and  Flesh  of  Buffaloes  drest,  the  Bones  lying 
but  a  little  from  it. 

In  3  Days  we  fill'd  about  twenty  six  Tun  of  Water, 
and  then  had  on  Board  about  30  Ton  in  all.  The  2 
following  Days  we  spent  in  Fishing  with  the  Saine,  and 
the  first  Morning  caught  as  many  as  served  all  my  Ship's 
Company:  But  afterwards  we  had  not  so  good  Success. 
The  rest  of  my  Men,  which  could  be  spared  from  the  Ship, 
I  sent  out ;  Some  with  the  Carpenter's  Mate,  to  cut  Timber 
for  my  Boats,  &c.     These  went  always  guarded  with  3  or 

^  *'  Breakers  ^  or  small  casks. 

476 


^^"  THE   ISLAND  TIMOR 

4  armed  Men  to  secure  them  :  I  shewed  ihcm  what  Wood  an. 

was  fitting  to  cut  for  our  Use,  especially  the  Calabash  and  '^ 

l4aho;  I  shewed  them  also  the   manner  of  stripping  the  M 

tfaho-bark,  and  of  making  therewith  Thread,  Twine,  Ropes,  I 

Others  were  sent  out  a  Fowling ;  who  brought  Home  ^ 

idgeona.  Parrots,  Cockatoos,  &c.     1  was  always  with  one 

Ihrty  or  other,  my  self;  especially  with  the  Carpenters,  to 

taten  them  to  get  what  they  could,  that  we  might  be  gone 

om  hence.  J 

Our  Water  being  full,  I  sail'd  from  hence  October  the  I 

Pth  about  4  in  the  Afternoon,  designing  to  coast  along  M 

Shore  to  the  Eastward,  till  I  came  to  the  Portugueze  Settle-  H 

menis.     By  the    next   Morning  we  were  driven   3    or   4  H 

Leagues  to  the  West  of  the  Bay;  but  in   the  Afternoon,  ■ 

having  a  faint  Sea-breeze,  we  got  again  abreast  of  it.     It  I 

was  the    llth    Day  at   Noon   before  we  got  as  far  as   the  I 

■null  Island  before-mentioned,  which  lies  about  7  Leagues  ■ 

to  the  East  of  the  Watering  Bay :  For  what  we  gained  in  I 

the  Afternoon  by  the   Benefit   of  the  Sea-breezes  we   lost  I 

igain  in  the  Evenings  and  Mornings,  while  it  was  calm,  in  I 

the  Interval  of  the  Breezes.     But  this  Day  the  Sea-breeze  I 

blowing  fresher  than  ordinary,  we  past  by  the  Island  and  I 

Inin  before  Night  about  7  Leagues  to  the  East  of  it.  I 

^L      This  Island  is  not  half  a  Mile  long,  and  not  above  100  I 

^Vardt  in  breadth,  and   look'd  just  like  a   Barn,  when  we  I 

^nrerc  by  it :   It  is  pretty  high,  and  may  be  seen  from  a  I 

Ship's  Topmast-head  about   10  Leagues.     The  Top,  and  I 

Pan  of  the  Sides,  are  covered  with  Trees,  and  it  is  about  3  I 

Leagues  from  Timor;  'tis   about    Mid-way  between    the  M 

Watering-place  and  the  Portugueze  first  and  main  Settle-  I 

ment  by  the  Shore.  I 

In  the  Night  we  were  again  driven  back  toward  the  M 

Island,   3  Leagues:  But  the    12th   Day,  having   a    pretty  H 

briik  Sea-brcezc.  we  coasted   along  Shore ;    and  seeing   a  H 

great  many  Houses  by  the  Sea,  I  stood  in  with  my  Ship  till  ■ 

I  was  within  2  Miles  of  them,  and  then  sent  in  my  Boat,  I 

and  lay  by  till  it  returned.     I  sent  an  Officer  to  command  I 

^^  Boat ;  and  a  Portugueze  Seaman  that  I  brought  from  I 

Hpnzil,  to  speak  with  the  Men  that  we  saw  on  the  Bay;  I 

■                                            477  1 


PARLEY  WITH   THE   PORTUGUEZE 

But  to  proceed.  While  I  staid  here,  1  went  ashore 
ry  Day,  and  my  Men  took  their  Turns  to  go  ashore  and  '^'1 
Rck  for  what  they  had  Occasion  for;  and  were  now  all 
f  well  again:  And  to  keep  themselves  in  Heart,  every 
n  Wiught  some  Rice,  more  or  less,  to  recruit  them  after 
former  Fatigues.  Besides,  I  order'd  the  Purser  to  buy 
te  for  them,  lo  serve  them  instead  of  Pease,  which  were 
f  almost  spent.     I  fill'd  up  my  Water-Casks  again  here, 

cut  more  Wood  ;  and  sent  a  Present  to  the  Lieutenant, 
xis  Mendosa,  designing  to  be  gone ;  for  while  I  lay 
:,  we  had  some  Tornadoes  and  Rain,  and  the  Sky  in  the 
rth-Wcst  looked  very  black  Mornings  and  Evenings, 
li  Lightning  all  Night  from  that  Quarter ;  which  made 
Tcry  uneasy  and  desirious  to  depart  hence;  because 
I  Road  lay  expos'd  to  the  North-North-West  and  North 
Inds,  which  were  now  daily  ex[wcted,  and  which  are 
Rionly  so  violent,  that  'tis  impossible  for  any  Ship  to 

them  out :  Yet,  on  the  other  Hand,  it  was  absolutely 
3*«ry  for  mc  to  spend  about  2  Months  Time  longer  in 
e  Place  hereabouts,  before  I  could  prosecute  my  Voyage 
(icr  to  the  Eastward ;  for  Reasons  which  I  shall  give 
:kfta  in  its  proiier  Place  in  the  ensuing  Discourse. 
en  therefore  I  sent  the  Present  to  the  Governour,  I 
red  to  have  a  Pilot  to  Larentucka  on  the  Island  Ende ; 
re  I  desir'd  to  spend  the  Time  I  had  to  spare.  He 
'  sent  me  Word  that  he  could  not  well  do  it,  but 
Id  wnd  me  a  Letter  to  Port  Scsiall  for  the  Natives, 
I  would  come  to  me  there  and  supply  me  with  what 
rtnon  they  had. 

I  fuid  3  Days,  in  hopes  yet  to  get  a  Pilot  for 
rentucka,  or  at  least  the  Letter  from  the  Governour 
Port  Scsiall.  But  seeing  neither,  I  sail'd  from  hence 
22d  of  October,  coasting  to  the  Eastward,  designing  for 
ill);  and  before  Night,  was  about  lo  Lc^ucs  to  the 
K  of  Laphao.  I  kept  about  3  Leagues  on  Shore,  and 
'  Boat  ranged  along  close  by  the  Shore,  looking  into 
ry  Bay  and  Cove ;  and  at  Night  returned  on  Board. 
E  next  Morning,  being  3  or  4  Leagues  farther  to  the 
tward,  I  sent  my  Boat  ashore  again  to  6nd  Scsiall.     At 

OL.   II.  48)  Z   H 


BABAO 

One    Reason,   as    I    said    before,    of  my    coming    ah. 

:r,  was  to  ride  secure,  and  lo  clean  my  Ship's  Bottom  ;  '*" 

^also  to  endeavour  by  Fishing  and  Hunting  of  Buffaloes, 

Tcfresh  my  Men  and  save  my  salt   Provision-     It  was 

to  be   some   Time  before    I    could   clean    my  Ship, 

tise  I  wanted  a  great    many  Necessaries,  especially  a 

el  to  careen  by.     I  had  a  Long-Boat  in  a  Frame,  that 

XHight  out  of  England,  by  which  I  might  have  made 

lift  to  do  it  ;    but  my  Carpenter  was  uncapable  to  set 

up.       Besides,    by    that    Time    the    Ship's-sides    were 

t'd,  my  Pitch  was  almost  spent;  which  was  all  owing 

r  Carpenter's  wilful  Waste  and  Ignorance ;  so  that  I 

lothing  to  lay  on    upon   the  Ship's    Bottom.       But 

i  of  this,  I  intended  to  make  Lime  here,  which  with 

;  made  a  good  Coat  for  her.     Indeed  had  it 

able,  1  would  have  gone  in  between  Cross  Island 

bor,  and  have  hal'd  my  Ship  ashore ;  for  there  was 

p  convenient   Place  to  do  it  in  ;  but  my  Ship  being 

*  1  did  not  dare  to  do  it :  Besides,  I  must  have  taken 

f  thing  out  of  her ;  and  I  had  neither  Boats  to  get  my 

hings  ashore,  nor  Hands  to  look  after  them  when  they 

c  there;  for  ray  Men  would  have  been  all  employed; 

,  though  here  are  no  Indians  living  near,  yet  they  come 

tthcr  in  Companies  when  Ships  arc  here,  on  Purpose  to  do 

Mischief  they  can  to  them ;    and  'twas  not  above  2 

m  nncc  a    Portugueze  Ship  riding  here,  and    sending 

r  Boat  for  Water  to  one  of  the  Galleys,  the  Men  were 

1  kilkd  by  the  Indians.     But  to  secure  my  Men  I  never 

igffcr'd  them  to  go  ashore  unarmed  ;  and  while  some  were 

at  Work,  others  stood  to  guard  ihem. 

We  lay  in  this  Place  from  October  the  28th,  till 
December  the  ijth.  In  which  Time  we  made  very  good 
Lime  with  Shells,  of  which  here  are  plenty.  We  cut 
Palmeto- leaves  to  burn  the  Ship's-sidcs;  and  giving  her 
as  good  a  Heel  as  we  could,  we  burned  her  Sides,  and 
pud  *  tiiem  with  Lime  and  Water  for  want  of  Oyl  to  mix 

■  A*  oppoMd  to  "  full"    So  buill  tluil  bh«  could  noi  be  beached  aiiboui 
(rest  danfo  to  ber  bendt. 

+83 


THE    DUTCH    FORT   CONCORDIA  ^^^ 
with    him  ;    so    I    took    my  Clerk    and    my  Gunner,  and    an, 
vent  ashore  in  my  Pinnace :  The  Gunner  spoke  very  good  '^ 
French,  and   therefore  I  took  him  to  be  my  Interpreter,     ^M 
because  the  Governour  speaks  French  :  He  was  an  honest     ^| 
Man,  and  I  found   him  always  diligent  and  obedient.     It     ^| 
u  pretty  late  in  the  Afternoon  before  we  came  ashore ; 
»  that  we  had  but  httle  Time  with  the  Governour.     He 
em'd  to  be  much  dissatisfied  at  the  Report  my  Officer 
id    made    to    me  ;     (of  which    I    have    before    given    an     ^M 
&.ccount;)  and  said  it   was  false,   neither  would   he  now     ^H 
ake  any  Money  of  me;  but  told  me  1  was  welcome;  as     ^| 
indeed  I  found  by  what  he  provided.     For  there  was  plenty 
of  very  good  Victuals,  and  well  drcst ;  and  the  Linncn  was 
white  and  clean  ;  and  all  the  Dishes  and  Plates,  of  Silver 
or  fine  China.     I  did  not  meet  any  where  with  a  better 
Entcruinmcnt,  while    I  was  abroad;    nor  with  so  much 
:  Decency  and  Order.     Our  Liquor  was  Wine,  Beer,  Toddy, 
or  Water,  which  we  liked  best  after  Dinner.     He  shew'd 
Ue  some  Drawers  full  of  Shells,  which  were   the  strangest 
Uid   tno*i  curious   that  I    had    ever  seen.     He    told    me, 
Ibefore  I  went  away,  that  he  could  not  supply  me  with 
aajr  Naval  Stores;    but   if  I  wanted  any  fresh  Provision, 
he    would  supply  me  with  what    I    had   occasion  for.     I 
thank'd  him,  and  told  him  I  would  send  my  Boat  for  some 
jats  and  Hogs,  though  afterwards  on  second  Thoughts 
',  did  not  do  it :  For  'twas  a  great  way  from  the  Place 
where  we  lay,  to  the  Fort  ;  and   I  could    not    tell  what 
MiKhicf  might  befall  any  of  my  Men,  when  there,  from 
the  Natives;  especially  if  incouragcd  by  the  Dutch,  who 
!  Enemies  to  all  Europeans  but  such  as  arc  under  their 
'n  Government.     Therefore  I  chose  rather  to  fish  and 
bunt  for  Provisions,  than  to    be  beholden  to  the  Dutch, 
od  pay  dearly  for  it  too. 

We  found  here,  as  I  said  before,  Plenty  of  Game ;  so 
lit  all  the  Time  we  lay  at  this  Place,  we  spent  none  or  very 
htle  of  our  Salt-provisions;  having  Fish  or  Fresh  Bufliiloe 
[Very  Day.  We  lay  here  7  Weeks;  and  although  the 
IJorth-North-West  Monsoon  was  every  Day  expected  when 
I  wu  at  Laphao,  yet  it  was  not  come,  so  that  if  I   had 

485 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    prosecuted  my  Voyage  to  the  Eastward  without  staying 

*^  here,  it  had  been  but  to  little  Advantage.     For  if  I  had 

gone  out,  and  beaten  against  the  Wind  a  whole  Month, 

I  should   not  have   got  far;   it  may   be   40,    50,   or  60 

Leagues ;  which  was  but  24  Hours  run  for  us  with  a  krge 

Wind;  besides  the  Trouble  and  Discontent,  which  might 

have  arisen  among  my  Men  in  beating  to  Windward  to  so 

little  Purpose,  there  being  nothing  to  be  got  at  Sea;  bat 

here  we  lived  and  did  eat  plentifully  every  Day  without 

Trouble.     The  greatest  Inconveniency  of  this  Place,  was 

want  of  Water;   this  being   the   latter  Part   of  the  dry 

Season,   because   the  Monsoon  was  very   late   this  Year. 

About  4  Days  before  we  came  away,  we  had  Tornadoes, 

with  Thunder,  Lightning  and  Rain,  and  much  Wind ;  bat 

of  no  long  Continuance;  at  which  Time  we  filled  some 

Water.     We  saw  very  black  Clouds,  and  heard  it  thunder 

every  Day  for  near  a  Month  before,  in  the  Mountains ;  and 

saw  it  rain,  but  none  came  near  us :  And  even  where  we 

hunted,  we  saw  great  Trees  torn  up  by  the  Roots,  and 

great  Havock  made  among  the  Woods  by  the  Wind ;  yet 

none  touched  us. 


486 


CHAP.    II 

^rHnUr  Dfurifilim  of  ihi  Uiond  Timer,  lis  Coait.  Thi  hlatid 
A»aka*.  Fault  of  tht  Draugha,  Thr  ClianntI  bitwtot  Timor 
and  Anainv.  Cfpang-hay.  Fori  Concordia,  A  particular  de- 
Khplitn  «f  tht  Buy.  Tht  Anchoring-place,  tallrU  Babaa.  The 
Malayam  htrt  kill  all  the  Eunpranf  ihty  tan.  Lafhao^  a 
P^rtugutxt  Srillement,  denriied.  Port  Ciaalf.  The  Hillt,  IValtr^ 
Itw-lamdi,  S«il,  t/^cods,  Metalj,  in  ihe  liland  Timor.  Its  Trtes. 
Cana-fiilMie-trte  deKrihtd.  IVild  Fig-lrm  dncribed.  Twe  new 
wrf(  9/  Palm-ireft  dmribed.  The  Fruits  of  the  Island.  The 
Her  it,  lis  Land-Animals.  Fowls.  The  Ringing  Bird.  Its 
Fish.  Cotklt-merchanis  and  Opiers.  Codies  as  big  as  a  Man's 
Htad.  Its  original  Natives  described.  The  Porlugune  and 
Dtilth  Stultmenlt.  The  Malayan  Language  generally  sfieien  here. 
L'Oranttui  tn  the  Island  Endt.  The  Seasons^  IVinds,  ana  Weather 
Ml  Tim»r. 

THE  Island  Timor,  as  I  have  said  in  my  "  Voyage 
round  the  World."  is  about  seventy  Leagues  ' 
Itmg,  and  fourteen  or  sixteen  broad.  It  lies 
nearly  North-East  and  South-Wcst.  The 
Middle  of  it  lies  in  about  9  d.  South  Lat.  It  has  no 
Navigable  Rivers,  nor  many  Harbours;  but  abundance  of 
Bays,  for  Ships  to  ride  in  at  some  Seasons  of  the  Year. 
The  Shore  is  very  bold,  free  from  Roclcs,  Shoals  or  Islands : 
excepting  a  few  which  are  visible,  and  therefore  easily 
avoided.  On  the  South-«idc  there  is  a  Sholc  laid  down  in 
jOur  Draughts,  about  thirty  Leagues  from  the  South-West- 
end  ;'  I  was  fifteen  or  twenty  Leagues  further  to  the  East 
.than  that  distance,  but  saw  nothing  of  the  Sholc -,  neither 
could  I  find  any  Harbour.  It  is  a  pretty  even  Shore,  with 
Sandy  Bays  and  low  Land  for  about  three  or  four  Miles 

'  The  Ashmore  Ke«f, 

487 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIERS   VOYAGES 

AX.  up;  amd  then  *ds  mountainous.  There  is  no  Anchoring 
>^99  but  within  half  a  League  or  a  League  at  farthest  from  ! 
the  ^ore;  and  the  low  Land  that  bounds  the  Sea,  hath 
nothing  but  red  Mangroves,  even  from  the  Foot  of  the 
Mountains  till  you  come  within  a  hundred  and  fifty  or  two 
hundred  paces  of  the  Sea :  and  then  you  have  Sandbanks, 
cloith^d  with  a  sort  of  Fine;  so  that  there  is  no  getting 
Water  on  this  ade,  because  of  the  Mangroves. 

At  the  South-West-cnd  of  Timor,  is  a  pretty  high 
Island,  called  Anabao.  It  is  about  ten  or  twelve  Leagues 
long,  and  about  four  broad;  near  which  the  Dutch  are 
settled.  It  lies  so  near  Timor,  that  *tis  laid  down  in  our 
Draughts  as  part  of  that  Island;  yet  we  found  a  narrow 
deep  Channel  fit  for  any  Ships  to  pass  between  them.  This 
Channel  is  about  ten  Leagues  long,  and  in  some  places  not 
above  a  League  wide.  It  runs  North-east  and  South-Wcst, 
so  deep  that  there  is  no  Anchoring  but  very  nigh  the  Shore. 
There  is  but  little  Tide ;  the  Flood  setting  North,  and  the 
Ebb  to  the  Southward.  At  the  North-East-cnd  of  this 
Channel,  are  two  Points  of  Land,  not  above  a  League 
asunder;  one  on  the  South-side  upon  Timor,  called 
Copang;  the  other  on  the  North-side,  upon  the  Island 
Anabao.  From  this  last  point,  the  Land  trends  away 
Northerly  two  or  three  L^igues,  opens  to  the  Sea,  and 
then  bends  in  again  to  the  Westward. 

Being  past  these  Points,  you  open  a  Bay  of  about  eight 
Leagues  long,  and  four  wide.  This  Bay  trends  in  on  the 
South-side  North-East  by  East  from  the  South-point  before 
mentioned;  making  many  small  Points  or  little  Coves. 
About  a  League  to  the  East  of  the  said  South-point,  the 
Dutch  have  a  small  Stone  Fort,  situated  on  a  firm  Rock 
close  by  the  Sea :  This  Fort  they  call  Concordia.  On  the 
East-side  of  the  Fort,  there  is  a  small  River  of  fresh  Water, 
which  has  a  broad  boarded  Bridge  over  it,  near  to  the 
Entry  into  the  Fort.  Beyond  this  River  is  a  small  sandy 
Bay,  where  the  Boats  and  Barks  land  and  convey  their 
Traffick  in  or  out  of  the  Fort.  About  an  hundred  Yards 
from  the  Sea-side,  and  as  many  from  the  Fort,  and  forty 
Yards  from  the  Bridge  on  the  East-side,  the  Company  have 

488 


THE   ISLAND   TIMOR   DESCRIBED 

fine  G»rdcn,  surrounded  with  a  good  Stone-Wall ;  In  it 
plenty  of  all  sorts  of  Sallads,  Cabbages,  Roots  for  the 
ttchen ;  in  some  parts  of  it  are  Fruit-trees,  as  Jaca's, 
implcnosc.  Oranges,  sweet  Lemons,  &c.  and  by  the 
^alls  arc  Coco-nut  and  Toddy-trees  in  great  plenty, 
aides  these,  they  have  Musk  and  Water-Melons,  Pine- 
pplcs,  Pomccitrons,  Pomegranates,  and  other  sorts  of 
uits.  Between  this  Garden  and  the  River,  there  is  a 
un  for  black  Cattle,  whereof  they  have  plenty.  Beyond 
B  Companies  Ground,  the  Natives  have  their  Houses,  in 
imbcr  about  fifty  or  sixty.  There  are  forty  or  fifty 
lldiers  belonging  to  this  Fort,  but  I  know  not  how  many 
una  they  have ;  for  I  had  only  opportunity  to  see  one 
stion,  which  had  in  it  four  Guns.  Within  the  Walls 
:re  i«  a  neat  little  Church  or  Chapel. 

Beyond  Concordia  the  Land  runs  about  seven  Leagues 

i  the  bottom  of  the  Bay ;  then  it  is  not  above  a  League 

a  half  from  side   to  side,  and   the  Land  trends  away 

rthcrly  to  the  North-Shore,  then  turns  about  again  to 
e  Westward,  making  the  South-side  of  the  Bay.  About 
rce  I.£agucs  and  a  half  from  the  bottom  of  the  Bay  on 
is  side,  there  is  a  small  Island  about  a  Musket-shot 
Dm  the  Shore  ;  and  a  RifF  of  Rocks  that  runs  from  it  to 
e  Eutward  about  a  mile.  On  the  West-side  of  the 
land  is  a  Channel  of  three  Fathom  at  low  Water,  of 
bich  depth  it  is  also  within,  where  Ships  may  haul  in  and 
West  from  this  Island  the  Land  rounds  away  in 
Bite  or  Elbow,  and  at  last  ends  in  a  low  point  of  Land, 
kadi  thoots  forth  a  Ledge  of  Rocks  a  mile  into  the  Sea, 
kich  is  dry  at  Low-Water.  Just  against  the  low  Point  of 
And,  and  to  the  West  of  the  Ledge  of  Rocks,  is  another 
letty  high  and  rocky,  yet  woody  Island,  about  half  a  mile 
om  the  low  Point;  which  Island  hath  a  Ledge  of  corally 
ocks  ninning-from  it  alt  along  to  the  other  small  Island, 
Dly  leaving  one  Channel  between  them.  Many  of  these 
ocks  are  to  be  seen  at  Low-Water,  and  there  seldom  is 
Pater  enough  for  a  Boat  to  go  over  ihem  till  quarter 
lood  or  more.  Within  this  Ledge  there  is  two  or  three 
■thorn  Water,  and  without  it  no  less  than  ten  or  twelve 
489 


1 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER^S   VOYAGES 

AN.   above  nine  Foot  upon  a  Spring- tid e :  But  it  made  great 
1699  Riplings  and  a  roaring  Noise ;  whirling  about  like  Whirl- 
pools.    We  had  constantly  eddy  Tides  under  the  Shore, 
made  by  the  Points  on  each  side  of  the  Bay. 

When  you  go  hence  to  the  Eastward,  you  may  pass 
between  the  small  Island,  and  Timor ;  and  when  you  are 
five  or  six  Leagues  to  the  Eastward  of  the  small  Island, 
you  will  see  a  large  Valley  to  the  Eastward  of  you ;  then 
running  a  little  further,  you  may  see  Houses  on  the  Bay : 
You  may  lufF  in,  but  anchor  not  till  you  go  about  the 
next  Point.  Then  you  will  see  more  Houses,  where  you 
may  run  into  twenty  or  thirty  Fathom,  and  anchor  right 
against  the  Houses,  nearest  the  West-end  of  them.  This 
place  is  called  Laphao.  It  is  a  Portuguese  Settlement, 
about  sixteen  Leagues  from  the  Watering-bay. 

There  are  in  it  about  forty  or  fifty  Houses,  and  one 
Church.  The  Houses  are  mean  and  low,  the  Walls 
generally  made  of  Mud  or  watled,  and  their  Sides  made 
up  with  Boards:  They  are  all  thatch'd  with  Palm  or 
Palmeto-Leaves.  The  Church  also  is  very  small:  The 
East-end  of  it  is  boarded  up  to  the  Top ;  but  the  Sides 
and  the  West-end  are  only  boarded  three  or  four  foot 
high  ;  the  rest  is  all  open :  There  is  a  small  Altar  in  it, 
with  two  Steps  to  go  up  to  it,  and  an  Image  or  two ;  but 
all  very  mean.  'Tis  also  thatch'd  with  Palm  or  Palmeto- 
Leaves.  Each  House  has  a  Yard  belonging  to  it,  fenced 
about  with  wild  Canes  nine  or  ten  Foot  high.  There  is  a 
Well  in  each  Yard,  and  a  little  Bucket  with  a  String  to 
it  to  draw  Water  withal.  There  is  a  Trunk  of  a  Tree 
made  hollow,  placed  in  each  Well,  to  keep  the  Earth  froiu 
falling  in.  Round  the  Yards  there  are  many  Fruit-trees 
planted  ;  as  Coco-nuts,  Tamarins  and  Toddy-trees. 

They  have  a  small  Hovel  by  the  Sea-side,  where  there 
are  six  small  old  Iron  Guns  standing  on  a  decayed  Plat- 
form, in  rotten  Carriages.  Their  Vents  ^  are  so  big,  that 
when  they  are  fired,  the  strength  of  the  Powder  flying 
out  there,  they  give  but  a  small  Report,  like  that  of  a 

*  Touch-holes. 

492 


V  TIMOR  ^^^^ 
Musket.  This  is  ihcir  Court  of  Guard  ;  and  here  were  a  , 
few  armed-men  watching  all  the  time  wc  lay  here.  ' 

The  Inhabitants  of  the  Town,  are  chiefly  a  sort  of 
Indians,  of  a  Copper-colour,  with  black  lank  Hair :  They 
speak  Portugueze,  and  are  of  the  Romish  Religion ;  but 
they  ukc  the  Liberty  to  eat  Flesh  when  they  please. 
They  value  themselves  on  the  account  of  their  Religion 
and  descent  from  the  Portugueze;  and  would  be  very 
angry,  if  a  Man  should  say  they  are  not  Portugueze :  Yet 
I  saw  but  three  White  Men  here,  two  of  which  were 
Padres.  There  are  also  a  few  Chinese  living  here.  It  is 
a  place  of  pretty  good  Trade  and  Strength,  the  best  on 
this  Wand,  Porta-Nova  excepted.  They  have  three  or 
four  small  Barks  belonging  to  the  Place;  with  which  they 
trade  chiefly  about  the  Island  with  the  Natives,  for  Wax, 
Gold,  and  Sandall-wood.  Sometimes  they  go  to  Batavia, 
and  fetch  European  Commodities,  Rice,  &c. 

The  Chinese  trade  hither  from  Macao ;  and  I  was 
informed  that  about  twenty  Sail  of  small  Vessels  come 
from  thence  hither  every  Year.  They  bring  coarse  Rice, 
•duiterated  Gold,  Tea,  Iron,  and  Iron-tools,  Porcellane, 
Silks,    &c.     They    take    in    exchange    pure    Gold,   as    'tis 

githered  in  the  Mountains,  Bees-wax,  Sandall-wood,  Slaves, 
c.  Sometimes  also  here  comes  a  Ship  from  Goa.  Ships 
that  trade  here,  begin  to  come  hither  the  latter-end  of 
Mirch ;  and  none  stay  here  longer  than  the  latter-end 
of  Aunist.  For  should  they  be  here  while  the  North- 
Nortb-Wcst  Monsoon  blows,  no  Cables  nor  Anchors 
would  hold  them ;  but  they  would  be  driven  ashore  and 
dash'd  in  pieces  presently.  But  from  March  till  September, 
while  the  South-South- East  Monsoon  blows,  Ships  ride 
here  very  secure ;  For  then,  though  the  Wind  often  blows 
hard,  yet  'tis  off  Shore;  so  that  there  is  very  smtxjth 
Water,  and  no  fear  of  being  driven  ashore;  And  yet  even 
then  ther  moor  with  three  Cables  ;  two  towards  the  Land, 
Eastward  and  Westward ;  and  the  third  right  off  to 
Seaward. 
_^  At  this  is  the  second  place  of  Traflick,  so  'tis  in 
■Btrength  the  second  place  the  Portugueze  have  here,  though 
I  493 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Sea  are  overflown  with  Water ;  and  then  the  small  Drills 
'^  that  run  into  the  Sea,  are  great  Rivers ;  and  the  Gullcys, 
which  are  dry  for  3  or  4  Months  before,  now  dischai^c  an 
impetuous  Torrent.  The  low  Land  by  the  Sea- side,  is  for 
the  most  part  friable,  loose,  sandy  Soil ;  yet  indiflercntly 
fertile  and  cloathed  with  Woods.  The  Mountains  arc 
checquered  with  Woods,  and  some  Spots  of  Savannahs: 
Some  of  the  Hills  are  wholly  covered  with  tall,  flourishing 
Trees ;  others  but  thinly ;  and  these  few  Trees  that  arc  on 
them,  look  very  small,  rusty  and  withered ;  and  the  Spots 
of  Savannahs  among  them,  appear  rocky  and  barren.  Many 
of  the  Mountains  are  rich  in  Gold,  Copper,  or  both :  The 
Rains  wash  the  Gold  out  of  the  Mountains,  which  the 
Natives  pick  up  in  the  adjacent  Brooks,  as  the  Spaniards  do 
in  America :  How  they  get  the  Copper,  I  know  not. 

The  Trees  that  grow  naturally  here,  are  of  divers 
Sorts ;  many  of  them  wholly  unknown  to  me ;  but  such 
as  I  have  seen  in  America  or  other  places,  and  grow  here 
likewise,  are  these,  viz.  Mangrove,  white,  red  and  blade; 
Maho,  Calabash,  several  Sorts  of  the  Palm-kind:  The 
Cotton-Trees  are  not  large,  but  tougher  than  those  b 
America:  Here  are  also  Locust-Trees  of  2  or  3  Sorts, 
bearing  Fruit,  but  not  like  those  I  have  formerly  seen; 
these  bear  a  large  white  Blossom,  and  yield  much  Fruit, 
but  it  is  not  sweet. 

Cana-fistula-trees,  are  very  common  here ;  the  Tree  is 
about   the   Bigness   of  our  ordinary   Apple-Trees;    their 
Branches  not  thick,  nor  full  of  Leaves.     These  and  the 
before-mentioned,  blossom  in  October  and  November ;  the 
Blossoms  are  much  like  our  Apple-Tree    Blossoms,  and 
about  that  Bigness :  At  first  they  are  red  ;  but  before  they 
fall    off^,    when  spread   abroad,  they   are   white;    so  that 
these  Trees  in  their  Season  appear  extraordinarily  pleasant, 
and  yield  a  very  fragrant  Smell.     When  the  Fruit  is  ripe, 
it  is  round,  and  about  the  Bigness  of  a  Man's  Thumb ;  of 
a  dark  brown  Colour,  inclining  to  red,  and  about  2  Foot  or 
2  Foot  and  half  long.     We  found  many  of  them  under  the 
Trees,  but  they  had  no  Pulp  in  them.     The  Partitions  in 
the  Middle,  are  much  at  the  same  Distance  with  those 

496 


WILD   FIG   TREES— PALMS 
ghi  to  England,  of  the  same  Substance,  and  such  small   am. 
kt   Seed  in  them :    But  whether  they  be  the  true  Cana-   '*99 
istula  or  no,  I  cannot  tell,  because  I  found  no  black  Pulp 
I  tbem. 

The  Calabashes  here  are  very  prickly  :  The  Trees  grow 

1  and  tapering  ;  whereas  in  the  West-Indies  they  are  low 

1  spread  much  abroad. 
Merc  are  also  wild  Tamarind-trees,  not  so  laige  as  the 
though   much    resembling   them  both  in  the   Bark 

I  Leaf. 

Wild  Fig-Trees  here  are  many,  but  not  so  Urge  as 
'  1  America.  The  Fruit  grows,  not  on  the  Branches 
Bl^ly,  tike  those  in  America,  but  in  Strings  and  Clusters, 
fO  or  50  in  a  Cluster,  about  the  Body  and  great  Branches  of 
the  Tree,  from  the  very  Root  up  to  the  Top.  These  Figs 
m  about  the  Bigness  of  a  Crab-Apple,  of  a  greenish 
Colour,  and  full  of  small  white  Seeds ;  they  smell  pretty 
well,  but  have  no  Juice  or  Taste ;  they  are  ripe  in 
November. 

Here  likewise  grows  Sandal-wood,  and  many  [more 
Sorts  of  Trees  fit  for  any  Uses.  The  tallest  among  them, 
roemble  our  Pines;  they  arc  streight  and  clear-bodied,  but 
not  very  thick;  the  Inside  is  reddish  near  the  Heart,  and 
bani  &nd  ponderous. 

9  Of  the  Palm-kind  there  arc  3  or  4  Sorts;  two  of 
Bdch  Kinds  I  have  not  seen  any  where  but  here.  Both 
fpt*  vc  ver)~  large,  and  tall.  The  Arst  Son  had  Trunks 
of  tbout  7  or  eight  Foot  in  Circumference,  and  about  80 
or  90  Foot  high.  These  had  Branches  at  the  Top  like 
Coco-nut  Trees,  and  their  Fruit  like  Coco-nuts,  but  smaller: 
The  Nut  was  of  an  oval  Form,  and  about  the  Bigness  of  a 
Duck's  Egg :  The  Shell  black  and  very  hard.  1'wat 
llmoit  full  of  Kernel,  having  only  a  small  empty  Space 
in  the  Middle,  but  no  Water  as  Coco-nuts  have.  The 
Kernel  is  too  hard  to  be  eaten.  The  F'ruit  somewhat 
membles  that  in  Brazil  formerly  mentioned.  The  Husk 
or  Outside  of  the  Fruit,  was  very  yellow,  soft  and  pulny, 
vben  ripe;  and  full  of  small  Fibres;  and  when  il  fell 
itmrn  front  the  Tree,  would  math  and  Mncli  unsavoury. 
Wmou.  It.  497  a  I 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  The  other  Sort  was  as  big  and  tall  as  the  former;  the 

*^  Body  growing  streight  up  without  Limbs,  as  all  Trees  of 
the  Palm- kind  do :  But  instead  of  a  great  many  long  green 
Branches  growing  from  the  Head  of  the  Tree,  these  had 
short  Branches  about  the  Bigness  of  a  Man's  Arm,  and 
about  a  Foot  long ;  each  of  which  spread  it  self  into  a 
great  many  small  tough  Twigs,  that  hung  full  of  Fruit 
like  so  many  Ropes  of  Onions.  The  Fruit  was  as  big  as 
a  large  Plumb;  and  every  Tree  had  several  Bushels  of 
Fruit.  The  Branches  that  bore  this  Fruit,  sprouted  out 
at  about  50  or  60  Foot  heighth  from  the  Ground.  The 
Trunk  of  the  Tree  was  all  or  one  Bigness,  from  the  Ground 
to  that  Heighth ;  but  from  thence  it  went  tapering  snullcr 
and  smaller  to  the  Top,  where  it  was  no  bigger  than  a 
Man's  Leg,  ending  in  a  Stump :  And  there  was  no  Green 
about  the  Tree,  but  the  Fruit ;  'so  that  it  appeared  like  a 
dead  Trunk. 

Besides  Fruit-Trees,  here  were  many  Sorts  of  tall 
streight-bodied  Timber-Trees ;  one  Sort  of  which  was  like 
Pine.  These  grow  plentifully  all  round  the  Island  by  the 
Sea-side,  but  not  far  within  Land.  'Tis  hard  Wood,  of  a 
reddish  Colour,  and  very  ponderous. 

The  Fruits  of  this  Island,  are  Guavoes,  Mangoes,  Jaca's, 
Coco-nuts,  Plantains,  Bonanoes,  Pine-Apples,  Citrons,  Pome- 
granates, Oranges,  Lemons,  Limes,  Musk-Melons,  Water- 
Melons,  Pumpkins,  &c.  Many  of  these  have  been  brought 
hither  by  the  Dutch  and  Portugueze ;  and  most  of  them 
are  ripe  in  September  and  October.  There  were  many 
other  excellent  Fruits,  but  not  now  in  Season ;  as  I  was 
informed  both  by  Dutch  and  Portugueze. 

Here  I  met  with  an  Herb,  which  in  the  West-Indies 
we  call  Calalaloo.  It  grows  wild  here.  I  eat  of  it  several 
Times,  and  found  it  as  pleasant  and  wholesome  as  Spinage. 
Here  are  also  Parsly,  Sampler,  &c.  Indian  Corn  thrives 
very  well  here,  and  is  the  common  Food  of  the  Islanders; 
though  the  Portugueze  and  their  Friends  sow  some  Rice, 
but  not  half  enough  for  their  Subsistence. 

The  Land-Animals  are  Buffaloes,  Beeves,  Horses,  Hogs, 
Goats,  Sheep,  Monkeys,  Guanoes,  Lizards,  Snakes,  Scorpions, 

498 


THE   RINGING   BIRD— FISH 

^tuDtpccs,  &c.     Beside  the   tame   Hogs  and   Bul^loes,   an. 
c  are  many  wild  alt  over  the  Country,  which  any  may  '^ 
ly  kill.     As  for  the  Beeves,  Horses,  Goats  and  Sheep, 
probable  they  were  brought  in  by  the  Portuguezc  or 

tch  ;  especially  the  Beeves;  for  1  saw  none  but  at  the 

tch  Fort  Concordia. 

Wc  also  saw  Monkeys,  and  some  Snakes.     One  Sort 

low,  and  as  big  as  a  Man's  Arm,  and  about  4  Foot 
J :  Another  Sort  no  bigger  than  the  Stem  of  a  Tobacco- 
t,  about  $  Foot  long,  green  all  over  his  Body,  and  with 
It  red  Head  as  big  as  a  Man's  Thumb. 
The  Fowls  are  wild  Cocks  and  Hens,  Eagles,  Hawks, 
iws,  2  Sorts  of  Pidgeons,  Turtle-doves,  3  or  4  Sorts  of 
rots,  Parrakites,  Cockatoes,  Black-birds ;  besides  a  Mul- 

ide  of  smaller  Birds  of  divers  Colours,  whose  charming 
■ick  makes  the  Woods  very  pleasant.  One  Sort  of  these 
:ty  little  Birds  my  Men  call'd  the  Ringing-bird  ;  because 
»d  6  Notes,  and  always  repeated  all  his  Notes  twice  one 
r  another ;  beginning  high  and  shrill,  and  ending  low. 
s  Bird  was  about  the  Bigness  of  a  Lark,  having  a  small 
-p  black  Bill  and  blue  Wings ;  the  Head  and  Breast 
c  of  a  pale  red,  and  there  was  a  blue  Streak  about  its 
k.  Here  arc  also  Sea  or  Water-Fowls,  zs  Men  of 
r-Birds,  Boobies,  Fishing- hawks.  Herons,  Goldens,  Crab- 

ichcrs.  Sec.  The  tame  Fowl  arc  Cocks,  Hens,  Ducks, 
ac ;  the  2  last  Sorts  I  only  saw  at  the  Dutch  Fort;  of 
other  Sort  there  are  not  many  but  among  ihe  Fortu- 
ne: The  Woods  abound  with  Bees,  which  make  much 
ncy  and  Wax. 

The  Sea  is  very  well  stock'd  with  Ush  of  divers  Sorts, 
,  Mullets.  Bass,  Brcamcs,  Snooks,  Mackarel,  Farracoots, 
'•fith,  Tcn-poundcrs.  Scuttle-fish,  Siing-rays,  Whijvniys, 

Ipcraecs,  Cockle-merchants,  or  Oyster-crackcn,  Cavalliea, 

ngcr-EcIs,  Rock-fijh,  Dog-fish.  &c.  The  Rays  are  to 
iliful.  that  I  never  drew  the  Sain  but  I  catch'd  sbme  of 
n ;   which  wc  salted  and  dryed.     I  caught  one  whcMe 

il  was  13  Foot  long.    The  Oxkle-Mcrchants  are  shaped 
Cavallics,  and  about  their  Bigness.    They  feed  on  Shcll- 
luving  2  very  hard,  thick,  fiat  Booet  in  their  Ihroat, 
499 


I 


J 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  with  which  they  break  in  Pieces  the  Shells  of  the  Fish  they 
1699  swallow.  We  always  find  a  great  many  Shells  in  their 
Maws,  crushed  in  Pieces.  The  Shell-fish,  are  Oysters  of 
3  Sorts,  viz.  Long-Oysters,  Common  Oysters,  growing 
upon  Rocks  in  great  Abundance,  and  very  flat ;  and  another 
Sort  of  large  Oysters,  fat  and  crooked ;  the  Shell  of  this, 
not  easily  to  be  distinguished  from  a  Stone.  Three  or 
four  of  these  roasted,  will  suffice  a  Man  for  one  Meal. 
Cockles,  as  big  as  a  Man's  Head ;  of  which  2  or  3  are 
enough  for  a  Meal ;  they  are  very  fat  and  sweet.  Craw- 
fish, Shrimps,  &c.  Here  are  also  many  green  Turtle,  some 
Alligators  and  Grand-pisces,  &c. 

The  Original  Natives  of  this  Island,  are  Indians,  they 
are  of  a  middle  Stature,  streight-bodied,  slender-limb'd, 
long-visag*d ;  their  Hair  black  and  lank ;  their  Skins  very 
swarthy.  They  are  very  dextrous  and  nimble,  but  withal 
lazy  in  the  highest  Degree.  They  are  said  to  be  dull  in 
every  Thing  but  Treachery  and  Barbarity.  Their  Houses 
are  but  low  and  mean,  their  Cloathing  only  a  small  Cloath 
about  their  Middle;  but  some  of  them  for  Ornament  have 
Frontlets  of  Mother  of  Pearl,  or  thin  Pieces  of  Silver  or 
Gold,  made  of  an  oval  Form,  of  the  Breadth  of  a  Crown- 
piece,  curiously  notched  round  the  Edges ;  Five  of  these 
placed  one  by  another  a  little  above  the  Eye-brows,  making 
a  sufficient  Guard  and  Ornament  for  their  Fore-head.  They 
are  so  thin,  and  placed  on  their  Fore-heads  so  artificially, 
that  they  seem  riveted  thereon:  And  indeed  the  Pearl- 
Oyster-shells  make  a  more  splendid  Show,  than  either  Silver 
or  Gold.  Others  of  them  have  Palmeto-caps  made  in  divers 
Forms. 

As  to  their  Marriages,  they  take  as  many  Wives  as  they 
can  maintain ;  and  sometimes  they  sell  their  Children  to 
purchase  more  Wives.  I  enquired  about  their  Religion, 
and  was  told  they  had  none.  Their  common  Subsistence 
is  by  Indian  Corn,  which  every  Man  plants  for  himself. 
They  take  but  little  Pains  to  clear  their  Land ;  for  in  the 
dry  Time  they  set  Fire  to  the  withered  Grass  and  Shrubs, 
and  that  burns  them  out  a  Plantation  for  the  next  wet 
Season.     What  other  Grain  they  have,  beside  Indian  Corn, 

500 


m 


. ! 


ill 


I 


THE   INHABITANTS   IN   TIMOR 

know  not.  Their  Plantations  are  very  mean ;  for  they 
flight  most  in  hunting ;  and  here  are  wild  Buffaloes  and 
[ogs  enough,  though  very  shy,  because  of  their  so  frequent 
inling. 

They  have  a  few  boats  and  some  Fishermen.  Their 
Lrms  are  Lances,  thick  round  short  Truncheons  and 
•i^cls;  with  these  they  hunt  and  kill  their  Game,  and 
beir  Enemies  too;  for  this  Island  is  now  divided  into 
ny  Kingdoms,  and  all  of  different  Languages;  though 
their  Customs  and  manner  of  living,  as  well  as  Shape 
nd  Colour,  they  seem  to  be  of  one  Stock. 

The  chiefesi  Kingdoms  are  Cupang,  Amabie,  Lortribie, 
'obumbic,  Namquimat;  the  Island  also  of  Anamabao,  or 
Lnabao,  is  a  Kingdom.  Each  of  these  hath  a  Sultan  who 
supreme  in  his  Province  and  Kingdom,  and  hath  under 
im  several  Raja's  and  other  infcriour  Officers.  The  Sultans 
or  the  most  Part  are  Enemies  to  each  other;  which  En- 
liiies  arc  fomented  and  kepi  up  by  the  Dutch,  whose  Fort 
id  Factory  is  in  the  Kingdom  of  Cupang ;  and  therefore 
le  Bay  near  which  they  are  settled,  is  commonly  called 
^pang-Bay,  They  have  only  as  much  Ground  as  they 
keep  within  Reach  of  their  Guns ;  yet  this  whole 
^Rgdom  is  at  Peace  with  them ;  and  they  freely  trade 
Ogcthcr;  as  also  with  the  Islanders  on  Anabao,  who  are 
1  Amity  as  well  with  the  Natives  of  Cupang,  as  with  the 
lutch  rcMding  there;  but  they  arc  implacable  Enemies 
»  those  of  Amabie,  who  arc  their  next  neighbours,  and  in 
Lmity  with  the  Portuguezc :  as  arc  also  the  Kingdoms  of 
!bbumbic,  Namquimal  and  Lortribie.  It  is  very  probable, 
t  these  2  European  Settlements  on  this  Island,  arc  the 
[realcst  Occasion  of  their  continued  Wars.  The  Portu- 
^nezc  vaunt  highly  of  their  Strength  here,  and  that  they 
:  able  at  Pleasure  to  rout  the  Dutch,  if  they  had  Authority 
to  do  from  the  King  of  Portugal ;  and  they  have 
itten  to  the  Vice-roy  ofGoa  about  it :  And  though  their 
tequcst  is  not  yet  granted,  yet  (as  they  say)  they  live  in 
txpcclation  of  it.  These  have  no  Forts,  but  depend  on 
beir  Alliance  with  the  Natives;  And  indeed  they  are 
Irudy  so  mixt,  that  it  is  hard  to  distinguish  whether  they 
501 


i 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER*S  VOYAGES 

A%.  are  Poftagoeze  or  Indians.    Thdr  Lai^nage  is  Portugaeze ; 

'^  and  the  Religion  they  hare,  is  Romish.  They  seem  in 
Words  to  acknowledge  the  King  of  Portugal  for  thdr 
Sovereig) ;  yet  they  will  not  accept  of  any  Officers  sent  bjr 
him*  They  speak  indiffinmtly  the  Malayan  and  their  own 
native  Languages,  as  well  as  Portuguese ;  and  the  chiefest 
Officers  that  1  saw,  were  of  this  Sort ;  ndther  did  1  see 
above  3  or  4  white  Men  among  them ;  and  of  these,  2  were 
Priests*  Of  this  mixt  Breed  there  are  smne  thousands ;  of 
whom  some  have  small  Arms  of  thdr  own,  and  know  how 
to  use  them.  The  chiefest  Person  (as  I  before  said)  is 
called  Captain  More  or  Maior :  He  is  a  white  Man,  sent 
hither  by  the  Vice-Roy  of  Goa,  and  seems  to  have  great 
Command  here.  I  did  not  see  him ;  for  he  seldom  comes 
down.  His  Residence  is  at  a  Place  called  Porta  Nova; 
which  the  People  at  Laphao  told  me  was  a  great  way  oflF; 
but  1  could  not  get  any  more  particular  Account.  Some 
told  me  that  he  is  most  commonly  in  the  Mountains,  with 
an  Army  of  Indians,  to  guard  the  Passes  between  them 
and  the  Cupangayans,  especially  in  the  dry  Times.  The 
next  Man  to  him  is  Alexis  Mendosa :  He  is  a  right  Indian, 
speaks  very  good  Portugueze,  and  is  of  the  Romish  Re- 
ligion. He  lives  5  or  6  Miles  from  the  Sea,  and  is  called 
the  Lieutenant.  (This  is  he  whom  I  caird  Govemour, 
when  at  Laphao.)  He  commands  next  to  Captain  More, 
and  hath  under  him  another  at  this  Fort  (at  the  Sea-side) 
if  it  may  be  so  called.  He  also  is  called  Lieutenant,  and  is 
an  Indian  Portugueze. 

Besides  this  Mungrel-Breed  of  Indians  and  Portugueze 
here  are  also  some  China-Men,  Merchants  from  Maccao: 
They  bring  hither  coarse  Rice,  Gold,  Tea,  Iron-work, 
Porcelane,  and  Silk  both  wrought  and  raw :  They  get  in 
Exchange  pure  Gold  as  it  is  here  gathered.  Bees-wax, 
Sandall-Wood,  Coire,  &c.  It  is  said  there  are  about  20 
small  China  Vessels  come  hither  every  Year  from  Maccao; 
and  commonly  one  Vessel  a  Year  from  Goa,  which  brings 
European  Commodities  and  Callicoes,  Muslins,  &c.  Here 
are  likewise  some  small  Barks  belonging  to  this  Place,  that 
trade  to  Batavia,  and  bring  from  thence  both  European  and 

502 


THE    DUTCH    SETTLEMENT 

lian  Goods  and  Rice.     The  Vessels  generally  come  here 
March,  and  stay  till  September.  ' 

The  Dutch,  as  I  before  said,  are  setled  in  the  Kingdom 
Cupang,  where  they  have  a  small  neat  Stone  Fort.  It 
lems  to  be  pretty  strong;  yet,  as  I  was  informed,  had 
en  taken  by  a  French  Pirate  about  2  Years  ago :  The 
Jtch  were  used  very  barbarously,  and  ever  since  are  very 
Jous  of  any  Strangers  that  come  this  Way ;  which  I  my 
f  experienced.  These  depend  more  on  their  own  Strength 
in  on  the  Natives  their  Friends ;  having  good  Guns, 
nrder,  and  Shot  enough  on  all  Occasions,  and  Soldiers 
Bicient  to  manage  the  Business  here,  all  well  disciplin'd 
d  in  good  Order ;  which  is  a  Thing  the  Portugueze 
tir  Neighbours  arc  altogether  destitute  of,  they  having 
European  Soldiers,  few  Arms,  less  Ammunition,  and 
sir  Fort  consisting  of  no  more  than  6  bad  Guns  planted 
linst  the  Sea,  whose  Touch-holes  (as  was  before  observed) 
!  so  entarg'd  by  Time,  that  a  great  Part  of  the  Strength 
the  Powder  flics  away  there ;  and  having  Soldiers  in  pay, 
B  Natives  on  all  Occasions  arc  hired ;  and  their  Govcrn- 
fOt  now  13  so  loose,  that  they  will  admit  of  no  more 
Been  from  Portugal  or  Goa.  They  have  also  little  or 
■  Supply  of  Arms  or  Ammunition  from  thence,  but  buy 
as  often  as  they  can,  of  the  Dutch,  Chinese,  &c.  So 
It  upon  the  whole  it  seems  improbable  that  they  should 
tr  attempt  to  drive  out  the  Dutch,  for  fear  of  loosing 
(rnielves,  notwithstanding  their  boasted  Prowess  and  Alli- 
Ce  with  the  Natives :  And  indeed,  as  far  as  I  could  learn, 
•y  have  Business  enough  to  keep  their  own  present  Terri- 
ic»  from  the  Incursions  of  the  Cupangayans  ;  who  are 
lends  to  the  Dutch,  and  whom  doubtless  the  Dutch  have 
lys  enough  to  preserve  in  their  Friendship;  besides  that 
y  have  an  inveterate  Malice  to  their  Neighbours,  inso- 
ich  that  they  kill  all  they  meet,  and  bring  away  their 
idt  in  Triumph.  The  great  Men  of  Cupang  stick  the 
ids  of  those  they  have  killed,  on  Poles;  and  set  them 
the  Tops  of  their  Houses;  and  these  they  esteem  above 
their  other  Riches.  The  inferiour  Sort  bring  the  Heads 
those  they  kill,  into  Houses  made  for  that  Purpose ; 
503 


J 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.      of  which  there  was  one  at   the  Indian  Village   near  the 
1699     Port   Concordia,   almost   full   of   Heads,   as   I  was  told. 
I  know  not  what  Encouragement  they  have  for  their  In- 
humanity. 

The  Dutch  have  always  2  Sloops  belonging  to  their 
Fort;  in  these  they  go  about  the  Island,  and  trade  with 
the  Natives;  and,  as  far  as  I  could  learn,  they  trade 
indifferently  with  them  all.  For  though  the  Inland 
People  are  at  war  with  each  other,  yet  those  by  the  Sea- 
side seem  to  be  little  concerned ;  and,  generally  speaking 
the  Malayan  Language,  are  very  sociable  and  easily  induced 
to  trade  with  those  that  speak  that  Language;  which 
the  Dutch  here  always  learn ;  Besides,  being  well  acquainted 
with  the  Treachery  of  these  People,  they  go  well  arm'd 
among  them,  and  are  very  vigilant  never  to  give  them  ao 
Opportunity  to  hurt  them;  and  it  is  very  probable  that 
they  supply  them  with  such  Goods,  as  the  Portuguezc 
cannot. 

The   Malayan    Language,   as   I   have   before  said,  is 
generally  spoken  amongst  all  the  Islands  hereabouts.    The 
greater  the  Trade  is,  the  more  this  Language  is  spoken: 
In  some  it  is  become  their  only  Language ;  in  others  it  is 
but  little  spoken,  and  that  by  the  Sea-side  only.     With  this 
Language  the  Mahometan  Religion  did  spread  it  self,  and 
was  got  hither  before  any  European  Christians  came :  But 
now,  though  the  Language  is  still  used,  the  Mahometan 
Religion  falls,  where-ever  the  Portugueze  or   Dutch  are 
settled ;  unless  they  be  very  weak,  as  at  Solor  and  Ende, 
where  the  chief  Language  is  Malayan,  and  the  Religion 
Mahometanism ;    though  the  Dutch  are  settled  at  Solor, 
and  the  Portugueze  at  the  East-end  of  the  Island  Ende, 
at  a  Place  called  Lorantuca;^  which,  as  I  was  informed, 
is    a    large   Town,    hath  a   pretty   strong   Fort   and  safe 
Harbour.     The  chief  Man  there  (as  at  Timor)  is  called 
Captain  More,  and  is  as  absolute  as  the  other.     These  2 
principal  Men   are  Enemies  to  each  other;  and  by  their 
Letters  and  Messages  to  Goa,  inveigh  bitterly  against  each 

1  Larantuka  on  the  N£.  coast  of  Flores. 

504 


W  LORANTUCA  ^ 

Bthcr ;  and  are  ready  to  do  all  tbe  ill  Offices  tber  can  ;  yet   as.  ] 
Kdchcr  of  them  much  regards  the  Vice-Roy  of  Goa,  as  I  **» 
Kas  infonn'd. 

■  L'  Onntuca  a  said  to  be  more  populous  then  any  Toirn 
Kd  Timor ;  the  Island  Ende  affbriing  greater  Plenty  of  all 
Kunno*  of  Fruit,  and  being  much  betur  supplied  with  all 
Bleccssarics,  than  Laphao;  especially  with  bbecp,  Goats, 
^Hogs,  Poultry,  &c.  but  it  b  very  dai^eraus  gctoog  into 
■liis  Harbour,  because  of  the  violent  Tides,  betweea  the 
■lUnds  Ende  and  Solor.  Id  the  middle  Channel  between 
Blmor  and  the  Range  of  Islands  to  the  Northward  of  it, 
Brhereof  Ende  and  Solar  arc  2,  there  runs  a  constant 
Current  all  the  Year  to  the  Westward  ;  though  near  either 
^Biore  there  are  Tides  indeed ;  but  the  Ttdc  of  Flood, 
^bfaich  sets  West,  ninnit^  8  or  9  Hour^  and  the  Ebb  not 
Hxcecding  3  or  4  Hours,  the  Tide  in  some  Places  riseth  9 
Sir  10  Foot  on  a  Spring. 

I  The  Seasons  of  the  Year  here  at  Timor,  arc  much  the 
■nmc  as  in  other  Places  in  South  Latitude.  The  fair 
Weather  begins  in  April  or  May,  and  continues  to  October, 
then  the  Tornadoes  begin  to  come,  but  do  violent  bad 
Weather  till  the  Middle  of  December.  Then  there  are 
violent  West  or  North-Wesl  Winds,  with  Rain,  till  towards 
the  Middle  of  February.  In  May  the  Southerly  Wmds  act 
in,  and  blow  very  strong  on  the  Ncrth-ndc  of  the  Island, 
but  fair.  There  is  great  Diffi:rence  of  Winds  on  the  Z 
Sdcs  of  the  Island  :  For  the  Southerly  Winds  are  but  very 
faint  on  the  South-^ide,  and  very  hard  on  the  North-side  ; 
and  the  bad  Weather  on  the  South'side  comes  in  very 
violent  in  October,  which  on  the  North-side  comet  not  till 
December.  You  have  very  good  Sea  and  Land-breezes, 
when  the  Weather  is  fair;  and  may  run  indifli^rently  to  the 
East  or  West,  as  your  Business  ties.  We  found  from 
September  to  December  the  Wmds  veering  all  round  the 
Compass gradtully in  24  Hours  Time;  but  such  a  constant 
Western  Current,  that  it's  much  harder  getting  to  the  Eut 
1  West  at  or  near  Spring  Tides :  Which  I  have  more 
t  once  made  Tryal  of.  For  weighing  from  Balwo  at 
I  Clock  in  the  Momiog  on  the  12th  Insunt.  wc  kept 
505 


4 


kcpl  ^ 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AX.  By  a  good  Observation  we  found  that  the  South-East-point 
*^  of  Omba  lies  in  Latitude  8  d.  25  m.  In  my  Draughts  its 
laid  down  in  8  deg.  10  min.  My  true  Course  from  Babao, 
is  East,  25  deg.  North,  distance  one  hundred  dghty  throe 
miles.  We  sounded  several  times  when  near  Omba,  bat 
had  no  ground.  On  the  North-East  point  of  Omtn  wt 
saw  four  or  five  Men,  and  a  little  further  three  pretty 
Houses  on  a  low  Pcnnt,  but  did  not  go  ashore. 

At  five  this  Afternoon,  we  had  a  Tornado,  whid 
yielded  much  Rain,  Thunder  and  Lightning ;  yet  we  had 
but  little  Wind.  The  24th  in  the  Morning  we  catched  a  large 
Shark,  which  gave  all  the  Ships  Company  a  plentiful  Meal 
The  27th  we  saw  the  burning  Island,^  it  lies  in  Ladtude 
6  deg.  36  min.  South ;  it  is  high,  and  but  small.  It  nios 
fi-om  the  Sea  a  little  sloaping  towards  the  Top ;  which  is 
divided  in  the  Middle  into  two  Peaks,  between  which  issued 
out  much  Smoak :  I  have  not  seen  more  from  any  Vulcana 
I  saw  no  Trees ;  but  the  North-side  appeared  green,  and 
the  rest  look'd  very  barren. 

Having  past  the  burning  Island,  I  shap*d  my  Course 
for  two  Islands  called  Turtle  Isles,  which  lye  North-Eist 
by  East  a  little  Easterly,  and  distant  about  fifty  Le3f[ues 
from  the  burning  Isle.  I  fearing  the  Wind  might  veer 
to  the  Eastward  of  the  North,  steered  20  Leagues  North- 
East,  then  North-East  by  East.  On  the  28th  wc  saw 
two  small  low  Islands,  called  Luca-parros,'  to  the  North 
of  us.  At  Noon  I  accounted  my  self  20  Leagues  short 
of  the  Turtle  Isles. 

The  next  Morning,  being  in  the  Latitude  of  the  Turtk 
Islands,  we  looked  out  sharp  for  them,  but  saw  no  appear- 
ance of  any  Island,  till  1 1  a  Clock ;  when  we  saw  an  Island 
at  a  great  distance.  At  first  we  supposed  it  might  be  ODt 
of  the  Turtle  Isles :  But  it  was  not  laid  down  true,  nrither 
in  Latitude  nor  Longitude  fi-om  the  burning  Isle,  nor  from 
the  Luca-parros,  which  last  I  took  to  be  a  great  help  to 
guide  me,  they  being  laid  down  very  well  from  the  Burmng 

'  Gunong  Api. 

'  Lucipara.    The  Turtle  Islands  are  low  sandy  islets  to  the  noith  of 
the  Lucipara  group,  of  which  they  are,  in  fiict,  a  part. 

508 


THE  TCRTLE   ISLES— BIRD-ISLAND 

^  md  thu  Gkewtae  in  true  LAdtiidc  and  distance  from 
:  So  tfau  I  could  aac  tell  what  to  chink  of  the  Isi&ad  ' 
in  aglu;  wc  iMTing  had  fior  Weather,  so  thit  wc 
1  pm  bf  the  Turtle  bles  without  seeing  tbem ; 
'  rht  was  much  too  far  off  for  them.  We 
I  deg,  2  mio.  East.  In  the  Afternoon  I 
lax  by  East  for  the  Islands  that  we  saw.  At 
a  Qock  I  went  and  iook'd  av&  tbc  Fore-yard,  and  saw 
Islands  at  much  greater  distance  than  the  Turtle  Islands 
e  laid  down  in  m;  Draughts;  one  of  them  was  a  very 
gb  pcak'd  Mountun,  cleft  at  Top,  and  much  like  the 
Iming  labnd  that  we  past  by.  but  bigger  and  higher ;  the 
'ler  was  a  pretty  long  high  Sat  Island.  Now  I  was 
tain  that  these  were  not  the  Turtle  Islands,  and  that 
J  could  be  no  other  than  the  Bandc  '-Isles ;  yet  wc 
in  to  make  them  plainer.  At  3  a  Clock  we  dis- 
'ened  another  small  flat  Island  to  the  North-West  of  the 
and  saw  a  great  deal  of  Smoak  rise  from  the  Top  of 
high  Island;  At- 4  wc  saw  other  small  Islands,  by 
htch  I  was  now  assured  that  these  were  the  Bande-lsles 
ere.  At  5  I  altered  my  Course  and  steered  East,  and  at 
Easi-South-Easi ;  because  I  would  not  be  seen  by  the 
■habitants  of  those  Islands  in  the  Morning.  We  had 
k  Wind  all  Night ;  and  in  the  Morning  as  soon  as  'twas 
;hc,  wc  saw  another  high  pcak'd  Island  :  At  8  it  bore 
ith-South-East  half  East,  distance  8  Leagues.  And  this  I 
:w  (o  be  Bird-Isle.'  'Tis  laid  down  in  our  Draughts  in 
[itude  5  dcg.  9  min.  South,  which  is  too  far  Southerly 
f  17  Miles  according  to  our  Observation ;  And  the  like 
rror  in  laying  down  the  Turtle-Islands,  might  be  the 
Iccasion  of  our  missing  them. 
At  night  I  shonned  Sail,  for  fear  of  coming  too  nigh 
ne  Islands.'  that  stretch  away  bending  like  a  half  Moon 
■m  Ceram  towards  Timor,  and  which  in  my  Course  I 
M  of  ncccsuty  pass  through.  The  next  Morning  be- 
es, I  saw  them  ;  and  found  them  to  be  at  a  farther 
;ance  from  Bird-Island,  than  I  expected.     In  the  After- 


>  SerwaUi  Iklindt. 


J 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   Boat  could  come  close  to,  and  it  was  very  easie  to  be  fill*d ; 

>7oo  2nd  that  the  Ship  might  anchor  as  near  to  it  as  I  pleas'd : 
So  I  went  thither.  The  next  Morning  therefore  we  anchor'd 
in  25  Fathom  Water,  soft  oazie  Ground,  about  a  Mile 
from  the  River :  We  got  on  board  3  Tun  of  Water  diat 
Night ;  and  caught  2  or  3  Pike-fish,  in  shape  much  like 
a  Parracota,  but  with  a  longer  Snout,  something  resembling 
a  Garr,  yet  not  so  long.  The  next  day  I  sent  the  Boat 
again  for  Water,  and  before  night  all  my  Casks  were  full. 

Having  filfd  here  about  15  Tuns  of  Water,  seeing  we 
could  catch  but  little  Fish,  and  had  no  other  ReiFreshments, 
I  intended  to  sail  next  day;  but  finding  that  we  wanted 
Wood,  I  sent  to  cut  some ;  and  going  ashore  to  hasten  it, 
at  some  distance  from  the  place  where  our  Men  were,  1 
found  a  small  Cove,  where  I  saw  two  Barbecues,  which 
appear*d  not  to  be  above  2  Months  standing :  The  Spam 
were  cut  with  some  sharp  Instrument ;  so  that,  if  done  by 
the  Natives,  it  seems  that  they  have  Iron.  On  the  loth,  a 
little  after  1 2  a-Clock,  we  weighed  and  stood  over  to  the 
North-side  of  the  Bay ;  and  at  i  a-Clock  stood  out  with 
the  Wind  at  North  and  North-North-West.  At  4  we 
past  out  by  a  White  Island,  which  1  so  named  from  its 
many  white  ClifFs,  having  no  name  in  our  Draughts.  It 
is  about  a  League  long,  pretty  high,  and  very  woody :  Tis 
about  5  Miles  from  the  Main,  only  at  the  West-end  it 
reaches  within  3  Miles  of  it.  At  some  distance  oflF  at  Sea, 
the  West-point  appears  like  a  Cape-land  ;  The  North-side 
trends  away  North-North-West,  and  the  East-side  East- 
South-East.  This  Island  lies  in  Latitude  3  degrees  4  min. 
South ;  and  the  Meridian  Distance  from  Bahao,  500  and 
12  Miles  East.  After  we  were  out  to  Sea,  we  pliexl  to  get 
to  the  Northward ;  but  met  with  such  a  strong  Current 
against  us,  that  we  got  but  little.  For  if  the  Wind  favoured 
us  in  the  night,  that  we  got  3  or  4  Leagues ;  we  lost  it 
again,  and  were  driven  as  far  astern  next  Morning ;  so  that 
we  plyed  here  several  Days. 

The  14th,  being  past  a  point  of  Land  that  we  had 
been  3  Days  getting  about,  we  found  little  or  no  Current ; 
so    that  having   the  Wind  at  North- West  by  West  and 

512 


MM 


INHABITANTS  OF  NEW  GUINEA 
West-North-Wcst,  wc  stood  to  the  Northward,  and  had  ' 
leveral  Soundings:  Ai  3  a-C!ock,  38  Fathom;  the  nearest  'J™^ 
part  of  Ncw-Guinca  being  about  3  Leagues  distance :  At 
4,  37 ;  at  5,  36;  at  6,  36;  at  8,  33  Fathom;  Then  the 
Cape  was  about  4  Leagues  distant ;  so  that  as  we  ran  ofF, 
we  found  our  Water  shallower.  Wc  had  then  some  Islands 
to  the  Westward  of  us,  at  about  four  Leagues  distance. 

A  liltle  after  noon  we  saw  Smokes  on  the  Islands  tod 
the  West  of  us ;  and  having  a  fine  Gale  of  Wind,  1  steered  I 
swsy  for  them  :  At  7  a-Clock  in  the  Evening  we  anchored  ' 
in  35  Fathom,  about  two  Leagues  from  an  Island,  good 
soft  oazic  Ground.     Wc  lay  still  all  night,  and  saw  Fires 
tsborc.     In  the  Morning  wc  weighed  again,  and  ran  farther  | 
in,  thinking  to  have  shallower  Water;  but  wc  ran  within  I 
s  Mile  of  the  Shore,  and  came  to  in  38  Fathom,  good  soft  I 
holding  Ground.      While  we    were    under  Sail,    2    Canoes 
came  ot"  within  call  of  us:  They  spoke  to  us,  but  we  did 
not  understand  their  Language,  nor  Signs.     Wc  wav'd  to 
them  to  come  aboard,  and  1  call'd  to  them  in  the  Malayan 
Language  to  do  the  same ;  but  they  would  not ;  yet  they 
came  so  nigh  us,  that  we  could  shew  them  such  Things  as 
wc  had  to  truck  with  them  ;  Yet  neither  would  this  entice 
tbcnt  to  come  aboard ;  but  they  made  Signs  for  us  to  come 
ashore,  and  away  they  went.     Then  I  went  after  them  in 
my    Rnnacc,    carrying    with    me    Knives,    Beads,    Glasses, 
Hatchets,  &c.      When   we  came  near   the  Shore,   I    called 
to  them  in  the  Malayan  Language :  I  saw  but  2  Men  at 
first,  the  rest   lying  in  Ambush  nchind  the  Bushes ;  but 
tt  soon  as  I  threw  ashore  some  Knives  and  other  Toys, 
they  came  out,  flung  down  their  Weapons,  and  came  into 
the  Waicr  by  the  Boat's  Side,  making  Signs  of  Friendship 
by  pouring  Water  on  their  Heads  with  one  Hand,  which 
they  dipt  mto  the  Sea.     The  next  Day  in  the  Afternoon 
several    other   Canoas   came    aboard,    and    brought    many 
Roots  and  Fruits,  which  we  purchas'd. 

This  Island  has  no  Name  in  our  Draughts,  but  the 
Natives  call  it  Puto  Sabuda.'     It  is  about  3  Leagues  long. 


s  Bi  tb«  enUMice  to  McClaei'*  Inlet. 

513 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  and  2  Miles  wide,  more  or  less.  It  is  of  a  good  Heighth, 
'700  so  as  to  be  seen  1 1  or  12  Leagues.  It  is  very  Rocky;  yet 
above  the  Rocks  there  is  good  yellow  and  black  Mould ; 
not  deep,  yet  producing  plenty  of  good  tall  Trees,  and 
bearing  any  Fruits  or  Roots  which  the  Inhabitants  plant 
I  do  not  know  all  its  Produce ;  but  what  we  saw, 
were  Plantains,  Coco-Nuts,  Pine-Apples,  Oranges,  Papaes, 
Potatoes,  and  other  large  Roots.  Here  are  also  another 
sort  of  wild  Jaca*s,  about  the  bigness  of  a  Man's  two  Fists, 
full  of  Stones  or  Kernels,  which  eat  pleasant  enough  when 
roasted.  The  Libby  Tree  grows  here  in  the  Swampy 
Valleys,  of  which  they  make  Sago  Cakes :  1  did  not  see 
them  make  any,  but  was  told  by  the  Inhabitants  that  it 
was  made  of  the  Pith  of  the  Tree,  in  the  same  Manner 
1  have  described  in  my  "Voyage  Round  the  World." 
They  shew'd  me  the  Tree  whereof  it  was  made,  and  1 
bought  about  40  of  the  Gdces.  I  bought  also  3  or  4 
Nutm^  in  their  Shell,  which  did  not  seem  to  have  been 
long  gathered ;  but  whether  they  be  the  Growth  of  this 
Island  or  not,  the  Natives  would  not  tell  whence  they  had 
them,  and  seem'd  to  prize  them  very  much.  What  Beasts 
the  Island  affords,  I  know  not :  But  here  are  both  Sea  and 
Land-Fowl.  Of  the  first,  Boobies  and  Men  of  War-Birds 
are  the  chief ;  some  Goldens,  and  small  Milk-white  Crab- 
catchers.  The  Land-Fowls  are  Pidgeons,  about  the  Bigness 
of  Mountain-Pidgeons  in  Jamaica ;  and  Crows  about  the 
Bigness  of  those  in  England,  and  much  like  them;  but 
the  inner  Part  of  their  Feathers  are  white,  and  the  Out- 
side black ;  so  that  they  appear  all  black,  unless  you  extend 
the  Feathers.  Here  are  large  Sky-coloured  Birds,  such  as 
we  lately  kilTd  on  New  Guinea;  and  many  other  small 
Birds,  unknown  to  us.  Here  are  likewise  Abundance  of 
Bats/  as  big  as  young  Coneys;  their  Necks,  Head,  Ears 
and  Noses,  like  Foxes ;  their  Hair  rough ;  that  about 
their  Necks,  is  of  a  whitish  yellow,  that  on  their  Heads 
and  Shoulders  black ;  their  Wings  are  4  Foot  over,  from 
Tip  to  Tip :  They  smell  like  Foxes.     The  Fish  arc  Bass, 

*  Pteropus  siramineus  {J\ 

i 


'HE   INHABITANTS   OF   THE   ISLAND 

;k-6sh,  and  a  Sort  of  Fish  like  Mullets,  OM-wives, 
ip-r»ys,  and  some  other  Sorts  that  1  know  not,  but  no  '^"^  ] 
X  Plenty  of  any;  for  'tis  deep  Water  till  within  less 
I  a  Mile  of  the  Shore ;  then  there  is  a  Bank  of  Coral 
within  which  you  have  Shoal  Water,  white  clean 
So  there  is  no  good  Fishing  with  the  Sain. 
This  Island  lies  in  Latitude  2  deg.  43  min.  South, 
Meridian  distance  from  Port  Babao  on  the  Island 
or,  486  Miles.  Besides  this  Island,  here  are  9  or  10 
r  small  Islands,  as  they  are  laid  down  in  the  Draughts. 
The  Inhabitants  of  this  Island  are  a  Sort  of  very  tawny 
ins,  with  long  black  Hair;  who  in  their  Manners 
r  but  little  from  the  Mindanayans,  and  others  of 
:  Eastern  Islands.  These  seem  to  be  the  chief;  for 
ies  them  wc  saw  also  shock  curl-patcd  New-Guinea 
many  of  which  are  Slaves  to  the  others,  but  I 
ik  not  all.  They  arc  very  poor,  wear  no  Cloaths,  but 
;  a  Clout  about  ihcir  Middle,  made  of  the  Rinds  of 
Tops  of  Palmeto  Trees;  but  the  Women  had  a  Sort 
Callicoc-Cloaths.  Their  chief  Ornaments  arc  Blue 
Yellow-Beads,  worn  about  their  Wrists.  The  Men 
themselves  with  Bows  and  Arrows,  Lances,  broad 
rds  like  those  of  Mindanao;  their  Lances  are  pointed 
I  Bone.  They  strike  Fish  very  ingeniously  with 
den  Fiss-gigs,  and  have  a  very  ingenious  way  of  making 
Fish  rise  :  For  they  have  a  Piece  of  Wood  curiously 
'd  and  painted  much  like  a  Dolphin  (and  perhap 
T  Figures) ;  these  they  let  down  into  the  Water  by  a 
;  with  a  small  Weight  to  sink  it ;  when  they  think  it 
enough,  they  haul  the  Une  Into  their  Boats  very  fast, 
(he  Fish  rise  up  after  this  Figure ;  and  they  stand 
ly  to  strike  them  when  they  arc  near  the  Surface  of  the 
er.  But  their  chief  Livelihood  is  from  their  Planta- 
.  Yet  they  have  large  Boats,  and  go  over  to  New- 
lea,  where  they  get  Slaves,  fine  Parrots,  6cc.  which 
carry  to  Goram '  and  exchange  for  Callicoes.  One 
came  from  thence  a  little  before  I  arriv'd   here  ;  of 

'  An  itbnd  in  lh«  Cctaoi  Lnui  itioup. 

S"S 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  whom  I  bought  some  Parrots ;  and  would  have  bought  a 
'7«>  Slave,  but  they  would  not  barter  for  any  Thing  but 
Gillicoes,  which  I  had  not.  Their  Houses  on  this  Side 
were  very  small,  and  seem'd  only  to  be  for  Necessity ;  but 
on  the  other  Side  of  the  Island  we  saw  good  large  Houses. 
Their  Proes  are  narrow  with  Outlagers  on  each  Side,  like 
other  Malayans.  I  cannot  tell  of  what  Religion  these  are ; 
but  I  think  they  are  not  Mahometans,  by  their  drinking 
Brandy  out  of  the  same  Cup  with  us  without  any  Scruple. 
At  this  Island  we  continued  till  the  20th  Instant,  having 
laid  in  Store  of  such  Roots  and  Fruits  as  the  Island 
aflForded. 

On  the  20th,  at  half  an  Hour  after  6  in  the  Morning, 
I  weigh'd,  and  standing  out  we  saw  a  large  Boat  full  of 
Men  lying  at  the  North-point  of  the  Island.  As  we  passed 
by,  they  rowed  towards  their  Habitations,  where  wc  sup- 
posed they  had  withdrawn  themselves  for  fear  of  us  (tho' 
we  gave  them  no  Cause  of  Terrour),  or  for  some  Difer- 
ences  among  themselves. 

We  stood  to  the  Northward  till  7  in  the  Evening; 
then  saw  a  Ripling ;  and  the  Water  being  discoloured,  we 
sounded,  and  had  but  22  Fathom.  I  went  about  and  stood 
to  the  Westward  till  2  next  Morning,  then  tack'd  again, 
and  had  these  several  Soundings :  At  8  in  the  Evening,  22 ; 
at  10,  25;  at  II,  27;  at  12,  28  Fathom;  at  2  in  the 
Morning  26 ;  at  4,  24;  at  6,  23 ;  at  8,  28 ;  at  12,  22. 

We  passed  by  many  small  Islands,  and  among  many 
dangerous  Shoals,  without  any  remarkable  Occurrence,  till 
the  4th  of  February,  when  we  got  within  3  Leagues  of  the 
North-West  Cape  of  New-Guinea,  called  by  the  Dutch 
Cape  Mabo.^  Off  this  Cape  there  lies  a  small  woody  Island, 
and  many  Islands  of  different  Sizes  to  the  North  and  North- 
East  of  it.  This  Part  of  New  Guinea  is  high  Land,  adorn  d 
with  tall  Trees  that  apf)eared  very  green  and  flourishing. 
The  Cape  it  self  is  not  very  high,  but  ends  in  a  low  sharjp 
Point ;  and  on  either  Side  there  appears  another  such  Point 
at  equal  Distances,  which  makes  it  resemble  a  Diamond. 

*  Cape  Selee. 

516 


■  COCKLE   ISLAND 

fats  only  appesrs  when  you  are  abreast  of  the  middle  an. 
Point;  and  then  you  have  no  Ground  within  3  Leagues  *^°° 
if  the  Shore. 

In  the  Afternoon  we  past  by  the  Cape,  and  stood  over 
""or  the  Islands.  Before  it  was  dark,  we  were  got  within  a 
Laguc  of  the  Wcstcrmost ;  but  had  no  Ground  with  50 
Pathom  of  Line.  However  fearing  to  stand  nearer  in  the 
l«rk,  wc  tack'd  and  stood  to  the  East,  and  plyed  all  Night, 
The  next  Morning  wc  were  got  5  or  6  Leagues  to  the  East- 
irard  of  that  Island;  and  having  the  Wind  Easterly,  we 
itood  in  to  the  Northward  among  the  Islands;  sounded, 
md  had  no  Ground.  Then  I  sent  in  my  Boat  to  sound, 
.  !  i  they  had  Ground  with  50  Fathom  near  a  Mile  from 
L-  Shore.  Wc  tack'd  before  the  Boat  came  aboard  again, 
r  fear  of  a  Shoal  that  was  about  a  Mile  to  the  East  of 
hat  Island  the  Boat  went  to ;  from  whence  also  a  Shoal- 
wnt  stretched  out  it  self  till  it  met  the  other :  They 
irought  with  them  such  a  Cockle,  as  I  have  mentioned  in 
ny  "Voyage  round  the  World,"  found  near  Celebes;  and 
hey  saw  many  more,  some  bigger  than  that  which  they 
)rought  aboard,  m  they  said  ;  and  for  this  Reason  I  named 
t  Cockle-Island.  I  sent  them  to  sound  again,  ordering 
hem  to  fire  a  Musquet  if  they  found  good  anchoring ;  we 
Kcrc  then  standing  to  the  Southward,  with  a  fine  Breeze. 
%s  soon  as  they  fired,  I  tack'd  and  stood  in  :  They  told  me 
iiey  had  50  Tathom  when  they  fired.  I  tack'd  again,  and 
nidc  all  the  Sail  I  could  to  get  out,  being  near  some  Rocky 
[sUnds  and  Shoals  to  Leeward  of  us.  The  Breeze  increased, 
lod  I  thought  we  were  out  of  Danger ;  but  having  a  Shoal 
lUst  by  U9,  and  the  Wind  falling  again,  I  ordered  the  Boat 
!o  tow  us,  and  by  their  Help  wc  got  clear  from  it.  We 
ud  a  strong  Tide  setting  to  the  Westward. 

At  I  a-Clock,  being  past  the  Shoal,  and  finding  the 
ride  setting  to  the  Westward,  I  anchor'd  in  35  Fathom, 
mane  Sand,  with  small  Coral  and  Shells.  Being  nearest 
Ui  Cockle-Island,  Limmcdiatcly  sent  both  the  Boats  thither ; 
me  to  cut  Wood,  and  the  other  to  fish.  At  4  in  the 
Wtcmoon,  having  a  small  Breeze  at  South-South- West,  I 
de  a  Sign  for  my  Boats  to  come  aboard.     They  brought 

5>7  J 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  some  Wood,  and  a  few  small  Cockles,  none  of  them  cx- 
'700  ceeding  lo  Pound  weight;  whereas  the  Shell  of  the  great 
one  weighed  7  8  Pound ;  but  it  was  now  high  Water,  and 
therefore  they  could  get  no  bigger.  They  also  brought  on 
Board  some  Pidgeons,  of  which  we  found  Plenty  on  all  the 
Islands  where  we  touch'd  in  these  Seas.  Also  in  many 
Places  we  saw  many  large  Batts,  but  kill'd  none,  except 
those  I  mentioned  at  Pulo  Sabuda.  As  our  Boats  came 
aboard,  we  weigh'd  and  made  Sail,  steering  East-South- 
East  as  long  as  the  Wind  held :  In  the  Morning  we  found 
we  had  got  4  or  5  Leagues  to  the  East  of  the  Place  where 
we  weighed.  We  stood  to  and  fro  till  1 1  ;  and  finding 
that  we  lost  Ground,  anchored  in  42  Fathom,  coarse  gravelly 
Sand,  with  some  Coral.  This  Morning  we  thought  we  saw 
a  Sail. 

In  the  Afternoon  I  went  ashore  on  a  small  woody 
Island,  about  2  Leagues  from  us.  Here  I  found  the 
greatest  Number  of  Pidgeons  that  ever  I  saw  either  in 
the  East  or  West-Indies,  and  small  Cockles  in  the  Sea 
round  the  Island,  in  such  Quantities  that  we  might  have 
laden  the  Boat  in  an  Hour's  Time :  These  were  not  above 
10  or  12  Pound  Weight.  We  cut  some  Wood,  and  brought 
off  Cockles  enough  for  all  the  Ship's  Company ;  but  having 
no  small  Shot,  we  could  kill  no  Pidgeons.  I  returned  aboot 
4  a-Clock;  and  then  my  Gunner  and  both  Mates  went 
thither,  and  in  less  than  3  quarters  of  an  Hour  they  kill'd 
and  brought  oflF  i  o  Pidgeons.  Here  is  a  Tide :  The  Flood 
sets  West  and  the  Ebb  East ;  but  the  latter  is  very  feint, 
and  but  of  small  Continuance.  And  so  we  found  it  ever 
since  we  came  from  Timor.  The  Winds  we  found  Easterly, 
between  North-East  and  East-South-East ;  so  that  if  these 
continue,  it  is  impossible  to  beat  farther  to  the  Eastvwtl 
on  this  Coast  against  Wind  and  Current.  These  Easterly 
Winds  encreased  from  the  Time  we  were  in  the  Latitude 
of  about  2  deg.  South ;  and  as  we  drew  nigher  the  line, 
they  hung  more  Easterly.  And  now  being  to  the  NcMth 
of  the  Continent  of  New  Guinea,  where  the  Coast  lies  East 
and  West,  I  find  the  Trade-wind  here  at  East ;  which  yet 
in  higher  Latitudes  is  usually  at  North-North- West  and 

518 


KING  WILLIAMS   ISLAND 

forth-West ;  and  so  I  did  expect  them  here,  it  bat^  to 
South  of  the  Line.  ' 

The  7th  in  the  Morning   1   sent  my  Bo«t   ashore  on 
^dgeon-lsland,  and  staid   till   Noon.     In   the   Aitcroooa 
ly  Men  returned,  brought  22  Ptdgeoas,  and  nuny  Gxkles, 
me  very  large,  some  small :  They  also  brooght  one  empty 
lell,  that  weigh "d  258  Pound. 

At  4  a-Clock  we  weigh'd,  having  a  tatall  Westcrtjr 
^ind,  and  a  Tide  with  us;  at  7  in  the  Evening  we 
chorM  in  42  Fathom,  near  King  William's  Island,  whefc 
went  ashore  the  next  Morning,  drank  his  Majesty's 
lealth,  and  honour'd  it  with  his  Name-  It  is  about  a 
«agucs  and  a  half  in  length,  very  high,  and  extraOFdinarily 
;11  cloithed  with  Woods.  The  Trees  are  of  dirers  Sorts, 
ost  unknown  to  us.  but  all  very  green  and  flourislttng; 
■ny  of  them  had  Flowers,  some  wbhc,  some  purple, 
hers  yellow  ;  all  which  smelt  very  fragrantly.  The  Trees 
e  generally  tall  and  streight-bodicd,  and  may  be  fit  for 
ly  Uses.  I  saw  one  of  a  clean  Body,  wtthotit  Knot  or 
imb,  60  or  70  Foot  high  by  Esiimaxion.  It  was  3  of  my 
athoms  about,  and  kept  its  Bigness  without  any  tennble 
even  to  the  Top.  The  Mould  of  the  Island  is 
Itck,  but  not  deep;  it  being  very  rocky.  On  the  Sides 
k)  Top  of  the  bland,  are  many  Palmeto-Trees.  whose 
leads  we  could  dtsccm  over  all  the  other  Trees,  but  their 
lies  we  could  not  see. 

About  I  in  the  Afternoon  we  weighed  and  stood  to  the 
lutward,  between  the  Main  and  King  William's  Island  ; ' 
iving  the  Island  on  our  Larboard-^ide,  and  sounding  till 
were   past  the   Island;  and    then   wc    had    no  Ground. 
we  found  the  Flood  setting  East  by  Nonh,  and  the 
h  West  by  South.     There  were  Shoalt  and  small  Islands 
:wecn  us  and  the  Main,  which  caused  the  Tide  to  act 
7  inconstantly,  and  make  many  Whirlings  in  the  Water  ; 
!  we  did  not  find  the  Tide  to  set  strong  any  way,  nor 
:  Water  to  rise  much. 
On  the  9ih,  being  to  the  Eastward  of  King  William's 

■  OtM  of  tim  WaiaBK  iiUmIl 

i»9 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Island,  we  plied  all  Day  between  the  Main  and  other  Islands, 
'700  having  Easterly  Winds  and  fair  Weather  till  7  the  next 
Morning.  Then  we  had  very  hard  Rain  till  8,  and  saw 
many  Shoals  of  Fish.  We  lay  becalm'd  ofF  a  pretty  deep 
Bay  on  New-Guinea,  about  12  or  14  Leagues  wide,  and  7 
or  8  Leagues  deep,  having  low  Land  near  its  Bottom,  but 
high  Land  without.  The  Eastermost  Part  of  New-Guinea 
seen,  bore  East  by  South,  distant  12  Leagues  :  Cape  Mabo 
West-South-West  half  South,  distant  7  Leagues. 

At  I  in  the  Afternoon  it  began  to  rain,  and  continued 
till  6  in  the  Evening ;  so  that  having  but  little  Wind  and 
most  Calms,  we  lay  still  ofF  the  fore- mentioned  Bay,  having 
King  William's  Island  still  in  Sight,  though  distant  by 
Judgment  1 5  or  16  Leagues  West.  We  saw  many  Shoals 
of  small  Fish,  some  Sharks,  and  7  or  8  Dolphins;  but 
catcht  none.  In  the  Afternoon,  being  about  4  Leagues 
from  the  Shore,  we  saw  an  Opening  in  the  Land,  which 
seem'd  to  afFord  good  Harbour :  In  the  Evening  we  saw 
a  large  Fire  there  ;  and  I  intended  to  go  in  (if  Winds  and 
Weather  would  permit)  to  get  some  Acquaintance  with 
the  Natives. 

Since  the  4th  Instant  that  we  passed  Cape  Mabo,  to  the 
1 2th,  we  had  small  Easterly  Winds  and  Calms,  so  that 
we  anchor'd  several  Times;  where  I  made  my  Men  cut 
Wood,  that  we  might  have  a  good  Stock  when  a  Westerly 
Wind  should  present ;  and  so  we  ply'd  to  the  Eastward, 
as  Winds  and  Currents  would  permit ;  having  not  got  in 
all  above  30  Leagues  to  the  Eastward  of  Caf)e  Mabo.  But 
on  the  1 2th,  at  4  in  the  Afternoon,  a  small  Gale  sprung 
up  at  North-East  by  North,  with  Rain  :  At  5  it  shuffled 
about  to  North-West,  from  thence  to  the  South  West,  and 
continued  between  those  2  Points  a  pretty  brisk  Gale ;  so 
that  we  made  Sail  and  steered  away  North-East,  till  the 
13th  in  the  Morning,  to  get  about  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope. 
When  'twas  Day,  we  steer 'd  North-East  half  East,  then 
North-East  by  East  till  7  a-Clock ;  and  being  then  7  or  8 
Leagues  off  Shore,  we  steer'd  away  East ;  the  Shore  trend- 
ing East  by  South.  We  had  very  much  Rain  all  Night, 
so  that  we  could  not  carry  much  Sail ;  yet  we  had  a  very 

520 


THE   COAST   OF    NEW   GUI3 


dy  Gale.  At  8  this  Momtng  tfac  Wc 
and  the  Wind  decreu'd  to  a  fine  TopgtlfaaC  Gale;  nd  ' 
settled  at  West  by  South.  Wc  had  more  Rjia  tkw  } 
Days  past,  than  all  the  Voyage  in  so  sbort  Ttmc  We 
were  now  about  6  Leagues  froa  the  Land  a(  Nc«- 
Guinca,  which  appcar'd  very  high ;  aod  we  sv  2  Head- 
's about  20  Leagues  asunder ;  the  one  to  the  Eau,  and 
other  to  the   West,  which  last  it  calkd  the  Cafe  of 

Hope.     Wc  found  Variaikm  Eaa  4  deg. 

The  15th  in  the  Morning  between  IZ  and  2  s-Clock,  tt 

very  brisk  Gale  at  Nrwrh-West.  and  loofc'd  very 

k   in  the  South-West.      At  z  it    flcw   aboat  at  ooce 

the  South-South- West,  and  rained   very    hard.      The 

ind    settled    sometime    at    West-South- West,   and    we 

ircd  East-North-£a$t  till  3  in  the  Mofiung :  Then  the 

ind  and    Rain  abating,  we  «ieend  East  haJf  North  for 

of  coming  near  the  Land.      Presently  after,  it  being  a 

Jc  clear,  the  Man  at  the  Bowsprit  end,  caJl'd  out.  "  Land 

our  Starboard  Bow."     We  lookt  out  and  saw  it  plain. 

I  presently  sounded,  and  had  but  lo  Faibom  soft  Ground. 

The  Master,  being  somewhat  scar'd,  came  running  in  haste 

vith  thb  News,  and  said  it  was  best  to  anchor :  I  told  him 

but  sound  again;  then  wc  had    12  Fathom;  the  next 

Int.    13  and   a  half;  the  4ih,  17   Fathom  ;  and  then  no 

round  with  jo  Fathom  Ljne.     However  we  kept  off  the 

'  ind,  and   did  not  go  so  fast  but  that  wc  could  see  any 

ler   Danger  before  wc  came  nigh    it.     For  here  might 

'c  been   more   Islands  not  laid  down   in   my  Draughts 

I  Thti,     For  I  search'd   all  the  Draughts  I  had,  if 

ince  I   might  6nd  any  Island  in  the  one,  which   was 

t  in  the  others;  but  I  could  find  none  near  us.     When  it 

1  Day,  wc  were  about  5  Leagues  off  the  land  wc  saw ; 

I,  I  believe,  not  above  5  Mile  or  at  most  2   I.«aguc8  off 

when  wc  first  saw  it  in  the  Night. 

This  is  a   small   Island,*  but  pretty   high ;  I  named  it 

ovidcncc.     About  5   Leagues  to  the  Southward  of  this, 

Te  is  another  Island,  whtch  is  called  William  Scoutcn's 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   in  our  Draughts.     We  found  Variation  9  deg.  50  min. 

'700  East. 

The  28  th  we  had  many  violent  Tornadoes,  Wind,  Rain, 
and  some  Spouts ;  and  in  the  Tornadoes  the  Wind  shifted. 
In  the  Night  we  had  fair  Weather,  but  more  Lightning 
than  we  had  seen  at  any  Time  this  Voyage.  This  Morning 
we  left  a  large  high  Island  on  our  Larboard-side,  called  in 
the  Dutch  Draughts  Wishart's  ^  Isle,  about  6  Leagues  from 
the  Main ;  and  seeing  many  Smoaks  upon  the  Main,  I 
therefore  steer'd  towards  it. 

*  Visscher's  Island.     "The  Main''  being  New  Ireland,  or,  as  it  is  now 
called,  New  Mecklenburg. 


524 


CHAP.  IV 

Ttl/  main  Land  »/  Nfw-Guinra.  Its  InbahhaMi.  SUngrr's  Bay. 
SmaU  hiandi.  Carrel  Dtnnh  Itli  deuribed.  !u  Inhabitant]. 
Thiir  PrMi.  jinlhtny  Cavt't  Jiltind,  li>  Inhabitants.  Trtfs 
full  <./  W-'srm.  f^nd  in  iht  Sea.  St.  John'i  Uiand.  The  main 
Land  af  NtxvGuinra.  Ill  Inhabitants.  The  Coast  dricrihrd. 
Caf*  and  Boy  St.  George.  Cape  Orford.  Another  Bay.  The 
Inhatilanlt  thrrt.  A  large  account  of  the  Author's  Attempts  ta 
Trade  with  them.  He  namri  the  plate  Port  Mountagur.  The 
CeuMtry  ihereabaafi  desiriied,  and  its  produce.  A  Burning  Island 
Jntriied.  A  new  passage  found.  Neva  Britannia.  Sir  George 
Ratt't  Island.  Long  Island,  and  Crown  Island,  ditcovertd  and 
deurihed.  Sir  R.  Rieh'i  Island.  A  burning  Island,  A  strange 
Spoil.  A  Conjecture  concerning  a  nevj  Passage  Sauthtuard.  King 
IVitSam's  Island.  Strange  ff^hirlpcols.  Distance  between  Cape 
Mabt,  and  Cape  St.  George,  computed. 

THE  main  Land,  at  this  place,  is  high  and  moun-  ' 
tainous,  adoni'd  with  tall  flourishing  Trees ; 
The  Sides  of  the  Hills  had  many  large  Planta- 
tions and  Patches  of  clear'd  Land;  which, 
tcjcctber  with  the  Smoaks  wc  saw,  were  certain  Signs  of  its 
being  well  inhabited  ;  and  I  was  desirous  to  have  some 
Commerce  with  the  Inhabitants.  Being  nigh  the  Shore, 
we  saw  first  one  IVoe ;  a  little  after,  2  or  3  more;  and  at 
last  «  great  many  Boats  came  from  all  the  adjacent  Bays. 
When  they  were  46  in  Number,  they  approach'd  so  near 
u»,  that  we  could  see  each  others  Signs,  and  hear  each  other 
speak;  though  we  could  not  understand  them,  nor  they 
us.  They  made  Signs  for  us  to  go  in  towards  the  Shore, 
pointing  that  way ;  it  was  squally  Weather,  which  at  first 
Rude  me  cautious  of  gwng  too  near;  but  the  Weather 
beginning  to  look  pretty  well,  I  endeavoured  to  get  into  a 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Bay  a-head  of  us,  which  we  could  have  got  into  well  enough 
^^^  at  first ;  but  while  we  lay  by,  we  were  driven  so  far  to 
Leeward,  that  now  it  was  more  difficult  to  get  in.  The 
Natives  lay  in  their  Proes  round  us;  to  whom  I  shewed 
Beads,  Knives,  Glasses,  to  allure  them  to  come  nearer ;  but 
they  would  not  come  so  nigh,  as  to  receive  any  thing  from 
us.  Therefore  I  threw  out  some  things  to  them,  viz.  a 
Knife  fastned  to  a  piece  of  Board,  and  a  Glass-botde 
corked  up  with  some  Beads  in  it,  which  they  took  up  and 
seemed  well  pleased.  They  often  struck  their  left  Breast 
with  their  right  hand,  and  as  often  held  up  a  black  Trun- 
cheon over  their  Heads,  which  we  thought  was  a  Token  of 
Friendship;  Wherefore  we  did  the  like.  And  when  we 
stood  in  towards  their  Shore,  they  seem'd  to  rejoyce ;  but 
when  we  stood  ofF,  they  frown'd,  yet  kept  us  Company  in 
their  Proes,  still  pointing  to  the  Shore.  About  5  a-Clock 
we  got  within  the  Mouth  of  the  Bay,  and  sounded  several 
times,  but  had  no  Ground,  though  within  a  mile  of  the 
Shore.  The  Bason  of  this  Bay  was  above  2  Miles  within 
us,  into  which  we  might  have  gone;  but  as  I  was  not 
assured  of  Anchorage  there,  so  I  thought  it  not  Prudence 
to  run  in  at  this  time ;  it  being  near  Night,  and  sedng  a 
black  Tornado  rising  in  the  West,  which  I  most  feard: 
Besides,  we  had  near  200  Men  in  Proes  close  by  us.  And 
the  Bays  on  the  Shore  were  lined  with  Men  from  one  end 
to  the  other,  where  there  could  not  be  less  than  3  or  400 
more.  What  Weapons  they  had,  we  know  not,  nw  yet 
their  Design.  Therefore  I  had,  at  their  first  coming  near 
us,  got  up  all  our  small  Arms,  and  made  several  put  on 
Cartouch  Boxes  to  prevent  Treachery.  At  last  I  resolved 
to  go  out  again :  Which  when  the  Natives  in  their  Proes 
perceived,  they  began  to  fling  Stones  at  us  as  fast  as  they 
could,  being  provided  with  Engines  for  that  purpose; 
(wherefore  I  named  this  place  Slinger's  Bay:)  But  at  the 
Firing  of  one  Gun  they  were  all  amaz'd,  drew  oflF  and  flung 
no  more  Stones.  They  got  together,  as  if  consulting  what 
to  do ;  for  they  did  not  make  in  towards  the  Shore,  but 
lay  still,  though  some  of  them  were  killed  or  wounded; 
and  many  more  of  them  had  paid  for  their  Boldness,  but 

526 


THE   INHABITANTS   OF   NEW   GUINEA 

i»t  I  was  unwilling  to  cut  off  any  of  them ;  which  if  I 
1  done,  1  could  not  hope  afterwards  to  bring  them  to  ' 
!at  with  me. 
The  next  day  wc  sailed  close  by  an  Island,'  where  we 
kw  many  Smoaks,  and  Men  in  the  Bays ;  out  of  which 
me  2  or  3  Canoas,  taking  much  pains  to  overtake  us, 
ot  they  could  not,  though  we  went  with  an  easy  Sail ;  and 
I  could  not  now  stay  for  them.  As  1  past  by  the  South-East 
Point,  I  sounded  several  times  within  a  Mile  of  the  Sandy 
lays,  but  had  no  Ground  :  About  3  Leagues  to  the  North- 
•rd  of  the  South-East  Point,  wc  opened  a  large  deep  Bay, 
r*d  from  West- North- Wq;st  and  South-West  Winds. 
rhcrc  were  2  other  Islands  that  lay  to  the  North-Kast  of  it, 
'hich  sccur'd  the  Bay  from  North-East  Winds;  One  was 
Dt  small,  yet  woody ;  the  other  was  a  League  long, 
ihabited  and  full  of  Coco-Nut-Trecs,  I  endeavoured  to 
into  this  Bay  :  but  there  came  such  Flaws  off  from  the 
gh  Land  over  it,  that  1  could  not ;  Besides,  we  had  many 
ard  Squalls,  which  deterr'd  me  from  it ;  and  Night 
ning  on,  I  would  not  run  any  hazard,  but  bore  away 
the  small  inhabited  Island,  to  see  if  we  could  get 
nchoring  on  the  East-side  of  it.  When  we  came  there, 
found  the  Island  so  narrow,  that  there  could  be  no 
lelter;  therefore  I  tack'd  and  stood  toward  the  greater 
land  again:  And  being  more  than  Mid-way  between 
0th,  I  lay  by,  designing  t<i  endeavour  for  Anchorage  next 
Homing.  Between  7  and  8  at  Night,  we  spied  a  Canoa 
loac  by  us ;  and  seeing  no  more,  suffered  her  to  come 
ird.  She  had  3  Men  in  her,  who  brought  off  5  Coco- 
Juts,  for  which  1  gave  each  of  them  a  Knife  and  a  String 
Beads,  to  encourage  them  to  come  off  again  in  the 
iomtng :  But  before  these  went  away,  wc  saw  two  more 
knoas  coming  ;  therefore  we  stood  away  to  the  Northward 
«jm  them,  and  then  lay  by  again  till  Day.  We  saw  no 
t  Boats  this  Night ;  neither  design'd  to  suffer  any  to 
c  aboard  in  the  dark. 
By  nine  a-Clock  the  next  Moniing,  we  were  got  within 

'  Appanatly  one  of  the  Gaidner  iiLniii. 

S»7 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   thinking  we  could  run    the  Ship  a-ground  any  where,  as 
'7«>  they  did  their  Proes ;  for  we  saw  neither  Sail  nor  Anchor 
among  any  of  them,  though  most  Eastern   Indians  have 
both.     These  had  Proes  made  of  one  Tree,  well  dug,  with 
Outlagers  on  one  side :    They  were   but  small,  yet  well 
shap'd.     We  endeavour'd  to  anchor,  but  found  no  Ground 
within  a  Mile  of  the  Shore:    We   kept  close  along  the 
North-side,  still  sounding  till  we  came  to  the  North-East- 
end,  but  found  no  Ground ;  the  Canoas  still  accompanying 
us ;  and  the  Bays  were  covered  with  Men  going  along  as  we 
sailed :  Many  of  them  strove  to  swim  ofF  to  us,  but  we  left 
them  astern.     Being  at  the  North-East  Point,  we  found  a 
strong  Current  setting  to  the  North- West ;  so  that  though 
we  had  steered  to  keep  under  the  high  Island,  yet  we  were 
driven  towards  the  flat  one.     At  this  time  3  of  the  Natives 
came  aboard  :  I  gave  each  of  them  a  Knife,  a  Looking- 
Glass,  and  a  String  of  Beads.     I  shew'd  them  Pumpkins 
and  Coco-nut  shells,  and  made  Signs  to  them  to  bring  some 
aboard,  and  had  presently  3  Coco-nuts  out  of  one  of  the 
Canoas.     I  shew'd  them   Nut-megs,  and  by  their  Signs  I 
guess*d  they  had  some  on  the  Island.     I  also  shew'd  them 
some  Gold-Dust,  which  they  seem'd  to  know,  and  call'd 
out  Manned^  Manned^  and  pointed  towards  the  Land.    A 
while  after  these  Men  were  gone,  2  or  3  Canoas  came  from 
the  flat  Island,  and  by  Signs  invited  us  to  their  Island ;  at 
which  the  others  seem'd  displeas'd,  and  us'd  very  menadi^ 
Gestures  and  (I  believe)  Sf)eeches  to  each  other.     Night 
coming  on,  we  stood  oflF  to  Sea;    and  having  but  little 
Wind   all  Night,  were   driven  away  to  the  North-West 
We  saw  many  great  Fires  on  the  flat  Island.     These  last 
Men  that  came  off^  to  us,  were  all  black,  as  those  we  had 
seen  before,  with  frizled  Hair :  They  were  very  tall,  lusty, 
well-shap'd  Men ;  They  wear  great  things  in  their  Noses, 
and  paint  as  the  others,  but  not  much ;   They  make  the 
same  Signs  of  Friendship,  and  their  Language  seems  to  be 
one :  But  the  others  had  Proes,  and  these  Canoas.     On  the 
Sides  of  some  of  these,  we  saw  the  Figures  of  several  Fish 
neatly  cut ;  and  these  last  were  not  so  shy  as  the  others. 
Steering  away  from   Cave's   Island   South-South-East, 

530 


ST.  JOHNS   ISLAND— THE  MAIN 

wc  fuuml  a  strong  Current  against  us,  wludi  set  naif 
tome  places  in  Streams ;  and  \a  them  we  snr  Busy  Trees  'T* 
and  Lngs  of  Wood,  which  drove  fay  ol  We  lad  bat 
little  Wood  aboard  ;  wfaerefocc  I  botsted  oat  ibe  Kaoace, 
and  sent  her  to  take  up  some  of  this  Drtft-vood.  In  a 
little  time  she  came  aboard  with  a  great  Tice  in  a  tow, 
which  we  could  hardly  hotsr  in  with  al)  oor  Tackkm.  We 
cut  up  the  Tree  and  split  it  for  Flrc-w-ood.  It  wis  modi 
worm-eaten,  and  had  in  tt  some  lire  Worms  above  an  Indi 
long,  and  about  the  btgne«s  of  i  GcKHe-(|uiU,  aad  faariag 
their  I^fcads  crusted  over  with  a  ihsD  SbeU. 

After  this  we  fussed  hj  an  Island,  called  bf  ibc  Dotcb 
St.  John's  Inland,  leaving  it  to  the  North  of  a>.  It  is  about 
9  or  to  leagues  round,  aod  very  well  adom'd  with  lofty 
Trees.  Wc  saw  many  Plaotatioas  on  the  Sidct  of  the 
Mills,  and  Abundance  of  Coco-nut-Trees  about  tbcro ;  as 
also  thick  Groves  on  the  Bays  by  the  Sea-tide.  As  we  came 
near  it,  3  Canuas  came  off  10  us,  but  would  not  come  aboard, 
^facy  were  such  as  we  had  teen  about  the  other  islands : 
bey  spoke  the  same  Language,  and  made  the  wame  S^|m 
'  Peace ;  and  their  Canoos  were  such,  as  at  Cave's  Islaad, 
We  stood  along  by  St.  John's  bland,  till  we  came 
icst  to  the  South-Hasi-Point ;  and  then  leeit^  no  more 
mds  to  the  Eastward  of  us,  nor  any  likelihood  of 
iioring  under  thts,  1  steer'd  away  for  the  Main  of  Ncw- 
Inea;  we  being  now  (as  1  soppoa'd)  to  the  Ease  of  it, 
this  Nonh-ndc.  My  De^n  of  seeing  these  lilands  as 
■St  along,  «-as  to  get  Wood  and  Water,  but  could  find 
Anchor-Ground,  and  therefore  could  not  do  as  I  pur- 
rd.  Besides,  these  Ulands  arc  all  so  populous,  that  I 
''d  not  send  my  Boat  ashore,  unle«s  1  could  have  anchr^'d 
tty  nigh.  Wherefore  I  rather  chotc  to  proiecute  my 
lign  on  the  Main,  the  Season  of  the  Year  being  now  at 
id  ;  for  I  judg'd  the  Westerly  Winds  were  nigh  spent. 
On  the  Hth  of  March,  we  Mw  some  Smoaks  on  the 
lin,  being  distant  from  it  4  or  5  Leagues.  Tis  very 
h,  woody  Land,  with  some  Spots  uf  Savannah.  About 
in  the  Morning  6  or  7  Canoaa  came  off*  to  ui :  M<i»t  of 
m  had  no  more  than  one  Man  in  them ;  they  were  ill 
53» 


n 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    black,  with  short  curl'd  Hair  ;  having  the  same  Ornaments 
'700  in  their  Noses,  and  their  Heads  so  shav'd  and  painted,  and 
speaking  the  same  Words,  as  the  Inhabitants  of  Cave's 
Island  before-mentioned. 

There  was  a  Head-land^  to  the  Southward  of  us, 
beyond  which  seeing  no  Land,  I  supposed  that  from  thence 
the  Land  trends  away  more  Westerly.  This  Head-land 
lies  in  the  Latitude  of  5  deg.  2  min.  South,  and  Meridian 
distance  from  Cape  Mabo,  1290  Miles.  In  the  Night  wc 
lay  by,  for  fear  of  over-shooting  this  Head-land.  Between 
which  and  Cape  St.  Maries,*  the  Land  is  high,  Mountainous 
and  Woody;  having  many  Points  of  Land  shooting  out 
into  the  Sea,  which  make  so  many  fine  Bays.  The  Coast 
lies  North-North-East  and  South-South- West. 

The  9th  in  the  Morning  a  huge  black  Man  came  off 
to  us  in  a  Canoa,  but  would  not  come  aboard.  He  made 
the  same  signs  of  Friendship  to  us,  as  the  rest  wc  had  met 
with ;  yet  seem'd  to  differ  in  his  Language,  not  using  any 
of  those  Words  which  the  others  did.  We  saw  neither 
Smoaks  nor  Plantations  near  this  Head-land.  We  found 
here  Variation  i  deg.  East. 

In  the  Afternoon,  as  we  plied  near  the  Shore,  3  Canoas 
came  off  to  us ;  one  had  4  Men  in  her,  the  others  2  apiece. 
That  with  the  4  Men,  came  pretty  nigh  us,  and  shew'd  us 
a  Coco-Nut  and  Water  in  a  Bamboo,  making  Signs  that 
there  was  enough  ashore  where  they  liv'd  ;  they  pointed  to 
the  place  where  they  would  have  us  go,  and  so  went  away. 
We  saw  a  small  round  pretty  high  Island  about  a  League 
to  the  North  of  this  Head-land,  within  which  there  was  t 
large  deep  Bay,  whither  the  Canoas  went;  and  we  strove 
to  get  thither  before  Night,  but  could  not ;  wherefore  vc 
stood  off,  and  saw  Land  to  the  Westward  of  this  Head- 
Land,  bearing  West  by  South  half  South,  distance  about 
10  Leagues;  and,  as  we  thought,  still  more  Land  bearing 
South- West  by  South,  distance  12  or  14  Leagues:  But 
being  clouded,  it  disappeared,  and  we  thought  we  had  been 
deceived.     Before  Night  we  opened  the  Head-Land  fair, 

'  Cape  St.  George.  '  Cape  Santa  Maria,  farther  to  the  N. 

532 


THE   MAIN   LAND  OF  NEW   GUINEA 

njmed  it  Cape  St.  George,  The  Land  from  hence  a 
s  away  West-North-West  about  lo  Leagues,  which  '' 
U  far  as  we  could  see  it ;  and  the  Land  that  we  saw 
the  Westward  of  it  in  the  Evening,  which  bore  West 
South  half  South,  was  another  Point  about  lo  Leagues 
im  Cape  St.  Gcor^  ;  between  which  there  runs  in  a  deep 
y  for  20  Leagues  or  more.  We  saw  some  high  Land  in 
X>t3  tike  Islands,  down  in  that  Bay  at  a  great  distance ; 
;t  whether  they  arc  Islands,  or  the  Main  closing  there, 
know  not.  The  next  Morning  we  saw  other  Land  to 
Souih-Easi  of  the  Wcstermost  Point,  which  tili  then 
>  clouded  ;  it  was  very  high  Land,  and  the  same  that 
saw  the  day  before,  that  disappear'd  in  a  Cloud.  This 
■pe  St.  George  lies  in  the  Latitude  of  5  dcg.  5  miD. 
ith ;  and  Meridian  distance  from  Cape  Mabo  1290 
liles.  The  Island  off  this  Cape,  I  called  St.  George's 
':;'  and  the  Bay  between  it  and  the  West-Point,  I 
ned  St.  George's  Bay.  Note,  No  Dutch  Draughu  go 
far  as  this  Cape,  by  10  Leagues.  On  the  icth  in  the 
yening,  we  gat  within  a  League  of  the  Wcstermost  I^nd 
ai,  which  is  pretty  high  and  very  woody,  but  no  Appear- 
ce  fi{  Anchoring.  1  stood  off  again,  designing  (if  ponble) 
ply  lu  and  fro  in  this  Bay,  till  1  found  a  Convenicncy  to 
'ood  and  Water.  We  saw  no  more  Plantations,  »or 
Ko-nut-Trccs ;  yet  in  the  Night  we  diKcrned  a  small 
'in:  right  against  us.  The  next  Morning  we  saw  a  Bum* 
Mountain  in  the  Country.  It  was  round,  high,  and 
at  top  (as  most  Vulcano's  are),  and  sent  forth  a 
cat  Quantity  of  Smoak.  We  t»x>kupa  I>og  of  drift  Wood 
d  split  it  for  Firing  ;  in  which  we  found  some  small  Fish. 
The  Day  after,  we  past  by  the  South-Wcst  Cape  <>(  th» 
J,  leaving  it  to  the  North  of  us :  When  we  were  abreavt 

it,  I  called  my  Officers  tr^ethcr.  and  named  it  Cape 

Word,'  in   Honoar  of  my  noble  Patron ;    drinking  hU 

Watlu  I  lUnd-    Tlw  hay  k,  of  cownc.  ^  Ceonc't  QwmmI. 

Ednnl  Riuicll,  Lard  OttotO,  Axbatnl  of  the  flM  liUy  nn)  « 
Inwu)  "  al  a  ufirntnc  con^kwm,  iadi«ia«  to  bl  1  of  a  m*lUm  tUtmtx." 
■omauutAtd  tlw  BritUi  aeO  m  Um  Mcradoa*  Mgiiam  iM  VntteU  (nA<1*r 
Came  dt  T(Mn41k)  in  Hajr,  1693.    Hcww  rm  Lvnl  «/ llw  A4MmHr 

■konly  after  Daaipwr  bad  aaibd  m  ilwa  mftikiam- 
533 


I 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER^S   VOYAGES 

AN.   into  the  Inhabitants,  who  were  very  numerous,   and  (by 
^700  what  I  saw  now,  and  had  formerly  experienc'd),  treacherous. 
After  this  I  sent  my  Boat  to  sound ;  they  had   first  40, 
then  30,  and  at  last  20  Fathom  Water.     We  followed  the 
Boat,  and  came  to  anchor  about  a  quarter  of  a  Mile  from 
the  Shore,  in  26  Fathom  Water,  fine  black  Sand  and  Oazc 
We  rode  right  against  the  Mouth  of  a  small  River,  where 
I  hoped  to  find  fresh  Water.     Some  of  the  Natives  stand- 
ing on  a  small  Point  at  the  River's  Mouth,  I  sent  a  small 
Shot  over  their  Heads  to  fright  them  ;  which  it  did  eflfectu- 
ally.     In    the   Afternoon    I   sent  my  Boat  ashore  to  the 
Natives  who  stood  upon  the  Point  by  the  River's  Mouth 
with  a  Present  of  Coco-nuts;  when  the  Boat  was  come 
near  the  Shore,  they  came  running  into  the   Water,  and 
put  their  Nuts  into  the  Boat.     Then  I  made  a  Signal  for 
the  Boat  to  come  aboard,  and  sent  both  it  and  the  Yawl  into 
the  River  to  look  for  fresh  Water,  ordering  the  Pinnace  to 
lye  near  the  River's  Mouth,  while  the  Yawl  went  up  to 
search.     In   an    Hour's   time   they   return'd    aboard  with 
some  Barrecoes  full  of  fresh  Water,  which  they  had  taken 
up  about  half  a  Mile  up  the  River.     After  which,  I  sent 
them  again  with  Casks ;  ordering  one  of  them  to  fill  Water, 
and  the   other  to  watch  the  Motion  of  the  Natives,  lest 
they  should  make  any  Opposition ;  but  they  did  not,  and 
so  the  Boats  return'd  a  little  before  Sun-set  with  a  Tun 
and  half  of  Water;  and  the  next  Day  by  Noon  brought 
aboard  about  6  Tun  of  Water. 

I  sent  ashore  Commodities  to  purchase  Hogs,  &c.  being 
informed  that  the  Natives  have  plenty  of  them,  as  also  of 
Yamms  and  other  good  Roots ;  But  my  Men  returned 
without  getting  any  thing  that  I  sent  them  for;  the 
Natives  being  unwilling  to  trade  with  us :  Yet  they  admirM 
our  Hatchets  and  Axes;  but  would  part  with  nothing  but 
Coco-nuts;  which  they  us'd  to  climb  the  Trees  for;  and 
so  soon  as  they  gave  them  our  Men,  they  beckon'd  to  them 
to  be  gone ;  for  they  were  much  afraid  of  us. 

The  1 8th,  I  sent  both  Boats  again  for  Water,  and 
before  Noon  they  had  filled  all  my  Casks.  In  the  After- 
noon I  sent  them  both   to  cut  Wood ;  but   seeing  about 

S3^ 


THE    INHABITANTS   OF   NEW   GUINEA 

>  Natives  standing  on  the  Bay  at  a  small  Distance  from 
W  Men,  I  made  a  Signal  for  them  to  come  aboard  again;  ' 
fcich  they  did,  and  brought  me  Word  that  the  Men  which 
e  saw  on  the  Bay  were  jiassing  that  way,  but  were  afraid 
lo  come  nigh  thera.  At  4  a  Clock  I  sent  both  the  Boats 
again  for  more  Wood,  and  they  return'd  in  the  Evening. 
^liien  I  called  my  Officers  to  consult  whether  it  were 
hpnvcnicnt  10  suy  here  longer,  and  endeavour  a  better 
Kcquaintance  with  these  People ;  or  go  to  Sea.  My 
^)csign  of  tarrying  here  longer,  was,  if  possible,  to  get 
some  Hogs,  Goats,  Yamms  or  other  Roots;  as  also  to 
get  some  Knowledge  of  the  Country  and  its  Product. 
ply  Officers  unanimously  gave  their  Opinions  for  slaying 
hngcr  here.  So  the  next  Day  I  sent  both  Boats  ashore 
nun,  to  fish  and  to  cut  more  Wood.  While  they  were 
Tlahore  about  30  or  40  Men  and  Women  past  by  them  ; 
they  were  a  little  afraid  of  our  People  at  first ;  but  upon 
ihcir  making  signs  of  Friendship,  they  past  by  quietly; 
the  Men  finely  bcdcck'd  with  Feathers  of  divers  Colours 
about  their  Heads,  and  Lances  in  their  Hands ;  the 
Women  had  no  Ornament  about  them,  nor  any  Thing 
10  cover  their  Nakedness,  but  a  Bunch  of  small  green 
Boughs,  before  and  behind,  stuck  under  a  String  which 
came  round  their  Wastes.  They  carried  lai^c  Baskets  on 
their  Heads,  full  of  Yamms.  And  this  I  have  observ'd 
amongst  all  the  wild  Natives  I  have  known,  that  they 
make  their  Women  carry  the  Burdens,  while  the  Men 
walk  before,  without  any  other  Load  than  their  Arms  and 
Ornaments.  At  Noon  our  Men  came  aboard  with  the 
Wood  they  had  cut,  and  had  catch'd  but  6  Fishes  at 
■  or  5  Hauls  of  the  Sain,  though  we  saw  Abundance  of 
Rlh  leaping  in  the  Bay  all  the  Day  long. 
f  In  the  Afternoon  I  sent  the  Boats  ashore  for  more 
VVood  ;  and  some  of  our  Men  went  to  the  Natives 
Houses,  and  found  they  were  now  more  shy  than  they 
us'd  to  be;  had  taken  down  alt  the  Coco-nuts  from  the 
Trees,  and  driven  away  their  Hogs.  Our  People  mode 
Signs  to  them  to  know  what  was  become  of  their  H(^, 
fltc.  The  Natives  pointing  to  some  Houses  in  the  Bottom 
537 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER^S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Sorts.  Many  of  them  were  now  about  the  Houses,  and 
'7^  none  ofFer'd  to  resist  our  Boats  landing,  but  on  the  con- 
trary were  so  amicable,  that  one  Man  brought  lo  or  12 
Coco-nuts,  left  them  on  the  Shore  after  he  had  shew'd 
them  to  our  Men,  and  went  out  of  Sight.  Our  People 
finding  nothing  but  Nets  and  Images,  brought  some  of 
them  away;  which  2  of  my  Men  brought  aboard  in  a 
small  Canoa;  and  presently  after,  my  Boats  came  off. 
I  order'd  the  Boatswain  to  take  care  of  the  Nets,  till  wc 
came  at  some  place  where  they  might  be  disposed  of  for 
some  Refreshment  for  the  Use  of  all  the  Company:  The 
Images  I  took  into  my  own  Custody. 

In  the  Afternoon  I  sent  the  Canoa  to  the  Place  fi-om 
whence  she  had  been  brought;  and  in  her,  2  Axes,  2 
Hatchets  (one  of  them  helv*d),  6  Knives,  6  Looking-glasses, 
a  large  Bunch  of  Beads,  and  4  Glass-bottles.  Our  Men 
drew  the  Canoa  ashore,  placed  the  Things  to  the  best  Ad- 
vantage in  her,  and  came  off  in  the  Pinnace  which  I  sent 
to  guard  them.  And  now  being  well  stocked  with  Wood, 
.  and  all  my  Water-casks  full,  I  resolvM  to  sail  the  next 
Morning.  All  the  Time  of  our  Stay  here,  we  had  very 
fair  Weather;  only  sometimes  in  the  Afternoon  we  had 
a  Shower  of  Rain,  which  lasted  not  above  an  Hour  at 
most :  Also  some  Thunder  and  Lightning,  with  very  little 
Wind.  We  had  Sea  and  Land-breezes ;  the  former  between 
the  South-South-East,  and  the  latter  from  North-East  to 
North-West. 

This  Place  I  named  Port  Mountague,^  in  Honour  of 
my  noble  Patron.  It  lies  in  the  Latitude  of  6  deg.  10  min. 
South,  and  Meridian  distance  from  Cape  St.  George,  151 
Miles  West.  The  Country  hereabouts  is  mountainous  and 
woody,  full  of  rich  Valleys  and  pleasant  fresh  Water-brooks. 
The  Mould  in  the  Valleys  is  deep  and  yellowish ;  that  on 
the  Sides  of  the  Hills  of  a  very  brown  Colour,  and  not 
very  deep,  but  rocky  underneath ;  yet  excellent   planting 

*  The  fine  bay  between  Cape  Dam  pier  and  Roebuck  Point,  on  the  S. 
coast  of  New  Britain  (New  Pomerania).  The  noble  patron  was  Charles 
Montague,  Earl  of  Halifax  (1661-1715),  sometime  Chancellor  of  the  Ex- 
chequer. 

540 


THE  COAST  OF  NEW   GUINEA 

l»d.     The  Trees   in   general  are  neither  very  streight,    an. 

ick,   nor   tall;    yet   appear  green   and    pleasant   enough:   ''"^ 

mc  of  them  bore  Flowers,  some  Berries,  and  others  big 

liits;  but  all  unknown  to  any  of  us.     Coco-nut-Trees 

rive  very  well  here;  as  well  on  the  Bays  by  the  Sea-side, 

mure  remote  among  the  Plantations.      The  Nuts  are  of 

indifferent  Size,  the  Milk  and  Kernel  very  thick  and 

asant.     Here  is  Ginger,  Yanims,  and  other  very  good 

ots  for  the  Hot,  thai  our  Men  saw  and  tasted.     What 

her   Fruits   or    Roots   the  Country  affords,  1   know   not. 

arc   Hogs  and    Dt^s ;  other  Land-Animals  we  saw 

The    Fowls   we    saw    and    knew,    were    Pidgeons, 

rrots,  Cockadores  and  Crows  like  those  in  England  ;  a 

of    Birds    about    the    Bigness    of  a    Black-Bird,   and 

iller  Birds  many.     The   Sea    and    Rivers    have    Plenty 

Fish ;    wc   saw    Abundance,    though    we    catch'd    but 

r,    ind  these   were    Cavalties,    Yellow-tails   and   Whip- 

We  departed  from  hence  on  the  22d  of  March,  and 
t  the  24th  in  the  Evening  we  saw  some  high  Land  bcar- 
;  North-Wcst  half  West ;  to  the  West  of  which  wc  could 
:  no  Land,  though  there  appeared  something  like  Land 
Sring  West  a  little  Southerly ;  but  not  being  sure  of  it. 
Steered  West -North- West  all  Night,  and  kept  going  on 
ith  an  easy  Sail,  intending  to  coast  along  the  Shore  at  a 
istancc.  At  10  a  Clock  I  saw  a  great  Fire  bearing  North- 
Test  by  West,  blazing  up  in  a  Pillar,  sometimes  very  high 
'  3  ur  4  Minutes,  then  falling  quite  down  for  an  equal 
ice  of  Time;  sometimes  hardly  visible,  till  it  blazed  up 
lin.  I  had  laid  mc  down  having  been  indisposed  ihis  3 
lys :  But  upon  a  Sight  of  this,  my  chief  Mate  called  me  ; 
got  up  and  view'd  it  for  about  half  an  Hour,  and  knew 
to  be  a  burning  Hill  by  its  Intervals:  I  charg'd  them 
I  look  Well  nut,  having  bright  Moon-light.  In  the  Mom- 
I  found  that  the  Fire  wc  had  seen  the  Night  before, 
I  a  burning  Island  ; '  and  stcer'd  for  it.  We  saw  many 
l&bads,  one  large  high  Island,  and  another  smaller, 

*  Tbm  ti  a  imiall  active  volcano  on  Ritier  Uland  in  Uampier  Slnil, 
I  iMt  KMjr  have  been  the  one  described. 

i*' 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 

AN.  very  well  inhabited  with  strong  well-limb*d  Negroes,  whom 
^700  ^g  found  very  daring  and  bold  at  several  Places.  As  to  the 
Product  of  it,  I  know  no  more  than  what  I  have  said  in  my 
Account  of  Port  Mountague :  But  it  is  very  probable  this 
Island  may  afford  as  many  rich  Commodities  as  any  in  the 
World  ;  and  the  Natives  may  be  easily  brought  to  Commerce, 
though  I  could  not  pretend  to  it  under  my  present  Circum- 
stances. 

Being  near  the  Island  to  the  Northward  of  the  Volcano, 
I  sent  my  Boat  to  sound,  thinking  to  anchor  here ;  but  she 
returned  and  brought  me  Word  that  they  had  no  Ground, 
till  they  met  with  a  RifF  of  Coral  Rocks  about  a  Mile  from 
the  Shore.  Then  I  bore  away  to  the  North-side  of  the 
Island,  where  we  found  no  anchoring  neither.  We  saw 
several  People,  and  some  Coco-nut-Trees,  but  could  not 
send  ashore  for  want  of  my  Pinnace  which  was  out  of  order. 
In  the  Evening  I  stood  off  to  Sea,  to  be  at  such  a  distance, 
that  I  might  not  be  driven  by  any  Current  upon  the  Shoals 
of  this  Island,  if  it  should  prove  calm.  We  had  but  little 
Wind,  especially  the  Beginning  of  the  Night ;  but  in  the 
Morning  I  found  my  self  so  far  to  the  West  of  the  Island, 
that  the  Wind  being  at  East-South-East,  I  could  not  fetch 
it ;  wherefore  I  kept  on  to  the  Southward,  and  stemm'd 
with  the  Body  of  a  high  Island  about]  11  or  12  Leagues 
long,  lying  to  the  Southward  of  that  which  I  before  designed 
for.     I  named  this  Island  Sir  George  Rook's  ^  Island. 

We  also  saw  some  other  Islands  to  the  Westward; 
which  may  be  better  seen  in  my  Draught  of  these  Lands, 
than  here  described.  But  seeing  a  very  small  Island '  lying 
to  the  North- West  of  the  long  Island  which  was  before  us, 
and  not  far  from  it ;  I  steerM  away  for  that ;  hoping  to 
find  anchoring  there :  And  having  but  little  Wind,  I  sent 
my  Boat  before  to  sound ;  which,  when  we  were  about  2 
Miles  distance  from  the  Shore,  came  on  Board  and  brought 
me  Word   that   there  was  good  anchoring    in    30   or  40 

*  Rook  Island.  Sir  George  Rooke  (1650-1709)  was  lieutenant  aboard 
Sir  Edward  Spragge's  flagship,  the  Royal  Prince^  during  Dampier*s  service 
aboard  her  against  the  Dutch,  in  1673.  ^^  became  one  of  the  Lords  of 
the  Admirahy  a  short  time  before  the  Roebuck  left  England. 

^  A  little  island  off  Lottin  Island. 

544 


Wr    THE  COAST   OF   NEW   GUINEA 

Bhom  Water,  a  Mile  from  the  Isle,  and  within  a  Riff  of  an. 
he  Rocks  which  lay  in  a  half  Moon,  reaching  from  the  '^°° 
lorth-part  of  the  Island  to  the  South-East ;  so  at  Noon 
ttgot  in  and  anchored  in  36  Fathom,  a  Mile  from  the  Isle. 
ft  In  the  Afternoon  I  sent  my  Boat  ashore  to  the  Island, 
bee  what  Convenience  there  was  to  haul  our  Vessel  ashore 
Porder  to  be  mended,  and  whether  we  could  catch  any 
'ish.  My  Men  in  the  Boat  rowed  about  the  Island,  but 
ould  not  land  by  Reason  of  the  Rocks  and  a  great  Surge 
jUUiing  in  upon  the  Shore.  We  found  Variation  here,  8 
II  25  min.  West. 

p  I  dcsign'd  to  have  stay'd  among  these  Islands  till  I  had 
n  my  Pinnace  refitted  ;  but  having  no  more  than  one 
4*n  who  had  skill  to  work  upon  her,  I  saw  she  would  be 
long  Time  in  Repairing ;  (which  was  one  great  Reason 
'hy  I  could  not  prosecute  my  Discoveries  further :)  And 
ic  Easterly  Winds  being  set  in,  I  found  I  should  scarce  be 
ble  to  hold  my  Ground. 

The  31SI  in  the  Forenoon  we  shot  in  between  2  Islands, 
ring  about  4.  Leagues  asunder;  with  Intention  to  pass 
Btween  ihem.  The  Southcrmosc  is  a  long  Island,  with  a 
igh  Hill  at  each  End;  this  I  named  Long  Island.  The 
lorthermosi  is  a  round  high  Island  towering  up  with 
tvcral  Heads  or  Tops,  something  resembling  a  Crown; 
lis  I  named  Crown-Isle,  from  its  Form.  Both  these 
lUnds  appear'd  very  pleasant,  having  Spots  of  green 
ivmnnahs  mixt  among  the  Wood-land  :  The  Trees  appeared 
cry  cp%cn  and  flourishing,  and  some  of  them  looked  white 
ad  mil  of  Blossoms.  We  past  close  by  Crown-Isle ;  saw 
lany  Coco-nut-Trccs  on  the  Bays  and  the  Sides  of  the 
lills;  and  one  Boat  was  coming  off  from  the  Shore,  but 
rtum'd  again.  We  saw  no  Smoaks  on  cither  of  the  Islands, 
cither  did  we  sec  any  Plantations;  and  it  is  probable  they 
■c  not  very  well  peopled.  We  saw  many  Shoals  near 
rown-lsland,  and  Riffs  of  Rocks  running  off  from  the 
cttnts,  a  Mile  or  more  into  the  Sea.     My  Boat  was  once 

aboard,  with    Design    to   have   sent    her   ashore ;   but 

hg  little  Wind,  and  seeing  some  Shoals,  I  hoisted  her 
UR,  and  stood  off  out  of  Danger. 

^t.  It.  545  ^  M 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  In  the  Afternoon,  seeing  an  Island  bearing  North-Wcst 

1700  by  West,  we  steer*d  away  North-West  by  North,  to  be  to 
the  Northward  of  it.  The  next  Morning,  being  about 
Mid-way  from  the  Islands  we  left  Yesterday,  and  having 
this  to  the  Westward  of  us ;  the  Land  of  the  Main  of  New 
Guinea  within  us  to  the  Southward,  appeared  very  high. 
When  we  came  within  4  or  5  Leagues  of  this  Island  to  the 
West  of  us,  4  Boats  came  off  to  view  us ;  one  came  within 
call,  but  returned  with  the  other  3  without  speaking  to  us : 
So  we  kept  on  for  the  Island ;  which  I  named  Sir  R.  Rich's^ 
Island.  It  was  pretty  high,  woody,  and  mixt  with  Savan- 
nah's like  those  formerly  mentioned.  Being  to  the  North 
of  it,  we  saw  an  Opening  between  it  and  another  Island^  2 
Leagues  to  the  West  of  it,  which  before  appear  d  all  in 
One.  The  Main  seemed  to  be  high  Land,  trending  to  the 
Westward. 

On  Tuesday  the  2d  April,  about  8  in  the  Morning, 
we  discovered  a  high  peeked  Island^  to  the  Westward, 
which  seem'd  to  smoak  at  its  Top.     The  next  Day  we  past 
by  the  North-side  of  the  Burning  Island,  and  saw  a  Smoak 
again  at  its  Top ;  but  the  Vent  lying  on  the  South-side  of 
the  Peek,  we  could  not  observe  it  distinctly,  nor  sec  the 
Fire.     We  afterwards  opened   3  more  Islands,  and  some 
Land   to  the  Southward,  which  we  could    not  well  tell 
whether   it  were    Islands   or  Part    of   the   Main.     These 
Islands  are  all  high,  full  of  fair  Trees  and  Spots  of  green 
Savannahs;  as  well  the  Burning  Isle  as  the  rest;  but  the 
Burning  Isle  was  more  round  and  peek'd  at  Top,  very  fine 
Land  near  the  Sea,  and  for  two  Thirds  up  it.     We  also 
saw  another  Isle  sending  forth  a  great  Smoak  at  once ;  but 
it  soon  vanished,  and  we  saw  it  no  more.     We  saw  also 
among  these  Islands  3  small  Vessels  with  Sails,  which  the 
People  on  Nova  Britannia  seem  wholly  ignorant  of. 

The  1 1  th  at  Noon,  having  a  very  good  Observation,  I 

'  After  Sir  Robert  Rich,  a  Lord  of  the  Admiralty.  Sir  Robert  was 
descended  from  the  family  of  Rich,  earls  of  Warwick  and  Holland.  The 
island  retains  its  name. 

*  Probably  the  SE.  extremity  of  Rich  Island.  The  island  is  crescent- 
shaped,  with  a  deep  gut  forming  a  harbour  on  the  S£.  side. 

^  Dampier  Island. 

546 


THE  COAST   OF   NEW    GUINEA 


und 


my 


self  to  the  Northward   of 


my 


Reckoi 


ing 


and 


thence  concluded   that  we   had  a  Current  setting  North-  ' 

West,  or  rather  more  Westerly,  as  the  Land  lies.     From 

that  Time  to  the  next  Morning,  we  had  fair  clear  Weather, 

and    a  fine  moderate  Gale  from   South-Kast  to  East    by 

North  :  But  at  Daybreak,  the  Clouds  began  to  fly,  and  it 

lighlncd  very  much  in   the  East,  South-East,  and   North- 

East.     At  Sun-rising,  the  Sky  look'd  very  red  in  the  East 

near  the  Horizon  ;  and  there  were  many  black  Clouds  both 

to  the  South  and  North  of  it.     About  a  Quarter  of  an 

■Hour  after  the  Sun  was  up,  there  was  a  Squall    to    the 

^M^indwtrd  of  us;  when  on  a  sudden  one  of  our  Men  on 

■  the  Fore-castle  called  out  that  he  saw  something  astern,  but 

could  not  tell  what :  I  look'd  out  for  it,  and  immediately 

saw  a  Spout  beginning  to  work  within  a  Quarter  of  a  Mile 

of  us,  exactly  in  the  Wind.     We  presently  put  right  before 

it.     It  came  very  swiftly,  whirling  the  Water  up  in  a  Pillar 

about  6  or  7  Yards   high.     As   yet  I  could  not  see  any 

—pendulous  Cloud,  from  whence  it  might  come ;  and  was  in 

Hnopcs  it  would  soon  lose  its  Force.     In  4  or  5   Minutes 

Hrime,  it   came  within   a  Cable's   Length  of  us,   and   past 

^■way  to  Leeward:   and  then   I  saw  a   long  pale  Stream, 

coming  down  to  the  whirling  Water.     This  Stream  was 

about  the  Bigness  of  a  Rainbow:  The  upper  End  seem'd 

vastly  high,  not  descending   from  any  dark   Cloud,  and 

therefore  the  more  strange  to  me  ;  I  never  having  seen  the 

like  before.     It  past  about  a  Mile  to  Leeward  of  us,  and 

then  broke.     This  was  but  a  small  Spout,  not  strong  nor 

lasting :  yet  I  perceived    much  Wind  in  it,  as  it  past  by 

us.     The  Current  still  continued  at  North-Wcst  1  little 

Westerly,  which  I  allow'd  to  run  a  Mile  per  Hour. 

By  an  Observation  the  13th  at  Noon,  1  found  my  self 
15  min.  to  the  Northward  of  my  Reckoning;  whether 
occasion *d  by  bad  Steerage,  a  bad  Account,  or  a  Current,  I 
could  not  determine ;  but  was  apt  to  judge  it  might  be  a 
Complication  of  all ;  for  I  could  not  think  it  was  wholly 
the  Current,  the  Land  here  lying  I'^asi  by  South,  and  West 
by  North,  or  a  little  more  Northerly  and  Southerly.  We 
had  kept  so  nigh  as  to  see  it,  and  at  farthest  had  not  been 
547 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    above  20  Leagues  from  it,  but  sometimes  much    nearer; 

'700  and  it  is  not  probable  that  any  Current  should  set  directly 
ofF  from  a  Land.  A  Tide  indeed  may;  but  then  the 
Flood  has  the  same  Force  to  strike  in  upon  the  Shore,  as 
the  Ebb  to  strike  off  from  it :  But  a  Current  must  have  set 
nearly  along  Shore,  either  Easterly  or  Westerly;  and  if 
anything  Northerly  or  Southerly,  it  could  be  but  very  little 
in  Comparison  of  its  East  or  West  Course,  on  a  Coast 
lying  as  this  doth ;  which  yet  we  did  not  perceive.  If 
therefore  we  were  deceived  by  a  Current,  it  is  very  probable 
that  the  Land  is  here  disjoyn'd,  and  that  there  is  a  Passage 
through  to  the  Southward,  and  that  the  Land  from  King 
William's  Cape  to  this  Place  is  an  Island,  separated  from 
New-Guinea  by  some  Streight,  as  Nova -Britannia  is  by  that 
which  we  came  through.  But  this  being  at  best  but  a 
probable  Conjecture,  I  shall  insist  no  farther  upon  it. 

The  14th  we  passed  by  Scou ten's  Island  and  Providence 
Island,  and  found  still  a  very  strong  Current  setting  to  the 
North-West.     On  the  17th  we  saw  a  high  Mountain  on  the 
Main,  that  sent  forth  great  Quantities  of  Smoak  from  its 
Top :  This  Vulcano  we  did  not  see  on  our  Voyage  out. 
In   the  Afternoon  we  discovered  King  William's  Island, 
and  crowded  all  the  Sail  we  could,  to  get  near  it  before 
Night;  thinking  to  lye  to  the  Eastward  of  it  till  Day,  for 
fear  of  some  Shoals  that  lye  at  the  West-end  of  it.     Before 
Night  we  got  within  2  Leagues  of  it,  and  having  a  fine 
Gale  of  Wind  and  a  light  Moon,  I  resolv'd  to  pass  through 
in  the  Night ;  which  I  hop'd  to  do  before  1 2  a-Clock,  if 
the  Gale  continued ;  but  when  we  came  within  2  Miles  of 
it,  it  fell  calm ;  yet  afterwards  by  the  Help  of  the  Current, 
a  small  Gale,  and  our  Boat,  we  got  through  before  Day. 
In  the  Night  we  had  a  very  fragrant  Smell  from  the  Island. 
By  Morning-light  we  were  got  2  Leagues  to  the  Westward 
of  it ;  and  then  were  becalm'd  all  the  Morning ;  and  met 
such  whirling  Tides,  that  when  we  came  into  them,  the 
Ship  turn'd  quite  round ;  and  though  sometimes  we  had  a 
small  Gale  of  Wind,  yet  she  could  not  feel  the  Helm  when 
she  came  into  these  Whirlpools :  Neither  could  we  get  from 
amongst  them,  till  a  brisk  Gale  sprung  up  ;  yet  we  drove 

548 


HIRLPOOLS— COAST  OF  NEW  GUINEA 
t  much  any  way,  but  whirt'd  round  like  a  Top.     And    an, 
xc  Whirlpools  were  not  constant  in  one  Place,  but  drove  ' 
>ut  strangely;  and  sometimes  we  saw  among  them  large 
plings  of  the  Water,  like  great  Over-falls,  making  a  fearful 
lisc.     I  sent  my  Boat  to  sound,  but  found  no  Ground. 

The  1 8th,  Cape  Mabo  hore  S,  distance  9  Leagues.  By 
lich  Account  it  lies  in  the  Latitude  of  50  min.  South, 
1  Meridian  distance  from  Cajie  S.  George  1243  Miles. 
John's  Isle  lies  48  Miles  to  the  East  of  Cape  St.  George  ; 
ich  being  added  to  the  Distance  between  Cape  St.  George 
1  Cape  Mabo,  makes  1291  Meridional  Parts ;  which 
s  the  furthest  that  1  was  to  the  East.  In  my  outward 
and  Voyage  1  made  Meridian  distance  between  Cape 
ibo  and  Ope  St.  George,  1290  Miles;  and  now  in  my 
:um,  but  1243  ;  which  is  47  short  of  my  distance  going 
-  This  Difference  may  probably  be  occasion 'd  by  the 
oog  Western  Current  which  we  found  in  our  Return, 
ach  I  allowed  for  after  I  perceiv'd  it  ;  and  though  we 

I  not  discern  any  Current  when  we  went  to  the  East- 
rd,  except  when  near  the  Islands;  yet  it  is  probable  we 
]  one  against  us,  though  we  did  not  take  Notice  of  it 

lUK  of  the  strong  Westerly  Winds.  King  William's 
ltd  lies  in  the  Latitude  of  21  Min.  South,  and  may  be 

II  distinctly  off  of  Cape  Mabo. 
In  the  Evening  we  past  by  Cape  Mabo ;  and  afterwards 

tr'd  away  Soulh-East,  half  East,  keeping  along  the 
wv,  which  here  trends  South-easterly.      I'hc  next  Morn- 

teeing  a  large  Opening  in  the  Land,  with  an  Island 
r  the  South-side ;  I  stood  in,  thinking  to  anchor  there. 
Itcn  we  were  shot  in  within  two  leagues  of  the  Island, 

Wind  came  to  ihc  West,  which  blows  right  into  the 
ening,  I  stood  to  the  North  Shore ;  intending,  when  I 
w  pretty  nigh  to  send  my  Boat  into  the  Opening,  and 
ind,  before  I  would  adventure  in.  We  found  several  deep 
n,  but  no  Soundings  within  2  Miles  of  the  Shore  ;  there- 
E  I  stocxt  off  again.  Then  seeing  a  Ripling  under  our 
^  I  sent  my  Boat  to  sound  on  it ;  which  return 'd  in  half 
Hour,  and  brought  me  Word  that  the  Kipling  we  saw 
I  only  I  Tide,  and  that  they  had  no  Ground  there. 
549 


CHAP.    V 

The  Ah  return  from  the  Coast  of  New-Guinea.  A  deep  ChanneL 
Strange  Tides,  The  Island  Ceram  described.  Strange  Fowls, 
The  Islands  Bonao^  Bouroy  Misacombij  Pentarej  LaubanOy  and 
Potoro,  The  Passage  between  Pentare  and  Laubana.  The  Island 
Timor,  Babao  Bay.  The  Island  Rotte,  More  Islands  than  an 
commonly  laid  down  in  the  Draughts.  Great  Currents.  tVhaln. 
.  Coast  of  New-Holland.  The  Tryal-Rocks.  The  Coast  of  Jam. 
Princes  Isle.  Streights  of  Sunda.  Thwart-the-way  Island, 
Indian  ProeSy  and  their  Traffick.  Passage  through  the  Streight. 
Arrival  at  Batavia. 

^HE  Wind  seeming  to  incline  to  East,  as  might 
be  expected  according  to  the  Season  of  the  Year ; 
I  rather  chose  to  shape  my  Course  as  these 
Winds  would  best  permit,  than  strive  to  return 
the  same  way  we  came;  which,  for  many  Leagues,  must 
have  been  against  this  Monsoon :  Though  indeed  on  the 
other  hand,  the  Dangers  in  that  way,  we  already  knew; 
but  what  might  be  in  this,  by  which  we  now  proposed  to 
return,  we  could  not  tell. 

We  were  now  in  a  Channel  about  8  or  9  Leagues  wide, 
having  a  Range  of  Islands  on  the  North-side,  and  another 
on  the  South-side,  and  very  deep  Water  between,  so  that 
we  had  no  Ground.  The  22d  of  April  in  the  Morning, 
I  sent  my  Boat  ashore  to  an  Island  on  the  North-side,  and 
stood  that  way  with  the  Ship.  They  found  no  Ground  till 
within  a  Cable's  length  of  the  Shore,  and  then  had  Coral 
Rocks ;  so  that  they  could  not  catch  any  Fish,  though  they 
saw  a  great  many.  They  brought  aboard  a  small  Canoa, 
which  they  found  a-drift.  They  met  with  no  Game  ashore, 
save  only  one  party-colour*d  Parrakite.  The  Land  is  of 
an    indifferent    Height ;    very  Rocky,  yet    cloathed    with 

550 


.1 


M 


I 


n 


m 


I 


ni 


STRANGE  TIDES 


ill  Trees,  whose  hare  Roots  res  mjosj^  xpot  tae  R'rac?     «: 
Kit  People  saw  a  Pood  of  Salt  W 
lear  this  Island  we  met  a 
cither  Tide  nor  Current 


On  the  24th,  being  aboct  2  Lck^ss  ttzjcl  sx  jsfissc 

he  Southward  of  us,  we  came  GPs^er  a  Sbc&l 

ut  5  Fathom  and  a  half.     We  i5d  xn  p 

&w  the  Ground  under  us.   In  ssm 

he  Boat  had  been  sounding  zn  iscTM'jnr 

0  Ground.    We  manned  the  Boer 

hip  about ;  and  then  sooaiisg. 

id   then   no  Ground  whh   ocr 


as  rockv ;  but  in  1 2  and  i  c  ¥r±rjsL  w*  iai  :«n  firviac 
We  found  here  very  strange  Tiiss.  tic  nsL  it  5rr»aai&, 
aking  a  great  Sea ;  and  roor^sg  v^  yj:jt^  zzae:  wt  vjLst 
?ar  them  before  ther  came  wr^rrr  a  >ILe  cc  1.1  T'rit  Vsa 
»und  about  them  seem*d  ail  brrjrrr,  irai  t'-«rsi  '::i:e  Scr;. 
>  that  she  would  not  answer  ficr  H^V  T'z*!*!:  iCrJjjrjgx 
>mmonly  lasted  10  or  12 


still  and  smooth  as  a  ^^Li-prjcxL  W*  sciirairt  'jf'-er. 
hen  in  the  midst  of  them,  a2>d  aftsnraris  ri  tie  t&vri 
^ater ;  but  found  no  Ground,  rarT^rtr  c-XmaI  •»*  vtrtcrr^ 
lat  they  drove  us  any  way. 

We  had  in  one  Night  iereral  of  ticit  Tjd*!.  Tjit  ti-r^t 
lost  of  them  from  the  WeK ;  a:i.d  ti:«t  'A'jui  '^^.rxi  rV'jci 
lat  Quarter,  we  commoniy  beard  tier::  i  >jrjg  - :.r:it  vrfor* 
ley  came ;  and  sometimes  iowertd  ccr  T^c^--ta;.«i  r';tc.r>^ 

was  a  Gust  of  Wind.  Tfaer  were  ^^'  srr^ar  ^^xr'.  ir^j^ 
I'orth  to  South,  but  their  brsadth  n.v:  ext.tertrr::?'  :.->'^  yt?":t. 
id  they  drove  a  great  pace :  F^jt  tr,',cigr-  -»*  rri.-:  ,^**;^ 
(Tind  to  move  us,  vet  these  wx.;*!  v>vr'  '^ki  \'m^y,  a.v: 
ave  the  Water  very  smooth  ;  %rA  y^v:  'v?t'-r*  »^*  ^^y^.-^ 
•ed  them,  we  met  a  gr*at  .Swtii,  ':>-t  r  ->-:  r>v!  -r-ak. 

The  26th  we  saw  the  h;2r.i  Ctnrr. ;  aru-:  t-  ..  --^r  v.rr>» 
liplings,  but  much  fainter  than  -ho^  T.e  r.^.-:  •'>•:  i  j,--e- 
reding  Days.  We  saifd  aior.^  t.-:>t  Ii  1%^  ^./^%r.  •f,  •*^, 
iTestward,  edging  in  witha!.  v.  vrr,  r  :>?-».: /--.•  .r*  *>• 
light  find  a  Harbour  to  ar.cr.or  ';r.,  »v^*  w*  rr.  y, 
atcr,  trim  the  Ship,  and  refr*:sh  ^j^-;r  M^., 

55' 


"  </«  * 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  In  the  Morning  wc  saw  a  Sail  to  the  North  of  us, 

'7°°  steering  in  for  the  West-end  of  Ceram,  as  we  likewise  were. 
In  the  Evening,  being  near  the  Shore  on  the  North-side  of 
the  Island,  I  stood  off  to  Sea  with  an  easy  Sail ;  intending 
to  stand  in  for  the  Shore  in  the  Morning,  and  try  to  find 
Anchoring,  to  fill  Water,  and  get  a  little  Fish  for  refresh- 
ment. Accordingly  in  the  Morning  early,  I  stood  in  with 
the  North- West  point  of  Ceram;  leaving  a  small  Island, 
called  Bonao/  to  the  West.  The  Sail  we  saw  the  Day 
before,  was  now  come  pretty  nigh  us,  steering  in  also  (aswc 
did)  between  Ceram  and  Bonao.  I  shortned  Sail  a  little 
for  him ;  and  when  he  got  abreast  of  us,  not  above  2  Miles 
off,  I  sent  my  Boat  aboard.  It  was  a  Dutch  Sloop,  come 
from  Teranate,*  and  bound  for  Amboyna  :  *  My  Men  whom 
I  sent  in  the  Boat,  bought  5  Bags  of  new  Rice,  each  con- 
taining about  130  pounds,  for  6  Spanish  Dollars.  The 
Sloop  had  many  rare  Parrots  aboard  for  Sale,  which  did 
not  want  price.  A  Malayan  Merchant  aboard,  told  our 
Men,  that  about  6  Months  ago  he  was  at  Bencola,*  and  at 
that  time  the  Governour  either  dyed  or  was  kill'd,  and 
that  the  Commander  of  an  English  Ship  then  in  that  Road 
succeeded  to  that  Government. 

In  the  Afternoon,  having  a  Breeze  at  North  and  North- 
North-East,  I  sent  my  Boat  to  sound,  and  standing  after  her 
with  the  Ship,  anchored  in  30  Fathom  Water  oazy  Sand, 
half  a  Mile  from  the  Shore,  right  against  a  small  River  of 
fresh  Water.  The  next  Morning  I  sent  both  the  Boats 
ashore  to  Fish  ;  they  returned  about  10  a-Clock,  with  a  few 
Mullets  and  3  or  4  Cavallies,  and  some  Pan-Fish.  Wc 
found  Variation  here,  2  deg.  15  min.  East. 

When  the  Sea  was  smooth  by  the  Land- Winds,  we 
sent  our  Boats  ashore  for  Water;  who,  in  a  few  Turns, 
filled  all  our  Casks. 

The  Land  here  is  low,  swampy  and  woody ;  the  Mould 
is    a    dark    Grey,    friable   Earth.     Two    Rivers    came  out 

^  Banoa.  •  Between  Celebes  and  Gilolo. 

'  To  the  S  W.  of  Ceram. 

*  Benkulen.    The  governor  was  Dampier's  old  enemy,  mentioned  in  the 
other  volumes. 

552 


I  STRANGE   FOWLS 

Ethtn  a  Bow-shot  of  each  other,  just  opposite  to  the  place   . 

Bfacre  we  rode  :  One  comes  right  down  out  of  the  Country  ;  ' 

■kI  the  other  from  the  South,  running  along  by  the  Shore, 

kt  Musquet-shot  from  the  Sea-side.     The  Northermost 

Bvcr  is  biggest,  and  out  of  it  we  filled  our  Water;  our 

■Dats  went   in  and  out  at  any  time  of  I'idc.     In  some 

^aces  the  Land  is  overflown  with  fresh  Water,  at  full  Sea. 

The  Land  hereabouts  is  full  of  Trees  unknown  to  us,  but 

none  of  them  very  large  or  high  ;   the  Woods  yield   many 

lid  Fruits  and   Berries,  such   as   I    never  saw  elsewhere. 

fie  met  with  no  Land-Animals.     The  Fowls  we  found, 

tre  Pidgcons,  Parrots,  Cockadores,  and  a  great  number 

small  Birds  unknown  to   me.      One  of  the   Master's 

latcs  killed  2  Fowls  as  big  as  Crows;  of  a  black  Colour, 

;ccpting   that  the  Tails  were  all   white.      Their  Necks 

Ere  pretty  long,  one  of  which  was  of  a  Saffron-colour, 

c  other  Black.     They  had  very  large  Bills,  much  like  a 

ims-horn  ;  their  Legs  were  strong  and  Short,  and  their 

iws  like  a  Pidgeon's;  their  Wings  of  an  ordinary  length  : 

'ct  they  make  a  great  Noise  when  they  fly,  which  they  do 

cry  heavily.     They  feed   on   Berries,  and   perch  on   the 

Ighcst  Trees.     Their  Flesh  is  sweet :    I  saw  some  of  the 

me  Species  at  New-Guinea,  but  no  where  else. 

May  the  3d,  at  6  in  the  Morning  we  weighed,  intend- 
l  to  pass  between  Bnnao  and  Ccram  ;  but  presently  after 
:  got  under  Sail,  we  saw  a  pretty  large  Proc  coming  about 
c  North- West-point  of  Ceram.  Wherefore  I  stood  to 
c  North  to  speak  with  her,  putting  abroad  our  F.nsign. 
c  seeing  us  coming  that  way,  went  into  a  small  Creek, 
d  skulked  behind  a  Point  a  while:  At  last  discovering 
r  again,  i  sent  my  Boat  to  speak  with  her;  hut  the  Proc 
w'a  away,  and  would  not  come  nigh  it.  After  this, 
iding  1  could  not  pass  between  Bonao  and  Ceram,  as  I 
lirposed ;  I  steer'd  away  to  the  North  of  it. 
>  Thb  Bonao  is  a  small  Island,  lying  about  4  Leagues 
'HI  the  North-Wcst  Point  of  Ccram.  I  was  Inform'd  by 
:  Dutch  Slo<ip  bcfnrc-mentioned,  that  notwithstanding 
smallncKS,  it  hath  one  lim-  River,  and  that  the  Dutch 
;  there  settled.     Whether  there  be  any  Natives  on  it,  or 


553 


J 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  After  Noon,  being  near  the  end  of  the  Isle  Pentare, 

1700  which  lies  West  from  Misacomby,  we  saw  many  Houses 
and  Plantations  in  the  Country,  and  many  Coco-nut-Trces 
growing  by  the  Sea-side.  We  also  saw  several  Boats  sailing 
•  cross  a  Bay  or  Channel  at  the  West-end  of  Misacomby, 
between  it  and  Pentare.  We  had  but  little  Wind,  and 
that  at  North,  which  blows  right  in,  with  a  Swell  rowling 
in  withal ;  wherefore  I  was  afraid  to  venture  in,  though 
probably  there  might  be  good  Anchoring,  and  a  Commerce 
with  the  Natives.  I  continued  steering  to  the  West, 
because  the  Night  before,  at  Sun-setting,  I  saw  a  small 
round  high  Island  to  the  West  of  Pentare,  where  I  expected 
a  good  Passage. 

We  could  not  that  Day  reach  the  West-end  of  Pentare, 
but  saw  a  deep  Bay  to  the  West  of  us,  where  I  thought 
might  be  a  Passage  through,  between  Pentare  and  Laubana. 
But  as  yet  the  L^nds  were  shut  one  within  an  other,  that 
we  could  not  see  any  Passage.     Therefore  I  ordered  to 
sail  7  Leagues  more  Westerly,  and  lye  by  till  next  Day. 
In  the  Morning  we  looked  out  for  an  Opening,  but  could 
see  none ;  yet  by  the  distance  and  bearing  of  a  high  round 
Island   called   Potoro,  we  were  got  to  the    West  of  the 
Opening,  but  not  far  from  it.     Wherefore  1  tack'd  and 
stood  to  the  East ;  and  the  rather,  because  I  had  reason 
to  suppose  this  to  be  the  Passage  we  came   through  in 
the  Cygnet  mentioned  in  my  **  Voyage  round  the  World  '* ; 
but  I  was  not  yet  sure  of  it,  because  we  had  rainy  Weather, 
so  that  we  could   not   now  see  the  Land  so  well  as  we 
did   then.      We    then    accidentally   saw    the   Opening,  at 
our  first  falling  in  with  the  Islands;    which   now  was  a 
Work  of  some  time  and  difficulty  to  discover.     However 
before  10  a  Clock  we  saw  the  Opening  plain;  and  I  was 
the  more  confirm'd  in  my  Knowledge  of  this  Passage,  by 
a  Spit  of  Sand  and  2  Islands  at   the  North-East  part  of 
its  Entrance.     The  Wind  was  at  South-South-West,  and 
we   plied  to  get  through  before  Night ;   for  we  found  a 
good    Tide    helping    us    to   the   South.       About    7    or  8 
Leagues  to  the  West  of  us  we  saw  a  high  round  piked 
Mountain,  from   whose   Top  a  Smoak   seem'd   to  ascend 

556 


THE   ISLAND    PENTARE 

Irom  a  Vulcano.      There  were  3  other  very  high   piked 
iDuiitains,   2  on  the  Esst,  and    i   on  the  West  of  that  ' 
ch  smoaked. 

In  our  plying  to  get  through  between  Pentare  and 
ihana,  we  had  (as  I  said)  a  good  Tide  or  Current  setting 
to  the  Southward.  And  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  near 
Shores  in  these  Parts  we  commonly  find  a  Tide  setting 
rthwardly  or  Southwardly,  as  the  Land  lyes;  but  the 
rthwardly  Tide  sets  not  above  3  Hours  in  12,  having 
Ic  strength  ;  and  sometimes  it  only  checks  the  contrary 
rent,  which  runs  with  great  Violence,  especially  in 
Passes,  such  as  this,  between  2  Islands.  It  was 
■I  Night  before  we  got  clear  of  t  other  small  Islands, 
;  lay  on  the  South-side  of  the  Passage;  and  there  we 

a  very  violent  Tide  setting  us  through  against  a  brisk 
E  of  Wind.  Notwithstanding  which,  I  kept  the  Pinnace 
,  for  fear  wc  should  be  bccalm'd.  For  this  is  the  same 
;e,  through  which  I  passed  in  the  Year  1687,  mentioned 
ay  "  Voyage  round  the  World  "  (pag.  449}.     Only  then 

came  out  between  the  Western  small  Island  and 
ibana,  and  now  we  came  through  between  the  two 
It  Islands.  We  sounded  frequently,  but  had  no 
tmnd.  I  said  there,  that  we  came  through  between 
iba  and  Pentare:  I*'or  wc  did  not  then  see  the  Opening 

ccn  those  1  Islands ;  which  made  me  take  the  West- 

of  Pentare  for  the  West-end  of  Omba,  and  Laubana 
Pentare.      But  now  we  saw  the  Opening  between  Omba 

Pentare ;  which  was  so  narrow,  that  I  would  not 
ure  through :  Besides,  1  had  now  discovered  my 
nd  hop'd  to  meet  with  the  other  Passage  again, 
indeed  we  did,  and  found  it  to  be  bjld  from  Side  to 
:,  which  in  the  former  Voyage  I  did  not  know.  After 
were  through,  we  made  the  best  of  our  way  to  Timor; 

on  May  the   18th  in  the  Morning,  wc  saw  it  plain, 

made  the  high  Land  over  Laphao  the  Portugueze 
:ory,  u  also  tne  high  Peak  over  our  first  Watering- 
e,  and  a  small  round  Island  about  mid-way  between 

We    ccttstod    along    the    Island    Timor,    intending    to 
557 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S 

AN.  West  of  Timor ;  But  being  got  so 
1700  were,  though  there  may  be  a  very  grca 
not  seem  probable  to  me  that  it  sh 
Strength  as  we  now  found :  For  both 
lose  their  Force  in  the  open  Sea,  whert 
spread;  and  it  is  only  in  narrow  PI 
lands,  that  their  Force  is  chiefly  fe 
Opinion,  it  should  here  rather  set  to  t! 
being  open  to  the  narrow  Sea,  that  <j 
from  the  Range  of  Islands  before-meni 
The  27th,  we  found  that  in  the  1; 
gone  9  Miles  less  South  than  the  Lc 
probable  we  were  then  out  of  the  Sou 
we  felt  so  much  before.  We  saw 
about  us.  And  found  Variation  !  deg 
On  June  the  rst,  we  saw  several 
had  at  this  Time  seen  on  the  Coast 
here  before,  we  saw  many ;  at  which  ' 
the  Shore  than  now.  The  Variation 
min.  West. 

I  design'd  to  have  made  New-H 
Latitude  of  20  deg.  and  steerM  Course 
but  in  the  Night  could  not  be  so  bold 
had  sounding.  This  afternoon  I  steer' 
6  a-Ciock ;  then  it  blowing  fresh,  and 
steer'd  West-South-West,  till  we  hai 
then  stood  West,  which  Course  earn 
the  Morning  again  from  6  to  12  I 
West,  to  have  made  the  Land,  but,  no 
we  were  to  the  West  of  it.  Here  is  ' 
on  this  Coast.  When  we  past  this  w 
we  had,  near  this  Latitude  of  19  deg. 
about  1 8  Leagues  from  the  Land :  Bu 
not  the  Land.  The  next  Morning  I 
Scuttle-Fish-bones,  which  was  a  Sign  t 
from  the  Land.  Also  a  great  many 
floating  by  us. 

We  found  the  Variation    increase 
went  Westward.     For  on  the  3d,  it  ' 
560 


CHANGE    IN   THE   VARIATION 

est :  on  the  4th,  6  deg.  20  min.  and  on  the  6th,  7  deg. 

I  min.     That  Evening  we  saw  some  Fowls  like  Men  of  ' 
ar  Birds  flying  Nonh-East,  as  I  was  told :  for  I  did  not 

t  them,  having  been  indisposed  these  3  or  4  Days, 

On  the  iith  we  found  the  Variation  8  deg.  i  min. 
'est;  on  the  I2th,  6  deg.  o  min.  I  kept  on  my  Course 
the  Westward  till  the  15th,  and  then  altered  it.  My 
esign  was  to  seek  for  the  Tryal  Rocks ' ;  but  having  been 
Jt  5  or  6  Days,  without  any  fresh  Provision  or  other 
(od  Nourishment  aboard,  and  seeing  no  Likelihood  of  my 
Kovcry,  I  rather  chose  to  go  to  some  Port  in  Time,  than 
best  here  any  longer ;  my  People  being  very  negligent, 
IH^  was  not  upon  Deck  myself:  I  found  the  Winds 
^H|JL  so  that  I  might  go  any  way.  East,  West,  North, 
^^^B;  wherefore,  its  probable  I  might  have  found  the 
l^^ocks,  had  not  Sickness  prevented  me  ;  which  Dis- 
vcry  (when  ever  made)  will  be  of  great  use  to  Merchants 
iding  to  these  Parts. 
From  hence  nothing  material  happened,  till  wc  came 

Ejn  the  Coast  of  Java.  On  the  23d  we  saw  Princes-Isie 
in,  and  the  Mouth  of  the  Streights  of  Sunda.  By  my 
imputation,  the  Distance  between  Timor  and  Princes-Isle, 
14  deg.  23  min.  The  next  Day  in  the  Afternoon,  being 
rcast  of  Crockadore*  Island.  I  stcer'd  away  East-North- 
■st  for  an  Island  that  lies  near  Mid-way  between  Sumatra 
id  Java,  hut  nearest  the  Java  Shore  ;  which  is  by  English 
Icn  called  Thwart- the- way.     We  had  but  small  Winds 

II  about  3  a-Clock,  when  it  freshncd,  and  I  was  in  good 
[opet  10  pass  through  before  Day :  But  at  9  a  Clock  the 
find  fell,  and  wc  got  but  little.  I  was  then  abreast  of 
"hwart-the-way,  which  is  a  pretty  high  long  Island;  but 

fore  II,  the  Wind  turned,  and  presently  afterward  it 
II  calm.  I  was  then  about  3  Leagues  from  the  said 
and;  and,  having  a  strong  Current  aguinst  us,  before 
ly  we  were  driven  astern  4  or  j  Leagues.  In  the  Morning 
!  had  the  Wind  at  North- North- West ;  it  look'd  black 


56, 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER^S   VOYAGES 

AN.   and  the  Wind  unsettled :  So  that  I  could  not  expect  to  get 

*7^  through.     I  therefore  stood  toward  the  Java  Shore,  and  at 

lo  anchored  in  24  Fathom  Water,  black  oazy  Ground,  3 

Leagues  from  the  Shore,     I  sounded  in  the  Night  when 

it  was  calm,  and  had  54  Fathom,  coarse  Sand  and  Coral. 

In  the  Afternoon  before,  we  had  seen  many  Proes ;  but 
none  came  off  to  us ;  and  in  the  Night  we  saw  many  Fires 
ashore.  This  Day  a  large  Proe  came  aboard  of  us,  and 
lay  by  our  Side  an  Hour.  There  were  only  4  Men  in  her, 
all  Javians,  who  spoke  the  Malayan  Language.  They 
ask'd  if  we  were  English ;  I  answered,  we  were ;  and  pre- 
sently one  of  them  came  aboard,  and  presented  me  with  a 
small  Hen,  some  Eggs  and  Coco-nuts ;  for  which  I  gave 
some  Beads  and  a  small  Looking-Glass,  and  some  Glass- 
Bottles.  They  also  gave  me  some  Sugar-Canes,  which  I 
distributed  to  such  of  my  Men  as  were  scorbutick.  They 
told  me  there  were  3  English  Ships  at  Batavia. 

The  28  th  at  2  in  the  Afternoon  we  anchored  in  26 
Fathom  Water;  presently  it  fell  calm  and  began  to  rain 
very  violently,   and  so  continued   from    3    till   9   in  the 
Evening.     At    i  in  the  Morning  we  weigh'd  with  a  fine 
Land-wind  at  South-South-East ;  but  presently  the  Wind 
coming  about  at  East,  we  anchored ;    for  we  commonly 
found  the  Current  setting  West.     If  at  any  Time  it  tum'd, 
it  was  so  weak,  that  it  did  us  little  good ;  and  I  did  not 
think  it  safe  to  venture  through  without  a  pretty  brisk 
leading  Gale ;  for  the  Passage  is  but  narrow,  and  I  knew 
not  what  Dangers  might  be  in  the  way,  nor  how  the  Tide 
sets  in  the  Narrow,  having  not  been  this  way  these  28 
Years,  and  all  my  People  wholly  Strangers :  We  had  the 
Opening  fair  before  us. 

While  we  lay  here,  4  Malayan  Proes  came  from  the 
Shore,  laden  with  Coco-nuts,  Plantains,  Bonanoes,  Fowls, 
Ducks,  Tobacco,  Sugar,  &c.  These  were  very  welcome, 
and  we  purchased  much  Refreshment  of  them.  At  10 
a-Clock  I  dismissed  all  the  Boats,  and  weighed  with  the 
Wind  at  North- West.  At  half  an  Hour  past  6  in  the 
Evening,  we  anchored  in  32  Fathom  Water  in  a  coarse 
Sort  of  Oaze.     We  were  now  past  the  Island  Thwart-the- 

562 


STR.MTS  OF   SDNDA 

stilt  one  of  the  small  Islands  to  pass.  The  . 
0  run  strong  to  the  West ;  which  fjbligcd  me  ' 
_  nchor  while  1  had  Soundings,  for  Fear  of  being  driven 
■ek  again  or  on  some  unknown  Sand.  1  lay  still  all 
■•ght.  At  5  a  Clock  the  next  Morning,  the  Tide  began 
■slacken :  At  6,  I  weigh'd  with  the  Wind  at  South-I^ast 
^  East,  a  handsom  Breeze.  Wc  just  weather'd  the 
lucton,'  and  sounding  several  Times,  had  still  between 
o  and  40  Fathom.  When  we  were  abreast  of  the  Button, 
nd  about  2  Leagues  from  the  Wcstcrroost  point  of  Java, 
re  had  34  Fathom,  small  Peppery  Sand-  You  may  cither 
omc  between  this  Island  and  Java,  or,  if  the  Wind  is 
Iprtherly,  run  out  between  the  Island  Thwart-tbc-way 
■  this  last  small   Island. 

t  The  Wind  for  the  most  Part  bcii^  at  East  and  East 
¥  South,  I  was  obliged  to  run  over  towards  the  Sumatra 
■re,  sounding  as  I  went,  and  had  from  34  10  23  Fathom. 
the  Evening  1  sounded  pretty  quick,  being  got  near  the 
unutra  Shore;  and,  finding  a  Current  setting  to  the  West, 
etwcen  8  and  9  a-Clock  we  anchored  in  34  Fathom-  The 
fide  set  to  the  West  from  7  in  the  Evening  to  7  this 
tiing;  and  then,  having  a  small  Gale  at  West-Souih- 
_Jt,  I  weigh'd  and  stood  over  to  the  Java  Shore- 
I  In  the  Evening  having  the  Wind  between  East-North- 
m  and  South-East  by  East,  we  could  not  keep  off*  the 
ava  Shore.  Wherefore  1  anchored  in  27  Fathom  Water, 
bout  a  League  and  a  half  oflF  Shore.  At  the  same  Time 
m  Hw  a  Ship  at  anchor  near  the  Shore,  about  2  Mile  to 
Bward  of  us.  We  found  the  Tide  setting  to  the  West- 
■d,  and  presently  after  we  anchored  it  fell  calm.  We 
ly  still  til  Night,  and  saw  many  Fires  ashore.  At  5 
he  next  Morning,  being  July  the  ist,  wc  weigh'd  and 
tood  to  the  North  for  a  Sea-breeze:  At  10  the  Wind 
oming  out,  I  tack'd  and  had  a  fine  brisk  Gale.  The 
hip  we  saw  at  anchor,  weigh'd  also  and  stood  after  us. 
Vhile  we  past  hy  Pulo  Baby,*  I  kept  sounding,  and  had 
;  leas  than  14  Fathom.  The  other  Ship  coming  after 
■  TV  Bgtum  lid  a  few  inilM  be|«fid  Thwrnn-thc-Wsy  Itlond. 

$«3 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  u^  with  all  the  Sail  she  could  make,  I  shortned  Sail  on 
1700  Purpose  that  she  might  overtake  us,  but  she  did  not.  A 
little  after  5,  I  anchored  in  13  Fathom  good  oazy  Ground. 
About  7  in  the  Evening,  the  Ship  that  followed  us,  past 
by  close  under  our  Stern ;  she  was  a  Dutch  Fly-boat ;  they 
told  us  they  came  directly  from  Holland,  and  had  been 
in  their  Passage  six  Months.  It  was  now  dark,  and  the 
Dutch  Ship  anchored  within  a  Mile  of  us.  1  order  d  to 
look  out  sharp  in  the  Morning ;  that  so  soon  as  the 
Dutch  Man  began  to  move,  we  might  be  ready  to  follow 
him ;  for  I  intended  to  make  him  my  Pilot.  In  the 
Morning  at  half  an  hour  after  5  we  weigh'd,  the  Dutch 
Man  being  under  Sail  before ;  and  we  stood  directly  after 
him.  At  8,  having  but  little  Wind,  I  sent  my  Boat  aboard 
of  him,  to  see  what  News  he*  had  brought  from  Europe. 
Soon  after,  we  spied  a  Ship  coming  from  the  East,  plying 
on  a  Wind  to  speak  with  us,  and  shewing  English  Colours. 
I  made  a  Signal  for  my  Boat,  and  presently  bore  away 
towards  her ;  and  being  pretty  nigh,  the  Commander  and 
Super-cargoe  came  aboard,  supposing  we  had  been  the 
Tuscany  Galley,  which  was  expected  then  at  Batavia. 
This  was  a  Country  Ship,  belonging  to  Fort  St.  George, 
having  come  out  from  Batavia  the  Day  before,  and  bound 
to  Bencola.  The  Commander  told  me  that  the  Fleet- 
frigat  was  at  Anchor  in  Batavia  Road,  but  would  not  stay 
there  long :  He  told  me  also,  that  his  Majesty's  Ships 
commanded  by  Captain  Warren  were  still  in  India,  but 
he  had  been  a  great  while  from  the  Coast  and  had  not 
seen  them.  He  gave  me  a  Draught  of  these  Streights, 
from  the  Button  and  Cap  to  Batavia,  and  shew'd  me  the 
best  way  in  thither.  At  11  a  Clock,  it  being  calm,  I 
anchored  in  14  Fathom  good  oazy  Ground. 

At  2  a  Clock  we  weigh'd  again ;  the  Dutch  Ship  being 
under  Sail  before,  standing  close  to  Mansheters^  Island; 
but  finding  he  could  not  weather  it,  he  tack'd  and  stood 
off  a  little  while,  and  then  tack'd  again.  In  the  mean 
Time  I  stood  pretty  nigh  the  said  Island,  sounding,  but 

*  Menscheneters. 

564 


ARRIVAL   AT   BATAVIA 

could  not  weather  it.  Then  I  tack*d  and  stood  ofF,  and  an. 
the  Dutch  stood  in  towards  the  Island ;  and  weathered  it.  *7oo 
I  being  desirous  to  have  room  enough,  stood  ofF  longer, 
and  then  went  about,  having  the  Dutch  Ship  4  Points 
under  my  Lee.  I  kept  after  him ;  but  as  I  came  nearer 
the  Island,  I  found  a  Tide  setting  to  the  West,  so  that 
I  could  not  weather  it.  Wherefore  at  6  in  the  Evening 
I  anchored  in  7  Fathom  oazy  Ground,  about  a  Mile 
from  the  Island  :  The  Dutch  Ship  went  about  2  Miles 
further,  and  anchored  also;  and  we  both  lay  still  all 
Night.  At  5  the  next  Morning  we  weighed  again,  and 
the  Dutch  Ship  stood  away  between  the  Island  Cambusses  * 
and  the  Main ;  but  I  could  not  follow,  because  we  had 
a  Land-wind.  Wherefore  I  went  without  the  Cambusses, 
and  by  Noon  we  saw  the  Ships  that  lay  at  the  careening 
Island  near  Batavia.  After  the  Land-wind  was  spent,  which 
we  had  at  South-East  and  South-South-East ;  the  Sea- 
breeze came  up  at  East.  Then  we  went  about ;  and  the 
Wind  coming  afterward  at  East-North-East,  we  had  a 
large  Wind  to  run  us  into  Batavia  Road  :  And  at  4  in 
the  Afternoon,  we  anchored  in  6  Fathom  soft  Oaze. 

'    Kombuys. 


565 


CHAP.   VI 

The  A,  continues  in  Batavia-Roady  to  refity  and  to  get  Providtm, 
English  Ships  then  in  the  Road.  Departure  from  Batem, 
Touch  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  And  at  St.  Helena.  Arrival 
at  the  Island  of  Ascension.  A  Leak  Sprung.  IVhich  beii^  «- 
possible  to  be  stopped  ;  the  Ship  is  lostj  but  the  Men  saved.  Thej 
find  Water  upon  the  Island.     And  are  brought  back  to  England. 

E  found  in  Batavia  Road  a  great  many  Ships 
at  anchor,  most  Dutch,  and  but  one  English 
Ship  named  the  F/f^/-frigat,  commanded  by 
one  Merry.  We  rode  a  little  without  them 
all.  Near  the  Shore  lay  a  stout  China  Junk,  and  a  great 
many  small  Vessels,  viz.  Brigantines,  Sloops  and  Malayan 
Proes  in  abundance.  As  soon  as  I  anchored,  I  sent  my 
Boat  aboard  the  F/f^/-frigat,  with  orders  to  make  them 
strike  their  Pendant,  which  was  done  soon  after  the  Boat 
went  aboard.  Then  my  Clerk,  whom  I  sent  in  the  Boat, 
went  for  the  Shore,  as  I  had  directed  him ;  to  see  if  the 
Government  would  answer  my  Salute :  But  it  was  now 
near  Night,  and  he  had  only  time  to  speak  with  the  Ship- 
bander,  who  told  him  that  the  Government  would  haw 
answered  my  Salute  with  the  same  number  of  Guns,  if 
I  had  fired  as  soon  as  I  anchored;  but  that  now  it  wis 
too  late.  In  the  Evening  my  Boat  came  aboard,  and  the 
next  Morning  I  my  self  went  ashore,  visited  the  Dutd 
General,  and  desir'd  the  Priviledge  of  buying  such  Pro- 
vision and  Stores,  as  I  now  wanted  ;  which  he  granted  me. 
I  lay  here  till  the  17th  of  October  following,  all  whidi 
time  we  had  very  fair  Weather,  some  Tornadoes  exceptci 
In  the  mean  time  I  supplied  the  Carpenter  with  such  Starts 
as  were  necessary  for  refitting  the  Ship ;  which  prov'd  more 
leaky  after  he  had  caulk'd  Her,  then  she  was  before:  So 

566 


BATA\X\   ROAD 

that  I  was  obliged  to  careen  her,  fhr  wbidi  purjuae  Z  Jarcst 
Vessels  to  take  in  our  Gtins«  Boxlasc  Pmviaoii  jnd  tcdtcs. 

The  English  Ships  char  arrr^'d  here  nnm  Ea^racii- 
wcre  first  the  LLmpa^  cammanded  by  Csntanx  Mjcuik. 
bound  for  China;  nexc  die  pjmker.  -i 
Captain    Robinson;   then   ihe  J^Ci».aJ-fcg3t:.    - 


by  Captain  Clerk.  Ail  diese  br-.ugin:  jncc  TT^iing  inm 
England.  Most  of  them  had  hcea  inmr^nnarg  n  ■:scr 
Officers ;  especially  Captain  Riicinacn.  irha  sui  'na:  yimc 
of  them  had  been  conspinn^  :n  rim  him  aui  us  "^  irs®;. 
There  came  in  also  several  Engtisii  Czuacrr  Trssrr*  :  irsr  e 
Sloop  from  Ben-jarr ;  com  mantled  ly  ine  !^.i«^r  vjusc  7a 
Bengale:  next,  the  .I/jct'/^v.  'leinnghig  ':n  ^engae  ze 
had  been  at  Malacca  at  the  some  "rime  Tigr  us  3ffsaeErr 
Ship  the  Harxuk  was  thert:  Ararwams  sme  -a  «u« 
another  small  Ship  from  Bengale;. 

While  we  stay'd  her^.  lil  die  ^irsrgmrrr  r^igi^n  5::rai 
sailed  hence ;  the  2  Brrgale  Scics  scj^^rri::!.     VEarr  Z.fir.r: 
Ships  also  came  in  her:,  and   iecar^n  i^in    -ler^v^   is. 
We  had  several  Reporrs  crxcrrTiing  :iir  ifci  ^  '♦^sr  a 
India,  and  much  talk  c^ncming  S.^^r^ri  -ttxc   :a<i    v-t:- 
mitted  several  Spoils  apcc  die  C-.as5r,  in*i  ji  -re 
of  Malacca.     I  CiC.  not  hear  'X  irjj  *c::^«.  aerr  vir 
them.     At  my  first  cocir^  hi.  I  »afi  '.ui  rizsz  i  ^::c»  r^c 
been  sent  from  Amboyiia  ir.  z-sear  -,c  2:1c  ;  -nuct  ▼ic  ir-c 
confirmed  bv  one  of  the  Skrrcen,  -wii.r::  I  in  vj--'.^jr  iier 
with  here.     He  told  rse  they  ha^i  •  rmr-nr^  tz^nfsr   t^^ 
that    thcv   came  to   Y:.'jj^hirj^^^    'jr.  v^   l^'-j^r   'jf   ^wrir- 
Guinea  28  Davs  after  mv  dr^arnrr  rztrrj^.  tai  -p-rr-  sc  'V 
as  Scouten's  Island,  aad  hearing  ^^^  fir-jri^  Srvi   •/  r/^ 
rctum'd.     Something  likewise  v.  tr-^  r».ry>fcs  V?L'   Wc^« 
Commander  of  the  FUe>ir.z^^  tv^t  r:it  ^  r:  ^  t.'v  si*^    «. 
here ;  and  that  the  General  at  hkr^^  ^  z^i  a  ^^.r i  vf  t-  • 
Commission  and  Instmc^ior* ;  ^.t  i   .vjc  c    .>^    r-   i:.   i 
very  improbable  thing. 

While  we  lay  ho-c,  tiie  Dutch  h^*.  vr-trt  V.*'-..  'i- 
tions  about  sending  some  Sh:;^  fv  r,--,:r  vxr^.*  "-«;- 
ordinary:  At  last  the  i^th  of  O.-.ovtr  »ii  air-.rr:  .;'^<r 
for  the   Day  of  Sailing,  which   is  2   Mvr.-r.i   vxritr   va-- 

5^- 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER^S   VOYAGES 

AN.  usual.  They  lay  ready  2  or  3  Days  before,  and  went  out 
*7«>  on  the  loth.  Their  Names  were,  the  Ostresteen^  bound 
to  Zealand ;  the  Vanheusen^  for  Enchiehoust ;  ^  and  the  3 
Crowns,  for  Amsterdam,  commanded  by  Skipper  Jacob 
Uncright,  who  was  Commadore  over  all  the  rest.  I  had 
by  this  time  finished  my  Business  here ;  viz.  fitted  the 
Ship,  recruited  my  self  with  Provision,  filled  all  my  Water; 
and  the  time  of  the  Year  to  be  going  for  Europe  being 
now  at  hand,  I  prepar'd  to  be  gone  also. 

Accordingly  on  the  17th  of  October,  at  half  an  Hour 
after  6  in  the  Morning,  I  weighed  Anchor  from  Batavia, 
having  a  good  Land-wind  at  South,  and  fair  Weather: 
And  by  the  19th  at  Noon,  came  up  with  the  3  Dutch 
Ships  before-mentioned.  The  29th  of  November  in  the 
Morning  we  saw  a  small  Hawk  flying  about  the  Ship  fill 
she  was  quite  tired.  Then  she  rested  on  the  Mizcn-Top- 
Sail-Yard,  where  we  catch'd  her.  It  is  probable  she  was 
blown  ofF  from  Madagascar  by  the  violent  Northerly 
Winds;  that  being  the  nighest  Land  to  us,  though  distance 
near  150  Leagues. 

The  30th  of  December,  we  arrived  at  the  Cape  of 
Good  Hope ;  and  departed  again  on  the  1 1  th  of  January, 
1 70 1.  About  the  end  of  the  Month,  we  saw  abundance  of 
Weeds  or  Blubber  swim  by  us,  for  I  cannot  determbe 
which.  It  was  all  of  one  Shape  and  Colour.  As  they 
floated  on  the  Water,  they  seem'd  to  be  of  the  breadth  of 
the  Palm  of  a  Man's  Hand,  spread  out  round  into  many 
Branches  about  the  Bigness  of  a  Man's  Finger.  They  had 
in  the  middle  a  little  Knob,  no  bigger  than  the  Top  of 
a  Mans  Thumb.  They  were  of  a  Smoak-colour ;  and  the 
Branches,  by  their  pliantness  in  the  Water,  seem'd  to  be 
more  simple  than  Gellies,  I  have  not  seen  the  like 
before. 

The  2d  of  February,  we  anchored  in  St.  Helena  Road, 
and  set  sail  again  from  thence  on  the  13th. 

On  the  2 1  St  we  made  the  Island  of  Ascension,  and  stood 
in  towards  it.      The  22d  between  8   and   9   a-Clock,  we 

'  Enkhuizen. 

568 


A   LEAK   SPRUNG 

sprung  a  Leak,  which  increased  so  that  the  Qnis-fnmp 
could  not  keep  the  Ship  free.  Whereupon  I  set  ibc  Hand-  '^'^ 
pump  to  work  also,  and  by  lo  a-CIock  suck'i  bcr:  Tbcs 
wore  the  Ship,  and  stood  to  the  Soutfavard,  ro  try  ^  rrtax 
would  ease  her:  and  then  the  Chain-pomp  just  ktrp:  bez 
free.  At  5  the  next  Morning  we  made  Soil  and  sicod  r:: 
for  the  Bay;  and  at  9  anchor^  in  10  and  a  half  Farb^G, 
sandy  Ground.  The  South-point  bore  Soatb-Soctr-W 
distance  2  Miles,  and  the  North-pcnnt  of  the  Bay,  Ncr 
East  half  North,  distance  2  Miles.  As  vxxs  as 
anchored,  I  ordered  the  Gunner  to  dear  his  Pc^wir-rwioa, 
that  we  might  there  search  for  the  Leak,  axxi  endszTcc?  to 
stop  it  within  board  if  possible ;  for  we  ccpajd  r^x  htsti  tbt 
Ship  so  low,  it  being  within  4  Screaks  of  zhc  Kxxi ;  z^tiriktr 
was  there  any  convenient  place  to  faaol  ber  tai^jrt.  I 
ordered  the  Boatswain  to  assist  the  Gtxraa-;  aad  vr  jc 
a-Clock  the  Powder-room  was  clear.  Tbt  Ctruiszrjgsr\ 
Mate,  Gunner,  and  Boatswain  went  d^ywz. :  irxi  vxe  ar:tr 
I  followed  them  my  self,  and  ask*d  thes  1 
could  come  at  the  Leak:  They  said  tber  - 
might,  by  cutting  the  Gcling;*  I  told  tit  Q;kzy:zj'xs^ % 
Mate  (who  was  the  only  Person  in  the  S::p  tbar  '-3id*ncv>c 
any  Thing  of  Carpenters-work,)  that  if  bt:  tb'Xi^,-t  « 
could  come  at  the  Leak  by  cutt-ng  tit  Cjt,:rj^  wrbw 
weakening  the  Ship,  he  might  do  h :  for  ryr  r-a,c  tr//^^-: 
one  Leak  so  before ;  which  though  xvx  y>  V^  ii  tiTi  >5» 
having  seen  them  both,  I  thought  be  isijrht  ai*  »e,l  c<o  v.-:t 
as  the  other.  Wherefore  I  left  hLii  to  co  hn  vw,  7  -jr 
Ceiling  being  cut,  they  could  not  cook  at  ^bt  I^ak  ;  for  - 
was  against  one  of  the  Foot-fcook'T:.*r/v!ri,*  »'hj-,-:  -vt 
Carpenter's  Mate  said  he  must  firK  c-t,  vrf'/r-r  :♦  '.o.;.-:  *>r 


»  The  chain-pump.  •'Tlus  w  v>  f^Ji^a  va-  »  i-/r./  -.•:*  t  0,uvfy^/  m^A 
a  sufficient  number  of  vaJves,  at  ;«'op*r  Cf-rv^n  »i.-.-  .1  y.  -->» .  -v^-  ,-^  ^< 
through  a  wooden  tube  azMl  retjf&t  ^^nrar-:  -  --j*  -^-j,  !':fc-i^*  -,  \^ 
other  side.  It  is  mauged  by  a  rp//fr  --^  -&<:*'.'>  vsj^-'^r^  -^  •'^  <'^*  ,^, 
be  employed  at  once.'  The  aaad-prjx;,  v^t  .  c^  «  .  -^^^  -^  ix.-y.^-  .  ,  ^ 
hardly  more  powerful  The  pump*  »er*  ta./:  v.  •^•^  ^.^.  .^  ,  •->-•/: 
the  water  in  the  well,  acd  drew  cp  a-r,  »-i  -.v^  it-,  ■^'  •w  ^/  ,    .t«r  ,^^^ 

*  The  inside  planks,  or  mser  i»;x^  'A  a  t.r  :;, 

'  Foot-hook.  orfuttorJc.  vm^'j^m  a.'»  '.r»  f.jf  »'••>.-  .  ,  .^  ^,^,  ,^^ 
floor  and  the  top-timbers  ^A  a  w v>Je&  t  •  >  ' 

569 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 

AN.  In  the  Afternoon,  with  the  Help  of  a  Sca-breczc,  I 

"70I  ran  into  7  Fathom,  and  anchored ;  then  carried  a  small 
Anchor  ashore,  and  warpM  in  till  I  came  into  3  Fathom  and 
a  half.  Where  having  fastned  her,  I  made  a  Raft  to  carry 
the  Men*s  Chests  and  Bedding  ashore;  and,  before  8  at 
Night,  most  of  them,  were  ashore.  In  the  Morning  I 
ordered  the  Sails  to  be  unbent,  to  make  Tents ;  and  then 
my  self  and  Officers  went  ashore.  I  had  sent  ashore  a 
Puncheon,  and  a  36  Gallon  Cask  of  Water,  with  one  Bag 
of  Rice  for  our  common  use:  But  great  Part  of  it  was 
stolen  away,  before  I  came  ashore ;  and  many  of  my  Boob 
and  Papers  lost. 

On  the  26th  following,  we,  to  our  great  Comfort, 
found  a  Spring  of  fresh  Water,  about  8  Miles  from  our 
Tents,  beyond  a  very  high  Mountain,  which  we  must 
pass  over  :  So  that  now  we  were,  by  God*s  Providence,  in 
a  Condition  of  subsisting  some  Time;  having  Plenty  of 
very  good  Turtle  by  our  Tents,  and  Water  for  the 
fetching.  The  next  Day  I  went  up  to  see  the  Watering- 
place,  accompanied  with  most  of  my  Officers.  We  lay  by 
the  way  all  Night,  and  next  Morning  early  got  thither; 
where  we  found  a  very  fine  Spring  on  the  South-East-side 
of  the  high  Mountain,  about  half  a  Mile  from  its  Top: 
But  the  continual  Fogs  make  it  so  cold  here,  that  it  is 
very  unwholsome  living  by  the  Water.  Near  this  Place, 
are  Abundance  of  Goats  and  Land-crabs.  About  2  Mile 
South-East  from  the  Spring,  we  found  3,  or  4  shrubby 
Trees,  upon  one  of  which  was  cut  an  Anchor  and  Cable, 
and  the  Year  1642.  About  half  a  Furlong  from  these, 
we  found  a  convenient  Place  for  sheltering  Men  in  any 
Weather.  Hither  many  of  our  Men  resorted  ;  the  hollow 
Rocks  affording  convenient  Lodging;  the  Goats,  Land- 
crabs,  Men  of  War  Birds,  and  Boobies,  good  Food ;  and 
the  Air  was  here  exceeding  wholsome. 

About  a  Week  after  our  coming  ashore,  our  Men 
that  liv'd  at  this  new  Habitation,  saw  2  Ships  making 
towards  the  Island.  Before  Night  they  brought  me  the 
News ;  and  I  ordered  them  to  turn  about  a  Score  of 
Turtle,  to  be  in  Readiness  for  these  Ships  if  they  should 

572 


RETURN   TO    ENGLAND 

>uch  here :  But  before  Morning  they  were  out  of  Sight,  an. 
id  the  Turtle  were  released  again.  Here  we  continued  '7oi 
ithout  seeing  any  other  Ship  till  the  second  of  April ; 
hen  we  saw  1 1  Sail  to  Windward  of  the  Island  :  But  they 
kewise  past  by.  The  Day  after  appeared  4  Sail,  which 
ime  to  anchor  in  this  Bay.  They  were  his  Majesty*s 
(lips  the  Anglesey^  Hastings  and  Lizard ;  and  the  Canterbury 
ast-India  Ship.  I  went  on  board  the  Anglesey  with  about 
5  of  my  Men;  and  the  rest  were  disposed  of  into  the 
ther  2  Men  of  War. 

We  saird  from  Ascension,  the  8th ;  and  continued 
M)ard  till  the  8th  of  May :  At  which  Time  the  Men  of 
/ar  having  miss'd  St.  Jago,  where  they  designed  to  Water, 
M-e  away  for  Barbadoes:  But  I  being  desirous  to  get  to 
ngland  as  soon  as  possible,  took  my  Passage  in  the  Ship 
anterbury^  accompanied  with  my  Master,  Purser,  Gunner, 
id  3  of  my  superiour  Officers. 


573 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

Kins  ale  y  6th  of  August  1 7  03. — Arrived  Cinque  Ports  ^  galley  of  Loodoo, 
Bur.  120^  Charles  Peckering  Comander,  goes  in  Company  with  CapL 
W™'  Dampier  to  the  South  Seas. 


WILLIAM   FUNNELL'S   CHIMERICAL    RELATIONS 

Page  2y  line  13. — But  whilst  we  were  in  the  Downs^  there  arisiDg  some 
difference  between  the  two  Captains,  Captain  PuJiing  in  his  Ship  the  Fame 
went  away  and  left  us  ;  intending,  as  he  said,  to  go  and  cruize  among  the 
Canary  Islands  ;  and  we  never  saw  him  after. 

P.  2,  1.  27. — Our  Proposals  were  to  go  into  the  River  of  PUte,  to 
Buenos  Ayres,  to  take  two  or  three  Spanish  galleons  which  Captain 
Dampier  gives  an  account  are  usually  there :  And  if  by  that  ExpediiioD 
we  got  to  the  value  of  600,000  Pounds  then  to  return  again  without  pro- 
ceeding further :  But  if  we  missed  of  Success  there,  then  to  cruize  upoo 
the  Coast  of  Peru,  for  the  ValSvla  Ships,  which  commonly  are  said  to 
bring  down  store  of  Gold  to  Lima :  But  if  that  Design  should  also  fail, 
then  to  attempt  some  rich  Towns,  according  as  Captain  Dampier  should 
think  fit. 

P.  6,  1.  I. — At  this  place  (Porto  Praya)  we  watered  our  Ship  and 
refreshed  ourselves ;  and  here  being  some  Disagreement  between  our  Cap- 
tain and  first  Lieutenant,  our  Captain  turned  him  ashore  with  his  Chest  aad 
Cloaths  and  Servant,  much  against  both  their  Wills,  about  twelve  at  Night 

P.  II,  1.  32. — (Isla  Grande).  Here  our  first  Lieutenant  (Barsaby) 
(with  eight  of  our  Men)  our  Captain  and  they  falling  out,  went  ashoar  with 
their  goods  and  left  us. 

P.  13,  1.  12. — Betimes  in  the  Morning  we  saw  the  Islands  of  Sibbil 
de  Wards,  which  are  three  in  Number,  lying  in  the  Latitude  of  51  d. 
35  m.  S.  Longitude  W.  from  London^  by  my  account  51  d.  37  m.  .  .  . 
Captain  Dampier  in  his  Voyage  round  the  IVorldy  computes  the  Longitude 
of  these  Islands  West  from  the  Lizard  to  be  57  d.  28  m.  The  occasioQ  of 
which  difference  I  suppose  to  be  his  having  made  longer  Runs  in  that 
Voyage,  and  so  more  liable  to  mistakes  of  this  Nature. 

P.  25,  1.  16.  At  Sun-rise  the  next  Morning  being  March  the  ist,  we 
began  to  engage  the  said  Ship.  .  .  .  We  fought  her  very  close,  broadside 
and  broadside,  for  seven  Hours ;  and  then  a  small  gale  springing  up,  she 
shear'd  off.  As  for  our  Consort,  he  fired  about  ten  or  twelve  guns,  and 
then  fell  a  Stern,  and  never  came  up  again  during  the  Fight.  We  had 
nine  of  our  Men  killed  in  the  Fight,  and  several  wounded.  We  were 
desirous  to  have  the  other  Tryal  with  him  knowing  it  would  be  of  dangeroui 
consequence  to  let  him  go  ;  for  if  we  did,  we  were  sure  he  would  discover 
us  to  the  Spaniards^  which  would  be  of  ill  consequence  to  our  whole 
Proceedings:  But  our  Captain  was  against^  it,  saying,  that  at  the  worst,  if 
the  Spaniards  should  know  of  our  being  in  those  Seas,  and  so  should  hinder 
their  Merchant-Ships  from  coming  out,  yet  that  he  knew  where  to  go  aod 
could  not  fail  of  taking  to  the  value  of  ^500,000  any  Day  in  tlfe  Year. 
Upon  this  we  lay  by  for  our  Consort,    who  soon  came  up:  And  it  was 

576 


WILLIAM    FUNNELL'S   RELATIONS 

Ujr  agrtvd  fanwMn  tht  tao  Optaini  to  tci  lua  go.      So   tbr  Eaeay 
d  from  Di.  I  Mippow  *rry  well  ndifin]  t&a  be  had  diafpouMd  « 

P.  JO,  I.  19.— We  .  .  .  «cran  docryed  tw«  Sti.     We  fraesdj  nade 

r  Ship,  and  gate  duje,  and  aoon  one  op  vith  tbe  Mss-moH ;  )fce 

'    D  be  the  thip  we  fooght  wnfc  otf  the  Itttai  ham  Feraado*.  .  .  . 

t  wtn  nrj  eager  10  moo  her,  .  .  tor  if  ve  cnaU,  it  «a«ld  luadcT  tfar 

6  from  hiriag  latalhgeiKe  of  ua.     Becides  we  did  oot  ^urwem  tbe 

r  hrf,  beouie  now  our  M«n  were  all  im  Heahh,  whcna*  when  we 

^hi  hei  before,  wc  bad  bttwego  iwtM}-  aad  thirty  Me*  107  Mck  and 

;  boi  bring  willing  to  abow  themaeUei,  tbey  had  doae  what  (ood 

f  eoald.     We  knew  ilao,  if  we  took  her,  that  afae  noM  Bccda  mroft  ■ 

And   her  Guat,  AMBmnirioB,  and  Proraaoa^  veJd  kt«e 

mne  to  ui-     So  we  cnndadcd  10  >*{•{(  bar  osrarhfa,  aad 

1  StradliBg  afm  the  other,  wMdi  ttrutd  am  to  fa%.     B« 

k  tboDgbt  it  not  admablc  to  wmiuv  opoa  her :  Aad  wUm  tha 

V  «M  diipKtiDil  the  two  Shtpa  got  ioio  Lima, 

■  P.  31,  L  ji.— We  a«w  a  Sail  .  .  .  aad  took  her.     We  kept  her  widi 
htill  Mtfch  (he  3cxh,  aad  ibra  hiving  taken  out  a  hnle  of  every  tUnc 

r  Captun  diKhargcd  brr,  illedgine  that,  if  we  kepi  her,  it  woatd  he  a 
a  hia  ptater  Deiigoa,  Wc  were  farced  10  be  a*  wetl  ooneaa 
I. 
■  33t  !•  3--  Oa  the  ^ih  of  /fyni  ihia  Second  Pme.  after  we  had 
a  frw  odd  Thiop.  wa*,  coottsry  10  moat  ot  one  Hiada  ifiaMl  t 
B  Captjin  ^Hedging,  that  be  would  not  nnnber  tip  the  Shi|k 

P.  4). — By  Piylighc  the  next  Moniing,  a*  W7  lay  at  aadMr,  ih*  TtSg 
t  Ebb  DM  being  door,  I  CaMXi  widi  fite  fm^Mu  anw  witha  etfl  of  m. 
'  u*  and  aakcd  fron  iriimce  we  cane^  Oni  ladaa  PSot,  by 
I  Ciptiini  DirrctioiM,  mada  antwn  that  wc  came  bom  Pm^mm.  H* 
1  thrm  came  oo  board,  b«t  they  aniwetMl  they  wo«U  oM!  80  mt 
I  ordered  tbcm  to  be  6red  at,  which  accordtnjly  waa  dan  a  .... 
n  of  ill  coaar^uroce  t  for  ve  were  tare  they  wmld  diacover  na  10 

■  Spasiatda. 
P  P.  4^  I.  ti>.— The  next  Day  .  .  .  April  joth.  CafUtn  Daiapwr  aad 

J,  with  three  Lanacbea  aad  tbe  Canoa,  with  Sy  of  ow  me*, 

r  SMu  M*rm .-  .  .  .  AbcMK  Twd>«  thn  Ni|hl  ibay  m«rMd 

I  of  their  Dnitn.     Osr  nen  |a«v 

^ilp  withia  a  Qaartcr  of  a  Mile  of  ihc  Toa 


that  ihey  wen 


Ed  ^  three  Ambwcadea  [P.  4J,  I.  4],  aad  w"  wilbMly  kaf*  pat 
m,  but  Captain  Daiapaer  adrHed,  that  race  the  ftpaatarda  laaw  i4  war 
aag  .  .  .  It  c"  IM  be  dnabtcd  hot  ibcy  bad  ank  tha  beat  af  dw4r 
r  .  .  .  Mt  it  wa*  rea(il*ed  to  rrtara  10  Scfcaebadara. 


'  P.  4{i  ■■  H- — So  Kaiiit  of  pTe*iaiaoa  order*  pm  tn  hot)  {  g'ttn  Plaa* 
I  fnr  every  tix  Men.     To  oar  grm  cMafort,  whea  we  •na  alninat  « 

t  Wita  end,  we  deicried  ■  Sad  who  omt  ui  an  Aacbw  elao    by  ai 

i  4{,  L  It],  ...  ire  took  her  witboM  any  rcMiaaca.  A  |/«M  My,  til 
1  jjo  t  iiaa,  dt«ply  bden  with  Flower,  Sagar,  Braady,  «tc,  a«(,  ,  ,  , 
w  wc  taigbt  upply  ounctve*  with  Prwtii^MM  for  fear  or  it'  yaart. 

[  P.  46,  L  If.— Oa  the  iSih  a  MiaU  Bark  .  .  .  cMiib>|  M  Mghi  .  ,  , 


I  VOL.  II. 


577 


1  u 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

we  took  her.     She  had  little  in  her,  only  a  small  quantity  of  money.    Thii 
Bark  Capt.  Stradling  kept  for  his  own  use. 

P.  46, 1.  31. — Here  (near  to  the  Island  Tabago,  in  the  Bay  of  Panama) 
our  Captain  and  Captain  Stradling  having  some  disagreement,  coocladed  to 
part  company :  [P.  47,  1.  i]  which  accordingly  they  did :  and  the  men  of 
each  Ship  had  their  liberty  to  go  in  which  Ship  they  thought  confenieot. 
So  five  of  our  men  went  to  Capt.  Stradling,  and  £yc  of  his  came  to  os. 
We  were  told  by  the  Prisoners,  that  there  were  80,000  Dollars  00  board 
the  Prize;  that  they  were  taken  in  by  stealth  at  Lima  fP.  47,  1.  8],  and  lay 
at  the  bottom  in  the  Run  of  the  Ship.  Our  Captain  did  not  beliere  thii; 
and  was  unwilling  to  tarry  longer,  .  .  •  because  he  thought  loss  of  time 
would  spoil  his  greater  Designs. 

P*  55»  1*  3* — ^We  saw  a  sail,  .  .  .  she  proved  to  be  a  Spanish  Man  of 
War  which  was  fitted  out  on  purpose  to  take  us.  They  gave  us  a  broad- 
side, but  we  did  not  mind  them ;  all  our  care  was  to  get  the  weather-gage. 
In  order  to  which,  while  we  carried  too  much  Sail,  and  the  Wind  blew  Tery 
fresh,  our  fore-top  Mast  unfortunately  came  by  the  board.  Immediately  we 
got  our  Hatchets  and  cut  all  clear  away,  and  our  Captain  ordered  the  Helm 
to  be  clapt  a  Weather  and  bore  away.  The  Enemy  •  .  .  bore  away  after 
us  with  all  the  sail  they  could ;  .  •  •  and  doubted  not  but  they  sh^  take  os. 
We  .  .  .  resolved  thereupon  to  lie  by,  and  fight  it  out.  Captain  Dampier'i 
Opinion  was,  that  we  could  sail  better  upon  one  mast  than  the  Enemy ;  [P.  56] 
and  therefore  that  it  was  best  to  put  before  the  Wind.  But,  howe?er,  we 
being  embayed,  chose  rather  to  fight,  than  to  be  chased  ashoar.  So  .  .  • 
we  began  the  fight.  [L.  i]. — We  fired  about  560  Guns,  and  he  (Enemy) 
about  no  or  115.  •  .  .  At  half  an  hour  past  six,  it  growing  duskisb,  they 
left  off  firing,  and  we  did  the  same. 

P.  58,  1.  13. — We  anchored  at  Tacames  and  sent  our  Boat  ashoar  .  .  • 
hoping  to  get  Provisions ;  but  the  Inhabitants  having  notice  of  an  Enemy's 
being  in  those  Seas,  as  soon  as  they  saw  us,  drove  the  Cattle  from  the 
Water-side  up  into  the  Country.  So  our  Men  went  into  the  Village, 
which  consisted  of  about  fifty  InJian  Houses.  Here  in  the  River  we  found 
a  Bark  .  .  .  with  new  Plank  enough  by  her,  to  build  another.  And  we 
took  another  small  Bark  •  .  .  laden  with  Plantains. 

P.  68,  1.  25. — Sep*-  the  2°**.  Our  Captain  and  Mr.  Ciippinton  the  chief 
mate  falling  out;  Mr.  CRppinton^  with  21  of  our  Men,  seized  upon  the 
Bark,  in  which  was  all  our  Ammunition,  and  a  great  part  of  our  Provisioni ; 
and  got  up  her  anchor,  and  went  without  the  Islands.  From  thence  he  leot 
us  word,  that  if  any  of  us  had  a  mind  to  go  with  him,  we  should  be  wel- 
come ;  but  however,  that  we  might  not  be  quite  destitute,  he  w"  restore  us 
all  our  Powder,  Shot  and  Ammunition ;  reserving  only  two  or  three  Barrcli 
for  his  own  use :  and  according  to  his  promise  he  put  on  shore  our  Powder, 
Shot,  and  other  Ammunition  .  .  •  and  sent  us  word  of  his  so  doing.  And 
we  went  with  our  Canoas  and  fecht  it  aboard. 

P.  83,  1.  20. — In  the  Morning,  we  saw  a  Sail  and  soon  came  up  with 
her.  She  proved  to  be  the  Afani/fi-ship.  So  we,  being  all  provided,  gave 
her  several  broad-sides,  before  she  could  get  any  of  her  Guns  clear. 

P.  84,  1.  7. — Time  being  delayed  in  quarrelling,  between  those  of  »$ 
that  would  lay  her  aboard,  and  those  that  w^  not,  the  Enemy  got  out  a  tire 

578 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VINDICATION 

f  C«>t,  ind  ihni  were  loo  bard  for  ut  j   to  that  we  cuuld  not  lie  along  ber 

,  to  do  her  *ny  conilderablc  damage.   ,   .  .   So   being  much   damaged 

.  the  Signal  wv«  made  to  itand  otf  from  ihe  Enemy. 

P.  WS.— On  the  fi"  it   was  concluded   between   Capt.  Dampirr  and   30 

r  Men,  to  Guntinuc  in  the  South-SeaB  ;    but  upon  what   Terms  tbia 

Lxreemeflt  wa*  made,  wt«  kept  lecret.     We  who  were  re&oNed  to  go  for 

I,  ucd  OUT  cndeaToara  to  get  into  the  Gntf  of  jlmapalla  (which  wai  the 

we  dciigned  to  water  at)   with  all  the  hane  we  could.     Where  «c 

Kfaurrd  on  the  16'''  of  January  1 704.      And  the  same  day  :  the  Ptovitton* 

being  n]iulty  paited  according  to  the  directioni  of  the  Owneri  Agent ;  and 

foor   girat   Cunii,   with   Mine   Small    Armt,   Powder  and   Shot,  etc.,  bring 

taken  oai  fur  u> ;  we  (that  is,  33  of  ub  who  reiolted  to  go  in  the  Bark  for 

^Hbdia)  went  on  ihore  in  order  to  water  our  Vessel  for  the  laid  Voyage. 

Kapt 

l^ 


APTAIN    DAMPIER-S   VINDICATION  OF   HIS  VOYAGE 
THE      SOUTH     SEAS      IN     THE     SHIP     "ST. 
GEORGE" 

IfiifA  /MW  /Md//  Oitfrtvtlnat  for  tht  Pmenl  an  Mr,  FimarFt  Cbimrritai 
ReUt«M  Of  Ibt  f'ojagt  Reuml  the  WorU  t  aad  Dtletltd  m  UllU, 
tnlil  be  ihall  It  Examiit'J  mart  at  Largi, 


■'i,  ft'u,  md  Muu  imid  «#/ 


Id  the  Grti  place,  he  calli  himwif  my  Mate ;  He  went  out  tny  Steward, 
aad  ifterwatdi  I  did  make  a  Midshiptiun  of  him  :  Indeed  he  had  the 
Adtaaiage  of  penuing  Djuugliti  and  Hooka,  of  which  be  afterward*  gave 
_  bw  a  ileoder  Account,  fur  some  he  pretended  were  la*t,  and  otheri  ibc 
lausfau  are  torn  out  of  them  \  Eipecially  the  Draoghu  ti  Wind*,  wkicii 
I  greatly  nuprct  him  of  Doing,  bccaiue  be  ii  (mm  the  firtt  Mas  that  la* 
■TOur'd  to  build  upon  aoothei  Man'*  Foundation. 
.  In  pag.  1,  lin.  4,  he  uys,  that  Capt.  Pi^k%  wm  going  is  CompMiy 
I   nil    but    while   we   lay    at    Anchor  in   ibe   Dvmnu,  thne   woat   ■ 

e  between  ua  two  Capuioi,  on  which  PMm  w*m  awa*. 
/  -tvaaJrr  at  tU  ImpaJtmt,  f»r  I  tnu  or  I.tmAm, 
<t  tf«^  (  aaJ  'tit  vm  Imovm  'tviai  llu  Ounwr' 
^   rr  ,-  to  wiom  I  ApfKai. 

^In  p.  1,  I.  1;.     Our  P<opo«»U,  isy*  he.  were  10  f«  nMo  ifc«  |t)««f 
Sir  and  lo   Bwrnoi    Ayrr*  10  take   I   or   }   Spniih  gaOeoM  witicb 

C>ft.  DKBjnet  give>  an  Accmum  of  (I  uy  Capt.  Mtntfm,  at  tie  dive, 
becwiac  1  wji  a  f-orr.go  Gmileman  tliat  waa  mm  10  fetWD  Inmw)  m> 
MuDy  there.  1  dcwe  to  know  of  iliu  gcMleaMS,  whew  n  wm  tW  I  Mt> 
tliti  AccoBDt,  and  to  whom  ;  I  moM  coojew  lime  waa  mmr  Uisumw  Jm* 
it ;  bat  I  never  detiga'd  to  lo  to  Bnnoa  Ayre*,  far  then,  hHn|  Mxh  * 
UangcroM  Rtver  to  go  Up :  And  I  tMnk  Capt.  Pntlcn  taJk'd  M^nmhtm^  M* 
ihia,  and  w  Mt.  Fnnori  bom  tlmce  nny  cMclnlr  wlut  tmjtn^a,  ¥m 
inj^y^t  girct  ReaaoM  of  hia  own  |  why  wc  ckl  mm  ga  M  t^ttm 
Indeed  be  hat  a  very  Pradwctitc  Brain  i«  fniuu  RcMnne ' 

Whrre  Mr.  hiWDell  nyt  CafC  Dal^ier  and  Litwi.  H^ffwd  ItttMftM. 
TbMv  wat  no  Mch  thing;  for  k  waa  Mr.  Mm|m,  Pw*w  Mt4  hf^m, 
579 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S 

that  diugreed  with  Lieut.  Huxford,  went  ashore, 
a  Poctugueie,  a  >ort  of  Corrigidor,  Confin'd  Mr, 
two  afterwards,  lie  himself  tent  ibr  hia  Chest  i 
deliver'd.  But  the  Day  before  I  uil'd  I  sent 
Cheet  tad  Cloatha  actually  came,  m>  that  I  had 
him ;  but  Mr.  Morgan  iwore,  if  Mr.  Huxford 
not  go  the  Voyage.  And  where  ill  Blood  ia,  ihii 
which  I  ordered  him  to  go  oo  Board  Capt.  PJcli 
Board  along  our  Side,  and  Lieut.  Stradling  in  i 
I  could  Reconcile  these  Two  after  a  Geotleman-li 
1  could,  but  it  happeo'd  otherwise,  for  instead  of  ci 
porit.  Me  and  Huxford  disagreeing  when  they  M 
him  on  Board  a  Portuguese  Merchant- Man. 

4.  In  relation  to  James  Barnaby,  second  Liei 
Disagreement  with  him,  the  Lieut,  (meaning  Bart. 
went  on  share  and  left  us,  taking  their  Chest*  and  ' 

To  the  Contrary  of  this  I  answer :  I  take 
disagreed  with  him  ;  but  finding  him  a  little  Pert 
between  him  and  Mr.  Morgan,  I  ordered  him  a 
little  time  after  this,  as  we  Rode  at  the  Isle  of  ( 
the  Cinque  Port,  sent  for  his  Things,  but  1  refu 
comes  on  board  after  a  Refractory  manner.  Charge 
he,  and  eight  of  the  Men,  being  rather  Assisted  tl 
(as  Mr.  Bunnell  knows)  Mutiny'd,  to  begin  iheii 
Boat  and  went  away  per  Force,  on  a  Design  to 
that  was  lying  on  the  other  shore,  nearer  the  Main 
was  aware  of  them.  Upon  which  to  acquit  my  1 
I  sent  Letters  to  the  Governor  of  Rio  de  Janeiro; 
Knavish  Part  of  their  Intent,  and  that  they  migl 
secuted  something  like  the  former  Design  }  This  1 

In  p.  15,  Mr.  Funnel),  to  senle  my  Mistakei 
d'  Wards  (Falkland  Islands).  But  every  bod 
mistake  to  be  Positive  in  seeing  that  he  nei 
Mr.  Morgan  and  my  Self  could  know  the  Contrai 

In  p.  14,  towards  the  latter  God,  he  says  we  * 
contrary  to  all  Expectations. 

This  is  a  Merry  way  of  his  ;  for  it  is  well  k 
I  told  them  we  should  sec  Land  the  next  Morning 
the  South  Part  of  it :  Now  I  look  upon  that  to  be 
one  side  of  the  Land  for  the  other,  than  'tis  to 
Westward  of  the  whole  Island,  and  miss  his  L 
of  course. 

Tho'  there  may  be  more  Mistakes  that  we  p 
Matter,  as  yet,  my  crew  not  being  wholly  here. 
Actions  of  the  Voyage,  on  which  depend  the  Mil 
the  Mens  Disorder. 

The  first  of  which  is  the  FreDch  ship  thi 
coming  to  the  Island  of  Juan  Femando's,  to  wl 
3  in  the  Afternoon,  and  fetch'd  upon  her  so  fa 
580 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VINDICATION 

I  found  the  wu  an  Guropcan  Ship  and  not  a  Spaniard,  upon  which, 

aoc  willing  lo  puriue  her  any  further,  but  the   men   being   (ai   they 

)  in  a  Desire  of  Engagement,  Right  or  Wrong,  I  follow'd  her, 

next  Morning  eirly,  we  came  up  with  her,  and  when  1  saw  nothing 

i  duenjjage  theni  ftom  an  Iniigoilicant  Attempt,  I   encourag'd  them  all 

lid.     Dy  thi>  time  my  Ginsori  had  given  her  a  Broad  tide,  lo  I  ranged 

het  other  tide,  and  gave  her  a  Droad-iide  likewise.     Now  to  shew  the 

'uaiofl  lliey  were  then  in,  ihey  Fir'd  upon  our  own  Consort  in  his  falling 

tTO,  and   niniirr'd  hi*   Help.      Notwithstanding  thi»  I   came  up  again, 

Uxchant;'d  j  or   4   Broadside)  with  her,  wheiein  Ten  of  my    Men 

r'd,   9   kiU'd    and    1     wounded;   which   Diimay'd  my   Men    so  much, 

actiuUy  run  down  off  the  Deck,  and  made  nothing  of  it  afterwards,  ao 

when  I  could  hare  boarded  her  and  carried  her,  the  Mate,  Cleppington 

N'Oie,  cry'd  The  Men  are  all  gone;  and  Bellhash  the  Master,  whose 

ice  It  wai  to  be  always  upon  Deck,  was  gone  alio  ;   tho'  thia  Gentleman 

aw  a  Valiant  Talker,  to  my  Detriment. 

la  p.  i{,  16.  Mr.  Funnell  says  the  Crew  were  Desirous  to  Ftghi  thii 
p  again.  Now  since  they  made  nothing  of  it  while  in  my  Power  ;  What 
I  to  be  done  afterwards!  And  as  to  my  telling  ihcm  {aa  he  says)  1 
M  gM  at  any  time  ^{CX),ooo,  1  i.iy,  so  I,  kept  my  Boat*  which  were 
R  lo«i,  n(  would  my  People  have  been  Rul'd. 

In  p.  }i  Mr.  Funnell  lays  we  look  a  ship  of  ii:>o  Tuns,  loaden  with 
eral  good  Commodities,  as  Indigo,  Cochineal,  Sec. 
Now  for  Cochineal,  t  never  heard  of  any.  Indigo  there  wai :  but  the 
ir,  and  the  Tuttlethel,  he  so  frequently  (peaks  of,  may  be  gone  the 
m  way  that  many  Rich  and  Valuable  Goods  have,  by  the  Management 
(bote  Pyrating  Fellows,  rather  than  Sailors,  the  Indigo  1  could  not  take 
Board  t  nor  could  I  tru»t  any  of  them  with  the  •Soiling  such  a  ship,  ai 
Id  OcittieT  keep  tttc  Company,  nor  make  a  right  Slrctage-way. 
Im  p>.  55  He  lays  truth  ai  to  Mr.  Obiervator's  Ship  and  the  Monkey 
I WB1  ten  in  her ;  but  as  to  Firing  at  anything  but  the  Ship,  iind  the 
lir  Cicw,  who  before  we  could  make  up  to  her,  had  msde  into  their 
M*,  utd  Kithiog  tictidei  the  C-irgu  and  the  Monkey  were  indeed  un  Board, 
Icb  ahmi'd  hate  been  brought  alon;t,  had  we  nut  Obsrrv»tori  enough  at 

Tbe  noil  thing  they  Charge  me  with,  ci|ieci4lly  Mr.  Funnell  in  p.  41 
be  Gulph  of  St.  Michael,  saya,  when  we  were  in  the  Bar(|ue  Ian  taken, 
ladiaa  Canoe  Hiled  us,  and  that  I  order 'd  her  10  be  Fir'd  upon.  The 
is  VFfy  plain,  for  when  1  taw  some  of  them  that  had  Fir'd  without 
Ordcn,  I  was  very  Uneaay  and  Troubled  at  it,  knowing  the  Consequnice 

The  Second  I'hing  that's  Matieriil  is,  that  the  Ship  mentioned  by 
.  Funnell  in  p.  45,  4'T,  where  he  iremi  to  F.xplain  fKu,OOo  was  Hid  in 
Run  of  the  Ship,  and  I  slipt  the  Op)iiirtunity  of  taking  it,  and  turning 
Adrift;  .So  this  I  answer,  1*hat  1  bad  rTideni  Proof  ihe  hod  Landed 
Mooey  at  Tiuiillot  and  a>  10  Protisioos,  we  took  as  much  a <  would 
ride  u*  for  One  Year,  and  much  longer,  if  well  nunag'd,  that  was,  what 
Shin  could   well  Stnw,   and  this  wai  the    Steward    and    the  Crew's 

S8l 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S 

Now  as  to  a  Report  that  they  make  about  T 
be  offer'd  for  her  Ransom :  First  I  had  no  con' 
and  the  strong  Southerly  Winde  were  tet  in,  and 
her  muBt  certainly  been  Imbay'd  for  3  or  4  M< 
thro'  the  Treachery  of  the  Spaniard),  I  haw 
before  in  a  like  Case,  Riding  there  For  Ranio 
Capt.  Davit,  for  instead  of  keeping  their  Faith,  t 
Ship  in  the  Night  and  14  Periagoea ;  and  tho*  w 
and  Stouter  men,  we  came  narrowly  off. 

Now,  that  they  are  Judge*  in  my  Case  ai 
Feilowi  who  were  Perpetually  drunk.  And 
Guarding  a  Ship  in  the  Night,  or  being  kept  in  ai 

Again  in  p.  46,  47.  Wliereai  Mr.  Funnell 
that  I  could  agree  with  nobody ;  and  to  says  th 
Capt.  Stradling.  I  >ay,  I  Deputed  Capt.  Stradli 
at  Juan  de  Fernando's,  when  all  bis  Men  left  hi 
him  again :  therefore  I  might  expect  a  Reasoat 
entered  into  a  Dispute.  I  lent  him  a  spare  Ti 
being  sickly,  he  had  always  my  Chirurgeon,  and  t 
a  last,  and  any  Kindness  I  could  do  him,  I  did 
of  his  Voyage. 

In  p.  5S,  he  says  we  met  a  Spanish  Man  of 
manner,  we  got  to  Leeward  of  Her  thro'  their 
Broad-side  or  two  were  Given  and  Taken,  I  ei 
Sail,  Hung  out  my  Flying  Gib.  They  who  wei 
they  should  not ;  and  did  not  think  me  worthy 
my  Fore-Top  Mast  in  the  Night,  so  it  immedj 
By  this  I  was  utterly  deprived  of  means  to  get 
ehe,  I  lying  wholly  at  her  Mercy  j  that  Figbtin] 
sistent  with  Reason. 

And  whereas  he  says  we  Fir'd  ;6o  Guns  ai 
not  60  em  Hit  her  :  now  to  what  purpose  th 
know  rot.     For  I  was  forced  to  Command  'em  ^ 

P.  58.— In  our  going  to  Tacames,  he  Talks 
call  my  judgement  in  question  about  getting  it,  1 
away  the  Cattle.  There  may  be  wild  Hogs 
nothing  else,  bo  that  I  suppose  this  is  to  Redicule 
but  that  there  might  be  2  or  3  Cows.  He  ma 
and  there  they  did  bring  off  a  little  Boat,  and  I 
deal  of  Plank  ashore. 

The  next  Morning  I  sent  the  Master,  Bellh 
Man  now,  with  10  or  30  Men  and  Fire-Arms  m 
far  from  bringing  Plank,  that  upon  one  Shot  fii 
Running  Aboard  frighted,  lost  i  or  3  Pieces;  / 
Bravoes  that  are  fit  to  set  People  by  the  Ears  at 
as  Rife  with  me  as  'lis  with  them. 

What's  observable,  is,  it  is  not  enough  to  Ru 
Goods,  and  do  what  you  please  with  Bale*  of 
other  Stores  ;  and  under  Pretence  of  Shares,  uk< 

582 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIERS   VINDICATION 


d  do  what  r\tt  ihev  phaie :  offer  to  kill  the  Captain  or  a 
*hM  Vb.  Funntll  calli  Falliag  out  with  xhc  Capuin  ;  Thi 


ly  other  VilUny. 
■  is  hii  frequent 


But  at  to  Mr.  Ci< 


■ppingto 


.  that  he  mention*  it 


rord.      On  the  contrary,  he  leized   my   Bjrque,  therein  was  two 
Ifincr    lleck    Guot,  two  PattererorR,  with    all    my    Powder   and  Shot, 
lat  we  weie  upon  ihe  Careen  in  the  Gulph 
ins,  except  Tour,   were    aihore,   and   ihute    4 
mtj   Hole  :  my  tmall  Armi  wet,  to  ihat  I  had  nothing  to  command  him 


,    forget    I 


tell   the    World    iheae     Frilot 


Bellhaah, 
inaod,  itript  the  Prisoner!,  Indians  or  Spaniards;  whereas  let  them 
'  t  me  of  anything  more  than  the  most  Compassionate  Christian  Usage 
Rinkt  tif  Men,  and  this  I  thought  was  the  best  way  of  Performing 
Voyajte,  Therefore  to  return  to  Mr.  Oeppington,  let  the  World 
'  R  theie  Roguci  (whotc  Cruelty  ii  a  Mark  of  Cowardice)  were  not 
the  Watch  from  lime  to  time,  to  diiappoint  and  overset  the  Voyage  [ 
htre  waa  Bellhaih  the  Mailer,  CIcppington  the  Mate,  Bath  the 
■ad  about  10  Men  ;  with  the  never  be  forgotten  noble  Capt. 
,*faich  I  will  speak  of  hereifter.  But  in  the  Erening  comrs  back 
ih,  Thomai,  and  some  others,  demanding  their  Cloaths,  these 
Aa  aooti  11  e»er  the  Mate  Cleppington  wjs  gtme,  then  ihe  rest  of 
made  a  Demand  to  have  the  Money  and  Plate  :  and  what  v/u 
n  ^r'd  amongit  them,  which  I  refiu'd  to  do  ;  and  when  1  found  they 
rre  in  the  Mutinving  Vein,  1  produc'd  the  Queen's  Orderi,  and  told  'em 
WJ*  ottt  of  my  Power  j  but  if  at  the  End  of  the  Voyage,  they  would 
rry  the  Ship  into  any  Pott  of  the  West-Indies,  or  East,  I  would  do 
Mice  lo  my  Owners  and  them. 

Hr.    FunocU  forgets  that    he  minded   1 
him  (which  wai).  that  all  Go< 
d  then  ihry  ihould  have  nothing.      N 
liainy,  and  punish 'd  with  Death. 

Ai  W  the  AcajHjlca  Ship  which  he  menlioni  Jn  p.  8j.  He  say* — 
bra  wt  came  up  with  the  Ac.ipuica  Ship,  we  gate  her  seteral  Broad- 
lea  before  *he  could  get  any  of  her  duns  clear.     To  ihii  I  aniwer. 

It  is  False  {niircly  so  ;  for  I  no  sooner  Fir'd  00  her,  but  ihe  Fir'd  on 
F,  and  had  tier  Cuns  out  bcfbte.      Again  he  aays, 

Thai  while  some  of  them  were  Quarrelling  about  Laying  her  on  Board, 
■d  utme  Diijiuting  the  Contrary,  the  got  out  a  Teer  of  Guns,  and  then 
H  too  hard  nt  at. 

Mr.  Fonnetl  might  bear  Oisputa,  ai  he  calls  it,  among  the  Men; 
'hat  WM  nothing  to  my  Ctminuod.  They  might  have  taken  het,  would 
cy  have  Obey'd  my  Adkicr,  which  was  in  Ply  her  with  mr  Chaec  Guns, 
id  Comniand  her  that  way  :  Fnr  we  had  nothing  to  do  dlong  Side,  and 
■I  I  refer  myself  lu  all  Sailors  in  ihe  Woild,  whether  it  was  right  oc  not. 
And  coundenng  the  Inecjualriy  of  our  Numliers  and  Bulk  uf  Ship. 

~  '  beginning  of  (hii  Action,  we  were  10  the  Windward  of  her, 

the  Westward,  and  *e  llearing  away  upon  her  with  a  Flown 

583 


1  of  one  thing  that  is  lery 
of  Forts  were  my  Friends, 
Ship  of  War  ihit  would  be 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S 

Sheet  I  then  order'd  my  Officers  to  keep  eoough 
of  her :  instead  of  this,  tpite  of  my  Heart,  they  : 
far  from  having  the  Power  to  Command  and  Boar 
we  lost  the  Opportunity,  and  were  forc'd  to  Le< 
that  I  Taclt'd,  came  abou',  and  had  her  under  m 
hop'd  to  Batter  her  with  my  Chace  Guns,  ahe  h 
Gal!  u»  ;  thia  I  took  to  be  ihc  best  way  of  Disablinj 
have  made  her  yield.  Instead  of  (hit,  to  shew  t 
OtHcera  were  to  Board  her,  or  Perform  their  I 
Mate  left  the  Bracei,  and  betook  them  to  the 
ConfuBioD,  neither  they  nor  the  prirate  Men  (let 
ever  intended  Boarding  her :  For  'tit  an  Argai 
Bay,  there  wat  not  a  Man  to  be  Awittant  to 
brjcM  not  a  Rope  splic'd  or  knotted  io  all  the  Ac 
at  Helm  contradicted  my  Orderi,  Edg'd  her  aw 
at  which  I  offered  to  ahoot  him  through  the  heai 
this  Paa*,  the  Boatiwain  being  at  the  Braces,  I 
intend  to  do  ?  He  toid  me  to  Board  her.  Clap 
I .  But  for  want  of  Wind  by  this  time  (ihey  bein 
as  if  all  things  had  concurr  d  to  our  wrong.  The 
would  the  keep  to>  Now  could  I  have  gotten 
far  from  being  Desirous  to  Board  her,  that  the 
couraging  of  the  Men :  Not  only  (hat,  but  he  a 
shewing  the  Powder  Barrels  at  the  Enemy's  Yar<j 
Afieraoon,  when  we  were  a  great  way  to  the  I 
who  by  this  time  was  Potent  in  Liquor,  cry'd  Boa 

I  answer'd,  to  Night,  'tis  Impossible,  we  hat 
brfure  ue,  and  now  no  Wind  to  work  the  Ship. 
these  Fellows,  in  the  Night  they  actually  lost  her 
her  ;  and  for  3  days  after  this,  they  were  frightet 
ihey  call  it,  their  Pannick  Qualms,  was  ever  Inc 
Tack  about  again  on  any  Account. 

To  conclude  then :  to  engage  them  to  cruizt 
forc'd  to  set  my  Hand  to  a  Paper,  that  I  would  (i 
best  of  my  way  to  India.  So  once  more  we  stood 
and  nfier  standing  liastward  for  some  time,  we,  W 
to  Amapala  to  Water. 

In  p.  86. — We  must  not  omit  that  Funnell  sa 
bciweifn  Capt.  Dampier  and  30  of  our  Men,  to  coi 
but  upon  what  Terms  this  Agreement  was  made,  * 

'Tis  well  known  I  never  professed  anything 
Honourable  and  Justifiable  on  our  Return  to  E 
Villany,  and  is  really  Witty  in  his  turning  Robbel 
Whereas  I  w'*  have  kept  all  my  Men,  and  begg 
that  they  w'"!  Consider  the  Blackness  of  the  Act 
Funnell  himself  was  chiefly  an  Undertaker,  his  F^ 
mav  extort  his  as  well  as  other  FoHies  that  he  is  C 

For  when  he  v/^^  Colour  over  the  Matter,  he 
(Mr,  Morgan,  who  is  Beholden  to  hrm)  appointed 

584 


JOHN    WELBE'S    ANSWER 

I  be  ii-     I  wii  DO  wDonct  it  an  Anchor  at  AnapaU,  boi  all  Hasdi 
I,  went  to  vort  in  getting  the   Bucgae  oa   Baud,  and  took    ■■]> 
d  PfDciiion  OM  by  Force. 

I  that   Mr.  Hillbaih  by  nime,  that  all  men  nuy.know  him,  atid  bow 

'i  to  be  iDtruiicd,  took  mc  bv  the  Throit,  anj  Swore  if  I  ipokc  a 

iFordi  ihey  would  Uaih  mj  fitaitu  out,  afid  the  re*t  Mndiog  hff  CooeiTing 

ft  tbe  Acuoo.    So  that  wlicn  we  comr  to  Repeat  ihu  whicti  axj  be  ipoken 

'        e  at  large,  the*  aik'd  for  iny  Key*  of  the  PvnJtr  Rmm  and  Cheu  of 

J  Annii   !  da^d'm.      Mr.  Murgan  bimiti/ imd,  n  to  tbK  we  hive 

B  Crowi  on  B<Mtd,  they  are  ai  good   Keyi  m  we  denre,  aod  wrtli  that 

A'afr— Out  of  60  Handi  that  femain'd,  they  left  me  7 1  Men  «fief 
kg  rreryihiiig.  Nov  I  refer  Riytclfto  all  Mankiftd,  ai  ibey  nude  ibeir 
|i  they  fifi  me  but  One  Sailor ;  So  ihey  left  me  Life  there.  But  they 
ive  me  ol  my  Cuud  Name  here,  and  M>b  my  RepulalkMi  for 
10  make  tuie  Play  itill.  they  tura'd  my  PriaoMn  atbare*  and  by 
1  intrnded  to  tay  luch  a  &;ir  io  my  way,  Tim  aa  they  have 
eied  I  ahould  neret  come  Home ;  it  ia  ■  Miracle  m  Natmv  Iww  I  did. 
Coanderio^  the  Spaniaida  had  Noiif  e  of  me  before  I  got  noa  ihc  Ca*M 
'Pers,  ihiougb  their  (tclexlDe  the  I'riaoncr*  i  Now  let  all  Maklu*d  )adce 
-  Mnwi^blr  i:an-!ition  I  wa«  in.  there  b^g  a  Maa  of  War  (hai  1^ 
idy  for  mc.  So  ihii  let  'em  colour  one  Villaay  oa  another,  asd  cxcmc 
eill,  I  am  latitf^'d  tlie  Frar  of  nxetiog  tbe  Spamb  Hea  of  War 
oart,  wa«  tbe  Occaaion,  'Twonld  be  tcdioua  to  itaeM  ibcir 
Bj'-  when  that  BulTooa  Tabj  Thmuu  by  name.  Bid,  Pttr 
;  thy  Caie  ■*  like  Kinji  Jimei,  errry  Body  hat  leA  thee:  1  mi« 
otjie  World  then,  aod  Alwjy*.  tbe  Doctor  waa  iJie  only  OAcer 
J  by  it»e  in  all  my  Adnr«iiie«>  More  ahall  be  laad  of  Mr.  Fanoell 
Ef,  when  hii  whole  Book  >>  more  aerioualy  coaiider'il. 

■ifi. — HavJDg;  Read  Capt.  Le  Wtigbi'*  Pro;M«il*  for  nodier 
I  into  the  South  Sea*.  I  do  think  it  Proper  aod  AdTaata^ieoa, 
I  he  was  Incirely  io  the  Right;  asd  I  am  ready  to  Satiafy  any 
t  of  Mefchaoi*  how  Practicable  h  bspedmi  it  b  lo  yat  it  in 
B  forthwith. 


M8WER5  TO  CAPT.  DAMPIER'S  VINDICATION,  BY 
JOHN  WELBE  (MIDSHIPMAN  ON  BOARD  CAPTAIN 
DAMPIER'S   SHIPf 


Stimify. 


ClKhL 


— Aa  for  wlut  Capt.  Dampicr  ny*  cooceraiM  Li« 
ia  true,  Mr.  Mnrjian  and  be  had  a  Moall  QMrrcTi  but 
afitaia  Damper'i  P«rT,  who  were,  both  after  and  before 
omanoal  Variaocr.  Wiincu  the  very  Efit  Ni|bt  we  ca 
4  auch  high  WorJa  in  the  Cabbm,  that  Cnt.  DamfNer 
rt,  ia  order  to  put  the  Ship  abogi,  jad  atand  i«  afain  for 
r  to  pot  him  aihore.  Now,  bad  be  fW  him  Mhwi*  at  Ii 
have  Uam'd  him ;  but  l^ti  laat  Qaarrrl  happea'ed  at  the 
one  of  the  Cap  d«  Verd  lalaadai  tmk  CafN.  Ihmpier 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

the  Portugueze  Officer  to  confine  him.  And  the  next  Day,  Mr.  Huxfbrd 
sent  for  his  Chest  and  Cloaths,  which  were  sent  him.  But  the  Day  before 
we  sail'd,  he  came  on  Board  again,  and  brought  his  Chest  and  Cloaths  with 
him ;  but  as  soon  as  the  Capt.  saw  him,  he  order'd  him  to  go  out  of  the 
Ship.  Mr.  Huxford  begg'd  of  him  not  to  be  so  barbarous,  as  to  turn  him 
ashore  amongst  a  Parcel  of  Banditties  and  Negro's ;  but  desir'd  him  to  let 
him  lye  in  the  Long-boat;  or  he  w'^  be*  contented  to  go  before  the  maft, 
rather  than  go  ashore  amongst  a  Parcel  of  Heathens.  But  our  Consort'i 
Boat  coming  on  Board,  with  Lieut.  Stradling,  Capt.  Dampier  and  be 
contrived  together  to  get  Mr.  Huxford  into  his  Boat,  under  a  Pretence  of 
carrying  him  on  Board  of  our  Consort,  and  so  to  carry  him  on  Board  of 
one  of  the  Portugueze  Ships,  that  lay  in  the  Road :  but  Mr.  Huxford  beiDg 
unwilling  to  go  out  of  the  Ship,  Capt.  Dampier,  with  his  own  Hands,  took 
hold  of  him,  and  thrust  him  out  of  the  Ship  into  Lieut.  Stradling's  Boat, 
who  put  him  on  Board  a  Portugueze  Ship  in  the  Road,  according  to  the 
Contrivance  aforesaid ;  where  he  remained  not  long,  before  they  tum'd  hio 
ashore,  and  within  three  months  afterwards  miserably  ended  his  Dayi, 
partly  with  Hunger;  yet  I  wonder  not  at  the  Captain's  monstrous  Bar- 
barity, knowing  the  like  Scene  of  Cruelty  was  acted  by  him,  when  Gnd- 
mander  of  the  Roc'Buck, 

Thirdly, — As  to  Mr.  James  Barnaby,  our  Second  Lieutenant,  he  uji, 
he  never  disagreed  with  him ;  which  is  false :  For  being  both  drnok  to- 
gether in  the  Cabbin,  they  quarrell'd,  Mr.  Morgan  being  ashore  kirr 
nothing  of  it ;  upon  which  Mr.  Barnaby  desir'd  CapL  Dampier  to  gife  hia 
Leave  to  take  his  Chest  and  Cloaths  out  of  the  Ship,  and  he  w*^  go  ashoR 
to  the  Portugueze ;  and  Capt.  Dampier  told  him,  he  might  take  his  Thb^ii 
and  go  where  he  pleas'd.  Accordingly  the  next  day  he  w"  have  goae 
ashore ;  but  Capt.  Dampier  w^"*  not  let  him,  but  took  him,  and  ty'd  \m 
Hands  behind  him :  But  towards  the  Evening,  one  of  our  men  cat  hii 
Hands  loose ;  and  about  ten  at  Night,  he  and  eight  more  of  our  men  put 
their  Chests  and  Cloaths  in  the  Pinnace,  and  desir'd  some  of  the  Ship*i 
Company  to  go  in  the  Boat  with  them,  to  bring  her  back  again ;  which 
accordingly  they  did,  Capt.  Dampier  being  in  his  Cabbin  quite  drunk. 

Fourthly, — He  says  he  mentions  only  the  two  Actions  of  the  Voy^ 
on  which  depends  the  Miscarriage  of  the  whole,  by  the  Men's  Disorder. 

To  which  I  answer.  That  the  Miscarriage  of  the   Voyage  depeodi 
wholly  on  the  Want  of  Courage  and  Conduct  in  the  Commander.     AsfiBr 
the  French  Ship,  that  we  engag'd  near  the  Island  Juan  de  Femando'i, 'tii 
true,  we  chased  her  all  the  Afternoon,  and  fetch'd  upon  her ;  but  taking  her 
to  be  an   European  Ship,  (as  Capt.  Dampier  says  in  his  own  scandakoi 
Vindication)  he  did  not  care  to  engage  her,  (he  believing,  that  she  might  haie 
Guns  on  Board,  to  which  he  always  had  a  natural  Aversion  ;  and  besides, art  ; 
knowing  how  to  behave  himself,  or  work  his  Ship  in  Time  of  EngageneBt, 
as  it  plainly  appear'd  afterwards).     Having  chas'd  this  Ship  all  Night,  bthe 
Morning  our  Consort  came  first  up  with  her,  and  gave  her  a  Broadside  or 
two ;  but  finding  her  to  be  a  Ship  of  greater  Force  than  his  was,  he  sooi 
shear'd  off,  and  shortened  Sail,  which  was  the  Occasion  of  his  falling  asters; 
and  now  it  being  left  to  the  courageous  Capt.  Dampier,  to  dispute  the  De- 
cision of  the  Victory,  he,  as  soon  as  we  came  within  Gun-shot  of  the  Enemyi 

586 


JOHN   WELBE'S   ANSWER 

eaatminit  to  iJiarien  Sail ;  but,  by  tht  PersuMtoni  or  the  Officer*. 

aDd  run  ntotig  her  Side,  often  asking  hii  men,  whether  lie  wan  near 

Ct|<T.  Pampier  i*  pkan'il  to  my  in  liti  own  Vindication,  that  after 

ing'H  Mtrral  Btcudsides  with  the  enemy,  wherein  several  of  our 

lili'd  and  wounded,  that  hii  Men  run  down  olf  the  Deck,  and  made 

Jig  of  it. 

:i  tku  I  aniwer,  that  none  of  our  Men  quitied  their  Poeii,  during  the 

of  Enga^cnienl,  except  Capt.  Dampicr  himielf,  who  the  whole  Time 

Eliga|[etnrtii,  nrilhcr  eticourag'd  his  Men,  nof  gave  any  tegular  Command, 

b  Maaltf  rei^uirciJ  from  a  Commander  at  tuch  Times ;   but  ilood  upon  the 

marter-l>irck  hchiod  a  good   Barricado,  which  he  had  order'd  to  be  made 

■  firdi.  Rug*.  Pillow*,  Blankets,  etc.  to  defend  him  fioin  the  amall  «hot  of 

■•  Eonay  i   where  he  itood  with  hi<  Fuire  in  hi>  Hand,  and  neier  lo  much 

m  look  C»r«  to  bare  the  Quaiter-Deck  Gune  and  Patlareroa  iir'd.      And 

■beilu  he  uya,  he  could  have  boarded  her,  and  carry 'd  her,  tt  is  probably 

trae  :  but  he  wai  ra  far  from  intending  it,  that   he  call'd  out  to  make  Sail, 

br  Tear  the  littciny  ihould  clap  u»  oo   Board,  and  lake  us ;   which  was  the 

6nt  Wo(d  that  I  hi-.trd  him  tpcjik  during  ihe  Engagement;  and  lo  accord- 

tegly  wr  ih(er*d  ojf  from  her,  and  lay  by,  'till  our  Coniort  came  up  ;  and 

both  Shipt  Companies  would  fain  have  attack'd  her  agiiin,  knowing 

take  her,  that  ihe  w"  discover  our  being  in   the  Seas,  to 

Spattiardi.  which  w*^  cooncquently  frustrate  our  De«igni  on  the  Coast  of 

(m  Mcordingly  it  afterwards  happcn'd)  but  Capi.  Dampicr  w'"  not 

to  ii.     And  afterward*  meeting  her  ihe  lecood  Time  off  Lima, 

oar  Mn  briog  in  Health,  and  both  Ships  Compaoiet  willing  to  tight  her 

for  the  afoietaid  Reasons,  Capt.  Dampier  w''*  in  do  wi*e  consent  to 

hot  calling  for  the  Doctor,  ask'd  him.  If  he  c''  make  any  more  Men,  in 

should  engage  thU  Ship,  and  lose  any !     But  the  Doctor  told  him, 

c*'  not  make  Mm  ;   yet  he  w'"*  do  his  Endeavour  to  pteaerre  those 

lud,   if  he  should  have  any  wounded.      Upon  which   Answer,  the  Capl. 

(It  la  stand  to  Sea,  and  w*"'  in  no  wise  Content  to  hazard  his  Peraon 

:ottd  l-DgigrmeDt.     U|ion  which,  one  of  our  Men  told  him  to  hii 

\  hf  WW  a  Coward,  and  ask'd  him,  Whether  he  came  to  tho«c  P«ru  of 

r  Wnrid  to  fi^hi,  or  Dot  ?     And  he  reply'd,  He  did  not  come  to  fight  i 

be  knrw  where  to  make  a  Voyage,  without  fit;hling. 

LikewiK  Capi.  Dampicr  lays,  in  hi*  own  Vir>dication,  that  he  could 

r  pK  ^500,000,  if  he   had  kept  hi*    Qoais,  which    were   then   lo*i. 

ifa  H  bin  ■  very  slender  Gxcute  of  Captain  Dampier'*  :  for  the  very  next 

Rafier  that  he  refused  to  tight  the  French  sliip  off  of  Lima,  We  took  a 
of  Ifo  Toiu,  which  had  two  Boats;  and  six  Days  after,  we  took 
Btber  Ship  of  too  Tuns,  which  had  a  large  Boat  likewiae:  *o  that  it 
"  MM  be  for  want  of  Boats,  that  he  fail'd  in  his  Deaigo,  but  only  hi*  not 
mg  «bere  to  light  of  such  a  considerable  Sum  of  Money,  afirr  he  wai 
•cr'd  on  the  Ooiit,  fwhich  he  muit  bbme  himself  for.)     He  likewise 
that  he  nnrr  heard  of  any  Cochinrel,  (hat  wa*  on  Board  the  second 
;  vbkh  it  ftlne;   for  I  heatil  tpveral  of  the  Ship's  Company  tell  him 
It.  «nd  WW  on  llojrd  the  S)<ip  myself,  and   saw  some  of  the  Cochinecl ; 
1  cm  give  no  Account  of  what  yuanii'y  ihrre  was  on  Board,  becaute  she 
a  dceji  loaden  Ship,  and  we  were  not  allow'd  th*  Liberty  to  learch 

587 


I 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

her  ;  so  that  I  cannot  tell  what  more  yaluable  Goods  she  might  have  on  Board. 
I  w"  willingly  know  what  Reasons  Capt.  Dampier  can  give  for  his  taking 
of  Prizes,  and  discharging  of  them,  without  ransoming  or  searching  of  tbem. 

He  allows  some  Part  of  the  Story  of  the  Obser?ator's  Ship  and  the 
Monkey,  to  be  true ;  but  says,  he  knew  that  the  Ship's  Company  had  kft 
the  Ship,  which  if  he  did,  what  was  his  Reason,  as  soon  as  we  came  aloDg 
her  Side,  for  hailing  of  her  himself,  when  there  was  none  but  his  Brother 
Captain  (the  Monkey)  on  Board  to  answer  him  ? 

Likewise  he  denies,  that  he  order'd  the  Indian  Canoe,  that  hailed  u 
in  the  Bark,  to  be  fir'd  at,  which  is  false :  for  it  was  by  his  own  Order ; 
which,  together  with  his  ill  Conduct  in  anchoring  so  often,  when  there  wai 
no  Occasion  for  it,  and  making  so  much  Delay  in  that  Attempt,  that  gafe 
the  Spaniards  an  Opportunity  of  discovering  us,  and  so  frustrated  that  Desiga. 

He  also  pretends,  that  he  had  evident  Proof,  that  the  Ship  which  we  took 
in  the  Bay  of  Panama,  loaden  with  Flower,  had  landed  her  money  at  Truxillo. 

To  this  I  answer,  that  as  soon  as  the  Capt.  of  the  Spanish  Ship  came  oo 
Board  of  us,  being  an  old  Commander,  and  well  acquainted  with  the  Ways 
of  the  Buckaneers  of  America,  he  asked  Capt«  Dampier,  Who  he  was? 
Whether  a  Man  of  War,  or  a  Pirate  ?  Capt.  Dampier  told  him,  he  had  a 
Commission  for  what  he  did ;  and  then  asking.  If  he  had  any  Money  oo 
Board  ?  To  which  the  Spanish  Captain  answered  him.  If  he  found  any 
Money  on  Board,  except  what  he  gave  him  an  Account  of,  which  was  hot 
very  little,  he  w^^  give  him  leave  to  hang  him  at  the  Yard-Arm :  for,  said 
he,  hearing  of  your  being  in  the  Seas,  by  the  French  Ship  that  you  fought 
with  near  the  Island  of  Juan  de  Fernando's,  I  put  all  my  money  ashore  at 
Truxillo,  and  so  put  to  Sea,  being  in  hopes  to  miss  you.  This  is  all  the 
evident  Proof  that  Capt.  Dampier  had  of  their  Money  being  landed  at 
Truxillo ;  which  is  no  Proof  at  all ;  for  the  Spanish  Capuin  knew  ferj 
well,  that  Captain  Dampier  having  a  Commission,  w^^  be  oblig'd,  at  his 
Return,  to  give  an  Account  of  his  Voyage,  and  had  no  Power  to  punish  him, 
if  he  told  him  any  Lies,  he  being  a  Prisoner  of  War  :  But  on  the  contrary, 
if  we  had  been  Pirates,  he  knew  he  must  expect  no  Mercy,  if  he  gave  any 
wrong  Account.  I  was  on  Board  this  Prize  my  self  several  Times,  and 
was  told  by  some  of  the  Prisoners,  that  there  was  $80,000  hid  in  the  Ron 
of  the  Ship ;  and  I  sent  Captain  Dampier  Word  of  it :  but  I  c*^  not  have 
the  Liberty  to  search  her,  Capt.  Dampier  putting  so  much  Confidence  io 
the  Spanish  Captain's  word. 

The  Reasons  that  he  gives  for  his  not  taking  the  $50,000,  that  was 
proffer'd  him  for  the  Ransom  of  this  Ship,  are  but  very  slender  and  weak. 
In  the  first  Place,  he  says.  He  had  no  convenient  Road  to  ride  in ;  this  is 
a  wilful  Mistake  of  Captain  Dampier's,  for  there  was  Port  Pinas,  in  the 
Latitude  of  7  Degrees  North,  which  is  a  very  safe  Port,  and  good  Anchor- 
ing, it  being  a  Place  of  no  Trade  ;  neither  is  there  any  Inhabitants,  except  a 
few  Indians,  it  being  a  good  Place  for  Ships  to  get  Wood  and  Water  at. 
When  we  took  this  Prize,  we  were  lying  at  an  Anchor  at  Point  Garrachina, 
which  lies  in  the  Latitude  of  7  Degrees  and  20  Minutes  North,  which  is 
but  20  Miles  distant  from  Port  Pinas.  I  would  willingly  know  what 
Reason  Captain  Dampier  can  give  for  his  not  going  to  this  Place  ? 

The  next  Reason  that  he  gives,   is,   his  Fear  of  loytering  away  his 

588 


— —     _  ^ '  ' 


JOHN    WELBE'S    ANSWER 

being  imiuycd  for  3  or  4  Montiu.  To  tbia  I  answer,  that  had 
wnjf'd  the  Prise  to  Port  Picas,  he  need  oot  have  lost  so 
he  did  bj  tarrying  where  he  was  with  her  1  for  he  kept  her 
*«  VHy*  ia  Cuitody,  wheo  the  Sjiauisli  CapitiiD  deslr'd  but  three  Days 
IT  to  ictcb  the  Rantom,  and  w'''  have  left  his  two  Brothers  as  Hosiagei, 
the  Ship  in  our  Cuitodjr,  'till  his  Return.  We  were  Shipi  of  good 
Be,  caoaidering  where  we  were,  hating  z6  Guns,  and  our  Coniori 
GuiM  :  besides  we  knew,  thai  there  was  no  Men  of  War  in  the  Bay  of 
■a  Bor  within  400  Leagues  of  us  :  and  therefore  consequently  could 
■TMratly  lu>e  Intelligeoce  of  our  being  in  the  B,iy. 
Likewise  on  the  Coast  of  Mexico,  we  had  an  Account  of  four  or  live 
thai  were  at  Anchor  in  the  Port  of  Cualaico,  which  ia  a  place  of  no 
tbey  were  laden  with  Silks  there  ;  yet  w'''  the  Captain  in  no  wi«e  be 
'  to  let  ut  go  in  and  fetch  them,  which  we  might  vcty  easily  have 

H«  o»*d  sonietimet  to  call  the  Officers  aft  to  a  Council  of  War.  Now, 
BMial  io  a  Council  of  Wat  for  the  youngett  OlTicer  lo  give  liia  Opinion 
:  but,  to  the  contrary,  Capt.  Dampier  w'**  alw,iyB  givi-  hii  own  Opinion 
t  BOid  ibcD,  if  any  of  the  Officers  gave  their  Opinion  contrary  10  liii, 
v^  Ay  out  in  a  PaMion.  and  say.  If  you  know  better  than  I  do,  take 
Cbarec  of  the  Ship.  He  was  alwayt  a  Man  to  much  sclf-conceiicd, 
,  be  w**  Drrer  hear  any  Reaaon. 

When  we  met  the  I^panish  Man  of  War,  we  got  to  the  l.eward  ol 
WK  lhtau);h  our  own  Miscarriages  (as  Capt.  Dampier  Terms  it),  but 
Bxb  hit  own  obstinate  Humour :  for  the  Night  bi'fore  we  engag'd  her, 
was  tboBi  a  League  and  an  half  to  the  Winilward  of  us,  plying  to  the 
•dward,  ai  we  were  1  bm  however,  in  the  Morning  we  were  almoit  up 
I  het,  ibx,  IS  t  believe,  twt  keeping  up  so  close  to  the  Wind  as  she 
hi  hare  done  ;  lor  I  found  afterwards  she  hel<)  as  good  a  Wind  as  we ; 
we  had  the  iVdvaotij^e  of  fore-reaching  on  her  :  We  were  then  about 
K  Lnguei  olTof  the  Shore,  ahe  wai  about  three  Points  on  our  Weather- 
tut,  above  a  League  distant.  About  to  in  the  Morning  Cant,  Dampier 
t'd  vt  to  nuke  ready  to  tack  tlie  Ship;  Upon  which  I  ask'd  him 
I  br  deMjrp'd  to  do !  He  said.  He  w'**  tack  the  Ship,  and  see  what  she 
■poai  Which  I  advised  him  not  (u  tack  the  Ship,  'till  we  had  the 
jc  of  the  Sea-Breece,  and  then  we  might  be  sure  of  getting  to  the 
■dwardofhni  but  if  we  tack'd  the  Ship  then, 
tk'*  lose  the  Advantage  of  the  Sca-Bree/e,  at 
of  her.  But  he  w'''  not  content  to  it,  but  1 
iiaidy  uck'd  it>r  Ship.  And  a>  I  said,  so  it 
aUc  lo  letch  to  the  Windward  of  her.  Bui  it  C 
Advice,  we  had  not  had  any  Occasion  lu  have  ' 

Mast,  but  might  easily  have  taken  her,  all  our   Men   being   in 
■hk,  and  very  wilting  to  engage  her. 

As  fo(  Mr.  Cteppiogton's  leaving  of  him,  il  was  Capt.  Dampirr**  own 
ifcl  br  Mr.  C'lepptngtoD  and  he,  having  tome  Wordi  about  the  Ship'* 
tarn,  At  being  very  much  worm-eaten,  the  Captain  told  him,  tlul  hr, 
M  mnnj  at  were  williag  10  go  with  him,  might  takr  the  Bark,  and  gu 
~    Ibiy  plm'd,  nd  be  ar"  give  tbem  Armt :  lor,  aayi  be,  if  I  ha**  biH 

5»9 


«  he  in 

ended  to 

do. 

d  be  Euie 

wn  Way, 

the 

ook    hit  0 

antl 

hap|*fl'd 

lur  we 

vere 

^pl,   Dam 
Crowded 

ier  had  uken 

■0  much. 

and 

CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S 

ao  or  30  Mm,  I  know  where  to  make  a  Voyage 
hit  BravidoB.  So  that  Mr.  Cleppington  did  but  1 
tend  to  justify  Mr.  Cleppington  in  carrying  iwaj 
but  only  blame  the  Capt.  for  his  ill  Conduct  in  I 

November  the  ii"*  1704,  there  being  10  of 
Capt.  Dampier  Call'd  on  Board  of  ut :  and  to 
Sataugua,  which  ii  about  twelve  League*  to  t 
■ome  Water,  and  order'd  us  to  come  to  him : 
the  Sail  he  could  from  u>,  and  toon  run  ui  out 
call'd  all  Hand*  on  the  Deck,  and  told  them, 
Prize,  had  run  away  with  her,  and  so  alter'd 
another  Place.  But  it  pleas'd  God,  on  the  2^ 
little  nearer  the  Shore  than  ordinary,  and  saw  a 
which,  we  being  but  ten  of  us,  and  had  8  Prison 
have  but  four  Muskets  to  defend  our  scItc*,  we 
on  Board  when  the  Capt.  left  ue,  and  about  la 
go  in  and  see  what  Ship  she  was,  which  accon 
great  Comfort,  found  her  to  be  our  own  Ship, 
us,  that  the  Capt.  did  it  on  purpose  to  lose  us. 

Likewise  he  says  :  that  when  we  first  saw 
standing  to  the  Westward  :  which  is  a  very  great  1 
for  she  came  from  the  Fillipin  Islands,  which 
was  hound  for  Acapulca,  which  was  to  the  East 

Likewise  he  says :  It  was  his  Mens  Fault, 
Which  is  like  the  rest  of  bis  false  Stones ;  for  1 
having  our  Larboard  Tacks  on  Board,  standing 
Easterly.  She  was  about  two  Leagues  a-head 
bow,  having  her  Star-board  Tacks  on  board,  *tx 
as  soon  as  she  came  right  Head  of  us,  she  bore 
us ;  and  a  little  before  she  came  within  Gun-s 
10  in  the  Moroing,  she  hoisted  her  Spanish  i 
the  Lewjrd,  as  a  Friend,  bclieTing  us  to  be  a  S| 
the  Officers  desir'd  the  Capt.  to  hoist  Spanis 
with  a  Gun  to  the  Leward  ;  but  he  w"  not  coi 
hoisted  an  English  Ensign,  and  fir'd  a  Sho 
perceiv'd  that  we  were  an  Enemy,  bnt  immed 
hail'd  close  upon  a  Wind,  and  so  got  to  the  Wit 
to  heave  all  her  Boats  over  Board,  and  her  Gooi 
made  a  clear  Ship :  and  got  a  teer  of  Guns  o 
having  but  two  Guns  upon  the  upper  Deck,  wh 
she  had  clear  Co  fight,  when  we  came  first  up  ' 
uck'd,  and  run  along  her  Side,  the  Men  beii 
Board  ;  but  the  Capt.  was  so  much  against  it 
order'd  the  Man  at  the  Helm  to  edge  near  he 
Board,  the  Capt.  Swore  he  w'''  shoot  the  Mai 
Head,  if  he  offer'd  to  edge  near  her.  After 
several  Shot  under  water,  one  of  the  Men  told 
was  a  sinking,  and  that  now  was  the  Time  to 
instead  of  clapping  her  00  Board,  the  Capt.  cry*< 


JOHN   WELBE'S    ANSWER 

here  u  th«  Canoe?  And  wa*  tor  getting  into  the  Boat  to  save  hii  Life, 
itew'd  whai  Man  of  Courage  and  Conduct  he  wag.  But  we  thear- 
[  off  from  her,  the  Carpeotcr  itopp'd  the  LeAks.  After  which,  the 
M.  ordn'd  u*  to  iLiDd  otT  from  hrr,  which  accordingly  wc  did  :  all  the 
if'$  Com[iaDy  being  exceedingly  vcx'd  at  ibe  Capt.iin'K  ill  Conduct.  We 
od  about  two  Leagues  off  from  her  ;  and  then  the  Captain  «aid,  Well, 
nxleaim,  t  will  not  lay,  »  Johny  Armsirorg  said,  I'sc  Uy  me  down  and 
•d  ■  while  ;  but  I  will  Uy  me  down  and  sleep  a  while :  but  he  Ibrgot  to 
kc  again,  'till  7  or  li  a  cluck  the  next  Morning.  He  never  so  much  as 
i  iBj  Ordcii,  with  the  Officers,  what  they  shou'd  do;  but  set  a  Centry 
his  Cabiun- Door,  that  no  Body  ihou'd  disturb  him.  And  whereas  he 
L,  that  the  Men  loii  him  in  the  Night,  it  is  false  i  for  we  were  in  Sight 
brrr  the  next  Morning,  and  he  order'd  us  to  steer  away  directly  from 
.  Now,  if  to  be  thai  Capt.  Dampiec  w'^  have  done  as  the  Officers 
lii'il  him,  which  was,  when  we  brst  came  Up  with  her,  to  have  hoisted 
taoA  Colours,  and  tir'd  a  Gun  10  the  Leward,  as  a  Friend,  we  might 
V  run  along  her  Side,  she  not  suspecting  us  to  be  an  F.nemy ;  and  then 
d  oor  lingliih  Coloun,  and  gaie  her  a  Broad-side,  and  a  Volley  of 
i  which  w'''  have  been  a  great  Surprize  to  them,  and  so  ctapp'd 
r  on  Board  :  In  the  Confusion,  we  might  very  easily  have  taken  her.  .  . .' 
fhti  kfiet  having  fought  tlie  Acapuico  Ship,  all  the  Ship's  Company 
'm  tir'd  of  ihcir  bad  Fortune,  and  the  Captain  s  ill  Manugrmtnt,  (a>  they 
n  d  k)  were  fur  staying  no  longer  in  these  Seat ;  but,  as  long  as  they  had 
niaiiNU^  was  for  going  tu  the  liast  Indies,  in  order  to  get  Home.  But 
E  C«p(.  not  cotuentine,  saying,  th^t  it  was  100  soon  for  the  Season,  desir'd 
B  to  Kay  but  SIX  Weeks  longer,  in  which  Time  he  hop'd  to  gci  somc- 
1  least,  a  belter  Ship  ;  for  he  proicsled  against  venturing  in  the 
,  Gfargf,  she  being  so  very  leaky;  and  a*  for  the  Bafk,  she  was  too 
'v  to  cuTy  U)  all  (as  he  said  : )  To  which  they  consented  ( I  niean  the 
w]  ID  stay  with  him,  upon  Condition  he  w''^  stay  no  lunger  than  (he  said 
Wirkat  which  he  did.  After  which,  we  made  the  most  sail  wc  could 
4  Acapulco,  olTof  which  Place  we  lay  tu  see  if  we  e'"*  meet  with  any 
lip  nxBtag  from  the  Coast  ol  Peru,  to  trade  with  the  Acapulco  Ship,  aa 
nid  wa*  usual :  but  not  meeting  with  any,  we  lail'd  farther  along  the 
^  to  lltf  I--Bstwa(d,  in  older  10  look  into  all  the  Harbours,  as  we  Iiasa'd 
.  Bui  vheiher  by  out  Capiain's  usual  Fear  ol  going  too  near  the  •Nhore, 
otber  Reasons  known  ro  no  IWy  but  himselfi  we  never  look'd  into  any. 
Jainaiy  the  ft'",  M  ihicc  a  Clock  in  the  Aftrrnoon,  the  Captain  call'd 
tbe  IhMtswain  frum  the  ^uariei-Deck,  to  cjII  all  Hands  upon  Deck, 
hen  he  wk'd,  Who  w"  stay  with  him  10  get  Money  ?  For  hia  Pan,  he 
■w  with  thdt  Den)>n,  and  did  not  iniviid  lo  go  out  of  thcra  Seas,  'till  he 
II  Some.  And  all  those  that  w'''  stay  with  him,  he  had  them  come  upon 
r  Q«Htrr-I)eck  ;  and  ihosr  that  were  for  gomg  awav,  might  go  I'otwaids, 
d  Utrrc  WM  a  Bark  for  them.  Mr.  Morgan  ask'd  him,  upon  what  Account 
r  wa*  XMDg .'     That  if  he  coniinu'd  still  upon  the  tarn*  Accoom  he  came 


10  <>k<!  ihr  I 
,  ro  ha..  ,1., 


tu*n,   (liiy   will  |>i   bnndjr 


59' 


J 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S 

out  upon,  he  v'^  not  leave  him ;  but  otherwiie  he 
made  Answer,  Thai  theo  he  w"  not  rcBolve  hii 
upon  the  Queen's  Account.  Mr.  Morgan  ami 
Queen's,  but  the  Owner'*.  No  matter  for  that,  ( 
mission.  Upon  which,  a  great  many  went  aft  to 
taken,  though  he  knew  partly  most  of  them  befb 
and  others,  who  made  it  their  Business,  for  toiiK 
and  aoiuid  those  who  were  willing,  upon  condition 
they  got,  and  nothing  for  the  Owners. 

On  the  ii'"  December  1704,  the  said  Clark  i 

by  the  Captain's  Orders,  where  he  openly  spoke 

Who  w'^  stay  with  Capt.  Dampier  ?     And  that 

upon  the  same  Account  that  they  came  out 

suppose  if  they  were,  there  was  no  need  ol 

then  who  w'''  stay  with  him ;  for  if  he  hj 

than  his  Promise,  no  Body  could  force  him,  nor  tl 

on  the  contrary,  those  that  came  away,  w*^  be  ma 

In  short,  it  is  to  be  much  doubted,  if  those  thai  1 

calls   al)   Rogues,   had   not  forc'd  him   away,  wh 

under    the    Necessity    of    surrendering    themielfe 

whether  eier  he  w"  come  for  England,  or  not. 

But  to  return,  we  continu'd  sailing  along  the  St 

seeing  any  Thing,  or  looking  into  any  Harbour  w 

gel  something,  and  so  came  to  an  Anchor  in  d 

which  Time  it  was  continually  spoke  by  those  t 

they  w*^  take  the  Money  Mr.  Morgan  had,  « 

Owners,  saying — It  was  their  free  Plunder.     At 

said  :  It  not  being  mentioned  in  the  Bills  of  Lad 

the  Owners,  but  that  it  ought  to  be  dirided  amoa| 

not  consenting  to  the  forcing  of  it  from  Mr.  Morg 

Will  ss  several  other  Contests  betwixt  those  that  1 

came  away.     Captain  Dampier's  usual  Treati 

ue.  Rascal,  Son  of  a  Bitch,  and  other  such  1 

the  Occasion  of  Mr.  Bellhash's  Quarrel  last  « 

On  the  26''',  we  that  were  for  coming  away,  ha 

order  to  take  our  Part  of  Prorisions,  which  was  ei 

Veinon  being  appointed  for  that  by  Capt.  Dampiel 

for  tlicm  that  were  going  away.    After  which  to  m 

and  our  selves  from  the  Enemy,  we  took  4  Guns,  1 

Cases  of  Pistols,  and  a  Barrel  of  Powder. 
for  Robbing  or  Piracy,  we  made  the  best  of  our 
without  a  Boat,  Rigging,  Cables,  or  any  Thing  ell 
by  a  greater  Providence  than  what  Capt.  Dam[ 
Amhoyna.  For  his  Part,  he  was  a  great  Pilot,  1 
but  none  of  us  ever  had ;  and  if  he  c'^  have  he 
then  he  w'''  be  sure  none  could  give  any  Account 
Conduct,  but  the  World  must  have  been  amuz'd  w 
More  shall  be  said  of  Capuin  Dampier  hereaftei 

1   Wordi  illegible. 


LETTERS   AND   PAPERS 

n)e  rtadtr  mli  do  ^vell  to  compare  the  above  with  the  following  letter^  dated 
Au^  IC/*  1722. — The  bumble  Petition  of  Captain  John  Welbe  to  Lord 
Towmbemdy  Principal  Secretary  of  State. 

Second  Clatue. — That  there  is  another  Conspiracy  against  Your  Petitioner 
by  Mr.  Edward  Morgan,  a  Roman  Catholics  liveing  in  Bloomsbury  Square 
who  was  round  the  globe  with  Capt.  Dampire,  the  same  voyage  that  Your 
Petitioner  was,  and  was  the  death  of  the  first  Lievetennant  by  turning  him 
most  barbarously  ashore  at  the  Island  of  St.  Jago,  where  he  miserably  ended 
his  davs  with  hunger  and  greife,  and  the  said  Morgan  was  afterwards  the 
ruin  of  the  said  expedition,  and  now  endeavours  to  ruin  Your  Petitioner. 

Augf'  22,  1722. — John  Welbe  to  Mr,  Burtt^  book-keeper  to 

Mr,  Richard  Cambridge, 

Your  Master  desired  them  to  have  regard  to  Mr.  Morgan's  caractor, 
and  not  speak  disrespectfully  of  him,  etc.,  altho'  you  knew  he  was  a  Roman 
Catholicky  and  had  mind  Capt  Dampire's  Expedition,  and  was  then 
endeavouring  to  ruin  mine.  (Signed)     Jno  Welbe. 


EDITOR'S   NOTE 

The  foregoing  pages  give  the  reader  the  statemcnu  of  William  Funnell, 
Daropier's  reply  to  them,  and  John  Welbe's  answer  to  the  reply. 
Funnell's  statemenu  have  been  discredited  by  Admiral  Smyth ;  but  I 
shall  refrain  firom  attacking  Funnell  till  I  have  found  more  corroborative 
evidence  either  for  or  against  him.  Dampier's  Vindication  must  speak 
for  itself. 

As  for  Welbe's  evidence  against  Dampier,  though  it  is  plausibly  put 
forward,  and  to  some  extent  supported  by  what  we  learn  of  Dampier 
from  Fisher's  evidence  (p.  596),  it  is  made  worthless  by  the  sutemenu 
in  the  above  letters.  One  has  but  to  compare  his  aniwrr  with  the  extracts 
given  above  from  the  Townshend  MSS.,  to  see  that  he  was  a  man  of  little 
truth  and  evil  temper. 


VOL.  II.  593  2  f 


COURTS-MART 


Atrial  II,  1701.  Te  the  Secrtlary,  Hii 
Hatl'mgt  and  ImotJ  having  arrired  with  "  aair 
ol'  the  Roehaii'i  men,"  be  hope*  their  Lordthi 
on  the  lou  of  the  said  ship.     Clerk's  hand.        { 

At^utt  17,  1701.  To  the  Same,  Hai  beer 
that  the  Roehtuk't  boatswain  died  at  Barbadoc 
Dot  come  home.  Hope*  their  absence  will  not ' 
of  our  Trial  which  is  frequenily  lolicited  by  son 

( 

ICmgi  Street,  Golden  Square,  Seplemier  aj,  17 
hearty  thanlci  for  **  ye  hon''  and  favour  you  doe 
my  approaching  trialc."  Has  hia  paperi  ready, 
officers  and  as  many  of  his  men  as  he  can  ' 
Preaumei  that  it  will  be  uecestary  to  have  "  youi 
delivered  you  my  Journal  which  pleate  to  send  n 
{ 

Petlieripi.  Hopes  that  thetr  Lordships  wi 
Marual  such  Letter*  and  Evidences  as  were  ■ 
L'  Fiiher,  that  the  witnesses  may  be  there  swon 


On  September  29,  1701,  a  Coun-Martial 
mouth)  enquired  into  the  loss  of  [he  Roebuck 
giying  the  finding  of  (he  Court  have  not  been  pn 
of  the  Captain  (Dampier),  Master,  Boatswain'* 
other*  arc  to  be  seen  at  the  Record  Office  (Co 
add  nothing  to  the  information  given  by  Dampic 
except  that  "  the  leak  was  very  large,"  and  that  tl 
"in  ye  Eviniog"  of  September  23,  1700. 

Letter.  To  the  HonV  Joi'ia  Burcbel  Eif,  5 
Sir, — I  make  bould  to  trouble  yo'  Hon''  witi 
hare  been  to  enquire  where  I  may  find  more  of 
material  witnesses  for  me  in  Mr.  Fisher's  tryal. 
Three  Tun  Tavern  in  Holbourn,  Mr  Philip  Pai 
in  London  street  nere  Ratclitf  Cross,  he  belong 
not  her  name,  Mr.  Hugh  Davis  belongs  to  a  > 
name ;  Mr.  Baptist  Watson  is  as  I  am  informed 
594 


f 


COURTS-MARTIAL 


pov  OM  fa«T  ume,  M(.  John  Pary  bclooge  to  Captain  Haddock  abord  the 
mttiror,  Atrxandrr  Bral  1  canoot  here  dI'  and  at  1  sent  in  my  former  thai  I 
■irc^  lo  tu<r  besidn  my  Officer!  as  maoy  of  the  Scameo  a*  can  be  foundi 
■  nery  wK  can  uy  tuniewbat  in  the  tryall,  viz.,  Robert  Ediingtoni  Paul 
■alLiBay,  &c:  Hoablr  Sit.  I  humbly  dnire  that  I  may  have  all  ur  moit  of 
pnc  men  and  tho«e  fotmcrly  mentioned  at  the  Tcyall,  I  am  yo*  Hon''* 
I  humble  irrvant 

\  Maj  lU  JJ""  1 70  J.  H^~  D>im/>irr. 

fcl.ieutnum  George  Fiaher,  the  cau«e  of  Dampier'i  diagrace,  entered  the 
(■**  imployiDcnl  in  i<>88,  and  did  ituch  service  it)  a  gunner  at  the  relief  of 
domlerry,  "00  the  lath  of  June  l68(j"  that  he  received  a  warrant  an 
■BBer  of  the  Fimhip  Grifhon.  He  took  part  in  the  engagement  off  Beacby 
lad,  and  icrred  b  the  Royal  Oak,  the  Si.  Miihail  and  the  Albtmorlf. 
H  l£th  July  tft^a  he  wai  "  Conimiuioncd  LicuicQani  of  ye  Hoe-Huii." 
\  Hr  brought  a  number  of  accuialiont  againit  Dampier ;  the  chief  of  them 
Ibg  tbu  of  cruelly  lowardi  himietf  He  alto  accuae*  Dampier  of  being  a 
id  aniu  Of  Divigator ;  of  laying  an  abominable  plot  to  have  him  (Fithcr) 
iillllllil  .  and  of  cxcetaive  Uxity  in  maintiining  discipline. 
I  Dunpicr'i  counier-chatgei  accuied  Fithcr  {inter  alia)  of  "  tpeaktng  con- 
|M|itiKKuly  of  the  Lord*  of  the  Admiralty,"  of  *' diiobcdiencc,  impudence 
'~ll  ilircaD)"  of  altering!  the  ihip't  couric  contrary  to  orden;  of  calliOK  hii 
"  kAA  Rogue,  old  Dog,  old  Cheat  "  ;  and  of  *'  railing  a  '  " 
I  agtioai  the  Captain. " 


FORMATION  OF  LIEUTENANT  FISHFR  AGAINST 
CAPTAIN  DAMPIER,  LATK  COMMANDER  OF  THE 
-ROEBUCK" 

>  hia  Ex"*  TboDHi  Earle  of  Pembroke  and  Montgonnry  &'  Lotd 
Hi{h  Adrairall  of  England  &.'.,  ■•  matt  humbly  addmtcd.  The 
Caw  of  Lieut.  George  Fiihrr  together  with  the  SulTeringi  and 
Op^eanoiu  laid  on  him  by  hit  Uie  Comander  Cajil,  Wiliiam  Vium^et 
'n  hii  Ma*^  Ship  Her-Huti,  without  any  Cau*r,  lave  hii  laithfiilneii 
■  Ducharge  of  hit  Duty  a*  will  fully  appcjr  when  ii  thall  pleaae  your 
Ex**  to  grant  him  the  favour  of  being  'I'ytd  at  a  Court  Martiall. 

tf^SS.  He  went  voluntarily  inio  hi*  Ma""  Service,  and  wa*  made  a 
nne  in  the  Trainc  of  Artillciy  in  Ireland  and  tor  lii*  great  terticc  at  ihf 
ifeiJir  of  London  Dciry  on  the  nth  of  June  i''>f*<^  wa«  Dimchargrd  that 
nice,  and  by  leitcra  from  Major  Geocrall  Kiik  (u  iltc  Lordi  of  the 
Uonralty  recomcnded  for  prel'ermrnt  in  the  Kojal  Naty,  who  were  ple^iied 
'~  0  y'  Rcomendalion  to  warrant  him  Gunner  ol  bii  Ma'^*  fireihip  Griphoti, 
'  m  Oumberltine  Coniaiidrr. 
After  Beacbcy  head  Ln^agrmenl,  upon  Capt.  Chamber  I  ainc'i  Ceitilicaic 
'  kia  bekavii'ur  youi  Ex"*  wai  ulraacd  to  appuint  him  in  1690  Licutrnani 
■  the  Rajall  Oaie,  and  tic  thrie  Cnniioued  during  the  Command*  of  Capl. 
[,  Capu  Lee,  Cipt  Gardner,  Capt.  Five*  «Ad  S'  Gcm^c  Rooke  u  flogg. 


595 


d 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

Thence  he  was  removed  into  the  St.  Mlchaell  under  Capt.  Mundeo,  and  with 
him  afterwards  removed  into  the  Albemarle^  and  there  senred  dureing  his  and 
Capt  Fairbourne's  Coma^  of  her,  untill  the  Peace  dureing  all  which  services 
he  behaved  himselfe  as  became  his  Duty  without  any  complaint  as  by  the 
Certificates  of  his  Comanders  more  fully  appears  not  only  by  these  follow- 
ing but  by  more  in  this  Honb^*  office. 

November  i,  1698. — Then  he  was  Commissioned  Lieutenant  of  y*  Rot- 
Suck  on  Board  of  w®^  in  disscharge  of  his  Duty  he  lay  in  the  Downes,Capt. 
W"*  Dampier  Comander. 

jirticle  I . — S'  Cloudsley  Shovell  in  the  Swiftsure  came  to  an  Anchor 
in  y®  Downes  and  made  a  Signall  for  Lieutenants,  Fisher  being  then  ashoar 
with  leave  I  mediately  hired  a  Deal  Boat,  And  went  on  Board  y*^  flagg  where 
he  found  his  Commander  on  the  Quarter  Deck,  who  said  he  had  a  Secrett 
to  tell  him  in  private,  and  (having  leave)  they  two  went  into  the  Lieuteoaoti 
Cabin  and  being  alone  y*'  Capt.  said  Since  you  have  been  ashoar  there  wai 
like  to  have  been  a  Mutiny  on  Board  the  Roe^Buck  for  y*  James  Grigsea 
and  Jn.  Knight  had  been  drinking  with  the  Boatswaine  in  his  Cabin  and 
were  over  heard  by  the  Master  to  swear  that  when  they  came  to  sea  they 
would  heave  the  Master  over  Board  and  run  away  with  the  King's  Ship  as 

the  Ma*  Jacob  Hews  had  acquainted  him  adding  he  did  not  like  M' 

our  Boatswaine,  and  demanded  Fisher's  advice  in  the  Case.  Fisher 
answered  it  was  proper  to  acquaint  the  flagg  thereof,  which  the  Capt.  promised 
to  do  but  did  not,  tho^  Fisher  Reminded  him  severall  times  thereof. 

November  ^th^  (2). — At  5  at  Night  Capt.  Jumper,  Captaine  Cleasbte 
and  S'  Cloudsley's  Secretary  came  on  Board  the  Rot^Buck  with  an  order  to 
Examine  if  our  Crew  were  Seamen  ;  as  they  were  comeing  on  Board,  Fisher 
Comanded  the  Boatswaine  to  order  the  Pinnace  a  Stern  out  of  their  wsyi 
but  he  answered  with  an  Oath  he  would  not  obey  his  Comands  when  the 
Capt.  was  on  Board,  so  that  the  Capt.  and  Secretary  was  forced  to  come  over 
the  Boate  to  come  in,  before  whom  Fisher  Complained  to  his  Capt.,  who  was 
told  by  them,  that  he  ought  to  see  that  Fisher  should  be  protected  in  his 
Commands  and  with  all  reprimanded  the  Boatswaine. 

November  ijthf  (3). — This  morning  Fisher  moved  the  Capt.  to  Punish 
James  Grigsen  still  finding  him  a  refractory  and  dangerous  Fellow,  y*  Capt 
seemed  unwilling,  untill  Fisher  told  him  the  Lords  of  y^  Admiralty  ought 
to  be  acquainted  with  it ;  Then  he  ordered  Fisher  to  see  him  made  fast  to 
the  Gang-way  which  he  did,  and  in  an  hour  he  was  set  Loose  without  any 
punishment,  Fisher  told  the  Capt.  it  would  give  an  ill  Example  if  he  was 
not  punished  and  sent  ashoar ; 

Then  the  Captaine  ordered  him  to  be  made  fast  a  second  time,  and  that 
Fisher  should  order  the  Boatswaine  to  give  him  6  Blows  on  his  back  with 
all  his  Cloaths  on,  which  was  done,  and  the  Captaine  said  he  would  tume 
him  and  John  Knight  on  shoar  just  before  the  ship  sailed,  Fisher  then 
answered  he  would  goe  on  Board  the  Comadore  to  get  2  Men  in  their 
Roomes. 

December  ^tb, — S'  Cloudesley  Shovell  came  into  the  Downes  from  H(J- 
land,  and  Fisher  moved  the  Captaine  to  Complaine  of  these  Men  to  S' 
Cloudesley,  but  he  Cou'd  not  prevaile. 

December  6tL — The  Flagg  was  Struck  on  Board  the  Swft'Sure  and  thi 

596 


COURTS-MARTIAL 

Board   the 


,  c.,.,. 


Bfaumont 
Burlington, 


Hoyued 
whhhcr  Fiiher  wtni  and  acquainted   1 
■uiuiu  Fairtioroc  with  the  thtcMened  Mutiny,  desireing  v 

o(  the  »'■  Grigien  and  Knight,  and  the  word  being  given  three  gooa 

tbonieltet,  which  Fisher  acquainted  the  Captaine  with,  who 

I  before,  ihit  he  would   xcnil  them   ashtiar  when  the  shipp  wna 

Swleing,  and  t)ot  before,  to  avoid  a  Noise;   Notwilhitanding   which, 

bcMg  hit  Old  Acc|U3inunce,  he  carried  them  to  tea. 

JmtMary  iSii,    169^.   (4). — I,a«t   Night  as  walking  on  the   Deck  with 

Ca|itttac  and  Captainci  Clerk,  Fisher  wai  taken  ill,  ard  3  Dropi  of 

I  frU  fiom  hii  Nose  on  his  hand,  and  fainting,  went  to  his  Cabbin, 

fat  the  Dr.,  and  was  Lett  Blood,  and  puit  into  a  Sweat,  but  Consider- 

■  lud  1   Watches  that  night,  sent  for  the    Cheife    Mate   and   aakt 

by  hit  Reconing  the  ihipp  wai,  but  he  Cou'd  not  tell,  Fisher  said  by 

Rccoaing  they  were  within  i  J  Lcaguet  of  Algoranca,  and  Wondred  that 

be  BOt   the  Capuine   had   ordered  to   Look  out  for  Land,  Advising 

to  Shonen  S^ilr  and  keep  a  good  Look  out,  which  he  jironiitcd  to 

«t  6  Next  Morning  wee  made  the  Idaod   Lanceratta  alxiut  8  Lejgurt 

ig  S.E.,  at  which  the  Capiainc  and  Master  were  Much  Suipiised, 

60  Leagues  out  of  their  Reckoning. 

JO/A,  (s). — They  came  to  an   Anchor  in  .Sancla  Cru/  Roade, 

the  Exftrrimml  Galley,  Captaine  Trevars  Comandcr,  who  Came 

ad  Desired  a  Hogihead  of  Small  Deer,  which  the  Capiainc  granted, 

mkred  Fiiber  to  km  it  done.      Fisher  thereupon  ordered  the  Cooper  to 

k  a  Bati,  and  a*  he  was  going  to  do  it  mett  the  Puraer  on  ihe  Deck, 

Tbfntvurd    to   break  his  head  if  he  obeyed  l'*iiihera  order  thrr«!n> 

crrupon  before  Captainc  Trevart  Conipbined  to  his  Commander, 

to   bear   him   out   in   his  Coinands.  in   which  Capuine  Treren 

bun,  taying,  if  you  Sutfer  your  Lieutenant  to  be  thus  used  it  may 

of  111  Coitscijuetice  in  your  Voyage.     NcvenheleM  hia  Commander  would 

k  do  him  Justice  therein,  u  appears  by  Capuine  Trevors  Affidavit  ready 

be  prodnccd. 

Jmmmj  j(»/,  (fi). — -This  Morning  ihe  Captaine,  Docior,  .ind  l*uiMr 
niMboir,  and  the  Captainc  gave  Fisher  Lhvc  tofjo  Aiboar  »l»u,  who  did, 
A  FkUkt  Cjtried  some  Letters  to  Merchants  to  he  Sent  [o  I'ingland  by 
e  &tsi  ahipp,  and  coming  to  one  Mr.  Hopper,  Merchant,  he  (here  found 
I  Captainr,  Doctor,  Puricr,  Capti.  Gierke  and  James  Barnjhy  at  the  wid 
Fiiber  Delivered  hia  LeiKra  and  waa  returning,  iwt  the 
lanted  him  to  stay  and  dine  with  him,  he  accepted  it,  a*  they  stayed 
[Cther  >o(ill  tl  at  Night,  aitd  in  their  retume  the  Cspt.  in  a  very  MoroM 
met  said  to  Fiiher  t>e  bad  better  kia*  the  Bruich  of  hi*  Young  Men  ihra 
Meddle  wTih  them,  which  Sui)>ri>ed  Fisher,  at  not  knowing  bis  mnniagt 
d  MkiBf  hb  Meaning,  he  ni'I  Fisher  had  he^ten  jainn  Oarasby  then 
IWM  [  Fitbrr  dcneyed  it,  or  that  he  ever  Threatened  10  Beat  him,  and 
imb*  kiauelfe  oWi>ed  the  same,  and  tlut  Fiaher  had  been  very  kind  la 
D.  Nolwiihatanding  which  the  Captitoe  said  he  would  putt  Fisher  in 
BM  whets  he  came  cm  Board.  Fiiher  rcplyed  he  wsi  ncn  wsv  fir  fliim  the 
of  ibe  Admiralty  but  ihry  would  have  notice  ot  hu  duings,  uimn  iliis 
Fisher  in  ihr  Uar  to  cane  ILrnaliy,  which  it  he  had 

597 


I 
I 


I 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

done,  Fisher  perceiving  their  Intent  was  to  draw  and  Runn  him  Through  in 
the  SculHe  as  afterwards  appear' d ;  Comeing  to  the  Waterside  the  Captaine 
went  into  the  Castle  to  the  Governour,  and  Fisher  went  on  Board  and  the 
Gierke  with  him,  when  he  Came  into  the  Steerage  he  told  the  Officers  they 
would  see  him  in  Irons  when  the  Capt.  Came  on  Board,  why  said  they, 
what  have  you  done,  nothing  said  Fisher,  the  Clerke  replyed,  no  he  should 
not,  why  said  Fisher,  are  you  Capuine,  gett  you  out  of  the  Steerage.  Thii 
Clerke  was  a  Base  Impudent  fellow,  and  would  frequently  say  the  shipp 
would  not  goe  home  this  7  Yeares,  and  Sometime  that  Shee  would  oerer 
goe  home. 

February  znd^  (7). — About  Noone,  Fisher  being  Sitting  on  the  Quarter 
Deck,  Orders  were  given  for  two  Puncheons  of  Beefe  to  be  Hoysted  out  of 
the  Hold  and  sent  ashoar  to  Mr.  Hopper,  a  Merchant.  The  Captaioci 
Clarke  came  to  Fisher  and  askt  him  if  he  did  not  hear  the  Shipp  Coropaoj 
Complaine  of  their  Provisions  goeing  a  Shoar  to  be  sold,  which  thenueivft 
should  want,  Fisher  Bid  him  goe  downe  and  acquaint  the  Captaine  of  it, 
which  he  did,  and  comeing  back  said,  the  Captaine  tooke  no  Notice  of  it. 
Then  Fisher  went  downe  and  told  the  Captaine,  the  Consequence  thereof  if 
they  came  to  want  Provisions,  upon  which  it  was  Stopt.  But  Fisher  fouod 
reason  to  beleive  this  was  a  Trick  betwixt  the  Captaine  and  his  Clarke  to 
putt  the  Purser  upon  Selling  of  Provisions  to  Create  a  Differance  betwixt 
the  Purser  and  him  for  the  better  Carrying  on  his  greater  and  most  Villanoos 
designes  w***  Safety. 

February  '^rd^  (8). — This  afternoon  the  Shipp  Weighed  fh>m  Sancu  Cruz 
Road.  When  under  Saile  James  Barnaby  came  to  Fisher  and  told  him  be 
had  saved  his  life ;  how  said  Fisher,  Barnaby  replyed,  Andrew  Gastier  the 
Spanjard  on  Board  told  his  Countreymen  on  Shoare  you  had  beatd  and  used 
him  Barbarously,  and  desired  their  Assistance  to  kill  you  when  on  Shoare, 
which  they  promised  to  do,  and  I  understanding  Spanish  and  hearing  this, 
Told  the  Spanjards  all  he  had  said  of  you  was  false  to  my  knowledge,  bat 
on  all  Occasions  the  contrary,  upon  which  the  Spanjards  turned  him  out  of 
their  Company.  Fisher  acquainted  the  Captaine  herewith,  who  made 
Slight  of  it,  and  Called  him  fx>oll  for  believing  it.  But  this  very  Spanjard 
afterwards  Leaving  the  Shipp  at  Brazille,  Confisst  the  whole  Matter,  and 
that  it  was  the  Captaine  and  his  Clarke  who  had  Sett  him  upon  it  to  take 
away  Fisher's  Life,  and  that  he  had  done  it  if  Barnaby  had  not  prevented 
him. 

February  i  lib, — The  Shipp  Anchored  in  the  Bay  of  the  Isle  of  May 
where  they  found  Mr.  Barfoot,  Master  of  the  Ncutport  of  London,  to 
whome  the  Purser  Sold  Provisions  for  Wine  and  Brandy,  and  becauie 
Fisher  would  not  take  a  part  of  it  nor  be  concerned  in  it  he  was  very  mucli 
Dissturbed  and  Angry. 

February  \*jtb^  (9). — About  Noon  the  Shipp  sailed  out  of  May  Roadc 
for  the  Island  of  St.  lago,  which  is  about  5  Leagues  over  ;  it  being  th( 
Masters  first  Watch,  Fisher  went  to  Sleep,  but  at  3  in  y*  Morning,  hearioj 
the  Men  cry  out  Land,  presently  got  up  on  y®  Quarter  Deck  and  Looking 
under  the  Lee  of  the  Maine  Saile  Saw  the  wash  of  the  Shoare  and  Askt  tb< 
Captaine  what  he  Designed  to  doe ;  he  Answered  (as  if  Crying)  he  did  001 
know  what  the  Master  Designed  ;  said  Fisher  if  you  Lett  him  do  what  b< 

598 


COURTS-MARTIAL 

he  will  Knock  the  Kiags  Shipp  at  head,  the  Master  being  then  So 

Iniiik  hr  coulil  not  Marxt  on  h<a  Leggs.     The  Captainc  Walked  off  ihe 

kaner  Deck  and  FinliM  urdi'mi  [lie  Helm   alt   Lre,  and  if  the  ehipp  had 

^  ^laTc^l  the  had  run  Ai-hoar,  »hce  havein^  all  the  imall  Sailes  Sett  at  y' 

mr  time. 

Feinurt  t^rJ,  (lo),  — Being  the  2d  Day  of  her  SnJIcing  from  St.    lago 

the  cTcning  the  Capiaine  ask't   Finher  to  Clubb  for  a  Bowie  of  Punch, 

i  which    he    Conaenied,   the   Capuinc  ....  Purser  and    Gierke  only 

ring  Pfrtmt :  whil*t  drinking  it  the  CapiAine  «aid  bad  he  Comnianded  one 

F  tbe    Kingi  Shipp)  in   the    Late   Warr    all    French    Men   he   Took    in 

Wfi teeii  we  would  have  Tyed   back   to  back   and   Thrown   over  Board, 

ldi«g  'aU   the    Kng   Captoines    were   fouls,  they   did   not  do  it.      Fiiher 

bhcd  tl  wa-  n   Tery   Cruell   thought  and   th.it   the   Frrnch  would   have 

^Bhkrf  it,  but  he  (Wore  he  would  have  done  it. 

K^Ths Doctor  uid  it  wai  barbarously  Intended. 

■  ^Ilw  CqiuiDe  answered  it  would  have  made  a  Quick  End  of  the  Warr. 

brr  nsd  it  would  have  rather  Prolonged  it  and  Created  a  Irreconcileable 

red,  ud  that  if  all   Nations  would  give  noc  protection   to   Pirates,   but 

If  ibcm  W  soon  as  taken   it   would   be   of  good  service   to   all  Traders 

aad.     The  Captaine    Demanded    what    he    ment    by    Pyrates,    Fiiher 

nwred  *ucb  an  Freryc  and  hi>  men  were  ;  be  iworc  if  he  mctt  with  any  vf 

dd  not  hurl   them,  nor  a  hairc  of  y*"  heads.      Fiiher  answered 

■I  he  bcittg  now  one  of  the  King»  Captaines  and  h^d  the   Kings  Commii- 

I  onght  a*  he  Concrifed  wherever  he  found  Such,  to  secure  them  and 

ig  tbrin  to  Juiticc.     't'he  Capt.  kept  his  word  as  will  appear  hereafter. 

Fiirwarj  tffi,  (l  i>~This  Evening  Fisher  Drinking  a  Bowie  of  Punch 

k  the  dpiainc  ia  his  Cibbin  there  was  also  Doctor,  Purser  and  Clarke, 

C«ptaine  sent  for  -Fames  Grigjon  down,  and  laid,  Mr.  Gngion  I  Beg  y' 

dua  for   Puniihing   you  in  the   Downei,  liut  it  was  to  picatc  one  Man, 

brr  hivmg  the  Bowie  in  hii  hand,  and  much  surprised  and  Concerned  to 

r  his  Capt.   Brgg  sn   Base  a  lellows  Pardon   whome  he   knew  to   be   a 

Mm,  and  ai  is  before  uid  himselfe  Complained  off  to  Fisher  in 

DiiwiiM,  and  Ask't  his  Advice  what  to  do  with  him  and  at   whose 

iMIfiUiiM  be  wa*  Punished,   Sett  the    Bowie   downe,   fmlled   olf  his   batt 

It  MytDg  iKie  wotde,  witlidrew  into  his  owne  Cabbin  and   reflected  on 

ikiofi  had  pissed  perticularly  what  the  CIcrkc  had  uid,  Vii'  That 

bvf  would  find  Captaine  Dampier  another  sort  of  a  Man  when  he  came 

'      other  «ide  the   I-'({uinoctall   Line,  That  it   would  be  a   Long  time 

Ihe  Shipp  vou'd  got  home,  which  Fisher  often  told  the  Ciptaiiw  who 

favn  would  uke  any  notice  of  it  to  his  Clarke,  but  upheld  him  in  it  and  as 

FUicf  had  reason  to  b'leive  did  .Send  bit  Clerke  often  amons  the  Shippt 

h*«,  to  fathom  thriie  Inclination*  and  how  they  were  Inclined  to  a   Long 

toftit  and  to  joyne  with  him  into  any  Villanoui  Action. 

M«ftt  ^th,  (ii).  "Walking  with  the  Captaine  on  the  Quarter  Deck, 

ibn  Aak't  him  what  Place  on  the  Cnaati  of  Braulle  he  Desifincd  to  go 

to  Ptnumbuck  or  Baja,  he  answered  he  had  not  resolved,  But  ai  a  Secrerl 

_|uin(H)   him,  That   Mr.  Flamstod   the  great   Maihrmatiiion  told  him  in 

Ei^lbwl  thai  wbcs  he  Caow  to  the  Coast  of  Braiille  his  men  would  Mutiny, 

BpfcW  ltipty«J  he  cou'd  IKK  beleevt  any  such  Uiing,  for  by  hta  obaerviiian 


I 
I 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 

all  his  officers  and  men  seemed  very  Easie  and  quiett ;  well  says  he,  Yoa 
will  see  it  when  you  come  there. 

March  ^th^  (^S)* — Happened  some  words  Betwixt  Fisher  and  the 
Purser  concerning  1 500  weight  of  Bread  which  had  received  wett  and  was 
ordered  downe  in  the  Powder  Roome  which  was  a  Damp  place,  and  the 
Gunner  had  spoke  severall  times  to  the  Purser  to  remove  it  and  spend  it 
first,  but  he  would  not  do  it,  upon  which  the  Gunner  had  complained  to 
Fisher  and  that  the  Bread  would  be  Spoyled,  and  Fisher  to  the  Purser,  who 
still  answered  if  it  was  spoild  he  would  pay  it.  Fisher  then  Complained  to 
the  Captaine,  the  Purser  present,  who  gave  the  same  answer,  and  told  Fisher 
it  was  none  of  his  business.  Railed  and  Called  him  Knave  Rogue  &^.,  The 
Captaine  Countenanceing  him  therein. 

March  6tby(i^), — Fisher  with  the  Doctor  and  Purser  being  of  die 
Captaines  Mess,  and  at  Dinner,  the  Capt.  tooke  in  his  Gierke ;  whiles  at 
Table  y^  Purser  said  the  Carpenter  owed  him  eighteen  shillings  which  be 
would  not  pay,  would  therefore  putt  it  Downe  in  the  Shipp  Booke.  The 
Captaine  not  understanding  the  Methods  of  the  Navie,  Fisher  said  y^ 
!  .*  Purser  ought  not  to  do  it,  nor  cou'd  answer  it,  and  if  the  Carpenter  should 

Complaine  of  it  at  pay  Table,  it  would  ruine  him,  but  the Purser  and 

Clerke  most  rudely  told  him,  he  Lyed,  upon  which  he  Desired  to  goe  out  of 
the  Captaines  Mess  and  after  shewed  him  his  Instructions,  by  w^^  it  appeared 
to  be  true  as  Fisher  had  said.  The  Cap^^*  Replyed  he  Could  not  Comply 
with  those  Instructions. 

Three  or  4  Day  after  the  Gunner  Complain'd  to  the  Cap**  y*  the 
X  500  Weight  of  Bread  was  all  spoild  and  not  Eauble ;  then  the  Cap*^-  ordred 
it  up  and  it  appeared  Mouldy  and  RiU  of  Redd  Specks.  The  Purser  then 
renewed  his  Scurrilous  Language  of  Rogue  and  Villain  before  the  Capt.  to 
Fisher,  who  finding  them  all  of  a  Peece  and  the  Captaine  Suffering  it,  wai 
forced  to  take  it  Quietly,  and  the  Shipps  Company  was  putt  to  whole 
allowance  of  Bread  and  the  Mould  mixt  amongst  the  good. 

March  loM,  (15). — The  Cooke  and  some  of  the  Shipps  Company 
Complained  to  Fisher  it  was  3  in  the  afternoon  and  had  no  beer.  The 
Cooper  being  Examined  Said  it  was  out,  Fisher  ask't  the  Cooper  if  y®  CapL 
had  ordred  him  not  to  Broach  any  more  Beer,  he  answered  No.  Then 
Fisher  ordred  him  to  Broach  a  fresh  Butt  for  the  Shipps  Company  which 
he  did.  After  the  Captaine  Sent  for  the  Cooper  upon  the  Quarter  Deck  and 
for  no  other  Cause  but  for  obeying  Fishers  said  order,  in  a  Violent  Manner 
Caned  him,  and  broke  his  head.  Then  Sent  for  Fisher  up  and  Demanded 
why  he  ordred  a  Butt  of  Beer  to  be  Broacht,  and  before  he  Could  answer 
fell  on  him  with  his  Cane  and  Caned  him  to  the  forecastle  and  confined  him 
to  his  Cabbin. 

Betwixt  the  loth  and  i6th  of  March,  Fisher  found  the  Capt.  had 
further  Villanyes  to  Countenance  and  Act  against  him,  having  held  severall 
Private  Consults  in  the  Night  w*^  his  Clerke  who  Fisher  knew  to  be  a  great 
Villaine  in  Divers  respects  and  therefore  was  jealous  they  intended  to  take 
away  his  Life,  and  a  Note  was  throwne  into  his  Cabbin  by  one  of  the  Shipps 
Company,  that  he  heard  the  Clerke  sweare  if  he  was  Captaine  he  would  han^ 
Fisher  and  2  or  3  more  in  two  Days,  and  Fisher  thought  his  Capt. 
was  taking  his  Advice,  for  on  the  i6th  in  the  Mornmg  he  ordred  all  handi 

600 


;  otdred  iota  Iron*,  and  ihr  Boat- 
■  found  *  good  nun  and  would  nut 


COURTS-MARTIAL 

tic   Called    up,   and  then   uid    they    had   a    Dengne   to   Mutiny  i  all 

bwend  No,  nor  ncrer  ihnughi  of  Such  a  Dctignc  tmi  were  rrry  willing 

(■ScfTc  under  him  t   he  ihcn  Said  it  was  a  Surmiic  of  hii  ownr.  But  Fiiher 

I   CWkc  and   Grigaon   were   hi>  lafofmeri;   at    Doon    th« 

I  Touke  Fi«her  out  of  hi«  Cabbin,  puit  Irooi  on  hira  and 

re'd  him  in  againe,  where  he  Lay  in   Great  Miiery  and  all  iliit 

;    any    Cauae    Alledged,    and    under    it     the   CapCaine    Caned     him 

ilently  and  Lockt  him  up  CIok,  tiiat  with  the  Heat  and  being  under  the 

t  sod  forced  to  Eaie  Njcure,  there,  he  wai  almoit  Siiflled  lu  Death,  «■ 

V  Doubt  wai  intended  he  ihou'd  be,  for  he  aaid  he  Cou'd  hang  Fialiet  but 

p  bdccTCii  thi>  Confinement  would  do  hia  buiincu, 

March  19/A,  (16).  — Being  Sunday  the  Cjptaine  ordted  the  Boattwaine 

}  Call  u|i  all  handa  and  ilie  .Sm^ll  Arii)e«  on  the  Quariei  Deck  l^oadrd, 

h  wai  done,  and  he  lold  them  he  hejrd  some  of  ihera  deaignrd  to  Leave 

tf  Shijip,  when  they  came  to  Brazille,  to  which  all  were  Surpriaely  Silent) 

"    ~       ine  then  Called  John  Boate,  Owen  Hatria  and  Alexander  Beale, 

i  them  in  be  made  fiat  to  ihe  Gangwjy,  and  then  Examined  them 

anything  of  an  Intended  Mutiny;   All    )   lold   him   No,  But 

_^    f  lutderaiood  that  the  Captainc  and  Clcrkc  would  faignc  ba»e  had 

Bir'tf  Iba  Shij'pt  Comjiany  Swear  falarly  sgainat  bim,  but  Could  find  none 

[do  it  but  the  ajid  .lamr«  Grigaon,  •1"°  brcauae  tbo»e  3  poor  men  would 

falaely  aeainat  him  they  t 

ine  to  hii  Catifoin  becauK  he  w 

'ken  to  their  wicked  advice. 

The  Shipp  then  Steered  away  for  Bdja  in  the  Bra/.ilei,  and  there  «rri*eil 

Ihe  ajrd  of  March,  when  the  Capt.  acnt  one  Aihoat  to  .  .  .  Acuuaini 

r   Goiernor,   that    l''iaher    waa  ■  great    Rogue   and   would   have  killnl 

and   the  Captainr.     The   Governor    otdred    Kiihei    •iiould  be   aent 

'  if  the  Ca[/*  had   )   Wiitneaa  to  profe  it  or  Mutiny  would 

■g  lUBI. 

Marti  m,  1699.— The  Cap'"  ordered  the  Maiicr  to  Carty  Fiaher  out 

Ua  Cloae  Continem'  Aihmr   Priaoner  aivl  take  a  Strung  Guarde  w" 

imI  Piaialli,  and  in  th^ti  Manner  he  wu  carried  oo   Shnar  i 

pnt  iiua  a  Caitle  amongit   Ncgroc*,   Molettoa  and  condemned  peraoot 

■II  mamer  of  Villanie*  where  he  Lay  until]  y*  4th  of  July  fnllowmg. 

The  Shipp  Stayed  at    Baja  a   Month,  Init  the  Cain. 

he*  nor  any  of  hia  Crew  but  by  Stealth,  The  Cj|t.  Cunimmdin)!  them  10 

Contrary  on  Se»ere  Threati,  but  the  Captjioe  himaelf  Atiociainl  with 

enll  of  Bierieet  Crew. 

Here  Fiaher  Petitioned  the  Gotecnour  that  Capt.  Dumpier  and  btmtelfr 
■cnt  for  and  beard  before  him  and  all  the  Olficera  in  the  fihipp 
ind  if  it  appeared  he  had  Comiited  Mutiny  ur  any  oihot  Crime 
wuuld  not  Complaine  if  he  Suflered  Death,  addmg  it  w*a  lUH  Legally  In 
Capuinr*  Power  to  Leair  him  there  a  Priaonrr.  The  Gritrmtiur  Kite 
Prthioo  and  aaid  be  could  not  Conceroe  bimielfr  wilh  the  King  ttl 
glaada  officetij  had  only  Lent  the  Cairt,  a  Priion.  Fiaher  then  wiiile  M 
CapUitle  if  aay  men  he  had  that  cou'd  accuae  him  miKbl  he  afnt  nti  Hhnat 
.  make  Oath  hrfore  the  Juatice  there,  but  he  reloard  nnd  kept  lilnorllr  on 
decUrrd  he  would  Leave  Flatter  Miind,  «ad  ac<ardii)|ly  M>M 
601 


1 


CAPTAIN  DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

one  Joseph  Bugsby  and  Rob*  Rayns  Fishers  Seryant  ashoar  and  at  Bap 
Entred  4  men  more  than  his  Complyment. 

Fisher  seeing  he  must  be  left  behind,  sent  for  his  Cloaths  Chest,  Books, 
Goods  and  some  Provisions  to  carry  him  his  Servant  and  Joseph  Bugsby  to 
Lisbon ;  w^  much  Importunity  he  sent  what  of  his  Goods  he  pleased.  Tore 
what  he  pleased  out  of  his  Journall,  and  sent  4  Month  Provisions  for  Fishff 
and  his  Servant  which  the  Portuguese  stole  from  him  but  none  for  Bugsby, 
and  sailed  y*  23th  of  Ap^  for  Madagascar.  As  Fisher  beleeves  sometime  after 
Joseph  Bugsby  Dyed  of  the  Country  Desease  at  Baja,  Else  would  have 
been  a  good  Wittness  for  Fisher. 

Soe  that  Fisher  besides  all  Abuses  and  Wrongs  on  Board  was  kep't  a 
Close  Prisoner  at  Baja  from  the  8th  of  March  1 699  to  the  4th  of  Jnly 
following,  when  he  was  sent  Prisoner  on  Board  a  Portuguese  Shipp  for 
Lisbon,  as  appears  under  the  hand  of  John  Earle  Esq'*,  his  Ma^^  Coosnll 
at  Lisbon,  readie  to  be  produced,  where  he  safe  arrived  in  October,  and  hu 
Case  being  Examined  was  Sett  at  Liberty  and  came  home  a  passenger  io 
December  1699,  And  hath  been  ever  since  out  of  his  Ma^~  Service. 

George  Fisher. 

Examined  and  declared.     In  Cur.  (1702).     Jn.  Bathurst  and  Jn.  Hov. 


THE    INFORMATION   OF  CAPTAIN   Wm.   DAMPIER 
AGAINST   LIEUTENANT   FISHER 

1.  His  Contempt  of  ye  Captn.  When  the  Ship  lay  in  ye  Downes  Mr. 
Philip  Pain,  Gunner  of  the  Roehuck^  discoursing  with  L'*  Fisher  about  the 
Captain,  the  L**  said  dam  him  for  an  old  Rogue  he  minds  nothing. 

2.  Speaking  Conten^tuotuly  of  the  Lords  of  the  jidmiraity.  He  the  id 
Lt.  did  often  speak  against  the  Lords  of  the  Admiralty  before  Purser, 
D'*  and  Mr.  James  Brands ;  reproved  for  it  by  the  Capt*** 

3.  DisobeMence,  Impudence  and  threats  ;  this  tvas  heard  and  seen  by  Banuij 
and  Gunner.  The  28*^  of  January  the  L'*  was  goeing  to  put  his  bed  and 
bedclothes  into  the  Pinnace  that  lay  on  the  boomes,  and  the  Boatswain  toold 
him  that  the  Captn.  had  ordered  him  to  suffer  no  man  to  go  into  the  Boat, 
nor  put  anything  in  her,  the  L'*  replyed;  the  Captn.  ought  to  hate 
acquainted  me  with  it,  and  ordered  the  bed  to  be  put  into  the  Boat,  the 
Captn.  seeing  a  man  and  boy  in  the  Boat,  told  the  L**  that  he  did  expect  it 
from  him  to  show  good  examples,  the  L**  presently  bent  his  fist  and  held  it 

to  his  nose  and  sd  he  did  not  care  a for  him,  and  also  tould  the  Captn. 

that  if  ever  he  saw  James  Barnaby  on  the  quarter-deck  he  would  kick  him 
off.     Mr.  Barnaby  was  a  midshipman. 

4.  The  Lieutenant  alters  ye  cours  contrary  to  ye  Capts,  orders.  About  the 
8th  of  March  the  Captn.  ordered  to  steer  away  south,  the  wind  was  at  East ; 
in  a  short  time  afterwards  the  Captn.  going  off  the  deck,  L^*  Fisher  altered 
the  Cours  and  ordered  to  keep  close  on  a  wind  S.S.E.  ;  being  then  two  ^ 
so***  of  ye  Line. 

5.  The  L^'  meanes  to  insinuate  himself  into  the  favour  of  ye  men,  (Wit- 
nesses— Mr.  Hughes  etc. )  About  the  8th  of  March  there  were  some  bags  ol 
bread  brought  on  the  deck  out  of  the  Powder  room.     The  L^*  opened  one 

602 


COURTS-MARTIAL 

)i  rn  ihc  wut  and  pecking  out  3  cake  thai  was  a  liitic 


mp  Mfing  grnttrmcn  ihii 


luldy  lictd 
o  eat ;  the  Boatswain  standing  by  him 
II  wor»  ih»D  damnified  brrad,  but  the  M'-  turning  it  all  out  on  the  deck 
tJiriR  titat  he  had  eaten  wot*  bread  in  the  Channel  of  England,  the 
&)■(&.  lould  the  turn  they  ahduld  eat  good  bread  and  the  damnilied  should 
Ise  thrown  averboatd. 

6.  nil  agmvations  and  tiaiiJaloui  iiiagf  of  ye  Capin.     The  lOthofMarch 
C-ipto.  >|icjltinK  roughly  to  the  L'-  for  broching  a  butt  of  beer  in  ihe  night, 

Ik  calhl  the  Cjpt"*  names  loftly,  and  urged  the  Capin.  to  strike  him,  then  he 
loodlr  calld  him  a  grc-it  many  ill  names,  as  old  Rogue,  old  Dog,  old  Cheat, 
and  tndeiioured  to  Mirr  up  the  seamen  to  a  mutiny,  by  telling  them  thut  the 
Captn.  kneai  ttoi  whe^thet  he  waa  going,  that  he  wag  no  artist,  that  he  knew 
BOthing,  hat  wai  a  mere  theaf,  and  when  he  would  not  be  silent,  but  con- 
■laiitlf  coatinurd  railing  on  his  Captn.  he  was  at  last  conlincd  to  his  Cabbin. 

7.  Hii  aistiitale  periiilrnit  m  giving  icurraloui  language.     The  next  day 
ilicii  be  cotninued  niltng  on   the   Captn.  and   calling  of  him    as   many 

invent;  the   Captn.  sent   Mr.  Hughei  to  the   !.'■  to 
■ietin  liim   10   hould   hi*  tongue  or  cite   he  should   be  forced  to  take  olhrr 

wiih  him,  ihe  L'"  repiyed  let  the  old  rogue I  nm 

r  and  will  speak  what  I  please,  and  all  the  time  af'eiward  as  long 
■t  he  wa*  abotd  he  conntandy  raild  at  ihc  Captn.  and  call  him  name* 
caprcially  when  he  passed  through  ihe  steerage. 

8.  ....    .    .    (Witne»»es — 3tr.     Hughti,     Bamahy,    and    Gunner.) 

Tbe  iHih  day  at  night  many  of  the  olTicei*  desired  the  Captn.  to  get  his 
brddins  and  cloaihi  on  to  ihe  Quarter  deck  and  lye  there  being  aprchea- 
■ire  oi  tone  design  againn  him  by  Mr.  I-'isher'!  accomplices,  the  Captn. 
(tooke)  their  counccll  and  ordered   the  gunner  to  secure  the  Gunroom  dore, 

Uie  next  morning  all  the  small  armes  were  got  on  the  quarter  deck  10 
rat  a  rising,  atid  some  men  luggisird  and  examined,  wherein  ihey  tax 
■»cb  other,  namely  Baptist  Watson  and  Alexander  Beal,  and  searching 
Boat  they  feund  a  (uipci  wrlittn  against  the  Captn.  and  he  said  he  was 
tnlentd  to  write  it  by  the  L'- 

.    He  told  the   Master   that    if  the    Captn.    d [word 

flkfiUe — ?  died)  that  he  is  no  more  but  Matter;  and  sometime  jner  at 
~ior  in  the  harbour  of  B^hia  de  Todoa  Santos  he  sent  the  Mailer  to 
_  CapQi.  10  riciire  that  lie  mighi  be  »ent  to  Pnrlugall  in  one  of  the 
haruigwt  Bsen  a  ware,  and  to  he  sent  from  tliense  to  l-infjlaiid,  ihr  Captn. 
this,  hut  ihurlly  after  pasving  through  (he  ileredg  the  L'' 
itoU  him  thai  he  had  sent  to  know  if  he  might  be  sent  to  [vnglaod  by  the 
Wiv  of  Pnrtugall  the  Captn.  told  him  it  wai  time  enough  to  think  of  ihit, 
ivfasck  *o  intrenied  the  t/-  that  he  cilld  him  all  the   ill  names  that  he  could 


10.  Tht  IM-  mitlititu  itnjfidi  Suggrilioni  ta  the  Gevfrnoyr  ami  Mtrtbanit 
'^  B^ti*.  (Wiincts — Mr.  llughrt.)  The  l.t.  continuing  railing  and  inceiu- 
ig  tb«  men  agairitt  the  Captn.  he  wat  forced  at  last  to  send  him  ashore  in 
i>pe»  of  tamring  him  ihete.  but  to  no  purpo«e  for  he  tends  lettef*  to  the 
tomnour  compiainmg  of  the  Captn.  but  ii  not  minded,  then  he  tends  for 
Dane*  mrrchMtil  and  tell*  liim  yt  it  was  not  long  since  tlie  Captn,  had 
Dn-ch  ship  and  barbarously  lued  the  men  and  deairtd  the  n 
603 


I 
I 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

to  acquaint  the  Govcrnour  of  it  yt  the  Captn.  might  be  secured  the  next  day ; 
a  Dutch  seaman  that  was  their  interpreter  came  abord  and  told  it  before  the 
Master  and  severall  others. 

II.  Indeavours  to  he  revenged  hj  stirring  the  Cleargy,  (Witness — Mr, 
Brands.)  About  the  lO  Or  12  of  April  when  he  found  that  the  GoTerooor 
would  not  take  notice  of  what  he  sd,  he  struck  in  with  the  Church,  but  the 
Captn.  had  notice  of  it  and  forbore  coming  ashore.  W^*  Dampier. 

Signature  in  a  darker  ink  and  written  with  a  finer  pen. 


MINUTES   OF   THE  COURT-MARTIAL 

At  a  Court  Martiall  held  on  Board  her  Map**  ship  the  Rojall  Sottoerane 
att  Spithead  on  Munday  the  8th  day  of  June,  1702. 


PRSSBNT 

The  Honble  Sir  George  Rooke,  Vue^Admrall  of '  England^  zvA  jidml.oj 
her  Maf'  Fleet,  etc..  President :  Sir  Clowd«y  Shovell,  Adml,  of  yt 
White }  Tho.  Hopson,  Esq'*,  Vice-Adnd,  ;  S'*  Stafford  Fairebouroe, 
Rere'Adml, 

Captns,  Graydon,  Greenway,  Haddock,  Turville,  Jn.  Leake,  Edwardei, 
Jn.  Johnson,  Guy,  Myngs,  Tho.  Robinson,  Rnapp,  Tho.  Mitchell, 
Wyvell,  Haughton,  Crowe,  Jn,  Mitchell,  P.  Arc  Hamilton,  Jn, 
Jennings,  Pedder,  Smith,  Bokenham,  Wisheart,  Cowper,  Ste.  Martin, 
Dilke,  Good,  Long,  Howard,  Maynerd,  Rumsey,  Foulke,  Harlow. 

All  duely  sworne  pursuant  to  a  late  Act  of  Parliament,  etc. 

Enquiry  was  made  by  the  Court  into  the  Difference    betwixt  Capt" 
Will"  Dampier  late  command'  of  her  Maj"  ship  the  Roe^huci,  and  George 
Fisher  Lieut"^  of  the  same  ship,  and  their  mucuall  Complaints  against  each 
other,   of  many  Irregularities  and  undue  Practices  committed  by  each  of 
them  in  their  late  Voyage  to  India  in  the  years  1698  and    1699.     The 
Court  having  strictly  examined  into  all  the  particulars  of  their   severall 
Informations :   Is  of  opinion  that  it  has  appeared  to  ye  Court  by  Evidence 
upon  oath  that  Cap'"  William  Dampier  has  been  guilty  of  very  Hard  and 
cruell   usage  towards  Lieutenant  Fisher  in  beating  him  on   Board  ye  sd. 
Ship,  and  confining  him  in  Irons  for  a  considerable  Time,  and  afterwards 
Imprisoning  him  on  shore  in  a  strange  Countrey,  and  itt  is  Resolvd  that  itt 
dos  not  appeare  to  ye  Court  by  ye  Evidence  that  there  has  been  any  grounds 
for  this  his  ill  usage  of  him,  and  that  the  sd.  Captain  Dampier  i^lls  under 
ye   33rd  Article  for  these  his    Irregular  proceedings,  and  the   Court  dos 
Adjudge  that  Hee  be  Fined  all  His  Pay  to  ye  Chest  att  Chatham,  exclusive 
of  about  Fifty  Pounds  stop'd  in  ye  Treasurer  of  ye  Navies  Hand  for  in- 
demnifying the  Queen  as  to  a  Bill  drawn  on  ye  Navy  Board  by  L'  Fisher 
from  Lisbon ;  and  itt  is  farther  the  opinion  of  ye  Court  that  the  said  Capt 
Dampier  is  not  a  Fitt  person  to  be  Employ'd  as  comd'  of  any  of  her  Ma*^ 
ships. 

604 


COURTS-MARTIAL 

And  the  Court  is  of  opinion  that  the  InformatioDS  sett  forth  by  Capt" 
Dampier  against  L'  Fisher  have  not  been  made  Good,  and  therefore  die 
Court  dos  Aquit  him  from  that  Charge. 

Then  the  Court  proceeded  to  enquire  concerning  the  death  of  John 
Norwood,  late  Boatswain  of  ye  Roe^buci^  itt  having  bin  suggested  that  his 
death  had  bin  in  a  great  measure  occasiond  by  ye  severity  and  hardship  of 
his  confinement  by  Captain  Dampier  then  command'  of  the  sd.  Ship,  in 
their  late  Vovage  to  India.  The  Court  having  strictly  enquird  into  that 
matter :  Is  of  opinion  that  itt  dos  not  appeare  by  ye  Evidence  that  the  sd. 
Jn.  Norwood's  confinement  was  the  Cause  of  his  Death,  and  therefore  ye 
Court  do's  Acquit  the  sd  Captn.  Dampier  as  to  the  Death  of  Jn.  Norwood , 
Late  Boats w"  of  ye  Roc^hucL 


(Signed  by) 


Rooke. 

S.  Fairborne. 
Jno.  Graydon. 
A.  Hamilton. 
Tho.  Robinson. 
Hen.  Haughton. 
J.  Jennings. 
Pr.  Haddock. 

H.  Cooper. 
Tho.  Long. 
C.  Rumsey. 
Hen.  Turvile. 


Clow**'  Shovell. 
J.  Leake. 
Fran.  Wyvell. 
Chr.  Myngs. 
S.  G.  Foulke. 
J.  Wishart. 
Edw**-  Good. 
Jn.  Johnson. 


Tho.  Hopeonn. 
Will.  Bokenham. 

J.  Dilkes. 
James  Green  way. 
R.  Edwards. 
Jn.  Maynerd. 
T.  Harlowe. 
J.  Knapp. 
Jos.  Crowe. 


Chas.  Guy. 
Tho.  Mitchell. 
Jn.  Mitchell. 
Geo.  Smyth. 
Steph.  Nlartin. 


Act  in  Cur. 
J.  Bathurst, 
Jud.  Advg. 
(Endorsed)    Soveraign   at    Spithead,   8  June,    1702.       Court    Martiall 
Enquiry  into  the  difference  bctw.  Capt.  Dampier  and  L    Fisher,  and  into 
the  Death  of  Jn.  Norwood,  his  laie  Boatsw*** 


605 


INDEX 


Atlantick  Sea  {continued) — 
Trade  winds  in,  ii.  2jo,  232-233 
Winds  near  the  line  in,  i.  234 

Australia,  i.  357,  450  ;  ii.  349  et  seq, 

Aves,  Isle  of,  i.  78  and  note  *,  79-80, 89 
Little  Isle  of,  82 

Ay  nam,   Islands  of,   562  and  note^^ 

573 

Bahama  Islands,  i.  102 

Bahia  de  todos  los  Santos,  ii.  379-400, 

402-403,  445 
Baker,  Mr.,  ii.  196 
Balachaun,  ii.  579-580 
Balderas,  valley  of,  i.  290  and  note  ' 
Baldivia,  i.  iii  andnote*^  121-122  and 

note 
Bambo-Achar,  i.  389 
Bang,  ii.  ^4  and  note  ^ 
Bantam,  ii.  65,  102,  108 
Barbadoes,  ii.  no,  314 
Barcolongo,  the,  i.  53  and  note  ^ 
Barefoot,  Capt.,  ii.  358,  372 
Bark-logs,  i.  165  and  note-i6j 
Barker,  Mr.  B.,  i.  102 
Barlow,  Mr.,  i.  490 
Barralaventa  Fleet,  ii.  220 
Bashee  Islands,  i.  415  and  note^-^ij^ 

420-428,  431 
Basilan  Islands,  i.  379  and  notes-'fio 
Batan  Island,  i.  416  note 
Batangan,  Cape,  i.  563  note  * 
Batavia,  i.  436 

Batsha  village,  i.  566  and  note 
Batt  Island,  i.  382  and  note  ^^  385 
Bayedore,  Cape,  ii.  242 
Bays  more  subject  to  rain  than  head- 
lands, ii.  299-301 
Beef  farms,  i.  242,  256 
Beef  hunting  in  the  Western  Lagune, 

ii.  179-180 
Beef  Island  (Carmen  Island),  ii.  152- 

153,  i55i  176,  185,  189-196,  198 
Beer,  Chinese,  i.  414  and  note  ^-^i^ 
Bees,  ii.  208 
Bees-wax,  i.  340 

Bells,  church,  dispute  as  to,  ii.  32-34 
Bencalis  (Bangkali),  ii.  41  and  note-^7 
Bencouli  (Benkulen),  i.  394  and  note^ 

489,  496  and  note,  501,  506-507, 

610  ;  ii.  29-30,  100-105 
Bengal  Bay — 
Climate,  i.  583 
Channel,  ii.  51 
Winds,  ii.  246 


Bermudas  Isles^  i.  60,  102,  173 
Betel  leaf,  i.   327-328,  562,  576,  602, 

603 
Bill-Birds,  ii.  169,  395  andnote^ 
Birds— 
Roca's  Islands,  of,  i.  83-84 
Tonquin,  of,  i.  577-578 
Birds,  Island  of,  i.  79 
Black  birds  of  Campeachy,  ii.  167 
Blake,  Admiral,  ii.  352  ami  note 
Blanco,  Cape,  i.   86,    131,   137   cmi 
note-i-fiy  162-163;   ii.  242,  257, 
320 
Blanco,  Island  of,  i.  87  and  noU^-Uj 

95 
Blewfield,  Capt.,  i.  63 

Blewfields,  i.  143 

Blewfields  Hill,  ii.  141  a/idnote* 

Blewfields  River,  i.  62  and  noie\  63 

and  note 
Expedition  down,  63-68 
Blood  wood,  ii.  1 59 
Bloom,  Govemour,  ii-  47 
Blooms,  i.  5 1 1-5 12 
Bocco  del  Drago,  i.  64  and  note 
Bocco  del  Toro,  i.  62  and  noti\  64 

andnote^  68-69,  I3ij  252 
Bon  Airy  (Buen  Ay  re),  i.  77  andnoU\ 

78-79 
Bonano-tree,  i.  325 

Bond,  Capt.,  i.  103  and  note  '-104, 106, 
210  and  note  *-2ii^  219 

Booby  birds,  i.  79  and  note\  83,  295 ; 
ii.  128-129 

Borneo,  i.  340,  373  and  note,  430 

Boutan,  Kingdom  of,  i.  611 

Bouton     Island,     i.     443    and  noU- 

448 
Bowman,  W.,  i.  47  and  note 
Bowry,  Capt.,  i.  373,  487-488 
Bowyers,  Mr.,  ii.  31 
Branly,  Capt,  i.  228,  231 
Brazil — 

Climate  of,  ii.  298-299 

Cotton  flower  of,  ii.  445 

Trade  winds  off  coast  of,   ii.  24; 

244 
Vegetation  of,  ii.  387-400 

Bread  fruit,  i.  302  and  note ',  307  an 

notes-y>S 

Brewer's  Streights,  ii.  39-40 

Brewster,  Capt.,  ii.  32,  39 

BufFadore,  the,  i.  251 

Buffaloes,  ii.  55 

Buggasses,  ii.  38 


608 


INDEX 


Bullocks— 

Hocksing,    Spanish  method  of,  ii. 

I93-J94 
Preserving  skins  of,  ii.  185-186 

Burt  on- wood,  i.  127 

Bush  men,  ii.  321 

Cabbage  trees,  i.  115,  187  and  Hote- 
ls \  ii.  53,  393  andnote^ 
Cables — 

Coir,  i.  30^  cmd  note-yoh 

Piassava,  li.  ^84  and  notes  '  and  ' 

Rattans,  of,  ii.  89-90 

Tresabo,  ii.  388 
Cacafuego^  Tfu^  i.  156  157  and  noU 
Cacao-tree,  i.  89-92,  175  ;  ii.  208,  214, 

215  ;  white,  ii.  207 
Cachao,  city  of,  i.  5^7  and  note,  569- 
S70,  581,  582,  594-598 

Province  of,  i.  572,  573,  574 
Cautr^  1  ke^  i.  559,  560 
Caihooca,  i.  253 
Calabash,  i.  43  and  note 
Caldera,  Bay  of,  i.  139-144 
California — 

Lake  of,  i.  286  andnote^ 

Pearl  fishery  of,  i.  194,  279 
Callasusung  (Kalin  Susu),  i.  444  and 

Hote-44,% 
Cambodia — 

Kingdom  of,  i.  393 ;  ii.  36-38 

River  of,  i.  388,  561 
Campbell,  Mr.  O.,  ii.  186 
Campeachy  Bay — 

Anchorage  in,  i.  419 

Animal  life  of^  i.  64,  117  ;  ii.  160-171 

Climate  of,  i.  583 

Currents  of,  ii.  ^18 

Fish  of,  i.  95;  iu  171-177 

Fruit  of,  i.  223,  278 

Land  and  sea  breezes  in,  iu  256-259 

Logwood  cutters,  see  that  title 

Norths  and  souths  in,  ii.  282,  285 

Ri%*ers  and  towns  of,  ii.  198-222 

Savannahs  of,  i.  1 14 

Sea  coast  of,  li.  144-147 

Seasons  of,  ii.  1 57,  299 

Soil  of,  ii.  160 

Summasenta  winds  in,  iL  265-266 

Trees  of,  i.  187  ;  ii.  158-159 

Voyage  to,  from  Jamaica,  ii.  114- 

otherwise  mentioned,  L  89,  127, 131, 

M7,  149,  507 
Campeachy  town,  i.  92  ;  ii.  147-149 


Camphire,  ii.  54 

Cam-wood,  i.  106  and  no/e*;  ii.  160 

Canales  Island,  i.  232 

Canary  Islands,  ii.  350  et  seq, 

Canby,  Mr.,  cited^  1.  301,  443;  ii.  17, 

242 
Cancer,  Tropic  of,  trade  wind  in,  ii. 

231,  232 
Cane,  Mr.  W.,  ii.  184-185 
Canes,  i.  381  and  note 
Caneo  Island,  i.  235 
Cannibals,  i.  471  and  note  ^-/^72 
Canoas — 

Manner  of  making,  i.  234 

Nicobar  Islands,  of,  i.  467 
Cantarras  Island,  i.  232 
Canton,  i.  401,  402,  561  andnote^ 
Capalita,  River,  i.  251 
Cape  River,  i.  153 
Cape  of  Good  Hope — 

Account  of  the  country,  i.  96,  409- 
410,  510-515  ;  ii.  200 

Course  to  England  from,  i.  528 

Currents  of,  ii.  319-320 

Dutch  settlement  at,  i.  513-516 

Natives  of,  i.  517-522 
Caput  Cavalli,  i.  281 
Caraccos,  coast  of,  i.  88-95,  4i9  '•>  i^* 
241 

Town,  i.  92 
Carbery,  Earl  of,  ii.  207  and  note^ 
Carcass,  i.  ^^  and  note  * 
Caribbe   Indians,  i.  471    and  note*- 

472  ;  ii.  1 10 
Caribbe  Island,  i.  245;  ii.  241 
Carpenter's  River,  i.  59  and  note^*  60, 

89 
Carrion  crows,  ii.  168-169,  394 

Carthagena,  i.  69,  71,  72  and  note^^ 

75,  200,  204,  205 
Winds  peculiar  to  coasts  of,  ii.  266- 

268 
Cashew  fruit,  ii.  390-391 
Casivina,  Point,  1.  146-147,  152 
Catoch,   Cape,  i.    150,    159,  256;    ii. 

IK-116,  118,  121,  132 
Cavendish,   Sir  Thomas,  i.  275,  293 

and  note  * 
Caymanes  Island,  i.  133  and  note;  ii. 

ii4f  i33-"34,  175.399 
Cedar  trees,  i.  60,  289 
Celebes  Island,  i.  420,  437-441 
Centapees,  i.  329  and  note  * 
Chagra,  River,  i.  57  and  note* 
Chambers,  Capt.,  ii.  235 


VOU  II. 


609 


2  Q 


INDEX 


Cbambongo  (Zamboango),  i.  379 
Chametly,  Islands  of  (S.  of  Tropic  of 

Cancer),  i.  277  afui  nofe^-2yS 
Chametly,  Keys  of  (E.  of  Cape  Cor- 

rientes),  i.  272-273 
Champa,  i.  397 
Champello,   Islands    of,    i.    561    and 

note  *-562 
Champeton,  River,  ii.  149 
Chandler,  Capt.,  ii.  189,  190,  196 
Chau,  i.  J 82 
Cheape,  1.  248 
Cheapo,   River,  i.    52,    54,  222    and 

note^^  224-225,  231 
Cheapo  Town,  i.  44,  201,  225 
Checapeque  Creek,  ii.  212-213 
Chepelio  Island,  i.  222  and  notes-22^^ 

226 
Chequetan,  i.  265 
Cherburg,  ii.  160 
Chiapo  Mts.,  ii.  198,  204 
Children,  sale  of,  by  parents,  i.  588, 

599 
Chili,  i.  98,  118^  121-122,  418 

China — 

Coast  of,  visit  to,  i.  402  et  seq. 

Navigation  to,  ii.  248 
China  earthenware,  i.  404-405 
China-root,  i.  405  and  note 
Chinchanchee,  ii.  119 
Chinese — 

Appearance  and  customs,  i.  403-405 

Cochinchina,  in,  i.  569 

Drinks  made  by,  i.  414-415 

Gaming,  fondness  for,  i.  592 ;  ii.  63 

Idols  of,  i.  394,  406-407 

Industries  of,  i.  404-405 

Jonks  of,  i.  407  and  note-/^oZ 

Malacca,  of,  ii.  85 

Manilan  trade  of,  i.  386,  402 

Pirates  settled  in  Cambodia,  ii.  37 

Tartar  conquest  of,  i.  403 

Traders  to  the  Achin  goldfields,  ii. 
62-64 

Women,  i.  404 
Chirapee,  Bay  of,  i.  167 
Chocolate,  i.  90 
Chocolatto  Norths,  ii.  142,  281 
Chop  sticks,  ii.  17 
Christianity,  state  of,  in  the  East,  ii. 

26-28 
Christmas  Island,  i.  460  and  note  ^461 
Chuche  Island,  i.  230  and  note 
Chucquebul,  ii.  153 
Clam,  the,  i.  197 


Cliffs,  high,  reason  for  calling,  **  bold 

shores,"  i.  419 
Clocking  hens,  ii.  395-396 
Clovebark,  i.  325 
Cloves,  i.  325-326,  355 
Cobaya,  Isles  of,  i.  185,  188,  229  and 

note^ 
Cobson,  R.,  i.  70 
Cochinchina,  i.  393,  561  et  seq, 
Cochinchinese,  i.  392,  561 
Cochineel,  i.  247-248 
Cockles,  monster,  i.  439 
Cockrecoes,  ii.  169-170 
Coco-nut  oil,  i.  305 
Coco-nut  trees,  i.  137,  303-307,  461- 

462,  465,  466  ;  ii.  388 
Coco-plum  bush,  ii.  151 
Cocos  Island  (Keeling  Island),  i.  136 

and  note  *-i37,  458  emd  note\  460 
Colan,  i.  164-165,  167 
Collima,  i.  89  and  note^  267,  268-269 
Colorado  Sholes,  ii.  133  andnote^ 
Comana,  i.  93  and  note  ' 
Comesserie  tree,  ii.  388 
Comorin,  Cape,  i.  432  and note^y  $t^\ 

ii.  246 
Compass,  azimuth,  i.  512-513 
Compos  talla,  i..  280  and  note^j  283-284 
Conception,  River,  i.  53  ;  ii.  160 
Condecedo,  Cape,  ii.  116  and  note,  i  I7i 

121,144 
Condore,  Pulo,  i.  561,  563 
Congo,  River  (America),  i.  38,  44, 47 
Congos,  River,  i.  214  and  note  ^ 
Constant,  Captain,  ii.  72 
Content,  The^  ii.  109 
Cook,  Captain,  i.  135,  138-139,  213 
Cook,  Mr.,  i.  72 
Cook,  John,  i.  96-98 
Cookworthy,  John,  i.  375 
Coolecan,  River  (Culiacan),  i.  279  <m 

note^ 
Coppinger,  H.,  i.  375-376,  386,  39f 

469,  491  ;  ii.  81,  82,  87 
Coquibaco,  Cape,  ii.  314-315 
Coquimbo,  i.  122,  164,  210 
Coretaga,  i.  59  note  ■ 
Cormorants,  ii.  171 
Corn  Island,  i.  62  and  note^-t^ 
Coromandel  coast,  i.    167,  420,  49 

492,  588-589  ;  ii.  268-269 
Coronada,  i.  271 
Corpus  Sant  (corposant),  i.  410  «) 

note^ 
Correso,  ii.  167 


610 


INDEX 


Corrientes,  Cape  (MexicoX  i*  292-500 

Corrientes,  Cape  (PeniX  i*  I95)  261, 

271-272,  275»  290 ;   "•   I33»  I35» 

24S 
Corrisao  Island,  iL  314 

Corrosoes  (Curassow),  i.  69  and noie^ 

Coninna,  i.  5 1 1  note 

Costa  Rica,  i.  89 

Cotton  plants,  i.  186-187  ;  ii.  52-53, 

363.445 
Counter  currents,  ii.  317-318 

Covant,  Capt.  John,  ii.  210;  quoted^ 

ii.  274-278 
Coventry,  Mr.,  ii.  75,  78,  79, 80,  81,  88, 

89,91,98 
Cowley,  A.,  i. 98  noU^;  cited,  i.  134 

nctiy  135  note^  ijf>  notes,  137  note; 

quoted,  i.  168  note^ 
Coxon,Capt.,  i.  57  and  note,  58,68,  71, 

72,  73  note,  199,   215,  246  and 

note^ 
Cozumel  Island,  ii.  115  and  note  *,  132 
Crabcatchers,  ii.  170 
Crabs,  i.  70  and  note  ^ ;  ii.  136 
Craw-fish,  terrestrial,  i.  460  and  note  ^ 
Crawfot,  T^  i.  270  note 
Crce,  Mr.,  i.  253 
Crockadore^  the,  i.  447 
Crocodile,  ii.  175-176 
Crows,  chattering,  ii.  394 
Cruxes,  Venta  de,  i.  205  and  note* 
Cuban  Isles,  i.  64,  128-129,  206,  246  ; 

ii.  132»  >33»  134-135*260 
Culverin,  ii.  4  and  note* 
Cunnimere,  i.  492  and  note 
Curaccos  coast,  ii.  260-261 
Curlews,  ii.  170 
Currecoos,  ii.  396 
Currents — 

Definition  of,  iL  306,  314 

Trade  winds,  influenced  by,  ii.  314, 

316 
Curreso  birds,  ii.  395 
Curtana,  The,  i.  491  ;  ii*  35 
Custard  apple,  ii.  370  and  note 
Cuyo,  Monte  de,  ii.  116  and  note*  - 

117 
Cygnet,  The,  i.  490»  494 


D ALTOS,  Mr.,  ii.  77,  78,  98 
Damar  tree,  i.  389  and  note 
Daniarel,  John,  i.  469 
Dampier,  Judith,  i.  417  and  note* 
Dauicing  women,  i.  3471  365 


61 


Danes,  colony  of,  i.  490 
Darien  Isthmus — 
Connection  under,  for  N.  and  S. 

Seas,  supposed,  ii.  309 
Indians  o^  l  71  and  note*  -72,  201- 

204 
Journey  across,  from  North  to  South 

Seas,  i.  43-55,  212,  217 
Land  breezes  off,  iL  254 
mentioned,  i.  180 ;  iL  200 
Davila,  Pedrarias,  L  198  note* 
Davis  Bay,  L  287 
Davis,  Capt.  Edward,  i.  97  and  note  \ 

>35.  154,  158,  192,  193.  212-213, 
220,  225,  227,  228,  231,  234-235, 
238-239,  243  and  note,  357 
Cruise  with  Captain  Swan,  i.  161- 

243 
Expedition  to  Amapalla  Islands,  i. 

144.  146,  149-152 
Deer,  L  329 

Deer,  Bay  of,  L  353-354 
Defence,  The,  i.  502,  504  ;  ii.  99 
Dellagoa,  River  of,  ii.  321 
Desartes  Island,  i.  117  and  note*,  121 

and  note  • 
Desmarais,  Captain,  i,  217  note* 
D'Estre,  Count,  i.  77  and  no/e^i 
Diabolo,  Mount,  iL  113-114 
Diamond  Point,  iL  49,  79-80 
Diamond,  The,  i.  495 
Dildoe  bushes,  i.  109  and  note  ^  127 
Dilly,  River,  iL  80,81 
Dinding,  Pulo,  ii.  93-98 
Doleman,  i.  190-.91 
Domea   River,   i.  565  and  note,   568, 

571,  J73 
Domea  village,  i.  566-567 
Dorothy,  The,  ii.  71,  72 
Dos  Boccas,  River,  iL  213-214 
Dragon-trees,  i.  452  and  notes 
Drake,  Sir  Francis,  i.  53  note*,  69  and 
note*,  72  note'^,  73  notes*  and*, 
88  note  *,  1 56,  157  and  note,  200 
and  note  >,  205  note  ',251  and  note, 
293  and  note  \  466  and  note  * 
Drink  made  from  bonanos,  i.  325 

From  plantains,  i.  323 
Driscal,  Mr.  D.,  i.  486-487;  ii.  67,  71 
Dropsy,  treatment  of,  i.  271,  290 
Du  Quesne,  cited,  i.  505  and  note  *  ;  ii. 

53  and  note  ' 
Ducks,  ii.  170,  396 
Dulce,  Gulf  of,  L  235 
Durians,  fruit,  i.  328  and  note  * 

I 


INDEX 


Dutch- 
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  settlement  at, 

i-  5>3i  515-516,  520-521 
Hatred  of,  in  the  East  and  West 
Indies,  i.  326  and  note^  338-339, 

35 5»  363.  446  ;  ii.  46 
Sea  fight  with  the  French,  i,  505- 

506 
Trade— 
Achin  gold  mines,  at,  ii.  62 
Cachao,  i.  597  and  note 
Caraccos  coast,  on,  i.  93 
Champa,  with,  i.  397 
Cochinchina,  in,  i.  566-567 
Dinding,  Pulo,  at,  ii.  93-98 
Domea,  at,  i.  566 
Java,  with,  ii.  46 
Jihore,  with,  i.  560  ;  ii.  87 
Malacca,  with,  ii.  83-85,  87-88 
Mindanao,  with,  i.  340 
Slave  Trade,  i.  446 
Spice   Islands,  with,  i.   325-326, 

355 
West  Indies,  in,  i.  76-79 

Wars  of,  ii.  109  andnoie^ 

Dyes,  i.  244-248,  611 

Early  voyages  of  Dampier,  ii.  108- 

114 
Earning,  Captain,  ii.  108 
East  by  south  trade  winds,  ii.  232 
East  Coker,  ii.  52  andnote^y  109 
East  Indies — 
Achar  made  in,  i.  389-390 
Boats  of,  i.  311  and  note 
Cattle  of,  i.  385 
Cotton  trees  in,  i.  187 
Distance  from  America,  i.  300 
Englishmen,  value  set  on,  in,  ii.  42 
Fruits  of,  i.  241,  304-306,  307,  324» 

327, 390 ;  ii-  390 

Language  of  trade  in,  i.  392 

Pearl  Oysters  of,  i.  194 

Princes  of,  i.  445 

Time  reckoning  as  compared  with 

that  of  Europe,  i.  378 
Voyages  to,  i.  293-300;  ii.  250 
Winds,  tides,  and  storms  of,  ii.  202, 

231,  243,  246-250,  268-269,  279, 

290-293,  300,  311 
Women  and  children  in,  i.  393,  588 
East  India  Company  :  Achin  factory, 

i.  486 ;    Bencouli  factory,  i.  496, 

501  ;    Dutch,  see    Dutch    trade; 

Fort  St.  George  factory,  ii.  ^^- 


78  ;   free  merchants  and,  i.  326 ; 

Mindanayan  settlement  proposed, 

i.  360 ;    Siamese  war,  ii.  39 ;  St 

Hellena  seized,  L  524-525 
East  Indian  Ocean — 
Trade  winds  in,  ii.  230,  237-238 
Winds  near  or  under  the  line  in, 

ii.  234 
East-north-east  trade   wind,   ii.  231, 

232 
East-south-east    trade  wind,  ii.  231, 

232 
Easter  Island,  i.  357  note 
Eaton,  Captain,  i.  109,  iii  andnote^- 

112,  120,  122,  123,  124,  125,  126, 

137,  I43>  146,  154,  15^  158,  161, 
162,  168  and  noteSy  169-170,  181, 
210-21 1 ;  ii.  238 

Egg  birds,  i.  84;  ii.  128 

Elephant  Mountain,  i.  565,  571 

Elephanta  storm,  ii.  292 

English  seamen,  prodigality  of^  i.  36S- 

369 
Equator,  crossing  of,  ii.  233-237,  273- 

.275 
Equinoctial  degree,  number  of  miles 

to,  i.  300,  301 

Escondedo,  Port,  ii.  150 

Estapa,  i.  265  and  note  '  ;  ii.  207 

Exquemeling,  cited ^  i«  153  note^ 

Falcon,  Constant,  ii.  38,  39,  40,  77 
Fever  outbreak  at    Rea  Lejo,  i.  243 

and  note 
Fire,  Indian  method  of  getting,  145$ 
Fisgig,  i.  39  and  note  * 
Fisher,    Lieutenant    George,    L    320 

note^;  ii.  595 
Fishers  Island,  i.  564 
Fishing,  Tonquinese    methods  of,  i. 

580-581 
Fishing-hawks,  ii.  171 
Fishook,  Captain,  i.  93  note*  ;  ii.  114 
Fitz-Gerald,  John,  i.  386-387 
Flamingoes,  i.  99-100 
Flemming,  Mr.,  ii.  144 
Floods  in  Torrid  Zone,  i.  584-585 
Florida,  Gulf  of,  i.  206 ;  ii.  249 
Fogo(Fuego),  Island  of,  loi  andnoti\ 

105 
Formosa,  i.  416 
Fort  St.  George,  i.  390,  394,  489, 49^1 

493»    494i    504-506;    ii.    99-ioa 

264 
Freke,  Captain,  i.  494 


612 


INDEX 


French — 

English  war  with,  i.  504-505 
Overland   passage  to    South   Seas 

attempted  by,  i.  203,  212 
Querisao,  attempts  to  capture,  i.  77- 

78 
Fresh  water,  taking  up,  at  sea,  ii.  80, 

81 
Fruit  bats,  i.  ^30  note ' 
Fustick  tree,  li.  382  and  note 

Gagk,  Mr.,  cited^  i.  235  fiote^  237  ;  ii. 

211;  quoted,  i.  237  note 
Galingame,  i.  bio  and  note^ 
Gallapagos  Isles,  i.  126-129,  132-136, 

220,  357  ;  ii.  238,  310-31 1,  320 
Gallera  Island,  i.  195 
Gallio  Island,  i.  34  and  note* ^  36,  185, 

190-191 
Gaily- wasps,  ii.  165 
Gaming,  prevalence  of, among  Eastern 

nations,  i.  592 
Gar-fish,  ii.  172  and  note 
Garachina,  Point,  i.  36  and  note  ^,  195 

and  note  ^,  197,  213,  214,  218,  219 
Gartos,  Rio  de  la,  ii.  11 7-1 19,  125 
Gayney,  G.,  i.  48 
George^  Tke^  ii.  77 
Giblx>nt,  Mr.,  49^ 
Gibbs,  Captain,  ii.  225 
Gtlolo  Island,  L  420,  438 
Goa,  il  85,  293 
Goa  arack,  i.  304 
Goat  Island,  i.  417,  420 
Goats,  i.  1 1 5 
Goddard,  Mr,  437,  502 
Gold,  i.  175  and  note,  199,  215,  216, 

231,  280,  333,  355,  356,  360,  385, 

496-497*  61 1,  638  ;  ii.  55,  60-63 
Gold  coast,  ii.  272-273 
Golden  Island,  i.  29  andnote^^  53 
Golden  Mount,  ii.  50,  60 
Gongo,  iu  12  and  note 
Goodlud,  Admiral,  i.  73  note ',  317-318, 

3SS.  3^ 
Gopson,  Mr.,  i.  y>  and  note 

(sorgonia.  Isles  of,  i.  30  and  note* ,  35, 

"93-194;  "•  y>2 
(infton  Isle,  i.  417,  420,  421,  423,  429 
Grape-tree,  i.  390  <//r</ii<'/^/  ii.  151  and 

note*-i$2 
Gratia  dc  Dios,  Cape,  i.  39 ;  ii.  243, 

3»7.  3»8 
Greenhill,  Mr.,  letters  of,  quoted^  ii. 

270-274 


Gret,  John,  i.  202-204 
Groin,  i.  51 1  and  note 
Gronet,  Capt.  Francois  (Grogniet),  i. 
153  note\  180,  212  andnote^,  216, 
225,  227,  228,  235 
Gualaba,  i.  105 
Guam  (Guahan) — 

Description  of,  and  of  visit  to,  i.  261 
and  note  \  302-303,  307-314,  378  ; 
ii.  3" 
Voyage  to,  with  table  of  each  day's 
run,  i.  292-302 
Guanchaquo,  i.  124,  125,  126 
Guano,  the  (Igiiana),  i.  87  and  note\ 

128,  278  ;  ii.  425-426 
Guasickwalp,  River,  ii.  216  and  note  ^ 
Guatamala,  i.  248-249 
Guatimala,  i.  244-248,  419 
Guatulco,  i.  250-251,  256 
Guava  fruit,  i.  241,  575,  576 
Guaver  trees,  ii.  204 
Guaxaca,  ii.  248 

Guiaquil,  i.  34  and  note  ^  90  and  note  *, 
122, 174-175,  176-180 
Bay  of,  1.  162,  170,  176,  233 
River  of,  i.  89  ;  ii.  308-309 
Guinea  coast — 
Anchorage  on,  i.  419 
Adventure  off,  i.  442-443 
Climate  of,  ii.  235,  298-299 
Current  of,  ii.  319 
Customs  of,  i.  393,  518;  ii.  16-17 
Fruit  of,  i.  324 
Harmatans  on,  ii.  270-271 
Land  breezes  on,  ii.  261 
Outward    and     homeward     bound 
vessels  from,  crossing  the  equator 
by,  ii.  235-236 
Trade  winds  on  coasts  of,  ii.  231, 

239-241 
West  Indies,  course  to,  ii.  244,  273 

274 
Guinea-hens,  ii.  364  and  note 

Guinea  worms,  ii.  187  and  note^i%% 

Guitteba  tree,  ii.  388 

Hacha,  Rio  de  la,  ii.  73-74,  76,  159, 

Hall,  Capt.,  ii.  i83<iS6 

Mr.  Robert,  i.   431,   469,  473-48o, 
488,  558;  ii.  48 
Hally,  Capt.,  ii.  350 
Halover,  the,  ii.  214 
Halpo,  ii.  207,  214 
Hamago,  ii.  222 


613 


INDEX 


Hamilton,  Alex.,  cited^  i.   597  note; 

quoted^  ii.  103  note 
Hammond,  Capt,  ii.  416 
Harmatans,  ii.  270-271 
Harris,  Captain,  i.  135,  161  and note\ 

180,  195,  198,  215,  218,  219,  222, 

225,  228,  229,  231,  234,  242-243 
Harthop,  Mr.,  i.  374i  37^,  43^ 
Havana,  i.  205-206 
Hawkins,  John,  i.  73  note^  ;  quoted,  i. 

219  note^y  471  notes^  and* 
Hean,  i.  569-570  ;  ii.  25-30 
Heath,  Capt.,  i.  502,  504-510,  522,  523 
Hecatee,  i.  128  and  note* 
He-ho,  River,  i.  564  note  * 
Hellier,  Colonel,  ii.  52  and note^y  109 
Heming,  Captain,  ii.  1 13-1 14 andnote^ 
Herons,  ii.  170 

Hewet,  Captain,  ii.  207  and  note  ^y  213 
High  and  low  lands,  rain  in,  ii.  302- 

303 
High  and  low  coast  lands,  depth  of 

sea  in  relation  to,  i.  417-420 
Hilanoones,  the,  i.  333 
Hina  Hill,  ii.  146-147 
Hippopotami  (sea-horses),  African  and 

American,  ii.  200-203 
Hispaniola,  i.  61,  213,  246;  ii.  112 
Hoc  Shu,  i.  414  and note^4iS 
Hodmadods,  see  Hottentots 
Hog  Island,  i.  462  and  note ^462 
Hog  plumb-trees,  i.  148 
Hogs,  i.  189,329;  ii.  55,  195 
Honduras,  Bay  of,  i.  246  and note-247i 

405,  419  ;  ii.  258,  299 
Hooker,  Mr.  John,  ii.  142 
Hottentots,  i.  453,  517-522  ;  ii.  275 
Howel,  Captain,  i.  495,  496  ;  ii.  36,  39, 

100 
Hudsel,  Captain,  ii.  114 
Hudson's  Bay,  i.  287 
Hullock,  John,  ii.  1 20-1 21 
Humming-bird,  ii.  166 
Hurricanes,  ii.  287-290 

Idolaters,  i.  393-394 

Iguanas,  i.  329  and  note  • 

India,  ii.  248,  320 

Indians,  settlements  of,  i.  43-54,  62- 

64,  68-69,   74-75,    113,   1 19-120, 

139-143,  U5-  148-153,  158,  159- 
161,  165,  167,   172-173,  188-189, 

190-191,  201-204,   252-253,  275, 

276  and  note^y  281,  286,  308-312, 

320  andnote\  323,  385-386,  421- 

6 


427,  444-447,  455,  464-467,  471- 
472,  491,  498,  518,  519;  iL  iio- 
112,  153,  191-192,  208-211,214 
Indian  Sea — 
Calculations  as  to  breadth  of,  300 
Winds  near  or  under  the  line  in,  iL 

234 
Indico,  i.  244-246 
Indrapore,  i.  495  and  note* 
Ingwa  fruit,  ii.  392  and  note* 

Jaccals,  i.  256  and  note 

Jack  fruit,  i.  328  and  note  '-329 

Jamaica — 
Animals  o(  i.  64,  393 ;  ii.  194-195 
Capture  of,  by  Spain,  i.  63  note 
Chma  root  of,  i.  405 
Dyes  made  in,  i.  245 
Fruit  of,  i.  223,  224,  241,  307 
Trees  of,  i.  60,  89-90,  143,  264, 
Voyages  to,  ii.  109-110,  123-142 
Winds  and  storms  of^  ii.  253-256, 
259,  264,  284-285 

Japan,  i.  32-33,  609 

Java,  i.  420 ;  ii.  65 

JefTeries,  L.,  i.  443 

Jenette,  ii.  395 

Jennipah  fruit,  ii.  391 

Jeoly,  Prince  (The  Painted  Prince), 

i.  355,494-5«>»  5^2, 511,528;  ii.ioo 
Jew-fish,  i.  265  and  note ' 
Jihore,  Kingdom  of,  i.  559-560;  ii.  87 
Johanna  Island,  i.  494,  509 
Johnson,  Captain,  ii.  40-47,  114 
Jonca,  Passange,  i.  484-485  ;    ii.  48, 

60,  61 
Jonks,  Chinese,  i.  407-408 
Josiahy  They  i.  522,  523,  528 
Juan  Fernandez,  i.  11 2-1 19,  124 
Jucatan,  ii.    116,    119,   126,  132,  159, 

256,  318 

Kalin  Susu,  i.  444  note 

Kent,  Capt.,  ii.  109,  112 

Keyhooca,  ii.  216,  217 

Keys  Island  (of  Cuba),  i.  132,  133 

Kings  Islands,  see  Pearl  Islands 

Knight,  Captain,  i.  217  and  note* y  227 

233-235,  238,  242-243,  494 
Knox,  Captain,  i.  306  and  note^  49 

and  ftote  * 

La  Guaire,  i.  92-93 
La  Sound,  Captain,  i.  200  and  note^ 
203,  225 


H 


INDEX 


La  Sounds  Key,  i.  53  ami  tu>le\  54. 

J7.70 
La  Vacbc,  lile  of,  i.  72  and mote^ 
La  VeU,  Cape.  ii.  243. 144.  31  S>  3"  7 
\a   Vera  Cnu,  i.   160,  276,  j<)i  and 

mfflr^;  ii.  314.  215,  JI9-321 
L»ck  and  Ucquered  work,  i    574-577. 

L«cy.  CapuJD,  L  561,  566 ;  W.  35,  39, 

40,47 
LAdrone  Islands,  i.  261,  293.  303,  308, 

3'i 
L«gtma,Cityof.  ii.  353-357 
Lance-wDod,  l  143  and nolt' 
LaKCTDU,  ii.  3!0 
Land  brceiCM— 

Coldness  of.  ii.  264 

CeaeraJ.  ii.  153  et  sty. 

Iklands,  among,  ii.  2A0 

Lagtme*,  in,  ii.  2^8^259 

Level  caa«U,  on,  ti.  160-261 

Feraliar  to  some  coasts,  ii.  265-273 

Short  voyages,  for,  ii.  149 

Sijnts  of.  ii-  263-364 

StnwKest  and  &inie«,  where  met 
with,  ii.  257-260 
Laos,  Kingdctn  of,  i.  J71  and  note 
Ljirelia,  i.   196,  220^  331   and  nott\ 

«7.  131 
Leotpa,  River,  1.  243 
Lvoo,  City  oU  i-  Jii  lutd  nolt  >,  335, 

237-244 
Leopards,  li.  396 
LcfmMy.  L  ^A,  341  and  noU ' 
Libbytrees,  i.  yt)  and  mcU*-i2o 
Lichca,  i.  57 (  aKdnoU*,  576 
Ligunn,  i.  561  and  m<U ' 
Lina.  t.  11:,  123,  125,  t88, 191,  199- 

300,  261 
Lima.  Viceroy  of,  i.  123,  125,  204 
Limes,  i.  307,  j;6 
Lmchanchee,  li-  11 9 
IJmaebtXetL,  fwa/td,  i.  tlo  nott' 
Lioas,  ii.  16} 

LinlrtoB.  Sir  Fdwaid,  ii.  416 
Luardsiii.  152 
LaafiEU.  ii  37i-i77 
Lobos  Island.  L    113-116,    162,   169, 

tSi,  211,  111 
Lobuen,  I  109 
Locum*,  i.  4»4.  S7*-i79 
Loncthcad  Key,  ii.  1 1  j 
Loffoe,  Cape,  ii.  243 
Lofship,  wooden,  i.  yn  an//,  310  mid 


Logwood- cutlers  of  Campeachy  Ban 
ii.  132-123,  i43-'44. 146.  149-15*^" 
153-154,  155-157. 178^/ «?.,  334- 
225 
Logwood  trees,  ii.  115,  158-159 
Long,  CapL,  ii.  131-133  _ 

Luconia  Island,  i.  316-317,  384-38^ 

434 
Ludfbrd,  Mr.,  11.  20-21 
Lynch,  Sir  Thamaa,  ii.  195,  336 

Macao,  i.  413 
Macasser  Town,  i.  43S,  446 
Mackril,  Spanish,  ii.  173 
Madagascar,  i.  118,  493-494 
Magellan  (Fernando  Magethaens), 

316  and noU^yj 
Magellan,  Streights  of,  i.  117 
Maguella,  valley  of,  i,  267 
Maho  tree,  i.  68 
Mahomcdans,  i.  344-360,  485 
Mail,  drinks  made  from,  ii.  209 
Malabar  coast,  i.    588-589 :    ii. 

269,  292 
Malabrigo,  i.  32t,  222 
Malacca,  ii.  40,  47,  83-86,  88-89, 

558 

Malacca,  Streights  of,  i.  558;  ii.  39,313 
Malayan  language,  i.  392 
Malayans,  i.  398-399.  4^7  :  "■  43-44. 

56,  87-88,  97.  100-101.  loa 
Maldlve  Islands,  i.  306 
Malmesy  wine,  ii-  355 
Mammee  trees,  i.  127.  Z12  and  net*' 
Mammce-sappoia's,  star  apples,  i. 

and  note*,  223-224 
Mammet  trees,  i.  208  and  note* 
Manatee  (sea  cow)  64-67.  73.  33©  1 

t73.  wj 
Manchaneet  trees,  i.  70  and  note  • 
Mandarins  of  Tonqiiin,  >i.  14-18 
Manifostan  fruit,  ii.  53 
Maogera  Island,  i.  147,  149,  152 
Mango-Achar,  i.  389,  390 
.Manifocs,  i.  389-390,  573  and  naft^i 

ii.  390 
Mangrove  trees,  i.  84  ami  not*,  Bj, 

336-137;  ii-  191,3*8 
Manila,  i.  360-262  and  motes,  175  and 

nolt,  117,  33S  is<»rf  noU,  383-384> 

386 ;  li.  220 
Mania,  Island  of,  i.  159-161 
Maracaybo.  L  sot 
Margama,  Islandof,  i.  85,  86, S;,  194. 


\ 


i'i 


INDEX 


Maria's  Islands,  i.  288-290 

Marquiz,  Port,  i.  263  and  note  * 

Martinico,  i.  78 

Martin  Lopez,  Port  of,  i.  149 

Maslin,  ii.  52  andnote^ 

Massaclan,  i.  280 

Maticjue,  Gulf  of,  i.  244,  246 

Mauntius,  i.  128  andnote^ 

Maxentelbo,  i.  282 

Mayo,  Island  of,  i.  103-105  ;  ii.  357- 

'   ^    360,  362-367 

Meangis  Islands,  i.  352,  355,  495  and 

note^y  496-498,  502 
Melory,  tree,  i.  465  and  note,  466-467 
Men-of-War  birds,  i.  79-80,  83  ;   ii. 

128-129 
Mendibees,  ii.  393 
Mentaweis  Islands,  i.  462  andnote^ 
Merga,  ii.  76 

Mencasah  fruit,  ii.  392  andnote^ 
Merida,  ii.  119 
Meridians,  calculation  of,  i.  379  and 

note^ 
Mestisos,  i.  207 
Metcalf,  Captain,  i.  495 
Mexico — 

Commerce  of,  i.  291 

Land  route  from  Panama  to,  i.  231 

Mines  of,  i.  283-284,  286-287 

Navigation  of  coast  of,  ii.  239,  240- 
241,  250  .,,J 

Swan's  (Captain)  journey  to,  i.  242 
et  seg,  • 

Winds  and  storms  of,  ii.  258,  261- 
262,  268,  280-284 

otherwise    mentioned,    i.    137-138, 
197,  200,  248  ;  ii.  219 
Mims  (Myngs),   Sir  Christopher,  ii. 

147  and  note  ^-i^^ 
Minchin,  Captain,  i.  172  ;  ii.  78,  79, 

9h  93»  98 
Mindanao — 
Circumcision  Day  in,  i.  345-349 
Coasting  voyage  round,  i.  352,  377, 

379-381 
Description  of,  i.  318-331 

English  settlement  desired  bypeople 

of,  i.  354-358 
People  of,  i.  332-350,  354-355.  359, 
361,  363,  370,  371,  376,  395  ««^ 
note 

^Werofjh^S^andnote  ',362,366-367 
Sultan  of,  i.  336  and  note,  341-348, 

359-362 
Trade  route  to,  i.  356-357 


Mindanao^  The,  i.  494 
Mindora  Island,  i.  383-384 

Streights  of,  i.  385 
Miniota,  ii.  365 
Mishlaw,  i.  323 
Mogul,  the,  English  seamen  in  service 

of,  i.  491,  492-493 
Monday,  Captain,  i.  525  and  note 
Money  and  money  changers,  ii.  59-^ 

67-68 
Monkeys,  ii.  161-162 
Monmouth   Island,  i.   417,  420,  421, 

423,429 
Monomatapa,  i.  453 
Monsoons,  i.  476  and  note;  ii.  246-2$o 
Monsoons  (storms),  ii.  291-292 
Monte-Christo,  i.  160 
Moody,  Mr.,  i.  355,  437,  495,  496, 499, 

500 ;  ii.  100 
Moors,  i.  491,  492  ;  ii.  72-73 
More,  Mr.  Henry,  i.  217-218,  359,  377 

note,  381 
Morgan,  Mr.,  i.  490,  491,  493 
Morgan,  Sir   Henry,   i.  59  note\  73 

note^,  198  andnote^  ;  iL  112, 154 
Moro  de  Porco^  i.  221  and  note  \  231 
Morrice,  Price,  ii.  186 
Morton,  R.,  i.  2 10-2 11 
Moskito  Indians,  i.  33, 39-42  and  notes, 

65^68,  1 1 2-1 14 
Mosquito  country^  i.  42  note 
Mountain    cow    (tapirX   ii.    199  c^ 

note-201 
Muckishaw,  fruit,  ii.  392  and  note ' 
Muddiford,  Sir  Thomas,  i.  245  ;  ii.  1 12 
Mugeres  Island,  ii.  115  and  note* 
Mulattoes,  i.  58  and  note,  264-266 
Mulberry  trees,  i.  577 
Mum,  i.  414  and  note  ^ 
Munden,  R.,  525  note 
Mungaroo  fruit,  ii.  392  and  note  * 
Musl^  i.  61 1 
Musteran-de-ova   fruit,    ii.    392    and 

note^-y^l 
Mustesoes  (mestisos),!.  ^Zandnote,iffl 

NarborOUGH,  Sir  John,  i.    1 21-122 

and  note,  262 
Nassaw  Island,  i.  462 
Nata,  i.  196,  221  and  note  \  231 
Natal,  account  of,  ii.  321-324 
Necklin,  John,  ii.  104 
Negroes,  ii.  1 80-181,  188,  438-440 
Nellegree,  The,\\,  71,  72,  75 
Nelly,  Mr.,  i.  396,  436 


616 


INDEX 


Nequebars,  see  Nicobar 
Nevil,  Captain,  ii.  206  midnoie^ 
New  Holland- 
Description  of,  i.  64,  452-457  ;  iL 

312-313 
Voyages  to,  i.  450-452 ;  ii.  349^/  seq, 

Newfoundland,  ii.  108,  224,  367 

A'ewport^  The,  il  358 

Ngeam,  Province  of,  i.  573,  574 ;  ii.  6 

Nicaragua,  i.  39,  63,  140,  153  note*\ 

ii.  159 

Nicobar  Island,  i.  loi  and  note ^^  463- 
467,  468-470,  478  ;  ii.  26 

Nicoya,  i.  139-140,  235 

Nigrill,  ii.  141 

Nile,  i,  585 

Noddy  biids,  i.  83  and  note  ^ ;  ii.  437 

Nombre  de  Dios,  i.  29  note\  88  and 
note* 

North- East  Passage,  method  to  dis- 
cover, i.  288 

North-easterly    wind  from   England, 
ii.  231 

North  Seas,  overland  from  Pacific  to, 
i.  153 

North- West  Passage,  method  to  dis- 
cover, i.  287-288 

Norths,  the,  ii.  157-158,  280-284 

Norwood,  Mr.,  i.  301  and  note 

Nuke-mum,  i.  579-580 

Nun-buoy,  ii.  441 

Nurse  bird,  ii.  129 

Nutmeg  trees,  i.  325,  390 


Oaks,  tropical,  ii.  155 

Oakum,  i.  306 

Oarrha,  i.  270 

Obi,  Pulo,  i.  396  note 

Old  Callabar,  ii.  241 

Oleta,  River,  i.  282  and  note^ 

Oliver,  John,  i.  470-493 

Omba  Island,  i.  448  and  note* 

One- Bush- Key,  ii.   122-123,  153  and 

note\  189 
Opium  trade,  ii.  88-89 
Orange  Island,  i.  417,  423 
Oranges,  i.  575  and  note  ^^  576  ;  ii.  390 
Oratavia,  ii.  35t«  355 
Orchilla,  Islands  of,  i.  83  and  note* 
Oro,  Pulo,  I  560 
Osthdges,  i.  514 ;  ii.  396 
Otee  fruit,  ii.  w  and  note  ^ 
Otoque  Islancf,  i.  220  and  note  * 
Otta,  i.  244  and  note*,  245-247 


Outriggers  used  by  Indian  boat- 
builders,  i.  ^10  and  note  S  31 1  note  * 

Oxenham,  John,  i.  53  note*,  193  note, 
200  and  note  1 

Oxford,  The,  i.  72  and  note* 

Oysters,  i.  197 

PacH£C.\  Island.  L  195  and  note*,  198, 

216,  219,  22^,  226 
Pacifick  Ocean,  1.  120- 121 
Pain,  Capt.,  i.  57,  68,  81  and  note-^2 
Paita,  ii.  258 

Palimbam,  i.  398  and  note  1 
Pallacat  (PulicatX  i*   505  and  note*-, 

ii.  292 
Palm-berries   (dendee),    ii.   393    ami 

note^ 
Palm-tree,  spreading,  i.  263-264 
Palm-wine,  i.  264 
Palma- Maria  trees,  i.  232 
Palmas,  Cape,  ii.  242 
Palmas,  River,  ii.  214 
Palmeto  tree,  i.  173 
Panama,  i.  57,  65,  125,  192  and  note- 

193,  196,  198  a////  note*,  199-200, 

206.  220,  222,  225,  331,  419  ;   ii. 

243,  244,  2j8,  299-300 
Panama,  President  of,  1.  125, 139,  159, 

16a- 16 1,  207  note^ 
Panay  Island,  L  383  and  note  ^ 
Pangasanam,  i.  384  and  note  * 
Panuk,  river  and  city,  ii.  221 
Papah  fruit,  ii.  370-371 
Parricootas,  ii.  172 
Parrots,  ii.  223 
Parselorc,  Pulo,  ii.  82-83,  92 
Passao,  Cape,  i.  34  and  note"^,  184  ;  ii. 

257 
Patagonia,  i.  113,  357 
Patereroes,  i.  61  and  note* 
Payta,  i.  16J-164,  167,  234 
Pearl  fishenes,  ii.  22,  74,  194,  279 
Pearl  Islands,  i.  62  and  note*,  192  and 

note,  195-198,  216-217,  222,  225, 

565-566 
Peccary  (wild  hog),  i.  41  and  note  ^ 
Pedro,  Point,  iu  256 
Pegu.  i.  389,  393»  56}  ;  ii.  75*77 
Pelicans,  ii.  170-171 
Penguin  fruit,  i.  123-124,  278 
Peniare  Isle  (Pantar),  i.  448  and  note*- 

449 
Pepper,  i.  559,  562  ;  ii.  40,  44-46,  55» 

87,  102-103,  21B  and  note  ^ 
Peralta,  Capuin,  ii.  154  and  note* 


6.7 


INDEX 


Perica  (Perico),  i.  205  and  note  1,  207 

and  note  ^^  209-210,  216,  219 
Pcrnambuc,  ii.  yj^yil 
Perpetuana,  ii.  206  and  note  * 
Persia,  Gulph  of,  ii.  246,  269-270 
Peru — 
Climate  of,  i.  188,  586 ;  ii.  295-296 
Navigation  of  coast  of,  i.  418  ;    ii. 

249-250,  320 
Trade  between  Acapuico  and,  i.  261 
Winds  off  coast  of,  ii.  239-241,  257, 

261-262 
otherwise    mentioned,   i.   98,    118, 
121-122,  163-168,  231 
Petango  fruit,  ii.  392  and  note  • 
Petaplan  Hill,  i.  264  and  note 
Petit  Guavos,  i.  59  and  note^^  61,  97, 

212-213 
Petrels,  ii.  408,  409 
Petumbo  fruit,  ii.  392  and  note ' 
Peuns,  i.  491-492 

Philippine  Islands,  i.  206  and  note* ^ 
260  et  seq,^  291,  293  and  note\ 

^      315-318,  356-357,383 

Physick-nuts,  ii.  393  and  note  • 

Picard,  Captain,  i.  217 

Pinas,  Don  Diego  de,  i.  191,  198 

Pinas,  Port,  i.  218  and  note *-2ig 

Pine,  wild,  ii.  158 

Pines,  Island  of,  i.  128  ;  ii.  133,  134- 

139,  301-302 
Pinose,  ii.  363 
Pintado-bird,  ii.  408,  419 
Piscadores  Islands,  i.  412-415 
Pisco,  i.  217  and  note  ^ 
Piura,  i.  167-168 
Plantain-fibre-cloth,  i.  324  and  note  1, 

335 
Plantain  tree  and  fruit,  i.  41  andnote^^ 

52,92,321-324 
Plants,  account  of,  ii.  445-448 
Plata,  Island  of,  i.  156-157,  181-182, 

311,401-402 
Pongassinay,  i.  384  and  note  ' 
Ponticheri,  i.  505  and  note  *,  506 
Pontique,  Point,  i.  276  and note^-2'TJ 
Ponto,  Don  Pedro  de,  ii.  356-357 
Pool,  Capt.,  i.  490,  566,  609,  610 ;  ii. 

35,  38 
Porpusses  (Porpoises)  oyl  of,  i.  561 

Port  Royal  Harbour  and  Island,  i.  131, 
1 32  ;  ii.  1 14, 1 50  and notes-i^ i 

Portabell  (Porto  Bello),  i.  57,  60,  75, 
192,  199-200,  204-205,  211 

Porto  Nova,  i.  386  and  note 

61 


Porto  Rico  Islands,  i.  246 

Portuguese,  I  386,  413,  512,  524 ;  ii 
84-86 

Posole,  ii.  145,  209 

Potatoes,  i.  41  and  note  ^ 

Pracel,  shoals  of,  i.  387  and  note*-ii&y 
401,  561,  563 

Praya,  ii.  367 

Prickle-pear,  i.  241 

Prince  George's  Island,  i.  289 

Princess  Ann,  The,  iL  99 

Privateers'  method  of  securing  in- 
formation, i.  58-59 

Proes  (Indian  boats),  i.  308-311, 342- 

343 
Prout,  Captain,  ii.  189,  190 

Providence,  Isle  of  (Santa  Katalina), 
i.  59  and  note  ^,  63  ;  ii.  1 59 

Puebla  Nova,  i.  233  andnote^ 

Pulo-Land,  for  names  beginning  wHk 
Putoy  see  second  part  o/name:  flJ 
Pulo  Condore^  see  Condore 

Pumple-musses,  ii.  390 

Pumple-nose  fruit,  ii.  52  and  note  ^-^^ 

Pumps,  Spanish,  ii.  435 

Puna  Island,  i.  172-174,  197 

Punta  Arena,  i.  172 

Punta  de  Guaira  (La  GuayraX  i*  20; 
and  note  * 

Purchas,  quoted^  ii.  69  note^  129  note 

QUAMS,  i.  69  and  note  * ;  ii.  167 
Queen's  Peak,  ii.  50  note 
Querisao,  i.  76  and  note  ^ 
Quibo,  Islands  of  (Cobaya)  i.  36,  18$ 

231,  232,  233,235 
Quicaro  Island,  i.  232,  235 
Quinam  city,  i.  562 
Quito,  i.  175-176 

Raccoons,  ii.  425  and  note,  443  am 

note* 
Rack,  i.  601 

Rackan,  i.  610  and  note  ^ 
RcUnboWy  The,  i.  490,  566 ;  ii.  35 
Rains,  influence  of,  on  harvests  of  th 

Torrid  Zone,  ii.  587-589 
Raja  Laut — 

Entertainment   of    English   by, 

354-366,  368-372 
otherwise  mentioned,  343-344,  36I 

372-373,  435>  436-437,  498 
Rancheries,  the,  i.  74  and  note^  19 

232,  235 
Rattlesnakes,  ii.  397 

8 


^C4pisin.ii.  143 
^  a.  173 

■  1361  137.  '44-146,  335- 
M.  3H 


.  uin,  royafes  with,  L  377- 
).  401-46*  490-491,  493,  494 
ohn  (of  Brislol),  1.  101,  374 
k,  Capuin,  i.  441 
1,1.493.494:  11.245-346 
Dd,  Mexican,  1.  Mpmtd  lUiU*, 


tnisslonary  eflbrU,  iu  36- 

uincK,  of,  i.  603-60J 
ut  Sucking  lishes 
396-397,  406.  577.  587-S»8  : 

toti-  371-371.  414  ""'^'w/ir' 
,  Mr.,  ii.  91,  93,  95,  96, 93 

.    Mi.,  i,    J86 ;    eiltd,   I.    140 
',  193  HoU^  quoUd,  i,  90  not*  *, 

I  noU,  20B  n6l*  * 

inde.  i.  73  and naU'-Ji,  7s 
oT  ibe  *».  ii.  374 

Capuin,  ii.  21^  ami  it^tt,  317 

■  '    ,i.8»-8c.89.94.9! 

.        1 16  UMlf  MO// \  118 

CapiaiRL,  i.  133 

I;  Tit,  ii.  349  and  not* 

kpuin,  t.  330  and  nol4*,  335, 

Captain,  ifuoUd,  ii.  aoi-soj. 

33" 

SiTtr,  i.  j64,  S69.  STOi  S73 

Cape  11.  314-316,317 
Pnlo^ii.  ji 

lible,  L  38ft  S74  ;  ii-  S4 

river  and  town  of,  i.  3S0  and 

'-a«l 

^ptain,  t.  S7.  ai7  iroA-',  334 
wy  Uhod.  ii,  434-43i 
John,  ii.  331 


;,  Cape,  ii.  336,  316,  376 
L,  Itkof,  I.  171 
!rM.i«.3i>-3S3     , 
*•  Ficc,i.  410  HIM  MO/'* 


St.   Francisco,  Cape,  i.  35  and  note 

36,  ISS-156,  184,  185.331 
St.  George,  Fort,  \.  313,  317 
St.  Hellena,!.  158,  159,  161,  181,  533- 

S38 
St   Jago  Island,  i.  I04-105  ;    ii.  109, 

Wiandnols*,  pl-^l^ 
Si.  jago,  River  of,  i,  185-191,  182  and 

note\  384  andnnW 
St.  John  d'UUoa,  i.  360 ;  ii.  219 
St  John's  Island  (near  Hong-Kong), i. 

401  and  ntitt-ifiy,  405-407 
St.  John's  Island  (Philippine  Islands), 

i.  316,  31B,  38s,  434 
St  Julian,  Port,  i.  197  and  note 
St  Lawrence,  Cape,  ii.  357 
St  Lawrence  Isle,  1.  138 
St  Lorcnio,  Cape.i.  38,  157, 160,313- 

314 
St.  Lucas,  Cape,  i.  361  and  note*,  38£s 

2B9 
Santa  Lucia  Island,  i.  473  :  ii.  1 10 
Santa  Mana,  i.  44,  t8o,  195,  315  and 

nMei-3t6 
Sanla  Maria,  River,  i.  54,214-115,317, 

218,  333 
Si.  Martha,  i.  73  and  note  >,  30{ 
St  Martin's  Land,  ii.  121  and  nott\ 

217 
St  Michael,  i.  36  and  neti ' 
St   Michael,   Gulf  nf,  i.  313-316;  ii. 

308-310 
St       Michael'i       Mount       (Central 

America),  i.  146,  147,  U^ 
St  Nicholas  Island,].  [01-103,  i^S 
S|.  Paul's  Island,  i.  196,  22; 
Santa  Pecaquc,  i.  283,  284 
St  Peter  and  St.  Paul.  River,  ii.  191. 

198  and nole-\tf),  203 
St  Thomas  tsbnd,  i.  76  am,i  not** 
St  Vincent,  ii.  no 
Salinas,  ii.  144-146 
Sail  Island,  i.  99-102 
Sallagua.   i.  261    and  n^i*,  169  and 


367 :    kemintc    tcaton, 
146 


»4S- 


Sall-Tortuga,  Island  of.  t.  8j-S6;  iu 

366 
Samshu,  1.  414  «Mi«<*IV'-4iS 
SamboUoes   Islands,  i  S}.  A  6»-7i. 

201-104  i  ■)■  160.  2A0 
SatnbiloDg,  Pulo,  ii.  93-93 


619 


INDEX 


Sambo,  River,  i.  214  and  note\  218, 

219 
Sapadilloes,  i.  70,  222  and  note' y  223 
Saphire^  The^  i.  561 ;  ii.  35 
Sapiera  trees,  ii.  387-388 
Sappan  wood,  i.  61 1 
Sarsaparilla,  i.  175 
Sassafras,  ii.  394  and  note  ^ 
Savannahs,  i.  114-115,  138 
Sawkins,  Capt.,  i.  46,  199,  208  note^^ 

209  note^^  233  andnote^ 
Scorpions,  i.  329 
Scucnaderoes,  i.  216 
Scuda  Island,  i.  69  and  note  ^ 
Sea  breezes — 
Distinction    between    trade    winds 

and,  ii.  251 
Rising  of,  ii.  252 
Temperature  of,  ii.  264 
Sea,  depth  of,  near  high  or  low  lands, 

i.  417-420 
Sea-horse  (African  hippopotamus),  ii. 

200-203 
Sea-lion,  i.  118  and  note,  526 
Sea    reckonings    and    variations,    ii. 

410-415 
Sea-snakes,  ii.  432 
Seal  oil,  ii.  1 30-1 31 
Seal  skin  bladders,  ii.  262 
Seals,  i.  11 6- 117,  123,  278,  289-290, 

515;  ii.  129,  130-131 
Seasons  of  Torrid  Zone  on  N.  and  S. 

of  the  Equator,  ii.  294-295 
Sebo  Island,  1.  381 
Segovia,  i.  153  and  note  ^ 
Selam,  ii.  118 

Serangani  Islands,  i.  352  note  ^ 
Series,  Captain,  ii.  154  and  note 
Serles^s  Key,  ii.  154 
Sharks,  i.  107,  136;  ii.  426-427 
Sharks'  Bay,  ii.  423  and  note-42g 
Sharp,  Captain,   140  and  note\  153, 

199,  200,  209  note ',  2 10,  2 1 5,  233 ; 

ii.  155  and  note 
Sheba,  Queen  of,  ii.  69 
Sherboro,  i.  106  and  note  ^ 
Ship  worms,  i.  366  and  note-^6y 
Shipwrecked    men,    treatment    of,  in 

Cochinchina  and  Pegu,  i.  562-563 
Shrimps,  ii.  222 
Siam,  ii.  26,  36-39,  77-7Z,  248,  389, 

393i  397,  419 
Sibbel  de  Wards  Islands,  i.  108  and 

note'^-\o() 
Sierra- Leone,  ii.  160 


Sierra  Nevada,  i.  73  note^ 

Silk,  i.  574,  577,  608 

Silk  cotton  plant,  ii.  362-363,  388-390 

Sillabar,  i.  398  andnote^ ;  ii.  100 

Silver  mines  .of  Mexico,  i.  283-284 

Silvester  trees,  i.  248 

Simalu  (Hog  Island),  i.  462  andnoU^ 

463 
Sincapore,  Streights  of,  i.  559;  il  40 
Sisal,  ii.  119  and  note,  121 
Sixteen-Mile  Walk,  Jamaica,  ii.  112- 

113 
Skinner,  Captain,  ii.  189,  190 

Sloane,    Sir    Hans,    quoted,   iL    112 

notes  •  and  ^ 

Sloth,  the,  ii.  162-163 

Smith,  Mr.,  i.  239-240,  354,  436 

Snake-root,  ii.  394  and  note  * 

Snakes,  i.  231  note;  ii.  164, 397-398,433 

Snappers,  i.  116  and  note,  118 

Snooks  fish,  i.  259  and  note  ^ 

Sologues,  i.  333,  380 

Song-Ka,  River,  i.  564  note^ 

Sougoud  Boyan  Bay,  i.  352  and  note^- 

354 
Sour-sop,  ii.  390  and  note ' 

South  Keys,  ii.  139-140 

South  Seas — 

Breadth  of,  reckoning  as  to,  i.  300 

Navigation  in,  ii.  249-250 

Overland  passage  of  Darien  Isthmu 
to,  i.  201-204 

Pearl  oysters  in,  i.  194 

Trade  winds  in,  ii.  230,  231,  237-2^ 

Voyage  in,  i.  iii  et seg. 

Winds  near  and  under  the  line  ii 
ii.  234 
South-west  monsoon,  ii.  330  and  note 
Southerly   winds    in    North    Atlanti 

ocean,  ii.  233 
Souths,  the,  ii.  284-287 
Sowden,  Mr.,  i.  500  and  note^soi 
Soy,  i.  580 
Spain,  treasure  fleet   of,  i.   88  noU 

192,  199,  204-206  ;  ii,  220-221 
Spaniards,  i.  71,  74,  184,  188,209-21 

213,   215-216,   217,   223-224,  22/ 

229  and  noteSf  246-247,  252-25 
257-259,  269-270,  274,  311-31 
317-318,  338  and  note,  363,  37 
383;  il.  193-194,218,219,223-2: 

Spice  Islands,  1.  320,  325-326, 355-3 

Spiders,  ii.  165 

Sprague  (SpraggeX  Sir  Edward,  il  i 
and  note  ^ 


620 


INDEX 


prattin,  Robert,  i.  47  amd  mcU 

pringer's  Key,  L  56  amd  m^U,  57 

quash,  the,  vl  160- 161 

tar  apple  tree,  L  224 

tates  Island,  L  1 10  mmd  m^e^  419 

tatham,  Capt,  L  93  maU^i  iL  114 

tock-iish-wood,  ii.  159-160 

tone,  Mr.,  ii.  268 

torms,  terrible,  i.    9^-^9>    409-411. 

430-431;  iL  189-190 
torms,  tropical,  iL  279-293 
ubtle-jacks,  iL  xh^atidtufU^ 
licking-fishes   (Remora),   L   94  mmd 

note-<^^  ;  iL  275 
agar,  i.  241-242,  424-425  I   ^  f-^ 

370.382 
Refining  oi;  ii.  382-383 
umatra,  L   yib-yorj^  398  and  mUe^ 

420,  461,  4^3. 484, 489 ;  iL  90-97 

ummasenta.  River  (Usamaswta 
River),  iL  153,  198,  225 

ummasenta  winds,  iL  265-266 

un,  declination  oC  in  ralmbting 
meridians,  L  y;<)  amd  moU^ 

urinam,  i.  64,  419 

urrat  channel,  iL  5 1 

wan,  Capuin,  i.  109,  112,  123,  161, 
170,  184^/1^.,  192,  193,210,212, 
213,  216,  226,  227,  228,  233,  235, 
238-239,  242  and  tuf/e^-My,  244, 
260,  266,  272,  275,  285-286,  288- 
300,  3'4,  35S-356,  3S7-3A  435- 
-♦37 

word  fish,  ii.  129 


*ABAOO    Island,  L    207    amd 
209,219,225;  iL  no,  154 
able  land,  i.  513 
abogilla  Island,  i.  209  mu 
*acatalpo,  iL  207 
'amarind,  wild,  L  324110/^' 
'aneiuitoro  Ptak,  i.  266  mote-ifrj 
'angoU  Island,  L250 
'apir,  ii.  \^  and  nde-iox 
'ar  tree,  the,  i.  389  and  naU 
'arpom  fish,  iL  117-118 
*artan,  Spanish,  L  61  amdmoit^ 
*artars,  subjection  of  Chinese  by,  i. 

403,  413-414  . 
"artary,  coast  of,  L  288 
'artilloes,  iL  145,  209 

"ca,  405 

'eat.  Captain,  L  293,  296,  368,  375, 
377  and  twU^  38 19  432  Md  moU\ 

436,469.494 


I 


I 


and  isnrxk,  1.  ^c^  amd  mat :  ii.  ziif 
Tenaau  laxnwvt  xi.  i.  zr-^  :  L-  3V-23 

TemaAi.  Isiaxid  c£.  i..  yzi-^^ 
Teaga ife.  Pikr  ci  ;.  73  i^nvU *  :  iL 

3^  i»^  «/^.  35-^-3^1 
TcsHjxnmder  u^  11.  3-:  smd  m4g-J72 
Tesamde.  l  33^  am  vr^iff  - 
Tessuna.  La^rnsa.  i^  i33-'>( 
Tcmasc:.  1.  3^^^.  423  «»i  nt^u^  43I: 
Terra  del  Fnsipct.  I  ^  j  :s-  35^  337 
TempOL  :-  S2t  amdmie^-i^, 
ThelHpan^  L  21^7 
Tbwaji.  r^jAitm   l  329  ;  :.  73-72 


I>OBa»  K-ner.  <<£  L'3^^5.  iV. 
liia&ds,  ol  iL  33^-313 
La^xDca  Terxaaa,  of ,  1^  133 
Xew  HoUax^  vj^vl  of,  ;  451,  437 
Stiooj^  afid  weauL  j-  yJj^yJL 

TiCof^  L  320.  43?j 

Tiger  cat.  ;i-  J^y3 

Tlmaosi.  PuJk*.  ^  3V-/ 

the  »'/rici,  ~  37^37> 
Tmyx  ImumI,  l  yy^.  432-  -4^  43^^ 
Tispo,  IL  221 
To^oco^,  L  340  ««(/  iv«/^-34f 

IfjdAj,  L  3c*4 

Tomar/)  n\^r  and  rilhi-^^.  :.  i</>  |/yi 

TQ«npeck,  ;l  i^^  <jmu/  ftoU  » 

TocDpe<pe  laguoe  a»j  ''/tio,  j;,  221 
222 

Toodeio,  V.rktr,  ijl  2f  $  and  fu^tr  * 

Tcmqain — 

A&xmaJ  Jile  in,  l  577  57', 
Ann*  and  armx  '/f.  *;   412 
Bay  o{.  1,  363. 5//, ;  1;,  35 

Con»t;r»jtJ//n  fWT,  u.  i  <^/  i<^ 
Cookery     marketv-  pf/A^i«K/f««,      1, 

Dru^i  jn.  1.  610-61 1 

fishing  m,  1.  ^fSo-^Hi 

Funeral]  fea%f  in,  11,  2  }  24 

Hor»^*  and  elep^anft  of  the  kinic, 

11-  3-4 
Impoftt,  i  612 


621 


INDEX 


Tonquin  {continuedy-- 
Justice,  administration  of,  ii.  12-16 
Kings  of,  i.  596-597  ;  ii.  i  et  seq. 
Missionary  work  in,  ii.  26-28 
Natives  of,  i.  590  et  seq.y  606-612 
Naval  force  of,  ii.  8-10 
Productions,  natural,  of,  i.  574-577 
Provinces  of,  i.  573-574 
Religion  of,  i.  394,  603-605 
Situation,  soil,  &c,  i.  571-572 
Trading  villages  of,  i,  566-570,  593- 

594 
otherwise  mentioned,  i.  489;  ii.  160, 

248,  312 
Tornadoes,  i.  107,  155-156,  236,  244, 

330-331  ;    "•   233-234,     272-273, 

303-304 
Tomd  Zone,  floods  and  harvests  of, 

i.  584-589 
Tortuga  Island  (off  Cape  Codera),  i. 

83  and  note  ^ 
Townley,  Captain,!.  1 80, 2 1 2  and  note  •- 
213,  216-217,  226,  228,  235,  238, 
242,  244,  249-252,  259  and  note\ 
262-263,  272,  273,  274,  275,  276 
Trade,  English  laxity  as  to,  in  the 

East,  ii.  32-34 
Trade  winds — 
Coasting- 
Constant,  ii.  239 
Shifting — 

Oblique  points,  to,  ii.  243-244 
Opposite  points,  to,  ii.  245-246 
Monsoons  in  the  East  Indies, 
ii.  246-250 
Definitions,  ii.  229-230 
Direction  of,  off  Cape  Corrientes,  i. 

294 
Sailing  against,  ii.  249-2J0,  263 
True,  ii.  230-238;  directions  of,  in 
N.  and  S.  latitudes,  ii.  231 
Trangambar,  i.  490  andnote^  491, 493  ; 

ii.  81-82 
Triangles,  the,  ii.  147  andnote^ 
Trinadada,  Island  of,  i.  86  and  note, 
89 ;  ".  316, 317 

Trinity y  The^  ii.  154 

Triste  Island,  i.  461   and  note  ^"4^62  \ 

ii.  121-124,  151-152 
Tristian,  Captain,  i.  54,  58,  68,  97,  213 
Tropick  birds,  ii.  83  and  note ' 
Truxillo,  i.  124,  12^-1 2b  and  note 
Tucker,  Captain,  i.  57,  59,  62 
Tuffoons,  ii.  290-291 
Tumaco  Bay,  i.  34  note  • 


Turpentine,  i.  610 

Turtle,  i.  67-68,  87,  128-135,  ^57*  '^2, 
234.  330,  391,  393,  439,  443-444, 
561  ;  ii.  134,  167,  173.  322,  365- 
366,  399,  426 

Turtle  doves,  i.  129 

Tutaneg  (TinX  ii.  95,  98,  99 

Tygers,  ii.  39^-397 

Tyler,  Captain,  ii.  61,  75,  76-77,78 

Typhoons,  i.  409-411  Mid  note,  586- 

587 

Ubi,  Pulo,  i.  396  and  note,  397 ;  ii*  3^ 

Vacca,  Isles  of,  i.  28  andnote^f  97 
Valderas  valley,  i.  273  andnote^-rjh 
Vally,  Capt.,  ii.  190 
Varela,  Cape,  i.  561  andnott^ 
Variations,  Table  of,  ii.  412-415 
Vaughan,  Lord  John,  ii.  \^t  and  note 
Venezuela,  i.  93  and  note  * 
Verero,  Pulo,  ii.  81 
Vermiatico  tree,  ii.  388 
Villa  de  Mosa,  iL  106-107,  208,  214 
Vinello  (vanilla),  i.  69,  252-253 
Virginia,  i.  60,  95,  96 ;  ii.  307 
Volcan  Vejo,  i.  235 

Wafer,  Lionel,  i.  40  note,  43  nott^ 

46  and  note,  48  and  note,  50,  54 

and  note,  70  note^,  98  note^^  108 

note^y  175  note,  204,  243  note 

Wall  is,  Daniel,  i.  399  and  note^^  52: 

and  note 
Warner,  Captain,  ii.  1 1 1  and note*-ii: 
Warree  (wild  hog),  i.  41  and  note* 
Water  in  hot  countries,  i.  506-507 
Water-dogs,  ii.  398 
Water-snake,  ii.  398 
Water-spout,  i.  441-442 
Watlin,  Captain,  i.  1 1 2 
Way  Island,  i.  483;  ii.  50,  51,  65 
Weldon,  Captain,  i.  464,  489,  557-56C 
610;  ii.  19,  21,  22,  32,  34,  39-40, 4^ 
Wells,  Mr.,  ii.  40-42,  44,  47^75 
West  Indies— 
Currents  among,  ii.  314-315 
Dyes  produced  in,  i.  245 
Fruits  of,  i.  224,  241,  307,  323,324 

ii.  390 
Guinea,  course  to,  ii.  244 
Land  animals  of,  ii.  136 
Leg  worms  in,  ii.  187-188 
Navigation  in,  ii.  249 
Pearl  oysters  in,  i.  194 


622 


[NDEX  TO  THE  APPENDICES,  ETC. 


Indies  {continued) — 

ts  oi;  i.  187,  232,  264,  387-390 

ds,  tides,  and  storms  of,  ii.  231, 

3-244,279-290,311 

s,  ii.  384  andnot€\  430 

ey,  Mr.,  ii.  109,  112,  113 

tns,  Captain,  i.  57,  68  ;  iL  36, 


nitions,  ii.  229-230 

i  and  sea  breezes,  see  Land  and 

le,  see  that  title 

of  Tcncriffe,  ii.  355 

Abraham,  i.  443 

n,  position  o^  in  the  East,  i. 

13,  S99-600 


Wood-quests,  ii.  167  and  note  ^ 
Woodersy  Will,  ii.  12V124,  137 
Worms  in  human  nesh,  i.  187  and 

note-iSS 
Wren,  Captain,  ii.  1 14 
Wright,  Captain,  i.  57,  61,  69,  70,  75, 

88,  92  note\  153  note\  201-204, 

558 

Yams,  i.  41  and  note  ^ 

Yankes,  Captain,  i.  ^y 

Yanky,  Captain,  i.  68, 70,  75-76, 88,  97 

Yemma,  ii.  394 

Ylo  River,  i.  36  and  note  ",  122,  586 

Yunam,  i.  61 1 

Zelisco  Hill,  i.  282 


INDEX  TO   THE   APPENDICES,   ETC. 


,  battle  of,  i.  53S 

I,  R.,  deposition  of,  i.  544 

,  Dampier's  letter  from,  ii.  333- 

4 

ia,  adventure  of  the   Cygnefs 

ewat,  i.  541-542 

e  Islands,  ii.  326 

let's  Delight^  Tke^  i.  530.  532- 

4t537 

iel  Toro,  i.  535 

"AiN  Cowley's  Voyage  round 

e  Globe,"  i.  533 

)ers,  George,  i.  542 

John,  i.  530,  533,  537 

,  Edmund,  i.  530,  536 

martial  of  Dampier,  and  papers 

lating   to   Lieut.   Fisher,   i.   5  ; 

333-334  . 

|r,  William    Ambrosia,   i.   532- 

i3 

,  John,  i.  2,  29  and  note^^  531- 

H 

\  Tk€,  i.  534,  53S.  540-531 


Dampier,  Mrs.,  i.  2 
Dampier,  George,  i.  10,  28  note^ 
Dampier,  William,  Life  of,  i.  1  et  seq» 
Estimation    and    appreciation    of, 
work  of,  i.  10-13 
Darien  Isthmus,  i.  3,  530,  531,  535, 

536-537,  5?»,  S43 
Davis  or  Davics,  Edward,  i.  2,  533- 

534,  537,  53»,  S44 
Eaton,  John,  i.  533,  534,  541 

Flshek,   Lieutenant  George,  mutiny 
of,  ii.  333-334 

GiLOLO  Island,  ii.  326 
Grogniet,  Franqois,  i.  538 

Harris,  Peter,  i.  531,  537,  542-544 
**  History  of  the  Buccaneers,"  i.  535 

Indians,  Wafer's  life  among,  i.  537 

JEOLY,   Prince  (the  Painted  Prince), 

i-  S39-S40 
Joliy  Prize^  I  he^  ii.  327 


623 


INDEX   TO   THE   APPENDICES,   ETC. 


Knight,  John,  ii.  327,  328,  330,  334 
Knight,  William,  i.  534,  537,  538 

Laurens,  Captain,  i.  531,  539 

Madagascar,  provisions  at,  ii.  526 
Maps  by  Dampier,  i.  21-22  and  not e^ 

New  Guinnia,  ii.  326 

New  Holland  voyage — 
Admiralty  instructions,  ii.  331 
Dampier's  letters  relating  to,  ii.  325 
et  seq. 

Or  FORD,    Earl   of,  letter  to,  quoted 
from,  ii.  330-33I 

Panama,  i.  534,  538 
Perico,  battle  of,  i.  531,  535 

Reitenge,  The,  i.  530,  532,  534,  S37 
Rmgrose,  Basil,  i.  535,  542,  543 
Roebuck^  The^  provisionmg  of,  ii.  327- 

329»  334 


St,  George^  The^  vo3rage  o^  i.  6-8 
St.  George,  Fort,  provisions  at,  ii.  326 
Sawkins,   Richard,  i.  3,   22  note\  29 

andnote\  34,  530,  531,  535 
Sharp  or  Sharpe,  Bartholomew,  i.  22 

note  1,  29  and  note  \  30  note  ",  31, 

32,  530,  531,  535-536 
Swan,  Charles,  i.  2,  22  note  1,  535, 538, 

540-545 

Teat,  Josiah,  i.  541-543 
Townley,  Captain,  i.  538 
Tristian,  Captain,  i.  530,  533,  537,  539 

Wafer,  Lionel,  i.  536-538 
Warren,  Robert,  ii.  329-330 
Watling,  John,  i.  535 
Williams,  John,  i.  539        "V 
Wise,  John,  i.  544 
Wright,  Captain,  i.  537 

Yanky,  Captain,  i.  530,  531,  537,  539 


THE  END 


Printed  by  Ballantyne,  Hanson  &•  Co. 
Exlinburgh  6*  London 


iiiiiiiinl 

3   2044   036  353 

d 


The  borrower  must  rcium  this  item  on  or  before 
the  last  dale  stamped  below.  If  another  user 
places  a  recall  for  this  item,  the  borrower  will 
be  notified  of  the  need  for  an  earlier  return. 

Non-recfipi  of  overdue  notices  does  not  exempt 
the  borrower  from  overdue  fines. 


Harvard  College  Wldener  Library 
Cambridge,  MA  021;%        617-495-2413 


Please  handle  with  care. 

Thank  you  for  htlping  u>  preserve 
library  collections  at  Harvard. 
