Dampier's Voyages, Vol. I (William Dampier (John Masefield, ed.), 1906)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1906 Masefield edition (https://archive.org/details/dampiersvoyages00dampgoog). The buccaneer-explorer's New Voyage Round the World (1697) — the first Englishman to explore Australia, in Masefield's edition.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


HARVARD 
COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 


This  edition  is  limited 
to  one  thousand  copies 
for  sale  in  the  United 
Kingdom. 


No. 


THE    VOYAGES 

OF 

CAPTAIN   WILLIAM    DAMPIER 


( 


IDAMPIER' 
VOYAGES 

Coiuifting  of  k  New  Voyage  Kound  the  World, 

Supplement  lo  the  Voyage  Round  the  World, 

Two  Voyiges  to  Campcachy,  a  Discourse 

of  Windi,  »  Voyage  to  New  Holland, 

uid  a  Vindicadon,  in  aniwer  to 

the  Oumerical  Relation  of 

""■'"■■" 

CAPTAIN  WILLIAM    DAMPIER 

BBTTKb  BY 

JOHN    MASEFlhl.lJ 
IN  TWO  VOLUMES 


LONDON 

,       \  N  I      H  1  .    1  i   \  l<  1 )  N 

7  CARLTON    STREET 
igo6 


c 


DAMPIER'S 
VOYAGES 

Consisting  of  a  New  Voyage  Round  the  World,  a 

Supplement  to  the  Voyage  Round  the  World, 

Two  Voyages  to  Campeachy,  a  Discourse 

of  Winds,  a  Voyage  to  New  Holland, 

and  a  Vindication,  in  answer  to 

the  Chimerical  Relation  of 

William  Funnell 

BY 

CAPTAIN    WILLIAM    DAMPIER 


JOHN   MASEFIELD 


IN  TWO  VOLUMES 


LONDON 

E.    GRAM     RICHARDS 

7  CARLTON  STREET 
1906 


( 


UAH  ^  ^^"^ 


At  the  BillKatnie  Pr«» 


HAXiov  ^Ca 


\ 


CONTENTS    OF    VOL.    I 


LIFE    OF  CAPTAIN   DAMPIER  ,        . 

NOTE    ON  THE   TEXT 14^ 

AUTHOR'S   DEDICATION   AND   PREFACE  ■  'T  , 

AUTHOR'S  TABLE   OF   CONTENTS  .  .  JJ 

■  THE    INTRODUCTION    TO    THE   VOYAGE   ROUND 
THE   WORLD       

THE   VOYAGE    ROUND   THE   WORLD 

APPENDIX     TO      THE      VOYAGE      ROUND     THE 

WORLD:   DAMPIER'S   ASSOCIATES  .     ;jo 

DEDICATION   AND   PREFACE    TO    THE    SUPPLE- 
MENT       549 

THE   CONTENTS   OF   THE    SUPPLEMENT  ■,      .        .     SSS 

THE    VOYAGE    TO    TONQUIN     FROM     ACHIN    IN 

SUMATRA 557 


LIFE    OF    WILLIAM    DAMPIER 


IT  is  not  my  intention  to  write  a  long  life  of  DuntneTf 
for  my  researches  have  added  little  to  the  mform«- 
tion  in  Dampicr's  own  writings,  in  the  "  Biographical 
Sketch  "  attributed  to  Admiral  Smyth  {Uniud  Servut 
Journa!,  1837,  Parts  II.  and  III.),  and  in  the  article  by 
Professor  Laughton  {Did.  of  Nai.  Biog.,  iv.).  At  the 
same  time,  a  brief  record  of  the  main  incidents  in  hia 
life  may  be  of  service  to  the  reader. 

William  Dampier  was  the  son  of  a  tenant-farmer  at 
East  Cokcr,  near  Yeovil,  in  Somersetshire,  He  was 
baptized  on  the  8th  of  June  1652.  His  father  died  in 
1662 ;  and  his  mother,  who,  according  to  Professor 
Laughton,  "had  kept  on  the  farm,"  died  in  1668.  His 
parents,  it  seems,  had  designed  him  for  a  trade,  and  had 
placed  him  in  the  Latin  school  (presumably  at  Yeovil). 
On  his  mother's  death,  his  guardians  gave  his  education 
a  more  material  bent,  by  causing  him  to  be  instructed  in 
arithmetic  and  writing.  In  1669,  at  his  own  request,  he 
was  apprenticed  to  a  Weymouth  master-mariner,  with  whom 
he  sailed  to  France  and  to  Newfoundland.  One  gathers 
that  his  dislike  of  "  the  rigours  of  that  cold  climate  *' 
caused  him  to  obtain  the  cancellation  of  his  indentures. 
Early  in  1671,  he  sailed  (as  a  foremast  hand)  to  Bantam, 
aboard  an  Elast  Indiaman.  He  returned  to  England  just 
before  the  breaking  out  of  the  second  Dutch  War  in 
March  1672.  About  a  year  later  he  entered  aboard 
H.M.S.  Royal  Prince,  the  flagship  of  Sir  Edward  Spragge. 
He  took  part  in  the  battles  of  May  28th  and  June  4th; 


H 


LIFE   OF   WILLIAM  DAMPIER 

but  fell  ill,  and  had  to  go  ashore,  with  other  sick  men,  a 
little  later  in  the  summer.  After  a  few  months  ashore,  a 
Colonel  Helyar,  or  Hellier,  the  lord  of  the  manor  of  East 
Coker,  offered  to  send  him  to  Jamaica,  to  assist  in  the 
management  of  a  plantation.  The  accounts  of  his  life  in 
Jamaica,  and  of  his  adventures  in  Campeachy  directly 
afterwards,  may  be  read  in  the  second  volume,  in  the  section 
headed  "  Voyages  to  the  Bay  of  Campeachy." 

During  his  brief  visit  to  England  in  1678,  he  seems 
to  have  married  a  woman  out  of  the  household  of  the 
Duchess  of  Grafton,  "  leaving  her  at  Arlington  House  " 
when  he  returned  to  Jamaica  early  in  1679.  Mrs. 
Dampier's  Christian  name  was  Judith. 

From  the  end  of  1679  to  May  1688,  Dam  pier  was 
with  the  buccaneers,  save  for  an  interval  of  several  months, 
which  he  spent  in  Virginia.  His  buccaneer  career  may 
be  divided  into  three  parts. 

1.  From  Christmas  1679  to  May  168 1,  during  which 
time  he  helped  to  take  Porto  Bello,  and  accompanied  Sharp, 
Sawkins,  and  Coxon  on  their  raid  into  the  South  Sea.  In 
this  cruise  he  seems  to  have  held  no  position  of  authority ; 
but  it  is  probable  that  he  acquired  several  hundred  dollars 
as  his  share  of  the  plunder  taken. 

2.  From  May  168 1  to  July  1682,  during  which  he 
cruised  to  and  fro  in  the  West  Indies,  after  his  return 
overland  from  the  South  Seas,  as  described  in  his  first 
volume.  In  July  1682  he  landed  in  Virginia,  where  he 
remained  for  thirteen  months. 

3.  From  August  23,  1683,  to  May  16,  1688.  This 
third  and  most  important  period  is  chronicled  in  his  first 
volume.  It  covers  the  period  passed  with  Davis  and  Cook 
in  the  Revenge  and  Batchelo?s  Delight^  and  the  rather 
longer  period  (with  Swan)  in  the  Cygnet.  He  left  the 
Cygnet  at  the  Nicobar  Islands,  and,  after  a  long  illness, 
made  one  or  two  trading  voyages  in  East  Indian  waters, 
in  one  of  which  he  went  to  Tonquin.     He  then  obtained 

2 


LIFE  OF   WILLIAM    DAMPIER 

the  post  of  master-gunner  at  Bcncoulen  in  Sumatrm,  under 
a  ruffianly  governor  named  Sowden.  He  escaped  from  this 
post  by  stealth  (2nd  January  1691)  and  landed  in  England 
in  September  of  that  year,  with  nothing  to  show  for  twelve 
years'  work  but  a  tattooed  East  Indian  prince.  He  seems 
to  have  exhibited  this  prince  for  a  livelihood ;  but  was  soon 
forced  to  sell  him. 

For  the  next  six  years  we  have  no  trace  of  Dampicr's 
movements,  save  that  he  was  at  anchor  at  the  Groyne 
(Corunna)  in  July  1694.  He  was  almost  certainly  aboard 
a  merchant  ship  at  this  time,  for  the  depo«itions  at  his 
court-martial  (in  1702)  make  it  clear  that  in  1698-9 
he  was  ignorant  of  naval  customs.  In  the  spring  of  1697 
he  published  his  first  volume,  which  he  dedicated  to 
Charles  Montague,  the  President  of  the  Royal  Society. 
The  book  proved  to  be  a  great  success,  and  ran  through 
three  or  four  editions  in  a  few  months 

One  would  conclude  that  Charles  Montague  acknow- 
ledged the  compliment  of  the  dedication  by  procuring  for 
Dampier  a  modest  position  in  the  Custums  House,  for 
the  name  appears  upon  the  Establishment  of  the  Customs 
in  the  Ibt  fw  Midsummer,  1 697.  The  entry  runs  :  "  Will" 
Dampiere.  Extraord".  To  be  sunck  next  vacancy."  The 
entry  is  at  the  foot  of  the  list  of  Land-carriage  men,  who 
received  each  £i,  153.  a  quarter.  The  "vacancy"  oc- 
curred August  28,  1697.  Dampier  was  in  or  near  London 
in  June  1697,  for,  on  the  30th  of  that  month,  he  was 
ordered  to  appear  before  the  Council  of  Trade  and  Planu- 
tions  to  be  "  examined  as  to  the  design  of  the  Scotch  East 
India  Company  to  make  a  settlement  on  the  Isthmus  of 
Darien,"  under  the  leadership  of  William  Paterson.  He 
attended  (in  company  with  Lionel  Wafer)  on  the  2nd  July, 
"and  gave  an  account  of  the  Isthmus  of  Darien  and  the 
country  between  it  and  Porto  Bello,"  which  he  was  "  desired 
to  draw  up  in  writing."  A  year  later,  when  he  was  pre- 
paring for  his  voyage  in  the  Roebuck,  he  was  again  called 
3 


1 


LIFE   OF   WILLIAM   DAMPIER 

before  the  Council  to  declare  whether  he  knew  of  any 
proposals,  or  bribes,  offered  to  Wafer  by  the  Scotch  East 
India  Company.  He  declared  that  he  knew  nothing,  and 
added  that  he  did  not  think  Wafer  capable  "  of  doing  the 
Scotch  East  India  Company  any  great  service."  On 
September  22nd  he  attended  the  Council  to  advise  them 
about  the  fitting  out  of  a  squadron  against  the  pirates  "  to 
the  east  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope."  On  the  26th  he  was 
asked  **how  long  a  ship  might  be,  running  from  England 
to  Madagascar  at  this  time  of  year  ? "  In  answer  to  this 
question  and  to  others  of  the  same  nature,  he  writes : — 

''Sept.  27,  1698. 

"  ...  to  the  best  of  my  judgment  it  might  be  done 
in  three  months  and  a  half.  (2)  How  long  a  ship  might 
be  in  passing  from  Madagascar  to  the  Red  Sea  ?  I  could 
not  answer  this  without  consulting  my  papers,  and  I 
now  inform  you  that  since,  according  to  the  best  of  my 
information,  on  the  coast  of  Madagascar  the  winds  are 
at  NE.  and  NNE.  from  the  end  of  January  to  the 
end  of  May  (which  is  right  against  them)  the  voyage 
could  not  be  performed  in  less  than  two  months.  (3) 
How  long  a  ship  might  be  in  passing  from  the  Red  Sea  to 
Cape  Comorin?  This  depends  upon  the  setting  in  of 
the  western  monsoon.  In  the  Red  Sea  this  falls  out  in 
May,  when  you  may  pass  in  a  month,  but  you  cannot 
bridge  that  way  earlier.  Thus  if  a  ship  leave  England 
in  November  she  may  reach  Madagascar  by  the  middle 
of  February  and  the  Red  Sea  about  the  middle  of  April. 
She  must  then  wait  about  a  month  for  the  monsoon,  and 
about  the  middle  of  June  she  will  reach  Cape  Comorin, 
a  week  or  two  sooner  or  later  according  to  the  setting 
in  of  the  monsoon.  Will  Dampier." 

During   1697,  or  the  early  part  of  1698,  Montague 
introduced  Dampier  to  the  notice  of  the  Earl  of  Orford, 

4 


LIFE   OF    WILLIAM    DAMPIER 

then  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty.  The  Earl  requested 
Darapier  to  draw  up  a  proposal  for  a  voyage  of  cxplors- 
tion ;  On  which  Dampicr  suggested  the  tailing  to  explore 
the  coasts  of  Australia,  as  a  country  likely  lo  contain 
gold.  His  "  Proposals  for  his  Proceeding  on  his  In- 
tended Voyage  "  will  be  found  in  the  introduction  to  hU 
"  Voyage  to  New  Holland,"  at  the  end  of  the  second 
volume.  In  March,  1698,  he  was  appointed  to  com- 
mand a  ship  called  The  Jelhf  Prize;  but  on  representing 
that  she  would  be  too  small  for  such  an  undertaking, 
he  was  appointed  to  the  Rotiruck  of  twelve  guns,  in  which 
he  sailed  on  January  14,  [699.  For  his  account  of  the 
voyage,  see  Vol.  II. 

While  the  Roebuck  was  fitting  for  the  voyage,  Dampier 
dined  with  Samuel  Pepys.  Among  the  company  was 
John  Evelyn,  the  diarist,  who  thought  Dampier  "  a 
more  modest  man  than  one  would  imagine  by  the  rela- 
tion of  the  crew  he  had  assorted  with."  The  conversation 
turned  upon  Winds;  and  Dampier,  says  Evelyn,  "assured 
us,  that  the  maps  hitherto  extant  were  all  false  as  to  the 
Pacific  Sea,  which  he  makes  on  the  South  of  the  Line, 
that  on  the  North  and  running  by  the  coast  of  Peru 
being  extremely  tempestuous." 

The  Roebuck  "  foundered  through  perfect  age  at  the 
Island  of  Ascension,"  on  her  homeward  passage.  Dampicr's 
voy^e  effected  little,  nor  did  it  add  anything  to 
hb  reputation.  On  his  return  to  England  he  was  tried 
by  court-martial  (8th  June,  1702)  for  cruelty  to  his 
lieutenant  The  Court  found  him  "guilty  of  very 
hard  and  cruel  usage,"  and  sentenced  him  to  be 
"  fined  all  his  pay  to  the  chest  at  Chatham."  It  also 
found  that  he  was  not  a  fit  person  to  command  a  King's 
ship. 

Shortly  after  his  trial,  he  obtained  the  command  of 
the  St.  George  privateer,  a  26-gun  ship,  fitted  out  by  a 
company  of  merchants,  of  whom  Sir  Edward  Southwell 
5 


LIFE   OF   WILLIAM    DAMPIER 

seems  to  have  been  a  principal.  The  5/.  George  sailed 
from  Kinsale  on  September  ii,  1703,  in  company 
with  the  Cinque  Ports  galley,  Captain  Pickering  com- 
mander. Our  knowledge  of  this  voyage  is  derived  from 
the  narrative  of  William  Funnell,  who  describes  himself 
as  mate  of  the  St.  George.  FunnelFs  book  was  published 
in  1707,  some  time  before  Dam  pier  had  returned  to 
England.  It  is  a  tedious  work,  containing  little  original 
matter  of  any  interest.  It  is  interesting  chiefly  for  its 
sneering  comments  on  Dampier*s  statements  and  conduct. 
It  caused  Dampier  to  write  the  ill-written  and  incoherent 
"Vindication"  here  reprinted.  As  an  Appendix  to  the 
"  Vindication  "  I  have  printed  the  charges  brought  against 
Dampier  first  by  Funnell,  and,  later,  by  John  Welbe, 
midshipman  of  the  St.  George^  who  answered  the  "Vindi- 
cation" in  a  pamphlet  as  angry  and  as  ill-penned. 

To  be  brief,  the  two  ships  sailed  from  Kinsale  bound  for 
the  South  Seas.  They  touched  at  Porto  Praya,  St.  Anns, 
and  Isla  Grande,  where  Captain  Pickering,  of  the  Cinque 
PortSy  died.  His  place  was  taken  by  his  lieutenant,  Thomas 
Stradling. 

After  leaving  the  Isla  Grande,  they  beat  round  the 

Horn,  and  anchored  to  refit  at  Juan  Fernandez.     Here  the 

disaffection  of  the  crews,  which  had  been  gradually  rising, 

broke  out  into  open  mutiny.     Some  of  Stradling*s  men 

rebelled  and  went  ashore,  nor  would  they  come  aboard 

again  until  Dampier  interposed  and  coaxed  them  back  to 

good  behaviour.     Soon  after  this,  a  large  French  cruiser 

was  sighted.     The  men  got  aboard,  and  gave  chase,  and 

soon  saw  that  she  was  not  a  Spaniard,  but  from  Europe. 

However  Dampier's  men  were  eager  for  the  engagement, 

^^  right  or  wrong  ;*^  and  Dampier  was  unable  to  restrain 

them.     The  fight  began  at  close  range,  and  continued  for 

seven  hours  (according  to  Funnell),  with  the  result  that 

Dampier  lost  nine  men  killed  and  one  wounded,  and  the 

French  ship  won  clear  and  escaped.     Seeing  that  they  could 

6 


LIFE   OF    WILLIAM    DAMPIER 

do  nothing,  the  two  English  ships  returned  towards  Juan 
Fernandez,  where  they  had  left  their  spare  sails,  boats, 
anchors,  cables,  and  other  stores,  together  with  six  men  of 
the  Cinque  Poru  crew,  "in  the  hurry  of  slipping  to  chase." 

As  they  came  towards  the  island,  they  sighted  two  large 
French  ships,  which  appeared  to  be  too  strong  for  them. 
A  few  shots  were  exchanged,  without  effect,  between  these 
vessels  and  the  Cinque  Parts.  Dampicr  thought  it  best  to 
avoid  an  action  with  them  at  all  costs;  so,  leaving  his 
stores  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  he  made  sail  for 
the  Peruvian  coast,  where  he  picked  up  two  prizes.  On 
the  28th  April,  J  704,  he  tried  to  surprise  the  mining  town 
of  Santa  Maria;  but  the  attempt  was  not  successful,  owing 
to  the  failure  of  one  of  the  men  to  refrain  from  firing  at  a 
canoa.  The  shot  gave  the  alarm.  When  the  boats  made 
their  attempt,  they  rowed  into  a  Spanish  ambuscade,  which 
killed  one  and  wounded  several  of  their  hands.  The  boats' 
crews  landed,  and  dispersed  the  ambuscade,  but  thought  it 
useless  to  go  farther,  seeing  that  the  Spaniards  were  alarmed. 
On  their  return  to  the  ships,  they  took  a  great  Spanish 
provision  ship  and  a  small  bark.  "This  Bark  Captain 
Stradling  kept  for  his  own  use." 

While  they  lay  at  anchor  at  Taboga,  in  Panama  Road, 
Captain  Stradling  is  said  to  have  quarrelled  with  Dampicr, 
who  sailed  from  Taboga  without  him.  Shortly  afterwards 
(22nd  July,  1704)  the  St,  George  fell  in  with  a  Spanish 
32-gun  ship,  which  had  been  fitted  out  to  cruise  for  her. 
In  manoeuvring  for  the  weather-gage  the  St.  George's  fore- 
topmast  "came  by  the  Board,"  so  that  Dampier  was  forced 
to  put  away  in  order  to  clear  the  wreck.  The  Spaniards 
gave  chase  "with  all  the  Sail  they  could,"  and  a  battle 
began  at  long  range.  It  lasted  till  it  grew  "duskish," 
when  Dampier  shifted  his  foretopmast,  and  sponged  and 
loaded  ready  for  the  morning.  In  the  morning  the  Spanish 
ship  was  out  of  sight 

After  this  they  went  to  the  Gulf  of  Nicoya  to  careen. 
7 


LIFE   OF   WILLIAM    DAMPIER 

Here  they  discovered  that  the  bottom  of  the  5/.  George  "  was 
in  many  places  eaten  like  a  Honey-comb ;  insomuch  that 
the  firm  Plank  was  no  thicker  than  an  old  Sixpence ;  Nay, 
in  some  places  in  the  Hold,  we  could  thrust  our  Thumbs 
quite   through  with  ease.*'      This  perilously  firm   Plank 
they  tinkered  up  with  nails  and  oakum.     On  September  2, 
1704,  Dampier  fell  out  with  Clippcrton,  his  mate.     Clipper- 
ton  was  an  unruly  man,  but  a   bold  ssulor;    and,   being 
fearful  of  sailing  in  a  ship  so  crazy  as  the  St.  George^  and 
eager  to  strike  a  stroke  for  himself,  he  got  together  twenty- 
one  hands,  seized  one  of  the  prize  barks,  and  ran  away  with 
her.     George  Shelvocke,  who  had  afterwards  some  experi- 
ence of  Ciipperton,  alleges  that  he  took  with  him  Dampicr's 
commission  ;  but  this  is  disproved  by  Dampier*s  own  words. 
He  speaks  of  having  the  Qjieens  Orders  after  Ciipperton 
had  sailed. 

Three  weeks  after  Clippcrton's  defection,  the  5/.  George^ 
with  the  second  prize  bark,  sailed  out  to  attack  the  Manilla 
galleon.  Dampier  was  now  in  command  of  sixty-four  men 
and  boys,  most  of  them  mutinous,  and  some  of  them 
drunken.  On  the  6th  December,  1704,  they  sighted  and 
attacked  the  galleon,  but  were  beaten  off.  They  seem  to 
have  lost  no  one,  but  the  5/.  George  received  very  serious 
injury.  The  failure  gave  occasion  for  a  new  defection. 
Funnell,  with  thirty-four  others,  resolved  to  go  for  India 
in  the  prize  bark;  which  resolution  they  put  in  practice 
on  the  1st  February,  1705.  After  several  traverses,  they 
reached  the  Dutch  East  Indian  Islands,  from  which  Funnell 
and  seventeen  others  came  to  England,  where  they  arrived 
in  August,  1706.  Dampier's  subsequent  adventures,  with 
the  twenty-nine  (or  twenty-seven)  men  left  to  him,  are 
obscure;  but  it  appears  that  he  plundered  the  town  of 
Puna,  abandoned  the  old  St,  George^  and  sailed  for  the  East 
Indies  in  a  small  Spanish  brigantine.  On  his  arrival  at  a 
Dutch  factory  his  ship  and  goods  were  seized,  and  he  was 
imprisoned  for  some   months.      He   arrived  in  England 


LIFE   OF   WILLIAM    DAMPIER  ] 

towards  the  end  of  1707,  to  find  Funncli's  nwntive. 
"already  published,"  and  his  reputation  at  a  low  ebb. 
Late  in  1707  he  issued  his  angry  and  incoherent  "  Vindica- 
rion,"  a  piece  of  literature  which  neither  vindicates  nor 
convinces.  It  is  the  writing  of  a  very  angry,  Jntcmpcnte 
person.  It  effects  nothing  in  itself;  but  its  tone  helps  us 
to  understand  how  this  gentle  chronicler  of  the  lesser 
kingdoms  should  have  beaten  his  lieutenant  aboard  the 
Roebuck  and  have  failed  to  keep  order  aboard  the  Si.  George. 
It  is,  however,  ccruin  that  Dampier  had  still  a  follow- 
ing of  admirers.  He  had  not  been  many  months  ashore 
before  he  was  appointed  pilot  to  the  Bristol  privateers, 
Duie  and  Dutchess,  then  fitting  out,  under  Captain 
Woodes- Rogers,  for  a  cruise  tn  the  South  Seas.  The 
command  of  these  ships  had  been  given  to  Woodes-Rogcrs 
before  Dampicr's  return  from  the  East  Indies;  but  the 
position  of  pilot  was  honourable,  and  Dampicr's  accept- 
ance of  it  was  by  no  means  a  sign  of  destitution. 
His  name  appears  fairly  frequently  in  the  published  ac- 
counts of  this  voyage.  He  was  one  of  the  council  which 
decided  important  questions,  and  his  advice  was  frequently 
taken  in  positions  of  difficulty.  The  voyage  was  highly 
successful  and  highly  romantic.  After  liberating  Alex- 
ander Selkirk  from  Juan  Fernandez  (he  had  been  left 
there  by  Captun  Stradling  of  the  Cinque  Ports  galley  four 
years  and  four  months  before),  they  plundered  Guayaquil 
and  made  several  rich  prizes.  They  failed  to  take  the 
Manilla  galleon ;  but  when  they  arrived  in  the  Thames 
(14th  October,  1711)  after  an  absence  of  three  years  and 
two  months,  they  had  "  conveyed "  booty  to  the  value 
of  ^170,000.  This  booty  (half  of  which  belonged  to  the 
crews)  was  not  divided  until  1 7 1 9  ;  but  no  doubt  Dampier 
was  able  to  obtain  an  advance  (if  he  felt  the  need  of  one) 
from  the  owners  or  his  wealthy  friends.  He  was  now  an 
old  man  of  sixty  years,  and  (one  gathers)  no  longer 
strong  and  active.  He  does  not  appear  to  have  gone 
9 


LIFE   OF   WILLIAM    DAMPIER 

again  to  sea.  Probably  he  returned  to  his  work  in  the 
Customs,  and  lived  quietly  in  the  parish  of  St  Stephen's, 
Coleman  Street,  in  the  society  of  good  and  learned  friends, 
until  his  death  early  in  March  17 15.  His  will  is  dated 
29th  of  November,  17 14.  It  describes  him  as  "diseased 
and  weak  of  body,"  "but  of  sound  and  perfect  mind/* 
He  left  nine-tenths  of  his  property,  with  all  his  goods  and 
household  stuff,  to  his  dear  cousin  Grace  Mercer,  of 
London,  spinster.  The  remaining  tenth  he  left  to  his 
brother,  George  Dampier,  "of  Porton,  near  Breadport, 
Dorset,  gent."  The  will  was  proved  on  the  23rd  of 
March  in  the  following  year. 

In  estimating  the  work  of  any  man,  it  is  well  to  re- 
member the  conditions  under  which  he  worked ;  for,  until 
those  are  known,  one  cannot  tell  what  difficulties  he  over- 
came. Under  some  circumstances,  as  when  "  pricked  on 
by  your  popes  and  kings,"  a  man  does  well  almost  because 
he  cannot  help  himself.  Under  others,  as  when  hounded 
from  pillar  to  post,  like  Dekker ;  or  dogged  by  duns,  like 
Hogarth's  poet ;  a  man  deserves  reward  for  doing  anything 
that  is  not  positively  criminal.  In  the  case  of  William 
Dampier,  I  would  ask  those  readers,  who  find  the 
voyages  dull,  to  remember  the  life  of  him  who  wrote 
them. 

When  one  considers  his  busy  life  of  action,  one  is 
surprised  that  Dampier  should  have  found  time  to  write 
the  three  books  of  voyages  by  which  he  is  remembered 
to-day.  But  when  one  considers  that  the  man's  literary 
life  was  spent  among  pirates,  lumber-men,  and  drunken 
and  ignorant  sailors,  one  is  surprised  that  he  ever  wrote 
a  word.  It  is  pathetic  to  think  of  him  ("a  man,"  as 
Coleridge  says,  "  of  exquisite  refinement  of  mind  "),  writ- 
ing up  his  journal,  describing  a  bunch  of  flowers,  or  a  rare 
fish,  in  the  intervals  between  looting  a  wine-ship  and 
sacking  a  village.  Of  case  and  leisure,  during  the  years 
of  his  literary  production,   he  knew   nothing.     His  best 

10 


LIFE   OF    WILLIAM    DAMPIER 
ok  was  written  aboard  a  buccaneer  cruiser,  amid    the 


I 

^^Hrunkcnness  and  noise  of  his  shipmates.  He  must  have 
^P^onc  without  sleep  many  times  (a  sailor  will  appreciate  this 
■  Mcrifice)  in  order  to  "take  a  survey,"  or  drawing,  of  the 
cout.  When  he  went  ashore  he  did  not  follow  his  mates 
into  the  rum-shops,  to  taste  the  "  fine  Rack,"  or  curious 
"  Boshee  Drink,"  of  their  heart's  desires.  He  examined 
the  natives  and  the  country,  and  jotted  down  every  detail 
of  every  bind,  beast,  tree,  and  fruit  which  he  chanced  to  see. 
We  cannot  say  that  the  faithful  chronicling  of  minute 
naturai  detail  is  the  work  of  a  great  intellect ;  but  such 
chronicling,  to  have  any  value,  should  be  both  faithful 
and  minute ;  and  the  supreme  faithfulness  and  care  of 
Dampier's  chronicling  can  only  be  gauged  by  those  who 
take  the  trouble  to  compare  the  work  of  even  the  very 
belt  of  the  chroniclers  who  have  succeeded  him  with  the 
perfect  work  done  under  such  diificulties  aboard  the 
buccaneer  cruiser.  The  accumulation  of  knowledge  is 
ooe  of  the  many  pleasant  ways  by  which  men  turn  from 
wisdom.  Knowledge  in  itself,  and  unapplied,  is  not  power; 
it  IS  not  even  weakness.  It  is  the  comfortable,  fat,  and 
cloying  thing  which  keeps  men's  souls  from  life.  Those 
who  give  themselves  to  the  accumulation  of  knowledge, 
bory  their  beauty  in  the  dust,  and  heap  many  parti- 
coloured blankets  about  their  central  fires.  There  are 
some  men  who  acquire  infinite  knowledge  that  they  may 
brood  infinitely  upon  the  whole  of  life.  The  work  of 
these  men  is,  as  it  were,  a  key  which  opens  the  doors  into 
the  living  world.  Or,  in  the  case  of  the  greatest  of  them, 
it  presents  a  perfected  world,  in  which  all  things  have  been 
judged  and  ordered,  according  to  their  true  significance. 
William  Oampier  is  not  among  the  greatest  of  these 
writert,  for  he  judged  nothing,  not  even  himself;  but  his 
work  has  this  supreme  merit,  chat  it  surveys  the  lesser 
kingdoms  with  a  calm,  equable,  untroubled,  and  delighted 
He  charms  us  as  all  must  charm  us  whose  imagi- 


LIFE   OF   WILLIAM    DAMPIER 

nations  are  both  quick  and  clear.  He  excites  us  also, 
because  he  enables  us  to  possess  imaginatively  the  experi- 
ence of  his  varied  and  wild  life. 

It  would  be  well  to  close  this  introduction  with  an 
eloquent  passage  from  the  peroration  of  the  "  Biographical 
Sketch  "  attributed  to  Admiral  Smyth : — 

*'  We  have  already  testified  our  respect  for  the  writings 
of  Dam  pier.  .  .  .  The  information  he  affords  flows  as  from 
a  mind  which  possesses  the  mastery  of  its  subject,  and  is 
desirous  to  communicate  it.  He  delights  and  instructs  by 
the  truth  and  discernment  with  which  he  narrates  the  inci- 
dents of  a  peculiar  life ;  and  describes  the  attractive  and  im- 
portant realities  of  nature  with  a  fidelity  and  sagacity  that 
anticipate  the  deductions  of  philosophy.  Hence  he  was  the 
first  who  discovered  and  treated  of  the  geological  structure 
of  sea  coasts ;  and  though  the  local  magnetic  attraction  in 
ships  had  fallen  under  the  notice  of  seamen,  he  was  among 
the  first  to  lead  the  way  to  its  investigation,  since  the  facts 
that  *  stumbled '  him  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  respect- 
ing the  variations  of  the  compass,  excited  the  mind  of 
Flinders,  his  ardent  admirer,  to  study  the  anomaly.  His 
sterling  sense  enabled  him  to  give  the  character  without 
the  strict  forms  of  science  to  his  faithful  delineations 
and  physical  suggestions ;  and  inductive  inquirers  have 
rarely  been  so  much  indebted  to  any  adventurer  whose 
pursuits  were  so  entirely  remote  from  their  subjects  of 
speculation.  .  .  . 

By  the  French,  the  Dutch,  and  even  the  Spaniards,  he 
has  been  described  as  a  man  distinguished  above  his  fellows, 
and  as  one  to  whose  professional  eminence,  his  own  country 
has  scarcely  done  justice.  In  foreign  works  the  epithets  of 
exacts  skilfuly  admirable^  incomparable  are  found  attached 
to  his  name;  the  morose  Make  Brun  terms  him  the 
"learned";  Humboldt  expressly  says  that  the  illustrious 
savans  Condamine,  Juan,  and  UUoa  added  little  to  his 
observations;    and   the   author   of  the    "Navigation   aux 

12 


LIFE   OF    WILLIAM    DAMPIER 
Tares    Australes"    emphatically    demands  :      "  Mais 
troupe  t'on  des  navigateurs  comparables  a  Dampier  ? " 

Our  own  seamen  and  geographers  have  also  tendered  the  | 
tribute  of  their  admiration.     By  Pinkerton,  who  is  rather  a  ' 
niggardly  praiser  in  general,  he  is  extolled  as  "  the  Cook  of  I 
1  former  age,"     Byron,  Cook,  Broughton,  Flinders,  and  . 
othen  of  our  choicest  naval  worthies,  evinced  the  strongest 
respe«    for    his  testimony ;    and    those    excellent    officers, 
Philip  Carteret  and  Erasmus  Gower  have  declared,  that 
they  have  referred  to  Dampier,  while  on  his  ground,  with  ' 
greater   confidence    than    to   any    other    navigator.      Both 
Howe   and    Nelson    recommended    his    volumes    to    their 
youngsters,  and  Lord  Exmouth  assured  us  that  he  had  read 
them    over  itveral  times.     To  this  decisive  evidence  we  j 
have  the  great  pleasure  of  adding  that  of  the  judicious  ' 
Admiral  Bumey,  one  of  the  shipmates  of  Cook :   "  It 
not  easy,"  he  says,  "  to  name  another  voyager  or  traveller  I 
who  \a&  given  more  useful  information  to  the  world ;  to  i 
whom  the  merchant  and  mariner  are  so  much  indebted ;  or 
who  has  communicated  his  information  in  a  mere  unem- 
barrassed and  intelligible  a  manner.     And  this  he  has  done 
in  a  style  perfectly  unassuming,  equally  free  from  afFecta- 
tioa,  and  from  the  most  distant  appearance  of  invention." 

It  would  seem  that  the  portrait  of  William  Dampier, 
now  in  the  National  Portrait  Gallery,  was  painted  by 
Thomas  Murray  at  the  instance  of  Sir  Hans  Sloane.  It  is 
mentioned  in  the  catalogue  of  Sir  Hans  Sloane's  collection, 
but  it  was  transferred  to  the  British  Museum  during  the 
eighteenth  century,  after  Sir  Hans  Sloane's  decease.  An 
engraving  of  it,  by  Charles  Sherwin,  was  published  during 
Dampier's  lifetime. 

JOHN  MASEFIELD. 


THE   TEXT 


rHE  text  used  for  the  "  New  Voyage  round  the  fTorld,*" 
the  "  Voyage  to  Tonquiriy^  the  "  Description  of  Camptackj^ 
and  the  "  Discourse  of  Windsy^  is  that  of  the  sixth  edition.  The 
text  used  for  the  "  Voyage  to  New  Ho/land*^  is  that  of  the  edition  of 
1729,  which  has  been  carefully  collated  with  the  earlier  editions. 
The  annotated  manuscript  of  the  ^^  New  Voyage  round  the  JVorli^ 
is  to  he  seen  in  Sloane  MSS.  3236.  //  is  much  shorter  than  the 
printed  version  ;  but  it  contains  many  picturesque  personal  notes 
which  the  printed  version  lacks.  Some  of  these  have  been  printed 
as  footnotes  to  the  text  in  the  present  edition. 

It  has  been  said  that  Dampier  never  wrote  his  own  books,  but 
supplied  or  dictated  his  material  to  practised  writers.  One  has 
but  to  compare  the  annotated  manuscript  with  the  printed  version, 
to  see  that  Dampier  was  the  writer  of  both  ;  but  that  before 
going  to  press,  he  worked  over  his  old  journals  with  minute  and 
loving  care,  expanding  and  compressing  and  excluding,  till  he  had 
wrought  his  matter  to  his  mind. 


H 


A     NEW 

VOYAGE 

ROUND     THE 

WORLD. 

Dcfcribing  particularly 
The  Iftbmsi  of  America,  feveral  Coafts  and 
Iflandsin  the/i^<y?/»j3'i«.thcIflesofCii;)f  ^fr*/^, 
the  Pafiagc  by  Terra  del  Futgo,  the  Souih  Sea 
Coafts  of  Chili,  Peru,  and  Mexico  ;  the  Ifle  of 
Guam  one  of  the  Ladrines^Mindanao,  and  other 
Pbilippine  and  Eaft  India  Iflands  near  Cambodia, 
China,  Forme/a,  Luconia,  Celebes,  &c.  New  Hol- 
land, Sumatra,  Nicobar  Ifles ;  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope,  and  Santa  HelUna. 

THEIR 
Soil,    Rivers,    Harbours,    Plants,  Fruits,  Ani- 
mals, and  Inhabitants. 
THEIR 
Cuftoms,  Religion,  Government,  Trade,  ^c. 


VOL.    I. 


By  Captain  Wtiiiam  Dampier. 


nhiilrated  with  Particular  Maps  and  Draughts 


The  Sixth  Edition  CorreHed. 


LONDON: 

Ptinttd  for  James  Knapton,  at  the  Crown  in  St. 

PauVi  Church-Yard.     1717. 


i 


M 


TO  THE  RIGHT   HONOURABLE 
CHARLES    MOUNTAGUE,'    Esq. 

iSIDENT   OF   THE   ROYAL   SOCIETY,  ONE   OF  THE 
LORDS  COMMISSIONERS  OF  THE  TREASURY,  etc. 

SIR, 


AY  it  picasc  you  to  Pardon  the  Boldness  of  a 
Stranger  w  your  Person,  if  Uf>on  the  en- 
couragement of  Common  Fame,  he  presumes 
so  much  upon  your  Candor,  as  to  lay  before 
thU  Account  of  his  Travels.  As  the  Scene  of  them 
not  only  Remote,  but  for  the  most  part  little  frequented 
o,  so  there  may  be  some  Things  in  them  New  even  to 
a;  and  some  possibly,  not  altogether  unuseful  to  the 
iblick:  And  that  just  Veneration  which  the  World 
f»,  11  to  your  General  Worth,  so  especially  to  that  Zeal 
r  the  Advancement  of  Knowledge,  and  the  interest  of 
ur  Country,  which  you  express  upon  all  Occasions,  gives 
u  a  panicular  Right  to  whatever  may  any  way  tend  to 
E  promoting  these  Interests,  as  an  Offering  due  to  your 
cnt.  I  have  not  so  much  of  the  Vanity  of  a  Traveller, 
to  be  fond  of  telling  Stories,  especially  of  this  kind  ;  nor 
[)  I  think  this  plain  Piece  of  mine,  deserves  a  place  among 
ur  more  Curious  Collections  :  much  less  have  I  the  Arro- 
Bce  to  use  your  Name  by  way  of  Patronage  for  the  too 
pvious  Fsults,  both  of  the  Author  and  the  Work.  Yet 
re  I  avow,  according  to  my  narrow  Sphere  and  poor 
ixtities,  a  hearty  Zeal  for  the  promoting  of  useful  Know- 
Ige,  and  of  any  thing  that  may  never  so  remotely  tend 
my  Countries  Advantage:  And  1  must  own  an  Ambition 


'  Cfeaili^*  Monuirue,  Kul  of  Halifax  (1661- 
'al  Soeie«r  <n»a  169S-1698. 

you  I.  17 


1715),  tt-as  Prfsidrnl  of  the 


THE  EPISTLE   DEDICATORY 

of  transmitting  to  the  Publick  through  your  Hands,  these 
Essays  I  have  made  toward  those  great  Ends,  of  which  you 
are  so  deservedly  esteemed  the  Patron.  This  hath  been 
my  Design  in  this  Publication,  being  desirous  to  bring  in  my 
Gleanings  here  and  there  in  Remote  Regions,  to  that  general 
Magazine,  of  the  Knowledge  of  Foreign  Parts,  which  the 
Royal  Society  thought  you  most  worthy  the  Custody  of, 
when  they  chose  you  for  their  President :  and  if  in  perusing 
these  Papers,  your  Goodness  shall  so  far  distinguish  the 
Experience  of  the  Author  from  his  Faults,  as  to  judge  lum 
capable  of  serving  his  Country,  either  immediately,  or  by 
serving  you,  he  will  endeavour  by  some  real  Proofs  to  shew 
himself, 

SIR, 

Your  Most  Faithful, 

Devoted,  Humble  Servant, 

W.  Dampier. 


iS 


THE    PREFACE 


BF.KORE  the  Reader  proceed  any  further  in  the 
perusal  of  this  Work,  I  must  bespeak  a  little  of  his 
k  Wiicncc  here,  to  take  along  with  him  this  short 
'  account  of  it.  It  is  composed  of  a  niixl  Relation 
of  PUces  and  Actions,  in  the  same  order  of  time  in  which 
Obey  occurred :  for  which  end  I  kept  a  Journal  of  every 
D»y»  Observations. 

In  the  Description  of  Places,  their  Produce,  &c.  I  havt: 
endeavoured    to   give    what    satisfaction    I    could    to    my 
Country-men  ;  tho'  possibly  to  the  describing  several  things 
that  may  have  been  much  better  accounted  for  by  others : 
ClKxnir^  to  be  more  particular  than  might  be  needful,  with 
nspecc  to  the  intelligent  Reader,  rather  than  to  omit  what 
^  thought  might  tend  to  the  Information  of  Persons  no  less 
liblc  and  inquisitive,  tho"  not  so  Learned  or  Experienced, 
r  which  reason,  my  chief  Care  hath  been  to  be  as  par- 
s  was  consistent  with  my  intended  brevity,  in  setting 
I  such  Obaervables  as  I  met  with.     Nor  have  1  given 
Rclf  any  great  trouble  since  my  Return,  to  compare  my 
Kovoie4  with   those    erf"   others :    The   rather,  because, 
tild  it  vi  happen  that  I  have  described  some  places,  or 
I  which  others  have  done  before  me,  yet   in  different 
Koonts,  even  of  the  same  things,  it  can  hardly  he  but 
will  be  some  new  Light  afforded  by  each  of  them. 
bt  after  all,  considering  that  the  main  of  this  Voyage  hath 
■  Scene  taid  in  long  Tracts  of  the  Remoter  Parts,  both  of 
'  ;  East  and   West   Indies,  some  of  which  very  seldom 
JKled  by  English-men,  and  others  as  rarely  by  any  Euro- 
ins,  1  may  without  vanity  encourage  the  Reader  to  expect 
my  things  wholly  new  lo  him,  and  many  others  more  fully 
1  than  he  may  have  seen  elsewhere ;  for  which  not 
'9 


THE   PREFACE 

only  in  this  Voyage,  tho'  it  self  of  many  years  continuance, 
but  also  several  former  long  and  distant  Voyages,  have 
qualified  me. 

As  for  the  Actions  of  the  Company  among  whom  I 
made  the  greatest  part  of  this  Voyage,  a  Thread  of  which 
I  have  carried  on  thro'  it,  'tis  not  to  divert  the  Reader 
with  them  that  I  mention  them,  much  less  that  I  take  any 
pleasure  in  relating  them :  but  for  methods  sake,  and  for 
the  Readers  satisfaction ;  who  could  not  so  well  acquiesce 
in  my  Description  of  Places,  &c.  without  knowing  the 
particular  Traverses  I  made  among  them;  nor  in  these, 
without  an  Account  of  the  Concommitant  Circumstances: 
Besides,  that  I  would  not  prejudice  the  Truth  and  Sincerity 
of  my  Relation,  tho'  by  Omissions  only.  And  as  for  the 
Traverses  themselves,  they  make  for  the  Readers  advantage, 
how  little  soever  for  mine;  since  thereby  I  have  been  the 
better  inablcd  to  gratify  his  Curiosity ;  as  one  who  rambles 
about  a  Country  can  give  usually  a  better  account  of  it, 
than  a  Carrier  who  ji^s  on  to  his  Inn,  without  ever  going 
out  of  his  Road. 

As  to  my  Stile,  it  cannot  be  expected,  that  a  Seaman 
should  alfect  Politeness ;  for  were  I  able  to  do  it,  yet  I 
think  I  should  be  little  solicitous  about  it,  in  a  work  of 
this  Nature.  I  have  frequently  indeed,  divested  my  self  of 
Sea  Phrases,  to  gratify  the  Land  Reader ;  for  which  the 
Soiimcn  will  hardly  forgive  me:  And  yet,  possibly,  I  shall 
not  seem  Complaisant  enough  to  the  other ;  because  I  still 
retain  the  use  of  so  many  Sea-rerms.  I  confess  I  have  not 
Ixrcn  at  all  scrupulous  in  this  matter,  either  as  to  the  one  or 
the  other  of  these;  for  1  am  pcrswaded,  that  if  what  I  say 
Ixr  intelligible,  it  matters  not  greatly  in  what  words  it  is 
expressed. 

For  the  same  reason  I  have  not  been  curious  as  to  the 
s{x*lling  of  the  Names  of  Places,  Plants,  Fruits^  Animals, 
s^o,  which  in  any  of  these  remoter  parts  are  given  at  the 
pleasure  of  Travellers,  and  vary  according  to  their  dilFerent 
Humours:  Nei:her  have  I  confined  my  self  to  such  Names 
as  are  given  by  Learned  Authors^  or  so  much  as  enquired 
after  manv  of  them.     I  write  for  mv  Countnrmen ;  and 

20 


THE  PREFACE 
:  ihcreforc,  for  the  most  part,  used  such  names  a 
ramilur  to  our  English  Seamen,  and  those  of  our  Colonies 
abroad,  yet  without  neglecting  others  that  occurr'd.  As 
ii  might'  suffice  mc  to  have  given  such  Names  and  Descrip- 
noosas  I  could  ;  I  shall  leave  to  those  of  more  leisure  and 
opponuniiy  the  trouble  of  comparing  these  with  those 
irhich  other  Authors  have  assigned.' 

The  Reader  will  find  as  he  goes  along,  some  References 
>  an  Appendix,  which  I  once  designed  to  this  Book;  as 
I  a  Chapter  about  the  Winds*  in  different  parts  of  the 
l^orld ;  to  a  Description  of  the  Bay  of  Cami^eachy  *  in 
;  West  Indies,  where  I  lived  long  in  a  former  Voyage; 
1  to  a  particular  Chorographical  Description  of  all  the 
buth  Sea  Coast  of  America/  partly  from  a  Spanish  MS, 
Bd  partly  from  my  own  and  other  Travellers  Observa- 
.  besides  those  contained  in  this  Book.  But  such  an 
hppcndix  would  have  swelled  it  too  unreasonably :  and 
rfore  I  chose  rather  to  publish  it  hereafter  by  its  self, 
"«•  opportunity  shall  serve.  And  the  same  must  be  said 
also  as  to  a  particular  Voyage"  from  Achin  in  the  Isle  of 
Sumatra,  toTonquin,  Malacca,  &c.  which  should  have  been 
itucrted  as  part  of  this  General  one  ;  but  it  would  have  been 
toi>  long,  and  therefore  omitting  it  for  the  present,  I  have 
carried  on  this,  next  way  from  Sumatra  to  England  ;  and  so 
ide  the  Tour  of  the  World  correspondent  to  the  Title. 
For  the  better  apprehending  the  Course  of  the  Voyage, 
the  Situation  of  the  Places  mentioned  in  it,  I  have 
'.  several  Maps  to  be  engraven,  and  some  particular 
"    5  of  my  own  Composure.     Among  them,  there  is 

Eufjr  ediiioiK :  Am/  it  may. 
Earty  cdiliotti :  ilfstpitil 

"  The  Dweoune  nf  Winds  "  fornix  Part  III-  of  his  second  vnlutnc. 
"Tbv  Dctciiptinn  of  Cuni>eac1iy  "  fnnns  Pari  II.  of  his  sccodcI  volume. 
**Tbc  CttomEnfibital  ncscnpiinn,"  dcsignei)  oriKinally  as  an  appendix 
%  ■»»  nei-u  published.    It  is  probable  thai  Danipicr  felt  him- 
3  0»e  luk  of  ctdlating  the  "WaKBoocrs"  of  .Sharp,  Ringrosc, 
was  loih,"  he  says  in  the  Iniroduciior  ■     ' " 
c  a  work,  much  of  which  musi  have  t( 
»et  have  left  unavoidably  many  nior> 
Hme  and  firlpx  for  this  affair;  an<j  futiit 
Light  (o  direct  them." 
I.  of  the  sei-ond  columc. 
21 


THE  PREFACE 

in  the  Map  of  the  American  Isthmus,  a  new  Scheme  of 
the  adjoining  Bay  of  Panama  and  its  Islands,  which  to 
some  may  seem  superfluous  after  that  which  Mr.  Ringrose  ^ 
hath  published  in  the  History  of  the  Buccaneers;^  and 
which  he  offers  as  a  very  exact  Draught.  I  must  needs 
disagree  with  him  in  that,  and  doubt  not  but  this  which 
I  here  publish  will  be  found  more  agreeable  to  that  Bay, 
by  one  who  shall  have  opportunity  to  examine  it ;  for  it  is 
a  contraction  of  a  larger  Map  which  I  took  from  several 
Stations  in  the  Bay  it  self.  The  Reader  may  judge  how 
well  I  was  able  to  do  it,  by  my  several  Traverses  about  it, 
mentioned  in  this  Book ;  those,  particularly,  which  are 
described  in  the  7th  Chapter,  which  I  have  caused  to  be 
marked  out  with  a  pricked  Line;  as  the  Course  of  my 
Voyage  is  generally  in  all  the  Maps,  for  the  Readers  more 
easy  tracing  it. 

I  have  nothing  more  to  add,  but  that  there  are  here 
and  there  some  mistakes  made,  as  to  expression,  and  the 
like,  which  will  need  a  favourable  Correction  as  they  occur 
upon  Reading.  For  instance,  the  Log  of  Wood  lying  out 
at  some  distance  from  Sides  of  the  Boats  described  at 
Guam,  and  parallel  to  their  Keel,  which  for  distinctions 
sake  I  have  called  the  little  Boat,  might  more  clearly  and 
properly  have  been  called  the  side  Log,  or  by  some  such 
Name ;  for   though    fashioned   at   the   Bottom  and  Ends 

^  This  is  Basil  Rin^Tose,  a  youn^  buccaneer  who  accompanied  the  ex- 
pedition to  the  South  Seas  under  Sharp  and  Sawkins  in  1680.  He  was  one 
of  those  who  remained  with  Sharp  after  Dampier's  party  had  left  for  the 
Isthmus.  Rin^rose's  journal  was  published  in  a  mutilated  form,  with  inter- 
polations by  Captain  Bartholomew  Sharp,  as  the  fourth  part  of  the  1684 
edition  of  the  English  translation  of  Exquemeling's  De  Americaenicke 
Zee  Rovers.  His  drau^^ht  of  the  Hay  of  Panama  is  "more  agreeable  to 
that  Hay"  than  that  of  Dampier,  though  both  are  on  too  minute  a  scale  to 
be  of  much  service.  Dampier's  draught  is  superior  inasmuch  as  it  gives 
the  soundings,  and  indicates  the  points  of  the  compass.  Ringrose  took  an 
active  share  in  the  bloody  sea-fight  off  Perico  (April  23,  1680)  and,  later,  in 
the  no  less  bloiKly,  but  unsuccessful,  attack  upon  Arica  (January  30,  1681). 
He  did  not  prosper  as  a  buccaneer;  for,  shortly  after  his  return  to  England 
(at  the  close  of  Sharp's  expedition),  want  constrained  him  to  enter  as  super- 
cargo under  a  merchant  captain  named  Charles  Swan.  He  was  killed  near 
Santa  l*ecaque  (near  the  western  coast  of  Mexico)  on  the  19th  February  1686, 
while  conveying  plunder  to  the  boats  of  his  shipmates.     See  Appendix. 

*  The  translation  from  the  Dutch  above-mentioned. 

22 


THE   PREFACE 

Boat-wise,  jret  is  not  hollow  at  top,  but  solid  throughout. 
In  other  places  also  I  may  not  have  express'd  my  self  so 
fully  as  I  oughi :  But  any  considerable  Omission,  that  I 
shall  recollect  or  be  inform'd  of,  I  shall  indeavour  to  make 
up  in  those  Accounts  I  have  yet  to  publish  ;  and  for  any 
Faults,  I  leave  the  Reader  to  the  joint  use  of  his  Judgment 
and  Candour. 


THE    CONTENTS 


IH£  Introduction,  containing  ihe  Author's  Departure 
from  EngUnd,  into  the  West  Indies  and  the  South 
Seas,  to  the  lime  of  his  leaving  Captain  Sharp, 

Chip.   I.   His  Return  out  of  the  South  Seas,  to  his 
Landing  at  the  Isthmus  of  America. 
,  His  Return  by  Land  over  the  Isthmus. 

Hrt  TravcTtes  among  the  West  India  Islands  and  Coasts,  and 
Am*al  in  Virginia, 
.  H»  departure  for  the  South  Seas  again  j  his  touching  at  the 
I&biids  of  Cape  Vcrd,  and  the  African  Coast,  and  Arrival  at 
the  I»Ie  of  John  Fernando  In  the  South  Seas. 
,  His    CouTv:    thence    Northward,    to    the    Isles    of   Lobos    and 
Gallapaao*,  to  Caldera  Bay,  Rco  Lcja,  and  Amapalla  in   the 
K.  of  Mexico. 
,  He  goes  back  toward    Peru,  to   the  Isle   Plata,  Point   Santa 
HeDena,  Manta,  Paita,  Luhos,  Puna,  Guiaquil,  and  Plata  again. 
L  Ht»  Ptogrcto  Northward  again  to  the  R.  Saint  Jago,  Tomaco, 
the  T«lc  Galleo,  1.  Gorgonia,  the  Peatl  Isles,  &c.  in  the  Bay  of 
Panan.-\. 
DL  He  proceeds  -lone  the  Mexican  Coast  to  the  Keys  of  Quibo, 
Rex  Lejo,  and  the  Harbour  of  Guaiulco. 
.  He    ciasts  along    to  Acapnia,   Pctaplan,  Estapa,  Colima,  Sal- 
hciu,  Cape  Cottienics  ;  ihcncc  to  the  Isles  of  Chamctty,  Bay 
of    Valricras,   Isles    of  Pontiquc,    other    Isles    of    Chametly  ; 
l&SBcIan,  Rotario,   R.   Saint  Ja^o,  Santa  Pccaquc,  Isles  of 
Santa  Maria,  VaUeras,  and  Cape  Corricntes  again. 
t  He  Kami*  over  the  Southern  Ocean  for  the  East  Indies,  and 

arrivci  at  Guam,  one  of  the  Ladrone  Isles. 
,  Hi»  arrival  ai  Mindanao,  one  of  the  Philippine  Islands  :  and  of 
!t»  Natural  State. 

.  The  Political  Suic  of  Mindanao. 
Dl-  Occurrence*  during  the  Author's  stav  at  Mindanao. 
S'.   He  dcparn  towards  Manila,  in  the  Isle  of  Luconic  ;  touching 
at  B*l  I<Jand,  and  the  Isle  of  Mindora,  and  leaving  Luconia,  he 
goe»  to  Pulo  Oindofe,  on  the  Coast  of  CambtHlia,  to  Pulo  Uby, 
in  Ibc  Bay  of  Siam,  and  to  Pulo  Condore  again. 

25 


THE   CONTENTS 

XV.  He  goes  to  the  I.  of  St.  John  on  the  Coast  of  China,  to  the 
Isles  riscadores  near  Formosa ;  and  the  Bashee,  or  5  Islands, 
between  Formosa  and  Luconia,  called  Orange,  Monmouth, 
Grafton,  Bashee,  and  Goat  Isles. 

XVI.  He  Coasts  along  the  East  side  of  Luconia,  Mindanao,  and 
other  of  the  Philippines  :  and  touching  at  the  I.  Celebes,  and 
Callasusung  in  the  I.  of  Bouton,  he  arrives  at  New- Holland. 

XVII.  He  goes  thence,  touches  at  the  I.  Triste,  and  another  ;  and 
steering  along  the  West  Coast  of  Sumatra,  arrives  at  the  I.  of 
Nicobar,  where  he  stays  ashore,  and  the  Ship  departs. 

XVIII.  He  stands  over  from  thence  in  an  open  Boat  to  Passange 
Jonca ;  and  thence  to  Achin  ;  and  after  several  Traverses 
comes  to  Bencouli,  all  on  the  I.  of  Sumatra. 

XIX.  He  ships  himself  for  England,  and  arrives  at  the  Cape  of 
Good  Hope. 

XX.  His  departure  thence  to  the  I.  Santa  Hellena,  and  Arrival  in 
the  Downs. 


26 


CAPTAIN'  WILLIAM   DAMPIER'S 

VOYAGE 


ROUND    THE 


TERRESTRIAL     GLOBE 


THE   INTRODUCTION 

|t  JtOhtr't  Dtparturi  from  England,  and  Arrival  in  Jamaica,     Hit 

)  fra  ping  avtr  iht  Itthmui  of  America  into  the  South  Stai  :  His 

<M(/m;  tf^Mjf  Prm  and  Chili,  and  hack  again,  to  hit  parting  with 

Captain  Sharp  near  thi  lilt  of  Plata,  in  order  to  return  enier  Land. 

FIRST  tct  out  of  England  on  this  Voyage  at  the  amj 
beginning  of  the  year  1679,  '"  the  Loyal  Merchant  of  '^'ST 
London,  bound  for  Jamaica,  Captain  Knapman  Com~ 
mander.  I  went  a  Passenger,  designing  when  I  came 
Kthcr,  to  go  from  thence  to  the  Bay  of  Campeachy,  in  the 
llph  of  Mexico,  to  cut  Log-wood :  where  in  a  former 
ige'  I  had  spent  about  three  years  in  that  employ;  and 

'cil  acquainted  with  the  place  and  the  work. 
We  ailed  with  a  prosperous  gale  without  any  impedi- 
,  or  remarkable  passage  in  our  Voyage :   unless  that 

>  TW  <mrlr  edition*  dctcribc  him  ns  Mr. 

'  M«  6m  vitited  Campeachy  Bay  in  August  167$.  He  returned  to  the 
mtiBV  "bcitiK  resolved  to  spend  some  time  at  the  Logwood 
1  Fcbrnary  167*-  In  June  of  ihat  year  a  great  siorm,  following 
■  *lMn>  bcut  of  "guinea-wonn,"  compclkd  him  10  go  buccaneering. 
■crauMvl  tow  "11  or  1 1  monthi"  atun){  the  Campeachy  coast,  then  worked 
Jfaa  as  a  lac*w^  culler,  (or  "  ten  or  twelve  months,"  and  then  relumed 
-  fi-tr"-",  in  May  1678.  From  Jamaica  ho  sailed  to  England  for  a  brief 
■^■K,  arrtTiDK  tn  Lotidon  in  August  1678.  and  sailing  from  thence  about 
1  iMMh*  lalcr.  tut  Pon  R«yaj. 

27 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  when  we  came  in  sight  of  the  Island  Hispaniola,*  and  were 
'^79  coasting  along  on  the  South  side  of  it  by  the  little  Isles 
of  Vacca,  or  Ash,  I  observed  Captain  Knapman  was  more 
vigilant  than  ordinary,  keeping  at  a  good  distance  offshore, 
for  fear  of  coming  too  near  those  small  low  Islands;  as 
he  did  once,  in  a  Voyage  from  England,  about  the  year 
1673,  losing  his  Ship  there,  by  the  carelessness  of  his 
Mates.  But  we  succeeded  better ;  and  arrived  safe  at  Port 
Royal  in  Jamaica  some  time  in  April  1679,  and  went 
immediately  ashore. 

I  had  brought  some  Goods  with  me  from  England, 
which  I  intended  to  sell  here,  and  stock  my  self  with  Rum 
and  Sugar,  Saws,  Axes,  Hats,  Stockings,  Shoes,  and  such 
other  Commodities,  as  I  knew  would  sell  among  the 
Campeachy  Log-wood  Cutters.  Accordingly  I  sold  my 
English  Cargo  at  Port  Royal;  but  upon  some  maturer 
considerations  of  my  intended  Voyage  to  Campeachy  I 
changed  my  thoughts  of  that  design,  and  continued 
at  Jamaica  all  that  year,  in  expectation  of  some  other 
business. 

I  shall  not  trouble  the  Reader  with  my  observations  at 
that  Isle,  so  well  known  to  Englishmen ;  nor  with  the 
particulars  of  my  own  Affairs  during  my  stay  there.  But 
in  short,  having  there  made  a  purchase  of  a  small  Estate  in 
Dorsetshire,^  near  my  Native  Country  of  Somerset,  of  one 
whose  Title  to  it  I  was  well  assured  of,  I  was  just  em- 
barking my  self  for  England,  about  Christmas,  1679,  when 
one  Mr.  Hobby  invited  me  to  go  first  a  short  Trading 
Voyage  to  the  country  of  the  Moskito's,'  of  whom  I  shall 
speak  in  my  first  Chapter.  I  was  willing  to  get  up  some 
Money  before  my  return,  having  laid  out  what  I  had  at 
Jamaica ;  so  I  sent  the  Writing  of  my  new  purchase  along 

^  Hispaniola,  now  called  St.  Domingo,  or  Haytl.    The  isles  of  Vacca, 
or  Ash,  now  La  Vache,  lie  near  the  south-western  extremity. 

*  Perhaps  that  at  *'  Porion,  near  Breadport,"  afterwards  owned  by  the 
s  bro 
he  c( 

Cap<  ,  „     , 

the  Gulf  of  Honduras.     The  Mosquito  Indians  were  always  friendly  to  the 
English.  See  Burney,  "  South  Sea  "  ("  H  istor>'  of  the  Buccaneers,"  chap.  viii.). 

28 


THE   INTRODUCTION 
with  the  stmc  friends  whom  I  should  have  accompanied  1 
[jiglind.  and  went  on  board  Mr.  Hobby. 

Soon  after  our  setting  out  we  came  to  an  anchor  again 
m  Ncgril  Bay,  at  the  West  end  of  Jamaica;  but  finding 
then:  Captain  Coxon,'  Sawkiiis,"  Sharp,'  and  other  Priva- 
tem,  Mr.  HoW>y'&  Men  all  left  him  to  go  with  them, 
Hpa  an  Expedition  they  had  contrived,  leaving  not  one 

h  him,  beside  my  self;  and  being  thus  left  alone,  after 
1 3  or  4   days    stay    with    Mr.    Hobby,    I    was  the    more 
aily  persuaded  to  go  with  them  too. 

It  was  shortly  after  Christmas  1679  when  we  set  out. 
be  first  Expedition  was  to  Portobel,'  which  being  accom- 
pfahcd,  it  was  resolved  ^  to  march  by  Land  over  the  Isthmus 
of  t^rrien,  uptm  some  new  Adventures  in  the  South  Seas. 
Accordingly  on  the  5th  of  April  1680,  we  went  ashore  on 
the  Uthmus*  near  Golden  Island,"  one  nf  the  Sambaloes,' 
to  the  number  ^  of  between  3  and  400  Men,  carrying  with 
ui  such  Provisions  as  were  necessary,  and  Toys  wherewith 
t*i  gntifie  the  Wild  Indians,  through  whose  Country  we 

!  to  p*SB.     In  about  nine '  days  march  we  arrived  at 


t  of  this  bucouicer  will  be  given  in  the 
Tven  Dompier  met  him  he  w.is  in  conimnnc!  of  nearly  too  men. 
^  Savktn*.  KiclisiiL     See  Appenilix.      He  was  "a  man  who  was  as 
tast  atnJ  caangeoui  at  any  cuulil  be," 

*  Sban^  Banholoraew.  See  Appendix.  The  journal  of  this  captain 
(im  ■  virnl  account  of  the  expedition. 

*  PtmUihtL  Puflo  or  Puerto  liellOi  the  fine  harbour  discovered  by 
fiiliBaliiii  on  [be  nonh  coui  o(  the  Isthmus  of  Darien,  a  liitte  10  the  cast 
tf  Coion.  AflcT  1^84  11  became  the  port  of  the  galleons  in  place  of  ilie 
i«fctiMiiiii1  Ncntbrc  de  Dios,  some  tew  miles  farther  east.  Porto  Bello 
»  a  very  befluiifnl  but  very  unhealthy  pl.-icc  It  has  now  on!y  a  shadow  of 
n  fameT  impoTtance,  but  in  the  seventeenth  century  it  was  a  splendid  and 
•«»!tkr  city-  OampDcr't  piuty  iharcd  about  £y3  a  man  from  the  spoils  of  it, 
aad  till*  only  deven  ycon  »fier  it  had  been  sacked  and  gutted  by  Henry 

'  At  ibe  time  of  ihe  discussion  the  buccaneer  force  consisted  of  nine 
fcfo,  477  men.  and  43  guitt.  Two  companies  were  French,  and  these  look 
on  part  in  tbe  ci]i0liiioD,  being  **  not  willing  10  go  to  Panama." 

*  CoMcB  liUnd  lies  olT Ihe  Isthmus  in  Fat.  e.S4  N.,  long.  77.40  W. ;  it  is 
(be  iBMi  cuierty  of  the  "  Sambaloes,"  or  Mulaias  Islands. 

^  '  ftr*"'""  ■"'^""'"'1"  or  Isles  of  Son  Bias,  "certain  islands  reach- 

n  extent,  and  lying  fourteen  Icasues  westward  "  of  ihc 
Tbey  are  now  called  ibe  Mulalus. 
c  131  all  told. 

n  days. 

39 


I  -::?3?.f   VOYAGES 


rr     -   '_■    TTi  Srirr  ».  Cr^st,  and  there 


"•^i  -B^ir;  IS  sight  of 
"ir^r  '—  "J^"  itremptcd 
:  ^*gr  CzcinianJer  in 


;::-.    -11-:   ell  •.   ^:   rni^i  >:=:;  5tiv  at  the 

V  .   ' -'-r:  --  r  r:=   J-i?:    ::  ?ir^     Accord- 
ir.   V    ^    -  !-  -:?   :r    j^  :»:  zzt  rth  of  June, 

::--    -  --    :    .^  —  rr.a     irrc  P-lu.'  -s-j  came  to 

..    ^    -r-.     -    ::2  J  iirc   :r  rir.,  zni  took  it 

J"^-    "xr    ^"^    ::  N    ■iirrrcr  -^t  "^--:  thence  to 


.r.i   «  :^^-    :.:w  iX'^t  ^ -_-:?tn:as  were 
■   '  .:.t   r-zr^xTi:.  -  "s-h.-.;?:  was  the 

;  V.::  r-cc  ^-Ti- *  t:  the  Nrrthward, 
. -«--:-.     :  i-r:.'^  T:"3^.  livantage- 


:r     :.::  Tirre.     I:  *a5  a 


*  : - :    r.-i   :-^,--LT•^:.-^  ::■■<    ::  &at  it 


>.-.-  ^.:    Tir:.     :  .T  ".i="r  fr  w^as  not 
"    v:,f  1  «— _Lr.  fsrn  up  a 


■-*■■-■  ramous, 


••  • 


.    ,  •  .       ■":■:'    *  ■   :  ;*:  r  5~  r»  viowTi  at 

■  '  ^:   ,-;-■:?■  \  :.-%."     X  r.^r:>e  has  left  a 

>^  .  •    '.  y.'..:-    ■      7''f.   --r-.-.  *  .-ne-i  with 

■,'-^r>  '.:  >:      ^.Tr*:^'!  :.■»  have  been 
■".  -vi^-si  i  ••  £5  2  sketch  and 


•     •  • 


.  X, 


>v  ..   :      ,■  •..    * ''i-^  ■.*;■   !-::-:;•-:  •>:  provisions, 

,'f    '."..-.'""S;-   ir::.      Tr.e  :own  they 
.'i     ;  "  .'r  rrr>e-:  Cviji-ilv). 


»^  .    <      ♦-■■  — 


■    .N.       •.     S   •"       '."hi'  h-.:wV.\r.eirs  were  beaten 
..V,    '     »v      .    .     A  ..*  -tvv:  i"*"^  :.^*r..     The  ha::! e  was  fought 


*v 


THE   INTRODUCTION 

LouIt  situated  in  the  hollow  of  the  Elbow,  or  bending  of  an." 

'ePtruvian  Coast.     But  being  there  repulsed  with  great  '^^' 
IJoa,wt  continued  our  course  Northward,  till  by  the  middle 
l«f  April  we  were  come  in  sight  of  the  Isle  of  Plata,  a  little 
■  to  the  Southward  of  the  Equinoctial  Line. 

1  hive  related  this  part  of  my  Voyage  thus  summarily 

id  concisely,  as  well  because  the  World  hath  Accounts  of 

hit  ilnady,  in  the  relations  that  Mr.   Ringrose  and  others 

Ihwe  given  of  Captain  Sharp's  Expedition,  who  was  made 

F  thief  Commander,  upon   Sawking's  being  kill'd ;    as    also, 

I  beame  in  the  prosecution  of  this  Voyage  I  shall  come  to 

ipak  of  these  parts  again,  upon  occasion  of  my  going  the 

woikl  time  into  the  South  Seas:  and  shall  there  describe 

It  Urge  the  places  both  of  the  North  and  South  America, 

a  tbcy  occurred  to  me.     And  for  this  reason,  that  I  might 

iroid  needless  Repetitions,  and  hasten  to  such  particulars, 

M  the  Publick  hath  hitherto  had  no  account  of,  1  have 

chosen  to  comprize  the  Relation  of  my  Voyage  hitherto,  in 

'■hit  short  compass,  and  place  it  as  an  Introduction  before 

the  rest,  that  the  Reader  may  the  better  perceive  where  I 

man  to  begin  to  be  Particular ;  for  there  I  have  plac'd  the 

3nJe  of  my  first  Chapter. 

All  therefore  that  I  have  to  add  to  the  Introduction, 
I  thta;  Thai  while  we  lay  at  the  Isle  of  John  Fernando, 
'ratain  Sharp  was,  by  general  consent,  displaced  from 
Commander ; '  the  Company  being  not  satisfied 
with  his  Courage  or  Behaviour,  In  his  stead, 
ain  Wailing*  was  advanced :  but  he  being  killed 
rtly  after  before  .\rica,  we  were  without  a  Commander 
all  the  rest  of  our  return  towards  Plata.  Now 
hcling  being  killed,  a  great  number  of  the  meaner  sort 
to  be  as  earnest  for  choosing  Captain  Sharp  again 

llbc  jcxh  laBoAty  l68t.  Uompicr  was  one  of  ihc  ship-kccpcrs  on  thai 
_tamom-  RiBgtote  ami  Sharp  were  both  engaged,  while  Wafer  stayed  in 
ite  bMO,  and  ipent  the  day  in  pieparinx  salves  for  the  wounded. 

■  Thnaiasaa  tbe6tb  January  loSt.  llie  deposition  was  anaiigeil  ashore, 
W  «■«  •horn  Sluup  calb  "  a  true-hearted,  diMembtins  A'nf  England  man, 
f*^  C*i  hf  name.      Cox  left  an  interesting  joumsl  of  the  voyage. 

'  John  Watling,  who,  "  having  been  an  Old  Huccanetr,  had  gained  the 
—    -       B  of  bcitiK  a  »toui  Seaman."    Walling  seems  to  have  been  cruel, 
Ho  held  command  for  less  than  a  month. 

31 


.  -C  .      »  -^ 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES* 

Ky  znzj  the  ticuct.  js  before  they  had  been  as  forward  as  any 
^im  him  out:  And  on  the  other  side^  the  abler  and 
more  experienced  Men.  being  altogether  dissatisfied  with 
Shirrs  rirmer  Cxiduct,  would  bv  no  means  consent  to 
hive  him  chjier..  In  shorty  by  that  time  we  were  come 
:n  sight  of  the  IsLind  Plata,  the  difference  between  the 
Contending  Pirties  was  grown  so  high,  that  they  resolved 
to  part  Companies ;  having  first  made  an  Agreement,  that 
which  Party  5«3ever  should,  upon  Polling,  appear  to  have 
the  Majority,  they  should  keep  the  Ship :  And  the  other 
should  content  themselves  with  the  Launch  or  Long-boat, 
and  Canoas.  and  return  back  over  the  Isthmus,  or  go  to 
seek  their  fortune  other  wavs,  as  thev  would. 

Accordingly  we  rut  it  to  the  Vote ;  and  upon  dividing. 
Captain  Sharp's  Party  carried  it.  I,  who  had  never  been 
pleased  with  his  management,  though  I  had  hitherto  kept 
mv  mind  to  mv  self,  now  declared  mv  self  on  the  side  of 
those  that  were  Out-voted ;  and  according  to  our  agree- 
ment, we  took  our  shares  of  such  Necessaries,  as  were  fit 
to  carry  over  Land  with  us,  (for  that  was  our  Resolution :) 
and  so  prepared  for  our  Departure. 


3^ 


THE    TRAVELS 


CAPTAIN'    WILLIAM    DAMPIER 


CHAP.    I 

■  •  Attmtmt  »f  thi  Author's  Rrturn  tut  »f  the  South  Sras,  to  his  Landing 
mair  Cafit  Si.  Uwrfnce,  In  th<r  Ulhmus  ef  Dmim  :  With  an 
Oumtismal  Ueitri/,tUn  of  the  Mofkita  Indians. 

yAFRIL  the    17th    1 68 1,  about   Ten  a  Clock  in  the 

/^k       morning,  being  12  kagues  N.  W,  from  the  Island 

/      ^     Plata,  wc  left  Captain  Sharp  and  those  who  were 

•^       -^*  willing  togo  with  him  in  the  Ship,  and  imbarqued 

;..  our    i^nch  and  Canoas,  designing   for  the   River  of 

-intM  Maria,  in  the  Gulf  of  St.  Michael,  which  is  about 

-^o  leagues  from  the  Isle  of  Plata.     We  were  in  numl>er 

-t  white  Men  who  bore  Arms,  a  Spanish  Indian,  who  bore 

.rm*  also;  and   two  Mmkito    Indians,   who    always    bear 

H.-'-ms  inumgsi  the  Privateers,  and  are  much  valued  by  them 

■^  striking  Rsh,  and  Turtle  or  Tortoise,  and  Manatee  or 

-J  Cow ;  and  5  Slaves  ukcn  in  the  South  Seas,  who/ell  to 

Tbc    Craft   which  carried    us    was   a  Lanch,  or    Long 

,  one  Canoa,  and  another  Canoa  which  had  been  sawn 

r  in   the  middle,  in  order  to  have  made  Bumkins,^ 

ft  Vcwels  for  carrying  water,  if  we  had  not  separated  from 

■  Ship.      This  we  joyn'd   together   again    and    made  it 

provuling  Sails  to  help  us  along :  And  for  3  days 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   before  we  parted,  we  sifted  so  much  Flower  as  we  could 
1681  ^eii  carry,  and  rubb'd  up  20  or  30  pound  of  Chocolate 
with  sugar  to  sweeten  it;  these  things  and  a  Kettle,  the 
Slaves  carried  also  on  their  backs  after  we  landed.     And 
because  there  were  some  who  designed  to  go  with  us  that 
we  knew  were  not  well  able  to  march,  we  gave  out,  that 
if  any  Man  faultred  in  the  Journey  over  Land  he  must 
expect  to  be  shot  to  death ;  for  we  knew  that  the  Spaniards 
would  soon  be  after  us,  and  one  Man  falling  into  their 
hands  might  be  the  ruin  of  us  all,  by  giving  an  account  of 
our  strength  and  condition :  yet  this  would  not  deter  'em 
from  going  with  us.     We  had  but  little  Wind  when  we 
parted  from  the  Ship ;  but  before  12a  clock  the  Sea-breeze 
came  in  strong,  which  was  like  to  founder  us  before  we  got 
in  with  the  shoar ;  for  our  security  therefore,  we  cut  up 
an  old  dry  Hide  that  we  brought  with  us,  and  barricadoed 
the    Lanch    all    round    with   it  to   keep  the    Water   out. 
About   10  a  clock  at  night  we  got  in  about  7  leagues  to 
windward   of  Cape  Passao^  under  the  Line,  and  then  it 
proved   calm ;    and   we    lay  and   drove    all    night,    bang 
fatigu'd  the  preceding  day.     The  1 8th  day  we  had  little 
wind  till  the  afternoon ;  and  then  we  made  sail,  standing 
along  the  shore  to  the  Northward,   having  the  Wind  at 
S.  S.  W.  and  fair  Weather. 

At  7  a  clock  we  came  abrest  of  Cape  Passao,  and 
found  a  small  Bark  at  an  Anchor  in  a  small  Bay  to 
Leeward  *  of  the  Cape,  which  we  took,  our  own  Boats 
being  too  small  to  transport  us.  We  took  her  just  under 
the  Equinoctial  Line,  she  was  not  only  a  help  to  us  but 
in  taking  her  we  were  safe  from  being  described :  we  did 
not  design  to  have  meddled  with  any  when  we  parted  with 
our  consorts,  nor  to  have  seen  any  if  we  could  have  helped 
it.  The  Bark  came  from  Gallio'  laden  with  Timber,  and 
was  bound  for  Guiaquil.* 

>  Cape  Passado,  about  20'  south  of  the  Equator. 

•  To  leeward  is  here  to  the  northward. 

'  Gallio,  or  Gallo,  a  small  island,  covered  with  timber,  in  Tumaco  Bay 
to  the  north  of  Mangles  Pt.  It  supplied  much  of  the  timber  needed  in 
the  barren  ports  of  Peru  and  Chile. 

*  Now  Guayaquil,  the  chief  port  in  Ecuador. 

34 


[RETURN    OUT   OF   THE   SOUTH    SEAS 

The  19th  day  in  the  morning  we  came  to  an  anchor   ah.  I 
12  leagues  to  the  Southward  of  Cape  St.  Francisco,'  >68i  1 
b|>u[  our  new  Bark  into  a  better  trim.     In  3  or  4  hours 
I  we  finished  our   business,    and    came  to  sail    again, 
I  Kcercd    along    the  Coast  with  the  Wind  at  S.  S.  W. 

■  to  touch  at  Gorgonia. 
Being  to  the  Northward  of  Cape  St.  Francisco  we  met 
*ith  very  wet  weather;  but  the  wind  continuing  we 
-rriroi  at  Gotgonia  the  24th  day  in  the  morning,  before 
'  w«  light ;  we  were  afraid  to  approach  it  in  the  day 
"  rne,  for  fear  the  Spaniards  should  lie  there  for  us,  it 
■-.ng  the  place  where  we  careened  lately,  and  where  they 
■itght  expect  us. 

When  we  came  ashore  we  found  the  Spaniards  had 
ttcn  there  to  seek  after  us,  by  a  House  they  had  built, 
which  would  entertain  100  Men,  and  by  a  great  Cross 
before  the  Doors.  This  was  token  enough  that  the 
Spaniards  did  expect  us  this  way  again ;  therefore  we  ex- 
-  lined  our  Prisoners  if  they  knew  any  thing  of  it,  who 
nfosed  they  had  heard  of  a  Pereago,  (or  large  Canoa) 
-at  rowed  with  1 4  Oars,  which  was  kept  in  a  River  on 
•Jx  Main,  and  once  in  2  or  3  days  came  over  to  Gorgonia 
purpcoely  to  sec  for  us ;  and  that  having  discovered  us, 
she  was  to  make  all  speed  to  Panama  with  the  News ; 
T^ere  they  had  3  Shijis  ready  to  send  after  us. 

We  lay  here  all  the  day,  and  scrubb'd'  our  new  Bark, 
-Ji  if  ever  we  should  be  chased  we  might  the  better 
isapc:  we  fill'd  our  Water,  and  in  the  evening  went 
from  thence,  having  the  Wind  at  S.  W.  a  brisk  gale. 

TTic  25th  day  we  had  much  Wind  and  Rain,  and  we 
lost  the  Cano*  that  had  been  cut  and  was  joined  together ; 
wc  would  have  kept  all  our  Canoas  to  carry  us  up  the 
River,  the  Bark  not  being  so  convenient. 

TTie  J7th  day  wc  went  from  thence  with  a  moderate 
€  trf  Wind  at  S.  W.  In  the  afternoon  wc  had  excessive 
^cwen  of  Rain. 

_^i  KMDc  Ko'  Donh  of  the  line. 
B'^^liKftHCIo  and  other  tilih  were  scraped  or  burned  from  ihe  bull 
V lte(  ■!*£  Biiglit  Kli()c  mine  imiiolhtr  inrouKh  the  sea. 

35 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

ak.  The  28th  day  was  very  wet  all  the  morning;  betwixt 

i68f  10  and  1 1  it  cleared  up,  and  we  saw  two  great  Ships  about 
a  league  and  half  to  the  Westward  of  us,  we  being  then 
two  leagues  from  the  shore,  and  about  10  leagues  to  the 
Southward  of  point  Garrachina.^  These  Ships  had  been 
cruising  between  Gorgonia  and  the  Gulf  6  months;  but 
whether  our  Prisoners  did  know  it  I  cannot  tell. 

We  presently  furled  our  Sails,  and  rowed  in  close 
under  the  shore,  knowing  that  they  were  Cruisers;  for 
if  they  had  been  bound  to  Panama  this  Wind  would  have 
carried  them  thither;  and  no  Ships  bound  from  Pknanui 
come  on  this  side  of  the  Bay,  but  keep  the  North  side 
of  the  Bay  till  as  far  as  the  Keys  of  Quibo  to  the  West- 
ward ;  and  then  if  they  are  bound  to  the  Southward  they 
stand  over  and  may  fetch  Galleo,  or  betwixt  it  and  Cape 
St.  Francisco. 

The  Glare  did  not  continue  long  before  it  rained  agun, 
and  kept  us  from  the  sight  of  each  other :  but  if  they 
had  seen  and  chased  us,  we  were  resolved  to  run  our  Bark 
and  Canoas  ashore,  and  take  ourselves  to  the  Mountains 
and  travel  over  Land ;  for  we  knew  that  the  Indians 
which  lived  in  these  parts  never  had  any  commerce  with 
the  Spaniards,  so  we  might  have  had  a  chance  for  our 
Lives. 

The  29th  day,  at  9  a  clock  in  the  morning,  we  came 
to  an  Anchor  at  Point  Garrachina,  about  7  leagues  Arom 
the  Gulf  of  St.  Michael,  which  was  the  place  where  we 
first  came  into  the  South  Seas,  and  the  way  by  which 
we  designed  to  return. 

Here  we  lay  all  the  day,  and  went  ashore  and  dried 
our  Cloaths,  clean'd  our  Guns,  dried  our  Ammunition, 
and  fixt  our  selves  against  our  Enemies,  if  we  should  be 
attacked ;  for  we  did  expect  to  find  some  opposition  at 
Landing :  we  likewise  kept  a  good  look-out  all  the  day, 
for  fear  of  those  two  Ships  that  we  saw  the  day  before. 

The  30th  day  in  the  morning  at  8  a  clock  we  came 
into  the  Gulf  of  St.  Michael's  mouth ;  for  we  put  from 

'  At  the  entrance  to  the  Gulf  of  San  Miguel. 

36 


RETURN  OUT  OF  THE  SOUTH  SEAS 

sint  GarrachiDa  in  the  Evening,  designing  to  have  reached 
the   Islands  in  the  Gulf  before  day ;  that  we  might  the  ' 
better  work  our  escape  from  our  Enemies,   if  we  should 
find  any  of  them  waiting  to  stop  our  passage. 

About  9  a  clock  we  came  to  an  Anchor  a  mile  without 
»  large  Island,  which  lies  4  miles  from  the  mouth  of  the 
Kiver;  we  had  other  small  Islands  without  us,  and  might 
"JVC  gone  up  into  the  River,  having  a  strong  tide  of  flood, 
Jt  would  not  adventure  farther,  till  we  had  lookt  well 
aooul  us. 

We  immediately  sent  a  Canoa  ashore  on  the  Island, 
wbeic  we  saw  (what  we  always  feared)  a  Ship  at  the 
Mouth  of  the  River,  lying  close  by  the  shore,  and  a 
^-irge  Tent  by  it,  by  which  we  found  it  would  be  a  hard 
'isk  for  us  to  escape  them. 

When  the  Camia  came  aboard  with  this  news,  some  of 
jr  Men  were  a  little  disheartned  ;  but  it  was  no  more 
ir.An  1  ever  expected. 

Oof  care  was  now  to  get  safe  over  land,  seeing  we 
not  land  here  according  to  our  desire :  Therefore 
the  Tide  of  flood  was  spent,  we  manned  our 
I  and  rowed  again  to  the  Island,  to  see  if  the  Enemy 
i  yet  in  motion.  When  we  came  ashore  we  dispersed 
iclves  all  over  the  Island,  to  prevent  our  Enemies 
coming  any  way  to  view  us;  and  presently  after 
»-watcr  we  saw  a  small  Canoa  coming  over  from  the 
I  to  the  Island  that  we  were  on;  which  made  us  all 
;  into  our  Canoa,  and  wait  their  coming ;  and  we  lay 
till  they  came  within  Pistol-shot  of  us,  and  then 
'  ready,  we  »tancd  out  and  took  them.  There  were 
la  her  one  white  man  and  two  Indians ;  who  being  ex- 
i-niAcd,  told  us  that  the  Ship  which  we  saw  at  the  Rivers 
-T"Oth,  had  lain  there  six  months,  guarding  the  River, 
waiting  for  our  coming;  that  she  had  12  Guns,  and  150 
^smen  and  Soldiers ;  that  the  Seamen  all  lay  aboard, 
'jI  the  Soldiers  lay  ashore  in  their  Tent ;  that  there 
'•^n  100  men  at  the  Mines,  who  had  all  small  Arms, 
'i  vouM  be  aboard  in  two  Tides  time.  They  likewise 
"  -d  ML  that  there  were  two  Ships  cruising  in  the  Bay, 
37 


be£L 


CAPTAIN    DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  between  this  place  and  Gorgonia;  the  biggest  had  20 
'^'  Guns,  and  2cx^  Men,  the  other  10  Guns,  and  150  men: 
Besides  all  this  they  told  us  that  the  Indians  on  this  ude 
the  Country  were  our  Enemies;  which  was  the  worst 
news  of  all.  However  we  presently  brought  these  Pri- 
soners aboard,  and  got  under  sail,  turning  out  with  the 
Tide  of  Ebb,  for  it  was  not  convenient  to  stay  longer 
there. 

We  did  not  long  consider  what  to  do;  but  intended 
to  land  that  night,  or  the  next  day  betimes;  for  we  did 
not  question  but  we  should  either  get  a  good  Conmierce 
with  the  Indians,^  by  such  Toys  as  we  had  purposely 
brought  with  us,  or  else  force  our  way  through  their 
Country,  in  spight  of  all  their  opposition:  and  we  did 
not  fear  what  these  Spaniards  could  do  against  us,  in 
case  they  should  land  and  come  after  us.  We  had  a 
strong  Southerly  Wind,  which  blew  right  in;  and  the 
Tide  of  Ebb  being  far  spent,  we  could  not  turn  out. 

I  perswaded  them  to  run  into  the  River  of  Congo, 
which  is  a  large  River,  about  three  leagues  from  the  Island 
where  we  lay ;  which  with  a  Southerly  Wind  wc  could 
have  done :  and  when  we  were  got  so  high  as  the  Tide 
flows,  then  we  might  have  landed.  But  all  the  arguments 
I  could  use  were  not  of  force  sufficient  to  convince  them 
that  there  was  a  large  River  so  near  us,  but  they  would 
land  somewhere,  they  neither  did  know  how,  where,  nor 
when.* 

When  we  had  rowed  and  towed  against  the  Wind  all 
night ;  we  just  got  about  Cape  St.  Lorenzo  in  the  morning ; 
and  sailed  about  4  miles  farther  to  the  Westward,  and  run 
into  a  small  Creek  within  two  Keys,  or  little  Islands,  and 
rowed  up  to  the  Head  of  the  Creek,  being  about  a  Mile 
up,  and  there  we  landed  May  i,  1681. 

We  got  out  all  our  Provision  and  Cloaths,  and  then 
sunk  our  Vessel. 

'  A  note  in  the  original  MS.  (Sloane  3236)  runs  "for  we  very  well  know 
the  hearts  of  the  Indians.'* 

*  Note  in  MS.  '* There  was  not  a  man  in  this  party  but  myself  that 
ever  Heard  of  this  River."  The  MS.  runs  "All  the  persuasions  I  could 
use  were  not  of  force  sufficient  to  worke  on  their  stubbome  oature." 

38 


■    ACCOUNT  OF  THE   MOSKITO   INDIANS 
^L      While  wc  were  landing  and  fixing  our  Snap-sacks  to 
^■gurfh,  our  Moskito  Indians  struck  a  plentiful  Dish  of  Fish,  ' 
^Hvhich  we  immediately  drest,  and  therewith  satisfied  our 
^^Huiwer. 

^1      Having  made  mention  of  the  Moskito  Indians,  it  may 

^H  w  be  amiss  to  conclude  this  Chapter  with  a  short  account 

^Bflf  them.      They   are    tall,    well-made,    raw-bon'd,    lusty, 

^■Mrcng,  and  nimble  of  Foot,  long-visaged,  lank  black  Hair, 

^Bfeok  stern,   hard  favour'd,  and  of  a  dark  Copper-colour 

^HpDniptcxion.     They  are  but  a  small  Nation  or  Family,  and 

^^Br  too  Men  of  them  in  Number,  inhabiting  on  the  Main 

^^Hl  the  Norib-side,  near  Cape  Gratia  Dios ;  between  Cape 

^^nonduras  and  Nicaragua.      They  are  very    ingenious  at 

thnming  the  Lance,  Fisgig,'  Harpoon,  or  any  manner  of 

(hrt,  being  bred  to  it  from  their  Infancy ;  for  the  Children 

^rnttating  their  Parents,  never  go  abroad  without  a  Lance 

■n  ihdr  Hands,  which  they  throw  at  any  Object,  till  use 

bth  made  them  masters  of  the  Art.    Then  they  learn  to 

r-ut  by  a  Lince,  Arrow,  or  Dart :    The  manner  is  thus. 

Two  boys  stand  at  a  small  distance,  and  dart  a  blunt  stick 

i'  one  another ;  each  of  them  holding  a  small  stick  in  his 

■:ght  ha»d,  with  which    he  strikes  away  that  which  was 

:!arted  at  hina.     As  they  grow  in  years  they  become  more 

uleztcrouft  and  courageous,  and  then  they  will  stand  a  fair 

tnaric,  to  any  one  that  will  shoot  Arrows  at  them  ;  which 

they  will  put  by  with  a  very  small  stick,  no  bigger  than 

the  Rod'  of  a  Fowling-piece;  and  when  they  are  grown 

■  ■  be  Men,  they  will  guard  themselves  from  Arrows,  tho' 

-.ey  come  very  thick  at  them,  provided  two  do  not  happen 

lo  oocnc  It  once.     They  have  extraordinary  good  Eyes, 

^^U  will  discry  a  Sail  at  Sea  farther,  and  see  any  thing 

^^^^er  than  we.     Their  chiefest  employment  in  their  own 

^^^nntry  is  to  strike  Fish,  Turtle  or  Manatee,  the  manner 

of  which  I  describe   elsewhere.  Chap.   3.     For  this   they 

-.re  esteemed   and  coveted  by  all  Privateers;    for  one  or 

TWO  of  them  in  a  Ship,  will  maintain    100  Men  :  So  that 

'  ^'*tV'  ^'*^Vi  "^  **tiEV>  ■>()*  gencmlly  called  the  grains,  a  harpoon 
*«>  Am  or  RK»«  Mtb«d  bead>. 

39 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  when  we  careen  our  Ships,  we  choose  commonly  such 
'^'^'  places,  where  there  is  plenty  of  Turtle  or  Manatee  for 
these  Moskito  Men  to  strike ;  and  it  is  very  rare  to  find 
Privateers  destitute  of  one  or  more  of  them,  when  the 
Commander,  or  most  of  the  Men  are  English ;  but  they 
do  not  love  the  French,  and  the  Spaniards  they  hate 
mortally.  When  they  come  among  Privateers  they  get 
the  use  of  Guns,  and  prove  very  good  marks  Men ;  they 
behave  themselves  very  bold  in  fight,  and  never  seem  to 
flinch  nor  hang  back ;  for  they  think  that  the  white  Men 
with  whom  they  are,  know  better  than  they  do  when  it 
is  l^st  to  fight,  and  let  the  disadvantage  of  their  party  be 
never  so  great,  they  will  never  yield  nor  give  back  while 
any  of  their  party  stand.  I  could  never  perceive  any 
Religion  nor  any  Ceremonies,  or  superstitious  Observations 
among  them,  being  ready  to  imitate  us  in  whatsoever  they 
saw  us  do  at  any  time.  Only  they  seem  to  fear  the 
Devil,  whom  they  call  Wallesaw ;  and  they  say  he  often 
appears  to  some  among  them,  whom  our  Men  commonly 
call  their  Priest,  when  they  desire  to  speak  with  him  on 
urgent  business ;  but  the  rest  know  not  any  thing  of  him, 
nor  how  he  appears,  otherwise  than  as  these  Priests  tell 
them.  Yet  they  all  say  they  must  not  anger  him,  for 
then  he  will  beat  them,  and  that  sometimes  he  carries  away 
these  their  Priests.  Thus  much  I  have  heard  from  some 
of  them  who  speak  good  English. 

They  marry  but  one  Wife,  with  whom  they  live  till 
death  separates  them.  At  their  first  coming  t(^ther, 
the  Man  makes  a  very  small  Plantation,'  for  there  is 
Land  enough,  and  they  may  choose  what  spot  they  please. 
They  delight  to  settle  near  the  Sea,  or  by  some  River,  for 
the  sake  of  striking  Fish,  their  beloved  imployment. 

Far  within  Land  there  are  other  Indians,  with  whom 
they  are  always  at  War.  After  the  Man  hath  cleared  a 
spot  of  Land,  and  hath  planted  it,  he  seldom  minds  it 
afterward,  but  leaves  the  managing  of  it  to  his  Wife,  and 
he  goes  out  a  striking.     Sometimes  he  seeks  only  for  Fish, 

1  Wafer  tells  us  that  the  plantation  was  cleared  for  the  newly  married 
couple  by  the  men  of  the  tribe. 

40 


ACCOUNT  OF  THE  MOSKITO  INDIANS 
II  other  times  for  Turtle,  or  Manatee,  and  whatever  he 
mi  he  brings  home  to  his  Wife,  and  never  stirs  out  to  ' 
■«k  for  more  till  it  is  all  eaten.  When  hunger  begins  to 
wc,  he  cither  takes  his  Canoa  and  seeks  for  more  game 
itSca,  or  walks  out  into  the  Woods  and  hunts  about  for 
f'ttory.'  Wirrce,"  each  a  sort  of  wild  Hogs,  or  Deer;  and 
KldoHi  returns  empty  handed,  nor  seeks  for  any  more  so 
l'«g  as  any  of  it  lasts.  Their  Plantations  are  so  small, 
ihit  they  cannot  subsist  with  what  they  produce  :  for  their 
itfgei  Plantations  have  not  above  20  or  -jo  Plantain- 
Trea,'  a  bed  of  Yams*  and  Potatoes,"  a  bush  of  Indian 
Ptpper,  and  a  small  spot  of  Pine-apples ;  which  last  fruit 
It  »  main  thing  they  delight  in,  for  with  these  they  make 
I  tort  of  drink  which  our  men  call  Pine-drink,  much 
«ocmed  by  these  Moskito's,  and  to  which  they  invite 
«h  other  to  be  merry,  providing  Fish  and  Flesh  also. 
Whoever  of  them  makes  of  this  Liquor  treats  his  Neigh- 
tKun,  making  a  little  Canoa  full  at  a  time,  and  so  enough 
Co  fflikc  them  all  drunk  ;  and  it  is  seldom  that  such  Feasts 
»t  made,  but  the  party  that  makes  them  hath  some 
^ioign,  either  to  Ik  revenged  for  some  injury  done  him, 
''■f  to  dcbite  of  such  differences  as  have  hapned  between 
him  and  hb  Neighbours,  and  to  examine  into  the  truth 
''jfitKfa  nutters.  Yet  before  they  are  warmed  with  drink, 
itiey  never  s^ieak  one  word  of  their  grievances :  and  the 
■'xnen,  who  commonly  know  their  Husbands  designs, 
prevent  them  from  doing  any  injury  to  each  other  by 
hNiing  their  Lances,  Harpoons,  Bows  and  Arrows,  or  any 
"ther  Weapon  that  they  have. 

These  Moskito's  are  in  general  very  civil  and  kind  to 
't  English,  of  whom  they  receive  a  great  deal  of  respect, 

'1  when   they  are  aboard  their  Ships,  and  also  ashore, 

1*  t'trtaT.     A  yic(;arioii»  mU]  bog.     "'Tis  black,  and  has  link  short 

'  fe  M  pmtjr  nnnblc"    ll  it  known  lo  n-iluralisls  as  DualyUi  torquaius. 

WvTcc.     "A  wty  %°"A  *on  of  a  wjlil  beast,  which  is  much  like  unto 

EafTttti  M'Ht-'     ll  bftt  luiks  and  bristles  like  the  European  wild-boar. 

r.rr  t.-,\-iyi,K  than  the  p«cuiry.    Matuialists  call  it  the  Dicotylts 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER^S  VOYAGES 

AN.  either  in  Jamaica,  or  elsewhere,  whither  they  often  come 
1681  yf\^\^  ^j^g  Seamen.  We  always  humour  them,  letting  them 
go  any  whither  as  they  will,  and  return  to  their  Country 
in  any  Vessel  bound  that  way,  if  they  please.  They  will 
have  the  management  of  themselves  in  their  striking,  and 
will  go  in  their  own  little  Canoa,  which  our  men  could 
not  go  in  without  danger  of  oversetting :  nor  will  they 
then  let  any  white  man  come  in  their  C^noa,  but  will  go 
a  striking  in  it  just  as  they  please :  All  which  we  allow 
them.  For  should  we  cross  them,  tho'  they  should  sec 
Shoals  of  Fish,  or  Turtle,  or  the  like,  they  will  purposely 
strike  their  Harpoons  and  Turtle-irons  aside,  or  so  glance 
them  as  to  kill  nothing.  They  have  no  form  of  Govern- 
ment among  them,  but  acknowledge  the  King  of  England 
for  their  Soveraign :  They  learn  our  Language,  and  take 
the  Governour  of  Jamaica  ^  to  be  one  of  the  greatest  Princes 
in  the  world. 

While  they  are  among  the  English  they  wear  good 
Cloaths,  and  take  delight  to  go  neat  and  tight ;  but  when 
they  return  again  to  their  own  Country  they  put  by  all. 
their  Cloaths,  and  go  after  their  own  Country  fashion, 
wearing  only  a  small  piece  of  Linnen  tied  about  their 
Wastes,  hanging  down  to  their  Knees. 

^  In  later  times  "The  King  (of  the  Mosquito  Country)  bad  his  com- 
mission from  the  Governor  of  Jamaica,  and  at  every  new  Governor's  anrival, 
they  came  over  to  know  his  pleasure.  The  King  of  the  Mosquitoes  was 
received  by  His  Grace  the  Duke  of  Portland  (Governor  of  Jamaica,  1722-3) 
with  that  courtesy  which  was  natural  to  him,  and  with  more  ceremony  thsm 
seemed  to  be  due  to  a  Monarch  who  held  his  sovereignty  by  commission." 


42 


Tit  Jmtfw'i  Land  Jwrntyfrom  thi  South  to  the  North  Sea, 
avtr  tht  Ttrra  Firaia,  or  Itthmus  ofDarien. 

BKING  landed,  May  the   ist,  we  began  our  march   i 
about  3  a  Clock  in  the  Afternoon,  directing  our  ' 
I    course  by  our  pocket  Compasses  N.  E.  and  having 
gone  about  2  miles,  we  came  to  the  foot  of  a  hill 
where  we  built  small   Hutts  and  lay  all    night;    having 
excessive  Rains  till  12  a  Clock. 

The  2d  day  in  the  morning  having  fair  weather  we 
ascended  the  hill,  and  found  a  small  Indian  path,  which 
we  fojiowcd  till  wc  found  it  run  too  much  Easterly,  and 
then  doubting  it  would  carry  us  out  of  our  way,  we  climb'd 
some  of  the  highest  Trees  on  the  Hill,  which  was  not 
meanly  furnished  with  as  large  and  tall  Trees  as  ever  I 
saw :  At  length  wc  discovered  some  Houses  in  a  Valley 
on  the  North  side  of  the  Hill,  but  it  being  steep  could 
Dot  descend  on  that  side,  but  followed  the  small  path 
which  led  us  down  the  Hill  on  the  East  side,  where  we 
prckcnily  found  several  other  Indian  Houses.  The  first 
that  wc  came  to  at  the  foot  of  the  Hill,  had  none  but 
women  at  home,  who  could  not  speak  Spanish,  but  gave 
each  of  us  a  good  Calabash  or  shell  full  of  Corn-drink.* 
Tbc  other  Houses  had  some  men  at  home,  but  none  that 
•poke  Spanish  ;  yet  we  made  a  shift  to  buy  such  food  as 
their  Houses  or  Plantations  atFordcd,  which  we  drest,  and 
all  tctfcther;  having  all  sorts  of  our  Provision  in 
lOo,  because  none  should  live  better  than  others,  or 


U       their  1 
^^t  all 


P. 

I 


Or  ducbali.     W&icr  »ays  that  "it  Usies  like  sour  small  Beer,  y«i 
frrf  ■BicmcatiDx''     It  was  made  in  a  peculiarly  disgusting  manner. 
r4ea9tt  MC  W«r.  pp.  3S6-3S7.  ed-  >729- 
43 


CAPTAIN    DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  pay  dearer  for  anything  than  it  was  worth.  This  day  we 
'^^'  had  marched  6  mile. 

In  the  evening  the  Husbands  of  those  women  came 
home,  and  told  us  in  broken  Spanish,  that  they  had  been 
on  board  of  the  Guard  Ship,  which  we  fled  from  two  days 
before,  that  we  were  now  not  above  3  mile  from  the  mouth 
of  the  River  Congo,  and  that  they  could  go  from  thence 
aboard  the  Guard  Ship  in  half  a  Tides  time. 

This  evening  we  supped  plentifully  on  Fowls,  and 
Pecary ;  a  sort  of  wild  Hogs  which  we  bought  of  the 
Indians ;  Yams,  Potatoes,  and  Plantains  served  us  for 
Bread,  whereof  we  had  enough.  After  Supper  we  agreed 
with  one  of  these  Indians  to  guide  us  a  days  march  into 
the  Country,  towards  the  North  side ;  he  was  to  have  for 
his  pains  a  Hatchet,  and  his  bargain  was  to  bring  us  to 
a  certain  Indians  habitation,  who  could  speak  Spanish, 
from  whom  we  were  in  hopes  to  be  better  satisfied  of  our 
Journey. 

The  3d  day  having  fair  weather,  we  began  to  stir 
betimes,  and  set  out  between  6  and  7  a  clock,  marching 
through  several  old  ruined  Plantations.  This  morning  one 
of  our  Men  being  tired  gave  us  the  slip.  By  12  a  clock 
we  had  gone  8  mile,  and  arrived  at  the  Indians  house,  who 
lived  on  the  bank  of  the  River  Congo,  and  spake  very  good 
Spanish  ;  to  whom  we  declared  the  reason  of  this  Visit. 

At  first  he  seemed  to  be  very  dubious  of  entertaining 
any  discourse  with  us,  and  gave  very  impertinent  answers 
to  the  questions  that  we  demanded  of  him ;  he  told  us 
he  knew  no  way  to  the  North  side  of  the  Country,  but 
could  carry  us  to  Cheapo,  or  Santa  Maria,  which  we  knew 
to  be  Spanish  Garrisons ;  the  one  lying  to  the  Elastward 
of  us,  the  other  to  the  Westward  :  either  of  them  at  least 
20  miles  out  of  our  way.  We  could  get  no  other  answer 
from  him,  and  all  his  discourse  was  in  such  an  angry  tone, 
as  plainly  declared  he  was  not  our  friend.  However,  we 
were  forced  to  make  a  virtue  of  necessity,  and  humour 
him,  for  it  was  neither  time  nor  place  to  be  angry  with 
the  Indians;  all  our  lives  lying  in  their  hand. 

We  were  now  at  a  great  loss,  not  knowing  what  course 

44 


HVS  OF   AMERICA' 

Buice,  for  wc  tempted  him  wiih  Beads,  Money,  Hatchets, 
btchcats,  or  long  Knives;  but    nothing  would  work  on  ' 

,  till  one  of  our  men  took  a  Sky-cloured  Petticoat  out 

f  his  hag  and   put  it  on   his  Wife ;  who  was  so  much 

1  with  the  Present,  that  she  immediately  began   to 

latter  to  her   Husband,  and  soon  brought   him  into    a 

Eftcr  humour.     He  could  then  tell  us  that  he  knew  the 

Rjr  10  the  North  side,  and  would  have  gone  with  us,  but 

I  he  had  cut  his  foot  2  days  before,  which  made  him 

apkble  of  serving  us  himself:  But  he  would  take  care 

1  wc  should  not  want  a  guide ;  and  therefore  he  hired 

t  SMK    Indian   who   brought   us   hither,   to   conduct   us 

[Idij^  march  further  for  another  Hatchet.     The  old  man 

1  have  stayed  us  here  all  the  day,  because  it  rained 

'  hard ;    but    our    business    required    more    haste,    our 

I  lying  so  near  us,  for  he  told  us   that  he  could 

t  from   his  house  aboard   the  Guard   Ship   in    a    Tides 

;  and   this  wa?  the  4th  day  since  they  saw  us.'     So 

e  lurched  3  miles  farther,  and  then  built  Hutts,  where 

kmyed  all  Night;  it  rained  all  the  Afternoon,  and  the 

aiat  j«rt  of  the  Night. 

The  4th  Day  wc  began  our  March  betimes,  for  the 
Venoons  were  commonly  fair,  but  much  Rain  Afternoon: 
pD*  whether  it  rained  or  shined  it  was  much  at  one  with 
t,for  I  verily  believed  we  crosi  the  Rivers  30  times  this 
y:  the  Indians  having  no  Paths  to  travel  from  one  part 
'the  Country'  to  another;  and  therefore  guided  them- 
l  by  the  Rivers.  We  marched  this  Day  12  Miles, 
I  then  built  our  Hutts,  and  lay  down  to  sleep;  but 
t  always  kept  two  Men  on  the  Watch;  otherwise  our 
I  Shvcs  might  have  knockt  us  on  the  head  while  we 
rained  violently  all  the  afternoon,  and  most 
night.  We  had  much  ado  to  kindle  a  6rc 
ing :  our  Hutts  were  but  very  mean  or  ordinary, 
P4rc  small,  so  that  we  could  not  dry  our  Cloaths, 
E  warm  our  selves,  and  no  sort  of  Kood  for  the  Belly  ; 
fwhich  made  it  very  hard  with  us.     I  confess  these  hard- 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 

AN.   ships  quite  expel  I'd  the  thoughts  of  an  Enemy,  for  now 
'^*  having  been  4  days  in  the  Country,  we  began  to  have  but 
few  other  cares  than  how  to  get  Guides  and  Food,  the 
Spaniards  were  seldom  in  our  thoughts. 

The  5th  day  we  set  out  in  the  morning  betimes,  and 
having  travelled  7  miles  in  those  wild  pathless  Woods,  by 
10  a  clock  in  the  morning  we  arrived  at  a  young  Spanish 
Indian's  House,  who  had  formerly  lived  with  the  Bishop 
of  Panama.     The    young   Indian   was   very   brisk,  spoke 
very  good  Spanish,  and  received    us   very  kindly.     This 
Plantation   afforded    us    store    of    Provision,    Yams,   and 
Potatoes,  but  nothing  of  any  Flesh,  besides  2  fat  Monkeys 
we  shot,  part  whereof  we  distributed  to  some  of  our  Com- 
pany, who  were  weak  and  sickly ;  for  others  we  got  Eggs, 
and    such   refreshments  as  the  Indians  had,   for  we  still 
provided  for  the  sick  and  weak.     We  had  a  Spanish  Indian 
in  our  company,  who  first  took  up  Arms  with  Captain 
Sawkins,  and  had  been  with  us  ever  since  his  Death.     He 
was  jxTSwaded  to  live  here  by  the  master  of  the  house,  who 
promised  him  his  Sister  in  marriage,  and  to  be  assistant  to 
him  in  clearing  a  Plantation:  but  we  would  not  consent 
to  part   from  him  here,  for  fear  of  some  treachery,  but 
promised   to  release  him  in  two  or  three  days,  when  we 
were  certainly  out  of  danger  of  our  Enemies.     We  stayed 
here    all    the    Afternoon,    and    dried    our    Cloaths    and 
Ammunition,  cleared  our  Guns,  and   provided   our  selves 
for  a  march  the  next  morning. 

Our  Chirurgeon,  Mr  Wafer,  came  to  a  sad  disaster 
here:  being  drying  his  Powder,^  a  careless  fellow  passed 
by  with  his  Pipe  lighted,  and  set  fire  to  his  Powder; 
which  blew  up  and  scorched  his  Knee;  and  reduced  him 
to  that  Condition,  that  he  was  not  able  to  march  ;  where- 
fore we  allowed  him  a  Slave  to  carry  his  things,  being  ail 
of  us  the  more  concerned  at  the  accident,  because  liable 
our  selves  every  moment  to  misfortune,  and  none  to  look 

1  "  I  was  sitting  on  the  Ground,  near  one  of  our  Men,  who  was  drying 
of  jrun  powder,  in  a  Silver  Plate :  But  not  managing  it  as  he  should,  it 
blew  up  and  scorch'd  my  Knee  to  that  Degree,  that  the  Bone  was  left  bare, 
the  Flesh  being  torn  away,  and  my  Thigh  burnt  for  a  great  Way  above 
it  •'  (Wafer). 

46 


OVER  THE   ISTHMUS   OF  AMERICA 

after  us  but  him.     This  Indian  Plantation  was  scatcj  on 
the  bank  of  the  River  Congo,  in  a  very  fat  Soil,  and  thus  " 
far  we   might  have  come  in  our  Canoa,  if  I  could  have 
persuaded  them  to  it. 

The  6th  day  wc  set  out  again,  having  hired  another 
guide.  Here  we  first  crost  the  River  Congo  in  a  Canoa, 
having  been  from  our  first  Landing  on  the  West  side  of 
the  River,  and  being  over,  we  marched  to  the  Eastward 
2  miles,  and  came  to  another  River,  which  wc  forded 
several  times,  though  it  was  very  deep.  Two  of  our  Men' 
were  not  able  to  keep  company  with  us,  but  came  after  us 
as  they  were  able.  The  last  time  wc  forded  the  River,  it 
was  so  deep,  that  our  tallest  Men  stood  in  the  deepest 
place,  and  handed  the  sick,  weak  and  short  Men ;  by 
which  means  wc  all  got  over  safe,  except  those  two  who 
were  behind.  Foreseeing  a  necessity  of  wading  through 
Rivers  frequently  in  our  Land-march,  I  took  care  before 
I  left  the  Ship  to  provide  my  self  a  large  Joint  of  Bambo, 
which  I  stopt  at  both  ends,  closing  it  with  Wax,  so  as  to 
keep  out  any  Water.  In  this  I  preserved  my  Journal  and 
other  Writings  from  being  wet,  tho'  1  was  often  forced  to 
swim.  When  we  were  over  this  River,  we  sat  down  to 
wait  the  coming  of  our  Consorts  who  were  left  behind, 
and  in  half  an  hour  they  came.  But  the  River  by  that 
time  was  so  high,  that  they  could  not  get  over  it,  neither 
could  we  help  them  over,  but  bid  them  be  of  good  comfort 
and  stay  till  the  River  did  fall;  But  wc  marched  2  mile 
farther  by  the  side  of  the  River,  and  there  built  our  Hutts, 
having  gone  this  day  6  miles.  Wc  had  scarce  finished  our 
Hutts,  before  the  River  rose  much  higher,  and  overflowing 
the  Banks,  obliged  us  to  remove  into  higher  ground :  But 
the  next  night  came  on  before  we  could  build  more  Hutts, 
so  we  lay  straggling  in  the  Woods,  some  under  one  Tree, 
some  under  another,  as  we  could  find  conveniency,  which 
might  have  been  indifferent  comfortable  if  the  weather  had 
been  fair;  hut  the  greatest  part  of  the  night  we  had  extra- 
ordinary hard   Rain,  with   much  Lightening    and   terrible 


'  Robert  .Spratlin  and  William  Downuui. 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  claps  of  Thunder.  These  hardships  and  inconveniencies 
'^****'  made  us  all  careless,  and  there  was  no  Watch  kept,  (tho' 
I  believe  nobody  did  sleep :)  So  our  Slaves  taking  oppor- 
tunity, went  away  in  the  night;  all  but  one,  who  was  hid 
in  some  hole  and  knew  nothing  of  their  design,  or  else  fell 
asleep.  Those  that  went  away,  carried  with  them  our 
Chirurgcons  Gun  ^  and  all  his  Money. 

The  next  morning  being  the  8th  day,  we  went  to  the 
Rivers  side,  and  found  it  much  fallen ;  and  here  our  Guide 
would  have  us  ford  it  again,  which  being  deep,  and  the 
current  running  swift,  we  could  not.  Then  we  contrived 
to  swim  over ;  those  that  could  not  swim,  we  were  resolved 
to  help  over  as  well  as  we  could  :  But  this  was  not  so 
feizable :  for  we  should  not  be  able  to  get  all  our  things 
over.  At  length  we  concluded  to  send  one  Man  over  with 
a  Liiu\  who  should  hale  over  all  our  things  first,  and  then 
ixot  the  Men  over.  This  being  agreed  on,  one  George 
(vuyny  took  the  end  of  a  Line  and  made  it  fast  about  his 
Neck,  and  left  the  other  end  ashore,  and  one  Man  stood 
by  the  Line,  to  clear  it  away  to  him.  But  when  Gayny 
was  in  the  midst  of  the  water,  the  Line  in  drawing  after 
him  chanced  to  kink  or  grow  entangled  ;  and  he  that  stood 
by  to  clear  it  away,  stopt  the  Line,  which  turned  Gayny  on 
his  back,  and  he  that  had  the  Line  in  his  hand  threw  it  all 
into  the  River  after  him,  thinking  he  might  recover  him- 
self; but  the  stream  running  very  swift,  and  the  Man 
having  three  hundred  Dollars  at  his  back,  was  carried 
down,  and  never  seen  more  by  us.  Those  two  Men  whom 
we  left  behind  the  day  before,  told  us  afterwards  that  they 
found  him  lying  dead  in  a  Creek,  where  the  Eddy  had 
driven  him  ashore,  and  the  Money  on  his  back;  but  they 
meddled  not  with  any  of  it,  Ixiing  only  in  care  how  to  work 
their  way  through  a  wild  unknown  Country.  This  put  a 
jXM-iod  to  that  contrivance.  This  was  the  fourth  Man  that 
we  lost  in  this  Luid-Journy ;  for  those  two  Men  that  we 

*  The  (iiinirj'coii  was,  of  course,  Lionel  Wafer.  A  slave  hail  been 
allotted  him  *Mt>  rarry  my  Mtnlirines/'  but,  in  the  nijjht,  **hc  ti^ok  them  all 
aw.iy  with  him  t«»>irtlKT  with  the  rost  of  my  Thinj;s ;  and  thereby  left  me 
ilrpiivM  of  whorewiihal  to  dress  my  Sore." 

48 


■      OVER   THE  ISTHMUS  OF  AMERICA 

left  the  day  before  did  not  come  to  us  till  we  were  in  the  . 
North  Seas,  so  we  yielded  them  also  for  Inst.  Being  ' 
frustrated  of  getting  over  the  River  this  way,  wc  looked 
about  for  a  Tree  to  fell  across  the  River.  At  length  wc 
found  one,  which  we  cm  down,  and  it  reached  clear  over : 
on  this  we  passed  to  the  other  side,  where  wc  found  a 
small  Plantain  walk,  which  we  soon  ransackt. 

While  we  were  busy  getting  Plantains,  our  Guide  was 
gone,  hut  in  less  than  two  hours  came  to  us  again,  and 
brought  with  him  an  old  Indian,  to  whom  he  delivered  up 
his  charge ;  and  we  gave  him  a  Hatchet  and  dismist  him, 
and  entered  our  selves  under  the  conduct  of  our  new 
guide:  who  immediately  led  us  away,  and  crost  another 
River,  and  entered  into  a  large  Valley  of  the  fattest  land 
1  did  ever  take  notice  of;  the  Trees  were  not  very  thick, 
but  the  largest  that  I  saw  in  all  my  travels;  We  saw  great 
tracks,  which  were  made  by  the  Pccaries,  but  saw  nunc  of 
*em.  We  marched  in  this  pleasant  Country  till  3  a  clock 
in  the  afternoon,  in  all  about  4  Miles,  and  then  arrived  at 
rhe  old  mans  Country-house,  which  was  only  a  habitation 
for  Hunting :  there  was  a  small  Plantain  walk,  some 
Yams,  and  Potatoes.  Here  we  took  up  our  quarters  fur 
this  day,  and  Refreshed  our  selves  with  such  food  as  the 
place  afforded,  and  dryed  our  Cloaths  and  Ammunition. 
At  this  place  our  young  Spanish  Indian  provided  to  leave 
us,  for  now  we  thought  our  selves  past  danger.  This  was 
he  that  was  perswaded  to  stay  at  the  last  house  we  came 
from,  to  marry  the  young  Man's  Sister;  and  we  dismissed 
him  accoriling  to  our  promise. 

The  9th  day  the  old  Man  conducted  us  towards  his 
■  )wn  habitation.  Wc  marched  about  5  miles  in  this 
Valley ;  and  then  ascended  a  Hill,  and  travelled  about 
5  miles  farther  over  two  or  three  smalt  Hills,  before  we 
came  to  any  settlement.  Half  a  mile  before  wc  came  to 
the  Plantations  we  light  of  a  path,  which  carried  us  to  the 
Indians  habitations.  We  saw  many  wooden  Crosses  erected 
in  the  way,  which  created  some  jealousy  in  us  that  here 
were  some  Spaniards;  Therefore  we  new  primed  all  our 
Guns,  and  provided  our  selves  for  an  Enemy ;  but  coming 
L      VOL.  t.  49  D 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   into  the  Town  found  none  but  Indians,  who  were  all  got 
*^*  together  in  a  large  House  to  receive  us :  for  the  old  man 
had  a  little  boy  with  him,  that  he  sent  before. 

They  made  us  welcome  to  such  as  they  had,  which 
was  very  mean ;  for  these  were  new  Plantations,  the  Corn 
being  not  eared.  Potatoes,  Yams,  and  Plantains,  they  had 
none,  but  what  they  brought  from  their  old  Plantations. 
There  was  none  of  them  spoke  good  Spanish :  Two  young 
Men  could  speak  a  little,  it  caused  us  to  take  more  notice 
of  them.  To  these  we  made  a  present,  and  desired  them 
to  get  us  a  Guide  to  conduct  us  to  the  North  side,  or  part 
of  the  way,  which  they  promised  to  do  themselves,  if  we 
would  reward  them  for  it,  but  told  us  we  must  lye  still 
the  next  day.  But  we  thought  our  selves  nearer  the  North 
Sea  than  we  were,  and  proposed  to  go  without  a  Guides 
rather  than  stay  here  a  whole  day :  However  some  of  our 
men  who  were  tired  resolved  to  stay  behind;  and  Mr. 
Wafer  our  Chirurgeon,  who  marched  in  great  pain  ever 
since  his  Knee  was  burned  with  powder,  was  resolved  to 
stay  with  them. 

The  tenth  day  we  got  up  betimes,  resolving  to  march, 
but  the  Indians  opposed  it  as  much  as  they  could,  bat 
seeing  they  could  not  perswade  us  to  stay,  they  came 
with  us;  and  having  taken  leave  of  our  friends,  we  set 
out. 

Here  therefore  we  left  the  Chirurgeon  and  two  more,^ 
as  we  said,  and  marched  away  to  the  Eastward  following 
our  Guides.  But  we  often  look'd  on  our  Pocket  Com- 
passes, and  shewed  them  to  the  Guides,  pointing  at  the 
way  that  we  would  go,  which  made  them  shake  their  Heads, 
and  say,  they  were  pretty  things,  but  not  convenient  for 
us.  After  we  had  descended  the  Hill  on  which  the  Town 
stood  we  came  down  into  a  Valley,  and  guided  our  selves 
by  a  River,  which  we  crossed  32  times ;  and  having  marched 
9  miles,  we  built  Huts  and  lay  there  all  night:  Tlus 
evening  I  killed  a  Quaum,  a  large  Bird  as  big  as  a  Turkey, 

*  Mr.  Richard  Gopson,  or  Cobson,  "an  ingenious  Man,  and  a  good 
Scholar,"  and  John  Hingson,  mariner,  were  the  two  men  who  stayed  with 
Wafer. 

SO 


/ 


OVER  THE  ISTHMUS  OF  AMERICA 


for 


brought 


'  wherewith    wc   treated    our  ' 
Provision  with  us.     This  night  our  last  Slave  run  away. 

The  eleventh  day  we  marched  ro  mile  farther,  and 
built  Hutts  at  night ;  but  went  suppcrlcss  to  bed. 

The  twelfth  in  the  morning  wc  crossed  a  deep  River, 
passing  over  it  on  a  Tree,  and  marched  7  mile  in  a  low 
swampy  ground  ;  and  came  to  the  side  of  a  great  deep 
River,  but  could  not  get  over.  We  built  Hutts  upon  its 
Banks  and  lay  there  ail  night,  upon  our  Barbecu's,  or 
frames  of  Slicks,  raised  about  3  foot  from  the  ground. 

The  thirteenth  day,  when  wc  turned  out,  the  River 
had  ovcrflowd  its  Banks,  and  was  J  foot  deep  in  our 
Hutts,  and  our  Guides  went  from  us,  not  telling  us  their 
intent,  which  made  us  think  they  were  returned  home 
again.  Now  wc  began  to  repent  our  haste  in  coming 
from  the  last  Settlements,  for  wc  had  no  food  since  we 
came  from  thence.  Indeed  we  got  Macaw-berries  in  this 
place,  wherewith  wc  satisfied  our  selves  this  day  though 
coursly. 

The  fourteenth  day  in  the  morning  betimes,  our 
Guides  came  to  us  again;  and  the  Waters  being  fallen 
within  their  bounds,  they  carry 'd  us  to  a  Tree  that  stcKxl 
on  the  Bank  of  the  River,  and  told  us  if  we  could  fell  that 
Tree  cross  it,  we  might  pass ;  if  not,  we  could  pass  no 
farther.  Therefore  wc  set  two  of  the  best  Ax-men  that 
we  had,  who  fell'd  it  exactly  cross  the  River,  and  the 
boughs  just  reached  over;  on  this  we  passed  very  safe. 
We  afterwards  crossed  another  River  three  times,  with 
much  difficulty,  and  at  3  a  clock  in  the  afternoon  we  came 
to  an  Indian  settlement,  where  we  met  a  drove  of 
Monkeys,  and  killed  4  of  them,  and  stayed  here  all 
night,  having  marched  this  day  6  miles.  Here  we  got 
Plantains  enough,  and  a  kind  reception  of  the  Indian  that 
lived  here  all  alone,  except  one  Boy  to  wait  on  him. 

The  fifteenth  day  when  we  set  out,  the  kind  Indian 
and  his  Boy  went  with  us  in  a  Canoa,  and  set  us  over  such 
places  as  wc  could  not  ford:  and  being  past  those  great 
Rivers,  he  returned  back  again,  having  helped  us  at  least 
2  mile,  Wc  marched  afterwards  5  mile,  and  came  to  large 
51 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Plantain  walks,  where  we  took  up  our  quarters  that  night ; 
i^Hi  ^,^  there  fed  plentifully  on  Plantains,  both  ripe  and  green, 
and  had  fair  weather  all  the  day  and  night.  I  think  these 
were  the  largest  Plantain-walks,  and  the  biggest  Plantuns 
that  ever  I  saw,  but  no  house  near  them :  We  gathered 
what  we  pleased  by  our  Guides  orders. 

The  sixteenth  day  we  marched  3  mile,  and  came  to  a 
large  settlement,  where  we  abode  all  day:  Not  a  Man  of 
us  but  wisht  the  Journey  at  an  end ;  our  Feet  being 
blistered,  and  our  Thighs  stript  with  wading  through  so 
many  Rivers  ;  the  way  being  almost  continually  through 
Rivers,  or  pathless  Woods.  In  the  afternoon  five  of  us 
went  to  seek  for  game,  and  kill'd  3  Monkeys,  which  we 
drcst  for  Supper.  Here  we  first  began  to  have  fur 
weather,  which  continued  with  us  till  we  came  to  the 
North  Seas. 

The  eighteenth  day  we  set  out  at  10  a  Clock,  and  the 
Indians  with  5  Canoas  carried  us  a  league  up  a  River;  and 
when  we  landed,  the  kind  Indians  went  with  us  and  carried 
Dur  burthens.  We  marched  3  mile  farther  and  then  built 
our  Hutts,  having  travelled  from  the  last  settlements 
(}  miles. 

The  nineteenth  day  our  Guides  lost  their  way,  and  we 
did  not  march  above  2  miles. 

The  twentieth  day  by  12  a  Clock  we  came  to  Cheapo 
River.  The  Rivers  we  crost  hitherto  run  all  into  the 
South  Seas ;  and  this  of  Cheapo  was  the  last  we  met  with 
that  run  that  way.  Here  an  old  man  who  came  from  the 
last  settlements,  distributed  his  burthen  of  Plantains  amongst 
us,  and  taking  his  leave  returned  home.  Afterward  we 
forded  the  River,  and  marched  to  the  foot  of  a  very  high 
Mountain,  where  we  lay  all  night.  This  day  we  marched 
about  9  miles. 

The  2 1st  day  some  of  the  Indians  returned  back,  and 
we  marched  up  a  very  high  Mountain  ;  being  on  the  top, 
we  went  some  miles  on  a  ridge,  and  steep  on  both  sides; 
then  descended  a  little,  and  came  to  a  fine  Spring,  where 
we  lay  all  night,  having  gone  this  day  about  9  miles, 
the  weather  still  very  fair  and  clear. 

52 


■      ARRIVAL   AT  THE   NORTH   SEAS 

The  22d  day  wc  marched  over  another  very  high 
Mountain,  keeping  on  the  ridge  5  miles.  When  we  came  ' 
to  the  North  end,  we,  to  our  great  comfort,  saw  the  Sea; 
then  we  descended ;  and  parted  our  selves  into  3  Com- 
panies, and  lay  by  the  side  of  a  River,  which  was  the  first 
we  met  that  runs  into  the  North  Sea. 

The  23d  day  we  came  through  several  lai^e  Plantain 
walks,  and  at  lO  a  Dock  came  to  an  Indian  habitation,  not 
far  from  the  North  Sea.  Here  we  got  Canoas  to  carry  us 
down  the  River  Conception  tn  the  Sea  side ;  having  gone 
this  day  about  7  miles.  We  found  a  great  many  Indians 
at  the  mouth  of  the  River.  They  had  settled  themselves 
here  for  the  benefit  of  Trade  with  the  Privateer* ;  and 
their  Commodities  were  Yams,  Potatoes,  Plantains,  Sugar, 
Canes,  Fowls,  and  Eggs. 

The  Indians  told  us,  that  there  had  been  a  great  many 
English  and  French  ships  here,  which  were  all  gone  but 
i>ne  Barcolongo,'  a  French  Privateer  that  lay  at  La  Sounds 
Key  or  Island.  This  Island  is  about  3  leagues  from  the 
mouth  of  the  River  Conception,^  and  is  one  of  the 
Samballoes,  a  range  of  Islands  reaching  for  about  20 
leagues,  from  point  Samballas  to  Golden  Island  Eastward. 
These  Islands  or  Keys,  as  we  call  them,  were  first  made 
the  Rendezvous  of  Privateers  in  the  year  1 679.'  being 
very  convenient  for  careening,  and  had  names  given  to 
some  of  them  by  the  Captains  of  the  Privateers;  as  this 
La  Sounds  Key'  particularly. 

Thus  we  finished  our  Journey  from  the  South  Sea  to 
the  North  in  23  days;  in  which  time  by  my  account  we 
travelled    iio  miles,  crossing  some  very  high  Mountains; 

'  liatcolon^o  ;  an  undecked  long-boat,  with  two  or  three  masts.  They 
are  generally  rigged  with  lug  or  lateen  sails.  The  rorcmast  has  a  marked 
foTward  rake,  and  the  greatest  beam  is  well  afi. 

•  To  tlie  west  of  the  Coquera  I'oim. 

'  This  is  an  error.  Francis  Drake  made  his  rendeivous  amnng  them 
in  1 572-3,  while  on  his  Nomhre  de  Dios  raid.  John  Oxenham  hid  his  ship 
among  them  a  year  or  two  later,  They  were  loo  "  convenient  "  for  people 
of  that  way  of  life,  and  they  were  probably  tenanted  iliroughoui  the  first 
half  of  (he  seventeenth  century- 

'  La  Sounds  Key  is  not  now  to  he  identified.  An  untrustworthy  chart 
of  1697  places  ii  a  littio  to  the  cast  of  the  Klo  Concepcion.  I  am  inclined 
to  idcAti^  it  with  the  present  Cayo  Piedras. 

53 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  but  our  common  march  was  in  the  Valleys  among  dc^ 
'^'  and    dangerous    Rivers.      At    our   first    landing    in  tha 
Country,  we  were  told  that  the  Indians  were  our  Enemies;^ 
we  knew  the  Rivers  to  be  deep,   the  wet  season  to  be 
coming  in;  yet,  excepting  those  we  left  behind,  we  lost 
but  one  Man,  who  was  drowned,  as   I   said.     Our  first 
landing  place  on  the  South   Coast  was  very  disadvanta- 
gcous,  for  we  travelled  at  least  fifty  miles  more  than  m, 
need  to  have  done,  could  we  have  gone  up  Cheapo  Riven 
or  Santa  Maria  River ;  for  at  either  of  these  Places  a  Mm 
may  pass  from  Sea  to  Sea  in  3  days  time  with  ease.     Thr 
Indians  can  do  it  in  a  day  and  a  half,  by  which  you  may 
sec  how  easy  it  is  for  a  party  of  Men  to  travel  over.    I 
must  confess  the  Indians  did  assist  us  very  much,  and  I 
question   whether   ever   we   had   got   over   without  thdr' 
aj^stanoe,  because  they  brought  us  from  time  to  time  to 
their  Plantations,  where  we  always  got   Provision,  which 
el^"  we  should  have  wanted.     But  if  a  party  of  500,  or, 
^c^?  Men,  or  more,  were  minded  to  travel  from  the  Nortld 
:v>  the  South  Seas,  they  may  do  it  without  asking  leave  of' 
:hc  Indians ;  tho'  it  be  much  better  to  be  friends  with  them. 
On   :hc  24th  of  May,  (having   lain  one  night  at  the 
K:xvrs  mouth)  we  all  went  on  board  the  Privateer,  whoj 
li\   it  La  Sounds  Key.     It  was  a  French  Vessel,  Captun 
rrls:u:i  Commander.     The  first  thing  we  did  was  to  get 
su^h  :hln^  as  we  could  to  gratifie  our  Indian  Guides,  for 
>\'C  ^VvTc  resolved  to  reward  them  to  their  hearts  content. 
Vh-s  wc  viivi  by  gi\nng  them  Beads,  Knives,  Scissars,  and 
1  *vk;:*.*l-j:Iasscs,  which  we  bought  of  the  Privateers  Crew: 
A:vi   hilt  a   Hollar  a   Man  from   each   of  us;    which  we 
>^o;;*x:  hAvc  bcstowc\i  in  Goods  also,   but  could   not  get 
a:\\,   :hc  IVi\-atcer  having  no  more  toys.     They  were  so 
wvll  sAtisticN:  with  these^  that  they  returned   with  joy  to 
t>.o*,r  tvton.is;  And  were  very  kind  to  our  Consorts  whom 
wv  )ctt  Iv^hind ;  as  Mr.  Wafer*  our  Chyrurgeon  and  the 

*  W.itri  jrnu;ncv?  .unoti};  the  Imiians  for  several  months,  during  which 
he  it^%rutsi  *^-x»nc  h%>:uv,»-s.  an*!  ihc  promise  of  the  hand  of  an  Indian 
piimvvx.  \\c  }^^>  M  1-a  Sounds  Key  when  Dampier  arrived  there  at  the 
i,titci  rnd  ol  AtiisuNt  iN?i.  ,itier  a  cruise  atong  the  Main.  The  other  four 
MHj:j5lci-N  Hrir  ihcir  xuih  hun.    When  Wafer  went  aboard  the  privateer, 

54 


#k 


h; 


^ 


CtTtcs 


TsitJ 


A 


I      ARRIVAL   AT  THE   NORTH    SEAS 

Bit  of  them  told  us,  when  they  came  to  us  some  months   an. 
fterwards  as  shall  be  said  hereafter.  "^' 

I  might  have  given  a  further  account  of  several  things 
Uating  to  this  Country ;  the  Inland  parts  of  which  are 
ft  Bttle  known  to  the  Europeans,  But  I  shall  leave  this 
!lwvinoc  to  Mr.  Wafer,  who  made  a  longer  abode  in  it 
Ittn  I ;  and  is  better  able  to  do  it  than  any  Man  that  I 
Bow,  and  is  now  preparing  a  particular  Description  of 
in  Country  for  the  Press. 

Lrhia  kmg  U*y  Among  the  Indians,  he  was  "painted  as  they  were," 
Ijte  cnMoBMiy  "red,  yellow  and  blue,  very  bright  and  lovely."  He  was 
JK'all  aalced  bui  only  about  the  Waist,"  and  had  a  "Nose-niece,"  of 
■  gold,  fasaring  over  his  mouth.  "'Twas  the  belter  part  of  an  Hour 
■•  aoe  of  tbe  Craw,  loddag  more  narrowly  upon  me  cr/d  out  /iere's 


( 


CHAP.   Ill 

The  ./ar^yr'i  cruising  with  the  Privateers  in  the  North  Seas  w  At 
//  V<r  India  Coast.     They  g9  to  the  Isle  of  St,  Andreas.    Of  At 
CL\L;n  there.     The  Corn  Islands^  and  their  Inhabitants,    Bbt- 
fit.'Js  River ^  and  an  account  of  the  Manatee  there,  or  &ff-CfiVi 
iL'::.h  the  manner  how  the  Moskito  Indians  kill  theniy  and  Toriis^ 
&c.     The  Mahs^tree.     The  Savages  of  Bocca-toro.     He  tmthei 
a^att  at  Pjint  Samba  I/as,  and  its  Islands.     The  Groves  of  &/*• 
»::/:»:f>'  the't'y  the  Soldier  Insect,  and  Aianchaneel  Tree,     The  River 
jt  IXi^-len,  and  the  Wild  Indians  near  it;  Monastery  of  Maire  ii 
iV«\  Ri:  Grande,  Santa  Martha  Town,  and  the  high  Mountain 
there  ;   Ki:  la    Hacha    Town,  Rancho   Reys,  and  Pearl  Fishery 
tht'e :    the    Indian    Inhabitants   and    Country »      Dutch   Isle  ef 
0:%iri>a\  &c.    C:unt   D*Estree*s  unfortunate  Expedition  thither. 
/».V  /r'  B:'t    Jiry.     Isle  of  /Ives,  the  Booby  and  Man  of  War 
li:*d:     The  If'reck  of  D'Estree's  Fleet,  and  Captain  Pain's  Ai- 
i '.•;::.'«   here.     Little  Isle  of  Aves.     The  Isle  Roca*s,  the  Noddy 
,rt.i   7%v^Ac  B:'\i,  Mineral  Water,  Egg  Birds;  the  Mangrwe 
'/*•«■. .«,  hlack^  redy  and  white.     Isle  of  Tortuga,  its  Salt  Ponds.     Isle 
,-'  R'i.i»v  ;   the  Guano  Animal,  their  Variety;  and  the  best  Sea 
7'-"  .'.•;.•«■,     M.\itrn  Alterations  in  the  West  Indies.      The  Coast  oj 
(\.»,;,VJiS  it>  rt":i;rka!'le  Land,  and  Product  of  the  best  Cacao  Nuts, 
The  (.\.\.;;   deyKrii'td  at  large  with   the  Husbandry  of  it.      City 
.'f  (.\.»m\v.->.       La  Guaire  Fort  and  Haven.      Town  of  Comana, 
l\*l*ui^it>  fa**i:u>  ivit  Sf'anish   Tobacco.     The  rich   Trade  of  thi 
C\i>t    :t    Ca*\u\:i.       Of  the    Sucking    Fish,    or    Remora.       Thi 
.  Ih  th:r*y  Arrii. 'a I  in  I  ir^inia . 

IIK  Privateer  on  board  which  we  went  being  now 
cleaned,  and  our  Indian  Guides  thus  satisfy *d  and 
set  ashore,  we  set  sail  in  two  days  for  Springer's 
Key,^  another  of  the  Samballoes  Isles,  and  about 

*  Springer's  Key  lay  a  little  to  the  N\V.  of  La  Sounds  Key.     Perhaps 
Cayo  Ini;lcs,  perhaps  Isla  I'uyadas. 

S6 


PRIVATEERS  IN  THE  NORTH   SEAS 


Here  lay  8  sail  of  ait" 
t68i 


English  Commanders 
and  Englishmen. 


7  or  8  leagues  from  La  Sound's  Key. 

Privateers  more,  viz. 

Capt,  Coxon,'  lO  Guns,  lOO  Men. 

Capt.   Payne,   lo  Guns,    too  Men. 

&p,.  Wrigh,,  ]      ^  ^^ 

a  Barcolongo,  J  ^  '  ^ 

Capt.  Williams,  a  small  Barcolongo. 

Capt.  Yankes,    a    Barcolongo,    4    Guns,  about    60    Men, 

English,  Dutch,  and  French;  himself  a  Dutchman, 
apt.  Archemboc    8  Guns,  40  Men,  1  p„„eh  Commander, 
apt,  fucker   6  Gun,,  70  Men.  ,„j  „^„ 

Capt.  Kosc,  a  barcolongo.  ' 

An  hour  before  we  came  to  the  Fleet,  Captain  Wright, 
who  had  been  sent  to  Chagra*  River,  arrived  at  Springers 
Key,  with  a  large  Canoa  or  Pcrcago  laden  with  Flower, 
which  he  took  there.  Some  of  the  Prisoners  belonging  to 
the  Periago,  came  from  Panama  not  above  6  days  before 
he  took  her,  and  lold  the  news  of  our  coming  over  land, 
and  like-wise  related  the  condition  and  strength  of  Panama, 
which  was  the  main  thing  they  enquired  after ;  for  Captain 
Wright  was  sent  thither  purposely  to  get  a  Prisoner  that 
was  able  to  inform  thetn  of  the  strength  of  that  City, 
because  these  Privateers  designed  to  join  all  their  force, 
and  by  the  assistance  of  the  Indians,  (who  had  promised  to 

L  be  their  Guides)  to  march  over  land  to  Panama  ;  and  there 
"  i  no  other  way  of  getting  Prisoners  for  that  purpose,  but 

■by  absconding  between  Chagra  and  PortabcU,  because  there 

■Are  much  Goo<is  bmught  that  way  from  Panama  ;  especially 
when    the  Armado'   lycth    at    PortabcU.     All    the    Com- 

Imanders  were  aboard  of  Captain  Wright  when  wc  came  into 

Captain   Coxon,   it   will  be   remembered,  roirmoiidetl   a  company  of 

anecra  in  ihe  march  to  Sania  Mnrta.  He  look  part  in  ilie  batilc  of 
ico,  bill  did  not  distinguish  himself  in  Uutt  engagement.  In  fact,  "  some 
ickrd  not  to  defame,  or  brand,  him  with  the  note  of  cowiiidice."  Shority 
r  the  engagement  he  returned  to  iJie  North  Sea  with  sevent/buccaneers, 
ng  whom  were  "  the  best  of  the  Doctors."  Since  his  return  (26th  April 
>)  be  liad  been  cruising  DlTthe  Mnin. 

Clingra.    The  Chngres  River,  emptying  into  the  North  Sea  a  liiilc 

B  wrst  of  Colon. 

The  galleons  which  conveyed  the  treasure  from  Porto  Bello  to  Spain. 

pier  tells  of  ibcir  periudical  visits  to  the  Isthmus  in  bis  seventh  chapter. 

57 


to 


-     afc 


.w,  -iiii^  ^9^     But 
iiiimrf'Mtrly 


toiee 
3^  in 

^      -  ^i^   iaiTiaraz  at  us 


iifV-uT  13  be 


I 


r-     ■  :j:^^>    *     rrr   ^su.   rr  tl  ziu  Cj:kc  COD 


■    Li 


■rr-'r^ir  -  -<  t^-'ss'^ic  r:  rr. 


_  i_  .  ^       ..■&..         MiB «.  * .  lw^«  w^S     >li      ^^«  ■  »i— »C»S  I 


:r  :-.  n  -j:::  f  Tx:-:ir:.r  :.  vi -^   vitrr  *  i-Tvi  2:'»'  tie  Look- 


'JlVt   STt   "T-I-It:!  •        ■■•  rei^-iT   7»n?i;  ?•«£  :.'  XTTlC  I^«5   1  -.-i'-vvti 


'    **« ' 


%     « 


THE   PRIVATEERS*   INTELUGENCE 

1  if  tbey  have  lud  any  former  discourse  of  such  places    an. 
I  other  Prisoners,  they  compare  one  with  the  other;  '"* 
n  examine  agun,  and  enquire  if  he  or  any  of  them  are 
■  c  to  be  Guides  to  conduct  a  party  of  men  thither  :  if 
not,  where  and  how  any  Prisoner  may  be  taken  that  may 
do  a ;  and  from  thence  they  afterwards  Uy  their  Schemes 
i  10  prosecute  whatever  design  they  take  in  hand. 

It  was  7  or  8  days  after  before  any  resolution  was 
T  yet  consultations  were  held  every  day.  The  French 
1  very  forward  to  go  to  any  Town  that  the  English 
I  or  would  propose,  because  the  Governour  of  Petit 
BiTOj'  (from  whom  the  Privateers  take  Commissions) 
i  recommended  a  Gentleman  lately  come  from  France  to 
k  General  of  the  Expedition,  and  sent  word  by  Captain 
Ttidur,  with  whom  this  Gentleman  came,  that  they  should, 
ii  poaable,  make  an  attempt  on  some  Town  before  he 
wnm'd  again.  The  English,  when  they  were  in  company 
with  the  French,  scem'd  to  approve  of  what  the  French 
laid,  but  never  look'd  on  that  General  to  be  fit  for  the 
nee  in  band. 

At  length  it  was  concluded   to  go  to  a  Town,'  the 

:  of  which  I  have  forgot ;  it  lies  a  great  way  in  the 

inlry,  but  not  such  a  tedious  march  as  it  would  be  from 

e  to  Panama.     Our  way  to  it  lay  up  Carpenter's  River,' 

■Uch  b  about  6o  leagues  to  the  westward  of  Portabel. 

Our  greatest  obstruction  in  this  design  was  our  want  of 

Boao:  therefore  It  was  concluded  to  go  with  all  our  Fleet 

^B  S(.  Andreas,  a  small  uninhabited  Island  lying  near  the 

^Hk  oi*  Providence/  to  the  Westward   of  it,  in    13    deg. 

^^P  AsMhtr  naoM  for  Tortuga,  a  small  island  to  tbe  NW.  of  Hispnniola, 
^^■iB  thminita 

^^P  Tie  early  «fi«>OM  call  the  town  CoretaKa  :  "  A  Town  called  Cor^faj^t, 
^^bk  Ttnra  lictb  a  Hreai  Way  in  ilie  Country."     Probably  CotUko,  in 
MLf^p  N,  lon«.  86.1S  W. 

•  Ckrpentci'*  River.  Ihe  Rio  Rnsentaxon,  or  Rio  Pacuar  in  Cosia  Rica. 
:i  m  IcM  dun  tlity  Icagoes  ftnm  Porlnbclln,  but  Dampier  gives  the  distance 
u>  W  tnseneil  by  buau  huK^ng  [he  shore. 

*  C>r  Senu  Kaioliu.  li  lies  in  lai.  13'  14'  N.,  and  about  3:0  miles  from 
'Utpcata*'*  River,  Muif  an  (aflenranis  Sir  Henry)  had  designed  to  plant 
»  lieczaaacr  cnlonj  upon  tlic  iiland  ;  but  the  death  of  his  ally  Mansvelt, 
tad.  baa,  the  cnforccmeni  of  the  Treaty  of  America,  compelled  him  to 

Lichone.    The  island  was  generally  called  Old  Providence  to 



CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 

AN.    1 5  Min,  North  Lat.  and  from  Portabell  N.  N.  W.  iboat 
i(>8i  -^o  leagues;  where  we  should  be  but  a  little  way  from 
Carpenter*s  River.     And  besides,  at  this  Island  we  ought 
build  Canoas,  it  being  plentifully  stored  with  large  Cechn 
for  such  a  purpose ;  and  for  this  reason  the  Jamaica-men 
come  hither  frequently  to  build  Sloops ;  Cedar  being  very 
tit  for  building)  and  it  being  to  be  had  here  at  free-cost; 
beside  other  Wood.     Jamaica  is  well  stored  with  Cedars  of 
its  own,  chiefly  among  the  Rocky  Mountains:  these  also  of 
St.  Andreas  grow  in  stony  ground,  and  are  the  lai^est  that 
ever  I  knew  or  heard  of;  the  Bodies  alone  being  ordinarily 
40  or  50  foot  long)  many  60  or  70,  and  upwards,  and  of  a 
proportionable  bigness.     The  Bermudas  Isles  are  well  stored 
with  them  ;  so  is  Virginia,  which  is  generally  a  sandy  Seal. 
I  saw  notie  in  the  East  Indies,  nor  in  the  South  Sea  Coast, 
except  i>n  the  Isthmus  as  I  came  over  it.     We  reckon  the 
IViYiiiro's  and  Canoa's  that  are  made  of  Cedar  to  be  the 
Ivst  of  any ;  they  are  nothing  but  the  Tree  it  self  made 
holK^w    Boatwise,    with    a    flat    bottom,    and    the    Canoa 
i^enerallv  sharp  at  both  ends,  the  Pereago  at  one  only,  with 
the  i^her  end  flat.     But  what  is  commonly  said  of  Cedar, 
that  the  Worm  will  not  touch  it,  is  a  mistake,  for  I  have 
seen  of  it  vcrv  much  worm-eaten. 

All  things  l^ing  thus  concluded  on,  we  sailed  from 
hei\ce»  direv  tinij;  our  course  towards  St.  Andreas.  We  kept 
con\pai\y  the  first  day,  but  at  night  it  blew  a  hard  gale  at 
N.  M.  anvl  some  of  our  Ships  bore  away:  the  next  day 
others  were  torcevl  to  leave  us,  and  the  second  night  we 
lost  all  luir  cotnpany.  I  was  now  belonging  to  Captain 
.\rcheinK>»  for  all  the  rest  of  the  Fleet  were  overmanned: 
i.'apiaii\  Archembo  wanting  Men,  we  that  came  out  of  the 
South  S^Ms  must  either  sail  with  him,  or  remain  among  the 
li\viians.  Indeed  we  found  no  Cause  to  dislike  the  Captain ; 
but  his  iMench  Seamen  were  the  saddest  Creatures  that 
ever  I  was  an\ong ;  for  tho'  we  had  bad  weather  that  re- 
i|uirM   mai\y  I  latuls  aloft,  yet  the  biggest  part  of  them 

diMin>:uish  it  Irom  an  islaml  of  the  suimc  name  in  the  Bahama  group. 
Si.  Amlicis  lies  in  about  Kit.  12**  34'  N.,  some  20  miles  to  the  west  of 
S.ini.i  Kaialina. 

60 


THE   PRIVATEERS  SEPARATE 


iver  stirred  out  of  their  Hammocks,  but  to  cat  or  case 

^Emselves.  We  made  a  shift  to  find  the  Island  the  fourth 
ly,  where  we  met  Captain  Wright,  who  came  thither  the 
lay  before,  and  had  uken  a  Spanish  Tartan.'  wherein  were 
30  Men,  all  well  armed  :  She  had  4  Patercnjcs,'  and  some 
long  Guns  plac'd  in  the  Swivel  on  the  Gunnel.  They 
fought  an  hour  before  they  yielded.  The  News  they  re- 
lated was,  that  they  came  from  Cartagena  in  company  of 
II  Armadilloes  (which  are  small  Vessels  of  War)  to  seek 
for  the  Fleet  of  Privateers  lying  in  the  Sambalnes:  That 
they  parted  from  the  Armadilloes  2  Days  before :  That 
they  were  ordered  to  search  the  Sambaloes  for  us,  and  if 
they  did  not  find  us,  then  they  were  ordered  to  go  to 
Purtabcil,  and  lay  there  till  they  had  farther  intelligence 
of  us ;  and  he  supposed  these  Armadilloes  to  be  now  there. 
We  that  came  over  Land  out  of  the  South  Seas  being 
weary  of  living  among  the  French,  desired  Captain  Wright 
to  fit  up  his  Prize  the  Tartan,  and  make  a  Man  of  War  of 
her  for  us,  which  he  at  first  seemed  to  decline,  because  he 
was  settled  among  the  French  in  Hispaniola,  and  was  very 
well  beloved  both  by  the  Govcrnour  of  Petit  Guavos,  and 
all  the  Gentry ;  and  they  would  resent  it  ill,  that  Captain 
Wright,  who  had  no  occasion  of  Men,  should  Ik-  so  unkind 
to  Captain  Archembo,  as  to  seduce  his  Men  from  him  ;  he 
being  so  meanly  manned  that  he  could  hardly  ^ail  his  Ship 
with  his  Frenchmen.  We  tnld  him  we  would  no  longer 
remain  with  Captain  Archembo,  but  would  go  ashore  there, 
and  build  Canoas  to  transport  our  selves  down  to  the 
Moskitoes,  if  he  would  not  entertain  us  ;  for  Privateers  are 
not  obliged  to  any  Ship,  but  free  to  go  ashore  where  they 
please,  or  to  go  into  any  other  Ship  that  will  entertain 
them,  only  paying  for  their  Provision. 

When  Captain  Wright  saw  our  resolutions,  he  agreed 
ivith  us  on  condition  we  should  be  under  his  command,  as 
urie  Ships  company,  to  which  we  unanimously  consented. 


n  was  a  swifi  coasting  traft  rigged  with  ii 


1  and  howsprii, 
a  which  were  set  a  lafge  lateen  sail  and  n  small  jib.  The  proid.o,  of  the 
Mediterranean,  is  her  modern  e<iuivalent. 

*  ratcreroes  were  small,  short,  squat  cannon,  e»ily  traversed.    They 
threw  bombs  and  carcasses. 

61 


^ 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 


AN.  We  scaid  here  about  lo  days,  to  see  if  any  more  of  our 

'^'  Fleet  would  come  to  us;  but  there  came  no  more  of  us  to 
the  Island  but  three,  viz,  Captun  Wright,  Capuun  Archembo, 
and  Captain  Tucker.  Therefore  we  concluded  the  rest 
were  bore  awav  either  for  Bocca  Toro,^  or  Bluefields  Itiver' 
on  the  Main ;  and  we  designed  to  seek  them.  We  had 
fine  weather  while  we  lay  here,  only  some  Tornadoes,  or 
Thunder-shores:  But  in  this  Isle  of  St.  Andreas,  there 
being  neither  Fish,  Fowl,  nor  Deer,  and  it  being  therefore 
but  an  ordinary  place  for  us,  who  had  but  little  Provinon, 
we  sailed  from  hence  agsun  in  quest  of  our  scatterM  Fleet, 
directing  our  course  for  some  Islands  lying  near  the  Mun, 
called  by  the  Privateers  the  Corn  Islands ; '  being  in  hopes 
to  get  Com  there.  These  Islands  I  take  to  be  the  same 
which  are  generally  called  in  the  Maps  the  Pearl  Islands, 
lying  about  the  Lat.  of  12  D.  lo  M.  North.  Here  we 
arrived  the  next  day,  and  went  ashore  on  one  of  them,  but 
found  none  of  the  Inhabitants ;  for  here  are  but  a  few,  poor, 
naked  Indians  that  live  here;  who  have  been  so  often 
plundered  by  the  Privateers  that  they  have  but  little  Pro- 
vision ;  and  when  they  see  a  Sail  they  hide  themselves ; 
otherwise  Ships  that  come  here  would  take  them,  and 
make  Slaves  of  them ;  and  I  have  seen  some  of  them  that 
have  been  Slaves.  They  are  People  of  a  mean  Stature,  yet 
strong  Limbs ;  they  are  of  a  dark  copper-colour,  black 
Hair,  full  round  Faces,  small  black  Eyes,  their  Eye-brows 
hanging  over  their  Eyes,  low  Foreheads,  short  thick  Noses, 
not  high,  but  flattish ;  full  Lips,  and  short  Chins.  They 
have  a  fashion  to  cut  holes  in  the  Lips  of  the  Boys  when 
they  are   young,   close   to  their  Chin;   which   they  keep 

*  Bocca  Toro,  or  Boca  del  Toro,  the  modern  Boca  Tore,  "  an  opening 
between  two  islands"  (Provision  and  Colombo  Islands)  in  lat  9°  35'  N., 
long,  84°  35'  W.  The  turtle  swarmed  there,  and  they  aflforded  good  careen- 
age.    The  buccaneers  used  to  re-provision  and  to  refit  in  this  place. 

•  Blewfields  River,  in  lat.  12.7'  N.,  long.  86®  10'  W.  on  the  Mosquito 
shore  in  Nicaragua.  It  was  named  after  an  old  buccaneer,  who  often 
visited  it  (from  his  base  in  Santa  Katalina)  for  logwood. 

'  The  Corn  Islands  are  two  small  fruitful  islands  between  Cape  de  las 
Perlas  and  Cape  Blewfields.  They  lie  some  forty  miles  to  seaward  of  the 
Mosquito  shore.  The  Pearl  Islands  are  farther  north,  and  nearer  to  the 
mainland. 

62 


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  CORN  ISLANDS 
open  with  little  Pegs  till  they  are  14  or  15  years  old; 
then  they  wear  Beards  in  them,  made  of  Turtle  or  ' 
Tonoisc -shell,  in  the  form  you  sec  in  the  Margin.  The 
Snlc  notch  at  the  upper  end  they  put  in  through  the 
Lip,  where  it  remains  between  the  Teeth  and  the  Lip; 
tbe  under  part  hangs  down  over  their 
dun.  This  they  commonly  wear  all  day, 
tad  when  ihcy  sleep  they  take  it  out. 
Tbey  have  likewise  holes  bored  in  their 
tin,  both  Men  and  Women  when  young  ; 
and  by  continual  stretching  them  with 
pta:  Pegs,  they  grow  to  be  as  big  as  a 
BBird  five  Shilling-piece.  Herein  they 
•or  pieces  of  Wood,  cut  very  round  and 
' ,  90  that  their  Ear  seems  to  be  all 
»Dod,  with  a  little  Skin  about  it.  Another 
Ornament  the  Women  use  is  about  their 
Ifgi,  which  they  are  very  curious  in ;  for  from  the  Infancy 
of  the  Girls  their  Mothers  make  fast  a  piece  of  Cotton 
Cloath  about  the  small  of  their  Leg,  from  the  Ankle  to 
the  Calf,  verj'  hard ;  which  makes  them  have  a  very  full 
&if :  this  the  Women  wear  to  their  dying  day.  Both  Men 
d  Women  go  naked,  only  a  Clout  about  their  Wastes; 

Ka  they  have  but  little  Feet,  though  they  go  bare-foot, 
lading  do  Provision  here,  we  sailed  toward  Bluefield 
River,  where  we  careened  our  Tartane;  and  there  Captain 
Archembo  and  Captain  Tucker  left  us,  and  went  towards 
Boccoloro. 

This  Blcwficlds  River  comes  out  between  the  Rivers  of 
Kiaragua  and  Veragua.  At  its  mouth  is  a  fine  sandy  Bay, 
•here  Barks  may  clean  :  It  is  deep  at  its  mouth,  but  a  shole 
ihin;  to  that  ships  may  not  enter,  yet  Barks  of  60  or  70 
Itins  may.  It  had  thb  name  from  Captain  Blewfield,  a 
i  Privateer  living  on  Providence  Island  long  before 
laica '  was  taken.  Which  Island  of  Providence  was  settled 
f  tbe  English,  and  belonged  to  the  Earls  of  Warwick. 

Januka  was  ukea  bum  ihe  Spanish  in  ihe  year  165^,  by  a  squadron 
kUci  Pens  and  Veoablca.  Tbe  aitacldng  force  consisted  in  pan  of 
■ftnaecn  from  Baitadoet. 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  In   this  River  we  found  a  Canoa  coming   down  the 

'^'  stream;  and  though  we  went  with  our  Canoas  to  seek  for 
Inhabitants,  yet  we  found  none,  but  saw  in  2  or  3  places 
signs  that  Indians  had  made  on  the  side  of  the  River.  The 
Canoa  which  we  found  was  but  meanly  nuule  for  want  of 
Tools,  therefore  we  concluded  these  Indians  have  no  com- 
merce with  the  Spaniards,  nor  with  other  Indians  that 
have. 

While  we  lay  here,  our  Moskito  Men  went  in  their 
Canoa,  and  struck  us  some  Manatee,  or  Sea-Cow.  Besides 
this  Blewfields  River,  I  have  seen  of  the  Manatee  in  the 
Bay  of  Campeachy,  on  the  Coasts  of  Bocca  del  Drago,^  and 
Bocco  del  Toro,  in  the  River  of  Darien,  and  among  the 
South  Keys  or  little  Islands  of  Cuba.  I  have  heard  oftheir 
being  found  on  the  North  of  Jamaica,  a  few,  and  in  the 
Rivers  of  Surinam  in  great  multitudes,  which  is  a  very  low 
Land.  I  have  seen  of  them  also  at  Mindanea  one  of  the 
Phillippine  Islands;  and  on  the  Coast  of  New  Holland. 
This  Creature  is  about  the  bigness  of  a  Horse,  and  10  or 
1 2  foot  long.  The  mouth  of  it  is  much  like  the  mouth  of 
a  Cow,  having  great  thick  Lips.  The  Eyes  are  no  bigger 
than  a  small  Pea,  the  Ears  are  only  two  small  holes  on  each 
side  of  the  Head.  The  Neck  is  short  and  thick,  bigger 
than  the  Head.  The  biggest  part  of  this  Creature  is  at 
the  Shoulders,  where  it  hath  two  large  FiAljfone  on  each 
side  of  its  Belly.  Under  each  of  these  Fins  the  Female 
hath  a  small  Dug  to  suckle  her  young.  From  «he  Shoulders 
towards  the  Tail  it  retains  its  bigness  for  about  a  foot,  then 
groweth  smaller  and  smaller  to  the  very  Tail,  which  is  flat, 
and  about  14  inches  broad,  and  20  inches  long,  and  in  the 
middle  4  or  5  inches  thick,  but  about  the  edges  of  it  not 
above  2  inches  thick.  From  the  Head  to  the  Tail  it  is 
round  and  smooth  without  any  Fin  but  those  two  before 
mentioned,  I  have  heard  that  some  have  weighed  above 
1200  /.  but  I  never  saw  any  so  large.  The  Manatee  delights 
to  live  in  brackish  Water;  and  they  are  commonly  in 
Creeks  and  Rivers  near  the  Sea.     *Tis  for  this  reason  pos- 

^  Boca  del  Drago  is  the  strait  which  separates  Isla  del  Drago  from 
Costa  Kica.     It  is  some  ten  miles  from  Boca  del  Toro. 

64 


THE   MANATEE,  OR  SEA   COW 

nbtjr  the)'  arc  not  seen  in  the  South  Seas  (that  ever  I  could 
<ifaiervc)  where  the  Coast  ts  generally  a  bold  Shore,  that  is,  "*' 
logh  Land  and  deep  Water  close  home  by  it,  with  a  high 
Sa  ur  great  Surges ;  except  in  the  Bay  of  Panama ;  yet 
OTJi  there  is  no  Manatee.  Whereas  the  West-Indies,  bdng 
M  it  were,  one  great  Bay  composed  of  many  smaller,  arc 
ooaly  low  Land  and  shoal  Water,  and  afford  proper 
psaurc  (as  I  may  say)  for  the  Manatee.  Sometimes  we 
hod  them  in  salt  Water,  sometimes  in  fresh ;  but  never  far 
ti  So.  And  those  that  live  in  the  Sea  at  such  places  where 
there  is  no  River  nor  Creek  fit  for  them  to  enter,  yet  do 
commtmly  come  once  or  twice  in  24  hours  to  the  mouth 
11^  ay  fresh  water  River  that  is  near  their  place  of  abode. 
They  live  on  Grass  7  or  8  inches  long,  and  of  a  narrow 
Slide,  which  grows  in  the  Sea  in  many  places,  especially 
iRKing  Islands  near  the  Main.  This  Grass  groweth  likewise 
in  Cr^ks,  or  in  great  Rivers  near  the  sides  of  them,  in  such 
plices  where  there  is  but  little  tide  or  current.  They  never 
come  ashore,  nor  into  shallower  water  than  where  they  can 
"im.  Their  Flesh  is  white,  both  the  fat  and  the  lean,  and 
atraordinary  sweet  wholesome  meat.  The  tail  of  a  young 
I  Co*  ii  most  estccm'd  ;  but  if  old  both  head  and  tail  are 
Y  tough.  A  Calf  that  sucks  ts  the  most  delicate  meat ; 
tecrs  commonly  roast  them ;  as  they  do  also  great 
I  cut  out  of  the  Bellies  of  the  old  ones, 
'  The  Skin  of  the  Manatee  is  of  great  use  to  Privateers, 
rthcy  cot  ihcm  into  straps,  which  they  make  fast  on  the 
les  of  their  Canoas  through  which  they  put  their  Oars 
M  rowing,  instead  of  tholes  or  pegs.  The  Skin  of  the 
BqU,  or  of  the  Back  of  the  Cow  is  too  thick  for  this  use  ; 
■W  ()f  it  they  make  Horse-whips,  cutting  them  2  or  3  foot 
"■ng:  at  the  handle  they  leave  the  full  substance  of  the 
Scin,  and  from  thence  cut  it  away  tapering,  but  very  even 
*nd  tquarc  alt  the  four  sides.  While  the  Thongs  are 
green  they  twist  them,  and  hang  them  to  dry :  which  in  a 
*ttk$  ijtne  become  as  hard  as  wood.  The  Moskito-mcn 
We  always  a  small  Canoa  for  their  use  to  strike  Fish, 
Tonoue,  or  Manatee,  which  they  keep  usually  to  them- 
tdves,  and  very  neat  and  clean.     They  use  no  Oars  but 


■  VOL. 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER^S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Paddles,  the  broad  part  of  which  doth  not  go  tapering 
1^1  towards  the  staff,  pole  or  handle  of  it,  as  in  the  Oar ;  nor 
do  they  use  it  in  the  same  manner,  by  laying  it  on  the  »de 
of  the  Vessel ;  but  hold  it  perpendicularly,  griping  the  staff 
hard  mth  both  hands,  and  putting  back  the  Water  by  main 
strength,  and  very  quick  strokes.  One  of  the  Moskitoes 
(for  there  go  but  two  in  a  Canoa)  sits  in  the  stem,  the 
other  kneels  down  in  the  head,  and  both  paddle  till  they 
come  to  the  place  where  they  expect  their  game.  Then 
they  lye  still  or  paddle  very  softly,  looking  well  about 
them,  and  he  that  is  in  the  head  of  the  Gmoa  lays  down 
his  paddle,  and  stands  up  with  his  striking  staff  in  his 
hand.  This  staff  is  about  8  foot  long,  almost  as  big  as  a 
mans  Arm,  at  the  great  end,  in  which  there  is  a  hole  to 
place  his  Harpoon  in.  At  the  other  end  of  his  staff  there 
is  a  piece  of  light  wood  called  Bobwood,  with  a  hole  in  it, 
through  which  the  small  end  of  the  staff  comes ;  and  on 
this  piece  of  Bobwood,  there  is  a  line  of  lo  or  12  fathom 
wound  neatly  about,  and  the  end  of  the  line  made  fast  to 
it.  The  other  end  of  the  line  is  made  fast  to  the  Harpoon, 
which  is  at  the  great  end  of  the  staff,  and  the  Moskito-man 
keeps  about  a  fathom  of  it  loose  in  his  hand.  When  he 
strikes,  the  Harpoon  presently  comes  out  of  the  staff,  and 
as  the  Manatee  swims  away,  the  Line  runs  off  from  the 
bob ;  and  altho*  at  first  both  staff  and  bob  may  be  carried 
under  water,  yet  as  the  line  runs  off  it  will  rise  agsun. 
Then  the  Moskito-men  paddle  with  all  their  might  to  get 
hold  of  the  bob  again,  and  spend  usually  a  quarter  of  an 
hour  before  they  get  it.  When  the  Manatee  begins  to  be 
tired,  it  lieth  still,  and  then  the  Moskito-men  paddle  to 
the  bob  and  take  it  up,  and  begin  to  hale  in  the  line. 
When  the  Manatee  feels  them  he  swims  away  again,  with 
the  Canoa  after  him ;  then  he  that  steers  must  be  nimble 
to  turn  the  head  of  the  Canoa  that  way  that  his  Consort 
points,  who  being  in  the  head  of  the  Canoa,  and  holding 
the  line,  both  sees  and  feels  which  way  the  Manatee  is 
swimming.      Thus   the   Canoa   is   towed   with   a   violent 

'  The  Man.itee  :  M,  ausiralis.  The  name  manatee,  or  manati,  refers  to  the 
peculiarly  human  way  in  which  the  creature  uses  his  fore  limbs,  or  flippers. 

66 


THE  MANATEE.  OR  SEA  COW 
,  till  the  Manatee's  strength  decays.  Then  they  am3 
r  in  the  line,  which  they  are  often  forced  lo  let  all  go 
:  very  end.  At  length  when  the  Creature's  strength 
a  spent,  they  hzlc  tt  up  to  the  Canoas  side,  and  knock  it 
m  the  Head,  and  tow  it  to  the  nearest  shore,  where  they 
aiikc  it  fist,  and  seek  for  another;  which  having  taken, 
ihtygo  on  shore  with  it,  to  put  it  into  their  Canoa :  For 
i:  ij  so  heavy  that  they  cannot  lift  it  in,  but  they  hale  it 
ap  in  sholc  water,  as  near  the  shore  as  they  can,  and 
then  overset  the  Canoa,  laying  one  side  close  to  the 
Minitec,  Then  they  roll  it  in,  which  brings  the  Canoa 
Jftight  again,  and  when  they  have  heav'd  out  the  water, 
tliey  faMen  a  line  to  the  other  Manatee  that  lieth  afloat, 
ind  tow  it  after  them.  I  have  known  two  Moskito-men 
(or  1  w«k  every  day  bring  aboard  2  Manatee  in  this 
miBBer;  the  least  of  which  hath  not  weighed  less  than 
tej  pound,  and  that  in  a  very  small  Canoa,  that  3  English- 
iKB  would  scarce  adventun;  to  go  in.  When  they  strike 
1  Cow  that  hath  a  young  one,  they  seldom  miss  the  Calf, 
f<r  she  cummonly  takes  her  young  under  one  of  her  Fins. 
8«l  if  the  Calf  is  so  big  that  she  cannot  carry  it,  or  so 
tr^liteoed  that  she  only  minds  to  save  her  own  life,  yet 
'^  jooae  never  leaves  her  till  the  Moskito-men  have  an 
ofTxirTunity  to  strike  her. 

The  manner  of  striking  Manatee  and  Tortoise  is  much 
(Be  tune  ;  only  when  they  seek  for  Manatee 
ificy  paddle  so  gently,  that  they  make  no 
■"^  and  never  touch  the  side  of  the  Canoa 
>~:li  their  paddle;  because  it  is  a  Creature 
"■■it  hears  vcrj-  well.     But  they  arc  not  so 
'■£  when   they  seek    for    Tortoise,   whose 
i  m  are  better  than  his  Ears.     They  strike 
"-C  TortcNse  with  a  square  sharp  Iron  Peg, 
■■;  other  with  a  Harpoon.     The  Moskito- 
■  ^  make  their  own  striking  Instruments, 
_^  Harpoons,    Fish-hooks,   and    Tortoise-Irons    or    Pegs. 
Ir>e   Pcgi,  or  Tortoise- Irons  are   made  4  square,  sharp 
toe  end,  and  not  much  above  an  inch   in   length,   of 
t  s  figure  as  you  sec  in  the  Margin.     The  small  spike 
67 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER^S   VOYAGES 

AN.  at  the  broad  end  hath  a  line  fastened  to  it,  and  goes  also 
'^^'  into  a  hole  at  the  end  of  the  Striking  staff;  which  when 
the  Tortoise  is  struck  flies  off,  the  Iron  and  the  end 
of  the  line  fastned  to  it,  going  quite  within  the  Shell, 
where  it  is  so  buried  that  the  Tortoise  cannot  possibly 
escape. 

They  make  their  Lines  both  for  Fishing  and  Striking 
with  the  bark  of  Maho ;  which  is  a  sort  of  Tree  or  ShruD 
that  grows  plentifully  all  over  the  West  Indies,  and  whose 
Bark  is  made  up  of  strings,  or  threads,  very  strong.  You 
may  draw  it  off  either  in  flakes  or  small  threads,  as  you 
have  occasion.  'Tis  fit  for  any  manner  of  Cordage ;  and 
Privateers  often  make  their  Rigging  of  it.  So  much  by 
way  of  digression. 

When  we  had  clean'd  our  Tartane  we  sailed  from 
hence,  bound  for  Boca-toro,  which  is  an  opening  between 
2  Islands  about  lo  Deg.  lo  Min.  North  Lat.  between  the 
Rivers  of  Verague  and  Chagre.  Here  we  met  with  Captain 
Yanky,  who  told  us  that  there  had  been  a  Fleet  of  Spanish 
Armadilloes  to  seek  us :  That  Captain  Tristian  having 
fallen  to  Leeward,^  was  coming  to  Boca-toro,  and  fell  in 
amongst  them,  supposing  them  to  be  our  Fleet :  That  they 
fired  and  chased  him,  but  he  rowed  and  towed,  and  they 
supposed  he  got  away :  That  Capt.  Pain  was  likewise  chaced 
by  them  and  Capt.  Williams ;  and  that  they  had  not  seen 
them  since;  That  they  lay  within  the  Islands:  That  the 
Spaniards  never  came  in  to  him ;  and  that  Captain  Coxon 
was  in  at  the  Careening  place. 

This  Boca-toro  is  a  place  that  the  Privateers  use  to 
resort  to,  as  much  as  any  place  on  all  the  Coast,  because 
here  is  plenty  of  green  Tortoise,  and  a  good  Careening 
place.  The  Indians  here  have  no  commerce  with  the 
Spaniards;  but  are  very  barbarous,  and  will  not  be  dealt 
with.  They  have  destroyed  many  Privateers,  as  they  did 
not  long  after  this  some  of  Captain  Pain's  men;  who 
having  built  a  Tent  ashore  to  put  his  goods  in  while  he 
Careened  his  Ship,  and  some  men   lying  there  with  their 

1  To  the  eastward,  in  this  instance. 

68 


)INT  SAMBALLAS,  AND  ITS  ISLANDS 
irmi,  in  the  night  the  Indians  crept  softly  into  the  Tent, 
cut  off  the  Heads  of  3  or  4  men,  and  made  their 
ipc;  nor  was  this  the  first  time  they  had  served  the 
Trivitccrs  so.  There  grow  on  this  Coast  Vineiloes'  in 
peit  quantity-,  with  which  Chocolate  is  perfumed.  These 
lihill  describe  elsewhere. 

Our  Fleet  being  thus  scattered,  there  were  now  no 
kopo  of  getting  tt^ether  again ;  therefore  every  one  did 
wbi  they  thought  most  conducing  to  obtain  their  ends. 
Gfitain  Wright,  with  whom  I  now  was,  was  resolved  to 
oiffle  on  the  Coast  of  Cartagene  ;  and  it  being  now  almost 
the  Westerly  wind  season,'  we  sailed  from  hence,  and 
Captain  Yanky  with  us;  and  we  consorted,  because  Captain 
Vialty  had  no  commission,  and  was  afraid  the  French 
•ouW  take  away  his  Bark.  We  past  by  Scuda,"  a  small 
l^d  (where  'tis  said  Sir  Francis  Drake's  bowels  were 
Wy'd)  and  came  to  a  small  River  to  Westward  of  Chagrc  ; 
vikre  we  took  two  new  Canoas,  and  carry'd  them  with  us 
wo  the  Simbalocs.  We  had  the  Wind  at  West,  with 
•uch  Rain ;  which  brought  us  to  Point-Samba  I  las.  Here 
Gpuin  Wright  and  Captain  Yanky  left  us  in  the  Tartane, 
10  fix  the  Canoas,  while  they  went  on  the  Coast  of 
Cm^ne  to  seek  for  provision.  We  cruised  in  among 
die  lilands,  and  kept  our  Moskito-men,  or  strikers,  out, 
'a  brooght  aboard  some  half-grown  Tortoise;  and  some 
^^  uc  went  ashore  every  day  to  hunt  for  what  we  could 
kd  in  the  Woods  :  Sometimes  we  got  Peccary,  Warree,  or 
Bttr;  at  other  times  we  light  on  a  drove  of  large  fat 
Hookcys,  or  ^uames,*  Corrosocs,'  (each  a  large  sort  of 
n\)  Pidgeons,  Parrots,  or  Turtle-doves.     We  Hv'd  very 

*  Vaoillm.  *  Sec  the  Discourse  of  Winds,  chap,  iii, 

*  Or  Scndi^  a  toull  istuicl  near  the  entrance  to  foriobello,  Drake 
4  af  dpcntery  in  fortobcllo  harbour.  His  liody  was  buried  at  sea 
hide  ttc  bubour,  tnjt  there  is  a  wide)}'  spread  belief  that  his  heart 
>bnn«il  n>  Ihe  island.  The  island  is  sometimes  called  El  Draque, 
Dnk^s  IiIamL  il  was  certainly  associated  with  him.  Charles  Fili- 
fey,  (ha  aBthaff  of  the  [loetkal  panegyric  upon  Drake,  first  published 
1(99,  only  ihice  ycats  After  the  death  of  Drake,  alludes  tu  it  in  hia 

'  Qmtat,  a  (nnt-eatin|t  bird,  with  duncoiourcd  wings  and  stumpy  tail, 
!■&  *  Curassow,  a  sort  of  wild  turkey. 

6j 


CAPTAIN    DAM  PIER'S    VOYAGES 

AN.  well  on  what  we  got,  not  staying  long  in  one  place ;  but 
*^^'  sometimes  we  would  go  on  the  Islands,  where  there  grow 
great  Groves  of  Sapadillies,  which  is  a  sort  of  Fruit  much 
like  a  Pear,  but  more  juicy ;  and  under  those  Trees  we 
found  plenty  of  Soldiers,'  a  little  kind  of  Animals  that  live 
in  Shells  and  have  two  great  Claws  like  a  Crab,  and  are 
good  food.  One  time  our  men  found  a  great  many  large 
ones,  and  being  sharp>-set  had  them  drest,  but  most  of  them 
were  very  sick  afterwards,  being  poisoned  by  them :  For  on 
this  Island  were  many  Manchaneel "  Trees,  whose  Fruit  is 
like  a  small  Crab,  and  smells  very  well,  but  they  are  not 
wholesome ;  and  we  commonly  take  care  of  meddling  with 
any  Animals  that  eat  them.  And  this  we  take  for  a 
general  rule,'  when  we  find  any  Fruits  that  we  have  not 
seen  before,  if  we  see  them  peck'd  by  Birds,  we  may  freely 
eat,  but  if  we  see  no  such  sign,  we  let  them  alone ;  for  of 
this  fruit  no  Birds  will  taste.  Many  of  these  Islands  have 
of  these  Manchaneel-Trees  growing  on  them. 

Thus  cruising  in  among  these  Islands,  at  length  we 
came  again  to  La  Sound's  Key ;  and  the  day  before  having 
met  with  a  Jamaica  Sloop  that  was  come  over  on  the  Coast 
to  trade,  she  went  with  us.  It  was  in  the  evening  when  we 
came  to  an  Anchor,  and  the  next  morning  we  fired  two 
Guns  for  the  Indians  that  lived  on  the  Main  to  come 
aboard ;  for  by  this  time  we  concluded  we  should  hear 
from  our  five  men,  that  we  left  in  the  heart  of  the  Country 
among  the  Indians,  this  being  about  the  latter  end  of 
August,  and  it  was  the  beginning  of  May  when  we  parted 
from  them.  According  to  our  expectation  the  Indians 
came  aboard,  and  brought  our  friends  with  them :  Mr. 
Wafer  wore  a  Clout  about  him,  and  was  painted  like  an 
Indian ;  and  he  was  some  time  aboard  before  I  knew  him. 
One  of  them,  named  Richard  Cobson,  dyed  within  3  or  4 
day's  after,  and  was  bury'd  on  La  Sound's  Key. 

After  this  we  went  to  other  Keys,  to  the  Eastward  of 
these,  to  meet  Captain  Wright  and  Captain  Yanky,  who 

*  Soldier  crabs,  so  called  **  because  of  the  colour,"  which  is  reddish. 
'  Man(,'anilla.     It  has  a  fniit  like  a  yellow-gfreen  crab  apple. 
^  Wafer  and  Sir  Pichard  Hawkins  lay  down  similar  rules.* 

70 


WILD    INDIANS 

•X  with   a    Fleet  of  Percagoes  laden  with  Indian  Corn,    a^ 
Hog,  and  Fowls,  going  tn  Cartagene  ;  being  convoyed  by 
%«R«I1  Amiadilly' of  2  Guns  and  6  Patererocs.     Her  they 
duced  ashore,  and  most  of  the  Pereagoes;   but  they  got 
Iwn  of  them  off,  and  brought  them  away. 

Here  Captain  Wright's  and  Captain  Yanky's  Barks 
woe  dcan'd  ;  and  wc  stock'd  our  selves  with  Com,  and 
ihen  went  towards  the  Coast  of  Cartagene.  In  our  way 
itther  we  passed  by  the  River  of  Darien ;  ^  which  is  very 
itoti  at  the  mouth,  but  not  above  six  loot  water  on  a 
Sonng-tide ;  For  the  Tide  riseth  but  little  here.  Captain 
uoon,  about  6  months  before  we  came  out  of  the 
S«th  Seas,  wcm  up  this  River  with  a  party  of  Men : 
Ererv  Man  carry'd  a  small  strong  Bag  to  put  his  Gold  in  ; 
apecring  great  Riches  there,  tho'  they  got  little  or  none. 
They  rowol  up  about  lOO  leagues  before  they  came  to  any 
itrtlenMmt,  and  then  found  some  Spaniards,  who  lived  there 
to  tmek  with  the  Indians  for  Gold ;  there  being  Gold 
Sales  in  every  house.  The  Spaniards  admired  how  they 
ame  to  far  from  the  mouth  of  the  River,  because  there 
ire  a  sort  of  Indians  living  between  that  place  and  the  Sea, 
•Hoifc  very  dreadful  to  the  Spaniards,  and  will  not  have 
wj  commerce  with  them,  nor  with  any  white  people. 
They  use  Tninks  about  8  foot  long,  out  of  which  they 
Hrm  poysoned  Darts ;  and  are  so  silent  in  their  attacks  on 
tfcar  Enemies,  and  retreat  so  nimbly  again,  that  the 
Sputinls  can  never  find  them.  Their  Darts  are  made  of 
Huaw-wood.  being  about  the  bigness  and  length  of  a 
Knitting-needle;  one  end  is  wound  about  with  Cotton, 
Ae  other  end  is  extraordinary  sharp  and  small ;  and  is 
jigged  with  notches  like  a  Harpoon :  So  that  whatever  it 
Knkes  into,  it  immediately  breaks  off,  by  the  weight  of 
Ik  biggest  end ;  which  it  is  not  of  strength  to  bear,  (it 
Itieg  tnade  so  slender  for  that  purpose)  and  is  very  diffi- 
tili  to  be  got  out  again,  by  reason  of  those  notches. 
Thae  Indians  have  always  War  with  our  Darien  friendly 
Iniiatti,  and  live  on  both  sides  this  great  River  50  or  60 
See  Kingrosc. 


J 


CAPTAIN    DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    leagues  from  the  Sea,  but  not  near  the  mouth  of  the  River. 

1681  Xhere  are  abundance  of  Manatee  in  this  River,  and  some 
Creeks  belonging  to  it.  This  relation  I  had  from  several 
Men  who  accompany*d  Captain  Coxon  in  that  discovery; 
and  from  Mr.  Cook  in  particular,  who  was  with  them,  and 
is  a  very  intelligent  person :  He  is  now  chief  Mate  of  a 
Ship  bound  to  Guinea.  To  return  therefore  to  the  pro- 
secution of  our  Voyage;  meeting  with  nothing  of  note, 
we  (^ssed  by  Cartagene ;  which  is  a  City  so  well  known, 
that  I  shall  say  nothing  of  it.  We  sailed  by  in  sight  of  it, 
for  it  lies  open  to  the  Sea :  and  had  a  fair  view  of  Madre 
dc  Popa,  or  Nuestra  Sennora  de  Popa,  a  Monastery  of  the 
Virgin  Mary's,  standing  on  the  top  of  a  very  steep  hill  just 
behind  Cartagene.^  It  is  a  place  of  incredible  wealth,  by 
reason  of  the  offerings  made  here  continually;  and  for  this 
reason  often  in  danger  of  being  visited  by  the  Privateers, 
did  not  the  neighbourhood  of  Cartagene,  keep  them  in 
awe.  'Tis  in  short,  the  very  Loretto  of  the  West  Indies: 
It  hath  innumerable  Miracles  related  of  it.  Any  mis- 
fortune that  befalls  the  Privateers  is  attributed  to  this 
Lady*s  doing  ;  and  the  Spaniards  rep>ort  that  she  was  abroad 
that  night  the  Oxford^  Man  of  War  was  blown  up  at  the 
Isle  of  Vacca  ^  near  Hisnaniola,  and  that  she  came  home 
all  wet ;  as,  belike,  she  often  returns  with  her  Cloaths  dirty 
and  torn  with  passing  thro*  Woods,  and  bad  ways,  when 
she  has  been  out  upon  any  expedition ;  deserving  doubtless 
a  new  suit  for  such  eminent  pieces  of  service. 

From  hence  we  passed  on  to  the  Rio  Grande,*  where 
we  took  up  fresh  Water  at  Sea,  a  league  off  the  mouth  of 

*  Cartagena  (in  the  ])icscnt  Republic  of  Colombia)  was  the  most  im- 
portant Spanish  city  on  the  northern  coast.  It  is  situated  to  the  eastward 
of  a  capacious  double  harbour,  or  lagoon,  in  lat.  lo*  25'  N.,  long.  75.34' 
W.  Drake  sacked  the  town  in  1585,  in  his  I ndies  Voyage ;  but  the  hue- 
uinccrs  never  attempted  it.  The  monastery  of  which  Dampier  speaks  was 
ransomed  by  the  S|)aniards  at  the  time  of  Drake's  raid. 

'  'I'hc  Oxford  man-of-war  was  blown  up  between  December  17,  1668, 
and  January  14,  1669.  She  was  a  34 -gun  frigate  (manned  by  160  men) 
bound  u]>on  a  cruise  off  Cartagena.  Exqucmeling  has  distorted  the  story 
of  her  loss. 

^  'I'he  Isle  of  Vacca,  or  La  Vache,  lies  a  few  miles  to  the  eastward  of 
Cape  (iravios,  in  the  Tiburon  Peninsula,  Haytu 

*  The  Magdalcna. 

72 


SANTA-MARTHA— ITS   HIGH    LAND 

ihat  River.  From  thence  we  sailed  Eastward,  passing  by  aw.' 
St  Martha,  a  large  Town,  and  good  harbour,  belonging  '^*' 
'»th<  Spaniards:  yet  hath  it  within  these  few  years  been 
'  uken  by  the  Privateers.  It  stands  close  upon  the 
1,  ind  the  Hill '  within  land  is  a  very  large  one,  towering 
ipi  great  hcighth  from  a  vast  body  of  Land.  I  am  of 
iwoa  that  it  is  higher  than  the  Pike  of  Tenariff";  others 
othat  have  seen  both  think  the  same;  the'  its  bigness 
!  its  hcighth  less  sensible.  I  have  seen  it  in  passing 
V,  30  leagues  off  at  Sea ;  others,  as  they  told  me,  above 
fe:  and  several  have  told  me,  that  they  have  seen  at  once, 
Jinttica,  Hispaniola,  and  the  high  Land  of  Santa  Martha  ; 
-ind  yet  the  nearest  of  these  two  places  is  distant  from  it  120 
ka^ocs ;  and  Jamaica,  which  is  farthest  off,  is  accounted 
r  150  leagues;  and  1  question  whether  any  Land  on 
Dtbcr  of  those  two  Islands  may  be  seen  50  leagues.  It's  head 
igaierally  hid  in  (he  Clouds  ;  but  in  clear  weather,  when 
Ac  top  api^iean,  it  looks  white ;  supposed  to  be  covered 
mhSnow.  St.  Martha  licth  in  the  Lat.  of  12  Deg.  North. 
Being  advanced  5  or  6  leagues  to  the  Eastward  of 
Snu  Martha,  wc  left  our  Ships  at  Anchor,  and  return'd 
kd  in  our  Canoa's  to  the  River  Grande  ;  entring  it  by  a 
■ogth'of  it  that  disembogues  itself  near  Santa  Martha; 
lirpoBug  to  attempt  some  Towns  that  lye  a  pretty  way  up 
*Tit  River.'  Bui  this  design  meeting  with  discourage- 
EDts,'  wc  rctum'd  to  our  ships,  and  set  sail  to  Rio  la 
iariu.*  This  hath  been  a  strong  Spanish  Town,  and  is 
til  built;  but  being  often  taken  by  the  Privateers,  the 
paniards  deserted  it  some  time  before  our  arrival.  It 
"1  to  the  Westward  of  a  River;  and  right  against  the 

'  By  Admin)  Goodlud  in  idSS ;  by  John  Coxon  in  ifi77- 
'  Tfcr  Stem  Nevada.     The  peak  is  16,700  feel  hiKh.     "The  Pike  of 
wif*  is  ahool  i^flaa  feci. 
'  SolDC  Ifairtv  mild  tu  the  SSW.  of  ihe  town, 
'  Dnfce  made  tl)c  nme  aUetnpt  in  1 572- 
'  Matouilara  and  ciirrenls. 

Rio  lie  ta  Hacha.  <n  tlic  Uaich,  so  called  because  the  Spnninrds  who 
Mtded  there  sait  an  Indian  an  axe  (o  induce  him  tu  shuw  ihcm  .1 
tg.  Riode  h  Hacha  was  uken  by  John  Hawkins  in  Ij68.  Sir  Francis 
ke,  who  had  «cnmi  k'u'Ikc  against  Ihe  lown  (il  is  not  known  why)  ile- 
p^  ii  in  iS9t,  a  few  weeks  bcfure  his  de:ith.    Some  buccaneers  of 


wJuedii  il 


73 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AN.  Tciwri  is  a  good  Road  for  Ships,  the  bottom  clean  and 
''•*'*'  sandy.  The  Jamaica  Sloops  used  often  to  come  over  to 
trade  here  :  and  I  am  inform*d  that  the  Spaniards  have 
again  settled  themselves  in  it,  and  made  it  very  strong. 
Wc  cnter'd  the  Fort,  and  brought  two  small  guns  aboard. 
l«'rom  thence  we  went  to  the  Rancheries,*  one  or  two  small 
Indian  Villages,  where  the  Spaniards  keep  two  Barks  to 
fish  for  Pearl.  The  Pearl-banks  lye  about  4  or  5  leagues 
off  from  the  shore,  as  I  have  been  told  ;  thither  the  Fishing- 
Burks  go  and  anchor ;  then  the  Divers  go  down  to  the 
bottom,  and  fill  a  Basket  (which  is  let  down  before)  with 
Oysters ;  and  when  they  come  up,  others  go  down,  two  at 
a  time ;  this  they  do  till  the  Bark  is  full,  and  then  go 
ashore,  where  the  old  men,  women  and  children  of  the 
Indians  open  the  Oysters,  there  being  a  Spanish  Overseer 
to  look  after  the  Pearl.     Yet  these  Indians  do  very  often 

m 

secure  the  best  Pearl  for  themselves,  as  many  Jamaica- 
men  can  testifie  who  daily  trade  with  them.  The  meat 
they  string  up,  and  hang  it  a  drying.  At  this  place  we 
went  ashore,  where  we  found  one  of  the  Barks,  and  saw 
great  heaps  of  Oyster-shells,  but  the  people  all  fled :  Yet 
in  another  place,  between  this  and  Rio  La  Hacha,  we  took 
some  of  the  Indians,  who  seem  to  be  a  stubborn  sort  of 
jx'ople :  They  are  long  visaged,  black  hair,  their  noses 
somewhat  rising  in  the  middle,  and  of  a  stern  look.  The 
Spaniards  report  them  to  be  a  very  numerous  Nation  ;  and 
that  they  will  not  subject  themselves  to  their  yoak.  Yet 
they  have  Spanish  Priests  among  them  ;  and  by  trading 
have  brought  them  to  be  somewhat  sociable ;  but  cannot 
keep  a  severe  hand  over  them.  The  Land  is  but  barren, 
it  lx.-ing  of  a  light  sand  near  the  Sea  ;  and  most  Savannah, 
or  Champian  ;  and  the  grass  but  thin  and  course,  yet  they 
feed  plenty  of  Cattle.  Every  man  knoweth  his  own,  and 
looketh  after  them  ;  but  the  Land  is  in  common,  except 
only  their  Houses  or  small  Plantations  where  they  live, 
which  every  man  maintains  with  some  fence  about  it. 
They  may  remove  from  one  place  to  another  as  they  please, 

*  The  Kancherics  were  also  famous  places  for  grain. 

74 


CRUISING    IN   THE    WEST   INDIES  ■ 

no  man  having  right  to  any  Land  hut  what  he  posscsseth.  ahM 

This  part  of  the  Country  is  not  so  suhjcct  to  Rain  as  to  the  '**' 
Westward  of  Santa   Martha ;  yet  here  are  Tornadoes,  or 

Thunder -showers ;  but  neither  so  violent  as  on  the  Coast  _ 

of  Portabell,  nor  so  frequent.     The  Westerly  winds  in  the  M 

Westerly  wind  season  blow   here,   tho'  not  so  strong  nor  ■ 

lasting  as  on  the  Coasts  of  Cartagcne  and  Fortabcll.  H 

When  we  had  spent  some  time  here,  we  return 'd  again  I 

towards   the  Coast  of  Cartagenc ;  and  being  between  Rio  I 

Grande  and  that  place,  we  met  with  Westerly  winds,  which  I 

kept  us  still  to  the  Eastward  of  Cartagene  3  or  4  days ;  I 

and  then  in  the   morning  we  deserved  a  sail  off  at  Sea,  and  H 

we  chased  her  at  noon :  Captain  Wright,  who  sailed  best,  I 

came  up  with  her,  and  engaged  her;  and  in  half  an  hour  I 

after  Captain  Yaiiky,  who  sailed  better  than  the  Tartan  (the  I 

Vessel  that  I  was  in)  came  up  with  her  likewise,  and  laid  * 
her  aboard,  then  Captain  Wright  also ;  and  they  took  her 
before  we  came  up.  They  lost  2  or  3  men,  and  had  7  or  8 
wounded.  The  Prize  was  a  ship  of  12  Guns  and  40  men, 
who  had  all  good  small  Artns :  She  was  laden  with  Sugar 
and  Tobacco,  and   had    8  or    10  Tuns   of  Marmalctt  on 

board  :  She  came  from  Saint  Jago  on  Cuba,  and  was  bound  ■ 

to  Cartagene,  ■ 

We  went  back  with  her  to  Rio  Grande,  to  fix  our  rigging  I 

which  was  shattered  in   the  Fight,  and  to  consider  what  to  I 

do   with   her;  for  these  were  commfiditics  of  little  use  to  I 

us,    and  not  worth  going  into  a  Port  with.     At  the  Rio  I 

Grande   Captain  Wright  demanded  the  Prize    as  his  due  I 

by    virtue    of    his     Commission :     Captain  Yanky    said    it  I 

was  his  due  by   the  Law  of  Privateers.      Indeed  Captain  I 

Wright  had  the  most  right  to  her,  having  by  his  Commis-  ■ 

sion  protected  Captain  Yanky  from  the  French,  who  would  I 

have  turned  him  out  because  he  had  no  Commission ;  and  m 
he  likewise  began  to  engage  her  first.     But  the  Company 
were  all  afraid  that  Captain  Wright  would  presently  carry 
her  into  a  Port ;  therefore  most  of  Captain  Wright's  men 
stuck  to  Captain  Yanky,   and  Captain  Wright    losing  his 

Prize  burned  his  own  Bark,  and  had  Captain  Yanky's,  it  j 

being  bigger  than  his   own  ;    the    Tartan  was  sold    to   a  J 

WL                                              7S  M 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Jamaica  Trader,  and  Captain  Yanky  commanded  the  Prize 
'^^'  Ship.  We  went  again  from  hence  to  Rio  la  Hacha,  and 
set  the  Prisoners  ashore ;  and  it  being  now  the  banning 
of  November,  we  concluded  to  go  to  Querisao  ^  to  sell  our 
Sugar,  if  favoured  by  westerly  Winds,  which  were  now 
come  in.  We  sailed  from  thence,  having  fair  weather  and 
Winds  to  our  mind,  which  brought  us  to  Querisao,  a  Dutch 
Island.  Captain  Wright  went  ashore  to  the  Governor,  and 
offered  him  the  Sale  of  the  Sugar:  But  the  Govemour, 
told  him  he  had  a  great  Trade  with  the  Spaniards,  the^^ 
fore  he  could  not  admit  us  in  there ;  but  if  we  would  go  to 
St.  Thomas,'  which  is  an  Island,  and  free  Port,  belonging 
to  the  Danes,  and  a  Sanctuary  for  Privateers,  he  wouu 
send  a  Sloop  with  such  goods  as  we  wanted,  and  Money  to 
buy  the  Sugar,  which  he  would  take  at  a  certain  rate;  but 
it  was  not  agreed  to. 

Querisao  is  the  only  Island  of  importance  that  the 
Dutch  have  in  the  West  Indies.  It  is  about  5  leagues 
in  length,  and  may  be  9  or  10  in  circumference:  the 
Northermost  point  is  laid  down  in  North  lat.  12  d.  40  m. 
and  it  is  about  7  or  8  leagues  from  the  Main,  near  Cape 
Roman.  On  the  South  side  of  the  East  end  is  a  good 
harbour,  callM  Santa  Barbara ;  but  the  chiefest  harbour, 
is  about  3  leagues  from  the  S.  E.  end,  on  the  South  side 
of  it  where  the  Dutch  have  a  very  good  Town,'  and  a  very 
strong  Fi^rt.  Ships  bound  in  thither  must  be  sure  to  keep 
close  to  the  Harbour*s  mouth,  and  have  a  Hasar,^  or  Rope 
ready  to  send  one  end  ashore  to  the  Fort :  for  there  is  no 
Anchoring  at  the  entrance  of  the  Harbour,  and  the  Currant 
always  sets  to  the  Westward.  But  being  got  in,  it  is  a 
very  secure  port  for  Ships,  either  to  Careen,  or  lye  safe. 
At  the  East  end  are  two  hills,  one  of  them  is  much  higher 
than  the  other,  and  steepest  towards  the  North  side.  The 
rest  of  the  Island  is  indifferent  level ;  where  of  late  some 
rich  Men  have  made  Sugar  works ;  which  formerly  was  all 

*  Ciinisao,  or  Curazao,  in  lat.  12®  21'  N.,  long.  69*  10'  W. 

'  St.  Tliomns,  in  the  Virgin  group.     It  would  have  been  too  far  out  of 
the  way  for  the  buccaneers. 
'  W'illeinstad. 

*  Hawser. 

76 


'1 

4 


ISLE   OF    QUERISAO 

uture  for  Cattle  :  there  are  also  some  small  Plantations  of 
Pi)aioe&  and  Yams,  and  they  have  still  a  great  many  Cattle   ' 

the   Island ;  but    it  is  not  so  much  esteemed  for  its 
iTodiicc,  as  for  its  situation  for  the  Trade  with  the  Spaniard. 

'onneriy  the  Harbour  was  never  without  Ships  from 
Cvtigcnc  and  Portabell,  that  did  use  to  buy  of  the  Dutch 
itn  1000  or  1500  Negroes  at  once,  besides  great  quanti- 
6m of  European  Commodities;  but  of  late  that  Trade  is 
iato  the  hands  of  the  English  at  Jamaica:  yel  still 
ik  Dutch  have  a  vast  Trade  over  all  the  West  Indies, 
Rndit^  from  Holland  Ships  of  good  force  laden  with 
Euopcan  goods,  whereby  they  make  very  profitable  re- 
laritt.  The  Dutch  have  two  other  Islands  here,  but  of 
felle  moment  in  comparison  of  Querisan;  the  one  lieth  7 
a  8  kagucs  to  the  Westward  of  Querisao,  called  Aruba ; ' 
Uk  other  9  or  10  leagues  to  the  Eastward  of  it,  called 
Bno-Airy.*  From  these  Islands  the  Dutch  fetch  in  Sloops 
IWiww  for  Qucrisao,  to  maintain  their  Garrison  and 
Kegmea.     I  was  never  at  Aruba,  therefore  cannot  say  any 

Dof  it  as  to  my  own  knowledge;  but  by  report  it  is 
like  Bon-Airy,  which  I  shall  describe,  only  not  so  big. 
Betvecn  ^uerisao  and   Bon-Airy   is  a    small    Island   called 
Littic  QiJi«nsao,    it    is    not   above   a    league    from    Great 
fooisao.     The  King  of  France  has  long  had  an  eye  on 
Jittriao,  and  made  some  attempts  to  take  it,"  but  never 
JH  SDccccded.      I   have   heard   that  about   23   or  24  years 
ict  the  Governor  had  sold  it  to  the  French,  but  dy'd  a 
■11  time  before  the  Fleet  came  to  demand  it,  and  by  his 
iaih  that  design    failed.     Afterwards,  in  the  year  1678, 
1  Count  D'  [".strc,*  who  a  year  before  had  taken  the  Isle 
Tobago  from  the  Dutch,  was  sent  hither  also  with  a 
of  stout  Ships,  very  well  mann'd,  and  fitted  with 
and    Carcasses;*   intending    to  take    it  by  storm. 


'  la   l67>    Tfce  eipcdiiion  was  wrecked  on   Desccheo  Island,  near 
mKiea. 

'  Ot  d'EtU^CA  Hb  iqtudron  consisted  of  18  !>hi|is  of  war,  and  two 
aMv  iliip*.  Man)'  baccitnecn  cmbnrked  in  Itic  inen>of-wUT ;  so  thai 
t  matt  kawe  been  at  least  four  Ihousrind  men  engat-cil  in  the  expedition, 
an  iron  thell  filled  with  inflammables. 


77 


CAPTAIN    DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  This  Fleet  iSirst  came  to  Martinico;  where,  while  they 
1681  stay*d,  orders  were  sent  to  Petit  Guaves,  for  all  Privateen 
to  repair  thither,  and  assist  the  Count  in  his  design.  There 
were  but  two  Privateers  Ships  that  went  thither  to  lum, 
which  were  mann*d  partly  with  French,  partly  with  EnglislH 
men.  These  set  out  with  the  Count ;  but  in  their  wmy  to 
Querisao,  the  whole  Fleet  was  lost  on  a  RifF  or  Ridge  of 
Rocks,  that  runs  off  from  the  Isle  of  Aves ;  ^  not  above  two 
Ships  escaping,  one  of  which  was  one  of  the  Privateen; 
and  so  that  design  perished. 

Wherefore  not  driving  a  Bargain  for  our  Sugar  with  the 
Governour  of  Querisao,  we  went  from  thence  to  Bon-Airy, 
another  Dutch  Island,  where  we  met  a  Dutch  Sloop  come 
from  Europe,  laden  with  Irish  Beef;  which  we  bought  b 
exchange  for  some  of  our  Sugar. 

Bon-Airy  is  the  Eastermost  of  the  Dutch  Islands,  and 
is  the  largest  of  the  three,  tho*  not  the  most  considerable. 
The  middle  of  the  Island  is  laid  down  in  Lat.  12  d.  16  m. 
It  is  about  20  leagues  from  the  Main,  and  9  or  10  from 
Querisao,  and  is  accounted  16  or  17  leagues  round.  The 
road  is  on  the  S.  W.  side,  near  the  middle  of  the  Island ; 
where  there  is  a  pretty  deep  Bay  runs  in.  Ships  that  come 
from  the  Eastward  luiF  up  close  to  the  Eastern  shore  :  and 
let  go  their  Anchor  in  60  fathom  water,  within  half  a  Cables 
length  ^  of  the  shore.  But  at  the  same  time  they  must  be 
ready  with  a  Boat  to  carry  a  Hasar  or  Rope,  and  make  it 
fast  ashore ;  otherwise,  when  the  Land-wind  comes  in  the 
night,  the  Ship  would  drive  off  to  Sea  again ;  for  the  Ground 
is  so  steep,  that  no  Anchor  can  hold  if  once  it  starts. 
About  half  a  mile  to  the  Westward  of  this  Anchoring  place 
there  is  a  small  low  Island,  and  a  Channel  between  it  and 
the  main  Island. 

The  Houses  are  about  half  a  mile  within  Land,  right  in 
the  Road :  There  is  a  Governour  lives  here,  a  Deputy  to 
the  Governour  of  Querisao,  and  7  or  8  Soldiers,  with  5  or 
6  Families  of  Indians.  There  is  no  Fort ;  and  the  Soldiers 
in  peaceable  times  have  little  to  do  but  to  eat  and  sleep,  for 

»  In  lat.  1 1°  59'  N.,  long.  67°  40'  V^. 
•  Or  one  hundred  yards. 

78 


BOOBY    AND   MAN-OF-WAR    BIRDS 

ihey  never  watch,  but  in  time  of  War.  The  Indians  are  , 
Husband-men,  and  plant  Maiz  and  Guinea  Corn,  and  some  ' 
Yams,  and  Potatoes :  But  their  chicfcst  business  is  about 
Cattle;  for  this  Island  is  plentifully  stocked  with  Goats: 
and  they  send  great  quantities  every  year  in  Salt  to^ucrisao. 
There  are  some  Horses,  and  Bulls  and  Cows;  but  I  never 
saw  any  Sheep,  tho'  I  have  been  all  over  the  Island.  The 
South  side  is  plain  low  Land,  and  there  are  several  sorts  of 
Trees,  but  none  very  large.  There  is  a  small  Spring  of 
Water  by  the  Houses,  which  serves  the  inhabitants,  tho*  it 
is  blackish.  At  the  West  end  of  the  Island  there  is  a  good 
Spring  of  fresh  Water,  and  3  or  4  Indian  Families  live 
there,  but  no  Water  nor  Houses  at  any  other  place.  On 
the  South  side  near  the  East  end,  is  a  good  Salt-pond, 
where  Dutch  Sloops  come  for  Salt. 

From  Bon  Airy  wc  went  to  the  Isle  of  Aves,  or  Birds ; 
so  called  from  its  great  plenty  of  Birds,  as  Men-of-War'  and 
Boobies;'  but  especially  Boobies.  The  Booby  is  a  Water- 
fowl, somewhat  less  than  a  Hen,  of  a  light  greyish  colour. 
I  observed  the  Boobies  of  this  Island  to  be  whiter  than  others. 
This  Bird  hath  a  strong  Bill,  longer  and  bigger  than  a 
Crows,  and  broader  at  the  end  :  her  feet  are  flat  like  a  Ducks 
feet.  It  is  a  very  simple  Creature,  and  will  hardly  go  out 
of  a  Man's  way.  In  other  places  they  build  their  Nests  on 
the  Ground,  but  here  they  build  on  Trees;  which  1  never 
saw  any  where  else  ;  tho'  1  have  seen  of  them  in  a  great  many 
places.  Their  F"lesh  is  black  and  cats  fishy,  but  are  often 
eaten  by  the  Privateers.  Their  numbers  have  been  much 
lessened  by  the  French  Fleet,'  which  was  lost  here,  as  I 
shall  give  an  account. 

The  Man-of-War  (as  it  is  called  by  the  English)  is  about 
the  bigness  of  a  Kite,  and  in  shape  like  it,  but  black ;  and 
the  neck  is  red.  It  lives  on  Fish,  yet  never  lights  on  the 
Water,  but  soars  aloft  like  a  Kite,  and  when  it  sees  its  prey, 
it  flies  down  head  foremost  to  the  Waters  edge,  very  swiftly 


'  Han.ef.War  bird  :  the  frigate  pelican,  o 
(Lilary  bird  nf  grent  slrengtli  and  swiftness, 
»  iloobies  ;  Sulafmcu.    It  is,  as  Uunipier ! 
'  Under  Count  d'Eslries,  in  1678. 

: n 


i'eiecanus  Aptilys.     A  prc- 
lys,  ''a  very  simple  Creature." 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

I 
■I 

AN.   takes  its  prey  out  of  the  Sea  with  its  Bill,  and  immediately  [ 
1682  mounts  again  as  swiftly ;  and  never  touching  the  Water  with  ■[ 
his  Bill.     His  Wings  are  very  long,  his  Feet  are  like  other 
Land  fowl,  and  he  builds  on  Trees,  where  he  finds  any; 
but  where  they  are  wanting,  on  the  Ground. 

This  Island  Aves  lies  about  8  or  9  leagues  to  the  East-  ^ 
ward  of  the  Island  Bon- Airy,  about  14  or  15  leagues  from 
the  Main,  and  about  the  lat.  of  1 1  d.  45  m.  North.  It  ii 
but  small,  not  above  4  mile  in  length,  and  towards  the  Eait 
end  not  half  a  mile  broad.  On  the  North  side  it  is  low  Land, 
commonly  overflown  with  the  Tide  ;  but  on  the  South  »de 
there  is  a  great  Rocky  Bank  of  Coral  thrown  up  by  the 
Sea.  The  West  End  is,  for  near  a  mile  space,  plain  even 
Savannah  Land,  without  any  Trees.  There  are  2  or  3  Wells 
dug  by  Privateers,  who  often  frequent  this  Island,  because 
there  is  a  good  Harbour  about  the  middle  of  it  on  the 
North  side,  where  they  may  conveniently  c^een.  The  Riff, 
or  Bank  of  Rocks,  on  which  the  French  Fleet  was  lost,  as 
I  mentioned  above,  runs  along  from  the  East  end  to  the 
Northward  about  3  mile,  then  trends  away  to  the  West- 
ward, making  as  it  were  a  Half-Moon.  This  RiflF  breaks 
oflF  all  the  Sea,  and  there  is  good  Riding  in  even  sandy 
ground  to  the  Westward  of  it.  There  are  2  or  3  small  low 
sandy  Keys,  or  Islands,  within  this  RiflF,  about  3  miles  from 
the  main  Island.  The  Count  d'Estree  lost  his  Fleet  here  in 
this  manner.  Coming  from  the  Eastward,  he  fell  in  on  the 
back  of  the  RiflF,  and  fired  guns  to  give  warning  to  the  rest 
of  his  Fleet :  But  they  supposing  their  Admiral  was  en- 
gaged with  Enemies,  hoisted  up  their  Topsails,  and  crouded 
all  the  Sails  they  could  make,  and  ran  full  sail  ashore  after 
him ;  all  within  half  a  mile  of  each  other.  For  his  light 
being  in  the  Main-Top  was  an  unhappy  Beacon  for  them 
to  follow ;  and  there  escaped  but  one  Kings-Ship,  and  one 
Privateer.  The  Ships  continued  whole  all  day,  and  the  Men 
had  time  enough,  most  of  them,  to  get  ashore,  yet  many 
perished  in  the  Wreck :  ^  and  many  of  those  that  got  safe 
on  the  Island,  for  want  of  being  accustomed  to  such  hard- 

*  About  300  were  drowned. 

80 


PAIN'S   ADVENTURE 

ships,  died  like  rotten  Sheep.  But  the  Privateers  who  had  aic. 
been  used  to  such  accidents  lived  merrily,  from  whom  I  had  "*' 
this  relation  :  and  they  told  me,  that  if  ihcy  had  gone  to 
Jamaica  with  30  /.  a  Man  in  their  Pockets,  they  could  not 
have  enjoyed  themselves  more  ;  For  they  kept  in  a  Gang  by 
themselves,  and  watched  when  the  Ships  broke,  to  get  the 
Goods  that  came  from  them ;  and  though  much  was  staved 
against  the  Rocks,  yet  abundance  of  Wine  and  Brandy 
floated  over  the  Riff,  where  the  Privateers  waited  to  take  it 
up.  They  lived  here  about  3  weeks,  waiting  an  opportunity 
to  transport  themselves  back  again  to  Hispaninla ;  in  all 
which  time  they  were  never  without  2  or  3  Hogsheads  of 
Wine  and  Brandy  in  their  Tents,  and  Barrels  of  Beef  and 
Pork  ;  which  they  could  live  on  without  Bread  well  enough, 
the'  the  new-comers  out  of  France  could  not.  There  were 
about  Forty  Frenchmen  on  board  in  one  of  the  Ships  where 
there  was  good  store  of  Uquor,  till  the  after  part  of  her 
broke  away  and  floated  over  the  Riff,  and  was  carry'd  away 
to  Sea,  with  all  the  Men  drinking  and  singing,  who  being 
in  drink,  did  not  mind  the  danger,  but  were  never  heard  of 
afterwards. 

In  a  short  lime  after  this  great  Shipwrack,  Captain 
Pain,'  Commander  of  a  IVivatecr  of  6  Guns,  had  a  pleasant 
iccident  bcfel  him  at  this  Island.  He  came  hither  to 
careen,  intending  to  fit  himself  very  well ;  for  here  lay 
driven  on  the  Island,  Masts,  Yards,  Timbers,  and  many 
things  that  he  wanted,  therefore  he  haled  into  the  Harbour, 
close  to  the  Island,  and  unrigg'd  his  Ship,  Before  he  had 
done,  a  Dutch  Ship  of  20  Guns,  was  sent  from  Querisao 
to  take  up  the  Guns  that  were  lost  on  the  Riff:  But  seeing 
a  Ship  in  the  Harbour,  and  knowing  her  to  be  a  French 
Privateer,  they  thought  to  take  her  first,  and  came  within 
a  mile  of  her,  and  began  to  fire  at  her,  intending  to  warp 
in  the  next  day,  for  it  is  very  narrow  going  in.  Capt. 
Pain  got  ashore  some  of  his  Guns,  and  did  what  he  could 
to  resist  them  ;  tho'  he  did  in  a  manner  conclude  he  must 


i 


'  Tills  wsis  the  Cnptain  P.iyne  mentioneil  cnrlier  as  being  one  of 
squadron  at  Springer's  Key,  n[  ihc  end  of  May,  1(181.  He  wns  ihcn  i 
command  of  a  ahtp  of  to  guns  and  100  men. 

VOL.  I.  81  F 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  be  taken.  But  while  his  Men  were  thus  busied,  he  spy'd 
1682  ^  Dutch  Sloop  turning  to  get  into  the  Road,  and  saw  her 
at  the  evening  Anchor  at  the  West  end  of  the  Island. 
This  gave  him  some  hope  of  making  his  escape ;  which  he 
did,  by  sending  two  Canoas  in  the  night  aboard  the  Sloop, 
who  took  her,  and  got  considerable  purchase  in  her ;  and 
he  went  away  in  her,  making  a  good  Reprizal,  and  leaving 
his  own  empty  Ship  to  the  Dutch  Man  of  War. 

There  is  another  Island  to  the  Eastward  of  the  Isle  of 
Aves  about  4  leagues,  called  by  Privateers  the  little  Isle 
of  Aves,  which  is  over-grown  with  Mangrove  Trees.  I 
have  seen  it,  but  was  never  on  it.  There  are  no  In- 
habitants, that  I  could  learn,  on  either  of  these  Islands, 
but  Boobies  and  a  few  other  Birds. 

While  we  were  at  the  Isle  of  Aves,  we  careen'd  Gipt. 
Wright's  Bark,  and  scrubbed  the  Sugar-prize,  and  got 
2  Guns  out  of  the  Wrecks ;  continuing  here  till  the  be- 
ginning of  Feb.  i68j^. 

We  went  from  hence  to  the  Isles  Roca*s  ^  to  careen  the 
Sugar-prize,  which  the  Isle  of  Aves  was  not  a  place  so 
convenient  for.  Accordingly  we  haled  close  to  one  of  the 
small  Islands,  and  Got  our  Guns  ashore  the  first  thing  we 
did,  and  built  a  Breast-work  on  the  Point,  and  planted  all 
our  guns  there,  to  hinder  an  Enemy  from  coming  to  us 
while  we  lay  on  the  Careen  :  Then  we  made  a  House, 
and  covered  it  with  our  Sails,  to  put  our  Goods  and 
Provisions  in.  While  we  lay  here,  a  French  Man  of  War 
of  36  Guns,  came  thro'  the  Keys,  or  little  Islands;  to 
whom  we  sold  about  10  Tun  of  Sugar.  I  was  aboard 
twice  or  thrice,  and  very  kindly  welcomed  both  by  the 
Captain  and  his  Lieutenant,  who  was  a  Cavalier  of  Malta ; 
and  they  both  offered  me  great  Encouragement  in  France, 
if  I  would  go  with  them ;  but  I  ever  designed  to  continue 
with  those  of  my  own  Nation. 

The  Islands  Roca's  are  a  parcel  of  small  uninhabited 
Islands,  lying  about  the  lat.  of  1 1  deg.  40  min.  about 
15  or    16   leagues  from  the  Main,  and  about  20  leagues 

^  Los  Roqiiesy  a  few  miles  to  the  east  of  the  Isles  of  Aves. 

82 


THE   NODDY    AND   TROPICK-BIRDS 

N.  W.  by  W.  from  Tortuga,'  and  6  or  7  leagues  to  the  am. 
Westward  of  Orchilla,'  another  Island  lying  about  the  '^^ 
uax  distance  from  the  Main  ;  which  Island  I  have  seen, 
hn  WIS  never  ai  it.  Roca's  siretch  themselves  East  and 
fot  about  5  leagues,  and  their  breadth  about  3  leagues. 
Northernmost  of  these  Islands  is  the  most  remarkable 
of  a  high  white  rocky  Hill  at  the  west  end  of 
which  may  be  seen  a  great  way  ;  and  on  it  there  are 
"  ;nce  of  Tropick  Birds,'  Mcn-of-War,  Booby  and 
fcddics,*  which  breed  there.  The  Booby  and  Man-of- 
ffir,  I  have  describ'd  already.  The  Noddy  is  a  small 
ibck  Bird,  about  the  bigness  of  the  English  Black-bird, 
ini  indifferent  good  Meat.  They  build  in  Rocks,  We 
WTer  find  them  far  off"  from  shore.  I  have  seen  of  them 
a  other  places,  biit  never  saw  any  of  their  Nests,  but  in  this 
lilind,  where  there  is  great  plenty  of  them.  The  Tropick 
Bird  i*  as  big  as  a  Pigeon,  but  round  and  plump  like  a 
Piitridge,  They  are  all  white,  except  two  or  three 
fathers  in  each  Wing  of  a  light  grey.  Their  Bills  are 
"f  1  yellowish  Colour,  thick  and  short.  They  have  one 
•fiof  Feather,  or  rather  a  Quill,  about  7  Inches  long, 
fTows  out  at  the  Rump,  which  is  all  the  Tail  they  have. 
They  are  never  seen  far  without  either  Tropick,  for  which 
'^Moo  they  arc  called  Tropick  Birds.  They  are  very  good 
f'wd,  and  we  meet  with  them  a  great  way  at  Sea,  and  I 
'■cTtrsiw  of  them  any  where  but  at  Sea  and  in  this  Island, 
^hen  they  build  and  are  found  in  great  plenty. 

By  the  Sea,  on  the  South-side  of  that  high  Hill,  there's 
'mh  Water  comes  out  of  the  Rocks,  but  so  slowly,  that 
'■  yields  not  above  40  Gallons  in  24  hours,  and  it  tastes 
>i  coppcrish,  or  aluminous  rather,  and  rough  in  the  Mouth, 
■:''Jt  It  seems  very  unpleasant  at  first  drinking :  But  after 
I  or  3  days  any  Water  will  seem  to  have  no  taste. 


1'  The  isLuKl  off  Cape  Coder),  Vencmeta  : 
'^   NW.  of  SiU)  Oomtago. 


iOnUfa,  u  island  a 


1^ 
■  TW  trapic  bini,  PMaUon  aiktmit. 
*T1n  noddy  'm  mnch  mch  a  "slmpli 
ll  w  aaMnUni  aa  Slerma  tiotida. 
1 : 


Ihc  eastward  of  ihe  Los  Roques 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AN.  The  middle  of  this  Island  is  low  plain  Land,  over- 

'^^  grown  with  long  Grass,  where  there  are  multitudes  of 
small  grey  Fowls  no  Ugger  than  a  Black-bird,  yet  lay 
Eggs  bigger  than  a  Magpy*s;  and  they  are  therefore  1^ 
Privateers  called  Egg-binds.  The  East  end  of  the  Island 
is  overgrown  with  black  Mangrove  Trees. 

There  are  3  sorts  of  Mangrove-Trees,*  black,  red  and 
white.  The  black  Mangrove  is  the  largest  Tree;  the 
body  about  as  big  as  an  Oak,  and  about  20  feet  high. 
It  is  very  hard  and  serviceable  Timber,  but  extraordinary 
heavy,  therefore  not  much  made  use  of  for  Building.  The 
red  Mangrove  groweth  commonly  by  the  Sea  side,  or  by 
Rivers  or  Creeks.  The  body  is  not  so  big  as  that  of  the 
black  Mangrove,  but  always  grows  out  of  many  Roots 
about  the  bigness  of  a  Man's  Leg,  some  bigger  some  less, 
which  at  about  6,  8,  or  10  foot  above  the  Ground,  jo]rn 
into  one  trunk  or  body,  that  seems  to  be  supported  by  so 
many  Artificial  Stakes.  Where  this  sort  of  Tree  grows,  it 
is  impossible  to  march,  by  reason  of  these  Stakes,  which 
grow  so  mixt  one  amongst  another,  that  I  have,  when 
forced  to  go  through  them,  gone  half  a  mile,  and  never 
set  my  foot  on  the  Ground,  stepping  from  Root  to  Root. 
The  Timber  is  hard  and  good  for  many  uses.  The  inside 
of  the  Bark  is  red,  and  it  is  used  for  tanning  of  Leather 
very  much  all  over  the  West-Indies.  The  white  Mangrove 
never  groweth  so  big  as  the  other  two  sorts,  neither  is  it 
of  any  great  use :  Of  the  young  Trees  Privateers  use  to 
make  Looms,  or  Handles  for  their  Oars,  for  it  is  commonly 
straight,  but  not  very  strong,  which  is  the  fault  of  them. 
Neither  the  black  nor  white  Mangrove  grow  towering  up 
from  stilts  or  rising  roots,  as  the  red  doth ;  but  the  Body 
immediately  out  of  the  Ground,  like  other  Trees. 

The  I^nd  of  this  East  end  is  light  sand,  which  is 
sometimes  over-flown  with  the  Sea  at  Spring-tides.  The 
Road  for  Ships  is  on  the  South-side,  against  the  middle  of 

*  Mangrove  trees :  Rhizophora.  They  are  common  on  tropical  coasts. 
The  red  Mangrove^  or  Khizaphora  candel^  is  the  most  useful.  It  is  still 
used  "  for  tanning  of  leather"  and  also  for  dyeing.  Tinctures  of  the  astrin- 
gent bark  are  of  use  in  cases  of  fever,  and  for  soothing  the  pain  of  wasp 
stings  and  mosquito  bites. 

84 


.  \ 


[SLE  OF  TORTUGA 

the  UUnii.  The  rest  of  the  Islands  of  Roca's  are  low. 
The  next  to  this  on  the  South  side  is  but  small,  flat,  and  '^*1 
even,  without  Trees,  bearing  only  Grass.  On  the  South 
side  of  it  is  a  pond  of  brackish  water,  which  sometimes 
Privateers  use  instead  of  bctier ;  there  is  likewise  good 
Riding  by  it.  About  a  league  from  this  are  two  other 
I(Und«,  not  lOO  yards  distant  from  each  other ;  yet  a  deep 
Channel  for  Ships  to  pass  through.  They  are  both  over- 
grown with  red  Mangrove  Trees  ;  which  Trees,  above  any 
of  the  Mangroves,  do  flourish  best  in  wet  drowned  Land, 
Mich  as  these  two  Islands  are ;  only  the  East  point  of 
the  Wcstcrmost  Island  is  dry  sand,  without  Tree  or  Bush. 
On  this  point  we  careened,  lying  on  the  South  side  of  it. 

The  other  Islands  are  low,  and  have  red  Mangroves, 
and  other  Trees  on  them.  Here  also  Ships  may  ride,  but 
no  «uch  place  for  careening  as  where  we  lay,  because  at 
that  place  Ships  may  hale  close  to  the  shore;  and  if  they 
have  but  four  Guns  on  the  point,  may  secure  the  Channel, 
ind  hinder  any  Enemy  from  coming  near  them.  I  ob- 
served that  within  among  the  Islands,  was  good  riding  in 
Tiany  places,  but  not  without  the  Islands,  except  to  the 
Westward,  or  South  West  of  them.  For  on  the  East,  or 
N.  E.  of  these  Islands,  the  common  Trade-Wind  blows, 
ind  makes  a  great  Sea  :  And  to  the  Southward  of  them, 
thoe  b  no  ground  under  70,  or  80,  or  100  fathom,  clbse 
by  the  Land. 

After  we  had  filled  what  water  we  could  from  hence, 
«  «t  out  again  in  April  1682,  and  came  to  Salt-Tortuga, 
M  ailed  to  distinguish  it  from  the  shoals  of  Dry  Toriugas,' 
"tv  Cape  Florida,  and  from  the  Isle  of  Tortugas  by 
Hiipaniola  which  was  called  formerly  French  Tortugas; 
uvngb  not  having  heard  any  mention  of  that  name  a  great 
wble,  I  am  apt  to  think  it  is  swallowed  up  in  that  of 
Petk-Guave»,  the  chief  Garrison  the  French  have  in  those 
Tvn.  This  Island  wc  arrived  at  is  pretty  large,  unin- 
hibited, and  abounds  with  Salt.  It  is  in  lat.  1 1  d.  North, 
I  aid  Ijreth  west  and  a.  little  northerly  from  Margarita,  an 


To  dH  wcatward  of  Key  W«i,  in  lat.  24*  ^T*  N.,  loDg.  83'  ja'  W. 

8s 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER^S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Islajid  inhabited  by  the  Spaniards,  strong,  and  wealthy ;  it 
'^2  jg  distant  from  it  about  14  leagues,  and  17  or  18  from 
Cape  Blanco  on  the  Main :  A  Ship  being  within  these 
Islands,  a  little  to  the  Southward,  may  see  at  once  the 
Main,  Margarita,  and  Tortuga,  when  it  is  clear  Weather. 
The  East  end  of  Tortuga  is  full  of  rugged,  bare,  broken 
Rocks,  which  stretch  themselves  a  little  way  out  to  Sea. 
At  the  S.  E.  part  is  an  indifferent  good  Road  for  Ships, 
much  frequented  in  peaceable  times  by  Merchant-shipSi 
that  come  thither  to  lade  Salt,  in  the  Months  of  May, 
June,  July,  and  August.  For  at  the  East  end  is  a  large 
Salt-pond,  within  200  paces  of  the  Sea.  The  Salt  begins 
to  kern,  or  grain  in  April,  .except  it  is  a  dry  season  ;  for  it 
is  observed  that  Rain  makes  the  Salt  kern.  I  have  seen 
above  20  Sail  at  a  time  in  this  Road  come  to  lade  Salt ;  and 
these  Ships  coming  from  some  of  the  Caribbe  Islands,  are 
always  well  stored  with  Rum,  Sugar,  and  Lime-juice  to 
make  Punch,  to  hearten  their  Men  when  they  are  at  work, 
getting  and  bringing  aboard  the  Salt ;  and  they  commonly 
provide  the  more,  in  hopes  to  meet  with  Privateers,  who 
resort  hither  in  the  aforesaid  Months,  purposely  to  keep  a 
Christmas,  as  they  call  it ;  being  sure  to  meet  with  Liquor 
enough  to  be  merry  with,  and  are  very  liberal  to  those  that 
treat  them.  Near  the  West  end  of  the  Island,  on  the 
South  side,  there  is  a  small  Harbour  and  some  fresh 
Water :  That  end  of  the  Island  is  full  of  shrubby  Trees, 
but  the  East  end  is  rocky  and  barren  as  to  Trees,  produc- 
ing only  course  Grass.  There  are  some  Goats  on  it,  but 
not  many ;  and  Turtle  or  Tortoise  come  upon  the  sandy 
Bays  to  lay  their  Eggs,  and  from  them  the  Island  hath  its 
name.  There  is  no  riding  any  where  but  in  the  Roads 
where  the  Salt-ponds  are,  or  in  the  Harbour. 

At  this  Isle  we  thought  to  have  sold  our  Sugar  among 
the  English  Ships  that  come  hither  for  Salt ;  but  failing 
there,  we  design'd  for  Trinidada,^  an  island  near  the  Main, 
inhabited  by  the  Spaniards,  tolerably  strong  and  wealthy; 
but   the   Current   and   Easterly   winds   hindering   us,   we 

*  Trinidad. 

86 


THE  GUANO— ISLE  OF  BLANCO 
thruogh  between  Margarita  and  the  Main,  and 
went  to  Blanco,'  a  pretty  large  Island  almost  North  of  "*^*  I 
Margariu ;  about  30  leagues  from  the  Main,  and  in 
lid.  50  m.  Nonh  Lat.  It  is  a  flat,  even,  low,  unin- 
habited bland,  dry  and  healthy :  most  Savannah  of  long 
Grass,  and  hath  some  Trees  of  Lignum  Vita:  growing  in 
^^r-<ns,  with  shrubby  bushes  of  other  Wood  about   them. 

-  ■*  plentifully  stored  with  Guano's'  which  are  an  Animal 
fctr  a  Lizard,  but  much  bigger.  The  body  Is  as  big  as  the 
-rail  of  a  mans  Leg,  and  from  the  hind  quarter  the  Tail 

_-nn  tapering  to  the  end,  which  is  very  small.  If  a  Man 
-ica  hold  of  the  tail,  except  very  near  the  hind  quarter, 

-  will  part  and  break  off  in  one  of  the  joints,  and  the 
'iano  will  get  away.     They  lay  Eggs  as  most  of  those 

■  Tiphiinous  creatures  do,  and  are  very  good  to  eat.  Their 
"=sh  b  much  esteemed  by  Privateers,  who  commonly  dress 
"=m  for  their  sick  Men  ;  for  they  make  very  good  Broath. 
'.  ley  are  of  divcni  colours,  as  almost  black,  dark  brown, 
jht  brown,  dark  green,  light  green,  yellow,  and  speckled. 
raey  all  live  as  well  in  the  Water  as  on  Land,  and  some  of 
■an  are  constantly  in  the  Water,  and  among  Rocks: 
rae»  are  commonly  black.  Others  that  live  in  swampy 
s^  ground  arc  commonly  on  Bushes  and  Trees,  these  are 
r^soL  But  such  as  live  in  dry  ground,  as  here  at  Blanco, 
»-T  commonly  yellow  ;  yet  these  also  will  live  In  the  Water, 
■vi  a«  sometimes  on  Trees.  The  Road  is  on  the  N,  W. 
-'•4,  against  a  small  Cove,  or  tittle  sandy  Bay.  There  is 
M  riding  any  where  else,  for  it  is  deep  water,  and  steep,* 
:  to  the  Land.  There  is  one  small  Spring  on  the 
■  Vat  side,  and  there  is  sandy  Bays  round  the  Island,  where 
or  Tortoise  come  up  in  great  abundance,  going 
■  in  the  night.  These  that  frequent  this  Island  are 
d  green  Turtle,  and  they  are  the  best  of  that  sort,  both 
I  and  sweetness  of  any  in  alt  the  West-Indies. 
here  give  a  particular  description  of  these,  and 
,  of  Turtle  in  these  Seas;    but  because  I   shall 

,      c  ofthe  Hcrmanos  itroup-  '  The  (Ruana 

Plhl  aboATuiK  grailiallr.    One  of  those  places  where  the  tnnd  nses 
"•  tea*  the  •«- 

87 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  have  occasion  to  mention  some  other  sort  of  Turtle  when 
1682  I  come  again  into  the  South  Seas,  that  are  very  different 
from  all  these,  I  shall  there  give  a  general  account  of  all 
these  several  sorts  at  once,  that  the  difference  between  them 
may  be  the  better  discerned.  Some  of  our  modern  Descrip- 
tions^ speak  of  Goats  on  this  Island.  I  know  not  what 
there  may  have  been  formerly,  but  there  are  none  now  to 
my  certain  knowledge ;  for  my  self,  and  many  more  of  our 
Crew,  have  been  all  over  it.  Indeed  these  parts  have 
undergone  great  changes  in  this  last  Age,  as  well  in  places 
themselves,  as  in  their  Owners,  and  Commodities  of  them ; 
particularly  Nombre  de  Dios,*  a  City  once  famous,  and 
which  still  retains  a  considerable  name  in  some  late  ac- 
counts, is  now  nothing  but  a  Name.  For  I  have  lain 
ashore  in  the  place  where  that  City  stood ;  but  it  is  all 
overgrown  with  Wood,  so  as  to  leave  no  sign  that  any 
Town  hath  been  there. 

We  staid  at  the  Isle  of  Blanco  not  above  ten  days,  and 
then  went  back  to  Salt-Tortuga  again,  where  Captain 
Yanky  parted  with  us:  And  from  thence,  after  about 
4  days,  all  which  time  our  men  were  drunk  and  quarrel- 
ling, we  in  Capt.  Wright's  Ship  went  to  the  Coast  of 
Caraccos  on  the  Main  Land.  This  Coast  is  upon  several 
accounts  very  remarkable :  'Tis  a  continued  tract  of  high 
Ridges  of  Hills,  and  small  Valleys  intermixt,  for  about 
20  leagues,  stretching  East  and  West,  but  in  such  manner, 
that  the  Ridges  of  Hills  and  the  Valleys  alternately  run 

*  "  Our  modem  descriptions."  Probably  those  in  "  The  English  Pilot" 
'  Nombre  de  Dios,  once  a  city  on  the  north  coast  of  the  Isthmus  of 
Darien,  in  the  S£.  comer  of  the  Bay  of  San  Cristoval.  It  was  founded 
by  Diego  di  Niqueza,  about  15 10.  It  was  counted  '*the  vilest  place* 
in  all  the  pestilential  isthmus.  It  had  a  church,  and  about  sixty  houses, 
when  Drake  raided  it  in  1572,  but  this  was  shortly  after  it  had  been 
destroyed  by  the  Cimmaroons.  In  IJ96,  when  Drake  burned  it,  it  was 
a  "bigge  towne,"  with  "houses  very  hie,  all  built  of  timber,"  and  "one 
church  very  faire."  A  bad  road  led  from  it  across  the  isthmus  to  Panama. 
In  the  spring,  the  treasure  collected  in  the  South  American  Spanish 
colonies  was  carried  to  Nombre  de  Dios  to  be  shipped  to  Spain  m  the 
annual  treasure  fleet.  After  1 596,  the  town  was  removed  to  Porto  Bello, 
a  better  and  slightly  healthier  harbour  to  the  west.  Wafer  confirms 
Dampier's  remark,  and  adds  that  the  site  is  "all  overgrown  with  a  sort 
of  Wild  Canes."  This  directly  contradicts  the  statements  in  "  The  English 
Pilot." 

88 


COAST   OF   CARACCOS 

Mndng  upon  the  Shore  from  South  to  North ;  The  i 
valleys  some  of  them  about  4  or  j,  oihers  not  above  one  '' 
or  two  furlongs  wide,  and  in  length  from  the  Sea  scarce 
my  nf  ihcm  above  4  or  5  mile  at  most ;  there  being  a  long 
ridge  of  Mountains  at  that  distance  from  the  Sea-coast, 
and  in  a  manner  parallel  to  it,  that  jnyns  those  shorter 
Ridges,  and  closeth  up  the  South  end  of  the  Valleys,  which 
at  the  North  ends  of  them  lyc  ofien  to  the  Sea,  and  make 
so  many  little  sandy  Bays,  that  are  the  only  Landing-places 
on  the  Coast.  Both  the  main  Ridge,  and  these  shorter 
Ribs  arr  very  high  Land,  so  that  3  or  4  leagues  off  at  Sea 
the  Valleys  scarce  appear  to  the  Eye,  but  all  looks  like  one 

?:ncat  Mountain.     From  the  Isles  of  Roca's  about   15,  and 
rom   the  Isic  of  Aves   about    20  leagues  off,  we  see  this 
Coast  very  plain  from  on  board  our  Ships;  yet  when  at 
anchi^v  on  this  Coast,  we  cannot  see  those  Isles  ;  tho'  again 
from  the  tops  of  these  Hills,  they  appear  as  if  at  no  great 
disuncc.  like  so  many  Hillocks  in  a  Pond.     These  Hills 
are  barren,  except  the  lower  sides  of  them,  that  are  covered 
with  some  of  the  same  rich  black   Mould   that  fills  the 
Vdleyi,  and  a  as  good  as  I  have  seen.     In  some  of  the 
Valleys,  there  is  a  strong  red  Clay,  but  in  the  general  they 
ire   cxtrcamly    fertile,    well     watered,     and     inhabited     by 
Spaniards  and  their  Negro's.     They  have  Maiz  and   Plan- 
ains  for  ibcir  support,  with  Indian  Fowls  and  some  Hogs. 
But  the  main  Product  of  these  Valleys,  and   indeed   the 
'wIt  Commodity  it  vends,  are  the  Cacao-Nuts,  of  which 
the  Chocolate  is  made.     The  Cacao-Tree  grows  no  where 
in  the  North  Seas  but  in  the  Bay  of  Campcachy,  on  Costa 
Rica,  between  Portabel  and  Nicaragua,  chiefly  up  Carpenters 
Ri»er;  and  on  this  Coast  as  high  as  the  Isle  of  Trinidada. 
la  the  South  Seas,  it  grows  in  the  River  of  Guiaquil,  a 
Snk  to  the  Southward  of  the  Line,  and  in  the  Valley  of 
Collima,'  on  the  South  side  of  the  Continent  of  Mexico  ; 
'y*h  which  places  I  shall  hereafter  describe.      Besides  these, 
I  v&  confident,  there  is  no  place  in  the  World  where  the 
(JOKi  grows,  except  those  in  Jamaica,  of  which  there  are 

■  ColniM,  in  lat.  19*  3d  N.,  long.  103"  40'  W. 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  now  but  few  remaining,  of  many  and  large  Walks  or 
1682  Plantations  of  them  found  there  by  the  English  at  their 
first  arrival,  and  since  planted  by  them;  and  even  these, 
though  there  is  a  great  deal  of  pains  and  care  bestowed  on 
them,  yet  seldom  come  to  any  thing,  being  generally 
blighted.  The  Nuts  of  this  Coast  of  Caraccos,  tho'  less 
than  those  of  Costa  Rica,  which  are  large  flat  Nuts,  yet  are 
better  and  fatter,  in  my  opinion,  being  so  very  oily,  that  we 
are  forced  to  use  Water  in  rubbing  them  up;  and  the 
Spaniards  that  live  here,  instead  of  parching  them,  to  get 
off  the  Shell  before  they  pound  or  rub  them,  to  make 
Chocolate,  do  in  a  manner  burn  them  to  dry  up  the  Oil ; 
for  else,  they  say,  it  would  fill  them  too  full  of  Blood, 
drinking  Chocolate  as  they  do,  five  or  six  times  a  day. 
My  worthy  consort  Mr.  Ringrose  commends  most  the 
Guiaquil  Nut ;  ^  I  presume,  because  he  had  little  knowledge 
of  the  rest ;  for  being  intimately  acquainted  with  him,  I 
know  the  course  of  his  Travels  and  Experience :  But  I  am 
pers waded,  had  he  known  the  rest  so  well  as  I  pretend  to 
have  done,  who  have  at  several  times  been  long  used  to,  and 
in  a  manner  lived  upon  all  the  several  sorts  of  them  above- 
mentioned,  he  would  prefer  the  Caraccos  Nuts  before  any 
other ;  yet  possibly  the  drying  up  of  these  Nuts  so  much 
by  the  Spaniards  here,  as  I  said,  may  lessen  their  esteem 
with  those  Europeans,  that  use  their  Chocolate  ready 
rubb'd  up :  So  that  we  always  chose  to  make  it  up  our 
selves. 

The  Cacao  ^  Tree  hath  a  Body  about  a  foot  and  an 
half  thick  (the  largest  sort)  and  7  or  8  foot  high  to  the 
Branches,  which  are  large,  and  spreading  like  an  Oak, 
with  a  pretty  thick,  smooth,  dark-green  leaf,  shaped  like 
that  of  a  Plumb-Tree,  but  larger.     The  Nuts  are  inclosed 

*  In  the  Fourth  Part  of  the  "History  of  the  Buccaneers,"  chap,  xii.,  Ring- 
rose,  speaking  of  Guayaquil,  says :  "  Hither  comes  much  gold  from  Quito, 
and  very  good  and  strong  broadcloth,  together  with  images  for  the  use 
of  the  churches,  and  several  other  things  of  considerable  value.  But  more 
especially  cacao-nut,  whereof  chocolate  is  made,  which  is  supposed  here  to 
be  the  best  in  the  whole  universe."  Ringrose  had  no  knowledge  of  the 
other  kinds.  He  first  tasted  the  Guayaquil  sort  after  the  sack  of  Hilo,  in 
October  1680,  where  his  mates  "plundered  some  small  quantity.*' 

'  Cacao,  or  cocoa  :   Theobroma  cacao, 

90 


THE  CACAO-TREE 

as  both  a  Man's  Fists  put  together :  At    a«J 


f  Iroad  end  of  which  there  is  a 


ugh,  limber  ' 


kik,  by  which  they  hang  pendulous  from  the  Body  of 
:  Tree,  in  alt  parts  of  it  from  top  to  bottom,  scattered 
Itstsnccs,  and  from  the  greater  Branches  a 
little  way  up ;  especially  at  the  joints  of  them,  or  partings, 
wbcrr  they  hang  thickest,  but  never  on  the  smaller  Boughs. 
There  nuy  be  ordinarily  about  20  or  30  of  these  Cods 
upon  a  well-bearing  Tree ;  and  they  have  2  Crops  of 
them  in  a  year,  one  in  December,  but  the  best  in  June. 
The  Cod  it  self  or  Shell  is  almost  half  an  Inch  thick; 
neither  spongy  nor  woody,  but  of  a  substance  between 
both,  brittle,  yet  harder  than  the  Rind  of  a  Lemmon ; 
like  which  its  surface  is  grained  or  knobbed,  but  more 
Qoursc  and  unequal.  The  Cods  at  first  are  of  a  dark 
groen,  but  the  side  of  them  next  the  Sun  of  a  muddy 
red.  As  they  grow  ripe,  the  Green  turns  to  a  fine  bright 
Yellow,  and  the  Muddy  to  a  more  lively  beautiful  Red, 
Ttry  pleasant  to  the  Eye,  They  neither  ripen,  nor  are 
gatheml  It  once:  But  for  three  Weeks  or  a  Month,  when 
the  Season  is,  the  Overseers  of  the  Plantations  go  every 
day  about  to  sec  which  are  turned  yellow;  cutting  at 
once,  it  may  be,  not  above  one  from  a  Tree.  The  Cods 
thus  gathered,  they  lay  in  several  heaps  to  sweat ;  and 
then  bursting  the  Shell  with  their  hands,  they  pull  out 
the  Nuts,  which  are  the  only  substance  they  contain, 
having  no  stalk  or  pith  among  them,  and  (excepting  that 
ibcsc  Nuts  lye  in  regular  rows)  are  placed  like  the  grains 
'ff  Maiz,  but  sticking  together ;  and  so  closely  stowed, 
that  afier  they  have  been  once  separated,  it  would  be  hard 
lu  place  them  again  in  so  narrow  a  compass.  There  are 
jeocnily  near  100  Nuts  in  a  Cod;  in  proportion  to  the 
greatness  of  which,  for  it  varies,  the  Nuts  arc  bigger  or 
icm.  When  taken  out  they  dry  them  in  the  Sun  upon 
Marts  spread  on  the  Ground :  After  which  they  need  no 
more  care,  having  a  thin  hanl  skin  of  their  own,  and 
ffloch  Oil,  which  preserves  them.  Salt- Water  will  not 
hurt  them  ;  for  wc  had  our  Baggs  rotten,  lying  in  the 
I  Off  our  ship,  and  yet  the  Nuts  never  the  worse. 
9> 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

•  V  Thev  raise  die  young  Trees  of  Nuts,  set  with  the  great 
^'-^'^  end  dovn-Trard,  in  fine  black  Moald,  and  in  the  same 
places  where  :hev  are  to  bear;  which  thej  do  in  4  or  5 
yean  time,  without  the  trouWc  of  transplanting.  There 
are  ordinarily  of  these  Trees,  from  500  to  2000  and  up- 
ward in  a  Plantation  or  dcao-walk,  as  they  call  them; 
and  they  3h.e::er  the  young  Trees  from  the  weather  with 
Plantains  set  about  them  for  two  or  three  years;  destroy- 
ing all  the  Plantains  by  such  time  the  Gicao-Trees  are 
of^a  pretty  good  Body,  and  able  to  endure  the  heat; 
which  I  take  to  be  the  most  pernicious  to  them  of  any 
thing ;  for  tho'  these  Valleys  lye  open  to  the  North  Winds, 
unless  a  little  shelter*d  here  and  there,  by  some  Groves 
of  Plantain  Trees  which  are  purposely  set  near  the  Shores 
of  the  Several  Bays,  yet,  by  all  that  I  could  either  observe 
or  learn,  the  Cacao*s  in  this  Country  are  never  blighted, 
as  I  have  often  known  them  to  be  in  other  places.  Gicao- 
Nuts  are  used  as  Money  in  the  Bay  of  Campeachy. 

The  chief  Town  of  this  Country  is  called  Caraccos,^ 
a  gorxl  way  within  Land,  'tis  a  large  wealthy  place,  where 
live  most  of  the  Owners  of  these  Cacao-walks,  that  are 
in  the  Valleys  by  the  shore ;  the  Plantations  being  man- 
aged by  Overseers  and  Negro's.  It  is  in  a  large  Savannah 
Country,  that  abounds  with  Cattle ;  and  a  Spaniard  of  my 
ac(]uaintance,  a  very  sensible  Man  who  hath  been  there, 
tells  me  that  'tis  very  populous,  and  he  judges  it  to  be 
three  times  as  big  as  Corunna  in  Gallicia.  The  way  to 
it  is  very  steep  and  craggy,  over  that  ridge  of  Hills, 
which  I  said  closes  up  the  Valleys  and  partition  Hills  of 
the  Cacao  Coast.  In  this  Coast  it  self  the  chief  place  is 
l«a  (juaire,''  a  good  Town  close  by  the  Sea;  and  though 
it  has  but  a  bad  Harbour,  yet  it  is  much  frequented  by 
the  Spanish  Shipping;  for  the  Dutch  and  English  anchor 
in  the  sandy  Bays  that  lie  here  and  there,  in  the  mouths 
of  several  Valleys,  and  where  there  is  very  good  riding. 
The  Town  is  oj^n,  but  hath  a  strong  Fort ;  yet  both 
were  taken  some  years  since  by  Captain  Wright'  and  his 

*  ( 'aiar.'is.  *  La  Guayra.  '  In  1677  (?). 

92 


LA   GUAIRE— LA   COMANA— VERINA 


*Tis  seated  about  4  or  5  leagues  to  the  aw." 
Wtstmrd  of  Cape  Blanco,  which  Cajw  is  the  Eastermost  '^^- 
knitdary  of  this  Coast  of  Caraccos.  Further  Eastward 
'jbui  20  leagues,  is  a  great  Lake  or  Branch  of  the  Sea, 
'alkd  Laguna  dc  Venezuela;*  about  which  are  many  rich 
;Tont,  but  the  mouth  of  the  Lake  is  shallow,  that  no 
'Sups  an  enter.  Near  this  mouth  is  a  place  called 
rCunuit,'  where  the  Privateers  were  once  repulsed  without 
■dving  to  attempt  it  any  more,  being  the  only  place  in 
the  North  Seas  they  attempted  in  vain  for  many  years ; 
inJ  the  Spaniards  since  throw  it  in  their  teeth  frequently, 
ui  word  of  reproach  or  defiance  to  them.  Nor  far  from 
cbl  pkcc  is  Vcrina,  a  small  Village  and  Spanish  Plantation, 
hmom  for  its  Tobacco;  reputed  the  best  in  the  World. 

Bat  to  return  to  Caraccos,  all  this  Coast  is  subject  to 
irj  Winda,  generally  North  East,  which  caused  us  to 
(ave  scabby  Lips;  and  we  always  found  it  thus,  and 
that  in  difFcrent  Seasons  of  the  year,  for  I  have  been  on 
this  Coast  several  times.*  In  other  respects  it  is  very 
healthy,  and  a  sweet  clear  Air.  The  Spaniards  have 
Look-outs  or  Scouts  on  the  Hills,  and  Breast-works  in 
:hc  Valleys,  and  most  of  their  Negro's  arc  furnished  with 
Anns  also  for  defence  of  the  Bays,  The  Dutch  have  a 
very  profitable  Trade  here,  almost  to  themselves.  I  have 
koown  3  or  4  great  Ships  ai  a  time  on  the  Coast,  each 
::  may  be  of  30  or  40  Guns.  They  carry  hither  all  sorts 
•f  Earopcan  Commodities,  especially  Linnen ;  making 
rjst  Returns,  chiefly  in  Silver  and  Cacao.  And  I  have 
ficn  wondered  and  regretted  it,  that  none  of  my  own 
Ciuntrymen  find  the  way  thither  directly  from  England; 
icr  our  Jamaica-men  Trade  thither  indeed,  and  find  the 
tveet  of  it,  though  they  carry  English  Commodities  at 
letaiid  or  third  hand. 


'  TiMCtttfof  Cuiaco. 

•  Htm  Cwnaitt-  It  >«»  Btuckcd  in  1668-9  by  one  of  Henry  Morgan's 
laftta^  OB*  Cmuiit  Kantcl,  **  wbo  hnd  behaved  himscK  very  couni^eouily 
M  ilr  ukiBf  M  Porto  Bella."  The  alUck  woi  repulsed  witli  great  losi, 
te«(fe  the  hnctxoeen  "  killed  »oine  few  Indiant." 

*  fmkopi  darinR  ibe  thirteen  months  in  Viri;inin.  perliaps  while  with 
~    ~  '  aSiukut  and  Fishook  in  1&74. 

93 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AK.  While  we  lay  on  this  Coast,  we  went  ashore  in  some 

^^^'^  of  the  Bays,  and  took  7  or  8  Tun  of  Cacao;  and  after 
that  3  Barks,  one  laden  with  Hides,  the  second  with 
Kuropean  Commodities,  the  third  with  Earthen-ware  and 
Brandy.  With  these  3  Barks  we  went  again  to  the  Islands 
of  Roca*s  where  we  sharM  our  Commodities,  and  sepa- 
rated, having  Vessels  enough  to  transport  us  all  whither 
we  thought  most  convenient.  Twenty  of  us  (for  we 
were  about  60)  took  one  of  the  Vessels  and  our  share  of 
the  GfKxis,  and  went  directly  for  Virginia.  In  our  way 
thither  we  took  several  of  the  Sucking-fishes;  for  when 
we  see  them  about  the  Ship,  we  cast  out  a  Line  and 
Hook,  and  they  will  take  it  with  any  manner  of  Bait, 
whether  Fish  or  Flesh.  The  Sucking-fish^  is  about  the 
bigness  of  a  large  Whiting,  and  much  of  the  same  shape  i 
towards  the  Tail,  but  the  Head  is  flatten  From  the  Head  ^ 
to  the  middle  of  its  back,  there  groweth  a  sort  of  flesh  of  j 
a  hard  gristly  substance  like  that  part  of  the  Limpit  (a  ,, 
Shell-fish,  tapering  up  pyramidically)  which  sticks  to  the 
Rocks ;  or  like  the  head  or  mouth  of  a  Shell  Snail,  but 
harder.  This  Excrescence  is  of  a  flat  oval  form,  about 
7  or  8  Inches  long,  and  5  or  6  broad;  and  rising  about ^ 
half  an  Inch  high.  It  is  full  of  small  ridges  with  which  ' 
it  will  fasten  itself  to  any  thing  that  it  meets  with  in  the  ^ 
Sea,  just  as  a  Snail  doth  to  a  Wall.  When  any  of  them 
hapjHsn  to  come  about  a  Ship,  they  seldom  leave  her,  for 
they  will  feed  on  such  filth  as  is  daily  thrown  over-board, 
or  on  nicer  Excrements.  When  it  is  fair  weather,  and 
but  little  wind,  they  will  play  about  the  Ship;  but  in 
blustering  weather,  or  when  the  Ship  sails  quick,  they 
commonly  fasten  themselves  to  the  Ships  bottom,  from 
whence  neither  the  Ships  motion,  though  never  so  swift, 
nor  the  most  tempestuous  Sea  can  remove  them.  They 
will  likewise  fasten  themselves  to  any  other  bigger  Fish; 
for  they  never  swim  fast  themselves,  if  they  meet  with 
any  thing  to  carry  them.  I  have  found  them  sticking 
ti^  u  Shark,  after  it  was  hal'd  in  on   the  deck,  though  a 

*  The  sucking' -fish  :    Fchimis  rem&ra, 

94 


>F  THE   SUCKING-FISH    OR   REMORA 

d    boisterous   a    Fish,    and    throws    i 

about    him  so  vehemently  for   half  an   hour  together,  it  ' 

Buy  be,  when  caught,  that  did  not  the  Sucking-fish  stick 

at  no  ordinary  rale,  it  must  needs  be  cast  off  by  so  much 

noJencc     It  is  usual  also  to  sec  them  sticking  to  Turtle, 

to  any  old  Trees,  Flanks,  or  the  like,  that  lie  driving  at 

Sea.     Any  knobs  or  inequalities  at  a  Ships  bottom,    are 

-■   great   hindenince    to   the   swiftness  of  its  sailing ;    and 

.:;  or  12  of  these  sticking  to  it,  must  needs  retard  it,  as 

much,  in  a  nunner,  as  if  its  bottom  were  foul.     So  that 

I  am   inclined   to  think  that  this  Fish  is  the  Remora,  of 

which  the  Antients  tell  such  stories ;  if  it  be  not,  1  know 

r.o  other  that  is,  and  I  leave  the  Reader  to  judge.     I  have 

iccn  of  these  Sucking-fishes  in    great   plenty  in  the  Bay 

c<f  Campcachy,  and   in  all   the  Sea  between  that  and  the 

CoaM  of  Caraccos,  as   about  those  Islands  particularly,  I 

!w«  lately  described,  Rocas,  Blanco,  Tortugas,  &c.     They 

tare  no  scales,  and  arc  very  good  meat. 

We  met  nothing  else  worth  remark,  in  our  Voyage  to 

Virjinia;  where  we  arrived  in  July  1682.     That  Country 

^  V  well  known  to  our  Nation,  that  I  shall  say  nothing  c^f 

hall  I  detain  the  Reader  with  the  story  of  my  own 

ind  the  troubles  that  befel   me  during  about    13 

■  if  my  stay  there;'  but  in  the  next  Chapter,  enter 

rcJiatciy  upon  my  second  Voyage  into  the  South  Seas, 

i  round  the  Globe. 

o  be  regretted.     We  know  that  he  lodged  with 

n,"  and  ih»i,  after  be  had  been  ashore  some  five  or  sin  months, 

I  witb  a  KtritMa-tvarni  in  his  .tnkle.     A  negro  cured  him  of  this 

One  wtwkl  coadude  thai  he  then  mnde  a  buccaneering  cruise 

enela  cflan.  uid  that  he  gnt  into  some  trouble  with  the  autho- 

t  in»r  have  been  one  of  those  who  "  made  .1  short  voyage  to 

^'ia  /asnary  idS^iatdescrilMd  two  tngcs  further  on.    A  buccaneer's 

B  '  wen  XKAcnllf  due  to  charges  of  piraty. 


CHAR   IV. 

The  Author's  Voyage  to  the  Isle  of  John  Fernando  in  the  South  Smu 
He  arrives  at  the  Isles  of  Cape  Verd.     Isle  of  Sail ;   its  SmH 
Ponds,     The  Flamingo^  and  its  remarkable  Nest,     Amhergrtmi 
where  found.     The  Isles  of  St.  Nicholas^  MayOj  St,  JagOy  F^g^ 
a  burning  Mountain  ;    with  the  rest  of  the  Isles  of  Cape  Vi 
Sher borough  River  on  the  Coast  of  Guinea,     The  Commodities  amii\ 
Negroes  there  :   A  Town  of  theirs  described.     Tornadoes^  Sharbf 
Flying-fish.     A  Sea  deep  and  clear ^  yet  pale.     Isles  of  SibbU  it 
Ward,     Small  red  Lobsters,     St r eight  le  Mair,     States   Island* 
Cape  Horn  in   Terra  del  Fuego.     Their  meeting  with  Captaim 
Eaton  in  the  South  Seas,  and  their  going  together  to  the  Isle  ^ 
John  Fernando,     Of  a  Moskito^man  left  there  alone  3  Tears  :  Hit 
Art  and  Sagacity ;  with  that  of  other  Indians,     The  Island  di^ 
scribed.     The  Savannahs  of  America.     Goats  at  John  Fernandiu 
Seals.      Sea^Lions.      Snappers   a  sort   of  Fish,     Rock- fish,     Th$ 
Baysj  and  natural  strength  of  this  Island, 

EING  now  entring  upon  the  Relation  of  a  new 
Voyage,  which  makes  up  the  main  body  of  this 
Book,  proceeding  from  Virginia  by  the  way  of 
Terra  del  Fuego,  and  the  South  Seas,  the  East- 
Indies,  and  so  on,  till  my  return  to  England  by  the  way 
of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  I  shall  give  my  Reader 
this  short  Account  of  my  first  entrance  upon  it.  Among 
those  who  accompanied  Captain  Sharp  into  the  South 
Seas  in  our  former  Expedition,  and  leaving  him  there, 
return'd  over  Land,  as  is  said  in  the  Introduction,  and 
in  the  ist  and  2d  Chapters;  there  was  one  Mr.  Cook,* 
an  English  Native  of  St.  Christophers,  a  Creole,  as  wc 
call   all   born   of  European   Parents   in  the   West-Indies. 

*  This  was  John  Cook.     There  were  two  other  Cooks  (Edmund  and 
William)  in  Sharp's  company. 

96 


SECOND   VOYAGE  TO  SOCTH   ^A 


r  uwikknUt  tnc  «kk  Cqx.  Wiigk,  n  i 

f  Totti^is; 

(Rtr  pwtiag.  das  Mc  Caok  hea^  1_ 
CqKiin  Yuik;,  ife  ■  iimiI  pfacE  m  tfe a^  KKasd- 
>  tbe  Lav  of  IHiwuiA.  bd  tUmrntm  9ip  tfef 
froB  the  Spnnnfa:  si^  mA  vi  DfCM  Tvkrs 
n  were  w  di^oni.  pwncahrif  d  daac  vksoaK 
monr  Ljiad  vent  abovd  tlii  Ri«.^iiiy  ^lAx  tke 
C^Kun  Cook.  TIb  ifiinaiMiiM  vs  nade  «c  the 
tf  Vuci^or  the  Ue  ctf^  Aih,K«caD  k;  s^  km 
abo  mdi  Goods  v  tkf  had  tJkem,  Bat 
hiTiag  DO  rnmmiwiiw,  a  Cuiwia  Taakr. 
1  rattm,  (DO  sone  otfaer  Ficnck  Coa^BBiieis 
by  then  at  that  bbnd,  and  Acf  giwclaag  the 
socfa  a  Vcad.  they  all  jc^ned  togetbar,  plaadewd 
of  their  Shin  Goods,  and  AniB,  aad  tamed 
Yet  Captain  Trisdan  took  in  about  8  or  lo 
«  tiiac  English,  and  carried  them  with  Imn  to  Peth- 
Ctarear  of  which  omnbcr  Captain  CocA  was  one,  and 
C^lain  Divis-  another,  who  with  tbe  rest  found  means 
toiOEC  the  Ship  as  die  lay  at  Anchor  in  the  Road,*  Capt. 
Trabn  and  many  of  hb  Men  bcii^  then  ashore :  and  the 
''^Ub  aendii^  ashore  such  Frenchmen  as  remained  in 
nt  sup  and  were  mastcr'd  by  them,  though  superior  in 
tafacr,  stood  away  with  her  immediately  for  the  Isle  of 
'«c»,  before  any  notice  of  this  surprize  could  reach  the 
Ffiadi  Governor  <nf  that  Isle ;  so  deceiving  him  also  by 
'Stmwem,  ibcy  got  on  board  the  rest  of  their  Country- 
W.  who  had  been  left  on  that  Isbnd  ;  and  gmng  thence 
•■T  took  a  Ship   newly  come  from   France,   laden    with 


•M  ihc  ehief  nfficcf  aboard  Initcaneering  iresseli. 
to  ib«  6ni  lieuteiuni  in  a  Ving'i  ship. 
Uwd  Davw.     S«c  Appendix,  "  UampMir's  Associates. 

^OL,  I.  97 


aseh.  ^H 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Wines.  They  also  took  a  Ship  of  good  force,  in  which 
'  ^  they  resolved  to  embark  themselves,  and  make  a  new 
Expedition  into  the  South  Seas,  to  cruise  on  the  Coast 
of  Chili  and  Peru.  But  first  they  went  for  Virginia  with 
their  Prizes ;  where  they  arrived  the  April  after  my  coming 
thither.  The  best  of  their  Prizes  carried  i8  Guns;  this 
they  fitted  up  there  with  Sails,  and  every  thing  necessary 
for  so  long  a  Voyage ;  selling  the  Wines  they  had  taken 
for  such  Provisions  as  they  wanted.  My  self,  and  those 
of  our  Fellow-travellers  over  the  Isthmus  of  America,  who 
came  with  me  to  Virginia  the  Year  before  this,  (most  of 
which  had  since  made  a  short  Voyage  to  Carolina,  and  were 
again  return'd  to  Virginia)  resolv'd  to  join  our  selves  to 
these  new  Adventurers :  and  as  many  more  engaged  in  the 
same  design  as  made  our  whole  Crew  consist  of  about 
70  Men.^  So  having  furnished  our  selves  with  necessary 
Materials,  and  agreed  upon  some  particular  Rules,  especi- 
ally of  Temperance  and  Sobriety,  by  reason  of  the  length 
of  our  intended  Voyage,  we  all  went  on  board  our  Ship. 

August  23,  1683,  we  sailed  from  Achamack^  in  Vir- 
ginia, under  the  command  of  Captain  Cook,  bound  for 
the  South  Seas.  I  shall  not  trouble  the  Reader  with  an 
account  of  every  days  Run,  but  hasten  to  the  less  known 
parts  of  the  World,  to  give  a  description  of  'em ;  only 
relating  such  memorable  Accidents  as  hapned  to  us,  and 
such  Places  as  we  touched  at  by  the  way. 

We  met  nothing  worth  observation  till  we  came  to  the 
Islands  of  Cape  Verd,  excepting  a  terrible  Storm,  which 
could  not  escape  it :  This  hapned  in  a  few  days  after 
we  left  Virginia ;  with  a  S.  S.  E.  wind  just  in  our  Teeth.* 
The  storm  lasted  above  a  week  :  It  drencht  us  all  like  so 
many  drowned  Rats,  and  was  one  of  the  worst  storms  I 

*  Among  them  were  Lionel  Wafer,  Ambrose  Cowley,  Edward  Davis, 
John  Cook,  and,  of  course,  William  Dampier.  Ambrose  Cowley  has  left 
a  journal  of  the  voyage.  John  Cook  was  commander;  Edward  Davis, 
quarter-master ;  Ambrose  Cowley,  master,  or  navigator;  Dampier  (perhaps) 
Cowley's  "  mate,"  and  Lionel  Wafer,  chirurgeon. 

*  Achamack  is  Accomac,  on  the  Accomac  Peninsula,  which  shuts  Chesa- 
peake Bay  from  the  sea. 

*  Probably  a  cyclone.  With  the  wind  at  SSE.,  they  would  have  been 
rather  to  the  east  of  the  centre,  and  in  the  track  of  its  advance. 

98 


THE   ISLES   OF   CAPE   VERD 

One  1  met  with  in  the  East-Indies  was  more 
r  rhe  time;  but  of  not  above  24  hours  continu-  ' 
her  that  Slorm  we  had  favourable  winds  and  good 
Sn";  «nd  in  a  short  time  we  arrived  at  the  Island  Sal!,' 
hkh  tx  one  of  the  Eastcrmost  of  the  Cape  Verd  Islands. 
T  these  there  arc  ten  in  number  (so  considerable  as  to  bear 
Rtnci  nimcs)  and  they  lie  several  degrees  off  from  Cape 
in  Africk,  whence  they  receive  that  Appellation; 
up  about  5  d^.  of  Longitude  in  breadth,  and  about 
loony  of  Litttude  m  their  length,  viz.  from  near^  14  to 
'"I  North.  They  arc  most  inhabited  by  Portuguese  Ban- 
This  of  Sail  is  an  Island  lying  in  the  Lat.  of  16.  in 
19.  dcg.  33m.  West  from  the  Lizard  in  England, 
etching  from  North  to  South  about  8  or  9  leagues,  and 
t  above  a  league  and  an  half  or  2  leagues  wide.  It  hath 
1  lume  from  the  abundance  of  Salt  that  is  naturally 
:nngc^cd  there,  the  whole  Island  being  full  of  large  Salt- 
pcods.  The  Land  is  very  barren,  producing  no  Tree  that 
I  could  aec,  but  some  small  shrubby  Bushes  by  the  Sea-side. 
Nmher  could  I  discern  any  Grass ;  yet  there  arc  some  poor 
Gous  on  it. 

1  know  not  whether  there  are  any  other  Beasts  on 
the  Island:  There  are  some  wild  Fowl,  but,  1  judge,  not 
Tooy.  I  »*w  a  few  Flamingo's,  which  is  a  sort  of  large 
Fowl,  much  like  a  Heron  in  shape,  but  bigger,  and  of  a 
rrddtsh  colour.  They  delight  to  keep  together  in  great 
uHnpanies,  and  feed  in  Mud  or  Ponds,  or  in  such  places 
■tec  there  is  not  much  Water  :  They  are  very  shy,  there- 
fcae  it  is  hard  to  shoot  them.  Yet  I  have  lain  obscured  in 
t^  evening  near  a  place  where  they  resort,  and  with  two 
i*otc  tn  my  company  have  killed  14  of  them  at  once;  the 
avc  shot  being  made  while  they  were  standing  on  the 
groaad,  the  otncr  two  as  they  rose.  They  build  their 
Scats  in  Shallow  Ponds,  where  there  is  much  Mud,  which 
*iKf  KTipe   together,  making    little    Hillocks,  like    small 

[da,  appearing  out  of  the  Water,  a  foot  and  half  high 
the  bottom.     They  make  the  foundation  of  these 


*  Fnn  lat  14*  x/  U  17*  10^  N.  and  long.  22'  34'  I 

99 


IS'  31'  w. 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Hillocks  broad,  bringing  them  up  tapering  to  the  top, 
*^3  where  they  leave  a  small  hollow  pit  to  lay  their  Eggs  in; 
and  when  they  either  lay  their  Eggs,  or  hatch  them,  they 
stand  all  the  while,  not  on  the  Hillock,  but  close  by  it 
with  their  Legs  on  the  ground  and  in  the  water,  resting 
themselves  against  the  Hillock,  and  covering  the  hollow 
Nest  upon  it  with  their  Rumps:  For  their  Legs  are  very 
long;  and  building  thus,  as  they  do,  upon  the  ground, 
they  could  neither  draw  their  Legs  conveniently  into  their 
Nests,  nor  sit  down  upon  them  otherwise  than  by  resting 
their  whole  bodies  there,  to  the  prejudice  of  their  Eggs  or 
their  young,  were  it  not  for  this  admirable  contrivance, 
which  they  have  by  natural  instinct.  They  never  lay  more 
than  two  Eggs,  and  seldom  fewer.  The  young  ones  can- 
not fly  till  they  are  almost  full  grown;  but  will  run  px)- 
digiously  fast ;  yet  we  have  taken  many  of  them.  The 
Flesh  of  both  young  and  old  is  lean  and  black,  yet  very 
good  meat,  tasting  neither  fishy,  nor  any  way  unsavory. 
Their  Tongues  are  large,  having  a  large  knob  of  fat  at 
the  root,  which  is  an  excellent  bit :  a  Dish  of  Flamingo's 
Tongues  being  fit  for  a  Prince's  Table. 

When  many  of  them  are  standing  together  by  a  Ponds 
side,  being  half  a  mile  distant  from  a  Man,  they  appear  to 
him  like  a  Brick  Wall ;  their  Feathers  being  of  the  colour 
of  new  red  Brick :  And  they  commonly  stand  upright,  and 
single,  one  by  one,  exactly  in  a  row  (except  when  feeding) 
and  close  by  each  other.  The  young  ones  at  first  are  of  a 
light  grey ;  and  as  their  Wing-feathers  spring  out,  they 
grow  darker ;  and  never  come  to  their  right  colour,  or  any 
beautiful  shape,  under  lo  or  ii  months  old.  I  have  seen 
Flamingoes  at  Rio  la  Hacha,  and  at  an  Island  lying  near 
the  Main  of  America,  right  against  Querisao,  called  by 
Privateers  Flamingo  Key,  from  the  multitude  of  these 
Fowls  that  breed  there :  And  I  never  saw  of  their  Nests 
and  young  but  here. 

There  are  not  above  5  or  6  Men  on  this  Island  of  Sail, 
and  a  poor  Governor,  as  they  called  him,  who  came  aboard 
in  our  Boat,  and  about  3  or  4  poor  lean  Goats  for  a  Present 
to  our  Captain,  telling  him  they  were  the  best  that  the  Island 

100 


^Hp  ISLE   OF   SALL 

^^nnid.  The  Captain,  minding  more  the  poverty  of  , 
the  Giver  than  the  value  of  the  Present,  gave  him  in  re-  ' 
qoital  a  Coat  to  ctoath  him  ;  for  he  had  nothing  but  a  few 
Kifft  on  his  back,  and  an  old  Hat  not  worth  3  farthings; 
which  Tct  I  believe  he  wore  but  seldom,  for  fear  he  should 
want  before  he  might  get  another;  for  he  told  us  there 
had  not  been  a  Ship  in  3  years  before.  We  bought  of 
him  about  20  bushels  of  Salt  for  a  few  old  Cloaths:  And 
be  begg'd  a  little  Powder  and  Shot.  We  stay'd  here  3 
dxn;  in  which  time  one  of  these  Portuguese  offered  to 
tome  of  our  Men  a  lump  of  AmbL-rgrcece  in  exchange  for 
vtme  Cloaths,  desiring  them  to  keep  it  secret,  for  he  said 
■.i  the  Governor  should  know  it  he  should  be  hanged. 
\i  length  one  Mr.  Coppingcr  bought  for  a  small  matter; 
-rt  I  believe  he  gave  more  than  it  was  worth.  We  had 
-jt  a  Man  in  the  Ship  that  knew  Ambergreece ;  but  I  have 

:'>ee  lecn  it  in  other  places,  and  therefore  am  certain  it 
■»«  not  right.  It  was  of  a  dark  colour,  like  Sheeps  Dung, 
■  ri  very  soft,  but  of  no  smell,  and  possibly  'twas  some  of 

■'Hr  Goats  Dung.  I  afterwards  saw  some  sold  at  the 
Nequebars'  in  the  East-Indies,  which  was  of  a  lighter 
lour,  but  very  hard,  neither  had  it  any  smell;  and  this 
i  So,  I  suppose,  was  a  cheat.  Yet  it  is  certain  that  in  both 
'■'■•ae  places  there  is  Ambergreece  found, 

I  was  told  by  one  John  Read,  a  Bristol  Man,  that  he  was 
Prcatioe  to  a  Master  who  traded  to  these  Islands  of  Cape 
Vcrd.  and  once  as  he  was  riding  at  an  Anchor  at  Fogo,^ 
another  of  these  Islands,  there  was  a  lump  of  it  swam  by 
''rx  Ship,  and  the  Boat  being  ashore  he  mist  it ;  but  knew 
:  to  be  Ambergreece,  having  taken  up  a  lump  swimming  in 
■he  fifce  manner  the  Voyage  before,  and  his  Master  having 
iT  *eTCTaI  limes  bought  pieces  of  it  of  the  Natives  of  the 
I*le  of  Fogo,  so  as  to  enrich  himself  thereby.  And  so  at 
">c  Ncquebari,  KngUshmen  have  bought,  as  I  have  been 
:rcdibly  informed,  great  quantities  of  very  good  Ambcr- 


,_,  _j  caOcil  {Sir  Rkhard  Hawkins  tells  ns)  "for  that  Any  a 

%^»  ihm  bBmeUi  in  it  ■  vulcan,  whose  tliimn  in  the  ni(;hl  ai 
m  nrfTta  llie  tea."    Dainpicr  givvi  a  nimiUr  descripiio 
lOI 


CAPTAIN    DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   greece.     Yet  the  Inhabitants  are  so  subtle  that  they  will 
'^'^3  counterfeit  it,  both  there  and  here :  and  I  have  heard  that 
in  the  Gulf  of  Florida,  whence  much  of  it  comes ;  the  Native 
Indians  there  use  the  same  Fraud. 

Upon  this  occasion,  I  cannot  omit  to  tell  my  Reader 
what  I  learnt  from  Mr  Hill  a  Chirurgeon,  upon  his  shewing 
me  once  a  piece  of  Ambergreece,  which  was  thus.  One  Mr 
Benjamin  Barker,  a  Man  that  I  have  been  long  well  ac- 
quainted with,  and  know  him  to  be  a  very  diligent  and 
observing  Person,  and  likewise  very  sober  and  credible,  told 
this  Mr  Hill,  that  being  in  the  Bay  of  Honduras  to  pro- 
cure Logwood,  which  grows  there  in  great  abundance,  and 
passing  in  a  Canoa  over  to  one  of  the  Islands  in  that  Bay, 
he  found  upon  the  shore,  on  a  sandy  Bay  there,  a  lump  of 
Ambergreece,  so  large,  that  when  carried  to  Jamaica,  he 
found  it  to  weigh  a  hundred  pound  and  upwards.  When 
he  first  found  it,  it  lay  dry,  above  the  mark  which  the  Sea 
then  came  to  at  high-water ;  and  he  observed  in  it  a  great 
multitude  of  Beetles :  It  was  of  a  dusky  colour,  towards 
black,  and  about  the  hardness  of  mellow  Cheese,  and  of  a 
very  fragrant  smell :  This  that  Mr  Hill  shewed  me,  being 
some  of  it,  which  Mr  Barker  gave  him.  Besides  those 
already  mentioned,  all  the  places  where  I  have  heard  that 
Ambergreece  hath  been  found,  are  Bermudas,  and  the 
Bahama  Islands  in  the  West  Indies ;  and  that  part  of  the 
Coast  of  Africk,  with  its  adjacent  Islands,  which  reaches 
from  Mozambique  to  the  Red  Sea. 

We  went  from  this  Island  of  Sail,  to  St.  Nicholas,  an- 
other of  the  Cape  Verd  Islands,  lying  West  South  West 
from  Sail,  about  22  leagues.  We  arrived  there  the  next  day 
after  we  left  the  other,  and  Anchored  on  the  S.  E.  side  of 
the  Island.  This  is  a  pretty  large  Island  ;  it  is  one  of  the 
biggest  of  all  the  Caj-Ki  Verd,  and  lieth  in  a  triangular  form. 
The  largest  side,  which  lieth  to  the  East,  is  about  30 
leagues  long,  and  the  other  two  about  20  leagues  each.  It. 
is  a  mountainous  barren  Island,  and  rocky  all  round  towards 
the  Sea ;  vet  in  the  heart  of  it  there  are  Vallevs,  where  the 
Portuguese,  which  inhabit  here,  have  Vineyards  and  Plan- 
tations, anvi  Wixxi  for  fewcl.     Here  are  many  Goats,  which 

102 


-LE  OF  ST.  NICHOLAS— ISLE  OF   MAYO 

atc  but  poor  in  comparison  with  those  in  other  places,  yet   an.  , 

much  better  than  those  at  Sail :  There  are  likewise  many  '^W 

AsBc*.     The  Govcrnour  of  this  Island  came  aboard  us,  with         | 

3  or  4  Gentlemen  more  in  his  company,  who  were  all  in- 

ili0i;rcntly  well  cloathcd,  and  accoutred  with  Swords  and 

Piscols;  but  the  rest  that  accompanied  him  to  the  Sea-side, 

which  were  about  20  or  30  Men  more,  were  but  in  a  ragged 

gxrb.     The  Govcmour  brought  aboard  some  Wine  made  in 

the  Island,  which  tasted  much  tike  Madera  Wine  :  It  was 

f  a  pale  colour,  and  lookt  thick.     He  told  us  the  chief 

I  rwn  was  in  a  Valley  I4  mile  from  the  Bay  where  we  rode  ; 

".at  he  had  there  under  him  above  one  hundred  Families, 

rvsdcs  other  Inhabitants  that   lived   scattering   in  Valleys 

mure  remote.     They  were  all  very  swarthy;  the  Governor 

I'  mat  the  dearest  of  them,  yet  of  a  dark  tawny  complexion. 

w^M   At  this  Island  we  scrubh'd  the  bottom  of  our  Ship,  and 

^Hrc  also  we  dug  Wells  ashore  on  the  Bay,  and  filled  all  our 

^^Hitcr,  and  after  5  or  6  days  stay,  we  went  from  hence  to 

^^Bvo,'  another  of  the  Cape  Verd  Islands,  lying  about  40 

^^■e  Eaii  and  l>y  South  from  the  other ;  arriving  there  the 

^^Bt  day,  and  anchoring  on  the  N.  W.  side  of  the  Island. 

^^rtie  «eni  our  Boat  on  shore,  intending  to  have  purchased 

-  «ie  provi»on,  as  Beef  or  Goats,  with  which  this  Island  is 

vrtter  itock'd  than  the  rest  of  the  Islands.     But  the  In- 

ibitanis  would  not  suffer  our  Men  to  land ;  for  about  a 

cck  before  our  arriral  there  came  an  English  Ship,  the 

'■len  of  which    came    ashore,  pretending   friendship,  and 

rried  on  the  Govcrnour  with  some  others,  and  carrying 

-sm  aboard,  made  them  send  ashore  for  Cattle  to  ransom 

■  -cr  Liberties :  And  yet  after  this  set  sail,  and  carried  them 

iway,  and  they  had  not  heard  of  them  since.     The  English 

Man  that  did   this  (as  1  was  afterwards  informed)  was  one 

Cape  Bond  '  of  Bristol.     Whether  ever  he  brought  back 

■name  Men  again  I  know  not :  He  himself  and  most  of  his 

'>-1ca  have  since  gone  over  to  the  Spaniards :  and  it  was  he 


•  DsapKr  louchcd  bete  in  hii  New  KolUnU  voyage. 

'  Fa>  farther  nrwi  of  Cipiaia  Itond,  sec  Chapter  VII.     He  may  have 


4 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   who  had  like  to  have  burnt  our  Ship  after  this  in  the  Bay 
■683  ^f  Panama ;  as  I  shall  have  occasion  to  relate. 

This  Isle  of  Mavo  is  but  small,  and  invironed  with 
sholes,  yet  a  place  much  frequented  by  shipping  for  its  great 
plenty  of  Salt :  and  though  there  is  but  bad  landing,  yet 
many  Ships  lade  here  every  year.  Here  are  plenty  of  Bulls, 
Cows,  and  Goats ;  and  at  a  certain  Season  in  the  year,  as 
May,  June,  July,  and  August,  a  sort  of  small  Sea  Tor- 
toise come  hither  to  lay  their  E^s :  but  these  Turtle  are 
not  so  sweet  as  those  in  the  West-Indies.  The  Inhabitants 
plant  Corn,  Yams,  Potatoes,  and  some  Plantains,  and  breed 
a  few  Fowls ;  living  very  poor,  yet  much  better  than  the 
Inhabitants  of  any  other  of  these  Islands,  St.  Jago  excepted, 
which  lieth  4  or  5  leagues  to  the  Westward  of  Mayo,  and 
is  the  chief,  the  most  fruitful,  and  best  inhabited  of  all  the 
Islands  of  Cape  Verd ;  yet  mountainous,  and  much  barren 
Land  in  it. 

On  the  East-side  of  the  Isle  of  St.  Jago  is  a  good  Port, 
which  in  peaceable  times  especially  is  seldom  without  Ships ; 
for  this  hath  long  been  a  place  which  Ships  have  been  wont 
to  touch  at  for  Water  and  Refreshments,  as  those  outward 
bound  to  the  East-Indies,  English,  French  and  Dutch; 
many  of  the  Ships  bound  to  the  Coast  of  Guinea,  the  Dutch 
to  Surinam,  and  their  own  Portuguese  Fleet  going  for 
Brazil,  which  is  generally  about  the  latter  end  of  September : 
but  few  Ships  call  in  here  in  their  return  for  Europe. 
When  any  Ships  are  here  the  Country  People  bring  down 
their  Commodities  to  sell  to  the  Sea-men  and  Passengers, 
viz.  Bullocks,  Hogs,  Goats,  Fowls,  Eggs,  Plantains,  and 
Cocoa-Nuts,  which  they  will  give  in  exchange  for  Shirts, 
Drawers,  Handkerchiefs,  Hats,  Wastecoats,  Breeches,  or  in 
a  manner  for  any  sort  of  Cloth,  especially  Linnen,  for 
Woollen  is  not  much  esteemed  there.  They  care  not  will- 
ingly to  part  with  their  Cattle  of  any  sort  but  in  exchange 
for  Money,  or  Linen,  or  some  other  valuable  Commodity. 
Travellers  must  have  a  care  of  these  People,  for  they  arc 
very  thievish ;  and  if  they  see  an  opportunity  will  snatch 
any  thing  from  you,  and  run  away  with  it.  We  did  not 
touch  at  this  Island  in  this  Voyage ;   but  I  was  there  before 

104 


THE   OTHER   ISLES   OF   CAPE    VERD 


s  in  the  year  1670,'  when  I  ■ 


c  here  lying  on  the 


top  of  an  Hiil,  and  commanding  the  Harboui 

The  Governor  of  this  Island  is  chief  over  all  the  rest 
■  'I  the  IsUfuls.  I  have  been  told  that  there  are  two  large 
Towns  on  this  Uland,  some  small  Villages,  and  a  great  many 
Inhabitants  ;  and  that  they  make  a  great  deal  of  Wtne,  such 
15  b  that  of  St,  Nicholas.  I  have  not  been  nn  any  other  of 
:Sc  Cape  Vcrd  Islands,  nor  near  them ;  but  have  seen  most 
•f  them  at  a  distance.  They  seem  to  be  mountainous  and 
curpcn  ;  some  of  these  before- mentioned  being  the  most 
fruitful  and  most  frequented  by  Strangers,  especially  St. 
Jigo  and  Mayo.  As  to  the  rest  of  them,  Fogo  and  Brava 
ire  two  small  Islands  lying  to  the  Westward  of  St.  Jago, 
^ut  of  little  note ;  only  Fogo  is  remarkable  for  its  being 
i  Vulono:  It  is  all  of  it  one  large  Muuntain  of  a  good 
'^dghih.  out  of  the  top  whereof  issue  Flames  of  Fire,  yet 
'nJy  discerned  m  the  night :  and  then  it  may  be  seen  a 
,:nai  way  at  Sea.  Yet  this  Island  is  not  without  Inhabi- 
■xntx,  who  live  at  the  foot  of  the  Mountain  near  the  Sea. 
Iheir  substance  is  much  the  same  as  in  the  other  Islands ; 
;bey  have  some  Goats,  Fowls,  Plantains,  Coco-Nuts,  &c. 
t*  I  am  informed.  Of  the  Plantains  and  Coco-Nuts  I 
'•hall  have  occasion  tu  speak  when  I  come  into  the  East- 
lodics ;  and  shall  defer  the  giving  an  account  of  them  till 

The  remainder  of  these  Islands  of  Cape  Verd,  are 
,  Anihonio,  St.  Luda,  St.  Vinccnte,  and  Bona-Vista :  of 
wfuch  I  know  nothing  considerable. 

Our  entrance  among  these  Islands  was  from  the  North 
KasJ  ;  for  in  our  passage  from  Virginia  we  ran  pretty  far 
"rtrmrd  the  Coast  of  Gualata  in  Africk,  to  preserve  the 
rrade-wind,  lest  we  should  be  bom  off  too  much  to  the 
Wotward.  and  so  lose  the  Islands.  We  anchored  at  the 
"■uth  of  Sail,  and  parsing  by  the  South  of  St.  Nicholas 
ir>charcd  again  at  Mayo,  as  hath  been  said;  where  we 
aoAc  the  shorter  stay,  because  we  could  get  no  Flesh 
;  the  InhaUttnts,  by  reason  of  the  regret  they  had 


In  his  Banum  vuyAKe. 

105 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN',  at  their  Governor,  and  his  Men  being  carried  away  by 
''^^  Captain  Bond.  So  leaving  the  Isles  of  Cape  Vcrd  we 
stood  away  to  the  Southward  with  the  Wind  at  E.  N.  E. 
intending  to  have  touched  no  more  till  we  came  to  the 
Streights  of  Magellan.  But  when  we  came  into  the  lat. 
of  lO  deg.  North,  we  met  the  Winds  at  S.  by  W.  and 
S.  S.  W.  therefore  we  altered  our  Resolutions,  and  steered 
away  for  the  Coast  of  Guinea,  and  in  few  days  came  to 
the  Mouth  of  the  River  of  Sherboro,'  which  is  an  English 
Factory,  lying  South  of  Sierra  Liona.  We  had  one  of  our 
Men  who  was  well  acquainted  there ;  and  by  his  direction 
we  went  in  among  the  Shoals,  and  came  to  an  Anchor. 

Sherboro  was  a  good  way  from  us,  so  I  can  give  no 
account  of  the  place,  or  our  Factory  there;  save  that  I 
have  been  informed,  that  there  is  a  considerable  Trade 
driven  there  for  a  sort  of  red  Wood  for  dyeing,  which 
grows  in  that  Country  very  plentifully,  *tis  called  by  our 
People  Cam-wood.^  A  little  within  the  shore  where  we 
anchored  was  a  Town  of  Negroes,  Natives  of  this  Coast. 
It  was  skreen*d  from  our  sight  by  a  large  Grove  of  Trees 
that  grew  between  them  and  the  shore :  but  we  went  thither 
to  them  several  times,  during  the  3  or  4  days  of  our  stay 
here,  to  refresh  our  selves ;  and  they  as  often  came  aboard 
us,  bringing  with  them  Plantains,  Sugar-Canes,  Palm-wines, 
Rice,  Fowls,  and  Honey,  which  they  sold  us.  They  were 
no  way  shy  of  us,  being  well  acquainted  with  the  English, 
by  reason  of  our  Guinea  Factories  and  Trade.  This  Town 
sccmM  pretty  large ;  the  Houses  are  but  low  and  ordinary : 
but  one  great  House  in  the  midst  of  it,  where  their  chief 
Men  meet  and  receive  Strangers :  and  here  they  treated  us 
with  Palm-wine.  As  to  their  Persons,  they  are  like  other 
Negroes.  While  we  lay  here  we  scrubb'd  the  bottom  of 
our  Ship,  and  then  fill'd  all  our  Water-casks ;  and  buying 
up  two  Pimcheons  of  Rice  for  our  Voyage,  we  departed 

*  Shorhoroiijyh,  an  English  scttlemcnl  and  tradinjf  station.  It  lies  a 
little  to  the  ^oiuh  o\'  Sierra  Leone. 

-  **rhey  have  another  Wooil  called  Canibe,  wherewith  they  dye  their 
Pin>eN  .uul  Mats  revl"  (William  Finch,  /\Vw<*w^r.i//c cv  louchini:  Sierr.t 
I  s\'»t^^  i(K^7  :  in  Turi-hasV  Camwood  is  /ui/f/:t\t  m/tt/*i^  **  yielding  a  belter 
uvl  than  r*ni:il,"  the  more  familiar  kind  of  lo^jwooil. 

ic6 


■tornadoes,    or   THUNDER-SHOWERS 
ffom  hence  about  ihc  middle  of  November,  1683.  prose-   a 
-  ^ling    our    intended    Course    towards    the    Stretghts   of  " 
MigelUn. 

We  had  but  little  wind  after  we  got  out,  and  very  hot 
xeiihcr,  with  some  fierce  Tornadoes,  commonly  rising  out 
•i  the  N,  E.  which  brought  Thunder,  Lightening,  and  Rain. 
These  did  not  last  long  ;  sometimes  not  a  quarter  of  an 
hoar,  iiui  then  the  Wind  would  shuffle  about  to  the  South- 
nrd  again,  and  fall  fiat  calm  ;  for  these  Tornadoes  com- 
monly come  against  the  Wind  that  is  then  blowing,  as  our 
Thuoder-clouds  arc  often  observed  to  do  in  England ;  but 
the  Tornadoes  I  shall  describe  more  largely  in  my  Chapter 
ol  Winds,  in  the  Appendix  to  this  Book.  At  this  time 
msajr  of  our  Men  were  taken  with  Fevers ;  yet  we  lost 
but  one.  While  we  lay  in  the  calms  we  caught  several 
great  Sharks ;  sometimes  2  or  3  in  a  day,  and  eat  them 
ill,  boyling  and  squeezing  them  dry,  and  then  stewing 
iRera  with  Vinegar,  Pepper,  &c.  for  we  had  but  little  flesh 
tSrxnt  We  took  the  benefit  of  every  Tornado,  which 
ame  sometimes  3  or  4  in  a  day,  and  carried  what  sail  we 
C'juid  to  get  to  the  Southward,  for  we  had  but  little  Wind 
wfaeo  they  were  over;  and  those  small  Winds  between  the 
Tornadoes  were  much  against  us,  at  S.  by  E.  and  S.  S.  E. 
till  wc  past  the  Equinoctial  Line,  which  we  crost  about  a 
degree  to  the  Eastward  of  the  Meridian  of  the  Isle  of  St. 
jago,  one  of  the  Cape  Verd  Islands. 

At  first  we  could  scarcely  lie  S.  W.  but  being  got  a 
d^ree  Ut  the  Southward  of  the  Line,  the  wind  veer'd 
norc  Easterly,  and  then  we  stemmed  S,  W.  by  S.  and  as 
•c  got  farther  to  the  Southward,  so  the  wind  came  about 

I  the  Eastward  and  freshened  upon  us.     In  the  Lat.  of 

|S  we  had  the  wind  at  S.  E.     In  the  Lat.  of  5  we  had 

|at  E.  S.  E.'  where  it  stood  a  considerable  time,  and  blew 

1  Top-gallant  gale.     We  then  made  the  best  use  of 

Ting  on  briskly  with  all  the  sail  we  could  make ;  and 

I  wind,  by  the  l8lh  of  Jan.  carried  us  intn  the  Lat.  of 

\  South.     In  all  this  time  wc  met  with  nothing  worthy 

*  TbK  S£.  trade-wind. 
107 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AN 

1684  remark ;  not  so  much  as  a  Fish,  except  Flying  Fish,  which 
have  been  so  often  described,  that  I  think  it  needless  for 
me  to  do  it. 

Here  we  found  the  Sea  much  changed  from  its  natural 
greenness  to  a  white,  or  palish  colour,  which  caused  us  to 
sound,  supposing  we  might  strike  ground:  For  whenever 
we  find  the  colour  of  the  Sea  to  change,  we  know  wc  are 
not  far  from  Land,  or  shoals  which  stretch  out  into  the 
Sea,  running  from  some  Land.  But  here  we  found  no 
ground  with  one  hundred  Fathom  Line.  I  was  this  day 
at  noon  by  reckoning,  48  d.  50  m.  West  from  the  Lizard, 
the  variation  by  our  morning  amplitude  15  d.  50  m.  East, 
the  variation  increasing.  The  20th  day  one  of  our  Chirur- 
geons  died  much  lamented,  because  we  had  but  one  more^ 
for  such  a  dangerous  Voyage. 

January  28,  we  made  the  Sibbel  de  Wards,*  which  arc 
3  Islands  lying  in  the  lat.  of  51  d.  25  m.  South,  and 
longitude  West  from  the  Lizard  in  England,  by  my 
account,  57  d.  28  m.  the  variation  here  we  found  to  be 
23  d.  10  m.  I  had  for  a  month  before  we  came  hither, 
endeavoured  to  perswade  Captain  Cook,  and  his  Company, 
to  anchor  at  these  Islands,  where  I  told  them  we  might 
probably  get  water,  as  I  then  thought,  and  in  case  wc 
should  miss  of  it  here,  yet  by  being  good  Husbands  of 
what  we  had,  we  might  reach  John  Fernando's  in  the 
South  Seas,  before  our  water  was  spent.  This  I  urged 
to  hinder  their  designs  of  going  through  the  Streights  of 
Magellan,  which  I  knew  would  prove  very  dangerous  to 
us;  the  rather,  because  our  Men  being  Privateers,  and 
so  more  wilful,  and  less  under  command,  would  not  be 
so  ready  to  give  a  watchful  attendance  in  a  passage  so 
little  known.  For  altho'  these  Men  were  more  under 
command,  than  I  had  ever  seen  any  Privateers,  yet  I 
could  not   expect   to   find   them   at   a    minutes   call,*   in 

*  Lionel  Wafer. 

*  Sebald  de  Wart.  The  Falkland  Islands,  discovered  by  John  Davis 
in  1 591-2,  and  perhaps  rc-discovered  by  Sir  Richard  Hawkins  a  year 
later.     Dampier  saw  them  again  in  his  Woodes-Roj^ers  voyage. 

^  From  this  remark  we  may  conclude  that  Dampier  was  second  master, 
or  "  master*s  mate,"  of  the  ship,  under  Cowley. 

108 


A  SORT  OF  SMALL   LOBSTERS 

ling   to   an   Anchor,  or  weighing  Anchor:    Beside,  if  am. 
ever  we  should   have  occasion  to  moor,  or  cast  out   two  '*** 
Anchors,  we  had   not  a  Boat   to  carry  out  or  weigh  an 
Anchor.     These  Islands  of  Sibbcl  de  Wards  were  so  named 

by  the  Dutch.     They  are  all   three  rocky  barren    Islands  J 

without  any  Tree,  only  some  DiIdoe>Bushes'  growing  on  I 

them :  And  1  do  believe  there  is  no  Water  on  any  one  of  I 

them,  for  there  was  no  appearance  of  any  Water.     The  I 

two  Northcrmost  we  could  not  come  near,  but  the  Souther-  I 

most  we  came  close  by,  but  could  not  strike  ground  till  I 

within  2  Cables  length  of  the  shore,  and  there  found  it  I 

to  be  foul  rocky  Ground.  I 

From  the  time  that  we  were  in    lo  dcg.  South  till  we  I 

came  to  these  Islands,  we  had  the  Wind  between  K.  N,  1"'.  I 

and  the  N.  N.  E.  fair  weather,  and  a  brisk  gale.     The  day  I 

that  wc  made  these  Islands,  we  saw  great  shoals  of  small  I 

Lobsters,  which  coloured  the  Sea  red  in  spots,  for  a  Mile  in  i 

compass,  and  we  drew  some  of  them  out  of  the  Sea  in  our  I 

Water-buckets,     They  were  no  bigger  than  the  top  of  a  I 

Man's   little  Finger,  yet   all  their  Claws,  both  great  and  I 

small  like  a  Lobster.     I  never  saw  any  of  this  sort  of  Fish  I 

naturally  red  but  here ;    for  ours  on  the   English  Coast,  I 

which  are  black  naturally,  arc  not  red  till  they  arc  boiled  ;  I 

Neither  did  I  ever  any  where  else  meet  with  any  Fish  of  I 

the  Lobster-shape  so  small   as  these;    unless,  it   may  be,  I 

Shrimps  or  Prawns.     Capt.  Swan  and  Capt.  Eaton '  met  I 

also  with  shoals  of  this  Fish  in  much  the  same  Latitude  I 

Ei  Longitude.  I 

Leaving  therefore  the  Sibbel  de  Ward  Islands,  as  having  I 
ither  good  Anchorage  nor  Water,  we  sailed  on.  directing 

r  Course  for  the  Streights  of  Magellan.     But  the  Winds  I 

hanging  in  the  Wester-board,  and  blowing  hard,  oft  put  I 

us  by»our  Topsails,  so  that  we  could  not  fetch  it.     The  I 

^Ui  day  of  February  we  fell  in  with  the  Streights  Le  Mair,*  I 

<t  the  true  dililo-bushes,  but  the  "t.ill  I 

s  are  calicd  corn-fl.iKs,"  whicli  Pertiety  I 

took  (or  irecs,  as  he  sailed  along  this  (:oa.5l.     The  true  Dildo  is  "  lorcli-  I 

■  Thdc  captains  will  appear  later.    See  Appendix.  I 

*  Detween  Cape  San  Diego  and  Stateii  Island,  I 

109  J 


CAPTAIN    DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  which  is  very  high  Land  on  both  sides,  and  the  Strdffhts 
1684  y^j.y  narrow.  We  had  the  Wind  at  N.  N.  W.  a  fresh 
gale ;  and  seeing  the  Opening  of  the  Streights,  we  ran  in 
with  it,  till  within  four  Mile  of  the  Mouth,  and  then  it 
fell  calm,  and  we  found  a  strong  Tide  setting  out  of  the 
Strcights  to  the  Northward,  and  like  to  founder  our  Ship ; 
but  whether  flood  or  ebb  I  know  not ;  only  it  made  such 
a  short  cockling  Sea,  as  if  it  had  been  in  z  Race,  or  place 
where  two  Tides  meet ;  for  it  ran  every  way,  sometimes 
breaking  in  over  our  Waste,  sometimes  over  our  Poop, 
sometimes  over  our  Bow,  and  the  Ship  tossed  like  an  Egg- 
shell, so  that  I  never  felt  such  uncertain  Jerks  in  a  Ship. 
At  8  a  Clock  in  the  Evening  we  had  a  small  Breeze  at 
W.  N.  W.  and  steered  away  to  the  Eastward,  intending  to 
go  round  the  States'  Island,  the  East  end  of  which  we 
reached  the  next  day  by  Noon,  having  a  fresh  Breeze  all 
Night. 

The  7th  day  at  Noon  being  oflF  the  East  end  of  States 
Island,  I  had  a  good  observation  of  the  Sun,  and  found  my 
self  in  lat.  54  d.  52  m.  South. 

At  the  I'^ast  end  of  States  Island  are  three  small  Islands, 
or  rather  Rocks,  pretty  high,  and  white  with  the  Dung  of 
Fowls.  Wherefore  having  observed  the  Sun,  we  haled  up 
South,  designing  to  pass  round  to  the  Southward  of  Cape 
Home,  which  is  the  Southermost  Land  of  Terra  del  Fuego. 
The  Winds  hung  in  the  Western  quarter  betwixt  the  N.  W. 
and  the  West,  so  that  we  could  not  get  much  to  the  West- 
ward, and  we  never  saw  Terra  del  Fuego  after  that  Evening 
that  we  made  the  Streight  Le  Mair.  I  have  heard  that 
there  have  been  Smokes  and  Fires  on  Terra  del  Fuego,  not 
on  the  tops  of  Hills,  but  in  Plains  and  Valleys,  seen  by 
those  who  have  sailed  thro'  the  Streights  of  Magellan; 
supposed  to  be  made  by  the  Natives. 

We  did  not  see  the  Sun  at  rising  or  setting,  in  order  to 
take  an  amplitude,  after  we  left  the  Sibbel  de  Wards,  till 
we  got  into  the  South  Sea  :  Therefore  I  know  not  whether 
the  variation  increased  any  more  or  no.     Indeed  I  had  an 

^  Staten  Island. 

no 


THEY    MEET   CAPT.    EATON 

'Btion  of  the  Sun  at  NiX)n.  In  lat.  59  d.  30  m.  and  w 

E  then  standing  to  the  Southward  with  the  Wind  at  W.   '^* 

M.  and  that  Night  the  Wind  came  about  more  to  the 

wthwanl  of  the  West  and  we  lackt.     I  was  then  in  lat. 

60  by  reckoning,  which  was   the  farthest  South   latitude 

that  ever  I  was  in. 

The  14th  day  of  February  being  in  lat.  57,  and  to  the 
flat  of  Cape  Home,  wc  had  a  violent  Storm,  which  held 
■  till  ihc  3d  day  of  March,  blowing  commonly  S.  W.  and 
.  W.  by  W.  and  W.  S.  W.  thick  Weather  all  the  rime, 
i  tnialt  drizling  Rain,  but  not  hard.  We  made  a  shift 
ircvcr  to  save  23  Barrels  of  Rainwater,  besides  what  we 
[  our  Victuals  withal. 

March  the  3d  the  Wind  shifted  at  once,  and  came  about 
a:  Sooth,  blowing  a  fierce  gale  of  Wind,  soon  after  it  came 
about  to  the  Eastward,  and  we  stood  into  the  South  Seas. 

The  9th  day  having  an  observation  of  the  Sun,  not 
having  seen  it  of  late,  we  found  our  selves  in  lat.  47  d. 
tc  m.  aod  the  variation  to  be  but  15  d.  30  m.  East. 

The  Wind  stood  at  S.  E.  we  had  fair  Weather,  and  a 
moderate  Gale,  and  the  17th  day  we  were  in  lar.   36  by 
ition,  and  then  found  the  variation  to  be  but  8  d. 


TTie  19th  day  when  wc  looked  out  in  the  Morning  we 
'  a  Ship  to  the  Southward  of  us,  coming  with  all  the 
I  «bc  could  make  after  us :  We  lay  muzled  '  to  let  her 
:  up  with  us,  for  we  supposed  her  to  be  a  Spanish  Ship 
;  from  Baldivia'  bound  to  Lima:  We  being  now  to 
thr  Northward  of  Batdivia,  and  this  being  the  time  of  the 
Ttar  when  Ships  that  Trade  thence  to  Baldlvia  return  home. 
TTieT  had  the  same  opinion  of  us,  and  therefore  made  sure 
III  take  us,  but  coming  nearer  we  both  found  our  mistakes. 
Tim  proved  to  be  one  Capt.  Eaton  '  in  a  Ship  sent  purposely 
I'rom  L/mdon  for  the  South  Seas.  We  haled  each  other, 
t»i  the  Capt.  came  on  Board,  and  told  us  of  his  Actions 
<4  the  Gmlsc  of  Brazil,  and  in  the  River  of  Plate. 


»   With  port*  .:1'>»«I  anii  ti 
■  Vaklivui  i»  i;.i.  39'  49'  S 


-   ........  ..1  i;it.  39'  49'  .S..  loti^.  73* 

■  Capuin  Eatnn-    Sf^  Appendix. 


19"  W. 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AM.  He  met  Capt.  Swan^  (one  that  came  from  England 

'^'^'"^  to  Trade  here)  at  the  East  Entrance  into  the  Streights 
of  Magellan,  and  they  accompamed  each  other  thro'  the 
Streights,  and  were  separated  after  they  were  through  by 
the  Storm  before-mentioned.  Both  we  and  Captain  Eaton 
being  bound  for  John  Fernando*s  Isle,  we  kept  Company, 
and  we  spared  him  Bread  and  Beef,  and  he  spared  us 
Water,  which  he  took  in  as  he  passed  through  the 
Streights. 

March  the  22d,  1684,  we  came  in  sight  of  the  Island, 
and  the  next  day  got  in  and  anchored  in  a  Bay  at  the  South 
end  of  the  Island,  in  25  fathom  Water,  not  two  Cables 
lengths  from  the  shore.  We  presently  got  out  our  Canoa, 
and  went  ashore  to  see  for  a  Moskito  Indian,'  whom  we 
left  here  when  we  were  chased  hence  by  3  Spanish  Ships  in 
the  year  168 1,  a  little  before  we  went  to  Arica;  Capt. 
Watlin  being  then  our  Commander,  after  Capt.  Sharp  was 
turned  out. 

This  Indian  lived  here  alone  above  three  years,  and 
altho'  he  was  several  times  sought  after  by  the  Spaniards, 
who  knew  he  was  left  on  the  Island,  yet  they  could  never 
find  him.  He  was  in  the  Woods,  hunting  for  Goats,  when 
Capt.  Watlin  drew  off  his  Men,  and  the  Ship  was  under 
sail  before  he  came  back  to  shore.  He  had  with  him  his 
Gun  and  a  Knife,  with  a  small  Horn  of  Powder,  and  a 
few  Shot ;  which  being  spent,  he  contrived  a  way  by 
notching  his  Knife,  to  saw  the  Barrel  of  his  Gun  into 
small  Pieces,  wherewith  he  made  Harpoons,  Lances,  Hooks 
and  a  long  Knife ;  heating  the  pieces  first  in  the  fire,  which 
he  struck  with  bis  Gun-flint,  and  a  piece  of  the  Barrel  of 
his  Gun,  which  he  hardened ;  having  learnt  to  do  that 
among  the  English.  The  hot  pieces  of  Iron  he  would 
hammer  out  and  bend  as  he  pleased  with  Stones,  and  saw 
them  with  his  jagged  Knife,  or  grind  them  to  an  edge  by 
long  labour,  and  harden  them  to  a  good  temper  as  there 

*  C'antain  Swan.     Sec  Appendix. 

*  This  was  '*  William,''  who  had  l>een  left  behind  on  the  i  ilh  of  January 
if>Si,  when  the  sudiion  appearance  of  three  Sjxinish  ships  of  war  compelled 
the  buccaneers  to  slip  their  cables  and  put  to  sea. 

I  12 


L  MOSKITO  INDIAN  LEFT  HERE 
xa«oa.  All  this  may  seem  strange  to  those  that  are  an. 
:qusinted  with  the  sagacity  of  the  Indians;  but  it  is  '^°* 
OR  than  these  Moskiio  Men  are  accustomed  to  in 
■^£oDntry,  where  they  make  their  own  Fishing  and 
^^BRTuments,  without  either  Forge  or  Anvil  ;  the' 
^^BS  great  deal  of  time  about  them. 
ther  wild  Indians  who  have  not  the  use  of  Iron, 
1  the  Moskito  Men  have  from  the  English,  make 
den  of  a  very  hard  Stone,  with  which  they  will  cut 
Trees,  (the  Cotton-Tree  especially,  which  is  a  soft 
r  Wood)  to  build  their  Houses  or  make  Canoas; 
Jiough  in  working  their  Canoas  hollow,  they  cannot 
hem  so  neat  and  thin,  yet  they  will  make  them  fit 
heir  Service.  This  their  Digging  or  Hatchet-work 
help  out  by  Fire ;  whether  for  the  felling  of  the 
I,  or  for  the  making  the  inside  of  their  Canoas  hollow. 
t  Contrivances  are  used  particularly  by  the  Savage 
M  of  Blewfield's  River,  described  in  the  3d  Chapter, 
^^hois  and  Stone  Hatchets  I  have  seen.  These 
^^^pets  ve  about  to  Inches  long,  4  broad,  and 
^^p'tHck  in  the  middle.  They  are  grownd  away 
nd  tharp  at  both  ends :  Right  in  the  midst,  and  clear 
I  it  they  make  a  notch,  so  wide  and  deep  that  a  Man 
t  pUce  hi*  Finger  along  it,  and  taking  a  stick  or  withe 
L  4  foot  long,  they  bind  it  round  the  Hatchet-head,  in 
notch,  ind  so  twisting  it  hard,  use  it  as  an  handle  or 
;  the  head  being  held  by  it  very  fast.  Nor  are 
wild  Indians  less  ingenious.  Those  of  Patagonia, 
jiariy,  head  their  Arrows  with  Flint,  cut  or  ground  ; 
I  fuve  seen  and  admired.  But  to  return  to  our 
Msn  on  the  Isle  of  J.  Fernando.  With  such 
iments  as  he  made  in  that  manner,  he  got  such 
u  the  Island  afforded ;  either  Goats  or  Fish, 
u*  that  at  first  he  was  forced  to  cat  Seal,  which 
rr  ordinary  Meat,  before  he  had  made  Hooks :  but 
■ds  he  never  killed  any  Seals  but  to  make  Lines, 
their  Skins  into  Thongs.  He  had  a  Httlc  House 
ut  half  ■  Mile  from  the  Sea,  which  was  lin'd  with 
Skin;  his  Couch  tM"  Barbccu  of  Sticks  lying  along 
.r-  113  H 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AN.  about  2  foot  distant  from  the  Ground,  was  spread  with 
1^4  the  same,  and  was  all  his  Bedding.  He  had  no  Cloaths 
left,  having  worn  out  those  he  brought  from  Watlin*s  Ship, 
but  only  a  Skin  about  his  Waste.  He  saw  our  Ship  the 
day  before  we  came  to  an  Anchor,  and  did  believe  we 
were  English,  and  therefore  killM  3  Goats  in  the  Morning, 
before  we  came  to  an  Anchor,  and  drest  them  with 
Cabbage,  to  treat  us  when  we  came  ashore.  He  came 
then  to  the  Sea  side  to  congratulate  our  safe  Arrival. 
And  when  we  landed,  a  Moskito  Indian,  named  Robin, 
first  leaped  ashore,  and  running  to  his  Brother  Mosldto 
Man,  threw  himself  flat  on  his  ^ce  at  his  feet,  who 
helping  him  up,  and  embracing  him,  fell  flat  with  his 
face  on  the  Ground  at  Robin's  feet,  and  was  by  him  taken 
up  also.  We  stood  with  pleasure  to  behold  the  surprize, 
and  tenderness,  and  solemnity  of  this  interview,  which  was 
exceedingly  affectionate  on  both  sides;  and  when  their 
Ceremonies  of  Civility  were  over,  we  also  that  stood  gazing 
at  them  drew  near,  each  of  us  embracing  him  we  had 
found  here,  who  was  overjoyed  to  see  so  many  of  his  old 
Friends  come  hither,  as  he  thought  purposely  to  fetch  him. 
He  was  named  Will,  as  the  other  was  Robin.  These 
were  names  given  them  by  the  English,  for  they  had  no 
Names  among  themselves;  and  they  take  it  as  a  great 
favour  to  be  named  by  any  of  us ;  and  will  complain  for 
want  of  it,  if  we  do  not  appoint  them  some  name  when 
they  are  with  us :  saying  of  themselves  they  are  poor  Men, 
and  have  no  Name. 

This  Island  is  in  lat.  34  d.  45  m.  and  about  120  leagues 
from  the  Main.  It  is  about  12  leagues  round,  full  of 
high  Hills,  and  small  pleasant  Valleys  ;  which  if  manured, 
would  probably  produce  any  thing  proper  for  the  Climate. 
The  sides  of  the  Mountains  are  part  Savannahs,  part  Wood- 
land. Savannahs  are  clear  pieces  of  Land  without  Woods ; 
not  because  more  barren  than  the  Wood-land,  for  they 
are  frequently  spots  of  as  good  Land  as  any,  and  often 
are  intermixt  with  Wood-land.  In  the  Bay  of  Campeachy 
are  very  large  Savannahs,  which  I  have  seen  full  of  Cattle : 
but  about  the  River  of  Plate  are  the  largest  that  ever  I 

114 


■BLE    of  JOHN   FERNANDO,    DESCRIBED  I 

^K*rd  of,  50,  60,  or  100  Miles  in   length ;  and  Jamaica,  ah.1 

Cuba    ind    Hispaniola,    have    many    Savannahs    intermixt  '^*« 

with  Woods.     Places  cleared  of  Wood  by  Art  and  Labour  I 

do  not  go  by  this  Name,  but  those  only  which  are  found  I 

>o  in  the  uninhibited  parts  of  America,  such  as  this  Isle  of  I 

John  Pemandocs;  or  which  were  originally  clear  in  other  I 

farts.  I 

The  Grass  in  these  Savannahs  at  John  Femando's  is  I 

DOC  a  long  flaggy  Grass,  such  as  is  usually  in  the  Savannahs  I 

■■1  the  W(  cst-lndics,  but  a  sort  of  kindly  Grass,  thick  and  M 

rourishing   the   biggest  part    of  the    year.      The    Woods  ■ 

.Scrd  divers  sorts  of  Trees;  some  large  and  good  Timber  H 

;'«■  Bailding,  hut  none  fit  for  Masts,     The  Cabbage  Trees  V 

f  this  Isle  arc  but  small  and  low  ;  yet  afford  a  good  head,  1 

ind  the  Cabbage  very  sweet.     This  Tree  I  shall  describe  in  I 

■be  Appendix,  in  the  Bay  of  Campeachy.  J 

The  Savannahs  arc  stocked  with  Goats  in  great  Herds :  I 

but  those  that  live  on  the  East  end  of  the  Island  are  not  I 

•  I  fat  as  those  on  the  West  end  ;  for  though  there  is  much  I 

more  Grass,  and  plenty  of  Water  in  every  Valley,  never-  I 

todeaa  they  thrive  not  so  well  here  as  on  the  West  end,  I 

vbere  there  is  less  Food ;  and  yet  there  arc  found  greater  1 

Hoclu,  and  those  too  fatter  and  sweeter.  I 

That  West  end   of  the    Island   is  all  high  Champion  I 

<3round  without  any  Valley,  and  but  one  place  to  land;  I 

there  b  neither  Wood  nor  any  fresh  Water,  and  the  Grass  I 

ihort  sod  dry.  I 

Goats  were  first  put  on  the  Island  by  John  Fernando,  1 

rho  first    discovered    it    in    his    Voyage    from    Lima    to  1 

BUdivta;    (and  discovered  also  another   Island  about  the  J 

ame  bigness,  20  leagues  to  the  Westward  of  this.)     From  ■ 

thcae  Gouts  these  were   propagated,  and  the  Island  hath  m 

takm  its  Name  from  this  its  hrst  Discoverer,  who,  when  be  I 

*>rtiinied   to    Lima,  desired  a  Patent  for  it,  designing  to  I 

<^tile  here;  and  it  was  in  his  second  Voyage  hither  that  he  I 

■ct  ashore  j  or  4  Goats,  which  have  since,  by  their  increase,  ^ 
^' well  stock'd  the  whole  Island.     But  he  could  never  get 
-  Pitcnt  for  il,  therefore  it  lies  still  destitute  of  Inhabitants, 
an  doabtless  capable  of  maintaining  4  or  500  Families, 

>'J  J 


CAPTAIN  DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  by  what  may  be  produced  ofF  the  Land  only.  I  speak 
1684  jnuch  within  compass  ;  for  the  Savannahs  would  at  present 
feed  1000  Head  of  Cattle  besides  Goats,  and  the  Land 
being  cultivated  would  probably  bear  Corn,  or  Wheat,  and 
good  Pease,  Yams,  or  Potatoes;  for  the  land  in  their 
Valleys  and  sides  of  the  Mountains,  is  of  a  good  black 
fruitful  Mold.  The  Sea  about  it  is  likewise  very  produc- 
tive of  its  Inhabitants.  Seals  swarm  as  thick  about  this 
Island,  as  if  they  had  no  other  place  in  the  World  to  live 
in ;  for  there  is  not  a  Bay  nor  Rock  that  one  can  get 
ashore  on,  but  is  full  of  them.  Sea  Lions  are  here  in 
great  Companies,  and  Fish,  particularly  Snappers  and 
Rock-fish,  are  so  plentiful,  that  two  Men  in  an  hours  time 
will  take  with  Hook  and  Line,  as  many  as  will  serve 
100  Men.^ 

The  Seals  are  a  sort  of  Creatures  pretty  well  known, 
yet  it  may  not  be  amiss  to  describe  them.  They  are  as 
big  as  Calves,  the  head  of  them  like  a  Dog,  therefore 
called  by  the  Dutch  the  Sea-hounds.  Under  each  Shoulder 
grows  a  long  thick  Fin :  These  serve  them  to  swim  with 
when  in  the  Sea,  and  are  instead  of  Legs  to  them  when 
on  the  Land  for  raising  their  Bodies  up  on  end,  by  the 
help  of  these  Fins  or  Stumps,  and  so  having  their  Tail- 
parts  drawn  close  under  them,  they  rebound,  as  it  were, 
and  throw  their  Bodies  forward,  drawing  their  hinder- 
parts  after  them ;  and  then  again  rising  up,  and  springing 
forward  with  their  fore-parts  alternately,  they  lie  tumbling 
thus  up  and  down,  all  the  while  they  are  moving  on  Land. 
From  their  Shoulders  to  their  Tails  they  grow  tapering 
like  Fish,  and  have  two  small  Fins  on  each  side  the  Rump ; 
which  is  commonly  covered  with  their  Fins.  These  Fins 
serve  instead  of  a  Tail  in  the  Sea ;  and  on  Land  they  sit 
on  them,  when  they  give  suck  to  their  young.  Their 
Hair  is  of  divers  colours,  as  black,  grey,  dun,  spotted, 
looking  very  sleek  and  pleasant  when  they  come  first  out 

*  "  Here  is  such  great  Plenty  of  Fish,  that  one  Man  may  catch  enough 
in  a  Day's  time  to  suffice  200  Men  "  {Cowley's  Journal),  A  snapper  is 
Pomatomus  saltatrix,  A  rock-fish  is  a  fish  of  the  genus  Sebastodes.  The 
"rosy"  and  "blue**  rock-fishes  are  "  very  delicate  meat" 

116 


SEALS 

'  the  Sea :  l-'or  these  at  John  Fernando's  have  fine  thick  ak.  ^ 
short  Fur;  the  tike  I  have  not  taken  notice  of  any  where  ^^^* 
bat  in  these  Seas.  Here  arc  always  thousands,  I  might 
«y  possibly  millions  of  them,  either  sitting  on  the  Bays, 
nr  going  and  coming  in  the  Sea  round  the  Island  ;  which 
is  coTcred  with  them  (as  they  lie  at  the  top  of  the  Water 
-iaying  and  sunning  themselves)  for  a  Mile  or  two  from 

■  ■  c  Shore,  When  they  come  out  of  the  Sea  they  bleat 
tc  Sheep  for  their  young;  and  tho'  they  pass  through 

riuodrcds  of  others  young  ones,  before  they  come  to  their 
awn,  yet  they  will  not  suffer  any  of  them  to  suck.  The 
Tnuag  ones  arc  like  Puppies,  and  lie  much  ashore ;  but 
«hen  beaten  by  any  of  us,  they,  as  well  as  the  old  ones, 
^ill  make  towards  the  Sea,  and  swim  very  swift  and 
-mhlc;  tho'  on  shore  they  lye  very  sluggishly,  and  will 
vrt  go  out  of  our  ways  unless  wc  beat  them,  but  snap  at 
^v  A  blow  on  the  Nose  soon  kills  them.  Large  Ships 
Tiight  here  load  themselves  with  Seals  Skins,  and  Trane- 
.1 ;  for  they  arc  extraordinary  fat.  Seals  are  found  as 
«fll  in  cold  as  hot  Climates;  and  in  the  cold  places  they 
■ve  to  get  on  Lumps  of  Ice,  where  they  will  lie  and 
JO  themselves,  as  here  on  the  Land  :  They  arc  frequent 
"  the  Northern  parts  of  Europe  and  America,  and  in  the 
'^'Uthem  parts  of  Africa,  as  about  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope, 

■  ■id  at  the  Stnrights  of  Magellan:  And  tho'  I  never  saw 
or  in   the  West-Indies,   but  in    the   Bay  of  Campeachy, 

-  an^ain  Islands  called  the  Alcoranes,>  and  at  others  called 
-c  IXaartrt;*  yet  they  are  over  all  the  American  Coast 
■    the    South   Seas,   from    Terra    del    Fuego,    up    to   the 

^  .ijuinoctiat  Line ;  but  to  the  North  of  the  Equinox 
.jiin,  in  these  Seas,  I  never  saw  any,  till  as  far  as  2  1 
■•  iTth    lat.     Nor  did   I  ever  see   any  in  the  East-Indies. 

-  general  they  seem  to  resort  where  there  is  plenty  of 
'  !*h,  for  that  is  their  Food ;  and  Fish,  such  as  they  feed 

-  H  Cods,  Groopcrs,  &c.  arc  most  plentiful  on  rocky 
«sts :    and   such   is  mostly  this    Western    Coast  of  the 

^  utb  Anwrica;  as  I  shall  further  relate. 

>  Tbc  Alacrsji  clutter,  lo  the  north  of  Yucatan. 
Car*  Amn*,  in  ihn  Hay  or  Caniprachy. 
117 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AS.  The  Sea  Lion^  is  a  large  Creature  about  12  or  14  foot 

1684  long.  The  biggest  part  of  his  Body  is  as  big  as  a  Bull: 
It  is  shaped  like  a  Seal,  but  6  times  as  big.  The  Head 
is  like  a  Lion*s  Head;  it  hath  a  broad  Face  with  many 
long  Hairs  growing  about  its  Lips  like  a  Cat.  It  has  a 
great  goggle  Eye,  the  Teeth  3  Inches  long,  about  the 
bigness  of  a  Man*s  Thumb:  In  Capt.  Sharp*s  time,  some 
of  our  Men  made  Dice  with  them.  They  have  no  Hair 
on  their  Bodies  like  the  Seal ;  they  are  of  a  dun  colour, 
and  are  all  extraordinary  fat ;  one  of  them  being  cut  up 
and  boiled,  will  yield  a  Hogshead  of  Oil,  which  is  very 
sweet  and  wholsome  to  fry  Meat  withal.  The  lean  Flesh 
is  black,  and  of  a  course  Grain ;  yet  indifferent  good  food. 
They  will  lye  a  week  at  a  time  ashore  if  not  disturbed. 
Where  3,  or  4,  or  more  of  them  come  ashore  together, 
they  huddle  one  on  another  like  Swine,  and  grunt  like 
them,  making  a  hideous  noise.  They  eat  Fish,  which  I 
believe  is  their  common  Food. 

The  Snapper  is  a  Fish  much  like  a  Roach,  but  a  great 
deal  bigger.  It  hath  a  large  Head  and  Mouth,  and  great 
Gills.  The  back  is  of  a  bright  red,  the  belly  of  a  Silver 
Colour:  The  Scales  are  as  broad  as  a  Shilling.  The 
Snapper  is  excellent  Meat.  They  are  in  many  places  in 
the  West-Indies,  and  the  South  Seas:  I  have  not  seen 
them  any  where  beside. 

The  Rock-Fish  is  called  by  Sea-men  a  Grooper;  the 
Spaniards  call  it  a  Baccalao,  which  is  the  Name  for  Cod, 
because  it  is  much  like  it.  It  is  rounder  than  the  Snapper, 
of  a  dark  brown  Colour ;  and  hath  small  scales  no  bigger 
than  a  Silver-penny.  This  Fish  is  good  sweet  Meat,  and 
is  found  in  great  plenty  on  all  the  Coast  of  Peru  and 
Chili. 

There  are  only  two  Bays  in  the  whole  Island  where 
Ships  may  Anchor;  these  are  both  at  the  East  end,  and 
in  both  of  them  is  a  Ri volet  of  good  fresh  Water.  Either 
of  these  Bays  may  be  fortified  with  little  charge,  to  that 
degree    that   50  Men  in  each  may  be  able  to   keep   off 

*  Sea  Lion  :  Platyrhyncus  leoninus. 

118 


tR-  MANAGEMENT  OF  THEIR   SICK 

,  »nd   there  is  no  coming   into  these   Bays  from  the    anJ 
:  end,  but  with  great  difficulty,  over  the  Mountains,  ' 
e  if  three   Men  are  placed,  they  may  keep  down  as 

ny  as  come  against  them  on  any  side.     This  was  partly 

I  ecpoicnccd  by  5  Englishmen  that  Capt.  Davis  left  here, 
who  defended  themselves  against  a  great  body  of  Spaniards 
who  Undcd  in  the  Bays,  and  came  here  to  destroy  them  ; 
iid  iho"  the  second  time  one  of  their  Consorts  deserted 
.  d  fled  to  the  Spaniards,  yet  the  other  4  kept  their 
j-f>und,  and  were  afterwards  taken  in  from  hence  by 
-jpt.  Strong  of  London.' 

Wc  remained  at  John  Fernando's  16  days;  our  sick 
Vlcn  were  ashore  all  the  time,  and  one  of  Captain  Eaton's 
IXictors  (for  he  had  four  in  his  Ship),  tending  and  feeding 
them  with  Goat  and  several  Herbs,  whereof  here  is  plenty 
gromng  in  the  Brooks;  and  their  Diseases  were  chiefly 
:nQrhutick. 


CHAP.   V 

The  Author  departs  from  John  Fernando* $,  Of  the  Pacifick  Sea.  Of 
the  Andeiy  or  high  Mountains  in  Peru  and  Chili.  A  Prize  taken. 
Isle  of  Lohos :  Penguins^  and  other  Birds  there.  Three  Prizes 
more.  The  Islands  Gallapago*s :  The  Dildoe^Tree^  Burton^JVood^ 
Mammet'TreeSy  Guanoes^  Land-Tortoise^  their  several  kind  ;  Green 
Snakes  J  Turtle- Doves^  Tortoise^  or  Turtle-grass.  Sea-Turtle^  their 
several  Kinds.  The  Air  and  Weather  at  the  Gallapag^s.  S^me 
of  the  Islands  described^  their  Soilj  6v.  The  Island  Cocos  described^ 
Cape  Blancoy  and  the  Bay  ofCaldera  ;  the  Savannahs  there.  Captain 
Cook  dies.  Of  Nicoya^  and  a  red  Wood  for  dyings  and  other  C^m^ 
modifies.  A  narrow  Escape  of  twelve  Men.  Lance- Wood.  Volcan 
Fejoy  a  burning  Mountain  on  the  Coast  of  Ria  Leja.  A  Tomade. 
The  Island  and  Harbour  of  Ria  Leja.  The  Gulph  of  Amapalla  and 
Point  Casivina.  Isles  of  Mangera  and  Amapalla.  The  Indian 
Inhabitants.  Hog-Plumb-Tree.  Other  Islands  in  the  Gulph  9f 
Amapalla.  Captain  Eaton  and  Captain  Davis  careen  their  Ships 
here^  and  afterwards  part. 

^HE  8th  of  April,  1684,  we  sailed  from  the  Isle 
of  John  Fernando,  with  the  Wind  at  S.  E.  We 
were  now  two  Ships  in  Company :  Captain 
Cook's,  whose  Ship  I  was  in,  and  who  here 
took  the  Sickness  of  which  he  died  a  while  after;  and 
Captain  Eaton's.  Our  passage  lay  now  along  the  Pacifick- 
Sea,  properly  so  called.  For  tho'  it  be  usual  with  our 
Map-makers  to  give  that  Name  to  this  whole  Ocean 
calling  it  Marc  Australe,  Mai  del  Zur,  or  Mare  Pacificum ; 
yet,  in  my  opinion,  the  Name  of  the  Pacifick-Sea  ought 
not  to  be  extended  from  South  to  North  farther  than 
from  30  to  about  4  deg.  South  Latitude,  and  from  the 
American  shore  Westward  indefinitely,  with  respect  to 
my    observation ;    who    have    been    in    these    parts    250 

120 


ATTOliS   OF  CHIU   AND   PERU 

L>ciguc9  or  more  from  Land,  and  still  had  the  Sea  very    aaI 

qoict  from  Wimis.     For  in  all  ihis  Tract  of  Water,   of  "^B 

which  I  have  spoken,   there    arc    no    dark    rainy  Clouds, 

tho'  often  a  chick  Horizon,  so  as  to  hinder  an  observation 

f  the  Son  with  the  Quadrant ;  and  in  the  Morning  hazy 

■cathcr  frequently,  and  thick  Mists,  but  scarce  able  to  wet 

r.c.     Nor  are  there  In  this  Sea  any  Winds  but  the  Trade- 

iTful,    no   Tempests,  no  Tornadoes   or    Hurricanes   (tho' 

'^'-irth  of  the  Kquator,  they  arc  met  with  as  well  in  this 

Knn  as  in  the  Atlantick)  yet  the  Sea  it  self  at  the  new 

:nd  foil  of  the  Moon,  runs  with  high,  large,  long  Surges, 

uT  4uch  ai  never  break  out  at  Sea,  and  so  are  safe  enough ; 

unlcs*  that  where  they  fall  in  and  break  upon  the  shore, 

they  make  it  bad  landing. 

in  this  Sea  wc  made  the  best  of  our  way  toward  the 
Line,  till  in  the  lat.  of  24  S.  where  we  fell  in  with  the  main 
Laod  of  the  South  America,  All  this  course  of  the  Land, 
t»och  of  Chili  and  Peru  is  vastly  high ;  therefore  we  kept 
: !  or  14  leagues  off  from  shore,  being  unwilling  to  be  seen 
^  the  Spaniards  dwelling  there.  The  Land  (especially 
'^yond  this,  from  24  dcg.  S,  Lat,  to  17,  and  from  14 
t"  to)  '»  of  a  mcisl  prodigious  hcighth.  It  lies  generally  in 
kvlgcs  parallel  to  the  shore,  and  3  or  4  Ridges,  one  with 
iiothcr,  each  surpassing  other  in  heighth  ;  and  thi^e  that 
irc  farthest  within  Land,  arc  much  higher  than  others.  They 
ilway^  appear  blue  when  seen  at  Sea :  sometimes  they  are 
■  n>cured  with  Clouds,  but  not  so  often  as  the  high  Lands  in 
.:ber  p»ru  of  the  World,  for  here  are  seldom  or  never  any 
Kaii»  oa  these  Hills,  any  more  than  in  the  Sea  near  it ;  neither 
u-c  tbcy  subject  to  Kogs.  These  are  the  highest  Mountains 
that  ever  I  saw,'  far  surpassing  the  Pike  of  TenarifFe;  or 
^ata  Martha,  and  1  believe  any  Mountains  in  the  World. 

I  have  teen  very  high  Land  in  the  Lat.  of  30  South,'' 
t>ut  iKft  so  high  as  in  the  Latitudes  before  described.  In 
ir  John  Narborough's  Voyage  also  to  Batdivia,  (a  City  on 

'  He  Kkn  to  the  rank  of  prodigious  mountains  marshnlled  alont;  the 
:a^  <rf  Cltiic  fnun  Copiapo  la  Chipicanu  They  ratine  from  18,000  to 
ii^oo  ktt  at  hcishl.  The  feak  of  TenetifTe  U  but  a  litije  more  than 
iWiBfHt.    Tim  TtakotStMA  Manha  is  leis  than  17/XM  feet 

■  rntafalr  Acoecasiu. 

121 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  this  Coast)  mention  is  made  of  very  high  Land  seen  near 
1684  Baldivia  :  ^  and  the  Spaniards,  with  whom  I  have  discoursed, 
have  told  me,  that  there  is  a  very  high  Land  all  the  way 
between  Coquimbo,  (which  lies  in  about  30  d.  South  lat.) 
and  Baldivia,  which  is  in  40  South ;  so  that  by  all  likeli- 
hood these  Ridges  of  Mountains  do  run  in  a  continued 
Chain  from  one  end  of  Peru  and  Chili  to  the  other,  all 
along  this  South  Sea  Coast,  called  usually  the  Andes,  or 
Sierra  Nuevada  des  Andes.  The  excessive  heighth  of  these 
Mountains  may  possibly  be  the  reason,  that  there  are  no 
Rivers  of  note  that  fall  into  these  Seas.  Some  small  Rivers 
indeed  there  are,  but  very  few  of  them,  for  in  some  places 
there  is  not  one  that  comes  out  into  the  Sea  in  150  or  200 
Leagues,  and  where  they  are  thickest  they  are  30,  40  or  50 
Leagues  asunder,  and  too  little  and  shallow  to  be  Navi- 
gable. Besides,  some  of  these  do  not  constantly  run,  but 
are  dry  at  certain  Seasons  of  the  Year ;  as  the  River  of  Ylo, 
runs  flush  with  a  quick  Current  at  the  latter  end  of 
January,  and  so  continues  till  June,  and  then  it  decreaseth 
by  degrees,  growing  less,  and  running  slow  till  the  latter 
end  of  September,  when  it  fails  wholly,  and  runs  no  more 
till  January  again  :  This  I  have  seen  at  both  Seasons,  in  two 
former  Voyages  I  made  hither,  and  have  been  informed  by 
the  Spaniards,  that  other  Rivers  on  this  Coast  are  of  the 
like  Nature,  being  rather  Torrents  or  Land  floods  caused 
by  their  Rains  at  certain  Seasons  far  within  Land,  than 
perennial  streams. 

We  kept  still  along  in  sight  of  this  Coast,  but  at  a 
good  distance  from  it,  encountring  with  nothing  of  note, 
till  in  the  lat.  of  9  deg.  40  min.  South,  on  the  3rd  of  May, 
we  descried  a  Sail  to  the  Northward  of  us.  She  was  plying 
to  Windward,  we  chased  her,  and  Capt.  Eaton  being  a 
Head  soon  took  her:  she  came  from  Guiaquil  about  a 
Month  before,  laden  with  Timber,  and  was  bound  to  Lima. 
Three  days  before  we  took  her,  she  came  from  Santa, 
whither  she  had  gone  for  Water,  and  where  they  had  news 
of  our  Being  in  these  Seas  by  an  express  from  Baldivia,  for, 

*  The  Villa  Rica  volcano.     Sir  John   Narborough  came  to  these  seas 
in  1669. 

122 


I 


^     LOBOS 

I  we  «ltcrw»rds  heard,  Captain  Swan  had  been  at  Baldivia 
ft  seek  a  Trade  there,  and  he  having  met  Captain  Eaton  in  ' 
E  Streights  of  Magellan,  the  Spaniards  of  Baldivia  were 
i  informed  of  us  by  him,  suspecting  him  also  to  be 
One  of  us,  tho'  he  was  not.  Upon  this  News  the  Viceroy 
of  Lima  sent  Expresses  to  all  the  Sea  Ports,  that  they 
might  provide  themselves  against  our  Assaults. 

We  immediately  steered  away  for  the  Island  Lobes, 
which  lieth  in  lat.  5  d.  24.  m.  South  lat.  (I  took  the  Eleva- 
tion of  it  ashore  with  an  Astrolabe)  and  it's  5  leagues  from 
the  Main.  It  is  called  Lobos  dc  la  Mar,  to  distinguish  it 
from  another  that  is  not  far  from  it,  and  extrcamly  like 
ti,  called  Lobos  de  la  Terra,  for  it  lies  nearer  the  Main. 
Loboa,'  or  Lovos,  is  the  Spanish  Name  for  a  Seal,  of  which 
there  are  great  plenty  about  these,  and  several  other  Islands 
in  these  Seas  that  go  by  this  Name. 

The  9th  of  May  we  arrived  at  this  Isle  of  Lobos  de  la 
Mar,  and  came  to  an  Anchor  with  our  Prize.  This  Lobos 
coosists  indeed  of  two  little  Islands,  each  about  a  Mile 
round,  of  an  indifferent  height,  a  small  Channel  between,  fit 
for  Boats  only;  and  several  Rocks  lying  on  the  North-side 
'/  the  Islands,  a  little  way  from  shore.  There  is  a  small 
Co»r  or  Sandy  Bay  shcltrcd  from  the  Winds,  at  the  West 
end  of  the  Eastcnmost  Island,  where  Ships  may  careen  : 
The  rest  of  the  shore,  as  well  round  the  two  Islands  as 
between  them,  is  a  Rocky  Coast,  consisting  of  small  Clifis. 
Within  Land  they  are  both  of  them  partly  Rocky,  and 
partly  Sandy,  Barren,  without  any  fresh  Water,  Tree,  Shrub, 
Grass,  or  Herbs;  or  any  Land  Animals  (for  the  Seals  and 
Sea-Lions  come  ashore  here)  but  Kowls,  of  which  there  are 
{nat  multitudes;  as  Boobtes,  but  mostly  Penguins,  which 
i  hare  seen  plentifully  all  over  the  South  Seas,  on  the 
Coast  of  Newfoundland,  and  off  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope. 
They  are  a  Sea-Fowl,  about  as  big  as  a  Duck,  and  such 
Feet ;  but  a  sharp  Bill,  feeding  on  Fish.     They  do  not  fly, 

'  Ri^ro*e  saw  ooe  of  thc»e  ist^mU  on  the  loih  of  April  1681.  "We 
M«  bma  hoc  [the  bay  of  MaUbhtiu]  the  leewaid  [northerly]  island  of 
Lakaa,  or  Se«b,  bciitK  aothitiK  t>ui  n  rocky  and  scra^^y  (ilace.  On  the 
i.  W.  Mde  tbcnof  ii  ■  ted  bill.  .  .  .  which  Ihc  Indutn  tishcrmcn  much 
A^^M.*  IIm  boccauMn  fnqucnlly  visited  ihcse  blonds. 
'23 


CAPTAIN    DAM  PIER'S^  VOYAGES 

AS.  but  flutter,  having  rather  Stumps  like  a  young  Goslin*s, 
'^^"^  than  Wings:  And  these  are  instead  of  Fins  to  them  in 
the  Water.  Their  feathers  arc  downy.  Their  Flesh  is 
but  ordinary  tVx>d ;  but  their  Eggs  are  good  Meat.  There 
is  another  sort  of  small  black  Fowl,  that  make  holes  in  the 
Sand  for  their  Night  Habitations,  whose  Flesh  is  good 
sweet  Meat.  I  never  saw  any  of  them  but  here,  and  at 
John  Fernando's. 

There  is  good  Riding  between  the  Eastermost  Island 
and  the  Kocks,  in  ten,  twelve,  or  fourteen  Fathom,  for  the 
Wind  is  commonly  at  S.  or  S.  S.  E.  and  the  Eastermost 
Island  lying  East  and  West,  shelters  that  Road. 

Here  we  scrubbed  our  Ships,  and  being  in  a  readiness  to 
sail,  the  Prisoners  were  examined,  to  know  if  any  of  them 
could  conduct  us  to  some  Town  where  we  might  make 
some  attempt ;  for  they  had  before  informed  us,  that  wc 
were  descried  by  the  Spaniards,  and  by  that  we  knew  that 
they  would  send  no  Riches  by  Sea  so  long  as  we  were  here. 
Many  Towns  were  considered  on,  as  Guiaquil,  Zana, 
Truxillo,  and  others:  At  last  Truxillo  was  pitched  on, 
as  the  most  important ;  therefore  the  likeliest  to  make  us 
a  Voyage  if  we  could  conquer  it :  Which  we  did  not  much 
question,  though  wc  knew  it  to  be  a  very  populous  City. 
But  the  greatest  difficulty  was  in  Landing ;  for  Guan- 
chaquo,  which  is  the  nearest  Sea-Port  to  it,  but  6  miles  off, 
is  an  ill  place  to  Land,  since  sometimes  the  very  Fisher- 
men, that  live  there,  are  not  able  to  go  out  in  3  or  4  days. 
However  the  17th  of  May,  in  the  Afternoon,  our  Men 
were  mustered  of  both  Ships  Companies,  and  their  Arms 
proved.  We  were  in  all  108  Men  fit  for  service,  besides 
the  sick :  And  the  next  day  we  intended  to  sail  and  take 
the  Wood  Prize  with  us.  But  the  next  day,  one  of  our 
Men  being  ashore  betimes  on  the  Island,  descried  three 
Sail  hound  to  the  Northward ;  two  of  them  without  the 
Islantl  to  the  Westward,  the  other  between  it  and  the 
Continent. 

Wc  soon  got  our  Anchors  up  and  chased  :  and  Captain 
Mat  on,  who  drew  the  least  draught  of  Water,  put  through 
between  the  Westermost  Island  and  the  Rocks,  and  went 

124 


■  CRUISINGS 

Mcr  those  two  that  were  without  the  Islands.  We  in  t 
^■[Kain  Cook*&  Ship  went  after  the  other,  which  stood  in  " 
^m  the  Mun  Land,  but  we  soon  fetched  her  up,  and 
Hving  taken  her,  stood  in  again  with  her  to  the  Island ; 
Hr  w  saw  that  Captain  Eacon  wanted  no  help,  having 
Hken  both  those  that  he  went  after.  He  came  in  with  one 
^m  his  Prizes;  but  the  other  was  so  far  to  Leeward,  and  so 
^kp,  that  he  could  not  then  get  her  in,  but  he  hoped  to 
^■t  her  in  the  next  day :  But  being  deep  taden,  as  designed 
^»  go  down  before  the  wind  to  Panama,  she  would  not 
har  iaiL 

The  19th  day  she  turned  all  day,  but  got  nothing 
oearer  the  Island.  Our  Moskito  strikers,  according  to 
thcif  custom,  went  out  and  struck  six  Turtles;  fur  here 
irr  indiffrrcnt  plenty  of  them.  These  Ships  that  we  took 
the  day  before  came  from  Guanchaquo,  all  three  laden 
•ith  Flower,  bound  for  Panama.  Two  of  them  were 
Uden  as  deep  as  they  could  swim,  the  other  was  not  above 
half  laden,  but  wa«  ordered  by  the  Vice-Roy  of  Lima  to 
nil  with  the  other  two,  or  else  she  should  not  sail  till  we 
were  gone  out  of  the  Seas;  for  he  hoped  they  might  escape 
M  by  setting  out  early.  In  the  biggest  Ship  was  a  Letter 
■1)  the  IVesidcni  of  Panama  from  the  Vice-Roy  of  Lima; 
asuring  him.  that  there  were  Enemies  come  Into  that  Sea  ; 
I'oc  which  reason  he  had  dispatched  these  three  Ships  with 
R(#wer.  that  they  might  not  want ;  (for  Panama  is  sup- 
pfied  from  Peru ;)  and  de*ircd  him  to  be  frugal  of  it,  for 
he  knew  not  when  he  should  send  more.  In  this  Ship 
were  likewise  7  or  8  Tuns  of  Marmalate  of  Quinces,  and 
ft  suiely  Mule  sent  to  the  President,  and  a  very  large 
Imaee  of  the  Virgin  Mary  in  Woal,  carved  and  painted  to 
•acm  a  new  Church  at  Panama,  and  sent  from  Lima  by 
the  Vice-Koy ;  for  this  great  Ship  came  from  thetice  not 
Umg  before.  She  brought  also  from  Lima  800000  Pieces 
□f  Eight,  ro  carry  with  her  to  Panama  :  but  while  she  lay 
It  Guanchaco.  uking  in  her  lading  of  Flower,  the  Mer- 
chants hearing  of  Capt.  Swan's  being  in  Baldivia,  ordcr'd 
'.he  Money  ashore  again.  These  Prisoners  likewise  in- 
forrncd  u»,  that  the  Gentlemen  (Inhabitants  of  Truxillo) 
125 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  were  building  a  Fort  at  Guanchaquo  (which  is  the  Sea-Port 
1684  £qj.  Truxillo)  close  by  the  Sea,  purposely  to  hinder  the 
designs  of  any  that  should  attempt  to  land  there.  Upon 
this  news  we  altered  our  former  resolutions,  and  resolved 
to  go  with  our  three  Prizes  to  the  Gallapagos ;  which  are 
a  great  many  large  Islands,  lying  some  under  the  Equator, 
others  on  each  side  of  it.  I  shall  here  omit  the  description 
of  Truxillo,^  because  in  my  Appendix,  at  the  latter  end  of 
the  Book,  I  intend  to  give  a  general  Relation  of  most  of 
the  Towns  of  note  on  this  Coast,  from  Baldivia  to  Panama, 
and  from  thence  towards  California. 

The  1 9th  day  in  the  evening  we  sailed  from  the  Island 
Lobos,  with  Captain  Eaton  in  our  Company.  We  carried 
the  three  Flower  Prizes  with  us,  but  our  first  Prize  laden 
with  Timber,  we  left  here  at  an  Anchor ;  the  Wind  was  at 
S.  by  E.  which  is  the  Common  Trade- Wind  here,  and  wc 
steered  away  N.  W.  by  N.  intending  to  run  into  the 
latitude  of  the  Isles  Gallapagos,  and  steer  off  West,  because 
we  did  not  know  the  certain  distance,  and  therefore  could 
not  shape  a  direct  course  to  them.  When  we  came  within 
40  minutes  of  the  Equator,  we  steered  west,  having  the 
Wind  at  South,  a  very  moderate  gentle  Gale.  It  was  the 
31st  day  of  May  when  we  first  had  sight  of  the  Islands 
Gallapagos  :  Some  of  them  appeared  on  our  Weather-bow, 
some  on  our  Lee-bow,  others  right  a  head.  We  at  first 
sight  trimmM  our  Sails,  and  steered  as  nigh  the  Wind  as 
we  could,  striving  to  get  to  the  Southermost  of  them,  but 
our  Prizes  being  deep  laden,  their  Sails  but  small  and  thin, 
and  a  very  small  Gale,  they  could  not  keep  up  with  us ; 
therefore  we  likewise  edged  away  again,  a  point  from  the 
Wind,  to  keep  near  them ;  and  in  the  evening,  the  Ship 
that  I  was  in,  and  Captain  Eaton,  Anchored  on  the  East 
side  of  one  of  the  Eastermost  Islands,  a  Mile  from  the 
shoar,  in  sixteen  fathom  Water,  clean,  white,  hard  Sand. 
The  Gallapagos  Islands  are  a  great  number  of  unin- 

^  Truxillo,  or  Trujillo,  in  northern  Peru  (lat.  8*  7'  S.,  long:.  79*  4'  W.) 
is  one  of  the  oldest  of  the  Spanish  towns  upon  the  coast.  It  lies  a  few 
miles  within  land,  and  its  two  seaports,  Huanchaco  (to  the  north)  and 
Salavcrry  (to  the  south)  arc  surf-beaten  and  dangerous.  Salaverxy  is  now 
the  more  important  of  the  two. 

126 


ISLES   OF  THE   GALLAPAGOS 

IsUnds,    lying   under,   and    on    both   sides   > 
nor.     The  Eastcrmost  of  them  are  about  no  Leagues  '^^'* 

ihc  Main.  They  are  laid  down  in  the  Longitude 
8i,  reaching  to  the  Westward  as  far  as  176,  there- 
fort  their  Longitude  from  England  Westward  is  about 
6B  donees.'  But  1  believe  our  Hydrographers  do  not 
pUcc  them  far  enough  to  the  Westward.  The  Spaniards 
who  fir»t  discovered  them,  and  in  whose  draughts  alone  they 
are  laid  down,  report  them  to  be  a  great  number  stretching 
North-West  from  the  Line,  as  far  as  5  degrees  N,  but  we 
MW  not  above  14  or  15.  They  are  some  of  them  7  or  8 
leagues  long,  and  3  or  4  broad.  They  are  of  a  good 
hdghth,  most  of  them  flat  and  even  on  the  top ;  4  or  5  of 
the  E»Kermost  are  rocky,  barren  and  hilly,  producing 
neither  Tree,  Herb,  nor  Grass,  but  a  few  Dildoe-tree, 
escrpt  by  the  Sea  side.  The  Dildoe-tree  is  a  green  prickly 
ihrub,  that  grows  about  10  or  12  foot  high,  without  either 
Leaf  or  Fruit.  It  is  as  big  as  a  Mans  Leg,  from  the  root 
to  the  top,  and  it  is  full  of  sharp  prickles,  growing  in  thick 
nm*  from  top  to  bottom  ;  This  shrub  is  fit  for  no  use,  not 
»  much  as  to  bum.  Close  by  the  Sea  there  grows  in  some 
pUcd  bushes  of  Burton-wood,  which  is  very  good  firing. 
Th»  sort  of  wood  grows  in  many  places  in  the  West-Indies, 
eupccially  in  the  Bay  of  Campeachy,  and  in  the  Sambaloes. 
I  did  never  sec  any  in  these  Seas  but  here.  There  is  Water 
00  thoe  barren  Islands,  in  ponds  and  holes  among  the 
Rocks.  Some  other  of  these  Islands  arc  mostly  plain  and 
low,  and  ihc  Land  more  fertile,  producing  Trees  of  divers 
sons,  unknown  to  us.  Some  of  the  Wcstermost  of  these 
Islands,  arc  nine  or  ten  leagues  long,  and  six  or  seven 
trowj ;  the  Mould  deep  and  black.  These  produce  Trees 
7f  pni  and  tall  bodies,  especially  Ma mniee- trees,  which 
pmr  here  in  great  Groves.  In  these  large  Islands  there 
ut  aomc  pretty  big  Rivers;  and  on  many  of  the  other 
laaa-  Islands,  there  are  Brooks  of  good  Water.  The 
Sptaiinls  when  they  first  discover'd  these  Islands,  found 

*  Ahaot  $9'.     Uunpier'*  hdief  ms  well  justified.    Tt' 
■MMcamtthrin  BtlMt  CubIcv  call«  "Vunioutti  Kuad" 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER^S   VOYAGES 

AN.  multitudes  of  Guanoes,  and  Land-turtle  or  Tortoise/  and 
^^^^  named  them  the  Gallapago's  Islands.  I  do  believe  there  is 
no  place  in  the  World  that  is  so  plentifully  stored  with 
those  Animals.  The  Guanoes  here  are  as  fat  and  large  as 
any  that  I  ever  saw ;  they  are  so  tame,  that  a  man  may 
knock  down  twenty  in  an  hours  time  with  a  Club.  The 
Land-turtle  are  here  so  numerous,  that  5  or  600  Men 
might  subsist  on  them  alone  for  several  months,  without 
any  other  sort  of  Provision :  They  are  extraordinary  large 
and  fat ;  and  so  sweet,  that  no  Pullet  eats  more  pleasantly. 
One  of  the  largest  of  these  Creatures  will  weigh  150  or 
200  weight,  and  some  of  them  are  2  foot,  or  2  foot  6  inches 
over  the  Callap)ee  or  Belly.  I  did  never  see  any  but  at  this 
place,  that  will  weigh  above  30  pound  weight.  I  have 
heard  that  at  the  Isle  of  St.  Lawrence  or  Madagascar,  and 
at  the  English  Forest,^  an  Island  near  it,  called  also  Don 
Mascarin,  and  now  possessed  by  the  French;  there  are 
very  large  ones,  but  whether  so  big,  fat,  and  sweet  as  these, 
I  know  not.  There  are  3  or  4  sorts  of  these  Creatures  in 
the  West-Indies.  One  is  called  by  the  Spaniards,  Hecatee  ;• 
these  live  most  in  fresh  Water-ponds,  and  seldom  come  on 
Land.  They  weigh  about  10  or  15  pound;  they  have 
small  Legs  and  flat  Feet,  and  small  long  Necks.  Another 
sort  is  called  Terrapen ;  *  these  are  a  great  deal  less  than 
the  Hecatee ;  the  Shell  on  their  backs  is  all  carved  natur- 
ally, finely  wrought,  and  well  clouded :  the  Backs  of  these 
are  rounder  than  those  before-mentioned ;  they  are  other- 
wise much  of  the  same  form  :  these  delight  to  live  in  wet 
swampy  places,  or  on  the  Land  near  such  places.  Both 
these  sorts  are  very  good  Meat.  They  are  in  great  plenty 
on  the  Isles  of  Pines  near  Cuba  :  there  the  Spanish  Hunters 
when  they  meet  them  in  the  Woods  bring  them  home  to 
their  Huts,  and  mark  them  by  notching  their  Shells,  then 
let  them  go ;  this  they  do  to  have  them  at  hand,  for  they 

*  Testudo  Indica.    They  live  upon  "  succulent  cactus,"  the  acid  guaya- 
vita  berry,  and  a  lichen  which  grows  upon  the  dildo  bushes. 

'  Mascarenas,  or   Don   Mascarenhas,  the   Portuguese  name    for   the 
Mauritius. 

3  A  variety  of  marsh  or  fresh-water  tortoise. 

*  The  terrapin. 

128 


SEA   TORTOISE,   AND   THEIR    KINDS 

vcr    ramble    far    from    thence.       When    these    Hunters   » 
■:■---■.   to  Cuba,  after  about  a   month  or  six  Weeks  stay,   " 

.c.  ciuy  with  them  3  or  400,  or  more,  of  these  Creatures 
■o  sell ;  for  they  arc  very  good  Meat,  and  every  Man 
iuiows  hi»  own  hy  their  Marks.  These  Tortoise  in  the 
Galiapaga's  are  more  like  the  Hecatee,  except  that,  as  1 
atd  before,  they  arc  much  bigger ;  and  they  have  very  long 
small  necks  and  little  heads.  There  are  some  green  Snakes 
<m  these  Ulands,  but  no  other  Land  Animal  that  1  did  ever 
jct  There  arc  great  plenty  of  Turtle-Doves  so  tame,  that 
i  Man  may  kill  5  or  6  dozen  in  a  forenoon  with  a  stick. 
They  are  somewhat  less  than  a  Pigeon,  and  are  very  good 
■not.  aod  commonly  fat. 

There  arc  good  wide  Channels  between  these  Islands 
fit  for  Ships  to  pass,  and  in  some  places  shole  water,  where 
thcrt  grows  plenty  of  Turtle-grass;  therefore  these  Islands 
art  plentifully  stored  with  Sca-Tunle.  of  that  sort  which 
a  called  the  green  Turtle.  I  have  hitherto  deferred  the 
jocription  of  these  Creatures,  therefore  I  shall  give  it 
here.  There  arc  4  sorts  of  Sea-turtle,'  viz.  the  Trunk- 
mrtic.  the  Loggerhead,  the  Hawks-bill,  and  the  Green- 
turtle.  The  Trunk-turtle  is  commonly  bigger  than  the 
•xbcr,  ihcir  backs  are  higher  and  rounder,  and  their  flesh 
nnk  and  not  wholesome.  The  Loggerhead  is  so  called 
Kxausc  it  hath  a  great  head,  much  bigger  than  the  other 
wrts  ;  their  flesh  ts  likewise  very  rank,  and  seldom  eaten 
but  in  case  of  necessity  ;  they  feed  on  Moss  that  grows 
about  Rock*.  The  Hawks-bill  Turtle  is  the  least  kind,  they 
sre  K>  call'd  becauK  their  mouths  are  long  and  small,  some- 
wim  resembling  the  Bill  of  a  Hawk  :  on  the  backs  of  these 
Hawk»-biII  Turtle  grows  that  shell  which  is  so  much 
esteem *d  for  making  Cabinets,  Combs,  and  other  things. 
The  bugest  of  them  may  have  three  pound  and  a  half  of 

'tell ;  I  have  taken  some  that  have  had  3  pound  10  Ounces  : 
t  tbey  commonly  have  a  pound  and  half,  or  two  pound ; 

'  Tbe  Wwik-tiMlIe    It   SfiA-irgii   atriitea.     The  loKj-crlieail   is  Ckcltmt 
li  amelU  «cr)   (iraaul)'  of  miuk.    Tlio  hawk'i-bill   is  Ckthn    . 
\  of  ■b>cb  ilw  r%%\  are  very  delicious,  ihouKb  >he  fltsli  is  wune- 
The  KrcCfl  innlc,  Chtlom  mydat,  is  the  tunic  knonA 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 

AN.  some  not  so  much.  These  are  but  ordinary  food^  but 
1684  generally  sweeter  than  the  Loggerhead  :  Yet  these  Hawks- 
bills,  in  some  places,  are  unwholsome,  causing  them  that 
eat  them  to  purge  and  vomit  excessively,  especially  those 
between  the  Sambaloes  and  Portobel.  We  meet  with  other 
Fish  in  the  West-Indies,  of  the  same  malignant  nature :  But 
I  shall  describe  them  in  the  Appendix.  These  Hawks-Bill 
Turtles  are  better  or  worse,  according  to  their  feeding.  In 
some  places  they  feed  on  Grass,  as  the  Green  Tortoise  also 
doth ;  in  other  places  they  keep  among  Rocks,  and  feed  on 
Moss,  or  Sea  Weeds ;  but  these  are  not  so  sweet  as  those 
that  eat  Grass,  neither  is  their  Shell  so  clear ;  for  they  are 
commonly  over-grown  with  Barnacles  which  spoil  the  shell ; 
and  their  flesh  is  commonly  yellow,  especially  the  fat. 

Hawks-bill  Turtle  are  in  many  places  of  the  West- 
Indies.  They  have  Islands  and  places  peculiar  to  them- 
selves, where  they  lay  their  Eggs,  and  seldom  come  among 
any  other  Turtle.  These,  and  all  other  Turtle,  lay  eggs 
in  the  Sand ;  their  time  of  laying  is  in  May,  June,  July.* 
Some  begin  sooner,  some  later.  They  lay  three  times  in  a 
Season,  and  at  each  time  80  or  90  Eggs.  Their  Eggs  arc 
as  big  as  a  Hens  Egg,  and  very  round,  covered  only  with  a 
white  tough  Skin.  There  are  some  Bays  on  the  North-side 
of  Jamaica,  where  these  Hawks-bills  resort  to  lay.  In  the 
Bay  of  Honduras  are  Islands  which  they  likewise  make  their 
breeding  places,  and  many  places  along  all  the  Coast  on  the 
Main  of  the  West-Indies,  from  Trinidado  to  La  Vera  Cruz, 
in  the  Bay  of  Nova  Hispania.  When  a  Sea-turtle  turns 
out  of  the  Sea  to  lay,  she  is  at  least  an  Hour  before  she 
returns  again  ;  for  she  is  to  go  above  high-water  mark,  and 
if  it  be  low-water  when  she  comes  ashore,  she  must  rest  once 
or  twice,  being  heavy,  before  she  comes  to  the  place  where 
she  lays.  When  she  hath  found  a  place  for  her  purpose,  she 
makes  a  great  Hole  with  her  Fins  in  the  Sand,  wherein  she 
lays  her  Eggs,  then  covers  them  two  foot  deep  with  the  same 
Sand  which  she  threw  out  of  the  hole,  and  so  returns. 
Sometimes  they  come   up  the  night  before  they  intend  to 

'  The  early  editions  add  "  in  S.  lat.  about  Christmas." 

130 


SEA    TORTOISE,   AND   THEIR    KINDS 

.  »nd  take  i  view  of  the  place,  and  so  having  made  a    an. 
lur,  or  Semi- circular  March,  they  return  lo  the  Sea  again,  '^ 

they  never  fail  to  come  ashore  the  next  night,  to  lay 
ir  ihmt  pUcc.  All  sorts  of  Turtle  use  the  same  methods 
Uring.  I  knew  a  Man  in  Jamaica,  that  made  8  pound 
:rling  a*  the  shell  of  these  Hawks-bill  Turtle,  which  he 
fw  in  one  Season,  and  in  one  small  Bay,  not  half  a  mile 
*'«g.  The  manner  of  taking  them  is  to  watch  the  Bay,  by 
walking  from  one  part  to  the  other  all  night,  making  no 
DOtse,  nor  keeping  any  sort  of  light.  When  the  Turtle 
comeuhore,  the  Man  that  watches  for  them  turns  them  on 
their  Backs,  then  hales  them  above  high-water  mark,  and 
waves  them  till  the  Morning.  A  large  green  Turtle,  with 
^cr  weight  and  struggling,  will  puzzle  two  Men  to  turn 
r:er.  The  Hawks-biil  Turtle  are  not  only  found  in  the 
West-Indies,  but  on  the  Coast  of  Guinea,  and  in  the  East- 
lrv.{ics.     I  never  saw  any  in  the  South  Seas. 

The  Green  Turtle  are  so  called,  because  their  shell  is 

fnxner  than  any  other.     It  is  very  thin  and   clear,  and 

etter  clouded  than  the  Hawks-bill ;  but  'tis  used  only  for 

f.lays,  being  extraordinary  thin.     These  Turtles  are  gene- 

-iJIy  Ixrgcr  than  the  Hawks-bill ;  one  will  weigh  2  or  3 

-Liadrvd  pound.     Their  backs  arc  flatter  than  the  Hawks- 

•JL,  their  heads  round  and  small.     Green  Turtle  are  the 

Tfeetest  of  ill  the  kinds:  But  there   are  degrees  of  them, 

■.(b  in  respect  to  their  fle^h  and  their  bigness.     I  have 

I      nerved   ttut    at   Blanco    in   the    West-Indies,   the   green 

Tunic  (which  is  the  only  kind  there)  are  larger  than  any 

I     other  in  the  North  Seas.      There  they  will  commonly  weigh 

^^loor  300  pound  :  Their  Fat  is  yellow,  and  the  Lean  white, 

^Kd  tfaeir  flesh  extraordinary  sweet.     At  Boca  I'oro,  West 

^^■Ptanobcl,  they  arr  not  so   large,  their  flesh  not  sn  white, 

^»  ihc  fat  so  yellow.     Those  in  the  Bays  of  Honduras 

ud  Canipcachy  are  somewhat  smaller  still;    their  fat  is 

ETiea,  and  the  lean  of  a  darker  colour  than  those  at  Boca 

Ten-     I  heard  of  a  monstrous  green  Turtle  once  taken  at 

Pirt-Royal,'  in  the  Bay  of  Campeachy,  that  was  four  foot 

'  At  Laftna  de  TcmiBiM.     U  wiu  a  logwooiI-LUUcn'  camp. 

•31 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  deep  from  the  back  to  the  belly,  and  the  belly  6  foot  broad ; 
^^^4  Captain  Rocky's  Son,  of  about  9  or  lo  years  of  Age,  went 
in  it  as  in  a  Boat,  on  board  his  Fathers  Ship,  about  a  quarter 
of  a  mile  from  the  shore.  The  leaves  of  Fat  afForded  8 
Gallons  of  Oil.  The  Turtle  that  live  among  the  Keys,  or 
small  Islands,  on  the  South  side  of  Cuba,  are  a  mix*d  sort, 
some  bigger,  some  less ;  and  so  their  flesh  is  of  a  mixt 
colour,  some  green,  some  dark,  some  yellowish',  With  these 
Port  Royal  in  Jamaica  is  constantly  supplied,  by  Sloops  that 
come  hither  with  nets  to  take  them.  They  carry  them  alive 
to  Jamaica,  where  the  Turtles  have  wires  made  with  Stakes 
in  the  Sea,  to  preserve  them  alive ;  and  the  Market  is  every 
day  plentifully  stored  with  Turtle,  it  being  the  common 
food  there,  chiefly  for  the  ordinary  sort  of  People. 

Green  Turtle  live  on  Grass,  which  grows  in  the  Sea,  in 
3,  4,  5,  or  6  fathom  water,  at  most  o?  the  places  before 
mentioned.  This  Grass  is  different  from  Manatee-grass, 
for  that  is  a  small  blade ;  but  this  a  quarter  of  an  inch 
broad,  and  six  inches  long.  The  Turtle  of  these  Islands 
Gallapagos,  are  a  sort  of  a  bastard  green  Turtle;  for  their 
shell  is  thicker  than  other  green  Turtle  in  the  West  or  East- 
Indies,  and  their  flesh  is  not  so  sweet.  They  are  latter  than 
any  other  green  Turtle ;  for  it  is  common  for  these  to  be 
two  or  three  foot^  deep,  and  their  Callapees,  or  Bellies,  5 
foot  wide :  But  there  are  other  green  Turtle  in  the  South 
Seas  that  are  not  so  big  as  the  smallest  Hawks-bill.  These 
are  seen  at  the  Island  Plata,  and  other  places  thereabouts : 
They  feed  on  Moss,  and  are  very  rank,  but  fat. 

Both  these  sorts  are  different  from  any  others,  for  both 
He's  and  She's  come  ashore  in  the  day  time,  and  lie  in  the 
Sun  ;  but  in  other  places,  none  but  the  She's  go  ashore,  and 
that  in  the  night  only,  to  lay  their  Eggs.  The  best  feeding 
for  Turtle  in  the  South  Seas  is  among  these  Gallapago 
Islands,  for  here  is  plenty  of  Grass. 

There  is  another  sort  of  green  Turtle  in  the  South  Seas, 
which  are  but  small,  yet  pretty  sweet :  These  lie  Westward 
on  the  Coast  of  Mexico.     One  thing  is  very  strange  and 

*  The  early  editions  read  "  3  or  4  foot." 

132 


SEA   TORTOISE,   AND  THEIR    KINDS 

remarkable  in  these  Creatures;  that  at  the  breeding  time 
thty  leave  for  2  or  3  Months  their  common  haunts,  where  ' 
they  feed  most  of  the  Year,  and  resort  to  other  niaces,  only 
to  lay  their  Kggs:  And  'tis  not  thought  that  they  eat  any 
thing  during  this  Season  ;  So  that  both  He's  and  She's 
grow  very  lean  ;  but  the  He's  to  that  degree  that  none  will 
eat  them.  The  most  remarkable  places  that  I  did  ever 
hear  of  for  their  breeding,  is  at  an  Island  in  the  West- 
Indies  called  Caimanes,'  and  the  Isle  Asccntion  in  the 
Western  Ocean :  and  when  the  breeding  time  is  past,  there 
is  none  remaining.  Doubtless  ihcy  swim  some  hundreds 
of  Leagues  to  come  to  those  two  places:  For  it  hath  been 
often  observed,  that  at  Caimanes,  at  the  breeding  time, 
there  are  found  all  those  sorts  of  Turtle  before  described. 
The  South  Keys  of  Cuba  are  above  4O  leagues  from  thence, 
which  is  the  nearest  place  that  these  Creatures  can  come 
from  ;  and  it  is  most  certain,  that  there  could  not  live  so 
many  there  as  come  here  in  one  Season. 

Those  that  go  to  lay  at  Asccntion,  must  needs  travel 
much  farther ;  for  there  is  no  land  nearer  it  than  300 
Leagues:  And  it  is  certain,  that  these  Creatures  live  always 
near  the  shore.  In  the  South  Sea  likewise,  the  Gallapagos 
is  the  place  where  they  live  the  biggest  part  of  the  year  ; 
yet  they  go  from  thence  at  their  Season  over  to  the  Main, 
to  lay  their  Eggs;  which  is  100  Ltagues,  the  nearest  place. 
Altho'  multitudes  of  these  Turtles  go  from  their  common 
places  of  feeding  and  abode,  to  those  laying  places,  yet  they 
do  not  all  go  :  And  at  the  time  when  the  Turtle  resort  to 
these  places  to  lay  their  Eggs,  they  are  accompanied  with 
abundance  of  Fish,  especially  Sharks;  the  places  which  the 
Turtle  then  leave  being  at  that  time  destitute  of  Fish, 
which  follow  the  Turtle. 

When  the  She's  go  thus  to  their  places  to  lay,  the  Male 
accompany  them,  and  never  leave  them  till  they  return: 
Both  Male  and  Female  are  fat  the  beginning  of  the  Season  ; 
but  before  they  return,  the  Male,  as  I  said,  are  so  lean,  that 
*«y  arc  not  fit  to  eat,  but  the  Female  are  good  to  the  very 


'  (iiand  Caynian,  to  the  Muih  oi  Cuba. 

■33 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 

AN.  l^st :  yet  not  so  fat  as  at  the  beginning  of  the  Season.  It 
1684  is  reported  of  these  Creatures,  that  they  are  nine  days  en- 
gendering, and  in  the  Water;  the  Male  on  the  Females 
back.  It  is  observable,  that  the  Male,  while  engendring, 
do  not  easily  forsake  their  female :  For  I  have  gone  and 
taken  hold  of  the  Male  when  engendring :  and  a  very  bad 
striker  may  strike  them  then,  for  the  Male  is  not  shy  at 
all :  But  the  Female  seeing  a  Boat,  when  they  rise  to  blow, 
would  make  her  escape,  but  that  the  Male  grasps  her  with 
his  two  fore  Fins,  and  holds  her  fast.  When  they  arc  thus 
coupled,  it  is  best  to  strike  the  Female  first,  then  you  are 
sure  of  the  Male  also.  These  Creatures  are  thought  to 
live  to  a  great  Age;  and  it  is  observed  by  the  Jamaica 
Turtlers,  that  they  are  many  years  before  they  come  to 
their  full  growth. 

The  Air  of  these  Islands  is  temperate  enough  consider- 
ing the  Clime.  Here  is  constantly  a  fresh  Sea-breeze  all 
day,  and  cooling  refreshing  winds  in  the  night :  Therefore 
the  heat  is  not  so  violent  here,  as  in  most  places  near 
the  Equator.  The  time  of  the  year  for  the  Rains  is  in 
November,  December  and  January.  Then  there  is  often- 
times excessive  dark  tempestuous  weather,  mixt  with  much 
Thunder  and  Lightning.  Sometimes  before  and  after  these 
Months,  there  are  moderate  refreshing  showers;  but  in 
May,  June,  July,  and  August,  the  weather  is  always  very 
fair. 

We  staid  at  one  of  these  Islands,  which  lies  under  the 
Equator,  but  one  Night;  because  our  Prizes  could  not 
get  in  to  an  Anchor.  We  refreshed  our  selves  very  well, 
both  with  Land  and  Sea-Turtles  ;  and  the  next  day  wc 
sailed  from  thence.  The  next  Island  of  the  Gallapagos 
that  we  came  to,  is  but  two  Leagues  from  this :  *tis  rocky 
and  barren  like  this ;  it  is  about  five  or  six  Leagues  long, 
and  four  broad.  We  anchored^  in  the  Afternoon,  at  the 
North  side  of  the  Island,  a  quarter  of  a  Mile  from  the 

*  They  anchored,  apparently,  in  "Albany  Bay,"  a  bay  to  the  north  of  an 
island  which  Cowley  calls  the  Duke  of  York's  Island.  In  Cowley's  Chart 
the  island  is  called  King  James's  Island,  the  Duke  of  York  having  come  to 
the  throne  by  the  time  the  Chart  was  first  published. 

134 


THE  SOIL,   ETC. 


in    16    fathom  water.      It  is 


steep  : 


ind    this 


^BukI,  and  no  Anchoring  only  at  this  place.  Hci 
^■t  'Xtlinar)'  riding;  fur  the  ground  is  so  steep,  that  if  an 
^bchor  starts  il  never  holds  again;  and  the  Wind  is  com- 
mooly  off  from  the  Land,  except  in  the  Night,  when  the 
l-anii-wind  cumn  more  from  the  West,  for  there  it  blows 
right  along  the  shore,  though  but  faintly.  Here  is  no 
wucr '  but  in  Ponds  and  Holes  of  the  Rocks.  That  which 
•c  fini  Anchored  at  hath  Water  on  the  North  end,  falling 
down  in  a  stream  from  high  steep  Rocks,  upon  the  Sandy 
Bay,  where  it  may  be  taken  up.  As  soon  as  we  came  to  an 
.Anchor,  wc  made  a  Tent  ashore  for  Captain  Cook,  who 
WW  lick.  Here  Wc  found  the  Sea-Turtle  lying  ashore 
on  the  sand;  this  is  not  customary  in  the  West-Indies ; 
We  turned  them  on  their  backs  that  they  might  not  get 
away.  The  next  day  more  came  up,  when  we  found  it  to 
be  their  custom  m  tic  in  the  Sun  :  So  we  never  took  care  to 
mm  thetn  afterwards;  but  sent  ashore  the  Cook  every 
moming,  who  killed  as  many  as  served  for  the  day.  This 
castom  wc  observed  all  the  time  we  lay  here,  feeding  some- 
times on  Land-Turtle,  sometimes  on  Sea-Turtle,  there 
_,  plenty  of  cither  sort.  Captain  Davis  came  hither 
fitn  a  Kcond  time;  and  then  he  went  to  other  Islands  on 
West  side  of  these.  There  he  found  such  plenty  of 
d-Turtlc,  that  he  and  his  Men  eat  nothing  else  for 
|Month»  that  he  staid  there.  They  were  so  fat  that  he 
iixty  Jars  of  Oil  out  of  those  that  he  spent:  This 
mI  served  instead  of  Butter,  to  eat  with  Dough-boys  or 
Dumpltns,  in  his  return  out  of  these  Seas.  He  found  very 
convenient  places  to  Careen,  and  good  Channels  between 
the  Islands;  and  very  good  Anchoring  in  many  places. 
There  he  found  also  plenty  of  Brooks  of  good  fresh  Water, 
lad  Firewood  enough,  there  being  plenty  of  Trees  fit  for 
nzny  uses.  Captam  Harris,  one  that  we  shall  speak  of 
berafter,  came  thither  likewise,  and  found  some  Islands 
tan  had  plenty  of  Mammcc-Trccs,  and  pretty  large  Rivers. 

aw  '■  wuier  ninning 
Cowley  also  si 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  The  Sea  about  these  Islands  is  plentifully  stored  with  Fish, 
'^^4  such  as  are  at  John  Fernando*s.  They  are  both  large  and 
fat,  and  as  plentiful  here  as  at  John  Fernando's.  Here  are 
particularly  abundance  of  Sharks.  The  North  part  of  this 
second  Isle  we  anchored  at,  lies  28  minutes  North  of  the 
Equator.  I  took  the  heighth  of  the  Sun  with  an  Astrolabe. 
These  Isles  of  the  Gallapago's  have  plenty  of  Salt.  We 
stay'd  here  but  12  days;  in  which  time  we  put  ashore 
5000^  packs  of  Flower,  for  a  reserve,  if  we  should  have 
occasion  of  any  before  we  left  these  Seas.  Here  one  of  our 
Indian  Prisoners  informed  us  that  he  was  born  at  Rea  Leja, 
and  that  he  would  engage  to  carry  us  thither.  He  being 
examined  of  the  strength  and  riches  of  it,  satisfy*d  the 
Company  so  well,  that  they  were  resolv'd  to  go  thither. 

Having  thus  concluded ;  the  1 2th  of  June  we  sailed 
from  hence,  designing  to  touch  at  the  Island  Cocos,  as  well 
to  put  ashore  some  Flower  there,  as  to  see  the  Island,  be- 
cause it  was  on  our  way  to  Rea  Leja.  We  steer'd  North, 
till  in  Lat.  4  d.  40  min.  intending  them  to  steer  W.  by  N. 
for  we  expected  to  have  had  the  Wind  at  S.  by  E.  or 
S.  S.  E.  as  we  had  on  the  South  side  of  the  Equator. 
Thus  I  had  formerly  found  the  Winds  near  the  shore  in 
these  latitudes  ;  but  when  we  first  parted  from  the  Galla- 
pagos,  we  had  the  Wind  at  S.  and  as  we  sailed  farther 
North,  we  had  the  Winds  at  S.  by  W.  then  at  S.  S.  W. 
Winds  which  we  did  not  expect.  We  thought  at  first  that 
the  Wind  would  come  about  again  to  the  South ;  but  when 
we  came  to  sail  off  West  to  the  Island  Cocos,  we  had  the 
Wind  at  S.  W.  by  S.  and  could  lie  but  W.  by  N.  Yet  we 
stood  that  course  till  we  were  in  the  lat.  5  d.  40  m.  N.  and 
then  despairing,  as  the  Winds  were,  to  find  the  Island 
Cocos,  we  steer'd  over  to  the  Main  ;  for  had  we  seen  the 
Island  then,  we  could  not  have  fetcht  it,  being  so  far  to 
the  North  of  it. 

The    Island    Cocos  ^   is   so    named    by    the   Spaniards, 

1  Cowley  gives  the  number  as  "1500  Bags  of  Flower,  with  Sweet- 
meats." 

'^  Cocos  Island.  The  description  is  correct.  The  island  is  said  to  hide 
a  quantity  of  treasure,  buried  there  by  pirates  of  the  early  nineteenth 
century. 

136 


CAPE   BLANCO 

">tcause  there  wc  abundance  of  Coco-nut  Trees  growing  . 
UQ  it.  They  arc  not  only  m  one  or  two  places,  but  grow  ' 
in  great  Groves,  all  round  the  Island,  by  the  Sea,  This  is 
aa  uninhabited  Island,  it  is  7  or  8  leagues  round,  and 
ffmty  high  in  the  middle,  where  it  is  destitute  of  Trees, 
but  looks  very  green  and  pleasant,  with  an  Herb  called  by 
tbeSpiniards  Gramadcl.     It  is  low  Land  by  the  Sea  side. 

This  Island  is  in  5d.  15m.  North  of  the  Equator;  it 
is  environed  with  Rocks,  which  makes  it  almost  inacces- 
xtic:  only  at  the  N.  E.  end  there  is  a  small  Harbor  where 
Ships  may  safely  enter  and  ride  secure.  In  this  Harbor 
there  is  a  fine  Brook  of  fresh  Water  running  into  the 
Sea.  This  a  the  account  that  the  Spaniards  give  of  it, 
and  I  had  the  same  also  from  Captain  Eaton,  who  was 
there  afterward. 

Any  who  like  us  had  not  experienced  the  nature  of  the 
^^lods  in  these  parts,  might  reasonably  expect  that  we 
Lould  have  sailed  with  a  flown  sheet  to  Rea  Leja ;  but 
we  found  our  selves  mistaken,  for  as  we  came  nearer  the 
ibonr,  we  found  the  Winds  right  in  our  Teeth :  But  I 
>RaIl  refer  my  Reader  to  the  Chapter  of  Winds,  in  the 
Appendix,  for  a  further  account  of  this. 

We  had  very  fair  weather,  and  small  winds,  in  this 
Voyage  from  the  Gallapagris,  and  at  the  beginning  of 
Jnly  we  fell  in  with  Cape  Blanco,'  on  the  Main  of  Mexico. 
Thii  is  fo  called  frum  two  white  Rocks  lying  off  it. 
When  we  are  off  at  Sea  right  against  the  Cape,  they 
appear  as  part  of  the  Cape ;  but  being  near  the  shore, 
eeher  to  the  Eastward  or  Westward  of  the  Cape,  they 
appear  like  two  Ships  under  sail,  at  first  view,  but  coming 
oarer,  they  are  like  two  high  Towers ;  they  being  small, 
high,  and  »tcep  on  all  sides,  and  they  arc  about  half  a 
atlc  trom  the  Cape.  This  Cape  is  in  lat.  9.  d.  56  m.  It 
»  about  the  height  of  Beachy-head  in  England,  on  the 
Cfmn  of  Sussex.  It  is  a  full  Point,  with  steep  Kocks  to 
the  Scs.  The  top  of  it  is  flat  and  even  for  about  a  mile; 
rSen  it  gradually  falls  away  on  each  side  with  a  gentle 
'  Cowler  <^an«  il  Cape  Ti»)Mntai.     It  ia  at  the  western 

L 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  descent.  It  appears  very  pleasant,  being  cover'd  with 
1684  great  lofty  Trees.  From  the  Cape  on  the  N.  W.  side  the 
Land  runs  in  N.  E.  for  about  4  leagues,  making  a  small 
Bay,  caird  by  the  Spaniards  Caldera.  A  league  within 
Cape  Blanco,  on  the  N.W.  side  of  it,  and  at  the  entrance 
of  this  Bay,  there  is  a  small  Brook  of  very  good  water 
running  into  the  Sea.  Here  the  Land  is  low,  making  a 
saddling  between  2  small  Hills.  It  is  very  rich  Land, 
producing  large  tall  Trees  of  many  sorts;  the  Mould  is 
black  and  deep,  which  I  have  always  taken  notice  of  to 
be  a  fat  Soil.  About  a  mile  from  this  Brook,  towards  the 
N.  E.  the  Woodland  terminates.  Here  the  Savannah  Land 
begins,  and  runs  some  Leagues  into  the  Country,  making 
many  small  Hills  and  Dales.  These  Savannahs  are  not 
altogether  clear  of  Trees,  but  are  here  and  there  sprinkled 
with  small  Groves,  which  render  them  very  delightful. 
The  Grass  which  grows  here  is  very  kindly,  thick  and 
long,  r  have  seen  none  better  in  the  West-Indies.  To- 
ward the  bottom  of  the  Bay,  the  Land  by  the  Sea  is  low 
and  full  of  Mangroves,  but  farther  in  the  Country  the 
Land  is  high  and  mountainous.  The  Mountains  are  part 
Woodland,  part  Savannah.  The  Trees  in  those  Woods  are 
but  small  and  short ;  and  the  Mountain  Savannahs  are 
cloathed  but  with  indifFerent  Grass.  From  the  bottom 
of  this  Bay,  it  is  but  14  or  15  leagues,  to  the  Lake  of 
Nicaragua  on  the  North-Sea  Coast :  the  way  between  is 
somewhat  Mountainous,  but  most  Savannah. 

Capt.  Cook,  who  was  taken  sick  at  John  Fernandoes, 
continued  so  till  we  came  within  2  or  3  leagues  of  Cape 
Blanco,  and  then  died  of  a  sudden ;  tho'  he  seemed  that 
morning  to  be  as  likely  to  live,  as  he  had  been  some  weeks 
before;  but  it  is  usual  with  sick  Men  coming  from  the 
Sea,  where  they  have  nothing  but  the  Sea-Air,  to  die  off 
as  soon  as  ever  they  come  within  the  view  of  the  Land. 
About  4  hours  after  we  all  came  to  an  Anchor,  (namely 
the  Ship  that  I  was  in,  Captain  Eaton,  and  the  great  Meal 
Prize,)^  a  league  within  the  Cape,  right  against  the  Brook 

*  The  two  lesser  flour  ships  must  have  been  released,  or  burned. 

138 


rc\P€   BLANCO   AND   CALDERA    BAY        ^ 

Bf  Fresh-Water,  in  14  fathom  clean  hard  Sand.  Presently  aim 
^Bcr  wc  aune  to  an  Anchor,  Gipt.  Cook  was  carried  '*** 
^■borc  to  be  buried;  12  Men  carried  their  Arms  to  guard 
^Vose  that  were  ordered  to  dig  the  Grave :  for  although 
we  nw  no  appearance  of  Inhabitants,  yet  we  did  not  know  J 
but  the  Country  might  be  thick  inhabited.  And  Ivforc  H 
Cape  Cook  was  intcrr'd,  3  Spanish  Indians  came  to  the  ■ 
place  where  our  Men  were  dicing  the  Grave,  and  du-  H 
maoded  what  they  were,  and  from  whence  they  came  ?  H 
To  whom  our  Men  answered,  They  came  from  Lima,  H 
and  were  bound  to  Rca  Lcja,  but  thai  the  Captain  of  H 
ooe  of  the  Ships  dying  at  Sea,  obliged  them  to  come  into  H 
this  place  to  give  him  Christian  burial.  The  3  Spanish  H 
Indians  who  were  very  shy  at  first,  began  to  be  more  bold,  H 
and  dnwing  near,  asked  many  silly  Questions;  and  our  H 
Men  did  not  stick  to  sooth  them  up  with  as  many  Kals-  H 
hoods,  purposely  to  draw  them  into  their  clutches.  Our  H 
Men  orten  taught  at  their  temerity;  and  asked  them  if  H 
they  never  saw  any  Spaniards  before?  They  told  them,  H 
thai  they  themselves  were  Spaniards,  and  that  they  lived  H 
among  Spaniards,  and  that  altho'  they  were  horn  there,  H 
yet  they*  had  never  seen  3  Ships  there  before :  Our  Men  ^ 
toUl  them,  that  neither  now  might  they  have  seen  so  many,  y 

if  tt  had  not  been  on  an  urgent  occasion.  At  length  they 
drill'd  them  by  discourse  so  near,  that  our  Men  laid  hold 
OD  all  three  at  once;  but  before  Captain  Cook  was  buried, 
ooe  of  them  made  his  escape,  the  other  two  were  brought 
off  aboard  our  Ship.  Captain  Eaton  immediately  came 
abuonl  and  examined  them;  they  confessed  that  they  came 
purposely  to  view  our  Ship,  and  if  [wssiblc,  to  inform 
themselves  what  we  were;  for  the  President  of  Panama  h 
fiot  long  before  sent  a  Letter  of  advice  to  Nicoya,  inform-  ■ 
ifig  the  Magistrates  thereof,  that  some  Kncmics  were  come  ■ 
into  these  Seas,  and  that  therefore  it  behoved  them  to  be 
arcful  of  themselves.  Nicoya  is  a  small  Mulatto  Town, 
x\xMt  12  or  14.  leagues  East  from  hence,  standing  on  the 
Banks  of  a  River  of  that  name.  It  is  a  place  very  6t 
for  building  Ships,  therefore  most  of  the  Inhabitants  arc 
Cupeaicn ;    who    are    commonly   employed    in    building 

»39  ■ 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER^S   VOYAGES 

AN.    new,   or   repairing   old   Ships.       It   was   here   that   Capt. 

'^4  Sharp  (just  after  I  left  him/  in  the  Year  i68i,)  got 
Carpenters  ^  to  fix  his  Ship,  before  he  returned  for  England  : 
and  for  that  reason  it  behoved  the  Spaniards  to  be  careful, 
(according  to  the  Governour  of  Panama's  advice,)  lest 
any  Men  at  other  times  wanting  such  necessaries  as  that 
place  afforded,  might  again  be  supplied  there.  These 
Spanish  Indians  told  us  likewise,  that  they  were  sent  to 
the  place  where  they  were  taken,  in  order  to  view  our 
Ships,  as  fearing  these  were  those  mentioned  by  the 
President  of  Panama :  It  being  demanded  of  them  to 
give  an  account  of  the  Estate  and  Riches  of  the  Country ; 
they  said  that  the  Inhabitants  were  most  Husbandmen, 
who  were  imployed  either  in  Planting  and  Manuring  of 
Corn,  or  chiefly  about  Cattle ;  they  having  large  Savannahs, 
which  were  well  stored  with  Bulls,  Cows  and  Horses; 
that  by  the  Sea  side,  in  some  places  there  grew  some 
Red  wood,^  useful  in  Dying;  of  this  they  said  there  was 
little  profit  made,  because  they  were  forced  to  send  it  to 
the  Lake  of  Nicaragua,  which  runs  into  the  North  Seas : 
That  they  sent  thither  also  great  quantities  of  Bull  and 
Cow  hides,  and  brought  from  thence  in  Exchange  Europe 
Commodities;  as  Hats,  Linnen  and  Woollen,  wherewith 
they  cloathed  themselves;  that  the  Flesh  of  the  Cattle 
turned  to  no  other  profit  than  Sustenance  for  their 
Families ;  As  for  Butter  and  Cheese  they  make  but  little 
in  those  parts.  After  they  had  given  this  Relation,  they 
told  us,  that  if  we  wanted  Provision  there  was  a  Beef- 
Estantion,  or  Farm  of  Bulls  or  Cows  about  3  Mile  off, 
where  we  might  kill  what  we  pleased.     This  was  welcome 

*  May  9,  1 68 1. 

^  "A  shipwright  and  his  men,"  according  to  Ringrose.  "A  Parcel  of 
Carpenters,"  according  to  Sharp.  "We  took  them  in  the  Morning,"  he 
adds,  **  in  their  very  Beds  ;  and  we  were  so  much  the  more  glad  at  this 
Adventure,  by  how  we  had  great  Need  of  such  sort  of  Artificers."  The 
scene  of  the  capture  was  not  Nicoya,  but  a  place  called  "Dispensa,"  which, 
according  to  Ringrose's  very  inaccurate  draught,  lay  further  up  the  Gulf. 
The  carpenters  helped  Sharp's  men  to  raze  and  re-rig  the  ship,  the  Trinity^ 
in  which  the  gang  had  been  cruising. 

'  Red-wood.  Dampier  means  some  variety  of  logwood  containing  scarlet 
crystals.     The  true  redwood  {Sempcn'ircns)  is  the  giant  Californian  tree. 

140 


RED-WOOD— A    NARROW    ESCAPE 

for  wt  had  no  sort  of  Flesh  since  we  left  the 
ilUpagos;  therefore  24  of  us  immediately  entered  into  ' 
»  Boats,  taking  one  of  these  Spanish  Indians  with  us 
a  Hlot,  and  went  ashore  about  a  league  from  the 
Ship.  There  we  haled  up  our  Boats  dry,  and  marched 
all  away,  following  our  Guide,  who  soon  brought  us  to 
some  Houses  and  a  large  Pen  for  Cattle.  This  Pen  stood 
in  a  large  Savannah,  about  two  Mile  from  our  Boats: 
There  were  a  great  many  fat  Bulls  and  Cows  feeding  in 
the  Savannahs;  some  of  us  would  have  kill'd  3  or  4  to 
carry  on  board,  but  others  opposed  it,  and  said.  It  was 
better  to  stay  all  Night,  and  in  the  Morning  drive  the 
Cattle  into  the  Pen,  and  then  kill  20  or  30,  or  as  many 
aa  we  pleased.  I  was  minded  to  return  aboard,  and  en- 
deavoured to  pcrswadc  them  all  to  go  with  me,  but  some 
would  not,  therefore  I  returned  with  12,  which  was  half 
and  left  the  other  12  behind.  At  this  place  I  saw  3  or 
\  Tun  of  the  Red-wood  ;  which  I  take  to  be  that  sort  of 
Tfood,  called  in  Jamaica  Blood-wood,  or  Nicaragua-wood. 
Ve  who  returned  aboard,  met  no  one  to  oppose  us,  and 
'  :  Dcxl  day  we  expected  our  Consorts  that  we  left  ashore, 
:  none  came;  therefore  at  4  a  Clock  in  the  Afternoon, 
Men  went  in  our  Canoa  to  sec  what  was  become  of 
When  they  came  to  the  Bay  where  we  landed,  to 
go  to  the  Estaniion,  they  found  our  Men  all  on  a  small 
Rock,  half  a  mile  from  the  shore,  standing  in  the  Water 
op  to  thrir  Wastes.  These  Men  had  kept  ashore  in  the 
HoiHe,  and  turned  out  betimes  in  the  Morning  to  pen 
the  Cattle:  1  or  3  went  one  way,  and  as  many  another 
i«y,  to  get  the  Cattle  to  the  Pen,  and  others  stood  at 
:  Pen  to  drive  them  in.  When  they  were  thus  scatter'd 
40  or  50  armed  Spaniards'  came  in  among  them  : 
Men  immediately  called  to  each  other,  and  drew 
in  a  Body  before  the  Spaniards  could  attack 
,  and  marched  to  their  Boat,  which  was  hal'd  up 
oa  the  Sand.  But  when  they  came  to  the  sandy 
Bay.   they  found  thetr  Boat  all  in  Flames.     This  was  a 


"A  partjF  <rf  Spanish  Indians,"  according  tu  Cuwk-y, 
I4I 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER^S    VOYAGES 

AN.    very   unpleasing   sight,    for   they  knew   not   how   to   get 
'684  Aboard,  unless  they  marched  by  Land  to  the  place  where 
Capt.   Cook  was  buried,   which  was  near  a  league.     The 
greatest  part  of  the   way  was   thick  Woods,   where   the 
Spaniards  might  easily  lay  an  Ambush  for  them,  at  which 
they  are  very  expert.     On  the  other  side,  the  Spaniards 
now  thought  them  secure ;  and  therefore  came  to  them, 
and  asked  them  if  they  would  be  pleased  to  walk  to  their 
Plantations,  with  many  other  such  flouts ;  but  our  Mcli 
answered    never  a  word.     It   was   about  half  ebb,   when 
one  of  our  Men  took  notice  of  a  Rock  a  good  distance 
from  the  shore,  just  appearing  above  Water;    he  shewed 
it   to  his  Consorts,  and  told  them  it  would  be  a  good 
Castle  for  them  if  they  could  get  thither.     They  all  wisht 
themselves  there ;    for  the  Spaniards,  who  lay  as  yet   at 
a  good  distance  from  them  behind  the  Bushes,  as  secure 
of  their  Prey,    began  to   whistle    now   and   then   a   shot 
among    them.       Having    therefore    well    considered    the 
place,  together  with  the  danger  they  were  in,  they   pro- 
posed to  send  one  of  the  tallest  Men  to  try  if  the  Sea 
between  them  and  the  Rock  were  fordable.     This  Counsel 
they  presently  put   in  execution,  and  found  it  according 
to  their  desire.     So  they  all  marched  over  to  the  Rock, 
where  they  remained  till  the  Canoa  came  to  them ;  which 
was  about   7   Hours.     It  was  the  latter  part  of  the  Ebb 
when   they  first  went  over,  and  then  the  Rock  was  dry; 
but  when  the  Tide  of  Flood  returned   again,  the  Rock 
was  covered,  and  the  Water  still   flowing;  so  that  if  our 
Canoa  had  stayed  but  one  hour  longer,  they  might  have 
been   in  as  great  danger    of  their  lives  from  the  Sea,  as 
before    from    the    Spaniards ;    for    the    Tide   riseth    here 
about    8    foot.     The   Spaniards    remained   on    the    shore, 
expecting  to  see  them  destroyed,    but   never   came   from 
behind   the   Bushes,  where  they  first  planted  themselves; 
they   having    not  above  3   or  4   Hand-guns,    the  rest  of 
them   being  armed  with  Lances.     The  Spaniards  in  these 
parts  are  very  expert   in  heaving   or  darting  the  Lance ; 
with    which,    upon    occasion,    they   will    do   great    Feats, 
especially  in  Ambuscades :  And  by  their  good  Will,  they 

142 


LANCE   WOOD 


not   for  fighlitig  othei 


but 


themselves 


content 
standing  aloof,  thrcatning  and  calling  Names,  at  ' 
ich  they  are  as  expert  as  the  other;  so  that  if  their 
I  be  quiet,  we  always  take  it  for  granted  they 
d  some  Ambush.  Before  night  our  Canoa  came 
and  brought  our  Men  all  safe.  The  next  day 
:wo  Camjos  were  sent  to  the  bottom  of  the  Bay  to  seek 
■  -r    a    large    Canoa,  which   we   were    informed    was   there. 

1  ne  Spaniards  have  neither  Ships  nor  Barks  here,  and  but 
;  few  Canoas,  which  they  seldom  use :  Neither  arc  there 
iny  Fishermen  here,  as  1  judge,  because  Fish  is  very 
^^arce;  for  I  never  saw  any  here,  neither  could  any  of 
'^ir  Men  ever  take  any ;  and  yet  where  ever  we  come  to 
an  Anchor,  we  always  send  out  our  Strikers,  and  put 
our  Hooks  and  Lines  overboard,  to  try  for  Fish.  The 
tiext  day  our  Men  returned  out  of  the  Bay,  and  brought 
the  Canoa  with  them,  which  they  were  sent  for,  and  3  or 
4  day?  afterward  the  2  Canoas  were  sent  out  again  for 
another,  which  they  likewise  brought  aboard.  These 
Canoas  were  fitted  with  Thoats'  or  Benches,  Straps'  and 
Oars  fit  for  service;  and  one  of  these  Captain  Eaton  had 
•'  T  his  share,  and  we  the  other,  which  we  fixt  for  landing 
'■len  when  occasion  required.  While  we  lay  here,  we 
■ .  I'd  our  Water,  and  cut  a  great  many  Looms,  or 
Handles,  or  Staves  for  Oars;  for  here  is  plenty  of  Lance- 
wood.*  which  is  most  proper  for  that  use.  1  never  saw 
iTjv  in  the  Scmth-Scas,  but  in  this  place:  there  is  plenty 

f"  it  in  Jamaica,  especially  at  a  plate  called  Blcwficlds  (not 
H  cwiiclds  River  which  is  on  the  Main)  near  the  West  end 

f  that  Island.  The  Lancc-wood  grows  strait  like  our 
rtxing  Ashes;  it  is  very  hard,  tough  and  heavy,  therefore 
Priraicen  esteem  it  very  much,  not  only  to  make  looms 
f'r  Oaf*,  but  Scowring-Rods  for  their  Guns;  for  they  have 
<ctdom  less  than  3  or  4  spare  Rods  for  fear  one  should 
brak.  and  they  are  much  better  than  Roils  made  of  Ash. 
The    Day  before  we  went  from  hence.  Mr.   Edward 

*  Irumd  of  rowlocks  or  tholc-pins. 
Vari-yari,'  a  (oiifih,  duiic,  black  or  ydlow  wood 
tap  joints  of  fitliinii-KxIi. 


CAPTAIN  DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Davis,  the  Company's  Quarter-Master, .  was  made  Captain 
1684  by  consent  of  all  the  Company;  for  it  was  his  place  by 
Succession.  The  20th  day  of  July  we  sailed  from  this  Bay 
of  Caldera,  with  Captain  Eaton,  and  our  Prize  which  we 
brought  from  Gallapagos  in  Company,  directing  our  Course 
for  Rea  Leja.  The  Wind  was  at  North,  which  altho*  but 
an  ordinary  Wind,  yet  carried  us  in  three  days  abrest  of  our 
intended  Port. 

Rea  Leja  is  the  most  remarkable  Land  on  all  this  Coast, 
for  there  is  a  high  peeked  burning  Mountain,  called  by  the 
Spaniards  Volcan-Vejo,^  or  the  Old  Volcan.  Thb  must 
be  brought  to  bear  N.  E.  then  steer  in  directly  with  the 
Mountain,  and  that  course  will  bring  you  to  the  Harbour. 
The  Sea  winds  are  here  at  S.  S.  W.  therefore  Ships  that 
come  hither  must  take  the  Sea-winds,  for  there  is  no  going 
in  with  the  Land-wind.  The  Volcan  may  be  easily  known, 
because  there  is  not  any  other  so  high  a  Mountain  near  it, 
neither  is  there  any  that  appears  in  the  like  form  all  along 
the  Coast ;  besides  it  smoaks  all  the  day,  and  in  the  night 
it  sometimes  sends  forth  flames  of  Fire.  This  Mountain 
may  be  seen  20  leagues :  being  within  3  leagues  of  the 
Harbour,  the  entrance  into  it  may  be  seen ;  there  is  a  small 
flat  low  Island  which  makes  the  Harbor,  it  is  about  a  mile 
long,  and  a  quarter  of  a  Mile  broad,  and  is  from  the  Main 
about  a  mile  and  half.  There  is  a  Channel  at  each  end  of 
the  Island,  the  West  Channel  is  the  widest  and  safest,  yet 
at  the  N.  W.  point  of  the  Island  there  is  a  shole  which 
Ships  must  take  heed  of  in  going  in.  Being  past  that 
shole,  you  must  keep  close  to  the  Island,  for  there  is  a 
shallow  sandy  point  strikes  over  from  the  Main  almost  half 
way.  The  East  Channel  is  not  so  wide,  besides  there  runs 
a  stronger  Tide;  therefore  Ships  seldom  or  never  go  in 
that  way.  This  Harbour  is  capable  of  receiving  2cx>  Sail 
of  Ships ;  the  best  riding  is  near  the  Main,  where  there  is 
7  or  8  fathom  water,  clean  hard  Sand. 

Rea  Leja  Town  is  2  leagues  from  hence,  and  there  are 
2  Creeks  that  run  towards  it ;  the  Westermost  comes  near 

*  The  observed  height  of  this  volcano  is  1689  metres  or  about  5500  feet. 

144 


REA   LEJA    ISLAND   AND   HARBOUR 

t  backddc  of  the  Town,  the  other  runs  up  ro  the  Town, 

E  nothcr  Ships  nor  Barks  can  go  so  far.    These  Creeks  are 

ry  narrow,  and  the  Land  on  each  side  drowned  and  full 

F  red  Mangrove  Trees.    About  a  Mile  and  half  below  the 

Town,  on  the  Banks  of  the  East  Creek,  the  Spaniards  had 

OK  up  a  strong  Breast -work;  it  was  likewise  reported  they 

hid  another  on  the  West  Creek,  both  so  advantageously 

rUcrd,  that  lO  Men  might  with  ease  keep  200  Men  from 

iixiding.     I  shall  give  a  description   of  the  Town  in  my 

■rTum  hither,  and  therefore  forbear  to  do  it  here.     Where- 

■  re  to  resume  the  thread  of  our  course,  we  were  now  in 

^ht   vf  the  Volcan,  being  by  estimation  7  or  8   leagues 

ri«i  the  shore,  and  the  Mountain  bearing  N.  E,  we  took 

".  our  Topsails  and  hal'd  up  our  Courses,  intending  to  go 

*ith  our  Canoas  into  the  Harbour  in  the  night.     In  the 

-".  cning  we  had  a  very  hard  Tornado,  out  of  the  N.  E. 

*[th  much  Thunder,  Lightning  and  Rain.     The  violence 

r'  the    Wind   did    not   last    long,    yet   it  was    1 1    clock   at 

T^hc  before  wc  got  out  our  Canoas,  and  then  it  was  quite 

ilm.     Wc  rowed  in  directly  for  the  shore,  and  thought  to 

■JVC  reach'd  it  before  day,  but  it  was  9  a  clock   in   the 

morning  before  wc  got  into  the  Harbour.     When  wc  came 

VTifain  a  league  of  the  Island  of  Rea  Leja,  that  makes  the 

Harbour,  wc  saw  3  House  on  it,  and  coming  nearer  we 

aiw  1  or  3  Men,  who  stood  and  looked  on  us  till  we  came 

within  half  a  mile  of  the  Island,  then  they  went  into  their 

Cams,  which  lay  on  the  inside  of  the  Island,  and  rowed 

■■/wardi  ibc  Main;  but  we  overtook  them  before  they  got 

■cr.  and  brought  them  back  again  to  the  Island.     There 

>  a»  a  Honcrtun  right  against  us  on  the  Main  when  we  took 

riw  Canoa,  who  immediately  rode  away  towards  the  Town 

»  &*t  a«  he  could.    The  rest  of  our  Canoas  rowed  heavily, 

■nd  did  not  come  to  the  Island  till   12  a  clock,  therefore 

»=  were  forced  to  stay  for  them.     Before  they  came,  we 

"imined  the  Prisoners,  who  told  us,  that  they  were  set  there 

■  watch,  for  the  Governour  of  Rca  Lcja  received  a  Letter 

.-•wt  a  month  before,  wherein   he  was  advised  of  some 

>  come  into  the  Sea,  and  therefore  admonished  to 


ic  oreful ;  that  immediately  thereupon  the  Governor  had 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  caused  a  House  to  be  built  on  this  Island,  and  ordered  4 
1684  Mgj^  (Q  ijg  continually  there  to  watch  night  and  day;  and 
if  they  saw  any  Ship  coming  thither  they  were  to  give 
notice  of  it.  They  said  they  did  not  expect  to  see  Boats 
or  Canoas,  but  lookt  out  for  a  Ship.  At  first  they  took 
us  in  our  advanced  Canoa  to  be  some  Men  that  had  been 
cast  away  and  lost  our  Ship;  till  seeing  3  or  4  Gincas 
more,  they  began  to  suspect  what  we  were.  They  told  us 
likewise,  that  the  Horseman  which  we  saw  did  come  to 
them  every  morning,  and  that  in  less  than  an  hours  time 
he  could  be  at  the  Town.  When  Captain  Eaton  and  his 
Canoas  came  ashore,  we  told  them  what  had  happened.  It 
was  now  3  hours  since  the  Horseman  rode  away,  and  we 
could  not  expect  to  get  to  the  Town  in  less  than  two 
hours ;  in  which  time  the  Governour  having  notice  of  our 
coming,  might  be  provided  to  receive  us  at  his  Breast- 
works ;  therefore  we  thought  it  best  to  defer  this  Design 
till  another  time. 

There  is  a  fine  Spring  of  fresh  water  on  the  Island, 
there  are  some  Trees  also,  but  the  biggest  part  is  Savannah, 
whereon  is  good  grass,  though  there  is  no  sort  of  Beast  to 
eat  it.  This  Island  is  in  lat.  12  d.  10  m.  North.  Here 
we  stayed  till  4  a  clock  in  the  afternoon ;  then  our  Ships 
being  come  within  a  league  of  the  shore,  we  all  went  on 
board,  and  steered  for  the  Gulf  of  Amapalla,^  intending 
there  to  careen  our  Ships. 

The  26th  of  July  Capt.  Eaton  came  aboard  our  Ship, 
to  consult  with  Captain  Davis,  how  to  get  some  Indians  to 
assist  us  in  careening :  it  was  concluded,  that  when  we  came 
near  the  Gulf,  Captain  Davis  should  take  two  Canoas,  well 
mann'd,  and  go  before,  and  Capt.  Eaton  should  stay  aboard. 
According  to  this  agreement,  Capt.  Davis  went  away  for 
the  Gulf  the  next  day. 

The  Gulf  of  Amapalla  is  a  great  Arm  of  the  Sea  run- 
mng  8  or  10  leagues  into  the  Country.  It  is  bounded  on 
the  South-side  of  its  Entrance  with  Point  Casivina,  and  on 
the  N.  W.  side  with  St.  Michael's   Mount.     Both  these 

'  Now  the  Fonseca  Gulf. 
146 


AMAPALLA   AND    POINT   CASIVINA 
i  mrc  very  remarkable:  Point  Casivina  is  i 


high 


nd   Point,  which   at   Sea 


I  like  an  Island ;  because  the  Land  withir 
St.  Michael's  Mount  is  a  very  high  peeked  Hill, 
Very  steep :  the  Land  at  the  foot  of  it  on  the  S.  E. 
nde,  is  low  and  even,  for  at  least  a  mile.  From  this  low 
Land  the  Gulf  of  Amapalla  enti^rs  on  that  side.  Between 
this  low  Land  and  Point  Casivina,  there  are  two  con- 
ndcnble  high  Islands;  the  Southermost  is  called  Mangcra, 
the  other  is  called  Amapalla ;  and  they  are  two  miles 
■sunder. 

Mangcra  is  a  high  round  Island,  about   2    leagues  in 

^^jomtmsn,  appearing  like  a  tall  Grove.     It  is  invironed  with 

^■ocks  all  round,  only  a  small  Cove,  or  sandy  Bay  on  the 

^■^  E.  side.     The  Mold  and  Soil  of  this  Island  is  black, 

^^■t  not  deep;  it  is  mixt  with  Stones,  yet  very  productive 

^^m  brgc  tall  timber  Trees.     In  the  middle  of  the  Island 

^^Krc  ts  an  Indian  Town,  and  a  fair  Spanish  Church.     The 

^^bians  have  Plantations  of  Maiz  round  the  Town,  and 

wmc   Planuins:  They  have  a  few  Cocks  and  Hens,  but 

Bit  other  son  o(  tame  Fowl ;  neither  have  they  any  sort 

"f  Bean,  but  Cats  and  Dogs.     There  is  a  path  from  the 

Town  to  the  sandy  Bay.  but  the  Way  is  steep  and  rocky, 

K',  this  sandy  Bay  there  arc  always  to  or  12  Canoas  lie 

-.lied  up  dry,  except  when  they  are  in  use. 

Amapalla  is  a  larger  Island  than  Mangcra ;  the  Soil 
■!L»ch  the  same.  There  arc  two  Towns  on  it,  about  two 
'•tlJcs  asunder;  one  on  the  North-side,  the  other  on  the 
!  -sst-ftde  r  That  on  the  East-side  is  not  above  a  mile  from 
"•e  Sea;  it  stands  on  a  Plain  on  the  top  of  an  Hill,  the 
i'*th  (o  it  so  steep  and  rocky,  that  a  few  Men  might  keep 
.  ■•n  a  great  number,  only  with  Stones.  There  is  a  very 
■■i\T  Church  standing  in  the  midst  of  the  Town.  The  other 
iTovn  is  not  so  big,  yet  it  has  a  good  handsom  Church. 
c  thing  I  have  observed  in  all  the  Indian  Towns  under 
t  Spanish  Government,  as  well  in  these  parts  in  the  Bay 
'impeachy,  and  elsewhere,  that  the  Images  of  the  Virgin 
vand  othtr  Saints,  (with  which  all  their  Churches  were 
;  still  painted  in  an  Indian  Complexion,  and  partly 
'47 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  in  that  Dress;  but  in  those  Towns  which  are  inhabited 
1684  chiefly  by  Spaniards,  the  Saints  also  conform  themselves  to 
the  Spanish  Garb  and  Complexion.  The  Houses  here  arc 
but  mean;  the  Indians  of  both  Plains  have  good  Field 
Maiz,  remote  from  the  Town :  They  have  but  few  Plan- 
tains, but  they  have  abundance  of  large  Hog-plumb  Trees, 
growing  about  their  Houses.  The  Tree  that  bears  this 
Fruit  is  as  big  as  our  largest  Plumb-tree :  The  Leaf  is  of 
a  dark  green  colour,  and  as  broad  as  the  Leaf  of  a  Plumb- 
tree  ;  but  they  are  shaped  like  the  Haw-thorn  Leaf.  The 
Trees  are  very  brittle  Wood ;  The  Fruit  is  oval,  and  as 
big  as  a  small  Horse-Plumb.  It  is  at  first  very  green,  but 
when  it  is  ripe,  one  side  is  yellow,  the  other  red.  It  hath 
a  great  stone,  and  but  little  substance  about  it :  The  Fruit 
is  pleasant  enough ;  but  I  do  not  remember  that  ever  I  saw 
one  thoroughly  ripe,  that  had  not  a  Maggot  or  two  in  it. 
I  do  not  remember  that  I  did  ever  see  any  of  this  Fruit  in 
the  South  Seas ;  but  at  this  place.  In  the  Bay  of  Campeachy 
they  are  very  plentiful,  and  in  Jamaica  they  plant  them  to 
fence  their  Ground.  These  Indians  have  also  some  Fowls, 
as  those  at  Mangera :  No  Spaniards  dwell  among  them,  but 
only  one  Padre  or  Priest,  who  serves  for  all  three  Towns ; 
these  two  at  Amapalla,  and  that  at  Mangera.  They  are 
under  the  Governor  of  the  Town  of  St.  Michaels,  at  the 
foot  of  St.  Michaels  Mount,  to  whom  they  pay  their  Tribute 
in  Maiz ;  being  extreamly  poor,  yet  very  contented.  They 
have  nothing  to  make  Money  of,  but  their  Plantations  of 
Maiz  and  their  Fowls ;  the  Padre  or  Fryar  hath  his  tenths 
of  it,  and  knows  to  a  peck  how  much  every  Man  hath, 
and  how  many  Fowls,  of  which  they  dare  not  kill  one, 
tho'  they  are  sick,  without  leave  from  him.  There  was 
(as  I  said)  never  another  white  Man  on  these  Islands,  but 
the  Fryar.  He  could  speak  the  Indian  Language,  as  all 
Fryars  must  that  live  among  them.  In  this  vast  Country 
of  America  there  are  divers  Nations  of  Indians,  different 
in  their  Language,  therefore  those  Fryars  that  are  minded 
to  live  among  any  Nation  of  the  Indians,  must  learn  the 
Language  of  those  People  they  propose  to  teach.  Although 
these   here   are  but  poor,  yet  the   Indians  in  many  other 

148 


SLANDS    IN    AMAPALLA    GULF 


^^Bces  have  great  Riches,  which  the  Spaniards  draw  from  . 
^^pem  fcr  Trifles:  In  such  Places  the  Fryars  get  plentiful  ' 
■  Incomes ;  as  particularly  in  the  Bay  of  Campeachy,  where 
the  Indians  have  lai^c  Cacao-walks ;  or  in  other  places 
where  they  plant  C<Khonec!-Trees,  or  Silvester-Trees ; ' 
or  where  they  gather  Vinellocs,  and  in  such  places  where 
they  gather  Gold.  In  such  places  as  these,  the  Fryars  do 
get  a  g«ai  deal  of  Wealth.  There  was  but  one  of  all  the 
Indian*  on  both  these  Islands  that  could  speak  Spanish  ; 
be  could  write  Spanish  atsn,  being  bred  up  purposely,  to 
keep  the  Registers  and  Books  of  Account :  He  was  Secre- 
tary to  both  Islands.  They  had  a  Casica '  too,  (a  small  sort 
of  Magistrate  the  Indians  have  amongst  themselves)  but  he 
Duild  Dcithcr  write  nor  speak  Spanish. 

There  arc  a  great  many  more  Islands  in  this  Bay,  but 
none  inhabited  as  these.  There  is  one  pretty  large  Island, 
belonging  to  a  Nunnery,  as  the  Indians  told  us,  this  was 
5tocketl  with  Bulls  and  Cows;  there  were  3  or  4  Indians 
fired  there  to  look  after  the  Cattle,  for  the  sake  of  which 
wt  often  frequented  this  Island,  while  we  lay  in  the  Bay ; 
tliey  art  all  low  Islands,  except  Amapalla  and  Mangera. 
There  are  two  Channels  to  come  into  this  gulf,  one  between 
Point  Casivina  and  Mangera,  the  other  between  Mangera 
and  Amapalla :  The  latter  is  the  best.  The  Riding-place 
is  on  the  East  side  of  Amapalla,  right  against  a  spot  of  low 
rround  ;  for  all  the  Island  except  this  one  place  is  high 
I^and.  Running  in  farther.  Ships  may  anchor  near  the 
Main,  on  the  N.  E.  side  of  the  Island  Amapalla.  This 
t  tike  plaa  most  frequented  by  Spaniards :  It  is  called  the 
Port  oif  Martin  Lopez.  This  Gulf  or  Lake  runs  in  some 
Ijcaguo  beyond  all  the  Islands;  but  it  is  shole  Water,  and 
not  capable  of  Ships. 

It  %ras  into  this  Gulf  that  Capt.  Davis  was  gone  with 
the  two  Canoas,  to  endeavour  for  a  Prisoner,  to  gain 
tfTtdligencc,  if  possble,  before  our  Ships  came  in :  He 
ame  the  first  Night  to  Mangera,  but  for  want  of  a  Pilot, 
lid   ooc    know    where    to    look    for    the    Town.     In    the 


'  TW  ttlrcMcr  im  »  the  wild  m 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIERS   VOYAGES 

AN.  Morning  he  found  a  great  many  Canoas  haled  up  on  the 
i^^A  Bay ;  and  from  that  Bay  found  a  Path  which  led  him  and 
his  Company  to  the  Town.  The  Indians  saw  our  Ships  in 
the  Evening  coming  towards  the  Island,  and  being  before 
informed  of  Enemies  in  the  Sea,  they  kept  Scouts  out 
all  Night  for  fear  :  who  seeing  Capt.  Davis  coming,  run 
into  the  Town,  and  alarmed  all  the  People.  When  Capt. 
Davis  came  thither,  they  all  run  into  the  Woods.  The 
Fryar  happened  to  be  there  at  this  time;  who  being 
unable  to  ramble  into  the  Woods,  fell  into  Capt.  Davis*s 
Hands :  there  were  two  Indian  Boys  with  him,  who  were 
likewise  taken.  Capt.  Davis  went  only  to  get  a  Prisoner, 
therefore  was  well  satisfied  with  the  Fryar,  and  immedi- 
ately came  down  to  the  Sea-side.  He  went  from  thence 
to  the  Island  Amapalla,  carrying  the  Fryar  and  the  two 
Indian  Boys  with  him.  These  were  his  Pilots  to  conduct 
him  to  the  Landing-place,  where  they  arrived  about  Noon. 
They  made  no  stay  here,  but  left  3  or  4  Men  to  look 
after  the  Canoas,  and  Capt.  Davis  with  the  rest  marched 
to  the  Town,  taking  the  Fryar  with  them.  The  Town, 
as  is  before  noted,  is  about  a  Mile  from  the  Landing- 
place,  standing  in  a  Plain  on  the  top  of  a  Hill,  having  a 
very  steep  ascent  to  go  to  it.  All  the  Indians  stood  on 
the  top  of  the  Hill  waiting  Capt.  Davis's  coming. 

The  Secretary,  mentioned  before,  had  no  great  kindness 
for  the  Spaniards.  It  was  he  that  perswaded  the  Indians 
to  wait  Capt.  Davis  his  coming ;  for  they  were  all  running 
into  the  Woods;  but  he  told  them,  that  if  any  of  the 
Spaniards  enemies  came  thither,  it  was  not  to  hurt  them, 
but  the  Spaniards  whose  Slaves  they  were ;  and  that  their 
Poverty  would  protect  them.  This  Man  with  the  Casica 
stood  more  forward  than  the  rest,  at  the  Bank  of  the  Hill, 
when  Capt.  Davis  with  his  Company  appeared,  beneath. 
They  called  out  therefore  in  Spanish,  demanding  of  our 
Men,  What  they  were,  and  from  whence  they  came.?  To 
whom  Capt.  Davis  and  his  Men  replyed.  They  were 
Biscaycrs,  and  that  they  were  sent  thither  by  the  King  of 
Spain  to  clear  those  Seas  from  Enemies;  that  their  Ships 
were  coming  into  the  Gulf  to  careen,  and  that  they  came 

150 


ISLANDS   IN   AMAPALLA    GULF 

■tbcr  before  the  Ships,  to  seek  a  convenient  place  for  it,  ak.' 
I  also  to  desire  the  Indians  Assistance.  The  Secretary,  '^* 
.as  I  said  before,  was  the  only  Man  that  could  speak 
Jiish,  told  them  that  they  were  welcome,  for  he  had 
«  great  respect  few  any  old  Spain  Men,  especially  for  the 
Biscaycn,  of  whom  he  had  heard  a  very  honourable  Report ; 
•hereforc  he  desired  them  to  come  up  to  their  Town. 
Captain  Davis  and  his  Men  immediately  ascended  the  Hill, 
:he  Fryar  going  before ;  and  they  were  received  with  a 
at  deal  of  affection  by  the  Indians.  The  Casica  and 
iry  embraced  Capt.  Davis,  and  the  other  Indians 
ived  his  Men  with  the  like  Ceremony.  These  Saluta- 
i  being  ended,  they  all  marched  towards  the  Church, 
r  that  t«  the  place  of  all  pubtick  Meetings,  and  all  Plays 
Pastimes  are  acted  there  also ;  therefore  in  the 
hurchcs  belonging  to  Indian  Towns  they  have  ail  sorts  of 
Vizards  ^fd  strange  antick  Dresses  both  for  Men  and 
Women,  and  abundance  of  Musical  Hautboys  and  Strum- 
Mrums.  The  Strumstrura  is  made  somewhat  like  a 
Ctiem;  most  of  those  that  the  Indians  use  are  made  of 
a  large  Goad '  cut  in  the  midst,  and  a  thin  board  laid  over 
the  hollow,  atHi  which  is  fastned  to  the  sides :  this  serves 
for  the  belly ;  over  which  the  strings  are  placed.  The 
nighti  before  any  Holidays,  or  the  nights  ensuing,  are  the 
times  when  they  all  meet  to  make  merry.  Their  Mirth 
consists  in  singing,  dancing,  and  sporting  in  those  antick 
Habits,  and  using  as  many  antick  gestures.  If  the  Moon 
thine  they  use  but  few  Torches,  if  not,  the  Church  is  full 
■/  light.  They  meet  at  these  times  all  sorts  of  both  Sexes. 
All  the  Indians  thai  I  have  been  acquainted  with  who  are 
under  the  Spaniards,  seem  to  be  more  melancholy  than 
tKber  Indiana  that  are  free;  and  at  these  publick  Meetings, 
•Sen  they  are  in  the  greatest  of  their  Jollity,  their  Mirth 
kcsns  to  be  rather  forced  than  real.  Their  Songs  arc  very 
mdancholy  and  doleful ;  50  is  their  Musick :  but  whether 
a  be  natunU  to  the  Indians  to  be  thus  melancholy,  or  the 
t  of  thdr  Slavery,  I  am  not  certain  :  But  I  have  always 


Couni. 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  been  prone  to  believe,  that  they  are  then  only  con- 
'^^4  doling  their  misfortunes,  the  loss  of  their  Country  and 
Liberties  :  which  altho'  these  that  are  now  living  do  not 
know,  nor  remember  what  it  was  to  be  free,  yet  there 
seems  to  be  a  deep  impression  in  their  thoughts  of  the 
Slavery  which  the  Spaniards  have  brought  them  under, 
increas'd  probably  by  some  Traditions  of  their  ancient 
Freedom. 

Capt.  Davis  intended  when  they  were  all  in  the  Church 
to  shut  the  Doors,  and  then  make  a  bargain  with  them, 
letting  them  know  what  he  was,  and  so  draw  them  after- 
wards by  fair  means  to  our  assistance :  the  Fryar  being  with 
him,  who  had  also  promised  to  engage  them  to  it :  but 
before  they  were  all  in  the  Church,  one  of  Capt.  Davis 
his  Men  pusht  one  of  the  Indians  to  hasten  him  into 
the  Church.  The  Indian  immediately  ran  away,  and 
all  the  rest  taking  alarm,  sprang  out  of  the  Church  like 
Deer ;  it  was  hard  to  say  which  was  first :  and  Captain 
Davis,  who  knew  nothing  of  what  hapned,  was  left  in  the 
Church  only  with  the  Fryar.  When  they  were  all  fled. 
Captain  Davis  his  Men  fired  and  kill'd  the  Secretary ;  and 
thus  our  hopes  perished  by  the  Indiscretion  of  one  foolish 
Fellow. 

In  the  Afternoon  the  Ships  came  into  the  Gulf  between 
Point  Casivina  and  Mangera,  and  anchored  near  the  Island 
Amapalla,  on  the  East-side,  in  lo  fathom  Water,  clean 
hard  Sand.  In  the  evening  Captain  Davis  and  his  Company 
came  aboard,  and  brought  the  Fryar  with  them ;  who  told 
Captain  Davis,  that  if  the  Secretary  had  not  been  kilPd,  he 
could  have  sent  him  a  Letter  by  one  of  the  Indians  that 
was  taken  at  Mangera,  and  perswaded  him  to  come  to  us ; 
but  now  the  only  way  was  to  send  one  of  those  Indians  to 
seek  the  Casica,  and  that  himself  would  instruct  him  what 
to  say,  and  did  not  question  but  the  Casica  would  come  in 
on  his  word.  The  next  day  we  sent  ashoar  one  of  the 
Indians,  who  before  night  returned  with  the  Casica  and 
6  other  Indians,  who  remained  with  us  all  the  time  that  we 
staid  here.  These  Indians  did  us  good  service ;  especially 
in  piloting  us  to  an  Island  where  we  kill'd  Beef  whenever 

152 


lA^ANDS    IN    AMAPALLA    GULF 

V  nnled ;  and  for  this  their  service  we  satisfied  them  to  an. 
their  bans  content.  It  was  at  this  Island  Amapalla,  that  "^^ 
■  pmi  of  Knglish-mcn  and  Fn-rnih-men  '  came  afterwards, 
ijr'd  a  great  while,  and  at  last  landed  on  the  Main, 
died  over  Land  to  the  Cape  River,  which  dis- 
[  into  the  North  Seas  near  Cape  Gratia  Dios,  and 
I  llweforc  called  the  Cape  River  :  Near  the  Head  of  this 
r  they  made  Bark  logs  (which  I  shall  describe  in  the 
t  Chapter)  and  so  went  into  the  North  Seas.  This 
*c  way  thai  Captain  Sharp  had  proposed  to  go  if  he 
xa  put  to  it ;  for  this  way  was  partly  known  to 
«rs  by  the  discovery  that  was  made  into  the  Country 
1  ]0  Years  since,  by  a  Party  of  English  Men=  that  went 
t  River  in  Canoas,  about  as  far  as  the  place  where 
e French  Men  made  their  Bark-logs:  thore  they  landed 
i  nurchcd  10  a  Town  called  Segovia  in  the  Country. 
J  were  near  a  month  getting  up  the  River,  for  there 
T  many  Cataracts,  where  they  were  often  forced  to  leave 
t  Hirer,  and  hale  their  Canoas  ashoar  over  the  Land,  till 
J  woe  past  the  Cataracts,  and  then  launch  their  Canoas 
B  into  the  River.  I  have  discoursed  several  Men  that 
:  in  that  Expedition,  and  if  I  mistake  not.  Captain 
pwas  one  of  them.      But  to  return  to  our  Voyage  in 

t  pu\y  of  Pre i»ch  and   English   burcanecrs   whom   Grogniet  had 

■    ■      Crcgnid  die*l  of  b  wound  received  nl  the  lakinjj  of  Ciuayaquit 

The  company  landed  on  ihe  and  January,  lASH.     Nine  days 

iMik  SeKovia.    On  the  t^ih  Janunry  they  arrived  at  the  Cape 

ere  they  buili  "pipcrica,"  or  rafts,  on  winch  they  floated  down 

Thiej  had  hones  tu  help  ihcm  across  country,  so  thai  (he  expcdi- 

»  lew  remarkabte  than  thai  of  Sawklns's  men  in  t6tki.    After  they 

■Inrlced  on  ibeit  piperics  they  suflered  many  hardships,  hut  arrived 

I  C^e  Gntias  a  Dioi.    An  Knglish  bark  carried  ihcm  lo  Petit 

I  tbey  anchored  on  the  Sth  April,  after  an  absence  of  nearly 

I  cannot  be  identified  ;  but  it  rcMmbles  (hat  cited  by  Ex- 

i  WTcnth  chaplcr.     'Fhe  leader  in  Excjuemcling's  raid  was 

i,boro  at  Jamaica,"  who*e"inicni  was  to  rob  the  churches, 

iw«  of  the  chief  cidiens  of  the  lown  of  N  icaragua."    Eighty 

I  op  the  river  in  canoai,  and  :ittacked  the  town  on  the 

;  "and  robbed  all  tlie  money  and  pl.iie  they  could  find." 

t  EatjuetnelmK.  "did  they  spare  the  churches  and  most 

The  booty  seems  to  have  been  valued  at  jo,ooo  pieces  nf 

OB.    Tlic  raid  is  not  daicd,  even  approximately.    Captain 

f  plundered  Segovia  in   1675,  with  150  French  and  English 


53 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S  VOYAGES 

AN.   hand;  when  both  our  Ships  were  clean,  and  our  V^ 

1684  filled,  Captain  Davis  and  Captain  Eaton  broke  off  Con 

ships.     CsLpt.  Eaton  took  aboard  of  his  Ships  400  F 

of  Flower,  and  sailed   out  of  the  Gulf  the   second 

of  September. 


154 


CHAP.   VI 

ij  drfiirt  frtm  Amapcila.  Ttrnadtti.  Cape  S,  Franciut.  They 
wrt  Cti^ain  Ealan,  anil  part  again,  hie  ef  Plata  destribed. 
dwtthrr  meeting  with  Caft,  Eaton,  and  their ^nal  parting.  Paint 
S«*/#  Heliena.  Algalrane  a  ml  ef  Tar.  A  Spaniih  If're.i. 
Cnaiimp.  Mania,  Htar  Cape  St.  Lorfm./).  Minlr  Chrlstt. 
Cndanp.  Cape  Blatut.  Payta.  The  BuHdingi  in  Peru.  The 
Seitt/Ptry.  Ctlan.  Bari-Ugt  dexriM.  Piura.  The  Read  of 
Ptjta.  LtUi  di  Terra,  They  c»mi  again  to  Lohoi  dt  tii  Mar, 
Tkt  Bay  of  Guia^il.  hie  of  Saneia  Clara.  A  rich  Spaniih 
tt'reti  there,  Cal-fih.  Point  Arena  in  the  hie  Puna.  The 
liiamd  diuriM.  The  Palmelo-lree.  Tm»  and  Harkeur  ef 
hw.  River  »f  Guiaquil.  Guiaquil  Tav/n,  id  Cemmodittri, 
Catm,  Sariaparilla,  Quito  Cloth.  Of  the  City,  and  Gold,  and 
Jir  if  Qmitt.  They  enter  the  Bay  in  order  to  make  an  attempt 
m  iMr  Town  tf  Guit/quil,  A  great  advantage  itipi  that  might 
km*  iewn  made  if  a  company  of  Negroes  taken  in  Guiaquil  River, 
Thtygt/i  Plata  again,     hie  Plata. 

rHF.  third  day  of  September,  1684,  we  sent  the  ^ 
KrUr  ashoar,  and  left  the  Indians  in  possession  " 
of  the  Prize  which  we  brought  in  hither,  though 
she  was  Mill  half  laden  with  Flower,  and  we 
1  out  with  the  Land  Wind,  passing  between  Amapalla 
Mangera.  When  we  were  a  league  out,  we  saw  a 
■  coming  with  Sail  and  Oars  after  us;  therefore  we 
»]  Sti)  and  staid  for  her.  She  was  a  Canoa  sent  by 
remor  of  St.  Michaels  Town  to  our  Captain,  desir- 
lim  not  to  c«rry  away  the  Friar.  The  Messenger  being 
that  the  Friar  was  set  ashore  a^ain  at  Amapalla,  he 
Dcd  with  joy,  and  we  made  Sail  again,  having  the 
It  W.  N.  W.  Wc  steered  towards  the  Coast  of 
wc  had  Tornadoes  every  day  till  we  made  Cape  St. 
•55 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN    Francisco,  which  from  June  to  November  are  very  common 
^^^^  on   these  Coasts;  and   we   had  with  the  Tornadoes  very 
much  Thunder,  Lightning  and  Rain.    When  the  Tornadoes 
were  over,  the  Winds,  which  while  they  lasted,  were  most 
from  the  South  East,  came  about  again  to  the  West,  and 
never  failed  us  till  we  were  in  sight  of  Cape  St.  Francisco, 
where  we  found   the  Wind  at  South  with  fair  Weather. 
This  Cape  is  in  lat.  o  i  d.  oo  North.     It  is  a  high  bluff,  or 
full  point  of  Land,  cloathed  with  tali  great  Trees.     Pass- 
ing by  this  Point,  coming  from  the  North,  you  will  sec  a 
small  low  Point,  which  you  might  suppose  to  be  the  Cape; 
but  you  are  then  past  i:,  and  presently  afterwards  it  appears 
with  three  points.     The  Land  in  the  Country,  within  this 
Cape,  is  very  high,  and  the  Mountains  commonly  appear 
very  black.     When  we  came  in  with  this  Cape,  we  overtook 
Captain  Eaton,  plying  under  the  shore :  he  in  his  passage 
from  Amapalla,  while  he  was  on  that  Coast,  met  with  such 
terrible  Tornadoes  of  Thunder  and  Lightning,  that  as  he 
and  all  his  Men  related,  they  had  never  met  with  the  like 
in  any  place.     They  were  very  much  affrighted  by  them, 
the  Air  smelling  very  much  of  Sulphur,  and  they  appre- 
hending themselves  in  great  danger  of  being  burnt  by  the 
Lightning.     He  touched  at    the    Island    Cocos,    and    put 
ashore  200  Packs  of  Flower  there,  and  loaded  his  Boat  with 
Coco-Nuts,  and  took  in  FVesh  Water.     In  the  evening  we 
separated  again  from  Captain  Eaton  ;  for  he  stood  off^to  Sea, 
and  we  plied  up  under  the  shore,  making  our  best  advantage 
both  of  Sea  and  Land  Winds.     The  Sea  Winds  are  here  at 
South,  the  Land  Winds  at  S.  S.  E.  but  sometimes  when  we 
came  abrest  of  a  River  we  should  have  the  Wind  at  S.  E. 

The  20th  day  of  September  we  came  to  the  Island 
Plata,  and  Anchored  in  16  fathom.  We  had  very  good 
weather  from  the  time  that  we  fell  in  with  Cape  St. 
Francisco;  and  were  now  fallen  in  again  with  the  same 
places  from  whence  I  begin  the  account  of  this  Voyage  in 
the  first  Chapter,  having  now  compass'd  in  the  whole 
Continent  of  the  South  America. 

The  Island  Plata,  as  some  report,  was  so  named  by  the 
Spaniards,   after  Sir  Francis   Drake   took  the   Cacafoga^  a 

156 


THE  ISLE   PLATA 

--,ip  chiefly  laden  with  Plate,  wKich  they  say  he  brought    \hA 

iher,'  «nd  divided  it  here  with  his  Men.  It  is  about  4  ' 
-ile  long,  and  a  mile  and  half  broad,  and  of  a  good  heighth. 
i:  i»  bounded  with  high  steep  Cliffs  clear  round,  only  at 
one  place  on  the  East  side.  The  top  of  it  is  flat  and  even, 
the  Soil  sandy  and  dry :  the  Trees  it  produceth  arc  but 
tnall  bodied,  low,  and  grow  thin  ;  and   there  are  only  3  or 

-  torts  of  Trees  all  unknown  to  us.  I  observed  they  were 
-Mch  over-grown  with  long  Moss.     There  is  good  Grass, 

-pedally  in  the  beginning  of  the  year.  There  is  no  Water 
n  this  Island  but  at  one  place  on  the  East  side,  close  by 
■•z  Sea;  there  it  drills  slowly  down  from  the  Rocks,  where 
ii  nuy  be  received  into  Vessels,  There  was  plenty  of 
Gnats,  but  they  are  now  all  destroyed.  There  is  no  other 
ten  of  Land  Animal  that  I  did  ever  see ;  here  are  plenty 
■>f  Boobies  and  Men  of  War  Birds.  The  anchoring  place 
<>o  the  East  side,  near  the  middle  of  the  Island,  close  by 

■  -.c  shear,  within  two  Cables  lengths  of  the  sandy  Bay  : 
■^cre  i*  about  18  or  20  fathom  good  fast  oazy  ground,  and 

nooth  water  ;  for  the  S.  E.  point  of  the  Island  shelters  from 
•~c  South  Winds  which  constantly  blow  here.     From  the 

-  E.  point  there  strikes  out  a  small  shole  a  quarter  of  a  mile 
'j:o  the  Sea,  where  there  is  commonly  a  great  riplin  or 
•■:<rking  of  short  waves,  during  all  the  Flood.  The  Tide 
-:jn»  pretty  stronp,  the  Flood  to  the  South,  and  the  Ebb 

■  the  North.  There  is  good  landing  on  the  Sandy  Bay 
.sunn  the  Anchoring  place,  from  whence  you  may  go  up 
-jIO  the  Island,  and  at  no  place  besides.  There  arc  2  or  3 
-';!h,  «ecp,  small  Rocks,  at  the  S.  E.  point,  not  a  Cables 
m^h  from  the  Island  ;  and  another  much  bigger  at  the 
^.  E  end  :  it  is  deep  water  all  round,  but  at  the  anchoring 

ace,  ami  at  the  shole  at  the  S.  E.  point.  This  Island  lieth 
-  lat.  o  t  d.  10  m.  South.  It  is  distant  from  Cape  St. 
'.'•renio  4  or  y  leagues,  bearing  from  it  W.  S.  W.  and  half 

TOtnt  westerly.  At  this  Island  are  pletity  of  those  small 
x-i  Turtle  spoken  of  in  my  last  Chapter. 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  The  2 1  St  day  Captain  Eaton  came  to  an  Anchor  by  us: 
^^^4  he  was  very  willing  to  have  consorted  with  us  again ;  but 
Captain  Davis's  Men  were  so  unreasonable,  that  they 
would  not  allow  Captain  Eaton's  Men  an  equal  share  with 
them  in  what  they  got :  therefore  Captain  Eaton  staid  here 
but  one  night,  and  the  next  day  sailed  from  hence,  steering 
away  to  the  Southward.  We  staid  no  longer  than  the  day 
ensuing,  and  then  we  sailed  toward  Point  St  Hellena,  in- 
tending there  to  land  some  Men  purposely  to  get  Prisoners 
for  Intelligence. 

Point  Santa  Hellena  bears  South  from  the  Island  Plata. 
It  lies  in  lat.  2d.  15  m.  South.  The  Point  is  pretty  high, 
flat,  and  even  at  top,  overgrown  with  many  great  Thistles, 
but  no  sort  of  Tree  ;  at  a  distance  it  appears  like  an  Island, 
because  the  Land  within  it  is  very  low. 

This  Point  strikes  out  West  into  the  Sea,  making  a 
pretty  large  Bay  on  the  North  side.  A  mile  within  the 
Point,  on  the  Sandy  Bay,  close  by  the  Sea,  there  is  a  poor 
small  Indian  Village,  called  Sancta  Hellena ;  the  Land 
about  it  is  low,  sandy  and  barren,  there  are  no  Trees  nor 
Grass  growing  near  it ;  neither  do  the  Indians  produce  any 
Fruit,  Grain,  or  Plant,  but  Water-Melons  only,  which  are 
large  and  very  sweet.  There  is  no  fresh  Water  at  this 
place,  nor  near  it ;  therefore  the  Inhabitants  are  obliged 
to  fetch  all  their  Water  from  the  River  Colanche,  which  is 
in  the  bottom  of  the  Bay,  about  4  leagues  from  it.  Not 
far  from  this  Town  on  the  Bay,  close  by  the  Sea,  about  5 
paces  from  high-water  mark,  there  is  a  sort  of  bitumenous 
matter  boils  out  of  a  little  hole  in  the  Earth ;  it  is  like  thin 
Tar :  the  Spaniards  call  it  Algatrane.  By  much  boiling 
it  becomes  hard  like  Pitch.  It  is  frequently  used  by  the 
Spaniards  instead  of  Pitch ;  and  the  Indians  that  inhabit 
here  save  it  in  Jars.  It  boils  up  most  at  high  Water ;  and 
then  the  Indians  are  ready  to  receive  it.  These  Indians  are 
Fishermen,  and  go  out  to  Sea  on  Bark-logs.  Their  chief 
subsistence  is  Maiz,  most  of  which  they  get  from  ships  that 
come  hither  for  Algatrane.  There  is  good  anchoring  to 
leeward  of  the  Point,  right  against  the  Village :  but  on  the 
West  side  of  the  Point  it  is  deep  Water,  and  no  Anchoring. 

158 


ST.    HELLENA    VILLAGE— MANTA 

The  Spaniards  do  report,  that  there  was  once  a  very  rich  . 
Ship  driven  ashore  here  in  calm,  for  want  of  Wind  to  work  ' 
bo-.  As  soon  as  ever  she  struck  she  hcel'd  off  to  Sea,  7  or 
I  (jithom  Water,  where  she  lies  to  this  day  ;  none  having 
npted  to  fish  for  her,  because  she  lies  deep,  and  there 
»  in  here  a  great  high  Sea.  When  we  were  abreast  of 
Point,  we  sent  away  our  Canoas  in  the  night  to  take 
:  Indian  Village.  They  landed  in  the  morning  betimes 
;  by  the  Town,  and  took  some  Prisoners.  They  took 
:  a  small  Bark  which  the  Indians  had  set  on  fire,  but 
Men  quenched  it,  and  took  the  Indian  that  did  it ; 
I  being  asknl  wherefore  he  set  the  Bark  on  fire,  said, 
ki  there  was  an  Order  from  the  Vice-Roy  lately  set  out, 
mmanding  all  Seamen  to  burn  their  Vessels,  if  attack'd 
'  us,  and  betake  themselves  to  their  Boats.  There  was 
Bark  in  a  small  Cove,  a  Mile  from  the  Village, 
hher  our  Men  went,  thinking  to  take  her,  but  the  Sea- 
I  that  were  aboard  set  her  in  flames  and  fled :  In  the 
nine  our  Men  ame  aboard,  and  brought  the  small 
Bsrk  with  them,  the  fire  of  which  they  had  qut-nched  ;  and 
ilico  we  returned  again  towards  Hlata ;  where  wc  arrived 
t  a6th  day  of  September. 
In  the  Evening  we  sent  out  some  Men  in  our  Bark 
dy  taken,  and  Canoas,  to  an  I ndian  Vi Mage  cal led 
or  3  leagues  to  the  Westward  of  Cape  St. 
nzo;  hoping  there  to  get  other  Prisoners,  for  we 
bid  not  learn  from  those  we  took  at  Point  St.  Hellena 
reason  why  the  Vice-Roy  should  give  such  orders  to 
tbe  Ship».  They  had  a  fresh  Sea-breeze  till  12  a 
Clock  at  Night,  and  then  it  proved  calm  ;  wherefore  they 
'jwed  away  with  their  Canoas  as  near  to  the  Town  as  they 
'loaghi  convenient,  and  lay  still  till  day. 

Manta  is  a  small  Indian  Village  on  the  Main,  distant 
'Vom  the  Island  Plata  7  or  8  leagues.  It  stands  so  advan- 
igeoasly  to  be  seen,  being  built  on  a  small  Ascent,  that  it 
~xkcs  a  very  fiir  prospect  to  the  Sea ;  yet  but  a  few  poor 
altering  Indian  Houses.  There  is  a  very  fine  Church, 
-;'.cned  with  a  great  deal  of  carved  Work.  It  was  formerly 
J  Habitation  of  Spaniards,  but  they  are  all  removed  from 
1S9 


J 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  hence  now.  The  Land  about  it  is  dry  and  sandy,  bearing 
1684  Qj^iy  ^  fg^  shrubby  Trees.  These  Indians  plant  no  manner 
of  Grain  or  Root,  but  are  supplied  from  other  places ;  and 
commonly  keep  a  stock  of  Provision  to  relieve  Ships  that 
want ;  for  this  is  the  first  Settlement  that  Ships  can  touch 
at,  which  come  from  Panama,  bound  to  Lima,  or  any  other 
Port  in  Peru.  The  Land  being  dry  and  sandy,  is  not  fit 
to  produce  Crops  of  Maiz ;  which  is  the  reason  they  plant 
none.  There  is  a  Spring  of  good  Water  between  the 
Village  and  the  Seas. 

On  the  back  of  the  Town,  a  pretty  way  up  in  the 
Country,  there  Is  a  very  high  Mountain,  towring  up  like 
a  Sugar-loaf,  called  Monte-Christo.  It  is  a  very  good 
Sea-mark,  for  there  is  none  like  it  on  all  the  Coast.  The 
Body  of  this  Mountain  bears  due  South  from  Manta. 
About  a  Mile  and  half  from  the  shore,  right  against  the 
Village,  there  is  a  Rock,  which  is  very  dangerous,  because 
it  never  appears  above  Water ;  neither  doth  the  Sea  break 
on  it,  because  here  is  seldom  any  great  Sea ;  yet  it  is  now 
so  well  known,  that  all  Ships  bound  to  this  place  do  easily 
avoid  it.  A  Mile  within  this  Rock  there  is  good  Anchor- 
ing, in  6,  8,  or  10  fathom  Water,  good  hard  Sand,  and 
clear  Ground :  And  a  Mile  from  the  Road  on  the  West 
side,  there  is  a  shoal  running  out  a  Mile  into  the  Sea. 
From  Manta  to  Cape  St.  Lorenzo  the  Land  is  plain  and 
even,  of  an  indifferent  heighth.  [See  a  further  Account  of 
these  Coasts  in  the  Appendix.] 

As  soon  as  ever  the  day  appeared  our  Men  landed,  and 
marched  towards  the  Village,  which  was  about  a  Mile  and 
a  half  from  their  Landing-place :  Some  of  the  Indians  who 
were  stirring,  saw  them  coming,  and  alarmed  their  Neigh- 
bours ;  so  that  all  that  were  able  got  away.  They  took 
only  two  old  Women,  who  both  said,  that  it  was  reported 
that  a  great  many  Enemies  were  come  over  land  thro'  the 
Country  of  Darien  into  the  South  Seas,  and  that  they  were 
at  present  in  Canoas  and  Periagoes :  and  that  the  Vice-Roy 
upon  this  News  had  set  out  the  fore-mentioned  order  for 
burning  their  own  Ships.  Our  Men  found  no  sort  of 
Provision  here ;   the  Vice-Roy  having  likewise  sent  orders 

160 


rCAPTAIN   SWAN 

to  keep  no  Provision,  but  just  to  supply 
themsefvcs.     These    Women    also   said,    that    the    Manta  ' 
Indians  were  sent  over  to  the  Island   Plata,  to  destroy  all 
Goats  there ;    which  they  performed  about  a  Month 
ic ;     With    this  News  our  Men   returned  again,  and 
iv'd  at  Plata  the  next  day. 

Wc  lay  still  at    the  Island  Plata,  being  not    resolved 

what  to  do ;  till  the  second  day  of  October,  and  then  Captain 

Swan  in   the    Cygnet  of   London    arriv'd  there.     He  was 

6Ttcd  out  by  very  eminent  Merchants  of  that  City,'   on  a 

design  only  to  Trade  with  the  Spaniards  or  Indians,  having 

s  very  considerable  Cargo  well  sorted  for  these  parts  of  the 

World  ;    but   meeting   with    divers    Disappointments,    and 

beii^  out  of  hopes  to  obtain  a  Trade  in  these  Seas,  his  Men 

forced  him  to  entertain  a  Company  of  Privateers  which  he 

Tiei  with  near  Nicoya,  a  Town  whither  he  was  going  to 

-ck  a  Trade,  and  these  Privateers  were  bound  thither  in 

t'-Mt*  to  get  a  Ship.     These  were  the  Men  that  we  had 

■  of  at  Manta ;  they  came  over  Land  under  the  com- 

of  Captain  Peter  Harris,   nephew   to  that  Captain 

t,*  who  was  kitl'd  before  Panama.     Captain  Swan  was 

Commander  of  his  own  Ship,  and  Captain  Harris  com- 

a  small    Bark,  under  Captain   Swan.     There  was 

J07  on  all  sides  when   they  arriv'd;  and  immediately 

pon  Captain  Davis  and  Captain  Swan  consorted,  wish- 

for  Captain  Eaton  again.     Our  little  Bark,  which  was 

at  Santa  Hcllena,  was  immediately  sent  out  to  cruize, 

the  Ships  were  fitting;  for  Captain  Swan's  Ship  being 

of  Goods,  was  not  fit  to  entertain   his  new  Guest,  till 

Goods  were  disposed  of;  therefore  he  by  the  consent  of 

le  Super-cargo's,  got  up  all  his  Goods  on  Deck,  and  sold 

any  one  that  would  buy  upon  Trust :  the  rest  was  thrown 

cr-board  into  the  Sea,  except  fine  Goods,  as  Silks,  Muslins, 


'  Tte  adaocbnly    liiatorr   of  Captain    Swan    will    be   if'ven    i 


the 


.   I*«tef    Harri*,  "■  bmve  and    tlout  soU'rcr,   ftnd  a  valiant 

I,  bora  10   the  county  of  Kent,*  who  "  was  t>hoI   thrnugh   both 

E  buMly  iidvcnliiml"  in  ihc  bcMtdin^  of  ihe  ^n.imsh  da^jship 

He  dirul  of  his  wounds  a  day  or  iwo  bier,  April  i;. 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER*S   VOYAGES 

AN.   Stockings,  &c.  and  except  the  Iron,  whereof  he  had  a  good 
'^-^  Quantity,  both  wrought  and  in  Bars :  This  was  saved  for 
Ballast. ' 

The  third  day  after  our  Bark  was  sent  to  cruize,  she 
brought  in  a  Prize  of  4CXD  Tuns,  laden  with  Timber :  They 
took  her  in  the  Bay  of  Guiaquil ;  she  came  from  a  Town  of 
that  Name,  and  was  bound  to  Lima.  The  Commander  of 
this  Prize  said  that  it  was  generally  reported  and  believed 
at  Guiaquil,  that  the  Vice-Roy  was  fitting  out  10  sail  of 
Frigots  to  drive  us  out  of  these  Seas.  This  News  made 
our  unsettled  Crew  wish,  that  they  had  been  perswaded  to 
accept  of  Captain  Eaton^s  Company  on  reasonable  Terms. 
Captain  Davis  and  Captain  Swan  had  some  discourse  con- 
cerning Captain  Eaton ;  they  at  last  concluded  to  send  our 
small  Bark  towards  the  Coast  of  Lima,  as  far  as  the  Island 
Lobos,  to  seek  Captain  Eaton.  This  being  approved  by  all 
hands,  she  was  cleaned  the  next  day,  and  sent  away, 
mann'd  with  20  Men,  10  of  Captain  Davis's,  and  10  of 
Swan's  Men,  and  Captain  Swan  writ  a  Letter  directed  to 
Captain  Eaton,  desiring  his  Company,  and  the  Isle  of  Plata 
was  appointed  for  the  general  Rendezvous.  When  this 
Bark  was  gone,  we  turn'd  another  Bark,  which  we  had,  into 
a  Fircship ;  having  6  or  7  Carpenters,  who  soon  fixt  her ; 
and  while  the  Carpenters  were  at  work  about  the  Fire-ship, 
we  scrubbed  and  cleaned  our  Men  of  War,  as  well  as  time 
and  place  would  permit. 

The  19th  day  of  October  we  finished  our  business,  and 
the  20th  day  we  sailed  towards  the  Island  Lobos,  where 
our  Bark  was  ordered  to  stay  for  us,  or  meet  us  again  at 
Plata.  We  had  but  little  Wind,  therefore  it  was  the  23rd 
day  before  we  passed  by  Point  St.  Hellena.  The  25th  day 
we  crossed  over  the  Bay  of  Guiaquil.  The  30th  day  we 
doubled  Cape  Blanco.  This  Cape  is  in  lat.  3  d.  45  m.  It 
is  counted  the  worst  Cape  in  all  the  South  Seas  to  double, 
passing  to  the  Southward  ;  for  in  all  other  places  Ships  may 
stand  off  to  Sea  20  or  30  Leagues  off,  if  they  find  they  can- 
not get  any  thing  under  the  shore  ;  but  here  they  dare  not 
do  it :  for,  by  relation  of  the  Spaniards,  they  find  a  current 
setting  N.  W.  which  will  carry  a  Ship  oflF  more  in  two  hours, 

162 


f  PAYTA— THE   BUILDINGS    IN    PERU 
\  they  can  run  in  again  in  five.     Besides,  setting  to  the    an. 
thward  they  lose  ground  :  therefore  they  always  beat  up  '''^ 
Under  the  shore,  which  oft-times  they  find  very  difficult, 
3USC  the  wind  commonly  blows  very  strong  at  S.  S.  W. 


'  Land- 


or&  by  W.  without  altering;   tor  here  are  never  any  I 
winds.     This  Cape  is  of  an  indifferent  heighth  :  it  is  fenced 
ni;h  white  Rocks  to  the  Sea ;  for  which  reason,  I  believe, 

■  haih  this  name.     The  Land  in  the  Country  seems  to  be 
.11  of  high,  steep,  rugged  and  barren  Rocks. 

The  2d  day  of  November  we  got  as  high  as  Payta  : 
^c  Uy  about  6  leagues  off  shore  all  the  day,  that  the 
Spaniards  might  not  see  us;  and  in  the  evening  sent  our 
Canoas  ashore  to  take  it,  Mann'd  with  i  lO  Men. 

Payta  is  a  small  Spanish  Sea-Port  Town  in  the  lat.  of 
5d.  15  m.  It  is  built  on  the  Sand,  close  by  the  Sea,  in  a 
nook,  elbow,  or  small  Bay,  under  a  pretty  high  Hill. 
There  are  not  above  75  or  80  Houses,  and  two  Churches. 
The  Hou&cs  arc  but  low  and  ill  built.  The  building  in  this 
Coantry  of  Peru  is  much  alike,  on  all  the  Sea-Coast.  The 
Walk  are  buitt  of  Brick,  made  with  Earth  and  Straw 
knadcd  together :  They  are  about  three  foot  long,  two 
•"oi  broad,  and  a  foot  and  2  half  thick  :  They  never  burn 
-.cm,  but  lay  them  a  long  time  in  the  Sun  to  dry  before 
"<rT  are  used  in  building.  In  some  places  they  have  no 
k'off^  only  Poles  laid  across  from  the  side  walls  and 
^ered  with  matts;  and  then  those  Walls  are  carry'd  up  to 
.  i:ofisidcrable  heighth.  But  where  they  build  Roofs  upon 
--OT  Houses,  the  WaJIs  arc  not  made  so  high,  as  I  said 
efore.  The  Houses  in  general,  all  over  this  Kingdom,  are 
-It  meanly  built,  one  chief  reason,  with  the  common  People 
specially,  is   the  want  of  materials  to  build  withal;    for 

■  vweTer  it  be  more  within  Land,  yet  here  is  neither  Stone 
w  Timber  to  build  with,  nor  any  materials  but  such  Brick 

i^  I  have  described ;  and  even  the  Stone  which  they  have  in 
-  me  places  is  so  brittle,  that  you  may  rub  it  into  Sand  with 
-MT  finger*.  Another  reason  why  they  build  so  meanly  is, 
clause  it  never  rains ;  therefore  they  only  endeavour  to 
--.ce  themselves  from  the  Sun.  Yet  their  Walls,  which 
Ut  but  with  an  ordinary  sort  of  Brick,  in  comparison 
163 


CAPTAIN    DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   with  what  is  made  in  other  parts  of  the  World,  continue  a 
i^>84  JQj^g  ^.jj^g  j^g  £j.j^  ^g  when  first  made,   having  never  any 

winds  nor  rains,  to  rot,  moulder,  or  shake  them.  However, 
the  richer  sort  have  Timber,  which  they  make  use  of  in 
building ;  but  it  is  brought  from  other  places. 

This  dry  Country  commences  to  the  Northward,  from 
about  Cape  Blanco  to  Coquimbo,  in  about  3od  S.  having 
no  Rain  that  I  could  ever  observe  or  hear  of;  nor  any  green 
thing  growing  in  the  Mountains  :  neither  yet  in  the  Valleys, 
except  where  here  and  there  water'd  with  a  few  small  Rivers 
dispersed  up  and  down.  So  that  the  Northenmost  parts  of 
this  Tract  of  Land  are  supplied  with  Timber  from  Guiaquil, 
Galleo,  Tornato,  and  other  places  that  are  watered  with 
Rains ;  where  there  are  plenty  of  all  sorts  of  Timber.  In 
the  South  parts,  as  about  Guasco  and  Coquimbo,  they  fetch 
their  Timber  from  the  Island  Chiloe,  or  other  places  there- 
abouts. The  Walls  of  Churches  and  rich  Mens  Houses, 
are  whitened  with  Lime,  both  within  and  without ;  and  the 
doors  and  posts  are  very  large,  and  adorned  with  carved 
work,  and  the  beams  also  in  the  Churches :  The  inside  of 
the  Houses  are  hung  round  with  rich  embroidered,  or 
painted  Cloths.  They  have  likewise  abundance  of  fine 
Pictures,  which  adds  no  small  ornament  to  their  House : 
these,  I  suppose,  they  have  from  Old  Spain.  But  the 
Houses  of  Payta  are  none  of  them  so  richly  furnished. 
The  Churches  were  large  and  fairly  carved :  At  one  end  of 
the  Town  there  was  a  small  Fort  close  by  the  Sea,  but  no 
great  Guns  in  it.  This  Fort,  only  with  Musquets,  will 
command  all  the  Bay,  so  as  to  hinder  any  Boats  from  land- 
ing. There  is  another  Fort  on  the  top  of  the  Hill,  just 
over  the  Town,  which  commands  both  it  and  the  lower 
Fort.  There  is  neither  Wood  nor  Water  to  be  had  there : 
they  fetch  their  Water  from  an  Indian  Town  called  Colan, 
about  2  leagues  N.  N.  E.  from  Payta  :  for  at  Colan,  there  is 
a  small  River  of  Fresh  Water,  which  runs  out  into  the  Sea; 
from  whence  Ships  that  touch  at  Payta  are  supplied  with 
Water  and  other  refreshments,  as  h'owls.  Hogs,  Plantains, 
Yams,  and  Maiz :  Payta  being  destitute  of  all  these  things, 
only  as  they  fetch  them  from  Colan,  as  they  have  occasion. 

164 


COLAN— BARK-LOGS 

dians  of  Colan  are  all  Fishernien :  they  go  nut  am, 
fish  in  Bark-logs.'  Bark-logs  are  made  of  '*** 
nnd  Logs  of  Wood,  in  manner  of  a  Raft,  and 
f  different  according  to  the  use  that  they  are  designed 
for,  or  the  humour  of  the  People  that  make  them,  or  the 
mstter  that  tbcy  arc  made  of.  If  they  are  made  for  fishing, 
then  they  arc  only  3  or  4  Logs  of  light  Wood,  of  7  or  8 
foot  long,  plac'd  by  the  side  of  each  other,  pinn'd  fast 
toBcther  with  wooden  pins,  and  bound  hard  with  Withes. 
T'^e  Oigs  ire  so  placed,  that  the  middlemost  are  longer 
■  >.»n  those  by  the  sides,  especially  at  the  head  or  fore  part, 
*aich  grows  narrower  gradually  into  an  angle  or  point,  the 
•rttcr  to  cut  through  the  Water.  Others  are  made  to 
-imr  Goods:  the  bottom  of  these  is  made  of  20  or  30 
^rc»i  Trees  of  about  20,  30,  or  40  foot  long,  fasien'd  like 
the  other,  side  to  side,  and  so  shaped  ;  on  the  top  of  these 
they  place  another  shorter  row  of  Trees  across-  them, 
fina'd  fast  to  each  other,  and  then  pinn'd  to  the  undermost 
TO*  :  this  double  row  of  Planks  makes  the  bottom  of  the 
Real,  and  of  a  considerable  breadth.  From  this  bottom 
the  Raft  is  raised  to  about  10  foot  higher,  with  rows  of 
Pons  sometimes  set  upright,  and  supporting  a  floor  or  two  : 
bai  tfaoK  1  ob«rv'd  Were  rais'd  by  thick  Trees  laid  a-cross 
other,  as  in  Wood  Piles;  only  not  close  together,  as 
ttom  of  the  Float,  but  at  the  ends  and  sides  only, 
leave  the  middle  all  hollow  like  a  Chamber; 
t  here  and  there  a  beam  goes  across  it,  to  keep 
B  more  compact.  In  this  hollow,  at  about  4  foot 
1  the  beams  at  the  bottom,  they  lay  small  poles 
close  together,  to  make  a  floor  for  another 
Room,  00  the  top  of  which  also  they  lay  another  such 
•■■Mr  nude  of  poles;  and  the  entrances  into  both  these 
K'naras  is  only  by  creeping  between  the  great  traverse  Trees 
ihich  make  the  Walls  of  this  Sea-House.  The  lowest  of 
-vtK  ncrics  Serves  as  a  Cellar :  there  they  lay  great  stones 
'  c  Ballast,  and  their  Jars  of  fresh  Water  closed  up,  and 

ttaik-ta(>  of  Mnolt  the  arc  slill  in  u%e  on  the  weii  t^ouM  of  South 
Sane  earvlleni  ilrawinit*  ol  them   n-itt  be  found  in  Captain 
"Hktofy  dTiIm!  Dncmcrics  in  the  South  SciL" 

165 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  whatever  may  bear  being  wet ;  for  by  the  weight  of  the 
1684  Ballast  and  Cargo,  the  bottom  of  this  Room,  and  of  the 
whole  Vessel,  is  sunk  so  deep,  as  to  lie  2  or  3  feet  within 
the  surface  of  the  Water.  The  second  story  is  for  the  Sea- 
men, and  their  necessaries.  Above  this  second  story  the 
Goods  are  stowed,  to  what  heighth  they  please,  usually 
about  8  or  10  feet,  and  kept  together  by  poles  set  upright 
quite  round :  only  there  is  a  little  space  abaft  for  the 
Steers-man,  (for  they  have  a  large  Rudder)  and  afore  for 
the  Fire-hearth,  to  dress  their  Victuals,  especially  when  they 
make  long  Voyages,  as  from  Lima  to  Truxillo,  or  Guiaquil, 
or  Panama ;  which  last  Voyage  is  5  or  600  leagues.  In 
the  midst  of  all,  among  the  Goods,  rises  a  Mast,  to  which 
is  fastened  a  large  Sail,  as  in  our  West-Country  Baxges  in 
the  Thames.  They  always  go  before  the  Windi  being 
unable  to  Ply  against  it;  and  therefore  are  fit  only  for 
these  Seas,  where  the  Wind  is  always  in  a  manner  the 
same,  not  varying  above  a  point  or  two  all  the  way  from 
Lima,  till  such  time  as  they  come  into  the  Bay  of  Panama : 
and  even  there  they  meet  with  no  great  Sea  ;  but  some- 
times Northerly  winds :  and  then  they  lower  their  Sails, 
and  drive  before  it,  waiting  a  change.  All  their  care  then 
is  only  to  keep  off  from  shore ;  for  they  are  so  made  that 
they  cannot  sink  at  Sea.  These  Rafts  carry  60  or  70 
Tuns  of  Goods  and  upwards  ;  their  Cargo  is  chiefly  Wine, 
Oil,  Flower,  Sugar,  Quito-Cloth,  Soap,  Goat-Skins  drest, 
&c.  The  Float  is  manag'd  usually  by  3  or  4  Men,  who 
being  unable  to  return  with  it  against  the  Trade-wind, 
when  they  come  to  Panama  dispose  of  the  Goods  and 
Bottom  together ;  getting  a  passage  back  again  for  them- 
selves in  some  Ship  or  Boat  bound  to  the  Port  they  came 
from ;  and  there  they  make  a  new  Bark-log  for  their  next 
Cargo. 

The  smaller  sort  of  Bark-logs,  described  before,  which 
lie  flat  on  the  Water,  and  are  used  for  Fishing,  or  carrying 
Water  to  Ships,  or  the  like  (half  a  Tun  or  a  Tun  at  a 
time)  are  more  governable  than  the  other,  tho'  they  have 
Masts  and  Sails  too.  With  these  they  go  out  at  Night  by 
the  help  of  the  Land-wind  (which  is  seldom  wanting  on 

166 


SINGLE    BARK-LOGS— PIURA 
Co«t)  and    return   back   in  the  day  time  with   the    anT 
Sea-wind.  1684 

This  son  of  Floats  are  used  in  many  places  both  in  the 
E«R  and  West-Indies.  On  the  Coast  Coromandel  in  the 
East-Indies  they  call  them  Catamarans.  These  are  but 
one  I->Vi  or  two  sometimes,  of  a  sort  of  light  Wood,  and 
are  tnaoe  without  Sail  or  Rudder,  and  so  small,  that  they 
cury  but  one  Man,  whose  Legs  and  Breech  are  always 
io  the  Water,  and  he  manages  his  Log  with  a  Paddle, 
appearing  at  a  distance  like  a  Man  sitting  on  a  Fish's 
bock. 

Tbc  Country  about  Payta  is  Mountainous  and  Barren, 
like  all  the  rest  of  the  Kingdom  of  Peru.  There  is  no 
Towns  of  consequence  nearer  it  than  Piura,  which  is  a 
Urge  Town  in  the  Country  40  Miles  distant.  It  lieth,  by 
report  of  our  Spanish  Prisoners,  in  a  Valley,  which  is 
watered  with  a  small  River,  that  disembogues  it  self  into 
the  Bay  of  Chirapce,  in  about  7  d.  of  North  latitude. 
This  Bay  is  nearer  to  Piura  than  Payta:  yet  all  Goods 
imported  by  Sea  for  Piura  arc  landed  at  Payta,  for  the  Bay 
ofChiropce  is  full  of  dangerous  sholes,  and  therefore  not 
frequented  by  shipping.  The  Road  of  Payta  is  one  of  the 
hot  on  the  Coast  of  Peru.  It  is  sheltered  from  the  South- 
vest  by  a  point  of  Land,  which  makes  a  large  Bay  and 
smooth  Water  for  Ships  to  ride  in.  There  is  room  enough 
for  a  food  Fleet  of  Ships,  and  good  anchoring  in  any 
depth,  m}m  6  fathom  W^ater  to  20  fathom.  Right  against 
the  Town,  the  nearer  the  Town,  the  shallower  the  Water, 
and  the  smcK>ther  the  riding,  it  is  clean  Sand  all  over  the 
Bay.  Most  Ships  passing  either  to  the  North  or  the  South 
touch  at  this  place  for  Water,  for  tho'  here  is  none  at  the 
Town,  yet  those  Indian  Fisher-men  of  Colan  will,  and  do 
supply  all  Ships  very  reasonably  ;  and  Good  Water  is  much 
pnsed  on  all  this  Coast  through  the  scarcity  of  it. 

Norvcmber  the  3d,  at  6  a  clock  in  the  morning,  our 
Men  landed,  about  4.  Miles  to  the  South  of  the  Town,  and 
look  some  Prisoners  that  were  sent  thither  to  watch  for 
far  o(  us;  and  these  Prisoners  said,  that  the  Governor  of 
Ptun  came  with  100  armed  men  to  Payta  the  night  before, 

167 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    purposely    to    oppose   our  landing    there,    if  we    should 

'^^4  attempt  it. 

Our  Men  marched  directly  to  the  Fort  on  the  hill,  and 
took  it  without  the  loss  of  one  Man.  Hereupon  the 
Governor  of  Piura  with  all  his  Men,  and  the  Inhabitants 
of  the  Town,  ran  away  as  fast  as  they  could.  Then  our 
Men  entered  the  Town,  and  found  it  emptied  both  of 
Money  and  Goods ;  there  was  not  so  much  as  a  Meal  of 
Victuals  left  for  them. 

The  Prisoners  told  us  a  Ship^  had  been  here  a  little 
before  and  burnt  a  great  Ship  in  the  Road,  but  did  not 
land  their  Men;  and  that  here  they  put  ashore  all  their 
Prisoners  and  Pilots.  We  knew  this  must  be  Captain 
Eaton's  Ship  which  had  done  this,  and  by  these  circum- 
stances we  supposed  he  was  gone  to  the  East-Indies,^  it 
being  always  designed  by  him.  The  Prisoners  told  us  also, 
That  since  Capt.  Eaton  was  here,  a  small  Bark  had  been 
off  the  Harbour,  and  taken  a  pair  of  Bark-logs  a  Fishing, 
and  made  the  Fishermen  bring  aboard  20  or  30  Jars  of 
fresh  Water.  This  we  supposed  was  our  Bark  that  was 
sent  to  the  Lobos  to  seek  Capt.  Eaton. 

In  the  Evening  we  came  in  with  our  Ships,  and  Anchored 
before  the  Town  in  10  fathom  Water,  near  a  Mile  from 
the  shore.  Here  we  staid  till  the  sixth  day,  in  hopes  to 
get  a  Ransom  for  the  Town.  Our  Captains  demanded 
300  Packs  of  Flower,  3000  Pound  of  Sugar,  25  Jars  of 
Wine,  and  1000  Jars  of  Water  to  be  brought  off  to  us; 
but  we  got  nothing  of  it.  Therefore  Captain  Swan  ordered 
the  Town  to  be  fired,  which  was  presently  done.  Then  all 
our  Men  came  aboard,  and  Captain  Swan  ordered  the  Bark 
which  Captain  Harris  commanded,  to  be  burnt,  because 
she  did  not  sail  well. 

*  This  was  John  Eaton's  ship.  "We  stood  into  Paita  Bay,"  says 
Cowley  (his  sailing  master),  "where  we  took  two  Ships  at  an  Anchor;  bul 
the  Spaniards  would  not  ransom  them,  nor  give  us  any  Thing  for  Them  ; 
which  enraged  our  Captain  to  that  Degree,  that  he  commanded  our  Men 
either  to  sink  or  burn  them  ;  which  was  our  farewell  to  that  Coast."  This 
must  have  been  seven  or  eight  weeks  before  Dampier's  party  came  there. 

-^  The  supposition  was  correct.  Eaton  went  to  the  Isle  of  Plata  for 
»vood  and  water,  and  then  "steer'd  away  W.N.W.,"  and  went  ashore  no 
more  till  he  made  the  Ladrones. 

168 


ISLE   OF   LOBOS   DE  TERRA 

At  Night,  when  the  Land-wind  came  off,  we  sailed  aw. 
from  hence  towards  Lobes.  The  lOth  day  in  the  Even-  '^ 
ing  we  saw  a  Sail  bearing  N.  W.  by  N.  as  far  as  we  could 
well  discern  her  on  our  Deck.  We  immediately  chased, 
separating  our  selves,  the  better  to  meet  her  in  the  Night ; 
but  we  mist  her.  Therefore  the  next  Morning  we  again 
trimm'd  sharp,  ajid  made  the  best  of  our  way  to  the  l^^obos 
de  la  Mar. 

The  14th  day  we  had  sight  of  the  Island  Lobos  de 
Terra:  It  bore  East  from  us;  wc  stood  in  towards  it, 
and  betwixt  7  and  8  a  CliKk  in  the  Night  tame  to  an 
Anchor  at  the  N.  E.  end  of  the  Island,  in  4  fathom  Water. 
This  Island  at  Sea  is  of  an  indifferent  height,  and  appears 
like  Lobos  de  la  Mar.  About  a  quarter  of  a  Mile  from 
the  North  end  there  is  a  great  hollow  Rock,  and  a  g<>ixi 
^bfUinel  between,  where  there  is  7  fathom  Water.  The 
^■h  day  we  went  ashore,  and  fountl  abundance  of  Penguins 
Bg  Boobies,  and  Seal  in  great  [Quantities.  We  sent  aboard 
OT^all  these  to  be  drcst,  for  we  had  not  tasted  any  Klesh 
in  a  great  while  before ;  therefore  some  of  us  did  eat  vt-ry 
heartily.  Capt.  Swan,  to  encourage  his  Men  to  cat  this 
course  Flesh,  would  commend  it  for  extraordinary  good 
Fo»xi,  comparing  the  Seal  in  a  roasted  Pig,  the  Boobies 
to  Hens,  and  the  Penguins  to  Ducks :  this  he  did  to  train 
them  to  live  contentedly  on  course  Meat,  not  knowing  but 
we  might  be  forced  to  make  use  of  such  Food  before  we 
departed  out  of  these  Seas;  for  it  is  generally  seen  among 
Privateers,  that  nothing  emboldens  them  sooner  to  mutiny 
than  want,  which  we  could  not  well  suffer  in  a  place  where 
there  are  .such  i^uantities  of  these  Animals  to  be  had,  if 
n  could  be  perswadcd  to  be  content  with  them, 
Jn  the  Afternoon  we  sailed  from  Lobos  de  Terra ;  with 
I  Wind  at  S.  by  E.  and  arriv'd  at  Lobos  de  la  Mar  on 
!  19th  day.  Here  wc  found  a  Letter,  left  by  our  Bark 
t  was  sent  to  seek  Capt.  Eaton,  by  which  wc  understood, 
t  Capt.  Eaton  had  been  there,  but  was  gone  before  they 
Bved,  and  had  left  no  Letter  to  advise  us  which  way  he 
i  gone ;  and  that  our  Bark  was  again  return'd  to  Plata, 
Ehopes  to  find  us  there,  or  meet  us  by  the  way,  else 
169 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    resolving  to  stay  for  us  there.     We  were  sorry  to  hear  that 
'^^4  Capt.  Eaton  was  gone,  for  now  we  did  not  expect  to  meet 
with  him  any  more  in  these  Seas. 

The  2 1st  day  we  sent  out  our  Moskito  Strikers  for 
Turtle,  who  brought  aboard  enough  to  serve  both  Ships 
Companies ;  and  this  they  did  all  the  time  that  we  abode 
here.     While  we  lay  at  this  Island,  Capt.  Swan  made  new 
Yards,  squarer^  than  those  he  had  before,  and  made  hi!& 
Sails  larger,  and  our  Ships  Company  in  the  mean  time  split: 
Plank  tor  Fire-wood,  and  put  aboard  as  many  Planks  as 
we  could  conveniently  stow,  for  other  uses:  Here  being 
Plank  enough  of  all  sorts,  which  we  had  brought  hither 
in  the  first  Prize  that  we  took,  and  left  here. 

The  26th  day  in  the  evening,  we  saw  a  small  Bark 
about  3  Leagues  N.  N.  W.  from  the  Island,  but  we  sup- 
posing her  to  be  our  own  Bark,  did  not  go  after  her.  The 
next  Morning  she  was  two  Leagues  South  of  the  Island, 
standing  ofF  to  Sea ;  but  we  did  not  now  chace  her  neither, 
altho*  we  knew  she  was  not  our  Bark ;  for  being  to  Wind- 
ward of  us,  she  could  have  made  her  escape,  if  we  had 
chaced  her.  This  Bark,  as  we  were  afterward  informed, 
was  sent  out  purposely  to  see  if  we  were  at  this  Island. 
Her  Orders  were,  not  to  come  too  near,  only  to  appear 
in  sight ;  they  supposing  that  if  we  were  here  we  should 
soon  be  after  her ;  as  indeed  it  was  a  wonder  we  had  not 
chaced  her :  But  our  not  doing  so,  and  lying  close  under 
the  Island  undiscern'd  by  them,  was  a  great  occasion  of 
our  coming  upon  Puna  afterwards  unexpectedly,  they  being 
now  without  fear  of  any  Enemy  so  near  them. 

The  28th  day  we  scrubbed  our  Ships  bottom,  intend- 
ing to  sail  the  next  day  towards  Guiaquil ;  it  being  con- 
cluded upon  to  attempt  that  Town  before  we  returned 
again  to  Plata.  Accordingly,  on  the  29th  day  in  the 
Morning,  we  loosed  from  hence,  steering  directly  for  the 
Bay  of  Guiaquil.  This  Bay  runs  in  between  Cape  Blanco 
on  the  South  side,  and  Point  Chandy*  on  the  North. 
About  25  Leagues  from  C.  Blanco,  near  the  bottom  of 

»  Longer.  ^  Point  St.  Helena. 

170 


ISLE   OF   ST.   CLARA— CAT-FISH 

the  Bsy,  there  is  a  small  Island  called  Santa  Clara,  which 
lies  East  and  West:  It  is  of  an  indiflFcrenl  length,  and  it 
appears  like  a  dead  Man  stretched  out  in  a  Shroud.  The 
East  end  represents  the  Head,  and  the  West  end  the  Feet. 
Ships  that  are  bound  into  the  River  of  Guiaquil  pass  on 
the  South-side,  to  avoid  the  sholcs  which  lie  on  the  North- 
side  of  it ;  whereon  formerly  Ship  have  been  lost.  It  is 
reported  by  the  Spaniards,  that  there  is  a  very  rich  Wreck ' 
lies  on  the  North-side  of  that  Island,  not  far  from  it ;  and 
that  some  of  the  Plate  hath  been  taken  up  by  one  who 
came  from  Old  Spain,  with  a  Patent  from  the  King  to 
fish  in  those  Seas  for  Wrecks ;  but  he  dying,  the  Project 
ceased,  and  the  Wreck  still  remains  as  he  left  tl ;  only  the 
Indians  by  stealth  do  sometimes  take  up  some  of  it ;  and 
they  might  have  taken  up  much  more,  if  it  were  not  for 
the  Cat-fish*  which  swarms  hereabouts. 

The  Cat-fish  is  much  like  a  Whiting,  but  the  Head  is 
flatter  and  bigger.  It  hath  a  great  wide  Mouth,  and  certain 
small  Strings  pointing  out  from  each  side  of  it,  like  Cats 
Whiskers;  and  for  that  reason  it  is  call'd  a  Cat-fish.  It 
hath  three  Fins ;  one  growing  on  the  top  of  his  back,  and 
one  on  either  side.  Each  of  these  Fins  hath  a  stiff  sharp 
Bone,  which  is  very  venomous  if  it  strikes  into  a  Man  s 
Flesh ;  therefore  it  ts  dangerous  diving  where  many  of 
these  Fish  are.  The  Indians  that  adventured  to  search 
this  Wreck,  have  to  their  sorrow  experienced  it ;  some 
having  lost  their  Lives,  others  the  use  of  their  Limbs  by 
it :  this  we  were  informed  by  an  Indian,  who  himself  had 
been  fishing  on  it  by  stealth.  I  my  self  have  known  some 
■white  Men  that  have  lost  the  use  of  their  Hands,  only  by 
a  small  prick  with  the  Fin  of  these  Fish :  Therefore  when 
we  catch  them  with  a  Hook,  we  tread  on  them  to  take  the 
Hook  out  of  their  Mouths,  for  otherwise,  In  flurting  about 
(as  all  Fish  will  when  first  taken)  they  might  accidentally 
strike  their  sharp  Fins  into  the  Hands  of  those  that  caught 


'  "With  scveniy  brass  guns,"  and  "  no  less  ihari  iliirty  million  dollars, 
or  pieces  of  eight,"  abcuiTd  her,  She  seems  to  have  run  aground  on  Cape 
Flyaway. 

'  The  common  cat-fish  :  P.  atm. 

171 


CAPTAIN    DAM  PIERS    VOYAGES 

\N.  them.  Some  of  these  Fish  are  7  or  8  pound  weight;  some 
''**^-*  agiiin,  in  some  particular  Places,  are  none  of  them  bi^er 
than  a  Man's  Thumb,  but  their  F'ins  are  all  alike  venomous. 
They  use  to  be  at  the  Mouths  of  Rivers,  or  where  there  is 
much  Muil  and  (Jaze,  and  they  arc  found  all  over  the 
American  Coast,  both  in  the  North  and  South  Sea,  at  least 
in  the  hot  Countries,  as  also  in  the  East-Indies:  where 
sailing  with  Captain  Minchin  among  certain  Islands  near 
the  Streights  of  Malacca,  he  pointed  to  an  Island,  at  which 
he  t'>Ul  me  he  lost  the  use  of  his  Hand  bv  one  of  these, 
only  in  U'^ing  to  take  the  Hook  out  of  its  mouth.  The 
wound  was  scarce  visible,  vet  his  Hand  was  much  swoln, 
aiivl  the  pain  lasted  about  9  weeks;  during  most  part  of 
which  the  raging  heat  of  it  was  almost  ready  to  distract 
him.  However,  though  the  Bony  Fins  of  these  Fish  are 
so  venomous,  yet  the  Bones  in  their  Bodies  are  not  so;  at 
least  we  never  perceived  any  such  efFect  in  eating  the  Fish; 
and  their  Flesh  is  very  sweet,  delicious  and  wholesome 
Meat. 

Fr<»m  the  Island  Santa  Clara  to  Punta  Arena  is  7  leagues 
F.  N.  F.  This  Punta  Arena,  or  Sandy  Point,  is  the  Wester- 
mo  t  point  of  the  Island  Puna.  Here  all  Ships  bound  into 
the  River  of  (iuiaquil  anchor,  and  must  wait  for  a  Pilot,  the 
entrance  Ixring  very  dangerous  for  Strangers. 

The  Inland  Puna  is  a  pretty  large  flat  low  Island, 
stretching  Flast  and  West  about  12  or  14  leagues  long, 
and  about  4  or  5  leagues  wide.  The  Tide  runs  ver>* 
strtMig  all  about  this  Island,  but  so  many  different  ways, 
bv  reason  of  the  Branches,  Creeks,  and  Rivers  that  run  into 
the  Se.i  near  it,  that  it  casts  up  many  dangerous  sholes  on  all 
sides  of  it.  There  is  in  the  Island  only  one  Indian  Town 
on  the  South-side  of  it,  close  by  the  Sea,  and  7  leagues  from 
Point  Arena,  which  Town  is  also  called  Puna.  The 
Indians  of  this  Town  are  all  Seamen,  and  are  the  only 
Pilots  in  thei-e  Seas,  especially  for  this  River.  Their  chief- 
est  employment,  when  they  are  not  at  Sea,  is  fishing. 
These  Men  are  obliged  by  the  Spaniards  to  keep  good 
watch  for  Sliips  that  anchor  at  Point  Arena;  which,  as 
I  said   before,   is  7   leagues  from   the  Town    Puna.     The 

172 


PUNA— PALMETO-TREE 

•e  ihcy  keep  this  waich  is  at  a  Point  u( 

the  Island  Puna,  that  starts  uut  into  the  Sea ;  from  whence 

they  can  see  all  Ships  that  anchor  at  Point  Arena.     The 

'ndians  came  thither  in  the  morning,  and  return  at  night 

1  Horseback.     From  this  watching  Point  to  Point  Arena 

ii  4  leagues,  all  drowned  Mangrove-land :    and  in   the 

btdway  between  these  two  I'oints  is  another  small  Point, 

vhere  these  Indians  are  oblig'd  to  keep  another  Watch, 

■hen  they  fear  an  Enemy.     The  Centinel  goes  thither  in  a 

ADoa  in  the  morning,  and  returns  at  night ;  for  there  is  no 

ning  thither  by  Land,  through  that  Mangrove  marshy 

[round.     The  middle  of  the  Island  Puna  is  Savannah  or 

^sture.     There  are  some  ridges  of  good  Woodland,  which 

I  of  a  light  yellow  nr  sandy  Mould,  producing   large   tall 

Trees,  most   unknown  even    to  Travellers:   Bui   there  arc 

plenty  of  Palnieto-Trces,  which,  because  I  am  acquainted 

fith,    !  shall  describe.      The  Palmeto-Trcc  is  about  the 

bigness  of  an   ordinary  Ash  :  It   is  about  30  foot  high ;   the 

dy  straight,  without  any  limb,  or  branch,  or  leaf,  except 

t  the  head  only,  where  it  spreads  forth  into  many  small 

inches,  not   half  so  big   as  a   Mans  Arm,  some  no  bigger 

ones  Finger :  These  branches  are  about  3  or  4  foot 

tong,  clear  from  any  knot  :  At  the  end  of  the  branch  there 

[Toweth  one   broad   leaf,  about   the  bigness  of  a  large  Fan. 

"his,  when  it  first  shoots  forth,  grows  in  folds,  like  a  Fan 

when  it  is  closed  ;  and  still  as  it  grows  bigger  so  it  opens, 

till  it  becomes  like  a  Fan  spread  abroad.     It  is  strcngthncd 

^HCowards  the  stalk  with    many  small    ribs  springing   from 

^■thence,  and  growing  into  the   leaf;  which  as  they  grow 

^Kiear  the  end  of  the  leaf,  grow  thinner  and  smaller.     The 

^^leaves  that  make  the  brush  part  of  the  Flag-brooms  which 

are  brought  into  England,  grow  just  in  this  manner ;  and 

are  indeed  a  small  kind  of  Palraeto ;  for  there  are  of  them 

of  several  dimensions.      Jn  Bermudas,  and  elsewhere,  they 

make  Hats,  Baskets,  Brnnms,  Fans  to  blow  the  fire  instead 

of  Bellows,  with  many  other  House-implements,  of  Palmcto- 

teives.    On  the  Ridges  where  these  Trees  grow,  the  Indians 

pve  here    and    there    Plantations   of   Maiz,    Yams,    and 


i 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  There  are  in  the  Town  of  Puna  about  20  Houses,  and 
'^^  a  small  Church.  The  Houses  stand  all  on  Posts,  10  or  12 
foot  high,  with  Ladders  on  the  outside  to  go  up  into  them. 
I  did  never  see  the  like  Building  any  where  but  among  the 
Malayans  in  the  East-Indies.  They  are  thatched  with 
Palmeto-leaves,  and  their  Chambers  well  boarded,  in  which 
last  they  exceed  the  Malayans.  The  best  place  for  Ships 
to  lie  at  an  Anchor  is  against  the  middle  of  the  Town. 
There  is  5  fathom  water  within  a  Cables  length  of  the 
shore,  and  good  soft  deep  Oaze  where  ships  may  careen,  or 
hale  ashore  ;  it  flows  15  or  16  foot  Water  up  and  down. 

From  Puna  to  Guiaquil  is  reckoned  7  leagues.  It  is  i 
league  before  you  come  to  the  River  of  Guiaquil's  mouth, 
where  it  is  above  two  mile  wide ;  from  thence  upwards 
the  River  lies  pretty  streight,  without  any  considerable 
turnings.  Both  sides  of  the  River  are  low  swampy  Land, 
over-grown  with  Red  Mangroves,  so  that  there  is  no 
landing.  Four  mile  before  you  come  to  the  Town  of 
Guiaquil,  there's  a  low  Island  standing  in  the  River. 
This  Island  divides  the  River  into  two  parts,  making  2  very 
fair  Channels  for  Ships  to  pass  up  and  down.  The  S.  W. 
Channel  is  the  widest,  the  other  is  as  deep,  but  narrower 
and  narrower  yet,  by  reason  of  many  Trees  and  Bushes, 
which  spread  over  the  River,  both  from  the  Main  and  from 
the  Island ;  and  there  are  also  several  great  stumps  of 
Trees  standing  upright  in  the  Water,  on  either  side.  The 
Island  is  above  a  mile  long.  From  the  upper  part  of  the 
Island  to  the  Town  of  Guiaquil,  is  almost  a  league,  and 
near  as  much  from  one  side  of  the  River  to  the  other.  In 
that  spacious  place  Ships  of  the  greatest  burthen  may  ride 
afloat ;  but  the  best  place  for  ships  is  nearest  to  that  part 
of  the  Land  where  the  Town  stands;  and  this  place  is 
seldom  without  Ships.  Guiaquil  stands  facing  the  Island, 
close  by  the  River,  partly  on  the  side,  and  partly  at  the 
Foot  of  a  gentle  Hill  declining  towards  the  River,  by  which 
the  lower  part  of  it  is  often  overflown.  There  are  two 
Forts,  one  standing  on  the  low  Ground,  the  other  on  the 
Hill.  This  Town  makes  a  very  fine  prospect,  it  being 
beautifi'd  with  several  Churches  and  other  good  Buildings. 

174 


CACAO— SARSAPARILLA 

jjere  lives  a  Governor,  who,  as  I  have  been  informed,  hath    aw.' 

Patent    from    the  King  of  Spain.     Guiaquil    may    be  '*''^ 

fCkoned  one  of  the  chiefest  Sea-Ports  in  the  South  Seas: 

;  Commodities  which  arc  exported  from  hence  arc  Cacao, 

udes.  Tallow,  SarsaparilU,  and  other  Drugs,  and  WooUcn- 

iDth,  commonly  called  Cloth  of  Quito. 

The  Cacau  grows  on  both  sides  of  the  River  above  the 

lown.     It  is  a  small  Nut,  like  theCampeachy  Nut :  I  think, 

^c   smallest   of  the    two ;    they    produce    as   much   CaoiO 

:  as  serves  all  the  Kingdom  of  Peru  ;  and  much  of  it  is 

bt  to  Acapuico,  and  from  thence  to  the  Philippine  Islands. 

Sarsaparilla  grows   in   the   Water  hy    the  sides   of   the 

iver,  as  I  have  been  informed. 

The  Quito  Cloth  comes  from  a  rich  Town  in  the 
untry  within  Land  called  Quito,  There  is  a  great  deal 
■de,  both  Serges  and  Broad-Cloth.  This  Cloth  is  not 
fine,  but  it  is  worn  by  the  common  sort  of  People 
■oughout  the  whole  Kingdom  of  Peru.  This,  and  all 
her  Commodities,  which  come  from  Quito,  arc  shipt  off 
:  Guiaquil  for  other  Parts;  and  all  imported  Goods  for 
lie  City  of  Quito  pass  by  Guiaquil:  By  which  it  may 
_>ear  that  Guiaquil  is  a  Place  of  no  mean  Trade. 

Quito,  as  I  have  been  informed,  is  a  very  populous  City, 
■ted  in  the  heart  of  the  Country.     It  is  inhabited  partly 
Spaniards ;  but  the  major  part  of  its  Inhabitants  are 
dians,  under  the  Spanish  Government. 

It  is  environed  with  Mountains  of  a  vast  heighth,  from 
hose  bowels  many  great  Rivers  have  their  rise.  These 
fountains  abound  in  Gold,  which  by  violent  Rains  is 
ish'd  with  the  Sand  into  the  adjacent  Brooks,  where  the 
dians  resort  in  Troops,  washing  away  the  Sand,  and 
■tting  up  the  Gold-dust  in  their  Calabashes  or  Gourd 
iclls :  But  for  the  manner  of  gathering  the  Gold  I  refer 
I  to  Mr.  Wafer's  Book : '  only  I  shall  remark  here,  that 


"The 


of  their   getting  gold  is  c 


f  full  of  Sand,  which  they  draw  gently  out  of  the  Water;  and  al  every 
ping  they  lake  up  Cold  mix'd  with  the  Sand  and  Wniet,  more  or  less, 
>  they  shake  and  the  Sand  ri^eth,  and  goes  over  the  Brims  of  the 
I  with  the  Water ;  but  the  Gold  settles  to  ihe  bouom.  This  done, 
'75 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYACJES 

AN.  Quito  is  the  place  in  all  the  Kingdom  of  Peru  that  abounds 
'^**  most  with  this  rich  Metal,  as  I  have  been  often  informed. 
The  Country  is  subject  to  great  Rains,  and  very  thick 
Fogs,  especially  the  Valleys.  For  that  reason  it  is  very 
unwholsome  and  sickly.  The  chiefest  Distempers  are 
Fevers,  violent  Head-ach,  Pains  in  the  Bowels,  and  Fluxes. 
I  know  no  place  where  Gold  is  found  but  what  is  very 
unhealthy :  as  I  shall  more  particularly  relate  when  I  come 
to  speak  of  Achin  in  the  Isle  of  Sumatra  in  the  East* 
Indies.  Guiaquil  is  not  so  sickly  as  Quito  and  other 
Towns  farther  within  Land ;  yet  in  comparison  with  the 
Towns  that  are  on  the  Coast  of  Mare  Pacifico,  South  of 
Cape  Blanco,  it  is  very  sickly. 

It  was  to  this  Town  of  Guiaquil  that  we  were  bound, 
therefore  we  left  our  Ships  off  Cape  Blanco,  and  ran  into 
the  Bay  of  Guiaquil  with  our  Bark  and  Canoas,  steering  in 
for  the  Island  Santa  Clara,  where  we  arrived  the  next  day 
after  we  left  our  Ships,  and  from  thence  we  sent  away  two 
Canoas  the  next  evening  to  Point  Arena.  At  this  Point 
there  are  abundance  of  Oysters,  and  other  Shell-fish,  as 
Cockles  and  Muscles ;  therefore  the  Indians  of  Puna  often 
come  hither  to  get  these  Fish.  Our  Canoas  got  over 
before  day,  and  absconded  in  a  Creek,  to  wait  for  the 
coming  of  the  Puna  Indians.  The  next  morning  some  of 
them,  according  to  their  custom,  came  thither  on  Bark- 
logs,  at  the  latter  part  of  the  Ebb,  and  were  all  taken  by 
our  Men.  The  next  day,  by  their  advice,  the  two  Watch- 
men of  the  Indian  Town  Puna  were  taken  by  our  Men, 
and  all  its  Inhabitants,  not  one  escaping.  The  next  Ebb 
they  took  a  small  Bark  laden  with  Quito-cloth  She  came 
from  Guiaquil  that  Tide,  and  was  bound  to  Lima,  they 
having  advice  that  we  were  gone  off  the  Coast,  by  the  Bark 
which  I  said  we  saw  while  we  lay  at  the  Island  Lobos. 
The  Master  of  this  Cloth-bark  informed  our  Men,  that 

they  bring  it  out  and  dry  it  in  the  Sun,  and  then  pound  it  in  a  Mortar. 
Then  they  take  it  out  and  spread  it  on  Paper,  and  having  a  Loadstone 
they  move  that  over  it,  which  draws  all  the  Iron,  etc.,  from  it,  and  then 
leaves  the  Gold  clean  from  Ore  or  Filth;  and  this  they  bottle  up  in 
(lourds  or  Calabashes.  In  this  manner  they  work  during  tlie  dry  Season, 
which  is  three  Months."— /-/V?//^*/  lVafcf\,  pp.  31,  32  ;  ed.  1699. 

176 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  two  Barks  were  Mann'd  with  Spanish  Soldiers,  and  sent 
1684  ^.Q  ^^i^g  Qm.  Ships,  and  therefore  they  fired  3  Guns  at  them 
a  league  before  they  came  near.  The  two  Spanish  Barks 
immediately  came  to  an  Anchor,  and  the  Masters  got  into 
their  Boats,  and  rowed  for  the  shore ;  but  our  Gtnoa  that 
was  sent  from  us  took  them  both.  The  firing  of  these  3 
Guns  made  a  great  disorder  among  our  advanced  Men/  for 
most  of  them  did  believe  they  were  heard  at  Guiaquil,  and 
that  therefore  it  could  be  no  profit  to  lie  still  in  the  Creek ; 
but  either  row  away  to  the  Town,  or  back  again  to  our 
Ships.  It  was  now  quarter  ebb,  therefore  we  could  not 
move  upwards,  if  we  had  been  disposed  so  to  do.  At 
length  Captain  Davis  said,  he  would  immediately  land  in 
the  Creek  where  they  lay,  and  march  directly  to  the  Town, 
if  but  40  men  would  accompany  him :  and  without  saying 
more  words,  he  landed  among  the  Mangroves  in  the 
Marshes.  Those  that  were  so  minded  followed  him,  to  the 
number  of  40  or  50.  Captain  Swan  lay  still  with  the  rest 
of  the  Party  in  the  Creek,  for  they  thought  it  impossible 
to  do  any  good  that  way.  Captain  Davis  and  his  Men 
were  absent  about  4  hours,  and  then  returned  all  wet,  and 
quite  tired,  and  could  not  find  any  passage  out  into  the 
firm  Land.  He  had  been  so  far,  that  he  almost  despaired 
of  getting  back  again :  for  a  Man  cannot  pass  thro*  those 
red  Mangroves  but  with  very  much  labour.  When  Captain 
Davis  was  return'd,  we  concluded  to  be  going  towards  the 
Town  the  beginning  of  the  next  flood ;  and  if  we  found 
that  the  Town  was  alarm'd,  we  purposed  to  return  again 
without  attempting  any  thing  there.  As  soon  as  it  was 
flood  we  rowed  away,  and  passed  by  the  Island  thro'  the 
N.  E.  Channel,  which  is  the  narrowest.  There  are  so 
many  Stumps  in  the  River,  that  it  is  very  dangerous  passing 
in  the  night  (and  that  is  the  time  we  always  take  for  such 
Attempts)  for  the  River  runs  very  swift,  and  one  of  our 
Canoas  stuck  on  a  Stump,  and  had  certainly  overset,  if  she 
had  not  been  immediately  rescued  by  others.  When  we 
were  come  almost  to  the  end  of  the  Island,  there  was  a 

*  "  Davis  and  Swan  being  in  the  Creeke  when  the  Guns  fired,  were 
ready  to  eat  their  Guns  for  Madd"  (Original  MS,^  f.  140). 

178 


I      TOWN    OF  GUIAQUIL   ATTEMPTED  ■ 

BCusquct  &re(]  at  us  out  of  the  Bushes  on  the  Main.  We  am. 
^■en  had  the  Town  open  before  us,  and  presently  saw  '^* 
^^hicd  Torches,  or  Candles,  all  the  Town  over ;  whereas 
^Efore  the  Gtin  was  fired  there  was  but  one  Light :  there- 
^we  we  now  concluded  we  were  discovered :  Yet  many  of 
^Hr  Men  said,  that  it  was  a  Holy-day  the  next  day,  as  it 
^Ks  indeed,  and  that  therefore  the  Spaniards  were  making 
^ft'e-works,  whii:h  they  often  do  in  the  night  against  such 
^Bies.  We  rowed  therefore  a  little  farther,  and  found 
^Bm  Land,  and  Captain  Davis  pitched  his  Canua  ashore 
^HJ  landed  with  his  Men.  Captain  Swan,  and  most  of  his 
^Ben,  did  not  think  it  convenient  to  attempt  any  thing, 
^fting  the  Town  was  alarmed  ;  but  at  last,  being  upbraided 
^Bth  Cowardize,  Captain  Swan  and  his  Men  landed  also. 
^Bie  place  where  we  landed  was  about  2  mile  from  the 
^K)Wn :  it  was  alt  overgrown  with  Woods  so  thick,  that  we 
^■uld  not  march  through  in  the  Night ;  and  therefore  we 
^Bt  down,  waiting  for  the  light  of  the  Day.  We  had  two 
^Bdian  Pilots  with  us;  one  that  had  been  with  us  a  Month, 
^Hio  having  received  some  Abuses  from  a  Gentleman  of 
^Biiaquil,  to  be  revenged  oiFcred  his  Service  to  us,  and 
^K  found  him  very  faithful:  The  other  was  taken  by  us 
^Bt  above  2  or  3  days  before,  and  he  seemed  to  be  as 
filling  as  the  other  to  assist  us.  This  latter  was  led  by 
^Be  of  Captain  Davis's  Men,  who  shewed  himself  very 
^^rward  to  go  to  the  Town,  and  upbraided  others  with 
^■nt-heartedncss:  Yet  this  Man  (as  he  afterwards  con- 
^Bsed)  notwithijtanding  his  Courage,  privately  cut  the 
^King  that  the  Guide  was  made  fast  with,  and  let  him  go 
^Bthe  Town  by  himself,  not  caring  to  follow  him;  but 
^■len  he  thought  the  Guide  was  got  far  enough  from  us, 
^K  cried  out  that  the  Pilot  was  gone,  and  that  some  Body 
^Bd  cut  the  Cord  that  tied  him.  This  put  every  Man  in  a 
^■Dving  Posture  to  seek  the  Indian,  but  all  in  vain ;  and 
^Br  Consternation  was  great,  being  in  the  dark  and  among 
^iFoods ;  so  the  design  was  wholly  dashed,  for  not  a  Man 
■  after  that  had  the  heart  to  speak  of  going  farther.  Here 
we  staid  till  day.  and  then  rowed  out  into  the  middle  of 
the  River,  where  we  had  a  fair  view  of  the  Town ;  which, 
WL  >79 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  as  I  said  before,  makes  a  very  pleasant  prospect.  We  lay 
1684  g^yi  about  half  an  Hour,  being  a  mile,  or  something  better, 
from  the  Town.  They  did  not  fire  one  Gun  at  us,  nor  wc 
at  them.  Thus  our  design  on  Guiaquil  failM  :  yet  Captain 
Town  ley,  and  Capt.  Francois  Gronet*  took  it  a  little  while 
after  this.  When  we  had  taken  a  full  view  of  the  Town, 
we  rowed  over  the  River,  where  we  went  ashore  to  a  Beef 
Estantion  or  Farm,  and  kill'd  a  Cow,  which  we  drest  and 
eat.  We  staid  there  till  the  Evening  Tide  of  Ebb,  and 
then  rowed  down  the  River,  and  the  9th  day  in  the 
Morning  arrived  at  Puna.  In  our  way  thither  we  went 
aboard  the  3  Barks  laden  with  Negroes,  that  lay  at  their 
Anchor  in  the  River,  and  carried  the  Barks  away  with  us. 
There  .were  1000  Negroes  in  the  3  Barks,  all  lusty  young 
Men  and  Women.  When  we  came  to  Puna,  we  sent  a 
Canoa  to  Point  Arena,  to  see  if  the  Ships  were  come 
thither.  The  12th  day  she  returned  again,  with  tydings 
that  they  were  both  there  at  Anchor.  Therefore  in  the 
Afternoon  we  all  went  aboard  of  our  Ships,  and  carry'd 
the  Cloth-bark  with  us,  and  about  40  of  the  stoutest 
Negro-men,  leaving  their  3  Barks  with  the  rest ;  and  out 
of  these  also  Capt.  Davis  and  Capt.  Swan  chose  about  14 
or  1 5  apiece,  and  turn'd  the  rest  ashore. 

There  was  never  a  greater  opportunity  put  into  the 
Hands  of  Men  to  enrich  themselves  than  we  had,  to  have  gone 
with  these  Negroes,  and  settled  our  selves  at  Santa  Maria, 
on  the  Isthmus  of  Darien,  and  employed  them  in  getting 
Gold  out  of  the  Mines  there.  Which  might  have  been 
done  with  ease :  For  about  6  Months  before  this,  Captain 
Harris  (who  was  now  with  us)  coming  over  Land  from  the 
North  Seas,  with  his  Body  of  Privateers,  had  routed  the 
Spaniards  away  from  the  Town  and  Gold-Mines  of  Santa 
Maria,"  so  that  they  had  never  attempted  to  settle  there 
again  since :  Add  to  this,  that  the  Indian  Neighbourhood, 
who  were  mortal  Enemies  to  the  Spaniards,  and  had  been 
flush'd  by  their  Successes  against  them,  through  the  assist- 

*  These  two  captains  are  mentioned  in  Chapter  VII.      Their  ver>'  im- 
perfect histories  will  be  found  in  the  Appendix. 
-  See  Appendix. 

180 


NEGROES  TAKEN 

ke  of  the  IVivatccrs,  for  several  years,  were  our  fast  ak.  , 
»d«,  and  ready  to  receive  and  assist  us.  We  had,  as  I  '***| 
tsaid  lOOO  Negroes  to  work  for  us,  we  had  200  Tun  of 
rwtr  that  lay  at  the  Gallapagos,  there  was  the  River  of 
hnia  Maria,  where  we  could  careen  and  dt  our  Ships  ;  and 
i^bi  foftific  the  mouth  so,  that  if  all  the  strength  the 
Kiiinls  have  in  Peru  had  come  against  us,  we  could  have 
I  them  out.  ]f  they  lay  with  Guard-shi[TS  of  Strength 
sap  us  in,  yet  we  had  a  great  Country  to  live  in,  and  a 
Int  Nation  of  Indians  that  were  our  Friends  :  Beside, 
h  WIS  the  principal  thing,  we  had  the  North  Seas  to 
nd  us;  from  whence  wc  could  export  ourselves,  or 
I,  or  import  Goods  or  Men  to  our  assistance  ;  for  in  a 
I  time  wc  should  have  had  assistance  from  all  parts 
r  the  Wcsl-Indies  ;  many  thousands  of  Privateers  from 
UJca  and  the  Ktvnch  Islands  especially  would  have 
[kt  over  to  us  ;  and  long  before  this  time  we  might 
t  been  Masters  not  only  of  those  Mines,  (the  richest 
li-Mines  ever  yet  found  in  America)  but  of  all  the 
Omt  as  high  as  Quito :  And  much  more  than  1  say 
mfitt  (hen  probably  have  been  done. 

Bat  these  may  seem  to  the  Reader  but  Golden  Dreams  : 
I  leave  them  therefore;  The  13th  day  we  sailed  from 
ini  Arena  towards  Plata,  to  seek  our  Bark  that  was  sent 
■(be  Island  Lobc«,  in  search  of  Captain  Eaton.  We  were 
ship*  in  Company,  and  2  Barks;  and  the  i6th  day  we 
Woi  at  Plata,  but  found  no  Bark  there,  nor  any  Letter. 
E  acst  day  we  went  over  to  the  Main  to  fill  Water,  and 
ntr  Pi^sage  met  our  Bark :  she  had  been  a  second  time 
Libnd  Lobos,  and  not  finding  us,  was  coming  to 
I  again.  They  had  been  in  some  want  of  Provision 
[  tbcy  left  us,  and  therefore  they  had  been  at  Santa 
na,  and  taken  it ;  where  they  got  as  much  Maize  as 
I  them  J  or  4  days ;  and  that,  with  some  Fish  and 
e  which  they  struck,  lasted  them  till  they  came  to  the 
J  Lobos  dc  Terra,  They  got  Boobies  and  Penguins 
L  of  which  ihcy  laid  in  a  store;  and  went  from  thence 
ofaos  de  Ja  Mar,  where  they  replenished  their  stock  of 
L  and  salted  up  a  few  young  Seal,  for  fear  they  should 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  want :  And  being  thus  victualled,  they  returned  again 
1684  towards  Plata.  When  our  Water  was  fiird  we  went  over 
again  to  the  Island  Plata.  There  we  parted  the  Cloths 
that  were  taken  in  the  Cloth-Bark  into  two  Lots  or  Shares ; 
Captain  Davis  and  his  Men  had  one  part,  and  Captain  Swan 
and  his  Men  had  the  other  part.  The  Bark  which  the 
Cloth  was  in  Captain  Swan  kept  for  a  Tender.  At  this 
time  there  were  at  Plata  a  great  many  large  Turtles,  which 
I  judge  came  from  the  Gallapagos  for  I  had  never  seen  any 
here  before,  tho'  I  had  been  here  several  times.  This  was 
their  Coupling-Time,  which  is  much  sooner  in  the  Year 
here  than  in  the  West-Indies,  properly  so  called.  Our 
Strikers  brought  aboard  every  day  more  than  we  could  eat. 
Captain  Swan  had  no  Striker,  and  therefore  had  no  Turtle 
but  what  was  sent  him  from  Captain  Davis;  and  all  his 
Flour  too  he  had  from  Captain  Davis :  but  since  our  dis- 
appointment at  Guiaquil,  Captain  Davis's  Men  murmured 
against  Captain  Swan,  and  did  not  willingly  give  him  any 
Provision,  because  he  was  not  so  forward  to  go  thither  as 
Captain  Davis.  However,  at  last,  these  differences  were 
made  up,  and  we  concluded  to  go  into  the  Bay  of  Panama, 
to  a  Town  called  La  Velia ;  but  because  we  had  not  Canoas 
enough  to  land  our  Men,  we  were  resolved  to  search  some 
Rivers  where  the  Spaniards  have  no  Commerce,  there  to  get 
Indian  Canoas. 


182 


CHAP.  VII 

I  kmw  llu  hit  if  Plata.  Cap*  Paisae.  Thr  Comt  I'dwecn  that 
mmd  C»ft  Si.  Frandtto  ;  and  from  thtnct  on  U  Pamima.  The 
Rrwr  9/  St.  Jaga.  Thi  Red  and  tht  IVhitr  Cettsn-lrtr.  The 
Cahicp-trff.  The  Indians  af  St.  Jago  River,  and  its  Ntigbbeur- 
kmd.  The  tile  »f  Gaih.  The  River  and  Village  of  Tomaco.  hit 
if  G*rg$aia,  The  Pearl-Oystrrs  there  and  in  other  parts.  The 
l^nJ  tu  tht  .^ain.  Cape  Cerientei.  Point  Garachina.  Island 
G^lUrm.  Tkf  King,,  tr  Pear!  blandly  Pacheque.  St.  PauPs 
liiami,  UveSa.  Nala.  The  Clam-fish.  Oysters.  The  pltosont 
Prttpttti  !i  tht  Bay  tf  Panama.  Old  Panama.  The  New  City. 
TJit  Great  Ccneouru  there  from  Lima  and  Portabel,  S-t.  upon  the 
Arrival  of  the  Spanish  Armada  in  the  IVest  Indies.  The  Course 
tkt  jlrmitda  taiet  ;  uiith  an  incidental  Account  of  tht  first  induce- 
maUi  thai  made  tht  Privateers  undertake  the  passage  over  tht 
lahmat  *f  DaritH  into  the  South  Seas,  and  of  the  particular  hegin- 
wf  f/  their  eorresptndemt  tvith  the  Indians  thai  inhabit  that 
lithmmi.  Of  tht  Air  and  fVeathrr  at  Panama.  The  Isles  ofPtrico. 
Ttimgt,  a  pJraiant  Island.  The  Mammee-tree.  The  Village 
TiiiogK  A  Spanifh  Stratagem  or  two,  of  Capt.  Band  their 
Ewfinttr.  Tht  Ignorance  of  tht  Spaniards  of  these  parts  in  Sea 
'ftdrt.  A  party  of  French  Privalttri  arrive  from  over  Land. 
Of  tht  Ctmmiuiont  thai  are  given  out  hy  the  French  Govemour  of 
Pttit-Gmavrrt.  Of  the  Gulf  of  St.  Michael,  and  ike  Rivers  of 
Ci^u^  Saintt,  and  Sta.  Maria  :  and  an  Error  of  the  common 
Mmi,  in  tht  placing  Point  Garachina  and  Cape  St.  L«renxo, 
cfrerteA.  Of  the  Town  and  Gold  Mines  of  Sta.  Maria  ;  and  tht 
Ttwn  $/  S€itthader».  Capt.  Touinlty*s  Arrival  with  some  more 
BtgSii,  Prrvattrri  over  Land.  Jars  of  PiicO'fVine.  A  Hark  of 
I'm  Xttigkf'tJ^''"  *^^"'  P^'tt  Garachina  again.  Porta  dt  Pinas, 
/^  ^  Ol^aii*.  7***-  Poe^utt  from  Lima  taken.  Other  English 
'tdFrtmth  Priveitttri  arrive.     Chepelio,  one  of  tht  sweetest  Islands 

183 


CAPTAIN    DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

in  the  JVorld.  The  Sapadilloy  Avogato  Pear^  Afammee  Sappota. 
Jf^ild  Mammee  and  ^tar- Apple.  Cheapo  River  and  Town.  Some 
Traversings  in  the  Bay  of  Panama  ;  and  an  account  of  the  Strength 
of  the  Spanish  Fleety  and  of  the  Privateers^  and  the  Engagement 
between  them, 

AN.    T    ■     ^HE  23d  day  of  December,  1684,  we  sailed  from 
'^-^  I  the  Island  Plata,  towards  the  Bay  of  Panama: 

I  The  Wind  at  S.  S.  £.  a  fine  brisk  gale,  and  fine 

^  Weather.     The  next  Morning  we  past  by  Cape 

Passao.  This  Cape  is  in  lat.  00  d.  08  m.  South  of  the 
Equator.  It  runs  out  into  the  Sea  with  a  high  round 
Point,  which  seems  to  be  divided  in  the  midst.  It  is  bald 
against  the  Sea,  but  within  Land,  and  on  both  sides,  it  is 
full  of  short  Trees.  The  Land  in  the  Country  is  very  high 
and  mountainous,  and  it  appears  to  be  very  woody. 
Between  Cape  Passao  and  Cape  St.  Francisco,  the  Land  by 
the  Sea  is  full  of  small  Points,  making  as  many  little  sandy 
Bays  between  them ;  and  is  of  an  indiflerent  heighth, 
covered  with  Trees  of  divers  sorts ;  so  that  sailing  by  this 
Coast  you  see  nothing  but  a  vast  Grove  or  Wood  ;  which, 
is  so  much  the  more  pleasant,  because  the  Trees  are  of 
several  Forms,  both  in  respect  to  their  Growth  and  Colour. 

Our  design  was,  as  I  said  in  my  first  Chapter,  to  search 
for  Canoas  in  some  River  where  the  Spaniards  have  neither 
Settlement  or  Trade  with  the  native  Indians.  We  had 
Spanish  Pilots,  and  Indians  bred  under  the  Spaniards,  who 
were  able  to  carry  us  into  any  Harbour  or  River  belonging 
to  the  Spaniards,  but  were  wholly  unacquainted  with  those 
Rivers  which  were  not  frequented  by  the  Spaniards.  There 
are  many  such  unfrequented  Rivers  between  Plata  and 
Panama :  Indeed  all  the  way  from  the  Line  to  the  Gulf  of 
St.  Michaels,  or  even  to  Panama  it  self,  the  Coast  is  not  in- 
habited by  any  Spaniards,  nor  are  the  Indians  that  inhabit 
there  any  way  under  their  subjection  :  except  only  near  the 
Isle  Gallo,  where,  on  the  Banks  of  a  Gold  River  or  two, 
there  are  some  Spaniards  who  work  there  to  find  Gold. 

Now  our  Pilots  being  at  a  loss  on  these  less  frequented 
Coasts,  we  supply'd  that  defect  out  of  the  Spanish  Pilot- 

184 


■  RIVER    OF   ST.   JAGO 

Vtoks,  which  wc  took  in  their  Ships :  These  we  found  by    . 
experience  to  be  very  good  Guides.     Yet  nevertheless  the  ' 
Country  in  many  Places  by  the  Sea  being  low,  and  full  of 
'Openings,   Creeks  and  Rivers,  it  is  somewhat  difficult  to 
-iJ   any   particular  River  that  a  Man  designs  to  go  to, 
'^herv  he  is  not  well  acquainted. 

This  however  could  be  no  discouragement  to  us ;  for 
OAf  River  might  probably  be  as  well  furnished  with  Indian 
CuKMS  as  another;  and  if  we  found  them,  it  was  to  us 
indiffcrtnl  where,  yet  we  pitcht  on  the  River  St.  Jago, 
DOC  because  there  were  not  other  Rivers  as  large,  and  a» 
bkely  to  be  inhabited  with  Indians  as  it;  but  because  that 
RhrcT  was  not  far  from  Gallo,  an  Island  where  our  Ships 
could  anchor  safely  and  ride  securely.  We  past  by  Cape 
Sc  Frandsco,  meeting  with  great  and  continued  Rains, 
r  Land  by  the  Sea  to  the  North  of  the  Cape,  is  low  and 
dinary  woody ;  the  Trees  are  very  thick,  and  seem 
»  be  of  a  prodigious  height  and  bigness.  From  Cape  St. 
jco  the  Land  runs  more  Easterly  into  the  Bay  of 
tatna.  1  take  this  Cape  to  he  its  Bounds  on  the  South 
,  and  the  Isles  of  Cobaya  or  Quibo  to  bound  it  on  the 
iidc.  Between  this  Cape  and  the  Isle  Gallo  there  are 
-may  large  and  navigable  Rivers.  We  past  by  them  all 
■;ll  we  came  to  the  River  St.  Jago. 

This  River  is  near  a  d-  North  of  the  Equator.     It  is 

Izr^  and  navigable  some  leagues  up,  and  7  leagues  from 

:ne  Sea  it  divides  itself  into  two  parts,  making  an  Island 

that  is  4  leagues  wide  against  the  Sea.     The  widest  branch 

H  that  on  the  S.  W.  side  of  the  Island.     Both  Branches  are 

'rry  deep,  but  the  mouth  of  the  narrower  is  so  choakt  with 

ifaoies  that  at  low  water,  even  Canoas  can't  enter.     Above 

th«  lilaod  it  is  a  league  wide,  and  the  Stream  runs  pretty 

urugbt.  and  very  swift.     The  Tide  flows  about  3  leagues 

up  the  River,  but  to  what  height  I  know  not.     Probably 

•he  River  hath  its  original  from  some  of  the  rich  Mountains 

near  the  City  ^ibo,  and  it  runs  through  a  Country  as  rich 

J        a  Soil,  as  perhaps  any  in  the  World,  especially  when  it 

1       dnw*  within  10  or  J  2  leagues  of  the  Sea.    The  Land  there 

m     t>Mh  on  the  Island,  and  on  both  sides  of  the  River,  is  of  a 

k  185 


CAPTAIN    DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    black  deep  Mold,  producing  extraordinary  great  tall  Trees 
'^^"^  of  many  sorts,  such  as  usually  grow  in  these  hot  Climates. 
I  shall  only  give  an  account  of  the  Cotton  and  Cabbage- 
trees,  whereof  there  is  great  plenty ;  and  they  are  as  large 
of  their  kinds  as  ever  I  saw. 

There  are  two  sorts  of  Cotton-trees,^  one  is  called  the 
Red,  the  other  the  White  Cotton-tree.  The  White  Cotton- 
tree  grows  like  an  Oak,  but  generally  much  bigger  and 
taller  than  our  Oaks :  The  body  is  straight  and  clear  from 
knots  or  boughs  to  the  very  head :  there  it  spreads  forth 
many  great  limbs  just  like  an  Oak.  The  Bark  is  smooth  and 
of  a  grey  colour :  the  Leaves  are  as  big  as  a  large  Plumb-Leaf, 
jagged  at  the  edge ;  they  are  oval,  smooth,  and  of  a  dark 
green  colour.  Some  of  these  Trees  have  their  bodies  much 
bigger,  1 8  or  20  foot  high,  than  nearer  the  Ground,  being 
big-bellied  like  Nine-pins.  They  bear  a  very  fine  sort  c«F 
Cotton,  called  Silk-Cotton.  When  this  Cotton  is  ripe,  the 
Trees  appear  like  our  Apple-trees  in  England,  when  full  of 
Blossoms.  If  I  do  not  mistake,  the  Cotton  falls  down  in 
November,  or  December :  then  the  Ground  is  covered  white 
with  it.  This  is  not  substantial  and  continuous,  like  that 
which  grows  upon  the  Cotton-shrubs,  in  Plantations,  but 
like  the  Down  of  Thistles ;  so  that  I  did  never  know  any 
use  made  of  it  in  the  West-Indies,  because  it  is  not  worth 
the  Labour  of  gathering  it :  but  in  the  East-Indies  the 
Natives  gather  and  use  it  for  Pillows.  It  hath  a  small 
black  Seed  among  it.  The  Leaves  of  this  Tree  fall  ofF  the 
beginning  of  April ;  while  the  old  Leaves  are  falling  ofF, 
the  young  ones  spring  out,  and  in  a  weeks  time  the  Tree 
casts  off  her  old  Robes,  and  is  cloathed  in  a  new  pleasant 
Garb.  The  red  Cotton-tree  is  like  the  other,  but  hardly  so 
big :  it  bears  no  Cotton,  but  its  Wood  is  somewhat  harder 
of  the  two,  yet  both  sorts  are  soft  spungy  Wood,  fit  for  no 
use  that  I  know,  but  only  for  Canoas,  which  being  strait 
and  tall  they  are  very  good  for ;  but  they  will  not  last 
long,  especially  if  not  drawn  ashore  often  and  tarred ; 
otherwise  the  Worm  and  the  Water  soon  rot  them.     They 

*  Cotton  trees  :  Bombax  pctandrum  and  B,  samauma, 

186 


CABBAGE-TREES 

I  the  biggest  Trees,  or  perhaps  Weeds  rather,  in  the  West-    aii.\ 
Fney  are  common  in  the  East  and    West-Indies 

good  fat  LJind. 
A*  the  Cotton  is  the  biggest  Tree  in  the  Woods,  so 
the  C»bbage-trec '  is  the  tallest:  The  Body  is  not  very 
big,  but  very  high  and  strait.  I  have  measured  one  in 
the  B»y  of  Campcachy  120  feet  long  as  it  lay  on  the 
Ground,  and  there  are  some  much  higher.  It  has  no 
Limbs  nor  Boughs,  but  at  the  head  there  are  many 
Branches  bigger  than  a  Man's  Arm.  These  Branches  are 
oot  covered,  but  flat,  with  sharp  edges;  they  are  12  or 
14  fool  long.  About  two  foot  from  the  Trunk,  the 
Branches  shoot  forth  small  long  Leaves,  about  an  Inch 
broad,  which  grow  so  regularly  on  both  sides  of  the 
Branch,  that  the  whole  Branch  seems  to  he  but  one  Leaf, 
nude  up  of  many  small  ones.  The  Cabbage  Fruit  shoots 
out  in  the  midst  of  these  Branches,  from  the  top  of  the 
Tree ;  it  is  invested  with  many  young  Leaves  or  Branches 
-vhicfa  arc  ready  to  spread  abroad,  as  the  old  Branches 
Jrop  and  fall  down.  The  Cabbage  it  self,  when  it  is 
;akcn  out  of  the  Leaves  which  it  seems  to  be  folded  in, 
■.i  as  big  as  the  small  of  a  Man's  Leg,  and  a  foot  long ;  it 
Tt  IS  white  as  Milk,  and  as  sweet  as  a  Nut,  if  eaten  raw, 
ifld  it  is  very  sweet  and  wholesom  if  boiled.  Besides, 
the  Cabbage  it  self,  there  grow  out  between  the  Cabbage 
and  the  large  Branches,  small  Twigs,  as  of  a  Shrub, 
about  two  foot  long  from  their  Stump.  At  the  end  of 
those  Twigs  (which  grow  very  thick  together)  there  hang 
Bemcs  hard  and  round,  and  as  big  as  a  Cherry.  These  the 
Tree  sheds  every  year,  and  they  are  very  good  for  Hogs: 
fof  this  reason  the  Spaniards  fine  any  who  shall  cut  down 
any  of  these  in  their  Wootis,  The  body  of  the  Tree  is 
fuJJ  of  rings  round  it,  half  a  foot  asunder  frum  the  bottom 
10  the  top.  The  Bark  is  thin  and  brittle ;  the  Wood  is 
black  and  very  hard,  the  heart  or  middle  of  the  Tree  is 
vbitc  Pith.  They  do  not  climb  to  get  the  Cabbage,  but 
■t  diem  down ;  for  should  they  gather  it  off  the  Tree  as 


Tbc  cabbatjc  tiec ;  EuUrpi  cduiis. 

187 


CAPTAIN    DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  it  Stands,  yet  its  head  being  gone,  it  soon  dies.  These 
1684  Trees  are  much  used  by  Planters  in  Jamaica,  to  board  the 
sides  of  the  Houses,  for  it  is  but  splitting  the  Trunk  into 
four  parts  with  an  Axe,  and  there  are  so  many  Planks. 
Those  Trees  appear  very  pleasant,  and  they  beautifie  the 
whole  Wood,  spreading  their  green  Branches  above  all 
other  Trees. 

All  this  Country  is  subject  to  very  great  Rains,  so  that 
this  part  of  Peru  pays  for  the  dry  Weather  which  they 
have  about  Lima  and  all  that  Coast.  I  believe  that  is  one 
reason  why  the  Spaniards  have  made  such  small  discoveries, 
in  this  and  other  Rivers  on  this  Coast.  Another  reason 
may  be,  because  it  lies  not  so  directly  in  their  way ;  for 
they  do  not  coast  it  along  in  going  from  Panama  to  Lima, 
but  first  go  Westward  as  far  as  to  the  Keys  or  Isles  of 
Cobaya,  for  a  westerly  Wind,  and  from  thence  stand  over 
towards  Cape  St.  Francisco,  not  touching  any  where 
usually,  till  they  come  to  Manta  near  Cape  St.  Lorenzo. 
In  their  return  indeed  from  Lima  to  Panama,  they  may 
keep  along  the  Coast  hereabouts ;  but  then  their  Ships  are 
always  laden,  whereas  the  light  Ships  that  go  from 
Panama,  are  most  at  leisure  to  make  discoveries.  A  third 
Reason  may  be,  the  wildness  and  enmity  of  all  the  Natives 
on  this  Coast,  who  are  naturally  fortified  by  their  Rivers 
and  vast  Woods,  from  whence  with  their  Arrows  they  can 
easily  annoy  any  that  shall  land  there  to  assault  them.  At 
this  River  particularly  there  are  no  Indians  live  within 
6  leagues  of  the  Sea,  and  all  the  Country  so  far  is  full  of 
impassable  Woods ;  so  that  to  get  at  the  Indians,  or  the 
Mines  and  Mountains,  there  is  no  way  but  by  rowing  up 
the  River;  and  if  any  who  are  Enemies  to  the  Natives 
attempt  this,  (as  the  Spaniards  are  always  hated  by  them) 
they  must  all  the  way  be  exposed  to  the  Arrows  of  those 
who  would  lie  purposely  in  Ambush  in  the  Woods  for 
them.  These  wild  Indians  have  small  Plantations  of 
Maiz,  and  good  Plantain-Gardens ;  for  Plantains  are  their 
chiefest  food.     They  have  also  a  few  Fowls  and  Hogs. 

It  was  to  this  River  that  we  were  bound,  to  seek  for 
Canoas,  therefore  the  26th  supposing  our  selves  to  be  abrest 

188 


'^ 


ST.  JAGO    RIVER— HOGS 
.  wc  went  from  our  Ships  with  4  Canoas.     The  27th 


the 


half  Flood  into  the 


morning  we  entered 

iBullcr    branch  of   that    River,  and  rowed    up   6   leagues 

Icfare    wc    met   any    Inhabitants.     There    we  found    two 

imall   Huts  thatched  with  Palmeto  Leaves.     The  Indians 

teeing  us  rowing  towards  their  Houses,  got  their  Wives  and 

■Ttle  ones,  with  their  Household-stuff,  into  their  Canoas, 

"A  paddled  away  faster  then  we  could  row;  for  we  were 

"   -ccd  to  keep  in  the  middle  of  the  River  because  of  our 

'ITS,  but  they  with  their  Paddles  kept   close   under  the 

:''inks,  mnd  so  had  not  the  strength  of  the  stream  against 

.cm,  as  we  had.     These  Huts  were  close  by  the  River  on 

—I  East  side  of  it,  just  against  the  end  of  the  Island.     We 

iw  a  great  many  other  Houses  a  league  from  us  on  the 

■her  side  of  the  River ;  but  the  main  stream  into  which 

•  c  were  now  come,  seemed  to  be  so  swift,  that  we  were 

iiraid  to  put  over,  for  fear  we  should  not  be  able  to  get 

ick   again.     We    found    only    a   Hf^,   some  Fowls    and 

I'lintmins  in  the  Huts:  We  killed  the  Hog  and  the  Fowls, 

'hkh  were  drest  pixsently.    Their  Hogs  they  got  (as  I  sup- 

V>«e)  from  the  Spaniards  by  some  accident,  or  from  some 

Ndghbouring  Indians  who  converse  with   the   Spaniards; 

I      I'ljr  this  that  wc  took  was  of  their  European  kind,  which 

I      Ac  Spaniards  have   introduced   into   America  very   plenti- 

t'lillv,  especially  into  the  Islands  Jamaica,  Hispaniola,  and 

tab*  above    alt,    being    very    largely    stored    with    them ; 

■here  they  feed    in  the  Woods  in  the  day  time,  and  at 

':gl!lt  come  in  at  the  sounding  of  a  Conch-shell,  and  are 

:«  up  in  their  Crauls  or  Pens,  and  yet  some  turn  wild, 

■hjch   oevcrthclcss   are   often    decoyed   in    by    the    other, 

•Jtkh  being  all  marked,  whenever  they  see  an  unmarked 

Hof  in  the  Pen  they  know  it  is  a  wild  one,  and  shoot  him 

iTMcnily.     These  Crauls  I  have  not  seen  on  the  Continent ; 

'here  the  Spaniards  keep  them  tame  at  home.     Among 

■^  Wild    Indians,  or  in  their  Woods,  are  no  Hogs  but 

ffcary  and  Warrcc,  a  sort  I  have  mentioned  before. 

After  wc  had  refreshed  our  selves,  we  returned  toward 
'-.c  mouth  of  the  River,  It  was  the  evening  when  we 
ome  from  thcfice,  and  wc  got  to  the  Rivers  mouth  the 


CAPTAIN    DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    next  morning  before  day:  Our  Ships  when  we  left  them 

1^*84  ^gj.g  ordered  to  go  to  Gallo,  where  they  were  to  stay  for 

us.     Gallo  is  a  small  uninhabited  Island  lying  in  between 

2  and  3  Degrees  North  Lat.     It  lieth  in  a  wide  Bay  about 

3  leagues  from  the  mouth  of  the  River  Tomaco;   and 

4  leagues  and  half  from  a  small  Indian  Village  called 
Tomaco:  The  Island  Gallo  is  of  an  indifferent  heighth; 
it  is  cloathed  with  very  good  Timber  Trees,  and  is  there- 
fore often  visited  with  Barks  from  Guiaquil  and  other 
places:  for  most  of  the  Timber  carryM  from  Guiaquil  to 
Lima,  is  first  fetcht  from  Gallo.  There  is  a  Spring  of 
good  Water  at  the  N.  E.  end :  at  that  place  there  is  a  fine 
small  sandy  Bay,  where  there  is  good  landing.  The  Road 
for  Ships  is  against  this  Bay,  where  there  is  good  secure 
riding  in  6  or  7  fathom  water;  and  here  Ships  may 
careen.  It  is  but  shoal  water  all  about  this  Island ;  yet 
there  is  a  Channel  to  come  in  at,  where  there  is  no  less 
than  4  fathom  water :  You  must  go  in  with  the  Tydc  of 
Flood,  and  come  out  with  Ebb,  sounding  all  the  way. 

Tomaco  is  a  large  River  that  takes  its  name  from  an 
Indian  Village  so  called :  It  is  reported  to  spring  from  the 
rich  Mountains  about  Quito.  It  is  thick  inhabited  with 
Indians ;  and  there  are  some  Spaniards  that  live  there,  who 
traffick  with  the  Indians  for  Gold.  It  is  shoal  at  the 
mouth  of  the  River,  yet  Barks  may  enter. 

This  Village  Tomaco  is  but  small,  and  is  seated  not 
far  from  the  Mouth  of  the  River.  It  is  a  place  to  enter- 
tain the  Spanish  Merchants  that  come  to  Gallo  to  load 
Timber,  or  to  traffick  with  the  Indians  for  Gold.  At  this 
place  one   Doleman,^  with   7   or    8   Men    more,  once   of 

*  About  the  middle  of  M.iy  1680.  The  bark  (containing  seven  men) 
w.'is  blown  out  of  her  course,  and  from  her  consorts,  in  a  gale  of  wind. 
Wliile  sailing;  towards  Goat  Key,  where  they  hoped  to  rejoin  their  comrades, 
these  seven  pirates  landed  on  the  Isle  of  Gallo  and  captured  three  white 
women.  They  stayed  at  Gallo  for  some  days,  making  one  or  two  descents 
upon  the  mainland  to  recruit  their  larders.  One  of  the  Spanish  prisoners 
escaped,  and  contrived  to  raise  a  force  of  "fifty  men  with  fire-arms."  The 
pirates  were  ambushed  by  this  squadron  the  next  time  they  went  ashore. 
Six  of  them  were  shot  dead  at  the  first  volley.  The  seventh  obtained 
quarter.  Basil  Ringrose  tells  the  story,  in  the  twelfth  chapter  of  his 
published  Journal. 

190 


■                        TOMACO   TOWN  I 

^kpuin  Slurp's  Crew,  were  kill'd  in  the  Year  1680.     From  amJ 

The  Branch  of  the  River  St.  Jago,  where  we  now  lay,  to  '"*fl 

Tatnaco,  is  about   5   Leagues ;  the  Land   low,  and  full  of  ] 

Creeks,   so  that    Canoas  may  pass  within    Land    through  I 

'.  "»*e  Creeks,  and  from  thence  into  Tomaco  River. 

The  28th  Day  we  left  the  River  uf  St.  Jago,  crossing  | 

some  Creeks  in  our  way  with  our  Canoas;  and  came  to  an  I 

Irwiiwi  House,  where  we  took  the  Man  and  all  his  Family.  I 

We  staid  here  till  the  Afternoon,  and  then  rowed  towards  I 

Tomaco,  with  the  Man  of  this  House  for  our  Guide.      We  1 

aniTed  at  Tomaco  about   12  a  clock  at  night.     Here  we  I 

took    all    the   Inhabitants  of  the   Village,   and    a  Spanish  I 

Knight,  called  Don  Diego  de  Pinas.     This  Knight  came  in  1 
a  Ship  from  Uma  to  lade  Timber.     The  Ship  was  riding 
"m  a  Creek  about  a   Mile  off,  and    there  were  only   one 

Spaniard  and  8  Indians  aboard.     We  went  in  a  Canoa  with  J 

~   Men,  and  took  her;  she  had  no  Goods,  but    12  or  13  | 

J»rs  of  good  Wine,  which  we  took  out,  and  the  next  Day  J 

•ct  the  ^ip  go.     Here  an  Indian  Canoa  came  aboard  with  I 

•hree  Men   m  her.     These  Men   could   not  speak  Spanish,  I 

neither  could  they  distinguish  us  from  Spaniards ;  the  wild  W 
Indians  usually  thinking  all   white   Men   to   be  Spaniards. 
We  gare  them  3  or  4  Callabashes  of  Wine,  which  they 
frwly  drank.     They  were  streight-bodted  and  well-limbed 
Men,  (if  a  mean  heighth ;  their  Hair  black,  long-visaged, 

tnuU  No«e«  and  Eyes  ;  and  were  thin-fac'd,  ill-look'd  Men,  I 

'/  ■  Tery   dark    Copper-colour.      A    little    before    night  I 

Ciptain  Swan  and  all  of  us  return'd  to  Tomaco,  and  left  1 
t^  Vc«»el    to    the   Seamen.     The    31st    day   two    of   our 

kLuou,  who  had  been  up  the  River  of  Tomaco,  returned  1 
Iwk  igain  to  the  Village.     They  had  rowed  7  or  8  leagues 

tf,  and  found  but  one  Spanish  House,  which  they  were  | 

Md  did  belong  to  a  Lady  who  lived   at  Lima ;  she   had  1 

brvants  here  that  traded  with  the  Indians  for  Gold ;  but  I 

Icy  *xing   our  Men    coming,   ran   away :    yet  our  Men  I 

kukj  there  several  Ounces  of  Gold  in  Calabashes.  I 

The  first  day  of  January  1685,  we  went  from  Tomaco  1 

'■'>w»rds  Gallo.     We  carried  the  Knight  with  us  and  two  I 

uiaJI  Caotios  which  we  took   there,  and   while  we  were  J 

191  J 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AV.  rowing  over,  one  of  our  Canoas  took  a  Pacquet-Boat  that 
'^^3  was  sent  from  Panama  to  Lima.  The  Spaniards  threw 
the  Pacquet  of  Letters  overboard  with  a  Line  and  a  Buoy 
to  it,  but  our  Men  seeing  it  took  it  up,  and  brought  the 
Letters  and  all  the  Prisoners  aboard  our  Ships,  that  were 
then  at  an  Anchor  at  Gallo.  Here  we  staid  till  the  6th 
day,  reading  the  Letters,  by  which  we  understood  that  the 
Armada  from  Old  Spain  was  come  to  Portabel :  and  that 
the  President  of  Panama  had  sent  this  Pacquet  on  purpose 
to  hasten  the  Plate  Fleet  thither  from  Lima. 

We  were  very  joyful  of  this  News,  and  therefore  sent 
away  the  Pacquet-Boat  with  all  her  Letters;  and  we 
altered  our  former  resolutions  of  going  to  Lavelia.  We 
now  concluded  to  careen  our  Ships  as  speedily  as  we 
could,  that  we  might  be  ready  to  intercept  this  Fleet. 
The  properest  place  that  we  could  think  on  for  doing  it 
was  among  the  Kings  Islands  or  Pearl  Keys,^  because  they 
are  near  Panama,  and  all  Ships  bound  to  Panama  from  the 
Coast  of  Lima  pass  by  them ;  so  that  being  there  we  could 
not  possibly  miss  the  Fleet.  According  to  these  resolu- 
tions we  sailed  the  next  Morning,  in  order  to  execute  what 
we  designed.  We  were  2  Ships  and  3  Barks  in  Company, 
viz.  Captain  Davis,  Captain  Swan,  a  Fire-ship,  and  2  small 
Barks,  as  Tenders ;  one  on  Captain  Davis  his  Ship,  the 
other  on  Captain  Swan's.  We  weighed  before  day,  and 
got  out  all  but  Captain  Swan's  Tender,  which  never 
budged  ;  for  the  Men  were  all  asleep  when  we  went  out, 
and  the  Tide  of  Flood  coming  on  before  they  waked,  we 
were  forced  to  stay  for  them  till  the  next  day. 

The  8th  day  in  the  morning  we  descried  a  Sail  to  the 
West  of  us ;  the  Wind  was  at  South,  and  we  chased  her, 
and  before  noon  took  her.  She  was  a  Ship  of  about  90 
Tun  laden  with  Flower ;  she  came  from  Truxillo,  and  was 

1  Now  the  Pearl  Islands.  In  1574  when  John  Oxenham  came  into 
the  South  Seas  (in  a  pinnace  he  had  built  on  the  isthmus),  he  concealed 
himself  in  a  snug  creek  amon>|  these  islands,  and  set  a  watch  upon  the 
( liff-tops  for  ships  cominjf  to  Panama  from  Peru.  He  intercepted  two 
rich  ships  before  he  attempted  to  recross  the  isthmus.  He  found  some 
pearls,  and  pearl  fisheries,  on  the  islands,  so  that  the  name  was  not  always 
undeserved  as  Dampier  hints  a  few  pages  later. 

192 


GORGONIA 

ond  to   Panama.     This  Ship  came  very  opportunely  to 
,  for  Flower  began  to  grow  scarce,  and  Captain  Davis  his  ' 

1  grudg'd  at  what  was  given  to  Captain  Swan  ;  who,  as  I 
lid  before,  had  none  but  what  he  had  from  Captain  Davis. 
We  jogged  on  after  this  with  a  gentle  gale  towards 
Gorgnnia,  an  Island  lying  about  25  leagues  from  the  Island 
(nllo.  The  9th  day  we  anchored  at  Gorgonia,  on  the 
West-side  of  the  Island,  in  38  fathom  clean  ground,  not 
2  Cables  length  from  the  shore.  Gorgonia  is  an  uninhabited 
Isbnd,  in  lat.  about  3  degrees  North  :  It  is  a  pretty  high 
island,  and  very  remarkable,  by  reason  of  2  Saddles,'  or 
risings  and  fallings  on  the  top.  It  is  about  2  leagues  long, 
and  a  league  broad  ;  and  it  is  4  leagues  from  the  Main  : 
At  the  West-end  is  another  small  Island.  The  Land  against 
the  Anchoring  place  is  low ;  there  is  a  small  sandy  Bay  and 
good  landing.  The  Soil  or  Mould  of  it  is  black  and  deep, 
in  the  low  ground,  but  on  the  side  of  the  high  Land  it  is 
1  kind  of  a  red  Clay.  This  Island  is  very  well  cloathed 
with  Urge  Trees  of  several  sorts,  that  are  flourishing  and 
green  all  the  year.  It's  very  well  watered  with  small 
Bn>oks  that  issue  from  the  high  Land.  Here  are  a  great 
iRanr  little  black  Monkeys,  some  Indian  Conies,  and  a  few 
Snakes,  which  are  all  the  Land  Animals  that  I  know  there. 
It  b  reported  of  this  Island  that  it  rains  on  every  day  in 
the  Year  more  or  less ;  but  that  I  can  disprove :  However, 
it  t«  a  very  wet  Coast,  and  it  rains  abundantly  here  all  the 
Year  long.  There  arc  but  few  fair  days  ;  for  there  is  little 
diftrencc  in  the  Seasons  of  the  Year  between  the  wet  and 
dry;  only  in  that  Season  which  should  be  the  dry  time, 
tbe  Rains  are  less  frequent  and  more  moderate  than  in  the 
•  CI  Season,  for  then  it  pours  as  out  of  a  Sieve.  It  is  deep 
Witcr  and  no  anchoring  any  where  about  this  Island,  only  at 
the  We«-sidc :  The  Tide  riscth  and  falleth  7  or  8  foot  up 
lad  down.  Here  arc  a  great  many  Perewincles  and  Muscles 
to  be  had  at  low  Water.  Then  the  Monkeys  come  down 
by  the  Se«-side  and  catch  them  ;  digging  them  out  of  their 
Sbdls  with  their  Claws. 


I 


■   rh«ca 
vol-  I. 


n  ibc  published  version  or  KiiiKrose's  Joi 

193  ^ 


Mita 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Here  are  Pcarl-Oysters  in  great  plenty :  They  grow  to 

^^5  the  loose  Rocks,  in  4,  5  or  6  fathom  Water  by  Beards,  or  little 
small  Roots,  as  a  Muscle:  These  Oysters  are  commonly 
flatter  and  thinner  than  other  Oysters;  otherwise  much 
alike  in  shape.  The  Fish  is  not  sweet  nor  very  wholsom ; 
it  is  as  slimy  as  a  Shell-Snail :  they  taste  very  copperish,  if 
eaten  raw,  and  are  best  boiled.  The  Indians  who  gather 
them  for  the  Spaniards,  hang  the  Meat  of  them  on  strings 
like  Jews-ears,^  and  dry  them  before  they  eat  them.  The 
Pearl  is  found  at  the  head  of  the  Oyster,  lying  between  the 
meat  and  the  Shell.  Some  will  have  20  or  30  small  Seed- 
Pearl,  some  none  at  all,  and  some  will  have  i  or  2  ^pretty 
large  ones.  The  inside  of  the  Shell  is  more  glorious  than 
the  Pearl  it  self.  I  did  never  see  any  in  the  South  Seas 
but  here.  It  is  reported  there  are  some  at  the  South  end 
of  Callifornia.  In  the  West-Indies,  the  Rancho  Reys,  or 
Rancheria,  spoken  of  in  Chap  3.  is  the  place  where  they  are 
found  most  plentifully.  'Tis  said  there  are  some  at  the 
Island  Margarita,  near  St.  Augustin,  a  Towh  in  the  Gulf  of 
Florida,  &c.  In  the  East-Indies,  the  Island  Ainam,  near 
the  South  end  of  China,  is  said  to  have  plenty  of  these 
Oysters,  more  productive  of  large  round  Pearl  than  those 
in  other  places.  They  are  found  also  in  other  parts  of  the 
East-Indies,  and  on  the  Persian  Coast. 

At  this  Island  Gorgona  we  rummaged  our  Prize,  and 
found  a  few  Boxes  of  Marmalade,  and  3  or  4  Jars  of  Brandy, 
which  were  equally  shared  between  Captain  Davis,  Captain 
Swan,  and  their  Men.  Here  we  fill'd  all  our  Water,  and 
Captain  Swan  furnished  himself  with  Flower :  Afterward 
we  turned  ashore  a  great  many  Prisoners  but  kept  the 
chiefest  to  put  them  ashore  in  a  better  place. 

The  13th  day  we  sailed  from  hence  toward  the  Kings 
Islands.  We  were  now  6  Sail,  2  Men  of  War,  2  Tenders,  a 
Fireship  and  the  Prize.  We  had  but  little  Wind,  but  what 
we  had  was  the  common  Trade  at  South.  The  Land  we 
sailed  by  on  the  Main,  is  very  low  towards  the  Sea-side,  but 
in  the  Country  there  are  very  high  Mountains. 

*  Jews-ears  :  lichens. 

194 


THE   KINGS,   OR    PEARL   ISLANDS 

The  1 6th  day  wc  passed  by  Cape  Corrientes.  This  an. 
Cipc  is  in  Ut.  5  d.  lo  ni.  it  is  high  bluff  Land,  with  3  or  4  "^^5 
unall  Hillocks  on  the  top.  It  appears  at  a  distance  like  an 
ItUnd.  Here  wc  found  a  strong  current  nmning  to  the 
N.  buc  whether  it  be  always  so,  I  know  not.  The  day  after 
«e  psssed  by  the  Cape,  we  saw  a  small  white  Island,  which 
wc  chaced.  supplying  it  had  been  a  Sail,  till  coming  near  we 
found  our  Error. 

The  list  day  we  saw  Point  Garachina.'  This  point  is 
".  Ut-  7  d.  20  m.  North;  it  is  pretty  high  Land,  rocky,  and 
;rsdtutc  of  Trees;  yet  within  Land  it  is  woody.  It  is 
-cnccd  with  Kocks  against  the  Sea.  Within  the  Point,  by 
the  Sea,  at  low  Water,  you  may  find  store  of  Oysters  and 
Mascles. 

The  Kings  Islands,  or  Pearl  Keys,  are  about  12  leagues 

dtstint  from  this  Point.     Between  Point  Garachina  and  them, 

there  is  a  small  low  flat  barren  Island  called   Gallera,  at 

which  Captain  Harris  was  sharing  with  his  Men  the  Gold 

^e  took  in  his  pillaging  Sancta  Maria,  which  I  spake  of  a 

:tle  before,  when  on  a  sudden  5  Spanish  Barks  fitted  out 

«  purpose  at  Panama,  carae  upon  him  ;  but  he  fought  them 

.:•  noutly  with  one  Small   Bark   he  had,  and  some  few 

Caaoa»,  boirding  their  Admiral  particularly,  that  they  were 

til  glad  to  leave  him.     By  this  Island  we  anchored,  and  sent 

^aor  Basts  to  the  Kings  Island  for  a  good  careening  place. 

The  Kings  Islands  are  a  great  many  low  Woody  Islands, 

I  N.  W.   by  N.   and   S.   K.  by  S.     They   are    about   7 

I  from  ihc  Main,  and  14  leagues  in  length,  and  from 

I  about  12  leagues.     Why  they  are  called  the  Kings 

,  I  know  nut;  they  arc  sometimes,  and  mostly  in 

s  called  the  Pearl  Islands.     1  cannot  imagine  wherefore 

J  ire  called  vt,   for  I  did  never  sec  one  Pearl  Oyster 

t  them,  nor  any  Pearl  Oyster-shells ;  but  on  the  other 

I  have  made  many  a  Meal  there :  The  norther- 

i  of  all  this  range  is  called  Pachcca,  or  Pachcquc* 

shut  a  small  Island  distant  from  Panama    11  or  12 

■  point  at  ilie  SW.  of  ihe  cnirance  lo  the  Gulf 


■95 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   leagues.     The   Southermost  of  them   is  called  St.  Pauls. 

1685  Besides  these  two  I  know  no  more  that  are  called  by  any 
particular  Name,  though  there  are  many  that  far  exceed 
either  of  the  two  in  bigness.  Some  of  these  Islands  are 
planted  with  Plantains  and  Bonanas ;  and  there  are  Fields  of 
Rice  on  others  of  them.  The  Gentlemen  of  Panama,  to 
whom  they  belong,  keep  Negroes  there  to  plant,  weed,  and 
husband  the  Plantations.  Many  of  them,  especially  the 
largest,  are  wholly  untill'd,  yet  very  good  fat  Land,  full  of 
large  Trees.  These  unplanted  Islands  shelter  many  Run- 
away-Negroes, who  abscond  in  the  Woods  all  day,  and  in 
the  Night  boldly  pillage  the  Plantain  Walks.  Betwixt  these 
Islands  and  the  Main  is  a  Channel  of  7  or  8  leagues  wide ; 
there  is  good  depth  of  Water,  and  good  anchoring  all  the 
way.  The  Islands  border  thick  on  each  other;  yet  they 
make  many  small  narrow  deep  Channels,  fit  only  for  Boats 
to  pass  between  most  of  them.  At  the  S.  E.  end,  about  a 
league  from  St.  PauFs  Island,  there  is  a  good  place  for  Ships 
to  careen,  or  hale  ashore.  It  is  surrounded  with  the  Land, 
and  hath  a  good  deep  Channel  on  the  North  side  to  go  in 
at.     The  Tide  riseth  here  about  10  foot  perpendicular. 

We  brought  our  ships  into  this  place  the  25  th  day,  but 
were  forced  to  tarry  for  a  Spring-Tide  before  we  could  have 
Water  enough  to  clean  them ;  therefore  we  first  cleaned  our 
Barks,  that  they  might  cruise  before  Panama,  while  we  lay 
here.  The  27th  day  our  Barks  being  clean  we  sent  them 
out  with  20  Men  in  each.  The  4th  day  after ;  they  re- 
turned with  a  Prize  laden  with  Maiz,  or  Indian  Corn,  Salt 
Beef  and  Fowls.  She  came  from  Lavelia,  and  was  bound 
to  Panama.  Lavelia  is  a  Town  we  once  designed  to  attempt. 
It  is  pretty  large,  and  stands  on  the  Bank  of  a  River  on 
the  North  side  of  the  Bay  of  Panama,  6  or  7  leagues  from 
the  Sea. 

Nata  is  another  such  Town,  standing  in  a  Plain  near 
another  branch  of  the  same  River.  In  these  Towns,  and 
some  others  on  the  same  Coast,  they  breed  Hogs,  Fowls, 
Bulls  and  Cows,  and  plant  Maiz  purposely  for  the  support 
of  Panama,  which  is  supplied  with  Provision  mostly  from 
other  Towns  and  the  Neighbouring  Islands. 

196 


BAY   OF   PANAMA 
The  Beef  and  Fowl  our    Men  took,  came 


to  us  m  a 


I  but  little  Flesh  since  we  left  '^^5 


I  ume,  tor  wc  had  eaten  I 
;  IsUnd  Plata.  The  Harbour  where  we  careen'd  was  in- 
cd  by  three  Islands,  and  our  Ships  rode  in  the 
middle.  That  on  which  we  haled  our  Ships  ashore,  was  a 
link  Island  on  the  North  side  of  the  Harbour.  There  was 
I  6ne  small  sandy  Bay,  but  all  the  rest  of  the  Island  was  in- 
iroocd  with  Rocks,  on  which  at  low  Water  we  did  use  to 
i;a:her  Oysters,  Clams,  Muscles  and  Limpits.  The  Clam 
15  a  sort  of  Oyster  which  grows  so  fast  to  the  Rock,  that 
there  U  no  separating  it  from  thence,  therefore  we  did  open 
■:  where  it  grows,  and  take  out  the  Meat,  which  is  very 
Urge  fat  and  sweet.  Here  are  a  few  common  Oysters,  such 
iS  we  have  in  England,  of  which  sort  I  have  met  with  none 
n  these  Seas,  but  here,  at  Point  Garachina,  at  Puna,  and  on 
the  Mexican  Coast,  in  the  lat.  of  23  d.  North.  I  have  a 
Manuscript  of  Mr,  Teat,  Captain  Swan's  chief  Mate,  which 
gives  an  account  of  Oysters  plentifully  found  in  Port  St. 
Julian,'  on  the  F-ast  side  and  somewhat  to  the  North  of  the 
-•trcights  of  Magellan ;  but  there  is  no  mention  made  of 
*hat  Oysters  they  are.  Here  are  some  Guanoes,  but  we 
r.^und  no  other  sort  of  Land-Animal.  Here  are  also  some 
l^geons  and  Turilc-Doves,  The  rest  of  the  Islands  that 
incomposs  this  Harbour  had  of  all  these  sorts  of  Creatures. 
Our  Men  therefore  did  every  day  go  over  in  Canoas  to  them 
to  Fish,  Fowl  or  Hunt  for  Guanoes;  but  having  one  Man 
s-urprixcd  once  by  some  Spaniards  lying  there  in  ambush, 
ind  carried  off  by  them  to  Panama,  we  were  after  that 
marc  cautious  of  Stragghng. 

The  14th  day  of  Feb.  1685,  we  made  an  end  of  clean- 
ing our  Ship,  fiU'd  all  our  Water,  and  stock'd  our  selves 
with  Hre-wood.  The  15th  day  we  went  out  from  among 
the  Islands,  and  Anchored  in  the  Channel  between  them 
i&d  the  Main,  in  25  fathom  Water,  soft  Oazy  Ground. 
The  PUtc-Flect  was  not  yet  arrived  ;  therefore  we  intended 
10  cruise  before  the  City  of  Panama,  which  is  from  this 
place  about  25   leagues.     The  next  day  we  sailed  towanis 


'  Port  ,St-  Julian.     Ciifitiiin   Wood,  who  was  here  i 
*«UR  u(  MoMch  "  but  no  oysun. 

197 


1670,  mcnlions 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Panama,  passing  in  the  Channel  between  the  Kings  Islands 
'^^^  and  the  Main.  It  is  very  pleasant  sailing  here,  having  the 
Main  on  one  side,  which  appears  in  divers  forms.  It  is 
beautified  with  many  small  Hills,  cloath'd  with  woods  of 
divers  sorts  of  Trees,  which  are  always  green  and  flourish- 
ing. There  are  some  few  small  high  Islands  within  a 
league  of  the  Main,  scattering  here  and  there  one :  These 
are  partly  Woody,  partly  bare;  and  they  as  well  as  the 
Main,  appear  very  pleasant.  The  Kings  Islands  are  on  the 
other  side  of  this  Channel,  and  make  also  a  lovely  prospect 
as  you  sail  by  them.  These,  as  I  have  already  noted,  are 
low  and  flat,  appearing  in  several  Shapes,  according  as  they 
are  naturally  formed  by  many  small  Creeks  and  Branches 
of  the  Sea.  The  i6th  day  we  anchored  at  Pacheque,  in 
17  fathom  Water,  about  a  league  from  the  Island,  and 
sailed  from  thence  the  next  day,  with  the  Wind  at 
N.  N.  E.  directing  our  course  towards  Panama. 

When  we  came  abrest  of  Old  Panama  we  anchored  and 
sent  our  Canoa  ashore  with  our  Prisoner  Don  Diego  de 
Pinas,  with  a  Letter  to  the  Governour,  to  treat  about  an 
Exchange  for  our  Man  they  had  spirited  away,  as  I  said ; 
and  another  Captain  Harris  left  in  the  River  of  St.  Maria 
the  year  before,  coming  over  Land.  Don  Diego  was  desirous 
to  go  on  this  Errand  in  the  Name,  and  with  the  Consent  of 
the  rest  of  our  Spanish  Prisoners ;  but  by  some  accident  he 
was  killed  before  he  got  ashore,^  as  we  heard  afterwards. 

Old  Panama  *^  was  formerly  a  famous  place,  but  it  was 
taken  by  Sir  Henry  Morgan  about  the  year  1673,  and  at 
that  time  great  part  of  it  was  burned  to  ashes,  and  it  was 
never  re-edified  since. 

^  He  was  ambushed  by  some  Spaniards,  who  took  him  to  be  a  buccaneer 
spy. 

^  Old  Panama,  founded  by  Pedrarias  Davila^  was  the  most  splendid 
city  in  the  South  Seas.  It  contained  some  7000  houses,  many  of  which 
were  of  stone.  Most  of  them  were  built  of  the  local  "aromatic  cedar," 
with  lower  storeys  of  stone.  There  was  a  stately  cathedral,  dedicated  to 
St.  Anastasius,  and  a  number  of  lesser  churches  and  handsome  Goxxm- 
ment  buildings.  It  is  probable  that  its  burning  formed  no  part  of  Henr>' 
Morgan's  design.  Its  ruins  arc  rather  more  than  four  miles  from  the 
present  city.  They  are  covered  with  a  tangle  of  plants  and  creepers  ;  but 
the  cathedral  tower  is  still  a  landmark  for  sailors,  and  a  few  stone  walls 
and  a  neat  stone  bridge  were  standing  a  few  years  ago. 

198 


PANAMA— THE   SPANISH   ARMADA 

New  Fanxms  n  a  very  fair  City,  standing  close  by  the 

,  about  4  mile  from  the  Ruines  of  the  Old  Town.     It   ' 

Name  to  a  large  Bay  which  is  famous  for  a  great 

any    navigable    Rivers,  some  whereof  are    very    rich   in 

old  :   It   is  also   very  pleasantly  sprinkled   with  Islands, 

at   arc   not   only   profitable    to    their    Owners,   but   Very 

lightful  to  the  Passengers  and  Seamen  that  sail  by  them ; 

me  of  which  1  have  already  described.     It  Is  incompassed 

BB  tbe  backside  with  a  pleasant  Country,  which  is  full  of 

Hills  and  Valleys,  beautified  with  many  Groves  and 

fna  of  Trees,  that  appear  in  the  Savannahs  like  so  many 

ittle  Islands.     This  City  is  all   compassed    with  a    high 

Wall ' ;  the  Houses  are  said  to  be  of  Brick.     Their 

Roofi*  appear  higher  than  the  top  of  the  City  Wall.     It  is 

kutt6ed  with  a  great  many  fair  Churches  and  Religious 

Houses,  besides  the  President's  House,  and  other  eminent 

ftnUdings;  which  altc^eihcr  make  one  of  the  finest  objects 

Alt  I  did  ever  see,  in  America  especially.     There  are  a 

■real  many  Guns  on  her  Walls,  most  of  which  look  toward 

he  Land.     They  had  none  at  all  against  the  Sea,  when  1 

Sm  entered    these   Seas    with    Captain    Sawkins,    Captain 

CoKoo,  Captain  Sharp,  and  others;  for  till  then  they  did 

i«  far  any  Enemy  by   Sea :  but  since  then    they    have 

fboted  Guns  clear  round.     This  is  a  flourishing  City  by 

it  is  a  thorough-fair  for  all  imported  or  exported 

Gouis  and  Treasure,  to  and  from  all   parts  of  Peru  and 

CWi ;  whereof  tbcir  Store-houses  arc  never  empty.     The 

Koad  also  is  seldom  or  never  without  Ships.     Besides,  once 

'*  J  Yean,  when  the  Spanish  Armada  comes  to  Portobel, 

fei  the  Plate-Fleet  also  from  Uma  comes  hither  with  the 

Kiag'i  Treasure,  and  abundance  of  Merchant-Ships  full  of 

(kaii  and  Plate;  at  that  time  the  City  is  full  of  Mer- 

aod  Gentlemen,'  the  Seamen  are  busie  in  Landing 

pntdigioa*  cfBi  thai  ihe  King  of  Spain  is  said  to  have  ask«l 

-  Iwtlier  Uie  buildiDg  could  be  seen  from  his  Falace  windonrs. 

toah,  according  to  Wafer.    "1'he  Buildinj;  apu«>rs  while  j 

Walb,  which  are  of  ttone ;  and  ihe  covering  of  the  Houki 

Of  ure  ot  "  lhi«  heal  of  business,"  the  Fair  was  tnini- 

vbcte  "a  middle  chamber"  could  not  be  hired  for 

great  wn*  the  tush  fur  accoramodatton.     In 

199 


I 
I 

■ 
I 


J 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  the  Treasure  and  Goods,  and  the  Carriers,  or  Caravan 
'^■■'^?  Masters,  imployed  in  carrying  it  over  Land  on  Mules 
(in  vast  droves  every  day)  to  Portobel,  and  bringing  back 
luirDpcan  goods  from  thence :  Though  the  City  be  then  so 
full,  yet  during  this  heat  of  Business  there  is  no  hiring  of 
an  ordinary  Slave  under  a  Piece  of  Eight  a  day ;  Houses, 
also  Chambers,  Beds  and  Victuals,  are  then  extraordinary 
dear. 

Now  I  am  on  this  Subject,  I  think  it  will  not  be  amiss 
to  give  the  Reader  an  account  of  the  Progress  of  the 
Armada  from  Old  Spain,  which  comes  thus  every  three 
Years  into  the  Indies.  Its  first  arrival  is  at  Carthagena, 
from  whence,  as  I  have  been  told,  an  Express  is  imme- 
diately sent  over  Land  to  Lima,  thro'  the  Southern 
Continent,  and  another  by  Sea  to  Portobcl,  with  two 
l^acqucts  of  Letters,  one  for  the  Viceroy  of  Lima,  the 
other  for  the  Viceroy  of  Mexico.  I  know  not  which  way 
that  of  Mexico  goes  after  its  arrival  at  Portobel,  whether 
by  Land  or  Sea  :  But  I  believe  by  Sea  to  La  Vera  Cruz. 
That  for  Lima  is  sent  by  Land  to  Panama,  and  from 
thence  by  Sea  to  Lima. 

Upon  mention  of  these  Pacquets  I  shall  digress  yet  a 
little  further,  and  acquaint  my  Reader,  that  before  my  first 
going  over  into  the  South  Seas  with  Captain  Sharp,  and 
indeed  before  any  Privateers  (at  least  since  Drake'  and 
Oxcngham)  had  gone  that  way  which  we  afterwards  went, 
except    La  Sound,"    a    French   Captain,    who    by    Captain 

lN»rio  liirilo,  ilic  Fair  was  hold  at  nixht,  by  torchlight,  in  the  great  city 
S4|uarc  or  I'ia/a.  The  inrrclianis'  booths  were  tents,  made  of  the  sails 
of  the  ships.  I 'or  to  Hello  was  very  unhealthy.  It  was  reckoned  that  at 
least  4<x)  |)crsons  died  there  diiriny;  the  few  weeks  of  every  Fair. 

'  Drake  in  his  Nonibrc  dc  Dios  raid  of  1572-3.  Oxenham  or  Oxnam 
(who  accompanied  Drake  on  this  raid)  came  again  on  his  own  account  a 
year  later  (in  1574)-  He  built  a  pinnace^  sailed  into  the  South  Seas,  hid 
ainonj*  the  Tearl  Islands,  and  intercepted  two  treasure  ships.  On  his 
way  l).ick  across  the  isthmus  with  the  plunder,  his  men  mutinied,  so  that 
his  passage  was  delayed.  A  force  of  Sfianiards  fell  uj>on  him,  and  retook 
the  treasure,  and  soon  afterwards  the  whole  crew  was  betrayed  to  the 
Spanish  authorities  by  the  Cimmeroons.  Oxenham  and  his  pilot  were 
hanged  at  Lima.  His  men  were  shot  at  Panama.  The  ship's  boys  seem 
to  have  been  spared. 

"  On  a  prospecting  raid  in  1679-80.     He  was  "driven  back**  by  hunger. 

200 


■               A   SPANISH    PROPHECY  ■ 

^•nght'»  Instructions  had  ventured  as  far  as  Cheapo  Town  ah.  1 

with  a  Body  of  Men,  but  was  driven   back  again,  I  being  '^5 

then  on  Board  Captain  Coxon,  in  company  with  3  or  4 

more  Privateer*,  about  4  leagues  to  the  East  of  Portobel,  _ 

we  took    the    Pacquets   bound    thither    from  Carthagena.  ■ 

Wc  opcn'd  a  great  quantity  of  the  Merchants  Letters,  and  I 

'•mnd  the  Contents  of  many  of  them  to  be  very  surprising,  V 

-.c  Merchants  of  several    parts  of  Old  Spain  thereby  in-  I 

■   rming   their  Correspondents  of  Panama,  and  elsewhere,  I 

a   certain    Prophecy   that    went   about   Spain   that   year,  1 

;  Tenour  of  which  was,  That  there  would  be  English  I 

vatcers  that  Year  in  the  West-Indies,  who  would  make  I 

Kh  gnat  Discoveries,  as  to  open  a  Door  into  the  South  I 

'  tt ;    which    they  supposed    was   fastest   shut :    And   the  I 

tiers  were  accordingly  full  of  Cautions  to  their  Friends  I 

I  be  very  watchful  and  careful  of  their  Coasts.  I 

T)us  Door  they  spake  of  we  all  concluded  must  be  the  I 

PsKage  over  Land  through  the  Country  of  the   Indians  of         I 

Oaiiei,  who  were  a  little  before  this  become  our  Friends.  I 

anJ  had  lately  fallen  out  with  the  Spaniards,  breaking  off  I 

the  Intercourse  which  for  some  time  they  had  with  them  :  I 

and  upon  calling  also  to  mind  the  frequent  I»vitations  wc  I 

had  from  thcMc  Indians  a  little   before  this  time,  to  pass  I 

through  their  Country,  and  fall  upon  the  Spaniards  in  the  I 

^3«ih  Seas,  we  from  henceforward  began  to  entertain  such  I 

-^lOoghtB  in    earnest,  and  soon  came  to  a  Resolution   to  I 

■rake  those  Attempts  which  we  afterwards  did,  with  Capt.  I 

rtharp,  Coxon,  &c.     So  that  the  taking  these  Letters  gave  I 

ibc  first  life  to  those  bold  undertakings  ;  and  we  took  the  I 

ainntage  of  the  fears  the  S[>aniards  were  in  from   that  I 

IVopbeqf,  or  protwblc  Conjecture,  or  whatever  it  were;  for  ■ 

«e  tcaled  up  most  of  the  Letters  again,  and  sent  them  I 

ahore  to  Portobel.  I 

The  occasion  of  this  our  late  Friendship  with  those  I 

iixTiain  was  thus.     About   15  years  before  this  time,  Capt.  I 

Viieht  being  cruiung  near  that  Coast,  and  going  in  among  J 

iWSimhatloe*  hies  to  strike  Fish  and  Turtle,  took  there  I 

liTwing  Indian  Lad  as  he  was  paddling  about  in  a  Canoa.  H 

^HeliTHight  him  aboard  his  Ship,  and  gave  him  the  name  M 

201  ■ 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN',  of  John  Gret,  cloathing  htm,  and  intending  to  breed  him 
i^'^S  among  the  English.  But  his  Moskito  Strikers,  taking 
a  fancy  to  the  Boy,  beggM  him  of  Captain  Wright,  and 
took  him  with  them  at  their  return  into  their  own  Country, 
where  they  taught  him  their  Art,  and  he  married  a  Wife 
among  them,  and  learnt  their  Language,  as  he  had  done 
some  broken  English  while  he  was  with  Captain  Wright, 
which  he  improved  among  the  Moskitoes,  who  correspond- 
ing so  much  with  us,  do  all  of  them  smatter  English  after 
a  sort ;  but  his  own  Language  he  had  almost  forgot 
Thus  he  lived  among  them  for  many  years ;  till  about  6 
or  8  months  before  our  taking  these  Letters  Capt.  Wright 
being  again  among  the  Samballoes,  took  thence  another 
Indian  Boy  about  lo  or  12  years  old,  the  Son  of  a  Man 
of  some  account  among  those  Indians;  and  wanting  a 
Striker,  he  went  away  to  the  Moskito's  Country,  where  he 
took  John  Gret,  who  was  now  very  expert  at  it.  John 
Gret  was  much  pleased  to  see  a  Lad  there  of  his  own 
Country,  and  it  came  into  his  mind  to  persuade  Capt. 
Wright,  upon  this  occasion,  to  endeavour  a  Friendship 
with  those  Indians ;  a  thing  our  Privateers  had  long 
coveted,  but  never  durst  attempt,  having  such  dreadful 
apprehensions  of  their  numbers  and  fierceness:  But  John 
(irer  offered  the  Captain  that  he  would  go  ashore  and 
negotiate  the  matter ;  who  accordingly  sent  him  in  his 
Canoa  till  he  was  near  the  shore,  which  of  a  sudden  was 
covered  with  Indians,  standing  ready  with  their  Bows  and 
Arrows.  John  Gret,  who  had  only  a  Clout  about  his 
middle,  as  the  fashion  of  the  Indians  is,  leapt  then  out 
of  the  Boat,  and  swam,  the  Boat  retiring  a  little  way  back; 
and  the  Indians  ashore  seeing  him  in  that  habit,  and 
hearing  him  call  to  them  in  their  own  Tongue,  (which  he 
had  recovered  by  conversing  with  the  Boy  lately  taken) 
suffered  him  quietly  to  land,  and  gather^  all  about  to 
hear  how  it  was  with  him.  He  told  them  particularly, 
that  he  was  one  of  their  Countrymen,  and  how  he  had  been 
taken  many  years  ago  by  the  English,  who  had  used  him 
very  kindly;  that  they  were  mistaken  in  being  so  much 
afraid  of  that  Nation,  who  were  not  enemies  to  them,  but 

202 


■AGREEMENT  WITH    DARIEN   INDIANS 

^h  the  Spaniards:  to  confirm  this,  he  told  them  how  well 
^■e  English  treated  another  young  Lad  of  theirs,  they  had  ' 
■My  taken,  such  zn  ones  Son  ;  for  this  he  had  learnt  of 
^fce  Youth,  and  his  Father  was  one  of  the  company  that 
*M  got  together  on  the  shore.  He  persuaded  them  there- 
;  fc  to  make  a  League  with  these  friendly  People,  by  whose 
'tip  they  might  be  able  to  quell  the  Spaniards;  assuring 
)'.V}  the  Father  of  the  Boy,  that  if  he  would  but  go  with 
^'ot  to  the  Ship,  which  they  saw  at  anchor  at  an  Island 
tSere  (it  was  Golden  Island,  the  Easiermost  of  the  Sam- 
talloe*.  a  place  where  there  is  good  striking  for  Turtle) 
ae  should  have  his  Son  restored  to  him,  and  they  might 
»11  expect  a  very  kind  reception.  Upon  these  assurances 
:o  or  30  of  them  went  off  presently,  in  2  or  3  Canoas 
bdcn  with  Plantains,  Bonanoes,  Fowls,  &c.  And  Captain 
Wright  haWng  treated  them  on  board,  went  ashore  with 
them,  and  was  entertained  by  them,  and  Presents  were  made 
00  each  side.  Captain  Wright  gave  the  Boy  to  his  Father 
-.n  ■  very  handsom  English  Dress,  which  he  had  caused  to 
Se  made  purposely  for  him ;  and  an  Agreement  was  "im- 
mediately struck  up  between  the  English  and  these  Indians, 
wbo  invited  the  English  through  their  Country  into  the 
^thSeai. 

Pursuant  to  this  Agreement,  the  English,  when  they 
cune  upon  any  such  design,  or  for  Traffick  with  them, 
•or  to  give  a  certain  Signal  which  they  pitcht  upon, 
■Wcby  they  might  be  known.  But  it  happened  that 
■j  Sound,  the  French  Captain  spoken  of  a  little 
,  being  then  one  of  Captain  Wright's  Men,  learnt 
Signal,  and  staying  ashore  at  Petit-Guaves,  upon 
,  Wright's  going  thither  soon  after,  who  had  his 
feion  from  thence,  he  gave  the  other  French  there 
I  account  of  the  Agreement  before-mentioned,  and 
laeit  of  entring  the  South  Seas  thereupon,  that  he 
:  the  head  of  about  120  of  them,  who  made  that 
I  attempt  upon  Cheapo,  as  I  said,  making  use  of 
ignal  they  had  learnt  for  passing  the  Indians  Country, 
I  at  that  time  could  not  distinguish  so  well  between 
KMvcnl  Nuiooft  of  the  Europeans,  aa  they  can  unce. 


g 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  From  such  small  beginnings  arose  those  great  stirs  that 

'685  have  been  since  made  over  the  South  Seas,  viz.  from  the 
Letters  we  took,  and  from  the  Friendship  contracted  with 
these  Indians  by  means  of  John  Gret.  Yet  this  Friendship 
had  like  to  have  been  stifled  in  its  Infancy ;  for  within  few 
months  after  an  English  trading  Sloop  came  on  this  Coast 
from  Jamaica,  and  John  Gret,  who  by  this  time  had  ad- 
vanced himself  to  be  a  Grandee  among  these  Indians, 
together  with  5  or  6  more  of  that  quality,  went  oflF  to 
the  Sloop  in  their  long  Gowns,  as  the  custom  is  for  such 
to  wear  among  them.^  Being  received  aboard,  they  ex- 
pected to  find  every  thing  friendly,  and  John  Gret  talkt 
to  them  in  English;  but  these  English  Men,  having  no 
knowledge  at  all  of  what  had  happened,  endeavoured  to 
make  them  Slaves  (as  is  commonly  done)  for  upon  carrying 
them  to  Jamaica,  they  could  have  sold  them  for  10  or  12 
Pound  a  piece.  But  John  Gret,  and  the  rest,  perceiving 
this,  leapt  all  over  board,  and  were  by  the  others  killed 
every  one  of  them  in  the  Water.  The  Indians  on  shore 
never  came  to  the  knowledge  of  it ;  if  they  had,  it  would 
have  endangered  our  Correspondence.  Several  times  after, 
upon  our  conversing  with  them,  they  enquired  of  us  what 
was  become  of  their  Country-men :  but  we  told  them  we 
knew  not,  as  indeed  it  was  a  great  while  after  that  we 
heard  this  Story ;  so  they  concluded  the  Spaniards  had  met 
with  them,  and  killed,  or  taken  them. 

But  to  return  to  the  account  of  the  progress  of  the 
Armada  which  we  left  at  Cartagena :  After  an  appointed 
stay  there  of  about  60  days,  as  I  take  it,  it  goes  thence  to 
Portobel,  where  it  lies  30  days,  and  no  longer.  Therefore 
the  Viceroy  of  Lima,  on  notice  of  the  Armada's  arrival  at 
Cartagena,  immediately  sends  away  the  Kings  Treasure 
to  Panama,  where  it  is  landed,  and  lies  ready  to  be  sent 
to  Portobel  upon  the  first  news  of  the  Armada's  arrival 

*  "They  have  a  sort  of  long  Cotton  Garments  of  their  own,  some  white, 
others  of  a  rusty  black,  shap'd  like  our  Carter's  Frocks,  hanging  down  to 
their  Heels,  with  a  fringe  of  the  same  of  Cotton  about  a  Span  long,  and 
short,  wide,  open  sleeves,  reaching  but  to  the  middle  of  their  Amis.  These 
Ciarmcnts  .  .  .  are  worn  only  on  some  great  Occasions." — Lionel  IVa/er, 
p.  142. 

204 


SPANISH    ARMADA   AND   FLOTA 

there.  This  is  the  reason  partly  of  their  sending  Expresses 
>■:)  early  lo  Limi,  that  upon  the  Armada's  first  coming  ' 
to  Portobcl,  the  Treasure  and  Goods  may  lie  ready  at 
Fuuma,  to  be  sent  away  upon  the  Mules,  and  it  requires 
tome  time  for  the  Uma  Fleet  to  unlade,  because  the  Ships 
ride  not  «  Paruma,  but  at  Perica,'  which  are  3  small 
Islaods  1  leagues  from  thence.  The  King's  Treasure  is 
«aid  to  amount  commonly  to  about  24000CXX3  of  Pieces  of 
Kight :  besides  abundance  of  Merchants  Money.  All  this 
Treasure  is  carried  on  Mules,  and  there  are  large  Stables 
at  boch  places  to  lodge  them.  Sometimes  the  Merchants 
10  steal  the  Custom  pack  up  Money  among  Goods,  and 
scad  it  to  Vcnta  de  Crazes'  on  the  River  Chagrc  ;  from 
iheacc  down  the  River,  and  afterwards  by  Sea  to  Portobel : 
u)  which  passage  I  have  known  a  whole  Fleet  of  Periago's 
sad  Canooj  taken.  The  Merchants  who  are  not  ready  to 
■•U  by  the  thirtieth  day  after  the  Armada's  arrival,  are  in 
danger  to  be  left  behind,  for  the  Ship  all  weigh  the  30th  day 
precisely,  and  go  to  the  Harbors  Mouth ;  yet  sometimes, 
on  great  importunity,  the  Admiral  may  stay  a  week  longer ; 
for  It  is  impossible  that  all  the  Merchants  should  get  ready, 
for  want  of  Men,  When  the  Armada  departs  from  Porto- 
bd,  it  returns  again  to  Cartagena,  by  which  time  all  the 
Kittgs  Ro'cnue  which  comes  out  of  the  Country  is  got 
ready  there.  Here  also  meets  them  again  a  great  Ship 
caltni  the  Pattachc,  one  of  the  Spanish  Galeons,  which 
Wore  their  first  arrival  at  Cartagena  goes  from  the  rest  of 
the  Armada  on  purpose  to  gather  the  Tribute  of  the  Coast, 
uochlng  at  the  Margarita  s  and  other  places  in  her  way 
thence  to  Cartagena,  as  Punta  de  Guaira'  Maracaybo.  Rio 
<te  la  Hacha,  and  Sancta  Martha;  and  at  all  these  places 
takes  in  Treasure  for  the  King.  After  the  set  stay  at 
Cinagena,  the  Armado  goes  away  to  the  Havana  in  the 


Croccs,  a  vilUge  Mnne  few  miln  from  Poiuuna.  It  i« 
of  ibe  ChaifKi  Kivrr,  and  maikt  Uie  highest  poini  in 

the  Notib  S«a  may  ntccnd  Drake  raided  i(  durinu  his 
'  in  )  171-  It  <"■*  liuincd  by  the  Spantardi  abtuii  a  tcntuty 
10  Montan'i  buccaneers,  who  expected  lo  find  food  sod 
rw  ■  niiterable  village. 

20J 


CAPTAIN    DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Isle  of  Cuba,  to  meet  there  the  Flota,  which  is  a  small 
'^**5  number  of  Shij>s  that  go  to  la  Vera  Cruz,*  and  there  ukes 
in  the  effects  of  the  City  and  Country  of  Mexico,  and 
what  is  brought  thither  in  the  Ship  which  comes  thither 
every  year  from  the  Philippine  Islands ; '  and  having  joined 
the  rest  at  the  Havana,  the  whole  Armada  sets  sail  for  Spun 
through  the  Gulf  of  Florida.'  The  Ships  in  the  South 
Seas  lie  a  great  deal  longer  at  Panama  before  they  return 
to  Lima.  The  Merchants  and  Gentlemen  which  come 
from  Lima,  stay  as  little  time  as  they  can  at  Portobel, 
which  is  at  the  best  but  a  sickly  place,  and  at  this  time  is 
very  full  of  Men  from  all  parts.  But  Panama,  as  it  is  not 
overcharged  with  Men  so  unreasonably  as  the  other,  tho* 
very  full,  so  it  enjoys  a  good  Air,  lying  open  to  the  Sea- 
wind  ;  which  riseth  commonly  about  lO  or  ii  a  Clock 
in  the  morning,  and  continues  till  8  or  9  a  Clock  at  night: 
then  the  Land  wind  comes,  and  blows  till  8  or  9  in  the 
morning. 

There  are  no  Woods  nor  Marches  near  Panama,  but  a 
brave  dry  Champain  Land,  not  subject  to  Fogs  nor  Mists. 
The  wet  Season  begins  in  the  latter  end  of  May,  and  con- 
tinues till  Novemlier.  Ai  that  time  the  Sea  breezes  arc  at 
S.  S.  W.  and  the  Land  winds  at  N.  At  the  dry  season  the 
Winds  arc  most  betwixt  the  E.  N.  E.  and  the  North.  Yet 
off  in  the  Bay  they  are  commonly  at  South ;  but  of  this  1 
shall  be  more  particular  in  my  Chapter  of  Winds  in  the 
Appendix.  The  Rains  are  not  so  excessive  about  Panana 
it  self,  as  on  either  side  of  the  Bay ;  yet  in  the  Months  of 
June,  July  and  August,  they  are  severe  enough.  Gentlemen 
that  come  from  Peru  to  Panama,  especially  in  these  months, 
cut  their  hair  close,  to  preserve  them  from  Fevers ;  for  the 
place  is  sickly  to  them,  because  they  come  out  of  a  Country 
which  never  hath  any  Rains  or  Fogs,  but  enjoys  a  constant 
serenity  ;  but  I  am  apt  to  believe  this  City  is  healthy  enough 
to  any  other  People.     Thus  much  for  Panama. 

The  20th  day  we  went  and  anchored  within  a  league  of 

■ 

*  In  the  Gulf  of  Mexico. 

■-*  "  The  Manila  galleon  "  which  discharged  on  the  west  coast  at  Acapulco. 

^  The  passage  between  Florida  and  Cuba. 

206 


OUR   PRISONERS   EXCHANGED 

:  Islaods   Perico  (which  are  only  3  little  barren  rocky   an. 

bUnds)  in  expcaation  of  the  President  of  Panama's  Answer  *^S  , 

to  the  Letter,  I  said,  wc  sent  him  by  Don  Diego,  treating 

■boat  exchange  of  Prisoners ;  this  being  the  day  on  which 

he  had  given  us  his  Parole  to  return  with  an  answer.     The 

ittt  day  wc  took  another  Bark  laden  with  Hogs.  Fowl, 

Salt  Beef  and  Molossocs :  she  came  from  Lavclia,  and  was 

going  to  Rinanu.    In  the  afternoon  we  sent  another  Letter ' 

shore  by  a  young  Mastiso  (a  mixt  brood  of  Indians  and 

r.uropcans)  directed  to  the  President,  and  3  or  4  Copies  of 

■1)  be  dispersed  abroad  among  the  common  People.    This 

.--:(cr,  which  was  full  of  Threats,  tt^ethcr  with  the  young 

'•lin'i  managing  the  business,  wrought  so  powerfully  among 

":  common  People,  that  the  City  was  in  an  uproar.     The 

('-csidcnt  immediately  sent  a  Gentleman  aboard,  who  de- 

Tundod  the  Flower-Prize  that  we  took  ofF  of  Gallo,  and 

iH  t^  Prisoner?,  for  the  Ransom  of  our  two  Men  :  but  our 

Uptaiiu  told   him   ihcy  would  exchange  Man   for  Man. 

Tat  Gentleman  said  he  had  not  Orders  for  that,  but  if  we 

"'■uU  suy  till  the  next  day  he  would  bring  the  Governors 

The  next  day  he  brought  aboard  our  two  Men, 

d  had  about  4.0  Prisoners  in  exchange. 

I  The  24lh  day  wc  run    over    to  the    Island   Tabago.' 

'Tic  litwr  M  |i*cB  tn  full  in  the  orlKinal   MS.     It  U  Lcnainly  "full 

l^ilM  nA>c  tbt*  lut  demand  and  Ihinkc  ihai   Ihe  imprisonctnent  of 

fans  Eafluiunen  U  more  advantaf;cnus  tn  you  than  ihc  lives  of 

nr  of  jroKT  Cauntiymen  ii  are  already  and  what  else  shall  full  into 

u,  ikea  jaa  may  keep  Ibcm  and  wc  will  send  you  the  heads  of  these 

fct^fiMiii>a  :  and  Iben  doe  dut  Coumr^men  the  least  hurl  in  theit  livet 

pilf«s  mai  br  Uie  beipe  of  God  wee  will  colour  your  Land  Kivera  and 

iih  Wead  of  men  women  and  children  the  whole  time  that  wee 

aau,  cutntas  our  former  Mercy  into  cruelty,  shewing  mercy 

If  10  any.* 

_     If  oar  Sttim  near  your  walU  thai  you  uiay  have  the  pleasure 

■  (lfc«  Spaaoli  priwnert)  handed  at  nur  yard  annes." 

■Mke  you  kntrar  that  wee  arc  tlie  Comanders  of  the  whole 
n  ewwder  what  to  choose  for  wee  waite  your  sentence  of  life 
b  inmiieaeE,  if  deaih  you  shall  certainly  have  iJie  heads  by 


ma  the  Com.-uidcrs  of  the  whole  South  Seas. 

Feb.  «,  1581." 
puwerfuily." 


Ai 


CAPTAIN    DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Tabago  is  in  the  Bay,  and  about  6  Leagues  South  of 
J685  Panama.  It  is  about  3  mile  long,  and  2  broad,  a  high 
mountainous  Island.  On  the  North  side  it  declines  with  a 
gentle  descent  to  the  Sea.  The  Land  by  the  Sea  is  of  a 
black  Mold  and  deep ;  but  towards  the  top  of  the  Mountain 
it  is  strong  and  dry.  The  North  side  of  this  Island  makes 
a  very  pleasant  shew,  it  seems  to  be  a  Garden  of  Fruit  in- 
closed with  many  high  Trees;  the  chiefest  Fruits  are 
Plantains  and  Bonano's.  They  thrive  very  well  from  the 
foot  to  the  middle  of  it ;  but  those  near  the  top  are  but 
small,  as  wanting  moisture.  Close  by  the  Sea  there  are 
many  Coco-Nut-Trees,  which  make  a  very  pleasant  sight. 
Within  the  Coco-Nut-Trees  there  grow  many  Mammet 
Trees.^  The  Mammet  is  a  large,  tall,  and  straight-bodied 
Tree,  clean,  without  knots  or  limbs,  for  60  or  70  foot,  or 
more.  The  head  spreads  abroad  into  many  small  Limbs, 
which  grow  pretty  thick,  and  close  together.  The  Bark  is 
of  a  dark  grey  colour,  thick  and  rough,  full  of  large  chops. 
The  Fruit  is  bigger  than  Quince,  it  is  round,  and  covered 
with  a  thick  Rind,  of  a  grey  colour :  When  the  Fruit  is 
ripe  the  Rind  is  yellow  and  tough ;  and  it  will  then  peel  off 
like  Leather ;  but  before  it  is  ripe  it  is  brittle :  the  juice 
is  then  white  and  clammy;  but  when  ripe  not  so.  The 
ripe  Fruit  under  the  Rind  is  yellow  as  a  Carrot,  and  in  the 
middle  are  two  large  rough  stones,  flat,  and  each  of  them 
much  bigger  than  an  Almond.  The  Fruit  smells  very 
well,  and  the  taste  is  answerable  to  the  smell.  The  S.  W. 
end  of  the  Island  hath  never  been  cleared,  but  is  full  of 
Fire-wood,  and  Trees  of  divers  sorts.  There  is  a  very  fine 
small  Brook  of  fresh  Water,  that  springs  out  of  the  side  of 
the  Mountain,  and  gliding  through  the  Grove  of  Fruit- 
trees,  falls  into  the  Sea  on  the  North  side.  There  was  a 
small  Town  standing  by  the  Sea,  with  a  Church  at  one  end, 
but  now  the  biggest  part  of  it  is  destroyed  by  the  Priva- 
teers.^    There  is  good  anchoring  right  against  the  Town, 

*  The  Mammee  apple. 

-  The  buccaneers  under  Sawkins  lay  here  from  May  2-15, 1680.  **  VVhiic 
we  were  here,"  says  Ringrose,  "some  of  our  men  being  drunk  on  shore, 
hapncd  to  set  fire  unto  one  of  the  Houses,  the  which  consumed  twelve 
houses  more  before  any  could  get  ashoar  to  quench  it"  (p.  86,  ed.  1684). 

208 


A    SPANISH    STRATAGEM 
c  a  mile  from  the  shoar,  where  you  may  have  16  or 
^thom   Water,  sofc  oazy  ground.     There  is  a  small  ' 
close  by  the  N.  W.  end  of  this  called  Tabogilla,' 
ith  a  snull  Channel  to  pass  between.     There  is  another 
]y  Island  about  a  mile  on  the  N.  E.  side  of  Tabago, 
<  good  Channel  between  them  :  this  Island '  hath  no 
xme  that  ever  I  heard. 

While  wc  lay  at  Tabago,  we  had  like  to  have  had  a 
vrvy  trick  plaid  us  by  a  pretended  Merchant  from  Panama, 
rho  came,  as  by  stealth,  to  traffick'with  us  privately;  a 
Aii^  common  enou^jh  with  the  Spanish  Merchants,  both 
■  the   North  and  South  Seas,  notwithstanding  the  severe 
~    'libitions  of  the  Govcrnours;  who  yet  sometimes  con- 
i*e  at  it,  and  will  even  trade  with  the  Privateers  them- 
Jves.     Our    Merchant    was    by  agreement  to  bring   out 
Bark  laden  with  Goods  in  the  night,  and  wc  to  go  and 
at  the  South  of  Pcrico.     Out  he  came,  with  a  Fire- 
ip  iostead  of  a  Bark,  and  approached  very  near,  haling 
with  the  Watch-word*  we  had  agreed  upon.     Wc  sus- 
the  worst,  call'd  to  them  to  come  to  an  anchor, 
upoa  their  not  doing  so  fired  at  them  :  when  immedi- 
ately their  Men  going  out  into  the  Canoas,  set  fire  to  their 
Ship,  which  blew  up,  and  burnt  close  by  us ;  ^  so  that  we 
forc'd   to  cut  our  Cables  in  all  haste,  and  scamper 
Kwiy  as  welt  as  wc  could. 

The  Spaniard  was  not  altogether  so  politick  in  appoint- 
h^  to  meet  us  at  Perico,  for  there  we  had  Sea-room ; 
had  be  come  thus  upon  us  at  Tabago,  the  Land- 
wind  bearing  hard  upon  us  as  it  did,  we  must  either  have 
Wa  burnt  by  the  I*ircship,  or  upon  loosing  our  Cables 
kne  been  driven  ashore:  But  1  suppose  they  chose  Pcrico 

*  TafaicinDa.  *  It  i«  unnamr<l. 

*  WUcSluup  wkI  SawkiiM  lay  at  Tabofta,  in  1680,  "the  Sp^iniards  ranie 
A  Imdt  «rilb  B»  fraoi  tlic  Town,  In  wtiom  we  told  in  Wine  and  Dranily,  lo 
kMk«  of  Three  Tboucand  Pierci  of  Eight  "(Ca//<un  Bartkalomew  SMarf. 
fkrtiiA  H»dc). 

***-  wucbword  wa»  "  Mallena,'  "the  name  ol  an  old  Spaniah  pilote 

««mcd  hy  an  asirali|{n'  before  b«  came  from  the  Kinii'* 
bcvBTB  of  6re.  Ha  was  •rarnctl  a)(ain  that  "cavnini;"  by  the 
*     \fM£.  MS.) 


I 

J 


J 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  rather  for  the  Scene  of  their  Enterprize,  partly  because  they 
'^S  might  there  best  sculk  among  the  Islands,  and  partly  because, 
if  their  Exploit  fail'd,  they  could  thence  escape  best  from 
our  Canoas  to  Panama,  but  2  leagues  off! 

During  this  Exploit,  Capt.  Swan  (whose  Ship  was  less 
than  ours,  and  so  not  so  much  aim'd  at  by  the  Spaniards) 
lay  about  a  Mile  off,  with  a  Ginoa  at  the  Buoy  of  his 
Anchor,  as  fearing  some  Treachery  from  our  pretended 
Merchant ;  and  a  little  before  the  Bark  blew  up,  he  saw 
a  small  Float  on  the  Water,  and,  as  it  appeared,  a  Man  on 
it,  making  towards  his  Ship ;  but  the  Man  dived,  and  dis- 
appeared of  a  sudden,  as  thinking  probably  that  he  was 
discovered. 

This  was  supposed  to  be  one  coming  with  some  Com- 
bustible Matter  to  have  stuck  about  the  Rudder.  For 
such  a  trick  ^  Giptain  Sharp  was  served  at  Coquimbo,  and 
his  Ship  had  like  to  have  been  burnt  by  it,  if,  by  meer 
accident,  it  had  not  been  discovered:  I  was  then  aboard 
Captain  Sharp's  Ship.  Captain  Swan  seeing  the  Blaze  by 
us,  ciit  his  Cables  as  we  did,  his  Bark  did  the  like ;  so  we 
kept  under  Sail  all  the  Night,  being  more  scared  than  hurt. 
The  Bark  that  was  on  fire  drove  burning  towards  Tabago ; 
but  after  the  first  blast  she  did  not  burn  clear,  only  made 
a  smother,  for  she  was  not  well  made,  though  Captain  Bond  * 
had  the  framing  and  management  of  it. 

This  Captain  Bond  was  he  of  whom  I  made  mention  in 
my  4th  Chapter.  He,  after  his  being  at  the  Isles  of  Cape 
Verd,  stood  away  for  the  South  Seas,  at  the  instigation  of 
one  Richard  Morton,  who  had  been  with  Captain  Sharp  in 
the  South  Seas.  In  his  way  he  met  with  Captain  Eaton, 
and  they  two  consorted  a  day  or  two :  At   last  Morton 

^  **  They  blew  up  a  horse's  hide  like  unto  a  bladder,  and  upon  this  float 
a  man  ventured  to  swim  from  shoar,  and  come  under  the  stem  of  our  ship. 
Being  arrived  there,  he  crammed  Okeham  and  Brimstone,  and  other  com- 
bustible matter,  between  the  Rudder  and  the  Sternpost.  Having  done 
this,  he  fired  it  with  a  match,  so  that  in  a  small  time  our  Rudder  was  on 
fire,  and  all  the  ship  in  a  smoak."  This  was  December  6,  1680.  The  trick 
was  discovered  "  before  it's  going  too  far  "  (Ringrose^  p.  109 ;  ed.  1684).  Sharp 
alludes  to  it,  but  gives  no  details  (p.  43,  ed.  Hack). 

2  The  Captain  Bond  of  Bristol  mentioned  in  Chapter  IV.  as  the  kid- 
napper of  the  Governor  of  Mayo. 

210 


SPANISH   STRATAGEMS 

tbooxd  Captain  Eaton,  and   perswaded  him  to  lose 

Bond  in  the  Night,  which  Captain  Eaton  did,  ' 
I  continuing  aboard  of  Captain  Eaton,  as  6nding  his 
c  better  Ship.  Captain  Bond  thus  losing  both  his  Consort 
Eaton,  and  Morton  his  Pilot,  and  his  Ship  being  but  an 
cfdiittry  Sailer,  he  despaired  of  getting  into  the  South  Seas; 
and  be  had  plaid  such  tricks  among  the  Caribbee  Isles,  as 
i  have  been  told,  that  he  did  not  dare  to  appear  at  any  of 
the  English  Islands.  Therefore  he  persuaded  his  Men  to 
go  to  the  Spaniards,  and  they  consented  to  do  any  thing 
that  he  should  propose:  So  he  presently  steered  away  into 
the  West  Indies,  and  the  first  place  where  he  came  to 
an  Anchor  wtu  at  Portobcl.  He  presently  declared  to  the 
Gorcmour,  that  there  were  English  Ships  coming  into  the 
South  Scaa,  and  that  if  they  questioned  it,  he  offered  to 
be  krp<  a  Prisoner,  till  time  should  discover  the  truth  of 
vfau  be  said  ;  but  they  believed  him,  and  sent  him  away 
to  Panama,  where  he  was  in  great  esteem.  This  several 
nisoocn  told  us. 

The  Spaniards  of  Panama  could  not  have  fitted  out 
thdr  Fire-ship  without  this  Captain  Bond's  assistance;  for 
it  is  flcrangc  to  say  how  grosly  ignorant  the  Spaniards  in 
ibe  West  Indies,  but  especially  in  the  South  Seas,  are  of 
lit  sffiiii  They  build  indeed  good  Ships,  but  this  is  a 
small  matter :  for  any  Ship  of  a  good  bottom  will  serve  for 
time  Seas  on  the  South  Coast.  They  rig  their  Ships  but 
tmunran] ly,  have  no  Guns,  but  in  3  or  4  of  the  Kings 
%ps,  and  ire  meanly  furnished  with  Warlike  Provisions, 
and  as  much  at  a  loss  for  the  making  any  Kireships  or 
cckcr  I«9  usual  Machines.  Nay,  they  have  not  the  sense 
tn  have  their  Guns  run  within  the  sides  upon  their  dis- 
diam,  but  have  Platforms  without  for  the  Men  to 
leaaa  00  to  charge  them;  so  that  when  we  come  near  we 
as  fetch  them  down  with  small  shot  out  of  our  Boats. 
A  main  reason  of  this  is,  that  the  Native  Spaniards  arc 
too  prTMd  to  be  Seamen,  but  use  the  Indians  for  all  those 
I  Oftca:  One  Spaniard,  it  may  be,  going  in  the  Ship  to 
\  csmnaod  it,  and  himself  of  little  more  knowledge  than 
tboK  poor  igmjrant  Creatures:  nor  can  they  gain  much 
211 


I 

I 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    Experience,  seldom  going  far  off  to  Sea,  but  coasting  along 

'^5  the  shores. 

But  to  proceed :  In  the  Morning  when  it  was  light  we 
came  again  to  anchor  close  by  our  Buoys,  and  strove  to  get 
our  Anchors  again ;  but  our  Buoy-Ropes,  being  rotten, 
broke.  While  we  were  puzzling  about  our  Anchors,  we 
saw  a  great  many  Canoas  full  of  Men  pass  between  Tabago, 
and  the  other  Island.  This  put  us  into  a  new  Consterna- 
tion :  We  lay  still  some  time,  till  we  saw  that  they  came 
directly  towards  us,  then  we  weighed  and  stood  towards 
them :  And  when  we  came  within  hale,  we  found  that  they 
were  English  and  French  Privateers  come  out  of  the  North 
Seas  through  the  Isthmus  of  Darien.  They  were  280  Men, 
in  2  8  Canoas ;  200  of  them  French,  the  rest  English.  They 
were  commanded  by  Captain  Gronet,^  and  Captain  Lequie.' 
We  presently  came  to  an  Anchor  again,  and  all  the  Canoas 
came  aboard.  These  Men  told  us,  that  there  were  180 
English  Men  more,  under  the  command  of  Captain  Townley,' 
in  the  Country  of  Darien,  making  Canoas  (as  these  men 
had  been)  to  bring  them  into  these  Seas.  All  the  English 
Men  that  came  over  in  this  Party  were  immediately  enter- 
tained by  Captain  Davis  and  Captain  Swan  in  their  own 
Ships,  and  the  French  Men  were  ordered  to  have  our 
Flower  Prize  to  carry  them,  and  Captain  Gronet  being  the 
eldest  Commander  was  to  command  them  there ;  and  thus 
they  were  all  disposed  of  to  their  Hearts  content.  Captain 
Gronet,  to  retalliate  this  kindness,  offered  Captain  Davis 
and  Captain  Swan,  each  of  them  a  new  Commission  from 
the  Governor  of  Petit  Guaves.  It  hath  been  usual  for 
many  Years  past,  for  the  Governor  of  Petit  Guaves  to  send 
blank  Commissions  to  Sea  by  many  of  his  Captains,  with 
orders  to  dispose  of  them  to  whom  they  saw  convenient. 
Those  of  Petit  Guaves  by  this  means  making  themselves 
the  Sanctuary  and  Asylum  of  all  People  of  desperate 
Fortunes ;  and  increasing  their  own  Wealth,  and  the 
Strength  and  Reputation  of  their  Party  thereby.     Captain 

*  Grogniet.     See  Appendix.  *  L'Escuyer,  or  Lescuyer. 

*  Townley  (De  Lussan  calls  him  Toufl^).    The  French  accounts  give 
him  only  115  men. 

212 


■  GULF  OF  ST.    MICHAEL 

^Dbvis  accepted  of  one,  having  before  only  an  old  Commis-  a 
Bon.  which  fell  to  him  by  Inheritance  at  the  decease  of  '* 
Biptain  Cook  ;  who  took  it  from  Captain  Tristian,  together 
^riih  his  B«rk,  as  is  before  mentioned.  But  Captain  Swan 
refused  it,  saying.  He  had  an  Order  from  the  Duke  of 
York,  neither  to  give  oflfencc  to  the  Spaniards,  nor  to  re- 
ceive any  affiront  from  them  ;  and  that  he  had  been  injur'd 
by  them  at  Baldivia,  where  they  had  kill'd  some  of  his 
Men.  and  wounded  several  more  ;  so  that  he  thought  he 
had  a  lawful  Commission  of  his  own  to  right  himself.  1 
BCYcr  read  any  of  these  French  Commissions  while  I  was 
IB  these  Seas,  nor  did  I  then  know  the  import  of  them  ; 
bat  I  have  Icamt  since,  that  the  Tenour  of  them  is,  to  give 
a  Liberty  to  Fish,  Fowl,  and  Hunt-  The  occasion  of  this 
s,  that  the  Island  Hispaniola,  where  the  Garrison  of  Pctit- 
Guavcs  IS,  belongs  partly  to  the  French,  and  partly  to  the 
Spuiiardt ;  and  in  time  of  Peace  these  Commissions  are 
given  as  a  Warrant  to  those  of  each  side  to  protect  them 
from  the  adverse  Party :  But  in  effect  the  French  do  not 
rcHnin  ihcm  to  His{ianiola,  but  make  them  a  pretence 
for  a  general  ravage  in  any  part  of  America,  by  Sea  or 
Land. 

Having  thus  disposed  of  our  Associates,  we  intended 
to  sail  towards  the  Gulf  of  St.  Michael,  to  seek  Captain 
Townley ;  who  by  this  time  we  thought  might  be  entring 
tfiTo  these  Seas.  Accordingly  the  second  day  of  March, 
1 61 5,  we  nilcd  from  hence  towards  the  Gulf  of  St,  Michael. 
This  Gulf  tics  near  30  leagues  from  Panama,  towards  the 
S-  E.  The  way  thither  from  Panama  is,  to  pass  between 
tfae  Kings  Islands  and  the  Main.  It  is  a  place  where  many 
peat  Rivers  having  finished  their  courses  are  swallowed  up 
■a  Ak  Sea,  It  b  bounded  on  the  S.  with  Point  Garachina, 
vttch  Keth  in  North  lat.  6  d.  40  m.  and  on  the  North  side 
•kh  Cape  St.  Lorenzo.  Where,  by  the  way,  I  must  correct 
a  pom  error  in  our  common  Maps  ;  which  giving  no  name 
u  all  to  the  South  Cipc,  which  yet  is  the  most  consider- 
■hle,  and  is  the  true  Point  Garachina ;  do  give  that  name 
ta  the  North  Cape,  which  is  of  small  remark,  only  for 
those  who«e  busncss  is  into  the  Gulf:  and  the  name  St 
113 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AN.  Lorenzo,  which  is  the  true  name  of  this  Northern  Point, 
■^5  is  by  them  wholly  omitted ;  the  name  of  the  other  Pcunt 
being  substituted  into  its  place.  The  chief  Rivers  which 
run  mto  this  Gulf  of  St.  Michael,  are  Santa  Maria,  Sambo, 
and  Congos.  The  River  Congos^  (which  is  the  River  I 
would  have  persuaded  our  Men  to  have  gone  up,  as  their 
nearest  way  in  our  Journey  over  Land,  mentioned  Chap,  i .) 
comes  directly  out  of  the  Country,  and  swallows  up  many 
small  Streams  that  fall  into  it  from  both  sides ;  and  at  last 
loseth  itself  on  the  North-side  of  the  Gulf,  a  league  within 
Cape  St.  Lorenzo.  It  is  not  very  wide,  but  deep,  and  navi- 
gable some  leagues  within  Land.  There  are  Sands  without 
it ;  but  a  Channel  for  Ships.  'Tis  not  made  use  of  by  the 
Spaniards,  because  of  the  neighbourhood  of  Santa  Maria 
River;  where  they  have  most  business  on  account  of  the 
Mines. 

The  River  of  Sambo*  seems  to  be  a  great  River,  for 
there  is  a  great  tide  at  its  mouth ;  but  I  can  say  nothing 
more  of  it,  having  never  been  in  it.  This  River  falls  into 
the  Sea  on  the  South-side  of  the  Gulf,  near  Point  Gara- 
china.  Between  the  mouths  of  these  2  Rivers  on  either 
side,  the  Gulf  runs  in  towards  the  Land  somewhat 
narrower;  and  makes  5  or  6  small  Islands,  which  are 
cloathed  with  great  Trees,  green  and  flourishing  all  the 
year,  and  good  Channels  between  the  Islands.  Beyond 
which,  further  in  still,  the  shore  on  each  side  closes  so 
near,  with  2  Points  of  Low  Mangrove  Land,  as  to  make  a 
narrow  or  streight,  scarce  half  a  mile  wide.  This  serves 
as  a  mouth  or  entrance  to  the  inner  part  of  the  Gulf,  which 
is  a  deep  Bay  2  or  3  leagues  over  every  way,  and  about  the 
East-end  thereof  are  the  mouths  of  several  Rivers,  the 
chief  of  which  is  that  of  Santa  Maria.  There  are  many 
Outlets  or  Creeks  besides  this  narrow  place  I  have  de- 
scribed, but  none  navigable  beside  that.  For  this  reason, 
the  Spanish  Guard-Ship,  mention'd  in  Chap,  i,  chose  to 
He  between  these  two  Points,  as  the  only  Passage  they 
could  imagine  we  should  attempt;  since  this  is  the  way 

*  The  Congo,  emptying  into  the  Bay  of  San  Miguel. 

'  The  Sambre.     It  is  "a  great  River,"  emptying  into  Garachine  Bay. 

214 


THE   GOLD   MINES   OF   SANTA    MARIA 

le  Privateers  have  generally  taken,  as  the  nearest, 
n  the  North  and  South  Seas.  The  River  of  Santa  ' 
is  the  largest  of  all  the  Rivers  of  this  Gulf:  It  is 
tile  8  or  9  leagues  up ;  for  so  high  the  tide  flows. 
Bc^cod  that  place  the  River  is  divided  into  many  Branches, 
winch  are  only  fit  for  Canoas.  The  Tide  rises  and  falls  in 
tfai»  River  about  1 8  foot. 

About  6  leagues  from  the  Rivers  mouth,  on  the  South- 
side  of  it,  the  Spaniards  about  20  years  ago,  upon  their  first 
discovery  of  the  Gold  Mines  heir,  built  the  Town  Santa 
Maria,'  of  the  same  name  with  the  River.  This  Town  was 
taken  by  Captain  Coxon,  Captain  Harris,  and  Captain 
Sharp,  at  their  entrance  into  these  Seas ;  it  being  then  but 
newly  built.  Since  chat  time  it  is  grown  considerable  ;  for 
when  Captain  Harris,  the  Nephew  of  the  former,  took  it 
(as  is  said  in  Chap.  6.)  he  found  in  it  all  sorts  of  Trades- 
men, with  a  great  deal  of  Flower,  and  Wine,  and  abundance 
of  Iron  Crows  and  Fickaxes.  These  were  Instruments  for 
the  SUrct  to  work  in  the  Gold  Mines;  for  besides  what 
Gold  and  Sand  they  take  up  together,  they  often  find  great 
lumps,  wcdg'd  between  the  Rocks,  as  if  it  naturally  grew 
cbere.  I  have  seen  a  lump  as  big  as  a  Hens  Egg,  brought 
by  Captain  Harris'  from  thence,  (who  took  120  pound 
there)  and  be  told  me  that  there  were  lumps  a  great  deal 
bigger :  but  these  they  were  forc'd  to  beat  in  pieces  that 
tbcy  might  divide  them.  These  lumps  are  not  so  solid, 
but  thai  they  have  crevises  and  pores  full  of  Earth  and 
Dnst.  This  Town  is  not  far  from  the  Mines,  where  the 
Spaniards  keep  a  great  many  Slaves  to  work  in  the  dry 
time  of  the  year :  but  in  the  rainy  Season,  when  the  Rivers 
do  overflow,  they  cannot  work  so  well.  Yet  the  Mines  are 
•o  nigh  the  Mountains,  that  as  the  Rivers  soon  rise,  so  they 
irc  Mxtn  down  again  ;  and  presently  after  the  rain  is  the 
bot searching  for  Gold  in  the  Sands:  for  the  violent  rains 
da  wish  down  the  Gold  into  the  Rivers,  where  much  of  it 
wttlct   to    the   bottom    and    remains.      Then    the    Native 


f 


Marte-     Tbif  town  wai  a  iniic»Ue,  newly-builded  place,  "  wilb 
(■>  CbarcK*  when  Sharp  and  Sawhini  look  it  in  April  1680. 
'  CafpteiM  Pern  Ham*.     Hu  advmturc*  ar»  discuawd  in  the  Apptadix. 
215 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AN.  Indians  who  live  hereabouts  get  most;  and  of  them  the 
"^5  Spaniards  buy  more  Gold  than  their  Slaves  get  by  working. 
I  have  been  told  that  they  get  the  value  of  5  Shillings  a 
day,  one  with  another.  The  Spaniards  ^thdraw  most  of 
them  with  their  Slaves,  during  the  wet  Season,  to  Panama. 
At  this  Town  of  St.  Maria,  Captain  Townley  was  lying 
with  his  Party,  making  Canoas,  when  Captain  Gronet 
came  into  the  Seas ;  for  it  was  then  abandoned  by  the 
Spaniards. 

There  is  another  small  new  Town  at  the  mouth  of  the 
River  called  the  Scuchaderoes  :  It  stands  on  the  North  side 
of  the  open  place,  at  the  mouth  of  the  River  of  St  Maria, 
where  there  is  more  air  than  at  the  Mines,  or  at  Santa 
Maria  Town,  where  they  are  in  a  manner  stifled  with  heat 
for  want  of  air. 

All  about  these  Rivers,  especially  near  the  Sea,  the 
Land  is  low,  it  is  deep  black  Earth,  and  the  Trees  it 
produceth  are  extraordinary  large  and  high.  Thus  much 
concerning  the  Gulf  of  St.  Michael,  whither  we  were 
bound. 

The  second  day  of  March,  as  is  said  before,  we  weighed 
from  Perico,  and  the  same  night  we  anchor'd  again  at 
Pacheque.  The  third  day  we  sailed  from  thence  steering 
towards  the  Gulf.  Captain  Swan  undertook  to  fetch  off 
Captain  Townley  and  his  Men  :  therefore  he  kept  near  the 
Main ;  but  the  rest  of  the  Ships  stood  nearer  the  Kings 
Islands.  Captain  Swan  desired  this  office,  because  he  in- 
tended to  send  Letters  over-land  by  the  Indians  to  Jamaica, 
which  he  did ;  ordering  the  Indians  to  deliver  his  Letters 
to  any  English  Vessel  in  the  other  Seas.  At  2  a  clock  we 
were  again  near  the  Place  where  we  clean'd  our  Ships. 
There  we  saw  2  Ships  coming  out,  who  proved  to  be 
Captain  Townley  and  his  Men.  They  were  coming  out  of 
the  River  in  the  night,  and  took  2  Barks  bound  for 
Panama :  the  one  was  laden  with  Flower,  the  other  with 
Wine,  Brandy,  Sugar,  and  Oyl.  The  Prisoners  that  he 
took  declared  that  the  Lima  Fleet  was  ready  to  sail. 
We  went  and  anchored  among  the  Kings  Islands,  and  the 
next   day  Captain    Swan   returned    out   of  the    River   of 

216 


NEWS   OF    MORE   PRIVATEERS   COMING        ■ 

SulU  MftTta,  being  informed  by  the  Indians,  that  Captain  an,  A 
Townley  w«s  come  over  to  the  Kings  Islands.  At  this  '^SM 
fdace  Captain  Townley  put  out  a  great  deal  of  his  Goods  I 
to  make  room  for  his  Men.     He  distributed  his  Wine  and  I 

Brandy  some  to  every  Ship,  that  it  might  be  drunk  out,  I 

becsase    he    wantetl    the    jars    to    carry    water   in.      The  I 

Spuiiards  in  these  Seas  carry  all  their  Wine,  Brandy  and  I 

Oyl,  in  Jars  that  hold  7  or  8  Gallons.     When  they  lade  at  I 

t^sco  '  (m  place  about  40  leagues  to  the  Southward  of  Lima,  I 

and  famous  for  Wine)  they  bring  nothing  else  but  Jars  of  I 
Wine,  and  they  slow  one  Tier  at  the  top  of  another  so  I 

artificially,  that  we  could  hardly  do  the  like  without  break-  I 

rig  them:  yet  they  often  carr)-  in  this  manner   1500  or  I 

.  too,  or  more,  in  a  Ship,  and   seldom  break  one.     The  I 

.  ::>tli  day  we  took  a  small  Bark  that  came  from  Guiaquil :  I 

she  had  nothing  in  her  but  Ballast.     The   12th  day  there  I 

ctme  an  Indian  Canoa  out  of  the  River  of  Santa  Maria,  I 

and  toU  as,  that  there  were  300  English  and  Krench-mcn  ^ 

-nare  coming  over  Land  from  the  North  Seas.'  The 
sth  day  we  met  a  Bark,  with  5  or  6  English-men  in  her, 
"at  bdongtd  to  Captain  Knight'  who  had  been  in  the 
'^/uth  Seas  5  or  6  months,  and  was  now  on  the  Mexican 
.'■asc  There  he  had  espied  this  Bark  ;  but  not  being  able 
■  come  ap  with  her  in  hia  Ship,  he  dctach'd  these  5  or  6 
''Icn  in  a  Canoa,  who  took  her,  but  when  they  had  done 
'uld  not  recover  their  own  Ship  again,  losing  company 
■ith  her  in  the  night,  and  therefore  they  came  into  the 
Bay  of  IHnama,  intending  to  go  over-land  back  into  the 
North  Seas,  but  that  they  luckily  met  with  us:  for  the 
lulunus  of  Darien  was  now  become  a  common  Road  for 
Prtnteers  to  pass  between  the  North  and  South  Seas  at 
'hdr  pleasure.  This  Bark  of  Captain  Knight's  had  in  her 
40  or  50  Jars  of  Brandy :  she  was  now  commanded  by 
Mr.  Henry  More ;  *  but  Captain  Swan  intending  to  pro- 

'  A  dhak  called  PUco,  a  rvrr  iiiong  while  brandy,  is  Kill  made  at 

Tb>  pany  vndci  Capuini  Rote,  I'lcanl,  and  Ucxmaniis.    There  wcir 
r  tanj  Indiani  with  thrm. 

»  Witbun  Kniglii. 

tn  a  goM*mith  liviog  oecf  or  un  London  Bridge." 

317 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    mote  Captain  Harris,  caused  Mr.  More  to  be  turned  out, 

'^5  alledging  that  it  was  very  likely  these  Men  were  run  away 

from  their  Commander.     Mr.  More  willingly  resigned  her, 

and  went  aboard  of  Captain  Swan,  and  became   one   of 

his  Men. 

It  was  now  the  latter  end  of  the  dry  Season  here ;  and 
the  Water  at  the  Kings,  or  Pearl  Islands,  of  which  there 
was  plenty  when  we  first  came  hither,  was  now  dried  away. 
Therefore  we  were  forced  to  go  to  Point  Garachina,  think- 
ing to  Water  our  Ships  there.  Captain  Harris  being  now 
Commander  of  the  new  Bark,  was  sent  into  the  River  of 
Santa  Maria,  to  see  for  those  Men  that  the  Indians  told  us 
of,  whilst  the  rest  of  the  Ships  sailed  towards  Pcnnt 
Garachina;  where  we  arrived  the  2ist  day,  and  anchored 
2  mile  from  the  Point,  and  found  a  strong  Tide  running 
out  of  the  River  Sambo.  The  next  day  we  run  within  the 
Point,  and  anchored  in  4  fathom  at  low  Water.  The  Tide 
riseth  here  8  or  9  foot :  the  Flood  sets  N.  N.  E.  the  Ebb 
S.  S.  W.  The  Indians  that  inhabit  in  the  River  Sambo  came 
to  ut  in  Canoas,  and  brought  Plantains  and  Bonanoes. 
They  could  not  speak  nor  understand  Spanish ;  therefore  I 
believe  they  have  no  Commerce  with  the  Spaniards.  We 
found  no  fresh  Water  here  neither ;  so  we  went  from  hence 
to  Port  Pinas,  which  is  7  leagues  S.  by  W.  from  hence. 

Porto  Pinas  ^  lieth  in  lat.  7  d.  North.  It  is  so  called, 
because  there  are  many  Pine-trees  growing  there.  The 
Land  is  pretty  high,  rising  gently  as  it  runs  into  the 
Country.  This  Country  near  the  Sea  is  all  covered  with 
pretty  high  Woods :  the  Land  that  bounds  the  Harbor  is 
low  in  the  middle,  but  high  and  rocky  on  both  sides.  At 
the  mouth  of  the  Harbor  there  are  2  small  high  Islands,  or 
rather  barren  Rocks.  The  Spaniards  in  their  Pilot-Books 
commend  this  for  a  good  Harbor ;  but  it  lieth  all  open  to 
the  S.  W.  Winds,  which  frequently  blow  here  in  the  wet 
Season :  beside,  the  Harbor  within  the  Islands  is  a  place  of 
but  small  extent,  and  hath  a  very  narrow  going  in ;  what 
depth  of  Water  ^  there  is  in  the  Harbor  I  know  not 

Mn  7°  34'  N.  lat.    It  is  charted  in  Admiralty  plan  2267. 
'^  From  nineteen  to  seven  fathoms. 

218 


PORTO    PINAS 

The  25th  day  wc  arrived  at  this  Harbor  of  Pines,  bui 


not  go  in  with  our  Ship,  finding  it  but  an  ordi 


nary  ' 


c.  VVc  sent  in  our  Boats  to  search 
f  found  a  stream  of  good  Water  running  into  the  Sea  ; 
b«l  there  were  such  great  swelling  Surges  came  into  the 
Harbor,  that  we  could  not  conveniently  fill  our  Water 
there.  The  26th  day  we  returned  to  Point  Garachina 
again.  In  our  way  wc  took  a  small  Vessel  laden  with 
Cicao  :  she  came  from  Guiaquit.  The  29th  day  we  arrived 
mt  Point  Garachina  :  There  we  found  Captain  Harris,  who 
had  been  in  the  River  of  Santa  Maria  ;  but  he  did  not  meet 
the  Men  that  be  went  for.  Yet  he  was  informed  again  by 
the  Indiani,  thai  they  were  making  Canoas  in  one  of  the 
fannchcs  of  the  River  of  Santa  Maria.  Here  we  shared  our 
Caoo  lately  taken. 

Because  we  could  not  fill  our  water  here,  we  designed 

;i>  go  to  Tabogo  again,  where  wc  were  sure  to  be  supplied. 

Accordingly  on  the  30th  day  we  set  sail,  being  now  9  Ships 

m  compuiy;  and  had  a  small  wind  at  S.  S.  E.     The  first 

i«7  of  April,  bcir^  in   the  Channel  between   the    Kings 

Iftbfldi  and  the  Main,  we  had  much  Thunder,  Lightning, 

aad  some  Rain:  This  evening  wc  anchored  at  the  Island 

Pacbeque,  and  immediately  sent  4  Canoas  before  us  to  the 

liland  Tabago  to  take  some  Prisoners  for  information,  and 

•«  followed  the  next  day.     The  3rd  day  in  the  evening 

«e  anchored  by   Pcrica,  and   the  next  morning  went  to 

Tahago:'  where  we  found  our  4  Canoas.     They  arrived 

'■here  in  the  night,  and  took  a  Canoa  that  came  (as  is  usual) 

from  Panama  for  Plantains.     There  were  in  the  Canoa  4 

lodtans  and   a   Mulata.     The    Mulata,  because    he  said   he 

■uinthc  Kireship  that  came  to  burn  us  in  the  night,  was 

^aiDediately  hanged.'     These  Prisoners  confirmed,  that  one 

Captain  Bond,  an  English  Man,  did  command  her. 

Here  we  6lled  oar  Water,  and  cut  Firewood  ;  and  from 

■*Tuk  w«  Ur  there  (ome  of  Davis  his  men  (fellows  without  sense 

nspiivd  lu  tnrnc  him  out  ami  cbusc  and  putt  nnoiher  Cotnander 

iMt,  for  the  ((reatcsi  fault  that  ihcy  could  findc  with  him 

M  Milde"  (.v/fttur  .l/.S.V.,  3136). 

t  MS.  Kim  a  marg'MU  note,  "  'ii>  hard  folline  ii 

219 


nto  the  hands  of 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  hence  we  sent  4  Canoas  over  to  the  Main,  with  one  of  the 
'^^  Indians  lately  taken,  to  guide  them  to  a  Sugar-work :  for 
now  we  had  Cacao,  we  wanted  Sugar  to  make  Chocolate. 
But  the  chiefest  of  their  business  was  to  get  Coppers,  for 
each  Ship  having  now  so  many  Men,  our  Pots  would  not 
boil  Victuals  fast  enough,  though  we  kept  them  boiling  all 
the  day.  About  2  or  3  days  after  they  returned  aboard 
with  3  Coppers. 

While  we  lay  here,  Captain  Davis  his  Bark  went  to  the 
Island  Otoque.^  This  is  another  inhabited  Island  in  the 
Bay  of  Panama ;  not  so  big  as  Tabago,  yet  there  are  good 
Plantain-walks  on  it,  and  some  Negroes  to  look  after  them. 
These  Negroes  rear  Fowls  and  Hogs  for  their  Masters, 
who  live  at  Panama ;  as  at  the  Kings  Islands.  It  was  for 
some  Fowls  or  Hogs  that  our  Men  went  thither ;  but  by 
accident  they  met  also  with  an  Express  that  was  sent  to 
Panama  with  an  account,  that  the  Lima  Fleet  was  at  Sea. 
Most  of  the  Letters  were  thrown  overboard  and  lost ;  yet 
we  found  some  that  said  positively,  that  the  Fleet  was 
coming  with  all  the  strength  that  they  could  nuke  in  the 
Kingdom  of  Peru  ;  yet  were  ordered  not  to  fight  us,  except 
they  were  forced  to  it :  (though  afterwards  they  chose  to 
fight  us,  having  first  landed  their  Treasure  at  Lavelia)  and 
that  the  Pilots  of  Lima  had  been  in  consultation  what 
course  to  steer  to  miss  us. 

For  the  satisfaction  of  those  who  may  be  curious  to 
know,  I  have  here  inserted  the  Resolutions  taken  by  the 
Committee  of  Pilots,  as  one  of  our  company  translated 
them,  out  of  the  Spanish  of  two  of  the  Letters  we  took. 
The  first  Letter  is  as  follows. 

"  Sir, — Having  been  with  his  Excellency,  and  heard  the 
Letter  of  Captain  Michael  Sanches  de  Tena  read ;  wherein 
he  says,  there  should  be  a  meeting  of  the  Pilots  of  Panama 
in  the  said  City,  they  say  'tis  not  time,  putting  for  objection 
the  Gallapagoes ;  to  which  I  answered.  That  it  was  fear  of 


»  Otoque.     In  8*»  35'  N.  Lit.,  79°  35'  W.  long.     It  lies  to  the  SSW.  of 
the  Taboga  and  Tabo^uilla  islands. 

220 


SPANISH    FLEET'S   SAILING    ORDERS 

i  Enemy,  and  that  they  might  well  go  that  way.  I  told  . 
this  to  his  Excellency,  who  was  pleased  to  command  me  ' 
to  write  this  Course,  which  is  as  follows. 

"The  day  for  sailing  being  come,  go  forth  to  the  West 
South  West;  from  that  to  the  West  till  you  are  forty 
ksgues  off  at  Sea ;  then  keep  at  the  same  distance  to  the 
N.  W.  till  you  come  under  the  Line :  from  whence  the 
Kilot  must  shape  his  Course  for  Moro  de  Porco,'  and  for 
[he  Coast  of  Lavelia '  and  Natta  : "  where  you  may  speak 
with  the  People,  and  according  to  the  Information  they 
give,  you  may  keep  the  same  Course  for  Otoque,  from 
tbence  to  Tabsgo,  and  so  to  Panama  :  This  is  what  offers 
is  to  the  Course." 

The  Letter  is  obscure :  But  the  Reader  must  make 
what  he  can  of  it.  The  Directions  in  the  other  Letter  were 
to  this  EUTiKt. 

"  The  surest  Course  to  be  observed  going  forth 
froRi  Malabrigo,  is  thus:  You  must  sail  W.  by  S,  that 
you  may  avoid  the  sight  of  the  islands  of  Lobos ;  and 
if  you  should  chance  to  see  them,  by  reason  of  the 
Brteics,  and  should  fall  to  Leward  of  the  Lat.  of  Mala- 
brigo, keep  on  a  Wind  as  near  as  you  can,  and  if  neces- 
nry,  go  about,  and  stand  in  for  the  shoar ;  then  tack 
ud  stand  off,  and  be  sure  keep  your  Latitude ;  and  when 
foa  are  40  leagues  to  the  Westward  of  the  Island 
Uitnft,  keep  that  distance,  till  you  come  under  the  Line; 
lad  then,  if  the  general  Wind  follows  you  farther,  you 
an*  sul  N.  N.E.  till  you  come  into  3  degrees  North. 
■\iid  if  in  this  Lat.  you  should  6nd  the  breezes,  make  it 
nor  business  to  keep  the  Coast,  and  so  sail  for  Panama. 
If  IB  your  course  you  should  come  in  sight  of  the  Land 
■*'*'    :  you  are  abrest  of  Cape  St.  Francisco,  be  sure  to 


'  Horn  PncrcM.     In  tat  7'  n'  N..  Ion*.  8o*  15'  W. 

1  Vim,  or  Larclta,  lies  la  iho  SE.  of  Lim  Poiot,  on  the  1 

*  A  iBwll  io*a  OD  ■  river  of  th«  came  name     It  fronts  upon  Pariia 
a  hite  u>  the  N.  of  Ltw  Poini. 

221 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   Stretch  off  again  out  of  sight  of  Land,  that  you  may  not  be 
'^5  discovered  by  the  Enemy." 

The  last  Letter  supposes  the  Fleet's  setting  out  from 
Malabrigo,  in  about  8  deg.  South  Lat.  (as  the  other  doth 
its  going  immediately  from  Lima,  4  deg.  further  South) 
and  from  hence  is  that  Caution  given  of  avoiding  Lobos, 
as  near  Malabrigo,  in  their  usual  way  to  Panama,  and  hardly 
to  be  kept  out  of  sight,  as  the  Winds  are  thereabouts ;  yet 
to  be  avoided  by  the  Spanish  Fleet  at  this  time,  because 
as  they  had  twice  before  heard  of  the  Privateers  lying  at 
Lobos  de  la  Mar,  they  knew  not  but  at  that  time  we  might 
be  there  in  expectation  of  them. 

The  loth  day  we  sailed  from  Tabago  towards  the  Kings 
Island  again,  because  our  Pilots  told  us,  that  the  Kings 
Ships  did  always  come  this  way.  The  nth  day  we 
anchored  at  the  place  where  we  careened.  Here  we  found 
Captain  Harris,  who  had  gone  a  second  time  into  the  River 
of  Santa  Maria,  and  fetched  the  body  of  Men  that  last 
came  over  Land,  as  the  Indians  had  informed  us :  but  they 
fell  short  of  the  number  they  told  us  of.  The  29th  day 
we  sent  250  Men  in  15  Canoas  to  the  River  Cheapo,^  to 
take  the  Town  of  Cheapo.  The  21st  day  all  our  Ships, 
but  Captain  Harris,  who  staid  to  clean  his  Ships,  followed 
after.     The  2  2d  day  we  arrived  at  the  Island  Chepelio. 

Chepelio  is  the  pleasantest  Island  in  the  Bay  of  Panama : 
It  is  but  7  leagues  from  the  City  of  Panama,  and  a  league 
from  the  Main.  This  Island  is  about  a  mile  long,  and 
almost  so  broad ;  it  is  low  on  the  North-side,  and  riseth  by 
a  small  ascent  towards  the  South-side.  The  Soil  is  yellow, 
a  kind  of  Clay.  The  high  side  is  stony ;  the  low  Land  is 
planted  with  all  sorts  of  delicate  Fruits,  viz.  Sapadilloes,' 
Avogato-pears,®Mammees,*Mammee-Sappota*s,Star-apples,* 

*  The  Cheapo,  now  the  Chcpo  River,  empties  into  the  gulf  some  twenty- 
five  miles  to  the  east  of  Panama.  The  island  of  Chepillo  lies  at  its  mouth. 
A  sandy  spit  of  shore  curves  towards  the  northern  point  of  the  island, 
which  is,  as  Dampier  says,  low  lying. 

^  Sapadilloes,  the  sapodilla  plum,  or  nase  berry,  one  of  the  sapota  family. 
•''  "Alligator  Pears"  :  Persia jp'a/isstMa. 

*  The  San  Domingo  .ipricot. 

^  The  star-apple  is  also  of  the  sapota  family. 

222 


SAPADILLO-TREE— AVOGATO   PEAR 

&c     The  mtddlc  of  the  Island  is  planted  with  Plantain-   an. 
Trre«,  which  are  not  very  Urge,  but  the  Fruit  extraordinary  '^S 

The  Sapaditlo-Trec  is  as  big  as  a  large  Pear-tree,  the 
Fruit  much  like  x  Bcrgamot-pear,  both  in  colour,  shape  and 
Mie  ;  but  on  some  Trees  the  Fruit  is  a  little  longer.  When 
■  is  green  or  first  gathered,  the  Juice  is  white  and  clammy, 
-.J  It  will  «iek  like  glcw;  then  the  Fruit  is  hard,  but 
-::cr  it  hath  been  gathered  2  or  3  days,  it  grows  soft  and 
,]cy,  v»d  then  the  juice  is  clear  as  Spring-Water,  and  very 
»cet  ;  in  the  midst  of  the  Fruit  arc  2  or  3  black  Stones  or 
■•ai»,  about  the  bigness  of  a  Pumpkin-seed  :  This  is  an 
'Ticellcnt  Fruit. 

The  Avogato  Pear-tree  is  as  big  as  most  Pear-trees,  and 
n  commonly  pretty  h^h ;  the  skin  or  bark  black,  and 
frcity  flinooth  ;  the  leaves  large,  of  an  oval  shape,  and  the 
Kfuii  as  big  as  a  large  Lemon.  It  is  of  a  green  colour,  till 
h  s  ripe,  and  then  it  is  a  little  yellowish.  They  arc  seldom 
fit  to  eat  till  they  have  been  gathered  2  or  3  days;  then 
tikcT  becotne  soft,  and  the  Skin  or  Rind  will  peel  off.  The 
Hibstuicc  in  the  inside  is  green,  or  a  Httlc  yellowish,  and  as 
•oft  as  Butter.  Within  the  substance  there  is  a  stone  as 
bg  as  a  Horjc-PIumb.  This  Fruit  hath  no  taste  of  it  self, 
ud  therefore  'tis  usually  mixt  with  Sugar  and  Lime-juice, 
ftnd beaten  together  in  a  Plate  ;  ^nd  this  is  an  excellent  dish. 
The  ordinary  way  is  to  cat  it  with  a  little  Salt  and  a  roasted 
t^tatain  ;  and  thus  a  Man  that's  hungry,  may  make  a  good 
-^  of  it.  It  is  very  wholesome  eaten  any  way.  It  is 
Tponed  that  this  Fruit  provokes  to  Lust,  and  therefore  is 
-^jdtobe  much  esteemed  by  the  Spaniards:  and  I  do  believe 
"ey  air  much  esteemed  by  them,  for  1  have  met  with 
■.'■eaty  of  them  in  many  places  in  the  North  Seas,  where  the 
'■puurds  are  settled,  as  in  the  Bay  of  Campeachy,  on  the 
LoHt  of  Cartagena,  and  the  Coast  of  Caraccos;  and  there 
)^  tome  ia  Jinutca,  which  were  planted  by  the  Spaniards 
«te  the)'  poMCSsed  that  Island. 

Tbc    Manimec-Sappoia    Tree    is    diflfcrent    from    the 
Himtnee  described  at  the  Island  Tabago  in  this  Chapter. 
r  fciUBi  to  big  or  «q  tall,  neither  is  the  Fruit  so  big  or  so 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  round.  The  Rind  of  the  Fruit  is  thin  and  brittle;  the 
'^^5  inside  is  a  deep  red,  and  it  has  a  rough  flat  long  stone. 
This  is  accounted  the  principal  Fruit  of  the  West-Indies. 
It  is  very  pleasant  and  wholesome.  I  have  not  seen  any  of 
these  on  Jamaica ;  but  in  many  places  in  the  West-Indies 
among  the  Spaniards.  There  is  another  sort  of  Mammee- 
tree,  which  is  called  the  Wild  Mammee :  This  bears  a  Fruit 
which  is  of  no  value,  but  the  Tree  is  straight,  tall,  and  very 
tough,  and  therefore  principally  used  for  making  Masts. 

The  Star  Apple-tree  grows  much  like  the  Quince  Tree, 
but  much  bigger.  It  is  full  of  leaves,  and  the  leaf  is  broad, 
of  an  oval  shape,  and  of  a  very  dark  green  colour.  The 
Fruit  is  as  big  as  a  large  Apple,  which  is  commonly  so 
covered  with  leaves,  that  a  Man  can  hardly  see  it.  They 
say  this  is  a  good  Fruit ;  I  did  never  taste  any,  but  have 
seen  both  of  the  Trees  and  Fruit  in  many  places  on  the 
Main,  on  the  North  side  of  the  Continent,  and  in  Jamaica. 
When  the  Spaniards  possessed  that  Island,  they  planted  this 
and  other  sorts  of  Fruit,  as  the  Sapadillo,  Av<^to-Pear, 
and  the  like ;  and  of  these  Fruits  there  is  still  in  Jamaica 
in  those  Plantations  that  were  first  settled  by  the  Spaniards 
as  at  the  Angels,^  at  7  Mile  Walk,  and  16  Mile  Walk. 
There  I  have  seen  these  Trees  which  were  planted  by  the 
Spaniards,  but  I  did  never  see  any  improvement  made  by 
the  English,  who  seem  in  that  little  curious.  The  Road 
for  Ships  is  on  the  North  side,  where  there  is  good  anchor- 
ing half  a  Mile  from  the  shore.  There  is  a  Well  close 
by  the  Sea  on  the  North  side,  and  formerly  there  were  3 
or  4  Houses  close  by  it,  but  now  they  are  destroyed. 
This  Island  stands  right  against  the  mouth  of  the  River 
Cheapo. 

The  River  Cheapo  springs  out  of  the  Mountains  near 
the  North  side  of  the  Country,  and  it  being  penn'd  up  on 
the  South  side  by  other  Mountains  bends  its  course  to  the 
Westward  between  both,  till  finding  a  passage  on  the  S.  W. 

*  "  The  Angels,  7  mile  Walk  and  16  mile  Walk."  The  Angels  is  on  the 
right  bank  of  the  Cobra  river,  in  the  parish  of  St.  Kcitharine's.  Sezfcn- 
mile  Walk  seems  to  have  been  in  the  parish  of  St.  Dorothy's.  Sixteen- 
mile  Walk  is  in  the  parish  of  St.  Thomas  in  the  Vale.  Here  Mr.  Hellicr 
had  his  plantation. 

224 


CHEAPO    RIVER— CHEAPO   TOWN 

knakei  a  kind  of  a  half  circle ;  and  being  swell'd  t( 
ienblc  bigness,  it  runs  with   a  slow  motion  into  the 


,  7  leagues  from  Panama.     This  Ri 


■  of  s 


lilc  broad  :  but  the  i 


i  very  deep  and 
uth  of  i 


quarter  < 

choak'd  up  with  Sands,  so  that  no  Ships  can  enter,  but 
Barks  may.  There  is  a  small  Spanish  Town  of  the  same 
Bainc  within  6  leagues  of  the  Sea :  it  stands  on  the  left 
hand  going  from  the  Sea.  This  is  it  which  1  said  Captain 
La  Sound  attempted.  The  Land  about  it  is  champion,  with 
many  small  Hills  cloathed  with  Woods;  but  the  biggest 
part  of  the  Country  is  Savannah.  On  the  South  side  of  the 
River  it  is  all  Wood-land  for  many  leagues  together.  It 
•  is  to  this  Town  that  our  250  Men  were  sent.  The  24th 
av  they  returned  out  of  the  River,  having  taken  the  Town 
-  ■  thoat  any  opposition  :  but  they  found  nothing  in  it.  By 
c  way  going  thither  they  took  a  Canoa,  but  most  of  the 
^len  escaped  ashore  upon  one  of  the  Kings  Islands:  She 
-M  sen!  out  well  appointed  with  armed  Men  to  watch  our 
motioo.  The  2jth  day  Captain  Harris  came  to  us,  having 
cleaned  hli  Ship.  The  26th  day  we  went  again  toward 
Tib^o;  our  Fleet  now,  upon  Captain  Harris  joining  us 
ijaiii,  consisted  of  10  Sail.  Wc  arrived  at  Tabago  the 
.  *th  day:  there  our  Prisoners  were  examined  concerning 
•ne  strength  of  Panama;  for  now  we  thought  our  selves 
scrocig  enough  for  such  an  tjiterprize,  being  near  1000 
Men.  Out  of  these,  on  occasion,  we  could  have  landed 
500  :  but  our  ftiioncrs  gave  us  small  Encouragement  to  it, 
■■<■  they  assured  us,  that  all  the  strength  of  the  Country 
-»»  ibcrc,  and  that  many  Men  were  come  from  Portobel, 
-elides  its  own  Inhabiunls,  who  of  themselves  were  more 
la  number  than  wc.  These  reasons,  together  with  the 
■Tcngth  of  the  place  (which  hath  a  high  Wall)  deterr'd  us 
from  attempting  it.  While  we  lay  here  at  Tabago,  some 
!  our  Men  burnt  the  Town  on  the  Island. 

The  4th  of  May  we  sailed  hence  again  bound  for  the 
K-nn  Islands;  and  there  wc  continued  cruising  from  one 
^  of  these  Islands  to  the  other:  till  on  the  22d  day. 
Cjptaio  Davis,  and  Captain  Gronet,  went  to  Pacheque, 
<3tW  the  rest  of  the  Elect  at  anchor  at  St.  Pauls  Island. 
roL-  I.  225  P 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER^S   VOYAGES 

AN.  From  Pacheque  we  sent  2  Canoas  to  the  Island  Chepelio, 
*^^5  in  hopes  to  get  a  Prisoner  there.  The  25th  day  our  Canoas 
returned  from  Chepelio,  with  three  Prisoners  which  they 
took  there  :  They  were  Sea-men  belonging  to  Panama,  who 
said  that  Provision  was  so  scarce  and  dear  there,  that  the 
poor  were  almost  starved ;  being  hindred  by  us  from  those 
common  and  daily  supplies  of  Plantains,  which  they  did 
formerly  enjoy  from  the  Islands ;  especially  from  those  two 
of  Chepelio  and  Tabago :  That  the  President  of  Panama 
had  strictly  ordered,  that  none  should  adventure  to  any  of 
the  Islands  for  Plantains :  but  necessity  had  obliged  them 
to  trespass  against  the  President's  Order.  They  farther  re- 
ported, that  the  Fleet  from  Lima  was  expected  every  day; 
for  it  was  generally  talked  that  they  were  come  from  Lima : 
and  that  the  report  at  Panama  was,  that  King  Charles  II. 
of  England  was  dead,^  and  that  the  Duke  of  York  was 
crowned  King.  The  27th  day  Captain  Swan,  and  Captain 
Townly,  also  came  to  Pacheque,  where  we  lay,  but  Captain 
Swan's  Bark  was  gone  in  among  the  Kings  Islands  for 
Plantains.  The  Island  Pacheque,  as  I  have  before  related, 
is  the  Northermost  of  the  Kings-Islands.  It  is  a  small  low 
Island  about  a  league  round.  On  the  South  side  of  it 
there  are  2  or  3  small  Islands,  neither  of  them  half  a  mile 
round.  Between  Pacheque  and  these  Islands  is  a  small 
Channel  ^  not  above  6  or  7  paces  wide,  and  about  a  mile 
long.  Through  this  Captain  Townly  made  a  bold  run, 
being  prest  hard  by  the  Spaniards  in  the  fight  I  am  going 
to  speak  of,  though  he  was  ignorant  whether  there  was  a 
sufficient  depth  of  Water  or  not.  On  the  East  side  of  this 
Channel  all  our  Fleet  lay  waiting  for  the  Lima  Fleet,  which 
we  were  in  hopes  would  come  this  way. 

The  28th  day  we  had  a  very  wet  morning,  for  the  Rains 
were  come  in,  as  they  do  usually  in  May,  or  June,  sooner 
or  later;  so  that    May  is  here  a  very    uncertain  month. 

*  Charles  II.  died  on  the  6th  Februar>%  1685. 

*  The  latest  charts  show  no  such  channel.  Several  of  the  small 
islands  to  the  south  of  Pacheca  are  separated  by  narrow  guts  of  sea  "  not 
above  6  or  7  paces  wide."  Townley  probably  made  his  escape  between 
two  islands,  a  mile  to  the  north-east  of  Saboga,  two  or  three  miles  from 
Pacheca.     The  channel  here  would  be  about  three-quarters  of  a  mile. 

226 


SPANISH    FLEET   FROM    LIMA 
ffitbcrto.   tili  within  a  few  days,  we   had  had  good  fair 
weather,  and  the  Wind  at  N.  N.  E.  but  now  the  Weather  '** 
WM  aliaxd,  and  the  Wind  at  S.  S.  W. 

However  about  eleven  a  Clock  it  cleared   up,  and  we 

..«  the  Spanish  Fleet  about  3  leagues  W.  N.  W.  from  the 

Mand  Pachcque,  standing  close  on  a  Wind  to  the  Eastward  ; 

-t  they  could  not  fetch  the  Island  by  a  league.     We  were 

ling  a  league  S,  E.  from  the  Island  between  it  and  the 

Main  ;  only  Qptain  Gronet  was  about  a  mile  to  the  North- 

E(f  us  near  the  Island  :  he  weighed  so  soon  as  they  came 
ht,  and  stood  over  for   the  Main ;  and  we  lay  still, 
iog  when  he  would  tack '  and  come  to  us :  but  he 
»re  to  keep  himself  out  of  harms  way. 
ptain  Swan  and  Townly    came   aboard    of  Captain 
to  order  how  to  engage  the  Enemy,  who  we  saw  came 
— leljr  to  fight  us,  they  being  in  all    14  Sail,  besides 
Pen^oes,  rowing  with  12  and  I4  Oars  apiece.     Six  Sail  of 
them  were  Ships  of  good  force  :  first  the  Admiral  48  Guns, 
.  -O    Men ;  the  Vice-Admiral  40   Guns,    400  Men ;    the 
r<=ir- Admiral  36  Guns,  360  Men ;  a  Ship  of  24  Guns,  300 
Men ;  one  of  18  Guns,  250  Men ;  and  one  of  eight  Guns, 
lOoMen  ;  2  great  Fircships,  6  Ships  only  with  small  Arms, 
bmog   800  Men  on  board  them  all ;  besides  2  or  3  hun- 
dred Men  in  Periagocs.     This  account  of  their  Strength  we 
had  afterwards  from  Captain   Knight,  who  being    to    the 
Windward  on  the  Coast  of  Peru,  took  Prisoners,  of  whom 
he    had   this  Information,  being  what  they  brought  from 
l-icn.     Besdes  these  Men,  they  had  also  some  hundreds 
t  Old  Spain  Men  that  came  from  Portobel,  and  met  them 
■  Lavelia,  from  whence  they  now  came:  and  their  strength 
<  Men  from  Lima  was  3000  Men,  being  all  the  strength 
-cf  could  make  in  that  Kingdom  ;  and  for  greater  security, 
'-<T  had  fint  landed  their  Treasure  at  Lavelia. 

Our  Fleet  consisted  of  lO  Sail :  first  Captain  Davis  36 
,  156   Men,  most  English;    Captain  Swan    16  Guns, 

Id  Itial  Craicnict  twice  iiieil  to  Uck,  but  could  not  gel 
emay  havE  fell  thai  weanni;  would  have  broutihi  him 
(o  ibe  Spaoianlt.    There  can  Iw  liiUe  dotibl  that  Djivis,  in  hit 
irom  itii|]  and  borne  down  to  engaKC 

227 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 

AN.  140  Men,  all  English :  These  were  the  only  Ships  of  force 
'^^5  that  we  had ;  the  rest  having  none  but  small  Arms.  Captain 
Townley  had  no  Men,  all  English.  Captain  Gronet  308 
Men,  all  French.  Captain  Harris  100  Men,  most  English. 
Captain  Branly  36  Men,  some  English,  some  French. 
Davis  his  Tender  8  Men  ;  Swan's  Tender  8  Men ;  Townley*s 
Bark  80  Men ;  and  a  small  Bark  of  thirty  Tuns  made  a 
Fireship,  with  a  Canoas  Crew  in  her.  We  had  in  all  960 
Men.  But  Captain  Gronet  came  not  to  us  till  all  was 
over,  yet  we  were  not  discouraged  at  it,  but  resolved  to 
fight  them  ;  ^  for  being  to  Windward  of  the  Enemy,  we  had 
it  at  our  choice,  whether  we  would  fight  or  not.  It  was  3  a 
Clock  in  the  afternoon  when  we  weighed,  and  being  all 
under  sail,  we  bore  down  right  afore  the  wind  on  our 
Enemies,  who  kept  close  on  a  wind  to  come  to  us ;  but 
night  came  on  without  any  thing,  beside  the  exchanging  of 
a  few  shot  on  each  side.  When  it  grew  dark,  the  Spanish 
Admiral  put  out  a  light,  as  a  signal  for  his  Fleet  to  come 
to  an  Anchor.  We  saw  the  light  in  the  Admirals  top, 
which  continued  about  half  an  hour,  and  then  it  was  taken 
down.  In  a  short  time  after  we  saw  the  light  again,  and 
being  to  Windward  we  kept  under  sail,  supposing  the  light 
had  been  in  the  Admirals  top ;  but  as  it  proved,  this  was 
only  a  stratagem  of  theirs ;  for  this  light  was  put  out  the 
second  time  at  one  of  their  Barks  Topmast-head,  and  then 
she  was  sent  to  Leeward ;  which  deceived  us :  for  we 
thought  still  the  Light  was  in  the  Admirals  Top,  and  by 
that  means  thought  our  selves  to  windward  of  them. 

In  the  Morning  therefore,  contrary  to  our  exf)ectation, 
we  found  they  had  got  the  Weather-gage  of  us,  and  were 
coming  upon  us  with  full  Sail ;  so  we  ran  for  it,  and  after 

*  D.'impier's  manuscript  gives  a  more  detailed  account  of  the  engage- 
ment. "The  Spanish  Admiral  and  the  rest  of  his  squadron  began  to 
play  at  us,  and  we  at  them,  as  fast  as  we  could.  They  might  have  laid  us 
aboard  if  they  would  ;  but  they  came  not  within  small  arm  shot  intending 
to  moule  us  in  pieces  with  their  great  guns."  The  MS.  gives  particulars 
of  the  buccaneers'  fighting  orders.  A  note  in  the  State  Papers  says  that : 
"The  President  of  I'anama  sent  out  five  ships  against  them,  which  were 
beaten  back  with  loss  of  the  commanding  officer  .  .  .  the  President  agreed 
upon  a  truce"  {Calendar  of  State  Papers^  IV.  Ind,  and  Col,  Series^  p.  34  : 
Colonel  H.  Molesworth  to  Earl  of  Sunderland). 

228 


A    SEA    FIGHT,    ETC. 


t  ninning  Fight  all  day,  and  havii 
round  the  "         '  " 


taken  a  turn  almost   , 
Panama,  we  came  to  an  Anchor  again  at   ' 
the  Iilc  of  Pacheque,  in  the  very  same  place  from  whence 
we  Srt  out  in  the  Morning. 

Thus  ended  this  days  Work,  and  with  it  all  that  we 
had  been  projecting  for  5  or  6  Months ;  when  instead  of 
making  our  selves  Masters  of  the  Spanish  Fleet  and 
IVtasurc,  wc  were  glad  to  escape  them  ;  and  owed  that  too, 
-,  a  great  measure,  to  their  want  of  Courage  to  pursue  their 
Adrvitage. 

The  loth  day  in  the  Morning  when  we  looked  out  we 
■iw  the  Spanish  Fleet  all  together  3  leagues  to  Leeward  of 
M  at  an  Anchor.  It  was  but  little  Wind  till  10  a  Clock, 
lai  then  sprung  up  a  small  Breeze  at  South,  and  the 
:?piiabh  Fleet  went  away  to  Panama-  What  loss  they  had, 
I  know  not;  we  lost  but  one  Man:'  And  having  held  a 
Consult,  wc  resolved  to  go  to  the  Keys  of  t^uibo  or 
Cobty*,*  to  seek  Capt.  Harris,  who  was  forced  away  from 
a»  tn  the  Fight ;  that  being  the  place  appointed  for  our 
ReiKlezvous  upon  any  such  accident.  As  for  Gronet,  he 
■aid  his  Men  would  not  suffer  him  to  joyn  us  in  the  Fight : 
Bat  wc  were  not  satisfied  with  that  excuse ;  so  we 
■offered  him  to  go  with  us  to  the  Isles  of  Quiboa,  and 
-rwre  cashiered  our  cowardly  Companion.  Some  were  for 
'akii^  from  him  the  Ship  which  we  had  given  him :  But 
a*  Ictijgth  he  was  suffered  to  keep  it  with  his  Men,  and  we 
■•cnt  them  away  in  it  to  some  other  place. 

'  *We  acre  all  more icarvd  than  hurt"  (A/S.Hitt). 
*  CoAm.  til  th'  wMwMil  (rf  ihe  Gulf  of  Pfln&ma.  Walter,  who  was  here 
I,  nearly  tiiiy  yean  later,  dcscribtrs  it  thui :  "This  island  of 
.  niemriy  lofivraieni  for  wooding  and  walering,  since  the  trees 
K  U  the  fai|tb  water  trurk,  and  a  lar^  rapid  slream  of  fresh  water 
r  the  laady  beadi  mtu  tlic  tea.  The  whole  UUnd  is  of  a  very 
r  hcifht,  aiapuati  one  part.  It  tonsists  of  a  coniinoed  wood  .  .  . 
I  p(cMm*  lu  verdure  the  year  round.  Amongst  the  other  wood 
faaad  then  abaBdann  of  lu^ia,  and  a  few  lime  trees.  It  appeared 
Cafai  to  n.  that,  oonsiderins  the  climate  and  the  ahrlter,  we  should 
t  aft  Mher  birdi  than  parroii,  parroqueii  and  macaws.  .  .  .  Next  to 
n  teda,  the  aninult  w«  found  in  tnosi  plenty  wen;  inonkejn  atid 
■■ft  .  . .  Thcra  •««  ouflf  herd*  of  deer." 


CHAP.   VIII 

They  set  out  from  Tabago,  Isle  of  Chuche,  The  Mountain  catlei 
Moro  de  Porcos,  The  Coast  to  the  Westward  of  the  Bay  of 
Panama,  Isles  of  Quihoy  Quicaro,  Rancheria,  The  Palma- 
Maria-tree,  The  Isles  Canales  and  Cantarras,  They  build 
Canoas  for  a  new  Expedition  ;  and  take  Puehla  Nova,  Captain 
Knight  joyns  them,  Canoas  how  made.  The  Coast  and  ff^inds 
between  Quibo  and  Nicoya,  Volcan  Vejo  again.  Tornadoes^  and 
the  Sea  rough,  Rea  Lejo  Harbour,  The  City  of  Leon  taken  and 
burnt,  Rea  Lejo  Creek  ;  the  Town  and  Commodities  ;  the  Guava* 
Fruity  and  Prickle^Pear  :  A  Ransom  paid  honourably  upon  Parole : 
The  Town  burnt.  Captain  Davis  and  others  go  off  for  the  South 
Coast.  A  contagious  Sickness  at  Rea  Lejo,  Terrible  Tornadoes, 
The  Volcan  of  Guatimala  ;  the  rich  Commodities  of  that  Country^ 
IndicOy  Otta  or  Anatta^  Cochineel^  Silvester,  Drift  Wood^  and 
Pumice-Stones,  The  Coast  further  on  the  North-west,  Captain 
Townlefs  fruitless  Expedition  towards  Tecoantepeque,  The  Island 
Tangola^  and  Neighbouring  Continent,  Guatulco  Port,  The  Buffa- 
dorcy  or  J  Voter  Spout,  Ruins  of  Guatulco  Village,  The  Coast 
adjoining,  Capt,  Totunley  marches  to  the  River  Capalita,  Turtle 
at  Guatulco,  An  Indian  Settlement,  The  Vinello  Plant  and 
Fruit, 

CCORDING  to  the  Resolutions  we  had  taken,  we 
set  out  June  the  ist,  1685,  passing  between  Point 
Garachina  and  the  Kings  Islands.  The  Wind 
was  at  S.  S.  W.  rainy  Weather,  with  Tornadoes 
of  Thunder  and  Lightning.  The  3rd  day  we  passed  by 
the  Island  Chuche,^  the  last  remainder  of  the  Isles  in  the 
Bay  of  Panama.  This  is  a  small,  low,  round,  woody 
Island,  uninhabited ;  lying  4  leagues  S.  S.  W.  from 
Pacheca, 

*  Probably  Senova. 

230 


r 


MORO   DE   PORCOS 


In  our  passage  to  Quibo,  Captain  Branly  lost  his  Main-  f 
Mast ;  therefore  he  and  alt  his  Men  left  his  Bark,  and  " 
ame  aboard  Captain  Davis  his  Ship.  Captain  Swan  also 
iprung  his  Main-top  Mast,  and  got  up  another;  but 
while  he  was  doing  it,  and  we  were  making  the  best  of  our 
way.  We  lost  sight  of  him,  and  were  now  on  the  North 
ode  of  the  Bay;  for  this  way  all  Ships  must  pass  from 
Pananu,  whether  bound  towards  the  Coast  of  Mexico 
or  Peru.  The  loth  day  we  passed  by  Moro  de  Porcos, 
-.r  the  Moantain  of  Hogs.  Why  so  called,  I  know  not : 
-  ts  a  high  round  Hill  on  the  Coast  of  Lavelia. 

This  side  of  the  Bay  of  Panama  runs  out  Westerly  to 

•\c  Islands  of  Quibo;  there  are  on  this  Coast  many  Rivers 
-id  Creeks,  but  none  so  large  as  those  on  the  South  side 

i  cbeBay.  It  is  a  Coast  that  ts  partly  mountainous,  partly 
lorw  Land,  and  very  thick  of  Woods  bordering  on  the  Sea  ; 
but  a  few  leagues  within  Land  it  consists  mostly  of 
SsTannahs,  which  are  sTock'd  with  Bulls  and  Cows.  The 
RiTETS  on  this  side  are  not  wholly  destitute  of  Gold,  though 
aoe  so  rich  as  the  Rivers  on  the  other  side  of  the  Bay. 
The  Coast  is  but  thinly  inhabited,  for  except  the  Rivers 
■hat  lead  up  to  the  Towns  of  Nata  and  Lavelia,  1  know 

<  no  other  Settlement  between  Panama  and  Puebia  Nova. 
Ihe  Spaniards  may  travel  by  Land  from  Panama  through 

^■M  the  Kingdom  of  Mexico,  as  being  full  of  Savannahs ; 
^^hl  towards  the  Coast  of  Peru  they  cannot  pass  further 
^^■•tt  the  River  Cheapo;  the  Land  there  being  so  full  of 
^^■pdc  Woods,  and  watered  with  so  many  great  Rivers, 
^^H^ides  less  Rivers  and  Creeks,  that  the  Indians  themselves, 
^^Ho  uhsbnt  there,  cannot  travel  far  without  much  trouble. 
^^^  We  met  with  very  wet  weather  in  our  Voyage  to  Quibo; 
tad  with  S.  S.  W.  and  sometimes  S.  W.  Winds,  which  re- 
tanlcd  our  course.  It  was  the  i  5th  day  of  June  when  we 
!  at  Quibo,'  and  found  there  Captain  Harris,  whom 

■  LmMA  state*  thai  two  buccaneers  di«il  from  snnkc  hiic  while  uhore 

<  ^fcn  W«IICf  wu  toM  by  the  Spaniards  " ihai  ihcrc  «-u  frM|uen|]y 
ta«|  a  tbc  woodi  «  tnou  miKhicvoui  serpent,  rolled  the  flying  si»ke, 
•Wfe  ifcry  wd  darird  itMir  from  the  bouifhs  af  ir«««  un  either  nun  or 

K  vjthin  ill  reach,  and  whose  txia^  ihey  IxMeved  10  be 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    we  sought.     The  Island  Quibo  or  Cabaya,  is  in  lat.  7  d. 

"685  14  m.  North  of  the  Equator.  It  is  about  6  or  7  leagues 
long,  and  3  or  4  broad.  The  Land  is  low,  except  only 
near  the  N.  E.  end.  It  is  all  over  plentifully  stored  with 
great  tall  flourishing  Trees  of  many  sorts ;  and  there  is 
good  Water  on  the  East  and  North  East  sides  of  the 
Island.  Here  are  some  Deer,  and  plenty  of  pretty  large 
black  Monkies,  whose  Flesh  is  sweet  and  wholsome: 
besides  a  few  Guanoes,  and  some  Snakes.  I  know  no 
other  sort  of  Land  Animal  on  the  Island.  There  is  a  shole 
runs  out  from  the  S.  E.  point  of  the  Island,  half  a  mile 
into  the  Sea ;  and  a  league  to  the  North  of  this  shole 
point,  on  the  East  side,  there  is  a  Rock  about  a  mile  from 
the  shore,  which  at  the  last  quarter  ebb  appears  above 
Water.  Besides  these  two  places,  there  is  no  danger  on 
this  side,  but  Ships  may  run  within  a  quarter  of  a  mile  of 
the  shore,  and  Anchor  in  6,  8,  10,  or  12  fathom,  good 
clean  Sand  and  Oaze. 

There  are  many  other  Islands,  lying  some  on  the  S.  W. 
side,  others  on  the  N.  and  N.  E.  sides  of  this  Island ;  as 
the  Island  Quicaro,  which  is  a  pretty  large  Island  S.  W. 
of  Quibo,  and  on  the  North  of  it  is  a  small  Island  called 
the  Rancheria ;  on  which  Island  are  plenty  of  Palma-Maria 
Trees.  The  Pal  ma- Maria  is  a  tall  straight  bodied  Tree, 
with  a  small  Head,  but  very  unlike  the  Palm-tree,  not- 
withstanding the  Name.  It  is  greatly  esteemed  for  making 
Masts,  being  very  tough,  as  well  as  of  a  good  length  ;  for 
the  grain  of  the  Wood  runs  not  straight  along  it,  but 
twisting  gradually  about  it.  These  Trees  grow  in  many 
places  of  the  West-Indies,  and  are  frequently  used  both 
by  the  English  and  Spaniards  there  for  that  use.  The 
Islands  Canales  and  Cantarras,  are  small  Islands  lying  on 
the  N.  E.  of  Rancheria.  These  have  all  Channels  to  pass 
between,  and  good  Anchoring  about  them  ;  and  they  are 
as  well  stored  with  Trees  and  Water  as  Quibo.  Sailing 
without  them  all,  they  appear  to  be  part  of  the  Main. 
The  Island  Quibo  is  the  largest  and  most  noted ;  for 
although  the  rest  have  Names,  yet  they  are  seldom  used 
only  for  distinction  sake :  these,  and  the  rest  of  this  knot, 

232 


"i 


PUEBLA    NOVA   TAKEN 
r^mng  all  under  the  common  name  of  the  Keys  of  Quibo.    , 
Cipcain  Swan  gave  to  several  of  these  Islands,  the  Names  ' 
of   those    Knglish    Merchants    and    Gentlemen    who    were 
Owner*  of  his  Ship. 

June  i6ih.  C»ptain  Swran  came  to  an  Anchor  by  us: 
and  then  our  Captains  consulted  about  new  methods  to 
advance  their  Fortunes;  and  because  they  were  now  out  of 
hopes  to  get  any  thing  at  Sea,  they  resolved  to  try  what 
the  L«nd  would  afford.  They  demanded  of  our  Pilots, 
•■ttat  Towns  on  the  Giast  of  Mexico  they  could  carry  us 
■  \  The  Gty  of  Leon'  being  the  chiefcst  in  the  Country 
j-Tjr  thing  near  us)  though  a  pretty  way  within  Land,  was 
pKch'd  on.  But  now  wc  wanted  Canuas  to  Land  our  Men, 
mti  wc  had  no  other  way  but  to  cut  down  Trees,  and 
make  as  many  as  wc  had  occasion  for,  these  Islands  afFord- 
itig  plenty  of  large  Trees  fit  for  our  purpose.  While  this 
was  doing,  we  sent  150  Men  to  take  Puebia  Nova'  (a 
Town  upon  the  Main  near  the  innermost  of  these  Islands) 
•  ■  get  Provision  :  It  was  in  going  to  take  this  Town  that 
-ipCain  Sawkins  was  killed  in  the  year  1680,  who  was  suc- 
:aied  by  Sharp,  Our  Men  took  the  Town  with  much 
«e,  although  there  was  more  strength  of  Men  than  when 
■^pCaia  Sawkins  was  kill'd.  They  returned  again  the  24th 
ly,  but  got  no  Provision  there.  They  took  an  empty 
^Urk  in  their  way,  and  brought  her  to  us. 

The  Jth  day  of  July  Captain  Knight,  mentioned  in  my 
ur  Chapter,  came  to  us.  He  had  been  cruising  a  great 
■  ^hc  Westward,  but  got  nothing  beside  a  good  Ship, 
he  went  to  the  Southward,  as  high  as  the  Bay  of 
■  -  .  jil.  where  he  t<K>k  a  Bark-log,  or  \mr  of  Bark-lc^s 
.«  Wc  call  it,  laden  chiefly  with  Flower.  She  had  other 
rxidi,  as  Wine,  Ovl,  Brandy,  Sugar,  Soap,  and  Leather  of 
^>xtvikins;  and  he  took  out  as  much  of  each  as  he  had 
■oo  for,  and  then  turned  her  away  again.     The  Master 

'  la  S^^rmgUA.  It  »  locnc  milci  inland,  between  the  NW.  end  nf 
La*  Sn^imttiM  and  the  town  nf  Rest  L«jo. 

'  FiK^fa  Noeia.  A  xnAll  lovn  on  the  bankt  or  a  river,  some  eii[hi 
a  u>  ihe  Sol  Qnilxi^  S«irkini  «a«  »hoE  while  hacking  al  Uie  pales 
«Dckadn.  "  lieinji  a  man  af  undaunlci)  counkee,"  ant!  one  "whom 
f  M  onb  timU  temAe.'    Tliis  wai  May  »,  tbto. 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AS.  of  the  Float  told  hiniy  that  the  Kings  Ships  were  gone  firom 
'^^  Lima  towards  Panama  :  that  they  carried  but  half  the  Kings 
Treasure  with  them,  for  fear  of  us,  although  they  had  all 
the  strength  that  the  Kingdom  could  afford :  that  all  the 
Merchant  Ships  which  should  have  gone  with  them  were 
laden  and  lying  at  Payta,  where  they  were  to  wait  for 
further  Orders.  Captain  Knight  having  but  few  Men,  did 
not  dare  to  go  to  Payta,  where,  if  he  had  been  better  pro- 
vided, he  might  have  taken  them  all;  but  he  made  the 
best  of  his  way  into  the  Bay  of  Panama,  in  hopes  to  find 
us  there  inriched  with  the  Spoils  of  the  Lima  Fleet ;  but 
coming  to  the  Kings  Islands,  he  had  advice  by  a  Prisoner, 
that  we  had  engaged  with  their  Fleet,  but  were  worsted,  and 
since  that  made  our  way  to  the  Westward ;  and  therefore  he 
came  hither  to  seek  us.  He  presently  consorted  with  us,  and 
set  his  Men  to  work  to  make  Canoas.  Every  Ships  com- 
pany made  for  themselves,  but  we  all  helped  each  other 
to  launch  them,  for  some  were  made  a  mile  from  the  Sea. 

The  manner  of  making  a  Canoa  is,  after  cutting  down 
a  large  long  Tree,  and  squaring  the  uppermost  side,  and 
then  turning  it  upon  the  fiat  side,  to  shape  the  opposite 
side  for  the  bottom.  Then  again  they  turn  her,  and  dig 
the  inside ;  boring  also  three  holes  in  the  bottom,  one 
before,  one  in  the  middle,  and  one  abaft,  thereby  to  gage 
the  thickest  of  the  bottom ;  for  otherwise  we  might  cut 
the  bottom  thinner  than  is  convenient.  We  left  the  bottoms 
commonly  about  3  Inches  thick,  and  the  sides  2  Inches 
thick  below,  and  one  and  an  half  at  the  top.  One  or  both 
of  the  ends  we  sharpen  to  a  point. 

Captain  Davis  made  two  very  large  Canoas;  one  was 
36  foot  long,  and  5  or  6  feet  wide ;  the  other  32  foot  long, 
and  near  as  wide  as  the  other.  In  a  Months  time  we 
finished  our  Business  and  were  ready  to  sail.  Here  Captain 
Harris  went  to  lay  his  Ship  a  ground  to  clean  her,  but  she 
being  old  and  rotten  fell  in  pieces :  And  therefore  he  and 
all  his  Men  went  aboard  of  Captain  Davis  and  Captain 
Swan.  While  we  lay  here  we  struck  Turtle  every  day,  for 
they  were  now  very  plentiful :  But  from  August  to  March 
here  are  not  many.     The  i8th  day  of  July,  John  Rose,  a 

234 


THEY   SAIL   FROM    QUIBO  1 

Frenchman,  and  14,  Men  more,  belonging  to  Captain  Gronct,  an.  1 

hivii^  nude  1  new  Canoa,  came  in  her  to  Captain  Davis,  *^5 
mad  dcnred  to  serve  under  him  ;  and  Captain  Davis  accepted 
of  them,  because  they  had  a  Canoa  of  their  own. 

The  30th  day  of  JuW  we  sailed  from  Quibo,  bending 

o«r  coiine  for  Rca  Lcjo,  which  is  the  Port  for  Leon,  the 

^^^ly    that  we   now  designed   to  attempt.     We  were   now 

^^■O  Men  in  8  Sail  of  Ships,  commanded  by  Captain  Davis,  J 

^Hntain  Swan,  Captain  Towntcy  and  Captain  Knight,  with  I 

P^nireshtp  and  three  Tenders,  which  last  had  not  a  constant  I 

Crew.     Wc   past   out  between   the  River  Quibo  and   the  I 

Ranchcria,  leaving   Quibo  and  Quicaro   on  our    Larboard  I 

■ide,  and  the  Ranchcria,  with  the  rest  of  the  Islands,  and  ' 

'le  Main,  on  our  Starboard  side.     The  Wind  at  first  was 

■  South  South  West:  Wc  coasted  along  shore,  passing  by 

:ac  Gulf  of  Ntcoya,  the  Gulf  of  Dulce,  and  by  the  Island  . 

Caneo.     All  this  Coast  is  low  Land  overgrown  with  thick  ■ 

W<x)d$,  and  there  are  but  few  Inhabitants  near  the  shore.  I 

As  we  tailed   to  the  Westward   we  had   variable   Winds,  I 

HJOKtimcs  S.  W.  and  at  W.  S.  W.  and  sometimes  at  E.  N.  K.  I 

but    wc  had   them   most    commonly   at  S.  W.    we    had    a  I 

Tornado  or  two  every  day,  and  in  the  Evening  or  in  the  I 

N'ight,  we  had  Land  winds  at  N.  N.  E.  I 

The   8th  day  of  August,   being  tn   the  lat.  of  1 1   d.  I 

:^  in.  by  obtervaiion,  we  saw  a  high  Hill  in  the  Country,  I 

iwrii^  up  like  a  Sugar-loaf,  which  bore  N.  E.  by  N,     We  I 

apposed  it  to  be  Volcan  Vcjo,  by  the  smoak  which  ascended  I 

irooi  its  top ;  therv-fore  we  steered  in  North,  and   made  it  I 

plainer,  and  then  knew  it  to  be  that  Volcan,  which  is  the  Sea-  I 

mark  for  the  Harbour  for  Rca  Lejo  ; '  for,  as  I  said  before  I 

in  Chapter  the  5th,  it  is  a  very  remarkable  Mountain.    When  " 

we  had  brought  this  Mountain  to  bear  N.  E,  wc  got  out  all  1 

oar  Caaoas,  and  provided  to  embark  into  them  the  next  day.  i 

The  9th  day  in  the  Morning,  being  about   8   leagues  J 

from  the  shore,  wc  left  our  Ships  under  the  charge  of  a  1 

•  Xealem.  in  Gas*'i  tiiti*  (.mj  1637)  was  "a  lUvpti  very  weak  ami  M 

led.^     It  ii  wgniAcant  thit  TiHkg  invrUcI  ihrouuli  Mexica  on  mule-  ^M 

The  iMidaeM  of  th«  wcMcm  hftvcni  made  it  tmptniiliie  fuf  the  H 

t  «ca  *u  exEcntivrly  u  ii  vxt  ii%cil  atotiK  the  Terra  Firme,  H 

mad  aloDif  ihc  roaiti  nf  chile  and  Pciu.  H 

23s  ■ 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 

AN.  few  Men,  and  520  of  us  went  away  in  31  Canoas,  rowing 
'^5  towards  the  Harbour  of  Rea  Lejo.  We  had  fair  Weather 
and  little  Wind  till  2  a  Clock  in  the  Afternoon,  then  we 
had  a  Tornado  from  the  Shore,  with  much  Thunder, 
Lightning  and  Rain,  and  such  a  gust  of  Wind,  that  we 
were  all  like  to  be  foundred.  In  this  extremity  we  put 
right  afore  the  Wind,  every  Canoas  crew  making  what 
shift  they  could  to  avoid  the  Threatning  Danger.  The 
small  Canoas  being  most  light  and  buoyant,  mounted 
nimbly  over  the  Surges,  but  the  great  heavy  Canoas  lay 
like  Logs  in  the  S^,  ready  to  be  swallowed  by  every 
foaming  Billow.  Some  of  our  Canoas  were  half  full  cf 
Water,  yet  kept  two  Men  constantly  heaving  it  out.  The 
fierceness  of  the  Wind  continued  about  half  an  hour,  and 
abated  by  degrees ;  and  as  the  Wind  died  away,  so  the  fury 
of  the  Sea  abated:  For  in  all  hot  Countries  as  I  have 
observed,  the  Sea  is  soon  raised  by  the  Wind,  and  as  soon 
down  again  when  the  Wind  is  gone,  and  therefore  it  is  a 
Proverb  among  the  Seamen,  Up  Wind,  up  Sea,  Down 
Wind,  down  S^.  A  7  a  Clock  in  the  Evening  it  was  quite 
calm,  and  the  Sea  as  smooth  as  a  Mill-pond.  Then  we 
tugg'd  to  get  into  the  shore,  but  finding  we  could  not  do 
it  before  day,  we  rowed  off  again  to  keep  our  selves  out 
of  sight.  By  that  time  it  was  day,  we  were  5  leagues  from 
the  Land,  which  we  thought  was  far  enough  off  shore. 
Here  we  intended  to  lye  till  the  Evening,  but  at  3  a  Clock 
in  the  Afternoon  we  had  another  Tornado,  more  fierce  than 
that  which  we  had  the  day  before.  This  put  us  in  greater 
peril  of  our  Lives,  but  did  not  last  so  long.  As  soon  as 
the  violence  of  the  Tornado  was  over,  we  rowed  in  for  the 
shore,  and  entered  the  Harbour  in  the  Night :  The  Creek 
which  leads  towards  Leon,  lielh  on  the  S.  E.  side  of  the 
Harbour.  Our  Pilot  being  very  well  acquainted  here, 
carried  us  into  the  Mouth  of  it,  but  could  carry  us  no 
farther  till  day,  because  it  is  but  a  small  Creek,  and  there 
are  other  Creeks  like  it.  The  next  Morning  as  soon  as  it 
was  light,  we  rowed  into  the  Creek,  which  is  very  narrow ; 
the  Land  on  both  sides  lying  so  low,  that  every  Tide  it  is 
overflown  with  the  Sea.     This  sort  of  Land  produceth  red 

236 


CITY  OF  LEON 
ore-Trees,  which  arc  here  so  plentiful  and  thick, 
at  there  is  no  passing  thro'  them.  Beyond  these  Man-  ' 
rvei,  on  the  firm  Land,  close  by  the  side  of  the  River, 
:  Spaniards  have  built  a  Breast-work,  purposely  to  hinder 
lo  Enemy  from  Landing.  When  we  came  in  sight  of  the 
Br^oi-work,  we  rowed  as  fast  as  we  could  to  get  ashore : 
The  noise  of  our  Oars  alarmed  the  Indians  who  were  set 
to  watch,  and  presently  they  ran  away  towards  the  City  of 
Leon,  to  give  notice  of  our  approach.  We  landed  as  soon 
>s  we  could,  and  marched  after  them:  470  Men  were 
dnwn  out  to  march  to  the  Town,  and  I  was  left  with  $9 
Men  more  to  stay  and  guard  the  Canoas  till  their  return. 

The  City  of  Leon  is  20  Mile  up  in  the  Country:  The 
•■y  10  it  plain  and  even,  through  a  Champion  Country,  of 
loog  grassy  Savannahs,  and  spots  of  high  Woods.  About 
J  Mile  from  the  Landing-place  there  is  a  Sugar-work,  3 
Mite  farther  there  is  another,  and  2  Mile  beyond  that, 
there  u  a  fine  River  to  ford,  which  is  not  very  deep,  besides 
which,  chert  is  no  Water  in  all  the  way,  till  you  come  to 
aa  lodun  Town,  which  is  2  Mile  before  you  come  to  the 
(mj,  and  from  thence  it  is  a  pleasant  straight  sandy  way 
to  Leon.  This  City  stands  in  3  Plain  not  far  from  a  high 
pecked  Mountain,  which  often  times  casts  forth  Ere  and 
unoaJc  from  its  top.  It  may  be  seen  at  Sea,  and  it  is 
called  the  Volcan  of  Leon.'  The  Houses  of  Leon  are 
not  high  built,  but  strong  and  large,  with  Gardens  about 
t  thctn.  The  Walls  arc  Stone,  and  the  Covering  of  Pan-tile  ; 
^bbcre  are  3  Churches  and  a  Cathedral,  which  is  the  head 
^KhuFch  in  these  parts.     Our  Countryman  Mr.  Gage,*  who 


i 


Mucwt  Auixru,  "  «hieh  fnraierly  burst  oul  nl  ihe  top.' 
Thomu  ^1*$^  &  Dominican  pticit,  who  lived  in  Mexico  from  162; 
iM  1A3;.  Me  icda  at  a  Ronl  ile^l  about  Ntcaiaguii.  Alraut  Leon  he  layi, 
■tat  ii  **  u  vcfy  cuno<ut)t  built,  for  the  chief  delight  of  the  Inhabitants  con- 
Mctfc  la  then  boutcv  'tid  in  Ihe  picature  o(  ihe  Counirey  adjoining,  :>od 
a  ifcc  sImikUiut  of  all  thing*  (nr  the  hie  of  man.  more  than  in  any  extra- 
mAhstt  ncbet,  which  iheie  *it  not  M  niuch  enjoyed,  u  in  other  part&  of 
.4«9»a(.  Tbej  air  cimicntrfi  with  tine  garden*,  wiUi  variety  of  singing 
h«di  mnd  pAnrXt.  vith  plenty  of  6ih  athI  9e*h,  which  ii  chcan,  and  wilh 
Bv  kMMea,  Mtd  Mt  \€m\  a  ileliriout,  tiiiie  nnd  idle  life.  .  .  .  And  ctpccially 
VIM  the   pleaMirc  of  ihii  City   it  all   that  rrovinne  of  /^uanipta,  rolled 

CSpuiiard*   Mtk.mtti  Patailiic  ...   the   f jtradise  of  Amaita," 
*s  MS  wf%  that  It  oa*  "  not  soe  pleaaani  u  Gage  makes  i(." 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  travelled  in  these  parts,  recommends  it  to  the  World  as  the 
'^^  pleasantest  place  in  all  America,  and  calls  it  the  Paradice 
of  the  Indies.  Indeed  if  we  consider  the  Advantage  of  its 
Situation,  we  may  find  it  surpassing  most  Places  for  Health 
and  pleasure  in  America,  for  the  Country  about  it  is  of  a 
sandy  Soil,  which  soon  drinks  up  all  the  Rain  that  falls, 
to  which  these  parts  are  much  subject.  It  is  incompassed 
with  Savannahs;  so  that  they  have  the  benefit  of  the 
Breezes  coming  from  any  quarter;  all  which  makes  it  a 
very  healthy  Place.  It  is  a  place  of  no  great  Trade,  and 
therefore  not  rich  in  Money.  Their  Wealth  lies  in  their 
Pastures,  and  Cattle,  and  Plantations  of  Sugar.  It  is  said 
that  they  make  Cordage  here  of  Hemp,  but  if  they  have 
any  such  Manufactory,  it  is  at  some  distance  from  the 
Town,  for  here  is  no  sign  of  any  such  thing. 

Thither  our  Men  were  now  marching  ;  they  went  from 
the  Canoas  about  8  a  clock.  Captain  Townley,  with  80  of 
the  briskest  Men,  marched  before.  Captain  Swan  with  100 
Men  marched  next,  and  Captain  Davis  with  170  Men 
marched  next,  and  Captain  Knight  brought  up  the  Rear. 
Captain  Townley,  who  was  near  2  mile  a  head  of  the  rest, 
met  about  70  Horsemen  4  mile  before  he  came  to  the 
City,  but  they  never  stood  him.  About  3  a  clock  Captain 
Townley,  only  with  his  80  men,  entered  the  Town,  and 
was  briskly  charged  in  a  broad  Street,  with  170  or  200 
Spanish  Horsemen,  but  2  or  3  of  their  Leaders  being 
knock'd  down,  the  rest  fled.  Their  Foot  consisted  of 
about  500  men,  which  were  drawn  up  in  the  Parade ;  for 
the  Spaniards  in  these  parts  make  a  large  square'  in  every 
Town,  the'  the  Town  itself  be  small.  This  Square  is 
called  the  Parade :  commonly  the  Church  makes  one  side 
of  it,  and  the  Gentlemens  Houses,  with  their  Galleries 
about  them,  the  other.  But  the  Foot  also  seeing  their 
Horse  retire,  left  an  empty  City  to  Captain  Townley; 
beginning  to  save  themselves  by  flight.  Captain  Swan 
came  in  about  4  a  clock,  Captain  Davis  with  his  Men 
about  5,  and  Captain  Knight  with  as  many  Men  as  he 
could  incourage  to  march,  came  in  about  6,  but  he  left 
many  Men  tired  on  the  Road ;    these,  as  is  usual,  came 

238 


CITY  OF  LEON  TAKEN  AXD  BCRXT 

(iropping  to  ooe  or  ivo  at  x  tiac.  js  t^cf  aoc  aUc      The   , 

aott  tnomtng  ibe  Spunmli  Idird  erne  of  ov  lined  M^;  ' 

he  was  a  stout  old  Grr?  headed  Ma&,  a^ed  tikom  S4,  vfco 

faadaerred  under  Olhna-^  mtketnKof  xke  IrA  BcbefioB; 

•ftcr  which  he  was  at  Januo,  aad  bd  folkif  d.  Rivslioemg 

cner  snce.     He  would  doc  acccfc  of  the  tMet  vor  Mea 

made  lum  to  tajry  ashore,  bat  and  he  vohU  Tmtine  at 

(tr  as  the  best  of  tbcm:   and  whea  ■Miuwded  by  dv 

Spaniarda,  he  refused  to  take  Quarter,  bat  dadMugtd  lot 

Gun  amongst  them,  keeping  a  Rstol  sdU  diaiged.  ao  dwf 

ihoc  him  dead  ai  a  dtstaooe.     Hb  name  was  Smn;*   be 

was   a   Tcry   merry  hearty  oid  Man,  and  ahnys  used  to 

declare  be  would  never  take  Quarter :  Bat  they  took  Mr. 

Smith  who  was  tired  also ;  be  was  a  Mercbant  bclongiag 

to  Captaio  Swan,  and  being  carried  beAve  tbe  Gotonoor 

td  Leon,  was  known  by  a  Mohtta  Womaa  tbat  waited  00 

him.     Mr.  Smith   had   lived  rnaoT'  yean  in  tbe  Canaries, 

«nd  could  speak  and  write  Tery  ^>od  %aniah,  and  it  was 

;Here   ibis   Mutatta    Woman  remenAncd  Inm.     He  bcsi^ 

umtned  how  many  Men  we  were,  aud   1000  at  tbe  Ctty, 

.^-d  500  at  tbe  Onoas,  which  nude  wdl  for  us  at  the 

.ioan,  who  straggling  about  every  day,  m%ht  easily  have 

-'^ea  destroyed.     But  this  so  daunted  the  Govcmour,  that 

■r  did  never  offer  to  molest  our  Men,  although  he  had 

"th  hjm  above   1000  Men,  is  Mr.  Smith  guessed.     He 

ni  in  a  Flag  of  Truce  about  Noon,  pretending  to  Ransom 

'~c  Town,  rather  than  let  it  be  burnt,  hut  our  Capuins 

manded  300000  Pieces  of  Eight  for  iu  Ransom,  and  as 

jch  Provision  as  would  victual   fooo  Men  4  months,  and 

'•Ir.  Smith  to  be  Ransomed  for  some  of  their  Prisoners; 

-t  tbe  Spaniards  did  not  intend  to  Ransom  the  Town, 

.t  only  capitulated  day  after  day  to  prolor^  time,  till  they 

-ij  got   more  Men.     Our  Captains  therefore,  considering 

■^  (Tiscancc  that  they  were  from  the  Canoas,  resolved  to 

T  marching  down.     The  l4lh  day  in  the  Morning,  they 

rdered   the  City   to  be  set   on   fire,  which  was  presently 

:  •oe,  and  then  ihey  came  away :  but  they  took  more  time 


'  OlnTT  CnMBwriL 


■  JobnSwj 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  in  coming  down  than  in  going  up.  The  1 5th  day  in  the 
1685  morning,  the  Spaniards  sent  in  Mr.  Smith,  and  had  a 
Gentlewoman  in  exchange.  Then  our  Captains  sent  a 
Letter  to  the  Governour,  to  acquaint  him,  that  they  in- 
tended next  to  visit  Rea  Lejo,  and  desired  to  meet  him 
there :  they  also  released  a  Gentleman,  on  his  promise  of 
paying  150  Beefs  for  his  Ransom,  and  .to  deliver  them  to 
us  at  Rea  Lejo ;  and  the  same  day  our  Men  came  to  their 
Canoas :  where  having  staid  all  night,  the  next  morning  we 
all  entered  our  Canoas,  and  came  to  the  Harbour  of  Rea 
Lejo,  and  in  the  afternoon  our  Ships  came  thither  to  an 
Anchor. 

The  Creek  that  leads  to  Rea  Lejo,  lyeth  from  the 
N.  W.  part,  of  the  Harbour,  and  it  runs  in  Northerly.  It  is 
about  2  Leagues  from  the  Island  in  the  Harbours  mouth 
to  the  Town ;  two  thirds  of  the  way  it  is  broad,  then  you 
enter  a  narrow  deep  Creek,  bordered  on  both  sides  with 
Red  Mangrove  Trees,  whose  limbs  reach  almost  from  one 
side  to  the  other.  A  mile  from  the  mouth  of  the  Creek  it 
turns  away  West.  There  the  Spaniards  have  made  a  very 
strong  Breast-work,  fronting  towards  the  mouth  of  the 
Creek,  in  which  were  placed  100  Soldiers  to  hinder  us 
from  landing :  and  20  yards  below  that  Breast-work  there 
was  a  Chain  of  great  Trees  placed  cross  the  Creek,  so  that 
10  Men  could  have  kept  off  5  cx)  or  1000. 

When  we  came  in  sight  of  the  Breast-work  we  fired 
but  two  Guns,  and  they  all  ran  away :  and  we  were  after- 
wards near  half  an  hour  cutting  the  Boom  or  Chain.  Here 
we  landed,  and  marched  to  the  Town  of  Ria  Lexa,  or  Rea 
Lejo,  which  is  about  a  mile  from  hence.  This  Town  stands 
on  a  Plain  by  a  small  River.  It  is  a  pretty  large  Town  with 
3  Churches,  and  an  Hospital  that  hath  a  fine  Garden  belong- 
ing to  it :  besides  many  large  fair  Houses,  they  all  stand  at 
a  good  distance  one  from  another,  with  yards  about  them. 
This  is  a  very  sickly  place,  and  I  believe  hath  need  enough 
of  an  Hospital ;  for  it  is  seated  so  nigh  the  Creeks  and 
Swamps,  that  is  never  free  from  a  noisom  smell.  The 
Land  about  it  is  a  strong  yellow  Clay :  yet  where  the 
Town  stands  it  seems  to  be  Sand.     Here  are  several  sorts 

240 


THE   CUAVA— PRICKlX-TEMt 

Fruits,  as  Guivo's.  Pwc-»p^k%, 


Hear*.     The  Pine-ipple  a 

The  Guava  Fruit  grows  o*  s  i 
whose  Bark  is  smooth  tad  ■liiiiA.  ck 
and  snull,  the  leaf  somewbac  Su  ifee  k^«f  ml 
Fruit  much  like  a  Pen*.  inA  «  thin  liad;  s  «  fti  «f 
small  hard  Seeds,  and  il  say  be  omm  vMk  mit  V*> 
which  ts  a  thing  very  me  in  fk  !■&■ :  fcr  flMK  faa^ 
both  in  the  East  or  West-jiKiie&,  tft  Ml  «f  dMHif,  wkim, 
ji!savory  juice,  before  it  is  r^cv  Atea^  fia^^  tmrna^ 
iftcrwards.  When  this  hmt  s  Ofc  k  k  fdkv,  a^.  aad 
■  cry  pIcasanL  It  bakes  as  «di  m  a  Far,  aatf  k  XHy  ke 
.-(•ddletl.  and  it  maka  good  Rea.  ThoK  ae  ^f  Amis 
<  rts,  different  in  shape,  citte.  ^id  cakxr.  TW  kndc  «f 
•  oic  is  ^llow,  of  oihen  nd.  Wks  ifck  Finit  k  ^Boi 
jreen,  it  is  binding,  whea  ripe,  it  k  li—iMag. 

The  Prickle-Pcar,  Budi.crShrah.«fiha«4<r5<iMB 
"^igh,  grows  in  many  1 1  ii  1 1  rif  rtii  Wi  ■  lifa  i.  ai  w  Jimwti, 
trid  tnon  other  Islands  there;  aad  «■  the  Mm  ia  aacfiri 
;>laccs.  This  priddjr  Sfamb  '*'*g*—  SMH  in  lanBa  wamtf 
zrounds;  and  they  thrive  best  m  fiaoes  tha  aicaarilK 
Sea:  especially  where  the  Sand  k  mbaak.  TWTre,  w 
Shrab,  is  j  or  4  foot  In^  Mwrnfi^g  Asdi  wad  loBKka; 
aai  00  each  bnnch  1  or  3  Icsscl  TIttae  Irawea  (if  I  ai^ 
call  them  so)  are  round,  as  bratd  ^njf  wgf  as  fbe  fMlai  kT 
a  Man's  hand,  and  as  thkk ;  tick  mAmamet  Oc  Honar 
kzk ;  these  leares  are  fenced  nmad  ■miA  Strang  fncilei 
above  an  inch  long.  The  Fnns  grows  ai  Ak  brAa  edge 
of  the  leaf :  tt  k  as  big  as  a  lar^  Fhunli,  growkig  SBaO 
aear  the  leaf,  and  iMg  towards  tlx  cop,  where  k  opeas  Bee 
a  Medlar.  This  Fruit  at  first  k  green  like  the  In,  fma 
whence  it  springs  with  small  PricUes  ahooi  it ;  but  whea 
npe  it  k  of  a  deep  red  cokmr.  The  tnkde  k  AiU  </  «naU 
Stock  Seeds,  mixi  with  a  certain  rol  Polfv  Gke  thadt  Sjmip. 
It  k  very  pleasant  in  taste,  cooGng,  and  rcfreihiiig ;  bot  if 
t  Mas  cats  1  s  or  30  of  them  ibef  srill  oofenr  hn  Water, 
makicf  it  look  like  Blood.  This  I  have  often  ejqierknced. 
tn  found  no  harm  by  it. 

Tr-crc    anc    many   Sugar-works   in    the   Oxnitry, 
241  tt 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 

AN.  Estantions  or  Beef  Farms :  There  is  also  a  great  deal  of 
1685  Pitch,  Tar  and  Cordage,  made  in  the  Country,  which  is  the 
chief  of  their  Trade.  This  Town  we  approached  without 
any  opposition,  and  found  nothing  but  empty  Houses ; 
besides  such  things  as  they  could  not,  or  would  not  carry 
away,  which  were  chiefly  about  500  Packs  of  Flower, 
brought  hither  in  the  great  Ship  that  we  left  at  Amapalla, 
and  some  Pitch,  Tar  and  Cordage.  These  things  we 
wanted,  and  therefore  we  sent  them  all  aboard.  Here  we 
received  150  Beefs,  promised  by  the  Gentleman  that  was 
released  coming  from  Leon ;  besides,  we  visited  the  Beef- 
Farms  every  day,  and  the  Sugar- Works,  going  in  small 
Companies  of  20  or  30  Men,  and  brought  away  every  Man 
his  Load  ;  for  we  found  no  Horses,  which  if  we  had,  yet 
the  ways  were  so  wet  and  dirty,  that  they  would  not  have 
been  serviceable  to  us.  We  stayed  here  from  the  17th  till 
the  24th  day,  and  then  some  of  our  destructive  Crew  set 
fire  to  the  Houses :  I  know  not  by  whose  order,  but  we 
marched  away  and  left  them  burning ;  at  the  Brest-work 
we  imbarked  into  our  Canoas  and  returned  aboard  our 
Ships. 

The  25  th  day  Captain  Davis  and  Captain  Swan  broke 
off  Consortship ;  ^  for  Captain  Davis  was  minded  to  return 
again  on  the  Coast  of  Peru,  but  Captain  Swan  desired  to 
go  farther  to  the  Westward.  I  had  till  this  time  been  with 
Captain  Davis,  but  now  left  him,  and  went  aboard  of 
Captain  Swan.  It  was  not  from  any  dislike  to  my  old 
Captain,  but  to  get  some  knowledge  of  the  Northern  Parts 
of  this  Continent  of  Mexico.^  And  I  knew  that  Captain 
Swan  determined  to  coast  it  as  far  North,  as  he  thought  con- 
venient, and  then  pass  over  for  the  East-Indies ;  which  was 
a  way  very  agreeable  to  my  Inclination.  Captain  Townley, 
with  his  two  Barks,  was  resolved  to  keep  us  Company ;  but 
Captain  Knight  and  Captain  Harris  followed  Captain  Davis. 

*  "  The  two  Coinpanye%  had  never  agreed  since  wee  missed  Guiaquill " 
{Orie^nal  MS.). 

^  "  I  came  into  these  seas  this  second  time  more  to  endulge  my  cureosity 
than  to  gett  wealth,  though  I  must  confess  at  that  time  I  did  think  the 
trade  lawfull"  {Original  MS.). 

242 


MALIGNANT   FEVERS 

The  27th  day  in  the  Morning  Captain  Davis  with  his  Ships 
went  out  of  the  Harbour,  having  a  fresh  Ijind  Wind.  '^S 
They  were  in  Company,  Captain  Davis's  Ship  with  Captain 
Harris  in  her ;  Captain  Davis's  Bark  and  Fireship,  and 
Captain  Knight  in  his  own  Ship,  in  all  4  Sail.  Captain 
Swan  took  his  last  farewei  of  him  by  firing  15  Guns,  and 
he  fired  1 1  in  return  of  the  Civility. 

We  stayed  here  some  time  afterwards  to  fill  our  Water 
and  cut  Fire-wood ;  but  our  Men,  who  had  been  very 
healthy  till  now,  began  to  fall  down  apace  in  Fevers. 
Whether  it  was  the  badness  of  the  Water,  or  the  unhcallhi- 
ness  of  the  Town  was  the  cause  of  it  wc  did  not  know; 
but  of  the  two,  I  rather  believe  it  was  a  Distemper  we  got 
at  Rea  Lejo;  for  it  was  reported  that  they  had  been  visited 
with  a  Malignant  Fever'  in  that  Town,  which  had  oc- 
casioned many  People  to  abandon  it ;  and  although  this 
Visitation  was  over  with  them,  yet  their  Houses  and  CJoods 
might  still  retain  somewhat  of  the  Infection,  and  com- 
municate the  same  to  us. 

I  the  rather  believe  this,  because  it  afterwards  raged 
very  much,  not  only  among  us,  but  also  among  Captain 
Davis  and  his  Men,  as  he  told  me  himself  since,  when  I 
met  him  in  England  :  Himself  had  like  to  have  died,  as 
did  several  of  his  and  our  Men.  The  3d  day  of  September 
we  turned  ashore  all  our  Prisoners  and  Pilots,  they  being 
unacquainted  further  to  the  West,  which  was  the  Coast 
that  we  designed  to  visit;  for  the  Spaniards  have  very 
little  Trade  by  Sea  beyond  the  River  Lcmpa,  a  little  to  the 
North  West  of  this  place. 

About  10  a  clock  in  the  morning,  the  same  day,  we 
went  from  hence,  steering  Westward,  being  in  company  4 
Sail,  as  well  as  they  who  left  us,  vix.  Captain  Swan  and 


'  Lionel  Wafer,  the  chinirgeon,  rcniainrd  with  Davis  when  Captain 
S«an  parted  conipiny.  He  tells  us  that  the  disease  was  the  spiHIcd  fever 
Peicchial  fever,  one  of  ihe  mrielics  of  Typhus  fever)  and  thai  it  raged  so 
-hrewdly  among  Davis's  men  that  they  were  forced  to  put  ashore  in  the 
<lulf  of  Amapalla.  They  landed  their  sick  on  one  of  the  islands  in  the 
I  rrilf,  where  Ihey  built  a  few  huts  for  their  ainveniencc.  "  In  our  4  small 
hliips,  we  had  then  above  130  sick  .  .  .  many  of  whom  di«d."  Wafer,  wbo 
^Uended  iliein,  was  not  infected. 

Wk  u^ 


CAPTAIN    DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    his  Bark,  and  Captain  Townley  and  his  Bark,  and  about  340 
^6»5  Men. 

We  met  with  very  bad  weather  as  we  sailed  along  this 
Coast :  seldom  a  day  past  but  we  had  one  or  two  violent 
Tornadoes,  and  with  them  very  frightful  Flashes  of  Light- 
ning and  Claps  of  Thunder ;  I  did  never  meet  with  the  like 
before  nor  since.  These  Tornadoes  commonly  came  out  of 
the  N.  E.  the  Wind  did  not  last  long,  but  blew  very  fierce 
for  the  time.  When  the  Tornadoes  were  over  we  had  the 
Wind  at  W.  sometimes  at  W.  S.  W.  and  S.  W.  and  some- 
times to  the  North  of  the  West,  as  far  as  the  N.  W. 

We  kept  at  a  good  distance  off  shoar,  and  saw  no  Land 
till  the  14th  day;  but  then,  being  in  lat.  12  d.  50  m.  the 
Volcan  of  Guatimala  appeared  in  sight.  This  is  a  very  high 
Mountain  with  two  peeks  or  heads,  appearing  like  two 
Sugar-loaves.  It  often  belches  forth  Flames  of  Fire  and 
Smoak  from  between  the  two  heads;  and  this,  as  the 
Spaniards  do  report,  happens  chiefly  in  tempestuous  weather. 
It  is  called  so  from  the  City  Guatimala,  which  stands  near 
the  foot  of  it,  about  8  leagues  from  the  South  Sea,  and  by 
report,  40  or  50  leagues  from  the  Gulf  of  Matique  in  the 
Bay  of  Honduras,  in  the  North  Seas.  This  City  is  famous 
for  many  rich  Commodities  that  are  produced  thereabouts^ 
(some  almost  peculiar  to  this  Country)  and  yearly  sent  into 
Europe,  especially  4  rich  Dyes,  Indico,  Otta  or  Anatta,' 
Silvester,^  and  Cochineel. 

Indico  is  made  of  an  Herb  which  grows  a  foot  and  half 
or  two  foot  high,  full  of  small  branches ;  and  the  branches 
full  of  leaves,  resembling  the  leaves  which  grow  on  Flax, 
but  more  thick  and  substantial.  They  cut  this  Herb  or 
Shrub  and  cast  it  into  a  large  Cistern  made  in  the  ground 
for  that  purpose,  which  is  half  full  of  Water.  The  Indico 
Stalk  or  Herb  remains  in  the  Water  till  all  the  leaves,  and 
I  think,  the  skin,  rind,  or  bark  rot  off,  and  in  a  manner 
dissolve :  but  if  any  of  the  leaves  should  stick  fast,  they 

^  This  city  of  Guatimala  was  destroyed  by  an  earthquake  some  ninety 
years  later.  The  Sierra  Madre,  a  line  of  mountains  which  runs  along  the 
coast  of  Guatimala,  contains  many  active  volcanoes. 

*  Otta  or  Anatta  :  an  orange-red  dye. 

^  Silvester  is  wild  cochineel. 

244 


INDICO— OTTA   OR   ANATTA 

■force  them  off  by  much  labour,  tossing  and  tumbling  the 
mass  in  the  Waier  till  all  the  pulpy  substance  is  dissolved. 
Then  the  Shrub,  or  woody  part,  is  taken  out,  and  the 
Water,  which  is  like  Ink,  being  disturbed  no  more,  settles, 
and  the  Indico  falls  to  the  bottom  of  the  Gstern  like  Mud. 
When  it  is  thus  settled,  they  draw  off  the  Water,  and  take 
the  Mud  and  lay  It  in  the  Sun  to  dry  :  which  there  becomes 
hard,  as  you  see  ic  brought  home. 

Otta,  or  Anatia,  is  a  red  sort  of  Dye.  It  is  made  of  a 
',  Flower  that  grows  on  Shrubs  7  or  8  foot  high.  It  is 
hrown  into  a  Cistern  of  Water  as  the  Indico  is,  but  with 
his  difference,  that  there  is  no  stalk,  nor  so  much  as  the 
head  of  the  Flower,  but  only  the  Flower  it  self  pull'd  off 
■om  the  head,  as  you  peel  Rose-leaves  from  the  bud.  This 
1  in  the  Water  rill  it  rots,  and  by  much  jumbling  it 
dissolves  to  a  liquid  substance,  like  the  Indico;  and  being 
settled,  and  the  Water  drawn  off,  the  red  Mud  is  made  up 
into  Rolls  or  Cakes,  and  laid  in  the  Sun  to  dry.  I  did  never 
see  any  made  but  at  a  place  called  the  Angels  in  Jamaica, 
at  Sir  Tho.  Muddiford's' Plantations,  about  20  years  since; 
but  was  grubb'd  up  while  I  was  there,  and  the  Ground 
otherwise  employed.  I  do  believe  there  is  none  any  where 
else  on  Jamaica  :  and  even  this  probably  was  owing  to  the 
Spaniards,  when  they  had  that  Island.  Indico  is  common 
enough  in  Jamaica.  I  observed  they  planted  it  most  in 
sandy  Ground :  ihcy  sow  great  Fields  of  it,  and  I  think 
they  sow  it  every  year ;  but  1  did  never  see  the  Seeds  it 
bears.  Indico  is  pnxiuced  all  over  the  West-Indies,  on 
most  of  the  Caribbee  Islands,  as  well  as  the  Main ;  yet  no 
part  of  the  Main  yields  such  great  quantities  both  of  Indico 
nind  Otta  as  this  Country  about  Guatimala.  I  believe  that 
^tta  is  made  now  only  by  the  Spaniards;  for  since  the 
lesfoying  that  at  the  Angels  Plantation  in  Jamaica,  I  have 
ot  heard  of  any  Improvement  made  of  this  Commodity  by 
Countrymen  any  where;    and  as  to  Jamaica,   I  have 

r  Thomas  Mortjford  (1620  ?-i679)  was  the  Governor  of  Jar 
Irom  1664-1671.     He  was  a  good  friend  to  the  buccaneers,  who  gave  ti 
a  fificemh  nf  the  spoil  they  brought  to  Porl  Royal.     He  died  in  Jamai 
and  is  buried  at  Spanish  Town  in  that  island. 


4 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  since  been  informed,  that  'tis  wholly  left  off  there.  I  know 
*685  not  what  quantities  either  of  Indico  or  Otta  are  made  at 
Cuba  or  Hispaniola :  but  the  place  most  used  by  our 
Jamaica  Sloops  for  these  things  is  the  Island  Porto  Rico, 
where  our  Jamaica  Traders  did  use  to  buy  Indico  for  3 
Rials,  and  Otta  for  4  Rials  the  Pound,  which  is  but  2s.  3d. 
of  our  Money :  and  yet  at  the  same  time  Otta  was  worth 
in  Jamaica  5s.  the  Pound,  and  Indico  3s.  6d.  the  Pound ; 
and  even  this  also  paid  in  Goods ;  by  which  means  alone 
they  got  50  or  60  per  Cent.  Our  Traders  had  not  then 
found  the  way  of  trading  with  the  Spaniards  in  the  Bay  of 
Honduras ;  but  Captain  Coxon  ^  went  thither  (as  I  take 
it)  at  the  beginning  of  the  Year  1679,  under  pretence  to 
cut  Logwood,  and  went  into  the  Gulf  of  Matique,  which  is 
in  the  bottom  of  that  Bay.  There  he  landed  with  h'ls 
Canoas  and  took  a  whole  Storehouse  full  of  Indico  and 
Otta  in  Chests,  piled  up  in  several  parcels,  and  marked  with 
different  marks  ready  to  be  shipt  off  aboard  two  Ships  that 
then  lay  in  the  road  purposely  to  take  it  in ;  but  these 
Ships  could  not  come  at  him,  it  being  shole-water.  He 
opened  some  of  the  Chests  of  Indico,  and  supposing  the 
other  Chests  to  be  all  of  the  same  species,  ordered  his  Men 
to  carry  them  away.  They  immediately  set  to  work,  and 
took  the  nearest  at  liand ;  and  having  carried  out  one  heap 
of  Chests,  they  seized  on  another  great  pile  of  a  different 
mark  from  the  rest,  intending  to  carry  them  away  next. 
But  a  Spanish  Gentleman,  their  Prisoner,  knowing  that 
there  was  a  great  deal  more  than  they  could  carry  away, 
desired  them  to  take  only  such  as  belonged  to  the  Merchants, 
(whose  marks  he  undertook  to  shew  them)  and  to  spare 
such  as  had  the  same  mark  with  those  in  that  great  Hie 

^  This  adventure  is  mentioned  in  the  Calendar  of  State  Papers^  W,  Ind, 
and  Col.  Series,  October  i8,  1679,  p.  428-9  :  "There  has  been  lately  taken 
from  the  Spaniards  by  Coxon,  Batharpe,  Bothing  and  Hawkins,  with  their 
crew,  500  chests  of  indigo,  a  great  quantity  of  cacao,  cochineal,  tortoise- 
shell,  money  and  plate."  (Signed)  Don  Pedro.  On  September  21,  1680, 
reference  is  made  to  a  similar  exploit :  "  It  is  true  that  I  heard,  as  news, 
of  the  taking  of  several  chests  of  indigo  in  the  Bay  of  Honduras.  .  .  . 
There  were  some  chests  of  foreign  indigo  brought  into  the  remote  parts 
of  these  islands,  and  these  I  caused  to  be  searched  for,  and  captured" 
(Lord  Carlisle  to  the  Lords  of  Trade  and  Plantations), 

246 


I 


I 


COCHINEEL 

they  were  then  cntring  upon ;  because,  he  said,  those 
Chests  belonged  to  the  Ship-Capuins,  who  following  the  '**S 
Seas,  as  themselves  did,  he  hoped  they  would,  for  that 
reason,  rather  spare  their  Goods  than  the  Merchants.  They 
consented  to  his  Request ;  but  upon  their  opening  their 
Chests  (which  was  not  before  they  came  lo  Jamaica,  where 
by  connivance  they  were  permitted  to  scl!  them)  ihcy  found 
that  the  Don  had  been  too  sharp  for  them ;  the  few  Chests 
which  they  had  taken  of  the  same  mark  with  the  great  Pile 
proving  to  be  Otta,  of  greater  value  by  far  than  the  other; 
whereas  they  might  as  well  have  loaded  the  whole  Ship  with 
Otta,  as  with  Indico. 

The  Cochined  is  an  insect,  bred  in  a  sort  of  Fruit  much 
like  the  Prickle-Pear.  The  Tree  or  Shrub  that  bears  it  is 
like  the  Prick  le-Pear-Tree,  about  5  foot  high,  znd  to 
prickly  ;  only  the  Leaves  are  not  quite  so  trig,  but  the  Fruit 
is  bigger.  On  the  top  of  the  Fruit  there  grows  a  red 
Flower:  This  Flower,  when  the  Fruit  is  ripe,  ulls  down  on 
the  top  of  the  Fruit,  which  then  begins  to  open,  and  corers 
it  so,  that  no  Rain  nor  Dew  can  wet  the  inside.  The  next 
day,  or  two  days  after  its  falling  down,  the  Flower  being 
then  scorched  away  by  the  heat  of  the  Sun,  the  Fruit  opens 
as  broad  as  the  mnuth  of  a  Pint  Pot.  and  the  inside  of  the 
Fruit  is  by  this  time  full  of  small  red  Insects,  with  curious 
thin  Wings.  As  ihey  were  bred  here,  so  here  they  would 
die  for  want  of  food,  and  rot  in  their  huaks,  (having  by  this 
time  eaten  up  their  mother  Fruit)  did  not  the  Indians,  who 
plant  large  fields  of  these  Trees,  when  once  they  perceive 
the  Fruit  open,  take  care  to  drive  them  out :  for  they 
spread  under  the  branches  of  the  Tree  a  large  Linnen  Cloth, 
and  then  with  sticks  they  shake  the  branches,  and  so  disturb 
the  poor  Insects,  that  ihey  take  wing  to  be  gone,  yet  hover- 
ing still  over  the  head  of  their  native  Tree,  but  the  heat  of 
the  Sun  so  disorders  them,  that  they  presently  fall  down 
dead  on  the  Cloth  spread  for  that  purpose,  where  the 
Indians  let  them  remain  2  or  3  days  longer,  till  they  are 
throughly  dry.  When  they  fly  up  they  are  red,  when 
they  fall  down  they  are  black ;  and  when  first  they  arc 
quite  dry  they  are  white  as  the  sheet  wherein  they  lie, 
247 


I      quite  ury   inc] 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

though  the  Colour  change  a  little  after.  These  yield  the 
>  much  esteemed  Scarlet.  The  Cochineel-trees  are  called  by 
the  Spaniards  Toona's :  They  are  planted  in  the  Country 
about  Guatimala,  and  about  Cheape  and  Guaxaca,  all  3  in 
the  Kingdom  of  Mexico.  The  Silvester  is  a  red  Grain 
growing  in  a  Fruit  much  resembling  the  Cochineel-fruit ; 
as  doth  also  the  Tree  that  bears  it.  There  first  shoots 
forth  a  yellow  Flower,  then  comes  the  Fruit,  which  is  longer 
than  the  Cochineel-fruit.  The  Fruit  being  ripe  opens  also 
very  wide.  The  inside  being  full  of  these  small  Seeds  or 
Grains,  they  fall  out  with  the  least  touch  or  shake.  The 
Indians  that  gather  them  hold  a  Dish  under  to  receive  the 
Seed,  and  then  shake  it  down.  These  Trees  grow  wild ; 
and  8  or  10  of  these  Fruits  will  yield  an  ounce  of  Seed: 
but  of  the  Cochineel-fruits,  3  or  4  will  yield  an  ounce  of 
Insects.  The  Silvester  gives  a  colour  almost  as  fair  as  the 
Cochineel ;  and  so  like  it  as  to  be  often  mistaken  for  it, 
but  it  is  not  near  so  valuable.  I  often  made  enquiry  how 
the  Silvester  grows,  and  of  the  Cochineel ;  but  was  never 
fully  satisfied,  till  I  met  a  Spanish  Gentleman  that  had  lived 
30  years  in  the  West-Indies,  and  some  years  where  these 
grow  ;  and  from  him  I  had  these  relations.  He  was  a  very 
intelligent  Person,  and  pretended  to  be  well  acquainted  in 
the  Bay  of  Campeachy ;  therefore  I  examined  him  in  many 
particulars  concerning  that  Bay,  where  I  was  well  acquainted 
my  self,  living  there  3  years.  He  gave  very  true  and 
pertinent  answers  to  all  my  demands,  so  that  I  could  have 
no  distrust  of  what  he  related. 

When  we  first  saw  the  Mountain  of  Guatamala,  we 
were  by  judgment  25  leagues  distance  from  it.  As  we  came 
nearer  the  Land  it  appeared  higher  and  plainer,  yet  we  saw 
no  Fire,  but  a  little  Smoak  proceeding  from  it.  The  Land 
by  the  Sea  was  of  a  good  height,  yet  but  low  in  comparison 
with  that  in  the  Country.  The  Sea  for  about  8  or  10 
leagues  from  the  shore,  was  full  of  floating  Trees,  or  Drift- 
Wood,  as  it  is  called,  (of  which  I  have  seen  a  great  deal, 
but  no  where  so  much  as  here,)  and  Pumice-stones  floating, 
which  probably  are  thrown  out  of  the  burning  Mountains, 
and  washed  down  to  the  shore  by  the  Rains,  which  are  very 

248 


THE   SEA   COAST 

and  frequent  in  this  Country ;  and  on  the  side  of 
[onduras  it  is  excessively  wet.  " 

The  24th  day  we  were  in  lat.  1+  d.  30  m.  North,  and 
ihc  Weather  more  settled.  Then  Captain  Townley  took 
•rith  him  106  Men  in  9  Canoas,  and  went  away  to  the 
Westward,  where  he  intended  to  Land,  and  romage  in  the 
Country  for  some  refreshment  for  our  sick  Men,  we  having 
at  this  time  near  half  our  Men  sick,  and  many  were  dead, 
tince  we  left  Rea  Lcjo.  We  in  the  Ships  lay  still  with  our 
Topsails  furled,  and  our  Corses  or  lower  Sails  hal'd  up  this 
day  and  the  next,  that  Captain  Townley  might  get  the 
of  us. 
The  26th  day  wc  made  sail  again,  coasting  to  the  West- 
It  having  the  Wind  at  North  and  fair  weather.  We 
n  along  by  a  tract  of  very  high  Land,  which  came  from 
le  Eastward,  more  within  LanJ  than  we  could  see,  after 
fell  in  with  it,  it  hare  us  company  for  about  10  leagues, 
'  ended  with  a  pretty  gentle  descent  towards  the  West, 
Tbert  we  had  a  |>crfect  view  of  a  pleasant  low  Country, 
which  seemed  10  be  rich  in  Pasturage  for  Cattle.  It  was 
plcntiful]y  furnished  with  Groves  of  green  Trees,  mixt 
anong  the  grassy  Savannahs :  Here  the  Land  was  fenced 
hota  (he  Sea  with  high  sandy  Hills,  for  the  Waves  all 
aloc^  this  Coast  run  high,  and  beat  against  the  shore  very 
bonterously,  making  the  Land  wholly  unapproachable  in 
"  or  Canoas :  So  wc   coasted  still   along   by   this   low 

Land,  8  or  9  leagues  farther,  keeping  close  to  the  shore  for 
of  missing  Capt.  Townley.  We  lay  by  in  the  Night, 
in  the  Day  made  an  casie  sail. 

The  2d  day  of  (Xiobcr  Captain  Townley  came  aboard  ; 
he  had  coasted  along  shore  in  hts  Canoas,  seeking  for  an 
CBtrance,  but  found  none.  At  last,  being  out  uf  hopes  to 
iad  lay  Bay,  Creek,  or  River,  into  which  he  might  safely 
;  he  put  ashore  on  a  sandy  Bay,  but  overset  all  his 
Caoou;  he  had  one  Man  drowned,  and  several  lost  their 
Armt,  and  some  of  them  that  had  not  waxt  up  their 
Cutragc  *  or  Catouche  Boxes,  wet  all  their  Powder.    Captain 

'  Ciirirulec^ 

249 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

.  Townley  with  much  ado  got  ashore,  and  dragged  the 
5  Canoas  up  dry  on  the  Bay ;  then  every  Man  searched  his 
Catouche-box,  and  drew  the  wet  powder  out  of  his  Gun, 
and  provided  to  march  into  the  Country,  but  finding  it 
full  of  great  Creeks  which  they  could  not  ford,  they  were 
forced  to  return  again  to  their  Canoas.  In  the  night  they 
made  good  fires  to  keep  themselves  warm ;  the  next  morning 
200  Spaniards  and  Indians  fell  on  them,  but  were  immedi- 
ately repulsed,  and  made  greater  speed  back  than  they  had 
done  forward.  Captain  Townley  followed  them,  but  not 
far  for  fear  of  his  Canoas.  These  Men  came  from  Tegu- 
antapeque,^  a  Town  that  Captain  Townley  went  chiefly  to 
seek,  because  the  Spanish  Books  make  mention  of  a  large 
River  there ;  but  whether  it  was  run  away  at  this  time,  or 
rather  Captain  Townley  and  his  Men  were  short-sighted,  I 
know  not ;  but  they  could  not  find  it. 

Upon  his  return  we  presently  made  sail,  coasting  still 
Westward,  having  the  Wind  at  E.  N.  E.  fair  weather  and  a 
fresh  gale.  We  kept  within  2  mile  of  the  shore,  sounding 
all  the  way ;  and  found  at  6  miles  distance  from  Land  19 
fathom;  at  8  miles  distance  21  fathom,  gross  Sand.  We 
saw  no  opening,  nor  sign  of  any  place  to  land  at,  so  we 
sailed  about  20  leagues  farther,  and  came  to  a  small  high 
Island  called  Tangola,  where  there  is  good  anchoring.  The 
Island  is  indifferently  well  furnished  with  Wood  and  Water, 
and  lieth  about  a  league  from  the  shore.  The  Main  against 
the  Island  is  pretty  high  champion  Savannah  Land  by  the 
Sea ;  but  2  or  3  leagues  within  land  it  is  higher,  and  very 
woody. 

We  coasted  a  league  farther  and  came  to  Guatulco. 
This  Port  is  in  lat.  1 5  d.  30  m.  it  is  one  of  the  best  in  all 
this  Kingdom  of  Mexico.  Near  a  mile  from  the  mouth  of 
the  Harbour,  on  the  East-side,  there  is  a  little  Island  close 
by  the  shore ;  and  on  the  West-side  of  the  mouth  of  the 
Harbour  there  is  a  great  hollow  Rock,  which  by  the  con- 
tinual working  of  the  Sea  in  and  out  makes  a  great  noise, 
which  may  be  heard  a  great  way.     Every  Surge  that  comes 

^  Tehuantepec,  on  the  river  of  that  name. 

250 


in  t< 


GUATULCO— CAPAUTA    RIVER 

forceth  the  Water  out  of  a  little  hole  on  its  top,  as  oi 

Pip€^  from  whence  it  flies  out  just  like  the  blowing  of  "^*S 
'Whale ;  to  which  the  Spaniards  also  liken  it.     They  call 

Rock  and  Spout  the  BufFadore  :  upon  what  account  I  _ 
know  not.  Kven  in  the  calmest  Seasons  the  Sea  beats  in 
their,  nuking  the  Water  spout  out  at  the  hole :  so  that 
this  is  always  a  good  mark  to  find  the  Harbour  by.  The 
Harbour  b  about  3  mile  deep,  and  one  mile  broad  ;  it  runs 
in  N.  W.  But  the  West-side  of  the  Harbour  is  best  to 
ride  in  for  smalt  Ships  ;  for  there  you  may  ride  land-locked  : 
whereas  any  where  else  you  arc  open  to  the  S.  W.  Winds, 
which  often  blow  here.  There  is  good  clean  ground  any 
where,  atkl  good  gradual  soundings  from  16  to  6  fathom  ; 
it  a  bounded  with  a  smooth  sandy  shore,  very  good  to  land 
at ;  and  at  the  bottom  of  the  Harbour  there  is  a  fine  Brook 
frcah  Water  running  into  the  Sea.  Here  formerly  stood 
imall  Spanish  Town,  or  Vill^e,  which  was  taken  by  Sir 
icis  Drake : '  but  now  there  is  nothing  remaining  of  it, 
a  little  Chapi»el  standing  among  the  Trees,  about 
paces  from  the  Sea.  The  Land  appears  in  small  short 
parallel  to  the  shore,  and  to  each  other ;  the  inner- 
ttill  gradually  higher  than  that  nearer  the  shore ;  and 
ihcy  are  ill  cloathed  with  very  high  flourishing  Trees, 
that  it  is  extraordinary  pleasant  and  delightful  to  behold  at 
a  dmznce:  I  have  no  where  seen  any  thing  like  it. 

At  this  place  Captain  Swan,  who  had  been  very  sick, 
came  ashore,  and  all  the  sick  Men  with  him,  and  the 
Surgeon  to  tend  them.  Captain  Townley  again  took  a 
lompany  of  Men  with  him,  and  went  into  the  Country  to 
-•xk  for  Houses  or  Inhabitants.  He  marched  away  to  the 
Easrward,  atul  came  to  the  River  Capalita :  which  is  a 
swift  River,  yet  deep  near  the  mouth,  and  is  about  a  league 
(^roin  Guatulco.  There  2  of  his  Men  swam  over  the  River, 
»nd  took  3  Indians  that  were  placed  there,  as  Centincls,  to 
*atch  for  our  coming.     These  could  none  of  them  speak 

'  On  the  ijlti  April,  157^  Drake  entereil  the  luwn  quietly,  while  ihe 
I  tWrajei  were  <iyni|  Mnne  ncBroes  on  a  charce  of  conspiring  to  burn 
'W  pboc  Dnk«  tepnniiioaed  (rum  the  larders  of  the  cilitcnt,  and 
<aai  a  bnle  lilver,  a  pM  rhaiu,  ami  a  few  jewels.  Ii  wa»  litre  ihai  be 
Irft  te  plot  Nute  d*  Silva. 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Spanish  ;  yet  our  Men  by  signs  made  them  understand,  that 
'^^5  they  desired  to  know  if  there  was  any  Town  or  Village 
near ;  who  by  the  signs  which  they  made  gave  our  Men  to 
understand,  that  they  could  guide  them  to  a  Settlement : 
but  there  was  no  understanding  by  them,  whether  it  was  a 
Spanish  or  Indian  Settlement,  nor  how  far  it  was  thither. 
They  brought  these  Indians  aboard  with  them,  and  the  next 
day,  which  was  the  6th  day  of  October,  Captain  Townley 
with  140  Men  (of  whom  I  was  one)  went  ashore  again, 
taking  one  of  these  Indians  with  us  for  a  Guide  to  conduct 
us  to  this  Settlement.  Our  Men  that  stay'd  aboard  fill'd 
our  Water,  and  cut  Wood,  and  mended  our  Sails :  and  our 
Moskito  Men  struck  3  or  4  Turtle  every  day.  They  were 
a  small  sort  of  Turtle,  and  not  very  sweet,  yet  very  well 
esteemed  by  us  all,  because  we  had  eaten  no  Flesh  a  great 
while.  The  8th  day  we  returned  out  of  the  Country,  hav- 
ing been  about  14  miles  directly  within  land  before  we  came 
to  any  Settlement.  There  we  found  a  small  Indian  Village, 
and  in  it  a  great  quantity  of  Vinello's  ^  drying  in  the  Sun. 

The  Vinello  is  a  little  Cod  full  of  small  black  Seeds ;  it 
is  4  or  5  Inches  long,  about  the  bigness  of  the  stem  of  a 
Tobacco  leaf,  and  when  dried  much  resembling  it :  so  that 
our  Privateers  at  first  have  often  thrown  them  away  when 
they  took  any,  wondering  why  the  Spaniards  should  lay  up 
Tobacco  stems.  This  Cod  grows  on  a  small  Vine,  which 
climbs  about  and  supports  it  self  by  the  neighbouring 
Trees :  it  first  bears  a  yellow  Flower,  from  whence  the  Cod 
afterwards  proceeds.  It  is  first  green,  but  when  ripe  it  turns 
yellow ;  then  the  Indians  (whose  Manufacture  it  is,  and 
who  sell  it  cheap  to  the  Spaniards)  gather  it,  and  lay  it  in 
the  Sun,  which  makes  it  soft ;  then  it  changes  to  a  Chest- 
nut-colour. Then  they  frequently  press  it  between  their 
fingers,  which  makes  it  flat.  If  the  Indians  do  any  thing 
to  them  beside,  I  know  not ;  but  I  have  seen  the  Spaniards 
sleek  them  with  Oil. 

These  Vines  grow  plentifully  at  Bocca-toro,  where  I 
have  gathered  and  tried  to  cure  them,  but  could  not :  which 

'  Vanilla. 
252 


VINELLO'S,    WHKRE    FOUND 

nc  think  that  the  Indians  have  some  Secret  that  I  /i 
kDavf  not  of  to  cure  them.  I  have  often  askt  the  Spaniards  '' 
bow  they  were  cured,  but  I  never  could  meet  with  any  could 
tdl  mc.  One  Mr  Cree  also,  a  very  curious  Person,  who 
fpake  Spanish  well,  and  had  been  a  Privateer  ail  his  Life,  and 
7  yw«  a  Prisoner  among  the  Spaniards  at  Portobel  and 
Cartagcni,  yet  upon  all  his  enquiry  could  not  find  any  of 
■ncm  th«t  understood  it.  Could  we  have  learnt  the  Art  of 
,  icvcrml  of  us  would  have  gone  to  Bocca-toro  yearly,  at 
:  dr>-  season  and  cured  them,  and  freighted  our  Vessel. 
■e  there  might  have  had  Turtle  enough  for  food,  and 
of  Vinello's.  Mr  Cree  first  shewed  ^me  those  at 
Kca-toro.  At,  or  near  a  Town  also,  called  Caihooca,' 
■  the  Bay  cf  Campcachy,  these  Cods  are  found.  They  are 
nonly  sold  for  3  pence  a  Cod  among  the  Spaniards  in 
:  West-Indies,  and  are  sold  by  the  Druggist,  for  they  are 
much  used  among  Chocolate  to  perfume  it.  Some  will  use 
them  among  Tobacco,  for  it  gives  a  delicate  scent.  I  never 
bard  of  »ny  Vinello's  but  here  in  this  Country,  about  Cai- 
hooca, and  at  Bocca-toro. 

The  Indians  of  this  Village  could  speak  but  little 
Sriuitsh.  They  seemed  to  be  a  poor  innocent  People  :  and 
■V  them  wc  understood,  that  here  are  very  few  Spaniards 
.n  these  parts;  yet  all  the  Indians  hereabout  are  under 
them.  The  Land  from  the  Sea  to  their  Houses  is  black 
Earth,  mixi  with  some  stones  and  Rocks ;  all  the  way  full 
■A  very  high  Trees. 

The  loth  day  wc  sent  4  Canoas  to  the  Westward,  who 
were  ordered  to  lie  for  us  at  Port  Angels ; '  where  we  were 
in  hopes  that  by  some  means  or  other  they  might  get 
Prisooers,  that  might  give  us  a  better  account  of  the  Country 
than  at  present  we  could  have;  and  we  followed  them  with 
•nu  Ships,  all  our  Men  being  now  pretty  well  recovered  of 
'be  Fcrer,  which  had  raged  amongst  us  ever  since  wc 
iepuied  from  Kea  Lejo. 


L 


Port  Anfcb  :  Port  dc  Ani;cies,  Ju  !un|;  i/ti"  jj'  W. 


CHAP.   IX 

They  set  out  from  Guatulco,  The  Isle  Sacrificio,  Port  Angels.  Jaccals. 
A  narrow  Escape,  The  rock  Algatross^  and  the  neighbouring  CmtjI. 
Snooksy  a  sort  of  Fish.  The  Town  of  Acapulco,  Of  the  Traii 
it  drives  with  the  Philippine  Islands,  The  Haven  of  Acapubt. 
A  Tornado.  Port  Marquis.  Captain  Townley  mates  a  fndtlm 
Attempt.  A  long  sandy  Bay^  but  very  rough  Seas,  The  Palmrtm^ 
great  and  small.  The  Hill  of  Petaplan.  A  poor  Indian  FlUagim 
Jew-fish.  Chequetany  a  good  Harbour.  Estapa ;  Muscles  then. 
A  Caravan  of  Mules  taken.  A  Hill  near  Thelupan.  The  Ceast 
hereabouts.  The  Volcan^  Town^  Valley^  and  Bay  of  Cetma. 
Sallagua  Port.  Oarrha.  Ragged  Hills.  Coronada^  er  the 
Crown- Land.  Cape  Corrientes.  Isles  of  Chametly.  The  Citj 
Purification,  V alder  as  ;  or  the  Valley  of  Flags.  They  miss  their 
design  on  this  Coast.  Captain  Townley  leaves  them  with  the  Dariem 
Indians.  The  Point  and  Isles  of  Pontique,  Other  Isles  of  Chamtt" 
ley.  The  Penguin-fruity  the  yellow  and  the  red.  Seals  here.  Of 
the  River  of  Cullacan^  and  the  Trade  of  a  Town  there  with  CetB^ 

fornia.  Massac  Ian.  River  and  Town  of  Rosario.  Caput  CavaX^ 
and  another  Hill.  The  difficulty  of  Intelligence  on  this  Coast,  The 
River  of  Oleta.  River  of  St.  J  ago.  Maxentelba  Rock^  and 
Zelisco  Hill.  Sancta  Pecaque  Town  in  the  River  of  St.  J  ago.  Of 
Compostella.     Many  of  them  cut  off  at  Sancta  Pecaque.     OfCaB' 

fornia  ;  whether  an  Island  or  not  :  and  of  the  North  JVest  and 
North  East  Passage.  A  Method  proposed  for  Discovery  of  the 
North  TVest  and  North  East  Passages.  Isle  of  Santa  Maria.  A 
prickly  Plant.  Capt.  Swan  proposes  a  Voyage  to  the  East-Indies. 
Valley  of  Balderas  again^  and  Cape  Corrientes.  The  Reason  of 
their  ill-success  on  the  Mexican  Coasty  and  Departure  thence  fir  the 
East-Indies. 

T  was  the  12th  of  October,  1685,  when  we  set  out  of 
the  Harbour  of  Guatulco  with  our  Ships.     The  Land 
here  lies  along  West,  and  a  little  Southerly  for  about 
20  or  30  leagues,  and  the  Sea  winds  are  commonly  at 
W.  S.  W.  sometimes  at  S.  W.  the  Land  winds  at  N.     We 

254 


I  XHE    ISLE   SACRIFICIO 

hwr  fair  weather,  and  but  little  wind.  We  coasted  . 
^^^Mi  the  ^Ve3t^va^d,  keeping  as  near  the  shore  as  we  ' 
^Bhtct  the  benefit  of  the  Land  winds,  for  the  Sea  winds 
^Be  right  against  us ;  and  we  found  a  current  setting  to 
^■EastwarxT  which  kept  iis  back,  and  obliged  us  to  anchor 
Htfae  Island  SacriBcio,  which  is  a  small  green  Island  about 
Bf  a  mile  long.  It  lieth  about  a  league  to  the  West  of 
Btttulco,  and  about  half  a  mile  from  the  Main.  There 
knu  to  be  a  fine  Bay  to  the  West  of  the  Island ;  but  it  is 
llH  of  Rocks.  Ihe  best  riding  is  between  the  Island  and 
Be  Main  ;  there  you  will  have  5  or  6  fathom  Water. 
Here  rum  a  pretty  strong  tide  ;  the  Sea  riseth  and  falleth 
ftflr  6  foot  up  and  down. 

I  The  1 8th  day  wc  sailed  from  hence,  coasting  to  the 
PVcttward  after  our  Canoas.  We  kept  near  the  shore, 
■btch  was  all  sandy  Bays;  the  Country  pretty  high  and 
•oody,  and  a  great  Sea  tumbling  in  upon  the  shore.  The 
iind  day  2  of  our  Canoas  came  aboard,  and  told  us  they 
tud  been  a  great  way  to  the  Westward,  but  could  not  find 
?•*%  Angels.  They  had  attempted  to  land  the  day  before,  at 
t  yibce  where  they  saw  a  great  many  Bulls  and  Cows  feeding, 
in  hope*  ID  get  &ome  of  them  ;  but  the  Sea  run  so  high, 
■tut  they  ovcr-»ct  both  Canoas,  and  wet  all  their  Arms, 
tnd  Um  4  Guns,  and  had  one  Man  drowned,'  and  with 
much  ado  got  off  again.  They  could  give  no  account  of 
the  other  1  Canoas,  for  they  lost  company  the  first  night 
that   ihey  went    from  CJuatuIco,  and   had  not  seen  them 

HIKV. 

We  Wen:  now  abrest  of  Port  Angels,  though  our  Men 
in  the  Canots  did  not  know  it ;  therefore  we  went  in  and 
lacbored  there.  This  is  a  broad  open  Bay,  with  2  or  3 
Rocks  at  the  Wcst-stdc.  Here  is  good  anchoring  all  over 
the  Bay,  in  jo  or  20  or  12  fathom  Water;  but  you  must 
ride  open  to  all  Winds,  except  the  Land  Winds,  till  you 

e  into  12  or  13  fathom  Water;  then  you  are  sheltered 
from  the  W.  S.  W,  which  arc  the  common  Trade  Winds. 
TIk  Tide  riseth  here  about  5  foot ;  the  Flood  sets  to  the 

■  'Townly**  tinanenwuier  wunul  Abnham  lliuna"  (Ori^'ina/ J/S,). 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  N.  E.  and  the  Ebb  to  the  S.  W.  The  landing  in  this 
"^5  Bay  is  bad  ;  the  place  of  landing  is  close  by  the  West-side, 
behind  a  few  Rocks  ;  here  always  goes  a  great  swell.  The 
Spaniards  compare  this  Harbour  for  goodness  to  Guatulco, 
but  there  is  a  great  difference  between  them.  For  Guatulco 
is  almost  Landlocked,  and  this  an  open  road,  and  no  one 
would  easily  know  it  by  their  Character  of  it,  but  by  its 
marks  and  its  latitude,  which  is  15  d.  North.  For  this 
reason  our  Canoas,  which  were  sent  from  Guatulco  and 
ordered  to  tarry  here  for  us,  did  not  know  it,  (not  thinking 
this  to  be  that  fine  Harbour)  and  therefore  went  farther ; 
2  of  them,  as  I  said  before,  returned  again,  but  the  other 
2  were  not  yet  come  to  us.  The  Land  that  bounds  this 
Harbour  is  pretty  high,  the  Earth  sandy  and  yellow,  in 
some  places  red  ;  it  is  partly  Woodland,  partly  Savannahs. 
The  Trees  in  the  Woods  are  large  and  tall,  and  the 
Savannahs  are  plentifully  stored  with  very  kindly  Grass. 
Two  leagues  to  the  East  of  this  place  is  a  Beef  Farm, 
belonging  to  Don  Diego  de  la  Rosa. 

The  23d  day  we  landed  about  100  men  and  marched 
thither,  where  we  found  plenty  of  fat  Bulls  and  Cows 
feeding  in  the  Savannahs,  and  in  the  House  good  store  of 
Salt  and  Maiz  ;  and  some  Hogs,  and  Cocks  and  Hens :  but 
the  Owners  or  Overseers  were  gone.  We  lay  here  2  or  3 
days  feasting  on  fresh  Provision,  but  could  not  contrive  to 
carry  any  quantity  aboard,  because  the  Way  was  so  long, 
and  our  Men  but  weak,  and  a  great  wide  River  to  ford. 
Therefore  we  returned  again  from  thence  the  26th  day, 
and  brought  every  one  a  little  Beef  or  Pork  for  the  Men 
that  stay'd  aboard.  The  two  nights  that  we  stay'd  ashore 
at  this  place  we  heard  great  droves  of  Jaccals,  as  we  sup- 
posed them  to  be,  barking  all  night  long,  not  far  from  us. 
None  of  us  saw  these  ;  but  I  do  verily  believe  they  were 
Jaccals ;  ^  tho'  I  did  never  see  those  Creatures  in  America, 
nor  hear  any  but  at  this  time.  We  could  not  think  that 
there  were  less  than  30  or  40  in  a  company.  We  got 
aboard  in  the  evening ;  but  did  not  yet  hear  any  news  of 
our  two  Canoas. 

*  Probably  coyotes. 
256 


A   NARROW    ESCAPE 

The  17th  day  in  the  morning  we  sailed  from  hence, 
I  the  Land  Wind  at  N.  by  W.     The  Sea-Wind  came  ' 

noon  at  W.  S.  W.  and  in  the  evening  we  anchored 
16  fathom  Water,  by  a  small  rocky  Island,  which 
1  about  half  a  mile  from  the  Main,  and  6  leagues  West- 
".  from  Port  Angels.  The  Spaniards  give  no  account 
Island  in  their  Pilot-book.  The  28th  day  wc 
1  again  with  the  Land  Wind  :  in  the  afternoon  the  Sea 
*  blew  hard,  and  we  sprung  our  Main  Top-mast. 
,  coast  is  full  of  small  Hills  and  Valleys,  and  a  great 
I  in  upon  the  shore.  In  the  night  we  met  with  the 
t  of  our  Canoas  that  went  from  us  at  Guatuko. 
had  been  as  far  as  Acapulco  to  seek  Port  Angels. 
back  from  thence  they  went  into  a  River'  to 
Iter,  and  were  encountered  by  150  Spaniards,  yet 
led  their  Water  in  spight  of  them,  but  had  one 
ihot  thro"  the  Thigh.  Afterward  they  went  into 
a  Lwune/  tir  Lake  of  Salt-water,  where  they  found  much 
drieo  Fish,  and  brought  some  aboard.  We  being  now 
atvcK  of  that  place,  sent  in  a  Canoa  mann'd  with  12  Men 
for  more  Fish.  The  Mouth  of  this  Lagune  is  not  Pistol 
shot  wide,  and  on  both  sides  are  pretty  high  Rocks,  so 
coovmicntly  placed  by  Nature,  that  many  Men  may 
ahKond  behind  ;  and  within  the  Rock  and  Lagune  opens 
wide  on  both  sides.  The  Spaniards  tieing  alarmed  by  our 
1  Cwou  that  had  been  there  2  or  three  days  before,  came 
armed  it>  this  Place  to  secure  their  Kish ;  and  seeing  our 
Canoa  coming,  ihey  lay  snug  behind  the  Rocks,  and 
nflcred  the  C^noa  to  pass  in,  then  they  fired  their  Volley, 
and  wounded  5  of  our  Men.  Our  people  were  a  little 
aornrised  at  this  sudden  Adventure,  yet  tired  their  Guns, 
and  rowed  farther  into  the  Lagune,  for  they  durst  not 
adicsture  to  come  out  again  through  the  narrow  Entrance, 
I  near  a  quarter  of  a  Mile  in  length.  Therefore 
f  rowed  into  the  middle  of  the  Lagune,  where  they  lay 
'  Xot  BOW  lo  b*  tdeniified.     P«iliiip4  the  Rio  de  b  Cakni  menlioned 

■  Xoc  bow  10  be  kicniified.  The  descnption  tits  the  Laui 
^ntrmilca  [nxn  Acaiiutcn{u>  the  ESE.).  DampicT'i  M£ 
»  «  ,5^40  S. 

fOL    I.  257 


I 


I    adiKSti 


c  Rio  de  b  Calcm  menlioned        I 

iption  fits  the  Lauuna  Nupa,       ^^^| 
K.).     DampicT'i  MS.  gives  (h«       ^^H 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER^S   VOYAGES 

.  out  of  Gun-shot,  and  looked  about  to  see  if  there  was  not 
5  another  Passage  to  get  out  at,  broader  than  that  by  which 
they  entred,  but  could  see  none.  So  they  lay  still  two 
days  and  three  Nights,  in  hopes  that  we  should  come  to 
seek  them ;  but  we  lay  off  at  Sea,  about  3  leagues  distant, 
waiting  for  their  return,  supposing  by  their  long  absence, 
that  they  had  made  some  greater  Discovery,  and  were  gone 
farther  than  the  Fish-Range ;  because  it  is  usual  with 
Privateers  when  they  enter  upon  such  designs,  to  search- 
farther  than  they  proposed,  if  they  meet  any  Encourag- 
ment.  But  Capt.  Townley  and  his  Bark  being  nearer  the 
shore,  heard  some  Guns  fired  in  the  Lagune.  So  he  mann'd 
his  Canoa,  and  went  towards  the  shore,  and  beating  the 
Spaniards  away  from  the  Rocks,  made  a  free  passage  for 
our  Men  to  come  out  of  their  pound,  where  else  they 
must  have  been  starved  or  knocked  on  the  head  by  the 
Spaniards.  They  came  aboard  their  Ships  again  the  31st 
of  October.  This  Lagune  is  about  the  lat.  of  1 6  d.  40  m. 
North. 

From  hence  we  made  sail  again,  coasting  to  the  West- 
ward, having  fair  Weather  and  a  Current  setting  to  the 
West.  The  second  day  of  November  we  past  by  a  Rock, 
called  by  the  Spaniards  the  Algatross.  The  Land  hereabout 
is  of  an  indifferent  height,  and  woody,  and  more  within  the 
Country  Mountainous.  Here  are  7  or  8  white  Cliflfe  by 
the  Sea,  which  are  very  remarkable,  because  there  are  none 
so  white  and  so  thick  together  on  all  the  Coast.  They  are 
5  or  6  Mile  to  the  West  of  the  Algatross  Rock.  There  is 
a  dangerous  shoal  lieth  S.  by  W.  from  these  Cliflfs,  4  or  5 
Mile  off  at  Sea.  Two  leagues  to  the  West  of  these  Clifl^ 
there  is  a  pretty  large  River,  which  forms  a  small  Island  at 
its  Mouth.  The  Channel  on  the  East  side  is  but  shoal 
and  sandy,  but  the  West  Channel  is  deep  enough  for  Canoas 
to  enter.  On  the  Banks  of  this  Channel  the  Spaniards 
have  made  a  Brestwork,  to  hinder  an  Enemy  from  landing, 
or  filling  Water. 

The  3d  day  we  Anchored  abrest  of  this  River,  in  14 
fathom  Water,  about  a  Mile  and  half  off  shore.  The  next 
Morning  we  mann'd  our  Canoas,  and  went  ashore  to  the 

258 


SNOOKS,   A   SORT  OF   FEH 


rotted  by  a>»  ahhou^  k^ 
oamben,  and  in  mtnf  plxa  iamfied  «i 
titdr  mat  of  •mall  Fire-rav  ^  i^7  ^"^  ^k  ^ 
iUtheSe»Coasti,iirif  a^th»higgriiiBM 
«c  found  a  gnat  deal  rf  SA,  >iiii,lg  MAbi^  ai  1 
for  to  salt  Fbh,  whidi  ckcf  afte  m  4e  Lapas.    Tx 
I  otaenred  here  masdr.  wcxe  vfctf  «c  ofl  Sbs^b^^  i 
I  Sa  fi&h  DOT  Frail  Watcer  U»  ba  lov  iia  ■■■!  m 
ah  Likes.     Tha  Fab  s  iboK  a  Samt  feaa^  ^  : 
lad  as  thick  a»  tlie  sdbU  cf  a  li^^l^^vH^  a^^H 
l»d:  It  h>thScale«of»»*itMfc    \\U\\,mdimgmi 
Horn  tbe  Spaniards  cakr  tkes  I  bav  mi^  fiv  w 
t'ooad  to7  Nets,  Hoots,  or  Lkes;  n^ler  ?b  aas 
BoatfCr  Cantm,  among  ibem.aB  afl  t^  Cbk.  ckc 
Slap  1  shall  mcntiaa  at  J^fapJca 

We  marched  two  or  ilMe 
ud  met  with  bttt  ooe  Home^ 
IHbooct.  who  informed  m  ttf*  a  SUp  th«  warn  km%  ai 
u  Acapuko;   she  came  ham  limL      Ofom  Taa 
wiating  a  good  SUp,  t^oaf^  now  he  had  an  «ff«« 
of  getting  OEK,  if  be  eooU  peraaade  Im  Mia  i»  «m 
vitfa  lum  into  the  Haihnv  af  Aaf^D%  Md  iiaA 
Lbos  Ship  out.     Tbenfore  he 
i  fennd  not  ocdf  aJI  bii  ovn 
tf  of  Cspcaia  Svaa**  Ma 
,  because  ftoraioa  bnag  amnoe  mA  a^  he 
r  time  might  be  much  betfcr  s 
r  selves  with  food,  ud  hoc  mm  fimKy  af 
rer  where  we  now  were,  m  we  woe  iaCBemad  bf  4 
Kniner,  who  offered  to  condna  *■  m  Ae  aiKe  n 
^L    But  ndther  the  praenc  aeccaiiy,  nar  G^o^ 

h  a  inKdT  A^  *«*T  ^  ** :  '^ ' 

»»*fc«»  lfc«  MS.  £  T«i^T  «M«  «  MM.  te  k». 


»5» 


I 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   perswasion  availed  any  thing,  no  nor  yet  their  own  interest ; 

^^5  for  the  great  design  we  had  then  in  hand,  was  to  lie  and 
wait  for  a  rich  Ship  ^  which  comes  to  Acapulco  every  year 
richly  laden  from  the  Philippine  Islands.  But  it  was  neces- 
sary we  should  be  well  stored  with  Provisions,  to  enable  us 
to  cruise  about,  and  wait  the  time  of  her  coming.  How- 
ever, Townley's  Party  prevailing,  we  only  filled  our  Water 
here,  and  made  ready  to  be  gone.  So  the  5th  day  in  the 
Afternoon  we  sailed  again,  coasting  to  the  Westward,  to- 
wards Acapulco.  The  7th  day  in  the  Afternoon,  being 
about  twelve  Leagues  from  the  shore,  we  saw  the  high 
Land  of  Acapulco,  which  is  very  remarkable :  for  there  is  a 
round  Hill  standing  between  2  other  Hills;  the  Wester- 
most  of  which  is  the  biggest  and  highest,  and  hath  two 
hillocks  like  two  Paps  on  its  top :  the  Eastermost  Hill  is 
higher  and  sharper  than  the  middlemost.  From  the  middle 
Hill  the  Land  declines  toward  the  Sea,  ending  in  a  high 
round  point.  There  is  no  Land  shaped  like  this  on  all  the 
coast.  In  the  evening  Captain  Townley  went  away  from 
the  Ships  with  140  Men  in  12  Canoas,  to  try  to  get  the 
Lima  Ship  out  of  Acapulco  Harbour. 

Acapulco*  is  a  pretty  large  Town,  17  deg.  North  of 
the  Equator.  It  is  the  Sea-Port  for  the  City  of  Mexico, 
on  the  West  side  of  the  Continent ;  as  La  Vera  Cruz,  or 
St.  John  d'Ulloa  in  the  Bay  of  Nova  Hispania,  is  on  the 
North  side.  This  Town  is  the  only  place  of  Trade  on  all 
this  Coast ;  for  there  is  little  or  no  Traffick  by  Sea  on  all 
the  N.  W.  part  of  this  vast  Kingdom,  here  being,  as  I  have 
said,  neither  Boats,  Barks  nor  Ships,  (that  I  could  ever 
see)  unless  only  what  come  hither  from  other  parts,  and 

*  The  Manila  galleon.  She  sailed  from  Manila,  in  Luzon,  in  the  July 
of  each  year,  and  generally  arrived  at  Acapulco  before  the  February 
following.  She  was  always  a  ship  of  great  tonnage,  and  often  she  carried 
as  many  as  five  hundred  passengers  and  seamen.  Her  lading  usually 
consisted  of  spices,  China  silks,  Indian  textiles,  "which  are  much  worn 
in  America,"  and  a  quantity  of  goldsmith's  work. 

2  Acapulco.  "This,  tho'  call'd  a  City  scarce  deserves  the  name  of  a 
Village,  the  Houses  being  all  of  Mud  Walls,  and  thatchM.  The  Place  is 
dirty  and  inconvenient.  The  only  good  Thing  belonging  to  it,  is  the 
natural  Security." — Cooke  (in  1712).  The  harbour  is  one  of  the  best  in 
the  world. 

260 


SHIPS   THAT  TRADE   WITH    MANILA 
Boats  near  the  S.  E.  end  of  California ;  as  I  guess, 
t  the  intercourse  between  that  and  the  Main,  for  Pearl- 

Ine  Ship*  that  Trade  hither  are  only  3,  two  that  con- 
atiy  go  once  a  year  between  this  and  Manila  in  Luconia,' 
:  of  the  Philippine  Islands,  and  one  Ship  more  every 
to  and  from  Lima.  This  from  Lima  commonly 
rives  a  little  before  Christmas ;  she  brings  them  Quick- 
llvcr.  Cacao,  and  Pieces  of  Eight.  Here  she  stays  till  the 
iiUa  Ships  arrive,  and  then  takes  in  a  Cargo  of  Spices, 
,  CaIiicoc<i,  and  Muslins,  and  other  East-India  Com- 
idities,  for  the  use  of  Peru,  and  then  returns  to  Lima. 
Tte*  ia  hot  a  small  Vessel  of  20  Guns,  but  the  two  Manila 
Ships  arc  each  said  to  be  above  lOOO  Tun.  These  make 
tieir  Voyages  alternately,  so  that  one  or  other  of  them  is 
always  at  the  Manila's.  When  either  of  them  si;l3  out 
irom  Acapuico,  it  is  at  the  latter  end  of  March,  or  the 
begirming  of  April ;  she  always  touches  to  refresh  at 
GoMm,'  one  of  the  Ladrone  Islands,  in  about  60  days  space 
after  she  seta  out.  There  she  stays  but  2  or  3  days,  and 
then  prosecutes  her  Voyage  to  Manila,  where  she  commonly 
arrives  some  time  in  June.  By  that  time  the  other  is  ready 
to  sail  from  thence,  laden  with  East-India  Commodities. 
She  stretchcth  away  to  the  North  as  far  as  36,  or  sometimes 
■  40  degrees  of  North  lat.  before  she  gets  a  Wind  to 
1  over  fo  the  American  shore.  She  falls  in  first  with 
:  of  California,  and  then  coasts  along  the  shore  to 
South  again,  and  never  misses  a  Wind  to  bring  her 
/  from  thence  quite  to  Acapuico,  When  she  gets  the 
rth  of  Cape  St  Lucas,'  which  is  the  Southermost  point 
alifomia,  she  stretcheth  over  to  Cape  Corricntes,  which 
about  the  30th  degree  of  North  lat.  from  thence  she 
I  along  (ill  she  comes  to  Sallagua,*  and  there  she  sets 
Passengers  that  arc  bound  to  the  City  of  Mexico : 
i  thence  she  makes  her  best  way.  Coasting  stitl  along 
,  till  »hc  arrives  at  Acapuico,  which   is  commonly 

*  Lanmt.  '  CiuhaB. 
'  Cane  Am  LocM,  in  IbL  33*  N.,  long  1 10*  W. 

*  PralMUr  MuuanUIo  Uay.     (See  irW//r,  p.  ]t&} 
261 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

LN.  about  Christmas,  never  more  than  8  or  lo  days  before  or 
^^5  after.^  Upon  the  return  of  this  Ship  to  the  Manila,  the 
other  which  stayeth  there  till  her  arrival,  takes  her  turn 
back  to  Acapulco.  Sir  John  Narborough  therefore  was 
imposed  on  by  the  Spaniards,  who  told  him  that  there  were 
8  sail,  or  more,  that  used  this  Trade. 

The  Port  of  Acapulco  is  very  commodious  for  the 
reception  of  Ships,  and  so  large,  that  some  hundreds  may 
safely  Ride  there  without  damnifying  each  other.  There 
is  a  small  low  Island  crossing  the  mouth  of  the  Harbour ; 
it  is  about  a  mile  and  a  half  long,  and  half  a  mile  broad, 
stretching  East  and  West.  It  leaves  a  good  wide  deep 
Channel  at  each  end,  where  Ships  may  safely  go  in  or  come 
out,  taking  the  advantage  of  the  Winds ;  they  must  enter 
with  the  Sea- Wind,  and  go  out  with  the  Land- Wind,  for 
these  Winds  seldom  or  never  fail  to  succeed  each  other 
alternately  in  their  proper  season  of  the  day  or  night.  The 
Westermost  Channel  is  the  narrowest,  but  so  deep,  there  is 
no  Anchoring,  and  the  Manila  Ships  pass  in  that  way,  but 
the  Ships  from  Lima  enter  on  the  S.  W.  Channel.  This 
Harbour  runs  in  North  about  3  Miles,  then  growing  very 
narrow,  it  turns  short  about  to  the  West,  and  runs  about  a 
mile  farther,  where  it  ends.  The  Town  stands  on  the 
N.  W.  side ;  at  the  mouth  of  this  narrow  passage,  close  by 
the  Sea,  and  at  the  end  of  the  Town,  there  is  a  Platform 
with  a  great  many  Guns.  Opposite  to  the  Town,  on  the 
East-side,  stands  a  high  strong  Castle,  said  to  have  40 
Guns  of  a  very  great  bore.  Ships  commonly  Ride  near 
the  bottom  of  the  Harbour,  under  the  Command  both  of 
the  Castle  and  the  Platform. 

Captain  Townley,  who,  as  I  said  before,  with  140  Men, 
left  our  Ships  on  a  design  to  fetch  the  Lima  Ship  out  of 
the  Harbour,  had  not  Rowed  above  3  or  4  Leagues  before 
the  Voyage  was  like  to  end  with  all  their  Lives  ;  for  on  a 
sudden  they  were  encountred  with  a  violent  Tornado  from 
the  shore,  which  had  like  to  have  foundered  all  the  Canoas: 
but  they  escaped  that  danger,  and  the  second  night  got 

^  Walter,  "examining  our  prisoners  about  it"  (in  1742),  was  assured 
that  "  she  was  sometimes  known  to  come  in  after  the  middle  of  February!* 

262 


PORT   MARQUIS 

ort  M»K|uis.'     Port  Marquis  is  a 
league  to  the   East    of  Acapuico    Harbour.  ' 
they  staid  sll  the  next  day  to  dry  themselves,  their 
iths,  their  Arms,  and  Ammunition,  and  the  next  night 
■  rowed   softly  into  Acapuico  Harbour;    and   because 
would   not  be   heard,  they  hai'd  in  their  Oars,  and 
"    1  as  softly  as  if  they   had  been  seeking   Manatee, 
ddled  close  to  the  Castle ;  then  struck  over  to  the 
I  found  the  Ship  riding  between  the  Brest-work 
Fori,  within  about   too  Yards  of  each.      When 
had    well    viewed   her,  and  considered   the  danger  of 
:  design,  they  thought  it  not  possible  to  accomplish  it ; 
bcrcfore  they  paddled  softly  back  again,  till  they  were  out 
''  commutd  of  the  Korts,  and  then  they  went  to  Land, 
1  fell  in  among  a  Company  of  Spanish  Soldiers  (for  the 
ipBnuris  having  seen  them  the  day  before,  had  set  Guards 
lloog  the  Coast)  who  immediately  fired  at  them,  but  did 
no  damage,  only  made  them  retire  farther  from  the 
u     They  lay  afterwards  at  the  mouth  of  the  Harbour 
ill  it  was  day,  to  take  a  view  of  the  Town  and  Castle,  and 
Iko  returned  aboard  again,  being  tired,  hungry,  and  sorry 
br  their  Disappointment. 

The   nth  day  we  made  sail  again  further  on  to  the 

KTcatwird,  with  the  Land-wind,  which  is  commonly  at 
I.  E.  but  the  Sea  winds  are  at  S.  W.  We  passed  by  a 
Mig  sandy  Bay  of  above  30  leagues.'  All  the  way  along 
:  the  Sea  falls  with  such  force  on  the  shore,  that  it  is 
inpoastble  to  come  near  it  with  Boat  or  Canoa ;  yet  it  is 
food  clean  ground,  and  good  anchoring  a  mile  or  two  from 
the  shore.  The  Land  by  the  Sea  is  low  and  indifferent 
Fertile,  producing  many  sorts  of  Trees,  especially  the 
fmading  Palm,  which  grows  in  spots  from  one  end  of  the 
Bay  to  the  other. 

The  I^lm-trcc  is  as  big  as  an  ordinary  Ash,  growing 


'  Pan  Marqwi :  Son  Manrot,  on  the  Lafinon  of  Pflpajpyo- 

*  *n*ra  ia  a  beach  of  Bind,  whirh  extendi  eightten  Icaifuei  from  the 

hAar  aif  AtMpa^ct^  to  the  woiwnrd,  H^'ninit  which  ihe  ica  btealci  lu 

ntfoHlr  tlttl  will)  boat!  it  would  be  itnpuMible  la  land  on  any  part  of 

263 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  about  20  or  30  foot  high.  The  Body  is  clear  from  Boughs 
'^^5  or  Branches,  till  just  at  the  head ;  there  it  spreads  forth 
many  large  green  Branches,  not  much  unlike  the  Cabbage- 
tree  before  described.  These  Branches  also  grow  in  many 
places,  (as  in  Jamaica,  Darien,  the  Bay  of  Campeachy,  &c.) 
from  a  stump  not  above  a  foot  or  two  high ;  which  is  not 
the  Remains  of  a  Tree  cut  down ;  for  none  of  these  sort  of 
Trees  will  ever  grow  again  when  they  have  once  lost  their 
head  ;  but  these  are  a  sort  of  Dwarf-palm,  and  the  Branches 
which  grow  from  the  stump,  are  not  so  large  as  those  that 
grow  on  the  great  Tree.  These  smaller  Branches  are  used 
both  in  the  East  and  West-Indies  for  thatching  Houses: 
They  are  very  lasting  and  serviceable,  much  surpassing  the 
Palmeto.  For  this  Thatch,  if  well  laid  on,  will  endure  5 
or  6  Years ;  and  this  is  called  by  the  Spaniards  the  Palmeto- 
Royal.  The  English  at  Jamaica  give  it  the  same  Name. 
Whether  this  be  the  same  which  they  in  Guinea  get  the 
Palm-wine  from,  I  know  not ;  but  I  know  that  it  is  like 
this. 

The  Land  in  the  Country  is  full  of  small  peeked  barren 
Hills,  making  as  many  little  Valleys,  which  appear  flourish- 
ing and  green.  At  the  West-end  of  this  Bay  is  the  Hill  of 
Petaplan,*  in  lat.  17  d.  30  m.  N.  This  is  a  round  Point 
stretching  out  into  the  Sea  :  At  a  distance  it  seems  to  be  an 
Island.  A  little  to  the  West  of  this  Hill  are  several  round 
Rocks,  which  we  left  without  us,  steering  in  between  them 
and  the  round  Point,  where  we  had  1 1  fathom  Water. 
We  came  to  an  Anchor  on  the  N.  W.  side  of  the  Hill,  and 
went  ashore,  about  170  Men  of  us,  and  marched  into  the 
Country  12  or  14  miles.  There  we  came  to  a  poor  Indian 
Village  that  did  not  afford  us  a  Meal  of  Victuals.  The 
people  all  fled,  only  a  Mulatta  Woman,  and  3  or  4  small 
Children,  who  were  taken  and  brought  aboard.  She  told 
us  that  a  Carrier  (one  who  drives  a  Caravan  of  Mules)  was 
going  to  Acapulco,  laden  with  Flower  and  other  Goods, 
but  stopt  in  the  Road  for  fear  of  us,  a  little  to  the  West 
of  this  Village,  (for  he  had  heard  of  our  being  on  this  coast) 

^  Morro  de  Petatlan. 
264 


JEW-FISH— CHEQUETAN 

thought  he  still  remained  there:  And  therefore  t 
was  we  kept  the  Woman  to  be  our  Guide  to  carry  us  to  ' 
that  place.     At  this  place  where  we  now  by,  our  Moskito- 
men  struck  some  small  Turtle,  and  many  small  Jew-fish.' 

The  Jew-fish  is  a  very  good  Fish,  and  I  judge  so  called 
by  the  English,  because  it  hath  Scales  and  Kins,  therefore 
a  clean  Fish,  according  to  the  Leviiical  Law,  and  the  Jews 
at  Jamaica  buy  them,  and  cat  them  very  freely.  It  is  a 
very  large  P'ish,  shaped  much  like  a  Cod,  but  a  great  deal 
bigger;  one  will  weigh  3,  or  4,  or  5  hundred  weight.  It 
hath  3  large  head,  with  great  Kins  and  Scales,  as  big  as  an 
Half-Crown,  answerable  to  the  bigness  of  his  Bridy.  It  is 
very  sweet  Meat,  and  commonly  fat.  This  Fish  lives 
among  the  Rocks;  there  are  plenty  of  them  in  the  West- 
Indies,  about  Jamaica,  and  the  coast  of  Caraccos ;  but 
chiefly  in  these  Seas,  especially  more  Westward, 

We  went  from  hence  with  our  Ships  the  1 8th  day, 
and  steered  West  about  2  leagues  farther,  to  a  place  called 
Chequetan.  A  Mile  and  half  from  the  shore  there  is  a 
small  Key,  and  within  it  is  a  very  good  Harbour  where 
Ships  may  careen  ;  there  is  also  a  small  River  of  fresh 
Water,  and  Wood  enough. 

The  14th  day  in  the  morning  we  went  with  95  Men  in 
6  Canoas  to  seek  for  the  Carrier,  taking  the  Mulatto- 
Woman  for  our  Guide;  but  Captain  Townley  would  not 
go  with  us.  Before  day  we  landed  at  a  place  called 
Esiapa,-  a  league  to  the  West  of  Chequeton.  'I'he  Woman 
was  well  acquainted  here,  having  been  often  at  this  place 
for  Muscles,  as  she  told  us ;  for  here  are  great  plenty  of 
them.  They  seem  in  all  respects  like  our  English  Muscles, 
She  carry'd  us*  through  the  pathless  Wood  by  the  side  of 
a  River,  for  about  a  league  :  Then  we  came  into  a  Savannah 


'  Tlie  Jcw-fish  is  Mtgalops  atlantUu 
-•&  Fish." 
'  Estapa.     btapa,  a  village  on  a  nai 

ihe  NW.  of  Chequetan. 

(,     As  Uninpicr  s.iys,  it 

"is.-»  very 

iwo  rivers 

'  "We  had  an  astroliger,"  says  the 

MS,  "by  whose  means 

we  exited 

f  unwilling  people  10  hearken  to  the 

woman,  for  such  tricks  i 

I  mnii  may 

m Climes  use  to  lead  the  Ignoranl." 
L)>ng  no  heed  to  the  woman^  stories. 

Some  of  the  buccaneer 

3  wer«  lor 

265 

CAPTAIN    DAMPIER^S   VOYAGES 

AN.  full  of  Bulls  and  Cows;  and  here  the  Carrier  before- 
'^5  mentioned  was  lying  at  the  Estantion-house  with  his  Mules, 
not  having  dared  to  advance  all  this  while,  as  not  knowing 
where  we  lay ;  so  his  own  fear  made  him,  his  Mules,  and 
all  his  Goods,  become  a  Prey  to  us.  He  had  40  Packs  of 
Flower,  some  Chocolate,  a  great  many  small  Cheeses,  and 
abundance  of  Earthen  Ware.  The  Eatables  we  brought 
away,  but  the  Earthen  Vessels  we  had  no  occasion  for,  and 
therefore  left  them.  The  Mules  were  about  60:  We 
brought  our  Prize  with  them  to  the  Shore,  and  so  turned 
them  away.  Here  we  also  killed  some  Cows,  and  brought 
with  us  to  our  Canoas.  In  the  Afternoon  our  Ships  came 
to  an  Anchor  half  a  Mile  from  the  place  where  we  landed ; 
and  then  we  went  aboard.  Captain  Townley  seeing  our 
good  success,  went  ashore  with  his  Men  to  kill  some  Cows; 
for  here  were  no  Inhabitants  near  to  oppose  us.  The  Land 
is  very  woody,  of  a  good  fertile  Soil,  watered  with  many 
small  Rivers ;  yet  it  hath  but  few  Inhabitants  near  the  Sea. 
Capt.  Townley  kill'd  18  Beefs,  and  after  he  came  aboard, 
our  Men,  contrary  to  Captain  Swan's  inclination,  gave 
Capt.  Townley  part  of  the  Flower  which  we  took  ashore. 
Aftewards  we  gave  the  Woman  some  Cloaths  for  her,  and 
her  Children,  and  put  her  and  two  of  them  ashore ;  but 
one  of  them,  a  very  pretty  Boy,  about  7  or  8  Years  old, 
Capt.  Swan  kept.  The  Woman  cried,  and  begg'd  hard  to 
have  him ;  but  Capt.  Swan  would  not,  but  promised  to  make 
much  of  him,  and  was  as  good  as  his  word.  He  proved 
afterwards  a  very  fine  Boy  for  Wit,  Courage,  and  Dexterity; 
I  have  often  wonder'd  at  his  Expressions  and  Actions. 

The  2 1  St  day  in  the  evening,  we  sailed  hence  with 
the  Land-Wind.  The  Land-Winds  on  this  part  of  the 
Coast  are  at  N.  and  the  Sea-Winds  at  W.  S.  W.  We  had 
fair  Weather,  and  Coasted  along  to  the  Westward.  The 
Land  is  high,  and  full  of  ragged  Hills;  and  West  from 
these  ragged  Hills  the  Land  makes  many  pleasant  and 
fruitful  Valleys  among  the  Mountains.  The  25th  day  wc 
were  abrest    of  a  very  remarkable   HilV  which   towring 

*  Probably  Taneitaitoro  Peak. 

266 


THE   COASTING    ALONG 
the  rest  of  its  fellows,  is  divided  in  the  top. 


Jces  two  small 


parts. 


It  is  in   lat.   1 8  li.  8  m.  North. 


F  Spaniards  make  mention  of  a  Town  called  Thciupan 


this  Hil 


which  ' 


uld  ha< 


ted  if  \ 


id 


visitei 

hire  found  the  way  to  it.  The  26th  day  Captain  Swan 
ind  Captain  Townlcy,  with  200  Men,  of  whom  I  was  one, 
■eat  in  our  Canoas  to  seek  for  the  City  of  Colima,  a  rich 
fi»£c  hr  report,  but  how  far  within  Land  I  could  never 
lam :  for,  as  I  said  before,  here  is  no  Trade  by  Sea,  and 
-crcfore  vre  could  never  get  Guides  to  inform  us,  or 
niuct  U4  to  any  Town,  but  one  or  two,  on  this  Coast : 
j;J  there  is  never  a  Town  that  licth  open  to  the  Sea  but 
^ctpulco  ;  and  therefore  our  search  was  commonly  fruit- 
^:^  as  now  ;  for  we  rowed  above  20  Leagues  along  shore, 
i->]  found  it  a  very  bad  Coast  to  Land.  We  saw  no 
Hotuc,  nor  sign  of  Inhabitants,  although  we  past  by  a  fine 
V»llcy,  c&llcd  the  Valley  of  Maguella  ;  only  at  two  places, 
the  one  at  our  first  setting  out  on  this  Expedition,  and  the 
Jitiw  at  the  end  of  it.  we  saw  a  Horseman  set,  as  we 
tuppowd,  as  a  Centinct,  to  watch  us.  At  both  places  wc 
Uadcd  with  difficulty,  and  at  each  place  we  followed  the 
tndc  of  the  Horse  on  the  sandy  Bay;  but  where  they 
ottered  the  Woods  wc  lost  the  track,  and  although  we 
diligently  scarcht  for  it,  yet  we  could  find  it  no  more ;  so 
wv  were  perfectly  at  a  loss  to  find  out  the  Houses  or 
Town  they  came  from.  The  28th  day,  being  tired  and 
hopeless  to  find  any  Town,  we  went  aboard  our  Ships,  that 
now  come  abmt  of  the  place  where  we  were ;  for 
ahnys  when  we  leave  our  Ships,  wc  cither  order  a  certain 
e  of  meeting,  or  else  leave  them  a  sign  to  know  where 
e  are,  by  making  one  or  more  great  Smokes :  yet  we  had 
1  ntte  to  hive  been  ruin'd  by  such  a  signal  as  this,  in  a 
'  Voyage  under  Captain  Sharp,  when  we  made  that 
ifortuttatc  Attempt  upon  Arica,  which  is  mentioned  in 
ie"Histaryof  the  Buccaneers."  For  upon  the  routing  our 
1,  and  taking  several  of  them,'  some  of  those  so  taken 

*  7W  wmiiilnl  BMB  hid  been  left  in  it  church  with  the  docton.     Wben 

B  tbeir  retreat,  they  called  10  the  doctors  to  leaw  their 

~  "■  n  IxKly  10  ihe  iMMit.    The  doc — -■^-j'     - 

267 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   told  the  Spaniards,  that  it  was  agreed  between  them  and 

^^^5  their  Companions  on  board,  to  make  two  great  Smokes  at 

a  distance  from  each  other,  as  soon  as  the  Town  should  be 

taken,  as  a  signal  to  the  Ship,  that  it  might  safely  enter  the 

Harbour.     The  Spaniards  made  these  Smokes  presently: 

1  was  then  among  those  who  staid  on  board ;  and  whether 
the  signal  was  not  so  exactly  made,  or  some  other  dis^ 
couragement  happen'd,  I  remember  not,  but  we  forbore 
going  in,  till  we  saw  our  scatter'd  Crew  coming  oflF  in  their 
Canoas.  Had  we  enter'd  the  Port  upon  the  false  signal, 
we  must  have  been  taken  or  sunk ;  for  we  must  have  past 
close  by  the  Fort,  and  could  have  had  no  Wind  to  bring 
us  out,  till  the  Land- Wind  should  rise  in  the  night. 

But  to  our  present  Voyage :  After  we  came  aboard  wc 
saw  the  Volcan  of  Colima.^  This  is  a  very  high  Mountain, 
in  about  i8  d.  36  m.  North,  standing  5  or  6  Leagues  from 
the  Sea,  in  the  midst  of  a  pleasant  Valley.     It  appears  with 

2  sharp  peeks,  from  each  of  which  there  do  always  issue 
flames  of  fire  or  smoke.     The  Valley  in  which  this  Volcan 
stands,  is  called  the  Valley  of  Colima,  from  the  Town  it 
self  which  stands  there  not   far  from   the  Volcan.     The 
Town  is  said  to  be  great  and  rich,  the  chief  of  all  its 
Neighbourhood  :  and  the  Valley  in  which  it  is  seated,  by 
the  relation  which  the  Spaniards  give  of  it,  is  the  most 
pleasant  and  fruitful  Valley  in  all  the  Kingdom  of  Mexico. 
This  Valley  is  about  ten  or  twelve  leagues  wide  by  the  Sea, 
where  it  makes  a  small  Bay :  but  how  far  the  Vale  runs 
into  the  Country  I  know   not.     It  is  said  to  be  full  of 
Cacao-gardens,  Fields  of  Corn,  Wheat,  and  Plantain-Walks. 
The  neighbouring  Sea  is  bounded  with  a  sandy  shore ;  but 
there  is   no  going  ashore  for  the   violence  of  the  Waves. 
The  Land  within  it  is  low  all  along,  and  Woody  for  about 
2  leagues  from  the  East  side ;  at  the  end  of  the  Woods 
there  is  a  deep  River  runs  out  into  the  Sea,  but  it  hath 
such  a  great  Bar,  or  sandy  Shoal,  that  when  we  were  here, 

drinking,"  and  paid  no  attention  to  the  call.  They  were  taken  by  the 
Spaniards,  who  bullied,  or  tortured,  them  into  revealing  the  private  sipa^ 
Ringrose  says  that  the  signal  of  the  "smokes"  was  to  call  the  boats  into 
the  harbour,  but  no  doubt  the  signal  applied  also  to  the  ship.  ^ 

^  Mount  Colima.     It  is  about  11,700  ft.  in  height.  1 

268  ] 

\ 
u 

i 


^^^m        PORT   OF   SALLAGUA 

^^HHc  or  Onoa  could  possibly  enter,  the  Sea  running  . 
^Fiugh  upon  the  Bar ;  otherwise,  1  judge,  we  should  have  ' 
^hdc  some  farther  discovery  into  this  pleasant  Valley.  On 
^fce  West  side  of  the  River  the  Savannah-land  begins,  and 
runs  to  the  other  aide  of  the  Valley.  We  had  but  little 
Wind  when  we  came  aboard,  therefore  we  lay  off  this  Bay 
Bt  Afternoon  and  the  Night  ensuing.' 

The  29th  day  our  Captains  went  away  from  our  Ships 
ith  100  Men,  intending  at  the  first  convenient  place  to 
1  and  search  about  for  a  path  :  for  the  Spanish  Books 
E  mention  of  2  or  3  other  Towns  hereabouts,  especially 
e  called  Salitgua,  to  the  West  of  this  Bay.  Our  Canoas 
wed  along  as  near  the  shore  as  they  could,  but  the  Sea 
went  so  high  that  they  could  not  land.  About  10  or  11 
1  Clock.  3  Horsemen  came  near  the  shore,  and  one  of  them 
t  I  Bottle  out  of  his  Pocket,  and  dratik  to  our  Men. 
IFhilc  he  was  drinking,  one  of  our  Men  snatch'd  up  his 
,  and  let  drive  at  him,  and  kill'd  his  Horse:  so  his 
t  immediately  set  spurs  10  his  Horse  and  rode  away, 
the  other  to  come  after  a  foot.  But  he  being 
,  made  but  slow  haste  ;  therefore  two  of  our  Men 
I  themselves,  and  swam  ashore  to  take  him.  But  he 
rud  a  Machcat,  or  long  Knife,  wherewith  he  kept  them 
ir^h  from  seizing  him.  they  having  nothing  in  their  hands 
wherewith  to  defend  themselves,  or  offend  him.  The  30th 
dmj  our  Men  came  all  aboard  again,  for  they  could  not 
&em1  May  place  to  land  in. 

The  first  day  of  December  we  passed  by  the  Port  of 
Sallagaa.*  This  Port  is  in  lat  18  d.  52  m.  It  is  only  a 
jmvi  deep  Bay,  divided  in  the  middle  with  a  rocky  point, 
«lbch  makc«,  as  it  were,  two  Harbours.  Ships  may  ride 
rely  in  cither,  but  the  West  Harbour  is  the  best :  there 
»  good  Anchoring  any  where  in  10  or  12  fathom,  and  a 
~*  *E  of  fresh  Water  runs  into  the  Sea.  Here  we  saw  a 
V  thatched  House,  and  a  great  many  Spaniards  both 

t  '  •T4ai  aicbt  1  iron  an  ague,"  iay»  the  M.S.,  "whidi  afterwards  turned 
ptti  ^nprnf  utd  ImtMlil  me  in  gTi-ni  dnnjii-T  of  my  life." 

'  TtabiUty  HauasBlo  Day,  but  perhapc  Pnito  Navidttd,  m  few  mtltr* 
r  I0  the  weal.    The  "  Caiigiu  "  id  the  old  Spanish  charts  might  well 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Horse  and  Foot,  with  Drums  beating,  and  Colours  flying  in 
'^^5  defiance  of  us,  as  we  thought.  We  took  no  notice  of  them 
till  the  next  morning,  and  then  we  landed  about  200  Men 
to  try  their  Courage ;  but  they  presently  withdrew.  The 
Foot  never  stay'd  to  exchange  one  shot,  but  the  Horsemen 
stay'd  till  2  or  3  were  knocked  down,  and  then  they  drew 
off,  our  Men  pursuing  them.  At  last,  2  of  our  Men  ^  took 
two  Horses  that  had  lost  their  Riders,  and  mounting  them, 
rode  after  the  Spaniards  full  drive  till  they  came  among 
them,  thinking  to  have  taken  a  Prisoner  for  Intelligence, 
but  had  like  to  have  been  taken  themselves :  for  4  Spaniards 
surrounded  them,  after  they  had  discharged  their  Pistols, 
and  unhorsed  them ;  and  if  some  of  our  best  Footmen  had 
not  come  to  their  rescue,  they  must  have  yielded,  or  have 
been  killed.  They  were  both  cut  in  2  or  3  places,  but  their 
wounds  were  not  mortal.  The  4  Spaniards  got  away  before 
our  Men  could  hurt  them,  and  mounting  their  Horses, 
speeded  after  their  Consorts,  who  were  marched  away  into 
the  Country.  Our  Men  finding  a  broad  Road  leading  into 
the  Country,  followed  it  about  4  leagues  in  a  dry  stony 
Country  full  of  short  Wood  ;  but  finding  no  sign  of  In- 
habitants, they  returned  again.  In  their  way  back  they 
took  two  Mulatto's,  who  were  not  able  to  march  as  fast 
as  their  Consorts ;  therefore  they  had  skulked  in  the 
Woods,  and  by  that  means  thought  to  have  escaped 
our  Men.  These  Prisoners  informed  us,  that  this  great 
Road  did  lead  to  a  great  City  called  Oarrha,  from  whence 
many  of  those  Horsemen  before  spoken  of  came :  That 
this  City  was  distant  from  hence  as  far  as  a  Horse  will 
go  in  4  days ;  and  that  there  is  no  place  of  consequence 
nearer :  That  the  Country  is  very  poor,  and  thiiily  in- 
habited. They  said  also,  that  these  Men  came  to  assist  the 
Phillipine  Ship,  that  was  every  day  expected  here,  to  put 
ashore  Passengers  for  Mexico.  The  Spanish  Pilot-Books* 
mention  a  Town  also  called  Sallagua  hereabouts;  but  we 
could  not  find  it,  nor  hear  any  thing  of  it  by  our  Prisoners. 

^  "  The  name  of  one  of  them  was  Thomas  Crawfot "  {Original  MS.). 
'  The  Spanish  Western  Pilot-Books  of  this  date  are  generally  little  more 
than  rough  guides  to  the  coast. 


THE   AUTHOR   TAKEN    SICK 
Wc  now  intended  to  cruise  off  Cape  Corricntes,  to  wait    a* 
§or  the  Phillippinc  Ship.     So  the  6th  day  of  December  we  set  '^^ 
wil,  coKsting  to  the  Westward,  towards  Cape  Corricntes. 
We  had  fair  Weather,  and  but  little  Wind  ;  the  Sea-Breezes 
N.  W.  atKl  the  Land-Wind  at  N.     The  Und  is  of  an 
iDdiffornt    beighth,    full    of  ragged    Points,    which    at    a 
distance  appear  like  Islands :  The  Country  is  very  woody, 
but  the  Trees  arc  not  high,  nor  very  big. 

Here  I  was  taken  sick  of  a  Fever  and  Ague  that  after- 
wards turned  to  a  Dropsie,  which  I  laboured  under  a  long 
after;  and  many  of  our  Men  died  of  this  Distemper, 
our  Surgeons  used  their  greatest  skill  to  preserve 
Lives.  The  Dropsie  is  a  general  distemper  on  this 
snd  the  Natives  say,  that  the  best  remedy  they  can 
for  it,  b  the  Stone  or  Cod  of  an  Allegator  (of  which 
have  4,  one  near  each  Leg,  within  the  Flesh)  pulver- 
and  drunk  in  Water :  This  Receipt  we  also  found 
in  an  Almanack  made  at  Mexico :  I  would 
tried  it,  hut  we  found  no  Allegators  here,  though 
ifcctc  are  KVerat. 

There  are  many  good  Harbours  between  Sallagua  and 
Corrienlcs :  but  we  passed  by  them  all.  As  we  drew 
the  Cape,  the  Land  by  the  Sea  appeared  of  an  indifferent 
:b£h,  full  of  white  Cliffs;  but  in  the  Country  the  Land 
ligh  and  barren,  and  full  of  sharp  peeked  Hills,  un- 
sant  to  the  sight.  To  the  West  of  this  ragged  Land 
Chain  of  Mountains  running  parallel  with  the  Shore  ; 
;iid  on  the  West  with  a  gentle  descent ;  but  on  the 
Ea*t  ride  they  keep  their  heighth,  ending  with  a  high  steep 
Mountain,  which  hath  three  small  sharp  peeked  tops,  somc- 
vfaat  resembling  a  Crown ;  and  therefore  called  by  the 
Sfaaiards,  Coronada,  the  Crown  Land. 

The  I  ith  day  '  we  were  fair  in  sight  of  Cape  Corriemes, 
k  bora  N.  by  W.  and  the  Crown  Land  bore  North.     The 

0«  dv  fcb  day,  aritording  to  the  MS.,  the  biiccancert  killed  "the 
lAtni  wfnch  wa*  taken  ni  Sallagua,"  for   no  app.-ircn' 


ivs   Uampicr;  '"yet   these  blood>'  iniKt 
■  ftuhjr  (elUiwt  arc  cmntinly  but  uidiiuiry  felluws  in  the  face  ofiheir 
Oa  the  ^  (by  "  wee  had  lome  ililIei«no:  wiili  I'ownly  And  his 


? 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER^S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Cape  is  of  an  indifferent  heighth,  with  steep  Rocks  to  the 
'^5  Sea.  It  is  flat  and  even  on  the  top,  cloathed  with  Woods  : 
The  Land  in  the  Country  is  high  and  doubled.  This  Cape 
lieth  in  20  d.  28  m.  North.  I  find  its  longitude  from 
TenarifFto  be  230  d.  56  m.  but  I  keep  my  longitude  West- 
ward, according  to  our  Course;  and  according  to  this 
reckoning,  I  find  it  is  from  the  Lizard  in  England  121  d. 
41  m.  so  that  the  difiFerence  of  time  is  8  hours,  and  almost 
6  minutes. 

Here  we  had  resolved  to  cruize  for  the  Philippine  Ship, 
because  she  always  makes  this  Cape  in  her  Voyage  home- 
ward. We  were  (as  I  have  said)  four  Ships  in  Company ; 
Captain  Swan,  and  his  Tender ;  Captain  Townley,  and  his 
Tender.  It  was  so  ordered,  that  Captain  Swan  should  lye 
8  or  10  leagues  off  shore,  and  the  rest  about  a  league  distant 
each  from  other,  between  him  and  the  Cape,  that  so  we 
might  not  miss  the  Philippine  Ship ;  but  we  wanted  Pro- 
vision, and  therefore  we  sent  Capt.  Townley*s  Bark,  with 
50  or  60  Men  to  the  West  of  the  Cape,  to  search  about 
for  some  Town  or  Plantations,  where  we  might  get  Pro- 
vision of  any  sort.  The  rest  of  us  in  the  mean  time  cruiz- 
ing in  our  Stations.  The  17th  day  the  Bark  came  to  us 
again,  but  had  got  nothing,  for  they  could  not  get  about 
the  Cape,  because  the  Wind  on  this  Coast  is  commonly 
between  the  N.  W.  and  the  S.  W.  which  makes  it  very 
difficult  getting  to  the  Westward  ;  but  they  left  4  Canoas 
with  46  Men  at  the  Cape,  who  resolved  to  row  to  the 
Westward.  The  i8th  day  we  sailed  to  the  Keys  of 
Chametly  to  fill  our  Water.  The  Keys  or  Islands  of 
Chametly  are  about  16  or  18  leagues  to  the  Eastward  of 
Cape  Corrientes.  They  are  small,  low,  and  woody,  in- 
vironed  with  Rocks,  there  are  5  of  them  lying  in  the  form 
of  a  half  Moon,  not  a  mile  from  the  shore,  and  between 
them  and  the  Main  is  very  good  Riding,  secure  from  any  j 
wind.  The  Spaniards  do  report,  that  here  live  Fishermen,  ! 
to  fish  for  the  Inhabitants  of  the  City  of  Purification.  -^ 
This  is  said  to  be  a  large  Town,  the  best  hereabouts;  but 
is  14  leagues  up  in  the  Country. 

The  20th  instant  we  entered  within  these  Islands,  pass- 

272 


VALDERAS,   A   PLEASANT  VALLEY 

i  in  on  the  S.  K.  side,  and  Anchored  hcwmi  Ae 


I  the  Main 


fathom 
Wood, 


dean  Suid.     Hoc  i 


ah  Water  : 
Mook  and  Line,  a  son  of  FdI 
ble  of  John  Fernando,  but  wc  saw  no  sign  of  h^'^^fr'\ 
bciidcs  3  or  4  old  Hutts;  therefore  I  do  be&cvc  Aa  ckc 
Sptmah  or  Indian  Fishermen  come  hither  oolf  at  Lm,  or 
MMBc  Other  such  season,  but  that  they  60  kk  Swe  here 
cooftantly.  Xhe  zist  day  Captain  Ttnmley  wcac  svay, 
nth  about  60  Men,  to  take  an  Indian  Villigc;  7  cr  t 
Icigxies  from  hence  to  the  Westward  more  tovardt  dK 
C^,  and  the  next  day  we  went  to  cruise  otf*  the  Csfc, 
*We  Captain  Tawnlcy  was  tn  meet  ds.  Tlic  14th  day,  af 
«c  were  cruising  off  the  Cape,  the  four  Canoi  hna«- 
Tictitioned,  which  Capuin  Townley's  Bark  left  at  the  Cape. 
iHic  fyfF  to  us.  They,  after  the  Bark  left  them,  faat 
■■>  the  West  of  the  Cape,  and  rowed  into  the  Valley 
'  ilderaa,'  or  perhaps  Val  d'lrts;  for  it  tfgtnfiet  the  Valley 
'  Flags. 

This  Valley  lies  tn  the  bottom  of  a  pretty  deep  Bay, 
■TM  runs  in  between  Cape  Corrtentcs  oa  the  &  E.  and  die 
point  of  Poaiique  on  the  N.  W.  wludi  twopbccs  are  about 
10  l^^es  asunder.  The  Valley  is  ^loat  3  Icngnca  wide ; 
tbcrt  is  a  level  candy  Bay  against  the  Sea,  and  good  smooth 
hading.  In  the  midst  of  the  Bay  is  a  fine  River,  wherc- 
iato  Boats  may  enter;  but  it  is  brackoh  at  the  lancr  end 
of  the  dry  Season,  which  is  in  February,  March,  and  pan 
if  April.  I  shall  speak  more  of  the  Seasons  in  my  Chapter 
rf  Winds,  in  the  Appendix.  This  Valley  is  bounded  witlun 
Ltad,  with  a  small  green  Hill,  that  makes  a  very  gentle 
3K  into  the  Valley,  and  affords  a  very  pleasant  pro- 
k  to  Sea-ward.  It  is  inriched  with  fruitful  Savannahs, 
X  with  Groves  of  Trees  6t  for  any  tiiet,  beside  Fruit- 
Bna  in  abundance,  as  Guava's,  Oranges  and  Limes,  which 
e  mm  wikl  in  such  plenty,  as  if  Nature  had  designed  it 
yfor  a  Garden.  The  Savannahs  are  full  of  fai  Bulls 
i  Cows,  and  some  Horses,  but  no  House  in  sighL 


■  V«ldn»,  > 


Tbe  baj  Uim 


I  Cape  ComenK*  and 


CAPTAIN  DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AN.  When  our  Canoas  came  to  this  pleasant  Valley,  they 

'^5  landed  37  Men,  and  marched  into  the  Country  seeking  for 
some  Houses.     They  had  not  gone  past  3  mile  before  they 
were  attackt  by  150  Spaniards,  Horse  and  Foot:  There 
was  a  small  thin  Wood  close  by  them,  into  which  our  Men 
retreated,  to  secure  themselves  from  the  fury  of  the  Horse : 
Yet  the  Spaniards  rode  in  among  them,  and  attackt  them 
very   furiously,   till  the   Spanish  Captain,   and    17    more, 
tumbled   dead  oflF  their  Horses:  then  the  rest  retreated, 
being  many  of  them  wounded.     We  lost  four  Mcn,^  and 
had  two  desperately  wounded.     In  this  action,  the  Foot, 
who  were  armed  with  Lances  and  Swords,  and  were  the 
greatest  number,  never  made  any  attack;  the  Horsemen 
had  each  a  brace  of  Pistols,  and  some  short  Guns.     If  the 
Foot  had  come  in,  they  had   certainly  destroyed  all  our 
Men.     When  the  Skirmish  was  over,  our  Men  placed  the 
two  wounded  Men  on  Horses,  and  came  to  their  Canoas. 
There  they  kilfd  one  of  the  Horses,  and  dress*d  it,  being 
afraid  to  venture  into  the  Savannah  to  kill  a  Bullock,  df 
which  there  was  store.     When  they  had  eaten,  and  satisfied 
themselves,  they  returned  aboard.     The  25th  day,  being 
Christmas,  we  cruised  in  pretty  near  the  Cape,  and  sent  in 
3  Canoas  with  the  Strikers  to  get  Fish,  being  desirous  to 
have  a  Christmas  Dinner.     In  the  Afternoon  they  returned 
aboard  with  3  great  Jew-fish,  which  feasted  us  all ;  and  the 
next  day  we  sent  ashore  our  Canoas  again,  and  got  3  or  4 
more. 

Captain  Townley,  who  went  from  us  at  Chametly, 
came  aboard  the  28th  day,  and  brought  about  40  bushels 
of  Maiz.  He  had  landed  to  the  Eastward  of  Cape 
Corrientes,  and  march'd  to  an  Indian  Village  that  is  4  or  5 
leagues  in  the  Country.  The  Indians  seeing  him  coming, 
set  two  Houses  on  fire  that  were  full  of  Maiz,  and  run 
away ;  yet  he  and  his  Men  got  in  other  Houses  as  much  as 
they  could  bring  down  on  their  backs,  which  he  brought 
aboard. 

We  cruised  oflF  the  Cape  till  the  first  day  of  January 

*  One  of  them  the  Doctor's  Mate. 

274 


THEIR    DESIGNS  ON  THIS  COAST 

I  then  made  lowinls  the  Valley  Valdcns,  to  himt 
L  and  before  Night  we  Anchored  la  the  bottom  of  ' 
'f  in  60  fatbom  Water  a  mile  ^ai  the  shore.  Here 
^d  hunting  till  the  7th  day,  and  Captain  Swan  and 
Town  Icy  went  ashore  every  morning  with  about 
)  Men,  and  marched  to  a  smaJI  Hill ;  where  they  re- 
maed  with  50  or  60  Men  to  watch  the  Spaniards,  who 
ipeved  in  great  companies  on  other  Hills  not  &r  distant, 
ttdid  never  attempt  any  thtog  against  our  Men.  Here 
e  kilTd  and  salted  above  2  months  Meat,  besides  what  we 
:  fresh  ;  and  might  have  kill'd  as  much  more,  if  we 
I  been  better  stor'd  with  Salt.  Our  hopes  of  meeting 
e  Philippine  ship  were  now  over ;  for  we  did  all  conclude, 
at  whik  we  were  necessitated  to  hunt  here  for  IVoviaofis^ 
E  wa»  past  by  to  the  Eastward,  as  indeed  she  was,  as  wc 
id  understand  afterw.-an.1s  by  Prisoners.  So  this  design 
^^iTd,  through  Captain  Townicy's  eagerness  after  the  Lima 
hip.  which  he  attempted  in  Acapuico  Harbour,  as  1  have 
For  though  wc  took  a  little  Flower  hard  b)-,  yet 
:  Guide  which  told  us  of  that  Ship,  would  have 
Mdactcd  us  where  we  tnight  have  had  store  of  Beef  and 
'  '  :  but  instead  thereof,  we  lost  both  our  time,  and  the 
nunity  of  providing  our  selves  ;  and  so  we  were  forced 
k  be  victualling,  when  wc  should  have  been  cnibing  off 
e  Corrientes,  in  expectation  of  the  Manila  Ship. 
Hitherto  we  had  coasted  along  here  with  2  diflcrent 
designs;  the  one  was  to  get  the  Manila  ^ip,  which  would 
have  inrichcd  us  iKyund  measure  ;  and  this  Captain  Townlcy 
ns  mou  for.  Sir  Tho.  Cavendish  formerly  took  the 
Mutla  Ship'  off  Cape  St.  Lucas  in  California,  (where  wc 
tim  would  have  waited  for  her,  had  we  been  early  enough 
1  with  Provisions,  10  have  met  her  there)  and  threw 
■och  rich  Goods  over-board.  The  other  design,  which 
Ciptain  Swan  and  our  Crew  were  most  for,  was  to  search 

'  t»n  the  i4Jh  of  Noremhw  1587.     Her  lume  was  the  Uratt  .S/.  Amm^ 

■  h^  alMtd  bet  •mne  teo  loiu  of  -ih«  rkhett  mefchandiM*  aad 

I  oT  TftAA.      Uon;  ihui  {00  toot  of  tr>c  salleoo'*  frsktit  waa 

vd  IB  the  harbonr  ot  AgiuuU  Scftura,  where  the  prac  «u 

S«r  Tbomu  aherwanU  Iwnted  ibe  Crt>H  M.  Anma,  aad  va\bA 

rCMfcM,oabu*anc*>HMnetmndtke  Cape  of  Good  Hofw. 

^75 


3 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  along  the  Coast  for  rich  Towns,  and  Mines  chiefly  of  Gold 
^^^  and  Silver,  which  we  were  assured  were  in  this  Country,  and 
we  hoped  near  the  shore :  not  knowing  (as  we  afterwards 
found)  that  it  was  in  effect  an  Inland  Country,  its  Wealth 
remote  from  the  South  Sea  Coast,  and  having  little  or  no 
commerce  with  it,  its  Trade  being  driven  Eastward  with 
Europe  by  La  Vera  Cruz.  Yet  we  had  still  some  expecta- 
tion of  Mines,  and  so  resolved  to  steer  on  farther  North- 
ward ;  but  Captain  Townley,  who  had  no  other  design  in 
coming  on  this  Coast,  but  to  meet  this  Ship,  resolved  to 
return  again  towards  the  Coast  of  Peru. 

In  all  this  Voyage  on  the  Mexican  Coast,  we  had  with 
us  a  Captain,^  and  2  or  3  of  his  Men,  of  our  friendly 
Indians  of  the  Isthmus  of  Darien ;  who  having  conducted 
over  some  parties  of  our  Privateers,  and  expressing  a  desire 
to  go  along  with  us,  were  received,  and  kindly  entertained 
aboard  our  Ships;  and  we  were  pleased  in  having,  by  this 
means,  Guides  ready  provided,  should  we  be  for  returning 
over  Land,  as  several  of  us  thought  to  do,  rather  than  sail 
round  about.  But  at  this  time,  we  of  Captain  Swan's  Ship 
designing  farther  to  the  North  West ;  and  Captain  Townley 
going  back,  we  committed  these  our  Indian  Friends  to  his 
care,  to  carry  them  home.  So  here  we  parted ;  he  to  the 
Eastward,  and  we  to  the  Westward,  intending  to  search  as 
far  to  the  Westward  as  the  Spaniards  were  settled. 

It  was  the  7th  day  of  January  in  the  morning  when  we 
sailed  from  this  pleasant  Valley.  The  Wind  was  at  N.  E. 
and  the  weather  fair.  At  1 1  a  Clock  the  Sea-Wind  came 
at  N.  W.  Before  night  we  passed  by  Point  Pontiquc*; 
this  is  the  West  point  of  the  Bay  of  the  Valley  of  Valderas, 
and  is  distant  from  Cape  Corrientes  10  leagues.  This  point 
is  in  lat.  20  d.  50  m.  North ;  it  is  high,  round,  rocky  and 

*  Three  Indian  chiefs  are  mentioned  by  name  as  the  allies  of  the 
Buccaneers.  A'/V/j^  Golden  Cafi^  who  was  probably  too  old  and  too  great 
a  king  to  come  upon  so  long  a  cruise  ;  Don  Andreas^  and  Don  Antonio,  AH. 
three  kings  crossed  the  Isthmus  with  Sawkins  in  1680.  There  were  also 
the  son  and  the  nephew  of  King  Golden  Cap,  who  stayed  with  the  colours, 
*'  to  harry  the  Spaniards,"  after  King  Golden  Cap  had  returned  home  with 
Coxon.     The  Indian  captain  mentioned  here  was  a  Captain  Lewis. 

*  "Point  Pontique,"  apparently  Mita  Point.     A  village  "Pontoquc"  is 
mentioned  hereabouts  in  old  Spanish  maps. 

276 


■         OTHER   ISLES   OF   CHAMETLY 

^■rren.  At  a  dtsluicc  it  appears  like  an  Island.  A  league  a 
to  the  West  of  this  point  are  two  small  barren  Islands,'  ■' 
called  the  Islands  of  Pontique.  There  are  several  high, 
tharp,  white  Rocks,  ihac  lie  scattering  about  them :  We 
passd  between  these  rocky  Islands  on  the  left,  and  the 
Maui  On  the  right,  for  there  is  no  danger.  The  Sea-Coast 
beyond  this  point  runs  Northward  for  about  i8  leagues, 
nuking  many  ragged  points,  with  small  sandy  Bays  between 
them.  The  Land  by  the  Sea-side  is  low  and  pretty  woody  ; 
but  in  the  Country,  full  of  high,  sharp,  barren,  rugged, 
unpleasant  Hills. 

■|hc  14th  day  wc  had  sight  of  a  small  white  Rock,* 
which  appears  very  much  like  a  ship  under  sail.  This  Rock 
is  in  lat.  2i  d.  15  m.  it  is  3  leagues  from  the  Main.  There 
b  a  good  Channel  between  it  and  the  Main,  where  you  will 
hive  12  or  14  fathom  Water  near  the  Island  ;  but  running 
ncairr  the  Main,  you  will  have  gradual  soundings,  till  you 
cinae  in  with  the  shore.  At  night  we  Anchored  in  6  fathom 
W«cr,  near  a  league  from  the  Main,  in  good  oazy  ground. 
Wc  caught  a  great  many  Cat-iish  here,  and  ai  several  places 
u)  this  Cout,  both  before  and  after  this. 

From  this  Itland  the  Land  runs  more  Northerly,  mak- 
ing a  fair  sandy  Bay ;  but  the  Sea  falls  in  with  such  vio- 
icacc  on  the  shore,  that  there  is  no  landing,  but  very  good 
.Anchoring  on  all  the  Coast,  and  gradual  Soundings.  About 
a  Lc^ue  off  shore,  you  will  have  6  fathom,  and  4  mile  off 
there  you  will  have  7  fathom  Water.  Wc  came  to  an 
.\nchor  every  evening ;  and  in  the  mornings  we  sailed  off 
with  the  Land-wind,  which  we  found  at  N.  E.  and  the  Sca- 
iwtc2£»  at  N.  W. 

The  20th  day  we  Anchored  about  3  miles  on  the  East 
ade  0^  the  Islands  Chametly,'  different  from  those  nf  that 
before -mentioned ;  for  these  arc  6  small  Islands,  in 
23  d.   11   m.  a  little  to  the  South  of  the  Troplck  of 
notr,  and  about  3  leagues  from  the  Main,  where  a  Salt 
;  hacfa  ill  out-let  into  the  Sea.     These  Isles  are  of  an 
nt  bcigbth :  Some  of   them  have   a    few    shrubby 


Tte  HariMB  Iihadt. 


'  Perhaps  Isabel  Island. 


CAPTAIN  DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AN.  bushes ;  the  rest  are  bare  of  any  sort  of  Wood.    They  are 

'^^  rocky  round  by  the  Sea ;  only  one  or  two  of  them  have 

sandy  Bays  on  the  North  side.    There  is  a  sort  of  Fruit 

growing  on  these  Islands  called  Penguins ;  ^  and  'tis  all  the 

fruit  they  have. 

The  Penguin  Fruit  is  of  two  sorts,  the  yellow  and  the 
red.  The  yellow  Penguin  grows  on  a  green  stem,  as  big 
as  a  Mans  Arm,  above  a  foot  high  from  the  ground :  The 
leaves  of  this  stalk  are  half  a  foot  long,  and  an  inch  broad ; 
the  edges  full  of  sharp  prickles.  The  Fruit  grows  at  the 
head  of  the  stalk,  in  2  or  3  great  clusters,  16  or  20  in  a^ 
cluster.  The  Fruit  is  as  big  as  a  Pullets  Egg,  of  a  round  i 
form,  and  in  colour  yellow.  It  has  a  thick  skin  or  lind^ r 
and  the  inside  is  full  of  small  black  seeds,  mixt  among  the' 
Fruit.  It  is  a  sharp  pleasant  Fruit.  The  red  Penram  nr;] 
of  the  bigness  and  colour  of  a  small  dry  Onion,  and  is  H 
shape  much  like  a  Nine-pin ;  for  it  grows  not  on  a  stiHl^ 
or  stem,  as  the  other,  but  one  end  on  the  ground,  the  othef^ 
standing  upright.  Sixty  or  seventy  grow  thus  together  at 
close  as  they  can  stand  one  by  another,  and  all  nt>m  the 
same  Root,  or  cluster  of  Roots.  These  Penguins  are  en* 
compassM  or  fenced  with  long  leaves,  about  a  foot  and  a 
half,  or  two  foot  long,  and  prickly  like  the  former;  and 
the  Fruit  too  is  much  alike.  They  are  both  wholsomc^ 
and  never  offend  the  stomach ;  but  those  that  eat  maofi 
will  find  a  heat  or  tickling  in  their  Fundament.  They 
grow  so  plentifully  in  the  Bay  of  Gimpeachy,  that  there  il: 
no  passing  for  their  high  prickly  leaves. 

There  are  some  Guanoes  on  these  Islands,  but  no  odier 
sort  of  Land  Animal.  The  Bays  about  the  Islands  are  somB--] 
times  visited  with  Seal ;  and  this  was  the  first  place  wheie.j 
I  had  seen  any  of  these  Animals,  on  the  North  side  of  thi^ 
Equator,  in  these  Seas.  For  the  Fish  on  this  sandy  Coast  fie 
most  in  the  Lagunes  or  Salt-lakes,  and  Mouths  of  Rivets; 
but  the  Seals  come  not  so  much  there,  as  I  judge :  For  thil 
being  no  rocky  Coast,  where  Fish  resort  most,  there  seeni 
to  be  but  little  Food  for  the  Seals,  unless  they  will  vcntwt 
upon  Cat-fish. 

'  Or  pinguin,  the  wild  Anana. 
278 


PEARL-FISHERY   AT  CALIFORNIA 

Ctptaio  S^ran  ircnt  swiy  fmn  bence  vss  too  M^  a 

Cinaas,    to    the    Narthwxrd,   to  aecfc  tar  Ac  Ei^ 

ecao,'   poaubly   the  aauoe  wkk   Ac  B&mct  td  ff^sfa^ 

idi  aotoe  Maps  lay  dovo  ki  the  ftsirMCe  or  U^tm.  tf 

Ihcia.     Tbb    River  hah  in  dnA  14  d.  ?C.  faL     Ve 

Kinformed.  that  tbcfc  is  1  (arn^SpimATmmm 

At  Est  »dc  of  it,  with  &viaaah>  ■!»■*  k,  fid  flf 

'  CcHn  ;  and  that  the  InhiKnaw  of  tks  Tosa  fsa 

baa  to  the  tstand  Ci£lbnm,  vkoc  tkcf  fiA  ^  1 

■K  bEcn  told  nncc  hf  a  Spatmid  tfac  ad  hr  fad 

'  e  bland  Califomia,  dm  thae  se  ^tm  fin 

en  there,  and  tbat  the  SmJtk  laifiM  mf 

the  Pcarl-fisbeiy,  an  mort^ 

r  C^ttOBs  were  afatenc  3  or  4  dsf^  aad  ■■!  Atj 

ktbore  30  Icagoes  but  foDBd  so  finer;  ihai 

iheSeawas  low.  lod  all  aadf  Bn ;  hm^Ai 

B  there  was  no  harling.     llMf  aa  as  a  d 

the  tat.  13  d.  30  m.  amam^  afaog  A«c  i 

nrds  Culbcin  ;  to  wc  lUuiaui  apaa  tm  ik 

'»  «u  the  fu^hest  ihu  I  v»  to  the  K.  ^  4a 

Sa  or  7  leagues  N.  N.  W.  fnia  ihc  l^»  ^ 

IS  is  t  small  narrow  unrmtH  ma  a  Life^  a 

im  11  LagiKs  EasttHf.  pvaOcl  «iA  Ae 

Mr  »aU   low  MMgrave  bfanda.    ~ 

fce  is  in   lat.  aboot  >}  d.  30  a.     fc  is  oA^  hf 

laiwds  Rio  de  &1 : '  for  it  ■  a  S*  IjAb.     T^ 

''tar  enough  foe  Boats  «ni  Caaoa  tn  cnMK,  ^ri  lai 

lAag  alter  yoa  are  in     On  the  wcK  aie  «f  i^  ^a 

t  Hoose,  and  so  EsftntJon,  or  fatm  at  Imk  ~ 

md  bdcd.  m/c 


went  into  the  Lake  1 

e.  fouad  7  or  I  Bushels  «^  >Ui : 

•  *nj  by  tht  Sfmaands,  ja.  ihoK  mr  Mtm  wait 
^■o-  of  the  Esraitnna,  and  kvagkc  !■■  aiaai^  ^ 
id.  that   the   Beefs  were  diim   a  pai  ^  ■»  < 


M^tamt  SOT*]!' W     ^-— ^  --   "■   ^  -  , 


J 


CAPTAIN  DAMPIER^S  VOYAGES 

AN.    Country,  for  fear  we  should  kill  them.     While  we  lay 
i^^    here,  Captain  Swan  went  into  tlus  Lake  agiun^  and  landed 
1 50  Men  on  the  N.  E.  side,  and  marched  into  the  Country ! 
About  a  mile  from  the  landing-place,  as  they  were  entring 
a  dry  Salina,  or  Salt-pond,  they  fired  at  two  Indians  that  ^ 
cross'd  the  way  before  them ;  one  of  them  being  wounded   . 
in  the  Thigh,  fell  down,  and  being  examined,  he  tdd  our  ^ 
Men,  that  there  was  an  Indian  Town  4  or  5  leagues  off,  and  ] 
that  the  way  which  they  were  gcnng  would  bring  thott/ 
thither.     While  they  were  in  Discourse  with  the  Indiia' 
they  were  attacked  by  100  Spanish  Horsemen,  who  cuk' 
with  a  design  to  scare  them  back,  but  wanted  both  Amt; 
and  Hearts  to  do  it. 

Our  Men  past  on  from  hence,  and  in  their  way  marchfld: 
through  a  Savannah  of  long  dry  Grass.    This  the  Spaniafdl: 
set  on  fire,  thinking  to  burn  them,  but  that  did  not 
our  Men  from  marching  forward,  though  it  did 
them  a  little.     They  rambled  for  want  of  Guides  all 
day,  and  part  of  the  next,  before  they  came  to  the  T 
the  Indian  spoke   of.     There   they  found  a  company 
Spaniards  and  Indians,  who  made  head  against  them, 
were  driven   out  of  the   Town   after    a  short    IXsputfc 
Here  our  Surgeon  and  one  man  more  were  wounded  tritfc 
Arrows,  but  none  of  the  rest  were  hurt.     When  they  came 
into  the  Town  they  found  two  or  three  Indians  wounded^ 
who  told  them  that  the  Name  of  the  Town  was  Massadta; 
that  there  were  a  few  Spaniards  living  in  it,  and  the  fot: 
were  Indians ;  that  5  leagues  from  this  Town  there  iroe; 
two  rich  Gold  mines,  where  the  Spaniards  of  Compostallii' 
which  is  the  chiefest  Town  in  these  parts,  kept  many  Shftt 
and  Indians  at  Work  for  Gold.     Here  our  Men  laythiC 
night,  and  the  next  morning  packt  up  all  the  Muz  thit 
they  could  find,  and  brought  it  on  their  backs  to  the  C$aa» 
and  came  aboard. 

We  lay  here  till  the  2d  of  February,  and  then  CtpttfR 
Swan  went  away  with  about  80  Men  to  the  River  Rosario;* 

1  Compostela,  in  the  province  of  Tepic,  some  180  miles  to  the  SSK.rf"^ 
Mazatlan. 

*  At  Chametia,  Rosario  stands  in  a  fair  valley  some  miles  from  tfae  Ml* 

280 


RIVER   AND  TOWN   OF  ROSARIO 

irhere  they  landed,  and  marched  to  an  Indian  Town  of  the 
ame  Name.  They  found  it  about  9  mile  from  the  Sea;  ' 
the  way  to  it  fair  and  even.  This  was  a  fine  little  Town, 
of  about  60  or  70  Houses,  with  a  fair  Church  ;  and  it  was 
icfly  inhabited  with  Indians,  they  took  Prisoners  there, 
which  told  them.  That  the  Kiver  Rosario  is  rich  in  Gold, 
ind  that  the  Mines  arc  not  above  2  leagues  from  the  Town. 

aptain  Swan  did  not  think  it  convenient  to  go  to  the 
twines,  but  made  haste  aboard  with  the  Maiz  which  he  took 
here,  to  the  quantity  of  about  80  or  90  Bushels  ;  and  which 

>  us,  in  the  scarcity  we  were  in  of  Provisions,  was  at  that 
ime  more  valuable  than  all  the  Gold  in  the  World  ;  and 
lad  he  gone  to  the  Mines,  the  Spaniards  would  probably 
avc  destroyed  ihe  Corn  'before  his  return.  The  3d  of 
•ebruary,  we  went  with  our  Ships  also  towards  the  River 
losario,  and  Anchored  the  next  day  against  the  Rivers 
nouth,  7  fathom,  good  oazy  ground,  a  league  from  the 
bore.  This  River  is  in  lat.  22  d.  51  m.  N.  When  you 
irc  at  an  Anchor  against  this  River,  you  will  sec  a  round 
"  ,  like  a  Sugar-loaf,  a  little  way  within  Land,  right  over 
he  River,  and  bearing  N.  E.  by  N.  To  the  Westward  of 
hat  Hill  there  is  another  pretty  long  Hill,  called  by  the 
■paniards  Caput  Cavalli,  or  the  Horse's  head. 

The  7th  day  Captain  Swan  came  aboard  with  the  Maiz 
vhich  he  got.  This  was  but  a  small  quantity  for  so  many 
Wen  as  we  were,  especially  considering  the  place  we  were 
ti,  being  strangers,  and  having  no  Pilots  to  direct  or  guide  us 
nto  any  River ;  and  we  being  without  all  son  of  Provision, 
lUt  what  we  were  forced  to  get  in  this  manner  from 
shore.  And  though  our  Pilot-Book  directed  us  well 
nough  to  find  the  Rivers,  yet  for  want  of  Guides  to  carry 
IS  to  the  Settlements,  we  were  forced  to  search  2  or  3  days 
lefore  we  could  find  a  place  to  land  :  for,  as  I  said  before, 

sides  the  Seas  being  too  rough  for  landing  in  many  places, 
hey  have  neither  Boat,  Bark,  nor  Canoa,  that  we  could 

fcT   see  or   hear  of:   and   therefore  as  there  are  no  such 

iiding   places  in  these  Rivers,  as  there  are  in  the  North 
,  so  when  we  were  landed,  we  did  not  know  which 
ray  to  go  to  any  Town,  except  we  accidentally  met  with  a 
281 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   path.     Indeed,  the  Spaniards  and  Indians,  whom  we  had 
>^6  aboard,  knew  the  Names  of  several  Rivers  and  Towns  near 
them,  and  knew  the  Towns  when  they  saw  them ;  but  they 
knew  not  the  way  to  go  to  them  from  the  Sea. 

The  8th  day.  Captain  Swan  sent  about  40  Men  to  seek 
for  the  River  Oleta,  which  is  to  the  Eastward  of  the  River 
Rosario.  The  next  day  we  followed  after  with  the  Ships, 
having  the  Wind  at  W.  N.  W.  and  fair  weather.  In  the 
Afternoon  our  Canoas  came  again  to  us,  for  they  could  not 
find  the  River  Oleta ;  ^  therefore  we  designed  next  for  the 
River  St.  Jago  ^  to  the  Eastward  still.  The  1 1  th  day  in 
the  evening,  we  Anchored  against  the  mouth  of  the  River, 
in  7  fathom  Water,  good  soft  oazy  ground,  and  about  two 
mile  from  the  shore.  There  was  a  high  white  Rock  with- 
out us,  called  Maxentelbo.  This  Rock  at  a  distance, 
appears  like  a  Ship  under  sail ;  it  bore  from  us  W.  N.  W. 
distant  about  3  leagues.  The  Hill  2^1isco  bore  S.  E. 
which  is  a  very  high  Hill  in  the  Country,  with  a  Saddle 
or  bending  on  the  top.  The  River  St.  Jago  is  in  lat.  22  d. 
15  m.  It  is  one  of  the  principal  Rivers  on  this  Coast; 
there  is  10  foot  Water  on  the  Bar  at  low  Water,  but  how 
much  it  flows  here  I  know  not.  The  mouth  of  this  River 
is  near  half  a  mile  broad,  and  very  smooth  entring. 
Within  the  mouth  it  is  broader,  for  there  are  three  or  four 
Rivers  more  meet  there,  and  issue  all  out  together,  is  fresh 
Water,  is  brackish  a  great  way  up ;  yet  there,  the  Water 
to  be  had,  by  digging  or  making  Wells  in  the  sandy  Bay, 
two  or  three  foot  deep,  just  at  the  mouth  of  the  River. 

The  nth  day  Captain  Swan  sent  70  Men  in  four 
Canoas  into  this  River,  to  seek  a  Town ;  for  although  we 
had  no  intelligence  of  any,  yet  the  Country  appearing  very 
promising,  we  did  not  question  but  they  would  find  Inhabi- 
tants before  they  returned.  They  spent  two  days  in  rowing 
up  and  down  the  Creeks  and  Rivers ;  at  last  they  came  to  a 
large  Field  of  Maiz,  which  was  almost  ripe :  they  immedi- 
ately fell  to  gathering  as  fast  as  they  could,  and  intended 
to  lade  the  Canoas  ;  but  seeing  an  Indian  that  was  set  to 

*  Rio  Canas,  or  Rio  San  Pedro  (?). 
2  The  Rio  Grande  de  Santiago. 

282 


\ 


SANTA   PECAQUE 

vuch  the  Com,  they  quitted  that  troublesome  and  tedious 
work,  and  sctz'd  him,  and  brought  him  aboard,  in  hopes  by   "^^^ 
his  information,  to  have  some  more  easic  and  expedite  way 
of  3  supply,  by  6nding  Corn  ready  cut  and  dried.     He     ^h 
beii^  examined,  said,  ihat  there  was  a  Town  called  Santa    ^M 
Pecaque,  four  leagues  from  the  place  where  he  was  taken ;    ^H 
aad  di«t  if  we  designed  to  go  thither,  he  would  undertake     ^* 
to  be  our  Guide.     Captain  Swan  immediately  ordered  his 
Men  to  nuke  ready,  and  the  same  evening  went  away  with 
8  Cinoas  and  140  Men,  taking  the  Indian  for  their  Guide. 
He  rowed  about  five  leagues  up  the  River,  and  landed 
the  next  rooming.     The  River  at  this  place  was  not  above 
Fbcal-«bot  wide,  and  the  Banks  pretty  high  on  each  side,    ^m 
mad  the  Land  plain  and  even.     He  left  23  Men  to  guard    ^M 
the  Caaoas,  and  marcht  with  the  rest  to  the  Town.     He    ^M 

out  from  the  CanfJas  at  6  a  clock  in  the  morning,  and 
veach'd  the  Town  by  10.  The  way  through  which  he 
faaed  was  very  plain,  pan  of  it  Wood-land,  part  Savannahs. 
The  Savannahs  were  full  of  Horses,  Bulls  and  Cows.  The 
Spaatards  seeing  him  coming  run  all  away ;  so  he  entered  ' 
the  Town  without  the  least  opposition. 

This  Town  of  Santa  Pecaque  stands  on  a  Plain,  in  a 
Savannth,  by  the  side  of  a  Wood,  with  many  Fruit  Trees 
ahoat  h.  It  is  but  a  small  Town,  but  very  regular,  after 
the  Spanish  mode,  with  a  Parade  in  the  midst.  The 
Houses  fronting  the  Parable  had  all  Balconies:  there  were 
a  Churches;  ime  against  the  Parade,  the  other  at  the  end 
of  (he  Town.  It  is  inhabited  most  with  Spaniards.  Their 
chiefcst  occupation  is  Husbandry.  There  are  also  some 
earners,  who  arc  imploycd  by  the  Merchants  of  Compos- 
tclla,  to  Trade  for  them  to  and  from  the  Mines. 

Compoatella  is  a  rich  Town,  about  21  leagues  from 
oe.  It  is  the  chicfcst  in  all  this  part  of  the  Kingdom, 
aad  is  reported  to  have  70  white  Kamilics;  which  is  a 
pcai  matter  in  these  parts;  for  it  may  be,  that  such  a 
Town  hath  not  less  than  500  Families  of  copper-coloured 
Peopk,  bendes  the  white.  The  Silver  Mines  are  about  5 
or  6  !«•■£'■«  from  Santa  Pecaque ;  where,  as  we  were  lold. 
Inhabitants  of  Compostella  had  some  hundreds  of  SUvi 
283  — 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER^S   VOYAGES 

AN.  at  Work.  The  Silver  here,  and  all  over  the  Kingdom  of 
1686  Mexico,  is  said  to  be  finer  and  richer  in  proportion  than 
that  of  Potosi  or  Peru,  tho'  the  Oar  be  not  so  abundant ; 
and  the  Carriers  of  this  Town  of  Santa  Pecaque,  carry  the 
Oar  to  Compostella,  where  it  is  refined.  These  Carriers, 
or  Sutlers,  also  furnish  the  Slaves  at  the  Mines  with  Maiz, 
whereof  here  was  great  plenty  now  in  the  Town  designed 
for  that  use :  Here  was  also  Sugar,  Salt,  and  Salt-fish. 

Captain  Swan's  only  business  at  Santa  Pecaque  was  to 
get   Provision;  therefore  he   ordered   his  Men   to   divide 
themselves  into  two  parts,  and  by  turns  carry  down  the 
Provision  to  the  Canoas ;  one  half  remaining  in  the  Town 
to  secure  what  they  had  taken,  while  the  other  half  were 
going  and  coming.     In  the  Afternoon  they  caught  some 
Horses,  and  the  next  morning,  being  the  17th  day,  57 
Men,  and  some   Horses,  went   laden  with  Maiz   to   the 
Canoas.     They  found  them,  and  the  Men  left  to  guard 
them,  in  good  order ;  though  the  Spaniards  had  given  them 
a  small  diversion,  and  wounded  one  Man  :  but  our  Men  of 
the  Canoas  landed,  and  drove  them  away.    These  that  came 
loaded  to  the  Canoas  left  7  Men  more  there,  so  that  now 
they  were  30  Men  to  guard  the  Canoas.     At  night  the 
other  returned;  and  the    i8th  day  in  the  morning,  that 
half  which  staid  the  day  before  at  the  Town,  took  their 
turn  of  going  with  every  Man  his  burthen,  and  24  Horses 
laden.     Before  they  returned,  Captain  Swan,  and  his  other 
Men  at  the  Town,  caught  a  Prisoner,  who  said,  that  there 
were  near  a  thousand  Men  of  all  colours,  Spaniards  and 
Indians,  Negroes  and  Mulatto's,  in  arms,  at  a  place  called 
St.  Jago,^  but  3  leagues  oflT,  the  chief  Town  on  this  River ; 
that  the  Spaniards  were  armed  with  Guns  and  Pistols,  and 
the    copper-coloured  with   Swords   and    Lances.     Captain 
Swan,  fearing  the  ill  consequence "  of  separating  his  small 
company,  was  resolved  the  next  day  to  march  away  with 

^  Santiago,  a  little  further  up  the  river. 

2  Original  MS.  "Captain  Swan  had  been  warned  by  his  Astrologer  of 
the  great  danger  they  were  in,  whose  advice  Captain  Swan  allway  took.  .  .  . 
Besides  .  .  .  many  foreboded  their  misfortune  and  .  .  .  heard  as  they  lay 
downe  in  the  Church  in  the  night,  grievous  grownings  which  hindered  them 
from  sleeping." 

284 


FIFTY  OF  THEIR  MEX 

tbc  whole  Party;  tad  tfaoAve  he  • 
cstch  IS  auoy  Hoses  »  they  cadi.  ilK  ifccf  ■ 
the  more  Prorisoo  wA  tb^.  AcBatAfjIy^th 
bong  the  19th  diy  of  FiAiif  iCM.  G^ 
oiled  out  hb  Men  bftimrt  co  he  goae;  hit  ifcev-  * 
to  go,  and  said,  that  thcj  wtnU  aoc  ksvc  the  Toi 
all  thie  Provisoti  wn  ia  tk  Cbmbs:  TWhJijh.  kc  mm 
forced  to  yield  to  them,  and  wSettd  ha}£  tke  ooafHuy  to 
go  as  before:  TbcT  had  aov  J4.  H<ras  ladm,  «!■(& 
Captmin  Siran  orderad  to  be  taed  tae  to  a— An,  aad  ike 
Men  to  go  in  two  bodies,  25  facfcrc^  aad  a  ■^■7 
briiind;  but  the  Men  would  go  ax  their  amm  ntc,  cmy 
Man  leading  hii  Hone.  The  SpMMcA  olaerftj  thdr 
ounncr  of  oHtrcfaii^,  and  laid  an  AwttJi  aboat  a  ndc  horn 
the  Town,  which  they  managed  with  soch  ^ocoei,  that 
falling  on  our  body  of  Men,  who  were  guardii^  the  Coni 
to  the  CanGos,  they  killed  them  every  ODe.  Capmn  Swan 
hearing  the  icport  of  tbeir  Guns,  ordcTed  ias  Men,  who 
were  then  in  the  Town  with  him,  to  march  oat  to  tbetr 
aasmancc;  but  some  opposed  him,  despni^  their  Enemies; 
till  two  t£  the  Spaniards  Horses  that  had  lost  their  Riden, 
came  nllopping  into  the  Town  in  a  great  fright,  both 
bridled  and  nddlcd,  with  each  a  pair  of  Holsters  by  their 
sdes,  and  one  had  a  Carabine  newly  discharged  ;  which  was 
an  apparent  token  that  our  Men  had  been  engaged,  and 
that  by  Men  better  armed  than  they  imagined  they  should 
Bkcct  with.  Therefore  Captain  Swan  immediately  march'd 
out  of  the  Town,  and  his  Men  all  followed  him ;  and 
when  he  came  to  the  place  where  the  Engagement  had 
been,  he  saw  all  his  Men  that  went  out  in  the  morning 
lying  dead.  They  were  stripi,  and  90  cut  and  mangl'd, 
that  he  scarce  knew  one  Man.  Captain  Swan  had  not  more 
Men  then  with  him,  than  those  were  who  lay  dead  before 
him,  yet  the  Spaniards  never  came  to  oppose  him,  but  ke[ 
u  a  great  distance;  for  'tis  probable,  the  Spaniards  had  nol 
cut  off  to  many  Men  of  ours,  but  with  the  loss  of  a  g 
oany  of  their  own.  So  he  marched  down  to  the  Canoi 
and  came  aSrnrd  the  Ship  with  the  Maiz  that  was  alrcadj| 
ii  the  Canoas.     We  had  about  50  Men  killed,  and  amoi 

185 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  the  rest,  my  Ingenious  Friend  Mr.  Ringrose  was  one,  who 
1686  wrote  that  Part  of  the  "  History  of  the  Buccaneers,"  which 
relates  to  Captain  Sharp.  He  was  at  this  time  Cape- 
Merchant,  or  Super-Cargo  of  Captain  Swan's  Ship.  He 
had  no  mind  to  this  Voyage ;  but  was  necessitated  to 
engage  in  it  or  starve.^ 

This  loss  discouraged  us  from  attempting  any  thing 
more  hereabouts.  Therefore  Captain  Swan  proposed  to  go 
to  Cape  St.  Lucas  on  California  to  careen.  He  had  two 
reasons  for  this :  First,  that  he  thought  he  could  lie  there 
secure  from  the  Spaniards,  and  next,  that  if  he  could  get  a 
Commerce  with  the  Indians  there,  he  might  make  a  dis- 
covery in  the  Lake  *  of  California,  and  by  their  Assistance 
try  for  some  of  the  Plate  of  New  Mexico. 

This  Lake  of  California  (for  so  the  Sea,  Channel  or 
Streight,  between  that  and  the  Continent,  is  called)  is  but 
little  known  to  the  Spaniards,  by  what  I  could  ever  learn ; 
for  their  Drafts  do  not  agree  about  it.  Some  of  them  do 
make  California  an  Island,  but  give  no  manner  of  account 
of  the  Tides  flowing  in  the  Lake,  or  what  depth  of  Water 
there  is,  or  of  the  Harbours,  Rivers,  or  Creeks,  that  border 
on  it :  Whereas  on  the  West  side  of  the  Island,  towards  the 
Asiatick  Coast,  their  Pilot-Book  gives  an  account  of  the 
Coast  from  Cape  St.  Lucas  to  40  d.  North.  Some  of  their 
Drafts  newly  made  do  make  California  to  join  to  the  Main. 
I  do  believe  that  the  Spaniards  do  not  care  to  have  this 
Lake  discovered,  for  fear  lest  other  European  Nations 
should  get  knowledge  of  it,  and  by  that  means  visit  the 
Mines  of  New  Mexico.  We  heard  that  not  long  before  our 
arrival  here,  the  Indians  in  the  Province  of  New  Mexico 
made  an  Insurrection,  and  destroyed  most  of  the  Spaniards 
there,  but  that  some  of  them  flying  towards  the  Gulf  or 
Lake  of  California,  made  Canoas  in  that  Lake,  and  got  safe 
away ;  though  the  Indians  of  the  Lake  of  California,  seem 
to  be  at  perfect  Enmity  with  the  Spaniards.     We  had  an 

'  He  engaged  himself  in  London  after  his  return  to  England  in  March, 
1682.  Some  account  of  his  life  will  be  found  in  the  appendix.  It  would 
seem  that  he  was  one  of  those  who  urged  the  merchants  to  equip  the  Cygnet, 

^'  The  (iulf. 

286 


I 


KINGDOM    OF   NEW   MEXICO 


inielligcnt  Spaniard  now  aboard,  who  said  that  he  spoke    an. 
with  a  Frier  that  made  his  Escape  among  them.  '*** 

New  Mexico,  by  report  of  several  English  Prisoners 
there,  and  Spaniards  I  have  met  with,  iieth  N.  W.  from 
OW  Mexico  between  4  and  500  leagues,  and  the  biggest 
p«rt  of  the  Treasure  which  is  found  in  this  Kingdom,  is 
in  that  IVovincc;  but  without  doubt  there  are  plenty  of 
Mines  in  other  parts,  as  well  in  this  part  of  the  Kingdom 
where  we  now  were,  as  in  other  places;  and  probably,  on 
the  Main,  bordering  on  the  Lake  of  California ;  although 
not  yet  diKOvercd  by  the  Spaniards,  who  have  Mines 
enough,  and  therefore,  as  yet,  have  no  reason  to  discover 
more. 

la  my  opinion,  here  might  be  very  advantageous  Dis- 
coveries made  by  any  that  would  attempt  it :  for  the 
SpuuanU  have  more  than  they  can  well  manage.  1  know 
yet,  they  would  lie  like  the  Dog  in  the  Manger;  altho' 
not  able  to  eat  themselves,  yet  they  would  endeavour  to 
hinckr  others.  But  the  Voyage  thither  being  so  far,  I  take 
tlist  to  be  one  reason  that  hath  hindered  the  Discoveries  of 
ibde  puts:  yet  it  is  possible,  that  a  Man  may  find  a  nearer 
way  hither  than  we  came  ;  I  mean  by  the  North  West. 

I  know  there  have  been  divers  attempts  made  abitut 
a  North  West  Passage,  and  all  unsuccessful:  yet  I  am 
of  opinion,  that  such  a  Passage  may  be  found.  All  our 
Countrymen  that  have  gone  to  discover  the  N.  W.  Passage, 
lure  endeavoured  to  pass  to  the  Westward,  beginning  their 
^rarrh  along  Davis's  or  Hudson's  Bay.  But  if  I  was  to  go 
,  this  Dwcovery,  1  would  go  first  into  the  South  Seas, 
rnd  my  course  from  thence  along  by  California,  and  that 
-riy  seek  a  Passage  back  into  the  West  Seas.  For  as  others 
feave  ipent  the  Summer,  in  first  searching  on  this  more 
known  side  nearer  home,  and  so  before  they  gnt  through, 
Tie  time  of  the  year  obliged  them  tn  give  over  their  search, 
--d  provide  for  a  long  Course  back  again,  for  fear  of  being 
eft  in  the  Winter ;  on  the  contrary,  1  would  search  first 
^*i  the  leas  known  Coast  of  the  South  Sea-side,  and  then 
■•  the  Year  peist  away,  I  should  need  no  retreat,  for  I 
thould  cotne  farther  into  my  knowledge,  if  1  succeeded  in 

187 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    my  attempt,  and  should  be  without  that  dread  and  fear 

1686  which  the  others  must  have  in  passing  from  the  known  to 

the  unknown :    who,  for  ought  I  know,  gave  over  their 

search  just  as  they  were  on  the  point  of  accomplishing 

their  desires. 

I  would  take  the  same  method  if  I  was  to  go  to  dis- 
cover the  North  East  Passage.  I  would  winter  about 
Japan,  Corea,  or  the  North  East  part  of  China ;  and  taking 
the  Spring  and  Summer  before  me,  I  would  make  my  first 
trial  on  the  Coast  of  Tartary,  wherein,  if  I  succeeded,  I 
should  come  into  some  known  Parts,  and  have  a  great  deal 
of  time  before  me  to  reach  Archangel  or  some  other  Port. 
Captain  Wood,  indeed,  says,  this  N.  East  Passage  is  not  to 
be  found  for  Ice  :  but  how  often  do  we  see  that  sometimes 
designs  have  been  given  over  as  impossible,  and  at  another 
time,  and  by  other  ways,  those  very  things  have  been 
accomplished.     But  enough  of  this. 

The  next  day  after  that  fatal  Skirmish  near  Santa 
Pecaque,  Capt.  Swan  ordered  all  our  Water  to  be  filled, 
and  to  get  ready  to  sail.  The  21st  day  we  sailed  from 
hence,  directing  our  Course  towards  California :  we  had 
the  wind  at  N.  W.  and  W.  N.  W .  a  small  gale,  with  a 
great  Sea  out  of  the  West.  We  past  by  3  Islands  called 
the  Maria's.^  After  we  past  these  Islands  we  had  much 
wind  at  N.  N.  W.  and  N.  W.  and  at  N.  with  thick  rainy 
weather.  We  beat  till  the  6th  day  of  February,  but  it  was 
against  a  brisk  wind,  and  proved  labour  in  vain.  For  we 
were  now  within  reach  of  the  Land  Trade-wind,  which  was 
opposite  to  us :  but  would  we  go  to  California  upon  the 
discovery  or  otherwise,  we  should  bear  60  or  70  leagues  off 
from  the  shore;  where  we  should  avoid  the  Land-winds, 
and  have  the  benefit  of  the  true  Easterly  Trade-wind. 

Finding  therefore  that  we  got  nothing,  but  rather  lost 
ground,  being  then  21  d.  5  m.  N.  we  steered  away  more  to 
the  Eastward  again  for  the  Islands  Maria's,  and  the  7th 
day  we  came  to  an  anchor  at  the  East-end  of  the  middle 
Island,^  in  8  fathom  Water,  good  clean  Sand. 

1  Las  Tres  Marias  Islands.  *  Maria  Madre. 

288 


THE  MARIA'S  ISLANDS 
I  The  Mtrta's  arc  ihree  uninhabited  islands  in  lat.  ai  d.  am.  ' 
I  m.  they  are  distant  from  Cape  St.  Lucas  on  California  '^** 
>  leuues,  bearing  East  South  East,  and  they  are  distant 
mi  Cape  Corricntes  20  leagues,  bearing  upon  the  same 
points  01  the  Compass  with  Cape  Si.  Lucas.'  They  stretch 
N-  W.  and  S.  E.  about  14  leagues.  There  are  2  or  3 
small  high  Rocks  near  them  :  The  wcstermost  of  them  is 
the  biggest  Island  of  the  three;  and  they  are  all  three  of 
an  indifferent  heighth.  The  Soil  is  stony  and  dry,  the 
Land  in  most  places  is  covered  with  a  shrubby  sort  of 
Wood,  very  thick  and  troublesome  to  pass  through.  In 
some  places  there  is  plenty  of  straight  large  Cedars,  though 
tpeaktng  of  the  places  where  I  have  found  Cedars,  Chap.  3. 
I  forgot  to  mention  this  place.  The  Spaniards  make 
mention  of  them  in  other  places :  but  I  speak  of  those 
which  I  have  seen.  All  round  by  the  Sea-side  it  is  sandy ; 
and  there  is  produced  a  green  prickly  Plant,  whose  leaves 
are  much  like  the  Penguin-leaf,  and  the  root  like  the  root  of 
a  Sempervive,  but  much  larger.  This  root  being  bak'd  in 
an  Oven  is  good  to  eat :  and  the  Indians  on  California,  as 
I  haTc  been  informed,  have  great  part  of  their  subsistence 
from  these  Roots.  We  made  an  Oven  in  a  sandy  Bank, 
tad  b«ked  of  these  Roots,  and  I  eat  of  them  :  but  none  of 
35  greatly  cared  for  them.  They  taste  exactly  like  the 
kixrt*  of  our  English  Burdock  boil'd,  of  which  I  have 
-  i:cn.     Here  are  plenty  of  Guanoes  and  Raccoons  {a  iirgc  . 

rTt  of  Rat)  and  Indian  Conies,  and  abundance  of  large 
Pigeons  and  Turtlc-Doves,  The  Sea  is  also  pretty  well 
Kored  with  Fish,  and  Turtle  or  Tortoise,  and  Seal.  This 
'»  the  iecond  place  on  this  Coast  where  I  did  see  any  Seal : 
inJ  this  place  helps  to  conlirm  what  I  have  observed,  that 
■'cy  are  seldom  seen  but  where  there  is  plenty  of  Fish, 
ipGun  Swan  gave  the  middle  Island  the  Name  of  Prince 
-r-jftte's  Island, 

The  8th  day  we  run  nearer  the  Island,  and  anchored  in 
'  fathom,  and  moored  Head  and  Stern,  and  unri^g'd  both 
-lip   and    Bark,  in    order  to   careen.     Here    Capt.  Swan 


'   They  are  nllm  U 
VOL.   1, 


tbv  NE.  oftlic  tiniiKht  line  rrom  point  to  point 
289  T 


k 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  proposed^  to  go  into  the  East-Indies.  Many  were  well 
'^^  pleased  with  the  Voyage;  but  some  thought,  such  was 
their  Ignorance,  that  he  would  carry  them  out  of  the 
World ;  for  about  2  thirds  of  our  Men  did  not  think 
there  was  any  such  way  to  be  found ;  but  at  last  he  gained 
their  Consents. 

At  our  first  coming  hither  we  did  eat  nothing  but  Seal ; 
but  after  the  first  2  or  3  days  our  Strikers  brought  aboard 
Turtle  every  day ;  on  which  we  fed  all  the  time  that  wc 
lay  here,  and  saved  our  Maiz  for  our  Voyage.  Here  also 
we  measured  all  our  Maiz,  and  found  we  had  about  80 
Bushels.  This  we  divided  into  3  parts ;  one  for  the  Bark, 
and  two  for  the  Ship;  our  Men  were  divided  also,  100 
Men  aboard  the  Ship,  and  50  aboard  the  Bark,  besides  3  or 
4  Slaves  in  each. 

I  had  been  a  long  time  sick  of  a  Dropsie,  a  Distemper, 
whereof,  as  I  said  before,  many  of  our  Men  died ;  so  here 
I  was  laid  and  covered  all  but  my  head  in  the  hot  Sand :  I 
indured  it  near  half  an  hour,  and  then  was  taken  out  and 
laid  to  sweat  in  a  Tent.  I  did  sweat  exceedingly  while  I 
was  in  the  Sand,  and  I  do  believe  it  did  me  much  good, 
for  I  grew  well  soon  after. 

We  staid  here  till  the  26th  day,  and  then  both  Vessels 
being  clean,  we  sailed  to  the  Valley  of  Balderas  *  to  water, 
for  we  could  not  do  it  here  now.  In  the  wet  season 
indeed  here  is  Water  enough,  for  the  Brooks  then  run  down 
plentifully ;  but  now,  though  there  was  Water,  yet  it  was 
bad  filling,  it  being  a  great  way  to  fetch  it  from  the  holes 
where  it  lodged.  The  28th  day  we  anchored  in  the  bottom 
of  the  Bay  in  the  Valley  of  Balderas,  right  against  the 
River,  where  we  watered  before ;  but  this  River  was  brackish 
now  in  the  dry  season ;  and  therefore  we  went  2  or  3 
leagues  nearer  Cape  Corrientes,  and  anchored  by  a  small 
round  Island,  not  half  a  mile  from  the  shore.     The  Island 

*  Original  MS.  "  I  had  still  a  mind  to  make  further  discoveryes  and  my 
advice  and  Counsel  1  was  ever  accepted  by  the  Comp^  as  much  as  any 
one  Mans,  and  indeed  it  was  ever  a  designe  betweene  Captain  Swan  and 
myselfe  to  promote  it." 

2  Now  Banderas.  There  are  several  islands  in  the  bay;  the  Marieta 
group,  and  a  rather  larger  single  island  known  as  Corvetena. 

290 


OF   THE   COMMERCE   OF    MEXICO 

leagues  to  the  Northward  of  the  Cape;  and  the 

:  where  we  filled  our  Water  is  just  within  the  Island,  ' 

the  Main.     Here  our  Strikers  struck  9  or  lo  Jew 

;  some  we  did  cat,  and  the  rest  wc  salted  :  and  the  29th 

r  wc  fiU'd  32  Tuns  of  ver>-  good  Water. 

Having  thus  provided  our  selves,  we  had  nothing  more 

>  do.  but  to  put  in  execution  our  intended  Expedition  to 

:  East-Indies,  in  hopes  of  some  better  success  there,  than 

•  had  met  with  on  this  little  frequented  Coast.    We  came 

full  of  expectations  ;  for  besides  the  richness  of  the 

and  the  probability  of  finding   some   Sea-Ports 

I  visiting,   wc   perswaded   our  selves  that  there  must 

"  c  Shipping  and  Trade  here,  and  that  Acapulco  and 

a  Cruz '   were  to  the  Kingdom  of  Mexico,  what 

1  and  Portobcl  are  to  that  of  Peru,  viz.  Marts  for 

fing  on  a  constant  Commerce  between  the  South  and 

'1  Sas,  as  indeeil   they  are.      But  whereas  we  expected 

.  Commerce  should  be  managed  by  Sea,  we  found 

low  tctvcs  mistaken  ;  that  of  Mexico  being  almost  wholly  a 

iLud-trade,  and  managed  more  by  Mtdes  than  by  Ships: 

l&ihat  inMcad  of  pront  wc  met  with  little  on  this  Coast, 

1  ktsnlcs  fatigues,  hardships  and  losses,  and  so  were  the  more 

Itauly  induced  to  try  what  better  fortune  we  might  have  in 

|!hc  East-Indies.     But  to  do  right  to  Captain  Swan,  he  had 

n  to  be  as  a  Privateer  in  the  East-Indies  ;  but, 

bath  often  assured  me  with  his  own  mouth,  he  re- 

1  to  take  the  first  opportunity  of  returning  to  Eng- 

:  So  that  he  feigned  a  compliance  with  some  of  his 

,  who  were  bent  upon  going  to  cruize  at  Manila,  that 

nnght  have  leisure  10  take  sonic  favourable  opportunity 

f  tpntting  the  Privateer  Trade. 


■  The  port  of  tlie  galleon 


n  Citntpcai-lijr  ItMy. 


CHAP.   X 

Their  Departure  from  Cape  Corrientes  for  the  Ladrone  Islands^  and  the 
East-Indies.  Their  Course  thither^  and  Accidents  by  the  way : 
with  a  Table  of  each  days  Run^  &c.  Of  the  different  accounts  of  the 
breadth  of  these  Seas,  Guam,  one  of  the  Ladrone  Islands.  The 
Coco- Nut  Treey  Fruity  &c.  The  Toddiy  or  A  rack  that  distils  from 
it ;  with  other  Uses  that  are  made  of  it.  Coire  Cables.  The  Ume^ 
or  Crab  Limon.  The  Bread-fruit.  The  Native  Indians  of  Guam. 
Their  Proe^s^  a  remarkable  sort  of  Boats  :  and  of  those  used  in  the 
East-Indies,  The  State  of  Guam  :  and  the  Provisions  with  which 
they  were  furnish'* d  there. 

AN.  "W  HAVE  given  an  Account  in  the  last  Chapter  of  the 
1686  I  Resolutions  we  took  of  going  over  to  the  East-Indies. 
But  having  more  calmly  considered  on  the  length 
of  our  Voyage,  from  hence  to  Guam/  one  of  the 
Ladrone  Islands,  which  is  the  first  place  that  we  could 
touch  at,  and  there  also  being  not  certain  to  find  Provisions, 
most  of  our  Men  were  almost  daunted  at  the  thoughts  of 
it ;  for  we  had  not  60  days  Provision,  at  a  little  more  than 
half  a  pint  of  Maiz  a  day  for  each  Man,  and  no  other 
Provision,  except  3  Meals  of  salted  Jew-fish ;  and  we  had 
a  great  many  Rats  aboard,  which  we  could  not  hinder  from 
eating  part  of  our  Maiz.  Beside,  the  great  distance  between 
Cape  Corrientes  and  Guam :  which  is  variously  set  down. 
The  Spaniards,  who  have  the  greatest  reason  to  know  best, 
make  it  to  be  between  2300  and  2400  Leagues ;  our  Books 
also  reckon  it  differently,  between  90  and  100  degrees, 
which  all  comes  short  indeed  of  2000  Leagues,*  but  even 
that  was  a  Voyage  enough  to  frighten  us,  considering  our 
scanty  Provisions.     Captain   Swan,   to  encourage  his  Men 

^  Guahan,  or  Guam,  in  the  Ladrone  Islands. 
^  The  Spanish  estimate  is  fairly  accurate. 

292 


THE  TEDIOUSNESS   OF  THIS    VOYAGE 
to  go  with  him,  perswaded  them  that  the  English  Books  an, 
did  give  the  best  account  of  ihc  distance  ;  his  Reasons  were  '** 
nuny,  although  but  weak.     He  urged  among  the  rest,  that 
Sir  Thonus  Gindish '  and  Sir  Francis  Drake,  did  run  it  in  less       _ 
than  50  Oiys,  and  that  he  did  not  question  but  that  our     J 
Ships  were  better  sailers,   than  those  which  were  built  in     I 
that  Age,  and  that  he  did  not  doubt  to  get  there  in  little      ' 
more  than  40  Days  :  This  being  the  best  time  in  the  Year 
for    breezes,    which    undoubtedly  is    the    reason    that    the 
Spaniards  set  out  from  Acapulco  about  this  time ;  and  that 
lithough  they  arc  60  Days  in  their  Voyage,  it  is  because 
they    arc     great    Ships,    deep     laden,    and     very     heavy 
■ulcn ;  besides,    they    wanting    nothing,    arc   in  no  great 
Ittste  in  their  way,  but  sail  with  a  great  deal  of  their  usual 
caution.'    And  when  they  come  near  the  Island  Guam,  they 
lie  by  in  the  Night  for  a  Week,'  before  they  make  Land. 
In  frudencc  wc  al<tO  should  have  contrived  to  lie  by  in  the 
Night  when  wc  came  near  Land,  for  otherwise  we  might 
have  run  ashore,  or  have  outsailed  the  Islands,  and  lost 
»ght  of  them  before  Morning.      But  our  bold  Adventurers 
•eldom  proceed  with  such  wariness  when  in  any  straights. 

But  of  all  Captain  Swan's  Arguments,  thai  which  pre- 
vailed most  with  them  was,  his  promising  them,  as  I  have 
id,  to  cruise  oflf*  the  Manila's/  So  he  and  his  Men  being 
now  agreed,  and  they  incouraged  with  the  hope  of  gain, 
which  works  its  way  thro'  all  Difficulties,  wc  set  out  from 
Cape  Corrientcs  March  the  31st,  1686.  We  were  2  Ships 
in  Company,  Captain  Swan's  Ship,  and  a  Bark  commanded 
under  Captain  Swan,  by  Captain  Teat,  and  we  were  150 
Men,  100  aboard  of  the  Ship,  and  jo  aboard  the  Bark, 
Sbvcs,  as  I  said. 


,    ,.     ,  ,,  Francis   Umke  was  out 

full  tixty'Cighi  days"  (froin  July  24  to  Semrmber 

*  Alvar*  farliog  theircoorset  at  tun>«i,iin(lorienhtavmK-i»foTthc  n>Kh[. 
'  To  wauh  ftir  fire  siEiult  frotn  the  ittioic.     One  large  blnte  suddenly 

WMkcra^  followed  bjr  four  other  bkie*.  was  the  sipul  that  enemies  were 
OMi(  near  Cuain.  Tlw  Ga<rcn)Or  of  Guam  someliinu  communicated 
*idiihKfalMB  by  boat. 

*  TW  PMBpfMM  Iftlusd*. 

293 


I 


1 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  We  had  a  small  Land-wind  at  E.  N.  E.  which  carried 

1686  us  3  or  4  Leagues,  then  the  Sea-wind  came  at  W.  N.  W. 
a  fresh  gale,  so  we  steered  away  S.  W.  By  6  a  Clock  in 
the  Evening  we  were  about  9  leagues  S.  W.  from  the 
Cape,  then  we  met  a  Land-wind  which  blew  fresh  all  Night, 
and  the  next  Morning  about  10  a  Clock  we  had  the  Sea- 
breeze, at  N.  N.  E.  so  that  at  Noon  we  were  30  leagues 
from  the  Cape.  It  blew  a  fresh  gale  of  Wind,  which 
carried  us  off  into  the  true  Trade-wind,  (of  the  difference 
of  which  Trade-winds  I  shall  speak  in  the  Chapter  of 
Winds,  in  the  Appendix)  for  although  the  constant  Sea- 
breeze near  the  Shore  is  at  W.  N.  W.  yet  the  true  Trade 
off  at  Sea,  when  you  are  clear  of  the  Land-winds,  is  at 
E.  N.  E.  At  first  we  had  it  at  N.  N.  E.  so  it  came  about 
Northerly,  and  then  to  the  East  as  we  run  off.  At  250 
leagues  distance  from  the  Shore  we  had  it  at  E.  N.  E.  and 
there  it  stood  till  we  came  within  40  leagues  of  Guam. 
When  we  had  eaten  up  our  3  Meals  of  salted  Jew-fish,  in 
so  many  Days  time,  we  had  nothing  but  our  small  allowance 
of  Maiz. 

After  the  31st  Day  of  March  we  made  great  runs 
every  Day,  having  very  fair  clear  Weather,  and  a  fresh 
Trade-wind,  which  we  made  use  of  with  all  our  Sails,  and 
we  made  many  good  Observations  of  the  Sun.  At  our 
first  setting  out,  we  steer'd  into  the  lat.  of  13  degrees,^ 
which  is  near  the  lat.  of  Guam ;  then  we  steer'd  West, 
keeping  in  that  lat.  By  that  time  we  had  sailed  20  Days, 
our  Men  seeing  we  made  such  great  runs,  and  the  Wind 
like  to  continue,  repined  because  they  were  kept  at  such 
short  allowance.^  Captain  Swan  endeavoured  to  perswade 
them  to  have  a  little  Patience ;  yet  nothing  but  an  aug- 
mentation of  their  daily  allowance  would  appease  them. 
Captain  Swan,  though  with  much  reluctance,  gave  way  to 

^  Guam  is  in  lat.  13°  30'  N.,  long.  144**  45'  W. 

'  "There  was  not  any  occasion  to  call  men  to  victualls  for  the  kettle 
was  boyled  but  once  a  day,  which  being  made  ready  at  noone  all  hands 
were  aloft  to  see  the  quarter  master  share  it,  wherein  he  had  need  to  be 
exact  haveing  soe  many  eyes  to  observe  him  ;  wee  had  two  doggs  and  two 
catts  aboard,  they  likewise  lived  on  what  was  given  them,  and  waited  with 
as  much  eagerness  to  see  it  sheared  as  wee  did  "  {Original  MS.), 

294 


OCCURRENCES    DURING   THE   VOYAGE 

^bnuU  enlargemeni  of  our  Commons,  for  now  we  had  not 

^■Dve    to  spoonfuls  of  boil'd   Maiz  a   Man,  once  a  day, 

^Bcrou  before  we   had   8 :   I   do  believe   that    this   short 

^howancc  did  me  i  great  deal  of  good,  though  others  were 

«akcncd  by  it ;  for  I  found  that  my  Strength  encreased, 

ind    my    Dropsic  wore  off.      Yet  I  drank  3  times  every 

i4  Hours;  but  many  of  our  Men  did  not  drink  in  9  or 

todays  time,  and  some  not  in  12  days;  one  of  our  Men 

dkd  not  drink  in   17  days  time,  and  said  he  was  not  adry 

when  he  did  drink;   yet  he  made  water  every  day  more  or 

las.     One  of  our  Men  in  the  midst  of  these  hardships  was 

toand  guilty  of  theft,   and   condemned  for  the  same,  to 

Ibtc  3  blows  from  each  Man  in  the  Ship,  with  a  2  inch 

1  a  half  rope '  on  his  bare  back.     Captain  Swan   began 

and  struck  with  a  good   will  ;  whose  example  was 

fcllcnrcd  by  all  of  us. 

It  was  very  strange,  that  in  all  this  Voyage  we  did  not 
He  one  Fish,  not  so  much  as  a  Flying-Fish,  nor  any  sort  of 
Fowl ;  but  at  one  time,  when  we  were  by  my  account  4975 
miln  West  from  Cape  Corrientes,  then  we  saw  a  great 
nQmbcr  of  Boobies,  which  we  supposed  came  from  some 
Rocks*  not  far  from  us,  which  were  mentioned  in  some  of 
VT  Sea-Cards,  but  we  did  not  sec  them. 

After  we  had  run  the  1900  Leagues  by  our  reckoning, 
bich  made  the  English  account  to  Guam,  the  Men  began 
I  murmur  against  Captain  Swan,  for  pcrswading  them  to 
:  ihii  Voyage  ;  but  he  gave  them  fair  words,  and  told 
that  the  Spanish  account  might  probably  be  the 
at,  and  seeing  the  Gale  was  likely  to  continue,  a  short 
t  longer  would  end  our  troubles. 

As  we  drew  nigh  the  Island,  we  met  with  some  small 
I,  and  the  Clouds  settling  in  the  West,  were  an  apparent 
that  wc  were  not  far  from  Land ;  for  in  these 
aie«,  between  or  near  the  Tropicks,  where  the  Trade- 
blows  constantly,  the  Clouds  which  fly  swift  over 
,  yet  teem  near  the  Umb  of  the  Horizon  to  hang 


*  T«a  umI  a  half  inchn  in  circumference. 

*  Tbt  Cfttpar  RkOy  or  Damon,  groupi,  kc 

295 


I  the  most  piobablo. 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAC 

AN.    without  much   motion  or  alteration,  where  th 

'***  near.     I  have  often  taken  notice  of  it,  especia 

high  Land,  for  you  shall  then  have  the  Clouds 

it  without  any  visible  motion. 

i  '  \  *  The  20th  day  of  May,  our  Bark  being  abou 

1 '  a  head  of  our  Ship,  sailed  over  a  rocky  shole, 

||  there  was    but  4  fathom  water,  and    abundant 

swimming  about  the  Rocks.     They  imagin'd  b 

■  I  the  Land  was  not  far  off;  so  they  clapt  on  a  ' 

;  *  the  Barks  head  to  the  North,  and  being  past 

4    ls|;  lay  by  for  us.     When  we  came  up  with  them,  G 

il  '■■  came  aboard  us,  and  related  what  he  had  seen, 

then  in  lat,  12  d.  55  m.  steering  West,     The  Is! 
is  laid  down  in  Lat.   13  d.  N.  by  the  Spaniard 
,  Masters  of  it,  keepng  it  as  a  baiting  place  as  the; 

t^]  Philippine  Islands.     Therefore  we  clapt  on  a 

;    ;|  '  stood  to  Northward,  being  somewhat  troubled  an 

i   ""  whether  we    were   right,  because   there    is    no 

}    1  down,  in  the  Spanish  Drafts,  about  the  Island  C 

« I  j  4  a  Clock,  to  our  great  Joy,  we  saw  the  Island 

!    ■  about  8  leagues  distance. 

J,  :  It  was  well  for  Captain  Swan  that  we  got  : 

^    ':  before    our    Provision  was   spent,  of  which   w< 

•    ■  enough  for  3  days  more  ;  for,  as  1  was  afterwards 

( ■  the  Men  had  contrived,  first  to  kill  Captain  Sw 

f  him  when  the  Victuals  was  gone,  and  after  hin 

who    were    accessary  in    promoting    the    undert 

Voyage.     This  made  Captain  Swan  say  to  me 

;  arrival  at  Guam,  Ah !  Dampier,  you  would  have 

but  a  poor    Meal;  for  I  was  as  lean  as    the  C 

lusty  and   fleshy.     The  Wind  was  at  E.  N.   P 

Land  bore  at  N.  N.  E.  therefore  we  stood  to  1 

'    .  ward,  till  we  brought  the  Island  to  bear  East,  an 

turned  to  get  in  to  an  anchor. 

The  account  I  have  given  hitherto  of  our  C( 

Cape  Corrientes,  in  the  Kingdom  of  Mexico,  ( 

j  mentioned  another  Cape  of  that  name  in  Peru,  sc 

'  This  slio.il  was  prohably  some  portion  of  the  Doufilris 
296 


,.^ 


.  ,  "1 


» 


I 


:  > 


» 
4 


.? 


A   TABLE   OF   EACH    DAYS    RUN 

y  of  Panama)  to  Guam,  one  of  the  Ladrone  Islands,  hath    an. 
En   in  the  gross.     But  for  the  satisfaction  of  those  who   '"" 
ly  think  it  serviceable   to  the  fixing   the   Longitudes  of 
ac  Pans,  or  to  any  other  Use  in  Geography  or  Naviga- 
B,  I  hare  here  subjoyned  a  particular  Table  of  every  days 
a,  which  was  as  follows. 


a. 

Cmm. 

Ok.]  S. 

W. 

Lai. 

jr,»A. 

SWjdW.      .,|„ 

10 

10 

II  1  W  N  w 

I     !iW  (  W  [  loi  1  6S 

81 
100 

k.   ,9 

R.    17 

ilNW;NNW 

■.  1  SW   I   W  ,  .,1  ,  ,8 

IS    NbW 

3     W    by    S     loj     19 

Ob.  17 

6    N 

W     11    S  '  I40    19 
"W    10    S  '  ifio    s* 

136  1  Ob.  16 

Tjo  1  QbTtY 

106  ou^ry" 

86    Ob.  I's 

H  R.  .4" 
93   06.  14 

IJ7     Ob    ., 
11;     Ob.  14 
169     K.     14 
^9   X     ,4 

37    NiNNK 

f 

43    N 

6 
7 
8 
9 

W     10    S 
W      .    S 

108  1  18 

94      6 
15«    11 

15  1  N  E 
i  '  N  E  :  H  N  U 
S7     EN  E 
SI     E  NE 

■  O 

W      5    S 

39    E  N  E 
19  i  E  N  E 
1 S  "E  N  E 

II 

W      5    S 
■W     i   s 

114      10 
'70     '4 
170     14 

•f 

1  ,  E  N  E 

•4 

w™,  sr 

180  If 
174     18 

181  1  19 

17;    K.    ., 
TVr-RT-Ti 

46    E  N  E 

■  f 

W      6    S 

.8    U  N  E  tUd, 

1* 

17 

W      6    !i 

180 
114 

R.    „ 

9     i:  N  E  mln, 

W      6    !>    il«il> 

R.    11 

47  1  E  iJ  ETfiii. 

The  Summ  of  the  Westings  hitherto  is    .         .     2283 
Which  make  Dcg.  of  Longitude  ■    39  <^-  S-  '"■ 

From  hence  my  Course  is  most  West,  sometimes  Southerly, 
ictimes  Northerly. 


i^,/-- 

Dili. 

N.otS. 
0 

EbjN^ 

"ETJ  E 
EbjN 
EbfN 

lio 

I'i 
171 

0 
0 

180    R.    11:47 

-;^Rr-r.r47" 

771' R.    .1,47 

'..  .w 

0 

180    R.    11:47 

'5     OK  W  4  N 

170 

"'"«»Sb.;.";n 

1^  r:  w: 

_ut. 

0       146    R.    is: $8 

Eb,N 

CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 


April 


AN. 

1686 


M. 


Day 
26  ' 

28  ' 

30 


I 


2  ■ 


'     3 


5 


7  . 

8  1 


II 


12 


i.3_ 


15 


16 

"17 

'9 

i    20 
21 


Course. 

Dist. 

N.or.  S 

w. 

Lot. 

mnds. 

W 

146 
185 

0 

146 

R.    12 

=  58 

:    7 

'    7 

EbyN 

W     3     N 

gU 

184 

Oh.  13 
Ob.13 

EbyN 

W 

140 

0 

140 
167 
171 

173 

EbyN 

w 

167 
172 

0 

R.    13 
Ob.  13 

■    7 
:  12 

EbyN 

W    2    N 

5 

E 

W                ! 

172  i     0 

Ob.  13 
R.    13  = 

:  12 
:  12 
:  12 

E  N  E 

W                i 

196 

0     ! 

196 
160 

152 

179 
171 

160 

E  by  N 

w 

160 
154 

0    i 

Ob.  13: 

E  by  N 

W                    ! 

0 

R.    13  = 

;  12 

E  N  E 

R.  W. 

Ob.  W.  2  S  . 

»53 

180 

ssj 

R.    13: 
Ob.  13: 

.  12 
7 

E  N  E 

W    2    N 

7U 

Ob.  13: 

:  14 

EN  E 

W    2    N     . 

172  '  9  N  ; 
160      0 
149  i   7  S   i 
134;  9S   ! 

Ob.13: 

:  22 
22 

6 

E  N  E 

W 

Ob.  13.: 
Ob.  13: 

E  N  E 

w  3  s    : 

148 

E  by  N 

w  4  s    : 

'33 

Ob.  13: 

E  N  E 

w 

128 
112 

0   : 

128 
III 
128 
129 
128 
117 

R.    13: 
Ob.  12  : 

6 

'57 

ENE       i 

W    5    s 

9 

E  N  E 

w 

128       0 

R.     12: 
R.    12: 

57 
57 

ENE 

w 

129 

0 

ENE 

w 

1 

128 

0   1 

R.    12: 

57 

ENE       ' 

W    4    N     ' 

118  :    8  N    ! 

114     II  s 
109  1    5  S    ] 

120       01 
137  i     0     ! 

i34i     0    1 

13     «N  ' 

Ob.  13: 

5 

ENE 

W    6    S      1 

1 13  ! 
108  , 

120  1 

137 
130 

10' 

Ob.  12: 

54    E  N  E 

W    3    S 

W                 I 

Ob.  12: 
R.    12: 
R.    12: 
R.    12: 

49    E  N  E 
49  ':  E  N  E  " 

w 

W~               i 

49  ; 
50. 

ENE 

E 

E  'N"E  " 

N  W  7  W 

R.    12: 

59 

Summ  of  all  the  Westings 
Making  Deg.  of  Longitude  in  all 


7323 
125  d.  II  m. 


Now  the  Island  Guam  bore  N.  N.  E.  8  leagues  dist. 
this  gives  22  m.  to  my  Lat.  and  takes  9  from  my  Meridian 
dist.  so  that  the  Island  is  in  Lat.  13  :  21  ;  and  the  Merid. 
dist.  from  Corrientes  7302  miles;  which,  reduced  into 
degrees,  makes  125  d.  11  m. 

The  Table  consists  of  7  Columns.  The  first  is  of  the 
days  of  the  month.  The  2d  Column  contains  each  days 
course,  or  the  point  of  the  Compass  we  ran  upon.     The 

298 


THE  TABLE   EXPLAINED 
I  gives  the  dtsuncc  or  length  of  such  course  in  Italian  or 
letrical  miles,  (at  the  rate  of  60  to  a  degree)  or  the  ' 
5  the  Ship  makes  every  day  ;  and  is  reckoned  always 

I  noon  to  noun.  But  because  the  Course  is  not  always 
Rude  upon  the  same  Rhumb  in  a  direct  line,  therefore  the 
4lh  and  5th  Columns  show  how  many  miles  we  ran  to  the 
South  every  day,  and  how  many  to  the  West ;  which  last 
was  our  main  run  in  this  Voyage.  By  the  17th  of  April 
wc  were  got  pretty  near  into  the  latitude  of  Guam,  and 
our  Course  then  lying  along  that  parallel,  our  Northing 
asd  Southing  consequently  were  but  little,  according  as  the 
Ship  dcviatra  from  its  direct  course ;  and  such  deviation  is 
tbenceforward  expresi  by  N.  or  S.  in  the  5th  Column,  and 
the  9iipc  keeping  straight  on  the  West  Rhumb,  by  o,  that 
n  to  ay,  by  no  Northing  or  Southing.  The  6th  Column 
•hem  the  lit.  we  were  in  every  day,  where  R.  signifies  the 
dead  Reckoning,  by  the  running  of  the  Logs,  and  Ob. 
thews  the  lat.  by  observation.'  The  7th  Column  shews  the 
Wind  and  Weather. 

To  these  I  would  have  added  an  8th  Column,  to  shew 
(he  Variation  of  the  Needle ;  but  as  it  was  very  small  in 
rhia  course,  so  neither  did  we  make  any  observation  of  it, 
iSore  oQce,  after  we  were  set  out  from  the  Mexican  Coast. 
At  our  depanure  from  Cape  Corrientes,  we  found  It  to  be 
♦  d.  38  m.  Easterly;  and  the  observation  wc  made  of  it 
afterwards,  when  wc  had  gone  about  a  third  of  the  Voyage, 
thcwcd  it  to  be  so  near  the  same,  to  be  decreasing  :  Neither 
did  wc  ohserve  it  at  Guam,  for  Captain  Swan  who  had  the 
Insmimcnts  in  his  Cabin,  did  not  seem  much  to  regard  it : 
Tct  I  am  inclined  10  think  that  at  Guam,  the  Variation 
might  be  cither  none  at  all,  or  even  increasing  to  the 
Wenward. 

To  conclude.  May  20th  at  noon  (when  we  begin  to 
call  it  ii«)  we  were  in  lat.  11  d.  50  m.  N.  by  R.  having 
nm  Bnce  the  noon  before  134  mtlcs  directly  West.  We 
oandnued  the  same  Course  till  two  that  afternoon,  for 
wtudi  I  allow   10  miles  more  West  still,  and  then,  finding 


L 


I,  of  the  moon,  or  of  a  fixed  >ur. 
299 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  the  [>arallel  we  ran  upon  to  be  too  much  Southerly,  we 
*^^  clapt  on  a  Wind  and  sailed  directly  North,  till  5  in  the 
afternoon,  having  in  that  time  run  8  mile,  and  increased 
our  latitude  so  many  minutes,  making  it  12  d.  58  m.  We 
then  saw  the  Island  Guam  bearing  N.  N.  E.  distant  from 
us  about  8  leagues,  which  gives  the  latitude  of  the  Island 
13  d.  20  m.  And  according  to  the  account  foregoing,  its 
longitude  is  125  d.  11  m.  West  from  the  Cape  Corrientes 
on  the  Coast  of  Mexico,  allowing  58  and  59  Italian  miles 
to  a  degree  in  these  latitudes,  at  the  common  rate  of  60 
miles  to  a  degree  of  the  Equator,  as  before  computed. 

As  a  Corollary  from  hence  it  will  follow,  that  upon  a 
supposal  of  the  truth  of  the  general  allowance.  Seamen 
make  of  60  Italian  miles  to  an  Equinoctial  degree,  that  the 
South  Sea  must  be  of  a  greater  breadth  by  25  degrees,  than 
it's  commonly  reckoned  by  Hydrographers,  who  make  it 
only  about  100,  more  or  less.  For  since  we  found  (as  I 
shall  have  occasion  to  say)  the  distance  from  Guam  to  the 
Eastern  parts  of  Asia,  to  be  much  the  same  with  the 
common  reckoning ;  it  follows  by  way  of  necessary  conse- 
quence from  hence,  that  the  25  degrees  of  longitude,  or 
thereabouts,  which  are  under-reckoned  in  the  distance  be- 
tween America  and  the  East-Indies  Westward,  are  over- 
reckoned  in  the  breadth  of  Asia  and  Africk,  the  Atlantick 
Sea,  or  the  American  Continent,  or  all  together ;  and  so 
that  Tract  of  the  Terraqueous  Globe,  must  be  so  much 
shortned.  And  for  a  further  confirmation  of  the  fact,  I 
shall  add,  that  as  to  the  ^thiopick  or  Indian  Sea,  its 
breadth  must  be  considerably  less  than  'tis  generally  calcu- 
lated to  be ;  if  it  be  true  what  I  have  heard  over  and  over, 
from  several  able  Seamen,  whom  I  have  conversed  with  in 
these  parts,  that  Ships  sailing  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope 
to  New  Holland,  (as  many  Ships  bound  to  Java,  or  there- 
abouts, keep  that  latitude)  find  themselves  there,  (and 
sometimes  to  their  cost)  running  aground  when  they  have 
thought  themselves  to  be  a  great  way  oflF;  and  'tis  from 
hence  possibly,  that  the  Dutch  call  that  part  of  this  Coast 
the  Land  of  Indraught,  (as  if  it  magnetically  drew  Ships 
too  fast  to  it)  and  give  cautions  to  avoid  it :   But  I  rather 

300 


OF  THE  MILES   IN   A   DEGREE 


tinnk,  'tis  the  i 


t  c^  the  LUMJ. 


sBjr  Whiripool, 
As  to  the  breadth  ot  the  '*" 


:  nairocss 
or  the  like,  thit  surprizex  them 
AtUntick  Sea,  I  am  from  good  huds  assured,  that  it  is 
ovcr-Rckoned  by  six,  scvco.  c^ht,  or  ten  degrees;  fcv 
besda  the  concurrent  Accouats  of  several  expericaced 
Men.  who  have  confirmed  the  same  to  me  ■  Mr.  Canby 
particnlarljr,  who  hath  sailed  as  a  Mate  in  a  great  many 
Voyaga,  from  Cape  Lopez,  on  the  Coast  of  Guinea,  to 
Buittdoes,  and  is  much  cstcem'd  as  a  very  senublc  Man, 
hath  often  told  me,  that  he  coastantly  found  the  distance 
to  be  between  60  and  62  degrees;  whereas  'tis  taid  down 
in  6S.  69,  70,  and  72  degrees,  in  the  common  draughts. 


As  to  the  suppOMtjon  it  sell*,  which  our  Seamen  make, 
in  the  allowing  but  60  miles  to  a  degree,  I  am  not  ignorant 
bow  much  thi»  hath  been  canvased  of  late  years  especially, 
and  that  the  prevailing  opinion  hath  been  that  about  70, 
or  upwards,  should  be  allowed.  But  till  I  can  see  some 
better  grounds  for  the  exactness  of  those  trials,  that  have 
been  nude  on  Lind  by  Mr,  Norwood '  and  others,  con- 
lidering  the  inequality  of  the  Earths  surface,  as  well  as  the 
t'jbliquity  of  the  way  ;  in  their  allowing  for  which,  I  am 
somewhat  doubtful  of  their  mca<>urcs.  Upon  the  whole 
matter,  1  cannot  but  adhere  to  the  general  Sea-calculation, 
confirmed  as  to  the  main  by  daily  experience,  till  some 
more  certain  estimate  shall  be  made,  than  those  hitherto 
ttemptcd.  For  we  find  our  selves,  when  wc  sail  North  or 
viuth.  10  be  brought  to  our  intended  place,  in  a  time 
gTTcable  enough  with  what  we  expect  upon  the  usual 
apposition,  making  ail  reasonable  allowance,  for  the  little 
inxvoidablc  deviations  East  or  West :  and  there  seems  no 
cuon  why  the  same  estimate  should  not  serve  us  in  crosa- 
ie  the  Meridians,  which  we  find  so  true  in  Sailing  under 
As  to  this  course  of  ours  to  Guam  particularly,  we 
:  rather  increase  than  shorten  our  estimate  uf  the 
h    of  it,    considering    that    the    Easterly    Wind    and 

'  Itr.  Nwrvtml.    Richard  tianmod{tigo-itfJi),  n  (urvryor  anil  iiiailw 
-^Aiicisa  of  WMne  cdebrity.     His  "iiiah     were  rcmarlublc,  but  noi  very 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S  VOYAGES 

AN.  Current  being  so  strong,  and  bearing  therefore  our  Log  ^ 
1686  2fter  us,  as  is  usual  in  such  cases ;  should  we  therefore,  in 
casting  up  the  run  of  the  Ljog^  make  allowance  for  so 
much  space  as  the  Log  it  self  drove  after  us  (which  is 
commonly  3  or  4  miles  in  100,  in  so  brisk  a  gale  as  this 
was)  we  must  have  reckoned  more  than  125  degrees;  but 
in  this  Voyage  we  made  no  such  allowance :  (though  it  be 
usual  to  do  it)  so  that  how  much  soever  this  computation 
of  mine  exceeds  the  common  Draughts,  yet  is  it  of  the 
shortest,  according  to  our  experiment  and  calculation. 

But  to  proceed  with  our  Voyage :  The  Island  Guam  or 
Guabon,  (as  the  Native  Indians  pronounce  it)  is  one  of  the 
Ladrone  Islands,  belongs  to  the  Spaniards,^  who  have  a 
small  Fort  with  fix  Guns  in  it,  with  a  Governour,  and  20 
or  30  Soldiers.  They  keep  it  for  the  relief  and  refresh- 
ment of  their  Philippine  Ships,  that  touch  here  in  their 
way  from  Acapulco  to  Manila,  but  the  Winds  will  not  so 
easily  let  them  take  this  way  back  again.  The  Spaniards 
of  late  have  named  Guam,  the  Island  Maria ;  it  is  about 
12  leagues  long,  and  4  broad,  lying  N.  and  S.  It  is 
pretty  high  Champion  Land. 

The  2 1  St  day  of  May,  1686,  at  11  a  Clock  in  the 
Evening,  we  anchored  near  the  middle  of  the  Island  Guam, 
on  the  West  side ;  a  Mile  from  the  shore.  At  a  distance 
it  appears  flat  and  even,  but  coming  near  it  you  will  find 
it  stands  shelving,  and  the  East  side,  which  is  much  the 
highest,  is  fenced  with  steep  Rocks,  that  oppose  the 
Violence  of  the  Sea,  which  continually  rage  against  it, 
being  driven  with  the  constant  Trade- wind,  and  on  that 
side  there  is  no  Anchoring.  The  West  side  is  pretty  low, 
and  full  of  small  sandy  Bays,  divided  with  as  many  rocky 
Points.  The  Soil  of  the  Island  is  reddish,  dry  and  in- 
different fruitful.  The  Fruits  are  chiefly  Rice,  Pinc- 
Apples,  Water-melons,  Musk-melons,  Oranges  and  Limes, 
Coco-nuts,  and  a  sort  of  PVuit  called  by  us  Bread-fruit.' 

*  The  wooden  logship  by  which  seamen  estimate  the  speed  of  their 
vessels.  It  has  been  superseded,  to  some  extent,  by  the  patent  log,  which 
registers  the  total  run.  The  wooden  logship  provides  only  an  approximate 
estimate  of  the  speed  of  the  ship  at  the  moment  the  log  is  hove. 

'^  It  is  now  American.  ^  Artocarptis  incisa, 

302 


THE  COCO-NUT  ■ 

The  Coco-nut  Trees  grow  by  the  Sea,  on  the  Western  asi. 
tide  in  great  Groves,  3  or  4  Miles  in  length,  and  a  Mile  or  '^** 
two  broad.  This  Tree  is  in  shape  like  the  Cabbage-tree, 
itid  at  a  distance  they  are  not  to  be  known  each  from 
•Jthcr,  only  the  Coco-nut  Tree  is  fuller  of  Branches;  but 
the  Cabhagc-irec  generally  is  much  higher,  tho'  the  Coco- 
nuT  Trees  in  some  places  are  very  high.  h 

The  Nut  or  Fruit  grows  at  the  head  of  the  Tree,  among        ■ 
the  Branches  and  in  Clusters,  10  or  12  in  a  Cluster.     The        V 
Branch  to  which  they  grow  is  about  the  bigness  of  a  Man's 
Arm,  atKi  01  long,  running  small  towards  the  end.     It  is  of 
a  yellow  Colour,  full  of  Knots,  and  very  lough.     The  Nut 
ts  generally  bigger  than  a  Man's  Head.     The  outer  Rind        m 
a  near  two  Inches  thick,  before  you  come  to  the  Shell ;  the       ■ 
Shell  it  self  is  black,  thick,  and  very  hard.     The  Kernel  in       H 
foroc  Nuts  ii  near  an  Inch  thick,  sticking  to  the  inside  of       H 
the  Shell  clear  round,  leaving  a  hollow  in  the  middle  of  it,        ■ 
which  contains  about  a  Pint,  more  or  less,  according  to  the        I 
h^ness  of  the  Nut,  for  some  are  much  bigger  than  others.  I 

This  Cavity  is  full  of  sweet,  delicate,  wholcsom  and  I 
retresfair^  Water,  While  the  Nut  is  growing,  all  the  in-  M 
ode  »  full  of  this  Water,  without  any  Kernel  at  all ;  but 
u  the  Nut  grows  towards  its  Maturity,  the  Kernel  begins 
to  gather  and  settle  round  on  the  inside  of  the  Shell,  and 
ii  joft  like  Cream  ;  and  as  the  Nut  ripens,  it  increascth  in 
~i:b«tancc  and  becomes  hard.  The  ripe  Kernel  is  sweet 
rnough,  but  very  hard  to  digest,  therefore  seldom  eaten, 
^nJoi  by  Strangers,  who  know  not  the  effects  of  it;  but 
while  it  b  young  and  soft  like  Fap,  some  Men  will  eat  it, 
^cnping  it  out  with  a  Spoon,  after  they  have  drunk  the 

(Water  that  was  within  it.  I  like  the  Water  best  when  the 
knt  is  almost  ripe,  for  It  is  then  sweetest  and  briskest. 
'  When  theae  Nuts  are  ripe  and  gathered,  the  outside 
Rind  becomes  of  a  brown  rusty  colour;  so  that  one  would 
:hmk  that  they  were  dead  and  dry;  yet  they  will  sprout 
•ut  like  Onions,  after  they  have  been  hanging  in  the  Sun 
3  ur  4  Months,  or  thrown  about  in  a  House  or  Ship,  and 
>f  planted  afterward  in  the  lurth,  they  wilt  grow  up  to  a 
Free.  Before  they  thus  sprout  out,  thcrv  is  a  small  spungy 
303 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   round  knob  grows  in  the  inside,  which  we  call  an  Apple. 

1686  This  at  first  is  no  bigger  than  the  top  of  ones  finger,  but 
increaseth  daily,  sucking  up  the  Water  till  it  is  grown  so 
big  as  to  fill  up  the  Cavity  of  the  Coco-nut,  and  then  it 
begins  to  sprout  forth.  By  this  time  the  Nut  that  was 
hard,  begins  to  grow  oily  and  soft,  thereby  giving  passage 
to  the  Sprout  that  springs  from  the  Apple,  which  Nature 
hath  so  contrived,  that  it  points  to  the  hole  in  the  Shell, 
(of  which  there  are  three,  till  it  grows  ripe,  just  where  it's 
fastened  by  its  stalk  to  the  Tree ;  but  one  of  these  holes 
remains  open,  even  when  it  is  ripe)  through  which  it  creeps 
and  spreads  forth  its  Branches.  You  may  let  these  teeming 
Nuts  sprout  out  a  foot  and  half,  or  two  foot  high  before 
you  plant  them,  for  they  will  grow  a  great  while  like  an 
Onion  out  of  their  own  Substance. 

Beside  the  Liquor  or  Water  in  the  Fruit,  there  is  also 
a  sort  of  Wine  drawn  from  the  Tree  called  Toddy,  which 
looks  like  Whey.     It  is  sweet  and  very  pleasant,  but  it  is 
to  be  drunk  within  24  hours  after  it  is  drawn,  for  after- 
wards  it  grows  sowre.      Those  that   have  a   great   many 
Trees,  draw  a  Spirit  from  the  sowre  Wine,  called  Arack 
Arack  is  distil  I'd  also  from  Rice,  and  other  things  in  the 
East-Indies ;    but  none  is  so   much  esteemed  for  making 
Punch   as  this  sort,   made  of  Toddy,  or   the  sap  of  the 
Coco-nut  Tree,  for  it  makes  most  delicate  Punch  ;  but  it 
must  have  a  dash  of  Brandy  to  hearten  it,  because  this 
Arack  is  not  strong  enough  to  make  good  Punch  of  it  self. 
This  sort  of  Liquor  is  chiefly  used  about  Goa ;  and  there- 
fore it  has  the  Name  of  Goa  Arack.     The  way  of  drawing 
the  Toddy   from   the   Tree,   is    by   cutting   the   top  of  a 
Branch  that  would  bear  Nuts ;  but  before  it  has  any  Fruit; 
and  from  thence  the  Liquor  which  was  to  feed  its  Fruit, 
distils  into  the  Hole  of  a  Callabash  that  is  hung  upon  it. 

This  Branch  continues  running  almost  as  long  as  the 
Fruit  would  have  been  growing,  and  then  it  dries  away. 
The  Tree  hath  usually  3  fruitful  Branches,  which  if  they 
be  all  tapp'd  thus,  then  the  Tree  bears  no  Fruit  that  year; 
but  if  one  or  two  only  be  tapp'd,  the  other  will  bear  Fruit 
all  the  while.     The  Liquor  which  is  thus  drawn  is  emptied 

304 


THE  USES  OF  THE   COCO-NUT 

'  of  the  Callxbash,  duty  MotTitng  and  Evening,  so  long  ah-J 
it  continues  running,  and  is  sold  every  Morning  and  ''' 
-ening  in  most  Towns  in  the  East-Indies,  and  great  gains 
.=  produced  from  it  even  this  way;  but  those  that  distil  it 
»nd  make  Arack,  reap  the  greatest  profit.  There  is  also 
great  profit  made  of  the  Fruit,  both  of  the  Nut  and  of  the 
Shell. 

The  Kernel  is  much  used  in  making  Broath,     When 
the  Nut  Is  dry,  they  take  off  the  Husk,  and  giving  two 
good  Blows  on  the  middle  of  the  Nut,  it  breaks  in  two 
equal  parts,  letting  the  Water  fall  on  the  Ground ;  then 
with  a  small  Iron  Rasp  made  for  the  purpose,  the  Kernel 
^^r  Nut  is  rasped  out  clean,  which  being   put  into  a   little 
^^bsfa    Water,   makes   it   become   white    as   Milk.     In   this 
^BUky  Waicr  they  boil  a  Fowl,  or  any  other  sort  of  Flesh, 
^^fcd  it  makes  very  savory  Broath.     English  Seamen  put  this 
water   into  boiled    Rice,   which   they  eat   instead    of   Rice- 
milk,  carrying   Nuts  purposely  to  Sea  with   them.     This 
•hey  Icam  from  the  Natives. 

But  the  greatest  use  of  the  Kernel  is  to  make  Oyl, 

*T(h  for  burning  and  for  frying.     The  way  to  make  the 

')»1  It  to  grate  or  rasp  the  Kernel,  and  steep  it  in  fresh 

pater;  then  boil    it,  and  scum  off  the  Oyl  at  top  as  it 

:  But  the  Nuts  that  make  the  Oyl  ought  lu  be  a  long 

:  gathered,  so  as  that  the  Kernel  may  be  turning  soft 

doir. 

The  Shell  of  this  Nut  is  used  in  the  East-Indies  for 

Dishes,   Ladles,  Spoons,  and  in  a  manner  for   all 

j  and  drinking  Vessels.      Well  shaped  Nuts  are  often 

Highi  home  to  Europe,  and  much  esteemed.     The  Husk 

f  tSe  Shell  is  of  great  use  to  make  Cables  ;  for  the  dry 

fmk  a  full  of  small  Strings  and   Threads,   which  being 

[Btni,  become  soft,  and  the  other  Substance  which  was 

nong  it  falls  away  like  Saw-dust,  leaving  only  the 

j».     These  arc  afterwards  spun  into  long  Yarns,  and 

1  up  into  Balls  for  Convenience  :  and  many  of  these 

e-Yams  joined   tc^cthcr    make   good   Cables.'    This 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Manufactory  is  chiefly  used  at  the  Maldive-Islands,  and 
'^^  the  threads  sent  in  Balls  into  all  places  that  trade  thither, 
purposely  for  to  make  Cables.  I  made  a  Cable  at  Achin 
with  some  of  it.  These  are  called  Coire  Cables ;  they  will 
last  very  well.  But  there  is  another  sort  of  Coire  Cables 
(as  they  are  called)  that  are  black,  and  more  strong  and 
lasting ;  and  are  made  of  strings  that  grow,  like  Horse- 
hair, at  the  heads  of  certain  Trees,  almost  like  the  Coco- 
nut Tree.  This  sort  comes  most  from  the  Island  Timor. 
In  the  South  Seas  the  Spaniards  do  make  Oakam  to  caulk 
their  Ships,  with  the  husk  of  the  Coco-nut,  which  is  more 
serviceable  than  that  made  of  hemp,  and  they  say  it  will 
never  rot.  I  have  been  told  by  Captain  Knox,^  who  wrote 
the  Relation  of  Ceylon,  that  in  some  places  of  India  they 
make  a  sort  of  course  Cloth  of  the  husk  of  the  Coco-nut, 
which  is  used  for  Sails.  I  my  self  have  seen  a  sort  of 
course  Sail-cloth  made  of  such  a  kind  of  substance ;  but 
whether  the  same  or  no  I  know  not. 

I  have  been  the  longer  on  this  subject,  to  give  the 
Reader  a  particular  Account  of  the  use  and  profit  of  a 
Vegetable,  which  is  possibly  of  all  others  the  most  generally 
serviceable  to  the  conveniencies,  as  well  as  the  necessities  of 
humane  Life.  Yet  this  Tree,  that  is  of  such  great  use,  and 
esteemed  so  much  in  the  East-Indies,  is  scarce  regarded  in 
the  West-Indies,  for  want  of  the  knowledge  of  the  benefit 
which  it  may  produce.  And  'tis  partly  for  the  sake  of  my 
Country-men,  in  our  American  Plantations,  that  I  have 
spoken  so  largely  of  it.  For  the  hot  Climates  there  are  a 
very  proper  soil  for  it :  and  indeed  it  is  so  hardy,  both  in  the 
raising  it,  and  when  grown,  that  it  will  thrive  as  well  in  dry 
sandy  ground  as  in  rich  land.  I  have  found  them  growing 
very  well  in  low  sandy  Islands  (on  the  West  of  Sumatra) 
that  are  over-flowed  with  the  Sea  every  Spring-tide ;  and 
though  the  Nuts  there  are  not  very  big,  yet  this  is  no  loss, 

*  This  was  Robert  Knox,  a  sea-captain,  who  spent  nearly  twenty  years 
in  Ceylon  (1659-1679)  as  a  prisoner  among  the  natives  of  the  interior. 
His  book  is  called  "An  Historical  Relation  of  the  Island  of  Ceylon  in 
the  East  Indies."  It  is  a  folio  volume,  first  published  in  1681.  Knox  seems 
to  have  left  the  sea-service  about  1694.  He  died  at  the  age  of  eighty  in 
July  1720. 

306 


THE   LIME  TREE   AND   FRUIT  H 

for  the  Kernel  t»  thick  and  sweet;  and  the  Milk,  or  Water   aw. 
in  the  insdc,  is  marc  pleasant  and  sweet  than  of  the  Nuts  that  '^^ 
grow  in  rich  ground,  which  arc  commonly  Urge  indeed, 
bur  not  very  sweet.     TTiese  at  Guam  grow  in  dry  ground, 
ire  of  a  middle  size,  and  I  think  the  sweetest  that  1  did  ■ 

e\'er  taste.     Thus  much  for  the  Coco-nut.  | 

The  Lime  is  a  sort  of  bastard  or  Crab-Jimon.  The 
Tree,  or  Bush  that  bears  it,  is  prickly,  like  a  Thorn,  grow- 
ing full  of  small  boughs.  In  Jamaica,  and  other  places, 
they  make  of  the  Lime-Bush  Fences  about  Gardens,  or  any 
other  Inclosurc,  by  planting  the  seeds  close  together,  which  ■ 

Sawing  up  thick,  spread  abroad,  and  make  a  very  good  I 

edge.     The  Kniit  is  like  a  Lemon,  but  snullcr  ;  the  rind  I 

tiun,  and  the  inclosed  subsnncc  full  of  juice.  The  juice  is 
very  rart,  yet  of  a  pleasant  taste  if  sweetned  with  Sugar.  I 

It  H  chiefly  used  for  making  Punch,  both  in  the  East  and 
WeM'Indies,  as  well  ashore  as  at  Sea,  and  much  of  it  is  for 
that  purpose  yearly  brought  home  to  England,  from  our 
West-India   Plantations.      It  is  also  used  for  a  particular  . 

kind  of  Sauce,  which  is  called  Pcppcr-Sauce,  and  is  made  ■ 

of  Cod-pepper,  commonly  called    Guinea-pepper,  boiled  in  I 

Water,  and  then  pickled  with  Sati.  and  mixd  with  Lime-  I 
'  :ice  to  jTcservc  it.  Limcs  grow  plentiful  in  the  East  and  I 
'■  Veil -Indies,  within  the  Tropicks.  I 

The  Bread-fruit  (as  we  call  it)  grows  on  a  large  Tree,  * 

aa  big  and  high  as  our  largest  Apple-Trccs.  It  hath  a 
tprcsdiag  head  full  of  branche<t,  and  dark  leaves.  The 
Fruit  grows  on  the  boughs  like  Apples  :   it  is  as  big  as  a  ■ 

Penny-loaf,'  when  Wheat  is  at   five  Shillings  the  Bushel.  ■ 

It  is  of  a  round  shape,  and  hath  a  thick  tough  rind.     When  I 

the  Kruit  is  ripe,  it  is  yellow  and  soft ;  and  the  taste  is  M 
*w>eet  *  and  pleasant.  The  Natives  of  this  Island  use  it  for  I 
Bread :  they  gather  it  when  full  grown,  while  it  is  green  I 
ind  hard;  then  they  bake  it  in  an  Oven,  which  scorcheth  ' 

'he  rind  and  makes  it  black  :  but  they  scrape  off  the  outside 
lick  crust,  and  there  remains  a  tender  thin  crust,  and  the 
inside  ii  soft,  tender  and  white,  like  the  crumb  of  a  Penny 

'  It  i%  laiher  Urger  thnn  a  large  melon.  I 

*  Like  npyie  miitce.  i 

307  J 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AS.  Loaf.  There  is  ndther  seed  nor  stone  in  the  inside,  but 
'^^-^^  all  is  of  a  pure  substance  like  Bread :  it  must  be  eaten  new, 
for  if  it  is  kept  above  24  hours,  it  becomes  dry,  and  eats 
harsh  and  choaky ;  but  *tis  very  pleasant  before  it  is  too 
stale.  This  Fruit  lasts  in  season  8  months  in  the  year ; 
during  which  time  the  Natives  eat  no  other  sort  of  food  of 
Bread  kind.  I  did  never  see  of  this  Fruit  any  where  but 
here.  The  Natives  told  us,  that  there  is  plenty  of  this 
Fruit  growing  on  the  rest  of  the  Ladrone  Islands;  and  I 
did  never  hear  of  anv  of  it  anv  where  else. 

They  have  here  some  Rice  also :  but  the  Island  being  of 
a  dry  Soil,  and  therefore  not  very  proper  for  it,  they  do  not 
sow  very  much.  Fish  is  scarce  about  this  Island ;  yet  on 
the  shole  that  our  Bark  came  over  there  was  great  plenty, 
and  the  Natives  commonly  go  thither  to  fish. 

The  Natives  of  this  Island  are  strong-bodied,  large- 
Iimb*d,  and  well-shap'd.  They  are  Copper-coloured,  like 
other  Indians:  their  hair  is  black  and  long,  their  eyes 
meanly  proportioned ;  they  have  pretty  high  Noses ;  their 
Lips  are  pretty  full,  and  their  Teeth  indifferent  white. 
They  are  long  visaged,  and  stern  of  countenance  ;  yet  we 
found  them  to  be  affable  and  courteous.  They  are  many 
of  them  troubled  with  a  kind  of  Leprosie.  This  distemper 
is  very  common  at  Mindanao :  therefore  I  shall  speak  more 
of  it  in  my  next  Chapter.  They  of  Guam  are  otherwise 
very  healthy,  especially  in  the  dry  season :  but  in  the  wet 
season,  which  comes  in  in  June,  and  holds  till  October,  the 
air  is  more  thick  and  unwholsome ;  which  occasions  Fevers : 
but  the  Rains  are  not  violent  nor  lasting.  For  the  Island 
lies  so  far  Westerly  from  the  Philippine  Islands,  or  any 
other  Land,  that  the  Westerly  Winds  do  seldom  blow  so 
far ;  and  when  they  do,  they  do  not  last  long :  but  the 
Easterly  Winds  do  constantly  blow  here,  which  are  dry  and 
healthy ;  and  this  Island  is  found  to  be  very  healthful,  as 
we  were  informed  while  we  lay  by  it.  The  Natives  are 
very  ingenious  beyond  any  People,  in  making  Boats,  or 
Proes,  as  they  are  called  in  the  East-Indies,  and  therein  they 
take  great  delight.  These  are  built  sharp  at  both  ends; 
the  bottom  is  of  one  piece,   made  like   the   bottom  of  a 

308 


PROES.  OR   INDIAN   BOATS 

ttUe  Cancm,  very  neatly  dog,  uid  left  of  k  good  substance,  am. 
This  bottom  part  b  instead  of  a  Keel.  It  ts  about  16  or  '^^ 
26  foot  long ;  the  under  part  of  this  Keel  is  made  round, 
but  incltmrtg  to  a  wedge,  and  smcxxh ;  and  the  upper  part 
is  almost  ftat,  having  a  very  gentle  hollow,  and  is  about  a 
foot  brood  :  From  hence  both  sides  of  the  Boat  are  carried 
op  to  about  5  foot  high  with  narrow  Plank,  not  above  4 
or  5  inches  broad,  and  each  end  of  the  Boat  turns  up  round, 
very  prettily.  But  what  is  very  singular,  one  side  of  the 
Boat  is  made  perpendicular,  UkJe  a  Wall,  while  the  other 
sde  is  rounding,  made  as  other  Vessels  arc,  with  a  pretty 
full  belly.  Just  in  the  middle  it  is  about  4  or  $  foot  broad 
aloft,  or  more,  according  to  the  length  of  the  Boat.  The 
Mast  stands  exactly  in  the  middle,  with  a  long  Yard  that 
pecks  up  and  down  like  a  Mizen-yard.'  One  end  of  it 
reacheth  down  to  the  end  or  head  of  the  Boat,  where  it  is 
pUoed  in  a  notch.*  that  is  made  there  purposely  to  receive 
It,  and  keep  it  fast.  The  other  end  hangs  over  the  Stern  : 
To  this  Yard  the  Sail  is  fastened.  At  the  foot  of  the  Sail 
there  is  another  small  Yard,'  to  keep  the  Sail  out  square, 
and  to  roll  up  the  Sail  on  when  it  blows  hard  ;  for  it  serves 
insccad  of  a  Reef  to  uke  up  the  sail  to  what  d^rce  they 
please,  according  to  the  strength  of  the  Wind.  Along  the 
Beliy-^c  of  the  Boat,  parallel  with  it,  at  about  6  or  7  foot 
distance,  lies  another  small  Boat,  or  Canoa,  being  a  Leg  of 
very  light  Wood,  almost  as  long  as  the  great  Boat,  but  not 
to  wide,  being  not  above  a  foot  and  an  half  wide  at  the 
upper  part,  and  very  sharp  like  a  Wedge  at  each  end.  And 
there  arc  two  Samboes  of  about  8  or  10  font  long,  and  as 
big  as  ones  Leg,  placed  over  the  great  Boats  side,  one  near 
each  end  of  it,  and  reaching  about  6  or  7  foot  from  the  side 
of  the  Boat ;  By  the  help  of  which,  the  little  Boat  is  made 
firm  and  contiguous  to  the  other.  These  are  generally 
called  by  the  Dutch,  and  by  the  English  from  them,  Out- 

■  Tb«  inuea  yard  wm*  A  blixn  yard,  tcltintc  fore  Md  aft,  unlil  ibe  md 
of  Ibc  ci|lttecntli  centttry,  wben  iht  "i|Mnker"  wa>  Adopted.    The  ancimt 

'  A*  ia  maoT  latcciwigfed  boal*  in  lli«  Mediterranean. 
'  Tkb  cnnnmiice  i*  will  in  ■»>  amunK  ihe  praha  men  of  the  rhilippliM 
littwdi  ud  lb«  Malay  ArchipcUgo. 

309 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  layers.^  The  use  of  them  is  to  keep  the  greait  Boat  upright 
1686  from  over-setting;  because  the  Wind  here  bring  in  a 
manner  constantly  East,  (or  if  it  were  at  West  it  would  be 
the  same  thing)  and  the  Range  of  these  Islands,  where  their 
business  lies  too  and  fro,  being  mostly  North  and  South, 
they  turn  the  flat  side  of  the  Boat  against  the  Wind, 
upon  which  they  sail,  and  the  Belly-side,  consequently  with 
its  little  Boat,  is  upon  the  Lee :  And  the  Vessel  having  a 
Head  at  each  end,  so  as  to  sail  with  either  of  them  fore- 
most (indifferently)  they  need  not  tack,  or  go  about,  as  all 
our  Vessels  do,  but  each  end  of  the  Boat  serves  either  for 
Head  or  Stern  as  they  please.  When  they  ply  to  Wind- 
ward, and  are  minded  to  go  about,  he  that  steers  bears  away 
a  little  from  the  Wind,  by  which  means  the  stem  comes  to 
the  Wind  ;  which  is  now  become  the  Head,  only  by  shifting 
the  end  of  the  Yard.  This  Boat  is  steered  with  a  broad 
Paddle,  instead  of  a  Rudder.  I  have  been  the  more 
particular  in  describing  these  Boats,  because  I  do  believe, 
they  sail  the  best  of  any  Boats  in  the  World.  I  did  here 
for  my  own  satisfaction,  try  the  swiftness  of  one  of  them  ; 
sailing  by  our  Log,^  we  had  12  Knots  on  our  Reel,  and  she 
run  it  all  out  before  the  half  Minute-Glass  was  half  out ; 
which,  if  it  had  been  no  more,  is  after  the  rate  of  12  Mile 
an  hour  ;  but  I  do  believe  she  would  have  run  24  Mile  an 
hour.  It  was  very  pleasant  to  see  the  little  Boat  running 
along  so  swift  by  the  others  side. 

*  Outriggers. 

^  The  logship,  reel,  line,  and  glass  require  a  brief  description.  The 
logship  is  a  quadrant  of  wood,  weighted  on  the  curved  side.  It  is  attached 
to  the  line  by  two  strands,  one  of  which  is  pegged  into  the  logship  so 
lightly  that  a  smart  jerk  will  release  it.  The  line  is  generally  some  eighty 
fathoms  long.  It  is  of  white,  tough  cord  "rather  thicker  than  whip-cord." 
It  is  rolled  round  a  large  wooden  reel.  When  "hove"  the  two  strands 
of  the  line  are  so  fixed  as  to  keep  the  logship  upright  in  the  sea,  presenting 
a  flat  surface  to  the  water.  The  logship  then  offers  so  much  resistance 
to  the  water  that,  as  the  ship  advances,  the  line  is  drawn  off  the  reel 
quickly  or  slowly  according  to  the  speed  of  the  vessel.  The  log  is  hove 
at  the  instant  that  a  seaman  turns  a  half-minute  sand-glass.  The  line  is 
divided  into  spaces  "  which  bear  the  same  relation  to  a  nautical  mile  that 
half  a  minute  does  to  an  hour."  Each  space  is  marked  with  a  knot  in 
the  line  ;  so  that,  at  the  end  of  the  half  minute's  running,  the  seaman  can 
calculate  the  speed  of  his  ship  by  noting  the  number  of  knots  which  have 
run  out. 

310 


m  THE   SPANIARDS   AT   GUAM 

Tbc  Native  Indians  are  no  less  dexterous  in  managing, 
than  in  building  these  Boats.     By  report,  they  will  go  from   ■ 
bence  to  another  of  the  Ladrone  Islands  about  30  leagues 
fpB,  and  there  do  their  Business,  and  return  again  in  less 

I  II  hours.  I  was  told  that  one  of  these  Boats  was  sent 
ExpreM  to  Manila,  which  is  above  400  leagues,  and  per- 
forincd  the  Voyage  in  4  days  time.  There  are  of  these 
Procs  or  Boats  used  in  many  places  of  the  East-Indies,  but 
with  a  Belly  and  a  little  Boat  on  each  side.'  Only  at 
Mindanao  I  saw  one  like  these,  with  the  Belly  and  a  little 
Boat  only  on  one  side,  and  the  other  flat,  but  not  so  neatly 
built. 

Tlie  Indians  of  Guam  have  neat  little  Houses,  very 
hftodsomcly  thatch'd  with  Patmeto-thatch.  They  inhabit 
together  in  Villages  built  by  the  Sea,  on  the  west  side, 
and  have  Spanish  Priests  to  instruct  them  in  the  Christian 
Religion. 

The  Spaniards  have  a  small  Fort  on  the  west  side,  near 
ibe  south  end.  with  6  Guns  in  it.  There  is  a  Governor, 
and  20  or  30  Spanish  Soldiers.  There  are  no  more 
Spaniards  on  this  Island,  beside  2  or  3  Priests.  Not  long 
bnorc  we  arrived  here,  the  Natives  rose  on  the  Spaniards  to 
dntroy  them,  and  did  kill  many:  But  the  Governor  with 
hb  Soldiers  at  length  prevailed,  and  drove  them  out  of  the 
Fort :  So  when  they  found  themselves  disappointed  of  their 
tttient,  they  destroyed  the  Plantations  and  Stock,  and  then 
went  away  to  other  Islands :  There  were  then  3  or  400 
Indians  on  this  Island;  but  now  there  are  not  above  100; 
for  all  that  were  in  this  Conspiracy  went  away.  As  for 
these  who  yet  remain,  if  they  were  not  actually  concerned 
in  that  brutl,  yet  their  hearts  also  are  bent  against  the 
Spaniards :  few  they  offlsred  to  carry  us  to  the  Kort,  and 
aanit  us  in  the  Conquest  of  the  Island ;  but  Captain  Swan 
wat  DOC  for  molesting  the  Spaniards  here. 

'  A*  tn  tb«  Siameie  and  BenicatcHr  duff-ouli.  Mitny  primitive  Easi 
latea  bcatbgiMrn  ate  ihc  iluublc  outrigger  to  vive  th«ir  long,  n&n«w 
•afe  (tobilify.  Tbc  t*Btt\Ari  u»e  a  small  Ikai  fitted  with  an  oiitrigftcr 
^  ad)  tide.  Tbc  buctanccrs,  who  criii»rt)  w>  often  in  "amoBt,"  or  lonfc, 
WW  di«.«wU,  BM>*i  liavB  nMded  «  liniiUr  device.  TcThapt  ihey  luhed 
icn>|lM  «oadcn  polti  alone  the  wd«  of  the  canoas. 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Before  we  came  to  an  anchor  here,  one  of  the  Priests 

i^^  came  aboard  in  the  Night  with  3  Indians.  They  first  haled 
us  to  know  from  whence  we  came,  and  what  we  were :  to 
whom  answer  was  made  in  Spamsh,  that  we  were  Spaniards, 
and  that  we  came  from  Acapalco.  It  being  dark  they 
could  not  see  the  make  of  our  Ship,  nor  very  well  discern 
what  we  were :  Therefore  they  came  aboard ;  but  perceiving 
the  mistake  they  were  in,  in  taking  us  for  a  Spamsh  Ship, 
they  endeavoured  to  get  from  us  again,  but  we  held  their 
Boat  fast,  and  made  them  come  in.  Captain  Swan  received 
the  Priest  with  much  Civility,  and  conducting  him  into  the 
Great  Cabbin,  declared.  That  the  reason  of  our  coming  to 
this  Island  was  want  of  Provision,  and  that  he  came  not  in 
any  hostile  manner,  but  as  a  Friend  to  purchase  with  his 
Money  what  he  wanted  :  And  therefore  desired  the  Priest 
to  write  a  Letter  to  the  Governor,  to  inform  him  what 
we  were,  and  on  what  account  we  came.  For  having  him 
now  aboard,  the  Captain  was  willing  to  detain  him  as  an 
Hostage,  till  we  had  Provision.  The  Padre  told  Captain 
Swan,  that  Provision  was  now  scarce  on  the  Island ;  but 
he  would  engage,  that  the  Governor  would  do  his  utmost 
to  furnish  us. 

In  the  Morning  the  Indians,  in  whose  Boat  or  Proe 
the  Friar  came  aboard,  were  sent  to  the  Governor  with  two 
Letters ;  one  from  the  Friar,  and  another  very  obliging  one 
from  Captain  Swan,  and  a  Present  of  4  Yards  of  Scarlet- 
cloath,  and  a  piece  of  broad  Silver  and  Gold  Lace.  The 
Governor  lives  near  the  South  end  of  the  Island  on  the 
West  side;  which  was  about  5  leagues  from  the  place 
where  we  were  ;  therefore  we  did  not  expect  an  answer 
till  the  Evening,  not  knowing  then  how  nimble  they  were. 
Therefore  when  the  Indian  Canoa  was  dispatched  away  to 
the  Governor,  we  hoisted  out  2  of  our  Canoas,  and  sent 
one  a  fishing,  and  the  other  ashore  for  Coco-nuts.  Our 
fishing  Canoa  got  nothing ;  but  the  Men  ^  that  went  ashore 
for  Coco-nuts  came  off  laden. 

About   1 1  a  Clock,  that  same  Morning,  the  Governor 

*  Dampier  was  one  of  them.     His  mates  "felled  a  coco-nut  tree  whose 
fruite  gave  us  all  our  bellyes  full  both  of  the  milke  and  kemell." 

312 


r 


PRESENTS  TO   CAPTAIN    SWAN 


I 


of  the  l&land  tent  a  Letter  to  Captain  Swan,  complimenting  ' 
him  for  his  Present,  and  promising  to  support  us  with  as  " 
much  Provision,  as  he  could  possibly  spare  ;  and  as  a  Token 
of  hii  Gratitude,  he  sent  a  present  of  6  Hogs,  of  a  small 
sort,  most  excellent  Meat,  the  best  1  think,  that  ever  I  eat : 
They  are  fed  with  Coco-nuts,  and  their  flesh  is  hard  as 
Brisket  Beef.  They  were  doubtless  of  that  breed  in  America 
which  came  originallj'  from  Spain  :  He  sent  also  12 
Musknaelons,  larger  than  ours  in  England,  and  as  many 
Water-melons,  both  sorts  here  being  a  very  excellent 
Kruit ;  and  sent  an  order  to  the  Indians  that  lived  in  a 
Village  not  far  from  our  Ship,  to  bake  every  day  as  much 
of  the  Bread-fruit  as  we  did  desire,  and  to  assist  us  in 
getting  as  many  dry  Coco-nuts  as  we  would  have;  which 
they  accordingly  did,  and  brought  oflfthe  Bread-Fruit  every 
day  hot,  as  much  as  we  could  eat.  After  this  the  Governor 
sent  every  day  a  Canoa  or  two  with  H<^s  and  Kruit,  and 
destred  for  the  same  Powder,  Shot  and  Arms ;  which  was 
sent  according  to  his  Request.  We  had  a  delicate  large 
Kngltsh  Dog  ;  which  the  Governor  did  desire,  and  had  it 
given  him  very  freely  by  the  Captain  though  much  against 
the  grain  of  many  of  his  Men,  who  had  a  great  value 
for  that  Dog-  Captain  Swan  endeavoured  to  get  this 
Governors  Letter  of  Recommendation  to  some  Merchants 
at  Manila,  for  he  had  then  a  design  to  po  to  Fort  St. 
George,'  and  from  thence  intended  to  trade  to  Manila : 
but  thtfl  his  design  was  concealed  from  the  company. 
While  we  lay  here,  the  Acapulco  Ship  arrived  in  sight  of 
'the  IiUnd,  but  did  not  come  in  sight  of  us;  for  the 
Governor  sent  an  Indian  Proe,  with  advice  of  our  being 
here  Therefore  she  stood  off  to  the  Southward  of  the 
Island,  and  coming  foul  of  the  same  sholc  that  our  Bark 
had  run  over  bclore,  was  in  great  danger  of  being  lost 
there,  for  she  struck  off  her  Rudder,  and  with  much  ado 
gt){  clear;  but  not  till  after  three  days  labour.  For  tho* 
the  shole  be  so  near  the  Island,  and  the  Indians  go  off  and 
6%h  there  every  day,  yet  the  Master  of  the  Acapulco  Ship, 

'  Madnt. 
3'3 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  who  should  (one  would  think)  know  these  Parts,  was 
1686  utterly  ignorant  of  it.  This  their  striking  on  the  shole 
we  heard  afterward,  when  we  were  on  the  Coast  of  Manila ; 
but  these  Indians  of  Guam  did  speak  of  her  being  in  sight 
of  the  Island  while  we  lay  there,  which  put  our  Men  in 
a  great  heat  to  go  out  after  her,  but  Capt^n  Swan  per- 
suaded them  out  of  that  humour,  for  he  was  now  wholly 
averse  to  any  Hostile  action. 

The  30th  day  of  May,  the  Governor  sent  his  last 
Present,  which  was  some  Hogs,  a  Jar  of  pickled  Mangoes, 
a  Jar  of  excellent  pickled  Fish,  and  a  Jar  of  fine  Rusk, 
or  Bread  of  fine  Wheat  Flower,  baked  like  Bisket,  but  not 
so  hard.  He  sent  besides,  6  or  7  packs  of  Rice,  desiring 
to  be  excused  from  sending  any  more  Provision  to  us, 
saying  he  had  no  more  on  the  Island  that  he  could  spare. 
He  sent  word  also,  that  the  West  Monsoon  was  at  hand, 
that  therefore  it  behoved  us  to  be  jogging  from  hence,  unless 
we  were  resolved  to  return  back  to  America  again.  Captain 
Swan  returned  him  thanks  for  his  kindness  and  advice,  and 
took  his  leave ;  and  the  same  day  sent  the  Friar  ashore, 
that  was  seized  on  at  our  first  arrival,  and  gave  him  a  large 
Brass  Clock,  an  Astrolabe,  and  a  large  Telescope  ;  for 
which  Present  the  Friar  sent  us  aboard  six  Hogs,  and  a 
roasting  Pig,  3  or  4  Bushels  of  Potatoes,  and  50  pound 
of  Manila  Tobacco.  Then  we  prepared  to  be  gone, 
being  pretty  well  furnished  with  Provision  to  carry  us 
to  Mindanao,  where  we  designed  next  to  touch.  We  took 
aboard  us  as  many  Coco-nuts  as  we  could  well  stow,  and 
we  had  a  good  stock  of  Rice,  and  about  50  Hogs  in  salt. 


3H 


I 


CHAP.    XI 

"hty  rnaku  It  /»  m  Mindanao.  Thtir  dtpurturt  fretn  Guam.  Of 
tfu  PhiSffint  Iilandi.  The  hli  lufcnia,  and  ill  chief  Town  and 
P*rt,  Manila^  Manila,  ar  Maailha.  Ofthf  nth  Tradt  wr  might 
aUhSth  mth  ihtu  Itlandt.  Si.  Jahn'i  liland.  Thty  arrive  at 
Mimdanat.  The  Island  deuribed.  In  Feruliiy.  The  Libby 
Tretty  anJ  the  &ij:»  made  of  ihem.  The  Plantain  Tree,  Fruit, 
Lifur,  anJ  CUath.  A  imaller  Plantain  at  Mindanao.  The 
Bsmamt,  Of  the  CUve-bari,  Cloves  and  Nutmegs,  and  the  Methodi 
Uhn  by  the  Duuh  to  Monepolizf  the  Spites.  The  Betel-Nut,  and 
4rti'Tret.  Th*  Durian^  and  the  Jaca-Tree  and  Fruit.  The 
Btasts  tf  Mindanao.  Centafees  or  Fort</  Legi,  a  venomous  Insett, 
mmd  ufuru  Thir  Fotvlt,  Fish,  &c.  The  Temperature  of  the 
CSsmait,  with  the  Course  oj  the  Windi,  Tornadoes,  Rain,  and 
Temper  of  the  Air  throughout  the  tear. 

WHILE  we  lay  at  Guam,  wc  took  up  a  Resolu- 
tion of  going  to  Mindanao,'  one  of  the  Philip-  i 
pine  Islands,  being  told  by  the  Frier  atid 
other*,  that  it  was  exceedingly  well  stored 
■ith  PKtnsions;  that  the  Natives  were  Mahometans,  and 
dut  they  had  formerly  a  Commerce  with  the  Spaniards, 
but  that  now  they  were  at  Wars  with  them.  This  Island 
m«  therefore  thought  to  be  a  convenient  place  for  us  to  go 
to;  for  be«dc3  that,  it  was  in  our  way  to  the  East-Indies, 
which  we  had  resolved  to  visit ;  and  that  the  Westerly 
Monsooa  wis  at  hand,  which  would  oblige  us  to  shelter 
•ooiewbcre  in  a  short  time,  and  that  we  could  not  expect 
good  Harbours  in  a  better  place  than  in  so  large  an  Island 
ai  Mindanao :  besides  all  this,  I  say,  the  Inhabitants  of 
Mindanao  being  then,  as  wc  were  told,  (tho*  falsely)  at 

*  MiaiUatto.     In  IbL  &■  N^  tong.  134*  yf-     I<  ■•  on*  of  dx  brfvM  of 


I 

I 

i 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Wars  with  the  Spaniards,  our  Men,  who  it  should  seem 
1686  ^ere  ye,y  squeamish  of  plundering  without  Licence,  derived 
hopes  from  thence  of  getting  a  Commission  there  from  the 
Prince  of  the  Island,  to  plunder  the  Spanish  Ships  about 
Manila,  and  so  to  make  Mindanao  their  common  Rendez- 
vous. And  if  Captain  Swan  was  minded  to  go  to  an  English 
Port,  yet  his  Men,  who  thought  he  intended  to  leave  them, 
hoped  to  get  Vessels  and  Pilots  at  Mindanao  fit  for  their 
turn,  to  cruize  on  the  Coast  of  Manila.  As  for  Captain 
Swan,  he  was  willing  enough  to  go  thither,  as  best  suiting 
his  own  design ;  and  therefore  this  Voyage  was  concluded 
on  by  general  consent. 

Accordingly  June  2d,  1686,  we  left  Guam,  bound 
for  Mindanao.  We  had  fair  Weather,  and  a  pretty  smart 
gale  of  Wind  at  East,  for  3  or  4  Days,  and  then  it  shifted 
to  the  S.  W.  being  Rainy,  but  it  soon  came  about  again 
to  the  East,  and  blew  a  gentle  gale ;  yet  it  often  shuffled 
about  to  the  S.  E.  For  though  in  the  East  Indies  the 
Winds  shift  in  April,  yet  we  found  this  to  be  the  shifting 
season  for  the  Winds  here ;  the  other  shifting  season  being 
in  October,  sooner  or  later,  all  over  India.  As  to  our 
course  from  Guam  to  the  Philippine  Islands,  we  found  it 
(as  I  intimated  before)  agreeable  enough  with  the  account 
of  our  common  Draughts. 

The  2 1st  Day  of  June  we  arrived  at  the  Island  St.  John, 
which  is  one  of  the  Philippine  Islands.  The  Philippines 
are  a  great  company  of  large  Islands,  taking  up  about  1 3 
deg.  of  Lat.  in  length,  reaching  near  upon,  from  5  d.  of 
North  Lat.  to  the  19th  degree,  and  in  breadth  about  6 
deg.  of  Longitude.  They  derive  this  Name  from  Philip  II. 
King  of  Spain ;  and  even  now  do  they  most  of  them 
belong  to  that  Crown. 

The  chiefest  Island  in  this  range  is  Luconia,  which  lies 
on  the  North  of  them  all.  At  this  Island  Magellan  ^  died 
on  the  Voyage  that  he  was  making  round  the  World.  For 
after  he  had  past  those  Streights  between  the  South-end  of 
America  and  Terra  del  Fuego,  which  now  bear  his  Name, 

*  Fernando  Magelhaens  was  mortally  wounded  at  Mactan,  or  Matan, 
on  the  27th  April  1521.     Mactan  is  a  small  island  near  Cebu. 

316 


I 


LUCONIA— MANILO 

ind  had  ranged  down  in  the  South  Seas  on  the  back  of  _ 
America ;  from  thence  stretching  over  to  the  East-Indies,  '^^ 
he  fell  in  with  the  Ladrunc  Islands,  and  from  thence  steer- 
ing East  still,  he  fell  in  with  these  Philippine  Islands,  and 
ancfaorcd  at  Luconia ;  where  he  warr'd  with  the  Native 
Indians,  to  bring  them  in  Obedience  to  his  Master  the 
King  of  Spain,  and  was  by  them  kill'd  with  a  Poysoned 
Arrow,  It  is  now  wholly  under  the  Spaniards,  who  have 
several  Towns  there.  The  chief  is  Manilo,  which  is  a 
large  Sea-port  Town  near  the  S.  E.  end,  opposite  to  the 
Island  Mindora.  It  is  a  place  of  great  Strength  and  Trade  : 
The  two  great  Acapulco  Ships  before  mentioned  fetching 
from  hence  all  sorts  of  East-India  Commodities ;  which 
arc  brtiueht  hither  by  Foreigners,  especially  by  the  Chinese, 
and  the  Portuguese.  Sometimes  the  English  Merchants  of 
Fort  St.  George  send  their  Ships  hither  as  it  were  by  stealth, 
under  the  charge  of  Portuguese  Pilots  and  Mariners:  For 
as  yet  we  cannot  get  the  Spaniards  there  to  a  Commerce 
with  us  or  the  Dutch,  although  they  have  but  few  Ships  of 
their  own.  This  seems  to  arise  from  a  Jcalousie  or  Fear  of 
discovering  the  Riches  of  these  Islands,  for  most,  if  not  all 
tbe  Phtfippinc  Islands,  arc  rich  in  Gold :  And  the  Spaniards 
:lttTc  no  place  of  much  strength  in  all  these  Islands  that 
I  could  ever  hear  of,  besides  Manilo  it  self.  Yet  they  have 
Villages  and  Towns  on  several  of  the  Islands,  and  Padres  or 
Priests  to  instruct  the  Native  Indians,  from  whom  they  get 
tbcir  Gold. 

The  Spanish  Inhabitants  of  the  smaller  Islands  especi- 
ally, would  willingly  trade  with  us  if  the  Government  was 
noc  so  severe  against  it :  for  ihcy  have  no  Goods  hut  what 
are  brought  from  Manilu  at  an  extraordinary  dear  rate. 
I  am  of  the  Opinion,  That  if  any  of  our  Nations  will  seek 
a  Trade  with  them,  they  would  not  lose  their  labour ;  for 
the  Spaniards  can  and  will  Smuggle  (as  our  seamen  call 
Tradir^  by  stealth)  as  well  as  any  Nation  that  1  know; 
and  our  Jamaicans  are  to  their  profit  sensible  enough  of 
it.  And  I  have  been  informed  that  Captain  Goodlud  of 
London,  in  a  Voyage  which  he  made  from  Mindanao  to 
China,  touch'd  at  some  u(  these  Islands,  and  was  civily 
3*7 


I 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  treated  by  the  Spaniards,  who  bought  some  of  his  Com- 
1686  modities,  giving  him  a  very  good  Price  for  the  same. 

There  are  about  12  or  14  more  large  Islands  lying  to 
the  Southward  of  Luconia ;  most  of  which,  as  I  said  before, 
are  inhabited  by  the  Spaniards.  Besides  these,  there  are  an 
infinite  number  of  small  Islands  of  no  account,  and  even 
the  great  Islands,  many  of  them,  are  without  Names;  or 
at  least  so  variously  set  down,  that  I  find  the  same  Islands 
named  by  divers  Names. 

The  Island  St.  John  and  Mindanao  are  the  Souther- 
most  of  all  these  Islands,  and  are  the  only  Islands  in  all 
this  Range  that  are  not  subject  to  the  Spaniards. 

St.  John's  Island  is  on  the  East-side  of  the  Mindanao, 
and  distant  from  it  3  or  4  Leagues.  It  is  in  lat.  about  7  or 
8  North.  This  Island  is  in  length  about  38  Leagues, 
stretching  N.  N.  W.  and  S.  S.  E.  and  it  is  in  breadth  about 
24  Leagues,  in  the  middle  of  the  Island.  The  Norther- 
most  end  is  broader,  and  the  Southermost  is  narrower: 
This  Island  is  of  a  good  heighth,  and  is  full  of  many  small 
Hills.  The  Land  at  the  South-east-end  (where  I  was 
ashore)  is  of  a  black  fat  Mould :  and  the  whole  Island 
seems  to  partake  of  the  same  fatness,  by  the  vast  number 
of  large  Trees  that  it  produceth  ;  for  it  looks  all  over  like 
one  great  Grove. 

As  we  were  passing  by  the  S.  E.  end  we  saw  a  Canoa  of 
the  Natives  under  the  shore ;  therefore  one  of  our  Canoas 
went  after  to  have  spoken  with  her  ;  but  she  run  away  from 
us,  seeing  themselves  chaced,  put  their  Canoa  ashore, 
leaving  her,  fled  into  the  Woods ;  nor  would  be  allured  to 
come  to  us,  altho'  we  did  what  we  could  to  entice  them ; 
besides  these  Men,  we  saw  no  more  here,  nor  sign  of  any 
Inhabitants  at  this  end. 

When  we  came  aboard  our  Ship  again,  we  steered  away 
for  the  Island  Mindanao,  which  was  now  fair  insight  of  us: 
it  being  about  10  leagues  distant  from  this  part  of  St. 
John's.  The  2  2d  day  we  came  within  a  league  of  the 
East-side  of  the  Island  Mindanao,  and  having  the  Wind  at 
S.  E.  we  steered  toward  the  North  end,  keeping  on  the 
East-side,  till  we  came  into  the  lat.  of  7  d.  40  m.  and  there 

318 


THEIR    ARRIVAL   AT    MINDANAO 

we  ancburcd  in  a  small  Bay,'  about  a  Mile  from  the  Shore, 
in  lo  Fathom  Water,  Rocky  foul  ground.  ' 

Some  of  our  Books  gave  us  an  account,  That  Min- 
(Uxuo  Gty  and  Isle  lies  in  7  d.  40  m.  we  guest  that  the 
middle  of  the  Island  might  lie  in  this  iat.  but  we  were  at 
a  great  loss  where  to  find  the  City,  whether  on  the  East 
or  West-side.  Indeed,  had  it  been  a  small  Island,  tying 
open  to  the  Eastern  Wind,  we  might  probably  have 
searched  first  on  the  West-side;  for  commonly  the  Islands 
within  the  Tropicks,  or  within  the  bounds  of  the  Trade- 
'inds,  have  their  Harbours  on  the  West-side,  as  best 
Itcred;  but  the  Island  Mindanao  being  guarded  on  the 
il-side  by  St.  John's  Island,  we  might  as  reasonably 
expect  to  find  the  Harbour  and  City  on  this  side,  as  any 
whac  eisc!  but  coming  into  the  Lat,  in  which  we  judg'd 
the  City  might  be,  found  no  canoas,  or  People,  that  might 
give  us  any  umbrage  of  a  City,  or  place  of  Trade  near  at 
hand,  iho'  we  coasted  within  a  League  of  the  Shore. 

The  Island  Mindanao  is  the  biggest  of  all  the  Philippine 
Islands  except  Luconia.  It  is  about  60  Leagues  long,  and 
40  or  50  broail.  The  South-end  is  in  about  5  d.  N.  and 
the  N.  W.  end  rcachelh  almost  to  8  d.  N.  It  is  a  very 
moanuinous  Island,  full  of  Hills  and  Valleys,  The  Mould 
in  general  is  deep  and  black  and  extraordinary  fat  and 
fruitful.  The  sides  of  the  Hills  arc  stony,  yet  productive 
enough  of  very  large  tall  Trees.  In  the  heart  of  the 
Country  there  are  some  Mountains  that  yield  good  Gold. 
Tbc  Valleys  are  well  moistncd  with  pleasant  Brooks,  and 
Mnall  Rivers  of  delicate  Water;  and  have  Trees  of  divers 
Mirts  Nourishing  and  green  all  the  Year.  The  Trees  in 
general  are  very  large,  and  must  of  them  are  of  kinds 
unknown  10  us. 

There  is  one  sort  which  deserves  {larticular  notice ; 
called  by  the  Natives  Libby-Trecs.'  These  grow  wild  in 
prat  Groves  of  5  or  6  Miles  long,  by  the  sides  of  the 
Rivers.  Of  these  Trees  Sago  is  made,  which  the  poor 
Country  People  ett  instead  of  Bread  3  or  4  Months  in  the 


PcriMp«  the  Bay  of  San  Jinn. 
S.*£iti  /•rvu.     L)«mpiei'>  acco 

3»9 


>  alwai*.  ;■  « 


CAPTAIN    DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Year.  This  Tree  for  its  body  and  shape  is  much  like  the 
1686  Palmeto-Tree,  or  the  dbbage-Tree,  but  not  so  tall  as  the 
latter.  The  Bark  and  Wood  is  hard  and  thin  like  a  Shell, 
and  full  of  white  Pith,  like  the  Pith  of  an  Elder.  This 
Tree  they  cut  down,  and  split  it  in  the  middle,  and  scrape 
out  all  the  Pith ;  which  they  beat  lustily  with  a  Wooden 
Pestle  in  a  great  Mortar  or  Trough,  and  then  put  it  into  a 
Cloth  or  Strainer  held  over  a  Trough ;  and  pouring  Water 
in  among  the  Pith,  they  stir  it  about  in  the  Cloth :  So  the 
Water  carries  all  the  substance  of  the  Pith  through  the 
Cloth  down  into  the  Trough,  leaving  nothing  in  the  Cloth 
but  a  light  sort  of  Husk,  which  they  throw  away;  but 
that  which  falls  into  the  Trough  settles  in  a  short  time  to 
the  bottom  like  Mud  ;  and  then  they  draw  ofF  the  Water, 
and  take  up  the  muddy  substance,  wherewith  they  make 
Cakes ;  which  being  baked  proves  very  good  Bread. 

The  Mindanao  People  live  3  or  4  Months  of  the  Year 
on  this  P'ood  for  their  Bread-kind.  The  Native  Indians  of 
Teranate,^  and  Tidore,  and  all  the  Spice  Islands,  have 
plenty  of  these  Trees,  and  use  them  for  Food  in  the  same 
manner ;  as  I  have  been  informed  by  Mr.  Caril  Rofy,*  who 
is  now  Commander  of  one  of  the  King's  Ships.  He  was 
one  of  our  Company  at  this  time  ;  and  being  left  with 
Captain  Swan  at  Mindanao,  went  afterwards  to  Teranate, 
and  lived  there  among  the  Dutch  a  Year  or  two.  The  Sago 
which  is  transported  into  other  parts  of  the  East  Indies, 
is  dried  in  small  pieces  like  little  Seeds  or  Comfits,  and 
commonly  eaten  with  Milk  of  Almonds,  by  those  that  are 
troubled  with  the  Flux ;  for  it  is  a  great  binder,  and  very 
good  in  that  Distemper. 

In  some  places  of  Mindanao  there  is  plenty  of  Rice  ; 

*  Tcrnatc. 

*  "Mr.  Caril  Rofy."  Mr.  Kerrill  Roflfey  (sometimes  called  Mr.  Kcrill, or 
Caryl,  Rossey)  was  a  lieutenant  aboard  H.M.S.  Vanifuard  in  1691-2.  He 
afterwards  commanded  the  iiriphon  fireship,  aboard  which  was  Lieutenant 
Geor^'^c  Fisher,  the  man  who  caused  Dampier's  downfall  in  1702.  Roffcy 
went  on  service  to  the  West  Indies  in  1705.  He  rose  to  be  captain  of 
the  Rurford^  70-gun  ship,  and  died  in  17 16.  Charnock  gives  a  short 
life  of  him,  and  he  is  mentioned  repeatedly  in  the  logs  and  muster-books 
of  the  shii)s  in  which  he  served.  He  took  part  in  the  attack  on  Gibrahar 
in  1704. 

320 


THE    PLANTAIN   TREE   OR   SHRUB 
t  in  the  hilly    Land  they  plant    Yams,    Potatoes,  and    as-.- 
itnpltins ;  all  which  thrive  very  well.     The  other  Fruits  "^^^ 
of  this  Island  arc  Watcr-Melons,  Musk-Melons,  Plantains, 
Borunocs,  Guavas,  Nutmegs,  Cloves,  Betci-Nuts,  Durians, 
Jack-o,  or  Jacas,  Coco-Nuis,  Oranges,  &c. 

The  Plantain  1  take  to  be  the  King  of  all  Fruit,  not 
:pt  the  Coco  it  self.  The  Tree  that  bears  this  Fruit  is 
•bout  3  Foot,  or  3  Foot  and  an  half  round,  and  about  10 
or  t2  Foot  high.  These  Trees  are  not  raised  from  Seed, 
(for  they  seem  not  to  have  any)  but  from  the  Roots  of 
other  old  Trees.  If  these  young  Suckers  are  taken  out  of 
the  Ground,  and  planted  in  another  place,  it  will  be  15 
Months  before  they  bear,  but  if  let  stand  in  their  own 
Mtive  Soil  they  will  bear  in  12  Months.  As  soon  as  the 
Fruit  is  ripe  the  Tree  decays,  but  then  there  are  many 
young  ones  growing  up  to  supply  its  place.  When  this 
Tree  fim  springs  out  of  the  Ground,  it  comes  up  with  two 
Ixavcs;  and  by  that  time  it  is  a  Foot  high,  two  more 
iprii^  up  in  the  inside  of  them ;  and  in  a  short  time  after 
more  within  them  ;  and  so  on.  By  that  time  the 
xe  ti  a  Month  old,  you  may  perceive  a  small  body  almost 
big  as  one*  Arm,  and  then  there  arc  eight  or  ten  Leaves, 
some  rf  them  four  or  five  Foot  high.  The  first  Leaves 
tlut  it  shoots  forth  are  not  above  a  Foot  long,  and  half 
Foot  broad ;  and  the  Stem  that  bears  them  no  bigger 
sn  ones  Finger;  but  as  ihc  Tree  grows  higher  the  Leaves 
c  larger.  As  the  young  Leaves  spring  up  in  the  inside, 
the  old  IxiTcs  spread  off,  and  their  tops  droop  down- 
wmrd,  being  of  a  greater  length  and  breadth,  by  how  much 
tbey  are  nearer  the  Root,  and  at  last  decay  and  rot  oflF :  but 
■till  there  are  young  Leaves  spring  up  out  ot  the  top,  which 
irukct  the  Tree  look  always  green  and  flourishing.  When  the 
Tree  i$  full  grown,  the  Leaves  arc  7  or  8  Foot  long,  and  a 
Foot  and  half  broad  ;  towards  the  end  they  arc  smaller,  and 
cod  with  a  round  point.  The  Stem  of  the  Leaf  is  as  big 
•s  a  Man's  Arm,  almost  round,  and  about  a  Foot  in  length, 
hrtween  the  Leaf  and  the  Body  of  the  Tree.  That  part  of 
the  Stem  which  comes  from  the  Tree,  if  it  be  the  outside 
Leaf,  seems  to  inclose  half  the  Body  as  it  were  with  a  thick 
vol..  I.  3*'  * 


I 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AN.  Hide ;  and  right  against  it,  on  the  other  side  of  the  Tree, 
'^^  is  another  such  answering  to  it.  The  next  two  Leaves,  in 
the  inside  of  these^  grow  opposite  to  each  other  in  the  same 
manner,  but  so  that  if  the  two  outward  grow  North  and 
South,  these  grow  East  and  West,  and  those  still  within 
them  keep  the  same  order.  Thus  the  Body  of  this  Tree 
seems  to  be  made  up  of  many  thick  Skins,  growing  one 
over  another,  and  when  it  is  full  grown,  there  springs  out 
of  the  top  a  strong  Stem,  harder  in  substance  than  any 
other  part  of  the  Body.  This  Stem  shoots  forth  at  the 
Heart  of  the  Tree,  is  as  big  as  a  Man's  Arm,  and  as  long ; 
a:nd  the  Fruit  grows  in  clusters  round  it,  first  blossoming 
and  then  shooting  forth  the  Fruit.  It  is  so  excellent,  that 
the  Spaniards  give  it  the  preheminence  of  all  other  Fruit, 
as  most  conducing  to  Life.  It  grows  in  a  Cod  about  6  or 
7  Inches  long,  and  as  big  as  a  Man's  Arm.  The  Shell, 
Rind  or  Cod,  is  soft,  and  of  a  yellow  colour  when  ripe.  It 
resembles  in  shape  a  Hogs-gut  Pudding.  The  inclosed 
Fruit  is  no  harder  than  Butter  in  Winter,  and  is  much  of 
the  colour  of  the  purest  yellow  Butter.  It  is  of  a  delicate 
taste,  and  melts  in  ones  Mouth  like  Marmalet.  It  is  all 
pure  Pulp,  without  any  Seed,  Kernel  or  Stone.  This  Fruit 
is  so  much  esteemed  by  all  Europeans  that  settle  in 
America,  that  when  they  make  a  new  Plantation,  they 
commonly  begin  with  a  good  Plantain-walk,  as  they  call  it, 
or  a  Field  of  Plantains ;  and  as  their  Family  increaseth,  so 
they  augment  the  Plantain-walk,  keeping  one  Man  purposely 
to  prune  the  Trees,  and  gather  the  Fruit  as  he  sees  con- 
venient. For  the  Trees  continue  bearing,  some  or  other, 
most  part  of  the  Year ;  and  this  is  many  times  the  whole 
Food  on  which  a  whole  Family  subsists.  They  thrive  only 
in  rich  fat  ground,  for  poor  sandy  will  not  bear  them.  The 
Spaniards  in  their  Towns  in  America,  as  at  Havana, 
Cartagena,  Portobel,  &c.  have  their  Markets  full  of 
Plantains,  it  being  the  common  Food  for  poor  People : 
Their  common  price  is  half  a  Rial,  or  3  d.  a  Dozen.  When 
this  Fruit  is  only  used  for  Bread,  it  is  roasted  or  boiled 
when  it's  just  full  grown,  but  not  yet  ripe,  or  turn'd  yellow. 
Poor  People,  or  Negroes,  that  have  neither  Fish  nor  Flesh 

322 


THE    PLANTAIN    FRUIT 

_  1  eat  with  it,  nuke  Sauce  with  Cod-pepper,  Salt  and  Lime-  ak. 
juice,  which  makes  il  cat  very  savory;  much  bctier  than  a  '*^  ' 
crust  of  Bread  tJone.  Sometimes  for  a  change  they  eat  a 
roasted  Planuin,  and  a  ripe  raw  Plantain  together,  which  is 
instead  of  Brt^d  and  Butler.  They  cat  very  pleasant  so, 
and  I  have  made  many  a  good  meal  in  this  manner.  Some- 
times our  English  take  5  or  7  ripe  Plantains,  and  mashing 
(hem  together,  make  them  into  a  lump,  and  boti  them 
instead  of  a  Bag-pudding;  which  they  call  a  Buff-Jacket: 
and  this  is  a  very  good  way  for  a  change.  This  Fruit 
makes  »l»o  very  good  Tarts  ;  and  the  green  Plantains  slic'd 
thin,  and  dried  m  the  Sun,  and  grated,  will  make  a  sort 
of  Klour  which  is  very  good  to  make  Puddings.  A  ripe 
Pbntxin  slic'd  and  dried  in  the  Sun  may  be  preserved  a 
great  while ;  and  then  cat  like  Figs,  very  sweet  and  pleasant. 
rhe  Daricn  Indians  preserve  them  a  long  time,  by  drying 
*  ;m  gently  over  the  Fire ;  mashing  them  first,  and 
.I'lulding  them  into  lumps.  The  Moskito  Indians  will 
uke  a  npe  Plantain  and  roast  it ;  then  take  a  pint  and 
half  of  Water  in  a  Calabash,  and  squeeze  the  Plantain  in 
pieces  with  their  Hands,  mixing  it  with  the  Water ;  then 
tfaey  drink  it  all  off  together:  This  they  call  Mishlaw,  and 
It*)  pleasant  and  sweet,  and  nourishing ;  somewhat  like 
Lambs-wool  (as  'tis  call'd)  made  with  Apples  and  Ale: 
ind  of  this  Fruit  alone  many  thousands  of  Indian  Families 
!  the  West-Indies  have  their  whole  subsistence.  When 
cy  make  Drink  with  them,  they  take  10  or  12  ripe 
!'  antains  and  mash  them  well  in  a  Trough :  then  they  put 
.  Gallons  of  Water  among  them;  and  this  in  2  Hours 
■■me  will  ferment  and  froth  like  Wort.  In  4  Hours  it  is 
'!'  to  Drink,  and  then  they  bottle  it,  and  drink  it  as  they 
'  .ivc  occasion:  but    this  will   not   keep  above   34   or    30 

■  loun.     Those  therefore  that  use  this  Drink,  Brew  it  in 

■  his  manner  every  Momlne.  When  I  went  first  to  Jamaica 
:  could  relish  no  other  drink  they  had  there.  It  drinks 
'T>sk  and  cool,  and  b  very  pleasant.  This  Drink  is  windy, 
and  so  is  the  Fruit  eaten  raw  ;  but  boil'd  or  roasted  it  is  not 
in.  If  this  Drink  ts  kept  above  30  Hours  it  grows  sharp: 
but  if  then  it  be  put  out  in  the  Sun,  it  wilt  become  very 

223 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  good  Vinegar.  This  Fruit  grows  all  over  the  West-Indies 
1686  ^[jj  ^||g  proper  Climates)  at  Guinea,  and  in  the  East-Indies. 
As  the  Fruit  of  this  Tree  is  of  great  use  for  Food,  so 
is  the  Body  no  less  serviceable  to  make  Cloaths ;  but  this  I 
never  knew  till  I  came  to  this  Island.  The  ordinary  People 
of  Mindanao  do  wear  no  other  Cloth.  The  Tree  never 
bearing  but  once,  and  so  being  feird  when  the  Fruit  is  ripe, 
they  cut  it  down  close  by  the  Ground  if  they  intend  to 
make  Cloth  ^  with  it.  One  blow  with  a  Hatchet,  or  long 
Knife,  will  strike  it  asunder;  then  they  cut  off  the  top, 
leaving  the  trunk  8  or  10  foot  long,  stripping  off  the  outer 
Rind,  which  is  thickest  towards  the  lower  end,  having  stript 
2  or  3  of  these  Rinds,  the  Trunk  becomes  in  a  manner  all 
of  one  bigness,  and  of  a  whitish  colour :  Then  they  split 
the  Trunk  in  the  middle ;  which  being  done,  they  split  the 
two  halves  again,  as  near  the  middle  as  they  can.  This 
they  leave  in  the  Sun  2  or  3  Days,  in  which  time  part  of  the 
juicy  substance  of  the  Tree  dries  away,  and  then  the  ends 
will  appear  full  of  small  Threads.  The  Women,  whose 
employment  it  is  to  make  the  Cloth,  take  hold  of  those 
Threads  one  by  one,  which  rend  away  easily  from  one  end 
of  the  Trunk  to  the  other,  in  bigness  like  whited  brown 
thread ;  for  the  threads  are  naturally  of  a  determinate  big- 
ness, as  I  observed  their  Cloth  to  be  all  of  one  substance  and 
equal  fineness ;  but  'tis  stubborn  when  new,  wears  out  soon, 
and  when  wet,  feels  a  little  slimy.  They  make  their  pieces 
7  or  8  Yards  long,  their  Warp  and  Woof  all  one  thickness 
and  substance. 

There  is  another  sort  of  Plantains^  in  that  Island, 
which  are  shorter  and  less  than  the  others,  which  I  never  saw 
any  where  but  here.  These  are  full  of  black  Seeds  mixt 
quite  through  the  Fruit.  They  are  binding,  and  are  much 
eaten  by  those  that  have  Fluxes.  The  Country  People  gave 
them  us  for  that  use,  and  with  good  success. 

^  This  plantain-fibre  cloth  appears  to  have  become  obsolete  in  Mindanao. 
The  poorer  natives  now  wear  cotton.  The  rich  wear  a  material  woven  from 
the  leaf  of  the  pine-apple.  Many  natives  have  adopted  the  European 
habit.  Plantain-fibre  cloth  is  still  woven,  and  worn,  in  some  of  the  South 
Pacific  islands. 

*  Apparently  the  wild  tamarind. 

324 


r        BONANOS— CLOVES— NUTMEGS  ^ 

■       The  Bonano  Tree  is  exactly  like  the  Plantain  for  shape    am. 
rand  bigness,  not  easily  distinguishable  from  it  but  by  its  '^** 
[  Fruit,  which  is  a  great  deal  smaller,  and  not  above  half  so 
long  as  a  Plantain,  being  also  more  mellow  and  soft,  less 
luscious,  yet  of  a  more  delicate  taste.     They  use  this  for        J 
the  making   Drink   oftner  than    Plantains,  and  it  is  best        I 
when  used  for  Drink ;  or  eaten  as  Fruit ;  but  it  is  not  so       J 
good  for  Bread,  nor  doth  it  ext  well  at  all  when  roasted  or      H 
boil'd  ;  so  'tis  only  necessity  that  makes  any  use  it  this  way.       H 
They  grow  generally  where  Plantains  do,  being  set  inter-       H 
mixt  with  them  purposely  in  their  Plantain- walks.     They        ■ 
have  plenty  of  Clovcbark,  of  which  I  saw  a  Ship  load ;  and         I 
as  for  Cloves,  Raja  Laut,  whom  I  shall  have  occasion  to        I 
mention,  told  mc,  that  if  the  English  would  settle  there,         I 
ihey  could  order  Matters  so  in  a  little  time,  as  to  send  a         I 
ship-load  trf"  Cloves  from  thence  every  Year.     I  have  been         I 
informed  that  they  grow  on  the  Boughs  of  a  Tree  about  as         I 
big  as  a  Plumb'tree,  but  1  never  happened  to  see  any  of  them.         I 
I  have  not  seen  the  Nutmeg-trccs  anywhere  ;    but  the        M 
Nutmegs  this  Island  produceih  are  fair  and  large,  yet  they       H 
have  no  great  store  of  them,  being  unwilling  to  propagate       H 
tbem  or  the  Cloves,  for  fear  that  should  invite  the  Dutch         ' 
to  visit  them,  and  bring  them  into  subjection,  as  they  have 
dffiie  the  rest  of  the  neighbouring  Islands  where  they  grow. 
For  the  Dutch  being  seated  among  the  Spicc-Islands,  have 
monc^mlixed  all  the  Trade  into  their  own  Hands,  and  will 
not  suffer  any  of  the  Natives  to  dispose  of  it,  but  to  them- 
selves atone.     Nay,  they  arc  so  careful  to  preserve  it  in 
their  own  Hands,  that  they  will  not  suffer  the  Spice  to  grow 
in  the  uninhabited  Islands,  but  send  Soldiers  to  cut  the  Trees 
down.     Captain  Rofy  told  mc,  that  while  he  lived  with  the 
Dutch,  he  was  sent  with  other  Men  to  cut  down  the  Spice- 
Trees  ;  and  that  he  himself  did  at  several   times  cut  down 
7  or  800  Trees.     Yet  although  the  Dutch  lake  such  care 
to  destroy  ihcm,  there  arc  many  uninhabited  Islands  that 
have  great  plenty  of  Spice-Trees,  as  I  have  been  informed  by 
Dutch  Men  that  have  been  there,  particularly  by  a  Captain 
'>f  ■  Dutch  Ship  that  I  met  with  at  Achin,  who  tola  me, 
:lut  near  the  Island  Banda  there  is  an  Island  where  the 
3»5 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Cloves  falling  from  the  Trees  do  lie  and  rot  on  the  ground, 
'^^^  and  they  are  at  the  time  when  the  Fruit  falls,  3  or  4  Inches 
thick  under  the  Trees.  He  and  some  others  told  me,  that 
it  would  not  be  a  hard  matter  for  an  English  Vessel  to 
purchase  a  Ship's  Cargo  of  Spice,  of  the  Natives  of  some  of 
these  Spice-Islands. 

He  was  a  free  Merchant  that  told  me  this.  For  by  that 
name  the  Dutch  and  English  in  the  East-Indies,  distinguish 
those  Merchants  who  are  not  Servants  to  the  Company. 
The  free  Merchants  are  not  suffered  to  Trade  to  the  Spice- 
Islands,  nor  to  many  other  places  where  the  Dutch  have 
Factories;  but  on  the  other  Hand,  they  are  suffered  to 
Trade  to  some  places  where  the  Dutch  Company  themselves 
may  not  Trade,  as  to  Achin  particularly,  for  there  are  some 
Princes  in  the  Indies,  who  will  not  Trade  with  the  Com- 
pany for  fear  of  them.  The  Seamen  that  go  to  the  Spice 
Islands  are  obliged  to  bring  no  Spice  from  thence  for  them- 
selves, except  a  small  matter  for  their  own  use,  about  a 
pound  or  two.  Yet  the  Masters  of  those  Ships  do  com- 
monly so  order  their  business,  that  they  often  secure  a  good 
quantity,  and  send  it  ashore  to  some  place  near  Batavia, 
before  they  come  into  that  Harbour,  (for  it  is  always 
brought  thither  first  before  it's  sent  to  Europe,)  and  if  they 
meet  any  Vessel  at  Sea  that  will  buy  their  Cloves,  they  will 
sell  10  or  15  Tuns  out  of  100,  and  yet  seemingly  carry 
their  Complement  to  Batavia ;  for  they  will  pour  Water 
among  the  remaining  part  of  their  Cargo,  which  will  swell 
them  to  that  degree,  that  the  Ships  Hold  will  be  as  full 
again,  as  it  was  before  any  were  sold.  This  Trick  they  use 
when  ever  they  dispose  of  any  clandestinely,  for  the  Cloves 
when  they  first  take  them  in  are  extraordinary  dry ;  and  so 
will  imbibe  a  great  deal  of  Moisture.  This  is  but  one  In- 
stance, of  many  hundreds,  of  little  deceitful  Arts  the  Dutch 
Sea-men  have  in  these  Parts  among  them,  of  which  I  have 
both  seen  and  heard  several.  I  believe  there  are  no  where 
greater  Thieves ;  ^  and  nothing  will  persuade  them  to  dis- 

*  It  was  commonly  said  of  the  Dutch  in  the  East  Indies  at  this  time, 
that  **thcy  would  do  no  right,  and  take  no  wrong."  In  a  letter  from  Sir 
Thomas  Lynch  to  the  Lords  of  Trade  and  Plantations  (Calendar  of  Stale 

326 


THE   BETEL-TREE   AND   NUT 

trer  one  another;  for  should  any  do  it,  the  rest  would  ah.* 
Kecrtunly  knock  him  on  the  Head.  But  to  return  to  the  '^^ 
■■Rtxlucts  of  Mindanao. 

The  Betel-nut '  is  much  esteemed  here,  as  it  is  in  most 
places  of  the  East-Indies.  The  Betel-Tree  grows  like  the 
Cabbage-Tree,  but  it  is  not  so  big,  nor  so  high.  The  Body 
grows  strait,  about  12  or  14  foot  high  without  Leaf  or 
Branch,  except  at  the  Head.  There  it  spreads  forth  long 
Branches,  like  other  Trees  of  the  like  nature,  as  the  Cabbage- 
Tree,  the  Coco-Nut  Tree,  and  the  Palm.  These  Branches 
arc  about  to  or  12  foot  long,  and  their  stems  near  the  head 
of  the  Tree,  as  big  as  a  Man's  Arm.  On  the  top  of  the 
Tree  among  the  Branches  the  Betel-Nut  grows  on  a  tough 
'■:cni  as  big  as  a  Man's  Finger,  in  clusters  much  as  the 
Coco-Nuts  do,  and  they  grow  40  or  $0  in  a  cluster.  This 
Fruit  is  Inggcr  than  a  Nutmeg,  and  is  much  like  it.  but 
nwndcr.  It  is  much  used  all  over  the  East-Indies.  Their 
way  i»  to  cut  it  in  four  pieces,  and  wrap  one  of  them  up 
in  an  Arek  leaf,  which  ihcy  spread  with  2  soft  Paste  made 
of  Lime  or  Plaster,  and  then  chew  it  altogether.  Every 
nun  in  these  parts  carries  his  Lime-Box  by  his  side,  and 
dipping  his  Rngcr  into  it,  spreads  his  Betel  and  Arek  leaf 
with  it.  The  Arek  is  a  small  Tree  or  Shrub,  of  a  green 
Bark,  and  the  Leaf  is  long  and  broader  than  z  Willow.  They 
are  pgickt  up  to  sell  into  Parts  that  have  them  not,  to  chew 
with  the  Betel.  The  Betel-Nut  is  most  esteemed  when  it 
B  young,  and  before  it  grows  hard,  and  then  they  cut  it 

Papcfa,  West  Indiaa  and  Colonial  SEriei,  September  12,  1683)  mention  is 
— -*'  «f  MMnc  Dutch  piiatM  who  hail  been  at  work  near  Cura<;ua.  "1 
*i»dci  not,"  ttjn  Sir  ■niomai,  "that  they  do  this  in  the  West  as  they  have 
4aae  ao  vnch  mora  in  tb«  Ea»i  Indies,  and  that  there  is  in  Holland  this 
pwwwti.  *  l«MU  Chritt  if  ^ootJ,  but  trade  is  better.'" 

'  The  httclitui  proper  is  the  nut  of  the  Arcca  palm  {Areca  catechu), 
^)«B  to  ibe  iuiiTve«  as  the  bunfia.  The  nut  is  gathered  and  cut  a* 
Daapiar  dtxrib**.     The  faciel^hewcr  then  lakes  an  "Arek-lcaf," 


»: 


ftcta  leaf  tf  the  "  buyo,"  or  piper  betel  plant,  and  smears  it  thickly 


It  *  pule  at  liroe  (mode  from  pounded  oyster- she  Ms).  The  leaf  is  then 
vtapacd  roand  the  broken  piece  of  nut,  and  the  whole  is  placed  in  the 
■Hota  of  ibe  cbewef.  The  nut  siiinulates  uilivatlon,  and  tinges  the  spittle 
*«h  a  flcarld  cnhMr.  The  mouth  of  a  bctel-rhcwer  appearn  to  be  bloody. 
TWhetd-noi  ■■  wbole*onie,  if  used  in  moderation.  I)  am  pier  here  confounds 
At  t*a  plaaOk  but  hie  pain  tt  om  his  ctTOt  in  Chapter  1 1 1 .  of  his  Mcond  volume. 

327 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  only  in  two  pieces  with  the  green  Husk  or  Shell  on  it.  It 
1686  jg  ^[^g|^  exceeding  juicy,  and  therefore  makes  them  spit 
much.  It  tastes  rough  in  the  Mouth,  and  dies  the  Lips 
red,  and  makes  the  Teeth  black,  but  it  preserves  them,  and 
cleanseth  the  Gums.  It  is  also  accounted  very  wholsom 
for  the  Stomach ;  but  sometimes  it  will  cause  great  giddi- 
ness in  the  head  of  those  that  are  not  us*d  to  chew  it.  But 
this  is  the  Effect  only  of  the  old  Nut,  for  the  young  Nuts 
will  not  do  it.     I  speak  of  my  own  Experience. 

This  Island  produceth  also  Durians  and  Jacks.  The 
Trees  that  bear  the  Durians,  are  as  big  as  Apple-Trees,  full 
of  Boughs.  The  Rind  is  thick  and  rough ;  the  Fruit  is  so 
large  that  they  grow  only  about  the  Bodies,  or  on  the 
Limbs  near  the  Body,  like  the  Cacao.  The  Fruit  is  about 
the  bigness  of  a  large  Pumpkin,  covered  with  a  thick  green 
rough  Rind.  When  it  is  ripe,  the  Rind  begins  to  turn 
yellow,  but  it  is  not  fit  to  eat  till  it  opens  at  the  top. 
Then  the  Fruit  in  the  inside  is  ripe,  and  sends  forth 
an  excellent  Scent.^  When  the  Rind  is  opened,  the  Fruit 
may  be  split  into  four  quarters ;  each  quarter  hath  several 
small  Cells,  that  inclose  a  certain  quantity  of  the  Fruit, 
according  to  the  bigness  of  the  Cell,  for  some  are  larger 
than  others.  The  largest  of  the  Fruit  may  be  as  big  as  a 
Pullets  Egg.  'Tis  as  white  as  Milk,  and  as  soft  as  Cream, 
and  the  Taste  very  delicious  to  those  that  are  accustomed 
to  them ;  but  those  who  have  not  been  used  to  eat  them, 
will  dislike  them  at  first,  because  they  smell  like  roasted 
Onions.  This  Fruit  must  be  eaten  in  its  prime,  (for  there 
is  no  eating  of  it  before  it  is  ripe)  and  even  then  'twill 
not  keep  above  a  day  or  two  before  it  putrifies,  and  turns 
black,  or  of  a  dark  colour,  and  then  it  is  not  good. 
Within  the  Fruit  there  is  a  Stone  as  big  as  a  small  Bean, 
which  hath  a  thin  Shell  over  it.  Those  that  are  minded 
to  eat  the  Stones  or  Nuts,  roast  them,  and  then  a  thin  Shell 
comes  off,  which  incloses  the  Nut ;  and  it  eats  like  a 
Chesnut. 

The  Jack  or  Jaca"  is  much  like  the  Durian,  both  in  big- 

^  The  smell  is  disgusting. 

^  The  Jack  Fruit  is  a  variety  of  Durian. 

328 


THE   ANIMALS    HERE  ■ 

ness  »mi  shape.     The  Trees  that  bear  them  also  are  much  aw. 

1  hke,  and  so  is  their  manner  of  the  Fruiis  growing.     But  "^^ 
the  inside  is  dif^rcnt ;  for  the  Fruit  of  the  Duriati  is  white, 

that  of  the  Jack  is   yellow,  and   fuller  of  Stones.     The  ^ 

Durian  ts  most  esteemed ;  yet  the  Jack  is  a  very  pleasant  ^M 

Fruit,  and  the  Stones  or  Kernels  are  good  roasted.  ^| 

There  are  many  other  sorts  of  Grain,  Roots  and  Fruits  ^| 

in  thi^  Island,  which  to  give  a.  particular  description  of  ^M 

would  fill  up  a  large  Volume.  ^M 

In  this  Island  are  also  many  sorts  of  Beasts,  both  wild  ^M 

and  tame ;  as  Hones,  Bulls,  and  Cows,  Buflalocs,  Goats,  ^M 

Wild  Hc^s,  Deer,  Monkics,  Guano's,  Lizards,  Snakes,  &c.  ^M 

I  never  saw  or  heard  of  any  Beasts  of  Prey  here,  as  in  many  ^M 

other  nUccs.     The  Hogs  are  ugly  Creatures  ;  they  have  all  V 

great  Knobs  growing  over  their  Eyes,  and  there  arc  multi-  fl 

tudcs  of  them  in  the  Woods.     They  are  commonly  very  ^M 

poor,    yet   sweet.      Deer  are   here   very   plentiful   in   some  ^M 

^ccs,  where  they  are  not  disturbed.  ^M 

Of  the  venomous  kind  of  Creatures  here  arc  Scorpions,  H 

whose  fling  is  in  their  Tail;  and  Centapees,  call'd  by  the  ■ 

English  40  Legs,  both  which  are  also  common  in  the  West-  H 

Indies,  in  Jamaica,  and  elswhere.     These  Centapees  are  4  H 

or  5  Inches  long,  as  big  as  a  Goose-Quill,  but  flattish  ;  of  a  H 

Dun  or  reddish  colour  on  the  Back,  but  Belly  whitish,  and  H 

full  of  Legs  on  each  side  the  Belly.     Their  Sting  or  Bite  ■ 

is  more  raging  than  the  Scorpion.*    They  lie  in  old  Houses,  H 

and  dry  Timber.  There  are  several  sorts  of  Snakes,  some  V 
very  Poisonous.  There  is  another  sort  of  Creature '  like 
a  Guano  both  in  colour  and  shape,  but  four  times  as  big, 
whose  Tongue  is  tike  a  small  Harpoon,  having  two  beards 
like  the  beards  of  a  Fish-hook.  They  arc  said  to  be  very 
venomous,  but  I  know  not  their  Names.  I  have  seen  them 
in  other  places  also,  as  at  Pulo  Condore,  or  the  Island 
Condorc,  and  at  Achin,  and  have  been  told  that  they  are 
in  the  Bay  of  Bengal. 

The  Fowb  of  this  Country  are   Ducks  and    Hens: 

'  For   iht   "wotip^de  bite"    Mr.   ForcRUUi    prescribot    a    plaster   of 
cnBhed  cvlic.    TIm:  ttiag  ii  ulrcmdy  p«inful. 

*  Thnt  are  igvanuand  \argt  liiardt  nn  mosx  of  th«  islantU. 


CAPTAIN  DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AN.  Other  tame  Fowl  I  have  not  seen  nor  heard  of  any.     The 

'^^  wild  Fowl,  are  Pidgeons,  Parrots,  Parakits,  Turtle  Doves, 

and  abundance  of  snmll  Fowls.    There  are  Bats  as  tng  as 

a  Kite.^ 

There  are  a  great  many  Harbours,  Creeks,  and  good 
Bays  for  Ships  to  ride  in ;  and  Rivers  navigable  for  Canoas, 
Proes  or  Ba^ks,  which  are  all  plentifully  stored  with  Fish 
of  divers  sorts,  so  is  also  the  adjacent  Sea.  The  chiefest 
Fish  are  Bonetas,  Snooks,  Cavally's,  Bremes,  Mullets,  lo 
Pounders,  &c.  Here  are  also  plenty  of  Sea  Turtle,  and 
small  Manatee,  which  are  not  near  so  big  as  those  in  the 
West-Indies.  The  biggest  that  I  saw  would  not  weigh 
above  600  Pound ;  but  the  flesh  both  of  the  Turtle  and 
Manatee  are  very  sweet. 

The  Weather  at  Mindanao  is  temperate  enough  as  to 
heat,  for  all  it  lies  so  near  the  Equator ;  and  especially  on 
the  borders  near  the  Sea.  There  they  commonly  enjoy  the 
breezes  by  day,  and  cooling  Land  Winds  at  Night.  The 
Winds  are  Easterly  one  part  of  the  Year,  and  Westerly  the 
other.  The  Easterly  Winds  begin  to  blow  in  October,  and 
it  is  the  middle  of  November  before  they  are  settled. 
These  Winds  bring  fair  Weather.  The  Westerly  Winds* 
begin  to  blow  in  May,  but  are  not  settled  till  a  Month 
afterwards.  The  West  Winds  always  bring  Rain,  Torna- 
does, and  very  Tempestuous  Weather.  At  the  first  coming 
in  of  these  Winds  they  blow  but  faintly;  but  then  the 
Tornadoes  rise  one  in  a  Day,  sometimes  two.  These  arc 
Thunder-showers  which  commonly  come  against  the  Wind, 
bringing  with  them  a  contrary  Wind  to  what  did  blow 
before.  After  the  Tornadoes  are  over,  the  Wind  shifts 
about  again,  and  the  Sky  becomes  clear,  yet  then  in  the 
Valleys  and  the  sides  of  the  Mountains,  there  riseth  a 
thick  Fog,  which  covers  the  Land.  The  Tornadoes  con- 
tinue thus  for  a  Week  or  more ;  then  they  come  thicker, 

^  Large  fruit  bats  abound  in  many  of  the  East  Indian  Islands.  The 
natives  kill  them  for  their  fur  and  for  their  meat.  They  are  gregarious, 
and  the  caves  in  which  they  sleep  are  sometimes  visited  for  guana 

'  The  SW.  monsoon  generally  sets  in  at  the  end  of  April.  It  must  be 
borne  in  mind  that  the  seasons  are  reversed  on  all  "  those  coasts  directly 
facing  the  Pacific." 

330 


THE   WIND  AND   WEATHER 


V^wo  or  three  in  a  Day,  bringing  violent  gusts  of  Wind,  and  , 
terrible  claps  of  Thunder.  At  last  they  come  so  fast,  ' 
that  the  Wind  remains  in  the  quarter  from  whence  these 
Tornadoes  do  rise,  which  is  out  of  the  West,  and  there  it 
settles  till  October  or  November,  When  these  Westward 
Winds  are  thus  settled,  the  Sky  is  all  in  mourning,  being 
covered  with  black  Clouds,  pouring  down  excessive  Rains 
sometimes  mixt  with  Thunder  and  Lightning,  that  nothing 
can  be  more  dismal.  The  Winds  raging  to  that  degree, 
that  the  biggest  Trees  are  torn  up  by  the  Roots,  and  the 
Rivers  swell  and  overflow  their  Banks,  and  drown  the  low 
Land,  carrying  great  Trees  into  the  Sea.  Thus  it  con- 
tinues sometimes  a  week  together,  before  the  Sun  or  Stars 
■ppcar.  The  fiercest  of  this  Weather  is  in  the  latter  end 
of  July  and  in  August,  for  then  the  Towns  seem  to  stand 
in  a  great  Pond,  and  they  go  from  one  House  to  another 
ia  Cvtoss.  At  this  time  the  Water  carries  away  all  the 
filth  and  nastincss  from  under  their  Houses.  Whilst  this 
ttmpcstuous  season  lasts,  the  Weather  ts  Cold  and  Chilly. 
In  September  the  Weather  is  more  moderate,  and  the 
Wind*  are  not  so  fierce,  nor  the  Rain  so  violent.  The 
Air  thenceforward  begins  to  be  more  clear  and  delight- 
some ;  but  then  in  the  morning  there  arc  thick  Fogs, 
continuing  till  lo  or  ii  a  Clock  before  the  Sun  shines 
out.  apccially  when  it  has  rained  in  the  Night.  In 
October  the  Easterly  Winds  begin  to  blow  again,  and 
bring  fair  Weather  till  April.  Thus  much  concerning  the 
Itural  state  of  Mindanao. 


33" 


CHAP.  XII 

Of  the  Inhabitants^  and  Civil  State  of  the  Isle  of  Mindanao.  The 
MindanayanSj  HilanooneSj  Sologues^  and  Alfoores.  Of  the  Minda- 
nayanSy  properly  so  called ;  Their  Manners  and  Habits.  The 
Habits  and  Manners  of  their  JVomen.  A  Comical  Custom  at 
Mindanao.  Their  Houses^  their  Diety  and  JVashings.  The 
Languages  spoken  there^  and  Transactions  with  the  Spaniards, 
Their  fear  of  the  Dutch ^  and  seeming  desire  of  the  English.  Their 
Handy-<rafisj  and  peculiar  sort  of  Smiths  Bellows.  Their  Shippings 
Commodities^  and  Trade.  The  Mindanao  and  Manila  Tobacco. 
A  sort  of  Leprosie  there^  and  other  Distempers.  Their  Marriages. 
The  Sultan  of  Mindanao^  his  Poverty^  Power,  Family^  Sfc.  The 
Proes  or  Boats  here.  Raja  Lout  the  General^  Brother  to  the 
Sultan^  and  his  Family.  Their  way  of  Fighting.  Their  Religion. 
Raja  Lout's  Devotion.  A  Clock  or  Drum  in  their  Mosques.  Of 
their  Circumcision^  and  the  Solemnity  then  used.  Of  other  their 
Religious  Observations  and  Superstitions.  Their  abhorrence  of 
Swines  Fleshy  &c. 

[HIS  Island  is  not  subject  to  one  Prince,  neither 
is  the  Language  one  and  the  same;  but  the 
People  are  much  alike,  in  colour,  strength,  and 
stature.  They  are  all  or  most  of  them  of  one 
Religion,  which  is  Mahometanism,  and  their  customs  and 
manner  of  living  are  alike.  The  Mindanao  People,  more 
particularly  so  called,  are  the  greatest  Nation  in  the  Island, 
and  trading  by  Sea  with  other  Nations,  they  are  therefore 
the  more  civil.  I  shall  say  but  little  of  the  rest,  being 
less  known  to  me,  but  so  much  as  hath  come  to  my 
knowledge,    take    as    follows.       There    are    besides^    the 

*  The  priests  of  the  Jesuit  Missions  reckon  that  the  island  contains 
twenty-four  distinct  tribes.  The  "Sologues"  may  be  the  "  Moros,*'  a 
warrior  tribe  from  Borneo,  which  settled  in  northern  Mindanao  at  the  end 
of  the  sixteenth  century. 

332 


i      OF  THE    PEOPLE   OF   THE   ISLAND 

^Mindanaywia,  the  Hilanoones,  (as  they  call  them)  or  the   , 
Mountanecrs,  the  Sologues  and  Alfoores.  ' 

The  HtUnoones  live  in  the  heart  of  the  Country ; 
They  have  little  or  no  commerce  by  Sea,  yet  they  have 
Proc's  that  row  with  12  or  14  Oars  apiece.  They  enjoy 
the  benefit  of  the  Gold  Mines;  and  with  their  Gold  buy 
foreign  Commodities  of  the  Mindanao  People.  They  have 
abo  plenty  of  Bees-Wax,  which  they  exchange  for  other 
Commodities. 

The  Sologues  inhabit  the  N.  W.  end  of  the  Island. 
Tbey  are  the  least  Nation  of  all ;  they  trade  to  Manila  in 
Procs,  and  to  some  of  the  Neighbouring  Islands,  but  have 
BO  Commerce  with  the  Mindanao  People. 

The  Alfoores  are  the  same  with  the  Mindanayans,  and 
were  formerly  under  the  subjection  of  the  Sultan  of 
Mindanao,  but  were  divided  between  the  Sultan's  Children, 
tnd  have  of  late  had  a  Sultan  of  their  own ;  but  having 
by  Marriage  contracted  an  alliance  with  the  Sultan  of 
Mindanao,  this  has  occasioned  that  Prince  to  claim  them 
again  as  his  Subjects ;  and  he  made  War  with  them  a  little 
aner  we  went  away,  as  1  afterwards  understood. 

The  Mindanayans  properly  so  called,  are  Men  of  mean 
statures;  small  Limbs,  straight  Bodies,  and  little  Heads. 
Their  Faces  arc  oval,  their  Foreheads  flat,  with  black 
ifflail  Eyes,  short  low  Noses,  pretty  large  Mouths ;  their 
Lips  ihin  and  red,  their  Teeth  black,  yet  very  sound,  their 
Hair  black  and  straight,  the  colour  uf  their  Skin  tawney, 
but  inclining  to  a  brighter  yellow  than  some  other  Indians, 
especially  the  Women.  They  have  a  Custom  to  wear  their 
Thumb-nails  very  long,  especially  that  on  their  left  Thumb, 
for  they  do  never  cut  it  but  scrape  it  often.  They  are 
indued  with  good  natural  Wits,  arc  ingenious,  nimble,  and 
active,  when  they  are  minded;  but  generally  ve^ry  lazy  and 
thievish,  and  will  not  work  except  forced  by  Hunger.  This 
laziness  is  natural  to  most  Indians;  but  these  People's 
laziness  seems  rather  to  proceed  not  so  much  from  their 
natural  Inclinations,  as  from  the  severity  tif  their  Prince 
of  whom  they  stand  in  awe :  For  he  dealing  with  them 
very  arbitranly,  and  taking  from  them  what  they  get,  this 
333 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  damps  their  Industry,  so  they  never  strive  to  have  any 
1686  thing  but  from  Hand  to  Mouth.  They  arc  generally 
proud,  and  walk  very  stately.  They  are  civil  enough  to 
Strangers,  and  will  easily  be  acquainted  with  them,  and 
entertain  them  with  great  freedom ;  but  they  are  implac- 
able to  their  Enemies,  and  very  revengeful  if  they  are 
injured,  frequently  poisoning  secretly  those  that  have 
affronted  them. 

They  wear  but  few  Cloaths;  their  Heads  are  circled 
with  a  short  Turbat,  fringed  or  laced  at  both  ends;  it 
goes  once  about  the  Head,  and  is  tied  in  a  knot,  the 
laced  ends  hanging  down.  They  wear  Frocks  and  Breeches, 
but  no  Stockings  nor  Shooes. 

The  Women  are  fairer  than  the  Men ;  and  their  Hair 
is  black  and  long ;  which  they  tie  in  a  knot,  that  hangs 
back  in  their  Poles.  They  arc  more  round  visaged  than 
the  Men,  and  generally  well  featured;  only  their  Noses 
are  very  small,  and  so  low  between  their  Eyes,  that  in 
some  of  the  Female  Children  the  rising  that  should  be 
between  the  Eyes  is  scarce  discernable  ;  neither  is  there 
any  sensible  rising  in  their  Foreheads.  At  a  distance  they 
appear  very  well ;  but  being  nigh :  these  Impediments  are 
very  obvious.  They  have  very  small  Limbs.  They  wear 
but  two  Garments ;  a  Frock,  and  a  sort  of  Petticoat ; 
the  Petticoat  is  only  a  piece  of  Cloth,  sewed  both  ends 
together :  but  it  is  made  two  Foot  too  big  for  their 
Wastes,  so  that  they  may  wear  either  end  uppermost : 
that  part  that  comes  up  to  their  Wastes,  because  it  is  so 
much  too  big,  they  gather  it  in  their  Hands,  and  twist 
it  till  it  fits  close  to  their  Wastes,  tucking  in  the  twisted 
part  between  their  Waste  and  the  edge  of  the  Petticoat, 
which  keeps  it  close.  The  Frock  fits  loose  about  them, 
and  reaches  down  a  little  below  the  Waste.  The  Sleeves 
are  a  great  deal  longer  than  their  Arms,  and  so  small  at 
the  end,  that  their  Hands  will  scarce  go  through.  Being 
on,  the  Sleeve  sits  in  folds  about  the  wrist,  wherein  they 
take  great  Pride. 

The  better  sort  of  People  have  their  Garments  made  of 
long  Cloth ;    but  the  ordinary  sort  wear  Cloth   made  of 

334 


■  THEIR    HABITS 

■Plant ain-Trcc,  which  they  call  Saggcn,  by  which  Name  they 
call  the  Plantain,  they  have  neither  Stocking  or  Shooe,  and   ' 
the  Women  have  very  small  Feet. 

The  Women  arc  very  desirous  of  the  company  of 
Strangers,  especially  of  White  Men  ;  and  doubtless  would 
be  very  familiar,  if  the  custom  of  the  Country  did  not 
debar  them  from  that  freedom,  which  seems  coveted 
by  them.  Yet  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest  they  are 
allowed  liberty  to  converse  with,  or  treat  Strangers  in 
the  light  of  their  Husbands. 

There  is  a  kind  of  begging  Custom  at  Mindanao,  that  I 
have  not  met  elsewhere  with  in  all  my  Travels ;  and  which 
I  believe  is  owing  to  the  little  Trade  they  have ;  which  is 
thus:  When  Strangers  arrive  here,  the  Mindanao  Men  will 
come  aboard,  and  Invite  them  to  their  Houses,  and  inquire 
who  has  a  Comrade,  (which  word  I  believe  they  have  from 
the  Spaniards)  or  a  Pagally,  and  who  has  not.  A  Comrade 
Ha  familiar  Male-friend;  a  Pagally  is  an  Innocent  Platonick 
Friend  of  the  other  Sex.  Ail  Strangers  are  in  a  manner 
oblig'd  to  accept  of  this  Acquaintance  and  Familiarity, 
which  must  be  first  purchased  with  a  small  Present,  and 
afterwards  confirmed  with  some  Gift  or  other  to  continue 
the  Acquaintance:  and  as  often  as  the  Stranger  goes  ashore, 
he  is  welcome  to  his  Comrade  or  Pagally's  House,  where 
be  may  be  entertained  for  his  Money,  to  Eat,  Drink,  or 
Sleep;  and  complimented,  as  often  as  he  comes  ashore, 
with  Tobacco  and  Betel-Nut,  which  is  all  the  Entertain- 
ment he  must  expect  gratis.  The  richest  Mens  Wives,  are 
sllow'd  the  freedom  to  converse  with  her  Pagally  in  publick, 
and  may  give  or  receive  presents  from  him.  Even  the 
Sultana  and  the  Generals  Wives,  who  arc  always  coopt  up, 
will  yet  look  out  of  their  Cages  when  a  Stranger  passeth 
by,  and  demand  of  him  if  he  wants  a  Pagally  :  and  to  invite 
him  to  their  Friendship,  will  send  a  Present  of  Tobacco 
and  Betel-nut  to  him  by  their  Servants. 

The  ehicfeat  City  on  this  Island  is  called  by  the  same  name 
f  Mindanao.  It  is  seated  on  the  South  side  of  the  Island, 
I  lat.  7  d.  30  m.  N.  on  the  banks  of  a  small  Kiver,  about 

>  Mile  from  the  Sea.     The  manner  of  building  is  some- 
335 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  what  strange :  yet  generally  used  in  this  part  of  the  East- 
i6«6  Indies.  Their  Houses  are  all  built  on  Posts,  about  14, 1 6, 
18,  or  20  Foot  high.  These  Posts  arc  bigger  or  less, 
according  to  the  intended  magnificence  of  the  Super- 
structure. They  have  but  one  Floor,  but  many  Partitions 
or  Rooms,  and  a  Ladder  or  Stairs  to  go  up  out  of  the 
Streets.  The  Roof  is  large,  and  covered  with  Palmeto  or 
Palm-leaves.  So  there  is  a  clear  passage  like  a  Piazza  (but 
a  filthy  one)  under  the  House.  Some  of  the  poorer  People 
that  keep  Ducks  or  Hens,  have  a  fence  made  round  the 
Posts  of  their  Houses,  with  a  Door  to  go  in  and  out ;  and 
this  Under-room  serves  for  no  other  use.  Some  use  this 
place  for  the  common  draught  of  their  Houses,  but  build- 
ing mostly  close  by  the  River  in  all  parts  of  the  Indies,  they 
make  the  River  receive  all  the  filth  of  their  House ;  and 
at  the  Time  of  the  Land-floods,  all  is  washed  very  clean. 

The  Sultan's  House  is  much  bigger  than  any  of  the 
rest.  It  stands  on  about  1 80  great  Posts  or  Trees,  a  great 
deal  higher  than  the  common  Building,  with  great  broad 
Stairs  made  to  go  up.  In  the  first  Room  he  hath  about  20 
Iron  Guns,^  all  Saker  and  Minion,  placed  on  Field-Carriages. 
The  General,  and  other  great  Men  have  some  Guns  also  in 
their  Houses.  About  20  paces  from  the  Sultan's  House 
there  is  a  small  low  House,  built  purposely  for  the  Recep- 
tion of  Ambassadors  or  Merchant  Strangers.  This  also 
stands  on  Posts,  but  the  Floor  is  not  raised  above  three  or 
four  Foot  above  the  Ground,  and  is  neatly  Matted  pur- 
posely for  the  Sultan  and  his  Council  to  sit  on ;  for  they 
use  no  Chairs,  but  sit  cross-legg'd  like  Taylors  on  the 
Floor. 

The  common  Food  at  Mindanao  is  Rice,  or  Sago,  and 
a  small  Fish  or  two.  The  better  sort  eat  Buffalo,  or  Fowls 
ill  drest,  and  abundance  of  Rice  with  it.  They  use  no 
Spoons  to  eat  their  Rice,  but  every  Man  takes  a  handful 

^  The  saker  was  a  gun  of  3j-inch  bore,  throwing  a  ball  of  5^  lbs.  weight 
for  a  distance  of  about  1 100  yards.  The  gun  was  muzzle-loading,  and 
needed  a  charge  of  about  5  lbs.  of  powder.  It  was  9  or  10  feet  in  length, 
and  weighed  rather  less  than  12  cwt.  The  minion  was  a  lighter,  shorter 
gun  of  about  the  same  range.     It  threw  a  4-lb.  ball. 

33^ 


OF  THE   HOUSES,   ETC. 


of  the  PUi 


and   b)*  ' 


wttting  his  Hand  in  Water,  , 
that  il  may  not  stick  to  his  Hand,  squeezes  it  into  a  ' 
lump,  as  hard  as  possibly  he  can  make  it,  and  then  crams 
it  into  his  Mouth.  They  a41  strive  to  make  these  lumps 
as  big  as  their  Mouth  can  receive  them ;  and  seem  to  vie 
with  each  other,  and  glory  in  taking  in  the  biggest  lump ; 
•o  that  sometimes  they  almost  choak  themselves.  They 
always  wash  after  Meals,  or  if  they  touch  any  thing  that 
is  unclean;  for  which  reason  they  spend  abundance  of 
Water  tn  their  Houses.  This  Water,  with  the  washing 
tif  their  Dishes,  and  what  other  filth  they  make,  they  pour 
down  near  their  Kire-placc:  for  their  Chambers  are  not 
hoarded,  but  floored  with  split  Bamboes,  like  Laths,  so 
that  the  Water  presently  falls  underneath  their  dwelling 
Rooms,  where  it  breeds  Maggots,  and  makes  a  prodigious 
wink.  Besides  this  filthiness,  the  sick  People  ease  them- 
selves, and  make  Water  in  their  Chambers ;  there  being 
a  small  hole  made  purposely  in  the  floor,  to  let  it  drop 
through.  But  healthy  sound  People  commonly  ease  them- 
■elreSi,  and  make  Water  in  the  River.  For  that  reason 
you  shall  always  see  abundance  of  People,  of  both  Sexes 
in  the  River,  from  Morning  till  Night ;  some  easing 
themselves,  others  washing  their  bodies  or  Cloaths.  If 
they  come  into  the  River  purposely  to  wash  their  Cloaths, 
ihcy  strip  and  stand  naked  till  they  have  done ;  then  put 
them  on,  and  march  out  again  :  both  Men  and  Women 
take  grot  delight  in  swimming,  and  washing  themselves, 
being  bred  ro  it  from  their  Infancy.  I  do  believe  it  is 
very  wholsom  to  wash  Mornings  and  Evenings  in  these 
hot  Countries,  at  least  three  or  four  days  in  the  Week : 
Foe  [  did  use  my  self  to  it  when  1  lived  afterwards  at 
Bcn-cooly,  and  found  it  very  refreshing  and  comfortable. 
It  is  verj-  good  for  those  that  have  Fluxes  to  wash  and 
ttand  in  the  River  Mornings  and  Kvcnings.  I  speak  it 
experimentally ;  for  I  was  brought  very  low  with  that 
disteniper  at  Achin ;  but  by  washing  constantly  Mornings 
and  Evenings  I  found  great  benefit,  and  was  quickly  cured 
by  it. 
I  In  the  City  of  Mindanao  they  speak  two  Languages 

^TOL.  337  ^ 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  indifferently ;  their  own  Mindanao  Language,  and  the 
1686  Malaya :  but  in  other  parts  of  the  Island  they  speak  only 
their  proper  Language,  having  little  Commerce  abroad. 
They  have  Schools,  and  instruct  the  Children  to  Read 
and  Write,  and  bring  them  up  in  the  Mahometan  Religion. 
Therefore  many  of  the  words,  especially  their  Prayers,  are 
in  Arabick;  and  many  of  the  words  of  civility  the  same 
as  in  Turkey;  and  especially  when  they  meet  in  the 
Morning,  or  take  leave  of  each  other,  they  express  them- 
selves in  that  Language. 

Many  of  the  old  People,  both  Men  and  Women,  can 
speak  Spanish,  for  the  Spaniards  were  formerly  settled 
among  them,  and  had  several  Forts  on  this  Island;  and 
then  they  sent  two  Friars  to  the  City,  to  convert  the 
Sultan  of  Mindanao  and  his  People.  At  that  time  these 
People  began  to  learn  Spanish,  and  the  Spaniards  incroached 
on  them  and  endeavoured  to  bring  them  into  subjection ; 
and  probably  before  this  time  had  brought  them  all  under 
their  yoak,  if  they  themselves  had  not  been  drawn  off  from 
this  Island  to  Manila,  to  resist  the  Chinese,^  who  threatened 
to  invade  them  there.  When  the  Spaniards  were  gone,  the 
old  Sultan  of  Mindanao,  Father  to  the  present,  in  whose 
time  it  was,  razed  and  demolished  their  Forts,  brought 
away  their  Guns,  and  sent  away  the  Friars ;  and  since  that 
time  will  not  suffer  the  Spaniards  to  settle  on  the  Islands. 

They  are  now  most  afraid  of  the  Dutch,  being  sensible 
how  they  have  inslaved  many  of  the  Neighbouring  Islands. 
For  that  Reason  they  have  a  long  time  desired  the  English 

^  In  the  years  1603,  1639,  and  1660.  The  first  dread  of  a  Chinese  invasion 
appears  to  have  been  without  more  solid  foundation  than  the  visit  of  two 
gorgeously  dressed  Ambassadors  from  the  Emperor  of  China  to  the 
Spanish  Governor-General  at  Manila.  After  the  Ambassadors  had  returned 
to  China,  the  Spanish  authorities  prepared  for  a  Chinese  invasion.  The 
many  Chinese  merchants  at  Manila  were  so  cruelly  harassed  during  the 
panic  that  they  were  at  last  driven  to  take  arms  in  self-defence.  They 
attacked  Manila  "on  the  eve  of  St.  Francis'  Day,"  and  set  fire  to  several 
houses.  On  St.  Francis'  Day  they  destroyed  a  Spanish  garrison,  and 
invested  Manila.  The  Spaniards  soon  rallied,  and  contrived  to  beat  them 
from  the  walls.  After  this,  the  Chinese  were  massacred  wherever  they 
were  found.  It  is  said  that  24,000  were  put  to  death  or  imprisoned. 
Dampier  probably  alludes  to  the  bloody  struggle  with  the  Chinese  in  1660, 
when  nearly  every  Chinese  person  on  Luzon  was  barbarously  massacred. 

338 


THEIR   TRADES 

to  settle  among  them,  and  have  ofFered  them  any  convenient 
Plicc  to  build  a  Fort  in,  as  the  General  himself  told  us;  ' 
giving  this  Reason,  that  they  do  not  find  the  English  so 
incroaching  as  the  Dutch  or  Spanish.  The  Dutch  are  no 
less  jealous  of  their  admitting  the  English,  for  they  are 
sensible  what  detriment  it  would  be  to  them  if  the  English 
thould  settle  here. 

There  are  but  few  Tradesmen  at  the  Ciiy  of  Mindanao. 
The  chicfcst  Trades  are  Goldsmiths,  Blacksmiths,  and 
Carpenters.  There  are  but  two  or  three  Goldsmiths ; 
these  will  work  in  Gold  or  Silver,  and  make  any  thing  that 
you  desire :  but  they  have  no  Shop  furnished  with  Ware 
ready  made  for  Sale.  Here  arc  several  Blacksmiths  who 
work  very  well,  considering  the  Tools  that  they  work  with. 
Their  Bellows  arc  much  different  from  ours.  They  are 
made  of  a  wooden  Cylinder,  the  trunk  of  a  Tree,  about 
three  Foot  long,  bored  hollow  like  a  Pump,  and  set  upright 
on  the  ground,  on  which  the  Fire  it  self  is  made.  Near 
the  lower  end  there  is  a  small  hole,  in  the  side  of  the 
Trunk  next  the  Fire,  made  to  receive  a  Pipe,  through 
which  the  wind  b  driven  to  the  Fire  by  a  great  bunch  of 
fine  Feathers  fastned  to  one  end  of  the  Stick,  which  closing 
up  the  inside  of  the  Cylinder,  drives  the  Air  out  of  the 
Cylinder  through  the  Pipe;  Two  of  these  Trunks 
or  Cylinders  arc  placed  so  nigh  tc^cther,  that  a  Man 
standing  between  them  may  work  them  both  at  once 
alternately,  one  with  each  Hand.  They  have  neither  Vice 
nor  Anvil,  but  a  great  hard  Stone  or  a  piece  of  an  old 
Gun,  to  hammer  upon:  yet  they  will  perform  their  work, 
making  both  common  Utensils  and  Iron  works  about  Ships 
to  admiration.  They  work  altogether  with  Charcoal. 
Every  Man  almost  is  a  Carpenter,  for  they  can  work  with 
the  Ax  and  Adds.  Their  Ax  is  but  small,  and  so  made 
that  ihey  can  take  it  out  of  the  Helve,  and  by  turning  it 
make  an  Adds  of  it.  They  have  no  Saws  ;  but  when  they 
make  Plank,  they  split  the  Tree  in  iwo,  and  make  a  Plank 
of  each  part,  plaining  it  with  the  Ax  and  Adds.  This 
requires  much  pains,  and  takes  up  a  great  deal  of  time; 
but  they  work  cheap,  and  the  goodness  of  the  Plank  thus 
339 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    hewed,  which  hath  its  grain  preserv'd  entire,  makes  amends 
1686  £qj.  ^heir  cost  and  pains. 

They  build  good  and  serviceable  Ships  or  Barks  for  the 
Sea,  some  for  Trade,  others  for  Pleasure ;  and  some  Ships 
of  War.  Their  trading  Vessels  they  send  chiefly  to 
Manila.  Thither  they  transport  Bees-wax,  which,  I  think, 
is  the  only  Commodity,  besides  Gold  that  they  vend  there. 
The  Inhabitants  of  the  City  of  Mindanao  get  a  great  deal 
of  Bees-wax  themselves:  but  the  greatest  quantity  they 
purchase  is  of  the  Mountaneers,  from  whom  they  also  get 
the  Gold  which  they  send  to  Manila ;  and  with  these  they 
buy  their  Calicoes,  Muslins,  and  China  Silk.  They  send 
sometimes  their  Barks  to  Borneo  and  other  Islands;  but 
what  they  transport  thither,  or  import  from  thence,  I  know 
not.  The  Dutch  come  hither  in  Sloops  from  Ternate  and 
Tidore,  and  buy  Rice,  Bees-wax,^  and  Tobacco :  *  for  there 
is  a  great  deal  of  Tobacco  grows  on  this  Island,  more  than  in 
any  Island  or  Country  in  the  East-Indies,  that  I  know  of, 
Manila  only  excepted.  It  is  an  excellent  sort  of  Tobacco ; 
but  these  People  have  not  the  Art  of  managing  this  Trade 
to  their  best  advantage,  as  the  Spaniards  have  at  Manila.  I 
do  believe  the  Seeds  were  first  brought  hither  from  Manila 
by  the  Spaniards,  and  even  thither,  in  all  probability,  from 
America  :  the  difference  between  the  Mindanao  and  Manila 
Tobacco  is,  that  the  Mindanao  Tobacco  is  of  a  darker 
colour  ;  and  the  Leaf  larger  and  grosser  than  the  Manila 
Tobacco,  being  propagated  or  planted  in  a  fatter  Soil.  The 
Manila  Tobacco  is  of  a  bright  yellow  colour,  of  an  in- 
different size,  not  strong,  but  pleasant  to  Smoak.  The 
Spaniards  at  Manila  are  very  curious  about  this  Tobacco, 
having  a  peculiar  way  of  making  it  up  neatly  in  the  Leaf. 
For  they  take  two  little  Sticks,  each  about  a  Foot  long,  and 
flat,  and  placing  the  Stalks  of  the  Tobacco  Leaves  in  a  row, 
40  or  50  of  them  between  the  two  Sticks,  they  bind  them 
hard   together,  so  that   the  Leaves  hang   dangling   down. 

*  Bees-wax  is  still  exported  from  Mindanao. 

2  Tobacco  is  said  to  have  been  introduced  by  Spanish  missionaries 
from  Mexico  about  the  year  1590.  The  Mindanao  tobacco  crop  is  now 
very  small,  and  of  the  worst  possible  quality. 

340 


THE   LEPROSIE 

:  bundles  is  sold  for  a  Rial  at  Fort  St.  Georgi 
but  you  may  have  i  o  or  1 2  pound  of  Tobacco  at  Mindanao  '^ 
for  a  Rial ;  and  the  Tobacco  is  as  good,  or  rather  better 
[ban  the  Manila  Tobacco,  but  they  have  not  that  vent  for 
it  as  the  Spaniards  have. 

The  Mindanao  People  arc  much  troubled  with  a  sort  of 
Leprotic,'  the  same  as  we  observed  at  Guam.  This  Dis- 
temper runs  with  a  dry  Scurf  all  over  their  Bodies,  and 
causcth  great  itching  in  those  that  have  it.  making  them 
frequently  scratch  and  scrub  themselves,  which  raiseth  the 
outer  skin  in  small  whitish  flakes,  like  the  scales  of  little 
Fish,  when  they  are  raised  on  end  with  a  Knife.  This 
maku  their  skin  extraordinary  rough,  and  in  some  you 
shall  see  broad  white  spots  in  several  pans  of  their  Body. 
I  judge  such  have  had  it,  but  are  cured ;  for  their  skins 
were  smooth,  and  1  did  not  perceive  them  to  scrub  them- 
selves:  yet  I  have  Icamt  from  their  own  mouths  that  these 
spots  were  from  this  Distemper,  Whether  they  use  any 
means  to  cure  themselves,  or  whether  it  goes  away  of  it 
Mtf,  I  know  not :  but  1  did  not  perceive  that  they  made 
any  great  matter  of  it,  for  they  did  never  refrain  any 
company  for  it ;  none  of  our  People  caught  it  of  them,  for 
we  were  afraid  of  it,  and  kept  off.  They  are  sometimes 
troubled  with  the  Small  Pox,  out  their  ordinary  Distempers 
arc  Fevers,  Agues,  Fluxes,  with  great  jiains,  and  gripings 
in  their  Guts.*  The  Country  affords  a  great  many  Drugs 
and  Medicinal  Herbs,  whose  Virtues  are  not  unknown  to 
tome  of  them  that  pretend  to  cure  the  Sick. 

The  Mindanao  Men  have  many  Wives :  but  what 
Ceremonies  arc  used  when  they  Marry  1  know  not.  There 
n  commonly  a  great  Feast  made  by  the  Bridegroom  to 
entertain  his  Friends,  and  the  most  part  of  the  Night  is 
spent  in  Mirth. 

The  Sulun  is  absolute  in  his  Power  over  all  his  Subjects. 


'  Tin  b  iia(  tbe  Uuc  kpn»y,  but  a  perniciout  tkm  diicttc  Oue  la  the 

lawTC  CBttM  of  ceruiii  kitub  i>f  iheil-Ath.     It  U  a  fotin  of  Hcrjm- 

Katr*«  pounn  tor  a  *n  Gani,  Canna,  and  Sarnat.     It  Miiielimci  atudn 


'  iSBJMy  CtoirfM 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  He  is  but  a  poor  Prince ;  for  as  I  mentioned  before,  they 
1686  \^^yQ  but  little  Trade,  and  therefore  cannot  be  rich.  If  the 
Sultan  understands  that  any  Man  has  Money,  if  it  be  but 
20  Dollars,  which  is  a  great  matter  among  them,  he  will 
send  to  borrow  so  much  Money,  pretending  urgent  occa- 
sions for  it ;  and  they  dare  not  deny  him.  Sometimes  he 
will  send  to  sell  one  thing  or  another  that  he  hath  to 
dispose  of,  to  such  whom  he  knows  to  have  Money,  and 
they  must  buy  it,  and  give  him  his  price ;  and  if  afterwards 
he  hath  occasion  for  the  same  thing,  he  must  have  it  if  he 
sends  for  it.  He  is  but  a  little  Man,  between  50  or  60 
Years  old,  and  by  relation  very  good  natured,  but  over- 
ruled by  those  about  him.  He  has  a  Queen,  and  keeps 
about  29  Women,  or  Wives  more,  in  whose  company  he 
spends  most  of  his  time.  He  has  one  Daughter  by  his 
Sultaness  or  Queen,  and  a  great  many  Sons  and  Daughters 
by  the  rest.  These  walk  about  the  Streets,  and  would  be 
always  begging  things  of  us ;  but  it  is  reported,  that  the 
young  Princess  is  kept  in  a  Room,  and  never  stirs  out,  and 
that  she  did  never  see  any  Man  but  her  Father  and  Raja 
Laut  her  Uncle,  being  then  about  Fourteen  Years  Old. 

When  the  Sultan  visits  his  Friends  he  is  carried  in  a 
small  Couch  on  four  Mens  shoulders,  with  eight  or  ten 
armed  Men  to  guard  him  ;  but  he  never  goes  far  this  way ; 
for  the  Country  is  very  Woody,  and  they  have  but  little 
Paths,  which  renders  it  the  less  commodious.  When  he 
takes  his  pleasure  by  Water,  he  carries  some  of  his  Wives 
along  with  him.  The  Proes  that  are  built  for  this  purpose, 
are  large  enough  to  entertain  50  or  60  Persons  or  more. 
The  Hull  is  neatly  built,  with  a  round  Head  and  Stern, 
and  over  the  Hull  there  is  a  small  slight  House  built  with 
Bamboes ;  the  sides  are  made  up  with  Split  Bamboes,  about 
four  Foot  high,  with  little  Windows  in  them  of  the  same, 
to  open  and  shut  at  their  pleasure.  The  roof  is  almost 
flat,  neatly  thatched  with  Palmeto  Leaves.  This  House  is 
divided  into  two  or  three  small  Partitions  or  Chambers, 
one  particularly  for  himself.  This  is  neatly  Matted  under- 
neath, and  round  the  sides  ;  and  there  is  a  Carpit  and 
Pillows  for  him  to  sleep  on.     The  second  Room  is  for  his 

342 


THEIR   PROES 

h  like  the  former.  The  third  is  for  i 
Servants,  who  tend  them  with  Tobacco  and  Betel-Nut ;  ' 
for  thcjr  arc  always  chewing  or  smoaking.  The  fore  and 
after-parts  of  the  Vessel  are  for  the  Mariners  to  sit  and 
Row.  Besides  this,  they  have  Outlayers,  such  as  those  I 
described  at  Guam  ;  only  the  Boats  and  Outlayers  here  are 
larger.  These  Boats  are  more  round,  lilcc  the  Half-Moon 
almost ;  and  the  Bamboes  or  Outlayers  that  reach  from  the 
Boat  are  also  crooked.  Besides,  the  Boat  is  not  flat  on  one 
side  here,  as  at  Guam;  but  hath  a  Belly  and  Outlayers  on 
each  ade :  and  whereas  at  Guam  there  is  a  little  Boat 
fasten 'd  to  the  Outlayers,  that  lies  in  the  Water;  the 
Beams  or  Bamboes  here  arc  fasten'd  traverse-wise  to  the 
Oatlsycrs  on  each  side,  and  touch  not  the  Water  like 
Baits,  but  I,  3  or  4  Foot  above  the  Water,  and  serve  for 
the  Barge  Men  to  sit  and  Row  and  paddle  on  ;  the  inside  of 
the  Vessel,  except  only  just  afore  and  abaft,  being  taken  up 
with  the  apartments  for  the  Passengers.  There  run  a-cross 
the  Outlayers  two  tire  of  Beams  for  the  Padlers  to  sit  on, 
on  each  side  the  Vessel.  The  lower  tire  of  these  Beams  is 
not  above  i  Foot  from  the  Water:  so  that  upon  any  the 
least  reeling  of  the  Vessel,  the  Beams  are  dipt  in  the 
Water,  and  the  Men  that  sit  arc  wet  up  to  their  Waste : 
their  Feet  seldom  escaping  the  Water.  And  thus  as  all 
our  Vessels  arc  Rowed  from  within,  these  are  Paddled  from 
without. 

The  Sultan  hath  a  Brother  called  Raja  Laut,  a  brave 
Man.  He  is  the  second  Man  in  the  Kingdom.  All 
Strangers  that  come  hither  to  Trade  must  make  their 
Address  to  htm,  for  all  Sea  Afl^airs  belong  to  him.  He 
Liccnseth  Strangers  to  Import  or  Kxport  any  Commodity, 
and  'tis  by  his  Permission  that  the  Natives  themselves  arc 
sufferrd  to  Trade :  Nay  the  very  Fishermen  must  take  a 
Permit  from  him  :  So  that  there  is  no  Man  can  come  into 
the  River  or  go  out  but  by  his  leave.  He  is  two  or  three 
Years  younger  than  the  Sultan,  and  a  Utile  Man  like  him. 
He  has  eight  Women,  by  some  of  whom  he  hath  Issue. 
He  hath  only  one  Son,  about  twelve  or  fourteen  Years  old, 
who  was  Circumcised  while  we  were  there.  His  Eldest 
343 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER^S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Son  died  a  little  before  we  came  hither,  for  whom  he  was 
1686  3^jij  jj^  great  heaviness.  If  he  had  lived  a  little  longer  he 
should  have  Married  the  Young  Princess,  but  whether  this 
second  Son  must  have  her  I  know  not,  for  I  did  never  hear 
any  Discourse  about  it.  Raja  Laut  is  a  very  sharp  Man ; 
he  speaks  and  writes  Spanish,  which  he  learned  in  his 
Youth.  He  has  by  often  conversing  with  Strangers,  got  a 
great  sight  into  the  Customs  of  other  Nations,  and  by 
Spanish  Books  has  some  knowledge  of  Europe,  He  is 
General  of  the  Mindanayans,  and  is  accounted  an  expert 
Soldier  and  a  very  stout  Man ;  and  the  Women  in  their 
Dances,  sing  many  Songs  in  his  praise. 

The  Sultan  of  Mindanao  sometimes  makes  War  with 
his  Neighbours  the  Mountaneers  or  Alfoores.  Their 
Weapons  are  Swords,  Lances  and  sonie  Hand-Cressets. 
The  Cresset  ^  is  a  small  thing  like  a  Baggonet,  which  they 
always  wear  in  War  or  Peace,  at  Work  or  Play,  from  the 
greatest  of  them  to  the  poorest,  or  the  meanest  Persons. 
They  do  never  meet  each  other  so  as  to  have  a  pitcht 
Battle,  but  they  build  small  Works  or  Forts  of  Timber, 
wherein  they  plant  little  Guns,*  and  lie  in  sight  of  each 
other  2  or  3  Months,  skirmishing  every  Day  in  small 
Parties,  and  sometimes  surprizing  a  Breast-work  ;  and  what- 
ever side  is  like  to  be  worsted,  if  they  have  no  probability 
to  escape  by  flight,  they  sell  their  lives  as  dear  as  they  can ; 
for  there  is  seldom  any  quarter  given,  but  the  Conqueror 
cuts  and  hacks  his  Enemies  to  pieces. 

The  Religion  of  these  People  is  Mahometanism,  Friday 
is  their  Sabbath ;  but  I  did  never  see  any  diflFerence  that 
they  make  between  this  Day  and  any  other  Day,  only  the 
Sultan  himself  goes  then  to  the  Mosque  twice.  Raja  Laut 
never  goes  to  the  Mosque,  but  prays  at  certain  Hours, 
Eight  or  Ten  times  in  a  Day ;  where-ever  he  is,  he  is  very 
punctual  to  his  Canonical  Hours,  and  if  he  be  aboard  will 

1  There  are  about  half-a-dozen  varieties  of  this  "small  thing  like  a 
baggonet."  The  most  popular  form  is  short,  with  a  wavy  blade.  For  war 
a  heavier  kind  is  used,  with  a  weighted  back  and  a  cutting  edge.  This 
makes  a  terrible  weapon  at  close  quarters. 

2  Very  small  brass  guns  suspended  by  withes  from  wooden  crutches. 

344 


A   GONG— CIRCUMCISION 


I? 


uhorc,    on 


purpose   to    pray. 


For  no   Business   nor  aw.' 


I 


Company  hinders  him  from  ihis  Duty.  Whether  he  is  at  '* 
bome  or  abroad,  in  a  House  or  m  the  Field,  he  leaves  all 
bU  &Dmpany,  and  goes  about  lOO  Yards  ofF,  and  there 
kncch  down  to  his  Devotion.  He  first  kisses  the  Ground, 
then  prays  aloud,  and  divers  times  in  his  Prayers  he  kisses 
the  Ground,  and  does  the  same  when  he  leaves  off.  His 
Scrvmnts,  and  his  Wives  and  Children  talk  and  sing,  or 
play  how  they  please  all  the  time,  but  himself  is  very 
Krious.  The  meaner  sort  of  People  have  little  Devotion  : 
1  did  never  sec  any  of  them  at  their  Prayers,  or  go  into  a 
Mosque. 

In  the  Sultan's  Mosque  there  is  a  great  Drum  with  but 
one  Head  called  a  Gong ;  which  is  instead  of  a  Clock. 
This  Gong  is  beaten  at  1 2  a  Clock,  at  3,  6,  and  9 ;  a  Man 
being  appointed  for  that  Service.  He  has  2  Stick  as  big  as 
a  Man's  Arm,  with  a  great  knob  at  the  end,  bigger  than  a 
Man's  Fist,  made  with  Cotton,  bound  fast  with  small 
Cords:  with  this  he  strikes  the  Gong  as  hard  as  he  can, 
about  20  strokes;  beginning  to  strike  leisurely  the  first  5 
or  6  strokes;  then  he  strikes  faster,  and  at  last  strikes  as 
fast  as  he  can  ;  and  then  he  strikes  again  slower  and  slower 
so  many  mnre  strokes :  thus  he  rises  and  falls  three  times, 
and  then  leaves  off  till  three  Hours  after.  This  is  done 
Night  and  Day. 

They  circumcise  the  Males  at  11  or  1 2  Years  of  Age, 
or  older;  and  many  are  circumcised  at  once.  This 
Ceremony  is  performed  with  a  great  deal  of  Solemnity. 
There  had  been  no  Circumcision  ft>r  some  Years  before  our 
being  here ;  and  then  there  was  one  for  Raja  Laut's  Son. 
Tbcy  choose  to  have  a  general  Circumcision  when  the 
Sultan,  or  General,  or  some  other  great  Person  hath  a  Son 
fit  to  be  Orcumcised  ;  for  with  him  a  great  many  more  arc 
Cu-cumciscd.  There  is  notice  given  about  8  or  10  Days 
before  for  all  Men  to  appear  in  Arms,  and  great  preparation 
is  made  against  the  solemn  Day.  In  the  morning  before 
the  Boys  are  Circumcised,  Presents  are  sent  to  the  Father 
01  the  Child,  that  keeps  the  Feast ;  which  as  I  said  before, 
ii  either  the  Sulun,  or  some  great  Persoa :  and  about  10  or 
345 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  II  a  Clock  the  Mahometan  Priest  does  his  Office.  He 
1686  takes  hold  of  the  fore-skin  with  two  Sticks,  and  with  a  pair 
of  Scissars  snips  it  off.  After  this  most  of  the  Men,  both 
in  City  and  Country  being  in  Arms  before  the  House,  begin 
to  act  as  if  they  were  ingaged  with  an  Enemy,  having  such 
Arms  as  I  described.  Only  one  acts  at  a  time,  the  rest 
make  a  great  Ring  of  2  or  300  Yards  round  about  him. 
He  that  is  to  excercise  comes  into  the  Ring  with  a  great 
shriek  or  two,  and  a  horrid  look ;  then  he  fetches  two  or 
three  large  stately  strides,  and  falls  to  work.  He  holds  his 
broad  Sword  in  one  Hand,  and  his  Lance  in  the  other,  and 
traverses  his  Ground,  leaping  from  one  side  of  the  Ring 
to  the  other;  and  in  a  menacing  posture  and  look,  bids 
defiance  to  the  Enemy,  whom  his  fancy  frames  to  him ;  for 
there  is  nothing  but  Air  to  oppose  him.  Then  he  stamps 
and  shakes  his  Head,  and  grinning  with  his  Teeth  makes 
many  ruful  Faces.  Then  he  throws  his  Lance,  and  nimbly 
snatches  out  his  Cresset,  with  which  he  hacks  and  hews  the 
Air  like  a  Mad  man,  often  shrieking.  At  last,  being  almost 
tired  with  motion,  he  flies  to  the  middle  of  the  Ring,  where 
he  seems  to  have  his  Enemy  at  his  Mercy,  and  with  two  or 
three  blows  cuts  on  the  Ground  as  if  he  was  cutting  off  his 
Enemy's  Head.  By  this  time  he  is  all  of  a  Sweat,  and 
withdraws  triumphantly  out  of  the  Ring,  and  presently 
another  enters  with  the  like  shrieks  and  gestures.  Thus 
they  continue  combating  their  imaginary  Enemy  all  the 
rest  of  the  Day ;  towards  the  conclusion  of  which  the 
richest  Men  act,  and  at  last  the  General,  and  then  the 
Sultan  concludes  this  Ceremony :  He  and  the  General  with 
some  other  great  Men,  are  in  Armor,  but  the  rest  have 
none.  After  this  the  Sultan  returns  home,  accompanied 
with  abundance  of  People,  who  wait  on  him  there  till  they 
are  dismist.  But  at  the  time  when  we  were  there,  there 
was  an  after-game  to  be  played ;  for  the  General's  Son 
being  then  Circumcised,  the  Sultan  intended  to  give  him  a 
second  visit  in  the  Night,  so  they  all  waited  to  attend  him 
thither.  The  General  also  provided  to  meet  him  in  the 
best  manner,  and  therefore  desired  Captain  Swan  with  his 
Men  to  attend  him.     Accordingly  Captain  Swan  ordered 

346 


A    PROCESSION 

to  get  fwr  Guns,  and  wait  at  the  General's  House  til 
further  Orders,  So  about  40  of  us  waited  till  Eight  a 
Clock  in  the  Evening  :  When  the  General  with  Captain 
Swan,  and  about  1000  Men,  went  to  meet  the  Sultan,  with 
abundance  of  Torches  that  made  it  as  light  as  Day.  The 
nunner  of  the  march  was  thus:  First  of  all  there  was  a 
Pageant,  and  upon  it  two  dancing  Women  gorgeously 
apparelled  with  Coronets  on  their  Heads,  full  of  glittering 
S|)angla,  and  Pendants  of  the  same,  hanging  down  over 
their  Breast  and  Shoulders.  These  are  Women  bred  up 
purposely  for  dancing  :  Their  Feet  and  Legs  are  but  little 
imployed,  except  Bomctimcs  to  turn  round  very  gently ; 
but  their  Hands,  Arms,  Head  and  Body,  are  in  continual 
motion,  especially  their  Arms,  which  they  turn  and  twist  so 
Krangely,  that  you  would  think  them  to  be  made  without 
Borus.  Besides  the  two  dancing  Women,  there  were  two 
old  Women  tn  the  Pageant,  holding  each  a  lighted  Torch 
in  ihcir  Hands,  close  by  the  two  dancing  Women,  by  which 
%hi  the  glittering  Spangles  appeared  very  gloriously. 
Thii  Pageant  was  carried  by  six  lusty  Men  :  Then  came  six 
or  seTen  Torches,  lighting  the  General  and  Captain  Swan, 
who  marched  side  by  side  next,  and  we  that  attended 
Captain  Swan  followed  close  after,  marching  in  order  six 
and  six  abresi,  with  each  Man  his  Gun  on  his  Shoulder,  and 
Torches  on  each  side-  After  us  came  twelve  of  the 
General's  Men  with  old  Spanish  Match-locks,  marching 
four  in  a  row.  After  them  about  forty  Lances,  and  behind 
them  as  many  with  great  Swords,  marching  all  in  order. 
After  them  came  abundance  only  with  Cressets  by  their 
$idc5.  who  marched  up  close  without  any  order.  When  we 
came  near  the  Sultan's  House,  the  Sultan  and  his  Men  met 
oa,  and  we  whcel'd  off  to  let  them  pass.  The  Sultan  had 
ihree  Pageants  went  before  him  :  in  the  first  Pageant  were 
'  >ur  of  his  Sons,  who  were  about  10  or  1 1  Years  old. 
1  hey  had  gotten  abundance  of  small  Stones,  which  they 
■ijguishly  threw  about  on  the  Peoples  Heads.  In  the  next 
were  four  young  Maidens,  Nieces  to  the  Sultan,  being  his 
Sbtcn  Daughters ;  and  in  the  3d,  there  was  three  of  the 
Sultan's  Children,  not  above  six  Years  old,  '^^-  ^ 
347 


The  Sultan 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   himself  followed  next,  being  carried  in  his  Couch,  which 
1686  ^^5  j^Q^  lij^g  yQm-  Indian  Palankins,  but  open,  and  very 

little  and  ordinary.  A  multitude  of  People  came  after, 
without  any  order:  but  as  soon  as  he  was  past  by,  the 
General,  and  Captain  Swan,  and  all  our  Men  closed  in  just 
behind  the  Sultan,  and  so  all  marched  together  to  the 
General's  House.  We  came  thither  between  i  o  and  1 1  a 
Clock,  where  the  biggest  part  of  the  Company  were  im- 
mediately dismist ;  but  the  Sultan  and  his  Children,  and  his 
Nieces,  and  some  other  Persons  of  Quality,  entered  the 
General's  House.  They  were  met  at  the  head  of  the  Stairs 
by  the  General's  Women,  who  with  a  great  deal  of  Respect 
conducted  them  into  the  House.  Captain  Swan,  and  we 
that  were  with  him,  followed  after.  It  was  not  long  before 
the  General  caused  his  dancing  Women  to  enter  the  Room, 
and  divert  the  Company  with  that  pastime.  I  had  forgot 
to  tell  you  that  they  have  none  but  vocal  Musick  here,  by 
what  I  could  learn,  except  only  a  row  of  a  kind  of  Bells 
without  Clappers,  1 6  in  number,  and  their  weight  increasing 
gradually  from  about  three  to  ten  pound  weight.  These 
were  set  in  a  row  on  a  Table  in  the  General's  House,  where 
for  seven  or  eight  Days  together  before  the  Circumcision 
Day,  they  were  struck  each  with  a  little  Stick,  for  the 
biggest  part  of  the  Day  making  a  great  noise,  and  they 
ceased  that  Morning.  So  these  dancing  Women  sung 
themselves,  and  danced  to  their  own  Musick.  After  this 
the  General's  Women,  and  the  Sultan's  Sons,  and  his 
Nieces  danced.  Two  of  the  Sultan's  Nieces  were  about  18 
or  19  Years  Old,  the  other  two  were  three  or  four  Years 
Younger.  These  Young  Ladies  were  very  richly  drest, 
with  loose  Garments  of  Silk,  and  small  Coronets  on  their 
Heads.  They  were  much  fairer  than  any  Women  that  I 
did  ever  see  there,  and  very  well  featured ;  and  their  Noses, 
tho'  but  small,  yet  higher  than  the  other  Womens,  and  very 
well  proportioned.  When  the  Ladies  had  very  well 
—  diverted  themselves  and  the  Company  with  dancing,  the 
General  caused  us  to  fire  some  Sky-rockets,  that  were  made 
by  his  and  Captain  Swan's  Order,  purposely  for  this  Nights 
Solemnity ;  and  after  that  the  Sultan  and  his  Retinue  went 

348 


THE   RAMDAM 

■wiy  wilh  1  few  Attentiants,  and  we  all  broke  up.  and  thus   an, 
coded  this  Days  Solemnity  :  but  the  Boys  being  sore  with  '^"  ^ 
their  Amputation,  went  straddling  for  a  fortnight  after. 
They  arc  not,  as  I  said  before,  very  curious,  or  strict  in 

!»scrving  any  Days,  or  Times  of  particular  Devotions, 
'  »ccpt  it  be  Ramdam  time,  as  wc  call  it.  The  Ramdani 
■imc  was  then  in  August,  as  I  take  it,  for  it  was  shortly 
alter  our  arrival  here.  In  this  lime  they  fast  all  Day,  and 
about  Seven  a  Clock  in  the  Evening  they  spend  near  an 
Hour  in  Prayer.  Towards  the  tatter  end  of  their  Prayer, 
ihcy  loudly  invoke  their  Prophet,  for  about  a  quarter  of  an 
Hour,  both  old  and  young  bawling  out  very  strangely,  as 
if  they  intended  to  fright  him  out  of  his  sleepiness  or 
neglect  of  them.  After  their  Prayer  is  ended,  they  spend 
MMTie  time  in  Feasting  before  they  take  their  repose.  Thus 
tbey  do  ever)'  Day  for  a  whole  Month  at  least ;  for  some- 
times 'tis  two  cjT  three  Days  longer  before  the  Ramdam 
ends:  For  it  begins  at  the  New  Moon,  and  lasts  till  they 
see  the  next  New  Moon,  which  sometimes  in  thick  hazy 
Weather  is  not  till  three  or  four  Days  after  the  Change,  as 
it  happem'd  while  I  was  at  Achin,  where  they  continued  the 
Ramdani  till  the  New  Moon's  appearance.  The  next  Day 
i/tcr  ihey  have  seen  the  New  Moon,  the  Guns  are  all  dis- 
charged about  Noon,  and  then  the  time  ends. 

A  main  part  of  their  Religion  consists  in  washing  often, 
^1  keep  themselves  from  being  defiled  ;  or  after  they  are 

icfilcd  to  clcanic  themselves  again.  They  also  take  great 
care  to  keep  themselves  from  being  polluted,  by  tasting  or 
touching  any  thing  that  is  accounted  Unclean  ;  therefore 
Swine*  Flesh  is  verv  abominable  to  them  ;  nay,  any  one  that 
hath  cither  lasted  of  Swines  flesh,  or  touched  those  Creatures, 
is  not  permitted  to  come  into  their  Houses  in  many  Days 
after,  and  there  is  nothing  will  scare  them  more  than  a 
Swine.  Yet  there  are  wild  Hogs  in  the  Islands,  and  those 
lo  plentiful,  that  they  will  come  in  Troops  out  of  the 
Woodi  in  the  Night  into  the  very  City,  and  come  under 
their  Houses,  to  romage  up  and  down  the  Filth  that  they 
find  there.     The  Natives  therefore  would  even  desire  us  to 

lie  in  wait  for  the  Hogs,  to  destroy  thera,  which  we  did 


349 


J 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AN.    frcQuently,  by  shooting  them  and  aurying  them  {MTsently 
'^^  on  board,  but  were  prohibited  their  Houses  afterwards. 

And  now  I  am  on  this  Subject,  I  cannot  omit  a  Story 
concerning  the  General.  .  He  once  desired  to  have  a  pair  oif 
Shoes  made  after  the  English  Fashion,  tho*  he  did  very 
seldom  wear  any:  So  one  of  our  Men  made  him  a  Piur, 
which  the  General  liked  very  well.  Afterwards  soot 
Body  told  him.  That  the  Thread  wherewith  the  Shoes 
were  sowed,  were  pointed  with  Hogs-bristles.  This  put 
him  into  a  great  Passion ;  so  he  sent  the  Shoes  to  the  Mm 
that  made  them,  and  sent  him  withal  more  Leather  to 
make  another  Pair,  with  Threads  pointed  with  some 
other  Hair,  which  was  immediately  done,  and  then  lie 
was  well  pleased. 


350 


CHAP.   XIII 

Tluir  etmtng  attng  th  tilt  sf  MimtUnuta,  fnm  «  Bmy  m  th*  E^a-nde 
U  «»•/*«■  It  th  S.  E.  mJ.  T*riiaJm  mnd  Utttrmi  Ifrathtr. 
The  S.  E.  Ctait,  anJ  iti  Savammik  and  pUntj  if  Deer.  They 
Cmitt  mkmg  the  Stuth-uJe  t»  tht  Rmr  »/  MindamM  City,  amd 
rnmchtr  thtrt.  The  Suban'f  Brtther  and  Sm  ctme  mltard  thorn,  md 
imviU  them  »  lettU  there.  Of  the  Feoailnm  end  pnhMe  Ad%Mm- 
Ug*  (/'urA  a  Settlement^  frtm  the  Nei^hmrmg  G*U  Mmd  Spiee 
tiitMdi.  Of  tht  ifit  way  tt  Mixdanat  ky  tht  Smth  Sea  *md  Terra 
JmtraSi  ;  aiid  »f  art  acddental  Diutvery  thtrt  by  Caftaim  Dovi'i, 
Mmd  c  prtimHSty  $f  a  grfater,  Tht  Cafatity  they  were  im  U  utile 
here.  Tht  M'tdanayeim  mtaimrt  their  Ship,  Caftain  Swam't 
Preitmt  It  the  SiUtam :  hii  R/ceptint  tf  it,  and  Amdientt  pven  tt 
Captain  Swam,  vjilh  Raja  Lamt,  tht  Snbamt  Brtther'i  Emtertaim- 
mtmt  if  him.  The  Ctntenti  if  tw*  Emgliih  Ltttert  ihevnt  them  ky 
the  Su/lam  tf  Minda»at.  Of  the  Ctmmtditiei,  and  the  Ptauih- 
Memti  there.  The  Generari  Catoiim  h*w  t*  detntm  thtmufvn,  at 
hit  Ptnuaiin  they  lay  uf  their  Shipt  ht  tht  River.  Tht  Min- 
danmieni  Carrtiet.  The  great  Raimt  and  Fltadt  at  the  City,  Tht 
Mindanaiam  have  Chinttt  dcenmptanti.  Hitv  their  U^imen  dame, 
i  0^  ^  mt  3 Am  Thmtktr.  Their  Bart  eaten  ap,  and  their  Ship 
imdangrr'd  hy  tht  tVtrm.  Of  tht  ff^tmu  here  and  ebewhere.  Of 
Captain  Swan.  Raja  Lam,  the  Generaft  Deeeilfitheu,  Hunting 
u.-iU  Kime.  Tht  Pridign/ity  tf  >tme  if  the  EngHA.  Captain 
Swan  trtmtt  with  a  I'tmng  Indian  if  a  Spice-liland,  A  Huntimg 
fty^p  tvith  tht  GtntroL  Hit  pmmiihimg  a  Servant  tf  hit.  Of 
Att  Vnwi  and  ffimtn.  A  wn  if  ttrmg  Rut-drini.  Tht  J 
Gemtrafi  fmt  Diabng  and  Eaaetiant.  Captain  SiLan'i  Vmtau^  \ 
■ni  and  inditirtei  .Hanagtment.  Hit  Mem  Mntiwy.  Of  n  fnatt 
35  » 


1 


THE   BAY   OF  DEER 

I  to  have  been  our  selves.  We  aschared  «m  ike  Sok^  Woe 
!  of  the  Bay,  in  fifteen  fuboai  Wattc, 
jth  from  the  shore.  Here  we  w 
mr  selves  from  the  violence  of  dK  W 
listerouswith  Rains,  and  TomiiQe^  amd  > ipgag  We^eri^ 
had,  that  we  were  very  glad  CO  bid  dw  f^fOtwrnAmAm 
L.  being  the  only  shelter  on  this  «de  Aom^c  Wot  Wii^ 
This  Bay  is  not  above  two  ftfik  «ide  al  At  MamA,  im 
■her  in  it  h  three  Leagues  wide,  tad  acfcs  6AiB  ittf, 
ning  in  N.  N.  W.  There  k  ■  good  dcfA  ^  V^flv 
«t  four  or  five  Leagues  in,  but  Rocfef  ml  Gfoaad  fiir 
ut  two  Leagues  in,  from  the  mooih  <m  hoik  afo  of  dv 
lay,  except  only  in  that  place  wbere  «c  hf.  JUdk  Ahb 
Leagues  in  from  the  mouth,  on  tile  Enoerm  tUc,  Aae  ac 
hir  nndy  Bays,  and  very  good  aadkorvg  m  fasv  fr«^  aad 
ax  £ithom.  The  Land  on  the  East  adc  is  ^^gK  Ma^»' 
tatnoos,  and  Woody,  yet  rezr  well  — wai  «idh  aarii 
Brooks,  and  there  ts  one  River  large  eao^^  for  Cmoh  m 
enter.  On  the  West  side  of  the  Biy,  the  uad  m  «f  a  meam 
heighth  with  a  large  Savannah,  faorderiag  ob  the  So.  aad 
stretching  from  the  month  of  the  Btf,  a  gnt  wwf  to  the 
Westward. 

This   Savannah    abounds   with    loag   GnM,  ami  u  h 

plentifully  uock'd  with  Deer.     The  at^arar  Waoda  am  • 

Covert   for  them  in  the  beat  of  the  Dtfz  hac  MivaaM 

and  Evenings  they  feed  in  the  open  HtMa,  m  thick  as  ■ 

i,    our  Parks  in  tlngland.     I  neva-  aw  any  when  aach  fJea^ 

j^kf  wild  Deer,  tho'  1  have  met  with  them  ta  aevenl  parts  *if 

^^merica,  both  in  the  North  and  Sosth  Saa. 

^K       The  Deer  live  here  pretty  peaccahiy  and  awaiaiLaii.d  ; 

I     ^for  there  are  no  Inhabitants  on  thu  ade  of  the  Bay.     We 

viuted   thb  Savannah  every  Monung,  aod  katled  as  aMsy 

Deer  as  we  pleased,  sometiiBes  i6  or  it  in  a  Day;  tmd  we 

did  eat  nothing  but  Ventson  all  the  tine  we  stayed  here. 

We  saw  a  great  many  Pbatatians  by  the  wdca  of  the 
Mountains,  on  the  East  nde  of  the  Bay,  and  we  wcBl  CO 
Doe  of  them,  in  hopes  to  learn  of  the  lohabioms  where- 
lixHits  the  City  was,  that  we  might  not  ovcr-sul  it  m  the 

iVight :  but  they  6ed  from  u*.  ^^1 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES  ' 

AN.  We  lay  here  till  the  12th  Day  before  the  Winds  abated 

1686  Qf  their  fury,  and  then  we  sailed  from  hence,  directing  our 
course  to  the  Westward.  In  the  Morning  we  had  a  Land 
Wind  at  North.  At  11  a  Clock  the  Sea-breeze  came  at 
West,  just  in  our  Teeth,  but  it  being  fair  Weather,  we  kept 
on  our  way,  turning  and  taking  the  advantage  of  the  Land- 
breezes  by  Night,  and  the  Sea-breezes  by  Day. 

Being  now  past  the  S.  E.  part  of  the  Island,  we  coasted 
down  on  the  South  side,  and  we  saw  abundance  of  Canoas 
a  fishing,  and  now  and  then  a  small  Village.  Neither  were 
these  Inhabitants  afraid  of  us  (as  the  K)rmer)  but  came 
aboard ;  yet  we  could  not  understand  them,  nor  they  us, 
but  by  signs  :  and  when  we  mentioned  the  word  Mindanao, 
they  would  point  towards  it. 

The   1 8  th  Day  of  July  we  arrived  before  the  River  of 
Mindanao,^  the  mouth  of  which  lies  in  lat  6  d.  22  m.  N.  and 
is  laid  in  231  d.    12  m.  Longitude  West,  from  the  Lizard 
in  England.     We  anchored  right  against  the  River  in   15 
fathom  Water,  clear  hard  Sand ;  about  two  Miles  from  the 
shore,  and  3  or  4  Miles  from  a  small  Island,*  that  lay  with- 
out us  to  the  Southward.     We  fired  7  or  9  Guns,  I  re- 
member not  well  which,  and  were  answered  again  with  3 
from  the  shore ;  for  which  we  gave  one  again.      Immedi- 
ately after  our  coming  to  an  Anchor  Raja  Laut,  and  one  of 
the  Sultan's  Sons  came  off  in  a  Canoa,  being  rowed  with 
10  Oars,   and  demanded  in  Spanish  what  we  were?    and 
from    whence  we    came  ?  Mr.  Smith  (he  who  was   taken 
Prisoner  at  Leon  in  Mexico)  answered  in  the  same  Lan- 
guage, that  we  were  English,  and  that  we  had  been  a  great 
while  out  of  England.    They  told  us  that  we  were  welcome, 
and    asked    us   a   great    many   questions   about    England ; 
especially    concerning    our   East    India    Merchants ;    and 
whether  we  were  sent  by  them  to  settle  a  Factory  here? 
Mr.    Smith   told  them  that  we  came   hither  only  to  buy 
Provision.     They  seemed  a  little  discontented  when  they 

^  It  has  three  mouths,  between  lat.  7°  11'  and  7**  16'  N.  Dampier's  6° 
is  probably  a  slip.  He  is  generally  fairly  accurate  in  his  latitudes.  15' is 
his  avenige  error. 

'-^  A  small  rock. 

354 


THEIR   RECEPTION 

undcntood  that  we  were  not  come  lo  settle  amoc^  them :  for 
tbcr  had  heard  of  our  arrival  on  the  East-nde  of  the  Isbnd  ^^^  | 
a  great  while  before,  and  entertained  hopes  that  we  were 
xni  purposely  out  of  England  hither  to  settle  a  Tndc 
with  them ;  which  it  should  seem  they  are  raj  desross 
of.  For  Captain  Goodlud  had  been  here  not  loc^  before  to 
treat  with  them  about  it ;  and  when  he  went  away  told  tbe« 
(as  they  said)  that  in  a  shon  time  they  might  expect  m  Am- 
bassadotar  from  England  to  make  a  full  bargain  with  tbem. 

Indeed  upon  mature  thoughts,  I  should  think  we  coold 
not  have  done  better,  than  to  have  complied  with  the  d^re 
they  seemed  io  have  of  our  settling  here;  and  to  hare 
taken  up  our  quarters  among  them.  For  as  tberriiy  we 
might  better  have  consulted  our  own  profit  and  aiii»- 
faction,  than  by  the  other  loose  roving  way  of  Efe ;  so  n 
m^bt  probably  have  proved  of  publidt.  benefit  to  oar 
Nation,  and  been  a  means  of  introducing  an  Engfidi 
Settlement  and  Trade,  not  only  here,  bat  throogli  Kreral 
of  the  Spice  Islands,  which  lie  io  iti  Ncighboorbood. 

For  the  Islands  Mcangis,  which  I  mentianed  in  the 
beginning  of  this  Qiapicr,  lye  within  twenty  Leagues  of 
Mindatuo.  These  arc  three  small  Islands  that  abound  with 
Goid  and  Qovcs,  If  I  may  credit  my  Author  Friixe  Jeoly. 
who  was  bom  on  one  of  them,  and  was  at  that  time  a  Stare 
to  the  City  of  Mindanao.  He  might  hare  been  purchased 
by  us  of  his  Master  for  a  small  matter,  as  he  wat  alter* 
wards  by  Mr.  Moody,  (who  came  hither  to  trade,  and 
laded  a  Ship  with  Clovc-Bark)  and  by  transporttog  him 
botne  to  his  own  Country,  we  might  have  gocien  a  Trade 
there.  But  of  Prince  Jcoly  !  shall  speak  more  hereafter. 
These  Islands  arc  as  yet  probably  unknown  to  the  Dutch. 
who  as  I  said  before,  indeavour  to  iagrosa  all  the  Sptce  into 
their  own  Hands. 

There  was  another  opportunity  offered  tts  here  of 
jctlling  on  another  Spice-Island  that  was  very  well  in- 
habited :  for  the  Inhabitants  fearing  the  Dutch,  and  under- 
standing  that  the  English  were  settling  at  Mindanao,  their 
Saltan  «ent  his  Nephew  to  Mindanao  while  we  were  there 
to  invite  us  thither :  Captain  Swan  confcrr'd  with  him 
3SJ 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 

AN.   about  it  divers  times,  and  I  do  believe  he  had  some  In- 

1686  clination  to  accept  the  offer ;  and  I  am  sure  most  of  the 

Men  were  for  it :  but  this  never  came  to  a  head,  for  want 

of  a   true  understanding  between  Captain  Swan  and  his 

Men,  as  may  be  declared  hereafter. 

Beside  the  benefit  which  might  accrue  from  this  Trade 
with  Meangis,  and  the  other  Spice  Islands,  the  Philippioe 
Islands  themselves,  by  a  little  care  and  industry,  might 
have  afforded  us  a  very  beneficial  Trade,  and  all  thoe 
Trades  might  have  been  managed  from  Mindanao,  hj 
settling  there  first.  For  that  Island  lyeth  very  convenient 
for  Trading  either  to  the  Spice-Islands,  or  to  the  rest  of 
the  Philippine  Islands :  since  as  its  Soil  is  much  of  the  same 
nature  with  either  of  them,  so  it  lies  as  it  were  in  the 
Center  of  the  Gold  and  Spice  Trade  in  these  parts;  the 
Islands  North  of  Mindanao  abounding  most  in  Gold,  and 
those  South  of  Meangis  in  Spice. 

As  the  Island  Mindanao  lies  very  convenient  for  Ttwkt 
so  considering  its  distance,  the  way  thither  may  not  be 
over-long  and  tiresome.  The  Course  that  I  would  chooK 
should  be  to  set  out  of  England  about  the  latter  end  of 
August,  and  to  pass  round  Terra  del  Fuego,  and  so  stretdh 
ing  over  towards  New  Holland,  coast  it  along  that  Shove 
till  I  came  near  to  Mindanao ;  or  first  I  would  coast  dom 
near  the  American  Shore,  as  far  as  I  found  convenient,  and 
then  direct  my  Course  accordingly  for  the  Island.  By  tini 
I  should  avoid  coming  near  any  of  the  Dutch  Settlements; 
and  be  sure  to  meet  always  with  a  constant  brisk  Easterly 
Trade  Wind,  after  I  was  once  past  Terra  del  Fatfa 
Whereas  in  passing  about  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  after 
you  are  shot  over  the  East-Indian  Ocean,  and  are  come  to 
the  Islands,  you  must  pass  through  the  Streights  of  Malacca 
or  Sandy, ^  or  else  some  other  Streights  East  from  JiWi 
where  you  will  be  sure  to  meet  with  Counter-winds,  go oa 
which  side  of  the  Equator  you  please ;  and  this  waoA 
require  ordinarily  7  or  8  months  for  the  Voyage,  but  the 
other  I  should  hoj)e  to  perform  in  6  or  7  at  most    h 

*  Sunda. 

356 


BEST  WAY  TO   PHILIPPINE   ISLANDS 

your  return  from  thence  also  you  must  observe  the  same 
Rule  as  the  Spaniards  do  in  going  from  Manila  to  Acapulco ;  ' 
only  as  they  run  towards  the  North-Pole  for  variable 
Winds,  so  you  must  run  to  the  Southward,  till  you  meet 
with  ■  Wind  that  will  carry  you  over  to  Terra  del  Fuego. 
There  are  places  enough  to  touch  at  for  Refreshment, 
either  going  or  coming.  You  may  touch  going  thither  on 
other  ade  of  Terra  Patagonia,  or,  if  you  please,  at  the 
Galiapagocs  Islands,  where  there  is  Refreshment  enough; 
and  returning  you  may  probably  touch  somewhere  on  New 
Holland,  and  so  make  some  profitable  discovery  in  these 
Places  without  going  out  of  your  way.  And  to  speak  my 
Thi>ughts  freely,  I  believe  'tis  owing  to  the  neglect  of  this 
easie  way  that  all  that  vast  tract  of  Terra  Australis  which 
bounds  the  South  Sea  is  yet  undiscovered:  those  that  cross 
that  Sea  seeming  to  design  some  Business  on  the  Peruvian 
or  Mexican  Coast,  and  so  leaving  that  at  a  distance.  To 
confirm  which,  I  shall  add  what  Captain  Davis  told  me 
lately.  That  after  his  Departure  from  us  at  the  Haven  of 
Ro  Lcjo  (as  is  meniioned  in  the  8th  Chap.)  he  went  after 
several  Traverses,  to  the  Gallapagoes,  and  that  standing 
(bcncc  Southward  for  Wind,  to  bring  him  about  Terra  del 
Fuego,  in  the  Lat.  of  27  South,  about  joo  leagues  from 
Copanpo,  on  the  Cout  of  Chili,  he  saw  a  small  sandy 
IsUnd  just  by  him;  and  that  they  saw  to  the  Westward 
of  it  a  long  Tract  of  pretty  high  Land,'  tending  away 
toward  the  North  West  out  of  sight.  This  might  probably 
be  the  Coast  of  Terra  Australis  Incognita. 

But  to  return  to  Mindanao;  as  to  the  Capacity  we  were 
then  in,  of  sctiling  our  selves  at  Mindanao,  although  we 
were  not  sent  out  of  any  such  design  of  settling,  yet  we 
were  as  well  provided,  cm-  better,  considering  all  circum- 
tooces.  than  if  we  had.  For  there  was  scarce  any  useful 
Trade,  but  some  or  other  of  us  undcr5to<xl  it.  We  had 
Sswyen,    Cartxrnters,  Joyncrs,    Brickmakcrs,     Bricklayers, 

Ciors,  &c.,  we  only  wanted  a  good  Smith 
;  which  we  might  have  had  at  Min- 
: 


I 


'  Thii  «ai  prabohlr  Euta  lilaod. 

3J7 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

danao.  We  were  very  well  provided  with  Iron,  Lead,  and 
all  sorts  of  Tools,  as  Saws,  Axes,  Hammers,  &c.  We  had 
Powder  and  Shot  enough,  and  very  good  small  Arms.  If 
we  had  designed  to  build  a  Fort,  we  could  have  spared 
8  or  lo  Guns  out  of  our  Ship,  and  Men  enough  to  have 
managed  it,  and  any  Affair  of  Trade  beside.  We  had  also 
a  great  Advantage  above,  raw  Men  that  are  sent  out  of 
England  into  these  places,  who  proceed  usually  too 
cautiously,  coldly  and  formally,  to  compass  any  consider- 
able Design,  which  Experience  better  teaches  than  any 
Rules  whatsoever ;  besides  the  danger  of  their  Lives  in  so 
great  and  sudden  a  change  of  Air :  whereas  we  were  all 
inured  to  hot  Climates,  hardened  by  many  Fatigues,  and 
in  general,  daring  Men,  and  such  as  would  not  be  easily 
baffled.  To  add  one  thing  more,  our  Men  were  almost 
tired,  and  began  to  desire  a  quietus  est;  and  therefore 
they  would  gladly  have  seated  themselves  any  where.  Wc 
had  a  good  Ship  too,  and  enough  of  us  (beside  what  might 
have  been  spared  to  manage  our  new  Settlement)  to  bring 
the  News  with  the  Effects  to  the  Owners  in  England :  for 
Captain  Swan  had  already  5000  /.  in  Gold,  which  he  and 
his  Merchants  received  for  Goods  sold  mostly  to  Captain 
Harris  and  his  Men  :  which  if  he  had  laid  but  part  of  it 
out  in  Spice,  as  probably  he  might  have  done,  would  have 
satisfy'd  the  Merchants  to  their  Hearts  content.  So  much 
by  way  of  digression. 

To  proceed  therefore  with  our  first  Reception  at  Min- 
danao, Raja  Laut  and  his  Nephew  sat  still  in  their  Canoa, 
and  would  not  come  aboard  us ;  because,  as  they  said,  they 
had  no  Orders  for  it  from  the  Sultan.  After  about  half 
an  Hour's  Discourse,  they  took  their  leaves ;  first  inviting 
Captain  Swan  ashore,  and  promising  to  assist  him  in  getting 
Provision ;  which  they  said  at  present  was  scarce,  but  in 
three  or  four  Month's  time  the  Rice  would  be  gathered  in, 
and  then  he  might  have  as  much  as  he  pleased  :  and  that  in 
the  mean  time  he  might  secure  his  Ship  in  some  convenient 
place,  for  fear  of  the  westerly  Winds,  which  they  said  would 
be  very  violent  at  the  latter  end  of  this  Month,  and  all  the 
next,  as  we  found  them. 

358 


AUDIENCE   OF   THE   SULT.VHl 


Wc  did  not  know  the  Quality  of  these  r«ro  1 
after  they  wcrr  gone ;  else  we  should  hare  fir'd  sorae  Gum  ' 
at  their  departure :  When  they  were  gooe,  a  cerraio  Offico* 
under  the  Sulian  came  aboard,  and  inasurcd  our  Ship.  A 
Custom  derived  from  the  Chinese,  who  alwxf*  masarc  die 
length  and  hreadth,  and  the  depth  of  the  HoU  of  mil  Skofit 
that  come  to  load  there ;  by  which  means  they  kiMiw  bow 
much  each  Ship  will  cam*.  But  for  what  leasoo  this 
Custom  is  used  either  by  the  Chtoesc,  or  Mindanao  Men, 
I  could  never  learn  ;  unless  the  Muidanayans  design  by  this 
means  to  improve  their  Skill  in  Shippiog.  against  they  have 
a  Trade. 

Captun  Swan,  conadcring  that  the  Season  of  the  Y^ 
would  oblige  us  to  spend  some  time  at  this  Island,  thought 
it  convenient  to  make  what  Interest  he  could  with  the 
Sultan  ;  who  might  afterwards  cither  obstruct,  or  advance 
his  Designs.  He  therefore  immediately  provided  a  Present 
to  tend  ashore  to  the  Sultan,  viz.  Three  Yards  of  Scarlet 
Cloath,  Three  Yards  of  broad  Gtdd  Lace,  a  Turkish  Scimiter 
and  a  Pair  of  Pistols:  And  to  Rija  Laut  he  sent  Three 
Yards  of  Scarlet  Cloth,  and  Three  Yards  of  Silver  Lace 
This  Present  was  carried  by  Mr.  Henry  More '  in  the 
Evening.  He  was  first  conducted  to  Raja  laut's  House ; 
where  he  remained  till  report  thereof  was  made  to  the 
Saltan,  who  immediately  gave  order  for  all  things  to  be 
made  ready  to  receive  him. 

About  nine  a  Clock  at  Night,  a  Messenger  came  from 
the  Sulcan  to  bring  the  Present  away.  Then  Mr.  More 
was  conducted  all  the  way  with  I'orches  and  armed  Men, 
till  he  came  to  the  House  where  the  Sultan  was.  The 
Saltan  with  eight  or  ten  Men  of  his  Council  were  seated  on 
Carpets,  waiting  his  coming.  The  Present  that  Mr.  More 
brought  was  laid  down  before  them,  and  was  ver>'  kindly 
acoemed  by  the  Sultan,  who  caused  Mr.  More  to  sit  down 
by  tnem,  and  asked  a  great  many  questions  of  him.  The 
(^course  was  in  Spanish  by  a  Interpreter.  This  con- 
fiavDCe  Isstcd  about  an  hour,  and  then  he  was  dismist, 
of   tbe    Lonijon    |[old«inilh    albre' 

359 


I 


CAPTAIN    DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    and  returned  again  to  Raja  Laut's  House.     There  was  a 
1686  Supper  provided  for  him,  and  the  Boats  crew ;  after  wWch 
he  returned  aboard. 

The  next  day  the  Sultan  sent  for  Capt.  Swan:  He 
immediately  went  ashore  with  a  Flag  flying  in  the  Boats 
head,  and  two  Trumpets  sounding  all  the  way.  When  he 
came  ashore,  he  was  met  at  his  Landing  by  two  prindpal 
Officers,  guarded  along  with  Soldiers  and  abundance  of 
People  gazing  to  see  him.  The  Sultan  waited  for  him  in 
his  Chamber  of  Audience,  where  Captain  Swan  was  treated 
with  Tobacco  and  Betel,  which  was  all  his  Entertainment. 
The  Sultan  sent  for  two  English  Letters  fc»-  Captain 
Swan  to  read,  purposely  to  let  him  know,  that  our  East- 
India  Merchants  did  design  to  settle  here,  and  that  they 
had  already  sent  a  Ship  hither.  One  of  these  Letters 
was  sent  to  the  Sultan  from  England,  by  the  East-India 
Merchants.  The  chiefest  things  contained  in  it,  as  I 
remember,  for  I  saw  it  afterwards  in  the  Secretaries  hand, 
who  was  very  proud  to  show  it  to  us,  was  to  desire  some 
priviledges,  in  order  to  the  building  of  a  Fort  there.  Thb 
Letter  was  written  in  a  very  fair  Hand ;  and  between  each 
Line,  there  was  a  Gold  Line  drawn.  The  other  Letter 
was  left  by  Captain  GooJIud,  directed  to  any  English-men 
who  should  happen  to  come  thither.  This  related  wholly 
to  Trade,  giving  an  account,  at  what  rate  he  had  agreed 
with  them  for  Goods  of  the  Island,  and  how  European 
Goods  should  be  sold  to  them ;  with  an  account  of  their 
Weight  and  Measures,  and  their  difference  from  ours. 

The  Rate  agreed  on  for  Mindanao  Gold,  was  14 
Spanish  Dollars,  (which  is  a  current  Coin  all  over  India) 
the  English  Ounce,  and  18  Dollars  the  Mindanao  Ounce. 
But  for  Bees- wax  and  Clove-bark,  I  do  not  remember  the 
Rate,  neither  do  I  well  remember  the  Rates  of  Europe 
Commodities ;  but  I  think  the  Rate  of  Iron  was  not 
above  4  Dollars  a  Hundred.  Captain  Goodlud's  Letter 
concluded  thus.  Trust  none  of  them^  for  they  art  all 
T/iieveSy  but  Tace  is  Latin  for  a  Candle.  We  under- 
stood afterwards  that  Captain  Goodlud  was  robb'd  of 
some   Goods  by  one  of  the  General's  Men,  and  that  he 

360 


j 


A   MINDANAIAN   PUNISHMENT 

that  robb'd  him  wu  fled  into  the  Mountains,  ind  coold  j 
Dot  be  found  while  Captain  Goodlud  was  here.  But  the  " 
Fellow  returning  back  to  the  City  some  time  after  oor 
arrinl  here.  Raja  Laut  bruught  him  bound  to  Captain 
Swan,  and  told  him  what  he  had  done,  desiring  him  to 
punish  him  for  il  as  he  pleased ;  but  Captain  Swan  excused 
himself,  and  said  it  did  not  belong  to  him,  therefore  fae 
wuuld  have  nothing  to  do  with  it.  However,  the  General 
Raja  Laut,  would  not  pardon  htm,  but  punished  him 
according  to  their  own  Custom,  which  1  did  nerer  see 
but  at  thb  time. 

He  was  stript  stark  naked  in  the  Morning  at  Son- 
ruing,  and  bound  to  a  Post,  so  that  be  could  not  stir 
Hand  nor  Foot,  but  as  he  was  mov'd ;  and  was  placed 
with  his  Face  Eastward  against  the  Sun.  In  the  Afternoon 
they  tum'd  his  Face  towards  the  West,  that  the  Sun  might 
still  be  in  his  Face;  and  thus  he  stood  all  Day,  parcfai  in 
the  Sun  (which  shines  here  excessively  hot)  and  tormented 
with  the  Moskiio's  or  Knata:  After  this  the  General 
would  have  killed  him,  if  Captain  Swan  had  consented  to 
it.  1  did  never  sec  any  put  to  Death  ;  but  I  believe  they 
arc  barbarous  enough  in  it.  The  General  told  us  himself 
that  he  put  two  Men  to  Death  in  a  Town  where  some  of 
us  Were  with  him ;  but  I  heard  not  the  manner  of  it. 
Their  common  way  of  punishing  is  to  strip  them  in  this 
m«nncr,  and  place  them  in  the  Sun ;  but  sometimes  they 
lay  them  flat  on  their  Backs  on  the  Sand,  which  is  very 
hot ;  where  they  rctnain  ■  whole  Day  in  the  scorching  Sun, 
with  the  Moskito's  biting  them  all  the  time. 

This  Action  of  the  General  in  offering  Captain  Swan 
the  Punishment  of  the  Thief,  caus'd  Captain  Swan  after- 
wards to  make  him  the  same  offer  of  his  Men,  when 
iny  had  (jffcndcd  the  Mindanao  Men :  but  the  General  left 
^uch  Offenders  to  be  punished  by  Captain  Swan,  as  he 
hfrughi  convenient.  So  that  for  the  least  Offence  Captain 
>wan  punished  hta  Men,  and  that  tn  the  sight  of  the 
Mindanaians;  and  I  think  sometimes  only  fur  revenge;  as 
he  did  once  punish  his  chief  Male  Mr.  Teat,  he  that 
.       .Mac  Captain  of  the  Bark  to  Mindanao.     Indeed  at  that 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER^S   VOYAGES 

AN.   time  Gtptain  Swan  had  his  Men  as  much  under  command 
1686  23  jf  {^^  ))2^  \y^^^  in  2.  King's  Ship :  and  had  he  known  hour 

to  use  his  Authority,  he  might  have  led  them  to  any  Settle- 
menty  and  have  brought  them  to  assist  him  in  any  desgn 
he  had  pleased. 

Gtptain  Swan  being  dismissed  from  the  Sultan,  with 
abundance  of  Civility,  after  about  two  Hours  Discourse 
with  him,  went  thence  to  Raja  Laut's  House.  Raja  Liut 
had  then  some  Difference  with  the  Sultan,  and  therefore  he 
was  not  present  at  the  Sultan*s  Reception  of  our  Captun; 
but  waited  his  return,  and  treated  him  and  all  his  Men  with 
boyled  Rice  and  Fowls.  He  then  told  Gtptain  Swan  again, 
and  urged  it  to  him,  that  it  would  be  best  to  get  his  Slup 
into  the  River  as  soon  as  he  could,  because  of  the  usuil 
tempestuous  Weather  at  this  time  of  the  Year  ;  and  that 
he  should  want  no  assistance  to  further  him  in  any  thing. 
He  told  him  also,  that  as  we  must  of  necessity  stay  hot 
some  time,  so  our  Men  would  often  come  ashore;  and 
he  therefore  desired  him  to  warn  his  Men  to  be  carefiil 
to  give  no  affront  to  the  Natives ;  who,  he  said,  were  very 
revengeful.  That  their  Customs  being  different  from  ours, 
he  feared  that  Captain  Swan's  Men  might  some  time  or 
other  offend  them,  though  ignorantly ;  that  therefore  he 
gave  him  this  friendly  warning,  to  prevent  it ;  That  his 
House  should  always  be  open  to  receive  him  or  any  of  his 
Men,  and  that  he  knowing  our  Customs,  would  never  be 
offended  at  any  thing.  After  a  great  deal  of  such  Dis- 
course he  dismist  the  Captain  and  his  Company,  who  took 
their  leave  and  came  aboard. 

Captain  Swan  having  seen  the  two  Letters,  did  not 
doubt  but  that  the  English  did  design  to  settle  a  Factory 
here :  therefore  he  did  not  much  scruple  the  honesty 
of  these  People,  but  immediately  ordered  us  to  get  the 
Ship  into  the  River.  The  River  upon  which  the  Gtyof 
Mindanao  stands  is  but  small,  and  hath  not  above  10  or  H 
foot  Water  on  the  Bar  at  a  Spring-tide :  Therefore  ^ 
lightened  our  Ship,  and  the  Spring  coming  on,  we  with 
much  ado  got  her  into  the  River,  being  assisted  by  5^ 
or  60  Mindanaian  Fishermen,  who  livM  at  the  mouth  rf 

362 


THE  NATIVES  CARESS  THEM 
ivcr ;  Rajs  Liut  himself  bdag  abowd  our  Si 
direct  them.  We  carried  her  sboat  a  qnincr  c£  i 
np,  within  the  mouth  of  the  Rirer,  ud  there  moand 
bcr,  head  and  stem  m  a  bole,  where  wc  alwsfs  nde 
afloat.  After  this  the  Cttzens  of  Mindanao  tame  iire- 
quently  aboard,  to  invite  oar  Men  to  their  Howks,  sad 
to  offer  us  Pig»Hics.  *Twxs  a  kog  tine  noe  amf  of 
m  hmd  received  soch  Frieodship,  and  thatSat.  wc  woe 
the  more  easily  drawn  to  aeoepc  of  ihdr  kmdacaKs; 
in  a  very  thort  time  most  of  oar  Mea  got  *  C 
or  two.  and  as  aanj  Pigal&a;  npmiUy  tmik  «f  m  s 
had  good  Qothes,  and  store  of  Gold,  as  mamj  had,  vW 
wen  of  the  number  of  those  that  aceemfamei  G«bb 
Harris  over  the  Isthmus  of  Dviea,  tke  fcsc  of  fli  feaig 
poor  enough.  Nay,  the  very  poorca  sad  mc*  cf  ■• 
ooold  bar^y  pass  the  Streets,  bat  wr  warn  mm  IttTd  hf 
Force  into  their  Hooses,  to  be  trested  hf  tk^:  skk^ 
their  Treats  were  but  mean,  viz.  TokKBo^  or  P 
or  a  little  sweet  speed  Water.  Tct  dKsr  SBcaHK^SiMt 
Simplicity,  and  the  manner  of  bLSCowiag  thKK  GUa,  s 
tbem  very  accepabk.  When  wc  case  to  ikv  Hshe% 
they  woukl  always  be  pratsBg  tbe  Fa^liifc.  as  AoiHHC 
that  tbe  Engltsfa  and  MiadiiMisaa  woe  al  ' 
they  exprcst  by  pcoxuig  Aar  two 
together,  and  sayii^  that  the  Ea^db  aad 
wcR  Sawn,  stmt,  that  b,  all  ooc  Thea  A^  wmU  Aaw 
their  fore-fingers  half  a  foot  i         '  ^      _       . 

and  they  were  Ba^m,  irtadh  i 
tt  such   distance  ia   poaK  of 
Spaniardf,   they  woold  sake  s  soKr 
distance  than  fv  the  Doi^:  ^av^  ikae, 
felt,  and  smarted  from  the  SpSMadi^  wfco  had 

„      brought  them  tmder. 

^L       Optain  Swan  did  addaa  f»  i 

^hat  into  Raja  Laat's.    Then  br 

Hoay ;  and   as  many  of  lii  Mea  as 

■     no  Money  to  '■^^"rt  the^aelta^ 

II  a  Clock,  when  thqr  hsd  RSbb  a     ^     , ^ 

drett.aad  sooie  na^«f  Fbwfa.  v  h*  ^  Bai^ftK  <>««» 
J«3 


i 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 

AN.  very  nastily.  Captain  Swan  was  served  a  little  better,  and 
'^^^  his  two  Trumpeters  sounded  all  the  time  that  he  was  at 
dinner.  After  dinner  Raja  Laut  would  sit  and  discourse 
with  him  most  part  of  the  Afternoon.  It  was  now  the 
Ramdam  time,  therefore  the  General  excused  himself,  that 
he  could  not  entertain  our  Captain  with  Dances,  and  other 
Pastimes,  as  he  intended  to  do  when  this  solemn  Time 
was  past ;  besides,  it  was  the  very  heighth  of  the  wet 
Season,  and  therefore  not  so  proper  for  Pastimes. 

We  had  now  very  tempestuous  Weather,  and  excessive 
Rains,  which  so  swelfd  the  River,  that  it  overflowed  its 
Banks ;  so  that  we  had  much  ado  to  keep  our  Ship  safe : 
For  every  now  and  then  we  should  have  a  great  Tree 
come  floating  down  the  River,  and  sometimes  lodge  against 
our  Bows,  to  the  endangering  the  breaking  our  Cables, 
and  either  the  driving  us  in,  over  the  Banks,  or  carrying 
us  out  to  Sea ;  both  which  would  have  been  very  dangerous 
to  us,  especially  being  without  Ballast. 

The  City  is  about  a  Mile  long  (of  no  great  breadth) 
winding  with  the  Banks  of  the  River  on  the  right  Hand 
going  up,  the*  it  hath  many  Houses  on  the  other  Side 
too.  But  at  this  time  it  seemed  to  stand  as  in  a  Pond, 
and  there  was  no  passing  from  one  House  to  another  but 
in  Canoas.  This  tempestuous  rainy  Weather  happened 
the  latter  end  of  July,  and  lasted  most  part  of  August. 

When  the  bad  Weather  was  a  little  asswaged.  Captain 
Swan  hired  a  House  to  put  our  Sails  and  Goods  in,  while 
we  careen'd  our  Ship.  We  had  a  great  deal  of  Iron  and 
Lead,  which  was  brought  ashore  into  this  House.  Of 
these  Commodities  Captain  Swan  sold  to  the  Sultan  or 
General,  8  or  lo  Tuns,  at  the  Rates  agreed  on  by  Captain 
Goodlud,  to  be  paid  in  Rice.  The  Mindanaians  are  no 
good  Accomptants ;  therefore  the  Chinese  that  live  here, 
do  cast  up  their  Accompts  for  them.  After  this.  Captain 
Swan  bought  Timber-trees  of  the  General,  and  set  some 
of  our  Men  to  saw  them  into  Planks,  to  sheath  the  Ship's 
bottom.  He  had  two  Whip-Saws  on  Board,  which  he 
brought  out  of  England,  and  four  or  five  Men  that  knew 
the  use  of  them,  for  they  had  been  Sawyers  in  Jamaica. 

364 


A  STORY  OF  JOHN  THACKER 

When  the  Rundam  tune  «w  over,  nd  tkc  Arw  i 
■et  in  X  little,  the  GenenU  to  tibiae.  Oq^aim  Smam,  a 
uined  him  every  N%ht  with  DkaccL   TW  diadi 
that  are  purposely  bred  up  to  tt,  and  ^oke  k  ch 
1  have  already  dacrihed.     Bm  beside  ikai  aH  ike  W^mtm 
in  general  are  moch  addicted  to  TliWM^      Thcf  Aibk 
4.0  or  50  at  oQce  ;  and  that  Hindwig  all  nmaJk  m  *  ^t^ 
joined    Hand  in  Hand,  and   Sogiig  «d   ketigmf  ubc 
But  they  never  bodge  oot  of  tho-  pfaos,  mtm  Bike  ^tf 
mocion  till  the  Chcros  is  Soag;  nea  afl  m  okt  tkey 
dirow  out  one  Leg.  and  bawl  aat  aload;  aad  mmBOmet 
they  only  clap  their    Hands  wh^  the  Cks^  is  Shk> 
Captain  Swan,  to  retaliate  the  GeaenTs  Favoofs.  atal  w-  i 

hb  Violins,  and  lome  that  cooU  daace  Fa^Jii*  Dncea; 
wherewith  the  General  was  vaj  wcfl  pfcwirj  The^ 
coRunotily  spent  the   biggest  pan  of  the  tS^tt  m  theM  I 

sort  of  Pastimes. 

Among  the  rest  of  our  Mca  tfaat  did  ^k  to  daace  dai 
before  the  General,  there  was  one  }oha  Thacfca;  who  ^b 
a  Sounan  bred,  and  could  neitber  Write  dot  Bead:  hat  had 
fonnerly  learnt  to  Dance  in  the  MvmA-hama  aboac 
Wspping :    This   Man   came  into  the  Sonth  Seat    with  1 

Captain  Harris,  and  gettiif  wkfa  huB  a  good  QoMtitf  of 
Gctld,  and  being  a  pretty  good  Hadaad  ti  has  SkaM;  had 
ftill  some  left,  besides  what  be  bid  out  ia  a  vcxy  good  wmt  I 

of  Qoathf.  The  Geoeial  fupposed  by  his  Giih  aad  has 
Dancing,  that  he  had  been  of  aoble  Excraasoa  ;  aad  CO  be 
Mtisfy'd  of  his  fjoality,  asked  of  one  of  ov  Mo,  if  he  did 
not  gucis  aright  of  htm  ?  The  Maa  of  whom  the  Gcaoml 
asked  this  Question  told  him,  be  was  aach  ia  the  ri^> ; 
and  that  most  of  our  Ship's  Company  woe  df  the  &fcc 
Extraction  ;  especially  all  those  that  had  &ne  Ooa^;  aad 
that  they  came  aboari  only  to  ice  the  WorU,  haviag 
Money  enough  to  bear  their  Expeaces  whoc-cver  chey 
came;  but  that  for  the  rest,  those  that  had  but  mean 
Clothes,  they  Were  only  common  Seamen.  Alter  this,  the 
GcDcral  shew'd  a  great  deal  of  Respect  to  all  that  had  good 
Oothcs,  but  especially  to  John  Thacker,  till  Captain  Swia 

kcame  to   know  the  Bunne»,  aad  marr'd  all ;  aadccemag      J 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   the  General,  and  drubbing    the  Nobleman :    For  he    was 
^^^^  so  much  incensed   against   John   Thacker,   that   he  could 
never  endure  him  afterwards ;  tho'  the  poor  Fellow  knew 
nothing  of  the  Matter. 

About  the  middle  of  November  we  began  to  work  on 
our  Ship's  Bottom,  which  we  found  very  much  eaten  with 
the  Worm :  For  this  is  a  horrid  place  for  Worms.  We 
did  not  know  this  till  after  we  had  been  in  the  River  a 
Month ;  and  then  we  found  our  Canoas  Bottoms  eaten  like 
Honey-combs ;  our  Bark,  which  was  a  single  Bottom,  was 
eaten  thro' ;  so  that  she  could  not  swim.  But  our  Ship 
was  sheathed,^  and  the  Worm  came  no  further  than  the 
Hair  between  the  sheathing  Plank,  and  the  main  Plank. 
We  did  not  mistrust  the  General's  Knavery  'till  now :  for 
when  he  came  down  to  our  Ship,  and  found  us  ripping  ofF 
the  sheathing  Plank,  and  saw  the  firm  Bottom  underneath, 
he  shook  his  Head,  and  seemed  to  be  discontented ;  saying, 
he  did  never  see  a  Ship  with  two  Bottoms  before.  We 
were  told  that  in  this  place,  where  we  now  lay,  a  Dutch 
Ship  was  eaten  up  in  2  Months  time,  and  the  General  had 
all  her  Guns ;  and  it  is  probable  he  did  expect  to  have  had 
ours :  Which  I  do  believe  was  the  main  Reason  that  made 
him  so  forward  in  assisting  us  to  get  our  Ship  into  the 
River,  for  when  we  came  out  again  we  had  no  Assistance 
from  him.  We  had  no  Worms  till  we  came  to  this  place : 
For  when  we  carcen'd  at  the  Marias,  the  Worm  had  not 
touch'd  us ;  nor  at  Guam,  for  there  we  scrubb'd ;  nor 
after  we  came  to  the  Island  Mindanao ;  for  at  the  S.  E.  end 
of  the  Island  we  heel'd  and  scrubb'd  also.  The  Min- 
danaians  are  so  sensible  of  these  destructive  Insects,  that 
whenever  they  come  from  Sea,  they  immediately  hale  their 
Ship  into  a  dry  Dock,  and  burn  her  bottom,  and  there  let 
her  lye  dry  till  they  are  ready  to  go  to  Sea  again.  The 
Canoas  or  Proes  they  hale  up  dry,  and  never  suffer  them  to 

*  Before  the  introduction  of  copper-sheathing  at  the  end  of  the 
eighteenth  century,  ships  were  sheathed  with  thin  fir  deals.  The  bottoms 
so  sheathed  were  first  treated  with  preparations  of  tar  and  hair,  or,  in 
some  cases,  with  felt,  or  tar  and  ground  glass.  Leaden  plates  seem  to 
have  been  used  occasionally.  The  worm  is  "a  very  good  worm"  for 
getting  through  oak  and  elm.     It  is  called  Teredo  navalis, 

366 


^^H  SHIP   WORMS  I 

0^0^  in  the  Water.  It  is  reported  that  those  Worms  an.  ] 
which  get  into  a  Ships  bottom  in  the  salt  Water,  will  dye  in  '^**  1 
the  fresh  Water;  and  that  the  fresh  water  Worms  will  dye  ' 

in  salt  Water:  but  in  brackish  Water  both  sorts  will  in- 
crease prodigiously.  Now  this  place  where  we  lay  was 
lometimcs  brackish  Water,  yet  commonly  fresh  ;  but  what 
sort  of  Worm  this  was  I  know  not.  Some  Men  are  of 
Opinion,  that  these  Worms  breed  in  the  Plank  ;  but  I  am  I 

perswaded  they  breed  in  the  Sea :  For  I  have  seen  Millions  ' 

of  them  swimming  in  the  Water  particularly  in  the  Bay 
of  E^ama ;  for  there  Captain  Davis,  Captain  Swan  and  my 
letf.  and  most  of  our  Men,  did  take  notice  of  them  divers 
times,  which  was  the  reason  of  our  Cleaning  so  often  while 
we  were  there:  and  these  were  the  largest  Worms  that  I 
did  ever  sec,  I  have  also  seen  them  in  Virginia,  and  in  the 
Bay  of  Campcachy ;  in  the  latter  of  which  places  the 
Worms  eat  prodigiously.     They  are  always  in  Bays,  Creeks,  j 

Mouths  of  Rivers,  and  such  places  as  are  near  the  shore ; 
beang  never  found  far  out  at  Sea,  that  I  could  ever  learn ; 
yet  a  Ship  will  bring  them  lodg'd  in  its  Plank  for  a  great 
way. 

Having   thus  ript  off  all  our  Worm-eaten  Plank,  and        J 
ebpt   on    new,   by   the   beginning  of  December    1686,  our         I 
Ship's  bottom  was  sheathed  and  tallowed,  and  the  10th  day        I 
we  went  over  the  Bar  and  took  aboard  the  Iron  and  Lead        I 
that  we  could   not  sell,  and   began  to  fill   our  Water,  and         I 
fetch  aboard  Rice  for  our  Voyage :  but  C,  Swan  remain'd        I 
ashore  still,  and  was  not  yet  determin'd  when  to  sail,  or        I 
whither.     But  I  am  well  assured  that  he  did  never  intend        I 
to  cruize  about  Manila,  as  his  Crew  designed ;  for  I  did        1 
once  ask  him,  and  he  told  me,  That  what  he  had  already 
done  of  that  kind  he  was    forc'd  to ;  but  now  being  at 
Liberty,  he  would  never  more  engage  in  any  such  Design : 
For,  aaid  he.  there  is  no  Prince  on  Earth  is  able  to  wipe 
off  the  Stain  of  such  Actions.     What  other  Designs  he  had 
1  know  not,  for  he  was  commonly  very  cross;  yet  he  did 
never  propose  doing  any  thing  else,  but  only  ordered   the 
Provision  to  be  got  aboard   in  order  to  sail ;  and    I   am 
cooSdent  if  he  had  made  a  motion  to  go  to  any  English 
367 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Factory,  most  of  his  Men  would  have  consented  to  it,  tho' 
1686  probably  some  would  have  still  opposed  it.  However,  his 
Authority  might  soon  have  over-swayed  those  that  were 
refractory ;  for  it  was  very  strange  to  see  the  Awe  that 
these  Men  were  in  of  him,  for  he  punished  the  most 
stubborn  and  daring  of  his  Men.  Yet  when  we  had 
brought  the  Ship  out  into  the  Road,  they  were  not 
altogether  so  submissive  as  while  it  lay  in  the  River,  tho' 
even  then  it  was  that  he  punished  Captain  Teat. 

I  was  at  that  time  a  hunting  with  the  General  for  Beef, 
which  he  had  a  long  time  promised  us.  But  now  I  saw 
that  there  was  no  Credit  to  be  given  to  his  Word ;  for  I 
was  a  Week  out  with  him  and  saw  but  four  Cows,  which 
were  so  wild,  that  we  did  not  get  one.  There  were  five 
or  six  more  of  our  Company  with  me;  these  who  were 
young  Men,  and  had  Dalilah's  there,  which  made  them 
fond  of  the  Place,  all  agreed  with  the  General  to  tell 
Captain  Swan  that  there  were  Beeves  enough  only  they 
were  wild.  But  I  told  him  the  Truth,  and  advised  him 
not  to  be  too  credulous  of  the  General's  Promises.  He 
seemed  to  be  very  angry,  and  stormed  behind  the  General's 
Back,  but  in  his  Presence  was  very  mute,  being  a  man  of 
small  Courage. 

It  was  about  the  2oth  Day  of  December  when  we 
returned  from  hunting,  and  the  General  designed  to  go 
again  to  another  place  to  hunt  for  Beef;  but  he  stayed 
till  after  Christmas-day,  because  some  of  us  designed  to  go 
with  him ;  and  Captain  Swan  had  desired  all  his  Men  to 
be  aboard  that  Day,  that  we  might  keep  it  solemnly 
together :  And  accordingly  he  sent  aboard  a  Buflfaloe  the 
Day  before,  that  we  might  have  a  good  dinner.  So  the 
25  th  Day  about  10  a  Clock,  Captain  Swan  came  aboard, 
and  all  his  Men  who  were  ashore :  For  you  must  under- 
stand that  near  a  third  of  our  Men  lived  constantly  ashore, 
with  their  Comrades  and  Pagallies,  and  some  with  Women- 
Servants,  whom  they  hired  of  their  Masters  for  Concubines. 
Some  of  our  Men  also  had  Houses,  which  they  hired  or 
bought,  for  Houses  are  very  cheap,  for  5  or  6  Dollars. 
For   many  of  them   having  more  money  than  they  knew 

368 


PRODIGALITY   OF   ENGLISH    SEAMEN 

whit  to  (to  with,  cased  themselves  here  of  the  trouble  ak. 
of  telling  it,  tpending  it  very  lavishly,  their  Prodigality  •*** 
Rukine  the  people  impose  upon  them,  to  the  making  the 
rest  of  us  pay  the  dearer  for  what  we  bought,  and  to  the 
endangering  the  like  Impositions  upon  such  Englishmen  as 
may  come  here  hereafter.  Kor  the  Mindanayans  knew  how 
to  get  our  Squires  Gold  from  them  (for  we  had  no  Silver,) 
and  when  our  Men  wanted  Silver,  they  would  change  now 
and  then  an  Ounce  of  Gold,  and  could  get  for  it  no  more 
than  ten  or  eleven  Dollars  for  a  Mindanao  Ounce,  which 
tbcy  would  not  part  with  again  under  eighteen  Dollars. 
Yet  this,  and  the  great  Prices  the  Mindanayans  set  on  their 
Goods,  were  nm  the  only  way  to  lessen  their  Stocks ;  for 
ibeir  Ftgallies  and  Comrades  would  often  be  begging 
•omewhat  of  them,  and  our  Men  were  generous  enough, 
and  would  bestow  half  an  Ounce  of  Gold  at  a  time,  in  a 
Ring  for  their  Pagallics,  or  in  a  Silver  Wrist-band,  or 
Hoop  to  come  about  their  Arms,  in  hopes  to  get  a  nights 
Lodging  with  them. 

When  wc  were  all  aboard  nn  Christmas-day,  Captain 
Swan  ind  his  two  Merchants;  1  did  expect  that  Captain 
Swan  would  have  made  some  proposals,  or  have  told  us 
his  designs;  but  he  only  dined  and  went  ashore  again, 
without  speaking  any  thing  of  his  mind.  Yet  even  then  I 
Jo  think  that  he  was  driving  on  a  design  of  going  to  one 
■f  the  Spice  Islands,  to  load  with  Spice;  for  the  young 
Man  before  mentioned,  who  I  said  was  sent  by  his  Unkle, 
the  Sultan  of  a  Spice  Island  near  I'ernate,  to  invite  the 
English  to  their  Island,  came  aboard  at  this  time,  and  after 
some  private  discourse  with  Captain  Swan,  they  both  went 
•shore  tt^ethcr.  This  young  Man  did  not  care  that  the 
Mtndanaians  should  be  privy  to  what  he  said.  I  have 
heard  Capuin  Swan  say  that  he  oflfcrcd  to  load  his  Ship 
with  Spice,  provided  he  would  build  a  sniall  Fort,  and 
leave  some  Men  to  secure  the  Island  from  the  Dutch ; 
but  1  am  since  informed,  that  the  Dutch  have  now  got 
pcweMton  of  the  Island. 

TTie  next  day  after  Christmas,  the  General  went  away 
again,  and    $   or   6    Englishmen    with    him,  of  whom    I 
^K  VOL.  369  A  ^^ 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  was  one,  under  pretence  of  going  a  hunting ;  and  we  all 
1686  ^gj^^  together  by  Water  in  his  Proe,  together  with  his 
Women  and  Servants,  to  the  hunting  place.  The  General 
always  carried  his  Wives  and  Children,  his  Servants,  his 
Money  and  Goods  with  him :  so  we  all  imbarked  in  the 
Morning,  and  arrived  there  before  Night.  I  have  already 
described  the  fashion  of  their  Proes,  and  the  Rooms  made 
in  them.  We  were  entertained  in  the  Generals  Room  or 
Cabbin.  Our  Voyage  was  not  so  far,  but  that  we  reached 
our  Port  before  Night. 

At  this  time  one  of  the  General's  Servants  had  offended, 
and  was  punished  in  this  manner :  He  was  bound  fast  flat 
on  his  Belly,  on  a  Bambou  belonging  to  the  Prow,  which 
was  so  near  the  Water,  that  by  the  Vessel's  motion,  it 
frequently  delved  under  Water,  and  the  Man  along  with 
it ;  and  sometimes  when  hoisted  up,  he  had  scarce  time 
to  blow  before  he  would  be  carried  under  Water  again. 

When  we  had  rowed  about  two  Leagues,  we  entred 
a  pretty  large  deep  River,  and  rowed  up  a  League  further, 
the  Water  salt  all  the  way.  There  was  a  pretty  large 
Village,  the  Houses  built  after  the  Country  fashion.  We 
landed  at  this  place,  where  there  was  a  House  made  ready 
immediately  for  us.  The  General  and  his  Women  lay  at 
one  end  of  the  House,  and  we  at  the  other  end,  and  in 
the  Evening  all  the  Women  in  the  Village  danced  before 
the  General. 

While  we  staid  here,  the  General  with  his  Men  went 
out  every  Morning  betimes,  and  did  not  return  till  four 
or  five  a  Clock  in  the  Afternoon,  and  he  would  often 
complement  us,  by  telling  us  what  good  Trust  and  Con- 
fidence he  had  in  us,  saying  that  he  left  his  Women  and 
Goods  under  our  Protection,  and  that  he  thought  them 
as  secure  with  us  six  (for  we  had  all  our  Arms  with  us) 
as  if  he  had  left  100  of  his  own  Men  to  guard  them.  Yet 
for  all  this  great  Confidence,  he  always  left  one  of  his 
principal  Men,  for  fear  some  of  us  should  be  too  familiar 
with  his  Women. 

They  did  never  stir  out  of  their  own  Room  when  the 
General   was  at  Home,  but  as  soon  as  he  was  gone  out, 

370 


I 


THE  GENERAL'S   SERAGLIO 

they  would  presently  come  into  our  Room,  and  sit  with 
us  all  Day,  and  ask  a  Thousand  Questions  of  us  concern- 
it^  our  English  Women,  and  our  Customs.  You  may 
imagine  that  before  this  time,  some  of  us  had  attained 
so  much  of  their  Language  as  to  understand  them,  and 
give  them  Answers  to  their  Demands.  I  remember  that 
one  day  ihcy  asked  how  many  Wives  the  King  of  England 
had?  Wc  told  them  but  one,  and  that  our  English  Laws 
did  not  allow  of  any  more.  Thev  said  it  was  a  strange 
Custom,  that  a  Man  should  be  confined  to  one  Woman ; 
some  of  tbem  said  it  was  a  very  bad  Law,  but  others 
again  said  it  was  a  good  Law ;  so  there  was  a  great 
Impute  among  them  about  it.  But  one  of  the  General's 
Women  said  positively.  That  our  Law  was  better  than 
theirs,  and  made  them  all  silent  by  the  Keason  which  she 
gave  for  it.  This  was  the  War  Queen,  aa  we  called  her, 
for  she  did  always  accompany  the  General  when  ever  he  was 
called  out  to  engage  his  Enemies,  but  the  rest  did  not. 

By  this  Familiarity  among  the  Women,  and  by  often 
discoursing  them,  we  came  to  be  acquainted  with  their 
Cusioms  and  Privilcdges.  The  Geocral  lies  with  his  Wives 
by  turns;  but  she  by  whom  he  had  the  first  Son,  has  a 
double  Portion  of  his  Company :  For  when  it  comes  to 
her  turn,  she  has  him  two  Nights,  whereas  the  rest  have 
him  but  one.  She  with  whom  he  is  to  lye  at  Night,  seems 
to  have  a  particular  Respect  shown  her  by  the  rest  all 
the  precedent  day ;  and  for  a  Mark  of  distinction,  wears 
a  striped  «lk  Handkerchief  about  her  Neck,  by  which 
we  knew  who  was  Queen  that  day. 

We  lay  here  about  5  or  6  Days,  but  did  never  in  all 
that  time  sec  the  least  sign  of  any  Beef,  which  was  the 
Busincn  wc  came  about ;  neither  were  we  suffered  to  go 
out  with  the  General  to  see  the  wild  Kinc,  but  wc  wanted 
for  nothing  else:  However,  this  did  not  please  us,  and 
we  often  importuned  him  to  let  us  go  out  among  the 
Cattle.  At  last  he  told  us.  That  he  had  provided  a  Jar 
of  Rice-drink  to  be  merry  with  us,  and  after  that  we 
should  go  with  htm. 

Thb  Rice-drink  is  made  of  Rice  boiled  and  put  into 
371 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   a  Jar,  where  it  remains  a  long  time  steeping  in  Water. 

1687  J  i^now  not  the  manner  of  making  it,  but  it  is  very  strong 
pleasant  Drink.  The  Evening  when  the  General  designed 
to  be  merry,  he  caused  a  Jar  of  this  Drink  to  be  brought 
into  our  Room,  and  he  began  to  drink  first  himself,  then 
afterwards  his  Men;  so  they  took  turns  till  they  were 
all  as  drunk  as  Swine,  before  they  suffered  us  to  drink. 
After  they  had  enough,  then  we  drank,  and  they  drank 
no  more,  for  they  will  not  drink  after  us.  The  General 
leapt  about  our  Room  a  little  while ;  but  having  his  Load 
soon  went  to  sleep. 

The  next  Day  we  went  out  with  the  General  into  the 
Savannah,  where  he  had  near  100  Men  making  of  a  large 
Pen  to  drive  the  Cattle  into.  For  that  is  the  manner  of 
their  Hunting,  having  no  Dogs.  But  I  saw  not  above  eight 
or  ten  Cows,  and  those  as  wild  as  Deer,  so  that  we  got 
none  this  Day :  yet  the  next  Day  some  of  his  Men  brought 
in  three  Heifers,  which  they  kill'd  in  the  Savannah.  With 
these  we  return'd  aboard,  they  being  all  that  we  got  there. 

Captain  Swan  was  much  vex'd  at  the  General's  Actions ; 
for  he  promised  to  supply  us  with  as  much  Beef  as  we 
should  want,  but  now  either  could  not,  or  would  not 
make  good  his  Promise.  Besides,  he  failed  to  perform 
his  Promise  in  a  Bargain  of  Rice,  that  we  were  to  have 
for  the  Iron  which  we  sold  him,  but  he  put  us  off  still 
from  time  to  time,  and  would  not  come  to  any  Account. 
Neither  were  these  all  his  Tricks;  for  a  little  before  his 
Son  was  Circumcised,  (of  which  I  spake  in  the  foregoing 
Chapter)  he  pretended  a  great  streight  for  Money,  to 
defray  the  Charges  of  that  Day ;  and  therefore  desired 
Captain  Swan  to  lend  him  about  twenty  Ounces  of  Gold  ; 
for  he  knew  that  Captain  Swan  had  a  considerable  quantity 
of  Gold  in  his  possession,  which  the  General  thought  was 
his  own,  but  indeed  had  none  but  what  belonged  to  the 
Merchants.  However  he  lent  it  the  General ;  but  when 
he  came  to  an  account  with  Captain  Swan,  he  told  him, 
that  it  was  usual  at  such  solemn  times  to  make  Presents, 
and  that  he  received  it  as  a  Gift.  He  also  demanded 
Payment  for  the  Victuals  that  our  Captain  and  his  Men 


DISORDERS   AMONG  THE  SHIP'S   CREW 

did  eat  at  his  House.  These  things  startled  Captain  ak 
Swan,  yet  how  to  help  himself  he  knew  not.  But  all  '^^ 
this,  with  other  inward  Troubles,  lay  hard  on  our  Captain's 
Spirits,  and  put  him  very  much  out  of  Humour ;  for  his 
own  Company  were  pressing  him  every  Day  to  be  gone, 
because  now  was  the  hcighth  of  the  Easterly  Monsoon, 
the  only  Wind  to  carry  us  farther  into  the  Indies. 

About  this  time  sonic  of  our  Men,  who  were  weary 
and  tired  with  wandring,  ran  away  into  the  Country  and 
absconded,  they  being  assisted,  as  was  generally  believed 
by  Raja  Laut.  There  were  others  also,  who  fearing  we 
should  not  go  to  an  English  Fort,  bought  a  Canoa,  and 
designed  to  go  in  her  to  Borneo ' :  For  not  long  before 
the  Mindanao  Vessel  came  from  thence,  and  brought  a 
Letter  directed  to  the  chief  of  the  English  Factory  at 
Mindanao.  This  Letter  the  General  would  have  Captain 
Swan  have  opened,  but  he  thought  it  might  come  from 
some  of  the  East-India  Merchants  whose  Affairs  he  would 
n<x  inter  meddle  with,  and  therefore  did  not  open  it.  I 
since  met  with  Captain  Bowry  at  Achin,  and  idling  him 
this  Story,  he  said  that  he  sent  that  Letter,  supposing  that 
the  English  were  settled  there  at  Mindanao,  and  by  this 
Letter  we  also  thought  that  there  was  an  English  Factory 
It  Borneo:  So  here  was  a  mistake  on  both  sides.  But  this 
CtfUM,  wherewith  some  of  them  thought  to  go  to  Borneo, 
Captain  Swan  took  from  them,  and  thrcatned  the  Under- 
ukers  very  hardly.  However,  this  did  not  so  far  discourage 
tbetn,  for  they  secretly  bought  another ;  but  their  Designs 
taking  Air,  they  were  again  frustrated  by  Captain  Swan. 

The  whole  Crew  were  at  this  time  under  a  general  Dis- 
aJcctton,  and  full  of  very  different  Projects;  and  all  for 
want  of  Action.  The  main  Division  was  between  those 
that  had  Money  and  those  that  had  none.  There  was  a 
great  Difference  in  the  Humours  of  these;  for  they  that 
had  Mf«iey  liv'd  ashore,  and  did  not  care  for  leaving  Min- 

ao;  whilst  those  that  were  poor  liv'd  Aboard,  and  urg'd 


I 


,  a  koa  Murleen  olben  bati  bouctK  *  pcnaguti  intending  toEO 
Id  BonMOi  bat  Swan  leittd  the  boat,  and^cpt  (hem  from  utling.  Tbe 
M&  gi«»  dttuls. 

373 


I 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AN.  Capt.  Swan  to  go  to  Sea.  These  began  to  be  Unruly  as 
1687  ^eii  as  Dissatisry'd,  and  sent  ashore  the  Merchants  Iron  to 
sell  for  Rack  and  Honey,  to  make  Punch,  wherewith  they 
grew  Drunk  and  Quarrelsome :  Which  disorderly  Actions 
deterr'd  me  from  going  Aboard ;  for  I  did  ever  abhor 
Drunkenness,  which  now  our  Men  that  were  Aboard 
abandon'd  themselves  wholly  to. 

Yet  these  Disorders  might  have  been  crusht,  if  Capt. 
Swan  had  used  his  Authority  to  suppress  them  :  But  he 
with  his  Merchants  living  always  ashore,  there  was  no 
Command  ;  and  therefore  every  Man  did  what  he  pleased 
and  encouraged  each  other  in  his  Villanies.  Now  Mr. 
Harthop,  who  was  one  of  Captain  Swan's  Merchants,  did 
very  much  importune  him  to  settle  his  Resolutions,  and 
declare  his  Mind  to  his  Men ;  which  at  last  he  consented 
to  do.  Therefore  he  gave  warning  to  all  his  Men  to  come 
aboard  the  13th  day  of  January  1687. 

We  did  all  earnestly  expect  to  hear  what  Captain  Swan 
would  propose,  and  therefore  were  very  willing  to  go 
Aboard.  But  unluckily  for  him,  two  days  before  this 
Meeting  was  to  be.  Captain  Swan  sent  Aboard  his  Gunner, 
to  fetch  something  ashore  out  of  his  Cabbin.  The  Gunner 
rummaging  to  find  what  he  was  sent  for,  among  other 
things  took  out  the  Captain's  Journal  from  America  to  the 
Island  Guam,  and  laid  down  by  him.  This  Journal  was 
taken  up  by  one  John  Read,  a  Bristol  Man,  whom  I  have 
mentioned  in  my  4th  Chapter.  He  was  a  pretty  Ingenious 
young  Man,  and  of  a  very  civil  carriage  and  behaviour. 
He  was  also  accounted  a  good  Artist,^  and  kept  a  Journal, 
and  was  now  prompted  by  his  curiosity,  to  peep  into  Captain 
Swan's  Journal,  to  see  how  it  agreed  with  his  own ;  a  thing 
very  usual  among  Seamen  that  keep  Journals,  when  they 
have  an  opportunity,  and  especially  young  Men,  who  have 
no  great  experience.  At  the  first  opening  of  the  Book  he 
light  on  a  place  in  which  Captain  Swan  had  inveighed 
bitterly  against  most  of  his  Men,  especially  against  another 
John  Reed,  a  Jamaica  Man.  This  was  such  stuff  as  he  did 
not   seek   after  :     But  hitting   so  pat  on  this  subject,  his 

*  Or  navigator.     One  skilled  in  the  art  of  navigation. 

374 


CREW    DISGUSTED   AT  THEIR   CAPTAIN     ■ 

curiosity  led  him  lo  pry  farther  ;  and  therefore  while  the    amM 
Gunner  was  busie,  he  convcy'd  the  Book  away,  to  look  over  '^' 
it  at  his  leisure.    The  Gunner  having  dispatch'd  his  business, 
i'jck'd  up  the  Cabbin-door,  not  missing  the  Book,  and  went 
i-vhore.     Then  John  Reed  shewed  it  to  his  Namesake,  and       J 
to  the  rest  that  were  aboard,  who  were  by  this  time  the       H 
biggest  part  of  them  ripe  for  mischief;  only  wanting  some       ^ 
fair  pretence  to  set  themselves  to  work  about  it.    Therefore 
looking  on  what  was  written  in  this  Journal  to  be  matter 
sufficient  for  them  to  accomplish  their  Ends,  Captairi  Teat,  . 

who  as  I  said  before,  had  been  abused  by  Captain  Swan,  laid         J 
hold  on  this  opportunity  to  be   revenged   for  his  Injuries,  I 

and  aggravated  the  matter  to  the  heighth  ;  perswading  the       M 
Men  to  turn  out  Captain  Swan  from  being  Commander,  in       H 
hopes  to  have  commanded  the  Ship  himself.     As  for  the       H 
Sea-men  they  were  easily  pcrswaded  to  any  thing ;  for  they       ■ 
were  quite  tired  with  this  long  and  tedious  Voyage,  and       H 
most  of  them  despaired  of  ever  getting  home,  and  therefore       H 
did  noe  care  what  they  did,  or  whether  they  went.     It  was         " 
only  want  of  being  busied  in  some  Action  that  made  them 
to  uncasie  ;  therefore  they  consented  to  what  Teat  proposed, 
and  immediately  all  that  were  aboard  bound  themselves  by 
Oath  to  turn  Captain  Swan  out,  and  to  conceal  this  design 
fnwn  those  that  were  ashore,  until  the  Ship  was  under  Sail ; 
which  would   hive  been  presently,  if  the  Surgeon  or  his 
Mate  had  been  aboard  ;  but  ihcy  were  both  ashore,  and  they 
ihoughi  it  no  Prudence  to  go  to  Sea  without  a  Surgeon : 
Therefore   the  next  Morning  they  sent  ashore  one  John 
Cookworthy,  to  hasten  off  cither  the  Surgeon  or  his  Mate, 
by  pretending  that  one  of  the  Men  in  the  Night  broke  his 
Leg  by  falling  into  the  Hold.     The  Surgeon  told  him  that 
he  intended  to  come  aboard  the  next  day  with  the  Captain, 
and  would  not  come  before ;  but  sent  his  Mate,  Herman 
Coppinger. 

This  Man  sometime  before  this,  was  sleeping  at  his 
PagallteSf  and  a  Snake  twisted  himself  about  his  Neck;  but 
■fterwards  went  away  without  hurting  him.  In  this 
Country  it  is  usual  to  have  the  Snakes  come  into  the 
Houses  and  into  the  Ships  too ;  for  we  had  several  came 
375 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  aboard  our  Ship  when  we  lay  in  the  River.  But  to  proceed, 
J 6^7  Herman  Coppinger  provided  to  go  aboard ;  and  the  next 
day,  being  the  time  appointed  for  Captain  Swan  and  all  his 
Men  to  meet  aboard,  I  went  aboard  with  him,  neither  of 
us  distrusted  what  was  designing  by  those  aboard,  till  wc 
came  thither.  Then  we  found  it  was  only  a  trick  to  get 
the  Surgeon  ofF;  for  now,  having  obtained  their  Desires, 
the  Canoa  was  sent  ashore  again  immediately,  to  desire  as 
many  as  they  could  meet  to  come  aboard ;  but  not  to  tell 
the  Reason,  lest  Captain  Swan  should  come  to  hear  of  it. 

The  13th  day  in  the  Morning  they  weighed,  and  fired 
a  Gun :  Capt.  Swan  immediately  sent  aboard  Mr.  Nelly, 
who  was  now  his  chief  Mate,  to  sec  what  the  matter  was : 
To  him  they  told  all  their  Grievances,  and  shewed  him 
the  Journal.  He  perswaded  them  to  stay  till  the  next  day, 
for  an  Answer  from  Captain  Swan  and  the  Merchants.  So 
they  came  to  an  Anchor  again,  and  the  next  Morning  Mr. 
Harthop  came  aboard  :  He  perswaded  them  to  be  reconciled 
again,  or  at  least  to  stay  and  get  more  Rice.  But  they 
were  deaf  to  it,  and  weighed  again  while  he  was  aboard. 
Yet  at  Mr.  Harthop's  Perswasion  they  promised  to  stay 
till  2  a  Clock  in  the  Afternoon  for  Captain  Swan,  and  the 
rest  of  the  Men,  if  they  would  come  aboard  ;  but  they 
suffered  no  Man  to  go  ashore,  except  one  William  Williams 
that  had  a  wooden  Leg,  and  another  that  was  a  Sawyer. 

If  Capt.  Swan  had  yet  come  aboard,  he  might  have 
dash'd  all  their  designs ;  but  he  neither  came  himself,  as  a 
Captain  of  any  Prudence  and  Courage  would  have  done, 
nor  sent  till  the  time  was  expired.  So  we  left  Captain 
Swan  and  about  36  Men  ashore  in  the  City,  and  6  or  8 
that  run  away;  and  about  16  we  had  buried  there,  the 
most  of  which  died  by  Poison.  The  Natives  are  very  ex- 
pert at  Poisoning,  and  do  it  upon  small  occasions:  Nor 
did  our  Men  want  for  giving  Offence,  through  their  general 
Rogueries,  and  sometimes  by  dallying  too  familiarly  with 
their  Women,  even  before  their  Faces.  Some  of  their 
Poisons  are  slow  and  lingering ;  for  we  had  some  now 
aboard  who  were  Poison'd  there  ;  but  died  not  till  some 
Months  after. 

376 


CHAP.    XIV 

irl  frtm  tht  River  of  Mindanao.  Of  the  lime  lost  or  gain'ii 
Im  mtimg  reuiui  the  Warld :  IVith  a  Cautitn  to  Seamen,  abnul  the 
aUntmne*  ihry  are  ta  take  far  the  dtffirtnct  of  the  Sun's  dec/inalion. 
Tht  Sutlh  C*ait  of  Mindanaa.  Cbamhonge  Town  and  Harbaur, 
with  itt  Nrigkhuring  Keys.  Green  Turlli.  Ruini  af  a  Spanish 
Fart.  The  Ifnttrmait  paint  af  Mindanao.  Two  Proes  of  the 
Stitpm  ladrn  fram  Manila.  An  hit  to  the  Wist  of  Seho. 
Walking  CaiUf,  Isle  of  Baits,  very  large  ;  and  numerous  Turtle 
m»d  Mematet,  A  dangtrout  Shoal.  They  sail  hy  Panay  belong- 
img  tt  the  Spaniards  and  others  of  the  Philippine  Islands.  Isle  of 
MimtUra.  Ttua  Barks  taken.  A  further  account  af  the  Isle 
Lamieif  and  the  Cily  and  Harbour  of  Manila.  They  go  off  Pulo 
Cmdartta  Ke  there.  The  Sholes  of  Pracel,  &-c.  Puis  Condore. 
The  Tar-tree.  The  Mango.  Grape-tree.  The  IVild  or  Bastard 
Nmtnug.  Their  Animal,.  Of  the  Migration  of  the  Turtle  fi-am 
fiaa  It  plan.  Of  tht  Commodious  Situation  of  Pulo  Condorr ;  in 
Waltr^  aad  its  Cachimhinest  inhabitants.  Of  the  Malayan  Tongue. 
The  Cusltm  tf  prostituting  their  JVomen  in  these  Countries,  and  in 
Gmimem.  The  Idolatry  here,  at  Tunquin,  and  among  the  Chinese 
Staemra,  and  of  a  Proeessian  at  Fort  St.  George.  They  reft  their 
Ship.  Tw*  of  ihem  dyt  of  Poyson  iliey  look  at  Mindanao,  Thiy 
uie  im  tfaler,  and  a  Pilot  for  the  Bay  of  Siam.  Pulo  Uby  j  and 
Ptiat  of  Cambodia.  Two  Cambodian  Vessels,  lilet  in  the  Bay  of 
Siam.  Tht  tight  Fesseli  and  Seamen  of  the  Kingdom  af  Champa. 
Sttrmi.  A  Chinese  Jonk  from  Palimbam  in  Sumatra.  They  came 
again  ta  PuU  Condore.  A  bloody  Fray  with  a  Malayan  y<sset. 
The  Surgran'i  and  the  Author's  dtiiret  af  leaving  their  Crra: 


HK  14th  day  of  January  1687,  at  three  of  the 
Clock    in    the   Afternoon,   we  sailed  from    the  ' 
River  of  Mindanao,  designing  to  cruise  before 
Manila.' 


T 


■  /oho  Rc«d  nu  capuun.  Teat  master,  and  More  quarier-maMcr. 
377 


CAPTAIN  DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AN.  It  was  during  our  stay  at  Mindanao,  that  we  were  first 

'^^7  made  sensible  of  the  change  of  time,  in  the  course  of  our 
Voyage.  For  having  travell'd  so  far  Westward,  keeping 
the  same  Course  with  the  sun,  we  must  consequently  have 
gained  something  insensibly  in  the  length  of  the  particular 
Days,  but  have  lost  in  the  tale,  the  bulk,  or  number  of  the 
Days  or  Hours.  According  to  the  different  Longitudes 
of  England  and  Mindanao,  this  Isle  being  West  from  the 
Lizzard,  by  common  Computation,  about  210  Degrees,  the 
difference  of  time  at  our  Arrival  at  Mindanao  ought  to  be 
about  1 4  hours :  And  so  much  we  should  have  anticipated 
our  reckoning,  having  gained  it  by  bearing  the  Sun  com- 
pany. Now  the  natural  Day  in  every  particular  place 
must  be  consonant  to  itself :  But  this  going  about  with,  or 
against  the  Suns  course,  will  of  necessity  make  a  difference 
in  the  Calculation  of  the  civil  Day  between  any  two  places. 
Accordingly,  at  Mindanao,  and  all  other  places  in  the 
East-Indies,  we  found  them  reckoning  a  Day  before  us, 
both  Natives  and  Europeans;  for  the  Europeans  coming 
Eastward  by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  in  a  Course  contrary 
to  the  Sun  and  us,  where-ever  we  met  they  were  a  full 
Day  before  us  in  their  Accounts.  So  among  the  Indian 
Mahometans  here,  their  Friday,  the  Day  of  their  Sultan's 
going  to  their  Mosques,  was  Thursday  with  us ;  though 
it  were  Friday  also  with  those  who  came  Eastward  from 
Europe.  Yet  at  the  Ladrone  Islands,  we  found  the 
Spaniards  of  Guam  keeping  the  same  Computation  with 
our  selves ;  the  reason  of  which  I  take  to  be,  that  they 
settled  that  Colony  by  a  Course  Westward  from  Spain; 
the  Spaniards  going  first  to  America,  and  thence  to  the 
Ladrones  and  Philippines.  But  how  the  reckoning  was 
at  Manila,  and  the  rest  of  the  Spanish  Colonies  in  the 
Philippine  Islands,  I  know  not;  whether  they  keep  it  as 
they  brought  it,  or  corrected  it  by  the  Accounts  of  the 
Natives,  and  of  the  Portugueze,  Dutch  and  English, 
coming  the  contrary  way  from  Europe. 

One  great  Reason  why  Seamen  ought  to  keep  the 
difference  of  time  as  exact  as  they  can,  is,  that  they  may 
be  the  more  exact  in  their  Latitudes.     For  our  Tables  of 

378 


TOWN  OF  CHAM  BONGO— ISLANDS,  ETC. 

rhc  Suns  declinatioit,'  being  calculated  for  the  Meridians  am.  I 
of  the  places  in  which  they  were  made,  differ  about  '**'T| 
II  Minutes  from  those  parts  of  the  World  that  lie  on 
their  opposite  Meridians,  in  the  Months  of  March  and 
September ;  and  in  proportion  to  the  Suns  declination,  at 
other  times  of  the  Year  also.  And  should  they  run 
farther  as  we  did,  the  difference  would  still  increase  upon 
:hrm,  and  be  an  occasion  of  great  Errors,  Yet  even  able 
Seamen  in  these  Voyages  are  hardly  made  sensible  of  this, 
;hough  90  necessary  to  be  observed,  for  want  of  duly 
itiending  to  the  reason  of  it,  as  it  happened  among  those 
if  our  Crew;  who  after  we  had  past  180  Degrees,  began 
to  decrease  the  difference  of  declination,  whereas  they 
ought  uitl  to  have  increased  it,  for  it  all  the  way  increased 
upon  us. 

Wc  had  the  Wind  at  N.  N.  E.  fair  clear  Weather,  and 
J  brisk  Gale.  We  coasted  to  the  Westward,  on  the  South- 
^ide  of  the  Island  of  Mindanao,  keeping  within  4  or  5 
Leagues  of  the  Shore.  The  Land  from  hence  trends  away 
W.  by  S.  It  is  of  a  good  heighch  by  the  Sea,  and  very 
woody,  and  in  the  Country  we  saw  high  Hills. 

The  next  day  wc  were  abrcst  of  Chambongo ;  *  a 
Town  in  this  Island,  and  30  Leagues  from  the  River  of 
Mindanao.  Here  is  said  to  be  a  good  Harbour,  and  a 
great  Settlement,  with  plenty  of  Beef  and  Buffaloe.  It 
IS  reported  that  the  Spaniards  were  formerly  fortified  here 
alvi:  There  arc  two  shoals  lie  off  this  place,  2  or  3 
Leagues  from  the  Shore.  From  hence  the  Land  is  more 
low  and  even ;  yet  there  are  some  Hills  in  the  Country. 

About  6  Leagues  before  wc  came  to  the  West-end 
uf  the  Island  Mindanao,  we  fell  in  with  a  great  many  small 
low  Islands'  or  Keys,  and  about  two  or  three  Leagues  to 
the  Southward  of  these  Keys,  there  is  a  long  Island  * 
stretching  N.  E.  and  S.  W.  about  12  Leagues.  This 
U\xnd  n  low  by  the  Sea  on  the  North-side,  and  has  a  Ridge 
of  Hills  in  the  middle,  running  from  one  end  to  the  other. 


*  The  fun'*   ilecljnaiion  :    hi*  anitutar  distai 
*  The  B»ilan  group. 

379 


from    the   terreiiml 
'  The  I  tie  of  UasiUn. 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AN.   Between  this  Isle  and  the  small  Keys,  there  is  a  good  large 

*^^7  Channel :  Among  the  Keys  also  there  is  a  good  depth  of 

Water,  and  a  violent  Tide;  but  on  what  point    of  the 

Compass  it  flows,  I  know  not,  nor  how  much  it  riseth  and 

falls. 

The  17th  day  we  anchored  on  the  East-side  of  all  these 
Keys  in  8  Fathom  Water,  clean  Sand.  Here  are  plenty  of 
green  Turtle,  whose  Flesh  is  as  sweet  as  any  in  the  West- 
Indies  :  But  they  are  very  shy.  A  little  to  the  Westward 
of  these  Keys,  on  the  Island  Mindanao,  we  saw  abundance 
of  Coco-nut  Trees  :  Therefore  we  sent  our  Canoa  ashore, 
thinking  to  find  Inhabitants,  but  found  none,  nor  sign  of 
any  ;  but  great  Tracts  of  Hogs,  and  great  Cattle ;  and  close 
by  the  Sea  there  were  Ruins  of  an  old  Fort.  The  Walls 
thereof  were  of  good  heighth,  built  with  Stone  and  Lime ; 
and  by  the  Workmanship  seem'd  to  be  Spanish.  From 
this  place  the  Land  trends  W.  N.  W.  and  it  is  of  an 
indifferent  heighth  by  the  Sea.  It  run  on  this  point  of 
the  Compass  4  or  5  Leagues,  and  then  the  Land  trends 
away  N.  N.  W.  5  or  6  Leagues  farther,  making  with  many 
bluff  Points. 

We  weigh'd  again  the  14th  day,  and  went  thro' 
between  the  Keys ;  but  met  such  uncertain  Tides,  that  we 
were  forced  to  anchor  again.  The  22nd  day  we  got 
about  the  Westermost  Point  of  all  Mindanao,  and  stood 
to  the  Northward,  plying  under  the  Shore,  and  having 
the  Wind  at  N.  N.  E.  a  fresh  Gale.  As  we  sailed  along 
further,  we  found  the  land  to  trend  N.  N.  E.  On  this 
part  of  the  Island  the  Land  is  high  by  the  Sea,  with  full 
bluff  Points,  and  very  woody.  There  are  some  small 
Sandy  Bays,  which  afford  Streams  of  fresh  Water. 

Here  we  met  with  two  Prows  belonging  to  the 
Sologues,  one  of  the  Mindanaian  Nations  before-mentioned. 
They  came  from  Manila  laden  with  Silks  and  Calicoes.  We 
kept  on  this  Western  part  of  the  Island  steering  Northerly, 
till  we  came  abrest  of  some  other  of  the  Philippine  Islands,^ 
that    lay    to    the    Northward    of   us ;    then    steered    away 

^  Negros  and  Boho. 

380 


towards  them  ;  but  still  keeping  on  the  West  side  of  them,   ah. 
ind  we  had  the  Winds  at  N.  N.  E.  '^^ 

The  3d  of  February  we  anchored  in  a  good  Bay  on 
the  West  side  of  the  Island,  in  Lat.  9  d.  JJ  min.  where  we 
had  13  Fathom-water,  good  soft  Oaze.     'rhis  Island  hath 
no  Name  that  wc  could  find  in  any  book,  but  licth  on  the         I 
West  side  of  the  Island  Scbo.     It  is  about  8  or  10  Leagues        | 
long,    mountainous   and    woody.     At    this    place    Captain         I 
Read,  who  was  the  same  Captain  Swan  had  so  much  railed         I 
against  in  his  Journal,  and  was  now  made  Captain  in  his         I 
room  (as  Captain  Teat  was  made  Master,  and  Mr.  Henry 
More  yuartcr-Mastcr)  ordered  the  Carpenters  to  cut  down         j 
our  Quarter-Deck  to  make  the  Ship  snug,  and  the  fitter  for        I 
tailing.     When   that  was  done  we  heeled   her,  scrubbed  her         I 
Bottom,  and  tallowed  it.     Then  we  fill'dall  our  Water,  for         I 
here  is  a  delicate  small  run  of  Water.  I 

The  Land  was  pretty  low  in  this  Bay,  the  Mould  black 
and  fat,  and  the  Trees  of  several  Kinds,  very  thick  and  tall. 
In  some  places  we  found  plenty  of  Canes,'  such  as  we  use  in 
Ef^land  for  Walking-Canes.  These  were  short -join  ted,  not 
above  two  Foot  and  a  half,  or  two  Foot  10  inches  the 
longest,  and  most  of  them  not  above  two  Foot.  They  run 
along  on  the  Ground  like  a  Vine ;  or  taking  hold  of  their 
Trees,  they  climb  up  to  their  very  tops.  They  are  15  or 
zo  Fathom  long,  and  much  of  a  bigness  from  the  Root,  till 
within  5  or  6  Fathom  of  the  end.  They  are  of  a  pale  green 
Colour,  cloathed  over  with  a  Coat  of  short  thick  hairy 
Substance,  of  a  dun  Colour;  but  it  comes  off  by  only 
drawing  the  Cane  through  your  hand.  We  did  cut  many 
of  them,  and  they  proved  very  tough  heavy  Canes.  1 

We  saw  no  Houses,  nor  sign  of  Inhabitants ;  but  while 
we  lay  here,  there  was  a  Canoa  with  6  Men  came  into  this 
Bay ;  but  whither  they  were  bound,  or  from  whence  they 
came,  I  know  not.  They  were  Indians,  and  wc  could  not 
understand  them. 

In  the  middle  <^  this  Bay,  about  a  Mile  from  the  Shore, 
there  is  a  small  low  woody  Island,  not  above  a  Mile  in 

'  Kaiuni.  J 

38>  1 


L.MI 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   Circumference ;  our  Ship  rode  about  a  Mile  from  it.     This 
>687  Island  was  the  Habitation  of  an  incredible  number  of  great 
Batts,^  with  Bodies  as  big  as  Ducks,  or  large  Fowl,  and  with 
vast  Wings :  For  I  saw  at  Mindanao  one  of  this  sort,  and 
I  judge  that  the  Wings  stretcht  out  in  length,  could  not  be 
less  asunder  than  7  or  8  Foot  from  tip  to  tip ;  for  it  iws 
much  more  than  any  of  us  could  fathom  with  our  Amu 
extended  to  the  utmost.     The  Wings  are    for  Substance 
like  those  of  other  Batts,  of  a  Dun  or  Mouse  colour.     TIk 
Skin  or  Leather  of  them  hath  Ribs  running  along  it,  ind 
draws  up  in  3  or  4  Folds,  and  at  the  joints  of  those  Rib 
and  the  extremities  of  the  Wings,  there  are  sharp  and 
crooked  Claws,  by  which  they  may  hang  on  any  thing.    In 
the  Evening  as  soon  as  the  Sun  was  set,  these  Creaturs 
would  begin  to  take  their  flight  from  this  Island,  in  swanm 
like  Bees,  directing  their  flight  over  to  the  Main  Island; 
and  whither  afterwards  I  know  not.     Thus  we  should  see 
them  rising  up  from  the  Island  till  Night  hindred  our  »ght; 
and  in  the  Morning  as  soon  as  it  was  light,  we  should  see 
them  returning  again  like  a  Cloud,  to  the  small  Island; 
till  Sun  rising.     This  Course  they  kept  constantly  wMk 
we  lay  here,  affording  us  every  Morning  and  Evening  an 
Hour's  Diversion    in    gazing  at  them,  and  talking   about 
them ;  but  our  Curiosity  did  not   prevail  with   us  to  go 
ashore  to  them,  our  selves  and  Canoas  being  all  the  daf 
time  taken  up  in  business"  about  our  Ship.     At  thb  Ue 
also  we  found  plenty  of  Turtle  and  Manatee,  but  no  Fish. 
Westay'd  here  till  the  loth  of  February,  1687  ;  andtbcD 
having  compleated  our  Business,  we  sailed  hence  with  the 
Wind  at  North.     But  going  out  we  struck  on  a  Rock,  where 
we  lay  two  Hours.     It  was  very  smooth  Water,  and  the 
Tide  of  Flood,  or  else  we  should  there  have  lost  our  Siupi 
We  struck  off  a  great  piece  of  our  Rudder,  which  was  al 
the  damage  that  we  received,  but  we  more  narrowly  mist 
losing  our  Ship  this  time,  than  in  any  other  in  the  whok 

*  Bats.  Perhaps  Pterofus  Ja^mnacus,  a  "smoky  red'  and  " black ''hi^ 
with  wings  which  measure  some  five  or  six  feet  across  when  extended. 

^  In  scrubbing  her  bends,  tallowing,  filling  wood  and  water,  cnttini 
down  her  quarter-deck  (or  high  after  works),  &c.,  &c. 

382 


I  ISLE  OF   PANAY— ISLE   OF   MINDORA 


Vo>igc. 


This! 


a  vcrydangei 


Tous  Shoal,  because  it  does  not    aw. 


break,  unless  probably  ii  may  appear  in  foul  Weather.     It   '**7  j 
lies  about   two  mile  to    the  Westward,   without  the  small 
Batt  Island.     Here  wc  found  the  Tide  of  Flood  setting  to 
the  Southward,  and  the  Ebb  to  the  Northward. 

After  wc  were  past  this  Shoal,  we  coasted  along  by  the 
reat  of  the  Philippine  Islands,  keeping  on  the  West-side  of 
them.  Some  of  them  appeared  to  be  very  Mountainous 
dry  Land.  We  saw  many  Fires  in  the  Night  as  we  passed 
by  Panay,'  a  great  Island  settled  by  Spaniards,  and  by  the 
Firw  up  and  down  it  seems  to  be  well  settled  by  them  ;  for 
this  a  a  Spanish  Custom,  whereby  they  give  Notice  of  any 
Danger  or  the  like  from  Sea  ;  and  'tis  probable  they  had  seen 
our  Ship  the  Day  before.  This  is  an  unfrequented  Coast, 
and  'tia  rare  to  have  any  Ship  seen  there.  We  touched  not 
at  Panay,  nor  any  where  else ;  tho'  we  saw  a  great  many 
small  Islands  to  the  Westward  of  us,  and  some  Shoals,'  but 
ncme  of  them  laid  down  in  our  Draughts. 

The  1 8th  day  of  Feb.  we  anchored  at  the  N.  W.  end  of 
the  Island  Mindora,'  in  lo  Fathom-water,  about  3  quarters 
of  a  Mile  from  the  Shore.  Mindora  is  a  large  Island ;  the 
middle  of  it  lying  in  Lat.  13,  about  40  Leagues  long, 
stretching  N.  W.  and  S.  E.  It  is  High  and  Mountainous, 
and  not  very  Woody.  At  this  Place  where  we  anchored  the 
Land  was  neither  very  high  nor  low.  There  was  a  small 
Brook  of  Water,  and  the  Land  by  the  Sea  was  very  Woody, 
and  the  Trees  high  and  tall,  but  a  League  or  two  farther 
in.  the  Woods  arc  very  thin  and  small.  Here  we  saw  great 
tracks  of  Hogs  and  Beef,  and  we  saw  some  of  each,  and 
hunted  them  ;  but  they  were  wild,  and  we  could  kill  none. 

While  wc  were  here,  there  was  a  Canoa  with  4  Indians 
came  from  Manila.  They  were  very  shy  of  us  a  while : 
But  at  last,  hearing  us  speak  Spanish,  they  came  to  us, 
and  told  us,  that  they  were  going  to  a  Fryar,  that  liv'd 
at  an  Indian  Village  towards  the  S.  E.  end  of  the  Island. 
They  told  us  also,  that  the  Harbour  of  Manila  is  seldom 
or  never  without  20  or  30  Sail  of  Vessels,  most  Chinese, 

'  Thry  were  pauinu  wcMwarri  round  ihc  nonhr rn  end  of  Pjinny. 


pawiru 
e  Middi 


oSira 


383 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  some  Portugueze,  and  some  few  the  Spaniards  have  of 
^68?  their  own.  They  said,  that  when  they  had  done  their 
business  with  the  Fryar  they  would  return  to  Manila, 
and  hoped  to  be  back  again  at  this  place  in  4  Days  time. 
We  told  them  that  we  came  for  a  Trade  with  the  Spaniards 
at  Manila,  and  should  be  glad  if  they  would  carry  a  Letter 
to  some  Merchant  there,  which  they  promised  to  do.  But 
this  was  only  a  pretence  of  ours,  to  get  out  of  them  what 
intelligence  we  could  as  to  their  Shipping,  Strength,  and 
the  like,  under  Colour  of  seeking  a  Trade ;  for  our  business 
was  to  pillage.  Now  if  we  had  really  designed  to  have 
traded  there,  this  was  as  fair  an  opportunity  as  Men  could 
have  desired :  For  these  Men  could  have  brought  us  to 
the  Fryar  that  they  were  going  to,  and  a  small  Present 
to  him  would  have  engaged  him  to  do  any  kindness  for 
us  in  the  way  of  Trade :  For  the  Spanish  Governors  do 
not  allow  of  it,  and  we  must  Trade  by  stealth. 

The  2 1  St  Day  we  went  from  hence  with  the  wind  at 
E.  N.  E.  a  small  gale.  The  23d  Day  in  the  Morning 
we  were  fair  by  the  S.  E.  end  of  the  Island  Luconia,  the 
place  that  had  been  so  long  desired  by  us.  We  presently 
saw  a  Sail  coming  from  the  Northward,  and  making  after 
her  we  took  her  in  2  Hours  time.  She  was  a  Spanish 
Bark,  that  came  from  a  place  called  Pangasanam,^  a  small 
Town  on  the  N.  end  of  Luconia,  as  they  told  us ;  probably 
the  same  with  Pongassinay,^  which  lies  on  a  Bay  at  the 
N.  W.  side  of  the  Island.  She  was  bound  to  Manila  but 
had  no  Goods  aboard  ;  and  therefore  we  turned  her 
away. 

The  23d  we  took  another  Spanish  Vessel  that  came 
from  the  same  place  as  the  other.  She  was  laden  with 
Rice  and  Cotton-Cloth,^  and  bound  for  Manila  also. 
These  Goods  were  purposely  for  the  Acapulco  Ship  : 
The  Rice  was  for  the  Men  to  live  on  while  they  lay  there, 
and  in  their  return  :  and  the  Cotton-cloth  was  to  make 
Sail.  The  Master  of  this  Prize  was  Boatswain  of  the 
Acapulco  Ship  which  escaped  us  at  Guam,  and  was  now 

^  Pangasanam.  -  Pongasinay.  ^  Dungare  (dungaree)  in  the  MS. 

384 


■  THE   ISLE   OF   LUCONIA 

'  at  Manila.     It  wis  this  Man  that  gave  us  the  Relation  of 
whar  Strength  it  had,  how  they  were  afraid  of  us  there,  ' 
»nd  of  the  accident  thai  happen'd '  to  them,  as  is  before 
mentioned    in    the    loth    Chapter.     We    took    these    two 
Vessels  within  7  or  8  Leagues  of  Manila. 

Luconia  I  have  spoken  of  already:  but  I  shall  now 
add  this  further  account  of  it.  It  is  a  great  Island,  taking 
up  between  6  and  7  degrees  of  Lat.  in  length,  and  its 
breadth  near  the  middle  is  about  60  Leagues,  but  the 
ends  are  narrow.  The  North-end  lies  in  about  19  d. 
North  Lat.  and  the  &  end  is  about  12  d.  30  m.  This 
great  Island  hath  abundance  of  small  Keys  or  Islands 
lying  about  it;  especially  at  the  North-end.  The  South- 
side  fronts  towards  the  rest  of  the  Philippine  Islands:  Of 
these  that  arc  its  nearest  Neighbours,  Mindora  lately 
mcntion'd,  is  the  chief,  and  gives  Name  to  the  Sea  or 
Streighi  that  parts  it  and  the  other  Islands  from  Luconia: 
being  called  the  Strcights  of  Mindora. 

The  Body  of  the  Island  Luconia  is  composed  of  many 
spacious  plain  Savannahs,  and  large  Mountains.  The 
Nt>rth-end  seems  to  be  more  plain  and  even,  I  mean  freer 
from  Hills,  than  the  South-end  :  but  the  Land  is  all  along 
of  a  g<Kxl  hcighth.  It  does  not  appear  so  flourishing  and 
green  as  some  of  the  other  Islands  in  this  Range;  especially 
that  of  St.  John,  Mindanao,  Bait  Island,  &c.  yet  in  some 
places  it  is  very  Wooily.  Some  of  the  Mountains  of  this 
Island  aiford  Gold,  and  the  Savannahs  are  well  stockt  with 
herds  of  Cattle,  especially  Buffaloes,  These  Cattle  arc  in 
gnat  plenty  all  over  the  Kast-Indies;  and  therefore  'tis 
very  probable  that  there  were  many  of  these  here,  even 
before  the  Spaniards  came  hither.  But  now  there  are  also 
plenty  of  other  Cattle,  as  I  have  been  told,  as  Bullocks, 
Horses,  Sheep,  Goats,  Hogs,  &c.  brought  hither  by  the 
Spaniards. 

It  is  pretty  well  inhabited  with  Indians,  most  of  them, 
if  not  all,  under  the  Spaniards,  who  now  arc  masters  of  it. 
The  Native  Indians  do  live  together  in  Towns;  and  they 


L 


■  RunninK  on  a  ihoal. 

38J 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   have  Priests  among  them  to  instruct  them  in  the  Spanish 

'^7  Religion. 

Manila  the  chief,  or  (>erhap)S  the  only  City,  lies  at  the 
foot  of  a  ridge  of  high  Hills,  facing  upon  a  spacious 
harbour  near  the  S.  W.  point  of  the  Island,  in  about  the 
Lat.  of  14  d.  North.  It  is  environed  with  a  high  strong 
Wall,  and  very  well  fortify 'd  with  Forts  and  Breast-works. 
The  Houses  are  large,  strongly  built,  and  covered  with  Pan- 
tile. The  streets  are  large  and  pretty  regular;  with  a  Parade 
in  the  midst,  after  the  Spanish  fashion.  There  are  a  great 
many  fair  Buildings,  besides  Churches  and  other  Religious 
Houses ;  of  which  there  are  not  a  few. 

The  Harbour  is  so  large,  that  some  hundreds  of  Ships 
may  ride  here :  and  is  never  without  many,  both  of  their 
own  and  strangers.  I  have  already  given  you  an  account 
of  the  two  Ships  going  and  coming  between  this  place  and 
Acapulco.  Besides  them,  they  have  some  small  Vessels  of 
their  own ;  and  they  do  allow  the  Portuguese  to  trade 
here,  but  the  Chinese  are  the  chiefest  Merchants,  and  they 
drive  the  greatest  Trade ;  for  they  have  commonly  20  or 
30  or  40  Jonks  in  the  Harbour  at  a  time,  and  a  great 
many  Merchants  constantly  residing  in  the  City,  beside 
Shop-keepers,  and  Handy-crafts-men  in  abundance.  Small 
Vessels  run  up  near  the  Town,  but  the  Acapulco  Ships  and 
others  of  greater  burthen,  lye  a  league  short  of  it,  where 
there  is  a  strong  Fort  also,  and  Store-houses  to  put  Goods  in. 
I  had  the  major  part  of  this  relation  2  or  3  years  after 
this  time,  from  Mr.  Coppinger  our  Surgeon ;  for  he  made 
a  Voyage  hither  from  Porto  Nova,^  a  Town  on  the  Coast 
of  Coromandel ;  in  a  Portuguese  Ship,  as  I  think.  Here 
he  found  10  or  12  of  Captain  Swan's  Men;  some  of  those 
that  we  left  at  Mindanao.  For  after  he  came  from  thence, 
they  brought  a  Proe  there,  by  the  Instigation  of  an  Irish 
Man,  who  went  by  the  name  of  John  Fitz-Gerald,  a  person 
that  spoke  Spanish  very  well ;  and  so  in  this  their  Proe 
they  came  hither.  They  had  been  here  but  18  months 
when  Mr.  Coppinger  arrived  here,  and  Mr.  Fitz-Gerald  had 

*  Porto  Novo  :  to  the  south  of  Cuddalore. 

386 


JOHN    FITZ-GERALD,   AN   IRISHMAN 

in  this  time  gotten  a  Spanish  Mustcsa  Woman  to  Wifc, 
and  a  good  E}owry  with  her.  He  then  professed  Physick  ' 
and  Surgerjr,  and  was  highly  esteemed  among  the  Spaniards 
for  his  supposed  knowledge  in  those  Arts  ;  ftK  being  always 
troubled  with  sore  Shins  while  he  was  with  us,  he  kepi 
some  PiaistcTS  and  Salves  by  him ;  and  with  these  he  set 
up  upon  his  bare  natural  stock  of  knowledge,  and  his 
experience  in  Kibes.*  But  then  he  had  a  very  great  stock 
of  Confidence  withal,  to  help  out  the  other;  and  being  an 
Irii^h  Roman  Catholick,  and  having  the  Spanish  Language, 
he  had  a  great  advantage  of  all  his  Consorts  ;  and  he  alone 
lived  well  there  of  them  all.  We  were  not  within  sight  of 
this  Town,  but  I  was  shewn  the  Hills  that  over-looked  it, 
and  drew  a  draft  of  them  as  we  lay  off  at  Sea ;  which  I 
have  caused  to  be  engraven  among  a  few  others  that  I  took 
my  self.     See  the  Table. 

The  time  of  the  year  being  now  too  far  spent  to  do 
any  thing  here,  it  was  concluded  to  sail  from  hence  to  Pulo 
Condore,  a  little  parcel  of  Islands,  on  the  Coast  of 
Cambodia,  and  carry  this  Prize  with  us,  and  there  careen 
if  we  could  find  any  convenient  place  for  it,  designing  to 
return  hither  again  by  the  latter  end  of  May,  and  wait  for 
the  Acapuico  Ship  that  comes  about  that  time.  By  our  Drafts 
(which  we  were  guided  by,  being  strangers  to  these  parts) 
this  seemed  to  us  then  to  be  a  place  out  of  the  way,  where 
we  might  lye  snug  for  a  while,  and  wait  the  time  of  rcttim- 
tng  for  our  Prey.  For  we  avoided  as  much  as  we  could  the 
going  to  lye  by  at  any  great  place  of  Commerce,  lest  we 
ahould  become  too  much  exposed,  and  perhaps  be  assaulted 
by  a  Force  greater  than  our  own. 

So  havir^  set  our  Prisoners  ashore,  we  sailed  from 
Luconia  the  26th  Day  of  Feb.  with  the  Wind  E.  N.  E.  and 
fair  Weather,  and  a  brisk  Gale.  We  were  in  Lat.  14  d.  N. 
when  we  b^an  to  steer  away  from  Pulo  Condore,  and  we 
steer'd  S.  by  W.  In  our  way  thither  we  went  pretty  near 
the  Sboals  of  Pracel,'  and  other  Shoals  which  are  very 
dangerous.     Wc    were   very    much    afraid    of  them,    but 

*  G«n>i  ar  nkaiK  '  Off  tbc  mouUu  of  the  Mekottic  Riv«r. 

■  Tbe  Pancel  reefa  and  uUadi. 

387 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    escaped  them  without  so  much  as  seeing  them,  only  at 
1687  ygj.y  South-end  of  the  Pracel  Shoals  we  saw  3  little  sa 
Islands  or  spots  of  Sand,  standing  just  above  Water  wit 
a  Mile  of  us. 

It  was  the  1 3th  Day  of  March  before  we  came  in  si 
of  Pulo  Condore,  or  the  Island  Condore,  as  Pulo  signi 
The  14th  Day  about  Noon  we  anchored  on  the  North-i 
of  the  Island,  against  a  sandy  Bay  2  Mile  from  the  Sh 
in  10  Fathom  clean  hard  Sand,  with  both  Ship  and  Pr 
Pulo  Condore  is  the  Principal  of  a  heap  of  Islands,  and 
only  inhabited  one  of  them.  They  lye  in  lat.  8  d.  40 
North,  and  about  20  Leagues  South  and  by  East  from 
Mouth  of  the  River  of  Cambodia.^  These  Islands  lyd 
near  together,  that  at  a  distance  they  appear  to  be  but  t 
Island. 

Two  of  these  Islands  are  pretty  large,  and  of  a  g( 
heighth,  they  may  be  seen  14  or  15  Leagues  at  Sea; 
rest  are  but  little  Spots.     The  biggest  of  the  two  (whid 
the  inhabited  one)  is  about  4  or  5  Leagues  long,  and 
East   and    West.     It  is  not   above  3   Mile  broad  at 
broadest  place,  in  most  places  not  above  a  Mile  wide.    1 
other  large  Island  is  about  3  Mile  long,  and  half  a  N 
wide.     This    Island   stretcheth  N.   and   S.     It  is  so  o 
veniently  placed  at  the  West-end  of  the  biggest  Island,  t 
between  both  there  is  formed  a  very  commodious  Harbo 
The  entrance  of  this  Harbour  is  on  the  North-side,  wh 
the  two  Islands  are  near  a  Mile  asunder.     There  are  3  o 
small  Keys,  and  a  good  deep  Channel  between   them  s 
the  biggest  Island.     Towards  the  South-end  of  the  Harbi 
the  two  Islands  do  in  a  manner  close  up,  leaving  onl; 
small   Passage  for   Boats  and  Canoas.     There  are  no  m* 
Islands  on  the  North-side,  but  5  or  6  on  the  South-side 
the  great  Island.     See  the  Table. 

The  Mold  of  these  Islands  for  the  biggest  part  is  blacki 
and    pretty   deep,    only    the   Hills    are    somewhat  stoi 
The  Eastern  part  of  the  biggest  Island  is  sandy,  yet 
cloathed  with  Trees  of  divers  sorts.     The  Trees  do  1 

*  The  Mekong  River. 

388 


■ 


I 


ft 

j 


I      ' 


I    i 


THE  TAR   TREE 

w  so  thick  i%  I  have  seen  them  in  some  Places,  but  they   ahA 
generally  large  and  tall,  and  fit  for  any  use.  '^7^ 

There  is  one  sort  of  Tree '  much  larger  than  any  other  on 
1  Island,  knd  which  I  have  not  seen  any  where  else.  It 
^^mut  3  or  4  Foot  Diameter  in  the  Body,  from  whence  is 
iwn  a  sort  of  clammy  Juice,  which  being  boiled  a  little 
»mcs  perfect  Tar ;  and  if  you  boil  it  much  it  will  become 
id  as  Pitch.  It  may  be  put  to  cither  use ;  we  used  it 
■}i  ways,  and  found  it  to  be  very  serviceable.  The  way 
tt  they  get  this  Juice,  is  by  cutting  a  great  gap  hori- 
itxlly  in  the  Body  of  the  Tree  half  through,  and  about 
'oot  from  the  Ground  ;  and  then  cutting  the  upper  part 
the  Body  aslope  inwardly  downward,  till  in  the  middle 
ihc  Tree  it  meet  with  the  traverse  cutting  or  plain.  In 
I  plain  horizontal  semicircular  stump,  they  make  a 
llow  like  a  Bason,  that  may  contain  a  Quart  or  two. 

0  this  hole  the  Juice  which  drains  from   the  wounded 
part   of  the  Tree    falls ;    from  whence  you   must 

ipty  it  everyday.  It  will  run  thus  for  some  Months  and 
m  di7  away,  and  the  Tree  will  recover  again. 
The  Fruit-trees  that  Nature  hath  bestowed  on  these 
es  are  Mangoes  ;  and  Trees  bearing  a  sort  of  Grape,  and 
ler  Trees  bearing  a  kind  of  wild  or  bastard  Nutmegs. 
lese  all  grow  wild  in  the  Woods,  and  in  very  great 
mty. 

The  Mangoes  here  grow  on  Trees  as  big  as  Apple-trees  : 
at  Fort  St.  George  arc  not  so  large.  The  Fruit  of 
is  as  big  as  a  small  Peach ;  but  long  and  smaller 
the  top  :  It  is  of  a  yellowish  colour  when  ripe  ;  it 
Very  juicy,  and  of  a  pleasant  smell,  and  delicate  taste. 
Tien  the  Mango  is  young  they  cut  them  in  two  pieces, 

1  pickle  them  with  Salt  and  Vinegar,  in  which  they  put 
Be  Cloves  of  Garlick.  This  is  an  excellent  Sauce,  and 
ich  esteemed ;  it  is  called  Mango-Achar.  Achar  I 
■uroc  signifies  Sauce.     They  make  in  the  East-Indies, 

illy  It    Siam    and  Pegu,    several  sorts  of  Achar,  as 
the  young  tops  of  Bambocs,  &c.     Bambo-Achar  and 

*  Thii  U  Um  dunar,  dt  (Lutimer,  tree,  the  Vammam  Orfat/a/ii,  or 

389 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Mango-Achar  are  most  used.  The  Mangoes  were  ripe 
1687  when  we  were  there,  (as  were  also  the  rest  of  these  Fruits) 
and  they  have  then  so  delicate  a  Fragrancy,  that  we  could 
smell  them  out  in  the  thick  Woods  if  we  had  but  the  wind 
of  them,  while  we  were  a  good  way  from  them,  and  could 
not  see  them ;  and  we  generally  found  them  out  this  way. 
Mangoes  are  common  in  many  Places  of  the  East-Indies; 
but  I  did  never  know  any  grow  wild  only  at  this  Place. 
These,  though  not  so  big  as  those  I  have  seen  at  Achin  and 
at  Maderas  or  Fort  St.  George,  are  yet  every  whit  as  pleasant 
as  the  best  sort  of  their  Garden  Mangoes. 

The  Grape- tree ^  grows  with  a  strait  Body,  of  a 
Diameter  about  a  Foot  or  more,  and  hath  but  few  Limbs  or 
Boughs.  The  Fruit  grows  in  Clusters,  all  about  the  Body 
of  the  Tree,  like  the  Jack,  Durian,  and  Cacao  Fruits. 
There  are  of  them  both  red  and  white.  They  are  much 
like  such  Grapes  as  grow  on  our  Vines,  both  in  shape  and 
colour;  and  they  are  of  a  very  pleasant  Winy  taste.  I 
never  saw  these  but  on  the  two  biggest  of  these  Islands ; 
the  rest  had  no  Tar-trees,  Mangoes,  Grape-trees,  nor  Wild 
Nutmegs. 

The  Wild  Nutmeg-tree  is  as  big  as  a  Walnut-tree ;  but 
it  does  not  spread  so  much.  The  Boughs  are  gross,  and 
the  Fruit  grows  among  the  Boughs  as  the  Walnut,  and 
other  Fruits.  This  Nutmeg  is  much  smaller  than  the  true 
Nutmeg,  and  longer  also.  It  is  inclosed  with  a  thin  Shell, 
and  a  sort  of  Mace,  encircling  the  Nut,  within  the  Shell. 
This  bastard  Nutmeg  is  so  much  like  the  true  Nutmeg 
in  shape,  that  at  our  first  arrival  here  we  thought  it  to 
be  the  true  one  ;  but  it  has  no  manner  of  smell  nor  taste. 

The  Animals  of  these  Islands,  are  some  Hogs,  Lizards, 
and  Guanoes ;  and  some  of  those  Creatures  mentioned  in 
Chap.  XI,  which  are  like,  but  much  bigger  than  the  Guanoes. 

Here  are  many  sorts  of  Birds,  as  Parrots,  Parakites, 
Doves  and  Pigeons.  Here  are  also  a  sort  of  wild  Cocks 
and  Hens  :  They  are  much  like  our  tame  Fowl  of  that  kind  ; 
but  a  great  deal  less,  for  they  are  about  the  bigness  of  a 

^  The  grape-tree  is  a  shrub  of  the  genus  Coccolobo, 

390 


TURTLES    MOVING   FROM    SEA  TO   SEA      ■ 
Crow.     The   Cocks  do  crow  like  ours,  but  much    more    aw^ 
small  ind  shrill ;  and  by  their  crowing  we  do  6rst  find  them   '^' 
out  in  the  Woods  where  we  shoot  them.     Their  flesh   is 
very  white  and  sweet.  _ 

There  arc   a  great  many  Limpits  and    Muscles,    and       m 
plenty  of  green  Turtle.  H 

And  upon  this  mention  of  Turtle  again,  I  think  it  not        ^ 
amiss  to  add  some  reasons  to  strengthen  the  opinion  that  I 
have  given  concerning  these  Creatures  removing  from  place 
to  place.     1  have  said  in  Chapter  5th,  that  they  leave  thetr       ^ 
common  feeding  places,  and  go  10  places  3  great  way  from       ^M 
thence  to  lay,  as  particularly  to  the  Island  Ascention.     Now      ^M 
I  have  discoursed  with  some  since  that  Subject  was  printed,        ^ 
who  are  of  opinion,  that  when  the  laying  time  is  over,  they 
never  go  from  thence,  but  lye  somewhere  in  the  Sea  about 
the  Island,  which  I  think  is  very  improbable  :  for  there  can        h 
be  no  food  for  them  there,  as  I  could  soon  make  appear;      ^M 
and  particularly  from  hence,  that  the  Sea  about  the  Isle  of      ^M 
Ascention  is  so  deep  as  to  admit  of  no  anchoring  but  at  one        ^ 
place,  where  there  is  no  sign  of  Grass  :  and  we  never  bring 
up  with  our  sounding  Lead  any  Grass  or  Weeds  out  of  very 
deep  Seas,  but  Sand,  or  the   like,  only.     But  if  this  be 
granted,  that  there  is  food  for  them,  yet  I  have  a  great  deal 
of  reason  to  believe  that  the  Turtle  go  from  hence;  for 
after  the  laying  time  you  shall  never  sec  them,  and  whcre- 
ever  Turtle  arc,  you  will  sec  them  rise,  and  hold  their  Head 
above  Water  to  breath,  once  in  7  or  8  minutes,  or  at  longest 
in  10  or  12.     And  if  any  Man  docs  but  consider,  how  fish      ^m 
take  their  certain  Seasons  of  the  year  to  go  from  one  Sea  to      ^M 
another,  this  would  not  seem    strange ;    even   Fowls   also      ^M 
having  their  seasons  to  remove  from  one  place  to  another. 

These  Islands  are  pretty  well  watered  with  small  Brooks 
of  freth  Water,  that  run  flush  into  the  Sea  for  10  Months 
in  the  Year.  The  latter  end  of  March  they  begin  to  dry 
away,  and  in  April  you  shall  have  none  in  the  Brooks,  but 
what  is  lodged  in  deep  Holes;  but  you  may  dig  Wells  in 
some  places.  In  May,  when  the  Rain  comes,  the  Land  is 
again  replenished  with  Water,  and  the  Brooks  run  out  into 
the  Sea. 

39' 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  These  Islands  lie  very  commodiously  in  the  way  to  and 

1687  from  Japan,  China,  Manila,  Tunquin,  Cochinchina,  and  in 
general  all  this  most  Easterly  Coast  of  the  Indian  Continent ; 
whether  you  go  through  the  Streights  of  Malacca,  or  the 
Streights  of  Sunda,  between  Sumatra  and  Java  :  and  one  of 
them  you  must  pass  in  the  common  way  from  Europe,  or 
other  parts  of  the  East-Indies ;  unless  you  mean  to  fetch  a 
great  Compass  round  most  of  the  East-India  Islands,  as  we 
did.  Any  Ship  in  distress  may  be  refreshed  and  recruited 
here  very  conveniently ;  and  besides  ordinary  Accommoda- 
tions, be  furnished  with  Masts,  Yards,  Pitch  and  Tar.  It 
might  also  be  a  convenient  place  to  usher  in  a  Commerce 
with  the  neighbouring  Country  of  Cochinchina,  and  Forts 
might  be  built  to  secure  a  Factory;  particularly  at  the 
Harbour,  which  is  capable  of  being  well  fortified.  This 
place  therefore  being  upon  all  these  Accounts  so  valuable, 
and  withal  so  little  known,  I  have  here  inserted  a  Draft  of 
it,  which  I  took  during  our  stay  there. 

The  Inhabitants  of  this  Island  are  by  Nation  Cochin- 
chinese,  as  they  told  us,  for  one  of  them  spake  good 
Malayan :  which  Language  we  learnt  a  smattering  of,  and 
some  of  us  so  as  to  speak  it  pretty  well,  while  we  lay  at 
Mindanao ;  and  this  is  the  common  Tongue  of  Trade  and 
Commerce  (though  it  be  not  in  several  of  them  the  Native 
Language)  in  most  of  the  East-India  Islands,  being  the 
Lingua  Franca^  as  it  were,  of  these  Parts.  I  believe  'tis  the 
vulgar  Tongue  at  Malacca,  Sumatra,  Java,  and  Borneo ; 
but  at  Celebes,  the  Phillippine  Islands,  and  the  Spice  Islands, 
it  seems  borrowed  for  the  carrying  on  of  Trade. 

The  Inhabitants  of  Pulo  Condore  are  but  a  small  People 
in  Stature,  well  enough  shaped,  and  of  a  darker  Colour 
than  the  Mindanayans.  They  are  pretty  long  Visaged ; 
their  Hair  is  black  and  streight,  their  Eyes  are  but  small 
and  black,  their  Noses  of  a  mean  bigness,  and  pretty  high, 
their  Lips  thin,  their  Teeth  white,  and  little  Mouths. 
They  are  very  Civil  People,  but  extraordinary  poor.  Their 
chiefest  Employment  is  to  draw  the  Juice  of  those  Trees 
that  I  have  described,  to  make  Tar.  They  preserve  it  in 
wooden  Troughs ;  and  when  they  have  their  Cargo,  they 

392 


THE   INHABITANTS   IDOLATERS 


t  it  to  Oxhinchina,  their  Mocher-Coi 


ntry. 


Some 


s  of  them  employ  themselves  to  catch  Turtle,  and  boil  ' 
their  Fat  to  Oil,  which  they  also  transport  home. 
:  People  have  great  large  Nets,' with  wide  Mashes  to 
catch  the  Turtle.  The  Jamaica  Turllers  have  such  ;  and  1 
did  never  sec  the  like  Nets  but  at  Jamaica  and  here. 

They  are  so  free  of  their  Women,  that  they  would  bring 
them  aboard  and  offer  them  to  us ;  and  many  of  our 
Men  hired  them  for  a  small  matter.  This  is  a  Custom 
uied  by  Several  Nations  in  the  East-Indies,  as  at  Pegu, 
Siam,  Cochinchina,  and  Cambodia,  as  I  have  been  told. 
It  is  used  at  Tunquin  also  to  my  Knowledge;  for  1  did 
^^^terwards  make  a  Voyage  thither,  and  most  of  our  Men 
^■vl  Women  aboard  all  the  time  of  our  abode  there.  In 
^ftenca  also,  on  the  Coast  of  Guinea,  our  Merchants,  Factors, 
^Tnd  Seamen  that  reside  there,  have  their  black  Misses.  It 
is  accounted  a  piece  of  Policy  to  do  it ;  for  the  chief 
Faaurs  and  Captains  of  Ships  have  the  great  Mens 
Daughters  offered  them,  the  Mandarins  or  Noblemens 
at  Tunquin,  and  even  the  King's  Wives  in  Guinea  ;  and 
by  this  sort  of  Alliance  the  Country  people  are  engaged 
to  a  greater  Friendship:  And  if  there  should  arise  any 
difference  about  Trade,  or  any  thing  else,  which  might 
provoke  the  Natives  to  seek  some  treacherous  Revenge,  (to 
which  all  these  Heathen  Nations  are  very  prone)  then  these 
Daiilahs  would  cenainly  declare  it  to  their  White  Friends, 
and  so  hinder  their  Country-niens  Designs. 

These  People  arc  Idolaters ;  but  their  manner  of 
Worship  t  knnw  not.  There  are  a  few  scattering  Houses 
and  Plantations  on  the  great  Island,  and  a  small  Village  on 
the  South-side  of  it ;  where  there  is  a  little  Idol  Temple, 
and  an  Image  of  an  Elephant,  about  5  foot  high,  and  in 
bignes  proportionable,  placed  on  one  side  of  the  Temple  ; 
and  a  Horse,  not  so  big,  placed  on  the  other  aide  of  it ; 
both  standing  with  their  Heads  towards  the  South.  The 
Temple  it  self  was  low  and  ordinary,  built  of  Wood^  and 
thatched,  like  one  of  their  Houses;  which  arc  but  very 
meanly. 

The  Images  of  the  Horse  and  the  Elephant  were  the 
393 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AN.  most  general  Idols  that  I  observM  in  the  Temples  of 
1687  Tunquin,  when  I  travell'd  there.  There  were  other  Images 
also,  of  Beasts,  Birds  and  Fish.  I  do  not  remember  I  saw 
any  Humane  Shape  there ;  nor  any  such  monstrous  Repre- 
sentations as  I  have  seen  among  the  Chinese.  Where-ever 
the  Chinese  Seamen  or  Merchants  come  (and  they  are  very 
numerous  all  over  these  Seas)  they  have  always  hideous 
Idols  on  board  their  Jonks  or  Ships,  with  Altars,  and  Lamps 
burning  before  them.  These  Idols  they  bring  ashore  with 
them :  And  beside  those  they  have  in  common,  every  Man 
hath  one  in  his  own  House.  Upon  some  particular  solemn 
Days  I  have  seen  their  Bonzies,  or  Priests,  bring  whole 
Armfuls  of  painted  Papers,  and  burn  them  with  a  great 
deal  of  Ceremony,  being  very  careful  to  let  no  Piece  escape 
them.  The  same  Day  they  kill'd  a  Goat  which  had  been 
purposely  fatting  a  Month  before  ;  this  they  offer  or  present 
before  their  Idol,  and  then  dress  it  and  feast  themselves 
with  it.  I  have  seen  them  do  this  in  Tunquin,  where  I 
have  at  the  same  time  been  invited  to  their  Feasts;  and 
at  Bancouli,^  in  the  Isle  of  Sumatra,  they  sent  a  Shoulder 
of  the  sacrific'd  Goat  to  the  English,  who  eat  of  it,  and 
ask'd  me  to  do  so  too ;  but  I  refused. 

When  I  was  at  Maderas,  or  Fort  St.  George,  I  took 
notice  of  a  great  Ceremony  used  for  several  Nights  succes- 
sively by  the  Idolaters  inhabiting  the  Suburbs :  Both  Men 
and  Women  (these  very  well  clad)  in  a  great  multitude 
went  in  solemn  Procession  with  lighted  Torches  carrying 
their  Idols  about  with  them.  I  knew  not  the  meaning 
of  it.  I  observ'd  some  went  purposely  carrying  Oyl  to 
sprinkle  into  the  Lamps,  to  make  them  burn  the  brighter. 
They  began  their  round  about  1 1  a  Clock  at  Night,  and 
having  paced  it  gravely  about  the  Streets  till  2  or  3  a  Clock 
in  the  Morning,  their  Idols  were  carry'd  with  much 
Ceremony  into  the  Temple  by  the  Chief  of  the  Procession, 
and  some  of  the  Women  I  saw  enter  the  Temple,  particularly. 
Their  Idols  were  different  from  those  of  Tunquin,  Cambodia, 
&c.  being  in  Humane  Shape. 

^  IJenkulen. 

394 


MEN»   POISONED    AT   MINDANAO,   DIE 

I  have  said  already  that  we  arrived  at  these  Islands  the 
14th  day  of  March,  1687.  The  next  day  we  searched  about  ' 
for  a  Place  to  careen  in  ;  and  the  i6ih  day  we  entered  the 
Harbour,  and  immediately  provided  to  careen.  Some  men 
were  «ct  to  fell  great  Trees  to  saw  into  Planks;  others 
went  to  unrigging  the  Ship ;  some  made  a  House  to  put 
our  Goods  in,  and  for  the  Sail-maker  to  work  in.  The 
Country  People  resorted  to  us,  and  brought  us  of  the  Fruits 
of  tbc  Island,  with  Hogs,  and  sometimes  Turtle  ;  for  which 
they  received  Rice  in  exchange,  which  we  had  a  Ship-load  of, 
taken  at  Manila.  We  bought  of  them  also  a  good  quantity 
of  their  pitchy  Liquor,  which  we  boiled,  and  used  about  our 
Ship's  bottom.  Wc  mixed  it  first  with  Lime,  which  we  made 
here ;  and  it  made  an  excellent  Coat,  and  stuck  on  very  well. 

Wc  staid  in  this  Harbour  from  the  i6th  day  of  March 
tilt  the  i6th  of  April;  in  which  time  we  made  a  new 
Suit  of  Sails  of  the  Cloth  that  was 'taken  in  the  Prize.  Wc 
cut  a  spare  Main-top-mast,  and  sawed  Plank  to  sheath  the 
Ship's  Bottom ;  for  she  was  not  sheathed  all  over  at 
Mindanao,  and  that  old  Plank  that  was  left  on  then  we  now 
ript  off,  and  clapt  on  new. 

While  wc  lay  here  2  of  our  Men  died,  who  were 
pGJson'd  at  Mindanao,  they  told  us  of  it  when  they  found 
themselves  poison'd,  and  had  lingered  ever  since.  They 
were  opcn'd  by  our  Doctor,  according  to  their  own  Request 
before  they  died,  and  their  Livers  were  black,  light  and  dry, 
like  pieces  of  Cork.' 

Our  Business  being  finished  here,  we  left  the  Spanish 
Prize  taken  at  Manila,  and  most  of  the  Rice,  taking  out 
enough  for  our  selves,  and  on  the  17th  day  we  went  from 
hence  to  the  place  where  wc  first  anchored,  on  the  North- 
tide  of  the  great  Island,  purposely  to  water;  for  there  was 
a  great  Stream  when  we  first  came  to  the  Island,  and  wc 
thousbi  it  was  so  now.  But  wc  found  it  dried  up,  only  it 
siockT  in  Holc«,  2  or  3  Hogsheads  or  a  Tun  in  a  Hole. 
Therefore  we  did  immediately  cut  Samboes,  and  made 
Spouts,  through  which  wc  conveyed  the  Water  down  to  the 

*  ErkleMly  drriiosit.    The  cundiiion  was  probably  due  not  to  poison, 
'    '    '  *        « In  amdc,  after  (be  privations  or  the  voyage. 

395 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Sea-side;  by  taking  it  up  in  Bowls,  and  pouring  it  into 
^^^7  these  Spouts  or  Troughs.  We  conveyed  some  or  it  thus 
near  half  a  Mile.  While  we  were  filling  our  Water,  Captain 
Read  engaged  an  old  Man,  one  of  the  Inhabitants  of  this 
Island,  the  same,  who,  I  said,  could  speak  the  Malayan 
Language,  to  be  his  Pilot  to  the  Bay  of  Siam ;  for  he  had 
often  been  telling  us,  that  he  was  well  acquainted  there,  and 
that  he  knew  some  Islands  there,  where  there  were  Fisher- 
men lived,  who  he  thought  could  supply  us  with  Salt-fish 
to  eat  at  Sea ;  for  we  had  nothing  but  Rice  to  eat.  The 
Easterly  Monsoon  was  not  yet  done;  therefore  it  was 
concluded  to  spend  some  time  there,  and  then  take  the 
advantage  of  the  beginning  of  the  Western  Monsoon,  to 
return  to  Manila  again. 

The  2 1st  day  of  April  .1687,  we  sailed  from  Pulo 
Condore,  directing  our  Course  W.  by  S.  for  the  Bay  of 
Siam.  We  had  fair  Weather,  and  a  fine  moderate  Gale  of 
Wind  at  E.  N.  E. 

The  23d  day  we  arrived  at  Pulo  Ubi,^  or  the  Island  Ubi. 
This  Island  is  about  40  Leagues  to  the  Westward  of  Pulo 
Condore ;  it  lies  just  at  the  entrance  of  the  Bay  of  Siam,  at 
the  S.  W.  point  of  Land,  that  makes  the  Bay ;  namely  the 
point  of  Cambodia.  This  Island  is  about  7  or  8  Leagues 
round,  and  it  is  higher  Land  than  any  of  Pulo  Condore 
Isles.  Against  the  South-East  part  of  it  there  is  a  small 
Key,  about  a  Cables  length  from  the  main  Island.  This 
Pulo  Ubi  is  very  woody,  and  it  has  good  Water  on  the 
North-side,  where  you  may  anchor ;  but  the  best  anchoring 
is  on  the  East-side  against  a  small  Bay ;  then  you  will  have 
the  little  Island  to  the  Southward  of  you. 

At  Pulo  Ubi  we  found  two  small  Barks  laden  with 
Rice.  They  belonged  to  Cambodia,  from  whence  they  came 
not  above  two  or  three  Days  before,  and  they  touched  here 
to  fill  Water.  Rice  is  the  general  Food  of  all  these 
Countries,  therefore  it  is  transported  by  Sea  from  one 
Country  to  another,  as  Corn  in  these  parts  of  the  World. 
For  in  some  Countries  they  produce  more  than  enough  for 

^  Pulo  Obi  :  to  the  south  of  Cape  Cambodia. 

396 


THE  SEAMEN   OF  CHAMPA 
themselves,  and  send  what  they  can  spare  to  those  places  ah. 
where  ihcrc  is  but  little.  '**?_! 

The  24th  Day  we  went  into  the  Bay  of  Siam  :  This  is 
X  hrge  deep  Bay,  of  which  and  of  this  Kingdom  I  shall  at 
present  speak  but  little,  because  I  design  a  more  particular 
account  of  all  this  Coast,  to  wit,  of  Tunquin,  Cochinchina, 
Siam,  Champa,  Cambodia,  and  Malacca,  making  all  the  most 
Easterly  pan  of  the  Continent  of  Asia,  lying  South  of 
China;  but  to  do  it  in  the  Course  of  this  Voyage,  would 
too  much  swell  this  Volume :  and  I  shall  chuse  therefore 
to  give  a  separate  Relation  of  what  I  know  or  have  learnt 
of  them,  together  with  the  neighbouring  Parts  of  Sumatra, 
Java,  &c.  where  I  have  spent  some  time. 

Wc  run  down  into  the  Bay  of  Siam,  till  we  came  to  the 
bUnds '  that  our  Pulo  Condore  Pilot  told  us  of,  which  lie 
about  the  middle  of  the  Bay  :  But  as  good  a  Pilot  as  he 
was,  he  run  us  aground  ;  yet  wc  had  no  damage.  Captain 
Read  went  ashore  at  these  Islands,  where  he  found  a  small 
Town  of  Fishermen;  but  they  had  no  F-'ish  to  sell,  and  so 
we  returned  empty. 

We  had  jret  fair  Weather,  and  very  little  Wind  ;  so  that 
being  often  becalmed,  we  were  till  the  13th  day  of  May 
before  wc  got  to  Hulo  Ubi  again.  There  we  found  two 
small  Vessels  at  an  Anchor  on  the  Ea3t-side :  They  were 
bden  with  Rice  and  Laquer,  which  is  used  in  Japanning 
of  Cabinets.  One  of  these  tome  from  Champa.*  bound  to 
the  Town  of  Malacca,  which  belongs  to  the  Dutch,  who 
took  it  from  the  Portugucze  :  and  this  shews  that  they  have 
t  Trade  with  Champa.  This  was  a  very  pretty  neat  Vessel, 
her  botitHn  very  clean  and  curiously  coated  ;  she  had  about 
40  Men  all  armed  with  Cortans,  or  broad  Swords,  Lances, 
and  some  Guns,  that  went  with  a  Swivel  upon  their  Gunnals. 
They  were  of  the  Idolaters,  Natives  of  Champa,  and  some 
of  the  briskest,  most  sociable,  without  Tearfulness  or  shyness, 
and  the  most  neat  and  dexterous  about  their  Shipping  of 
any  such  I  have  met  with  in  all  my  Travels.  The  other 
Vessel  came  from  the  River  of  Cambodia,  and  was  bound 


'  Pwlap*  the  Way  amap. 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    towards  the  Streights  of  Malacca.     Both  of  them  stopt 
*^7  here,  for  the  Westerly  Winds  now  began  to  blow,  which 
were  against  them,  being  somewhat  belated. 

We  anchored  also  on  the  East-side,  intending  to  fill 
Water.  While  we  lay  here  we  had  very  violent  Wind  at 
S.  W.  and  a  strong  Current  setting  right  to  Windward. 
The  fiercer  the  Wind  blew,  the  more  strong  the  Current 
set  against  it.  This  Storm  lasted  till  the  20th  day,  and 
then  it  began  to  abate. 

The  2 1  St  day  of  May  we  went  back  from  hence 
towards  Pulo  Condore.  In  our  way  we  overtook  a  great 
Jonk  that  came  from  Palimbam,^  a  Town  on  the  Island 
Sumatra :  She  was  full  laden  with  Pepper  which  they 
bought  there,  and  was  bound  to  Siam :  but  it  blowing  so 
hard,  she  was  afraid  to  venture  into  that  Bay,  and  therefore 
came  to  Pulo  Condore  with  us,  where  we  both  anchored 
May  the  24th.  This  Vessel  was  of  the  Chinese  make,  full 
of  little  Rooms  or  Partitions,  like  our  Well-boats.  I  shall 
describe  them  in  the  next  Chapter.  The  Men  of  thb 
Jonk  told  us,  that  the  English  were  settled  on  the  island 
Sumatra,  at  a  place  called  Sillabar ;  ^  and  the  first  know- 
ledge we  had  that  the  English  had  any  settlement  on 
Sumatra  was  from  these. 

When  we  came  to  an  Anchor,  we  saw  a  small  Bark  at 
an  Anchor  near  the  Shore ;  therefore  Captain  Read  sent  a 
Canoa  aboard  her,  to  know  from  whence  they  came ;  and 
supposing  that  it  was  a  Malayan  Vessel,  he  ordered  the 
Men  not  to  go  aboard,  for  they  are  accounted  desperate 
Fellows,  and  their  Vessels  are  commonly  full  of  Men,  who 
all  wear  Cressets,  or  little  Daggers  by  their  sides.  The 
Canoas  Crew  not  minding  the  Captain's  Orders  went 
aboard,  all  but  one  Man  that  stay'd  in  the  Canoa.  The 
Malayans,  who  were  about  20  of  them,  seeing  our 
Men  all  armed,  thought  that  they  came  to  take  their 
Vessel ;  therefore  at  once,  on  a  Signal  given,  they  drew  out 
their  Cressets,  and  stabbed  5  or  6  of  our  Men  before  they 
knew  what  the  matter  was.     The  rest  of  our  Men  leapt 

*  Palembang.  '  Sillabar  :  a  settlement  near  Benkulen. 

398 


AFFRAY   WITH   A   MALAYAN   VESSEL 

overboard,  some  into  the  Canoa,  and  some  into  the  Sea, 
and  »o  got  away.  Among  the  rest,  one  Daniel  Wallis'  ' 
leapt  into  the  Sea,  who  could  never  swim  before  nor  since ; 
yet  now  he  swam  very  well  a  good  while  before  he 
was  taken  up.  When  the  Canoas  came  aboard,  Captain 
Read  manned  two  Canoas,  and  went  to  be  revenged  on  the 
Malayans;  but  they  seeing  him  coming,  did  cut  a  Hole  in 
their  Vessel's  bottom,  and  went  ashore  in  their  Boat.  Capt. 
Read  followed  them,  but  they  run  into  the  Woods  and  hid 
themselves.  Here  we  stay'd  ten  or  eleven  Days,  for  it 
blew  very  hard  all  the  time.  While  we  stay'd  here 
Herman  Coppinger  our  Surgeon  went  ashore,  intending  to 
live  here;  but  Captain  Read  sent  some  Men  to  fetch  him 
again.  1  had  the  «ame  Thoughts,  and  would  have  gone 
ashore  too,  but  waited  for  a  more  convenient  place.  For 
neither  he  nor  I,  when  we  were  last  on  board  at  Mindanao, 
had  any  knowledge  of  the  Plot  that  was  laid  to  leave 
Capt.  Swan,  and  run  away  with  the  Ship;  and  being 
sufficiently  weary  of  this  mad    Crew,  we  were   willing   to 

five  them  the  slip  at  any  place  from  whence  we  might 
ope  to  get  a  passage  to  an  English  Factory.     There  was 
nothing  else  of  Moment  happened  while  we  stayd  here. 

*  "A  joaitg  maa,  now  liveiogio  Waymoutb"  (Origimal  MS.). 


399 


\ 


CHAP.   XV 

They  leave  Pulo  Condorej  designing  for  Maniloy  but  are  driven  off  from 
thence^  and  from  the  Isle  of  PratOy  by  the  fVinds^  and  brought 
upon  the  Coast  of  China,  Isle  of  St,  John^  on  the  Coast  of  the 
Province  of  Canton  ;  its  Soil  and  Productions^  China  Hogs^  istc. 
The  Inhabitants  ;  and  of  the  Tartars  forcing  the  Chinese  to  cut  ofi 
their  Hair.  Their  Habits^  and  the  little  Feet  of  their  Women, 
China-ware^  China-roots^  Tea^  (f^c.  A'  Village  at  St.  John's 
Islandy  and  of  their  Husbandry  of  their  Rice,  A  Story  of  a 
Chinese  Pagoda^  or  Idol-Temple^  and  Image.  Of  the  China 
Jonksj  and  their  Rigging.  They  leave  St,  JohrCs  and  the  Coast 
of  China,  A  most  outrageous  Storm,  Corpus  Sant,  a  Lighty  or 
Meteor  appearing  in  Storms,  The  PiscadoreSy  or  Fishers  Islands 
near  Formosa  :  A  Tartarian  Garrisony  and  Chinese  Town  on  one 
of  these  Islands,  They  anchor  in  the  Harbour  near  the  Tartars 
Garrison,  and  treat  with  the  Governour,  Of  Amoy  in  the 
Province  of  FokieUy  and  Macao  a  Chinese  and  Portuguese  Towny 
near  Canton  in  China.  The  Habits  of  a  Tartarian  Officer  and 
his  Retinue,  Their  PresentSy  excellent  Beef  Samciuy  a  sort  of 
Chinese  Aracky  and  Hocciu  a  kind  of  Chinese  Mum,  and  the  Jars 
it  is  bottled  in.  Of  the  Isle  of  Formosay  and  the  five  Islands ;  to 
which  they  gave  the  Names  of  Orangey  Monmouthy  Graftony  Basheey 
and  Goat-Islands,  in  generaly  the  Bashee  Islands,  A  Digression 
concerning  the  different  depths  of  the  Sea  near  high  or  low  Lands, 
Soily  &c,  as  before.  The  Soily  Fruits  and  Animals  of  these  Islands, 
The  Inhabitants  and  their  Cloathing,  Rings  of  a  yellow  Metal 
like  Gold,  Their  Houses  built  on  remarkable  Precipices,  Their 
Boats  and  Employments.  Their  Foody  of  Goat  SkinSy  Entrailsy\<5c, 
Parcht  Locusts,  Basheey  or  Sugar-cane  Drink,  Of  their  Language 
and  Original,  Launces  and  Buffaloe  Coats,  No  Idolsy  nor  civil 
Form  of  Government,  A  young  Man  buried  alive  by  them  ; 
supposed  to  be  for  Theft,  Their  JVives  and  Childreny  and 
Husbandry,  Their  Manners,  Entertainments,  and  Traffick,  Of 
the  Ships  first  Entercourse  with  these  Peoplcy  and  Bartering  with 

400 


DEPARTURE   FROM    PULO   CONDORE 

tfum.       Thfir  Cturir  om«ng  the  li/aitds ;    their  ittty  there,  and    , 
frtndtH  t»  depart.     They  art  drivtn  iff  by  a  vhlent  Sterm,  and  ■ 
nttm.      The  Nativet  KindneSi  to  6  ef  thrm  Itfl  behind.       The 
Crew  Humraged  by  thote  Stermi,  quit  their  design  ef  Cruising  aff 
Manila  for  the  Atafulca  Ship  ;  and  'lit  rtsahed  la  fetch  a  Csmpau 
f  Cap*  Ctiasrin  and  it  fir  the  Red-Sea. 

HAVING  fill'd  our  Water,  cut  our  Wood,  and 
got  our  Ship  in  a  sailing  posture,  while  the 
blustring  hard  Winds  lasted,  we  took  the  first 
opportunity  of  a  settled  Gale  to  Sail  towards 
Manila.  Accordingly  June  the  4th,  1687,  we  loosed  from 
Pulo  Condorc,  with  the  Wind  at  S.  W.  fair  Weather  at  a 
brisk  Gale.  The  Pepper  Jonk  bound  to  Siam  remained 
there,  waiting  for  an  Easterly  Wind  ;  but  one  of  his  Men, 
a  kind  o(  a  bastard  Portuguese,  came  aboard  our  Ship,  and 
was  entertained  for  the  sake  of  his  knowledge  in  the  several 
Languages  of  these  Countries.  The  Wind  continued  in  the 
S.  W.  but  24  hours,  or  a  little  more,  and  then  came  about 
to  the  North,  and  then  to  the  N,  E. ;  and  the  Sky  became 
exceeding  clear.  Then  the  Wind  came  at  East,  and  lasted 
betwixt  K.  and  S.  E.  for  8  or  lO  Days.  Yet  we  continued 
pljring  to  Windward,  expecting  every  Day  a  shift  of  Wind, 
Koittsc  these  Winds  were  not  according  to  the  Season  of 
(he  year. 

Wc  were  now  afraid  lest  the  Currents  might  deceive 
us,  and  carry  us  on  the  Shoals  of  PraccI,  which  were 
near  ua,  a  little  to  the  N.  W.  but  we  passed  on  to  the 
Eastward,  without  seeing  any  sign  of  them ;  yet  we  were 
kept  much  to  the  Northward  of  our  intended  course: 
And  the  Easterly  Wmds  still  continuing,  we  despaired  of 
getting  to  Manila ;  and  therefore  began  to  project  some 
Dew  design ;  and  the  result  was,  to  visit  the  Island  Plata,' 
about  the  Lat.  of  20  Dcg.  40  Min.  North;  and  not  far 
from  us  at  this  time. 

It  is  a  small  low  Island,  cnviron'd  with  Rocks  clear 
round  it,  by  report.  It  lyeth  so  in  the  way  between 
Manila  and  Canton,  the  Head  of  a  Province,  and  a  Town 


i 


*  The  }'iuu«  tttf,  in  lat.  10°  40'  N.,  lon(.  1 16*  50'  E. 
401  2  C 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  of  great  Trade  in  China,  that  the  Chinese  do  dread  the 
1687  Rocks  about  it,  more  than  the  Spaniards  did  formerly 
dread  Bermudas;  for  many  of  their  Jonks  coming  from 
Manila  have  been  lost  there,  and  with  abundance  of 
Treasure  in  them ;  as  we  were  informed  by  all  the 
Spaniards  that  ever  we  converst  with  in  these  parts.  They 
told  us  also,  that  in  these  Wrecks  most  of  the  Men  were 
drowned,  and  that  the  Chinese  did  never  go  thither  to  take 
up  any  of  the  Treasure  that  was  lost  there,  for  fear  of 
being  lost  themselves.  But  the  danger  of  the  Place  did 
not  daunt  us;  for  we  were  resolved  to  try  our  Fortunes 
there,  if  the  Winds  would  permit ;  and  we  did  beat  for  it 
5  or  6  Days :  but  at  last  were  forced  to  leave  that  Design 
also  for  want  of  Winds ;  for  the  S.  E.  Winds  continuing, 
forced  us  on  the  Coast  of  China. 

It  was  the  25  th  Day  of  June  when  we  made  the  Land ; 
and  running  in  towards  the  Shore  we  came  to  an  Anchor 
the  same  Day,  on  the  N.  E.  end  of  St.  John's  Island.^ 

This  Island  is  in  Lat.  about  22  d.  30  min.  North, 
lying  on  the  S.  Coast  of  the  Province  of  Quantung  or 
Canton  in  China.  It  is  of  an  indifferent  heighth,  and 
pretty  plain,  and  the  Soil  fertile  enough.  It  is  partly 
woody,  partly  Savannahs  or  Pasturage  for  Cattle ;  and 
there  is  some  moist  arable  Land  for  Rice.  The  skirts  or 
outer  part  of  the  Island,  especially  that  part  of  it  which 
borders  on  the  main  Sea,  is  woody :  The  middle  part  of  it 
is  good  thick  grassy  Pasture,  with  some  Groves  of  Trees  ; 
and  that  which  is  cultivated  Land  is  low  wet  Land, 
yielding  plentiful  Crops  of  Rice;  the  only  Grain  that  I 
did  see  here.  The  tame  Cattle  which  this  Island  affords, 
are  China  Hogs,  Goats,  Buffaloes,  and  some  Bullocks. 
The  Hogs  of  this  Island  are  all  black;  they  have  but 
small  Heads,  very  short  thick  Necks,  great  Bellies,  com- 
monly touching  the  Ground,  and  short  Legs.  They  eat  but 
little  Food,  yet  they  arc  most  of  them  very  fat ;  probably 
because  they  Sleep  much.  The  tame  Fowls  are  Ducks,  and 
Cocks  and  Hens.      I  saw  no  wild  Fowl  but  a  few  small  Birds. 

One  of  the  islands  near  Hong-Kong,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Canton  Ri\er. 

402 


ICHINESE  FORCED  TO  CUT  THEIR  HAIR 


The  Nativ 


of  this  Island 


Chir 


Hives  ot  this  island  are  Chinese,  I  hey  are  am. 
subject  to  the  Crown  of  China,  and  consequently  at  this  ' 
lime  to  the  Tartars.  The  Chinese  in  general  are  tall, 
strait-bodied,  i^w-boned  Men.  They  are  long  Visaged, 
and  their  Foreheads  are  high ;  but  they  have  little  Eyes. 
Their  Noses  are  pretty  large,  with  a  rising  in  the  middle. 
Their  Mouths  are  of  a  mean  size,  pretty  thin  Lips.  They 
irc  of  an  ashy  Complexion  ;  their  Hair  is  black,  and  their 
Beards  thin  and  long,  for  they  pluck  the  Hair  out  by  the 
Roots,  suffering  only  some  few  very  long  straggling  Hairs 
to  grow  about  their  Chin,  in  which  they  take  great  pride, 
often  combing  them,  and  sometimes  tying  them  up  in  a 
knot,  and  they  have  such  Hairs  too  growing  down  from 
each  side  of  their  upper  Lip  like  Whiskers.  The  ancient 
Chinese  were  very  proud  of  the  Hair  of  their  Heads, 
letting  it  grow  very  long,  and  stroking  it  back  with  their 
Hands  curiously,  and  then  winding  the  plats  all  together 
round  a  B'xlkin,  thrust  through  it  at  the  hinder  part  of  the 
Head ;  and  both  Men  and  Women  did  thus.  But  when 
the  Tartars  conquered  them,  they  broke  them  of  this 
custom  they  were  fond  of,  by  main  force ;  insomuch  that 
they  resented  this  Imposition  worse  than  their  subjection, 
and  rebelled  upon  it ;  but  being  still  worsted,  were  forc'd  to 
acquiesce;  and  to  this  day  they  follow  the  fashion  of  their 
Masters  the  Tartars,  and  shave  all  their  Heads,  on  I  y 
reserving  one  lock,  which  some  tye  up,  others  let  it  hang 
down  to  a  grx^t  or  small  length  as  they  please.  The 
Chinese  in  other  Countries  still  keep  their  old  custom,  but 
if  any  of  the  Chinese  is  found  wearing  long  Hair  in  China, 
he  forfeits  his  Head ;  and  many  of  them  have  abandoned 
their  Couniry  to  preserve  their  Hbcny  of  wearing  their 
Hair,  as  I  have  been  told  by  themselves. 

The  Chinese  have  no  Hats,  Caps,  or  Turbans;  but 
when  they  walk  abroad,  ihcy  carry  a  small  Umbrello  in 
their  Hands,  wherewith  they  fence  their  Head  from  the  Sun 
or  the  Rain,  by  holding  it  over  their  Heads.  If  they  walk 
but  a  little  way,  they  carry  only  a  large  Kan  made  of  Paper, 
or  Silk,  of  the  same  fashion  as  those  our  Ladies  have,  and 
many  of  them  arc  brought  over  hither;  one  of  these 
'  403 


.      CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   every  Man  carries  in  his  Hand  if  he  do  but   cross  the 
'^^7  Street,    skreening    his    Head  with   it,  if  he   hath  not  an 
Umbrello  with  him. 

The  common  Apparel  of  the  Men,  is  a  loose  Frock 
and  Breeches.     They  seldom  wear  Stockings,  but  they  have 
Shoes,  or  a  sort  of  Slippers  rather.     The  Mens  Shoes  are 
made  diversly.     The  Women  have  very  small  Feet,  and 
consequently  but  little  Shoes ;  for  from  their  Infancy  their 
Feet  are  kept  swathed  up  with  Bands,  as  hard  as  they  can 
possibly  endure  them ;  and   from  the  time  they  can  go 
till    they  have   done  growing   they  bind  them   up  every 
night.     This  they  do  purposely  to  hinder  them  from  grow- 
ing, esteeming  little  Feet  to  be  a  great  Beauty.     But  by 
this  unreasonable  Custom  they  do  in  a  manner  lose  the  use 
of  their  Feet,  and  instead  of  going  they  only  stumble  about 
their  Houses,  and  presently  squat  down  on  their  Breeches 
again,  being,  as  it  were,  confined  to  sitting  all  Days  of  their 
Lives.    They  seldom  stir  abroad,  and  one  would  be  apt  to 
think,  that,  as  some  have  conjectured,  their  keeping  up 
their  fondness  for  this  Fashion  were  a  Stratagem  of  the 
Mens,  to  keep  them  from  gadding  and  gossiping  about, 
and  confine  them  at  home.     They  are  kept  constantly  to 
their  work,  being  fine  Needle-Women,  and  making  many 
curious  Embroideries,   and   they   make   their   own   Shoes ; 
but   if  any    Stranger   be   desirous  to   bring  away   any  for 
Novelty's  sake,  he  must  be  a  great  Favourite  to  get  a  pair 
of  Shoes  of  them,  though  he  give  twice  their  value.     The 
poorer  sort   of  Women  trudge  about  Streets,  and  to  the 
Market,  without  Shoes   or  Stockings ;    and   these    cannot 
afl^ord  to  have  little  Feet,  being  to  get  their  living  with 
them. 

The  Chinese,  both  Men  and  Women,  are  very  ingenious  ; 
as  may  appear  by  the  many  curious  things  that  are  brought 
from  thence,  especially  the  Porcelaine,  or  China  Earthen 
Ware.  The  Spaniards  of  Manila,  that  we  took  on  the 
Coast  of  Luconia,  told  me  that  this  Commodity  is  made  of 
Conch-shells  ;  the  inside  of  which  looks  like  Mother  of  Pearl. 
But  the  Portuguese  lately  mentioned,  who  had  lived  in 
China,  and  spoke  that  and  the  neighbouring  Languages  very 

404 


CHINA    WARE— CHINA    ROOT— TEA 

well,  said,  That  it  was  made  of  a  6ne  son  of  Clay  that  was 
dug  in  the  Province  of  Canton.     I  have  often  made  enquiry   ' 
about  it  but  could  never  be  well  satisfied  in  it :  But  while  I 
was  on  the  Coast  of  Canton  1  forgot  to  inquire  about  it. 

I  They  nuke  very  fine  Lacquer-ware  also,  and  good  Silks; 

i  ind  they  are  curious  at  Painting  and  Carving. 

China  affords  Drugs  in  great  abundance ;  especially 
Chini-Rooi;'  but  this  is  not  peculiar  to  that  Country 
alone ;  for  there  is  much  of  this  Root  growing  at  Jamaica, 
particularly  at  i6  mile  walk,  and  in  the  Bay  of  Honduras 
It  is  very  plentiful.  There  is  a  great  store  of  sugar  made 
In  this  Country;  and  Tea  in  abundance  is  brought  from 
thence ;  being  much  used  thcTc,  and  in  Tunquin  and 
Cochin-china  as  common  drinking ;  Women  sitting  in  the 
Streets,  and  selling  Dishes  of  Tea  hot  and  ready  made  ;  they 
call  it  Chau,  and  even  the  poorest  People  sip  it.  But  the 
Tea  at  Tonquecn  of  Cochinchina  seems  not  so  good,  or  of 
80  pleasant  a  bitter,  or  of  so  fine  a  colour,  or  such  virtue  as 
this  in  China ;  for  I  have  drank  of  it  in  these  Countries : 
unless  the  fault  be  in  the  way  of  making  it,  for  I  made 
none  there  my  self;  and  by  the  high  red  colour  it  looks  as 
if  they  nude  a  Decoction  of  it,  or  kept  it  stale.  Yet  at 
Japan  I  was  told  there  is  a  great  deal  of  pure  Tea,  very 
good. 

The  Chinese  are  very  great  Gamesters,  and  they  will 
never  be  tired  with  it,  playing  night  and  d.ty,  till  they  have 
lost  all  their  Esutcs;  then  it  is  usual  with  them  to  hang 
theiztfelves.  This  was  frequently  done  by  the  Chinese 
Factors  at  Manila,  as  I  was  told  by  Spaniards  that  lived 
there.  The  Spaniards  themselves  are  much  addicted  to 
Gaming,  and  arc  very  expert  at  it ;  but  the  Chinese  are  too 
subtle  for  thtm,  being  in  general  a  very  cunning  People. 

But  a  particular  Account  of  them  and  their  Country 
would  fill  a  Volume;  nor  doth  my  short  Experience  of 
them  qualifie  me  to  say  much  of  them.  Wherefore  1  con- 
fine my  self  chiefly  to  what  1  nbscrv'd  at  St.  John's  Island, 
where  we  lay  some  time,  and  visited  the  shore  every  day  to 


^B    where  we  lay  some  ii: 
^^  ■  Smila-i 


Smilas  Ckimi :  A  »ort  of  Hnaporilb. 
♦05 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER^S   VOYAGES 

AN.  buy  Provision,  as  Hogs,  Fowls,  and  Buflaloe.  Here  was  a 
'^^7  small  Town  standing  in  a  wet  swampy  Ground,  with  many 
filthy  Ponds  amongst  the  Houses,  which  were  built  on  the 
Ground  as  ours  are,  not  on  Posts  as  at  Mindanao.  In 
these  Ponds  were  plenty  of  Ducks ;  the  Houses  were  small 
and  low,  and  covered  with  Thatch,  and  the  insides  were  but 
ill  furnished,  and  kept  nastily :  And  I  have  been  told  by 
one  who  was  there,  that  most  of  the  Houses  in  the  City  of 
Canton  it  self  are  but  poor  and  irregular. 

The  Inhabitants  of  this  Village  seem  to  be  most 
Husbandmen  :  They  were  at  this  time  very  busy  in  Sowing 
their  Rice,  which  is  their  chiefest  Commodity.  The  Land 
in  which  they  choose  to  Sow  the  Rice  is  low  and  wet,  and 
when  Plowed  the  Earth  was  like  a  mass  of  Mud.  They 
plow  their  Land  with  a  small  Plow,  drawn  by  one  Buflaloe, 
and  one  Man  both  holds  the  Plow,  and  drives  the  Beast. 
When  the  Rice  is  ripe  and  gathered  in,  they  tread  it  out  of 
the  Ear  with  Buffaloes,  in  a  large  round  place  made  with  a 
hard  floor  fit  for  that  purpose,  where  they  chain  3  or  4  of 
these  Beasts,  one  at  the  tail  of  the  other,  and  driving  them 
round  in  a  Ring,  as  in  a  Horse-mill,  they  so  order  it  that 
the  Buffaloes  may  tread  upon  it  all. 

I  was  once  ashore  at  this  Island,  with  7  or  8  English 
Men  more,  and  having  occasion  to  stay  some  time,  we 
killed  a  Shote,^  or  young  Porker,  and  roasted  it  for  our 
Dinners.  While  we  were  busie  dressing  of  our  Pork,  one 
of  the  Natives  came  and  sat  down  by  us ;  and  when  the 
Dinner  was  ready,  we  cut  a  good  piece  and  gave  it  him, 
which  he  willingly  received.  But  by  Signs  he  begged  more, 
and  withal  pointed  into  the  Woods  ;  yet  we  did  not  under- 
stand his  meaning,  nor  much  mind  him,  till  our  Hunger 
was  pretty  well  asswaged ;  although  he  did  still  make  signs, 
and  walking  a  little  way  from  us  he  beckoned  to  us  to  come 
to  him  ;  which  at  last  I  did,  and  2  or  3  more.  He  going 
before,  led  the  way  in  a  small  blind  Path,  through  a 
Thicket,  into  a  small  Grove  of  Trees,  in  which  there  was 
an  old  Idol  Temple  about  10  foot  square  :  The  Walls  of  it 

*  Earlv  editions  read  "  a  small  shote." 

406 


CHINESE   IDOL,  TEMPLE,   AND   IMAGE 

;  about  6  Foot  bigh,  and  2  Foot  thick,  made  of  Bricks. 
The  Floor  was  paved  with  broad  Bricks,  and  in  the  middle  '**' 
of  the  Floor  stood  an  old  rusty  Iron  Bell  on  its  Brims. 
This  Bell  was  about  two  foot  high,  standing  flat  on  the 
Ground  ;  the  Brims  on  which  it  stood  were  about  16  Inches 
diameter.  From  the  brims  it  did  taper  away  a  little 
towards  the  Head,  much  like  our  Bells;  but  that  the  Brims 
did  mrt  turn  out  so  much  as  ours  do.  On  the  Head  of  the 
Bell  there  were  3  Iron  Bars  as  big  as  a  Man's  Arm,  and 
about  10  Inches  long  from  the  top  of  the  Bell,  where  the 
ends  join'd  as  in  a  Center,  and  seemed  of  one  Mass  with 
the  Bell,  as  if  Cast  together.  These  bars  sto(xl  all  Parallel 
to  the  Ground,  and  their  farther  ends,  which  stood  Tri- 
angularly and  opening  from  each  other  at  equal  Distances, 
like  the  Fliers  of  our  Kitchen-Jacks,  were  made  exactly  in 
the  shape  of  the  Paw  of  sonic  monstrous  Beast,  having 
sharp  Claws  on  it.  This  it  seems  was  their  God  ;  for  as 
soon  as  our  zealous  Guide  came  before  the  Bell,  he  fell  flat 
o«  his  Face  and  beckoned  to  us,  seeming  very  desirous  to 
have  us  do  the  like.  At  the  inner  side  of  the  Temple, 
against  the  Walls,  there  was  an  Altar  of  white  hewn  Stone. 
The  Table  of  the  Altar  was  about  3  Foot  long,  16  Inches 
broad,  and  3  Inches  thick.  It  was  raised  about  two  Foot 
firom  the  Ground,  and  supported  by  3  small  Pillars  of  the 
same  white  Stone.  On  ihis  Altar  there  were  several  small 
Earthen  Vessels;  one  of  them  was  full  of  small  Sticks  that 
had  been  burned  at  one  end.  Our  Guide  made  a  great 
many  signs  for  us  to  fetch  and  to  leave  some  of  our  Meat 
there,  and  seemed  very  importunate,  but  we  refused.  We 
left  him  there,  and  went  aboard ;  I  did  see  no  other 
Temple  nor  Idol  here. 

While  we  lay  at  this  Place,  we  saw  several  small  China 
Jnaks,'  Sailing  in  the  Lagune  between  the  Islands  and  the 
Main,  one  came  and  anchored  by  us.  I  and  some  more  of 
our  Men  went  aboard  to  view  her :  She  was  built  with  a 
square  fiat  Head  as  well  as  Stem,  only  the  Head  or  fore- 

'  The  HoDg;  Knny  carijo  jnnks  arc  dctervedly  CiRinut.  They  are  fut, 
rMMBT,  1»ikIv.  and  very  ulfll  Latierly  the  Mjiurc  (orcwiil  has  Ki*ci  "'>T 
in  the  UMial  Chincw  baiwn  lu^- 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

[an.  part  was  not  so  broad  as  the  Stern.  On  her  Deck  she  had 
1687  little  thatcht  Houses  like  Hovels,  cover'd  with  Palmeto 
Leaves,  and  raised  about  3  Foot  high,  for  the  Seamen  to 
creep  into.  She  had  a  pretty  large  Cabbin,  wherein  there 
was  an  Altar  and  a  Lamp  burning.  I  did  but  just  look  in, 
and  saw  not  the  Idol.  The  Hold  was  divided  in  many  small 
Partitions,  all  of  them  made  so  tight,  that  if  a  Leak  should 
Spring  up  in  any  one  of  them,  it  could  go  no  farther,  and 
so  could  do  but  little  Damage,  but  only  to  the  Goods  in 
the  bottom  of  that  Room  where  the  Leak  springs  up. 
Each  of  these  Rooms  belong  to  one  or  two  Merchants,  or 
more  ;  and  every  Man  freights  his  Goods  in  his  own  Room ; 
and  probably  lodges  there,  if  he  be  on  Board  himself.  These 
Jonks  have  only  two  Masts,  a  Main-mast  and  a  Fore-mast. 
The  Fore-mast  has  a  square  Yard  and  a  square  Sail,  but  the 
Main-mast  has  a  Sail  narrow  aloft,^  like  a  Sloops-Sail,  and 
in  fair  Weather  they  use  a  Top-sail,  which  is  to  hale  down 
on  the  Deck  in  foul  weather.  Yard  and  all ;  for  they  do 
not  go  up  to  furl  it.  The  Main-mast  in  their  biggest 
Jonks  seem  to  me  as  big  as  any  third-rate  Man  of  Wars 
Mast  in  England,  and  yet  not  pieced  as  ours,  but  made 
of  one  grown  Tree ;  and  in  all  my  Travels  I  never  saw 
any  single  Tree-masts  so  big  in  the  Body,  and  so  long, 
and  yet  so  well  tapered,  as  I  have  seen  in  the  Chinese 
Jonks. 

Some  of  our  Men  went  over  to  a  pretty  large  Town  on 
the  Continent  of  China,  where  we  might  have  furnished 
our  Selves  with  Provision,  which  was  a  thing  we  were 
always  in  want  of,  and  was  our  chief  Business  here ;  but 
we  were  afraid  to  lye  in  this  Place  any  longer,  for  we  had 
some  signs  of  an  approaching  Storm ;  this  being  the  time 
of  the  Year  in  which  Storms  are  expected  on  this  Coast ; 
and  here  was  no  safe  Riding.  It  was  now  the  time  of  the 
Year  for  the  S.  W.  Monsoon,  but  the  Wind  had  been 
whiffling  about  from  one  part  of  the  Compass  to  another 
for  two  or  three  Days,  and  sometimes  it  would  be  quite 
calm.     This  caused  us  to  put  to  Sea,  that  we  might  have 

*  This  was  the  ordinary  oriental  batten  lug.     A  sloop's  sail  was  not  a 
lug,  but  a  gaff-sail,  setting  on  a  gaff  and  boom,  like  the  modern  spanker. 

408 


A    MOST   DREADFUL   STORM 
'■  Sea-room  at  least ;  for  such  flattering  Weather  is  cotnmonly 
the  fore-runner  of  a  Tempest.  ' 

Accordingly  we  weighed  Anchor,  and  set  out;  yet  we 
had  very  little  Wind  all  the  next  night.  But  the  day 
cnsuir^,  which  was  the  4th  day  of  July,  about  4  a  clock  in 
the  afternoon,  the  Wind  came  to  the  N.  E.  and  freshened 
upon  us,  and  the  Sky  look'd  very  black  in  that  quarter, 
snd  the  black  Clouds  began  to  rise  apace  and  mov'd 
towards  us;  having  hung  all  the  morning  in  the  Horizon. 
This  made  us  take  in  our  Top-sails,  and  the  Wind  still 
increasing,  about  9  a  clock  we  rift '  our  Main-sail  and 
Fore-*ail ;  at  10  we  furl'd  our  Fore-sail,  keeping  under  a 
Main-sail  and  Mizcn ;  at  1 1  a  clock  we  furl'd  our  Main- 
sail, and  ballasted'  our  Mizen  ;  at  which  time  it  began  to 
rain,  and  by  t2  a  clock  at  night  it  blew  exceeding  hard,  and 
the  Rain  poured  down  as  through  a  Sieve.  It  thundered 
and  lightened  prodigiously,  and  the  Sea  seemed  all  of  a 
Fire  about  us;  for  every  Sea  that  broke  sparkled  like 
lightning.  The  violent  Wind  raised  the  Sea  presently  to 
a  great  heighth,  and  it  ran  very  short,  and  began  to  Iveak 
in  on  our  Deck.  One  Sea  struck  away  the  Rails  of  our 
Head,  and  our  Sheet-Anchor,  which  was  stowed  with  one 
Flook '  or  bending  of  the  Iron,  over  the  Ships  Gunal,  and 
Usht  very  well  down  to  the  side,  was  violently  washt  ofl^, 
and  had  like  to  have  struck  a  hole  in  our  Bow,  as  it  lay 
beating  against  it.  Then  we  were  forced  to  put  right 
before  the  Wind  to  stow  our  Anchor  again  ;  which  wc  did 
with  much  ado;  but  afterwards  we  durst  not  adventure  to 
bring  our  Ship  to  the  Wind  again,  for  fear  of  foundring, 
for  the  turning  the  Ship  cither  tu  or  fro  from  the  Wind  is 
dangerous  in  such  violent  Storms.  The  fierceness  of  the 
Waiher  continued  till  4  a  clock  that  morning;  in  which 
time  wc  did  cut  away  two  Canoas  that  were  towing 
utern. 

After  four  a  clock  the  Thunder  and  the  Rain  abated, 

*  Bihaoed.  A  miicn,  ot  laicen  wil,  w»»  uiil  10  be  "ballasted,"  01 
"faataaoed,^  wiitn  it  v;u  reefed.  A  "bat.-incc  reef"  is  a  reef  which  cmiscs 
■  nil  ifi>goaall)r.    The  act  of  reefing  reiluce*  the  area  of  a  Siiil. 

*  ftate.    The  crook*,  or  Uions.  uf  nn  anchor  are  known  as  flukes. 
409 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  and  then  we  saw  a  Corpus  Sant^  at  our  Main-top-mast 
'^7  head,  on  the  very  top  of  the  truck  of  the  Spindle.*  This 
sight  rejoyced  our  Men  exceedingly ;  for  the  height  of  the 
Storm  is  commonly  over*  when  the  Corpus  Sant  is  seen 
aloft ;  but  when  they  are  seen  lying  on  the  Deck,  it  is 
generally  accounted  a  bad  Sign. 

A  Corpus  Sant  is  a  certain  small  glittering  light ;  when 
it  appears  as  this  did,  on  the  very  top  of  the  Main-mast  or 
at  a  Yard-arm  it  is  like  a  Star  ;  but  when  it  appears  on 
the  Deck,  it  resembles  a  great  Glow-worm.  The  Spaniards 
have  another  Name  for  it,*  (though  I  take  even  this  to  be 
a  Spanish  or  Portuguese  Name,  and  a  corruption  only  of 
Corpus  Sanctum)  and  I  have  been  told  that  when  they  see 
them,  they  presently  go  to  Prayers,  and  bless  themselves  for 
the  happy  sight.  1  have  heard  some  ignorant  Seamen  dis- 
coursing how  they  have  seen  them  creep,  or  as  they  say 
travel  about  in  the  Scuppers,  telling  many  dismal  Stories 
that  hapned  at  such  times :  but  I  did  never  see  any  one 
stir  out  of  the  place  where  it  was  first  fixt,  except  upon 
Deck,  where  every  Sea  washeth  it  about :  Neither  did  I 
ever  see  any  but  when  we  have  had  hard  Rain  as  well  as 
Wind ;  and  therefore  do  believe  it  is  some  Jelly :  but 
enough  of  this. 

*  Corposant,  or  Compasant,  a  ball  of  light  (an  electrical  discharge) 
which  sometimes  appears  in  stonns  on  the  masts,  spars,  and  decks  of  ships. 

'  The  spindle  was  a  tapering  iron  pin  at  the  summit  of  a  mast.  It 
formed  the  rest  for  the  wind  vane  which  crossed  it  transversely. 

^  See  Jan  Huyghen  van  Linschoten's  Discourse  of  Voyages,  in  his 
"Return  Voyage  from  Goa  to  Enkhuisen"  (1588-1592) :  "The  same  night, 
we  saw  upon  the  mainyard  and  in  many  other  places,  a  certain  sign  which 
the  Portuguese  call  Corpo  Santo^  or  "the  holy  body  of  Brother  Peter 
Gonsalvcs,"  but  the  Spaniards  aill  it  San  Elmo  .  .  .  whensoever  that  sign 
showeth  upon  the  mast  or  mainyard  or  in  any  other  place  ;  it  is  commonly 
thought,  that  it  is  a  si^n  of  better  weather.  When  they  first  perceive  it, 
the  Master  or  Chief  Boatswain  whistleth,  and  commandeth  every  man  to 
salute  it." 

*  St.  Elmo's  Fire.  Sec  the  Voyage  of  Robert  Tomson  "to  the  West 
Indies  and  Mexico"  in  1556-1558  (Hakluyt  "  Princij^il  Navigations,"  ed. 
1589):  "In  the  great  and  boisterous  storm  of  this  foul  weather,  in  the 
night  there  came  upon  the  top  of  our  mainyard  and  mainmast,  a  certain 
little  light,  much  like  unto  the  light  of  a  little  candle,  which  the  Spaniards 
called  the  corpus  sancto^  and  said  it  was  Saint  Elmo,  whom  they  take  to 
be  the  advocate  of  sailors.  .  .  .  This  light  continued  aboard  our  ship  about 
three  hours,  flying  from  mast  to  mast,  and  from  top  to  top  ;  and  sometimes 
it  would  be  in  two  or  three  places  at  once." 

410 


r  A    STORM 

Wc  continued  scudvling  right  before  Wind  and  Sea 
from  2  till  7  a  Clock  in  the  Morning,  and  then  the  Wind  ' 
being  much  abated,  we  set  our  Mizcn  again,  and  brought 
our  Ship  to  the  Wind,  and  lay  under  a  Mizen  till  ii. 
Then  it  fell  flat  calm,  and  it  continued  so  for  about  2 
Hours :  but  the  Sky  looked  very  black  and  rueful, 
especially  in  the  S^  W.  and  the  Sea  tossed  us  about  like 
an  Egg-shell,  for  want  of  Wind.  About  one  a  Clock  in 
the  Afternoon  the  Wind  sprung  up  at  S.  W.  out  of 
the  quarter  from  whence  we  did  expect  it :  therefore  we 
presently  brail'd  up  our  Mtzen,  and  wore  our  Ship :  But 
we  had  no  sooner  put  our  Ship  before  the  Wind,  but  it 
blew  a  Storm  again,  and  ratn'd  very  hard,  though  not  so 
violently  as  the  Night  before  :  but  the  Wind  was  altogether 
as  boisterous,  and  so  continued  till  lo  or  ti  a  Clock  at 
Night.  All  which  time  we  acudded,  and  run  before  the 
Wind  very  swift,  tho'  only  with  our  bare  Poles,  that  is, 
without  any  Sail  abroad.  Afterwards  the  Wind  died  away 
by  d^rccs,  and  before  Day  we  had  but  little  Wind,  and 
fine  clear  Weather. 

1  was  never  in  such  a  violent  Storm'  in  all  my  Life; 
so  Mid  all  the  Company.  This  was  near  the  change  of  the 
Moon :  it  was  2  or  3  days  before  the  change.  The  6th 
day  in  the  Morning,  having  fine  handsome  Weather,  we 
got  up  our  Yards  again,  and  began  to  dry  our  Selves  and 
our  Cloaths,  for  wc  were  all  well  sopt.  This  Storm  had 
deadncd  the  Hearts  of  our  Men  so  much,  that  instead  of 
going  to  buy  mure  Provision  at  the  same  place  from 
whence  wc  came  before  the  Storm,  or  of  seeking  any  more 
for  the  Island  Praca,  they  thought  of  going  somewhere  to 
tliclter  before  the  Full  Moon,  for  fear  of  another  such 
Storm  at  that  lime :  For  commonly,  if  there  is  any  bad 
Weather  in  the  Month,  it  is  about  2  or  3  Days  before  or 
after  the  Full,  or  Change  of  the  Moon. 

Thew  Thoughts,  I  say,  put  our  Men  on  thinking 
where  to  go,  and  the  Drafts  or  Sea-plats  being  first  con- 

'  It  <nu  >  tjrpbooB,  or  revolving  tiomi.     TI>e  sea  niMcl  by  u  typhuon  is 
extmiwdy  dABjt^raiH  ;  for  it  term*  to  break  all  way«  at  once,  "  it  runs  very 
•Iton,"  u  Uwnpier  ny*,  owing  to  the  conuani  thifting  of  ibc  wind. 
4" 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  suited,  it  was  concluded  to  go  to  certain  Islands  lying  in 
'^7  Lat.  23  d.  N.  called  Piscadores.  For  there  was  not  a  Man 
aboard  that  was  anything  acquainted  on  these  Coasts ;  and 
therefore  all  our  dependance  was  on  the  Drafts,  which 
only  pointed  out  to  us  where  such  and  such  Places 
or  Islands  were,  without  giving  us  any  account,  what 
Harbour,  Roads,  or  Bays  there  were:  or  the  Produce, 
Strength,  or  Trade  of  them :  these  we  were  forced  to  seek 
after  our  selves. 

The  Piscadores  are  a  great  many  inhabited  Islands, 
lying  near  the  Island  Formosa,  between  it  and  China,  in 
or  near  the  Lat.  of  23  dcg.  N.  Lat.  almost  as  high  as 
the  Tropick  of  Cancer.  These  Piscadore  Islands  are 
moderately  high,  and  appear  much  like  our  Dorsetshire 
and  Wiltshire-Downs  in  England.  They  produce  thick 
short  Grass,  and  a  few  Trees.  They  are  pretty  well 
watered,  and  they  feed  abundance  of  Goats,  and  some 
great  Cattle.  There  are  abundance  of  Mounts  and  old 
Fortifications  on  them :  but  of  no  use  now,  whatever  they 
have  been. 

Between  the  2  Eastermost  Islands  there  is  a  very  good 
Harbour,  which  is  never  without  Jonks  riding  in  it :  and 
on  the  West  side  of  the  Eastermost  Island  there  is  a  large 
Town  and  Fort  commanding  the  Harbour.  The  Houses 
are  but  low,  yet  well  built,  and  the  Town  makes  a  fine 
Prospect.  This  is  a  Garrison  of  the  Tartars,  wherein  are 
also  3  or  400  Soldiers ;  who  live  here  3  years,  and  then 
they  are  mov'd  to  some  other  Place. 

On  the  Island,  on  the  West  side  of  the  Harbour,  close 
by  the  Sea,  there  is  a  small  Town  of  Chinese ;  and  most  of 
the  other  Islands  have  some  Chinese  living  on  them,  more 
or  less. 

Having,  as  I  said  before,  concluded  to  go  to  these 
Islands,  wc  steered  away  for  them,  having  the  Wind  at 
W.  S.  W.  a  small  gale.  The  20th  day  of  July  we  had  first 
sight  of  them,  and  steered  in  among  them  ;  finding  no  place 
to  anchor  in  till  we  came  into  the  Harbour  before- 
mentioned.  We  blundered  in,  knowing  little  of  our  way, 
and  we  admired  to  see  so  many  Jonks  going  and   coming, 

412 


I 


[     TARTAR   GARRISON    AT    PISCADORES  ] 

and  soroc  at  an  Anchor,  and  so  great  a  Town  as  the  ks. 
Neighbouring  Eastcrmost  Town,  the  Tartarian  Garrison;  '^^~ 
for  we  did  not  expect,  nor  desire,  to  have  seen  any  People, 
being  in  Care  to  lie  com-cal'd  in  these  Seas ;  however,  ■ 
feeing  we  were  here,  we  boldly  run  into  the  Harbour,  and  ■ 
presently  sent  ashore  our  Canoa  to  the  Town.  I 

Our  People  were  met  by  an  Officer  at  their  Landing,       m 
«nd  our  Quartcr-tnastcr,  who  was  the  chiefest  Man  in  the      I 
Boat,  was  conducted  before  the  Governour  and  examined  of      I 
what  Nation  we  were,  and  what   was  our  Business  here.       I 
He  answcr'd.  That  wc  were  English,  and  were  Bound  to       I 
Amoy,  or  Anhay,  which  is  a  City  standing  on  a  Navigable       I 
River  in  the  Province  of  Fokien  in  China,  and  is  a  place  of      I 
vait  Trade,   there  being   a  huge  multitude  of  Ships  there,       I 
and    in  general   on  all  these  Coasts,  as    I   have  heard  of      m 
several  that  have  been  there.     He  said  also,  that  having 
received  some   Damage   by  a  Storm,   we   therefore   put  in 
here  to  refit,  before  we  could  adventure  to  go  farther  ;  and 
that  we  did  intend  to  lie  here  till  after  the  full  Moon,  for 
fear  of  another  Storm.     The  Governour  tnid  him,  that  we        I 
tnight  better  refit  our  Ship  at  Amoy  than  here,  and  that  he        ' 
heard  that  two  English  Vessels  were  arrived  there  already ; 
and  that  he  should  be  very  ready  to  assist  us  in  any  thing; 
but  wc  must  not  expect  to  Trade  there,  but  must  go  to  the 
places  allowed  to  entertain  Merchant-Strangers,  which  were 
Amoy  and  Macao.     Macao  is  a  Town  of  great  Trade  also, 
lying  in  an  Island  at  the  very  Mouth  of  the  River  of  Canton. 
Tis  fortified  and  garisoncd  by  a  large  Portuguese  Colony, 
but    yet    under    the   Chinese  Government,    whose    People 
inhabit  one  Moiety  of  the  Town,  and  lay  on  the  Portuguese 
what    Tax    they  please ;  for  they  dare  not   disoblige  the 
Chinese,   for  fear  of   losing    their    Trade.      However,    the 
Governour    very    kindly    told    our    yuarier-mastcr,    that 
whatsoever  we  wanted,  if  that  place  could  furnish  us,  we 
thould  have  it.     Yet  that  wc  must  not  come  ashore  on  that 
Uland,  but  he  would  send  aboard  some  of  his  Men,  to 
know  what  wc  wanted,  and  they  should  also  bring  it  off  to 
us.     That  nevcrihclcss   we   might    go  on  shore  on  other 
Islands  to  buy  Kcfreshmcnts  of  the  Chinese.     After  the 
4'3 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    Discourse  was  ended,  the  Governour  dismist  him,  with  a 
'^7  small  Jar  of  Flower,  and  3  or  4  lai^e  Cakes  of  very  fine 
Bread,  and  about  a  dozen  Pine-Apples  and  Water-Melons 
(all  very  good  in  their  kind)  as  a  Present  to  the  Captain. 

The  next  day  an  eminent  Officer  came  aboard,  with  a 
great  many  Attendants.  He  wore  a  black  Silk  Cap  of  a 
particular  make,  with  a  Plume  of  black  and  white  Feathers, 
standing  up  almost  round  his  Head  behind,  and  all  his 
outside  Cloaths  were  black  silk :  He  had  a  loose  black 
Coat,  which  reached  to  his  Knees,  and  his  Breeches  were  of 
the  same ;  and  underneath  his  Coat  he  had  two  Garments 
more,  of  other  coloured  Silk.  His  Legs  were  covered  with 
small  black  limber  Boots.  All  his  Attendants  were  in  a 
very  handsom  garb  of  black  Silk,  all  wearing  those  small 
black  Boots  and  Caps.  These  Caps  were  like  the  Crown  of 
a  Hat  made  of  Palmeto-leaves,  like  our  Straw  Hats ;  but 
without  brims,  and  coming  down  but  to  their  Ears.  These 
had  no  Feathers,  but  had  an  oblong  Button  on  the  top,  and 
from  between  the  Button  and  the  Cap,  there  fell  down  all 
round  their  Head  as  low  as  the  Cap  reached,  a  sort  of 
course  Hair  like  Horse-Hair,  dyed  (as  I  suppose)  of  a  light 
red  colour. 

The  Officer  brought  aboard,  as  a  present  from  the 
Governour,  a  young  Heifer,  the  fattest  and  kindliest  Beef, 
that  I  did  ever  taste  in  any  Foreign  Country :  'Twas  small, 
yet  full  grown ;  2  large  Hogs,  4  Goats,  2  Baskets  of  fine 
Flower,  20  great  flat  Cakes  of  fine  well  tasted  Bread,  2 
great  Jars  of  Arack/  (made  of  Rice  as  I  judged)  called  by 
the  Chinese,  Sam  Shu;  and  55  Jars  of  Hoc  Shu,*  as  they 
call  it,  and  our  Europeans  from  them.  This  is  a  strong 
Liquor,  made  of  Wheat  as  I  have  been  told.  It  looks  like 
Mum,^  and  tastes  much  like  it,  and  is  very  pleasant  and 

*  Arrack.  The  true  "Sam  Shu"'  was  distilled  from  rice  which  had  been 
steeped  in  milk.  Nieuhoff,  who  drank  of  it  in  1653-54,  describes  it  as  bein^ 
"almost  as  strong  as  brandy." 

*  Native,  or  China  beer.  There  is,  or  was,  another  drink  with  a  name 
very  similar.  This  was  made  by  steeping  the  roots  of  an  herb  in  boiling 
water,  and  adding  the  seeds  of  a  kind  of  tamarind.  The  "  Hoc  Shu "'  was 
brewed  from  a  special  variety  of  rice,  to  which  drugs  were  added. 

'  Mum  was  strong  beer  brewed  after  a  German  receipt. 

414 


r                SAM   SHU    AND    HOC   SHU  | 

hearty.     Our  Seamen  love  it  mightily,  and  will  lick  their  an. 

Lips  with  it :  for  scarce  a  Ship  goes  to  China,  but  the  Men  '^^^ 
come  home  fat  with  soaking  this  Liquor,  and  bring  store  of 

Jars  of  it  home  with  them.     It  is  put  into  small  white  thick  h 

J»n,  that  hold  near  a  quart :  The  double  Jars  hold  about  H 

two  quarts.     These  Jars  are  small  below,  and  thence  rise  up  H 

with  a  pretty  full  belly,  closing  in  pretty  short  at  top,  with  H 

a  small  thick  mouth.     Over  the  mouth  of  the  Jar  they  put  H 

a  thin  Chip  cut  round,  just  so  as  to  cover  the  mouth,  over  H 

that  a  piece  of  Paper,  and  over  that  they  put  a  great  lump  H 

of  Clay,  almost  as  big  as  the  Bottle  or  Jar  it  self,  with  a  H 

hollow  in  it,  to  admit  the  neck  of  the  Bottle,  made  round,  H 

and  about  4  inches  long ;  this  is  to  preserve  the  Liquor.  H 

If  the  Liquor  take  any  vent  it  will  be  sowre  presently,  so  H 

that  when  we  buy  any  of  it  of  the  Ships  from  China  re-  H 

turning  to  Maderas,  or  Fort  St.  George,  where  it  is  then  V 

sold,  or  of  the  Chinese  themselves,  of  whom  I  have  bought  1 

it  at  Achin,  and  Bcncouli  in  Sumatra,  if  the  Clay  be  crackt,  I 

or  the  Liquor  mothcry,'  we  make  them  take  it  again.     A  I 

qiurt  Jar  there  is  worth  Six-pence.     Besides  this  Present  I 

from  the  Governour,  there  was  a  Captain  of  a  Jonk  sent  two  M 

Jars  of  Arack,  and  abundance  of  Pine-apples  and  Water-  ■ 

melons.  H 

Captain  Read  sent  ashore,  as  a  present  to  the  Governour  H 

a  curious  Spanish  Silver-hilted  Rapier,  an  English  Carbine,  H 

and  a  Gold  Chain,  and  when  the  Officer  went  ashore,  three  H 

Guns  were  fired.      In  the  Afternoon  the  Governour  sent  off  H 

the  same  Officer  again,  to  complement  the  Captain  for  his  ■ 

Civility,  and  promised  to  retaliate  his  kindness  before  we  I 

departed ;  but  wc  had  such  blustring  Weather  afterward,  1 
that  no  Boat  could  come  aboard. 

Wc  suycd  here  till  the  29th  Day,  and  then  sailed  from 
hence  with  the  Wind  at  S.  W.  and  pretty  fair  Weaihcr. 
Wc  now  directed  our  Course  for  some  Islands  wc  had 
chosen  to  go  to,  that  lye  between  Formosa  and  Luconta.* 
They  are  laid  down  in  our  Plots  without  any  name,  only 

with  a  figure  of  5,  denoting  the  number  of  them.     It  was  J 

'  Mottiery,  (hick,  full  of  i>rilimrni.  like  unc);>ti.  I 

'  They  lie  to  Uie  nnnh  of  the  1'liilippines.  ^| 

415  ■ 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   supposed  by  us,  that  these  Islands^  had   no  Inhabitants, 
'^^7  because  they  had   not   any  name  by  our  Hydrographers. 
Therefore  we  thought  to  lye  there  secure,  and  be  pretty 
near  the  Island  Luconia,  which  wc  did  still  intend  to  visit. 

In  going  to  them  we  sailed  by  the  South  West  end  of 
Formosa,  leaving  it  on  our  Larboard-side.  This  is  a  large 
Island;  the  South-end  is  in  Lat.  21.  d.  20  m.  and  the 
North-end  in  the  25  d.  10  m.  North  Lat.  the  Longitude  of 
this  Isle  is  laid  down  from  142  d.  5  m.  to  143  d.  16  m. 
reckoning  East  from  the  Pike  of  TenarifFe,  so  that  *tis  but 
narrow  ;  and  the  Tropick  of  Cancer  crosses  it.  It  is  a  high 
and  woody  Island,  and  was  formerly  well  inhabited  by 
the  Chinese,  and  was  then  frequently  visited  by  English 
Merchants,  there  being  a  very  good  Harbour  to  secure 
their  Ships.  But  since  the  Tartars  have  conquered  China, 
they  have  spoiled  the  Harbour,  (as  I  have  been  informed) 
to  hinder  the  Chinese  that  were  then  in  Rebellion,  from 
fortifying  themselves  there ;  and  ordered  the  Foreign 
Merchants  to  come  and  trade  on  the  Main. 

The  fifth  day  of  August  we  arrived  at  the  five  Islands 
that  we  were  bound  to,  and  anchored  on  the  East-side  of 
the  Northermost  Island,  in  15  Fathom,  a  Cablets  length 
from  the  Shore.  Here,  contrary  to  our  Expectation,  we 
found  abundance  of  Inhabitants  in  sight  ;  for  there  were 
3  large  Towns  ail  within  a  League  of  the  Sea ;  and  another 
larger  Town  than  any  of  the  three,  on  the  backside  of  a 
small  Hill  close  by  also,  as  we  found  afterwards.  These 
Islands  lie  in  Lat.  20.  d.  20  m.  North  Lat.  by  my  Obser- 
vation, for  I  took  it  there,  and  I  find  their  Longitude 
according  to  our  Drafts,  to  be  141  d.  50  m.  These 
Islands  having  no  particular  Names  in  the  Drafts,  some  or 
other  of  us  made  use  of  the  Seamens  priviledge,  to  give 

^  The  Batan  or  Bashee  group,  between  lat.  i(.f  58'  and  20"^  28'  N.,  and  long. 
122°  41' and  123°  E.  There  are  various  small  islands  in  addition  to  the  five 
Dampier  mentions.  "The  Westernmost "  is  now  called  Ibayat ;  "The  Duke 
of  Grafton's  Isle"  is  Batan  ;  "The  Duke  of  Monmouth's  Island"  is  Sabian. 
The  lesser  island  of  Bashee  is  now  Basay.  The  group  was  settled  by  the 
Spaniards  in  1783,  and  the  islands  are  now  more  populous  than  they  were 
in  Dampier's  time.  The  inhabitants  are  Malayan  ;  but  their  language  is 
not  like  any  known  Malayan  dialect. 

416 


I  GRAFTON  AND  MONMOUTH  ISLES 
them  what  Nimcs  we  please.  Three  of  the  Islands  were 
pretty  large ;  the  Wcstermost  is  the  biggest.  This  the  ' 
Dutchmen  who  were  among  us  called  the  Prince  of 
Orange's  Island,  in  honour  of  his  present  Majesty.  It  is 
about  7  or  8  Leagues  long,  and  about  two  Leagues  wide  ; 
and  it  lies  almost  N.  and  S.  The  other  two  great  Islands 
arc  ilx)ut  4  or  5  Leagues  to  the  Eastward  of  this.  The 
Northermost  of  them,  where  we  first  anchored,  I  called 
the  Duke  of  Grafton's  Isle,  as  soon  as  we  Landed  en  it ; 
having  married  my  Wife '  out  of  his  Dutchess's  Family, 
and  leaving  her  at  Arlington-house,  at  my  going  Abroad, 
This  Isle  is  about  4  Leagues  long,  and  one  League  and  an 
half  wide,  stretching  North  and  South.  The  other  great 
Island  our  Seamen  called  the  Duke  of  Monmouth's  Island. 
This  is  about  a  League  to  the  Southward  of  Grafton 
Ule.  It  is  about  3  Leagues  long,  and  a  League  wide, 
lying  as  the  other.  Between  Monmouth  and  the  South 
end  of  Orange  Island,  there  arc  two  small  Islands  of  a 
roundish  Form,  lying  East  and  West.  The  Eastermost 
Island  of  the  two,  our  Men  unanimously  called  Bashce 
Islaod,  from  a  liquor  which  we  drank  there  plentifully 
every  day,  after  wc  came  to  an  Anchor  at  it.  The  other, 
which  is  the  smallest  of  all,  wc  called  Goat  Island,  from 
the  great  number  of  Goats  there  ;  and  to  the  Northward  of 
them  all,  are  two  high  Rocks. 

Orange  Island,  which  is  the  biggest  of  them  all,  is  not 
Inhabited.  It  is  high  Land,  flat  and  even  on  the  top,  with 
steep  Cliffs  against  the  Sea ;  for  which  Reason  we  could 
not  go  ashore  there,  as  we  did  on  all  the  rest. 

r  have  made  it  my  general  Observation,  That  where 
the  Land  is  fenced  with  steep  Rocks  and  Cliffs  against  the 
Sea,  there  the  Sea  is  very  deep,  and  seldom  affords  Anchor 
Ground ;  and  on  the  other  side  where  the  Land  falls  away 
with  a  declivity  into  the  Sea,  (altho*  the  Land  be  extra- 
ordinary high  within,)  yet  there  are  commonly  good 
Soundings,  and  consequently  Anchoring ;  and  as  the 
visible  declivity  of  the  Land  appears  near,  or  at  (he  edge 


L 


*  Jndilli  Datnpier.    She  was  olive  in  i?ov 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  of  the  Water,  whether  pretty  steep,  or  more  sloping,  so 
1687  ^g  commonly  find  our  Anchor-ground  to  be  more  or  less 
deep  or  steep;  therefore  we  come  nearer  the  Shore,  or 
anchor  farther  off,  as  we  see  convenient ;  for  there  b  no 
Coast  in  the  World,  that  I  know,  or  have  heard  of,  where 
the  Land  is  of  a  continual  heighth,  without  some  snull 
Valleys  or  Declivities,  which  lie  intermixt  with  the  Wgh 
Land.  They  are  the  subsidings  of  Valleys  or  low  Lands, 
that  make  Dents  in  the  Shore,  and  Creeks,  small  Bays,  and 
Harbours,  or  little  Coves,  &c.  which  afford  good  anchoring, 
the  surface  of  the  Earth  being  there  lodged  deep  under 
Water.  Thus  we  find  many  good  Harbours  on  such 
Coasts,  where  the  Land  bounds  the  Sea  with  steep  Clifis, 
by  reason  of  the  Declivities,  or  subsiding  of  the  Land 
between  these  Cliffs :  But  where  the  Declension  from  the 
Hills,  or  Cliffs,  s  not  within  Land,  between  Hill  and  Hill, 
but,  as  on  the  Coast  of  Chili  and  Peru,  the  Declivity  is 
toward  the  Main  Sea,  or  into  it,  the  Coast  being  per- 
pendicular, or  very  steep  from  the  neighbouring  EQUs,  is 
in  those  Countries  from  the  Andes,  that  run  along  the 
Shore,  there  is  a  deep  Sea,  and  few  or  no  Harbours,  or 
Creeks.  All  that  Coast  is  too  steep  for  anchoring,  and 
hath  the  fewest  Roads  fit  for  Ships  of  any  Coast  I  know. 
The  Coasts  of  Gallicia,  Portugal,  Norway  and  Newfound- 
land, &c.  are  Coasts  like  the  Peruvian,  and  the  high 
Islands  of  the  Archipelago ;  but  yet  not  so  scanty  of  good 
Harbours ;  for  where  there  are  short  Ridges  of  Land, 
there  are  good  Bays  at  the  extremities  of  those  Ridges^ 
where  they  plunge  into  the  Sea ;  as  on  the  Coast  of 
Caraccos,  &c.  The  Island  of  John  Fernando,  and  the 
Island  St.  Hellena,  &c.  are  such  high  Land  with  deep 
Shore:  and  in  general,  the  plunging  of  any  Land  under 
Water,  seems  to  be  in  proportion  to  the  rising  of  its 
continuous  part  above  Water,  more  or  less  steep ;  and  it 
must  be  a  bottom  almost  level,  or  very  gently  declining, 
that  affords  good  Anchoring,  Ships  being  soon  driven  from  j 
their  Moorings  on  a  steep  Bank :  Therefore  we  never  . 
strive  to  anchor  where  we  see  the  Land  high,  and  bounding  ] 
the  Sea  with  steep  Cliffs ;    and  for  this  reason,  when  it    '< 

418  , 


j 


I 


HIGH    SHORES    AND   DEEP   SEAS  ■ 

came  in  sight  of  Statcn  Island  near  Terra  del  Fuego,  before   ah. 
wc  entered  into  the  South  Seas,  we  did  not  so  much  as  '^' 
think  of  anchoring  after  wc  saw  what  Land  it  was,  because 
of  the  steep  Cliffs  which  appeared  against  the  Sea ;    yet    ^H 
there  might  be  little  Harbours  or  Coves  for  Shallops,  or     ^H 
the  like,  to  anchor  in,  which  we  did  not  see  or  search  after.    ^H 

As  high  steep  Cliffs  bounding  on  the  Sea  have  this  ill  ^H 
consequence,  that  they  seldom  afford  anchoring ;  so  they  ^H 
have  this  heneJit,  that  wc  can  see  them  far  off,  and  sail  ^H 
close  to  them,  without  danger:  for  which  reason  wc  call  ^H 
them  bold  Shores ;  whereas  low  land  on  the  contrary,  is  ^H 
seen  but  a  little  way,  and  in  many  places  we  dare  not  ^H 
come  near  it,  for  fear  of  running  aground  before  we  sec  it.  ^| 
Besides,  there  arc  in  many  places  Shoals  thrown  out  by  the  ^| 
course  of  great  Rivers,  that  from  the  low  Land  fall  into  ^M 
the  Sea.  ^M 

This    which   I    have  said,    that  there  is  usually  good    ^H 
anchoring  near  low  Lands,  may  be  illustrated  by  several    ^H 
Instances.       Thus    on    the     South     side    of    the    Bay    of     ^| 
Campcachy,  there  is  mostly  low  Land,  and  there  also  is      H 
good  Mchoring  all  along  Shore ;  and  in  some  places  to  the      ■ 
Kastward  of  the  Town  of  Campeachy,  we  shall  have  so 
many  fathom  as  we  arc  Leagues  off^  from  Land ;  that  is, 
from  9  or    lO   Leagues   distance    till   you    come   within   4 
Leagues:  and  from  thence  to  Land  it  grows  but  shallower. 
The   Bay  of  Honduras  also  is   low   Land,  and  continues 
m'Mtly  so,  as  wc  past  along  from  thence  to  the  Coasts  of 
Portobei,  and  Cartagena,  till    we  came  as  high  as  Santa 
Martha;  afterwards  the  Land  is  low  again,  till  you  come 
towards  the  Coast  of  Caraccos,  which  is  a  high  Coast  and 
bold  Shore.     The  Land  about  Surinam  on  the  same  Coast 
Is  low  and  good  anchoring,  and  that  over  on  the  Coast  of 
Guinea  is  such  also.     And  such  tcxi  is  the  Bay  of  Panama, 
where  the  Pilot<Book  orders  the  Pilot  always  to  sound,  and 
not  to  come  within  such  a  depth,  be  it  by  Night  or  Day. 
In  the  same  Seas,  from  the  hit^h   Land   of  Guatimala  iti 
Mexico,  to  California,  there  is  mostly  low  Land  and  good 
Anchoring.     In  the  Main  of  Asia,  on  the  Coast  of  China, 
the   Bay    of    Siam    and    Bengal,    and    all    the   Coast    of  , 
♦  19 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Coromandel,  and  the  Coast  about  Malacca,  and  against  it 
'^^7  the  Island  Sumatra,  on  that  side,  are  mostly  low  anchoring 
Shores.  But  on  the  West-side  of  Sumatra,  the  Shore  is 
high  and  bold ;  so  most  of  the  Islands  lying  to  the  East- 
ward of  Sumatra ;  as  the  Islands  Borneo,  Celebes,  Gilolo, 
and  abundance  of  Islands  of  less  note,  lying  scattering  up 
and  down  those  Seas,  are  low  Land,  and  have  good  anchor- 
ing about  them,  with  many  Shoals  scattered  to  and  fro 
among  them  ;  but  the  Islands  lying  against  the  East- 
Indian  Ocean,  especially  the  West  sides  of  them,  are  high 
Land  and  steep,  particularly  the  West-parts,  not  only  of 
Sumatra,  but  also  of  Java,  Timor,  &c.  Particulars  are 
endless;  but  in  general,  'tis  seldom  but  high  Shores  and 
deep  Waters  ;  and  on  the  other  side,  low  Land  and  shallow 
Seas,  are  found  together. 

But  to  return  from  this  Digression,  to  speak  of  the 
rest  of  these  Islands.  Monmouth  and  Grafton  Isles  are 
very  hilly,  with  many  of  those  steep  inhabited  Precipices 
on  them,  that  I  shall  describe  particularly.  The  two 
small  Islands  are  flat  and  even ;  only  the  Bashee  Island 
hath  one  steep  scraggy  Hill,  but  Goat  Island  is  all  flat  and 
very  even. 

The  Mold  of  these  Islands  in  the  Valley,  is  blackish 
in  some  places,  but  in  most  red.  The  Hills  are  very 
rocky :  The  Valleys  are  well  watered  with  Brooks  of  fresh 
Water ;  which  run  into  the  Sea  in  many  diff^erent  places. 
The  Soil  is  indifi^erent  fruitful,  especially  in  the  Valleys; 
producing  pretty  great  plenty  of  Trees  (tho*  not  very  big) 
and  thick  Grass.  The  sides  of  the  Mountains  have  also 
short  Grass ;  and  some  of  the  Mountains  have  Mines 
within  them,  for  the  Natives  told  us.  That  the  yellow 
Metal  they  shewed  us,  (as  I  shall  speak  more  particularly) 
came  from  these  Mountains;  for  when  they  held  it  up 
they  would  point  towards  them. 

The  Fruit  of  the  Islands  are  a  few  Plantains,  Bonanoes, 
Pine-apples,  Pumkins,  Sugar-canes,  &c.  and  there  might  be 
more  if  the  natives  would,  for  the  ground  seems  fertile 
enough.  Here  are  great  plenty  of  Potatoes,  and  Yames, 
which   is  the  common  Food  for  the  Natives,  for  Bread- 

420 


INHABITANTS   OF  THE   BASHEE   ISLES 

kind :  For  those  few  Plantains  they  have,  ire  only  used  ak 
as  Fruit.  They  have  some  Cotton  growing  here  of  the  '*''7 
small  Plants. 

Mere  arc  plenty  of  Goats,  and  abundance  of  Hogs ; 
but  few  Fowls,  cither  wild  or  tame.  For  this  I  have 
always  observed  in  my  Travels,  both  in  the  East  and 
West  Indies,  that  in  those  Places  where  there  is  plenty  of 
Grain,  that  is,  of  Rice  in  one,  and  Maiz  in  the  other,  there 
are  also  found  great  abundance  of  Fowls ;  but  on  the 
contrary,  few  Fowls  in  those  Countries  where  the  Inhabi- 
tants feed  on  Fruits  and  Roots  only.  The  few  wild  Fowls 
that  are  here  are  Parakites,  and  some  other  small  Birds. 
Their  tame  Fowl  are  only  a  few  Cocks  and  Hens. 

Monmouth  and  Grafton  Islands  arc  very  thick  in- 
habited ;  and  Bashee  Island  hath  one  Town  on  it.  The 
Natives  of  these  Islands  arc  short  squat  People  ;  they  are 
generally  round  visagfd,  with  low  Foreheads,  and  thick 
rlyc-brows;  their  Eyes  of  a  hazel  colour,  and  small,  yet 
bigger  than  the  Chinese ;  short  low  Noses,  and  their  Lips 
and  Mouths  middle  proportioned  ;  Their  Teeth  are  white; 
their  Hair  is  black,  and  thick,  and  lank,  which  they  wear 
but  short;  it  will  just  cover  their  Ears,  and  so  it  is  cut 
round  very  even.  Their  Skins  are  of  a  very  dark  copper 
colour. 

TTiey  wear  no  Hat,  Cap,  nor  Turbat,  nor  any  thing  to 
keep  off  the  Sun.  The  Men  for  the  biggest  part  have 
only  a  small  Clout  to  cover  their  Nakedness;  some  of 
them  have  Jackets  made  of  Plantain-leaves,  which  were  as 
rough  as  any  Bear's  skin  :  1  never  saw  such  rugged  Things. 
The  Women  have  a  short  Petticoat  made  of  Cotton,  which 
comes  a  little  below  their  Knees.  It  is  a  thick  sort  of 
«ubborn  Cloth,  which  they  make  themselves  of  their 
Cotton,  Both  Men  and  Women  do  wear  large  Ear-rings, 
made  of  that  yellow  Metal  before  mentioned.  Whether  it 
were  Gold  or  no  1  cannot  positively  say ;  I  took  it  to  be 
so,  it  was  heavy  and  of  the  colour  of  our  paler  Gold.  I 
Would  fain  have  brought  away  some  to  have  satisfial  my 
Ciiriosity ;  but  I  had  nothing  wherewith  to  buy  any. 
Captain  Read  bought  two  of  these  Rings  with  some  Iron, 
4.21 


I 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AX.  of  which  the  People  are  very  greedy ;  and  he  would  have 
'^'  bought  more,  thinking  he  was  come  to  a  very  fair  Market, 
but  that  the  paleness  of  the  Metal  made  him  and  his  Crew 
distrust  its  being  right  Gold.  For  my  part,  I  should  have 
ventured  on  the  purchase  of  some,  but  having  no  property 
in  the  Iron,  of  which  we  had  great  store  on  board,  sent 
from  England,  by  the  Merchants  along  with  Giptain  Swan, 
I  durst  not  barter  it  away. 

These  Rings  when  first  polished  look  very  gloriously, 
but  time  makes  them  fade,  and  turn  to  a  pale  yellow. 
Then  they  make  a  soft  Paste  of  Red  Earth,  and  smearing 
it  over  their  Rings,  they  cast  them  into  a  quick  Fire, 
where  they  remain  till  they  be  red  hot;  then  they  take 
them  out  and  cool  them  in  Water,  and  rub  off  the  Past ; 
and  they  look  again  of  a  glorious  Colour  and  Lustre. 

These  People  make  but  small  low  Houses.  The  Sides 
which  are  made  of  small  Posts,  watled  with  Boughs,  are 
not  above  4  Foot  and  a  half  high  :  the  Ridge-pole  is  about 
7  or  8  foot  high.  They  have  a  Fire-place  at  one  end  of 
their  Houses,  and  Boards  placed  on  the  Ground  to  lye  on. 
They  inhabit  tc^ether  in  small  Villages  built  on  the  sides 
and  tops  of  rocky  Hills,  3  or  4  rows  of  Houses  one  above 
another,  and  on  such  steep  Precipices,  that  they  go  up  to 
the  first  Row  with  a  wooden  Ladder,  and  so  with  a  Ladder 
still  from  every  Stor}'  up  to  that  above  it,  there  being  no 
way  to  ascend.  The  Plain  on  the  first  Precipice  may  be 
so  wide,  as  to  have  room  both  for  a  Row  of  Houses  that 
stand  all  along  on  the  Edge  or  Brink  of  it,  and  a  very 
narrow  Street  running  along  before  their  Doors,  between 
the  Row  of  Houses  and  the  foot  of  the  next  Precipice  ; 
the  Plain  of  which  is  in  a  manner  level  to  the  tops  of  the 
Houses  below,  and  so  for  the  rest.  The  common  Ladder 
to  each  Row  or  Street  comes  up  at  a  narrow  Passage  left 
purposely  about  the  middle  of  it ;  and  the  Street  being 
bounded  with  a  Precipice  also  at  each  end,  'tis  but  drawing 
up  the  Ladder,  if  they  be  assaulted,  and  then  there  is  no 
coming  at  them  from  below,  but  by  climbing  up  as  against 
a  perpendicular  Wall  :  And  that  they  may  not  be  assaulted 
from  above,  they  take  care  to  build  on  the  side  of  such 

422 


THEIR    BOATS,    FISHING,   FOOD 

a  Hill,  whose  bacltwde  hangs  over  the  Sea,  or  U  some  ak. 
high,  steep,  perpendicular  Precipice,  altogether  inaccessible.  '^' 
These  Precipices  are  natural ;  for  the  Rocks  seem  too  hard 
to  wijrk  on ;  nor  is  there  any  sign  that  art  hath  been 
employed  about  them.  On  Bashce  Island  there  is  one 
such,  and  built  upon,  with  its  back  next  the  Sea.  Grafton 
and  Monmouth  Isles  are  very  thick  set  with  these  Hills 
and  Towns ;  and  the  Natives,  whether  for  fear  of  Pirates, 
or  Foreign  Enemies,  or  Factions  among  their  own  Clans, 
care  not  for  Building  but  in  these  Fastnesses ;  which  1  take 
to  be  the  Reason  that  Orange  Isle,  though  the  largest,  and 
as  fertile  as  any,  yet  being  level,  and  exposed,  hath  no 
Inhabitants.     I  never  saw  the  like  Precipices  and  Towns. 

These  People  are  pretty  Ingenious  also  in  building 
Boats.  Their  small  Boats  arc  much  like  our  Deal  Tails, 
but  not  so  big  ;  and  they  arc  built  with  very  narrow  Plank, 
pinn'd  with  wooden  Pins,  and  some  Nails.  They  have  also 
some  pretty  large  Boats,  which  will  carry  40  or  50  Men. 
These  they  Row  with  12  or  14  Oars  of  a  side.  They  arc 
built  much  like  the  small  ones,  and  they  Row  double 
Banked ;  that  is,  two  Men  setting  on  one  Bench,  but  one 
Rowing  on  one  side,  the  other  on  the  other  side  of  the 
Boat.  They  understand  the  use  of  Iron,  and  work  it 
ibemselves.     Their  Bellows  arc  like  those  at  Mindanao. 

The  common  Imploymcnt  for  the  Men  is  Fishing ;  but 
I  did  never  sec  them  catch  much :  Whether  it  is  more 
plenty  at  other  limes  of  the  Year  I  know  not.  The 
Women  do  nunage  their  Plantations. 

I  did  never  sec  them  kill  any  of  their  Goats  or  Hogs 
for  themselves,  yet  they  would  beg  the  Paunches  of  the 
Goats  that  they  themselves  did  sell  to  us:  And  if  any  of 
our  surly  Seamen  did  heave  them  into  the  Sea,  they  would 
lake  them  up  again  and  the  Skins  of  the  Goats  also.  They 
would  not  meddle  with  Hogs-guts,  if  our  Men  threw  away 
any  besides  what  they  made  Chitterlings  and  Sausages  of. 


The  t>«al  yawl  U  buill  spMially  Tor  biunchinK  fron  [)cal  bcacb,  "fox 

■ -*-  ■  *• —  "  ---*  -amctinic*  the  »ca  nin*  high 

were  not  good  wholtsonu! 


then  it  a  Mronjt  ><dc,'  uys  Uampiet,  "Bnd  tomctinic*  the  *ca  nuu  high 
■nd  rofftag  which  would  sink  ihcm  if  they 


4»3 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  The  Gfoat-sldns  these  People  would  carry  ashore,  and 
'^7  making  a  Fire  they  would  singe  off  all  the  Hair,  and  after- 
wards let  the  Skin  lie  and  parch  on  the  Coals,  till  they 
thought  it  eatable ;  and  then  they  would  gnaw  it,  and  tear 
it  in  pieces  with  their  Teeth,  and  at  last  swallow  it.  The 
Paunches  of  the  Goats  would  make  them  an  excellent  Dish ; 
they  drest  it  in  this  manner.  They  would  turn  out  all  the 
chopt  Grass  and  Cru(tities  found  in  the  Maw  into  their 
Pots,  and  set  it  over  the  Fire,  and  stir  it  about  often :  This 
would  Smoak  and  Puff,  and  heave  up  as  it  was  Boyling ; 
wind  brealdng  out  of  the  Ferment,  and  making  a  very 
savory  Stink.  While  this  was  doing,  if  they  had  any  Fish, 
as  commonly  they  had  2  or  3  small  Fish,  these  they  would 
make  very  clean  (as  hating  Nastiness  belike)  and  cut  the 
Flesh  from  the  Bone,  and  then  mince  the  Fl^  as  small  as 
possibly  they  could,  and  when  that  in  the  Pot  was  well 
Doiled,  they  would  take  it  up,  and  stremng  a  little  Salt  into 
it,  they  would  eat  it,  mixt  with  their  raw  minced  Flesh. 
The  Dung  in  the  Maw  would  look  like  so  much  hcnVd  Herbs 
minc*d  very  small ;  and  they  took  up  their  Mess  with 
their  Fingers,  as  the  Moors  do  their  KUaw,  using  no  Spoons. 
They  had  another  Dish  made  of  a  sort  of  Locusts, 
whose  Bodies  were  about  an  Inch  and  an  half  long,  and 
as  thick  as  the  top  of  one*s  little  Finger ;  with  large  thin 
Wings,  and  long  and  small  Legs.  At  this  time  of  the 
Year  these  Creatures  came  in  great  Swarms  to  devour  their 
Potato-leaves,  and  other  Herbs ;  and  the  Natives  would  go 
out  with  small  Nets,  and  take  a  Quart  at  one  sweep.  When 
they  had  enough,  they  would  carry  them  home,  and  parch 
them  over  the  Fire  in  an  earthen  Pan  ;  and  then  their 
Wings  and  Legs  would  fall  off,  and  their  Heads  and  Backs 
would  turn  red  like  boil'd  Shrimps,  being  before  brownish. 
Their  Bodies  being  full,  would  eat  very  moist,  their  Heads 
would  crackle  in  one's  Teeth.  I  did  once  eat  of  this  Dish, 
and  liked  it  well  enough  ;  but  their  other  Dish  my  Stomach 
would  not  take. 

Their  common  Drink  is  Water;  as  it  is  of  all  other 
Indians :  Besides  which  they  make  a  sort  of  Drink  with  the 
Juice  of  the  Sugar-cane,  which  they  boil,  and  put  some 

424 


L 


BASHEE   LIQUOR— THEIR   LANGUAGE 
small   black  sort  of  Berries  among  it.     When  it  is  well    an. 
bcnlcd,  they  put  it  into  great  Jars,  and  let  it  stand  3  or  4  '^^' 
days  and  work.     Then  it  settles,  and  becomes  clear,  and  is 
presently  fit  to  drink.     This  is  an  excellent  Liquor,  and 
very  much  like  English  Beer,  both   in  Colour  and  Taste. 
It  is  very  strong,  and  I  do  believe  very  wholesome  :  For  our 
Men,  who  drank  briskly  of  it  all  day  for  several  Weeks,  were 
frequently  drunk  with  it,  and   never  sick  after  it.     The 
Natives  brought  a  vast  deal  of  it  every  day  to  those  aboard 
and  ashore :  P'or  some  of  our  Men  were  ashore  at  work  on 
Bashce  Island  ;  which  Island  they  gave  that  Name  to  from 
their  drinking   this  Liquor  there ;  that  being  the    Name 
which  the  Natives  call'd  this  Liquor  by:  and  as  they  sold 
it  to  our  Men  very  cheap,  so  they  did  not  spare  to  drink  it 
as  freely.     And  indeed  from  the  plenty  of  this  Liquor,  and 
tbeir  plentiful  use  of  it,  our  Men  call'd  all  these  Islands,  . 
the  Bashee  Islands. 

What  Language  these  People  do  speak  I  know  not: 
for  it  had  no  affinity  in  sound  to  the  Chinese,  which  is 
spoke  much  through  the  Teeth;  nor  yet  to  the  Malayan 
Language.  They  called  the  Metal  that  their  Ear-rings 
were  made  of  Bullawan,  which  is  the  Mindanao  word  for 
Gold ;  therefore  probably  they  may  be  related  to  the 
Philippine  Indians ;  for  that  is  the  general  Name  for  gold 
among  all  those  Indians.  I  could  not  learn  from  whence 
they  have  their  Iron ;  but  it  is  most  likely  they  go  in  their 
great  Boats  to  the  North  end  of  Luconia,  and  Trade  with 
the  Indians  of  that  Island  for  it.  Neither  did  I  see  any 
thing  beside  Iron,  and  pieces  of  Buffaloes  Hides,  which  I 
could  judge  that  they  lK)ught  of  Strangers:  Their  Cloaths 
were  of  their  own  Growth  and  Manufacture, 

These  Men  had  Wooden  Lances,  and  a  few  Lances 
headed  with  Iron;  which  arc  all  the  Weapons  that  they 
have.  Their  Armour  is  a  piece  of  Buffatoe-hide,  shaped 
like  our  Carters  Frocks,  being  without  Sleeves,  and  sewed 
both  sides  together,  with  holes  for  the  Head  and  the  Arms 
la  come  forth.  This  Buff-Coat  reaches  down  to  their 
Knees:  It  is  close  about  their  Shoulders,  but  below  it  is  3 
Foot  wide,  and  as  thick  as  a  Board. 
425 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  I  could  never  perceive  them  to  Worship  any  thing, 
»6S7  neither  had  they  any  Idols;  neither  did  they  seem  to 
observe  any  one  day  more  than  other.  I  could  never 
perceive  that  one  Man  was  of  greater  Power  than  another  ; 
but  they  seemed  to  be  all  equal ;  only  every  Man  ruling  in 
his  own  House,  and  the  Children  Respecting  and  Honour- 
ing their  Parents. 

Yet  'tis  probable  that  they  have  some  Law,  or  Custom, 
by  which  they  are  governed ;  for  while  we  lay  here  we  saw 
a  young  Man  buried  alive  in  the  Earth ;  and  'twas  for 
Theft,  as  far  as  we  could  understand  from  them.  There 
was  a  great  deep  hole  dug,  and  abundance  of  People  came 
to  the  Place  to  take  their  last  Farewell  of  him :  Among  the 
rest,  there  was  one  Woman  who  made  great  Lamentation, 
and  took  off  the  condemned  Person's  Ear-rings.  We  sup- 
posed her  to  be  his  Mother.  After  he  had  taken  his  leave 
of  her  and  some  others,  he  was  put  into  the  Pit,  and  covered 
over  with  Earth.  He  did  not  struggle,  but  yielded  very 
quietly  to  his  Punishment ;  and  they  cramm'd  the  Earth 
close  upon  him,  and  stifled  him. 

They  have  but  one  Wife,  with  whom  they  live  and 
agree  very  well ;  and  their  Children  live  very  Obediently 
under  them.  The  Boys  go  out  a  Fishing  with  their  Fathers  ; 
and  the  Girls  live  at  home  with  their  Mothers :  And  when 
the  Girls  are  grown  pretty  strong,  they  send  them  to  their 
Plantations,  to  dig  Yames  and  Potatoes  ;  of  which  they 
bring  home  on  their  Heads  every  day  enough  to  serve  the 
whole  Family  ;  for  they  have  no  Rice  nor  Maiz. 

Their  Plantations  are  in  the  Valleys,  at  a  good  distance 
from  their  Houses;  where  every  Man  has  a  certain  spot 
of  Land,  which  is  properly  his  own.  This  he  manageth 
himself  for  his  own  use  ;  and  provides  enough,  that  he 
may  not  be  beholding  to  his  Neighbour. 

Notwithstanding  the  seeming  nastiness  of  their  Dish  of 
Goats  Maw,  they  are  in  their  Persons  a  very  neat  cleanly 
People,  both  Men  and  Women :  And  they  are  withal  the 
quietest  and  civilest  People  that  I  did  ever  meet  with.  I 
could  never  perceive  them  to  be  angry  with  one  another. 
I  have  admired  to  see  20  or  30  Boats  aboard  our  Ship  at  a 

426 


I 


I 


THE  MANNERS  OF  THE   BASHEANS 

time,  and  yet  no  difference  among  them;  but  all  civil  and  an. 
quiet,  endeavouring  to  help  each  other  on  occasion  :  No  '' 
noise,  nor  appearance  of  distaste:  and  although  sometimes 
cross  Accidents  would  happen,  which  might  have  set  other 
Men  together  by  the  Ears,  yet  they  were  not  moved  by 
them.  Sometimes  they  will  also  drink  freely,  and  warm 
themselves  with  their  Drink;  yet  neither  then  could  I  ever 
perceive  them  out  of  Humour.  They  are  not  only  thus 
civil  among  themselves,  but  very  obliging  and  kind  to 
Strangers;  nor  were  their  Children  rude  to  us,  as  is  usual. 
Indeed  the  Women,  when  we  came  to  their  Houses,  would 
modestly  beg  any  Rags  or  small  pieces  of  Cloth,  to  swaddle 
their  young  ones  in,  holding  their  Children  out  to  us ; 
and  begging  is  usual  among  all  these  wild  Nations.  Yet 
neither  did  they  beg  so  importunately  as  in  other  Places; 
nor  did  the  Men  ever  beg  any  thing  at  all.  Neither, 
except  once  at  the  first  time  that  we  came  to  an  Anchor 
(as  I  shall  relate)  did  they  steal  anything ;  but  dealt 
justly,  and  with  great  sincerity  with  us ;  and  made  us  very 
welcome  to  their  Houses  with  Bashee  drink.  If  they  had 
none  of  this  Liquor  themselves,  they  would  buy  a  Jar  of 
Drink  of  their  Neighbours,  and  sit  down  with  us :  for  we 
could  see  them  go  and  give  a  piece  or  two  of  their  Gold 
for  some  Jars  of  Bashee.  And  indeed  among  Wild  Indians 
as  these  seem  to  be,  I  wondcr'd  to  sec  buying  and  selling, 
which  is  not  so  usual ;  nor  to  converse  so  freely,  as  to  go 
aboard  Stranger's  Ships  with  so  little  caution  :  Yet  their  own 
small  Trading  may  have  brought  them  to  this.  At  these 
Entertainments,  they  and  their  Family,  Wife  and  Children 
drank  out  of  small  Calabashes :  and  when  by  themselves, 
they  drink  about  from  one  to  another ;  but  when  any  of  us 
camcamong  them,  then  they  would  always  drink  to  one  of  us. 
They  have  no  sort  of  Coin ;  but  they  have  small 
Crumbs  of  the  Metal  before  described,  which  they  bind  up 
very  safe  in  Plantain  Leaves,  or  the  like.  This  Metal  they 
exchange  for  what  they  want,  giving  a  small  quantity  of  it, 
about  a  or  3  Grains,  for  a  Jar  of  Drink,  that  would  hold 
5  or  6  Gallons.  They  have  no  Scales,  but  give  it  by 
guetl.     Thus  much  in  general. 


i____a 


•■  ■*-  '.  / 


CAPTAIN  DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AM.  To  proceed  thcfefore  mth  our  Affiurs:  I  have  aud 
1687  befone,  that  we  anchored  here  the  6th  day  of  Aagoat. 
While  we  were  furfing  oar  Ssub»  there  can^  near  100 
Boats  c^  the  Nadves  aboardy  mth  3  or  4  Men  in  each ;  so 
that  our  Deck  was  fiill  of  Men.  We  were  at  first  afraid 
of  them^  and  therefore  got  up  20  or  30  small  Arms  on 
our  Poopy  and  kept  3  <nr  4  Men  as  CentinelSy  with  Guns  in 
tiieir  Hands,  ready  to  fire  on  them  if  they  had  offered  to 
molest  us.  But  they  were  pretty  quiet,  ooly  they  pidkt 
up  such  old  Iron  that  they  found  on  our  Deck,  ami  they 
abo  took  out  our  Fump-Bolts,  and  lincb-Fins  out  of  the 
Carrisffes  of  our  Guns  before  we  pa:€rived  thenu  At  hut, 
one  of  our  Men  percdyed  one  of  them  very  busy  ffetting 
out  one  of  our  Lmch  Kns ;  and  took  hold  of  the  fetlow, 
who  immediately  bawl'd  out,  and  all  the  rest  presently 
leaped  over-board,  some  into  their  Boats^  others  into  the 
Sea ;  and  they  all  made  away  for  the  Shore  But  when  we 
perceived  thdr  Fright  we  made  much  of  lum  that  was 
m  hold,  who  stood  Trembling  all  the  while;  and  at  last 
we  gave  lum  a  small  fnece  ot  Iron,  mth  which  he  imme- 
diately leapt  overboard  and  swam  to  his  Consorts;  who 
hovered  about  our  ^ip  to  see  the  Issue.  Then  we 
beckned  to  them  to  come  aboard  again,  being  very  loth  to 
lose  a  Commerce  with  them.  Some  of  the  Boats  came 
aboard  again,  and  they  were  always  very  honest  and  civil 
afterwards. 

We  presently  after  this  sent  a  Canoa  ashore,  to  see 
their  manner  of  living,  and  what  Provision  they  had :  The 
Canoa's  Crew  were  made  very  welcome  with  Bashee  drink, 
and  saw  abundance  of  Hogs,  some  of  which  they  bought, 
and  returned  aboard.  After  this  the  Natives  brought  aboard 
both  Hogs  and  Goats  to  us  in  their  own  Boats ;  and  every 
day  we  should  have  1 5  or  20  Hogs  and  Goats  in  Boats 
aboard  by  our  side.  These  we  bought  for  a  small  matter ; 
we  could  buy  a  good  fat  Goat  for  an  old  Iron  Hoop,  and 
a  Hog  of  70  or  80  pound  weight  for  2  or  3  pound  of 
Iron.  Their  drink  also  they  brought  off  in  Jars,  which  we 
bought  for  old  Nails,  Spikes,  and  Leaden  Bullets.  Beside 
the   fore-mentioned   Commodities,    they    brought    aboard 

428 


I 


THEIR    BUSINESS   AT  THESE   ISLES         ■ 

gnat  quantities  of  Yams  and  Potatoes  ;  which  we  purchased    ah. 
for  Nails,  Spikes,  or   Bullcis.      It   was  one  Man's  work   to  '^' 
be  all  day  cutting  out  Bars  of  Iron  into  small  pieces  with  a 
cold  Chisel :   And  these   were   for   the  great   Purchases  of        I 
}~Iogs  and  Goats,  which  ihcy  would  not  sell  for  Nails,  as      ■ 
their  Drink  and  Roots,     We  never  let  them  know  what      M 
Store  we  have,  that  they  may  value  it  the  more.     Every 
morning,  as  soon  as  it  was  light,  they  would   thus  come 
aboard  with  their  Commodities;  which  we  bought  as  we 
had  occasion.     We  did  commonly  furnish  our  selves  with 
as  many  Goats  and  Roots  as  served  us  all  the  day;  and 
their  H<^s  we  bought  in  large  Quantities,  as  we  thought 
convenient ;  for  we  salted  them.     Their  Hogs  were  very    ^1 
sweet ;  but  I  never  saw  so  many  Meazled  ones.  ^M 

We  filled  all  our  Water  at  a  curious  Brook  close  by  us,    f 
in  Grafton's  Isle,  where  we  first  anchored.     We  stayed  there 
al>out  three  or  four  days,  before  we  went  to  other  Islands. 
Wc  sailed  to  the  Southward,  jiassing  on  the  ICast-side  of 
Grafton    Island,  and    then  passed  thro'  between   that  and 
Monmouth   Island  ;  but  wc  found   no  Anchoring  till  wc 
came  to  the  North  end  of  Monmouth  Island,  and  there  wc 
stopt  during  one  Tide.     The  Tide  runs  very  strong  here,     M 
and  sometimes  makes  a  short   chopping  Sea.     Its  course     H 
among  these  islands  is  S.  by  E.  and  N.  by  W,     The  Flood      U 
sets  to  the  North,  and  Ebb  to  the  South,  and  it  riseth  and 
falleth  8  Foot. 

When  we  went  from  hence,  we  coasted  about  2  Le^ues 
to  the  Southward,  on  the  West  side  of  Monmouth  Island  ;    J 
and    finding    no    Anchor-ground,    wc   stood    over    to    the     H 
Bishcc  Island,  and  came  to  an  Anchor  on  the  North  East      m 
part  of  it,  against  a  small  sandy  Bay,  in  7  fathom  clean 
hard  Sand,  and  about  a  quarter  of  a  Mile  from  the  Shore. 
Here  is  a  pretty  wide  Channel  between  these  two  Islands, 
and  Anchoring  all  over  it.     The  Depth  of  Water  is  12, 
14,  and  16  Fathom. 

Wc  presently  built  a  Tent  ashore,  to  mend  our  Sails 

in,  and  stay'd  all  the  rest  of  our  time  here,  viz.  from  the 

13th  day  of  August  till  the  l6th  day  of  September.     In 

which  time  wc  mended  our  Sails,  and  scrubbed  our  Shi[4 

429 


1 


CAPTAIN  DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AM.  bottom  very  well;  and  every  day  some  of  as  went  to 
'^7  their  Towns,  and  were  kindly  entertained  by  them.  Their 
Boats  also  came  aboard  widh  thmr  Merchandize  to  sell, 
and  lay  aboard  all  Day ;  and  if  we*  did  not  take  it  off 
their  Hands  one  day,  they  would  bring  the  same  again  the 
next. 

We  had  yet  the  Winds  at  S.  W.  and  S:&  W.  mostly 
fair  Weather.  In  October  we  did  escpect  the  Winds  to 
shift  to  the  N.  E.  and  therefore  we  provided  to  sail  (as  soon 
as  the  Eastern  Monsoon  was  settled)  to  cruize  off  of 
Manila.  Accordingly  we  provided  a  stock  of  Provision. 
We  salted  70  or  80  good  fat  Hc^  and  bought  Yams  and 
Potatoes  good  store  to  eat  at  Sea. 

About  the  24th  day  of  Srotember,  the  Winds  shifted 
about  to  the  East,  and  from  thence  to  the  N.  E.  fine  fkv 
Weathtf.  The  25th  it  came  at  N.  and  began  to  gt>w 
fresh,  and  the  Sky  began  to  be  clouded;  and  the  Wind 
freshned  on  us. 

At  12  a  clock  at  night  it  blew  a  very  fierce  Storm.  We 
were  then  ridingwith  our  best  Bower  a  Head,  and  though 
our  Yards  and  Top-mast  were  down,  yet  we  drove.  Tms 
obliged  us  to  let  go  our  Sheet- Anchor,  veering  out  a  good 
scope  of  Cable,  which  stopt  us  till  10  or  11  a  clock  the 
next  day.  Then  the  Wind  came  on  so  fierce,  that  she 
drove  again,  with  both  Anchors  a-head.  The  Wind  was 
now  at  N.  by  W.  and  we  kept  driving  till  3  or  4  a  clock  in 
the  afternoon :  And  it  was  well  for  us  that  there  were  no 
Islands,  Rocks,  or  Sands  in  our  way,  for  if  there  had,  we 
must  have  been  driven  upon  them.  We  used  our  utmost 
Endeavours  to  stop  her,  being  loath  to  go  to  Sea,  because 
we  had  six  of  oiu*  Men  ashore,  who  could  not  get  off  now. 
At  last  we  were  driven  out  into  deep  Water,  and  then  it 
was  in  vain  to  wait  any  longer :  Therefore  we  hove  in  our 
Sheet  Gible,  and  got  up  our  Sheet  Anchor,  and  cut  away 
our  best  Bower,  (for  to  have  heav*d  her  up  then  would 
have  gone  near  to  have  foundred  us)  and  so  put  to  Sea. 
We  had  very  violent  Weather  the  night  ensuing,  with  very 
hard  Rain,  and  we  were  forced  to  scud  with  our  bare  Poles 
till  3  a  Clock  in  the  morning.     Then  the  Wind  slackened, 

430 


I 


OF  SIX   ENGLISHMEN    LEFT   ASHORE 

and  we  brought  our  Ship  to,  under  a  mizen,  and  lay  with  / 
our  Head  to  the  Westward.  The  27th  day  the  Wind  " 
abated  much,  but  it  rained  very  hard  all  day,  and  the 
Night  ensuing.  The  28th  day  the  Wind  came  about  to 
the  N.  E.  and  it  cleared  up.  and  blew  a  hard  Gale,  but 
it  stood  not  there,  for  it  shifted  about  to  the  Eastward, 
thence  to  the  S.  E.  then  to  the  South,  and  at  last 
settled  at  S.  W.  and  then  we  had  a  moderate  Gale  and 
fair  Weather. 

It  was  the  19th  day  when  the  Wind  came  to  the  S.  W. 
Then  we  made  all  the  Sail  we  could  for  the  Island  again. 
The  30th  day  we  had  the  Wind  at  West,  and  saw  the 
Islands ;  but  could  not  get  in  before  night.  Therefore 
we  stood  off  to  the  Southward  till  two  a  Clock  in  the 
Morning ;  then  we  taekt  and  stood  in  all  the  morning,  and 
about  12  a  clock,  the  ist  day  of  October,  wc  anchored 
again  at  the  place  from  whence  we  were  driven. 

Then  our  six  Men  were  brought  aboard  by  the  Natives,  ' 
to  whom  we  gave  3  whole  Bars  of  Iron,  for  their  kindness 
and  civility,  which  was  an  extraordinary  Present  to  them. 
Mr.  Robert  Hall  was  one  of  the  Men  that  was  left  ashore. 
I  shall  speak  more  of  him  hereafter.  He  and  the  rest  of 
them  told  me,  that  after  the  Ship  was  out  of  sight,  the 
Natives  began  to  be  more  kind  to  them  than  they  had 
been  before,  and  pcrswaded  them  to  cut  their  Hair  short, 
as  theirs  was,  offering  to  each  of  them  if  they  would  do  it, 
a  young  Woman  to  Wife,  and  a  small  Hatchet,  and  other 
Iron  Utensils,  fit  for  a  Planter,  in  Dowry;  and  wiihal 
shewed  them  a  piece  of  Land  for  them  to  manage.  They 
were  courted  thus  by  several  of  the  Town  where  they  then 
were :  but  they  took  up  their  head  quarters  at  the  House 
of  him  with  whom  they  first  went  ashore.  When  the 
Ship  appeared  in  sight  again,  then  they  importuned  them 
for  some  Iron,  which  is  the  chief  thing  that  they  covet, 
even  above  their  Ear-rings.  We  might  have  bought  all  1 
their  Ear-rings,  or  other  Gold  they  had,  with  our  Iron- 
^L  bare,  had  wc  been  assured  of  its  goodness ;  and  yet  when  it 
^M  was  touch'd  and  compared  with  other  Gold,  we  could 
^^      not   discern  any  difference,  tho'  it  looked  so  pale  in    the 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   lump ;  but  the  seeing  them  polish  it  so  often  was  a  new 

«687  discouragement. 

This  last  Storm  put  our  Men  quite  out  of  heart :  for 
although  it  was  not  altogether  so  fierce  as  that  which  we 
were  in  on  the  Gxist  of  China,  which  was  still  fresh  in 
Memory,  yet  it  wrought  more  powerfully,  and  frighted 
them  from  their  design  of  cruising  before  Manila,  fearing 
another  Storm  there.  Now  every  Man  wisht  himself  at 
home,  as  they  had  done  an  hundred  times  before:  But 
Captain  Read,  and  Captain  Teat  the  Master,  perswaded 
them  to  go  towards  Cape  Comorin,*  and  then  they  would 
tell  them  more  of  their  Minds,  intending  doubtless  to 
cruize  in  the  Red  Sea;  and  they  easily  prev^led  with 
the  Crew. 

The  Eastern  Monsoon  was  now  at  hand,  and  the  best 
way  had  been  to  go  through  the  Streights  of  Malacca  :  but 
Captain  Teat  said  it  was  dangerous,  by  reason  of  many 
Islands  and  Shoals  there,  with  which  none  of  us  were 
acquainted.  Therefore  he  thought  it  best  to  go  round  on 
the  East-side  of  all  the  Philippine  Islands,'  and  so  keeping 
South  toward  the  Spice  Islands,  to  pass  out  into  the  East- 
Indian  Ocean  about  the  Island  Timor. 

This  seem'd  to  be  a  very  tedious  way  about,  and  as 
dangerous  altogether  for  Shoals ;  but  not  for  meeting  with 
English  or  Dutch  Ships,  which  was  their  greatest  Fear.  I 
was  well  enough  satisfied,  knowing  that  the  farther  we 
went,  the  more  Knowledge  and  Experience  I  should  get, 
which  was  the  main  Thing  that  I  regarded  ;  and  should  also 
have  the  more  variety  of  Places  to  attempt  an  Escape  from 
them,  being  fully  resolv'd  to  take  the  first  opportunity  of 
giving  them  the  slip. 

■  The  southern  extremity  of  India. 

-  The  reason  Captain  Teat  gave  seems  insufficient.  He  may  have 
thoiij(ht  the  route  ina  the  Moluccas  and  the  Banda  Sea  more  likely  to 
afTord  him  refreshment,  and  quiet  anchorajjes.  Or  he  may  have  had  hopes 
of  estal)lishinj(  a  trade  at  some  spice  island  not  then  annexed  by  the  Dutch. 
The  route  he  chose  was  less  frequented  than  the  other,  and  he  may  have 
chosen  it  to  avoid  Dutch  and  English  vessels,  as  Dampier  suggests  a  few 
lines  lower  down. 


432 


CHAP.   XVI 

■  7*A/^  dtfart  from  tht  Baihtt  ttlanils,  and  passing  ty  sontr  alhrrt^ 
and  tht  N.  End  of  Lucenia.  St.  Jahn'i  Itit,  and  aihrr  tf  ikf 
Phi/lifiinn.  They  stop  at  tht  two  hl/s  ntar  Mindanat ;  whtrt 
they  rf-fil  ihrir  Ship,  and  mate  a  Pump  afttr  tht  Spanish  fashitn. 
By  iht  pung  Princt  nf  tht  Spiti  Is/and  ihty  have  Wnvi  »f  Captain 
Sivan,  and  hit  Attn,  lift  at  Mindanao.  The  Author  propaui  to 
tht  Crew  to  return  to  him  \  but  in  vain  :  Tht  Story  of  his  Murdtr 
at  Mindanao.  The  C/ave-lUands.  Ttrnait.  Tidore,  t^t.  Tht 
Ithnd  Ciltbeiy  and  Dutch  Town  of  Mataatr.  Thty  Coast  aiong 
tht  East  sidt  of  Ctlthtt,  and  betwttn  it  and  other  Islandi  and  Sholrt, 
with  great  difficulty.  Shy  Turtlf.  Fait  Cocklts.  A  wild  Vint  of 
great  Virtue  for  Sorts.  Gnat  Trees;  oni  txctssivtly  big.  Btacons 
intttad  of  Buoys  on  the  Shales.  A  Spaut :  a  Description  of  them, 
with  a  Story  of  ant.  Uncertain  Tornadoes.  Turtle,  The  Island 
Bmton,  and  its  chief  Town  and  Harbour  Callasusung.  The  In- 
habilaHli,  Fitits  given  and  receiv'd  by  the  Sultan.  Hit  Device  in 
the  Flag  of  his  Prie:  His  Guards,  Habit,  and  Children.  Their 
Ctmmeree.  Their  different  esteem  {as  they  pretend)  of  the  English 
and  Dutch.  Marilimt  Indians  sell  others  for  Slaves.  Their 
Rtteptim  in  tht  Town.  A  Boy  with  4  rntis  of  Teeth.  Paraiitei, 
I  Crteiadores,  a  sort  of  IVhite  Parrots,  They  pass  among  other 
>  Inhabited  Islands,  Omba,  Pentare,  Timore,  isfc.  Sholeu  New- 
Htlland  ;  laid  down  too  much  Northward.  In  Soil,  and  Dragen- 
irtts.  The  poor  IViniing  Inhabitants :  their  Feathers,  Habit, 
Food,  Arms,  ifc.  The  way  of  fetching  Fire  out  of  ffood.  Tht 
Inhabitants  on  the  Islands.  Their  Habitations,  Unfiinest  for 
Labmr,  iJe.  Tht  grtat  Tidti  htrt.  They  detign  for  tht  Island 
Cm**,  and  Cap*  Comarin. 

THE  third  Day  of  October  1687,  wc  sailed  from    an. 
these    Islands,    standing   to  the  Southward ;  in-   '^7 
tending  to  sail  through  among  the  Spice  Islands. 
Wc   had  fair  Weather,  and  3ie  Wind  at  West. 
We  first  steered  S.  S.  W.  and   passed  close  by  certain  small 
voi-l.  433  1  t 


L 


CAFTADi    DAMPIER^  VOYAGES 


AST.  L:iaads  dat  he  =usr  bf  de  NorA-cad  of  die  Uud 
'^*  Loooca.  We  Ldft  them  all  OB  die  West  of  os^  and  post  on 
rbr  Ejsc-saie  of  it,  and  the  rest  of  die  FU^iiiuie  Ishiids^ 
ccassDg  to  t£ie  Sootlnmd. 

The  N.  Exscrcod  of  die  Umd  Ijorwnii  appcas  to  be 
good  CbampoB  Laad,  of  an  mdifinnt  h^g^idi,  plain  and 
cren  for  manT  Leagues;  onlj  it  has  aoine  pretty  U^ 
Hills,  ^nifciifg  apright  bf  thimwlits  in  dwae  Flaina;  Imt 
no  ridges  of  Hilh;»  or  doins  of  Binqntains  joymng  one  to 
another.  The  Land  on  tins  aide  seems  to  he  moat  Savannah, 
or  Pasture:  The  S  E.  part  is  more  Mountainous  and 
Woody. 

Leaving  the  Island  fjnmnia,  and  with  it  our  Golden 
Projects,  we  suled  cm  to  the  Southward,  paauig  on  the 
East-side  of  the  rest  of  the  Philippine  fahnds.  These 
appear  to  be  more  Mountaunoos^  and  km  Woody,  till 
we  came  in  sight  of  the  Island  St.  John;  the  first  of 
that  name  I  mentioned :  the  other  I  spake  of  on  the  GMst 
of  China.  This  I  have  already  described  to  be  a  very 
woody  Island.  Here  the  Wind  coming  Southerly,  forced 
us  to  keep  futher  from  the  Islands. 

The  14th  day  of  October  we  came  close  by  a  small  low 
woody  Island,  that  lieth  East  from  the  S.  E.  end  of 
Mindanao,  disunt  from  it  about  20  Leagues.  I  do  not  find 
it  set  down  in  any  Sea-Chart. 

The  1 5  th  day  we  had  the  Wind  at  N.  E.  and  we  steered 
West  for  the  Island  Mindanao,  and  arrived  at  the  S.  E.  end 
again  on  the  i6th  day.  There  we  went  in  and  anchored 
between  two  small  Islands,  which  lie  in  about  5  d.  10  m. 
North  Lat.  I  mentioned  them  when  we  first  came  on  this 
Coast.  Here  we  found  a  fine  small  Cove,  on  the  N.  W. 
end  of  the  Eastermost  Island,  fit  to  careen  in,  or  hale 
ashore ;  so  we  went  in  there,  and  presently  unrigg'd  our  Ship, 
and  provided  to  hale  our  Ship  ashore,  to  clean  her  bottom. 
These  Islands  are  about  3  or  4  Leagues  from  the  Island 
Mindanao ;  they  are  about  4  or  5  Leagues  in  Circumference, 
and  of  a  pretty  good  heighth.  The  Mold  is  black  and 
deep ;  and  there  are  two  small  Brooks  of  fresh  Water. 

They  are  both  plentifully  stored  with  great  high  Trees ; 

434 


I 
I 
I 


I 


i 


W^m  SPANISH    PUMPS  ^HH 

B^K  t-r.   <^H 

therefore  our  Carpenters  were  sent  ashore  to  cut  down  some    ak. 
of  them  for  our  use ;  for  here  they  made  a  new  Boltsprit,  ""*' 
which  we  did  set  here  also,  our  old  one  being  very  faulty. 
They   made  a  new  ]''nre-yard  loo,  and  a  Kore-top-mast :       J 
And  our  Humps   being  faulty,    and  not  serviceable,  they       H 
did  cut  a  Tree  to  make  a  Pump.     They  first  squared  it,       ^ 
then  sawed  it  in  the  middle,  and  then  hollowed  each  side 
exactly.     The  two  hollow  sides  were  made  big  enough  to 
contain  a  Pump-box  in  the  midst  of  them  both,  when  they 
were  joined  together;  and   it  required  their  utmost  Skill       J 
to  close  them  exactly  to  the  making  a  tight  Cylinder  for      H 
the  Pump-box  ;  lieing  unaccustomed  to  such  Work.      We       ^ 
learnt  this  way  of  Pump-making  from  the  Spaniards ;  who 
make  their  Pumps  that  they  use  in  their  Ships  in  the  Souih- 
Scas  after  this  manner ;  and  I  am  confident  that  there  are 
no  better  Hand-pumps  in  the  World  than  they  have.  J 

While  we  lay  here,  the  young  Prince'  that  I  mentioned  ^| 
in  the  13th  Chapter  came  aboard.  He  understanding  that  ^M 
We  were  bound  farther  to  the  Southward,  desired  us  to 
transfwrt  him  and  his  Men  to  his  own  Island.  He  shewed 
it  to  us  in  our  Draft,  and  told  us  the  Name  of  it;  which 
we  put  down  in  our  Draft,  for  it  was  not  named  there; 
but  I  quite  forgot  to  put  it  into  my  Journal. 

This  Man  told  us,  thai  not  above  six  days  before  this, 
he  saw  Captain  Swan,  and  several  of  his  Men  that  we  left 
there,  and  named  the  Names  of  some  of  them,  who.  he 
said,  were  all  well,  and  that  now  they  were  at  the  City  of 
Mindanao;  but  that  they  had  all  of  them  been  out  with 
Raja  Laut,  fighting  under  him  in  his  Wars  against  his 
Enemies  the  Alfoores;  and  that  most  of  them  fought  with 
undaunted  Courage;  for  which  they  were  highly  honoured 
and  esteemed,  as  well  by  the  Sultan,  as  by  the  General  Raja 
Laut ;  that  now  Capt.  Swan  intended  to  go  with  his  Men  to 
Kort  St.  George,  and  thai  in  order  thereto,  he  had  proffered 

'  "  The  youfiK  man  befort  mentionrd, «  ho  I  laid  wa»  «nt  by  hi»  Unklf, 
Ihf  .Sultan  <i(  »  Sjiioi  [iland  ni-nr  Ttrrtalr,  10  invitp  the  English  lo  their 
UUnd."  Ho  offfted  "tn  Innil  hi»  (C.iplnin  Swan'»>  »hip  with  spice,  pro- 
vidcd  he  wouki  buiM  a  imall  Fnn,  nnd  leave  inme  men  lo  lecute  (he  island 
from  the  Ounk."  DampicT  wai  aflcrwardi  lotd  ihat  ibe  Dutch  had  a.\ 
tlic  iiUnd. 


435 


'.I^-'^^.^pt- 


CAPTAm  DAMFErat'S  YOTAGE5 


'^W€ftmotj€t  agnml;  a«l  tfat  fce  fi»d  tfat  the  Mta 
wooU  MK  let  lwB«0  «nf  ^  Ae  Wan  vac  caded. 

ilU  am  llie  nmet  told  «  mihe  BUUfm  Xo^pi^ 
wMAmmf^iuBhad  Icamr;  aad  vim  lie  ipeatswvf  1"^ 
ITOOHffid  t0  ictom  fo  US  fl^flii  ia  3  dafs  tunt,  and  mi  lo^g 
Capftiifi  Scad  nmiiwd  10  ttay  fiv  luai  C^v  ipb  lad  iioar 
mboo&t  soaaicd  OBf  jMiMflcss  j  and  1h^  aocDMsd  ncfv  iriad  of 
Oa  oppofftiMii|r  Of  gjoin|g[ 'wdk  Qa» 

Ancr  tliif  I  cndcafoorad  to  pcnwada  oiir  Bfien,  to 
jptftma  wiuii  ub6  ^MIM^  €0  um*  Jiuvcsr'  €■  DfiodanaoL  and  o^rst 
tlwir  Sari^  agni  to  Captafli  Svaa.  I  took  an  opportmnty 
flAMi  tiief  Here  fifing  of  Water^  dme  being  then  half 
die  Stttpi  QmiiNttijr  adiore;  and  I  found  all  dicae  way 
Hilfing  to  do  k.  I  dcdrcd  tlieai  to  aqr  notlung,  till  I  had 
tried  the  htinda  of  the  other  hatfl  which  I  intywfed  to  do 
die  next  day;  it  being  thdr  torn  to  fil  Water  then ;  But 
one  of  these  Mdi^  who  teemed  nioat  foniatd  to  invite  badL 
Ciptm  Sffan,  t«rid  Caplann  Bead  and  Captain  Teat  of  the 
Fririect,  and  thqr  pttaentlf  dbawaded  the  Men  from  any 
McftDe^  Yetfearingthewoi»t,diey  made  all  possible 
haste  to  be  eone* 

I  have  since  been  informed,  that  Captain  Swan  and  his 
Men  stayed  there  a  great  while  afterward ;  and  that  many 
of  the  Men  got  passages  from  thence  in  Dutch  Sloops  to 
Ternate,  particularly  Mr.  Rofy,  and  Mr.  Nelly.  There 
they  renuined  a  great  while,  and  at  last  got  to  Batavia 
(where  the  Dutch  took  their  Journals  from  them)  and  so 
to  Europe ;  and  that  some  of  Captain  Swan*s  Men  died  at 
Mindanao;  of  which  number  Mr.  Harthope,  and  Mr. 
Smith,  Captain  Swan's  Merchants  were  two.  At  last  Captain 
Swan  and  his  Surgeon  going  in  a  small  Canoa  aboard  of  a 
Dutch  Ship  then  in  the  Road,  in  order  to  get  passage  to 
Europe,  were  overset  by  the  Natives  at  the  Mouth  of  the 
River ;  who  waited  their  coming  purposely  to  do  it,  but 
unsuspected  by  them  ;  where  they  both  were  kill'd  in  the 
Water.  This  was  done  by  the  General's  order,  as  some 
think,  to  get  his  Gold,  which  he  did  immediately  seize  on. 
Others  say,  it  was  because  the  General's  House  was  burnt  a 

436 


I 

I 


OF  CAPTAIN   SWAN— CELEBES 

little  before,  and  Captain  Swan  was  suspected  to  be  the   ah. 
Author  of  it ;  and  others  say,  That  it  was  Captain  Swan's  '^' 
Threats  occasioned  his  own  Ruin ;  for  he  would  often  say 
passionately,  that  he  had  been  abused  by  the  General,  and 
that  he  would   have  satisfaciion  for  it;  saying  also,  that 
now  he  was  well  acquainted  with  their  Rivers,  and  knew 
how  to  come  in  at  any  time  ;  that  he  also  knew  their  manner 
of  Fighting,  and    the  Weakness   of  their    Country ;  and 
therefore  he  would  go  away,  and  get  a  Band  of  Men  to 
assist  him,  and  returning  thither  again,  he  would  spoil  and       _ 
take  all  that  they  had,  and  their  Country  too.     When  the      ■ 
General  had  been  informed  of  these  Discourses,  he  would      I 
say.  What,  is  Captain  Swan  made  of  Iron,  and  able  to  resist       ' 
a  whole  Kingdom  ?     Or  docs  he  think  that  we  arc  afraid  of 
him,  that  he  speaks  thus  ?     Yet  did  he  never  touch  him, 
tilt  now  the  Mindanayans  killed  him.     It  is  very  probable 
there  might  be  somewhat  of  Truth   in  all  this ;  for  the 
Captain  was  passionate,  and  the  General  greedy  of  Gold. 
But  whatever  was  the  occasion,  so  he  was  killed,  as  several 
have  assured  mc,  and  his  Gold  seized  on,  and  all  his  Things  ; 
and  his  Jounial  also  from  England,  as  far  as  Cape  Corrientes 
on  the  Coast  of  Mexico.     This  journal  was  afterwards  sent 
away  from  thence  Isy  Mr.  Moody  (who  was  there  both  a 
httlc  before  and  a  little  after  the  Murder)  and  he  sent  it  to 
England  by  Mr.  Goddard,  Chief  Mate  of  the  DeftHce. 

But  to  our  purpose :  Seeing  1  could  not  pcrswadc  them 
to  go  to  Captam  Swan  again,  1  had  a  great  destre  to  have 
hacTthe  Prince's  Company:  But  Captain  Read  was  afraid 
to  let  his  fickle  Crew  lie  long.  That  very  day  that  the 
Prince  had  promised  to  return  to  us,  which  was  November 
,  1687,  we  sailed  hence,  directing  our  Course  South  West, 


I 


and  having  the  Wind  at  N.  W. 

This  Wind  continued  till  we  came  in  sight  of  the 
Island  Celebes;  then  it  veered  about  to  the  West,  and  to 
the  Southward  of  the  West.  We  came  up  with  the  N.  E. 
end  of  the  Island  Celebes  the  9th  day,  and  there  we  found 
the  Current  selling  to  the  Westward  so  strongly  that  we 
could  hardly  get  on  the  East-side  of  that  Island. 

The  UUnd  Celebes  is  a  very  large  island,  extended  in 
437 


i 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

lovA  from  North  to  Soucb,  about  7  degrees  of  Lat.  and 
'  in  Bfodlh  it  ts  xbout  3  degrees^  It  lies  under  the  Equator, 
the  North-end  being  in  Lat.  i  d.  30  m.  North,  and  the 
Sonth-cnd  in  Lst.  5  d.  30  m.  South,  and  by  commoa 
accoont  the  North-point  in  the  Bulk  of  this  Island,  lies 
neatest  K-i^^h  and  South,  but  at  the  North  Easi  end  there 
ruBB  am  a  loog  oarrow  Point,  stretching  N.  E.  about  30 
Leagues;  and  about  30  Leagues  to  the  Eastward  c^  this 
Umtg  Sfipe,  is  the  Island  Gilolo,  on  the  West-side  of  which 
are  4.  small  Islands,  dose  bj  it,  which  are  very  well  stored 
widi  Cloves.  The  two  chiefcst  are  Temate  and  Tidore ; 
and  as  the  Isle  (^  Ceylon  is  reckoned  the  only  place  for 
Gnnamon,  and  that  of  Banda  for  Nutmegs,  so  these  are 
Aoa^a.  by  some  to  be  the  only  Clove-Istands  in  the  World ; 
bat  tlus  is  a  great  Error,  as  I  have  already  shewn. 

At  the  South-end  of  the  Island  Celebes  there  is  a  Sea  or 
Gulfdi,  of  about  7  or  8  Leagues  wide,  and  40  or  50  long, 
iriuch  runs  up  the  Country  almost  directly  to  the  North; 
and  thb  Gulph  hath  several  small  Islands  along  the  middle  1 
of  It.     On  the  West-side  of  the  Island,  almost  at  the  South^ 
end  of  it,  the  Town  of  Macasser  is  seated.     A  Town  o^ 
great  Strength  and  Trade,  bel<Miging  to  the  Datch. 

There  are  great  Inlets  and  Lakes  on  the  East-side  of 
the  Island  ;  as  also  abundance  of  small  Islands,  and  Sholcs 
tying  scattered  about  it.  We  saw  a  lugh  peeked  Hill  at 
the  N.  end  :  but  the  Land  on  the  East-side  is  low  alt  altnig  ; 
for  we  cruized  almost  the  length  of  it.  The  Mold  on  this 
side  is  black  and  deep,  and  extraordinary  fat  and  rich,  and 
full  of  Trees ;  And  there  are  many  Brooks  of  Water  run 
out  into  the  Sea.  Indeed  all  this  East-side  of  the  Island 
seems  to  be  but  one  lai^e  Grove  of  extraordinary  great  high 
Trees. 

Having  with  much  adogot  on  this  East-side,  coasting 
along  to  the  Southward,  and  yet  having  but  little  Wind, 
and  even  that  little  against  us,  at  S.  S,  W.  and  sometimes 
Calm,  we  were  a  long  time  going  about  the  Island. 

Tiie  22d  day  we  were  in  Lat.  1  d.  20  m.  South,  and  being 
about  3  Leagues  from  the  Island  standing  to  the  Southward, 
with  a  Very  gentle  Land- Wind,  about  2  or  3  a  Clock  in  the 

438 


I 


I 


[  SHY   TURTLE— VAST   COCKLES  | 

Morning,  we  heard  a  clashing  in  the  Water,  like  Boats    aw. 
rowing :  and  fearing  some  sudden  Attack,  we  got  up  all  '^^ 
our  ^ms,  and  stood  ready  to  defend  our  selves.     As  soon 
as  it  was  day,  wc  saw  a  great  Proc,  built  like  the  Minda- 
Dayan  Procs,  with  about  60  Men  in  her:  and  6  smaller 
Procs,     They  lay  still  about  a  mile  to  windward  of  us,  to 
view  us;  and  probably  design'd  to  make  a  Prey  of  us  when        h 
they  first  came  out ;  but  they  were  now  afraid  to  venture       ■ 
on  us.  H 

At  last  we  shewed  them  Dutch  Colours,  thinking  H 
thereby  to  allure  them  to  come  to  us :  For  we  could  not  H 
go  to  them  ;  but  they  presently  rowed  in  toward  the  Island,  H 
and  went  into  a  large  Opening  ;  and  we  saw  them  no  more  ;  V 
nor  did  we  ever  see  any  other  Boats  or  Men,  but  only  one  ■ 
fishing  Canoa,  while  we  were  about  this  Island  ;  neither  did  I 
wc  see  any  House  on  all  the  Coast.  I 

About  5  or  6  Leagues  to  the  South  of  this  place,  there  I 
is  a  great  Range  of  both  large  and  small  Islands  ;  and  many  I 
Shoals  also  that  arc  not  laid  down  in  our  Drafts;  which  I 
made  it  extreamly  troublesome  for  us  to  get  through.  But  I 
we  past  between  them  all  and  the  Island  Celebes,  and  n 
anchored  against  a  sandy  Bay  in  8  Fathom  sandy  Ground, 
abuut  hair  a  Mile  from  the  main  Island;  being  then  in 
Lat.  id.  50m.  South. 

Here  wc  stayed  several  Days,  and  sent  out  our  Canoas 
a  striking  of  Turtle  every  Day;  for  here  is  great  plenty  of 
them;  but  they  were  very  shy,  as  they  were  generally 
whcre-evcr  wc  found  them  in  the  East-India  Seas.  I  know 
not  the  reason  of  it,  unless  the  Natives  go  very  much  a 
striking  here :  for  even  in  the  West-Indics  they  arc  shy  in 
places  that  arc  much  disturbed :  And  yet  on  New-Holland 
we  found  them  shy,  as  I  shall  relate ;  though  the  Natives 
there  do  not  molest  them. 

On  the  Shole  without  us  wc  went  and  gathered  Shell- 
fish at  low  Water.  There  were  a  monstrous  sort  of 
Cockles ;  the  Meat  of  one  of  them  would  suffice  7  or  8 
Men,  It  was  very  good  wholesom  Meat.  We  did  also 
beat  about  in  the  Woods  on  the  Island,  but  found  no 
Game.     One  of  our  Men  who  was  always  troubled  with 

439  ~ 


CAPTAIN  DAMPUm*S  TOTALIS 

joL  toreLqgip  found  &  oertui  Vine  that  mppmtiBi  hwdfhf 
^^  tS&offog  sboot  odier  Tnet.  The  Lem^n  radi  6  or  7  Foot 
Ug^lmttlieSlrii^  orBnndKS  II  or  ».  }thtAartarj 
gfem  Leafy  Pfcttj  Ivoad  and  rouncfiA,  end  of  a  dudk 
Sabstanot.  Theie  Leaves  poonded  snail  and  boiled  uridi 
Hog;a  Lard,  make  an  cicdlent  Sahe.  Oar  Men,  knoiniig 
the  Vertnea  of  it,  atodct  thenwdvea  here :  there  was  scarce 
aBfanintheS^pbot  gotaPoondortfioof  it;  e^edally 
such  as  were  troobled  with  old  Ulcers,  who  found  ereat 
braefit  by  it«  This  Kfan  that  discovered  these  leaves  herc^ 
had  1^  first  knowledge  of  dmn  in  the  bthmitt  of  Darien, 
he  having  had  his  Recrapt  frcmi  one  of  the  Indians  there : 
and  he  had  been  ashore  in  cfivers  (daces  nnce,  porposdy  to 
sedctheseLeaves^bot  did  never  find  any  but  here.  AmoiK 
the  many  vast  Trees  hereaboots,  there  was  one  exceeded 
all  the  rest*  This  Captsun  Read  caused  to  be  cut  down,  in 
order  to  make  a  Canoa,  having  lost  oar  Boats,  all  but  one 
small  one,  in  the  late  Storms;  so  6  lusty  Men,  who  had 
been  Logwood-catters  in  the  Bays  dP  Campeachy  and 
Honduras  (as  Captain  Read  lumaelf,  and  many  more  of  us 
had)  and  so  were  very  expot  at  this  work,  undertook  to 
fell  it,  taking  their  turn,  3  alwajrs  cutting  together;  and 
they  were  one  whole  Day,  and  lulf  the  next  before  they 
got  it  down.  This  Tree,  though  it  grew  in  a  Wood,  was 
yet  1 8  Foot  in  circumference,  and  44  Foot  of  clean  Body, 
without  Knot  or  Branch :  and  even  there  it  had  no  more 
than  one  or  two  Branches,  and  then  ran  clear  again  i  o  Foot 
higher ;  there  it  spread  it  self  into  many  great  Limbs  and 
Branches,  like  an  Oak,  very  green  and  flourishing :  yet  it 
was  perisht  at  the  Heart,  which  marr*d  it  for  the  Service 
intended. 

So  leaving  it,  and  having  no  more  Business  here,  we 
weighed,  and  went  from  hence  the  next  Day,  it  being  the 
29th  Day  of  November.  While  we  lay  here  we  had  some 
Tornadoes,  one  or  two  every  day,  and  pretty  fresh  Land- 
winds  which  were  at  West.  The  Sea-breezes  were  small 
and  uncertain,  sometimes  out  of  the  N.  E.  and  so  veering 
about  to  the  East  and  South-East.  We  had  the  Wind  at 
North  East  when  we  weighed,  and  we  steered  off  S.  S.  W. 

440 


I 


I 


SHOALS— A    TORNADO    AND  SPOUT 

In  the  Afternoon  we  saw  a  Shole  a-hcad  of  us,  and  altered 
our  Course  to  the  S.  S.  E.  In  the  Evening,  at  4  a  Clock, 
we  were  close  by  another  great  Shole ;  therefore  we  tackt, 
and  stood  in  for  the  Island  Celebes  again,  for  fear  of  run- 
ning on  some  of  the  Sholcs  in  the  Night.  By  Day  a  Man 
might  avoid  them  well  enough,  for  they  had  all  Beacons 
on  them,  like  Huts  built  on  tall  Posts,  above  High-water 
Mark,  probably  set  up  by  the  Natives  of  the  Island 
Celebes,  or  those  of  some  other  neighbouring  Islands;  and 
I  never  saw  any  such  elsewhere.  In  the  Night  we  had  x 
violent  Tornado  out  of  the  S.  W.  which  lasted  about  an 
Hour. 

The  30th  day  we  had  a  fresh  Land  Wind,  and  steered 
away  South,  passing  between  the  2  Shoals,  which  we  saw 
the  Day  before.  These  Shoals  lye  in  Lat.  3  d.  South,  and 
about  10  Leagues  from  the  Island  Celebes.  Being  past 
them,  the  Wind  died  away,  and  we  lay  becalmed  till  the 
Afternoon :  Then  we  had  a  hard  Tornado  out  of  the 
South  West,  and  towards  the  Evening,  we  saw  two  or 
three  Spouts,  the  first  I  had  seen  since  I  came  into  the 
East-Indies;  in  the  West-Indies,  I  had  often  met  with 
ihcm.  A  Spout  is  a  small  Ragged  piece  or  part  of  a 
Cloud  hanging  down  about  a  Yard,  seemingly  from  the 
blackest  part  thereof.  Commonly  it  hangs  down  sloping 
from  thence,  or  somctimea  appearing  with  a  small  bending, 
or  elbow  in  the  middle.  I  never  saw  any  hang  perpendicu- 
larly down.  It  is  small  at  the  lower  end,  seeming  no 
bigger  than  ones  Arm,  but  'tis  fuller  towards  the  Cloud, 
from  whence  it  proceeds. 

When  the  surface  of  the  Sea  begins  to  work,  you  shall 
see  the  Water,  for  about  too  paces  in  circumference,  foam 
and  move  gently  round  till  the  whirling  motion  increases: 
and  then  it  flies  upward  in  a  Pillar,  about  100  Paces  in 
compass  at  the  bottom,  but  lessening  gradually  upwards 
to  the  smallnessof  the  Spout  it  self,  there  where  it  rcachcth 
the  lower  end  of  the  Spout,  through  which  the  rising  Sea- 
water  seems  to  be  conveyed  into  the  Ctguds.  This  visibly 
appears  by  the  Clouds  increasing  in  bulk  and  blackness. 
1  hen  you  shill  pretently  see  the  Cloud  drive  along,  althot^h 


CAPTAIN  DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 
UK.  befoftt  it  seemed  to  be  without  any  motion  :  the  Spout  also 
*^  kee[Mi^  the  same  course  with  the  Cloud,  and  still  sucking 
ap  the  Water  as  it  goes  along,  and  they  make  a  Wind  as 
tbey  go.  Thus  it  continues  for  the  space  of  half  an  Hour, 
mwe  or  less,  until  the  sucking  is  spent,  and  then  breaking 
off;  all  the  Water  which  was  below  the  Spout,  or  Pendulous 
[Hcce  of  Cloud,  falls  down  again  into  the  Sea,  making  a 
great  ncnse  with  its  fall  and  clashing  motion  in  the  Sea. 

It  is  very  dangerous  for  a  Ship  to  be  under  a  Spout 
when  it  breaks,  therefore  we  always  endeavoured  to  shun 
it,  by  keeping  at  a  distance,  if  possibly  we  can.  But  for 
want  of  "Wind  to  carry  us  away,  we  are  often  in  great  fear 
and  danger,  for  it  is  usually  calm  when  Spouts  are  at  work, 
except  Only  just  where  they  arc.  Therefore  Men  at  Sea, 
when  tbcy  see  a  Spout  coming,  and  know  not  how  to  avoid 
it,  do  sometimes  fire  Shot  out  of  their  great  Guns  into  it,  . 
to  give  it  air  or  vent,  that  so  it  may  break ;  but  I  dicif; : 
nerer  hear  that  it  proved  to  be  of  any  benefit. 

And  now  being  on  this  Subject,  I  think  it  not  amiss  to 
g^ve  you  an  account  of  an  accident  that  happened  to  a  Ship 
once  on  the  Coast  of  Guinea,  some  time  in  or  about  the 
Year  1674.  One  Captun  Records  of  London,  bound  for 
the  Coast  of  Guinea,  in  a  Ship  of  300  Tuns,  and  16  Guns, 
called  the  Blessing;  when  he  came  into  the  Lat.  7  or  8 
degrees  North,  he  saw  several  Sponts,  one  of  which  came 
directly  towards  the  Ship,  and  he  having  no  Wind  to  get 
out  of  the  way  of  the  Spout,  made  ready  to  receive  it  by 
furling  his  Sails.  It  came  on  very  swift  and  broke  a 
little  before  it  reached  the  Ship;  making  a  great  ncMse, 
and  raising  the  Sea  round  it,  as  if  a  great  House  or 
some  such  thing  had  been  cast  into  the  Sea.  The  Fury  of 
the  Wind  still,  lasted,  and  took  the  Ship  on  the  Starboard- 
bow  with  such  violence,  that  it  snapt  on  the  Boltsprit  and 
Fore-mast  both  at  once,  and  blew  the  Ship  all  along,  ready 
to  over-set  it,  but  the  Ship  did  presently  right  again,  and 
the  Wind  whirling  round,  took  the  Ship  a  second  time  with 
the  like  fury  as  before,  but  on  the  contrary  side,  and  was 
again  like  to  over-set  her  the  other  way.  The  Mizen-mast 
felt  the  fury  of  this  second  Blast,  and  was  snapt  short  off. 


1 


I 


'  ISLE  OF   BOUTON 

as  the  Korc-mast  and  Boltsprit  had  been  before.  The 
Main-mast  and  Main -top- mast  received  no  damage,  for  ' 
the  Fury  of  the  Wind  (which  was  presently  over)  did  not 
reach  them.  Three  Men  were  in  the  Fore-top  when  the 
Fore-mast  broke,  and  one  on  the  Boltsprit,  and  fell  with 
them  into  the  Sea,  but  all  of  them  were  saved.  1  had  this 
Relation  from  M,  John  Ginby,  who  was  then  Quarter- 
master, and  Steward  of  her  ;  one  Abraham  Wise  was  Chief 
Mate,  and  Leonard  JcfFcrics  Second  Mate. 

Wc  are  usually  very  much  afraid  of  them  :  Yet  this 
was  the  only  damage  that  ever  I  heard  done  by  them. 
They  seem  terrible  enough ;  the  rather  because  they  come 
upon  you  while  you  lie  becalm'd,  like  a  Log  in  the  Sea,  and 
cannot  get  out  of  their  way :  But  though  I  have  seen,  and 
been  beset  by  them  often,  yet  the  Fright  was  always  the 
greatest  of  the  Harm. 

December  the  ist,  wc  had  a  gentle  Gale  at  E.  S.  E.  we 
fjteercd  South  ;  and  at  noon  I  was  by  Observation  in  Lat. 
3  d.  34  m.  South.'  Then  wc  saw  the  Island  Bouton,  bear- 
ing South  West,  and  about  lo  Leagues  distant.  Wc  had 
very  uncertain  and  unconstant  Winds:  The  Tornadoes 
came  out  of  the  S.  W.  which  was  against  us ;  and  what 
other  Winds  we  had  were  so  faint,  that  they  did  us  little 
kindness;  but  wc  took  the  advantage  of  the  smallest  Gale, 
and  got  a  little  way  every  day.  The  4th  day  at  noon  I 
was  by  Observation  in  Lat.  4  d.  30  m.  South. 

The  fth  day  wc  got  close  by  the  N.  W.  end  of  the 
Island  Bouton,  and  in  the  Evening,  it  being  fair  Weather, 
We  hoisted  out  our  Canoa,  and  sent  the  Moskitc  Men,  of 
whom  we  had  2  or  3,  to  strike  Turtle,  for  here  arc  plenty 
of  them ;  but  they  being  shy,  wc  chose  to  strike  them  in 
the  night  (which  is  customary  in  the  West-Indies  also)  for 
every  time  they  come  up  to  breathe,  which  is  once  in  8  or 
10  minutes,  they  blow  so  hard,  that  one  may  hear  them 
at  30  or  40  yards  disuncc ;  by  which  means  the  Striker 
knows  where  they  are,  and  may  more  easily  approach 
them  than  in   the  day;    for  the  Turtle  sees  better   than 

'  Buton  Itland  lin  ia  lat.  i'  30'  S- 

443 


J 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  he  hears ;  but  on  the  contrary,  the  Manatee's  hearing  is 
^^7  quickest. 

In  the  Morning  they  returned  with  a  very  large  Turtle, 
which  they  took  near  the  Shore ;  and  withal  an  Indian  of 
the  Island  came  aboard  with  them.  He  spake  the  Malayan 
Language;  by  which  we  did  understand  him.  He  told  us, 
that  2  Leagues  farther  to  the  Southward  of  us,  there  was  a 
good  Harbour,  in  which  we  might  Anchor  :  So  having  a  fair 
Wind,  we  got  thither  by  noon. 

This  Harbour  is  in  Lat.  4  d.  54  m.  South ;  lying  on 
the  East-side  of  the  Island  Bouton.  Which  Island  lies 
near  the  S.  E.  end  of  the  Island  Celebes,  distant  from  it 
about  3  or  4  leagues.  It  is  of  a  long  form,  stretching 
S.  W.  and  N.  E.  about  25  Leagues  long,  and  10  broad. 
It  is  pretty  high  Land,  and  appears  pretty  even,  and  flat 
and  very  woody. 

There  is  a  large  Town  within  a  League  of  the  anchoring 
place,  called  Callasusung,^  being  the  chief,  if  there  were 
more ;  which  we  knew  not.  It  is  about  a  Mile  from  the 
Sea,  on  the  top  of  a  small  Hill,  in  a  very  fair  Plain,  incom- 
passed  with  Coco-nut  Trees.  Without  the  Trees  there  is  a 
strong  Stone  Wall,  clear  round  the  Town.  The  Houses 
are  built  like  the  Houses  at  Mindanao ;  but  more  neat : 
And  the  whole  Town  was  very  clean  and  delightsome. 

The  Inhabitants  are  small,  and  well  shaped.  They  are 
much  like  the  Mindanaians  in  shape,  colour,  and  habit ;  but 
more  neat  and  tight.  They  speak  the  Malayan  Language, 
and  are  all  Mahometans.  They  are  very  obedient  to  the 
Sultan,  who  is  a  little  Man,  about  40  or  50  years  old,  and 
hath  a  great  many  Wives  and  Children. 

About  an  hour  after  we  came  to  an  Anchor,  the  Sultan 
sent  a  Messenger  aboard,  to  know  what  we  were,  and  what 
our  Business.  We  gave  him  an  account,  and  he  returned 
ashore,  and  in  a  short  time  after  he  came  aboard  again,  and 
told  us,  That  the  Sultan  was  very  well  pleased  when  he 
heard  that  we  were  English ;  and  said,  that  we  should  have 
any  thing  that  the  Island   afforded  ;  and  that  he   himself 

^   Kalin  Susu. 

444 


I 


I 
I 


L 


THE  SULTAN  OF  BOUTON 
would  come  aboard  in  the  morning.  Therefore  the  Ship  am. 
was  made  clean,  and  every  thing  pul  in  the  best  order  to  '^' 
receive  him. 

The  6th  day  in  the  morning  betimes,  a  great  many 
Boats  and  Canoas  came  aboard,  with  Fowls,  Eggs,  Plantains, 
Potatoes,  &c.  but  they  would  dispose  of  none  till  they  had 
orders  for  it  from  the  Sultan,  at  his  coming.  About  lo 
a  clock  the  Sultan  came  aboard  in  a  very  neat  Proe,  built 
after  the  Mindanao  Fashion.  There  was  a  large  white 
Silk  Flag  at  the  head  of  the  Mast,  edged  round  with  a  deep 
red  for  about  2  or  3  Inches  broad,  and  in  the  middle  there 
was  neatly  drawn  a  Green  Griffon,  trampling  on  a  winged 
Serpent,  that  seemed  to  struggle  to  get  up,  and  threatened 
his  Adversary  with  open  Mouth,  and  with  a  long  Sting  that 
was  ready  to  be  darted  into  his  Legs.  Other  East  Indian 
Princes  have  their  Devices  also, 

The  Sultan  with  3  or  4  of  hb  Nobles,  and  3  of  his  Sons, 
sate  in  the  House  of  the  Proe.  His  Guards  were  10 
Musquetcers,  5  standing  on  one  side  of  the  Proe,  and  5  on 
the  other  side ;  and  before  the  door  of  the  Proe-house 
Stood  one  with  a  great  br(ad  Sword  and  a  Target,  and  2 
more  such  at  the  after-part  of  the  House  ;  and  in  the  Head 
and  Stern  of  the  Proe  stood  4  Musquetcers  more,  2  at 
each  end. 

The  Sultan  had  a  Silk  Turbat,  laced  with  narrow  Gold 
Lace  by  the  sides,  and  broad  Lace  at  the  end  :  which  hung 
down  on  one  side  the  Head,  after  the  Mindanayan  Fashion. 
He  had  a  Sky-coloured  Silk  pair  of  Breeches,  and  a  piece 
of  Kcd  Silk  thrown  cross  his  Shoulders,  and  hanging  loose 
about  him  ;  the  greatest  part  of  his  Back  and  Waist  appear- 
ing naked.  He  had  neither  Stocking  nor  Shoe  One  of 
his  Sons  was  about  15  or  16  year  old,  the  other  two  were 
young  things;  and  they  were  always  in  the  Arms  of  one  or 
other  of  his  Attendants. 

Captain  Read  met  him  at  the  side,  and  led  him  into  his 
small  Cabin,  and  fired  five  Guns  for  his  welcome.  As  soon 
as  he  came  aboard  he  gave  leave  to  his  Subjects  to  traffick 
with  us  ;  and  then  our  People  bought  what  they  had  a 
mind  to.  The  Sultan  seem'd  very  well  plets'd  to  be  visited 
445 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   by  the  English ;  and  said  he  had  coveted  to  have  a  sight  of 

1^7  Englishmen,  having  heard  extraordinary  Characters  or  their 

just  and  honourable  Dealing:    But  he  exclaimed  against 

the  Dutch  (as  all  the  Mindanayans,  and  all  the  Indians  we 

met  with  do)  and  wish'd  them  at  a  greater  distance. 

For  Macasser  ^  is  not  very  far  from  hence,  one  of  the 
chiefest  Towns  that  the  Dutch  have  in  those  parts.  From 
thence  the  Dutch  come  sometimes  hither  to  purchase  Slaves. 
The  Slaves  that  these  People  get  here  and  sell  to  the  Dutch, 
are  some  of  the  Idolatrous  Natives  of  the  Island,  who  not 
being  under  the  Sultan,  and  having  no  Head,  live  straggling 
in  the  Country,  flying  from  one  place  to  another  to  preserve 
themselves  from  the  Prince  and  his  Subjects,  who  himt 
after  them  to  make  them  Slaves.  Foe  the  civilized  Indians 
of  the  Maritime  Places,  who  trade  with  Foreigners,  if  they 
cannot  reduce  the  inland  People  to  the  Obedience  of  their 
Prince,  they  catch  all  they  can  of  them  and  sell  them  for 
Slaves ;  accounting  them  to  be  but  as  Savages,  just  as  the 
Spaniards  do  the  poor  Americans. 

After  two  or  three  hours  discourse,  the  Sultan  went 
ashore  again,  and  5  Guns  were  fired  at  his  departure 
also.  The  next  day  he  sent  for  Captain  Read  to  come 
ashore,  and  he  with  7  or  8  Men,  went  to  wait  on  the 
Sultan.  I  could  not  slip  an  opportunity  of  seeing  the 
Place;  and  so  accompanied  them.  We  were  met  at  the 
landing  place  by  two  of  the  chief  Men,  and  guided  to  a 
pretty  neat  House,  where  the  Sultan  waited  our  coming. 
The  House  stood  at  the  farther  end  of  all  the  Town  before- 
mentioned,  which  we  past  through ;  and  abundance  of 
People  were  gazing  on  us  as  we  past  by.  When  we  came 
near  the  House  there  were  40  poor  naked  Soldiers  with 
Musquets  made  a  Lane  for  us  to  pass  through.  This 
House  was  not  built  on  Posts,  as  the  rest  were,  after  the 
Mindanayan  way;  but  the  Room  in  which  we  were 
entertained  was  on  the  Ground,  covered  with  Mats  to  sit  on. 
Our  Entertainment  was  Tobacco  and  Betel-nut,  and  young 
Coco-nuts;    and    the    House   was   beset   with    Men,    and 

^  Macassar,  in  Celebes,  about  200  miles  to  the  west. 

446 


THE   CROCKADORE— NEAT   PROES 
I         Women    and    Children,    who    thronged    to    get    near    the 
Windows  to  look  on  us.  " 

We  did  not  tarry  above  an  hour  before  wc  took  our 
leaves  and  departed.  This  Town  stands  in  a  sandy  Soil ; 
but  what  the  rest  of  the  Island  is  J  know  not,  for  none  of 
us  were  ashore  but  at  this  Place. 

The  next  day  the  Sultan  came  aboard  again,  and  presented 
Capt.  Read  with  a  little  Boy,  but  he  was  too  small  to  be 
serviceable  on  board  ;  and  so  Captain  Read  returned  Thanks, 
and  told  him  he  was  too  little  for  him.  Then  the  Sultan 
sent  for  a  bigger  Boy,  which  the  Captain  accepted.  This 
Boy  was  a  very  pretty  tractable  Boy ;  but  what  was 
wonderful  in  him,  he  had  two  Rows  of  Teeth,  one  within 
another  on  each  Jaw.  None  of  the  other  People  were  so, 
nor  did  I  ever  see  the  like-  The  Captain  was  presented 
also  with  2  He-goats,  and  was  promised  some  Buffkloe,  but 
I  do  believe  that  they  have  but  few  of  cither  on  the  Island. 
We  did  not  sec  any  Buffaloc,  nor  many  Goats,  neither  have 
they  much  Rice,  but  their  chiefest  Food  is  Roots,  We 
bought  here  about  a  thousand  pound  Weight  of  Potatoes. 
Here  our  Men  bought  also  abundance  of  Crockadores.'  and 
fine  large  Parakites,  curiously  coloured,  and  some  of  them 
the  finest  I  ever  saw. 

The  Crockadore  is    as  big  as    a    Parrot,   and    shaped 

much  like  it,  with  such  a  Bill ;  but  it  is  as  white  as  Milk,  and 

hath  a  bunch  of  Feathers  on  his  head  like  a   Crown.     At 

I         this  Place  we  bought  a  Proc  also  of  the  Mindanayan  make, 

for  our  own  use,  which  our  Carpenters  afterwards  altered, 

I'        and  make  a  delicate  Boat   fit  for  any  Service.     She  was 

I        sharp  at  both  ends,  but  wc  saw'd  oflT  one,  and  made  that  end 

flat,  fastening  a  Rudder  to  it,  and  she  rowed  and  sailed 

incomparably. 

We  stay'd  here  but  till  the  I2th  day,  because  it  wasabad 
Harbour  and  foul  Ground,  and  a  bad  time  of  the  year  too, 
for  the  Tornadoes  began  to  come  in  thick  and  strong. 
When  we  went  to  weigh  our  Anchor,  it  was  hooked  in  t 
Rock,  and    we  broke  our  Cable,  and  could   not  get  oi^H 

'  Cocluiioo*  0).  ^^^^M 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 

AN.  Anchor,  though  we  strove  hard  for  it ;  so  we  went  away 
^^7  and  left  it  there.  We  had  the  Wind  at  N.  N.  E.  and  we 
steered  towards  the  S.  E.  and  fell  in  with  4  or  5  small 
Islands/  that  lie  in  5  d.  40  m.  South  Lat.  and  about  5 
or  6  Leagues  from  Callasusung  Harbour.  These  Islands 
appeared  very  green  with  Coco-nut  Trees,  and  we  saw  two 
or  three  Towns  on  them,  and  heard  a  Drum  all  night ;  for 
we  got  in  among  Shoals,  and  could  not  get  out  again  till 
the  next  day.  We  knew  not  whether  the  Drum  were  for 
fear  of  us,  or  that  they  were  making  merry,  as  'tis  usual  in 
these  parts  to  do  all  the  Night,  singing  and  dancing  till 
Morning. 

We  found  a  pretty  strong  Tide  here,  the  Flood  setting 
to  the  Southward,  and  the  Ebb  to  the  Northward.  These 
Shoals,  and  many  other  that  are  not  laid  down  in  our 
Drafts,  lie  on  the  South  West  side  of  the  Islands  where  we 
heard  the  Drum,  about  a  League  from  them.  At  last  we 
past  between  the  Islands,  and  tried  for  a  Passage  on  the 
East  side.  We  met  with  divers  Sholes  on  this  side  also, 
but  found  Channels  to  pass  through ;  so  we  steered  away 
for  the  Island  Timor,  intending  to  pass  out  by  it.  We 
had  the  Winds  commonly  at  W.  S.  W.  and  S.  W.  hard 
Gales  and  rainy  Weather. 

The  1 6th  day  we  got  clear  of  the  Shoals,  and  steered 
S.  by  E.  with  the  Wind  at  W.  S.  W.  but  veering  every 
half  hour,  sometimes  at  S.  W.  and  then  again  at  W.  and 
sometimes  at  N.  N.  W.  bringing  much  Rain,  with  Thunder 
and  Lightning. 

The  20th  day  we  passed  by  the  Island  Omba,^  which  is 
a  pretty  high  Island,  lying  in  Lat.  8  d.  20  m.  and  not 
above  5  or  6  Leagues  from  the  N.  E.  part  of  the  Island 
Timor.  It  is  about  13  or  14  Leagues  long,  and  5  or  6 
Leagues  wide. 

About  7  or  8  Leagues  to  the  West  of  Omba,  is  another 
pretty  large  Island,  but  it  had  no  Name  in  our  Plats ;  yet 
by  the  Situation  it  should  be  that,  which  in  some  Maps  is 
called  Pentare.^     We  saw  on  it  abundance  of  Smoaks  by 

1  The  Tukang  Besi  group.  ^  Ombai.  ^  Pantar. 

448 


Pda: 


A   DIFFICULT   PASSAGE— TIMOR 


I 


day,  and  Fires  by  night,  and  a  large  Town  on  the  North- 
side  of  it,  not  far  from  the  Sea  ;  but  it  was  such  bad  '^ 
Weather  that  wc  did  not  go  ashon:.  Between  Omba  and 
Pcntarc,  and  in  the  mid  Channel,  there  is  a  small  low  sandy 
Island,'  with  great  Sholes  on  either  side;  but  there  is  a 
very  good  Channel  close  by  Pcntare,  between  that  and  the 
Sholes  about  the  small  Isle.  Wc  were  three  Days  beating 
ofF  and  on,  not  having  a  Wind,  for  it  was  at  South  South 
West. 

The  zjd  day  in  the  Evening,  having  a  small  Gate  at 
North,  we  got  through,  keeping  close  by  Pentare.  The 
Tide  of  Kbb  here  set  out  to  the  Southward,  by  which  wc 
were  helped  through,  for  we  had  but  little  Wind.  But 
this  Tide,  which  did  us  a  kindness  in  setting  us  through, 
had  like  to  have  ruined  us  afterwards;  for  there  are  two 
small  Islands  lying  at  the  South-end  of  the  Channel  we  came 
through,  and  towards  these  Islands  the  Tide  hurried  us  so 
swiftly,  that  wc  very  narrowly  escaped  being  driven  ashore ; 
for  the  little  Wind  we  had  before  at  North  dying  away,  we 
had  not  one  breath  of  Wind  when  we  came  there,  neither 
was  there  any  Anchor-Ground.  But  we  got  out  our  Oars 
and  rowed,  yet  all  in  vain;  for  the  Tide  set  wholly  on  one 
of  these  small  Islands,  that  wc  were  forced  with  might  and 
main  Strength  to  bear  off  the  Ship,  by  thrusting  with  our 
Oars  against  the  Shore,  which  was  a  steep  Bank,  and  by 
this  means  we  presently  drove  away  clear  of  Danger ;  and 
having  a  little  Wind  in  the  Night  at  North,  we  steered 
away  S.  S.  W.  In  the  Morning  again  wc  had  the  Wind 
at  W.  S.  W.  and  steered  S.  and  the  Wind  coming  to  the 
W.  N.  W.  we  steered  S.  W.  to  get  clear  of  the  S.  W.  end 
of  the  Island  Timor.  The  29th  day  we  saw  the  N.  W. ' 
point  of  Timor,  S,  E.  by  K.  distant  about  8  Leagues. 

Timor  is  a  long  high  mountainous  Island  stretching 
N.  E.  and  S.  W.  it  is  about  70  Leagues  long,  and  15  or 
16  wide,  the  middle  of  the  Island  is  in  Lat.  about  9  d. 
South.  I  have  been  informed  that  the  Portuguese  do  trade 
to  this  Island ;  But  I  know  nothing  of  its  produce  besides 

*  AHor  Desar. 

*  Thui  in  all  the 

VOL.  r. 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  Coire,  for  making  Cables ;  of  which  there  is  mention 
^687  Chap.  X. 

The  27th  day  we  saw  two  small  Islands^  which  lie  near 
the  S.  W.  end  of  Timor.  They  bear  from  us  S.  E.  Wc 
had  very  hard  Gales  of  Wind,  and  still  with  a  great  deal  of 
Rain ;  the  Wind  at  W.  and  W.  S.  W. 

Being  now  clear  of  all  the  Islands,  we  stood  ofF  South, 
intending  to  touch  at  New  Holland,  a  part  of  Terra 
Australis  Incognita,  to  see  what  that  Country  would  afford 
us.  Indeed  as  the  Winds  were  we  could  not  now  keep 
our  intended  Course  (which  was  first  westerly,  and  then 
northerly)  without  going  to  New  Holland,  unless  we  had 
gone  back  again  among  the  Islands:  But  this  was  not  a 
good  time  of  the  Year  to  be  among  any  Islands  to  the 
South  of  the  Equator,  unless  in  a  good  Harbour. 

The  31st  day  we  were  in  Lat.  13  d.  20  m.  still  standing 
to  the  Southward,  the  Wind  bearing  commonly  very  hard 
at  W.  we  keeping  upon  it  under  two  Courses,  and  our 
Mizen,  and  sometimes  a  Main-top-sail  Rift.  About  10  a 
Clock  at  Night  we  tackt  and  stood  to  the  Northward,  for 
fear  of  running  on  a  Shoal,^  which  is  laid  down  in  our 
Drafts  in  Lat.  13  d.  50m.  or  thereabouts:  It  bearing  S.  by 
W.  from  the  East-end  of  Timor ;  and  so  the  Island  bore 
from  us  by  our  judgments  and  Reckoning.  At  3  a  Clock 
we  tackt  again,  and  stood  S.  by  W.  and  S.  S.  W. 

In  the  Morning,  as  soon  as  it  was  day,  we  saw  the 
Shoal  right  a-head  :  It  lies  in  13  d.  50  m.  by  all  our  Reckon- 
ings. It  is  a  small  Spit  of  Sand,  just  appearing  above  the 
Waters  edge,  with  several  Rocks  about  it,  8  or  10  foot 
high  above  water.  It  lies  in  a  triangular  Form ;  each  side 
being  about  a  League  and  half.  We  stemm'd  right  with  the 
middle  of  it,  and  stood  within  half  a  Mile  of  the  Rocks, 
and  sounded  ;  but  found  no  ground.  Then  we  went  about 
and  stood  to  the  North  two  Hours ;  and  then  tackt  and 
stood  to  the  Southward  again,  thinking  to  weather  it,  but 
could  not.     So  we  bore  away  on  the  North-side,  till  we 

^  Rotti  and  Saman. 

•  This  may  have  been  Scott's  Reef  or  the  Ashmore  Reef.     The  latter  is 
the  more  probable. 

450 


AN    ERROR   OF  THE    HYDROGRAPHERS 


came  to  the  East- 


point ,  giving 


the  Rocks  a.  small  birth :    am,  ' 


Then  we    trimm'd  sharp,  and    stood    to    the    Southward,  " 
passing    close    by   it,    and    sounded    again    but    found    no 
Ground. 

This  Shoal  is  laid  down  in  our  Drafts  not  alwve  i6  or 
20  Leagues  from  New  Holland  ;  but  wc  did  run  afterwards 
60  Leagues  due  South  before  we  fell  in  with  it ;  and  I  am 
very  confident,  that  no  part  of  New  Holland  hereabouts 
lies  so  far  Northerly  by  40  Leagues,  as  it  is  laid  down  in 
our  Drafts.  For  if  New  Holland  were  laid  down  true,  we 
must  of  necessity  have  been  driven  near  40  Leagues  to  the 
Westward  of  our  Course  ;  but  this  is  very  improbable,  that 
the  Current,  should  set  so  strong  to  the  Westward,  seeing 
wc  had  such  a  constant  Westerly  Wind.  I  grant,  that 
when  the  Monsoon  shifts  first,  the  Current  docs  not 
presently  shift,  but  runs  afterwards  near  a  Month  ;  but  the 
Monsoon  had  been  shifted  at  least  two  Months  now. 
But  of  the  Monsoons  and  other  Winds,  and  of  the 
Currents,  elsewhere,  in  their  proper  place.'  As  to  these 
here,  1  do  rather  believe  that  the  Land  is  not  laid  down 
true,  than  that  the  Current  deceived  us;  for  it  was  more 
probable  we  should  have  been  deceived  before  we  met  with 
a  Shole,  than  afterwards ;  for  on  the  Coast  of  New  Holland 
we  found  ihc  Tides  keeping  their  constant  Course;  the 
Flood  running  N.  bv  R.  and  the  Ebb  S.  by  W. 

The  4th  day  of  January,  1688,  wc  fell  in'  with  the 
Land  of  New  Holland  in  the  Lat.  of  1 6  d.  50  m.  having,  as 
I  said  before,  made  our  Cour>e  due  South  from  the  Shoal 
that  we  past  by  the  jist  day  of  December.  We  ran  in 
ciose  by  it,  and  finding  no  convenient  anchoring,  because  it 
lies  open  to  the  N.  WT  we  ran  along  shore  to  the  Eastward, 
steering  N.  E.  by  E.  for  so  the  Land  lies.  We  steered 
thus  about  1 2  Leagues  ;  and  then  came  to  a  Point  of  Land, 
from  whence  the  Land  trends  Hast  and  Southerly,  for  to 

*  In  bU  eictllcni  cbaptrr  on  Wind*  in  the  Kcond  volume 

*  The  landfjil)  may  >uvc  Iwen  in  ilie  ncishbourhnod  of  C«p<:  nuikcrtille, 
in  which  cue  the  anchnm^  woold  have  bcm  in  Kinfi  Sound  ;  or  in  Collier 
Bay,  with  lb*  anchoran  in  Brantwiclc  Bay.    The  "  ainindance  of  1  lUndt " 

mmv    liav*    twjn     Ihe   **  lluff!aneer    Arrhini>LiLm "    al     Thp    mouth    nf    ICinv 


451 


*        V- 


*T^?^' 


GAPTAIN  DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES   ' 

AN.  or  12  Leagues;  but  how  afterwards  I  know  not  About 
'^^  3  Lei^es  to  the  Eastward  of  this  Pcrint,  there  is  a  pretty 
deep  Bay,  with  abundance  of  Islands  in  it,  and  a  very  good 
place  to  anchor  in,  or  to  hale  ashore.  About  a  League  to 
the  Eastward  of  that  Point  we  anchored  January  the  5th, 
1688,  2  Mile  from  the  Shore,  in  29  Fathom,  good  hard 
Sand,  and  clean  Ground. 

New  Holland  b  a  very  large  Tract  of  Land.  It  is  not 
yet  determined  whether  it  is  an  Island  or  a  main  G>ntinent ; 
but  I  am  certain  that  it  Joyns  neither  to  Asia,  Africa,  nor 
America.  This  part  of  it  that  we  saw  is  all  low  even 
Land,  with  Sandy  Banks  against  the  Sea,  only  the  Points 
are  rocky,  and  so  are  some  of  the  Islands  in  this  Bay. 

The  Land  is  of  a  dry  sandy  Soil,  destitute  of  Water, 
except  you  make  Wells;  yet  producing  divers  sorts  of 
Trees ;  but  the  Woods  are  not  thick,  nor  the  Trees  very 
Ug.  Most  of  the  Trees  that  we  saw  are  Dragon-trees,^  as 
we  supposed ;  and  these  too  are  the  largest  Trees  of  any 
there.  They  are  about  the  Ingness  of  our  large  Apple- 
trees,  and  about  the  same  heighth :  and  the  Rind  is  blaciush, 
and  somewhat  rough.  The  Leaves  are  of  a  dark  colour; 
the  Gum  distils  out  of  the  Knots  or  Cracks  that  are  in  the 
Bodies  of  the  Trees.  We  compared  it  with  some  Gum 
Dragon,  or  Dragon's  Blood,  that  was  aboard,  and  it  was  of 
the  same  colour  and  taste.  The  other  sorts  of  Trees  were 
not  known  by  any  of  us.  There  was  pretty  long  Grass 
growing  under  the  Trees ;  but  it  was  very  thin.  We  saw 
no  Trees  that  bore  Fruit  or  Berries. 

We  saw  no  sort  of  Animal,  nor  any  Track  of  Beast, 
but  once ;  and  that  seemed  to  be  the  Tread  of  a  Beast  as 
big  as  a  great  MastifF-Dog.  Here  are  a  few  small  Land- 
birds,  but  none  bigger  than  a  Blackbird  ;  and  but  few  Sea- 
fowls.  Neither  is  the  Sea  very  plentifully  stored  with  Fish, 
unless  you  reckon  the  Manatee  and  Turtle  as  such.  Of 
these  Creatures  there  is  plenty ;  but  they  are  extraordinary 
shy ;  though  the  Inhabitants  cannot  trouble  them  much, 
having  neither  Boats  nor  Iron. 

*  Dragon-trees  :  Dracena  Draco. 

452 


I 


WINKING    PEOPLE   OF   NEW   HOLLAND 

The  Inhabitants  of  this  Country  are  the  miserablcst 
People  in  the  world.  The  Hudmadods  of  Monomatapa,  ' 
though  a  nasty  People,  yet  for  Wealth  are  Gentlemen  to 
these;  who  have  no  Houses  and  skin  Garments,  Sheep, 
Poultry,  and  Fruits  of  the  Earth,  Ostrich  Eggs,  &c.  as  the 
H<xlmadt>ds  have  :  And  setting  aside  their  Humane  Shape, 
they  differ  but  little  from  Brutes.  They  are  tall,  strait- 
bodied,  and  thin,  with  small  long  Limbs.  They  have  great 
Heads,  round  I'orehcads,  and  great  Brows.  Their  Eye-lids 
are  always  half  closed,  to  keep  the  I'lics  out  of  their  Eyes; 
they  being  so  troublesome  here,  that  no  Fanning  will  keep 
them  from  coming  to  ones  Face  ;  and  without  the  assistance 
of  both  Hands  to  keep  them  off",  they  will  creep  into  ones 
Nostrils,  and  Mouth  too,  if  the  Ups  are  not  shut  very 
close:  so  that  from  their  Infancy  being  thus  annoyed  with 
these  Insects,  they  do  never  open  their  Eyes  as  other 
People  ;  And  therefore  they  cannot  see  far,  unless  they 
hold  up  their  Heads,  as  if  they  were  looking  at  somewhat 
over  them. 

They  have  great  Bottle  Noses,  pretty  full  Lips,  and 
wide  Mouths.  The  two  Fore-teeth  of  their  Upper  jaw  arc 
wanting  in  all  of  them,  Men  and  Women,  Old  and  Young; 
whether  they  draw  them  out,  1  know  not:  Neither  have 
they  any  Beards.  They  arc  long  visagcd,  and  of  a  very 
unpleasing  Asjicct,  having  no  one  graceful  Feature  in  their 
Faces.  Their  Hair  is  black,  short  and  curl'd,  like  that  of 
the  Negroes ;  and  not  long  and  lank  like  the  common 
Indians.  The  colour  of  their  Skins,  both  of  their  Faces 
and  the  rest  of  their  Body,  is  coal  black,  like  that  of  the 
Negroes  of  Guinea. 

They  have  no  sort  of  Cloaths,  but  a  piece  of  the  Rind 
of  a  Tree  ty'd  like  a  Girdle  about  their  Waists,  and  a 
handful  of  long  Grass,  or  3  or  4  small  green  Boughs  full 
of  Leaves,  thrust  under  their  Girdle,  to  cover  their 
Nakedness. 

They  have  no  Houses,  but  lie  in  the  open  Air,  without 
any  covering;  the  Earth  being  their  Bed,  and  the  Heaven 
their  Canopy.  Whether  they  cohabit  one  Man  to  one 
Woman,  or  promiscuously,  1  know  not:  but  they  do  live 
453 


k 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  in  Companies,  20  or  30  Men,  Women,  and  Children 
^^^  together.  Their  only  Food  is  a  small  sort  of  Fish,  which 
they  get  by  making  Wares  ^  of  Stone  across  little  Coves 
or  Branches  of  the  Sea  ;  every  Tide  bringing  in  the  small 
Fish,  and  there  leaving  them  for  a  Prey  to  these  People, 
who  constantly  attend  there  to  search  for  them  at  Low- 
water.  This  small  Fry  I  take  to  be  the  top  of  their 
Fishery:  They  have  no  Instruments  to  catch  great  Fish, 
should  they  come ;  and  such  seldom  stay  to  be  left  behind 
at  Low-water :  Nor  could  we  catch  any  Fish  with  our 
Hooks  and  Lines  all  the  while  we  lay  there.  In  other 
Places  at  Low-water  they  seek  for  Cockles,  Muscles,  and 
Periwincles :  Of  these  Shell-fish  there  are  fewer  still :  so 
that  their  chiefest  dependance  is  upon  what  the  Sea  leaves 
in  their  Wares ;  which,  be  it  much  or  little  they  gather  up, 
and  march  to  the  Places  of  their  abode.  There  the  old 
People  that  are  not  able  to*  stir  abroad  by  reason  of  their 
Age,  and  the  tender  Infants,  wait  their  return ;  and  what 
Providence  has  bestowed  on  them,  they  presently  broil  on 
the  Coals,  and  eat  it  in  common.  Sometimes  they  get 
as  many  Fish  as  makes  them  a  plentiful  Banquet;  and 
at  other  times  they  scarce  get  every  one  a  taste :  But  be 
it  little  or  much  that  they  get,  every  one  has  his  part, 
as  well  the  young  and  tender,  the  old  and  feeble,  who  are 
not  able  to  go  abroad,  as  the  strong  and  lusty.  When 
they  have  eaten  they  lie  down  till  the  next  Low-water, 
and  then  all  that  are  able  march  out,  be  it  Night  or 
Day,  rain  or  shine,  'tis  ail  one ;  they  must  attend  the 
Wares,  or  else  they  must  fast :  For  the  Earth  affords 
them  no  Food  at  all.  There  is  neither  Herb,  Root,  Pulse 
nor  any  sort  of  Grain  for  them  to  eat,  that  we  saw ;  nor 
any  sort  of  Bird  or  Beast  that  they  can  catch,  having  no 
Instruments  wherewithal  to  do  so. 

I  did  not  perceive  that  they  did  worship  any  thing. 
These  poor  Creatures  have  a  sort  of  Weapon  to  defend 
their  Ware,  or  fight  with  their  Enemies,  if  they  have  any 
that  will  interfere  with  their  poor  Fishery.     They  did  at 

»  Weirs. 

454 


I 


THEIR  ARMS— HOW  INDIANS  GET  FIRE 

first  endeavour  with  their  Weapons  to  frighten  us,  who  a«. 
lying  tshore  deteir'd  them  from  one  of  their  Fishing-  '^^ 
places.  Some  of  them  had  wooden  Swords,  others  had  a 
sort  of  Lances,  The  Sword  is  a  piece  of  Wood  shaped 
somewhat  like  a  Cutlass.  The  Lance  is  a  long  strait  Pole 
sharp  at  one  end,  and  hardened  afterwards  by  heat.  I  saw 
no  Iron,  nor  any  other  sort  of  Metal ;  therefore  it  is  pro- 
bable they  use  Stone-Hatchets,  as  some  Indians  in  America 
do,  described  in  Chap.  IV. 

How  they  get  their  I'ire  I  know  not;  but,  probably,  as 
Indians  do,  out  of  Woo<l.  I  have  seen  the  Indians  of 
Bon-Airy  do  it,  and  have  my  self  trycd  the  Experiment: 
They  take  a  fiat  piece  of  Wood  that  is  pretty  soft,  and 
make  a  small  dent  in  one  side  of  it,  then  they  take  another 
hard  round  Stick,  about  the  bigness  of  ones  Httlc  I'ingcr, 
and  sharpening  it  at  one  end  tike  a  Pencil,  they  put  that 
sharp  end  in  the  hole  or  dent  of  the  flat  soft  piece,  and 
then  rubbing  or  twirling  the  hard  piece  between  the  Palms 
of  their  Hands,  they  drill  the  soft  piece  till  it  smoaks,  and 
at  last  takes  fire. 

These  People  speak  somewhat  thro'  the  Throat ;  but 
we  could  not  understand  one  word  that  they  said.  Wc 
anchored,  as  I  said  before,  January  the  5th,  and  seeing 
Men  walking  on  the  Shore,  wc  presently  sent  a  Canoa  to 
get  some  Acquaintance  with  them :  for  we  were  m  hopes 
to  get  some  Provision  among  them.  But  the  Inhabitants, 
seeing  our  Boat  coming,  run  away  and  hid  themselves. 
We  searched  afterwards  3  Days  in  hopes  to  find  their 
Houses;  but  found  none:  yet  we  saw  many  places  where 
they  had  made  Fires.  At  last,  being  out  of  hopes  to  find 
their  Habitations,  wc  searched  no  farther;  but  left  a  great 
many  Toys  ashore,  in  such  places  where  we  thought  that 
they  would  come.  In  all  our  search  wc  found  no  Water, 
but  old  Wells  on  the  sandy  Bays. 

At  last  we  went  over  to  the  Islands,  and  there  wc  found 
a  great  many  of  the  Natives :  I  do  believe  there  were  40 
on  one  Island,  Men,  Women,  and  Children.  The  Men  at 
our  first  coming  ashore,  threatened  us  with  their  Lances 
atul  Swords ;  but  they  were  frighted  by  firing  one  Gun, 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  which  we  fired  purposely  to  scare  them.  The  Island  was 
"^^  so  small  that  they  could  not  hide  themselves:  but  they 
were  much  disordered  at  our  Landing,  especially  the 
Women  and  Children :  for  we  went  directly  to  their  Camp. 
The  lustiest  of  the  Women  snatching  up  their  Infants  ran 
away  howling,  and  the  little  Children  run  after  squeaking 
and  bawling ;  but  the  Men  stood  still.  Some  of  the 
Women,  and  such  People  as  could  not  go  from  us,  lay 
still  by  a  Fire,  making  a  doleful  noise,  as  if  we  had  been 
coming  to  devour  them :  but  when  they  saw  we  did  not 
intend  to  harm  them,  they  were  pretty  quiet,  and  the  rest 
that  fled  from  us  at  our  first  coming,  returned  again. 
This  their  place  of  Dwelling  was  only  a  Fire,  with  a  few 
Boughs  before  it,  set  up  on  that  side  the  Winds  was  of. 

After  we  had  been  here  a  little  while,  the  Men  began 
to  be  familiar,  and  we  cloathed  some  of  them,  designing 
to  have  had  some  service  of  them  for  it :  for  we  found 
some  Wells  of  Water  here,  and  intended  to  carry  2  or  3 
Barrels  of  it  aboard.  But  it  being  somewhat  troublesome 
to  carry  to  the  Canoas,  we  thought  to  have  made  these 
Men  to  have  carry*d  it  for  us,  and  therefore  we  gave  them 
some  old  Cloaths;  to  one  an  old  pair  of  Breeches,  to 
another  a  ragged  Shirt,  to  the  third  a  Jacket  that  was 
scarce  worth  owning ;  which  yet  would  have  been  very 
acceptable  at  some  places  where  we  had  been,  and  so  we 
thought  they  might  have  been  with  these  People.  We  put 
them  on  them,  thinking  that  this  finery  would  have  brought 
them  to  work  heartily  for  us ;  and  our  Water  being  filled 
in  small  long  Barrels,  about  6  Gallons  in  each,  which  were 
made  purposely  to  carry  Water  in,  we  brought  these  our 
new  Servants  to  the  Wells,  and  put  a  Barrel  on  each  of 
their  Shoulders  for  them  to  carry  to  the  Canoa.  But  all 
the  signs  we  could  make  were  to  no  purpose,  for  they 
stood  like  Statues,  without  motion,  but  grinn'd  like  so 
many  Monkeys,  staring  one  upon  another :  For  these  poor 
Creatures  seem  not  accustomed  to  carry  Burthens ;  and  I 
believe  that  one  of  our  Ship-boys  of  10  Years  old,  would 
carry  as  much  as  one  of  them.  So  we  were  forced  to  carry 
our  Water  our  selves,  and  they  very  fairly  put  the  Cloaths 

456 


THE   PEOPLE   ON    THE    ISLANDS 
off  again,  and  laid  thcni  down,  as  if  Cloaths  were  only  to  ak. 
work  in.     1  did  not  perceive  that  they  had  any  great  liking   '" 
to  them  at  first,  neither  did  they  seem  to  admire  any  thing 
that  wc  had. 

At  another  time  our  Canoa  being  among  these  Islands 
seeking  for  Game,  espy'd  a  drove  of  these  Men  swimming 
from  one  Island  to  another;  for  they  have  no  Boats, 
Canoas,  or  Bark-logs.  They  Kxik  up  Four  of  them,  and 
brought  them  aboard ;  two  of  them  were  middle  aged,  the 
other  two  were  young  Men  about  i8  or  20  Years  old. 
To  these  wc  gave  boiled  Rice,  and  with  it  Turtle  and 
Manatee  boiled.  They  did  greedily  devour  what  wc  gave 
them,  but  took  no  notice  of  the  Ship,  or  any  thing  in  it, 
and  when  they  were  set  on  Land  again,  they  ran  away  as 
fast  as  they  could.  At  our  first  coming,  before  wc  were 
acquainted  with  them,  or  they  with  us,  a  Company  of 
them  who  liv'd  on  the  Main,  came  just  against  our  Ship, 
and  standing  on  a  pretty  high  Bank,  threained  us  with 
their  Swords  and  Lances,  by  shaking  them  at  us ;  at  last 
the  Captain  ordered  the  Drum  to  be  beaten,  which  was 
done  ot  a  sudden  with  much  vigour,  purposely  to  scare  the 
poor  Creatures.  They  hearing  the  noise,  ran  away  as  fast 
as  they  could  drive,  and  when  they  ran  away  in  haste,  they 
would  cry  "Gurry,  Gurry,"  speaking  deep  in  the  Throat. 
Those  Inhabitants  aim  that  live  on  the  Main,  would  always 
run  away  from  us ;  yet  wc  took  several  of  them.  For,  as 
I  have  already  observed,  they  had  such  bad  Eyes,  that  they 
could  not  see  us  till  we  came  close  to  them.  Wc  did 
always  give  them  Victuals,  and  let  them  go  again,  but  the 
Islanders,  after  our  first  time  of  being  among  them,  did 
not  stir  for  us. 

When  wc  had  been  here  about  a  week,  we  hal'd  our 
Ship  into  a  small  sandy  Cove,  at  a  Spring-tide,  as  far  as 
she  would  float ;  and  at  low  Water  she  was  left  dry,  and 
the  Sand  dry  without  us  near  half  a  mile ;  for  the  Sea 
riscth  and  falleth  here  about  5  fathom.  The  FUmxI  runs 
North  by  Flast,  and  the  Kbb  South  by  West.  All  the 
Necp-tidcs  wc  lay  wholly  a-ground,  for  the  Sea  did  not 
come  near  ui  by  about  a  hundred  yards.  We  had  therefore 
457 


I 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 
AM.   time  enough  to  clean  our  Ships  bottom,  which  we  did  very 
'^88  ^gii_     Most  of  our  Men  lay  ashore  in  a  Tent,  where  our 
Sails  were  mending  ;  and  our  Strikers  brought  home  Turtle 
and  Manatee  every  day,  which  was  our  constant  Food. 

While  we  lay  here,  1  did  endeavour  to  persuade  our 
Men  to  go  to  some  English  Factory;  but  was  threatened 
to  be  turned  ashore,  and  left  here  for  it.  This  made  me 
desist,  and  patiently  wait  for  some  more  convenient  place 
and  opportunity  to  leave  them,  than  here  :  Which  I  did 
hope  I  should  accomplish  in  a  short  time ;  because  they 
did  intend,  when  they  went  from  hence,  to  bear  down 
towards  Cape  Comorin.  In  their  way  thither  they  de- 
signed also  to  visit  the  Island  Cocos,'  which  lieth  in  Lat. 
12  d.  12  m.  North,  by  our  Drafts;  hoping  there  to  find 
of  that  Fruit ;  the  Island  having  its  Name  from  thence. 

'  Keeling  Island,  in  lat  i2°  5.,  long.  98"  E. 


4S8 


CHAP.   XVII 


Lraving  Ntw-Halland  they  pass  hy  the  hiand  Co€tt,  ana  touth  ai 
amthtr  urfedy  lilaitd  mar  it.  A  Land  Animal  liti  large  Craw- 
fiih.  Coft  Nuti^flaaling  in  tht  Sta.  Thr  Island  Tritu,  hraring 
Cxo't,  ytt  »vrr-J!nvn  rvtry  Spring-tide.  They  Anchar  at  a  imall 
Uland  near  that  tf  Nassaw.  Hog  Island,  and  tthtrs.  A  Prci 
taken,  Mongsng  to  Ac/tin,  Nicekar  Island,  and  the  rett  called  by 
that  Namt.  Amhergrease,  good  and  bad.  The  Manners  of  the 
Inhabitant!  ef  these  Islands.  They  Anchar  at  Nieobar  Isle.  Its 
Sittiatitn,  Stil,  and  pleasant  Mixture  ef  its  Bays,  Treei,  fit.  Tht 
Melary  Tree  and  Fruit,  used  far  Bread.  Tht  Natives  of  Nicabar 
Island,  their  Form,  Habit,  Language,  Habitations  ,■  no  form  af 
Religian  or  Government ;  Thisr  Faad  and  Cenoai.  They  clean  tht 
Ship.  Tht  Author  projttti  and  grii  have  ta  stay  ashore  here,  and 
with  him  two  English-men  mare,  the  Parluguese,  and  4  Malayans 
of  Achin.  Thtir  first  Rtncounter,  with  tht  Native,.  Of  the 
tamman  Traditians  eoneerning  Cannibals,  tr  Man-F,attrs,  Thtir 
EnttrtasnmtHi  ashore.  They  buy  a  Canaa,  to  Iranifiari  them  over  la 
Achin  ;  but  ovtrstt  her  at  first  going  aut.  Having  rerruittd  and 
improved  htr,  they  set  out  again  far  the  East  side  af  the  islanet. 
with  the  I  slanders :  but  Peace  being  rt- 
Stortif  end  makt  preparations  for   their 


They  havt  a  If^ar 
established,  they  lay  1 
y^age. 


MARCH  the  I2th,  1688,  we  sailed  from  New  aw. 
Holland,  wiih  the  Wind  at  N.  N.  W.  and  '^8 
fair  weather.  Wc  directed  our  course  to  the 
Northward,  intending  as  I  said,  to  touch  at 
the  Island  Civos :  But  wc  met  with  the  Winds  at  N.  W. 
W.  N.  W.  and  N.  N.  W.  for  several  days ;  which  obliged 
U9  to  keep  a  more  Easterly  counie  than  was  convenient  to 
find  that  Island.  We  had  soon  after  our  setting  out  very 
♦Si* 


CAPTAIN  DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AN.  bad  weather,  mth  much  Thunder  and  Lightning,  Rain  and 

'^^  high  blustring  Winds. 

It  was  the  26th  day  of  March  before  we  were  in  the  Lat. 
of  the  Island  Cocos,  which  is  in  1 2  d.  1 2  m.  and  then,  hy 
Judgment,  we  were  40  or  50  Leagues  to  the  East  of  it ; 
and  the  Wind  was  now  at  S.  W.  Therefore  we  did  rather 
chuse  to  bear  away  towards  some  Islands  on  the  West-side 
of  Sumatra,  than  to  beat  against  the  Wind  for  the  Island 
Gkos.  I  was  very  glad  of  this ;  bdng  in  hopes  to  make 
my  escape  from  them  to  Sumatra,  or  to  some  other  Place. 

We  met  nothing  of  remark  in  this  Voyage,  beside  the 
catching  2  great  Sharks,  till  the  28  th  day.  Then  we 
feu  in  with  a  small  woody  Island,^  in  Lat.  10  d.  30  m. 
Its  Longitude  from  New  Holland,  from  whence  we  came, 
was,  by  my  account,  1 2  d.  6  m.  West.  It  was  deep  Water 
about  the  Island,  and  therefore  no  Anchoring ;  but  we  sent 
two  Ginoas  ashore ;  one  of  them  ^th  the  Carpenters,  to 
cut  a  Tree  to  make  another  Pump ;  the  other  Ginoa  went 
to  search  for  fresh  Water,  and  found  a  fine  small  Brook 
near  the  &  W.  point  of  the  Island ;  but  there  the  Sea  fell 
in  on  the  Shore  so  high,  that  they  could  not  get  it  off. 
At  noon  both  our  Canoas  returned  aboard;  and  the 
Carpenters  brought  aboard  a  good  Tree,  which  they  after- 
wards made  a  rump  with,  such  a  one  as  they  made  at 
Mindanao.  The  other  Canoa  brought  aboard  as  many 
Boobies,  and  Men  of  War  Birds,  as  sufficed  all  tj^e  Ships 
Company,  when  they  were  boiled.  They  got  also  a  sort 
of  Land-Animal,  somewhat  resembling  a  large  Craw-fish, 
without  its  great  Claws.  These  Creatures  lived  in  holes 
in  the  dry  sandy  Ground,  like  Rabbits.  Sir  Francis  Drake  * 
in  his  Voyage  round  the  World  makes  mention  of  such 
that  he  found  at  Ternate,  or  some  other  of  the  Spice 
Islands,  or  near  them.  They  were  very  good  sweet  Meat, 
and  so  large  that  two  of  them  were  more  than  a  Man 
could  eat ;  being  almost  as  thick  as  ones  Leg.  Their 
shells  were  of  a  dark  brown  ;  but  red  when  boiled. 

^  Christmas  Island. 

'  "A  terrestrial  sort  of  Craw-fish,  which  dig  holes  in  the  Earth  like 
Conies." — Drakes  Voyage  round  the  World, 

460 


TRISTE,   AN   ISLE  NEAR  SUMATRA 


I 


I 


This  Island  Is  of  a  good  hcighth,  with  steep  Cliffs 
against  the  S.  and  S.  W,  and  a  sandy  Bay  on  the  North- 
side ;  but  very  deep  wqier  steep  t»  the  shore.  The  Mold 
is  blackish,  the  Soil  fat,  pnxiucing  large  Trees  of  divers 
sorts. 

About  one  a  clock  in  the  Afternoon  we  made  sail  from 
this  Island,  with  the  Wind  at  S.  W.  and  wc  steered  N.  W. 
Afterwards  the  Winds  came  about  at  N.  W.  and  continued 
between  the  W.  N.  W.  and  the  N.  N.  W.  several  days.  I 
observed,  That,  the  Winds  blew  for  the  most  part  out  of 
the  West,  or  N.  W.  and  then  wc  had  always  rainy  Weather 
with  Tornadoes,  and  much  Thunder  and  Lightning ;  but 
when  the  Wind  came  any  way  to  the  Southward,  it  blew 
but  faint,  and  brought  fair  weather. 

Wc  met  nothing  of  remark  till  the  7th  day  of  April, 
and  then,  being  in  L^t.  7  d.  S.  we  saw  the  Land  of  Sumatra 
at  a  great  distance,  bearing  North.  The  8th  day  we  saw 
the  &st-cnd  of  the  Island  Sumatra  very  plainly;  we  being 
then  in  Ldt.  6  d.  S.  The  loth  day,  being  in  Lat.  5  d.  1 1  m. 
and  about  7  or  8  Leagues  from  the  Island  Sumatra,  on  the 
West  side  of  it,  we  saw  abundance  of  Coco  Nuts  swimming 
in  the  Sea;  and  we  hoysed  out  our  Boat,  and  took  up  some 
of  them  ;  as  also  a  small  Hatch,  or  Scuttle  rather,  belong- 
ing to  some  Bark.  The  Nuts  were  very  sound,  and  the 
Kernel  sweet,  and  in  some  the  Milk  or  Water  in  them,  was 
jrct  sweet  and  good. 

I'he  1 2th  day  wc  came  to  a  small  Island  called  Triste,' 
in  Lat.  (by  Observation)  4  d.  South;  it  is  about  14  or  ij 
Leagues  to  the  West  of  the  Island  Sumatra.  From  hence 
to  the  Northward  there  arc  a  great  many  small  uninhabited 
Islands,  lying  much  at  the  same  distance  from  Sumatra. 
This  Island  Trtste  is  not  a  Mile  round,  and  so  low,  that  the 
Tide  flows  clear  over  it.  It  is  of  a  sandy  Soil,  and  full  of 
Coco-nut  Trees,  The  Nuts  arc  but  small ;  yet  sweet 
enough,  full,  and  more  ponderous  than  1  ever  felt  any  of 
that  liigncss;  notwithsunding  that  every  Spring-tide  the 
Salt-water  goes  clear  over  the  Island. 

'  One  of  ibc  fOttlbennaM  of  the  Nasaau  Istand^     ll  fi 
been  Enj^ano. 

461 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.         We  sent  ashore  our  Canoas  for  Coco-nuts,  and  they 

'^^  returned  aboard  laden  with  them  three  times.    Our  Strikers 

also  went  out  and  struck  some  Fish,  which  was  b<nled  for 

Supper.     They  also  killed  2  young  Aligators,  which  we 

salted  for  the  next  day. 

I  had  no  Opportunity  at  this  place  to  make  my  Escape 
as  I  would  have  done,  and  gone  over  hence  to  Sumatra, 
could  I  have  kept  a  Boat  with  me.  But  there  was  no 
compassing  this;  and  so  the  15th  day  we  went  from  hence, 
steering  to  the  Northward  on  the  West  side  of  Sumatra. 
Our  E^ood  now  was  Rice,  and  the  Meat  of  the  Coco-nuts 
rasped,  and  steep'd  in  Water ;  which  made  a  sort  of  Milk, 
into  which  we  did  put  our  Rice,  making  a  pleasant  Mess 
enough.  After  we  parted  from  Triste  we  saw  other  small 
Islands,  that  were  also  full  of  Coco-nut  Trees. 

The  19th  day,  being  in  Lat.  3  d.  25  m.  S.  the  S.  W. 
point  of  the  Island  Nassaw  bore  N.  about  5  mile  dist. 
This  is  a  pretty  large  uninhabited  Island  ;  in  Lat.  3  d.  20  m. 
S.  and  is  full  of  high  Trees.  About  a  mile  from  the  Island 
Nassaw  there  is  a  small  Island  full  of  Coco-nut  Trees. 
There  we  anchored  the  29th  day  to  replenish  our  stock  of 
Coco-nuts.  A  Riff  of  Rocks  lies  almost  round  this  Island, 
so  that  our  Boats  could  not  go  ashore,  nor  come  aboard  at 
low  Water;  yet  we  got  aboard  four  Boat-load  of  Nuts. 
This  Island  is  low  like  Triste,  and  the  anchoring  is  on  the 
North-side  ;  where  you  have  14  fathom,  a  mile  from  shore, 
clean  Sand. 

The  2 1  St  day  we  went  from  hence,  and  kept  to  the 
Northward,  coasting  still  on  the  West-side  of  the  Island 
Sumatra;  and  having  the  Winds  between  the  W.  and 
S.  S.  W.  with  unsettled  Weather;  sometimes  Rains  and 
Tornadoes,  and  sometimes  fair  weather. 

The  25th  day  we  crost  the  Equator,  still  coasting  to 
the  Northward,  between  the  Island  Sumatra,  and  a  Range 
of  small  Islands,^  lying  14  or  15  Leagues  off  it.  Amongst 
all  these  Islands,  Hog  Island  2  is  the  most  considerable.     It 

^  The  Mentaweis. 

'  Nias  is  the  largest  of  those  to  the  N.  of  the  Equator,  but  Simalu  is  the 
sland  to  which  he  refers.     He  fixes  its  position  a  degree  too  far  to  the  N. 

462 


THE   WEST   COAST— ACHIN    HARBOUR 

■  lies  in  Lat.  3  d.  40  m.  North.    It  is  pretty  high  even  Land, 
cloathed    with  tall  flourishing   Trees;  we   past  it  by   the  '*** 
28th  day. 

The  29th  wc  saw  a  Sail  to  the  North  of  us,  which  we 
chased:  but  it  being  little  Wind,  wc  did  not  come  up  with 
her  till  the  30th  day.  Then,  being  within  a  League  of 
her.  Captain  Read  went  into  a  Canoa  and  took  her,  and 
brought  her  aboard.  She  was  a  Proe  with  four  Men  tn 
her,  belonging  to  Achin,'  whither  she  was  bound.  She 
came  from  one  of  these  Coco-nut  Islands  that  we  past  by, 
and  was  laden  with  Coco-nuts,  and  Coco-nut  Oil.  Captain 
Read  rn^lered  his  Men  to  take  aboard  all  the  Nuts,  and  as 
much  of  the  Oil  as  he  thought  convenient,  and  then  cut  a 
hole  in  the  bottom  of  the  Proe,  and  turned  her  loose, 
keeping  the  Men  Prisoners. 

It  was  not  for  the  lucre  of  the  Cargo,  that  Captain 
1^  Read  took  this  Boat,  but  to  hinder  me  and  some  others 
r  from  going  ashore ;  for  he  knew  that  we  were  ready  to 
make  our  escapes,  if  an  opportunity  presented  it  self;  and 
he  thought,  that  by  his  abusing  and  robbing  the  Natives, 
wc  should  be  afraid  to  trust  our  selves  among  them.  But 
yet  this  proceeding  of  his  turned  to  our  great  advantage, 
as  shall  be  declared  hereafter. 

May  the  1st,  we  ran  down  by  the  North  West  end  of 
the  Island  Sumatra,  within  7  or  8  leagues  of  the  shore. 
All  this  West-side  of  Sumatra  which  wc  thus  coasted  along, 
our  Englishmen  at  Fort  St.  George,  call  the  West-Coast 
simply;  without  adding  the  name  of  Sumatra.  The 
Prisoners  who  were  taken  the  day  before,  shewed  us  the 
Islands  that  lie  off*  of  Achin  Harbour,  and  the  Channels 
through  which  Ships  go  in ;  and  told  us  also  that  there 
was  an  English  Factory  at  Achin.  I  wisht  my  self  there, 
but  was  forced  to  wait  with  patience  till  my  time  was  come. 

We  were  now  directing  our  course  towards  the  Nicobu* 
Islands,  intending  there  to  clean  the  Ship's  bottom,  in  order 
to  make  her  sail  well. 

The  4th  day  in  the  evening,  we  had  sight  of  one  of  the 

'  A  Uxn)  od  the  N.W.  poutt  at  Sanatia. 

463 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    Nicobar  Islands.     The  Southermost  of  them  lies  about  40 

'^^^  leagues  N.   N.  W.  from  the  N.  W.  end   of  the  Island 

Sumatra.     This  most  Southerly  of  them  is  Nicobar  it  self, 

but  all  the  cluster  of  Islands  lying  South  of  the  Andeman 

Islands  are  called  by  our  Seamen  the  Nicobar  Islands. 

The  Inhabitants  of  these  Islands  have  no  certain  Con- 
verse with  any  Nation;  but  as  Ships  pass  by  them,  they 
will  come  aboard  in  their  Proes,  and  offer  their  Com- 
modities to  Sale,  never  inquiring  of  what  Nation  they  are ; 
for  all  white  People  are  alike  to  them.  Their  chiefest 
Commodities  are  Ambergrease  and  Fruits. 

Ambergrease  is  often  found  by  the  Native  Indians  of 
these  Islands,  who  know  it  very  well ;  as  also  know  how  to 
cheat  ignorant  Strangers  with  a  certain  mixture  like  it. 
Several  of  our  Men  bought  such  of  them  for  a  small 
Purchase.  Captain  Weldon  also  about  this  time  touched 
at  some  of  these  Islands,  to  the  North  of  the  Island  where 
we  lay ;  and  I  saw  a  great  deal  of  such  Ambergrease,  that 
one  of  his  Men  bought  there ;  but  it  was  not  good,  having 
no  smell  at  all.  Yet  I  saw  some  there  very  good  and 
fragrant. 

At  that  Island  where  Captain  Weldon  was,  there  were 
2  Fryers  sent  thither  to  convert  the  Indians.  One  of  them 
came  away  with  Captain  Weldon  ;  the  other  remained  there 
still.  He  that  came  away  with  Captain  Weldon  gave  a 
very  good  Character  of  the  Inhabitants  of  that  Island,  viz. 
that  they  were  very  honest,  civil,  harmless  People ;  That 
they  were  not  adicted  to  Quarrelling,  Theft,  or  Murder ; 
That  they  did  marry,  or  at  least  live  as  Man  and  Wife,  one 
Man  with  one  Woman,  never  changing  till  Death  made  the 
Separation ;  That  they  were  punctual  and  honest  in  per- 
forming their  Bargains  ;  And  that  they  were  inclined  to 
receive  the  Christian  Religion.  This  Relation  I  had  after- 
wards from  the  Mouth  of  a  Priest  at  Tonqueen,  who  told 
me  that  he  received  this  Information  by  a  Letter  from  the 
Fryer  that  Captain  Weldon  brought  away  from  thence. 
But  to  proceed. 

The  5th  day  of  May  we  ran  down  on  the  West  side  of 
the  Island  Nicobar,  properly  so  called  and  anchored  at  the 

464 


NICOBAR   ISLE— THE    MELORY   TREE 

N.  W.  end  of  it,  in  a  small  Bay,  in  8  Fathom  Water,  not  a 
half  a  Mile  from  the  Shore.  The  body  of  this  Island  is  in  '* 
7  d.  30  m.  North  Lat.  It  is  about  12  Leagues  long,  and 
3  or  4  bruad.  The  South  end  of  it  is  pretty  high,  with 
steep  Cliffs  against  the  Sta ;  the  rest  of  the  Island  is  low, 
fiat,  and  even.  The  Mold  of  it  is  black,  and  deep ;  and 
it  is  very  well  watered  with  small  running  Streams.  It 
produccth  abundance  of  tall  Trees,  fit  for  any  uses;  for 
the  whole  bulk  of  it  seems  to  be  but  one  entire  Grove. 
But  that  which  adds  most  to  its  Beauty  off  at  Sea.  are  the 
many  spots  of  Coco-nut  Trees  which  grow  round  it  in 
every  small  Bay.  The  Bays  are  half  a  Mile,  or  a  Mile 
long,  more  or  less ;  and  these  Bays  arc  intercepted,  or 
divided  from  etch  other,  with  as  many  little  rocky  Points 
of  Wood-land. 

As  the  Coco-nut  Trees  do  thus  grow  in  Groves, 
fronting  to  the  Sea,  in  the  Bays,  so  there  is  another  sort 
of  Fruit  Trees  in  the  Bays,  bordering  on  the  Back-side  of 
the  Coco  Trees,  farther  from  the  Sea.  It  is  called  by  the 
Natives,  a  Melory  '  Tree.  This  Tree  is  as  big  as  our  large 
Apple  Trees,  and  as  high,  It  hath  a  blackish  Rind,  and  a 
pretty  brood  Leaf.  The  Fruit  is  as  big  as  the  Bread-fruit  at 
Guam,  described  in  Chapter  X,  or  a  large  penny  Loaf.  It 
is  shaped  like  a  Pear,  and  hath  a  pretty  tough  smooth  Rind, 
of  a  light  green  Colour.  The  inside  of  the  Fruit  is  in 
Subsunce  much  like  an  Apple ;  but  full  of  small  Strings, 
IS  big  as  a  brown  Thread.  I  did  never  see  of  these  Trees 
any  where  but  here. 

The  Natives  of  this  Island  are  tall  well-Umb'd  Men ; 
pretty  long  visaged,  with  black  Eyes;  their  Noses  middle 
proportioned,  and  the  whole  Symmetry  of  their  Faces 
agreeing  very  well.  Their  Hair  is  black  and  lank,  and  their 
Skins  of  a    dark  Copper  colour.     The  Women  have  no 

I  Hair  on   their  Eye-brows.     I  do  believe  il  is  pluckl  up 
by  the  roots ;  for  the    Men    had    Hair  growing  on  their 
Eye-brows,  as  other  People. 
The  Men  go  all  naked,  save  only  a  long  narrow  pteoe  of 
L 


'  Tbe  mtloTT,  or  binnn  tne,  v 
VOIk  I.  465 


1  O 


^ 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   Cloath,  or  Sash,  which   going  round  their  Wastes,  and 

1688  thence  down  between  their  Thighs,  is  brought  up  behind, 

and  tuckt  in  at  that  part  which  goes  about  the  Waste. 

The  Women  have  a  kind  of  a  short  Petticoat  reaching  from 

their  Waste  to  their  Knees. 

Their  Language  was  different  from  any  that  I  had  ever 
heard  before ;  yet  they  had  some  few  Malayan  words,  and 
some  of  them  had  a  word  or  two  of  Portuguese ;  which 
probably  they  might  learn  aboard  of  their  Ships,  passing  by 
this  place :  for  when  these  Men  see  a  Sail,  they  do  presently 
go  aboard  of  them  in  their  Canoas.  I  did  not  perceive 
any  Form  of  Religion  that  they  had;  they  had  neither 
Temple,  nor  Idol,  nor  any  manner  of  outwsuti  veneration 
to  any  Deity,  that  I  did  see. 

They  inhabit  all  round  the  Island  by  the  Sea-side,  in 
the  Bays ;  there  being  4  or  5  Houses,  more  or  less,  in  each 
Bay.  Their  Houses  are  built  on  Posts,  as  the  Mindanayans 
are.  They  are  small,  low,  and  of  a  square  form.  There 
is  but  one  Room  in  each  House,  and  this  Room  is  about 
8  foot  from  the  ground ;  and  from  thence  the  roof  is 
raised  about  8  foot  higher.  But  instead  of  a  sharp  ridge, 
the  top  is  exceeding  neatly  arched  with  small  Rafters  about 
the  bigness  of  a  Man*s  Arm,  bent  round  like  a  Half-Moon, 
and  very  curiously  thatcht  with  Palmeto-leaves. 

They  live  under  no  Government  that  I  could  perceive ; 
for  they  seem  to  be  equal,  without  any  distinction ;  every 
Man  ruling  in  his  own  House.  Their  Plantations  are  only 
those  Coco-nut  Trees  which  grow  by  the  Sea-side ;  there 
being  no  cleared  Land  farther  in  on  the  Island :  for  I 
observed  that  when  past  the  Fruit-Trees,  there  were  no 
Paths  to  be  seen  going  into  the  Woods.  The  greatest  use 
which  they  make  of  their  Coco-Trees  is  to  draw  Toddy 
from  them,  of  which  they  are  very  fond. 

The  Melory  Trees  seem  to  grow  wild  ;  they  have  great 
Earthen  Pots  to  boil  the  Melory  Fruit  in,  which  will  hold 
12  or  14  Gallons.  These  Pots  they  fill  with  the  Fruit; 
and  putting  in  a  little  Water,  they  cover  the  Mouth  of  the 
Pot  with  Leaves,  to  keep  the  steam,  while  it  boils.  When 
the  Fruit  is  soft  they  peel  off  the  rind,  and  scrape  the  pulp 

466 


THEIR   CANOAS 


from  the  ; 


5  with  i 


ick  made  like  a  Knife ;  and 


:  strings  v 
then  make  it  up  in  great  lumps,  as  big  as  a  Holland  '**" 
Cheese ;  and  then  it  will  ket;p  6  or  7  days.  It  looks 
yellow,  and  tastes  well,  and  is  their  chiefcst  Footl :  For 
they  have  no  Yams,  Potatoes,  Kicc,  nor  Plantains  (except 
a  very  few ;)  yet  they  have  a  few  small  Hogs,  and  a  very 
few  Cocks  and  Hens  like  ours.  The  Men  employ  them- 
selves in  Fishing,  but  I  did  not  sec  much  Fish  that  they 
got:  Every  House  hath  at  least  2  or  3  Canoas belonging  to 
it,  which  they  draw  up  ashore. 

The  Canoas  that  they  go  a  fishing  in  are  sharp  at  both 
ends;  and  both  the  sides  and  the  bottom  are  very  thin  and 
smooth.  They  arc  shaped  somewhat  like  the  Procs  at 
Guam,  with  one  side  flattish,  and  the  other  with  a  pretty 
big  belly;  and  they  have  small  slight  Outlagers  on  one 
side.  Being  thus  thin  and  light  they  arc  better  managed 
with  Oars  than  with  Sails :  Yet  they  sail  well  enough, 
and  are  steered  with  a  Paddle.  There  commonly  go  20 
or  30  Men  in  one  of  these  Canoas ;  and  seldom  fewer 
than  9  or  to.  Their  Oars  are  short,  and  they  do  not 
paddle  but  row  with  them  as  wc  do.  The  Benches  they 
sit  on  when  they  row  are  made  of  split  Bambocs,  laid 
across,  and  so  near  tt^cihcr,  that  they  look  like  a  Deck. 
The  Bamboeslie  moveable  ;  so  that  when  any  go  in  to  row 
they  take  up  a  Banibo  in  the  place  where  they  would  sit ; 
and  lay  it  by  to  make  room  for  their  Legs.  The  Canoas 
of  those  of  the  rest  of  these  Islands  were  like  those  of 
Nicobar:  and  probably  they  were  alike  in  other  things; 
for  we  saw  no  difference  at  all  in  the  Natives  of  them,  who 
came  hiihcr  while  we  were  here. 

But  to  proceed  with  our  Affairs :  it  was,  as  1  said 
before,  the  jth  Day  of  May,  about  to  in  the  Morning, 
when  wc  anchored  at  this  Island  :  Captain  Read  immedi- 
ately ordered  his  Men  to  heel  the  Ship  in  order  to  clean 
her:  which  was  done  this  Day  and  the  next.  All  the 
water  Vessels  were  fill'd,  they  intended  to  go  to  Sea  at 
Night :  for  the  Winds  being  yet  at  N.N.E.  the  Capiain  was 
in  nopcs  to  get  over  to  Cape  Comorin  before  the  Wind 
fthifted.     Otherwise  it  would  have  been  somewhat  di£< 

467 


|MM  mW  ^K^^  WmtXmCf  lUlffBM^  UBOn^  <V 

ll«ye  j(<^flr  wtdi  nir  m  ooe  of  dnr  CiDoas  to  Adm;  and 
tWc  f//  hare  fonitdied  mf  self  widi  sidi  Cdraiiicx5txs»  as 
f  /<^iilld  OKM  coreted  bf  tliem;  and  theiewith,  at  way 
r€turnf  Up  fare  hfm^t  ihiar  Ambcrgreaac 

f  had^  till  tlm  timcy  made  no  open  shoir  of  gob^ 
Mb/^e  here ;  bat  ncm^  the  Witer  hdag  filled,  and  the  Ship 
in  a  readineif  to  sail,  I  desired  Captain  Read  to  set  me 
a#h/^e  ^/fi  this  Island.  He,  suppo^ng  that  I  cxKild  not  go 
a#h//fe  in  a  place  less  frequented  by  Ships  than  this,  gave 
me  leave :  which  probably  he  would  have  refused  to  have 
iUmCf  if  he  thrnignt  I  should  have  gotten  from  hence  in 
any  short  time ;  for  fear  of  my  giving  an  account  of  him 
to  the  Knglish  r/r  Dutch.  I  soon  got  up  my  Chest  and 
Beddings  and  immediately  got  some  to  row  me  ashore ;  for 
fear  lest  his  mind  should  change  again. 

The  Canoa  that  brought  me  ashore,  landed  me  on  a 

468 


I 


THE  AUTHOR   GOES   ASHORE 

small  sandy  Bay,  where  there    were  two  Houses,  but  no   Ari. 
Person    in  them.     For    the  inhabitants  were    removed  to  '*** 
some  other   House,  probably,  for  fear  of  us ;  because  the 
Ship  was  close  by :  and  yet  both  Men  and  Women  came 
aboard    the   Ship  without  any  sign   of  fear.     When  our 
Ship's  Canoa  was  going  aboard  again,  they  met  the  Owner 
of  the  Houses  coming  ashore  in  his   Boat.     He  made  a 
great  many  signs  to  them  to  fetch  me  off  again:  but  they 
would  not    understand  him.'     Then  he  came  to  me,  and 
offered  his  Boat  to  carry  me  off:  but  1  refused  it.     Then        ■ 
he  made  signs  for  me  to  go  up  into  the    House,  and,      H 
according  as  1  did  understand  him  by  his  signs,  and  a  few       V 
Malayan  words  that  he  used,  he  intimated  that  somewhat 
would  come  out  of  the  Woods  in  the  night,  when  I  was 
asleep,  and  kill  me,  meaning    probably  some  wild  Beast. 
Then  I  carried  my  Chest  and  Cloaths  up  into  the  House. 

I  had  not  been  ashore  an  hour  before  Captain  Teat  and 
one  John  Damarel,  with  3  or  4  armed  Men  more,  came  to 
fetch  me  aboard  again.     They  need  not  have  sent  an  armed 
Posse  for  me;  for  had  they  but  sent  the  Cabbin-boy  ashore 
for    me,    I    would    not    have   denied    going    aboard.     For 
though  I  could  have  hid  my  self  in  the  Woods,  yet  then      ^ 
they    would    have    abused,    or    have    killed    some   of  the      H 
Natives,   purposely  to  incense  them  against   me.     I   told      ^ 
them   therefore,  that    I  was  ready  to  go  with  them,  and 
went  aboard  with  all  my  Things. 

When  1  came  aboard  I  found  the  Ship  in  an  uproar; 
for  there  were  3  Men  more,'  who  taking  Courage  by  my 
example,  desired  leave  also  to  accompany  me.  One  of 
them  wis  the  Surgeon  Mr.  Coppingcr,  ihc  other  was  Mr. 
Robert  Hall,  and  one  named  Ambrose  ;  I  have  foi^ot  his 
Sir-name.  These  Men  had  always  harboured  the  same 
Designs  as  1  had.  The  two  last  were  nut  much  opposed ; 
but  Captain  Read  and  his  Crew  would  not  part  with  the 


"Tlwy  n 


r  liini  undcnUnd  . 


i»  a  Mappra  n 


down  and  gave  tbankitn  Cod  Altmittlity  (at  ilii(<ldiveranc«"(Un^tM>i/iV5.). 
■  A  foonb,  a  Mr.  Stepben  Oftcku,  "wu  mindnl   to   come   but  wu 
dad  to  IM  coamuy  '  {Origimit  USX 
469 


CAPTAIN  DAMPIER^S  VOYAGES 

AN.  Surgeon.  At  last  the  Surgeon  leapt  into  the  Ctnoa,  and 
'^^  taking  up  my  Gun,  swore  he  would  go  ashcx^,  and  that  if 
any  Man  did  oppose  it,  he  would  shoot  him :  But  John 
Oliver,  who  was  then  Quarter-master,  leapt  into  the  Canoa, 
taking  hold  of  him,  took  away  the  Gun,  and  with  the  help 
of  two  or  three  more,  they  dragged  him  agun  into  the 
Ship. 

Then  Mr.  Hall  and  Ambrose  and  I  were  again  sent 
ashore ;  and  one  of  the  Men  that  rowed  us  ashore  stole  an 
Ax,  and  gave  it  to  us,  knowing  it  was  a  good  Commodity 
with  the  Indians.  It  was  now  dark,  therefore  we  lighted  a 
Candle,^  and  I  being  the  oldest  stander  in  our  new  Country^ 
conducted  them  into  one  of  the  Houses,  where  we  did 
presently  hang  up  our  Hammocks.  We  had  scarce  done 
this  before  the  Oinoa  came  ashore  again,  and  brought  the 
4  Malayan  Men  belonging  to  Achin,  (which  we  took  in  the 
Proe  we  took  off  of  Sumatra)  and  the  Portuguese .  that 
came  to  our  Ship  out  of  the  Siam  Jonk  at  Pulo  Gmdore : 
the  Crew  hairing  no  occasion  for  these,  being  leaving  the 
Malayan  Parts,  where  the  Portuguese '  Spark  served  as  an 
Interpreter ;  and  not  fearing  now  that  the  Achinese  could 
be  serviceable  to  us  in  bringing  us  over  to  their  Country, 
40  Leagues  off;  nor  imagining  that  we  durst  make  such  an 
attempt ;  as  indeed  it  was  a  bold  one.  Now  we  were  Men 
enough  to  defend  our  selves  against  the  Natives  of  this 
Island,  if  they  should  prove  our  Enemies :  though  if  none 
of  these  Men  had  come  ashore  to  me,  I  should  not  have 
feared  any  danger.  Nay,  perhaps  less,  because  I  should 
have  been  cautious  of  giving  any  offence  to  the  Natives : 
and  I  am  of  the  Opinion,  that  there  are  no  People  in  the 
World  so  barbarous  as  to  kill  a  single  Person  that  falls 
accidentally  into  their  Hands,  or  comes  to  live  among 
them ;  except  they  have  before  been  injured,  by  some  out- 
rage, or  violence  committed  against  them.  Yet  even  then, 
or  afterwards,  if  a  Man  could  but  preserve  his  Life  from 
their  first  rage,  and  come  to  treat  with  them  (which  is  the 
hardest  thing,  because  their  way  is  usually  to  abscond,  and 

1  "We  brought  away  candles  with  us"  {Original MS ^, 

470 


'  OF  THE  REPORTS  ABOUT  CANNIBALS 


rushing  suddenly  u 


their  Enemy  to  kill  hirr 


t  unawares; 
one  might,  by  some  slight,  insinuate  ones  self  into  their  '^* 
Favours  again,  KspccialTy  by  shewing  some  Toy,  or  Knack 
that  they  did  never  see  before  :  which  any  European,  that 
has  seen  the  World,  might  soon  contrive  to  amuse  them 
withal :  as  might  be  tione,  generally  even  with  a  little  Fire 
struck  with  a  Flint  and  Steel. 

As  for  the  common  Opinion  of  Anthropophagi,  or  Man- 
eaters,  I  did  never  meet  with  any  such  People :  All  Nations 
or  Families  in  the  World,  that  I  have  seen  or  heard  of, 
having  some  sort  of  Food  to  live  on,  either  Fruit,  Grain, 
Pulse,  or  Roots,  which  grow  naturally  or  else  planted  by 
them ;  if  not  Fish  and  Land-Animals  besides ;  (yea,  even 
the  people  of  New-  Holland,  had  Fish  amidst  all  their 
Penury)  and  would  scarce  kill  a  Man  purposely  to  eat  him. 
1  know  not  what  barbarous  Customs  may  formerly  have 
been  in  the  World  ;  and  to  Sacrifice  their  Enemies  to  their 
Gods,  is  a  thing  hath  been  much  talked  of,  with  Relation 
to  the  Savages  of  America.  1  am  a  Stranger  to  that  also,^ 
if  it  be,  or  have  been  customary  in  any  Nation  there ;  and 
yet,  if  they  Sacrifice  their  Enemies,  it  is  not  necessary  they 
should  Eat  them  too.  After  all,  1  will  not  be  peremptory 
in  the  Negative,  but  1  speak  as  to  the  compass  of  my  own 
Knowledge,  and  know  some  of  these  Cannibal  Stories  to  be 
false,  and  many  of  them  have  been  disproved  since  I  first 
Went  to  the  Wcst-lndies.  At  that  time,  how  Bart»rous 
were  the  poor  Florida  Indians'  accounted,  which  now  we 
find  to  be  civil  enough.*  What  strange  Stories  have  we 
heard  of  the  Indians,  whose  Islands  were  called  the  Isles  of 
Cannibals.'  Yet  we  find  that  they  do  Trade  very  civilly 
with  the  French  and  Spaniards ;  and  have  done  so  with 
us.     I  do  own  that  they  have   formerly  endeavoured    to 

'  See  De  Bry.  Cf.  alio  the  Hawkins  Voyaucs  :  "  Tho*e  people  of  Uic 
Cap«  of  riarida  xk  of  mure  Mvojte  and  firnrc  rututc.  and  more  tnlionl, 
Ihui  any  of  ihe  rut  Thi*  mn  ate  eaieri  ai  ihe  flcth  of  men  u  well  as  ihe 
cannibalt," 

'The  C«ribboe  Itlandk     Ii^hii   H.i*;.,ris  .:ill*  (hnt   mhabiinnii  "ihe 
men  (inpcnitc  KBrricn  thai    > 
of  SpanUtdi.  Indian*,  and  .' 

a  and  uurdy  wock,  v«n   ' 


frim  and 


i>)  turkcri  both 
;  hey  were  of  a 
I  inhabited  the 


CAPTAIN  DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AN.  destroy  our  Plantations  at  Barbadoes,  and  haire  duice 
*^^  hindred  us  from  settling  the  Island  Santa  Lucia  by  destroy-* 
ing  two  or  three  Colonies  successively  of  those  that  were 
settled  there ;  and  even  the  Island  Tabago  Jbas  been  c^ten 
annoyed  and  ravaged  by  them,  when  settled  by  the  Dutch, 
and  still  lies  waste  (though  a  delicate  fruitful  Island)  as 
being  too  near  the  Giribb^  on  the  Continent,  who  vi^t  it 
every  Year.  But  this  was  to  preserve  thdr  own  right,  by 
endeavouring  to  keep  out  any  that  would  settle  themselves 
cm  those  Islands,  where  they  had  planted  themselves ;  yet 
even  these  People  would  not  hvut  a  sii^le  Person,  at  I 
have  been  told  by  some  that  have  been  Prisoners  amcmg 
them.  I  could  instance  also  in  the  Indians  of  Boa:a  Toro, 
and  Bocca  Drago,  and  many  other  Places  where  they  do 
live  as  the  Spaniards  call  it.  Wild  and  Savage:  yet  there 
they  have  been  familiar  with  Privateers,  but  by  Abuses 
have  withdrawn  their  Friendship  again.  As  far  these 
Nicobar  Pec^le,  I  found  them  Amible  enough,  and  there- 
fore I  did  not  fear  them,  but  I  did  not  much  care  whether 
I  had  gotten  any  more  Company  or  no. 

But  however,  I  was  very  well  satisfied,  and  the  rather 
because  we  were  now  Men  enough  to  row  our  selves  over 
to  the  Island  Sumatra ;  and  accordingly  we  presently  con- 
sulted how  to  purchase  a  Canoa  of  the  Natives. 

It  was  a  fine  clear  Moon-light  Night,  in  which  we  were 
left  ashore.  Therefore  we  walked  on  the  sandy  Bay  to 
watch  when  the  Ship  would  weigh  and  be  gone,  not  thinking 
our  selves  secure  in  our  new-gotten  Liberty  till  then. 
About  II  or  12  a  Clock  we  saw  her  under  Sail,  and  then 
we  returned  to  our  Chamber,  and  so  to  sleep.  This  was 
the  6th  of  May. 

The  next  Morning  betimes,  our  Landlord,  with  4  or 
5  of  his  Friends,  came  to  see  his  new  Guests,  and  was 
somewhat  surprized  to  see  so  many  of  us,  for  he  knew  of 
no  more  but  my  self.  Yet  he  seemed  to  be  very  well 
pleased,  and  entertain'd  us  with  a  large  Calabash  of  Toddy, 
which  he  brought  with  him.  Before  he  went  away  again, 
(for  wheresoever  we  came  they  left  their  houses  to  us,  but 
whether  out  of  Fear  or  Superstition  I  know  not)  we  bought 

472 


THEY   SET   OUT   IN    A    BOAT 

a  Canoa  of  him  for  an  Ax.  and  wc  did   presently  put  our    ai^ 
Chests  and  Cloaths  in  it,  designing  to  go  to  the  South-end  '^' 
of  the  Island,  and  lye  there  till  the  Monsoon  shifted,  which 
wc  expected  every  day. 

When  our  things  were  stowed  away,  wc  with  the 
Achincse  entered  with  joy  into  our  new  Frigot.  and 
launched  off  from  the  Shore.  Wc  were  no  sooner  off, 
but  our  Csnoa  overset,  bottom  upwards.  Wc  preserved 
our  Lives  well  enough  by  Swimming,  and  dragged  also 
our  Chests  and  Cloaths  ashore  ;  but  all  our  things  were 
wet.  1  had  nothing  of  value  but  my  Journal  and  some 
Drafts  of  Land  of  my  own  taking,  which  I  much  prized, 
and  which  I  had  hitherto  carefully  preserved.  Mr.  Hall 
had  also  such  another  Cargo  of  Books  and  Drafts,  which 
were  now  like  to  perish.  But  we  presently  opened  our 
Chests  and  took  out  our  Books,  which,  with  much  ado, 
we  did  afterwards  dry ;  but  some  of  our  Drafts  that  lay 
loose  in  our  Chests  were  spoiled. 

We  lay  here  afterwards  3  days,  making  great  Fires 
to  dry  our  Books.  The  Achincse  in  the  meantime  fixt 
our  Canoa,  with  Outlagcrs  on  each  side;  and  they  also 
cut  a  good  Mast  for  her,  and  made  a  substantial  Sail 
with  Mats. 

The  Canoa  being  now  very  well  fixt,  and  our  Books 
and  Cloaths  dry,  we  launched  out  the  second  time,  and 
rowed  towards  the  East-side  of  the  Island,  leaving  many 
Islands  to  the  North  of  us.  The  Indians  of  the  Island 
accompanied  us  with  8  or  10  Canots  against  our  desire; 
for  we  thought  that  these  Men  would  make  Provision 
dearer  at   that  side   of  the   Island  wc  were  going  to,  by 

?;iving  an  account  what  rates  we  gave  for  it  at  the  place 
rom  whence  we  came,  which  was  owing  to  the  Ships  being 
there  ;  for  the  Ships  Crew  were  not  so  thrifty  in  bargaining 
(as  they  seldom  are)  as  single  Pers4:ms,  or  a  few  Men  might 
be  apt  to  be,  who  would  keep  to  one  bargain.  Thcrcmre 
to  hinder  them  from  going  with  us,  Mr.  Hall  scared  one 
Canoas  Crew,  by  firing  a  shot  over  them.  They  all  leapt 
ovcrbotutl,  and  cried  out,  but  seeing  us  row  away,  they  got 
into  their  Canoa  again  uvi         e  after  us. 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AN.  The  firing  of  that  gun  made  all  the  Inhalntants  of  the 
'^^  Island  to  be  our  Enemies.  For  presently  after  this  we  put 
ashore  at  a  Bay  where  were  four  Houses,  and  a  great  many 
Gmoas :  but  they  all  went  away,  and  came  near  us  no 
more  for  several  Days.  We  had  then  a  great  Loaf  of 
Melory  which  was  our  constant  Food ;  and  if  we  had  a 
mind  to  Coco-Nuts,  or  Toddy,  our  Malayans  of  Adun 
would  climb  the  Trees,  and  fetch  as  many  Nuts  as  we 
would  have,  and  a  good  Pot  of  Toddy  every  Morning* 
Thus  we  lived  till  our  Melory  was  almost  spent ;  bdng  still 
in  hopes  that  the  Natives  would  come  to  us,  and  sell  it  at 
they  had  formerly  done.  But  they  came  not  to  us;  nay 
they  opposed  us  where-ever  we  came,  and  often  shaking 
their  Lances  at  us,  made  all  the  shew  of  hatred  that  they 
could  invent. 

At  last,  when  we  saw  that  they  stood  in  opposition  to 
us,  we  resolved  to  use  force  to  get  some  of  their  Food,  if 
we  could  not  get  it  other  ways.  VTith  this  Resolution  we 
went  into  our  Gmoa  to  a  small  Bay,  on  the  North  part  of 
the  Island ;  because  it  was  smooth  Water  there  and  good 
landing;  but  on  the  other  side,  the  Wind  being  yet  on 
that  Quarter,  we  could  not  land  without  jeopardy  of  over- 
setting our  Canoa,  and  wetting  our  Arms,  and  then  we 
must  have  lain  at  the  mercy  of  our  Enemies,  who  stood 
2  or  300  Men  in  every  Bay,  where  they  saw  us  coming, 
to  keep  us  off. 

When  we  set  out,  we  rowed  directly  to  the  North  end, 
and  presently  were  followed  by  7  or  8  of  their  Canoas. 
They  keeping  at  a  distance,  rowed  away  faster  than  we  did, 
and  got  to  the  Bay  before  us;  and  there,  with  about  20 
more  Ginoas  full  of  Men,  they  all  landed,  and  stood  to 
hinder  us  from  landing.  But  we  rowed  in,  within  a  hundred 
yards  of  them.  Then  we  lay  still,  and  I  took  my  Gun, 
and  presented  at  them ;  at  which  they  all  fell  down  flat  on 
the  Ground.  But  I  turn'd  my  self  about,  and  to  shew  that 
we  did  not  intend  to  harm  them,  I  fired  my  Gun  off  to 
Sea ;  so  that  they  might  see  the  Shot  graze  on  the  Water. 
As  soon  as  my  Gun  was  loaded  again,  we  rowed  gently  in ; 
at  which  some  of  them  withdrew.     The  rest  standing  up, 

474 


I  THEY   DESIGN   FOR   ACHIN  1 

did  still  cut  and  hew  the  Air,  making  Signs  of  their  hatred  ;   ak. 
til)   1  once  more    frighted    thcni  with  my  Gun,  and  dis-    '*** 
charg'd  it  as  before.     Then  more  of  them  sneak'd  away, 
leaving  only  J  or  6  Men  on  the  Bay.     Then  wc  rowed  in  i 

again,  and  Mr.  Hall  taking  his  Sword  in  his  Hand,  leapt  I 
ashore;  and  I  stood  ready  with  my  Gun  to  6re  at  the  M 
Indians,  if  they  had  injured  him  :  But  they  did  not  stir,  till  fl 
he  came  to  them  and  saluted  them.  H 

He  shook  them  by  the   Hand,  and  by  such  signs  of       H 
Friendship  as  he  made,  the  Peace  was  concluded,  ratified        ■ 
and  confirmed  by  all  thai  were  present :  And  others  that        I 
were  gone,  were  again  call'd   back,  and  they  all  very  joy-        M 
fulty  accepted  of  a  Peace.     This  became  universal  over  all       H 
the  Island,  to  the  great  joy  of  the  Inhabitants.     There  was       H 
no  ringing  of  Bells  nor  Bonfires  made,  for  that  is  not  the       V 
Custom  here;  but  Gladness  appcar'd  in  their  Countenances, 
for  now  they  could  go  out  and  fish  again,  without  fear  of 
being  taken.     This  Peace  was  imt  more  welcome  to  them 
than  to  us ;  for  now  the  Inhabitants  brought  their  Melory 
again    to   us ;  which   wc   bought    for  old   Rags,   and    small 
stripes  of  Cloath,  about  as  broad  as  the  Palm  of  ones  Hand. 
I  did  not  see  above  five  or  six  Hens,  for  they  have  but         J 
few  on  the  Island.      At  some   places  we  saw  some  small         I 
Hogs,  which  wc  would  have  bought  of  them  reasonably;         I 
but  wc  would  not  ofltnd  our  Achinese  Friends,  who  were        I 
Mahometans.  I 

We  stayed  here  two  or  three  days  and  then  rowed  " 
toward  the  South-end  of  the  Island,  keeping  on  the  East- 
side,  and  We  were  kindly  received  by  the  Natives  wherc- 
evcr  we  came.  When  we  arrived  at  the  South-end  of  the 
Island,  we  fitted  our  selves  with  Melory  and  Water.  We 
bought  3  or  4  Loaves  of  Melory.  and  about  la  large  Coco- 
nut shells,  that  had  all  the  Kernel  uken  out,  yet  were 
preserved  whole,  except  only  a  small  hole  at  one  end;  and 
all  these  held  for  us  aboui  3  gallons  and  a  half  of  Water. 
Wc  bought  also  2  or  3  Bambocs,  that  held  about  4  or  5 
Gallons  more  :  This  was  our  Sea-store. 

Wc  now  designed   to  go  10  Achin,  *  Town    on  the 
N.  W.  end    of  the    IsUnd  Sumatra,  distant    from  hence 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AN.  about  40  leagues,  bearing  South  South  East.  We  only 
1688  waited  for  the  Western  Monsoon,  which  we  had  expected 
a  great  while,  and  now  it  seemed  to  be  at  hand ;  for  the 
Clouds  b^an  to  hang  their  Heads  to  the  Eastward,  and 
at  last  moved  gently  that  way ;  and  though  the  Wind  was 
still  at  East,  yet  this  was  an  infallible  Sign^  that  the 
Western  Monsoon  was  nigh. 

'  ^  An  infiiUiblc  Sign  **  at  all  times  of  an  impending  change  of  wind. 


47 


76 


CHAP.   XVllI 


t  Author,  with  umt  tthrr^  finis  to  Sea  in  an  ofien  Boat,  dtiigmng 
far  Achin.  Their  /tcfommodatiom  fir  ihr'ir  Ftyagt.  Change  of 
lytalhtr  ;  it  Hah  ahoul  the  Sun,  anU  a  vioUnt  Storm.  ThAr 
great  Danger  and  Ditlrrti,  Cudito,  a  Tamn  and  Harbour  an  the 
Coail  of  Malacca.  Pulo  IVay.  Golden  Mountain  on  the  hit  of 
Sumatra  :  River  and  Town  of  Paiiengf-Jonea,  on  Sumatra,  near 
Diamond-point  ,■  where  thrjgo  aihort  very  lick,  and  art  iind/y  tnttr- 
taintd  by  the  Oromiay,  and  Inhaiilanli.  They  go  ihenct  to  Achin. 
Thr  Author  it  examined  hefori  the  Shatandtr  ;  and  tain  Phyiid  of 
a  Malayan  Doctor.  Hit  long  l/ltirii.  He  lett  out  toward)  fficoiar 
again,  hut  rtturm  suddenly  to  Achin  Road.  He  makes  several 
ytyagti  tktnci,  ti  Tonqutrn,  to  Malacca,  to  Fort  Si,  Gforgt,  and 
to  Bencoufi,  an  English  Factory  on  Sumatra.  An  Account  of  iht 
Ship's  Crew  who  set  the  Author  ashore  at  Nicohar.  Some  go  to 
Trangambar,  a  Danish  Fort  on  CeromanAel ;  otheri  to  Fort  St. 
Gttrgt !  many  It  the  Mogul's  Camp.  Of  the  Ptuns ;  and  how 
John  Oliver  made  himsflf  a  Captain.  Capt.  Read,  with  the  rest, 
/saving  plundered  a  riih  Portuguese  Ship  near  Ceylon,  goes  to  .Mad- 
agatair,  and  ships  himself  off  ihencr  in  a  Nrw-Tori  Ship.  Tht 
Traverses  of  tht  reit  te  Johanna,  (Jc.  Their  Ship,  tht  Cygnet  of 
Londtn,  now  lies  sunt  in  Augustin  Bay  at  Madagascar,  Of  Printt 
Jeoly,  the  painted  Man,  whom  Ihe  Author  brought  ivith  him  to 
England,  and  who  died  at  Oxford.  Of  hit  Country  the  lilt  of 
Meangii  I  tht  CInits  there,  ld(.  The  Author  is  made  Gunner  of 
BtneanS,  but  it  forced  to  slip  away  from  thence  to  come  far 
England. 

IT  was  the  15th  diy  of  May,  1688,  about  four  a  Clock    ak. 
in    the    Afternoon,    when    wc    left    Nkobar    Island,  ■'■** 
directing  our  Course  towards  Achin,  being  eight  Men 
of  us  in  Company,  viz.,  three  English,  four  Malayans, 
who  were  born  at  Achin,  and  the  Mungrel  Portuguese. 
477 


r 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

^^  Our  Vessel,  the  Nicobar  Canoa,  was  not  one  of  the 

i6ss  l^gg^t,  nor  of  the  least  size :  She  was  much  about  the 
Burthen  of  one  of  our  London  Wherries  below  Bridge,  and 
built  sharp  at  both  ends,  like  the  fore  part  of  a  Wherry. 
She  was  deeper  than  a  Wherry,  but  not  so  broad,  and  was 
so  thin  and  light,  that  when  empty,  four  Men  could  launch 
her,  or  hale  her  ashore  on  a  sandy  Bay.  We  had  a  good 
substantial  Mast,  and  a  Mat  Sail,  and  good  Outlagers 
lash*d  very  fast  and  firm  on  each  side  the  Vessel,  being  made 
of  strong  Poles.  So  that  while  these  continued  firm  the 
Vessel  could  not  overset,  which  she  would  easily  have  done  ^ 
without  them,  and  with  them  too  had  they  not  been  made 
very  strong ;  and  we  were  therefore  much  beholding  to  our 
Achinese  Companions  for  this  Contrivance. 

These  Men  were  none  of  them  so  sensible  of  the 
Danger  as  Mr.  Hall  and  my  self,  for  they  all  confided  so 
much  in  us,  that  they  did  not  so  much  as  scruple  anything 
that  we  did  approve  of.  Neither  was  Mr.  Hall  so  well 
provided  as  I  was,  for  before  we  left  the  Ship,  I  had 
purposely  consulted  our  Draft  of  the  East-Indies,  (for  we 
had  but  one  in  the  Ship)  and  out  of  that  I  had  written  in 
my  Pocket-book  an  account  of  the  bearing  and  distance  of 
all  the  Malacca  Coast,  and  that  of  Sumatra,  Pegu,  and  Siam, 
and  also  brought  away  with  me  a  Pocket-Compass  for  my 
Direction  in  any  Enterprize  that  I  should  undertake. 

The  Weather  at  our  setting  out  was  very  fair  clear  and 
hot.  The  Wind  was  still  at  S.  E.  a  very  small  Breeze,  just 
fanning  the  Air,  and  the  Clouds  were  moving  gently  from 
West  to  East,  which  gave  us  hopes  that  the  Winds  were 
either  at  West  already  abroad  at  Sea,  or  would  be  so  in  a 
very  short  time.  We  took  this  opportunity  of  fair  Weather, 
being  in  hopes  to  accomplish  our  Voyage  to  Achin,  before 
the  Western  Monsoon  was  set  in  strong,  knowing  that 
we  should  have   very  blustering  Weather    after  this  fair 

*  The  vessel  being  extremely  crank,  with  gunnals  "not  above  three 
inches  above  the  water."  The  Nicobar  boats  are  built,  as  a  rule,  for  oars 
and  paddles.  The  easterly  monsoon  does  not  reach  these  islands  in  its  full 
force,  owing  to  the  presence  of  Sumatra  and  the  Malay  Peninsula  directly 
to  windward.  As  the  islanders  cannot  depend  on  sailing-winds  for  at  least 
half  the  year,  they  do  most  of  their  travelling  under  oars  or  paddles. 

478 


THEY   PROCEED   ON  THEIR    VOYAGE 

Weather,  especially  at    the   first  coming  of  the  Western    as. 
Monsoon.  '"" 

Wc  rowed  therefore  away  lo  the  Southward,  supposing 
that  when  wc  were  clear  from  the  Island  wc  should  have  a 
true  Wind,  as  we  call  it;  for  the  Land  hales  the  Wind; 
and  we  often  find  the  Wind  at  Sea  different  from  what  it  is 
near  the  Shore.  Wc  rowed  with  4  Oars,  taking  our  turns: 
Mr.  Hall  and  I  steered  also  by  turns,  for  none  of  the  rest 
were  capable  of  it.  We  rowed  the  first  Afternoon,  and  the 
Night  ensuing,  about  twelve  Leagues  by  my  Judgment.  Our 
Course  was  South  South  East;  but  the  16th  Day  in  the 
Morning,  when  the  Sun  was  an  Hour  high,  we  saw  the 
Island  from  whence  we  came,  bearing  N.  W.  by  N. 
Therefore  I  found  we  had  gone  a  point  more  to  the  East 
than  I  intended,  for  which  reason  we  steered  S.  by  K. 

In  the  Afternoon  at  4  a  Clock,  we  had  a  gentle  Brcese 
at  W.  S.  W.  which  continued  so  till  9,  all  which  time  we 
laid  down  our  Oars,  and  steered  away  S.  S.  E.  I  was  then 
at  the  Helm,  and  I  found  by  the  ripling  of  the  Sea,  that 
there  was  a  strong  Current  against  us.  It  made  a  great 
noise  that  might  be  heard  near  half  a  Mile.  At  9  a  Clock 
it  fell  calm,  and  so  continued  till  10.  Then  the  Wind 
sprung  up  again,  and  blew  a  fresh  Breeze  all  Night. 

The  1 7th  Day  in  the  Morning  we  lookt  out  for  the  Island 
Sumatra,  supposing  that  we  were  now  within  20  Leagues 
of  it ;  for  we  had  rowed  and  sailed,  by  our  reckoning,  24 
Leagues  from  Nicobar  Island ;  and  the  distance  from 
Nicobar  to  Achin  is  about  40  Leagues.  But  we  lookt  in 
vain  for  the  Island  Sumatra ;  for  turning  our  selves  about, 
we  saw,  to  our  Grief  Nicobar  Island,  lying  W.  N.  W.  and 
not  above  8  Leagues  distant.  By  this  it  was  visible,  that 
Wc  had  met  a  very  strong  Current  against  us  in  the  Night. 
But  the  Wind  frwhned  on  us,  and  wc  made  the  best  use 
of  it  white  the  Weather  continued  fair.  At  noon  we  had  an 
ObKtvation  of  the  Sun,  my  lat.  was  6  d.  55  m.  and  Mr. 
Hall's  was  7  d.  N. 

The  1 8th  Day  the  Wind  freshned  on  us  again,  and 
the  Sky  began  to  be  clouded.  It  was  indifferent  clear  till 
Noon,  and  wc  thought  to  have  had  an  Obeervation  ;  but 
479 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  wc  were  hindred  by  the  Clouds  that  covered  the  Face  of 
'^^  the  Sun,  when  it  came  on  the  Meridian.  This  often 
happens  that  we  are  disappointed  of  making  Observations, 
by  the  Sun*s  being  clouded  at  Noon,  though  it  shines 
clear  both  before  and  after,  especially  in  places  near  the 
Sun ;  and  this  obscuring  of  the  Sun  at  Noon,  is  commonly 
sudden  and  unexpected,  and  for  about  half  an  hour  or 
more. 

We  had  then  also  a  very  ill  Presage,  by  a  great  Circle 
about  the  Sun  (5  or  6  times  the  Diameter  of  it)  which 
seldom  appears,  but  storms  of  Wind,  or  much  Rain  ensue. 
Such  Circles  about  the  Moon  are  more  frequent,  but  of 
less  import.  We  do  commonly  take  great  notice  of  these 
that  are  about  the  Sun,  observing  if  there  be  any  Breich 
in  the  Circle,  and  in  what  Quarter  the  Breach  is  ;  for  from 
thence  we  commonly  find  the  greatest  stress  of  the  Wind 
will  come.  I  must  confess  that  I  was  a  little  ansdous  at 
the  sight  of  this  Circle,  and  wishM  heartily  that  we  were 
near  some  Land.  Yet  I  shewed  no  sign  of  it  to  discourage 
my  Consorts,  but  made  a  Vertue  of  Necessity,  and  put  a 
good  Countenance  oa  the  Matter. 

I  told  Mr.  Hall,  that  if  the  Wind  became  too  strong 
and  violent,  as  I  feared  it  would,  it  being  even  then  very 
strong,  we  must  of  necessity  steer  away  before  the  Wind 
and  Sea,  till  better  Weather  presented;  and  that  as  the 
Winds  were  now,  we  should,  instead  of  about  20  Leagues 
to  Achin,  be  driven  60  and  70  Leagues  to  the  Coast  of 
Cudda,^  or  Queda,  a  Kingdom,  and  Town,  and  Harbour 
of  Trade  on  the  Coast  of  Malacca. 

The  Winds  therefore  bearing  very  hard,  we  rolled  up 
the  Foot  of  our  Sail  on  a  Pole  fastned  to  it,  and  settled 
our  Yard  within  three  Foot  of  the  Canoa  sides,  so  that  we 
had  now  but  a  small  Sail ;  yet  it  was  still  too  big,  consider- 
ing the  Wind ;  for  the  Wind  being  on  our  broad  side, 
prest  her  down  very  much,  tho*  supported  by  her  Outlagers; 
insomuch  that  the  Poles  of  the  Outlagers  going  from  the 
sides  of  their  Vessel,  bent  as  if  they  would  break;  and 

>  Kedah,  or  Old  Kcdah,  on  the  Malay  Peninsula,  in  lat  5°  48*  N,  long. 
100°  48'  E. 

480 


null 
Hbic 


I 


THEIR    DANGER    INCREASES 

should  they  have  broken,  our  overturning  and  perishing 
had  been  inevitable.  Besides,  the  Sea  cncreasing,  would  ' 
soon  have  filled  the  Vessel  this  way.  Yet  thus  wc  mule  a 
shift  to  bear  up  with  the  side  of  the  Vessel  against  the 
Wind  for  a  while;  But  the  Wind  still  increasing,  afKim 
one  a  Clock  in  the  Afternoon  wc  put  away  right  before 
Wind  and  Sea,  continuing  to  run  thus  all  the  Afternoon, 
■d  part  of  the  Night  ensuing.'  The  Wind  continued 
icreasing  all  the  Aftenioon,  and  the  Sea  still  swelled 
higher,  and  often  broke,  but  did  us  no  damage ;  for  the 
ends  of  the  Vessel  being  very  narrow,  he  that  steered 
received  and  broke  the  Sea  on  his  back,  and  so  kept  it 
from  coming  in  so  much  as  to  endanger  the  Vessel ; 
Though  much  Water  would  come  in,  which  we  were  forced 
to  keep  heaving  out  continually.  And  by  this  time  we 
saw  it  was  well  that  we  had  altered  our  Course,  every 
Wave  would  tise  have  fiU'd  and  sunk  us,  taking  the 
side  of  the  Vessel  :  And  though  our  Outlagers  were  well 
lash'd  down  to  the  Canoas  bottom  with  Rattans,  yet  they 
must  probably  have  yielded  to  such  a  Sea  as  this ;  when 
even  before  they  were  plunged  under  Water,  and  bent  like 
twigs. 

The  Evening  of  this  i8th  day  was  very  dismal.  The 
!€ky  look'd  very  black,  being  covered  with  dark  Clouds, 
the  Wind  blew  hard,  and  the  Seas  ran  high.  The  Sea  was 
already  roaring  in  a  white  Foam  about  us;  a  dark  Night 
coming  on,  and  no  Land  in  sight  to  shelter  us,  and  our 
little  Ark  in  danger  to  be  swallowed  by  every  Wave;  and, 
what  was  worst  of  all,  none  of  us  thought  our  selves 
prepared  for  another  World.  The  Reader  may  better  guess 
than  I  can  express,  the  Confusion  that  we  were  all  in.  I 
had  been  in  many  eminent  Dangers  before  now,  some  of 
which  1  have  already  related,  but  the  worst  of  them  all  was 
but  a  Play-game  in  comparison  with  this.  !  must  confess 
that  I  was  in  great  Conflicts  of  Mind  at  this  time.  Other 
Dangers  came  not  upon  me  with  such  a  leisurely  and 
dreadful  Solemnity.     A  sudden  Skirmish  or  Engagement, 

'  They  were  in  one  of  the  very  violeni  local  south -westerly  or  wesi-souih- 
westerly  gales  known  as  "  Sumutras," 

VOL.  I.  481  2  H 


CAPTAIN  DAMPIER*S  VOYACSil 

AN.  or  so,  was  nothing  when  ones  Blood  was  up,  and  poshM 
i^s  forwards  with  eager  Expectations.  But  here  I  nad  a 
lingring  view  of  approaching  Death,  and  little  or  no  hopes 
of  escaping  it ;  and  I  must  confess  that  my  Gotirage,  which 
I  had  hitherto  kept  up,  failed  me  hare ;  and  I  imide  Tery 
sad  Reflections  on  my  former  lif e,  and  look'd  back  mth 
Horror  and  Detestation,  on  Actions  which  before  I  dis- 
liked, but  now  I  trembled  at  the  remembrance  of.  T  had 
long  before  this  repented  me  of  that  roving  course  of  Lifc^ 
but  never  with  such  concern  as  now.  I  did  also  call  to 
mind  the  many  nuraculous  Acts  of  God's  Providence 
*  towards  me  in  the  whole  course  of  my  Life,  of  whichi  Idnd 
I  believe  few  Men  have  met  with  the  like.  For  all  these  I 
returned  Thanks  in'  a  peculiar  Manner,  and  thb  once  more 
desired  God*s  As^tance,  and  composed  my  Mind,  as  well 
as  I  could,  in  the  hopes  of  it,  and  as  the  Event  shewed,  I 
was  not  disappointed  of  my  hopes. 

Submitting  our  selves  therefore  to  God's  good  Provi- 
dence, and  taking  all  the  Gu-e  we  could  to  preserve  our 
Lives,  Mr.  Hall  and  I  took  turns  to  steer,  and  the  rest 
took  turns  to  heave  out  the  Water,  and  thus  we  provided 
to  spend  the  most  doleful  Night  I  ever  was  in.  About  lo 
a  Clock  it  began  to  Thunder,  Lighten,  and  Rain ;  but  the 
Rain  was  very  welcome  to  us,  having  drank  up  all  the 
Water  we  brought  from  the  Island. 

The  Wind  at  first  blew  harder  than  before,  but  within 
half  an  hour  it  abated,  and  became  more  moderate;  and 
the  Sea  also  asswaged  of  its  Fury ;  and  then  by  a  lighted 
Match,  of  which  we  kept  a  piece  burning  on  purpose,  we 
looked  on  our  Compass,  to  see  how  we  steered,  and  found 
our  Course  to  be  still  East.  We  had  no  occasion  to  look 
on  the  Compass  before,  for  we  steered  right  before  the 
Wind,  which  if  it  shifted  we  had  been  obliged  to  have 
altered  our  Course  accordingly.  But  now  it  being  abated, 
we  found  our  Vessel  lively  enough  with  that  small  Sail 
which  was  then  aboard,  to  hail  to  our  former  Course, 
S.  S.  E.  which  accordingly  we  did,  being  now  in  hopes 
again  to  get  to  the  Island  Sumatra. 

But  about  2  a  clock  in  the  Morning  of  the   19th  day, 

482 


HARD    RAINS— THEY   SEE   LAND 

we  had  another  Gust  of  Wind,  with  much  Thunder, 
Lightning  »nd  Rain,  which  lasted  till  Day,  and  obliged  us  ' 
to  put  before  the  Wind  again,  steering  thus  for  several 
Hours.  It  was  very  dark,  and  the  hard  Kain  soaked  us 
so  thoroughly,  that  wc  had  not  one  dry  Thread  about  us. 
The  Kain  chill'd  us  extrcamly ;  for  any  fresh  Water  is 
much  colder  than  that  of  the  Sea.  For  even  in  the  coldest 
Climates  the  Sea  is  warm,  and  in  the  hottest  Climates  the 
Rain  is  cold  and  unwholsome  for  Man's  Body.  In  this 
Wet  starveling  plight  wc  spent  the  tedious  Night.  Never 
did  poor  Mariners  on  a  Lec-shore  more  earnestly  long  for 
the  dawning  Light  then  we  did  now.  At  length  the  Day 
appeared ;  but  with  such  dark  black  Clouds  near  the 
Horizon,  that  the  first  glimpse  of  the  Dawn  appeared  30 
or  40  degrees  high ;  which  was  dreadful  enough ;  for  it 
is  a  common  Saying  among  Seamen,  and  true,  as  I  have 
experienced,  that  a  high  Dawn  will  have  high  Winds,  and 
a  low  Dawn,  small  Winds. 

We  continued  our  Course  still  Kast,  before  Wind  and 
Sea,  till  about  8  a  Clock  in  the  morning  of  this  19th  day; 
and  then  one  of  our  Malayan  Friends  cried  out,  Pulo  Way. 
Mr.  Hall,  and  Ambrose  and  I,  thought  the  P'cllow  had 
said  Pull  away,  an  Expression  usual  among  English  Seamen, 
when  they  are  Rowing.  And  we  wondered  what  he  meant 
by  it,  till  wc  saw  him  point  to  his  Consorts;  and  then  we 
looking  that  way,  saw  Land  appearing,  like  an  Island,  and 
all  our  Malayans  said  it  was  an  Island  at  the  N.  W.  end  of 
Sumatra,  called  Way;  for  I*ulo  Way,  is  the  Island  Way.' 
We.  who  were  dropping  with  Wet,  Cold,  and  Hungry, 
were  all  over-joyed  at  the  sight  of  the  Land,  and  presently 
marked  its  bearing.  It  bore  South,  and  the  Wind  was  still 
It  West,  a  strong  gale;  but  the  Sea  did  not  pun  so  high 
as  in  the  Night.  Therefore  wc  trimmed  our  small  Sail  no 
bigger  than  an  Apron,  and  steered  with  it.  Now  our 
Outlagcrs  did  us  a  great  kindness  again,  for  although  we 
had  but  a  small  Sail,  yet  the  Wind  was  strong,  and  prcst 
,  down  our  Vessel's  side  very  much :  But  being  suppcu-ted 

■  11  is  Mill  ntlcd  Way  Itlaml. 
483 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  by  the  Outlagers,  we  could  brook  it  well  enough,  which 
'6*8  otherwise  we  could  not  have  done. 

About  Noon  we  saw  more  Land  beneath  the  supposed 
Pulo  Way;  and  steering  towards  it,  before  Night  we  saw 
all  the  Coast  of  Sumatra,  and  found  the  Errors  of  our 
Achinese;  for  the  high  Land  that  we  first  saw,  which  then 
appear'd  like  an  Island,  was  not  Fulo  Way,  but  a  great 
high  Mountun'  on  the  Island  Suntatra,  called  l^  the 
English,  the  Golden  Mountun.  Our  Wind  continued  tUt 
about  7  a  Clock  at  night;  then  it  abated,  and  at  lo  a 
Clock  it  died  away :  And  then  we  stuck  to  oar  Oact 
again,  tbo  all  of  us  quite  tired  with  our  f<wmer  Fatigues 
and  Hardships. 

The  next  Morning,  bang  the  20th  day,  we  saw  all  the 
low  Land  plain,  and  judged  ourselves  not  above  8  Leagues 
off.  About  8  a  Clock  in  the  Morning  we  had  the  Wind 
again  at  West,  a  fresh  gale,  and  steering  in  still  f<K-  the 
S^ore,  at  5  a  Clock  in  the  Afternoon  we  run  to  the  Mouth 
of  a  Itiver  on  the  Island  Sumatra,  called  Passange  Jonca.' 
It  is  34  Leagues  to  the  Eastward  of  Achin,  and  6  Leagues 
to  the  West  of  Diamond  Point,  which  makes  with  three 
Angles  of  a  Rhombus,  and  is  low  Land. 

Our  Malayans  were  very  well  acquainted  here,  and 
carried  us  to  a  small  Fishing  Village,  within  a  Mile  of  the 
River's  Mouth,  called  also  by  the  name  of  the  River, 
Passange  Jonca.  The  Hardships  of  this  Voyage,  with  the 
scorching  heat  of  the  Sun,  at  our  first  setting  out,  and  the 
cold  Rain,  and  our  continuing  Wet  for  the  last  two  days, 
cast  us  all  into  Fevers,  so  that  now  we  are  not  able  to  help 
each  other,  nor  so  much  as  to  get  our  Canoa  up  to  the 
Village ;  but  our  Malayans  got  some  of  the  Townsmen  to 
bring  her  up. 

The  News  of  our  Arrival  being  noised  abroad,  one  of 
the  Oramkai's,  or  Noblemen  of  the  Island,  came  in  the 
Night  to  see  us.  We  were  then  lying  in  a  small  Hut,  at 
the  end  of  the  Town,  and  it  being  late,  this  Lord  only 
viewed  us,  and  having  spoken  with  our  Malayans,  went 

*  Either  the  Queen's  Peak  or  Fryar's  Hood.  '  Passanjan. 

48+ 


RECEPTION   AT   PASSANGE  JONCA 

away  again;  but  he  returned  to  us  again  the  next  day,  and  ak. 
provided  a  large  House  for  us  to  live  in,  till  wc  should  be  "** 
recovered  of  our  sickness;  ordering  the  Towns-People  to 
let  us  want  for  nothing.  The  Achinesc  Malayans  that 
came  with  us,  told  them  all  the  Circumstances  of  our 
Voyage ;  how  they  were  taken  by  our  Ship,  and  where,  and 
how  we  that  came  with  them  were  Prisoners  aboard  the 
Ship,  and  had  been  set  ashore  together  at  Nicobar,  as  they 
Were.  It  was  for  this  reason  probably,  that  the  Gentlemen 
of  Sumatra  were  thus  extraordinary  kind  to  us,  to  provide 
Ci'cry  thing  that  wc  had  need  of;  nay,  they  would  force  us 
to  accept  of  Presents  from  them,  that  wc  knew  not  what 
L  to  do  with ;  as  young  BufFaiocs,  Goats.  &c.  for  these  wc 
I  would  turn  loose  at  Night,  after  the  Gentlemen  that  gave 
I  them  to  us  were  gone,  for  wc  were  prompted  by  our 
Achincse  Consorts  to  accept  of  them,  for  fear  of  disoblig- 
iDg  by  our  Refusal,  But  the  Coco-Nuts,  Plantains,  Fowls, 
E^s,  Fish,  and  Rice,  we  kept  for  our  u*c.  The  Malayans 
I  that  accompanied  us  from  Nicobar,  separated  themselves 
I  from  us  now,  living  at  one  end  of  the  House  by  themselves, 
i  fw  they  were  Mahometans,  as  all  those  of  the  Kingdom  of 
Achin  arc ;  and  though  during  our  Passage  by  Sea  to- 
gether, wc  made  them  be  contented  to  drink  their  Water 
out  of  the  same  Coco-shell  with  us;  j"et  being  now  no 
longer  under  that  Necessity,  they  again  took  up  their  ac- 
customed Nicety  and  Rcscrvedncss.  They  all  lay  sick,  and 
as  their  sickness  increased,  one  of  them  threatned  us,  that 
if  any  of  them  died,  the  rest  would  kill  us,  for  having 
brought  them  this  Voyage ;  yet  I  question  whether  they 
would  have  attempml,  or  the  Country  People  have  suffered 
it.  Wc  made  a  shift  to  dress  our  own  Food,  for  none  of 
ifaese  People,  though  they  were  very  kind  in  giving  us  any 
thing  that  we  wanted,  would  yet  come  near  us,  to  assist 
us  in  dressing  our  Victuals:  Nay,  they  would  not  touch 
any  thing  that  wc  used.  Wc  had  all  Fevers,  and  therefore 
took  turns  10  dress  Victuals,  according  as  w  had  strength 
to  do  it,  or  Stomachs  to  cat  it.  I  found  my  Fever  to 
increase,  and  my  Head  so  distempered,  that  I  could  scarce 
•tand,  therefore  I  whetted  and  sharpened  my  Penknife, 
4»5 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 

AW.  in  order  to  let  my  aelf  Blood;  but  I  could  not,  for  my 

'^^  Kniie  was  too  blunt. 

We  stayed  here  ten  or  twelve  days,  in  hopes  to  recover 
'Our  Health;  but  finding  no  amendment,  we  desired  to  go 
to  Achin.  But  we  were  delayed  by  the  Natives,  who  had 
a  desire-  to  have  kept  Mr.  Halt  and  my  self,  to  Sail  in 
tluir  Vessels  to  Malacca,  CuddaJ  or  to  other  places 
whither  they  Trade.  But  finding  us  more  desirous  to 
be  with  our  0)untry-men,  in  our  Factory  at  Achin,  they 
provided  a  large  Proc  to  carry  us  thither,  we  not  being 
able  to  nunage  our  own  Canoa.  Besides,  before  this,  three 
of  our  Malayan  C>mrade3  were  gone  very  sick  into  the 
Country,  and  only  one  of  them  and  the  Portuguese  ro* 
mained  mih  us,  accompanying  us  to  Achin,  and  uiey  bodi 
as  mck  as  we. 

It  was  the  beginning  of  June,  i68S,  when  we  left 
Passange  Jonca.  We  had  4  men  to  row,  one  to  steer,  and 
a  Gentleman  of  the  Country,  that  went  purposely  to  give 
an  Information  to  the  Government  of  our  Arrival.  We 
were  but  three  days  and  nights  in  our  Passage,  having  Sea- 
breezes  by  day,  and  Land-winds  by  night,  and  very  fair 
Weather. 

When  wc  arrived  at  Achin,'  I  was  carried  before  the 
Shabander,  the  chief  Magistrate  in  the  City.  One  Mr. 
Dennis  Driscal,  an  Irish-man,  and  a  Resident  there,  in  the 
Factory  which  our  East  India  Company  had  there  then, 
was  Interpreter.  I  being  weak,  was  suffered  to  stand  in 
the  Shabander's  Presence :  For  it  is  their  custom  to  make 
Men  sit  on  the  Floor,  as  they  do,  cross-legg'd  like  Taylors  : 
But  I  had  not  strength  then  to  pluck  up  my  Heels  in  that 
manner.  The  Shabander  asked  of  me  several  Questions, 
especially  how  we  durst  adventure  to  come  in  a  Canoa 
from  the  Nicobar  Islands  to  Sumatra.  I  told  him,  that  I 
had  been  accustomed  to  hardships  and  hazards,  therefore  I 
did  with  much  freedom  undertake  it.     He  enquired  also 

'  Achin,  or  Acheen,  lies  at  the  N.W.  end  of  Sumatra,  between  the  King's 
Point  and  Point  Gingion.  It  is  built  on  three  islands  at  the  mouths  of  Uie 
Acbin  River.  In  Dampier's  time  it  was  an  important  trading  station, 
protected  by  a  fort, 

486 


HE   TAKES    PHYSIC    OF   A   MALAYAN 

concerning  our  Ship,  whence  she  came,  &c.  I  told  him,  ak.  ' 
from  the  South  Seas  ;  that  she  had  ranged  about  the  Philip-  '^^ 
pine  Islands,  Sec.  and  was  now  gone  towards  Arabia,  and 
the  Red  Sea,  The  Malayans  also  and  Portuguese  were 
afterward  examined,  and  confirmed  what  1  declared,  and  in 
less  than  half  an  Hour,  I  was  dismist  with  Mr.  Driscal, 
who  then  lived  in  the  English  East  India  Company's 
Factor)'.  He  provided  a  Room  for  us  to  lie  in,  and  some 
Victuals. 

Three  Days  after  our  arrival  here,  our  Portuguese  died 
of  a  Fever.  What  became  of  our  Malayans  I  know  not, 
Ambrose  lived  not  long  after,  Mr.  Hall  also  was  so  weak, 
that  I  did  not  think  he  would  recover.  I  was  the  best ; 
but  still  very  sick  of  a  Fever,  and  little  likely  to  live. 
Therefore  Mr.  Driscal,  and  some  other  Knglishmcn,  pcr- 
swaded  me  to  take  some  Purging  Physick  of  a  Malayan 
Doctor.  1  took  their  advice,  being  willing  to  get  Ease: 
But  after  three  Doses,  each  a  lai^e  Calabash  of  nasty  stuff, 
6nding  no  amendment,  I  thought  to  desist  from  more 
Physick :  but  was  pcrswadcd  to  take  one  Dose  more ; 
which  I  did,  and  it  wrought  so  violently,  that  I  thought  it 
would  have  ended  my  (lav's.  I  struggled  till  I  hail  been 
about  20  or  30  times  at  Stool  :  But  it  working  so  quick 
with  me,  with  little  Intermission,  and  my  Strength  being 
almost  spent,  I  even  threw  my  self  down  once  for  all,  and 
had  above  60  Stcxtls  in  all  before  it  left  off  working.  I 
thought  my  Malayan  Doctor,  whom  they  so  much  com- 
mended, would  have  killed  mc  out-right.  I  continued 
extraordinary  weak  for  some  days  after  his  drenching  me 
thus:  But  my  Fever  left  me  for  above  a  week:  After 
which,  it  rctunied  upon  mc  again  for  a  Twelve  Month,  and 
I  Flux  with  it. 

However,  when  I  was  a  little  recovered  from  the  Kffcas 
of  my  Drench,  1  made  a  shift  to  go  abroad :  And  having 
been  kindly  invited  to  Capl.  Bowrej-'s  House  there,  my 
first  visit  was  to  him ;  who  had  a  Ship  in  the  Road,  but 
lived  ashore.  This  Gentleman  was  extraoniinary  kind  to 
us  all,  particularly  to  me,  and  importuned  mc  to  go  his 
Boatiwun  CoPenia;  whither  he  was  bound,  with  a  design 

487 


CAPTAIN  DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 
to  sell  hU  Ship  there,  as  I  was  told,  though  not  by  himself!- ' 
'  From  thence  he  intended  to  pass  with  the  Caravan  to 
Aleppo,  and  so  home  for  England.  His  Business  required 
him  to  stay  some  time  longer  at  Achin ;  I  judge,  to  sell 
some  Commodities,  that  he  had  not  yet  disposed  of.  Yet 
he  chose  rather  to  leave  the  disposal  of  them  to  some 
Merchant  there,  and  make  a  short  trip  to  the  Nicobar 
Islands  in  the  mean  time,  and  on  his  return  to  take  in  his 
Edicts,  and  so  proceed  towards  Persia.  This  was  a  sudden 
Resolution  of  Captain  Howry's,  presently  after  the  arrival 
of  a  small  Frigot  from  Siam,  with  an  Ambassador  from  the 
King  of  ^m,  to  the  Queen  of  Achin.  The  Ambassador 
was  a  Frmchman  by  Nation.  The  Vessel  that  he  came  in 
was  but  small,  yet  very  well  mann'd,  and  fitted  for  a  Fight. 
Therefore  it  was  generally  supposed  here,  that  Captain 
Bowry  was  afraid  to  lye  in  Achin  Road,  because  the  Siamers 
were  now  at  Wars  with  the  English,  and  he  was  not  able 
to  defend  his  Ship,  if  he  should  be  attack'd  by  them. 

But  whatever  made  him  think  of  going  to  the  Nicobar 
Islands,  he  provided  to  Sail ;  and  took  me,  Mr.  I&li,  and 
Ambrose  with  him ;  though  all  of  us  M  ^ck,  and  weak, 
that  we  could  do  him  no  service.  It  was  sometime  about 
the  beginning  of  June  when  we  sailed  out  of  Achin  Road : 
But  we  met  with  the  Winds  at  N.  W.  with  turbulent 
Weather,  which  forced  us  back  again  in  two  days  time. 
Yet  he  gave  us  each  12  Mess  apiece,  a  Gold  Coin,  each  of 
which  is  about  the  Value  of  1 5  d.  English.  So  he  gave 
over  that  Design :  And  some  English  Ships  coming  into 
Achin  Road,  he  was  not  afraid  of  the  Siamers  who  lay 
there. 

After  this,  he  again  invited  me  to  his  house  at  Achin, 
and  treated  me  always  with  Wine  and  good  Cheer,  and 
still  importuned  me  to  go  with  him  to  Persia :  But  I  being 
very  weak,  and  fearing  the  Westerly  Winds  would  create 
a  great  deal  of  trouble,  did  not  give  him  a  positive  Answer ; 
especially  because  I  thought  I  might  get  a  better  Voyage 
in  the  English  Ships  newly  arrived,  or  some  others  now 
expected  here.  It  was  this  Captain  Bowry  who  sent  the 
Letter  from  Borneo,  directed  to  the  Chief  of  the  English 
488 


HIS   VOYAGE  TO  TONQUEEN,  ETC. 

Factory    at    Mindanao,    of   which    mention    is    made    in    ah 
Chapter  XIII.  •'"" 

A  short  time  after  this,  Captain  Wcidcn  arrived  here 
from  Fori  St.  George,  in  a  Ship  called  the  Curtana,  bound 
to  Tonquccii,  This  being  a  more  agreeable  Voyage  than 
to  Persia,  at  this  time  of  the  year;  besides,  that  the  Ship 
was  better  accommodated,  especially  with  a  Surgeon,  and  1 
being  still  sick  ;  I  therefore  chose  rather  to  serve  Captain 
Wcliicn  than  Captain  Bowry.  But  to  go  on  with  a  par- 
ticular account  of  that  Expedition,  were  to  carry  my  Reader 
back  again :  Whom  having  brought  thus  far  towards 
England  in  my  Circum-Navigalion  of  the  Globe,  I  shall 
not  weary  him  with  new  Rambles,  nor  so  much  swell  this 
Volume,  as  I  must  to  describe  the  Tour  I  made  in  those 
remote  parts  of  the  East  Indies,  from  and  to  Sumatra.  So 
that  my  Voyage  to  Tonquecn  at  this  time,  as  also  another 
to  Malacca  afterwards,  with  my  observations  in  ihcm,  and 
the  descriptions  of  those  and  the  Neighbouring  Countries; 
as  well  as  the  description  of  the  Island  Sumatra  it  self,  and 
therein  the  Kingdom  and  City  of  Achin,  Bencouli,  &c. 
I  shall  refer  to  another  place,  where  I  may  give  a  particular 
Relation  of  iheni.  In  short,  it  may  suffice,  that  I  set 
out  to  Tonquecn  with  Captain  Wcidcn  about  July  1688, 
and  returned  to  Achin  in  the  April  following.  I  staid 
here  111)  the  latter  end  of  September  1689,  and  making 
a  short  Vnyagc  to  Malacca,  came  thither  again  about 
Christmas.  Soon  after  that,  I  went  to  Fort  St.  George, 
and  Slaying  there  about  five  months,  I  returned  once  more 
to  Sumatra ;  not  to  Achin,  but  Bencouli,  an  English  Factory 
on  the  West  Coatt ;  of  which  I  was  Gunner  about  five 
months  more. 

So  that  having  brought  my  Reader  to  Sumatra,  without 
carrying  htm  back,  I  shall  bring  him  on  next  way  from 
thence  to  Kngland :  And  of  all  that  occurr'd  between  my 
first  setting  mit  from  this  Island  in  1688.  and  my  final 
de|unure  from  it  at  the  beginning  of  the  Year  1691,  I 
shall  only  take  notice  at  present  of  two  Passages;  which  I 
think  I  ought  not  to  omit. 

The  fan.  i>,  Out  at  my  return  from  Malacca,  a  little 
+89 


I 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AK.  before  Chriscmas,  1689, 1  found  ai  Achin  one  Mr.  Morgan, 
'***  who  was  one  of  our  Ship's  Crew  that  left  me  ashore  at 
Nicobar,  now  Mate  of  a  Danish  Ship  of  Trangambar ; ' 
which  b  a  Town  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandel,  near  Cape 
Comorin,  belonging  to  the  Dane's :  And  receiving  an 
account  of  our  Crew  from  him  and  others,  I  thought  it 
might  not  be  amiss  to  gratifie  the  Readers  Curiosity  there- 
with ;  who  would  probably  be  desirous  to  know  the  success 
of  those  Ramblers,  in  their  new  intended  Expedition  towards 
the  Red  Sea :  And  withal  I  thought  it  might  not  be 
unlikely  that  these  Papers  might  fall  into  the  hands  of 
some  of  our  London  Merchants,  who  were  concerned  in 
fitting  out  that  Ship;  which  1  said  formerly  was  called  the 
Cygnet  of  Lxindon,  sent  on  a  Trading  Voyage  into  the 
South  Seas,  under  the  command  of  Capt.  Swan :  And  that 
they  might  be  willing  to  have  a  particular  Information  of 
the  fate  of  their  Ship.*  And  by  the  way,  even  before  this 
meeting  with  Mr.  Morgan,  while  I  was  at  Tonqueen, 
January  1689,  I  met  with  an  English  Ship  in  the  River 
of  Tonqueen,  called  the  Rainbow  of  London,  Captain 
Poole  Commander;  by  whose  Mate,  Mr.  Barlow,  who 
was  returning  in  that  Ship  to  England,  I  sent  a  Pacquet, 
which  he  undertook  to  deliver  to  the  Merchants,  Owners 
of  the  Cygnet,  some  of  which  he  said  he  knew  :  Wherwn  I 
gave  a  particular  account  of  all  the  Course  and  Trans- 
actions of  their  Ship,  from  the  time  of  my  first  meeting 
it  in  the  South  Seas,  and  g<Hng  aboard  it  there,  to  its 
leaving  me  ashore  at  Nico^r.  But  I  never  could  hear 
that  either  that,  or  other  Letters  which  I  sent  at  the  same 
time,  were  received. 

To  proceed  therefore  with  Mr.  Morgan's  Relation : 
He  told  me,  That  when  they  in  the  Cygnet  went  away 
from  Nicobar,  in  pursuit  of  their  intended  Voyage  to 
Persia,  they  directed  their  Course  towards  Ceylon.  But 
not  being  able  to  weather  it,  the  Westerly  Monsoon  being 
hard  against  them,  they  were  obliged  to  seek  Refreshment 

'  Tranquebar. 

*  The  letters  which  Swan  wrote  from  Panama  Bay  had  warned  them  to 
exp«c(  the  worst. 


n 


OF  THE    CrCNET  AND    HER   CREW 

ast  of  Coromandel.     Here  this  mad  fickle  Crei 
I  upon  new  projects  again.      Their   Designs    nieeiing   '™^ 
such    delays   and   obstructions,   that  many  of  them 
grew  weary  of  it,  and  about    half  of  them  went  ashore. 
Of  this  number,   Mr.    Morgan,  who    told    me    this,  and 
Mr.  Herman  Coppingcr  the  Surgeon,  went  to  the  Danes 
at  Trangambar,  who   kindly  received  them.     There  they 
lived  very  well ;  and  Mr.  Morgan  was  employed  as  a  Mate 
in  a  Ship  of  theirs  at  this  time  to  Achin :  and  Captain 
Knox'  tells  me,  that   he  since  Commanded  the   Cartana, 
the  Ship   that    I   went    in    to   Tonquecn,  which    Captain 
Weldcn  having    sold   to   the  Mogul  s  Subjects,  they    em- 
ployed Mr.  Morgan  as  Captain  to  trade  in  her  for  them ;         J 
and  it  is  an  usual  thing  tor  the  trading  Indians  to  hire         I 
Europeans  to  go  Officers  on  board  their  Ships ;  especially         " 
Captains  and  Guimcrs. 

About  two  or  three  more  of  these  that  were  set  ashore, 
went  to  Fort  St.  George  ;  but  the  main  body  of  them  were 
for  going  into  the  Mogul's  Service.  Our  Seamen  arc  apt 
to  have  great  Notions  of  I  know  not  what  Profit  and 
Advantages  to  be  had  in  serving  the  Mogul ;  nor  do  they 
want  for  fine  stories  to  encourage  one  another  to  it.  It 
was  what  these  Men  had  long  been  thinking  and  talking 
of  as  a  fine  thing;  but  now  they  went  upon  it  in  good 
earnot.  The  place  where  they  went  ashore  was  at  a  Town 
of  the  Moors:  Which  name  our  Seamen  give  to  all  the 
Subjects  of  the  great  Mogul,  but  especially  his  Mahometan 
Subjects;  calling  the  Idolaters,  Gcntous  or  Kashbouts.  At 
this  Moors  Town  they  got  a  Pcun  to  be  their  Guide  to  the 
Mogul's  nearest  Camp  ;  For  he  hath  always  several  Armies 
in  his  vast  Kmprc. 

These  Pcuns  are  some  of  the  Gcntous  or  Rashbouts, 
who  in  all  places  along  the  Coast,  especially  in  Sea-port 
Towns,  make  it  their  business  to  hire  themselves  to  wait 
upon  Strangers,  lie  they  Merchants,  Seamen  or  what  they 
will.  To  qualifie  them  for  such  Attendance;  they  learn 
1  the  European  languages,  English,  Dutch,  French,  Portu- 

■  Captain  Koben  Knox. 
49' 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 

AS.  guese,  &c.  according  as  they  have  any  of  the  Factories  of 
't^  these  Nations  in  their  Neighbourhood,  or  are  visited  by 
their  Ships.  No  sooner  doth  any  such  Ship  come  to  an 
Anchor,  and  the  Men  come  ashore,  but  a  great  many  of 
these  Peuns  are  ready  to  proffer  their  service.  'Tis  usual 
for  the  Strangers  to  hire  their  Attendance  during  their 
stay  there,  giving  them  about  a  Crown  a  Month  of  our 
Money,  more  or  less.  The  richest  sort  of  Men  will 
ordinarily  hire  2  or  3  Peuns  to  wait  upon  them  ;  and  even 
the  common  Seamen,  if  able  will  hire  one  apiece  to  attend 
them,  either  for  Convenience  or  Ostentation  ;  or  sometimes 
one  Peun  between  two  of  them.  These  Peuns  serve  them 
in  many  Capacities,  as  Interpreters,  Brokers,  Servants  to 
attend  at  Meals,  and  go  to  Market  and  on  Errands,  &c. 
Nor  do  they  give  any  trouble,  eating  at  their  own  Homes 
and  Lodging  there;  when  they  have  done  their  Masters 
.  Business  for  them,  expecting  nothing  but  their  Wages, 
except  that  they  have  a  certain  allowance  of  about  a 
Fanam,  or  3  d.  in  a  Dollar,  which  is  an  i8th  part  profit, 
by  way  of  Brokerage  for  every  Bargain  they  drive ; 
they  being  generally  employed  in  Buying  and  Selling. 
When  the  Strangers  go  away,  their  Peuns  deare  them  to 
give  them  their  Names  in  Writing,  with  a  Certificate  of  their 
honest  and  diligent  serving  them ;  And  these  they  shew 
to  the  next  Comers,  to  get  into  Business ;  some  being  able 
to  produce  a  large  Scroll  of  such  Certificates. 

But  to  proceed ;  the  Moors  Town,  where  these  Men 
landed,  was  not  far  from  Cunnimere,'  a  small  English 
Factory  on  the  Coromandel  Coast.  The  Governour 
whereof  having  intelligence  by  the  Moors  of  the  landing 
of  these  Men,  and  their  intended  March  to  the  Mogul's 
Camp,  sent  out  a  Captain  with  his  Company  to  oppose  it. 
He  came  up  with  them,  and  gave  them  hard  Words :  But 
they  being  30  or  40  resolute  Fellows,  not  easily  daunted, 
he  durst  not  attack  them,  but  returned  to  the  Governour, 
and  the  News  of  it  was  soon  carried  to  Fort  St,  George- 
During   their  March,  John  Oliver,  who  was  one  of  them, 

'  Calinere  (?). 
492 


I 


CAPTAIN   OLIVER   AND   HIS   MEN  | 

privately  told  the  Pcun  who  guided  them,  that  himself  was  aw.  ' 
their  Captain.  So  when  they  came  to  the  Camp,  the  Peun  '^^ 
told  this  to  the  General :  And  when  their  Stations  and 
Pay  were  assigned  them,  John  Oliver  had  a  greater  respect 
paid  him  than  the  rest;  and  whereas  their  Pay  was  ten 
Pagodas  a  Mnnth  each  Man,  (a  Pagoda  is  two  Dollars, 
or  9  s.    English)  his  Pay  was  twenty   Pagodas:     Which  . 

Stratagem  and  Usurpation  of  his,  occasioned  him  no  small  J 
Envy  and  Indignation  from  his  Comrades.  I 

Soon  after  this,  2  or  3  of  them  went  to  Agra,  to  be  of  M 
the  Mt^ul's  Guard.  A  while  after  the  Governour  of  Fort  H 
St.  George  sent  a  Message  to  the  main  Body  of  them,  and  H 
a  Pardon,  to  withdraw  them  from  thence ;  which  most  of  ^ 
them  accepted,  and  came  away.  John  Oliver,  and  the 
small  remainder,  continued  in  the  Country  ;  but  leaving 
the  Camp,  went  up  and  down  plundering  the  Villages,  and  . 

fleeing  when  they  were  pursued;  and  this  was  the  last  ■ 
News  I  heard  of  them.  This  Account  I  had  partly  by  I 
Mr.  Moi^an,  from  some  of  those  IJcscrtcrs  he  met  with  at  ' 

Trangambar ;  partly  from  others  of  them,  whom  I  met 
with  my  self  at  Trangambar ;  partly  from  others  of  them, 
whom  I  met  with  my  self  afterwards  at  Fort  St.  George. 
And  these  were  the  Adventures  of  those  who  went  up  into 
the  Country. 

Captain  Read  having  thus  lost  the  best  half  of  his 
Men,  sailed  away  with  the  rest  of  them,  after  having  filled 
his  Water,  and  got  Rice,  still  intending  for  the  Red  Sea. 
When  they  were  near  Ceylon,  they  met  with  a  Portuguese 
Ship  richly  laden,  out  of  which  they  took  what  they 
pleas'd,  and  then  turn'd  her  away  again.  From  thence 
they  purtu'd  their  Voyage  :  but  the  westerly  Winds  bearing 
hard  against  them,  and  making  it  hardly  fcizable  for  them 
to  reach  the  Red  Sea,  they  stood  away  for  Madagascar. 
There  they  entered  into  the  Service  of  one  of  the  petty 
Princes  of  that  Island,  to  assist  him  against  his  Neighbours 
with  whom  he  was  at  Wars.  During  this  Interval,  a  smalt 
Vessel  from  New  York  came  hither  to  purchase  Slaves : 
Which  Trade  is  driven  here,  as  it  is  upon  the  Coast  of 
Guinea ;  one  Nation  or  Clan  selling  others  that  are  their 
493 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AM.  Enemies.  Captain  Read,  with  about  5  or  6  more,  stole  away 
■''9°  from  their  Crew,  and  went  aboard  this  New- York  Ship ; 
and  Captain  Teat  was  made  Commander  of  the  Residue. 
Soon  after  which,  a  Brigantinc  from  the  West-Indies. 
Captain  Knight  Commander,  coming  thither  with  a  design 
to  go  to  the  Red  Sea  also,  these  of  the  Cygnet  consorted 
with  them,  and  they  went  together  to  the  Island  Johanna.' 
Thence  going  together  towards  the  Red  Sea,  the  Cygnet 
proving  leaky,  and  sailing  heavily,  as  being  much  out  of 
repair.  Captain  Knight  grew  weary  of  her  Company,  and 
giving  her  the  slip  in  the  Night,  went  away  for  Achin  : 
for  having  heard  that  there  was  plenty  of  Gold  there,  he 
went  thither  with  a  design  to  cruize  :  And  'twas  from  one 
Mr.  Humes,  belonging  to  the  /^««  of  London,  Capt. 
Freke  Commander,  who  had  gone  aboard  Captain  Knight, 
and  whom  I  saw  afterwards  at  Achin,  that  I  had  this 
Relation.  Some  of  Captain  Freke's  Men,  their  own  Ship 
being  lost,  had  gone  aboard  the  Cygnet  at  Johanna :  And 
after  Capt.  Knight  had  left  her,  she  still  pursued  her 
Voyage  towards  the  Red  Sea:  But  the  Winds  bdng 
against  them,  and  the  Ship  in  so  ill  a  condition,  they  were 
forced  to  bear  away  for  Coromandel,  where  Capt.  Teat  and 
his  own  Men  went  ashore  to  serve  the  Mogul.  But  the 
Strangers  of  Captain  Freke's  Ship,  who  kept  still  aboard 
the  Cygnet  undertook  to  carry  her  for  England :  and  the 
last  News  I  heard  of  the  Cygnet  was  from  Captain  Knox, 
who  tells  me,  that  she  now  lies  sunk  in  St.  Augustin's  Bay' 
in  Madagascar.  This  Digression  I  have  made,  to  give  an 
account  of  our  Ship. 

The  other  Passage  I  shall  speak  of,  that  occurred  during 
this  interval  of  the  Tour  I  made  from  Achin,  is  with 
relation  to  the  Painted  Prince,  whom  I  brought  with  me 
into  England,  and  who  died  at  Oxford,  For  while  I  was 
at  Fort  St.  George,  about  April  1690,  there  arrived  a  Ship 
called  the  Mindanao  Merchant,  laden  with  Clove-bark  from 

*  One  of  the  Comoro  group  between  Madagascar  and  Portuguese  Eas 
Africa.  It  afterwards  became  the  haunt  of  pirates.  See  the  lives  of  Tew, 
Misson,  Kyd,  and  others. 

»  On  the  SW.  coast. 


THE   AUTHOR   GOES   FOR    BENCOULI  I 

Mindanao.     Three   of  Capt.    Swan's  Men,  that  remain'd    aw.  ' 
there    when    wc  went    from   thence,  came  in  her;   From  '*^ 
whom   1  had  the  Account  of  Captain  Swan's  death,  as  U 
before    related.      There   was  also  one  Mr.  Moody,  who 
was  Supercargo  of  the  Ship,     This  Gentleman  bought  at 
Mindanao  the  Painted  Prince  Jcoly  '  (mentioned  in  Chapter 
XIII.)  and  his   Mother;   and   brought  them  to  Fort  St.         - 
George,  where  they  were  much  admired  by  all  thit  saw        ■ 
them.     Some  time  after  this,  Mr.  Moody,  who  spoke  the        I 
Malayan    Language    very    well,    and    was   a    person    very         " 
ca[>able  to    manage    the   Company's   Affairs,  was   ordered 
by  the  Govcrnour  of  Fort  St.  Gcoi^e,  to  prepare  to  go 
to  Indraporc,*  an  English  Factory  on  the  West  Coatt  of         ■ 
Sumatra,  in  order  to  succeed  Mr.  Gibbons,  who  was  chief        ■ 
of  that  Place.  I 

By  this  time  I  was  ver)-  intimately  acquainted  with  ' 

Mr.  Moody,  and  was  importuned  by  him  to  go  with  him, 
and  to  be  Gunner  of  the  Fort  there.  I  always  told  him  I 
had  a  great  desire  to  go  to  the  Bay  of  Bengal,  and  that  I 
had  now  an  offer  to  go  thither  with  Capt.  Metcalf,  who 
wanted  a  Mate,  and  had  already  spoke  to  me.  Mr.  Moody, 
to  encourage  me  to  go  with  him,  told  me,  that  if  1  would 
go  with  him  to  Indrapore  he  would  buy  a  small  vessel 
there,  and  send  me  to  the  Island  Meangis,'  Commander  of 
her ;  and  that  I  should  carry  Prince  Jcoly  and  his  Mother 
with  mc  (that  being  their  Country)  by  which  means  I  might 
gain  a  Commerce  with  his  People  for  Cloves. 

This  was  a  dcs^n  that  I  liked  very  well,  and  therefore 
I  consented  to  go  thither.  Il  was  some  time  in  July  1690, 
when  we  went  from  Fort  St.  George  in  a  small  Ship,  called 
the  Diamentf,  Capt  Howcl  Commander.  We  were  about 
JO  or  60  Passengers  in  all;  some  ordered  to  be  left  at 
Indrapore,  and  some  at  BcncouH :  Five  or  six  of  us  were 
Officers,  the  rest  Soldiers  to  the  Company.  Wc  met 
nothing  in  our  Voyage  that  deserves  notice,  till  we  came 
abnrst  of  Indrtpore.  And  then  the  wind  came  at  N.  W. 
and  blew  so  hard  that  we  could  not  get  in,  but  were  forced 

'  For  on  iccooot  at  Jcoly,  sc«  ihc  Anpradis. 

'  In  the  Tuhir  snM[v 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AN.   to  bear  away  to  Bencouli,^  another  English  Factory  on  the 
'^  same  Coast,  lying  50  or  60  Leagues  to  the  Southward  of 
Indrapore. 

Upon  our  arrival  at  Bencouli  we  saluted  the  Fort^  and 
were  welcomed  by  them.  The  same  day  we  came  to  an 
Anchor,  and  Captain  Howel,  and  Mr.  Moody,  with  the 
other  Merchants  went  ashore,  and  were  all  kindly  received 
by  the  Governour  of  the  Fort.  It  was  two  days  before  I 
went  ashore,  and  then  I  was  importuned  by  the  Governour 
to  stay  there,  to  be  Gunner  of  this  Fort;  because  the 
Gunner  was  lately  dead :  And  this  being  a  place  of  greater 
import  than  Indrapore,  I  should  do  the  Company  more 
Service  here  than  there.  I  told  the  Governour,  if  he 
would  augment  my  Sallary,  which  by  Agreement  with 
the  Governour  of  Fort  St.  George  I  was  to  have  had  at 
Indrapore,  I  was  willing  to  serve  him,  provided  Mr.  Moody 
would  consent  to  it.  As  to  my  Sallary,  he  told  me,  I 
should  have  24  Dollars  per  month,  which  wasT  as  much  as 
he  gave  to  the  old  Gunner. 

Mr.  Moody  gave  no  Answer  till  a  Week  after,  and 
then,  being  ready  to  be  gone  to  Indrapore,  he  told  me  I 
might  use  my  own  Liberty,  either  to  stay  here,  or  go  with 
him  to  Indrapore.  He  added,  that  if  I  went  with  him,  he 
was  not  certain,  as  yet,  to  perform  his  promise,  in  getting 
a  Vessel  for  me  to  go  to  Meangis,  with  Jeoly  and  his 
Mother :  But  he  would  be  so  fair  to  me,  that  because  I  left 
Maderas  on  his  account,  he  would  give  me  the  half  share 
of  the  two  painted  People,  and  leave  them  in  my  Posses- 
sion, and  at  my  Disposal.  I  accepted  of  the  Offer,  and 
Writings  were  immediately  drawn  between  us. 

Thus  it  was  that  I  came  to  have  this  Painted  Prince, 
whose  Name  was  Jeoly,  and  his  Mother.  They  were  born 
on  a  small  Island  called  Meangis,  which  is  once  or  twice 
mentioned  in  Chap.  XIII.  I  saw  the  Island  twice,  and  two 
more  close  by  it :  Each  of  the  three  seemed  to  be  about  four 
or  five  Leagues  round,  and  of  a  good  heighth.  Jeoly  himself 
told  me,  that  they  ail  three  abounded  with  Gold,  Cloves, 

^  Benkulen. 

496 


JEOLY,  THE    PAINTED   PRINCE 

and  Nutmegs:  Kor  I  shewed  him  some  of  each  sort  several  am. 
times,  and  he  told  mc  in  the  Malayan  Language,  which  '^ 
he  spake  indifferent  well,  Meun^is  HutUa  Ma4o(h<ila  St 
Bullawan :  That  is,  there  is  abundance  of  Gold  at  Meangis. 
Bul/anan,  I  have  <thscrvcd  to  be  the  common  word  for 
Gold  at  Mindanao;  hut  whether  the  proper  Mala)'an  word 
I  know  not,  for  I  found  much  difference  between  the 
Malayan  Language  as  it  was  spoken  at  Mindanao,  and  the 
Language  on  the  Coast  of  Malacca  and  Achin.  When  I 
shewed  him  Spice,  he  would  not  only  tell  me,  that  there  _ 

was  MadochaUi,  that  is,  abundance ;  but  to  make  it  appear  -J 
more  plain,  he  would  also  show  mc  the  Hair  of  his  Head, 
a  thing  frequent  among  all  the  Indians  that  I  have  met 
with,  to  shew  their  Hair,  when  they  would  express  more 
than  they  can  number.  He  told  me  also,  that  his  Father 
was  Raja  of  the  Island  where  they  lived  :  That  there  were 
not  above  Thirty  Men  on  the  Island,  and  about  one 
Hundred  Women :  That  he  himself  had  five  Wives  and 
eight  Children,  and  that  one  of  his  Wives  painted '  him. 

He  was  painted  alt  down  the  Breast,  between  his 
Shoulders  behind ;  nn  his  Thighs  (mostly)  before;  and  in 
the  form  of  several  broad  Rings,  or  Bracelets,  round  his 
Arms  ami  Legs.  1  cannot  liken  the  Drawings  to  any 
Figure  of  Animals,  or  the  like ;  but  they  were  very  curious, 
full  of  great  variety  of  Lines,  Flourishes,  Chequered  Work, 
8tc.  keeping  a  very  graceful  Projiortion,  and  appearing 
very  Artificial,  even  to  wonder,  especially  that  upon  and 
between  his  Shoulder-blades.  By  the  Account  he  nve  me 
of  the  manner  of  doing  it,  I  understood  that  the  Painting 
was  done  in  the  same  manner,  a»  the  Jerusalem  Cross  is 
made  in  Mens  Anns,  by  [iricking  the  Skin,  and  rubbing  in 
a  Pigment.  But  whereas  Powder  is  uscii  in  making  the 
Jerusalem  Cross,  they  at  Mcangis  use  the  Gum  of  ■  Tree 
beaten  to  Powder,  called  hy  l^nglish,  Dimmer,  which  is 
uscil  instead  of  Pitch  in  many  parts  of  India.  He  told  me, 
that  m«»t  of  the  Men  and  Women  on  the  Island  were  thus 
painted :  And  also  that  they  had  all  Ear  Rings  made  of 


mi  Mmwm*  myA\  ■  a  Mm.    TW  A^  !■*  hac  wnds 

|r<xiBrff  deacce  Male  z^  Fcaole:  Aad  as  ^^m*  sniies 
a  l<^  «o  £/«»  Mmmms  b  >  Cbdt.  aid  ^am  m£  b  a 

}|en.     Bat  d»  bf  die  wxf. 

He  Mid  also  diax  die  CascooB  of  diase  ockr  Ues,  and 
tltdr  maimer  r^  Irrio^  vas  Eke  dusn,  and  dnt  tfacy  woe 
the  f/nly  fetyfie  with  wbotn  tbey  had  any  Convcfsc :  And 
that  one  time,  as  be,  with  his  Father,  Mother  and  Bmcber, 
with  two  Of  three  Men  more  wcic  going  to  one  of  these 
^/fher  klands,  they  were  driYcn  by  2  strong  Wind  on  the 
i^oM  of  Mindanao,  where  they  were  taken  by  the  Fisher- 
men of  that  I»Und,  and  carried  ashore,  and  sold  as  Slaves; 
thry  ticirtg  first  ttript  of  their  Gold  Ornaments.  1  did  not 
%ec  any  of  the  Gold  that  they  wore,  but  there  were  great 
holeo  in  their  Ears,  by  which  it  was  manifest  that  they  had 
W'rf'n  tome  Ornaments  in  them.  Jeoiy  was  sold  to  one 
Michael  a  Mindanayan,  that  spoke  good  Spanish,  and 
commonly  waitcii  on  Raja  Laut,  serving  him  as  our  Intcr- 
(irctcr,  where  the  Kaja  was  at  a  loss  in  any  word,  for 
498 


<nu 


OF    PRINCK  JEOLY    AND    HIS   MOTHER 

Michael  undcrsto<xi  it  better.  He  did  often  beat  and  an. 
abuse  his  painted  Servant,  t(i  make  him  work,  but  all  in 
vain;  for  neither  fair  means,  threats  nor  blows,  would 
make  him  work,  as  he  would  have  him.  Yet  he  was  very 
timerous,  and  could  not  endure  to  sec  any  sort  of  Weapons ; 
and  he  often  told  me  that  they  had  no  Arms  at  Mcangis, 
they  having  no  F-ncmies  to  fight  with. 

I  knew  this  Michael  very  well,  while  we  were  at 
Mimlanao :  I  suppose  that  Name  was  given  him  by  the 
Spaniards,  who  baptized  many  of  them  at  the  time  when 
they  had  footing  at  that  Island  :  But  at  the  departure  of 
the  Spaniards,  they  were  Mahometans  again  as  before.  Some 
of  our  I'copic  lay  at  this  Michael's  house,  whose  Wife  and 
Daughter  were  Pagallics  to  some  of  them.  I  often  saw 
Jeoly  at  his  Master  Michael's  House,  and  when  I  came  to 
have  him  so  long  after,  he  remembered  mc  again.  ]  did 
never  see  his  Father  nor  Brother,  nor  any  of  the  others 
that  were  taken  with  them;  but  jeoly  came  several  times 
aboard  our  Ship  when  we  lay  at  Mindanao,  and  gladly  ac- 
cepted of  such  Victuals  as  wc  gave  him ;  for  his  Master 
kept  him  at  very  short  Commons. 

Prince  Jeoly  lived  thus  a  Slave  at  Mindanao  4  or  5 
Years,  till  at  last  Mr.  Moody  bought  him  and  his  Mother 
for  60  Dollars,  and  as  is  before  related,  carried  him  to  Fort 
St.  George,  and  from  thence  along  with  mc  to  BcncouU. 
Mr.  Moody  stayed  at  Bcncouli  about  three  weeks,  and  then 
Went  back  with  Captain  Howcl,  to  Indraporc,  leaving  Jeoly 
and  his  Mother  with  me.  They  lived  in  a  House  by 
themselves  without  the  Fort.  I  had  no  employment  for 
them  ;  but  they  both  employed  themselves.  She  used  to 
make  and  mend  their  own  Clt»ths,  at  which  she  was  not 
very  expert,  for  they  wear  no  Cloaths  at  Mcangie,  but  only 
a  Cloath  about  ihcir  Wastes:  And  he  busied  himself  in 
making  a  Chest  with  4  Boards,  and  a  few  Nails  that  he 
be^ed  of  me.  It  was  but  an  ill  shaped  odd  thing,  yet  he 
was  as  proud  of  it  as  if  it  had  been  the  rarest  piece  in  the 
World.  After  some  time  they  were  both  taken  sick,  and 
though  1  took  as  much  care  of  them  as  if  they  had  been 
'  Brother  and  Sister,  yet  she  died.     1  dkl 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S  VaTAOBS      ' 

AH.  to  comfort  Jeoly;  but  he  took  on  extreamly,  insomuch 
'*^  that  I  feared  him  also.  Thercf(«  I  caused  a  Grave  to  be 
made  presently,  to  hide  her  out  of  his  sight.  1  had  her 
shrouded  decently  tn  a  jnece  of  new  Callico ;  but  Jeoly  was 
not  so  satisfied,  for  he  wrapt  all  her  Cloaths  about  her,  and 
two  new  pieces  of  Chinta  that  Mr.  Mocxiy  gave  her,  saying 
that  they  were  his  Mothers,  and  she  must  have  'em.  I 
would  not  disoblige  him  for  fear  of  endangering  his  life ; 
and  I  used  all  posKble  means  to  recover  his  health  :  but  I 
found  little  amendment  while  we  stay'd  here. 

In  the  little  Printed  Relation  that  was  made  of  him 
when  he  was  shown  for  a  ^ht  in  England,  there  was  a 
Romantick  Story  of  a  Beautmil  Sister  of  his  a  Slave  vritfa 
them  at  Mindanao ;  and  of  the  Sultan's  falling  in  Love 
with  her ;  but  these  were  Stories  indeed.  They  reported 
also  that  this  Punt  was  of  such  Virtue,  that  Serpents  and 
Venomous  Creatures  would  flee  from  him,  for  which 
reason,  I  suppose,  they  represented  so  many  Sopents 
scampering  about  in  the  Printed  Picture  that  was  made  of 
him.*^  But  I  never  knew  any  Pwnt  <rf  such  Virtue :  and 
as  for  Jeoly,  I  have  seen  him  as  much  a&aid  of  Snakes, 
Scorpions,  or  Centapees,  as  my  self. 

Having  given  this  account  of  the  Ship  that  left  me  at 
Nicobar,  and  of  my  Painted  Prince  whom  I  brought  with 
me  to  Bencouli,  I  shall  now  proceed  on  with  the  Relation 
of  my  Voyage  thence  to  England,  after  I  have  given  this 
short  Account  of  the  occasion  of  it,  and  the  manner  of  my 
getting  away. 

To  say  nothing  therefore  now  of  that  place,  and  my 
Employment  there  as  Gunner  of  the  Fort,  the  Year  1690, 
drew  towards  an  end,  and  not  finding  the  Governour  *  keep 
to   his   agreement   with    me,    nor  seeing   by    his    carriage 

'  See  Appendix. 

'  This  was  the  ruffianly  and  drunken  "  Mr.  Sowdon,"  or  Sowden,  men- 
tioned by  Alexander  Hamilton.  He  was  originally  a  book-keeper  al  some 
inland  station  ;  but  a  pestilence  brought  him  ptomolion.  Hamilton's  book 
makes  it  clear  that  Dampier  did  not  judge  the  man  too  harshly.  The  single 
anecdote  he  allows  himself  describes  him  as  a  callous  and  bloody-minwd 
scoundrel.  We  might  add  that  he  was  "  much  litter  to  be  a  HangroHl 
than  a  Book  keeper." 

500 


I        THINKS  OF   LEAVING    BENCOULI  ] 

towards  others  any  great  reason  I  had  to  expect  he  would,    aw. 
I    began   to  wish   my  self  away  again.       1  saw  so   much  '^' 
Ignorance  in  him,  with  respect  to  his  charge,  being  much 
fitter  to  be  a  Book-keeper  than  Governor  of  a  Fort ;  and 
yet  so  much  insolence  and  cruelty  with  respect  to  those 
under  him,  and  rashness  in  his  management  oi  the  Malayan 
Neighbourhood,  that  I  soon  grew  weary  of  him,  not  think- 
ing my  self  very  safe,  indeed,  under  a  Man  whose  humours        I 
were  so  brutish  and  barbarous.     1  forbear  to  mention  his         I 
name  after  such  a  Character;  nor  do  I  care  to  (ill  these 
Painters  with  particular  stories  of  him  :  But  therefore  give 
this  iniimation,  because  as  it  is  the  Interest  of  the  Nation 
in  general,  so  is  it  especially  of  the  Honourable  Hast  India 
Company,    to  be  informed  of  abuses  in   their  Factories.         I 
And  I  think  the  Company  might  receive  great  advantage         ' 
by  strictly  enquiring  into  the  behaviour  of  those  whom 
they  entrust  with  any  Command.      For  beside  the  odium, 
which  reflects  luck  upon  the  Superiours  from  the  mis-doings 
of  their  Servants,  how  undeservedly  soever,  there  are  great 
and  lasting  Mischiefs  proceed  from  the  Tyranny  or  igno- 
rant rashness    of  some    petty  Governours.     Those  under 
them  are  discouraged  from  their  Service  by  it,  and  often  go 
away  to  the  Dutch,  the  Mogul,  or  the  Malayan  Princes,  to         I 
the  great  detriment  of  our  Trade,  and  even  the  Trade  and         I 
the  Forts  themselves  are  many  times  in  danger  by  indiscreet         I 
provocations  given  to  the  Ncighhouring  Nations,  who  arc         I 
txsst  managed,  as  all    Mankind  are,  by  Justice,   and   fair         ' 
dealings ;  nor  any  more  implacably  revengeful  than  those 
Malayans,  who  live  in    the   Neighbourhood  of  Bencouli, 
which  Fort  hath  been  more  than  once  in  danger  of  being 
surpriz'd  by  them.     I  speak  not  this  out  of  disgust  to  this 
particular  Govcmour ;  much  less  would  I  seem  lo  reflect  on        I 
any  others,  of  whom  I  know  nothing  amiss :  But  as  ii  is 
L   not  to  be  wondered  at,  if  some  should  nnt  know  how  to 
ft  demean  themselves  in  places  of  Power,  for  which  neither 
f  their  Education  nor  their  business  jxissibly  have  suflicicntly 
qualified   them,  so   it  will   be   the   marc  necessary  for   the 
Honourable  Company  to  have  the  closer  eye  over  them, 
and  M  much  u  may  be;  to  prevent  or  reform  any  abuses 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    tfaey  may  be  guilty  of;  and  'tis  purely  out  of  my  Zeal  for 
'*9'  thdrs  and  the  Nation's  interest,  that  I    have  given    this 
caution,  having  seen  too  much  occasion  for  it. 

I  had  other  Motives  also  for  my  going  away.  I  began 
to  long  after  my  Native  Country,  after  so  tedious  a  ramble 
from  it :  and  I  proposed  no  small  advantage  to  my  self 
from  my  Painted  Prince,  whom  Mr.  Moody  had  left 
entirely  to  my  disposal,  only  reserving  to  himself  his  right 
to  one  half  share  in  him.  For  beside  what  might  be  gained 
by  showing  him  in  England,  I  was  in  hopes  that  when 
I  had  got  some  Money,  I  might  there  obtain  what  I  had 
in  vain  sought  for  in  the  Indies,  viz,  A  Ship  from  the 
Merchants,  wherewith  to  carry  him  back  to  Meangis,  and 
re-instate  him  there  in  his  own  Country,  and  by  his  Favour 
and  Negotiation  to  estabhsh  a  traffick  for  the  Spices  and 
other  products  of  those  Islands. 

Upon  these  Projects,  1  went  to  the  Governour  and 
Council,  and  desired  that  I  might  have  my  discharge  to 
go  for  England  with  the  next  Ship  that  came.  The 
Council  thought  it  reasonable,  and  they  consented  to  it ; 
he  also  gave  me  his  word  that  I  should  go.  Upon  the  2d 
of  January,  1691,  there  cajne  to  Anchor  in  Bencoult  Road, 
the  Defence,  Captain  Heath  Commander,  bound  for 
England,  in  the  service  of  the  Compny.  They  had  been 
at  Indrapore,  where  Mr.  Moody  then  was,  and  he  had 
made  over  his  share  in  Prince  Jeoly  to  Mr.  Goddard  chief 
Mate  of  the  Ship.  Upon  his  coming  on  shore,  he  shewed 
me  Mr.  Moody's  writings,  and  lookt  upon  Jeoly,  who 
had  been  sick  for  3  Months:  in  all  which  time  I  tended 
him  as  carefully  as  if  he  had  been  my  Brother.  I  agreed 
matters  with  Mr.  Goddard,  and  sent  Jeoly  on  board,  in- 
tending to  follow  him  as  I  could,  and  desiring  Mr. 
Goddard's  assistance  to  fetch  me  off,  and  conceal  me  aboard 
the  Ship,  if  there  should  be  occasion  ;  which  he  promised 
to  do,  and  the  Captain  promised  to  entertain  me.  For  it 
proved,  as  I  had  foreseen,  that  upon  Captain  Heath's  arrival, 
the  Governor  repented  him  of  his  Promise,  and  would  not 
suffer  me  to  depart.  I  importuned  him  all  I  could  ;  but  in 
vain  :  so  did  Captain  Heath  also,  but  to  no  purpose.  In 
502 


GETS   ON   CAPTAIN   HEATH^S   SHIP 

short,  after  several  essays,  I  slipt  away,  at  midnight  (under-  an. 
standing  the  Ship  was  to  sail  away  the  next  morning,  and  '^' 
that  they  had  taken  leave  of  the  Fort)  and  creeping  through 
one  of  the  Port-holes  of  the  Fort,  I  got  to  the  shore,  where 
the  Ships  Boat  waited  for  me,  and  carried  me  on  board.  I 
brought  with  me  my  Journal,  and  most  of  my  written 
Papers:  but  some  Papers  and  Books  of  value  I  left  in 
haste,  and  all  my  Furniture ;  being  glad  I  was  my  self  at 
liberty,  and  had  hopes  of  seeing  England  again. 


503 


Tht  Author"!  departure  frsm  Bencouliy  m  board  the  Defence,'  under 
Captain  Heath.  Of  a  Fight  between  seme  French  Men  of  JVar 
from  Ponticheri,  and  some  Dutch  Ships  from  Pallacat,  jo-jned  vjitk 
xome  Engliih,  in  sight  ef  Fort  St.  George.  Of  the  had  fVater  taken 
in  at  Bencou/i ;  and  the  strange  tiekneu  and  druih  of  the  Seamen, 
lupposed  to  be  occasioned  thereby.  4  spring  at  BencouH  recommended. 
The  great  Exigencies  on  Board ;  d  Consult  heldy  and  a  Proposal 
made  to  go  to  Johanna.  A  Resolution  taken  to  prosecute  their 
Voyage  to  the  Cope  of  Good  Hope.  The  Wind  favours  them. 
Tht  Captains  Condsui.  They  arrive  at  tht  Capt,  and  arfht^td 
inta  Harbour  by  tht  Dutch.  A  Descriptitn  of  the  Caft,  its 
Prospect,  Soundings,  Table  Mount,  Harbour,  Soil,  6v.  lar^  Ptm- 
granates  and  good  Haines.  The  Land  Animah.  A  very  ieatiHJk/ 
kind  of  Onager,  or  wild  Ass  striped  regularly  black  and  wHitt. 
Ostrages.  Fish  Seals.  The  Dutch  Fort  end  Factory.  Their  fine 
Garden.      The  Traffiek  here. 

BEING  thus  got  on  board  the  Defence,  I  was  con- 
cealed there,  till  a  Boat  which  came  from  the 
Fort,  laden  with  Pepper,  was  gone  off  again.  And 
then  wc  set  sail  for  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope, 
Jan.  25,  1691,  and  made  the  best  of  our  way,  as  Wind 
and  Weather  would  permit,  expecting  there  to  meet  3 
English  Ships  more,  bound  home  from  the  Indies:  for  the 
War  with  the  French  having  been  proclaimed  at  Fort 
St.  George,  a  littk-  before  Captain  Heath  came  from  thence, 
he  was  wilting  to  have  company  home,  if  he  could. 

A  little  before  this  war  was  proclaimed,  there  was  an 

Engagement  in  the  Road  of  Fort  St.  George  between  some 

French  Men  of  War  and  some  Dutch  and  English  Ships 

at  anchor  in  the  Road  :    which,  because  there  is  such  a 

504 


I 
I 


PALLACAT  AND    PONTICHERI 

plsuaiblc  Story  made  of  it  in  Monsieur  Duquesnc's '  late  ak. 
Voyage  to  the  East  Indies,  I  shall  give  a  short  account  of,  '*9' 
as  1  had  it  particularly  related  to  mc  by  the  Gunners  Mate 
of  Capt.  Heath's  Ship,  a  very  sensible  Man,  and  several 
others  of  his  Men,  who  were  in  the  Action.  The  Dutch 
have  a  Fort  on  the  Coast  of  Coromandcl,  called  Pallacat,' 
about  20  Leagues  to  the  Northward  of  Fort  St.  George. 
Upon  some  occasion  or  other  the  Dutch  sent  some  Ships 
thither  to  fetch  away  their  Effects,  and  transport  them  to 
Batavia.  Acts  of  Hostility  were  already  begun  between 
the  French  and  Dutch ;  and  the  French  had  at  this  time 
a  Suuailron  newly  arrived  in  India,  and  lying  at  Ponticheri,' 
a  Ircnch  Fort  on  the  same  Coast,  Southward  of  Fort 
St.  Geof^c.  The  Dutch  in  returning  to  Batavia,  were 
obliged  to  coast  it  along  by  Fort  St.  George  and  Ponticheri, 
for  the  sake  of  the  Wind :  but  when  they  came  near  this 
last,  they  »aw  the  French  Men  of  War  lying  at  Anchor 
there ;  and  should  they  have  prcKceded  along  the  Shore, 
or  stood  out  to  Sea,  cxj>ectca  to  be  pursued  by  them. 
They  therefore  turned  back  again ;  for  though  their  Ships 
were  of  a  pretty  good  force,  yet  were  they  unfit  for  Fight ; 
as  having  great  Loads  of  Goods,  and  many  Passengers, 
Women  ana  Children,  on  board ;  so  they  nut  in  at  Fort 
St.  George,  and  desiring  the  Governours  Protection,  had 
leave  to  anchor  in  the  R<)ad,  and  to  send  their  Goods  and 
useless  People  ashore.  There  were  then  in  the  Road  a 
few  small  English  Ships :  and  Capt.  Heath,  whose  Ship 
w«s  a  very  stout  Merchant  man,  and  which  the  French 
Rclatcr  calls  the  English  Admiral,  was  just  come  from 
China ;  but  very  deep  laden  with  Goods,  and  the  Deck 
full  of  Canisters  of  Sugar,  which  he  was  preparing  to  send 
■shore.  But  before  he  could  do  it,  the  French  appeared  ; 
coming  into  the  Road  with  their  lower  Sails  and  top  Sails, 
and  had  with  them  a  Fireship.     With  this  they  thought 

'  Montieur  Dni]ue«iw'i  "New  Vayas^  V>  1 
169a  aiwl  1691 "  wu  fint  publitlicd  in  Eii,:!.ir 
norf  *  it  thnuoninl  enoupi ;  tnit  the  ir  n  '  - 
manderwa*  afnid  lo  come  to  doM  i)ii.i-' 
b«ilte  wen»  la  have  tslunt  pbc*  on  thr 

•  I'alkai.  *  Pon<^ 


I  > 


-..-T.-.IX    lA.'wPIZHr    •.'■:•  YAGE5 


'.1  1^" i  i.i*^^    T   1.1  ..'—    a'  lt  -"^icjuoF.  .r 


•   *  "    .—  —  .... 

r    "     ">*w     -*"''"  '-.1      TT      ^;i'~-^     r..i'-'"iil      in     -IICM1«     ^y^^r^'  LIT 

'.:=  r.-^-.^i    :.-.-:'  .^:-::  r     --iz    :r  riach  :f  the  shot  .:-r  t:ie 

^      ■  V  «  1 

^  ^  ■  ■  ^^  ■         ■  m 

ir.'.u-  r;ur  .--'.'^n  :i^.zz.r.:i,  z:i^r  :ur  ■::se-^  v^iCies,  iulI 
iwiv  r.  .ti-.ti  ir.-i  i.sy.riir.  t-.t::  i..  i-eir  Sails  V^-tse.  svtn 
:h:;:r  T  .^  zi..i:-7  Sai.i,"  v-icn  is  --'.c  iisual,  but  when 
"^nics  ir,  '  ^j.T.  ?t-xt  t ',  r'..n.tir.;i  i*^*". 

-it'-iin  Hist.t,  "•'.  TV-t-tstiUkiiri;^  rtis  Siiir  W3s  so  tiiavT 
i.-z  :r.z-^rr.zrtz,  zcr.Ji'^-tl  r.:.t:ielr  T^ry  mvilv  in  the  n^ht; 
ir.ii  I'cn  thi  g-ir.:r  :c  :r  the  Fr:::tch  w;:-t  ab«jard  the 
D'-;:ch  C-^c.ntot  :r2  ir.i  ti-i  hin,  th-it  ":f  he  would  pursue 
t>.e.r.,  r.t  v:t:'i  stir.Li  ".ut  w:-:h  thim  to  Sea,  though  he 
r.JLi  "tTf  !:tt!-  '/^' it;:r  iv'.ar::  .   tit  the  D-:cr>  Ccmmandir 

«  p—  -  •  *    «    , 

"7.  iv    * '>    hr::^    t.".*."?"..       ."ir.  I    t.fS    "aTis    tr.-  11X7. 7  It  ''•T.icn    trii 

r  ■■  '  T    '  '   '  *  1"^  y 

Lt     ^  Cm    ^      '      ^  ^«--^         •*■»■  ■-•«•»         *a*         »-  —    ^,*       -_  •  I  ^    -—1    ^         ••^.J*         *^^  I       ll"**»l 

'aV-'     *a<'**"     f'^*^     -••^--      -,•--.:.       --.,.-     U    - -♦     -  •■     h'.-.r>  — /•  ".>p> 

Bit  *o  rr^cte.i  -^/i^".  our  V:.v2^e  :  We  hai  r*ot  been  iz 
'vja  ior.ir  Sef^ri:  o  :r  Men  be^ar.  "lo  iroor,  :r.  a  sort  of  Dis- 
*!'j';<P'r  *r.a*  -toi-j  ir^s'jnsibiy  on  theni,  ar.i  proved  fatal  ro 
jiS'iV".  'Kirty,  who  ciici  *::erorj  w-  arrived  at  the  Cape. 
W':  ha^l  som'.'rim?:s  r'^r^,  an.i  once  three  Men  thrown  over- 
hoarl  in  a  rnornini/.  This  Distemper  might  probably  arise 
from  th^'  Wariness  of  the  Water,  which  we  took  in  at 
M'ri^ouli:    I'or   I  did    ohscrvt:  v.hilc   I   was  there  that    the 

'  At  ilii.  tirnr  wli'ri  tv.»i  \\ri\'.  v.m^-  alirjiit  to  (rn-^Ti-^e  c.'K.h  other  they 
j;/-fir!;ill  /  .h'lrfMi* 'I  .:iil.  'I  lir  to|>i;,il:;iiit,  or  n|*p«rr  s.'iils,  ucrc  furled;  the 
r  ffiri  .« -i  "  h.i'ilffi  ii|i  III  thf  liKiil.  ;"  anrl  tlic  topsail:-,  atvl  jih  alone  left 
rh.i-.viii};  I  \ir  .11  ti'iii  (if  (111-  l-if-iK  I)  Admiral  in  loobijyf  his  top;^'aIlant  sails 
W.I';  iliiMifnii   immI,  .111(1  lil:(;ly  to  Ik:  Tuisiindcrilcy*^     ^ 

506 


A    MORTALITY— BAD   WATER 

Rivcr-watcr,  wherewith  our  Ships  were  watered,  was  very 
unwholesome,  it  being  mixt  with  the  Water  of  many 
small  Creeks,  that  proceeded  from  low  Land,  and  whose 
Streams  were  always  very  black,  they  being  nourished  by 
the  Water  that  drained  out  of  the  low  swampy  unwholesome 
Ground, 

I  have  observed  not  only  there,  but  in  other  hot 
Countries  also  both  in  the  East  and  West  Indies,  that  the 
Land-floods  which  pour  into  the  Channels  of  the  Rivers, 
about  the  season  of  the  Rains,  are  very  unwholesome.  For 
when  I  lived  in  the  Bay  of  Campcachy,  the  Fish  were  found 
dead  in  heaps  on  the  shores  of  the  Rivers  and  Creeks,  at 
such  a  season  ;  and  many  we  took  up  half  dead  ;  of  which 
sudden  mortality  there  appeared  no  cause,  but  only  the 
malignity  of  the  Waters  draining  ofl^  the  Land.  This 
haptens  chiefly,  as  I  take  it,  where  the  Water  drains  through 
thick  Woods  and  Savannahs  of  long  Grass,  and  swarapy 
Grounds,  with  which  sonic  hot  Counirics  abound :  And  I 
believe  it  receives  a  strong  Tincture  from  the  Roots  of 
several  kind  of  Trees,  Herbs.  &c.  And  especially  where 
there  is  any  stagnancy  of  the  Water,  it  soon  corrupts;  and 
possibly  the  Serpents  and  other  poisonous  Vermin  and 
Insects  may  not  a  little  contribute  to  its  bad  {Qualities:  at 
such  times  it  will  look  very  deep  coloured,  yellow,  red,  or 
black,  &c.  The  season  of  the  Rains  was  over,  and  the 
Land-floods  were  abating  upon  the  taking  up  this  Water 
in  the  River  of  Bcncouli :  but  would  the  Seamen  have 
given  themselves  the  trouble  they  might  have  fill'd  their 
Vessels  with  excellent  good  Water  at  a  Spring  on  the  back- 
side of  the  Fort,  not  above  2  or  3CX5  paces  from  the  Landing 
place ;  and  with  which  the  Fort  is  served.  And  I  mcntioti 
this  as  a  caution  to  any  Ships  that  shall  go  to  Bcncouli  for 
the  future ;  and  withal  I  think  it  worth  the  care  of  the 
Owners  or  Governors  of  the  Factory,  and  that  it  would 
tend  much  to  the  preservation  of  their  Seamen's  lives,  to  lay 
Pipes  to  convey  the  Fountain  Water  tu  the  Shore,  which 
~"ght  easily  \k  done  with  a  small  charge  :  and  had  1  staid 
_  r  there  1  would  have  undenakcn  il.  I  had  a  de»gn 
^<^  bringing  it  into  the  Fon,  tho*  much  higher:  for  it 
507 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES  ! 

AM.  would  be  a  great  convenience  and  security  to  it,  in  case  of' 
169"  a  Siege.  3 

Besides  the  badness  of  our  Water,  it  was  slowed  among  ' 
the  Pepper  in  the  Hold,  which  made  it  very  hot.     Every  * 
Morning  when  we  came  to  take  our  Allowance,  it  was  so 
hot  that  a  man  could  hardly  suflFer  his  hands  in  it,  or  hold 
a  Bottle  full  of  it  in  his  hand.      1  never  any  where  felt  the 
like,  nor  could  have  thought  it  possible  that  Water  should  ' 
heat  to  that  degree  in  a  Ships  Hold.     It  was  exceeding  ' 
black  too,  and  looked  more  like  Ink  than  Water.     Whether 
it  grew  so  black  with  standing,  or  was  tinged  with  the 
Pepper,  I  know  not,  for  this  Water  was  not  90  black  when 
it  was  first  taken  up.    Our  Food  also  was  very  bad ;  for 
the  Ship  had  been  out  of  England  upon  tins  Voyage  above 
.  three  Years ;  and  the  salt  Provision  brought  from  thence, 
and  which  we  fed  on,  having  been  so  long  in  Salt,  was  bat 
ordinary  Food  for  sickly  Men  to  feed  on. 

Captain  Heath,  when  he  saw  the  misery  of  his  Company, 
ordered  his  own  Tamarinds,  of  which  he  had  some  Jus 
aboard,  to  be  given  Some  to  each  Mess,  to  eat  vrith  tfa^ 
Rice.  This  was  a  great  refreshment  to  the  Men,  and  I  do 
believe  it  contributed  much  to  keep  us  on  our  L^. 

This  Distemper  was  so  universal,  that  I  do  believe  there 
was  scarce  a  Man  in  the  Ship,  but  languished  under  it ;  yet 
it  stole  so  insensibly  on  us,  that  we  could  not  say  we  were 
sick,  feeling  little  or  no  pain,  only  a  Weakness,  and  but 
little  Stomach.  Nay,  most  of  those  that  died  in  this 
Voyage,  would  hardly  be  perswaded  to  keep  their  Cabbins, 
or  Hammocks,  till  they  could  not  stir  about ;  and  when 
they  were  forced  to  lye  down,  they  made  their  Wills,  and 
piked  off  in  two  or  three  days. 

The  loss  of  these  Men,  and  the  Weak  languishing  con- 
dition that  the  rest  of  us  were  in,  rendered  us  uncapable  to 
govern  our  Ship,  when  the  Wind  blew  more  than  ordinary. 
This  often  happened  when  we  drew  near  the  Cape,  and  as 
oft  put  us  to  our  trumps  to  manage  the  Ship.  Captain 
Heath,  to  encourage  his  Men  to  their  labour,  kept  his 
Watch  as  constantly  as  any  Man,  tho'  sickly  himself,  and 
lent  an  helping  hand  on  all  occasions.  But  at  last,  almost 
508 


I 


CAPTAIN    HEATH'S   POLICY 

desf>atrtng  of  gaining  his  Passage  to  the  Cape  by  reason  i 
the  Winds  coming  Southerly,  and  we  having  now  been  sailing  '^'' 
8  or  9  weeks,  he  called  all  our  Men  to  consult  about  our 
safety,  and  desired  every  Man,  from  the  highest  to  the 
lowest,  freely  to  give  his  real  Opinion  and  Advice,  what  to 
do  in  this  dangerous  juncture;  for  wc  were  not  in  a  con- 
dition to  keep  out  long ;  and  could  we  not  get  to  Land 
quickly,  must  have  [lerished  at  Sea.  He  consulted  there- 
fore whether  it  were  best  to  beat  for  the  Cape,  or  bear  away 
for  Johanna,  where  wc  might  expect  relief,  that  being  a  place 
where  our  outward  bound  East  India  Ships  usually  touch,  I 
and    whose    Natives    are   very   familiar:    but   other    places,  ' 

esjiecially  St.  Laurence,  or  Madagascar,  which  was  nearer, 
was  unknown  to  us,  Wc  were  now  so  nigh  the  Cape,  that 
with  a  fair  Wind  wc  might  expect  to  be  there  in  4  or  5 
days ;  but  as  the  Wind  was  now,  we  could  not  hope  to  get 
thither.  On  the  other  side  this  Wind  was  fair  to  carry  us 
to  Johanna  :  but  then  Johanna  was  a  great  way  off,  and  if 
the  Wind  should  continue  as  it  was,  to  bring  us  into  a  true 
Trade  Wind,  yet  we  could  not  get  thither  under  a  fortnight : 
and  if  we  should  meet  calms,  as  we  might  probably  expect, 
it  might  be  much  longer.  Besides,  wc  should  lose  our 
passage  about  the  Cape  till  October  or  November,  this  being 
about  the  latter  end  of  March,  for  after  the  lOth  of  May, 
'tis  not  usual  to  beat  about  the  Cape  to  come  home.  All 
circumstances  therefore  being  weighed  and  considered,  wc 
at  last  unanimously  agreed  to  prosecute  our  Voyage  towards 
the  Cape,  and  with  patience  wait  for  a  shift  of  Wind. 

But  Captain  Heath,  having  thus  far  s«)unded  the  in- 
clination of  his  weak  Men,  told  them,  that  it  was  not 
enough  that  they  all  consented  to  beat  for  the  Cape,  for 
Our  desires  were  not  sufficient  to  bring  us  thither;  but 
that  there  would  need  a  mure  than  ordinary  labour  and 
management  from  those  that  were  able.  And  withal,  for 
their  encouragement  he  promised  a  months  pay  Gratis,  to 
every  man  that  would  engage  to  assist  on  alt  occasions, 
atHi  be  ready  upon  call,  whether  it  Were  his  turn  to  watch 
or  not;  and  this  Money  l)e  promised  to  [lay  at  the  Cape. 
Thi*  offer  wm  fint  embraced  by  some  of  the  Officers,  atid 
509 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S  VOYAGES 

AN.   then  as  many  of  the  Men  as  found  themselves  in  a  captcity, 
'^^  listed  themselves  in  a  Roll  to  serve  their  G)mmander. 

This  was  wisely  contrived  of  the  Captain,  for  he  could 
not  have  compeird  them  in  their  weak  condition,  neither 
would  fair  Words  alone,  without  some  hopes  of  a  reward, 
have  engaged  them  to  so  much  extraordinary  Work ;  for 
the  Ship,  SsLil  and  Rigging  were  much  out  of  repair.  For 
my  part,  I  was  too  weak  to  enter  my  self  into  that  List ; 
for  else  our  common  safety,  which  I  plainly  saw  lay  at 
stake,  would  have  prompted  me  to  do  more  than  any  such 
reward  would  do.  In  a  short  time  after  tlus  it  pleased 
God  to  favour  us  with  a  fine  Wind,  which  being  improved 
to  the  best  advantage  by  the  incessant  labour  of  these  new 
listed  men,  brought  us  in  a  short  time  to  the  Cape. 

The  night  before  we  entered  the  Harbour,  which  was 
about  the  beginning  of  April,  being  near  the  Land,  we 
fired  a  Gun  every  hour,  to  give  notice  that  we  were  in 
distress.  The  next  day,  a  Dutch  Captain  came  aboard  in 
his  Boat,  who  seeing  us  so  weak  as  not  to  be  able  to  trim 
our  Sails  to  turn  into  the  Harbour ;  tho*  we  did  tolerably 
well  at  Sea,  before  the  Wind,  and  being  requested  by  our 
Captain  to  assist  him,  sent  ashore  for  a  hundred  lusty 
Men,  who  immediately  came  aboard,  and  brought  our  Ship 
in  to  an  Anchor.  They  also  unbent  our  Sails,  and  did 
every  thing  for  us  that  they  were  required  to  do,  for 
which  Capt.  Heath  gratified  them  to  the  full. 

These  men  had  better  stomachs  than  we,  and  eat  freely 
of  such  Food  as  the  Ship  afforded :  and  they  having  the 
freedom  of  our  Ship,  to  go  to  and  fro  between  Decks, 
made  prize  of  what  they  could  lay  their  Hands  on,  especi- 
ally Salt-Beef,  which  our  men,  for  want  of  stomachs  in  the 
Voyage,  had  hung  up  6,  8,  or  lo  pieces  in  a  place.  This 
was  conveyed  away  before  we  knew  it,  or  thought  of  it : 
besides,  in  the  night  there  was  a  Bale  of  Muzlins  broke 
open,  and  a  great  deal  conveyed  away :  but  whether  the 
Muzlins  were  stolen  by  our  own  Men,  or  the  Dutch  I  cannot 
say ;  for  we  had  some  very  dexterous  Thieves  in  our  Ship. 
Being  thus  got  safe  to  an  Anchor,  the  Sick  were 
presently  sent  ashore  to  Quarters  provided  for  them,  and 

510 


I 


TEMPERATURE  OF  THE  CAPE  CLIMATE 

those  that  were  able  remained  aboard,  and  had  good  fat  an. 
Mutton,  or  frtsh  Beef,  sent  aboarvi  every  day.  I  went  ''">• 
ashore  also  with  my  Painted  Prince,  where  1  remained  with 
him  till  the  time  of  sailing  again,  which  was  about  six 
Weeks.  In  which  time  I  took  the  opportunity  to  inform 
my  self  what  I  could  concerning  this  Country,  which  I 
shall  in  the  next  place  give  you  a  brief  account  of,  and  so 
make  what  haste  I  can  home. 

The  Cape  of  Good  Hope  is  the  utmost  Bounds  of  the 
Continent  of  Africa  towards  the  South,  lying  in  34  d.  30 
m.  S.  lat.  in  a  very  temperate  Climate.  1  look  upon  this 
latitude  to  be  one  of  the  mildest  and  sweetest  for  its 
temperature  of  anj  whatsoever;  and  I  cannot  here  but  take 
Notice  of  a  common  prejudice  our  European  Seamen  have 
ts  to  this  Country,  that  they  look  upon  it  as  much  colder, 
than  Places  in  the  same  Latitude  to  the  North  of  the  Line. 
1  am  not  of  their  opinion  as  to  that  :  and  their  thinking  so, 
I  believe,  may  easily  be  accounted  for  from  hence,  that 
Whatcvijr  way  ihey  come  to  the  Cape,  whether  going  to  the 
East  Indies  or  returning  back,  they  pass  through  a  hot 
Climate;  and  coming  to  it  thus  out  of  an  extremity  of 
heat,  'tis  no  wonder  it  it  appear  the  colder  to  them.  Some 
impute  the  coldness  of  the  South  Wind  here  to  its  blowing 
off  from  Sea.  On  the  contrary,  I  have  always  observed 
the  Sea  Wmds  to  be  warmer  than  I^nd  Winds,  unless  it 
be  when  a  bloom,  as  we  call  it,  or  hot  blast  blow  from 
thence.  Such  an  one  we  felt  in  this  very  Voyage,  as  we 
went  from  Cape  Vcrd  Islands,  towards  the  South  Seas ; 
which  I  forgot  to  mention  in  its  proper  place.  Chap.  4th. 
For  one  aftcrnr«on  about  the  19th  of  Jan.  1683,  in  the  lat. 
of  37  South  wc  felt  a  brisk  (iale  coming  from  off  the  Coast 
of  America,  but  so  violent  hot,  that  wc  thought  it  came 
from  some  burning  Mountain  on  the  Shore,  and  was  like 
the  heat  from  the  mouth  of  an  Oven.  Just  such  another 
Gleam  I  fck  one  afternoon  also,  as  I  lay  at  Anchor  at  the 
Groin  '  in  July  1694,  it  came  with  a  Southerly  Wind :  both 


pbelwcu)  1691  and  1697. 

S" 


i9B«Hn 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AM.  these  were  followed  by  a  Thunder  shower.  These  were 
'^'  the  only  great  Blooms  I  ever  met  with  in  my  Travels. 
But  setting  these  aside,  which  are  exceptions,  I  have  made 
it  my  general  observation,  that  the  Sea-Winds  are  a  great 
deal  warmer  than  those  which  blow  from  Land:  unless 
where  the  Wind  blows  from  the  Poles,  which  I  take  to  be 
the  true  cause  of  the  coldness  of  the  South  Wind  at  the 
Cape,  for  it  is  cold  at  Sea  also.  And  as  for  the  Coldness 
of  Land-Winds,  as  the  South  West  parts  of  Europe  are 
very  sensible  of  it  from  the  Northern  and  Eastern  Winds ; 
so  on  the  opposite  Coast  of  Virginia,  they  are  as  much 
pinched  with  the  North  West  Winds,  blomng  excesdvely 
cold  from  over  the  Continent,  though  its  Lat.  be  not 
much  greater  than  this  of  the  Cape. 

But  to  proceed :  This  large  Promontory  consists  of 
high  and  very  remarkable  Land ;  and  off  at  Sea  it  afibrds  a 
very  pleasant  and  agreeable  Prospect.  And  without  doubt 
the  Prospect  of  it  was  very  agreeable  to  those  Portuguese 
who  first  found  out  this  way  by  Sea  to  the  East  Indies ; 
when  after  coasting  along  the  vast  Continent  of  Africk, 
towards  the  South  Pole,  they  had  the  comfort  of  seeing  the 
Land  and  their  Course  end  in  this  Promontory :  Which 
therefore  they  called  the  Cape  de  Bon  Esperance,  or  of 
Good  Hope,  finding  that  they  might  now  proceed 
Easterly. 

There  is  good  sounding  off  this  Cape  50  or  60  Leagues 
at  Sea,  to  the  Southward,  and  therefore  our  English  Sea- 
men standing  over  as  they  usually  do,  from  the  Coast  of 
Brazil,  content  themselves  with  their  Soundings,  concluding 
thereby  that  they  are  abrest  of  the  Cape,  they  often  pass 
by  without  seeing  it,  and  begin  to  shape  their  course 
Northward.  They  have  several  other  Signs  whereby  to 
know  when  they  are  near  it,  as  by  the  Sea-P'owl  they  meet 
at  Sea,  especially  the  Algatrosses,  a  very  large  long  winged 
Bird,  and  the  Mangovolucres,  a  smaller  Fowl.  But  the 
greatest  dependance  of  our  English  Seamen  now  is  upor 
their  observing  the  variation  of  the  Compass,  which  is  ver\ 
carefully  minded  when  they  come  near  the  Cape,  by  takinc 
the  Suns  Amplitude  mornings  and  evenings.     This   thei 

512 


■  SOIL,  FRUIT,  AT  THE   CAPE  ■ 

are  so  exact  in,  that  by  the  help  of  the  Azimuth  Compass,    am. 
an  Instrument  more  peculiar  to  the  Seamen  of  our  Nation,  '^' 
ihcy  know  when  they  are  abrcst  of  the  Capw,  or  arc  cither 
lo  the  East  or  the  West  of  it :  And  for  that  reason,  though         j 
they  should    be    to  fiouthward    of  all    the  Soundings,  or         I 
fathomable    Ground,  they   can    shape    their   course    right,         ^ 
without  being  obliged  to  make  the  Land.     But  the  Dutch 
on  the   contrary,  having  settled  themselves  on  this  Pro- 
montory, do  always  touch  here  in  their  East-India  Voyages. 
both  going  and  coming.  j 

The  most  remarkable  Land  at  Sea  is  a  high  Mountain,         I 
steep  to  the  Sea,  with  a  flat  even  top,  which  is  called  the         I 
Table  Land.     On  the  West  side  of  the  Cape,  a  little  to         I 
the  Northward   of  it,   there  is  a  spacious  Harbour,  with         I 
a    low  flat  Island  lying  off  it,  which   you  may   leave  on        ^ 
either  hand,  and   pass  in  or  out   securely  at  either  end. 
Ships  that  anchor  here,  ride  near  the  main  Land,  leaving 
the  Island  at  a  farther  distance  without  them.     The  Land 
by  the  Sea  against  the  Harbour  is  low ;    but  backt  with         J 
high  Mountains  a  little  way  in,  to  the  Southward  of  it.  I 

The  Soil  of  this  Country  is  of  a  brown  colour;  not         I 
deep,   yet    indifl^crently   productive  of  Grass,   Herbs   and         I 
Trees.     The  Grass  is  short,  like  that  which  grows  on  our        I 
Wiltshire  or  Dorsetshire  Downs.     The  Trees  hereabouts        I 
are  but  small  and  few ;  the  Country  also  farther  from  the        I 
Sea,    docs    not    much    abound   in   Trees,  as    I    have    been         I 
informed.     The  Mould  or  Soil  also  is  much  like  this  near         " 
the  Harbour,  which  though  it  cannot  be  said  to  be  very 
fat,  or  rich  Land,  yet  it   is  very  fit  for  cultivation,  and 
yields  good  Crops  to  the  industrious  Husbandman,  and 
the    Country  is   pretty   well    settled    with    Farms,    Dutch 
Families,  and  French  Refugees,  for  20  or  30  leagues  op 
the    Country ;    but    there    are    but    few    Farms    near    the 
Harbour. 

Here  grows  plenty  of  Wheal,  Barly,  Pease,  &c.  Here 
arc  also  Fruits  of  many  kinds,  as  Apples,  Pears,  Quinces, 
and  the  largest  Pomgranatcs  that  I  did  ever  see. 

The  chief  Fruits  are  Grapes.  These  thrive  very  well, 
and    the  Country   is  of  Ute  Years,  so   well  stockt   with 

L.   1.  {I3  2    K 


1. 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 


Au.    Vineyards,  that  they  make  abundance  of  Wine,  of  which 

**9*  they  have  enough  and  to  spare  ;  and  do  sell  great  quantities 

to  Ships  that  touch  here.     This  Wine  is  like   a    French 

High-Country  White-wine,  but  of  a  pale  yellowish  colour  ; 

it  is  sweet,  very  pleasant  and  strong. 

The  tame  Animals  of  this  Country  are  Sheep,  Goats, 
Hogs,  Cows,  Horses,  &c.  The  Sheep  are  very  large  and 
fat,  for  they  thrive  very  well  here :  This  being  a  dry 
Country,  and  the  short  Pasturage  very  agreeable  to  these 
Creatures,  but  it  is  not  so  proper  for  great  Cattle  ;  neither 
is  the  Beef  in  its  kind  so  sweet  as  the  Mutton.  Of  wild 
Beasts,  'tis  said,  here  are  several  sorts,  but  I  saw  none. 
However  it  is  very  likely  there  are  some  wild  Beasts,  that 
prey  on  the  Sheep,  because  they  are  commonly  brought 
into  the  Houses  in  the  night,  and  penn'd  up. 

There  is  a  very  beautiful  sort  of  wild  Ass  in  this 
Country,  whose  Body  is  curiously  striped  with  equal  Lists 
of  white  and  black ;  the  Stripes  coming  from  the  Ridge 
of  his  Back,  and  ending  under  the  Belly,  which  is  white. 
These  stripes  are  two  or  three  Fingers  broad,  running 
Parallel  with  each  other,  and  curiously  intermixt,  one 
white  and  one  black,  over  from  the  Shoulder  to  the  Rump. 
I  saw  two  of  the  Skins  of  these  Beasts,  dried  and  preserved 
to  be  sent  to  Holland,  as  a  Rarity.  They  seemed  big 
enough  to  inclose  the  Body  of  a  Beast,  as  big  as  a  large 
Colt  of  a  Twelvemonth  old. 

Here  are  a  great  many  Ducks,  DunghU  Fowls,  &c. 
and  Ostriges  are  plentifully  found  in  the  dry  Mountains 
and  Plains.  I  eat  of  their  Eggs  here,  and  those  of  whom 
I  bought  them  told  me  that  these  Creatures  lay  their  E^ 
in  the  Sand,  or  at  least  on  dry  Ground,  and  so  leave  them 
to  be  hatch'd  by  the  Sun.  The  Meat  of  one  of  their  E^s 
will  suffice  two  Men  very  well.  The  Inhabitants  do  pre- 
serve the  Eggs  that  they  find  to  sell  to  Strangers.  They 
were  pretty  scarce  when  I  was  here,  it  being  the  beginning 
of  their  Winter ;  whereas  I  was  told  they  lay  their  Eggs 
about  Christmas,  which  is  their  Summer. 

The  Sea  hereabouts  affords  plenty  of  Fish  of  divers 
sorts;  especially  a  small  sort  of  Fish,  not  so  big  as  a 
5H 


■  the  dutch  garden  at  the  cape      ■ 

Herring ;  whereof  they  have  such  great  Plenty,  that  they    ah. 
pickle  great  Quantities  yearly,  and  send  them  to  Europe.  '^' 
Seals  are  also  in  great  Numbers  about  the  Cape;  which,  as 
I  have  still  observed,  is  a  good  sign  of  the  Plentifulness  of        ■ 
Kiah,  which  is  their  Food.  I 

The  Dutch  have  a  strong  Fort  by  the  Sea  side,  against  I 
the  Harbour,  where  the  Governour  lives.  At  about  2  or  I 
300  Paces  distance  from  thence,  on  the  West  side  of  the  I 
Fort,  there  is  a  small  Dutch  town  in  which  I  told  about  ■ 
50  or  60  Houses;  low,  but  well  built,  with  Stone-walls;  I 
there  being  plenty  of  Stone,  drawn  out  of  a  Quarry  I 
close  by.  1 

On  the  backside  of  the  Town,  as  you  go  towards  the 
Mountains,  the  Dutch  East  India  Company  have  a  large 
House,  and  a  stately  Garden  walled  in  with  a  high 
Stone- wall. 

This  Garden  is  full  of  divers  sorts  of  Herbs,  Flowers, 
Roots,  and  Fruits,  with  curious  spacious  Gravel-walks  and 
Arbours ;  and  is  watered  with  a  Brook  that  descends  out 
of  the  Mountains :  which  being  cut  into  many  Channels, 
is  conveyed  into  all  parts  of  the  Garden.  The  Hedges 
which  make  the  Walks  are  very  thick,  and  9  or  to  Foot 
high  ;  They  arc  kept  exceeding  neat  and  even  by  continual 
pruning.  There  are  lower  Hedges  within  these  again, 
which  serve  to  separate  the  Fruit-Trees  from  each  other, 
but  without  shading  them :  and  they  keep  each  sort  of 
Fruit  by  themselves,  as  Apples,  Pears,  abundance  of 
Quinces,  Pomgranales,  8cc.  These  all  prosper  very  well, 
and  bear  good  Fruit,  especially  the  Pomgranate.  The 
Roots  and  Garden-Herbs  have  also  their  distinct  places, 
hedged  in  apart  by  themselves;  and  all  in  such  order,  that 
it  is  exceeding  pleasant  and  beautiful.  There  are  a  great 
number  of  ^Jegro  Slaves  brought  from  other  parts  of  the 
World ;  some  of  which  are  continually  weeding,  pruning, 
trimming  and  looking  after  it.  All  Strangers  arc  allowed 
the  liberty  to  walk  there ;  and  by  the  Servants  leave,  you 
may  be  admitted  to  taste  of  the  Fruit :  but  if  you  think  to 
do  it  clandestinely,  you  may  be  mistaken,  is  I  knew  one 

.  when  I  was  in  the  Garden,  who  took    {  or  6  Pom- 
5>S 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AM.  graaates,  and  was  espy'd  by  one  of  the  Slaves,  and 
'^'  threatned  to  be  carry 'd  before  the  Governour  :  I  believe 
it  coit  him  some  Money  to  make  his  peace,  for  I  heard  no 
more  of  it.  Further  up  from  the  Sea  beyond  the  Garden, 
towards  the  Mountains,  there  are  several  other  small 
Gardetis  and  Vineyards,  belonging  to  private  Men :  but 
the  Mountains  are  so  nigh,  that  the  number  of  them  is 
but  small. 

The  Dutch  that  live  in  the  Town  get  considerably  by 
the  Ships  that  frequently  touch  here,  chiefly  byentcrtainii^ 
Strangers  that  come  ashore  to  refresh  themselves;  for  you 
must  give  3  s.  or  a  Dollar  a  Day  for  your  Entertainment; 
the  Bread  and  Flesh  is  as  cheap  here  as  in  England  ;  besides 
they  buy  good  pennyworths  of  the  Seamen,  both  outward 
and  homeward  bound,  which  the  Farmers  up  the  Country 
buy  of  them  again  at  a  dear  rate ;  for  they  have  not  an 
opportunity  of  buying  things  at  the  best  hand,  but  must 
buy  of  those  that  live  at  the  Harbour :  the  nearest  Settle- 
ments, as  I  was  informed,  being  20  miles  off. 

Notwithstanding  the  great  plenty  of  Corn  and  Wine, 
yet  the  extraordinary  high  Taxes  which  the  Company  lays 
on  Liquors,  makes  it  very  dear ;  and  you  can  buy  none  but 
at  the  Tavern,  except  it  be  by  stealth.  Thci«  are  but 
3  Houses  in  the  Town  that  sell  strong  Liquor,  cme  of 
which  is  this  Wine-House  or  Tavern  ;  there  they  sell  only 
Wine;  another  sells  Beer  and  Mum;  and  the  third  selb 
Brandy  and  Tobacco,  all  extraordinary  dear.  A  Flask  of 
Wine  which  holds  3  quarts  will  cost  18  Stivers,  fe»  so 
much  I  paid  foe  it ;  yet  I  bought  as  much  for  8  Stivers  in 
another  place,  but  it  was  privately  at  an  unlicenced  House, 
and  the  Person  that  sold  it,  would  have  been  ruined  had  it 
been  known ;  and  thus  much  for  the  Country,  and  the 
European  Inhabitants. 


5.6 


I 


I 


CHAP.    XX 

Oflht  Hotitral  Inkahifanti  ef  tht  Capt  if  Good  Hopr,  the  NoJmaJodt  or 
Htttanttti.  Thrir  P/nanagt^  Garh,  htimtaring  thrmuhirt ;  thfir 
Chiilhing,  Heuiti,  Ftoti,  way  if  Livings  and  Darning  al  tht  Full 
»f  tht  Mttn  :  Cfmfiarrd  in  thmr  r/tfittti  with  atker  Nrgrees  and 
U^ild  Indiam.  Captain  Hrath  rtfrnhts  hit  Mm  at  tht  Caftt, 
and  gttling  lamt  nurt  Hands,  dtparit  in  nmpany  with  tht  James 
and  Mvjr,  and  tht  Josiah.  A  grtat  tu/tlHng  Sta  from  S.  K^, 
Thfj  arrivt  at  Santa  Htlltna,  and  tbrrt  mt/t  with  tht  Prmcest 
Ann,  hemtward  bound.  Tht  Air,  Situaticn,  and  Stil  tf  that 
Island,  llf  fint  diun/trj,  and  thangt  cf  MaUtn  linet.  Haw 
thf  Bnglith  gat  it.  Ill  Strength,  Town,  Inhahitanti,  and  tht 
Praduil  9/  thtir  Plantatiam.  Tht  Santa  Htlltna  Manattt  >u 
tthtr  than  ihi  Sta  Lian.  Of  the  Englith  fftmtn  at  ihii  hit. 
Tht  Engliih  Ships  rtfreih  their  Men  here ;  and  depart  all 
ttgtthtr.  Of  tht  difftrtnl  Caursti  fram  htait  ta  England.  Tkfsr 
Cauru  and  arrival  in  tht  Engliih  Channel  and  the  Dawni. 

THE  Natural  Inhabitants  of  the  Cape  arc  the  ; 
Hodmodods,  as  they  are  commonly  called,  which  ■ 
is  a  corruption  nf  the  Word  Hottantot ;  for  this 
■«  the  Name  by  which  they  call  to  one  another, 
either  in  their  Dances,  or  on  any  occasion  ;  as  if  every  one 
of  them  had  this  for  his  Name.  The  Word  probably  hath 
some  signification  or  other  in  their  Language,  whatever  it  is. 
These  Hottantots  are  People  of  a  middle  Stature,  with 
small  Limbs  and  thin  Bodies,  full  of  activity.  Their  Kaccs 
arc  of  a  flat  oval  Figure,  of  the  Negro  make,  with  great 
Eye-brows,  black  Eyes,  but  neither  arc  their  Noses  so  flat, 
nor  their  Lips  so  thick,  as  the  N^roes  of  Guinea.  Their 
Complexion  is  darker  than  the  common  Indians;  tho'  not 
so  black  OS  the  Negroes  or  New  Hollanders;  neither  ia 
their  Hair  so  much  frizled. 

5*7 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 
AN.  They  besmear  themselves  all  over  with  Grease,  as  well 

»*9»  to  keep  their  Joints  supple,  as  to  fence  their  half-naked 
Bodies  from  the  Air,  by  stopping  up  their  Pores.  To  do 
this  the  more  effectually,  they  rub  Soot  over  the  greased 
parts,  especially  their  Faces,  which  adds  to  their  natural 
Beauty,  as  Painting  does  in  Europe;  but  withal  sends  from 
them  a  strong  Smell,  which  though  sufficiently  pleasing  to 
themselves,  is  very  unpleasant  to  others.  They  are  glad  of 
the  worst  of  Kitchen-stuff  for  this  purpose,  and  use  it  as 
often  as  they  can  get  it. 

This  Custom  of  anointing  the  Body  is  very  common  In 
other  parts  of  Africa,  especially  on  the  Coast  of  Guinea, 
where  they  generally  use  Palm-Oil,  anointing  themselves 
from  Head  to  Foot ;  but  when  they  want  Oil,  they  make 
use  of  Kitchen-stuff,  which  they  buy  of  the  Europeans, 
that  Trade  with  them.  In  the  East-Indies  also,  especially 
on  the  Coast  of  Cudda  and  Malacca,  and  in  general,  on 
almost  all  the  Easterly  Islands,  as  well  on  Sumatra,  Java, 
&c.  as  on  the  Phillipine  and  Spice  Islands,  the  Indian 
Inhabitants  anoint  themselves  with  Coco-nut  Oil,  two  or 
three  times  a  day,  especially  Mornings  and  Evenings. 
They  spend  sometimes  half  an  hour  in  chafing  the  Oil  and 
rubbing  it  into  their  Hair  and  Skin,  leaving  no  place 
unsmear'd  with  OU,  but  their  Face,  which  they  daub 
not  like  these  Hottantots.  The  Americans  also  in  some 
places  do  use  this  Custom,  but  not  so  frequently,  perhaps 
for  want  of  Oil  and  Grease  to  do  it.  Yet  some  American 
Indians  in  the  North  Seas  frequently  daub  themselves  with 
a  Figment  made  with  Leaves,  Roots,  or  Herbs,  or  with  a 
sort  of  red  Earth,  giving  their  Skins  a  yellow,  red,  or  green 
Colour,  according  as  the  Hgment  is.  And  these  smell  un- 
savourly  enough  to  People  not  accustomed  to  them; 
tho'  not  so  rank  as  those  who  use  Oil  or  Grease. 

The  Hottantots  do  wear  no  covering  on  their  Heads, 
but  deck  their  Hair  with  small  Shells.  Their  Garments 
are  Sheep-skins  wrapt  about  their  Shoulders  like  a  Mantle, 
with  the  woolly  sides  next  their  Bodies.  The  Men  have 
besides  this  Mantle  a  piece  of  Skin  like  a  small  Apron 
hanging  before  them.  The  Women  have  another  Skin 
Sl8 


THE    HOTTANTOTS'   GARB 

'  tucked  about  their  Waists,  which  comes  down  to  their  . 
Knets  like  a  Petticoat ;  and  their  Legs  arc  wrapt  round  ' 
with  Sheeps-guts  two  or  three  inches  thick,  some  up  as 
high  as  to  their  Calves,  others  even  from  their  Feet  to 
their  Knees,  which  at  a  small  distance  seems  to  be  a  sort  of 
Boots.  These  arc  put  on  when  they  are  green ;  and  so 
they  grow  hard  and  stiff  on  their  Legs,  for  they  never  pull 
them  off  again,  till  they  have  occasion  to  cat  them ;  which 
is  when  they  Journey  from  home,  and  have  no  other  Food  ; 
then  these  Guts  which  have  been  worn,  it  may  be,  six, 
eight,  ten  or  twelve  Months,  make  them  a  good  Banquet: 
This  1  was  informed  of  by  ihe  Dutch.  They  never  pull 
off  their  Sheep-skin  Garments,  but  to  louse  themselves,  for 
by  continual  wearing  them  they  are  full  of  Vermin,  which 
obliges  them  often  to  strip  and  sit  tn  the  Sun  two  or  three 
hours  together  in  the  heat  of  the  day,  to  destroy  them. 
Indeed  most  Indians  that  live  remote  from  the  Kquator, 
are  molested  with  l.ice,  though  their  Garments  afford  less 
shelter  for  Lice  than  these  Hottantots  Sheep-Skins  do. 
For  all  those  Indians  who  live  in  cold  Countries,  as  in  the 
North  and  South  parts  of  America,  have  some  sort  of  Skin 
or  other  to  cover  their  Bodies,  as  Deer,  Otter,  Beaver  or  Seal 
Skins,  all  which  they  as  constantly  wear,  without  shifting 
themselves,  as  these  Hottantots  do  their  Sheep  skins.  And 
hence  they  arc  lowsy  too,  and  strong  scented,  though  they 
do  not  dauh  themselves  at  all,  or  but  very  little;  for  even 
by  reason  of  their  Skins  they  »mcll  strong. 

The  Hottantou  Houses  arc  the  meanest  that  I  did  ever 
see.  They  are  about  9  or  lo  foot  high,  and  10  or  iz 
from  side  to  side.  They  are  in  a  manner  round  made  with 
■mall  Poles  stuck  into  the  ground,  and  brought  together 
It  the  top,  where  they  are  fastened.  The  sides  and  top  of 
the  House  are  filled  up  with  Boughs  coursely  watlcd 
between  the  Poles,  and  all  is  covercil  over  with  long  Grass, 
Rushes,  and  pieces  of  Hides;  and  the  House  at  a  distance 
appears  just  like  a  Hay-cock.  They  leave  only  a  small 
hole  tm  one  side  about  3  or  4  foot  high,  for  a  door  to  creep 
in  and  out  at;  but  when  the  Wind  comes  in  at  this  door, 
they  stop  it  up,  and  nuke  another  hole  in  the  oppoute 
5'9 


I 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AH.   nde.     They  make  the  Fire  in  the  middle  of  the  House, 
i^>  and  the  Smoke  ascends  out  of  the  Crannies,  from  all  parts 
of  the  House.     They  have  no  Beds  to  lie  on,  but  tumble 
down  at  night  round  the  fire. 

Their  Houshold  Furniture  is  commonly  an  earthen  Pot 
or  two  to  boil  Victuals,  and  they  live  very  miserably  and 
hard ;  it  is  repOTted  that  they  will  fast  two  or  three  days 
together,  when  they  travel  about  the  Country. 

Their  common  Food  is  either  Herbs,  Flesh,  or  Shell- 
fish, which  they  get  among  the  Rocks,  or  other  places  at 
low  Water :  For  they  have  no  Boats,  Barlclc^s,  nor  Canoas 
to  go  a  Fishing  in;  so  that  their  chiefest  subsistence  is  on 
Ijuid  Animals,  or  on  such  Herbs  as  the  Land  naturally 
fffoduceth.  I  was  told  by  my  Dutch  Landlord,  that  they 
kept  Sheep  and  Bullocks  here  before  the  Dutch  settled 
among  them :  and  that  the  Inland  Hottantots  have  still 
great  stocks  of  Cattle,  and  sell  them  to  the  Dutch  for  Rolls 
of  Tobacco:  and  that  the  price  for  which  they  sell  a  Cow 
or  Sheep,  was  as  much  twisted  Tobacco,  as  will  reach  from 
the  Horns  or  Head,  to  the  Tail ;  for  they  are  great  lovers 
of  Tobacco,  and  will  do  any  thing  for  it.  This  their  way 
of  trucking  was  confirmed  to  me  by  many  others,  who  yet 
said  that  they  could  not  buy  their  Beef  this  cheap  way, 
for  they  had  not  the  liberty  to  deal  with  the  Hottantots, 
that  being  a  priviledge  which  the  Dutch  Elast-India  Com- 
pany reserved  to  themselves.  My  Landlord  having  a  great 
many  Lodgers,  fed  us  most  with  Mutton,  some  of  which 
he  bought  of  the  Butcher,  and  there  is  but  one  in  the 
Town ;  but  most  of  it  he  kill'd  in  the  Night,  the  Sheep 
being  brought  privately  by  the  Hottantots,  who  assisted 
in  Skinning  and  Dressing,  and  had  the  Skin  and  Guts  for 
their  pains,  I  judge  these  Sheep  were  fetched  out  of  the 
Country,  a  good  way  off,  for  he  himself  would  be  absent  a 
day  or  two  to  procure  them,  and  two  or  three  Hottantots 
with  him.  These  of  the  Hottantots  that  live  by  the  Dutch 
Town,  have  their  greatest  subsistence  from  the  Dutch,  for 
there  is  one  or  more  of  them  belonging  to  every  House. 
These  do  all  sorts  of  servile  Work,  and  there  take  their 
Food  and  Grease.  Three  or  Four  more  of  the  nearest 
520 


THEIR    DANCING    BY    MOONLIGHT  | 

iReUtions  at  at  the  Doors  or  near  the  Dutch  House,  waiting   aw. 
fw  the  scraps  and  fragments  that  come  from  the  Tabic  ;  '°9' 
tnd  if  between  meals  the  Dutch  People  have  any  occasion 
for  them,  to  go  on  Errands,  or  the  like,  they  are  ready  at 
command;    expecting    little    for    their    pains;    but    for   a 
stranger  they  will  not  budge  under  a  Stiver. 

Their  Religion,  if  they  have  any,  is  wholly  unknown 
to  mc ;  for  they  have  no  Temple  nor  Idol,  nor  any  place  I 

of  Worship  that  I  did  see  or  hear  of.     Yet  their  mirth  and  1 

nocturnal  pastimes  at  the  New    and  full  of  the    Moon,  J 

lookt  as  if  they  had  some  Su|^er$tition  about  it.     Kor  at         I 
the  Full  especially  they  sing  and  dance  all  Night,  making  I 

a  great  noise :  I  walked  out  to  their  Huts  twice  at  these  I 

times,  in    the  Kvcning,  when  the  Moon  arose  above  the,         I 
Horizon,  and  viewed  them  for  an  Hour  or  more.     They  I 

»cem  all   very  busic,  both    Men,    Women   and    Children,  I 

dancing  very  oddly  on  the  green  Grass  by  their  Houses.  I 

They  traced    too  and   fro  promiscuously,  often  clapping  I 

their  Hands  and  singing  aloud.     Their  Faces  were  some-  I 

limes  to  the  East,  sometimes  tn  the  West :  neither  did   I  I 

•ec  any  motion  or  gesture  that  they  used  when  their  Faces  I 

were  towards  the  Moon,  more  than  when  their  backs  were 
toward  it.  After  I  had  thus  observed  them  for  a  while, 
I  returned  to  my  Lodging,  which  was  not  above  2  or  300 
paces  from  their  Huts;  and  I  heard  them  Singing  in  the 
tame  manner  all  Night.  In  the  grey  of  the  Morning  I 
walked  out  again,  and  found  many  of  the  Men  and  Women 
still  Singing  and  Dancing  ;  who  continued  their  Mirth  tilt 
the  Moon  went  down,  and  then  they  left  off:  Some  of 
them  going  into  ihcir  Huts  to  sleep,  and  others  to  their 
Utendance  in  their  Dutch  Houses.  Other  Negroes  are 
less  circumspect  in  their  Night-Dances,  as  to  the  precise 
time  of  the  Full  Moon,  they  being  more  general  in  these 
Nocturnal  Pastimes,  and  use  them  oftcncr;  as  do  many 
People  also  in  the  East  and  West  Indies :  yet  there  is  a 
difference  between  colder  and  warmer  Countries  as  to  their 
Divcrtiscmcnts.  The  warmer  Climates  being  generally 
very  prtxluctive  u{  delicate  Fruits,  &c.  and  these  un- 
civilized People  caring  for  little  else  than  what  is  barely 
521 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AM,  necessary ;  they  spend  the  greatest  part  of  their  ^ttme  m 
"9*  diverting  themselves,  after  their  several  Fashions;  but  the 
Indians  of  colder  Climates  are  not  so  much  at  leisure,  the 
Fruits  of  the  Earth  being  scarce  with  them,  and  they 
necessitated  to  be  continually  Fishing,  Hunting,  or  Fowling 
for  their  subsistence ;  not  as  with  us  for  Recreation. 

As  for  these  Hottantots,  they  are  a  very  lazy  sort  of 
People,  and  though  they  live  in  a  delicate  Country,  very 
fit  to  be  manured,  and  where  there  is  Land  enough  for 
them,  yet  they  choose  rather  to  live  as  their  Fore-fathers, 
poor  and  miserable,  than  be  at  pains  for  plenty.  And  so 
much  for  the  Hottantots:  1  shall  now  return  to  our  own 
Afikirs. 

Upon  our  arrival  at  the  Cape,  Captain  Hoith  took  an 
House  to  live  in,  in  order  to  recover  his  health.  Such  «f 
lus  Men  as  were  able  did  so  too,  for  the  rest  he  provided 
Lodgings  and  paid  their  Expences.  Three  or  Four  aC  our 
Men,  who  came  ashore  very  sick,  died,  l»it  the  rest,  by  the 
asustance  of  the  Doctors  of  the  Fort,  a  fine  Air,  uid  good 
Kitchin  and  Cellar  Pfayuck,  soon  recovered  their  Health*. 
Those  that  subscribed  to  be  at  all  calls,  and  aansted  to 
bring  in  the  Ship,  received  Captain  Heath's  Bounty,  by 
which  they  furnished  themselves  with  Liquor  for  their 
homeward  Voyage.  But  we  were  now  so  few,  that  we 
could  not  sail  the  Ship;  therefore  Captain  Heath  desired 
the  Governour  to  spare  him  some  Men ;  and  as  I  was  in- 
formed, had  a  promise  to  be  supplied  out  of  the  home- 
ward bound  Dutch  East-India  Ships,  that  were  now 
expected  every  Day,  and  we  waited  for  them.  In  the 
mean  time  in  came  the  yames  and  Mary,  and  the  Jostah 
of  London,  bound  home.  Out  of  these  we  thought  to 
have  been  furnished  with  Men;  but  they  had  only  enough 
for  themselves ;  therefore  we  waited  yet  longer  for  the 
Dutch  Fleet,  which  at  last  arrived  :  but  we  could  get  no 
Men  from  them. 

Captain  Heath  was  therefore    forced  to  get  Men  by 

stealth,  such    as  he  could  pick  up,  whether  Soldiers  or 

Seamen.     The  Dutch  knew  our  want  of  Men,  therefore 

near  40  of  them,  those  that  had  a  design  to  return  to 

522 


■  THEY  LEAVE  THE  CAPE  I 

^Europe,  came  privately  and  offered  themselves,  and  waited  am.  ■ 
in  the  night  at  places  appointed,  where  aur  Boats  went  and  '*9' 
fetched  3  or  4  aboard  at  a  time,  and  hid  them,  especially 
when  any  Dutch  Boat  came  aboard  our  Ship.  Here  at  the 
Cape  I  met  my  Friend  Daniel  Wallis,  the  same  who  leapt 
into  the  Sea  and  swam  at  Pulo  Condorc.'  After  several 
Traverses  to  Madagascar,  Don  Mascarin,'  Pontichcrri,  Pegu, 
Cunnimcrc,  Madcras,  and  the  River  of  Hugli,  he  was  now 
got  hither  in  a  homeward  bound  Dutch  Ship.  I  soon  pcr- 
swaded  him  to  come  over  to  us,  and  found  means  to  get  i 

him  aboard  our  Ship.  I 

About  the  13d  of  May  we  sailed  from  the  Cape,  in  the  I 

Company  of  the  'James  and  Mary,  and  the  Joiia/i,  directing 
our  Course  towards  the  Island  Santa  Hellena.  We  met 
nothing  of  remark  in  this  Voyage,  except  a  great  swelling 
Sea,  out  of  the  S.  W,  which  taking  us  on  the  Broad-side, 
made  us  rowl  sufficiently.  Such  of  our  Water-casks  as 
were  between  Decks,  running  from  side  to  side,  were  in  a 
short  time  all  staved,  and  the  Deck  well  washed  with  the 
Fresh  Water.  The  Shot  tumbled  out  the  Lockers  and 
Garlands ;' and  rung  a  loud  Peal,  rumbling  from  side  to 
side,  every  mwl  that  the  Ship  made;  neither  was  it  an 
casie  matter  to  reduce  them  again  within  Bounds.  The 
Guns,  being  carefully  look'd  after  and  lash'd  fast,  never 
budg'd,  but  the  Tackles*  or  Pulleys,  and  Lashings,  made 
great  Musick  too.  The  sudden  and  violent  motion  of  the 
Ship,  made  us  fearful  test  some  of  the  Guns  should  have 
broken  loose,  which  must  have  been  very  detrimental  to 
the  Ship's  sides.     The  Masts  were  also  in  great  danger  to 

When  attacked  aboard  the  Malay  veuel. 

The  Mauritiui.  1 

A  garland  wa*  a  grummel,  or  lope  ring,  within  ohich  shot  could  b« 

A  "  locket"  for  ahot  tan  found  eadi  hatdioray,  and  alanK  the  side*  ' 

trf  ihc  iruD'dccki. 

*  The  ucklrs  were  thrt«  in  number:  a  tide-tackle  on  each  tide  of  the 
KUn-farha^c,  lo  enable  the  };un'i  crew  lo  nin  ihc  piece  out  oi  in,  and  a 
tnin,  i>r  ptcventer  tackle.  In  keep  the  nun  (rum  runnmit  out  too  far  with 
the  roll  (if  the  »hip.  There  were  generally  two  laihingi :  a  breechinK. 
ninninK  rinlil  round  the  |[un  to  keep  it  elate  to  the  ■hip'*  iide,  and  a  hoaunf 
or  munle-lathinn,  10  tecure  the  gun'*  munle  to  the  upper  part  of  ilie  uort. 
The  lattnamed  wat,  of  counc,  oM  atide,  when  the  gun  fm  pieparea  for 

533 


Rs, 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AK.  be  rowl'd  by  the  board ;  but  no  harm  happened  to  any  of 
****  us,  besides  the  loss  of  3  or  4  Buts  of  Water,  and  a  Barrel 
or  1  of  good  Cape  Wine,  which  was  staved  in  the  great 
Cabbin. 

This  great  Tumbling  Sea,  took  us  shortly  after  we  came 
from  the  Cape.  The  violence  of  it  lasted  but  one  Night ; 
yet  we  had  a  continual  swelling  came  out  of  the  S.  W. 
almost  during  all  the  Passage  to  Santa  Hellena  ;  which  was 
an  eminent  Token  that  the  S.  W,  Winds  were  now  violent 
in  the  higher  Latitudes  towards  the  South  Pole;  for  this 
was  the  time  of  the  Year  for  those  Winds.  Notwithstand- 
ing this  boisterous  Sea  coming  thus  obliquely  upon  us,  we 
had  fine  clear  Weather,  and  a  moderate  Gale  at  S.  E.  or 
between  that  and  the  East,  till  we  came  to  the  Island  Santa 
Hellena,  where  we  arrived  the  20th  day  of  June.  There 
we  found  the  Princess  Ann  at  an  Anchor,  waiting  for  us. 

The  Island  Santa  Hellena  lies  in  about  1 6  Degrees  South 
Lat.  The  Air  is  commonly  Serene  and  Clear,  except  in  the 
Months  that  yield  Rain ;  yet  we  had  one  or  two  very 
Rainy  days,  even  while  we  were  here.  Here  are  Moist 
Seasons  to  Plant  and  Sow,  and  the  Weather  is  Temperate 
enough  as  to  Heat,  tho'  so  near  the  Equator,  and  very 
Healthy. 

The  Island  is  but  small,  nor  above  nine  or  ten  Leagues 
in  Length,  and  stands  3  or  400  Leagues  from  the  Main 
Land.  It  is  bounded  against  the  Sea  with  step  Rocks,  so 
that  there  is  no  landing  but  at  two  or  three  places.  The 
Land  is  high  and  Mountainous,  and  seems  to  be  very  dry 
and  poor ;  yet  they  are  fine  Valleys,  proper  for  cultivation, 
The  Mountains  appear  bare,  only  in  some  places  you  may 
see  a  few  low  Shrubs,  but  the  Valleys  afford  some  Trees 
fit  for  building,  as  I  was  informed. 

This  Island  is  said  to  have  been  first  discover'd  and 
settled  by  the  Portuguese,  who  stockt  it  with  Goats  and 
Hogs.  But  it  being  afterwards  deserted  by  them,  it  lay 
waste,  till  the  Dutch  finding  it  convenient  to  relieve  their 
East-India  Ships,  settled  it  again ;  but  they  afterwards 
relinquished  it  for  a  more  convenient  place ;  I  mean  the 
Cape  of  Good  Hope.  Then  the  English  East-India  Com- 
524 


PF   SEVERAL   OWNERS    OF   ST.    HELENA 

ny  settled  their  Servants  there,  and  began  to  Fortify  it,    ah. 

,t  they  being  yet  weak,  the  Dutch  about  the  year  1672,  '*9' 
came  thither,  and  re-took  it,  and  kept  it  in  their  possession. 
This  News  being  reported  in  England,  Captain  Monday' 
was  sent  to  retake  it,  who  by  the  advice  and  conduct  of 
one  that  had  formerly  lived  there,  landed  a  party  of  Armed 
Men  in  the  night  in  a  small  Cove,  unknown  to  the  Dutch 
then  in  Garrison,  and  climbing  the  Rocks,  got  up  into  the 
Island,  and  so  came  in  the  Morning  to  the  Hills  hanging 
over  the  Kort,  which  stands  by  the  Sea  in  a  small  Valley. 
From  thence  firing  into  the  Fort,  they  soon  made  them 
surrender.  There  were  at  this  time  two  or  three  Dutch 
East-India  Ship,  cither  at  Anchor,  or  coming  thither,  when 
our  Ships  were  there.  These,  when  ihcy  saw  that  the 
English  were  Masters  of  the  Island  again,  made  sail  to  be 
gone ;  but  being  chaccd  by  the  English  Frigots,  two  of 
them  became  rich  Prizes  to  Captain  Monday  and  his 
Men. 

The  Island  hath  continued  ever  since  in  the  Hands  of 
the  English  East-India  Company,  and  hath  been  greatly 
strengthened  both  with  Men  and  Guns;  so  that  at 
this  day  it  is  secure  enough  from  the  Invasion  of  any 
Enemy.  For  the  common  Landing-place  is  a  small  Bay, 
like  a  Half  Moon,  scarce  500  Paces  wide,  between  the  two 
Points.  Close  by  the  Sea-side  are  good  Guns  planted  at 
equal  distances,  lying  along  from  one  end  of  the  Bay  to 
the  other ;  besides  a  small  Fort,  a  little  further  in  from  the. 
Sea,  near  the  midst  of  the  Bay.  All  which  makes  the 
Bay  so  strong,  that  it  is  impossible  to  force  it.  I'he  small 
Cove  where  Captain  Monday  landed  his  Men  when  he  took 
the  Island  from  the  Dutch,  is  scarce  fit  for  a  Boat  to  land 
at ;  and  yet  that  is  now  also  fortified. 

There  is  a  small  English  Town  within  the  great  Bay, 
ttanding    in    a    little   Valley,   between    two    high    steep 

'  The  **  Monday'  i*  Hicliard  Manden  (1640-1680).     He  atriwd  ofT  St. 
I   Helms  In  Mty  tili-     He  atiackcil  00  tlie  Ath  May,  snd  rapiumJ  itir 
■"'"   d.  t*j{fih«T  «iih  ihrcp  Duich  EJiit  Indiaincn.     He  wnt  knighted  (or 
feat.     DnlrTTBplv'i  colltciioii  of  map*  containi  a  plan  at  the  uland 
■\ag  Munilvn'i  lulvancr  fftmi  ih*  "taull  cove*  10  ibe  fort. 


CAPTAIN  DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 
AM.  Mounduns.  There  may  be  about  20  or  30  small  Houses, 
**9*  whose  Walls  are  built  with  rough  Stones :  The  inside 
Furmture  is  very  mean.  The  Governour  hath  a  pretty 
tolerable  handsome  low  House,  by  the  Fort ;  where  he 
commonly  lives,  having  a  few  Soldiers  to  attend  him, 
snd  to  guard  the  Fort.  But  the  Houses  in  the  Town 
befctfe- mentioned  stand  empty,  save  only  when  Ships  arrive 
here;  for  their  Owners  have  all  Plantations  farther  in  the 
Island,  where  they  constantly  employ  themselves.  But 
when  Ships  arrive,  they  all  flock  to  the  Town,  where  they 
live  all  the  time  that  the  Ships  lie  here ;  for  then  is  their 
F«r  or  Market,  to  buy  such  Necessaries  as  they  want,  and 
to  sell  off  the  Product  of  their  Plantations. 

Their  Plantations  afford  Potatoes,  Yames,  and  some 
Plantains  and  Bonanoes.  Their  Stock  consists  chiefly  of 
Hogs,  Bullocks,  Cocks  and  Hens,  Ducks,  Geese,  and 
Turkeys,  of  which  they  have  great  plenty,  and  sell  them 
at  a  low  rate  to  the  Sailors,  taking  in  exchange,  Shirts, 
Drawers,  or  any  light  Cloaths ;  pieces  of  Callico,  Silks,  or 
Muzlins:  Arack,  Sugar,  and  Lime-juice,  is  also  much 
esteemed  and  coveted  by  them.  But  now  they  are  in 
hopes  to  produce  Wine  and  Brandy,  in  a  short  time :  for 
they  do  already  begin  to  plant  Vines  for  that  end,  there 
being  a  few  French  Men  there  to  manage  that  affair.  This 
I  was  told,  but  1  saw  nothing  of  it,  for  it  runed  so  hard 
when  I  was  ashore,  that  I  had  not  the  opportunity  of 
seeing  their  Plantations.  I  was  also  informed,  that  they 
get  Manatee  or  Sea  Cows  here,  which  seemed  very  strange 
to  me.  Therefore  enquiring  more  strictly  into  the  matter, 
I  found  the  Santa  Hellena  Manatee  to  be,  by  their  shapes, 
and  manner  of  lying  ashore  on  the  Rocks,  those  Creatures 
called  Sea-lyons ;  for  the  Manatee  never  come  ashore, 
neither  are  they  found  near  any  rocky  Shores,  as  this  Island 
is,  there  being  no  feeding  for  them  in  such  places.  Besides, 
in  this  Island  there  is  no  River  for  them  to  drink  at,  tho* 
there  is  a  small  Brook  runs  into  the  Sea,  out  of  the  Valley 
by  the  Fort. 

We  stayed  here  5  or  6  days ;  alt  which  time  the  Islanders 
lived  at  the  Town,  to  entertain  the  Seamen  ;  who  constantly 
526 


V  THE  WOMEN   OF  SANTA    HELLENA 

■flock  : 


'  flock  ashore,  to  enjoy  themselves  among  their  Country  aw. 
People.  Our  touching  at  the  Cajx  had  greatly  drained  the  '*9' 
Seamen  of  their  loose  Coins,  at  which  these  Islanders  as 
greatly  repined  ;  and  some  of  the  poorer  sort  openly  com- 
plained against  such  doings,  saying,  it  was  6t  that  the  East- 
India  Company  should  Be  acquainted  wiih  it,  that  they 
might  hinder  their  Ships  from  touching  at  the  Cape.  Yet 
they  were  exireamly  kind,  in  hopes  to  get  what  was  remain- 
ing. They  arc  most  of  them  very  [x>or  :  but  such  as  could 
get  a  little  Liquor  to  sell  to  the  Seamen  at  this  time  got 
what  the  Seamen  could  spare  ;  for  the  Punch  Houses  were 
never  empty.  But  had  we  all  come  directly  hither,  and 
not  touched  at  the  Cape,  even  the  poorest  People  among 
them  would  have  gotten  something  by  entertaining  sick 
Men,  For  commonly  the  Seamen  coming  home,  arc 
troubled,  more  or  less,  with  Scorbutick  Distempers ;  and 
their  only  hopes  are  to  get  refreshment  and  health  at  this 
Island,  and  these  hopes  seldom  or  never  fail  them,  if  once 
they  get  footing  here.  E'or  the  Islands  afford  abundance 
"  delicate  Herbs,  wherewith  the  Sick  are  first  bathed  to 
pple  their  Joints,  and  then  the  Fruits  and  Herbs,  tnd 
fresh  food  soon  after  cure  them  of  their  Scorbutick 
Humour.  So  that  in  a  Weeks  time  Men  that  have  been 
carried  ashore  in  Hammocks,  and  they  who  were  wholly 
unable  to  go,  have  soon  been  able  to  leap  and  dance. 
Doubtless  the  serenity  and  wholesomencss  of  the  Air  coit- 
iributes  much  to  the  carrying  off"  of  these  Distempers;  for 
here  is  constantly  a  fresh  breeze.  While  we  stay'd  here, 
many  of  the  Seamen  got  Sweethearts.  One  young  Man 
belonging  to  the  JamfS  and  Mary,  was  Married,  and  brought 
his  Wife  to  England  with  him.  Another  brought  his 
Sweetheart  to  England,  they  being  each  engaged  by  Bonds 
to  Marry  at  their  Arrival  in  England  ;  and  several  other 
of  our  Men,  were  over  Head  and  Ears  in  Love  with  the 
Santa  Hellena  Maids,  who  tho'  they  were  bom  there,  yet 
very  earnestly  desired  to  be  released  from  that  Prison, 
which  they  have  no  other  way  to  compass,  but  by  Marrying 
Seamen,  or  Passengers  that  touch  here.  The  young  Women 
born  here,  are  but  one  remove  from  .~ 


u 


h 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 
AN.    Daughters  of  such.      They  are  well  shaped,  proper    and 
'*9'   comely,  were  they  in  a  Dress  to  set  them  off. 

My  stay  ashore  here  was  but  two  days,  to  get  Refresh- 
ments for  my  self  and  Jeoly,  whom  I  carried  ashore  with 
me  :  and  he  was  very  diligent  to  pick  up  such  things  as  the 
Islands  afforded,  carrying  ashore  with  him  a  Bag,  which  the 
People  of  the  Isle  filled  with  Roots  for  him.  They  flockt 
about  him,  and  seemed  to  admire  him  much.  This  was 
the  last  place  where  I  had  him  at  my  own  disposal,  for 
the  Mate  of  the  Ship,  who  had  Mr.  Moodie's  share  in  him, 
left  him  entirely  to  my  management,  I  being  to  bring  him 
to  England.  But  I  was  no  sooner  arrived  in  the  Thames, 
but  he  was  sent  ashore  to  be  seen  by  some  eminent  Persons; 
and  I  being  in  want  of  Money,  was  prevailed  upon  to  sell 
first,  part  of  my  share  in  him,  and  by  degrees  all  of  it.' 
After  this  I  heard  he  was  carried  about  to  be  shown  as  a 
Sight,  and  that  he  died  of  the  Small-pox  at  Oxford. 

But  to  proceed,  our  Water  being  filled,  and  the  Ship  all 
stocked  with  fresh  Provision,  we  sailed  from  hence  in 
Company  of  the  Princess  Ann,  the  James  and  Mary,  and  the 
Josiah,  July  2d,  1 69 1 ,  directing  our  course  towards 
England,  and  designing  to  touch  no  where  by  the  way. 
We  were  now  in  the  way  of  the  Trade  Winds,  which  we 
commonly  find  at  E.  S,  E.  or  S.  E.  by  E.  or  S.  E.  till  wel 
draw  near  the  Line,  and  sometimes  till  we  are  8  or  ic 
d^rees  to  the  North  of  the  Line.  For  which  reason  Ship 
might  shape  their  course  so,  as  to  keep  on  the  African] 
shore,  and  pass  between  Cape  Verd  and  Cape  Verd  Islands  J 
for  that  seems  to  be  the  directest  course  to  England.  Buta 
experience  often  shews  us,  that  the  farthest  way  about  is] 
the  nearest  way  home,  and  so  it  is  here.  For  by  striving  toj 
keep  near  the  African  Shore,  you  meet  with  the  Windaj 
more  uncertain,  and  subject  to  calms ;  whereas  in  keeping 
the  mid-way  between  Africa  and  America,  or  rather  neareil 
the  American  Continent,  till  you  are  North  of  the  Line,! 
you  have  a  brisk  constant  gale. 

This  was  the  way  that  we  took,  and  in  our  passage} 


'  "  I  fell  amongst  rooks,"  says  the  MS. 

528 


i      THEIR  ARRIVAL  IN  THE  DOWNS  | 

before  wc  got  to  the  Line,  we  saw  three  Ships,  and  making  ak. 
towards  them,  wc  found  two  of  them  to  be  Portuguese,  '"'' 
bound  to  Brazil.  The  third  kept  on  a  Wind,  so  that  we 
could  not  speak  with  her  ;  but  we  found  by  the  Portuguese 
it  was  an  English  Ship,  called  the  Dorothy,  Capt.  Thwart 
Commander,  bound  to  the  East  Indies.  After  this  we  kept 
Company  still  with  our  Three  Consorts  till  wc  came  near 
England,  and  then  were  separated  by  bad  weather ;  but 
before  we  came  within  sight  of  Land  wc  got  together  again, 
all  but  the  yames  and  Mary.     She  got  into  the  Channel  J 

before  us,  and  went  to  Plymouth,  and  there  gave  an  account  I 
of  the  rest  of  us;  whereupon  our  Men  of  War  who  lay  I 
there,  came  out  to  join  us,  and  meeting  us,  brought  us  off 
of  Plymouth.  There  our  Consort  the  James  and  Mary 
came  to  us  again,  and  from  thence  we  all  sailed  in  company 
of  several  Men  of  War  towards  Portsmouth.  There  our  first 
Convoy  left  us,  and  went  in  thither.  But  we  did  not  want 
Convoys,  for  our  Fleets  were  then  repairing  to  their  Winter 
Iiarbours,'  to  be  laid  up;  so  that  wc  had  the  company  of 
several  English  Ships  to  the  Downs,  and  a  Squadron  also 
of  Dutch  sailed  up  the  Channel,  but  kept  off  farther  from 
our  English  Coast,  they  being  bound  home  to  Holland. 
When  wc  came  as  high  as  the  South  Foreland,  we  left 
them  standing  on  their  course,  keeping  on  the  back  of  the 
Goodwin  Sands;  and  we  lufft  in  for  the  Downs,*  where  we 
anchored  September  the  i6th,  1691. 


'  The  thipt  of  the  Channel  tquadrons 
home-porit  during  tb«  winicf. 
'  Uu)  Koad. 


t  always  "Eald-up" 


APPENDIX 


DAMPIER'S   ASSOCIATES  f 

EDMUND  COOK,  OR  COOKE 

Perhapc  this  Edmund  Cooke  was  the  Ednmod  Cooke  who  wis  at  ds  { 
time  matter  of  the  pink,  yirgmy  of  London,  1670.     Hu  ship  was  taken  \  j 
the  Spaniards,  **  about  40  leagues  short  of  the  Havana,"  on  May  10,  i6n. 
and  her  cargo  of  logwood,  indigo,  tortotae-sheD,  fltc,  made  a  prey,  maflf 
and  crew  being  turned  adrift  in  the  longboat.     He  went  to  Spain,  all 
passed  nine  months  in  Madrid,  TiinlT  trying  to  get  restitution.     He  ^ 
tried  to  get  **  leuers  of  reprisal " ;  and  one  concludes  that  he  was  suc( 
However,  one  cannot    be   certain   that   the  two    Edmund  Cookes 
identical;  though  we  know  diat  both  came  from  London. 

The  buccaneering  Edmund  Cooke  was  cruizing  off  Cartagena  at  the 
of  the  second  sacking  of  Porto  Bello,  in  1679-80.     He  was  the  caj 
a  ship  of  3  $  tons  and  43  men  at  '^  the  general  rendezrous  of  the  fleet 
few  weeks  later  at  fioco  del  Toro.     He  crossed  the  Isthmus  with  Sawl 
and  Sharp  in  command  of  their  seventh  company.     He  was  apparently?! 
engaged  at  the  battle  of  Perico,  but  he  was  given  the  command  of  a  S| 
prize  directly  afterwards.     He  was  turned  out  of  this  ship  by  his  crei 
the  end  of  May   1680.      On  the  6th  of  January   1681,  he  was   pi 
irons  for  conduct  unbecoming  a  buccaneer.     He  returned  across  the  1st 
with  Dampier's  party,  and  made  one  of  the  crew  of  the  Baichelors  Di 
I  can  trace  no  further  adventures  in  which  he  had  a  hand. 


JOHN  COOK 

Perhaps   the  Captain  Cook  who,  in  September    1679,   took    a 
cacao  shallop  on  the  coast  of  Cuba.     He  seems  to  have  been  a  respe< 
merchant  captain  until  he  was  forced  to  abandon  his  ship  near  Cura^oi 
order  to  escape  some  Spanish  cruisers.     He  crossed  the  Isthmus  with 
and  Sawkins,  and  returned  with  Dampier's  party.     Dampier  tells  the 
of  his  subsequent  career  with  Captain  Yanky,  and  of  the  ruse  by  whi< 
took    possession  of  Captain   Tristian's  ship.      Wafer's  narrative  con! 
Dampier.       In    August    1683,   he  was   captain   of  <'the   good    ship 
Revenge^**  sailing    from    Accomac    towards   the  South   Seas.       He  r 
minded   the  Baichelors  Delight  until   his  death  at  or   near   Cape    Bl 
(Gulf  of  Nicoya)  in  July  1684. 

530 


DAMPIER'S  ASSOCIATES 


JOHN   COXON 

ler  (at  the  L^nsa  de  TcrmiDot),  and  in  a 

f  at    i*^^  Md  for  three  yean  later.     A   buccanm 

ing  c^  Jinuica  (villi  a  Preocb  coninnuoa)  in  Auguii  1^76.     Com- 


I  •qnulnMi  vfaictt  umk  lita.  Martha 
I  abovt  j^to  a  man ;    bat  Coxon  probably 


)  hero   of  thii   raid. 


1  of  the  Biahofi,  whom  ht  c. 


got  Mime  tiling  more 


"CoKOn  and  the   Englixh  with  him  did   all." 


D  Bello  a 


"  joo  dacK>  of  indigo"  in  September  1679.     Helped  1 


Uke 


a  later.  Then  croaoed  the  Inhmui  with  Sharp  and 
1  of  97  me».  He  had  a  quarrel  with  Feter  Harrii 
E  march,  but  Sharp  iDicrfrted  "atkd  brought  htm  to  be  quiet."  On 
^  to  win  a  good  (poil  it  Sta.  Maria  he  wia  anxious  to  return  to  the 
,  but  on  being  made  Gcoeial  of  the  army  he  ironaentcd  10  cuntinue 
It  the  colottrk  A>  General,  he  carried  the  force  before  Pmania,  to  the 
e  of  Perictt.  He  took  a  (hate  in  that  battle,  but  he  cut  »o  poor  a 
t  betide  Richard  Sawltia*  that  many  "tiickcd  not  to  defame  or  brand 
the  note  of  cowardice."  Two  or  three  dayi  later,  thit  defamation 
im  to  withdraw  from  the  army,  with  "ihc  bett  of  the  doctori" 
:  70  haadt.  With  iheie  he  returned  acroii  the  Itthmui  to  hit 
I,  loting  leTcral  men  by  the  way.  He  wat  chated  by  the  J/imiir  ftlgate, 
jT  Point  Negril,  Jamaica,  tn  June  or  July  1680,  but  hit  tliip  wai  fut. 
caped.  He  then  seemi  to  hate  obtained  a  commiiiion  from  the 
lor  of  the  Bahama  [ilands  ''to  make  war  on  the  Spaniard!  of  Cuba, 
,  Augustine,  and  othcri "  ;  but  before  he  had  made  much  war  he  wii 
>cked  by  Sir  Thornai  Lynch,  who  cancelled  the  commiiiion,  l.ynch 
1681}  then  tent  him  to  Honduras  to  fetch  away  nomc  logwood 
1 ;  and  for  a  little  while  he  gave  manifest  tokens  uf  being  a  reformed 
er.  "  Hii  men  plotted  to  take  the  ship  and  gu  privateering,  but  he 
y  resitted,  killed  one  or  two  with  hi*  own  hand,  forced  eleven  ovcr- 
I,  and  brought  three  here  (Port  Royal)  who  were  condemned."  Tiiii 
It  pleaaed  Lynch  to  much  that  he  sent  Coxon  to  periuadc  Captain  Yanky 
join  him  in  an  attack  upon  a  iamout  pirate  ihip,  La  Tromffute,  Capuio 
mrcns.  However,  in  November  1683, "Coxon  was  again  in  rebctlioo"; 
X  the  part  of  tpy  and  goTcmment  agent  did  not  please  him.  In  January 
■  686,  be  again  became  virtuous,  and  gave  himielf  up  for  trial  at  Jamaica, 
and  was  ordered  to  be  tried  at  St.  lago  de  la  Vega  "  whete  there  will  be 
few  sympathisers  among  the  jury."  He  must  have  been  acquitted  i  for  in 
Notcmber  of  that  year  he  was  logwood  cutting  in  Camprachy,  with  another 
warrant  out  for  hii  apprehension  as  a  pirate.  Two  or  thrrc  ihipt  were 
deipiched  in  quest  of  him,  but  he  put  to  sea,  and  »o  eluded  them.  In 
September  1688,  he  surrendered  to  the  Governor  of  Jamaica,  and  was  sent 
to  Lynch,  with  Eomc  of  his  crew.  Lynch  was  nut  so  hard-hearted  as  to 
hang  him:  but  it  is  not  known  how  he  persuaded  Lynch  to  let  him  ^o 
free.     He  was  released  with  sufficient  booty  to  purchase  him  a  sloop,  in 


\ 


53" 


V1'»J 


tt»» " 


to 


„»? 


"1 K 


Tilde  s 


o[  '* 


!■"<«, 


iM;f 


.6""" 


.VU»*« 


CAPTAIN   DAM  PIER'S   VOYAGES 

aboard  the  Revenge  and  the  Bauhelors  Delight,  After  John  Cook's  death 
he  was  elected  captain  of  the  latter  vessel ;  and,  as  such,  he  commanded 
the  buccaneer  forces  in  their  cruising  in  the  Bay  of  Panama.  Dampier  was 
with  him,  and  tells  the  story  of  his  adventures  in  the  South  Seas  until 
August  1685.  When  Dampier  left  Davis's  ship  to  go  aboard  the  Cygnet^ 
on  her  passage  to  the  East  Indies,  Davis  was  about  to  sail  from  Rio  Lejo. 
He  sailed  August  27,  in  company  with  William  Knight,  but  a  spotted 
fever  broke  out  among  his  crew,  so  that  he  was  forced  to  put  in  to  Amapalla 
to  recruit.  He  then  sailed  to  Cocos,  the  Galapagos,  Huasco,  Pisco,  and 
Juan  Fernandez,  at  which  last  place  Knight  left  him,  to  return  home. 
After  this,  he  went  to  Guayaquil,  which  had  just  been  taken  by  Grogniet. 
He  then  made  some  further  traverses  in  the  Pacific,  sighting  what  seems  to 
have  been  Easter  Island,  before  he  returned  to  the  West  Indies,  via  Cape 
Horn.  He  then  went  to  settle  in  Virginia,  with  Wafer  and  others ;  bat 
in  1688-9  he  was  arrested  for  his  piracies,  narrowly  escaped  the  gallows, 
and  was  sent  home  to  England,  with  the  others,  to  be  tried  in  London. 
After  some  months  in  prison  they  were  acquitted,  and  after  long  delay  their 
confiscated  booty  was  returned  to  them.  In  1693  ^^  '^^y  ^^^^  been  in 
Virginia,  collecting  this  plunder  from  the  authorities  who  had  impounded  it. 
He  then  disappears  for  several  years;  but  one  gathers  that  Dampier  met 
him  frequently  m  London,  in  the  years  prior  to  his  voyage  in  the  Roebuck^ 
1698-9.  In  1702,  Davis  was  in  Jamaica.  When  the  War  of  the 
Spanish  Succession  broke  out,  the  Governor  of  Jamaica  issued  several 
commissions  to  privateers.  Davis  shipped  aboard  one  of  these  privateers 
(a  Captain  Brown),  and  went  with  him  to  the  plunder  of  Tolu,  where 
Brown  was  killed.  Afterwards  the  party  sailed  to  '*the  Samballoes," 
where  they  persuaded  the  Indians  to  lead  them  to  the  Spanish  gold  mines. 
The  expedition  obtained  little  gold  ;  but  the  narrative  of  the  raid,  as  written 
by  Davis  two  years  later,  is  very  curious  and  entertaining.  It  is  not  well 
written,  and  one  or  two  phrases  would  seem  to  confirm  De  Lussan's  state- 
ment that  he  was  a  foreigner.  Nothing  more  is  known  of  him.  It  may  be 
added  that  he  is  sometimes  spoken  of  as  Nat,  or  Nathaniel  Davis,  from 
which  we  may  infer  thnt  he  was  known  to  the  buccaneers  as  Ned. 


JOHN    EATON 

This  may  be  the  Captain  John  Eaton  (master  of  a  Virginia  trader) 
mentioned  in  a  letter  from  Clement  Hill  "from  Maryland,"  May  18,  1682. 
A  year  later  he  seems  to  have  been  sailing  from  London,  "  to  make  his 
fortune  in  the  South  Seas/'  in  command  of  a  ship  called  the  Nicolas, 
Details  of  his  voyage  will  be  found  in  the  papers  concerning  Charles  Swan 
or  Swann.  He  joined  the  Batchelor^ s  Delight  near  Juan  Fernandez  (March 
19,  1684)  and  consorted  with  her  till  September  2,  when  one  of  the 
common  quarrels  forced  them  to  part  company.  He  returned  to  Europe 
via  the  East  Indies,  committing  many  **  barbarous  insolencies  "  at  Guahan 
and  elsewhere.     See  also  the  life  of  Ambrosia  Cowley. 

534 


DAMPIER'S   ASSOCIATES 


BASIL  RINGROSE 

Tht  iiuthor  of  iltc  Fourth  Pan  of  the  "  Hinor)-  of  tite  Buccaoecra."  He 
doa  Dot  Item  to  bare  heU  any  poiition  of  aucharity  among  the  privaiccn  t 
buE  one  guhfri  thjt  he  had  grtM  phydcal  tirmgth  and  rcmJtkaUe  counge. 
He  tirtt  appear)  "at  ihe  geocral  rcndczvoua  of  the  fleet ''  at  Boco  del  Toro 
in  the  nrly  part  of  1680.  He  wat  then  (appareniJy}  newly  arrived  in  the 
West  Indiem.  He  croucd  the  httimu*  with  Sharp  and  bawkini,  took  a 
promiocai  part  in  the  baiilci  of  Pcrico  and  Arica,  and  returned  to  EnKUnd 
with  Sharp  in  March  16^1.  While  in  l^nglaod  he  wai  probably  tried  for 
piracy  with  hi*  old  captain. 

nil  Jouraal,  which  gi*e*  a  very  clear,  and  wmetimet  brilliant,  accoum 
of  hi*  "daniterou  voyage  and  bold  agiault*,"  wa*  publithcd  io  1685  a*  a 
coDtiDuatloo  of  the  Engti*h  traiulation  of  Gxquemliitg'"  "  Hittory  of  the 
Buccaneer*."  Before  it  appeared,  Ringroae  had  tailed  a*  lupercargo  with 
Charle*  Swan  (f.v.)  to  that  Bartholomew  Sharp  wa*  able  to  make  a  few 
interpolation  in  the  MS.  It  would  appear  that  Ringroie  wa*  in  «ome  way 
imtru mental  in  the  fitting  out  of  the  Cjjiari  lor  her  trading  voyage  ;  yet 
Danipier  add*  that  he  "had  no  mind  tu  thi*  voyage,"  bui  wat  forced  to 
engage  in  it  or  to  itwe.  In  February  16861  he  wa*  ambuihed  near  Su. 
Pecaque,  in  Mexico.  He  wa>  one  of  fifty-four  buccaneers  who  lou  their 
live*  on  thi)  occwon.      Dampirr  *pcak*  of  Ringroie  a*  "my  iogenJou* 

r 

^^f      A  C^uia  Sawkin*,  a  privatcrfi  < 

^H^Hr»f  in  November  1679. 

^^  1  can  find  ou  other  mention  of  him  till  we  bear  of  him  at  the  buccaneer 
miutei  early  io  1680.  At  Buco  del  Toro  he  coninunded  a  *hip  of  one  gun 
and  ;i;  men.  He  croucd  the  lithmiu  in  command  uf  a  division  i  and  look  a 
part  in  the  battle  of  Perico,  He  ihowcd  inch  dopcntc  latcnir  in  thi*  iHllle 
■hat  the  buccaneeii  nude  him  their  Admifal,  alter  the  tediiion  and  delcciioa 
of  -lohn  Coxon.  He  wat  kil'ed  a  few  week*  later  in  ihr  fruiilei*  attempt 
or  Puel^o  Nuevti  {May  11.  i^itto).  Kingtotc  call*  liim  "a  valiant  and 
geoeroui  ^rited  man,  and  beloved  above  any  other  we  ever  bad  among  »*." 


■      BARTHOLOMEW  SHARP,  OR  SHARPE 

Daranier  MigftAathM  rhi*  !mcctnrcf  made  one  of  a  gang  who  plundered 
Segovia  (in  167$  F)  01  m  ■  iiid  even  earlier.  He  appeal  next  in  a  tfaip  of 
two  gun*  and  40  mni  at  Boco  del  Toro  in  I  ti)iQ.  He  commai>ded  a  diviiion 
00  the  march  aciOM  the  Uthmu*;  but  took  no  part  in  the  fight  at  PctiCO. 
After  ibe  death  q4'  Sawkui*  he  comnunded  the  buccaneer  H|ttadrua  in  the 
South  Sea* ;  until  January  i6t<i,  when  he  wa*  depo«cd  ai  Jvan  FciruBdcz 
in  tavow  of  Jobo  Watliag.  After  the  fight  at  Arica  (January  i6i(i)  tw 
535 


RICHARD  SAWKINS 

ciptured  nut  Jamaica  by  H.M.S. 


HT 


■#::- 


CAPTAIN  DAMPIER*S  VOYAGES 

till  Pcbraury  1682,  wIicb  Be  kft  hb  tlup  (tbe  TrM^)  at  Ant^pn.  He 
ilm  retmcd  to  Engfindy  was  wrrtttedf  tried  ftr  pincjTf  and  facapcd  liaiijim 
throng  lack  of  efideoce*  He  admits  hovricr^diat  lie  ^«aa  trofy  near 
k.''  He  aeeoia  to  hate  iUjed  in  Eoghnd  loift|  enoi^  to  malBe  aooe 
ioleipdatioBa  (m  hit  own  finrov)  b  Itio^oae't  ]y^  \mt  bf  Jmamj  ^g, 
1684,  he  vaa  agiua  ia  Juaicaf  with  a  coimnkwon  ^to  take  «id  appidicod 
Mfage  lodiuit  and  pintct.*'  With  thii  comnriwion  he  aeeoia  to  lunre  gone 
a-ron^g  ^'oo  the  account''  at  of  old  At  Banuida»  howeiertin  the  ammnar 
of  16&9  he  showed  himaelf  ''a  h»yal  and  good  iabject»  and  an  extn* 
ordmary  imtntnicnt  in  nreaemng  the  Kbg't  Peace."  He  was  tried  finr 
piracy  at  the  end  of  1^6,  ^and  acquitted  for  want  of  evidence/'  Two 
diareet  were  broi^t  againt  him ;  ooe  for  piracy  at  Jamaica,  1684,  and 
one  for  piracy  at  VaMOfeaickjf  1686,  but  he  escaped  00  bodi  oonnta.  His 
Joomal  of  die  1680  nnd  was  printed  in  1609.  I  can  find  nothii»  fiutlier 
aboot  him;  but  the  ehborafee**  Waggoners''  which  he  comjaled, lead  one 
to  siqypose  that  his  later  Hfe  was  free  from  worry.  The  **  Wag^mera  '^  are 
prescarved  in  the  Sloane  MSS. 


LIONEL  WAFER 

This  writer  seems  to  have  nassed  his  yonth  <*at  the  Navan  upon  the 
Boyne,  and  aboot  the  Town  of  Virgmia  upon  Lough  Ramor  in  the  Barony 
of  Caade  Raghen  in  the  County  of  Cavan,  and  also  in  the  H^hlanda  of 
Scodaod."  In  a  manuscript  preserved  in  the  British  Museum  (AddL  MSS. 
33054)9  he  writes  as  though  Wales  were  his  native  countryy  and  England 
the  land  of  his  adoption*  His  parents,  or  guardians,  seem  to  have  been 
roving  people  of  no  position. 

Wafer^s  **  first  going  abroad  was  in  the  Great  Anne  of  London^  •  .  . 
bound  for  Bantam  ...  in  the  year  1677."  He  was  then  **very  young" 
(say  15  or  16),  and  **in  the  Service  of  the  Surgeon"  as  loblolly  boy,  or 
oresser.  The  Great  Anne  visited  Bantam,  then  sailed  to  Jamby  in  Sumatra, 
and  then  returned  to  Bantam  to  complete  her  cargo.  Wafer  seems  to  have 
gone  ashore  at  Bantam  with  the  intention  of  deserting.  The  Great  Anne 
sailed  without  him,  and  he  *<  got  a  Passage  home  "  aboard  a  ship  called  the 
Bombay.  He  arrived  in  England  in  1679,  stayed  a  month,  and  then  sailed 
(as  loblolly  boy^  in  a  ship  bound  to  Jamaica,  rle  had  a  brother  in  Jamaica, 
employed  at  oir  Thomas  Modyford's  plantation  at  the  Angels.  This 
brother  kept  him  for  a  while,  and  then  set  him  up  as  a  surgeon  in  Port 
Royal,  **  where  I  followed  my  Business  of  Surgery  for  some  Months." 

Captain  Linch,  or  Lynch,  and  Captain  Edmund  Cook,  <*two  Privateers 
who  were  going  out  from  Port  Royal^^*  persuaded  Wafer  to  join  them,  as 
Surgeon.  They  visited  the  coasts  of  Cartagena,  and  arrived  at  the  Basti- 
mentos,  near  Porto  Bello,  in  the  early  spring  of  1680,  shordy  after  the 
second  taking  of  Porto  Bello  by  Sawkins,  Coxon,  and  Sharp.  It  was  here 
that  Wafer  first  met  with  Dampier. 

Wafer  accompanied  Edmund  Cook  upon  the  march  over  the  Isthmus  to 

536 


DAMPIER'S   ASSOCIATES 

the  South  Stdt.  He  wMCruiting  in  (he  Pacific  with  Shirp  and  the  other 
bwccuccr*  aUttrd  iht  f{ofy  Trinity,  until  afttr  the  ImiiIct  of  Arica,  when 
the  cumpany  liifldetJ.  He  retuinetl  with  Danipirr't  jiaiiy  acroM  the  lathmut  i 
but  on  ■'  the  5th  day  of  our  Journey  "  hii  leg  w»  icorched  by  an  exploiion 
of  powder  i  10  that  he  wu  forced  to  nay  behind  among  the  Indiani,  with 
two  other  buccaneert,  who  could  walk  no  further.  The  three  were  joined 
*oon  ilicrwaidi  by  two  other  itraggter*. 

Wjlirr  ■* tired  lome  Month*"  among  the  Indian)  "who  in  a  Manner 
■dor'd  him"  by  reaion  of  hii  akill  in  Phytick  and  Phlebotomy."  He 
lived,  he  Myi,  "  in  great  Splendour  and  Repute "  ;  and  he  alone,  of  the 
fire  pruonera,  waa  painted  "  in  yellow,  red  and  blue,  very  bright,  and  lovely  " 
a»  a  mirk  of  ipcdal  atTeciion.  Fveniually  the  five  men  reached  La  Sounda 
Key,  where  Captain  'I'riitian  took  them  aboard  hia  crutier.  Wafer  tailed 
under  Triatian  (haTing  Dampicr  a*  a  ahipmate)  for  *ome  day*,  and  then  went 
with  Dampicr,  under  Captain  Wright  and  Vanky,  for  a  cruiac  in  the  Weat 
Indiea.  At  Salt  Tortuga  the  two  privatcera  parted  company.  Dampier 
Kayed  with  Wright,  and  Wafer  went  with  Yanky  to  the  "  Iile  of  Aah," 
or  Vacca.  Here  be  left  Yanky  in  order  to  lail  with  John  Cook  (another 
of  Sharp'*  party  who  had  returned  with  Dampier)  in  a  newly  ca|>turcd 
Spaniah  ahip.  The  French  objected  that  Cook  had  no  commiaaion  and 
that  he  had  no  right  to  command  the  prize.  They  plundered  the  Engliah 
•eamcn  aboard  her  and  then  turned  them  aihore.  Captain  Triatian,  who 
happened  tu  be  in  the  anchorage,  received  "  about  8  or  1 0  of  ihcae  Hngliah  ; 
of  which  number  Captain  Cook  waa  one,  and  Captain  Davia  another,"  and 
fwc  inrmiae)  Lionel  Wafer  a  third.  Theae  ••»  or  10"  waited  till 
'  Triatian  went  aahore  ai  Tortuga,  and  then  ran  4way  with  hia  ihip,  carried  her 
back  to  Vacca,  picked  up  the  reit  of  the  crew,  and  went  a-craiaing  in  her. 
They  took  a  wine  ahip,  and  a  ahip  of  eight  guna  called  the  Rrvragr,  in 
which  they  came  to  Virginia  "about  S  or  9  montha  after  Atr.  Dampitr 
came  thither  "  (April  i68j).  They  fitted  up  the  Rntnge  ai  their  cruiaer, 
and  fet  aad  aboard  her  Augutt  13,  ■'>'*3>  on  the  foyage  to  Sierra  Leone 
(where  ihey  took  and  went  aboard  the  Balibfior'i  DtSgbt).  Wafer,  who 
waa  one  of  the  chirurgeona  of  ihc  party,  aeerai  10  have  had  a  merry  time 
among  the  Alrican  nativea,  while  the  Siuthitr'r  Dtl'gbi  refitted.  He  took 
put  in  the  adientutea  in  the  South  Scaa  with  Cook,  Davia,  and  the  othera 
[  tniil  Auguai  17,  16S7,  when  Datia  and  Swan  patted  company.  Uampiet 
1  Maycd  with  Swaoi  but  Wafer  remained  in  the  Baithtlor't  VrJigti,  iioda 
Davia,  with  whom  wne  Captain*  Knighi  aitd  Harria.  After  viaiting  Coco* 
laland,  "the  Gallapaga'a,  and  ■■  acvttal  of  the  lalanda  and  Coaau  of 
Peru,"  tbia  aquadron  took  Huana,  Huacho,  and  Piaco.  Davia  then 
cruiird  wettward,  lighting  what  may  have  been  liaaier  laland  in  (he  late 
autumn  of  iMj.  They  called  at  Juan  Feinandei  (where  four  men  "  would 
nredi  atay  behind  "}  and  then  Miled  round  the  Horn  un  their  wav  home. 
Near  the  Caiibbcc  Itlandi,  Waier,  Davxi,  and  othera  went  aboard  a 
fiarindoei  *)oop,  and  Bailed  in  her  up  the  Delaware  id  Philadelphia,  where 
they  arrived  in  May  l6tt8.  Oae  gaiiieti  that  they  aettled  in  America,  at 
Point  Comfort,  Va.  *•  Bui  meeting  with  tome  Troublea,  after  a  3  Year'* 
Reaiileacci"    Wdin   muntd   to    England    (in    the    >ear     1690).      1*h« 

537 


CAPTAIN  DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

**  Troubles  "  were  a  charge  of  piracy,  which  ioTolt ed  the  whole  partj,  and 
▼ery  nearly  •ent  them  to  the  gallowt.     Their  booty  (mostly  olfer)  vai 
ukeo  from  them,  and  they  were   forced  to  leave  the  colony;  bat,  after 
several  mooths  in  Newgate,  io  London,  they  were  released  (1691)  aad 
managed   to  win   back   the  greater   part   of  their   ^poil.     Wafer  was  is 
London  in  1697 ;  fi^r  he  then  gave  evidence  before  the  Board  of  Trade 
and  Planutioos,  concerning  the  setdement  of  the  Isthmus  of  Darien.    Is 
1699  he  published  hu  *'  New  Voyage  and  Description,"  which  he  dedicated 
to  the  Earl  of  Romney.     In  or  about  the  year  1 700  he  drew  up  a  secret 
memorandum  on  places  fit  for  settlement  in  the  South  Seas.     This  was 
done  at  the  instance  of  the  Duke  of  Marlborough,  to  whom  (in  1704}  dx 
second  edition  of  Wafier's  book  was  dedicated.     Wafer  is  said  to  have  died 
in  1 705.     He  is  sometimes  spoken  of  as  De  la  Wafer. 


CAPTAIN  FRANCOIS  GROGNIET 

Arrived  in  the  Bay  of  Panama,  with  a  French  commissioo,  March  25, 
1685.  He  was  accompanied  by  200  Frenchmen  and  80  Englishmen,  who 
joined  Captains  Davis  and  Swan  at  their  anchorage.  In  the  futile  batde 
of  Panama  (May  28-29,  1685)  he  seems  to  have  behaved  with  sliglit 
courage,  so  that  the  partnership  was  dissolved  (June  i,  1685).  After  a 
long  cruise,  he  fell  in  with  Townley  {q,v.)  with  the  help  of  whom  he  sacked 
Granada  (on  the  Lake  of  Nicaragua)  and  Rio  Lejo.  After  this  he  cmiied 
towards  California  with  part  of  his  crew.  April  20,  1686,  he  nrpriied 
Guayaquil,  and  took  an  immense  booty,  with  many  prisoners.  He  died  of  a 
wound  received  in  the  attack.  May  2,  1686. 


CAPTAIN   WILLIAM   KNIGHT 

He  arrived  at  Quibo  on  July  5,  1685,  having  then  been  nine  or  ten  mooths 
in  the  South  Seas,  getting  little  save  *' a  good  ship."  He  placed  himaelf 
under  Davis's  orders,  and  remained  with  Davis  till  1687-8,  when  he  parted 
company,  and  returned  to  the  West  Indies,  %*ia  Cape  Horn.  He  had  thes 
much  plunder  in  his  possession. 


CAPTAIN    TOWNLEY 

Crossed  the  Isthmus  with  180  men  in  February  1685.  Joined  Dsfii 
and  Grogniet,  March  3.  Took  part  in  the  raids  with  Davis  and  Swao  till 
August  1685,  when  Davis  sailed  for  Amaplla.  He  remained  with  Swtf 
till  January  1 686.  He  then  cruised  alone  for  two  months,  after  which  be 
re-joined  Grogniet,  with  whom  he  raided  Granada  and  Rio  Lejo.  On  tk 
igih  May  1686,  he  commanded  a  party  which  sacked  Lavelia;  and 'tool 

538 


I 


DAMPIER'S   ASSOCIATES 

great  booiT.  which  wu  aftcrwarili  Ion  through  twd  maiugcmcnt.  He  wu 
on  Panama  in  Auguat  r<)KA.  On  the  iind  he  received  a  wound  in  a  battle 
with  ihrrr  Sjtaniah  thipi.     He  died  of  the  wound  on  the  i;th  of  the  following 

month. 


CAPTAIN   TRISTIAN,  CHRISTIAN  (•), 
OR  TRISTAN 

All  that  i*  known  of  lhi«  buccaneer  a  told  by  Uamjncf  md  Wafer. 


CAPTAIN  JOHN  WILLIAMS 
,  perhap*  inteipreter   or  (ailinj-nattcfi  to  Vanbcy  in  the 


CAPTAIN    VANKES,   OR   YANKEY, 
OR   YANKV   DUCH 

Took  part  in  Van  Hom'i  {reat  raid  on  Vera  Cruf  in  the  aummer 
flf  lASj.  In  Febtiiary  16K4,  be  laiJed  with  Laiueni  to  Cartagena,  where 
hn  helwd  to  take  three  Spani*h  ihtpa.  He  had  thro  a  commiMion  from 
Pnii  Cuavc*.  He  Kiml  ■  Januica  iloop  in  the  autumn  of  16K4,  "  uaing 
reviling  language  "  10  ihe  Miloit,  .ind  behaving  geoeially  like  a  pirate.  On 
prutett  being  made  lo  tlie  Go*«nof  of  Petit  Guavct,  thai  gentleman  rowed 
thai  he  knew  Yankey  "  10  be  incapable  of  luch  a  thing  -.  "  from  which  we 
may  conclude  that  Yankey  wai  then  well  to  do.  In  September  16X6,  he  look 
a  Spaniah  ahip  worth  50,000  iloli.  A  year  later  he  lurrrDdered  10  Cofrrnor 
Moleiworth,  reteiTed  a  royal  patdon,  and  then  made  a  craiu  to  ike  weal- 
ward,  wliere  he  took  a  big  Spaniah  ihip.  Danipier  give*  further  dclailt 
fat  tlic  yeaia  1681-].     What  becanic  of  Yankey  doei  not  appear. 


PRINCE  JEOLY.  DAMPIER'S  PAINTED  PRINCE 

A  folio troadahcR  (i^i'>)  V*"  *t)r  following  deacriplion  of  GiolOi 
»  Jeoly:  — 

"  Thii  fatnou*  Paintiu  Paisci  ii  the  Juit  wonder  of  the  Age,  hi*  whole 

)dy    (except   Face,  Hjndi,  aoil    Feet)   <»  cutioudy  and   moat  exquiiilely 

iiamrJ  full  of  Vir.eiy  ol    InveDttuo,   widi   prodi||K]ui   Art   and 

irm'd.      In   to    ntuch,   that  the   antirni   and   nuble    Myiicry   ot 

Uing  or  Staiiunf  upoai   Hu4taine   UoOie*  irenia  to  be  comprtied  in  thii 

■  *utd](  Fmcc. 

[  "tp/iRtjmt  mi  Ukmc  otitcr  engraven  Figurr*  pabud  from  bim,  and 

539 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

now  dispersed  abroad,  serve  onlf  to  detciibe  ai  much  as  they  can  of  the 
Fore-parts  of  this  inimitahle  Piece  of  Workmanship.  The  more  admirable 
Back  Part*  afford  us  a  Lively  Representation  of  one  quarter  part  of  the 
World  upon  and  betwixt  his  shoulders,  where  the  Arctick  and  Tropick 
Circles  center  in  the  North  Pole  on  his  Neck.  And  all  the  other  Lines, 
Circles  and  Charactert  are  done  in  auch  exact  Symmetry  and  Proportion 
that  it  ia  astonishing  and  surmounts  all  that  has  hitherto  been  seen  of  this 
kind.  What  Wisdom  and  antient  Learning  may  tic  veiled  under  those  other 
curious  Figures  and  myaterioua  Characters  scattered  up  and  down  his  Body, 
must  be  the  Work  of  very  ingenious  Men  to  discover, 

"  The  Paint  itself  is  so  durable,  that  nothing  can  wash  it  off,  or  deface 
the  beauty  of  it ;  It  is  prepared  from  the  Juice  of  a  certain  Herb,  or  Plant, 
peculiar  to  that  Country,  which  they  esteem  infallible  to  prestrve  humane 
Bodies  from  the  deadly  poiKn  (k-  bun  of  any  venomoni  Crettant  what- 

"  Thu  admirable  Pertcm  U  about  the  Age  of  Thirty,  graccfid  and  w^ 
propoitioDed  in  aO  hit  Limbt,  extreamlv  nKxIett  and  onl,  neat  and  cleanly  | 
bat  hit  Language  ia  not  tutdentood,  ncitber  can  he  meak  EogUth. 

'*  He  it  expoaed  to  pnblick  view  tnrj  day  (aoring  hit  ttay  in  Town) 
from  the  i6th  day  of  thit  itutant  June,  at  hit  Lodgisga  at  the  fileir  Boar'i 
Head  in  Fleetttreet,  near  Water  Lane:  where  he  wUl  antimie  frir  aaoie 
tune,  if  hit  health  will  permit. 

<*  Bat  if  any  Ferton*  of  Quali^,  Gentlemen  or  Ladiei,  do  denre  to  aec 
thit  noble  Peraon,  at  thctr  own  Houaet)  or  any  whtt  conmnent  place,  in  or 
^xnit  thit  City  of  London :  they  are  deiircd  to  tend  timely  notice,  and  he 
will  be  ready  to  wait  opon  them  in  a  Coach  or  Chair,  any  ttme  they  pkaae 
to  appcHDt,  if  in  the  day  time. 

"ViTAHT  Res  and  Rbgiha." 

There  i>  a  chap-book  on  Jeoly,  "  written  from  his  own  Month " 
(by  T.  Hyde?)  and  published  in  1691.  It  contains  an  CDgraving  of 
Jeoly,  representing  him  "  in  hit  habit  at  he  lived,"  painted  with  Variety  of 
Invention  from  his  ankles  to  his  chest.  Scorpions,  snakes,  and  lizards  are 
represented  as  fleeing  from  him  in  terror.  The  book  it  dull,  and  probably 
apocryphal. 


CAPTAINS  SWAN   AND   HARRIS 

Some  account  of  CHAt-Lti  Swan,  or  Swanm,  ofihe  ihip  "  Cygnet"  1  •unthpapcre 
and  quotalioHi  relating  to  Captain  Peter  Harris.  Tie^e  papcrt  art 
quoted  from  Dampier'i  manuicripu  in  the  Shane  Collection,  and  from 
the  "  Calendar  of  Stale  Paperi,"  Wejl  Indian  and  Colonial  Seriet. 

A  Brief  Account  of  Captain  Stvan's  Voyage  into  the  South  Seas,  and  what 

befel  him  at  Baldivia.     (Abridged.) 

October  the  Firit,  1683.   Captain  Swan  in  the   Signelt  of  London  with 

36  men  sailed  out  of  the  Downs  bound  for  the  South  Seas.     Marginal  Note, 

540 


DAMPIER'S   ASSOCIATES 

^  thipof  i8o  tuaniaod  i6  gunot,  the  ww  funnrrly  calld  Uic  lUclr  Engltnd, 

raad  being  bumd  in  the  ricer  wai  rebuilt  by  Mr.  Ca>ile  and  calld  tbe  Signt» 

I  by  ibotr  mcrchanta  that  bought  her,  ihc  being  litlcd  out  with  a   very  good 

I  cargo  for  the  South  S««.      (The  merchanli  were  "eminent,"  and  the  cargo 

worth  j^sooo.l 

Otiotrr  iSib,  "They  paiKd  by  Palma  but  neter  Stop  there."  "They 
Soon  arrived  ai  Mayo  where  they  took  aboard  two  butt*  of  Salt." 

After  a   brief  paiuc  fur  retreihmenii  at  St.   lago,  he  tailed   for  the 
Strait*  of  Magellan. 
I  l^li  ef  Dfcrmhrr.    In   Ul.   31°  44'  tS.      "  Haveing   hii  iludeing  Siilri 

I  abroad  with  a  fmh  gale  both  top  muu  went  by  the  board  ai  once." 

Hih  «/  January   1684.  Arrjircd  at  the  Suaii'a  Mouth  and  taw  two 

ahip*,  which  both  bore  away  10  ipcalc  with  himi  but  he  being  lurprited 

to  ICC  two  ihiM  in  thi«  part  of  the  world,  "  thought  ii  was  Doe  prudence  to 

lye  for  them,'  and  therefore  mjde  away  from  them.     The  next  day  (after 

"be  lud  tiyed  their  Sailing") — for,  ai  Dampiet  note*  in  ihc margin — **noc 

inan  will  ipealc  with  a  *hip  at  xra  except  he  knowi  himaclf  of  tufEcient 

I  Krength  10  de^t  with  hrr,  eipccially  in  ihi*  pan  of  the  world  "— Capuin 

|.8wan  "ipoak"  with  thne  ahipa.     "The  biggeit  wa«  Cipuin  Faton,  who 

;  out  of  Ii!ngland  dettgning  to  leeke  hia  tortune  in  the  .South  Stai,  the 

I  Mher  was  a  Porlugueie  tiatke,  commanded  by  one  Morton  who  had  been 

I  with  Sharpe  "  (and  afterward*  with  "Mr.  Bond.")      Eaton  had  taken  the 

I  brk  off  Braiil  a  little  while  bd'orc. 

Captain  Katon  rndeaToured  to  permade  Swan  "to  contorte  with  him." 
On  Swan'i  rcfutal,  IHatun  tried  to  entice  hit  men  away,  but  uniucceM- 

L  fi>liy- 

I  yj  Feinurj  1684.  In  the  Siratti  of  Magellan.     "  loiioh  Teal,  the 

I  Chief  Mate,  went  a  thoaie  and  had  a  Commerce  with  tbe  I  atagenei." 

7/j    Frbraary    \(>ii^.     At    Port    Famine    in   the    Sintiu.      EaUm    and 
f  Morton  in  company. 

iKfA  Fthnnxrj  16M4.  I^ighl  of  Swin'a  men  itole  the  longboat  sod  weoi 
■board  Morton'*  ahio.  Morton  at  once  tec  tail  and  made  off.  They  taw 
hii  ihip  once  again,  but  *oon  afterward*  hr  wa*  Ion  in  a  uorm.  Dumpier 
note*  that  "  Eatoa  and  Monon  were  agreed,  though  Eaton  carried  it  fair 
with  Swan  at  if  be  knew  nothing  of  it." 

Martb  (4,  1684.  Capuin  Swan  anchored  at  Balditia.  Eaton  ttood 
oDt  (o  tea  to  craitc. 

One  of  Swan'*  "  merchani*,"  or  lupercargoet,  went  athore  with  a  cock- 

IA&d-bull  ttory  that  tbey  wett  Spantardi  bound  to  Eaat  India. 
Martb    If,    1684.    They    went   tthoie    again  "and    lud    like    to    be 
inp^nd  into   ao  Anbiucado,  bm   gott  awiy."     Later  on,  ihry  came  to 
term*  with  the  Sptoiard*.     Tbe  Spaniard*  aiked  for  hoitaget  tu  be  given 
before  trading ;   m>  that 

Marti    16,    1684.    "The    boatc    went    athore    againe,    Joaiah    Teat 
ittrrrd  and  the  thite  merchant*  (Ringtoie,   Hanhop,  and  Smith]    were 
■TO  of  tbcin  Iwing  to  remaine  athoie  a*  Pledge**  the  other  wai  to 
ny  the  Sponiatdi  oS  (tu  the  tiiip).      When  they  cjmc  athoare  the 
I  deiired  them  to  tow  in  about  a  pointe  of  Land  which  ihry  aud 

541 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

Was  better  Laodiag,  but  Teal  fraring  their  desigocj  would  not  be  »oe 
easily  imposed  on.  Hee  ruan  ihe  boate  in  betweene  two  Ledges  of  Rockt 
on  to  the  Sandy  bay  where  the  Spjnidids  came  and  told  them  that  tie 
.  'Govcrnour  bad  leat  a  preicot  to  the  Captain  which  wss  brought  by  two 
Indiani  and  thiown  down  on  the  Biy  halfe  a  Muskett  ihotc  from  the  boaie 
and  the  Spaniards  who  were  at  a  distance  called  ihem  to  fetch  it.  This 
bread  some  coDtroversy  between  Teat  and  the  merchants  " ;  but,  after  some 
delay,  one  George  Chambere  leapt  from  the  boat  with  Basil  Ringrose,  and 
"  went  to  fetch  the  present."  Before  they  had  gotten  to  the  present,  a 
party  of  armed  Spniards  made  a  rush  upon  them.  Chambers  was  killed  at 
fince,  but  Ringrose  made  a  shift  to  get  into  tlie  9ca  "  and  lakeing  hold  of 
the  boat's  painter  was  drag'd  off  noe  man  knowing  where  he  was."  The 
men  in  the  boat  had  a  hard  fight  to  win  clear.  Chambers  was  killed, 
'Griffin  Harris  mortally  wounded,  Harthope  and  Ramage  shot  through  the 
arms,   Patrick   wounded   in   the  breast,   Sheaphead  in  the   hand,   and   Teat 

Sazed  by  a  bullet  op  the  thigh.  Ringrose  and  Smith  were  the  only  ones 
ho  escaped  unhurt.  134  shott  came  into  the  boat,  and  14  bullets  went 
through  the  flag  of  tnice.  However,  among  the  Spaniards,  "  they  all  say 
that  two  Captains  were  killed  and  many  of  the  Indians." 

"  When  Teat  came  aboard  with  this  news  Capn.  Swan  begun  to  repent 
tliat  ever  he  look  this  Voyage  in  hand  and  he  did  never  affect  Master  Riog- 
Mse  afterwards  "  Damfaer  adds  a  note :  "  for  Mr.  Ringrose  being  the 
propOBer  of  this  Voyafie,  did  di'monstrait  the  thing  very  feazable  in  Englaixl 

Tlf  Cjf»tt  vSfA.  from  Baldhia  thit  afienKkm. 

After  a  «»  at  tbe  Iiland  of  Mocha,  Swan  tailed  to  Jau  PcruBdez. 

Apr^  8,  1 684.     He  anchored  at  Tnaa  Fernandez,  to  refit. 

Miq  19,  1684.     He  tailed  for  Plata. 

Juni  30,  1684.  He  anchored  at  Plata,  to  rcGt.  "He  Knib'd  hi* 
Ship  againe  and  tallowed,  and  cut  wood,  and  Saved  Some  water,  be 
likewise  burned  lime  (ai  a  waib  for  his  ahip'i  bottom}  and  went  adioare 
every  day  and  killd  goau  and  turned  many  titftle." 

Jidj  17,  1684.  He  sailed  for  Nicoya,  "intending  to  trade  there  but 
was  disappointed."  "  Indeed,"  adds  Dampier,  "  I  am  a  little  at  a  stand 
when  I  consider  Mr.  Ringrose,  his  Meathod,  I  confiMs  he  was  an  Ingeoions 
Gentleman,  but  was  extreamely  besides  hil  mark  in  proposeing  two  tuch  placet 
as  Baldivia  and  the  Gulfe  of  Necoya  to  trade  in,  the  one  being  only  a 
garrison  the  other  a  post  of  pore  Malattot." 

Auguji  z,  1684.  Came  to  the  river  of  Necoya.  Chased  two  Spanith 
barks. 

jiuguti  3,  1684.  Saw  a  bark  coming  down  the  river,  and  thinking  her 
to  be  Spanish  he  "  ordered  his  Ensign  to  be  spread  and  fired  a  gunn."  He 
then  sent  his  boat  towards  the  bark,  while  the  bark  sent  a  canoa  towardt 
the  boat.  The  two  boats  hailed  each  other  in  midstream,  ■'  before  they 
came  to  neer."  The  bark  proved  to  be  a  prize,  lately  taken  by  Caplmn 
Peter  Harrit  ("nephew  to  Captain  Harris  whoc  was  killd  before  Panama 
in  the  year  1680  ").  He  had  97  men  aboard  her,  and  "  he  said  he  came 
thither  for  money,  '  having  sunk  his  ship  at  Golden  Island  and  given  the 
S+2 


DAMPIER'S    ASSOCIATES 

ladian  guidri.     Hv  had  iak«n  Sta.  Maria  on  hi*  way  "where 
much  gold  ai  they  thared  17  ounces  per  man,  betides  paying 


they  took 

Ship'«  Share  and  the  wounded 


r 


I  OF    CAPTAIN    PETER    HARRIS 

Harrii  had  marched  over  the  Imhniua  in  the  riina.  He  wrpriaed  Su. 
MatJB,  "  and  lookc  it  without  rctiitance,"  and  fouod  there  aboQt  "  1 10  waitr 
of  gold."  (Presumably  the  word  "  pounds  "  hai  been  omitted.)  He  then 
•eiied  a  bark  and  a  Periagoe,  and  uiled  to  Gallera,  in  the  Bay  of  Panama, 
"  thinking  on  nothing  but  rich  prizes  laden  wtih  Silver  and  Gold."  The 
fourth  day  after,  his  look-ouis  repoited  a  Sjianinh  iquadton  of  fiic  sail  coming 
towards  him.  Kc  got  uitder  sail,  ran  alon|;ude  the  Spaiiiib  flagship,  forced 
her  hands  to  run  below,  and  broke  her  foreyjid  in  the  slings.  He  then 
chased  the  *<|uadi on  bjck  to  Patiam.i,  losing' thrrc  iticn  killed  and  nine  wounded. 
After  this,  he  sailed  for  Nicoya,  where  he  met  Capuin  Swan. 


MORE  OF  CAPTAIN   SWAN 

Finding  thai  the  men  under  Harris  needfd  arms,  Captain  Swan  bfoachet) 
CarKO,  tad  opened  a  trade  with  them  at  the  folluwing  "  good  rale  "  : — "  40 
dollars  for  a  gun,  a  dollar  far  a  pound  of  powder,  6  pence  lor  a  pound  of 
ihoi  or  Lead,  an  oz.  of  gold  tor  a  black  (clvet  Ca]ip  worth  to  shillings." 
All  other  commodities,  such  as  cloth,  serge,  silk,  libboas,  and  kniTn,  sold 
"at  any  rates." 

"  Ca{Aain  Swao't  men  seeing  the  PHtateera  soe  full  of  Gold  thought 
it  a  belter  trade  than  what  they  foUnwed,  and  therefore  .  .  .  went  aboard 
of  Captain  Harris,  who  rnirrtained  sll  thai  came."  Id  short.  Swan  Ion 
•o  many  hinda  that  he  wj>  forced  to  consort  with  Harris,  and  to  enter  into 
an  agreement  with  him.  Articles  were  signed  and  sealed  on  the  ^ih  of 
August,  1684. 

yftnil  %,  1684.     They  anchored  at  tKe  Island  Chira. 

jIi^iuI  it,  1684.     Swan  took  Riogro«e  with  ii  men,  in  two  canoas,  1 


k 


a  look  for  Nicoya  city,  or  (or  its  caiprnter'i  yi 
(one  mortally). 


jliigmit  7, 1864.    Th«y  ran  ii 
(le  mortair 


n  ambush,  and  h 


three  n 


n  wounded 


,  1684.  They  got  alnard  the  bark  again.  This  day  Test 
was  "aiaine  made  maaier"  ha*iitg  been  reduced  at  the  linie  of  the  signing 
of  the  articles  with  Hanii. 

Auuit  II,  16N4.  They  careened  the  Cjgari  and  burned  two  of  their 
sstiall  Milts.  The  burning  of  tbe  barks  forced  Swan  to  destroy  Mine 
■Wfckaodiar,  to  make  room  for  the  inen  who  had  manned  them. 

A^pul  >6,  1684.     "They  scm  a  Canoa  to  cuu  Loom*  (handle*)  for 
euta,  tbtre  briag  pltmy  of  good  itrah  red  Ma&groTc    For  ptiviUcn  utmtj 
J43 


DAMPIER'S   ASSOCIATES 


dwtrlfd  « 


I  Io>t. 


Then  I  cinit  lo  VMir 


,  when  I  h4d  tw< 


1  killed 


day'i  parley  ami  nil  oatlit  bunuD  und 
n  ooe  uxl  two  hundred  men  cime  out, 
and  lirnl  upon  a  poor  eight  af  ui  in  the  yawl.  But  Ood  puniihed  them 
likcwiM,  a«  wc  hear,  we  killing  three  of  their  captaitu  and  »ome  other*.  [| 
ii  too  long  10  gire  you  an  accouoi  of  all  my  trouble*,  which  were  chiefly 
owing  to  the  fact  that  the  ihip  wi*  meant  to  be  run  tt/^y  with.  In  Nicoya 
the  reit  of  my  men  left  me,  to  that,  haviDg  no  one  10  Mil  iJie  thip,  I  waa 
forced  to  join  then).  So  that  now  1  am  in  hoaiility  with  ibe  Spamaida,  and 
have  taken  and  burnt  Mime  towna,  and  have  forced  the  Prcaideni  of  Panama 
to  tend  me  two  men  he  had  taken  from  ua.  The  Mme  day  270  new  men 
came  to  me,  and  we  are  going  to  take  in  200  more  thai  they  left  behind. 
We  ihall  woo  be  900  men  in  the  South  Seai.  Aaiure  my  employer*  thai 
[  do  all  I  can  to  pretrrTC  their  iDtcrni,  and  thai  what  I  do  now  I  could 
in  00  wi*e  preteDi.  So  deiire  them  to  do  what  they  can  with  the  K-ing 
for  me,  for  as  loon  ai  I  can  I  ahall  deliver  tnyaelf  lu  the  King'*  juitice 
and  I  had  rather  die  than  live  akuUing  like  a  vagabond  for  fear  of  death. 
The  King  might  make  thi*  whole  Kingdom  of  Peru  tributary  to  him  in 
two  yean'  lime.  We  now  await  the  Spaniih  tieel  that  bring*  the  money  to 
Panama.  We  were  retolved  10  fight  them  before  wc  had  reached  (bi* 
ftrengih,  and  had  lain  in  wait  fi  month*  for  them,  but  now  we  hear  that 
ibey  are  at  aei,  and  expect  them  evrry  day.  tf  we  hate  tucccM  againtt 
them  we  ihall  make  a  detperjte  alaim  all  Europe  OTcr.  I  have  loroc  money 
which  I  wt«h  were  with  you,  for  my  wife.  1  ihull,  with  God'*  help,  do 
thing*  which  ( were  it  with  my  Prince'*  leate)  would  make  her  a  lady  i  but 
now  1  cannot  tell  bat  it  may  bring  me  to  a  halter.  But  if  it  doth  my 
comfort  ia  tliat  1  alull  die  lot  that  I  cannot  help.  Pr^y  pfe*eDt  my  faithful 
love  to  my  dear  wife,  and  auure  her  the  t*  itever  out  of  my  miod. 

Dampier  teila  of  the  melancholy  end  of  Captain  Swan  oa  pkge  4jd  of 


54$ 


>  i 


.!•• 


VOYAGES 


AND 

DESCRIPTIONS. 

VOL.    11. 

IN    THREE    PARTS,   viz.: 

I.  A  Supplement  to  the  VOYAGE  round  the 
WORLD :  Defcribing  the  Countries  oiTonquin^ 
Achin^  Malacca^  &c.  their  Produdl,  Inhabitants, 
Manners,  Trade,  Policy,  &c. 

IL  Two  VOYAGES  to  Campeacby  ;  with  a  De- 
fcription  of  the  Coafts,  Produft,  Inhabitants, 
Logwood-Cutting,  Trade,  &c.  of  Jucatan^ 
Campeacby^  New-Spain^  &c. 

III.  A  Discourse  of  Trade- winds,  Breezes, 
Storms,  Seafons  of  the  Year,  Tides  and  Currents 
of  the  Torrid  Zone  throughout  the  World  : 
With  an  Account  of  Natal  in  Africk^  its  Pro- 
dudt,  Negro's,  &c. 


By  Capt.  WILLIAM  DAMPIER. 
Illuftrated  with  Particular  Maps  and  Draughts. 


To  which  is  added 
A  General  Index  to  both  Volumes. 

L  OND  ON: 

Printed  for  James  Knapton,  at  the  Crown  in 
St.  PauPs  Church-Yard.     Mdcc. 


f 


! 


r1 
It 


I 


TO  THt  RIGHT  HONOURABLE 

EDWARD 

f  EARL  OF  ORFORD,  VISCOUNT  DARFLEUR,  BARON 
OF  SHINGEY,  PRINCIPAl.  LORD  OF  THE  ADMIR- 
ALTY, TRKASURKR  OF  HIS  MAJLISTY'S  NAVY,  Etc.. 
AND  ONE  OF  HIS  MAJBSTY'S  MOST  HONOURABLE 
PRIVY  COUNCIL. 

MY   LORD, 

TIS  in  Acknowledgment  of  the  Favours  your 
Lordship  has  confirrr'd  upon  mc,  that  I  presume 
to  place  your  Name  before  these  Papers.  The 
Honourable  Person  to  whom  I  dedicated  my 
former  Volume  could  not  have  taken  a  more  agreeable 
way  to  befriend  me,  than  by  recommending  mc  to  your 
Patronage;  and  I  shall  always  retain  a  grateful  sense  of 
it ;  And  your  Lordship  has  been  pleas'd  to  prefer  me  in 
a  way  suitable  to  my  Genius  and  Hxpcrience ;  and  wherein 
therefore,  if  in  any  way,  I  may  be  able  to  do  something 
toward  the  preserving  the  good  Opinion  you  have  been 
pleased  to  entertain  of  me.  'Tis  a  further  Satisfaction  to 
me,  that  my  Employment  is  of  such  a  Nature  as  does 
not  alienate  me  from  your  Lordship's  more  [vculiar  Juris- 
diction, but  places  me  more  immediately  under  it.  and 
chiefly  acccnintable  to  your  self.  Whatever  parts  of  the 
World  I  shall  range  into,  I  shall  carry  this  Comfort  along 
"""""  me,  that  next  under  the  Providence  of  God.  and  his 
»ty's  Prtin-ciion,  I  shall  be  so  long  as  I  am  upon  the 
'  ' »  the  Province,  and  under  the  Direction  of  your 
:|  Honourable  Board  :  Kor  whose  Favours 
549 


DEDICATION 

to  me  in  general  I  have  no  better  way  of  Expressing  my 
Gratitude,  than  by  doing  it  thus  to  your  Lordship,  who 
presides  there.     And  with  these  Sentiments,  I  am  bold 
subscribe  ray  self, 

MY    LORD, 

Your  Lordship's  most  Faithful, 

and  Devoted  Humble  Servant, 

William  Dampier. 


'ho 


IN  the  Preface  to  my  former  Volume,  I  have  accounted 
for  the  Design,  and  Method,  and  Stile  of  those 
Relations  of  my  Travels.  What  I  have  more  to  say 
u(  that  kind,  is  chic6y  with  reference  to  what  I  now 
offer  the  Reader.  Thus  far  I  have  thought  fit  to  change 
my  Method  in  this  Volume,  as  to  divide  it  into  distinct 
Parts,  because  the  Matters  it  treats  of  are  so  different  from 
one  another,  in  point  of  Time,  or  other  Circumstances : 
But  still  in  each  Part  I  have  taken  the  same  Course  of 
making  several  Chapters,  that  this  Volume  might  retain 
some  Uniformity  with  the  other. 

The  First  of  these  is  that  Account  1  promised  of  my 
Voyages  from  Achin  in  Sumatra,  to  several  Places  in  the 
E.  Indies;  of  which  1  forbore  to  particularize  in  the  former 
Volume,  for  Reasons  there  mentioned.  I  have  now  more 
than  discharged  my  self  of  that  Promise :  For  I  have 
improved  my  own  Observations,  especially  as  to  Tonquin, 
by  those  of  some  English  Gentlemen,  who  made  a  con- 
siderable stay  in  that  Kingdom.  I  am  abundantly  satisfied 
my  self  of  their  Ability  and  Integrity;  the  proper  Quali- 
fications in  things  of  this  Nature :  And  could  1  have 
obtained  their  leave,  the  Reader  also  should  have  had  the 
Satisfaction  of  knowing  to  whom  he  was  to  ascribe  several 
(^  those  Particulars ;  i  lowcvcr,  I  have  taken  frequent 
Occuions  to  distinguish  in  general  what  I  saw,  from  what 
I  was  informed  of.  This  part  is  the  Supplement  of  what 
is  contained  in  the  former  Volume;  and  complcats  the 
'*  Voyage  round  the  World." 

The  Second  Part  contains  what  relates  to  the  Time 
I  spent  in  the  Bay  t>f  Campeachy,  eithi  '  oewood- 

S5' 


THE   PREFACE 

Cutter,  or  a  Trader  to  them.  This  was  before  I  made  my 
Voyage  round  the  World,  as  the  Reader  will  perceive  : 
And  upon  this  Occasion,  therefore,  I  have  gone  so  far 
back,  as  to  speak  of  my  first  entrance  upon  this  Rambling 
kind  of  Life.  For  the  Account  it  gives  of  Campeachy, 
and  the  Neighbouring  parts  of  Jucatan  and  New  Spain,  &c. 
I  refer  the  Reader  to  the  Work  it  self. 

The  Third  Part  is  an  Account  of  the  Winds,  and 
Weather,  Storms,  Tides,  and  Currents  of  the  Torrid  Zone, 
round  the  World;  which  may  be  of  Use  towards  the 
Improvement  of  Navigation,  and  that  part  of  Natural 
History.  'Tis  the  substance  of  what  I  have  remarked  or 
learnt,  about  things  of  that  Kind,  in  so  long  a  course  of 
Roving  upon  the  Seas:  And  tho'  I  have  not  omitted  to 
speak  of  these  Matters  in  the  series  of  my  Voyages,  as 
occasion  offered,  yet  I  thought  it  might  not  be  unaccept- 
able, to  put  them  together  in  one  View  also  by  themselves, 
in  a  Methodical  Discourse,  ranging  the  several  Particulars 
under  their  proper  Heads. 

To  render  these  things  the  more  intelligible,  I  have 
prefixed  peculiar  Maps:  One  to  each  of  the  foregoing 
Parts ;  but  two  to  this  of  the  Winds,  &c.  that  the  Variety 
of  Trade- Winds  might  some  way  be  pictured,  as  it  were, 
to  the  Eye ;  and  the  Reader  might  be  the  less  liable  to 
be  confounded  with  the  Multiplicity  of  Words,  denoting 
the  several  Points  of  the  Compass,  or  other  Terms  necessary 
to  the  Descriptional  part  of  the  Discourse.  These  Maps 
contain  the  Torrid  Zone,  and  so  much  towards  each  Pole 
as  was  of  Use  to  my  Design :  And  the  Projection  differs 
in  this  only  from  the  Common  Maps,  that  in  order  to 
shew  the  Atlantick  and  South  Oceans  each  in  one  entire 
view,  the  Division  of  the  Hemispheres  is  made,  not  at  the 
first  Meridian,  (reckoning  from  TenerifFe,)  nor  at  the 
350th,  as  is  usual  also,  and  as  'tis  in  the  Globe-Map, 
prefixed  to  my  first  Volume,  but  at  the  300th ;  yet  still 
retaining  the  common  Graduation  in  the  Equator,  from 
that  customary  Meridian  of  the  Canaries,  or  C.  Verd. 

And  upon  this  mention  of  the  Atlantick  Sea,  there  is 
one  thing  I  would  observe  to  the  Reader,  that  I   use  that 


^^^m  THE    PREFACE  M 

name  not  only  for  the  North-Sea,  as  'tis  called,  but  for 
this  whole  Ocein,  on  both  sides  of  the  Equator  between 
Europe  and  Africk  on  one  hand,  and  America  on  the  other. 
If  I  be  questioned  for  taking  this  Liberty,  I  should  think 
it  enough  to  say,  that  I  wanted  a  general  name  for  this 
whole  Ocean,  and  I  could  not  find  one  more  proper.  And 
yet  even  as  to  the  Reason  of  the  thing,  if  the  Discovery 
of  a  Sea  to  the  South  of  the  Isthmus  of  Daricn,  or  the 
Mexican  Coast,  were  ground  sufficient  for  the  extending 
the  Name  of  the  South-Sea  to  all  that  largest  Ocean  of 
the  World,  tho'  it  lies  West  rather  of  the  whole  Continent 
of  America  ;  much  more  may  I  be  allowed  a  less  consider- 
able Enlargement  of  the  Name  of  Atlantick  Sea,  which 
others  have  long  since  extended  lo  so  great  a  Part  of  this 
Ocean,  from  its  Original  narrow  Confines,  the  Neighbour- 
hood of  Mount  Atlas,  and  the  Coasts  of  Mauritania.  I 
know  that  so  much  of  this  Ocean  as  lies  South  of  the 
K.  Niger,  went  usually  by  the  Name  of  the  ^thiopick 
Sea :  Tct  I  can't  learn  a  sufficient  Reason  for  It :  For  tho' 
'tis  true,  that  the  Ancients  called  all  the  South  Parts  of 
Africk  to  each  Sea,  /[Lthiopia,  yet  even  upon  this  bottom, 
the  Name  of  ^thiopick  Sw  should  have  been  left  common 
to  the  Oceans  on  each  side  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope. 
But  if  the  Name  must  be  appropriated,  why  to  this  on 
the  West  of  Africa  f  why  not  rather  to  that  on  its  E, 
Coast  ?  which  lies  nearer  the  Inward  or  more  proper 
ALthiopta,  now  the  Abissinc  Empire  ?  and  consequently 
might  better  tic  called  ^thiopick  Sea.  Accordingly  I  have 
ventured  to  call  it  so,  Vol.  I.  Page  300,  making  ii  there 
the  same  as  the  Indian  ;  which  I  also  make  to  oe  all  the 
Ocean  from  the  East  Coast  of  Africa  to  the  remotest  of 
the  East-India  Islands,  New-Holland,  and  New-Guinea: 
Tho'  this  Name  also  of  Indian-Sea  has  been  understood, 
usually  of  narrower  bounds.  But  be  that  as  it  will,  I  was 
for  using  comprehensive  Names ;  and  therefore  these  three 
Names  c^  Atlantick,  Indian,  and  South-Seas,  or  Oceans, 
serve  me  for  the  whole  Ambit  of  the  Torrtd  Zone,  and 
what  else  I  have  occasion  to  speak  of. 

^_      To  these  three  Parts  is  added  a  General  Index  of  both 

K  553 


THE    PREFACE 

Volumes.  The  first  Volume  should  not  have  been 
published  without  one,  but  that  was  reserv'd  to  be  annexed 
to  this;  that  the  Reader  might  not  have  the  Trouble  of 
turning  over  2  Alphabets. 

Thus  what  1  designed  as  an  Appendix  to  the  former 
Volume,  is  grown  to  its  self  a  volume  answerable  to  the 
other.  And  I  am  sensible  there  is  one  part  of  the  intended 
Appendix  yet  behind,  viz.  the  Description  of  the  South-Sea 
Coasts  of  America,  from  the  Spanish  Pilot-Book,  &c.  I 
confess  I  had  thoughts  of  crowding  it  into  this  Volume ; 
But  besides  the  dryness  and  fatigue  of  such  a  Work,  and 
the  small  leisure  I  had  for  it,  I  was  quite  discouraged  from 
attempting  it,  when  upon  a  nearer  View  of  the  matter  I 
found  in  those  Descriptions  and  Charts  a  repugnance  with 
each  other  in  many  particulars;  and  some  things  which 
from  my  own  Experience  I  knew  to  be  erroneous.  Indeed 
as  they  are,  they  may  be  very  useful  to  Sailors  in  those 
Parts,  being  generally  right  enough  in  the  main  :  But  I 
was  loth  to  undertake  a  Work,  much  of  which  must  have 
consisted  in  correcting  Mistakes,  and  yet  have  left  un- 
avoidably many  more  to  be  rectified.  Others  may  have 
Time  and  Helps  for  this  Affair;  and  future  Discoveries 
may  give  greater  Light  to  direct  them.  To  me  it  shall 
suffice,  that  bating  this  one  particular,  I  have  here  en- 
deavoured to  perform  what  1  had  made  the  Publick 
expect  from  me. 


J 


THE    CONTENTS 


i: 

i 

c 

I 


PART    I 

The  Supplemeni  of  the  Voyage  round  ike  fVarU 


c 


HAPTER   I.    The  Auihor'j  Voyage  froin   Achin   to 

Malacca  anJ  Tonquin. 

The  Natural  State  of  Tonquin. 
3.  Of  the  Naiit-cs,  their  Customs,  Religion,  Trade,  &c. 

Of  theGoveriiment,  King%SalJicry,aiid  Mandarins. 
Voyage  i»  Tenan.  The  A.'t  Journey  by  Land  to  Cachao,  and 
Occurrence!). 

His  return  from  Tonquin,  with  lome  pariicuUn  of  Cambodia, 
and  Bcncouli,  and  Arrival  at  Malacca  and  Achin. 
Achin   described  ;   its  Natural   and    PolilicaJ   State,  Custom's, 
Trade,  Civil  War,  tie. 

His  Voyai^  to  Malacca  again  :  Malacca  described. 
His  Return  10  Achin  ;  Voya^^c  to  Fort  St.  George,  and  ihcnce 
to  Bcncouli :  Bcncouli  described. 


Tht    Camp€achy   Voyages 

Chapter  1.  The  A.'i  Fif«  Vay»ge  to  Campcachy,  and  Return. 

Jucatan,  Alcrancs,  and  I.  of  Pines  dcscribM. 
a.  His  Second  \!m*^c.     The  E.  Coast  of  Campcachy  docrib'd  ; 

its  Vcfteubles,  VVcathcr,  AnimaU,  Kc- 
I    3.   Logwood  Cutting,  Beef-huntinjc,  and  Occurrence!. 

4.  The  W.  Coast  of  Campcachy  described,  in  Mounta[n<Cow, 
Indians,  &c. 

5.  The  Coasi  further  W.  ar>d  products  of  Campcar 
Spain  dcacribed.     The  A.'s  return  lo  Englaaa, 


THE   CONTENTS 


A  Discourse  of  fVinds^  Storms,  Seasons,  Tides,  and 
Currents  in  the  Torrid  Zone 


Chapter  I.  Of  the  True  or  General  Trade-Wind  at  Sea,  Crossing  I 
the  Line,  &c. 

2.  Of  the  Coasting  and  constant  Trade  Winds. 

3.  Of  the  shifting  Trade-Winds,  and  Monsoons. 

4.  Of  the  ordinary  Sea  and  Land-Breezes. 
S-  Of  peculiar  Breezes,  and  Winds  of  particular  effects,  Summa-   ' 

senta    Winds,    Cartagena    Breezes,    Popogaios,    Tereno's,    and   ' 
Harmatans. 

6.  Of  Storms,    Norths,    Souths,    Hurricanes,    TufFoons,    stormy  I 
Monsoons  and   Elephanta's. 

7.  Of  the  Seasons  of  the  Year,  Weather,  Rains,  and  Tornadoes. 

8.  Of   Tides    and    Currents.      Natal    described ;     its    Product,  j 
Negroes,  &c. 


) 


556 


MR.    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

VOL.    II 


PART     I 

VOYAGE  FROM  ACHIN  IN  SUMATRA,  TO 
TONQUIN,  AND  OTHER  PLACES  IN  THE  EAST- 
INDIES. 

CHAP.  I 

Th*  CmtuJtun  tfthit  Diueuru  with  iht  faya^t  rtunJ  ihf  iy«rl4,  T/it 
jtuifw'i  Dff^rturt  fnm  Athit  in  iht  hit  ef  Sumatra  with 
Caftaim  IVfidtn.  Thrir  C»uru  ahng  tht  Strrighli  »f  Afalaetu. 
PaU  Nu/M,  and  ithrr  hlandi.  Th  R.  and  Kingdm  of  Miri. 
PuU  On,  and  Pnh  Ttmaon  :  Grtfn  Turih  thrrt.  Pult  Csndcre. 
Shtab  »f  PractL,  Rivtr  of  Camhodioy  Cta»  of  Champa,  PuU 
Camltn.  Cothinthinfu,  Pnte  ChamftlU,  R.  and  City  af  Quinam, 
Oil  if  Ptr/mii/i  and  Turll/,  Skipwrtukl  Mtn  dttalntd  inuatiy  at 
Ctchimhina  and  Pfgn,  Agua/a  ff^aad  frtm  tht  Bay  »f  Siam. 
Bay  af  Tannin.  I.  af  Aynam,  and  alhfr  Itiandi.  Rakia  am 
Mautti  tflht  thitf  R.  tfTanjuin.  Fithtrt  I.  Rivtr  af  Dtmta, 
iht  athtr  Mauth.  tti  Bar  and  Entramt.  Mmntain  Eltfihant. 
PfarUli/andi.  Piiati  af  Battha.  Thty  ga  up  ih  Riwr  af  Damea. 
Damaa  and  ill  Gardrni,  and  Oulch  iturr.  Thrj  Uavt  ikiir  Shift 
at  Anther  ahavt  it,  uihtrf  tht  Nativti  hiild  a  Ttxvn.  Thrj  ga  op 
ta  tht  fhitf  City  in  tfir  Ctintry  Baati.  Tht  Riwr  and  th* 
Camntry  ahaat  it.     Lrfratu    Btggart.     Hfan,  a    Tnum   af  nUt ; 

bChinett  thrrt.      Tht  Gavrmaur,  Shipping  and  Tid*.      Thty  arrivt 
at  Cathaa,  tht  MrtrapaHf  af  Tan^nin, 


T 


%HK  Reader  will  find  upon  perusing  my  "Voyage    *ji,' 
round  the  World,"  ihat  I  then  omilied  to  speak  '**• 
particularly    of    the     Excursions    I     made    to 
^g,       n         Tonquin,     Malacca,     Fort    St.     Georve,    and 
HSencouli  from  Achin  in  the  Isle  of  Sumatra  ;  togetiier  with 

L 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   the  Description  I  intended  to  give  of  those  Parts.     I  do 
1688  bm  just  mention  them  there ;  but  shall  now  proceed  to  a 
more  distinct  Account  of  them. 

And  to  keep  to  the  Order  of  Time,  the  Reader  may 
recollect,  that  my  first  Departure  from  Achin  was  to 
Tonquin,  along  with  Captain  Weldon,  about  July  1688,  as 
I  have  said  p.  489th  of  my  former  Volume.  I  have  there 
related  in  a  page  or  two  before,  to  how  weak  a  Condition 
my  self  and  my  Companions  were  brought,  through  the 
Fatigues  of  our  Passage  from  Nicobar  to  Achin :  yet  did 
not  my  Weakness  take  me  off  from  contriving  some  Em- 
ployment or  Expedition,  whereby  I  might  have  a  comfort- 
able  Subsistence.  Captain  Weldon  touched  here,  to  sell 
the  Slaves  he  had  brought  with  him  from  Fort  St.  George ; 
it  being  in  his  way  to  the  Streights  of  Malacca,  and  so  to 
Tonquin,  whither  he  was  bound.  This  afforded  me  the 
Opportunity  of  trying  that  Voyage,  to  which  he  kindly 
invited  me,  and  to  which  I  was  the  more  incouraged 
because  he  had  a  good  Surgeon  in  his  Ship,  whose  Advice  I 
needed  :  and  my  Friend  Mr.  Hall  was  particularly  animated 
thereby  ;  who  had  also  resolved  upon  this  Voyage,  and  was 
in  a  weaker  Condition  than  my  self.  Besides,  Capt.  Weldon 
promised  to  buy  a  Sloop  at  Tonquin,  of  which  he  would 
make  me  Commander,  to  go  a  trading  Voyage  from  thence 
to  Cochinchina,  Champa,  Cambodia,  or  some  others  of  the 
adjacent  Countries :  which  Trade  has  been  scarce,  yet  has 
been  attempted  by  our  Country-men,  and  there  were 
Hopes  it  might  turn  to  a  good  Account ;  but  this  Project 
came  to  nothing. 

However,  Captain  Weldon  having  finished  his  Business 
at  Achin,  I  set  out  thence  with  him  thro'  the  Streights  of 
Malacca,  and  we  soon  arrived  at  the  Town  of  Malacca : 
of  which  Town  and  Country,  I  shall  have  a  better  Occasion 
to  speak  hereafter.  Here  we  found  the  desar  of  London, 
commanded  by  Captain  Wright,  who  came  from  Bombay, 
and  was  bound  to  China.  He  stopt  here  to  water  and 
refresh,  as  is  usual  for  Ships  to  do  that  pass  these  Streights. 
By  him  we  were  informed  that  three  other  English  Ships 
had  touched  here,  and  were  past  on  to  the  Eastward  ten 

558 


PULO   NUTTEE 

Days  before.     These  3  Ships  came  from  l*ort  St.  George,    j 
in  Company  with  Captain  Weldon  :  but  his  Business  calling  ' 
him   to  Achin,  they   in  the  mean  Time  prosecuting  their 
Voyage,  got  the  Start  of  us  thus  much.     The  desar  was 
soon  ready  to  sail  again,  and  went  away  the  next  Morning 
after  our  Arrival  at  Malacca. 

Our  Captain  being  a  Stranger  to  the  Bay  of  Tonquin, 
as  were  all  his  Ship's  Company,  be  hired  a  Dutch  Pilot  at 
Malacca;  and  having  finished  his  Business  there,  wc  set 
sail,  two  Days  after  the  C^tiar.  Wc  were  desirous  to 
overtake  these  four  Ships,  and  therefore  crouded  all  the 
Sail  wc  could  make  ;  having  a  strong  westerly  Wind,  accom- 
panied with  many  hard  Gusts  and  Tornadoes :  and  the  very 
next  Day  we  got  Sight  of  them ;  for  they  had  not  yet 
passed  through  a  narrow  Passage,  called  the  Streights  oi 
Stncaporc.  Wc  soon  got  up  with  them,  and  past  through 
together ;  and  sailing  about  three  Leagues  farther  we 
anchored  near  an  Island  called  Pulo  Nuttee,  belonging  to 
the  Kingdom  of  Jihore.' 

Here  Capiain  Weldon  look  in  Wood  and  Water,  and 
some  of  the  Indian  Inhabitants  came  aboard  us  in  their 
Canoas,  of  whom  we  bought  a  few  Coco-nuts,  Plantains, 
and  fresh  Fish.  We  staid  here  not  above  four  and  twenty 
Hours;  for  the  other  Ships  had  filled  most  of  their  Water 
at  other  Islands  near  this,  before  we  came  up  with  them  : 
for  tho*  Ships  do  usually  take  in  Water  at  Malacca  Town, 
yet  they  da  as  frequently  discharge  it  again  at  some  of 
these  Islands,  and  take  in  better. 

We  sailed  the  next  Day,  and  kept  near  the  Malacca 
Shore  ;  and  there  passing  by  the  Mouth  of  the  River  Jihore, 
we  left  many  other  Islands  on  our  Starboard -side. 

The  River  of  Jihore  runs  by  the  City  of  that  Name, 
which  is  the  Scat  of  the  little  Kingdom  of  Jihore.  This 
Kingdom  lies  on  the  Continent  of  Malacca,  and  consists  of 
the  extremity  or  doubling  of  that  Promontory.  It  abounds 
with  Pepper,  and  other  good  Commodities. 

**"  .  Mahooieun    People,    very    warlike,   and 


I 


CAPTAIN  DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 
AH.  desirons  of 'Trade.  TheyMelight  much  in  Shipping  and 
>6^  g<nng  to  Sea,  all  the  nei^bouring  Islands  in  a  Manner 
being  Colonies  of  this  Kingdom,  and  under  its  Government. 
They  coast  about  in  their  own  Shipping  to  several  Parts  of 
Sumatra,  Java,  &c,  their  Vessels  are  out  small,  yet  very 
serviceable :  and  the  Dutch  buy  up  a  great  many  of  them 
.  at  8  small  ^ce,  and  make  good  tradit^  Sloops  of  them. 
But  they  first  fit  them  up  after  thdr  own  Fashion,  and  put 
a  Rudder  to  them,  which  the  Jihcmans  don't  use,  the'  they 
are  vary  good  Seamen  in  their  way ;  but  they  make  their 
Vessels  slurp  at  each  End,  though  but  one  End  is  used  as . 
the  Head;  and  instead  of  «  Rudder,  they  have  on  each 
Side  the  Stem  a  Thing  like  a  very  broad  Oar,  one  of  which 
they  let  down  ipto  the  Water  at  Pleasure,  as  there  is  Occauon 
to  steer  the  Ship  dther  to  the  one  Side  or  the  other, 
always  letting  down  that  which  is  to  the  Leeward.  They 
have  Proes  of  a  particular  Neatness  and  Curio^ty.  We 
call  them  Half-moon  Proes,  for  they  turn  so  much  at  each 
End  from  the  Water,  that  they  much  resemble  a  Half- 
moon,  with  the  Hixns  upwards.  They  are  kept  very  clean, 
sail  well,  and  are  much  used  by  them  in  their  Wars.  The 
People  of  Jihore  have  formerly  endeavoured  to  get  a 
Commerce  with  our  Nation.  For  what  Reason  that  Trade 
is  neglected  by  us,  I  know  not.  The  Dutch  trade  very 
much  there;  and  have  lately  endeavoured  to  bring  the 
King,  who  is  very  young,  to  their  Bow. 

At  the  farther  End  of  the  Streights  of  Malacca,  among 
many  other  Islands,  we  sailed  by  those  of  Fulo  Oro,  and 
Pulo  Timaon : '  which  last  is  a  place  often  touched  at  for 
Wood,  Water,  and  other  Refreshments,  tho'  we  past  by  it. 
Among  other  things,  there  are  great  Plenty  of  excellent 
Green  Turtle  among  these  Islands. 

Being  at  length  got  clear  of  the  Islands  into  the  wide 
Ocean,  we  steered  away  still  together  till  we  came  in  sight 
of  Pulo  Condore,  when  having  all  brought  to,  and  spoke 
with  each  other,  we  parted  for  our  several  Voyages.  The 
desar  and  two  others,  that  were  bound  to  China,  steered 

*  Tioman. 
560 


I[  PULO  CANTON  AND  CHAMPELLO 
nny  to  the  Eastward,  keeping  to  the  South  of  Pulo  aw.  ' 
Condore ;  it  being  their  best  Course,  thereby  to  avoid  the  •**• 
large  Sholcs  of  Praccl.  We  and  the  Saphire  of  Fort 
St.  George,  commanded  by  Captain  Lacy,  steered  more 
Northerly ;  and  leaving  Pulo  Condore  on  our  Starboard, 
wc  hal'd  in  for  the  Continent,  and  fell  in  with  it  near  the 
River  of  Cambodia.  But  leaving  this  also  on  our  Star- 
board '  side,  wc  coasted  along  to  the  Eastward,  keeping 
near  the  Champa  Shore,  and  coming  to  the  Point  of  Land' 
that  bounds  the  S.  W.  part  of  the  Bay  of  Tonquin,  we 
doubled  it,  and  coasting  to  the  North ;  leaving  Champa 
still  on  our  Larboard  side,  and  the  dangerous  Shoals  of 
Praccl  about  12  or  14  Leagues  oiT  on  our  Starboard  side, 
we  kept  along  fair  by  the  Shore,  just  without  Pulo 
Canton.* 

This  Island  lies  in  about  13  d.  North.  It  is  much 
frequented  by  the  Cochtnchincse,  whose  Country  begins 
hereabouts,  bordering  on  the  Kingdom  of  Champa.  They 
arc  most  Ktshermcn  that  come  hither,  and  their  chief 
Business  is  to  make  Oyl  of  Porpusses ;  for  these  Fish  arc 
found  in  great  Plenty  here  at  some  Seasons  of  the  Year, 
and  then  the  Cochinchincse  resort  hiihcr  to  take  them. 
The  People  thai  we  found  on  Pulo  Condore,  mentioned 
in  the  14th  Chapter  of  my  "Voyage  round  the  World," 
page  392,  were  of  these  Cochinchincse.  The  Turtle  also 
which  they  catch,  is  chiefly  in  order  to  make  Oyl  of  their 
Fat:  And  there  is  a  great  Store  of  Turtle  on  all  this 
Coast. 

Wc  coasted  yet  fanher  on  this  Shore,  till  we  came  to 
the  Islands  of  Champello.'  These  may  seem  to  have  some 
Affinity  to  Champa,  by  the  Sound  of  the  Word,  which  one 
would  take  to  be  a  Portuguese  diminutive  of  Champa;  yet 
they  lye  on  the  Cochinchina  Coast,  and  belong  to  it,  tho* 
uninhabited.  They  are  4  or  5  in  Number,  and  lye  4  or  5 
Leagues  fn>m  the  Shore.  They  arc  called  Champella  de  la 
Mar,  to  distinguish  them  from  others  lying  farther  down 

>  Should  be  brbmnL  Tbe  rhret  nf  Cambodct  di»chaisn  iimIT  a  liillc 
to  Itie  toutb  of  (he  loUi  ponllcL 

*  fintMbty Cape Vanla.  ■  In  laL  tt'So'N.  ■  Ct«m ColUtt <?). 

VOL.  I.  561  2  K 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    in  the  Bay  of  Tonquin,  called  Champello  de  Terra.     These 
1688  i^t  lyg  ij^  about  16  d.  45  m.  North,  but  the  Islands  of 
Champello  de  la  Mar  lye  in  about  13  d.  45  m.  N. 

Over  against  these  last  Islands,  on  the  Main,  there  is  a 
large  navigable  River  empties  it  self  into  the  Sea.     The 
City  of  Quinam  stands  on  the  Banks  of  this  River,  and  is 
said  to  be  the  principal  City  of  the  Kingdom  of  Cochin- 
china.      As   to   its    Distance   from   the   Sea,  its    Bigness, 
Strength,  Riches,  &c.  I  am  yet  in  the  dark :  only  I  have 
been  informed,  that  if  a  Ship  is  cast  away  on  this  Kingdom, 
the  Seamen  that  escape  drowning  and  get  ashore  become 
Slaves  to  the  King.     Captain  John  Tiler  was  thus  served, 
and  despaired  of  ever  getting  his  Freedom ;  but  after  a 
considerable  Stay   there  he   was   taken  Notice  of  by   the 
King,  and  upon  Promise  of  returning   thither   again   to 
trade  there,  he  was  sent  away.     I  sailed  in  a  Vessel  of  his 
after  this :  but  I  never  found  him  inclined  to  Trade  thither 
any  more.     However,  notwithstanding  this  their  Severity 
to  Shipwrackt  People,   I  have  been  informed  by  Captain 
Tiler  and  others,  that  they  have  a  Desire  to  Trade,  though 
they  are  yet  destitute  of  the  Means  to  attain  it.     This 
Desire  of  Trade,  they  seem  to  have  taken  up  from  some 
Chinese  Fugitives,  who  fled   from  the  Tartars,  when  they 
conquered  their  Country :    and  being  kindly  received  by 
these    Cochinchinese,    and     having    among    them     many 
Artificers,  they  instructed  their  kind  Protectors  in  many 
useful  Arts,  of  which  they  were  wholly  ignorant  before. 
'Tis    probable   this    their    Custom    of  seizing   Shipwrackt 
Seamen  may  soon  vanish  by  the  coming  in  of  Trade,  which 
is  already  advancing  among  them ;  for  the  Merchants  of 
China    do    now    drive    some    small  Traffick    among   these 
People,  and  fetch  thence  some  small  Quantities  of  Pepper, 
Lignum,^    Aloes,    and    Aguala^    Wood,    which    is    much 
esteemed  for  its  rare  Scent,  and  is  very  valuable  in  other 
Places   of  India.     They  also    fetch    Betle  from   hence,  it 
growing  here  in  great  Plenty.     I  have  had  no  Account  of 
any  Shipping  the  Cochinchinese  have  of  their  own,  but  I 

'  Lignum  vitcp.  *  Aqmia,  or  eagle  wood. 

562 


AGUALA   WOOD— ISLAND  OF   AYNAM 

have  met  with  them  in  their  open  Boats  of  four,  five,  or  six 
Tun ;  impluying  themselves  chiefly  in  getting  Pitch  and 
Tar  from  Pulo  Condore,  in  fishing  about  the  Coast  and 
Island  to  get  Oyl,  and  in  fetching  Aguala  Wood  from  the 
Bay  of  Siam ;  which,  whether  it  grows  there  or  no,  I  can't 
tell,  but  I  have  hean.t  that  'tis  only  Drift-wood  cast  ashore 
by  the  Sea. 

The  seizing  Shipwrackt  Men  has  been  also  a  Custom  at 
Pegu,  but  whether  still  continued  I  know  not.  They  lookt 
on  such  as  Men  preserved  by  God,  purposely  for  them  to 
feed  and  maintain  ;  and  therefore  the  King  ordered  them 
to  be  maintained  by  his  Subjects ;  neither  was  any  Work 
required  af  them,  but  they  had  Liberty  to  beg.  By  this 
means  they  got  Food  and  Raiment  from  the  Inhabitants, 
who  were  zealously  charitable  to  them. 

But  to  proceed  ;  we  kept  a  little  without  all  the  Islands, 
and  coasting  five  or  six  Leagues  further,  wc  stood  right 
over  towards  the  N.  E.  Cod  of  the  Bay  of  Tonquin.  The 
I  Bay  of  Tonquin  has  its  Entrance  between  the  S.  E.  Point 
lof  Champa  '  on  the  West-side,  which  lies  in  the  Lat.  of 
Ftbout  13  d.  North,  and  the  Island  of  Aynam'  near  the 
S.  W.  part  of  China,  on  the  East  side.  The  Island  of 
Aynam  is  in  about  19  d.  North.  It  is  a  pretty  considerable 
Island,  well  peopled  with  Chinese  Inhabitants.  They  have 
Ships  of  their  own,  and  drive  a  great  Trade  by  Sea.  I  have 
seen  many  of  their  Ships,  some  of  100  Tun,  with  Outtagcrs 
on  both  Sides,  and  others  like  ordinary  Jonks,  without 
Outtagers;  but  am  wholly  ignorant  of  their  Trade,  any 
farther  than  what  1  have  mentioned  of  their  having  Pearl 
Oysters  there,  in  the  7th  Chapter  of  my  "  Voyage  round 
the  World,"  p.  174. 

Near  the  Cod  of  the  Bay  af  Tonqain  there  arc  Abund- 
ance of  tmall  Islands,*  of  which  I  shall  speak  more  here- 
after. The  Mouth  of  the  Bay  seems  to  be  barred  up  with 
the  great  Sholc  of  Pracel,  which  lies  stretched  at  length 
before  it,  yet  leavir^  two  wide  Channels,  one  at  each 
^End  ;  so  that  Ships  may  pass  in  or  out  either  way.     And 

>  Cape  Uautagan.  ■  Hainui. 

*  The  Naran,  Gan-uu,  and  olbei  gmtms. 

563       ^ 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER^S   VOYAGES 

AN.    therefore  even  the  Ships  that  are  bound  from  the  Streights 
1688  Qf  MaUcca  or  Siam  to  China,  may  as  well  pass   to  and 
from  within  the  Shole  as  without. 

The  Bay  of  Tonquin  is  about  30  Leagues  wide  in  the 
broadest  Place.  There  is  good  Sounding  and  Anchoring 
all  over  it :  and  in  the  Middle,  where  it  is  deepest,  there  is 
about  46  Fathom  water.  There  you  have  black  Oaze,  and 
dark  Peppery  Sand :  but  on  the  West-side  there  is  reddish 
Oazy  Sand.  Beside  the  other  Islands  before-mentioned, 
there  are  others  of  less  Note  on  the  Cochinchina  Coast; 
but  none  of  them  all  above  four  or  five  Miles  from  the 
Shore. 

In  the  Bottom  of  the  Bay  also,  there  are  some  small 
Islands,  close  by  the  Tonquin  Shore:    2  of  these  are  of 
especial  Note,  not  for  their  Bigness,  but  for  Sea-marks  of 
the  2  principal  Rivers,  or  Mouth  rather  of  the  chief  River  ^ 
of  Tonquin.      One  of  these  Rivers  or  Mouths,  is  called 
Rokbo.     It  discharges  it  self  into  the  Sea  near  the  N.  W. 
Corner  of  the  Bay :  and  the  Mouth  of  it  is  in  about  20  d. 
6  m.  N.     This  River  or  Branch  I  was  not  at,  but  have 
been  informed,  that  it  has  not  above  1 2  Foot  Water  at  the 
Entrance ;  but  that  its  Bottom   is  soft  Oaz,  and  therefore 
very  convenient  for  small  Vessels,  and  it  is  the  way  that 
all  the  Chinese  and  Siamers  do  use.     About  a  League  to 
the  Westward*  of    this  River's  Mouth,  there    is  a  small 
pretty  high  Island   calfd  Fishers  Island.      It  lieth  about 
two  Mile   from  the  Shore,  and  it  hath  good   Anchoring 
about  it  in   17  or  18  Foot  Water:  and  therefore  it  is  not 
only  a  Sea-mark  for  the  River,  but  a  secure  place  to  ride 
in,  and  very  convenient  for  Ships  to  Anchor  at,  to  shelter 
themselves  when  they  come  hither,  especially  if  they  have 
not  a  present  Opportunity  to  enter  the  River ;  either  be- 
cause of  coming  too  late  in  the  Year,  or  being  hindrcd 
by  bad  Weather. 

The  other  River   or  Mouth,  was    that  by  which  we 
entered ;  and  *tis  larger  and  deeper  than   the  former.    I 

*  The  He-ho,  or  Black  River,  and  the  Song-Ka,  or  Red  Ri\'cr,  which 
join  and  break  into  a  number  of  mouths. 
'  Should  be  eastward. 

564 


RIVER   OF   DOMEA 

r  hot  its  particular  Name ;  but  for  distinction  I  snHT 
call  it  the  River  of  Domca;'  because  the  first  Town  of  '^8 
Note,  that  I  saw  on  its  Bank  was  so  called.  The  Mouth 
of  the  River  is  in  lat.  2o  d.  45  m.  It  disembogues  jo 
Leagues  to  the  N.  E.  of  Rokbo.  There  are  many  dangerous 
Sands  and  Shoals  between  these  two  Rivers,  which  stretch 
into  the  Sea  a  Leagues  or  more ;  and  all  the  Coast,  even 
from  the  Cochinchina  Shore  on  the  West,  to  China  on  the 
East,  admits  of  Shoats  and  Sands,  which  yet  tn  some  Places 
lie  stretched  farther  off  from  the  Shore  than  in  others. 

This  River  of  Domea  is  that  by  which  most  European 
Ships  enter,  for  the  sake  of  its  Depth :  yet  here  is  a  Bar 
of  near  two  Mile  broad,  and  the  Channel  is  about  half  a  I 

Mile  broad,  having  Sands  on  each  Side.  The  Depth  of  I 
the  River  is  various  at  different  Times  and  Seasons,  by  the  1 
Relation  of  the  Pilots  who  arc  best  acquainted  here :  for  at 
some  Times  of  the  Year  here  is  not  above  15  or  16  Foot 
Water  on  a  Spring  Tide ;  and  at  other  Times  here  are  26 
or  27  Foot.  The  highest  Tides  arc  said  to  be  in  the 
Months  of  November,  December,  and  January,  when  the 
Northerly  Monsoons  blow ;  and  the  lowest  in  May,  June, 
and  July,  when  the  Southerly  Monsoons  blow;  but  to  be 
particular  in  them  is  beyond  my  Experience. 

The  Channel  of  the  Bar  is  hard  Sand,  which  makes  it 
the  more  dangerous :  and  the  Tides  whirling  among  the 
Sands,  set  divcr»  ways  in  a  Tides  Time ;  which  makes  it 
the  more  dangerous  still.  Therefore  Ships  that  come 
hither,  commonly  wait  for  a  Pilot  to  direct  them,  and  if 
they  arrive  when  it  is  Nepc-lide,  they  must  stay  for  i 
Spring  before  a  Pilot  will  come  off  to  take  Charge  oS  them. 
The  Mark  of  this  River  is  a  great  high  ridgy  Mountain  in 
the  Country,  call'd  the  Elephant.  This  must  be  brought 
to  bear  N.  W.  by  N  :  then  steering  towards  the  Shore,  the 
Water  runs  shallower,  till  you  come  into  6  Fathom,  and 
then  you  will  be  two  or  three  Miles  from  the  Foot  or 
Entrance  of  the  Bar,  and  about  the  same  Distance  from  a 
L^null    Island    called    Pearl    Island ;   which  will  then    bear 

■  Tbt  Kua  Gok,  at  ToMtnin  Ritm. 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.   nearest  N.  N.  E.     Having  these  Marks  and  Depth,  you 
'^*^  may  anchor,  and  wait  for  a  Pilot. 

The  Pilots  for  this  River  are  Fishermen,  who  live  at  a 
Village  called  Batsha,^  at  the  Mouth  of  the  River;  so 
seated,  that  they  can  see  all  Ships  that  wait  for  a  Pilot, 
and  hear  the  Guns  too,  that  are  often  fired  as  Signals  by 
Europeans,  to  give  Notice  of  thdr  Arrival. 

It  was  in  the  Road  before  the  Bar,  in  Sight  of  the 
Elephant  Land,  that  we  found  the  Rainbow  of  London, 
apuin  Pool  Commander,  riding  and  waiting  for  a  PUot, 
when  we  and  Captain  Lacy  arrived.  Captain  Pool  came 
directly  from  England,  and  passing  thro*  the  Streights  of 
Sundy,  touched  at  Batavia. 

He  had  lain  here  2  or  3  days  before  we  arrived :  but 
the  Spring-tides  coming  on,  the  Hlots  came  aboard,  and 
we  all  three  in  Company  passed  in  over  the  Bar,  and  entring 
about  half-flood,  we  had  14  Foot  and  a  half  Water  on  the 
Bar.  Being  got  over  the  Bar,  we  found  it  deeper,  and  the 
Bottom  soft  Oaze.  The  River  at  its  Mouth  is  above  a 
Mile  wide,  but  grows  narrower  as  you  run  farther  up. 
We  had  a  moderate  Sea-breeze,  and  having  a  good  Tide 
of  Flood,  made  the  best  of  it  to  reach  to  our  anchoring 
Place. 

Having  run  about  five  or  six  Leagues  up  the  River, 
we  past  by  a  Village  called  Domea.  This  is  a  handsome 
Village :  and  'twas  the  first  of  Note  that  we  saw  standing 
on  the  Banks.  *Tis  seated  on  the  Starboard-side  going  up, 
and  so  nigh  the  River,  that  the  Tide  sometimes  washes  the 
Walls  of  the  Houses,  for  the  Tide  rises  and  falls  here  nine 
or  ten  Foot.  This  Village  consists  of  about  100  Houses. 
The  Dutch  Ships  that  trade  here  do  always  lye  in  the  River 
before  this  Town,  and  the  Dutch  Seamen,  by  their  annual 
Returns  hither  from  Batavia,  are  very  intimate  with  the 
Natives,  and  as  free  here  as  at  their  own  homes :  for  the 
Tonquinese  in  general  are  a  very  sociable  People,  especially 
the  Traders  and  poorer  Sort :  but  of  this  more  in  its 
proper  Place.     The  Dutch  have  instructed  the  Natives  in 

»  "A  fisher  village  at  the  River's  mouth  where  the  European  ships 
enter  it "  (Baron), 

566 


I 


THKY    ANCHOR 


the  Art  of  Gardening:  by  which  means  they  have  Abund- 
ance of  Herbage  for  Sallading  ;  which  among  other  Things  ' 
)>  a  Great  Refrcshmetit  To  the  Dutch  Seamen,  when  they 
arrive  here. 

Tho'  the  Dutch  who  come  to  trade  in  this  Kingdom, 

to  no  higher  with  their  Ships  than  this  Domea,  yet  the 
English  usually  go  about  3  Mile  farther  up,  and  there  lye 
at  Anchor  during  their  Stay  in  this  Country.  We  did  so 
at  this  Time,  and  passing  by  Domca  came  to  an  anchor 
at  that  Distance.  The  Tide  is  not  so  strong  here  as  at 
Domca ;  but  we  found  not  one  House  near  it :  yet  our 
Ship  had  not  lain  there  many  Days  before  the  Natives 
came  from  all  the  Country  about,  and  fell  a  building  them 
Houses  after  their  fashion ;  so  that  in  a  Month's  time 
there  was  a  little  Town  built  near  our  anchoring  Place. 
This  is  no  unusual  thing  in  other  parts  of  India,  especially 
where  Ships  lye  long  at  a  place,  the  poorer  sort  of  Natives 
uking  this  Opportunity  to  truck  and  barter ;  and  by  some 
little  Offices,  or  Begging,  but  especially  by  bringing  Women 
to  let  to  hire,  they  get  what  they  can  of  the  Seamen. 

This  place  where  our  Ships  rode  at  Anchor  was  not 
above  20  Miles  from  the  Sea :  but  the  Trade  of  the 
Kingdom  is  driven  at  Cachao,'  the  principal  City ;  where 
fur  that  Reason  the  English  and  Dutch  East-India  Com- 
panies have  each  of  them  their  Factors  constantly  residing. 
The  City  was  farther  up  the  River,  about  80  Miles  from 
our  anchoring  Place;  and  our  Captains  got  themselves  tn 
a  readiness  to  go  up  thither;  it  being  usual  to  send  up  the 
Goods  in  the  Country  Boats,  which  are  targe  and  commodious 
enough ;  and  the  hire  is  pretty  reasonable  both  for  the 
Vessels,  arkl  the  Men  who  manage  them.  They  are 
Tonquincse,  and  use  both  Oars  and  Sails.  Our  Factory  at 
Cachao  had  news  of  our  arrival  before  wc  came  to  an 
Anchor,  and  immediately  the  chief  of  the  Factory,  with  some 
of  the  King  of  Ton()uin*s  Officers,  came  down  to  us,  by 

*  Or  "  Cha-cbo,'  a  city  tome  i>a  mile*  up  ihe  rirer.  It  wu  the  opital 
of  Tonqvin,  and  miitbi  "  for  it*  capacioiuon*,  be  cmnpaml  with  many 
ehm  tn  Aaiii,  and  uperiot  10  nmst  Ibr  {Mpulouans.'  Sm  Samtad  Baron^ 
"OMChpDon."  16S). 

5'7 


1 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    that  time  wc  had  lain  there  about  4  or    5    Days*     The 
1688  Tonquinese  Officers  came  to  take  an  account  of  the  Ships 
and  Lading,  and  our  Captains  received  them  with  great 
civility,  firing  of  Guns,  feasting  for  2  or  3  Days,  and  Pre- 
sents also  at  their  return  back  to  Cachao. 

Soon  after  their  departure,  the  chief  of  the  Fzctory  re- 
turned thither  again,  and  with  him  went  our  three  Captwis, 
and  some  others,  among  whom  I  got  leave  to  go  also. 
Captain  Weldon  had  recommended  me  to  the  chief  of  the 
Factory,  while  he  was  aboard  us :  and  my  going  up  now 
to  the  City,  was  in  Order  to  have  his  Assistance  in  the 
Voyage  to  Cochinchina,  Champa,  or  Cambodia,  which 
Captain  Weldon  had  contrived  for  me;  nor  was  it  his 
Fault  that  it  came  to  nothing. 

We  went  from  our  Ships  in  the  Country  Boats  we  had 
hired,  with  the  Tide  of  Flood,  and  anchored  in  the  Ebb: 
For  the  Tide  runs  strong  for  thirty  or  forty  Miles  beyond 
the  Place  where  we  left  our  Ships.  Our  Men  contented 
themselves  with  looking  after  their  Goods  (the  Tonquinese 
being  very  light-finger*d)  and  left  the  Management  of  the 
Boats  entirely  to  the  Boat's  Crew.  Their  Boats  have  but 
one  Mast ;  and  when  the  Wind  is  against  them  they  take 
it  down,  and  ply  their  Oars.  As  we  advanced  thus  up  the 
River,  sometimes  rowing,  sometimes  sailing,  we  had  a 
delightful  Prospect  over  a  large  level  fruitful  Country,  It 
was  generally  either  Pasture  or  Rice-fields;  and  void  of 
Trees,  except  only  about  the  Villages,  which  stood  thick,  and 
appeared  mighty  pleasant  at  a  Distance.  There  are  many 
of  these  Villages  stand  close  to  the  Banks  of  the  Rivers, 
incompassed  with  Trees  on  the  Backside  only,  but  open  to 
the  River. 

When  we  came  near  any  of  these  Villages,  we  were 
commonly  encountered  with  Beggars,  who  came  oflTto  us  in 
little  Boats  made  of  Twigs,  and  plaistered  over  both  Inside 
and  Outside  with  Clay,  but  very  leaky.  These  were  a 
poor  Leprous  People,  who  for  that  Reason  arc  compell'd 
by  the  rest  to  live  by  themselves,  and  are  permitted  to  b^ 
publickly.  As  soon  as  they  spied  us  they  set  up  a  loud 
doleful  Cry,  and  as  we  past  by  them  we  threw  them  out 

568 


CHINESE   AND   FRENCH    FACTORIES 

'  some    Rice,  which    they  received  with   great    Appearance 
of  Joy.  '•' 

In  about  four  Days  Time  wc  got  to  Hean,  a  Town  on 
the  Iiast-side  of  the  River;  which  is  here  entire;  for  a 
little  before  we  came  to  Hean  wc  met  the  main  Stream 
where  it  parts  into  the  two  Channels,  that  of  Domca,  which 
we  came  up,  and  the  other  of  Rokbo:  making  a  large  and 
triangular  Island  between  them  and  the  Sea  ;  the  Mouths  of 
those  Channels  being,  as  I  have  said,  20  Leagues  asunder. 

Hean  is  about  60  Miles  from  the  Place  where  we  left 
our  Ships,  and  about  80  from  the  Sea  that  way  :  But  along 
the  River  or  Channel  Rokbo,  where  the  Land  trends  more 
to  the  Southward,  it  seems  to  be  farther  distant  from  the 
Sea,  'Tis  a  considerable  Town,  of  about  2000  Houses; 
hut  the  Inhabitants  are  most  poor  People  and  Soldiers,  who 
keep  a  Garrison  there ;  tho'  it  has  neither  Walls,  Fort,  nor 
great  Guns. 

Here  is  one  Street  belonging  to  the  Chinese  Merchants. 
For  some  Years  ago  a  great  many  lived  at  Cachao ;  til) 
they  grew  so  numerous,  that  the  Natives  themselves  were 
even  swallowed  up  by  them.  The  King  taking  Notice  of 
it,  ordered  them  to  remove  from  thence,  allowing  them  to 
live  any  where  but  in  the  Gty.  But  the  major  Part  of  them 
presently  forsook  the  Country,  as  not  finding  it  convenient 
for  them  to  live  any  where  but  at  Cachao;  because  that  is 
the  only  Place  of  Trade  in  the  Country,  and  Trade  is  the 
Life  of  a  Chinese.  However  some  of  them  were  content 
to  settle  at  Hean,  where  they  have  remained  ever  since. 
And  these  Merchants,  notwithstanding  the  Prohiirition,  go 
often  to  Cachao,  to  buy  and  sell  Goods;  but  are  not 
suflvr'd  to  make  it  their  constant  Residence.  There  were 
two  of  these  China  Merchants  who  traded  yearly  to  Japan, 
with  raw  and  wrought  Silks,  bringing  hack  Money  chiefly. 
These  all  of  them  wore  long  Hair  braided  behind,  as  their 
own  Country  Fashion  was  before  the  Tartarian  Conquest. 
The  French  too  have  their  Faaory  here,  not  being  allowed 
to  fix  at  Cachao  and  their  Bishops  Palace  is  the  fairest 
building  in  Hean :  but  of  this  I  shall  have  ocouton  to 
Ipcak  more  hcretfter. 

569 


I 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  The  Governor  of  the  adjacent  Province  lives  here.     He 

'^^  is  one  of  the  p)rindpal  Mandarins  of  the  Nation,  and  he  has 
always  a  great  many  Soldiers  in  the  Town,  and!  inferiour 
Officers,  whom  he  employs  at  his  pleasure  on  any  Occasion. 
Besides,  here  are  also  some  c^  the  King's  River  Frigats,^ 
which  I  shall  hereafter  describe,  ready  to  be  sent  on  any 
Expedition  :  and  tho*  no  Europeans  come  up  so  far  as  thu 
with  their  Ships,  (that  I  could  learn)  yet  the  Samites  and 
Chinese  bring  their  Ships  up  the  River  Rokbo,  quite  to 
Hean,  and  lie  at  Anchor  before  it :  and  we  found  there 
several  Chinese  Jonks.  They  ride  a-float  in  the  middle  of 
the  River ;  for  the  Water  does  not  rise  and  fall  much  at 
this  place  :  Neither  is  the  flood  discerned  by  the  turning 
of  the  stream ;  for  that  alwap  runs  down,  though  not  so 
swift  near  full  Sea  as  at  other  times :  for  the  Tide  pressing 
against  the  Stream,  tho*  faintly  so  far  up  the  River,  has  not 
Power  to  turn  it,  but  only  slackens  its  Course,  and  makes 
the  Water  rise  a  little. 

The  Governor  ot  his  Deputy  gives  his  Chop  *  or  Pass 
to  all  Vessels  that  go  up  or  down ;  not  so  much  as  a  Boat 
being  suffered  to  proceed  without  it.  For  which  Reason 
we  also  made  a  Stop :  yet  we  stayed  here  but  a  little  while ; 
and  therefore  I  did  not  now  go  ashc^e ;  but  had  a  while 
after  this  a  better  Opportunity  of  seeing  Hean. 

From  Hean  we  went  up  to  Cachao  in  our  Boats,  being 
about  2  Days  more  on  our  Voyage,  for  we  had  no  Tide  to 
help  us.  We  landed  at  the  English  Factory,  and  I  stayed 
there  7  or  8  Days,  before  I  went  down  to  our  Ships  again  in 
one  of  the  Country  Boats.  We  had  good  Weather  coming 
up  :  but  it  rained  all  the  time  of  this  my  first  stay  at  Cachao ; 
and  we  had  much  wet  weather  after  this.  But  having  got 
thus  far,  I  shall  now  proceed  to  give  some  general  Accoimt 
of  this  Country;  from  my  own  Observations,  and  the 
Experience  of  Merchants  and  others  worthy  of  Credit,  who 
have  had  their  Residence  there,  and  some  of  them  a  great 
many  Years. 

*  The  Admiral  of  the  Tonquinese  sea  forces  had  his  palace  at  Hean. 

*  Chaopy  a  seal,  or  sealed  passport. 

570 


CHAP.   II 

Tetiquin,  itt  Situatim,  S«7,  ffattn  anJ  Prtvlnctt,  lit  natural  Product, 
Rmi,  Htris,  Fruilt,  uiid  Trttt.  Thr  Cam-chain  anJ  Cam-piit 
Orangri.  Thnr  Limet,  i^e.  Th/ir  Btt/f  anJ  Lichea  Fruit, 
Tht  Panflrte,  Latk-trtti,  Mulhtrry-lrftt,  and  Riit.  Their 
Land  jfnimali.  Fowl,  tame  and  wild ;  Nrti  for  l^ild  Dueit, 
Lttvilif  Fith,  Balacbaun,  Nuirmum-Pieilt,  Sfif,  and  manner  of 
Fiihing.  Thr  Marin,  Prwiiieni,  Fted  and  Caoiery.  Their 
Cheu  *r  Tea.  The  Temperature  *f  their  Air  and  tVeathtr 
tkrmghaut  the  year.  Of  the  great  Heatt  near  the  Trapieh. 
Of  the  yearly  Land  Flaadi  here,  and  eltewhere  in  the  Terrid 
Ztne,  and  »f  the  averfnving  of  the   Mi/e  in  Egypt.     Of  Slarmi 

^  tailed    Tuffitni :   and  of  the    /n/umet  the    Raint    have   «m  the 

Hanmt  at  Tmjuin,  and  iluwhere  in  the  Tarrid  Zon*. 

THE  Kingdom  of  Tonquin  is  bounded  to  the  an. 
North  and  North  East  with  China,  to  the  West  '^ 
with  the  Kingdom  of  Laos,'  to  the  S.  and  E.  with 
Cochinchina  and  the  Sea,  which  washes  a  part  of 
this  Kingdom.  As  to  the  farticular  Bounds  or  Extent  of 
it,  1  cannot  be  a  competent  Judge,  coming  to  it  by  Sea,  and 
going  up  directly  to  Cachao :  but  it  is  reasonable  tn  believe 
It  to  be  a  pretty  large  Kingdom,  by  the  many  great  Prt>- 
vinces  which  are  said  to  he  contained  in  it.  That  part  of 
the  Kingdom,  that  borders  on  the  Sea,  is  all  very  low 
land:  neither  is  there  any  Hill  to  be  seen,  but  the 
Ktcphani  Mountain,  and  a  Ridge  of  a  much  less  Heighth 
continued  from  thence  to  the  Mouth  of  the  River  of 
Dumea.  The  Land  for  about  sixty  Miles  up  in  the 
Country  is  still  very  low.  even  and  plain :  nor  is  it  much 
higher,  for  about  forty  Miles  farther  quite  to  Cachao,  and 


57' 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER^S   VOYAGES 

AN.  beyond  it ;  being  without  any  sensible  Hill,  tho'  generally 
1688  Qf  jj  tolerable  good  Heighth,  and  with  some  gentle  Ri^ngs 
here  and  there,  that  make  it  a  fine  pleasant  Champion ;  and 
the  further  Side  of  this  also  is  more  Level  than  the 
Champion  Country  it  self  about  Hean  or  Cachao.  Farther 
still  to  the  North,  beyond  all  this,  I  have  been  informed 
that  there  is  a  Chain  of  high  Mountains,  running  cross  the 
Country  from  East  to  West ;  but  I  could  get  no  Intimation 
of  what  is  beyond  them. 

The  Soil  of  this  Country  is  generally  very  rich :  That 
very  low  Land  I  speak  of  towards  the  Sea,  is  most  black 
Earth,  and  the  Mould  pretty  deep.  In  some  Places  there's 
very  strong  Clay.  The  Champion  Land  is  generally 
yellowish  or  greyish  Earth,  of  a  looser  and  more  friable 
Substance  than  the  former:  yet  in  some  Places  it  has  a 
Touch  of  the  Clay  too.  In  the  plain  Country,  near  the 
Mountains  last  mentioned,  there  are  said  to  be  some  high 
steep  Rocks  of  Marble  scattered  up  and  down  at  unequal 
Distances,  which  standing  in  that  large  plain  Savannah,  are 
like  so  many  great  Towers  or  Castles:  and  they  appear 
more  visible,  because  the  Land  about  them  is  not  burdened 
with  Wood,  as  in  some  Places  in  its  Neighbourhood. 

I  have  said  somewhat  already  of  the  great  River  and  its 
two  Branches  Rokbo  and  Domea,  wherewith  this  Country 
is  chiefly  watered :  tho'  it  is  not  destitute  of  many  other 
pleasant  Streams,  that  are  lost  in  these,  in  their  Course 
towards  the  Sea :  and  probably  there  are  many  others,  that 
run  immediately  into  the  Sea,  through  their  own  Channels, 
tho'  not  so  navigable  as  the  other.  The  Country  in  general 
is  very  well  watered ;  and  by  Means  of  the  great  Navigable 
River  and  its  Branches,  it  has  the  Opportunity  of  Foreign 
Trade.  This  rises  about  the  Mountains  in  the  North,  or 
from  beyond  them  ;  whence  running  Southerly  towards  the 
Sea,  it  passes  thro'  the  before-mentioned  Plsun  of  Marble 
Rocks,  and  by  that  Time  it  comes  to  Cachao,  which  is 
about  forty  or  fifty  Miles  to  the  South  of  the  Mountains, 
'tis  about  as  broad  as  the  Thames  at  Lambeth :  yet  so 
shallow  in  the  dry  Season,  as  that  it  may  be  forded  on 
Horseback.     At    Hean,    twenty   Miles   lower,    'tis   rather 

572 


Boroadi 


THE   PROVINCES  OF 


TONQUIN 

and  so  below  Hean 


let  than  the  Thames  at  Gravcscnd  ; 
to  the  Place  where  it  divides  it  self.  ' 

The  Kingdom  of  Tonquin  is  said  to  be  divided  into 
eight  large  Provinces,  viz,  the  East  and  West  Provinces, 
the  North  and  South  Provinces,  and  the  Province  of  Cachao 
in  the  Middle  l>etween  those  four:  which  five  I  take  to  be 
the  principal  Provinces,  making  the  Heart  of  the  Country. 
The  other  three,  which  arc  Tcnan,  Teneboa,  and  Ngcam,  lie 
more  upon  the  Borders. 

The  Province  of  Tenan  is  the  most  Kasierly,  having 
China  on  the  S.  E.  the  Island  Aynara  and  the  Sea  on  the  S. 
and  S.  W.  and  the  East  Province  on  the  N.  W.  This  is 
but  a  small  Province :  its  chicfest  Product  is  Rice. 

The  East  Province  stretches  away  from  Tenan  to  the 
Korth  Province,  having  also  China  on  its  East  side,  part  of 
(he  South  Province,  and  the  Province  of  Cachao  on  the 
West ;  and  the  Sea  on  the  South.  This  is  a  very  lai^e 
Province ;  'tis  chiefly  low  L^nd,  and  much  of  it  Islands, 
especially  the  S.  E.  part  of  it,  bordering  on  the  Sea  towards 
Tenan ;  and  here  the  Sea  makes  the  Cod  of  a  Bay.  It  has 
Abundance  of  Fishermen  inhabiting  near  the  Sea  :  but  its 
chief  Produce  is  Rice :  here  is  also  good  Pasturage,  and 
much  Cattle,  &c  Hean  is  the  chief  Place  of  this  Province, 
and  the  Scat  of  the  Mandarin  its  Governor. 

The  S.  Province  is  the  triangular  Island,  made  by 
Sea :  The  River  of  Domea  is  on  its  East-side,  dividing  it 
from  the  Ivast  Province,  and  Rockbo  on  the  West,  dividing 
it  from  Tenan ;  having  the  Sea  to  its  South.  This 
Province  is  very  low  plain  even  Land,  producing  Rice  in 
great  Abundance :  here  are  large  Pastures,  and  Abundance 
of  Fishermen  near  the  Sea. 

Teneboa  to  the  West  of  Rokbo,  has  the  West  Province 
on  its  Nonh,  Aynam  on  its  West,  and  the  Sea  on  its  South  : 
this  Province  is  also  low  Land,  chiefly  abounds  in  Rice  and 
Cattle,  and  hath  a  great  Trade  in  Fishing,  as  all  the  Sca- 
Cotst  has  in  general. 

The  Province  of  Ngeam,  hath  Teneboa  on  the  East, 
and  on  the  South  and  West  it  borders  on  Cochinchina,  and 
has  the  Wcftt  Province  on  lU  North.  This  is  a  pretty 
573 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    large  Province,  abounding  with  Rice  and  Cattle :  and  here 
'688  j^j^  always  Soldiers  kept  to  guard  the  Frontiers  from  the 
Cochinchinese. 

The  West  Provinces  hath  Ngeam  on  the  South,  the 
Kingdom  of  Laos  on  the  West,  the  Province  of  Cachao  on 
the  East,  and  on  the  North  the  North  Province.  This  is 
a  large  Province,  and  good  Champion  Land ;  rich  in  Soil, 
partly  woody,  partly  Pasture.  The  Product  of  this  Pro- 
vince is  chiefly  in  Lack ;  and  here  are  bred  a  great 
Abundance  of  Silk-worms  for  making  Silk. 

The  North  Province  is  a  large  Tract  of  Land^  making 
the  North-side  of  this  whole  Kingdom.  It  hath  the 
Kingdom  of  Laos  on  the  West,  and  China  on  the  East  and 
North,  the  Kingdom  of  Bao  or  Baotan  on  the  North  West, 
and  on  the  South  Borders  on  three  of  the  [nincipal 
Provinces  of  Tonquin,  viz.  the  West  Province  that  of 
Cachao,  and  the  East  Province,  The  North  Province, 
as  it  is  large,  so  it  has  Variety  of  Land  and  Soil ;  a  great 
deal  of  plain  Champion  Land,  and  many  high  Mountains 
which  yield  Gold,  &c.  The  wild  Elephants  of  thb 
Country  are  found  most  on  these  Mountains.  The  other 
Parts  of  the  Province  produce  Lack  and  Silk,  &c. 

The  Province  of  Cachao,  in  the  Heart  of  the  Kingdom, 
lies  between  the  East,  West,  North,  and  South  Provinces  : 
*tis  a  Champion  pleasant  Country :  the  Soil  is  yellow  or 
grey  Earth :  and  'tis  pretty  woody,  with  some  &ivannahs. 
It  abounds  with  the  two  principal  Commodities  of  their 
Trade,  viz.  Lack  and  Silk,  and  has  some  Rice :  Nor  are 
any  of  the  Provinces  destitute  of  these  Commodities,  tho' 
in  different  Proportions,  each  according  to  the  respective 
Soil. 

This  Country  has  of  its  own  Growth  all  Necessaries  for 
the  Life  of  Man.  They  have  little  Occasion  for  eatable 
Roots,  having  such  Plenty  of  Rice ;  yet  they  have  Yams 
and  Potatoes  for  Variety  ;  which  would  thrive  here  as  well 
as  any  where,  were  the  Natives  industrious  to  propagate 
them. 

The  Land  is  every  where  cloathed  with  Herbage  of  one 
kind  or  other ;  but  the  dry  Land  has  the  same  Fate  that 

574 


i 


HERBAGE— WILD   PURSLAIN— FRUITS 

most  dry  Lxnds  have  between  the  Troplcks,  to  be  over-run    ah.   , 
with  Purslain  ;  which  growing  wild,  ind  being  pernicious  '*•* 
to  other  tender  Herbs  and  Plants,  they  arc  at  the  Pains  to 
weed  it  out  of  their  Fields  and  Gardens,  though  'tis  very 
sweet,  and  makes  a  good  Sallad  for  a  hot  Country. 

There  is  a  Sort  of  Herb  very  common  in  this  Country, 
which  grows  wild  in  stagnant  Ponds,  and  floats  on  the 
Surface  of  the  Water.  It  has  a  narrow,  long,  green  thick 
Leaf.  It  is  much  esteemed  and  eaten  by  the  Natives,  who 
commend  it  for  a  very  wholesome  Herb,  and  say  that  'tis 
good  to  expel  Poyson.  This  Country  produces  many  other 
Sorts  of  wild  Herbs ;  and  their  Gardens  also  arc  well  fur- 
nished with  pleasant  and  wholesome  ones,  especially  many 
Onions,  of  which  here  arc  great  Plenty. 

Plantains  and  Bonanoes  grow  and  thrive  here  as  well  as 
any  where,  but  they  are  used  here  only  as  Fruit,  and  not 
;for  Bread,  as  in  many  Places  of  America.  Besides  these 
lere  are  divers  sorts  of  excellent  Fruits,  both  Ground-fruit 
and  Trcc-fruit.  The  Ground-fruits  arc  Pumpkins,  Melons, 
Finc-applcs,  &c.  the  Tree-fruits  are  Mangoes,'  a  few 
Oranges,  Limes,  Coco-nuts,  Guava's,*  Mulberries,  their 
much  esteemed  Belle,  a  Fruit  called  Lichea.*  &c.  The 
Oranges  are  of  divers  Sorts,  and  two  of  them  more 
excellent  than  the  rest.  One  Sort  is  called  Cam-chain,  the 
other  is  call'd  Cam-quit.  Cam,  in  the  Tonquincse 
Language,  signifies  an  Orange,  but  what  the  distinguishing 
Words  Chain  and  Quit  signifie  I  know  not. 

The  Cam-chain*  is  a  large  Orange,  of  a  yellowish 
Colour:  The  Rind  is  pretty  thick  and  rough;  and  the 
Inside  is  yellow  like  Amber.  It  has  a  most  fragrant  Smell, 
and  the  Taste  is  very  delicious.  This  Sort  of  Orange  is 
the  best  that  I  did  ever  taste;  1  believe  there  are  not  better 
in  the  World :  A  Man  may  cat  freely  of  them ;  for  they 
arc  so  innocent  that  they  are  not  denied  to  such  as  h>7e 
Fercn,  and  other  sick  People. 

'  Ummr^trm  mdiat, 

•  t'tiMum  *oma/mim  atid  prnfrmm. 

■  Lkbn :  NffJuimm  UI(M. 

'  Citrus  imUm. 

575 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  The  Cam-quit  *  is  a  very  small  round  Fruit,  not  above 

'^^  half  so  big  as  the  former.  It  is  of  a  deep  red  Colour,  and 
the  Rind  is  very  smooth  and  thin.  The  Inside  also  is 
very  red ;  the  Taste  is  not  inferiour  to  the  Cam-chain,  but 
it  is  accounted  very  unwholesome  Fruit,  especially  to  such 
as  are  subject  to  Fluxes ;  for  it  both  creates  and  hdghtens 
that  Distemper.  These  two  Sorts  are  very  plentiful  and 
cheap,  and  they  are  in  Season  from  Octobo-  till  February, 
but  then  the  Cham-chain  becomes  redder,  and  the  Rind  is 
also  thinner.  The  other  Sorts  of  Oranges  are  not  much 
esteemed. 

The  Limes*  of  Tonquin  are  the  largest  I  ever  saw. 
They  are  commonly  as  big  as  an  ordinary  Limon,  but 
rounder.  The  Rind  is  of  a  pale  yellow  Colour  when  ripe ; 
very  thin  and  smooth.  They  are  extraordinary  juicy,  but 
not  near  so  sharp  or  tart  in  Taste  as  the  West-Indian 
Limes. 

Coco-nuts  and  Guava's  do  thrive  here  very  well :  but 
there  are  not  many  of  the  latter. 

The  Betle  of  Tonquin  is  said  to  be  the  best  in  India ; 
there  is  great  Plenty  of  it ;  and  *tis  most  esteemed  when 
it  is  young,  green  and  tender;  for  *tis  then  very  juicy. 
At  Mindanao  also  they  like  it  best  green :  but  in  other 
Places  of  the  East-Indies  it  is  commonly  chew*d  when  it  is 
hard  and  dry. 

The  Lichea  is  another  delicate  Fruit.  *Tis  as  big  as  a 
small  Pear,  somewhat  long  shaped,  of  a  reddish  Colour,  the 
Rind  pretty  thick  and  rough,  the  Inside  white,  inclosing  a 
large  black  Kernal,  in  Shape  like  a  Bean. 

The  Country  is  in  some  part  woody ;  but  the  low 
Land  in  general  is  either  grassy  Pasture,  or  Rice  Fields, 
only  thick  set  with  small  Groves,  which  stand  scattering 
very  pleasantly  over  all  the  low-Country.  The  Trees  in 
the  Groves  are  of  divers  Sorts,  and  most  unknown  to  us. 
There  is  good  Timber  for  building  either  Ships  or  Houses 
and  indifferent  good  Masts  may  here  be  had. 

There  is  a  Tree  called  by  the  Natives  Pone,  chiefly  used 

*  Perhaps  the  mandarin. 

'  Citrus  Decumana  (the  shaddock)  and  C  medUa, 

576 


r 


MULBERRY  TREES— RICE 


making  Gibintts,  or  other  Wares  to  be  lackrcd.  This 
is  a  soft  Sort  of  Wooii,  not  much  unlike  Fir,  but  not  so  ' 
serviceable.  Another  Tree  grows  in  this  Country  that 
yields  the  Lack,  with  which  Cabinets  and  other  fine  Things 
are  overlaid.  These  grow  plentifully  in  some  Places, 
especially  in  the  Champion  Lands.  Here  arc  also  Mulberry 
Trees  in  great  Plenty,  to  feed  the  Silk-worms,  from  whence 
comes  the  chief  Trade  in  the  Country.  The  Leaves  of  the 
old  Trees  are  not  so  nourishing  to  the  Silk-worms,  as  those 
of  the  young  Trees ;  and  therefore  they  raise  Crops  of 
young  ones  every  Year,  to  feed  the  Worms;  for  when  the 
Season  is  over,  the  young  Trees  arc  plucki  up  by  the 
Roots,  and  more  planted  against  the  next  year;  so  the 
Natives  suffer  none  of  these  Trees  to  grow  to  bear  Fruit. 
I  heard  of  no  Mulberries  kept  for  eating,  hut  some  few 
raised  by  our  English  Merchants  at  Hean ;  and  these  bear 
but  small  hungry  Fruit. 

Here  is  good  Plenty  of  Rice,  especially  in  the  low 
Land,  that  is  tatned  by  the  overflowing  Rivers.  They  have 
two  Crops  every  Year,  with  great  Inaease,  if  they  have 
seasonable  Rains  and  Floods.  One  Crop  is  in  May,  and 
the  other  in  November:  and  though  the  low  Land  is 
sometimes  overflown  with  Water  in  the  Time  of  Harvest, 
yet  they  matter  it  not,  but  gather  the  Crop  and  fetch  it 
Home  wet  in  their  Canoas ;  and  making  the  Rice  fast  in 
small  Bundles,  hang  it  up  on  their  Houses  to  dry.  Thts 
serves  them  for  Bread-corn  ;  and  as  the  Country  is  very 
kindly  for  it,  so  their  Inhabitants  live  chiefly  of  it. 

Of  Ljind-Animals  in  this  Country  there  arc  lilephanis. 
Horses,  Buffaloes,  Bullocks,  Gusts,  Deer,  a  few  Sheep  for 
the  King,  Hogs,  Dogs,  Cats,  Lizards,  Snakes,  Scorpions, 
Ccnupccs,  Toads,  Frogt,  &c.  The  Country  is  so  very 
populous,  that  they  have  but  few  Deer  or  wild  Game  for 
Hunting,  unless  it  l>e  in  the  remoter  Parts  of  the  Kingdom. 
But  they  have  Abundance  of  Fowls  both  tame  and  wild. 
The  tame  Fowls  arc  Cocks  and  Hens,  and  Ducks  also  in 

:  Plenty,  of  the  same  Sort  wirh  ours.  The  Inhabiunis 
iRve  little  Houses  made  purposely  for  the  Ducks  to  lay 

'  l%g>  ii<  driving  tbcm  in  every  Night  in  laying  Tittte, 
577  3  o 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AS.   and  letting  them  out  again  in  the  Morning.     There  are 
'^^  also   some   Geese,   Parrots,   Partridges,   Parakites,  Turtie- 
Doves,  &c.  with   many  sorts  of  smaller  Birds.     Of  wild 
Water-fowls,  they  have  Ducks,  Widgeons,  Teals,  Herons, 
Pellicans,  and  Crab-catchers,  (which  1  shall  describe  in  the 
Bay  of  Gtmpeachy)  and  other  smaller  Water-fowls.     The 
Duck,  Widgeon,  and  Teal  are  innumerable :  They  breed 
here  in  the  Months  of  May,  June,  and  July  ;  then  thcy^ 
fly  only  in  Couples :  but  from  October  to  March  you  wil"*^ 
see  over  all  the  low  watry  Lands  great  Companies  together 
and   I  have    no  where  .seen  such  large  Flights,  nor  suc^ 
Plenty  of  Game.     They  are  very  shy  since  the  English  ai^^ 
Dutch  settled  here  ;  for  now  the  Natives  as  well  as  th^r 
shoot  them :  but  before  their  Arrival  the  Tonquinese  tool 
them  only  with  Nets,  neither  is  this  Custom  left  oflF  ycf. 
The  Net  that  is  used  for  this  Game  is  made  square,  2ad 
either   bigger   or   less   according   as   they  have  Occasion. 
They  fix  two  Poles  about  ten  or  eleven  Foot  high,  upright 
in  the  Ground,  near  the  Ponds,  where  the  Ducks  haunt; 
and   the    Net  has   a  Head-cord,  which   is   stretched  out 
streight,  made  from  the  Top  of  one  Pole  to  the  other; 
from  whence  the  lower  part  of  the  Net  hangs  down  loose 
towards  the  Ground ;  and  when  in  the  Evening  they  fly 
towards  the  Pond,  many  of  them  strike  against  the  Net, 
and  are  there  entangled. 

There  is  a  kind  of  Locust  in  Tonquin,  in  great  Abun- 
dance. This  Creature  is  about  the  Bigness  of  the  Top  of 
a  Man's  Finger,  and  as  long  as  the  first  Joynt.  It  breeds 
in  the  Earth,  especially  in  the  Banks  of  Rivers  and  Ditches 
in  the  low  Country.  In  the  Months  of  January  and 
February,  which  is  the  Season  of  taking  them,  being  then 
only  seen,  this  Creature  first  comes  out  of  the  Earth  ui 
huge  Swarms,  it  is  then  of  a  whitish  Colour,  having  two 
small  Wings,  like  the  Wings  of  a  Bee :  at  its  first  coming 
out  of  the  Earth  it  takes  its  Flight ;  but  for  Want  or 
Strength  or  Use  falls  down  again  in  a  short  Time.  Such 
as  strive  to  fly  over  the  River,  do  commonly  fall  down  into 
the  Water  and  are  drowned,  or  become  a  Prey  to  the  Fish 
of  the  River,  or  are  carried  out  into  the  Sea  to  be  devoured 

578 


FROGS— FISH— BALACHAUN 

[there :  But  the  Natives  in  these  Months  watch  the  Rivers,  i 
and  take  up  thence  Multitudes,  skimming  thcni  from  off  ' 
the  Water  with  little  Nets.     They  cat  them  (rcsh,  broiled 
on  ihc  Coats ;  or  pickle  them  lo  keep.     They  arc  plump 
and  fat,  and  are  much  esteemed  by  Rich  and  I'oor,  as  good 
wholesome  Food,  cither  fresh  or  pickled. 

The  Rivers  and  Ponds  art  stored  with  divers  Sorts  of 
excellent  i'ish,  besides  Abundance  of  Kri^;s,  which  they 
angle  for,  being  highly  esteemed  by  the  Tonquinesc.  The 
Sea  too  contributes  much  towards  the  Support  of  poor 
People,  by  yielding  plentiful  Stores  uf  Msh,  that  swarm  on 
this  Coast  in  their  Seasons,  and  which  are  commonly  prc- 
ferr'd  before  the  River  Kish.  Of  these  here  are  divers 
Sorts,  besides  Sea-Turtle,  which  frequently  come  ashore 
on  the  sandy  Bays  in  their  Seasons  to  lay  their  Eggs. 
Here  are  also  both  Land-crabs  and  Sea-crabs  good  Store, 
and  other  ShcU-fish,  viz.  Craw-fish,  Shrimps,  and  Prawns, 
Here  is  one  Sort  of  small  Fish  much  like  an  Anchovy, 
both  in  Shape  and  Size,  which  is  very  good  pickled. 
I  There  are  other  Sorts  of  small  Kish,  which  1  know  not  the 
frames  of.  One  Sort  of  them  comes  in  great  Shoals  near 
1  the  Shore,  and  these  the  Fishermen  with  their  Nets  take  so 
plentifully  as  to  load  their  Bunts  with  them.  Among  these 
they  generally  take  a  great  many  Shrimps  in  their  Nets, 
which  they  carry  ashore  mixt  together  as  they  take  them, 
and  make  ilalachaun  with  them, 

Balachaun  is  a  Compoution  of  a  strong  Savour;  yet  a 
very  delightsome  Dish  to  the  Natives  of  this  Country. 
To  nuke  it,  they  throw  the  Mixture  of  Shrimps  and  small 
FiUi  into  a  sort  of  weak  Pickle  made  with  Salt  and  Water, 
and  put  it  into  a  tight  earthen  Vessel  or  Jar.  The  Pickle 
being  thus  Weak,  it  keeps  not  the  Fish  6rm  and  hard, 
neither  is  it  probably  vt  designed,  for  the  Fish  arc  never 
gutted.  Therefore  in  a  short  Time  they  turn  all  to  a 
Mash  in  the  Vessel ;  and  when  they  have  tain  thus  a  good 
while,  so  that  the  Fish  is  reduced  to  a  Pip,  they  then  draw 
ofF  the  Liquor  into  fresh  Jars,  and  [Tcscrve  it  for  use. 
The  masht  Fish  that  remains  behind  is  called  Balachaun, 
tnd  the  Liquor  pour'd  off  U  called  Nuke-mum.  The  poor 
579 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  People  eat  the  Balachaun  with  their  Rice.  *Tis  rank- 
'688  scented,  yet  the  Taste  is  not  altogether  unpleasant;  but 
rather  savory,  after  one  is  a  little  used  to  it.  The  Nuke- 
mum  is  of  a  pale  brown  Colour,  inclining  to  grey;  and 
pretty  clear.  It  is  also  very  savory  and  used  as  a  good 
Sauce  for  Fowls,  not  only  by  the  Natives,  but  also  by 
many  Europeans,  who  esteem  it  equal  with  Soy.  I  have 
been  told  that  Soy  is  made  partly  with  a  fishy  Composition, 
and  it  seems  most  likely  by  the  Taste :  tho*  a  Gentleman 
of  my  Acquaintance,  who  was  very  intimate  with  one  that 
sailed  often  from  Tonquin  to  Japan,  from  whence  the  true 
Soy  comes,  told  me,  that  it  was  made  only  with  Wheat, 
and  a  Sort  of  Beans  mixt  with  Water  and  Salt. 

Their  way  of  Fishing  differs  little  from  ours :  in  the 
Rivers  they  take  some  of  their  Fish  with  Hook  and  Line, 
others  with  Nets  of  several  Sorts.  At  the  Mouths  of  the 
Rivers  they  set  Nets  against  the  Stream  or  Tide.  These 
have  two  long  Wings  opening  on  each  Side  the  Mouth  of 
the  Net,  to  guide  the  Fish  into  it ;  where  passing  through 
a  narrow  Neck,  they  are  caught  in  a  Bag  at  the  farther 
End. 

Where  the  River*s  Mouth  is  so  wide,  that  the  Wing  of 
the   Net   will   not  reach   from  side  to  side,   as   at   Batsha 
,    particularly  it  will  not,  there  they  supply  that  Defect,  with 
long   slender    Canes,   which   they  stick    upright    near  one 
another  in  a  Row :  for  on  both  Sides  of  the  River,  when 
the  Tide  runs  strong  (which  is  the  Time  that  the  Fish  arc 
moving)  the  limber  Canes  make  such  a  rattling  by  striking 
against  each  other,  that  thereby  the  F^ish  are  scared  from 
thence  towards  the  Mouth  of  the  Net,  in  the  Middle  of 
the  Stream.     P'arther  up  the  River,  they  have  Nets  made 
square  like  a  great  Sheet.     This  Sort  hath  two  long  Poles 
laid  across  each  other.     At  this  crossing  of  the   Poles  a 
long  Rope  is  fastned  ;  and  the  Net  hangs  down  in  a  Bag 
by  its  Corners  from  them.     To  manage  it  there  is  a  sub- 
stantial Post,  set  upright  and  firm  in  the  River ;  and  the 
Top  of  it  may  be  eight  or  ten  Foot  above  the  Water.    On 
the  Top  of  this  Post  there  is  a  Mortice  made  to  receive 
a  long  Pole,  that  lies  athwart  like  the  Beam  of  a  Balance: 

580 


FISHING— MARKETS— PROVISIONS 

to  the  heavier  End  of  which  they  tic  the  Rope,  which  holds 
the  Net ;  and  to  the  other  End  another  Rope  to  pull  up  '*** 
the  Net  on  Occasion.  The  Fishermen  sink  it  with  Stones 
to  the  River's  Bottom,  and  when  they  sec  any  Fish  come 
over  it,  one  suddenly  pulls  the  Rope  at  the  opposite  End 
of  the  Beam,  and  heaves  Net  and  Fish  out  of  the  Water. 
They  take  a  great  deal  of  Fish  this  way :  and  sometimes 
they  use  Drag-Ncts,  which  go  quite  a-croas,  and  sweep  the 
River, 

In  the  stagnant    Ponds,  such  as  the  Mandarins  have 

immonly  about  their  Houses,  they  go  in  and  trouble  the 

'ater  with  their  Feet,  till  'tis  all  muddy  and  thick:  and 

as  the  Fish  rise  to  the  Surface  they  take  what  they  please 

with  small  Nets,  fastned  to  a  Hoop,  at  the  End  of  a  Pole. 

For  all  these  Sorts  of  Provision  there  arc  Markets  duly 
kept  all  over  Tonquin  one  in  the  Week,  in  a  Neighbour- 
hotxl  of  four  or  five  Villages;  and  held  at  each  of  them 
successively  in  its  Order  :  so  that  the  same  Village  lias  not 
the  Market  returned  to  it  till  four  or  five  Weeks  after. 
These  Markets  are  abundantly  more  stor'd  with  Rite  (as 
being  their  chief  Subsistence,  especially  the  poorer  Sort) 
than  cither  with  Flesh  or  Fish,  yet  wants  there  not  for 
Pork,  and  young  Pigs  good  Store,  Ducks  and  Hens, 
Plenty  of  Eggs,  Fish  great  and  small,  frvsh  and  salted 
Balachaun  and  Nuke-Mum  ;  with  all  Sorts  of  Roots,  Herbs, 
and  Fruits,  even  in  these  Country  Markets.  But  at  Cachao, 
where  there  are  Markets  kept  every  day,  they  have  besides 
these.  Beef  of  Bullocks,  BufiaIoes<fiesh, Goats- flesh.  Horse- 
flesh, Cats  and  Dogs,  (as  I  have  been  told)  and  Locusts. 

They  dress  thetr  Food  very  cleanly,  and  make  it  savory  : 
fur  which  they  have  several  Ways  unknown  in  Europe  ;  but 
they  have  many  Sorts  of  Dishes  that  would  turn  the 
Stomach  of  a  Stranger,  which  yet  they  themselves  like  very 
well,  as  particularly,  a  Dish  of  nw  Pnrk,  which  is  very 
cheap  ana  common.  This  is  only  Pork  cut  and  minced 
very  small,  fat  and  lean  together;  which  being  afierwardt 
jnade  up  in  Balls,  or  Rolls  like  Sausages,  and  prcsi  very 
^Wd  together,  ts  then  neatly  wrapt  up  in  clean  Leaves, 
witliHil.   more    ado,   served    up  to    the    TaWe.      Rnr 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.    Beef  is  another  Dish,  much  esteemed  at   Cachao.     When 
'^^  they  kill  a  Bullock  they  singe  the  Hair  ofF  with  Fire,  as  we 
singe  Bacon-Hogs  in  England.     Then  they  open  it;  and 
while  the  Flesh  is  yet  hot,  they  cut  good  Collops  from  off 
the  lean  Parts,  and  put  them  into   a  very  tart  Vinegar, 
where  it  remains  three  or  four  Hours  longer,   till  it   is 
sufficiently  soaked,  and  then,  without  more  Trouble,  they 
take  it  out,  and  eat  it  with  great  Delight.     As  for  Horse- 
flesh, 1  know  not  whether  they  kill  any  purposely  for  the 
Shambles ;  or  whether  they  only  do  it,  when  they  are  not 
likely  to  live;   as   I    have   seen  them    do    their   working 
Bullocks  at  Galicia  in  Old  Spain ;  where  the  Cattle  falling 
down  with  Labour,  and  being  so  poor  and  tired  that  they 
cannot  rise,  they  are  slaughtered,  and  sent  to  Market ;  and 
I  think  I  never  eat  worse  Beef  than  at  the  Groin.     The 
Horse-flesh  comes  to   Market  at  Cachao  very  frequently, 
and  is  as  much  esteemed  as  Beef.     Elephants  they  eat  also ; 
and  the  Trunk  of  this  Beast  is  an  acceptable  Present  for  a 
Nobleman,  and  that  too  tho'  the  Beast  dyes  with  Age  or 
Sickness.     For  here  are  but  few  wild  Elephants,  and  those 
so  shy,  that  they  are  not  easily  taken.    But  the  King  having 
a   great   Number  of  tame   Elephants,   when    one  of  these 
dyes,  'tis  given  to  the  Poor,  who  presently  fetch  away  the 
Flesh,  but  the  Trunk  is  cut  in  Pieces,  and  presented  to  the 
Mandarins.     Dogs  and  Cats  are  killed  purposely  for  the 
Shambles,  and  their  Flesh  is  much  esteemed  by  People  of 
the  best  Fashion,  as  1  have  been  credibly  informed.     Great 
yellow  Frogs  also  are  much  admired,  especially  when  they 
come  fresh  out  of  the  Pond.     They  have  many  other  such 
choice  Dishes :  and  in  all  the  Villages,  at  any  Time  of  the 
Day,  be  it  Market-day  or  not,  there  are  several  to  be  sold 
by    poor   People,   who  make    it   their  Trade.     The  most 
common  Sorts  of  Cookeries,  next  to  boiled  Rice,  is  to  dress 
little  Bits  of  Pork,  spitted  five  or  six  of  them  at  once  on  a 
small  Skiver,  and  roasted.     In  the  Markets  also,  and  daily 
in  every  Village,  there  are  Women  sitting  in  the  Streets, 
with  a  Pipkin  over  a  small  Fire,  full  of  Chau,  as  they  call 
it,  a  Sort  of  very  ordinary  Tea,  of  a  reddish  brown  Colour, 
and  'tis  their  ordinary  Drink. 

582 


especially  in 

I'or    the   Seasons   of  thi 


OF  THE  YEAR— HEATS 

1  of  Tonqiiin  is  in  general  healthy  enough,    an. 


Season,  when  also  ii 


~t  n  IS  very  ucltghtsomc,  ' 
Year  at  Tonquin  and  all  the 
Countries  between  the  Tropicks,  arc  distinguished  into  Wet 
and  Dry.  as  properly  as  others  arc  into  Winter  and  Summer : 
But  as  the  Alteration  from  Winter  to  Summer,  and  vug 
vend  is  not  made  of  a  sudden,  but  with  the  interchange- 
able Weather  of  Spring  and  Autumn  ;  so  also  towards  the 
Knd  of  the  dry  Season,  there  are  some  gentle  Showers  now 
and  then,  that  precede  the  violent  wet  Months;  and  again 
toward  the  End  of  these,  several  fair  Days  that  introduce 
the  dry  Time.  These  Seasons  arc  generally  much  alike  at 
the  same  Time  of  the  Year  in  all  Places  of  the  Torrid 
■ijZonc,  on  the  same  Side  of  the  Equator :  but  for  two  or 
■three  Degrees  on  each  Side  of  it,  the  Weather  is  more  mixt 
and  uncertain,  (tho'  inclining  to  the  wet  extreme)  and  is 
often  contrary  to  that  which  is  then  settled  on  the  same 
Sv\c  of  the  Equator  more  toward  the  Tropick.  So  that 
even  when  the  wet  Season  is  set  in,  in  the  Northern  Parts 
of  the  Torrid  Zone,  it  may  yet  be  dry  Weather  two  or 
three  Degrees  North  of  the  Line :  and  the  same  may  be 
said  of  the  contrary  Latitudes  and  Seasons,  This  1  speak 
with  Respect  to  the  Dryness  or  Moisture  of  Countries  in 
the  Tomd  Tmik  :  but  it  may  also  hold  go(xl  of  their  Heat 
or  Cold,  generally:  for  as  to  all  these  Qualities  there  is  a 
further  Difference  arises  from  the  Make  or  Situation  of  the 
Land,  or  other  accidental  Causes,  besides  what  depends  on 
the  respective  Latitude  or  Regard  to  the  Sun.  Thus  the 
Bay  of  Campcachy  in  the  West-Indies,  and  thai  of  Bengal 
in  the  East,  in  much  the  same  Latitude,  are  exceeding  hot 
and  moist ;  and  whether  their  Situation,  being  very  low 
C'lunirics,  and  the  Scarcity  and  Kaintncss  of  the  Sea- 
breezes,  as  in  most  Bays,  may  not  contribute  hereunto,  1 
■feave  others  to  judge.  Yet  even  as  to  the  Latitudes  of 
Places,  lying  near  the  Tmpicka  they  are  generally 
on  that  Accf>unt  alone  more  inclined  to  great  Heats, 
Places  near  the  Equator.  This  is  what  I  have  cx- 
^nccd  in  nuny  places  in  such  Latitudes  both  in  the 
ist  and  West-Indies,  that  the  hottest  parts  of  the  World 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER^S    VOYAGES 

AN.  arc  these  near  the  Tropicks,  especially  3  or  4  Degrees 
1688  ^thin  them ;  sensibly  hotter  than  under  the  Line  it  self. 
Many  reasons  may  be  assigned  for  this,  beside  the  accidental 
ones  from  the  make  of  the  particular  Countries,  Tropical 
Winds,  or  the  like.  For  the  longest  Day  at  the  Equator 
never  exceeds  12  Hours,  and  the  Night  b  always  at  the 
same  length :  But  near  the  Tropicks  the  longest  Day  is 
about  13  Hours  and  an  half;  and  an  Hour  and  an  half 
being  also  taken  from  the  Night,  what  with  the  length  of 
the  Day,  and  the  shortness  of  the  Night,  there  is  a  difference 
of  three  Hours  :  which  is  very  considerable.  Besides  which, 
at  such  Places  as  are  about  3  Degrees  within  the  Tropicks, 
or  in  the  Lat.  of  20  Deg.  N.  the  Sun  comes  within  2  or  3 
Degrees  of  the  Zenith  in  the  beginning  of  May;  and 
having  past  the  Zenith,  goes  not  above  2  or  3  Degrees 
beyond  it,  before  it  returns  and  passeth  the  Zenith  once 
more ;  and  by  this  means  is  at  least  three  Months  within  4 
Degrees  of  the  Zenith :  so  that  they  have  the  Sun  in  a 
manner  over  their  Heads  from  the  beginning  of  May,  till 
the  latter  end  of  July.  Whereas  when  the  Sun  comes 
under  the  Line,  in  March  or  September,  it  immediately 
posts  away  to  the  North  or  the  South,  and  is  not  20  Day's 
in  passing  from  3  Degrees  on  one  side,  to  3  Degrees  on  the 
other  side  the  Line.  So  that  by  his  small  stay  there, 
the  Heat  cannot  be  answerable  to  what  it  is  near  the 
Tropick,  where  he  so  long  continues  in  a  manner  Vertical 
at  Noon,  and  is  so  much  longer  above  the  Horizon  each 
particular  Day,  with  the  intervening  of  a  shorter  Night. 

But  to  return  to  Tonquin.  During  the  wet  Months 
there  'tis  excessive  hot,  especially  whenever  the  Sun  breaks 
out  of  the  Clouds,  and  there  is  then  but  little  Wind 
stirring :  And  I  have  been  told  by  a  Gentleman  who  lived 
there  many  Years,  that  he  thought  it  was  the  hottest  Place 
that  ever  he  was  in,  though  he  had  been  in  many  other 
Parts  of  India.  And  as  to  the  Rains,  it  has  not  the  least 
share  of  them,  though  neither  altogether  the  greatest  of 
what  I  have  met  with  in  the  Torrid  Zone ;  and  even  in 
the  same  Latitude,  and  on  the  same  side  of  the  Equator. 
The  wet  Season   begins  here   the  latter  End  of  April,  or 

584 


FLOODS— OVERFLOW   OF  THE  NILE 

the  beginning  of  May;  and  holds  till  the  Utter  End  of  ak. 
August,  in  which  Time  are  very  violent  Kains,  some  of  '*™ 
many   Hours,   others  of  two  or  three   Days  continuance. 
Yet  arc  not  these  Rains  without  some  considerable  intervals 
of  fair  Weather,  especially  toward  the  beginning  or  end 
of  the  Season. 

By  these  Kains  are  caus'd  those  Land-flnnds,  which 
never  fail  in  these  Countries  between  the  Tropicks  at 
their  annual  Periods ;  all  the  Rivers  then  overflowing  their 
Banks.  This  is  a  thing  so  well  known  to  all  who  are 
any  way  acquainted  with  the  Torrid  Zone,  that  the  Cause 
of  the  overflowing  of  the  Nile,  to  find  out  which  the 
Ancients  set  thctr  Wits  so  much  upon  the  Rack,  and 
fancied  melting  of  snows,  and  blowing  of  Etesia,  and  I 
know  not  what,  is  now  no  longer  a  Secret.  For  these 
Floods  must  needs  discharge  themselves  upon  such  low 
Lands  as  lie  in  their  way;  as  the  Land  of  Egypt  docs 
with  respect  to  the  Nile,  coming  a  great  way  from  within 
the  Torrid  Zone,  and  falling  down  from  the  higher 
Ethiopia.  And  any  one  who  will  be  at  the  Pains  to  com- 
pare the  Titnc  of  the  Land-flood  in  Egypt  with  that  of 
the  Torrid  Zone  in  any  of  the  parts  of  it  along  which  the 
Nile  runs,  will  find  that  of  Egypt  so  much  later  than  the 
other,  as  'twill  be  thought  reasonable  to  allow  for  the 
daily  Prioress  of  the  Waters  along  so  vast  a  tract  of 
Ground.  They  might  have  made  the  same  wonderment 
of  any  other  Rivers  which  run  any  long  Course  from  out 
the  Torrid  Zone :  but  they  knowing  only  the  North 
Temperate  Zone,  and  the  Nile  being  the  only  great  River 
known  to  come  thither  a  great  way  from  a  Country  near 
the  Line,  they  made  that  only  the  subject  of  their  enquiry  : 
but  the  same  effect  must  also  follow  from  any  great  River 
that  should  run  from  out  of  the  Torrid  Zone  into  the 
South  Temperate  Zone.  And  as  to  the  Torrid  Zone,  the 
yearly  Floods,  and  their  cause,  are  every  where  as  well 
known  by  People  there,  as  the  Rivers  themselves.  In 
America  particularly,  in  Campeachy  Rivers,  in  Rio  Grande, 
and  others,  'tis  a  vast  havnck  ia  made  by  these  Floods; 
s  Trees  of  an  incredible  bigness; 
5«5 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER^S   VOYAGES 

AN.  and  these  Floods  always  come  at  the  stated  season  of  the 
1688  Year.  In  the  dry  part  of  Peru,  along  the  G>asts  of  the 
Pacifick  Sea,  where  it  never  Rains,  as  it  seldom  does  in 
Egypt,  they  have  not  only  Floods,  but  Rivers  themselves, 
made  by  the  annual  falling  of  Rain  (Hi  the  Mountains 
within  Land ;  the  Channels  of  which  are  dry  all  the  rest 
of  the  Year.  This  I  have  observed  concerning  the  River 
Ylo,  on  the  Coast  of  Peru,  in  my  former  Volume,  p.  122. 
But  it  has  this  difference  from  the  Floods  of  Egypt,  that 
besides  its  being  a  River  in  the  Torrid  Zone,  *tis  also  in 
South  Latitude,  and  so  overflows  at  a  contrary  Season  of 
the  Year;  to  wit,  at  such  Time  as  the  Sun  being  in 
Southern  Signs,  causes  the  Rains  and  Floods  on  that  side 
the  Line. 

But  to  return  from  this  digression,  in  August  the 
weather  at  Tonquin  is  more  moderate,  as  to  heat  or  wet, 
yet  not  without  some  showers,  and  September  and  October 
are  more  temperate  still :  yet  the  worst  weather  in  all  the 
Year  for  Seamen,  is  the  one  of  the  3  Months  last  men- 
tioned :  for  then  the  violent  Storms,  called  Tufibons 
(Typhones)  are  expected.  These  Winds  are  so  very  fierce, 
that  for  Fear  of  them  the  Chinese  that  trade  thither,  will 
not  stir  out  of  Harbour  till  the  End  of  October :  after 
which  Month  there  is  no  more  Danger  of  any  violent 
Storms,  till  the  next  Year. 

TufFoons  are  a  particular  kind  of  violent  Storms, 
blowing  on  the  Coast  of  Tonquin,  and  the  neighbouring 
Coasts  in  the  Months  of  July,^  August,  and  September. 
They  commonly  happen  near  the  Full  or  Change  of  the 
Moon,  and  are  usually  preceded  by  very  fair  Weather, 
small  Winds  and  a  clear  Sky.  Those  small  Winds  veer 
from  the  common  Trade  of  that  Time  of  the  Year,  which 
is  here  at  S.  W.  and  shuffles  about  to  the  N.  and  N.  E. 
Before    the    Storm    comes    there  appears  a  boding  Cloud 

*  Cf.  the  "Typhoon  rh>'nie"  :— 

"June,  too  soon. 
July,  stand  by. 
August,  look  out  you  must. 
September,  remember. 
Octol^er,  all  over." 

586 


TUFFOONS  OR  TYPHOONS,  STORMS 

'in  the  N.  K.  which  is  very  black  near  the  Horizon,  hut 
towards  the  upper  Edge  it  looks  of  a  dark  Copper-colour,  ' 
and  higher  still  it  is  mighter,  and  afterwards  It  fades  to  a 
whitish  glaring  Colour,  at  the  very  Kdgc  of  the  Cloud. 
This  Cloud  appears  very  amazing  and  ghastly,  and  is 
sometimes  seen  twelve  I  lours  before  the  Storm  comes. 
When  that  Cloud  begins  to  move  apace,  you  may  expect 
the  Wind  presently.  It  comes  on  fierce,  and  blows  very 
violent  at  N.  K.  twelve  Hours  more  or  less.  It  h  also 
commonly  accompanied  with  terrible  Claps  of  Thunder, 
large  and  frequent  flashes  of  Ughtning,  and  excessive  hard 
Rain,  When  the  Wind  begins  to  abate  it  dies  away 
suddenly,  and  falling  flat  calm,  it  continues  so  an  Hour, 
more  or  less :  then  the  Wind  comes  about  to  the  S,  W. 
and  it  blows  and  rains  as  fierce  from  thence,  as  it  did 
bcture  at  N.  E.  and  as  long. 

November  and  December  arc  2  very  dry,  wholcsom, 
warm  and  pleasant  Months.  January,  February,  and 
March  are  pretty  dry :  but  then  you  have  thick  Fogs  in 
the  Morning,  and  sometimes  drtsling  cold  Kains  :  the  Air 
al5<i  in  these  three  Months,  particularly  in  January  and 
Fel>ruary  is  very  sharp,  especially  when  the  Wind  is  at 
North  East,  or  North  North  East,  whether  because  of 
the  garter  it  blows  from,  or  the  Land  it  blows  over,  I 
know  not :  for  I  have  elsewhere  observed  such  Winds  to 
be  colder,  where  they  have  come  from  over  Land.  April 
is  counted  a  moderate  Month,  either  as  to  Heat  or  Cold, 
^EPryness  or  Moisture. 

^H  This  is  ordinaniy  the  State  of  their  Year:  yet  are 
^BlDt  these  various  Seasons  so  exact  in  the  Returns,  but 
^B&at  tlicrc  may  sometimes  be  the  Difl^erence  of  a  Month, 
^ntr  more.  Neither  ytM  are  the  several  Seasons,  when  they 
^■qo  cnmc,  altogether  alike  in  all  Years.  For  sometimes 
the  Rains  are  more  violent  and  lasting,  at  other  l"imcs 
more  moderate ;  and  some  Years  they  arc  not  sufficient 
to  produce  reasonable  Crops,  or  else  they  come  so  un- 
i  to  injure  and  destroy  the  Rice,  or  at  least 
il Vance  it  but  little.  For  the  Husbandry  of  this 
Lplhcr  Cijuntrics  in  the  Torrid  Zone  depends 


I 


THE   POOR    PEOPLE   OF  TONQUIN 

!-of  Malabar  and  Coromandcl,  and  this  o(  Tnnquin,  that 
the  more  Rain  they  have  there,  the  greater  is  their  Blessing:  ' 
but  here  ihey  may  have  too  much  Rain  for  the  lower  part 
of  the  Kingdom  ;  but  that  is  rare.  When  this  happens 
they  have  Banks  to  keep  in  the  Rivers  and  Ditches  to  tfratti 
the  Land ;  though  sometimes  to  little  purpose,  when  the 
Floods  arc  violent,  and  especially  if  out  of  Season.  For 
if  the  Floods  come  in  their  Seasons,  though  tht-y  are  great, 
and  drown  all  the  Land,  yet  arc  they  not  hurtful ;  but  on 
the  contrary,  very  beneficial,  because  the  mud  that  they 
leave  behind  fattens  the  Land.  And  after  all,  if  the  low 
Land  should  be  injured  by  the  Floods,  the  dry  Champion 
Land  yields  the  better  increase,  and  helps  out  the  other; 
as  that  does  them  also  in  more  kindly  Seasons.  In  the 
dry  Seasons  the  low  Lands  have  this  Advantage,  that 
Channels  are  easily  cut  out  of  the  River,  to  water  them 
each  side.  So  that  let  the  Season  he  wet  or  dry,  this 
luntry  seldom  suffers  much.  Indeed  considering  the 
Number  of  its  Inhabitants,  and  the  Poverty  of  the  major 
part,  it  is  sometimes  here,  as  in  all  populous  Countries, 
very  hard  with  the  poor,  especially  the  Tradespeople  in 
the  large  Towns.  For  the  Trade  is  very  uncertain,  and 
the  People  are  imployed  according  to  the  number  of  Ships 
that  come  thither,  to  fetch  away  their  Gotxts:  and  if  but 
few  Ships  come  hither,  as  sometimes  it  happens,  then  the 
poor  arc  ready  to  famish  for  want  of  work,  whereby  to  get 
a  Subsistance.  And  not  only  this,  but  most  Silk  Countries 
are  stixkt  with  great  Multitudes  of  poor  People,  who  work 
cheap  and  live  meanly  on  a  little  Rice ;  which  if  it  is  not 
very  cheap,  as  it  commonly  is  here,  the  poor  People  are  not 
able  to  matnlain  themselves. 


J«9 


CHAP,   in 


To 
: 


Of  the  Nativis  »/  Taiiqu'in  :  Tht'ir  Farm,  Diipoiit'ion,  Capadly,  CUatkt, 
Buililingi,  Vilhgti^  Grovti,  Bunh,  Ditchei,  and  Gardent.  Of 
Cac/iao,  the  Capital  City.  Ovens  ta  secure  Goods  from  Fire  j  and 
other  Preiautions  against  it.  The  Streets  of  the  City,  the  Kings 
Pa/aces,  and  English  and  Dutch  Factories.  An  Artificial  Mole 
above  the  City,  to  break  the  Force  of  the  Land-floods.  Of  their 
IVives  and  Common  IVomen,  Feasts  at  the  Graves  of  the  Dead, 
and  Annual  Feasts :  their  entertaining  with  Belle  and  Arek,  i£c. 
Their  Religien,  Idols,  Pagods,  Priests,  Offerings,  and  Prayers. 
Their  Language  and  Learning.  Their  Mechanick  Am,  Trades, 
Manufactures,  Commodities  and  Traffick. 

^ONQUIN  is  very  populous,  being  thick-set  with 
Villages;  and  the  Natives  in  general  are  of  a 
middle  Stature,  and  clean  iimb'd.  They  are  of 
a  Tawny  Indian  colour :  but  1  think  the  fairest 
and  clearest  that  I  ever  saw  of  that  Complexion :  for  you 
may  perceive  a  Blush  or  Change  of  Colour  in  some  oi  their 
Faces,  on  any  sudden  Surprize  of  Passion ;  which  I  could 
never  discern  in  any  other  Indians.  Their  Faces  are  gene- 
rally flattish,  and  of  an  oval  Form.  Their  Noses  and  Lips 
are  proportionable  enough,  and  altogether  graceful.  Their 
Hair  is  black,  long  and  lank,  and  very  thick;  and  they 
wear  it  hanging  down  to  their  Shoulders. 

Their  Teeth  are  as  black  as  they  can  make  them ;  for 
this  being  accounted  a  great  Ornament,  they  dye  them  of 
that  Colour,'  and  are  three  or  four  Days  doing  it.  They 
do  this  when  they  are  about  twelve  or  fourteen  Years  old, 
both  Boys  and  Girls :    and   during   all    the  Time  of  the 

'  "  With  the  Juice  of  a  certain  Herb  which  they  hold  in  their  Mouths 
for  three  Days  successively,  and  the  black  Tincture  continues  ever  after." 
{A.  Hamilton,  New  Account  of  the  East  Indies, tcA.  ii.  p.  215.) 
590 


I 


BLACKING  OF  TEETH  A  BEAUTY 

Operation  they  dare  not  take  any  Nourishment,  besides  *if.l 
Water,  Chau,  or  some  liquid  Thing,  and  not  much  of  that  •''°" 
neither,  for  fear,  1  judge,  of  being  pnyson'd  by  the  Dye, 
or  Figment.  So  that  while  this  is  doing  they  undergo 
very  severe  Penance:  but  as  both  Sexes,  so  all  Qualities, 
the  Poor  as  well  as  the  rich,  must  be  in  this  Fashion:  they 
say  they  should  else  be  like  Brutes;  and  that  would  be  a 
great  Shame  to  them  to  be  like  I'".lcphants  or  Dt^s ;  which 
they  compare  those  to  that  have  white  Teeth. 

They  are  generally  dextrous,  nimble,  and  active,  and 
ingenious  in  any  Mcchanick  Science  they  profess.  This 
may  be  seen  by  the  Multitude  of  fine  Silks  that  are  made 
here ;  and  the  curious  Lacker-work,  that  is  yearly  trans- 
ported from  thence.  They  are  also  laborious  and  diligent 
m  their  Callings;  but  the  Country  being  so  very  populous, 
many  of  them  are  extreme  poor  for  Want  of  Employment : 
and  tho*  the  Country  is  full  of  Silk,  and  other  Materials  to 
work  on,  yet  little  is  done,  but  when  strange  Ships  arrive. 
For  'tis  the  Money  and  Goods  that  are  brought  hither, 
especially  by  the  English  and  Dutch,  that  puts  Life  into 
them  :  for  the  Handicrafts  Men  have  not  Money  to  set 
themselves  to  work ;  and  the  Foreign  Merchants  are  there- 
fore forced  to  trust  them  with  Advance- money,  to  the 
Value  of  at  least  a  third,  or  half  their  Goods  \  and  this  for 
two  or  three  Months  or  more,  before  they  hive  made  their 
Goods,  atKi  brought  them  in.  So  that  they  having  no 
Goods  ready  by  them,  til)  they  have  Money  from  the 
Merchant  Siratigcrs.  the  Ships  that  trade  hither  must  of 
Necessity  stay  here  all  the  time  that  their  Goods  are  making, 
hich  arc  commonly  5  or  h  Months. 
The  Tonquittcsc  make  very  good  Servants;  1  think  the 
best  in  India.  For  as  they  are  generally  apprehensive  and 
docil.so  are  they  faithful  when  hired,  diligent  and  obedient. 
Yet  they  arc  low  spirited  : '  probably  by  reason  of  their 
living  under  an  Arbitrary  Government.  They  are  patient 
in  Labour,  but  in  ^ckncss  they  arc  mightily  dcjeaed. 
They  have  one  great  Fault  extreme  common  among  them, 

'  "  Thcv  aro  BM  much  KivcD  in  Choler,  r«i  arc  addicted  10  ihe  Ui  worse 
IHuiMu  of  Mtvjr  ami  nahca,  even  10  ma  «simiMi  dcfive  °  (.Vimmm/  Uttnmit 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  which  is  gaming.  To  this  they  are  so  universally  addicted, 
1688  Servants  and  all,  that  neither  the  awe  of  their  Masters, 
nor  any  Thing  else,  is  sufficient  to  restrain  them,  till  they 
have  lost  all  they  have,  even  their  very  Cloaths.  This  is  a 
reigning  Vice  among  the  Eastern  Nations,  especially  the 
Chinese,  as  I  said  in  the  1 5th  Chapter  of  my  former  Volume. 
And  I  may  add,  that  the  Chinese  I  found  settled  at  Tonquin, 
were  no  less  given  to  it  than  those  I  met  with  elsewhere. 
For  after  they  have  lost  their  Money,  Goods  and  Cloaths, 
they  will  stake  down  their  Wives  and  Children  :  and  lastly, 
as  the  dearest  Thing  they  have,  will  play  upon  tick,  and 
mortgage  their  Hair  upon  Honour :  And  whatever  it  cost 
them  they  will  be  sure  to  redeem  it.  For  a  free  Chinese  as 
these  are,  who  have  fled  from  the  Tartars,  would  be  as 
much  ashamed  of  short  Hair,  as  a  Tonquinese  of  white 
Teeth. 

The  Cloaths  of  the  Tonquinese  are  made  either  of  Silk 
or  Cotton.  The  poor  People  and  Soldiers  do  chiefly  wear 
Cotton  Cloath  dyed  to  a  dark  tawny  Colour.  The  rich 
Men  and  Mandarins  commonly  wear  English  Broad-Cloath  : 
the  chief  Colours  are  red  or  green.  When  they  appear 
before  the  King,  they  wear  long  Gowns  which  reach  to 
their  Heels :  neither  may  any  Man  appear  in  his  presence 
but  in  such  a  Garb.  The  great  Men  have  also  long  Caps 
made  of  the  same  that  their  Gowns  are  made  of:  but  the 
middle  sort  of  Men  and  the  poor  commonly  go  bare-headed. 
Yet  the  Fishermen,  and  such  Labourers  as  are  by  their 
Employments  more  exposed  to  the  Weather,  have  broad- 
brimm'd  Hats  made  of  Reeds,  Straw,  or  Palmeto-leaves. 
These  Hats  are  as  stiff  as  Boards,  and  sit  not  pliant  to  their 
Heads :  for  which  reason  they  have  Band-strings  or  Neck- 
laces fastened  to  their  Hats ;  which  coming  under  their 
Chins  are  there  tied,  to  keep  their  Hats  fast  to  their  Heads. 
These  Hats  are  very  ordinary  Things ;  they  seldom  wear 
them  but  in  rainy  Weather.  Their  other  Cloaths  are  very 
few  and  mean :  a  ragged  pair  of  Breeches  commonly 
sufficeth  them.  Some  have  bad  Jackets,  but  neither  Shirt, 
Stockings  nor  Shooes. 

The    Tonquinese    Buildings    are    but     mean.       There 

592 


e 


THEIR    HOUSES    AND    FURNITURE 


[ouses  arc  small  and  low:  the  Walls  arc  cither  Mud,  or 
Wattle  Iwdawbcd  over:  and  the  Roofs  arc  thatched,  and  ' 
that  Very  ill,  especially  in  the  Country.  The  Houses  are 
toti  low  to  admit  of  Chambers :  yet  they  have  here  2  or 
3  Partitions  on  the  Ground-floor,  made  with  a  watling  of 
Canes  or  Sticks,  for  their  several  uses;  in  each  of  which 
there  is  a  Window  to  let  in  the  Jight.  'I'hc  Windows  are 
very  small  square  Hotcs  in  the  Walls,  which  they  shut  up 
at  Night  with  a  Board  fitted  for  that  Purpose.  The  Rooms 
arc  but  meanly  furnished;  with  a  poor  Bed  or  two  (or 
more,  according  to  the  bigness  of  the  Family)  in  the  inner 
Room.  The  outer  Rooms  arc  furnished  with  Stools, 
nchcs,  or  Chairs  to  sit  on.  There  is  also  a  Table,  and 
m  one  side  a  little  Altar,  with  two  Incense-pots  on  it;  nor 
any  House  without  its  Altar.  One  of  these  Incense  Pots 
a  small  bundle  of  Rushes  in  it ;  the  ends  of  which  I 
Iways  took  notice  had  been  burnt,  and  the  fire  put  out. 
outer  Room  is  the  place  where  they  commonly  dress 
their  Food  :  yet  in  fair  Weather  they  do  it  as  frequently  in 
the  open  Air,  at  their  Doors,  or  in  their  Yards;  as  being 
thereby  the  less  incomm<xicd  by  Heat  or  Smoak. 

They   dwelt    not    in    lone   Houses,    but    together    in 

.Villages :  'tis  rare  to  sec  a  single  House  by  it  self.     The 

'Country  Villages  commonly  consist  of  twenty,  thirty,  or 

forty  Houses,  and  are  thick  seated  over  all  the  Country; 

yet  hardly  to  be  seen  till  you  come  to  their  very  Doors,  by 

Reason  of  the  Trees  and  Groves  they  are  surrounded  with. 

And  'tis  as  rare  to  sec  a  Grove  without  a  Village,  in  the 

Country  near  the  Sea,  as  to  see  a  Village  without  a 

ove:  but  the  high  Lands  are  full  of  Woods,  and   the 

iltages   there   stand    all    as   in    one  great    Forest.      The 

lllagcs  and   Land  about  them   do  most  belong  to  great 

len,  and  the  Inhabitants  are  Tenants  that   manure  and 

Itivate  the  Ground. 

The  Villages  in  the  low  Land  arc  also  surrounded  with 

:at  Banks  and  deep  Ditches.     These  incompass  the  whole 

ive,  in  which  each  Village  stands. 

The  Banks  arc  tn  keep  the  Water  from  overflowing 
lir  Gardciu,  and  from  coming  into  thdr  Houses  io  the 
vol..  I.  59J  2  r 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  wet  Time,  when  all  the  Land  about  them  is  under  Water, 
1688  ^^Q  Qj.  three  Foot  deep.  The  Ditches  or  Trenches  are  to 
preserve  the  Water  in  the  dry  Time,  with  which  they 
water  their  Gardens  when  need  requires.  Every  Man  lets 
Water  at  Pleasure,  by  little  Drains  that  run  inward  from 
the  Town-ditch,  into  his  own  Garden  ;  and  usually  each 
Man's  Yard  or  Garden  is  parted  from  his  Neighbours  by 
one  of  these  little  Drains  on  each  Side.  The  Houses  lie 
scattering  up  and  down  in  the  Grove ;  no  where  joining  to 
one  another,  but  each  apart,  and  fenced  in  with  a  small 
Hedge.  Every  House  hath  a  small  Gate  or  Stile  to  enter 
into  the  Garden  first,  for  the  House  stands  in  the  Middle 
of  it :  and  the  Gardens  run  also  from  the  Backside  of  the 
House  to  the  Town-Ditch,  with  its  drain  and  hedge  on 
each  side.  In  the  Gardens  every  Man  has  his  own  Fruit- 
trees,  as  Oranges,  Limes,  Betle;  his  Pumkins,  Melons, 
Pine-apples,  and  a  great  many  Herbs.  In  the  dry  Season 
these  Grovy  dwellings  are  very  pleasant;  but  in  the 
wet  season  they  are  altogether  uncomfortable :  for  though 
fenced  in  thus  with  banks,  yet  are  they  like  so  many  Duck- 
houses  all  wet  and  dirt :  neither  can  they  pass  from  one 
Village  to  another,  but  Mid-leg  or  to  their  Knees  in  Water, 
unless  sometimes  in  Boats,  which  they  keep  for  this 
purpose :  But  notwithstanding  these,  they  are  seldom  out 
of  mire  and  wet,  even  in  the  midst  of  Village  or  Garden,  so 
long  as  that  season  lasts.  The  Inhabitants  of  the  higher 
part  of  the  Kingdom  are  not  troubled  with  such  incon- 
veniences, but  live  more  cleanly  and  comfortably,  forasmuch 
as  their  Land  is  never  overflown  with  Water :  and  tho'  they 
live  also  in  Villages  or  Towns  as  the  former,  yet  they  have 
no  Occasion  to  surround  them  with  banks  or  trenches,  but 
lie  open  to  the  Forest. 

The  Capital  City  Cachao,  which  stands  in  the  high 
Country  about  80  Miles  from  the  Sea,  on  the  West-side 
of  the  River,  and  on  a  pretty  level,  yet  rising  Ground, 
lies  open  in  the  same  manner,  without  wall,  bank,  or 
ditch.  There  may  be  in  Cachao  about  20,000  Houses. 
The  Houses  are  generally  low,  the  walls  of  the  Houses 
are  of  mud,  and  the  covering  Thatch,  yet  some  are  built 

594 


PRECAUTIONS   AGAINST   FIRE 

rith    Brick,    and    the   covering    with    Pan-tile.     Most    of  a«' 


Hritl 

^Hkhese  Houses  have  a  Yard,  or  Back-side  belonging  to  '"^ 
^Btbcm.  In  each  Yard  you  shall  sec  a  small  arched  Building 
^  made  somewhat  like  an  Oven,  about  six  foot  high,  with 
the  Mouth  on  the  Ground.  It  is  built  from  top  to 
bottom  with  brick,  all  over  daub'd  thick  with  mud  and 
dirt.  If  any  House  wants  a  Yard,  ihcy  have  nevenheless 
such  a  kind  of  Oven  as  this,  but  smaller,  set  up  in  the 
middle  of  the  House  tt  self;  and  there  is  scarce  a  House 

^in  the  City  without  one.  The  use  of  it  is  to  thrust  their 
chiefest  Goods  into  when  a  Fire  happens :  for  these  low 
thatch'd  Houses  arc  very  subject  to  take  (ire,  especially 
in  the  dry  Times,  to  the  Destruction  of  many  Houses  in 
an  Instant,  that  often  they  have  scarce  Time  to  secure 
their  Goods  in  the  arched  Ovens,  though  so  near  them. 

As  every  private  Person  hath  this  Contrivance,  to 
secure  his  own  Goods,  when  a  Fire  happens,  so  the 
Government  hath  carefully  ordered  nccessarj-  means  lo 
be  used  for  the  preventing  of  Fire,  or  extinguishing  it 
before  it  gets  too  great  a  Head.  For  in  the  beginning 
of  the  dry  Season  ever)"  Man  must  keep  a  great  Jar  of 
Water,  on  the  top  of  his  House,  to  be  ready  to  pour 
down  as  occasion  shall  serve.  Besides  this,  he  is  to  keep 
a  lung  Pole,  with  a  Basket  or  Bowl  at  the  End  of  it.  to 
throw  Water  out  of  the  Kennels  ujxin  the  Houses.  But 
if  the  Fire  gets  to  such  a  Head,  that  both  these  expedients 
fail,  then  they  cut  the  Straps  that  hold  the  Thatch  of  the 
l/Houscs,  and  let  it  drop  from  the  Rafters  to  the  Ground, 
ihis  is  done  with  little  Trouble ;  for  the  Thatch  is  not 
I  as  ours,  neither  is  it  tied  on  by  single  Leaves,  « 
in  the  West-Indies,  and  many  paru  of  the  F.asl-lndica, 
where  they  thatch  with  Palmcto  or  Palm-Tree  Leaves: 
but  this  IS  nude  up  in  Panes  of  7  or  8  foot  square,  before 
it  is  laid  on ;  so  that  4  or  6  Panes,  more  or  less,  according 
to  the  bigness  of  the  House,  will  cover  one  ^de  of  it: 
and  these  Panes  being  only  fastned  in  a  few  places  to  the 
Rafters  with  Rattans,  they  are  easily  cut,  and  down  drops 
half  the  covering  at  once.  These  Panes  an:  also  better 
tJuui  lootc  Thatch,  ai  being  more  manageable,  in  case  any 
595 


CAPTAIN  DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 
AH.  of  theih  should  fall  on  or  near  the  Oven  where  the  Goods 
'*W  are;  fae  they  are  easily  dragged  off  to  another  place.  The 
ndghbourins  Houses  may  this  way  be  soon  uncovered, 
bera'c  the  Flames  comes  to  'em ;  and  the  Thatch  either 
carried  away,  ot  at  least  laid  where  it  may  burn  by  it  self. 
And  for  thii  purpose  every  Man  is  ordered  to  keep  a 
long  Pole  or  Bambo  at  his  Door,  with  a  Cutting-hook 
at  the  end  of  it,  purposely  for  uncovering  the  Houses : 
and  if  any  Man  is  found  without  his  Jar  upon  the  Mouse, 
and  his  Bucket-Pole  and  long  Hook  at  his  Door,  he  will 
be  punished  severely  for  his  neglect.  They  are  rigorous 
in  exacting  this:  for  even  with  all  this  caution  they  art- 
much  and  often  damaged   by  Fire. 

The  prindpal  Streets  in  this  City  are  very  wide,  though 
some  are  but  narrow.  They  are  most  of  them  pav'd,  or 
patcVd  rather,  with  small  Stones;  but  after  a  very  ill 
nunaer.  In  the  wet  Season  they  are  very  dirty ;  and  in 
the  dry  Time  there  are  many  stagnant  Ponds,  and  some 
Ditches  full  of  black  stinking  Mud,  in  and  about  the 
Gty.  This  makes  it  unpleasant,  and  a  Man  would  think 
unwholesome  too:  yet  it  is  healthy  enough,  as  far  as  I 
perceiv'd,  or  could  ever  learn. 

The  Kings  of  Tonquin,  who  make  this  City  their 
constant  Residence,  have  two  or  three  Palaces  in  it,  such 
as  they  be.  Two  of  them  are  very  mean ;  they  arc  built 
with  Timber,  yet  have  they  many  great  Guns  planted  in 
Houses  near  them.  Stables  for  the  King's  Elephants  and 
Horses,  and  pretty  large  square  Spots  of  Ground  for  the 
Soldiers  to  draw  themselves  up  regularly  before  him. 
The  Third  Palace  is  called  the  Palace  Royal.  It  is  more 
magnificently  built  than  the  other  two :  yet  built  also 
with  Timber,  but  all  opien  as  the  Divans  in  Turky  are 
said  to  be.  The  Wall  that  incompasseth  it  is  most 
remarkable.  It  is  said  to  be  3  Leagues  in  Circumference. 
The  Heighth  of  this  Wall  is  about  15  or  16  foot,  and 
almost  as  many  broad  or  thick.  It  is  faced  up  on  both 
sides  with  Brick :  there  are  several  small  Gates  to  go  in 
and  out  at,  but  the  main  Gate  faceth  to  the  City.  This 
they  say  is  never  opened,  but  when  the  Boua  or  Emperour 
596 


ENGLISH    FACTORY 

1  or  comes  out.  There  are  two  smaller  Gate; 
adjoining  to  it,  one  on  each  side,  which  are  opened  on  '^* 
all  Occasions,  for  any  concerned  there  to  pass  in  and  out ; 
hut  Slrangen  arc  not  permitted  this  Liberty.  Yet  they 
may  ascend  to  the  ton  of  the  Wall,  and  walk  round  it, 
there  being  Stairs  at  the  Gate  tu  go  up  by  :  and  in  some 
places  the  Walls  are  fallen  down. 

Within  this  Wall  there  are  large  Fish-ponds,  where 
also  there  arc  Pleasure- Boats  for  the  Emperor's  diversion. 
I  shall  defer  speaking  of  him,  whose  Prison  this  is,  rather 
than  Court,  till  the  next  Chapter,  where  I  shall  discourse 
of  the  Government. 

The  House  of  the  English  Factory,'  who  are  very 
few,  is  pleasantly  seated  on  the  North-end  of  the  City, 
fronting  to  the  River.  "Tis  a  pretty  handsom  low-built 
House;  the  best  that  I  saw  in  the  City.  There  is  a 
handsome  Dining-room  in  the  middle,  and  at  each  end 
convenient  Apartments  for  the  Merchants,  Factors,  and 
Servants  belonging  to  the  Company  to  live  in,  with  other 
conveniences.  This  House  stands  parallel  with  the  Rivcr  ; 
and  at  each  end  of  it  there  arc  smaller  Houses  for  other 
uses,  as  Kitchen,  Store-Houses,  &c.  running  in  a  Line 
from  the  great  House  towards  the  River,  making  two 
Wings,  and  a  square  Court  open  to  the  River.  In  this 
square  space,  near  the  Banks  of  the  River,  there  stands 
a  Flag  Staff,  purposely  for  the  hoysing  up  the  English 
Coloun  on  all  Occasions :  for  it  is  the  custom  of  our 
Countrymen  abroad,  to  let  Ay  their  Colours  on  Sundays, 
and  all  other  remarkable  Days. 

The  Dutch  *  Factory  joins  to  the  Engliiih  Factory  on  the 
luth-side :  I  was  never  m  it,  and  therefore  can  say  nothing 
'  it,  but  what  1   have  heard,  that  their  Ground  is  not  so 


Ml  lit  '. 
1719.  » 

•  In  ih* 

Ith  factory  ippeai 
■  fey  ■■!>«t!k 


I  KjiI  Indian  Company 


■iT-n  lilt  l.rifl-iV,  aiM  Ilic  T.innuiiif  w:  by  an  ad  of  LtuUlily. 

(Irawinit  i*l  ''Ch4-cho*(Chun:hiir(  **  Viiyagci,*  viiL  vl  p  \\,  ibe 
•Tf  ippean  to  the  imnh  of  ibr  EauKih  hoaw  and  »e(>anil«d  firon 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 
.    large  as  ours,  tho'  they  are  the  longest  Standers  here  by 
^  many  Years :  for  the  English  are  but  newly  removed  hither 
from  Hean,  where  they  resided  altogether  before. 

There  is  nothing  more  in  or  about  the  City  worth 
noting,  but  only  a  Piece  of  Work  on  the  same  side,  up  the 
River.  This  is  a  massy  Frame  of  Timber,  ingeniously  put 
together,  and  very  artificially  placed  on  great  Piles,  that 
are  set  upright  in  the  River,  just  by  its  Banks.  The  Piles 
are  driven  firmly  into  the  Ground,  close  one  by  another : 
and  all  the  space  between  them  and  the  Bank  is  filled  up 
with  Stones,  and  on  them  great  Trees  laid  a-cross,  and 
pinn'd  fast  to  each  end  of  the  Piles.  So  that  the  whole 
Fabrick  must  be  moved  before  any  part  of  it  will  yield. 
This  Piece  of  Work  is  raised  about  i6  or  17  Foot  above  the 
Water  in  the  dry  Time,  but  in  the  wet  Season  the  Floods 
come  within  2  or  3  Foot  of  the  Top.  It  was  made  to  resist 
the  violence  of  the  Water  in  the  rainy  Season  :  for  the 
Stream  then  presseth  so  hard  against  this  Place,  that  before 
,  this  Pile  was  built,  it  broke  down  the  Bank,  and  threatned 
I  to  carry  all  before  it,  even  to  the  ruining  of  the  City,  if  this 
I  course  had  not  timely  been  taken  to  prevent  it.  And  so 
much  the  rather,  because  there  is  a  lai^  Fond  just  within 
Land,  and  low  Ground  between  it  and  the  City :  So  that  had  it 
made  but  a  small  breach  into  the  Pond,  it  would  have  come 
even  to  the  Skirts  of  the  City.  And  though  the  City 
stands  so  high  as  that  the  Land-floods  never  reach  it,  yet 
the  Land  on  which  it  stands  being  a  sort  of  yielding  Sand, 
could  not  be  thought  capable  of  always  resisting  such 
violence.  For  the  natural  Floods  do  very  often  make  great 
changes  in  the  River,  breaking  down  one  point  of  Land,  and 
making  another  point  in  the  opposite  side  of  the  River; 
and  that  chiefly  in  this  part  of  the  Country,  where  it  Is 
bounded  with  high  Banks :  for  nearer  the  Sea,  where  it 
presently  overflows,  the  Floods  do  seldom  make  any  con- 
siderable change,  and  move  more  quietly. 

But  to  return  to  the  People.  They  are  courteous  and 
civil  to  Strangers,  especially  the  trading  People :  But  the 
great  Men  are  Proud,  Haughty  and  Ambitious;  and  the 
Soldiers  very  insolent,     The  poorer  sort  arc  very  Thievish  ; 

598 


WOMEN  LET  OUT  TO  STRANGERS 
insomuch  that  the  Factors  and  Strangers  thai  Tniffick  hither  am. 
arc  forced  to  keep  good  Watch  in  the  Night  to  secure  their  '*** 
Goods,  notwithstanding  the  severe  Punishments  they  have 
against  Thieving.  They  have  indeed  great  Opportunities  of 
Thieving,  the  Houses  being  so  slightly  built :  But  they  will 
work  a  way  under  Ground,  rather  than  fail ;  and  use  many 
subtle  Sinitagenis.  lama  Stranger  to  any  Ceremonies  used 
by  them  in  Marriage,  or  at  the  Birth  of  a  Child,  or  the  like, 
if  they  use  any :  Polygamy  is  allowed  of  in  this  Country, 
and  they  buy  their  Wives  of  the  Parents.  The  King  and 
great  Men  keep  several,  as  their  Inclinations  lead  them,  and 
their  Ability  serves.  The  Poor  are  stinted  for  want  of 
means  more  than  desire  :  For  though  many  arc  not  able  to 
buy,  much  less  to  maintain  one  Wife ;  yet  most  of  them 
make  a  shift  to  get  one,  for  here  arc  some  very  low-prized 
ones  that  arc  glad  to  ukc  up  with  poor  Husbands.  But 
then  in  hard  Times,  the  Man  must  sell  both  Wife  and 
Children,  to  buy  Rice  to  maintain  himself.  Yet  this  is  not 
so  common  here  as  in  some  Places ;  as  1  before  observed 
[of  the  Malabar  and  Coromandel  Coasts,  This  Custom 
.mong  them  of  buying  Wives,  cawly  degenerates  into  thai 
"her  of  hiring  Misses,  and  gives  great  Liberty  to  the  young 
'omen,  who  ofitr  themselves  of  their  own  accord  to  any 
irangcrs,  who  will  go  to  their  Price-  There  are  of  ihcm  of 
■11  Prizes,  from  too  Dollars  to  5  Dollars,  and  the  Refuse 
of  all  will  be  caressed  by  the  poor  Seamen :  Such  as  the 
Lascan,  who  are  Moors  of  India,  coming  hither  in  Vessels 
&um  Kort  St.  George,  and  other  Places ;  who  yet  have 
ithing  to  give  them,  but  such  Fragments  of  Food,  as  their 
_  immons  will  aflbrd.  Even  the  great  Men  of  Tonquin 
will  oflfcr  their  Daughters  to  the  Merchants  and  Officers, 
though  their  Stay  is  not  likely  to  he  above  five  or  six  Months 
in  the  Country :  neither  arc  they  afraid  to  be  with  Child  by 
White  Men,  for  their  Children  will  be  much  fairer  than 
their  Mrtthcrs,  and  consequently  of  greater  Repute,  when 
they  grow  up,  if  they  be  Girts.  Nor  is  it  any  great  Charge 
10  breed  them  here :  and  at  the  worst,  if  their  Mothers  arc 
>t  able  to  maintain  them,  'tb  but  selling  them  when  they 
young.  But  to  return,  the  Women  who  thus  tec 
599 


'CAPTArtJ  DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AH.  themselvu  to  hire,  if  they  have  been  so  frugal  as  to  save 
'***  what  they  have  got  by  these  loose  Amours,  they  soon 
procure  Huabancb,  that  will  love  and  esteem  them  well 
enough:  and  themselves  also  will  prove  afterwards  obedient 
and  fiiithful  Wives.  Fof  *tis  said,  that  even  while  they  are 
with  Strangers,  they  ore  Very  faithful  to  them  ;  especially  to 
such  as  remain  long  in  the  Country,  or  make  annual  Returns 
hither,  as  the  Dutch  generally  do.  Many  of  these  have 
gotten  good  Estates  I^  their  Tonquin  Ladies,  and  that 
oiiefly  by  trusting  them  with  Money  and  Goods.  For  in 
this  poor  Country  'tis  a  great  Advantage  to  watch  the 
Market;  and  these  Female  Merchants  having  Stocks  will 
mightily  improve  them,  talring  their  Opportunities  of  buy- 
ing raw  Slk  in  the  dead  Time  of  the  Year.  With  this 
they  will  employ  the  poor  People,  when  Work  is  scarce ; 
and  get  it  cheaper  and  better  done,  than  when  Ships  are 
here  :  for  then  every  Man  being  employed  and  in  a  Hurry 
of  -Bunness,  he  will  have  his  Price  according  to  the  Haste 
of  Work.  And  by  thb  Means  they  will  get  their  Goods 
ready  i^inst  the  Ships  arrive,  and  before  the  ordinary 
worldng  Season,  to  the  Profit  both  of  the  Merchant  and 
the  Pagally. 

When  a  Man  dies  he  is  interr'd  in  his  own  Land,  for 
here  are  no  common  Burying-places :  And  within  a  Month 
afterwards  the  Friends  of  the  Deceased,  especially  if  he  was 
the  Master  of  the  Family,  must  make  a  great  Feast  of  Flesh 
and  Fruit  at  the  Grave.  'Tis  a  Thing  belonging  to  the 
Priest's  Office  to  assist  at  this  Solemnity ;  they  are  always 
there,  and  take  care  to  see  that  the  Friends  of  the  Deceased 
have  it  duly  performed.  To  make  this  Feast  they  are 
obliged  to  sell  a  Piece  of  Land,  tho'  they  have  Money 
enough  otherways:  Which  Money  they  bestow  in  such 
Things  as  are  necessary  for  the  Solemnity,  which  is  more 
or  less,  according  to  the  Quality  of  the  Deceased.  If  he 
was  a  great  Man,  there  is  a  Tower  of  Wood  erected  over 
the  Grave ;  it  may  be  7  or  8  Foot  square,  and  built  20  or 
25  Foot  high.  About  20  Yards  from  the  Tower,  arc  little 
Sheds,  built  with  Stalls,  to  lay  the  Provisions  on,  both  of 
Meat  and  Fruits  of  all  Sorts,  and  that  in  great  Plenty. 
600 


[PASTIMES   AT  NEW  YEAR'S   FEASTS 

flithcr  the  Country  People  resort  to  fill  their  Bellies,  i 
the  Feast  seems  to  be  free  for  all  Comers,  at  least  of  t 
Neighbourhood.  How  it  is  drcst  or  distributed  about, 
know  not ;  but  there  the  People  wait  till  'tis  ready.  Tlw 
the  Priest  gets  within  the  Tower,  and  climbs  up  to  the  To 
and  looking  out  from  thence,  makes  an  Oration  to  t] 
People  below.  After  this  the  Priest  descends,  and  th( 
they  set  Kirc  tn  the  Foundation  of  the  Tower,  burning 
down  to  the  Ground^  and  when  this  is  done  they  fall  I 
their  Meat.  I  saw  one  of  these  Grave-Feasts,  which  1  shi 
have  elsewhere  occasion  to  mention. 

The  Tonquincse  have  two  Annual  Feasts.  The  chii 
is  at  the  first  New-Moon  of  the  New- Year:  and  the 
New-Year  begins  with  the  first  New-Moon  that  falls  < 
after  the  Middle  of  January,  for  else  that  Moon  is  reckon' 
to  the  Old  Year.  At  this  Time  they  make  merry  an 
rejoycc  lo  or  12  Days,  and  then  there  is  no  Busine 
done,  but  every  Man  makes  himself  fine  as  may  b 
etpccially  the  common  Sort.  These  spend  their  Time  I 
Gaming  or  Sporting,  and  you  <>hall  see  the  Streets  full  ^ 
People,  both  Citizens  and  Country-Folks,  gazing  at  sever 
diverting  Exercises.  Some  set  up  Swings  in  the  Strcel 
and  get  Money  of  those  that  will  swing  in  them.  Tl 
Frames  arc  contrived  like  ours  in  the  Fields  about  Lottdq 
in  Holiday  Times:  but  they  who  swing  stand  upright  \ 
the  lower  part  of  the  Swing,  which  is  only  a  Stick  standln 
on  each  End,  being  fzstned  to  a  pendulous  Rot«,  whU 
ihcy  hold  fast  with  their  Hands  on  each  side ;  and  thl 
raise  themselves  to  such  a  prodigious  Hdghth,  that  if  tL 
Swing  should  break  they  must  needs  break  their  Umbs  1 
best,  if  not  kill  themselves  out-right.  Others  spend  the 
Time  in  Drinking.  Their  ordinary  Drink  is  Tea:  b 
they  make  themselves  merry  with  hot  Rack,  which  sorr 
limes  also  they  mix  with  their  Tea.  Fliiher  way  it  hal 
an  odd  nasty  Taste,  but  is  very  strong ;  and  is  thercfoi 
much  esteemed  by  them,  especially  at  this  Time,  whi 
they  so  much  devote  themselves  to  Minh,  or  Madness,  1 
even  bestial  Drunkenness.  The  richer  Sort  arc  more  I 
yet  they  will  also  he  very  merry  at  this  Tin 
6ot 


CAPTAm    DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  The  NoUes  treat  their  Friends  with  good  Cheer  and  the 
****  best  Rack;  hut  indeed  there  is  none  good  in  this  Country. 
Yet  such  as  they  have  they  esteem  as  a  great  Cordial; 
especially  when  Snakes  and  Scorpions  have  been  infused 
therein,  as  I  have  been  informed.  This  is  not  only  ac- 
counted a  great  Cordial,  but  an  Antidote  against  the 
Leprosy,  and  all  Sorts  of  Poison ;   and  'tis  accounted  a 

Ssat  I^ece  cf  Respect  to  any  one  to  treat  him  with  this 
quor.  I  had  this  Relation  from  one  that  had  been  treated 
thus  by  many  of  the  great  Men.  They  also  at  this  Time 
more  especially  chew  Abundance  of  Betle,  and  make-  jfte* 
seats  thuiof  to  one  another. 

The  Betle  Leaf  is  the  great  Entertainmeat  in  tJie  Eart 
for  all  Vintants;  and  'tis  always  ^ven  with  the  Arek 
folded  up  in  it.  They  make  up  the  Arek  in  Pellets  fit 
for  use,  by  first  peeling  off  the  outer  green  hatd  Itiiid  of 
the  Nuts,  and  then  splitting  it  length-ways  in  three  or  £aar 
Parts,  more  or  less,  according  to  its  Bipum,  Then  they 
dawb  the  Leaf  all  over  with  Chinam  or  lime  made  into  a 
Mortar  or  Paste,  and  kq>t  in  a  Box  for  this  Furpoie, 
spreading  it  thin. 

And  here  by  the  Way  I  shall  take  Nodce  of  a  Slip  in 
the  former  Volume,  p.  327*  which  1  desire  may  be  cm^ 
reeled :  the  Nut  being  there  by  Mistake  call'd  the  Betle, 
and  the  Arek-tree  call'd  the  Betlc-tree,  whereas  Betle  is 
the  name  of  the  leaf  they  chew.  In  this  Leaf  thus  spread 
with  Chinam,  they  roll  up  a  slice  of  Arek  Nut,  very 
neatly,  and  make  a  Petlet  of  about  an  Inch  long,  and  as 
big  as  the  Top  of  one's  Finger.  Every  Man  here  has  a 
Box  that  will  hold  a  great  many  of  these  Pellets,  in  which 
they  keep  a  Store  ready  made  up  ;  for  all  Persons,  of  what 
Quality  soever,  from  the  Prince  to  the  Beggar,  chew 
Abundance  of  it.  The  poorer  Sort  carry  a  smalt  Pouchful 
about  with  them :  But  the  Mandarins,  or  great  Men,  have 
curious  oval  Boxes,  made  purposely  for  this  use,  that  will 
hold  fifty  or  sixty  Betle  Pellets.  These  Boxes  are  neatly 
lackered  and  gilded,  both  Inside  and  Outside,  with  a  Cover 
to  take  off;  and  if  any  Stranger  visits  them,  especially 
Europeans,  they  are  sure,  among  other  good  Entertainment, 
602 


f 


PRESENTS  OF   BETLE 


I' 


be  treated  with  a  Box  of  fietle.     The  Attendant  that    an. 
brings  it,  holds  it  to  the  left  Hand  of  the  Stranger ;  who  '*** 
therewith  taking  off  the  Cover,  takes  with  his  right  Hand 
the   Nuts  out  of   the   Box.     'Twere  an   Affront   to   take 
them,  or  give   or  receive  any  thing   with  the   left  Hand, 
which  is  confined  all  over  India  to  the  viler  Uses. 

It  is  accounted  good  Breeding  to  commend  the  Taste 

Neatness  of  this  Present ;  and  ihcy  all  love  to  be 
ttcr'd.  You  thereby  extreamly  please  the  Master  of  the 
House,  and  ingage  him  to  be  your  Friend  :  and  afterwards 
you  may  be  sure  he  will  not  fail  to  send  his  Servant  with  a  ' 
Present  of  Betle  once  in  two  or  three  Mornings,  with  a 
Complement  to  know  how  you  do.  Thia  will  cost  you  a 
small  Gratuity  to  the  Servant,  who  joyfully  acquaints  his 
Master  how  gratefully  you  received  the  Present :  and  this 
still  engages  him  more;  and  he  will  complement  you  with 
great  Respect  whenever  he  meets  you.  I  was  invited  to 
one  of  these  New-years  Feasts  by  one  of  the  Country,  and 
accordingly  went  ashore,  as  many  other  Seamen  did  upon 
like  Invitations.  I  know  not  what  Entertainment  they 
had ;  but  mine  was  like  to  be  but  mean,  and  therefore  I 
presently  left  it.  The  staple  Dish  was  Rice,  which  I  have 
lid  before  is  the  common  Food ;  Besides  which,  my 
'riciid,  that  he  might  the  better  enteruin  me  and  his  other 
Guests,  had  been  in  the  Morning  a  fishing  in  a  Pond  not  ■ 

far  from  his  House,  and  had  caught  a  huge  Mess  of  Frogs,  ■ 
■nd  with  great  Joy  brought  them  home  as  soon  as  I  came  V 
to  his  House.  I  wondcr'd  to  sec  him  turn  out  so  many 
of  these  Creatures  into  a  Basket;  and  asking  him  what 
they  were  for  f  he  told  me,  to  eat :  but  how  he  drest  them 
I  know  not ;  I  did  not  like  his  Dainties  so  well  as  to  stay 
and  dine  with  him. 

The  other  great  Featt  they  have,  is  after  their  May- 
crop  is  hous'd,  about  the  Beginning  of  June.  At  this  Feast 
also  chey  have  puhlick  Kejoydng;  but  much  tnferiour  to 
those  of  their  New-years  Feast. 

Their    Religion    is    Paganism,    and    they    arc    great 

Idolaters;  Nevertheless  they  own  an  omnipotent,  supreme 

over-ruling    Power,    that    beholds    both    them    and    their 

603 


CAPTAIN  DAMPIER'S  VOYAGES 

AM.  Actioiu,  and  lo  iiir  takes  Notice  of  them,  as  to  reward  the 
****  Good,  tad  panUh  the  Bad  in  the  other  World.  For  they 
believe  the  Immortidity  of  the  Soul :  but  the  Notion  that 
they  have  of  the  Deity  is  very  obscure.  Yet  by  the  Figures 
which  they  nuke  representing  this  God,  they  manifestly 
shew  that  they  do  believe  him  to  excel  in  Sight,  Strength, 
■  Courags  and  WudtHn,  Justice,  &c.  For  though  their 
Idols,  wluch  are  made  in  humane  Shapes,  are  very  different 
in  their  Forma ;  yet  they  all  represent  somewhat  extra- 
(H^inary,  either  in  the  Countenance,  or  in  the  Make  of  the 
Body,  or  limbs.  Some  are  very  corpulent  and  fat,'  others 
are  very  lean ;  some  aleo  have  many  Eyes,  others  as  many 
I^ds,  and  all  grasping  somewhat.  Their  Aspects  are 
also  different,  and  in  some  Measure  representing  what  they 
are  made  to  imitate,  or  there  is  somewhat  in  their  Hands 
or  Ijing  by  them,  to  illustrate  the  Meaning  of  the  Figure. 
SeveralPasKOns  are  also  represented  in  the  Countenance  of 
the  Image,  as  Love,  Hatred,  Joy,  Grief.  I  was  told  of  one 
Image'  that  was  placed  sitting  on  his  Hams,  with  his 
Elbows  resting  on  his  Knees,  and  his  Chin  resting  on  his 
two  Thumbs,  for  the  supporting  his  Head,  which  lookt 
drooping  forwards:  his  Eyes  were  moutnfully  lifted  up 
towards  Heaven,  and  the  Figure  was  so  lean,  and  the 
Countenance  and  whole  Composure  was  so  sorrowful,  that 
it  was  enough  to  move  the  Beholder  with  Kity  and  Com- 
passion. My  Friend  said  he  was  much  affected  with  the 
Sight  thereof. 

There  are  other  Images  also,  that  are  in  the  Shape  of 
Beasts,  either  Elephants  or  Horses,  for  I  have  not  seen 
them  in  any  other  Shape.  The  Pagodas  or  Idol  Temples, 
are  not  sumptuous  and  magnificent,  as  in  some  of  the 
Neighbouring  Kingdoms.  They  are  generally  built  with 
Timber,  and  are  but  small  and  low :  yet  mostly  covered 
with  Pantile ;  especially  the  City  Pagodas ;  but  in  the 
Country  some  of  them    are  thatched.     I  saw  the  Horse 

'  As  "  the  God  called  Miglfck"  who  sits  "  in  a  laiy  Posture  "  on  a  "  large 
Cushion  or  Boisler."     This  god  "  is  very  corpulent  and  always  laughing." 

'  Perhaps  the  god  described  by  Hamilton  as  ''a  young  God  that  died 
before  he  reach:  Twenty." 

604 


THE    PAGODAS   OR   TEMPLES 

*«nd  Elephtni  Idols  only  m  the  Country :  and  indeed  I  saw  j 
none  of  the  Idols  in  the  City  Cachiio,  hut  was  told  they  '' 
were  generally  in  humane  Shapes. 

The  Horse  and  Elephant  Images  I  saw,  were  both  Sorts 
about  the  Bigness  and  Height  of  a  good  Horse,  each 
standing  in  the  midst  of  a  tittle  Temple,  just  big  enough 
to  contain  them,  with  their  Heads  towards  the  Door:  and 
sometimes  one,  sometimes  two  together  in  a  Temple,  which 
was  always  open.  There  were  up  and  down  in  the  Country 
other  Buildings,  such  as  Pagodas,  or  Temples,  Tombs,  or 
the  like,  less  than  these  ;  and  not  above  the  Heighth  of  a 
Man  :  but  these  were  always  shut  so  close,  that  1  could  not 
H*ee  what  was  within  them. 

^■_     I'hcrc  were    many   Pagan    Priests  belonging    to    these 

^Vhgodasi,  and  'tts  reported  that  they  are  by  the  Laws  tied 

^Bd  strict  Rules  of  Living,  as  Abstinence  from  Women,  and 

^BUong  Drink  especially,  and  enjoined  a  poor  Sort  of  Life. 

^nTct  they  don't  seem  to  confine  themselves  much  to  these 

Rules:  but  their  Subsistence  being  chiefly  from  Offerings, 

and  there  being  many  of  them,  they  are  usually  very  poor. 

The  OfFcring   to    the    Priest    is    commonly   two   or   three 

HandfuU   of   Rice,   a   Box    of   Bctlc.  or  some  such   like 

Present.      One  Thing   the    People   resort   to  them   for  is 

Fortune-telling,  at  which  they  pretend   to  be  very  expert, 

and   will  be   much  offended   if  any  dispute  their  Skill  in 

that,  or  the  Truth  of  their  Religion.     Their  Habitations 

arc  very  little  and  mean,  close  by  the  Pagodas,  where  they 

k constantly  attend  to  offer  the  Petitions  of  the  poor  People, 
ihat  frcijucntly  resort  thither  on  some  such  Errand.     For 
Ulcy  have  no  set  Times  of  Devotion,  neither  do  they  seem 
to  esteem  one    Day  above   another,  except    their   Annual 
Feasts.     The  People  bring  to  the  Priest  in  Writing  what 
Petition    they    have    (o    nuke :    and    he    reads   it    aloud 
^^beforc  the  Idol,  and    afterwards  burns    it  in   an   Inccnsc- 
Hjpot,  the  Supplicant  all  the   while   lying   prottrate  on   the 
f^Sround. 

I  think  the  Mandarins  and  rich  People  seldom  come  to 
the  Pagodas,  but  have  a  Clerk  of  their  own,  who  reads  the 
Petition  in  their  own  Courts  or  Yards :  tnd  it  ahoald  tewn 
605 


I 


CAPTAIN  DAMPIER*3  VOYAGES 

AN.  by  this,  that  the  Mandarins  haye  a  better  Snse  of  the 
1688  i5eity^  than  the  common  Pec^le ;  for  in  these  Yatds,  there 
is  no  Idol,  before  whom  to  pmorm  the  Certmonj»  but  'lis 
done  with  ejres  lift  up  to  Heayen.  When  they  make  tlus 
Petition  they  order  a  great  deal  of  good  Mei^  to  be  dreat^ 
and  calling  all  their  Servants  into  the  Court,  wimre  the 
Ceremony  is  to  be  performed,  they  place  the  Food  on  a 
Table,  where  also  two  Incense-^pots  are  placed,  and  then 
the  Mandarin  presents  a  Pkper  to  the  Clerk,  who  ttsads  it 
with  an  audible  Voice.  In  the  first  Place  there  is  drawn 
up  an  ample  Account  of  all  that  God  has  blest  him  withal, 
as  Health,  Riches,  Honour,  Favour  of  lus  Princei  &c.  and 
long  life,  if  he  be  old ;  and  tO¥mtis  the  Conclusion,  there 
is  a  Petition  to  God  for  a  Continuance  of  all  these  Blesnngs, 
and  a  farther  Augmentation  of  them ;  especially  with  Umg 
life  and  Favour  of  his  Prince,  wlueh  last  they  esteem  as 
the  greatest  of  all  Blessings.  While  this  Fkper  is  reaitii^, 
the  Master  kneels  down,  and  bows  lus  face  to  the  Earth ; 
and  when  the  Clerk  has  done  reading  it,  he  puts  it  to  the 
burning  Rushes,  that  are  in  the  Inoense->pot,  where  'tis  oonr 
sum'd.  Then  he  flings  in  3  or  4  little  Bundles  of  sacred 
Paper,  which  is  very  fine  and  gilded ;  and  when  that  also 
is  burnt,  he  bids  his  Servants  eat  the  Meat.  This  Relation 
I  had  from  an  English  Gentleman,  who  understood  the 
Language  very  well,  and  was  present  at  such  a  Ceremony. 
This  burning  of  Paper  seems  a  great  Custom  among  the 
Eastern  Idolaters:  and  in  my  former  Volume  I  observed 
the  doing  so  by  the  Chinese,  in  a  Sacrifice  they  had  at 
Bencouli. 

The  Tonquinese  Language  is  spoken  very  much  through 
the  Throat,  but  many  Words  of  it  are  pronounced  through 
the  Teeth.  It  has  a  great  Affinity  to  the  Chinese  Language, 
especially  the  Fokein  Dialect,  as  I  have  been  informed: 
and  though  their  Words  are  differently  pronounced,  yet 
they  can  understand  each  other^s  Writings,  the  Characters 
and  Words  being  so  near  the  same.  The  Court  Language 
especially  is  very  near  the  Chinese ;  for  the  Courtiers  being 
all  Scholars,  they  speak  more  elegantly ;  and  it  differs  very 
much  from  the  vulgar  corrupted  Language.     But  for  the 

606 


HMa 


THE  TONQUINESIi    LANGUAGI- 


Malayan  Tongue,  which  Monsieur's  Tavcrnicr's '  Brother  ; 
in  his  History  of  Tonquin  says  is  the  Court  Language,  I  ' 
never  could  hear  by  any  Person  that  it  is  spoken  there, 
tho'  I  have  made  prticular  Inquiry  about  it ;  neither  can 
I  be  of  his  Opinion  in  thai  Matter.  For  the  Tonquinesc 
have  no  Manner  of  Trade  with  any  Malayans  that  1  could 
observe  or  learn,  neither  have  any  of  their  neighbours : 
and  for  what  other  grounds  the  Tonquincse  should  receive 
that  language  I  know  not.  It  is  not  probable  that  cither 
Conquest,  Trade  or  Religion  should  bring  it  in  ;  nor  do 
they  travel  towards  Malacca,  but  towards  China ;  and 
commonly  'tis  from  one  of  these  causes  that  Men  learn 
the  language  of  another  Nation.  The  remarkable  smooth- 
ness of  that  Language,  I  confess,  might  excite  some  People 
to  learn  it  out  of  curiosity:  but  the  Tonquincse  are  not 
so  curious. 

They  have  Schools  of  Learning  and  Nurseries  to  tutor 
youth.  The  Characters  they  write  in  arc  the  same  with 
the  Chinese,  by  what  I  could  judge;  and  they  write  with 
a  hair  Pencil,  not  sitting  at  a  Table,  as  we  do,  but  stand 
upright.  They  hold  their  Paper  tn  one  hand,  and  write 
with  the  other:  making  their  Characters  very  exact  and 
fair.  They  write  their  Lines  right  down  from  the  Top  to 
the  Bottom,  beginning  the  first  Line  from  the  right  Hand, 
and  so  proceeding  on  towards  the  Left.  After  they  can 
write  they  are  instructed  in  such  Sdcnces  as  their  Mastcn 
can  tutor  them  in  ;  and  the  Mathemalicks  arc  much  studied 
by  them:  They  seem  to  understand  a  little  of  Geomewy 
and  Arithmctick,  and  somewhat  more  of  Astronomy.  They 
have  Almanacks  among  them  :  but  I  could  not  learn  whether 
"icy  are  made  in  Tonquin,  or  brought  lo  them  from  China. 

Since  the  Jesuits  came  into  these  parts,  some  of  them 
ve  improved  themselves  in  Astronomy  pretty  much. 
icy  know  from  them  the  Revolution  of  the  Planets; 

*  Je«n    tUpliile    Tarcmicf's    Kr^ltri/    Jti   I'iuiieari    RtUtiomi,    ciM- 

bin];    ■  "  RelilMifl    da    RoTaom*  At  Tanqoin,"  »»  nublitlicil  at    Taris 

I  l&Ty.    Thit  particular  "KeUtion''  was  t>y  jean  BapitUc't  brother.    An 

*  vlutt  irsruUtton   appeared  in   16S4-     Tanrnkr's  tiuolc  hai  been  dii- 

dited  by  other  vriicr*. 

607 


CAPTAIN   DAMPIER'S   VOYAGES 

AN.  they  also  learn  of*  them  natural  Philosophy,  and  especially 
1688  Ethicks:  and  when  young  Students  are  admitted  to  make 
Graduates,  they  pass  through  a  very  strict  Examination. 
They  compose  something  by  way  of  Trial,  which  they 
must  be  careful  to  have  wholly  their  own,  for  if  it  is  found 
out  that  they  have  been  assisted,  they  are  punished,  degraded, 
and  never  admitted  to  a  second  Examination. 

The  Tonquinese  have  learnt  several  Mechanick  Arts 
and  Trades,  so  that  here  are  many  Tradesmen,  viz.  Smiths, 
Carpenters,  Sawyers,  Joyners,  Turners,  Weavers,  Tailors, 
Potters,  Painters,  Money-changers,  Paper-makers,  Workers 
on  Lacker- Ware,  Bell-founders,  &c.  Their  Saws  are  most 
in  Frames,  and  drawn  forwards  and  backwards  by  two 
Men.  Money-changing  is  a  great  Profession  here.  It  ts 
managed  by  Women,  who  are  very  dextrous  and  ripe  in 
this  Employment.  They  hold  their  Cabals  in  the  Night, 
and  know  how  to  raise  their  Cash  as  well  as  the  cunningest 
Stock-jobber  in  London. 

The  Tonquinese  make  indifferent  good  Paper,  of  two 
Sorts.  One  Sort  is  made  of  Silk,  the  other  of  the  Rinds  of 
Trees.  This  being  pounded  well  with  wooden  Pestles  in 
large  Troughs,  makes  the  best  writing  Paper. 

The  vendible  Commodities  of  this  Kingdom,  are  Gold, 
Musk,  Silks,  both  wrought  and  raw,  some  Caliicoes,  Drugs 
of  many  Sorts,  Wood  for  dying,  Lacker- Wares,  Earthen- 
Wares,  Salt,  Anniseed,  Wormseed,  &c.  There  is  much 
Gold  in  this  Country  :  It  is  like  the  China  Gold,  as  pure 
as  that  of  Japan,  and  much  finer.  Eleven  or  twelve  Tale' 
of  Silver  brings  one  of  Gold.  A  Tale  is  the  Name  of 
a  Summ  '^  about  a  Noble  English.  Besides  the  raw 
Silk  fetched  from  hence,  here  are  several  Sorts  of  wrought 
Silks  made  for  Exportation,  nz.  Pelongs,  Sues,  Hawkins, 
Piniasco's,  and  Gaws.  The  Pelongs  ana  Gaws  are  of  each 
Sort,  either  plain  or  flowered  very  neatly.  They  make 
several  other  Sorts  of  Silk,  but  thcMare  the  Principal  that 
are  bought  by  the  English  or  DutdL-'*- 

'  Tael.  '  I^^^^^M 

'  The  lael  is  now  to  B 

EciKlish. 


OF  THE    LACKER    WARE,   AND    LACK 

The  lackcr'd  Ware  that  is  made  here,  is  not  inferior  to 
any  but  that  of  Japan  only,  which  is  esteemed  the  best  in  ' 
the  World ;  probably  because  the  Japan  Wood  is  much 
belter  than  this  at  Tonquin,  for  there  seems  not  any  con- 
siderable Difference  in  the  Paint  or  Varnish.  The  Lack' 
of  Tonquin  is  a  Sort  of  ^mmy  Juice,  which  drains  out  of 
the  Bodies  of  Limbs  of  Trees.'  It  is  gotten  in  such  Quan- 
tities by  the  Country  People,  thai  they  daily  bring  ii  in  great 
Tubs  to  the  Markets  at  Cachao  to  sell,  especially  all  the 
working  Season.  The  natural  Colour  is  white,  and  in 
Substance  thick  like  Cream:  but  the  Air  will  change  its 
Colour,  and  make  it  look  blackish :  And  therefore  the 
luntry  People  that  bring  it  to  Town,  cover  it  over  with 
or  3  Sheets  of  Paper,  or  Leaves,  to  preserve  it  in  its 
fresh  native  Colour.  The  Cabinets,  Desks,  or  any  Sort 
of  Frames  to  be  Lackered,  are  made  of  Fir,  or  Pone-tree : 
but  the  Joyncrs  in  this  Country  may  not  compare  their 
Work  with  that  which  the  Euroj^^ans  make ;  and  in  laying 
on  the  Lack  upon  good  or  fine  jnyncd  work,  they  frequently 
Hv  il  the  joynts,  edges,  or  comers  of  Drawers  of  Cabinets : 
Besides,  our  fashions  of  Utensils  differ  mightily  from  theirs, 
for  that  reason  Captain  Pool,  in  his  sccotid  Voyage  to 
_  Country,  brought  an  ingenious  Joyner  with  him  to 
make  fashionable  Commodities  to  be  lackered  here,  as  also 
Deal-boards,  which  are  much  better  than  the  Pooe-wood  of 
this  Country. 

The   Wnrk-houscD  where    the  Lacker  is   laid    on,  are 
accounted  very  unwholesome,    by  reason    <*f  a   poisonous 

r'ity,  said  to  be  in  the  Lack,  which  fumes  into  the  Brains 
ugh  the  Nostrils  of  those  that  work  at  it,  making  them 
bn-tk  out  in  Botches  and  Biles ;  yet  the  scent  is  not  strong, 
nor  the  smell  unsavoury.  The  Labourers  at  this  Traae 
irk  only  in  the  dry  Season,  or  when  the  drying  North 
blow  :  for  as  they  lay  several  Coats  of  Lack,  one  on 
r,  so  these  must  all  ha%'e  time  to  be  throughly  dry, 
in  outer  Coat  can  be  laid  on  the  former.  It  grows 
of  it  self,  when    exposed  to   the    Air;    but  the 


Co! 

Fbf. 


Kmali 


609 


ia/rr. 


CAPTAIN    DAMPIER'S    VOYAGES 


I 


nii^n 


Colour  is  heightened  by  Oil  and  other  ingredients  mi 
^  with  it.  When  the  outside  Coat  is  dry,  they  polish  it  to 
bring  it  to  a  gloss.  This  is  done  chiefly  by  often  rubbing 
it  with  the  ball  or  Palm  of  their  Hands.  They  can  make 
the  Lack  of  any  colour,  and  temper  it  so  as  to  make 
therewith  good  Glew,  said  to  be  the  best  in  the  World  : 
It  is  also  very  cheap,  and  prohibited  Exportation.  They 
make  varnish  also  with  the  Lack. 

Here  is  also  Turpentine  in  good  plenty,  and  very  cheap. 
Our  Captain  bought  a  considerable  quantity  for  the  Ships 
use :  and  of  this  the  Carpenter  made  good  Pitch,  and  used 
it  for  covering  the  Seams,  after  they  were  caulked. 

The  Earthen  Ware  of  this  Country  is  course  and  of 
a  grey  Colour,  yet  they  make  great  quantities  of  small 
Earthen  Dishes,  that  will  hold  half  a  Pint  or  more.  They 
are  broader  towards  the  brim  than  at  the  bottom,  so  that 
they  may  be  stowed  within  one  another.  They  have  been 
sold  by  Europeans,  in  many  of  the  Malayan  Countries,  and 
for  that  reason  Capt.  Pool  in  his  first  Voyage  bought  the 
best  part  of  looooo,  in  hopes  to  sell  them  in  his  return 
homeward  at  Batavia,  but  not  finding  a  Market  for  them 
there,  he  carried  them  to  Bencouli  on  the  Island  Sumatra, 
where  he  sold  them  at  a  great  profit  to  Governour  Bloom: 
And  he  also  sold  most  of  them  at  good  Advantage  to  the 
Native  Malayans  there :  yet  some  thousands  were  still  at 
the  Fort  when  I  came  thither,  the  Country  being  glutted 
with  them.  Capt.  Weldon  also  bought  30  or  40000,  and 
carried  them  to  Fort  St.  George,  but  how  he  disposed  of 
them  I  know  not.  The  China  Wares  which  are  much 
finer,  have  of  late  spoiled  the  sale  of  this  Commodity  in 
most  places:  Yet  at  Rackan'  in  the  Bay  of  Bengali,  they 
are  still  esteemed,  and  sell  at  a  good  rate. 

The  several  sorts  of  Drugs  bought  and  sold  here,  are 
beyond  my  Knowledge :  but  here  is  China  root,'  Galingame,* 

>  Smiiax  China  L-    A  sort  of  sarsaparilla  once  thought  "  sovereign  for 
the  gOQt." 

'  Galingale,  "mild  ginger,"  the  root  of  some  East  Indian  roots  of  the 
genus  Alpinia. 

610 


I     SAPPAN   WOOD,   WORMSEED,   MUSK 

Rhubarb,  Ginger,  ficc.  Neither  do  I  know  whether  any  of  . 
these  grow  in  this  Country,  for  they  are  mostly  imported  ' 
from  their  Neighbours;  tho'  as  to  the  Ginger,  I  think  it 
grows  there.  Here  is  also  a  sort  of  Fruit  or  Berry  said  to 
grow  on  small  Bushes,  called  by  the  Dutch  Annise,'  because 
its  scent  and  taste  is  strong  like  that  of  the  Anniseed. 
This  Commodity  is  only  exported  hence  by  the  Dutch,  who 
carry  it  to  Batavia,  and  there  distil  it  among  their  Arack,  to 
give  it  an  Anniseed  flavour.     This  sort  of  Arack  is  not  lit 

»to  make  Punch  with,  neither  is  it  used  that  way,  but  for 
want  of  plain  Arack.  It  is  only  used  to  take  a  Dram  of  by 
itself,  by  the  Dutch  chiefly,  who  instead  of  Brandy,  will 
nratlow  large  doses  of  it,  tho'  it  be  strong  :  but  'tis  also 
much  used  and  esteemed  all  over  the  East-Indies. 

There  is  ot.c  sort  of  Dying-wood  in  this  Country  much 
like  the  Campeachy  Log-wood,  tho'  whether  the  same,  or 
WiK)d  of  greater  value,  T  know  not.  I  have  heard  that  'tis 
called  Sappan  Wood  ;  and  that  it  comes  from  Siam.  It 
wu  HTuller  than  what  we  usually  cut  in  the  Bay  of 
Campeachy ;  for  the  biggest  stick  that  I  saw  here  was  no 

.bigger  than  my  Leg,  and  most  of  it  much  smaller,  and 

snxikcd.  They  have  other  sort  of  Dyes;  but  I  can  give 
Ho  account  of  them.  They  dye  several  Colours  here,  but  I 
'nve  been  told  they  are  not  lasting.  They  have  many 
s  of  good  tall  Timber-trees  in  this  Country,  fit  for  any 
a  of  Building :  but  by  relation  none  very  durable.  For 
isting.  the  Fir  and  Ponc-trees  are  the  best.  Here  is 
much  Wormsecd,  but  it  grows  not  in  this  Kingdom.  It  is 
brought  from  within  the  Land,  from  the  Kingdom  of 
Bouun,  or  from  the  Province  of  Yunam,  bordering  on  this 
Kingdom,  yet  belonging  to  China.  From  thence  comes  the 
Musk  and  Rhubarb ;  and  these  three  Commixiities  are  said 
to  be  peculiar  to  Boutan  and  Yuium.  The  Musk  grows 
in  the  Cods  of  Goats.  The  same  Countries  yield  Gold 
also,  and  supply  this  Country  with  it :  for  whatever  Gold 
Mines  the  Toaquinesc  are  said  to  have  in  their  own 
Mountaina,  yet  they  do  not  work  upon  them. 

'  AatM :  /iUdam 
6ii 


CAPTAIN  DAMPIER*S  VOYAGES 

AM.  With  All  these  rich  Gunmoctitieat  oot  would  expect  the 
>M8  p^ie  to  be  rich;  but  the  Geoenlhy  we  veiy  poor, 
coondoing  what  a  Trade  is  driren  herb  Fdr  aef  Iwve 
fittle  or  no  Trade  by  Sea  themselves,  ^mept  for  EstiAltt> 
as  j^ce,  and  Fish,  wUch  is  spent  in  the  Country:  bat  the 
'  nuun  Trade  of  the  Countrf  is  maint«ned  by  the  Ownpsc, 
Ei^lish,  Dutch,  and  other  Merchant  Strangers,  who  either 
rende  here  ccMistantly,  to  make  their  annual  Rerama  hither. 
These  export  thdr  Commodities,  and  import  such  as  arc 
vendible  here.  The  Goods  imported  hitht:r  besides  Silver, 
are  Salt-peter,  Sulphiu*,  yjiglwti  Broad-Ctoath,  Cloath- 
rashes,^  some  Callicoes,  Pef^ier  and  other  Spices,  Lead, 
.  great  Guns,  &c.  but  of  Gws  ,thc  idng  Saker  is  most 
esteemed.  Few  these  Coramodilics  you  receive  Money  or 
Goods,  acccxdiiw  to  contract:  but  the  Country  is  so  very 
pOM-,  that,  as  I  lormerly  dnerred,  the  Merchant  commonly 
stays  3  or  4  Mentha  for  hb  Goods  after  he  has  -paid  for 
them;  because  the  FocM-are  not  employed  till  Ships  arrive 
in  the  Country,  and  then  they  are  set  to  work  by  the 
Mtmey  that  is  brought  thither  in  them.  The  King  buys 
.  great  Guns,  and  some  peces  of  Broad-Cloath  :  but  his  pay 
is  so  bad,  that  Merchants  care  not  to  deal  with  him,  could 
they  avoid  it.  But  the  trading  People  by  all  accounts  art 
honest  and  just ;  That  I  heard  a  Man  say,  who  had  traded 
there  ten  Year$,  in  which  time  he  dealt  for  many  Thousands 
of  Founds,  that  he  did  not  in  all  that  time  loose  i  o/.  by 
them  all. 

'  Rough  woollen  fabrics.      ' 


END    OF  VOL.    I 


'i   - 


/ 


( 


t'     I 

*    -    I     « 


1    t    ■    ■ 


The  borrower  musl  return  this  item  on  or  before 
the  lasi  date  stamped  below.  If  another  user 
places  a  recall  for  (his  item,  (he  borrower  will 
be  no(ined  of  the  need  for  an  eariier  return. 

Non-rrceipr  of  overdue  notices  does  nol  exempt 
the  borrower  from  overdue  fines. 


Harrgrd  College  Widener  Library 
Cambridge,  MA  02138        617-495-2413 


PlesM  handle  with  care. 

Thank  you  for  helping  to  present 
library  collections  at  Harvard. 
