AUSTRALOPITHECUS AFRICANUS: THE MAN-APE OF SOUTH AFRICA
By Prof. Raymond A. Dart, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa
Nature, Vol. 115, No. 2884 (7 February 1925), pp. 195-199
[Transcribed from the original journal page images; OCR of 1925 newsprint]

Australopithecus africanus: The Man-Ape of South Africa. 
By Prof. Raymonp A. Dart, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa. 

7 eae the close of 1924, Miss Josephine 

Salmons, student demonstrator of anatomy in 
the University of the Witwatersrand, brought to me 
the fossilised skull of a cercopithecid monkey which, 
through her instrumentality, was very generously 
loaned to the Department for description by its owner, 
Mr. E. G. Izod, of the Rand Mines Limited. I learned 
that this valuable fossil had been blasted out of the 
limestone cliff formation—at a vertical depth of 50 feet 
and a horizontal depth of 200 feet—at Taungs, which 
lies 80 miles north of Kimberley on the main line to 
Rhodesia, in Bechuanaland, by operatives of the 
Northern Lime Company. Important stratigraphical 
evidence has been forthcoming recently from this dis- 
trict concerning the succession of stone ages in South 
Africa (Neville Jones, Jour. Roy. Anthrop. Inst., 1920), 
and the feeling was entertained that this lime deposit, 
like that of Broken Hill in Rhodesia, might contain 
fossil remains of primitive man. 

I immediately consulted Dr. R. B. Young, professor 
of geology in the University of the Witwatersrand, 
about the discovery, and 
he, by a fortunate coin- 
cidence, was called down 
to Taungs almost syn- 
chronously to investigate 
geologically the lime de- 
posits of an adjacent farm. 
During his visit to Taungs, 
Prof. Young was enabled, 
through the courtesy of 
Mr. <A. F. Campbell, 
general manager of the 
Northern Lime Company, 
to inspect the site of the 
discovery and to select 
further samples of fossil 
material for me from the 
same formation. These 
included a natural cer- 
copithecid — endocranial 
cast, a second and larger cast, and some rock 
fragments disclosing portions of bone. Finally, Dr. 
Gordon D. Laing, senior lecturer in anatomy, obtained 
news, through his friend Mr. Ridley Hendry, of another 
primate skull from the same cliff. This cercopithecid 
skull, the possession of Mr. De Wet, of the Langlaagte 
Deep Mine, has also been liberally entrusted by him to 
the Department for scientific investigation. 

The cercopithecid remains placed at our disposal 
certainly represent more than one species of catarrhine 
ape. The discovery of Cercopithecide in this area is 
not novel, for I have been informed that Mr. S. 
Haughton has in the press a paper discussing at least 
one species of baboon from this same spot (Royal 
Society of South Africa). It is of importance that, 
outside of the. famous Fayiim area, primate deposits 
have been found on the African mainland at Oldaway 
(Hans Reck, Sitzungsbericht der Gesellsch. Naturforsch. 
Freunde, 1914), on the shores of Victoria Nyanza (C. W. 
Andrews, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., 1916), and in Bechuana- 

NO. 2884, VOL. 115] 

Fic. 1.—Norma facialis of Australo- 
pithecus africanus aligned on the 
Frankfort horizontal. 

land, for these discoveries lend promise to the expecta- 
tion that a tolerably complete story of higher primate 
evolution in Africa will yet be wrested from our rocks. 

In manipulating the pieces of rock brought back by 
Prof. Young, I found that the larger natural endo- 
cranial cast articulated exactly by its fractured frontal 
extremity with another piece of rock in which the 
broken lower and posterior margin of the left side of a 
mandible was visible. After cleaning the rock mass, 
the outline of the hinder and lower part of the facial 
skeleton came into view. Careful development of the 
solid limestone in which it was embedded finally 
revealed the almost entire face depicted in the accom- 
panying photographs. 

It was apparent when the larger endocranial cast was 
first observed that it was specially important, for its 
size and sulcal pattern revealed sufficient similarity 
with those of the chimpanzee and gorilla to demonstrate 
that one was handling in this instance an anthropoid 
and not a cercopithecid ape. Fossil anthropoids have 
not hitherto been recorded south of the Fayiim in 
Egypt, and living anthropoids have not been discovered 
in recent times south of Lake Kivu region in Belgian 
Congo, nearly 2000 miles to the north, as the crow 
flies. 

All fossil anthropoids found hitherto have been 
known only from mandibular or maxillary fragments, 
so far as crania are concerned, and so the general 
appearance of the types they represented has been 
uriknown ; consequently, a condition of affairs where 
virtually the whole face and lower jaw, replete with 
teeth, together with the major portion of the brain 
pattern, have been preserved, constitutes a specimen of 
unusual value in fossil anthropoid discovery. Here, 
as in Homo rhodesiensis, Southern Africa has provided 
documents of higher primate evolution that are amongst 
the most complete extant. 

Apart from this evidential completeness, the speci- 
men is of importance because it exhibits an extinct 
race of apes intermediate between living anthropoids and 
man. 

In the first place, the whole cranium displays 
humanoid rather than anthropoid lineaments. It is 
markedly dolichocephalic and leptoprosopic, and mani- 
fests in a striking degree the harmonious relation of 
calvaria to face emphasised by Pruner-Bey. As 
Topinard says, “A cranium elongated from before 
backwards, and at the same time elevated, is already 
in harmony by itself; but if the face, on the other 
hand, is elongated from above downwards, and narrows, 
the harmony is complete.” I have assessed, roughly 
the difference in the relationship of the glabella- 
gnathion facial length to the glabella-inion calvarial 
length in recent African anthropoids of an age com- 
parable with that of this specimen (depicted in Duck- 
worth’s “ Anthropology and Morphology,” second 
edition, vol. i.), and find that, if the glabella-inion 
length be regarded in all three as 100, then the glabella- 
gnathion length in the young chimpanzee is approxi- 
mately 88, in the young gorilla 80, and in this fossil 70, 
which proportion suitably demonstrates the enhanced 

196 

NATURE 

[ FEBRUARY 7, 1925 

relationship of cerebral length to facial length in the 
fossil (Fig. 2). 

The glabella is tolerably pronounced, but any traces 
of the salient supra-orbital ridges, which are present 
even in immature living anthropoids, are here entirely 
absent. Thus the relatively increased glabella-inion 
measurement is due to brain and not to bone. Allow- 
ing 4 mm. for the bone thickness in the inion region, 
that measurement in the fossil is 127 mii. ; 7.¢e. 4 mm. 
less than the same measurement in an adult chimpanzee 
in the Anatomy Museum at the University of the 
Witwatersrand. The orbits are not in any sense de- 
tached from the forehead, which rises steadily from their 
margins in a fashion amazingly human. The inter- 
orbital width is very small (13 mm.) and the ethmoids 
are not blown out laterally as in modern African 
authropoids. This lack of ethmoidal expansion causes 
the lacrimal fossz to face posteriorly and to lie rela- 
tively far back in the orbits, as in man. The orbits, 
instead of being subquadrate as in anthropoids, are 
almost circular, furnishing an orbital index of 100, 
which is well within the range of human variation 
(Topinard, “ Anthropology”). The malars, zygomatic 
arches, maxille, and mandible all betray a delicate and 
humanoid character. The facial prognathism is rela- 
tively slight, the gnathic index of Flower giving a value 
of 109, which is scarcely greater than that of certain 
Bushmen (Strandloopers) examined by Shrubsall. The 
nasal bones are not prolonged below the level of the 
lower orbital margins, as in anthropoids, but end above 
these, as in man, and are incompletely fused together 
in their lower half. Their maximum length (17 mm.) 
is not so great as that of the nasals in Eoanthropus 
dawsoni. They are depressed in the median line, as in 
the chimpanzee, in their lower half, but it seems 
probable that this depression has occurred post-mortem, 
for the upper half of each bone is arched forwards 
(Fig. 1). The nasal aperture is small and is just wider 
than it is high (17 mm.x16 mm.). There is no nasal 
spine, the floor of the nasal cavity being continuous 
with the anterior aspect of the alveolar portions of the 
maxilla, after the fashion of the chimpanzee and of 
certain New Caledonians and negroes (Topinard, loc. 
cit.). 

In the second place, the dentition is humanoid rather 
than anthropoid. The specimen is juvenile, for the 

%e 

AUSTRALOPITHECUS 
Fic. 2.—Cranial form in living anthropoids of similar age (after Duckworth) 

GORILLA. 

CHIMPANZEE . 

and in the new fossil. For this comparison, the fossil is regarded as 
having the same calvarial length as the gorilla. 

first permanent molar tooth only has erupted in both 
jaws on both sides of the face; i.e. it corresponds 
anatomically with a human child of six years of age. 
Observations upon the milk dentition of living primates 
are few, and only one molar tooth of the deciduous 
dentition in one fossil anthropoid is known (Gregory, 
“The Origin and Evolution of the Human Dentition,” 
1920). Hence the data for the necessary comparisons 
are meagre, but certain striking features of the milk 

NO. 2884, VOL. 115] 

dentition of this creature may be mentioned. The 
tips of the canine teeth transgress very slightly 
(o-5-0-75 mm.) the general margin of the teeth in each 
jaw, i.e. very little more than does the human milk 
canine. There is no diastema whatever between the 
premolars and canines on either side of the lower jaw, 
such as is present in the deciduous dentition of living 
anthropoids ; but the canines in this jaw come, as 
in the human jaw, 
into alignment 
with the incisors 
(Gregory, loc. cit.). 
There is a dias- 
tema (2 mm. on 
the right side, and 
3 mm. on the left 
side) between the 
canines and lateral 
incisors of the 
upper jaw; but 
seeing, first, that 
the incisors are 
narrow, and, sec- 
ondly, that diaste- 
mata (1 mm.-1°5 
mm.) occur between the central incisors of the upper 
jaw and between the medial and lateral incisors of 
both sides in the lower jaw, and, thirdly, that some 
separation of the milk teeth takes place even in man- 
kind (Tomes, “ Dental Anatomy,” seventh edition) 
during the establishment of the permanent dentition, 
it is evident that the diastemata which occur in the 
upper jaw are small. The lower canines, nevertheless, 
show wearing facets both for the upper canines and 
for the upper lateral incisors. 

The incisors as a group are irregular in size, tend to 
overlap one another, and are almost vertical, as in 
man; they are not symmetrical and well spaced, and 
do not project forwards markedly, as in anthropoids. 
The upper lateral incisors do project forwards to 
some extent and perhaps also do the upper central 
incisors very slightly, but the lateral lower incisors 
betray no evidence of forward projection, and the 
central lower incisors are not even vertical as in 
most races of mankind, but are directed slightly back- 
wards, as sometimes occurs in man. Owing to these 
remarkably human characters displayed by the de- 
ciduous dentition, when contour tracings of the upper 
jaw are made, it is found that the jaw and the teeth, 
as a whole, take up a parabolic arrangement com- 
parable only with that presented by mankind amongst 
the higher primates. These facts, together with the 
more minute anatomy of the teeth, will be illustrated 
and discussed in the memoir which is in the process of 
elaboration concerning the fossil remains. 

In the third place, the mandible itself is humanoid 
rather than anthropoid. Its ramus is, on the whole, 
short and slender as compared with that of anthropoids, 
but the bone itself is more massive than that of a 
human being of the same age. Its symphyseal region 
is virtually complete and reveals anteriorly a more 
vertical outline than is found in anthropoids or even 
in the jaw of Piltdown man. The anterior symphyseal 
surface is scarcely less vertical than that of Heidelberg 
man. The posterior symphyseal -surface in living 

Fic. 3.—Norma lateralis of Australopithecus 
africanus aligned on the Frankfort horizontal. 

o> 

FEBRUARY 7, 1925] 

NATURE 

197 

anthropoids differs from that of modern man in possess- 
ing a pronounced posterior prolongation of the lower 
border, which joins together the two halves of the 
mandible, and so forms the well-known simian shelf 
and above it a deep genial impression for the attach- 
ment of the tongue musculature. In this character, 
Eoanthropus dawsoni scarcely differs from the anthro- 
poids, especially the chimpanzee ; but this new fossil be- 
trays no evidence of such a shelf, the lower border of the 
mandible having been mass- 
ive and rounded after the 
fashion of the mandible of 
Homo heidelbergensis. 

That hominid characters 
were not restricted to the 
face in this extinct primate 
group is borne out by the 
relatively forward situation 
of the foramen magnum. 
The position of the basion 
can be assessed within a 
few millimetres of error, 
because a portion of the 
right exoccipital is present 
alongside the cast of the 
basal aspect of the cere- 
bellum. Its position is such 
that the basi - prosthion 
measurement is 89 mm., 
while the basi-inion measurement is at least 54mm. This 
relationship may be expressed in the form of a “ head- 
balancing ” index cf 60-7. The same index in a baboon 
provides a value of 41-3, in an adult chimpanzee 50-7, 
in Rhodesian man 83:7, in a dolichocephalic European 
go’g, and in a brachycephalic European 105°8. It is 
significant that this index, which indicates in a measure 
the poise of the skull upon the vertebral column, 
points to the assumption by this fossil group of an 
attitude appreciably more erect than that of modern 
anthropoids. The improved poise of the head, and 
the better posture of the whole body framework 
which accompanied this alteration in the angle at 
which its dominant member was supported, is of great 
significance. It means that a greater reliance was 
being placed by this group upon the feet as organs of 
progression, and that the hands were being freed from 
their more primitive function of accessory organs of 
locomotion. Bipedal animals, their hands were assum- 
ing a higher evolutionary rdle not only as delicate 
tactual, examining organs which were adding copiously 
to the animal’s knowledge of its physical environment, 
but also as instruments of the growing intelligence in 
carrying out more elaborate, purposeful, and skilled 
movements, and as organs of offence and defence. 
‘The latter is rendered the more probable, in view, first, 
of their failure to develop massive canines and hideous 
features, and, secondly, of the fact that even living 
baboons and anthropoid apes can and do use sticks 
and stones as implements and as weapons of offence 
(‘‘ Descent of Man,” p. 81 et seq.). 

Lastly, there remains a consideration of the endo- 
cranial cast which was responsible for the discovery 
of the face. The cast comprises the right cerebral 
and cerebellar hemispheres (both of which fortunately 
meet the median line throughout their entire dorsal 

NO. 2884, VOL. 115] 

Fic. 4.—Norma basalis of Australo- 
pithecus africanus aligned on 
the Frankfort horizontal. 

length) and the anterior portion of the left cerebral 
hemisphere. The remainder of the cranial cavity 
seems to have been empty, for the left face of the cast 
is clothed with a picturesque lime crystal deposit ; 
the vacuity in the left half of the cranial cavity was 
probably responsible for the fragmentation of the 
specimen during the blasting. The cranial capacity 
of the specimen may best be appreciated by the state- 
ment that the length of the cavity could not have been 
less than 114 mm., which is 3 mm. greater than that 
of an adult chimpanzee in the Museum of the Anatomy 
Department in the University of the Witwatersrand, 
and only 14 mm. less than the greatest length of the 
cast of the endocranium of a gorilla chosen for casting 
on account of its great size. Few data are available 
concerning the expansion of brain matter which takes 
place in the living anthropoid brain between the time 
of eruption of the first permanent molars and the time 
of their becoming adult. So far as man is concerned, 
Owen (“ Anatomy of Vertebrates,” vol. iii.) tells us 
that “The brain has advanced to near its term of 
size at about ten years, but it does not usually obtain 
its full development till between twenty and thirty 
years of age.” R. Boyd (1860) discovered an increase 
in weight of nearly 250 grams in the brains of male 
human beings after they had reached the age of seven 
years. It is therefore redSonable to believe that the 
adult forms typified by our present: specimen possessed 
brains which were larger than that of this juvenile 
specimen, and equalled, if they did not actually 
supersede, that of the gorilla in absolute size. 
Whatever the total dimensions of the adult brain 
may have been, there are not lacking evidences that 
the brain in this group of fossil forms was distinctive 
in type and was an instrument of greater intelligence 
that that of living anthropoids. The face of the 
endocranial cast is scarred unfortunately in several 
places (cross-hatched in the dioptographic tracing— 
see Fig. 5). It is evident that the relative proportion 

parallel sulcus. __ 
e ge 

Fic. 5.—Dioptographic tracing of Australopithecus africanus 
(right side), 4. 
of cerebral to cerebellar matter in this brain was 
greater than in the gorilla’s. The brain does not 
show that general pre- and post-Rolandic flattening 
characteristic of the living anthropoids, but presents 
a rounded and well-filled-out contour, which points to 
a symmetrical and balanced development of the 
faculties of associative memory and intelligent activity. 
The pithecoid type of parallel sulcus is preserved, 
but the sulcus lunatus has been thrust backwards 
towards the occipital pole by a pronounced. general 

198 

NATURE 

[FEBRUARY 7, 1925 

bulging of the parieto-temporo-occipital association 
areas. 

To emphasise this matter, I have reproduced (Fig. 6) 
superimposed coronal contour tracings taken at the 
widest part of the parietal region in the gorilla endo- 
cranial cast and in this fossil. Nothing could illustrate 
better the mental gap that exists between living 
anthropoid apes and the group of creatures which the 
fossil represents than the flattened atrophic appearance 
of the parietal region of the brain (which lies between 
the visual field on one hand, and the tactile and auditory 
fields on the other) in the former and its surgent 
vertical and dorso-lateral expansion in the latter. The 
expansion in this area of.the brain is the more sig- 
nificant in that it explains the posterior humanoid 
situation of the sulcus lunatus. It indicates (together 
with the narrow interorbital interval and human char- 
acters of the orbit) the fact that this group of beings, 
having acquired the faculty of stereoscopic vision, had 
profited beyond living anthropoids by setting aside a 
relatively much larger area of the cerebral cortex to 

Sr eS 7. “ey, 
“7 "a3 
- yy 
Fa ro 
e ; * 
tt a’ 
4: $ \ 
/ : ‘ 
' 
J 
N . : Pd 
‘ . a , 
~~~%, _—— 
te, oy] 
a. J 
Fic. 6.—Contour tracings of coronal sections through the widest part of the 
parietal region of the endocranial casts in Australopithecus ...... and 
in a gorilla ----. 

serve as a storehouse of information concerning their 
objective environment as its details were simultane- 
ously revealed to the senses of vision and touch, and 
also of hearing. They possessed to a degree un- 
appreciated by living anthropoids the use of their 
hands and ears and the consequent faculty of associating 
with the colour, form, and general appearance of objects, 
their weight, texture, resilience, and flexibility, as well 
as the significance of sounds emitted by them. In 
other words, their eyes saw, their ears heard, and their 
hands handled objects with greater meaning and to 
fuller purpose than the corresponding organs in recent 
apes. They had laid down the foundations of that dis- 
criminative knowledge of the appearance, feeling, and 
sound of things that was a necessary milestone in the 
acquisition of articulate speech. 

There is, therefore, an ultra-simian quality of the 
brain depicted in this immature endocranial cast which 
harmonises with the ultra-simian features revealed by 
the entire cranial topography and corroborates the 
various inferences drawn therefrom. The two thousand 
miles of territory which separate this creature from its 
nearest living anthropoid cousins is indirect testimony 
to its increased intelligence and mastery of its environ- 
ment. It is manifest that we are in the presence here 

of a pre-human stock, neither chimpanzee nor gorilla, 
which possesses a series of differential characters not 
encountered hitherto in any anthropoid stock. This 
complex of characters exhibited is such that it cannot 

NO. 2884, VOL. 115] 

be interpreted as belonging to a form ancestral to any 
living anthropoid. For this reason, we may be equally 
confident that there can be no question here of a 
primitive anthropoid stock such as has been recovered 
from the Egyptian Fayiim. Fossil anthropoids, vari- 
eties of Dryopithecus, have been retrieved in many 
parts of Europe, Northern Africa, and Northern India, 
but the present specimen, despite its youth, cannot be 
confused with anthropoids having the dryopithecid 
dentition. Other fossil anthropoids from the Siwalik 
hills in India (Miocene and Pliocene) are known which, 
according to certain observers, may be ancestral to 
modern anthropoids and even to man. 

Whether our present fossil is to be correlated with 
the discoveries made in India is not yet apparent ; 
that question can only be solved by a careful com- 
parison of the permanent molar teeth from both 
localities. It is obvious, meanwhile, that it represents 
a fossil group distinctly advanced beyond living anthro- 
poids in those two dominantly human characters of 
facial and dental recession on one hand, and im- 
proved quality of the brain on the other. Unlike 
Pithecanthropus, it does not represent an ape-like man, 
a caricature of precocious hominid failure, but a 
creature well advanced beyond modern anthropoids in 
just those characters, facial and cerebral, which are to 
be anticipated in an extinct link between man and his 
simian ancestor. At the same time, it is equally 
evident that a creature with anthropoid brain capacity, 
and lacking the distinctive, localised temporal expan- 
sions which appear to be concomitant with and neces- 
sary to articulate man, is no true man. ft is therefore 
logically regarded as a man-like ape. I propose ten- 
tatively, then, that a new family of Homo-simiade be 
created for the reception of the group of individuals 
which it represents, and that the first known species 
of the group be designated Australopithecus africanus, 
in commemoration, first, of the extreme southern and 
unexpected horizon of its discovery, and secondly, of 
the continent in which so.many new and important 
discoveries connected with the early history of man 
have recently been made, thus vindicating the Darwin- 
ian claim that Africa would prove to be the cradle of 
mankind. 

It will appear to many a remarkable fact that an 
ultra-simian and pre-human stock should be. discovered, 
in the first place, at this extreme southern point in 
Africa, and, secondly, in Bechuanaland, for one does 
not associate with the present climatic conditions 
obtaining on the eastern fringe of the Kalahari desert 
an environment favourable to higher primate life. It 
is generally believed by geologists (vide A. W. Rogers, 
‘* Post-Cretaceous Climates of South Africa,” South 
African Journal of Science, vol. xix., 1922) that the 
climate has fluctuated within exceedingly narrow limits 
in this country since Cretaceous times. We must 
therefore conclude that it was only the enhanced 
cerebral powers possessed by this group which made 
their existence possible in this untoward environment. 

In anticipating the discovery of the true links be- 
tween the apes and man in tropical countries, there 
has been a tendency to overlook the fact that, in the 
luxuriant forests of the tropical belts, Nature was 
supplying with profligate and lavish hand an easy and 
sluggish solution, by adaptive specialisation, of the 

FEBRuARY 7, 1925] 

NATURE 

199 

problem of existence in. creatures so well equipped 
mentally as living anthropoids are. For the production 
of man a different apprenticeship was needed to sharpen 
the wits and quicken the higher manifestations: of 
intellect—a more open veldt country where competition 
was keener between swiftness and stealth, and where 
adroitness of thinking and movement played a pre- 
ponderating rdle in the preservation of the species. 
Darwin has said, ‘‘ no country in the world abounds in 
a greater degree with dangerous beasts than Southern 
Africa,” and, in my opinion, Southern Africa, by 
providing a vast open country with occasional wooded 
belts and a relative scarcity of water, together with a 
fierce and bitter mammalian competition, furnished a 
laboratory such as ‘was essential to this penultimate 
phase of human evolution. 

In Southern Africa, where climatic conditions appear 
to have fluctuated little since Cretaceous times, and 
where ample dolomitic formations have provided in- 
numerable refuges during life, and burial-places after 
death, for our troglodytic forefathers, we may con- 
fidently anticipate many complementary discoveries 
concerning this period in our evolution. 

In conclusion, I desire to place on record my in- 
debtedness to Miss Salmons, Prof. Young, and Mr. 
Campbell, without whose aid the discovery would not 
have been made ; to Mr. Len Richardson for providing 
the photographs ; to Dr. Laing and my laboratory staff 
for their willing assistance ; and particularly to Mr. 
H. Le Helloco, student demonstrator in the Anatomy 
Department, who has prepared the illustrations for this 
preliminary statement.
