Journey to Lhasa and Central Tibet
Sarat Chandra Das, ed. W. W. Rockhill (1902)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): The 1902 first edition (London: John Murray; New York: Dutton), edited by W. W. Rockhill, of Sarat Chandra Das's Journey to Lhasa and Central Tibet. Public domain.

========================================================================

JOURNEY  TO  LHASA  AND  CENTRAL  TIBET.


SARAT CHANDRA DAS, CLE.


A JOURNEY TO LHASA
AND CENTRAL TIBET.


By SARAT CHANDEA DAS, C.I.E.,

\  <  \

Of  the  Bengal  Educational  Service,  Member  of  the  Asiatic  Society,  Bengal,  etc.


EDITED BY

THE HON.  W.  W.  EOCKHILL.


SECOND EDITION, REVISED.


NEW Y  O  E  K  :
E. P. BUTTON & COMPANY.

L  O  N  D  ( )  X  :

JOHN  MUERAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.

1902.


PRINTED BV

WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED,

LONDON AND BECCLES.


DS7g5

ict0  2.


INTRODUCTION.


S  All  AT  Chandea  Das  was  born  in  the  town  of  Chittagong,  in  Eastern
Bengal,  in  1849,  in  a  Hindu  family  of  the  vaidiia,  or  medical  caste.
He  received  his  education  in  the  Presidency  College  at  Calcutta,
where  he  became  favourably  known  to  Sir  Alfred  Croft,  the  present
Director  of  Public  Instruction  of  Bengal,  who  ever  since  has  been  his
friend  and  guide  in  his  geographical  and  literary  work,  and  by  whose
representations  to  the  Indian  Government  it  became  possible  for  him
to  perform  his  important  journeys  into  Tibet.

While  still  in  the  engineering  department  of  the  college  he  was
appointed  in  1874  head  master  of  the  Bhutia  Boarding  School,  just
opened  at  Darjiling  by  order  of  the  Lieutenant-Governor  of  Bengal,
Sir  George  Campbell.  Sarat  Chandra  at  once  applied  himself  with
characteristic  energy  to  the  study  of  the  Tibetan  language,  and
established  friendly  relations  with  the  Raja  of  Sikkim  and  many  of
the  leading  lamas  in  that  country,  to  which  he  made  several  short
trips  in  the  succeeding  years.

In  1878,  lama  Ugyen-gyatso,  who  was  attached  to  his  school  as
Tibetan  teacher,  was  sent  to  Tashilhunpo  and  Lhasa  with  tribute  from
his  monastery,  and  advantage  was  taken  of  tliis  opportunity  to
ascertain  whether  permission  could  not  be  obtained  from  the  Tibetan
authorities  for  Sarat  Chandra  to  visit  Tibet.  The  lama  was  so
fortunate  as  to  obtain  from  the  Prime  Minister  of  the  Panchen
rinpoche  of  Tashilhunpo  an  invitation  for  Sarat  Chandra  to  visit  that
great  centre  of  lamaist  learning,  of  which  George  Bogle  and  Samuel
Turner  have  left  us  such  interesting  descriptions  ;  and,  so  as  further  to
insure  his  safety  and  justify  his  presence  in  the  country  in  the  eyes
of  the  suspicious  lamas  and  Chinese,  the  Minister  had  the  Babu's
name  entered  as  a  student  of  theology  in  the  Grand  Monastery  of  that


vi  INTRODUOTION.

place.  A  passport  was  also  brought  Sarat  Chandra  by  the  laraa,
issued  to  him  by  the  Prime  jMinister,  by  which  a  choice  of  roads  to
enter  Tibet  was  given  him,  and  his  safe  conduct  insured  to  Shigatse.

Armed  with  these  credentials,  Sarat  Chandra  set  out  for  Tashi-
Ihunpo  in  June,  1879,  accompanied  by  lama  Ugyen-gyatso,  and  there
he  remained  for  nearl}-  six  months,  the  guest  of  the  Prime  Minister,
with  whose  assistance  he  was  able  to  make  a  careful  examination  of
the  rich  collections  of  books  in  the  great  libraries  of  the  convent,
bringing  back  with  him  to  India  a  large  and  valuable  collection  of
works  in  Sanskrit  and  Tibetan,  He  also  explored  during  this  journey
the  country  north  and  nortli-east  of  Kanchanjinga,  of  which  nothing
was  previously  known,  noting  with  great  care  observations  of  bearing
and  distances.  Not  the  least  valuable  result  of  this  journey  was,
however,  the  friendly  relations  which  the  traveller  was  able  to
establish  with  the  liberal  and  powerful  Prime  Minister,  who,  deeply
interested  in  w^estern  civilization  and  its  wonderful  discoveries,  of
which  he  had  learned  much  from  the  mouth  of  Sarat  Chandra,
requested  him  to  come  back  again  to  Tashilhunpo,  to  instruct  him
further  in  the  wonders  of  the  west.

An  account  of  tliis  first  journey  was  printed  by  the  Bengal
Government  some  time  after  tlie  author's  return,  with  a  prefatory
note  by  the  traveller's  friend.  Sir  Alfred  Croft.  As  the  route  therein
described  is  the  same  as  that  followed  by  the  traveller  in  his  second
and  more  extended  journey  of  1881-82,  and  as  the  results  of  his
studies  in  Tibet  in  1879,  as  shown  in  this  report,  bear  nearly
exclusively  on  historical  and  religious  subjects,  it  has  been  deemed
advisable  to  omit  it  from  the  present  publication,  embodying  in  footnotes
all  such  details  as  have  been  found  in  it  bearing  on  the  geography
and  ethnology  of  Tibet,  and  which  are  not  in  the  later  and  fuller  report.

The  year  1880  was  passed  by  Sarat  Chandra  at  his  liome  in
Darjiling,  working  on  papers  on  the  history,  religion,  etlmology,  and
folk-lore  of  Tibet,  drawn  from  the  data  collected  during  his  journey.
These  papers,  most  of  them  of  great  value  to  Oriental  students,  have
since  appeared  in  the  Journal  of  the  Bengal  Asiatic  Society  and  in
that  of  the  Buddhist  Text  Society  of  India,  which  Sarat  Chandra
founded  in  1892,  and  of  which  he  has  since  remained  the  secretary.


INTB  OD  UCTION.  vii

In  Xovember,  1881,  in  fulfilment  of  the  promise  previously  made
to  the  Prime  Minister  of  the  Panchen  rinpoche,  Sarat  Chandra
started  on  his  second  journey  to  Tibet,  again  accompanied  by  Ugyen-
gyatso,  who  acted  as  secretary,  collector,  and  surveyor,  though  much
of  the  later  work,  including  the  extremely  important  survey  of  Lake
Palti  (Yamdo  tso),  was  done  by  the  traveller  himself.  Sarat  Chandra
again  established  his  headquarters  at  Tashilhunpo,  whence  he  made
various  excursions  along  both  banks  of  the  great  Tsangpo,  from  Sakya
in  the  west  to  Samye  and  Tse-tang  in  the  east.  He  was  also  so
fortunate  as  to  be  able  to  make  a  short  visit  to  Lhasa,  which  had
only  been  done  twice  by  native  explorers  prior  to  his  time,  once  in
1866  by  i^ain  Singh,  and  again  in  1880  by  Kishen  Singh,  the  latter
making  a  detailed  map  of  the  whole  city  and  its  environs.  He  was
present  at  an  audience  of  the  Tale  lama,  and  visited  a  number  of  the
important  monuments  of  the  city ;  but  for  various  reasons,  especially
of  a  prudential  nature,  he  was  prevented  from  seeing  many  places  of
great  interest  in  and  around  the  city ;  but  his  valuable  notes  are
a  most  important  addition  to  the  descriptions  left  us  by  previous
travellers.

After  tins  brief  visit  to  the  capital  of  Tibet,  Sarat  Chandra
explored  the  valley  of  the  Yalung,  where  Tibetan  civilization  is  said
to  have  first  made  its  appearance,  gathering  everywhere,  with  the
usual  thoroughness  which  distinguishes  his  work,  valuable  information
concerning  each  locality  traversed.  In  January,  1883,  he  re-entered
India  after  an  absence  of  about  fourteen  months.

The  report  of  this  journey  was  printed  in  two  separate  publica-
tions by  order  of  the  Government  of  Bengal.  They  are  entitled,
"  Narrative  of  a  Journey  to  Lhasa,"  and  "  Narrative  of  a  Journey
Round  Lake  Palti  (Yamdok),  and  in  Lhokha,  Yarlung,  and  Sakya."
For  various  reasons  these  reports  were  kept  as  strictly  confidential
documents  by  the  Indian  Government  until  about  1890,  when
selections  from  them,  bearing  exclusively  upon  the  ethnology  of
Tibet,  however,  appeared  in  an  article  in  the  July  number  of  the
Contemporary  licview,  and  five  years  later  further  extracts  from  them
were  published  in  the  August  number  of  the  Nineteenth  Century.  It
is  these  reports  which,  with  only  such  slight  modifications  as  have


viii  INTR  OD  UCTION.

seemed  absolutely  necessaiy  to  make  the  narrative  connected,  are
published  in  the  present  volume.

In  1885,  when  the  Government  of  India  contemplated  sending  a
mission  to  Tibet,  and  the  late  Honourable  Colman  Macauley  was  sent
by  it  to  Peking  to  obtain  the  necessary  authorization  of  the  Chinese
Government  to  the  projected  embassy,  Sarat  Chandra  accompanied
him  to  the  Chinese  capital,  where  he  remained  several  months  in  the
early  part  of  the  year.  It  was  during  this  visit  to  Peking  that  I
became  acquainted  with  the  Babu,  to  whom  I  felt  strongly  drawn  by
my  lifelong  interest  in  Tibetan  studies.  Sarat  Chandra  lived,  while
at  Peking,  in  the  lamasery  outside  the  An-ting  gate,  known  as  the
Hsi  Huang  ssu,  and  in  which  all  Tibetan  traders  stop  when  at
Peking.  He  wore  the  dress  common  to  lamas  in  China,  and  was
always  called  the  "  Ka-che  lama,"  or  "  the  lama  from  Kashmir."  His
knowledge  of  Tibetan,  his  extensive  travels,  and  his  courteous  manners
gained  for  him  the  friendship  of  many  of  the  lamas,  among  others  of
the  Chang-chia  Hutuketu,  the  Metropolitan  of  the  lama  church  in
China.  Had  the  mission  ever  been  sent  to  Tibet,  it  was  understood
that  Sarat  Chandra  was  to  accompany  it,  and  he  would  have  rendered
it  valuable  service ;  but  the  project  was  abandoned,  and  since  then
the  Babu  has  bent  all  his  energies  to  the  publication  of  Tibetan  texts
and  to  the  preparation  of  other  works  on  Buddhism  while  living  in
Darjiling,  where  he  holds  the  position  of  Tibetan  translator  to  the
Government  of  Bengal.

The  services  he  rendered  Mr.  Macauley  while  in  Peking  were
deemed,  however,  of  such  value  Ijy  the  Indian  Government,  that  on
his  return  to  Bengal  he  was  given  the  title  of  Eai  ]:>ahadur,  and
created  a  Companion  of  the  Order  of  the  Indian  Empire,  and  in  1887
the  lioyal  Geographical  Society  awarded  him  the  "  Back  Premium  "
for  his  geographical  researches.

The  amount  of  literary  work  accomplished  by  Sarat  Chandra  since
his  return  from  Tibet  in  1883  is  enormous  in  bulk,  and  its  value  to
students  cannot  Ije  over-estimated.  He  brought  back  with  him  from
his  travels  over  two  Inmdred  volumes,  manuscripts  or  lilock-prints,
cibtained  from  the  great  libraries  in  Tibet,  a  number  of  them  in
Sanskrit,  and  for  many  centuries  past  lost  in India. From  these


TNTRODUGTION.  ix

sources  he  has  drawn  for  the  preparation  of  the  valuable  papers
which  he  has  since  publislied,  a  list  of  which  would  occupy  several
pages.  Besides  a  large  number  of  translations  into  English  of  Tibetan
texts,  he  has  edited  in  Sanskrit  for  the  '  Bibliotheca  Indica '
Kshemendra's  poem,  entitled  "  Avadana  Kalpalata,"  which  he  was  so
fortunate  as  to  discover  in  Lhasa,  and  in  Tibetan  an  historical  work
of  great  value,  another  giving  the  history  of  the  pre-Buddhist  or  Bon
religion  of  Tibet,  a  very  valuable  native  grammatical  work,  and  others
too  numerous  to  mention.  He  is  now  engaged,  and  has  well  on
through  the  press,  a  Tibetan-English  dictionary,  which,  he  tells  me,
will  be  of  about  two  thousand  pages,  exclusive  of  a  Sanskrit-English
appendix  of  Buddhist  terms.

This  brief  notice  of  Sarat  Chandra's  literary  work  will  suffice,
however,  to  show  that  his  labours  in  this  field  are  as  important  as
those  which  he  has  rendered  to  geography.  Personally,  I  am  under
a  lasting  debt  of  gratitude  to  him  for  the  valuable  information  which
he  gave  me  while  in  Peking,  and  which  was  later  on  of  great  use  to
me  during  my  explorations  in  Tibet,  and  I  hold  myself  particularly
fortunate  in  having  been  chosen  by  the  Eoyal  Geographical  Society
to  edit  his  reports,  as  it  is  a  means  of  publicly  expressing  my
indebtedness  to  him,  and  also,  I  trust,  of  helping  him  to  take  the
place  he  so  justly  deserves  beside  Csoma  de  Koros,  as  one  of  the
greatest  pioneers  of  exploration  and  discovery  in  Tibet.

This  introductory  note  would  not  be  complete  if  further  reference
were  not  made  to  the  Babu's  faithful  companion  and  assistant  in  his
two  journeys  to  Tibet,  lama  Ugyen-gyatso.  The  lama,  who  is  a
Tibetan  from  Sikkim  and  connected  with  the  reigning  family  of  that
State,  was  born  in  1851  at  Yansang,  and  at  the  age  of  ten  entered  the
lamasery  of  Pema-yangtse,  where  he  took  the  usual  course  of  monastic
studies  for  twelve  years.  In  1873  he  visited,  for  the  first  time,
Darjiling  in  the  suite  of  the  Eaja  of  Sikkim,  and  a  little  later  on  in  the
same  year  he  was  designated  by  that  Prince,  and  at  the  request  of
the  Deputy-Commissioner,  Mr.  Edgar,  to  fill  the  post  of  Tibetan
teacher  at  the  Bhutia  school  at  Darjiling,  which  it  was  proposed  to
open.  For  a  time  the  lama  was  employed  in  the  ofl&ce  of  the
Deputy-Commissioner, and accompanied  that  officer  on a  visit  to


X  INTIWDUCTION.

Sikkiiii.  In  IS 74  lie  entered  upon  his  duties  as  teacher  in  the
school,  and  continued  there  until  1878,  when  he  went  to  Tibet,  as
previously  noted,  to  bear  tribute  from  his  lamasery  to  the  heads  of
the  church.  During  the  lama's  residence  at  iJarjiling  he  had  been
instructed  in  the  use  of  such  surveying  instruments  as  it  is  customary
for  the  trans-frontier  surveyors  to  use,  and  the  accurate  work  which
he  did  during  his  various  journeys  bears  witness  to  the  thoroughness
with  which  he  was  instructed  and  to  his  own  ability.  From  this
journey  of  1878,  the  lama  brought  back  with  him  the  passport  which
enabled  Chandra  Das  to  make  his  two  journeys  to  Tibet,  in  both  of
which  he  accompanied  him,  rendering  him  everywhere  true  and
valuable  service.

The  discovery  by  Sarat  Chandra  in  1882  of  the  true  dimensions
and  shape  of  Lake  Palti,*  seemed  to  Sir  Alfred  Croft  so  important
that  in  June,  1883,  he  despatched  the  lama  to  cover  the  same  ground
in  order  to  check  off,  verify,  and  complete  the  survey  of  the  Babu.
This  he  successfully  did,  adding  only  to  the  latter's  work  a  small
portion  to  the  south-east  of  the  lake,  l)ut  establishing  the  great
accuracy  of  the  previous  survey.  He  also  explored  the  Lhobrak  (Manas
valley,  and  again  visited  Lhasa,  returning  to  India  by  way  of  the
Tang  la  and  Chumbi  valley,  and  reaching  Darjiling  in  December  of
the  same  year.  A  report  of  this  work  was  prepared  by  Colonel,  now
Sir  Thomas,  Holdich,  and  appeared  in  the  "  Report  of  the  Explorations
in  Sikkim,  Bhutan,  and  Tibet  from  1856  to  1886,"  which  was
published  in  1889  by  the  Trigonometrical  Survey  of  India,  and  is
frequently  quoted  in  the  notes  to  the  present  narrative.

Since  then  the  lama,  whose  services  have  been  rewarded  by  the
Indian  Government  with  the  title  of  Eai  Bahadur,  a  silver  medal  and
a  grant  of  money,  has  been  employed  as  chief  Tibetan  translator  to
Government,  serving  in  that  capacity  during  the  late  Sikkim  expedi-
tion, and  has  also  given  valuable  assistance  to Sarat  Chandra  in

editing  Tibetan  texts.

AV.  W. KOCKHILL.
Block  Island,  U.S.A.,
July  27,  1899.t

*  Sai-iit  Cliandra  has,  in  lionour  of  Sir  Alfred  Croft,  named  the  lake  Yanido  Croft.
See  Journ.  Buddh.  Text  Soc,  iv.  jjt.  iii.  p.  iv.

t  The  publiciitiou  of  thia  volume  lias  been  unavoidably  delayed.


CONTENTS


CHAPTER  PACK

I. JoUR>rEY FROJI DaRJILIXG TO TASHILnUXPO ... ... ...  1

II. Residence  at  Tashilhuxpo ... ... ... ...  45

III.  Journey  to  Dongtse ... ... ... ... ...  G9

IV.  Residence at  Tashilhuxpo,  axd  preparations  for  Journey  to

Lhasa ... ... ... ... ... ...  104

V. Froji  Tashilhuxpo  to  Yamdo  Samdixg,  and  thexce  to  Lhasa  122

VI. Residexce  at  Lhasa ... ... ... ... ...  148

VII. GOVERXMEXT OF LhASA — CUSTOMS, FESTIVALS, ETC. ...  171

VIII. Returx  TO  Tashilhuxpo  an-d  Ugyex- gyatso's  visit  to  the  Bon'bo

Saxctuary  of  Rigyal  Sent)Ar .. ... ... ...  105

IX. FUXERAL OF the PaNCHEX RiNPOCHE  — ViSIT TO THE GrEAT

Lamasery  of  Samye  axd  to  Yarluxg  ... ... ...  213

X. Visit  to  Sakya  axd  Return  to  India ... ... ...  237

XI. Social  DmsioNS — Marriage — Fuxeral.s — ^Iedicixe — Festivals  246


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.*


PAGE

Portrait  of  Sarat  Chandra  Das ... ... ... ...  Frontispiece

Map  showing  the Routes op Sarat Chandra  Das  through  Sikkim and

Tibet  ... ... ... ... ... ... ...  ... 1

A  LiMBu  Woman  of  the  Kikati  Tribe ... ... ... ...  ... 9

A  Lepcha  Soldier  ... ... ... ... ... ...  ... 25

Sarat  Chandra  crossing  the  Donkhya  Pass ... ... ...  ... 42

Town  of  Shigatse  ... ... ... ... ... ...  ... 45

The  Grand  Monastery  op  Tashilhunpo  . . . ... ... ...  ... 50

Khandko  Ye-shes. Padma  Sambhava. Lha-cham  Mandaeasa  ... 58

Chang-sa  Egyab-pa,  Wine-drinking  concluding  Wedding  Ceremonies  ... 73

Black-hat  Dance  (Shanag  Cham) ... ... ... ...  ... 115

A  Tibetan  Lhacham  (Tibetan  Princess)  in  Full  Dress  ... ...  ... 120

Tibetan  Nobleman  ... ... ... ... ... ...  ... 125

Nam  Tos-sras  (Vaisravana),  the  Guardian  King  op  the  North ...  ... 136

The  Disposal  of  the  Dead  (by  cutting  the  Corpse  into  pieces)  ... 140

Plan  of  Lhasa ... ... ... ... ... ...  ... 149

Plan  of  the  City  of  Lhasa ... ... ... ...  ... 151

POTALA, THE RESIDENCE OF THE DaLAI LAMA, AT LhASA ... ...  ... 154

Paldan  Lhamo  (srimati-devi) ... ... ... ...  ... 158

Cho-Khang,  THE  Grand  Temple  of  Buddha,  at  Lhasa ... ...  ... 160

Funeral  Procession ... ... ... ... ...  ... 164

Potala,  the  Palace  op  the  Grand  Lama ... ... ...  ... 166

Lama  delivering  an  Oracle ... ... ... ...  ... 175

A  Little  Girl,  Daughter  of  a  Tibetan  Nobleman ... ...  ... 200

The  "Shabdo"  (Foot  Dance)  of  Tibet ... ... ...  ... 201

Lake  below  the  Yumptso  La,  Sikkim ... ... ... ...  ... 215

View  in  Lhonak  looking  towards  the  Naku  La ... ...  ... 219

View  in  Lhonak  near  Tebli ... ... ... ... ...  ... 223

Cane  Bridge  on  the  Rungit  River  ... ... ... ...  ... 229

Bamboo  Galleries  in  Talung  Valley ... ... ... ...  ... 233

Waterfall  above  Talung  Monastery  on  the  Way  to  Yumptso  La  ... 239

View  in  Lhonak,  Chomuimo  in  Distance ... ... ...  ... 243

Spurs  op  Simvu  and  Kangchenjunga  from  the  Moraine  of  the  Zemu  Glacier 249

SiNIOLCHUM  OR  D" ... ... ... ... ... ...  ... 253

Map  op  Tibet  and  the  surrounding  Regions ... ...  ... At  end

*  The  views  are  intended  to  show  the  general  character  of  the  scenery,  and  do  not
necessarily  illustrate  places  visited  by  the  autlior.


JOURNEY  TO  LHASA  AND CENTEAL TIBET.

CHAPTER  I.

JOUENEY FKOM DAKJILING TO TASHILHUNPO.

November  7,  1881. — On  the  night  of  my  departure  from  Darjiling,*
the  moon  was  shining  brightly,  though  some  dark  clouds  presaged
a  slight  fall  of  rain.  Our  eyes  often  turned  with  anxiety  towards  the
mountain-tops  on  the  eastern  outskirts  of  Nepal,  to  see  if  snow  was
falling  on  them ;  and  the  fear  of  death  in  the  snows  and  the  hope  of
overcoming  the  obstacles  of  nature  alternated  within  me  as  I  left  my
home  in  Darjiling,  soon  to  bid  a  long  farewell  to  my  native  land,
with  but  faint  hope  that  I  would  ever  see  it  again.

I  rode  on  silently,  and,  to  my  great  relief,  unnoticed  by  any  one,
save  one  or  two  Bhutias  on  their  way  towards  Darjiling,  and  in
the  stillness  of  the  night  we  could  hear  the  songs  of  the  workwomen
of  Takvar  and  the  music  of  their  pipes  and  drums.  Coming  to  the
river,  which  was  rather  broad  at  this  season  of  the  year,  I  met  lama
Ugyen-gyatso,  who  was  waiting  to  help  me  across.  Three  or  four
bamboos  loosely  laid  over  the  main  stream  enabled  us  to  cross,  though
with  some  difficulty,  and  with  the  help  of  an  intelligent  Bhutia
attendant  I  was  able  to  push  on  over  the  narrow  slippery  path  till
half-past  one,  when  I  reached  Gok,  now  a  deserted  village,  where,  in
place  of  the  dozen  shops  and  pretty  Buddhist  shrine  which  formerly
marked  the  place,  I  found  but  a  cow-shed  where  a  Nepali  was  snoring
fast  asleep.  It  was  here  that  the  up-country  grain- sellers  used  to
come  to  buy  large  quantities  of  Indian  corn  and  cardamom  seed  to
resell  in  the  Darjiling  bazar.

*  On  the  origin  of  Darjiling  as  a  eanatorinm,  see  Hooker, 'Himalayan  Journals,'
(1854)  1.  115.

B


2  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

Spreading  our  rugs  in  the  long  grass  near  the  cow-shed,  we  tried
to  rest  for  a  wliile ;  hut  what  with  the  unevenness  of  the  ground,
insects  creeping  over  me,  the  prickly  points  of  Ijramhles  and  weeds
penetrating  the  thin  rug  on  which  I  lay,  and  a  shower  of  rain
which  wetted  us  through,  we  could  get  no  sleep,  so  we  started  again
at  four  in  the  morning.  The  path,  hardly  a  foot  broad,  was  choked
with  weeds  and  long  grass.  Lighting  my  lantern,  I  followed
Plmrchung,  my  shot-gun  tied  across  the  top  of  the  load  he  carried,
and  with  many  a  slip  and  tumble  we  reached  the  valley  of  the
Rummam  at  daybreak.

Novcmher  8. — The  Eummam,  one  of  tlie  principal  feeders  of  the
Great  Piungit,  rises  in  the  Singli  mountains,  and  forms  the  boundary
between  Britisli  territory  and  independent  Sikkim  on  the  north-west,
all  the  country  to  the  right  (south)  of  it  belonging  to  the  former
(iovernment.  We  found  it  a  raging  torrent,  and  only  spanned  by  a
light  footbridge  of  bamboo  poles  resting  on  a  huge  boulder  in  the
middle  of  the  stream,  and  held  down  by  rocks.  The  Lepchas  and
Limbus  catch  fish,  sometimes  of  considerable  size,  in  the  cold  season
in  the  pools  in  the  river-bed,  which  the  former  sell  in  the  Darjiling
bazar.  Sal  trees  were  abundant,  and  on  the  hill-slopes  we  saw
cardamom  and  cotton  now  ready  to  be  picked.  On  the  larger  patches
of  cultivation,  guards  were  stationed  in  bamboo  watch-houses  to  scare
away  the  monkeys  and  bears  with  bamboo  clappers.  I  was  told  that
a  large  species  of  monkeys,  besides  the  small  variety  of  which  we
saw  a  few,  are  found  in  this  valley,  and  that  they  are  a  terror  to  the
peasants  and  to  solitary  female  travellers.*  To  kill  these  the  Lepchas
use  dogbane  and  other  poisonous  roots,  which  they  mix  with  cooked
edible  roots  or  rice.

On  nearing  the  bridge,  we  fell  in  with  some  twenty  men  carrying
oranges  to  Darjiling,  but  I  was  fortunately  able  to  pass  by  unnoticed.
After  a  short  rest,  during  which  I  had  some  breakfast,  and  changed
my  Indian  dress  for  a  Tibetan  one,  we  resumed  our  journey  uphill,
leaving  the  Mitogang  road  on  our  right.  Antelope  and  wild  goat
iiliuiunl  lieveabout,  l)ut  the  villagers  shoot  but  little  :  they  are  so  poor

*  Hooker,  op,  cit.,  ii.  37,  mentions  sceinp;  a  troop  of  large  monkeys  in  the
Lamteug  valley  (alt.  9000  feet)  in  Sikkim.  Ihid.,]>.  108,  he  says  that  in  the  most  snowy
part  of  Sikkim  (near  the  Tnnkra  la)  "large  monkeys  are  also  found  on  the  skirls  of
the  pine  forests,  and  a  curious  long-tailed  animal,  Ailurun  orJiracmts,  iieculiiir  to  the
Himalaya,  sometliing  between  a  diiiiinulive  bear  and  a  squirrel."  Large  monkeys  are
also  found  in  Eastern  Tibet  at  about  'JOOO  feet  alt.— (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  6

that  they  have  hardly  a  dozen  matchlocks  among  them  all.  Nepalese
settlers  are  numerous  here,  and  I  noticed  some  Brahmans  and  Chetris
who  live  chiefly  by  selling  milk  and  butter.  "We  passed  several
paddy  fields  made  on  terraces  along  the  hillsides,  where  ploughs
drawn  by  bullocks  were  used ;  but  the  Bhutias  neither  terrace  the
hillsides  nor  do  they  use  ploughs,  but  keep  to  their  time-honoured
implements,  hoes  and  clubs  {in)  of  oak,  by  which  they  get  but  scanty
returns.  The  Limbus  *  till  the  ground  for  three  consecutive  years,
and  then  leave  it  fallow  for  three,  when  the  weeds  are  cut  and  burnt,
and  it  is  again  put  under  cultivation.

After  ascending  several  hills  by  steep  paths,  we  came  to  the  top
of  a  ridge  marked  by  a  mcndoiKj  and  a  cJwrten,'\  and  from  whence  a
picturesque  view  of  the  valley  of  Dhuramdien,  dotted  with  numerous
houses,  and  of  the  surrounding  country  is  obtained.  This  spot  is
called  Mani-dara  by  the  Pahirias,  and  Chor ten-gang  by  the  Bhutias,
both  names  meaning  "  the  ridge  of  the  sacred  stuim!^  Here  we  halted
by  the  side  of  a  rill,  and  purchased  two  bottles  of  imcnva  beer  J  and
vegetables  from  some  Limbus.

November  9. — Our  way  led  along  an  easy  path  by  Limbu  houses
with  sheepfolds  and  pigsties  in  front  of  them,  and  around  which  a  few
goats  and  cows  were  also  seen.  The  Limbu  fowls,  by  the  way,  are
not  so  large  as  those  of  the  Bhutias.  As  I  journeyed  on  we  talked  of
some  of  the  Limbu  §  customs,  the  most  remarkable  of  which  is  that

*  Called  Chung  by  the  Lepchas.  Though  not  divided  into  castes,  they  belong  to
several  tribes.  All  consider  themselves  as  the  earliest  inhabitants  of  the  Tambur  valley,
thougli  they  have  a  tradition  of  Laving  originally  emigrated  from  Tibet.  See  Hooker,
op.  cit.,  i.  137.

t  It  would,  perhaps,  be  better  to  transcribe  this  mangdong  (from  Tibetnn  mang,
"  many ;  "  and  dong,  "  stones  ").  Chorten  is  mchod,  "  ofiering ;  "  rten,  "  receptacle."  It
is  usually  pronounced  chiirten. See  infra,  37,  40. — (W.  R.)

X  Made  from  half-fermented  millet.  Murwa  is  Eleusine  coracana.  See  Hooker,  op.
cit.,  i.  133,  175.— (W.  E.)

§  The  country  between  tbe  Arun  and  Tambur  is  called  Limbudu  by  the  Nepali
natives,  and  the  aboriginal  people  who  have  dwelt  there  from  time  immemorial  are
designated  by  the  name  of  Limbu,  though  they  call  themselves  by  the  name  of  Yak-
thanga.  In  the  same  manner  the  tribes  inhabiting  Kirauta,  or  the  regions  between
Dudkosi  and  the  Arun,  are  called  Kirat,  which  name  is  as  old  as  that  of  the  great
Hindu  deity  Mahadeva.  The  Kirat  of  the  north  and  the  Limbu  of  the  south  were
known  to  the  ancients  by  the  name  of  Kirata,  on  account  of  their  living  by  hunting  and
carrying  on  trade  with  the  natives  of  the  plains  in  musk,  yak-tails,  shellac,  cardamoms,
etc.,  from  the  earliest  Hindu  periods. See  also  infra,  p.  26.

The  Tibetans  and  the  Bhutias  of  Nepal  and  Sikkim  call  the  Limbus  by  the  name
of  Tsang,  probably  on  account  of  their  having  emigrated  from  the  Tsang  province  of
Tibet. Both  tradition  and  written  Limbu  works  relate  that  the  Limbu  people  partly


4  JOURNEY TO LHASA ASD CENTRAL TIBET.

of  beating  drums  on  even'  trixdal  occasion.  Every  Limbu  family,  be
it  poor  or  rich,  j)03ses3es,  as  a  rule,  three  or  four  tambourine- shaped
drums,  which  they  beat  on  going  out  of  or  returning  to  their  villages.
The  wife  or  children  beat  them  in  honour  of  the  husband  when  he
goes  out,  and  the  latter  when  he  leaves  the  house.

Crossing  the  range  we  entered  a  richer  country,  as  was  evidenced
by  the  vegetation  and  the  abundance  of  trees.  We  saw  long  canes
growing  luxuriantly,  and  there  was  quite  a  large  grove  of  plantation
trees,  showing  the  warm  climate  the  country  enjoys.

Noveiiiler  10. — The  sky  was  cloudy  and  the  atmosphere  filled
with  fog  when  we  set  out.  Along  the  banks  of  the  streams  we
had  to  cross  grew  tall  pines  and  giant  ferns,  wdiile  thick  brush-
wood, ferns  and  rattans  lined  the  banks,  the  water  dashing  down
from  the  hill-tops  in  cascades.  Pushing  our  way  through  the  dense
forests  of  the  Hi  range,  the  sky  scarcely  visible  through  the  lofty
oaks,  pines  and  magnolias,  we  reached  after  an  hour's  hard  ascent
the  Eishi  chorten,  near  which  is  a  moss-covered  mendong.  The
Hi  La  commences here,  and  from  it  one  commands an  excellent

emigrated  thither  (to  Limbuan)  from  Tsang  in  Thibet  and  Kashi  in  tlie  Madhya  Desh,
and  partly  sprang  from  underneath  a  hnge  rock  in  the  village  of  Khedab,  to  the  north-
east of  Taanpur.  So  that  the  Limbu  people  were  divided  into  three  great  tribes,
according  to  their  original  homes,  Tsang,  Kashi,  and  Phedah.  The  first  brancli  from
Tsang  spread  over  Tambur-Khola,  Phalung,  Mirva  Khola  itself,  Mayiwa,  and
Yangrub,  being  designated  by  the  'i'ibetans  as  Tsang  Monpa,  or  the  Limbus  inhabiting
the  defiles.  Those  who  came  from  Kashi  occupied  Chaibisa,  Kaikhola,  and  Tsolkar.
Those  that  sprang  from  underneath  the  great  rock  of  Phedah  were  also  called  Baiphuta.
The  name  of  the  place  in  the  middle  of  which  stands  the  huge  slab  of  rock,  measuring
a  hundred  fathoms  on  either  side,  was  Phedah  Pangi-loma,  which  is  evidently  a  corrup-
tion of  the  name  Pheduh  Pangi-lungpa,  oi  "the  pasture  land  in  Pheduh."  See  also
infra,  p.  2(5.

The  Baiphuta  Limbu  were  the  most  powerful  and  numerous;  their  chief,  Baiphuta
Han  Ilaja,  ruled  over  Eastern  Nejjal.  All  the  Limbu  tribes,  as  well  as  the  Kiratas,
paid  him  tribute  and  military  service,  in  a  manner  resembling  the  feudal  system  of
Europe.  The  fKjwer  of  this  family  havlug  declined,  the  third  tribe  assumed  the
supremacy,  and  ma.ssacred  the  adherents  of  the  former  rulers.  After  the  fall  of  the  Han
dynasty  there  was  anarchy  all  over  Eastern  Nepal,  until  there  arose  in  the  Srisobha  tribe
a  mighty  man  called  Marang,  who  succeeded  in  reconciling  the  different  tribes,  and  was
elected  king  over  all  the  aboriginal  tribes  of  Eastern  Nepal,  the  southern  X'ortion  being
ruled  by  a  Xewar  chief.  After  the  death  of  the  most  distinguished  of  his  successors,
Mohan i  Raja,  the  Limbu  tribes  again  fell  into  anarchy,  and  continued  in  this  state  for
more  than  a  century.  At  last,  probably  in  the  ninth  centurj-,  appeared  the  famous
Srijanga,  the  deified  hero  of  the  Limbus.  The  cis-Himalayan  Bhutius  identify  him
with  an  incarnation  of  Padma  Sambhava,  and  attribute  to  him  the  introduction  of  the
art  of  writing  by  the  invention  of  an  alphabet.  Tradition  also  attributes  the  introduction
of  this  art  to  Marang  Kaja,  and  its  revival  to  Srijanga. — (S.  C.  D.)  See  Gazetteer  of
Sihldm.  pp.  36-38.


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  5

view  of  South-Western  Sikkim,  including  Tonglo  and  Singli,  and
the  hills  of  Darjiling.  In  the  thickets  roundabout  were  to  be  seen
the  tracks  of  wild  pigs,  and  the  woods  were  alive  with  monkeys
which  feed  on  acorns.

At  about  1  p.m.  we  reached  the  top  of  the  range,  some  6000
feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  Crossing  a  number  of  brooks  which
empty  into  the  Eishi,  we  came  to  some  cowsheds,  where  I  would
have  liked  to  have  rested;  but  no  rest  was  possible,  for  I  could
see  the  leeches  *  spanning  their  length  with  swift  but  measured
paces,  making  for  me  with  haste.

At  4  p.m.  we  commenced  our  descent  from  the  top  of  the  ridge,
which  is  marked  by  a  lartse  f — here  a  bush  of  dwarf  bamboos,  with
scraps  of  red  cloth  tied  to  it,  near  which  Phurchung  uttered  his
Iha  sol,X  or  invocation  to  the  mountain  deities.  We  halted  for  the
night  in  a  little  clearing  in  the  jungle  at  the  foot  of  a  gigantic
oak,  a  few  miles  above  the  village  of  Lingcham.  The  giant  nettle
creeper  here  attains  its  largest  growth,  some  more  than  100  feet
long.  The  tree  nettle  also  abounds  in  this  forest,  and  our  servants
found  also  the  common  nettle,  the  tender  leaves  of  which  make
excellent  soup.§

November  11. — The  sky  was  overcast,  and  there  was  rain  and
sunshine  at  the  same  time,  a  phenomenon  the  IMiutias  call  mdog-
ckarpa,  or  "  flowery  shower."  The  village  of  Hi,  by  which  we  passed,
contains  several  Bhutia,  Lepcha,  and  Limbu  houses.  || The  latter

*  Cf.  Hooker,  op.  cit.,  i.  p.  107  :  "  They  puncture  through  thick  worsted  stockings,
and  even  trousers,  and  when  full  roll  in  the  form  of  a  little  soft  ball  into  the  bottom  of
the  shoe.  .  .  ."  Ibid.,  p.  167,  he  makes  mention  of  them  swarming  below  7000  feet.
"  a  small  black  species  above  3000  feet,  and  a  large  yellow-brown  solitary  one  below
that  elevation." — (W.  K.) Leeches  are  found  at  all  elevations  up  to  10,000  feet  at  least.

t  La,  "  pass  ;  "  rise,  "  point,  summit ;  "  usually  a  pile  of  stones  with  brush  stuck  in
it,  on  which  rags  are  hung. — (W.  R.)

X  Lha,  "god;"  gsoJ,  "to  beg."  The  invocation  I  have  always  heard  used  is  "  Z/m
gya  lo,  lha  (jya  lo,"  meaning,  "  god  (give  me)  an  hundred  years,  god  (give  me)  an  hundred
years  ! "— (W.  R.)

§  The  giant  nettle  is  the  Urtica  heterophyUa.  Hooker,  op.  cit.,  i.  IS'2.  Tiie
fibres  of  some  nettles  are  twisted  for  bowstrings,  others  as  thread  for  sewing  and
weaving,  while  many  are  eaten  raw  and  in  soups,  especially  the  numerous  little
succulent  species.  The  Urtica  crenulata,  or  great  shrubby  nettle,  grows  also  in
these  parts. Hooker,  op.  cit.,  ii.  18S. — (W.  R.)

!1  On  the  Lepchas.  see  Dr.  A.  Campbell,  Jour.  Anth.  Inst.,  i.  128,  et  seq.  Dr
r'ampbell  has  also  written  several  valuable  papers  on  the  Limboos  in  the  Jour.  Asiat.  See.
of  Bengal  for  1855  and  other  years,  and  in  the  Jour.  Anth.  Ind.,  vol.  i. ;  also  papers  on
the  Mnrnis  and  Haius  of  Nepaul  and  8ikkiin,  in  the  same  collection,  I  believe ;  but


G  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

people  seem  to  be  prosperous ;  they  cultivate  rice  on  irrigated  terraces,
and  use  a  plough  drawn  by  buffaloes.  A  few  liundred  yards  above
the  Pdver  Kalai  (also  called  Kalhait)  we  saw  cardamom  patches
carefully  fenced.  The  Kalai  river,  which  we  found  rapid  at  even
this  season  of  the  year,  rises  in  the  Singli  pass,  and  after  a  cir-
cuitous course  of  about  20  miles,  empties  into  the  great  Pamgit  near
the  foot  of  Tashiding  hill.  Villages  are  numerous  along  the  river  for
many  miles ;  they  are  situated  on  ridges,  which  look  like  lateral
ribs  of  a  ranQe  running  on  either  side  of  the  Kalai  from  west  to
east,  generally  sending  out  southerly  spurs.

The  Kalai  is  overhung  on  both  sides  by  lofty  trees  growing  on
steep  banks  apparently  inaccessible  when  looked  at  from  the  river
bank.  The  river  is  bridged  by  two  long,  stout  Ijamboos  resting  on
a  huge  Ijoulder  in  the  middle  of  the  stream,  and  weighted  down  with.
slabs  of  stone.

In  the  shallow  part  of  the  stream  piles  have  been  driven  to  hold
bamboo  nets  for  capturing  fish.  This  torrent  is  well  known  for  its
delicious  fish;  and  we  saw  growing  by  some  of  the  Limbu  houses
the  na-dag-sldg*  a  tree,  the  leaves  of  which  are  used  to  poison  fish
which  swarm  in  the  stagnant  pools  in  the  river.

There  are  five  classes  of  priests  among  the  Limbu  people,  who
perform  their  religious  and  secular  ceremonies.  They  are  called
Phedanfjla,  Bijna,  Dami,  Baidaiuj,  and  Srijanr/a.^

The  Phedangba  enjoy  the  privilege  of  conducting  tlie  religious
ceremonies,  and  of  dealing  in  omens  and  fortune-telling.  The  Bijuba
are  trained  to  the  Shamanic  worship,  of  which  fantastic  dances
are  the  characteristic  feature.  The  third  order  practice  witchcraft
exclusively,  and  are  said  to  be  able  to  expel  evil  spirits  through  the

they  are  not  accessible  to  me.  Dr.  Hooker,  op.  cit.,  i.  127-136,  says  of  the  Lepchas :
"  They,  or  at  least  some  of  their  tribes,  call  themselves  Rong  and  Arratt,  and  their
country  Dijong.  I'olyandy  is  unknown  among  them,  and  polygamy  rare.  Marriage
is  by  purchase.  Tlie  dead  are  burnt  or  buried.  Omens  are  sought  in  tlie  entrails  of
fowls  (p.  i:!5).  They  have  no  religion,  tliough  acknowledging  the  existence  of  good
and  bad  spirits." — (W.  R.)

*  Perhaps  Nya-dug-shing  (nya,  "  lisli ;  "  dug,  ''  poison ; "  nhing,  "  tree  ").  Dr.
Hocjker  (o;;.  cit.,  i.  J 68)  mentions  as  growing  in  Sikkim,  aconite  and  convallaria
yielding  the  hihh  poison. — (W.  R.)

t  Dr.  Hooker  (op.  ell.,  i.  138)  says  that  in  their  funeral  ceremonies  "  the  Bijooa
of  the  Lepchas  is  employed;  but  the  Limboo  has  also  priests  of  his  own,  called
'  Phednngljos,'  who  belong  to  ratlier  a  high(;r  order  than  the  Bijooas."  Dr.  Hooker's
description  of  the  Bijua  and  of  the  Lepchas'  religious  beliefs  prove  tliem  conclusively
to  profess  nearly  the  same  religion  as  tlie  Honbo  of  Tibet. — (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  7

mouth.  The  fourth  class,  called  Baidang,  are  physicians,  the  name
Baidang  being  undoubtedly  derived  from  the  Sanskrit  Baidya.  The
fifth,  which  is  the  most  important  of  the  five  orders,  has  the  exclusive
privilege  of  interpreting  the  religious  books,  and  of  studying  religious
observances  and  rites.  My  informant,  though  a  Srijanga,  combined
in  his  person  the  qualifications  of  the  other  four  orders;  hence  his
great  reputation  among  the  Limbus,  who  considered  him  endowed
with  divine  attributes.

Leaving  the  banks  of  the  Kalai,  we  pushed  on  uphill  through
long  grass  and  reed  thickets,  where  wild  pigs  were  numerous  and
the  porcupine  abounds.*  The  latter  animal  is  said  to  do  much  harm
to  pulse  and  radish  fields,  and  destroys  a  great  many  of  the  wild
yams  on  which  the  people  chiefly  subsist.  On  ascending  about
3000  feet  above  the  Kalai  valley,  we  enjoyed  distant  views  of
Pema-yangtse,  Yantang,  Hi,  Sakyang,  and  other  villages  on  the
high  flat  ridges  on  either  side  of  the  Kalai  and  Eatong  rivers,
and  on  our  right  was  the  village  of  Lingcham  with  its  orange
groves  and  numerous  muriva  fields.  We  halted  near  a  Limbii
house,  and  the  coolies  plucked  wild  onions  {lagog)-f  growing  in
the  crevices  of  the  rocks,  with  which  they  seasoned  their  curries.
This  lagog,  though  smelling  like  the  common  garlic,  is  not  half  so
strong,  and  gives  a  peculiar  flavour  to  meat.  It  is  said  to  produce
coughing.

November  12. — We  continued  to  ascend  by  a  hardly  discernible
trail,  passing  patches  of  Indian  corn  and  a  few  miserable  Limbu
houses  :  one  woman  we  saw  was  carrying  a  Ijasketful  of  wild  apricots.
At  2  p.m.  we  reached  the  top  of  the  ridge,  on  the  furthest  extremity
of  which  to  our  right  was  the  Sangnag  Choiling  (pronounced
Changachelling)  monastery,  while  near  the  path  we  were  following
was  an  old  moss-covered  chorten.

Passing  through  dense  woods  of  oaks  and  pines,  and  pushing  our
way  through  thickets  of  tree-nettle  and  underbrush,  we  reached,
after  two  hours,  the  little  village  of  Tale,  where  there  are  some
twenty  houses,  and  around  which  some  mares,  buffaloes,  pigs,  and  a
large  number  of  cows  M^ere  feeding. The  inhabitants  were  anxious

*  Cf.  Hooker,  op.  cit,  i.  205.— (W.  R.)

t  The  Tibetan  word  lagog  is  usually  translated  garlic.  I  have  always  heard  onion
called  by  its  Chinese  name  tsung.  Wild  onions  are  very  common  in  Northern  Tibet,  at
elevations  of  15,000  feet  and  upwards.— (W.  R.)


8  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTS AL TIBET.

to  get  salt  from  us  iii  exchange  for  clucnij*  for  the  October  fall
of  snow  had  prevented  the  Yangpung  salt  dealers  from  reaching
this  place,  and  salt  was  in  consequence  scarce ;  but  we  had  to  decline
their  offers,  as  we  had  no  more  than  we  required  ourselves.f

Novemher  13. — Our  way  led  us  through  the  village  of  Tale  to
the  Eingbi  river,  a  stream  as  rapid  as  the  Kalai.  There  is  a  strong
bamboo  bridge  over  it,  but  we  crossed  by  some  bamboos  laid  side  by
side  wliere  the  river  was  narrowest.  To  the  north-west  of  the  village,
on  a  parallel  ridge  trending  northward  from  the  same  range  of  hills,
is  the  village  of  Nambura.  We  followed  the  stream  up  for  5  miles
by  a  circuitous  trail,  and  then  crossed  over  again  to  the  right
bank,  a  little  below  Nambura.  The  path  led  along  the  side  of  a
cliff,  and  we  had  great  difficulty  in  making  our  way  along  its  slippery
side,  placing  our  feet  in  fissures  of  rocks  and  holding  fast  by  creepers
and  grass.  Then,  following  the  course  of  the  river,  we  ascended
towards  the  village  of  Eingbi,  and  looking  back  we  saw  Tale,  Nam-
bura, and  many  other  villages  perched  high  up  on  the  mountain
sides  several  thousand  feet  above  us.

Passing  under  a  huge  rock,  below  which  the  stream  had  cut
gullies,  we  crossed  over  by  means  of  bamboos  and  wooden  ladders.
Looking  up  once  I  saw  some  stuffed  pheasants  and  a  Tibetan  shirt
of  red  cloth  hidden  in  a  fissure  of  the  rock,  evidently  by  some
bird-s///7.fl?7'.s'.  Birds  of  various  hues,  especially  several  varieties  of
pheasants,  abound  in  these  woods,  which  are  frequented  by  shikaris
who  earn  a  livelihood  by  selling  stuffed  birds  at  Darjiling.

A  mile  further  on  we  came  to  the  village  of  Eingbi,:^  situated
in  a  beautiful  plain,  behind  which  rose  cragged  rocks ;  to  the  north
and  east  the  Eingbi  river  roared  far  down  below  us.  The  wild
plantain,  a  gigantic  rattan,  and  numerous  pines  and  oaks  covered
the  hills  on  the  other  side  of  the  torrent.  There  are  here  a  half-
dozen  houses  inhabited  by  Limbus,  who  raise  rice,  Indian  corn,
murwa,  and  other  varieties  of  millet.

As  soon  as  Phurchung  had  laid  his  load  on  the  ground,  he  ran
off  to  the  house  of  an  acquaintance  to  buy  for  me  some  bottles  of

*  Cluing  \h  made  from  half  fermonted  barley,  and  is  the  national  drink  of  Tibet.
On  its  preparation,  see  daeschke,  '  Tib.-Engl.  Dictionary,'  s.  r.  chaiig,  and  infra  34,
note  1.— (W.  R.)

t  On  tiie  salt  trade  rit'i  the  Rathong  valley,  see  Hooker,  op.  cil.,  i.  340,  350.

X  Hooker's  Rinpjbee.


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTBAL TIBET.


9


beer,  and  presently  returned  with  three,  of  which  he  well  knew
one  would  be  given  him.  Our  tent  was  pitched  on  the  flat  near
the  river,  and  my  rugs  being  spread,  I  stretched  myself  at  my
ease,  forgetting  the  fatigues  of  the  journey.  The  servants  had
dispersed,  some  to  collect  firewood,  some  to  pick  edible  wild  plants,


A LIIIBU WOMAN OF THE KIRATl Tlili;i:.


Others  to  buy  vegetables  for  our  evening  meal— nothing  broke  the
silence  save  the  sound  of  the  rushing  torrent  below.  I  slept  soundly,
my  mind  more  occupied  with  the  future  than  the  past.

Novemhcr  14.— The  morning  was  clear,  the  view  on  all  sides
superb,  and,  though  familiar  with  mountain  scenery,  my  eye  never
tired of  its  wild  grandeur. We  waited  and  waited  for  hours for


10  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

riiurehung,  whom  I  had  sent  to  NauiLura  to  buy  provisions ;  but,
as  he  had  not  appeared  by  noon,  we  had  to  give  up  all  thoughts  of
travelling  that  day.  In  the  afternoon  he  made  his  appearance,
loaded  with  rice,  maize,  murwa,  eggs,  vegetables,  etc.,  and  leading  a
ewe,  which  he  said  had  cost  him  liS.  4.  He  was  very  drunk,  but
conscious  of  his  condition.  He  begged  to  be  excused,  and,  after
numerous  salams  and  loUings  of  the  tongue  after  the  Tibetan  fashion,
he  vanished  from  our  sight.

IVe  were  asked  by  the  Lirabus  to  exchange  salt,  of  which  they
stood  much  in  need,  for  tsuo*  a  dyeing  creeper  which  grows  here  in
abundance,  and  of  which  they  had  collected  many  large  bundles ;  but
again  we  had  to  refuse.

Phurchung  much  regretted  that  one  of  his  best  friends  among  the
Limbus  of  this  place  had  gone  to  a  distant  village  to  attend  a
marriage,  for  he  might  have  rendered  great  assistance  in  many  ways.

The  marriage  customs  of  this  people  are  very  curious  and  interest-
ing. Some  among  them  at  the  time  of  marriage  consult  astrologers.
When  a  man  and  a  girl  think  of  marrying,  they  meet,  without  con-
sulting their  parents,  at  some  place — a  market,  if  there  l)e  one  near —
in  order  to  sing  witty  songs,  in  which  test  the  man  is  required  to
excel  his  fair  rival.  If  he  is  beaten  in  this  contest  by  the  maiden
whose  hand  he  covets,  he  runs  away  in  deep  shame  at  his  defeat ;
but  if  he  wins,  he  seizes  her  by  the  hand  and  takes  her  to  his  home
without  further  ceremony,  but  usually  accompanied  by  a  female
companion.  If  the  man  has  had  some  previous  knowledge  of  the
girl's  superior  attainment  in  singing,  he  sometimes  liribes  the  maiden's
companion  to  declare  him  the  winner  in  the  singing  competition.

Another  means  of  wife-winning  is  by  courting  her  in  the  house
of  her  parents,  to  which  free  access  is  readily  gained  by  presenting
the  girl's  nearest  relative  living  in  the  house  with  a  pig's  carcass,  a
present  called  in  their  language  fliudang.  When  the  marriage  cere-
mony takes  place,  the  bridegroom,  if  rich  enough,  kills  a  buffalo  or  a
pig,  which  is  presented  to  the  bride's  parents,  a  native  coin  fixed  on  its
forehead.  Among  the  lower  people,  the  parents  of  the  bride  seldom
know  anything  about  the  marriage  till  the  return  of  the  girl  from  her
captor's house. I'hen  the marriage  ceremony takes place. The

*  2W  Cpron.  <),o)  means  "dye"  in  Tibetan.  Tlie  dye  here  referred  to  is  probably
the  yellow  one  prepared  from  the  synqilocos.  See  Hooker,  op.  cit.,  ii.  41,  and  J.Ii.A.S.,
1891, '218.— (W.K.)


JOUBNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  11

friends  and  relatives  assemble  in  some  spacious  courtyard,  each
bringing  a  present  of  a  basket  of  rice,  a  bottle  of  murwa  or  arrack.
The  bridegroom  then  beats  a  drum,  to  the  music  of  which  the  bride
dances,  outsiders  also  taking  part  in  the  dance.  This  over,  a  Phe-
dangba  priest  conducts  certain  religious  ceremonies  beginning  with
the  following  mantra  :  "  According  to  the  commands  handed  down  to
us  from  ancient  times  and  the  doings  of  the  patriarchs,  we  bind  our
son  and  daughter  to-day  in  marriage."

As  the  priest  repeats  the  formula,  the  bridegroom  places  his  palm
on  that  of  the  bride,  holding  at  the  same  time  a  cock,  and  she  a  hen,
which  they  afterwards  hand  over  to  the  Phedangba.  When  the  above
formula  has  been  recited,  the  fowls'  throats  are  cut,  and  they  are
thrown  away  for  any  one  to  pick  up  and  keep,  and  the  blood  is  col-
lected on  a  plantain  leaf,  and  from  it  omens  are  drawn.  In  another
leaf  is  some  vermilion  paint,  in  which  the  bridegroom  dips  his  middle
finger,  which  he  passes  across  the  forehead  of  the  priest  to  the  tip  of
the  bride's  nose.  The  bridegroom  then  says,  "  Henceforth,  maiden,
thou  art  my  wife  ;  "  and  shouting  repeatedly,  "  Maiden,  thou  art  my
wife,"  he  puts  a  vermilion  mark  on  her  brow.

The  following  morning  the  priest  invokes  some  friendly  spirit,
and  says  to  the  newly  married  couple,  "  You  two  should  henceforth
live  as  husband  and  wife  as  long  as  you  remain  on  this  earth  ; "  to
which  the  parties  suitably  reply,  "We  will  do  as  you  command."
Unless  this  period  of  a  lifetime  is  mentioned,  the  marriage  is  held
to  be  unlucky ;  and  to  make  it  fortunate  further  ceremonies,  which
open  new  sources  of  profit  for  the  priest,  are  considered  necessary.

At  the  marriage  feast,  where  first  murwa  is  served  to  each  guest,
the  meat  is  generally  pork,  and  finally  a  dish  of  rice  is  presented
to  every  one  of  the  party.

When  the  marriage  ceremony  is  over,  the  bride,  released  from
her  captor's  hands  for  the  first  time,  returns  to  her  parents,  who  are
supposed  to  have  been  in  ignorance  of  the  previous  proceedings.
Two  or  three  days  after  her  return  comes  a  go-between,  or  iKirmi*
to  settle  differences  with  the  bride's  parents.  He  brings,  as  a  rule,
three  things — a  bottle  of  arrack,  the  carcass  of  a  pig,  and  a  silver  coin,
as  presents  to  the  bride's  parents.  Just  as  he  is  about  to  make
them  the  presents,  they  are  bound  to  fly  into  a  passion  and  threaten

* Parmi  seems  to  be  Tibetan  bar,  "  middle ;  "  mi,  '•  man." — (AV.  R.)


12  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

to  beat  him,  wliereupon  he  entreats  them  not  to  do  so,  and  tries  to
pacify  tliom  with  the  present  of  another  rupee.  Then  they  ask  him
in  an  angry  tone,  "  Why  did  you  steal  away  our  daughter  {  "  and  such-
like questions.  When  their  anger  has  subsided,  he  pays  the  price
of  tlie  bride,  winch,  according  to  the  wealth  of  the  groom,  varies
from  Pts.  10  to  Rs.  120,  or  the  equivalent;  but  in  all  cases  a  pig  is  an
indispensable  part  of  the  price.  Then  a  further  present  of  usually
Es.  12,  or  its  equivalent,  is  made  to  the  sofas  (subahs)  and  village
headmen.

This  present  is  known  in  Limbu  as  turayimhag,  meaning  satis-
faction to  the  parents  for  stealing  their  daughter ;  and  though  it  is
really  due  to  the  bride's  parents,  it  is  nowadays  ap])ropriated  by
the  village  officials.

Like  the  Tibetans,  the  Limbus  present  white  cotton  khntafi  to  all
who  are  interested  in  tlie  marriage.  When  the  time  comes  for  deliver-
ing up  the  bride  to  the  ^wr?^w',  the  parents  must  say,  "  Oh,  our
daughter  is  lost !  She  is  not  to  be  found !  Some  one  must  go  and
find  lier !  "  Then  a  couple  more  silver  coins  are  paid,  and  one  of
the  relatives  discovers  the  lost  bride,  who  lias  usually  hidden  herself
in  the  storeroom,  and  she  is  handed  over  to  the  parmi.  Now-
adays, however,  it  is  more  common  for  the  bride  to  come  forth  of
herself  as  soon  as  the  money  has  been  paid,  but  not  before.*

November  15. — The  villagers  tried  to  dissuade  us  from  attempting
to  cross  the  passes  where  the  paths  were  hidden  by  the  snow,  saying
that  it  M'ould  l)e  more  convenient  to  stay  at  Ringbi,  where  pro-
visions were  easily  procurable.  If  I  remained  here,  however,  various
re})orts  would  be  spread  to  prejudice  the  frontier  guards  of  Tibet
against  us,  and  we  would,  moreover,  be  unal)le  to  ascertain  when  the
snow  should  liave  hardened  sufficiently  to  admit  of  our  setting  out
on  our  journey,  as  the  passes  were  three  or  four  days'  march  from
the  village.  We  determined  to  try  the  Yampung  la,  which  still
remained  free  IVom  snow.  Our  coolies  gave  the  villagers  to  under-
stand  that  we  shikaris  (for  Thurclmng,  with  his  fowling-piece  and
load  of  cartridges,  was  enabled  to  pass  us  off  as  such)  had  very  little
to  (In  with  ih(!  passes,  except  for  going  to  Kangpa-chan,  where  game

*  Cf.  Hooker,  op.  lit.,  i.  i;;7,  138.  Speaking  of  their  buriiil  (;(!r(;monics,  ho  says,
"  They  moiiru,  burn,  and  hiiry  tlieir  dead,  raising  a  mound  over  the  corpse,  erecting
a  lieadstonc,  and  surrounding  tiie  grave  with  a  little  paling  of  sticks;  they  then
scatter  eggs  and  pebbles  over  tlio  ground." — (W.  It.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  13

was  more  abundant  :  if  we  failed  entering  Namga-tsal,  we  shcjuld
most  probably  return  by  Jongri  to  Darjiling.

We  passed  behind  the  village,  where  there  are  some  tall  cypresses
and  a  solitary  juniper  tree,  which  the  people  erroneously  call  cliandan,
or  sandal  wood.*  A  short  distance  from  the  village  we  passed  the
road  leading  to  Declian  phug,  "  the  cavern  of  bliss,"  a  huge  rock,  the
hollow  in  which  is  haunted  by  numerous  demons  and  evil  spirits.
Now  and  then  we  saw  Limb  us  making  bamboo  mats  or  collecting
osiers  to  thatch  their  houses.  The  road  along  the  river  was  easy,
the  rills  falling  into  it  bridged,  and  the  steep  banks  carefully  crossed
by  stone  dykes,  while  steps  were  cut  in  the  rocks  where  necessary.

By  one  o'clock  wo.  reached  Paongtang,  where,  in  a  wretched  slied
for  travellers  {doiig-kliang),  we  made  our  camp.  A  light  rain  was
falling,  so  we  had  to  cook  our  food  in  the  miserable  shed,  where  we
could  not  stand  erect,  where  ants  and  centipedes  were  creeping  over
everything,  and  the  smoke  and  dust  raised  by  the  bellows  nearly
suffocated  us.  Though  we  had  a  tent,  the  obstinacy  of  my  servants
compelled  me  to  forego  the  comfort  it  afforded,  for  to  them  the
doiig-lkaay  was  a  comfortable  dwelling,  and  they  insisted  that  I  should
enjoy  it  too.

Phurchung  bought  some  milk,  cheese,  murwa,  and  excellent
tish  from  one  of  the  neighbouring  herdsmen,  a  cousin  of  his  ;  and
when  we  had  refreshed  ourselves  with  the  beer,  we  sat  listening  to
two  of  our  companions,  Jordan  and  Tonzang,  as  they  sang  and
declaimed  over  their  drink.  Though  these  men  carried  our  loads,
they  were  men  of  much  respectability  in  their  own  country,  and  had
lieen  induced  to  do  menial  work  only  to  oblige  me,  as  I  did  not  care
to  trust  outsiders  with  the  secret  of  my  movements.  I  amused
myself  listening  to  Jordan,  and  really  wondered  that  even  among
the  uncivilized  dwellers  of  the  hills  wine  could  inspire  such  eloquence.
Among  the  volleys  of  his  eloquence  were  quotations  from  a  book
called  ' limchcn  Tenioa'  or  ' The  Precious  liosary.'

"  All  here  assembled,  pray  attend.

"  The  eagle  is  the  king  of  birds ;  ^\'hen  he  rises,  all  rise.

"  The  lion  is  the  king  of  beasts ;  when  he  leaps,  all  leap.

*  Trees  or  shrubs,  willi  aromatic  wood  or  having  sweet-smelliug  flowers,  are  fre-
quently called  cliandan  iu  Tibet.  At  Kumbum,  for  example,  the  famous  tree,  which
is  said  to  have  sprung  from  the  hair  cut  from  tbe  head  of  Tsongkhapa,  and  which  is
in  all  probability  a  Syringa,  is  called  Tsandan  (or  Chandan)  Jairjjo.—^W.  R.)


14  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

"  lie  \vlio  drinks  is  tlie  prince  of  speecli ;  Avlien  lu;  speaks,  allliear."

Here  Jordan's  analogy  broke  down,  for  lie  should  have  said,
"  When  lie  speaks,  all  speak  ;  "  but  as  his  were  quotations,  he  could
take  no  liberties  with  the  text.*

Xovcmher  IG. — After  having  started  Jordan  and  Tonzang  to
Darjiling  with  letters  and  my  Indian  clothing,  we  resumed  our
journey,  and  after  a  mile  along  the  course  of  the  Eingbi  we  climbed
the  Lungmo  la,  which  is  thickly  covered  with  dwarf  bamboos  and
mossy  oaks  of  immense  size.

At  2  p.m.  we  came  to  Chonjom,  the  junction  of  the  two  head-
streams  of  the  Eingbi,  where  there  is  a  well-made  bridge  across  the
river  with  strong  boulder-made  buttresses  ;  its  bed  is  here  covered  with
thick  green  moss.  A  little  later  on  we  halted  at  a  place  called  Keta,
in  the  midst  of  dark  woods,  the  abode  of  bears,  pigs,  and  Sikkim
leopards.  As  I  had  sent  my  tent  back,  we  had  to  make  a  shelter
against  the  inclemency  of  the  weather  by  a  contrivance  made  with
our  bed-clothes,  and  on  the  branches  of  a  neighbouring  tree  we  hung
our  meat  and  fish,  which  attracted  owls  and  mice  during  the  night.

Novemlcr  17. — Our  hearts  quaked  as  we  continued  our  way
through  the  dense  wood  and  thick  undergrowth,  for  a  man-eater  was
reported  to  have  killed  two  Nepalese  wood-cutters  in  the  Singli  la.
The  year  before  last  a  tiger  came  up  to  Jongri,  where  it  killed  a  dozen
yaks,  and  we  feared  lest  now  it  might  have  come  back  to  make  havoc
on  the  Yampung  yaks.  While  crossing  one  of  the  numerous  fences
dividing  different  pieces  of  property,  we  found  a  pheasant  caught  by
the  neck  in  a  hair-trap.  The  way  was  steej)  and  stony,  and  the  cold
piercing.

At  noon  we  reached  the  zone  of  rhododendrons,  and,  passing
through  the  pines,  where  we  startled  pheasants  and  some  other
birds  of  beautiful  plumage,  we  came  to  a  snow-covered  ridge.  Then
we  began  the  ascent  of  a  steep  spur,  where  we  were  told  the  Lepcha


*  This  work  of  Sukya  Pandita,  the  Sanskrit  title  of  wliich  is  '  Suhhashita  ratna
nidhi,'  is  well  known  to  Oriental  scholars  by  the  translation,  accompanied  by  the
Tibetan  text,  publL-ihed  l)y  Csonia  de  Koros  in  vols.  xxiv.  and  xxv.  of  the  Journ.  Bengal
Asiat.  Soc,  and  by  the  French  translation  of  a  selection  from  it  made  by  Ph.  E.  Foucaux,
Paris,  1858,  8vo.,  under  the  title  of  •  Lc  tresor  des  belles  paroles.'  Tlie  orij^iial  work
is  in  45t  stanzas.  Csoma  only  translated  tlie  234  first.  Sakya  Pandita's  Indian
name  was  Ananda  Dhwadja ;  lie  lived  in  the  thirteenth  century.  His  Tibetan  name
is  derived  from  that  of  the  lamasery  of  i«akya,  near  Tashilhunpo,  where  he  resided. —
(W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  15

troops  of  Sikkim  had  repelled  tlie  Gurkha  invaders,  shooting  their
arrows  at  them,  and  then  rolling  rocks  down  on  the  enemy.  After
this  difficult  piece  of  road,  the  ascent  became  more  gradual  and  easier.
On  the  way  we  saw  some  beehives,  which  differ  in  shape  from  those
of  the  plains,  being  like  great  wldte  fungi  projecting  from  the  rock.

At  2  p.m.  we  reached  the  Dok  of  Yampung,  situated  on  the  lee
side  of  the  range.  Long  mcndong  mark  the  approach  to  the  village,
and  iiying  flags  show  the  whereabouts  of  the  yak-sheds  and  houses  ;
patches  of  snow  and  ice  glistening  in  the  sun  gave,  from  a  distance,  a
fine  appearance  to  the  village,  but,  on  approaching,  the  beauty  vanished,
as  we  perceived  the  forlorn  and  deserted  condition  of  the  place.  Not
a  living  being,  not  a  yak,  nor  a  dog,  only  some  hungry  crows  perched
on  the  flag-poles  and  the  roofs.  The  village  is  composed  of  a  dozen
houses  built  very  rudely  of  loose  stone  slabs,  the  roofs  made  of  long
pine  planks  kept  in  their  places  by  stones.  The  larger  houses  were
locked  up,  and  the  doors  of  those  without  locks  were  sealed  by
strings.  Heaps  of  red  dye-creepers  w^ere  in  every  house,  which  the
people  exchange  for  salt  brought  here  from  Eastern  Nepal  in  the
summer  months  and  in  November  after  the  first  snows.  The  Limbus
and  Lepchas  of  Western  Sikkim  come  here  annually  to  buy  salt,
wool,  tea,  and  Tibetan  earthenware,  in  exchange  for  murwa,  maize,
dye-creepers,  and  other  little  commodities  of  the  Darjiling  bazar.

Kovcriibcr  18. — The  Yampung  la,  though  not  lofty,  presented  much
difficulty  in  the  ascent,  the  vegetation  on  its  sides  not  so  luxuriant  as
that  on  the  Jongri  la,  which  is  nearly  of  equal  height.  To  the  north
the  range  skirts  the  snows  of  the  famous  Kangchan,  the  dreaded
Khumba  Kama  of  the  hillmen.  The  eye,  on  all  sides  but  the  east,
met  only  snow,  and  as  I  descended  to  the  south-western  flank  of  the
Du  la,  "Demon  Mount,"!  looked  down  towards  the  deep  gorge  through
M'hich  the  Eingbi  leaps  with  ceaseless  roar.  The  snow-streams  from
the  Yampung  la  flow  into  a  lake  some  half-mile  in  circumference,
called  Tama  chu,  on  account  of  its  crescent  shape ;  the  Nepalese  call
it  Lampokri.

With  the  Du  la  the  difficulties  of  the  ascent  began.  Ugyen  com-
plained of  headache  and  shortness  of  breath,  and  said  he  was  sick  with
la  dug  (mountain-sickness) ;  and  to  add  to  our  troubles,  such  a  gale
was  blowing  that  I  was  thrown  to  the  ground  several  times.  One  of
the  coolies  fell  helpless  to  the  ground,  his  feet  frost-bitten.  I  gave
him  my  shoes  and  Kabul  socks,  putting  on  myself  a  new  pair  of


IG  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

Tibetan  boots.  The  direct  way  to  Gumo  tang  was  blocked  with  snow,
so  we  had  to  make  a  detour  by  the  northern  and  western  flanks  of
the  pass.  The  snow  was  frozen,  and  ^^•alking  became  very  dangerous.
I  made  my  way  as  best  I  could,  using  both  hands  and  feet.  The
gorge  along  which  we  advanced  was  so  deep  that  the  eye  tired  of  follow-
ing its  windings.  The  snows  from  the  pass  supply  the  headwater  of
the  Yong-dso  chu,  w^hich  runs  past  the  Jongri  (la).  The  descent  was
even  more  dangerous  than  the  ascent ;  my  coolies,  used  to  such  work,
had  soon  left  me  far  behind.

Leaving  the  snows  of  the  Du  la,  w^e  again  came  in  sight  of  deep
gorges  filled  with  pines,  with  here  and  there  bits  of  pasture-land
overhung  by  rugged  cliffs.

Again  we  had  to  cross  a  spur,  Ijeyond  which  lay  Gumo  tang,  our
next  halting-place,  in  a  deep  gorge,  some  2000  feet  below  us.  We
followed  a  glacier,  and  by  six  in  the  evening  I  reached  the  beautifully
wooded  Gumo  tang  gorge,  and  found  it  flooded  by  a  torrent  coming
from  the  melting  snows  to  the  north-east.  On  the  other  side  of  the
precipice  which  overhangs  Gumo  tang  is  Lachmi  pokri,  "  The  Lake
of  Fortune,"  said  to  contain  gold  and  precious  stones.  It  is  a  mile  in
circumference,  deep  black  in  colour,  and  in  its  depths  are  water-
elephants,  the  people  say.

A'Ofcmhcr  19. — Crossing  a  stream,  with  water  knee-deep,  flowing
eastward  to  feed  the  Eatong,  we  began  the  ascent  of  the  IJogto  la.
Firs  and  junipers  of  various  species  overhung  our  way,  which  lay
along  the  sides  of  a  dry,  glacial  channel,  with  a  stream  flowing  down
it,  and  debris  on  either  side.  There  are  two  tracks  from  here  leading
to  the  only  shed  on  the  slope  of  the  Bogto  ;  one  follows  the  course  of
the  stream  which  comes  down  from  the  Tso-nag  lake,  and  is  usually
taken  by  the  Yampung  herdmen  and  the  salt  traders  from  Yangma ;
but  the  one  we  followed  is  not  liked  by  them,  as  there  grows  along
it  a  plant  called  Dug  .shin;/*  a  deadly  poison  if  eaten  by  yaks  or
sheep.  I'heasants  were  feeding  on  the  rhododendron  berries,  and  we
also  saw  herds  of  wild  sheep ;  but  before  we  reached  the  summit
the  rliododendrons  and  junipers  disappeared,  and  we  only  saw  now
and  then  some  lichens  or  moss-like  vegetation  in  the  clefts  of  the
rocks,  t

lleduced  for  the  last  few  days  to  a  miserable  diet  of  rice  and  tea,

*  JJug,  "poison;"  shiiig,  "  tri'o  or  wood." — (W.  K.)
t  Cf.  Hooker,  op.  cit.,  i.  254.


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  17

we  were  but  ill  prepared  to  go  through  the  exertion  of  climbing  up
to  sucli  high  altitudes.  I  pushed  on  for  half  a  mile,  my  head  aching
violently  and  with  continual  retching;  I  finally  fell  to  the  ground,  and
lay  there  breathless  and  utterly  exhausted.  The  coolies  suffered  even
more  than  I,  for  while  I  had  only  my  heavy  clothing  to  carry,  they
had  their  loads  besides.  The  wind  was  piercingly  cold,  and  clouds
scudded  across  the  sky.  One  of  the  men  prepared  some  tea ;  I  drank
a  little,  but  I  had  no  desire  for  food,  though  Phurchung  insisted  on
my  eating  a  frozen  egg  and  a  little  dried  fruit.  Wrapped  in  all  my
blankets,  I  lay  prostrate,  my  feet  resting  against  one  of  the  loads  to
prevent  me  rolling  into  the  abyss.  I  passed  the  night  in  a  troubled
sleep,  while  close  by  me  my  companions  were  snoring  in  deep  slumber.

Novcmhrr  20. — The  sky  was  overcast  and  a  gentle  breeze  was
blowing,  and  the  guide,  who  saw  signs  of  a  snowstorm,  took  up  his
load  reluctantly,  after  chanting  some  mantras,  and,  leaving  this
dreadful  place,  called  the  Noga  slope,  w^e  began  the  ascent  of  the  pass.

A  few  hundred  yards  of  ascent  brought  us  to  tlie  Tso-nag  tso,  a
lakelet  now  frozen  to  the  bottom,  of  oval  shape,  and  about  400  yards
long  and  200  broad ;  passing  this  we  crossed  from  ridge  to  ridge,
each  covered  with  sheets  of  ice,  the  scenery  of  the  wildest  grandeur,
the  solitude  appalling,  no  sound  of  water,  not  even  the  fall  of  an
occasional  avalanche  was  heard,  no  one  spoke,  all  were  intent  on
making  their  way  over  the  slippery  surface.

After  a  mile  ascent  we  reached  another  frozen  lake.  The  guide
ran  forward,  and,  collecting  some  snow  and  pieces  of  ice,  he  sprinkled
them  across  the  lake  to  show  us  the  path  and  prevent  us  from  slip-
ping. This  lakelet,  of  about  the  same  size  as  the  one  just  referred  to,  is
held  in  the  sacred  books  of  the  Sikkimese  to  be  an  object  of  special
sanctity.  It  is  called  Tso  dom-dongma,  "  The  Lake  of  Peacock's
Spots,"  and  the  eye  of  the  enchanted  devotee  can  see  something  like
spots  in  the  bubbles  in  the  icy  sheets  of  the  lake.  The  glorious  peak
of  Chum-bok  la  rose  right  before  us.  Clouds  now  swept  swiftly
across  the  sun,  and  within  half  an  hour  the  whole  vault  of  heaven
was  hidden  from  our  view.  Courage  then  failed  our  hitherto  intrepid
guide.  "  Why  proceed  further  up,  sir  ? "  said  he.  "  Death  awaits  us  in
this  desolate  place.  One  hour  more  and  we  shall  be  gone."  "  What
do  you  mean  by  this,  Phurchung  ? "  said  I.  "  Where  see  you  death  ?  "
"  Sir,  look  at  the  sky  ;  those  clouds  will  shortly  fall  in  heavy  snow
on  us,  from  which  no  human  means  can  enable  us  to  escape. If  you

c


18  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TTBET.

escape  the  snows  on  this  side  of  the  path,  you  cannot  do  so  on  the
other."  He  trembled  and  looked  pale  and  depressed,  lie  cried,  and
said,  "Oh,  sir,  we  poii-i/or/  [master  and  servant]  will  |)erish  if  we  go
not  back  to  Bogto.  The  skies  are  ominous,  and  tell  you  to  return
towards  the  Bogto  la."  He  repeated  his  entreaties  with  childish
tears,  but  in  vain.  I  told  him  and  the  coolies  that  I  was  determined
not  to  retrace  a  single  step,  and  that  all  his  entreaties  were  to  no
purpose.  In  an  hour's  time  we  could  scarcely  reach  Bogto,  and  if  the
snow  began  falling  in  the  mean  time,  we  could  hardly  escape ;  besides,
such  a  course  would  not  lessen  our  troubles,  as  we  should  have  the
risk  of  recrossing  the  distance  we  had  now  travelled  over.  There
might  be  a  second  snowfall,  when  we  should  again  have  to  turn
back.

Ceding  finally  to  my  arguments,  Phurchung  pushed  forward.  I
took  the  lead,  and  with  fresh  energy  clambered  on,  till  after  an  hour
we  stood  on  the  pass.  The  skies  had  cleared  up,  the  azure  heavens
again  smiled  on  us,  and  the  welcome  reappearance  of  the  brilliant
sun  dispelled  all  our  fears.  To  our  left  was  Sundub  pliug,  to  the
right  the  towering  pinnacles  of  Kangla  jang-ma,  while  the  rounded
form  of  the  lofty  Lap-chyi  in  the  Shar-Khambu  district  of  Nepal
rose  above  the  haze.  The  valley  of  the  Chum-bok  la  is  called  Chu
lonkyok,  "The  Water-spoon,"  because  it  receives  the  waters  of  the
surrounding  mountains  in  a  spoon-like  basin.

I  had  hardly  time  to  congratulate  myself  on  having  reached  the
summit,  when  our  guide,  now  smiling,  put  his  arms  in  the  straps
(namlo)  of  his  load,  and  uttering  the  usual  prayer  (/ha  sol),  resumed
his  journey.  The  descent  was  fraught  with  immense  dangers,  for
it  lay  through  trackless  snows.  The  guide  sounded  the  snow  every-
where for  a  path,  and  not  finding  one,  he  took  a  circuitous  direction
which  seemed  practicalde  to  his  experienced  eye.

After  walking  about  an  hour  we  found  we  had  made  l)ut  little
progress,  when  we  came  on  the  tracks  of  a  Tibetan  long-tailed  leopard
{sail).*  I  wondered  how  the  animal  had  been  able  to  w^alk  along
over  the  soft  snow  without  ever  sinking  in  it,  but  my  men  explained
this  by  attributing  supernatural  powers  to  this  beast,  which  they
said  was  indeed  tlie  goblin  of  leopards.  An  hour's  struggle  in  the
snow  exhausted  my  strength,  and  I  could  proceed  no  further.  The
guide  opened  the  loads  and  repacked  them,  putting  all  the  breakable

*  ■\Vritten,  I  believe,  gslia.  — (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  19

objects  in  one,  all  the  clothing  and  provisions  in  the  other.  The
latter  he  threw  down  the  slope,  and  it  ploughed  a  path,  down  which
I  followed  till  the  load  brought  up  against  a  rock.  Then  I  let  myself
slide  down  the  half-hardened  snow,  guiding  myself  with  my  elbows
so  as  to  escape  any  crevasse  across  my  path.

By  3.30  p.m.  we  had  descended  so  far  in  the  gorge  of  Chu
lonkyok  that  patches  of  grass  showed  here  and  there  amidst  the
snow,  and  I  saw  an  alpine  shrub  called  upala*  with  large  pink
leaves  at  the  top  like  those  of  the  water-lily,  waved  in  the  wind,
which  had  again  begun  to  blow.  The  coolies  now  pushed  rapidly
ahead,  leaving  me  far  behind,  but  the  gradual  reappearance  of  grass,
rhododendrons,  and  juniper  bushes  revived  my  spirits  as  I  walked
on,  frequently  halting  to  catch  my  breath.  Continuing  down  the
gorge  through  rhododendrons,  junipers,  and  several  species  of  prickly,
sweet-scented  shrubs,  we  finally  reached,  about  dark,  a  great  boulder,
underneath  which  we  camped.  In  front  of  it  ran  a  brook  about  four
feet  wide,  said  to  be  the  head-stream  of  the  famous  Kabili  of  Nepal,
which  receives  the  waters  from  the  Chum-bok  and  the  Semarum
mountains.

November  21. — Though  I  still  felt,  when  I  awakened,  greatly
exhausted,  I  had  to  start  witliout  breakfast,  as  the  coolies  had  left
early,  fearing  lest  the  fine  morning  might  be  followed  by  a  bad  after-
noon. Dressed  very  lightly  in  order  to  be  able  to  climb  more  easily,  I
set  out,  following  in  Phurchung's  footsteps.  The  trail  at  first  presented
no  great  difficulty,  though  it  was  continually  up  and  down  over
mountain  ridges  five  or  six  hundred  feet  high ;  but  our  previous  day's
experience  made  us  think  little  of  such  a  road.  After  a  few  miles
we  reached  a  kind  of  gateway  lying  between  two  rocky  cliffs,  where
began  the  region  of  scanty  vegetation  that  invariably  is  found  just
below  the  snow-line.  Here  we  halted  for  a  while  and  drank  some
tea ;  then,  resuming  our  journey,  we  reached  the  summit  of  Semarum
after  a  couple  of  hours  of  most  trying  climbing  over  ice  and  melting
snow.  The  pass  is  protected  to  the  south  and  west  by  a  very  rugged
cliff  resembling  the  outspread  wings  of  an  eagle  both  in  colour  and
shape,  and  inspired  me  with  a  strange  feeling  of  dread.  Sitting  on
the  summit  of  the  pass,  I  enjoyed,  though  tired  and  unwell,  the

*  Ufpala,  or  Uclpala,  is  the  blue  lotus  of  India,  also  used  medicinally.  Mr.  Jaeschke,
'Tib.-Engl.  Diet.,'  s.v.,  says,  "In  Lliadak  this  name  seems  to  be  transferred  to  Polemo-
nium  caeruleurn." — (W.  R.)


20  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

grandeur  and  sublimity  of  the  scene.  No  poet  could  adequately
describe  Nature's  exploits  in  this  part  of  the  world,  no  pencil  could
delineate  these  romantic  scenes.

Legend  has  it  that  many  years  ago,  on  this  very  pass,  a  certain
cunning  and  designing  Limbu  of  Tambur  Khola  concealed  under
the  rocks  a  red  earthen  jar  filled  with  charcoal,  with  the  object  of
establishing  his  heirs'  right  over  the  whole  easternmost  part  of
Nepal,  called  Yangoro,  which  includes  Singli  la,  and  in  his  will  he
made  mention  of  this  bequest.  A  few  years  later  hostilities  broke  out
between  the  Limbus  of  Tambur  Khola  and  Yangoro,  which  lasted  for
nearly  twelve  years,  during  which  time  the  Gurung  were  the  chief
sufferers.  Pasturing  their  cattle  on  the  disputed  land,  both  parties
stole  them  as  a  rent  for  the  right  of  pasture.  Finally  the  Chambisi
Eajah,  who  ruled  at  Bhatgaong,  settled  the  dispute  in  favour  of  the
Yangoro  Limbus,  the  trick  of  the  Tambur  Khola  Limbus  having  been
found  out.

From  the  Semarum  pass  I  saw  the  Choma  Kankar,  or  "  Lord  of
Snows,"  the  famous  sacred  mountain  of  the  Buddhists  which  over-
hangs Lap-chyi,  the  highest  of  its  three  peaks,  dome-shaped,  the  two
others  standing  side  by  side,  of  truncated  cone  shape ;  then  to  the
north-west  of  these  appeared  the  Shar  Kliambu  Mountains,  half  lost
in  the  rising  mist ;  to  the  west,  beyond  the  great  chasm  formed  by
the  Tamljur  valley,  were  the  valleys  of  Feylep,  Yalung,  Dhunkota,
all  indistinct  in  the  general  haze.

rhurchung  endeavoured  in  vain  to  find  a  way  down  through  the
deep  snow  which  everywhere  covered  the  ground,  and  finally  we  had
to  slide  down  through  the  snow  for  several  hundred  feet ;  and  then,
iinding  a  foothold,  we  waded  on,  dragging  the  loads  behind  us.  I
saw  tracks  of  rabbits,*  snow-leopards,  and  a  species  of  bird
called  chamdaiKj,  probably  the  snow-pheasant.  After  a  little  while
we  could  advance  no  further  down  the  slope,  so  Phurchung  made  a
detour  over  a  ridge  to  our  right,  its  summit  a  huge  bare  rock  some
forty  to  fifty  feet  high.  From  this  we  descended  with  great  difficulty,
tlirowing  the  loads  down  ahead  of  us  and  sliding  down  ourselves  in
the  deep,  soft  snow.

By  4  i).m.  we  were  clear  of  the  snow,  and  once  more  found
vegetation.  After  a  short  rest  we  resumed  our  journey  along  the
gentle  rill  which  leaps  down  from  here  ^ith  a  pleasant  murmur,  and

*  IlarcB,  I  take  it,  are  meant. — (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  21

is  known  as  the  second  headwater  of  the  Kabili,  although  the  brook
which  we  followed  empties  into  the  Namga  stream  which  rises  in  the
Kangla  Nangmo  pass  near  Jongri.  The  snow,  reaching  several  miles
below  the  Kangla  pass  on  either  side  of  the  Namga,  showed  us  that
this  pass  was  inaccessible.  These  early  snows  are  called  shingsa
pahmo.  The  road  led  through  dwarf  rhododendrons,  bushy  junipers,
and  prickly  shrubs  bearing  a  red  fruit.  The  river  was  frozen  over,
except  in  the  narrow  parts.  In  the  distance  the  pine-clad  flanks  of
Juonga,  through  which  the  Yalung  dashes,  were  seen  resplendent  in
the  rays  of  the  setting  sun.  We  plodded  on  to  6  p.m.,  when  we
reached  a  broad  flat  called  Namga  tsal,  "The  Grove  of  Joy,"  and
shortly  after  crossed  the  river  by  a  wooden  bridge  of  the  East  Nepalese
type,  and  some  forty  feet  long,  and  came  to  the  halting-place  under
the  widespread  branches  of  a  high  dung  shing  or  cedar.  Namga  tsal
received  its  name,  I  was  told,  from  Lha-tsun,  the  great  Buddhist
patriarch  of  Sikkim,  having  spent  a  few  days  here  to  rest  from  his
fatigue  when  travelling  for  the  first  time  from  Tibet  to  convert  the
Lhopas  (Southerners).  He  so  enjoyed  his  rest  here  that  he  ordered
his  disciples  to  hold  the  place  sacred,  and  to  celebrate  their  annual
inaugural  religious  ceremonies  at  the  cavern  in  which  he  had  spent  a
few  days.  We  could  see  the  cave  from  where  we  were  camped,  and
were  told  that  the  Buddhists  of  Sikkim  and  Eastern  Nepal  still  resort
to  this  place  on  pilgrimage.

Novcmhcr  22. — Crossing  two  streams  with  swampy  banks,  the  way
led  uphill  for  a  while  through  thickets  of  rhododendrons,  where  we
saw  numerous  green  pheasants  of  the  colour  of  a  green  parrot,  with
spurs  on  their  legs  and  a  deep,  thick  red  line  round  their  eye.  In
size  they  were  larger  than  a  domestic  fowl.*  Next  we  came  to  the
Yalung  river,  which  we  crossed  by  a  substantial  bridge  of  cedar  logs
and  silver-fir  planks,  and  tlien  we  began  the  ascent  of  the  steep  and
lofty  Chunjorma,  or  "  Collection  of  Cascades."  In  the  wooded  soli-
tudes on  the  lower  slopes  of  the  great  Kanchanjinga  stood  the
little  monastery  of  Dechan  rolpa.  The  predecessor  of  the  present
abbot,  it  is  said,  was  able  to  visit  Na-Pematang,  the  Lepcha  Paradise,
which  has  only  been  entered  by  seven  families,  and  which  lies
between  the  Cho-kanchan  and  Cho-kanchanjinga.

*  Dr.  Hooker,  of.  cit.,  i.  255,  states  having  found  similar  pheasants  near  the
Nango  la.  The  male  bird  had  two  to  five  spurs  on  each  of  its  legs,  according  to  its
age. — (W.  E.) Ithagenes  Cruentus.


22  JOUIINEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

Some  three  miles  to  the  west  of  the  Dechau  rolpa  gomba  is  the
village  of  Yalimg,  where  twelve  families  live  who  spend  their  summer
in  tending  yaks  at  Yalung,  and  their  winter  at  Yanku  tang,  in  the
valley  of  the  Kabili.*

Passing  by  the  two  lakelets  of  Tso  chung  donka,  we  ascended  the
mountains  of  the  same  name,  and  finally  reached  by  the  ISTango  la
the  summit  of  Chunjorma,  which  name  a])plies  to  the  portion  of  the
pass  between  the  Nango  la  and  the  ]\Iirkan  la,  where  the  road  from
Nepal  by  Klian-do-phug  joins  it.

From  Mirkan  la  we  passed  some  lofty  crags,  called  Ta-miran
kukyab,  the  principal  of  which  is  said  to  be  the  image  of  the  horrible
deity  Tamdriu,  or  Haryagrilia.  In  shape  it  resembles  a  horse's  head
(Ta-mgrin)  facing  towards  Kanchanjinga.  Descending,  we  found
grass  growing  on  the  Pangbo  la,  and  on  the  Zinan  la  were  junipers  and
rhododendrons.  At  about  7  p.m.  we  reached  Mudang  phug,  Phurchung
carrying  me  on  his  back  for  part  of  the  way.

November  23. — Our  M^ay  led  along  an  extensive  moraine,  the  huge
reddish  boulders  of  which  were  covered  with  creeping  tamarisks  and
dwarf  junipers.  After  about  a  mile  we  reached  Manda  phug,  a
hollow  between  two  gigantic  boulders,  the  one  inclined  towards  the
other  ;  and  here  we  took  our  breakfast  of  rice  and  buttered  tea.  The
vegetation  improved  as  we  neared  Manda  la,  and  the  sight  of  thick
forest  growth  in  the  deep  glens  refreshed  our  eyes,  so  long  tired  with
looking  on  barren  rocks.  From  Tama  la,  where  we  saw  some  shep-
herds tending  their  flocks  and  some  yaks,  one  descends  the  Yamatari
valley,  the  top  of  the  slope  being  held  sacred  to  the  dreaded  Mamo
goddesses ;  on  the  rhododendron  bushes  were  white  and  red  flags
offered  to  them  by  wayfarers.  From  tliis  point  I  obtained  a  good
view  of  the  Kangpa-chan  valley.

Finding  that  1  was  greatly  exhausted,  DaoNamgyal,  Pliurcliung's
Ijrother- in-law,  took  me  on  his  back  and  carried  me  till  we  reached
tlie  north-west  flank  of  the  Tama  la.  Soon  after  this  we  came  to  a  flat,
grass-covered  valley  with  tall  rhododendrons  and  ferns  growing  about.
I'luircliuiig  held  this  spot  to  have  been  a  singularly  lucky  one  for  him,
for  it  was  here  that  his  parents  had  met  Hooker  some  tliirty-five
year.s  ago,  while  the  great  botanist  was  exploring  Nepal.  I'hurchung's
fathei*.  sufi'ering  from  snow-blindness,  was  led  by  his  wife  to  the
Doctor,  wlio  uoi  oidy  gave  him  excellent  medicine,  but  presented  her

*  a.  Hooker,  (>]>.  cit.,  i.  275.— (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  23

with  a  pretty  coin  to  hang  about  the  neck  of  her  chikl,  Phurchung,
then  a  baby  in  the  arms.*

At  about  2  p.m.  we  reached  the  Yamata  ri,  formed  by  the
streams  which  issue  from  Kanchanjinga.  Tlie  gorge  in  which  this
river  flows  is  singularly  beautiful.  Above  the  steep  crags  on  either
side  were  blue  glaciers,  and  at  their  feet  forests  of  native  firs
and  larches,  covered  with  pendant  mosses  waving  like  feathers  in  the
breeze.  Just  before  reaching  Kangpa-chan  (Gyunsar)  village,  the
Yamata  ri  river  is  crossed  by  a  little  bridge,  and  then  the  village
with  its  wooden  huts  comes  in  view.  Some  of  the  houses  were
empty ;  a  few  old  hags  with  goitre  sat  on  their  thresholds  basking
in  the  sun  and  spinning.

Phurchung  had  reached  this,  his  native  village,  ahead  of  us,  and
he  now  came,  much  the  worse  for  drink,  to  greet  us,  and  led  us  into
his  mother's  house,  where  a  fire  of  rhododendron  boughs  and  aromatic
firs  blazed  in  the  middle  of  the  room.  Chang  f  was  ready  in  wooden
bottles,  and  his  mother  poured  some  boiling  water  into  them  as  soon
as  we  were  seated  on  the  cushions  placed  for  us.  Some  dry  junipers
and  pines  were  burnt  as  incense,  and  two  joss-sticks  smoked  before
us.  Then  two  brass  plates  full  of  boiled,  red-skinned  potatoes
were  offered  us,  followed  by  rice  and  boiled  ]nutton,  the  rice  being
served  wrapped  up  in  the  broad  leaves  of  some  kind  of  hill  plant.
When  night  came  on  we  sat  around  the  fire,  each  with  a  bottle
of  murwa  before  him ;  but  drowsiness  soon  overtook  me,  and  I  fell
asleep.

Novemlcr  24. — The  village  of  Kangpa-chan  |  is  built  on  several
terraces  facing  the  south-west,  the  houses  enclosed  in  low  stone  walls.
Several  small  streams  empty  into  the  Kangchan  below  the  village,
and  mountains  covered  with  snow  and  ice  rise  precipitously  on
either  side  of  it,  their  lower  slopes  clad  with  thick  forest  growth
of mos3-covered silver firs, deodars, and larches. Juniper and


*  See  Hooker,  op.  cit.,  i.  263.— (W.  R.)

t  Tibetan  beer.  Its  preparation  is  thus  described  by  Jaesclike,  op.  cit.,  s.v.,  Chang :
''  When  the  boiled  barley  has  grown  cold,  some  inliabs  (yeast  or  dry  barm  prepared
in  Balti  of  tlour,  mixed  with  some  ginger  and  aconite)  is  added,  after  which  it  is  left
standing  for  two  or  three  days,  until  fermentation  commences,  when  it  is  called  glum.
Having  sufRciently  fermented,  some  water  is  jjoured  to  it,  and  the  beer  is  considered  to
be  ready  for  use." — (W.  E.)

:;:  Hooker's  Kambachen  {op.  cit.,  i.  257).  He  gives  its  altitude  at  11,380  feet
above  sea-level. — (W.  E.)


24  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND VENTRAL TIBET.

rhododendron  bushes  surniund  the  village.  IJouiid  about  it  are
patches  of  barley,*  from  one  to  the  otlier  of  whicli  Hew  Hocks  of  wild
pigeons.

Coining  back  from  a  stroll,  1  found  two  men  waiting  to  invite
me  to  drink  chang  at  their  houses ;  and  having  accepted  their  invita-
tion, I  went  first  to  that  of  a  man  called  Jorgya.  Taking  my  seat  on
a  thick  mattress-like  seat  covered  with  a  piece  of  Khamba  carpet,  a
bamboo  bottle  filled  with  murwa,  with  a  little  piece  of  butter  placed
on  top  of  it,  was  set  before  us.f  Tea  was  first  drunk,  the  housewife
serving  mine  in  a  china  cup,  a  form  of  Tibetan  politeness  only  shown
to  persons  of  superior  social  standing,  those  of  equal  or  inferior  rank
to  the  host  u.siug  the  wooden  bowls  each  one  carries  about  in  the
breast  of  liis  gown.  After  this,  a  brass  plate  filled  with  potatoes  was
placed  before  us  on  a  little  table,  together  with  parched  Indian  corn,
milk,  and  butter,  of  all  of  which  we  ate  heartily.

Our  host  advised  me  not  to  attempt  to  go  by  Wallung,  as  1  would
be  sure  to  meet  with  much  difficulty,  but  rather  to  enter  Tibet  by
Yangma  and  the  Kangla  chen  pass,  which  was  still  possible,  he  said,
even  at  this  advanced  season  of  the  year.

I  next  went  to  the  house  of  Pemazang,  Phurchung's  uncle,  which  I
found  well  plastered  and  with  a  tastefully  painted  chapel.  His  son
and  wife  received  me  at  the  head  of  the  ladder,  and  led  me  into  the
hous(i.  Pemazang  had  long,  tliick,  and  tangled  hair.  He  wore  gold
earrings  in  the  shape  of  magnolia  fiowers,  and  his  looks  and  talk  were
grave  and  serious.  He  often  sits  in  deep  meditation  for  tlie  purpose
of  arresting  hail  or  other  storms  by  the  potency  of  the  charms  he  is
able  to  pronounce.  I

Leaving  Pemazang,  we  crossed  the  river  and  paid  a  visit  to  tlie
Tashi-chos  ding  monastery,  which  we  found  nearly  deserted,  one  or

*  Hooker  {loc.  cit.)  says  that  the  only  cultivation  here  consists  of  radishes,  potatoes,
and  barley  :  no  wheat  is  gnAvn.— (W.  K.)

t  This  custom  of  putting  a  little  piece  of  butter  on  tlie  moutli  of  a  bottle  or  neek  of
a  jug  of  wine  when  offered  to  any  one  is  observed  by  all  Tiljetans.  and  by  most  of  the
Mongol  tribes  with  which  I  am  acquainted.— (W.  K.)

X  From  this  descri])tion  of  Pemazang,  it  may  be  inferred  that  he  was  a  Khamba,
a  Tibetan  from  the  north-east.  We  know  by  Hooker,  ojp.  cit.,  i.  137,  that  many
Khamba  came  to  Sikkim  witli  tlie  first  Sikkim  rajah.  They  are,  as  a  people,  famous
"  rain-makers;  "  while  the  people  from  other  parts  of  Tibet  are  not  much  given  to  per-
forming rain-making  or  rain-dispelling  ceremonies.  Cf.  'The  Land  of  the  Lamas,'
p.  188.— (W.  K.)


JOUBNET TO LHASA AND CENTBAL TIBET.


23


two  old  women  here  and  there  turning  the  prayer-wheels  outside
the  temple.  Ascending  two  flights  of  ladder-stairs,  we  entered  the
lama's  house.  He  and  his  ani  *  received  us  most  kindly,  and  the
latter  asked  me  for  some  medicines  for  the  old  gentleman,  who  was
suffering  M'ith  dyspepsia  {paJcan).


A LEPCHA SOLDIER.


Eeturning  to  our  lodgings,  we  found  that  the  lock  of  the  bag  in
which  I  kept  my  money  had  been  tampered  with,  but  I  did  not

*  The  term  ani  (also  pronounced  aneh')  is  used  to  designate  a  wife,  concubine,  or  nun.
In  the  present  case  it  certainly  means  a  nun  livino;  in  a  state  of  concubiunge  with  a
lama.  It  is  a  common  practice  in  Tibet,  and  in  many  places  lamas  (graba)  and
ani  live  in  the  same  convent.  See  '  Report  on  Explorations  in  Sikkim.  Bhutan,  etc.,
from  185G  to  1«S6,'  pp.  9  and  12,  and  infra,  p.  42.— (W.  R.)


26  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

open  it,  as  six  other  persons  were  living  in  the  room  we  occupied,
and  I  feared  lest  tliey  might  see  the  contents.  Whatever  the  loss
might  be,  I  made  up  my  mind  to  bear  it  silently,  and  keep  my
suspicions  to  myself.

Novemler  25, — Phurchuug's  brother,  Dao  Namgyal,  brought  me
a  quantity  of  presents — potatoes,  murwa,  millet,  butter,  and  last,  but
not  least,  a  kid,  for  which  I  gave  him  a  return  present  of  five  rupees.
The  poor  people  of  the  village  all  followed  with  various  presents,  not
that  they  had  any  great  respect  for  me,  but  solely  with  an  eye  to
return  presents,  which  they  hoped  would  be  greater  than  the  value
of  theirs.  Fortunately  there  were  but  few  people  in  the  village,
otherwise  they  would  have  drained  me  of  all  my  cash.

By  noon  Phurchung  had  sufficiently  slept  off  his  drunkenness  to
procure  for  me  several  pair  of  Jcijar*  or  snowshoes,  from  the  people
of  the  village.  I  had  learnt  from  a  newly  engaged  coolie  that  he
had  lately  crossed  the  Kangla  pass  on  kyar,  and  had  reached  Jongri,
where  he  had  met  Captain  Harman,  who  had  been  much  struck  by
the  great  usefulness  of  this  rude  contrivance.

In  the  evening  the  men  killed  two  kids ;  the  blood  was  poured
into  the  intestines,  which  had  been  washed  and  cleaned,  barley-flour
{tsamha)  being  mixed  with  it.f  These  blood  puddings  were  boiled
and  packed  away  with  the  tripe  in  a  small  wicker  basket  for  my
use  on  the  journey.

It  is  told  of  the  upper  Kangpa-chan  valley  that  it  was  first  peopled
])y  Tibetans,  called  Sharpa  (Easterners),  whose  original  home  was  in
the  mountains  of  Shar  Khambu,  or  Eastern  Kirata.J  Lower  down
the  valley  lived  the  Magar  tribe  from  Nepal,  whose  chief  extended
his  sway  over  the  Sharpa,  and  exacted  such  oppressive  taxes  from
them  that  they  decided  to  avenge  themselves.  The  Magar  chief,
going to the  village of Kangpa-chan, he  and his  followers  were

*  Written,  according  to  Jaesclike,  op.  cit.,  dtjhar.  The  word  and  the  thing  are
unknown,  I  believe,  in  other  parts  of  Tibet. — (W.  R.)

t  Throughout  Tibet  and  the  greater  part  of  ISIongoIia,  llie  intestines,  stuftVd  with
the  hashed  heart,  liver,  and  liglits,  compose  the  fir.st  meal  made  from  a  freslily  killed
sheep  or  kid.  The  head  and  pelt  are  u.sually  given  to  the  person  who  has  sold  the
sheep,  this  not  being  included  in  the  price  paid. Cf.  infra,  p.  41. — (W.  R.)

X  The  Kirata  are  well  known  as  a  tribe  of  non-Braiiraanical  people  (MIecha)  in  the
Veda.  See  Chr.  Lassen.  '  Indis.  Alterthumskunde,'  vol.  i.  p.  78:  "The  land  between
tiK;  San  Roci  and  Kankiiji  is  approximately  th(;  same  as  that  of  tlie  Kiratas."  A  com-
plete discussion  on  tlie  Kiratas  is  to  be  found  in  'Zeitschrift  fiir  Kunde  des  Morgen-
lander,'  vol.  i.  p.  So  ft". See  »upra,  \\  3. — (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  li

murdered,  and  their  bodies  buried.  aSTo  clue  could  be  had  of  the
missing  men,  so  the  chiefs  wife  went  herself  to  Kangpa-chan,  but
she  also  failed  to  discover  what  had  become  of  them.  While  going
along  the  river  bank,  a  boulder,  undermined  by  the  current,  tumbled
down,  when  a  swarm  of  flies  flew  buzzing  out.  Attracted  by  this,
the  queen  had  the  earth  removed,  and  discovered  the  bodies  of  her
husband  and  his  followers.  Eeturning  home  with  the  chief's  body,
she  ordered  great  funeral  ceremonies  to  be  held  at  a  place  some  six
miles  up  the  river,  near  the  Kapa-chan  torrent,  midway  between  the
two  great  villages  of  the  Kangpa-chan  valley — Gyunsar  and  Yarsa,*
as  being  more  accessible  for  the  people,  for  whose  entertainment
great  bowls  of  wine  were  to  be  provided.  In  the  wine  poison  was
mixed ;  and  as  soon  as  the  Magars  had  finished  drinking,  they  passed
it  to  the  Kangpa-chan  people,  who  drank  deeply,  and  fell  asleep  to
awake  no  more.  Nearly  a  thousand  people  were  in  this  way  done
to  death,  and  the  babies  were  carried  away  by  the  queen's  followers.
The  place  where  this  foul  deed  was  done  became  known  as  Tong-
shong  phug,  "  the  place  which  witnessed  a  thousand  murders."

The  few  who  escaped  carried  the  news  to  Tibet,  and  soon  returned
with  a  large  army  to  wage  war  against  the  Magars.  The  queen  shut
herself  up  in  one  of  her  castles,  and,  though  ill-prepared  to  stand  a
siege,  she  and  her  people  defended  it  for  three  months.  The  Tibetans
decided  to  reduce  the  place  by  famine  and  by  cutting  off  the  water-
supply.  Then  the  queen,  to  deceive  them,  opened  the  reservoir  in
the  castle  and  let  the  water  flow  towards  the  Tibetan  camp ;  and  the
enemy,  thinking  that  she  must  have  a  great  store  of  it  and  that
their  attempt  was  vain,  raised  the  siege,  and  withdrew  to  a  distance.
The  queen  now  attacked  them  in  turn,  but  fell  in  the  first
skirmish,  fighting  valiantly.  The  Tibetans  finally  expelled  the
Magars  from  the  Kangpa-chan  and  Tambur  valleys,  and  restored  them
to  their  former  possessors.

It  was  among  the  Kangpa-chan  tribe  that  I  had  found  Phurchung,
the  most  devoted  and  faithful  of  all  the  men  I  ever  came  across  in
the  Himalayas.  Although  Ugyen  distrusted  him,  and  he  abhorred
Ugyen,  yet  I  placed  implicit  confidence  in  his  loyalty  and  ability,
and  his  devotion  and  fidelity  to  me  were  boundless.

Novcmhcr  26. — We  left  Kangpa-chan,  our  party  now  comprising

* Yarsa  probably  means  "  upper  {yar)  land  (sa)." Yara  mora,  or  ijarka  marha,
meaning  •■  upper  and  lower,"  are  terms  used  throughout  Tibet. — (W.  R.)


28  JornxEY  to  lb  as  a  am>  central  tibet.

four  coolies.  Pliurehiing  marched  aloug  with  my  gnu  as  a  sign  of
his  importance,  Imt  its  red  cloth  cover,  its  principal  beauty,  had
been  stolen  the  night  before;  his  younger  brother,  Sonam-dorj,
carried  his  pack.  Ugyen-gyatso  and  I  rode  ponies,  hired  for  eight
annas  each,  to  take  us  halfway  up  the  Xango  la.  The  old  women
{ama)  of  the  village  waited  our  approach  at  the  east  end  of  the
bridge  to  give  us  the  stirrup  cup  {chang  hjd)  (a  custom  invariably
observed  in  Tibet  at  the  parting  of  friends  setting  out  on  a  long
journey),  with  bowls  of  wine  in  their  right  hand,  and  plates  full
of  parclied  barley  Hour  (tsamha)  in  their  left.  Each  of  the  old
women  poured  a  little  wine  into  a  china  cup,  to  which  a  pinch  of
Hour  was  added,  and  we  were  asked  to  take  a  sip,  with  the  wish
of  ":\ray  we  ofler  you  the  like  on  your  return."  We  thanked  them
for  their  kindness,  and  put  a  couple  of  rupees  in  one  of  their  plates,
to  be  divided  amongst  them.

We  rode  slowly  on  by  the  bounding  river,  into  which  a  number
of  little  rills  empty,  flowing  down  from  behind  the  monastery,  and
over  which  were  several  prayer-wheels  turned  by  the  water.  Our
way  lay  amidst  thick  woods  up  to  Daba  ngonpo,  where  the  natives
used  to  get  blue  clay  to  make  images.  This  clay  they  held  to  be
exceptionally  good,  as  it  came  from  the  summit  of  a  holy  mountain.
From  this  point  we  followed  up  the  bed  of  a  former  glacier,  passing
Kamai  phugpa,  and  reaching  at  Khama  kang  tung,  the  timber  line.
A  mile  lieyond  the  latter  place  we  came  to  the  end  of  the  pasture-
lands  on  this  side  the  Nango  la,  not  far  from  which  we  saw  a  flock
of  spotted  birds,  called  srcr/pa*  which  Ugyen  tried,  without  success,
to  shoot.

The  ascent  of  the  Xango  la  now  began  over  deep  snow,  in  some
places  its  surface  frozen,  in  others  so  soft  that  we  sunk  knee-deep
in  it.  I  soon  became  so  exhausted  that  I  had  to  get  one  of  the
coolies  to  carry  me  on  his  back,  and  so  we  reached  the  summit
of  the  pass.t

Two  miles  to  the  west  of  the  pass  is  Sayong  kong,  a  plateau
whence  there  is  a  direct  road  leading  to  Yangma.  A  mile  below
this place is Sayong-hok,  | where vegetation begins again, and

* Tetraogallus  Tibelunus.

t  Cf.  Hof>ker,  op.  cit.,  i.  250-254.  lie  made  tlie  altitude  of  this  iiass  to  be
15.770  feet  iibove  scii-level.— (W.  R.)

; Ifok  (or  og)  menus  "  lower,"  l,ong  or  fjnug  ineuus  "  upijer." — (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  29

gradually  increases  as  one  advances  along  the  Lungkyong  chu.  We
camped  on  the  river  bank  under  a  great  boulder,  spreading  our  ru^s
on  beds  of  long  dry  grass,  which  covered,  but  very  imperfectly,  the
rough,  stony  soil.

Novcmhcr  27. — We  followed  down  the  Lungkyong  chu  (the  only
way  of  communication  between  Kangpa-chan,  Yangma,  and  Walking),
the  mountains  on  our  left  nearly  hidden  in  the  mornino-  mists.  For
part  of  the  w\ay  our  road  led  along  a  steep  path  through  thick  woods
of  firs,  feathery  larches,  and  deodars,  amidst  which  I  saw  many
pheasants  and  other  kinds  of  birds,  and  the  coolies  told  me  that
musk  deer  and  wild  sheep  were  also  found  there.

About  two  miles  above  the  junction  of  the  Yangma  with  the
Lungkyong,  we  crossed  the  former  stream  by  a  wooden  bridge,  and
finally  arrived  at  the  village  of  Tingugma,  where  we  rested  a  while
and  ate  a  light  meal.

Shortly  after  starting  again  we  met  a  party  of  Yangma  natives
driving  before  them  a  few  sheep  and  a  dozen  yaks  laden  with
blankets,  yak  hides,  barley,  and  salt.  They  were  going  to  a  village
called  Chaini,  in  the  Tambur  valley,  to  exchange  their  goods  for  rice
and  Indian  corn.  Phurchung  asked  them  if  the  Kangla  chen  pass
was  still  open.  Some  said  we  could  easily  cross  it ;  others  expressed
doubts  about  it,  for  they  said  three  feet  of  snow  had  fallen  on  it  a
few  days  previously.

Passing  by  Maya  phug  (a  cavern  sacred  to  the  goddess  Mamo).
we  crossed  a  little  juniper-covered  plateau  called  Shugpa  thang
("  Juniper  plain  "),  and  after  a  short  but  steep  climb  reached  the
summit  of  the  pass,  from  whence  I  had  a  most  extended  and
beautiful  view  of  the  surrounding  country — behind  me  great  reddish
granite  rocks,  looking  like  the  ruins  of  gigantic  ramparts ;  before
me  a  plain  some  two  miles  long,  the  bed  of  a  former  glacier,  encircled
by  snowy  mountains  rising  the  one  above  the  other ;  while  to  the
south-east  was  the  Nango  la,  and  behind  it  the  plain  of  Sumdougma.
Crossing  the  Djari  thang,  or  "  Plain  of  Gravel,"  and  the  Do  la,  or
"  Eocky  pass  "  (round  the  base  of  which  the  Yangma  flows),  I  reached
by  dusk  the  monastery  of  Yangma,  or  Manding  gomba,  situated  on
a  broad,  shrub-covered  terrace  some  40  to  50  feet  above  the  stream ;
where  Phurchung  found  me  lodgings  in  a  wretched  cell,  where  I
settled  myself  as  best  I  could  for  the  night.  He  obtained  a  few
eggs  and  some  milk  from  the  lamas ;  and  while  one  of  the  nuns  {aid)


30  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

helped  Dao  Xanigyal  to  cook  the  food,  another  blew  the  bellows.
The  lamas  were  engaged  in  their  annnal  reading  of  the  Kahgyur,
which  occupied  them  daily  from  .")  in  the  morning  to  7.30  p.m.,  when
they  retired  to  their  respective  cells.  There  Avere  fifteen  monks  and
seven  ani  in  the  lamasery.*

Ugyen  had  been  suffering  most  of  the  day  with  violent  pains  in
tlie  bowels  ;  he  now  wrapped  himself  in  all  the  blankets  I  could
spare,  and  lay  groaning  and  crying,  "  Achi-chc  (qm-ouh  !  "  so  that  I  felt
grave  apprehensions  for  him,  and  feared  that  his  illness  might  oblige
us  to  stop  over  in  this  wretched  place.

Xorcmhe)'  28. — Phurchung  had  been  away  on  a  drunken  bout
all  night,  and  I  arose  full  of  fear  lest  he  might  have  disclosed  our
plans  to  his  companions,  and  Ugyen  shared  my  alarm.  After  a
while  riiurchung  and  Phuntso  appeared,  and  with  much  salaaming
and  lolling  of  the  tongue  asked  me  to  wait  here  a  day,  the  latter
assuring  me  that  he  hoped  to  obtain,  without  much  difficulty  or
the  payment  of  custom  duty  (called  chiia  in  this  part  of  Nepal),
permission  for  us  to  proceed  on  our  journey.  Shortly  after  the
elders  arrived,  the  richest  man  among  them  recognizable  by  his
tamiisl-i  hat,  a  long  earring,  and  a  deep  red  serge  robe  of  purug.^
He  had  come  from  the  village  of  Yangma  riding  a  half-breed  yak
(jo),  which,  with  the  saddle  still  on  its  back,  stood  tied  at  the  gate
of  tlie  monastery.  1  anxiously  awaited  the  result  of  their  con-
ference with  my  men,  and  in  great  anxiety  prayed  to  the  Supreme
]  )ispenser  of  our  destinies  that  nothing  might  happen  unfavourable
to  ourselves  and  our  enterprise.

The  Handing  gomba,  or  Nub  IMan-ding  gomba,  "  The  Western
Plying-^ledieine  ^Monastery,"  owes  its  name  to  the  fact  that  lama
Llm-tsun  once  lived  for  three  years  in  a  cave  close  by  called  the
Zimphug,  to  discover  medicines  of  wonderful  potency,  and  that  he
there  obtained  three  wonderful  pills.  One  came  to  him  through  the
air,  i'alling  on  the  spot  where  the  lamasery  now  stands.  The  second
]till  fell  a  little  al)Ove  the  monastery,  where  the  people  of  the  village
now  burn  tlieir  dead  ;  and  the  third  alighted  on  the  spot  where  the
2reat  chorten  now  stands.

*  See  infra.  j».  :!7.  imtc  '2.

t  Vurng  is  ratlicr  a  poor  transcription  of  the  word  phrug  (pronounced  iruk)^  but  better
known  by  tlio  Cliine.se  name  of  ptilo.  Pulo,  tbough  now  a  Cliinese  word,  is  a  borrowed
t<rn),  probably  the  Tibetan  name.  Phru(,'  is  native  Tibetan  clotli  made  in  pieces  usually
nine  or  ten  fatboinn  (ilamfxi  in  Tibetan)  long  and  about  fourteen  inches  broad. — (W'.  11.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  31

Manding  gomba  is  held  in  great  sanctity,  for  it  is  one  of  the
first  cis-Himalayan  lamaseries  founded  by  the  great  red-hat  Lama
Lha-tsun;  but  Wallung  ranks  first,  and  Kangpa-chan  second,  in  point
of  wealth  and  power.  Manding  possesses  a  fine  copy  of  the  Kahgyur
in  125  volumes.

The  Lha-hhang,  or  temple,  has  massive  and  neatly  painted  walls
and  doors,  after  the  manner  of  the  Sikkim  donpa.  The  huts  or  cells
of  the  monks  in  its  immediate  vicinity,  all  painted  red  with  clay
obtained  from  the  adjacent  mountains,  are  of  irregular  and  ugly
style,  the  doors,  windows,  and  cornices  being  roughly  made;  each
house  has  around  it  a  low  stone  wall,  inside  of  which  the  sheep  and
yak  find  shelter.

After  a  little  while  Phurchung  and  Puntso  came  back  to  me  in
high  spirits  over  the  result  of  their  conference  with  the  village  elders.
They  had  told  them  that  I  was  only  a  pilgrim  {nal'orjxi)  who  spoke
Tibetan  and  dressed  in  Tibetan  fashion.  The  head  lama  said  that
he  knew  of  no  order  from  the  ISTepalese  Government  for  stopping-
pilgrims  on  their  way  to  Tibet,  and  that  he  would  certainly  not
prevent  me  doing  so,  as  I  spoke  Tibetan  with  greater  fluency  and
accuracy  than  many  Nepalese.  The  headman  {gopa)  asked  that
Phurchung  should  give  bond,  holding  himself  personally  responsible
for  my  character  as  a  traveller,  and  a  custom  duty  of  eight  annas
a  head  was  levied  on  our  party.  Phurchung  also  told  me  that  the
headman  and  head  lama  were  coming  to  bid  me  farewell,  and  that
I  must  not  forget,  after  exchanging  compliments  with  them,  to  say
sangpoi  ja  chog,  "  May  we  meet  again  next  year."

In  a  little  while  the  big  men  arrived.  The  headman,  conspicuous
by  his  earring,  boots,  and  red  serge  robe,  nodded  to  me  slightly,  and
took  off  his  hat.  He  asked  me  why  I  had  chosen  such  a  bad  season
for  going  to  Tibet.  I  told  him  that  I  did  so  in  obedience  to  the
command  of  our  holy  and  learned  chief  lama  {Tsmvai),  and  not  by
my  own  wish.  His  object  in  coming  to  see  me  was  to  find  out  if
I  spoke  Tibetan  and  understood  the  Buddhist  religion.  My  fluency
in  Tibetan,  and  the  citing  of  one  or  two  proverbial  sayings  in  course
of  conversation,  made  him  form  a  high  opinion  of  my  knowledge  of
the  sacred  texts  and  histories,  as  well  as  of  my  character  and  holiness.
"  Laso,  laso  "  (yes,  yes),  he  said,  and  then  he  apologized  for  not  having
brought  me  some  presents ;  but  I  answered  him  that  our  acquaintance
was  only  just begun,  and there  would  be  time in  the  future to


32  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

cultivate  it,  ami.  haiidinu  him  a  scar ^khat a r/),  I  expressed  the  hope
that  we  might  meet  the  next  year  {saiv/poi  ja  choq).  ]\Iaiiy  of  the
bystanders  made  wishes  for  our  welfare,  but  some  one  in  the  crowd
said  tliat  I  was  certainly  not  a  Tibetan.  Then  another  swore  I  was
an  Indian ;  and  a  third  said  that  they  would  soon  have  news  of  me :
'*  That  Hindu  will  surely  die  in  the  snows,  and  his  servants  will  soon
return  here  with  the  news  of  his  death."

It  was  past  noon  when  the  coolies  picked  u])  their  loads,  and  I  set
out  in  excellent  spirits,  having  now  escaped  the  much-feared  obstruc-
tion from  the  Yangma  people,  on  whose  mercy  and  good-will  our
success  entirely  depended.

We  passed  by  some  memlo/i;/  and  chorten  at  the  entrance  to  the
convent,  and  then  followed  up  the  course  of  the  Yangma,  passing  by
a  pretty  lakelet,  the  Miza,  or  "  man  eating,"  *  now  filled  with  ice,
and  seeing  on  the  way  some  very  high  chorten,  known  as  thongwa
huadol,]  "bringing  deliverance  when  seen,"  which  had  a  few  years
previously  been  repaired  by  the  head  lama  of  Wallung.  Near  these
we  saw  a  half-dozen  wild  sheep  (uao),  but  we  gave  up  all  idea  of
shooting  them  when  told  that  the  Yangma  people  think  the  gods  of
the  land  and  mountains  (Ski-hdaf/,  rl-lha)  would  be  deeply  offended
if  any  one  molested  them.

By  3  p.m.  we  got  sight  of  tlie  village  of  Yangnia,J  whose
houses  could  only  be  distinguished  from  the  boulders  everywhere
strewing  the  ground  by  the  smoke  issuing  from  the  roofs.  There
were  not  more  than  a  hundred  houses  in  the  village,  and  the  fields
round  about  were  enclosed  within  low  stone  walls.  Buckwheat,
barley,  turnips,  radishes,  and  potatoes  are  grown  here,  and  rice
Ijrought  from  Yang-ku  tang  and  other  villages  in  the  warmer  valleys
is  procuraljle.  The  village  was  founded  by  Tibetans  from  Tashi-rabka,
one  of  them  having  discovered  the  valley  and  its  comparative  fertility
M-hile  hunting  for  a  lost  yak  calf.  The  name  Yangma  was  given  it
on  account  of  tlie  Ijroadth  of  the  valley.§

The  male  pait  of  the  ])opulation  is  idle  in  tlie  extreme,  but  tlie

•  Mi,  "  man  ; '"  za,  "  to  eat." — ( W.  It.)

t  3/</(o;i;/-ifa,  "  seen  ;  "  /cwx,  "  entire  ;  "  j/roZ,  "  freedom." — (W.  R.)

X  Alao  visitid  by  Hooker.  He  says  that  it  was  (in  1848)  a  miserable  collection
of  2U0  to  300  stone  huts.  Its  altitude  is  about  13,500  feet  above  sen-level.  See  Hooker,
(ip.  cit.,  i.  '238.  On  p.  lil'i  of  his  work  is  a  "diagram  of  the  glacial  terraces  at  the  fork
of  tlie  Yangma  valley." — (W.  R.)

§  Yaug-ma,  meaning  "  broad." — (\V.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  33

women  are  correspondingly  busy;  some  I  saw  were  threshing  corn,
some  gathering  fuel,  others  engaged  in  various  kinds  of  household
work.

By  5  p.m.  we  got  off  from  this  wretched  valley,  where  Phur-
chung  and  the  coolies,  by  the  way,  were  most  desirous  to  remain  to
continue  drinking  chang,  though  Phurchung  showed  unmistakable
signs  of  having  already  imbibed  too  much.  After  an  hour's  march
we  reached  Ki  phug,  where  we  found,  under  an  overhanging  rock,  a
bit  of  ground  free  from  snow  on  which  to  camp;  but  Pliurchung
remained  behind  in  Yangma,  in  a  helplessly  drunken  condition.

November  29. — The  way  lay  along  the  Yangma,  whicli  was
scarcely  visible,  snow  and  ice  covering  entirely  its  bed.  There  was
nothing  to  give  life  to  the  scenery ;  the  river  flowed  in  a  deep  gorge,
or  else  opened  out  into  lake- like  expanses ;  on  either  side  the
mountains  seemed  to  reach  to  the  sky  ;  not  a  bird,  not  even  a  cloud
in  the  heaven,  not  a  sound  save  that  of  our  feet  crushing  the  light
dry  snow.  It  was  11  a.m.  when  we  came  to  an  unfrozen  pool,  by
which  we  ate  our  Ijreakfast  of  tea  and  meal.  This  place,  which  is  in
a  broad  portion  of  the  valley,  is  a  favourite  summer  pasture-ground
{tser  chan)  for  the  Dokpas,  who,  from  July  to  September,  bring  their
herds  of  yaks  here.

Po  phug  was  reached  after  a  march  of  three  miles  through  the
snow,  then  the  ascent  became  steeper  and  freer  from  snow,  and  we
came  to  Luma  goma,  "  Fountain  head,"  the  source  of  the  Yangma
river ;  and  after  an  easy  ascent  of  half  an  hour  we  arrived  at  Tsa-
tsam,  the  limit  of  vegetation.*

Here  we  began  climbing  a  huge  glacier,  a  quarter  of  a  mile  wide
and  more  than  three  miles  long,  the  Chyang-chub  gya-lam,  or  "High-
way to  Holiness,"  over  which  I  was  carried  on  Phurchung's  back
wherever  the  snow  lay  deep.  Then  we  climbed  a  huge  mass  of  bare
black  rocks  (Dsama  nagmo),  and  darkness  had  overtaken  us  before  we
reached  the  "  White  Cavern  "  {Phugpa  iMrpo),  where  we  proposed
passing  the  night.  The  fog  added  to  the  obscurity  of  the  night,  our
feet  were  benumbed  by  the  cold,  and  we  frequently  slipped  into
crevasses  or  between  the  clefts  of  rocks.  Finding  it  impossible  to
reach  the  cavern,  we  scraped  away  the  snow  from  between  some
rocks,  and  there  I  sat,  my  knees  drawn  up,  hugging  myself  during
the  long  night.

*  Rtsn,  "  grass  ;  "  mtsams,  "  boundarj'-line,  limit." — (W.  R.)


34  JOUBNEY TO LB  ASA AXD CENTBAL TIBET.

How  exhausted  we  were  witli  tlie  fatigue  of  the  day's  journey,
how  overcome  by  the  rarefication  of  the  air,  the  intensity  of  the  cold ,
and  liow  completely  i.rostrated  by  hunger  and  thirst,  is  not  easy  to
describe.  The  very  remembrance  of  the  sufferings  of  that  dreadful
night  makes  me  shudder  even  now,  but  I  quickly  recover  under  the
inexpressible  delight  I  feel  at  the  consciousness  of  my  great  success.
This  was  the  most  trying  night  I  ever  passed  in  my  life.  There  was
a  light  breeze  blowing,  attended  with  sleet,  which  fortunately  weighed
my  blankets  down  and  made  them  cover  mc  closer  than  they  other-
wise would  have  done.  And  so  witli  neither  food  nor  drink,  placed
as  if  in  the  grim  jaws  of  death  in  the  l:)leak  and  dreary  regions  of
snow,  where  death  alone  dwells,  we  spent  this  most  dismal  night.

Xovcrnhn-  30.— The  coolies  once  more  picked  up  their  loads,  and
our  guide  began  in  his  gravest  tones  to  recite  his  Pema-juiuj-ne  samJm
ihiha  and  other  mantras.  Tlie  morning  was  gloriously  radiant,  and
the  great  Kangla  chen  glittered  before  us,  bathed  in  a  glory  of  golden
light.  Fortunately  for  us,  there  was  no  fresh  snow  on  the  ground  ;
for,  liad  there  been  any,  we  could  not  possibly  have  advanced.
"We  found  that  we  had  stopped  not  more  than  a  furlong  from  the
rinigpa  karpo,  which,  by  the  way,  is  not  a  cave  at  all,  but  only  a
crevasse  between  two  detached  rocks.  Our  guide,  leaving  his  load  in
charge  of  his  brother,  took  the  lead,  driving  his  long  stick  into  the
snow  at  each  step,  and  digging  footholds  in  the  soft  snow.  From
the  White  Cavern  the  top  of  the  pass  bore  due  east,  and  was  distant
about  two  miles.  Just  at  the  base  of  the  final  ascent  there  is  a  little
sandy  ]ilain,  in  the  middle  of  which  is  a  huge  boulder :  this  is  the
"Place  of  Salvation"  {Tarpa  (janrj),  thus  called  because,  when  once
this  point  is  reached,  travellers  may  be  confident  of  attaining  tlie
summit  of  tlie  pass.

I  steadily  followed  in  tlie  footsteps  of  the  guide,  and  would  not  let
him  take  me  on  his  l)ack  ;  for  if  I  succeeded  in  ascending  to  the
highest  summit  of  Kangla  chen  without  any  help,  I  could  look  to
the  achievement  with  greater  pride.  Ugyen  here  gave  out,  and  it  was
with  diflicully  that  I  persuaded  Phurchung  to  carry  him  on  his  back,
ior  they  Merc  far  from  being  on  the  best  of  terms.  An  hour's  hard
climliing  brought  us  t(j  the  summit  of  the  pass.  The  sky  was
eloudless  and  of  the  deepest  blue ;  against  it  a  snow-clad  world  of
mountains  stood  out  in  bold  relief.  Far  beyond  the  maze  of  snow-
clad peaks  we saw in the north-Avest the  mountains  of  Pherug,


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  35

in  Tibet,  while  those  of  Shar  Khambu  stood  gloriously  out  to  the
west.

The  summit  of  Kangla  chen  is  a  plateau,  some  two  miles  from  east
to  west,  and  one  mile  and  a  quarter  from  north-west  to  north-east ;
it  inclines  towards  the  west,  while  to  the  north-west  it  is  bounded  by
a  mountain  of  considerable  height.  Our  snowshoes  (hjar)  now  stood
us  in  good  need  ;  unfortunately  we  had  but  three  pairs,  so  Phurchung
and  I  had  to  wade  through  the .  deep  snow  in  the  footsteps  of  the
others,  with  many  slips  and  more  than  one  narrow  escape  from  falling
into  the  deep  crevasses.  On  all  sides  there  was  nothing  visible  but  an
ocean  of  snow.  Innumerable  snowy  peaks  touched  with  their  white
heads  the  pale  leaden  skies,  where  stars  were  shining.  The  rattling
roar  of  distant  avalanches  was  frequently  heard ;  but,  after  having
succeeded  in  crossing  the  loftiest  of  snowy  passes,  I  felt  too  trans-
ported with  joy  to  be  frightened  by  their  thunder.

These  splendid  scenes  of  wonderland,  the  grandest,  the  most
sublime  my  eyes  have  ever  beheld,  which  bewildered  me  so  that  even
now  my  pen  finds  no  words  to  describe  them,  inspired  me  with
feelings  of  deep  gratitude  to  Heaven,  by  whose  mercy  my  life  had
been  spared  thus  far.

We  camped  on  a  rock  bare  of  snow,  and  passed  another  miserable
night  with  nothing  to  drink,  and  Init  a  couple  of  dry  biscuits  to  stave
off  our  hunger.  To  add  to  my  misery,  Ugyen  was  still  suffering,  and
I  had  to  give  him  half  my  covering,  for  he  had  none  of  his  own ;  and
so,  with  not  even  enough  room  to  lie  down,  we  passed  the  night
huddled  together,  the  loads  placed  on  the  lower  side  of  the  rock  so  as
to  prevent  our  falling  off  in  our  sleep.

Dcccmher  1. — 'Twas  not  yet  dawn  when  all  were  on  foot  and
busy  packing  up.  The  track  was  hardly  visible  ;  below  our  path  lay
the  great  glacier,  extending  for  miles,  which  feeds  the  Tashi-rabka
river.  The  snowy  sides  of  the  mountains  beyond  this  were  furrowed
by  glacial  streams,  very  noticeable  in  their  varied  shades  of  blue  and
green,  and  on  the  surface  of  the  glacier  itself  rose  huge  rounded
surfaces,  or  hummocks,  evidently  produced  by  boulders  concealed
under  the  ice.

Following  carefully  in  the  footsteps  of  Phurchung,  we  crossed
some  six  spurs  of  the  Dorjetagh  range,  and  then  came  to  an  easy
path  down  the  central  moraine  of  a  former  glacier,  now  only  a  huge
heap  of  boulders  and  dehris. The  mountains  lost,  as  we  advanced,


nr>  JOUBXEY TO IF! AS  A JXD CENTRAL TIBET.

thu  whitish  colour  peculiar  to  the  Indian  ranges,  and  assumed  the
blackish  or  ochre  colour  distinctive  of  the  Tibetan  region.  'Twas
with  a  feeling  of  intense  relief  that  we  finally  discerned  vegetation
and  heard  the  babbling  of  a  little  brook,  near  which  flew  birds  feed-
ing on  rhododendron  and  juniper  berries,  and  a  little  way  off  we
saw  some  herds  of  yaks  grazing,  and  smoke  rising  from  a  camp  fire.
Here  we  stopped  at  the  foot  of  a  great  rock,  and  enjoyed,  after  our
long  fast  of  two  days,  a  meal  of  rice  and  buttered  tea.

"We  continued  down  tlis  course  of  the  stream,  passing  with  some
apprehension  near  a  huge  bull-yak  or  .<<halu,  though  low  stone  walls
separated  us  from  him  and  kept  him  away  from  the  she-yaks  (di)
in  the  adjacent  pasturage.  This  part  of  the  valley  is  frequently
visited  by  packs  of  wolves,  which  kill  large  numbers  of  yaks,  but
the  bulls  are  able  to  drive  them  off  with  their  long  sharp  horns.

At  3  p.m.  we  passed  Dsongo,  the  extreme  border  of  the  district
of  Tashi-rabka,  and  where  are  the  ruins  of  a  stone  house  built
on  a  huge  boulder.  This  was  formerly  a  stage-house  used  by  the
Sikkim  Kaja's  people,  when  the  Yangma  and  Wallung  districts  still
belonged  to  him,  wdien  going  to  or  returning  from  Tibet.  A  little
way  beyond  this  point  we  met  some  herdsmen,  who  made  inquiries
as  to  whence  we  came  and  where  we  were  going.  Near  by  were  their
tents,  where  I  noticed  two  swarthy  women  and  a  fierce  Tibetan
mastiff.  Phurchung  entered  one  of  the  tents,  sat  down  to  chat  and
drink  a  cup  of  fara,  a  sort  of  thin  curd.*

Ugyen  was  much  preoccupied  about  our  getting  by  Tashi-rabka
and  escaping  its  headman  {Tow/zungpa).  At  about  6  o'clock  we
were  close  to  the  village,  and  so  we  hid  till  dusk  in  a  gully,  where
we  boiled  our  tea  and  ate  some  tsamha.  The  moon  shone  out
lirightly  when  we  resumed  our  march  and  passed  along  a  portion  of
a  high  stone  wall,  erected  by  the  Tibetans  during  the  Nepalese  war,
when,  it  is  said,  they  put  up  five  miles  of  it  in  a  day  under  orders
of  their  general,  the  Shape  Shata.f This  wall  is  carried  across  the

*  Tara,  or  tarah,  ia  iiiudo  of  curdled  ruilk  slightly  cooked  and  stirred  up  in  the
process.  It  is  si  favourite  dish  throughout  Tibet  and  Western  Mongolia,  in  which  latter
country  it  is  also  known  as  tarah.  It  is  generally  eaten  just  before  meals.  In  Eastern
Tibet  and  the  Kokonor  it  is  called  djo  (pr.  sho).  It  is  the  same  as  the  yaurt  of  the
Turks  and  the  people  of  the  Ilalkanic  States.— (W.  R.)

t  StiitjiC  is  the  c(jllo(iuial  title  given  to  tiie  ministers  of  State  (Kalon)  of  the  Tale
lama.  Tlie  word  is  pot-sibly  {ighags,  "justice ;  "  dpe,  "  model,"  though  it  is  now  written
as  in  the  text. See  infra,  p.  174. — fW.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET,  37

river  on  a  bridge,  where  it  has  eight  small  watch  towers.  It
crosses  the  whole  valley,  its  ends  being  high  up  on  the  sides  of  the
mountains.  On  the  farther  side  of  the  wall  is  the  village.  Ugyen
and  Phurchung  stood  trembling,  not  knowing  whether  to  turn  back
towards  the  Kangia  chen  pass  or  to  proceed  onward  towards  the
cliorten,  near  which  the  headman  resides.  Phuntso  alone  was  equal
to  the  occasion.  "  If  the  guards  are  awake,  we  will  sing  some  of
our  national  Walking  songs,  and  pass  ourselves  off  for  Wallungpa."
After  a  few  words  of  encouragement  to  the  others,  we  set  out.
Before  we  had  reached  the  chorten,  a  voice  from  a  yak-hair  tent
cried  out,  "  Whence  are  you,  and  where  are  you  going  ?  "  To  which
Phuntso  replied  that  we  were  Wallungpa  going  to  Shigatse,  asked
them  where  they  were  going,  and  without  waiting  for  a  reply  we
hurried  on  and  passed  by  the  dreaded  headman's  house  without
awakening  any  one,  not  even  the  fierce  mastiffs  tied  up  in  front  of
the  dwelling.

About  30  yards  beyond  the  house  we  came  to  the  bridge,  a
rough  structure  of  logs  and  stone  slabs.  The  Tashi-rabka  river  was
partly  frozen,  and  its  swift  current  was  sweeping  down  blocks  of
ice.  We  crossed  over  unnoticed,  and  I  then  broke  the  silence  with
thanks  to  merciful  God  who  had  enabled  us  to  overcome  this  the
most  dreaded  of  all  difficulties,  one  which  had  frightened  rny  staunch
friend  Phurchung,  that  the  snows  of  the  Kangia  chen  had  not
daunted.

We  followed  the  river  in  an  easterly  direction,  passing  on  the
way  two  poor  traders  (Gyagar  Kliamha  *)  who  were  going  to  Wallung
to  sell  a  wild  sheep  {new)  they  had  killed.  Then  we  came  to  Pti-u,
where  is  a  large  Nyingmaj  monastery,  and  three  miles  further  on  to
a  bridge  over  the  two  branches  of  the  river.  'Twas  nearly  midnight
when  we  reached  a  sand-covered  hillock  called  Shara,  where  we
halted  for  the  night,  and  slept  in  a  sheepfold,  near  which  two  hunters
with  a  hound  {sltyaJchi)  were  also  camped.

Dece^nber  2. — At  sunrise  we  resumed  our  journey,  and  after  an
hour's  march  got  sight  of  the  village  of  Ckima  Shara,  at  the  foot  of  a
range  of  mountains  trending  north-west  and south-east. Leaving

*  Gyagar  Khamha  meaus  "  Indian  Khamba,"  the  same  as  probably  Hooker's  Khumba
of  Sikkim. See  p.  107,  note  ;  and  Hooker,  i.  136.— (W.  R.)

t  Nyingma,  or  Nyingma,  the  old  or  red-hat  sect  of  lamas.  Their  chief  stronghold  is
Ulterior  Tibet,  Sikkim,  and  Bhutan.— (W.  R.)


38  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

this  \-illage  some  miles  away  (on  our  right  ?),  we  turned  a  little  to  the
north  and  made  for  the  Langbu  la.  There  was  not  a  soul  to  be  seen
on  the  vast  table-land  we  were  traversing,  only  a  few  little  birds
like  swallows  twittered  on  the  hillsides  by  the  way,  and  some  kites
were  soaring  in  the  sky  near  Guma  Shara.  We  ascended  steadily  till
we  came  to  the  foot  of  the  pass,  from  which  point  the  summit  was
reached  by  a  zigzag  cut  in  the  rocks,  the  whole  surface  of  which
was  inscribed  with  the  mystic  syllables,  Om  mani imdme  hum*  I
became  so  fatigued  before  the  summit  (some  700  feet  above  the
jdateau)  M-as  reached,  that  Thuntso  had  to  carry  me  up;  and  Ugyen
also  made  the  ascent  on  IMiurchung's  back,  as  he  was  still  feeling
very  badly  and  was  C|uite  unable  to  keep  u])  with  us.  From  the
summit  we  could  see  due  north,  perched  on  a  lofty  peak,  the  Lhakha
of  Sakya.,  and  to  our  west  were  snow-clad  peaks  of  the  lofty  Perugh
mountains.

On  the  northern  slope  of  the  Langbu  we  found  much  drifted
sand,  and  a  short  distance  from  the  foot  of  the  pass  we  came  to  the
source  of  the  Ge  river,t  where  we  met  a  party  of  rice-collectors
{daduhpa)  on  their  way  to  Tashi-rabka  with  a  dozen  yaks  and  some
donkeys,  there  to  buy  rice  from  the  Wallung  traders.  While
I'hurchung  talked  to  one  of  them,  a  former  acc|uaintance,  I  slipped
by  without  attracting  tlieir  attention  ;  for  had  they  spoken  to  me,
they  would  certainly  have  detected  my  nationality  by  my  appearance
and  speech.

Proceeding  onward,  we  met  other  parties  of  swarthy  Tibetans,  in
which  the  women  were  conspicuous  by  their  headdress  {2Mtiuj).
Their  dirt-covered  faces,  their  white  teeth  and  eyeballs,  made  them
look  exceedingly  wild.  Crossing  the  rivulet  by  a  bridge  made  of
two  stone  slabs,  the  valley  broadened  as  we  advanced,  till  we  found
ourselves  on  a  plateau  several  miles  broad,  where  the  rivulet  turned
to  the  west,  to  empty  probably  farther  on  into  the  great  Arun.
Pluirchung  liere  pointed  out  a  place  \vliere  there  is  a  large  under-
ground monastery,!  the  chief  temple  {tswjla  hhawj)  of  which  is  cut

*  The  fuui(jU8  ■'  bix-syllablf  prayer." Sue  my  '  Land  of  the  Lamas,'  p.  326  et  aqq.—
(W.  K.)  ' f  -/i

t  A  hiuall  .stream  emptyiii-  iuto  the  Taya  Tdau<,'po  of  our  maps.— (W.  R.)
X  Ugyfn.gyat.so  vi^iited  in  1,S83  another  rock-cut  hermitage  in  this  neighbourhood,
at  a  place  called  Kyil-khor  ta  dub,  some  10  miles  from  the  She-kar  gomba,  at  the  foot
of  the  Lama  la. It  was  about  a  .luarter  mile  long. Padma  Sambhava  is  said  to  have
hvtd  in  It. See  '  RejKirt  ou  L.vploratiuus  in  Bhutan,  etc.,'  p.  2U,  §  20.— (W.  11.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  39

out  of  the  massive  rock.  There  are  twenty  inmates  to  this  lamasery,
and  the  church  furniture  and  images  are  said  to  be  of  great
antiquity.

Fording  the  little  Tibgyu  chu,  said  to  rise  in  the  Chabug  la,  we
proceeded  in  an  easterly  direction,  and  passed  the  little  village  of
Wena,  a  mile  from  which  stands  the  village  of  Chani,  where  lives
the  Chyugpo  niepang  family,  or  the  "  rich  men  who  never  reply
nay."  When  travellers  passing  by  this  way  have  asked  the  rich
men  {chyugpo  *)  if  there  was  such  and  such  a  thing  to  be  had  at
their  place,  they  have  never  replied  in  the  negative.  One  day,  in  the
month  of  August,  a  traveller  who  had  heard  the  story  concerning
this  family  came  to  test  its  truth,  and  asked  the  housewife  to  give
him  a  piece  of  ice,  when  she  at  once  produced  a  piece  from  the  butter-
cask.  On  another  occasion  a  traveller  asked  for  a  chile  pepper  in
February,  and  the  mistress  of  the  house  gave  it  to  him  at  once.

December  3. — At  about  a  mile  from  our  camp  of  last  night  we
came  to  a  rivulet  some  fifteen  feet  broad,  flowing  in  a  north-easterly
direction.  We  selected  a  shallow  part  of  it,  across  which  Phurchung
waded,  carrying  me  on  his  back.  Irrigation  ditches  led  the  water  of
this  stream  on  to  the  neighbouring  barley-fields.  We  stopped
towards  7  o'clock  at  the  camp  {dohX)  of  Pole,  situated  in  the  middle
of  a  plain  extending  from  east  to  v/est  some  ten  miles,  and  bounded
to  the  north  by  the  Arun  river.  There  were  several  sheep-folds  with
walls  of  sun-dried  bricks  six  or  seven  feet  high  and  two  feet  thick  ;
in  the  corners  of  tliese  folds  were  turret-like  houses,  in  which  the
shepherds  sought  shelter  from  the  severity  of  the  weather.  Here  we
hired  two  yaks  for  a  tanha  |  a-piece  to  carry  us  to  the  village  of
Tebong,  about  six  or  seven  miles  away.  This  whole  plateau  was
covered  with  a  species  of  briar,  amidst  which  grew  long  fine  grass,  on
which  cows  and  jo  (half-bred  yaks)  were  feeding,  and  whence  innu-
merable hares  and  foxes  ran,  startled  by  our  approach.  Midway
between  Pole  and  Tebong,  but  on  the  mountain  side,  lies  the  village
of  Mug,  with  some  forty  families  {jiiitsang). Before  reaching  Tebong,

*  Written  phyug-po. Med  (from  me),  "no." — (W.  E.)

t  Written  lihrog,  and  usually  pronouuced  dru,  du,  or  do.  The  name  dopa  or  drvpa
applies  equally  to  all  pastoral  tribes,  and  they,  when  speaking,  use  it  with  the  accepta-
tion of  "  house,  dwelling,  tent,  home." — (W.  R.)

X  Three  Tibetan  tankas  are  the  equivalent  of  one  rupee.  There  were  four  varieties
of  tankas  then  current  in  Tibet,  two  of  Nepalese  minting,  two  made  at  Lhasa,  the  best
being  that  known  as  Gadan  tanka,  and  made  at  tlie  Castle  of  Gadaii.— (W.  E.)


40  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

which  is  the  first  village  this  way  on  Tashilhunpo  soil,  we  crossed
the  dry  bed  of  the  Chorten  Xyiuia  river,  forming  tlie  boundary,  and
which  I  had  already  passed  over  on  my  first  journey  to  Shigatse  in
187i>.*  Xear  here  we  were  overtaken  by  a  violent  dust-storm,  which
hid  the  whole  country  from  our  view  and  forced  us  for  a  while  to
remain  motionless.

Once  on  Tashilhunpo  territory,  all  my  fears  of  being  arrested  were
over,  and  I  walked  on  to  the  village  of  Tanglungf  with  a  light
heart.  An  hour's  walk  brought  us  to  the  door  of  my  old  acquaintance,
Xabu  I  "W'anga,  who  led  me  with  much  ceremony  into  the  best  room
of  his  home,  apologizing  for  his  not  being  able  to  lodge  me  in  his
chapel,  which  was  filled  with  carcasses  of  sheep  and  goats  drying  for
winter  use.

December  4. — Our  host  appeared  early  in  the  morning  to  inquire
what  we  required  in  the  way  of  food  for  our  journey,  and  Ugyen  gave
him  a  list  of  articles, comprising  mutton,  barley-meal  (tsarnha^),  butter,
etc.  He  also  undertook  to  procure  us  three  ponies,  for  which  I  was  to
pay  Us.  4  each  as  far  as  Shigatse.  While  we  were  breakfasting  a
number  of  old  acc[uaintances  came  in,  bringing  me  presents  of  tmmha
mutton,  butter,  and  cliang.  One  man,  a  doctor  (amcJd),  brought  a
fox-skin  cap  of  ingenious  make,  which  he  offered  to  sell  me.  It  was
so  contrived  that  it  protected  every  part  of  the  head,  leaving  only
the  eyes  and  nose  exposed,  or  it  could  be  turned  up  and  used  as  an
ordinary  hat.||

In  the  evening  Delah  Tondub,  the  head  of  the  militia  or  village
police  (yulmajj  ^7),  received  an  order  from  Khamba  djong,  which  he
brought  me  to  decipher.  It  was  to  the  effect  that  he  must  hold
himself  and  force  in  readiness  to  proceed  at  once  to  the  Lachan
boundary,  fully  equipped  with  matchlocks,  lances,  swords,  slings,  etc.,

*  In  1879  Chandra  Das  crossed  the  Choiien  nyitiia  hi,  probably  20  to  30  miles
south  of  tlie  village  of  Tebong  (called  then  by  him  Tliokong).  He  followed  the
Chorten  uyima  river  from  its  source  in  the  mouutaiu  of  the  same  name  to  near  its
mouth  at  Tebong,  where  his  route  ioined  the  one  described  in  the  present  narrative. —
(W.  R.)

t  Or,  more  correctly,  Drang-lung;  for  he  says,  in  his  diary  for  1879,  that  it  means
"cold  valley."— (W.  II.)

X  Nahii,  or,  more  correctly,  Naho,  means  "  host,  landlord." — (W.  R.)

§  Called  satu  by  Anglo-Indian  writers.  This  word  is  also  found  in  Georgii, '  Alpha-
betum  Tibetanum '  (17(j'2),  j).  445:  "  ilordei  farinani  in  jentaculi,  pultisque  formam
Buljactam  Salii  communi  vocabulo  dicunt." — (W' .  R.)

II  This  is  the  ordinary  style  of  Mongol  fur  cap,  very  generally  used  in  Tibet. — (W.  R.)

^  On  this  organization,  see  chap.  vii.  p.  180.


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  41

in  view  of  the  fact  that  a  "  very  important  European  official,  deputy
of  the  Lieut.-Governor  of  Bengal,  was  on  his  way  to  the  Tibetan
frontier.  This  information  was  communicated  by  the  frontier  guards,
in  consequence  of  which  necessary  precautions  were  urgently  needed."
I  told  them  that  the  official  referred  to  was  probably  Captain  Harman
of  the  Survey  Department,  with  whom  he  was  acquainted,  having
met  him  the  year  before  at  Tangii,  near  Lachan.

December  5. — Our  arrangements,  being  completed  and  the  ponies
at  the  door,  we  hastened  to  finish  our  breakfast.  From  the  sheep-
pen  close  by  the  house  we  saw  some  fifty  sheep  led  to  the  slaughtering-
place  behind  the  village.  The  butchers  mutter  some  mantras  over
each  one  before  killing  it,  and  they  receive  as  their  perquisite  the
heads.

Following  the  same  route  I  had  taken  in  1879,  we  left  the
village  of  Mende  *  on  our  left,  and,  crossing  several  frozen  streams,
we  came  to  the  village  of  Targye,  where  we  stopped  in  the  house  of
an  old  man,  who  invited  us  to  be  his  guests  in  the  hope  of  getting
some  medicine  for  dyspepsia  from  which  he  was  suffering.  He  put
us  up  in  his  storehouse,  amidst  his  barley,  yak-hair  bags,  farming
implements,  etc.  He  had  manufactured  some  rugs,  and  I  bought  one
from  him  for  a  couple  of  rupees.  The  villagers,  hearing  of  my  pur-
chase, brought  me  a  number  of  their  choicest  carpets,  but  the  price
asked  was  larger  than  I  cared  to  give,

December  6. — I  learnt  with  pleasure  from  my  host  that  the
Minister  of  Temporal  Affairs  {Ki/ab  ving  t)  of  Ulterior  Tibet  {Tsang)
was  Phendi  Khangsar,  to  whom  I  was  well  known.  My  host  and
his  wife  came  and  begged  some  medicine,  and  I  prepared  for  him
an  effervescent  draught,  which  the  old  man  swallowed  with  much
difficulty.  "  Oh,  sir,"  he  exclaimed,  "  it  boiled  and  foamed  even  as
it  ran  down  my  throat ;  it  must  be  a  medicine  of  wonderful  potency  !
I  never  took  such  a  drink  in  my  life,  nor  heard  of  its  like  before  I "
And  the  spectators  all  said,  in  amazement,  "  This  amchi  is  a  miracle-
worker  (tidpa)  ;  his  medicine  boils  in  cold  water."  And  so  my  fame
was  noised  abroad.

*  In  his  journey  of  1879,  he  speaks  of  Mende  as  "  the  pretty  village  of  Mende.  .  .  .
Facing  the  village  is  a  flower-garden,  in  which  are  also  dwarf  willows,  stunted  birch
and  juniper  trees."  He  also  says  that  Targe  (Targye)  is  on  the  Yaru-tsang-po  (the
Taya  tsang-po  of  the  maps),  probably  a  local  appellation  for  the  upper  Arun.  Taya
tsang-po  is  probably  Targye  tsaug-po,  "the  river  of  the  Tar-gye." — (W.  R.)

t  Probably  Khyah-dvang,  "all-powerful,"  a  title  in  frequent  use  in  Tibet.— (W.  K.)


42


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTBAL TIBET.


Crossing  the  Yara  la,  we  made  for  Kurma,  before  reaching  which
place  we  experienced  some  difficulty  in  crossing  the  broad  bed  of  the
frozen  river.*  Near  the  village  we  saw  in  the  fields  several  wild
asses  {h-!/i'n!j),  some  wild  goats  (ruf/ijo),  and  wild  sheep  (nao).  At
Kurma  we  j-ut  up  in  the  house  of  a  doctor,  an  acquaintance  of
Phurchung,  who  liad  brought  him  a  quantity  of  medicines  the  amchi
had the year past commissioned  him  to  buy  at  Darjiling. Our


SAKAT CHANUEA CROSSIN'G THE DONKHYA PASS

supply  of  meat  being  exhausted,  Ugyen  bought  a  sheep's  carcass
{pafjru).  When  the  sheep  get  very  fat,  the  people,  for  fear  of  losing
any  (jf  the  fat  by  skinning  them,  roast  the  whole  as  they  would  a  pig.f


*  Tliis  river  is  tlie  Clie  chu  (or  Chi  elm),  the  great  Aruu.  Kurma,  the  author
tells  us  in  iiis  journal  of  1870.  is  a  "Dokpa  towneontaining  about  six  hundred  families.
.  .  .  All  supplie.s  are  brought  liere  from  Shigatse.'" — (W.  E.)

t  Hence  the  name  plia(j,  "pig;"  ra,  "goat."  S.  C.  D.  says  they  roast  them  alive.
This  must  be  a  mi.stake.  I  never  heard  of  meat  being  roasted  in  Tiljet.  He  evidently
means  that  the  slieepare  cooked  without  the  skin  being  removed.  The  Mongols  do  the
same  thing,  throwing  tiie  carcass  (some  say  the  live  sheep)  in  boiling  water. These


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  43

December  7. — Leaving  Kiirma  early  in  the  morning,  we  arrived  at
lago  *  by  6  p.m.,  where  we  got  accommodations  in  the  house  of  a  rich
farmer,  paying  him  a  tanJca  as  room-rent  (nala).  I  had  been  feeling
very  badly  all  day,  but  Phurchuug  whispered  to  me  to  let  no  one
know  I  was  ill,  as  sick  men  are  not  admitted  into  people's  dwellings
in  this  country.

Decemler  8. — By  10  a.m.  we  reached  Tamar,t  in  the  valley  of  the
Ee  chu,  here  thickly  dotted  with  hamlets.  Numerous  flocks  of
pigeons  and  swallows  were  picking  worms  and  grain  in  the  fields,
and  Ugyen  told  me  that  the  pigeons  were  a  serious  nuisance  to  the
people,  for  they  are  not  allowed  to  kill  them,  animal  life  being  held
sacred.

We  passed  the  foot  of  the  hill  on  which  the  Eegyinpai  lamasery  %
is  situated,  and  by  2  p.m.  came  to  Labrang  dokpa ;  but  finding  all
the  houses  closed,  we  continued  on  to  the  Xambu  la,§  crossing  which
we  reached  the  village  of  Nambu,  where  we  stopped  in  the  house  of
a  friend  of  Phurchung.

December  9. — We  arose  by  3.30  in  the  morning,  and  put  on  our
best  clothes,  for  to-day  we  were  to  enter  Tashilhunpo.  Travellers
were  more  numerous  now ;  we  met  several  parties  of  traders  with
yaks  and  donkeys  or  laden  sheep  going  to  or  coming  from  Shigatse.
The  day  was  cold,  and  there  was  a  light  wind  blowing.  I  alternately
rode  and  walked,  and  though  I  was  by  this  time  greatly  reduced  in
flesh  by  the  hardships  I  had  had  to  encounter,  I  was  in  high  spirits
at  the  success  which  had  so  far  attended  me.  Not  so  Ugyen :  he  was
ill,  and  fretted  fearfully,  his  appearance  was  repulsive,  and  his  language
to  the  Tang-lung  men,  whose  ponies  we  rode,  was  most  abusive,  but
they  bore  patiently  with  him.  At  9  o'clock  we  passed  through  Chuta,
and  an  hour  later  came  to  the  village  of  Jong  Luguri,||  where  I  was

carcasses  are  sold  in  a  frozen  state  by  the  Mongols  in  Peking  in  winter,  and  are  known
as  Tang-yang,  or  "  scalded  sheep,"  in  Chiuese.  Cf.  C.  K.  Markham's  '  Narrative  of  the
Mission  of  Geo.  Bogle,'  86.— (W.  K.)

*  It  is  called  Ya-go  on  the  maps.  S.  C.  D.  says,  in  the  account  of  his  first  journey,
that  this  village  is  on  the  boundary-line  between  Lhasa  and  Ulterior  Tibet,  belonging
to  the  former  country.— (W.  E.)

t  The  Tagmar  of  our  maps.  The  writer  says  elsewhere  that  it  has  about  two
hundred  houses. — (W.  E.)

X  The  Bra-gyin  pa  gomba  of  the  maps. — (W.  E.)

§  The  Ngambu  dung  la  of  our  maps,  altitude  14,800  feet ;  but  in  the  account  of  his
first  journey  S.  C.  D.  says  it  is  13,500  feet  high.  The  descent  on  the  north  side,  he
adds,  is  very  steep. — (W.  E.)

II  Or  Luguri  jong,  as  he  calls  it  elsewhere. — (W.  E.)


44  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

most  kindly  received  by  my  former  host  of  1879,  Lobdon  puti.  I
ate  a  couple  of  e,ii:gs  and  drank  a  few  cups  of  tea ;  then,  reloading  our
ponies,  we  paid  our  bill  {jaltsc)  and  set  out  for  Tashilhunpo,  where  we
arrived  by  half-past  four,  entering  it  by  the  small  western  entrance
marked  by  two  cliortcns*

*  S CD.  reached  this  city  for  the  first  time  on  July  7,  1879.


e


TOWK OF SHIGATSE.


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  45


CHAPTER II.

EESIDENCE AT TASHILHUNPO.

We  entered  the  monastery  of  Tashilhunpo  by  the  little  western  gate,
in  front  of  which  stand  two  cliortens — one  very  large  with  a  gilt
spire,  the  other  smaller  but  neatly  constructed.  I  walked  along  the
narrow  lane,  lined  on  either  side  by  lofty  buildings,  with  the
measured  steps  and  grave  demeanour  which  all  wearers  of  the  sacred
costume  are  supposed  to  have.  The  rays  of  the  setting  sun  shone
on  the  gilded  spires  of  the  houses  and  tombs  in  the  monastery,  and
made  a  most  enchanting  picture.*

The  minister,  I  learned  from  liis  head  cook  {Machen  f),  whom  I
now  met,  had  gone  to  Dongtse,  his  native  town,  but  he  had  left
instructions  that  I  be  lodged  in  the  Targod  chyi-khang  until  his
return.

Though  the  news  of  tlie  absence  of  my  friend  Phendi  Khang-sar
somewhat  damped  my  spirits,  yet  the  pleasing  thought  of  having
been  able  for  the  second  time  to  visit  Tashilhunpo  was  a  source  of
infinite  gratification.  The  Machen  opened  the  padlock  which  closed
the  great  door  of  the  house,  and  ushered  me  in  with  outstretched
hands  and  greetings  of  "  Pundib  la,  cliyag-'plieb  nang^'  "  Welcome,  Mr.
Pundit."  t

The  building  was  a  three-storied  one,  the  ground  floor,  adjoining
which  were  two  stables,  being  used  as  a  godown.  The  rooms  on  the
first  floor  were  spacious  and  neat,  but  very  cold  on  account  of  the

*  "  If  the  magnificence  of  the  place  was  to  be  increased  by  any  external  cause,  nono
could  more  superbly  have  adorned  its  numerous  gilded  canopies  and  turrets  than  the
sun  rising  in  full  splendour  directly  opposite.  It  presented  a  view  wonderfully  beauti-
ful and  brilliant ;  the  effect  was  little  short  of  magic,  and  it  made  an  impression  which
no  time  will  ever  efface  from  ray  mind." — Captain  Samuel  Turner, '  Embassy  to  the
Court  of  the  Teshu  Lama,'  230.

t  This  word  is  colloquially  used  to  designate  the  cook  of  any  dignitary  or  ofBcial. —
(W.  R.)

X  Or  rather,  "  Please  walk  in,  Mr.  Pundit."— (AV.  R.)


46  JOrnXFT TO LHASA and CEXTEAL TIBET.

height  of  the  roof  and  the  absence  of  sunlight.  Tlie  third  story,
though  it  looked  snug,  was  exposed  to  the  wind,  and  therefore  un-
inhaliitable.  The  minister's  steward  {Nerpa  *),  coming  in  while  we
were  looking  over  the  house,  recommended  the  first  floor  for  our
residence,  as  it  would  be  warm  in  winter,  when  much  air  is  not
desirable.  Having  made  up  my  mind  to  occupy  it,  he  had  the  rooms
dusted,  and  removed  some  two  hundred  volumes,  a  pile  of  printing-
blocks,  boards,  and  tallies  with  whicli  the  rooms  were  encumbered;
and  tlien,  some  thickly  stuffed  cushions  having  been  spread,  on  which
our  carpets  and  rugs  were  placed,  he  begged  us  to  be  seated.  Cups
were  placed  on  some  small  tables  before  us,  and  tea  was  brought
from  the  minister's  kitchen  and  served  us  by  the  head  cook.  A  few
twisted  biscuits,t  some  pieces  of  mutton  and  tsmnba  were  put  before
me,  and  from  another  teapot  tea,  of  evidently  an  inferior  quality,
was  served  to  my  companions.

The  Nerpa  told  me  that  we  were  to  be  lodged  here  by  tlie
minister's  order,  but  if  we  did  not  like  the  place  we  might  write
to  him  on  the  subject,  and  he  would  have  the  letter  forwarded  to
Dongtse.  The  remoteness  of  the  house,  with  only  that  of  the
minister  near  it,  and,  above  all,  its  location  near  the  western  gate,
gave  it  peculiar  advantages,  whicli  appeared  to  me  very  essential
for  my  purposes,  and  we  liad  every  reason  to  be  delighted  at  the
forethought  of  our  patron,  wlio  liad  shown  himself  so  anxious  about
our  safe  arrival  and  comfort.

When  the  Xerpa  and  ]\Iachen  had  left  us,  I  consulted  with
Ugyen  about  making  presents  to  the  servants  of  the  minister  and
to  our  former  acquaintances.  ]\Ioney,  being  very  scarce  in  Tibet,
is  valued  above  all  things,  so  that  for  the  renewal  of  our  former
acquaintance  we  could  do  nothing  better  than  to  make  presents  of
silver  coin  and  scarves  {IJintag).

Later  on  in  the  evening  we  returned  the  visits  of  the  steward
and  his  comrades,  and  presented  them  with  rupees,  eiglit-anna  or  four-
anna  pieces,  according  to  the  importance  of  their  respective  offices.
With  difficulty  we  persuaded  them  to  accept  the  presents,  for  tliey
feared  lest  the  minister  might  be  vexed  at  their  taking  money  from  me.

*  Or  Nyor-pa  (gnyer-pa) ;  this  word  is  generally  used  to  designate  the  procurator
or  manager  of  the  temporal  affairs  of  a  lamasery.— (W.  K.)

t  Called  ma-hua  by  the  CJiiuese;  made  of  thin  strips  of  dough  thrown  into  boiling
grease  for  a  minute  or  two.  They  are  eaten  all  over  China,  Mongolia,  and  Tibet.  I
do  not  know  the  Tibetan  name;  Mongols  call  them  by  the  Chinese  term  of  ma-hua-erh.
-(W.  !{.;


JOURNEY TO  LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  47

Beccmher  10. — Ugyen  and  Phurchung  were  up  by  dayliglit,
arranging  things  and  buying  firewood  and  otlier  necessaries.  Shortly
after  I  had  arisen  the  men  we  liad  hired  at  Tang-lung  to  lead  our
ponies  came  in  for  their  rewards.  I  gave  each  of  them  six  tanlms,
and  some  twisted  biscuits  to  carry  home  to  their  children,  all  of
which  pleased  them  greatly.  It  felt  strange  to  me  not  to  have  a
day's  journey  before  me,  so  accustomed  had  I  become  to  daily  travel,
instead  of  which  I  could  sit  peacefully  reclining  on  my  cushions  on
the  balcony,  lighted  up  by  the  rays  of  the  morning  sun.  Phurchung
was  the  only  servant  I  now  had  to  attend  on  both  myself  and  Ugyen,
so  it  was  decided  to  hire  a  man  to  help  him  in  fetching  water  and
in  blowing  the  bellows.  We  had  to  wait  till  the  Shigatse  market
{torn)  opened  at  11  o'clock  before  we  could  get  any  breakfast,  for
our  provisions  were  exhausted.  Both  Ugyen  and  Phurchung  went
to  the  market,  from  which  they  shortly  returned  with  butter,  salt,
mutton,  tsamha,  2)hiug*  and  a  few  Chinese  cakes  for  me.  They  had
been  surrounded  on  the  way  by  two  parties  of  beggars  {Eogyaha),
who,  recognizing  Ugyen  as  a  new  arrival  from  Sikkim,  had  by
alternate  threats  and  solicitations  succeeded  in  squeezing  from  him
several  silver  pieces.  They  had  also  seen  an  altercation  between
a  woman  selling  salt  and  some  Khamba  traders.  One  of  the  latter
had  bought  several  seers  of  salt  from  the  woman,  and  had  offered  her
a  debased  tanha  in  payment,  which  she  had  refused.  The  Khamba
would  not  return  the  salt  or  pay  in  better  coin ;  he  called  six  or
seven  of  his  friends  to  him,  threw  the  salt  on  the  ground,  and  wanted
to  beat  the  woman,  whom  there  was  no  police  to  protect.  It  ended
by  the  savage  Khamba  walking  off  unmolested,  and  the  poor  woman
losing  her  salt.  Ugyen  was  greatly  surprised  at  the  lawlessness  of
the  people  in  the  market,  their  violence  toM'ards  the  helpless,  and  the
absence  of  police  supervision.  I  smiled  at  his  fears,  and  told  him
to  take  a  hearty  breakfast.  In  the  evening  I  called  at  the  Phuntso
Khangsar,  and  learnt  from  tlie  steward  that  Kusho  Tung-chen,t  the
minister's  secretary,  would  be  back  on  the  following  afternoon.

*  This  appears  to  be  the  Chinese  ping,  meaning  "  cake  or  pastry,"  In  North-West
China  and  Szechuan  this  word  designates  a  thin  cake  of  wheat-flour  the  size  of  a  plate,
cooked  on  a  hot  iron  or  in  a  shallow  dish. In  Tibetan  it  is  called  pale. — (W.  E.)

t  Kusho  is  the  Tibetan  equivalent  of  "  Mr.  "  ;  Tung-chen  is  Brimg  (yig)  chen-po,
"  chief  secretary,"  not  a  name,  as  one  might  suppose  by  the  way  it  is  used  in  tbis
narrative.  The  minister's  residence,  S.  C.  D.  says  elsewhere,  was  at  the  northern  end  of
the  town. It  is  a  stone  building  three  stories  high,  the  exterior  painted  yellow. — (W.  E.)


48  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

Dccemhcr  11.— My  breakfast  consisted  of  a  cup  of  broth  {tugpa),
with  tmmha,  radishes,  marrow,  and  luineed  mutton,  a  little  salt  and
some  dried  cheese  {clwm)  m  it.  When  it  was  over  Ugyen  and
rhurchung  went  to  market,  and  on  the  way  they  met  Choi-tashi,
a  3[ongol  monk,  whom  I  had  once  helped  at  Darjiling  with  food
and  money.  The  faithful  :\Iongol  had  not  forgotten  my  kindness :
as  soon  as  he  saw  Ugyen  he  threw  his  arms  around  him  and  led
him  to  his  home  in  the  lamasery.  Ugyen  learnt  from  him  of  the
whereabouts  of  some  of  my  old  acquaintances— Lo])-zang  Tanzing
and  other  Mongol  friemls.  Lob-zang  had  failed  to  pass  his  final
examination  for  admission  into  the  monastery,  in  which  it  is  required
of  candidates  to  repeat  without  a  single  omission  or  mistake  120
pages  of  selected  sacred  texts,*  so  he  had  been  deprived  of  subsistence
allowances,  and  had  seen  his  name  struck  off"  the  roll  of  monks.  He
had  in  consequence  left  Tashilhunpo  four  months  before  my  arrival
for  his  native  land,  proposing  to  visit  Lhasa  on  the  way.

In  the  market  Ugyen  met  another  old  acquaintance,  the  Chinese
head  of  the  Shigatse  police,  who  invited  him  into  his  house,  where
his  mistress  {ani)  served  them  cliang  and  a  dish  of  vermicelli
{jya  tv/j).^  Then  the  Chinaman  told  l^gyen  of  the  recent  row  in
which  the  junior  Andjan  had  been  involved,  and  of  his  own  incredibly
swift  ride  to  Lhasa  to  carry  dispatches  to  the  senior  Amban.  As
the  senior  Amban,  together  with  the  Shape  Sa-wang  rampa  and
Lhalu,  had  come  to  Shigatse  to  settle  the  trouble,  tlie  head  constable
claimed  foi"  himself  no  small  share  in  the  successful  termination  of
the  affair.  It  was  also  said  that  the  Shape,  together  with  the  Amban,
had  decided  to  enforce  the  circulation  of  every  kind  of  silver  coin,
no  matter  how  debased.  The  distinction  made  in  the  Shigatse
market  between  good  and  bad  coin  was  considered  to  be  productive
of  much  inconvenience  to  trade,  and  so  they  had  forbidden  it.  The
same  order  had  been  recently  enforced  at  Lhasa,  to  the  great  con-
venience and  satisfaction  of  the  peo])le.  Secret  orders  w^ere  issued
to  arrest  the  few  respectable  monied  men  wlio  might  offer  objections
to  the  enforced  circulation  of  debased  coin,  by  which  means  all
trouble  in  the  matter,  it  was  hoped,  \vould  be  averted.  In  con-
sequence <ii'  tills  I'gyen  took  care  not  to  get  into  troulde  by  changing

*  Farther  on  (p.  57)  our  autlior  says  125  pages.

t  Ciilkd  in  Chinese  mien,  ami  nearly  the  same  as  the  Itiiliau  spaghetti. The  word
is  also  frequently  used  tor  the  Chinese  hua-mien. — (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  49

our  Indian  coins  for  Tibetan  fanha,  by  exchanging  them  in  the
monastery  itself.

In  the  market-place  my  men  saw  several  parties  of  prisoners
loaded  with  chains  weighing  twenty  pounds  and  upwards.  Some
had  their  hands  manacled,  others  their  arms  passed  through  blocks
of  wood,  not  a  few  had  their  eyes  put  out.  The  Government  does
not  provide  these  miserable  wretches  with  food,  but  lets  them  beg
their  sustenance  in  the  market-place.  They  are  more  troublesome
than  even  the  Eagyabas,  and  pour  out  curses  and  vile  abuse  on  all
who  do  not  at  once  give  them  alms.  At  4  p.m.  I  was  told  that  the
minister's  secretary,  the  Kusho  Tung-chen,  had  arrived,  and  wanted
to  see  me ;  so  I  dressed  myself  in  my  lama  costume,  and,  accom-
panied by  Ugyen  carrying  a  few  coins  and  some  Ichatag,  I  went  to
the  Puntso  Khangsar.

Being  conducted  into  his  presence,  I  presented  him  with  a  scarf
and  a  couple  of  rupees,  and  Ugyen  did  the  same.  We  were  then
given  fine  'kliatag,  and  asked,  with  an  air  of  genuine  cordiality  and
kindness  which  greatly  pleased  me,  to  be  seated  beside  him.  A
stuffed  raised  seat,  covered  with  a  Chinese  rug,  was  given  me,  and
a  small  table  placed  before  me.  Ugyen  occupied  a  lower  seat,  and
the  table  given  him  was  also  lower  than  mine,  to  show  the  difference
of  rank  between  us.  Plates  of  dried  and  boiled  mutton,  together  with
bowls  of  tsamha,  were  served  us.  An  attendant  then  brought  from
the  minister's  shelves  handsome  china  cups,  and,  filling  them  with
tea,  asked  me  to  drink  with  "  Pundib  la,  sol-ja-she  "  ("  Please  drink,
Mr.  Pundit "),  at  which  I  drank  about  a  third  of  the  contents ;  for
it  is  customary  in  Tibet  not  to  drink  more  than  this  at  first,  while
to  drink  less  would  be  a  reflection  on  the  cook  or  the  host.  After  a
short  conversation  of  no  importance  I  returned  to  my  dwelling.

December  12. — The  secretary  sent  to  inform  us  that  he  would  be
despatching  a  messenger  to  Dongtse  in  the  evening,  and  that  if  we
had  any  letters  to  send  they  should  be  ready  before  noon.  We  at
once  applied  ourselves  to  drafting  a  letter  to  the  minister,  which  was
no  easy  matter,  as  the  form  of  the  paper,  the  margin  to  be  left  at  the
top  and  bottom  of  the  sheet,  and  the  choice  of  complimentary  words
at  the  beginning,  had  all  to  be  carefully  weighed.  We  tried  to
convey  to  the  minister  how  sorry  we  were  in  not  having  had  the
honour  and  pleasure  of  meeting  him  at  Tashilhunpo,  and  how  thank-
ful we  felt  to  him  for  his  great  kindness  in  arranging  for  our  comfort


50  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

and  accommodation.  "We  begged  him,  if  possible,  to  return  to  the
capital  for  the  good  of  all  living  beings,  and  particularly  for  ourselves,
who  depended  solely  on  his  mercy  for  the  security  of  our  lives.  We
also  told  him  that  the  lithographic  press  he  had  ordered  me  on  my
first  visit  to  buy  for  him  in  India  had  arrived  at  Lachan,  where  it
was  held  by  the  prefect  of  Khamba  djong.  Ugyen  wrote  a  separate
letter  to  the  minister,  and  then  we  took  them  to  the  secretary,  who
added  a  few  lines  to  our  notes,  asking  his  master  to  vouchsafe  his
sacred  protection  and  mercy  to  us  who  had  come  so  far  and  had
encountered  such  incredible  hardships  and  dangers.

Eeturning  home,  I  found  Lupa  gyantsaan  (gyaltsan  ?),  a  former
acquaintance,  awaiting  me.  He  presented  me  some  provisions  and
other  things,  and  offered  his  services  to  buy  what  I  might  require,
and  see  that  I  was  not  cheated.  He  also  agreed  to  send  me  a  good
servant.

In  the  evening  I  called  on  another  old  friend,  a  most  respectable
man,  Kusho  Dechang.  He  was  delighted  to  see  me.  Eising  from  his
cushion,  he  begged  me  come  in,  saying,  "  Chyag-pkeb-nang-cldg."  Tlie
steward  {soljjon  *)  then  served  tea,  replenishing  my  cup  from  a  silver
teapot  (cJiamhim)  as  soon  as  it  was  about  a  third  empty.  Kusho
Dechang  then  questioned  me  concerning  the  present  condition  of
affairs  in  Ar}-avarta  (India),  and  about  its  government  under  the
Frang  (Europeans).  The  conversation  then  turned  on  the  recent
row  with  the  Chinese  and  its  settlement,  reached  to-day.

The  two  Chinese  Residents  at  Lhasa  inspect  each  year  in  turn
the  Nepal-Tibet  frontier,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  discipline  of  the
garrison  at  Tingri  and  the  state  of  the  defences  and  military  re-
sources of  the  several  frontier  posts.  As  the  task  is  a  most  tedious
and  fatiguing  one,  oMdng  to  the  desert-like  condition  of  the  country,
the  Ambans  draw  lots  to  find  out  who  is  to  go  on  the  inspection
tour.  In  the  latter  part  of  October  of  this  year  it  fell  to  the  junior
Amban's  lot  to  visit  Tingri  djong  and  Shigatse.  He  started  accord-
ingly, accompanied  by  an  experienced  Tibetan  civil  officer  with  the
rank  of  Tsipon  (accountant),  who  was  to  arrange,  as  usual,  for  the
tranisportation  of  the  Amban  and  his  retinue  by  sending  messengers
{ngoiulo)  ahead  to  the  different  stations  along  the  road.  The  Amban
decided  to  follow  the  northern  road  {chaag  lam)  via  Toilung  Tsorphu.

*  Or,  more  correctly,  '•  the  cup-bearer,  or  teapot-bearer." The  Solpon  chen-po  is
one  of  the  great  officers  of  State  both  at  Tasliilhunpo  and  Lliasa.— (W.  R.)


LIBRARY

UNIVERSiTY OF  CALIFORNIA

RlVcRSiDB


IFORNIA


the motiaMery  of


reijcd  stone  structure,
lo7iy^  and  60  feet  wide.
ry  is  hung  duriiig  the

in  which  relics  of
'■■  deposited.


:  AJTJohiistan-Iicnilecl.Edmbur^  A  londfln..


THE GRAND MONASTERY OF TASHI-LHTTNPO.


^,  L  ^  it N


■ul-liHh*d  by  th»  RcB'"!  r.eogr«phie«l  Si


JOURNEY  TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  51

Now,  according  to  pre-established  custom,  the  Tibetan  treasury  has
to  pay  the  Amban  a  daily  travelling  allowance  of  four  docltc,  or
lis.  500 ;  *  but  the  Government  of  Lhasa,  instead  of  paying  it  out
of  the  Government  treasury,  raises  it  from  the  people  at  the  time  of
the  Amban's  journey  and  along  his  route.  The  obligation  of  raising
the  Amban's  allowance  then  devolved  on  the  Tsipon  Kong  chyang-
lochan.  On  arriving  at  Shigatse,  the  Amban  demanded  six  docJies,
or  lis.  750,  instead  of  four.  The  Tsipon  notified  the  people  {misser)
between  Shigatse  and  Tingri,  and  when  they,  refused  to  give  this
amount,  the  headmen  {tsofj-pon)  were  flogged,  and  their  ponies  and
property  sold  to  make  up  the  amount.

lieturning  to  Shigatse  on  his  way  back  to  Lhasa,  the  Amban
stopped  there  several  days,  during  which  he  insisted  on  a  daily  allow-
ance of  Es.  750,  which,  the  people  protesting  they  could  not  pay,  the
Chinese  soldiery,  by  various  oppressive  means,  tried  to  squeeze  out
of  them.  The  Tsipon  tried  to  resign  his  commission,  and  then  the
Amban  visited  his  anger  on  him.  In  the  mean  time  the  people
combined  in  a  body  to  resist  the  exaction,  and,  with  the  connivance
of  the  two  prefects  {Djongpoii)  of  Shigatse,  openly  refused  payment
of  the  Amban's  unjust  demands.  Tlie  Amban,  furious,  ordered  his
Chinese  soldiers  to  arrest  the  Djongpon  and  put  the  Tsipon  in  irons ;
but  the  former  fled,  and  the  soldiery  were  stoned  by  the  mob.  The
next  day  the  Tsipon  was  tied  to  a  pillar  of  the  Amban's  house  and
flogged.  After  he  had  received  some  fifteen  cuts,  volleys  of  stones
were  thrown,  and  the  Amban  severely  hurt  before  he  could  escape
into  the  house,  and  he  was  only  saved  from  the  infuriated  populace
by  the  prompt  arrival  of  the  Tibetan  general  {Dah-jjon)  with  the
troops  under  his  command.  Then  it  was  that  a  messenger  was  sent
post-haste  to  Lhasa,  and  the  senior  Amban,  the  ministers  (Shape)
Eampa  and  Lhalu  having  arrived,  formed,  with  the  temporal  minister
of  the  Tashi  lama  [Kyal-dvang  chcnjJo)  and  the  paymaster  of  the
forces,  a  commission  to  investigate  the  matter.

Their  judgment  in  the  case  was  made  known  on  the  12th.  It
bore  that  the  two  Djongpon  of  Shigatse  should  be  degraded  from
the  third  to  the  fourth  class  of  Chinese  official  rank,  losing  also  their
position  as  Djongpon  for  that  of  Djongnyer  under  new  Djongpon ;

*  Kdo-tsad,  an  ingot  of  silver  weigliing  fifty  Chinese  ounces  (taels),  and  also  called
yambu  (from  the  Chinese  yuaii-pau),  tarmima  (rta-rmig-ma,  also  pronounced  idnpema),
or  simply  do.  A  do  is  usually  exchanged  for  Ka.  160.  Turner,  'Embassy,' p.  345
speaks  of  masses  of  pure  bullion  called  Tariema. — (VV.  R.)


52  JOVRNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

and  that,  furthermore,  each  of  them  sliould  receive  two  hundred  blows
with  the  bamboo.  The  village  headmen  {Uoy-pon.)  were  to  receive
four  hundred  blows  with  the  bamboo,  and  be  imprisoned  for  two
months  in  the  jails  of  Ee  and  Khamba  djong.  Eight  elders  ((jampo)
were  to  receive  fifty  blows  of  the  bamboo,  and  wear  the  cangue  for
six  months.

As  to  the  junior  Amban,  it  being  proven  tluit  he  had  attempted
to  extort  more  than  his  allowance  from  the  people,  the  Commis-
sioners decided  to  petition  the  Court  of  Peking  to  no  longer  allow
the  payment  by  the  Tibetan  people  of  the  Chinese  travelling  allow-
ance {jija-tal  *)  in  such  cases,  only  supplying  the  usual  travelling
facilities.  To  obtain  this  concession,  it  is  said  that  two  Lhasa  Shape
paid  the  Amban  fifteen  doclic,  or  lis.  1875.

Dechang  then  inquired  wliat  medicines  I  had  brought,  as  he  was
suffering  from  a  cold  and  cough,  and  I  promised  to  give  him  some
later  on.  Then,  pouring  the  contents  of  my  cup  into  tlie  slop-bowl
(shalu  t),  as  a  sign  of  taking  leave,  I  arose  and  went  home.

December  13. — To-day  some  ir),()00  persons  assembled  at  noon  in
the  market-place  to  see  the  arrival  of  the  Kashmir  Envoy  with  his
guards  and  escort  in  military  dress.  All  the  alleys  of  Shigatse,  the
courtyard  of  Kesar  Lhakhang,  and  the  adjacent  gardens  were  tilled
with  people  all  eagerly  waiting  for  the  tojio  (sight).  There  was  the
Envoy  of  the  ]\Iaharaja  Mdtli  some  fifty  sowars,  all  in  uniform,  besides
a  hundred  mounted  followers  of  various  nationalities,  some  Sikhs,
Mohammedans  with  flowing  beards  and  white  turbans,  Ladakis  in
clumsy  lambskin  dresses,  Murmis  from  Kepal,  Dokpas  from  Chang,
a  few  Nepalese,  and  some  Tibetans  from  Kirong.  There  were  also
with  the  Envoy  a  number  of  merchants  dressed  in  jirincely  style,  and
attended  by  servants  in  liveries  of  .silk  and  broadcloth.  Some  of  their
ponies  were  also  richly  caparisoned  with  ornaments  of  silver  and
brocade  of  gold.  The  Kashmir  Government,  I  learnt,  sends  an  envoy
to  Lhasa  every  three  years  with  presents  (called  tribute)  to  the  (Jrand
Lama.  The  Tibetan  Government,  on  receiving  notice  of  the  proposed
setting  out  <)\'  the  mission,  has  relays  (ta-u)  of  ponies  and  mules
about  5()U  liciid,  and  also  coolies,  prepared  at  all  the  towns  and  post^

*  The  oolloquiiil  niimc  for  Chinese  iu  Tibet  is  Gyu.  In  the  olHcial  hmguage  they
are  ealhd  Gija-iuKj. — (\V.  I'l.)

t  Or Ja-lu  {ldwj)\  also  called y«  lu-»a,  "bowl  (or  place)  to  pour  ten  in."  Usually  a
cup  with  a  metal  cover. — (W.lt.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  53

stations  along  the  road  from  the  Ladak  frontier  to  Lhasa.  Although
so  large  a  number  of  ponies  and  men  is  hardly  necessary  for  the  Envoy,
who  only  brings  presents  of  precious  things  of  little  bulk,  the  party
avails  itself  of  the  privilege  for  the  carriage  of  personal  property  and
merchandise  to  and  from  Lhasa.  As  the  mission  passed  by,  we  heard
the  people  remark  that  all  this  splendour  and  ostentation  was  at  the
expense  of  the  Government  of  Lhasa,  and  to  the  ruin  of  the  poor
people  of  Tibet.

The  origin  of  this  tribute  from  Kashmir  to  Lhasa  is  as  follows  :
After  the  conquest  of  Ladak,  Balti,  and  Skardo,  Zorwar  Sing,  the  famous
Sikh  general  of  Maharaja  (lolab  Sing,  turned  his  arms  against  Paidok
and  Gar  in  the  year  1840-41. These  two  provinces,  which  produce  the
finest  wool  of  Tibet,  and  contain  the  wealthiest  and  most  sacred  of
its  monasteries,  were  held  by  the  great  Buddhist  ruler  of  Tibet  as  his
most  valued  possessions,  and  the  Sikh  general,  by  attempting  tlieir
conquest,  excited  the  wrath  of  the  Lhasa  Government,  who,  applying
to  their  suzerain,  the  Emperor  of  China,  was  able  to  put  more  than
10,000  men  in  the  field. Zorwar  Sing,  with  some  5000  men,  invaded
these  two  provinces, and  the  governor  (garpon)  fled  to the  Chang
tang,*  leaving  the  fort  (of  Eudok  ?)  and  the  whole  country  at  the
mercy  of  the  enemy. The  general  established  himself  near  the  sacred
lake Mapham (Manasarowar),  and  sent detachments  all over  the
country  to  pillage  and  spread  desecration  in  the  holiest  of  Buddhist
sanctuaries  at  Mapham  and  Kailas ;  and  one  body  of  troops  he  posted
at  Purang,  near  the  Nepal  frontier,  to  watch  the  Lhasa  forces. The
combined  forces  of  Lhasa  and  China  now  marched  on  Eudok  under
the  leadership  of  one  of  the  Shape  ;  and  Zorwar  Sing,  whose  contempt
for  the  Tibetan  soldiery  was  great,  and  who  underrated  the  strength
of  the  forces  opposed  to  him,  sent  some  small  detachments  of  his
troops  to  oppose  their  advance. These  were  cut  to  pieces,  when  he
himself,  at  the  head  of  his  troops,  advanced  to  encounter  the  Lhasa
forces. The  two  armies  fought  for  two  days  and  nights  without  any
decisive  result,  but  on  the  third  day  the  Sikh  general  fell,  and  victory
declared  itself  for  the lamas. The  defeat  was complete,  and the
number  of  slain  on  both  sides  immense. The  victorious  troops  now
threatened  Ladak,  and  the  Maharaja  sued  for  peace. A  treaty  was
concluded  by  the  agent  of  Golab  Sing  and  the  Government  of  Lhasa,
of  which  one  of  the  terms  was  the  payment  of  a  triennial  tribute.

*  The  northern  ptirt  of  Tibet,  inhabited  by  a  few  pastoral  tribes  only.— (W.  K.)


54  JOUBNET TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TLBET.

Talking  with  the  Kiisho  Tung-chen  of  the  severity  of  the  punish-
ment inflicted  yesterday  on  the  Djongpon  of  Shigatse  and  the  circle
headmun  {t-W!/-pon),  he  told  me  that,  besides  those  mentioned  above,
the  Djongpon  liad  had  the  llesli  and  skin  stripi^ed  off  their  hands.
The  tsog-pon  had  oifered  to  pay  the  mandarin  Es.  2000  a-piece  to
escape  the  400  blows  of  the  bamboo,  but  the  Chinese  had  been
inexorable.

December  14. — The  Tung-chen  sent  me  one  of  his  acquaintances,
Norpu  Tondub,  a  Donnyer  of  Dongtse,  with  a  request  that  I  would
let  him  have  some  medicine,  as  he  was  suffering  from  dyspepsia.  At
first  I  refused,  as  I  had  but  very  few  drugs  with  me,  and  only  in
quantity  sufficient  for  myself;  but,  the  Tung-chen  insisting,  I  took
my  medicine-chest  with  me  and  went  to  his  house.  Lifting  up  the
lid,  I  displayed  the  various  bottles  with  their  sparkling  contents,  the
secretary,  his  friends,  and  the  servants  all  looking  on  with  amaze-
ment, while  Xorpu  Tondub,  at  the  very  sight  of  the  bottles,  seemed
to  become  certain  of  recovery,  and  said  he  would  pay  as  much  money
as  I  might  ask.  I  replied  that  even  then  I  could  not  let  him  have
any  medicine,  as  no  amount  of  money  could  get  me  a  fresh  supply
of  drugs  from  India  once  these  finished,  for  the  passes  were  all
closed  by  the  Til)etan  Government.  At  this  the  Tung-chen  looked
anxious,  so  I  opened  one  of  the  bottles  and  called  for  a  china  cup,
and  three  or  four  persons  ran  to  the  kitchen  and  brought  me  half  a
dozen  large  and  small  ones.  I  weighed  the  medicine  in  my  brass
balance ;  the  drams  and  scruples,  which  glittered  like  gold  coins,  per-
plexed them  much,  as  they  thought  I  was  a  miracle-worker  who  used
gold  coins  for  weights.  I  now  told  them  that  the  two  medicines  when
mixed  would  boil.  The  very  announcement  of  this  filled  the  spec-
tators with  mute  amazement,  and  made  the  patient  tremble  with  fear;
he  looked  at  the  Tung-chen  and  then  to  heaven  with  anxiety,  evidently
repenting  him  for  having  pressed  me  for  medicine,  and  seemed  anxious
to  escape  from  my  hands.  The  secretary,  too,  looked  aghast;  but
the  medicines  were  mixed,  and  to  his  mind  they  were  too  valuable
to  Ijc  thrown  away  ;  so,  having  examined  if  the  two  mixtures  were  hot,
and  finding  that  they  were  not,  he  encouraged  tlie  patient,  saying  that
I  was  a  great  physician,  and  he  had  no  cause  to  apprehend  danger  from
my  liands.  I  told  the  patient  that  he  could  depend  on  me  that  I  was
not  going  to  administer  poison  to  him,  and  to  be  ready  to  take  the
drauglit  as  soon  as  it  frotlied  up. All  waited  with  eager  expectation


JOURNEY TO  LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  55

to  see  the  phenomenon,  when  lo !  the  mixture  foamed  with  a  hissing
noise,  which  made  the  patient  shrink  back.  I  tokl  him  to  dip  his
finger  in  the  boiling  mixture ;  and  when  he  found  it  cokl  he  uttered
the  mystic  sentence,  "  Om  mani  jjadme  hum,"  and  swallowed  it,  and
said  it  was  agreeable  and  refreshing.  He  then  drew  from  the  breast
of  his  gown  a  I'hafar/  and  a  few  coins,  and  offered  them  to  me,  laying
the  scarf  on  the  ground  before  me.  "Great  physician,"  he  said,
"  accept  this  little  token  of  my  gratitude,  though  it  is  not  worthy  of
your  acceptance.  Considering,  however,  that  you  are  a  pious  man  to
whom  money  is  of  no  value,  I  venture  to  hope  you  will  accept  it."  I
declined  the  money,  but  at  the  request  of  the  Tung-chen  accepted  tlie
scarf.  With  looks  of  open-mouthed  astonishment  and  feelings  of
endless  admiration  for  the  marvellous  properties  of  the  medicine  and
for  the  wonderful  amchi  (physician)  who  disdained  money,  the  little
circle  of  spectators  returned  to  their  houses  and  work.

The  punishment  of  the  Djongpon  had  filled  the  people  with  fear
of  the  Chinese.  They  apprehended  new  insults  at  the  hands  of  the
Chinese  swaggering  about  the  streets  of  Shigatse.  People  who  had
come  to  the  market  from  a  distance  to  sell  their  goods  were  packing
them  up  to  hurry  off  home.  I^o  provisions  could  be  had,  no  purchases
could  be  made.  Ugyen  met  some  grain-dealers  whom  he  knew,  and
begged  them  to  sell  him  some  rice,  but  none  would  acknowledge  even
that  they  had  any  for  sale.  An  old  woman  who  had  sold  us  rice  on
our  first  visit  here  said,  "  Do  not  talk  of  rice  before  the  Chinese  and
their  friends,  for  they  will  come  and  take  what  I  have  away  and
throw  some  bad  coins  in  my  cloth.  Come  in  an  hour  or  two,  when
the  rascals  have  gone  away,  and  I  will  let  you  have  what  you  want."
On  one  side  of  the  market-place  is  a  large  zalcliang,  or  restaurant,
where  Phurchung  and  Ugyen  went  to  appease  their  hunger.  While
they  were  busy  with  their  chopsticks  the  proprietor  came  in.  He  was
a  nobleman  of  Tashilliunpo,  head  of  the  Tondub  Khangsar  family,  and
held  the  office  of  Chyangjob  of  the  Tashi  lama.  He  asked  Ugyen
whence  he  had  come,  where  he  had  put  up,  and  what  merchandise
{cliong)  he  had  for  sale.  The  lady,  under  whose  immediate  super-
vision this  establishment  is,  is  no  less  a  personage  than  the  wife  of
this  dignitary.  Her  manners  were  gentle  and  dignified,  and  she  spoke
in  a  sweet  and  polite  manner.  Her  head-dress  was  covered  with
innumerable  strings  of  pearls,  worth  certainly  not  less  than  PiS.  3000,
and  besides  these  there  were  on  it  coral  beads,  rubies,  turquoises,  and


56  JOUFNEY TO LHASA AXD CENTRAL TIBET.

other  precious  stones.  Althoiioh  she  Ijelongs  to  one  of  tlie  richest  and
noblest  families  in  Tsan,u  (Ulterior  Tibet),  besides  being  connected
with  the  family  from  which  the  Tashi  lama  has  sprung,  yet  she  does
not  feel  it  beneath  her  dignity  to  keep  the  accounts  of  the  inn  and
superintend  the  work  of  the  servants.

Dcamhcr  15. — To-day  was  the  twenty-fifth  of  the  tenth  Tibetan
moon,  and  one  of  the  greatest  holidays  of  the  Gelugpa  Church,  being
the  anniversary  of  the  death  of  Tsongkhapa.  It  is  known  as  Gadan
namcltoi  In  every  chapel  new  torma  *  of  tsamha  take  the  place  of
the  old  ones,  which  are  now  thrown  away.

Late  in  the  afternoon  the  ]\rongol  monk  Lobzang  tanzing,  to  wdiom
I  have  previously  referred,  came  to  pay  me  his  respects,  and  pre-
sented me  a  long  I'hatag  and  the  carcass  of  a  large  sheep.  He  had
only  a  few  days  before  been  released  from  a  two-months'  imprisonment,
under  suspicion  of  being  implicated  in  a  case  of  forgery,  and  had  been
repeatedly  flogged.  His  tutor  had  been  sentenced  to  three  years
of  imprisonment,  and  had  been  sent  to  the  prison  of  Khamba  djong.

In  the  evening  the  monks  of  Tashilhunpo  busied  themselves
illuminating  their  chapels.  Hundreds  of  butter-lamps  were  taste-
fully placed  in  rows  on  the  roof  of  every  building  in  the  lamasery.
The  Government  supplies  butter  to  every  house  in  the  town  and
to  every  resident  monk,  to  enable  them  to  contribute  towards  the
illumination.  From  the  roof  of  my  house  I  saw  the  illuminations  to
great  advantage.  The  fantastic  roofs  of  the  four  tombs  {{lyopliig)
of  the  Tashi  lamas  were  beautifully  lit  up.  The  mitre-shaped
spires,  tlie  upturned  eaves  of  the  temple  looked  most  gorgeous,  and
resemlded  tlie  illuminated  tajiahs  in  a  mohurum  procession  in  India.
The  great  monastery  of  Tashilhunpo,  situated  as  it  is  at  the  foot  of
a  hill,  presented  a  magnificent  appearance.  For  an  hour  the  illu-
mination was  beautiful,  but  towards  7.30  o'clock  the  wind  began  to
blow  a  gale,  and  had  soon  extinguished  all  tlie  lights  and  driven  me
into  my  house  shivering  with  cold.

One  of  the  newly  incarnated  lamas  of  Tashilhunpo,  who  had  just
arrived  from  tlic  ].vovinco  of  Tn-k]i;iiii,in  Eastern  Tibet,t took  advantage

*  A  torma  is  a  small  cuiie  varying  in  lieiglit  from  a  few  inclies  to  a  foot  and  more,
made  of  tsambn,  buttor,  eupir,  etc  Sometimes  tlie  surface  is  coloured,  and  some  tormns
are  of  great  size.  They  a  re  placed  on  the  front  of  the  altars  in  rows,  and  are  propitiatory
offering's. On  the  celebration  of  tiiis  feast,  cf.  J.7?.^.^.,  vol.  xxiii.  (1891).  p.  214.— (W.  R.)

+  Tu-Kham  is  probah)ly  Stfid  Kliams,  or  "Upper  Khan'do"— in  all  probaliility
De'rge  is  meant. — (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  57

of  to-day  being  a  holiday  to  get  himself  admitted  into  the  tu-khara
tsan  order  of  monks.  He  invited  the  Tanchen  from  Kun-khyab
ling,  and  presented  to  3800  monks  a  tanha  each,  making  also  large
presents  to  the  Grand  Lama  (of  Lhasa  ?),  his  court,  and  the  College  of
Incarnate  Lamas.  At  about  8  a.m.  his  holiness,  the  Panchen,*
arrived,  and  was  received  with  due  honours  by  the  monks  and  State
officials.  The  road  for  about  300  yards  was  lined  with  red  broad-
cloth and  banners.  Some  old  lamas  stood  in  a  profoundly  reverential
attitude  on  either  side  of  the  road,  bearing  divers  sacred  objects  to
receive  the  Panchen's  chyag-wang  (blessing  f).  Chinese  trumpets,
melodious  flutes  {gyaling),  and  great  resounding  horns  (dung  clien)
sounded  in  his  honour.  He  took  his  seat  on  an  altar  in  the  grand
hall  of  worship  {Tso  hhang),  to  preside  over  the  inaugural  ceremonies.
By  10  o'clock  the  ceremony  was  over,  and  we  saw  the  monks
returning  cheerfully  to  their  cells,  each  bearing  a  large  flat  cake,
sticks  of  candy,  and  strings  of  beads.  The  new  incarnation,  now
admitted  as  a  novice  in  Tashilhunpo,  had  gone  through  the  usual
course  of  moral  discipline  and  study  like  any  other  monk.  Within
a  year  from  the  date  of  admission,  every  monk  is  required  to  pass  an
examination  in  selections  from  the  sacred  books,  of  wdiich  he  must
repeat  from  memory,  and  without  a  single  mistake,  125  leaves
Candidates  coming  from  outside  Tibet  are  generally  allowed  three
years  to  prepare  for  their  final  admission,  which  gives  tliem  tlie
privileges  of  a  resident  monk,  with  an  allowance  of  food.  Any  one
failing  to  pass  the  final  examination  forfeits  his  rights  to  residence
and  his  allowances.  Once  admitted,  the  monk  may  rise,  by  dint  of
industry  and  study,  to  the  various  degrees  of  lamahood  %

*  During  his  first  visit  to  Tashilhunpo,  Chandra  Das  was  received  by  the  Panehen
riniDocho.  He  describes  him  as  follows  :  "  The  Grand  Lama  is  twenty-six  years  of  age,  of
a  spare  frame  and  middling  stature.  He  has  a  remarkably  broad  forehead  and  large
eyes,  slightly  oblique.  The  expression  of  his  face,  although  highly  intelligent,  is  not
engaging,  and  lacks  that  sympathy  and  dignity  so  conspicuous  in  the  minister's
countenance.  The  old  monks  of  Tashilhunpo  informed  me  that,  unlike  his  predecessor,
the  present  Grand  Lama  was  more  feared  than  liked,  on  account  of  his  cold  and  self-
reliant  spirit.  He  is  strict  in  the  observance  of  ceremonies  and  in  the  administration  of
justice,  and  slow  to  forgive."  Kun-kyab  ling  is  the  name  of  the  residence  of  the  Pan-
ehen lama,  the  great  lama  of  Tashilhunpo. — (W.  R.)

t  Bogle  thus  describes  the  ceremony  of  blessing  by  the  Panehen  riapoche  :  "  Upon
the  gylongs,  or  laymen  of  very  high  ranlc,  he  lays  his  palm  ;  the  nuns  {anni)  and  inferior
laymen  have  a  cloth  interposed  between  his  hand  and  their  heads;  and  the  lower  class
of  people  are  touched,  as  they  pass  by,  with  tlie  tassel  which  he  holds  in  his  hands." —
C.  R.  Markham, '  Narrative  of  the  Mission  of  Geo.  Bogle,'  p.  85.

X  For  further  details  on  the  subject  see  S.  C.  D.'s  '  Indian  Pundits  in  the  Land  of
Snow,'  and  Waddell,  '  Buddhism  of  Tibet,'  p.  173.


58


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.


At  noon  there  was  a  large  crowd  between  Tashilhimpo  and  the
Shigatse  djonci  (fort) — men  and  women  in  holiday  dress,  monks  from
the  lamaseries,  and  not  a  few  Chinese,  to  witness  the  annual  rope-
dancing.  A  long  rope  was  stretched  from  the  top  of  the  fort  to  the
foot  of  the  lower  castle  bridge,  a  distance  of  300  feet  or  more. Then


KANDUO YK  SHES.  I'ADMA SAMIiHAVA.  LHA-CHAM MANDARASA.


an  athlete  appeared,  a  wliitc  hhaliKj  tied  around  his  neck,  and  took
his  place  at  the  upper  end  of  the  rope.  With  his  face  turned  upwards,
he  invoked  the  gods  ;  then,  looking  downwards,  he  invoked  the  nagas
of  the  nether  world,  raising  liis  voice  to  its  highest  pitch,  and  at  times
shrieking  in  a  terrific  manner. Then  he  scattered  flour  on  all  sides,


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  59

and  sang  a  snatch  of  a  song,  to  which  some  one  in  the  crowd  sang  ont
a  laughable  reply.  He  then  let  himself  slide  down  the  rope,  exchanging
jokes  thrice  with  the  crowd  on  his  way  down,  and  finishing  with  a
shriek.*

Phurchung  and  Ugyen,  whom  I  had  sent  out  to  l)uy  books  for  me,
returned  towards  2  o'clock  with  a  quantity,  and  later  on,  while  I  was
sitting  making  my  choice  of  volumes,  the  bookseller's  son  came  in  to
carry  back  those  I  did  not  require.  I  had  a  talk  with  him  about
different  books,  and  he  gave  me  some  very  interesting  information.

I  engaged  also,  to-day,  a  new  cook  in  place  of  Phurchung,  whom
I  proposed  sending  to  Khamba  djong  to  arrange  for  the  conveyance
from  the  Lachan  barrier  to  Khamba  of  the  lithographic  press  bought
for  the  minister.

Dccemhcr  16. — Getting  up  from  bed  at  7  a.m.,  I  spread  two
mattresses  on  the  third  floor,  opened  the  shutters,  and,  while  basking  in
the  sun  and  sipping  tea  placed  on  a  little  table  before  me,  began  to  turn
over  the  leaves  of  one  of  my  newly  purchased  volumes.  The  residents
of  the  neighbouring  houses  peeped  out  from  their  windows  to  observe
my  manners  and  habits.  Henceforth  I  was  careful  to  conduct  myself
like  a  good  gelong  (priest).  Eeading  attentively,  writing  and  making
notes  was  the  chief  occupation  of  my  days.  It  was  not  my  habit  to
chant  mantras,  or  hymns,  or  say  my  beads,  for  in  the  former  practice
I  was  never  proficient,  and  with  my  beads  I  could  only  separate  one
bead  from  another  ^^'ithout  any  knowledge  of  the  prayers  meant  to
accompany  that  mechanical  action.

The  new  cook  has  proved  no  improvement  on  Phurchung;  he  is
a  sloven,  and  though  I  promised  him  a  reward  for  cleanliness,  he
neither  washed  his  face  nor  cleaned  his  teeth,t  and  always  smelled
most  offensively.  Finally  I  got  Phurchung  to  make  him  wash  his
clothes  and  face.  Our  breakfast  usually  consisted  of  a  few  pieces  of
bread,  tea,  and  one  or  two  cups  of  a  thin  paste  made  of  boiled  tmmha,
mutton,  and  dried  milk,  and  called  yatuij.  In  the  evening  I  met  the
Tung-chen,  the  minister's  secretary,  and  talked  to  him  about  getting
the  lithographic  press  here. Two  of  his  friends  were  sitting  witli

*  W.  Moorcroft,  '  Travels  in  the  Himalayan  Provinces,'  i.  17,  describes  this  feast  as
witnessed  in  Kashmir.  It  is  there  called  Barat,  and  is  celebrated  to  avert  impending
evil.  Chinese  authors  say  it  is  celebrated  at  Lhasa  a  few  days  after  the  New  Year.
See  J.B.A.S.,  vol.  xxiii.  (1891),  p.  209.

t  Tibetan  cooks  have  invariably  soot-covered  faces;  this  seems  as  indispensable  a
part  of  their  make-up  as  the  white  cap  is  to  the  French  c//e/.— (W.  R.)


60  JOURNEY TO LHASA AXD CENTRAL TLBET.

liim,  one  of  them  engaged  in  muucliing  a  piece  of  boiled  mutton.  He
told  me  that  tlie  Tung-chen  had  toothache,  caused  by  worms  in  the
root  of  a  tooth,  and  could  only  eat  hashed  or  pounded  meat.  The
secretary  showed  me  the  cavities  made,  he  said,  by  thread-shaped
worms  (ringpa).  He  had  killed  several,  lie  added,  by  inserting  red-
hot  pins  in  the  cavities.*

Dcecmher  17. — A  messenger  arrived  from  Dongtse  with  a  letter
from  the  minister  asking  Uygen  and  me  to  come  to  Dongtse,  a
distance  of  about  40  miles,  which  town  he  was  unable  to  leave,  for
various  reasons,  for  some  time  to  come.  Before  leaving  I  was  anxious
to  start  off  Phurchung  for  Khamba  djong,  and  also  to  get  winter  clothes
for  myself,  as  the  cold  was  getting  keener  every  day.  Our  house,
like  all  houses  in  Tibet,  had  no  ciiimney,  and  as  the  ceiling  was
covered  with  fine  Chinese  satin,  dung-fuel  was  most  objectionable,  so
I  had  charcoal  burnt  in  the  room  in  nicely  made  earthen  stoves
{jalang),  paying  about  a  rupee  four  annas  a  maund  weight.

At  about  noon  a  great  procession  arrived  from  Dechan  Phodang  f
to  pay  homage  liefore  the  image  of  the  Emperor  of  China  kept  in
the  monastery.  From  the  roof  of  the  minister's  house  I  commanded
an  excellent  view  of  the  southern  and  western  quarters  of  the  town.
The  Tung-chen  told  me  that  to-day  was  a  Chinese  holiday,  the
anniversary  of  their  present  Emperor's  accession  to  the  throne,  when
all  Chinese  and  subjects  of  the  Emperor  are  required  to  offer  him
homage  and  to  pray  to  Heaven  for  his  long  life  and  prosperity.
AVithin  the  monastery  there  exists  an  image  of  the  Emperor  of
China,  probably  Chien-lung,  to  pay  reverence  to  which  the  procession
I  now  saw,  headed  by  the  Lhasa  Shape,  the  Ambans,  the  Shape  Bora
of  Tsang,  was  now  advancing.  Flag-bearers  and  a  mounted  troop
came  first,  then  Tibetan  officials,  in  their  best  apparel  of  brocaded
satin  (Jcinlah),  painted  with  the  dragon  of  the  Tartars,  and  Chinese
satins  of  various  colours  and  patterns,  riding  on  richly  caparisoned
ponies,  were  marcliing  slowly  and  solemnly  towards  the  western  gate
of  the  monastery.  The  Chinese  were  conspicuous  by  their  pigtails
and  petticoats,  and,  tliough  very  well  dressed,  were  all  black  and

*  This  idea  is  common  to  Cliineso,  Mongols,  and  Tibetans,  among  whom  "  A  worm
has  bored  a  hole  in  my  tooth"  is  equivah-nt  to  ''I  liave  a  cavity  in  my  tooth."  Tiic
extraction  of  the  dead  nerve  confirms  tiiem  in  the  idea. — (W.  K.)

t  In  the  narrative  of  his  first  journey,  Chandra  Das  says  this  is  the  Panchen
rinpochc's  summer  residence.  'J'here  is  no  image  of  tlic  Kinpcror,  hut  an  imperial
tablet  and  a  throne,  or  chair  of  state. — (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  ()1

of  villainous  appearance,  greatly  contrasting  with  the  respectable
Tibetan  gentry,  which  forced  me  to  think  that  they  were  all  recruited
from  low-class  people  from  Western  China ;  and  the  Tung-chen  told
me  that  these  men  were  noted  in  Tibet  for  their  dissipated  and
licentious  habits.

Some  men  carried  boards  about  two  feet  square,  on  which  were
written  the  Amban's  titles  and  his  commission  to  supreme  authority
over  the  whole  of  Tibet.*  Some  of  these  inscriptions  were  in
Chinese,  and  were  carried  by  Chinamen  ;  others,  in  the  Tibetan  lan-
guage, were  carried  by  Tibetans.  The  Shape  also  rode,  their  advance
heralded  by  two  men  who  warned  passers-by  to  keep  out  of  the  way.
Each  was  escorted  by  three  mounted  men,  one  on  either  side  of  him,
and  one  marching  in  front,  keeping  off  the  crowd  with  whips,  which
they  freely  used,  while  two  grooms  ran  behind  holding  his  horse's
tail.  There  were  about  three  hundred  dignitaries  and  gentlemen  of
the  provinces  of  U  and  Tsang,  besides  the  followers  and  retainers
of  the  Ambans.  The  Ambans'  sedan  chairs  were  carried  by  eight
Chinese  soldiers  to  each,  and  some  fifty  Tibetan  soldiers  helped  to
drag  them  with  long  cords  attached  to  the  bars  of  the  chairs. f  After
paying  homage  at  the  sacred  chapels  and  tombs  of  the  departed
saints,  the  procession  came  out  of  the  monastery  by  the  eastern  gate,
and,  headed  by  the  Shape  Bora,  marched  across  the  market-place
towards  Kun-khyab  ling.  Pirst  came  the  oihcers  of  state,  then
followed  the  paymaster's  {Porjpon  X)  party,  then  the  Chinese  officials,
followed  by  the  chief  Amban  in  his  state  chair.  The  flags,  carried  in
tasteful  array,  were  all  of  China  silk,  those  at  the  point  of  the  lances
of  the  guard  being  of  brocade,  and  inscribed  in  Chinese  and  Tibetan.
Throughout  the  march  the  Tibetans  occupied  a  subordinate  position,
and  the  Chinese  displayed  their  superiority  in  every  possible  way.
Though  the  crowd  had  reason  to  fear  a  whipping  from  the  Chinese,
who  ran  on  all  sides,  they  did  not  suffer  from  the  Amban's  guard.
The  junior  Amban,  as  he  followed  on  horseback,  seemed  pleased  to

*  Such  tablets  are  always  carried  in  official  processions  in  China.— (W.  K.)
t  This  is  known  in  China  as  la  chiao,  "  to  drag  the  chair."  It  is  rather  a  mark  of
respect  to  the  official  being  carried  in  the  chair  than  assistance  to  the  bearers.  It  is
a  form  of  corvee  throughout  the  empire.  In  Tibet  the  Emperor's  representatives  and
the  Tale  lama  and  Panchen  rinpoche  alone  have  the  right  to  be  carried  in  green
sedan  chairs. — (W.  K.)

X  Spogs-dpon. Spogs  (pron.  pog)  means  "  salary  of  officials,"  and  more  especially
that  allowed  lamas  by  Government  or  the  monastic  authorities.— (W.  K.)


62  JOVBNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

see  the  lieuvily  chained  prisoners,  the  recently  punished  headmen
groaning  under  the  weight  of  their  cangues.  His  sedan  chair  was
carried  by  the  same  number  of  soldiers  as  that  of  the  senior  Aniban,
and  his  retinue  and  followers  resembled  his.  Then  came  the  other
Shape  with  their  respective  retinues.  The  guards  were  all  armed
with  Chinese  matchlocks  and  long  spears.  Following  them  came
the  captains  and  lieutenants  of  the  army,  with  a  hundred  men ;  and
behind  these  marched  the  yellow  and  black  turbaned  officers  of
Labrang  and  the  Djong.  The  Ambans  were  received  by  his  Holiness,
the  Pancheu,  with  due  honours,  and  they  paid  him  the  reverence  due
to  his  exalted  position  and  holy  character.

In  the  evening  I  saw  the  Tung-chen,  who  gave  me  a  very
valuable  manuscript  entitled  DsamUng  gyeshc,  or  "  Creneral  account  of
the  world."  * I  carried  it  off  with  me  to  my  house  to  read.

Uiccmhcr  18.— The  Tung-chen  sent  one  of  his  storekeepers,
Tsering-tashi  by  name,  to  Tondub  Khangsar  to  get  a  passport
Qam-yiij)  to  enable  me  to  send  Phurchung  to  Khamba  djong  and
Lachan,  to  bring  here  our  heavy  luggage.  The  tailor  came  at
7  o'clock  this  morning  to  begin  work  on  my  winter  clothes.  We
kept  ready  for  him  a  kettle  of  tea  on  an  earthen  stove.  A  cup,  a  few
pieces  of  boiled  mutton,  and  a  wooden  bowl  filled  with  tsaniba
remained  all  the  time  before  him,  and  he  drank  some  tea  every  hour
or  so,  making  also  three  meals  a  day.  His  breakfast  consisted  of
mutton,  tsaniba,  and  tea ;  at  noon  we  gave  him  a  dish  of  rice  and
mutton  curry,  tsamha,  and  tea;  and  at  6  o'clock  he  ate  a  few  balls
of  tsamha,  put  on  his  yellow  turban  (baJdo),  and,  making  a  low  bow,
walked  off  towards  his  home  at  Tashi-gyantsa.  I  was  much  pleased
with  his  steady  work,  which  had  earned  for  him  the  proud  title  of
Uje  chenpo,  or  "  head  craftsman,"  f  and  secured  for  him  a  tanha  a
day  wages,  exclusive  of  food.

Ucccmhcr  19. — Tsering-tashi  was  despatched  again  after  the  pass-
port. The  delay  in  securing  it  was  occasioned  by  the  Tung-chen
not  having  tipped the  clerks  and  officials  who  had  charge  of  the

*  Clifunlra  Das  has  given  u  transliitioii  of  an  extract  i'roni  this  work  in  the  Journal
of  the  Asiatir,  SocMy  of  Bengal,  vol.  Iv.  pp.  201-203,  ami  in  part  vii.  of  his  'Narrative
of  a  Journey  round  Lake  Y'amdo '  (Palti).  pp.  117-130.  Thougli  full  of  interesting
details,  it  has  been  thought  advisable  to  omit  it  from  the  present  work,  most  of  the
Tibetan  names  of  i)lace8  being  still  uuidentified.  He  says  the  work  is  by  Lama
Tsanpo  Nomenklian,  of  Amdo. — (W.  1{.)

t  Or  rather  "  master-tailor,'  Wu-je  iDwu-rJe)  tsem-iw  ou  Tashi-gyantsa,  see  infra,
p.  G7.-0V.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  63

matter.  The  senior  Ainban  started  to-day  for  Lhasa  via  Gyantse
and  Nangartse  djong.  All  the  ponies  of  Shigatse  had  been  requisi-
tioned to  supply  his  numerous  retinue  with  riding  and  pack  animals,
so  the  junior  Amban  and  the  Shape  could  not  get  off  for  want  (jf
^lIcc,  and  the  local  authorities  of  Gyantse  were  ordered  to  supply
what  they  could  to  them  as  soon  as  the  senior  Amban  reached  their
place.  In  the  meanwhile  the  Chinese  were  strolling  about  the
Shigatse  market,  carrying  off  the  best  of  everything,  paying  nothing,
or  only  a  nominal  price  for  the  things  they  took.  People  coming
into  town  saw  their  ponies  seized  by  the  ta-u  officers  for  the
Amban's  service,  and  started  off  with  loads  to  Gyantse.  ]\Iy  men
could  buy  nothing,  for  most  of  the  people  had  packed  up  their  wares
and  fled ;  but  they  managed  to  purchase  some  mutton  and  rice  inside
the  monastery,  and  we  found  out  that  good  things  could  be  had
there  at  comparatively  moderate  prices.

Decemher  20. — I  passed  most  of  my  day  reading  a  collection  of
hymns,  the  composition  of  the  second  Dalai  lama,*  which  I  liad
bought  from  a  Lhasan  bookseller.  To-day  there  arrived  five  men
from  Gyantse,  whose  advent  was  at  once  detected  by  the  Eogyabas,
for  these  pests  are  always  on  the  look-out  for  new-comers,  whom  they
at  once  surround  with  clamorous  solicitations  for  alms.  Few  can
escape  from  their  hands  without  paying  them  something.  As  soon
as  the  Eogyabas  saw  these  Gyantse  men,  they  informed  all  the
fraternity  of  the  new  prey,  on  which  vulture-like  they  pounced.
Well  do  they  deserve  their  name,  which  means  "  corpse-vultures,"
though,  to  speak  the  truth,  they  prey  on  the  living.f  These  Gyantse
men  brought  news  about  the  orders  issued  by  the  Lhasa  Govern-
ment stopping  the  egress  and  ingress  of  all  traders  at  the  frontier
passes.  The  two  Djongpon  of  Phagri  were  busy  executing  these
orders  ;  no  one,  it  was  said,  had  eluded  their  vigilance  and  reached
Darjiling.  Even  some  Bhutanese  traders  on  their  way  to  Lhasa
were  stopped  at  Phagri ;  but  another  party  of  these  people  had  started

*  The  second  Tale  lama  was  known  by  the  name  of  Gedun-gyatso.  Born  in  1476. —
(W.  K.)

t  Our  author  says  their  name  is  written  Eogyo-pa,  meaning  "  corpse-vulture."
According  to  Jaeschke,  the  -'vulture  "  is  go-vo,  while  ro  means  "  corpse."  Further  on
(p.  163)  S.  C.  D.  calls  them  ragyahas,  and  tells  us  that  their  houses  (at  Lhasa  at  all
events)  must  have  walls  made  of  horns.  From  the  fact  that  "  horn "  in  Tibetan  is
ra-cho,  we  might  suppose  that  the  name  of  this  class  of  people  is  Ea-cho-pa,  ''  the
horny  ones." I  have  never  met  with  the  name  in  writing. — (W.  R.)


64  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

out,  in  iletiauce  of  the  Djoiigpon,  for  Lhasa.  The  Bhutan  Govern-
ment resented  such  unusual  interference  on  the  part  of  the  Tibetans
in  a  trade  which  had  been  carried  on  from  ancient  times.

December  21. — To-day  is  the  new  moon  {nam-gang,  or  "  full  night"),
one  of  the  holiest  days  of  the  month.  The  conch-shells  called  loudly
the  lamas  to  prayers.  From  break  of  day  to  an  hour  after  sunset
large  numbers  of  men  and  women  circumambulated  the  monastery,
some  carrying  strings  of  l)eads,  others  prayer-wheels.  Early  in  the
morning  the  Nepalese,  beating  cymbals  and  chanting  Sanskrit
mantras,  walked  around  the  great  monastery.

Towards  10  o'clock  my  attention  was  attracted  by  an  unusual
scene  to  the  east  of  the  monastery,  where  the  entire  space  between
the  great  mcndong  of  the  market-place  and  the  eastern  gateway  of
Tashilhunpo  was  filled  witli  beggars,  both  men  and  women.  Among
them  were  people  from  Amdo  and  Khams,  whose  eyes  had  been  put
out  for  crimes  such  as  murdering  lamas ;  some  were  cripples  and
walked  with  crutches,  some  in  heavy  chains  and  drawn  on  wheel-
barrows, some  maimed,  otliers  deaf  and  dumlj,  others,  again,  still
bearing  traces  of  the  torture  to  which  they  had  been  subjected-r-a
vast  concourse  of  misery  and  pain.  In  their  midst  stood  the  well-
known  Lhagpa-tsering  distributing  alms,  an  anna  to  each  one.  Yor
ten  years  past  he  had  done  thus  on  the  first  of  every  moon.  The
circumstances  which  led  this  worthy  man  to  undertake  giving  alms
to  the  indigent  is  very  remarkable  and  instructive.

Lhagpa-tsering  had  been  a  silversmith,  and  had  by  patient  work
amassed  such  wealth  that  he  established  himself  as  a  jeweller  and
banker.  His  business  prospered ;  in  his  shop  were  all  kinds  of  goods
— fine  china,  besides  pearls,  coral,  turquoises,  and  jade ;  and  here  came
all  the  great  men  of  the  country.  He  became  noted  also  for  his
munificent  gifts  to  the  lamasery  of  Tashilhunpo.  Some  ten  years
ago  there  lived  at  Shang  a  saintly  lama  called  Chyabtam  lama ;  the
purity  of  his  life  and  his  vast  learning  had  made  him  an  object  of
worship  ibr  all  classes  of  people  in  Tsang.  The  jeweller  Lhagpa,
believing  that  if  he  made  offering  to  so  holy  a  personage  his  profits
in  trade  would  increase  a  hundred-fold,  went  to  Shang  and  offered
the  lama  Rs.  1250,  besides  numerous  objects  of  value.  The  saint
refused  them  all,  telling  him  that  they  represented  dishonest  earnings,
and  were  the  property  of  a  dishonest  man.  "  In  a  previous  existence
you  were  a  great  sinner,  and  in  yuur  next  you  will  be  a  crocodile."


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTBAL TIBET.  05

On  the  following  morning  Lhagpa,  filled  with  liorror  at  liis
impending  fate,  came  and  begged  the  sage  to  tell  him  how  he  might
avert  the  horrible  punishment — what  acts  of  charity,  what  good  deeds
would  save  him  ;  but  the  lama  made  no  reply.  Again  the  next  day
he  came,  and  the  saint  looked  in  his  magic  mirror,  and  said,  "  If  hence-
forth you  give  alms  to  the  poor  and  helpless,  of  whatever  station,  creed,
or  country  they  may  be,  on  every  new  moon  throughout  the  year  till
your  death,  you  will  surely  get  immense  wealth,  as  well  as  escape
from  rebirth  as  a  crocodile.  There  are  no  other  means  to  save  you ; "
and  he  sent  Lhagpa  away  without  accepting  his  gifts.  Since  then  he
has  been  in  the  habit  of  distributing  alms  on  the  first  day  of  the
moon.  His  example  has  produced  a  wholesome  influence  on  the
merchants  of  Khams,  who  now  show  some  hesitation  in  cheating.
A  trader,  when  he  cheats  others,  thinks,  as  a  general  rule,  if  he  is  a
Buddhist,  that  the  amount  thus  gained  was  due  to  him  in  a  previous
existence. This  is  a  dangerous  principle.

Close  to  the  cemetery  of  Shigatse,  called  Kega  tsal,  is  the  Chinese
graveyard,  where  there  are  about  three  hundred  tombs  of  varying  size
and  very  rude  construction.  At  a  short  distance  from  this  is  the
parade-ground,  about  half  a  mile  square,  called  Jah-hu-tang,  and
touching  it  a  walled  enclosure,  used  for  target  practice  with  bow  and
gun,  in  the  centre  of  which  is  a  large  house  used  by  the  Ambans.  On
the  sides  are  high  towers  for  the  drum-beaters  and  trumpet-blowers.
The  headmen  of  the  whole  country  had  assembled  here  to-day  to
muster  the  porters  and  pack-ponies  required  by  the  junior  Amban
and  the  Tibetan  officials  returning  to  Lhasa.  Three  hundred  ponies
were  ready,  and  it  was  decided  that  one  man  should  accompany  each
horse.  Orders  had  been  given  by  the  Amban  to  requisition  all  the
ponies  in  the  province,  no  matter  whether  they  belonged  to  subjects,
traders,  or  pilgrims.

Dccemhcr  22. — To-day,  at  9  a.m.,  the  junior  Amban,  with  a
retinue  of  300  men  on  horseback,  left  for  Lhasa.  The  owners  of  the
relay  ponies  followed  them  on  foot,  keeping  pace  with  the  ponies,  or
if  they  lagged  behind  they  were  whipped  by  the  men  on  horseback  ;
so  that  some  dropped  out  and  disappeared,  abandoning  their  property
to  the  Chinese  rather  than  undergo  their  ill  treatment.  Of  the  six
village  headmen  exiled  to  Ee  and  Khamba  djong  for  their  share  in
the  recent  trouble,  I  learnt  to-day  that  one  had  died  on  the  road,  and
another  is  hanging  between  life  and  death.

F


GG  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

Deccmler  23.— To-day  the  Shape  Lhalu  and  100  followers,  all
on  horsehack,  left  for  Lhasa.  The  ponies  and  the  men  who  have
to  accompany  them  on  the  uhi  are  treated  with  great  hardship.  They
have  to  carry  their  food  with  them,  as  well  as  provender  for  their
beasts.  In  the  present  case  they  had  received  but  short  notice,  and
are  ill  prepared  for  the  long  journey.  This  forced  service  is,  however,
patiently  borne  by  the  people,  as  it  is  a  recognized  custom  of  the
country.

The  market  to-day  received  a  large  supply  of  pottery  from  the  village
of  Tauag  and  Lholing,  on  the  Tsang-po,  a  few  miles  nortli-west  of
Shigatse.  In  these  localities  excellent  potter's  clay  is  obtainable,  and
the  people  carry  on  a  profital)le  trade  in  earthenware  with  the  sur-
rounding districts.  The  Tanag  pottery  has  not  only  an  extensive  sale
in  Tibet,  but  in  the  cis-Himalayan  countries  as  well,  where  most
utensils  are  of  untinned  copper,  and  the  Sikkim  and  Darjiling
people  use  them  exclusively  in  preference  to  the  earthenw^are  made  by
the  Nepalese  inhabiting  the  Lower  Himalayas.  The  Tanag  earthen-
ware is  carried  to  the  banks  of  the  Tsang-po  on  donkeys,  and  there
transferred  to  hide-boats  (kodrtc),  in  which  it  is  brought  down  to  the
I'atama  ferry,  about  four  miles  to  the  north-east  of  Shigatse.  The
Patama  dealers,  who,  by  the  way,  raise  fine  crops  on  the  alluvial  soil
along  the  river  banks,  and  make  a  good  deal  of  money  by  fishing  and
ferrying,  carry  the  earthenware  to  Shigatse  on  donkeys  that  jog
slowly  along  the  road  to  the  jingle  of  big  bells  fastened  around  their
necks.  The  Lholing  pottery  is  brought  to  Shigatse  via  Tanag  ;  this
locality  manufactures  very  large  vessels  for  keeping  wine  or  water
in,  and  so  heavy  that  two  men  can  hardly  lift  them.  The  Tanag
pottery  is  so  highly  glazed  that  it  compares  favourably  with  the
Chinese  and  European  earthenware  sold  in  the  Calcutta  shops.*

There  were  on  the  market-place  many  wildly  dressed  Dokpas  of
the Chang  province. The  women  wore  such  heavy  and  fantastic

♦  I  have  never  .seeu  pottery  made  in  Tibet,  but  know  that  no  wheel  is  used.
Capt.  R.  B.  Pcniberton,  in  his  •  Report  on  Bootan '  (in  '  Political  Missions  to  Bootan,'
p.  74),  gives  a  minute  description  of  the  mode  of  makinj;  pottery  among  tlie  Butia.
lie  remarks  that  "  a  lump  of  the  compost  was  jjlaced  on  a  flat  board,  supported  on  the
top  of  three  sticlcs,  and  was  kneaded  from  the  centre  outwards,  until  an  ojjening  liad
licen  eff(  eted  tlirough  tlie  mass  ;  the  orifice  thus  made  was  gradually  enlarged  liy  the
person  wlio  preserved  its  circular  form  by  walking  round  the  board  on  which  tlie  mass
rested.  .  .  .  The-  mass  thus  prepared  formed  the  upper  section  of  th(;  vessel ;  and  the
lower  half  l>eing  wrought  by  a  similar  ])rocess,  the  two  parts  were  united  together,  and
the  vessel  completeil." The  wliole  paragraph  is  very  interesting. — (\V.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  G7

apparel  that  one  who  had  not  before  seen  them  might  well  be  taken
aback.  From  a  distance  these  savages  looked  as  if  they  wished  to
imitate  tlie  peacock's  gaudy  plumes  in  their  costume  ;  tliey  had  so
many  beads  of  glass,  coral,  amber,  and  turquoise  suspended  from
their  headdress  that  one  could  hardly  see  their  faces.

To-day  the  tailor  finished  our  winter  suits,  consisting  of  a  Chinese
coat  (kiva-tse)  and  trousers  {2nslm)*  The  lambskin  lining  in  all  the
suits  was  quite  neatly  sewed.  I  was  also  furnished  with  a  foxskin
(ivajja)  cap,  made  after  the  Lhasa  fashion.  Provided  with  these,  I  felt
well  equipped  for  my  journey  to  Dongtse.  To  make  the  linings  of
the  coat,  I  had  bought  about  sixty  fine  lamb-skins  at  a  cost  of  Es.  7.8.
These  skins  appeared  to  have  been  obtained  from  very  young  lambs,
which  must  have  died  shortly  after  birth,  for  the  cost  of  a  single  piece
of  skin  was  not  more  than  three  or  four  annas,  and  as  the  live  lambs
would  fetch  at  least  double  that  price,  it  is  not  likely  that  they  had
been  killed  for  their  skins.  It  is,  however,  not  unusual  for  the
shepherds  to  kill  ewes  for  the  soft  skin  of  their  unborn  lambs,  for  they
fetch  a  high  price.  The  demand  from  China  for  this  kind  of  lamb-
skin has,  however,  of  late  years  much  decreased,  and  the  practice  of
killing  ewes  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  them  is  becoming  rare.f

In  the  evening  Tsering-tashi  brought  us  the  passport  from  the
Tondub  Khangar,  to  enable  us  to  bring  our  things  from  Lachan  to
Tashilhunpo.  Though  it  is  customary  to  issue  passports  in  open
covers,  this  one  was  enclosed  in  a  letter  to  the  Djongpon  of  Khamba,
and  we  were  therefore  unable  to  know  its  wording,  but  feared  from
this  fact  that  some  orders,  probably  to  examine  closely  our  packages,
were  contained  in  it.  The  Tung-chen,  however,  did  not  apprehend
that  any  trouble  would  arise  from  this  fact,  but  we  could  not  share
his  confidence.

BecetJiber  24 — In  the  morning,  after  washing,  I  went  upstairs  to
sit  in  the  sun.  The  cook  brought  tea  and  placed  the  pot  on  the  stove
before  me.  I  had  emptied  three  or  four  cups,  warming  my  numbed
hands  against  the  warm  cup,  when  Dungyig  Phurching,  a  copyist,
arrived, and was shortly  followed  by  the  Khamba  Dungyig.J I

*  Ewa-tse  (or  hua-tzu)  is  a  Chinese  term  for  a  short  riding-jacket.  The  Tibetans  of
the  better  class  have  adopted  this  article  of  Chinese  clothing,  and  also  their  name  for
it. I  have  never  heard  trousers  called  anything  but  ma-yo  (jsmad-gyogs).—(yf .  R.)

t  Cf.  Sam.  Turner,  op.  cit.,  p.  303.

X  Or  drung-yig,  "clerk,  secretary."  Khamba  Tungyig  means  "the  clerk  from
Khams  "  (or  Eastern  Tibet).— (W.  R.)


()S  JOrRNEV TO LHASA AND CENTBAL TIBET.

receiveil  tlie  first  with  " i'Ji)/(i(j-phrh  nc/ng-chig"  ("Please  come  in"),
extending  my  right  liand  towards  him,  and,  as  an  additional  mark  of
respect  to  the  latter,  I  half  raised  myself  from  my  seat  and  placed
him  on  my  left  hand  on  the  same  rug  on  which  I  was  sitting.  After
an  exchange  of  the  usual  compliments,  he  opened  a  bundle  of  papers
and  showed  me  an  almanac  he  was  engaged  in  copying  for  the  minister.

He  said  he  was  sorry  that  he  was  unable  to  copy  the  manuscript
of  tlie  B^(tm-Unrj-(jycshe,  but  recommended  Dungyig  Phurching;  and
the  latter  agreed  to  do  the  copying  at  the  rate  of  six  leaves  for  a
Utnla,  exclusive  of  ink  and  paper.

To-day  news  arrived  of  the  death  of  the  Tsopon  Shanku,  one  of  the
six  headmen,  and  the  richest  among  tliem,  punished  on  account  of  the
late  riot.  I  saw  several  monks  and  laymen  carrying  from  the  monastery
to  Shigatse  three  huge  copper  caldrons,  about  five  feet  in  diameter,
and  I  learnt  that  tea  and  tiigp((  (a  soup  of  isariiha,  minced  meat,  and
radishes)  were  to  be  prepared  in  them  for  the  entertainment  of  upwards
of  a  thousand  beggars  in  honour  of  the  deceased.  The  caldrons  belong
to  the  lamasery,  and  were  loaned  for  the  occasion.

During  market-time  Ugyen  visited  a  Nepalese  (Balpo)  *  friend  in
Shigatse,  from  whom  he  learnt  that  Nepalese  trade  was  suffering
greatly  by  the  introduction  of  Calcutta  goods  on  the  Tibetan  market.
"  The  Balpo  traders,"  he  said,  "  used  to  make  a  hundred  per  centum
profit  in  former  times,  but  nowadays  the  introduction  of  Calcutta
goods  by  shorter  routes  than  the  Katmandu  one  we  have  to  follow
has  caused  a  great  falling  off  in  our  profits  and  the  bulk  of  our  trade."

Later  on  in  tlie  day  the  Tung-ehen's  men  came  and  told  us  of

the  arrangements  made  for  our  j'ourney  to  Dongtse,  and  that  we  were

to  be  ready  to  start  on  the  following  morning. As  we  would  only

remain  at  Dongtse  a  very  short  while — for  the  minister  was  expected

to  return  in  afewdays  toTasliilhuiipo — we  were  told  not  to  take  many

tilings  with  us,  and  were  not  to  hire  donkeys,  as  we  had  intended,  to

carry  our  luggage. I  passed  the  evening  writing  letters  to  send  home

by  Phurchung,  who  was  to  start  at  the  same  time  as  we  did  for  the

Sikkim  frontier.

♦  They  are  usually  culled  Peurbu  in  Tibetan,  anil  by  the  Cliinese  these  people
are  known  as  Ve-  (or  ]'ieh-)puiig-(zu.  Tliey  are  not  to  be  confounded  witli  the  Gorkhas,
who  are  called  Korhhn.  Abbe  Hue,  '  Souvenirs  d'un  Voyage,  etc.,'  ii.  2G7,  calls  tliera
Peboun.  Speaking  of  those  of  Lhasa,  he  says,  "Les  Peboun  sont  les  seuls  ouvriers
me'tallurgistes  de  Lha-Ssa.  C'est  dans  leur  quartier  qu'il  faut  aller  chercher  les
forperons,  Its  chaudronniers,  les  plombiers,  les  ctanieurs,  les  fondcurs,  les  orfevres,  les
bijouticrs,  les  nn'canieiens,  meme  les  pliysiciens  et  les  chimistes." — (W.  li.)  Balpo,
or  properly  Palpa,  is  tiie  ciiief  district  in  Western  Nepal.


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET  69


CHAPTEE lit

JOUENEY TO  DONGTSE.

Decemhcr  26. — We  were  up  early,  finishing  our  letters  and  getting
I'hurchung  ready  for  his  journey  to  the  Sikkim  frontier.  After  tea  I
sent  Ugyen  to  tlie  market  to  buy  provisions  for  our  journey,  and  he
brought  back  a  large  quantity  of  2^^'^9'  ^  piece  of  mutton,  and
vegetables,  and  also  purchased  some  fresh  gija-twj  (vermicelli),  of
which  I  had  become  very  fond.  Two  strong  ponies  were  waiting
saddled  for  us  in  charge  of  a  groom  at  the  western  gateway  {giialgo)
of  the  monastery.  Our  traps  and  bags  being  made  over  to  the  charge
of  the  Tung-chen's  men,  we  left  Tashilhunpo  at  3  p.m.,  and  rode  off
at  a  gentle  trot  towards  the  village  of  Tashi-gyantsa.  The  Tung-
chen  wore  his  church  raiment,  and  a  silk-lined  chosa*  or  clerical
hat,  covered  his  head ;  Ijut  as  soon  as  we  had  reached  this  village  he
changed  it  for  a  fox-skin  cap  lined  with  brown  satin.  The  view  of
Tashilhunpo  from  Tashi-gyantsa  was  most  beautiful,  and  the  four
gilded  tombs  of  the  former  Tashi  lamas,  situated  in  the  middle  of
the  lamasery,  blazed  in  the  rays  of  the  sun.f

One  approaches  Tashi-gyantsa  by  a  lane  cut  through  a  hillock
some  20  feet  high,  on  top  of  which  the  village  stands.  The  alleys  are
crooked  and  dirty,  the  houses  of  comfortable  appearance,  are  painted
with  clay  in  bands  of  red,  black,  and  blue  colour,  and  surrounded  by
walls  forming  a  courtyard  in  front  of  each.  On  the  left  of  the  road
is  a  neatly  constructed  mcndong.  The  whole  village  is  inhabited  by
clerks,  copyists,  painters,  and  artisans  from  Tashilhunpo,  most  of
whom  get  allowances  {-pod)  from  Labrang. Cattle  {jo)  are  plentiful

*  Chos  dja.  Probably  the  yellow-pointed  cloth  hat  with  Haps,  and  ending  in  a
point  on  either  side  in  front,  the  usual  head-cover  of  lamas  outside  Iheir  monasteries.
Inside  the  lamaseries  all  go  bareheaded. — (W.  E.)

t  In  the  account  of  his  tirst  journey,  he  says  that  these  "  chaits  "  are  on  top  of  the
palace  of  the  Tashi  lama.


TO  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

in  the  villaue,  ami  as  we  passed,  a  few  yaks  with  pack-saddles  on  their
hacks  were  heing  led  off  from  the  village  by  two  tall,  savage-looking
men  dressed  in  goatskin  gowns  {hol'ltu).  The  old  people  sat  in  their
doorways,  warming  themselves  in  the  sun,  and  a  caravan  of  yaks  and
donkeys  had  halted  at  the  cJio/icn  just  outside  the  village.

"We  passed  by  l*erong  shavea,  a  group  of  hamlets,  in  the  midst  of
wliicli  is  a  little  garden  and  a  willow  grove;  then  by  the  village
of  ]~)eki-rabdan ;  and  wlien  two  miles  from  Tashi-gyantsa  we  reached
the  large  village  of  Khara  Tedong,  the  chief  of  which  is  a  Dahpon
(general),  lately  dismissed  from  a  command  at  Gartok,  near  Eudok.
Judging  from  the  outward  appearance  of  the  houses,  the  village  is
]:»rosperous.  Passing  the  villages  of  Sunapara  and  Sarsha,  and  leaving
1  )orhig  and  Semaron  on  our  right,  we  came,  after  two  miles,  to  the  Num
cliu,  now  a  nearly  (h-ied-u])  stream,  which  comes  down  from  the
mountains  to  the  novtli-west  of  Xartang,  which  border  the  plateau-
like valley  of  Cliyugpu  shung.  A  little  to  the  east  of  this  stream  is
the  large  village  of  Gyatso-shar,  composed  of  a  dozen  hamlets  forming
two  or  three  groups.

At  ')  p.m.  we  readied  the  village  of  Chyang  chu,  about  a  quarter
of  a  mile  from  tlie  Xum  chu,  belonging  to  our  friend  the  minister.
To  tlie  east  of  the  hamlet  is  a  little  garden,  and  in  it  a  small  house
called  Lobding  ;  here  the  minister  spends  a  few  days  during  the
autumn  holidays,  and  takes  the  baths.  Chyang  chu  is  the  birthplace
of  the  Tung-chen,  and  we  put  up  in  his  house,  at  the  gate  of  which
were  chained  two  big  mastiffs.  Two  servants  assisted  us  to  alight
from  our  ponies,  and  two  held  the  dogs  back  while  we  walked  in.
The  headman  of  the  ^'illage,  the  Deba  Shikha,*  received  us,  and
recognized  me  as  an  old  acquaintance.  We  were  conducted  to  the
central  room  of  the  upper  story,  where  we  found  two  stuffed  seats
{hu-fhrn)  spread  for  us.  The  room,  though  spacious,  was  dark  and
dusty,  and  a  heap  of  yak-liair  bags,  resembling  Indian  gnnnus,  filled
a  corner  of  tlie  i-oom.  ]\Iy  servant,  Lhagpa-sring,  spread  my  khamba
rug  on  the  seats,  and  busied  himself  fetching  our  bags  and  traps  from
the  courtyard.  The  Deba  presently  arrived,  and  begged  us  to  refresh
ourselves  with  tea  and  cluing.  Lhagpa,  looking  with  peculiar  eager-
ness at  the  maid-servant  who  was  .pouring  chang  in  Ugyen's  cup,
winked  at  her  to  lill  his  cii])  from  her  bowl,  but  to  his  disappointment
she  turned  away  ;  but  shurLly  after  another  maid  appeared  with  a  large
*  Elbewbere  he  Bays  that  Shihha  means  "bailiff."


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  71

bowl,  and  poured  out  wine  to  the  servants.  Then  the  Deba's  wife,
with  a  very  pretty  jug  in  her  hand,  came  to  serve  me,  but  I  declined.
After  a  few  minutes  dinner  was  served  in  tiii-Ihied  copper  dishes
resembling  salad-bowls,  the  first  course  consisting  of  minced  mutton
and  tsamha.  This  was  followed  by  minced  mutton  and  vermicelli,
the  Deba  waiting  upon  me  himself,  to  show  me  the  attention  due  to
a  guest  from  a  distant  country.

After  dinner  the  Tung-chen,  who  had  taken  his  meal  in  a  separate
room,  led  me  to  his  mother's  room,  where  old  lady  Angla  *  and  the
Deba's  son,  Damdul,  were  sitting  around  a  blazing  fire  in  a  stove
{jalang).  The  old  lady  had  seen  upwards  of  eighty  summers,  and  her
hair  was  snowy  white.  I  joined  the  party,  which  was  shortly  added
to  by  the  entrance  of  several  other  members  of  the  household,  and  we
sat  drinking  tea  and  talking  of  the  sacred  cities  of  India,  of  Vajra-
shena,  Varanasi,  and  Kapilavastu,  and  the  state  of  Buddhism  in
modern  India.  Angla  sighed  repeatedly  when  she  heard  that  all  their
sacred  places  in  India  were  now  in  ruins.  I  then  gave  her  a  short
history  of  ancient  India  and  Tibet,  which  delighted  the  whole  party,
and  the  Tung-chen  expressed  himself  highly  pleased  with  my  narra-
tive. Before  taking  leave  for  the  night  of  my  kind  host,  I  presented
the  Tung-chen  with  a  couple  of  rupees,  and  his  mother  with  one.
They  very  reluctantly  accepted  them,  saying,  however,  that  as  it  was
their  duty  to  please  me,  they  would  not  deny  me  the  pleasure  of
making  them  presents.  Lhagpa  led  me  to  my  bed,  which  was  spread
in  a  corner  of  the  room  where  we  had  dined  ;  and  the  Deba,  coming  in
to  see  if  I  was  comfortable,  found  my  wraps  rather  light,  and  brought
me  two  thick  blankets,  in  which  my  servant  wrapped  me  up.

December  26. — The  Deba  has  a  dozen  jomo  and  cows  yielding
plenty  of  milk.  A  jomo  yields  four  times  the  quantity  of  milk  which
a  cow  or  female  yak  gives.  The  di  yak  cow,  which  pastures  on  moun-
tain-tops, yields  ordinarily  two  seers  of  milk  a  day,  is  not  much
prized,  though  yak  milk  is  both  sweet  and  wholesome ;  but  the  Tibetans
value  very  highly  the  jo,  which  is,  besides  a  good  milker,  most  useful
in  husbandry.

*  The  syllable  la,  here  and  throughout  this  narrative,  whenever  it  is  a  suffix  to  a
name  of  a  person,  forms  no  part  of  the  name,  but  is  only  an  honorific  expletive.  It
is  even  used  after  titles,  as  Ponbo  la,  Pundib  la,  Lhachara  la,  Kusho  la,  etc.  Chandra
Das  hardly  ever  gives  the  names  of  the  Tibetans  he  refers  to  in  his  narrative,  because
a  person's  name  is  never  used  when  he  or  she  is  addressed,  nor  is  it  but  rarely  mentioned.
He  probably  never  heard  the  names  of  most  of  the  people  of  whom  he  speaks.— (W.  K.)


72  JOVBNKT TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

The  women  of  the  house  were  up  by  four  and  busy  milking  and
churning.  The  village  looked  i'rom  afar  like  one  big  liouse,  but  it  is
in  reality  composed  of  a  number  of  houses,  each  witli  a  courtyard  in
front.  The  place  is  vulgarly  called  the  "  Anthill  "  (i>t»<7  tsanf/  *),  on
account  of  the  great  number  of  serfs  inhabiting  it.  After  breakfast,
which  consisted  of  boiled  mutton,  minced  radish,  and  jja-^wr/,  or
balls  of  flour  cooked  in  mutton  brotli,  we  mounted  our  ponies  and
started  off.

To  the  south-west  of  Gyatsho-shar  f  is  the  })lateau  of  Chyugpu
Shung,  dotted  Mith  iiuiiieruus  handets,  chief  of  which  is  Lhena  djong.
About  two  miles  i'roni  Ch}'ang  chu  is  ISTorgya  Nangpa,  with  numerous
hamlets  surrounding  it,  and  one  mile  and  a  half  to  the  east  of  Norgya,
where  the  valley  approaches  the  edge  of  the  mountains  to  the  south,  is
Jvena,J  composed  of  a  dozen  hamlets.  The  houses  of  Kena  are  well
built  anil  prosperous  looking,  the  door-frames  and  windows  showing
considerable  taste,  and  the  walls  of  most  of  them  painted  with  long
Idue  and  red  stripes,  the  favourite  colours  of  the  Tibetans.  From
Kena  the  mountains  of  Pankor-shornub,  §  notorious  as  a  lair  of
Itrigauds,  were  clearly  discernible,  and  far  to  the  east,  across  the
Xyang  chu,  we  could  iust  discern  the  villaue  of  Sanga-ling.  At
Kena  we  crossed,  by  a  culvert  some  fifteen  feet  lontj,  an  irrigation  canal
whicli  comes  down  from  ISTyang  chu.  From  this  point  our  way  lay
over  a  barren  plateau  more  than  two  miles  broad ;  in  the  up])er  part
of  it  are  several  villages,  in  the  largest  of  which  is  the  Shalu  monas-
tery. A  little  above  the  junction  of  the  Shalu  with  the  Nyang  chu
stands  the  hamlet  of  Chuta  Chyangma,  three  or  four  dilapidated  mud
liovels,  the  ground  everywhere  overgrown  with  thistles  and  briars.
Here,  Ave  were  told,  the  Grand  Lama's  ||  camels  are  pastured  in  winter.
The  Nyang  chu  flows  liere  in  several  channels,  and  some  cranes  were
seeking  for  food  in  the  ice  along  the  banks.

Going  south-eastward  for  nearly  Wo  miles  and  a  half,  we  reached
a  fertile  tract  of  land,  in  which  stand  the  villages  of  Panam-gang,
Jorgya,  Pislii,  Penagangdo,  and  Natog,1I  A\]iich,  we  were  told,  belonged

*  Written  >jrog  txoiig,  or  (jrorj-ma  tsanff.—{'\N .  R.)
t  Or  lOastcrn  {»hur)  ;,'yats().— ( W.  R.)

+  Kye-ua  of  tlie  iiiiiii.— (W.  R.)

§  Prohubly  81iorimb  is  xhar,  "cast;" nuh,  '•  west."— (W.  R.)

i ]5y  "(Ji-iiiKl Lama"  tli.'  aiitiuir  iiieaii.s llie  J'aDchcii Riiiixiclie  or  Tc.slni lama  of
'J'a«liillniiip(j.

•  Called  on  tlie  iMaj)  Gang,  J.)r-f,'ya,  Putshal,  Pen  jaiig. Nato.i,^  does  not  appear  on  it.
On  p.  74  lie  ealltj  Pena^'aiiKdo,  Penjang,  and  Pislii,  Patal.— (W.  R.)


JOUENEY TO LHA^A AND CENTRAL TIBET.


73


to  Hamdang  Kaiu-tsan  of  Tashilhimpo.  At  Jorgya,  which  belongs  to
the  Djongpon  of  I*agri,  the  same  who  stopped  Sir  Eichard  Temple
near  Chumbi,  there  is  an  irrigation  canal  running  from  the  Nyang
chu,  and  on  its  bank  is  a  beautiful  garden  Ijordered  with  poplars,
willows,  and  other  fine  trees.  Its  walks  are  tastefully  laid  out,  and
the  two-storied  building  in  its  centre  is  the  finest  one  this  side  of
Tashilhunpo. In  the  principal  lane  of  this  village  is  a  deep  well


CHANG-SA RGYAB-PA, WINE-DRINKING CONCLUDING WEDDING CEBEJIONIES.

about  four  or  five  feet  in  circumference  at  the  moutli,  and  a  number
of  women  w^ere  drawing  water  from  it  in  sheep's  paunches.

A  short  distance  beyond  Jorgya  we  came  to  Pislii  Mani  Lhakbang
in  a  grove  of  poplars  and  willows,  with  a  large  orchard  and  several
hamlets  close  by.  This  place,  which  belongs  to  the  Pishi  Deba,  is
famous  for  its  manufacture  of  a  superior  quality  of  serge  and  broad-
cloth called unam* At the entrance to  the Mani Lhakbang,  a


*  I  have  never  heard  of  imam;  Imt  gonam  (sgo  snam  ?)  is  the  uaiiie  generally  givcu
to  Beiges  and  foreign  (Russian)  broadcloth. — (W.  E.)


74  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTBAL TIBET.

c/w77c;t-shaped  edifice,  are  rows  of  drum-shaped  prayer-^vheels.*
Five  furlongs  farther  on  we  passed  through  Panam-doi,t  and  two  miles
beyond  tliis  place  we  came  to  the  village  of  Taugaug  (or  Tagong).
The  trail — for  there  is  no  regular  road— then  led  by  Patsal,  Belung,
to  Penjang,  from  which  village  we  could  see,  on  the  hillside  beyond
the  Nyaug  chu,  the  large  monastery  of  Kadong.  We  were  now  in
the  district  of  Panam,|  said  to  be  very  fertile,  and  to  this  the
numerous  handets  scattered  about  give  testimony.  A  mile  to  the
south  of  Tagong  we  came  to  Tashigang,  around  which  there  is  no
vegetation,  not  a  blade  of  grass  nor  a  tree,  nothing  but  sand  and
gravel.  Here  we  were  to  spend  the  night.  We  were  kindly  received
by  an  old  lady,  Angputi  by  name,  and  shown  by  the  servant  up  a
flight  of  stone  steps  to  the  top  floor,  where  rugs  were  spread  for  us.
.Vngputi  had  a  headdress  {patug)  studded  with  flawed  turquoises
and  faded  coral ;  she  had  worn  it,  she  said,  for  nearly  twenty  years,
and  purposed  leaving  it  as  a  legacy  to  her  second  son.  Shortly
after  we  were  seated,  her  daughter,  a  nun  wdio  had  lately  arrived
on  leave  from  her  convent,  brought  us  a  kettle  of  tea  and  two  wooden
bowls  of  (saiiiha.^  Tlie  Tung-chen  was  given  the  room  the  minister
nses  Mhen  travelling  along  this  road.  It  was  provided  with  curtains,
silk-covered  ceiling,  some  nice  tables,  and  had  in  it  several  volumes
of  Yum  scriptures,!!  a  small  chapel,  two  dozen  bells,  oblation  cups,
a  sofa-like  altar,  and  a  number  of  pictures.  The  rugs  in  this  room
were  made  of  the  finest  Panam  wool,  and  were  the  best  articles  of
furniture  in  the  house.  After  drinking  tea,  the  hostess  brought  me
some  boiled  and  dried  mutton,  tsaniha,  and  tea.  This  kind  of  present
is  usually  offered  to  guests  on  their  arrival  in  a  house,  and  is  called
solichi,^  or  "first  show."

*  A  mani  lliakhang  is  usually  a  churten  around  wliich  arc,  under  covered  galleries,
rows  of  large  prayer-wheels,  or  rather  prayer-barrels.  I  have  never  seen  any  temple
attached  to  such  structures ;  but  the  chortens  are  hollow,  with  an  opening  at  tlic  base
by  whicli  clay  isu-tsu  offerings  can  be  put  in  the  monument. — (W.  R.)

t  Doi  of  the  maps.- (W.  E.)

X  Pcniim  jong  of  the  maps.  Cf.  Captain  Turner,  oj).  ciL,  '229  (he  calls  it  Painam),
and  C.  K.  Markhiim,  op.  cit.,  78,  where  Bogle  also  refers  to  it  as  Painam.— (W.  E.)

§  In  Tibet  a  married  woman  is  called  chang-ma,  or  "  wine  companion."  One  of  her
princijtal  duties  is  to  present  wine  to  her  friends  and  guests.  It  is  to  avoid  this  duty
tliat  many  women  enter  monastic  life  (S.  C.  D.).  I  think  S.  C.  D.  was  misinformed.
A  wife  is  called  chung-nm,  not  chang-ma. Chnng  means  "  little,"  and  ma  "  motlicr."

-(W. E.;

11  The  metaphysical  pnrtioii  of  the  Tibetan  lUiddhist  scrii)ture.s,  called  in  Sanskrit
Abliidliarma— (W.  E.)

t  Or  (jml  gchig,  i.e.  "  lirst  meal."-  (W.  E.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  75

Beccmher  27. — Leaving  the  Tashigang  valley,  we  came  to  the  foot
of  the  range  which  here  borders  the  left  bank  of  the  Nyang.  Two
and  a  half  miles  to  the  south-west  (east  ?)  there  is  a  precipice  called
Eitong,  where  some  twenty  years  ago  two  generals  of  Lhasa  were
murdered  l)y  the  usurper  Gadan  Gyahu,  At  this  point  we  obtained
a  fine  view  of  the  fort  of  Panam,  of  Gontai,  of  Takar,  Palri,*  and
various  other  monasteries.  Up  to  this  point  the  river  banks  are
overgrown  with  furze,  brambles,  and  various  thorny  plants  of  which
it  is  said  camels  are  very  fond.

Two  miles  to  the  west  (east  ?)  of  this  place  we  came  to  a  large
village,  called  Tsog-chi,t  with  an  imposing  castle,  formerly  the
residence  of  several  noted  generals,  but  now  the  property  of  one
of  the  chief  civil  officers  (Bung-khoi'  X)  of  Lhasa.  Close  by  is
Dukpa-nagpa,  formerly  a  town  of  Sorcerers  or  Nagpa,§  but  now
mostly  in  ruins,  and  inhabited  by  only  a  half-dozen  families.

A  mile  and  a  half  farther  on  we  came  to  Norpa  khyung-djin
("Eagle's  Gem"  ||),  where  there  was  once  an  important  lamasery  of
the  Karmapa  sect.  Its  ruins  crown  the  hilltop,  and  the  village,  of
a  hundred  houses,  is  scattered  along  the  slope  and  the  base  of  the
hills. Near  this  place  is  Nembotong  and  Pangang.H

In  the  upland  near  Taimen,**  a  hamlet  of  three  huts,  where  the
wind  that  sweeps  the  broad  plateau  on  which  this  place  is  built
has  drifted  the  sand  in  long  waves,  are  the  villages  of  Phola  and
Wangdan.  The  former  place  is  the  birthplace  of  King  Miwang,
and  the  latter  is  noted  for  the  excellence  of  its  rugs.  Due  south
from  Taimen,  and  at  the  head  of  the  broad  valley  which  opens
between  that  place  and  Norpa  khyung-djin,  is  the  Gingu  la,  over
which  a  trail  runs  to  Pietoi,  or  Upper  PtC,  near  lago,  and  also  the
fort  of  Darchung  djong.ft

A  little  more  than  a  mile  in  a  southerly  direction  from  Taimen

*  Pe  IL  of  the  maps.— (W.  R.)

t  Chog-tse  of  the  maps. — (W.  R.)

X  See  /.  n.  A.  S..  n.s.,  vol.  sxiii.  p.  220.  The  Dung-khors'  offices  are  mostly  hereditary.
— (W.  R.)

§  Nagpa,  "enchanters  or  experts  in  incantations."  See  Waddell,  op.  ciL,  47o,  -183.
'  Land  of  the  Lamas,'  p.  217.— (W.  R.)

II  Or  Norbu  khyung  hdjiu  (?),  "the  i^recious  j/arMfZa-holder."  The  garuda  {khyumj)
is  the  king  of  birds,  according  to  Tibetans. — (W.  R.)

Tf  Pong  kong  of  the  maps. — (W.  R.)

**  Called  Tho-man  on  the  maps. — (W.  R.)

tt  Gring-gu  la,  Ya-go,  and  Tuchung-Jong  of  the  maps.— (W.  R.)


76  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

brought  us  to  Shar-cliyog  Aniung,  also  called  Isa.*  The  poplar  and
willow  groves  arouud  it  give  it  a  most  prosperous  appearance.
Here  we  overtook  a  monk  of  the  Doiigtse  monastery,  sent  Ijy  the
minister  to  fetch  him  some  books  from  the  Kahdong  gomba,  near
Panam  djoug.  His  tall,  lithe  frame,  but  poorly  covered  with  torn
raiment,  his  curious  boots  and  headdress,  and  the  bundle  of  incense-
sticks  slung  like  a  quiver  across  his  back,  evoked  smiles  from  our
party  as  he  walked  swiftly  along,  keeping  pace  with  our  ponies.
Across  numerous  frozen  irrigation  ditches,  and  through  various
little  hamlets  of  three  and  four  houses,  the  road  led  us  by  Taling,
Dao-targe,t  and  Pangri,  to  tlie  village  of  Nesar,  where  live  some
twenty  families.  Just  before  reaching  this  place  a  mad  dog  ran
by,  and  though  it  bit  an  old  man  and  several  donkeys,  the  Tung-chen
would  not  let  me  sh(jut  it.  Xesar  has,  on  the  hillside  above  it,  a
neatly  built  temple  and  a  number  of  small  towers,  the  latter  sacred
to  the  sylvan  goddesses  or  ]\Iamos.  The  images  of  Shenrezig  and
Padma  Sambhava  are  painted  on  the  walls  of  its  mani  Ihahhang
and  on  tlie  towers  on  the  hill.  A  little  beyond  this  village  we  fell
in  with  four  Khambas,  each  armed  with  a  long,  straight  sword,
Mho  were  unquestionably  highwaymen.  Their  dress  and  features
showed  tlieni  to  be  natives  of  Gyarong,  in  Markham,  in  the  eastern
part  of  Tibet.J

At  5  o'clock  we  arrived  at  l)ongtse.§  The  monastery  where  the
minister  was  residing  was  on  a  rocky  eminence  some  300  feet  above
the  village.  After  walking  u])  several  flights  of  stone  steps,  we
reached  the  gateway  in  the  no\\-  partly  ruined  ^^•all  of  the  monastery.
Near  this  I  was  welcomed  by  the  minister's  page,  and  led  to  the
eastern  room  of  his  master's  a]»artments,  which  had  been  set  apart
for  my  use.  Before  we  had  finished  drinking  tea  a  message  came
calling  me  to  tlie  minister's  presence.  With  two  scarves  and  a
couple  of  rupees  in  our  hands,  we  proceeded  to  the  drawing-room,
and  approached  his  lioliness  with  profound  salutations. He  touched

*  Called  Shar  cho  ening  on  the  maps.  Shar,  "ea8t;"chyog  ipyogs),  "quarter."
— (W.  R.)

t  Dowa  targya  of  the  iiiiip.— (W.  ]{.)

X  Tiie  author  is  .slij<htly  mistaken  here.  The  Gyarong  is  on  the  west  border  of  Sze-
ch'uan  and  identical  with  tiie  Chinese  Chin-ehuan,  wliile  Markham  is  to  the  west  of
the  Kivor  of  Gold(;n  Sands  (Chin  .sha  chiang),  in  29°  N.  lat.,  witli  its  capital  at  Gartok
(or  Ghiang-ka).  and  is  one  of  the  easternmost  provinces  ruled  by  Lhasa.— (W.  K.)

§  ( Jeorgi, '  Alph.  Tibet,'  p.  450,  appears  to  refer  to  Dongtsc  when  lie  says, «  Anteciuam
l^erv.-mas  Kiangse  Feudum  est  Kalouii  Prouse,  Castellum  Yallo  minutum,  et  Auri-
tiidina." (W.  I{.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  77

our  heads  with  his  hand,  and  returned  us  the  scarves  we  had  in
the  first  place  presented  hira,  tying  them  around  our  necks.  His
holiness  graciously  inquired  after  our  health,  and  asked  if  we  had
not  suffered  great  privations  and  hardships  on  the  way.  We  "ave
a  brief  account  of  our  troubles  in  the  snows  and  of  our  miraculous
escape  at  Tashi-rabka.  "  By  the  grace  of  the  Three  Holies,"  *  I
added,  "we  have  overcome  all  difficulties,  and  now  our  delight  is
boundless  in  being  able  to  present  ourselves  at  last  at  your  Holiness's
feet."  The  minister  expressed  his  regrets  at  our  sufferings  and  his
pleasure  on  our  safe  arrival  after  an  absence  of  three  years.  He  had
to  go  to  prayers,  but  before  leaving  he  gave  orders  that  all  proper
attentions  be  shown  us.  Large  dishes  of  biscuits,  bread,  fruit,  and
meat  were  then  placed  before  us,  and  tea  was  poured  into  our  cups
from  the  minister's  own  pot,  as  a  mark  of  his  special  favour.

December  28. — After  we  had  finished  taking  tea  the  page  Ka-chan
Gopa  called  us  to  the  minister's  presence,  to  whom  we  gave  a  detailed
account  of  our  journey.  After  listening  with  attention,  he  observed,
"  Pundib  la,  I  fail  to  see  why  you  chose  such  a  dangerous  route  as
that  by  the  Kangla  chen  and  Tashi-rabka,  for  you  had  the  pass-
port issued  to  you  three  years  ago  by  which  you  were  permitted  to
return  to  Tsang  by  way  of  Khamba  djong.  Did  not  the  officials  at
that  place  treat  you  well  when  you  passed  there  on  your  way  back
to  India  ?  "  I  replied  saying  that  I  had  feared  that  difficulties  might
have  been  raised  by  the  Sikkim  Durbar  at  the  instance  of  i;he  Phodang
lama,  who  had  of  late  been  making  trouble  in  Sikkim.  The  minister
again  remarked  that  there  had  been  no  necessity  for  our  undertaking-
such  a  difficult  and  perilous  journey  through  the  Tingri  djong  country,
when  we  had  the  Grand  Lama's  (Panchen  Einpoche's)  passport
authorizing  us  to  cross  the  Lachan  pass,  which  was  very  easy  and
free  from  snow.  After  a  short  conversation  he  retired  to  his
contemplation  room  (oratory).

December  29. — We  had  an  interview  with  the  minister  in  the
Niltog  t  on  the  roof  of  the  Tsug-la-khang,  over  which  a  canopy  had

*  Kon-chog  sum,  i.e.  Buddha,  the  Law  and  the  Brotherhooil  (Sangha).  Protestant
missionaries  have,  very  wrongly,  I  tliink,  used  the  word  Kon-cliog  as  a  transhition  of
our  word  God,  which  is  as  untranslatable  into  Tibetan  as  it  appears  to  be  into  Chinese,
unless  the  Jlohanimedan  expression  Chen  chu,  "  the  real  Lord,"  be  used. — (W.  R.)

t  Or  Ngi-hok,  an  open  quadrangle  on  the  roof  of  a  house,  enclosed  on  all  sides  by
walls,  in  two  of  which  are  door-like  openings  (S.  C.  D.).  Jaeschke  explains  the
word  nyi-yol  by  "  any  screen  or  shelter  from  the  sun's  rays:  awning,  curtain,  parasol,
pent-house."


78  JOUBNET TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

been  spread.  His  holiness  said  that  since  last  I  had  been  to  Tibet
he  had  composed  two  large  volumes  on  the  history  of  tlie  philosophical
schools  of  Tibet,  and  that  they  were  now  being  stereotyped  at  the
Namrinf^  monastery.  He  showed  us  the  manuscript  of  the  second
volume,  and  read  us  extracts  from  it.

Dcccmher  30. — After  breakfast  Ugyen-gyatso  ami  I  went  to
make  obeisance  to  the  deities  {choi  jal),  carrying  with  us  a  bundle
of  incense-sticks,  two  tanJcas  worth  of  clarified  butter,  and  about  a
dozen  Ihatar/,  to  present  as  offerings  to  the  gods.  Descending  a  steep
ladder  we  came  to  the  lobby  of  the  congregation  hall  (du-Miang)  of
the  TsufT-la-khang.  The  portico  faced  eastward ;  its  painted  wooden
pillars  had  capitals  most  fantastically  and  picturesquely  carved,  the
walls  painted  in  fresco,  with  relief  images  of  the  sixteen  Staviras
(Naten  chudug*)  gorgeously  coloured,  but  of  a  much  lower  style  of
work  than  what  is  seen  in  India,  though  the  thick  coat  of  varnish
which  covered  them  hid  their  defects,  when  not  examined  too  closely.

The  most  remarkable  part  of  the  building  was  the  floor  made  of
pebbles,  nicely  set  and  smoothly  beaten  to  make  a  glossy  surface.f
The  du-l-hang  is  about  25  feet  long  and  20  broad  ;  the  images  of  the
crods  were  arranged  on  a  beautifully  carved  wooden  and  metal  altar
alonfT  the  north  and  south-west  side  of  the  building,  the  principal
ones  occupying  niches.  Most  of  the  images  were  very  old,  and  of
gilt-copper,  called  ser-zany  ("gilt-copper"),  and  had  been  made
with  much  skill.  The  image  of  the  Lord  (Jovo)  Buddha  had  been
made,  the  Tung-chen  told  me,  by  a  great  Indian  Buddhist  in  imita-
tion of  the  great  image  of  Shakya  tuba  at  Lhasa. J  The  founder  of
tlie  monastery,  Je  Lha-tsun,  once  prayed  that  the  gods  might  send
him  a  skilful  artist  to  make  images  for  the  newly  built  lamasery  ;
and  sliortly  afterwards  an  Indian  visited  Dongtse,  made  this  image,

*  Gnas-hrlan  hcUu-drug,  the  sixteen  highest  disciples  of  the  Buddha  Gautama. —

(W.  R.)

t  Cf.  Captain  Sam.  Turner,  op.  cit.,  '23G,  and  Geo.  Bogle  (in  C.  R.  Markham's
'  Narrative  of  the  ISiissiou,  etc.,'  97).  Bogle  there  saye,  "  The  floor  is  of  a  chalky
clay,  mixed  with  small  pebUos,  and  formed  into  a  smooth  and  very  beautiful  terrace,
wliich,  by  the  laliours  of  a  young  gylang,  who  every  morning  gets  his  feet  upon  two
wtiiillen  cliitlis,  and  exercises  himself  for  three  or  four  hours  in  skating  about  the  room,
will,  in  the  course  of  fifteen  or  twenty  years,  acquire  a  polish  equal  to  tlie  other  floors
in  tlie  palace,  which  are  not  inferior  to  the  finest  variegated  marble." — (W.  R.)

J  This  image  is  called  the  Jo-vo.  It  is  in  the  Lhasa  Jokhang,  in  tlie  centre  of  the
city.  See  my  'Land  of  the  Lamas,'  p.  10.'),  note  2.  See  also  chap.  vi.  p.  151  of  the
present  narrative. — (W.  R.;


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  70

and  then  returned  to  India.  The  Tung-chen,  when  he  had  toUl  nie
this,  smilingly  asked  me  if  I  was  not  a  reincarnation  of  this  Indian
Buddhist,  and  I  felt  proud  to  hear  of  my  countrymen  l)eing  so  highly
admired  and  venerated.  Ugyen-gyatso  prostrated  himself  before
every  one  of  the  images,  and  touched  with  his  head  their  feet  or  body,
and  I  showed  my  veneration  for  these  sacred  shrines  by  touching  with
my  head  their  right  hand,  to  thus  receive  their  chyag  vmng  (blessing).
My  companions  muttered  mantras  and  made  prayers  to  them,  while
I  felt  reverential  gratitude  to  the  Supreme  Euler  alone,  whose
merciful  providence  had  brought  me  safe  thus  far.

The  roof  of  the  du-kliang  is  supported  by  two  rows  of  pillars  of
wood,  on  the  artistically  constructed  capitals  of  which  hang  shields
and  quivers  full  of  arrows,  the  arms  of  the  Dharmaplas,*  with  which
they  protect  Buddhism  against  demons  and  heretics.  From  the
ceiling  of  the  hall  hang  rich  China  brocades,  with  dragons  magnifi-
cently embroidered  on  them  in  gold  and  silver.  Among  the  various
pictures  seen  here,  the  most  interesting  is  that  of  the  first  Dalai
lama,  Lobzang-gyatso,  in  which  he  is  portrayed  receiving  the  king-
dom of  Tibet  from  the  Mongol  conqueror,  Gushi  Khan.  His  prime
minister,  the  celebrated  Desi  Sangye,  is  seated  on  his  left,  and  is
thanking  the  magnanimous  and  liberal  prince  for  his  munificent  gift
on  behalf  of  his  thrice  holy  master.  I  was  also  shown  the  dais
reserved  for  the  minister.  Opposite  it,  and  at  the  top  of  the  second
row  of  seats  reserved  for  the  monks,  is  a  chair  three  feet  high,  on  which
the  head  lama  of  the  monastery  sits  during  service.  There  is  accom-
modation for  about  eighty  monks  in  this  hall,  and  I  was  told  that
service  is  held  in  it  daily,  at  which  most  of  the  monks  are  present.
They  receive  a  monthly  allowance  of  sixty  pounds  of  barley  from  the
church  endowment  fund  {lahrang  gzi).  This  they  parch  and  grind
themselves,  and  bring  a  little  supply  of  it  daily  with  them  to  the  hall
in  a  small  bag,  to  eat  with  the  tea,  which  is  given  them  three  times
during  each  service,  and  is  furnished  from  the  church  stores  {lahrang
djo).  On  returning  from  the  ehoijal,  I  was  called  to  the  minister's,
whom  I  found  seated  on  a  satin-covered  cushion  in  the  shade  of  a
nyi-liok  on  the  roof  of  the  third  story  of  the  chief  temple  of  the
Tsug-la-khang.

His  page  {shahdang),\  Ka-chan  Gopa,  placed  a  cup  of  tea  before

*  Called  in  Tibetan  Chos-gyong  (skyong),  "protectors  of  tlie  doctrine,"  or  Ku  na
gyalbo,  "five  great  kings." See  Emil  Schlaginweit,  '  Buddhism  in  Tibet,'  p.  157.

t  Dzahs-drung-(pa'),  lit.,  "one  near  the  feet  of."  The  expression  hu-drung-pa,  "  near
the  body,"  is  also  used. — (W.  R.)


80  JOUBNEY TO LUAf^A AND CENTRAL TIBET.

me,  together  with  some  tsamla,  meat,  ami  twisted  sugar-biscuits.
The  minister  raised  his  cup  to  his  lips,  and  graciously  said,  "  Drink,
Pundit,  please"  {Pundih  la,  sol  ja  nang).  I  at  once  drank  a  tliird  of
my  cup,  as  etiquette  requires,  and  every  time  he  drank  I  also  took  a
sip.  He  made  inquiries  respecting  the  lithographic  press  and  the
various  other  articles  which  I  had  brought  to  present  to  him,  and
which  were  now  on  the  way  to  Tashilhunpo.  After  dinner  he  showed
me  a  work  he  was  writing  on  history,  rhetoric,  astrology,  and  photo-
grapliy.  The  latter  section  he  had  composed  from  notes  I  had
furnished  him,  in  1879,  from  Tassinder's  '  Manual  of  Photography,'
and  I  was  delighted  to  see  the  diagrams  he  had  drawn  to  represent
the  various  photographic  apparatus  I  had  then  left  with  him.  He
afterwards  read  to  me  an  account  of  the  ancient  controversies  between
the  Brahmans  and  Buddhists  of  India.

"While  we  were  thus  engaged  the  page  informed  him  that  the
Dahpon  *  Phala  and  Kung  Chyang-chan  were  approaching  Dongtse,
so  we  went  to  the  top  of  the  fourth  story  of  the  Dongtse  choide  to
see  them  arrive.  The  Dahpon  being  the  chief  of  Dongtse,  the  monks
had  to  show  him  due  respect.  When  the  party  got  near  the  foot  of
the  hill  on  ^^•hich  the  choide  stands,  two  monks  in  full  canonicals  blew
two  long  copper  hautboys  (horns  ?),  two  others  played  on  a  clarionet-like
instrument  called  gi/a-ling ;  and  when  the  party  came  to  the  grove,  or
lingo,  in  front  of  the  castle,  the  Chya-dso-pa  f  received  them  with
his  band — a  gong  and  two  tambourines.  The  Daphon  and  his  friend
rode  spirited  mules  gaudily  caparisoned  with  brocades  and  tinsel.
They  were  preceded  by  five  sowars,  and  followed  by  an  equal  number,
all  carrying  lances  with  pennants  at  their  points.  The  minister  told
me  that  of  the  four  Daphons,  or  commanders  of  forces  in  Tsang,  two
are  ordinarily,  stationed  at  Shigatse,  one  at  Gyantse,  and  one  at
Tengri.

Deccmlcr  31. — I  was  anxious  to  take  a  trip  to  Gyantse,  which
Ugyen  said  was  only  eight  miles  distant,  and  could  be  reached  in  two
hours.  He  dissuaded  me,  however,  saying  it  would  not  be  prudent,
as  that  place  is  frequented  by  lihutia  traders  from  Darjiling  and
Phagri. At  nine  I  was  called  in  to  the  minister's,  and  read  a  few

*  Mddh-ilpoii,  •'  master  of  the  arrow,"  is  a  military  officer  of  al)Out  tlie  rank  of  a
general;  they  are  given  liglit-lihie  Imttoiis  (4th  class)  by  the  Chinese  authorities. —
(W.  R.)

t  A  Chyau-dso-pa,  or  Chya-djo-pa  (  Phyag-miljod-pn),  is  a  civil  officer  (of  .')tli  class
of  CiiincHi-  offiriiil  rank)  of  the  treasury. — (W.  R,)


JOURNEY TO LEAS  A AND CENTRAL TIBET.  81

sentences  of  English  from  the  '  Eoyal  Keader  No.  1 '  with  him.  After
this  I  asked  to  be  allowed  to  visit  the  great  temple  of  G-yantse,  called
the  "  Palkhor  choide,"  "  If  you  want  to  visit  G-yantse,"  he  replied,
"I  will  arrange  it  for  you;  but  you  must  bear  in  mind  that  the
people  of  that  town  are  not  good.  They  speak  much,  and  are  given
to  spinning  a  great  deal  out  of  a  little.  I  will  have  the  Tung-chen
take  you  there."  Ugyen-gyatso  then  asked  if  he  might  go  there,  as
he  wanted  to  buy  me  some  blankets ;  and  having  obtained  the
minister's  authorization,  he  left  at  noon.

January  1,  1882. — -For  about  half  an  hour  the  minister  practised
writing  the  Eoman  characters  on  a  wooden  slate  (chi/ang-shing)  about
two  feet  long  and  ten  inches  broad.  A  little  bag  of  powdered  chalk  was
tied  to  it ;  and  when  the  slate  had  been  washed  and  dried,  the  minister
rubbed  the  chalk-bag  lightly  over  the  board,  and  thus  covered  it  witli
a  thin  white  film.  In  this  he  scratched  letters  with  a  steel  style  about
a  foot  long.  I  told  him  of  the  slates  we  had  in  India — how  much
more  convenient  and  neat  they  were  than  his  rude  contrivance.  He
smiled  and  said,  "  My  chi/ang-shing  is  a  very  nice  one ;  even  the  great
ministers  of  China  use  the  like  ;*  but  they  are  not  clean.  And  if  you
can  get  me  a  couple  of  your  Indian  slates  from  Calcutta,  I  shall  be
much  obliged."

January  2. — In  the  morning  preparations  were  made  for  a  grand
reception  of  the  Dahpon  Phala  and  Kung  Chyang-chan,  the  Tsipon.f
All  the  furniture  of  the  room  we  occupied  was  replaced  by  choice
articles  from  the  minister's  storeroom.  Silk  drapings  and  curtains
were  hung  in  the  waiting-room  and  lobby,  beautiful  silk  cushions
were  spread  in  the  minister's  drawing-room,  and  its  ceiling  made
resplendent  with  a  covering  of  orange-coloured  Chinese  brocade.
Artistically  worked  dragons  appeared  everywhere — on  the  ceiling
draperies,  on  the  curtains,  and  even  in  the  carpets.  Handsome  dining-
tables,  three  feet  by  eighteen  inches,  and  two  feet  high,  were  placed
before  each  cushioned  seat.  The  minister's  seat  was  placed  as  usual
before  a  gilt  chapel  (niche),  and  three  feet  above  the  floor,  on  his
right  hand,  were  seats,  two  feet  high,  for  his  two  guests,  and  to  his
left  two  other  cushioned  seats,  about  eighteen  inches  high,  for  their

*  The  minister  was  not  correctly  informed.  So  far  as  I  am  aware,  tiie  Chinese  never
use  this  kind  of  "  white  board."  It  is,  however,  in  general  use  among  the  Western
Mongols,  where  paper  is  quite  as  rare  as  in  most  places  in  Tibet. — (W.  E.)

t  A  Tsipon  is  an  accounting  oiticer,  and  is  assimilated  by  the  Chinese  to  a  4th  class
official  among  them. — (W.  R.)

G


82  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

sons.  Pretty  china  cups,  painted  wooden  and  gilt  metal  bowls,  were
set  on  the  tables,  and  all  the  curiosities  and  ornamental  objects  the
minister  had  here  with  him  were  conspicuously  displayed.  On  the
corner  of  his  table  was  the  beautiful  stereoscope  I  had  given  him
in  1879,  with  some  two  hundred  slides,  and  in  the  middle  of  the  table
a  calendar-watch  and  some  toys  I  had  recently  presented  him.
Different  kinds  of  Tibetan  and  Chinese  dainties  were  arranged  by  the
head  couk,  under  the  Tung-chen's  directions,  and  the  minister  person-
ally supervised  the  arrangement  of  the  seats  and  the  decorating  of  the
room.  "When  all  was  ready  I  went  on  to  the  roof  to  see  the  proces-
sion arrive.  On  both  the  roads  leading  to  the  monastery  from
Dongtse  the  monks  were  waiting,  bearing  a  dozen  or  so  flags  and
nmsical  instruments — two  flageolets,  a  pair  of  brass  hautboys  (horns  ?),
or  ditngchcn,  two  tambourine-like  drums,  the  same  number  of  1)ells,
and  a  gong.

At  1  o'clock  the  Dahpon  and  his  friend,  the  Tsipon,  together  with
their  sons,  arrived  at  the  Dongtse  choide,  escorted  by  the  Chya-dso-pa.
They  were  very  simply  dressed  in  silk  robes,  Chinese  jackets,  soft
yellow  woollen  hats,  velvet  boots,  and  silk  trousers  ;  from  their  right
(left  ?)  ear  hung  long  earrings.*  The  Dahpon  appeared  to  be  about
thirty  years  old,  the  Tsipon  a  little  older.

Arriving  before  the  minister,  they  thrice  prostrated  themselves,
each  time  touching  their  foreheads  with  their  joined  palms.  The
minister  touched  their  heads  with  the  palm  of  his  hand  and  blessed
them,  and  then  they  presented  him  with  two  pieces  of  red  English
broadcloth  and  a  handful  of  silver  coins  each.

I  was  surprised  to  see  such  powerful  and  wealthy  chiefs  kotow
before  the  minister;  but  great  is  the  triumph  in  this  country  of  the
Church  over  the  laity,  and  the  greatest  ministers  of  state  fall  down  at
the  feet  of  the  incarnate  lamas  !

Dinner  was  served  with  great  ceremony.  As  soon  as  the  minister
had  said  grace,  all  fell  to  with  chopsticks  and  spoon,  and  partook
of  each  succeeding  course  in  profound  silence.  After  dinner,  tea
was  served,  when  at  last  the  silence  was  broken,  conversation  began,
and  the  guests  M^ere  shown  the  minister's  curios,  the  watches  and  the
stereoscopic  views  especially  interesting  them.

Ill  the  evening  there  was  a  review  in  the  pleasure  grove,  or  liiuja,

*  Ouc of  these  earrings  in figured ia Ilookcr'd '  Jliiiuilayan  .Journals,' ii.  271.
Tibetan  men  always,  I  believe,  wear  their  earring  in  the  left  ear.  — (W.  K.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  83

by  the  coininander  of  the  militia,  when  exercise  in  musketry,  I'uuuing,
archery,  etc.,  took  place  in  the  presence  of  the  two  dignitaries.

January  3. — After  tea  I  was  asked  to  read  English  with  the
minister.  He  transliterated  the  English  words  phonetically,  but  did
not  take  the  trouble  of  spelling  them,  observing  that  his  ordinary
duties  left  him  hardly  any  time  to  devote  to  study.  He  intended
asking  the  Grand  Lama  to  relieve  him  for  a  time  from  his  numerous
duties  in  connection  with  the  Church,  when  he  hoped  to  be  able  to
apply  himself  assiduously  to  the  study  of  English.

Breakfast  was  now  Ijrought  in,  and  consisted  of  a  kind  of  pot-herb,
called  2^(i-fsal*  cured  in  the  cold  draught,  potatoes,  and  radishes,
which  had  been  kept  in  sand  underground.  I  asked  the  minister  if
I  might  go  to  visit  the  Palkhor  clioide  of  Gyantse  with  the  Tung-chen
on  the  morrow ;  and  having  obtained  his  consent,  two  ponies  were
ordered  to  be  ready  for  an  early  start.

Jamiary  4. — The  ponies  were  ready  at  an  early  hour,  and  after
receiving  from  the  minister  a  few  khatag  to  present  to  the  deities  of
the  Palkhor  choide,  the  Tung-chen  and  I  rode  off.

Our  way  lay  across  fields  watered  by  the  Nyang  chu.  The
Nyang  chu  valley  is  one  of  the  richest  in  Tibet,  and  extends  from
Shigatse  to  about  15  miles  beyond  Gyantse,  a  distance  of  from  60  to
70  miles,  and  has  an  average  breadth  of  10,  every  inch  of  which  is
cultivated.  Its  great  natural  fertility,  and  its  being  so  very  favourable
for  the  growth  of  different  kinds  of  millet  and  pulses,  has  given  the
whole  district  the  name  of  Nyang,  or  "  land  of  delicacies,"  and  the
river  which  fertilizes  it  has  been  called  Nyang  chu,t  or  "  the  river  of
delicious  water."

Flocks  of  wild  geese  and  ducks  were  swimming  on  the  river,  near
the  bank  of  which  our  road  now  and  then  led  us,  and  long-billed
cranes  were  stalking  along  searching  for  food.  From  the  bushes  of
furze  and  other  thorny  plants  with  which  the  river  banks  were  over-
grown, hares  X  leaped  out  and  made  off  towards  the  mountain  recesses,

*  I  tliiuk  the  author  means  pe'-t^e',  the  usual  Tibetan  iDi-onunciation  of  the  Chinese
■pai-ts'ai,  and  meaning  "  cabbage."  "  Cured  in  the  eokl  draught"  is  a  culinary  prepara-
tion unknown  to  me.  White  potatoes  are  used  all  over  Tibet;  they  were  introduced
into  Bhutan  in  1774  by  Mr.  Bogle  (see  Markham's  '  Tibet,'  p.  U)).  Kadishes,  or  rather
turnips  (la-pvg,  from  the  Chinese  lo-po),  are  usually  eaten  raw ;  they  are  also  dried
for  winter  use. — (W.  E.)

t  A.  K.  calls  it  Pena  Nang  Chu  river.— (W.  R.)

X  The  Tibetans  neither  kill  nor  will  they  eat  hares.  All  wild  fowl  are  equally  safe
from  their  guns. — (W.  R.)


84  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

and  beautiful  little  birds,  probal)ly  a  variety  of  kingfisher,  were  seen
fishing  in  the  stream— but  the  Tung-chen  said  that  though  the  bird
was  pretty  to  luok  at,  it  emitted  a  most  offensive  odour  from  its
body.

Passing  a  few  villages,  we  came  to  a  stream  flowing  into  the
Xyang  chu  from  the  south.  Here  were  two  flour-mills,  of  which  we
liad  seen  at  least  a  dozen  since  leaving  Shigatse.  Tiiey  were  very
large,  and  the  stones  four  times  the  size  of  our  ordinary  millstones  in
India.  In  the  village  of  Gyabshi  the  people  seemed  very  industrious,
the  women  engaged  with  their  looms  or  spinning,  the  men  tending
sheep  or  collecting  fuel  from  the  fields.

"When  we  came  within  two  miles  of  Gyantse,  our  attention  was
attracted  by  the  Tse-chan  monastery,  the  entire  north-eastern  slope
of  a  hill  being  closely  covered  by  iLs  whitewashed  houses,  so  that  it
looked  like  a  great  castle  of  towering  height.  The  Tung-chen  told
me  that  this  lamasery  was  nearly  eight  hundred  years  old,  and  that
the  great  reformer  Tsong-khapa  had  spent  several  years  here  in  the
study  of  metaphysics  {isan-nyid).  I  was  also  shown  the  Tinkar  la,
by  which  herdsmen  travel  to  the  foot  of  the  Lachan  pass  of  Sikkini,
this  being  the  shortest  route  between  Gyantse  and  the  latter  country.

A  few  minutes'  ride  brought  us  to  the  bridge  over  the  Nyang  chu,
a  light  temporary  wooden  structure,  about  twenty  feet  long  and  six
feet  broad,  Ijuilt  on  the  ice  which  covered  the  stream.

We  entered  the  town  of  Gyantse,*  passing  beside  a  long  mendong,
on  either  side  of  which  were  dwellings,  and  by  a  narrow  lane  reached
the  gate  of  tlie  Gandan  Chakhang  on  the  left  side  of  the  main  street,
and  facing  the  great  cliorten  of  the  Palkhor  choide.

The  Kunyer,  or  priest,  of  the  Gandan  Chakhang,  an  acquaintance
of  the  Tung-chen,  greeted  him,  and,  sliowing  him  to  a  seat,  had  tea
served  us.  We  sent  the  groom,  Lhagpa-rida,  to  the  market  to  buy
arrack,  and  he  there  met  Ugyen,  and  told  him  of  our  arrival.

*  A.  K.  tiivij  of  tills  pluce  (wbicli  he  reached  on  August  21,  1878):  "Giaugche,  a
buiall  tuwu  ou  the  right  bank  of  the  Peua  Naug  Chu  river.  The  town  is  situated  about
two  small  hills  which  lie  east  and  west,  and  arc  united  by  a  saddle;  the  western  liill
is  further  connected  with  the  chain  of  mountains  to  the  north.  On  the  eastern  liill,
which  is  aljout  COO  feet  above  the  surrounding  plain,  is  a  large  fort,  .  .  .  and  on  the
western  hill  a  (iomba  inhabited  liy  live  hundred  Dabas.  In  tliis  Gomba  there  is  a
Chiorten,  called  Pangon  Chioilen,  wliich  is  considered  by  the  Tibetans  a  most  holy
place.  15e>ides  the  f(jrt  and  temple,  there  are  about  one  tiiousand  dwelling-houses  on
three  sides  of  the  douljle  hill.  Woolh.'u  cloth  called  Nhambii  is  manufactured.  There
is  a  large  market ;  and  traders  from  Nepal  and  China  reside  here."  iSee  'Report  on
the  Explorations  in  Great  Tibet.'  by  A.  K.,  p.  ;jl.


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CKNTRAL TIBET.  8:")

As  we  were  eating  our  meal  several  pilgrims  chanting  sacrcMl
hymns  entered  the  chapel  of  the  Lhakhang,  and  added  some  spoonfuls
of  butter  to  the  lamps.  Some  of  them  stared  at  Ugyen  and  me,
observing  to  one  another  that  we  were  strangers  from  l)eyond  tlie
Himalayas,  taking  Ugyen  for  a  Sikkimese,  but  not  l)eing  able  to
decide  whether  I  was  from  Ladak  or  Besahir.

Ugyen  told  me  of  his  movements  since  leaving  me  at  Dongtse  on
December  31.

He  had  left  Dongtse  at  noon  on  December  31,  riding  one  of  the
Tung-chen's  ponies.  On  the  road  he  met  some  of  the  muleteers  of
the  Dongtse  Dahpon  Phala,  who  were  proceeding  to  Lliasa  with
barley,  butter,  and  meat  for  the  use  of  Bangyc-shag,  IMiala's  resiihuice.

Ugyen  inquired  of  tliem  about  the  state  of  the  road  to  Lhasa,  and
the  best  time  to  make  the  journey  there.  They  told  him  that  winter
was  the  best  season  to  travel  to  Lliasa,  for  then  there  was  no  rain,
and  one  could  easily  ford  the  streams  and  get  across  the  Tsang-po  ;
moreover,  feed  was  cheap,  and  meat,  l)arley,  and  wine  obtainal)lo
everywhere.

The  following  day  (January  1,  1882)  Ugyen  visited  the  Gyantse
torn.  This  market  and  the  town  generally  are  inferior  to  Shigatse  in
importance  and  in  the  variety  of  articles  for  sale.  There  were  people
selling  Calcutta  and  Chinese  goods  of  very  inferior  equality.  He  saw
fifteen  or  twenty  Nepalese  shops  and  half  a  dozen  pastry  shops  kept
by  Chinese.  The  torn  (or  market-place)  is  the  property  of  the  Palkhor
choide,  the  great  monastery  of  Gyantse,  and  contributes  largely  to
its  maintenance.  The  monastic  authorities  also  collect  rents  from
the  shops  in  the  vicinity  of  the  torn,  which  do  not  belong  to  either
the  Government  or  landholders  {(jcrpas).  The  barley  for  sale  was
inferior  to  that  of  Shigatse,  as  was  also  the  chawi,  which  was,  how-
ever, cheaper  than  there;  and  butter  and  mutton  were  in  larger
quantities  than  at  the  latter  place.

The  market  only  lasts  for  three  hours  daily,  opening  at  10  a.m.
Ugyen  here  saw,  for  the  first  time,  women  selling  fresh  meat  and  dried
carcasses  of  sheep  and  yaks.  At  Shigatse  they  never  take  part  with
the  men  in  this  business.*  Some  of  these  women  have  amassed  much
wealth  by  this  profession,  and  wear  rich  headdresses  {-pctiirj)  thickly
studded  with  pearls,  amber,  and  turquoises.

*  But  women  throughout  Tibet  do  most  of the sellino- i,i the .shop*  and the
markets.— (W.  R.)


8G  JOUBXET TO LHASA AND CENTS AL TIBET.

IJeturiiin,!;-  to  his  lodi>in<js,  Fgyen  made  the  acquaintance  of  a
lieutenant,  or  Dingpon,  named  Nyima  tsering,  who  was  putting  up
in  the  same  house.  Ugyen  plied  him  with  chan;/,  and  when  he
had  become  very  jolly  over  it,  he  questioned  him  about  the  military
arrangements  of  Gyantse.  The  Dingpon  stated  that  there  were
ordinarily  500  Tibetan  soldiers  stationed  liere.  This  force  w^as
lUvided  into  two  battalions  under  two  Eupon.  Under  each  Eupon
were  two  captains  (Gyapon)  and  four  lieutenants,  or  Dingpon.  The
commander,  or  Dahpon,  of  the  Gyantse  troops  was  Tedingpa,
Besides  these  troops  there  are  50  Chinese  soldiers  under  a  Chinese
official  called  Da-loyc*  and  the  native  militia.  The  troops  both  at
Ctvantse  and  Sln'gatse  are  under  the  inspection  of  the  Chinese  pay-
master (]'(y/2i(ni)  of  Shigatse,  Nyima  tsering  told  Ugyen  that  the
Tibetan  soldiers  were  very  poorly  paid  by  the  Government.  The
Emperor  of  China  contributes  towards  their  maintenance  five  rupees
per  man  a  year,  and  the  Government  of  Tibet  gives  them  forty  pounds
of  barley  per  man  a  month,  but  no  pay  in  money,  on  the  ground  that
they  are  furnished  l)y  the  landholders  at  the  rate  of  one  soldier  for
every  lang  f  of  land.

The  Dingpon  and  Gyapon  receive  pay  at  the  rate  of  thirteen
sranff  and  twenty-five  srang  a  year  from  the  imperial  treasury,  but
no  more  rations  from  the  Tibetan  CJovernment  than  tlie  soldiers.

The  Emperor  allows  Chinese  soldiers  serving  in  Tibet  a  family
allowance  of  six  srang  a  month  and  sixty  pounds  of  rice  per  head  as
subsistence  allowance,  in  addition  to  their  monthly  pay  of  six  sraiu/.i
On  the  next  day  (January  2)  Ugyen  surveyed  the  town  and  its  great
monastery,  the  Palkhor  choide.  A  stone  wall  nearly  two  miles  and  a
half  long  surrounds  the  town.  He  estimated  its  length,  by  means  of
his  prayer-beads,  to  be  4500  paces.§ At  each  pace  he  dropped  a  bead

*  Ta  Laoyeh  is  the  honorific  appellation  claimed  by  all  subordinate  Chinese  oflScers
in  Tibet,  from  the  rank  of  Pa-tsiing  (sergeant)  to  that  of  Shou-[-ei,  or  major.  The
Ciiincse  officer  In  command  of  the  post  of  Gyantse  is,  I  believe,  a  Chien-tsimg,  or
lieutenant. f)n  the  Tibetan  military  organization,  see  chap.  vii.  p.  180.— (W.  R.)

t  The  ordinary  hang  is  a  measure  of  land  in  wliich  about  400  lbs.  of  seed-grain  can
be  sown. The  State  tax  on  each  kang  is  50  srang  (or  ounces  of  silver)  a  year.  — (S.  C.  D.)

X  On  the  pay  and  allowances  of  the  Chinese  troops  in  Tibet,  see  /.  It.  A.  S.,  n.s.
xxiii.,  p.  '27<i-278.  In  i;iany  places  along  the  route  lictwccn  Lhasa  and  Tachienlu  the
Chinese  soldiers  are  never  pai<l  in  cash,  but  only  receive  brick-tea,  the  value  of  which
is  arbitrarily  fixed  by  the  jiaymasster,  who  cheats  the  poor  devils  most  disgracefully.
A  Hrang  is  an  ounce  of  silver,  the  Chinese  tael.—CW.  R.)

§  Qcorgi,  op.  c!l.,  p.  451,  .says  of  tin's  town,  Kiang^fi:  "  Civitas  prEEclara  et  planire
ad  radius  montium. Ad  TIrl.i.s,  |)rffi8idiinn  Arx  est  injeclificata  rupi,  musis,et  fossis  aqua;


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  87

and  muttered  om  manl  ixidrm  hum,  and  the  good  people  of  Gyantse
who  accompanied  him  in  his  circumambulation  {lingkor)  little  sus-
pected the  nature  of  the  work  he  was  doing.  When  he  reached  the
foot  of  a  mendong  called  Gojogs,  and  situated  to  the  north  of  the
Djong,  he  took  the  bearing  of  the  Tse-chan  monastery,  one  of
the  most  ancient  religious  establishments  of  Tibet.  It  bore  south-
west, and  was  nearly  three  miles  from  him.  To  the  north  of  Gyantse
he  saw  Eitoi  gomba,  a  cloistered  lamasery  with  five  or  six  long  houses,
each  with  a  large  number  of  cells.  To  the  south-south-east  of
Gyantse  djong  is  the  road  to  Pagri,  in  the  direction  of  the  Nia-ni
monastery  and  the  Xiru  chu,  one  of  the  principal  feeders  of  the
Nyang  chu,  which  drains  the  northern  glacier  of  the  Chumo-llia  ri
mountain.  To  the  north-east  of  Gyantse  the  Nyang  chu  is  visible
for  a  great  distance,  and  I^gyen  conjectured  from  its  course  that  it
came  from  the  snow-clad  Nui-jin  kang-sang  mountains,  which  stretch
out  to  the  north  and  north-east.  On  the  uplands  to  the  north  of
Gyantse,  and  some  three  miles  away,  is  the  Choilung  gomba.

The  Chinese  cemetery  Ugyen  found  situate  at  the  foot  of  the  hill
on  which  the  Djong  stands,  a  little  above  the  high-road  to  Lhasa,  and
some  three  miles  from  the  town.  He  counted  three  hundred  tombs,  some
of  which  appeared  very  old  and  dilapidated,  but  a  few  quite  new.

The  castle  or  Djong  of  Gyantse  stands  on  the  top  of  a  hill  nearly
500  feet  above  the  town.  It  is  very  strong,  and  was  built  hj  the
famous  Choigyal  rabtan  who  ruled  in  the  fourteenth  century  over  the
province  of  Nyang,  of  which  Gyantse  was  the  capital.  This  province
was  a  part  of  the  domain  of  the  Sakhya  hierarchs.  He  had  built  a
long  stone-covered  way  running  from  the  Djong  to  the  foot  of  the  hill,
by  which  he  meant  to  secure  a  supply  of  water  in  time  of  siege  from
the  three  deep  wells  at  the  foot  of  the  hill.  Ugyen  visited  these
wells,  where  water-carriers  were  drawing  water  in  hide  buckets
attached  to  a  rope  about  150  feet  long  passing  over  a  pulley.

The  landlord  of  the  Litophug  sub-division  of  Gyantse  told  Ugyen
that  about  eighteen  years  ago  the  ex-Dewan  of  Sikkim  had  come
here  on  some  State  business,  and  had  put  up  in  the  same  house  in
which  he  was  now  stopping.  Que  night  about  fifty  sinister-looking
Khamba  traders  suddenly  broke  into  the  house,  beat  him  with  clubs,
tore  his  earring  out  of  his  ear,  stripped  him  of  his  clothing,  carried  off

vivae  circumvallata.  Ccenobium  vero  adeo  vastum,  et  magnificum,  ut  quum  luillia
aliquot  Xacaitaruin  contineat,  alterius  cujusdam  civitatis  speciem  praBreforre
videatur."


88  JOUBNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

all  liis  property,  and  tlirasliod  In's  servants  and  forced  them  to  run  for
their  lives.  Some  of  the  robbers  ran  away  from  flyantse,  takinj^  the
Dewan's  property,  his  mules  and  ponies  ;  but  on  the  following  morn-
ing, when  the  matter  was  brought  to  the  notice  of  the  Djongpon,  the
chief  of  the  rol)bers,  who  had  stayed  behind,  was  apprehended.  He
said  that  a  year  previously  the  Dewau  had  treated  him  and  his
accomplices  most  harshly  during  their  stay  at  Chumbi  on  their  way
to  Parjiling,  exacting  from  them  the  last  ;picc  they  had  in  their
purses,  besides  depriving  them  of  all  their  property  to  the  value  of
upwards  of  Es.  500.  The  Dewan  lost,  in  his  turn,  over  Es.  1000  in
cash,  besides  jewellery,  clothes,  etc.

A  well-informed  Nyingma  lama,  the  manager  of  Palri  kusho's  (an
incarnate  lama)  estate  near  Panam  Jong,  came  and  put  up  at  the
house  where  Ugyen  was  stopping.  He  was  on  his  way  back  from
Lhasa,  where  he  liad  stayed^for  two  or  three  months  after  a  pilgrimage
to  the  Tsari  country.  His  master  was  studying  sacred  literature  at
Lhasa.  He  ]iromised  to  let  Ugyen  see  the  books  of  the  Palri  library,
and  to  lend  them  to  him  on  the  surety  of  the  minister  or  his  Cliyag-
dso-pa.  He  told  him,  furthermore,  that  there  existed  two  printed
volumes  about  Choigyal  rabtan,  the  famous  king  who  had  founded
the  Palkhor  choide  of  Gyantse,  but  that  these  works  and  the  history
of  Gyantse  were  now  kept  as  sealed  works  (tcrchoi)  by  the  Lhasa
Government.  L^gyen  also  learnt  from  the  lama  that  in  the  recluses'
monastery  of  Lhari-zim-phug,  situated  on  a  wild  mountain  to  the  east
of  Panam  djong,  there  was  a  complete  account  of  the  life  and  writings  of
Lama  Llia-tsun  clienpo,  who  had  introduced  Puddhism  into  Sikkim.*

At  this  season  of  the  year  the  climate  of  Gyantse  is  very  bad,
high  winds  blowing  daily,  raising  dense  clouds  of  dust.  The  inhabi-
tants spend  this  time  of  the  year  in  idleness,  having  but  little  to  do
besides  weaving  and  spinning.

Such  was  the  information  that  Ugyen  gave  me  to-day.

AVhon  we  had  finished  our  breakfast  we  went  Avith  the  Kunyer
of  rjandan  Lhakhang  to  perform  choi-jal  at  the  different  shrines  of
Gyantse.  The  cliorten  is  a  s])lendid  edifice  of  an  unique  style  of
architecture.  Hitherto  I  had  been  under  the  impression  that  choricn
were  nothing  more  than  tombs  intended  solely  to  contain  the  remains
of  departed  saints,  but  now  my  views  became  entirely  changed.
This  fhortm  is  a  lofty  temple  nine  stories  high.  Ugyen,  T,  the
*  Born  in  a.d.  I."i9r)  in  S.E.  Tibet  (see  WaddcU,  op.  cit,  p.  4).— (W.  li.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTTiAL TIBET.  89

Kimyer,  Lhapa-rida,  and  our  servant,  Lhagpa-sring,  went  into  the
enclosure  and  entered  the  shrine  with  a  number  of  pilgrims  and
travellers,  most  of  whom  seemed  to  be  from  Ladak  or  the  Chang-
tang.  In  the  service  hall,  where  the  priests  were  assembled  for
religious  service,  hundreds  of  lamps  were  burning,  and  incense-sticks
were  smoking  so  as  to  nearly  darken  the  room.  We  ascended  at
once  to  the  top  story,  but  the  other  visitors  began  their  circu-
niambulation  from  the  bottom  upwards — the  usual  practice,  though
many  become  so  wearied  going  round  and  round  that  they  do  not
reach  the  uppermost  story.  The  chortcn  is  about  100  to  120  feet
high,  the  top  covered  by  a  gilt  dome,  the  gilded  copper  plates  of
which  are  so  thick  that  they  have  withstood  centuries  of  exposure  to
the  weather.  The  base  of  this  sacred  edifice  is,  we  found  by  actual
count,  50  paces  square.  From  the  cupola  {inimjia),  immediately
under  the  gilt  dome,  I  had  a  magnificent  view  of  tlie  town  and
monasteries  and  the  surrounding  hills  and  distant  mountains ;  their
black  surface,  broken  here  and  there  by  some  white-walled  monastery,
offered  a  singularly  wild  aspect.

There  were  inside  the  chortcn  innumerable  niches  filled  with
images  of  Buddhas  and  saints,  and  in  visiting  the  various  chapels  we
were  required  to  do  so  walking  from  left  to  right,  for  this  is  the
Buddhist  usage.

On  the  first  floor  we  were  shown  the  statue  of  Choigyal  rabtan,
under  whose  benign  rule  Gyantse  became  famous,  and  who  gave  a
fresh  impulse  to  Buddhism  and  literature.  The  Kunyer  of  tlie  cliorfcn
touched  our  heads  with  the  sword  of  this  illustrious  monarch,  and
said  that  by  his  blessing  {jin-lal))  we  could  triumph  over  our  enemies
and  enjoy  longevity  and  prosperity  in  this  world.

We  were  also  shown  two  images  of  Dorje  chang,  the  supreme
Buddha  of  the  Gelupa  sect,"  one  of  which  was  very  old  and  of  small
size,  the  other  large  and  very  higlily  burnished.  Once  on  a  time,  the
Grand  Lama  of  Tashilhunpo,  visiting  the  chortcn,  touched  the  breast
of  the  former  image  to  see  if  it  was  warm  and  full  of  life,  as  was
popularly  said.  He  soon  repented  him  of  his  sacrilegious  act,  con-
fessed his  sin,  and,  to  atone  for  his  wrong-doing,  had  made  the  large
gilt  image,  which  was  placed  beside  the  old  one.

Eeturning  to  the  Gandan  Lhakhang,  we  were  refreshing  ourselves
with  copious  draughts  of  tea,  when  the  abbot  of  the  Palkhor  choide,
*  Probably  an  error  for  Dorje  chyak,  Fadjrapani.— (W.  R.)


90  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBEl.

with  linlf  a  dozen  disciples,  came  to  make  reverence  to  the  great
image  of  tlie  Buddha  in  the  shrine,  on  whose  right  and  left  were
images  of  Tsong-khapa  and  Maitreya.

The  Kunyer  remarked  to  me  that  I  was  peculiarly  fortunate  in
having  come  to  Gyantse  to-day,  as  it  was  the  full  moon,  a  sacred  day
with  Buddhists,  on  which  day,  and  on  the  day  of  the  new  moon,  the
doors  of  all  the  shrines  and  of  the  great  clwrtcn  were  thrown  open  to
the  public.

After  an  hour's  rest  I  went  with  the  Tung-chen  and  Ugyen  to
visit  the  Palklior  clioide.  Its  grand  "temple  of  learning"  (tsug-la
hhang)  is  a  splendid  and  lofty  edifice,  the  hall  lighted  by  one  thousand
lamps.  On  three  sides — the  north,  east,  and  west — are  high  niches,  in
which  are  huge  images  of  the  Buddha  and  Bodhisattvas.  The  image
of  the  Buddha  is  made  of  copper,  heavily  gilt.  Five  hundred  monks
were  engaged  in  divine  service,  and  some  two  hundred  more  were
occupied  reading  the  sacred  scriptures.  No  one  lifted  his  eyes  to
look  at  us,  so  strict  is  the  discipline  observed  here.  We  were  con-
ducted to  the  great  library,  the  very  sight  of  which  filled  my  mind
with  feelings  of  awe  and  reverence.  The  books  were  all  old,  broad-
leaved,  and  some  two  to  four  feet  long.  I  was  shown  the  sacred
scriptures,  all  written  in  letters  of  gold.

With  what  assiduity  and  devotion  the  Buddhists  perform  the
sacred  duties  of  their  religion,  the  deep  interest  they  take  in  the
collecting  of  sacred  books  and  images,  and  their  zealous  care  in  pre-
serving them,  can  only  be  realized  by  visiting  such  places  as  this.
I  was  shown  some  sculptures  executed  by  Indian  Buddhists,  and
some  stone  images  similar  to  what  I  had  seen  at  Buddhagaya.  The
gilt,  Indian-made  images  of  the  Sravakas,  of  Saripu,  Mudgalputra,
Ananda,  Kashyapa,  and  other  arhats  were  of  exceeding  interest.  On
each  side  of  the  image  of  Shakya  Buddha  were  four  rows  of  monks,
of  twenty  each,  and  in  front  of  them  burned  hundreds  of  butter- fed
lamps.  Behind  the  seats  of  the  monks  were  drums,  each  witli  a  long
handle  ;  tliese  the  monks  beat  at  intervals,  and  to  the  accompaniment
also  (if  cym])als,  lirass  hautboys  {duiuj  chm),  and  cLivionets  {ijijuVmii),
they  olianted  liymns  in  deep  sonorous  voices.

When  exliausted  by  continual  repetitions  of  viantfioiy  they  re-
freshed themselves  with  tea.  Wine  is  not  brought  within  the  pre-
cincts of  these  Oelugpa  monasteries;  and,  in  fact,  all  drinkers  of  wine
among  the  monks  are  expelled  from  the  Gelugpa  Church.


JOURNEY TO LHASA ANT) CENTRAL TIBET.  91

In  the  lobby  of  the  monastery  I  found  a  grand  collection  of
stuffed  animals,  such  as  the  snow-leopard,  wild  sheep,  goat,  yak,
stag,  mastiff,  etc.,  and  a  Bengal  tiger.*

Eeturning  to  the  Gandan  Lhakhang,  we  visited  the  second  and
third  floors  of  that  building,  where  several  recluses  were  reading  the
sacred  books.  I  was  told  that  when  the  Tashi  lama  visited  the
Palkhor  choide,  he  puts  up  in  this  building,  and  I  was  shown
the  raised  seat  he  occupies  when  here.  I  also  learnt  that  successful
students  among  the  monks  of  Tashilhunpo  are  sent  here  to  complete
their  course  of  study  for  the  degree  of  tom-ram-pa  f  (bachelor  of  sacred
literature),  which  this  lamasery  alone  has  the  right  to  confer.

In  the  portico  of  the  building  and  underneath  its  eaves  I  noticed
several  sorts  of  flowering  plants  in  bloom.

At  3  p.m.  we  left  for  Dongtse,  where  we  arrived  before  dusk.
The  minister's  page  met  me  at  tlie  foot  of  the  hill,  and  led  me  to  his
master,  who  made  many  kind  inquiries  about  my  trip.  I  told  him
how  greatly  I  had  enjoyed  it,  and  that,  as  it  was  a  holiday,  all  the
buildings,  the  great  chortcn  and  the  temples,  had  been  open  to  me.
"  I  rejoice  at  it,"  he  replied ;  "  and  I  must  say  the  gods  have  shown
you  the  way  \Iha  lam  tan  som/],  for  it  did  not  strike  me  at  the  time
that  to-day  was  a  holiday.  If  you  should  have  put  it  off  till  to-morrow,
you  would  have  seen  but  very  little."

January  5. — I  called  on  the  minister,  and  talked  to  him  of  my
visit  to  Gyantse.  He  told  me  that  there  were  half  a  dozen  cliorten
in  Tibet  like  the  one  I  had  seeti  there.  There  were  now,  he  said,
about  six  hundred  monks  in  the  Palkhor  choide,  and  an  equal
number  in  the  adjacent  lamaseries,  but  in  former  times  there  were
three  thousand  monks  on  the  register  of  the  college.

Ugyen-gyatso  returned  to-day  from  Gyantse,  and  told  the
minister  of  his  experiences  there. He  had  been  lodged  in  Litophug

*  In  tlie  Lhobrak  country  lama  Ugyen-gyatso  visited  tlie  celebrated  shrine  of  Seh
Guru  Chlioi  wang.  built  after  tlie  model  of  the  famous  monastery  of  Nalendrajn  Magadba.
"  The  shrine  .  .  .  contains  some  important  relics,  among  others  a  stuffed  horse  of  great
sanctity  (belonging  to  the  Great  Guru),  which  is  called  Jamling  ninkhore,  or 'tlie
horse  that  can  go  round  the  world  in  a  day.'  Observing  that  the  horse  was  bereft  of
his  left  leg,  U.  G.  inquired  the  cause,  and  was  told  how  the  leg  had  been  stolen  by
a  Kh;imba  pilgrim  with  a  view  of  enchanting  the  ponies  of  Kham."  See  '  Report  of
Explorations  from  18.5G-86,'  p.  '2?).  Probably  the  objects  seen  at  Gyantse  by  our
author  were  oiiginally  votive  ofieriugs,  and  now  simply  curios.— (W.  R.)

t  Probably  written  Ston  ran-pa,  "one  who  may  teach;  a  doctor."  See  'Indian
Pundits  in  the  Land  of  Snow?  ' It  is  probably  the  same  degree  as  Ge-she.— (W.  R.)


92  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

ill  a  ]»vit'st's  lionse,  wliere  tlie  luastor  {milxi)  and  mistress  (nnmo)
showed  him  great  courtesy.  Tlgyen  presented  the  minister  a  dozen
oranges  lie  liad  bonglit  in  tlie  Gyantse  market  for  one  anna  each.
I  told  the  minister  that  these  oranges  came  from  Sikkini.  "  Oh,
indeed  !  "  he  said.  "  It  must  l)e  a  happy  land.  In  Tibet  no  oranges
mature ;  at  Lhasa  there  are  orange  trees  producing  small  fruit,  which
do  not,  however,  ripen."

Ill  the  evening  Ugyen  told  me  a  tale  he  had  heard  from  the
Chyag-dso-pa  of  the  Palri  monastery.

Once  on  a  time  Dugpa-kunleg,  a  famous  Ijut  eccentric  saint  of
the  red-hat  school,  was  staying  at  Khang-toi  shikha,  in  Lliasa.  He
saw  the  wife  of  his  host  stealing  a  piece  of  aml)er  from  the  bag  of  a
beggar  who  was  stop])ing  in  the  house,  and  putting  an  apple  in  its
stead  into  his  wallet.  The  saint  told  her  it  was  both  sinful  and
criminal  to  act  tlnis,  and  related  to  her  the  following  tale  by  way  of
instruction.

In  ancient  India  there  lived  two  friends.  One,  a  highlander,  was
a  dishonest  man ;  the  other,  a  lowlander,  was  upright  and  honest.
One  day  the  two,  while  walking  in  a  valley,  found  a  bowl  of  gold.
The  lowlander  said,  "  Well,  now  that  fortune  has  favoured  us  with  a
treasure,  let  us  first  return  thanks  to  the  local  divinities,  and  then
divide  the  gold  between  us."  The  other  rejoined,  "  Friend,  the  day
is  far  advanced;  we  can  do  all  this  to-morrow;  let  us  rather  take  the
1'|>\\1  lioinc  now."

I'o  this  the  lowlander  agreed.  The  next  morning  when  he  called
at  his  friend's  house,  he  found  him  in  a  corner  wailing  and  shedding
tears.  "  Ah,  friend,"  he  exclaimed,  "  my  heart  is  fdled  with  grief
and  sliame.  How  can  I  tell  you!  The  bowl  of  gold  has  been
miraculously  changed,  for  this  morning  1  found  but  sawdust  in  it.
The  gods  alone  know  what  has  become  of  the  treasure!  This,  I  am
grieved  to  say,  will  put  an  end  to  our  friendship,  for  it  will  create  in
your  mind  a  suspicion  against  me."  So  saying  he  began  weeping
afresh.

The  other,  perceiving  his  design,  said,  with  wonderful  calmness,
"  Friend,  you  need  not  cry.  The  loss  of  the  treasure  is  not  the
greatest  mishap  which  might  befall  us.  If  we  two  continue  friends
we  shmild  liold  (nirselves  very  happy.  Chance  brought  the  treasure;
chance  has  taken  it  away ;  crying  will  not  bring  it  back."

The  false  friend,  thinking  he  had  gained  his  end,  soon  dried  his


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  93

tears.  Before  leaving  for  his  home,  the  lowlander  said,  "  Friend,  I
have  not  mentioned  something  to  you.  In  my  orchard  most  delicious
mangoes  and  other  fruits  are  now  ripe.  I  have  no  children  to  eat
them ;  let  your  two  sous  come  home  with  me  tliat  I  may  regale  them
with  the  luscious  fruits."

To  this  the  other  assented,  and  the  two  boys  accompanied  the
lowlander  home.  On  his  return  to  his  home  he  bought  two  monkeys,
to  which  he  gave  the  same  names  as  the  boys,  and  trained  them  to
come  when  called  by  their  names.

After  a  while  the  false  friend  came  to  take  his  boys  home,  when
the  other  came  out  crying  in  a  loud  and  pitiful  voice,  "  Friend,  my
heart  bleeds  to  have  to  tell  you  of  the  misfortune  which  has  befallen
you.  Your  two  darlings  have  been  changed  into  monkeys  !  "  "  How
can  I  believe  such  a  story  ? "  the  other  replied.  "  If  you  doubt  it,
call  your  sons,  and  you  will  see."  So  the  father  called  his  older  son
by  name,  and  a  monkey  came  leaping  forth,  and  sat  upon  his  lap,
fondling  him  and  chattering  to  him  as  if  he  were  an  old  friend.  Filled
with  surprise,  he  called  his  second  son,  when  out  came  the  other
monkey,  and  climbed  into  his  lap  also.

After  a  while  the  lowlander  asked  his  friend,  '•  How  can  this  have
come  about  ?  Tell  me  how  it  was  that  the  gold  was  changed  into
sawdust ;  it  may  help  to  explain  this  new  wonder,"  The  other,
fearing  lest  his  sons  had  been  transformed  into  monkeys  by  the
incantations  of  the  friend  he  had  deceived,  replied,  "  Friend,  I
deceived  you  when  I  said  the  gold  had  been  turned  into  sawdust.
I  have  got  it  with  me  ;  we  will  divide  it  equally  between  us.  Is
it  true,  my  much  injured  friend,  that  my  sons  have  been  transformed
into  monkeys  ? "  "  Oh  no.  How  could  men  become  monkeys  ?
Your  sons  are  in  excellent  health,  and  are  now  in  one  of  my  distant
orchards."  So  the  two  returned  to  their  houses  with  their  respective
treasures — the  one  with  his  children,  tlie  other  with  his  gold.

Years  passed  by,  and  the  two  friends  were  finally  summoned  to
the  court  of  the  Lord  of  death,  there  to  have  their  good  and  bad  acts
weighed.  Their  moral  merits  and  their  prayers  were  also  weighed,
and  the  balance  turned  in  their  favour.  A  game  of  chess  was  then
played  by  the  gods  and  the  demon,  in  which,  by  means  of  casting
dice,  the  merits  and  demerits  of  gods  and  men  are  determined.  In
the  mirror  of  karma  (mundane  actions)  the  two  friends  saw  and
blushed  for  the  evil deeds they had done — the gold  turned  into


94  JOUBNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL IIBET.

sawdust,  and  the  boys  into  monkeys.  Tlie  Lord  oi'  death  decreed  that
the  uplander  should  pass  five  liundred  years  in  hell,  and  that  the
other  should  for  live  hundred  existences  be  born  a  monkey.  The
punishment  of  the  latter  was  the  severer  in  that  he  had  stolen  human
beings,  and  said  tliat  they  had  been  transformed  into  monkeys ;  but
because  he  had  desired  to  make  offerings  to  the  gods  when  the  treasure
had  been  found,  the  gods  had  pleaded  for  him.

Having  finished  his  tale,  Dugpa  kunleg  exhorted  the  woman  to
keep  from  stealing,  and  threatened  her  with  such-like  dire  punish-
ment if  she  did  not  desist.  The  woman  put  the  amber  back  in  the
befrsrar's  bac;,  and  the  saint  left  her  house  and  returned  to  Lhobrag,

Ugyen  also  heard  at  Gyantse  that  much  was  to  be  learnt  con-
cerning the  ancient  history  of  that  place  in  a  work  called  '  Nijang
chol  jiiwj  Nyimai  odscr.'  He  furthermore  told  me  that  he  had
heard  tliat  last  year  a  mendicant  from  Gyantse  visiting  Sikkim  gave
out  there  that  he  was  one  of  the  discoverers  of  sacred  books  of  which
the  Nyingma  history  of  Sikkim  makes  mention.  Pie  showed  what  he
claimed  was  a  very  ancient  manuscript  volume  on  the  propitiatory
ritual  of  Guru  Thag-mar,  a  fearful  deity  of  the  Ningma  pantheon.
The  Sikkani  rajah  gave  him  a  very  warm  welcome,  and,  in  con-
sultation with  the  chief  lama  of  his  Durbar,  arranged  to  have  block
prints  made  of  the  text.  Eecently  this  impostor  had  returned  to
Gyantse,  bringing  with  him  many  valuable  copper  and  brass  articles,
silk  gowns,  and  coined  money.

January  6. — The  minister's  mother,  accompanied  by  a  maid-
servant, came  to  pay  reverence  to  her  saintly  son  while  I  was  seated
willi  liim.  I  could  not  believe  that  she  was  his  mother  when  I  saw
her  make  three  profound  salutations  before  tlie  minister,  touching
the  ground  witli  her  forehead  and  receiving  his  blessing.  She  then
presented  him  with  a  few  balls  of  butter  and  a  khatag  ;  and  when  his
holiness  said  he  would  leave  for  Tashilhunpo  in  three  days,  she  wept
bitterly.

Jamiarij  7. — Early  in  the  morning  we  received  a  message  from
the  minister  asking  us  to  postpone  our  departure  for  Tashilhunpo,
as  the  Chyag-dso-pa  much  wished  me  to  accompany  the  minister
to  his  house  at  Kye-pa  Khangsar,  where  he  proposed  staying  three
days.

The  parents  of  the  minister,  accompanied  by  their  youngest  boy,
came  again  to  pay  their  respects. The  father,  a  quiet,  respectable-


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  95

looking-,  elderly  man,  saluted  me  by  taking  off  his  yellow  felt  turban
and  inquiring  after  my  health.  They  kotowed  before  the  minister,
who  gave  them  his  blessing  by  touching  the  crowns  of  their  heads
with  his  hand.

At  2  o'clock  the  minister,  dressed  like  a  Buddhist  cardinal,  and
accompanied  by  the  Tung-chen,  ourselves,  and  his  domestics,  entered
the  grand  hall  of  worship  {(lu-kang),  the  Tung-chen  carrying  a
bundle  of  incense-sticks  and  some  Ichatag.  The  head  lama  threw
some  grains  of  barley  towards  the  images  of  the  deities,  and  recited
some  mantras;  then  the  minister,  standing,  recited  a  short  prayer,
and  approaching  the  image  of  the  Buddha,  took  off  his  mitre  and
placed  a  Mataij  on  it.  Then  the  head  lama  took  the  other  khatag
which  the  Tung-chen  had  brought  with  him,  and  flung  them  one
by  one  at  the  other  images,  while  the  monks  who  accompanied  him
scattered  flowers  before  them.

After  this  we  circumambulated  the  monastery,  and  descended  to
the  foot  of  the  hill,  where  the  son  of  the  Chyag-dso-pa,  dressed  in  a
rich  Mongol  costume,  was  awaiting  us  with  two  spirited  and  richly
caparisoned  ponies  held  by  grooms,  one  of  which  the  minister
mounted,  while  we  walked  the  short  distance  which  separated  us
from  the  gateway  of  Kye-pa  Ivhangsar.  A  band  of  drums,  hautboys,
bells,  gongs,  and  fifes  marched  before  us,  playing  as  we  went  through
the  lay  town  {slio)  and  along  a  broad  road  lined  with  poplars  to  the
gate  of  the  Khangsar,  where  the  Chyag-dso-pa  was  standing  to  receive
the  minister.  He  was  dressed  in  a  rich  scarlet  satin  robe  girded  by
a  yellow  scarf,  a  yellow  woollen  turban,  and  a  pair  of  Tartar  velvet
boots.  His  tall  stature,  graceful  looks,  broad  forehead,  and  uncom-
monly well-shaped  nose,  gave  him  a  commanding  appearance.  He
greeted  the  minister  with  a  profound  bow,  and  presented  him  a  khatag,
and  received  a  Ijlessing  {cliyag  v:ang)  from  the  latter,  who  afterwards
dismounted,  putting  his  foot  on  a  velvet-covered  stool  placed  here
for  the  purpose.

The  Chyag-dso-pa  salaamed  to  Ugyen,  whom  he  took  for  me;
and  the  latter,  not  taking  off  his  hat  to  return  his  salutation  (or  pay
his  chgam-liu,  as  it  is  called),  was  reminded  of  it  in  a  whisper  by
the  Tung-chen.

We  then  ascended  a  flight  of  steps  and  entered  the  building.
The  minister  was  conducted  by  the  host  to  his  drawing-room,  while
we  were  led  bv  his  third  son,  Phuntso  Yu-gyal,  in  company  of  the


9G  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

Tuug-clien,  to  the  chapel,  the  central  room  on  the  first  floor.  The
house  \vas  very  neatly  built,  with  solid  rubble  walls  and  beautifully
carved  beams  of  old  poplar.  Tliere  was  a  skylit>ht  in  the  centre  of  the
roof;  thick  cushions  covered  with  Khamba  rugs  were  placed  around,
and  on  these  we  took  our  seats.  A  collation  was  served  on  little
tables  consisting  of  Chinese  cakes,  buckwheat  cakes,  twisted  sweet  bis-
cuits, and  tsamla  and  tea  was  given  us  by  the  Chyag-dso-pa's  page
Pinu.  After  a  little  while  we  were  led  into  the  Chyag-dso-pa's
presence,  when  we  presented  him  hhatcuj  and  a  few  rupees,  also  a
kliatag  to  his  wife,  Ama  Tung-la,  and  his  daughter-in-law,  Einpoche.
After  dinner  we  were  conducted  to  a  dormitory  on  the  south  side
of  the  chapel,  where  we  found  three  bedsteads,  and  after  a  cup  of
tea  we  retired  to  rest.

Januarij  8. — Early  in  the  morning  we  asked  our  iiost's  leave  to
start  for  Tashilhunpo,  but  he  was  most  reluctant  to  let  us  go,  and,
having  obtained  the  minister's  sanction  to  our  remaining  here  two
days  more,  we  postponed  our  departure.

Breakfast  was  served  by  a  maid-servant  (shctama)  and  our  host's
daughter-in-law  (jxctsa),  llinpoche,  the  only  wife  of  his  t\vo  sons.
She  is  entitled  to  be  addressed  as  Ohi/am  Kusho,  though  it  is  seldom
used  in  speaking  to  her.  She  is  a  young  lady  of  about  twenty,  of
modest  manners  and  intelligent  looks.  She  lingered  about  until  the
servants  and  other  guests  had  left,  with  the  evident  intention  of
conversing  v/ith  us.

Ugyen-gyatso  opened  the  conversation  by  asking  her  to  what
family  of  Ti])et  she  belonged.  She  replied  by  asking  him  if  he  had
ever  heard  of  Kusho  Maukipa  of  Tanag.  "  Yes,"  replied  he,  "  if  you
speak  of  Manki,  who  is  the  maternal  uncle  of  the  IJajah  of  Sikkini."
"  'Tis  he,"  she  said ;  "  and  lie  died  last  year  without  my  seeing  him.
Are  you  a  subject  of  my  cousin  Den  Jong  gyalpo  [the  chief  of
Sikkini]  ?  Oh,  how  I  long  to  see  my  aunt ! "  And  she  began  to
weep.  "It  is  now  full  three  years  since  I  came  iiere,  and  never  in
that  time  have  I  been  allowed  to  visit  my  fatherland.  Oh,  I  am
miserable!  1  have  to  work  continuously  at  the  loom,  supervise
the  workwonxen,  attend  to  the  kitchen,  and  serve  the  meals.  My
mother-in-law  is  without  mercy.  She  thinks  my  frame  is  made  of
iron. Tliough  this  family  is  rich,  tliey  work  like  ploughmen."

She  then  begged  Ugyeu  t(j  inform  the  Sikkini  rajah's  mother,
Lliu-yuin  Ivusho,  of  her  trouble,  and  to  persuade  her,  if  possible,  to


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  07

take  her  to  Chumbi  for  a  couple  of  months.  I  told  her,  by  way  of
consoling  her,  that  she  was  a  most  accomplished  person,  married
into  one  of  the  richest  families  of  Tsang,  and  might  hope  to  soon  be
a  mother,  so  she  must  not  consider  herself  miserable.  "  Do  you
know  palmistry  I  "  ""  she  suddenly  asked  ;  and  placing  her  right  hand
on  the  table,  she  desired  me  to  tell  her  fortune  by  the  lines  on  her
hand  (lag-ri).  I  was  much  embarrassed,  and  told  her  that  I  under-
stood very  little  of  this  art.  Fortunately  just  then  a  servant  came
and  called  us  to  the  presence  of  the  Chyag-dso-pa.

I  took  a  seat  on  his  right  hand,  and  his  wife,  Ama  Tung-la,
occupied  one  on  his  left,  while  Ugyen,  seated  a  little  distance  off,
acted  as  my  interpreter.  The  Cliyag-dso  Kusho  began  witU:  "In
the  sacred  books  we  find  mention  of  Indian  Punditas  who  laboured
for  the  diffusion  of  the  enlightened  religion.  If  you  be  a  Pundita,  as
I  hear  from  the  minister  that  you  are,  we  are  most  fortunate  to  have
you  among  us.  I  also  learn  that  you  know  about  medicines,  and
I  will  later  on  avail  myself  of  your  knowledge."  Then,  calling  his
son,  Phunsho  Yugyal,  he  desired  me,  to  my  great  embarrassment,  to
foretell  his  fortune  by  the  lines  on  his  hand.  Being  considered  a
Pundit,  it  was  impossible  for  me  to  say  that  I  did  not  know  such  an
essential  science  as  palmistry.  After  mature  reflection  I  told  him
that  although  I  had  studied  a  little  palmistry,  I  never  attached
much  importance  to  explanations  it  afforded  of  men's  fortunes.  The
science  was  very  little  understood,  anyhow,  and,  in  my  opinion,  it
did  not  deserve  any  more  attention  than  it  had  received :  nothing
could  be  more  unpleasant  than  a  foreknowledge  of  one's  misery,
Human  life  was,  albeit,  full  of  trouble  ;  it  was  for  deliverance  from  its
recurrence  that  the  Buddha  has  expounded  the  doctrine  of  nirvana.

He  listened  attentively  to  me,  and  seemed  to  think  very  highly
of  me.  He  said  that  if  he  but  knew  how  long  he  and  his  son  would
live,  he  could  devise  means  of  preventing  accidents  in  consultation
with  the  minister,  for  in  the  sacred  books  one  is  told  of  religious
remedies  by  the  use  of  which  calamities  caused  by  devils  (de)  can  be
averted.  He  pressed  me  to  examine  his  palm,  and  stretched  it  out
toward  me.  How  could  I  refuse,  and  how  could  I  predict  falsely  ?
So  I  told  him  that  there  are  certain  figures  and  lines  in  the  palm  of
the  hand  from  which  experts  in  pahnistry  can  draw  indications  of  a

*  Both  Bogle  (op.  cit.,  p.  107)  and  Captain  Turner  (op.  ciL,  p.  281)  mention  the
fondness  of  the  Tibetans  of  Shigatse  for  palmistry.— (W.  R.)

H


08  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

long  or  short  life.  In  his  palm  the  line  of  life  was  very  long ;  and  as
to  fortune,  it  was  well  known  that  he  was  favoured  by  the  gods.

Ama  Tung-la  then  showed  me  her  hand,  and  I  said,  "  Ama-la,
you  are  very  fortunate.  The  mother  of  three  sons,  all  of  them  grown
u])  and  accomplished  men ;  the  wife  of  a  great  man.  What  more  can
you  want  of  the  gods  ?  "  She  smiled  at  this,  and  said  that  for  some
days  past  she  had  been  suffering  from  a  cough;  could  I  give  her
some  medicine  that  would  relieve  her  ?  I  asked  for  some  black
pepper  and  rock-candy,  and  i)repared  a  powder  for  her.

At  noon  we  dined  with  the  minister  and  the  (Jhyag-dso  Kusho.
The  dishes  were  prepared  and  served  in  the  Chinese  fashion.  Chop-
sticks and  spoons  were  used.  The  first  course  was  rpja-tug,  a  tape-
like preparation  of  wheat-flour  and  eggs,  cooked  with  minced  mutton,
and  soup.  The  minister  did  not  eat  it,  as  he  had,  in  common  with
all  lamas,  taken  the  vow  of  abstaining  from  eggs.  The  second  course
was  rice  and  half  a  dozen  preparations  of  mutton  curry,  rice,  mutton
with  preserved  vegetables,  white  and  black  mushrooms,  Chinese  green
grass,  vermicelli,  potatoes,  and  fresh  shoots  of  peas.*  The  third
course  {lea,  literally,  "chapter")  was  buttered  and  sweetened  rice;
tlie  fourth,  and  last,  boiled  mutton,  tsamha,  and  tea.  The  Tung-chen
told  me  that  at  sumptuous  entertainments  thirteen  courses  are  usually
served.

About  an  hour  after  dinner  we  visited  Jerung  la,  the  second  son
of  tlie  Chyag-dso  Kusho,  who  is  a  monk  in  the  castle  of  Diba
Dongtse.  This  Ijuilding,  about  six  hundred  years  old,  is  built  of
stone  of  the  best  quality  ;  it  faces  south,  and  has  balconies  (rah-sal)
provided  witli  shutters  along  each  of  its  five  stories.  It  is  of  a  partly
Indian,  partly  Tibetan  style  of  architecture,  with  a  central  court-
yard about  100  feet  broad  and  200  long.  Around  this,  on  the
sides,  tlie  building  is  40  feet  high,  and  has  three  stories,  along  the
outer  eilge  of  wliicli,  on  the  courtyard  side,  arc  rows  of  drum-sliaped
prayer-wliecls  two  feet  high,  and  as  much  in  diameter,  that  take  the
place  of  railings.  There  are  some  three  hundred  of  these  prayer-
barrels  on  the  stories  of  the  three  sides.  The  main  building  is  on
the  north  side  of  the  court,  and  is  some  60  to  70  feet  high.  We
ascended  to  the  top  story  by  a  steep  ladder,  and  were  there  shown
tlie  (jonkhaiKj,^ the  shrine  of  the  guardian  deities — terrible  figures,

*  All  these  are  Chinese  dishes.— (W.  R.)

t  Gong  lihang  means  "  Ujipor  liouse."— (W.  It.)


JOURNEY TO LIIAHA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  99

among  which  I  noticed  three  of  Mamos,  resembling  Jaganath,
Balavendra,  and  Subhadra,  of  the  Hindus.

There  were  several  chapels,  in  each  of  which  was  a  resident
priest  called  am-choi.  On  the  balconies  of  the  wings  three  or  four
old  women  were  weaving  blankets,  and  at  the  entrance  to  the  build-
ing a  huge  mastiff  was  chained,  who  made  furious  attempts  to  rush
at  us  as  we  passed.

One  hundred  yards  south  of  the  castle  is  a  garden  (lingo)  with
tall  poplars — some  80  to  100  feet  high,  and  four  other  kinds  of  trees
planted  in  rows  along  its  four  walks,  in  the  middle  of  which  is  a
tastefully  built  summer-house,  its  cornice  and  external  decorations
remarkably  pretty.  One  hundred  yards  away  from  it  is  a  target  foi-
musket  and  bow  practice.

While  we  visited  the  linga  a  greyhound  *  was  running  about  it,
but  he  paid  no  attention  to  us.  On  our  way  homeward  we  passed
through  the  village  where,  under  some  tall  poplars,  tradesmen  were
displaying  pottery  for  sale.  We  also  saw  four  yellow-turbaned  men,
who,  we  were  told,  were  the  tax-collector's  understrappers.

January  9. — While  we  were  breakfasting  Rinpoche  came  in,  and
again  spoke  of  her  hard  work  and  of  the  merciless  treatment  of  her
mother-in-law.  I  asked  her  if  her  husband  was  not  fond  of  her,
"  Oh,  sir,"  she  said,  "  we  two  are  like  one  soul  and  body ;  but  he  is
most  of  the  time  at  Shigatse,  where  he  is  the  Dahpon's  steward  "
{NyerpaX).  She  told  me  that  she  had  just  heard  that  her  cousin,  the
Eajah  of  Sikkim,  was  coming  to  Tibet  to  get  married.  If  his  mother
came  with  him,  she  could  surely  persuade  her  to  take  her  with  her
to  Chumbi  for  a  couple  of  months.  She  also  said  to  me  that  her
mother-in-law  ought  not  to  have  given  her  such  a  high  sounding
name  as  Rinpoche  ("  the  Jewel "),  for  it  is  a  name  given  to  incar-
nate lamas  and  chiefs  ;  but  1  answered,  to  her  evident  pleasure,  that
Rinpoche  was  a  most  appropriate  name  for  handsome  and  accom-
pKshed  women.

After  this  I  went  to  the  minister's  apartment  for  dinner.  Before
it  was  served  we  washed  our  hands.  A  large  copper  bowl,  or  luttora,
was  placed  for  the  purpose  before  the  minister,  who,  in  washing  his

*  Most  likely  imported  into  the  country  by  some  Chinese.  I  have  never  seen  a
greyhound  in  Tibet,  and  they  are  rare  even  in  China  and  Mongolia.— (W.  R.)  ^

t  Apparently  we  should  read  "husbands,"  for  the  author  has  told  us  that  this
accomplished  young  woman  was  the  wife  of  tlie  two  sons  of  the  Chyag-dso-pa.— (W.  E.) /


100  JOURNEY TO LB  ASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

bauds,  rubbed  them  with  a  kind  of  wood  dust  called  sugpa*  obtained
from  a  plant  growing  in  Tibet,  and  used  instead  of  soap.

After  dinner  the  Chyag-dso-pa  made  presents  to  the  minister,
consisting  of  blankets,  Tibetan  serge  {pido),  three  pieces  of  red,
scarlet,  and  yellow  English  broadcloth,  Gyantse  rugs  of  superior
quality,  Khamba  rugs,  Chinese  brocaded  satin,  spotted  woollen  chintz,
about  two  bushels  of  tsamha,  a  large  quantity  of  buckwheat  cakes,
twisted  sugar  cakes,  loaves  of  bread,  and  three  liundred  tankas.  The
presentation  of  these  gifts  he  accompanied  by  profound  salutations,
and  the  minister  gave  him  his  blessing,  when  he  begged  him
to  pray  to  the  gods  to  make  him  prosperous  and  happy.  After
this  he  gave  presents  of  about  half  the  value  to  the  Tung-chen,  and
so  on,  less  and  less,  according  to  each  one's  rank ;  to  me  he  gave
two  Gyantse  rugs,  two  pieces  of  spotted  'pulo,  and  a  VlmfcKj.  Aims
"were  also  distributed  among  the  monks  and  the  minister's  menials.

When  the  Chyag-dso  Kusho  had  finished  making  all  these
presents  he  returned  to  the  minister's  room,  where  we  were  with
him.  In  course  of  conversation  he  suggested  the  propriety  of  my
presenting  the  Tashi  lama  with  an  elephant.  He  said  that  two  had
recently  been  sent  by  the  Eajah  of  Sikkim  to  Lhasa,  to  be  pre-
sented to  the  Dalai  lama,  one  of  which  had  died  on  the  way.j
He  also  spoke  of  the  superiority  of  Indian  metal  images  over
those  made  in  Tibet,  and  said  that  those  made  in  Ma<j;adha,  and
called  Jai-khim,  were  very  rare  in  this  country.  "  If  you  had  brought
some  of  these,  or  of  shar-li  [Bengal  bell-metal],  or  nul-li  [lower
Indus  valley], $  and  presented  them  to  the  minister,  he  would  have
been  infinitely  more  pleased  than  with  glass  and  other  fragile  and
useless  toys."

In  the  evening  it  was  settled  that  the  minister  should  start  for
Tashilhunpo  on  the  morrow,  and  that  Kusho  Jambala,  the  Chyag-
dso-pa's  elder  brother,  who  was  suffering  from  ophthalmia,  should
accoin])any  him,  to  sul)niit  there  to  my  medical  treatment.

*  Jaeschkc,  '  Tib.-Engl.  Diet.'  s.\.,  oug-pu,  says  tliis  word  is  used  to  designate
a  medicinal  plant.  It  usually,  however,  means  "  hand."  Soap  is  known  and  occa-
sionally used  in  Tibet,  thougli  not  manufactured  there.  It  is  usually  called  hingh
(written  '' glmuj-glad")  It  i.s  brought  there  from  India  or  China,  the  former  kind
being  the  best. — (W.  It.)

t  See  chap.  vii.  p.  171.

X  Hhar-li  means,  liternlly,  "  Eastern  bell-metal ;  "  and  Ntih-li,  "  Western  bell-metal."

-(w.  n.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET,  101

Jamiary  10. — We  were  up  early,  and  got  ready  to  leave  for
Tashilhunpo.  The  Tung-chen  advised  me  to  start  ahead  of  the
minister,  who  would  overtake  me  on  the  road,  as  he  travelled  very
rapidly,  and  he  furthermore  let  me  pick  out  for  my  use  the  quietest
pony  in  the  stable.  We  had  not  gone  four  miles  when  the  minister
and  four  attendants  caught  up  with  us.  We  rode  on  together  some
six  miles,  and  when  we  reached  the  bed  of  the  stream,  now  dry,
which  empties  into  the  Nyang  cUu,  we  all  alighted.  The  minister
ordered  his  page  to  bring  him  a  basketful  of  earth  from  a  spot  ho
pointed  out.  This  was  placed  before  him  as  he  sat  cross-legged  on  a
rug,  when  he  muttered  some  mantras  and  made  an  oblation  of  tsaniba
and  water.  The  Tung-chen  informed  me  that  on  the  last  journey
the  minister  had  made  this  way  he  had  at  this  spot  fallen  from  his
pony,  and  it  was  supposed  that  some  evil  spirit  haunting  this  spot
was  desirous  of  hurting  him,  and  so  this  ceremony  was  performed
to  drive  it  away.

When  it  was  over  we  had  a  light  collation,  the  minister  giving
me  some  dried  dates  and  C'abul  fruits,  while  the  Tung-chen  gave
the  others  treacle,  biscuits,  and  tsamba.

At  4  o'clock  we  reached  Tashi-gang,  After  partaking  of
refreshments  the  minister  took  his  seat  on  the  roof  of  Ang-putta's
second  story.  He  called  me  and  Ugyen  up,  and  asked  us  to  teach
him  the  foreign  system  of  land  surveying.  Ugyen  showed  him  his
prismatic  compass  with  attached  clinometer.  We  explained  the  use
of  these  instruments,  and  expressed  regrets  that  we  had  no  tape-
measure  or  chain  with  which  we  could  take  measurements,  carefully
abstaining  from  mentioning  measuring  distances  by  pacing,  lest  he
might  suspect  us  of  being  surveyors,  and  withdraw  his  protection.

He  then  spoke  of  his  desire  to  have  a  sextant,  various  mathe-
matical instruments,  a  chest  of  medicines,  and  an  illustrated  work
on  astronomy.  Ugyen  expressed  his  willingness  to  go  to  Calcutta  to
purchase  them,  were  it  not  that  he  could  not  leave  me  here  alone.,
and  with  my  desire  to  see  Lhasa  unfulfilled.  The  minister  replied,
"  That  is  easily  provided  for.  I  will  look  after  the  Pundit ;  and  as
to  his  going  to  Lhasa,  why,  there  is  every  probability  that  the  Tashi
lama  will  ffo  there  to  ordain  the  Dalai  lama  in  the  fourth  month
(June),  when  it  will  be  possible  to  arrange  for  the  Pundit's  going
there  also.  The  Shape  Eampa,  and  Phala  are  my  friends ;  they  will
help  him. However,  we  will  think  of  all  this  later  on  at  Tashilhunpo."


102  JOUBNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

He  then  said  there  were  five  persons  in  Tsang  who  took  interest
in  science  and  study — the  Shape  Porapa,  the  Chief  Secretary  (Dvnr/-
yig  ehcnpo)  Ka-chan  ])ao,  tlie  Donyer,  and  liimself.  "  There  are,"  he
added, "  many  other  learned  men  at  Tashilhunpo  and  in  various  other
monasteries  of  Tsang,  but  they  only  interest  themselves  in  sacred
literature  ;  they  do  not  care  to  know  of  the  science  and  civilization  of
other  great  countries  such  as  that  of  the  Phylinri  (foreigners)  and
India."

The  minister  finally  informed  me  that  to-morrow  he  would  visit
tlie  Kyi-plnig  nunnery,  al)Out  three  miles  off  in  the  hills  behind  Tashi-
gang.  The  Lady  Superior  and  her  nuns  (tsiin-mo)  had  repeatedly
begged  him  to  visit  tlieir  convent,  but  he  had  been  so  pressed  for
time  that  he  had  only  been  able  to  do  so  once  in  the  last  six
years.

January  11. — The  minister  and  liis  party  left  for  the  Kyi-phug
convent  at  7  a.m ,  and  we  set  off  for  Tashilhunpo  after  breakfast.
Old  Kushu  Jamljala  was  unable  to  keep  up  with  us.  As  he  followed
slowly  the  minister's  muleteers,  his  yellow-satin  mitre,  his  spectacles,
his  manner  of  sitting  on  his  pony,  and  his  tall  lank  figure  recalled
to  my  mind  the  renowned  knight  of  La  Mancha.  With  his  leave
we  rode  ahead.  We  saw  on  the  way  a  woman  sweeping  the  ground,
and  on  inquiry  she  told  us  that  she  was  removing  the  thick  grime
which  covered  the  ground  so  that  her  cattle  might  the  more  easily
pick  up  the  grass.  Many  sheep,  we  were  told,  die  in  winter  on
account  of  the  ice  crust  which  covers  the  grass.  At  4  p.m.  we
arrived  at  Chyang  chu,  where  we  were  most  kindly  received  l)y  the
Delja  Sliikha,  and  lodged  in  the  same  quarters  we  had  previously
occupied.

Janiifiry  12. — After  lireakfast  wo  strolled  about  the  lingd  in  front
of  the  minister's  bathing-house  {cham  chu).  It  is  surrounded  by
a  wall  of  sun-dried  bricks,  stones,  and  turf  seven  feet  high.  In  the
south-east  corner  is  the  snug  little  two-storied  house  where  the
minister  passes  a  few  days  in  October.  The  cooking  and  bathing
is  done  under  yak-hair  tents  pitched  in  the  western  avenue  of  the
grove.

At  9  o'clock  we  set  out,  and  were  at  Tashilhunpo  l)y  noon,  and
there  found  riiurdning,  who  liad  arrived  the  day  before  from  Kliamlia
jong.  Tlu!  Djongpon,  who  knew  him,  had  told  liim  that  unless  he
came  bearing  a  passport  from  the Tashi lama  or  the  Commander


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  103

of  Sliigatse,  be  could  not  let  him  pass  the  frontier.  There  were
formal  orders  from  the  Lhasa  Government  not  to  let  any  one  cross
the  frontier,  even  if  bearing  letters  from  the  high  officials  of  Labrang,
who  are  not,  however,  in  charge  of  frontier  affairs.  So  Einzing
Namgyal  had  to  leave  our  luggage  with  the  Pipon  of  Laclian,  and
had  gone  back  to  Darjiling.


04  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.


CHAPTER IV.

RESIDENCE AT TASHILHUNPO, AND PRErARATIONS FOR JOURNEY TO

LHASA.

January  13.— Tlic  money  we  had  brought  from  Darjiling  bemg
almost  expended,  we  were  now  in  the  necessity  of  selling  the  pearls
and  gold  we  had  brought  with  us.  I  therefore  sent  Ugyen  to  the
market  to  inquire  of  Lupa  gyaltsan,  with  whom  we  had  left  some
tolas  of  pearls  for  sale,  if  he  had  been  able  to  dispose  of  them.  Lupa
gyaltsan  told  him  that  he  had  shown  the  pearls  to  a  Lhasa  merchant,
who  had  not  offered  more  than  cost  price  for  them.  The  market  for
pearls,  ho  added,  was  very  poor,  and  we  must  not  expect  to  realize
much  profit  out  of  ours  for  some  months  to  come.

He  also  told  Ugyen  that  great  preparations  were  being  made  for
the  Grand  Lama's  visit  to  Lhasa  in  May,  for  the  ordination  of  the
Dalai  lama.*  On  that  occasion  the  Tashi  would  have  to  make
return  presents  and  give  rewards  in  money  to  the  various  officials
and  chiefs  of  Tibet,  for  which  robes,  boots,  etc.,  were  now  being  made
in  great  numbers.

Januarij  14. — On  the  way  to  the  market  to-day  Ugyen  met  Lupa
gyaltsan,  who  informed  him  that  some  traders  from  Phagri,  Chumbi,

*  On  July  :;i,  1S79,  the  thirteenth  incarnation  of  the  Dalai  lama  was  placed  on
the  throne  of  Lhasa.  Chandra  Das  speaks  of  this  event  in  the  following  terms  :  "  The
princely  infant,  into  whose  person  the  spirit  of  the  late  Dalai  had  passed,  had  been
brought  up  till  now  in  a  small  i)alace  of  Gyal-kup,  near  Lhasa.  Last  year  the
Tashi  lama,  at  the  invitation  of  the  Emperor  of  China  and  the  high  officials  of  Tibet,
had  gone  to  Lhasa  to  examine  the  infant  Dalai,  and  report  if  the  spirit  of  the  last
Dalai  had  really  passed  into  his  person.  For  several  days  oracles  were  consulted,  the
result  being  to  establish  beyond  doubt  that  the  infant  was  the  incarnate  Shenrazig,
the  patron  of  Tibet.  On  the  day  wlien  he  pronounced  the  infant's  claim  to  the  pontifical
throne  to  be  good  ami  valid,  a  magnificent  rainbow  is  said  to  have  ajjpeared  over  the
palace  of  Potala.  The  Tashi  lama  had  fixed  July  31  for  the  Dalai's  accession  to  the
throne  "  (see  '  Narrative  of  a  Journey  to  Tashilhunpo,'  p.  25).


JOUBNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  105

and  Ein-chen-gang  had  just  arrived,  and  that,  to  judge  from  their
conversation,  they  were  not  well  disposed  towards  us.  He  therefore
cautioned  Ugyen,  so  that  he  might  not  meet  them  unprepared.
Ugyen,  in  consequence,  first  went  to  the  police  station  and  learnt
from  his  friend,  the  Chinese  havildar  of  Shigatse,  who  the  new-
comers were ;  then  he  looked  them  up,  and  questioned  them  about
the  passes  to  India.  They  told  him  they  had  been  able  to  get  here
through  the  Lhasa  Government  having  declared  the  Phagri  pass  open.
As  to  the  Sikkim  rajah  coming  here,  they  could  give  no  definite
information,  though  they  said  there  was  much  talk  about  his
marrying  the  daughter  of  a  great  man  of  Lhasa.

In  the  afternoon  the  minister  sent  for  me,  and  told  me  that  tlie
boxes  containing  the  lithographic  press  sent  him  some  months  ago
had  not  been  opened  for  fear  of  small-pox.  "  I  thought  the  cases
contained  some  miraculous  remedies  which  could  neutralize  small-
pox. One  night  I  smelt  some  gaseous  emanations  coming  out  from
the  boxes,  which  I  thought  contained  the  germs  of  small-pox ;  so  I
could  not  sleep  that  night,  so  troubled  was  my  mind  lest  small-pox
should  attack  us,"  We  laughed  heartily  at  his  holiness's  fancies,  and
I  told  him  that  the  vaccine  he  had  asked  for  was  among  the  things
still  at  the  Lachan  pass.  At  last  he  was  convinced  of  the  ground-
lessness of  his  fears,  and  joined  with  us  in  laughing  at  them.

Januarii  15. — After  breakfast  we  unpacked  in  the  minister's
library  the  lithographic  press,  and  set  it  up,  the  minister  taking  great
interest  in  the  work  and  assisting  me  himself.

January  16. — After  breakfast,  which  we  took  with  the  minister
in  the  west  drawing-room  of  the  Phuntso  khangsar,  he  told  me  that
he  was  most  anxious  to  get  the  things  I  had  at  Lachan.  Phurchung
was  not  intelligent  enough  to  get  around  the  Djongpon  of  Khamba,
even  if  he  were  provided  with  the  best  of  passports.  He  thought
it  indispensable  for  Ugyen  to  undertake  the  journey  to  Lachan,
especially  as  he  had  relatives  there,  a  circumstance  which  would
greatly  facilitate  the  accomplishment  of  his  mission.

Ugyen  objected  to  start  on  such  a  difficult  journey  at  a  season  of
the  year  w^hen  the  cold  would  be  intense  and  the  Kangra  lamo  pass
would  be  blocked  with  snow ;  but  he  felt,  nevertheless,  called  upon  to
comply  with  the  minister's  request,  if  he  provided  him  with  a  proper
passport.  Not  only  did  the  minister  promise  to  give  him  an  excellent
passport,  but  he  also  said  that  he  would  propitiate  the  gods  to  the  end


106  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

that  tliey  would  protect  him  from  dangers  from  man,  beast,  or  disease,
till  the  first  of  the  third  Tibetan  moon  (end  of  April,  1882).

"\Mien  this  was  settled  Ugyen  begged  the  minister  to  look  after
me  in  his  absence,  and  not  to  allow  any  injury  to  be  done  me  on  the
ground  that  I  was  a  foreigner.  He  asked  him  to  give  him  a  letter
stating,  first,  that  he  (the  minister)  would  see  to  my  welfare,  and  that
I  Avould  be  in  no  w^ay  molested  ;  second,  that  on  Ugyen-gyatso's
return  he  and  I  might  go  on  a  pilgrimage  to  Central  Tibet ;  third,
that  we  should  be  protected  in  any  difficulty  which  might  arise  on  the
score  of  our  being  foreigners.

Besides  the  great  importance  of  obtaining  these  written  assurances
from  the  minister,  tlie  production  of  such  a  letter  by  Ugyen,  in  case
of  my  death  during  his  absence,  would  relieve  him  of  all  responsibility
towards  our  Government.

Tlie  minister  promised  to  keep  me  in  his  house  as  a  member  of
liis  family,  to  defray  all  my  expenses,  and  to  send  me  to  Lhasa  in
May  with  the  Tashi  lama's  party.  Should,  however,  neither  the
Grand  Lama  nor  himself  go  to  Lhasa,  he  would  make  other  arrange-
ments for  our  pilgrimage  there.  As  to  the  third  point  mentioned  in
the  aljove  agreement,  he  said  that  he  was  fully  aware  when  he  invited
us  to  come  to  Tashilhunpo  of  the  responsibility  he  assumed  towards
us,  and  that  he  would  not  allow  us  to  be  molested  by  any  one  during
our  stay  in  Tibet.

January  17. — The  minister  went  in  the  morning  to  Shigatse,  to
grant  absolution  to  the  departed  soul  of  Shang-po,  one  of  the  six  Tso-
pon  who  had  been  so  severely  punished  by  the  Chinese  authorities
on  the  13th  of  December  last,  and  who  had  died  from  the  effects  of  the
flogging  tlien  received.  We  devoted  the  whole  day  to  the  setting  up
of  tlie  lithographic  press.

January  18. — The  minister  told  Ugyen  that  Kusho  Badur-la,  the
head  of  the  transportation  de])artment,  wished  to  see  the  pearls  we
had  brought  with  us.  Ugyen  did  not  find  him  at  home,  but  conversed
with  his  wife,  whom  he  at  once  recognized,  having  seen  her  at  Tumlung
and  Chumbi,  she  ])eing  the  elder  sister  of  the  present  Kajah  of  Sikkim.
She  gave  him  a  very  kind  reception,  and  talked  to  him  for  nearly  an
hour,  treating  him  to  tea  and  yya-tug  (vermicelli).

Jamtary  19. — To-day  being  the  day  of  the  new  moon,  nearly  a
thousand  beggars  lined  the  road  leading  from  Tashilhunpo  to  Shigatse,
where  Lliagpa  tsering  was  distributing  alms  to  them.


JOUBNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  107

At  noon  Ugyen  visited  the  market-place,  where  he  witnessed  a
quarrel  between  a  woman  and  a  Khamba  over  a  tanka's  worth  of
tsamha,  in  the  course  of  which  the  woman  challenged  the  man  to  take
an  oath  very  common  in  Tibet,  namely,  that  if  he  told  an  untruth,  he
might  never  see  the  Grand  Lama's  face.  The  people  of  Khams  are  a
fierce  race  who  infest  the  solitudes  of  Tibet,  and  generally  carry  on
depredations  on  the  isolated  villages  north  of  Lhasa.  Tliey  are  a
dangerous  class.*

Jamiarij  20. — Early  in  the  morning  we  received  an  invitation  to
dine  with  our  acquaintance,  Lupa  gyaltsan.  We  were  told  that  to-day
was  the  New  Year's  Day  of  the  working  class,  and  was  so  observed  by
all  the  people  of  Tibet,  with  the  exception  of  the  clergy.

After  breakfast  we  went  to  the  minister's,  and  told  lum  the  press
was  ready  for  working.  I  asked  him  to  print  a  very  auspicious  hymn,
that  the  first  fruit  of  our  labour  might  be  a  sacred  composition.  He
at  once  ran  to  his  study  and  brought  a  stanza,  or  stotra,  composed  by
the  present  Grand  Lama  (of  Tashilhunpo  ?)  in  honour  and  praise  of
the  minister.  This  he  copied  himself  on  the  transfer  paper,  and  we
obtained  excellent  impressions  of  it,  much  to  his  delight.  The  "stone
press "  {do  par)  was  forthwith  given  the  name  of  the  "  miraculous
press  "  {till  par).

At  three  in  the  afternoon  we  asked  leave  to  go  to  Lupa
gyaltsan's  house,  where  I  had  a  most  hearty  reception,  he  and  his
wife  coming  to  help  me  dismount  from  my  pony.  We  were  ushered
into  a  newly  finished  room  on  the  first  floor,  where  was  also  his
chapel.  First  chang  was  served,  then  tea  was  brought  by  his
daughter,  a  girl  of  ten,  and  the  wife  placed  a  wooden  bowl  filled  with
tsamha  and  some  pieces  of  boiled  mutton  on  a  little  table  before  us.
Then  Lupa  gyaltsan,  taking  off  his  turban,  asked  me  to  take  sol  ja
and  consider  that  I  was  dining  in  my  own  house.  Shortly  after,
Ugyen,  in  accordance  with  Tibetan  custom,  made  a  short  speech
exhorting  Lupa  to  always  inquire  after  my  health  during  his  absence
from  Tashilhunpo,  and  to  get  for  me  all  such  articles  of  food,  etc.,  that
I  might  want.  He  thanked  him  for  his  kindness,  and  added  that,  as
Lupa  and  I  were  old  acquaintances,  we  should  behave  to  each  other  as

*  The  Khamba  avemuch  dreaded  throughout  Tibet;  frequent  mentions  are  made  in
the  narratives  of  the  Indian  explorers  of  their  lawless  ways.  For  fuller  particulars
regarding  them  and  their  country,  I  must  refer  the  reader  to  my  '  Land  of  tlie  Lamas  '
and  to  the  narrative  of  A.  K.'s  journey. — (W.  R.)


108  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

brothers  born  of  the  same  mother.  So  saying,  he  presented  him  and
his  wife  with  a  rupee  and  a  Mata;/  each,  putting  the  coins  in  their
hands  and  the  scarfs  round  their  necks.  Ugyen  then  put  a  khatag
around  my  servant  Lhagpa's  neck,  telhng  him  to  serve  me  ever  faith-
fully. Lupa's  daughter,  ha\'ing  dressed  herself  in  her  gala  dress,  danced
for  us  and  sang  a  song,  first  in  the  Tibetan  way,  then  in  the  Chinese ;
she  sang  also  a  Chinese  song,  Lupa  accompanying  her  on  the  flute
{ling-hii).  After  this  Lupa's  wife  sang  a  song,  and  then  wished  us  a
happy  new  year.  We  tlien  took  leave  of  our  hosts,  wishing  them
also  a  happy  new  year.

Having  inquired  if  the  observance  of  this  day  w^as  a  purely  Tibetan
custom,  I  gathered  from  their  reply  that  this  was  the  New  Year's  Day
according  to  the  Tibetan  custom  of  the  pre-Buddhist  period.  It  is
tlie  only  remnant  of  ancient  Tibetan  custom,  as  far  as  I  know,  which
has  not  been  displaced  by  Buddhism.

January  21. — This  day  was  also  observed  as  a  holiday  by  the
laity.  There  were  so  few  persons  in  the  market-place  that  Ugyen
could  buy  no  provisions.  The  minister  graciously  insisted  that  I
should  take  up  my  quarters  in  his  residence,  Puntso  khangsar,  where
he  offered  me  the  library  with  an  attached  waiting-room  and  bath-
room.

In  the  evening  Nyima-dorje,  the  oldest  son  of  the  Chyag-dso-pa
of  Dongtse,  came  and  consulted  me  about  his  eyes.  On  the  right  one
I  found  that  a  cataract  had  formed.  I  told  him  I  was  exceedingly
sorry  I  had  no  medicines  with  me  to  suit  his  case,  but  that  Ugyen
was  going  to  Calcutta  as  soon  as  he  had  obtained  a  passport,  and  that
he  would  Ijring  back  some  drugs  with  him.  He  then  said  that  it  was
this  passport  that  had  brought  him  here  to  speak  to  the  minister
about,  and  that  he  believed  it  would  be  ready  in  a  day  or  two.

January  22. — I  resumed  reading  English  and  working  sums  in
arithmetic  with  the  minister.  After  reading  a  few  lines  he  turned
over  the  pages  of  Ganot's  '  Physics,'  and  asked  me  to  explain  the
diagrams  on  telegraphy  and  the  camera  obscura.  He  wanted  every-
thing explained  to  him ;  Init,  unlbrtunately  for  me,  I  was  not  myself
acquainted  with  most  of  the  sultjccts  which  excited  his  curiosity.
Not  prepared  to  expose  my  ignorance,  I  dwelt  longer  on  such
questions  as  I  could  best  explain,  and  with  which  I  was  most
familiar ;  l)ut  in  spite  of  all  my  attempts  to  evade  his  inquisitive-
ness,  the  shrewd  minister  gauged  me  well,  and  expressed  his  earnest.


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  100

desire  to  meet  such  men  as  I  had  described  to  him,  Dr.  Sircar  and  my
brother,  Navin  Chandra,  to  be.

In  the  afternoon  Nyima-dorje  brought  the  lam-yig  (passport),  and
presented  it  to  the  minister.  We  were  called  in  and  shown  it ;  but
Ugyen  disapproved  of  it,  as  nothing  was  said  in  it  of  liis  return
journey  here,  so  it  was  sent  back  for  correction.

Jaimarij  23. — Crowds  of  visitors  came  to  receive  the  minister's
blessing  {chyag-wang) ;  among  them  were  many  Khalkhas  and  other
Mongols  from  remote  sections  of  that  country.  The  Khalkhas  were
introduced  by  Lobzang  Arya,  my  cook  during  my  first  sojourn  at
Tashilhunpo  in  1879,  and  now  a  man  of  standing  and  elder  {gyer-gycm)
of  the  Khalkha  Kham-tsan.  The  minister  talked  with  him  in  Mon-
golian, after  receiving  the  pilgrims  with  much  kindness.

January  24 — Early  in  the  morning  I  was  called  by  the  minister,
and  found  a  young  monk  of  the  Nyagpa  Ta-tsang  (a  Tantrik  school)  *
sitting  with  him.  The  minister  asked  me  to  examine  his  eyes,  which
were  a  little  swollen,  telling  me  at  the  same  time  that  this  young
man  had  served  him  devotedly  during  his  residence  at  the  Nyag-khang,
and  was  deserving  of  my  care.  I  gave  him  a  few  doses  of  alum  lotion
to  wash  his  eyes  with,  and  made  liim  promise  to  walk  round  the
monastery  several  times  a  day  whenever  it  was  fair  weather.

In  the  afternoon  I  lunched  with  the  Tung-chen,  and  we  conversed
about  the  high  winds  which  at  this  season  blow  every  afternoon.  He
spoke  also  of  the  Phagri  pass,  and  told  me  that  the  collector  of  customs
(Serpen)  there  was  a  friend  of  his,  and  that  if  Ugyen  went  to  Dar-
jiling  by  the  Phagri  pass,  he  could  give  him  a  letter  of  introduction
to  that  officer.  I  thanked  him  for  his  kindness,  adding  that  Ugyen
preferred  the  Lachan  pass,  as  he  had  a  passport  from  the  commander
of  Shigatse  which  did  not  extend  to  Phagri  djong.

January  25. — The  minister  told  me  that  in  certain  stellar  maps
he  had  examined  he  saw  that  figures  were  given  the  different  con-
stellations, and  that  he  understood  these  figures  really  existed  in  the
sky ;  so,  wishing  to  see  them,  he  had  bought  a  large  telescope  at  much
cost.  He  did  not  know,  however,  how  to  use  it,  and  was  most
anxious  to  have  a  well-illustrated  work  on  astronomy,  that  he  might
know  what  to  look  for  and  where  to  look  for  it.  He  also  remembered
my  saying  that  the  regions  of  the  moon,  Saturn,  and  even  of  the  sun,
were  visible  through  the  telescope,  and  he  was  curious  to  know  what

*  See  fupra,  p.  75.


110  JOUENEY TO  LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

these  luiiiinaries  contained,  for  lie  liad  hitherto  been  under  the
im])ression  that  these  celestial  bodies  were  angelic  luminaries  who,
lor  the  excellence  of  their  moral  merits,  had  been  promoted  to  celestial
mansions  of  different  heights,  thence  to  shed  on  us  their  radiant  lustre,
and  thereby  guide  all  living  beings  of  the  earth  in  the  path  of  dkarina.
"While  we  were  thus  talking  Nyima-dorje  arrived,  and  presented
the  passport  to  his  lioliness.  After  perusing  it  he  handed  it  to  me,  and
I  passed  it  to  Ugyen.  "We  found  that  the  commanders  of  Shigatse
(DaJipon),  in  order  to  prevent  tlie  introduction  of  small-pox,  had
instructed  in  it  the  Djongpon  of  Kliamba  to  examine  the  contents  of
our  buxes,  to  })revent  contagion  being  brought  into  the  country  in
them.  This  would  put  the  Djongpon  in  a  position  to  exact  from
Ugyen  any  amount  of  money  he  might  choose ;  but  as  it  would  be
inconvenient  to  wait  longer  for  a  corrected  lani-ijyj,  the  minister
advised  Ugyen  to  be  satisfied  with  the  present  one,  and  to  do  the
best  he  could  with  it.

January  26. — Ugyen  declared  that  lliurchung's  services  were
absolutely  necessary  to  him,  and  asked  that  he  be  lent  to  him  for  six
months,  adding  that  without  liim  he  would  not  start  on  the  journey.
After  breakfast  the  minister  consulted  with  tlie  Tung-chen  and  Gopa
aliout  keeping  me  with  him.  Arrangements  were  soon  made;  but
they  all  o])jected  to  my  kee})ing  Lliagpa  as  my  servant,  telling  me
that  a  Sliigatse  man  could  not  be  trusted,  as  they  were  cunning,
deceitful,  and  faithless.  He  added  tliat,  as  he  had  undertaken  to  look
to  my  wants  and  comforts,  there  was  not  the  least  necessity  for  my
keeping  a  servant  at  my  own  expense.  Fearing  lest  he  should  suspect
me  of  ulterior  designs,  I  at  once  accepted  his  decision,  though  I  had
hoped,  by  means  of  Lhagpa,  to  keep  myself  informed  of  what  was
going  on  in  the  monastery  and  the^  town,  I  myself  being  practically
confined  within  the  walls  of  the  minister's  residence,  as  I  was  re-
quired, according  to  custom,  to  wait  upon  his  holiness.

JanvMrij  27. — Ugyen  and  l*hurchung  busied  themselves  in  pre-
paring for  the  journey.  The  former  took  a  pair  of  Gyantse  blankets
and  a  suit  of  lamliskin  clothes,  and  I  gave  Phurchung  a  pair  of  my
own  blankets  for  his  use  during  the  journey.  They  purchased  a
large  quantity  of  sheep's  fat  to  distribute  among  the  Sikkimese  on
the  way.  Dried  mutton,  tsaniba,  and  sheep's  fat  are  the  dainties
the  Sikkimese  esteem  above  all  others.  They  hired  four  ponies  to
ride  and  carry  their  luggage.


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  Ill

In  the  evening  we  were  invited  to  take  tea  with  the  minister,  when
Ugyen  took  formal  leave,  making  three  profound  bows  to  his  holiness,
and  praying  that  his  blessing  might  always  be  on  him,  and  that,  by
the  mercy  of  the  sacred  Buddhas,  he  might  reach  his  destination  safely.
Januarii  28. — To-day,  the  10th  of  the  12th  moon,  was  considered
a  highly  auspicious  day  on  which  to  start  for  India.  At  6  o'clock
Ugyen,  Phurchung,  and  I  went  to  the  minister's  apartment,  when  his
holiness,  after  a  short  prayer,  wished  them  a  safe  and  pleasant  journey,
and  placed  khatag  on  their  necks.  At  Ugyen's  special  request  I
desired  Phurchung  in  a  short  speech  to  serve  Ugyen  as  he  would
serve  me,  to  which  he  answered,  "  La  laso,  laso  "  (yes,  sir,  yes).  Then
we  returned  to  the  Torgod  chyi-khang,  our  lodging,  where,  after  break-
fast, I  presented  parting  hhatag  to  my  faithful  companions.  The
scene  was  extremely  touching,  and  they  shed  tears  at  leaving  me
alone.  I,  too,  could  not  suppress  my  feelings  as  I  exhorted  them
to  take  care  of  themselves  in  the  snows,  and  to  be  prepared  for
heavy  snowfalls. They  both  rode  off  in  high  spirits  towards  Del  el.*

Shortly  after  I  sent  Wang-chyug  gyalpo  and  the  minister's  page
to  fetch  my  clothes,  utensils,  etc.,  to  my  new  quarters.  They  brought
some,  and  told  me  that  my  trusted  servant,  Lliagpa,  was  quietly
carrying  off  my  kettles  and  plates.  I  immediately  went  to  the
Torgod  chyi-khang,  and  asked  him  to  give  up  the  missing  articles,
but  he  denied  any  knowledge  of  them,  though  we  could  see  the
breast  of  his  gown  stuffed  out  with  them,  and  he  insisted  the  devils
{de)  must  have  carried  them  off.  I  at  once  sent  for  the  Nyerpa  and
the  Tung-chen.  It  was  impossible,  however,  to  search  Lhagpa,  so
we  had  to  confine  ourselves  to  drawing  up  a  list  of  the  things  missing
and  of  the  things  I  had  with  me ;  and  then,  locking  the  door  of  my
lodgings,  the  Tung-chen  told  Lhagpa  to  return  quietly  to  his  house.
The  Tung-chen  smiled  at  the  roguery  of  my  trusted  servant,  and  made
me  understand  that  I  knew  very  little  about  Tibetans,  and  that  I
should  not  have  trusted  Shigatse  people.

January  29. — The  minister  came  to  my  rooms,  and  insisted  on
nailing  up  a  curtain,  so  as  to  divide  the  room  in  two,  the  books  in
the  northern  part,  and  my  seat  and  bedstead  in  the  southern  half
of  it.  He  said  that  such  an  arrangement  was  necessary,  as  the  books
were  of  arsenical  paper,  and  I  would  fall  ill  if  I  continually  breathed
the  air  of  this  place.  Underneath  my  room  was  the  cook-room
*  De-le  of  our  maps.— (W.  K  )


112  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

(sol-tab),  the  heat  from  which  kept  the  library  dry  and  warm.  There
Avas  but  one  window,  about  four  feet  square,  in  my  room,  through
which  1  could  see  the  Xartang  hills.

At  0  o'clock  breakfast  was  announced,  when  the  Nyerpa  con-
ducted me  to  the  minister's  presence.  Tea  was  served  me  in  a  pretty
china  cup,  and  Kachan  gopa  brought  me  a  bowl  of  tsamha  and  a  few
slices  of  boiled  mutton,  and,  noticing  my  difficulty  in  making  dough
of  the  tsamha  and  tea  after  the  Tibetan  fashion,  took  it  from  me  and
mixed  it  himself,  twirling  the  cup  on  the  palm  of  his  hand,  and
mixing  the  flour  and  tea  with  his  forefinger.

In  the  dining-room  there  was  a  parrot  lately  presented  to  the
minister  by  the  Chyan-dso  shar  of  Tashilhunpo,  and  a  small  saffron
plant  raised  from  some  seed  brought  from  Kashmir.  This  plant
throve  well,  I  was  told,  but  yielded  no  saffron.

After  breakfast  I  returned  to  my  studies,  and,  with  the  permission
of  the  minister,  commenced  a  search  for  Sanskrit  books  in  his  library.
At  noon  tlie  cook  placed  on  an  earthenware  stove  near  me  a  pot  of
steaming'  tea,  and  in  the  afternoon  he  filled  it  again.  I  was  told
it  was  injurious  to  drink  cold  water;  Tibetans  very  seldom  drink  it ;
the  laymen  quench  tlieir  thirst  with  draughts  of  cold  fermented
barley  liquor  {clcang),  and  lamas  with  hot  tea.

As  the  minister,  on  account  of  his  vows,  was  debarred  from  eating
in  the  afternoon,  evening,  or  night,  he  desired  me  to  take  my  supper
with  the  secretary;  so  when  the  lamp  was  lighted  I  went  down-
stairs, and  sat  gossiping  in  the  kitchen  with  him.

Januarij  30. — To-day  I  discovered  three  Sanskrit  works  written
in  the  Tibetan  character.  They  were  the  Kavijadarslia,  by  Acharya
Sri  Dandi ;  the  Chandra  Vyakarana,  by  Chandra  Gomi ;  and  the
Svarasvat  Vi/aJcarana,  by  Acharya  Ami.  I  was  transported  with  joy
when  I  saw  that  they  contained  explanations  in  Tibetan.

In  the  afternoon  I  showed  Sri  Dandi's  work  to  the  minister,  who,
to  my  surprise,  was  able  to  give  me  more  information  concerning
him  than  I  had  expected,  and  he  had  committed  the  entire  work  to
memory.  "  Dandi,"  he  said,  "  must  have  lived  a  thousand  and  more
years  ago,  for  this  work  was  translated  into  Tibetan  by  one  of  tlie
Sakya  hierarchs  who  lived  about  six  hundred  years  ago,  and  it  is
probable  that  the  work  was  not  xary  new  when  it  came  to  be  known
in  this  country."

Januarij  31. — Preparatiuns  for the new  year's ceremonies  now


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  118

occupy  the  attention  of  all  classes.  Large  numbers  of  men  are
coming  to  take  the  first  vows  of  monkhood,  and  Kachan  Shabdung
introduced  to-day  a  number  of  them  to  his  holiness.  The  minister's
time  was  largely  taken  up  with  these  religious  duties,  and  I  could
not  see  him  for  more  than  ten  or  twelve  minutes.  When  I  withdrew
to  my  room,  the  astrologer,  Lobzang,  came  to  see  me ;  he  was  busy
with  the  almanac  for  the  new  year,  and  kept  turning  over  its  pages
to  see  if  there  were  any  mistakes.  The  minister  also  had  to  examine
it  before  submitting  it  to  the  Grand  Lama.

Lobzang,  seeing  the  lithographic  press,  was  curious  to  know  what
"  those  stones  and  wheeled  apparatus,"  as  he  put  it,  were  meant  for.
He  begged  me  to  explain  the  process  of  printing,  but  I  evaded  his
questions,  as  I  had  been  told  not  to  talk  of  the  press  to  outsiders.

In  the  evening  the  Deba  Shika  arrived  with  a  large  supply  of
butter  and  tsamba,  evidently  to  be  used  in  the  new  year's  ceremonies.

Prom  this  time  on  I  devoted  myself  to  the  study  of  the  sacred  books
and  histories  of  Tibet,  and  ceased  to  keep  a  regular  diary,  noting  only
such  things  concerning  the  customs  and  manners  of  the  country  as
seemed  interesting.  When  I  felt  tired  of  Tibetan  I  refreshed  my
mind  with  the  melodious  verses  of  Dandi's  Kavyadarsha,  both  in
the  original  and  the  Tibetan  translation,  and  during  my  leisure  hours
I  conversed  with  tlie  Tung-chen,  the  Nyerpa,  and  other  well-informed
men.

The  first  part  of  February  was  very  cold  ;  the  north  wind  blew
daily,  raising  clouds  of  dust  in  the  plain  to  the  west  and  south  of  the
city.  People,  however,  were  busily  engaged  out-of-doors,  gathering
fuel  and  tending  cattle ;  in  fact,  this  is  the  busiest  season  of  the
year,  a  period  of  universal  merry-making,  and  also  of  great  activity
in  trade.

The  Tibetans,  whether  monks  or  laymen,  are  very  early  risers.
In  the  monastery  the  great  trumpet  {dung  chcn)  summoned  the  monks
to  the  congregation  hall  for  prayers  at  three  in  the  morning,  and
those  who  failed  to  be  present  were  punished  at  the  Tsog-chen ;  for,
though  there  is  no  roll  call,  yet  the  absence  of  a  single  monk  is  surely
remarked  by  the  provost.

The  minister,  who  frequently  peeped  into  my  room  to  see  wdiether
I  was  studying  or  no,  excused  me  from  early  rising  on  tlie  ground
that  he  often  found  me  up  with  my  books  at  midnight.

On  the  16th  I  was  asked  by  the  Deba  Shika  to  go  with  him

I


114  JOUnSFA' TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

the  following  day  to  see  the  Grand  Lama  dance,  or  chain*  On  my
observing  that  I  feared  the  M-Jdps  of  the  stage  guards  {<^jiin-!/(';/-2)(()  i^  1
nuxed  with  the  crowd,  he  promised  to  have  seats  reserved  for  our  party.

Early  the  next  morning  men  and  women  dressed  in  their  best
be"an  streaming  into  the  monastery  to  see  the  chdvi.  Accompanied
by  the  Tung-chen,  the  Deba  Sliika,  and  a  lama  friend,  we  M^ent  our
way  towards  the  Nyag-khang,  in  the  courtyard  of  the  Tsug-la  khang,
in  which  the  dances  were  to  begin.  On  the  way  we  stopped  to  visit
an  old  chapel  containing  several  inscriptions  relating  to  Gedun-dub,
the  founder  of  Tashilhunpo,  and  the  mark  of  a  horse's  hoof  impressed
on  a  rock,  which  passers-by  touch  with  their  heads.f

Then  we  took  our  seats  on  the  balcony  of  the  second  floor  of  the
Xyao--khang  building,  and  watched  the  preparations  for  the  dance.
Twenty-four  sacred  flags  of  satin,  with  embroidered  figures  of  dragons
and  other  monsters  worked  in  threads  of  gold,  were  first  unfurled  at
the  top  of  long  and  slender  poplar  poles,  and  square  parti-coloured
flags  were  also  hung  all  around  the  Tsug-la  khang.  About  a  dozen
monks  wearing  coats  of  mail  had  masks  which,  for  the  most  part,
represented  eagles'  heads.  The  dancers  entered  one  after  the  other,
and  then  followed  the  abbot  of  the  Nyag-pa  Ta-tsan,  Kusho  Yon-
djin  Lhopa  by  name,  holding  a  dorje  in  his  right  hand,  and  a  bell  in
his  left.  He  wore  a  yellow  mitre-shaped  cap,  with  lappets  covering
his  ears  and  hanging  down  to  his  breast.  He  was  tall  and  fair ;  he
looked  intelligent,  his  manners  were  most  dignified,  and  he  per-
formed his  part  most  cleverly.

After  a  wdiile  the  flag-bearers,  the  masked  monks,  and  all  the
cortege  repaired  to  the  great  Tsug-la  khang  of  Tashilhunpo,  which  is
about  300  yards  long  and  l.~)0  feet  broad. Piound  this  courtyard  are

*  Speaking  of  the  dances  of  Tibet,  our  author  sa.vs  elsewhere  that  Padma  Sani-
bhava,  in  tlie  eiglith  century,  a.d.,  is  the  reputed  originator  of  religious  dances  in  Tibet.
He  introduced  the  war-dance  and  the  famous  luasqued  dance,  or  bag  chams  {hhag
hchams),  the  former  being  but  a  modification  of  tiie  latter.  At  present  the  great
religious  dance  of  'J'lbet  is  the  black-hat  dance  (I)za  nag  chum),  which  was  introduced
in  the  eleventh  century,  a.d.,  to  commemorate  the  assassination  of  the  iconoclast  King
Langdarma  by  Lama  Lhalun  Paldor,  the  murderer  having  disguised  himself  in  black
when  seeking  to  ajiproach  the  king.  Tiie  ordinary  dance  of  Tibet  (dzahs  hro)  is  per-
formeil  by  men  and  women  on  all  or  any  occasion  of  rejoicing.  Sometimes  they  dance
in  pairs,  sometimes  in  a  ring,  and  at  others  the  women  haiid-in-hand  on  one  side,  the
men  in  like  fasliion  on  the  other.  (S.  C.  D.).  Cf.  Markham, '  Tibet,'  \).  !)2  :  E.  F.  Knight,
'  Where  Three  Empires  Mtet,' p.  202  *•/ I'r/ry. ;  Waddell,  '  I'.uddhii^m  of  'J'ihet,' pp.  34,
•1-77,  51;")  et  gqq.

t  Cf.  infra,  p.  IK).


JOUBNEY TO LHASA AND CENTBAL TIUKT.  115

foiir-storied  buildings  with  handsome  piUared  balconies,  the  Grand
Lama's  seat  being  on  the  western  side.  The  long  balconies  on  the
east  and  south  w^ere  occupied  by  the  nobility  of  Tsang,  and  those  on
the  north  by  Mongol  pilgrims  and  a  number  of  Shigatse  merchants.
The  abbots  of  the  four  Ta-tsan  had  seats  just  above  the  Nyag-pa,
who,  to  the  number  of  fifty  odd,  and  assisted  by  their  Oni-dse  *  and


BLACK-HAT DANCE (SHANAG CHAM).


the  Dorje  Lopon,  these  holding  in  their  hands  cymbals  and  tam-
bourines, went  through  a  short  religious  service  under  the  direction
of  the  Kusho  Yon-djin  Lhopa.  This  latter  made  during  this  service
peculiar  motions  with  his  hands,  in  which  he  held,  as  I  have  said,  a
clor]c  and  a  bell.

When  this  was  over a  figure  with  a  dark-coloured  mask,  and
representing  the  Hoshang  Dharma-tala,t  advanced,  and  the  spectators

*  The  office  here  mentioned  is  well  known  in  Sikhim.  See  the  Sikhim,  Gazetteer,
p.  30i,  vi.  The  araged,  as  colloquially  pronounced,  is  the  active  ruler  of  the  monasterj-,
and  often  a  very  important  person.

t  This  Chinese  Buddhist  monk  (or  hoshang)  came  to  Tibet  in  the  reign  of  King
Srong-btsan  gambo  (a.d  629-098).  He  is  usually  called  Mahadeva,  not  Dharmatala
— (W.  R.)


IIG  JOUBNEV TO LHASA AND CENTBAL TIBET.

fhiDi:  him  I'hatags,  which  his  two  yellow-faced  wives  picked  up.
When  these  three  had  left  the  scene,  the  four  kings  of  the  four
cardinal  points  appeared,  dressed  in  all  the  wild  and  barbaric
splendour  in  which  such  monarchs  could  indulge.  Then  came  the
sons  of  the  gods,  some  sixty  in  number,  dressed  in  beautiful  silk  robes
(flittering  with  gold  embroideries  and  precious  stones.  These  were
followed  by  Indian  atsams,  whose  black  and  bearded  faces  and
uncoutli  dress  excited  loud  laugliter  among  the  crowd.  Then  appeared
four  guardians  of  the  graves,  whose  skeleton-like  appearance  was
meant  to  remind  the  spectators  of  the  terrors  of  death.  After  this
the  devil  was  burnt  in  effigy  on  a  pile  of  dry  sedge,  and  with  this
the  cliani  came  to  an  end.*  While  it  was  in  progress  incense  w^as
burnt  on  Mount  Dolma  (Dolmai-ri),  behind  the  monastery,  and  on  all
the  other  neighbouring  mountain-tops.  I  learnt  from  the  Tung-
chen  that  there  were  several  books  on  the  subject  of  these  religious
dances  and  music.

The  following  day  (February  18)  I  went  with  the  Tung-chen  for
a  walk.  Proceeding  about  300  paces,  we  came  to  a  flight  of  stone  steps
below  the  western  gateway.  This  latter,  which  is  some  twelve  feet
high  and  eight  wide,  has  massive  doors,  which  are  closed  between  sun-
set and  sunrise  ;  it  is  the  principal  entrance  of  the  monastery.  About
fifty  feet  beyond  this  gate,  and  on  a  line  with  the  gilt  mausolea  of  the
grand  lamas  {gya-phig),  we  came  to  another  flight  of  steps,  some  of
them  cut  in  the  rock,  which  led  us  to  the  north-western  corner  of  the
monastery  and  well  up  the  slope  of  the  Dolmai-ri,  whence  we  obtained
a  good  view  of  the  whole  of  Tashilhunpo  monastery,  the  adjacent
villages  and  mountains.

We  now  turned  to  the  north-east  along  a  narrow  rocky  path,
which  brouglit  us  behind  the  Nyag-khang.  I  was  surprised  to  notice
among  the  rocks  some  willows  {cliyoMg-ma)  in  flower,  and  we  saw
also  tlie  impress  of  lioofs  o  the  rocks,  left  there,  the  Tung  clien  said,
by  the  chargers  of  some  Bodhisattvas  ;  rang  chyung,  or  "  naturally
produced,"  the  Tibetans  say  of  such  marvels.  There  were  several
half-starved  pariah  dogs  lying  about,  who  looked  at  us  with  sleepy

*  Gfo.  Ijogle,  op.  cit.,  p.  100,  witnessed  a  somewhat  similar  dance  at  Tashilhunpo
on  New  Year's  Day.  An  effigy  of  the  devil  was  likewise  burnt,  Tibetans  use  the  word
atsara  iiiucli  as  the  ChinCf-e  do  yang  huei-tzu,  or  "  foreign  devils,"  though  it  was
origin  dly  tiie  name  given  to  learned  Indian  pilgrims.  The  word  is  Sanskrit,  acharya.
-(W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET  117

eyes,  and  the  Tung-chen  remarked  that  in  all  probability  tb.ey  bad
been  sinful  (j clang  (monks)  in  some  former  existence,  and  were  now
expiating  their  evil  deeds.  He  much  regretted  that  we  had  not
brought  some  balls  of  tsamha  for  them.

Some  200  paces  farther  on  in  the  same  direction  we  came  to  a
huge  stone  building  called  Kiku-tamsa.  It  is  about  60  paces  in
length  and  30  in  breadth,  and  I  counted  nine  stories  in  it.  Though
it  is  upwards  of  two  hundred  years  old,  it  is  still  in  excellent  repair.
Captain  Turner  made  a  sketch  of  it  in  1783,*  but  he  mistook  it
for  "  a  religious  edifice."  It  is  at  present  used  as  a  godown  for  dried
carcasses  of  yaks,  sheep,  and  goats.  Every  year,  in  the  latter  part  of
November,  all  the  sacred  pictures  of  the  Labrang  are  hung  up  on  this
building  for  the  benefit  of  the  people,  who,  by  touching  these  paintings
with  their  foreheads,  receive  the  blessings  of  the  gods  they  represent.f

On  our  way  down  to  the  eastern  gateway  of  Tashilhunpo  we  met
two  Ladaki  Tibetans,  who  told  us  that  they  liad  just  come  from  the
Chang-tang,  or  the  desert  in  the  north-western  part  of  Tibet4

The  Tung-chen  showed  me  the  Dongtse  Kham-tsan,  where  the
people  of  Dongtse  and  neighbourhood  put  up.  We  also  saw  a  juniper
bush  planted  by  Gedundub,  the  founder  of  Tashilhunpo,  in  which
that  saintly  lama's  hair  is  said  to  still  exist.§  I  had  pointed  out  to
nie,  as  we  walked  along  the  spacious  buildings  of  the  Taisamling
college,  the  Kyil  khang  Ta-tsan  and  the  Shartse  college.

The  descent  to  the  foot  of  the  hill  proved  very  steep,  but  all  along
it  we  found  rows  of  prayer- wheels,  which  we  put  in  motion  as  we
passed ;  near  the  gateway,  and  beside  a  metidong,  there  were  two
dozen  of  them  together.

Passing  by  the  main  Mani  Iha-khang,  we  reached  the  eastern
gateway  of  Tashilhunpo.  Over  it  is  a  notice  forbidding  smoking
within  the  monastery,  for  both  the  red  and  yellow-hat  schools  of
lamaism  strongly  denounce  tobacco -smoking  by  monks.

*  See  Captain  Samuel  Turner,  "  Embassj','  p.  314.

t  According  to  Chinese  authorities,  this,  or  a  similar  feiist,  is  celebrated  at  Lhasa
in  the  second  moon  of  tlie  year.  Another  analog  .us  fi  stival  is  held  ou  the  80tu  day  of
the  sixth  moon. See  J.B.A.S.,  xxiii.  pp  212,  218,— (W.  K.)

t  The  Chung-tarig  is  not  au  uniuhabiteil  desert,  for  numerous  tribes  of  Driipa
pasture  their  herds  there  the  year  1  .ng,  and  keep  up  a  considerable  trade  with  Lhasa
and  Saigatse,  wiiich  they  supply  with  salt.  It  has  beun  repeatedly  crossed  by  European
explorers. — (W.  R.)

§  Cf.  the  legend  of  the  miraculous  tree  sprung  from  the  hair  of  Tsongkhap  i,  and
still  growing  in  the  courtyard  of  Kumbum  gombii. '  The  Laud  of  the  Lamas,'  pp.  (i7,  68,


118  JOURNEY TO LI/ASA AND CENTHAL TIBET.

From  this  gateway  a  road  leads  south  to  the  Kiki-naga,  where  the
Grand  Lama's  mother  resides,  while  ainjther  runs  westward  to  the
court  of  the  Tashi  lama,  or  Labrang  gyal-tsan  tonpo.

It  was  dusk  when  we  had  finished  our  walk  around  the  monastery,
and  lamps  were  already  burning  in  many  of  the  liouses  to  bid  farewell
to  the  old  year.

Fchruary  19,  New  Year's  Day.* — The  preparations  for  the  day's
celebration  commenced  before  dawn,  and  the  noise  of  the  blowing  of
the  kitchen  fires  never  ceased,  as  there  were  many  dishes  and  dainties
to  be  got  ready  for  the  dinner  the  minister  was  to  give  to  a  large
party  of  nobles  and  incarnate  lamas.

AVhen  the  minister  came  back  from  ^•isiting  the  Grand  Lama,  he
told  me  that  the  latter  had  inquired  about  me,  as  he  had  some  trans-
lation into  Sanskrit  which  he  desired  I  should  make  for  him.  "  His
holiness,"  the  minister  said,  "  has  given  me  a  hundred  and  twenty
titles  of  chapters  of  a  work  he  has  written,  and  wishes  you  to  put
them  into  Sanskrit  for  him."  The  minister  further  said  that  when
I  had  finished  this  work  he  would  present  me  to  the  Grand  Lama.

The  next  day  the  minister  was  called  to  Dongtse  by  the  illness  of
the  Dahpon  Phala's  wife ;  his  prayers,  it  was  hoped,  would  restore
her  to  health.  About  a  week  after  his  departure  he  was  suddenly
recalled  by  the  Grand  Lama,  with  whom  he  had,  on  March  3,  a  long
conference.  The  Dalai  lama's  Government  had  protested  against  the
Tashi  lama  liaving  taken  the  vows  of  monkhood  from  the  Sakhya
Pan-chen,  a  red-hat  lama,  the  hierarch  of  the  Sakhya  school.  The
Dalai  lama  charged  him  with  encouraging  heresy,  if  not  with  being  a
heretic  himself.  It  was  for  this  reason  that  the  Tashi  lama  had  not
been  invited  to  ordain  the  supreme  ruler  of  Tibet,  for,  belonging  to  the
Gelugpa  or  yellow-hat  school,  the  Dalai  lama  could  have  no  connection
with  the  school  of  which  the  Sakhya  Pan-chen  was  the  chief.

On  March  4  the  minister  ordained  some  forty  monks  gcloiuj.
Formerly  the  Grand  Lama  used  to  perform  this  ceremony  himself,
but  he  has  now  delegated  a  large  portion  of  his  religious  duties,
including  ordination,  to  the  minister.!

Two  days  after  this  the  minister  was  again  asked  to  go  to  Dongtse.
as  the  wife  of  the  Dalipon  was  still  ill,  and  he  (the  Dahpon) had

*  Ou  till'  new  year  festivities,  see  Waddell,  op.  cit.,  p.  513.

t  On  lamaist  luouachism,  see  Sarat  Chandra  Das'a  '  Indian  rundits  in  the  Land  of
Haow,'  and  Waddell,  op.  cit.,  pp.  It!'.)  et  stjq.


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  \\9,

orders  to  proceed  at  once  to  Lhasa.  The  minister  asked  me  if  I
would  accompany  him,  and  I  readily  assented,  as  it  would  enable  me
to  make  arrangements  for  my  journey  to  Lhasa  during  the  next
summer.

On  March  7  we  started,  and  reached  Tashigang  the  same  day.
Some  of  the  people  we  passed  were  already  ploughing,  and  the  trees
showed  signs  of  budding.

The  next  day  we  reached  Dongtse  by  4  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.
We  found  the  Dahpon's  wife,  a  lady  of  about  thirty,  and  his  sister,
Je-tsun  Kusho,  in  the  central  room  of  the  fifth  floor  of  the  castle
{plioilrawi).

The  Lhacham  was  dressed  in  a  Mongol  robe ;  on  her  head  was  a
crown-shaped  ornament  studded  with  precious  stones  and  pearls  of
every  size.  Pearl  necklaces,  strings  of  amber  and  coral  hung  over  her
breast,  and  her  clothes  were  of  the  richest  Chinese  satin  brocades  and
the  finest  native  cloth.*  The  Je-tsun  Kusho,  an  elderly  woman  and
a  nun,  was  dressed  very  plainly ;  but,  though  nuns  all  shave  their
heads,  she  wore  all  her  hair.  She  belonged,  it  appears,  to  the  !N"yingma
school,  which  allows  nuns  certain  privileges,  this  one  among  others.f

The  following  day  I  prescribed  some  medicines  for  Je-tsun  Kusho,
who  was  suffering  from  bronchitis,  and  four  days  later  I  administered
some  to  the  Dahpon's  wife,  who  had  had  until  then  a  lama  from  the
Tse-chan  monastery  attending  her.  My  medicines  did  her  no  good,  and
at  this  the  minister  appeared  much  concerned.  I  tried  a  second  dose,
but  with  like  absence  of  effect.  In  fact,  the  Tihacham  felt  worse,  and
said  that  evil  stars  were  in  the  ascendant  in  her  quarter  of  the  sky
{khams),  and  would  work  her  ruin.  Some  people,  she  said,  insisted  she
was  being  persecuted  by  evil  spirits  who  had  followed  her  here  from
Tingri  (Djong),  but  she  did  not  believe  it ;  it  was  the  stars  which  were
against  her. The  minister  looked  at  me  and  asked  me  how  it  was

*  In  the  narrative  of  his  journey  in  1879  (p.  26),  S.  C.  D.  thus  describes  the  headdress
of  the  hxdies  of  wealth  and  fashion  at  a  festival  at  Tashilhunpo :  "  Their  headdresses
struck  me  much.  The  prevailing  form  consisted  of  two,  or  sometimes  three,  circular  bands
of  plaited  hair  placed  across  the  head  and  richly  studded  with  pearls,  cat's-eyes,  small
rubies,  emeralds,  diamonds,  coral  and  turquoise  beads  as  large  as  liens'  eggs,  pearl
drops,  and  various  sorts  of  amber  and  jade  encircled  their  lieads,  like  the  halo  of  liglit
round  the  heads  of  goddesses.  These  circles  were  attached  to  a  circular  headband
from  which  six  or  eight  short  strings  of  pearls  and  regularly  shaped  pieces  of  turquoise
and  other  precious  stones  hung  down  over  the  foreliead."

t  Farther  on  (p.  138),  our  autlior  tells  us  that  tlie  incarnate  goddess  Dorje  phagmo
also  wore  her  hair  loug.


120  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET

that  my  medicines  were  unavailing  in  the  Lhacham's  case.  In  the
midst  of  a  dead  silence  I  told  him  that  all  the  medicines  which
different  persons  had  administered  to  the  patient  were  affecting  her
nervous  system,  each  in  a  different  way.  I  had  heard  her  say  that
she  had  fh-st  taken  tliose  of  a  Chinese  quack,  then  those  of  a  Nepalese


A TJi'.E'lAN LHAUIIAM (TIUKTAN I'lMNCKSS) IN FULL DRESS.

physician,  and  lastly  the  medicines  of  several  learned  lama  doctors.
Under  the  circumstances  I  should  not  have  prescribed  for  her  at  all,
but  that  as  every  one  had  expected  me  to  do  something  for  her,  I  had
ceded  to  their  wishes.  It  was,  however,  my  opinion  that  if  the
Lhacham  would  be  cured,  the  only  medicine  slie  required  was  no
medicine  at  all.


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  121

Under  this  new  treatment,  which  she  promptly  adopted,  there
was  a  marked  improvement  in  the  Lhacham's  health  within  the  next
ten  days.  I  used  frequently  to  talk  with  her,  and  she  seemed  to
entertain  a  kind  regard  for  me.  One  day  the  minister  suggested  in
her  presence  that  it  would  be  a  good  thing  if  I  could  be  sent  to  Lhasa
to  see  the  Lord  Buddha,  the  incarnate  Shenrezig,  the  Dalai  lama.
The  Lhacham  approved  the  suggestion,  and  promised  to  have  me
lodged  in  her  residence  at  Lhasa,  and  to  take  me  under  her  protection
while  there.

On  March  23  I  left  Dongtse  for  Tashilhunpo.  On  the  way  to
Tashigang  we  saw  lambs  picking  the  young  shoots  of  grass,  and  the
country  folk  were  busy  in  the  fields  with  their  yaks,  which  were
decorated  with  red,  yellow,  blue,  and  green  hair  tassels,  and  collars  of
coloured  wool,  and  cowries.  The  farmers  hold  certain  religious  cere-
monies on  beginning  ploughing  and  on  first  putting  the  yokes
(nya-shinff)  on  their  yaks.  They  also  have  at  this  time  most  amusing
ploughing  races.

Beyond  Norbu  khyung-djin  we  saw,  as  we  rode  along,  afar  off
on  a  slope  of  rock,  incised  in  gigantic  characters,  the  sacred  formulae,
Om  vajra  pani  hum,  om  wagishvari  hum,  om  ah  hum,  etc.

The  next  day,  at  3  p.m.,  just  as  we  reached  the  house  of  the  Deba
Shika,  there  was  quite  a  heavy  fall  of  snow.  On  the  25th  we  arrived
at  Tashilhunpo,  and  I  once  more  took  up  my  interrupted  historical
studies.


122  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.


CHAPTER V.

FliO.M TASIIILIIlTXrO TO YAMDO SAMDING, AND THENGK TO LHASA.

Ox  "Wednesday,  April  26,  1882,  being  the  eighth  day  of  the  third
moon  of  the  water-horse  year  of  the  Tibetan  cycle,  I  left  Tashilhunpo
for  Dongtse,  there  to  make  my  final  arrangements  for  the  journey  to
Lhasa.

The  cook,  Dao-sring,  nicknamed  Aku  chya-rog,  or  "  Uncle  Daw,"
on  acconnt  of  the  dirt  and  soot  whicli  always  covered  liis  face,  now
turned  out  with  well-washed  face  and  hands,  in  new  leather  boots  and
fur  cap,  and  helped  me  to  mount  my  pony.

Tsering-tashi,  who  had  been  designated  to  accompany  me,  had
procured  all  that  was  necessary  for  a  long  journey — butter,  meat,
pounded  dry  mutton,  spices,  rice,  a  copper  kettle,  an  iron  pan,  flint
stones,  tinder,  and  a  bellows,  and  the  Tung-chen  had  presented  me
with  tsamba,  chura,  and  pea-flour  for  the  use  of  the  servants,  and  peas
for  the  ponies.  Of  all  the  articles  Tsering-tashi  had  brought,  the  one
which  he  valued  the  most  was  a  bamboo  tea-churn,*  which  he  thought
the  most  beautiful  and  useful  of  all  our  belongings.

1  tied  up  my  medicine-case  in  one  of  my  saddle-bags,  and  in  the
other  I  put  my  clothes,  and  at  2  o'clock  we  started.  There  were  five
of  us  in  the  party,  all  mounted,  and  riding  in  single  file  :  first  came  the
Tung-clicn,  then  1,  then  came  Tsering-tashi,  and  the  cook  and  a
groom  brought  up  the  rear.  We  followed  the  same  road  I  had  already
gone  over  on  several  occasions,  and  stopped  the  first  night  at  Chyang-
chu,  where  we  put  up  in  the  house  of  our  friend  the  Deba  Shikha.

Ajjril  27. — About  two  inches  of  snow  had  fallen  in  the  night,  and
there  was  a  slight  fog  when  we  got  up  in  the  morning.  In  front  of
the  house  I  noticed  some  men  and  women  diff^d  a  kind  of  root  called

or)

*  See  my  '  Diary  of  a  Jourmy  tlirotigh  IMoiigoliiiand  Tibet,'  p.  25(j,  where  two  such
tea-diuins  are  shown. — (W.  K.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  123

rampa.  This  underground  grass  acquires,  in  some  places,  a  length
of  five  or  six  feet,  and  in  the  early  spring,  when  vegetables  and
forage  are  scarce,  it  is  dug  up.  The  people  know  where  to  dig  for  it
by  the  little  shoots  which  rise  above  the  ground.*

We  were  detained  at  Chyang-chu  all  day,  waiting  for  Tsering-
tashi,  who  had  been  obliged  to  stop  over  at  Tashi-gyantse  to  make
some  purchases.

In  the  evening  tea  was  served  by  Po-ka-chan,  a  grey-haired  monk
who  works  on  the  estates  of  the  minister  at  Tanag.  He  had  travelled
much  in  Kongpo,  Naga,  and  among  the  Mishmis,  and  in  Tsari.  He
related  how  the  savage  Lhokabra  t  harassed  the  Tibetan  pilgrims,  and
how  the  Tsang-po  river  entered  the  country  of  defiles  in  Eastern
Bhutan,  rushing  in  a  tremendous  waterfall  over  the  top  of  a  gigantic
precipice  called  the  "  Lion's  Face,"  or  Sing-dong.

Ajyril  28. — The  villagers  had  all  assembled  to  bid  us  farewell,
and  the  Tung-chen's  sister  presented  me  with  a  "  scarf  for  good  luck  "
(tashi  hhatag).  We  saw  as  we  rode  along  numerous  flocks  of  cranes
{tontong),  and  brown  ducks  with  red  necks  were  swimming  in  the
river  and  the  irrigation  ditches.  We  stopped  for  the  night  at  Pishi
Mani  Ihakhang,  where  Angputti  received  us  with  the  same  kindness
she  had  shown  us  on  my  former  visits.  Snow  fell  during  the  night,
but  our  hostess's  servants  watched  over  our  ponies,  and  stabled  them
under  the  roof  of  the  oJc]iang,X  or  godown,  on  the  ground  floor.

We  reached  Dongtse  at  4:  p.m.  on  the  29  th,  and  took  up  our
lodgings  in  the  Choide;  but  in  the  evening  the  Deba  Chola  came
and  invited  us  to  put  up  at  the  castle,  where  the  minister  was  still
staying.

*  I  think  our  author  was  misinformed.  Rampa  (Polygonum  vivipariim,  L.)  docs  not
grow  as  described  here.  Eampa  seed  is  oaten,  after  being  parclied  and  ground,  mixed
with  tsamba.  Choma  {Potentilla  anserina),  also  eaten  all  over  Tibet  wherever  it  occurs,
is  dug  out  of  tlie  ground  ;  it  is  not  a  grain,  however,  but  a  small  root.  I  think  Chandra
Das  must  refer  to  choma,  though  it  is  a  small  tuber  not  over  IJ  inches  long.— (W.  K.)

t  Lama  Scrap  gyatsho  says  there  are  three  different  kinds  of  Lobas,  viz.  Lo  Karpo,
Lo  Nagpo,  and  Lo  Tawa,  or  Lo  Khabta.  The  Lo  Karpo  means  "  white,  and  little
civilized."  The  Lo  Nagpo  means  "  black,  and  little  civilized."  The  Lo  Tawas,  or
stripped  Lobas,  meaning  "quite  barbarous  Lobas,"  live  on  the  lower  part  of  the
Tsangpo,  on  the  east  bank.  They  are  said  to  kill  the  mother  of  the  bride  in  perform-
ing their  marriage  ceremony,  when  they  do  not  find  any  wild  men,  and  eat  her  flesh.
Report  on  Explorations,  etc.,  p.  7.  See  also  ibid.,  pp.  16,  17  ;  and  Pundit  Nain  Singh's
Journey,  in  Jour.  Roy.  Geo.  Soc,  vol.  xlvii.  p.  120.

X  Og  khang  means  "lower  liouse,"  as  opposed  to  Gong  khaug,  "upper  house,  or
story."— CW.  R.)


124  JOURNEY TO LHASA AXD CENTRAL TIBET.

The  Tung-cheii  took  an  early  opportunity  to  inform  the  minister
that  his  presence  was  anxiously  expected  at  Tashilhunpo,  where
hundreds  of  lamas  were  awaiting  his  return  to  be  ordained  fjdoag
(priests).  He  also  told  him  that  tlie  Mirkan  Pandita,  a  Mongol  Kutu-
ketu  who  liad  come  to  Tibet  for  the  sole  purpose  of  studying  under
the  minister,  now  intended  coming  to  Dongtse,  and  had  begged  that
arranuements  micrht  be  made  for  his  accommodation  in  the  minister's
residence.  "WhQe  the  minister  recognized  the  necessity  for  his  re-
turning  to  Tashilhunpo,  he  said  he  could  not  leave  until  the  services
for  the  propitiation  of  the  Lord  of  death,  Dorje  jig-je,  to  be  under-
taken for  the  recovery  of  the  Dahpon's  wife,  were  finished.

Mai/  2. — The  monks  of  Dongtse,  headed  by  a  learned  old  lama
named  Funlo,  arrived  at  the  castle  to  commence  reading  the  Kahgyur.
Arrangements  were  made  in  the  ni/ihoJi  for  the  worship  of  Dorje
jig-je.  Torma  offerings  *  were  placed  on  the  terrace  on  the  top  of
the  castle,  and  rugs  were  spread  on  the  floor  of  the  little  glazed  room
{nyihok)  on  it  for  the  accommodation  of  the  lamas.  In  the  house  was
a  raised  seat  for  the  minister,  and  in  a  corner  of  the  room  a  little
chapel,  with  all  the  necessary  church  furniture,  among  which  the  tsegi
hiimha,  or  "  bowl  of  life,"  of  Tse-pamed  was  conspicuous.f  This  pro-
pitiatory ceremony  occupied  three  days.

May  S. — News  arrived  to-day  that  small-pox  was  raging  at  Lhasa
and  other  places  of  Central  Tibet.  Several  persons  had  also  died  of
it  at  Gyantse,  and  three  or  four  localities  between  that  town  and  Lhasa
were  infected.  The  Lhacham  was  in  so  sjreat  dread  of  the  disease
that  she  confined  herself  to  her  sitting-room,  refusing  to  see  any  one.

On  May  9  the  Lhacham  left  for  Lhasa,  after  confiding  to  the
minister's  care  Ane,  her  third  son,  a  boy  of  ten,  who  was  destined
for  the  Church.  The  Lhacham  and  her  two  other  sons,  Lhasre  %  and
Kundi,  made  their  devotions  at  the  different  chapels  of  the  castle,
which  it  took  them  nearly  an  hour  to  accomplish,  and  then  returned
to  the  fifth  story  of  the  building  to  receive  the  minister's  blessing,
after  which  they  took  their  leave.

*  Torma  offerings  are  cones  made  of  tsamba,  butter,  treacle,  and  sugar,  and  not
uufrequontly  of  cardboard,  and  sometimes  painted  red,  blue,  or  green.  They  are  placed
in  front  of  the  images  of  malignant  g.ids  as  prop  tiatory  offerings.  See  Waddell,  op.  eil.,
297. On  the  word  nyihol;  see  supra,  p.  77. — (W.  E.)

t  One  of  these  libatiou  bowls  is  represented  on  p.  90  of  ■  Laud  of  the  Lamas.' — (W.  E.^l
X  Lhasre  is  the  usual  title  of  sons  of  very  high  officials. It  means,  literally,  ''son
of  a  god,"  but  may  be  conveniently  translated  by  "  prince." — (W.  K.)


J  GUI,' NET TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.


125


At  the  foot  of  the  ladder  in  the  courtyard  a  white  pony,  with
handsome  housings  of  embroidered  cloth  and  a  Tartar  saddle,  awaited
the  Lhacham.  With  her  pearl-studded  headdress,  her  gold  and  ruby
charm-boxes,  her  necklaces  of  coral  and  amber,  and  her  clothes  of
satin  and  kinkab,  she  looked  like  a  heroine  of  romance  or  a  goddess.

On  the  following  day  I  went  with  the  minister  and  the  Kusho
Ane, and  took up  my residence  in the Dongtse  Choide. Here


TIBETAX NOBLEMAN.


I  witnessed  the  opening  ceremonies  connected  with  the  Kalachakra
mandala  worship.  The  Om-dse,*  or  high  priest  of  the  Choide,  with
the  help  of  two  assistants,  had  described  with  coloured  tsamba  a
circle  about  20  feet  in  diameter  on  the  floor  of  the  northern  room  on
the  third  floor  of  the  Tsug-la  khang.  Within  this  mandala  were  drawn
the  entrance,  spires,  doors,  and  domes  of  the  Kalachakra  mansion.
The  presiding  deity  was  tall,  many-armed,  and  had  several  heads  ;
his  attendants  were  of  the  tantrik  order  of  deities,  and  all  these

*  See  uote  1,  p.  115.


120  JOURNET TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

paintings  were  made  in  coloured  powders  and  tsamha.  *  The  minister
highly  praised  the  work,  and  gave  as  a  gratuity  to  each  of  the  eighty
monks  of  the  monastery  lialf  a  tanka,  and  an  entertainment  of  tea
and  tsamha.

Mai/  11. — A  messenger  arrived  to-day  to  inform  us  that  the
Lhacham  would  leave  Gyantse  the  next  morning,  and  that  we  would
do  well  to  see  her  at  Gyankhar  before  she  started ;  so,  though  I  was
feeling  very  poorly,  I  made  up  my  mind  to  start  at  once.

My  ponies  were  brought  inside  the  monastery  by  Pador,  a  stalwart
young  fellow  who  had  been  several  times  to  Lhasa,  and  who  had
been  chosen  by  the  Chyag-dso-pa  f  to  accompany  me,  and  I  got  ready
to  leave  early  on  the  morrow.

At  an  early  hour  the  next  day  I  went  with  Tsering-tashi  to  see
the  minister,  ask  his  protection  {hyah^u),  and  beg  to  be  favoured  with
his  advice  as  to  the  conduct  of  our  journey,  or  sumj-ta,  as  it  is  called.

As  is  usual  on  such  occasions,  each  of  us  presented  him  with  a
Icliatag,  in  tlie  corner  of  which  were  tied  up  a  few  tanlms  in  a  bit  of
paper,  on  which  was  written  our  request.

After  a  hurried  breakfast,  while  the  servants  were  engaged  in
saddling  the  ponies  and  packing,  I  went  and  kotowed  to  the  Buddha
in  the  temple,  placed  Ichatag  on  the  sacred  images,  and  distributed
alms  to  the  monks  assembled  in  the  courtyard  to  offer  prayers  for
my  safe  journey.  Then  I  returned  to  my  room,  picked  out  the  hand-
somest Ixludag  I  possessed,  and  presented  it  to  the  minister.  His
holiness  graciously  touched  my  head  with  his  palms,  and  in  solemn
tones  said,  "  Sarat  Chandra,  Lhasa  is  not  a  good  place.  The  people
there  are  not  like  those  you  meet  here.  The  Lhasa  people  are
suspicious  and  insincere.  You  do  not  know,  and,  in  fact,  you  cannot
read  their  character,  I  advise  you  not  to  stay  long  in  one  place
there.  The  Lhacham  Kusho  is  a  powerful  personage  in  Lhasa ;
she  will  protect  you,  but  you  should  so  behave  as  rarely  to  require
her  protection.  Stay  not  long  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Dabung  or
Sera  monasteries.  If  you  intend  to  make  a  long  stay  at  Lhasa,
choose  your  residence  in  a  garden  or  village  in  the  suljurljs. You

*  The  "presiding  deity"  was  probably  Dorje  sempa  or  Vajrasattva.  The  Kala
Chakra  mysticism  and  its  standard  work  in  the  Tibetan  Tanjur,  called  '  Dus-gi  khorlo,'
wliich  I  once  tried  to  read,  have  remained  beyond  my  comprehension.  Emil
Schlaginwoit,  '  Buddliism  in  Tibet,'  pp.  4G-57,  and  p.  242  el  sqq.,  gives  many  details  on
the  subject. Hee  also  Waddell,  op.  cit..  If),  144,  397.— (W.  R.)

t  This  ofiicial  is  referred  to,  p.  rt4.— (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TLBET.  127

have  chosen  a  very  bad  time  for  your  pilgrimage,  as  small-pox  is
raging  all  over  Central  Til)et;  but  you  will  return  safely,  though
the  journey  will  be  trying  and  fraught  with  immense  difficulties."  *
Then,  turning  to  Tsering-tashi,  around  whose  neck  the  minister's
page  put  a  Wiatag,  he  said  to  him,  "Tsing-ta,  I  believe  you  know  whom
you  are  accompanying.  You  should  serve  him  as  you  would  serve
me  ;  your  relations  with  him  must  be  those  of  a  son  with  his  parents."

After  saying  good-bye  to  the  members  of  the  minister's  household,
presenting  and  receiving  hhatag  and  various  other  little  presents,  and
drinking  tea,  I  mounted  my  pony  and  set  out  for  Gyantse.  Thus  did
I  start  on  a  journey  to  a  hostile,  inhospitable,  and  unknown  country
with  only  two  men  as  my  companions,  and  they  strangers  to  me.

At  a  huge  willow  stump  I  waited  a  while  for  Tsering-tashi  to
join  me,  for  Pador,  with  the  pack-pony,  had  gone  to  liis  home  to  "•et
his  lance.  As  Tsering-tashi  came  up,  he  was  delighted  to  see  water
flowing  from  a  pool  in  the  direction  we  were  to  follow  ;  this  he  took
for  a  most  auspicious  sign.  On  reaching  chortcn,  about  a  mile
from  the  town,  we  alighted  and  waited  for  Pador,  who  shortly  after
made  his  appearance  with  a  lance  full  12  feet  long  in  his  hand.

By  noon  we  reached  Gyantse,  and,  passing  rapidly  through  the
market-place,  where  I  feared  to  be  recognized,  we  entered  the  Gyan-
khar,  or  castle  of  Gyantse.

At  1  p.m.  the  Lhacham  and  her  sons  started  for  Lhasa,  and  as
she  passed  by  me  slie  told  me  to  meet  her  at  Gobshi  that  evening.

I  was  now  surrounded  by  the  Chyag-dso-pa  and  his  family,  all
curious  to  see  the  Indian  physician  of  whom  they  had  heard  so  mucli
of  late.  From  what  tlie  Chyag-dso-pa  told  me,  I  concluded  he  had
chronic  bronchitis,  which  might  end  in  consumption.  I  gave  him  a
few  grains  of  quinine  and  some  doses  of  elixir  of  paregoric,  and
directed  him  also  as  to  his  diet.

After  partaking  of  some  gyatug,  rice,  and  boiled  mutton  with  the
family,  I  asked  permission  to  leave,  and  was  escorted  to  the  gate,
where,  mounting  my  pony,  I  bade  them  farewell.

The  Lhasa  high-road  I  found  very  similar  to  a  rough  Indian
cross-road;  in  some  places  it  is  more  than  20  feet  wide,  in  others
a  mere  trail,  while  in  many  places,  where  it  runs  between  fields,  it
is  also  made  to  serve  the  purpose  of  an  irrigation  ditch. The  Tibetan

*  Chandra  Das's  expeiience  recalls  to  my  mind  the  prophecy  made  me  in  1SS9  by
an  incarnate  lama  in  the  Tsaidam. '  Land  of  the  Lamas,'  pp.  1G4.  10.5.


128  JOURNEY TO LHASA AXD CENTRAL TIBET.

Government  pays  very  little,  if  any,  attention  to  road-making,  though,
in  such  a  dry  climate,  it  would  be  easy  to  construct  good  ones,  and
it  Moukl  be  little  trouble  to  keep  them  in  repair.  Thus  far  on  my
travels  in  Tibet  I  had  seen  no  wheeled  conveyances,  and  I  now  learnt
that  such  things  are  unknown  throughout  the  country.

Shortly  after  starting  it  began  snowing  heavily.  As  we  rode  on
along  the  bank  of  the  Nyang  chu,  Tsering-tashi  pointed  out  to  me
the  road  to  Phagri,  the  monastery  of  Na-niug,  the  ruins  of  Gyang-to,
both  formerly  places  of  importance.  Then  we  entered  the  ro7ig,  or
defiles,*  where  used  to  live  three  tribes  of  herdsmen,  the  Gyangro,
Ning-ro,  and  Gang-ro,  who  carried  on  a  thriving  trade  in  yak-tails
(cho2vries),  felt  hats,  felt,  and  blankets.

Crossing  the  river  at  Kudung  zampa,  we  reached  by  dusk  the
villa<Te  of  Gobshi,t  where  the  Lhacham  had  only  preceded  us  a  little.
I  found  her  very  gloomy,  for  she  had  just  learnt  that  there  were  in
the  house  where  she  was  now  stopping  five  small-pox  patients.  I
was  asked  to  vaccinate  her  and  her  whole  party ;  but,  unfortunately,
the  lymph  which  I  had  asked  for  in  India  had  not  reached  me  before
leaving  Tashilhunpo  ;  it  was  still  at  the  Lachan  barrier  with  Ugyen-
gyatso.

Mai/  13. — Gobslii,  or  "four  gates,"  is  a  large  village  of  about
fifty  houses,  half  of  it  belonging  to  the  Lhacham's  father-in-law.
There  are  a  few  poplar  and  pollard  willow  trees  growing  in  front  of
the  village,  and  terraced  fields  planted  with  barley  extend  along  the
river  banks.  A  little  to  the  east  of  the  village,  in  the  hills  beyond
the  confluence  of  the  Nyang  and  Niro  chu,  there  is  a  very  ancient
Bonbo  lamasery,  called  Khyung-nag,  or  "Black  Eagle"  monastery,
which  in  the  fifteenth  century  was  a  place  of  pilgrimage  famous
throughout  Tibet.

After  leaving  Gobshi,  we  passed  by  Kavo  gomba,  a  Ningma
religious  establishment,  and  Tsering-tashi  called  my  attention  to  the
blue  and  red  bands  painted  on  the  walls  of  the  temple  and  dwellings
of  the  lamas,  telling  me  that  these  coloured  stripes  are  characteristic
of  this  sect.

Pushing  on  tlirough  a  numljer  of  small  villages,  the  road  in  some
places  extremely  difficult  and  oven  dangerous,  we  forded  the  Nyang  chu

*  Bonq  usually  means  a  fortile  valley  where  cultivation  is  possible,  or  which  is
cultivated.— (W.  R.)

t  Gab  zi  on  tlie  maps.  It  must  ho.  the  same  as  A.  K."s  Upsi  village,  where,  he  says,
there  is  a  large  Chinese  stage-house.— (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  129

at  Shetoi,*  took  a  short  cut  to  the  Ralung  zamba,  and  by  3  p.m.
reached  the  village  of  Ralung  chong-doi,  crossing  once  more  tlie
river  by  a  wooden  bridge  before  entering  it.

Ealung  t  is  one  of  the  most  sacred  places  in  Tibet,  for  it  is  here
that  the  great  Dugpa  school  of  red-hat  monks  originated,  a  school
still  influential  with  numerous  adherents  in  Southern,  Northern,  and
Eastern  Tibet,  and  in  Bhutan,  which  latter  country  is,  in  fact,  called
Dugpa  owing  to  the  preponderance  of  this  sect.  The  Ralung-til,
the  head  monastery  of  the  Dugpa,  is  to  the  south-east  of  this  village.
This  monastery  owes  its  name  to  the  fact  that  it  is  surrounded  by
mountains  as  the  heart  (mt'il)  of  a  lotus  is  by  the  corolla.

J/rc//  14. — We  left  without  even  waiting  for  a  cup  of  tea,  as  the
Lhacham  was  desirous  of  reaching  JSTangartse  the  same  day,  and,  in
spite  of  my  enfeebled  condition,  I  was  anxious  to  keep  up  with  her
party,  for  the  country  we  had  to  traverse  is  infested  by  brigands.

After  following  up  the  river  for  a  while,  we  ascended  the  Karo  \a,l
a  lofty  plateau  from  which  we  could  distinguish  to  the  north-east  the
snow-covered  slopes  of  the  Noijin  kang-zang  (or  Noijin  norpa  zang-
po  and  Kang  zang-po).  The  plateau  of  the  Karo  la  is  called  Oma
tang,  or  "  milky  plain,"  §  as  is  also  the  little  hamlet  near  the  summit
of  the  pass.  On  this  plateau,  which  is  about  five  miles  broad  where
w^e  traversed  it,  there  is  fine  grazing,  and  we  saw  numerous  herds
of  yaks  by  the  sides  of  the  little  streamlets  which  meander  over  its
surface,  the  one  flowing  westward  becoming  the  Nyang  chu;  the
other  flows  to  the  east,  and  is  called  the  Kharnang-phu  chu,  and  along
this  the  road  led.  On  the  summit  of  the  pass  1  noticed  a  species
of  thorny  shrub,  the  like  of  which  I  had  not  seen  in  any  other  part
of  Tibet ;  the  thorns  were  quite  long,  and  the  stem  and  leaves  of
the  plant  of  an  ash  grey  colour,

A  short  way  down  the  other  side  of  the  pass  we  came  to  a
little  hut  made  of  loose  stones,  where  we  rested  and  partook  of  some

*  Called  Slietot  on  the  map.— (W.  R.)

t  A.  K.  says  that  there  is  also  at  this  village  a  large  Chinese  post  station.  These
post  stations  are  called  tang  in  Chinese  ;  the  building  itself  is  a  ku7ig  huan.  Ou  the
Dugpa  sect,  see  ^Yaddell,  op.  cit. He  says  it  originated  in  the  Xllth  century.— (W.  R.)

X  Also  known  as  Ralung  la,  according  to  A.  K. — (W.  R.)

§  Jaeschke,  Diet.,  s.v.  o-ma.,  says  that  this  name  designates  the  plain  ou  which  Lhasa
stands.  '  Georgi,  op.  cit.,  p.  451,  mentions  between  Gyautse  aud  Nangartse,  Lhomar
and  Lhamentung.  The  first  jjlace  I  do  not  find  on  any  maps  at  my  disposal.  The
latter,  however,  corresponds  with  the  Langma  of  the  maps.  According  to  the  maps,  the
Karo  la  is  16,600  feet  high,— (W.  R.)

K


130  JOUBNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TLBET.

refreshments.  In  conversation  with  the  Lhacham,  I  mentioned  the
superiority  of  sedan  chairs  {shing-chyam)  over  saddle-horses,  especially
for  women  when  travelling.  V>\\i  she  held  that  it  was  degrading
men  to  make  them  serve  as  beasts  of  burden,  and  that  if  it
shoidd  be  tried  in  Tibet  the  people  would  certainly  resent  it  as  an
indignity.  "  There  are  only  the  two  Great  Lamas,  the  Amban  and
the  Eegent,  who  are  allowed  to  use  sedan  chairs  in  Tibet,"  she  went
on  to  say ;  "  no  other  persons,  however  great  they  may  be,  can  make
use  of  them."

About  six  miles  down  the  valley  we  came  to  the  hamlet  of  Ring-la,
where  the  Kharnang-phu  chu  turns  north  to  empty  into  the  Yamdo-
yum-tso.  At  this  village  the  Nangartse  plain  begins,  and  the
monastery  of  Samding  becomes  faintly  visible.

The  road  now  became  good,  and  the  ponies  quickened  their  pace,
and  by  5  o'clock  we  came  in  view  of  the  town  of  Nangartse.

The  houses  of  the  fishermen  and  common  people  (tnisscr)  are
perched  on  the  hillside  overlooking  the  prefect's  house  {djong),  and
the  broad  blue  expanse  of  Lake  Palti's  waters  spreads  out  beyond.
Tlie  party  stopped,  and  the  Lhacham  changed  her  garments  for  finer
ones,  and  put  on  her  jewelled  headdress  {];>atug).  On  arriving  at  the
gate  of  the  house  where  we  were  to  stop,  there  was  a  raised  platform
covered  with  soft  blankets;  here  the  Lhacham  alighted,  while  her
sons  and  the  rest  of  the  party  got  down  near  by.

The  brother  and  nephew  of  the  host  were  laid  up  with  small-pox
(Ihcm-dum),  and  in  a  corner  of  the  house  some  lamas  were  reading
the  holy  books  to  bring  about  their  speedy  recovery.*  In  the  court-
yard lay  another  man  lately  arrived  from  Lhasa,  and  suffering  from
the  same  disease,  and  near  him  were  two  lamas  chanting  mantras  to
the  discordant  accompaniment  of  a  bell  and  a  damai'u  (hand  drum).

I  passed  a  miserable  night,  with  a  raging  fever  and  violent
cough  racking  my  whole  frame.  My  two  companions  sat  beside  me
and  did  what  they  could,  but  concluded  that  it  was  impossible  in
my  present  state  for  me  to  keep  up  with  the  Lhacham's  party  all  the
way  to  Lhasa.

The  next  morning  1 was  no  better,  the fits  of  coughing  were

more  violent. The  sons  of  the  Lhacham  and  her  attendants  came

to  see  me,  and  expressed  tlieir  sorroM^  at  having  to  leave  me. The

host  said  that  the  best  thing  for  me  to  do  was  to  go  to  the  Samding

*  On  such  religious  snrvicee,  see  Waddell,  op.  cit,  353,  494  et  eqq. — (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  131

monastery,  where  there  were  two  skilful  physicians  who  had  recently
successfully  treated  a  case  similar  to  mine.  Hearing  this,  one  of  the
Lhacham's  maids  suggested  that  her  mistress  might  give  me  a  letter
of  introduction  to  the  lady  abbess  of  this  convent,  the  Dorje  Phagmo,
with  whom  she  was  related  and  on  the  most  friendly  terms ;  the  only
danger  was  that  she  niiglit  not  allow  me  to  enter  her  convent,  as,  on
account  of  the  epidemic  of  small-pox,  she  had  closed  it  to  pilgrims.

I  followed  the  advice  of  those  around  me,  and  the  Lhacham  kindly
wrote  to  the  Dorje  Phagmo  to  take  care  of  me  and  look  to  my
wants ;  and  after  taking  an  affectionate  farewell,  and  telling  me  to
come  straight  to  her  house  at  Lhasa  as  soon  as  I  recovered,  she
recommended  me  to  the  people  of  the  house  and  rode  off.

After  taking  a  little  breakfast,  I  made  up  my  mind  to  o-q  at  once
to  the  Samding  gomba,  which  I  learnt  could  be  reached  in  two  hours'
ride.

My  companions  wrapped  me  in  woollens  and  blankets,  and  with
a  turban  round  my  head  they  set  me  on  my  horse.  About  two  miles
from  town  we  came  to  the  river  (the  same  we  had  followed  since
crossing  the  Kharo  la),  and  found  it  teeming  with  a  small  variety  of
fish.  After  crossing  several  rivulets  we  came  to  the  foot  of  the  hill,
on  the  top  of  which  stands  Samding  lamasery,*  A  flight  of  stone
steps  led  up  to  the  monastery,  and  I  looked  at  the  long  steep  ascent
with  dismay,  for  I  did  not  see  how  I  would  ever  be  able  to  climb
it  in  my  present  condition.  Taking  a  rest  at  every  turn  in  the
steps,  I  managed  finally  to  reach  the  top,  some  300  feet  above  the
plain.  We  had  not,  however,  arrived  at  the  convent ;  a  narrow  path-
way led  up  to  the  gateway,  near  which  were  chained  two  fierce  watch-
dogs {do  hhyi),  who  barked  furiously  and  strained  at  their  chains  as
we  passed.  The  Yamdo  dogs,  I  had  heard,  were  famous  throughout
Tibet  for  their  size  and  fierceness,  and  these  certainly  justified  the
reputation  given  them.

I  sat  down  on  a  stone  near  the  gateway  to  wait  until  Tsering-
tashi  had  looked  up  the  physicians.  After  an  hour  he  returned  and
informed  me  that  one  of  the  Amchi  (physicians)  was  in  the  lamasery,
and  he  led  me  to  his  house,  at  the  top  of  which  I  waited  his  coming.
After  a  little  while  the  doctor  made  his  appearance.  He  was  a  man
of  about  seventy  years  of  age,  but  still  sturdy,  of  middle  stature,  with

*  The  name  is  written  Bgam-kling,  meaning,  apparently,  "  fancy  iloating."  It  was
founded,  according  to  Chandra  Dats's  authorities,  by  Shou-nu  drupa.— (W,  K.)


132  JOURNEY TO LHASA ANT) CENTBAL TIBET.

an  agreeable  face,  broad  forehead,  and  dignified  appearance.  He
asked  me  a  few  questions,  examined  my  eyes  and  tongue,  and  then
led  the  way  into  his  house.  We  ascended  two  ladders,  and  thus
reached  the  portico  of  his  apartment.  The  old  man  sat  for  a  while
turning  his  prayer-wheel,  and  taking  frequent  pinches  of  snuff  while
he  scrutinized  me  closely.*  Then  he  gave  me  a  powder  to  be  taken
in  a  little  warm  water,  and  ordered  his  cook  to  give  me  some  weak
tea  {clia  fang),  after  which,  bearing  the  Lhacham's  letter  in  his  hand,
he  went  with  Tsering-taslii  to  present  it  to  the  Khyabgong  Dorje

Phagmo.t

In  the  evening  I  was  led  to  a  house  in  the  western  end  of  the
lamasery  lielonging  to  a  monk  called  Gelegs  namgyal,  where  I  had  to
accommodate  myself  as  best  I  could  under  the  portico.

Tsing-ta,  as  Tsering-tashi  was  usually  called,  told  me  that  he  had
asked  the  Dorje  Phagmo  to  tell  my  fortune,  and  that  she  had  made
out  that  my  illness  would  prove  very  severe  but  not  fatal,  but  the
performance  of  certain  religious  ceremonies  was  most  urgently  needed
to  hasten  my  recovery.  She  sent  me  word  that,  in  view  of  the  letter
of  introduction  from  the  Lhacham  I  had  brought  with  me,  she  would
shortly  be  pleased  to  see  me,  and  that  we  might  have  all  we  required
while  stopping  in  Samding.

The  next  day  my  companions  asked  me  to  give  a  "  general  tea  "
{mang  ja)  to  the  eighty  odd  monks  of  the  convent,  and  to  distribute
alms  to  them  at  the  rate  of  a  karma  (two  annas)  a  head.  I  gave  my
consent,  and  at  the  same  time  my  companions  made,  in  my  name,
presents  to  the  Dorje  Phagmo  and  to  the  deities  that  were  pointed
out  to  them  as  best  able  to  drive  away  the  fiends  of  disease  which
surrounded  me.

The  Dorje  Phagmo  gave  Tsing-ta  a  sacred  pill  (rimcl)  containing  a
particle  of  Kashyapa  Buddha's  relics,  and  the  latter  hastened  to  bring
it  to  me,  and  insisted  on  my  swallowing  it  forthwith.!

*  Tibetan.  Mongol,  and  Chinese  doctors  ask  their  i^atients  but  few,  if  any,  questions.
They  are  suijposed  to  diagnose  the  disease  by  tlie  general  appearance  of  the  patient
and  by  his  pulse  and  the  condition  of  his  urine. — (W.  II.)

t  Khyab-gong  and  Khyab-gong  rinpoche  are  titles  given  all  the  higher  incarnate
lamas. The  word means  "  protector."— (W.  R.)

X  Such  pills  are  usually  called  mani  rilbu.  On  the  ceremonies  performed  in  making
them,  I  must  refer  the  reader  to  my  paper  on  the  subject  in  Proceedings  of  the  American
Oriental  Society,  October,  1888,  j).  xxii.  On  the  subject  of  "general  teas,"  sec  Hue,
'Souvenirs,'  vol.  ii.  p.  122  ;  'Land  of  the  Lamas,'  p.  101 ;  and  Waddell,  '  Buddhism  of
Tibet,'  p.  191.— OV.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  133

The  Amclii  advised  me  to  carefully  abstain  from  drinking  cold
water,  especially  as  the  water  of  the  lake  was  injurious  to  many
persons  even  when  in  good  health.  He  also  forbade  me  drinking
buttered  tea.

By  agreeing  to  pay  my  host  a  daily  sum  of  four  annas,  I  managed
to  rent  his  two  miserable  rooms.  They  were  about  six  feet  by  eight,
and  six  feet  high.  In  the  bedroom  were  a  couple  of  little  tables,
half  a  dozen  books,  and  a  couple  of  boxes;  in  a  corner  there  was
a  little  altar  and  two  images  of  gods.

The  next  day  there  was  a  new  moon,  and  the  monks  assembled
early  in  the  congregation  hall  to  perform  religious  services,  as  on  the
morrow  began  the  fourth  month  (saga  dao)*  the  holiest  of  the  year.

At  the  conclusion  of  the  ceremonies  Tsing-ta  again  saw  the  Dorje
Phagmo,  and,  presenting  her  with  a  khatag  and  a  couple  of  tanka,
obtained  another  sacred  pill.  The  doctor  and  his  assistant  impressed
upon  me  the  importance  of  only  taking  such  medicines  as  experience
had  shown  were  efficacious  in  the  Yamdo  country.  They  also  in-
sisted that  it  was  essential  to  my  recovery  that  I  should  not  sleep  in
the  daytime.  I  felt  so  weak  and  ill  that  towards  midnight  I  called
my  companions  to  my  side,  and  wrote  my  will  in  my  notebook-
Later  on  some  medicine  given  me  by  the  doctor's  assistant,  Jerung,
brought  me  some  relief.

May  18. — Tsing-ta  again  gave  the  lamas  a  mang  ja  and  money
to  read  the  sacred  books  to  my  intent,  and  got  still  another  sacred  pill
from  the  Dorje  Phagmo.  On  his  way  back  to  our  quarters  he  saw  the
ex-incarnate  lama  of  the  Tse-chog  ling  of  Lhasa.  He  had  been
degraded  for  having  committed  adultery.

Seeing  no  pronounced  improvement  in  my  condition,  my  faithful
follower  went  again  in  the  afternoon  to  see  the  Dorje  Phagmo,  presented
her  a  khatag  and  ten  tanka,  and  got  her  to  perform  the  ceremony
known  as  "  propitiating  the  gods  of  life  "  (tse  dul).  She  also  gave
him  a  long  list  of  religious  rites,  which,  according  to  her,  it  was
imperative  that  I  should  immediately  get  learned  lamas  to  perform
to  insure  my  speedy  recovery.

These  rites  were  the  following :  1.  Eeading  the  Pradjna  paramita
in  8000  shlokas,  together  with  its  supplements — twelve  monks  could

*  Sa-ga  is  the  name  of  the  15th  lunar  mansion  (gyu-har\  and  also  of  a  month  of
the  year.  Dao  is  Da-iva,  "a  month."  On  the  new  moon  festivals,  see  Waddell,  op.  cit.,
501.


134  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

'\o  this  ill  two  days.  2.  Making  the  three  portion  [vliu  (jmui)  offerings,
these  consisting  in  painted  wafers  of  fsarnha  and  bntter.  One-third
is  ottered  to  the  ten  guardians,  (iya-ljin  (Indra),  the  god  of  tire,  the
ruler  of  Hades,  the  god  of  wind,  etc. ;  another  portion  is  offered  to
the  spirits,  and  the  third  to  the  denii-gods.  3.  Gi/al-ysol,  or  pro-
pitiating certain  genii  to  the  end  that  the  patient's  inind  may  be  at
rest  and  he  enjoy  peaceful  dreams.  4.  Libations  to  the  gods  or  Gser-
skyenis.  This  is  held  to  be  one  of  the  most  efficacious  ways  of  pro-
pitiating the  gods.  5.  "To  deceive  death"  (/w7</-s/m),  by  offering  an
image  of  the  sick  person,  together  witli  some  of  his  clothes,  and  food
to  the  Lord  of  death,  and  beseeching  him  to  accept  it  instead  of
the  person  it  represents.  This  means  is  resorted  to  after  all  others
have  failed.  (J.  "To  deceive  life"  (srog-sln),  by  saving  from  death
animals  about  to  be  killed.  This  is  also  known  as  "  life-saving
charity."  The  saving  of  the  lives  of  men,  beasts,  and  particularly
iishes,  is  calculated  to  insure  life.*  When  Tsing-ta  proposed  this  to
me,  I  at  once  agreed  to  save  five  hundred  fish.  The  old  doctor  said
he  would  go  to  the  fishermen's  village,  some  three  miles  away,  buy  the
fish,  and  set  them  free  for  me,  if  I  would  but  lend  him  a  pony.  He
came  back  in  the  evening,  and  reported  that  he  had  successfully
accomplished  this  most  important  mission,  by  which  much  merit
would  come  to  me.

In  spite  of  all  these  rites  and  observances,  for  some  days  my
illness  showed  no  signs  of  improvement,  and  so  at  last,  on  May  22,
Tsing-ta  went  once  more  to  the  Dorje  Phagmo,  and,  making  her  a  present
of  five  taiila  and  a  Jchatag,  asked  her  to  find  out  by  her  divine  know-
ledge if  the  old  Amchi  was  the  right  man  to  attend  to  me.  She
threw  dice  {s/io-inon),^  and  then  said  that  the  two  physicians  could  be
depended  on.

Accordingly,  1  sent  for  the  j)liysicians,  gave  them  each  a  present,
and  begged  them  to  prepare  some  new  and  energetic  remedy  for  me.
In  tlie  evening  Jerung  brought  me  some  pills,  which  smelt  strongly
of  musk,  and  some  })Owders,  probably  those  known  as  gurhum
cJuisu/a.l After  having  taken  some  of  each  I  felt  somewhat  better.

By  the  following  morning  there  was  a  marked  improvement  in

''  This  custom  prevails  in  Cliina,  where  it  is  chUmI  fang  shenrj,  "  to  let  go  living
creatures.'— (W.  R.)

t  See  '  Land  of  the  Lamas,'  p.  1G4.

X  Gurhiim  is  satt'ron. Cliusum  may  be  rliuburb.— (.W.  li.)


JOUBNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  135

my  condition,  and  I  was  able  to  sit  propped  up  on  my  blankets.
The  news  of  the  favourable  change  was  at  once  reported  to  the  Dorje
Phagmo,  who  advised  Tsing-ta  to  have  performed  the  ceremony  for
propitiating  Tamdrin,  Dorje  l*liagmo,  and  Khyung-mo  (the  Garuda) ;
especially  of  the  first-named.  Tsing-ta  made  her  a  further  present
of  seven  tanha  and  a  khutcuj,  and  she  agreed  to  perform  these
ceremonies  herself.

May  24. — Early  this  morning  the  old  doctor  visited  me.  "  The
danger  is  over,"  he  said  ;  "  the  fatal  stage  is  passed ;  you  can  take
a  little  food,  some  tsamha,  a  little  soup  and  meat."  In  truth,  I  felt
so  much  better  to-day  that  I  took  some  exercise,  and  the  fresh,  bracing
air  did  me  a  world  of  good.

The  next  day  I  was  able  to  visit  the  shrines  of  Samding,  on
which  tour  my  two  companions  accompanied  me,  carrying  a  bowl
of  butter,  a  bundle  of  incense-sticks,  and  about  fifty  khatcuj.

We  first  went  to  visit  the  kind  old  physician  and  his  assistant,
and  I  was  much  struck  by  the  neat  appearance  of  the  floors  of  his
rooms,  made  of  pebbles  very  evenly  laid  in  mortar,  and  beautifully
polished.  In  the  doctor's  sitting-room  the  walls  were  frescoed  with
Buddhist  symbols,  trees,  and  hideous  figures  of  guardian  deities.  The
furniture  comprised  of  four  painted  chests  of  drawers,  half  a  dozen
small  low  tables,  some  painted  bowls  for  tsamha,  two  little  wooden
altars  covered  with  images  of  gods,  and  some  rugs  spread  on  the
top  of  large  mattresses.  On  the  walls  hung  some  religious  pictures
covered  with  silk  curtains,  and  in  a  corner  there  were  a  sword  and  shield.

On  leaving  the  physician's  house  I  entered  the  courtyard  of
the  monastery,  which  I  found  more  than  150  feet  long,  and  100
broad.  There  were  buildings  on  three  sides,  and  broad  ladders,  each
step  covered  with  brass  and  iron  plates,  leading  to  the  main  floor ;
the  middle  ladder  is  used  by  the  Dorje  Phagmo  alone.  On  inquiring
for  her  holiness,  we  learnt  that  she  was  engaged  in  certain  religious
duties,  and  would  see  me  later.

In  the  meanwhile  I  visited  various  chapels  and  shrines.  In  the
gong-hhang  (upper  rooms)  are  lodged  the  most  terrifying  of  the  demons
and  genii ;  their  appearance  is  so  awful  that  they  are  usually  kept
veiled.  Almost  all  the  images  were  dressed  in  armour,  and  held  various
weapons  in  their  hands.  To  each  of  the  images  Tsing-ta  presented
a  khatag  and  a  stick  of  incense,  and  Pador  poured  a  little  l)utter  in
the  brass  or  silver  lamps  kept  continually  burning  before  them.


13G


JOUBNEY TO LHASA AXD CENTBAL TIBET.


It  is  due,  by  the  way,  to  the  Dorje  Phagmo's  spiritual  influence
that  the  waters  of  the  inner  lake  or  Dumo  tso  ("  Demons'  Lake  "),  of
the  Yamdo  tso,  are  held  in  bounds,  for  otherwise  they  would  overflow
and  inundate  the  whole  of  Tibet.  'Twas  for  this  that  the  Saniding
lamasery  was  originally  built.

In  the  largest  room  on  the  same  floor  are  the  mausolea  of  the


NAM TOS-SRAS (VAISRAVANA), THE GI^ARDIAN KING OF THE NORTH.

former  incarnations  of  Dorje  Pliagmo.  The  first  is  made  of  silver
gilt,  and  was  built  in  honour  of  Je-tsun  Tinlas-tsomo,'*  the  founder
of  the  monastery.  The  whole  surface  of  the  monument  is  studded
over  with  large  turquoises,  coral  l)Gads,  rubies,  emeralds,  and  pearls.

*  Cf...  liowevcr,  noto,  p.  i;]l,  wlnre  be  says  thiit  the  fouuder  of  tliis  lamasery  was
Shon-nu  dnipa. — (W.  It.)


JOUBNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  137

In  shape  it  resembles  a  chorten,  six  to  seven  feet  square  at  the  base.
Inside  of  it,  on  a  slab  of  stone,  is  an  impress  of  the  foot  of  the
illustrious  deceased.  The  second  monument  is  also  of  silver,  and  in
shape  like  the  preceding,  but  I  could  not  ascertain  the  name  of  the
incarnation  in  whose  honour  it  had  been  erected.  The  third,  also
of  silver,  is  that  of  Nag-wang  kun-bzang,  the  predecessor  last  but
one  of  the  present  incarnation,  and  has  around  it,  placed  there  as
great  curios,  some  pieces  of  European  chinaware  and  some  toys.  The
upper  part  of  the  monument  is  most  tastefully  decorated  with
gold  and  precious  stones.  This  work,  I  believe,  has  been  done  by
ISTei^alese,  though  some  persons  said  it  is  of  native  workmanship.

In  another  room,  not  open  to  the  public,  however,  are  the  mortal
remains  of  the  former  incarnations  of  Dorje  Phagmo.  I  was  told  that
each  incarnation  of  this  goddess  visits  this  hall  once  in  her  life  to
make  obeisance  to  the  remains  of  her  predecessors.

After  visiting  all  the  shrines  we  returned  to  the  Dorje  Phagmo's
apartments,  where  I  was  most  kindly  received.  She  occupied  a
raised  seat,  and  I  was  given  a  place  on  her  left,  while  the  ex-incar-
nate lama,  of  whom  I  have  previously  spoken,  occupied  one  a  little
behind  her,  but  his  seat  was  higher  than  mine.  The  ceremony  of
propitiating  Tamdrin  (Hayagriva)  was  proceeding,  and  twelve  lamas  in
full  canonicals  were  acting  as  assistants.  A  number  of  respectably
dressed  men  and  women  who  had  come  to  be  blessed  were  also  seated
about  on  ruo;s.

The  service  lasted  about  two  hours.  Every  now  and  then  the  Dorje
Phagmo  used  an  aspergill,  with  an  end  of  peacock  feathers  and  kusha
grass,*  to  sprinkle  saffron  water  taken  from  a  "  bowl  of  life,"  most  of
it,  much  to  my  annoyance,  for  I  feared  catching  cold,  falling  on  me,
but  it  was  a  much  envied  token  of  her  special  favour,  I  could  not
catch  the  words  of  the  charms  {mantras)  she  uttered,  as  she  spoke
very  rapidly,  so  as  to  get  through  the  services  as  quickly  as  slie
could.

At  the  termination  of  the  service  sugared  tsaviha  balls,  about
the  size  of  bullets,  most  of  them  painted  red,  were  distributed  among
tliose  present.  Before  each  person  received  any  he  prostrated  himself
before  her  holiness,  who  then  gave  them  to  him.

When  all  the  spectators  had  left,  the  Dorje  Phagmo  told  me  that  she

took  gi-eat  interest  in  my  recovery  on  account  of  the  Lhacham,  who

*  See  '  Land  of  the  Lamas,'  p.  1U6. On  Tamdrin,  see  Waddell,  op.  cit.,  G'2  and  3G4.


138  JOUliXEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

was  not  only  her  friend,  but  her  half-sister.  I  besought  her  to
allow  me  to  proceed  on  my  journey  to  Lhasa,  as  I  was  most  desirous
of  reaching  the  sacred  city  by  the  15th  of  the  present  moon  (June  1),
the  birthday  of  the  Buddha,  and  she  graciously  gave  me  leave  to
start  as  soon  as  I  was  strong  enough  to  bear  the  fatigue  of  travelling.

On  taking  leave,  she  gave  me  three  more  sacred  pills,  and  directed
her  valet  {gzim-dpon)  to  show  me  through  her  residence,  where  there
was  great  store  of  handsomely  carved  and  painted  furniture,  images
of  gold,  silver,  and  copper  neatly  arranged  on  little  altars.  There  was
also  a  library  with  about  3000  volumes  of  printed  and  manuscript
books.  One  work,  in  118  volumes,  was  by  Podong-chogleg  namgyal,
the  founder  of  the  sect  to  which  the  Dorje  Phagmo  belongs.

The  present  incarnation  of  the  divine  Dorje  Phagmo  is  a  lady  of
twenty-six,  Nag-wang  rinchen  kunzang  wangmo  by  name.  She  wears
her  hair  long ;  her  face  is  agreeable,  her  manners  dignified,  and  some-
what resembling  those  of  the  Lhacham,  though  she  is  much  less  pre-
possessing than  she.  It  is  required  of  her  that  she  never  take  her
rest  lying  down  ;  in  the  daytime  she  may  recline  on  cushions  or  in
a  chair,  but  during  the  night  she  sits  in  the  position  prescribed  for
meditation.*

I  learnt  that  the  Dorje  Phagmo,  or  the  "  Diamond  Sow,"  is  an  incar-
nation of  Dolma  (Tara),  the  divine  consort  of  Shenrezig.  In  days  of  old,
before  the  time  when  the  Buddha  Gautama  appeared,  there  was  a
hideous  monster  called  Matrankaru,  who  spread  ruin  and  terror  over
all  the  world.  He  was  the  chief  of  all  the  legions  of  demons,  goblins
and  other  evil  spirits ;  even  the  devils  (raJcsha)  of  Ceylon  had  to
become  his  subjects.  He  subdued  to  his  rule  not  only  this  world,
but  the  eight  planets,  the  twenty-four  constellations,  the  eight  Nagas,
and  the  gods.  By  liis  miraculous  power  he  could  lift  Mount  liirab
(Sumeru)  on  the  end  of  his  thumb.

*  Georgi, '  Alph.  Tibet,'  p.  451  says,  "  In  Australi  eoruiii  (montium)  latere  Monas-
terium,  at  Scdes  est  Majinse  Eenataj  Lhamisste  Tiircepaino.  Eain  lutli  quoque  Nckpal-
leDses,  tanquaiii  ipsi-simara  Deain  ]5avaiii  venerantur  et  colunt."  Mr.  Geo.  Bogle
visited  her  at  Tasliilhunpo  in  1775  :  "  The  mother  went  with  me  into  the  apartment  of
Durjay  I'aumo,  wlio  was  attired  in  a  gylong's  dress,  lier  arms  bare  from  the  sboulders,
and  sitting  cross-legged  upon  a  low  cushion.  She  is  also  the  daugbter  of  tiie  lama's
brother,  but  by  a  different  wife.  She  is  about  seven  and  twenty,  witb  small  Chinese
features,  delicate,  though  not  regular,  fine  eyes  and  teeth.  .  .  .  She  wears  her  hair — a
l)rivilege  granted  to  no  other  vestal  I  have  seen  ;  it  is  combed  back,  witliout  any  orna-
nicnts,  and  falls  in  tresses  upon  her  shoulders.  ...  I  never  visited  her  but  this  time.
Mr.  Hamilton  used  to  be  there  almost  every  day." Markbam,  '  Tibet,'  pp.  1U5,  108,  109.


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  139

Finally  the  Buddha  and  gods  held  council  to  compass  about
Matrankaru's  destruction,  and  it  was  decided  that  Shenrezig  should
take  the  form  of  Tamdrin  ("Horse-neck"),  and  his  consort,  Dolma,
that  of  Dorje  Phagmo  ("  the  Diamond  Sow  ").  When  the  two  had
assumed  these  forms  they  went  to  the  summit  of  the  Malaya  moun-
tains, and  Tamdrin  neighed  three  times,  to  fill  the  demon  with  terror,
and  Dorje  Phagmo  grunted  five  times,  to  strike  terror  into  the  heart
of  Matrankaru's  wife,  and  soon  both  were  lying  prostrate  at  the  feet
of  the  two  divinities.  But  their  lives  were  spared  them,  and  Matran-
karu  became  a  devout  follower  of  the  Buddha,  a  defender  of  the  faith
{ehos  ijyong),  and  was  given  the  name  of  Mahakala.

In  1716,  when  the  Jungar  invaders  of  Tibet  came  to  Nangartse,
their  chief  sent  word  to  Samding  to  the  Dorjo  Phagmo  to  appear  before
him,  that  he  might  see  if  she  really  had,  as  reported,  a  pig's  head.  A
mild  answer  was  returned  him  ;  but,  incensed  at  her  refusing  to  obey
his  summons,  he  tore  down  the  walls  of  the  monastery  of  Samding,
and  broke  into  the  sanctuary.  He  found  it  deserted,  not  a  human
being  in  it,  only  eighty  pigs  and  as  many  sows  grunting  in  the  con-
gregation hall  under  the  lead  of  a  big  sow,  and  he  dared  not  sack
a  place  belonging  to  pigs.

When  the  Jungars  had  given  up  all  idea  of  sacking  Samding,
suddenly  the  pigs  disappeared  to  become  venerable-looking  lamas
and  nuns,  with  the  saintly  Dorje  Phagmo  at  their  head.  Filled  with
astonishment  and  veneration  for  the  sacred  character  of  the  lady
abbess,  the  chief  made  immense  presents  to  her  lamasery.

May  26. — To-day  we  made  our  preparations  for  the  journey  to
Lhasa,  and  as  food  of  all  kinds  was  very  scarce  at  Samding,  the  Dorje
Phagmo  was  so  kind  as  to  supply  us  with  all  the  necessary  provisions.
The  old  doctor  presented  me  with  a  basket  of  dried  apricots  and
some  rice,  and  our  landlord  brought  us  some  wild  goose  eggs.

May  27. — We  left  to-day  for  Lhasa.  From  a  little  hillock  behind
our  lodgings  I  cast  a  last  glance  towards  the  lake  and  the  dark
hills  around  it,  behind  which  rose  the  snow-covered  mountains.  My
eyes  fell  on  the  Dumo  tso,  and  on  the  place  where  the  dead  are
thrown  into  the  lake,  and  I  shuddered  as  I  thought  that  this  had
come  near  being  my  fate.  Dead  bodies  throughout  Tibet  are  cut  up
and  fed  to  vultures  and  dogs,  but  on  the  shores  of  Lake  Yamdo  the
people  throw  their  dead  into  the  lake.  It  is  generally  believed
that  a  number  of  Lu  (serpent  demi-gods)  live  in  Lake  Yamdo,  and


140


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.


that  they  keep  the  keys  of  lieaven.  In  a  palace  of  crystal  in  the
deep  recesses  of  the  lake  lives  their  king,  and  the  people  think
that  by  throwing  their  dead  into  the  lake  there  is  a  chance  for
them  of  reaching  heaven  by  serving  the  king  of  the  Lu  during  the
period  intervening  Ijetween  death  and  regeneration.  Bardo  this  time
is  called.

Passing  through  cultivated  fields,  where  the  ponies  sank  up  to
their  knees  in  mud,  we  came  to  a  broad  steppe  where  wild  goats


TUi; lUil'OsAL OF THE DEAD (BY CUTTING THE COKPriE INTO PIECES).


and  sheep  and  a  fe\\-  musk  deer  were  grazing.  Dorje  Phagmo  is
their  special  patron,  and  no  wild  animals  may  be  killed  in  the
Yamdo  district.

At  aljout  2  o'clock  we  reached  Nangartse,  and,  passing  by  the
town,  proceeded  northward  along  the  bank  of  the  far-famed  Yamdo
(ralti)  lake,  also  called  Yum  tso,  or  "  turquoise  lake  " — a  name  which
the  deep  blue  waters  of  the  lake  amply  justify.

Travelling  along  the  lake-side  by  the  ^-illages  of  Hailo,*  Dab-lung,
and  Dejihu,  where  the  fishermen's  hide  boats  {hiulrv)  were  drying
*  Hailo  must  be  the  Haug  of  tlie  maps. — (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND GENTRAL TIBET.  141

against  the  houses,  and  near  which  are  a  few  fields  where  a  little
barley  is  raised,  we  came  to  the  Kal-zang  zamba,  where  we  rested  a
while  and  drank  some  tea.  Though  this  place  is  called  "  bridge "
{zamla),  it  is  in  reality  an  embankment  about  300  to  400  feet  long
dividing  a  narrow  arm  of  the  lake  into  two  parts.

A  little  beyond  the  Kal-zang  zamba,  at  a  place  where  a  string
of  coloured  rags,  inscribed  with  prayers,  stretched  between  two  crags
on  either  side  the  narrow  path,  Tsing-ta  made  me  dismount.  ITe
climbed  on  to  a  large  rock,  and  scattered  a  few  pinches  of  tsfmki,
and,  striking  a  light,  lit  an  incense-stick,  which  he  fixed  in  a  cleft  in
the  rocks.  This  place  is  called  Sharui  teng,  and  is  the  haunt  of
evil  spirits ;  should  any  traveller  neglect  to  make  these  offerings,  he
would  incur  their  anger.

On  reaching  Palti  djong,*  we  put  up  at  a  house  where  the
Lhacham  had  stopped  when  on  her  way  to  Lhasa,  and  were  most
hospitably  received.  We  bought  some  milk,  a  few  eggs,  and  some
cJiang  from  the  hostess,  who  supplied  us  also  with  water,  firewood,
and  two  earthen  cooking-pots.  I  was  offered  some  fish,  but  I  forbore
buying  any,  as  it  would  have  been  incompatible  with  my  character
of  a  pious  pilgrim,  such  indulgence  being  forbidden  by  the  Dalai
lama.  The  Grand  Lama,  I  must  mention,  having  lately  taken  the
vows  of  monkhood,  had  issued  an  edict  prohibiting  his  subjects
killing  or  eating  fish  for  the  space  of  one  year.

From  ancient  times  the  town  of  Palti  has  been  a  famous  seat
of  the  Nyiugma  sect,  and  the  lake  was  popularly  known  by  its
name.  The  name  of  the  town  as  applied  to  the  lake  by  foreigners
probably  originated  with  the  Catholic  missionaries  who  visited  Tibet
in  the  eighteenth  century.

When,  in  the  eighteenth  century,  the  Jungars  invaded  Tibet,  their
wrath  was  especially  turned  against  the  lamaseries  and  monks  of  the
Nyingma  sect.  There  then  lived  in  Palti  djong  a  learned  and  saintly
lama,  called  Palti  Sbabdung,  well  versed  in  all  the  sacred  literature,
and  proficient  in  magic  arts.  Hearing  that  the  invaders  had  crossed
the  ISTabso  la  and  were  marching  on  Palti,  he,  by  his  art,  propitiated

*  Georgi,  'Alph.  Tibet.,'  p.  451,  speaking  of  Lake  Palti,  says,  "Palti:  Lacus,
alias  Jamdro  aut  Jang-so  uuncupatus.  Maximse  amplitudinis  est,  quam  homo  pedi-
bus,  uti  indigene  tradunt,  nonnisi  octodecim  dieruni  spatio  circumire  queat.  Sic
totus  ambitus  300.  circiter  milliariorum  esset."  A.  K.  calls  the  town  Pete  Jong,  and
on  the  maps  it  figures  as  Pe  de  Jong,  or  Piahte-Jong.  The  Chinese  call  it  Pai-ti,  but
I  have  been  told  by  Tibetans  that  the  name  is  Pe'-di  (written  Spe-di). — (W.  K.)


142  JOUR  NET TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

the  deities  of  the  Like  who  caused  the  waters  of  the  lake  to  appear
to  the  Jungar  troops  like  a  plain  of  verdure,  so  that  they  marched
into  the  lake  and  were  drowned,  to  the  number  of  several  thousands.
Another  corps  which  had  advanced  by  the  Khamba  la,  not  finding
the  troops  wliich  had  gone  by  the  Nabso  la,  retraced  their  steps,  and
so  the  town  of  Palti  was  saved.

May  28. — We  left  by  daylight,  and  followed  along  the  shore  of
the  lake  till  we  reached  the  foot  of  the  Khamba  la.  The  ascent  was
comparatively  easy ;  on  the  rocks  by  the  wayside  were  painted  in
many  places  images  of  Buddhas  and  Bodhisattvas.  FromTamalung,*
a  small  village  halfway  up  the  mountain,  a  trail  led  eastward  along
the  cliffs  overhanging  the  lake,  and  the  sinuosities  of  the  shore  could
be  followed  with  the  eye  to  the  remote  horizon.

On  the  summit  of  the  pass  are  two  large  cairns,  to  which  each
of  mv  companions  added  a  stone  ;  they  also  tied  a  rag  to  the  brush
sticking  out  above  the  heaps,  and  already  covered  with  such  offerings.
Then  they  made  an  offering  of  a  little  isamha  and  some  dust,  instead
of  wine,  to  the  mountain  god,  reciting  a  prayer  the  while,  which  tliey
brought  to  an  end  by  shouting —

"  Lha  sol-lo,  LJia  sol-lo  !
Lha  gyal  lo,  lha  gyal  lo  !
Kei-kei — ho,  liooo  !  "

From  this  point  I  enjoyed  one  of  the  grandest  views  I  have  ever
had  in  Tibet — the  valley  of  the  Tsang-po  was  before  me,  the  great
river  flowing  in  a  deep  gorge  at  the  foot  of  forest-clad  mountains.
Here  and  there  was  to  be  seen  a  little  hamlet,  most  of  the  white-
walled  houses  surrounded  by  a  cluster  of  tall  trees.

By  3  o'clock  we  had  reached  the  foot  of  the  pass,  the  way  down
being  over  a  tedious  zigzag  for  over  five  miles.  Along  the  wayside
grew  brambles  and  wild  roses,  a  few  evergreens  and  rhododendrons,
and  some  flocks  of  sheep  were  grazing  on  the  hillsides.

Then  we  canui  to  a  sluggish  stream,  and  shortly  after  reached

the  straggling  village  of  Khamba  partshi,t  with  some  forty  wretched

stone  hovels. Passing through a patch of  barley  surrounded by

pollard  willows,  we  reached  the  sandy  banks  of  the  Tsang-po,  and

followed  along  it  to  Tongbu,  the  surrounding  plain  being  known  as

Khamba  chyang  tang.

*  The  nam(!  is  also  written  Slia-ma-luiig  and  Demalung.— (W.  1{.)
t  The  Khamba  barclii  of  tin;  native  explorers. It  is  also  called Kampa  lacha. —
Khamba  chyang  tang  means  •'  Plain  north  of  Khamba." — (\V.  K.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  143

Two  women  weeding  their  barley  patch  approached  me  as  I  rode
by,  and  offered  me  a  bunch  of  the  young  sprouts,  in  the  hope,  as
Tsing-ta  explained,  that  I  would  give  them  some  money.  This  is
a  custom  obtaining  throughout  Tibet,  and  is  called  luhul.

Further  on,  near  Toi-tsi,  we  saw  women  making  bricks,  and
some  donkeys  and  yaks  were  carrying  away  those  which  had  become
sufficiently  dry  to  be  used.  Two  miles  beyond  this  point  we  came
to  the  famous  Palchen  chuvori  monastery  and  the  chain  bridge
{chafj-zam)  over  the  Tsang-po.^  This  bridge,  built,  tradition  says,  by
Tang-tong  gyal-po  in  the  fifteenth  century,  consists  of  two  heavy
cables  attached  at  each  end  to  huge  logs,  around  which  have  been
built  large  cliortcii*

The  bed  of  the  river  here  is  about  400  feet  bi'oad,  but  at  this
season  of  the  year  it  spreads  out  several  hundred  feet  beyond  the
extremities  of  the  bridge,  and  travellers  are  taken  across  in  boats.

The  monastery  of  Palchen  chuvori  was  also  built  by  Tang-tong
gyal-po,  wdio  is  likewise  credited  with  having  constructed  eight  chain
bridges  over  the  Tsaug-po,  108  temples,  and  108  cliortcn  on  the
hills  of  Chung  Rivoche,  in  Ulterior  Tibet,  and  of  Palchen  chuvori,
in  Central  Tibet,  or  U.  The  Palchen  chuvori  monastery,  where
there  are  upwards  of  one  hundred  monks,  is  supported  by  the  toll
collected  at  the  ferry.

We  and  our  ponies  crossed  the  river  in  a  roughly  made  boat
about  20  feet  long,  but  a  number  of  skin  coracles  were  also  carrying
travellers  and  freight  from  one  side  to  the  other.  It  was  sunset
when  we  reached  the  village  of  Jim-khar,  belonging  to  the  Namgyal
Ta-tsan,  the  great  monastic  estaldisliment  of  Potala  at  Lhasa.
Here  we  obtained  lodgings  for  the  night  in  the  sheepfold  attached
to  the  house  of  the  headman,  or  gyan-po.  All  the  members  of  the
(jyan-pds family  were  ill  with  small-pox,  and  he  himself  had  but

*  A.  K.  thus  describes  this  bridge :  "  The  bridge  is  formed  of  two  iron  chains,
one  on  each  side ;  from  the  chains  thick  ropes  are  suspended  to  the  deptli  of  four  yards ;
by  these  ropes  planks,  three  feet  long  and  one  foot  broad,  are  supported  lengthwise,  so
as  only  to  admit  of  one  person  crossing  at  a  time.  The  chains  are  stretched  very  tight,
and  are  fastened  around  huge  blocks  of  wood  buried  beneath  immense  piles  of  stone  ;
the  length  of  the  bridge  is  about  100  paces."  'Report  on  the  Explorations,'  p.  31.
This  is  the  usual  style  of  Chinese  suspension  bridge  common  throughout  Western  China
and  Tibet.  This  one  was  in  all  likelihood  built  by  the  Chinese  in  the  eighteenth
century.  I  am  not  aware  that  the  Tibetans  ever  build  this  style  of  bridge ;  theirs  are
usually  of  wood  and  of  the  cantilever  description.  Sec  my  '  Diary  of  a  Journey.'  p.  .304.
— (W.  R.)


144  JOUBNEY TO LHASA AND CENTBAL TIBET.

recently  recovered  from  it.  It  began  to  rain  shortly  after  our  arrival,
and  what  Avith  the  leaks  in  the  roof  and  the  noise  made  by  nine
ponies  tied  up  near  us,  we  passed  a  miserable  night,  and  were  glad
to  resume  our  journey  at  the  first  streak  of  dawn.  After  proceeding
some  distance  we  came  in  sight  of  the  ruins  of  Chu-shul  djong,  on
a  ledge  of  rocks  about  a  mile  from  where  the  Tsang-po  is  joined  by
the  Kyi  chu,  the  river  of  Lhasa.  Some  two  hundred  years  ago
Chu-shul  was  a  place  of  importance,  but  now  it  is  but  a  village  of
about  sixty  houses,  surrounded  by  wide  fields,  where  barley,  rape,
buckwheat,  and  wheat  are  grown.*

Passing  near  the  hamlets  of  Tsa-kang  and  Semu,  the  road  in
many  places  so  boggy  that  the  ponies  sank  in  the  mire  up  to  their
knees,  we  came,  after  about  four  miles,  to  the  ruins  of  Tsal-pa-nang,t
where  we  overtook  some  of  the  attendants  of  the  Lhacham  on  their
way  to  Lhasa.  After  conversing  with  them  for  upwards  of  an  hour,
they  rode  on  ahead,  as  they  were  desirous  of  reaching  Netang  by
sunset;  and  they  advised  us  to  put  up  in  the  Jya-khang  (or
Chinese  post  station)  of  the  same  place,  where  we  would  find  good
accommodation.

Beyond  Tsal-pa-nang  the  road  led  over  a  sandy  plain,  while
crossing  which  we  scared  up  several  rabbits  (hares  ?).  Proceeding
eastward  for  several  miles,  we  came  to  the  large  village  of  Jang  hog,
or  "  Lower  Jang,"  then  to  Jang  toi,  or  "  Upper  Jang,"  X  wliere  the
beauty  of  the  country  so  greatly  charmed  me,  each  cluster  of  houses
surrounded  by  groves  of  willows  and  poplars,  and  the  fields  a  mass
of  flowers,  that  I  called  a  halt,  and,  spreading  my  rug  under  a
willow  tree,  we  made  some  tea,  and  ray  companions  indulged  in  a
good  long  drink  of  chaiKj.

From  Jang  toi,  following  a  narrow  trail  overhanging  the  Kyi  chu,
we  came  to  Nam.  Beyond  this  little  hamlet  the  path  leads  over
a  confused  mass  of  rocks  and  boulders  along  the  river  bank ;  it  is
called  //ft//  lam,  or  "  narrow  road,"  and  a  false  step  would  throw  one
amidst  tlie  quicksands  on  the  river's  bank,  or  into  its  eddying  waters.
I  was  not  surprised  to  be  told  that  the  two  elephants  sent  to  the
Grand  Lama  by  the  Sikkim  rajah  had  had  great  difficulty  in  getting

*  Chinese  autliors  say  that  convicts  used  to  be  confined  at  this  place See  Jour.
Jioy.  Ae.  Soc,  1891,  p.  78*— (W.  R.)

t  On  the  maps  lliiw  placr  is  called  Tsha-bu-na. — (W.  K.)
X  Called  Chiang-li  by  the  Chinese.— (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LEAS  A AND CENTRAL TIBET.  ]  45

by  this  place.  After  a  tedious  journey  of  about  three  miles  through
the  sand  and  over  the  rocks,  we  got  sight  of  the  famous  village  of
Netang,*  where  the  great  saint  and  Buddhist  reformer,  Atisha,  or
Dipankara,  died.

An  old  woman  led  us  to  the  Jya  khang,  where  we  were  most
hospitably  received,  and  though  there  were  other  travellers  stopping
in  it,  we  were  accommodated  for  the  sum  of  a  tanha  in  a  well-
ventilated  outer  room,  the  inner  ones  being  reserved  for  officials,
particularly  Chinese.  Netang  has  about  forty  or  fifty  houses,  all
built  closely  together,  but  many  are  only  miserable  hovels.

May  30. — We  were  off  at  an  early  hour,  as  to-day  we  wanted
to  reach  Lhasa.  The  hamlets  of  Norbu-gang  and  Chumi^-frang,
through  which  we  passed,  had  a  number  of  fine  substantial  houses
belonging  to  civil  officers  {Dung-hhor)  of  Lhasa,  and  around  theni
were  gardens  and  groves  of  trees.  Leaving  these  places  behind,  we
travelled  for  some  miles  over  a  gravelly  plain,  the  river  some  distance
on  our  right.

When  near  a  gigantic  image  of  the  Buddha,  cut  in  low  relief  on
the  face  of  a  rock,  Potala  and  Chagpori  came  in  sight,  their  gilt
domes  shining  in  the  sun's  rays.  My  long-cherished  wish  was
accomplished — Lhasa,  the  sacred  city,  was  before  me.

Four  miles  over  a  fairly  good  road  now  brought  us  to  the  Ti  chu
zamba,  a  large  and  handsome  stone  bridge  about  120  paces  long
and  eight  broad,  beneath  which  flowed  a  rivulet  coming  from  the  hills
to  the  north-west,  where  stands  the  monastery  of  Tsorpu,  founded  by
Karma  Bagshi,  one  of  the  two  celebrated  lamas  who  resided  at  the
Imperial  court  of  China  in  the  time  of  the  Emperor  Kublai.

The  Ti  chu  zamba  is  in  the  lower  part  of  the  big  village  of
Toilung,  around  which  are  numerous  hamlets,  each  amid  a  little
grove  of  pollard  willows.  The  adjacent  plain,  watered  as  it  is  by
the  Kyi  chu  and  the  Ti  (or  Toilung)  chu,  is  extraordinarily  fertile.
The  country  around  was  everywhere  cultivated,  and  the  barley,
wheat,  and  buckwheat  were  in  many  places  already  a  foot  high.

The  road  now  became  alive  v/ith  travellers,  mostly  grain-dealers
or  argol-carriers,  on  their  way  to  the  city  with  trains  of  yaks,  ponies,
mules,  and  donkeys  with  jingling  bells.

*  The  name  is  also  written  Nyer-tam.  The  Chinese  call  it  Yeh-tang.  Atisha  came
from  India  to  Tibet  in  a.d.  1083.  His  proper  Indian  name  was  Dipankara  Srijnana. —
(W.  E.)

L


146  JOUBNEY TO LHASA AND CENTBAL TIBET.

We  halted  for  breakfast  in  a  small  grove  in  front  of  the  village
of  fShing  donkar,  belonging  to  Sa-wang  Eagasha,  one  of  the  senior
Shape  of  Lhasa.  Via  could  hear  from  where  we  sat  the  voices  of
lamas  chanting  prayers,  and  I  learnt  from  an  old  woman  who  brought
my  men  some  ehang,  that  there  were  some  eighteen  Uabung  lamas
reading  prayers  for  the  recovery  from  small-pox  of  the  foreman
{shinycr)  of  the  farm.

About  a  mile  from  Sing  donkar  we  came  to  Donkar,  which  is
considered  as  the  first  stage  for  persons  travelling  officially  from
Lhasa.*  Then  we  passed  by  Cheri,  where  is  the  city  slaughter-
house ;  and  liere,  strange  as  it  may  seem,  the  Kashmiris  come  to  buy
meat,  for  most  of  those  living  at  Lhasa  are  so  lax  in  their  observance
of  tlie  ]\Iohammedan  laws  about  butchering  that  they  will  eat  yaks
killed  by  Tibetans,  even  though  they  have  been  put  to  death  by
wounds  of  arrows  or  knives  in  the  stomach.

"We  stopped  at  Daru  at  the  foot  of  the  hill  covered  by  Debung
and  its  park,  and  Pador  went  to  look  up  a  friend  whom  he  was
desirous  of  attaching  to  my  service.  After  an  hour's  delay  he
returned  without  having  found  him,  and  we  pushed  on,  passing
the  far-famed  temple  of  Nachung  chos  kyong,  where  resides  the
oracle  by  whom  the  Government  is  guided  in  all  important  affairs.
The  temple  is  a  fine  edifice  of  dark  red  colour,  built  after  the  Chinese
style,  and  has  a  gilt  spire  surmounting  it.  At  this  point  the  road
nears  the  river,  and  the  whole  city  stood  displayed  before  us  at  the
end  of  an  avenue  of  gnarled  trees,  the  rays  of  the  setting  sun  falling
on  its  gilded  domes.  It  was  a  superb  sight,  tlie  like  of  which  I  have
never  seen.  On  our  left  was  Total  a  with  its  lofty  buildings  and  gilt
roofs  ;  before  us,  surrounded  by  a  green  meadow  (maidan),  lay  the
town  with  its  tower-like,  wliitewashed  houses  and  Chinese  buildings
with  roofs  of  blue  glazed  tiles.  Long  festoons  of  inscribed  and
painted  rags  hung  from  one  building  to  another,  waving  in  the  breeze.

Beyond  Daru  tlie  road  lay  for  a  while  through  a  marsh  {dam-iso)
overgrown  with  rank  grass ;  numerous  ditches  drained  the  water  into
the  river,  and  at  tlie  north-east  end  of  the  marsh  we  could  distinguish

*  What  tbe  Chinese  call  chan.  Tliey  are  ridiculously  short  ou  the  high-road
between  Lliasa  and  Cliina,  and  probably  elsewhere.  Tiiia  is  so  as  lo  make  the  ula
les.s  opiJressive,  and  I  suspect  it  lias  something  to  do  with  the  allowances  of  the  Chinese
officers  who  have  to  travel  (ner  it,  and  which  are  regulated  by  stages,  not  by  miles
travelled.— (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  147

the  famous  monastery  of  Sera.  Beyond  a  high  sand  embankment  on
our  left  was  the  park  and  palace  of  Xorbu  linga,  and  the  beautiful
grove  of  Kemai  tsal,  in  the  midst  of  which  stands  the  palace  of
Lhalu,  the  father  of  the  last  Dalai  lama.

At  4  p.m.  we  passed  Kunduling,  the  residence  of  the  regent,
and  entered  the  city  by  the  western  gateway,  called  the  Pargo  kaliug
chorten,  and  my  heart  leaped  with  exultation  as  I  now  reached
the  goal  of  my  journey— tlie  far-famed  city  of  Lhasa,  the  capital
of  Tibet.


148  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.


CHAPTER VI.

EESIDENCE AT LHASA.

PRECEDED  by  Pador  canying  his  long  lance  and  by  Tsing-ta  driving
the  pack-pony,  we  entered  the  city.  The  policemen  {I'orcliafjpa)'^
marked  us  as  new-comers,  but  none  of  them  questioned  us.  My
head  drooped  with  fatigue,  my  eyes  were  hidden  by  dark  goggles,
and  the  red  pagri  around  my  head  made  me  look  like  a  Ladaki.
Some  people  standing  in  front  of  a  Chinese  pastry  shop  said,  as  I
passed,  "  Look  !  there  comes  another  sick  man ;  small-pox  has  affected
his  eyes. The  city  is  full  of  them. What  an  awful  time  for  Tibet ! "

After  a  few  minutes'  ride  we  came  to  the  Yu-tog  zamba,  a  short
stone  bridge  with  a  gate,  where  a  guard  commanded  by  a  lama  is
stationed,  which  examines  all  passers-by  to  ascertain  the  object  of
their  visit  to  the  city.  To  the  great  delight  of  my  companions,  who
had  been  most  anxious  about  my  getting  over  the  bridge,  we  passed
by  without  a  question  being  asked  us.

Near  the  bridge  I  noticed  the  dorimj,\  a  monolith  on  which  is
an  inscription  in  Tibetan  and  Chinese.  Though  a  thousand  years
old,  the  stone  has  been  but  little  affected  by  the  weather,  and  the
characters  can  be  easily  read.  The  monolith  I  took  to  be  between
eight  and  ten  feet  in  height,  and  it  stands  on  a  low  pedestal.

At  the  Yu-tog  zamba  the  city  proper  begins.  The  street  on  both
sides  was  lined  with  native  and  Chinese  shops ;  in  front  of  each  was
a  pyramidal  structure,  where  juniper  spines  and  dried  leaves  obtained
from  Tsari  are  bui'iit  as  an  offering  to  the  gods.

*  I  have  always  lieard  policemen  called  sa  sung  (jfrunfj)  pa  by  Tibctana.  Tlic  word
used  by  our  autlior  sccmn  to  be  lilior  die  (byed)  2>a,  wliich  would  correspond  to  "patrol-
men." Hue  says  Ibat  Lhasa  is  about  two  leagues  in  circuii)fercnc(!,  and  A.  K.  that  it
is  about  six  miles. — (W.  R.)

t  Dorin;^  (or  rdo  ring)  mfans  "iincient  stone,"  or  "  stone  from  lonp:  ago."  On  the
inscription  here  referred  to,  see  Jour.  Hoy.  As.  Soc.  (now  series),  vol.  xii.  48G  et  sqq.;
and  vol.  xxiii.  p.  2(j4. Yu-tog  zamba  means  "  blue  roofed  bridge." — (W.  li.)


PL  A  Nor  LHASA/ '%.

"•^^»,:-Vv«"

.11

On. Ml. t

/' \ I

l.»t IK- UN Lor,,.  0I-5 30-E 5

Hfish-. HI.-'  r* /■

Kxpianation f:

BjUTlOornh*

\Ji \ i"

1 <r*i^aApffrt ,'' ^^

li

2 BaUU^it ^^ 1

4 S,<£. ■ ^ ^^1<

\y  1 1

./^

\ / /

b F<j^  Khunsa. -^ i^

/ f

8 karmashycL L_' -^ Jl/

/ /

D»bc>ii  / /

9 Sfian^  Shia. _-~ „" .*^ ^v'  J i"

?ir^//m -, A

12 /hu " j 1

//^^^^r^r^ \

13 Sa^uiuPhoUm^ 1 11  1

14 Dur-ing ) |

1 / \

IS S»-ta 1 |j

// \

16 Yut.-.k 1 1^

[^Inftlbchiii^a.

17 Rjvj  y^.i^ 1 ,\

1  } 1

18 Yur^lk  Jampa Land 1 u n rf ;  . Vr

i \c u I t I. r a t I o n 1

V )

Lhalu  C^^^ y v/l  J\

\ /

7J>C.  ^,  /^

Vl\ T.^V

^^==^^'=^5^-^^

jLcV- ,^'" ^^^^^'"'^ J

^St-^-^  ,^==-*°'''°^ / «■'  '''■"  '^'■'^'■'■

3^'''^^^===^  /-''^

— =^^^^^^^^e^^^^^a''  ^^fnb^5

^

1

7  ^/ii^/  o""'"  ^4^5^.  UlI^S

H

t  rshio ^ —

/r^  #  -^--  - CIT^IX^ [:M3I'^  1^^^-jr.a 1

>u.!,.i^.QL',_^V__-j«f^:^i;£^-^ f—I^^Sl

^6^^^ LlYjKarrn/UV'^'^'J'' Canal

>^^*^ -<  '"'"-^^^gK^ S«&Ui«4jiiL3,X'^^^'^

S..--®-' cs''^^^^^ sd''"'*^'*^*::^^^

.ili-^*^^^^^^ ^  ' ^  ^  ^^^*^^^v /^

Potinjo ^ ^^°°*===fc_

^3^S "  "^T^^-^^^^  ^-^^^^-^

DcroUn^oQ _^*.===^«*,„^*^^^

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

>•■'''

X ..iWIt

.<..>^"""*"v

__^^_^^Mivv";:i^^;s-^'^'^""'

^^^^>^^s.^-^-s/^--^''' S.^^

^  *'4'i-

.../'•"'■

'*•♦>''"■'"■ Fnjm  a  pim  6.A  -  K-.je7a Tn |

auitn  ,^  >ii« r.pcrf

I  To /ace  i).  14!).


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  149

Coming  to  the  street  to  the  south  of  Kyil-khordiiig,*  we  found  on
either  side  of  it  Nepalese  shops  several  stories  high,  also  Chinese
ones,  where  silk  fabrics,  porcelain,  and  various  kinds  of  brick-tea
were  exposed  for  sale.

A  lama  guided  us  from  this  street  to  the  Bangye-sliag,  a  castle-
like building  three  stories  high,  the  residence  of  Sawang  Phala,  the
husband  of  my  protectress,  the  Lhacham,  Leaving  me  at  the  postern
gate,  my  two  companions  went  in  and  presented  the  lady  with  a
li'hatag,  and  she  directed  them  to  take  me  to  Paljor  rabtan,  a  building
belonging  to  the  Tashi  lama,  where  all  officers  and  monks  from
Tashilhunpo  find  lodgings  when  iw  Lhasa,  and  where  we  would  be
given  accommodations.

The  gateway  of  Paljor  rabtan  was  about  eight  or  nine  feet  high  and
five  feet  broad,  and  from  the  lintels  fluttered  fringes  about  a  foot  and
a  half  broad.f  Two  stout  flag-poles  20  to  25  feet  high,  carrying
inscribed  banners,  stood  on  either  side  of  it.  Ascending  a  steep
staircase,  or  rather  a  ladder,  we  came  to  a  verandah,  opposite  which
was  a  pretty  glazed  house,  the  dwelling  of  the  liJiang-nijer  (or  "  house-
keeper"), and  were  soon  given  by  him  a  room  to  lodge  in,  and
served  with  tea  and  cliang  by  an  old  woman.  From  the  window
of  our  room  we  could  see  the  damra,  or  grove  of  poplars  and  willows
in  a  marshy  bit  of  land  adjacent  to  the  Tangye-ling  monastery,  and
further  west  shone  the  lofty  gilt  spires  of  Potala.

Mag  31. — The  heavy  shower  which  had  fallen  last  evening  cleared
up  the  atmosphere,  and  the  gilt  domes  and  spires  glittering  in  the
morning  sun  filled  me  with  delight,  and  I  had  difficulty  in  subdu-
ing my  impatience  to  visit  all  the  monuments  now  before  me,  and
of  which  I  had  dreamed  for  so  many  years.  At  7  o'clock  Pador
brought  me  a  pot  of  tea  prepared  in  the  house  of  the  water-carrier  ;
but,  instead  of  butter,  tallow  had  been  used  in  its  preparation,  and  I

*  Better'  kuowu  by  its  jjopular  name  of  Cbo  or  Jo  khang,  or  Lha?a  Jo-wo  kbaiig.
A.  K.  calls  it  Jhio.  Ho  also  mentions  Azimabad  (Patua)  mercbants  as  having
sbops  in  Lbasa. — '  Keport  on  the  Explorations,'  p.  32.  See  also  Waddell,  op.  cit.,  300
tt  sqq.

t  Tbese  "  fringes"  are  cotton  strips  on  wbicb  are  printed  cbarms  (^mantras).  Usually
tbe  figure  of  a  horse  occupies  the  middle  of  tbe  strip.  They  are  called  lung-ta,  or
'■  wind-horse."  E.  Schlaginweit,  '  Buddhism  in  Tibet,'  p.  253,  and  plate  xi.  The
"  inscribed  banners "  belong  to  tbe  same  class  of  objects,  and  have  also  prayers
or  passages  from  tbe  scriptures  printed  on  them.  Georgi,  'Alph.  Tibet,'  p.  509,
refers  to  these  "tiag-poles"  as  being  called  Tarpo  cJie(tar-paisMng?),  "  Arbor  salutaris,
depulsoria  mali." See  also  W^xddell,  op,  cit,,  -IGS  et  sqq.


150  JOUBXEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

could  not  swallow  it ;  *  but  we  managed,  after  a  while,  to  make  some
in  our  own  room.  Shortly  after  Tsing-ta  came  in,  hringing  a  pair  of
ruffs.  two  cushions,  and  two  little  tables  he  had  borrowed  at  the
Bangye-shag.  He  had  also  an  invitatiim  from  tlie  Lliacham  to  visit
her  in  the  afternoon.

Having  shaved  ami  donned  my  lama  costume  and  goggles,  we
started  for  Bangyeshag,  which  was  about  a  mile  from  our  lodgings.
Most  of  the  shops  we  saw  were  kept  by  Kashmiris,  Nepalese,  or
Chinese ;  the  Tibetan  ones  were  few  and  poorly  supplied.

Bangyeshag  is  a  lofty,  fiat-roofed  stone  building  with  two  large
gateways.  The  ground  floor  is  used  as  storerooms  and  quarters  for
the  amlas  or  retainers  of  the  Phala  estates.  The  beams,  the  cornices,
as  also  the  winddw-frames,  are  painted  red  ;  a  few  of  the  windows
have  a  little  jjane  of  glass  in  them,  but  most  of  them  are  covered
with  paper.  On  reaching  the  second  floor,  the  Lhacham's  maids
{shctama)  greeted  me  most  kindly,  and  insisted  on  my  taking  a  cup
or  two  of  tea,  after  which  they  led  me  to  her  ladyship's  room,  where,
taking  off  my  hat,  I  presented  her  a  visiting  scarf  [jadar)  and  a  piece
of  gold  of  about  a  dzo  weight.f  Making  motion  to  one  of  her  maids
to  present  me  a  scarf,  she  kindly  wished  me  welcome  ("  Chyag-^jeb
nanff  chig,  PvMdih  la  "),  and  bade  me  take  a  seat  ("  Pundih  la,  shu  dang
shag,  shu  dang  shag  ' ).  After  conversing  with  her  a  while  about  my
recent  illness,  and  telling  lier  of  the  kindness  of  the  Dorje  Phagmo,
that  merciful  Lady  of  the  Lake  to  whom  I  owe  my  life,  I  took  my
leave  and  returned  home.

Jttne  1, — June  1  is  the  holiest  day  of  the  year,  saga  d((va,X  ^lie
day  of  the  Buddha's  nirrana,  and  incense  was  burnt  on  every  hilltop,
in  every  shrine,  chapel,  lamasery,  and  house  in  or  near  Lhasa.  Men,
women,  and  children  hastened  to  the  sacred  shrine  of  Kyil-khording  (or
Jo  khang,  as  it  is  commonly  called),  to  do  ;>//_/«  to  the  Jo-vo  ("  Lord
Buddha")  and  obtain  his  blessing.  All  carried  in  their  hands
bundles  of  incense-sticks,  bowls  of  butter,  and  khatag  of  all  sizes  and
cjualities.  Our  fellow-lodgers  went  with  the  rest,  calling  at  my  room
on  the  way  out,  and  in  a  short  time  we  also  joined  the  crowd.

*  -Mutton  fat  i.s  u  cuiiiiuoii  substitutf  for  butter  in  tea  among  thc^  Tibolims,  and  is
not  always  used  as  a,  pu  aller,  but  in  preference  to  butter.— (AV.  R.)

t  A  <ho  is  a  tenth  of  an  ounce  {mnij\  or  about  two-thirds  of  a  rupee  in  wi-i<,'ht.  In
India  its  equivalent  is  a  tola. — (\V.  R.)

X  The  Buddha's  death  is  said  to  Imve  occuind  on  the  ir>tli  of  Die  4th  month,  which
only  occasionally  falls  on  June  ].— (W.  R.;


JOUBNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  151

A  broad  street  runs  in  front  of  the  Jo  khang,  and  the  road  which
comes  from  the  Pargo  kaling  gate  terminates  on  its  western  face,  and
liere  grows  a  tall  poplar  said  to  have  sprung  from  the  hair  of  the
Buddha.  Beside  this  is  the  ancient  stone  tablet  erected  by  the
Tibetans  in  the  ninth  century  to  commemorate  their  victory  over
the  Chinese,  and  which  gives  tlie  text  of  the  treaty  then  concluded
between  the  Emperor  of  China  and  King  Ealpachan.*

The  magnificent  temple  engrossed,  however,  all  my  attention.
In  front  of  it  is  a  tall  flag-pole,  at  the  base  of  which  hang  two  yak-
tails,  some  inscriptions,  and  a  number  of  yaks  and  sheep-horns.  In
the  propylon  of  the  chief  temple  {Tsang  khang),  the  heavy  wooden
pillars  of  which  are  three  to  four  feet  in  circumference,  and  about
twelve  feet  high,  upwards  of  a  hundred  monks  were  making  prostra-
tions before  the  image  of  the  Lord  (Jo-vo)  on  a  throne  facing  the  west.
This  famous  image  of  the  Buddha,  known  as  Jo-vo  riapoche,  is  said
to  have  been  made  in  Magadha  during  the  lifetime  of  the  great
teacher.f  Visvakarma  is  supposed  to  have  made  it,  under  the
guidance  of  the  god  Indra,  of  an  alloy  of  the  five  precious  substances,
gold,  silver,  zinc,  iron,  and  copper,  and  the  "  fi\'e  precious  celestial
substances,"  probably  diamonds,  rubies,  lapis-lazuli,  emeralds,  and
indranila.

The  legend  goes  on  to  say  that  the  image  was  in  the  first  place
sent  from  India  to  the  capital  of  China  in  return  for  the  assistance
the  Emperor  had  given  the  King  of  Magadha  against  the  Yavanas
from  the  west.  When  the  Princess  Konjo,  daughter  of  the  Emperor
Tai-tsung,  was  given  in  marriage  to  the  King  of  Tibet,  she  brought
the  image  to  Lhasa  as  a  portion  of  her  dowry.

*  "  Outside  the  gale  (of  the  Jo  khang)  there  is  a  stone  pillar  in  a  poor  state  of  pre-
servation :  it  is  the  tablet  containing  the  alliance  of  Tang  Te-tsung  with  his  nephew.
On  either  side  of  the  pillar  are  old  willows,  whose  aged  trunks  are  bent  and  twisted
like  writhing  dragons.  It  is  said  that  they  date  from  the  Tang  period."  Jour.  Boy.
As.  Soc.  (new  series),  vol.  xxiii.  p.  264. This  inscription  bears  date  a.d.  783. — (W.  R.)

t  See  I.  J.  Schmidt,  'Geschicbte  der  Ost-Mongolen  von  Ssanang  Ssetsen,'  p.  35.
According  to  Tibetan  historians,  this  same  princess  (or  Kung  chu,  her  name  was
Chin-Cheng),  the  wife  of  King  Srong-btsan  gambo,  introduce  I  into  Tibet,  among
other  things,  the  art  of  pottery,  grist-mills,  looms,  etc.  Emil  Schlaginweit,  '  Die
Konige  von  Tibet,'  p.  49.  Chinese  authors  (see  Jour.  Boy.  As.  Soc,  vol.  xxiii.
p.  191)  attribute  to  her  influence  the  first  use  of  winepresses,  paper,  ink,  the  Chinese
almanac,  and  the  introduction  of  the  silkworm.  Tliis  princess  was  not  a  daughter  of
the  Emperor  Tai-tsung,  but  a  member  of  his  family.  She  appears  to  have  travelled
from  China  to  Lhasa  by  the  Hsi-ning  road,  which  passes  by  the  sources  of  the  Yellow
River.— (W.  R.)


152  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

The  image  is  life-size  and  exquisitely  modelled,  and  represents  a
handsome  young  prince.  The  crown  on  its  head  is  said  to  be  the
gift  of  Tsong-khapa,  the  great  reformer.  The  Jvunyer  said  that  the
image  represented  the  Buddha  when  at  the  age  of  twelve ;  hence
the  princely  apparel  in  which  he  is  clothed  and  the  dissimilarity  of
the  image  to  those  seen  elsewhere.*  On  the  four  sides  of  it  were
gilt  pillars  with  dragons  twined  around  them,  supporting  a  canopy.
On  one  side  of  the  image  of  the  Buddha  is  that  of  Maitreya,  and
on  the  other  that  of  Dipankara  Buddha.t  Behind  this,  again,  is  the
image  of  the  Buddha  Gang-chan  wogyal,  and  to  the  right  and  left  of
the  latter  those  of  the  twelve  chief  disciples  of  the  Buddha.

We  were  also  shown  the  image  of  the  great  reformer,  Tsong-khapa,
near  which  is  the  famous  rock,  called  Amolonhha,  discovered  by
Tsong-khapa.J  On  this  rock  is  placed  the  bell  with  a  gem  in  the
handle,  supposed  to  have  been  used  by  Maudgalyayana,  the  chief
disciple  of  the  Buddha,

After  the  image  of  the  Buddha,  the  most  celebrated  statue  in  this
temple  is  that  of  Avalokiteswara  with  the  eleven  faces  (Shen-re-zig
chu-cliig  dzal).  It  is  said  that  once  King  Srong-btsan  gambo  heard  a
voice  saying  that  if  he  made  a  full-sized  image  of  Shenrezig,  all  his
wishes  W'Ould  be  granted  him ;  so  he  constructed  this  one,  in  the
composition  of  which  there  entered  a  branch  of  the  sacred  Bo  tree,
some  soil  of  an  island  in  the  great  ocean,  some  sand  from  the  Eiver
Nairanjana,§  some  gosirsha  sandalwood,  some  soil  from  the  eight
sacred  places  of  India,  and  many  other  rare  and  valuable  substances.
All  these  were  first  powdered,  then,  having  been  moistened  with  the
milk  of  a  red  cow  and  a  goat,  made  into  a  paste  and  moulded  into  a
statue.  To  give  it  additional  sanctity,  the  king  had  a  sandalwood
image  of  the  god  brought  from  Ceylon  put  inside  of  it.

This  statue  is  also  known  as  the  "  five  self-created "  {n//a  rang
chgiiag) ;  for  the  Xepalese  sculptor  who  made  it  said  that  it  had
sprung  into  shape  rather  than  had  been  moulded  by  him,  and  it  is

*  On  the  various  cel-jbrnted  images  of  the  Buddha,  see  '  Land  of  the  Lamas,'  p.  105,
note  2. Kunyer  is  the  "  keeper  of  images." — (AV.  It.)

t  Maitreya  (Chyamha,  in  Tibetan)  is  tlie  Buddha  to  come  in  the  last  period  of  this
cych-,  and  Dijtankara  (Mar-mc  chad)  is  the  Buddha  of  the  first  period.  The  historical
Buddha,  or  Sachya  tubpa,  is  the  Buddha  of  the  present  era.— (W.  R.)

X  Our  author  calls  it  "a  fossil  rock  .  .  .  discovered  in  a  rock  cavern  in  Tibet."  I
can  offer  no  explanation  of  the  nature  of  this  relic. — (W.  R.)

§  A  river  of  Magadha  famous  in  early  Buddhi.st  history,  and  in  whicli  the  Buddlia
is  said  to  have  bathed  alter  attaining  omniscience. — (W.  \{.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND VENTRAL TIBET.  153

further  said  that  the  souls  of  King  Srong-btsan  gambo  and  his
consorts  were  absorbed  in  it.  It  occupies  the  northern  chapel  in
the  temple,  and  is  surrounded  by  the  images  of  a  numljer  of  gods
and  goddesses.

In  the  outer  courtyard  of  the  temple  is  a  row  of  statues,  among
which  is  that  of  King  Srong-btsan  gambo  and  various  saints  and
Pundits.  On  the  porch  of  the  Tsang-khang  are  images  of  the  Buddhas
of  the  past,  present,  and  future.  Iiniumerable  other  highly  interesting
images  and  votive  offerings  were  shown  us,  among  which  I  will
mention  a  hundred  and  eight  lamps  made  out  of  stone  under  Tsong-
khapa's  directions.

Among  the  other  objects  of  interest  shown  us  was  a  stone  slab
{Padma  'pung-'pcC)  which  King  Srong-btsan  gambo  and  his  wives  were
wont  to  use  as  a  seat  when  taking  their  baths,  and  a  life-size  statue
of  Tsong-khapa  surrounded  by  images  of  gods,  saints,  and  worthies.
In  the  room  where  these  statues  are  seen,  and  which  is  closed  by  a
wire  lattice,  is  also  a  famous  image  of  the  god  Chyag-na  dorje  (Vaj-
rapani).  "When  the  iconoclast  King  Langdarma  *  began  persecuting
Buddhism,  he  ordered  this  image  to  be  destroyed.  A  valet  tied  a
rope  around  its  neck  to  drag  it  from  the  temple,  but  he  suddenly
became  insane,  and  died  vomiting  blood,  and  the  image  was  left
undisturbed.

In  the  outer  court,  or  lcl(ijamra,\  is  the  image  of  the  god  Tovo  Me-
tsig-pa,J  by  whose  power  the  invading  armies  of  China  were  routed
in  the  war  which  immediately  followed  the  death  of  King  Srong-
btsan  gambo.  Near  it  are  statues  of  the  king  and  his  two  consorts,
and  some  huge  yak-horns,  of  which  the  following  anecdote  is  told  to
inquisitive  pilgrims  by  the  temple  servants  {Jmnyer).  Ea-chung-pa,
a  disciple  of  the  great  saint  ]Milarapa,§  had  been  to  India,  and  had

*  This  king  reigned  over  Tibet  at  the  end  of  the  ninth  century,  a.d.  He  appears
to  have  been  a  fervent  follower  of  the  Bonbo  religion.  He  was  murdered  in  900  by
a  lama  who  had  disguised  himself  so  as  to  be  able  to  approach  the  king,  and  went
through  clownish  tricks  and  dances.  The  murder  of  the  king  is  still  feted  by  dances,
in  which  the  participants  wear  costumes  resembling  those  of  the  murderer  of  tlic
iconoclast. See  supra,  p.  114. — (S.  C.  D.)

t  Presumably  Chijl  (phyi),  "outside  ;  "  and  ra-iva,  "  an  enclosure."

X  I  sup25ose  this  name  means  "innumerable  beings;  legions  of  beings  (gro-vo) ;  a
host  in  himself."  The  title  To- wo  or,  "Angry,"  applies  to  a  wliole  class  of  deities  of
the  Protector  (or  Chos-gyong)  class. — (W.  R.)

§  A  wandering  lama  and  saint  who  lived  in  Southern  Tibet  in  the  eleventli  century,
and  who  taught  by  parables  and  songs,  some  of  which  have  considerable  literary  merit.


154  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

there  studied  under  the  most  learned  masters  all  the  mysteries  of
the  fiiith,  and  had  returned  to  Tibet  filled  with  pride  over  his  know-
ledge. Travelling  to  Lhasa  with  his  master,  they  reached  the  middle
of  the  desert  called  Palmoi-paltang,  when  Milarapa,  who  knew  of
the  conceit  of  his  disciple  and  wished  to  teach  him  a  lesson,  ordered
him  to  fetch  him  a  pair  of  yak  horns  lying  near  by.  IJut  Ea-
chung-pa  said  to  himself,  "  The  master  wants  everything  he  sees.
Sometimes  he  is  as  fretful  as  an  old  dog,  at  others  as  full  of  childish
fancies  as  an  old  man  in  his  dotage.  Of  what  possible  use  can  the
horns  be  to  liim ;  he  can  neither  use  them  for  food,  drink,  nor  cloth-
ing ? "  Then  he  asked  the  sage  what  he  proposed  doing  with  them.
"  Though  it  is  not  possible  to  say  what  may  occur,"  replied  Mila-
rapa, "  they  will  certainly  be  of  use  some  time  or  other ; "  and  lie
picked  them  up  himself  and  carried  them  along.

After  a  while  a  violent  hailstorm  overtook  the  travellers,  and
there  was  not  so  much  as  a  rat-hole  in  which  they  could  find  shelter,
Ea-chung-pa  covered  his  head  with  his  gown,  and  sat  on  the  ground
till  the  storm  had  passed  by.  When  he  searched  for  the  lama,  he
could  see  him  nowhere ;  but  he  heard  a  voice,  and,  looking  about,  lo !
there  was  Milarapa  seated  inside  one  of  the  horns.  "  If  the  son  is
the  equal  of  the  father,  then,"  said  the  saint,  "let  him  seat  himself
inside  the  other  horn ;  "  l)ut  it  was  too  small  to  even  serve  Ea-
chung-pa  for  a  hat.  Then  Milarapa  came  out  of  the  horn,  and
Ea-chung-pa  carried  them  to  Lhasa,  and  presented  them  to  the
Jo-vo.*

After  visiting  all  the  ground  floor  we  climbed  up  to  the  second
and  third  stories,  where  we  were  shown  a  number  of  other  images,
among  Aviiich  I  noticed  that  of  Paldan  Ihamo.  By  the  time  we  had
seen  all  the  images  we  had  exhausted  our  supply  of  butter,  for  Pador
b;id  ])ut  a  little  in  every  lamp  lighted  that  day  in  the  chapels.
Those  before  the  image  of  tlie  Jo-vo  were  of  gold,  and  each  must  have
held  ten  or  twelve  pounds  of  butter.

I5y  the  time  we  reached  our  lodgings  I  was  completely  worn  out,
and  passed  tlie  rest  of  the  day  in  my  rooms  or  on  the  housetop,  the

The  two  principiil  works  iiscribcil  to  liim  are  an  autobiography,  or  'Nam-tar,'  and  a
collection  of  tracts  called  '  Lu  bum,'  or  ''  the  myriad  .songs."  They  arc  still  among  the
most  popular  books  in  Tibet.  See  Nineteenth  Century,  Oct.,  1899,  pp.  (J13-G32.^(W.  K.)
*  Though  I  have  not  a  copy  of  INIihinipa's  '  I.u  bum'  witli  m<',  I  feel  sure  that  tliis
anecdote  is  taken  from  it. — CW.  li.)


LIBRARY

DNIVcRSlTY  OF  CALIFORNIA
-  RIVERSIDE


Wl  a  Tf  .TnTmntim  I.TmittJ


POTALA


#


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TTBET.  155

view  from  which  always  charmed  me,  especially  when  the  rays  of  the
setting  sun  shone  brightly  on  the  gilded  domes  of  tlie  temples  and
palaces.

I  was  much  troubled  in  my  mind  by  hearing  from  Tsing-ta  tliat
small-pox  was  raging  in  town,  even  the  keeper  of  our  house,  his  wife
and  children,  were  down  with  the  disease,  and  in  every  dwelling  in
the  neighbourhood  some  one  was  ill  with  it.

On  the  following  morning  (June  2),  after  an  early  breakfast,  I
went  to  visit  the  famous  shrine  of  Eamoche,*  carrying,  as  on  the
previous  day,  a  bundle  of  incense-sticks,  some  butter  and  khatags.
We  took  a  horribly  muddy  lane,  where  heaps  of  filth  emitted  a  most
offensive  odour  ;  then,  turning  northward,  we  crossed  the  Potala  road  at
tlie  north-west  corner  of  the  Tomse-gang,  as  the  Kyil-khording  square
is  commonly  called,  and  passed  by  the  lofty  Wangdu  cTiortcn,  which
was  built  to  bring  under  the  power  {ivang,  "power;"  clu,  "to  sub-
jugate ")  of  Tibet  all  the  neighbouring  nations.  This  spot  is  also
called  Gya-bum  gang,  for  it  is  said  that  once  during  tlie  Ming  dynasty
of  China  100,000  {gya-hum)  Chinese  troops  camped  (f/aw/)  on  the
plain  to  the  north  of  this  chorten.  Other  accounts  explain  this  name
by  saying  that  in  the  war  with  China,  after  the  death  of  King  Srong-
btsangambo,  100,000  Chinamen  were  killed  in  a  battle  near  this  spot.f

A  few  hundred  paces  beyond  this  place  we  reached  the  gate  of
Eamoche,  the  famous  temple  erected  by  the  illustrious  Konjo,  %
daughter  of  the  Emperor  Tai-tsung,  and  wife  of  King  Srong-btsan
gambo.  It  is  a  flat-roofed  edifice  three  stories  high,  and  has  a  wide
portico.  At  the  front  of  the  building  there  is  to  be  seen  a  very
ancient  inscription  in  Chinese,  giving  probably  the  history  of  tlie
building  of  the  temple.  The  image  of  Mikyod  dorje  (Vajra  Akshobhya),
brought  here  by  King  Srong-btsan's  second  wife,  a  Nepalese  princess,
is  of  undoubted  antiquity,  even  tliough  the  face  of  the  statue  is
covered  with  gilding.

In  the  northern  lobby  are  heaps  of  relics — shields,  spears,  drums,
arrows,  swords,  and  trumpets,  and  in  a  room  to  the  left  of  the  entrance,

*  Ramoche  means  "  a  large  enclosnro  " :  it  was  probably  the  name  of  the  locality
on  which  the  famous  temple  was  built,  and  not  tlie  original  name  of  that  structure. —
(W.  E.)

t  A.  K.  (op.  cit.,  p.  33)  mentions  this  chorfen  which  he  calls  Giaug  Bimmoche,
'•erected  in  honour  of  a  Tibetan  hero  who  is  said  to  have  killed  100,000  of  his  enemies
(Chinese)  on  the  spot.'" — (W.  K.)

X  The  princess  is  said  to  have  been  buried  in  this  temple.— (W.  R.)


156  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND GENTllAL TIBET.

and  sliut  in  by  an  iron  lattice,  are  a  few  very  holy  images.  With
the  excex)tion  of  a  very  small  gilt  dome  built  iu  Chinese  style,  I  saw
nothing  strongly  indicative  of  that  description  of  architecture,  and,
taking  it  all  together,  Eamoche  fell  far  short  of  the  preconceived
idea  I  had  formed  of  it.*

Lay  monks,  or  Serkempa,  usually  perform  the  services  held  at
Eamoche,  and  half  a  dozen  of  them  and  a  lamycr  (sexton)  live  in
the  upper  stories  of  the  temple.

As  we  left  the  temple  we  were  met  by  a  party  of  singing  beggars,
who  followed  us  to  our  house  clamouring  for  solra,  or  alms  ;  finally
we  sent  them  oif  witli  a  Icarma,  or  the  value  of  two  annas.  Had  we
given  more  we  would  have  been  persecuted  by  numerous  other  parties
of  these  pests.

June  3. — A  lama  of  Khams,  whom  I  had  met  at  Tashilhunpo,
came  to  see  me  to-day.  He  told  me  that  he  was  waiting  for  nine
loads  of  silver  from  Tashilhunpo,  on  the  arrival  of  which  he  would
leave  for  Western  China,  coming  back  to  Lhasa  next  March  or  April.
I  had  heard  at  Tashilhunpo  that  he  had  a  caravan  of  700  mules,  and
carried  on  trade  between  Darchendo  t  and  Lhasa.  This  Pomda  |
lama  was  a  man  of  gigantic  stature,  something  over  six  feet,  well
proportioned,  and  of  great  strength ;  he  was  well  known  to  brigands,
and  none  dared  molest  him.  j\ly  further  acquaintance  with  him
confirmed  me  in  the  opinion  I  had  formed  of  the  Khambas.  Though
they  are  wild,  they  are  devoted  friends,  and  when  once  one  becomes
intimate  with  one  of  them,  he  will  be  faithful  to  the  end.

I  heard  to-day  the  following  story  about  the  famous  Eegent
Tsomoling  and  his  social  reforms  :  Once  there  came  to  Lhasa  a  lama
pilgrim  from  Tsoni,  in  Amdo,§  and  he  was  admitted  into  the  Sera


*  Gcorgi,  'Alpli.  Tibet.'  p.  242,  says,  "  Magia;  D( tctores  iS^t  Jiam/«<  dicti,  diabolicse
liujus  sapientiaa  mysterii.s  initiantur,  Magica  Laiirea  soleimiiter  ornantiir  in  duobus
Lhassie  Coenobii.s  Ramoie  Chintopa  and  Moru  Cliiupa  uuncupalis.  .  ,  .  Oracula  sunt
iuni  publica  tnm  domestica,  quir;  ropuli,  quae  C'ives,  qujE  sacri  ac  profani  IMagistiatus
adeant  rcsponsa  capturi."

t  Or  Ta-chien-lu,  on  the  border  of  Sze-chuen. — (W.  R.)

+  Pomda  ajipears  to  be  Pungde,  a  little  post-station  two  days'  ride  from  Chamdo,
and  south-east  of  that  town.  It  is  called  by  the  Chinese  Pao-tuu.  Sec  my  '  Diary  of  a
Journey,'  p.  31G.— (W.  R.)

§  Amdo  is  that  portion  of  tlie  western  liordur-land  of  the  Chinese  province  of  Kan-
su  and  Sze-ehuen  whicii  is  occupied  by  Tibetan  tribes.  This  anecdote  is  also  found
in Ugyen-gyatso's  relation  of  his  exploration, '  Report  on  Explorations  from  1856  to

i88(;,'  p.  :n.


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  157

convent,  where  he  studied  under  a  learned  Mongol  lama.  After  a
few  years  the  Amdo  lama's  tutor  returned  to  his  home,  and  on  parting-
he  left  his  pupil  a  couple  of  earthen  pots,  a  hhatag,  and  a  bag  of
barley,  the  most  valuable  things  he  possessed,  as  he  told  him.  The
pupil,  disappointed  with  these  gifts,  carried  the  pots  to  the  market
and  sold  them  for  half  a  tanha,  with  which  he  bought  butter  that  he
put  in  the  lamps  burning  before  the  great  image  of  the  lord  (Jo-vo),
praying  that  if  he  ever  became  Eegent  of  Tibet,  lie  might  be  able  to
reform  the  social  customs  of  the  country.

In  the  course  of  time  he  rose  to  the  dignity  of  a  teacher  in  liis
convent ;  then  he  became  its  abbot,  or  Jchanpo ;  and  finally  he  rose  to
the  rank  of  regent.  One  of  the  first  acts  of  his  administration  was
to  expel  all  public  women  from  Lliasa,  and  to  compel  all  women
to  cover  their  faces  witii  a  coating  of  catechu,  so  as  to  hide  their
comeliness  from  the  public  view.*  Women  were  also  made  to
wear  a  bangle  cut  out  of  a  conch-shell  on  tlieir  right  wrist,  by
which  they  could  be  held  when  arrested.  From  his  time  also  dates
the  nse  by  women  of  aprons  (jjancf-dcn)  and  of  the  present  style
of  headdress,  or  patiuj.  The  old  style  of  'p'g.tiui  is  now  only  worn
by  the  wives  (or  Lhacham)  of  the  Shape  (ministers).  He  was  the
first  of  the  Tsomoling  lamas,  and  his  reincarnations  still  inhabit  the
lamasery  of  that  name  behind  Eamoche.

On  June  4  I  again  visited  the  Jo  khang.j  After  paying  reverence
to  the  Jo-vo  and  circumambulating  his  sacred  throne,  the  hunyer
poured  some  holy  water  (tu)  into  my  hand  from  a  golden  vessel.  In
a  little  cJiortcn  in  one  of  the  chapels  on  the  south  side  of  the  temple
is  kept  a  statue  of  red  bell-metal,  or  li-mar,  made,  so  says  tradition,
in  the  days  of  King  Kriki,  when  men  lived  20,000  years.  For  many
centuries  it  was  kept  by  the  kings  of  Nepal ;  but  when  a  princess
from  that  country  married  King  Srong-btsan  gambo,  she  brought  it
to  Tibet,  and  placed  it  in  this  temple,  where  it  is  the  object  of
constant  worship.

But  perhaps  the  most  revered  of  all  the  images  in  the  Jo  khang,

*  Cf.  Hue,  '  Souvenirs  d'un  voyage  daus  ia  Tartaric  et  le  Tliibet,'  vol.  ii.  p.  258 ;
and  '  Land  of  the  Lamas,'  p.  214.

t  Georgi,  op.  cit.  p.  406  et  sqq.,  describes  very  fully  and  accurately  this  famous
temple,  of  which  he  also  gives  a  ground  plan.  He  calls  it  the  Lalipranga  Lhassensi.
This  description  agrees  very  closely  with  that  of  our  author,  and  is  highly  interesting,
as  the  analogies  between  its  style  of  architecture  and  that  of  Christian  churches  are
discussed. — (W.  E.)


158


JOUBNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.


exclusive  of  that  of  the  Jo,  is  that  of  Paldan  Ihaiiio  (Srimati  devi).
The  terrifying  face  of  the  goddess  is  kept  veiled,  but  the  kunycr
uucovered  it  for  us.  This  terrific  goddess  is  regarded  as  the  guardian
of  the  Dalai  and  Tashi  lamas.  The  chestnut-coloured  mule  she  rides,
the  offspring  of  a  red  ass  and  a  winged  mare,  was  given  her  by  the


PALOAN LIIAMO (SKI.MATI-DEVl).


goddess  of  the  sea.  The  saddle  she  sits  on  is  the  skin  of  an  ogre,  and
the  l)ridle  and  crupper  are  vipers.  Kya  dorje  gave  her  dice  with
which  t(»  i»lay  for  lives,  and  the  ogres,  oi^Srinpo,  presented  lior  a  string
of  skulls,  wliich  she  holds  in  her  left  hand,  and  the  goblins  that  haunt
graveyards  gave  her  corpses,  on  which  she  feeds.  In  her  right  hand
she  holds  a  club  given  her  by  the  god  Chyagna-dorje. 'Twas  in  such


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  159

fearful  attire  that  she  waged  war  against  the  foes  of  Buddhism,  and
became  the  greatest  of  all  its  guardian  deities.

The  chapel  of  Paldan  Ihamo  is  overrun  by  mice,  so  tame  that
they  crawled  up  the  kumjers  body.  They  are  supposed  to  have
been  lamas  in  former  existences.  On  one  of  the  walls  we  saw  a
painting  made  with  the  blood  of  King  Srong-btsan.

As  we  were  walking  home  I  saw  some  men  hawking  books,  and
told  them  what  works  I  would  buy  if  they  could  but  procure  tliem
for  me. They  promised  to  luring  them  to  me  shortly.

The  excellent  brick-tea  {du  tang-nyipa)  which  I  had  brought
from  Tashilhunpo  was  now  exhausted,  and  I  was  reduced  to  drinking
a  miserable  quality  known  as  <jija-])a.  Du  tang,  or  first-quality  tea,
is  more  highly  flavoured  than  the  quality  I  liked,  but  it  was  too
strong  for  me.

Tea  was  introduced  into  Tibet  earlier  than  the  tenth  century,  but
it  only  became  of  universal  use  from  the  time  of  the  Sakya  hierarchy
and  the  Phagmodu  kings.*  During  the  early  part  of  the  Dalai  lama's
rule  the  tea  trade  was  a  governmental  monopoly,  and  since  the
beginning  of  the  present  century,  though  nominally  open  to  every
one,  the  trade  is  practically  in  the  hands  of  the  officials.

Some  notes  on  the  mode  of  selection  of  incarnate  lamas  may  not
be  out  of  place  here.  It  used  to  be  customary  when  selecting  incarnate
lamas  to  either  decide  by  throwing  dice  or  by  some  other  trial  of  luck,
or  by  taking  the  opinion  of  the  College  of  Cardinals  ;  but  that  method
not  giving  perfect  satisfaction,  it  was  decided  that  the  candidates
should  undergo  certain  examinations,  which,  together  with  the  hints
thrown  out  from  time  to  time  by  the  defunct  incarnation  as  to  where
and  when  his  successor  would  be  found,  helped  in  the  determination
of  the  lawful  reincarnation.

From  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century  down  to  1860,  when
the  Dalai  lama,  Tinle-gyatso,  was  chosen,  the  rightful  reincarnation

*  Phagpa  was  given  the  government  of  Tibet  by  the  Emperor  Kublai  in  i.D.  1260.
The  first  of  the  Phagmodu  kings  was  Nyakri  btsan-po,  who  is  said  to  have  ascended  the
throne  of  Tibet  (then  a  little  principality  south  of  the  Tsangpo,  in  the  Yarlung  valley)
B.C.  313.  See  I.  J.  Schmidt,  op.  sup.  viL,  p.  23  ;  and  Emil  Schlaginweit,  '  Die  Konige
von  Tibet,'  pp.  39-41.  From  b.c.  313  to  a.d.  1260  is  such  a  long  period  of  time,  that  we
are  hardly  able  to  say  that  the  date  of  the  introduction  of  tea  into  Tibet  has  been  fixed.
It  is  probable  that  the  Tibetans  did  not  use  tea  before  the  eighth  century,  at  the
earliest,  and  its  use  only  became  common  in  recent  times.  No  mention.  I  believe,  is
made  of  tea  in  the  works  of  Milarapa  (eleventh  century),  nor  in  any  of  the  older
books  known  to  us  in  the  Tibetan  language. — (W.  R.)


1()0  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

of  a  defunct  Scaint  was  found  out  by  the  use  of  the  goklen  jar,  or
scr-hum.'"

Three  years  after  the  death  of  an  incarnate  hima  the  names  of
the  ditt'en'nt  cliikh-en,  wlio  it  was  chximed  were  his  reincarnation,
were  taken  down.  These  names,  in  the  case  of  the  Dalai  or  Tashi
lamas,  were  sent  to  the  regent  for  examination,  after  which  the
president  of  the  conclave,  in  the  presence  of  the  IJcgent  and  the
ministers,  enclosed  in  tsariiba  balls  slips  of  paper,  on  each  of  which
was  written  the  name  of  a  candidate.  In  other  tsamha  balls  were
slips  on  whicli  was  written  "  yes  "  or  "  no,"  as  well  as  some  blank
slips.  All  these  were  put  together  in  a  golden  jar,  wliich  was  placed
on  the  altar  of  the  principal  chapel  of  Lhasa,  and  for  a  week  the
gods  were  invoked.  On  the  eighth  day  the  jar  was  twirled  round  a
certain  number  of  times,  and  the  name  which  fell  out  three  times,
together  with  a  pellet  in  which  was  a  slip  inscribed  "  yes,"  was
declared  the  true  reincarnation.  Those  wlio  were  sent  to  bring  the
reincarnated  saint  to  Lhasa  or  Tashilliunpo  submitted  him  to  certain
trials ;  as,  for  example,  picking  out  from  a  number  of  similar  objects
the  rosary,  the  rings,  cup,  and  mitre  of  the  deceased  lama.f

In  1(S75,  a  year  after  the  death  of  the  Dalai  lama  Tinle-gyatso,
the  regent  and  the  College  of  Cardinals  consulted  the  celebrated
Xachung  Chos-gyong  oracle  ^  aljout  the  Dalai's  reappearance,  and  the
oracle  declared  that  the  reincarnation  could  only  be  discovered  by
a  monk  of  the  purest  morals.  It  required,  again,  the  supernatural
powers  of  the  oracle  to  find  the  future  discoverer  of  tlie  Grand  Lama ;
he  was  the  Shar-tse  Khanpo  of  Gadan,  a  lama  of  great  saintliness
and  profound  knowledge. The  oracle  further  stated  that  he  should

*  Accor(lin<?  to  Chinese  authors,  the  selectiou  of  incarnate  lamas  by  the  d rawing
of  lots  from  a  golden  vase  dates  from  1793.  See  Jour.  Roy.  As.  Soc,  vol.  xxiii.  ;
'  Land  of  the  Lanias,'  p.  290 ;  Waddell,  op.  cit.,  245  et  sqq.  and  279,  note  2  ;  also  Hue,  oj>.
cit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  348.  rran5ois  Bernier,  in  his  'Voyages'  (1723),  vol.  ii.  p.  310,  gives
some  interesting  details  about  the  reincarnation  of  the  Grand  Lama,  as  told  him  by  an
attache  to  a  mission  from  the  King  of  Little  Tibet  to  Aureng-Zeb. — (W.  R.)

t  Among  the  strange  events  which  occur  on  the  birth  of  a  reincarnation  of  the
Tale  lama  may  be  mentioned  '■  the  blossoming,  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  birth-
place, of  fruit-trees  some  months  before  their  usual  season  ;  the  casting  of  two  or  more
young  by  animals  whicli  as  a  rule  do  not  cast  so  many  at  a  birth ;  and  tlie  sudden
recovery  from  fatal  illnesses  of  persons  coming  in  contact  with  the  newborn  child."
See  'Keport  on  E.xplorations,'  made  by  A.  K.,  p.  32. — (AV.  R.)

X  See  "Waddell,  op.  cit.,  p.  478.  He  calls  him  "the  Necromancer-in-Ordinary  to  the
CJovernment."  He  was  iirst  brought  to  Tibet  by  Padma-sambhava,  the  founder  of
Lamaism  in  the  middle  of  the  eighth  century, — (W.  R.)


il


LIBRARY
SNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORIMIA


re

id
le
le

r,

's

it

e


K  Ajl^JcQnistcmJJmited  j;ftiiibur;gh  A  tandcTi .


CHO-  KHANG


V_.


LHASA


#


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTBAL TIBET.  IGl

go  to  Choskhor-gya,  as  the  reincarnation  was  to  be  found  somewhere
near  Kong-po.*  The  Khanpo  went  there  accordingly,  and  sat  in  deep
meditation  for  seven  days,  when,  on  the  night  of  tlie  last  day,  he  had
a  vision  and  heard  a  voice  which  directed  him  to  repair  to  the
Mu-li-ding-ki  tso  (lake)  of  Choskhor.  Awakening  from  his  sleep,  the
Khanpo  went  to  the  lake,  where,  on  the  crystal  surface  of  the  water,
he  saw  the  image  of  the  incarnate  Grand  Lama  seated  in  his  mother's
lap,  and  his  father  fondling  him.  ,  The  house,  its  furniture,  all  was
shown  him.  Suddenly  the  image  disappeared,  and  he  set  out  at
once  for  Kong-po.  On  the  way  he  stopped  in  Tag-po  at  the  house
of  a  respectable  and  wealthy  family,  and  at  once  he  recognized  the
child  and  all  the  images  seen  in  his  dream.  He  promptly  informed
the  Government  at  Lhasa,  and  the  regent  and  the  cardinals  came
to  Tag-po  and  took  the  child,  then  a  year  old,  and  its  parents  to  the
Kigyal  palace,  near  Lhasa.  This  child,  now  aged  ten,  is  called  Nag-
wang  lo-zang  tubdan  gya-tso,  "  the  Lord  of  speech,  the  mighty  ocean
of  wisdom."  f

The  reason  why  the  golden  jar  was  not  used  for  finding  this  re-
incarnation was  because  of  the  apprehension  that  the  Dayan  Khanpo's
spirit — he  had  but  recently  died,  and  had  been  violently  opposed  to
the  Dalai  lamas  and  their  form  of  government — might  be  able  to
cause  a  wrong  name  to  be  drawn  from  the  jar.

June  5. — Early  this  morning  I  was  invited  to  dine  with  the
Lhacham  at  Bangye-shag.  I  was  received  most  graciously,  and  was
led  by  the  Lhacham  to  her  drawing-room,  a  room  about  IG  feet  by
12,  facing  the  south  and  on  the  third  story  of  the  building.  There
were  in  it  two  Chinese  chests  of  drawers,  on  top  of  which  were  a  lot
of  porcelain  cups ;  Chinese  pictures — -picnics  and  dancing  most  of
them  represented — covered  the  greater  part  of  the  walls ;  the  ceiling
was  of  Chinese  satin,  and  thick  rugs  of  Yarkand  and  Tibetan  make
covered  the  floor.  Well-polished  little  tables,  wooden  bowls  for
tsamha,  and  some  satin-covered  cushions  completed  the  furniture  of
the  room.

*  A  small  and  fertile  district  a  little  to  the  east  of  Lhasa.  The  cliief  towu  in  this
district  is  usually  called  Kong-po  gyamda.  Esjjlorer  K.  P.  visited  it  in  1SS.3  (?).  He
says  that  "  there  are  about  twenty  Nepalese  shops  and  fifteen  shops  of  Tibetans  at
this  place." See  '  Eeport  of  Explorations  in  Butan  and  Tibet,'  p.  15. — (W.  R.)

t  Of.  Ugyen-gyatso's  account  of  this  discovery  in  '  Report  on  the  Explorations,'
p.  31.  The  place  of  his  birth  was  "  Paruchude,  near  Nam  Jong,  in  Takpo,"  according
to  the  explorer  K.  P.,  op.  sup.  cit.,  p.  8.— (W.  R.)

M


102  JOUBNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

After  conversing  for  a  while  and  drinking  a  few  cups  of  tea,  the
Lhachani  withdrew,  and  one  of  her  maids  showed  me  the  rooms  in
the  mansion.  The  furniture  was  much  the  same  as  that  in  the
Lhacham's  room,  only  of  inferior  quality  and  ruder  make.  The
walls  were  painted  green  and  blue,  with  here  and  there  pictures  of
processions  of  gods  and  demons,  and  the  beams  of  the  ceiling  were
carved  and  painted.  The  doors  were  very  roughly  made  and  without
panels ;  the  windows  were  covered  wdth  paper,  with  a  very  small
pane  of  glass  fitted  in  the  middle  of  each.  There  were  no  chimneys
in  any  of  the  rooms,  but  earthenware  stoves,  or  jala.  In  a  few  of  the
rooms  flowers  were  growing  in  pots.

Eeturning  to  the  Lhacham's  room,  dinner  was  served  me  at
noon,  and  while  I  ate  she  asked  me  many  questions  concerning  the
marriage  laws  of  India  and  Europe.  Wlien  I  told  her  that  in  India
a  husband  had  several  wives,  and  that  among  the  Phyling  *  a  man
had  but  one  wife,  she  stared  at  me  with  undisguised  astonishment.
"  One  wife  with  one  husband  !  "  she  exclaimed.  "  Don't  you  tlunk
we  Tibetan  women  are  better  off?  The  Indian  wife  has  but  a  portion
of  her  husband's  affections  and  property,  but  in  Tibet  the  housewife
is  the  real  lady  of  all  the  joint  earnings  and  inheritance  of  all  the
brotliers  sprung  from  the  same  mother,  who  are  all  of  the  same  flesh
and  blood.  The  Ijrothers  are  but  one,  though  their  souls  are  several.
In  India  a  man  marries  w^ell  several  women  who  are  strangers  to
each  other."  "  Am  I  to  understand  that  your  ladyship  would  like  to
see  several  sisters  marry  one  husband  ?  "  I  asked.  "  That  is  not  the
point,"  replied  the  Lhacham.  "  "What  I  contend  is  that  Tibetan
women  are  happier  than  Indian  onc^s,  for  they  enjoy  the  privileges
conceded  in  the  latter  country  to  the  men."  f

Juiv  7. — My  two  men  had  heard  from  Gadan  Tipa,  a  soothsayer,
that  they  would  be  stricken  with  small-pox  if  they  ventured  to  go  to
Samye,  and  they  besought  me  to  give  up  the  idea ;  but  I  declared
emphatically  my  resolve  to  visit  that  famous  lamasery,  and  also  that
of  Gaden.

*  I.e.  "  foreigners  ;  "  literally,  "  outside-country."  The  word  has  no  connection,  as
was  once  supposed,  with  Ferawjlii  or  Franhs. — (W.  E.)

t  Our  author  tells  us  further  on  (p.  2IG)  of  a  woman  married  to  two  men  not
related.  P^lsewliere  he  makes  mention  of  a  lamasery  in  which  monks  and  nuns  cohabit,
and  bring  up  their  children  in  their  profession.  Polygamy  also  obtains  among  the
wealthier  Tibetans,  who  have  probably  adopted  it  from  the  Cliinese,  and  monogamy
has  a  few  votaries. See  '  Land  of  the  Lamas,'  p.  211  et  sqq.


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  163

On  June  8  I  again  visited  the  Jo  khang.  The  nuiaerous  wooden
pillars  supporting  the  second  story  are  among-  the  most  remarkable
things  in  this  temple.  The  largest  of  these  have  capitals  with
sculptured  foliage,  and  are  called  Iri-wa  shinff-lho  chan.*  At  their
base  are  Ijuried,  it  is  said,  great  treasures  of  gold  and  silver.  Other
pillars,  with  dragon-heads  as  capitals,  have  hidden  under  them  charms
against  devils,  for  curing  diseases,  and  for  keeping  off  and  thwarting
the  evil  designs  of  the  enemies  of.  Buddhism  and  of  the  government
of  the  church.  Other  pillars,  again,  called  scvf/  f/o-chan,  "  having
lions'  heads  as  capitals,"  have  concealed  under  them  many  potent
charms  {yang-yig)  f  to  insure  bounteous  crops.

Under  the  floor  of  the  Lu-khang  are  many  charms  and  precious
things  wrapped  in  snow-fox  or  snake-skin.  These,  it  is  supposed,
preserve  the  flocks  and  herds  of  Tibet.  Beneath  tlie  image  of
Dsambhala  is  hidden  in  an  onyx  box  some  tar/-sJia,'\.  which  preserves
the  precious  stones,  the  wool,  the  grain,  and  the  other  riches  of  the
country.

Among  the  other  objects  of  special  sanctity,  I  was  shown  in  the
passage  for  circumambulating  the  temple  a  cavity  in  the  rock  where
neither  moss  nor  grass  grow ;  it  is  said  to  keep  back  the  waters  of
the  Kyi  cliu  from  invading  the  Jo  khang.§

June  9. — I  went  out  walking  to-day  in  the  direction  of  Eamoche.
On  the  streets  I  met  numerous  bands  of  rafiijahas,  or  scavengers,
wandering  from  place  to  place,  clamouring  for  alms  from  every  new-
comer or  pilgrim  they  saw.  If  no  attention  is  paid  to  them,  they
thrust  their  dirty  hats  in  the  stranger's  face  and  lavish  insults  on
him  ;  and  if  he  take  ofience,  they  reply,  "  Why,  my  lord,  this  is
not  insolence ;  we  are  but  saluting  you  !  "

These  ragyahas  of  Lhasa  form  a  guild.  Persons  convicted  of  any
crime,  or  vagabonds,  are  usually  sent  back  to  their  native  villages,
there  to  work  out  their  sentence  ;  but  when  the  authorities  cannot
learn  whence  they  come,  they  are  handed  over  to  the  chief  of  the
ragyahas,  who  receives  them  into  his  guild.  Besides  begging,  the
ragyahas  cut  up  the  corpses  which  are  brought  to  the  two  cemeteries

*  Meaning,  literally,  "pillars  of  southern  wood."  The  "southern  -wood"  is
probably  the  same  as  the  nan  mii  or  teak  of  the  Chinese. — (W.  K.)

t  The  term  yang-yig  usually  means  "  musical  score,"  the  lamas  using  sometimes  a
descriptive  score  to  teach  chanting. — (W.  R.) Lu  kang  means  "  Snakehouse."

X  A  medicinal  plant. — (S.  C.  D.)

§  See  Jour.  Boy.  A&iat.  Soc,  xxiii.  p.  70,  and  Hue,  op.  ciL,  ii.  p.  191.— (W.  R.)


1()4


JOUIiNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.


of  Lhasa,  near  which  they  live,  and  feed  them  to  vultures  and  dogs.
A  rcujijalja  may  not  show  his  wealth,  however  great  it  be  ;  the  walls
of  their  houses  must  be  made  with  horns  of  sheep,  goats,  or  yaks,  the
convex  sides  turned  upwards.*

At  present  the  chief  of  the  ragyahas  is  a  man  of  about  fifty  years,
called  Abula;  he  wears  a  red  serge  gown  and  a  yellow  turban.
Cursed  is  the  lot  of  the  rcufyahm,  and  twice  cursed  is  Abula,  if  a  day
passes  without  a  corpse  being  brought  to  the  cemetery ;  for  people


FUNERAL PKOCESSION.


Ijelieve  that  if  a  day  passes  without  a  death  it  portends  evil to
Lhasa.

In  connection  with  the  erection  of  Eamoche,  it  is  said  that  the
princess  who  had  it built  discovered  that  the  spot  on  which  the

*  "  In  the  faubourgs  tliere  is  a  quarter  where  the  houses  are  built  entirely  with
horns  of  oxen  and  sheep.  These  curious  buildings  arc  extremely  solid,  and  present  a
rather  pleasing  aspect.  The  ox-horns  being  smooth  and  whitish,  and  the  sheep-horns,
on  the  contrary,  black  and  rough,  these  strange  building  materials  lend  themselves
marvellously  well  to  endless  combinations,  and  form  on  the  walls  designs  of  infinite
variety ;  tlie  spaces  between  the  horns  are  filled  with  mortar.  These  houses  are  the  only
ones  which  are  not  whitewashed,"  Hue,  '  Souvenirs  d'un  voyage,'  vol.  ii.  p.  254.


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  165

temple  was  erected  was  in  communication  with  licll,  ami  tlrat  there
was  a  crystal  palace  inhabited  by  the  JSTagas  deep  in  tlie  earth  under-
neath this  place.*

Among  the  most  remarkable  relics  preserved  in  this  temple,  and
which  I  had  not  had  time  to  examine  on  my  first  rather  hurried  visit,  I
now  noticed  one  of  Dolma  f  made  of  turquoise,  and  which  is  said  to
render  oracles,  one  of  Tse-pa-med  %  made  of  coral,  and  one  of
PJn-chen  Khadoma  §  in  amber,  and  a  number  of  others  of  jade,  conch-
shells  and  mwmcn,\  besides  many  jars  and  l)0wls  of  jade  and  gold.

In  the  afternoon  I  called  on  the  Lhacham,  and  was  sorry  to
learn  that  her  second  son  had  small-pox.  I  told  her  how  disappointed
I  was  at  not  having  been  able  to  get  even  a  glimpse  of  the  Kyabgong^
the  "  lord  protector  "  of  Tibet,  the  Dalai  lama.  "  Alas  ! "  I  added,
"  I  have  not  acquired  a  sufticient  moral  merit  in  former  existences
to  be  able  to  see  Shenrezig  in  flesh  and  blood !  "

"  Do  not  be  cast  down,  Pundib  la ;  though  it  is  not  an  easy  matter
for  even  the  Shape  and  nobles  of  Tibet  to  see  the  Dalai  lama,  I  will
arrange  an  audience  for  you."  IT

Early  the  next  day  a  gentleman  {hii-dag),  who  was  a  ]  )ungkhor  of
Potala,  called  on  me,  and  said  that  the  Kusho  Lhacham  of  Phala  had
arranged  with  the  Donyer  chenpo  of  Potala  for  an  audience  for  me
with  the  Dalai  lama,  and  that  I  must  get  ready  as  soon  as  possible.

Swallowing  breakfast  as  quickly  as  possible,  I  put  on  my  best
clothes,  and  had  hardly  finished  when  the  Dungkhor  Chola  Kusho,
accompanied  by  a  servant,  arrived. Having  provided  myself  with

*  The  Kung-chu  came  to  Tibet  ad.  639  (see  I.  J.  Schmidt,  op.  fit.,  p.  341).  He
there  says  (trauslating  from  the  Bodhimur)  that  when  the  princess  reached  the  spot
where  the  Ramoche  temple  now  stands,  the  cart  on  which  was  the  image  of  the  Buddha
(Jo-vo)  stopped  of  itself,  and  could  not  be  made  to  move  forward.— (W.  R.)

t  Dolma,  or  Drolma  (Sanskrit  Tara).  The  two  wives  of  King  Srong-btsan  gambo  are
worshipped  under  this  name.  The  Chinese  princess  is  called  Dol-kar,  or  "  tlie  white
Dolma,"  and  the  Nepalese  ijrincess  Dol-jang,  or  "  the  green  Dolma."  The  latter  is
prayed  to  by  women  for  fecundity.  On  the  worship  of  Dolma,  see  Waddell,  op.  cit.,
p.  435  et  sqq.

i  The  god  of  eternal  life  ;  in  Sanskrit,  Amitayus.

§  The  Ka-dro  (mlmli-hgro')  are  nymphs  or  fairies,  all  friendly  to  man.  In  Sanskrit
they  are  called  Dakini. See  Waddeli,  op.  cit.,  p.  300.

II  Mumen,  "  a  precious  stone  of  dark  blue,  but  inferior  to  the  azure  stone,  occasion-
ally used  for  rosaries."  Mention  is  also  made  of  mumen  dmar-po  ("red  mumen^').
Jaeschke,  '  Tib.-Engl.  Diet.,'  s.v.  mu-men.

t  From  what  the  author  says  a  little  later,  it  would  appeav  that,  on  the  contrary,
the  Tale  lama  is  very  accessible.  Manning  called  repeatedly  on  him  in  1811,  and
Hue  tells  us  there  was  no  diiUculty  about  being  admitted  to  his  presence.— (AV.  R.)


166  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

three  bundles  of  incense-stieks  and  a  roll  oiUtatag,  we  mounted  our
ponies  and  sallied  forth.  As  we  crossed  the  doorway  we  saw  a  calf
sucking,  and  several  women  carrying  water.  My  companions  smiled,
and  Chola  Kusho  remarked  that  I  was  a  lucky  man,  as  these  were
most  auspicious  signs.*

Arriving  at  the  eastern  gateway  of  Potala,  we  dismounted  and
walked  through  a  long  hall,  on  either  side  of  which  were  rows  of
prayer- wheels,  which  every  passer-by  put  in  motion.  Then,  ascending
three  long  flights  of  stone  steps,  we  left  our  ponies  in  care  of  a  by-
stander— for  no  one  may  ride  further — and  proceeded  towards  the
palace  under  the  guidance  of  a  young  monk.  We  had  to  climb  up
five  ladders  before  we  reached  the  ground  floor  of  Phodang  marpo,t  or
"  the  Eed  palace,"  thus  called  from  the  exterior  walls  being  of  a  dark
red  colour.  Then  we  had  half  a  dozen  more  ladders  to  climb  up,  and
we  found  ourselves  at  the  top  of  Potala  (there  are  lune  stories  to  this
building),  where  we  saw  a  number  of  monks  awaiting  an  audience.
The  view  from  here  was  beautiful  beyond  compare :  the  broad  valley
of  the  Kyi  chu,  in  the  centre  of  which  stands  the  great  city  sur-
rounded by  green  groves  ;  the  gilt  spires  of  the  Jo-khang  and  the  other
temples  of  Lhasa,  and  farther  away  the  great  monasteries  of  Sera
and  Dabung,  behind  which  rose  the  dark  blue  mountains.

After  a  while  three  lamas  appeared,  and  said  that  the  Dalai  lama
would  presently  conduct  a  memorial  service  for  the  benefit  of  the
late  Meru  Ta  lama  (great  lama  of  Meru  gomba),  and  that  we  were
allowed  to  be  present  at  it.  Walking  very  softly,  we  came  to  the
middle  of  the  reception  hall,  the  roof  of  which  is  su})ported  by  three
rows  of  pillars,  four  in  each  row,  and  where  light  is  admitted  by  a
skylight.  The  furniture  was  that  generally  seen  in  lamaseries,  but  the
liangings  were  of  the  richest  brocades  and  cloths  of  gold;  the  church
utensils  were  of  gold,  and  the  frescoing  on  the  walls  of  exquisite
fineness.  Behind  the  throne  were  beautiful  tapestries  and  satin
hangings forming a great <jijal-tsan, or canopy. The floor  was

*  Cf.  Jour.  Roy.  Asiat.  Soc,  xxiii.  p.  285.

t  The  earliest  name  of  Mount  Potala  was  Marjjo  ri,  "  the  red  hill."  King:  Srong-
htsan  gambo  is  said  to  have  built  a  palace  on  its  sunimit,  and  it  was  occupied  by  the
kings  of  Tibet  down  to  the  time  of  the  fifth  Tale  lama,  who  built  about  tlie  middle  of  the
seventeenth  century  the  present  palace.  See  Emil  Schlaginweit,  '  Die  Konige  von  Tibet,'
J).  49.  Our  author  says  the  palace  was  built  "  by  the  fifth  Dalai  lama  and  his  illus-
trious Regent  Desi  Sangye-gyatso."  In  connection  with  our  author's  audience  of  the
Grand  Lama,  it  is  interesting  to  read  Manning's  account,  which  agrees  with  it  very
closely,— (W.  11.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  167

beautifully  smooth  and  glossy,  but  the  doors  and  windows,  which
were  painted  red,  were  of  the  rough  description  common  throughout
the  country.

A  Donyer  approached,  who  took  our  presentation  Jchatag,  but  I
held  back,  at  the  suggestion  of  Chola  Kusho,  the  present  I  had  for
the  Grand  Lama ;  and  when  I  approached  him  I  placed  in  his  lap,
much  to  the  surprise  of  all  present,  a  piece  of  gold  weighing  a  tola.
We  then  took  our  seats  on  rugs,  of  which  there  were  eight  rows  ;
ours  were  in  the  third,  and  about  ten  feet  from  the  Grand  Lama's
throne,  and  a  little  to  his  left.

The  Grand  Lama  is  a  child  of  eight  with  a  bright  and  fair
complexion  and  rosy  cheeks.*  His  eyes  are  large  and  penetrating,
the  shape  of  his  face  remarkably  Aryan,  though  somewhat  marred  by
the  obliquity  of  his  eyes.  The  thinness  of  his  person  was  probably
due  to  the  fatigue  of  the  Court  ceremonies  and  to  the  religious  duties
and  ascetic  observance  of  his  estate.  A  yellow  mitre  covered  his
head,  and  its  pendant  lappets  hid  his  ears ;  a  yellow  mantle  draped
his  person,  and  he  sat  cross-legged  with  joined  palms.  The  throne
on  which  he  sat  was  supported  l»y  carved  lions,  and  covered  with  silk
scarfs.  It  was  about  four  feet  high,  six  feet  long,  and  four  feet  broad.
The  State  officers  moved  about  with  becoming  gravity :  there  was  the
Kuchar  Klianpo,  with  a  bowl  of  holy  water  {tu),  coloured  yellow  with
saffron ;  f  the  Censor-carrier,  with  a  golden  censor  with  tliree  chains ;
the  Solpon  chenpo,  with  a  golden  teapot ;  and  other  household  officials.
Two  gold  lamps,  made  in  the  shape  of  flower  vases,  burnt  on  either
side  of  the  throne.

When  all  had  been  blessed  and  taken  seats,  the  Solpon  chenpo
poured  tea  in  his  Holiness's  golden  cup,  and  four  assistants  served
the  people  present.! Then  grace  was  said,  beginning  with  Om,  Ah,

*  Manning  says  of  the  then  Tale  lama  (Lozang  lung-tog-gyatso  by  name),  "  The
lama's  beautiful  and  interesting  face  and  manner  engrossed  almost  all  my  attention.
He  was  at  that  time  about  seven  years  old;  had  the  simple  and  unaffected  manners  of
a  well-educated  princely  child.  His  face  was,  I  thought,  poetically  and  atfectingly
beautiful.  ...  I  was  extremely  affected  by  this  interview  with  the  lama.  I  could
have  wept  through  strangeness  of  sensation."  See  Markham,  op.  cit.,  pp.  'IGb,  206.  I
am  sorry  I  have  not  now  access  to  Nain  Singh's  report  of  his  interview  with  the  Tale
lama  in  18C6;  but.  if  I  remember  rightly,  it  contains  some  interesting  details  on  his
audience  with  the  Dalai  lama  Trin-las-gyatso.— (W.  R.)

t  Water  used  for  oblations  in  Tibet  is  usually  coloured  (or  perfumed?)  with  saffron.
See  Waddell,  op.  cit.,  p.  208.— (W.  E.)

X  Manning  says  (op.  cit.,  p.  265),  ''The  ceremony  of  presentation  being  over
Munshi  and  I  sat  down  on  two  cushions  not  far  from  the  lama's  throne,  and.  had  suchi


lG8  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TLBET.

Hiuii,  thrice  repeated,  and  fullowed  by,  "Never  losing  sight  even  for
a  moment  of  the  Three  Holies,  making  reverence  ever  to  the  Three
Precious  Ones.  Let  the  blessing  of  the  Three  Konchog  be  upon  us,"
etc.  Then  we  silently  raised  our  cups  and  drank  the  tea,  which  was
most  deliciously  perfumed.  In  this  manner  we  drank  three  cupfuls,
and  then  put  our  bowls  back  in  the  bosoms  of  our  gowns.

After  this  the  Solpon  clienpo  put  a  golden  dish  full  of  rice  before
the  Dalai  lama,  and  he  touched  it,  and  then  it  was  divided  among
those  present ;  then  grace  was  again  said,  and  his  Holiness,  in  a  low,
indistinct  tone,  chanted  a  hymn,  which  was  repeated  by  the  assembled
lamas  in  deep,  grave  tones.  When  this  was  over,  a  venerable  man
rose  from  the  first  row  of  seats  and  made  a  short  address,  reciting  the
many  acts  of  mercy  the  Dalai  lamas  had  vouchsafed  Tibet,  at  the
conclusion  of  which  he  presented  to  his  Holiness  a  number  of  valuable
things  ;  tlien  he  made  three  prostrations  and  withdrew,  followed  by
all  of  us.

As  I  was  leaving,  one  of  tlie  Donyer  chenpo's  (or  chamberlain)
assistants  gave  me  two  packets  of  blessed  pills,  and  another  tied  a
scrap  of  red  silk  round  my  neck — these  are  the  usual  return  presents
the  Grand  Lama  makes  to  pilgrims.

As  we  were  going  out  of  the  hall,  we  were  met  by  Chola  Kusho's
younger  brother,  a  monk  in  Namgyal  Ta-tsan,  the  monastery  of  the
palace,  "and  in  his  and  his  brother's  company  I  visited  the  palace,  and
learnt  from  them  much  relating  to  the  history  and  the  traditions  of
the  place.

AVe  first  visited  a  chapel  where  is  an  image  of  Shenrezig  with
eleven  heads  and  a  thousand  arms,  an  eye  in  the  palm  of  each  of  his
hands.  Near  it  is  an  image  with  four  arms,  also  many  small  gold
chortcn  and  objects  in  bronze.  Next  I  was  led  to  a  hall  where
there  is  an  old  throne,  opposite  which  are  images  of  King  Srong-
btsan,  his  two  consorts,  his  minister  Tonmi  Sambhota,  General  Gar,
and  I'rince  Gungri  gung-btsan.* Leaving  this  room,  we  went  to  the

brought  us.  It  was  most  excellent,  and  I  meant  to  have  mended  my  draught  and
emptied  the  cup,  but  it  was  whipped  away  suddenly,  before  I  was  aware  of  it."  SucM
is  sol  ((jsol)Ja,  the  polite  term  for  "tea."  "Perfumed  tea"  is  the  Cliinese  lisiang  pieii
ch'a.—{W.  R.)

*  Tonmi  Sambhota  introduced  the  alphabet  of  India  into  Tilict,  and  negotiated  the
king's  marriages  with  his  two  famous  consorts.  Gar  {Mijar)  was  an  equally  famous
general  of  the  .same  epoch,  and  Prince  Gungri  guug-tsan  is,  I  think,  Srong-btsan  gambo's
grandson. See  Emil  Schlaginweit,  '  Die  Kiinige  von  Tibet,'  p.  17  et  sqq.—iW.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  KID

great  hall  where  Nag-wang  lob-zang,  the  fifth  Dalai  hiiiia,  used  to
hold  his  court.  Old  paintings,  supposed  to  be  indestructible  by  fire,
representing  King  Srong-btsan's  family,  Shenrezig,  and  the  first  Grand
Lama,  hung  from  the  pillars,  and  several  images,  among  which  one
of  sandalwood  representing  Gon-po,*  may  be  seen  here.

We  were  then  led  to  the  hall  where  the  Desi  Sangye-gyatso  used
to  hold  his  councils.!  Here  also  is  the  tomb  of  the  first  Dalai  lama.
It  is  two-storied,  and  the  dome  is  covered  with  thin  plates  of  gold.
The  Dalai's  remains  are  entombed  with  many  precious  things,  and
the  sepulchre  is  ornamented  with  various  objects  of  the  richest  designs
and  most  costly  materials  brought  hither  by  devotees.  This  tomb  is
called  the  Dsamling  gyan,  %  fiii<l  is  the  prototype  of  the  tombs  we  saw
around  it  containing  the  remains  of  the  other  incarnations  of  the
Dalai  lama ;  but  these  are  all  smaller  than  it.

After  visiting  these  halls  we  descended  to  the  Nanigyal  Ta-tsan.
The  architecture  of  the  Phodang  marpo  embarrassed  me  greatly,  the
halls  and  rooms  being  piled  up  story  on  story.  The  stonework  was
beautiful,  but  it  is  so  poorly  drained  that  in  many  places  the  odours
are  stifling.

Entering  a  small  room,  the  cell  of  our  guide,  we  were  given  seats
and  served  witli  tea  and  a  collation.  Shortly  after  we  started  home,
having  expressed  in  the  warmest  terms  our  thanks  to  Chola  Kusho
and  his  brother  for  their  kindness.  We  followed  the  ling-Ichor,  as  the
road  which  encircles  Lhasa  is  called.  On  the  way  we  passed  a  small
grove  where  is  the  elephant-shed,  the  solitary  occupant  of  which — a
present  from  the  Eajah  of  Sikkim — was  standing  in  a  barley  patch
near  by.  Further  on  we  came  to  a  place  where  the  corpses  of  the
townspeople  are  fed  to  pigs,  whose  flesh,  by  the  way,  is  said  to  be
delicious. N'ear  here  are  numerous  huts  of  Eagyabas.

In  the  evening  a  drove  of  donkeys  loaded  with  tscunha  and  butter
arrived  from  Gyautse,  and  I  was  distressed  to  learn  that  my  friend
the  minister  had  small-pox.  My  men  again  began  pestering  me  to
return  to  Tsang,  alleging  as  a  pretext  that  I  might  be  of  assistance

*  There  are  seventy-five  gods  bearing  this  name.  Tlie  gon-po  (jngon-po)  are  the
fiercest  of  the  terrifying  type  of  divinities. — ("SV.  R.)

t  On  this  famous  Tibetan  statesman  ("  Tisri  vir  ingenii  sagacissimi,"  as  Geoi-gi,
op.  cit,  p.  329,  calls  him),  see  Georgi's  notice,  loc.  cit,  and  Jour.  Roy.  Asiat.  boc,  xxiii.
p.  186.

X  Meaning  "  the  ornament  of  the  world."


170  JOUnNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

to  the  minister,  and  I  finally  prepared  to  go  to  him,  especially  as  the
donkey-men  said  he  had  expressed  a  desire  to  have  me  near  him.

On  June  11  I  went  to  see  the  Lhacham,  thanked  her  for  having
obtained  for  me  an  audience  of  the  Kyab-gong  Einpoche,  and  spoke
to  her  about  my  intention  of  setting  out  for  Dongtse.  She  advised
me  to  leave  at  once,  as  small -pox  was  raging  at  Lhasa ;  her  two  sons
now  liad  it,  and  from  her  appearance  I  feared  that  she  was  about  to
foil  ill  of  the  same  disease.

Eeturning  to  our  lodgings,  1  despatched  Tsing-ta  to  her  to  ask  a
loan  of  200  tanlas.  The  sum  was  l^rought  me  in  the  evening  bv  her
maid  Apela,  and  the  Lhacham  also  sent  me  provisions  for  tlie  journey
and  feed  for  the  ponies.


JOUBNEY TO LHASA AND CENTAL TIBET.  171


CHAPTER VIJ.

GOVERNMENT OF LHASA— CUSTOMS, FESTIVALS, ETC.

The  Dalai  lama's  *  position  resembles  that  held  until  lately  by  the
Pope  in  the  Christian  world.  He  is  believed  by  the  Northern
Buddhists  to  be  the  Buddha's  A'ice-regent  incarnate  on  earth,  and  the
spiritual  protector  of  Tibet.  He  is  known  as  Tug-je  chenpo  Shen-
rezig,  or  the  Most  merciful  Avalokiteswara.  He  never  dies,  though
at  times,  displeased  with  the  sinfulness  of  the  world,  he  retires  to  the
paradise  of  Gadan,t  leaving  his  mortal  body  on  earth.  The  ancient
records  of  Tibet  say  that  he  has  only  appeared  on  earth  fourteen
times  in  the  eighteen  centuries  from  the  time  of  the  Buddha's  death
to  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth  century.

In  the  year  l-iv-i  Gedun-gyatso  was  born,  an  embodiment  of
Gedun-dub,  who  was  an  incarnation  of  Slienrezig,  and  the  founder  of
the  famous  lamasery  of  Tashilhunpo.ij:  Gedun-gyatso  was  elected
head  lama  of  Tashilhunpo  in  1512,  which  office  he  resigned  to  fill  the
same  position  in  Dabung,  the  chief  lamasery  of  Lhasa.  He  had
built  at  this  latter  place  the  Gadan  phodang  of  Dabung,  which  since
then  has  been  famed  as  the  principal  seat  of  Buddhist  learning. §  He
was  the  first  of  the  line  of  Dalai  lamas.

*  Pronounced  Tale  lama.  This  Mongol  name  is  in  common  use  in  Tibet.  He  is
also  known  as  Gyal-wa-gyatso,  or  Kyab-gong  Kinpoche  ;  but  this  latter  title  is  applied
likewise  to  all  very  high  incarnate  lamas.  A.  K.'s  Kiamkun  Eingboche  is  but  an
inaccurate  transcription  of  Kyab-gong  Einpoche,  which  means  "  the  Precious  Protector."
— (W.  K.)

t  Or  rather  De-wa-chau,  "the  happy  (place)  "  in  Sanskrit  Sukavati ;  also  called
Nub-chyog  Dewachan,  or  "  the  western  abode  of  bliss." — (W.  E.)

X  On  the  Tale  lamas,  see  Jour.  Roy.  Asiat.  Soc,  xxiii.  p.  285  et  sqq.,  and  Waddell,
op.  cit,  p.  227  ;  the  dates  given  in  the  former  work  are  derived  from  Chinese  sources,
and  diifer  by  a  year  or  two  from  those  usually  accepted  by  Tibetans. — (W.  E.)

§  I  believe  that  the  Lhasa  mint  is  in  this  Gadan  phodang.  Tibetan  silver  coins
(tanha)  are  inscribed  Nam-gyal  Gadan  phodang  chyog-las,  '•  From  the  Gadan  phodang
of  the  Victorious  (Tale  lama)." See  Lacouperie,  '  The  silver  coinage  of  Tibet.'— (W.  E.)


172  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTIIAL TIBET.

His  successor  was  Sonam-gyatso.  He  was  invited  to  Mongolia
by  the  famous  conqueror  Altan  Khan,  and  on  his  arrival  at  the
hitter's  camp  the  Khan  addressed  him  in  Mongol  by  the  name  of
Dalai  lama,  the  Tibetan  word  gyatso,  "  ocean,"  being  the  equivalent
of  dalai  in  IMongol.  Altan,  knowing  that  the  lama's  predecessor  had
also  the  word  gyatso  in  his  name,  took  it  for  a  family  name ;  and  this
mistake  has  been  the  origin  of  the  name  of  Dalai  lama  since  given
to  all  the  reincarnations  of  the  Grand  Lama.

In  1642  Kushi  Khan  conquered  Tibet,  and  made  over  the  sove-
reignty of  the  central  portion  of  it  to  the  fifth  Dalai  lama,  Nagwang
lozang-gyatso,  and  that  of  Tsang,  or  Ulterior  Tibet,  to  the  Grand  Lama
of  Tashilhunpo,  though  he  continued  himself  to  be  the  dc  facto
sovereign,  appointing  Sonam  chuphel  as  Desi,  or  Governor,  of  Central,
and  another  as  administrator  of  Ulterior  Tibet.  The  spiritual  govern-
ment remained,  however,  in  the  Dalai  lama's  hands,  and  he  con-
ferred on  Kushi  Khan  the  title  of  Tandjin  chos-gyi  Gyalbo,  "  the  most
Catholic  king."

In  1645  the  Dalai  lama  erected  the  palace  of  Potala,  Kushi  Khan
having  his  residence  in  the  Gadan  khangsar  palace  in  Lhasa  itself.
Engrossed  with  extending  and  consolidating  his  newly  acquired
kingdom,  he  had,  little  by  little,  to  transfer  to  the  Dalai  lama  and  the
Desi  most  of  his  authority  over  Tibet.  In  1654  Kushi  Khan  died,
and  the  Desi  Sonam  chuphel  followed  him  shortly  to  the  grave.  15y
this  time  so  much  of  the  temporal  authority  had  devolved  on  the
Dalai  lama,  that,  from  the  time  of  the  death  of  Kushi  till  his  suc-
cessor Dayan  arrived  in  Lhasa  in  1660 — even  though  for  a  year
(1658-1659)  there  w\as  no  Desi — the  country  enjoyed  peace  and
prosperity  under  his  rule.

During  Dayan  Khan's  reign,  which  only  lasted  eight  years,  a
Mongol  chief,  Jaisang  Teba,  was  Desi  of  Tibet,  and  the  Desi  who
succeeded  him  was  appointed  by  the  Dalai  lama  himself.

The  successor  of  Dayan  was  Ratna-talai  Khan,  but  by  this  time
the  management  of  .State  affairs  had  entirely  ])assed  into  the  hands  of
the  Grand  Lama.  In  ICxSO  lie  ajipointed  Sangye-gyatso  Desi,  and
conferred  on  him  such  authority  that,  under  the  title  of  Governor-
Treasurer  {Sa-l-yong-ivai  dtyag-dso),  he  was  in  reality  King  of  Tibet.
He  remodelled  the  Government,  and  introduced  many  useful  reforms
in  every  branch  of  the  public  service.

The  Desi  is  commonly  called  "regent"  {gyal-tsah),  or  "king"


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  173

(r/j/alho).*  The  office  is  now  elective,  but  no  layman  may  hold  it ;  it  is
filled  by  a  lama  from  one  of  the  four  great  linr/s,  Tangye  ling,  Kundu
ling,  Tse-chog  ling,  and  Tsomo  ling ;  though  there  have  been  cases,
as,  for  instance,  that  of  the  Desi  Shata  (or  Shadra),  wliere  lamas  from
other  places  have  been  selected.f

The  council  of  ministers  (Kalou)  and  the  Prime  Minister  {Chyi-
l-ycd)  hhanpo  %)  select  the  regent,  and  their  choice  is  confirmed  by  the
oracles  of  iSTachung  chos-gyong  and  Lhamo  sung  chyong-ma ;  and,
lastly,  the  nomination  is  ratified  by  the  Emperor  of  China.

When  the  Dalai  lama  reaches  his  majority,  fixed  at  eighteen
years,  the  regent,  in  the  presence  of  the  Kalon,  the  chiefs  and  nobles,
presents  him  with  the  seals  of  of&ce  of  both  spiritual  and  temporal
affairs.  Since  the  beginning  of  the  present  century  no  Dalai  lama  has
reached  majority,  and  the  regency  has  been  without  interruption. §

The  regent  is  assisted  by  a  Chasag,  whose  appointment  is  also
subject  to  confirmation  by  the  Emperor  of  China.  He  wields  great
power,  and  sometimes  exercises  the  functions  of  the  regent  himself.
No  petitions  on  any  official  business  can  reach  the  regent  without
passing  through  his  hands.  He  is  entrusted  with  the  great  seal,  and
when  a  paper  has  been  prepared  by  the  chief  secretary,  or  Kadung,
the  Chasag  affixes  the  seal  to  it.  The  word  Chasag  means  "a  strainer
for  tea,"  the  dignitary  so  designated  being  the  test  and  model  of
merit.  11


*  Manning  calls  the  King  "  Ti-mu-fu,  or  Hu-lu-tu."  See  Markliam,  •  Tibet,'  p.  2G4.
I  am  unable  to  explain  satisfactorily  tliese  names,  though  the  first  has  a  rather  Cliinese
tournure.  The  second  may  be  the  Mongol  Hutuhetu,^'  incarnate  saint  of  the  first  rank."
The  Cliinese  call  the  Regent  Tsang  Wang,  or  "  King  of  Tibet."  See  also,  on  the
selection  of  this  functionary,  '  Land  of  the  Lamas,'  p.  289,  and  '  Report  on  Explorations,
185G-1886,' p.  31.

t  In  this  connection  the  following  is  interesting :  "  Some  few  years  ago  the  Grand
Council  of  Lhasa  (Caphyu)  was  composed  of  three  men,  named  Semeliug,  Tengeling,
and  Kunduling.  A  man  of  influence  named  Sape  Satya  complained  to  the  Emperor
of  China  of  the  oppressive  and  inefficient  rule  of  these  men.  The  Chinese  commissioner,
'  Kissen,'  came  from  China,  ai^prehended  Semeling,  and  took  him  off  as  a  prisoner  to
China." — Ashley  Eden,  '  Report  on  the  State  of  Bootan,'  p.  131  ;  cf.  Hue,  op.  cit.,  ii.  287
et  sqq.

X  He  is  also  called  Cliyi-lon  Hutuketu.  He  is  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer ;  the
Chinese  Ambau  is  his  colleague,  and  his  approval  of  any  expenditure  is  necessary. —
(W.  R.)

§  See  Hue,  op.  cil.,  ii.  286.

II  Our  author's  informant  must  have  written  ja  tsag,  meaning  "  tea-strainer  " ;  but
Chasag  is  spelt  rgijal  tsab,  and  means  "  viceroy."  The  Lhasa  Amban  is  in  like
manner  called  Gong-ma  tsab,  "  the  Emperor's  deputy." — (W.  R.)


174  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

The  council  of  ministers,  or  Kalon  sluuj  Iciujjja,  is  composed  of
four  laymen  and  one  monk,  all  of  them  appointed  for  life.  Formerly
there  were  only  four  Kalon,  but  of  late  the  preponderating  influence  of
the  clergy  has  forced  the  Grand  Lama  to  put  in  the  council  one  of  its
members,  and  he  takes  the  first  seat  in  the  council  hall,  or  kasliag,  the
Kalon  kripa  coming  next  to  him.  The  council  sits  daily  from  nine
to  two,  and  transacts  the  political,  judicial,  and  administrative  work
of  the  Government.  It  hears  appeals  from  the  Djongpon,  or  from
the  Court  of  the  Timpon  of  Lhasa,  known  as  "  the  black  court "
{Nagtsa-shar)*  The  ministers  sit  cross-legged  on  thick  cushions
placed  on  raised  seats,  with  a  bowl  of  tea  on  a  little  table  in  front  of
each  of  them,  which  is  kept  full  by  the  Court  Solpon.  The  secretaries
and  clerks  occupy  adjoining  rooms.  The  ministers  and  all  the  officers
of  their  court  are  provided  with  dinner  at  the  expense  of  the  State.

Estates  (or  Loiislii)  are  set  apart  for  the  maintenance  of  the
ministers,  who  receive  no  other  salary.  They  are  not  allowed  the
privilege  of  being  carried  in  sedan  chairs  (j^hch-chyam),  the  Amban,
the  Dalai,  the  Panchen  lamas,  and  on  certain  occasions  the  regent,
being  alone  permitted  to  use  this  conveyance.  The  Kalon  dress  in
yellow  tunics,  and  wear  Mongol  hats  with  a  coral  button  on  top.j

When  the  office  of  a  Kalon  becomes  vacant,  the  regent,  in  con-
sultation with  the  other  Kalon,  selects  two  or  three  generals
(Dahpon),  and  sends  their  names  to  the  oracles  of  Nachung  and
Lhamo  sung-chyong-ma  of  Potala  for  them  to  pronounce  upon.  The
person  approved  of  by  the  oracles  is  appointed.

In  literary  style  the  ministers  are  called  CJi;/i/tff-fianfj  or  Dun-
na-dun,  but  colloquially  they  are  known  as  Kalon  or  Shape,  and  the
title  of  Sa-v:ang  ("  power  of  the  land  ")  is  usually  afiixed  to  their  names,
as  they  are  selected  from  among  the  wealthy  and  powerful  nobles.
When  sitting  in  a  judicial  capacity  they  are  known  as  Shalchepa,
and  Sludewpa  when  they  perform  the  duties  of  advocate.

Formerly  the  wives  of  Gyalbo  and  Desi  were  ad(h'essed  by  the
title  of  Lkacham,  but  nowadays  it  is  only  given  to  the  wives  of
Kalon. Their  sons  are  called  Llia-are,  or  "  })rince."


*  Cf.  Jour.  lloy.  Aniat.  Soc,  xxiii.  pp.  11,  220,  239,  242.  Tlie  nominees  to  tliese
positions  are  coufirmeil  by  tlic;  iMnpeior  ol'  China. — (W.  R.)

t  This  button  is  given  them  by  tlie  Emperor  (or  rather  the  Amban).  'J'he  lama
minister  does  not  wear  one.  According  to  Ciiinese  authorities,  the  Kalon  have  only
3rd  class,  or  blue,  buttons. The  coral  button  belongs  to  the  Ist  class.— (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.


ITfj


There  are  four  secretaries,  or  Kaduntj,  chosen  from  among  the
Dungkhor,  and  one  chief  clerk,  or  K((hshopa,  attached  to  tlie  Kalon's
court.  Under  these  secretaries  are  175  Dungkhor,  or  civil  officers,
under  the  immediate  supervision  of  the  Tsipon,  or  accounting
officer.


LAMA DELIVERING AN ORACLE.


The  Dungkhor  *  are  chosen  from  among  the  best  scholars  of  the
Yutog  school,  where  the  sons  of  nobles  and  the  leading  people  are
educated.  They  are  taught  accounting  by  serving  five  years  in  the
Bureau  of  Accounts,  or  Tsi-khang,  after  which  they  are  de^mted  to
perform  various  duties,  especially  in  connection  with  the  treasury,

*  On  the  Dungklior,  see  Jour.  Boy.  Asint.  Soc,  xxiii.  pp.  "220,  241?.


17G  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

and  the  most  experienced  among  tliem  are  appointed  Djongpon,  or
prefects.

The  salaries  of  the  Dungkhor  are  harely  sufficient  for  their  main-
tenance ;  but,  as  they  belong  for  the  most  part  to  well-to-do  families,
this  question  is  unimportant.*  The  Dungkhor  have  a  peculiar  way
of  dressing  their  hair,  which  distinguishes  them  from  all  other
officers.

Those  among  the  sons  of  the  wealthy  and  prominent  people  of
Lhasa  who,  having  become  members  of  the  Church,  desire  to  enter
public  life,  are  trained  at  the  Tse  labdra  of  Potala,  after  which  they
become  Tiic-dung,  or  monk  officials.  The  number  of  these  Tse-dung
cannot  exceed  175.  In  all  places  of  trust  and  responsibility  there
are  two  officers,  and  sometimes  more,  one  at  least  of  whom  is  a
Tse-dung.  Thus,  in  the  office  of  the  treasurer  of  Potala  there  are  two
Tse-dung  and  one  Dungkhor ;  in  the  Labrang  treasury  there  are
two  Tse-dung  and  one  Dungkhor,  etc.  The  Tse-dung  are  appointed
to  these  offices  for  a  term  of  three  years.

The  Djongpon,  or  prefects,  are  entrusted  within  their  respective
DjoiKj  with  civil  and  military  powers ;  they  try  civil  and  criminal
cases,  and  levy  taxes,  the  latter  duty  being  performed  under  Kargya,
or,  as  we  would  say,  Pnncanas  from  the  Court  of  Kalon.  There  are
53  Djong  and  123  Sub-prefectures  under  Djongnyer.

There  are  t^'O  Djongpon  to  every  Djong,t  their  authority  being
equal  in  all  respects.  In  military  matters  they  are  subordinate  to
the  generals  and  the  Amban.  They  render  yearly  accounts  to  the
Aniban  of  the  military  stores  in  their  district,  and  have  also  to
show  their  proficiency  in  shooting,  riding,  and  other  athletic  sports  at
the  annual  inspection  of  the  troops  made  by  the  Amban  and  the
Dahpon ;  and  the  former  confers  on  them  blue  or  crystal  buttons,  to
be  worn  on  their  official  hats. J

The  establishment  of  a  Djongpon  comprises  two  Dungkhor  and  two
storekeepers  (Z>yo7i(/-n^rr) — administering  sub-districts — and  a  number
of  under-strappers.  The  heads  of  villages  (or  Tsopon),  the  headmen
(or  Mq'ion),  the  elders  (or  Gyanjio),  all  of  whom  are  elected  for  a  term
of  years,  are  also  under  his  orders.

*  Our  author  forgets  the  "  squeezes,"  which  swell  all  salaries  to  verj'  respectable
sizes.— (W.  R.)

t  A  Inma  (Tsc-duiig)  and  a  layman. — (S.  C.  D.)

X  On  the  military  inspections  made  by  the  Amban,  see  Peldng  Gazette,  January  24,
188G,  and  Jour.  Roy.  Asiat.  Soc,  xxiii.  p.  216.


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  177

In  every  Djoug  there  are  two  store-houses — the  har-gija,  or  reserve
store,  and  the  djong-dso,  or  repository  of  the  Bjong.  The  keys  of  the
former  are  kept  by  the  Kalon,  and  it  is  opened  only  once  or  twice  a
year.  The  Government  sends  annually  a  revenue  officer  to  check  the
accounts  of  the  Djongpon  and  tax-collectors  {Khraldupa),  and  to  take
over  the  revenue  collected  by  them.  The  Djongpon  liave,  like  the
Kalon,  their /a^irs  or  djong-slii  for  their  maintenance,  in  lieu  of  salary.

The  following  citation,  taken  from  a  work  entitled  '  Sherab  dongbu,'
or  '  Bits  of  Wisdom,'  ma}-  prove  of  interest : —

"  Whenever  petitions  or  requests  are  made,  they  should  be  care-
fully examined.  Impartiality  should  be  shown  to  all  classes  alike,  to
great  and  small,  to  lamas  and  to  laymen.  Uninfluenced  by  gratuities  or
the  fear  of  criticism,  the  Djongpon  should  administer  perfect  justice.
Questions  of  jurisdiction,  of  taxes  due  by  the  misser,  and  of  forced
labour,  should  be  settled  by  the  rules  (tsa-tsig)  of  each  Djong.  The
villages,  houses,  and  inhabitants  should  be  counted  and  inspected
yearly,  and  the  numbers  compared  with  those  of  preceding  years.  He
should  have  returned  to  their  houses  those  who  have  left  them,  par-
ticularly misser  who  have  been  absent  from  their  houses  for  not  more
than  five  years.  Servants  and  labourers  of  the  Djong  should  not  be
employed  by  him  at  his  private  work  ;  the  number  of  servants  allowed
him  is  fixed  by  the  tsa-tsig.  He  should  be  kind  to  the  misser,  and
not  without  a  good  cause  have  disputes  with  neighbouring  Djongpon,
as  the  Government's  interests  would  thereby  suffer.  He  should  not
allow  the  public  lands  to  be  encroached  upon,  nor  should  tenants  on
them  be  taken  away  by  landholders  (gerpas).

"  No  women  should  be  allowed  to  loiter  about  the  Djong,  and  the
Djongpon  should  carefully  refrain  from  any  flirtation.  He  should  see
to  facilitating  the  courier  service,  and  he  should  see  that  no  one
receives  supplies  for  tlieir  journey  unless  they  are  bearers  of  passports
(leim-yig).  Frontier  or  foreign  traders  who  cannot  show  a  passport
should  be  held,  and  any  information  he  may  obtain  of  affairs  in  other
quarters  should  be  transmitted  to  Lhasa."  *

As  previously  mentioned,  the  Kalon  and  Djongpon  exercise
judicial  functions. In  the  case  of  the  Sera  and  Dabung  lamaseries,

*  Of  course  most  of  the  Djongpon  only  attend  to  a  very  few  of  these  duties.  They
squeeze  the  people  under  them,  exact  as  much  service  as  possible,  and,  together  with
the  lamas,  get  everything  they  can  out  of  them,  and  only  stop  when  their  exactions
appear  likely  to  cause  serious  trouble. — (W.  li.)

N


178  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

the  abbots  decide  all  miiioi-  offences  committed  within  the  monastery
limits,  but  the  more  serious  charo-es  are  committed  to  the  court  of  the
regent  and  the  Kalon.  In  all  other  lamaseries  only  offences  against
the  common  law  are  tried  by  the  convent  authorities.

It  is  customary  for  both  parties  in  a  suit  to  make  presents  to  the
judge.  "When  the  case  has  been  examined,  the  judge  fixes  the
costs  (tim-tiy)  to  be  borne  in  ecj^ual  portions  by  the  plaintiffs  and
defendants.  As  a  general  rule,  disputes  are  settled  l)y  the  village
elders ;  but  few  lawsuits  occur  on  the  whole,  for  the  Tibetans  are  a
peaceful,  kind-hearted,  law-abiding  people,  and  very  amenable  to  reason.

The  Amban,  or  Imperial  Resident  of  China  in  Tibet,  is  the  head
of  the  Tibetan  army.  His  Chinese  staff  consists  of  an  Assistant
Amban,  two  Laoyeh,  and  a  paymaster  (j^oi/^ion).*  There  is  also  one
Tibetan  general,  or  Magpon,  six  Dahpon,*  or  division  commanders,
six  Eupon  commanding  regiments,  and  a  number  of  subordinate
officers.

The  Andjan  is  the  medium  of  all  communications  befjween  the
Tibetan  Government  and  China.  He  settles  all  political  differences
between  the  various  states  of  Tibet  and  the  Lhasa  Government ;  he
confers  titles  and  honours  on  native  military  officials ;  but  he  has,
theoretically,  no  authority  in  the  internal  administration  of  the
country.  He  ordinarily  resides  at  Lhasa,  and  annually  makes  an
inspection  of  the  Nepalese  frontier  as  far  as  Tingri  djong.  Sometimes
the  Assistant  Amban  performs  this  duty,  and  he  then  inspects  the
military  stores  and  forces  at  the  different  Djong.

The  political  relations  between  Tibet  and  China  are  now  so
intimate  that  the  Imperial  Eesidency  established  at  Lhasa  in  the
first  quarter  of  the  last  century  has  converted  Tibet  from  a  protected
state  into  a  dependency  of  China.  The  two  Ambans  are  commanders
of  the  militia,  and  arrogate  to  themselves  the  supreme  political
authority  of  the  country.  The  a})pointment  of  two  Ambans  to  watch
the  political  interests  of  the  country  is  probably  based  on  the  principle
tliat  the  one  acts  as  a  spy  on  the  other.  This  has,  as  in  China,
] become  a  custom  in  Tibet.

The  Ambans  are  the  terror  of  the  Tibetans,  who  abhor  them  from

*  In  Chinese,  called  Liang-tai. On  the  Chinese  military  establi-shmeiit  in  Tibet,  see
Jour.  Roy.  Asiat.  Soc.  xxiii.  p.  27.5  et  sqq. ;  ami  on  the  Ainban'.s  duties,  ibid.,  p.  7  et

t  In  the  Anglo-Tibetau  war  there  were  four  jNIagpons  or  Mafeas,  and  eight  Dahpons.


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTBAL TIBET.  179

the  depth  of  their  hearts.*  Whenever  they  leave  the  capital  on
pleasure  excursions,  or  on  inspection  tours,  provisions,  conveyances,
and  all  sorts  of  labour  are  forcibly  exacted  from  the  poor  villagers,
who  are  deprived  of  their  ponies  and  }'aks,  which,  owing  to  the  merci-
less treatment  of  the  Ambans'  numerous  retainers,  die  in  numbers  on
the  road.  No  compensation  is  given  them  for  their  losses,  and  no
complaints  are  admitted  by  the  courts  of  justice,  presided  over  by  the
lamas,  against  this  kind  of  oppression.  Tsamha  and  sheep  are  also
on  these  occasions  taken  away  by  force  from  the  people,  who,  unable
to  bear  the  oppression,  not  unfrequently  rise  in  a  body  against  the
Ambans'  retainers,  when  matters  are  settled  by  the  district  Djongpou,
who  are  generally  the  creatures  of  the  Ambans.  Nor  is  this  all.
Every  Chinese  or  Manchu  soldier  or  merchant  who  enters  Tibet,
whether  in  a  public  or  private  capacity,  is  provided  with  a  pass  from
Peking,  which  facilitates  his  journey  and  brings  him  safe  to  his
destination  free  of  charge,  f  The  same  is  the  case  with  those  who
leave  Tibet  for  China,  the  Ambans  being  the  only  ofl&cials  qualified
to  grant  passports.  The  happy  traveller,  armed  with  the  Ambans'
authority,  takes  every  advantage  of  his  pass,  and  never  fails  to  use
his  whip  freely  when  the  villagers  delay  in  complying  with  his
requisitions.

One  of  the  Ambans  at  least  is  required  to  pay  a  visit  to  the  Tashi
lama  once  a  year,  to  confer  with  him  on  State  affairs,  when,  as  the
representative  of  the  Emperor  of  China,  he  is  received  with  the  highest
marks  of  distinction.  The  Amban  is  required  to  make  a  low  saluta-
tion with  joined  palms,  and  as  he  approaches  the  throne  he  presents
a  hhatag  to  the  lama.  The  Tashi  lama,  on  his  side,  blesses  him  by
touching  his  head  with  his  open  hand,  and  seats  him  on  his  right  on
a  State  cushion.  After  a  short  interchange  of  compliments  the  con-
versation turns  on  the  health  of  the  Emperor,  the  happiness  of  the
people,  and the prospects of  the year's crops. Interpreters who

*  Thos.  Manning  (Markbam, '  Tibet.,'  p.  274)  says,  "It  is  very  bad  policy  thus  per-
petually to  send  men  of  bad  character  to  govern  Tibet.  It  uo  doubt  displeases  the
Grand  Lama  and  Tibetans  in  general,  and  tends  to  prevent  tiieir  affections  from
settling  in  favour  of  the  Chinese  Government.  I  cannot  help  thinking,  from  what  I
have  seen  and  heard,  that  they  would  view  the  Chinese  influence  in  Tibet  overthrown
without  many  emotions  of  regret." — (W.  R.)

t  This  is  not  correct.  Traders  only  have  a  permit  issued  either  at  Ta-chien-lu  by
the  Chun-liang-fu  or  at  Lhasa  by  the  Amban  allowing  them  to  enter  or  leave  Tibet.
All  officials,  even  common  soldiers — the  latter  only  when  going  to  Tibet  or  when
on  duty — have  ula  supplied  them. — (W.  E.)


180  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

understand  the  Mongol,  Mancliu,  and  Chinese  languages  always
accompany  the  Amban,  and  the  Tashi  lama  has  also  his  interpreters.
When  the  Amban  appears  abroad  he  is  carried  in  a  yellow  chair,  and
attended  by  a  numerous  retinue  bearing  the  insignia  of  his  high  office.

Of  the  Dahpon,  two  are  stationed  at  Lhasa,  two  at  Shigatse,  one
at  Gyantse,  and  one  at  Tingri  djong.  Three  of  the  six  Elipon  belong-
to  Central  Tibet,  and  three  to  Ulterior.

The  regular  army  consists  of  6000  men,  3000  being  under  arms,
and  the  other  3000  at  home  on  half-pay.  Those  in  active  service
serve  for  three  years  at  a  monthly  pay  of  two  ounces  of  silver.  After
this  they  return  to  their  homes,  and  enter  the  territorial  army,  or
yvl-mag,  whence  they  may  be  at  any  moment  recalled  to  active  service.
They  are  not  usually  uniformed,  though  some  wear  a  black  Chinese
jacket.  They  are  armed  with  matchlocks,  bows  and  arrows,  long
spears,  and  slings  {ordo).

Besides  the  regular  army,  the  Government  may,  in  case  of  need,
call  out  all  the  forces  of  the  country,  when  each  family  has  to  supply
one  man  fully  equipped  and  provisioned,  and  every  landholder  sends
a  man  for  every  kany  *  of  land  he  owns,  and  a  follower  to  carry  his
provisions.  The  Kalon,  Djongpon,  Dahpon,  and  chief  men  furnish
quotas  of  cavalry  (or  tariKuj),  all  those  who  have  ponies  being  incor-
porated in  this  arm.

Besides  the  expense  of  maintaining  the  army — each  Chinese
private  being  paid  fourteen  rupees  a  month  and  thirty  surs  of  tsamha,
and  every  Tibetan  2\  rupees  a  month — the  Tibetan  Government  has  to
contribute  50,000  rupees  to  the  Eesidency  establishment,  exclusive  of
the  Amban's  salary.  The  Tibetan  Government,  as  well  as  the  whole
nation,  groan  under  this  excessive  and  useless  expenditure ;  but  the
maintenance  of  this  order  of  things  is  declared  to  be  essential  for  the
protection  of  the  holy  lamas  against  the  encroachments  of  the  English,
Nepalese,  and  Kashmir  Governments.  Both  the  latter  states  are
allies  of  Tibet,  while  the  very  name  of  the  first  is  dreaded  by  the
Government  officers,  especially  the  monk  officers,  as  an  invincible
power,  and  as  being  the  incarnation  of  the  Lhamayins  (giants)  who
fought  against  the  gods.

It  is  universally  believed  in  Tibet  that  after  two  hundred  years  the
Tashi  lama  will  retire  to  Shambala,  the  Utopian  city  of  the  Buddhists,

*  A  kang  is  a  piece  of  hind  to  sow  wliich  10  yak-loads  of  barlty  are  used,  or  one
which  pays  50  to  55  ounces  of  silver  a  year  as  taxes. — (S.  C.  D.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  181

and  will  not  return  to  Tibet,  and  that  in  the  mean  time  the  whole  world
will  succumb  to  the  power  of  the  Phylings  (Ilussians  and  Eno-lish).
Neither  the  Emperor  of  China  nor  the  coml)ined  legions  of  gods  and
demi-gods  who  reside  round  the  golden  mount  of  Eiral>  (Sumeru)  will
be  able  to  arrest  the  progress  of  their  arms  or  the  miracles  of  their
superior  intellect.  It  is  the  policy  of  the  Tibetans  to  keep  them  at  a
distance,  not  by  open  hostilities,  but  l)y  temporizing  and  diplomacy.
They  were  initiated  into  this  policy  by  the  Ambans,  who  are  always
busy  in  devising  fresh  plans  for  guaranteeing  the  safety  of  the  country
against  all  sorts  of  imaginary  foreign  aggressions.

Tlie  ISTepalese  are  not  now  so  much  the  object  of  this  terror  as
they  were  a  century  ago,  but  are  regarded  as  peaceful  allies  under  the
rule  of  the  Emperor  of  China,  Tibet  pays  no  tribute  to  Nepal,  nor
does  it  entertain  any  agent  at  Katmandu,  while  Nepal  maintains  an
agent  at  Lhasa  to  promote  friendly  relations,  as  also  to  protect  her
commercial  interests  with  Tibet.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  the
richest  merchants  and  bankers  of  Lhasa  are  Nepalese  Palpas.

During  the  late  disturbances  between  the  monks  of  the  To-sam  ling
College  and  the  Nyer-chang  chenpo,  the  late  Tashi  lama  did  not
consult  the  Amban,  or  invite  the  aid  of  his  soldiers  to  quell  the
rebellion  among  the  1500  disaffected  and  unruly  monks,  but  secretly
apprised  his  subjects  of  the  neighbouring  villages  of  his  intentions,
and  on  the  appointed  day  10,000  armed  men  were  assembled,  carry-
ing long  spears,  bucklers,  matchlocks,  and  slings,  who  at  once
struck  the  rebel  monks  with  terror.  He  has  since  that  day  been
convinced  of  the  sincere  veneration  and  devoted  loyalty  of  his  people
and  of  the  perfect  uselessness  of  the  Amban's  forces.  This  instance
of  tact  in  the  Panchen  rinpoche  has  raised  him  higher  than  ever  in
the  estimation  of  the  people,  much  to  the  discomfort  of  the  jealous
Amban.  It  is  also  pleasing  to  notice  some  signs  of  independence  in
the  youthful  Tashi,  who  is  now  the  senior  sovereign  of  Tibet,  the
Dalai  lama  being  as  yet  an  infant.  The  villagers  and  common  folks,
who  suffer  most  from  the  Amban's  tyranny,  say  that  in  course  of  time
the  present  Tashi  will  prove  a  worthy  successor  of  the  great  Tempai
nyima  *  in  faith  as  well  as  in  strength  of  mind.

The  principal  sources  of  revenue  of  the  Lhasa  Government  are
the  family-tax  and  the  land-tax,  the  first  being  usually  paid  in  coin,

*  The  4tli  Panchen  rinpoche  was  called  Pal-dan  Tan-pai  nyi-ma. He  was  born  in
1782. He  died  in  the  early  fifties. Turner, '  Embassy,'  p.  2:J0.— (W.  U.)


182  JOUBXET TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

and  the  latter  in  kind. The  family-tax  may  be  jiaid  at  any  time
of  the  year.

Apart  from  the  lands  held  liy  chiefs  and  noltles,  there  are,  as
already  stated,  altogether  fifty-three  Djong,  or  districts,  under  Djongpon,
and  a  hundred  and  twenty-three  sub-districts  under  Djongnjicr.
These  constitute  wliat  are  called  shung  shi,  or  State  lands.  Each
djo7ig  contains,  on  an  average,  five  hundred  families  of  misser,  or
farmers.  A  misser  family  consists  of  one  wife,  with  all  her  husbands,
children,  and  servants.  Each  family,  on  an  average,  possesses  two
or  three  knng  of  arable  soil.  If  one  Mai  (50  lb.)  yields  nine  or  ten
Ihd.I,  it  is  considered  a  good  harvest ;  six  to  eight  is  a  tolerable  crop,
four  to  six  a  bad  one.  The  Government  revenue  for  each  Jmiu/  is,
on  an  average,  fifty  sirmg  (125  rupees),  or  about  one  hundred  and
fifty  Ihal  of  grain.  The  Crown  revenue,  if  taken  entirely  in  kind,
would  therefore  amount  to  2,625,000  Jrkal,  which  would  be  equivalent
in  money  to  2,000,000  rupees.  This  is  partially  expended  by  the
State  for  the  Church,  and  in  distributing  alms  to  the  whole  body  of
lamas  belonging  to  the  monasteries  of  Potala,  Sera,  Dabung,  Gadan,
etc.  In  every  Djong  are  kept  registers,  in  which  are  entered  the
collections  in  previous  years  and  the  quality  of  the  land  under
cultivation.  The  collector,  after  examining  these,  inspects  the  crops,
and  estimates  the  quantity  of  the  yield,  and  by  comparison  with  that
of  the  five  preceding  years  he  fixes  the  tax  for  the  current  year.  In
very  prosperous  years  the  State  takes  two-fifths  of  tlie  crop  (the
maximum  allowed  it).

Ulag  consists  in  supplying  to  all  those  bearing  a  Government
order  for  ulag,  in  which  the  number  of  animals,  etc.,  is  enumerated,
beasts  of  burden — ponies,  mules,  yaks,  and  donkeys.  If  the  misser
have  no  ponies,  they  have  to  furnish  yaks  or  donkeys  instead.  Eor
stages  along  which  neither  yaks  nor  ponies  can  pass,  porters  must
be  supplied  for  carrying  the  traveller's  goods.  In  default  of  these,
the  misser  are  required  to  pay  a  certain  sum  for  carriage  or  convey-
ance. Bfisscr,  and  all  those  who  own  more  than  one  I'ang  of  land,
must  supply  ulag  and  ta-v,  consisting  of  either  one  coolie  or  pony,
free  of  charge  when  the  traveller  produces  his  Government  pass.
The  system  of  levying  ulag  is  a  kind  of  indirect  taxation,  accounts
of  which  are  kept  by  the  village  headmen.  Some  families  supply  a
hundred  ulag  in  a  year,  others  only  five  or  ten.  If  a  misser  fail  to
Supply  ulag  once  in  a  year,  he  is  required  to  supply  double  the  amount


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  183

the  following  year.  This  duty  is  levied  on  all  kinds  of  State  lands  and
subjects,  freeholds  and  private  property  granted  to  sacred  personages
alone  being  exempt  from  this  hateful  tax.  Lands  purchased  from
Government  are  also  liable  to  it.  Under  the  Lhasa  Government
there  are  about  a  hundred  and  twenty  landlords,  out  of  wliom  about
twenty  are  very  rich  and  poM^erful.  The  present  regent.  Lama
Ta-tsag  Einpoche,  of  Kundu  ling,  has  upwards  of  3000  mlssrr  on
his  estates  in  Kharu  and  Tibet  Proper.  The  ex-regent,  whose  estates
lie  in  Kongpo,  has  about  5000  misser,  and  other  great  lamas  and
laymen  about  1000  misser  each.  The  greatest  noble  of  Tibet,  Phags-
pa-sha,  of  Chab-mdo,*  is  lord  over  10,000  misser.

When  questions  arise  about  newly  reclaimed  lands,  the  tax-
collector,  having  no  register  {tsi-shi)  to  guide  him,  measures  the  h'ekl
and  superintends  the  harvesting,  when  he  fixes  the  amount  due  to
the  State.  He  is  forbidden  fixing  his  assessments  otherwise  than'  by
personal  examination.  The  land-tax  may  be  paid  in  three  instal-
ments— in  November,  December,  and  January,  at  which  latter  date
it  is  remitted  by  the  Djongpon  to  Lhasa  or  Tashilhunpo,  as  the  case
may  be.  The  tax-gatherer  has  authority  to  remit  a  portion  of  the
tax  when  the  crops  have  failed  for  some  reason  or  other ;  in  fact,  as
a  Tibetan  author  puts  it,  "  as  eggs  are  quietly  taken  from  under  a
sitting-hen  without  disturbing  the  nest,  so  should  the  tax-gatherer
collect  the  taxes  without  oppressing  or  disturbing  the  misser" f

The  great  monasteries  at  Lhasa  and  its  neici-hbourhood,  such  as
Sera,  Dabung,  Gadan,  Samye,  etc.,  have  large  freehold  estates.

Besides  these,  there  are  more  than  three  hundred  landholders,
called  (jerpa,  who  pay  a  nominal  revenue  to  the  Government,  varying
from  ten  to  thirty  doclie  (1250  to  3750  rupees),  and  who  are  also
called  upon  to  furnish  'idcuj,  ta-n,  and  other  indirect  taxes.  Cows
and  jomo  belonging  to  the  Government  and  tended  by  dolqxt  are
calculated  to  yield  at  the  rate  of  five  pounds  of  butter  per  head  per
year.  In  the  provinces  of  Kong-po  and  Pema-kyod  numerous  pigs
are  reared,  and  rich  families  count  their  pigs  by  the  thousands.  The
Lhasa  Government  levies  a  tax  of  one  tanha  on  every  pig,  and
derives no inconsiderable revenue from these  districts from  this

*  Chamdo,  in  Eastern  Tibet.  It  is  an  ecclesiastical  fief  uudcr  the  rule  of  a  high
iligtiitary  of  the  Gelngpa  sect  who  bears  the  title  of  Phapa  Uia. — (W.  R.)

t  In  other  words,  he  should  take  all  he  can  possibly  get  without  forcing  tlie  misser
to  open  revolt. — (W.  R.)


184  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

source.  The  tenants  in  eacli  Djong  contriljute  ten  days'  labour
per  head  for  tlie  ploughing  or  liarvesting  of  the  State  lands.  This
service  is  called  the  las-tal,  or  "  labour-tax."

There  is  in  Tibet  no  fixed  rate  of  duties  on  merchandise,  nor
is  there  a  regular  import  duty.  Eich  merchants  who  come  from
foreign  countries  are  required  to  pay  annually  a  tax  of  fifty  sra7ig  to
Government ;  large  traders  are  charged  twenty-five  srang,  and  small
traders  three  srang.  Shopkeepers  and  pedlars  pay  five  sho  (1|  rupee)
annually,  and  itinerant  Khamba  hawkers  who  carry  their  own  loads
are  charged  half  a  tanka  per  quarter  both  in  U  and  Tsang.

For  crossing  large  bridges  the  charge  is  from  one  I'J/ft  (one  anna)
to  one  tanlrt  per  head  for  a  man,  and  a  ]:arma  (two  annas)  to  a  sho
(four  annas)  for  ponies.  For  pasturing  cattle  on  pul)lic  lands  there
is  a  charge  of  from  three  to  five  sho  yearly  for  every  head.  Besides
these,  there  is  a  capitation  tax  of  from  two  to  three  srang  (7?,  rupees)
on  people  owning  no  land  but  only  homesteads.  The  revenue-
collectors  {Khralduiia)  and  their  servants  get  conveyance,  ponies,  and
yaks  at  every  stage  free  of  charge,  and  the  villagers  are  bound  to
furnish  them  in  addition  with  attendants,  water,  fuel,  and  lodgings.
The  revenue-collectors  may  accept  for  their  own  use  all  the  I'hatag,
butter,  tea,  and  silver  coin  which  the  misscr  may  see  fit  to  offer  them.
They  are  also  authorized,  when  on  tour,  to  kill  one  out  of  every
hundred  sheep  belonging  to  the  misscr  for  their  own  consumption.*
In  all  other  matters  they  are  guided  by  tlie  usages  and  laws  of  the
country.  No  Government  official,  revenue  officer,  or  Djongpon  may
oppress  the  poorest  misscr.  If  one  of  these  peasants  fails  to  pay  his
taxes  in  money,  he  may  offer  the  equivalent  in  tea,  butter,  or  blankets  ;
but  live  stock,  except  when  nothing  else  is  available,  are  not  to  be
accepted.  The  property  in  cattle  belonging  to  the  Lhasa  Government
exceeds  1,000,000  head.  There  is  a  superintendent  of  this  Government
stock,  who,  at  the  end  of  every  year,  submits  an  account  of  the  live
animals  and  tlie  number  died  or  killed  during  the  year.  In  order  to
satisfy  the  authorities,  lie  is  required  t(j  produce  the  entire  dried
carcasses  of  the  dead  animals  witli  their  tails  and  liorns.  These
superintendents  are  appointed  annually,  and  as  a  consequence  they
take  every  opportunity  of  making  their  fortune  at  the  expense  of
the  State  before  the  expiration  of  their  term  of  service.

*  This  spems  impossible,  in  view  of  tlie  large  flocks  owned  by  most  of  the  people
One  in  a  thousiind  would  already  be  a  heavy  tax. — (W.  K.)


JOURNEY  TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  185

Letters  are  carried  by  messengers  and  special  couriers  called
cliih-zamha  (or  ta-zamha),  meaning,  literally,  "  liorse-lnidge."  The
couriers  generally  discharge  their  duty  with  admirable  efficiency,  and
every  one  assists  them  with  great  promptness.  All  Government
messengers  are  provided  with  the  best  and  swiftest  ponies,  and  at
every  halt  are  furnished  with  lodgings,  water,  firewood,  and  a  man
to  cook  their  victuals.  Couriers  on  foot  usually  travel  from  20  to
25  miles  a  day,  while  those  who  ride  do  from  30  to  35  miles.  The
latter  is  the  express  rate,  for  which  the  Government  generally  gives
an  extra  remuneration.  Government  couriers  alone  get  ta-u,  or
ponies  for  travelling ;  private  letters  of  officials  are  carried  by  them,
while  common  people  make  their  own  arrangements  for  the  convey-
ance of  their  letters,  which  are  not,  however,  numerous.

The  express  couriers,  or  te-td,  on  the  road  between  Lhasa  and
China  are  dressed  in  tight  blue-coloured  gowns,  the  tape  fastenings
of  which  are  tied  on  their  heads,  and  the  knot  sealed.  They  are
required  to  subsist  daily  on  five  hen's  eggs,  five  cups  of  plain  tea,
a  pound  of  corn-flour,  half  a  pound  of  rice,  and  a  quarter-pound  of
lean  meat.*  They  are  forbidden  to  take  much  salt,  and  are  strictly
forbidden  to  eat  onions,  garlic,  red  pepper,  butter,  or  milk.  At  mid-
night they  are  allowed  to  sleep  in  a  sitting  posture  for  three
hours,  after  which  they  are  awakened  by  the  keeper  of  the  stage-
house.  It  is  said  that  these  couriers  are  in  the  habit  of  taking
certain  medicines  to  give  them  the  power  of  endurance  against
fatigue.f  The  letters  are  enclosed  in  a  yellow  bag,  which  the  courier
carries  on  his  back,  generally  using  some  soft  feathers  to  keep  it
from  coming  into  contact  with  his  person.  They  get  relays  of  ponies
at  the  end  of  every  five  lebor.X  Arriving  at  a  stage-house,  they  fire  a
gun  as  a  notice  to  the  keeper  of  the  next  postal  stage  to  make  ready  a
post-pony.  At  every  sucli  stage  a  relay  of  five  ponies  is  usually  kept
ready. The  courier  is  allowed  to  change  his  dress  once  a  week.§

A  special  class  of  trained  men  are  employed  on  this  service.  The
distance between  tlie  Tibetan  capital  and  Peking  is  divided  into  a

*  A  pretty  good  allowance,  one  would  tliiuk.  Cf.,  on  this  courier  .service,  Hue,
op.  ciL,  vol.  ii.  p.  450.— (W.  R.)

t  In  China  mo.st  of  the  couriers  are  opium-smokers. — (W.  R.)

X  A  lebor  is,  says  our  author,  equal,  to  720  yards.  It  is  the  Chinese  li,  but  I  have
heard  the  word  always  pronounced  leu. A  li,  however,  is  about  GOO  yards. — (W.  R.)

§  I  fancy  our  author  means  rearrange  or  remove  his  dress.  A  travelling  Tibettm
never  changes  his  dress. — (W.  R.)


186  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTBAL TIBET.

hundred  and  twenty  fpjd-tsuij,  or  postal  stages,  of  about  80  to
90  lebor  each.  This  distance  of  nearly  10,000  hlior  is  retjuired
to  be  traversed  in  seventy-two  days.  Couriers  are  generally  allowed
a  delay  of  five  days,  but  when  they  exceed  that  they  are  punished.
On  occasions  of  very  great  importance  and  urgency  the  express  rate
to  Peking  is  thirty-six  days.*  During  the  last  affray  between  the
junior  Amban  and  tlie  people  of  Shigatse  the  express  took  a  montli
and  a  lialf  to  reach  Peking.

As  regards  the  administration  of  justice  and  the  laws  of  Tibet,
the  following  peculiarities  may  be  noted :  Both  parties  in  a  suit  make
written  statements  of  their  case,  and  these  briefs  are  read  in  court.

The  judge  has  the  evidence,  depositions,  and  his  decision  written
down,  three  copies  of  the  latter  being  given  to  the  parties  concerned.
Then  he  states  the  law  fee  {tim  teg)  and.  the  engrossing  fee  {myurj-rin),
both  of  which  vary  with  the  importance  of  the  case,  and  are  borne
by  both  parties  to  the  suit.

The  death  punishment  is  only  inflicted  in  certain  cases  of  dacoity
{chagpa),  when  tliose  convicted  are  sewed  in  leather  bags  and  thrown
into  a  river.

Offences  of  a  less  heinous  nature  are  dealt  with  by  banishment
to  the  borders,  whipping,  imprisonment,  or  fines.f

Nothing  can  be  more  horrible  and  loathsome  than  a  Tibetan  jail.
There  are  some  dungeons  in  an  obscure  village  two  days'  journey  up
the  river  from  Tashilhunpo,  where  life  convicts  are  sent  for  confine-
ment. The  prisoner  having  been  placed  in  a  cell,  the  door  is  removed
and  the  opening  filled  up  with  stone  masonry,  only  one  small  aperture,
about  six  inches  in  diameter,  being  left,  through  which  the  unhappy
creature  is  supplied  with  his  daily  food.  There  are  also  a  few  small
holes  left  open  on  the  roof,  through  wliich  the  guards  and  tlie  jailor
empty  every  kind  of  filth  into  the  cell.  Some  prisoners  have
lived  for  two  years  under  this  horrible  treatment,  while  others,  more
fortunate,  die  in  a  few  months.^

*  There  arc  cases  on  record  in  which  a  despatch  from  Lhasa  lias  been  delivered  in
Peking  within  a  month.— (W.  R.)

t  Cf.,  however,  Jour.  Roy.  Asiaf.  Soc.  xxiii.  pp.  216-218.  See  also  'Report  on
Explorations  made  by  A.  K.,"  p.  J53.  The  Chinese  punishment  of  the  cangue  is  now
adopted  throughout  Tibet,  the  criminals  wearing  it  being  also  heavily  chained.  The
cangue  is  called  in  Tibetan,  tse-go. — (W.  R.)

X  This,  I  fancy,  is  hearsay  testimony,  and,  I  tliink,  should  be  taken  with  several
grains  of  salt.  The  Tilietans  are  not  cruel,  though,  like  all  Asiatics,  they  believe  in
deterring  from  crime  by  the  terror  of  the  punisliment. — (W.  R.)


JOURNEY  TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  187

In  cases  of  murder,  there  are  four  fines  to  be  paid  l)y  the
murderer:  first,  "blood-money"  {toiuj  jcd)\  second,  a  sum  for  funeral
ceremonies  for  the  benefit  of  the  slain ;  third,  a  fine  to  the  State ;
and  fourth,  a  peace  offering  to  the  family  and  friends  of  the  mur-
dered person.  These  fines  vary  from  the  weight  of  the  liody  of
the  slain  in  gold,  to  five  ounces  of  silver,  or  the  equivalent  in
kind.  Should  these  fines  not  be  paid,  the  murderer  is  thrown  into
prison.

When  the  murderer  is  insane,  or  a  minor,  aged  less  than  eight
years,  the  relatives  or  friends  are  only  required  to  pay  the  funeral
expenses  of  the  victim ;  the  same  rule  applies  if  any  one  is  killed  by
a  horse,  yak.  or  other  animal,  the  owner  paying  the  funeral  expenses
of  the  person  killed.

When  a  husband  kills  his  wife,  or  a  master  his  servant,  he  is
required  to  pay  the  usual  fine  to  the  State  and  the  funeral  expenses.

Thieves  have  to  pay  from  a  hundred  to  seven  times  the  value
of  the  goods  stolen,  according  to  the  social  standing  of  the  person
from  whom  they  have  stolen.

When  the  thief  is  a  recidivist,  his  hands  ma]i  be  cut  off  if  it  is
his  fifth  conviction,  and  he  may  be  hamstrung  if  it  is  his  seventh.
For  tlie  ninth  conviction  his  eyes  can  be  put  out.

If  a  thief  is  punished  by  the  person  from  whom  he  is  attempting
to  steal,  the  courts  will  not  take  cognizance  of  tlie  case ;  but  should
the  thief  be  killed,  blood-money,  to  the  amount  of  five  ounces  of
silver,  must  be  paid  to  his  family.

Children  aged  less  than  thirteen  are  not  punishable  for  theft,  but
their  parents  are  remonstrated  with.  When  a  woman  commits  a
theft,  the  fines  and  possible  corporal  punishment  are  borne  in  equal
proportions  by  herself  and  her  husband.

No  corporal  punishment  can  be  inflicted  on  a  pregnant  woman,
nor  on  those  suffering  from  an  illness,  who  have  recently  lost
parents,  or  who  are  older  than  seventy.

He  who  harbours  a  thief  is  held  to  be  a  greater  culprit  than  the
thief  himself.  If  a  person  witness  a  theft  and  do  not  give  notice
thereof,  he  is  held  equally  guilty  with  the  thief  Thefts  by  one
member  of  a  family  on  another  member  should  be  punished  by  the
head  of  the  family  alone.

The  theft  of  a  lock,  a  key,  or  a  watch-dog,  is  considered  equi-
valent to  robbing  the  objects  they  keep  safe.


188  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

Eape  on  the  person  of  a  married  woman  of  liigh  degree  is  punish-
able by  emasculation  and  lines.  In  case  the  woman  belongs  to  the
middle  or  lower  classes,  the  culprit  pays  the  husband  a  fine  and
gives  the  woman  a  suit  of  clothes.

If  a  man  of  low  rank  has  intercourse  with  the  unmarried  daughter
of  a  man  of  high  standing,  he  must  serve  the  father  without  wages
for  a  term  of  years.  If  the  offender  is  of  high  standing,  he  has  only
a  fine  to  pay.

In  all  cases  of  assault  and  battery,  fines,  known  as  song  jal,  or
"  life  money,"  are  alone  imposed,  to  which  may  be  added  the  amount
necessary  for  medical  treatment  for  the  wounded  party.  Tlie  amount
of  the  fine  is  fixed  by  the  size  and  depth  of  the  wounds,  the  impor-
tance of  the  bone  broken  or  the  organ  injured.

When  judges  or  arbitrators  are  unable  to  reach  a  decision,  they
may  permit  the  plaintiff  to  challenge  the  defendant  to  make  a
deposition  on  oath,  or  undergo  an  ordeal.  In  Khams  and  Amdo
this  practice  is  dying  out,  but  it  is  still  in  vogue  in  Central  Tibet.
On  account  of  the  nature  of  these  oaths  and  ordeals,  the  law  exempts
certain  classes  of  men  from  taking  them.  Lamas,  teachers,  gcnyen
(semi-priestly  laymen),  monks,  and  novices  are  not  allowed  to
take  oatlis  and  pass  through  ordeals,  nor  are  Tantriks  (religious
sorcerers)  and  other  practitioners  of  mystic  incantations,  who  are
supposed  to  be  able  to  counteract  the  fearful  consequences  of  breaking
an  oath  by  means  of  their  powerful  spells.  Destitute  and  famished
people,  to  whom  food  and  clothing  are  all  in  all,  and  men  who  will
do  anything  they  like,  regardless  of  the  consequences  in  a  future
existence,  are  not  allowed  to  make  a  deposition  on  oath,  nor  are
wives  and  mothers,  who  can  easily  be  persuaded  to  swear  in  the
interests  of  their  husbands  and  children.  Besides  these,  young  boys,
lunatics,  and  the  dumb,  who  do  not  understand  the  difference
between  good  and  evil,  happiness  and  misery,  are  equally  exempt.
All  others,  not  included  in  the  above  list,  who  are  honest,  know  the
difference  between  good  and  evil,  believe  in  the  inevitable  conse-
quences of  one's  actions  {karma),  are  held  proper  persons  to  take
oaths  and  undergo  ordeals.

The  challenger  is  required  to  pay  the  defendant  the  "  oath
compensation,"  or  "oath  blood"  {na-tra),  which  varies  from  a  trifling
amount  to  a  very  large  sum,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  case  ;
but  for  one  of  considerable  importance  the  usual  compensation  is


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  189

fifty  silver  srang  (125  rupees),  and  a  yak ;  besides  this  "  oath  flesh  "
{na  slia)  is  claimed.

The  person  challenged  to  take  the  oath  first  offers  prayers  to  the
all-knowing  gods,  the  Buddhas  and  Bodhisattvas,  to  the  gods  of  tlie
land  and  to  the  goddesses  called  Sntiuj-ma  (protectresses),  to  the  demi-
gods of  the  land,  and  to  the  goblins  and  nymphs  who  live  in  the  land,
invoking  them  to  bear  witness  to  his  solemn  deposition.  Then  he
speaks  the  following  words  :  "What  I  depose  is  the  truth,  and  nothing
but  the  truth."  He  then  seats  himself  naked  on  the  skin  of  a  cow
or  ox  newly  slain,  smears  himself  with  the  blood  of  the  animal,  and
places  an  image  of  Buddha,  with  some  volumes  of  religious  books,  on
his  head.  Xext,  after  eating  the  raw  heart  of  the  ox,  and  drinking
three  mouthfuls  of  its  steaming  blood,  he  declares  to  the  spectators,
"  There  is  certainly  no  guilt  in  me,  and  if  there  be  any,  may  the
guardians  of  the  world  and  the  gods  make  me  cease  to  exist  before
the  end  of  the  current  month."  He  then  receives  the  oath  com-
pensation (na-fra)  and  the  slain  ox  or  "  oath  flesh  "  (na  sha).

It  is  commonly  believed  among  the  Tibetans  that,  should  one
perjure  himself,  he  either  becomes  insane,  or  dies  vomiting  blood,
before  the  expiration  of  a  hundred  and  seven  days.  When  this  does
not  befall  him,  other  misfortunes  happen,  such  as  the  loss  of  his
wife  or  children,  quarrels,  feuds,  or  the  loss  or  destruction  of  his
property.  Death  is  believed  to  be  the  most  common  consequence
of  perjury.

The  undero'oinff  of  such  an  oath  liberates  the  swearer  from  the
penalty  of  death,  and  from  paying  fines  in  all  cases  of  robbery  and
murder,  as  well  as  from  civil  liabilities,  such  as  debts  and  disputes
about  land,  even  though  it  involves  thousands  of  srang.  On  the
other  hand  it  is  believed  that  if  the  challenger  be  guilty  of  false  and
malicious  accusation,  all  the  evils  reserved  for  the  perjured  swearer
will  fall  upon  him.

In  certain  cases  the  guilt  or  innocence  of  parties  is  decided  by
the  tlirowing  of  dice,  the  person  being  exculpated  who  gets  the
greatest  number  of  points.

Important  cases  of  murder,  dacoity,  and  theft  are  also  decided
by  ordeals,  of  which  there  are  two  kinds — picking  out  white  and
black  pebbles  from  a  bowl  of  boiling  oil  or  muddy  water,  and
handling  a  red-hot  stone  ball.  In  the  presence  of  the  prosecutor,
the witnesses, the  judge, or his representative, and  many  other


190  JOUBNEY TO LHASA AND CENTllAL TIBET.

spectators,  the  accused  person  invokes  the  gods  and  the  demi-gods
to  bear  witness  to  his  statement,  and  declares  that  he  tells  the
perfect  truth.  A  copper  or  iron  bowl  filled  with  boiling  oil  or  muddy
water  is  then  placed  before  him,  in  which  two  pebbles  of  the  size
of  an  egg,  one  white  and  the  other  black,  each  enveloped  and  tied
up  in  a  bag,  are  thrown.  The  swearer  washes  his  hands  first  with
water,  and  then  with  mill-:,  and,  having  heard  read  a  section  of  the
Law  written  on  a  tablet  with  the  blood  of  a  cow  slain  for  the
occasion,  plunges  his  hand  in  the  boiling  oil  or  water,  and  with-
draws one  of  the  pebbles.  If  he  takes  out  the  white  one  without
scalding  his  hand,  he  is  believed  to  be  innocent ;  but  if  his  hand
is  scalded,  he  is  considered  to  be  only  partially  innocent.  If  he
brings  out  the  black  stone  and  gets  his  hand  scalded  besides,  he  is
pronounced  guilty.

The  second  form  of  ordeal  is  performed  by  heating  a  stone  ball
of  the  size  of  an  ostrich's  egg  red  hot,  and  then  placing  it  in  an
iron  vessel.  The  person  taking  the  oath,  having  washed  his  hand
in  water  and  milk,  seizes  the  ball  and  walks  with  it  to  a  distance  of
seven,  five,  or  three  paces,  according  as  his  challenger  is  of  the
first,  second,  or  third  class  of  social  rank.  After  this,  his  hand  is
enveloped  in  a  white  cotton  bag,  which,  in  the  presence  of  the
spectators,  is  tied  up  and  sealed.  At  the  end  of  the  third,  fifth,  or
seventh  day,  the  bag  is  opened  and  the  palm  examined.  If  it  is
found  unscalded,  with  only  a  pale  yellowish  line  or  stain  upon  it,
the  accused  is  declared  innocent ;  if  there  appear  a  blister  of  the
size  of  a  pea,  he  is  thought  partly  guilty ;  if  three  blisters  of  that
size  appear,  he  is  considered  half  guilty ;  but  if  his  hand  be  burned
all  over,  he  is  held  guilty  of  all  the  charges.

According  to  the  laws  of  Tibet,  the  interest  on  money,  grain,  or
any  other  commodity  is  twenty  per  cent.,  or  one  measure  for  five
measures  yearly.  Tlie  courts  in  a  few  cases  admit  contracts  at  even
a  higher  rate  of  interest;  but  those  who  claim  more  according  to
their  contract  deeds  may  be  punished  as  usurers,  though  sometimes
their  claims  are  allowed.  In  urgent  cases  thirty-three  per  cent,  have
been  known  to  have  been  agreed  upon.  All  contracts  are  required
to  be  made  in  writing,  attested  ]jy  witnesses,  and  duly  signed  and
sealed.  The  interest  must  be  paid  at  the  end  of  the  year.  If  the
debtor  abscond,  the  witnesses  are  called  upon  to  make  good  the  loss
sustained  by  the  lender ;  but  if  he  die,  or  become  insolvent,  and  the


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  iOl

money  be  not  realized,  the  witnesses  are  not  held  responsible.  If,
however,  the  money  has  been  lent  by  the  Government,  by  certain
monasteries,  or  lamas,  or  by  the  paymaster  of  the  army,  the  amount
is  realised  from  the  relatives,  witnesses,  and  neighbours  of  the  debtor.
At  every  military  station,  a  certain  amount  of  money  is  generally  lent
out  by  Government,  on  the  interest  of  which  the  militia  is  paid  by  the
quartermaster,  who  is  one  of  the  chief  Government  money-lenders.
Usually  when  the  person  soliciting  a  loan  is  not  known,  or  if  doubts
about  his  honesty  are  entertained,  securities  are  required.  Xot  so  in
Tibet,  where  the  lenders  have  been  known  to  use  their  power  to  collect
debts  from  the  heirs  of  debtors  to  the  third  generation.  The  more
the  debtor  exceeds  the  fixed  term  for  the  payment  of  his  debt  the
more  urgent  is  the  creditor  in  his  demands.  The  court,  when  it  sees
that  the  creditor  has  extracted  compound  interest  for  many  years
from  the  debtor,  can  put  a  stop  to  the  accumulation  of  further  com-
pound interest;  but  there  is  no  fixed  period  mentioned  in  the  law
after  which  compound  interest  must  cease  to  accumulate.*

In  Tibet  such  articles  as  household  utensils,  implements  of
husbandry  or  war,  drinking  cups,  borrowed  articles,  articles  held  in
trust,  landed  estates  of  which  the  revenue  is  paid  to  the  State,  and
images  of  gold,  are  never  given  in  loan  or  mortgaged.

When  a  man  has  a  single  pony,  one  milch  cow  or  jo,  one  plough,
one  span  of  bullocks  or  yaks,  or  one  suit  of  clothing,  nobody  can  ask
for  a  loan  of  any  of  these  articles  without  committing  the  offence  of
"  impudence,"  for  which  he  may  be  severely  rebuked.  Creditors,
whether  the  Government  or  private  persons,  cannot  seize  upon  any  of
these  properties  for  debt.  This  is  the  Grand  Charter  of  the  Tibetans.
Nor  can  any  creditor  by  force  seize  the  property  of  his  debtor.  If
without  the  debtor's  permission  he  removes  one  sraivj,  he  forfeits  his
entire  claim  on  a  loan  of  a  hundred  srang ;  if  he  remove  two,  on
two  hundred  s.rang,  and  so  on  in  the  same  proportion.  ISTobody,  be
he  a  public  (jfficer,  landlord,  master,  or  creditor,  can,  for  any  kind
of  pecuniary  claim,  exercise  violence  on  the  people.  If,  while  beiog
in  possession  of  means  to  do  so,  a  man  of  the  people  refuses  to  pay  off
his  liabilities  or  debts,  his  creditors  may  employ  mediators,  or  institute
proceedings against him in a court of  justice ; but if, without

*  All  this  does  not  add  materially  to  our  knowledge  of  Tibetan  business  methods.
It  would  seem  that  the  Tibetans  follow  the  rules  coueeruing  loans  which  obtain  in
China  and  India,  but  the  text  is  not  very  clear. — (W.  K.)


192  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

resorting  to  these  means,  they  beat  him  or  use  any  kind  of  violence
on  him,  they  forfeit  all  claims  upon  him.

If  after  buying  an  article  the  purchaser  wishes  to  return  it  on  the
same  day,  he  must  forfeit  one-tenth  of  the  price.  If  he  return  it  on
the  following  day  he  forfeits  one-fifth;  on  the  second,  one-half;  and
if  he  keeps  it  beyond  the  third  day  it  is  not  returnable.  If  a  house-
holder cheat  a  merchant  lodger,  he  is  required  to  pay  compensation
at  the  rate  of  five  sramj  for  every  sraiufs  worth  stolen.  If  a  trader
deceive  his  customers  by  using  false  weights  and  measures,  or  by
selling  adulterated  goods,  imitation  gems  or  jewels,  or  by  circulating
counterfeit  coin,  he  must  be  immediately  handed  over  to  the  police,
and  committed  for  trial.  If  the  merchant  convicted  be  a  Tibetan
subject,  all  his  goods  are  confiscated,  and  he  is  sentenced  to  penal
servitude  for  a  certain  number  of  years.  If  he  be  a  subject  of  some
foreign  Government,  such  as  China,  ]\Iongolia,  Kashmir,  or  Nepal,
such  fine,  as  is  prescribed  by  law,  is  exacted  from  him.  His  goods
are  seized,  examined,  taken  stock  of,  and  after  being  securely  packed,
are  sent  with  the  owner  in  charge  of  the  police  to  his  own  Govern-
ment, together  with  a  document  complaining  of  his  conduct,  and
stating  the  amount  of  the  fine  exacted  from  him.

The  jealousy  of  the  Tibetans  towards  Europeans  is  supposed  to
date  from  1791-92,  when  English  soldiers  were  believed  to  have
taken  part  in  the  war  which  followed  the  incursion  of  the  Gorkhas
into  Tibet ;  and  as  the  English  Government,  then  in  its  infancy  in
India,  took  no  steps  to  cultivate  tlie  friendship  of  the  Tibetans,  that
feeling  took  a  lasting  hold  on  their  minds.  The  shock  which  China,
Nepal,  Bhutan,  and  Sikkim  have  received  from  their  reverses  when  at
war  with  the  British  power,  has  also  extended  to  the  peace-loving
Tibetans.

Throughout  the  iiineteenth  century  the  Tibetans  have  followed  the
Chinese  policy  of  exclusiveness,  not  from  fear  of  annexation,  but
because  they  had  been  shortly  before  nearly  conquered,  and  were
entirely  under  Chinese  influence.  This  fear  has  been  sedulously
encouraged  by  an  ex-minister  of  the  Bajali  of  Sikkim,  the  Dewaii
ISTamgyal,  wlio  was  expelled  from  tliat  country  for  his  treatment  of
Drs.  Hooker  and Campl)ell,*  and subsequently  obtained  from the

*  See  Hooker's  '  Himalayan  Journals,'  vol.  i.  p.  117,  and  vol.  ii.  p.  202  et  sqq.  He
says,  in  siieaking  of  the  Dewau,  "  Considering,  however,  his  energy,  a  rare  quality  in
these  countries,  I  should  not  he  surprised  at  his  cutting  a  figure  in  Bhutan,  if  not  in
Sikkim  itself  (ojj.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  241).— (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  193

Grand  Lama  the  post  of  frontier  otficer,  to  watch  the  "encroach-
ments" of  the  Indian  ({overnment.  The  attempts  of  Dr.  Hooker,
Mr.  Edgar,  and  lastly  of  Sir  Eichard  Temple,  to  enter  Tibetan
territory  were  described  by  him  as  instances  of  encroachment  on  the
part  of  the  Government  of  India,  which  he  represented  as  devoting  all
its  energies  to  the  invasion  of  Tibet,  and  as  having  been  foiled  by  his
diplomatic  skill  and  wisdom,  aided  by  the  zealous  co-operation  of  the
Djongpon  of  Khamba  and  Phari.  On  one  occasion  he  even  stated  to
the  Lhasa  officials,  as  a  proof  of  his  unshaken  loyalty  to  the  Grand
Lama,  that  he  had  refused  a  pension  of  fifty  rupees  which  had  been
offered  to  him  by  the  Indian  Government  for  supplying  information
respecting  the  state  of  affairs  in  Tibet !  This  functionary  lias,  how-
ever, together  with  his  coadjutor  the  Djongpon  of  Khamba,  lately
fallen  into  disgrace  with  the  Grand  Lama,  and  has  also  lost  all
influence  at  Tashilhunpo.

The  exclusiveness  of  the  Tibetan  Government  is  to  be  chiefly
attributed  to  the  hostile  and  intriguing  attitude  of  tlae  fi'OKtier  officials
towards  the  British  Government.  Next  to  it  is  the  fear  of  intro-
ducing small-pox  and  other  dangerous  diseases  into  Tibet,  where  the
people,  being  ignorant  of  the  proper  treatment  of  this  disease,  die  in
great  numbers  from  it.  Death  from  small-pox  is  the  most  dreaded,
since  the  victim  is  believed  to  be  immediately  sent  to  hell.  Not  the
least  important  cause,  however,  is  the  fear  of  the  extinction  of
Buddhism  by  the  foreigners — a  feeling  which  prevails  in  the  minds
of  the  dominant  class,  the  clergy.

Besides  jealousy  of  foreigners,  there  is  another  cause  of  great
importance,  being  connected  with  the  commercial  interests  of  China.
Peking  is  eight  or  ten  months',  and  Silling  (Hsi-ning)  four  months'
journey  from  Lhasa,  yet  the  Tibetans  carry  on  a  brisk  trade  with  these
and  other  noted  cities  of  China  in  tea,  silk,  wooden  furnitm-e,  and  other
commodities.  The  Government  of  Lhasa  sends  every  year  two  or  more
caravans  to  purchase  goods  for  the  State  from  the  commercial  centres
on  the  borders  of  China.  An  escort  of  500  soldiers  accompanies  each
caravan,  for  it  is  not  unusual  for  mounted  bands  of  robbers,  from  200
to  300  strong,  to  attack  the  caravans.  By  the  opening  of  the  Darjil-
ing  railway,  Calcutta,  where  most  of  the  Chinese  articles  valued  in
Tibet  may  be  easily  and  cheaply  procured,  will  be  brought  within
three  weeks'  journey  of  Lhasa.

The  Tibetans  thoroughly appreciate  these  facilities,  and every

o


194  JOVRNEJ TO LHASA AND OESTBAL TIBET.

Tibetan  who  has  ever  visited  IJarjiling  warmly  praises  our  Govern-
^e, for making the Jalep la road. Tl>e (Innese Governmen
naturally  fear  that  with  the  opening  of  free  mtercourse  between  Tib
"n Ind  a,  China  will  be  a  great  loser  so  far  as  her  commercial  mterests


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  195


CHAPTER  VIII.

EETUEN TO TASHILHUNPO AND UGYEN-GYATSO's  VISIT TO THE BOXBO
SANCTUARY OF EIGYAL SENDAR.

The  bells  of  the  Jo  kliang  were  ringing  and  the  great  truni])ets  of
Tangye-ling  were  summoning  the  lamas  to  early  morning  service,
when,  on  June  13, 1  took  from  the  roof  of  our  house  a  last  look  at  the
gilded  spires  and  red  walls  of  Potala,  and  started  out  for  Tashilhunpo.
I  noticed  near  our  lodgings  a  number  of  women  drawing  water  from
a  well  in  rawhide  buckets.  The  water  of  Lhasa  is  excellent,  and
both  abundant  and  very  near  the  surface,  most  of  the  wells  being  not
over  four  feet  deep  ;  and  this  is  the  reason  for  the  belief  that  the  town
is  over  a  subterranean  lake.

Arriving  at  the  foot  of  Chagpori,  on  the  summit  of  which  is  the
College  of  Surgeons  of  Tibet,  I  got  off  my  horse  and  ascended  the  hill,
as  I  had  promised  to  visit  an  old  doctor  known  as  Amchi  Eivola,  who
was  afflicted  with  cataract.  On  the  way  up  I  was  met  by  one  of  the
Amchi's  pupils,  who  presented  me  with  a  khatag.  1  was  led  into
a  nice  room  containing  a  few  neatly-finished  tables,  on  one  of  which
was  a  cup  full  of  delicate  rose-coloured  tea  of  the  most  delicious
aroma.*  The  ceiling  was  covered  with  silk,  and  satin  hangings  hid
the  walls,  on  which  hung  also  pictures  of  the  god  of  medicine  and  his
attendants.

Amchi  Eivola  soon  made  his  appearance,  a  man  of  commanding
looks  and  heavily  built.  He  was  the  Principal  of  the  Vaidurya  Ta-
tsan  of  Chagpori,  and  physician  to  the  regent.  He  expressed  his
pleasure  at  seeing  me,  and  said  he  had  heard  me  most  kindly  spoken
of  by  the  Lhacham  Phala,  and  he  would  be  greatly  pleased  if  I  would

*  I  fancy  our  author  refers  to  the  hsiang  pien  cha  usually  drunk  hy  Chinese  in
Peking  and  elsewhere  in  the  north.  Jasmine  flowers  are  dried  with  tlie  tea,  and
impart  to  it  a  strong  and  agreeable  perfume. — (W.  R.)


19 (J  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

postpone  my  journey  to  Sliigatse  iind  endeuvour  tu  cure  his  disease,
Avliicli  lie  thought  curable  by  an  operation,  but  he  knew  of  no  surgeon
in  Tibet  able  to  perform  it.

I  was  pained  at  my  utter  inability  to  help  liini,  and  told  him  that
I  would  willingly  prolong  my  stay  at  Lhasa  if  I  had  any  means  of
curing  him,  but  I  had  none  whatever,  and  must  take  my  leave.  So
saying,  I  rose  from  my  seat,  and  left  alter  the  usual  leave-takings.*

Following  the  same  road  by  which  we  had  come  to  Lhasa,  we
stopped  that  night  at  Netang.  On  the  loth  we  reached  Palti  djong,
and  on  the  IStli  arrived  at  Uongtse  at  10  o'clock  at  night,  and  put  up
in  Pador's  house.

Early  the  following  morning  I  went  to  the  monastery,  and  was
promptly  led  to  the  minister's  apartments,  where  I  found  him  covered
with  small-pox  pustules,  and  hardly  able  to  speak.  The  Lhacham's
son  was  also  ill  with  the  same  disease,  but  convalescing.

AVhen  the  minister  fell  asleep,  I  went  to  the  Tung-chen's  room.
He  asked  me  if  I  had  not  met  Phurchung  on  the  road,  as  he  had  left
for  Lhasa  only  a  week  ago  carrying  my  letters  and  a  shot-gun.  As
to  Ugyen-gyatso,  he  had  returned  from  Lachan  with  the  luggage  that
had  been  left  there,  and  was  now  waiting  for  me  at  Gyatsoshar,  near
Shigatse.  I  remained  at  Dongtse  until  July  II,  when,  in  company
with  Phurchung  and  l*ador,  I  set  out  for  Gyatsoshar,  which  place  we
reached  the  following  day,  and  Ugyen  gave  me,  to  my  infinite  delight,
a  package  of  letters  from  India.

Ugyen  told  me  that  since  his  return  from  the  Lachan  barrier  he
had  been  busy  collecting  plants.  He  had  also  carefully  kept  a  diary
from  which  I  culled  the  following  details,  which  may  prove  of
interest.

One  evening  a  lama  friend  had  called  on  him,  and  asked  him
if  he  would  like  to  meet  a  Golog  from  Amdo.  These  Goloti',  his
friend  went  on  to  say,  are  a  nation  of  brigands  living  in  Amdo  in
Eastern  Tibet.f Their  country  is  nowhere  cultivated,  but  they  breed

*  It  ib  straii',^e  that  our  author  tells  us  nothing  of  this  famous  lamasery  of  Chagpori.
We  know,  however,  that  it  is  one  of  the  oldest  in  Tibet,  that  the  medieal  school  is
attended  by  some  .300  students,  and  that  it  sujiplies  witli  medicines,  most  of  which  are
simples  collected  by  th(;  lamas  thi-msilves,  not  only  Lhasa,  but  remote  parts  of  Tibet
and  Mongolia.  I  liave  seen  remedies  bought  at  Chagpori  used  in  the  Tsaidam,  tlie
Koko  Nor,  and  all  over  Eastern  Tibet. — (W.  11.)

t  Amdo  being  used  here  in  its  broadest  sense  as  including  all  North-east  Tibet.
rhese  Golok  (or  (Jolog)  trade  witli  Kumbum,  Sungpan  (in  North-west  Sze-ehuen),  and
with  the  Lhasa  country. "  At  Pberehode  (near  Naiudjong  in  Takpo)  many  traders  called


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  197

many  ponies,  which  they  nse  for  making  raids  on  the  adjacent
peoples.  Their  chiefs  exact  black-mail  {cJiafj  tal)  from  all  people,
and  rob  all  they  fall  in  with,  unless  they  have  passports  frcmi  the
Golog  chiefs.

The  Gologs  have  a  few  lamaseries,  the  heads  of  which  come  from
Tashilhimpo,  and  are  appointed  for  a  term  of  five  years,  after  whicli
they  return  to  Ulterior  Tibet.  Not  long  ago  one  of  these  lamas
returned  to  Tashilhunpo,  after  having  enjoyed  during  his  sojourn  in
Crologland  the  confidence  of  the  people  and  chiefs.  He  had  amassed
considerable  wealth,  and  he  spent  on  his  return  several  thousand
rupees  in  entertaining  all  the  Tashilhunpo  monks,  and  in  giving  them
presents  of  money.  Two  years  ago  the  wife  of  the  Golog  chief,  near
whom  he  had  lived,  came  to  Tashilhunpo  on  a  pilgrimage,  and  after
visiting  the  temple,  she  expressed  a  desire  to  see  their  former  lama,
but  he  was  nowhere  to  be  found,  though  it  was  known  that  he  was
at  Tashilhunpo.  Among  the  Golog  people  it  is  customary  to  greet
one  another  with  a  kiss,  and  whoever  omits  the  kiss  when  meetins
or  parting  with  an  acquaintance  is  considered  rude  and  unmannerly.

The  lama  had  kissed  this  lady  hundreds  of  times  in  her  own
country,  but  how  could  he  kiss  her  now  before  all  the  monks  ?  and
particularly  as  the  Panchen  rinpoche  was  present  at  Tashilliunpo  ;
how  could  he  hope  to  escape  unpunished  if  he  committed  an  act  of
such  gross  immodesty  ?

The  lady,  however,  before  leaving  Tashilhunpo,  invited  him  to
a  dinner,  and  as  soon  as  she  appeared  in  the  room  he  shut  the  door
and  greeted  her  with  a  kiss  on  the  mouth,  and  explained  to  her  the
reason  of  his  failing  to  see  her  at  first,  and  the  embarrassment  he
had  felt  in  approaching  her  in  public*

Ugyen's  friend  also  told  him  that  in  the  Bardon  district  of
Khams,t  when  two  acquaintances  meet  they  touch  each  other's
foreheads  together  by  way  of  salutation.

The  same  friend,  who  had  imparted  to  Ugyen  the  preceding
information,  told  him  one  day  this  fable  : In  times  of  yore,  wlien

'Golokpas'  come  with  large  lierds  of  yaks  fo  trade,  and  annually  visit  this  place  in
the  months  of  October  and  November  with  merchandise,  chiefly  consisting  of  salt  and
wool." '  Kei^ort  on  the  Exploration,  from  1S5G  to  1886,'  p.  8.

*  This  is  at  all  events  a  good  story,  but  I  doubt  whether  the  Golok,  any  more  than
the  Chinese,  Mongols,  or  other  Tibetan  tribes,  kiss  in  public. --(W.  R.)

t  I  have  never  heard  of  any  district  of  this  name.  Tliis  mode  of  saluting  is  a
Mohammedan  one. — (W.  R.)


198  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

beasts  could  talk,  a  leopard  met  an  ass,  and,  though  he  had  a  strong
inclination  to  kill  him,  he  was  impressed  by  his  strength,  of  which
he  judged  by  his  loud  bray,  so  he  offered  him  his  friendship  on
condition  that  he  would  watch  his  den  when  he  went  out  in  search
of  prey.

One  day  the  leopard  sallied  forth  with  a  mighty  roar  by  way
of  prelude  to  his  day's  work,  and  forthwith  a  wild  yak  rolled  down
the  cliff  overhanging  his  den,  killed  from  fright  at  the  sound.  When
the  leopard  returned  and  saw  the  dead  doivi,  the  ass  said  he  had
killed  it,  and  stuck  out  his  tongue,  smeared  with  blood,  in  proof  of
his  prowess.

The  leopard  believed  him,  and  promised  to  help  him  when  the
time  came.  One  day  he  told  him  to  go  and  graze  in  the  meadow
on  the  other  side  of  the  hill.  When  the  ass  had  eaten  his  fill  he
brayed  twenty  or  thirty  times  in  sheer  wantonness,  and  the  leopard
thinking  his  friend  in  trouble,  ran  to  his  rescue,  but  the  ass  told  him
he  was  only  braying  for  pleasure.  A  little  while  after  a  pack  of
wolves  attacked  the  ass,  when  he  brayed  loudly,  calling  his  friend
to  his  help ;  but  the  leopard  thought  that  he  was  only  amusing  him-
self, and  did  not  go  to  his  rescue,  and  the  ass  was  torn  to  pieces  by
the  wolves.

On  the  7th  of  the  eighth  moon  (June  23)  a  grand  military  review
was  held  at  Shigatse,  when  more  than  a  thousand  soldiers  were
present,  and  there  was  a  sham  fight  in  the  presence  of  the  general.
There  are  two  reviews  {mag  clvjamj)  every  year,  one  in  summer,  the
other  in  winter ;  and  besides  these  there  is  one  whenever  the  Amban
visits  Shigatse  on  a  tour  of  inspection.

On  June  29  the  summer  prayer  ceremony  (or  monlam)  was
celebrated.*  All  the  monks  of  Tashilhunpo,  some  three  thousand  odd,
assembled  at  Chyag-tsal-gang.  A  satin  wall  or  gyahyal,  1000  feet
in  circumference,  was  erected,  and  inside  it  was  a  great  State  canopy,
under  which  the  Panchen  rinpoche's  throne  was  placed.  He  was
unable  to  be  present,  but  his  stole  and  mitre  were  put  on  the  throne,
and  round  it  thronged  tlie  lamas  in  order  of  precedence  and  rank.
The  people  of  Shigatse  were  there,  some  under  tents,  others  under
bowers of  cypress and willow branches,  all amusing themselves

*  Tsongkhapa,  the  great  lama  reformer  in  the  14th  century,  instituted  these  annual
prayer  meetings.  The  most  important  one  is  the  "  great  prayer  meeting  "  (mon-lam
chen-po)  in  tlie  early  part  of  the  year. — (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTHAL TIBET.  199

singing  and  joking.  A  mast  about  120  feet  high  was  erected,  and
ropes  stretched  from  it  to  the  great  Kiku  Ijuilding,  and  on  these
were  hung  pictures  of  all  the  gods  of  the  pantheon.  At  Shigatse,  the
while,  there  was  racing  and  military  manceuvres  and  drill.

The  following  day  was  sacred  to  Dipankara  Buddha,  and  his
picture  was  made  to  occupy  a  prominent  place  in  the  exhibition.
This  representation  of  him  was  about  100  feet  high,  and  skilfully
worked  in  different  coloured  satins.  On  either  side  of  it  were
gigantic  representations  of  the  Buddha.

All  the  lamas  and  nobles  of  Shigatse  with  their  families  made
merry  under  the  great  tent  in  the  Chyag-tsal-gang.  Sumptuous
dinners,  cooked  by  the  best  native  and  Chinese  cooks,  were  served
to  the  great  personages  of  Tashilhunpo  and  of  the  Government.
Many  persons  had  pitched  tents  near  the  great  one,  and  were  amusing
themselves  there  with  their  families  and  friends.  From  morning  to
evening  the  deafening  music  of  drums,  cymbals,  and  trumpets  never
ceased.

No  one  was  absent  from  the  fete  save  the  Grand  Lama,  who,  it
was  rumoured,  was  laid  up  with  small-pox  at  Tobgyal,  where  he  had
gone  after  a  visit  to  the  hot  springs  of  Tanag.  On  either  side
of  the  great  nine-storied  building  of  Kiku,  between  Shigatse  and
Tashilhunpo,  were  two  huge  lions  in  which  men  were  concealed ;
these  were  moved  about  from  time  to  time  to  the  Gfreat  delight  of
the  people.

The  next  day  was  the  full  moon,  and  was  sacred  to  Sakya  Buddha.
The  great  picture  of  Dipankara  Buddha  was  removed,  and  one  of
Sakya  Sinha,  of  gigantic  size,  and  surrounded  by  all  the  Buddhas  of
past  and  future  ages,  took  its  place.  This  picture  was  brought  out
from  the  lamasery  to  the  sound  of  deafening  music,  and  with  great
ceremony.  Ten  black  priests  {Nagpa),  well  versed  in  tantrik  rituals,
conducted  a  solemn  religious  service,  and  were  assisted  by  :>00
lamas  from  Tsomaling  chanting  hymns.

In  the  plain  of  Chyag-tsal-gang  the  lamas  and  people  again
feasted  and  enjoyed  themselves  as  on  the  previous  day.

On  the  morrow  (July  2)  the  picture  of  Sachya  tubpa  was  dis-
placed for  one  of  the  Buddha  who  is  to  come,  Maitreya  (or  Chyamba).
It  was  brought  out  and  hung  up  with  the  same  ceremony  as  was
observed  on  the  preceding  days.  This  day  Tashilhunpo  was  open  to
women,  and  crowds  of  them  in  the  gayest  and  richest  apparel  visited


200


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.


the  temples  and  shrines.  Ugyen  estimated  the  value  of  the  head-
dress of  one  lady  he  saw  at  40,000  rupees.  In  the  evening  every
one  went  and  touched  w^ith  his  or  her  head  the  picture  of  Chyaniba,
and  thus  received  his  blessing.*

During  my  stay  at  Gyatsoshar  I  occupied the little pavilion


A J  ri'lLE GIUL, UAUGHTI.Ii (jl


I  ll.l.i  A.S ;>wl.l,HIAN.


belonging  to  the  minister,  wliicli  I  liave  described  ])reviously.t Tlie


*  Cliinese  aiithoi-B  make  moution  of  ii  similar  festival,  held  at  Lhasa  yearly,
beginning  on  the  latter  i)art  of  the  second  moon  (middle  IMarcli),  and  lasting  for  a
month.  Another  of  like  deserijition  is  held  in  the  sixtii  moon.  See  Jour.  Boy.
Asiat.  Soc,  xxiii.  pp.  212,  '21.'!.

t  tiee]snpr((,  p.  70.


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.


201


flowers  in  the  garden  which  surrounded  it  filled  the  aii'  with  their
fragrance;  the  tall  poplars,  the  widespread  willows,  the  fragrant
junipers,  the  graceful  cedars,  all  contributed  to  make  this  place  the
most  favoured  of  all  the  neighbourhood.

My  health  rapidly  improved  in  these  pleasant  surroundings  and
genial  temperature,  and  I  worked  diligently  at  transcribing  works
of  great  interest  into  the  nagari  character  which  had,  though  written
in  Sanskrit,  been  preserved  in  the  (JVu-chan)  script  of  Tibet. Ugycn


THE '■  SHABDO/' (FOi  IT_  DANCK) OP TIISKT.


devoted  himself  to  botanizing,  extending  his  excursions  to  consider-
able distances.  Finally,  to  facilitate  bringing  in  his  collections,  he
bought  a  donkey  and  a  pony  for  himself  to  ride.

July  19  was  kept  as  a  great  holiday,  it  being  the  day  on  which
the  Buddha  first  turned  the  Wheel  of  the  Law.  The  people  of
Shigatse  and  neighbourhood  visited  the  different  chapels  and  sanc-
tuaries and  thronged  in  every  corner  of  Tashilhunpo.

Two  days  later  the  Deba  Shikha,  of  whom  I  have  had  so  often  to
speak,  gave  a  garden-party  to  a  number  of  his  friends  in  the  garden
surrounding  the  house  in  which  I  was  living  at  Gyatsoshar.  There
were  a  dozen  men  and  women ; the  former  amused  themselves  the


202  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

whole  day  at  archery  and  quoits,*  in  both  of  which  they  exhibited
considerable  skill.  The  same  day  Ugyen  started  on  a  botanizing
trip,  which  took  liini  as  far  as  Sakya.

On  July  26  I  returned  to  Pongtse,  and  was  pleased  to  find
that  the  Minister  had  recovered  from  the  small-pox.  I  found  the
Tung-chen  busy  preparing  for  the  ceremony  of  consecrating  a  new
house  of  the  Seng  chen,t  as  tlie  minister  is  called,  now  nearly  com-
plete, and  built  a  little  to  the  north  of  the  Tsug-la  khang  temple.  In
the  room  given  me  were  some  five  or  six  hundred  balls  of  butter  of
about  two  pounds  weight  each,  and  a  number  of  bags  of  tsamha  and
wheat  flour.

I  had  only  been  here  four  days  when  I  was  requested  by  the
Chyag-dso-pa  of  Gyantse  to  visit  him  and  see  if  I  could  not  do  some-
thing for  the  complaint  from  which  he  had  now  been  suffering  for
some  time.  The  invitation  was  so  pressing  that  I  could  not  refuse ;
so  I  set  out  at  once,  and  was  most  kindly  received  by  him  and  his
family.  I  remained  here  until  August  l'.\,  when  a  letter  reached
me  from  the  minister,  who  was  still  at  Dongtse,  asking  me  to  rejoin
him  there  at  once.  This  letter  of  the  minister,  though  written  in
Tibetan,  was  in  the  Eoman  character,  which  I  had  taught  him  to
write  the  preceding  winter.  |

As  I  rode  back  to  Dongtse  I  was  greatly  struck  by  the  beauty  of
the  vegetation ;  the  little  pools  were  frequently  covered  with  lilies,
and  wild- flowers  were  in  full  bloom.

The  minister  asked  me  if  I  would  go  to  Tobgyal  and  see  the
Grand  Lama,  who  was  desperately  ill.  He  had  received  a  letter  from
him  asking  for  some  consecrated  pills  (tse-i^il) ;  I  could  take  this
medicine  along  with  me,  and  at  tlie  same  time  he  would  inform  the
Panchen  that  I  was  a  skilful  physician  and  might  be  able  to  cure  him.

Hearing  of  the  desperate  condition  of  the  Grand  Lama,  I  naturally
hesitated  to  undertake  this  commission,  and  so  asked  for  time  for
reflection.  The  next  day,  however,  I  told  the  minister  that  I  could
not  venture  to  wait  on  the  Grand  Lama  unless  he  expressed  a  wish

*  This  game  is  one  of  the  very  few  national  games  of  Tihet,  hut  is  prohahly  of
foreign  origin.  I  have  never  seen  it  played  in  Northern  or  Eastern  Tibet.  In
Bhutan  tlie  people  appear  to  be  specially  skilful  at  it. — (W.  R.)

t  Senff  clien  is  a  Chinese  title,  meaning  "  tlie  Monk  Minister." — CW.  R.)
X  Hue,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  338,  tells  us  of  the  ]il(asure  the  Regent  of  Lhasa  found
in learning  from  him  th(:  Roman  alphabet. I  my.self  have  found  it  the  one  subject
which  never  failed  to  interest  Tibetans,  lamas,  and  laymen. — (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  203

to  see  me  ;  or,  at  all  events,  unless  I  was  accompanied  by  the  minister
himself.  He  finally  decided  that  he  would  send  the  tse-ril  by  a  con-
fidential servant,  and  hint  in  his  note  accompanying  them,  that
perhaps  Indian  medicines  might  prove  beneficial.

On  Angust  25  and  26,  the  final  ceremonies  of  consecrating  the
new  house  built  by  the  minister  (and  which  had  been  going  on  for
the  last  five  days)  were  begun.  The  last  ceremony  is  called  the
cliin-srcg*  The  mask  of  the  god  of  death  (Shinje  gyalbo),  his  weapons
and  armour  were  hung  on  a  stake  stuck  close  to  the  fireplace.  Then
bundles  of  sandalwood  were  arranged  in  six  heaps,  and  melted  butter
poured  over  them  to  feed  the  flame ;  and  a  lama,  chanting  hymns,
sat  opposite  each  fire.  Sesamum  and  barley  were  scattered  about.
At  the  termination  of  the  first  day's  ceremony,  a  dinner  was  served
to  all  the  guests  and  monks.

The  cliin-srcg  ceremony  on  the  26tli  was  similar  to  that  of  the  day
before,  and  wound  up  with  a  long  service.  In  the  afternoon  the  Seng
chen  (the  minister)  took  his  position  on  a  raised  seat  under  a  spacious
awning  spread  on  the  roof  of  the  tsug-lha-l-liang,  and  ordered  all  the
lamas,  carpenters,  masons,  coppersmiths,  gilders,  etc.,  to  assemble,
when  he  distributed  presents  to  them.  To  the  lamas  and  monks  he
gave  silver  coins,  Jchatag  and  blankets  ;  and  to  the  head  labourers,
rugs  {tumslii),  felt  hats  {Uiamljo),  and  homespun  cloth  {gyantsc).

On  the  28th  news  reached  us  that  two  of  the  Grand  Lama's
physicians  had  run  away,  another  had  gone  mad,  and  the  fourth  was
without  hope  or  ability  to  do  anything  more  for  the  illustrious  patient,
who  had  had  a  severe  hemorrhage.

On  the  31st  the  dreaded  event  took  place,  a  letter  was  handed  tlie
minister  announcing  the  Grand  Lama's  death.  He  had  died  on  the
day  previous  at  Tobgyal,  or,  as  it  is  the  custom  to  say,  "  He  had  left
this  world  for  repose  in  the  realm  of  bliss  (Deva-chan)."

A  notice  was  issued  to  the  people  to  assume  signs  of  mourning ;
the  women  were  forbidden  to  wear  their  headdresses  or  any  other
jewellery,  and  amusements  and  ornamenting  of  houses  were  pro-
hibited. The  people  showed  signs  of  deep  distress  at  the  untimely
death  of  the  Panchen ;  some  attributing  it  to  the  sorrow  he  had  felt
at  the  disloyalty  of  his  people,  others  said  he  had  left  this  world  on

*  On  this  ceremony  of  burnt-offering,  cliin  (sbyin),  "  alms;"  sreg,  "to  bm-n  up,"  see
Emil  Schlagintwcit,  '  Buddlusm  in  Tibet,'  p.  2-id  <t  gqq. ;  and  Waddell,  op.  cif.,  p.  498.


204  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

accoimt  of  the  discourtesy  of  the  Dalai  lama  in  not  inviting  liini  to
his  consecration.

At  Dongtse,  where  I  was,  the  minister  was  having  performed  as  a
termination  to  the  ceremonies  attending  the  consecration  of  the  new
building,  a  grand  religious  dance  in  the  courtyard  of  the  Choide.  A
»reat  crowd,  all  in  their  holiday  attire,  was  assembled  on  the  roofs
and  balconies  of  the  tem])le.  The  dance  had  but  commenced ;  the
minister's  page,  who  impersonated  the  herald  of  the  gods,  had  twice
fired  off  a  gun,  and  had  proclaimed  the  arrival  of  the  four  guardian
deities  of  the  w^orld ;  the  devils  and  goblins  had  gone  through  their
part  of  the  performance,  when  the  news  of  the  death  of  the  (Irand
Lama  was  made  known  to  the  minister.  At  once  the  dance  was
stopped,  and  the  dancers  and  the  crowd  rapidly  dispersed.

On  September  3  it  was  reported  to  me  that  the  Chinese  commander
of  Shigatse  had  flogged  several  of  the  Grand  Lama's  servants  for  not
having  told  him  of  the  gravity  of  their  master's  illness.  One  of  the
physicians  of  the  Panchen  had  been  severely  beaten,  and  the  other
medical  attendant  was  found  dead  shortly  after  the  Grand  Lama  had
breathed  his  last.  I  thanked  God  I  had  not  consented  to  the
minister's  proposal  to  go  and  attend  the  Grand  Lama  !

On  the  6th  Ugyen  returned  to  Dongtse  from  his  trip  to  Sakya,  and
from  his  journal  I  take  the  following  facts,  M'hich  may  be  of
interest : —

He  had  started,  as  previously  stated,  on  July  21,  and  on  the
23rd  crossed  to  the  left  bank  of  the  Tsang-po  near  Tashi-gang,  and
camped  in  the  valley  of  Tang-pe.  Thence  he  and  his  companion,  a
Mongol  lama  by  the  name  of  Chos-tashi,  went  to  the  Tanag  district,
where  a  fine  quality  of  pottery  is  manufactured.*  They  conld  not
get  lodgings  anywhere,  so  afraid  \vere  the  people  that  they  might
introduce  small-pox  among  them,  coming  as  they  did  from  the
infected  city  of  Shigatse.

On  July  26  they  crossed  the  Tanag  Tong  chu  by  an  iron  suspen-
sion bridge,  and,  travelling  westward,  stopped  for  the  night  in  the
lamasery  of  Tubdan,  Leaving  Tubdan  on  the  2Sth,  the  travellers
reached,  after  a  march  of  twelve  miles  in  a  northerly  direction,  the
famous  hot  springs  of  Burchu-tsan.  A  circular  wall  of  stone  encloses
a  portion  of  the  springs,  and  here  the  Grand  Lama  takes  his  baths.
The  ])laco  where  he  camps  is  surrounded  by  a  low  turf  wall. Tlie

*  See  supra,  p.  60.


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  205

Graud  Lama  had  recently  taken  the  baths,  but  it  was  sui)posed
that  the  water  gods  (or  nagas)  had  in  some  way  (jr  other  been
offended,  as  the  water  had  but  aggravated  his  (;omplaint.  To
propitiate  these  lu  a  hundred  lamas  had  been  employed  here  until
within  a  few  days  conducting  religious  services.  In  and  near  these
springs  are  numerous  black  snakes  which,  though  they  are  said  to  be
venomous,  do  no  harm  to  either  man  or  beast.  They  enter  houses  in
the  neighbouring  villages,  but  no  one  ever  thinks  of  hurting  them.

The  next  day  they  crossed  the  Jeh  la  and  stopped  for  the  niglit  at
the  village  of  Keshong,  but  again  they  could  not  get  lodgings.  On
the  30th  they  reached  the  old  village  of  Shendar  ding,*  near  which
is  situated  the  famous  Bonbo  monastery  of  Eigyal  Shendar.  Ugyen
visited  this  lamasery  the  following  day,  and  represented  himself
as  a  Bonbo  from  Sikkim  on  a  pilgrimage  to  the  sanctuaries  of  Bonbo
Shenrab  mivo,  the  chief  deity  of  this  religion.  He  expressed  a
desire  to  give  a  general  tea  {inany  ja)  to  the  monks,  presented  the
manager  five  tanka  for  the  purpose,  and  it  was  arranged  that  the
entertainment  should  take  place  on  the  morrow.

In  the  mean  time  he  was  shown  about  the  temple.  In  the  con-
gregation hall  the  priests  were  reading  the  Bonbo  scriptures.  In  the
chapel  of  the  upper  story  he  noticed  among  the  images  of  tlie  various
gods  of  the  Bon  pantheon  that  of  Sakya  Buddha.

The  next  day  the  mang  Ja  took  place.  There  M'ere  about  thirty
monks  (dahas)  present,!  and,  on  inquiring  why  there  were  so  few,
Ugyen  was  told  that  a  large  number  of  monks  who  are  natives  of
Khams  Gyarong  had  gone  to  the  Chang-tang  J  to  look  to  the  interests
of  the  Bon  church  there.

Ugyen,  in  company  with  the  head  priest  (o7n-dsc),  then  visited  the
gloomy  chapels  of  the  monastery,  only  lighted  by  torches  and  butter-
fed  lamps,  where  he  saw  a  number  of  curious  pictures  and  tapestries
on  which  were  represented  various  terrifying  gods. After  this  he

*  Ding  means  something  like  "  village."  It  is  a  very  common  termination  to  names
of  places  throughout  Tibet.— (W.  R.)

t  Duba,  or  Draba,  is  the  name  apijlied  to  all  lamas  irresijective  of  rank.  The  word
Zama  is  only  used  when  speaking  of  some  liigh  dignitary  in  the  church,  or  of  a  ijeloiuj,
or  '•  priest." — (W.  R.)

X  The  Gyade  country,  which  extends  from  the  high-road  from  Nagchukha  to
Hsi-ning  in  Kansu  and  toChamdo,  is  not  under  tlie  rule  of  Lhasa,  it  is  a  purely  lioubo
country.  I  traversed  this  region  from  west  to  east  in  1892.  Khams  Gyarong  refers
to  the  Chin  chuan,  a  small  region  on  the  Upper  Ta-tung  river,  in  North-west  Sze-chuen,
where  this  religion  has  many  adherents. — (W.  R.)


206  JOUBNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

was  presented  to  the  high  priest,  Je  Khiidub  rinpoche,  who  received
him  most  kindly.  He  was  a  man  of  sixty-eight  years  of  age,  but
strong  and  hearty.  He  explained  to  Ugyen  various  points  of  the
"  black  water  "  {chab-nag)  mysteries  of  Bonism,  and  lent  him  some
books  to  read,  a  number  of  which  Ugyen  made  copies  of.*

The  Rigyal  Sendar  monastery  is  said  to  have  been  erected  on  the
site  of  an  ancient  Bon  temple,  called  Darding  sergo  tamo,  and  was
built  several  hundred  years  before  Tashillmnpo  ;  and  was  sacked  by
the  Jungar  Mongols  in  the  17th  century.  When  they  demolished  the
chapel,  the  Bon  high  priest  hurriedly  concealed  tlie  sacred  treasures
and  scriptures,  written  in  silver  on  dark  blue  tablets,  in  the  deep
recesses  of  a  cavern,  and  hence  the  sacred  writings  of  the  Bonbo  are
now  in  a  confused  state.  The  church  furniture  and  other  requisites
of  worship  in  the  monastery  are  extremely  ancient.  Among  them
are  the  huge  tambourines  {shang),  and  gigantic  cymbals  made  of  the
finest  bell-metal,  paintings  representing  the  Seven  Heroic  Saints
{Pao-rab  dun),  numerous  old  tapestries,  and  several  volumes  of  scrip-
tures written  in  silver  and  gold  on  thick  dark-blue  (card)  boards.
The  roof  of  the  great  hall  of  congregation  is  supported  by  forty-
two  pillars,  six  feet  apart,  and  all  around  the  monastery  are  fine-
looking  chorten,  mcndong,  and  cairns,  which  visitors  are  allowed  to
circumambulate  from  right  to  left,  instead  of  from  left  to  right,  as  do
Buddhists.  When  questioned  respecting  the  reason  for  this  custom,
the  priests  replied  that  salutation,  circumambulation,  and  the  chanting
of  mantra  being  intended  by  the  sages  as  processes  to  sanctify  the
body,  speech,  and  mind,  they  did  not  at  all  Ijenefit  the  divinity.  It  is,
therefore,  immaterial  how  and  which  way  one  salutes  and  circumam-
bulates the  sacred  things,  but  it  is  the  established  usage  of  the  Bon
community  to  circulate  from  right  to  left.f

The  Bon  monastery  of  Shendar  is  now  in  the  joint  possession
of  the  four  powerful  members  of  the  family  of  Shen-tsang.  Though
they  are  laymen,  having  wives  and  children,  yet  being  the  descendants
of  Shenrab  Mivo,  the  illustrious  founder  of  the  Bon  religion,  they  are
venerated  as  lamas.  The  mother  of  the  two  leading  members  of  this
family  was tlie  elder  sister  of  Sikyong,  the  late  Bajah  of  Sikkim.

*  The  present  Boiibo  religion  is  hardly  distinguishable  from  Tibetan  Buddhism,
except  in  a  few  peculiar  reversals  of  lamaist  customs,  and  in  the  names  of  the  gods.
See  '  Land  of  the  Lamas,'  p.  217.  Schiefner,  Sarat  (Jhandia,  and  Laufcr  have  published
translations  and  texts  of  some  I'.onbo  works. —  (W.  It.)

t  Not  a  very  intelligible  or  satisfactory  explanation. See  Waddell,  op.  cit.,  p.  287.


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  207

The  late  Paiichen  rinpoche  was  the  nephew  of  these  brothers,  in
consequence  of  which  they  are  addressed  by  the  people  as  Ku-shawj,
"  Eoyal  Maternal  Uncle."  The  late  Grand  Lama  was  of  pure  Bonbo
stock,  and  the  two  families  from  which  he  sprang  are  known  Ijy  the
names  of  Shen-lug  and  Tu-lug.  People  inquire  with  wonder  why
the  vice-regent  of  Buddha  in  the  flesh  should  have  been  born  in  the
family  of  Shenrab  Mivo,  the  heretic.  Some  disaffected  Tibetans  were
even  in  the  habit  of  ridiculing  this  Grand  Lama  by  calling  him  the
offspring  of  Bon  heretics.

In  the  monastery  are  two  sections  of  monks,  called  respectively
the  Tibetan  Association  {Bod  kham-tsan)  and  the  Khams  Association
{Kliamba  Jcham-tsan) ,  the  latter  being  the  most  numerous.  The
officers  consist  of  one  priest  for  the  grand  congregation  {Om-dse),  two
discipliners  {Ckos-tims),  two  church  directors  (GeJihor),  two  general
managers  {Chi-nycr),  and  two  chapel-keepers  {Kit-nijcr).

While  conducting  service  the  monks  dress  like  the  Gelugpa
monks  of  Tashilhunpo.  They  wear  tall  mitre-shaped  yellow  caps,  and
a  yellow  cloak  covering  the  bodies.  The  ordained  monks  hang  the
chab-lug,  or  badge  of  celibacy,*  from  their  waist-bands  like  the
Buddhist  monks,  and  wear  red  serge  boots.  They  are  not  allowed  to
wear  anything  that  is  blue,  green,  black,  or  white.  During  their
residence  at  the  monastery  they  wear  the  church  costume,  composed
of  the  sliam-tab  and  tougir^^  and  red  boots  made  according  to  the  Bon
fashion.  When  they  enter  the  congregation  hall  for  service  they
leave  their  boots  at  the  door.  The  cost  of  the  tea  drunk  during  the
services  is  borne  for  the  most  part  by  the  Shen-tsang  family.  The
monastery  is  maintained  by  a  small  endowment,  supplemented  by
the  donations  and  subscriptions  paid  by  the  Bon  community  of  Chang. :J:

The  monks  of  the  Khams  Association,  numbering  about  forty,  go
annually  during  the  summer  to  conduct  religious  services  in  the
houses  of  the  Bon  people  of  Chang.  Li  the  winter  they  remain  in
the  monastery.  During  divine  service  the  monks  are  allowed  to
drink  as  much  tea  as  they  like,  there  being  no  restriction  in  this
respect,  as  in  the  great  Buddhist  monasteries.

*  The  little  water-bottle  carried  by  geloDgs,  and  with  which  they  moisten  their
mouths  in  the  forenoon  when  they  arc  not  allowed  to  eat  or  drink.  Waddell,  op.  cit.,
201.— (W.  E.)

t  The  Sham-tub  is  a  plaited  petticoat  of  red  pulo;  it  is  worn  liy  all  lamas.  The
toiKjii  is  the  upjjer  shawl.

X  By  which  he  means,  I  suppose,  the  Chang  tang  Bonbos  of  Gyade.— (Vv'.  R.)


208  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

The  lamas  here  are  divided  into  two  sects,  which  ditier  slightly  in
their  vows.  In  the  one  called  Shen-tang  srung-lug,  a  man  may  take
vows  when  sixty  years  of  age ;  while  in  the  otlier,  called  Shen-tsang
lug,  he  must  take  the  vows  of  abstinence  and  piety  as  soon  as  he  has
finislied  his  final  clerical  examinations.  The  higli  priest,  or  Je  Kadub
rinpuche,  Ynng-drung  gyal-tsan  by  name,  administers  vows  and
ordains  monks.

The  rules  of  moral  discipline,  called  tsa-i/ii/,  written  on  a  broad
sheet  of  pasted  daphne  paper,  are  posted  in  a  conspicuous  position
in  the  monastery.  When  an  ordained  monk  is  found  guilty
of  violating  these  rules,  and  particularly  those  of  chastity,  he  is
immediately  punished  and  expelled  from  the  monastery.  Such
punishments  are,  however,  commutable  into  fines,  such  as  the  pay-
ments of  money  to  the  lama  who  ordained  him,  and  providing  enter-
tainment and  presents  for  the  other  monastic  authorities  and  the
members  of  the  congregation.

The  marriage  ceremonies  of  the  Bonbo  are  the  same  as  those  of  all
other  Tibetans :  so  also  the  funeral  rites,  although  some  communities
throw  their  dead  into  rivers  and  lakes.*  After  death  the  body  is
kept  in  the  house  twenty-four  hours,  after  which  it  is  removed  to  the
temple  or  monastery.  On  the  fourth  day  the  ornaments  and  clothes
worn  by  the  deceased  are  placed  before  the  gods,  and  prayers  offered
to  them  to  take  charge  of  his  soul.  At  the  end  of  the  ceremony  the
corpse  is  removed  to  the  cemetery,  where  it  is  cut  into  pieces  to  be
devoured  by  vultures  and  dogs.f

Ugyen  left  Shendar  ding  on  August  5,  and  stopped  at  noon  at  the
hot  springs  of  Langpag,  where  the  Tashi  lama  has  a  temple-like  house
in  charge  of  an  officer.  The  water  is  so  hot  that  meat  can  be  cooked
in  it  in  half  an  hour.

l*roceeding  thence  they  came  to  Non  chu,  where  he  saw  the
Non  chu  lama  rinpoche,  who  made  many  inquiries  about  Calcutta,
tlie  railways,  telegraphs,  and  telephones  of  which  he  had  heanl
travellers  speak.  He  himself,  lie  said,  had  invented  a  telephone,  and
was  just  then  engaged  in  making  a  new  instrument  with  wliich  lie

*  This  is  also  done  amonj;  Buddhists,  as  in  the  Palti  lake  country. See  sfupra,  j).  ]:!'.».

t  Moorcroi't.  '  Travels.'  ii.  <!S,  refers  to  Bonbo  lamas  when  he  describes  the  lamas  of
I'iu  (in  Ijadak).  wlio  allow  their  hair  to  grow  and  become  matted,  and  wiio  wear  black.
Nain  Singh  makes  mention  of  the  Bonbo  country  of  North  Tibet,  which  he  calls  "  the
Ombo,  or  Pembo  country,"  Journal  of  the  Royal  Geographical  Society,  xlvii.  p.  107.—
(W.  K.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTBAL TIBET.  209

would  be  able  to  communicate  with  people  at  a  distance  by  means  of
strokes  of  a  hammer.*  He  was  also  most  curious  to  know  iibont
illuminating  gas.

The  next  day  Ugyen  again  called  on  the  lama,  who  asked  many
questions  about  the  resources  of  India,  its  government,  commerce,
laws,  etc.,  and  as  Ugyen  replied  he  noted  down  all  he  heard.

Taking  leave  of  the  lama  the  same  day,  the  travellers  reached
Eag-tso  ferry,  where  they  crossed  the  Tsang-po  in  a  rudely  constructed
boat,  in  which  men  and  animals  were  ferried  across.  They  halted  for
the  night  at  Tondub  ling,  in  the  district  of  Jerong.  They  were  unable  to
gain  admittance  to  any  house,  and  had  to  pass  the  night  in  a  sheepfold.

The  next  day  they  came  to  Phuntso  ling,  where  there  is  a  lamasery
with  five  hundred  inmates.  This  was  formerly  the  seat  of  the
Taranath  lama,  and  from  here  he  went  to  Urga  in  Mongolia.  Ugyen
visited  the  cave  where  Taranath  once  lived  as  an  ascetic.  He  also
saw  the  printing-house  of  the  Phuntso  ling  lamasery,  which  contained
printing  blocks  for  many  valuable  historical  works.

Two  roads  lead  to  >Sakya  from  this  place,  one  via  Tondub  ling,
the  other  by  way  of  Lhartse.  The  travellers  followed  the  latter,
which  is  the  shortest,  arriving  at  Lhartse  on  August  10.  Shakar
djongjf  Ugyen  learnt,  can  be  reached  from  Lhartse  in  a  day.  The
monks  of  Shakar  are  noted  for  their  wealth,  much  of  which  is
acquired  by  buying  gold.

Lhartse  castle  {djong)  is  on  a  fine  eminence  overlooking  the  Tsang-
po.  It  is  the  chief  place  of  trade  of  Upper  Tsang.  Its  monastery  used
to  contain  one  thousand  lamas,  but  now  tlie  number  is  considerably
smaller.  Some  distance  from  Lhartse  is  the  famous  monastery  of
Namring,  whose  monks  are  noted  for  their  great  learning.

Proceeding  by  way  of  Tana  and  Lasa,  Ugyen  and  his  companions
reached  Sakya  on  the  14th,  and  put  up  in  a  house  belonging  to  the
chief  of  the  ulag  department.  There  is  a  good  market  in  tliis  town,
but  with  the  exception  of  meat,  all  articles  of  food  are  dearer  than  at
Shigatse.  No  good  tsamhc  could  be  bought,  and  straw  and  hay  were
very  dear,  a  tanJca  for  a  basketful  of  not  over  five  pounds  weight.

Sakya  is  a  notorious place  for  thieves and all kinds of  bad

*  I  have  heard  of  Chinese  claims  to  the  discovery  of  the  telephone,  hut  never  before
of  Tibetan.  I  fancy  the  lauia  had  heard  of  the  Morse  transmitter,  which  may  liavo
been  taken  for  a  little  hammer  struck  on  a  board.  — (W.  R.)

t  Visited  by  Ugyeu-gyatso  in  1883.

P


210  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

characters,  aud  the  cattle  have  to  be  locked  up  at  night  in  the  stables
and  sheep-pens.

The  next  day,  being  the  anniversary  of  the  birth  of  Feme
Chyungnas  (Padma  Sambhava),  a  grand  religious  dance  took  place
in  the  courtyard  of  the  temple,  in  the  presence  of  the  five  surviving
members  of  the  royal  Khon  family  of  Sakya,  who  sat  on  chairs  on
a  raised  dais  under  a  large  Chinese  umbrella,  with  attendants  carry-
ing the  gyal-tsan  or  banners,  and  the  sceptre.

Eighty  gaudily  dressed  dancers  {chyam])a)  danced  the  day  long
to  the  music  of  clarionets,  trumpets,  kettle-drums,  tambourines,  and
cymbals,  stopping  only  occasionally  to  partake  of  tea.  When  they
finally  stopped  they  carried  off  with  them  on  their  shoulders  quantities
of  1,'hatad  flung  to  them  by  the  audience.

This  dance,  called  the  "club  dance"  {pliAtrpcd  Ml  chijam),  \yq.s
performed  in  celebration  of  the  birth,  from  a  lotus  flower  in  the  lake
of  Dhanakosha,  of  the  sage  Uddayani.  Two  Timpon  and  a  dozen
policemen  kept  the  great  crowd  in  order  with  their  whips.

When  the  ceremony  of  the  day  was  over,  the  heir  apparent  of  the
Sakya  Panchen  took  his  seat  in  the  maidan  in  front  of  the  great
temple,  and  gave  his  blessing  {chyag  wang)  to  all  who  approached.
Ugyen  visited  tlie  same  day  the  famous  library,  where  lie  saw  many
manuscripts  written  in  gold,  the  pages  some  six  to  eight  feet  long
and  three  or  four  feet  broad.*  On  the  board  which  covered  these
volumes  were  painted  in  gold  and  silver  the  images  of  innumerable
Buddhas.  There  were  also  many  books  in  Chinese,  dating  back  to
the  early  years  of  the  Christian  era.

The  next  day  another  kind  of  dance,  called  the  dsa-nag,  or  "  black
hat "  dance,  was  performed  in  the  court  of  the  residence  of  Gong-sa.
There  were  about  eighty  dancers.  Seventy  kept  up  the  dance  con-
tinually, while  the  ten  remaining  took  refreshments.  They  danced
with  much  grace,  the  movements  of  their  arms  and  hands  being
especially  curious.

On  August  17  Ugyen  left  Sakya,  and  travelling  by  way  of
Lhadong,  Shong-mar-tse,  the  Pa  la  and  Cliihhnig..  reached  Dobta  on
the  20tli.t Tills  latter  locality  he  found  very  poor,  the  people  living

*  Our  author  fartlier  on  (p.  241)  says  tliat  these  volumes  are  about  six  feet  long  by
eighteen  inches  broad.  This  appears  more  likely.  The  age  of  the  Chinese  books  is
certainly  greatly  exagi;erated. — (W.  11.)

t  Dob-tha  jong  of  tiie  map.  Our  author  passed  through  it  when  returning  to
Darjiling,  .see  infra,  p.  '244.


JOUBNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  211

in  great  squalor. The  country  is  rocky  and  l)arren,  yet  the  peasants
have  to  give  half  the  produce  of  their  fields  to  the  Sikkini  Eajah.

Leaving  Dobta,  Ugyen  came  to  the  Tsomo  tcl-tung,  or  "  Mule's
Drink  Lake,"  which  he  went  around,  keeping  it  to  his  left,  an  heretical
action  according  to  Buddhist  ideas.

Stopping  at  Naring  for  the  night,  he  then  passed  through  Tagnag
and  reached  Targye  on  the  24th.*  Near  here  is  the  Dora  chu-tsan
("Hot  Springs"),  in  the  neighbourhood  of  which  he  saw  several
carpet  looms,  on  which  excellent  rugs,  called  titm-shi,  were  l)eing
made  by  women,  who  showed  great  taste,  in  designing  patterns.

Leaving  Targye  the  travellers  passed  without  any  incidents
through  Kurma,  Kyoga,  Labrang-dokpa,  and  Luguri  Jong,t  and
reached  Shigatse  about  noon  on  August  29.

Ugyen  remained  at  Shigatse  for  seven  days,  drying  the  plants  he
had  collected  on  his  journey,  and  observing  the  different  incidents
which  took  place  after  the  death  of  the  Grand  Lama.

The  day  after  the  Grand  Lama's  death,  he  and  a  friend  had  gone
to  Tashilhunpo  to  perform  their  devotions,  but  were  refused  ad-
mittance. No  outsider  was  admitted  into  the  lamasery,  the  inmates  of
which  were  now  not  allowed  to  see  any  one  or  leave  the  monastery.

As  they  were  coming  back  they  passed  in  front  of  the  palace  of
Kun-khyab  ling,  and  saw  a  large  pack  of  hounds  and  mastiffs,  which
the  Panchen  kept  for  hunting ;  for,  though  his  sacred  character
forbade  him  shooting  animals,  he  could  indulge  in  this  other  form  of
sport.

While  in  the  palace  of  Phuntso  phodang,  the  lama's  favov^rite
residence,  and  where  they  were  allowed  to  enter,  an  officer  from  the
Labrang  attached  seals  on  everything  Ijelonging  to  the  deceased,  and
on  all  the  doors  of  the  principal  rooms  in  Kun-khyab  ling.

The  next  day  there  was  a  report  that  the  lama  had  come  to  life
again,  and  every  one  was  thanking  the  gods ;  the  tscmiha  vendors  on
the  market-place  were  throwing  handfuls  of  their  ware  heavenward
as  offerings  to  the  gods  who  had  restored  their  Grand  Lama  to  them.

The  Dingpon  of  Shigatse  said,  in  the  hearing  of  Ugyen,  that  last
year,  when  the  Government  of  Lhasa  had  consulted  the  oracle  of
Lhamo  sung-chyongma, it  had  foretold  great  calamities  for  Tibet.

*  About  five  miles  from  Kliauiba  djong. — (W.  E.)

t  The  same  road  followed  by  him  and  Chandra  Das  when  going  to  Shigatse.—
(W.  K.)


212  JOUnXKY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

These  were  inevitable,  in  view  of  the  perversity  of  the  people  who  no
longer  had  faith  in  the  gods,  but  let  themselves  be  led  by  demons  in
human  shape.

Witchcraft  was  steadily  increasing,  he  said,  and  in  every  village
there  were  those  who  said  they  were  in  communion  with  devils.  An
edict  had  been  issued  forbidding  witchcraft  and  fortune-telling.  It
was  found  that  under  tlie  castle  of  Shigatse  itself  there  were  fifteen
witches  {-paonal  jorma).  These  had  been  brought  to  trial,  and  had
been  submitted  to  an  examination  which  required  them  to  describe
the  contents  of  several  chests  filled  with  a  variety  of  things.  Four
alone  were  able  to  answer,  the  others  were  flogged  and  then  released
on  condition  that  they  should  give  up  imposing  on  the  public  credulity
and  would  furnish  bonds  for  their  srood  behaviour.


JOURNEY TO  L//ASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  2Jo


CHAPTEE IX.

FUNERAL OF THE PANCHEN EINrOCHE.  —  VISIT TO THE GItEAT
LAMASERY OF SAMYE AND TO YARLUNG.

On  September  19  the  minister  left  Dongtse,  and  I  despatched
TJgyen  once  more  to  the  Eigyal  Shendar  monastery  to  obtain  further
information  on  the  Bonbos  and  their  religion.  I  myself  went  to
Gyantse,  where  I  was  most  kindly  received  by  the  Chyag-dso-pa
and  his  family.

The  Chyag-dso-pa  of  Gyantse  has  under  his  superintendence  a
large  rug  and  blanket  factory  in  which  about  ninety  women  are
kept  constantly  employed,  some  picking  the  wool,  some  dyeing  it,  and
others  weaving.  The  fso,  or  "  dye  plant,"  grows  in  rocky  soil  and  is
collected  by  the  Dokpas.  It  supplies  a  beautiful  yellow  colour.  The
leaves  only  are  used  in  dyeing.*

The  people  employed  in  this  factory  are  kept  under  the  strictest
discipline.  One  day  one  of  the  women  who  was  late  beginning  her
work,  was  whipped  by  order  of  the  Chyag-dso-pa.  A  boy  caught
stealing  wool  was  also  punished  in  the  same  way  and  imprisoned  for  a
fortnight.  I  was  rather  surprised  at  seeing  the  Chyag-dso-pa  thus
taking  the  law  in  his  own  hands ;  but  he  told  me  that  the  Government
allowed  great  landholders  like  his  master,  the  Shape  Phala,  judicial
power  over  their  own  serfs.  I  may  here  note  that  the  pastoral  tenants
on  this,  and  probably  all  other  estates,  pay  the  owners  every  year  two
pounds  of  butter  for  every  she  yak  they  own,  and  two  pounds  of  wool
for  every  sheep.

On  September  25,  corresponding  to  the  13th  of  the  8th  moon,
harvest began. This day was selected as it was a very lucky

*  It  is  a  slimb  (Syrnplocos)  common  in  Sikkim.  See  Hooker.  '  Himalayan  Journals,'
ii.41.  Tso  (or  Tsos)  is  not,  I  believe,  the  Tibetan  name  of  the  plant,  but  only  means
'•  dye."  -(W.  R.)


214  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

one.  All  the  peo^jle  turned  out  for  the  work,  and  I  went  to  the  roof
of  the  castle  to  watch  the  reapers.  While  working  they  sang  hymns
and  offered  the  gods  bunches  of  barley,  peas,  and  wheat,  as  first-
fruit  offerings.

Ugyen  returned  from  his  trip  on  the  1st  of  October.

On  September  13  (25  ?),  the  day  of  the  full  moon,  while  he  was
still  at  Shigatse,  the  dead  Grand  Lama  was  brought  from  Tob-gyal
to  Tashilhunpo.  First  of  all  came  a  crowd  of  people  on  foot,  followed
by  about  a  hundred  men  on  ponies.  After  these  came  the  officials  of
Labrang,  followed  Ijy  the  chiefs,  nobles,  and  high  officials  of  Tsang,
all  on  horseback.  Behind  them  was  carried  the  sedan  containing  the
remains  of  his  holiness,  the  Panclien  rinpoche.  The  sedan  was
followed  by  the  Chinese  garrison,  consisting  of  fifty  soldiers.  The
lamentations  of  the  people  increased  as  the  procession  approached,
and  Ugyen  said  he  cried  like  a  child.  Some  prayed  loudly,  looking
towards  heaven :  "  God  and  saints  ordain  that  our  beloved  protector
{kyab-gong),  may  soon  return  to  this  world  for  the  good  of  all  living
beings."  Ko  bells  were  rung,  and  the  procession  passed  on  in  solemn
silence,  all,  laymen  and  monks,  dressed  in  dark  red  apparel,  without
any  ornaments.  When  the  procession  entered  Tashilhunpo,  the  sedan
chair  was  placed  on  the  State  altar,  in  the  Hall  of  Departed  Saints.
On  the  following  day  Ugyen  went  to  make  his  obeisance  to  the  dead
Lama.  He  found  the  body  {ku-por)  wrapped  in  l-hatags,  and  placed  in
a  sitting  posture.  It  was  very  small,  bearing  no  proportion  to  the
stature  of  the  Lama  when  living.  Ugyen  was  told  that  this  was  the
result  of  the  embalmment.*

The  same  day  the  period  of  summer  retirement  (yar-nas)  for  monks
came  to  an  end.  It  was  observed  as  a  holiday  by  the  people :  there
was  racing  and  other  sports,  and  all  the  people,  lamas,  men,  women,
and  cliildren  bathed  together  in  the  Nyang  chu.  The  only  sign  of
mourning  still  observed  this  day  was  keeping  the  windows  of  the
houses  in  town  and  at  Tashilhunpo  shut.

On  the  17th  Ugyen  reached  Shendar  ding,  where  he  put  up  in  the
house  of  a  man  whose  wife  had  just  been  confined.  A  woman  in
Tibet,  as  in  India,  is  held  to  be  unclean  (Jcycdih)  for  a  month  after  her
confinement,  at  the  expiration  of  which  time  certain  religious
ceremonies  are  performed  for  her  purification.

*  See  infra,  p.  256;  tlie  details  there  giveu  du  not  ^uite  agree  with  what  he  say.s  on
tliis  occasion. — (W.  K.)


JOUItNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  215

Ugyen  remained  in  this  place  until  the  26th,  and  obtained  from
tlie  high  priest  of  the  lamasery  much  valuable  information  bearing  on
the  theology  and  history  of  the  Bon  religion.  He  also  copied  many
valuable  works  on  these  subjects,  which  were  obligingly  put  at  his
disposal  by  the  lama.*

Having  been  prevented  wlien  at  Lhasa,  as  previously  narrated,
from  going  to  the  celebrated  monastery  of  Samye,  the  most  ancient


LAKE BELOW THE YUMPTSO LA, SIEKIM.

and  famous,  probably,  of  all  Tibetan  lamaseries,  I  now  endeavoured
to  make  arrangements  for  this  much  longed-for  trip.  I  sent  Ugyen
to  Dongtse,  after  his  return  from  his  trip  to  Sliendar  ding,  to  try  and
get  a  guide ;  but  he  failed,  as  rumours  had  got  abroad  that  I  was  a

*  Our  author  gives  several  pages  of  text  on  the  ethics,  etc.,  of  the  Bonbo,  but  they
are  so  technical  that  I  have  been  obliged  to  omit  them.  The  Bonba  terminology  used
by  him  is  pr^cticHlly  the  same  as  thut  of  the  lamas.  He  tells  us  that  tiie  Bonbo  are
divided  into  sis  sects,  the  most  popular  of  which  is  the  Tu  lug,  to  wliich  the  people  of
the  Chang  tang  and  Gyade  belong.  The  Shen-tsang  lug  is  the  second  iu  importance.
See  also  supra,  208. — (W.  R.)


21G  JOUUNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

British  employe,  and  Pliurchung  was  accused  of  having  brought  me
into  Tibet  in  vioLation  of  the  express  orders  of  the  Nepal  Durbar.

In  view  of  these  disturbing  rumours,  I  left  Gyantse  on  October  4,
and  returned  to  Tashilhunpo,  where  I  was  rejoined  on  the  13th  by
Phurchung,  who  had  been  sent  with  letters  to  India  in  August.

I  now  decided  to  send  Ugyen  back  to  India  with  the  botanical  and
other  collections  he  had  made,  while  I  would  visit  Samye,  and  the
Lhokha  country  south  of  it.  He  bought  ten  yaks  for  a  hundred
rupees,  and  pack  saddles,  and  engaged  Lachung  men  to  accompany
him  to  Khamba  djong.  He  started  on  the  17th,  while  Phurchung  and
I  returned  to  Gyantse,  arriving  there  on  the  18th.

The  people  were  now  busy  threshing  their  barley — cows,  their
muzzles  covered  with  wicker  baskets,  treaded  it  out,  and  were  kept
to  their  work  by  two  boys.

The  Chyag-dso-pa  lent  me  a  man  to  guide  me  to  Samye  and  the
south  country  (Lhokha) ;  his  name  was  Gopon.  He  told  me  he
was  ready  to  start  at  any  time,  for  his  brother  (namdo  pun,  "joint
brother  "),  as  he  called  him,  had  now  returned  from  Shigatse,  and  he
could  leave  his  wife.  These  two  men  had,  though  not  related,  one
wife  between  them,  and  the  three  of  them  got  on  very  well  together.

On  October  21  I  j&nally  started  for  Samye,  and  followed,  as
far  as  the  ruined  village  of  Eing-la,  the  high  road  to  Lhasa  I
had  travelled  over  earlier  in  the  year.  There  is  but  one  family  now
living  in  this  once  prosperous  place.  These  poor  people  earn  a
precarious  livelihood  by  making  pottery.  A  concave  wooden  pan  is
used  for  the  purpose,  in  which  the  pots  are  shaped  with  a  piece  of
wood  or  the  lingers,  by  turning  the  pan  or  mould  around  with  the
hand. This  is  the  usual  method  employed  in  Tibet.

Leaving  Eing-la,  we  travelled  through  the  fine  pasture-lands
adjoining  the  Yamdo  tso,  and  over  desolate  highlands  with  an
occasional  stump  of  a  juniper  or  cedar  tree,  till  we  reached  the  village
of  Ta-lung,  famous,  as  its  name  implies,*  for  the  number  and  breed  of
its  ponies.  Around  the  village  the  land  is  cultivated,  and  showed
evidence  of  great  industry  on  the  ])art  of  the  people.

We  at  first  failed  to  secure  a  night's  lodgings  in  any  of  the  houses
of  the  village,  for  the  people  took  us  for  Lhopa  or  Bhutia,  of  whom
they  stand  in  great  dread,  as  they  frequently  make  raids  on  this
district ;  but  we  were  so  fortunate  in  the  end  as  to  secure  the  good-

*  Ta,  "horse;"  Ititirf,  "valley." On  the  name  Yamdok tso,  see  Journ.  Buddh.
Tt.rt.  Sac.  of  India.  IV.  Tt.  111.  p.t.— (W.  R.)


J0UBNE7 TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  217

will  of  a  lama  of  the  mouastei-y,  who  got  a  friend  of  his  to  admit  us
to  his  house.

The  next  day  (October  24)  we  resumed  our  journey  by  daylight,
and  crossing  the  Shandung  chu  bay  of  Lake  Yamdo,  followed  along
the  base  of  the  steep  hills  which  overhang  its  shores.  We  got  sight,
on  the  way,  of  the  Chong-khor  monastery,*  from  which  come  all  the
amcM  Ihavio  dancers  and  mimes.f  some  of  whom  annually  visit
Darjiling.  Passing  the  Eivotag  river  some  eight  miles  north  of  the
Djong  of  the  same  name,  we  ascended  a  ridge,  from  the  top  of  which
we  saw  the  villages  of  Yurupe,  Ke-utag,  and  Khyunpodo.  The
country  was  everywhere  thinly  populated  ;  but  large  numbers  of  yaks,
donkeys,  sheep,  and  goats  were  grazing  about.

We  stopped  at  the  village  of  Shari,  prettily  situated  between  the
Yamdo  and  a  little  sweet-water  lakelet,  and  put  up  in  the  mani  Iha
lilianKj,  the  centre  of  which  was  taken  up  by  a  great  prayer-wheel  about
six  feet  high  and  three  feet  in  diameter.  An  old  man  lived  here
whose  sole  occupation  was  to  turn  the  wheel.

The  next  morning  we  crossed  a  low  hill,  the  Kabu  la,  and,  skhting
the  northern  extremity  of  the  Eombujalake,  reached  by  eleven  o'clock
the  village  of  Melung,*  thus  called  from  the  fire  (vne)  stones  found  in
the  valley  {lung)  in  which  it  is  situated.

After  a  short  halt  at  Melung,  we  resumed  our  march,  the  country
opening  a  little  as  we  advanced,  and  villages  and  hamlets  becoming
more  numerous.  That  night  we  stopped  at  Khamedo,  where  there
live  about  a  hundred  flimilies.

AYe  were  off  by  sunrise,  and  passing  some  distance  to  the  north  of
the  large  village  of  Ling,§  where  the  Djongpon  of  the  Yamdo  district
reside,  we  soon  after  found  ourselves  in  the  broad  pasture-lands  of
Karmoling,  here  some  ten  miles  broad,  wdiere  hundreds  of  ponies,
belonging  to  the  Lhasa  Government,  were  seen  grazing.

We  ate  our  breakfast  at  Shabshi,  and  then,  passing  through  the
hamlet  of  Tanta,||  we  began  the  ascent  of  the  Tib  la,  which  marks  in
this  direction  the  boundary  between  the  Yamdo  and  Lhokha  districts,

*  The  Choi-khor-tse  of  the  map. — (W.  E.)

t  Certain  dancers  represent  the  celestial  musicians  or  hinnara,  called  in  Tibetan
mi  ham-chi.  These  are  probably  what  S.  C.  D.  refers  to.  Ki-o-tag  Jong  of  the  map.
— (W.  E.)

X  Probably  Nyema  lung  of  the  map.— (VV.  E.)

§  Called  Loh-bu  Jong  ou  the  maps.— (W.  E.)

II  Tang-da  of  the  maps.— (W.  E.)


218  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

and  from  the  top  of  which  I  had  a  magnificeiit  view  of  the  whole  lake
country,  the  like  of  which  I  have  seen  nowhere  in  the  Himalayas.

The  difiiculties  attending  the  descent  of  the  Tih  la  were  infinitely
greater  than  those  of  the  ascent,  and  the  violence  of  the  wind  made
it  difficult  even  to  stand  erect.  By  five  o'clock  we  reached  the
village  of  Tib,  where  there  are  about  ten  houses,  around  which  grow
a  few  stunted  willows.  The  villagers  were  busy  treading  out  their
harvest  with  their  cattle,  and  their  merry  songs,  wafted  by  the  night
wind,  fell  pleasantly  on  my  ears  till  I  dropped  asleep.

Tib  is  under  the  authority  of  the  Gongkhar  Djongpon,  who,  with
his  two  lama  assistants,  or  Tsc-dimg,  usually  resides  in  the  neighbour-
ing town  of  Tosnam-gyaling.

Odohcr  27. — Our  road  led  us  down  the  course  of  the  Tib  chu.
The  valley  was  covered  with  willows  (here  called  nijamijam slbiiyj,  or
"mourning  trees"),  cypresses,  junipers,  and  a  species  of  silver  fir,
and  though  the  way  was  stony,  it  was  pleasant  on  account  of  the
forest  growth  through  which  it  led.

We  reached  Tos  nam-gyaling  djong  *  early  in  the  afternoon.
This  place  is  celebrated  for  the  serge  and  broadcloth  manufactured
here.  The  Tib  chu,  as  it  flowed  through  the  town  between  low
banks  covered  with  flowers,  and  the  tall  poplars  and  walnut  trees
surrounding  the  high,  well-built  houses,  gave  this  place  a  most
attractive  appearance.  We  met  here  a  party  of  Horba  f  with  a
caravan  of  yaks  laden  with  salt,  which  they  had  brought  from  the
north  for  sale  in  this  country.

Before  reaching  the  town  we  passed  by  the  little  nunnery  of
Peru,  and  shortly  after  leaving  it  we  came  to  the  large  lamasery  of
Toi  Suduling,  with  about  five  hundred  monks  of  the  Gelugpa  sect.

We  stopped  for  the  night  at  Khede-sho,|  a  small  town  with  two
castles,  and  situated  near  the  Tsang-po.  Tlie  town  looks  like  a
fortress,  with  its  old-fashioned  solid  houses,  its  narrow  streets,  the
Dombu  choskhor,  or  lamasery,  with  encircling  walls  painted  blue  and
red,  and  an  old  monastery  on  top  of  the  hill  commanding  the  town.

It  seemed  to  be  a  prosperous  place ;  there  were  flower  gardens

*  Ton  namgyalling  Jong  of  the  maps. Altitude  12,430  feet.— (W.  R.)
t  Tibetans  from  Nortli-eiist  Tibet. Tliese  were  more  probably  Chnngpa  from  the
Chang  tang,  for  the  Horba  do  not  bring  salt  to  Central  Tibet.— (W.  R.)

X  Kedeslio  Jong  of  the  maps.  A.  K.,  who  passed  through  it  the  same  year,  only  a
fortnight  before  our  author,  calls  it  Chitiohio  Jong.  He  says  there  are  about  a  thou-
sand liouses  in  it.—'  Report  on  the  Explor.  made  by  A.  K.,'  p.  84.— (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO  LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.


219


and  groves  of  trees,  and  in  nearly  every  window  and  doorway  flowers
were  growing  in  pots.  Two  Nyerpa  are  stationed  here,  who  administer
the  town  and  supervise  the  manufacture  of  serge  and  cloth  for  tlie
Dalai  lama  and  Panchen  rinpoche.

The  next  morning  we  passed  through  two  miles  of  soft  sand,  and
Anally  came  to  the  mighty  Tsang-po,  and  after  mucli  shouting  to  tlie
boatmen  on  the  farther  side  to  bring  over  their  junk  (sJiaiijiK)*  and


VIEW IN LHONAK LOOKING TOWAIi'DS THE NAKU LA.


after  a  couple  of  hours  waiting  in  the  cold  and  fog,  it  came  slowly
across,  rowed  by  three  women  and  two  men,  who  sang  lustily  as  they
pulled.

The  river  is  here  about  half  a  mile  broad,  very  deep,  but  with  a
sluggish  current.  We  were  soon  landed  at  the  Dorje-tag  ghat,  where
we  paid  a  tanka  for  each  of  our  ponies, and five I'arnia  (or  two

*  Sluuipa  DQeauB  "  boatman."  not  boat. — (W K.)


220  JOUBNEY TO LHASA AND GENTIIAL TIBET.

aiiuas)  for  each  iiiaii  as  ferry  charges.  The  ferry  belongs  to  the
Dorje-tag  lamasery  near  by,  one  of  the  oldest  and  holiest  of  the
Nyingma  sect.  The  incarnate  lama  who  rnles  this  lamasery  died
about  a  year  and  a  half  ago,  but  he  has  reappeared  recently  in  the
flesh  at  Darchendo.*  This  convent  is  at  the  foot  of  a  range  of  hills
which  stretches  along  the  river  to  beyond  Saniye,  and  a  large  grove
extends  from  near  it  to  the  high  road.

We  stopped  for  tiffin  on  the  river  bank,  where  I  noticed  the
ground  covered  with  fish-bones  and  shells.  Gopon  told  me  that  all
the  small  fry  which  the  people  of  this  country  catch  are  used  to
manure  the  fields  with,  as  they  are  too  bony  to  eat.

Gopon,  who,  by  the  way,  was  a  most  loquacious  fellow,  told  me
while  we  drank  our  tea  that  when  a  new-born  child  dies  in  this
country  the  body  is  packed  in  an  earthenware  jar  or  wooden  box,
and  is  thus  kept  in  the  storeroom,  or  hung  from  the  ceiling  of  its
parents'  house.f  In  Upper  Tibet  the  body  is  usually  kept  on  the
roof  with  a  little  turret  built  over  it ;  though  the  people  who  cannot
afford  to  do  this  keep  it  also  hung  from  the  ceiling,  the  face  turned
upwards.

The  road  now  led  over  sand  hillocks  and  spurs  of  rock,  in  some
places  close  to  the  edge  of  the  river,  where  great  care  was  necessary
in  getting  the  ponies  along.

We  stopped  at  Tag,  behind  which  rise  the  forest- covered  moun-
tains, and  where  we  got  quarters  in  a  fine  new  house,  and  were  made
most  comfortable  by  the  owners.

The  next  day  we  were  off"  before  sunrise,  and  after  a  few  miles
through  heavy  sand,  came  to  Songkar|  with  about  two  hundred
houses,  and  around  which  grow  walnut,  willow,  peach,  poplar,  and
other  varieties  of  trees. It  is  said  that Prince  Lhawang,  son of

*  Ta-cliieu-lu,  on  the  l)or(ler  of  Sze-cluieu.  The  Durje-tag  (Rdo-rje  brag)  hxmaiery
has  given  its  name  to  a  sect. See  Waddell,  op.  cit.,  73.

t  This  seems  to  be  the  same  custom  as  obtains  in  Eastern  Tibet,  where  all  corpses
are  kept  until  the  crops  have  been  reaped,  and  then  either  fed  to  vultures,  burnt,
or  otherwise  disjiosed  of.  See  '  Land  of  the  Lamas,'  p.  28G.  The  text  is  not  quite
clear,  for  it  does  not  state  whether  or  not  the  corpses  are  kept  permanently  in  the  houses
of  the  parents. — (W.  E.)

X  Called  Tsong-ka  on  the  maps.  All  this  route  was  again  gone  over  by  Ugyen-
gyatso  in  1883.  See  '  Report  on  Explorations  from  1S5G  to  1886.'  p.  28  et  sqq.  lie  says
Cp.  29)  that  the  river  at  Tsong-ka  is  over  a  mile  broad.  King  Me  a^^tsoms  was  the
father  of  Tisrong  detsan,  of  wliom  our  author  has  so  often  occasion  to  speak.  He
reigned  over  Tibet  in  the  latter  half  of  the  seventh  century,  ad. — (\V.  K.)


JOUBNEY TO  LHASA AND CENTRAL TTBET.  221

King  Me  agtsoms,  was  drowned  liere,  and  the  kino-,  furions  at  the
river  gods  for  having  caused  the  death  of  his  lieir,  ordei'ed  the  river
to  be  whipped.  The  nagas  were  terrified  when  they  learnt  tlie  order,
and  repairing  to  the  king,  told  him  that  if  he  would  forbear,  they
would  show  him  many  good  omens.  'Tis  for  this  that  this  place  is
also  called  Songkar  (or  Zungkhar)  Iha-tag,  or  "  Zungkhar  of  the  gods'
omens."

Near  the  village  passes  the  road  to  Lhasa  by  the  Songkar  la  and
Dechen,*  over  which  a  great  deal  of  timber  is  carried  on  yaks  to
Dechen  and  thence  by  boat  to  Lhasa.

From  Songkar  to  Samye  most  of  the  way  is  over  a  great  sandy
plain  called  Nagshu  chyema,t  which  stretches  from  the  l)ase  of  the
rugged  Lomda  hills  to  the  Tsang-po.  Eeaching  tlie  top  of  a  low  hill,
Samye  stood  before  me,  its  gilded  domes  glittering  in  the  sun,  and
the  hillock  of  Haboi  ri  rising  amidst  the  sands  to  the  south  of  the
great  monastery.

Passing  under  some  willow  trees  growing  througli  the  sand  just
outside  the  lamasery  walls,  we  entered  by  the  soutliern  gate,  over
which  was  a  chorten  made  somewhat  in  the  shape  of  a  dorjc.X  The
guide  led  us  to  the  house  of  the  mother  of  the  Om-dse  (head  priest),
and  we  were  most  hospitably  received  by  the  old  lady,  who  gave  us
her  oratory  to  lodge  in.  Before  the  rooms  assigned  us  was  a  little
flower  patch,  and  other  plants  were  growing  here  and  there  in  pots.
There  were  also  two  singing-birds  in  cages,

Tung-ma,  our  hostess,  was  a  line-looking  old  lady  of  about  sixty
years  of  age.  She  wore  as  a  necklace  a  number  of  silver  ornaments
and  charm  boxes  set  with  turquoises.  Her  head-dress  differed  from
any  I  had  seen,  being  in  shape  like  a  pointed  cap.§

Phurchung  was  delighted  with  Samye ;  he  had  not  only  reached
the  holiest  of  Tibetan  sanctuaries,  but  a  place  where  chang  was
extraordinarily  good  and  cheap ;  what  more  could  he  ask  for  ?

After  taking  tea  I  went  with  my  two  companions  to  visit  the  chief

*  The  Gokbar  la  crossed  by  Nain  Singh  in  1873.  Dechen  djong  is  on  the  Kyi  ehu,
a  day's  journey  east  of  Lhasa. — (W.  R.)

t  Chyema (lye-ma)  means  "  sand,"  nagslm  probably  means  "  black." — (W.  R.)

X  I  cannot  conceive  how  a  chorten  can  resemble  a  dorje  (rajra).  The  com-
parison is  not  a  happy  one. — (W.  E.)

§  Perhaps  she  came  from  Litang.  The  women  there  wear  a  large  silver  plaque
on  either  side  of  the  head,  which  meet  over  the  crown  in  a  point,  so  that,  from  a  dis-
tance, the  head-dress  looks  not  unlike  a  pointed  cap.— (W.  R.)


222  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

temple  of  Wu-tse  (Amitabha).  I  inquired  of  the  beadle  (ku-nj/cr)
the  whereabouts  of  the  celebrated  library  with  the  famous  Indian
books  which  Atisha  had  found  here  when  he  came  to  this  monastery
eight  hundred  years  ago.  I  was  told,  to  my  great  disappointment,
that  "  for  our  sins  the  great  library  was  destroyed  by  fire  about  sixty
years  ago,  and  there  are  at  present  but  modern  reprints  in  it."

In  the  great  congregation  hall  the  Dalai  lama's  throne  occupies
the  north-eastern  corner  of  the  chapel  of  the  -To-vo.  Near  this  latter
is  an  image  representing  the  first  Dalai  and  statues  of  the  principal
disciples  of  the  Buddha.

In  the  second  story  of  this  building  are  images  of  Tsepamed
(Amitayus)  and  of  the  historic  Buddha,  besides  many  others  of  minor
interest.  In  the  third  or  upper  story  are  images  of  the  three  Buddhas
of  the  present  cycle.  From  this  story  I  had  a  splendid  view  of  the
Tsaiig-po,  wdiich  is  very  wide  here.

On  the  wall  surrounding  the  Wu-tse  temple  are  painted  various
mythological  and  historical  scenes,  also  pictures  of  the  principal
sanctuaries  of  Tibet.*  The  monks  attached  to  the  temple  live  close
by  in  a  two-storied  building.

The  next  day  (October  30)  I  visited  the  four  ling,  or  minor
temples  built  around  the  Wu-tse,  and  the  eight  ling-ten  or  lesser
shrines.  In  some  of  the  smaller  chapels  were  life-size  images  of
Indian  sages  who  had  visited  Tibet  in  the  early  ages  of  Buddhism  in
this  country,  and  these  images  are  said  to  have  been  made  by  Hindu
artists.  I  also  noticed  growing  in  some  of  the  court-yards  some
stunted  Ijamboos  and  Indian  shrubs.

After  visiting  the  white  diorten,  we  went  outside  the  temple  walls
to  see  the  chapel  built  by  the  wives  of  King  Tisrong  detsan,  which
resembles  in  style  the  Wu-tse,  though  much  smaller  than  it.

We  made  an  excursion  the  next  day  to  the  famous  cave  called
Chim  phug,  where  Padma  Sambhava  and  other  worthies  gave  them-
selves up  for  a  period  to  abstraction.

AVe  passed  through  the  village  of  Samye, in  which there  are

probably  a  thousand  people  and  a  few  Chinese  and  Nepalese  shops,

and  then  for  a  few  miles  travelled  through  cultivated  fields,  with  here

and  there  a  little  village,  till  we  came  to  the  foot  of  tlie  Cliim  phug

liill. The  range  of  wliich  it  forms  a  part  is  a  thousand  feet  or  so

*  These  are  tlie  sul)ject8 usually  seen  in  such frescoes throughout Tibet and
Mongolia. — (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  223

high,  well  covered  with  fine  timlier,  and  inhabited,  so  some  of  the
numerous  woodcutters  we  met  told  us,  by  wild  goats,  sheep,  deer,  and
snow  leopards.

We  reached  the  temple  before  noon.  It  is  a  two-storied,  fiat-
roofed  building  built  on  the  rock.  In  the  rock  underneath  the
temple  there  is  a  fissure  about  fifteen  feet  long  and  six  feet  broad,
and  varying  in  height  from  three  to  six  feet. In  this  there  is  a  little


VIEW IN LHOXAK NEAR TEBLI.


chapel  where  the  image  of  Padma  Sambhava,  flanked  by  two  female
attendants,  is  to  be  seen.  In  the  building  above  are  images  of  a  host
of  deities  and  saints,  as  also  that  of  King  Tisrong.  The  books  I
looked  at  in  the  temple  belonged  to  the  Nyingraa  sect,  and  were  of  no
special  interest.

Leaving Chim  phug  after  a  couple  of  hours'  rest,  we  returned
to  Samye  by  another  road,  passing  three  little  temples,  or  rather


224  JOUnXEY TO LHASA ANJ^ CENTBAL TIBET.

liermitaCTes,  where  Indian  pundits  are  said  to  have  lived  in  times
of  yore.  Flocks  of  pigeons  were  hovering  about  them,  and  walnut
and  willow  trees  grew  around,  giving  them  a  peaceful  and  secluded
appearance.

The  sands  are  slowly  but  surely  burying  Samye,  and  a  large
portion  of  the  town,  including  some  of  the  temples,  is  already  lost
under  them.  There  is  a  prophecy  attributed  to  Padma  Sambhava,
to  the  effect  that  Samye  will  be  engulfed  in  the  sands,  and  it  is  in  a
fair  way  of  being  accomplished.

Norcmhcr  1. — I  again  visited  the  Wu-tse.  The  principal  room  in
the  gonff  Jchang  (upper  hall)  is  full  of  all  kinds  of  weapons  and  armour
sacred  to  the  gods,  protectors  of  religion  (l)armapalas).  In  the
beautiful  temple  of  Behor  and  Noijinhamara  *  is  a  room  called  the
vm-hhang,  where  the  breath  of  the  dying  is  kept  in  a  jar  specially
consecrated  to  this  purpose.!

A  few  notes  on  the  famous  lamasery  of  Samye  and  Padma  Sam-
bhava find  place  here.

The  temple  was  built  by  King  Tisrong  detsen,  whose  capital  was
on  the  hill  of  Haboi-ri,  just  south  of  where  Samye  now  stands,  at  the
suggestion  of  the  Indian  sage  Santa  Piakshita,  and  with  the  assistance
of  Padma  Sambhava,  the  originator  of  monasticism  in  Tibet. J  It  was
a  copy  of  the  great  temple  of  Odantapura  in  Central  India.  Its  three
stories  were  each  in  a  different  style  of  architecture,  one  Tibetan,
another  Indian,  and  the  third  Chinese  :  so  it  was  after  a  while  given
the  name  of  San-yang  or  "three  styles,"  which  in  Tibetan  is  pro-
nounced Samye,  §  though  it  was  originally  named  ]\Ii-gyur  Ihun-grub
Tsug-lha-khang,  "  the  temple  of  the  unalterable  mass  of  perfection."

*  Behor  must  be  Bihar  gyalpo,  one  of  the  five  great  patron  saints  or  Chu-gyong,  of
Tibet. Noijinliamara  may  be  tlie  god  of  wealth. — (W.  R.)

t  Wu-hhang  would  appear  to  mean  "  central  room  or  house."  I  have  never  heard  of
bottling  up  the  breath  or  spirit  of  the  dead  among  any  Buddhist  people.  This  must
be  a  survival  of  some  pro-Buddhist  superstition. — (W.  R.)

X  Tibetan  historians  inform  us  that  Padma  Sambhava  (Feme  chyung-nas)  was  called
to  Tibet  from  Kafiristan  {0-rgyan)  by  Santa  Rakshita  {Dji-wa  tso),  who  could  not
withstand  the  onslaught  of  the  Bonbos.  See  Emil  Schlaginweit,  '  Die  Konige  von
Tibet,'  p.  52  et  sqq.

§  Written  Bmm-ijas.  I  du  not  believe  that  this  interpretation  of  the  word  Samye  is
correct.  San  yang,  it  is  true,  means  "  three  styles  "  in  Chinese,  but  Chinese  yaug  would
never  be  pronounced  ye  in  Tibetan.  Waddell,  op.  cit.,  2GG,  translates  the  name,  "  the
academy  for  obtaining  the  heap  of  unclianging  meditation."  Nain  Singh  visited  Samye
(he  calls  it  Sama-ye  Gomba)  in  1873.  '•  It  is  surrounded  by  a  very  high  circular  wall,
li  mile  in  circumference,  with  gates  facing  the  four  points  of  tlie  compass. On  the  top


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  225

Both  Santa  Eakshita  and  Padma  Sambhava  were  unable,  on  account
of  the  open  hostility  of  the  Bonbo,  to  remain  long  in  Tibet  It  is  said
by  some  that  the  latter  sage  remained  tliere  six  years,  others  make
his  sojourn  there  eighteen  years,  after  which  he  returned  to  India  ;
but,  however  long  he  stayed,  he  firmly  implanted  mysticism  in  Tibet.

King  Tisrong  gathered  together  at  Samye  sacred  images  and
treasures  from  India  and  the  borderlands  of  China ;  but  of  all  the  col-
lections made  here  the  most  valuable  was  the  great  library  of  Indian
works,  of  which  Atisha,  who  visited  Samye  in  the  eleventh  century,
said  that  there  were  more  Indian  books  here  than  in  the  great  Indian
convents  of  Buddhagaya,  Vikramashila,  and  Odantapura  united,

Samye  has  experienced,  since  the  days  of  its  foundation,  manv
vicissitudes :  it  was  partly  destroyed  by  King  Langdharma,*  and
again  later  on  by  other  followers  of  the  old  religion.  Then  it  was
partially  destroyed  by  an  earthquake,  in  1749  (?),  and  in  1808  (?)  the
Wu-tse  itself  was  destroyed  by  fire.t  To  rebuild  it  the  people  of
Tibet  gave  a  hundred  thousand  ounces  of  silver,  and  the  Shape  Shada
Dondub  dorje,  who  had  charge  of  the  works,  occupied  five  hundred
workmen  for  seven  years  in  reconstructing  the  temple.  Again,  in
1850,  an  earthquake  caused  great  damage  to  the  temple,  the  dome  fell
in  and  the  frescoes,  floors,  etc.,  were  irreparably  injured.  But  the
damage  was  again  repaired  by  means  of  public  subscriptions  and
grants  from  the  State,  amountiug  together  to  about  175,000  oimces
of  silver  in  value,  i

of  this  wall  the  Pundit  counted  1030  chharfans  {cliorten)  made  of  burnt  bricks  .  .  .
The  interiors  of  the  (stone)  walls  of  these  temples  are  covered  with  very  beautiful
writing  in  enormous  Hindi  (Sanscrit)  characters  .  .  ."  Jour.  Boy.  Geug.  Soc,  xlvii.
p.  114.  Sarat  Chandra  says  that  a  work,  entitled  '  Pama  Kahthang '  ('  Peme  Katang  ? ').
contains  a  full  description  of  this  famous  lamasery.  See  also  Waddell,  op.  cit.,
266-26S.

*  This  iconoclast,  who  appears  to  have  been  born  in  a.d.  861,  interdicted  the
Buddhist  religion  in  Tibet  in  899,  and  was  murdered  in  900.  See  Csoma,  'Tib.
Grammar,'  p.  183.  Cf.  Emil  Schlaginweit.  op.  cit,  p.  59,  and  I.  J.  Schmidt,  '  Geschichte
der  Ost  Mongolen,'  pp.  i9.  362,  et  sqq.  In  the  last  work  is  the  history  of  the  murder
of  the  king  by  the  hermit,  Lha-lung  palgyi  dorje.  It  agrees  with  what  our  author  ha.^
told  us  supra,  p.  153,  when  describing  the  origin  of  the  "black  hat  "  dance.— (W.  K.)

t  Our  author  says,  only  "  in  the  year  jire-tiger  of  the  thirteenth  cycle,"  and  "  again,
after  a  period  of  ten  years,  in  the  month  of  May  (fire-tiger  of  the  fourteenth  cycle)."
This  is  impossible,  as  jire  tiger  is  the  third  year  in  the  cycle  of  sixty  years.  Assuming
the  first  date  to  be  correct,  the  second  must  be  a.d.  1808.  Waddell,  op.  cit.,  267,  says
the  library  was  destroyed  about  ISltJ. — (W.  R.)

X  Nain  Singh  speaks  of  a  town  called  Sawe,  where  the  Tibetan  treasury  is  kept.  See
Markham's  '  Tibet,'  p.  csiii. This  is  Samye. Explorer  A.  K.  passed  here  in  October,

Q


226  JOVRNKY TO LHASA AND CENTEAL TIBET.

On  November  2  I  left  Samye  for  a  visit  to  Yarlung,  the  early
home  of  the  first  Tibetan  kings,  if  tradition  is  to  be  believed.

The  road  we  followed  led  eastward,  over  a  sandy  plain  and  by
numerous  villages,  the  most  important  of  which  was  Do,  until  we
reached  Taga-sho,  around  which  were  many  walnut  {taga),  peach,
plum,  poplar,  and  willow  trees,  all  planted  with  great  regularity.  *
Here  we  put  up,  in  the  house  of  a  friend  of  our  guide,  who  himself
was  from  the  neighbouring  village  of  Do.

I  was  pleased  to  find  mutton  selling  here  at  a  very  low  price,
a  result  of  the  presence  of  a  party  of  Hor  Dokpa  from  Piadeng.f
who  had  brought  large  quantities  of  salt,  wool,  and  meat.  Their
yaks  were  the  largest  I  have  seen  in  Tibet.

Leaving  Taga-sho  the  next  morning,  wo,  passed  by  tlie  ruins  of
Tagkar-sho,  probably  at  one  time  the  residence  of  the  kings  of  the
Phag-modu  dynasty,  who  derive  their  name  probably  from  a  village
near  by  still  called  Phagmodu.|  Near  this  place,  in  a  commanding
position,  is  the  lamasery  of  Nari  ta-tsang,  founded  by  the  Dalai  lama
Gedun-gyatso.

At  the  village  of  Jong  §  we  began  the  ascent  of  the  steep  hill  on
whose  summit  is  the  old  lamasery  of  Densa-til,  the  principal  building
nestled  amidst  frowning  crags,  on  which  grow  here  and  there  a  few
firs  and  juniper  trees.  In  the  adjacent  cliffs  were  numerous  caves
for  recluses.

This  temple  differs  somewhat  from  all  other  buildings  of  this  kind

1882.  but  his  notes  contain  nothing  about  this  celebrated  place.  Ugyen-gyatso  visited
it  in  October,  1883,  but  his  report  also  contains  little  of  interest.  See  '  Reiwrt  on  Ex-
ploration from  IS.IO  to  1886,'  pp.  28,  29.  Osoma,  'Tib.  Grammar,'  p.  183,  says  it  was
founded  a.d.  749.  Cf.  Emil  Schlaginweit,  '  Die  Konige  von  Tibet,'  p.  53.  Ssanang
Ssetsen  (I.  J.  Schmidt,  '  Geschichte  der  Ost  Mongolen  '),  p.  41,  says  the  building  of  the
temple  was  begun  in  a.d.  8)1,  and  finished  in  823.  Tiie  date  given  by  Csoma  is
l)robably  correct,  as  King  Tisrong  detsan's  father  was  a  contemjDorary  of  the  Tang
Emperor  Chang-tsung,  who  reigned  in  GS4.  Tisrong  reigned  from  740  to  786.  Ho
was  born,  according  to  Csoma,  a.d.  728. — (AV.  R.)

*  Ugyen-gyatso  also  speaks  of  the  woods  and  gardens,  and  especially  the  walnut
trees  of  this  section  of  coiintry.  He  refers  also  to  the  excellent  roads.  See  '  Report  on
tiie  Explor.  from  18.56  to  1886,'  p.  28.  A.  K.  speaks  of  the  village  of  Do  as  Dushio.
Tso  {shin)  means  village,  and  is  an  abl)reviatioii  from  grong-tso  (pr.  drong-tgo). —
(W.  R.)

t  There  is  a  Reting  gond^a  on  the  big  broad  between  Lhasa  and  llsi-niug,  not  far
from  Nagchukha.  The  party  referred  to  may  have  come  from  this  neighbourhood,
though  the  Dokpa  of  that  region  are  not  Horba. — (W.  R.)

X  Phamu  bub  of  tlie  maps.— (W.  R.)

§  Jang  on  the  maps. — (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO L/IASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  227

I  have  seen  in  Tibet,  tlie  j^lan  of  it  approaching  rather  that  of  a
modern  public  building  in  bengal.  I  noticed  here  eighteen  beautiful
silver  and  copper  chortcn,  the  finest  specimens  of  such  metal  work
I  have  seen.  Six  tablets  of  gold,  each  six  feet  long  and  six  inches
broad,  hung  from  the  ceiling,  besides  six  piles  of  similar  but  smaller
tablets  in  a  corner.

Of  all  the  monasteries  in  Til3et,  this  is  perhaps  the  richest  in
religious  treasures,*  and  the  Government  of  Lhasa  talvcs  particular
care  of  it.  Among  the  curious  objects  placed  before  the  images  of  the
gods  in  the  principal  temple,  I  saw  some  bowls  filled  with  various
kinds  of  seed  and  some  fossils,  among  which  some  grains  of  barley.

The  next  day  we  resumed  our  journey.  The  road  at  first  led
through  a  forest  said  to  have  sprung  from  the  hairs  of  Je  Phagmodu,
the  founder  of  the  Densa-til  lamasery,  f

All  the  way  to  Samdub  phodang,the  capital  of  the  Phagmodu  kings,
was  a  gentle  descent  over  gravel  and  mica-schist  rock.  Crossing  a
fine  wooden  bridge  about  fifty  yards  long,  with  railings  running  along
either  side,  we  found  ourselves  in  the  principal  street  of  the  town,  in
which  a  large  number  of  Dokpa  traders  were  camped  under  some
walnut  trees.

The  three-storied  castle,  once  a  royal  residence,  is  now  occupied
by  the  Djongpon  and  the  two  Tsedung  from  Lhasa.  Samdub  pliodang
is  now  a  gon-shi,  or  "  Crown  Demesne  "  of  Lhasa.

A  few  miles  beyond  this  town  we  came  to  the  Sangri  khamar
lamasery,  %  situated  on  a  beautiful  eminence  overlooking  the  Tsang-po,
whose  surface  is  broken  here  by  huge  masses  of  rock.  Around  the
great  lamasery  stretched  broad  fields  of  barley,  now  ripe  for  the
sickle,  and  the  beauty  of  the  crops  surpassed  anything  I  have  ever
seen  in  Tibet,

Here at  Sangri  khamar  once  lived Saint Machig  labdon,§  an

*  Quoting  from  the  Dsamling  yeshe,  our  author  says  elsewhere  that  tliere  arc
here  eighteen  silver  tombs  of  the  successive  Phagmondu  lama  rinpoche.

t  Trees  sprung  from  the  hair  of  saints  or  deities  are  frequently  found  in  Tibet  and
in  other  Buddhist  countries.  The  most  famous  is  the  "  white  sandalwood  tree "  of
Kumbum,  described  by  Hue  and  other  travellers.  Chandra  Das  tells  us  (supra,  p.  117)
of  a  juniper  within  the  walls  of  Tashilhunpo,  which  had  sprung  from  the  hair  of  Gediin-
dub,  the  first  Panchen  rinpoche.  Explorer  Ugyen-gyatso  ('  Report  on  Explor.  from
1856  to  i886,'  p.  28)  refers  also  to  the  Densatil  forest.  Csoma, '  Tib.  Gram.,'  p.  18.5,
says  the  Diin-sa  tel  (gdan-sa  tel)  monastery  was  founded  in  A.n.  11.56.~(W.  K.)

X  The  Dsamling  yeshe  calls  it  Zangri  khang  mar.— (S.  C.  D.)

§  Elsewhere  called  I.abkyi  Donma. — (S.  C.  D.)


228  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TLBET.

incarnation  of  Arya  Tara.  I  visited  the  cell  she  lived  in,  and  saw  her
tomb  and  an  image  of  her.  There  are  now  two  ascetics  living  here,
who  ha\'e  made  vows  never  to  come  out  nor  to  speak  a  word  so  long
as  they  live.  When  I  approached  them  they  smiled  and  seemed
pleased  with  the  little  present  I  made  them.  The  beadle  who
accompanied  me  said  they  had  been  immured  in  their  cells  for  ten
years.

Eesuming  our  journey,  we  passed  by  Sangri  Jong,  and  following
a  narrow  path,  scarcely  a  yard  wide,  overhanging  the  eddying  river,
reached  Logang  ferry ;  *  but,  though  we  shouted  for  an  hour  to  the
boatmen  on  the  other  side,  we  could  not  get  them  to  come  over  for
us,  so  we  had  to  return  to  the  village  of  Jong  at  the  western  base  of
the  Densa-til  mountain.  Here  we  got  lodgings  for  the  night  in  the
house  of  the  headman.

Kovemher  5. — A  little  before  dawn  we  left  Jong  and  made  for  the
Xango  t  ferry.  There  is  an  iron  suspension  bridge  at  this  place,  but
it  is  so  much  out  of  repair  that  it  cannot  be  crossed  over,  and  Ave
were  ferried  across  in  a  large  boat,  together  with  a  number  of  traders
and  their  donkeys.  The  river  is  very  narrow  here,  scarcely  a  hundred
yards  in  breadth.  Passing  tlirough  the  village  of  Khyungar  we
entered  Tse-tang,  %  the  capital  of  Yarlung,  and  formerly  a  place  of
great  importance.  Our  guide  procured  lodgings  for  us  in  the  house  of
a  woman  whose  husband,  a  Kashmiri,  had  died  a  year  or  so  before
and  who  was  now  living  alone  wdtli  her  Inisband's  son.  The  Kache
(Kashmiri)  received  us  very  kindly,  but  after  a  short  conversation
with  me  he  became  alarmingly  suspicious  of  my  true  character,  and
kept  continually  turning  the  conversation  to  the  Shaheb-logs  ("English-
men") lie  had  known  at  Katmandu,  and  the  greatness  of  the  Engrez
Maliarani  ("Queen  of  England"). As  often  as  he  spoke  of  these

*  From  Sangri  kliamar  the  traveller  turned  westward  along  the  river-bank  till  he
came  in  front  of  Logang  (or  Lu-kang-tu),  where  there  is  a  ferry-boat. — (W.  R.)

t  Nyen  on  the  maps.  I  find  no  mention  of  this  bridge  in  the  reports  of  other
exi)lorer8. — (W.  ll.)

X  Called  Chethang  by  all  the  other  explorers.  A.  K.  calls  it  "  a  large  town  con-
taining 1000  houses,  a  bazar,  a  gomba,  and  a  fort,"  '  Report  of  Explor.  made  by
A.  K.,'  p.  83.  Explorer  Ugyen-gyatso,  who  visited  in  October,  1883,  says,  "  Mahoraedan
shops  were  found  in  the  market  in  which  wheat  and  meat  soup  were  sold.  It  is  curious
tliat  tlie  lama  notes  tliat  pork  is  specially  cheap  at  this  place,  three  annas  being  the
price  paid  for  a  pig's  head,  and  eight  annas  for  a  quarter.  Radislies,  carrots,  and  yak's
flesh  are  also  sold  in  the  i)ublic  market,"  'Report  of  Explor.  from  1850  to  188G,'  p.  27.
Nain  Singh,  who  visited  Chetaiig  in  1873,  says  there  are  700  lamas  in  tlie  two
monasteries,  .see  Jour.  Hoy.  Geog.  Soc ,  xlvii.  117. — (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.


229


subjects,  so  often  did  I  rejoin  with  some  inquiry  about  Buddhism  or
a  lamasery  I  wished  to  visit.

I  soon  began  to  feel  excessively  nervous,  and  told  my  men  that
we  had  better  leave  Tse-tang  as  soon  as  possible ;  but  I'hurchung
assured  me  that  I  need  have  no  fear,  that  furthermore  the  ponies
absolutely  required  rest,  so  that  we  must  stay  here  a  few  days.


CANE BKIDGE OX THE KL'XGIT lUVEK.


The  day  after  our  arrival  at  Tse-tang  I  went  on  the  roof  of  our
house,  and  was  able  to  see  a  broad  stretch  of  the  surrounding
country.  To  the  north  of  the  town  was  the  Gonpoi  ri,  one  of  the
favourite  resorts  of  Shenrezig  (Avalokiteswara),  and  where,  according
to  tradition,  the  monkey  king  and  the  goblin  raised  their  family  of
monkeys,  from  which  ultimately  descended  the  Tibetan  race.*

*  This  legend  is  told  in  the  thirty-fourth  chapter  of  the  '  IMani  kambuni,'  and  our
author  gives  au  abstract  of  it.  I  have  translated  the  full  original  text  in  my  'Land
of  the  Lama?,'  p.  355  tt  sqq. —  (W.  K.)


230  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TTBET.

There  are  four  lamaseries  around  Tse-tang,  and  in  the  town  are
some  fifteen  Nepalese,  twenty  Cliinese,  and  ten  Kashmiri  shops,
besides  native  traders  from  all  parts  of  Tibet.  ]\Iutton  and  butter
were  abundant,  but  barley,  though  cheap,  is  of  inferior  quality.

I  left  Tse-tang  on  November  17  for  a  visit  to  the  Yarlung  valley
and  its  monuments.

A  short  distance  to  the  south  of  Tse-tang  we  passed  through
Ne-dong  djong,  where  resides  the  Djongpon  of  this  district,  and  which
used  to  be  a  royal  city  of  the  Phagmodu  kings.  Save  tlie  lamasery  of
Benja,  little  remains  but  ruins  to  attest  its  past  importance.

Following  up  the  course  of  the  Yarlung  river,  we  came  after  a  few
miles  to  the  temple  of  Tandub,  one  of  those  said  to  have  been  built
in  the  seventh  century  by  King  Strong-btsan  gambo,  and  to  which  a
monastery  was  later  on  added  by  Tisrong  detsan.  It  is  a  copy,  on  a
small  scale,  of  the  Jo  khang  of  Lhasa,  and  contains  many  objects  of
interest  to  the  pious  pilgrim.

Three  hours'  ride  from  Tandub  brought  us  to  Ombu  Iha-khang,*
the  most  ancient  of  Tibetan  palaces.  It  is  situated  on  the  side  of  a
range  of  bare  liills,  and  is  about  a  hundred  yards  from  tlie  village  of
Ombu,  which  derives  its  name  from  tlie  number  of  ombu  trees
(tamarisks)  which  grow  around  it.  Ombu  Iha-khaug,  though  it  has
temples  and  shrines,  is  more  properly  a  kind  of  memorial  hall.  The
images  in  it  are  not  those  of  gods  and  saints,  but  of  kings,  nobles,  and
ministers.  The  building  itself  is  a  curious  mixture  of  the  Indian  and
Tibetan  styles  of  architecture,  and  the  interior  arrangement  of  the
rooms  and  their  decorations  were  unlike  those  of  Tibetan  buildings.
The  rooms,  I  may  add,  all  face  eastward.

After  taking  our  lunch  under  a  tamarisk  tree,  we  remounted  our
ponies  and  rode  on  to  Phodang  djong,  the  most  ancient  town  in  Tibet.
As  all  the  kings  of  the  dynasty  which  sprang  from  tliis  place  bore  the
title  of  Chos-cjijul,  or  "  Catholic  majesty,"  this  town  is  also  called
Clios-gyal  phodang.  The  present  chief  of  this  place  claims  descent
from  this  very  ancient  line,  but  even  his  own  people  do  not  believe
mucli  in  liis  pretended  genealogy.

*  Called  on  the  mai)«  Zomba  T.hii  kliang  (•'  Ancient  Palace  "').  The  name  is  variously
written  U-bu  la-^ang,  Oniho  lang-gang.  See  Emil  Sciilaginwert,  'Die  Konige  von
Tibet,'  |).  42.  It  is  said  to  have  been  built  by  King  Nya-lvri  tsanpo  (IVth  century,
B.C.?),  or  by  King  Totori  nyau-lsan  (Ilird  century,  a.u.)-  I-  ■!■  Schmidt, oj^  cU.,  p.  ^17
•luoting  the  Bndhimur),  says  it  wa.s  called  Ombre  lang-ti.  — (W.  \\.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  231

A  few  miles  over  gently  rising  ground  brought  us  by  sunset  to  the
top  of  a  hill,  on  which  is  situated  the  Tag-tsan  buniba,  or  "  Dome  of
Good  Omens."  *  We  were  kindly  received  by  the  young  monk  in
charge  of  the  shrine,  who  presented  me  with  a  basket  of  splendid
white  potatoes,  which  vegetable  he  assured  me  had  grown  around  this
place  from  time  immemorial.f

November  8. — We  left  before  daylight,  and,  crossing  the  Yarlung,
reached  the  Rachung  lamasery  on  the  top  of  a  steep  hill,  where  we
gained  admittance  after  a  good  deal  of  trouble,  the  keeper  being
away  and  the  incarnate  lama,  Eachung,  confined  in  a  cell  performing
certain  vows.  A  little  below  the  monastery  we  were  shown  the  cave
in  which  the  original  Eachung,  the  greatest  of  Milaraspa's  disciples,
dwelt  for  three  years,  three  months,  and  three  days.|

We  rested  here  for  a  while,  and  then  went  to  the  village  of
Eachung  at  the  foot  of  the  hill,  where  we  found  good  lodgings  for  the
night  in  the  house  of  an  old  acquaintance  of  our  guide,  Gopon.

Formerly  this  broad  valley  of  Yarlung,  or  Gondang-tangme,  was
covered  with  innumerable  populous  villages,  and  in  no  other  part  of
Tibet  was  there  such  opulence.  But  one  day  the  snows  melting  on
the  Yarlha-shampo  and  torrential  rains  caused  a  mighty  flood  which
submerged  the  wliole  plain  for  many  days.  The  villages  were
utterly  destroyed,  and  the  people  all  perished,  and  when  the  waters
had  retired  a  deep  deposit  of  sand  covered  everything.  In  course  of
time  the  country  was  reclaimed,  and  has  now  reached  a  certain
degree  of  prosperity,  but  it  has  never  recovered  its  primitive
flourishing,  state.

The  next  day  we  rode  across  the  northern  slope  of  the  Shetag
mountains,  or  "Black  Crystal"  {Shcl-tag),  thus  called  from  the
glistening  black  rocks  exposed  to  view  along  the  road,§  and  after  a
few  miles  came  to  the  great  cemetery  which  adjoins  the  lamasery  of
Yarlung-shetag. Phurchung and  Gopon rolled  themselves  on  the


*  Tag  chlien  Poinda  on  the  maps. — (W.  R.)

t  The  young  monk  was  certainly  misinformed.  Potatoes  were  intioduced  into
Bhutan  by  Warren  Hastings,  and  spread  from  there  into  Tibet  within  the  last  hundred
years.  On  the  eastern  border  of  Tibet  potatoes  have  been  introduced  by  the  Chinese
and  the  French  missionaries. — (W.  R.)

%  Ras-chung  Dorje  gragspa,  or  "Dorje  drapa  of  Rachung,"  was  born  in  1083.  Tliis
lamasery,  which  he  founded, is  also  called Ras-cliung  phuggomba.  "the  lamasery  of  the
cave  of  Ras-chung." — (W.  R.)

§  Probably  porphyry. — (W.  R.)


232  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

blood-stained  stone  slab,  on  which  corpses  are  cut  up,  and  mumbled
some  mantra.

In  this  lamasery  there  live  forty  monks  and  as  many  nuns  :  *
their  children  are  brought  up  to  the  professions  of  their  parents.
This  arrangement  has  been  sanctioned  by  the  Nyingma  church,  as  the
lamasery  was  so  lonely  that  no  monks  could  be  induced  to  reside  in
it  till  this  privilege  was  conceded  them.

Beyond  this  lamasery  the  trail  led  along  the  edge  of  a  precipice
where  we  passed  a  number  of  little  cells  occupied  by  hermits  (or
tsampa),  who,  as  we  passed,  stretched  out  their  hands  for  alms
through  the  little  opening  left  in  the  front  of  their  dens.  Some  of
these  men  had  been  immured  five  years,  and  many  of  them  had  also
made  vows  of  silence.

A  little  way  beyond  this  point,  and  about  500  feet  below  the
summit  of  the  hill,  we  reached  the  cell  of  Padma  Sambhava,  near
which  is  a  chapel  called  the  Upper  Lha-khang  of  Shetag.  The
keeper  led  us  to  a  heavy  door  under  a  huge  rock ;  unlocking  it  we
entered  the  cavern,  which  is  held  the  most  sacred  shrine  of  the
Nyingma  sect.  In  it  I  saw  a  silver  reliquary  in  which  is  kept  a
silver  image  of  the  saint,  representing  him  as  a  boy  of  twelve.
There  was  a  plate  before  the  image  filled  with  rings,  earrings,
turquoises,  pieces  of  amber,  gold  and  silver  coins,  the  offerings  of
pilgrims.

Passing  the  Shetag,  we  came  to  the  village  of  Ze-khang  shikha.
and  thence  by  a  gentle  descent  we  reached  the  famed  temple  of
Tsandan-yu  lha-khang,  "  the  temple  of  sandal-wood  and  turquoise."
It  was  thus  called,  it  is  said,  because  that  its  founder,  King  Strong-
btsan  gambo,  only  used  in  building  it  sandal-wood,  and  that  the  blue
tiles  which  covered  it  were  glazed  with  melted  turquoises.f  It  is  a
rather  Chinese-looking  structure,  but  one  of  the  handsomest  I  have
seen  in  Tibet.  Every  month  six  monks  come  here  from  Tse-tang  to
hold  service.

A  very  short  distance  to  tlie  west  of  this  sanctuary  is  the  Llia-
bab-ii,  or  "  tlie  mountain  of  the  descent  (of  the  king  or  god)  "  {Uia

*  This  is  a  common  practice  in  the  Nyingma  sect.  Explorer  K.  P.  found  at
Tlium  Tsun^  (Lower  Tsangpo  valley)  a  monastery  in  which  "both  men  and  women
are  allowed  to  preach  and  live  together."  He  found  the  same  practice  in  the  adja-
cent village  of  Bhal  gonpa  and  Maritung.  '  Eejwrt  on  Explor.  from  185C  to  1886,'  pp.  U
and  12.— (W.  K.)

t  These  blue  tiles  are  certainly  of  Chinese  manufacture.— (W.  It.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.


233


having  both  meanings),  where  the  first  king  of  Tibet,  Nyakri-btsanpo,
was  seen  for  the  first  time  by  Tibetans.  There  is  a  little  plateau  on
this  hill,  called  the  "  King's  Plain,"  or  Btsan-tang,  where  a  temple
has  been  built  called  the  Btsan-tang  Iha-khang.*

Leaving  this  interesting  spot  behind,  we  rode  on  across  the  fields


BAMBOO GALLEIUEri IN TALUNG VALLEY.


wdiich  the  peasants  were  ploughing  and  irrigating  for  the  autumn
crops,  and  came,  after  a  few  hours,  to  the  sanctuary  of  Gadan
namgyal-ling,  where  Tsongkhapa  took  his  iinal  vows  of  moiddiood.

*  For  tLis  legend  see  I.  J.  Schmidt,  op.  cit.,  pp.  21  and  316.  Also  Eiuil  Scblaginweit,
'  Die  Konige  von  Tibet,'  p.  39  et  sqq.  Ugyen-gyatso  visited  this  spot  in  1883,  and
refers  to  this  legend,  op.  cit.,  p.  27. — (AV.  R.)


234  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

It  is  a  fine  building  in  tlie  midst  oi  a  grove  of  trees,  tlirougli  which
flows  a  brook.

From  this  point  we  retraced  our  steps  to  Tse-tang,  which  we
readied  the  same  day,  recrossing  the  Yarhmg  chu  by  a  long  stone
bridge  near  the  monastery  of  Tse-chog-pa,  where  we  saw  a  number
of  the  monks  bathing  in  the  river.

The  Yarluug  valley  appeared  to  me  to  be  a  most  prosperous  one,
the  people  gentle  and  good-natured.  The  soil  produces  grain  and
fruit  in  greater  abundance  than  any  other  part  of  Tibet  ;  chmvj,
butter,  meat,  oil,  barley,  wheat,  and  fuel  were  everywhere  plentiful.

On  November  10  we  left  Tse-tang,  on  the  return  journey  to
Taslnlhunpo.

"We  forded  the  Yarlung  river,  in  which  there  was  but  little  water,
nearly  all  of  it  having  been  drawn  off  by  irrigation  ditches  higher  up
the  valley,  and  passing  to  the  villages  of  Yangta  and  Gyerpal,  we
came  to  the  old  sanctuary  of  Yarlung,  called  the  Chyasa  Iha-khang,
or  "  the  resting-place-of-birds  temple,"  for  the  vast  flocks  of  birds  *
which  pass  here  in  their  migrations  make  it  a  resting-place.  It  is
situated  on  the  l)anks  of  the  Tsang-po,  and  is  a  finely  built  and  well-
kept  edifice,  with  a  courtyard  and  beautifully  frescoed  walls.  The
image  of  Sakya  Buddha  in  the  temple  is  said  to  be  made  with  an
alloy  of  gold,  silver,  copper,  and  iron.

Following  the  bank  of  tiie  Tsang-po,  through  heavy  sands  or  over
low  hills,  we  came  towards  evening  to  Chincho-ling,  a  secluded  and
desolate  little  hamlet,  the  houses  surrounded  by  low  walls  of  stone  to
keep  off  the  drifting  sands,  and  here  we  put  up  for  the  night.

The  next  morning  there  was  a  heavy  fog — quite  a  rare  phenomenon
in  these  parts — when  we  started.  We  breakfasted  at  the  little  fisher
village  of  Dong-sho,t  and  a  mile  or  so  beyond  this  entered  a  well-
cultivated  valley  containing  numerous  villages  and  fine  trees.  Near  the
first  village  we  came  to  stands  the  monastery  of  Chongdu-chog.  :|:  We
reached,  before  evening,  tlie  famous  Nying-ma  lamasery  of  Mindol
ling,  in  a  dale  opening  on  the  west  side  of  the  valley  ;  a  little  below
it  is  a  very  large  village,  where  we  found,  after  some  difficulty,
accommodation  in  the  house  of  a  well-to-do  man.

*  Called  Bya  (pronounced  Chya).  It  is  called  Clia  Sa  on  the  maps.  A.  K.  speaks
of  it  as  "tlie  temple  of  Chyasa  (Clieuse)  Lliakhang."— (AV.  R.)

t  Toug-slioi  on  tlic  maps.  A.  K.  mentions,  IJ  miles  west  of  this  point,  the  Gerpa
Duga  ferry.— (W.  R.)

X  Or  TsoDf,'  du  ta-tsaug,  according  tu  Ugyen-gyatso. — (W.  i!.J


JOUltNEY TO IjEASA AND GENTRAl. TIBET.  235

The  next  day  we  visited  the  temple,  which  is  very  beautiful,
though  the  lamasery  itself  has  never  recovered  from  the  pillage  l)y
the  Jungars  in  the  seventeenth  century  ;  and  the  Nyingma*  Church
being  at  present,  moreover,  persecuted  by  the  dominant  Gelugpa,  no
longer  enjoys  its  former  wealth.  The  neatness  of  tlie  stonework  and
the  finish  of  all  the  masonry  about  the  temple  were  very  remarkable,
and  the  courtyard  was  regularly  paved  with  stone  slabs.

To  the  south  of  the  monastery  is  the  residence  of  the  abbot,  wlio
is  always  selected  from  the  Tertalingpa  family,  in  which  this  office  is
hereditary.!

I  left  Mindol-ling  on  November  12,  returned  to  the  Tsang-po,
and  reached  the  village  of  Cho  by  dusk.  Quite  early  the  next
morning  we  entered  Khede-sho,  where  our  route  joined  that  we  had
taken  when  going  to  Samye.

We  left  Khede-sho  by  daylight  the  next  morning,  and  continuing
along  the  bank  of  the  Tsang-po,  crossed  the  long  meadow  of  Ding-
naga,  which  is  covered  with  a  fine,  short,  moss-like  sod.  Then  passing
through  the  villages  of  Kyishong,  Panza,  and  Gyatu-ling,  we  came  to
where  the  Gonkhar  mountains  abut  on  the  river.  On  their  farther
side  is  the  town  of  Gongkhar,  %  still  surrounded  by  imposing,  though
ruined  walls.  Here,  after  much  difficulty,  we  managed  to  obtain
shelter  in  the  house  of  a  fisherman,  who  gave  us  leave  to  pass  the
night  in  a  hovel  half  filled  with  yak  hides.  He  and  his  wife  were
very  kind  to  us,  and  looked,  to  the  best  of  their  ability,  after  our
wants  and  those  of  our  ponies.

"VVe  resumed  our  journey  at  4  in  the  morning,  and  pushed  on
slowly  and  with  considerable  difficulty,  for  the  path  was  over  rocks,
in  places  overhanging  the  roaring  river.  At  daybreak  we  passed  by
the  village  of  Shyati-ling,  and  shortly  after  the  sun  pierced  the  fog
which  had  enveloped  us.  A  low  col,  called  Yab  la,  was  next  passed,
and  we  joined  the  high-road  between  Lhasa  and  Shigatse,  which  I

*  This  lamasery  shares  with  Dorje-tag,  previously  referred  to,  the  honour  of  being
the  supreme  one  of  this  sect. Waddell,  o/>.  cit.,  217. — (W.  R.)

t  Ugyeu-gyatso  says  that  should  the  married  member  of  the  Tertaling  family
die  without  issue,  "  the  throne  "  Lama,  in  spite  of  his  vows,  is  expected  to  marry  the
widow,  and  raise  up  his  own  heirs  to  govern.  A  total  failure  of  heirs  is  attended  by
widespread  calamities— war,  famine,  and  general  disaster.  '  Report  of  Kxplor.  from
1856  to  1886,'  p.  29.

X  A.  K.  says  there  are  600  houses  in  Goug-klia  Jong  and  200  around  the  Gougkha
Chorten  (i.e.  Gong-kar  chosde). — (W.  R.)


23()  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

have  preA'iously  described.  We  stopped  for  the  nig-ht  at  Taina-
lung.

Tlie  next  day  (Xovember  16)  we  reached  Palti  djong.

On  the  18th,  a  mile  or  so  to  the  west  of  Oma-tang,  where  we  had
passed  the  night,  we  fell  in  with  the  Chinese  Amban  and  his  train  on
their  way  to  Lhasa.  First  came  numerous  parties  on  horseback,
then  about  three  hundred  men  on  foot  carrying  all  the  paraphernalia
common  to  Chinese  processions,  and  finally  the  Amban's  chair  carried
by  Chinese  and  sixteen  Tibetans,  the  latter  only  holding  strings
attached  to  the  poles  to  show  that  they  were  assisting  in  the  work.
Two  Chinese  armed  with  whips  kept  the  way  cleai'.

On  November  2-4  I  found  myself  once  more  at  Tashilhunpo,  and
immediately  set  to  work  to  prepare  for  a  trip  to  Sakya,  from  whence
it  was  my  intention  to  proceed  directly  to  India,  A  day  or  so  after
my  arrival  I  was  delighted  at  the  receipt  of  a  passport  from  the  new
Shape  of  Shigatse,  permitting  me  to  proceed  to  India  and  return
to  Tibet.  It  had  been  obtained  at  the  instance  of  my  friend,  the
minister.


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  237


CHAPTER X.

VISIT TO SAKYA  AND RETURN TO INDIA.

On  November  30,  1882,  I  said  farewell  to  Tashilhunpo,  and,
accompanied  by  Phnrchung  and  Gopon,  my  recent  guide  to  Saniye,  1
started  for  Sakya,  from  which  place  I  proposed  returning  to  Dar-
jiling  by  way  of  Khamba  djong  and  the  Kongra  lamo  pass.

The  country  was  now  bare,  the  brown  rocks,  the  gravelly  soil,  and
the  distant  snow-covered  mountains,  added  additional  bleakness  to
the  scene.  "We  reached  the  village  of  Nartang  the  same  evening,
and  were  kindly  received  by  some  old  friends  of  Phurchung.

A  little  before  daylight  the  next  morning  we  set  out,  following
the  great  high-road  which  leads  to  Upper  Tibet,  instead  of  taking  the
direct  road  which  leads  there  hy  the  Lang  la,  but  which  is  infested  by
highwaymen.

At  the  little  hamlet  of  Chagri  *  we  stopped  to  make  some  tea,  and
had  to  pay  three  annas  for  a  little  water,  as  the  people  have  to  bring
all  they  use  from  a  very  considerable  distance.

The  wind  was  blowing  violently  when  we  resumed  our  journey,  and
the  dust  was  so  thick  that  we  had  to  stop  at  Ge-chung,  a  little  village
to  the  west  of  the  Singma  la.

At  daybreak  we  set  out  again,  and  after  crossing  the  Re  chu  (here
called  Shab  chu),  along  whose  banks  are  numerous  hamlets,  we  came
to  Lhimpotse,  near  which  is  a  large  lamasery  built  on  a  rocky
eminence. t

We  stopped  for  the  night  at  Samdong,  just  beyond  which  village
is  a  long  wooden  bridge. We  got  accommodation  in  the  house  of  a

*  Chiakri  on  the  maps. — (W.  R.)

t  Called  Lingbo  chen  on  the  maps.  Our  author's  narrative  is  not  at  all  clear  in
this  part.  If,  as  he  states,  the  Re  chu  (Shab  chu)  flows  by  Samdong,  the  maps  arc
wrong,  for  they  make  this  river  to  flow  seven  miles  east  of  that  village  (Sau  chong  on
the  map).  It  is  probable  that  the  brook  (?)  which  flows  by  Samdong  is  an  affluent  of
the  Shab  elm,  but  the  maps  do  not  show  any  watercourse  at  this  point. — (W.  R.)


238  JOURNEY TO L/fASJ AND CENTRAL TIBET.

rich  A'illao-er,  the  younger  of  the  two  husliauds  (and  they  not  lirotliers)
of  the  woman  of  the  house.  The  other  husband  was  the  headman,
or  Sa-yong,  and  when  he  appeared,  he  oblighigly  sohl  us  very  good
clicmg,  mutton,  onions,  and  other  vegetables.

JDecetiiber  .3. — After  drinking  a  cup  of  steaming  cliaiKj  *  we  set
out,  and  following  the  course  of  the  Shab  chu,  came  to  where  the
Tsarong  chu  empties  into  it,  when  we  took  up  the  course  of  this
stream  and  followed  it  to  its  source.

Several  miles  above  the  village  of  Sikya,  where  cultivation
practically  ceases,  we  came  to  the  large  Dokpa  village  of  Jig-kyong,
where  we  stopped  for  the  night.  In  all  the  villages  small-pox  was
raging,  and  where  the  people  were  free  from  it,  they  showed  great
apprehension  about  letting  us  in,  lest  we  should  introduce  the
dreaded  disease  among  tliem.

The  next  day  (December  4)  we  crossed  the  Shong  la,t  which,
though  quite  high,  was  of  easy  ascent,  and  traversed  the  Tao  valley.
After  taking  lunch  at  the  Kham-yol  we  came  to  the  Aton  la,  from
whose  summit  Sakya  is  visible,  with  all  its  red-walled  buildings
and  gilded  spires,}  bearing  in  a  north-westerly  direction.

We  secured  lodgings  in  a  house  in  the  town,  near  the  bridge  over
the  Tom  chu,  and  from  the  window  of  my  room,  which  opened  to  the
south,  I  had  a  gorgeous  view  of  the  town  by  which  the  river  gently
flows  ;  also  of  the  great  temple,  and  beyond  these,  of  the  snow-
covered  peaks  of  Tinki  (Tingri)  and  Pherrug.

In  the  evening  I  strolled  about  the  clean,  though  narrow  streets,
where  the  market  people  were  still  busy  selling  their  wares.

Sakya  is  built  on  the  eastern  flank  of  Ponpoi  ri,  along  whose  base
flows  the  Tom  chu.  Facing  the  town,  but  on  the  other  side  of  the
river,  is  the  Lha-khang  chenpo  with  its  famous  liljrary  and  temple.

The  a])pearance  of  Sakya  is  different  from  that  of  most  Tibetan
towns,  Tlie  walls  of  almost  all  the  public  buildings,  temples,  and
dwelling-houses  are  painted  red  with  a  clay  obtained  from  the
neighbouring  hills.  Pdack  and  blue  stripes  about  nine  inches  broad
cut  the  walls  perpendicularly.  §

*  Usually  Tibetans  drink  tlicir  clumrf  cold.  Heating  it  is  the  Chinese  fashion. —
(W.  R.)

t  Chong  la  on  the  maps.— (W.  R.)

+  I  am  unable  to  follow  on  the  maps  our  author's  route  from  tlic  Chong  la  to
Sakya. He  appears  to  liave  taken  a  very  roundabout  way.- — (W.  R.)

§  This,  our  author  has  told  us  elsewhere,  i.s  a  distinguishing  sign  of  all  Nyingma
religious  and  lay  buildings. — (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.


2:^0


The  four  Labiung  *  temples,  built  vvitli  Cliiiiese  roofs  and  -ilded
spires,  are  especially  noticeable.  They  are  called  Lal)rang-shar  (or
"eastern"),  Labrang-nub  (or  "  western  "),  Labrangkhung,  and  Khansar
chenpo,  and  in  their  general  arrangement  tliey  do  not  differ  from  the
temples  I  had  seen  at  Tashilhunpo  and  elsewhere.


WA'l'KltFALL ABOXK TAlAX(i .MUNASTKI! V ON TIIK WAV TO YrJUTSO LA.


In  the  palmy  days  of  the  Sal^ya  hierarchy  there  were  four  abbots
under  the  hierarch  who  ruled  these  four  Labrang.  Tlie  rank  was
hereditary  in  their  families,  and  all  those  al)bots,  the  hierarch  in-
cluded, were  allowed  to  marry. This  system  of  hereditary  hierareliy

*  Lahrang  means  literally  "  dwelling  of  a  lama  dignitary." Phodrang  is  a  palace
or  residence  of  a  secular  oflficer. — (W.  R.)


240  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

M-as  known  as  dun-gyu.  At  the  present  time  the  abbots  are  Tantrik
lamas  from  Khams.  I  was  told  that  neither  the  lamas  nor  the  nuns
of  Sakya  are  held  by  the  people  to  be  exceptionally  virtuous,  and,  to
tell  the  truth,  the  laity  of  Sakya  has  a  similar  unsavoury  reputation
in  Tibet.

The  Emperor  Kublai  made  the  hierarch  Phagpa  ruler  of  Tibet,*
and  it  was  the  latter's  deputy  (or  Panchen  f),  Kunga  zangbo,  who
began  building  the  Lha-khang  chenpo  of  Sakya,  which  was  completed
by  one  of  his  successors  in  office,  Angien  tashi.  This  latter  proved
himself  an  able  and  vigorous  administrator,  and  annexed  Tagpo  to
the  Sakya  principality.  Zangpo-pal,  the  then  reigning  hierarch,  sent
him  on  a  mission  to  the  Emperor  of  China,  Buyantu,|  who  granted  to
him  and  his  heirs  in  perpetuity  the  Yamdo  lake  country.  The  Sakya
Panchen  have,  down  to  the  present  time,  been  taken  from  this
family.  The  last  Sakya  Panchen,  Kunga  nyingpo,  died  on  June
20,  1882  ;  his  tomb,  at  the  time  of  my  visit  to  Sakya,  was  almost
finished,  and  his  wife  was  still  wearing  mourning.

It  is  told  of  the  late  Sakya  Panchen  that,  some  sixteen  years  ago,
after  the  death  of  the  two  famous  Dayan  khanpo,  the  treasurer  of  the
Gadan  gomba  of  Lhasa,  when  his  wicked  spirit  was  causing  various
dire  calamities  to  Tibet,  every  endeavour  to  expel  it  from  the  country
proved  abortive.  So  finally  the  Government  of  Lhasa,  at  the  sug-
gestion of  the  oracles,  requested  the  Sakya  I'anehen  to  visit  Lhasa
to  drive  the  fiend  away.  At  the  foot  of  Mount  Potala  he  had  lighted
a  great  fire,  and,  by  the  potency  of  his  cliarms,  drove  the  evil  spirit
into  a  lay  figure  prepared  for  the  occasion,  whereupon  it  fell  straight-
way into  the  fire. Then  the  Panchen  drove  his  charmed  2>hu,rhu  §

*  Phagpa  (or  Dro-gon  Phagpa)  is  said  to  have  been  born  a.d.  1233,  and  became  ruler
of  Tibet  in  1251.  Csoma,  '  Tib.  grammar,'  p.  186.  The  latter  date  is,  however,  incon-
sistent with  facts,  as  Kublai  only  mounted  the  throne  in  1260,  and  became  actually
seated  on  the  throne  of  China  in  1280,  and  it  was  he  who  made  him  Kuo  shih,  or
"  Preceptor  of  the  realm."  H.  H.  Howorth,  'History  of  tlie  Mongols,'  i.  p.  506  et  sqq.,
makes  no  mention  of  Kul)lai  raising  Phagpa  to  be  ruler  of  Tibet.

t  Abbreviation  of  Poubo  chenpo,  or  "  great  officer."  The  Sakya  monastery  was
founded  in  a.d.  1071,  according  to  Csoma,  op.  cit.,  p.  197.  Phagpa  was  a  nephew  of  the
famous  Sakya  Pandita,  the  author  of  many  standard  works  of  Tibetan  literature.

+  Buyantu  reigned  from  1312  to  1320.  Ssanang  Ssetsen  says  that  the  lama  Sakya
Sribadra  was  head  of  the  church  under  him.  I.  J.  Schmidt,  op.  cit.,  p.  121.  The  Sa-
skya-pa  sect  was,  prior  to  the  rising  of  the  present  Gelugpa  sect,  the  most  powerful  of
tlic  reformed  schools  of  Tibetan  Buddhism. — (W.  II.)

§  A  spike  of  iron  or  bronze  with  a  triangular  section.  The  top  of  it  terminates  in
a  dorje.  It  is  used  in  (i.Korcisms.  Emil  Schlaginweit,  'Buddhism  in  Tibet,'  p.  257
tt  sqq.,  and  Waddell,  op.  cit..  pp.  311,  483,  and  488.— (W.  R.)


JOURNEY  TO LHASA AND CENTBAL TIBET.  241

into  the  imaj^e,  but  while  so  doing  the  flames  of  the  pyre  surroumled
him,  and  all  thought  he  was  dead ;  but  lo !  after  an  hour  or  so  he
came  out  of  the  flames  dressed  in  rich  satins,  and  with  not  even
so  much  as  a  hair  of  his  head  scorched.

Panchen  Jimed  wang-gyal,  or  one  of  the  other  sons  of  the  late
Panchen,  will  succeed  him  as  ruler  of  Sakya.  One  son  is  an  incarnate
lama  and  superior  of  the  Tanag  Donphug  lamasery,*  but  he  is  obliged
to  reside  continually  at  Sakya  on  account  of  a  nde  which  prescribes
that  when  the  re-embodiment  of  a  lama  takes  place  in  Sakya,  the  re-
incarnation cannot  return  to  the  locality  he  occupied  in  his  preceding
existence.  The  names  of  the  four  other  sons  of  the  deceased  Panchen
will  shortly  be  sent  to  Lhasa,  and  the  Nachung  oracle  will  decide
who  shall  become  the  ruler  of  the  principality.

These  princely  lamas  wear  long  hair,  ordinarily  plaited  in  two
queues  hanging  down  their  backs  and  tied  at  the  ends  with  white
cotton  handkerchiefs.  Over  their  ears  they  wear  covers  of  gold
studded  with  turquoises  and  emeralds,  and  almost  reaching  to  their
shoulders. To  the  lower  part  of  these  are  appended  earrings.f

In  the  Lhakhang  chenpo  (or  great  temple)  are  five  seats  of  equal
height,  on  which  the  princes  take  tlieir  places  when  conducting
religious  services ;  the  one  reserved  to  the  hierarch  remains  vacant
so  long  as  the  successor  to  the  title  has  not  been  chosen.

Under  the  hierarch  there  is  a  Shape,  or  minister,  who  attends  to
all  the  temporal  affairs  of  Sakya.  The  monks  are  divided  into  two
orders,  according  to  the  locality  of  their  birth ;  those  from  Tibet
proper  forming  one  set  ruled  by  a  Gekor,  and  having  their  cells  near
the  great  temple,  and  those  from  Khams  (or  Eastern  Tibet),  also  with
a  Gekor  over  them,  who  live  in  the  town.

As  to  the  great  library  of  Sakya,  it  is  on  shelves  along  the  walls
of  the  great  hall  of  the  Lhakhang  chen-po.  There  are  preserved
here  many  volumes  written  in  gold  letters  ;  the  pages  are  six  feet  long
by  eighteen  inches  in  breadth.  On  the  margin  of  each  page  are  illu-
minations, and  the  first  four  volumes  have  in  them  pictures  of  the
thousand  Buddhas.  These  books  are  bound  with  iron.  They  were
prepared  under  orders  of  the  Emperor  Kublai,  and  presented  to
Phag-pa  on  his  second  visit  to  Peking.

*  On  this  lamasery,  see  supra,  p.  06.

t  Apparently  the  earrings  are  attached  to  the  ear-covers  of  gohl,  not  to  the  ear
itself.— (W.  E.)

R


242  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND (JENTRAL TTBET.

There  is  also  preserved  in  this  temple  a  conch  shell  with  whorls
turning  from  left  to  right,  a  present  of  Kublai  to  Phagpa.  It  is  only
blown  l)y  the  lamas  when  the  request  is  accompanied  l)y  a  present  of
seven  ounces  of  silver ;  but  to  blow  it,  or  have  it  blown,  is  held  to
be  an  act  of  great  merit.*

On  December  5  I  left  Sakya,  and  passing  by  the  Choskhor-lhunpo
monastery,  entered  the  broad  Yalung  valley,  in  which  stands  the  big
village  of  Lora  and  numerous  scattered  hamlets.  We  stopped  at  Lora
to  eat  our  breakfast,  but  so  intense  was  tlie  fear  of  the  people  of
small-pox,  of  which  there  were  several  cases  in  the  village,  that  they
would  have  absolutely  nothing  to  do  with  us,  not  even  to  sell  us
firewood.f

After  crossing  the  Yalung  river  we  ascended  the  Doug  la,  from
whose  summit  we  saw  the  Chomo  kankar  (Mt.  Everest),  and  the
endless  ranges  of  mountains  which  jut  out  from  it  westward.  At  the
Dong  la  the  Arun  and  the  Kosi  have  their  sources.

The  descent  of  the  Dong  la  was  very  gradual,  the  country
extremely  bare,  not  a  single  tree  was  to  be  seen  anywhere.  We
reached  Chu-sho,  at  the  foot  of  the  pass,  at  about  five  o'clock,  and  it
was  only  after  much  persuasion  that  we  gained  admittance  to  a  poor
hut  occupied  by  an  old  woman  and  her  son.

The  next  day  we  followed  for  a  while  the  course  of  a  little  stream,
called  the  Chu-shu,  and  then  came  upon  a  broad,  barren  plain,  on
either  side  of  which  rose  l)leak  and  lofty  mountains.

Leaving  the  village  of  Map-ja,  in  which  there  are  about  one  hundred
houses,  we  breakfasted  at  Donkar,  and  then  made  our  way  towards
the  Shong-pa  la,  following  up  the  course  of  the  Shong  chu.  The
ground  in  many  places  was  riddled  with  holes  made  by  a  burrowing
animal  called  srimoivjX  and  our  ponies  had  many  tumbles  by  putting
their  feet  in  them.

*  Called  in  Tibettiu,  Ya  chyil  dung-liar :  and  in  Chinese,  Yu  Jisiiau  pai-lei.  Both
nations  consider  such  shells  as  treasures  of  inestimable  value.  'J'here  is  one  in  China,
kept  at  Fu  chu  by  the  Ti-tuh.  See  Pelthuj  (ruzetfe,  February  23,  1867,  and  one  at
Lhasa. '  Tlie  I^and  of  the  Lamas,'  p.  110. — (W.  R.)

t  "In  1791  tiie  Talc  lama,  under  orders  from  the  Emperor,  erected  special  iiospitals
for  small-pox  patients,  in  which  they  were  supjdicd  with  food  and  every  necessary,  and
which  were  in  care  of  a  special  officer.  .  .  .  Tlie  same  plan  has  been  adopted  by  the
aiitliorities  of  Tashilhunpo  and  Chamdo"  (Jour.  Eoij.  Asiat.  Soc  7t.8.  xxiii.  p.  2;i5).
I  am  not  aware  that  these  hospitals  are  kept  up  at  the  present  day. — (W.  R  )

X  Tlic  marmot  is  called  Chyi  (piiyi)-wa.  Mimg  I  am  unable  to  explain;  perhaps  it
is  the  same  animal  which  our  author  calls  elsewhere  the  sremong  (sri),  and  which  is


JOURNEY TO LfTASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  243

On  descending  from  the  Shong-pa  la  we  found  ourselves  in  the
broad  Chib-lung  valley,*  and  towards  six  o'clock  we  reached  the
village  of  Dogang,  and  found  shelter  for  the  night  in  the  hut  of  some
poor  people.

The  following  morning  we  passed  through  Tashigong  and  break-
fasted at  Cure,  a  village  belonging  to  my  friend  the  minister. Leaving


VIEW IX LHOXAK, CHOMUOIO IN DISTANX'E.

this  place,  we  began  the  ascent  of  a  high  range  which  separated  us
from  lake  Tel-tung,  or  "  Mule's  Drink."  f  This  pass  is  known  as  the
Dobta  Lachan  la,  and  one  commands  from  it  a  most  gorgeous  view  of
a  wide  expanse  of  countrj-,  tlie  ISTepalese  and  Sikkimese  Himalayas,

smaller  than  a  cat.  with  tawny  hair.  The  skin,  he  adds,  is  luiich  used  in  witchcraft.
The  skin  is  blown  up  after  putting  inside  it  a  slii)  with  the  name  of  the  jjcrson  it  is
desired  to  injure  on  it. The  victim  dies  of  an  inflated  body  within  seven  days. — ( W.  R.)

*  The  Chiblung  tsangpo,  the  Upper  Arun,  flows  througli  this  valley. — (W.  R.)

t  On  this  lake,  see  supra,  p.  211.


244  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

with  lake  Tel-tuiig  and  Dobta  djong,  belonging  to  the  Sikkim  Kajah,
on  a  hillock  beside  the  lake  in  the  foreground.

We  stopped  for  the  night  at  Chorka,  a  part  of  Dobta,  where  a
villager  gave  us  the  use  of  a  yak-hair  tent  standing  in  his  courtyard.
We  only  remained  here  a  short  while,  leaving  before  daylight,  as  we
wanted  to  reach  Khamba  djong  the  same  day.  The  cold  was  intense,
and  tlie  violent  wind  which  blew  made  it  more  piercing.  Our  way
led  along  the  margin  of  lake  Tel-tung,  now  completely  dried  up  and
more  resembling  a  broad  pasture  land  than  a  lake.  The  country
was  alive  with  game ;  wild  sheep,  goats,  and  asses  were  specially
numerous.

Leaving  this  broad  plain,  we  entered  the  valley  of  the  Che  chu
by  a  low  col  between  the  Dobta  and  Yarn  la  ranges.  Crossing  the
river,  we  stopped  for  a  while  at  Targye,*  wliile  Phurchung  went  on
ahead  to  Khamba  djong  to  secure  lodgings  for  us.

At  live  o'clock  we  reached  the  village  of  Khamba,  and  were
received  most  kindly  by  Phurchung's  friend,  Wang-gyal,  who,  together
with  his  wife,  did  everything  in  their  power  to  make  us  comfortable.

After  tea  I  went  with  Phurcliung,  who  had  put  on  his  best  clothes
for  the  occasion,  to  visit  the  Djongpon.  The  Djong  stands  on  a
hillock,  the  ascent  of  which  is  rather  steep,  and  is  made  by  flights  of
stone  steps.  The  fort  is  a  spacious  two-storied  building,  and  is
supplied  with  water  brought  there  through  clay  pipes  from  the
mountains  to  the  north,  a  piece  of  work  of  which  the  people  are  not
a  little  proud,  t

The  Djongpon  were  reading  religious  books  when  I  entered  their
presence,  and  the  lama  one  asked  me  questions  about  myself  and  the
object  of  my  journey,  all  of  which  I  managed  to  answer  satisfactorily.
I  showed  my  passport,  to  which  they  put  their  seals,  retaining  a  copy
of  the  document.  When  I  left  they  presented  me  with  a  dried
sheep's  carcass,  ten  pounds  of  rice,  and  a  rug,  and  expressed  the
hope  that  they  would  see  me  again  the  following  year.

On  returning  to  our  lodgings  I  hired  two  ponies  and  a  yak-hair
tent  for  our  use  as  far  as  Gen-pang  tang.

We  left  early  in  the  morning,  after  saying  farewell  to  our  faithful
guide  Gopon,  who  h'ft  us  here  to  return  to  his  home  at  Gyantse,  and

*  At  this  point  our  author's  route  joined  that  which  lie  had  taken  wluu  coming  into
Tibet. — (W.  H.) The  Ch(;  chu  is  tlic  Arun,  slo  sujjra,  p.  42.

t  Certainly  not  of  their  own  invention  or  manufacture. —  (\V.  I\.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  245

breakfasted  at  Geru.  On  the  way  we  saw  several  flocks  of  wild
sheep  and  some  foxes.  Leaving  Geru,  we  ascended,  one  after  the
other,  the  foothills  of  the  Kongra  lamo  pass,  through  a  wild  but
beautiful  country,  till  we  finally  reached  the  snow-covered  summit,
near  which  we  camped  on  a  bare  rock.  Thanks  to  the  yak-hair  tent
and  the  good  fire  of  argols  which  Phurchung  kept  burning,  we  did
not  suffer  from  the  intense  cold  and  piercing  wind.

The  following  morning  (December  10)  we  reached,  at  an  early
hour.  Gen-gang,  which  forms  the  boundary  lietween  the  territories  of
the  Grand  Lama  and  the  Rajah  of  Sikkim,  a  vassal  of  the  British
Raj.  From  this  point  my  way  lay  through  Sikkim  by  a  route
followed  by  various  European  travellers,  and  concerning  which  I
need  say  nothing  here.  I  reached  Darjiling  and  my  home  on
December  27,  after  an  absence  of  over  a  year.


246  JOUnNF.Y TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.


CHAPTEE XL

SOCIAL DIVISIONS — MARKIAGE — FUNEliALS — MEDICINE — FESTIVALS.

In  Tibet  there  are  three  distinct  chisses  among  the  people,  lay  and
clerical,  which  are  determined  by  birth  and  social  position,  and  each
of  these  has  three  sub-divisions.* They  are  as  follows  : —

First,  or  highest  class.  Bah : —

1. — Rah-hyi  rah.  The  king,  members  of  the  royal  family,  and
incarnate  lamas  who  have  appeared  many  times  on  earth.

2. — Bah-hji  ding.  The  Desi,  or  regent,  ordinary  incarnate  lamas,
ministers  and  councillors  of  state,  learned  lamas,  or  abbots,  professors
at  important  monasteries.

3. — Bah-laji  tama.  Secretaries  to  the  Government,  IJahpon,
Djongpon,  and  inferior  lamas,  or  abbots.

Middle  classes.  Ding  :■ —

1. — Bing-hyi  rcib,  or  "  upper  middle  class,"  including  families  who
have  for  generations  possessed  great  wealth,  landlords  who  do  not
claim  descent  from  illustrious  ministers  or  warriors ;  1  )ungkhor,  old
families  and  men  who  have  personally  contributed  in  a  marked  degree
to  the  welfare  of  the  country ;  and  lastly,  the  Don-nyer.

2. — Ding-l'yi  ding.  This  class  includes  the  Dung-yig,  or  clerks,
stewards,  chamljcrlains,  head  grooms,  head  cooks,  and  other  petty
officers.

3. — Ding-hiji  tama. Soldiers  and  sul))ects.  f

Lowest  class,  Tama : —

1. — Tamai  rah.  Grooms,  menials  engaged  in  domestic  service,
and  other  hired  servants.

*  I  think  thc'bc  "  classes  "  arc  more  theoretical  thau  real,  and  that  these  remarks
are  proliably  borrowed  from  some  work,  based  on  Indian  notions.  The  idea  of  caste  is
nn-Tibetan  as  it  is  un-Cliiuese.  Bah  (robs)  means  "  family,  race,  social  class."  Rah-
hyi  rahs  means  "  upper  superior  class;  "  Itah-laji  ding,  "  middle  superior  class;  "  Rah-
lyi  tamn,  '•  lowest  sujierior;  "  lJin(j-l:yi  rah,  "  superior  middle  class,"  etc.,  etc.—  (W.  R.)

t  By  "subjects"  I  fancy  our  author  must  mean  serfs  or  tenants  (misser).


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  247

2. — Tamed  ding.  Those  who  liave  no  fixed  homes,  men  wlio
keep  concubines,  but  no  wives,  loose  wcmien,  professional  beggars,
vagabonds,  and  paupers.

3. — Tamai  tama.  The  lowest  of  the  low  are  Ijutchers,  scaveno-ers.
disposers  of  dead  bodies,  blacksmiths,  and  goldsmiths.

In  Tibet  there  are  no  caste  restrictions  with  regard  to  marriage  as  ■
in  India.  The  rich  may  bestow  their  daughters  on  tlie  poor,  the
daughter  of  a  poor  man  may  become  the  bride  of  the  i)roudest  noble
of  the  country.  But  the  girls  of  the  royal  family  and  those  of  high
rank  are  not  generally  bestowed  on  the  low  classes ;  but  in  the  event
of  their  not  finding  a  suitable  matcli,  they  are  sent  to  convents.  The
daughters  of  commoners  do,  however,  occasionally  become  the  wives
of  nobles.

The  nuptial  ceremonies  are  alike  for  all  classes,  the  only  difference
being  in  the  amount  of  money  expended  in  the  festivities.  In
the  first  place,  the  friends  of  the  bridegroom  employ  a  go-between
to  make  the  first  overtures  to  the  parents  or  guardians  of  the  girl.
Should  the  latter  entertain  the  proposal,  the  parents  of  the  would-be
bridegroom  either  take  or  send  presents  to  them,  consisting  of  Jcliatag
and  wine  (called  long  chang,  "  proposal  wine  "),  and  formally  make
an  offer  of  marriage.  The  girl's  parents  make  excuses,  saying  that
she  is  neither  handsome  nor  accomplished,  and  will  be  of  no  service
to  the  suitor.  The  go-betweens  thereupon  more  and  more  earnestly
press  their  suit.  After  these  conventional  phrases  liave  been
exchanged,  the  girl's  parents  say,  "  If  you  are  really  in  earnest,  and
believe  that  she  will  be  of  service  to  you,  we  shall  consult  with  our
friends  and  relatives,  and  let  you  know  our  decision."

A  few  days  later  their  consent  to  the  union  is  formally  conveyed
to  the  suitor's  parents,  when  the  latter,  taking  with  them  twenty  or
thirty  gallons  of  wine,  proceed  to  the  home  of  the  bride,  where  they
entertain  not  only  all  her  relatives,  but  also  the  servants  and  neigli-
bours,  and  present  each  with  a  scarf.  The  purchase-money  (rin)  is
then  paid,  which,  for  the  middle  classes  is  usually  five  or  six  doche
(625  to  750  rupees),  and  about  fifty  gallons  of  wine.  Another  scarf
is  then  presented  to  each  of  the  elder  members  of  the  bride's  family,
and  also  to  prominent  persons  among  her  friends  and  neighbours.

After  an  auspicious  day  has  been  fixed  for  the  wedding,  the
parties  make  the  arrangements  necessary  for  the  occasion.  On  the
appointed  day  the  bridegroom's  parents  depute  some  seven  or  eiglit


248  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

respectable  men  to  ^o  as  their  representatives  to  bring  home  the
bride.  They  remain  at  her  father's  house  three  days,  during  which
they  are  engaged  in  making  negotiations  and  in  assuring  their  hosts,
by  whom  they  are  provided  during  this  period  with  all  necessaries,
that  their  daughter  will  be  liappy  in  her  new  home.  At  the  end  of  the
three  days  the  bride  is  told  by  her  parents  to  go  to  the  bridegroom's
house.  They  give  her  a  good  milch-cow  or  yak,  a  pony,  four  or  five
oxen,  two  suits  of  summer  and  winter  dress,  a  complete  set  of  jewellery
according  to  the  custom  of  the  country,  a  piece  of  stuffed  carpet  and
a  small  dining-table,  cups,  plates,  cooking  vessels,  and  other  articles
for  domestic  use,  fifty  ounces  of  silver,  and  a  female  attendant.  All
those  who  have  received  scarves  now  come  to  present  her  in  return
with  a  scarf  and  a  piece  of  money.  The  nearest  relatives  and  friends
of  the  parents,  the  chief  of  the  country,  and  other  people  of  position,
present  her  with  scarves,  clothes,  blankets,  etc.,  and  silver  coins.

Presently  about  twenty  of  the  bridegroom's  friends  arrive  to
conduct  the  bride  to  her  new  home.  For  the  first  half  of  the  journey
the  arrangements  are  made  and  expenses  defrayed  by  the  bride's
parents  ;  for  the  second  half  by  those  of  the  bridegroom,  and  it  is
made  on  horseback,  the  bride  riding  in  the  middle  of  the  party.
Arriving  at  their  destination,  the  bride  is  seated  on  a  cushion  placed
on  a  raised  stand  by  the  side  of  her  husband  in  the  middle  of  the
bridal  party.  At  an  auspicious  hour  a  short  religious  service  is
performed  by  the  village  lama,  and  the  parents  or  sponsors  of  the
parties  offer  prayers  for  the  happiness  of  the  union.*  The  bride-
groom's parents  then  beseech  the  gods  to  witness  the  ceremony  of
their  son's  marriage,  and  declare  that  lienceforth  the  bride  will  Ije
owned  by  the  Ijridegroorn  and  his  brothers  alone.  For  three  days  the
festivities  continue,  during  which  time  as  much  as  fifty  chiqnm  of
wine,  three  oxen,  and  three  pigs  are  sometimes  consumed.  The
notables  among  the  bridegroom's  friends  arrive  with  presents  of
scarves,  and  are  entertained  by  his  father.

On  the  third  day  the  bride  exchanges  the  clothes  and  jewellery
she  wore  on  her  arrival,  for  others  supplied  by  the  bridegroom.  After
a  short  prayer  to  the  gods  the  pair  are  left  together,  for  the  first  time,
and  on  the  following  morning  the  bride  begins  to  apply  herself  to  her
houseliuld  duties.  Her  brotliers  and  relatives  who  have  accompanied
lier,  return  liome  at  tlie  expiration  of  seven  days.

*  Cf.  Jour.  Boy.  Anat.  Soc,  n.s. xxiii.  pp.  228-230. See  also  Wudilcll,  op.  cit..


JOURNEY  TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TTBET.  249

Some  three  months  after  the  wedding  her  parents,  accompanied


by  the  chief  men  among  tlieir  friends  and  by  servants,  arrive  with
presents  of  food,  and  request  that  their  daughter  may  pay  them  a


250  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

vi.'^it.  After  being  entertained  for  ten  or  twelve  days,  tliey  return
home,  and  are  followed  some  weeks  later  by  the  young  couple,  who
are  accompanied  by  a  number  of  female  servants  bearing  presents  of
scarves,  provisions,  wdne,  etc.  They  remain  a  month,  and  on  their
departure  the  bride  receives  from  her  father  a  new  costume  and
jewellery,  and  the  husband  a  complete  suit  of  clothes  and  the
inevitable  scarf.

Among  the  very  poor  the  proceedings  are  much  simplified,  the
negotiations  being  conducted  by  the  parents  in  person.

There  is  no  fixed  limit  of  marriageable  age  in  Tiliet.  The  average
age,  however,  for  ])oth  sexes,  is  from  fifteen  to  twenty-five,  and
frequently  the  l)ride  is  older  than  the  bridegroom.

When  parties  are  desirous  of  dissolving  the  marriage  bond,  the
reason  for  so  doing  must  first  be  investigated.  If  the  husband  be
found  entirely  blameless  and  willing  to  live  with  his  wife,  but  she
be  resolved  to  divorce  him,  she  is  required  to  pay  double  the  rin,  or
price  paid  for  her,  as  a  fine  for  the  dissolution  of  the  marriage  con-
tract, called  horche  and  den  tjo,  that  is,  "  divorce  fine"  and  "  innocence
fine."  *  In  the  absence  of  a  marriage  contract,  the  divorce  fine  fixed
by  law  for  the  wife  to  pay  amounts  to  eighteen  gold  slw,  equal  to  135
rupees;  and  for  the  husband  three  gold  srang,  equal  to  180  rupees.
If  the  husljaud's  innocence  be  doubtful,  but  the  wife's  charges  remain
unproved,  the  wife  is  required  to  pay  as  divorce  fine  a  complete  suit  of
clothes,  a  pair  of  shoes,  a  bed-carpet,  bed-rug,  and  a  wrapper,  and  the
husband  must  present  to  his  wife  a  second  scarf  and  a  tliird  article  of
any  kind.

On  the  other  hand,  if  a  wife  be  found  perfectly  innocent,  and

willing  to  live  witli  her  husband,  but  the  husband  be  resolved  to

divorce  her  for  no  fault  of  hers,  he  is  required  to  i)ay  to  her  twelve  gold

sho,  equal  to  ninety  rupees,  as  divorce  fine,  and  also  yog  la,  "  service

wage,"  amounting  to  six  pounds  of  barley  for  every  day  and  six  for  every

night  which  she  has  spent  with  him  from  the  day  of  marriage  to  the

date  of  sejjaration. The  husband  is  also  required  to  return  the  price  of

all  the  clothes  and  other  gifts  made  to  the  wife  by  her  friends  since  the

time  of  their  marriage. The  divorced  woman  also  takes  away  with

her all jewellery given  her  by her  relatives,  but  not  that  given

*  Tlie  information  contained  in  this  section  lias  been  compiled,  our  author  says,
from  "a  Icj^al  work."  I  doubt  if  its  rules  are  in  practice.  Borche  appears  to  be  hhor-wa
chyt;  (Ityed),  "  to  cast  away,  to  abandon."  Den  yo  is  bde7i,  "  truth;  "  and  perhaps  gyogs
(for  yo),  "  covering  of." — (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET  251

to  her  by  her  husband.  The  wife  cannot  demand  tlie  "  innocence
fine."  If  there  be  children  at  the  time  of  separation,  the  father  takes
the  boys,  and  the  mother  the  girls.  If  the  ]iusl)and  be  a.  man  of
property,  the  court  may  order  liim  to  give  the  divorced  wife  a  certain
share  of  his  possessions  for  the  maintenance  of  the  girls.  On  the
other  hand,  if  the  wife  be  possessed  of  property,  she  may  be  required
to  give  something  for  the  maintenance  of  her  sons.

Again,  when  a  marriage  is  contracted  between  a  man  of  noble
blood  and  a  woman  of  humble  rank,  or  vice  versa,  with  the  definite
understanding  that  they  shall  share  each  other's  good  and  adverse
fortune,  their  property  in  case  of  divorce  is  to  be  divided  between  them
according  to  their  faithfulness  or  guilt,  and  their  amount  of  mutual
presents  at  the  time  of  union.  In  cases  of  divorce  between  parties
who  were  united  at  their  own  M'ish  for  the  enjoyment  of  pleasure  or
merriment,  the  court  should,  without  regard  to  the  nature  of  their
guilt,  divide  their  property  equally  between  them.*  In  cases  of
marriage  between  slaves  or  serfs,  tlie  owner  decides  their  separation
or  continued  union.  A  man  of  this  class  is,  for  instance,  married  to
a  woman  who,  the  owner  thinks,  might  be  of  some  service  to  him.
When  the  woman  is  found  useless,  she  is  dismissed,  being  given  one-
sixth  of  her  husband's  belongings,  and  her  place  is  supplied  by  a  new
wife  chosen  by  the  owner.

In  Tibet  members  of  the  same  family  are  forbidden  Ijy  law  to
contract  matrimonial  alliances  with  their  kindred  within  seven
degrees.  This  rule  is,  however,  nowadays  disregarded  by  the  people,
who  are  known  to  make  alliances  with  their  kinsmen  who  are  distant
only  three  or  four  degrees  of  consanguinity.  Among  the  Pobos  and
Khamlja  marriage  is  promiscuously  contracted,  the  brother  marrying
his  sister,  the  nephew  his  aunt.f  Among  the  common  Tibetans,  so
long  as  the  parties  do  not  claim  a  common  father,  there  is  no  objec-
tion to  the  marriage ;  the  uterine  brother  and  sister  may  be  united,
and  a  man  may  marry  his  stepmother  or  aunts.

The  custom  of  several  brothers  making  one  woman  their  common
wife,  to  keep  the  ancestral  property  entire  and  undivided,  is  said  to

*  This  would  appear  to  refer  to  temporary  marriages. — (W.  K.)
t  So  far  as  the  Khamba  are  concerned,  I  think  our  author  is  not  correct  in  his
staten.ent.  That  it  may  have  once  been  as  lie  says  is  highly  probable,  but  at  present
it  is  certainly  not  so  ;  intercourse  with  the  Chinese  has,  I  believe,  caused  not  only  the
people  of  Eastern  Tibet,  but  of  all  Tibet  to  adopt  to  a  great  extent  their  ideas  concerning
marriages  between  near  relations. — (W.  K.)


252  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CEXTHAL TIBET.

have  had  its  origin  in  Kliams,  "wlicre  it  is  at  this  day  extensively
practised.  The  Tibetans  of  U  and  Tsang  have  borrowed  it  from  their
cousins  of  Khams,  but  it  is  not  universal  with  them.*  The  wife  is
claimed  by  the  younger  brothers  as  their  wife  only  so  long  as  they
continue  to  live  with  the  eldest  one.  When  they  separate  from  their
eldest  brother,  they  cannot  ask  him  to  pay  compensation  for  their
share  in  the  wife,  and  she  remains  the  lawful  wife  of  the  eldest
brother.  It  is  not  unusual  for  a  father  or  uncle  to  live  with  his  son's
or  nephew's  wife,  and  even  in  high  life  a  fatlier  makes  himself  a
partner  in  the  marital  rights  over  his  son's  wife,  f

The  cessation  of  the  pulse  and  the  suspension  of  breathing  are  not
considered  tests  of  the  extinction  of  vitality.  The  Tibetans  consider
that  the  spirit  {nam  she)  usually  lingers  in  the  mortal  frame  for  not
less  than  three  days,  though  the  spirits  of  those  who  have  attained  to
some  stage  of  holiness  quit  the  body  immediately  after  the  last  breath
has  been  drawn,  for  communion  with  the  dwellers  in  Paradise,  called
Gadan  or  Tushita ;  but  instances  of  such  saintly  personages  are  of
very  rare  occurrence.  It  is  consequently  considered  a  very  sinful
action  to  move  or  dispose  of  the  corpse  immediately  after  death.
Nowadays  in  Tibet  and  Mongolia  the  dead  bodies  of  all  classes  of
men  are  carefully  kept  within  doors  for  three  days,  during  which
time  their  friends  and  relations  attend  on  them  and  make  prayers  for
their  future  well-being.  On  the  morning  of  the  fourth  day  the
horoscope  of  the  deceased,  and  that  of  the  man  who  is  selected  to  be
the  first  to  touch  the  corpse  for  removal,  are  consulted.  A  lama  is
employed  to  perform  certain  funeral  ceremonies,  with  a  view  to  cause
the  spirit  of  the  deceased  to  pass  out  through  a  certain  slit  in  the  skull. |
If  this  ceremony  is  omitted  the  soul  Avill  make  its  exit  by  some  other
passage  and  go  to  a  state  of  damnation.  The  lama  remains  ah)ne
with  the  corpse,  all  the  doors  and  windows  being  closed,  and  no  one
is  allowed  to  enter  until  he  declares  l)y  wliat  passage  the  soul  has
fled.  In  return  for  this  important  service  he  receives  a  cow,  yak,
sheep,  or  goat,  or  a  sum  of  money,  according  to  the  means  of  the
deceased.

Before  the  dead  body  is  removed  from  the  house,  an  astrologer

*  Neither  is  it  in  Kliamdo. See  my  '  Land  of  the  Lamas,'  p.  211  et  sqq.—CSV.  K.)
t  I  hardly  imap;ine  tliat  our  aullior  intends  to  convey  thi;  idea  tliat  this  is  a  custom
..f  tlic  Tiiietaiis.— (W.  K.)

X  Sec  Waildcll,  oj).  (tit.,  p.  88. He  says  the  "soul-extracting  lama"  is  called  lipnho.


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTBAL TIBET.


253


notes  the  dates  of  birth  of  tlie  friends  and  rehitions  present. If  any
among  them  were  born  nnder  the  same  constellation  and  planet  as


SINIOLCHUM OK D".


254  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

the  dead  person,  tliey  are  said  to  incur  the  risk  of  l»eiiig  ridden  by
his  ghost,  and  are  consequently  not  allowed  to  attend  the  funeral.
The  astrologer  also  receives  his  reward  in  money  or  kind.  Then  the
corpse,  tightly  wrapped  in  clothes,  is  placed  on  a  stretcher  facing  the
direction  which  has  been  declared  auspicious  by  the  astrologer,  and
is  placed  in  a  corner  of  the  house.  Five  butter  lamps  are  lighted
near  the  head,  and  a  screen  is  drawn  round  it,  within  which  his  usual
food  and  drink,  together  with  a  lamp,  are  placed.  Early  on  the
morning  of  the  day  appointed  for  the  disposal  of  the  body,  it  is
carried  to  the  nearest  cemetery.  At  the  time  of  its  removal  the
relations  make  profound  salutations  to  it.  Two  men  carrying  wine
or  tea,  together  with  a  dishful  of  tsamba,  follow  the  bier.  The  family
priest,  or  lama,  of  the  deceased  throws  a  hhatag  on  the  litter  and
walks  behind  at  a  slow  pace,  holding  a  corner  of  another  scarf  tied
to  it.  As  he  proceeds  he  mutters  funeral  manfra,  turning  a  hand-
drum  (dariLciru)  with  his  right  hand,  and  with  his  left  ringing  a  bell.
It  is  inauspicious  to  place  the  litter  on  the  ground  before  its  arrival
at  the  cemetery.  If  by  accident  this  should  happen,  the  body  must
be  disposed  of  at  that  spot,  instead  of  in  the  cemetery.  In  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Lhasa  there  are  two  sacred  cemeteries,  Phabongka  and
Serashar.  Those  who  dispose  of  dead  bodies  at  the  former  pay  two
or  three  tanha  for  tea  to  the  monks  of  Phabongka  monastery;  and
at  the  latter  they  pay  one  tanha  to  the  cemetery  keeper,  who  also
gets  the  bedding  and  clothes  of  corpses.

In  every  cemetery  there  is  a  large  slab  of  stone,  on  which  the
corpse,  stripped  of  its  coverings,  is  placed  face  downwards.  The
oflQciating  lama  then  crosses  it  with  lines,  and  while  repeating
'mantras,  cuts  it  in  pieces.  The  first  pieces  are  flung  towards  the
Ijiggest  and  oldest  vulture  of  the  flock,  called  tanlcar,  and  the  remain-
der to  the  rest.  They  are  so  tame  that  they  come  one  by  one  at  the
call  of  the  priest.  Last  of  all  the  head  of  the  corpse  is  crushed,  and
the  bones  pounded  together  are  mixed  with  the  brain  and  distributed
among  the  vultures.*  Then  a  new^  and  unused  earthen  bowl,  tilled
\\\\A\.  lire  of  anjol  (dried  cowdung),  with  some  butter  and  barley  Hour
burnt  in  it  as  incense,  is  presented  to  the  departed  by  being  placed
in  the  quarter  towards  which  he  is  sup])osed  to  have  gone.  The
funeral  attendants  now  wasli  their  liands,  and  retiring  to  a  short
distance  from  the  cemetery,  breakfast,  and  at  about  midday  return
*  Cf.  •  Land  of  the  Lamas,'  p.  287. — (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  255

home.  During  forty-nine  days  after  the  drawing  of  the  last  breath,
food  and  drink  are  offered  to  the  departed  in  his  favourite  dish  ;  and
incense,  consisting  of  barley,  butter,  and  juniper  spines,  is  burnt.

During  this  period  of  hardo,  as  the  interval  between  death  and
regeneration  is  called,  the  departed  spirit  is  believed  to  wander,  and
in  order  to  prevent  its  being  subject  to  misery,  on  the  forty-ninth  day
some  of  the  clothes,  shoes,  head-dress,  coins,  etc.,  which  belonged  to
the  deceased,  after  being  washed  and  sprinkled  with  saffron-water,
are  presented  to  some  incarnate  lama  for  his  blessing.  The  last
service  is  conducted  by  a  Tantrik  lama,  with  a  view  to  expelling  all
the  evil  spirits  and  hungry  ghosts  which  haunt  the  house  of  the
departed.

On  the  seventh  day  after  death,  prayers  are  moreover  offered  for
the  deceased's  well-being,  and  alms  in  coin,  food,  tea,  gold,  and  silver
are  distributed  among  religious  men.  This  is  repeated  on  every  con-
secutive seventh  day  until  the  forty-ninth  day,  when  a  grand  feast  is
given  to  the  congregation  of  lamas.  Nowadays,  however,  the  rich
people  of  Lhasa  generally  distribute  alms,  at  the  rate  of  one  tanha
each  to  the  monks  of  Sera,  Dabung,  and  Gadan,  dispensing  with  the
other  costly  ceremonies.  They  also  present  the  clothes  belonging  to
the  deceased  to  the  professors  and  heads  of  those  monasteries.  Some
bequeath  the  wliole  of  their  property  to  these  monastic  institutions  or
to  Lamas  of  great  repute.

The  practice  of  making  wills  has  been  followed  by  the  Tibetans
from  very  remote  times.  Every  man  of  property  leaves  a  will  l^e-
queathing  his  movable  property  to  his  children  or  friends,  and  leaving
instructions  for  the  performance  of  his  funeral  obsequies  and  otlier
pious  works.

The  cutting  up  and  distributing  of  a  corpse  is  a  practical  illustra-
tion of  the  Tibetan  belief  that  charity  is  the  highest  of  all  the  moral
virtues.  That  man  is  said  to  be  most  virtuous  whose  funeral  is
attended  by  the  largest  number  of  vultures,  while  if  his  corpse
attracts  but  a  small  company,  the  very  dogs  not  deigning  to  touch
his  defiled  remains,  he  is  judged  to  have  led  a  sinful  life.

The  dead  bodies  of  pregnant  and  barren  women,  and  also  of  le^^ers,
are  packed  in  leather  bags  and  thrown  into  the  waters  of  the  great
Tsang-po.  A  Tibetan  proverb  says,  "  She  whose  son  dies  after  birth
is  white  barren  (rah-clia  harpo) ;  she  whose  daughter  dies  after
birth  is  partly  barren  {rab-cha  tavo)  ;  she  who  has  borne  no  children


256'  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TLBET.

is  black  barren  (ra.b-cha  nagpo)."  The  corpses  of  such  and  of  lepers
are  considered  particularly  unclean,  and  should  not  be  kept  within
the  limits  of  the  country,  but  must  either  be  thrown  beyond  nine
hills  and  dales,  or  packed  in  horse's  or  ox's  skins  and  tlirown  into  the
river.

The  dead  bodies  of  incarnate  lamas  are  occasionally  burnt,  and
tlieir  ashes  and  bones  deposited  in  chortcn.  The  remains  of  saintly
personages,  such  as  pretend  to  have  emanated  from  Bodhisattvas  and
Buddhas,  are  preserved  like  the  Egyptian  mummies,  being  embalmed
or  salted  and  placed  within  gold,  silver,  or  copper  chortcn,  where
they  are  seated  in  a  meditative  posture,  like  the  conventional  image
of  Buddha.  These  incarnate  lamas,  at  the  time  of  death,  mention  the
time  when  and  the  place  and  the  family  where  their  souls  will  subse-
quently find  re-embodiment,  and  also  the  name  and  race  of  the  family,
and  instruct  their  friends  to  perform  rites  and  ceremonies  for  their
well-being  after  death.

On  the  demise  of  the  Dalai  and  Tashi  lamas,  the  work  in  all  the
public  and  private  offices,  all  business,  and  market  gatherings  are
suspended  for  seven  days.  For  thirty  days  women  are  forbidden  to
put  on  their  jewellery,  and  men  or  women  may  not  wear  new
apparel.  Lamas  and  monks  must,  on  such  occasions,  mourn  for  ten
days,  during  which  they  must  not  shave  their  heads,  or  wear  their
church  head-dresses  during  services.  All  classes  of  people  refrain
from  amusements  and  festivities,  and  from  going  into  groves  for  plea-
sure, sports,  or  love-making.  It  is  only  in  honour  of  the  death  of
these  two  great  hierarchs  of  Tibet  that  the  whole  country  goes  into
mourning.  The  mourning  for  abbots  of  other  monasteries  and  heads
of  families  is  confined  to  the  friends  and  monks  who  are  near  to  them,
liich  and  respectable  men  do  not,  watliin  a  year  after  the  death  of
their  parents,  take  part  in  marriage  ceremonies  and  festivities ;  and
do  not  undertake  journeys  to  a  distance.

Among  the  Sikkim  Buddhists,  dead  bodies  are  burnt.  On  the
fourth  day  after  cremation,  a  lama  performs  the  tusol,  or  washing
ceremony,  which  consists  in  removing  the  relics,  ashes,  etc.,  and
washing  the  place  of  burning  with  water.  The  relics  are  placed  in
an  urn  and  deposited  in  a  chorten.  The  ashes  are  thrown  into
a  mountain stream,  such as  the  Tista  or  Rungit.* The  relics  of

*  Tlio  tuisol,  or  "  cleansing  ceremduy  "  (hhrus,  washed ;  gsol,  to  pray),  is  performed  on
numerous  occasions  and  for  various  purposes.  I  suppose  that  by  "  relics,"  remains  after
cremation  are  here  meant. — (W li.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  257

lamas  and  important  men,  after  being  pulverized,  are  mixed  with
clay  and  cast  in  moulds  into  miniature  cliorten.  These  relic  clior-
ten  are  deposited  in  sacred  places,  such  as  monasteries,  temples,
caverns,  etc.  On  the  seventh  day  the  funeral  ceremony,  called  Ten-
zung,  is  performed.  All  relations  and  neighbours  are  invited  to  this
funeral  feast.  At  dusk  all  the  evil  spirits  which  are  believed  to  have
been  invited  to  the  departure  of  the  deceased,  are  expelled  by  a  Tan-
trik  priest,  assisted  by  the  deafening  yells  of  the  guests.*

The  physicians  of  High  Asia  have,  I  am  told,  discovered  such
remarkable  properties  of  vegetable  drugs,  and  of  the  flesli  and  bile  of
certain  animals,  and  of  some  sorts  of  excrements  in  healing  different
kinds  of  sores,  that  if  the  statements  of  niy  informant  be  true,  the
surgeons  of  civilized  countries  would  be  struck  with  wonder  at  their
marvellous  performances.  For  this  remarkable  success,  the  Tibetans
do  not  appear  to  be  indebted  to  their  Chinese  or  Indian  neighbours.!
Their  medicines  are  mostly  indigenous,  and  their  discoveries  in
surgery  have  resulted  from  their  own  experience.  They  supply  the
greater  number  of  physicians  and  surgeons  to  the  Mongols  and  other
neighbouring  peoples.

The  treatment  of  small-pox  is  very  little  understood  by  Tibetan
doctors.  Inoculation  is,  however,  resorted  to,  and  a  new  method  of
performing  this  operation  has  been  discovered  by  the  Northern  Chinese
physicians.  It  consists  in  selecting  the  best  lympli  from  the  light
white  pox  pustules  of  a  healthy  child,  which,  mixed  with  camphor
powder,  is  blown  with  a  pipe  into  the  nostril  of  the  person  to  be  in-
oculated. |  Great  care  and  experience  are  required  in  selecting  the
lymph,  on  which  alone  depends  the  safety  of  the  patients.  Chicken-
pox  occurs  only  in  a  mild  form,  and  is  generally  left  to  take  its  course.

Hydrophobia  is  very  prevalent  in  Tibet,  Mongolia,  and  China,  and
its  effects  are  considered  to  manifest  themselves,  according  to  the
colour  of  the  dog,  at  periods  varying  from  seven  days  to  eighteen
months,  and  also  according  to  the  time  of  day  at  which  the  bite  was
received. The  remedies  are,  however,  sufficiently  practical. As  soon

*  Waddell,  op.  cit.,  491,  calls  this  sacrifice  to  the  manes  of  tlie  deceased  ting-shag.

t  Our  author  is  not  quite  riglit  liere,  a^  the  Tiljetans  have  borrowed  the  major  pait
of  their  pharmacopojia  from  China  and  India.  Most  of  their  medical  works  are  purely
Chinese  or  Indian,  and  I  do  not  believe  they  have  much  more,  if  even  so  mucli.  know-
ledge of  surgery  as  tlie  Chinese,  who  are  terribly  ignorant  themselves  in  thi.^  art.
Tibetan  medicines  are  in  high  favour  among  the  Chinese  and  Mongols.— (W.  K.)

X  This  is  the  usual  Chinese  method  of  inoculation.— (W.  E.)


258  JOUENKY TO LHASA AND CENTBAL TIBET.

as  possible  tie  a  ligature  four  fingers  above  the  wound ;  draw  out  the
poison  by  means  of  the  sucking  apparatus,  called  rnijahs-ras,  similar
to  the  cupping-glasses  of  the  Indians,  and  then  bleed  the  wounded
part.  If  the  patient  presents  himself  to  the  physician  a  day  after
having  been  bitten,  the  latter  should  only  cauterize  the  wound,  and
then  apply  an  ointment  made  of  butter,  turmeric,  a  poisonous  bulb
called  hon-nya,  and  musk.

In  Lower  Kongbo,  Pobo,  Pemakyod,  and  other  mountainous  dis-
tricts of  Southern  Tibet,  and  in  ISTepal,  Sikkim,  and  Bhutan  on  this
side  of  the  Himalayas,  goitre  is  the  most  prevalent  disease.  It  owes
its  origin  to  the  calcareous  nature  of  the  water  drunk  by  the  natives.
Six  varieties  of  goitre  are  recognized  by  Tibetan  physicians,  which  are
variously  treated  by  cauterization,  bleeding  the  jugular  vein  behind
the  ear,  and  also  the  swollen  muscle  of  the  goitre,  and  the  administra-
tion of  nostrums  composed  of  the  dried  gullet  of  the  yak  or  sheep,  dried
fish,  different  kinds  of  salts,  Fipcr  longum  and  pepper,  and  powdered
conch-shell,  burnt  in  a  hermetically  closed  vessel.

Snake-bite  is  of  rare  occurrence  in  Higher  Tibet,  but  in  the  lower
valley  of  the  great  Tsang-po,  great  numbers  of  snakes  are  found,  and
also  on  the  western  frontier  of  China  bordering  Tibet.*  Snake-bites
are  treated  like  hydrophobia,  by  tying  a  ligature  above  the  part  bitten
and  cupping.  The  wound  is  then  washed  with  curd  or  milk,  camel's
milk  being  the  most  efficacious.!  It  is  believed  in  High  Asia  that  if
a  snake  bite  a  camel,  the  snake  dies  immediately  without  injuring  the
camel.  If  there  be  no  burning  heat  as  a  consequence  of  the  bite,  the
wound  should  be  cauterized.  Internal  remedies  are  also  taken,  con-
sisting of  cardamom,  musk,  pepper,  and  other  native  drugs.  The
Olak-los  (wild  petjple)  of  Pemakyod  %  immediately  cut  off  the  bitten
portion,  or  the  bitten  limlj,  if  possible,  after  which  they  apply  musk
and  bear's  bile  (gall  ?)  to  the  wound  and  bind  it  up.  The  Lalos  eat
snakes,  of  wliieh,  however,  they  reject  the  head  and  tail  as  injurious.

*  Our  author  was  misinformed.  Snakes  are  very  rare  along  the  western  border  of
China,  venomous  ones  especially. — (W.  11.)

t  Camel's  milk  must  be  as  great  a  rarity  in  most  parts  of  Tibet  as  is  elephant's
milk,  anotlicr  remedy  much  prized  in  that  country. — (W.  R.)

%  Probably  tlie  same  as  the  Lo  Tawa,  or  "  stripped  Lhopas,"  mentioned  by  lama
Serap-gyatso,  'Report  on  Explor.  from  185G  to  1888,'  p.  7.  Tiiis  explorer  dis-
tinguishes three  classes  of  Lhopas — Lho  karpo,  or  "  white  Lhopas,"  who  are  some-
what civilized  ;  Lho  nagpo,  or  "  black  Lhopas,"  who  are  a  little  less  civilized ;  and
the  Lho  tawa  (Aya-y<a),  or  uncivilized,  literally  "mottled"  Jjhopas.  Cf.  also,  op.  cit,
pp.  16,  17,  and  Nain  Singh's  remarks  in  Jour.  Boy.  Geog.  Soc,  vol.  xlvii.  p.  120.


JOURNEY TO  LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.  259

During  the  months  of  January  and  February,  when  the  great
mon-lam  (or  prayer-meeting)  fair  takes  phace  at  Lhasa,  the  city  is
occasionally  visited  by  a  highly  infectious  disease  which  causes  great
havoc  among  the  people  when  the  crowd  is  great.  When  the  disease
is  not  properly  treated  the  patient  generally  dies  before  the  tenth
day,  but  those  cases  which  have  passed  the  thirteenth  day  are  con-
sidered hopeful.  Tibetan  physicians,  by  watching  this  disease  in  its
different  phases,  have  achieved  remarkable  success  in  treating  it  with
their  indigenous  drugs.

In  Lhasa,  Shigatse,  and  other  towns  and  monasteries  of  Tibet,  the
principal  disease  from  which  people  suffer  and  die  is  paralysis.*  Five
different  kinds  of  this  disease  are  recognized  by  Tibetan  physicians,
who  also  profess  to  have  observed  that  the  first  symptoms  generallv
show  themselves  on  the  4th,  8th,  11th,  1.5th,  18th,  22nd,  25th,  or  29th
day  of  the  lunar  month.  Persons  who  have  passed  their  sixtieth  year
seldom  survive  a  paralytic  stroke  of  any  kind.  All  other  cases  in
their  milder  forms  are  curable  by  proper  and  regular  medical  treat-
ment.

Leprosy  is  prevalent  in  most  of  the  countries  of  High  Asia.  It  is
variously  q.qWq([ ghid-nad,  "the  nag's  (serpent's)  disease,"  and  mje-^iad,^
the  "  corroding  malady,"  and  is  believed  to  originate  from  various
causes,  fanciful  and  real.  By  digging  in  pestilential  soil  where
snakes  live,  turning  up  stones  under  which  these  reptiles  lurk,
felling  poisonous  trees,  throwing  tea,  water,  or  cooked  food  and  other
refuse  on  the  blazing  hearth,  men  are  said  to  excite  the  wrath  of  the
Nagas  and  mischievous  spirits  of  the  upper  and  nether  worlds,  who
delight  in  working  the  ruin  of  the  human  race.  They  spread  this
hateful  malady  by  the  exhalation  of  their  breath,  by  their  poisonous
touch  or  malignant  glance,  or  even  by  the  power  of  their  malignant
wish.  The  "  charmed  banner  "  J  is  a  great  preventive  of  these  evils.
The  people  of  High  Asia  generally  fix  banners  with  printed  charms
thereon  near  to  or  on  their  houses,  as  they  are  believed  to  prevent
the  Nagas  entering  them. Leprosy  is  likewise  assumed  to  be  the

*  Our  author  gives  tlie  name  of  this  disease  as  gzah-nacl.  Jacschke,  •  Tib.  engl.
diet.,'  translates  this  word  by  "  apoplexy,"  adding  tliat,  in  Western  Tibet  it  seems  to  be
used  only  for  "  epilepsy." — (W.  E.)

t  Kill  nad,  or  Klin  gnod-nad,  meaning  that  tlie  Nagas  brings  about  the  disease.
Mje  nad  is  indje  nad. — (W.  R.)

X  These  charmed  banners  are  the  lung-ta,  or  "  airy  horses,"  of  which  mention  is
frequently  made  in  this  work.


260  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

consequence  of  the  sins  of  former  lives.*  It  also  originates  from  dis-
orders produced  by  irregularity  and  intemperance  in  food  and  habits,
whereby  the  black  and  yellow  fluids  of  the  body  are  increased,  and
give  rise  to  this  distressing  malady.  Eighteen  different  kinds  of
leprosy  are  recognized.  The  chanting  of  charms  and  mantras  of
Vajrapani  Buddha  by  the  patient  or  the  physician  is  resorted  to,  that
wrathful  deity  being  a  mighty  subduer  of  all  malevolent  demons  and
Nagas,  and  various  native  drugs  are  also  administered  in  the  form  of
pills.

Dropsy,  though  rare  in  High  Asia,  prevails  in  the  southern  and
eastern  districts  in  Tibet,  and  is  caused  by  drinking  much  water  after
exercise,  lying  down  in  damp  places,  taking  cold,  or  by  light  unsub-
stantial food,  by  which  the  digestive  powers  are  deranged.  Twelve
varieties  of  this  disease  are  recognized,  wliich  are  divided  into  two
main  groups,  characterized  as  "  the  hot "  and  "  the  cold  fluid  "  re-
spectively. Bone-ash  is  believed  to  be  the  best  remedy ;  but  other
medicines,  consisting  of  grapes,  cinnamon,  oxide  of  iron,  pomegranate
(rind  ?),  lime,  and  other  ingredients,  are  also  prescribed.f

Dyspepsia  (jxid-hau)  is  one  of  the  commonest  diseases  in  Tibet,
and  forty-three  different  varieties  of  this  malady  have  been  observed
by  native  physicians.

Toothache  is  also  a  very  general  complaint  of  the  people  of  Tibet,
due  to  the  extreme  rigour  of  the  climate  and  the  coldness  of  the  water.
The  inhabitants  of  the  remote  province  of  Chang-tang  usually  lose
their  teeth  before  reaching  the  age  of  thirty.

Among  the  games  played  by  the  Tibetans,  there  are  some  such  as
mig-manfj,  or  "  many  eyes,"  resembling  chess ;  srid-inii  Icliorlo,  or
"  the  circle  of  life,"  |  and  dice,  which  even  the  clergy  are  permitted
to  amuse  themselves  with.  Others,  as,  for  instance,  wrestling,  archery,
polo,  foot  and  pony  races,  are  confined  to  the  people ;  nor  are  the
lamas  allowed  to  amuse  themselves  with  singing  and  dancing  except
at  stated  times,  as,  for  example,  during  the  New  Year  holidays.

*  This  remark  applies  equally  well  to  all  diseases  in  Buddhist  estimation.

t  Jacsclike,  '  Tib.  engl.  diet.,'  call.s  this  disease  pag»  elm,  "  skin  water  ;  "  snying  chu,
■•  lieart  water ;  "  dmu  chu,  "  dropsy,  especially  in  the  chest  aud  belly."  Ou  the  medical
knowledge  of  tlic  Tibetans,  see  Journ.  Bengal  Asiat.  «S'oc.,  iv.  pp.  1  et  sqq. — (W.  R.)

X  In  this  game,  wliich  is  an  invention  of  one  of  the  Panchcn  rinpoclies,  dice  are
thrown,  by  which  the  players  get  (lifl'creut  positions  in  tlie  various  liravens  or  hells —
(S.  C.  D.)  Our  autlior  also  mentions  a  game  called  te-pi,  or  rochet,  but,  unfortunately,
does  not  give  any  idea  of  the  game  itself.  See  also  "Report  U.S.  National  Museum,'
1893,  p.  723.— (AV.  R.)


JOUBXEY TO LEAS  A AND CENTHAL TIBET.  201

At  midsummer  the  people  and  nobility  dress  tents,  and  for  several
days  amuse  themselves  under  them,  picnicing,  dancing,  and  singing.

In  the  8th  moon  the  jon-gijtc  festival  takes  place,  lasting  for  seven
or  fourteen  or  even  twenty- one  days.  On  this  occasion  the  lamas
and  people  amuse  themselves  with  sports,  games,  dancing,  and  feast-
ing. This  festival  is  observed  in  all  northern  Buddhist  countries.*

Again,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  12tli  moon,  there  is  a  lama  dance
in  every  monastery,  after  which  the  evil  spirits  are  exorcised.f  Some-
times the  4th  of  the  6th  and  the  22nd  of  the  9th  moons  are  observed
as  feast  days ;  the  latter  as  the  anniversary  of  the  Buddha's  descent
from  the  Tushita  heaven.^

In  the  summer,  commencing  with  the  full  moon  in  July  and
lasting  for  a  period  of  forty-five  days,  all  lamas  make  a  retreat  in
their  monasteries,  during  which  time  they  are  not  allowed  to  go
without  the  lamasery  walls,  or  take  part  in  any  amusement.  This
is  known  as  the  i/(W-nas.l

The  birthdays  of  the  Dalai  and  Tashi  lamas  are  also  kept  as  holi-
days, and  on  their  reaching  the  age  of  three,  twenty-five,  forty -nine,
sixty-one,  seventy-three,  or  eighty-five,  there  are  also  great  festivities.

When  eclipses  of  the  sun  or  moon  occur,  the  Tibetans  hold
religious  ceremonies  similar  to  those  of  the  Hindus.

Of  all  feasts,  that  of  the  New  Year  is  probabl}'  the  most  popular.
At  Lhasa  the  State  makes  arrangements  for  the  celebrations,  beginning
them  about  a  month  beforehand.

*  Chinese  aiithors  say  that.  "  during  the  7th  and  8th  moons  tliey  (the  Tiljetans)  put
up  tents  along  the  river  banks,  and  men  and  women  bathe  together  in  the  river,  it
being  symbolical  of  the  purification  ceremonies  of  the  13th  of  the  3rd  month  (in  China),"
Jour.  Roy.  Asiat.  Soc,  No.  xxiii.,  p.  213. — (W.  R.)
t  On  the  29th  day  of  the  moon.— (W.  R.)
X  Our  author  mentions  also  the  following  festivals  : —
15th  of  1st  moun : Buddha's  birthday.
15th  of  3rd ,.  First  preaching  of  the  Kalachakra  tantra.

8th  of  4th .,  Buddha  became  a  mendicant.

15th  of  -Ith ..  Buddha's  nirvana.

5th  of  5th ,,  Feast  of  god  of  medicine.

4th  of  6th .,  Buddha's  first  sermon.

10th  of  7th ,.  Birth  of  Padma  chyuug-uas  (Padma  Sambhava).

15th  of  7th „  The  snowy  mountains  are  worshipped.

25th  of  10th „  Birth  of  Tsongkhapa.

Cf.  "NVaddell,  op.  cit.,  502  et  sqq.

§  Kuowu  in  southern  Buddhist  countries  as  var><ha  or  Barfat.  Yar  is  dbyar  (usually
pronounced  chyar),  "  summer ; "  and  nas  (gfnn.s),  "  abode."  I  do  not  believe  the  practice
is  generally  observed. Cf.  Waddell.  op.  cit.,  224.  and  supra.— (W.  U)


262  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIBET.

The  kitchen  of  the  Grand  Lama  is  in  a  large  yellow  building
called  the  Phodang  serpo,  or  Jag-ming  khang  (IJags-rning  Jihang),
situated  to  the  east  of  the  palace.  The  cooking-stoves  are  orna-
mented wdth  gold,  silver,  and  ])recious  stones,  estimated  to  be  worth
Es.  20,000,  and  all  the  cooking  utensils  are  of  solid  gold.  All  the
butter  and  milk  used  here  is  obtained  from  the  herd  of  live  hundred
jomos  (half-breed  yaks)  belonging  to  the  Dalai  lama,  which  herd  the
people  salute  as  it  passes,  taking  off  their  hats  or  kotowing  to  the
animals.  Twenty  Tse-dung  (lama  officials)  herd  these  cattle,  milk
them,  and  churn  the  butter.

Here,  when  New  Year  is  approaching,  five  lamas  prepare  cakes
and  dainties  for  the  Grand  Lama,  their  mouths  covered  with  eight
thicknesses  of  silk,  so  that  the  food  may  not  be  polluted  by  their
breath.  In  the  village  at  the  foot  of  Potala,  called  the  Shedo  khang,
two  or  three  hundred  men  make  cakes  and  biscuits  for  the  officials,
lamas,  and  people ;  and  every  one,  whether  rich  or  poor,  has  some
prepared  for  the  festival.

On  tlie  loth  of  the  12th  moon  two  hundred  workmen  begin  white-
washing the  walls  of  Potala,  which  work  occupies  them  for  three
days ;  and  then,  but  only  then,  people  are  at  liberty  to  have  the  walls
of  their  houses  whitened,  and  there  is  no  one  so  poor  that  he  does
not  at  this  season  renovate  the  exterior  of  his  dwelling.

On  the  18th  all  public  offices  are  closed  for  fifty  days.  Booths
are  erected  to  supply  the  crowds  which  assemble  for  the  onon-lam
chcnpo,  or  "grand  prayer-meeting,"  which,  beginning  on  Xew  Year's
day,  lasts  for  a  month,  and  many  of  the  officials  visit  Tse-dung
linga,  a  beautiful  park  to  the  south  of  the  city,  where  there  is  a
Chinese  restaurant  and  singing  and  dancing  girls,  called  Tung-
shema,  or  "  drinking  ladies."

On  the  22nd  in  all  lamaseries  and  in  many  houses  of  the  people
torma  offerings  are  made,  to  be  offered  the  following  day  to  the
household  gods.  Then  tlie  people  bathe  and  get  themselves  ready  to
make  visits  of  congratulations,  which  they  begin  doing  on  the  27th.
On  the  29th  each  householder  has  a  general  house  cleaning,  and  the
dust  and  dirt  is  thrown  in  a  cross-road,  and  thus  all  im]-)ending
misfortunes  are  got  rid  of  witli  the  rubljish.

Early  on  tlie  moniiiig  of  the  29th  large  and  gorgeously  decorated
tents  are  erected  in  the  great  courtyard  of  Potala  and  other  temples,
in  each  of  wliich  three  or  four  liundred  people  can  be  seated. In  the


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TTBET.  263

centre  of  each  tent  are  cstmdes  of  carved  and  gilt  sandal-wood  (?),  on
which  the  abbots,  head  lamas,  and  guests  of  distinction  take  their
seats,  while  on  lower  seats  are  the  other  guests.  A  number  of  lamas,
with  little  tables  of  sandal-wood  in  front  of  tlieiii,  on  which  different
instruments  of  music,  and  implements  used  in  church  ceremonies,
such  as  dorje,  bells,  damaru,  etc.,  are  placed,  occupy  another  portion
of  each  tent.  When  the  preliminary  service  is  over  the  grand
"  black  hat "  dance,  of  which  I  have  previously  made  mention,
begins.*

The  dancers  are  eighty  in  number,  and  their  gowns  are  made  of
w^hite,  red,  and  green  satin.  Each  one  holds  in  liis  left  hand  a
wooden  skull,  and  in  his  right  a  short  club,  from  which  hang  five
silk  scarfs  of  different  colours.  They  prance  about,  wildly  waving
their  arms,  for  half  an  hour  or  so,  when  suddenly  there  is  heard  wild
shrieking,  and  a  second  set  of  dancers,  or  masks  called  Kambah,
come  in.  They  are  dressed  to  represent  the  various  gods,  most  of
them  extraordinarily  hideous  to  look  at.  These  continue  the  wild
dance  to  the  music  of  cymbals,  drums,  and  flutes  for  a  couple  of
hours.

When  the  Kambab  have  stopped,  four  skeleton-like  figures  appear :
they  are  the  Diirdag,  or  "  lords  of  cemeteries,"  and  they  dance  in
their  turn.  These  are  followed  by  sixteen  figures  representing  Indian
atsaras,  who,  by  their  dress  and  contortions,  excite  wild  mirth  among
the  people.  A  number  of  dancers  wearing  stag  heads  then  appear,
and  finally  the  "  black  hat "  dancers  come  out  once  more,  each  with
a  cymbal  or  a  drum  in  his  hand,  and  the  dance  comes  to  an  end.

At  the  termination  of  the  dance  the  lamas  who  performed  the
religious  service  earlier  in  the  day  form  in  a  procession  and  proceed
to  throw  away  the  torma  offering.

Five  hundred  soldiers  and  twenty-four  flag-bearers  accompany  the
procession.  Three  lamas  carry  on  an  iron  tripod  the  tsamha  torma,
which  is  of  pyramidal  shape,  about  ten  feet  high  and  painted  red,  with
projecting  edges  to  represent  flames,  and  frequently  surmounted  by  a
skull  moulded  in  tsamha.  Three  other  lamas  bear  on  a  large  iron
tray  supported  by  a  tripod  a  skeleton  also  made  of  tsamha.  The
procession  goes  to  about  a  mile  from  the  temple  to  where  a  shed,  or
Jwm,  J'hang,  of  straw  or  brush  has  been  made,  in  which  the  torma  and
the  skeleton  are  placed  and  then  set  on  fire.

*  See  p.  114. Oil  the  New  Year  festivities,  see  Waddell,  op.  cit.,  518.


264  JOURNEY TO LHASA AND VENTRAL TIBET.

"When  the  flames  break  forth  the  flag-bearers  lower  their  flags  and
run  back  to  the  lamasery  with  all  speed,  to  escape  the  devil's  assaults,
and  tlie  soldiers  lire  off  their  guns  at  the  burning  mass  to  prevent  the
evil  spirits  escaping  from  the  fire  in  which  they  are  now  supposed  to
be  roasting.*

On  the  thirtieth  da}'  of  the  moon,  New  Year's  eve,  all  house
decorations  and  furniture  are  renewed  or  cleaned,  and  offerings  and
oblations  made  in  every  domestic  chapel.  The  walls,  pillars,  posts,
lintels,  etc.,  are  washed  with  whey.  A  lotus,  finger-marks  or  marks
of  animals'  claws  are  painted  on  the  wooden  floors  of  the  rooms,  or  a
sheep's  head  is  scorched,  and  its  eyes,  ears,  and  nose  painted  with  the
five  colours  mixed  with  butter :  this  is  said  to  be  a  certain  means  of
insuring  good  luck,  and  is  believed  to  be  a  pre- Buddhist  custom  of  the
country.

In  the  evening  the  whole  city  is  illuminated,  and  this  is  kept  up
for  three  successive  nights.

New  Year's  day  is  called  Gyalpo  lo  sar,  or  "  the  King's  new  year,"
and  the  Grand  Lama  holds  a  levee  on  this  occasion.  The  Donnyer
chenpo,  or  Grand  Chamberlain,  opens  the  ceremony  by  wishing  the
lama  all  happiness  ("  tra-shi  de  leg  fliun-sum  Isog  "),  and  presenting
him  some  wine  and  tsamha.  The  Grand  Lama  replies,  "  Tan-du  de-wa
tohpar  sliog,"  and  dipping  his  finger  in  the  wine,  sprinkles  a  little  about
as  an  oblation,  and  then  tastes  the  tsamla.  Tlien  the  great  trumpets
sound,  and  tlie  Dalai  lama  takes  his  seat  on  the  throne  in  the  great
hall,  and  all  the  ministers  and  church  dignitaries  take  their  places
according  to  precedence.  Tea  is  then  served,  followed  by  toma,  a  kind
of  red  potato  of  Tibet,  cooked  in  butter  and  sugared. -j-  AVhen  they
have  finished  eating,  every  one  presents  His  Holiness  with  hli.atag
about  eighteen  feet  long,  and  he  gives  each  one  in  return  his  blessing.

In  the  mean  time  "  the  good  luck  dance  "  (tra-sM-gi  gar)  is  going
on  outside  the  hall,  in  which  some  twenty  little  boys,  of  eight  years
of  age,  take  part,  the  lower  officials,  such  as  the  Dungkhor,  forming
the  audience.

In  every  house  of  any  importance  tlie  master,  his  wife,  and  children

*  I  have  witnessed  a  mimbor  of  tliese  lurim,  or  guilt-ofteriiig  cereinouics,  but  none
of  such  magnitude  as  the  one  held  at  Lhasa.  See,  for  a  picture  of  this  procession  at
Lhasa,  Georgi, '  Alph.  Tibet.'  p.  212.— (W.  R.)

t  Toma  is  droma  (or  doma),  the  root  of  the  potentilla  anserina,  and  called  chuoma
in  Eastern  and  North-eastern  Tibet.  It  is  mealy,  and  tastes  like  a  bean  ratlier  than
a  potato. It  is  about  H  inclies  long. — (W.  R.)


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND VENTRAL TIBET.  265

are  offered  the  compliments  of  the  season  by  all  tlieir  relatives,
dependents,  and  friends,  who,  in  tlieir  turn,  are  treated  with  wine
by  them.  When  the  New  Year's  wine  has  been  drunk,  the  misser
(serfs)  sing  some  hymns  or  glees.

At  the  New  Year  the  Tibetans  watch  out  for  omens  for  the  forth-
coming year,  the  best  of  which,  if  one  is  to  start  soon  on  a  journey,  is
to  see  a  young  woman  with  a  child  in  her  arms.  To  see  flags,  banners,
milking  of  cows,  persons  carrying'  vessels  filled  with  water  or  any
other  liquid,  or  timber  for  house-building  or  firewood,  is  lucky,  as  is
also  the  sight  of  a  corpse  on  a  bier.  To  meet  well-dressed  persons,
to  be  greeted  by  friends,  to  hear  a  lucky  name,  are  also  held  to  be
signs  of  good  luck ;  but  to  see  beggars,  ragged  persons,  empty  vessels,
a  person  descending  a  hill,  or  carrying  shoes  in  his  hand,  a  saddled
horse  without  a  rider,  to  hear  impolite  or  rough  language,  are  portends
of  bad  fortune.*

On  New  Year's  day  dancing  beggars  (or  Dre-kar)  make  their  ap-
pearance in  the  streets  and  houses.  They  wear  masks,  usually
representing  a  black  devil,  with  a  shaggy,  white  beard,  with  cowries
for  eyebrows  and  encircling  his  face,  and  sometimes  with  a  cowrie  on
either  cheek.  They  dance  and  crack  jokes  to  the  delight  of  the  guests
assembled  in  each  house  for  the  New  Year's  breakfast.f

In  the  afternoon  there  is  further  feasting  in  most  of  the  houses,
and  the  guests,  both  male  and  female,  frequently  end  the  entertain-
ment with  a  dance  (shahdo) ;  first,  the  women  dance  alone,  then  the
men,  and  finally,  both  sexes  together.^

The  New  Year's  festivities  terminate  on  the  third  day  at  noon,
when  the  monks  of  the  great  lamaseries  all  meet  in  the  Kyil  khording
(or  Jo  khang)  to  hear  the  Grand  Lama  expound  the  faith.  On  each
succeeding  day,  till  the  24th  of  the  moon,  they  hold  the  great  x^rayer-
meeting,  or  monlain.  chen'po.^

*  All  tliese  omens  of  oood  and  bad  luck  are  of  equal  importance  at  any  time  of  tlie
year.— (W.  E.)

t  I  liave  seen  these  mummers  in  North-eastern  Tibet.  See  '  Land  of  the  Lamas,'
p.  246.— (W.  K.)

X  On  the  second  day  of  the  new  year,  all  the  inhabitants  gather  together  to  witness
a  feat  performed  by  two  men,  each  of  whom  in  turn  mounts  on  a  wooden  saddle  and
slides  down  a  strong  rope  fastened  from  the  fort  walla  to  a  post  buried  about  nine  feet
in  the  ground.  '  Eeport  on  the  Explorations  of  A.  K.,'  p.  33.  Cf.  Jour.  Roy.  Asiat.  Soc.
n.s..  x.xiii.  p.  209,  and  '  Eeport  on  lama  U.  G.'s  Exploration.'  p.  :52,  where  we  learn  that
on  the  second  day  of  the  New  Year  the  Nachung  chos-gyong  prophesies  the  events  of
the  year  beginning. See  also  Hue,  '  Souvenirs  d'uu  voyage,'  ii.  375  tt  s>jq.

§  The  monlam  chenpo  was  instituted  by  Tsongkhapa  in  1-107.  Csoma,'  Tib.  gram..'  187.


266


JOURNEY TO LHASA AND CENTRAL TIRET.


lu  the  afternoon  of  the  third,  the  Tsog-chen  Shahiyo  of  Dabung
assumes  the  government  of  Lhasa  for  the  next  month  and  a  half,
previously  informing  the  police  magistrates  of  the  fact,  and  henceforth
all  authority,  even  that  of  the  Kalon,  as  far  as  the  city  is  concerned,
is  vested  in  him  alone.*

*  Cf.  lama  Ugyen-gyatso's  account  of  the  Shalnyo's  rule  in  'Keport  on  explor.
from  1856  to  1888,'  p.  32.  Also  A.  K.,  op.  cit.,  p.  33;  and  Hue,  oj).  cit.,  ii.  380.  He
calls  this  rule  of  the  Shiilnyo,  the  "  Lha-ssa  Morou,"  but  he  says  it  only  lasts  six  days ;
but  all  other  authorities  agree  in  saying  that  the  rule  of  the  city  is  turned  over  to  the
Dabung  lama  for  a  montli. — (W.  E.)


J?n 'yna


0^"-^*^ A^X^^yyi


INDEX.


Absolution  to  deceased  official,  106.
Acharya  Ami,  his  Svarasvat Vyaharana,

112.
Ailurus  ochracetis  in  Sikkim,  2.
Allowauce,  for  oificials  travelling,  51,  52 ;

to  monks,  79.
Almanac,  preparation  of,  113.
Altan  Khan, first uses the name  Dalai

lama,  172.
Altars  in  front  of  houses  in  Lhasa,  148.
Amban,the  senior  and  junior,  48  ;  trouble

of  junior  with  Tibetan  authorities,  48,

50-52  ;  inspections  by,  50  ;  expenses  for,

51 ;  in  procession,  61 :  goes  to  Lhasa,  63  ;

his  power  in  Tibet,  178 ; exactions  of,

179; his salary, 180; disliked by

Tibetans, 181 ; author meets him on

road,  236.
Amchi,  or  physician,  41,  55 ;  at  Samding

gomba,  131 ;  Ihamo  daiicers,  217.
Amdo,  province  of,  64,  156,  196.
Amolonkha,  a  sacred  rock,  152.
Ant,  or  nun,  25,  29 ;  meaning  concubine,

48.
Animals,  not  allowed  to  be  killed,  43,  76,

83.
Antelope,  in  Sikkim,  2.
Apricots,  7;  dried,  139.
Aprons  of  women,  157.
Archery,  202,  260.
Arms,  of  soldiers,  180.
Army,  force  of,  180  ;  how  recruited,  180.
Arun  valley,  inhabitants  of,  3 ;  river,  38,

39, 42 ; source of river, 242 ; upper

course,  243. See  Ohe-chu.
Aspergill,  used in religious ceremonies,

137.
Asses,  wild,  42,  244.


Astrologer making almanac, 113  ; at

funerals,  252,  253.
Atisha,  died  at  Netang,  145  ;  at  Samye,  222.
Aton  la,  238.

Bachelor  of  theology,  91.

Bad  luck,  signs  of,  265.

Balpo,  or  Nepalese,  68.

Bangle  worn  by  women,  reason  for,  157.

Bangye-shag,  residence  of  Phahv,  85 ;  149,
150,  161.

Banquet,  to  Tibetan  general,  81,  82.

Barat,  feast  thus  called,  59.

Bardo,  period  between  deatli  and  re-
generation, 14U,  255.

Bardon,  a  district  of  Kliams,  197.

Barley,  near  l^hasa,  145.

Bathing,  house,  102  ;  after  summer  retire-
ment, 214.

Bears,  2,  14.

Beehives,  15.

Beggars,  at  Shigatse,  47 ;  alms  distri-
buted to,  64,  68,  106 ;  at  Lhasa,  156 ;
dancing,  265.

Behor,  temple  of,  224.

Bellows,  30.

Belung,  hamlet  of,  74.

Bhutan. See  Dugpa.

Birthplace  of  Tibetans,  229.

Black  Court  of  Lhasa,  174.

Black-water  mysteries  of  Bonbo,  206.

Blessing,  57,95,  109.

Boats,  of  skin,  140,  143.

Bogto  la,  16,  IS.

Bonbo  sect,  205 ;  their  deities,  205;  high
priest,  206  ;  mysteries,  206 ;  lamas,  207,
208 ;  moral  rules  governing  them,  208 ;
tenets  of  their  faith,  215.


268


INDEX.


Books,  at  Gyant.se,  88,  90,  94 ;  arsenical
paper  used  for.  111 ;  search  for  Sanskrit
ones,  112;  on  lama  dances,  118;  written
by  Pan-chen  lama,  120 ;  owned  by  the
Dorje  Phagmo.  138 ;  of  Bonbo  at  Rigyal  |
Seudar,  20G;  at  Phuutso  ling,  209;  at
Sakya,  210  ;  copied  by  U.  G.  at  Shendar,
21o";  atSamye,222,  225;  at  Sakya,  241.

Bora,  the  t^hape,  60,  61.

Bra-gyin  -  pa  gonba.  See  Regyin-pai
monastery.

Bribery  of  Chinese  officials,  52.

Bridge,  bamboo,  1 ;  over  the  Rummam,
2  ;  over  the  Kalai,  6 ;  over  Rigbi,  8,  14 ;
over  Yalung,  21 ;  over  Yamatari,  23 ;
over  Yangma,  29 ;  at  Tashi-rabka,  37 ;
over  Nyang  chu,  84 ;  of  chains  over
Tsang-po,  143  ;  over  Ti  chu,  145  ;  over
Tong  chu,  204 ;  over  Tsang-po,  228.

Brigands,  72,  129.

Broadcloth,  superior  quality  made  at  Pishi
Mani  Lhakhang,  73 ;  of  Tosnam-gyaling,
218.

Broth,  Tibetan,  48,  72.

Btsan-tang,  pU^teau  of,  233;  Iha-khang,
233.

Buckwheat,  32,  144,  145.

Bufl'aloes,  7.

Bur-cliu  tsan,  .sprjnjis,  204.

Burnt  offerings,  203.

Butchering,  Tibet.m  usages,  41 .

Cabbages,  S3.

Calcutta,  goods in Tibet, 68; goods in

Gj'antse,  85.
Camels, winter pasturage of  Pan-clien

lama's,  72.
Campbell,  Dr.,  badly  treated.  193.
Cangue,  punishment  of  the,  186.
Curdamom,  1,2,  6.
Catechu,  used  by  women  to  smear  faces,

157 ;  origin  of  custom,  157.
Cavalry,  liow  recruited,  180.
Cedar  trees,  21.
Cemetery,  at  Shigatse  ;  at  Gyantse,  87;  of

Lhasa,  163.
Censor  carrier  of  Dalai  lama.  167.
Chabug  la,  39.

Chagpori,  Mount,  145,  195,  196.
Ciiagri,  hamlet  of,  237.
Chaini,  village  of,  2'.i.
Chamdang  bird,  20.


Chandra Gomi,  his  Chandra Vijaharann

found,  112.
Chang,  national  drink  of  Tibet,  8  ;  its  pre-
paration, 23;  drinking,  24,  70,  112.
Chang  tang,  plain  of  North  Tibet,  52,53;
pilgrims  from,  at  Gyantse,  89  ;  travellers
from,  119  ;  lamas  from,  205,  207.
Chani,  village  of,  39.
Changacbelling  monastery,  7.
Charcoal,  used  as  fuel  in  houses,  GO.
Charit}-,  64,  255.
Chasag,  or  Chancellor,  173.
Che  (or  Chi)  chu,  the  Arun  river,  42,  244.
Cheese,  dried,  48.

Cheri,  slauglitcr-house  of  Lliasa,  1-16.
Che.s8,  game  of,  260.
Chethang. See  Tse-tang.
Chiakri. See  Chagri.
Chiblung,  village  of,  210 ;  valley,  243.
Chim  phug,  222,  223.
Chincho-Iing,  hamlet  of,  234.
Chinese,  at  Shigatse,  48  ;  harsh  treatment
of  Tibetans,  51 ;  aid  Tibetans  against
Sikhs,  53 ; arrogance  of,  at Shigatse,
55,  63 ;  in  procession,  60 ;  cemetery  at
Shigatse, 65 ; in Gyantse, 85, 86 ;
cemetery at Gyantse, 87 ; in Lhasa,
148,  150;  iwlitical  relations  with  Tibet,
178,192,  193,  194;  Chinese  at  Samye,
222 ;  at  Tse-tang,  230.
Chitishio  Jong. See  Kidesher.
Cho,  vilhige  of,  235.
Choigyal rabtan, ruler of Nyang, 87;

books  about  him,  88  ;  liis  statue,  89.
Choi-khor-tse. S'eeChong-khor  monastery.
Choilung  monastery,  87.
Cho-kanchanjinga,  21,  23.
Choma,  an  edible  root,  125.
Chomo  Kankar  mountain,  20,  242.
Chongdu-chog  lamasery,  234.
Chong-khor  monastery,  217.
Chong  la. See  Shong  la.
Chonjom,  on  tlie  Riiigbi,  14.
Chopsticks,  used  by  Tibetans,  82.
Chorka,  part  of  Dobta  djong,  244.
Chorten,  3,  7,  3U,  32 ;  at  Tashilhunpo,  45 ;
at  Gyant.'se,  88;  great  ones  in  Tibet,  9;
at Potala, 168; of Bonbo, 206; at
Samye, 222; at  Jong, 227; made of
human  ashes,  257.
Chorten-gang,  3.
Chorten  Nyima  river,  40.


INDEX.


269


Chosthor-gyal  phodang.  See  Phodang
djong.

Chos-gya,  in  Kong  po,  161.

Choskhor-lliiinpo  monastery,  242.

Chu  lonkyok. ,S'ee  Clinm-bab  la.

Chiim-bok  la,  17,  18,  10.

Chumbi,  73;  traders  from,  at  Shigatse,
104.

Chumig-gang,  bamlet  of,  14.5.

Clmmo-lha  ri,  87.

Cbnug,  a  name  of  Limbus,  3.

Ch.ung  Kivoehe.  143.

Chunjorma  mountain,  21,  22.

Chu-sbo,  Tillage  of,  242.

Chu-shu,  brook,  242.

Cliu-shul  djong,  144.

Cliuta,  village  of,  43.

Chnta  Chyangma,  village  of,  72.

Chyabtam  lama,  tells  a  rich  man  how  to
escape  evil  birth,  64.

Chijng-dso-pa,  or  Treasurer,  SO,  94,  95.

Chyag-na  dorje,  the  god,  153;  miracle
working  image  of,  153

Chyag-tsal  gang,  place  of  prayer-meeting,
198,  199.

Chyamba,  the  future  Buddha,  152.

Chyang  chu,  village  of,  70,  102,  124,  125.

Chyang-chub  gya-lam,  33.

Chyaiigjob,  household  officer  of  Panchen
lama,  55.

Chya.sa  Iha-khang,  sanctuary,  234.

Cluji-hhyab  KhaniM.or  Prime  Minister,  173.

Chyi-lou  Huteketu. See  Minister.

Chying-sang,  a  name  given  the  Kalon.  174.

Chyugpo  mejDang  family,  30.

Chyugpu  Shuug,  plateau  of.  72.

Circumambulating,  78, 88  ;  by  Bonbo,  20G
211.

Club  dance,  210.

Coin,  debased,  forced  circulation  of,  48 ;
exchange  of  Indian  coin  for  Tibetan,  49.

Complimentary  address,  31,  32,  G8,  264.

Conch  shell,  242.

Contracts,  how  prepared,  190.

Corpse  thrown  into  Lake  Dumo,  139,  140;
fed  to  vultures  and  dogs,  164 ;  to  pigs,
169 ;  how  disposed  of  by  Bonbo,  208 ;
of  Panchen  lama,  214  ;  of  children,  how
disposed  of,  220;  stone  on  which  cut
up,  232,  254;  liow  treated  on  death,
252 ;  releasing  the  spirit,  252 ;  corpses
f)f  pregnant  and  barren  women,  255 ;  of


lepers.  256; of  incirnate  lamas,  25G;

burning of corpses, 256 ; disposal of

ashes,  257.
Cotton,  2.

Courier  service,  177,  185.
Corvees,  182.  183,  184.
Courts,  of  Lhasa.  174.
Cranes,  seen  on  Nyang  chu,  72,  83,  125.
Cushions,  70.
Custom  dues,  30,  31,  184.

Daba  xgoxpo,  •'  blue  clay,"  28.

Dab-lung,  village  of,  140.

Dabuug monastery,  146;  by  whom  founded,
171;  judicial  power  of  Abbot,  177;
revenues  of,  182;  annual  rule  of  Da-
bung  monks  over  Lhasa,  266.

Dacoity,  penalty  lor,  18(; ;  ordeal  for  prov-
ing, 189.

jDa/i^JOn,  or  general,  51,70,80;  of  Gyantsr.
86;  where  stationed,  180;  social  rank
of,  246.

Dalai  lama,  collection  of  hymns  by,  63 ;
picture  of  the  first  receiving  throne  of
Tibet,  79  ;  ordination  of,  104  ;  enthrone-
ment of,  104 ;  palace  of  father  of,  147  ;
mode  of  .selecting,  1.59-161;  discovery
of  latest  incarnation,  161 ;  audience  of,
165  ;  description  of,  167;  audience  hall
of  fifth  Dalai  lama,  169 ;  his  position  in
Buddhist  church,  170;  incarnation  of
Shenrezig,  171;  first  one,  171;  succes-
sors, 172;  become  sovereigns  of  Tibet,
172 ;  origin  of  name,  172 ;  majority  at
eighteen,  173;  his  throne  at  Samye,
222 ;  his  kitchen,  262 ;  mode  of  pre-
paring food  for,  262 ;  New  Year's  levee,
264.

Dam-ra,  or  ■'  grove  in  a  swamp,"  149.

Dance  by  Tibetan  girl,  IDS;  by  pro-
fessionals, 217,  262,  265  ;  on  New  Year's
day,  263,  265. See  also  Lama.

Dao-targe,  village  of,  76.

Darchendo,  the  town  of,  156.  See  aUo
Ta-chien-lu.

Darchung  djong,  75.  See  also  Tuchung,
Jong.

Darding  sergo  tamo  temple,  206.

Darjiling,  1 ;  Tibetan  pottery  sold  at,  GG;
railway  a  danger  for  Chinese  trade,  193;
return  to,  245.

Daru,  near  Lhasa,  146.


270


INDEX.


Dates,  dried,  101.

Dayan  Khan,  172.

Dayan  Khanpo,  feared  his  spirit  might
exercise  evil  iutiuence,  161 ;  expelled
by  Sakya  Panchen.  240,  241.

Death,  Lord  of,  weighing  men's  acts,  93 ;
his  image,  etc.,  in  commemoration  cere-
mony, 203;  spirit  after,  252;  period
before  rebirth,  255.

Deba,  or  chief,  70.

Deba  Shikha,  70,  102,  123,  124,  201.

Dechan  phodang,  of  Tashilhunpo,  60.

Dcchan  phug,  haunted  cave,  13.

Dechan  rolpa  monastery,  21,  22.

Dechen,  village  of,  221.

"Deceiving  deatli,"  ceremony  of,  134;
life,  ceremony  of,  134.

Deki  rabdan.  village  of,  70.

Demalung. See  Tamalung.

Densatil,  monastery  of,  226;  its  founder,
227.

Deodar  tree,  23,  29.

Dejjhu,  village  of,  140.

Desi,  or  regent,  172,  246.

Devil,  burnt  in  efiSgy,  118.

Dewan,  ex,  of  Sikkim,  his  influence  in
Tibet,  192,  193.

Dhuiikota  valley,  20.

Dhuramdien,  valley  of,  3.

Diba  Dongtse,  castle  of,  98.

Dice  used  for  divination,  134 ;  game  of,
260.

Ding-naga,  meadow  of,  235.

Ding-pon,  or  lieutenant,  86.

Dipankara  Buddha,  152 ;  feast  in  his
honour,  199.

Divination,  modes  used  for  selecting  in-
carnate lamas,  159.

Divorce,  25(J,  251.

Djari  tang,  29.

Djoncf.  or  prefectural  town,  177 ;  dso,  or
prefectural  store-house,  177  ;  shi,  or  pre-
fectural lands,  177;  accounts,  182.

Djim-khar,  village  of,  143.

Jjjonfj-nyer.  or  sub-prefect,  51,  176;  their
number,  182.

Djongpon.  or  prefect,  51 ;  of  Phagri,  73 ;
appeals  against  to  Lhasa,  174;  their
duties,  176,  177 ;  their  number,  176,
182  :  their  salaries,  177, 182 ;  social  rank
of,  246.

Do,  village  of,  220.


Doche,  ingot  of  silver,  equivalent  terms
for,  51,  183.

Do  la,  29.

Dobta  djong,  210,  244 ;  Lachau  la,  243 ;
mountains,  244.

Dog,  mad,  76 ;  pariah,  re-embodiment  of
sinful  lamas,  119;  watch-dogs  of  Yamdo
famous,  131  ;  kept  for  hunting  by  Pan-
chen lama,  211.

Dogaug,  village  of,  243.

Dogbane,  2.

Dog  tsang,  village  of,  72.

Doi. See  Panam  gang.

Dokpas,  Tibetan  pastoral  tribes,  52  ;  dress
of  women,  67.

Dolma,  the  goddess,  incarnate  in  Dorje
l^hagmo,  138 ;  turquoise  image  of  in
Ramoehe,  165 ;  in  Machig  labdon,  228.

Dolmai  ri,  mount  behind  Tashilhunpo,
118.

Dombu  choskhor  or  monastery,  218.

Dong  lihang,  traveller's  bungalow,  13.

Doug  la,  242.

Dong-sho,  village  of,  234.

Dongtse,  town  of,  45,  49 ;  invitation  to
visit,  60,  68;  leave  for,  69;  arrival  at,
76 ;  monastery  of,  76 ;  the  Kham-tsan
of  at  Shigatse,  119;  second  trip  of
S.  C.  D.  to,  121 ;  visits  it  third  time,
125  ;  fourth  visit  to,  196.

Donkar,  village  of,  146,  242.

Donnijer,  a  civil  officer,  5^  ;  social  rank,
246;  chempo  of  Potala,  168.

Dora  chu-tsan,  hot  springs,  211.

Doling,  village  of,  70.

Dorje  jig-je,  Lord  of  death,  126.

Dorje  phagmo,  incarnate  female  saint,
131 ;  tells  author's  fortune,  132,  134 ;
performs  religious  ceremonies  for  his
recovery,  133,  134,  137 ;  throws  dice
for  divination,  134  ;  jiower  to  restrain
waters  of  lake,  136 ;  tombs  of  predeces-
sors, 136,  137;  her  residence,  138;  de-
scription of  present  incarnation,  138;
peculiar  habits  of,  138 ;  incarnation  of
Dolma,  lv)8;  origin  of  incarnation,  139;
saves  monastery  from  invaders,  139.
Dorje-tag mountains, 35 ; ghat, 219 ;

monastery,  220.
Dowa  targya. See  Dao-targe.
Dragon-head  pillars  of  Jo  Khang,  163.
Dress  of  lady  of  rank,  121,  127;  of  Dalai


INDEX.


271


lama,  167; of Kalon,  174; of  Bonbo

lamas,  207;  of  hostess  at  Samye,  221.
Dropsy  in  Tibet,  its  treatment,  260.
Drum  beating,  by  Limbus,  4,  11.
Dsambling  g-yan,  tomb  of  Dalai  lama,  169.
DsamUng  gyeshe,  an  historical  work,  62 ;

copied  for  author,  68.
DsoDgo  stage  house,  36.
Ducks,  wild  on  Nyang  chu,  83.
Dugpa,  sect  of  lamas,  129.
Dugpa,  a  name  of  Bhutan,  origin  of  name

129.
Dugpa-kunleg,  saint  of  the  red  hat  lamas,

92,  94.
Bu  khang,  or  congregation  hall,  78,  79,  95.
Dukpa-nagpa,  old  Shaman  town,  75.
Du  la,  15,  16.

Dumo  tso,  or  Devil's  lake,  136.
Dimg klior, civil officer, 75,  145; their

number,  how  chosen,  175 ;  their  salaries,

176  ;  social  rank,  246.
Bung-yig,  or  clerk,  67 ;  social  rank,  246.
Dye  plant,  213.
Dyspepsia,  its  varieties,  260.
Dzo,  a  weight,  a  tenth  of  a  srmig,  150.

Earring,  24,  30,  82.
Earthquakes,  destroy  Samye,  225.
Eclipses,  religious  ceremonies  when  they

occur,  261.
Eggs,  not  eaten  by  lamas,  98.
Elephant,  sent by Rajah of  Sikkim  to

Lhasa,  100;  difficulty  of  road  for,  144;

shed  at  Lhasa,  169.
Eleusine  coracaua. See  Murwa.
Embalmment,  214.  256.
Emperor  of  China,  worship  of,  60 ;  ratifies

appointment  of  regent.  173.
Epidemic,  annual,  at  Lhasa,  259.
Estates,  great  ones  of  Tibet,  183.
Exorcising  evil  spirits,  101.

Fable,  the  leopard  and  the  ass,  198.

Feasts,  25th  of  10th  month,  56 ;  of  new
moon,  64, 106  ;  given  general  at  Dongtse,
81;  New  Year's  day,  107,  112,  120;
pre-Buddhist  feast,  108 ;  on  date  of
Buddha's  death,  150;  prayer-meeting
in  June.  198.  199;  15th  of  8th  moon,
199;  July  19,  great  holiday,  201;
harvest,  214;  midsummer,  261 ;  annual
feasts,  261. See  also  Xew  Year.


Feylep  valley,  20.

Fines,  in  lieu  of  punishments,  187.

Fir  trees,  218.

Fi.sh,  let  loose  as  charity,  134 ;  not  eaten

for  a  year  by  order  of  Talai  lama,  141 ;

used  as  manure,  220.
Fishing,  2,  6.
Flagpoles,  149,  151.
Floor,  made  of  mosaic,  78.
Flutes,  57,  108.
Fog.  234.
Foreigners,  policy  of  Tibet  regarding,  181,

192.
Fortune  telling,  132,  134 ;  forbidden,  212.
Fossils,  as  relics  in  temple,  227.
Foxes,  39,  245.
Funeral,  feast,  68.  257;  rites  of  Bonbo,

208; of  Panchen  lama, 214; persons

forbidden to be present  at,  253,  254;

ceremonie.s,  254,  255.

Gadan,  monastery  of,  its  revenues,  182.
Gadan  Gyahu,  the  usurper,  75.
Gadan  khangsar,  palace  of,  172.
Gadan  namchoi,  birthday  of  Tsongkhapa,

56.
Gadan  namgyal-ling,  sanctuary  of,  233.
Games,  260.
Gampo,  or  elder,  52.
Gandan  Chakhang  in  Gyantse,  84;  chapel

in,  85,  89;  description  of,  91.
Gang. See  Fanam-gang.
Gar,  attacked  by  the  Sikhs,  53.
Garden,  at  Jorgya,  73  ;  near  Dongtse,  99 ;

party,  201.
Gar,  General  of  King  Srong-btsan,  168.
Garpon,  or  governor  of  fortress,  53.
Garrison  of  Gyantse.  86.
Gartok,  70.
Ge  river,  38.

Ge-chnng,  village  of.  237.
Gedun-dub.  founder  of  Tashilhunpo,  114;

juniper  tree  grown  from  his  hair,  119 ;

reincarnate  in  first  Dalai  lama,  171.
Gedun-gyatso.  the  Tale  lama.  63  ;  becomes

head  of  Dabung  monastery,  171 ;  first

Dalai  lama,  171 ;  monastery  founded  by,

226.
Geese,  wild,  on  Nyang  chu,  83.
Gelong,  or  priest,  59;  ordinatiou  of.  120»

126.
Gelugpa  Church,  feasts  of.  56 ;  image  of


272


INDEX.


its  supreme  Bmldha,  SI) ;  forbid  use  of

wine,  90.
Gen-j^ang,  boundary  of  Sikkim,  24.").
Gem.  villaoje  of,  244.
Gingu  la,  75.

Glak-los,  wild  people,  2.58.
Goat,  wild,  ill  Sikkim,  2 :  at  Karma,  42  ;

stuffed at Gyantse, 91  : wild, near

Yamdo  tso,  140 ;  near  the  tsomo  Tel-

tuug.  244.
Gods,  of  land  and  mountains,  32.
Goitse,  at  Kangpa-cliau,  23:  in  other  parts

of  Tibet,  258 ;  treatment  of,  258.
Gojogs.  a  mendong  at  Gyantse.  87.
Gok,  village  of,  1.

Golab  Sing,  his  war  with  Lhasa,  53.
Golden  jar,  used  for  selecting  Dalai  lama,

160.
Golog,  their  country,  19G;  tlieir  customs

and  religion,  197  ;  kissing  among  them,

197.
Gondang-tangme.  valley  of,  231. Sec  also

Yarluug.
Gongkhar,  djong, 218, 235; mountains.

235.
Gon-po,  tiie  god,  1(19.
Gonpoi  ri,  229.
<;ood  luck,  sign  of,  1(]6  ;  how  insured  for

the year, 264 : dance. 264 ; signs

watched  for  on  New  Year's  day,  265.
Greyiiound,  99.

Guilt  offering  ceremony,  263,  264.
Guma  shara,  village  of,  37,  38.
Gumo  tang,  16.

(lungri  gung-btsan.  Prince,  168.
Gure,  village  of,  243.
<iuriug  tribe  of  Limbus,  20.
Gushi  Khan,  the  conqueror  of  Tiljet,  79.
Gya,  or  Chinese,  52.
Gva-bum  gang,  square  of,  155. See  also

Tomse  gang.
Gyade  country,  205

Gyal-Uah,  or  reagent,  172. See  also  De.H.
Gyampo,  or  elder,  176.
Gyantse  djong,  63  ;  general  at,  SO  ;  town

of, 80; author  wislies  to  visit  it,  81;

descriptiim of, 84; market at, 85;

ancient province of, 87 ; climate of,

88.
Gyapon.  or  captain.  86.
Gyarong,  tlie  district  of,  76 ;  lamas  from,

205.


Gyatso-shar, village of. 70, 196. 200;

beauty  of,  201.
Gyatu-ling,  village  of,  235.
Gyerpal,  village  of,  234.
Gyunsar,  village  of,  2;'.,  27.

Haboi  ki  of  Samye,  221,  224.

Ilailo,  village  of,"  140.

Hall,  of  worship,  57;  of  departed  saints,  214.

Hamdang  Kham-tsan,  73.

Hares,  20,  39,  83,  1 44.

Hariuan,  Captain,  26,  41.

Harvest,  lucky  day  to  begin  it,  213.

Hat,  30,  40 ;  of  lamas,  69 ;  worn  in  lama
dances,  114;  taking  off,  31,  95,  107;
felt,  203.

Headdresses,  of  Tibetan  women.  38.  55,
67,  85.  221 ;  origin  of,  157  ;  peculiar  of
the  Dungkhor,  176;  value  of,  200.

Hermits,  228,  232.

Hi,  range,  vegetation  on.  4  ;  village  of,  5,
7 ;  view  from  jjass  (Hi  la),  5.

Hooker,  Dr.,  meets  Phurchung,  22 ;  at-
tempt to  enter  Tibet,  192,  193.

Horba,  met  at  Tos  nam-gyaling,  218;
bring  salt  to  Samye,  226.

Horn,  57.

Horses,  richly  ornamented,  52 ;  hoof  re-
vered, 114,  116.

Hoshang  Dharma-'ala,  the,  115.

House,  in  Tashilliunpo,  45.  46:  no  chim-
ney, 60 ;  outside  decoration,  69.  72 ;  in-
terior of,  at  Tashi;;;ang,  74  ;  at  Kye-pa
Khangsar,  96  ;  of  lama  at  Saniding,  132,
135;  of  noble  at  Lhasa,  150,  162;  cere-
monies for  consecrating  new  liome,  202,
203.

Hydrophobia,  treatment  of,  257.

Iago,  village  of,  43,  75.

Illumination,  of  Tashiihuupo,  56.

Images,  holy,  at  Dongtse,  78  ;  at  Gyantse,
89,  90;  metal  out  of  wliich  made,  100;
piiintcd  on  rocks,  142, 145;  in  Jo  khang
at  Lhasa,  151,  152. 153,  157  ;  in  Potala,
168;  at  Ombu  Iha-khaug,  230.

Impostor,  claims  discovery  of  sacred
volumes,  94.

Incarnate  lama,  56;  college  of,  57;  re-
ceived as  novice,  57;  female  one,  131;
(see Dorje phagmo), degraded for


INDEX.


273


adultery, 133; mode of  selection of,

159,  IGO,  161.
Indian  corn,  1,  7,  8,  24,  29.
Inoculation  of  small-pox,  257.
Inscription, relating to founding of

Tashilhunpo,  114; gigantic,  on  rocks,

123 ;  on  stone  in  Tibetan  and  Chinese

at  Lhasa,  148,  151.
Interest  on  money,  11»0,  191.
Invocation  to  mountain  deities,  5,  18.
Irrigation,  39  ;  canals,  72,  73,  76.
Isa,  village  of,  76.

.Tah-hu  tang,  parade  ground,  65.

Jail,  horrors  of  Tibetan.  186.

Jaisang  Teba,  the  Desi,  172.

Jang,  village  of,  upper  and  lower,  144.
See  also  Jong.

Je  Kadub  rinpoche,  Bon  high  priest,  20G.

Je  la,  205.

Jelap  la,  value  of  road,  194.

Jerong,  district  of,  209.

Jetsun  Tiulas-tsomo,  founder  of  Samding
monastery,  136.

Jig-kyong,  camp  of,  238.

Joug,  village  of,  226.  228  ;  temple  at,  227.

Jong  Luguri,  village  of,  43.  See  also
Lugiiri  djong.

Jongri,  21 ;  la,  15,  16.

Jorgya.  \dllage  of,  72,  73.

Jo-vo,  "  the  Lord,"  his  image,  78 ;  of
Lhasa.  78.  151 ;  —  khang,  149,  150  ;  see
also  Kilkhordiug ;  description  of  temple,
151,  152,  153, 154  ;  second  visit  to,  157;
statue  in,  157 ;  pillars  of  temple,  163 ;
copy  of,  at  Tandub,  230.

Juugars,  attack  Samding,  139  ;  especially
inimical  to  Nyingma  sect,  141 ;  miracle,
141,  142:  sack  Eigyal  Sendar,  206;
pillage  Mindol-liiig,  235.

Juniper,  erroneously  called  "  sandal-
wood," 13 ;  grown  from  hair  of  saint,
119;  along  Tib  chu,  218.

Juonga,  mountain,  21.  See  also  Cho  Kang-
chan  Juonga.

Justice,  courts  of,  174,  177,178;  adminis-
tration of,  186.

Kabili  river,  19,  21,  22.
Kahsopa,  or  chief  clerk,  175.
Kabu  la,  217.
Ka-che,  or  Kashmiri.  228.


Kadong,  monastery  of,  74.

Knduiiij,  or  secretary,  173  ;  their  number,
175.

Kahdong  monastery,  76.

Kalai  river,  6.

Kalliat  river. See  Ealai.

Kalon,  or  ministers  of  State,  173 ;  their
dress,  174  ;  how  chosen,  174.

Kal-zang  zamba,  141.

Kamai  phugpa,  28.

Kamah,  a  class  of  dancers,  263.

K  imbachen. See  Kangpa-chan.

Kampa  lacha. See  Khamba  partshi.

Kang,  a  land  measure,  86,  18o,  182.

Kangchan  mountain,  15  ;  river,  23.

Kangla  chen  pass,  24,  29,  34,  35.

Kangla  jang-ma  peak,  18.

Kangla  Xangmo  la,  21.

Kaugpa-chan,  village  of,  12,  23;  cultiva-
tion at,  24  ;  departure  from,  27  ;  monas-
tery at,  31 ;  valley,  22 ;  early  inhabitants
of,  26;  their  fights  with  the  Magar,
27  ;  road  to,  29.

Kangyur,  reading  of,  30  ;  copy  at  Manding
gomba,  31 ;  at  Dongtse,  126.

Kang  zang-po  mountain,  129.

Kargya,  or  purwana,  176  ;  reserve  store,
177.

Karma,  a  hundredth  of  an  ounce,  184.

Karma  Bagshi,  a  celebrated  lama,  145.

Karmapa  sect,  old  lamasery  of,  75.

Karmoling,  pasture  lands  of,  217.

Kasliag,  or  ministers'  council  hall,  174.

Kashmir,  envoy  arrives  at  Tashilhunpo,
52 ;  why  sent,  53 ;  war  between  Gohib
Sing  and  Tibet,  53  ;  people  of  in  Lhasa,
146,  150;  lax  Mohammedans,  146;  man
at  Tse-tang,  228 ;  people  at  Tse-tang,
230.

Katmandu,  68,  228.

Kedesho  Jong. See  Kideshor.

Kegii  tsal  cemeterj',  65.

Kemai  tsal,  grove  of,  147.

Kena,  village  df,  72.

Kesar  Lhakhang,  temple  of  Knan-ti
(Ka?n-ti  miao  of  the  Chinese),  at
Shigatse,  5i.

Keshong,  village  of,  205.

Keta,  near  the  Ringbi,  14.

Khnma  kang  tung,  28.

Ke-utag  vilhige,  217.

Klial,  a  dry  measure,  182.

T


274


INDEX.


Khamba.  24  :  their  lawlessness.  47 ;  met j
near Dongtse, 76; attack ex-Dewan I
of  Sikkim,  87,  88 ;  quarrel  in  Shigatse
market,  107: lama, 156; estimate  of  \
character,  15G.  j

Khamha  chyang  tang.  142.  -

Khamba  jong.  40,  ;"iO,  5(j,  r)9,  G5,  216;  the
Djongpon  of,  stops  Phurchung  on his  '
way  to  India,  102 ;  return  of  author  to,
244 :  its  waterworks,  244.
Khamba  la,  142.
Kliamlia  partshi,  village  of.  142.
Khamdo,  province  of,  56,  64  ; lamas  from,

240.
Khanicdo,  village  of,  217.
Kham-yol,  238.
Kbando  phug,  22.
Kliang-nyer,  or  house-keeper.  149.
Khang-toi  shikha,  in  Lljasa.  92.
Khara  Tedong,  village  of,  70.
Khatag,  or  complimentary  scarf,  32,  49,
55.  78,  83,  95,  125.  128,  184;  red  ones
given  by  Dalai  lama,  168.
Kliamba  barchi. See  Kliamba  i>artshi  and

Kampa  lacha.
Kharnang-phu  chu,  river,  129,  130.
Kharo  la,  129.

Khede-sho,  town  of,  218,  235.
Khon  family,  210.

Khruldupa,  or  tax-collector,  177,  184.
Khunpodo  village,  217.
Kliyah-gong,  a  lama  title,  132.
Khyungar.  village  of,  228.
Kiki-naga,  residence  of  Panchen's  mother,

120.
Kiku-tamsa,  a  storehouse, 119; pictures

hung  up  on  it,  119.  199.
Kinlcah,  or  brocaded  silk,  60,  127.
Kingfisher,  or  Xyang  chu,  84.
Ki  pbug,  33.
Kirata  tribes,  3,  20.
Kiroug,  district  of,  ."i2.
Kissing  among  the  Golog,  197.
Kitchen  of  Dalai  lama,  2G2.
Kon-cliog  sum,  used  to  tran.slate "'god,"

77.
Konjo,  tlie  Princess,  brings  image  of
Buddha  to  Tibet,  151 ;  other  services
rendered  by  her,  151 ;  temple  built  by,
155;  founds  llamoche,  165;  her  image
at  Potala,  168.
Kongpo,  province  of,  12."),  161,  183;  goitre


prevalent in,  258 ; Gyamda.  town  of,

161.
Kongra  lamo  pass,  237.  245.
Korchagpa,  or  policeman.  148.
Kosi  river,  its  source,  242.
Kotowing.  82,  95.
Kuchar  khaupo,  official  of Dalai  lama's

household,  167.
Ku-dag,  or  gentleman,  165.
Kumba  karna  mountain,  15.
Kunduling,  palace  of  regent.  147  ;  mon-
astery, 73.
Kunga  nyingpo,  hierarch  of  Sakya,  240.
Kunga  zangbo,  of  Sakya,  240.
Kun-khyab  ling,  palace  of  Panchen  lama.

57,61,211.
Kumjer,  or  keeper  of  holy  images.  84,  et

pas.
Kurhii,  or  guilt  oftering  ceremony,  263,

264.
Kurma.  village  of.  42,  43,  211.
Kushi Khan, confers sovereignty of

Central  Tibet  on  Dalai  lama,  172.
Kutiiketu,  a  Mongol,  126.
Kyah-dvang  chenpo. See  Minister  of  Tem-
poral Aflairs.
Kye-na. See  Kena.
Kye-pa  Khangsar,  minister's  house  at.  94.

95.
Kyi  chu.  tlie river  of  Liiasa,  144,  145 ;

rock  which  keeps  back  its  waters  from

Jo  khang.  163.
Kyil  khang  Ta-tsun.  119.
Kyi-phug  nunnery,  102.
Kyilkhor-ding  temple,  149,  150; square

in front of, 155 ; New Year's cere-
monies at,  265. See  also  Jovo  Khang.
Kyishong,  village  of,  235.
Kyoga,  village  of,  211.

Labrang.  or  episcopal  palace,  of  Tashi-
Ihunpo,  62,  69;  full  name  given,  120;
at  Sakya,  239.

Laln-ang  dokpa  (camp),  43,  211.

Lachan,  frontier  post,  40,  50,  59,  77.

Lachang  pass,  84;  shortest  road  to  Sik-
kim, 84.

Laclimi  pokri,  lake,  16.

Ladak,  pilgrims  from,  at  Gyantse.  89.

La  dug,  mountain  sicliness,  15,  17.

Lamas,  at  Tasiiilliunpo,  48  ;  music  by,
57 ;  noviciate  of,  57  ;  studies,  91 ;  taking


INDEX.


275


vows,  113;  early  rivers,  113;  dance,
114,  117,  118,  201,  210,  26:'.;  from
Kliams,  as  traders,  156;  officials,  176;
revenues  of,  182.

Lamb  skins,  lining  of  clothing,  67.

Lampokri. See  Tama  chu  lake.

Lamps,  lit  on  New  Year's  eve,  120.

Lamteiig  valley,  monkeys  in,  2.

Langbu  la,  38.

Langdarma,  King,  153 ;  destroys  Samye,
225.

Lang  la,  237.

Langma,  village  of,  129.

Lap-ebyi  peak,  18,  20.

Larche  tree,  23,  29.

Lasa,  village  of,  209.

Lawsuits,  how  settled,  178.

Lebor,  a  measure  of  distance,  185.

Leeches  in  Sikkim,  5.

Leopards  in  Sikkim,  14,  18  ;  snow  leo-
pards, 20 ;  stuffed  at  Gyantse,  91.

Lepchas,  their  fishing,  2  ;  mode  of  killing
monkeys,  2 ;  notices  on,  5 ;  priests,  6 ;
marriage,  6 ;  burials,  6  ;  no  religion,  7  ;
paradise,  21.

Leprosy,  its  cause  and  treatment,  259,  260.

Letter  writing,  difficulty  in  Tibetan,  49.

Lha-bab  ri,  sanctuary  of,  232.

Lhacham,  or  lady  of  rank,  121 ;  stops  at
Nangartse,  130;  her  drawing-room,
161  ;  arranges  audience  with  Dalai
lama  for  S.  C.  D.,  165 ;  to  whom  title
given,  174.

Lhadong,  village  of,  210.

Lhagpa-tsering,  the  charity  of,  64.

Lhakha,  peak  of,  38.

Lha  lihang,  or  temple.  31.

Lhalu,  the  Shape,  51,  66.

Lhamo  sung  chyong-ma,  oracle  of,  173,
211.

Lhari-zim  phug,  monastery,  88 ;  books
at,  88.

Lhartse  djong,  209.

Lhasa,  tribute  sent  it  by  Kashmir,  52 ;
its  war  with  Kashmir,  53  ;  stops  travel
to  and  from  India,  63 ;  road  to,  best
season  to  travel,  85 ;  enforces  strict
rules  as  to  foreign  travel,  103  ;  protests
against  Panchen  taking  vow  of  monk-
hood, 120  ;  S.  C.  D.  advised  not  to  stay
long  at,  128 ;  first  view  of,  145,  146 ;
enters  city,  147 ;  description  of  streets.


148,  149,  150;  filtli  in  streets,  155;
view  of  from  Potala,  166;  author  leaves,
195.

Lhasre,  a  title,  126  ;  to  whom  given,  174.

Llia-tsun,  Buddhist  saint,  legend  con-
nected with.  21  ;  lived  at  Manding
gomba,  30, 31 ;  founded  Dongtse  gomba,
78  ;  books  concerning,  88.

Lheua  djong,  72.

Lhimpotsc,  village  of,  237.

Lhokha  country,  216.

Lholing,  village  of,  6G.

Lhopas,  Southerns,  21  ;  various  kinds
of,  125;  marriage  customs  of,  125;
raid  country  round  Lake  Palti,  216.

Limbudu,  country  of  the  Limbu,  3,  4.

Limbus,  their  fishing,  2  ;  tilling,  3 ;
early  habit  at,  3;  called  Chung  by
Lepchas,  3 ;  houses,  3 ;  customs,  4 ;
cultivation,  6 ;  priests,  6 ;  physicians,
7 ;  woman,  9  ;  marriages,  10 ;  divination,
11 ;  use  Ichatag,  12 ;  burial  services,
12  ;  a  Limbu  legend,  20.

Ling,  the  four  great  of  Lhasa,  173;  of
Samye.  222.

Ling,  village  of,  217.

Lingbo  cheu. See  Lhimpotse.

Lingcham,  village  of,  5,  7.

LiiKjhor,  circumambulatiou,  87 ;  of  Lhasa,
1(;9.

Lithographic  press,  brought  to  minister,
50,  59  ;  fear  it  might  spread  small-pox,
105  ;  first  printing  on.  107.

Lito  phug,  division  of  Gyantse,  87,  91.

Lobding,  country  place  of  minister,  70.

Logan  g  ferry,  228.

Loh-bu  Jong. See  Ling.

Lomba  hills,  221.

Lora,  village  of,  242.

Luguri  djong,  43,  211.  See  also  Jong
Luguri.

Lu  khang,  or  "  snake  house,"  of  the  Jo
khang,  1 63 ;  palladium  of  Tibet  pre-
served in,  163.

Lumber  for  Lhasa,  221.

Lungkyong  chu,  29.

Luugmo  la,  14.

Lung  ta,  or  '•  wind  horse,"  149 ;  keeps  oft'
leprosy,  259.

Lupa  gyaltsan,  a  friend  of  author's,  50,
104,  107.


276


INDEX.


Muclien,  or  chief  cook,  45.

:\Iacliig  labiion.  saiut,  227,  228.

Mairar  tribe,  26.

Mahakala,  a  patron  god,  formerly  Matran-
kani,  lot).

]\Iaitreya, imajjre of, at  Gyantse,  90 ; at
feast  at  Shigatse,  199  :  worship  of.  200.
Mamo,  the  goddesses,  or  she-devils,  22 :
towers  sacred  to,  7() ;  images  of,  99.

Jlanda  phug,  22  ;  la,  22.

Blnnding  monastery,  29,  30;  its  import-
ance, 31 .

Manidara,  3.

Mantra  (^charms)  recited,  34,  41  :  author
not  proficient  in,  59 ;  continual  repeti-
tion of,  90.

Mapham,  lake,  53.

Map-ja,  village  of,  242.

Magpon,  or  general,  178.

Ma'ngja,  or  "  general  tea,"  132,  133,  205.

Mani  Ihahhang,  or  prayer  wheel  temple,
73,74,76;  of  Tashilhun[)0,  119.

Market  of  Shigatse,  provisions  brought,
09.

IVIarkham,  the  province  of,  7G.

Marmots,  242.

Marriage  ceremonies  of  Bonbo,  208  ;
customs  of  Tibet,  247-250;  forbidden
degrees  of  consanguinity,  251 ;  poly-
andric,  251,  252.

Marsh,  near  Lhasa,  146.

Mastitis,  chained  before  gate,  70  ;  stutied
at  Gyautse,  91.

Matrankaru,  the  demon,  138 ;  destroyed
by  Tamdrin,  139. See  also  Mahakala.

Maudgalviiyana,  discijjle  of  the  Buddha,
152  ;  his  bill  preserved  at  Lhasa,  152.

JIayaphug,  29.

Me  agtsoms.  King,  orders  the  Tsang-po
to  be  whipped,  221.

Meals,  at  Tashillninpo.  46,  48,  49 ;  s-up-
plied  tailor,  62  ;  witli  the  Deba  Sliikha,
71,  72;  of  high  oflicials,  82;  with
minister,  83,  98,  99  ;  with  Lupa  gyalt-
san, 107.

Medicine,  given  by  S.  V.  D.  to  Tibetans,
41,  54,  98;  bought  at  Darjiling,  42;
given  to  Tibetan  lady,  121 ;  given  him
by  the  Dorje  pliagmo,  132,  133 ;  by
lamas,  134  ;  used  by  Tibetans,  257.

Molung,  village  of,  217.

Mende,  village  of,  41.


Mendong,  or  stone  pile-,  3,  4.  15,  32,  64,
69,  87 ;  of  Bonbo,  206.

Mice,  tame  in  chapel,  159.

Mikyod  dorje,  the  god,  155.

Milarapa,  saint,  a  legend  concerning,  153,
154.

Militia,  Tibetan,  40  :  commanded  by
Amban,  178  :  how  recruited,  180.

Mindol-ling  lamasery,  234,  235.

Minister,  Prime,  173;  Council  of  Ministers,
173  ;  duties  of,  173,  174.

Minister  of  Temporal  Afiairs  of  Tsang,
41,  51  ;  letter  to,  49:  his  country  house
at  Lobding,  70 ;  receives  author  at
Dongtse,  76  ;  his  literary  work,  78,  80  ;
talk  witli  author,  80 ;  learns  to  write
Eoman  characters.  81 ;  learning  English,
83;  his  mother  visits  him,  94  ;  exorcises
evil  spirits,  101  ;  wants  to  learn  survey-
ing, 101  ;  promises  to  facilitate  author's
journey  to  Lhasa,  101  ;  promises  to
send  S.  C.  D.  to  Lhasa,  lOd;  studies
with  author,  108:  speaks  Mongol,  109;
interest  in  astronomy,  109 ;  views  on
stars,  110:  lodges  S.  C.  D.  in  his  resi-
dence, 110,  111  :  does  not  eat  in  the  after-
noon, 112  ;  speaks  of  Panciien  ot  S.  C.  D.,
120;  ordains  priests,  120  ;  S.  C.  D.  takes
leave  of,  128;  stricken  with  small-pox,
169,  196;  writes  in  Koman  ciiaracter,
202.

3Iiiit  of  Lhasa,  171.

Mipon,  or  headman,  176.

Mirkan  la,  22.

Mirkan  Pandita,  a  Mongol,  124.

Mishniis,  the,  123.

Misser,  peasantry  or  serfs,  51 :  how  to  be
treated  by  officials,  177 ;  property  of,
182.

Missionaries,  feared  in  Tibet,  193.

Mitogang  road,  2.

Mi-waiig,  King,  his  birthplace,  75.

Miza  lakelet,  32.

Mougul,  in  Tashilhunpo,  48  :  lama,  failed
at  examination,  48;  punishment  for
forgery,  56  ;  pilgrims  at  Tashilhunpo,
109.

Monkeys  in  Sikkim,  2.

Monks,  admission  to  the  Kliam  tsau  order,
57.

Mon  lam,  or  prayer  meeting,  198, 262,  265.

Month,  fourth,  the  holiest,  133.


INDEX.


277


Mourniug,  signs  of,  203 ;  ou  deatli  of
Panchen  lama,  214,  256;  of  abbots  and
others,  250.

Mountain  sickness,  see  la-'Jiig  :  tops,
prayer  and  oifering,  142.

Mudang  phug,  22.

Mug,  village  of,  39.

Mu-li-ding-ki  tso,  image  of  new  Dalai
lama  appears  on  its  waters,  161.

Murder,  punishment  for,  187;  ordered  for
proving,  189.

Murmis,  at  Shigatse  witii  envoy  of  Kash-
mir, 52.

Murwa,  bier,  3  ;  fields  of,  7.

Musk  deer,  29  ;  near  Yarado  tso,  140.

Nabso  la,  141.

Nachuug chos-kyong, oracle of, 146  ;

description  of  temple. 146 ; consulted

as  to  successor  of  Dalai  lama,  160;  of

regent,  173  ;  of  Sakya  Panchen,  241.
Nagsliu  cliyema,  221.
Nagtsa-shar,  or  Black  Court,  174.
Nag-wang  lob-zang,  the  fifth  Dalai  lama,

169 ;  first  sovereign  of  Tibet,  172.
Nag-wang lo-zang tubdan gya-tso, tbe

present Dalai lama, 161  ; description

of,  167.
Naga,  district  of,  123.
Nagpa,  or sorceress,  75,  109 : —  khang,

114,  118.
Nag-wang  kun-bzang, a Dorje phagmo,

187.
Na-Pematang,  paradise  of  the  Lep-chas,

21.
Nairanjana,  sand  from  the  river,  152.
Nam,  hamlet  of,  144.
Nambu,  village  of,  43  ;  la,  43.
Nambura,  village  of.  8,  10.
Namga  stream,  21.
Namga-tsal,  13,  21.

Namgyal  Ta-tsau,  of  Lhasa,  143, 168,  169.
Namring  monastery,  78,  209.
Nangartse  djong,  63,  129,  130, 140.
Nango  ferry,  228  ;  la,  22,  38,  29.
Nanin  monastery,  87.
Nari  ta-tsang,  monastery  of,  226.
Naring,  village  of.  211.
Nartar  g,  town  of,  70,  237.
Natog,  village  of,  72
Ne-dong  djong,  230.
Nembotong,  village  of,  75.


Nei)al.  war  with  Tibet.  36  ;  friendly  rela-
tions with  Tibet,  181.

Nepalese,  at  Shigatse,  52 ;  their  trade
with  Tibet,  t_')S;  in  Gyantse,  85;  in
Lhasa,  149.  i:)0;  in  Samye,  222;  at
Tse-tang.  230.

Nesar,  village  of,  7(5.

Netang,  village  of,  144,  145,  196.

Nettle,  giant,  in  Sikkim,  5,  7.

New  moon  ceremonies,  133.

New  Year's  Day,  107;  festivities  for,
112,  113,  260,  262-266.

Ngambu  dung  la. See  Nambu  la.

Niru  chu,  87.

Noga  slojie,  camp  at,  17.

Noijinhamara  temple,  224.

Noi-jin  kang-zang  mountains,  87,  129.

Noijin  norpa  zang>po  mountain,  129.

Non  chu,  208.

Norbugang,  hamlet  of,  145.

Norbu  linga,  palace  of.  147.

Norgya  Nangpa,  72.

Norpa  khyung-djin,  ruins  of  lamasery,  75,
123.

Num  chu,  its  course,  70.

Nuns,  121 ;  and  monks  living  together,
232.

Nyagpa,  or  sorceress. See  Nagpa.

Nya-kri  btsan-po,  King,  230,  232.

Nyang  cliol  jung  Nyiniai  other,  tille  of
historical  work.  94.

Nyang  chu,  72,  73, 75  ;  extent  and  fertility
of,  83 ;  source  of,  87 ;  an  affluent  of,
101 ;  headwaters  of,  129  ;  bathing  in,
214.

Nyema  lung. See  Melung.

Nyen. See  Nango  ferry.

Nyer-tam. See  Netang.

Nyingma,  sect  of  lama,  37  ;  impostor  of.
claims  discovery  of  sacred  volume.-^,  94  ;
nuns,  wear  long  hair,  121 ;  Palti  djong
one  of  its  strongholds,  141;  holiest
shrine  of,  232  ;  colour  of  buildings,  238.
See  also  Eed-hat  sect.

Oath,  form  of,  in  Tibet,  107.

Ofleriugs  to  gods,  78,  134 ;  at  a  haunted

spot,  141 ;  ou  tops  of  mountains,  142.
Om-dse.  or  master  of  cereiiionies,  115,  205.
Om  mani  padme  hum.  out  on  rocks,  38  ;

when  recited,  55.
Oma  tang,  plateau  of,  129,  236.


278


INDEX.


Ombu,  Iha-klianir,  palace  of,  2:!0  :  village

of,  2:^0.
Omensi,  vratchcd  for  ou  New  Year's  Day,

2t]r..
Onions,  wild,  7.
Oranges,  7 ;  in  Gyautso,  92.
Orchard,  at  Pislii  niani  Ibakliaug,  To.
Ordeals,  188-190.

P.VDDV  fields,  in  Sikkim,  3.
Padma Sambhava, identified with the
Limbu Srijanga,  4 ; image  painted  on
temple,  7G ;  bis  birtbday,  210  ;  bis  cave
at  Samye,  222  ;  bis  prophecy  concerning
Samye, 224 ; driven away by Bonbo,
225 ;  his  cell,  232.
Painara. See  Pauam-gang.
Pa  la,  210.
Palchen chuvori,  monastery  of,  143 ; by

whom  built,  143.
Paldan Ihamo,  image  of  at  Lhasa,  154,
158 ;  mice  in  her  chapel,  159. See  also
Srimati  devi.
Paljor  rabtan,  house  in  Lhasa,  149.
Palkhor  choide,  great  temple  of  Gyantse,
81; visit  to,  88; chorten of,  84; sur-
veyed, 86 ; l)y whom founded, 88 ;
description  of,  90.
Palmistry,  esteemed  in  Tibet,  97.
Palmoi-pal  tang,  desert  of,  154.
Palri.  75. See  also  Pe-li.
Palri  Kusho,  the  lama,  88.
Palti, lake, 130 ; djong, 141 ; origin  of
name,  141;  town  saved  by  miracle,  141,
142; passed through, 196, 236. See
also  Yamdo  Yumtso.
Palti  Shabdung,  a  saint  who  saved  Palti

djong,  141.
Panam-gang, village of, 72 ; doi, 74 ;

district,  of,  74 ;  djong,  88.
Panchen  lama,  56 ;  attends  an  ordination,
57 ;  his  blessing,  57 ;  description  of,
57 ;  receives  the  Amban,  62 ;  punished
for  doubting  gods,  89;  visit  to  Lhasa,
104;  his  literary  work,  118;  Lhasa
Government  accuses  him  of  heresy,
118;  mode  of  selection  of,  160;  sove-
reignty of  Ult-Tibet  given  him  by
Kushi  Klian,  172  ;  audience  to  Amban,
179;  belief  he  will  leave  Tibet,  180;
its  consequence,  181 ;  independent  spirit
of,  181  ;  when  absent  from  oeie.iiouies


how  represented,  198 ;  fatal  illness  of,
202;  death  of,  203;  cause  of.  203,  204;
war  of  Bonbo  stock,  207  ;  incidents  con-
nected with  death  of.  211,  212;  his
funeral,  214.
Pangang,  village  of,  75. See also  Pong

kong.
Pangbo  la,  22.
Pangri,  hamlet  of,  76.
Pankor  shornub,  mountains  of,  72.
Pauza.  village  of,  235.
Paougtang,  13.

Parade  ground,  at  Shigatse,  65.
Paralysis,  i>revalence  of,  259.
Pargo  kaliug  chorten,  western  gateway  of

Lhasa,  147,  151.
Parrot  in  Tashilhunpo.  112.
Passjiort,  62,  67,  77 ;  severe  rules  enforced
at  Khamba  djong.  102 ; given  Ugyen-
gyatso,  109,  110  ;  duties  of  officials  con-
cerning, 177 ;  from  Golog  chiefs,  197 ;
given  author,  236.
I'atama,  ferry  on  the  Tsang-po,  66.
Patna,  merchants  of  in  Lhasa,  149.
Patsal,  hamlet  of,  74. See  also  Pisbi.
Pay  of  troops,  86.
Peli. See  Palri.
Peach  trees,  226.
Pearls,  sale  for  at  Shigatse,  104.
Pema-kyod,  province  of,  183 ; goitre  pre-
valent in,  258.
Pema-yangtse,  village  of,  7.
Penagangdo, village of, 72. See also

Penjang.
Penara  jong. See  Panam-gang.
Peru,  nunnery  of,  218.
Peri  jang,  74. See  also  Penagangdo.
Perong  sliavea,  hamlet  of,  70.
Peurbu.  or  Nepalese,  68.
Pbagiiiodu,  dynasty,  159.  226 ; origin  of
name,  226 ;  its  old  capital,  227 ;  village
of,  226 ;  royal  city  of,  230.
Phagpa,  the  lama,  159,  240 ;  books pre-
sented him,  241.
Phagpa  Iha,  greatest  noble  of  Tibet,  183.
Phagri djong, 63; road to and from
Gyantse,  87;  traders  from  at  Shigatse,
104 ;  pass,  109.
Phala,  the Dahpon,  80 ; reception  of  at
Dongtse,  81 ; his  home in  Lhasa,  85,
149,  150  ;  a  friend  of  the  minister,  101  ;
his  wife  ill,  120.


INDEX.


279


Phamu-bub. See  Phagmodu.

Pheasants,  1-1,  16 ;  snow,  20 ;  green,  21,
29.

Phendi  Kbangsar,  minister  of  Tsaug,  41.

Pherng  mountains,  34,  38,  238.

Phodaug  djong,  230.

Phodang  marpo,  palace  of  Potala,  16G;
architecture  of,  169.

Phola.  village  of,  75.

riirug,  or  serge,  30.

Phugpa  karpo,  33,  34.

Phuntso  Khaugsar,  residence  of  minister
at  Tasbilhunpo,  47,  49,  107,  108,  211.

Pbunsto  ling  monastery,  209.

Phurchung,  2,  10,  20 ;  his  brother-in-law,
22 ;  his  meeting  with  Sir  Joseph
Hooker,  22 ;  native  village  of,  23 ;  his
uncle,  24;  his  faithfulness,  27;  drunken-
ness, 30 ;  gives  a  bond  for  S.  C.  D.,  31 ;
his  duties  at  Tashilhunpo,  47 ;  sent  to
Khamba  djong,  60 ;  returns  to  Tashi-
lhunpo, 102 ;  prepares  to  return  to
India  with  U.  G.,  110 ;  starts  ou  journey,
111;  returns  to  Shigatse,  196;  rejoins
S.  C.  D.,  216.

Phjjling,  or  foreigner,  102.

Pictures  hung  up  for  bestowing  blessings,
119.

Pigeons,  43,  224.

Pigs,  wild,  7,  14 ;  at  Tale,  7 ;  fed  on
corpses  at  Lhasa,  169 ;  where  raised,
183.

Pillars  of  Jo  khang,  1G3.

Pills,  magical,  30.  132,  138,  168,  202,  203.

Pishi,  village  of,  72.

Pislii  mani  Ihakhang,  73,  125.

Plantain,  wild,  8.

Ploughing,  in  Sikkim,  3 ;  ceremonies  at
beginning  of.  123.

Plum  trees.  226.

Pobo.  province  of,  258  ;  goitre  prevalent
there,  258.

Po  phug,  33.

Podong-chogleg  namgyal.  author,  138.

Pogpon,  or  paymaster,  62  ;  of  Sliigatse,  86.

Poison,  for  killing  bears,  2 ;  for  fishing,  6 ;
weed  near  Bogto  la,  16 ;  natives  killed
by,  27.

Pole,  camp,  39.

Police,  Tibetan,  40  ;  Chinese  at  Shigatse,
48.

Polo,  game  of,  260.


Polyandry,  96; Tibetan  views on, 162;

husbands  not  related,  216,  238 ;  origin

of  custom,  251,  252.
Pomda,  town  of,  156.
Pong  kang. See  Pangang.
Ponpoi  ri,  238.
Poi)lars.  near Shigatse,  73; at Aniung,

76 ; at Dongtse,  95.  99 ; near Lhasa,

144,  149  ;  sprung  from  hair  of  Uuddlia,

151 ;  along  Tib  chu.  218  ;  at  Taga-sho,

226.
Postal  service,  177.  185 ;  diet  of  couriers,

185.
Potala.  mount,  at  Lhasa.  145. IKJ;  visit

to,  166;  audience  with  Dalai  lama  at,

166-169 ;  annual  white-washing  of,  262.
Potatoes,  23,  24,  26,  8:!,  98.  231.
Pottery,  of  Tanag,  66 :  manufacture  of.  in

Tibet,  66;  at  Ring-la,  216.
Potentilla  ans:rina,  used  as  food.  264.
Prayer-wheels,  25 ;  turned  by  water.  28 ;

at  Dongtse,  98; at  Tashilhunpo.  119;

at  Potala,  166;  at  Shari,  217  ;  meeting,

189,  262.
Presents,  money  and  scarves  usually  used,

46,  49,  71 ;  made  guests  on  arrival,  74  ;

to Chyag-dso-pa, 96 ; to minister of

rugs,  serge,  etc.,  100; to  Dalai  lama,

etc., 104 ; of green barley. 143 ; to

Dalai  lama,  167;  Xew  Year.  264.
Prisoners,  cruelly  treated,  49,  51,  62.  186.
Procession,  to  worship  Emperor  of  China,

60 ; on  arrival  of  general  at  Dongtse,

80,  82  ;  escorts  minister  out  of  Dongtse,

95  ;  New  Year's,  263.
Property, exempted from seizure, 191 ;

disposal  of  at  death,  255.
Propitiatory  ceremonies  of  Lord  of  death,

124;  of  gods  of  life,  133,  134;  of  Tam-

drin,  135,  137.
Pudding,  blood,  26.
Fido,  or  serge,  100.

Pungde,  town  of,  156. See  also  Pomda.
Punishment,  of  Tibetan  officials,  51,  52,

54; for forgery, 56; for murdering

lamas,  64  ;  of  work-people,  213.
Purang,  on  Nepal  border,  53.
Purug. See  Phrug.

Quoits,  game  of,  202.


280


INDEX.


Rachung,  saiuf,  a  lejjend  conceriiiuf^.  153,

154; his  cave, 231; monastery,  231;

village  of,  231.
Radeng,  Hor  Dokpa  from,  220.
Ragaslia,  the  Shape,  146.
Rag-tso  ferry,  209.
Ralpachan,  King,  151.
Railing  zamba,  bridge over  Nyang  chu,

129: chong-doi, village of, 129; til

monastery,  129.
Ramoche,  temple  of,  155  ;  relics  preserved

at, 155, 15tj; services  held at, 156;

communicates  with  hell,  165  ;  relics  in,

165.
Rampa,  the  Shape.  101.
Bampa,  a  food  plant.  125.
Rapa-chan,  stream,  27.
Rape,  how  punished,  188.
Rape,  raised  at  Chu-shul,  144.
Ratna  talai  Khan,  172.
Ratong  river,  7,  16.
Re  chu,  43,  237 ;  district  of.  65 ;  road  to,

75.  See  also  Shab  chu.
Red-hat  sect  of  lamas,  31.
Regent,  office  elective,  173 ;  how  chosen,

172 ;  duties  of  office,  173.
Regyinpai  monastery,  43.
Religious  services,  at  Gyantse,  90.
Restaurant,  at  Shigatse,  55.
Revenue  of  State,  181 ;  how  paid,  182  ;  in

cattle,  184.
Review  of  troops,  82,  178,  198.
Rhododendrons,  142.
Rice, at  Ringbi,  8; at Cliaini, 29; at

AVallung,  38;  given  by  Dalai  lama  at

audience,  168.
Rigyal Shendar, monastery of, 205 ;

description  of,  205,  206  ;  second  visit  of

U.  G.  to,  213.
Rin-chen  gang,  traders  fr(jm,  at  Shigatse,

105.
Rin-chen  Khadoma,  the  goddess,  amber

image  of,  in  Ramoche,  16.").
lUnchen  teniva,  quotixl,  13.
Ringbi,  river,  8,  14;  village  of,  7,  8.
Ring-la,  hamlet  of,  130,  21G.
Rishi  chorten,  on  Hi  range,  4.
Rishi  stream,  5.
Ritoi  monastery.  87.
Ri-tong  precipice.  75 ;  view  I'rom,  75.
Ri-u,  village  of,  37.
Rivotag,  river,  217  ;  djong,  217.


Rogijaha,  beggars,  at  Shigatse,  47  :  origin
of  name,  63 ;  form  a  guild  in  Lhasa,
163;  how  recruited.  163;  cut  up  dead
bodies,  164 ;  tlieir  chief,  164 ;  their
houses,  164,  169,

Rombuja  lake,  217.

Rope,  sliding  down,  at  festival,  58,  59,
265.

Roses,  wild,  142.

Rudok,  attacked  by  the  Sikhs,  53.

Rugs,  made  at  Targye.  41,  211 ;  at  Phola,
75 ;  at  Gyantse.  100,  203,  213.

Rummam,  the  river,  its  source,  2.

Rungit,  great,  the  river,  2,  6.

Bupon,  or  colonel,  86,  178.

Saffron  plant,  injiot  at  Tashilhunpo,  112.

Sakya,  hierarchs  of,  their  ancient  domain,
87 ;  translate  work  of  Sri  Dandi,  112 ;
ordain  the  Panchen,  120  ;  visit  to,  204: ;
roads  to,  209;  arrival  of  U.  G.  at,  209  ;
description  of,  209,  210  ;  —  Pauchen,
210  ;  first  view  of  town,  238  ;  description
of  town,  238, 239  ;  hierarchs  marry,  239  ;
succession,  241  ;  their  dress,  241 ;
government  of  principality,  241 ;  trea-
sures in  temple,  242.

Sa-sung-pa,  policeman,  148.

Sa-tvamj,  title  given  the  Kalou,  174.

Sa-wang  Rampa,  the  Shape,  48;  Phala,
149.

Sakyang,  village  of,  7.

Sal  trees,  2.

Salaries  of  ministers,  174  ;  of  Djongpou,
177.

Salt,  8  ;  trade  at  Yampuiig,  15.

Salutation,  mode  of,  in  part  of  Khams,
197.

Sam  ding,  monastery  of,  130 ;  arrival  at,
131 ;  description  of,  135,  136,  137 ;
origin  of,  136;  founder  of,  136;  saved
from  destruction  by  Dorje  pliagmo,  139.

Samdong,  village  of.  237.

Samdub  phodang,  227.

Samye,  monastery  of,  215  ;  S.  C.  D.  starts
to  visit  it,  216;  first  view  of,  221;
library  of,  222  ;  images  at,  222  ;  pictur(!S
on  temple  walls,  222 ;  village  of,  222 ;
adjacent  country,  223 ;  sands  rapidly
engulfing  it,  224 ;  temples  of,  224 ;
history  of,  224.

Sandalwood  image,  169.


INDEX.


281


Sangri  joug,  228.
Sangri  khamar  monastery.  227.
Sangye-gyatso,  the  Desi,  79,  IG'J,  172.
Sanskrit,  books  found  by  S.  C.  D.,  112.
Santa  Eakshita,  saint,  224 ;  driven  away

by  Bonbo,  225.
Sarsha,  village  of,  70.
Satu. See  Tsamba.
Saving  life,  to  acquire  merit  by,  lo-t.
Sawe. See  Samye.
Sa-yong,  lieadman,  238.
Sayong  kong,  plateau,  28 ;  hok.  28.
Science,  interest  in,  in  Tibet,  102.
Seal,  great,  by  whom  held,  173  ;  attached \

on  property  after  death,  211.
Sedan  chairs,  by  whom  used  in  Tibet,  61,

130,  174.
Semaron,  village  of,  70.
Semarum  la,  19,  20.
Semu,  village  of,  144.
Sera,  monastery  of,  147 ;  judicial  power  of

abbot  of,  177  ;  revenue  of,  182.
Seng-chen,  or  lama  minister,  202.
Serge,  30  ;  superior  quality  made  at  Pishi

Mani Ihakhang, 73 ; presented to

minister, 100; of Tos nam-gyaling,

218.
Serkempa,  or  lay  monk,  156.
Serpon,  or  collector  of  customs,  109.
Sbab  chu. See  Ee  chu.
Shabdung,  or  page,  79.
Shabshi,  village  of,  217.
Shalchepa,  title  given  the  Kalon,  174.
Shalu,  monastery,  72  ;  chu,  72.
Shamaluug. See  Tamalmig.
Shandung  chu,  217.
Shape,  minister  of  State,  36,  48, 51 ;  in

procession,  Gl  ;  also  called  Kalon  ;  174.
Shari,  village  of,  217.
Shar  Khambu  district,  18,  26  ;  mountains

of,  20,  35.
Shata,  the  Shape,  36,  173.
Shar-chyog  Aniuug,  village  of,  76.
Shartse  college,  119 ;  Khanpo  of,  tinds  the

Dalai  lama,  160,  161.
Sharui  teng,  a  haunted  spot,  ofleriug  made

at  it,  141.
Sheep, wild, 16, 32, 37, 42, 244, 245;

carcasses  cooked  whole,  42 ;  wild,  stuffed

at Gyantse, 91  ; horns hung before

temple,  151.
Shendar  ding,  village  of,  205,  214.


Shenrab  mivo,  chief  deity  of  the  Bonbo,
205  ;  his  descendants,  206.

Shenrezig,  the  god,.  76 ;  incarnate  in
Tnmdrin,  138,  139 ;  famous  statue  of,  in
Lhasa,  152;  statue  at  rotala,  168;
incarnate  in  Dalai  lama,  171  ;  one  of  his
favourite  resorts,  229.

Shen-tang  srung-lug.  sect  of  Bonbo,  208.

Sheu  tsang  family,  206,  207;  —  lug,  sect
of  lamas,  208.

Sherab  dongbu,  cited,  177.

Shetag  mountains,  231.

Shetanta,  maidservant,  96,  150.

Shetoi,  village  of,  129.

Shetot. See  Shetoi.

Shigatse,  town  of,  43;  market  at,  47,  51,
52  ;  people  dishonest.  111  ;  climate,  113  :
return  of  U.  G.  to,  211.

Shikya,  village  of,  2,38.

Shing  donkar,  village  of.  146.

SJnnyer,  or  foreman,  146.

Sho,  tenth  of  an  ounce,  184.

Shong  la,  238.

Shong-mar-tse,  village  of.  210.

Shong  chu,  242.

Shong-pa  la,  242,  243.

Shugpa  tang,  29.

Shulenpa,  title  given  the  Kalon,  174.

Shyati-ling,  village  of,  235.

Sikhs,  at  Shigatse  with  envoy  of  Kashmir,
52.

Sikkim, north-west  boundary  of,  2 ;  Tibetan
potter}'  sold  in,  G6  ;  Rajah's  sister,  206.

Sing-dong,  waterfall  in  the  Tsang-po,  125.

Singing  songs,  108 ;  birds,  221.

Singli  mountains,  2,  5,  6,  20.

Singma  la,  237.

Slate,  wooden,  used  to  learn  to  write  on,
81.

Small-pox, fear  of,  105, 110, 193;  in  Central
Tibet,  126;  at  Xangartse,  130;  cere-
monies for  recovery,  130 ;  persons  ill
with,  143 ;  prayers  for  recovery,  146 ;
spread  of,  in  Lhasa,  155,  170;  near
Sakya,  238;  hospitals  for,  242;  treat-
ment of,  257.

Snakes,  at  hot  springs,  205;  their  bite
rare,  258  ;  treatment  of,  258 ;  eaten  by
Lalos,  258.

Snow,  fall  of,  123,  124.

Snow-shoes,  26.

Soap,  substitute  for,  100.


•789


INDEX.


Social  divisions  of  Tibet,  24G,  247.

Solpon,  or  steward,  50 ;  cheupo.  or  cup-
bearer of  the  Dalai  lama,  107.

Souam  cliuphel,  the  Desi,  172.

Sonam-gyatso,  tlie  Dalai  lama,  172.

Songkar,  village  of,  220  ;  origin  of  name,
221  ;  la,  221.

Springs,  hot,  204,  211.

SraiKj,  or  ounce,  182.

Sri  Dandi,  his  Kaiyadarsha  found,  112;
minister's  opinion  of,  112:  study  of  it
by  S.  C.  D.,  113.

Srang-btsan  gambo.  King,  his  Chinese
wife,  151 ;  image  of,  Slienrezig  made  by
him,  152  ;  his  soul  absorbed  in  it,  153  ;
image  of  king,  153  ;  his  stone  seat,  153 ;
picture  painted  with  his  blood,  159;  his
image  in  Potala,  1G8;  temple  built  by,
230,  232.

Stag,  stnfted  at  Gyantse,  91.

Stirrup-cup.  28.

Store  houses  in  Djong,  177.

Stove,  earthenware,  60,  112,  162.

Stuffed  pheasants,  8 ;  animals  of  Gyantse,
91.

Sumdongma  plain,  29.

Summer  retirement  of  lamas,  214,  261.

Sunapara,  village  of,  70.

Sundub  phug,  18.

Surgeons,  college  of,  at  Lhasa,  195,  196.

Surveying  mode  followed  for  Gyantse,
86,  87  ;  minister  wants  to  learn,  101.

Swallows,  43.

Ta-cuien-lc,  the  town  of,  516.

Tag,  village  of,  220.

Taga-sho,  village  of,  226.

Tag  chhen  Panda. See  Tag-tsan  bumba.

Tagkar-sho,  ruins  of,  226.

Tagmar. See  Tamar.

Tagnag,  village  of,  211.

Tagong. See  Taugang.

Tag-po,  birth-place of  new Dalai  lama,

161 ;  annexed  to  Sakya,  240.
Tag-tsan  bumba,  shrine  of,  231.
Taimen,  hamlet  of,  75.
Taisamling  college,  119.
Takoar,  village  of,  1.
Tale of the two friends who tried to

deceive  each  other,  92-94.
Tale,  village  of,  7,  8.
Ta-lung,  village  of,  216.


Tama  chu,  lake,  15.

Tama  la,  22.

Tama  lung,  village  of,  142,  236.

Tamar,  village  of,  43.

Tamarisk  trees,  230.

Tambur  valley,  early  inhabitants,  327 ;
Khola  Linibu,  20.

Tamdrin,  the  god,  22  ;  see  also  Harya-
griva  ;  incarnation  of  Shenrezig,  138  ;
destroys  demon,  139.

Ta  miran  kukyab,  crags,  22.

Tana,  village  of,  209.

Tauag.  village  of,  Gd ;  estate  of  minister
at,  125  ;  visited  by  U.  G.,  204  ;  incarnate
lama  at,  241.

Tanag  Donphug,  lamasery  of,  241.

Tandub,  temple  of,  230.

Tang-da. See  Tanta.

Tanglung,  village  of,  40.

Tang-jje,  valley  of.  204.

Tangye-ling  monastery,  149,  195  ;  regent
taken  from,  173.

Tang-tong  gyal-po.  King,  builds  bridge
over  Tsangpo,  143;  his  other  works,
143.

Tanka,  Tibetan  coin,  39.

Tanta,  hamlet  of,  217.

Tao  valley,  238.

Tarauath  lama,  early  residence,  209.

Targod  chyi-khang,  author  lodged  in,  45  ;
leaves  it,  111.

Targye,  village  of,  41,  211,  244.

Tarmiina. See  doche.

Tarpa  gang,  34.

Taslii-chos  ding  monastery,  24.

Tashiding  hill,  at  mouth  of  Kalai  river,  6.

Tashigaug,  village  of,  74,  101.  121,  123,
204.

Tashigong,  village  of.  243.

Tashi-gyantsa,  village  of,  62,  69,  125 ;
description  of,  69.

Tashi  lama. See  Panchen  lama.

Tashilhunpo,  frontier  of,  40 ;  author's  first
journey  to,  40 ;  arrival  at,  43,  44 ;  resi-
dence at,  45  et  sqq. ;  beauty  of,  45 ;
illumination  of,  i)G\  worship  of  Emperor
of  China  in,  (;0;  view  of,  69;  employe's
living  at  Tashi-gyantsa,  <i9;  inscription
relating  to  founder  of,  114 ;  great
temple  of,  114,  117;  S.  C.  D.  leaves  it
for  Lhasa,  124  ;  house  in  Lhasa  belong-
ing to,  149 ;  final  departure  from,  237.


INDEX.


283


Tashi-rabka,  32,  3."),  3G,  77 ;  wall  at,  3G ;

bridge  at,  37  ;  trailers  at,  38.
Ta-tsan  or  colleges  of  Tasliilliunpo,  117.
Ta-u,  relay  of  horses,  52  ;  officers  of  the,

63  ;  tax,  182  ;  by  whom  due,  185.
Taugaug,  village  of,  74.
Tax-collectors,  177 ;  duties  and  rights,  184.
Taxes,  181  ;  exempted  classes,  182 ;  fixa-
tion of,  182,  183 ;  lamaseries  exempted

from,  183;  assessments,  how  made,  183;

on  wine,  183 ;  on  store-keepers,  pedlars,

184 ;  paid  to  landlords,  213.
Tea, drinking, 24, 49, 77-80;  "general

tea,"  132,  205 ;  varieties  at  Lhasa,  159  ;

its  introduction  into  Tibet,  159;  grace

before  drinking,  167,  168;  drinking  by

lamas,  207.
Teak  wood  pillars,  in  Jo  khaug,  163
Tebong.  village  of,  30.
Telephone  invented  by  lama,  208.
Teling,  hamlet  of,  76.
Temple,  description  of,  at  Dongtse,  78  ;  at

Gyantse,  90  ;  at  Samye,  222  ;  at  Sakya,

239.
Temple,  Sir  Kichard,  73.  193.
Tertaliiigpa  family,  235.
Theft, how punished, 187 ; ordeal for

determining,  189.
Thorny  shrub  on  Oma  tang.  129.
Threshing,  method  of,  216,  218.
Tibchu,218:  villageof,218;  la,  217,  218.
Tibgyu  chu,  39.
Ti  chu,  145  ;  bridge  over,  145.
Tiger,  in  Sikkim,  14  ;  stuli'ed,  at  Gyantse,

91.
Timkra  la,  monkeys  near,  2.
Timpon.  police  court  of  Lhasa,  174.
Tingri  djong,  50, 121 ;  road  to,  50 ;  general

at,  80 ;  visited  by  Amban,  178.
Tingugma,  village  of,  29.
Tiukar  la,  84.
Tinki,  peaks  of,  238.
Tinle-gyatso,  the  Dalai  lama,  159.
Tisrong  detsan, King, 222 ; his image,
228 ; founds Samye, 225 ; monastery
built  by,  230.
Tobacco, smoking forbidden, in Tashi-

Ihunpo,  119  ;  by  lamas  generally,  119.
Tobgyal,  palace  of,  199; Panchen  lama

dies  there,  203,  214.
Toilung,  village  of,  145.
Toilung  chu. See  Ti  chu.


Toilung  Tsorphu,  50.
Toi  Suduling,  monastery  of,  218.
Toitsi,  village  of,  143.
Toll,  bridge,  184.
Tom  chu,  238.

Tombs,  of  Panchen  lamas,  56,  69,  118  ;  of
Dorje  phagmo,  136,  137 :  of  first  Dalai
lama.  169.
Tomse-gang, sijuare of, 155. Se(s also

Gya-bum  gang.
Tondub  Khaugsar,  family.  55 ;  office  at,

62  ;  passport  from,  67.
Tondub  ling,  209.
Tongbu,  village  of,  142.
Tong  chu,  204.
Tonglo  mountain,  5.
Tong-shoi. See  Dong-sho.
Tonmi  Sambhota,  the  minister,  168.
Ton namgyalling Jong. See Tos nam-

gyaling.
Toothache,  caused  by  worms,  60  ;  its  pre-
valence in  Tibet,  260.
Torma  offerings,  56,  126,  262.
Tos-nam-gyaling,  town  of,  218.
Tovo  Metsig-pa,  the  god,  153.
Trade,  between Lhasa  and China,  156;

customs  in  Tibet,  191,  192.
Trap,  for  pheasants,  14.
Treasury  of  Tibet,  51.
Trees  sprung  from  hair  of  saint,  227.
Troops,  their  paj^,  180.
Tsa-khang,  village  of,  144.
Tsal-pa-nang,  ruined  village,  144.
Tsamba, parched barley meal, 40 ;  how

eaten,  112.
Tsandan-yu  llia-khang,  temple  of,  282.
Tsang  l:lian<j,  or  '"chief  temple,"  151,  158.
Tsarong  chu,  238.
Tsa  tsam,  33.
Tsang,  or  Ulterior  Tibet,  41 ;  generals  in,

80.
Tsang-po,  the  river,  66 ;  waterfall  at  entry
into  Bhutan,  125;  first  view  of,  142;
bridge  over,  143 ;  crossing  of  by  boat,
143  ;  crowd  near  Tashi-gang,  204 ;  ferry
at  Rag-tso,  209 ;  passage  near  Kideshor,
219 ;  at  Samdub,  227  :  ferry  at  Logang,
228  ;  journey  along,  234,  285.
Tsari,  country  of,  88,  125. See  also  Yaru

tsang-po.
Tse-chan  monastery, 84; one of most
ancient  in  Tibet,  87  ;  doctor  from,  121.


284


INDEX.


Tse-cbog  ling,  iiicaiuatelainn  of,  degraded
for  adulteij',  ISo ;  regent  chosen  from,
173.

Tse-chog-pa  monastery,  234.

Tse-dung,  or  lama  officials,  17(3 ;  their
number  and  duties,  116;  liuga,  202.

Tse  labdra  scliool  of  Potaia,  176.

Tse-pa-med,  the  god,  coral  image  of,  in
Eamoche,  1G.5;  image  at  Saraye,  222.

Tse-tang,  town  of,  228,  229 :  lamasc  ries
at,  230 ;  lamas  from,  232 ;  returns  to,
234. See  also  CLe-thang.

Tsha-bu-iia. See  Tsal-pa-nang.

Tgi-hhang,  or  Bureau  of  Accounts,  17.").

Tsipon,  or  accountant,  ."iO,  81.

Tso  chuug  donka.  lakelets,  22.

Tao  dom-dongma,  lake.  17.

Tsog-chen  shalnyo,  his  annual  reign  in
Lhasa,  2G6.

Tsog-chi,  village  of,  7.').

Tsogpon,  or  headman,  51,  52.

T>!0  kliaiig,  or  hall  of  worship,  57.

Tsomoling,  the  regent,  156 ;  his  reforms,
157;  anecdote  concerning,  l.")6,  157;
regent  chosen  from,  173.

Tsomoling  lamaserjs  157.

Tsomo  tel-tuug,  211,  243;  visit  to  lake,
244.

Tso-nag  lake,  16,  17.

Tsong  du  ta-tsang. See  Chong  du-chog.

Tsoug-khapa,  his  birthday,  56  ;  lamasery,
near  Gyantse  founded  by,  84 ;  image  at
Gyautse,  90 :  crown  on  Lhasa  Jo-vo
presented  by,  152  ;  his  statues  at  Lhasa,
152,  153;  rock  discovered  by,  152;
stone  lumps  given  by,  153  ;  his  prayer-
meeting,  198;  place  where  he  took  his
vows,  233.

Tsoni,  in  Ando,  156.

Tsopun,  or  head  ot  village,  176.

Teorpu  monastery,  145.

Tubdan.  lamasery  of,  204.

Tuchiiiig  Jong. See  Darclmng  djong.

Tu  Kham,  or  upper  (Stod)  Khamdo.  See
Khaiiulo.

Tu-lug,  family  of  13unbo,  2()7.

Tamj-chen,  chief  secretary,  47 ;  goes  to
Dongtse,  69;  his  dress,  69;  his  birth
place,  70;  visit  to  his  motlier,  71.

Turban,  yellow,  62,  95,  99.

Turnip,  32.


U,  or  Central  Tibet,  (U.

Uddayani,  dance  in  celebration  of  birth  of.
210.

Ugyen-gyatso,  lama,  1,  24,  27;  goes  to
Gyautse,  81 ;  his  visit  of  Gyantse,  85-
88 ;  surveys  the  town,  86 ;  questions
traders,  105;  sent  to  the  Lachan  pass,
105, 106;  recommends  S.  C.  D.  to  friend,
107;  prepares  for  journey,  110;  leaves
Shigatse,  111;  returns  to  Gyatso-shar,
196;  botanizes,  201;  visits  Bonbo  sanctu-
ary, 205,  206,  207,  208;  revisits  Bigyal
Sendar,  213  ;  returns  to  India,  216.

Vlag,  hardships  on  people,  51,  53,  (Jd,  179  ;
given  Chinese  Amban,  63,  63 ;  given  all
soldiers  and  mercliants,  179  ;  definition
of,  182 ;  by  whom  due.  182,  183 ;  who
exempted,  183.

I'nderground  monastery,  38.

Urga,  the  town  of,  209.

Usury,  190.

Vaccine,  author brings some to Tibet,

105.
Vaidurya  Ta-tsan,  19.").
Tajra  Akshobhya,  the  image  of,  at  Lhasa,

1.35.
Vermicelli,  59.
Visvakarma, sculptor of image of the

Buddha,  151.

AVallung, village of, 24; road to, 29;

lamasery  of,  31 ;  district  of,  36  ;  traders

from,  37.
Walnut  trees,  218,  224.  226.
Wangdan,  village  of,  75.
Wangdu  chorten,  of  Lhasa,  155.
Washing  bauds  before  meals,  99.
Watchmen  in  fields.  2.
Water,  cold,  not  drunk,  112.
Weather  makers,  24.

Well,  mode  of  drawing  water,  73,  87,  195.
Wena,  village  of,  39.
Wheat, grown at Chu-shnl, 144; near

Lhasa,  145.
Willow  trees,  70,  73,  76,  118  ;  near  Lliasa,

144, 145, 149  ;  at  Tos  nam-gyaliug,  218;

near  Samye,  224,  226.
Winds,  at  Shigatse,  109.
Wine,  not  allowed  lamas,  90.
Witchcraft,  spread  of,  212.


INDEX.


285


Wolves,  36.

Women,  occupied  in  business,  55;  their
labours,  72 ;  sell  in  market,  85 ;  not  in
business  at  Shigatse,  85 ;  harshly-
treated,  99;  dress  of  wealthy,  121;
make  bricks,  1-13 ;  official  duties  to-
wards, 177 ;  when  unclean,  214  ;  puri-
fication of,  214.

Worship,  in  temple  of  Dongtse,  78 ;  by
minister,  95;  Kalachakra  mandala,  127,
128.

Wu-tse  temple  of  Samye,  222,  224.

Yab  la,  235.

Ya-go,  village  of. See  lago.

Yak,  riding,  30; bulls  drive  off  wolves,

36;  stuffed  at  Gyantse,  91 ;  horns  hung

before  temple,  151 ;  legend  concerning

some  yak  horns.  153,  154.
Yakthanga,  name  of  Limbus,  3.
Yalung, valley, 20, 242; river, 21;

village,  22.
Yamata  ri  valley,  22,  23.
Yamhu,  a  weight  of  silver,  51.
Yamdo  tso,  136,  216. See  also  Palti,  lake,

and  Yamdo-yum  tso.
Yamdo-yum  tso,  lake,  130,  140.
Y'ampung  la,  12, 15  ;  village,  15  ;  trade  at,

15.


Yangaro  district,  20.

Yang-ku  tang,  village  of,  32.

Yaugma. 16, 24, 32; road to, 28, 29;

river, 29, 32, 33; traders from. 29;

cultivation  at,  32  ;  district  of,  36.
Yangpung,  salt  dealers  from,  8. .S'ee  also

Yampung.
Yangta,  village  of,  2'!4.
Yanku  tang,  22.
Yaiithang,  village  of,  7.
Yarllia-sliampo  moiintnins,  231.
Yarlung,  district  of,  226  ;  its  capital,  228  ;

inundation of,  231  ; its fertility, 234;

river,  231,  234  ;  —  shetag  lamasery,  231 .

See  also  Gondang-tangme.
Yarsa,  village  of,  27.
Yaru  la,  42,  244.

Yarn  tsangpo,  river  41. See  also  Tsang-po.
Yurupe  village,  217.
Yu-tog,  zamba.  148  ;  school,  175.
Yong-dso  cliu,  16.


Zangpo-pal.  hierarch  of  Sakya,  240.

Ze-khaiig  shikba,  village  of,  232.

Zim  phug,  30.

Zinan  la,  22.

Zomba  Lhakiiang. See  Ombulha-khang.

Zorwar  Sing,  the  Sikh  general,  53.


tup:  end.


PKINTED BY WILLIAM CLOVVBS  AND  SOXS, LIMITED, LONDON AND BIX'CLES.
