Celtic Researches (Edward Davies, 1804)
=================
Davies's 1804 origin-treatise on the ancient Britons — the first Romantic attempt at a systematic Celtic-druidic prehistory. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/celticresearches00davi).

^1^^,^!«%^


ì^  -χ  •


''iiSr^-


^';.•.Χ


.^SL


\•.Κ  "


«-Ŵ• 'J


^^k..  .^-ysv..

^-Ŵrt

vr  --Ι-Γ^Λ  ^

vls#Ŵ

>-..:ié-.ì#



3«?«^


W^ì


H.OEHNINGER

PAPETERIE-REIIURC

MONTREUX


í^


Lau


ai.


Celtic  3^eôearcî)es,


ON    THS


ORIGIN,  TRADITIONS  γ  LANGUAGE,


ANCIENT  BRITONS;


WITH    SOME


INTRODUCTORY  SKETCHES,


PRIMITIVE    SOCIETY.


BY  EDWARD  DAVIES,

Curate  of  Ohestoii,    Gloucestershire.


ΙΙαπϋοπ:

PRIN^TED    FOR    THE    AUTHOR,
AND  SOLD  BY  J,  BOOTH,  DUKE-STREET,  PORTLAND-PLACE.

1804.


J.  BAnriEtD,  Printer,  Wardour-Strc«t,
Soho.


TO    THE


KING.


SIRE,


Though  YOUR  Majesty's
permission  has  enabled  me  to
approach  your  Throne,  and  pre-
sent you  with  such  a  feeble  tri-
bute,  as  that  of    my,  obscure.


labours^  (in  a  patli^  ΛνΙιΐοΚ  no
floAvers  can  adorn^  or  practical
use  recommend^)  I  tremble,  when
I  contemplate  the  homeliness  of
the  oblation  itself.

Disadvantages,  personal  to
me,  or  incidental  to  the  subject,
had  precluded  the  faintest  hope
of  such  an  elevated  honour.

An  humble,  and  contracted
sphere,  of  occupations,  and  for-
tune, has  precluded  me  from
a  hberal  access  to  books^  or  to
men.


The  rude,  though  honest
Britoîîs.oíwhost  language  I  have
ti'aced  the  mysterious  analogies,
Λvere  placed,  by  the  simple  man-
ners of  the  age,  in  which  they
hved,  and  of  the  circle,  which
they  filled,  at  an  awful  distance
from  the  attainments  of  their  en-
lightened progeny  ;  for  whom
have  been  reserved  the  felicities
of  your  Majesty's  reigΉ,  the
moral  influence  of  your  domes-
tic life,  and  the  genial  encou-
ragements, conferred  upon  every
liberal  effort  in  the  arts,  by  this,
Augustan,  age  of  Britain,


tot

The  occult^  and  mystic  lore
of  Druidism,  though  containing
principles  of  inestimable  value
in  the  elements  of  language^  Avas
neither  intended^  nor  calculated^
for  that  general  prevalence,  and

reception,  which  could  alone
have  ascertained,  and  recorded,
this  branch  of  its  oracles,  with
precision.

Simplicity  of  manners,  and
superstitious  credulity,  which  con-
stituted the  most  prominent
features  of  character  in  the  vo-
taries of  that  rehgion,  obstructed


the  solution  oí  its  riddles^  and
consigned  its  legendary  tales  to
their  fate,  as  oracular  mysteries,
too  deep  to  be  fathomed.

It  became,  therefore,  a  task
of  extreme  difficulty,  at  a  distant
period  from  those  hints  of  science,
to  develop  their  scheme,  and  re-
duce their  principles  into  system.

These  difficulties,  were  heigh-
tened, by  an  imperfect  educa-
tion— laborious  duties — number-
less adversities— habitual  infirm-
ities of  constitution, — and,  most


\)ítf

of  all^  a  defect  in  the  organs  of


sight,


Be  the  fate  of  the  Olveston
Curate,  what  it  may^  it  has  one
advantage  at  the  bar  of  Critisism^
under  the  auspices  of  this  Reign  ;
That,  bene\^olent,  and  merciful
tribunal,  is  hke  your  Courts  of
Justice;  it  hears,  with  patience,
and  with  candour;  it  acquits  with
pleasure,  and  it  condemns  with
pain.

The    Author's  fate,     will
never  xifFcct  the    sentiments  of


ΤΗ  Ε  Man.  These,  have  been  ever
alive^  and  awake,  to  the  most
grateful  impressions  of  your
Majesty's  paternal  regard  for
ingenuous  enterprize  ; — for  the
interest  of  truth,  and  virtue  ;—
for  the  sacred  necessities  of  the
poor, — and  for  the  liberties  of  all.

If  sentiments  like  thcse.cozdd
be  heightened, — personal  grati-
tude, for  the  condeseension,which
I  have  recently  experienced,
and  which  /  dare  not  state  in
its  full  extent,  Avould  animate
them,  with  new  spirit.


χ

The  example,  however^  of
such  countenance^  and  protec-
tion, to  me,  will,  I  trust,  improve,
by  encouraging,  the  culture  of
many  other  soils,  more  propitious
to  the  seeds  of  learning,  than
mine,  though  visited  by  simihir
adversities.

I    am.   Sire,

Your  Majesty's

Devoted  subject,
and  Servant,
Edav.  Davies.

OLFESTON,  FEB.  29,  1804.


Of  all  human  attainments,  the  art,  which
enables  man  to  communicate  his  opinions,  or
his  feelings,  in  the  shape  of  oral,  and  ΛVΓitten
language, — is  the  most  pxccious  in  its  value.

By  the  chain  of  this  magical  union,  those
are  incorporated,  Avhom  the  distance  of  time,
and  of  scene,  would  else  have  separated ; — the
earl}^  and  the  recent  ages,  meet ; — a  barter  of
intellectual  treasure  is  negociated,— and  the
civilized  nations  of  the  earth  are  like  neighbour-
ing families  ; — in  a  word,  all  acquisitions  to
the  use,  and  the  ornament  of  the  social
world,  are  streams  from  this  fountain.
b


A  regularity  of  structure,  discernible  in  the
ancient,  and  pure  languages,  demonstrates,
that  such  an  art,  as  that  of  writing,  and  speak-
ing those  languages,  could  not  be  indebted
for  its  birth,  to  chance; — that  it  must  have
been  formed  by  inferences  of  reasoning  from
objects  of  nature; — formed  with  simplicity,
and  calculated  for  precision.

This  volume  attempts,  not  only  to  investi-
gate those  principles,  but,  in  some  degree,
to  ascertain  the  means  by  which  they  unfolded
themselves  into  language,  and  supplied  hints
for  their  o\vn  visible  shape, — in  other  words,
for  the  invention  of  speech,  as  analyzed  into
a  system.

This  art  originated  in  the  earliest  ages  of
man.  Its  first,  and  simple  essays,  are  lost  ia
their  antiquity.

Upon  a  topic  of  such  difficulty,  and  of
such  moment,  in  the  history   of  man,  evea


preface»  ίίί

local  facts,  may  be  of  some  value  to  the  his-
torian, who  fills  a  more  ample  space,  in
the  extent  of  his  views.  The  choice,  there-»
fore,  of  the  subject,  requires  no  apology,  or
defence.  The  execution  of  the  task  is  that,
which  alone  deprecates  the  severities  of  cri-
ticism.

I  was  directed  accidentally  to  this  channel
of  literature,  by  circumstances,  peculiar,  and
personal  to  me.  A  design  to  publish  what  I
had  written,  was  the  result  of  no  confidence
in  abilities,  or  attainments ;  it  was  the  effect
of  a  more  humble  sentiment :  I  was  per-
suaded, that  chance  had  thrown  in  my  way^
and  that  curiosity,  exempt  from  all  pre-con-
ception,  (the  bane  of  truth)  had  enabled  me
to  discover  a  system  elucidated  by  facts,  and
which  the  liberal  scholar  would,  at  least,  rather
examine  with  care,  though  laid  before  him
by  me,  than  consign  it  unexamined,  at  once^^
to  oblivion^


Inclination,  for  which  I  cannot  account,
having  disposed  nie  to  explore  the  few  traces
that  are  left  us  of  the  ancient  Tielsh,  my  at-
tention Λ\as  impelled,  with  slow,  but  accu-
mulating force,  to  their  singular  doctrines
upon  the  origin  of  speech,  and  the  fundamental
princijjles  of  language.  I  began  to  penetrate
the  niystic  imj)ort  of  these  oracles.  But,  re-
collecting, where  I  found  them,  I  was  inclin-
ed rather  to  believe  it  an  antiquarian^  whim,
than  a  discovery  of  real  use,  in  the  pursuit  of
historical  science.

In  179T?  I  iiad  occasion  to  make  researches
in  the  Irish  language.  Agaiii,  the  same  vision
presented  itself:  I  compared  the  notices,  Avhich
I  had  previously  obtained  at  home,  Λvith  lights
thrown  upon  them,  by  those  collateral  branches
oi' Üìc  Celtic  House; — till  I  found  myself  in  the
habit  of  arranging  a  system,  calculated  for
the  double  object  of  representing,  by  symbols
the  ideas,  and  the  sounds»


preface.  b

I  followed  this  clue,  till  I  had,  in  some
degree,  unravelled  that  ancient  scheme,  bj
analogies,  Λ\^ΰΰ1ι  appeared,  upon  repeated,
and  severe  trials,  to  be  taunded  in  truth.

Still  I  conceived  the  notion  to  be  exclu-
sively Celtic.  In  the  first  periods,  therefore,  and
stages,  of  the  analysis,  I  applied  the  several
principles  of  speech  to  Celtic  dialects  alone.
The  result  Λvas  gratifying  to  curiosity ;  but  it
rested  there.

Λ  perpetual  jealousy  agauist  theoretical
delusions,  or  partial  experiments,  determined
me  to  enlarge  the  field  of  inciuiry.  It  appeared
improbable,  that  radical  principles,  of  an
art  so  general,  should  have  been  discovered
originally  by  the  Celtic  race,  whose  knoΛvledge
of  any  letters  at  all,  has  been  doubted  by  some
of  the  modern  critics  in  historical  disquisition ; —
or  that  such  a  people,  as  tliey  are  in  general
described,  should  have  been  the  selected
guardians  of  those  principles.


Η  preface»

I  began  to  reason  with  myself  thus :

"  A  nation,  comparatively  rude,  and  sim-
ple, mai/  have  preserved  the  outlines  of  two,  or
three,  ancient,  and  primitive  arts,  with  more
precision  than  others,  who  were  ambitious  of
innovations,  and  refinements.

**  But,  if  the  system  be  a  genuine  relic  of
antiquity,  it  λ\'ύ\  abide  the  test  of  compa-
rison. Traces  of  it  will  be  found  in  other
countries; — at  least,  those  elements  Λvhich  are
intimated  by  the  si/mhols,  will  find  correspond-
ing affinities  in  the  radical  tenns  of  other  lan-
guages, which  are  knoAvn  to  be  ancient.  The
system  of  Celtic  speech  is  too  ingenious  to  have
been  struck  out  by  the  original  contrivance,
or  local  accidents  of  the  Celtic  race/*

I  made  an  experiment  upon  the  languages
of  Judea,•— upon  those  of  Greece, — and  of
Rome,


The  result  of  that  process  will  offer  itself  to
the  reader :  upon  me,  it  impressed  conviction.

My  limited,  and  mutilated  collection  of
books,  ΛνοηΜ  not  enable  me  to  extend  the
range  any  further,  at  present^  or  to  b^e  very
curious  in  the  choice  of  examples.  But  those,
which  I  have  selected,  will  afford  an  ample
opportunity  of  deciding  upon  the  measure  of
credit,  which  is  due  to  my  Celtic  masters,  and
upon  the  authenticity  of  the  collateral  sup-
port, Avhich  is  given  to  them,  by  other  nations.

I  have  not  strained  any  facts,  to  support  a
favourite  hypothesis;  my  own  first  impressions
have  resigned  themselves  to  the  current.
Their  guide  has  been  the  disinterested  aim  of
honest,  and  sober  experiment.  Their  distrust
of  themselves  has  made  them  diligent  in
accrediting,  as  far  as  they  could,  all  the
incidental  varieties  of  tnith.  Many  are  the
revolutions,  Avhich,  in  their  course,  they  hav^
adopted,  and  sustained.


Vitií  preface*

At  last,  they  reached  a  kind  of  station,
which  commanded  a  fair  view.  Tliey  rested
upon  it,  and  were  animated  by  the  hope  to
remove,  at  a  future  period,  the  shadows,  Λvhich
im]7eded  the  view,  and  Avithheld,  or  inter-
cepted a  part  of  the  sccac^

I  am,  therefore,  to  impk)re,  that  a  dis-
tinction ma}•  be  kept  in  view  by  the  reader,
between  those  principles,  Avhich  I  have  brought
forward,  and  the  7uo(!e  of  iUustraiing  ihem,
wliieli  is  peculiar  to  me.  The  former,  were
no  discoveries  of  mine.  1  have  told  my  reader
Λvllere  he  can  find  them,  as  well  as  myself.
They  are  nothing  like  novelties,  though  for  a
time  they  have  been  foj'gotten,  or  overlooked.
If  my  application  of  them  Avill  point  out,  from
new  sources  of  reasoniiig,  their  connection
Avith  hiatorical  intl/i,  iuid  witli  principles  of
nature,  the  intriusic  value  of  that  residt,  will
be  tlie  same,  Avhetlier  in  tracing  ail  the  roots,
i\m\  branches  of  their  pedigree,  my  inferences


preface.  tjt

have  been  sound,  and  legitimate, — or  ill  reason-
ed ;  my  attentions,  deep, — or  superficial.

I  am  not  sure,  Avhetlier  I  ought,  upon  the
whole,  to  lament  the  obscurity  of  my  path
in  the  Avorld,  so  far,  as  it  has  placed  me  at
an  Innnble  distance  from  all  intercourse  with
predecessoi's  in  the  same  line  of  pursuit.

Not  having  pointed  my  researches  at  the
original  spring  of  Avritten  language,  till  at
the  recent,  and  casual  impulse  of  the  circum-
stance above  recited,  in  the  JVelsh  manu-
scripts, I  had  not  even  learnt  the  names
of  some  very  eminent  critics,  Avho  have  been
occupied  in  a  pursuit  of  the  same,  or  similar
topics.  The  ingenious  works  of  Mr,  Astky  Mr*
Whiter,  General  Vallancey,  Mr.  Maurice,  Mon-
sieur de  Gebelin,  Monsieur  des  Brasses,  Sec.  &c.
were  laid  before  me,  as  novelties,  for  my  enter-
tainment, after  the  circulation  of  my  first
proposals.


An  earlier  knoAvledge  of  these  authorst
would  ha\'c  assisted  me  in  adjusting  my  ar-
guments, and  propositions :  it  would  have
spared  me  the  labour  of  some  proofs  built
upon  experiment,  which  employed  a  tedious
length  of  time  (though,  ultimately,  making
no  figure  in  the  work)  and  ΛνοηΜ  have  been
clear  gain  to  me  in  perspicuity  of  arrange-
ment ; — but  it  ΛνοηΜ  have  endangered  my  at-
tentions to  the  main  object.  It  might  have
seduced  me,  by  the  influence  of  learning,  to
borrow,  or  invent  systems,  Avhen  it  was  my
humble  office  to  develope,  authenticate,  and
confirm  the  use  of  materials,  constructed
many  ages  ago.

It  is  wûth  infinite  satisfaction,  however,
that  I  observe  an  occasional  coincidence  be-
tween some  of  my  notices,  and  those  of  the
authors  to  Λνΐιοηι  I  have  adverted ; — because
the  force  of  truth  could  alone  have  led  us  to
the  same  identical  spot,  by  routes  uncon-
nected, as  well  as  intricate.


^efate.  pi


I  was  treating  of  arts,  which  are  traced  from
the  earliest  ages  of  man.  It  was  unavoidable,
to  make  some  reflections  upon  the  character
of  society  in  those  periods  of  the  world.
Perhaps  there  is  no  topic,  upon  which  the
moderns  have  shewn  less  of  their  accustomed
liberality,  or  candour.

They  have  taken  their  sketch  of  primitive
man,  as  they  found  him,  at  the  daAvn  of  pro-
fane history,  in  the  middle  ages  of  the  world  ;
that  is,  Λν1ΐ6η  the  little  States  of  Greece,  of
Italy,  and  of  the  adjacent  regions,  began  to
want  elbow-room ; — when  ambition  had  violated
the  good  faith  of  prior  establishment,  or
compact ;  yet,  before  the  palm  of  the  victor
had  enabled  governments  to  control  their
subjects,  and  before  the  law  of  nations  had
rooted  their  principles  of  mutual  forbearance
between  the  rights  of  the  belligerant  parties,  at
the  end  of  their  conflict.    These,  were,  con-


jcíí  preface,

scqucntly,  times  -  of  confusion,  wliicli  dc-
gnidcd  the  human  character  into  a  pestilent,
and  brutal  spirit  of  rapine.  But  earher,  and
sacred  history  of  the  same  noble  creature,
man,  proves,  to  the  most  incredulous,  that
savage  life  is  the  child  of  accident,  and  has  no
filial  marks  of  nature,  as  her  parent.

I  hope  the  few  sketches  upon  this  topic,
Λvhich  I  have  thrown  together,  Λvill  contain
materials,  which  have  interest,  as  Avell  as  no-
velty enough  (I  mean,  in  the  notice  of  them)
to  atone  for  their  insertion.

The  short  outline  of  the  Celta:,  and  of  their
Druids,  was  neither  intended,  nor  calculated
for  the  purpose  of  adding  to  their  fame,  at
the  expence  of  their  neighbours  ; — but  for  the
single  object  of  marking  some  traditions  re-
specting their  primitive  character,  Λvhicll  they
had  not,  in  fact,  obliterated  from  their  me*
anory,  or  attention.


33reface*  xííi

The  hypothesis,  "  that  nations  originated,
not  from  colonies,  but  emigrating  families,"  ap-
pears to  be  Avarranted  by  the  sacred  historian.

Perhaps  what  I  hsLve  suggested,  may  prompt
others,  of  more  leisure,  and  of  superior  ta-
lents^ to  divest  themselves  of  national  pre-
judices, and  then,  to  examine  our  interesting
corner  of  ancient  Europe  with  more  accu-
racy.

The  field  is  not  so  barren,  or  its  fruit  so
harsh  to  the  taste,  as  they  have  been  too
hastily  described.


Having  thus  engaged,  and  with  no  impro-
vident haste,  in  what  struck  me,  as  a  fair  pur-
suit of  acquisition  to  literature, — unbiassed  by
antecedent  speculations, — but  unassisted  by
the  labours  of  ingenious  men,  who  had  gone
before  me  in  a  discussion  of  similar  topics,—


I  circulated  a  short  Prospectus  in  September,
1801.  It  was  in  the  form  of  proposals,  to  lay
before  the  Public  (if  I  could  reach  that  num-
ber by  subscription)  βνβ  hundred  copies  of  a
single  volume•

No  sooner  were  these  proposals  known,
ivhen  I  received  unequivocal  hints  of  that
munificent,  and  perhaps  unexampled,  patron-
age, which  appears  in  the  list  annexed.—
Amongst  other  disadvantages,  which  are  in  the
company  of  these  honours,  it  is,  perhaps,
the  heaviest  in  its  oppression  of  my  feelings^
that  I  cannot  pay  the  sincere  tribute  of
my  thanks,  in  the  detail  which  is  due  to
them  ;  and  that  I  must,  with  some  few  ex-
ceptions, request  the  indulgence  of  delicate
liberality,  if  I  abstain  from  particulars,  Λvhich,
if  enumerated,  Avould  not  only  seem  an  im-
pertinence of  tributary  homage,  but  would,
perhaps,  be  accused  of  pride,  under  the  mask
of  gratitude.


preface*  χίί

Some,  however,  there  are,  who  must  for-
give me,  if  I  discriminate  their  signal  fa•
vours.

Mr,  Hardinge  first  exhorted  me  to  pubhsh  a
Literart/  Essai/, — animated  mj  labours, — and
cherished  them.  He  exerted  his  influence,
early,  and  late,  in  my  support,  with  such  ar-
dour, and  with  such  effect,  that  Î  owe  to  him  the
most  ample  share  of  that  countenance  which
graces  the  list  of  my  Patrons.  The  impro-
vidence (if  such  it  must  be  deemed)  of  raising
the  Olveston  Curate^  from  the  dust  of  pro-
vincial obscurity,  into  public  notice,  lies  at
his  door.  He  has  honoured  me  Avith  his  ad-
vice,— he  has  furnished  me  with  an  ample
variety  of  curious  books, — and  has  enlightened
me  Avith  most  valuable  hints,  engrafted  upon
discoveries  of  his  own.

To  the  Bishop  of  Bath  and  Wellsy  my  obli-
^tions  are  most  interesting :  His  countenance,
to  the  work,  and  me,  had  value  superior  to  any


estimate.  But,  most  of  all,  I  thank  him,  and
with  an  honest,  though  simple  heart,  for  the
testimony  Avhicli  he  bore  to  m^^  personal,  and
professional  character.

Other  Prelates  have  not  only  distinguished
me  with  patronage,  communicated  by  their
names,  but  have  promoted  mj  interest,  and
haye  sustained  my  hopes,  by  acts  of  benefi-
cence, and  by  expressions  of  beneyolence,
Avliich  have  entered  into  the  heart,  and  have
made  impressions  there,  Λvhich  never  can  be
lost,  or  grow  faint,  as  long  as  memory  shall
be  firm  upon  her  seat.

The  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph,  upon  his  promotion
to  that  See,  left  me  as  a  kind  of  legacy  to
the  Chapter  at  JVtstiiiinstcr,  who  honoured
me,  at  his  request,  with  a  distinguished  mark
of  I  heir  {encouragement.

1  must  not  here  forget  this  Prelate's  imme-
diate predecessor,    λυΙιο   conferred    upon   me


preface*  jctoíí

the  value  of  a  subscription  for  ten  sets,  de-
sirins  a  single  book  in  excliano;c  for  it.  Wluni
the  reader  shall  do  nie  the  honour  to  recollect
who  that  Bishop  was,  perhaps  the  most  learn-
ed -  man  of  his  age,  he  Avill  forgive  me  the
vanity  of  recording  these  attentions  uoiii  Jiìììu

The  Bishop  of  Chichester^  though  I  A^as  a
perfect  stranger  to  him,  till  he  saw  my  letters
to  Mi\  Hardinge,  upon  the  subject  of  this
Work,  has  not  only  encouraged  me,  but  has
expressed  his  opinion  of  me,  in  terms  of  such
engaging  politeness,  and  zeal  for  my  interest,
that  he  has  enhanced  the  value  of  his  good
oihces  to  me,  by  the  manner  of  representing
his  motive  to  them.

The  Bishop  of  Dro?nore,  having  seen  Oìîe
of  those  lettei^,  adopted  me,  at  once,  into
his  confidence  and  regard,  as  if  I  had  been
long  knoΛvn  to  him,  and  almost  as  if  I  had
borne  a  part  with  him  in  those  masterly  dis-
cussions, Λvhich  have  acquired  so  eminent  a
mnk  in  the  literary  world,  both  for  them,  andl
c


for  liim.  I  have  the  happiness,  in  general,
to  coincide  Avith  his  opinions  ;  and  I  am  ever
proud  of  them,  Avhen  they  enable  me  to  in-
corporate them  into  my  system.  Few,  in  my
humble  views  of  men,  were  ever  blessed  with
a  more  lil:>eral  mind,  in  the  pursuit  of  historical
discoveries,  or  with  a  more  discriminating
power  to  appreciate  their  value.

I  must  here  add,  the  deep  and  permanent
obligation,  which  I  owe  to  the  Bench  of  Pre-
lates, collectively.  Every  one  of  w^hom,  with-
out a  dissenting  voice,  in  this,  and  many  in
tlie  sister  island,  have  countenanced  my  la-
bours, either  upon  a  general  view  of  their
object,  or  propitiated  by  the  zeal  of  partial
friends.

AVhen  mi/  (obscure)  path,  in  the  same  pro-
fession, which  has  elevated  them,  is  contem-
plated,this  indulgence  to  me,  is  a  markof  good-
ness, which  no  words  of  mine  can  appreciate.

That  a  general  spirit  of  munificence,  in  a


preface*  χίχ

degree  unexampled  by  other  cammunities  of
public  men,  characterizes  the  East-India  Com*
pani/,  cannot  appear  new  wherever  the  name,
of  Britahi  is  known.  The  condescension  of
it  in  mi/  favour,  is  indeed  a  powerful  claim
upon  my  personal  feelings,  (and  those  feelings
will  never  abjure  it)  but  it  cannot  heighten
the  habitual  principles  of  attachment,  Λvhich
calls  upon  the  votaries  of  science  to.  revere^
and  love  the  men,  Avhose  public  s}>irit  has
given  a  new,  and  brilliant  hemisphere  to  the
literary  world.

General  Vallancey,  Avhose  ingenuity,  and
learning,  have  been  of  great  use  to  me,  though
I  do,  by  no  means,  adopt  all  his  opinions —
with  a  liberality  of  spirit,  inseparable  from
those  Avho  are  scholars,  and  gentlemen,  has
patronized  me,  without  calculating  whether
I  was  friend,  or  adversary,  to  his  conjectures,
or  to  his  inferences.

Mr,  Astle,  to  whom  I  was  under  literarij
obligations  (before  I  Avas  honoured  Avith  hÍ5


VX  preface»

personal  notice)  for  the  advantage  of  reading
his  able  treatise  on  t\\o  Origin  of  Lett  era,  Avas
kind  enough  to  exert  himself  in  my  favour,  at
an  early  period,  and  has  Avarranted  some  of
ni}'  opinions.

Mr,  Maurice,  the  justly-admired  author  of
Indian  Antiquities,  approved  my  object,  and
conferred  upon  me,  one  of  the  noblest  gifts,
a  copy  of  that  inestimable  work,

Mr.  Bryant,  Avliose  personal  character  is
not  inferior  even  to  that  of  his  literary  fame —
though  I  had  an  caily  intimation,  that  he
held  my  Celtic  masters  cheap,  bestoAved  upon
ine  his  name,  as  one  of  my  patrons  ;  a  name,
that  ΛνΙΙΙ  command  the  love,  and  veneration
of  the  world,  as  long  as  the  pure  faith,  Avhich
he  has  illustrated,  shall  continue  to  improve
the  head,  and  the  heart  of  its  professors,

I  deplore  it  as  a  misfortune,  when  draAv*
ing  from  the  same  well,  I  differ  Avith  Ιώη,  iu


^rtface.  xxi

tlie  anal3^sis  of  those  waters  ;  but  I  ne\'cr  shall
cease  to  admh'C  his  talents,  to  venerate  his
learning, — or  to  esteem  and  love  the  unde-
viating  integrit}^  of  his  principles,  and  of
his  life.

The  Societif  for  Literary  Pmids,  can  receive
no  additional  credit  from  o?ie  of  the  numerous
individuals  whom  they  have  cherished  and
sustained  in  adversities,  like  those  Λνίπϋΐι  have
depressed  me ;  but  the  delicacy,  as  Λνεΐΐ  as
the  munificence  of  their  conduct  by  me,  de-
mands of  me,  as  a  debt  of  honour,  which  I
cannot  Avithhold,  that  I  should  mark  to  the
ΛVorld  so  beneficent  a  system  of  liberality  as
theirs.  I  have  received,  as  an  encourage-
ment of  this  ΛVork,  and  of  the  Λvriter,  two
successive  donations  from  them,  in  actual
payments,  conferred  upon  me  by  the  unani-
mous vote  of  their  conmiittccs,  and  recom-
mended by  the  most  obliging  curtesy  of  man-
ners, in  their  Secretary's  letters  to  me.^ —
Wherever  that  society  is  knoΛvn,  and  where
its  good  ofiices  have  been  felt,  in  blessings


XXií  í^reface.

upon  those,  Λνΐιοηι  fortune  has  wounded,  the
name  of  their  Secretary,  Mr,  Yates,  and  the
philanthropy  of  his  mind,  are  familiar  subjects
of  grateful  attachment.

The  early  and  liberal  patronage  of  Mr.  and
Mrs,  Codrington,  as  well  as  the  numerous
acquisitions  my  List  owes  to  them,  are
but  links  in  a  connected  scries  of  benefits,
conferred  upon  me  by  them.  After  this  ge-
neral, and  very  inadequate  acknoAvledgment,
of  them  all,  their  details,  ho\vever  precious
to  me,  Avill  remain,  where  gratitude,  not  un-
worthy, I  hope,  even  of  their  friendship,  has
implanted  them.

If  good  offices  are  to  be  measured  by  their
critical,  and  seasojiable  help,  as  Avell  as  by
their  Aveight  in  themselves,  Avhat  must  be  my
obligations  to  ÂTr.  Peach,  of  Tockirigton  ?

He  knows  to  zi^hat  I  allude;  and  will  give
mc  some  credit  for  sentiments,  not  injurious


preface*  γχίϋ

to  exertions,  tlie  noblest  that  friendship  ever
suggested.

Mr,  Theophilus  Jones,  of  Brecon,  my  ge-
nerous friend,  and  the  best  liearted  of  men,
had,  for  a  course  of  years,  made  it  extremely
difficult  for  me  to  say,  for  which  of  his  af-
fectionate boons  to  me  I  thanked  him  the
most,  and  loved  him  tlie  best.  He  has  re-
moved the  difficulty  ;  for  to  him  it  is  that  I
OΛVe  Mr.    Ilardingts  friendship.

To  rescue,  in  a  word,  tliat  inestimable  friend,
be  tlie  fate  of  this  Work  adverse,  or  propitious,
I  shall  contemplate  with  pride  of  independent
joy,  the  intercourse  Avith  him,  which  my  ex-
píMÍment,  invited,  and  cherished,  by  his  ge-
nerous heart,  has  produced.


1  am  now  to  represent  (and  wliat  lan^^uage  can
ever  do  my  feelings  justice  ?)  the  obligations
impressed  upon  me  by  Fersonages,  who,  in
this  point,  a.s  in  every  other,  disclaim  ail  tri^


butc  of  gratitude  for  sentiments,  which  ha-
bitually induce  them  to  elevate  their  high
station,  by  descending  from  it  into  all  the
charit  ies  of  domestic  life  ;  and  by  adorning  it
with  a  taste,  as  well  as  national  regard,  for
the  culture  of  letters.  Commanded  by  them,
to  abstain  from  panegyric,  I  leave  to  their
generous  natures,  the  interpretation  of  my
feelings ; — But  I  request  that  others^  to  whom  I
am  indebted  for  the  access  of  my  name,  and
work,  to  such  protectors^ — will  not  be  averse  to
the  justice,  Λvhich  I  owe  to  them.

Here  again,  as  at  every  turn,  Mr,  Hardinge
presents  himself.  At  his  instance,  the  poΛVCΓ-
ful  aid  of  minds,  no  less  illustrious  by  their
lives,  than  by  their  elevated  rank,  the  ΕαιΊ
».nd  Countess  of  Aylesbury^  was  exerted  in  my
favour,  and  Avas  propitious  to  me.  They  and
Mr,  Matthias,  whose  intellect  is  no  less  culti-
vated and  polished,  than  his  mind  is  ho-
nourable, and  viiluous,  must  permit  the  hum-
blest of  tiie  many,  Avhom  their  good  offices
have  blcs!ỳ«:d    but  not  the  most  ungrateful,  to


preface*  χχο

assure  them,  (and  I  cannot  thank  them  better)
that  I  had  rather  lose  their  good  will  to  me,
than  forfeit  the  generous  character  of  it  by
an  illiberal  action,  or  sentiment; — that  I  have
nothing  in  view  but  the  improvement  of  know-
ledge ;  which  is  nothing,  and,  perhaps,  Avorse
than  a  feather,  in  the  moral  system  of  the
world,  if  it  is  not  sworn,  and  faithful  to  the
interest,  and  the  honour  of  truth


LIST  OF  SUBSCmiBEKS

TO    TUB

FOLLOfVING  ESSAYS.


HER  MAJESTY.

His  Royal  Highness  the  Prince  ofJVale^    10  Sets

His  Itoi/al  Highness  the  Duke  of  Clarence  2  Sets

His  Royal  Highness  the  Duke  of  Kent  2  Sets

His  Royal  Highness  the  Duke  of  Cumberland  2  Set^

Her  Royal  Highness  the  Dutchess  of  Gloucester  2  Sets

His  Highness  Pri?ice  JVilliamFrederick  of  Gloucester  2,  Sets
Her  Highness  Princess  Sophia  Matilda  of  Gloucester  2.  Sets

His  Grace  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  2  Sets

His  Grace  the  Archbishop  of  York  2  Sets

The  Lord  Chancellor  2  Sets

Lord  Ellenborough,  Chief  Justice  of  the  King's  Bench  2  Sets
(The  late)  Lord  Kenyon_,  (late)  Chief  Justice  of  the

King's  Bench  2  Sets

Lord  Alvanley,  Chief  Justice  of  the  Common  PleHS      2  Sets

Tlie  Archbishop  of  Dublin  2  Sets

The  Archbishop  of  Cashell  2  Sets

TheLord  Clroncellorofîreîímti  2  Sets


(Tlie  late)  Lord  Viscount   Kilvvarden,  (late)  Chief

Justice  of  the  King's  Bench  in  Ireland  2  Set*

Lord  Norbury,  Chief  Justice  of  the  Common  Picas

in  Ireland  2  Set»

Lord  Viscount  Avonmore,  Chief  Baron  of  the

Exchequer  in  Ireland  2  Sets

Tlie  Duke  of  Somerset  2  Set»

The  Duke  of  Richmond  2  Sets

The  Duke  of  Grafton  4  Set»

(Tlie  late)  Duke  of  Beaufort  2  Sets

The  Dutchess  Dowager  of  Beaufort  2  Sets

The  Duke  of  Leeds  2  Sets

The  Duke  and  Dutchess  of  Devonshire  4  Sets

The  Duke  of  Marlborough  2  Sets

The  Duke  of  Rutland

The  Dutchess  Dowager  of  Manchester

The  Dutchess  Dowager  of  Dorset  2  Sets

The  Marquis  of  Lansdown  2  Sets

The  Marquis  Cornwallis  2  Sets

The  Marquis  of  Hertford  4  Sets

Tine  Marquis  of  Bute  2  Sets

Tlie  Marshioness  Dowager  of  Downsh ire  4  Sets

The  Marquis  and  Alarshioness  of  Thomond  Û  Sets

The  Earl  of  Pembroke  1  Sets
The  Earl  of  \V^e.stinorland

The  Earl  of  Sandwich  2  Sets

The  Earl  of  Carlisle  2  Set»

Earl  Berkeley  2  Set»

The  Earl  of  Oxford  2  Set*

The  Counters  Dowager  of  Oxford  2  Sets
The  Earl  of  BrL>tol


^iẅmẅtts.  χχίν

The  Earl  of  Dartmüuth,  &c.  &c.  Sec.  2  Sets

Tlie  Earl  of  Eiftnghaia

The  Earl  of  Ε  .sex  2  Sets

The  Countess  Dowager  Waldegrave

The  Earl  ot  Egremoot  2  Sets

Earl  Spencer  2  Sets

Tiie  Countess  Spencer

The  Countess  Dowager  Spencer

The  Earl  and  Countess  of  Aylesbury  2  Sets

The  Earl  of  Clarendon  2  Sets

Earl  Camden  2  Sets

The  Earl  of  St.  Vincent,  ^c.  Sec.  &.c.  2  Sets

The  Earl  of  iualmesbury  2  Sets

The  Earl  of  Romney  2  Sets

The  Countess  Dowager  of  Clanhrasil  2  Sets

The  Earl  of  Moira  2  Sets

The  Earl  of  Mountnorris  2  Sets

The  Earl  of  Londonderry  2  Sets

The  Earl  and  Countess  of  Bund  on  4  Sets

Lord  Viscount  Hereford  C  Sets

Lord  Viscount  Kilwarden  2  Sets
The  Dowager  Lady  Dacre,  of  Belhouse,  in  Essex         2  Sets

The  Dowager  Lady  Dacre,  of  Lee^  in  Kent  2  Sets
Lord  Hobart,  &c.  &c.  &c.

Lord  Pelham,  &c.  &c.  &c.  2  Sets

Lord  \  ernon  2  Sets

Lord  Hawke  2  Sets

Lord  Ducie  2  Sets

Lord  Brownlow  2  Sets

Lord  Foley  2  Sets

Lord  Thurlow  2  Sets

Lord  and  Lady  Dynevof         "  4  Sets


πτ            ê>uí)öcrtí)er0.

Lord  Sherborne

C  Set*

Lord  Amherst

2  Sets

Lord  Aiikland,  &:c.  &c.  Sec.

Lady  Clive

2  Set»

The  DoAvager  Lady  Calthorpe

«Sets

Lord  de  Dunstanville

10  Sets

Lord  Glastonbury

2  Sets

Lord  Bolton

2  Sets

Lord  and  Lady  Sheffield

2  Sets

Lord  and  Lady  INIilford  3  Sets

The  Dowager  Lady  Teinplctowa
Lord  Macdonald


Lord  Mancaster

2  Sets

Lord  Teignmouth

2  Sets

Lord  Whitworth

2  Sets

Lord  de  Blaquiere

The  Bishop  of  London

C  Sets

The  Bishop  of  Durham

2  Set&

The  Bishop  of  Winchester

2  Set*

The  Bishop  of  Bath  and  WelU-

5  Set3

(Tlie  late)  lìiáhop  of  Bath  and  Wells

2  Sets

The  Bishop  of  Ely

2  Sets

The  Bishop  of  Worcester

2  Sets

The  Bishop  of  Hereford

2  Sets

The  late  Bishop  of  Hereford

2  Set&

The  liishop  of  Litchfield

2  Sets

The  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph

2  Sets

The  late  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph

10  Sets

The  Bishop  of  L•ιndaíF

2  Sets

The  Bishop  of  Lincoln

2  Sets

The  Bishop  of  Salisbury

2  Sets

The  Bishop  of  Bangor

The  Bishop  of  Rochester

2  Sets

ê>ti6ömî)crö,  jrjcjcí

The  Bishop  of  Gloucester  <2  Sets

The  Bishop  of  Carlisle

The  Bishop  of  Norwich

The  Bishop  of  Peterborougii  2  Sets

The  late  Bishop  of  Exeter

The  Bishop  of  Bristol  ο  Sets

The  Bishop  of  Chichester  10  Sets

The  Bishop  of  Oxford  -2  Sets

The  Bishop  of  Chester

The  late  Bisliop  of  St.  David's

The  Bishop  of  Meath  3  Sets

The  Bishop  of  Limerick  ο  Sets

The  Bishop  of  Dromore  5  Sets

The  Bishop  of  Elphiii  2  Sets

The  Bishop  of  Down  2  Sets

The  Bishop  of  \^^aterford  2  Sets

The  Bishop  of  Cloyne  2  Seti

The  Bishop  of  Clogher  2  Sets

Prince  Bariatinsky,  Great  Portland-street  2  Set*

Lady  Frances  Somerset  <2  Sets

Lord  George  Lennox  2  Sets

The  Earl  of  Euston  2  Sets

Lord  George  H.  Cavendish                             '  2  Sets

Lord  Robert  Spencer  2  Seta

The  Earl  and  Countess  Temple  4  Set$

Lord  Henry  Seymour  2  Sets

Lord  Robert  Seymour  2  Sets

Lady  Caroline  Herbert  2  Sets
The  Dowager  Viscountess  Fielding
Lady  Maria  Waldegrave

Lord  Viscount  Royston  S  Sets


Lord  Viscount  Althorpc

Lady  Eleanor  Butler,  at  the  Cottage  near  LlangolleHj

in  Denbighshire  2  Sets
Lord  Kirkwall

Lady  Elizabeth  Pratt  2  Sets

^idy  Sarah  Price,  Saintfield,  in  theCounty  of  Down  2  Set*-

Lord  Viscount  Valentia  2  Sets

Lord  Viscount  Castlereagh,  See.  &,c.  2vc.  2  Sets

Lord  Viscount  Bernard  2  Sets
Lady  Caroline  Wood

The  Right  Hon.  Sir  Wm.  Grant,  Master  of  the  Rolls  2  Sets-

Tlie  Right  Hon.  Henry  Addington,  &,c.  Sec.  8vc.  2  Sets

The  Right  Hon.  Sir  William  Wynne,  &c.  &c.  &c.  2  Sets

The  Right  Hon.  Sir  William  Scott,&c.  &c.  8cc.  2  Sets

The  Right  Hon.  Charles  Yorke,  Sec.  &c.  &c.  2  Sets

The  Right  Hon.  William  Windham  2  Sets

The  Right  Hon.  Charles  Greville  2  Sets

The  Right  Hon.  John  Charles  Villiers  2  Sets

The  Right  Hon.  John  Foster  2  Sets
The  Right  Hon.  Sir  Joseph  Banks,  &c.  &c.  &.c.

The  Right  Hon.  Sir  C.  Morgan,  &c.  &c.  &c.  2  Sets

The  Right  Hon.  John  H.  Addington,  &c.  &c.  &c.  2  Sets

The  late  Right  Hon,  Thomas  Conolly  2  Sets

The  Right  Plon.  Maurice  Fitzgerald,  Knightof  Kerry  2  Sets

The  Hon.  and  Rev.  William  Capel  2  Sets

I'he  Hon.  George  Villiers  2  Sets
The  Hon.  John  Ward

The  Hon.  and  Rev.  Dr.  Marsham  2  Sets

The  Hon.  Henry  Devereaux  2  Sets
The  Hon.  Edward  Lascelles
The  Hon.  and  Rev.  Gerald  Welleslry

The  lion.  Mr.  and  Lady  Frances  Morton  4  Sets

The  Hon.  Captain  Morton  2  Sets

The  Hon.  Charles  James  Fox  2  Sets


^iŵöctííîerö.  miii

The  Hon.  W.  Η.  Irby  '      2  Sets

The  Hon,  Jolin  Peachey  and  Mrs.  Peachey  2  Sets

The  Hon.  Thomas  Fitzwilliani  2  Sets

The  Hon.  Walter  Yelverton  2  Sets

The  Hon.  Sir  Rob.  Graham^  Baron  of  the  Exchequer  2  Sets


The  Hon.  Spencer  Percival^  Sec.  &c.  &c.
The  Hon.  Thomas  M.  Sutton,  Esq.  &c.  &c.  Sec.
George  Hardinge,  Esq.  &g.  Sic.  &c.
Richard  Richards,  Esq.  Sec.  Sec.  Sec.
i)r.  Browne,  Sec.  Sec.  Sec.  Ireland

The  Dean  and  Chapter  of  Westminster

The  Dean  of  Canterbury

The  Dean  and  Chapter  of  Bristol

The  Dean  and  Chapter  of  Chichester

The  Dean  of  Ely

The  Dean  and  Chapter  of  Worcester

The  Dean  and  Chapter  of  Exeter

The  Dean  and  Chapter  of  Gloucester

The  Dean  and  Chapter  of  Hereford

The  Dean  of  Lincoln

The  Dean  of  Norwich

The  Dean  of  Christ  Church,  Oxford

The  Dean  of  Peterborough

The  Dean  of  Salisbury

The  Dean  and  Chapter  of  Rochester

The  Dean  and  Chapter  of  Wells

Tlie  Dean  of  Winchester

The  Dean  of  St.  Asaph

The  Dean  and  Chapter  of  York

The  Dean  of  Carlisle


10  Sets

2  Sets

10  Sets

2  Sets

40  Sets

2  Sets

8  Sets

5  Sets

2  Sets

2  Sets

4  Sets

3  Sets

α  Sets

2  Sets

2  Sets

2  Sets

2  Sets

4  Sets

4  Sets

2  Sets

4  Sets

2  Sets

jijrjrẁ          ^uíJöciŵcr©.

The  Dean  oí'  Deiry

2  Set»

l'lie  Dean  of  Raphoc

2  Sets

The  Dean  of  Ardfert

The  Dean  of  Connor

5  Sets

The  Dean  of  Waterford

2  Sets

The  Dean  of  Kilaloe

THE    DIRECTOltS    OF    THE    EAST-INDIA    COMPANY     40  SctS

The  Master  of  Baliol  College,  Oxford  2  Sets

The  Warden  of  Merton  College,  Oxford  2  Sets

The  Rector  of  Exeter  College  2  Seta

The  Provost  of  Oriel  College  2  Sets

The  Provost  of  Queen's  College,  Oxford  2  Sets

The  Warden  of  New  College  2  Sets

The  Warden  of  All  Souls  College,  2  Sets

The  President  of  Magdalen  College,  Oxford  2  Sets

The  President  of  Corpus  Christi  College,  2  Sets
The  President  of  Trinity  College,  Oxford

The  President  of  St.  John's  College,  Oxford  2  Sets

The  Warden  of  Wadhani  College,  2  Sets
The  Master  of  Pembroke  College,  Oxford

The  Provost  of  W^orcester  College  S  Sets
The  Principal  of  Alban  Hall

The  Regius  Professor  of  Hebrew,  in  Oxford  2  Sets
The  Regius  Professor  of  Modern  History,  in  Oxford    2  Set»
The  Professor  of  Anglo-Saxon,  in  Oxford
Tlic  Professor  of  Botany,  in  Oxford

The  Master  of  Peter-House,  in  Cambridge  2  Sets

The  Provost  of  King's  College,  Cambridge  2  Sets

The  Master  of  St.  John's  College,  in  Cambridge  2  Sets

The  Master  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge  2  Sets


ê>ttî»öcríí)erö.  xx]c)>

The  Master  of  Emmanuel  College  "  2  Sets

The  Regius  Professor  of  Civil  Law,  in  Cambridge  2  Sett

The  Public  Orator,  in  Cambiidge

The  Norrisian  Professor  of  Divinity,  in  Cambridge

The  Casuistical  Professor^  Cambridge

University  College  Library,  in  Oxford
Corpus  Christi  College  Library
Oriel  College  Library

The  Public  Library  of  Cambridge
The  Library  of  Jesus  College^  in  Cambridge
The  Library  of  Emmanuel  College
King's  College  Library,  Cambridge
Trinity  College  Library,  in  Cambridge

The  Provost  of  Eton  College  S  "^et*

Eton  College  2  Sets

The  Fellows  of  Eton  College  8  Sets

The  Masters  of  Eton  School  2  Sets

The  late  Upper  Master  of  Westminster  School  δ  Sets

The  Provost  of  Trinity  College^  Dublin
The  Master  of  the  Temple
The  Society  of  the  Middle  Temple
The  Master  of  the  Charter  House

The  Master  of  the  Charter  House  School  2  Seta

The  Society  for  Literary  Funds  20  Sets

Dublin  Library  Society
Cornwall  County  Library
Worcester  Library
Bristol  Library
Frenchay  Library,  in  Bristol
Sunderland  Subscription  Library
Book  Society  of  Battle,  in  Sussex
d2


Jolm  IiulhciíoithAbdy,  Esq.  Albyns^  near  Kpping^  in  Essex

Miá.  Abinirton

■Sir.  Ei-c(lerick  Accum,  Compton-street,  Soho

Samuel  Acton^  Esq.  Pcmbridge^  in  the  County  of  Hereford

Mrs.  Adair

Dr.  Adaui;,  Edinburgh

James  Adanis^  Esq.  M.  P.  &c.  &,c.  &c.  tì  Sets

Charles  Adams,  Esq.  M.  P.  2  Set»

Mrs.  Adams,  Olveston

John  Adolphus,  Esq.  F.  S.  A.  Warren  Street

Harland  Ainsworth,  Esq.  Swansea

Rev.  Thomas  Alban,  Ludlow

Rev.  Charles  Alcock,  Prebendary  of  Chichester

AVilliam  Alexander,  Esq.  King's  Couiisel

Grant  Allen,  Esq.  Winchester-Street

John  Allen,  Esq.  Town  Cierk^  Dublin

John  Allen,  Esq.  South-Street,  Finsbury-Square

Henry  Allen,  Esq.  Barrister  at  Law,  of  the  Lodge,  m

the  County  of  Brecon  2  Seî§

Rev.  James  Allen,  Rector  of  Shobdon,  in  the  County

of  Hereford
Mrs.  Altham,  Weymouth-Sti-eet

Miss  Andrews,  of  the  Circulating  Library,  in"Worcestei
Mrs.  Apreece,  Washingley  Hall,  Huntingdonshire
Rev.  William  Armstrong,  F.  A.  S.
George  Arnold,  Esq»  (late)  of  Halstead,  near  Seven

oaks,  in  Kent
Dr.  Ash,  M.  D.  Argyll-Street,  2  Set»

Edward  Asli,  Esq.  King's-Square,  Bristol  S  Sets

i^athaniel  Atchesou,  Esq,  F.  A.  S.  Ely-Place•
John  Atkinson,  Esq,  of  Manchester
Thomas  Aikiuson,l".sq.of  ditto

/iî5eph  Babingion,  ^L  D.  Lwdlovr


ê'tẃôcríìieriS,        jcx]c\)ii

Anthony  Bacon,  Esq.  Newtown,  near  Newbury,  in

Berks  2  Sets

Matthew  Bailhc,  M.  D.  2  Sets

Miss  Joanna  BaiUie,  Hampstead  '2  Sets

Edward  Baker,  Esq.  Sahsbury
George  Baker,  Esq.  Birmingham

Rev.  Mr.  Baker  7  Sets

Mr.  R.  Baker,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford
John  Baldwin,  Esq.  Manchester

Richard  Baldwin,  Esq,  8cc.  St.  Bartholomew's  Hospital
Benjamin  Ball,  Esq.  Assistant  Barrister  for  the

County  of  Donegal  2  Sete

Mr.  Gowen  Ball,  Bristol
Mr.  Joseph  Ball,  London
Mr.  Richard  Ball,  Bridgewater
Rev.  Mr.  Banister

J.  C.  Banks,  Esq.  at  the  Charter-house

Dr.  Bardsley,  M.  D.  Manchester  .         Si  Sets

Mr.  John  Barfield,  Printer  to  His  Royal  Highness

the  Prince  of  Wales  2  Sets

Rev.  Charles  Barker,  Canon  Residentiiuy  of  Wells      2  Sets
Rev.  Mr.  Barker,  Chancellor  of  Christ  College,Brecon
R.  P.  Barlow,  Esq.  General  Post  Office
Edward  Barnard,  Esq.  Harcfield-Grove,  INIiddlescx
Rev,  Mr.  Barnes,  Christ  Church,  Oxford  2  Sets

Dr.  Barnett,  M.  D.  Ludlow
Denham  Barons,  Esq.  Clapham
Rev.  Charles  Brent  Barry

Thomas  Barrow,  jun.  Esq.  Barrister  at  Law,  Inner  Temple
The  late  Rev.  Mr.  Barton,  late  Chaplain  to  the  House

of  Commons,  &c.        '
John  Barton,  Esq.  Manchester  2  Sets

Henry  Barton,  Esq.  ditto  2  Sets

Henry  Barton,  jun.  Esq.  ditto  *1  Sets.


John  Barton,  Esq.

Mrs.  James  Barton,  Dean's  Water,  nearWinslow,

in  Cheshire  2  Set*

John  Basset,  Esq.  of  Bolston,  in  Glamorganshire
Rev.  Mr.  Basset,  Vicar  of  Swansea  2  Sets

Rev.  John  Bastock,  M.  A.  Liverpool

Rev.  Dr.  Bathurst,  Prebendary  of  Durham  2  Seti

WilHam  Battersby,  Esq.  Berkeley  Square,  Bristol
George  Fleming  Baxter,  Esq.
Mr.  Beadford,  Frenchay,  Bristol

Rev.  Edwardes  Beadon,  North  Stoneham,  Essex  2  Sets

Rev.  Frederick  Beadon,  North  Stoneham,  Essex
Rev.  John  Watson  Beadon,  Odiam,  Hants
John  Bedford,  Esq.  Pershore,  Worcester
Rev.  Thomas  Bedford,  Rector  of  St.  Helen's,  Worcester
Rev.  Mr.  Beecher,  King's  College,  Cambridge
Peter  Begbie,  Esq.  New  Bond-Street
Adam  Bell,  Esq.  Victualling  Office,  Deptford
George  Beltz,  Esq.  Herald's  College
John  Bennett,  Esq.  Pythouse
Rev.  Mr.  Berens,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College,  Oxford
Major-General  and  Mrs.  Bernard  2  Sets

Mr.  Berrington,  Attorney  at  Law,  Swansea
Mr.  Berry,  sen.  Trinity  College,  Oxford
Mr.  Berry,jun.  ditto

Thomas  Best,  Esq.  Boxley,  near  Maidstone  2  Sets

Mr.  James  Best,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford
William  Bethell,  Esq.  and  Mrs.  Bethell,  Langton-

Hall,  Yorkshire  2  Sets

R.Bevau,  Esq.  Barrister  at  Law,  Boswell-Court,  Lincoln's-Inn
Rev.  ]\Ir.  Bevan,  Rector  of  Whitton  2  Sets

Richard  Bever,  Esq.  5  Set\

Ral})h  Bigland,  Esq.  Richmond,  Herald
Samuel  Birch,  Esq.  Portland-Square,  Bristol


^ẅmẅtîö.        xxxiv

Hex.  Mr.  Birch,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College,  Oxford

Thomas  Bird,  Esq.  Worcester

Mr.  Bird,  Bookseller,  Cardift'  2  Sets

Rev.  Mr.  Bishop,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College,  Oxford

Rev.  S.  Blackall,  Fellow  of  Emmanuel  College,  Cambridge

Mr.  J.  P.  Blackmore,  West  Bromwich

William  Blakeney,  Esq.

Rev.  Robert  Blakeney

Mr.  John  Blew,  Sheriff  of  the  City  of  Worcester

Rev.  Mr.  Bliss,  Frampton  Cotterell  2  Sets.

Mrs.  Bliss

Mrs.  C.  Bliss

William  Blizzard,  F.  A.  S.  2  Sets

Bendon  Bload,  Esq.  of  the  Count}'^  of  Clare,  in  Ireland  2  Sets

Rev.  William  Bhmdell,  A.  M.  Dublin

Rev.  Thomas  Blyth,  Solyhull,  Warwickshire

Rev.  Mr.  Boardman,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College,  Oxford

Thomas  Boddington,  Esq.  a  Bank  Director  2  Sets

John  Bodenham,  Esq.  of  the  Grove,  Radnorshire

Hugh  Bold,  Esq.  Barrister  at  Law,  Brecon

Thomas  Bold,  Esq.  of  ditto

Cornelius  Bolton,  Esq.  Waterford  2  Sets

Mr.  Bond,  Brighthelmstone

Henry  Bonham,  Esq.

Thomas  Bonville,  Esq.  St.  James's-Square,  Bristol       2  Set-s

Rev.  Mr.  Booker,  Dudley,  Warwickshire

Mr.   Booth,   Bookseller,  Corner   of  Duke  and

Dutchess-Street,  Portland-Place  6  Sets

Mr.  George  Booth,  Great  Portland-Street
William  Boscawen,  Esq.  2  Sets

William  Spencer  Boscawen,  Esq.  2  Sets

Rer.  Jonathan  Boucher,  A.  M.  F.  S.^A.  Vicar  of  Epsom
Rev.  Richard  Bourne,  A.  M.  Dublin
Sir  Charles  W.  R.  Boughton,  Barl,  2  Sete


John  Bowdler/ Esq.  and  Mrs.  Bowtller       '  2  Sets

Thomas  Bowdler,  Esq.  of  St.  Boniface,  in  the  Isle  of  Wighi

Mrs.  Bowdler,  of  Bath

WilHamBowdon,  Esq.  Union  Court,  Broad-Street

Wiiha-.n  Bowdon,  Esq.  Mart3'-Melland,  Devonshire

Rev.  W.  L.  Bowles,  Donhead

Thomas  B.  Brarapston,  Esq.  M.  P.  Albemarle-Street

Rev.  John  Brampston,  Stone-Forest  Hall,  Essex

Robert  Bree,  M.  Ό.  Birmingham

Charles  T.  Brereton,  Esq.  Bristol

Thomas  Brice,  Esq.

Samuel  Brice,  Esq.  Frenchay,  Bristol

Mr.  Brydges,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford

George  Bright,  Esq.

Richard  Bright,  Esq.

Brisco,  Esq.  Trinity  College,  Cambridge

Rev.  William  Bristovv,  Ireland
John  Hritten,  Esq.  Wilderness-Row

Theodore  Henry  Broadhead,Esq.  Portland-Place

Theodore  Henry  Broadhead,jun.  Esq.  Orchard-Street  2  Sets

Rev.  Anthony  Bromley,  Rector  of  St.  Mildred,  Poultry

Henry  Brockard,  Esq.  Camden-Street,  Pancras

Rev.  Mr.  Brooke,  Exeter  College,  Oxford

Rev.  Thomas  Brooke,  Sodbury

Mr.  Richard  Brooke

Rev.  Dr.  Brooker,  Dudley,  Warwickshire

Mr.  Brotherton,  Little  Britain,  Aldersgate-Street

J.  H.  Browne,  Esq.  M.  P.

Jolin  Browne,  Esq.  Presteigne

Thomas  Browne,  Esq.  New  Bridge-Street,  Blackfriars  C  Set&

Timothy  Browne,  Esq.  Camberwell

Francis  Browne,  Esq.  General  Post-Office

Mr.  Browne,  Attorney  at  Law,  Cardiff

Thomas  Browue,  Esq.  Banister  at  Law_,  Iiiner  Temple


ê>ttîismí)ers.  χΐί

Rev.  Mr.  Browne,  Corpus  Chrisli,  College,  Oxford

Crawiurd  Bruce,  Esq.  M.  P.  Fitzroy-Square

Rev.  Dr.  Bruce,  Ireliuicl

Jacob  BíVant,  Esq.  8tc.  &c.  &;c.  2  Sets

Mrs.  Bryant,  Bathwick

Admiral  Buckner,  Chichester  2  Sets

Miss  Maria  Budgeii,  Twickenham  2  Sets

Rev.  Mr.  Bullock,  Oriel  College,  Oxford

Mr.  Burch,  Miniature  Painter,  Charlotte-Street,

Rathbone-Place
Sir  James  B.  Burgess,  Bart.  2  Sets

Rev.  Mr.  Burgess,  Rector  of  Winfirth-Newburgh,  Dorsetshire
Miss  Burton,  Christ  Church,  Oxford

James  C.  Butson,  Esq.  Waterford  2  Sets

Rev.  J.  M.  Butt,  Student  of  Christ  Church
Rev.  Thomas  Butt^  Arley,  Worcestershire

Thomas  Cabbell,  Esq.  Exeter  College,  Oxford

Benjamin  B.  Cabbell,  Esq.  ditto

Mrs.  Cade,  Sidcop,  near  Foot's  Cray  2  Sets

Messrs.  Cadell  and  Davies,  Booksellers,  Strand  6  Sets

Tho.  Caldecot,  Esq.  Barrister  at  Law,  Dartford,  Kent  2  Sets

Henry  Callendar,  Esq.

Mr.  Calley,  Trinity  College

Colonel  Campbell,  New  Cavendish-Street

Dr.  Cameron,  M.  D.  \Yorcester

Rev.  Dr.  Camplin,  Vicar  of  All  Saints,  Bristol  2  Sets

Colonel  Capper,  Cardiff  2  Sets

John  Carleton,  Esq.  Mountjoy-Square,  Dublin

John  Carrington,  Esq.  Mile-End

John  Carstares,  Esq.  Stratford-Green,  Essex

David  Cassidy,  Esq.  Upper  Mary-le-bone-Street

Miss  Cartwright

Rev.  Dr.  Casberd,  Vicar  of  Penmark,  &c.  Glamorganshire


jrltí  ë^iŵmẅtxe.


Stephen  Cave,  Esq.  Brunswick-Square,,  Bristol

John  Cave,  Esq.

George  Chalmers,  Esq.  6  Sets

The  late  Sir  Robert  Chambers,  Chief  Justice  of  India,

Queen  Ann-Street  East
Lady  Chambers,  of  ditto
Dr.  Chambers,  M.  D.  Worcester
William  Chapman,  Esq.  Newcastle-upon-Tyne
Rev.  R.  Charleton,  Vicar  of  Olveston  4  Sets

Mrs.  Charleton  2  Sets

Mrs.  Charleton,  College  Green,  Bristol

R.  Chcarnley,  Esq.  Swansea

Edmund  Cheese,  Esq.  Kington,  Herefordshire

Mr.  John  Cheetham,  Manchester

Rev,  Joseph  Cheston,  A.  M.  Gloucester

George  Children,  Esq.  Tunbridge,  Kent  (2  Sets

Mrs.  P.  Cholmeley,  Weymouth-Street

Rev.  Mr.  Cholmeley,  Magdalen  College,  Oxford

James  Christie,  jun.  Esq.  Pall-Mali

Robert  Christie,  Esq.  Old-Jewry

John  Chughe,  Esq.  Gi'acechurch-Street

Mr.  John  Church,  Brecon

Mr.  Samuel  Church,  ditto

Mr.  Churchey,  Attorney  at  Law,  and  his  two  Sons,

Brecon,  3  Set*

Colonel  Clark,  4Gth  Regiment  of  Foot

Mr.  John  Clark,  Land  Surveyor

John  Clark,  M.  D.  Burlington-Street

Anthony  Clarke,  Esq.  CaroHne-Place,  Guild  ford-Street

Mrs.  Clarke,  of  the  Hill,  near  Ross,  Herefordshire

Rev.  Mr.  Clayton,  Fellow  of  Brazen  Nose  College,  Oxford

John  Clements,  Esq.  Upper  Grosvenor-Street  2  Sets

Rev.  Allen  Cliife,  Mathom,  near  Worcester

Rev.  Mr.  Coatcs,  Corpus  Chjisti  College,  Oxford


êîuìiöcrííjerö.  jrtíu


W.  H.  Coates,  Esq.  Surgeon,  5th  D.  G.  Howland-Street

Rev.  Mr.  Cockayne,  Stapleton

Sir  Charles  Codrington,  Bart.

C.  Codrington,  Esq.  M.  P.  Dodington,  5  Sets

Hon.  Mrs.  Codrington  5  Sets

Mrs.  Codrington,  Albemarle-Street

Captain  Codrington,  Winchfield,  Hants

Rev.  Francis  Coke,  Lower-Moor^  Herefordshire

Pennel  Cole,  Esq.  Worcester

Mrs.  Cole,  Wickham,  Suffolk

Miss  Cole

Charles  Collins,  Esq.  Swansea

Mr.  Collinson,  Queen's  College,  Oxford

Thomas  Collins,  Esq.  Berners-Street

Lieutenant  Colly,  Royal  Engineers,  Tower

Sir  John  Colpoys,  &c.  Sec.  &c.

Benjamin  Comberbatch,  Esq.  Worcester

Rev.  James  Commeline,  Gloucester

Rev.  Richard  Constable,  Prebendary  of  Chichester

John  Conyers,  Esq.  Mount-Street,  Grosvenor-Square

Rev.  Edward  Conyers,  Epping,  Essex

Edward  Cooke,  Esq.  Somerset-Street,  Portman-Square

Rev.  Thomas  Cooke,  Rector  of  Wickwar

John  Cooke,  Esq.  Duke-Street,  Portland-Place

Rev.  Richard  Cooke

Mr.  Cooke,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford

Hector  Cooksey,  Esq.  Presteigne

Rev.  Dr.  Coombe,  Prebendary  of  Canterbury

Rev.  Mr,  Coplestone,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College,  Oxford

Thomas  Copley,  Esq.  Neither-Hall,  Doncaster

Sir  George  Cornewall,  Bart.  M.  P.  2  Sets

Rev.  Mr.  Corser,  Bridgnorth

Sir  Stephen  Cotterell,  &c.  &c.  &c.

Messrs.  Cowley  and  Co.  Booksellers,  Bristol


Samuel  C.  Cox,  Esq.  a  Welsh  Judge  2  Sets

Richard  Cox,  Esq.  Quartly,  Hants  4  Sets

Rev.  Mr.  Coxe,  &c.  &c.  &:c.  Bemerton,  Wilts

Rev.  Mr.  Coxe,  Harley-Street

Mr.  Samuel  Crane,  Worcester

Mr.  Henry  Craven,  Trinity  College,  Oxford

Richard  Crawshay,  Esq.  Cyfartha^  Glamorganshire      2  Sets

Miss  Creswell,  Bath

Mr.  Creswell,  Trinity  College,  Oxford

Richard  Croft,  Esq.  Old  Burlington-Street  2  Set»

Rev.  John  Crofts

George  Crooke,  Esq.  Kemshot-Park,  Hants

Mr.  John  B.  Cross,  King-Square,  Bristol

Mrs.  Cumming,  Camden-Place,  Bath  S  Sets

Rev.  Mr.  Curteis,  Vicar  of  Seven  oaks,  Kent

Rev.  Trotman  Curties,  Fellow  of  Corpus  Christi  College

John  C.  Curwen,  Esq.  M.  P.  2  Sets

Mrs.  Oust,  Grantham

i)r.  Dale,  London

Br.  balton,  Caraberwell

Professor  Dalzell,  Edinburgh

John  Daniel,  Esq.  ]\iincing-Lane

Mr.  Darnell,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford

W.  Y.  Davenport,  Esq.  Davcnport-House,  Salop

Rev.  Richard  Davies,  Crickhowcll,  Breconshirc

Miss  Davies

Rev.  Dr.  Davies,  Clifton

Somerset  Davies,  Esq.  Croft  Castle,  Herefordshire        2  Set?-

Henry  Davies,  Esq.  Presteigne

James  Davies,  Esq.  Kington,  Herefordshire

Mr.  John  James  Davies,  Attorney  at  Law,  Presteigne

Captain  Richard  Davies.  Crickhowell,  Breconshire

Rev.  Riciiard  Davies,  \'icar  of  Tetbury


Mrs.  Davies^  Badminton

Mr,  Davies,  Rhisgog,  Radnorsliire  5  Sets

Kev.  William  Davies,  A.M.  Vicar  of  Llangors

D.  Davies,  Esq.  Swansea  2  Sets

William  Davies,  Esq.  Cringell

Ml".  Edmund  Davies,  Rhisgog

Rev.  Richard  Davies,  Vicar  of  Brecon^  &c.

Rev.  Richard  Davies,  jnn.  of  ditto

William  Davies,  Esq.  Brecon

Rev.  John  Davies,  Vice  Master  of  Trinity  College,Cambridge

Pr.  Davies,  M.  D.  Carmarthen

Morgan  Thomas  Davies,  Esq.  Swansea

Rev.  Dr.  Davies,  Macclesfield

Richard  Hart  Davis,  Esq.  Clifton

Rev.  Mr.  Dean,  Brazen  Nose  College,  Oxford

Martin  Deane,  M.D.  Ludlow

Rev.  Mr.  Deane,  Dudmarton

Joseph  Denman,  M.  D.  Bakewell,  Derbyshire  2  Sets

Dr.  Denman,  M.  D.  Old  Burlington-Street  2  Sets

Thomas  Denman,  Esq.  Lincoln's-Inn  2  Set«

Richard  Deane,  Esq.  Winchelsea

Mr.  Deane,  Trinity  College  Oxford

Rev.  Mr.  Dennison

W^illiam  Desmond,  Esq.  New  Palace  Yard  2  Sets.

Sir  John  Dick,  &c.  See.  &c.  Upper  Harley-Street         2  Sets

William  L.  Dilewyn,  Esq.

Rev.  Mr.  Dodd,  Magdalen  College,  Cambridge

Rev.  P.  Dodd,  Camberwell

Sir  William  Dolben,  Bart.  M.  P.  2  Sets

William  Dolby,  Esq.  Brizes,  Essex

Robert  Dolbyn,  Esq.  Recorder  of  W'aterford  ^  Sets

Andrew  Douglas,  Esq.  Portland-Place

Rev.  Robert  Douglas,  Salop

Rev.Dr.  Dowdeswell


jXoi  ^uìjmŵm.


Mr.  John  Dowding,  Worcester

Mrs.  Dowcll,  Cote,  near  Bristol

Richard  Dovvncs,  Esq.  Hereford

John  Dowse,  Esq.  Great  James-Street,  Bedford-Row

Rev.  Matthew  D'Oyley,  Buxted,  Sussex

Sir  Francis  Drake,  Bart.  2  SeU

Francis  Drake,  Esq.

John  Drew,  Esq.  Chichester  2  Sets

Driscot,  Esq.  Barrister  at  Law,  Dublin  2  Sets

Rev.  Dr.  Drought,  Bath

Rev.  J.  Drought,  A.  M.  Claines,  near  Worcester

Simeon  Droz,  Esq.  Portland-Place

Rev.  Dr.  Hay  Drummond,  Canon  of  Christ  Church

Robert  Duff,  Esq.  Finsbury-Square

Jonathan  Duncan,  Esq.  Governor  of  Bombay  2  Sets'

Christopher  Dunkin,  Esq.  Southwark

Rev.  Dr.  Duval,  Canon  of  Windsor  2  Sets

Mr.  Samuel  Dyer,  Bristol

Jeremiah  Dyson,  Esq.  &c.  See.  Sic.  2  Set*

Thomas  Eagle,  Esq.  Bristol
Rev.  Edward  Earle,  High  Ongar,  Essex
Hinton  East,  Esq.  Brazen  Nose  College,  Oxford
John  F.  Edgar,  Esq.  Bristol

Edington,  Esq.  New  Bond-Street

Richard  Edmonds,  Esq.  Exchequer  Pleas  Office

The  late  Rev.  Mr.  Archdeacon  Edwardes

Samuel  Edwards,  Esq.  Cotham  Lodge

Mr.  Thomas  Egerton,  Bookseller,  Whitehall  0  Seta

Rev.  Mr.  Elgee,  Rector  of  Wexford  2  Sets

Rev.  Dr.  Elrington,  Senior  Fellow  of  Trinity  College^DHbliu

Isaac  Elton,  Esq.  Hill-House

Edmund  Estcourt,  Esq.  Lincoln's-Inn-Fielda  2  Sets

John  Evans,  Esq.  Bylctts,  Herefordshire


ê)uî>scifterô.  jrlbíí

Mr.  Hugh  Evansjun.  Llandilo,  Carmarthenshire
Rev.  Dr.  Evans,  Prebendary  and  Archdeacon  of  Norwich
Hugh  P.  Evans,  Esq.  Noyadd,  Radnorshire  2  Sete

Rev.  J.  Evans,  Vicar  of  Newport,  Monmouthshire

Robert  Farquhar,  Esq.  Portland-Place

William  Fawkener,  Esq.  &,c.  &c.  &c.  2  Sete

Rev.  James  Fawcett,  B.  Ό.  Norfolk

Rev.  Joseph  F.  Fearon,  Prebendary  of  Chichester

Ralph  Fenwick,  M.  D.  Durham

Rev.  Edmund  Ferrers,  Cheriton,  Hants

Mr.  John  Fewster,  Surgeon,  Thornbury

William  T.  Fitzgerald,  Esq.

Thomas  Fitzherbert,  Esq.  Portland-Place

Robert  Fleetwood,  Esq.  Victualling  Office

Joseph  Fletcher,  Esq.  Great  Ealing  Q  Sets

Rev.  John  Foley,  Newent,  Gloucestershire

Rev.  Mr.  Foote,  Prebendary  of  Rochester

Lady  Ford,  Oakedge,  Shropshire  í2  Sets

Mr.  H.  F.  Ford,  Clifton

Mr.  William  Ford,  Manchester

John  Fordyce,  Esq.  Birchin-Laue

Rev.  Dr.  Fothergill,  Tiverton  ii  S  :

B.  Fountaine,  Esq.  Harford-Hall,  Norfolk

Rev.  Mr.  Foxcroft,  Winterbourne

Miss  Foxcroft,  Halstead,  Yorkshire

William  Fowler,  Esq.  Chichester

Thomas  Hodges  Fowler,  Esq.  Abbey  Cum  Hir,  Rad-
norshire 2  Sets

Mrs.  Fowler,  of  ditto  2  S^ts

Rev.  Mr.  Franklin,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College,  Oxford

Thomas  Franklyn,  Esq.  Barrister  at  Law,  Pwl-y-wrach
Glamorganshire

Rev,  Peter  A.  Franquefort,  Ireland  2  Sets


Captain  Frederick,  Glanark,  near  CrickhoAvell  2  Set3

FrancisFreelnií^,  Esq.  Sec.  &C.&.C.  General  Post  Office  2  Seta
Rev.  W.  J.  French,  Bow

Mrs.  Fryer,  Wrexham  2  Sets

John  Fuller,  Esq.  ÌM.  P.  Devonshire-Place  2  Sets

Lady  Furst,  Hili-Court

Messrs.  Garaeau  &Co.  Booksellers,  Albemarle-Street  12  Sets
John  W.  Garbett,  Esq.  Lieutenant-Colonel  of  the

Radnor  Militia  2  Set»

Christopher  Gardiner,  Esq.  Minchin  Hampton
Rev.  William  Gamier,  Prebendary  of  Winchester
Rev.  Thomas  Gamier,  Vicar  of  Froyle,  Hants
Rev.  Mr.  Gatehouse,  Corpus  Cliristi  College,  Oxford
Admiral  Gell,  Crickhowell  2  Sets

Peter  Giles,  Esq.  F.  R.S.  Streatham,  Surrey
Mr.  Girot

Rev.  Dr.  Glasse,  &c.  &:c.  &c.
George  Glenny,  Esq.  Russel-Square

Rev.  Dr.  Gooch,  8cc.  &c.  &c.  2  SeU

Rev.  Dr.  Goodall

Rev.  William  Goodenough,  Yate,  Gloucestershire        2  Set»
John  Goodrich,  Esq.  Encrglyn,  Glamorganshire  2  Sets

llev.  James  Gordon,  Sec.  Ireland  2  Sets

>   t  orge  Gordon,  Esq.  Sydenham

'    m  Gordon,  Esq.  Donhead-Hall
>bert  Gordon,  Esq.  Lewstou

>harles  Goring,  Esq.  β  Sets

Charles  Goring,  Esq.  Weston  Park,  Sussex
William  Goring,  Esq.  Great  Portland-Street
John  Gosling,  Esq.  Upper  Fitzroy-Street
AV'illiam  Gosling,  Esq.  Somerset-Place
Richard  Gough,  Esq.  Enfield
Mrs.  Gough,  Brianstone-Street,  Portman-Square


^iẃísciíííerö.  jrUjt


Rev.  Mr.  Graham,  Λ11  Souls  College,  Oxford

Rev.  Dr.  Graves,  Trinity  College,  Dublin

Rev.  John  Greig,  White  Waltham,  Berks

Thomas  Green,  Esq.  Maryborough,  Yorkshire
John  Lane  Green,  Esq.

Mr.  Hamilton  Green,  Parslow

William  Greenly,  Esq.  Titley-Court,  Herefordshire

Madame  Greffuihe,  Portland-Place

George  De-Lyne  Gregory,   Esq.  Hungerford-Lodge,

Lincolnshire
Rev.  Edward  Gregory,  Langar,  Nottinghamshire
Rev.  David  Griffith,  Brecon

John  Griffith,  Esq.  2  Setg

Rev.  Charles  Griffith,  Brecon
Rev.  James  Griffith,  University  College,  Oxford
The  late  Mr.  Philip  Griffith,  Merthir  Tidvil,  Glamor-
ganshire 2  Sets
Richard  Griffith,  Esq.  Cardiff                                          2  Sets

Grose,  Esq.

Shaw  Grosett,  Esq.  Clifton

Edward  Grubb,  Esq,  Great  Queen-Street,  Lincoln's-

Inn-Fields  ^

Mr.  Edward  Guest,  Dudley
Rev.  Mr.  Gutch,  All  Souls  College,  Oxford
Mrs.  Gwinnett,  Penlyn  Castle,  Glamorganshire
John  Gwinnett,  Esq.  Common-Hill,  Worcester
Thynne  H.  Gwynne,  Esq.  Buckland,  Breconshire       2  Sets
J.  H.  M.  Gwynne,  Esq.  Llanelveth,  Radnorshire.       2  Sets

Rev.  Mr.  Haistone,  Fello-  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge
Mr.  Hale,  Christ  Church

Samuel  C.  Hall,  Esq.  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge
Rev.  Dr.  Hall,  Canon  of  Christ  Church  2  Sets

Rev.  Dr.  Hall^  Rector  of  Ardshaw,  Irelaad  2  Sets

e


ι  ^nòmiìitîe,

Benjamin  Hall,  Esq.  Banister  at  Law  2  Sets

Rev.  Dr.  Hallam,  Canon  of  Windsor  2  Sets

Rev.  R.  W.  Hallifax,  A.  M.  StancUsh,  Gloucestershire

Mr.  Hauier_,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford

Rev.  Dr.  Hamilton,  Rector  of  St.  Martin's

Rev.  Dr.  R.  Hamilton,  Rector  of  St.  Olave,  Old-Jewry

Hugh  Hamilton,  Esq.  Clare-Street,  Dublin

Mrs.  Henrietta  Η  anbury,  Queen-Ann-Street,  AVest    C  Sets

]\irs.  Frances  Hanbury,  Ditto  Q,  Sets

INIessrs.  Hanwell  and  Parker,  Booksellers,  Oxford      2  Sets

Mrs.  Hardinge,  Grove,  Seven-Oaks,  Kent

Rev.  Henry  Hardinge,  Rector  of  Stanhope,  in  the

County  of  Durham  2  Sets

Mr.  Charles  Hardinge,  A.  M.  University  College,

Oxford  2  Sets

Captain  George  Nicholas  Hardinge,  of  the  Royal

Navy  2  Sets

Henry  Hardinge,  Esq.  Lieutenant  in  the  Army  2  Seta

Rev.  Dr.  Hardwicke,  Sopworth-House,  Wiltshire       2  Sets
James  Hare,  Esq.  M.  P.  2  Sets

Benjamin  Harenc,  Junior,  Esq.  Pembroke  College,

Cambridge  2  Sets

John  Harford,  Esq.  Bleize-Castle  2  Sets

Francis  Hargrave,  Esq.  Barrister  at  Law
Rev.  John  Harley,  Rector  of  Presteigne
John  Harman,  Esq.  Frederick-Place,  Old-Jewry
James  Lloyd  Harris,  Esq.  Kington,  Herefordshire      2  Sets
George  Hartwcll,  Esq.  2  Sets

John  Harvey,  Esq.  Guildford-Strcet  2  Sets

John  Harvey,  Esq.  Portland-Place

William  Harvey,  Esq.  White  Fryar-Street,  Dublin     2  Sets
Rev.  Mr.  Harwell,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford
Rev.  J.  D.  íLislewood,  Devonshire-Street,  Portland-
Place


James  Haworth,  Μ.  D.  Sec.  &.c.  &c.  Lincolu's-Inn-

Fields  2  Sets

Rev.  C.  HayneS;,  Rector  of  Siston

Mr.  Haynes,  St.  Augustine's-Placc,  Bristol

Sir  Isaac  Heard,  Garter  King  at  Arms  2  Sets

The  late  Colonel  Heathcote,  Hereford

Rev.  Mr.  Heath  cote.  Master  of  Hackney-School

Ames  Hellicar,  Esq.  Bath

Mr.  Ames  Hellicar,  Junior,  Bristol

Mr.  G.  Hellicar,  Bristol

Mr.  Joseph  Hellicar,  Bristol

Rev.  Dr.  Hemming,  Hampton,  Middlesex

Rev.  Mr.  Henley,  Howland-Street,  Fitzroy-Square

Rev.  Edward  Herbert,  Archdeacon  of  Aghadoe,  Ireland

Rev.  William  Herringham,  Chipping  Ongar,  Essex

Mr.  Thomas  Hetling,  Attorney  at  Law,  Sodbury

Mr.  Thomas  Hewitt,  Manchester

Rev.  Dr.  Hey,  Passenham,  Northamptonshire

Mr.  D.  Higgs,  Sodbury

Mr.  W.  Higgs,  St.  Paul's,  Bristol

Sir  Richard  Hill,  Bart.  M.  P.  2  Sets

Charles  Hill,  Esq.  Wick

Joseph  Hill,  Esq.  Saville-Row  2  Sets

Rev.  Averill  Hill,  Limerick

Richard  Hill,  Esq.  Cardiff  2  Sets

J.  Hinckley,  Esq.  F.  S.  A.

Mr.  Thomas  Hindley,  Manchester

Rev.  Mr.  Hipgame,  Jesus  College,  Cambridge

Sir  John  Cox  Hippesley,  Bart.  Lower  Grosvenor-

Street  2  Sets

Rev.  Joshua  Hird,  Fellow  of  King's  College,  Cam-
bridge

George  Hoare,  Esq.  Jewell  Office,  Tower

Dr.  Hobbes,  M.  D.  Swansea


Hi  ^ttbsmíjerö.

Isaac  Ilobhouse,,  Esq.  6  Sets

Samuel  Hobson,  Esq.  Assistant   Barrister   for   the

County  of  Waterford  2  Sets

Thomas  Fowler  Hodges,  Esq.Abbey-Cwm-hir^Radnor  2  Sets
Mr.  Hoi  borough,  Tockington

Mr.  Robert  Hole,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge
Samuel  Homfray,   Esq.   Pendaran-Place,   Glamor-
ganshire 2  Sets
Daniel  Hopkins,  Esq.  Leadenhall-Street
William  Hooper,  B.  D.  Fellow  of  University  College,

Oxford
John  Archer  Houblon,  Esq.  Great  Hallingbury,  Essex-
Henry  Howard,  Esq.  M.  P.  Thornbury
Rev.  Benjamin  Howell,  Rector  of  Boughwood
Thomas  Bridges  Hughes,  Esq.  Barrister  at  Law  2  Sets

•  Dr.  Hughes,  Jesus  College,  Oxford
Mr.  Hughes,  Ditto

Rev.  John  Hughes,  Vicar  of  Pembroke
The  late  Rev.   Mr.   Huish,  Rector  of  Pembridge,

Herefordshire  2  Sets

Rev.  John  Huish,  late  of  Ditto  2  Sets

Rev.  Francis  Huish,  Rector  of  Clisthydon,  Devonshire  2  Sets
John  Huitson,  Esq.  Newman-Street
J.  Humphreys  Esq.  Barrister  at  Law,  Llantris-ent,

Glamorganshire
Miss  Hunt,  at  Mrs.  Bowdler's,  Park-Street,  Bath
David  Hunter,  Esq.  Blackheath

Rev.  Mr.  Huntley,  Boxwell-Court  2  Sets

Herbert  Hurst,  Esq.  Cabalva,  Glamorganshire

Samuel  Jackson,  Esq.  2  Sets

John  Jackson,  Esq.  Manchester

W.  H.  R.  Jackson,  Esq.  Mall,  Clifton,

Sir  Walter  11.  James,  Bart.  Devonshire-Place  3  Sets


^uíiömîícrö.  Uii

Richard  James_,  Esq.  Ightham,  Sevenoaks,  Kent         2  Sets
Rev.  Morgan  James,  Brecon  2  Sets

Mr.  James,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford
Thomas  Jameson,  Esq.  Fire-Court
Rev.  Mr.  James,  Rector  of  Rememham,  Berkshire
John  Jeffreys,  Esq.  Peckham
John  Jeffreys,  Esq.  Swansea
John  Jeffreys,  Junior,  Esq.  Ditto
Walter  Jeffreys,  Esq.  Brecon
Blias  Jenkins,  Esq.  Neath

Lewis  Jenkins,  Esq.  Ditto  2  Sets

Mr.  John  Jenkinson,  Manchester
Robert  Jenner,  Esq.  Wenvoe-Castle,  Glamorgan-
shire 6  Sets
Rev.  William  Jephson,  Camberwell

Mr.  D.  Jephson,  Ditto  2  Sets

Mr.  J.  T.  Jephson,  West  Bromwicli,  Warwickshire
Sir  Hugh  Inglis,  Bart.  &c.  &c.  &c.  2  Sets

R€V.  Dr.  Ingrain,  New  College,  Oxford
Rev.  P.  Ingram,  Stamford,  Worcestershire
Richard  Ingram,  Esq.  Worcester
Mr.  Ingram,  Trinity  College,  Oxford

John  Innes,  Esq.  β  Sets

Thomas  Johnes,  Esq.  Μ  P.  5  Sets

Rev.  Samuel  Johnes,  Vicar  of  Allhallows  Barking       2  Sets
Lieutenant  General  Johnson,  Ireland  2  Sets

Cuthbert  Johnson,  Esq.  Swansea
Richard  Johnson,  Esq.  Stratford-Place
Peter  Johnson,  Esq.  Percy-Street
Major  Johnson,  Swansea
Benjamin  Johnson,  Esq.  Barrister  at  Law
J.  Johnson,  Esq.

Mr.  Johnstone,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge
Thomas  Tyrwhit  Jones,  Esq.  M.  P.  Clarence  Lodge


lib  ^nòöctiìitîe,

Henry  Jones,  Esq.  Gravesend

Daniel  Jones_,  Esq.  of  Lau twit- Major,  Glamorgan-
shire 2  Sets
John  Jones,  Esq.  Cardift-Arms  C  Sets
John  Jones,  Esq.  St.  Helen's,  Glamorganshire  2  Sets
Harford  Jones,  Esq.  Resident  at  Bagdad  2  Sets
Theophilus  Jones,  Esq.  Brecon  10  Sets
Edward  Jones,  Esq.  Llandovery,  Carmarthenshire  2  Sets
Rev.  Dr.  Jones,  Redland  10  Sets
Thomas  Jones,  Esq.  Stapleton

Rev.  Richard  Jones,  Charfield  2  Sets

Mr.  Jones,  A.  B.  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge
Rev.  Thomas  Jones,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,

Cambridge
Rev.  Thomns  Jones,  Wickwar  2  Sets

G.  Jones,  Esq.  Swansea

Rev.  B.  Jones,  Swansea,  Vicar  of  Cheriton,  Hants
Mr.  John  Jones,  Neath
Mr.  John  Jones,  Surgeon,  Ditto
Mr.  W.  Jones,  Attorney  at  Law,  Swansea
Mr.  O.  Jones,  Thames-Street
Mr.  Edward  Jones,  Harpist  of  the  Prince  of  Wales

Rev. Ireland,  Croydon,  Surrey  2  Sets

Elias  Isaac,  Esq.  Worcester

James  Kearney,  Esq.  Garret's-Town,  in  the  County

of  Cork
Miss  Keene,  lîath  4  Set»

Benjamin  Kccne,  Esq. Charles-Street,Berkeley-Square  2  Sets
Rev.  Mr.  Kect,  Hatfield,  Herts.
William  Kemys,  Esq.  Maindee,  Monmouthshire
Edward  Kendall,  Esq.  Langattock  Crickhowell  2  Sets

Mr.  Joseph  Fr.  de  Kergariou  de  Laninou  en  Brctagne
Rev.  Mr.  Kett,  Trinity  College,  Oxford  2  Sets


ê'uíiscnlirrs.  lb

Henry  Jan-ett  Key,  Esq.  Abcliurch-Lane  «  Sets

Rev.  Mr.  Keysall

Mr.  Kilpin

Thomas  King,  Esq.  Noke,  Herefordshire

Rev.  Mr.  King,  Olveston  2  Setg

Henry  King,  Esq.  Bristol

Rev.  Mr.  King,  Brazen-Nose  College,  Oxford

Colonel  Kingscote,  Kingscote

James  Kinnersley,  Esq.  Ludlow  g  Sets

Lieutenant-Colonel  William  Kirkpatrick  2  Sets

Richard  Kirwan,  Esq.  F.  R.  S.

Thomas  Andrew  Knight,  Esq.  Elton,  near  Ludlow       2  Sets

Mr.  William  Knight,  Park-Row,  Bristol  2  Sets

Henry  Knight,  Esq.  Tythegstone,  Glamorganshire

Rev.  Mr.  Knottesford,  Hadleigh,  Suffolk  2  Sets

James  Lackington,  Esq.  «  Sets

Lieutenant-Colonel  Lambard  2  Sets

Rev.  Mr.  Lambert,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College

Samuel  Langford,  Esq.  Peckhani

Dr.  Latham,  &c.  M.  D.  Bedford-Row  2  Sets

James  Law,  Esq.  Portland-Place

Rev.  Dr.  Law,  Archdeacon  of  Rochester

Dr.  Lawrence,  M.  D.  Cambridge

George  Urquhart  Lawtie,  Esq.  53,  UpperÌMary-le-bone

Street
John  Martin  Leake,  Esq.  Harley-Street
Edward  Lee,  Esq.  M.  P.  2  Sees

Capel  Hanbury  Leigh,  Esq.  Pontipool  2  Sets

Mrs.  Leigh,  ditto  2  Set?

Rev.  Charles  Lesley
Captain  Lewes,  Brecon  Militia
Rev  Richard  Lewis,  Limerick
Rev,  Lewis  Lews,  Gwynfer,  Carmarthenshire


John  Lewis,  Esq.  Byletts,  Shropshire

Rev.  Mr.  Lewis,  Corsham

David  Lewis,  Esq.  Clan  y  Rhyd,  Carmarthenshire

Hugh  Leycester,  Esq.  M.  P.  &c.  &c.  8cc.  2  Sets

Mrs.  Liell,  Richmond,  Surrey  •  2  Sets

John  Liptrap,  Esq.  Mile-End  2  SeU

Rev.  R.  Litchford,  Boothby-Pagnel,  Lincolnshire

Rev.  William  Llewellyn,  Thornbury  S  Sets

John  Lleweilin,  Esq.  Penllergare,  Glamorganshire       2  Sets

John  Lleweilin,  Esq.  of  Welsh  St.  Donats,

Glamorganshire  2  Sets

Griffith  Lleweilin^  Esq.  Margam,  Glamorganshire       2  Sets
John  Lloydj  Esq.  Dinas,  Breconshire  2  Sets

Thomas  Lloyd,  Esq.  Bronwydd,  Cardiganshire
John  Lloyd,  Esq.  Aberannell,  Breconshire
David  Lloyd,  Esq.  Brecon
Rev.  Evan  Lloyd,  Orsett,  Essex
Rev.  Bartholomew  Lloyd,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College

Dubhn
Rev.  William  Lockton,  Corpus  Christi  CollegCj  Oxford
Rev.  Dr.  Lodge,  Chancellor  of  Armagh  2  Sets

Edward  Long,  Esq.  Worcester
Mr.  Longfellow,  Brecon
Colonel  Loraine,  Weymouth-Street
Rev.  Verney  Lovctt,  Vicar  of  Bandon,  Leland
Jonathan  Lovett,  Esq.  Deputy  Persian  Interpre^ter  to

the  Government  of  Bombay
Mrs.  Lowe,  Park-Street,  Grosvenor-Square  2  Sets

Richard  Lowndes,  Esq.  Rcd-Lion-Square
p.  J.  Luard,  Esq.  Worcester
Rev.  Dr.  Ludlow,  Sopworth

Sauuiel  Ludlow,  Esq.  Henrietta-Street,  Covent-Gardeii
Mr.  LuiTman,  Geographer,  Ball- Alley,  Coleman-SU"eei
William  Lukiu,  Esq.  Royal  Navy


Sir  Stephen  Lusliington,  Bart.  Μ.  P.    Sec.  Upper

Harley-Strect
Mr.  Liiry,  Lower  Hazel,  Olveston
Samuel  Lysons^  Esq.  F.  R.  S.  and  F.  S.  A.  Winslow

Rev.  Mr.  Maber,  Rector  of  Merthir  Tidvill,  Glamor-
ganshire

Dr.  Macdonell,  M.  D.  Ireland

Colonel  Mac  Lachlan

Donald  Macleod,  Esq.  in  Geannies  2  Sets

John  Macnamara,  Escj.  Langoed  Castle^Breconshire   4  Seta

Rev.  Spencer  Madan,  Birmingham

Rev.  Mr,  Madevvell,  in  Scotland

Rev.  Dr.  Magee,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Dublin

Samuel  Manesty,  Esq.  Resident  at  Bussorah

Sir  William  Manners,  Bart.  Oxford-Street  2  Sets

John  W.  Mansfield,  Esq.  Swansea  2  Sets

Rev.  Mr.  ISIant,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College,  Oxford

Thomas  Markham,  Esq,  Glamorganshire  2  Sets

Rev.  Herbert  Marsh,  B.  D.  Fellow   of  St.  John's
College,  Cambridge

Rev.  Mr,  Marsh,  Christ  Church,  Oxford

Rev.  Mr.  Μ  arshall,  Lincoln  College,  Oxford

Rev.  Mr.  Marshall,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College,  Oxford

Mr.  Edward  Marshall,  Bradford,  Wilts

WiUiam  Byam  Martin,  Esq.  Portland-Place  2  Sets

Mrs.  Mathew,  Rathbone-Place

Thomas  Matthias,  Esq.  &c.  &c.  &c.  2  Sets

Rev.  Thomas   Maurice,    Author  of  the  Indian
Antiquities

Mr.  Hugh  Maurice,  Thomas-Street,  Bristol

Mr.  Joseph  Maurice,  Surgeon,  Bristol

Thomas  Maybery,  Esq.  Brecon

Peter  Mellish,  Esq.  Brunswick-Square
f


Μίί  ^vwmibtvo.

ìî.  Μ.  iMencCj  Esq.  Worcester

Kev.  Benjamia  Mence,  Fellow  of  Worcester  College,

Oxford
Richard  Mence,  Esq.  Temple
Thomas  Meredith,  Esq.  Knighton,  Radnorshire
Thomas  Meredith,  Esq.  Brecon

Paul  C.  Methuen,  Esq.  Lower  Grovesnor-Street  2  Sets

Mr.  Melhuen,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College,  Oxford
Mr.  Edward  Michal,  Bradford,  \Vilts
William  Miller,  Esq.  Ozelworth
Sir  Francis  Millman,  Bart.  M.  D.
John  Miers,  Esq.  Cado  χ  ton-Place,  Glamorganshire
ìtlìss  Millgrove,  Thornbury
Λ^Ίlliam  Minier,  Esq.  Adelphi-Tcrrace
Mr.  Minoch,  Trinity  College,  Oxford
Rev.  John  Mitchell,  Fellow  of  Worcester  College,

Oxford
IVIr.  Mitford,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College,  Ditto
Mr.  Hugh  Moises,  University  College,  Ditto
William  Moncriffe,  M.  D.  Bristol
Basil  Montague,  Esq.  Paper  Buildings,  Inner  Temple
Dr.  Moody,  LL.  D.  Turnham-Green  2  Set»

Abraham  Moore,  Esq.  Barrister  at  Law
Rev.  James  Moore,  Wimbledon,  Surrey
Rev.  Thomas  Moore
Mrs.  Hannah  More

Charles  Morgan,  Esq.  M.  P.  5  Sets

Rev.  William  Älorgan,  Brecon
Edward  Morgan,  Esq.  Recorder  of  BrecoD
Edward  Morgan,  Esq.  Llandaff  2  Sets

Mr.  Charles  Morgan,  Talgarth,  Breconshire
Mr.  John  Morgan,  Brecon
Mr.  C.  Morgan,  St.  Peter's  College,  Cambridge
Jblo  Morgwns


g^iẃöctííierô*  Ιίχ


Rev.  Dr.  Morrice,  Secretary  of  the  Society  for  the

Propagation  of  the  Gospel
John  Morris,  Esq.  Clasemont,  Glamorganshire
Walter  M.  Mosely,  Esq.  Glasshampton,  Worcestershire
Michael  Mosely,  Esq.  King's  Bench  Walks,  Temple
Rev.  Dr.  Moss,  Prebendary  of  St.  Paul's
Rev.  Mr.  Moulding,  Rector  of  Rotherham,  Essex
John  Moultrie,  Esq.  Aston-Hall^  near  Shifnal,

Sliropshire
Mr.  Mount,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford
Abel  Moysey,  Esq.  Sec.  Sec.  Sec.  2  Sets

Abel  Moysey,  Ju».  Esq.  Lincoln's-Inn
Rev.  Mr.  Mulso,  Abergavenny
George  J.  Murphy,  Esq.  Mus.  D.  Dublin
Sir  John  Macgregor  Murray,  Bart
Sir  John  C.  Musgrave,  Bart.  Portland-Place
Rev.  Dr.  Myddleton,  Rotherhithe  2  Sets

Rev.  Mr.  Myddleton,  Ditto

Rev.  Slade  Nash,  nearAVorcester

Richard  Nelms,  Esq.  Bradley  House

Rev.  JNIr.  Neve,  V^icar  of  Sodbury

Rev.  Mr.  New,  Vicar  of  St.  Philip's,  Bristoi

James  Nibbs,  Esq.

Mrs.  Nibbs

Rev.  Dr.  Nicholas,  Great  Ealing  '2  Sets

William  Nicholl,  Esq.  Barrister  at    Law,  Great

George- Street,  Hanover-Square  Q.  Sets

John  Nichols,  Esq.  Red  Lion-Passage,  Eleet-Street
Mr.  Samuel  Nicholson,  Manchester
Rev.  Robert  Nixon,  A.  M.  Foot's  Cray,  Kent
Robert  Nixon,  Esq.  F.  R.  S.  2  S€U

W^illiam  Nodes,  Esq.  New  Cavendiáh-Street:
Dr.  Noehden,  Eton  College


Major  Noel,  of  the  Worcester  Militia

George  Norman,  Esq.  Bromley  Common,  Kent  2  Sets

Rev.  Francis  North,  Rector  of  St.  Mary's,

Southampton
Messrs.  North,  Brecon
Thomas  Northmore,  Esq.  Bentinck-Street
Mr.  Norton,  Bookseller,  Bristol  6  Sets

Rev.  Mr.  Nott,  All  Soul's  College,  Oxford
Peter  Nouailles,  Jun.  Esq.  Greatness,  near  Sevenoaks,

Kent  2  Sets

Mrs.  Nowell,  Dorset-Street  2  Sets

Mr.  George  Nutcombe,  Priory,  Warwickshire

Silvester  O'Hallaran,  Esq.  Limerick

Rev.  Mr.  Oldnall,  Rector  of  St.  Nicholas,  Worcester

]Mr.  William  Ogilvy,  Bread-Street,  Hull

L.  Oliver,  Esq.  late  of  Nook,  in  the  County  of  Hants  2  Seta

William  Oram,  Esq.  Harley-Strect

Dowell  O'Reilly,  Esq.  Dublin

JNlr.  Ord,  Trinity  College,  Oxford

Sir  WilHam  Ouseley,  LL.  D.  &c.  &c.  &c.

Ralph  Ouseley,  Esq.  Limerick

Gore  Ouseley,  Esq.  East-Indies

Thomas  Owen,  Esq.  Carmarthenshire

PiCV.Mr.  Owen,  Clifton,  Bristol

Rev.  John  Owen,  Archdeacon  of  Richmond

Mr.  William  Owen,  Author  of  the  Welch  Dictionary

James  Pain,  Esq.  Maidenhead  2  Set»

Rev.  Richard  Palmer,  Grantham

Robert  Pardoe,  Jun.  Esq.  Bradley,  Worcestershire

The  late  Rev.  Dr.  Parker,  Rector  of  St.  James,

\^^estminster  2  Sets

Rev.  Mr.  Parker,  Oxford


g»iiì)öcríí)ecs.  Ιχί

Tliomas  Parker^  Esq.  Worcester

Rev.  Mr.  Parker,  Pellow  of  Mertoii  College,  Oxford

Mrs.  Parry,  Gressford  Fiodge,  Denbighshire  2  Sets

Sir  WilliaiTi  Paxton,  Middleton  Hall,  Carmar-
thenshire 2  Sets

Charles  Partridge,  Esq.  Bristol

Mr.  Pasquier,  Gray's-Inn-Square

Sir  George  O.  Paul,  Bart.  Lower  Grosvenor-Street        2  Sets

Robert  Paul,  Esq.  Assistant  Barrister  for  the  County

of  VVaterford  2  Sets

Samuel  P.  Peach,  Esq.  Tockington  4  Sets

Mr.  Pearce,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford

Miss  Frances  Pearson,  Percy-Street

Peter  Peirson,  Esq.  Paper  Buildings,  Inner  Temple

The  late  Henry  Cressett  Pelham,  Esq.  Counde  Hall,

Shropshire  2  Sets

Christopher  R.  Pemberton,  M.  D.  Great  George-Street,
Hanover-Square

Granville  Penn,  Esq.  Secretary  of  State's  Office  2  Sets

John  Penn,  Esq.  Spring-Garden  2  Sets

Rev.  Dr.  Penny  2  Sets

Mrs.  Pennyman

Sir  William  Pepys,  Bart,  a  Master  in  Chancery  2  Sets

Dr.  Percival,  Manchester

Rev.  Dr.  Percy

Rev.  David  Peter,  Carmarthen

Mr.  Peters,  Gower-Street

Henry  Peters,  Esq.  M.  P.  Park-Street,  Grosvenor-
Square

Richard  Mansell  Phillipps,  Esq.  Sketty,  Glamor-
ganshire 2  Sets

Mrs.  Catharine  Philipps,  Hampton-Court

Mrs.  Joyce  Philipps,  Hampton  Court

Mrs.  Jane  Philipps,  Picton  Castle,  Pembrokeshire


Ιχϋ  ê>uí)0crtì»erö.

John  Philips,  Esq.  Llandilo,  Carmarthen

Rev.  Luke  Philips,  Vicar  of  Grain,  Kent

John  Pliihps,  Esq.  Fenchurch-Street

Joseph  PhiHimore,  Esq.  Christ  Church,  Oxford

Wilham  PhilUinore,  Esq.  Barrister  at  Law

John  Philhps,  Esq.  Carmarthen

Mr.  Phillips,  Frenchay,  Bristol

Humphry  Phillpot,  Esq.  2  Sels

Mr.  Phillott,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford

Rev.  Barré  Phipps

J.  P.  Picard,  Esq.

Rev.  ^VΊlliam  Pigott,  Rector  of  Edgmoná

Mr.  Pigott,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford

Rev.  Mr.  Pinckney,  Ditto

John  Pinkerton,  Esq.  Pimheo,  &c.  &c.  &c.

Mr.  Player,  Elberton

Mr.  John  Player,  Tockington,  near  Bristol

Miss  Player

Miss  Mary  Player

Rev.  Henry  Plimley,  Rector  of  Shoreditch

Rev.  Mr.  Plumbtree,  Prebendary  of  Worcester

Thomas  Phnner,  Esq.  King's  Counsel

Miss  Polhill,  Chipstead,  Sevenoaks

William  Pollock,  Esq.  Secretary  of  State's  Office         2  Setw

James  Poole,  Esq.  Barrister  at  Law

Thomas  J.  Powell,  Esq.  Berwick-House,  Shropshire

Joiin  Kynaston  Powell,  Esq.  M.  P.

Thomas  H.  Powell,  Esq.  Barrister  at  Law,  Brecon      £  Sets

Rev.  Thomas  Powell,  Cantref

Walter  Powell,  Esq.  Brecon  2  Sets

John  Powell,  Esq.  Brecon  2  Sets

Sir  Gabriel  and  Lady  Powell  2  Set»

Thomas  Jelf  Powis,  Esq.  Berwick-House,  Salop

Rev.  Mr.  Poyntz,  Rector  of  Tormarton

Mr.  Nathaniel  Poyntz,  Ditto


^ulíombero.         Ιχίίί


Mr.  Pratt

Sir  G.  B.  Prescott,  Bart.  Theobald's-Park,  Herts.
Rev.  Dr.  Prettyman,  Prebendary  of  Norwich
Hev.  William  Price,  LL.D.  Chaplain  to  His  Royal

Highness  the  Prince  of  Wales
Richard  Price,  Esq.  M.  P.  2  SeU

Mr.  Rice  Price,  Surgeon,  Hay,  Breconshire  2  Sets

Samuel  Price,  Esq.  Coroner  and  Surgeon,  Brecon
Rev.  J.  Price,  Trinity  College,  Oxford
Theophilus  Price,  Esq.  Hnrborne
Kicholas  Price,  Esq.  Saintfield,  Downshire,  Ireland
John  Price,  Esq.  LlandafF  2  Set$

Roger  Price,  Esq.  Castle  Madoc,  Breconshire
Penry  Price,  Esq.  Rhayader,  Radnorshire
Thomas  Price,  Esq.  Builth,  Breconshire
Thomas  Price,  Esq.  Birmingham
John  Prichard,  Esq.  Bridgend,  Glamorganshire
Mr.  Thomas  Prichard,  Ross
Mr.  D.  Prichard,  Builth,  Breconshire
Mr.  James  Cooles  Prichard

Miss  Piitchard,  near  Ambleside,  Westmorland  2  Sets

John  Pritchard,  Esq.  Dolevelin,  Radnorshire  2  Sets

Charles  Pritchard,  Esq.  Brecon

Captain  Puget,  Royal  Navy  2  Seta

Lieutenant-General  Sir  James  Pulteney,  Bart.
Henry  James  Pye,  Esq.  &c.  8cc.  &c.
Rev.  Reginald  Pyndar,  Hadsor,  near  Worcester
Jonathan  Pytts,  Esq.

Alexander  Raby,  Esq.  2  Sets

Rev  Dr.  Radcliffe,  Prebendary  of  Canterbury
R.  Raikes,  Esq.  Gloucester
Rev.  Mr.  Raikes,  Ditto
Rev.  Dr.  Raine,  Charterhouse


Ixia


'UÎîôcríîierô.


General  Rainsford,  8cc.  Sec.  Sec.  Soho-Sqiiare
Rev.  Charles  J.  Rainsford^  Powick,  near  Worcester
James  Ramsden,  Esq.  of  tlie  College  of  Phj-sicians
Rev.  Benson  Ramsden,,  A.  M.  Rector  of  Stanbridge,

Essex
Rev.  Mr.  Randolph;,  Corpus  Christ!  College,,  Oxford
Joshua  Reeves^  Esq.  Canterbury-Square
John  Reeves,  Esq.
James  Rennell,  Esq.  &c.  &c.   &c.  Suffolk-Street^

Middlesex-Hospital
Rev.  J.  H.  Renouard,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge
Jacob  Reynardson,  Esq.  Hollywell,  near  Stamford
William  Reynolds,  Esq.  Colebrook-dale,  Shropshire
Mrs.  William  Richards,  Cardiff
Rev.  Benjamin  Riclnirdson,  Rector  of  Farley,  Hun-

gerford
Rev.  Mr.  Richardson,  Bennett  College,  Cambridge
Mr.  Richardson,  Iron-Acton

Samuel  Richardson,  Esq.  Hensol,  Glamorganshire     G  Sets
Mr.  Richardson,  Druggist,  Bristol
Bev.  Mr.  Roberts,  Cambridge
Rev.  Peter  Roberts,  Arundel-Street,  Strand
Edward  Roberts,  Esq.  Little  Ealing  2  Sets

Mr.  Roberts,  Stoke's-Croft,  Bristol
Rev.  J.  R.  Roberts,  Great  Portland-Street
G.  P.  Rogers,  Esq.  Swansea

Stephen  Rolleston,  Esq.  Secretary  of  State's  Office      C  Sets
George  Rolph,  Esq.  Thornbury
Mr.  Rolph,  Surgeon,  Peckham
Samuel  Rom  illy,  Esq.  King's  Counsel
Lieutenant-General  Rooke
Tiiomas  Rowerscroft,  Esq.  Broad-Street
lU'v.  Mr.  Rudd,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College,  Oxford
Di.  Uuddiman,  Charlotte-Street,  Portland-Place


Sir  William  and  Lady  Rush,  Wimbledon,  Surrey       2  Sets

Richard  Rushworth,  Esq.  Manchester

William  Russell,  Esq.  Barrister  at  Liuv,  Powlck,

near  Worcester  2  Sets

James  J.  Russell,  Esq.  Limerick

John  Salmon,  Esq.  Oiveston,  Gloucestershire

Mr.  Edward  Salmon,  Surgeon,  Thornbury,  Gloucestershire

Rev.  J.  L.  Salvador,  Grat'ton-Street,  Piccadill}'•

Sir  Robert  Salusbury,  Bart.  M.  P.

David  Samuel,  Esq.  Bolston,  Glamorganshire  2  Set3

INIr.  Sandford,  Wimbledon,  Surrey

Rev.  Charles  Sandiford,  Gloucester

Mr.  Sangar,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College,  Oxford

Rev.  John  Savage,  Rector  of  Bcverstoii

Captain  Saunders,  Upton-Grove

Joshua  Saunders,  Esq.

Rev.  Mr.  Sayer,  Bristol

J.  Sayer,  Esq.  Hallow-Park,  near  Worcester

David  Scott,  Esq.  Upper  Harley-Street  fi  Sets

Mr.  George  Scott,  Manchester

Edward  Sealy,  Esq.  Bridgewatcr

Rev.  Mr.  John  Sealy,  Ditto

Mr.  Selwyn,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford

Mr.  Serle,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Oxford

Richard  Seymour,  Esq.  St.  John's  College,  Oxford

Mr.  Seymour,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford

Rev.  Joseph  Shapland,  A.  M.  Rector  of  St.  Peter's,

Worcester
Miss  Charlotte  Shapland,  Marshfield
Rev.  Thomas  Shepherd,  Limerick
Mr.  Shepherd  Wotton-under-Edge

John  Sherborne,  Esq.  Hereford  2  Set»

Rev.  T.  Shurry


Mr.  Shute,  Park-Street,  Bristol

James  Sibbald,  Esq.  Upper  Harley-Street  t,  Seta

Mr.  Sibthorpe,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford

Kadcliffc  Sidebottom,  Esq.  4  Sets

G.  Simcocks,  Esq.

Joseph  Skey,  Μ .  D.  Worcester

Robert  Slade,  Esq.  Doctor's  Commons

Rev.  Dr.  Small,  Prebendary  of  Gloucester

Charles  Smith,  Esq.  M.  P.  Portland-Place  2  Set»

Colonel  Smith,  &,c.  &-c.  2  Sets

Rev.  J.  Smith,  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge

Ferdenando  Smith,  Esq.  Barbourne,  near  Worcester

Lieutenant-Colonel  Smith,  Groom  of  the  Bedchamber

to  his  Royal  Highness  the  Duke  of  Kent
Rev.  J.  G.  Smith,  Che-ll-esworth,  Suffolk,  and  Chaplaio

to  his  Royal  Highness  the  Didve  of  Kent
Rev.  Samuel  Snead,  Ludlow

Rev.  Tho.  Sockett,  Vicar  of  Ombersley,Worcestershir€
Henry  Sockett,  Esq.  of  Crickhowell,  Breconshire,

Barrister  at  Law  2  Sets

Mr.  Songar,  Trinity  College,  Oxford
William  Sothehy,  Esq.
William  A.  Sotheby,  Esq.
Robert  Sparkes,  Esq.  Portland-Place
Joseph  Sparkes,  Esq.  Bridgenorth
James  Spencer,  Esq.  Hay,  Breconshire
John  Spicer,  Esq.  George-Street,  Hanover-Square
Rev.  Benjamin  Spry,  Bristol  2  Sets

Miss  Stanley,  Court,  near  AV^rexham
Henry  Stapleton,  Esq.  .

liichard  J.  Stark,  Esq.  Llangharn-Castle,  Carmarthen-
shire
Henry  Stephens,  Esq.   Chevenage-Housc  10  Sets

J'Vancis  Step.hene,  Esq.  Ealing  2  Sets


William  Stevens,  Esq,

Rev.  John  Stevens

J.  E.  Stock,  INI.  JD.  Bristol

Mr.  Stock,  Wickvvar,  Gloucestershire  Q  Sets

Rev.  J.  B.  Stone,  Forest-Hull,  Essex

Rev.  Mr.  Stone,  Brazen-Nose  College,  Oxford*

Mrs.  Stou2;hton,  Pontipool,  Monmouthshire

Hardinge  Stracey,  Esq.  Upper  Harley-Street  2  Sets

Edward  Stracey,  Esq.  Ditto  ο  ."^^^^

Edward  Stracey,  Jun.  Esq,  Fludyer-Street,

AVestminster  2  Sets

Hardinge  Stracey,  Jun.  Esq.  Lincoln's-Inn  q  Sets

Josiah  Stracey,  Esq.  Berners-Street  ο  ggtg

William  Strode,  Esq.  Upper  Brook-Street
Mr.  Strong,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College,  Ox  fowl
Mr.  John  Sturge
Mrs.  Elizabeth  Sturge
Mr.  Young  Sturge,  Westhury-upon-Trim
Rev.  Dr.  Sturrock,  Archdeacon  of  .innagh
Mrs.  Sullivan,  Queen -x\nn-Street  East

R.  J.  Sullivan,  Esq.  Grafton-Street,  Piccadilly  2  Set»

John  Surtes,  Esq.  University  College,  Oxford
John  Swale,  Esq.  iVJildenhall,  butiolk
Rev.  Mr.  Swaine,  Puckle-  hurch
Rev.  Joseph  Sympson,  Stilto-n,  Huntingdonshire

Henry  Tahourdin,  Esq.  Sydenham

William  Taitt,  Esq.  Cardiff  «  Set-g

Rev.  William  Talbot,  Elmset,  Suffolk

Rev.  Mr.  Tavell,  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge

Mr.  Taunton,  Corpus     hnsti  College,  Oxford

Rev.  Dr.  Thomas  Taylor,  LL.D,  King's  Chaplain

Mr.  Charles  Taylor,  Ludlow

R.  S.  Taylor^  Esq.  Field-Court^  Gray'sÈ-Ina


Rev.  Thomas  Thhlwall,  Λ.  ]M.  Lecturer  of  Stepney

Dr.  Thomas,  ]M.1>.  of  Kington,  Hereforclshu-e  C  Sets

John  Thomas,  Esq.  Lluyilicoecl,  Carmarthenshire      í2  Sets

John  Thomas,  Esq,  Cardiff  (^  Sets

Rev.  Thomas  Thomas,  Fohbing,  Essex

Rev.  John  Thomas,  Lucton,  Horefordshire

Rev.  Mr.  Thomas,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford

^Ir.  Rees  Thomas,  Swansea

JSlr.  Nelson  Thomas,  Swansea

Mr.  Evan  Thomas,  Attorney  at  Law,  Builth,

Breconshire
Mr.  John  Thomas,  Langattock,  Carmarth.enshirç
Rev.  Mr.  Thomas,  Kingswood,  Wiltshire
Rev.  NathanielThornbury,  Rector  of  Avening
Mr.  ThornbiuT,  Oriel  College,  Oxford
Bache  Thonihlll,  Esq.  Stanton,  Derbyshire  2  Sets

Samuel  Thornton,  Esq.  M.  P.  2  Sets

Robert  Thornton,  Esq.  M.  P.  2  Sets

Henry  Thornton,  Esq.  M.  P.  3  Sets

Gervas  Thorpe,  M.  D.  Ludlow
Charles  Thorpe,  Esq.  University  College,  Oxford
Mr.  Ticker,  Manchester
Dr.  Tierney,  Brighton

Λ\Ίlliam  Tighe,  Esq.  Ennisteog,  Ireland  2  Sets

Rev.  William  Tindal,  A.  M.  Chaplain  of  the  Tower
Mr.  Tongar,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College,  Oxford
Henry  Tonge,  Esq.  Devonshire-Street,  Portland-Place
William  N.  Tonge,  Esq.  Olveslon
Charles  Tottenham,  Esq.  University  College,  Oxford
Charles  Hanbury  Traccy,  Esq.  Portland-Place
The  Hon.  Mrs.  Hanbury  Tracey,  Ditto
Edmund  Traherne,  Esq.  Castclla,  Olamorganshire       2  Sets
Rev.  Dr.  Trad
Wilham  B.  Trevelyan,  Esq.  St.  John's  College,    •

Cambridge


)iiîîscrtfccr0


ií*


m^


Lady  TiJgge,  Saville-Row

Captain  Trigge,  Gloucester

Fiennes  Tiotman,  Esq.  iSiston  Court

Mr.  J.F.Tiiahi,  London

Rev.  Mr.  'I'urner,  Archdeacon  of  Taunton

Edmund  Turner,  Esq.

Sharon  Turner,  Esq.  &c.  Sec.  &.C..  Fctherstone-

Buildiu^s,   Hulborn
Mr.  Turner,  St.  John's  College,  Canibridi^e
Rev.  Mr.  Turner,  Oriel  College,  Oxtord
Dr.  Turton,  M.  D.  Physician  to  the  King
Dr.  Turton,  M.  D.  Swansea
VVilliam  Turton,  Esq.  Olveston
Mr.  Joseph  Turton,  Attorney  at  Law,  Olveston
Mr.  Zoucli  Turton,  Attorney  at  Law,  Chepstow
Mrs.  Turton,  Swansea
Miss  1  urton


2  Sets
2  Set3

2  Sets

2  Sets

2  Sets
2  Sets


General  Vallencey,  Sec.  &c.  &c.  2  Sets

Rev.  Dr.  Valpy,  Reading

G.  C.  Vanderherst,  Esq.  Swansea

Mrs.  G.  Vansittart,  Bisham  Abbey,  Berks.  2  Sets

John  Vaughan,  Esq.  Golden-Grove,  Carmarthenshire

Mrs.  Vaughan,  Portman-Square


Mr.  Uphill,  Bookseller,  Bridge-Street,  Covent-

Garden
Rev.  Dr.  Vyse,  Rector  of  Lambeth


2  Sew


Robert  Waddell,  Esq.

Daniel  Wait,  Juu.  Esq.

Thomas  Walbeoffe,  Esq.  Pen-y-ìau,  Breconshire

James  Wale,  Esq.  Belle  Vue,  Warwickshire

Wiliiam  Wall,  Esq.  Worcester


Ijcjc  g)tẃscrtìîers.


Samuel  Wall,  Esq  Ditto

INIr.  Walrond  2  Sets

INlrs.  Walrond  t  Sete

Ílev.  Richard  Ward,  Portman-Strcet

Mrs.  R.  Ward,  Hazle,  Olveston

Rev.  Mr.  Holt  Waring

Mr.  Waring,  Alton,  Hampshire  2  Sets

Rev.  Francis  Warre,  Rector  of  Cheddon,  Somerset-
shire

Henry  Warre,  Esq.  Lincoln's-Inn

ΛVilliam  Warwick,  Esq.  Warwick-House,  Herts.

Rev.  Thomas  Watkins,  Pennoyre-House,  Breconshire

Mrs.  T.  Watkins,  Ditto

Edward  Watkins,  Esq.  Alveston,  2  Set»

Rev.  Mr.  W  atkins.  Corpus  Christi  College

!Mr.  Watkins,  Oriel  College,  Oxford

D.  P.  Watts,  Esq.  Gower-Street  2  Sets

George  Watson,  Esq.  Deputy  Teller  of  the  Exchequer  2  Sets

John  Watson,  Esq.  Preston  2  Sets

John  Watson,  Jun.  Esq.  Ditto

Rev.  James  Way,  Powick,  near  Worcester

Mr.  Webbe,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford

The  late  Samuel  Wegge,  Esq.  2  Sets

Rev.  Mr.  \\'^eldalc,  Brazen-Nose  College,  Oxford

Rev.  Thomas  Wellings

Richard  Wellington,  Esq.  of  the  Hay,  Breconshire

Richard  S.  Wells,  Esq.  Ely-Place

Edward  West,  Esq.  Weymouth-Street

Mrs.  H.  West

Rev.  Richard  Wetherell,  Westbury,  Gloucestershire  2  Set»

Joseph  Whatlcy,  Esq.  Bristol

Mr.  Wheeler,  Uriel  College,  Oxford

Rev.  Joseph  Whitchurch,  Redcliff-Street,  Bristol

CiiarlesN.  White,  Esq.  Portland-Place


g>tiîjômìirrs»  Ιχχί


Rev.  Mr.  "^^-Tiitear,  Hastings

Rev.  Christopher  Whitehead

Rev.  Walter  Whiter,  &c.  &c.  kc.  Cambridge

Rev.  Dr.  Whitfield,,  Rector  of  St.  Margaret's,

Lothbury  S  Set»

Rev.  Dr.  Whitmore,  Lawford,  Essex

John  Whitmore,  Esq.  M.  P.  Old  Jewry  C  Set$

Mr.  Whittingham,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford

G.  D.  Whittington,  Esq.  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge

William  Whitworth,  Esq,  Cornhill

Rev.  J.  Λν.  IVickes,  Caplaia  to  his  Royal  Highness

the  Duke  of  Cumberland  2  Sets

William  Wilberforce,  Esq.  M.  P,  4  Sets

Rev.  Dr.  Wilgres,  Eltham
Rev.  John  T.  Wilgres,  A.  M.  Trinity  College,

Cambridge
Walter  Wilkins,  Esq.  M.  P.  INIaesllwch,  Radnorshire  2  Sets
Walter  Wilkins,  Jun.  Esq.  Ditto
Thomas  Wilkins,  Esq.  Brecon
Jeffery  Wilkins,  Eéq.  Ditto
William  Wilkins,  Esq.  Ditto

Rev.  John  Wilkins,  Rector  of  Desserth,  Radnorshire
Sir  Edward  Williams,  Bart.  CUfton  2  Sets

Rev.  David  Williams,  Brecon
Rev.  John  Williams,  Ditto
Rev.  George  Williams,  Rector  of  Martin,  near

Worcester
Henr}  AVilliams,  Esq.  Llangattock-PlaGe,Breconshire
R.  R.  Williams,  Esq.  2  Sets

Rev.  George  Williams,  Limehouse,  Middlesex
Rev.  Edward  Williams,  Stepnej'
Mr.  Williams,  Trinity  College,  Oxford  .  .

William  AVilliams,  Esq.  Brecon
Wllliaia  Williamsj  Jun.  E^q.  Ditto


ìmi


mìjsmòtts.


John  Williams,  Esq.  Coroner  and  Surgeon,  Brecon

Mr.  Williams,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford

Rev.  Mr.  Williams,  Abergavenny

John  Williams,  Esq.  Cowbridge,  Glamorganshire

Mr.  Williams,  Oriel  College,  Oxford

Mr.  Williams,  Bookseller,  Strand  6  Set»

Rev.  Evan  Williams,  Clipstone,  Northamptonshire      2  Sets

Rev.  Joseph  Williams,  Wickwar,  Gloucestershire

William  Williams,  Esq.  Aberpergvvm,  Glamorganshire

Rev.  Edward  Williams,  Rector  of  Uffington,  &,c.

Shropshire
DaviW  Williams,  Esq.  2  Sets

David  Williams,  Esq.  Brompton-Row
Thonuis  Williams,  Esq.  Brecon

The  late  Bloom  Williams,  Esq.  Cardiff  2  Sets

Thomas  Williams,  Esq.  Cowbridge  2  Sets

Robert  Williams,  Esq.  Town-Clerk,  Brecon
Miss  Willis  2  Sets

John  Wilmore,  Esq.  Worcester
Edward  Wilmot,  Esq.  Lansdowne-G rove,  Bath
Mr.  Wilson,  Lincoln
Edward  L.  Wilson,  Esq.
riiiiip  Wilson,  M.  D.  Worcester

Richard  AV'ilson,  Esq.  Sec.  &c.  Lincoln's-lnn-Fields     2  Sete
]Mr.  John  Wilton,  Ilazlc,  Olveston

Josoj)!»  \Mndbam,  Esq.  F.  S.  A.  8cc.  Portland-Place  2  Set«
Sir  Edward  Winnington,  Bart.  Stanford,Worcester-

shire
Colonel  Wood,  of  the  East  Middlesex  ]Militia
Colonel  Wood,  late  of  Hereford
^\  illiam  G.  Wood,  Esq.  Devizes
John  Wood,  Jun.  Esq.  Cardift'

Cçlonel  and  Mrs.  Woodburne  4  Sets

Richard  VVooddcson,  Esq.  Chancery- Lane,  Barrister-

at  Law  2  Sets


êjuböcríbtrö.  lyjciii

C,  R.Woodwarcì,  Esq.  Tetbury,  Gloucestershire
Rev.  Mr.  Woolcombe,  Fellow  of  Oriel  College,Oxford
LadyWrey,  Bath  2  Set*i

Sir  James  Wright..  Bart.  Little  Ealing  2  Set»

Rev.  Thomas  Wright,  A.  M.  Rector  of  Wliitechapel
Rev.  T.  Wright,  F.  S.  A.

Mr.  William  ^Vright,  Park-Row  2  Sets

Robert  Wrixon,  Esq.  Teutham-Down,  Glamorgan-
shire 2  Sets
Mrs.  Wroughton,  Bedford-Street,  Bedford-Square
George  Wyatt,  Esq.  New  Bridge-Street,  Blackfriars
Thomas  Wyndham,  Esq.  M.  P.  Dunravon-Castle,

Glamorganshire  2  Sets

Sir  William  Wynne  2  Sc£^

Robert  Wynne,  Esq.  Garthowen,  Denbighshire
Mr.  Wynniott,  Trinity  College,  Oxford
William  Wynter,  Esq.  Brecon
Rev.  Robert  Wynter,  Rector  of  Penderin,  Breconsliirt

Rev.  Dr.  Yate,  Bromsberrow,  Gloucestershire

Rev.  Mr.  Yates,  &c.  Chaplain  of  Chelsea  College

Rev.  John  Yeatman,  East-Brent

Philip  Yorke,  Esq.  Erthig,  Denbighshire

Mrs.  Yorke,  Ditto

Captain  Young,  Worcester  Militia

Mr.  William  Young,  Surgeon,  ShiiTnal,  Shropshire

Added  since  the  foregoing  -χ as  put  to  Prei^'i,
Sir  JamesDuberlr


SKETCHES,


THE    STATE    A:ND    ATTAINMENTS


Prímítíbe  ê^ocítí^.


I.


TL•  impcrtance  of  distinctly  marking  fayidamenial
jìrincijìles.


w.


HEN  I  entered  upon  a  serious  inquiry  into  some
particulars  respecting  the  original,  and  primitive  inhabitants
of  these  countries,  I  found  my  thoughts  necessarily  carried
back  towards  their  original  state  as  a  people,  and  conse-
quently, towards  the  general  attainments  of  human  society,
when  mankind  began  to  be  formed  into  distinct  nations.
It  became  desirable,  to  distinguish  those  customs,  arts,  and
stores  of  knowledge  which  the  Celtm  probably  imported  into
their  Western  settlements,  from  those,  which  they  must
have  acquired  afterwards,  by  their  own  diligence,  or  by  their
intercourse  with  strangers.  I  could  not  proceed  with  satis-
faction^ till  my  thoughts  attained  a  certain   degree  of  pre^

A


á


cision  as  to  tlicse  points^.  This  appeared  an  essential  ground-
work of  local  inquiry:  It  may  indeed  be  affirmed,  that  for
the  discussion  of"  any  difficult  subject,  certain  bearings,  and
relative  distances,  to  which  the  argument  may  be  directed,
and  from  wliich  a  chain  of  inferences  maybe  drawn,  should
be  distinctly  marked.  For  want  of  such  leading  objects,  it
has  frequently  happened,  that  propositions  have  been  as-
serted upon  one  set  of  principles,  and  have  been  denied  upon
another; — so  that  historical  truth  has  been  left,  after  an
elaborate  discussion,  enveloped  in  tenfold  obscurity,  or
buried  under  amass  of  contending  elements.

It  is  true,  that  all  deductions  of  argument  are  sometimes
regarded,  as  more,  or  less  conclusive,  in  proportion  to  their
harmony,  or  disagreement,  Avith  some  preconceived  opinion.
It  cannot  therefore  be  expected,  that  general  assent  must  be
the  consequence  of  unfolding  first  principles  ;  but  at  least,
by  this  means  a  charge  of  inconsistency  may  be  avoided.
That  charge,  I  hope  to  obviate,  by  presenting  a  few  sketches
of  my  conceptions,  relative  to  the  attainments  of  primitive
society,  and  by  offering  a  few  plain  arguments  in  support  of
my  opinion.  In  order  to  form  this  opinion,  it  was  necessary
to  enter  into  periods,  far  beyond  the  reach  of  profane  histor}'.
The  first  point,  that  was  to  be  settled,  was  the  choice  of  the
most  faithful  guides,  through  such  remote  regions.

The  poets,  and  mythological  writers,  of  G/tí'í-í',  and  Rome,
have  transmitted  some  interesting  tales,  respecting  the  most
early  times;  but  these,  are  delivered  in  language  highly
figurative,  and  are  mixed  with  so  mucli  allegory,  or  fable,
that  it  seems  hardly  possible,  to  reduce  them  into  fact.
Hence  the  most  learned,  and  sincere  investigators  of  an-
ti([uity,  arc  far  from  being  agreed  in  their  inter[)retation  of
poetica/  Uiìúìúons.     And  this  is   not  to  be   wondered  at:


3


for  so  hidden  was  the  suhjcct,  even  to  the  generality  of"  the
Greeks  themselves,  that  we  find  those  authors,  who  made  it
their  business  to  elucidate  mythological  narration,  two  thou-
sand years  ago,  perpetually  amusing  «s  with  puerile  con-
ceits, or  shifting  the  solution  with  a  commodious  plea  ot
sacred  mysteries.

This  darkness,  and  the  uncertainty  of  pofííCö/ reports,  the
only  ancient  histories,  which  the  Greeks,  and  Romans  pos-
sessed, induced  their  phi losojj/iers  to  reject  it  altogether,  and
frame  new  theories  of  their  own,  upon  the  original  state  ot
mankind.

Amongst  all  the  ancient  professors  of  oracular  wisdom,
none  carried  their  speculations  upon  this  topic,  so  far,  as  that
sect,  which  denied  the  operation  of  the  first  intelligent  cause,
and  the  superintending  energies  of  a  Divine  Providence, —
ascribed  the  formation  of  all  things  to  a  fortuitous  concourse  of
atoms,  and  consigned  the  government  of  the  world  into  the
hands  of  chance.  The  most  connected  of  the  details,  which
give  us  the  opinions  of  the  EpicureatLS,  is  contained  in  the
Jearned,  but  most  unphilosophical  poem  of  Lucretius.  From
this,  we  may  gather,  that  in  that  peculiar  sect  were  men
of  genius,  and,  could  vVe  but  grant  their  fundamental  prin-
ciples, men  of  acute  reasoning.

According  to  their  hypothesis,  the  first  men,  that  weîe
produced,  were  fit  inhabitants  of  the  world  that  existed  lonly
by  accident.  And  they  were  above  resting  their  specular-
tions  upon  imagination  alone:  it  was  their  ambition,  to
support  them  by  data,  when  they  could  reach  them,  and
such,  as  could  best  accommodate  their  atheistical  pre-
conceptions,

Λ  ο


The  condition  of  α  few  nncient  hunters,  who,  as  is  ueuulin
all  newly  inhabited  countries,  wandered  amongst  the  woods,
and  were  driven  occasionally  to  extreme  difficulties  in  pro-
curiuii  food,  and  lodging,  was  brought  forwards,  and  was
obtruded,  as  the  general  picture  of  original  society.

They  had  observed,  th:it  in  general,  wherever  the  arts,
and  science?  had  flourished,  they  had,  for  some  ages,  been
slowly,  and  uniformly,accumulating  their  acquisitions ;  from
which  they  inferred,  that  their  progress  had  observed  the
same  line  of  march  universally.  They  could  not  ascertain
tîìe  time,  nor  the  manner,  in  which  man  had  begun  his
existence.

They  were  supplied  with  no  authentic  history  of  his  pri-
mitive condition,  and  therefore,  as  their  own  scant}'  line  of
research  carried  them  back  far  beyond  the  invention  of  many-
arts  in  the  pale  of  their  own  district,  into  an  age  compara-
tivei\'  barbarous,  tliey  concluded  themselves  warranted  in
imagining  a  period  of  indefinite  extent,  before  the  invention
of  any  arts  whatsoever,  before  human  reason  had  made
her  successful  exertions,  and  even  before  her  light  had
begun  its  dawn  in  the  mind  of  man.

Daring  this  imaginary  period,  the  race  of  mortals  were
described,  as  making  slow,  and  painful  progress,  towards  the
verge  of  humanity  ;  as  having,  for  a  long  series  of  ages,
crept,  and  felt  their  way,  through  various  degrees  of  savage
life,  before  they  emerged  into  a  superior  condition.

Such  was  the  hypothesis,  opposed  by  these  philosophers,  to
the  few  rays  of  early  light,  preserved  by  the  pott,  and  recog-
nized by  tlic  more  temperate  reason  of  other  philosophers,
who    reprcacntcd    man,   as   originally   distinguished    from


other  terrestrial  animals,  by  his  erect  countenance,  and  his
capacity  for  sublime  contemplation — as  formed  of  two  dis-
tinct parts,  a  governing,  as  well  as  immortal  spirit,  related,
though  inferior,  to  the  Divine  Creator,— and  a  passive  body,
which  degraded  him  to  the  nature  of  brutes.

But  the  hypothesis  of  the  philosophers,  obtained  great
popularity.  It  was  not  only  received,  as  founded  upon
truth,  during  the  most  illustrious  ages  of  Greek,  and  Roman
learning,  but  it  has  also  been  adopted,  and  refined  upon,  by
eminent  writers  of  modern  times.  We  have  consequently
been  amused  with  strange,  and  monstrous  tales  of  that  mute,
as  well  as  ill-contrived  quadruped,  Man, — a  being,  who,
for  a  series  of  ages,  crawled  upon  the  earth,  before  he  began,
occasionally,  to  assume  an  erect  posture,  and  walk  upon  his
hinder  feet ;  who  afterwards  made  slow  progress  through
the  monkey,  and  the  savage,  accidentalii/  acquired  speech
and  reason;  till  at  length,  forming  iiimself  into  a  kind  of
terrestrial  God,  he  established  a  dominion  over  his  brethren
of  the  forest.

In  this  country,  there  are  perhaps  few  men  who  would
not  refuse  to  admit  these  notions  in  their  full  extent;  yet
I  believe,  there  are  multitudes,  whose  imaginations  are  in-
fluenced by  them,  in  a  certain  degree.  When  they  describe
an  original  state  of  nature,  an  early  age,  or  the  first  in-
habitants of  a  country,  they  represent  a  condition  of  ther
most  wretched  barbarism.

If,  therefore,  elaborate  theory,  or  popular  opinion,  were  to
be  received,  as  unerring  guides,  the  points,  now  under  con-
sideration, or  the  original  state  of  society,  and  the  condition
of  those,  who  first  inhabited  the  West  of  Europe,  might
soon  be  disposed  of,  by  a  few  quotations  ívovaLucrctitis,  and


Horace,  a  few  scraps  from  the  ancient  Historians,  Phi-
losophers and  Geographers,  or  from  their  disciples  in
modern  days.

But  the  connection  of  this  hypothesis,  in  its  mature  state^
with  such  atlieistical,  and  most  absurd  principles,  renders  it,
in  all  parts,  highly  suspicious.  Recollecting  the  purposes
for  which  it  was  framed,  we  should  be  guilty  of  an  unpar-
donable negligence,  to  embrace  it,  without  a  Jealous  exa-
mination. And  it  will  not  bear  such  a  test.  It  is  not  only
injurious  to  the  honour  of  our  nature,  but  is  contradictory
to  the  venerable  remains  of  the  ancient  world,  and  the
testimony  of  all  our  senses.

Besides,  we  ought  undoubtedly,  in  this  point,  as  in  every
other,  carefully  to  estimate  all  the  facts,  before  we  adopt
any  theories  whatsoever.  If  authentic  information  can
be  obtained,  it  claims  preference  to  the  most  flattering
hypothesis,  and  the  most  acute  inferences  of  abstract  rea-
soning. Where  tiiis  rule  is  not  observed,  no  wise  man  can
acquiesce  in  opinions,  merely  because  they  have  been  popu-
lar, and  because  they  have  been  supported  by  favourite
names,  or  by  ingenious  arguments.

The  original  state  of  mankind,  in  the  earliest  ages,  iä
avowedly  one  of  those  topics,  upon  which  we  have  an  oppor-
tunity of  examining  well  authenticated  facts.

By  all  those,  who  profess  our  Christian  religion,  it  will
readily  be  conceded,  that,  in  one  ancient  volume,  we  are
furnislied  with  a  correct  epitome  of  the  most  ancient  periods;
and  the  generality  even  of  those  philosophers  who  reject  the
writings  of  Moses,  and  the  other  books  of  the  Old  Testament,


as  matter  of  religious  faith,  are  yet  candid  enough  to  admit,
that  they  contain  the  hest,  and  most  authentic  accounts  of
the  first  ages.  The  notices  they  give  us  of  those  ages,  though
few,  and  short,  are  the  most  clear,  and  comprehensive  that
can  be  imagined.  In  the  following  sheets  I  shall  regard  these
venerable  documents,  in  the  light  of  authentic  histories.  My
inferences,  being  founded  upon  books  which  are  universally
read,  and  which,  for  many  centuries,  have  employed  the
united  learning,  and  critical  sagacity  of  the  Christian
world,  may  not  offer  much  that  is  absolutely  new;  yet  may
be  of  some  use,  in  directing  the  attention  of  my  readers  to
those  truths,  which  they  profess  to  believe.


II.

Generalviezi)  of  the  first  ages — primitive  knowledge  jyreserved,
and  communicated  bj/  Noahj  and  his  sons.


XN  the  book  of  Genesis,  we  have  a  consistent,  and  clear,
though  brief  account,  of  mankind,  in  their  primitive  state, — •
of  their  disposition  to  acquire  knowledge  during  the  first  ages,
— and  of  their  success  in  the  pursuit.  We  are  there  informed,
that  the  first  man  whom  God  created  upon  the  earth,  was
far  advanced  above  the  condition  of  a  dumb,  and  brutal
savage  ; — that  he  was  not  formed  by  his  nature,  to  associate
with  inferior  creatures,  but  for  dominion  overthem  ; — that  no
sooner  did  he  come  out  of  his  Maker's  hand,  than  he  began
to  exercise  his  distinguishing  endowment  of  reason,  and  ac-


δ


íiuirecl  the  faculty  of  speech,  as  a  medium  for  the  exprcssictn
of  his  perceptions,  and  ideas  ; — that  in  the  period  of  his  inno-
cence, and  after  his  transgression,  he  employed  his  rational
powers  in  the  dihgent  prosecution  of  arts,  which  have,  in
all  ages,  heen  peculiar  to  civilized,  and  social  life.

The  solitary  savage,  knows  not  what  is  meant,  by  dressing
a  garden,  and  keeping  it ;  the  habit,  and  the  ialent,  of  tii ling
the  ground,  and  eating  bread  by  the  sweat  of  his  brow,  are
things,  of  which  he  is  neither  skilled,  nor  studious,

OÎ  Adam's  two  elder  sons,  we  find,  that  one  was  a  tiller
of  ground,  the  other  a  keeper  of  sheep; — and  this,  before  the
birth  of  Seth,  or  about  a  century  after  the  human  creation.
This  deserves  notice.  It  proves,  not  only,  that  in  this  early
age,  men  understood  the  comforts  of  life  derived  both  from
agriculture,  and  pasturage,  calculating,  how  to  enjoy  the
advantages  arising  from  both ;  but  that  also  they  pursued
these  advantages  upon  the  most  improved  plan  of  civil  so-
ciety. They  divided  amongst  individuals  those  cares,  and
ftccupations,  that  were  conducive  to  the  mutual  benefit  of  all.
Their  attention  was  never  distracted  by  a  multitude  of  objects ;
but  was  directed  skilfully  to  one.  The  shepherd  in  that  age
did  not  overlook  the  necessary  care  of  his  flock,  in  his  cul-
tivation of  the  field  ;  nor  the  husbandman  lose  the  season
of  tillage,  when  he  guarded  his  flocks.  This,  demonstrates
Ά  vigorous  eflbrt  of  the  reasoning  powers,  and  the  most
huuinous  acquisitions  of  useful  experience.

Again :  Cain  brought  to  the  Lord  an  offering  of  thr
fruit  of  the  ground,  and  Jbel,  of  the  firstlings  of  hisjfoch.
Here  was  no  community  of  rights — no  promiscuous  plunder.
Every  man  claimed,  and  was  allowed,  his  property  in  that,
which  he  hud  procured  by  his  individual  care,  or  labour:  and


9

he  had  a  right  to  dispose  of  it,  ^vithi}l  the  regulations  of
society.

The  epitome  of  primitive  histoiy,  in  the  fourth  chapter  of
Genesis,  informs  us  of  several  eminent  men  amongst  the
descendants  of  Adam,  down  to  the  flood,  who  discovered
and  improved  upon  the  first  principles  of  such  arts  and
sciences  as  are  conducive  to  the  comfort  and  ornament  «f
societ}'.  Nor  was  this  all  that  they  did.  The  antediluviaa
ages  were  evidently  ages  of  application  as  well  as  of  genius»
Mgn  did  not  accidentally  strike  upon  some  solitary  discoveiy,
and  content  themselves  with  the  fame  they  acquired  in  the
completion  of  it.  They  applied  the  principles  of  llie  art  ;ü-
jeady  known,  as  a  clue  for  the  discovery  of  other  arts,  with
which  it  had  a  natural  conneéìion.

Thus,  the  first  inventor  of  stringed  instruments  kept  sight
of  the  general  principles  of  music,  and  the  scale  of  harmo-
nious sounds,  till,  by  analogy,  he  had  found  out  die  nature
of  wind-instruments :  and,  by  repeated  eiiorts  of  genius,  he
became  the  father  of  all  Hich  as  handle  the  Ηλερ  and  tite
Organ.

The  first  artificer  in  brass  pursue^  the  same  course,  till  he
had  likewise  developed  tiie  nature  and  proper  management
of  iron  pre.

If  we  refleéì  that  these  men  retained  the  vigorous  use  of
their  iacukies  for  a  space  of  six  or  seven  centuries,  to  re-
peat their  experiments,  and  to  make  continual  improvement
upon  die  useful  hints  which  presented  themselves,  I  think  we
may  conclude  that  they  carried  their  inventions  to  a  high
degree  of  perfection.  And  it  was  perhaps  the  Avise  design  of
Pro\'idence  to  afiord  an  opportunity  for  such  improv.enientsi


10


lîunng  the  primitive  ages,  by  extending  the  period  of  humrtn
life  to  nearly  a  thousand  years.  At  present,  our  days  are  only
couuneiisurate  with  the  ends  of  living:  may  we  not  believe  that
this  was  the  case  from  the  beginning:

Moses  directly  records  only  the  inventions  of  one  family,
fhe  house  of  Cain.  But  Adam  had  sons  and  daughters  whose
names  and  history  are  not  preserved .  Let  usi  form  a  conception
of  the  longer  catalogue  which  has  been  omitted  by  the  sacred
penman — the  inventions  of  all  these  families,  and  add  them
to  the  present  record,  and  it  will  be  evident  that  the  state  of
nature,  or  the  original  state  of  man,  was  not  that  of  brutes  and
savages,  but  a  state  of  immediate  mental  exertion,  and  of
rapid  progress  in  civilization,  and  the  acquisition  of  usefiil  arts,
— a  picture  which  true  philosophy  might  have  presented  of
rational  beings,  as  formed  and  disposed  by  the  hand  of  a
good  and  wise  Creator.

If  we  carry  our  attention  forward  to  the  generation  Avhich
immediately  succeeded  the  flood,  we  shall  discover  no  vestiges
"•fa  savage  state.  Human  society  was  now,  for  a  second  time,
confined  within  narrow  limits,  and  the  abilities  of  each  indi-
'vidual  were  necessarily  called  forth,  to  secure  general  comfort•
If  this  age  did  not  display  so  much  inventive  genius  as  those
xvliich  had  preceded,  yet  its  comparative  advantages  were  far
superior  to  those  which  had  been  enjoyed  by  the  first  race  of
mortals.     The  mental  powers  of  the  species  could  not  now  bç


Reason  had  now  the  accumulated  stock  of  iGjO^'cars,  ready
to  be  employed.  For  it  is  evident  that  Noali  and  his  sons
preserv»id,  not  only  the  general  history  of  the  primitive  world,
but  as  much  of  its  acquired  knowledge  as  could  be  uselul  to
themselves  and  thvir  potlevity.    This  iheij  had  ample  op^ortu-^


Η


nity  of  doing;  for  the  flood,  in  rcgaixlto  Noali,  was  no  feiiddeti
and  unforeseen  event.  And  it  was  done ;  for  Moses  records
the  aiitedikivian  inventors  of  many  arts  which  hud  been
preserved  to  his  own  time.

The  book  of  Job  dohneates  an  nge  long  prior  to  that  of
Moses.  And  it  must  be  recolleded  that  the  })idure  is  not
taken  at  the  time  of  Job's  death,  but  of  his  afRidion,  an  event
Avhich  appears  to  me  to  have  certainly  happened  many  years
before  the  death  of  Shem,  of  Hebcr,  and  of  many  patriarchs
born  in  the  first  postdiluvian  century.  Upon  the  contra61ed
iicale  of  human  life,  such  as  it  was  become  in  the  days  of  Job,
Xlipliaz  the  Temanite  and  Bildad  the  Shuhite  were  "'  very  old
and  grey-lieaded  men;"  yet  we  find  them  familiarly  and
confidently  appealing  to  the  living  testimony  of  a  former  age
— to  the  words  whicli  would  be  uttered  by  the  men  of  this  age,
by  which  they  could  mean  no  other  than  these  patiiarchs^

The  interlocutors,  in  this  most  ancient  book,  either  expressly
mention  or  clearly  allude  to  every  science  and  every  laudablô
art  which  has  usually  been  placed  to  the  account  of  the
Babylonians,  Egyptians,  Phoenicians  or  Indians.  And  it  is
remarkable  that  Job  and  his  friends  ascribe  their  whole  stock
of  knowledge,  whether  of  religion  and  morality,  of  the  work*
of  nature,  or  of  civil  aits — not  to  the  exertion  of  their  owu
genius,  or  to  the  succesful  inquiry  of  any  particular  society,
which  had  recently  emerged  from  barbarism ;  but  purely  to
the  tradition  of  the  patriarchs  of  the  first  age  aitcr  the  flood.

"  For  enquire,  I  pray  thee,  of  the/òr;?icr  age;  and  prepare
thyself  for  the  sccrrcÄofíÄe/r  fathers  (for  ζϊ/Υ  are  but  of  yesterday,
and  Imozu  nothing,  seeing  our  days  on  earth  are  as  a  shadozc)
[as  nothing  when  compared  to  their  j'cars]  shall  îhey  not  teach
thee  and  tell  thee,  -awa  utter  zvords  out  of  their  heart  r" — —
Chap.  viii.


Ϊ2


'•  I  ΛνΙΙΙ  shew  thec^  hear  me,  and  that  Λvhich  I  have  sceu
will  1  tleclare,  which  uhe  men  have  toidj'rom  t/uii  fathers  (and

Iiavc  not  liid  it)  uiita  zclip/u  alone  the  enrth  zcas  given," •

Chap.  x\'.

Froni  these  and  sinvlar  passages,  wc  must  infer,  that  a
gcueral  stock  of  knowledge  had  hecn  treasured  up  hy  the  great
patriarchs,  for  the  henefit  of  their  posterity;  and  that  good
men  amongst  the  descendants  of  Noah,  for  several  geneiations,
regarded  It  as  their  greatest  wisdom  to  learn  and  attend  to
these  traditions  gf  their  fathers,  who  hvcd  many  days  upoa
ihc  ca^th.

We  also  learn  that  the  rapid  abridgment  of  the  period  of
iiuman  life,  which  was  not  only  recent  but  progressive  in  the
tiuie  of  Job,  had  struck  the  race  of  mortals  with  a  consterna-
tion which,  for  a  while,  checked  the  ardour  of  original  inves-
tigation, and  damped  the  confidence  of  genius.  The  life  of
man  still  compiehended  a  apace  of,  at  least,  two  centuries ;
yet  men'regarded  themselves,  λ\  hen  compared  with  the  foiiner
age,  but  of  yesterday.  They  could  not  extend  the  limits  of
knowledge,  because  their  days  on  earth  were  as  a  shadow. — ■
All  they  could  pretend  to  was,  to  preserve  those  inestimable.
|reasures  which  they  had  derived  from  happier  times.


13


ÍIL


Detail  of  primilive  tradiíìom — Rdlgion  mid  mòraUfy — Ckil

arts,  and  sciences JgriculUire,  architeclure,  mctaUnrgij,

natural  hislori/,  computaüoìi  of  time,  oslronomi/,  geographic.

XT  may  not  be  improper  in  this  place  to  touch  briefly  upon
some  particulars  of  this  valuable  patrimony  of  the  early  ages.

Of  the  state  of  religion  and  moral  philosophy  in  the  primi-
tive \vorlclj  we  have  no  detailed  ini'ormation.  ^  ct  several  vciy
important  circumstances  may  be  collefted  from  the  books
cited  above,  the  latter  of  Avhich  I  particularize  on  this  occasion,
because  the  notices  contained  in  it  are  wholly  independent  of
the  ]\[osaic  legation.  These  circumstances  will,  in  a  great
measure,  elucidate  the  notions  entertained  by  mankind,  as  to
these  points,  before  the  promulgation  of  the  Jewish  law.

It  appears  that  at  a  very  early  j^eriod,  the  Divine  will  and
purposes,  and  some  of  the  essential  truths  of  religion,  \vere
revealed  to  mankind  in  a  more  full  and  complete  manner  tliau
they  are  express'y  recorded  to  have  been.  In  the  old  testament
we  have  allusioi^s  to  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  the  resurreéíion
and  the  future  judgment.  No  direél  revelation  of  these  things
is  given  by  Moses,  or  in  the  writings  of  the  prophets  contained
in  that  volume.  They  are  spoken  of  rather  as  truths  already
known  and  admitted,  upon  the  authority  of  a  prior  revelation.

An  obscure  tradition  of  diem  was  preserved  both  by  tlie
Jews  and  Gentiles,  as  may  stril  be  ascertained  from  the  tiicolo-


14


gîcal  systems  of  many  nations;  but  such  a  clear  manifcstatlou
of  lliem  as  might  fully  ^crve  to  animate  hope,  and  enforce  the
praŴcc  of  virtue,  was  reserved  for  HIM  who  abolished  deatli
and  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  through  the  Gospel,
and  whose  coming  all  the  kindreds  of  the  earth  expeéted.

Some  communications  upon  these  sulýc£ìs  must  have  been
given  to  the  primitive  ages,  together  with  the  promise  of  a
Kedeemcr.  Tiiere  were  prophets  and  holy  men  long  before
the  flood.  God  spake  to  our  first  parents,  Enoch  walked  with
God,  or  conduâed  himself  agreeably  to  some  known.  Divine
law:  And  in  the  time  of  Enos,  men  began  to  invoke  tlie
sacred  name.  Of  the  nature  and  attributes  of  the  Divine  Being,
the  primitive  world  seem  Tiot  to  have  possessed  just  and  fixed
conceptions.  We  are  told  that  our  first  parents  heard  the
voice  of  the  Lord  God  ίνα /king  in  the  garden,  in  the  cool  of
the  day — ^That  it  repented  the  Lord  that  he  had  made  man
upon  the  earth,  and  it  grieved  him  at  his  heart — ^That  God
looked  upon  the  earth,  and  behold  it  was  corrapt — "  And  the
Lord  said.  Because  the  "cry  of  Sodom  and  GomoiTah,  and
because  their  sin  is  very  grievous,  I  will  go  doun  now  and  see
whether  they  have  done  altogether  according  to  the  cry  of  it,
Tvhich  is  come  unto  me,  and  if  not,  /  nill  hiozc."

This  is  speaking  the  language  of  men;  but  it  is  a  language
liighly  illustrative  of  the  opinions  and  concep^^ions  of  the  early
ages:  and  it  aflbrds  a  proof,  that  in  all  ages  the  Almighty
revealed  himself  in  a  manner  which  might  be  level  to  the
capacities  and  comprehensions  of  men.  A  more  spiritual  and
*deci7ale  revelation  of  his  nature  might,  a'  tliis  period,  have
been  totally  unintelligible,  and  consequently  useless.  Men
could  not  conceive  of  the  Ahnighty  as  being  every  where
present,  at  the  same  instant,  but  as  having  the  power  to  remove
himself   whither    he  pleased not  as  knowing  all  things


15


throagîiout  (he  iinmeneity  of  space,  but  as  capaLiC  of  ia-
forming  himself — not  as  executing  his  Divine  will,  by  Üie
Immediate  exertion  of  his  own  po\ver,  but  as  employing  tlic
ministration  of  other  spiiltuul  beings  whom  they  indifferenth
styled  Angels  and  Gods.

Yet  strictly  speaking,  mankind,  in  the  primitive  agC3^
appear  not  to  have  been  polytheists.  They  regai"ded  One
Being  as  supreme  over  all  the  world  of  spirits,  acknowledging
at  the  same  time  that  there  were  other  spirits,  endowed  vviih
many  όϊ  his  attributes,  though  under  his  controul,  and  em-
ployed in  the  execution  of  his  commands.  But  in  theLi-  fornis
of  expression,  at  least,  they  were  seldom  careful  to  disci'imi-
nate  between  tlie  One,  Eternal,  Universal  Spirit  iind  hi*»
created  ministers.

This  vague  manner  of  speaking  gradually  led  to  great  abuser
in  the  Gentile  WOrld;  yet,  occasionally,  we  find  tlie  natione
acknowledging  one  supreme  God,  whose  unity  they  |>er-
ceived,  under  a  great  variety  of  symbols  and  allegorical
characters.

Men  appear  to  have  been  early  informed  as  to  the  difference
of  good  and  evil,  and  all  the  great  points  of  the  moral  law.-—
God  said  to  Cain,  *''  If  thou  doest  well,  shalt  thou  not  be
accepted?"  where  the  form  of  expression  clearly  intimates  that
Cain  was  previously  acquainted  with  the  rule  and  its  sanation.
The  atrociousness  of  murder  Avas  understood  amongst  tlie
descendants  of  Cain  to  the  fifth  generation,  and  the  sentence
pronounced  upon  him  was  not  forgotten,  as  appears  by
Lamech's  apology.  By  the  express  command  of  the  Deity,
murder  was  rendered  a  capital  crime  in  the  time  of  Noah.—
The  patriarchs,  Λνΐιο  were  the  priests  as  v.ell  as  the  supreme
judges  of  their  faiuiliesj  îe^uired  the  blood  of  the  ofienders,  as


16


forfeited  by  a  Divine  law.  Hence,  perhaps,  originated  the
Gentile  custom  of  sacrificing  malefaò^ors,  and  by  a  dreadful
abuse,  the  abomination  of  offering  the  innocent.  Decency  of
deportment,  and  the  respeél  due  to  parents,  were  duties  so
sacred  in  the  family  of  Noah,  that  we  find  the  violation  of  them
punished  by  the  most  solemn  malediction.

The  general  invcóiivcs  pronounced  against  the  zcickcdncss
and  violence  of  the  old  world,  sufliciently  declare,  that  their
praulices  were  transgressions  of  some  known  law,  and  the
nature  of  the  charges  alledged  against  them  clearly  intimates
that  this  must  have  been  the  eternal  and  moral  law.

The  primitive  world  had  also  several  positive  institutions,
connected  with  religion  and  morality,  which  were  afterwards
revived  and  enforced  by  the  law  of  INloscs.  The  Sabbath,  as
appears  from  the  history  of  the  creation,  was  sanétitied  from
the  beginning.  And  though  we  discover  no  plain  traces  of  its
strict  observance,  before  the  reinforcement  of  the  precept  in
the  wilderness,  yet  we  may  colle6l  from  Noah's  dividing  of
time  into  portions  of  seven  days  (Gen.  viii.  10,  12)  from  the
pre\-alence  of  the  same  custom  amongst  all  nations,  and  from
Laban's  request  (Gen.  xxix.  27)  "  Fulfil  her  weeiv",  that  the
primitive  world  were  acquainted  with  the  reason  of  such  a
division.

Marriage  was  instituted  between  our  first  parents :  from
that  time  it  \vas  esteemed  sacred,  and  the  abuse  of  it  is  re-
yCorded  with  censure.     Gen.  vi,  2,  3.

Sacrifices  were  appointed  under  somt;  of  the  same  form:i
which  were  prescribed  by  the  Levitical  law;  and  animals
were  discriminated  into  clean  and  unclean.  Abel  offered  the
Jirstli?igs  of  his  flock  and  the^hí  thereof:  Noali  builded  an


17

íiìtar  nnto  the  Loid^  and  took  of  every  clean  beast,  and  of
ixcry  cLanfoiil  and  olVered  burni  ofj^erings  upon  the  altar.

Even  the  consecration  of  tithes  did  not  originate  in  the
Levitical  law.  Melchisedec,  as  priest  of  the  most  high  God,
received  fiom  Abraham  tithes  of  all.  Jacob  vows  unto  tlie
Lord  "  Of  all  that  thou  shalt  give  me,  I  will  surely  give  the
tenth  unto  thee."  Not  that  the  tenth  had  not  been  previously
devoted  to  the  God  whom  men  Avorshipped ;  but  because  he
now  resolved  that  the  Lord  should  be  his  God.  Gen.  xiv.  20.
xxviii.  21,  22.

This  appears  then,  to  have  been  a  primitive  and  universal
institution,  and  as  such,  it  will  best  explain  the  charge  al-
ledged  against  Cain  of  not  rightly  dividing,  as  it  is  rendered
by  the  Seventy.

Thus  vrc  find  many  of  the  moral  and  ritual  precepts  of  the
law  of  Moses  are  onh'  renewals  of  a  primitive  and  universal
law,  w^iich  had  been  in  force,  amongst  the  descendants  of
Koah,  at  the  time  of  the  general  allotment.

Traces  of  such  a  law,  and  of  such  institutions  have  been
remarked  amongst  several  nations,  long  secluded  from  each
other,  and  widely  dispersed  over  the  face  of  the  earth^on
the  borders  of  Siberia,  in  China,  Japan,  Africa,  IMexico,  and
the  Islands  of  the  Pacific  ocean.

Such  vestiges  have  led  pious  travellers  to  a  conclusion,  that
these  several  people  must  have  had  some  unknown  connexion
with  the  Jewish  nation  ;  and  unbelieving  philosophers  deduce
from  them  a  notion  still  more  improbable — that  similar  follies
have  been  the  spontaneous  grozith  of  various  soils.  Whereas
in  faél,  such  resemblances  are,  for  the  most  part,  only  the


18


remains  of  what  was  once  common  to  the  wliole  human  race.
They  arc  part  of  the  stores  of  the  antediluvian  world  trans-
mitted by  the  patriarchs  to  their  posterity.

Of  the  civil  arts,  and  the  sciences  of  the  primitive  world
which  Averc  thus  preserved  and  transmitted,  1  shall  offer
some  slight  extraéts— the  list  may  be  abundantly  enlarged
by  diligent  research.

1 .  Agriculture  and  pasturage  are  recorded  as  occupations  of
the  very  first  age :  and  these  were,  in  a  remarkable  degree,
the  employments  of  Noah,  Abraham,  Job,  and  the  other
patriarchs  in  the  ages  which  succeeded  the  flood.  The  im-
mediate descendants  of  Noah,  as  well  as  of  Cain,  dwelt  in
tents  and  possessed  cattle.

2.  The  firstborn  of  human  parents  was  also  the  first  builder
of  a  city ;  and  the  history  of  Babel  affords  a  proof  that  the
art  of  building  Avas  not  forgotten.  Noah  must  have  been
eminently  skilled  in  this  art,  as  well  as  in  a  multitude  of
others,  which  are  necessarily  subservient  to  it.  The  great
patriarch  received  only  a  few  genera^  instrudions  as  to  the
form  and  dimensions  of  the  ark.  From  these  he  was  enabled
to  construél  that  enormous  fabric,  with  such  firmness  and
compaciness  as  to  resist  the  waters  of  a  deluge  which  over-
whelmed the  Λvorld.  We  have  no  authority  to  assert  that
the  art  of  naval  architetìure  was  new,  but  whatever  progress
may  have  been  made  in  it,  this  design  was  vast :  it  far  ex-
ceeded any  thing  that  has  been  undertaken  in  the  docks
of  modern  Europe.  It  must  therefore  have  called  in  a  num-
ber of  useful  arts  which  are  not  expressly  recorded,  but  which
were  undoubtedly  handed  down  to  the  next  generation.

55.    Some  of  the  descendants  of  Cain,  as  I  have  already


19

remarked,  invented  metallurgy,  and  instnitTted  artificers  in
Brass  and  Iron ;  whilst  others  were  cultivating  the  fine  arts,
and  teaching  men  to  handle  the  harp  and  the  organ,  both
string  and  wind  instruments.  These  arts  were  so  far  from
being  lost,  that  in  the  oldest  piAure  of  society  after  the
deluge,  we  meet  with  "  Bows  of  steel,  and  molten  Mirrors,"
things  which  could  never  Iiave  existed,  or  have  been  renderea
fit  for  use,  without  considerable  skill  in  the  tempering,  com-
pounding and  polishing  of  metals.  In  the  same  book  also,
the  harp  and  the  organ,  the  identical  kinds  of  instruments
taughtby  Jubal,  are  repeatedly  mentioned.  Hence  it  appears
tîiat  not  only  such  arts  as  were  indispensably  necessary,  but
even  the  ornamental  ai-ts  of  the  antediluvians,  were  carefully
preserved.

4.  It  has  been  noted  that  Noah  was  acquainted  with  the
distinóìion  of  animals  into  clean  and  unclean.  And  this
distintìion  was  known  before  the  flood ;  for  it  was  the  general
rule  by  which  he  was  to  determine  the  number  of  each  species
to  be  admitted  into  the  ark.  Of  every  clean  beast,  and  of
every  clean  fowl,  he  took  unto  him  by  sevens,  or  seven  pairs
of  each  sort ;  and  of  the  unclean,  by  single  pairs.  It  is  clear
then  that  the  primitive  ages  had  made  some  progress  in  the
study  of  natural  history :  they  had  had  their  Linnei  and  their
Buifons ;  for  when  an  observance  of  the  same  distinélion  of
clean  and  unclean  animals  is  enjoined  to  the  Israelites
(Lev.  xi)  we  find  that  it  required  and  depended  upon  an  ac-
curate classification  of  the  genera,  agreeably  to  dieir  several
natural  marks  or  charaéters.  Thus  quadrupeds  were  classed
into  1.  Those  which  were  clovenfooted  and  chewed  the  cud.

2.  Those  which  were  clovenfooted  and  chewed  not  the  cud.

3.  Those  which  chewed  the  cud  and  were  not  clovenfooted.

4.  Those  which  neither  chewed  the  cud  nor  were  cloven-
footed.    In  like  manner  aquatic  animals  were  distinguishi-J.

9  2


20


into  1.  Such  as  liad  Hns  and  scales.  Q.  Such  as  iiad  iins
and  no  scales.  3.  Such  as  had  scales  and  no  fins.  4.  Such
as  had  neither  fins  nor  scales.

This  classification  may  indeed  appear  rade  and  simple^
vhen  compared  with  the  present  systems ;  but  all  I  contend
for  is,  that  the  primitive  world  had  discovered  the  rudiments  or
first  principles  of  the  sciences,  so  far  as  to  open  the  way  for
gradual  improvement  and  more  minute  investigation,  and  that
these  rudiments  were  presened  by  the  family  of  Noah.  Be-
sides, as  the  preceding  characleristics  regarded  only  the  ritual
distinction  of  animals  into  clean  and  unclean,  we  are  not,
from  hence,  warranted  to  conclude,  that  a  more  elaborate
discrimination  of  the  genera  and  classes  was  unknown  to  the
early  ages.  In  the  book  of  Job,  we  have  observations  upon
the  characters,  dispositions  and  habits  of  several  animals,
such  as  the  wild  goat,  the  hind,  the  wild  ass,  the  unicorn,
the  peacock,  the  stork,  the  ostrich,  the  horse,  the  hawk,  the
eagle,  &c.  and  these  observations  are  closely  connected  and
intimately  blended  with  those  religious  and  moral  sentiments
vvliich  had  constituted  the  wisdom  of  the  former  age.  They
must  have  descended  together.  And  this  may  induce  a  belief
üiat  the  study  of  nature  had,  in  a  peculiar  degiee,  attracted
the  attention  of  the  early  generations.  These  studies  must
have  embraced  the  vegetable  as  well  as  the  animal  kingdom.
Our  first  parents  remarked  those  trees  which  were  pleasant  to
i/ie  sight,  and  those  which  were  good  for  food.  The  first
husbamlmen  must  have  regarded  the  difference  between  the
useful  plants  upon  which  they  bestowed  their  labour,  and  the
noxious  ones  Λvhich  required  to  be  eradicated.  Their  whole
ikill  ill  thfse  matters  must  have  aiisen  from  aélual  obser-
vation :  there  was  no  established  praWice  to  which  they  could
Tiifer.  As  Adam  eat  bread  in  the  sweat  of  liis  brow,  he  must
have  studied  the  nuturc  and  proper  culture  of  grain,     And  h


21


h  probable  that,  not  only  the  procuring  of  bread,  but  tlic
planting  of  vineyards,  and  the  preparation  of  {"erinentcd  liquor
were  known  long  before  the  flood.  At  least,  we  hnd  them
praéliscd  soon  afterwards,  while  Noah  and  his  three  sons  as  yet
constituted  but  one  family  and  dwelt  in  the  same  tent :  and
the  planting  of  a  vineyard  by  the  great  patriarch  is  simply
recorded,  as  a  thing  which  belonged  of  course  to  the  occu-
pation of  a  hutibandman.

5.  The  astronomical  knowledge  of  the  primitive  ageá  and
rheir  computation  of  time  have  aiforded  matter  for  much
debate.  Some  learned  men  are  of  opinion,  that  the  annual
period  of  the  earth's  revolution  and  the  succession  of  the
seasons  experienced  a  great  change  at  the  time  of  the  deluge.
There  are  those  who  produce  authorities  to  prove  that  the
ancients  calculated  only  by  lunar  months,  while  others  con-
tend that  their  years  consisted  of  360  days  and  no  more.

May  Γ  offer  a  few  slight  and  general  hints  upon  these  sub-
jecls  ?  They  are  not  the  striclures  of  a  man  of  science ;  but
such  as  they  are,  with  undissenibled  diffidence  they  are
addressed  to  the  candid  critic.

The  occupations  of  the  antediluvians,  their  diligence  ia
the  parsuit  of  knowledge  and  their  peculiar  opportunities  for
repeated  observation,  forbid  me  to  suppose  that  they  could
have  been  ignorant  of  the  stated  return  of  the  seasons,  and
of  the  true  annual  pei'iod,  whatever  it  was  in  their  time.

It  seems  to  me  that  an  addition  of  5  day»  and  (3  hours,  to
the  former  period  of  the  earth's  annual  revolution,  would  have
introduced  great  confusion  into  the  whole  solar  svstem ;  I
therefore  conclude  that  this  period  has  remained  the  same
from  the  creation.  The  promise  made  to  Noah  ^'  Í  wiU  not
Β  3


22


again  cuYSc  the  ground  any  more  for  man's  sake ^While

the  earth  reraaineth,  seedtime  and  harvest,  and  cold  and
heat,  and  summer  and  winter,  and  day  and  night  shall  not
cease"  seems  rather  to  imply  the  unintemipted  continuance
of  an  order  of  things  already  known,  than  the  commence-
ment of  a  new  and  difl'erent  order.

Supposing  that  the  course  of  nature  was  changed  at  the
deluge,  it  must  be  obvious  that  neither  lunar  months  nor  the
year  of  360  days  could  have  been  adequate  to  the  purposes
of  agriculture  or  of  pasturage.  They  would  by  no  means  cor-
respond with  the  stated  returns  of  the  seasons.  They  could
not  have  been  retained  for  half  a  century,  without  producing
the  greatest  inconvenience,  changing  summer  into  Λvintcr,
and  suggesting  the  necessity  of  reformation,  to  a  society  in-
finitely more  rude  than  the  family  of  Noah.  How  are  we  then
to  account  for  the  lunar  months  and  the  year  of  360  days  which
occur  in  ancient  authors  ?

Some  societies  may  have  gradually  sunk  into  such  a  state
of  rudeness,  as  to  have  little  occasion  for  marking  with  pre-
cision the  length  of  the  year,  they  may  tlierefore  have
ricgleéled  and  forgotten  the  science  of  their  ancestors.  But
in  many  cases,  it  is  probable  that  the  scantiness  or  imper-
fedion  of  ancient  documents  may  liave  betrayed  us  into
some  error  upon  this  subjetì:.  A  vague  and  familiar  mode  of
expression;,  hi  which  many  people  indulged  themselves,  may
liave  occasioned  a  similar  defect  in  those  early  authors  we
consult.

Thus,  for  instance,  we  call  four  weeks  a  month  and  a  year
a  twelvemonth.  A  month  with  us  is  a  very  vague  term.  It
implies  4  weeks,  a  lunation,  the  ninth  part  of  the  time  of
gestation,  a  calendar  month  of  various  lengdis,,  &.c.  &c.    W'  e


23


also  compute  the  annual  return  of  certain  festivals,  by  tlie
ai;e  of  a  certain  moon.  All  this  produces  no  error  nor  con-
fusion. But  had  such  a  seeming  confusion,  amongst  any
ancient  people,  fallen  in  the  way  of  the  Greek  writers,  what
embarrassment  would  their  slight  and  superficial  accounts
have  occasioned  to  modern  chronologers  ?

The  vanity  of  several  nations  led  them  to  ascribe  to  their
own  ancestors  many  of  those  inventions,  and  improvements
in  science,  which  were  due  to  the  primitive  ages,  and  there-
fore, to  speak  of  a  fúrmer  state  of  rudeness,  which  in  faóì,
had  never  existed  amongst  them  as  distinct  people.

The  early  ages  in  general  must  have  been  acquainted  Avith
the  solar  period,  which  alone  could  be  of  use  in  the  compu-
tation of  years.  For  while  we  deny  them  this  knowledge,  it
is  yet  granted  diat  diey  had  the  use  of  cycles,  by  which  their
defedive  years  were  adjusted  to  the  course  of  nature.  If
they  knew  the  sum  of  19,  30  or  60  years,  could  they  have
been  ignorant  of  the  extent  of  one  ?  That  their  years  were
so  adjusted  is  evident;  for  we  find  the  same  months  con-
gtautly  fall  about  the  same  season.  Hesiod's  description
Mr.vx  Se  ?.r,yaiu),»,  &c.  Efy.  β.  322,  cau  be  applied  only  to  the
depth  of  winter,  and  therefore  can  have  belonged  only  to
years  which,  taken  together,  amounted  to  solar  years.  The
Abib  of  Moses,  or  Month  of  Greai  Corn,  as  the  name  im-
plies, must  have  constantly  returned  after  the  vernal  equinox,
from  the  first  time  it  received  the  name.  And  diis  name
could  not  have  been  new.  It  was  not  Egyptian,  but  either
Hebrew  or  Chaldaic ;  the  Israelites  had  therefore  brought  it
with  them  into  Egypt.  It  had  been  known  in  the  time  of
Abraham.  For  on  the  14th  of  this  month  the  children  of
Israel  came  out  of  Egypt,  and,  on  the  self  same  day,  430  years
"before,  their  great  aucestor,  Abraham  had  begun  his  pcre-•


24


grination.  The  length  oV  the  solar  year  had  then  been
kiiowii  iiom  the  days  oi'  Shem,  who  survived  the  eotnmencc-
ment  oi'Abraluun  s  sojourning  about  73  years.  Had  this  year
been  unknown ;  had  the  Epagones,  or  even  the  Bissextile
been  omitted,  the  month  of"  Green  Corn  must,  during  that
pqriod  of  430  years,  have  sometimes  fallen  in  the  beginning,
anil  sometimes  in  the  depth  of  whiter.

The  Egyptians  claim  the  Epagones,  and  the  aecurate  eom-
putation  of  time,  as  inventions  of  their  own  ancestors.  This
claim  may  be  granted,  if  we  take  their  own  account  of  the
inventor.  The  first  Thoth,  amongst  other  things,  calculated
the  annual  peiiod.  We  leain  from  ^Manetho,  the  celebrated
Egyptian  historian,  who  relates  die  genuine  traditions  of  liis
nation,  that  this  Thoth  lived  hcfoix  the  flood.  For  he  left
his  discoveries  engraved  upon  certain  columns,  in  the  sacred
Dialed,  and  in  Hieroglifphk  Letters  (where  Ave  may  observe
by  the  way  tliat  hierogh^hics,  in  any  particular  dialed,
wtiere'  Hieroglyphics  representing  elementary  sounds)  and,
after  the  deluge  (another)  Thoth  (or  philosopher)  the  son  of
Agathodemon  (Osiris  or  jMizraim)  transcribed  these  inscrip-
tions into  books,  and  placed  them  in  the  sanéhiaries  of  the
Egyptian  temples.  Apad  En^eh.  j-rap.  Ev.  L.  1.  C.  9.  What
discoveries  do  the  Egyptians  boast  of,  which  were  not  origi-
nally derived  from  the  Great  Thoth  ?  Those  ancestors  of  the
Egyptians,  who  so  eminently  distinguished  themselves,  were
then  antediluvians,  and  consequently  the  common  parents  of
all  other  nations.

When  strangers  sjioke  of  the  deluge,  the  Greeks  imme-
diately thought  of  .Deucalion's  flood,  which  they  date  in  the
I  Gth  Century  before  Christ,  but  which,  in  faCt,  could  have
been  no  other  than  die  flood  of  Noah.

'i'hoth  is  said  to  have  left  .'-.ri.v:,:)  Rolls  of  hi>  discoveries,


t»y  which  the  learned  understand,  periods  of  time  whieli  he
had  culcuUited.  I  find,  hy  Philo  Jadoeus,  that  the  ancient
Mystagogues  regarded  100  as  a  perleét  numher.  As  the  parts
which  composed  a  perfect  whole :  or  as  the  number  ot"  units
which  constituted  a  complete  series.  If  we  regard  100  parts
as  equal  to  a  complete  diurnal  revolution,  then  36525  parts
Vtill  amount  to  oQo  days  and  6  hours:  or  if  100  years  con-
stitute a  perfecl  age,  agreeably  to  Philo's  application  of  the
number  in  the  case  of  Abraham,  then  o(^òQ.5  λνϋΐ  be  the
diurnal  revolutions  comprehended  in  that  age.  This  I  con-
sider as  a  more  simple  method  of  accounting  for  the  number
of  the  Hennetic  volumes,  than  by  supposing  a  multiplication
of  cycles,  which  must  imply  mack  more  than  a  true  calcu-
lation of  the  solar  period.

The  Egyptians  had  yearn,  as  they  are  styled  by  the  Greeks,
of  6,  4,  or  3  Months.  They  may  have  divided  the  annual
Circle  into  seasons,  by  inscribing  some  of  their  geometiucal
figures,  as  the  line  or  the  triangle,  or  else  the  square,
touching  at  the  4  cardinal  points.  Still  the  complete  circle
remained  the  same.  Is  there  nothing  in  the  old  testament  to
confirm  tlie  antiquity  of  this  computation  and  the  use  of  tlie
Epagones  ì  Job  speaks  (Chap.  iii.  6.)  of  days  joined  to  tlie
year,  exclusive  of  the  number  of  the  months.  The  Epa-
gones appear  then  to  have  been  known,  out  of  Egypt,  about
the  time  when  Abraham  settled  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  and
during  the  life  of  the  great  patriarchs.  Let  us  consider  Noali'.s
year.  In  the  history  of  the  deluge  we  have  5  successive
months  consisting  altogether  of  150  days,  or  30  days  each.
I  cannot  conceive  how^  such  months  could  have  been  formed
upon  any  lunar  observation.  From  the  first  day  of  the  tenth
month,  we  have  an  enumeration  of  6l  days,  together  wiili
an  unspecified  period  oftime»,  before  the  commencement  of
the  succeedhig  year.     A  complete  year  in  Noah's  days  could


2S


Dot  then  have  consisted  of  fewer  than  12  such  months  or
S60  days.  But  if  with  the  hest  copies  of  the  70,  and  with
some  other  versions  of  credit,  we  date  the  6l  days  from  the
Itrst  of  the  Elevejith  month,  this  point  must  be  regarded  as
fully  determined.  Tiiere  will  he  12  months  and  a  few  days
over,  during  which  Noah  waited  for  the  return  of  the  third
dove,  and  before  he  removed  the  covering  of  the  ark,  on  the
Jirst  day  of  thej^Vsi  month  of  the  new  year.  And  there  is
the  greatest  probability  in  favour  of  this  reading.  Noah
already  knew  that  the  waters  were  abated  from  οβ"  the  earth.
The  question  was  now,  \vhether  the  Earth  produced  any
thing,  or  whether  the  dove  would  be  compelled  by  hunger
to  return  to  the  ark.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  after
having,  for  some  time,  dispatched  liis  weekly  messengers,
the  patriarch  should  now  wait  29  days  to  make  this  experi-
ment; 3  or  4  days  must  have  been  fully  sufficient  for  the
purpose.  Would  not  these  circumstances  have  pointed  out
some  error  in  the  text,  had  no  ancient  version  suggested  and
authoa-ized  its  correélion  ì  Upon  this  authority  we  have
12  months  of  30  days  days  each,  and  the  Epagones,  or  in  all
300  daj's.  But  how  are  we*  to  account  for  the  number  and
the  precise  length  of  the  months  ì  Perhaps  something  in  the
fuUowing  manner.  The  hrst  periodical  phoenomenon  which
attraded  the  notice  of  our  iìiát  parents  Λvas  probably  the  re-
appearance of  the  moon,  after  the  change.  The  iteration  of
the  seasons,  and  the  periodical  approach  and  retreat  of  the
sun,  with  which  the  seasons  were  obviously  conneekd,  must
have  also  presented  themselvc^i  to  observation.  it  could  not
but  be  desirable  and  useful  to  ascertain  the  period  of  these
changes.  The  moon  was  resorted  to,  as  the  tìrst  means  of
computation,  and  12  lunations  were  found  to  come  round
nearer  to  thi;  same  point,  than  any  other  number:  Hence  the
iu,-tlvc  months.  But  these  were  very  soon  discovered  to  be  too
short.    The  objcòt  in  view  was  to  obtain  a  knowledge  of  the


27

return  of  the  sun  and  the  seasons.  His  course  was  then  divided
into  12  portions  or  signs,  corresponding  with  the  number  of
moons  in  the  first  computation.  Each  of  these  portions  was
found  to  consist  of  30  days  and  a  fraélion ;  but  as  it  would  be
inconvenient  to  divide  a  da}^  the  whole  number  was  retained,
and  the  surplus  added  to  complete  the  year.

The  first  idea  of  a  year  must  have  been  that  of  the  return  of
the  sun  and  the  seasons  to  the  same  point.  And  ftom  the
visible  revolution  of  die  sun,  men  must  have  first  obtained
months  and  years  thus  construéted.  Hence  the  Hebrew  terra,
for  a  year  nw  implies  an  Iteration,  Repetition,  a  Return  to
the  same  point.  This  could  have  been  no  other  than  the
return  of  the  sun  and  the  seasons.  The  sun  was  the  great
luminary  which,  by  his  regular  course  amongst  the  other  lights
or  stars,  was  appointed  to  measure  years.     Gen.  i.  14,  16.

If  the  moon  was  first  resorted  to  for  the  purpose  of  measuring
the  sun's  course,  it  was  soon  found  inadequate  Lo  the  purpose.
Its  revolution  had  no  connection  with  the  return  of  the  seasons^
It  only  served  to  suggest  a  division  ol"  the  sun's  course  into  1 2
portions.  In  most  nations,  of  which  any  ancient  records  and
traditions  are  preserved,  we  find  that  tiiis  division  of  the  year,
and  the  signs  of  the  zodiac,  by  which  it  was  marked,  were
known  from  remote  ages.  The  discovery  is  claimed  by  several
difterent  nations,  a  circumstance  Avhich  generally  attends  those
inventions  which  were  derived  from  the  common  parents  of  the
nations.  The  history  of  the  deluge  is  understood  to  be  recorded
in  the  names  and  delineations  of  some  of  the  constellations.
It  is  not  improbable  that  the  Noachidai,  assigned  to  them  new
names  and  representations,  in  order  to  commemorate  this
awful  event,  in  the  volume  of  the  heavens,  Avliich  would  be
open  to  their  posterity,  in  every  region  of  the  earth.  But  with
no  postdeiuvian  nation  can  astronomical  studies  have  origi-


28


r.atcd.  Astronomical  observations  had  been  preserved  it
Babylon,  for  somewliat  moie  tlian  IQ  centuries^  before  the
conquest  of  that  city  by  Alexander.  Tliey  had  therefore
cotamenced  from  the  very  time  when,  agreeably  to  our  chro-
itologv,  the  sons  of  men  first  began  to  dwell  ia  the  land  of
Shinar.

Before  their  removal  into  that  country,  they  could  have  haci
no  observations  calculated  for  the  latitude  of  Babylon,  and
their  date,  from  this  very  sera,  absolutely  proves  that  the
science  \vas  not  the  discovery  of  the  inhabitants,  but  that  they
brought  it  wdth  them,  from  their  former  residence  amongst  tlie
mountains  of  Aramt,  where  the  antediluvian  astronomy  had
already  been  adjusted  to  the  circumstances  of  time  and  place.
An  investigation  and  discovery  of  the  principles  of  the  science
must  necessarily  have  preceded  a  series  of  just  observations.

The  antiqu'^y  of  this  study  may  be  inferred  from  the  book
of  Job,  vi^here  several  stars  and  constellations  are  mentioned,
in  conneéhon  -with  observations  upon  the  seasons,  and  as  parts
of  the  works  of  God,  which  had  been  pointed  out  by  the  searcli
of  the  great  fathers  of  the  human  race.

The  Mosaicai  years  from  the  Creaiion  cannot,  one  with.
Another,  have  fallen  much  short  of  solar  r^'volutions,  Avhich
\ve  re  evidently  the  measure  of  calculation  in  thf  time  of  Noah:
for  the  age  of  this  patriarch  rather  exceeds  an  avaragc  of  the
ages  of  his  progenitors.

From  their  common  ancestors  then,  the  several  nations  may
have  derived  the  rudiments  of  astronomy,  and  a  pretty  ex  a  A
knowledge  of  the  annual  period.  Difl'erent  Societies  may,  for
the  regulations  of  festivals  and  for  various  purposes,  have
i'mploved  lunar  cÍ>,lculations,  and  reckoned  from  tlie  age  oi"  a-


29

ΓΑΟοη  \vhich  appeared  after  a  certain  eqiunox  or  solstice,  or
îií'ter  tlie  rising  of"  a  certain  star;  but  such  calculations  wei^e
adjusted  by  cycles  so  as  not  mateiially  to  afícŵ  the  truth  of
chronology.  It"  we  find  a  people  acquainted  only  w  ith  lunar
months,  or  only  with  years  of  360  days,  that  people  must
have  fallen,  at  some  period,  into  a  state  of  rudeness  far  beluw
the  standard  of  the  primitive  ages.

6.  A  great  philosopher  of  our  own  days  accounts  for  tire
marine  substances  found  in  various  parts  of  the  earth,  by-
supposing  that,  at  the  deluge,  the  primae\^l  continent  sub-
bided,  and  the  bed  of  the  old  ocean  heaved  itself  above  the
waters  so  as  to  constitute  the  present  habitable  world.  Tliis
hvpothesis  may  not  be  devoid  of  truth,  yet  1  think  it  ought  to
be  received  with  caution  and  great  limitation.  There  can  be
no  doubt  that  great  local  alterations  took  place  when  the  foun-
tains of  the  great  deep  were  broken  up.  Yet  it  appears  to  me
that  the  imiversal  deluge,  was  not  so  much  direóted  against  the
earth  itself,  as  against  tlie  lives  of  its  inhabitants,  and  that  the
general  face  of  the  globe,  as  to  its  grand  features,  was  not
materially  changed.  As  to  the  marine  substances,  which  are
seldom  entire,  we  must  recolleel;  that  the  great  deep  covered
the  earth  at  the  time  of  the  creation,  and  the  waters  may  have
begun  to  form  the  embryo  of  their  productions,  before  they
were  Avholly  gathered  together  into  one  place.  The  impe-
tuous currents  of  the  deluge  may  have  forced  upward  some  of
the  younger  fry,  which  partly  ciune  to  maturity,  in  the  shoal-
waters  upon  the  sides  of  the  mountains,  during  the  continuance
and  gradual  subsiding  of  the  ilood.  And  in  other  instances,
the  bursting  ot"  the  internal  abyss  may  have  forced  up  moun-
tains and  large  islande,  from  the  bottom  of  the  ocean^
crowned  with  their  unknown  inhabitants.

That  the  sreneral  face  of  the  earth  was  not  transformed,  we


30


have  several  reasons  to  believe.  We  find  traditions  in  many
coimlrics,  that  certain  mountains,  rivers,  and  even  cities  had
survived  the  deluge,  oi•,  at  least,  that  new  cities  were  built
upon  the  site  of  the  old  ones^  and  retained  their  names,  WMiat-
ever  credit  may  be  given  to  the  particulars  of  such  traditions,
their  whole  sum,  and  their  great  geographical  extent,  suffi-
ciently declare  the  general  opinion  of  antiquity  upon  this
subjetì:;  and  it  is  a  subjeéf,  upon  which  it  may  be  supposed,
that  some  historical  trudi  survived.

Moses  describes  the  branches  of  the  river  of  Eden,  which
had  existed  from  the  Creation,  by  their  names  and  courses,
as  known  in  his  own  time.  No  circumstance  could  possibly
have  constituted  the  identity  of  these  rivers,  but  the  identity
of  the  country  through  which  they  flowed.  It  is  evident  then
that  the  part  of  the  old  continent  which  formed  the  cradle  of
the  human  race,  and  the  centre  of  antediluvian  population,
survived  the  deluge.  Why  should  we  think  otherwise  of  those
remote  regions,  which  must  have  been  less  obnoxious  to  the
Divine  displeasure  ?

It  appears  that  even  the  trees  were  not  wholly  eradicated,
that  their  vegetative  power  was  not  destroyed,  and  that  the
produAions  of  the  earth  were  not  re-created,  but  gradually
recovered.  For  no  sooner  had  the  waters  left  the  surface  of
the  ground  than  the  olive-trees  began  to  put  forth  leaves,
"  And  the  dove  came  to  Noah  in  the  Evening,  and  lo!  in  her
mouth  was  an  olive  leaf  plucked  off"."  It  must  have  been  a
loaf  in  full  vegetation,  othei-MÌse  it  could  not  have  been  dis-
tinguished from  the  leaf  of  a  branch  wlii(  h  had  floated  upon
the  waters.  But  though  the  dove  found  dry  land,  and  trees
producing  leaves,  she  found  as  yet  no  proper  sustenance,  and
therefore  was  compelled  to  return — a  necessity  to  which  she
was  not  reduced  at  her  next  visit,  when  vegetation  was  further
advanced.


31


It  is  not  then  improbable  that  many  ruins  of  the  works  of
men — such  works  as  had  been  designed  to  oudive  their
antediluvian  constructors,,  may  have  survived  the  deluge. —
Such  remains  may  have  suggested  to  >simro<l  and  his  associate^
the  idea  of  making  brick,  and  erecting  the  Lower  of  Babel.
Without  some  leading  hint,  we  can  hardly  conceive  dial
mankind  were  then  in  an  apt  situation  to  embrace  so  vast  a
design.  The  mutual  cohoriations  of  the  children  of  men — •
^'  Go  to,  let  us  make  brick  and  burn  them  thoroughly,"  cleaily
imply  that  they  were  previously  acquainted  with  the  durabk:
nature  of  brick,  and  with  the  method  of  preparing  it.

At  any  rate,  large  countries  retained  after  the  deluge  tixr,
situation  they  had  occupied  before.  They  must  have  been
recognized  by  Noah.  And  it  appears  in  faŵ  tliat,  in  after
ages,  the  geography  of  the  old  world  was  not  wholly  forgotten.
The  site  of  Paradise  is  minutely  described,  by  its  relative
position  to  certain  streams  that  traversed  weU-kno\vn  region?.
The  residence  of  Cain,  in  the  land  of  Nod,  on  tlie  East  of
Eden,  a  land  known  in  the  time  of  Moses,  is  pointed  out;  and
the  name  and  situation  of  his  city,  the  oldest  city  in  the  world,
are  still  upon  record.  Noah  could  not  then  have  been  igno-
rant of  the  general  extent  and  nature  of  the  patrimony  he  left
to  liis  offspring.  He  must  have  had  some  knowledge  of  the
face  of  the  eaiẃ,  as  far  as  it  had  been  known  and  inhabited
before  the  flood.  He  had  dwelt  upon  it  for  a  space  of  six
hundred  years.  He  umst  have  known  how  its  various  regions
were  divided  by  seas,  rivers  and  mountains.  He  must  have
heard  something  of  the  nature,  temperatme  and  extent  of
these  regions.  Accordingly  he  appears  to  have  been  awar-e  of
tlie  disproportion  of  the  lot  assigned  to  Japheth,  when  he  pro-
phetically promises  that  "  God  shall  enlarge  him."

In  the  days  of  Peleg,  who  was  born  about  a  century  after


32


the  deluge  and  died  ten  years  before  Noah,  we  are  told
obliquely  that  the  earth  uas  dwideä.  The  manner  in  whieh
this  event  is  touched  upon  by  Moses  shews  that  the  circum-
stances ol'  it  were  familiarly  known  in  his  time.  But  our
accounts  of  it  are  rather  scanty.  In  one  other  passage,  the
sacred  historian  alludes  to  the  time,  "  AVhen  the  Most  High
divided  to  the  nations  their  inheritance."  From  these  passages
we  may  coHetì;  that,  by  a  Divine  decree,  there  was  a  solemn
division  of  the  countries  amongst  the  descendants  of  iSoah.
This  division  took  place  in  the  time  of  the  great  patriarch,
and  there  can  be  no  doubt  but  it  was  conducted  under  his
inspection,  and  ascertained  by  lot,  as  we  find  a  similar
tUvision  of  the  land  of  Canaan  amongst  the  Israelites.

Tliroughout  Gen.  c.  x.  Moses  is  nut  speaking  of  a  com-
pulsory separation  of  families ;  but  of  a  regular  division  of  the
earth  amongst  the  Noachidas.  "  The  sons  of  Japheth — By
these  were  the  isles  of  the  gentiles  divided,  in  their  Lands. —
The  sons  of  Ham — in  their  countries  and  in  their  nations. —
The  sons  of  Shem — in  their  lands,  after  their  nations.  These
are  the  families  of  the  sons  of  Noah,  after  their  generations,
in  their  nations:  and  by  these  \vere  the  nations  divided  in  the
earth  after  the  flood."     v.  G,  5,  CO,  31,  32.

The  name  of  Pelcg  gives  occasion  to  spiecily  the  time,
rchcn  the  land  zoas  divided,  not  uhen  the  people  were  scattered
abroad.  The  narrative  of  this  division  is  interrupted  only  by
the  incidental  account  of  the  rebellion  and  ambition  of
Nimrod,  the  subject  of  which  is  resumed  and  its  consequences
described  chap.  xi.  If  Nimrod's  kingdom  comprized  the
"wiiole  of  mankind,  their  scattering  abroad  must  have  been,
each  into  his  land,  agreeably  to  the  previous  division;  but  it  is
sufficiently  evident  that  Nimrod's  empire  was  not  universal. —
Ashur,  lilam,  Mizraim,  Canaan,   Corner,  Javan  and  many


oo


others,  certainly  retired  \vith,  at  least,  part  of  their  familits.
In  a  subsequent  age  we  find  amongst  the  children  ol"  Canaan
many  little  settlements  of  xVmakins  or  Giants.  But  that  was
not  the  general  description  of  the  Canaanites.  They  were  uol
all  Anakims.

The  language  of  the  riÄo/e  eff;?/<  was  confounded.  Indivi-
duals, perhaps  of  each  family,  experienced  this  confusion  and
oftenvards  carried  it  with  them  into  all  lands,  Avhither  they  were
dispersed.  We  say,  the  peace  qf  all  Europe  is  distiirUed,  when
only  the  minds  and  actions  of  certain  descriptions  of  men  aro
irregularly  aífeéled.

The  Heathens  retained  some  traditions  of  such  a  distribu-
tion. The  Phoenician  Historian  says  that  Cronus  (the  Hus-
bandman) bestowed  upon  Thoth  the  Kingdom  of  Egypt,  and
upon  Minerva  that  of  Attica.  Hesiod  speaks  of  a  general  as-
signment by  lot,  to  all  the  sons  of  Heaven  and  Earth,  and
adds  that  the  Titans  were  permitted  to  enjo}'  their  portion,
according  to  the  former  distribution,  ichicii  Zias  made  in  the
beginning.    Theog.  S£)0 — A2à.*

The  very  idea  of  Noah's  dividing  the  land  amongst  his  des-
cendants, necessarily  presupposes  his  knowledge  of  the  land
that  was  to  be  so  divided.  He  must  have  described  the  several
shares,  their  extent  and  boundaries,  by  certain  names.  And
these,  in  general,  could  have  been  no  other  than  the  names
by  which  the  same  regions,  rivers  and  mountains  had  been
already  known  to  him,  and  consequently,  which  they  had
borne  before  the  flood.  Thus  may  we  account  for  the  identity
of  the  names  of  several  streams  and  mountains,  in  ancient


^  See  many  and  strong  authoiiiies  for  a  general  division  by  lot,  Bryanff,
Amlyiis  iij.  13.  and  Holujcli'i  Mytliol.  Did.  v.  Earth'


34


geography,  from  India  to  Britain,  and  from  the  Northern
Ocean  to  the  middle  of  Africa.  The  names  must  have  been
descriptive,  in  the  primitive  language,  and  several  streams  and

mountains  must  have  come  under  the  same  description. »

From  the  time  of  this  general  allotment,  it  seems  to  have
been  a  common  praéìice  for  men  to  distinguish  themselves
and  their  children  by  the  name  of  their  patrimony  or  estate.
Hence  Moses,  in  his  genealogies  of  the  early  ages,  frequently
gives  us  the  names  of  cities  and  distrióls,  or  names  descriptive
of  local  and  relative  situations,  instead  of  the  proper  names  of
men,

The  declaration  of  this  distribution  seems  to  have  been
made  after  the  human  race  had  assembled  in  the  land  of
Shimar  (Jfter  Cronus  came  into  the  land  of  the  South.  Sanclion.)
The  founding  of  the  kingdom  of  Nimrod,  The  Son  of  Rebellion,
and  the  eiiterprize  of  those  Children  of  men  who  joined  hi^
party,  was  in  direct  opposition  to  the  Divine  decree.  It  was
leU  they  should  be  scattered  abroad,  or  to  prevent  the  execution
of  a  purpose  already  known  and  declared;  but  not  as  yet
carried  into  eíFeél.  The  topic  will  be  resumed  in  the  course
of  my  sketches.


IV,

On  the  Jniiqultj/  of  writing.


X  HERE  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  primitive  ages  pos-
sessed some  means,  beside  oral  tradition,  of  recording  and
perpetuating  their  several  branches  of  knowledge,  but  re-
specting the  nature  of  these  means,  Ave  are  left  somewhat  iu
tlie  dark.  It  is  xmiversaliy  allowed  that  no  human  device
could  have  answered  this  purpose  better   than    alphabetical


35


writing.  IVere  the  early  ages  acquainted  tiith  αη,  alphabet?
Xhis  has  been  a  great  que:>tiua.  Aiuongst  some  ancient  and
modern  nations,  we  find  pidure  writing,  liieroglyphical  re-
presentations, or  else  arbitrary  signs  of  ideas,  emplo3ed  as
the  general  means  of  preserving  men?orials.  But  whether  any
of  these  are  the  remains  of  a  primitive  art,  or  the  resources  of
those  societies  which  had  forgotten  the  accomplishments  of
their  forefathers,  is  anothçr  question.  Our  louver  order  of  me-
chanics and  labourers,  who  have  never  been  taught  to  v,TÌte,
use  a  variety  of  marks  and  figures,  to  record  their  little  trans-
actions: And  if  one  of  these  families  werç  removed  to  a  se-
questered island,  and  excluded  from  other  society,  this  would
become  their  established  mode  of  writing,  though  they  Λverc
descended  from  a  people  who  had  the  use  of  an  alphabet.

The  sacred  volume  has  given  us  no  express  information,
yeladve  to  the  antiquity  of  an  alphabet.  It  has  been  the  opi-
nion of  some  eminent  men,  that  this  important  expedient  was
Plvinely  communicated  to  Moses,  when  he  received  the  tables
of  the  law  upon  Mount  Sinai.  But  it  is  clear  from  the
testimony  of  Moses  himself,  that  this  opinion  is  erroneous.
Of  this,  the  following  proofs  have  been  urged ;  and,  ibr  my
own  part,  I  cannot  but  regard  them  as  incontrovertible.*  We
are  infoaned  (Ex.  xvii.)  that  Amalek  came  and  fought  with
Israel  in  Rephidun,  and  was  there  overcome.  And  the  Lord
said  unto  Moses,  "  λ^'^ιΐϋε  this  for  a  memorial  in  a  book,  and
reheaisc  it  in  the  ears  of  Joshua,  for  I  will  utterly  put  out  the
remembrance  of  Amalek  from  under  heaven."  As  this  record
jrclaLcd  exclusively  to  Amalek,  it  might  be  concluded  that  the
command  zi:rite  this  was  given  in  Kephidim,  immediately  arter
the  war,  and  betoie  Israel  had  come  near  to  Mount  Sinai.

«  '  II         ■■<■■■      I  ■      .  ■.  .       ■  ■         '"

*  foi  several  of  these  oboervaiicr.s,  I  am  indebted  to  Astie,  on  ojittin^:-^
Put  1  quote  from  memory.

c  2


36


J3at  the  context  is  decisive.  jNIoscs  built  an  altar  (in  Rcphi-
dim)  and  called  the  name  of  it  Jehovah->sissi;  for  he  said,
"  Because  the  Lord  hath  szcorn,  that  the  Lord  will  have  war
with  Amalek,  from  generation  to  generation.  jNloses  knew,
therefore,  what  was  meant  by  a  Book,  and  was  acquainted
Avith  die  nature  of  Memoriab,  the  art  of  Writing,  and  of
Reading  or  rehearsing  out  of  memorials,  before  the  delivery
oi'the  sacred  tables.  Again  (Ex.  xxviii.)  Moses  is  commanded
to  take  two  onyx  stones  and  grave  upon  them  the  names  of
the  children  of  Israel — "  With  the  zc'ork  of  an  engraver  in
stone,  LIKE  the  engravings  of  a  signet,  shalt  thou  engrave  the
tv,O  stones,  with  the  names  of  the  children  of  Israel."  In  the
same  chapter,  he  is  further  commanded  to  engrave  twelve
stones,  with  the  names  of  the  children  of  Israel,  according  to
ihcir  names,  like  the  engravings  of  a  signet.  In  these  passage  s
we  have  a  constant  reference  to  a  zcell  knozcn  art  of  engraving
names  upon  signets;  and  these  engravings  cannot  be  regarded
as  cyphers  or  mere  hieroglyphical  symbols;  for  (v.  C>0)  we  find
another  command  to  make  a  plate  of  ρμιβ  gold,  and  grave
upon  it,  like  the  engravings  of  a  signet,  "  HOLIMESS  TO
THE  LORD."  This  cannot  possibly  mean  any  thing  else
than  writing  in  Jl'ords  and  in  Letters:  and  all  these  com-
mands were  given,  beibre  the  first  tables  were  delivered.

It  is  then  an  indisputable  fad,  that  books  or  memorials  íh
writing,  and  consequently  reading,  \vere  things  well  imder-
stood  before  the  giving  of  the  sacred  tables.  These  tables
certainly  consisted  of  alphabetical  writing,  and  the  preceding
inscriptions  were  imdoubtedly  of  the  same  kind,  and  in  the
íüme  characler.  Otherwise  the  introduélion  of  a  nezo  and
Micred  mode  of  writing  must  soon  have  rendered  the  former,
and  less  pcrfcci  mode  obsolete;  and  the  names  upon  the  geitis
and  the  golden  plate  must  have  become  obscure  and  uninteU


37

But  in  this  age,  the  art  of  writing  could  not  have  heen  u
recent  invention.  Tlie  engraving  of  names  upon  signets  is
referred  to,  as  a  thing  publicly  known  ;  and  surely,  tlie  first
essays  in  writing  had  not  been  made  in  precious  stones. —
Signets  were  used  by  the  IsraeUtes  before  they  went  down  into
Egypt,  and  it  is  not  improbable  that  they  were  inscribed. —
Their  inscriptions  must  have  been  in  simple  charaélers,  adapted
to  the  subjcCi;  and  the  space  which  the  gems  afibrded;  Λvherea3
the  letters  in  general  use  in  Egypt  seem  to  have  consisted  of
the  representations  of  animals,  and  other  produŵions  of  nature.
In  some  Oxd  Asiatic  alphabets,  we  still  discover  Mters  in  the
figures  of  certain  quadrupeds,  and  exaelly  similar  to  some  ct
the  hieroglyphics  on  the  Egyptian  obelisks.  Such  charaŵrs
may  have  been  liable  to  abuse,  amongst  a  people  so  prone  to
idolatry  as  the  Israelites  were,  and  for  this  reason,  it  may  have
been  commanded  that  the  more  simple  alphabet  of  the  en-
graver of  signets  should  be  used  in  preference.

In  tlie  book  of  Job,  we  find  the  antiquity  of  v/riting  asserted
in  a  manner  no  less  positive.  In  one  passage,  that  illustrious
sufferer  complains,  "  Thou  writest  bitter  things  against  me,
and  makest  me  to  possess  the  iniquity  of  my  youth."  lu
another,  he  exclaims,  "  Oh !  that  my  rvords  v.ere  now  written.
Oh !  that  they  were  printed  in  a  hook !  (stamped,  as  on  the
Babylonian  bricks  r) — that  they  were  graven  with  an  iron  jicn
and  lead  in  the  rock  for  ever  Γ  Here  writing  is  not  spoken  of
as  a  new  invention.  It  must  have  been  an  art  long  estabUshed,
before  its  various  forms,  uses  and  properties  could  have  been
so  Λνεΐΐ  understood.  In  the  time  of  Job,  it  Avas  applied,  as  at
present,  to  the  taking  of  minutes  of  trivial  circumstances  or
uniting  of  bitter  things;  the  recording  of  greater  events  in
books,  and  the  presen'ing  a  lasting  memorial  of  what  is
very  remarkable,  in  public  inscriptions.  It  must  have  bcea
one  of  those  arts  whicli  are  ascribed  to  the  search  of  the  fatliers
c  3


38


of  the  human  race.  Had  there  been  -any  just  grounds  for
ascribing  the  invention  to  a  Divine  communication  on  Mount
Sinai,  it  IS  impoasiblo  but  that  some  notice  would  have  been
tai^en  of  so  \voi:dcrful  an  event.  We  should  have  had  some
hint  oi"  the  Great  lawgiver's  instru6tions.  Every  circumstance
of  the  giving  of  the  law  is  minutely  recorded,  but  not  a  word
has  been  ibund  to  this  purpose.  On  the  contrary,  the
Israelites  appear  to  have  been  readers  in  general.  Each  of
the  princes  looks  upon,  and  discriminates  the  rod  which  lx)re•
his  own  name  (iSumb.  xvii.)

Again :  such  a  circumstance  as  the  original  communication
of  writing  must  have  been  notorious  to  tlie  w  hole  assembled
nation.  A  thing  so  remarkable,  and  of  such  magnitude^
could  not  have  been  forgotten.  Some  allusion  to  it,  at  least,
would  have  occurred  in  the  subsequent  writings  of  the  old  tes-
tament ;  but  nothing  appears.  The  vanity  of  the  more  modern
Jews  would  have  disposed  them  to  claim  the  discovery;  but
their  traditions  uniformly  ascribe  it  to  tlie  first  age  of  man.

It  may  be  demanded — How  happens  it,  if  the  art  of  writing
was  really  understood  by  the  primitive  ages,  that  Moses  has
not  recorded  the  name  of  its  inventor,  amongst  other  antedi-
luvian instruótors?

To  this  it  may  be  answered,  Tliat  the  Mosaic  history  of  the
Antediluvians  is  a  mere  epitome.  The  historian  records  only
the  inventions  of  one  family,  that  of  Cain.  Kis  catalogue
must  have  omitted  many  great  arts  which  the  Antediluvians
possessed.  W  ho  was  tlie  first  carpenter  or  the  first  weaver?
Ilad  the  descendants  of  Cain  aólually  invented  writing,  yet  it*
progress  to  pericction,  from  its  first  simple  rudiments,  may
have  been  so  gradual,  that  ISloses  could  not  ascertain  the
nniuc  of  its  first  inventor;  and  he  records  no  invention,  where


39

he  has  not  nn  opportunity  of  adding  this  circumstance.  His
design  seems  to  have  been^  not  so  much  to  mark  the  antiquity
of  the  arts  known  in  his  time,  as  to  preserve  a  memorial  of
eminent  persons;  more  particularly  in  that  family  which  \vus
now  AvhoUy  cut  off,  from  the  face  of  the  earth.

But  why  has  not  Moses  mentioned,  or  alluded  to  ancient
writings,  in  some  passage  of  his  history  before  the  xvii.  chap.
of  Exodus  I*

If  it  be  certain  that  no  such  mention  or  allusion  is  made,  it
may  be  replied  that  the  subjeft  may  not  have  come  imme-
diately in  his  way,  and  that  it  was  not  the  custom  of  writers,
far  less  ancient  than  Moses,  to  be  minute  in  quoting  their
authorities.

But  we  are  not  certain  that  Moses  has  not  both  alluded  to,
and  expressly  mentioned  writings,  of  a  date  long  prior  to  his
own  time.  In  the  historical  part  of  the  sacred  scripture^  we
frequently  find  references  to  the  authority  of  books  which  are
no  longer  extant.  Such  historial  parts  Avere  therefore  com-
piled from  the  materials  of  earlier  writers,  and  not  communi-
cated to  the  authors  of  the  present  volumes,  by  immediate  inspi-
ration. It  is  sufficient  in  this  case  to  believe,  that  the  Divine
spirit  directed  the  judgment  of  these  authors,  and  disposed
them  to  examine  with  diligence,  and  record  nothing  but  the
truth.

The  book  of  Genesis,  if  we  except  the  account  of  thft
creation,  consists  of  matter  purely  historical,  or  such  as  might
have  come  within  the  compass  of  human  research,  and  have
been  recorded  in  history.  And  Moses  no  where  declares  that
he  derived  it  from  any  other  source.  No  part  of  it  is  intro-
«luced  with  the  solemn  form,  "  The  Lord  spake  unto  Moses.''


40


We  have  it  simply  as  a  brief  introduélîon  to  the  histor}'  of  the
Israelites,  and  tlic  promulgation  of  the  law.  Between  the
several  portions  of  this  introdudlory  history,  a  considerable
difference  of  style  has  been  remarked.  They  differ  in  this
lesped  from  each  other,  and  from  the  usual  style  of  Moses  in
his  subsequent  writings.

In  the  several  portions  of  this  primitive  history,  the  same
events  are  recapitulated,  to  the  same  general  efíeéì;,  but  \vith
new  and  peculiar  circumstances.  This  is  a  thing  not  usual  in
tlie  original  and  entire  composition  of  one  author.  It  has
rather  the  charaéler  of  a  colledion  of  documents.

The  several  portions  are  also  distinguished  by  such  appro-
priate titles  as,  in  any  other  volume  of  antiquity,  would  be  ac-
knowledged to  point  out  the  beginning  of  detached  compo-
sitions.

Thus  chap.  i.  and  to  v.  4,  chap.  ii.  contains  the  history  of
the  creation,  and  the  institution  of  the  sabbath.

Then  follows  another  brief  history  of  the  creation,  the
garden  of  Eden  and  the  fall  of  man,  with  an  exordium  which
intimates  a  distind  and  independent  composition.  "  These  are
the  generations  of  the  heaven  and  the  earth,"  &c.  This  book
concludes  with  chap.  iii.

It  is  remarkable  that  the  only  tenn  for  the  Divine  Being,  itî
the  former  of  these  portions,  is  Elohim,  God,  which  is  re-
peated 35  times.  In  the  latter  portion,  excepting  in  the
conversation  of  Eve  with  the  serpent,  it  is  Jehovah  Elohinij
the  Lord  God,  which  is  also  repeated  20  times.

In  chap.  iv.  which  contains  the  histoiy  of  Cain  and  Abel,


41


and  of  the  descendants  of  the  former,  the  sacred  name  ÌA
Jehovah,  without  any  variation,  excepting  once,  in  a  speech
of  Eve.

Tlie  use  of  these  tenns  as  here  described  is,  I  think,  a  pccu-
harity  v.hich  could  not  well  have  happened,  in  the  original
and  entire  composition  of  one  age,  one  country,  and  one  man»
For  hov.  ever  the  mysterious  meaning  of  the  terms  themselves
may  be  discriminated,  yet  Elohim  iu  the  first  chapter,  and
Jehovah  Elohim,  in  the  second  and  third,  are  evidently  used
in  a  synonymous  sense,  and  precisely  the  same  operations  are
ascribed  to  them.

Chap.  V,  begins  with  an  appropriate  title,  which  more  par-
ticularly indicates  a  distinct  and  independent  composition. —
"  This  is  the  Book  (or  Record)  of  the  generation  of  Adam."
Here  again,  the  history  of  the  creation  of  man  is  briefly
recited,  as  an  introduction  to  this  separate  book,  which  is
complete  in  its  kind;  for  it  begins  from  the  creation  and
concludes  with  the  birth  of  the  sons  of  Noah.  May  it  not  be
regarded  as  a  transcript  from  an  authentic  genealogical  table
or  pedigree,  which  had  been  regularly  kept  in  the  family  of
this  patriarch  ?

We  have  aftenvards — "  These  are  the  generations  of  Noah"
"  These  are  the  generations  of  the  sons  of  Noah,"  Sec.  These
things  I  cannot  but  consider  as  internal  proofs,  that  Moses
has  not  only  alluded  to  writings  which  existed  before  his  own
time,  but  has  aâually  given  us  transcripts  of  some  of  the
compositions  of  the  primitive  ages:  and  that  the  book  of
Genesis,  like  other  historical  parts  of  the  scripture,  consists  in
a  great  measure  of  compilations  from  more  early  documents.
May  not  these  several  Books,  which  recapitulate  the  same
events,  and  the  matter  of  which  has  not  been  wholly  forgottezi


42


by  the  heathens,  be  regarded  as  so  many  primitive  records,
adding  mutual  strength  to  each  other,  and  refleéling  mutual
light,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  books  of  Kings  and  Chro-
nicles, and  the  narratives  of  the  four  Evangelists  ì

If  we  duly  consider  the  matter  contained  in  the  book  of
Genesis,  I  think  we  shall  be  led  to  conclude  that  much  of  it
must  necessaiily  have  beeti  colleéìed  from  prior  documents.
For  example  (Gen.  xxii.  20.)  Abraham  receives  infonnation
respecting  the  family  of  his  brother  Nahor.  No  reason  is
given  why  it  was  told  Abraham :  nor  does  any  thing  imme-
diately i'ullovv,  as  a  consequence  of  such  information.  But  as
the  account  related  to  Abraham's  family,  we  are  left  to
conclude,  that  he  recorded  it ;  and,  iipon  his  mithoriti/,  Moses
preserves  the  record.  He  gives  it  not  as  a  subjeét  of  revela-
iation,  nor  as  the  result  ol'his  enquiry-  amongst  the  descendants
of  IValior,  nor  yet  does  he  content  himself  with  registering
the  simple  faft,  but  he  tells  us  what  had  been  told  Abraham  at
such  a  time.  At  a  distance  of  400  years,  he  transcribes  the
names  of  Nahor's  eight  sons  in  due  order,  with  some  particular
circumstances  respefting  them,  as  it  had  been  told  Abraham,
and  therefore,  as  it  niuüt  have  been  recorded  in  some  memo-
rials in  Abraham's  family.  Moses  must  have  possessed  a  very
exaél  detail  of  the  transaélions  of  Abraham's  time.  Hence
the  circumstantial  account  of  the  expedition  of  the  four  kings,
of  that  patriarch's  treaties  with  the  princes  of  the  land  in  which
he  sojourned,  of  his  sacrifices,  and  of  the  promises  he
received,  and  the  allusion  (Ex.  xii.)  to  the  7/ear,  the  ynonth,  and
the  very  day  on  which  he  began  his  peregrinations.

In  confirmation  of  the  opinion  advanced  above,  it  may  be
observed,  that  history  furnishes  no  instance  of  an  exatSt  chro-
nology having  been  preserved,  for  a  series  of  ages,  by  any
people  who  were  totally  illiterate,     llelative  dates^  and  the


43


«•numeration  of  months  and  days,  would  soon  become  unmor-
Dageable  in  oral  tradition:  and  the  precise  length  ot  mens*
lives,  and  their  age  at  the  birth  of  their  children,  are  circum-
stances not  likely  to  have  been  the  subjed  of  immediate
revelation  to  Moses.  Yet  his  history  of  the  primitive  world
preserves  an  unbroken  chain  of  chronology,  from  the  creation.

Sacred  and  profane  writers  have  mentioned  an  ancient  mode
of  recording  faéìs  by  means  of  nails  iixcd  in  pieces  of  timber
or  notches  cut  in  sticks ;  but  if  these  customs  were  capable  of
preserving  historical  fads,  conneded  with  their  dates,  for  25
centuries,  we  must  regard  them  as,  in  some  manner,  equiva-
lent to  the  use  of  letters ;  and  I  trust  I  shall  be  able  to  prove
in  the  ensuing  essays,  that  this  was  the  case.

The  enumeration  of  circumstances,  in  the  history  of  tlie
deluge,  clearly  points  out  the  early  use  of  letters,  or  of  some-
thing equivalent  to  letters.

Here  we  have  upon  record,  the  particular  month,  and  the
day  of  the  month,  upon  which  the  rain  began — the  number
of  days  it  continued — the  period  during  which  the  earth  was
covered — the  day  on  \vhich  the  ark  first  rested — on  which
the  tops  of  the  mountains  were  first  seen — on  which  the  face
of  the  ground  was  first  observed  to  be  dry,  and  on  which  Noah
and  his  family  descended  from  the  ark,  with  several  other
particulars.  Surely  all  this  must  have  been  colleded  from  an
exaót  register,  kept  at  the  time,  and  committed  to  writing,  by
those  who  were  adlually  present.  Would  it  not  be  detracting
from  the  credit  of  the  history  to  think  othervase?

Here  again,  Moses  records  not  the  phaenomena  of  the
deluge,  as  simple  fads,  but  he  records  them,  as  they  had
been  seen  and  observed  by  ISoah.     He  does  npt  tell  us  upon


44

what  day  the  mountains  first  emerged  from  tlic  waters^  but
upon  what  day  their  lops  zvere  seen.  We  are  iiilbrmcci  indeed
that  "  In  the  GOlst  year,  on  the  first  day  of  the  first  month,
the  waters  were  dried  up  from  off  the  earth."  But  ho\v  was
tliis  known?  The  sacred  historian  informs  us — On  that  day
*^  Noah  removed  the  covering  of  the  ark,  and  looked,  and
behold  the  face  of  the  ground  was  dry."  It  is  then  recorded
upon  the  authority  of  Noah's  observation.


I  would  remark  another  minute  circumstance  in  this  liistory,
\^'hich  tends  forcibly  to  the  same  point.  The  zcatcrs  ore  said
io  have  prevailed  13  cubits  upwards,  and  the  mountains  ac/e
covered.  Now  mountains  are  so  various  in  their  height,  that,
if  by  this  passage  we  are  simply  to  understand  that  the  naters
rcert  15  cubits  higher  than  the  mountains,  it  can  mean  nothing•
The  waters  must  have  been  much  deeper,  over  the  mountains
of  Ararat,  before  they  could  hade  reached  the  top  of  the  Alps.
And  the  mountain  where  the  ark  rested  could  not  have  been
an  inaccessible  peak;  it  must  have  afforded  a  practicable
descent  for  man  and  beast.

But  let  us  recollect  that  the  whole  depth  of  the  ark  was  30
cubits.  In  order  to  give  its  motion  a  due  steadiness  on  the
flood,  and  at  the  same  time,  to  afford  a  sufficient  access  of
air  to  the  middle  and  lower  story,  through  the  window  that
was  in  its  side,  we  must  suppose  that,  together  with  its  freight,
it  drew  about  15  cubits,  or  half  its  own  depth,  of  water.  \et
it  was  lilted  up  from  the  earth,  it  floated  over  the  summits
of  the  hills,  without  touching  them,  till  the  seventh  month;
when  it  indicated  an  abatement  of  the  waters,  by  resting  upon
a  mountain  of  Ararat:  and  this  happened  upwards  of  two
months  before  the  top  of  any  other  neighbouring  mountain
was  seen.  These  circumstances  nmst  have  been  minutely
observed  by  Noah,  and  from  tlicin,  he  must  have  collected.


45


that  the  waters  were  15  cubits  deep  over  those  mouiitaini.
Here  tlien  is  one  particular,  in  the  history  of  the  clehige,
evidently  derived  from  aéíual  observation,  and  recorded  to
posterity  by  tliüse  who  had  remarked  the  circiunstcmce  upon
the  spot.

If  to  all  these  presumptive  argmnents  of  the  high  antiquity
of  writing,  we  add,  that  the  most  ancient  nations,  in  various
parts  qf  the  world,  those  which  \vere  first  regularly  settkd,
and  were  most  tenacious  of  their  primitive  customs  and
institutions,  such  as  the  Chaldeans,  the  Assyrians,  the  Egyp-
tians, the  Phrygians,  the  Pelasgi,  the  Indians  and  the
Turdetani  are  found  to  have  possessed  the  art  of  alphabetical
writing :  and  that  several  of  these  societies  regarded  letters  as
coeval  with  the  nation  itself,  if  not  with  the  human  race,  we
shall  have  abundant  reason  to  conclude,  that  letters  were
certainly  known  to  mankind  before  the  separation  of  families,
and  very  probably  before  the  deluge.  We  need  not  then
pronounce  the  tradition  of  the  Jews,  respeòiing  the  learning
of  the  primitive  world,  altogether  vain  and  fanciful,  nox  the
apostle  unfounded  in  his  cpiotatiou  of  the  prophecy  of  Enoch,
the  seventh  from  Admn.

Piclure-w  riting  and  arbitrary  signs  of  ideas  may  have  been

the   resource  of  societies    which    had  forirutten    the  use  of

ο

letters,  or,  in  other  nations,  they  may  have  been  used  toge-
ther with  letters,  for  compendium,  for  secrecy,  for  ostentation
or  ornament.  We  still  retain  their  use  in  astronomv,
algebra,  numerals,  marks  of  pauses  or  reference,  iind  abun-
dance of  other  instances.


46


V.


Conditions  of  men  in  primitive  society — The  separation  of  the-
I^oachida^

JL  he  same  hj-pothesis  which  regarded  man,  in  his  pri-
mitive and  natural  state,  as  placed  extra  civitattm,  or  in  the
condition  of  an  unconneded  savage,  has  furnished  occasion
to  some  late  theorists  to  contend  for  the  Rights  of  Man,  to
insist  upon  an  equality  of  condition,  and  to  assert  the  unlaw-
fulness of  every  degree  of  authority',  which  has  not  been
personally  acknowledged  or  virtually  conceded.  I  must
confess  myself  not  so  much  of  a  philosopher  or  politician  as
to  perceive  the  principles  upon  wliich  this  doctrine  can  be
maintahied.

If  all  the  children  of  nature  íiave  an  equal  claim  to  he?•
bounty,  then  the  brute  creation,  every  thing  tha,t  breathesj^
must  be  placed  upon  an  equal  fçoting  with  mankind.

If  a  mere  endowment  with  reason  constitute  a  title  to
pre-eminence,  then  women  and  children  must  rank  with  men,
not  only  in  an  equality  of  condition,  but  in  an  immunity
from  all  controul  which  is  not  conceded,  and  in  the  right
of  delegating  or  exercising  authority.

If  the  prerogative  of  man  be  urged,  upon  lire  plea  of
superior  mental  powers,  it  must  be  recoUeéled  that  men  differ
from  each  other,  in  this  respeét,  no  less  than  in  the  established
gradations  of  society.


47

In  vain  should  our  theorists  appeal  to  the  precedent  and
authority  of  history:  for  no  such  things  as  an  equality  of
conditions^  and  an  avowed  equality  of  rights,  can  be  traced,
or  even  supposed  to  have  existed  in  civil  lile.  And  even  in  the
most  savage  nations,  where  society  is  not  connected  by  any
laws  that  extend  beyond  single  families,  excepting  the  law
of  custom,  it  will  be  found  that,  in  those  tamilies,  authority
and  subordniation  are  understood  and  admitted.  The  same
distindion  obtains  in  respeóì;  of  rights.  The  sou  who  Ivills
the  bear  or  the  seal,  has  a  right  to  feast  with  his  father  upon
the  train;  but  the  indolent  brother,  who  refuses  to  join  in  the
enterprize,  has  no  claim  to  come  in  for  his  share  of  the
spoil.

This  is  exactly  analogous  to  the  distinélion  of  riglits,  which.
is  acknowledged  in  society,  and  it  points  out  a  necessary
discrimination  between  social  rights,  and  those  which  are
properly  natural.  To  those  gifts  which  nature  bestows  ha
common  to  all  her  children,  they  have  an  equal  right,  sucli
as  breathing  the  vital  air,  seeing  the  light  of  the  sun,  or
drinking  of  the  current;  but  of  such  things  as  arc  either
acquired  or  proteéled  by  social  regulations,  society  must  have
a  right  to  dispose,  agreeably  to  its  laws:  And  such  lawi
necessarily  suppose  authority,  and  consequently  the  duty  of
submission;  permissionj,  and  consequently  the  power  of
restraint;  relative  conneéhons,  and  therefore,  rclativQ
conditions.

It  follows  then  that,  ever  since  mankind  began  to  live  in
society,  authority  and  subordination,  agreeably  to  some,
certain  rules,  together  with  a  variety  of  conditions,  must  have
existed  in  the  Λvorld.  And  diis  has  been,  according  to  the
testimony  of  the  sacred  historian,  from  the  day  upon  which
God  created  man  upon  the  earth.


4β


When  marriage  was  instituted  between  our  first  parents,
a  social  and  relative  conneétion  was  formed.  At  this  time
indeed,  there  could  be  no  great  diversity  of  conditions;  yet
authority  and  subordination  were  established,  not  as  the  result
of  a  deUberative  compaél,  but  by  a  positive  decree  of  God
and  nature.  Eve  submitted  with  afîeétion  to  the  generous
dominion  of  her  husband.  Adam  possessed  a  like  authority
over  his  children.  It  was  from  under  the  proteòtion  of  his
parents,  and  from  the  society  of  his  brothers  and  sisters  who,
by  this  time  might  be  pretty  numerous,  that  Cain  was  ibrced
to  retire,  when  he  complained  that  his  punishment  was  more
than  he  could  bear — because  he  was  driven  out  from  the  face
oi'thc  earth,  and  was  doomed  to  be  a  fugitive  and  a  wanderer.

While  the  human  race  consisted  but  of  one  family,,  the
authority  of  the  chief  was  necessarily  only  patriarchal,  or  cou-
fmed  to  his  own  relations  and  descendants.  Such  was  the  case
in  the  days  of  Adam  and  of  Noah.  But  the  patriarch's  power,
from  which  there  was  no  appeal,  was  not  necessarily  trans-
mitted in  the  line  of  seniority.  Several  instances  an;  rccoidctl
of  the  patriarchal  privilege,  to  set  aside  the  claim  of
primogeniture,  to  delegate  his  authority  to  cither  of  his
children  and  constitute  him  the  chief  among  his  brethren:
And  also  to  determine  and  declare  the  condition  of  tlie
fccveral  branches  of  his  descendants.  Thus  Noah  gave  the
chief  blessing  to  Shem,  his  second  son,  and  doomed  the  sou
of  Ham  to  be  servant  of  servants  to  his  brethren.

It  may  here  be  observed  that,  as  Noah  and  his  sons  knew
what  was  meant  by  a  condition  of  servitude,  they  must  have
been  acquainted  with  such  a  condition  before  the  Hood:  And
as  the  children  of  Ham  were  to  serve  the  children  of  Shem
add  Japiiedi,  it  is  clear  that  Noah  did  not  regard  all  authority
inijust,  which  was  not  strictly  patriarchal;    when   mankind


49

should  have  multiplied  upon  the  earth,  one  family  might
exercise  a  lawful  dominion  over  another  family.  This  must
have  occurred  to  Noah,  as  a  natural  consequence  of  the  pro-
gressive state  of  society,  and  as  a  necessary  repetition  of  what
had  taken  place  in  the  prunitive  world.

For  great  kingdoms  and  states  appear  to  have  heen  fonned
amongst  the  antediluvians.  They  had  their  heroes  and  their
conquerors,  for  such  I  apprehend  were  the  giants  which  were
in  the  eaith  in  those  days,  who  became  mighty  men,  which
Avere  of  old  men  of  renown,  Moses  has  not  thought  proper  to
enlarge  upon  the  renown  of  these  mightics,  yet  his  oblique
manner  of  speaking  plainly  alludes  to  some  known  history  of
them.  They  are  not  reprehended  for  the  possession  but  the
abuse  of  power.  The  general  history  of  the  antediluvians  had
not  then  been  totally  lost.

Several  heathen  nations  retained  some  fragments  of  thi^
history  for  many  ages.  The  Greek  and  Roman  mythologists
give  us  details  of  the  actions  of  certain  giants  before  the  floods
but  the  story  is  spoiled  by  embellishment.  The  genuine  works
of  Berosus,  as  we  are  told  by  Synceilus,  contained  the  reigns
of  ten  kings  of  Chaldea  before  the  flood.  This  was  the  exa6i:
luimber  of  the  patriarchs  from  Adam  to  jNoah,  both  inclusive.
Their  residence  seems  to  have  been  in  the  neighbourhood  of
the  Euphrates.

Nimrod,  the  mighty  hunter,  may  then  have  done  no  new
thing  upon  the  eartli,  when  he  established  a  kingdom  in
Babylonia.  The  fonnation  and  maintaining  of  kingdoms  and
governments,  whether  good  or  bad,  must  suppose  on  the  one
hand,  a  diversity  of  conditions,  and,  on  the  other,  a  consi-
derable progress  in  civilization,  and  the  exercise  of  many  arts,
which  could  not  but  be  useful  and  ornamental  to  society.


50


Upon  the  \vholej  we  find  that  the  ages  from  the  creation
down  to  the  deluge  were  not  distinguished  merely  by  the
depravity  of  their  morals,  but  also  by  their  extensive  acquisi-
tions, in  the  various  branches  of  useful  knowledge,  and  by  the
first  dovclopenient  of  the  forms  and  conditions  of  social  life;
and  ii)at  the  great  patriarch  of  the  new  world  took  care  to
preserve  the  valuable  attainments  of  former  ages,  and  transmit
them  to  his  descendants,  iclieii  the  Most  High  divided  to  the
nations  their  inheritauct•.  "Which  memorable  event  took
place  in  his  οΛνη  days  and  under  his  inspeclion.

It  may  be  objected  that,  however  general  and  successful
the  search  of  the  antediluvians  may  have  been;  yet  iSoah's
information  may  not  haA'e  been  co-extensive,  but  confined  to
certain  branches  of  knowledge.  But  will  not  a  consideration
of  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  this  patriarch,  in  a  great
measure,  over-rule  the  objeétion  ?

For  120  years  before  the  flood,  he  had  been  apprized  of  the
Almighty's  purpose  to  destroy  the  old  world,  and  to  renovate
the  human  race  in  his  oftspring.  This  must  have  induced
him  to  employ  much  of  this  time  in  considering  the  acquisi-
tions of  the  age,  in  acquainting  himself  vvith  numberless
particulars,  Λvhich  are  not  expressly  recorded,  in  discrimi-
nating between  the  good  and  the  bad,  and  in  treasuring  up  all
the  knowledge  which  could  be  of  real  value,  and  conducive
to  the  well  being  of  future  generations.  And  after  the  great
catastrophe  of  the  primitive  world,  he  must  have  used  the
most  cftcftual  means  for  the  perpetuating  of  this  knowledge
amongst  his  posterity.

Accordingly  \ve  find  that,  in  the  next  succeeding  age,  there
Averc  uise  men  who  made  it  their  business  to  conmiunicate  the
treasures  of  wisdqm  Λνΐιϊςΐι  they  derived  from  their  fathers—


51


"  Which  wise  men  have  told  from  their  fathers  (and  have
not  hid  it)  îoito  whom  alone  tlie  earth  was  given"  Job  viii.
and  XV.

It  appears  then  that^  at  no  period  from  the  creation  to  the
distribution  of  the  earth  amongst  the  descendants  of  Noah,
can  savage  hfe  be  regarded  as  the  natural  or  the  actual  state
of  mankind.  During  this  series  of  ages,  the  arts  and  occu-
pations of  civil  life  were  regularly  cultivated  and  advanced,
and  social,  moral  and  religious  obligations  Avere  generally
understood,  though  not  uniformly  respeéìed.

These  valuable  acquisitions  could  not  fail  of  being  trans-
mitted, by  the  fathers  of  the  nations,  to  their  respeétive
families,  which  settled  in  the  various  regions  of  the  earth.

The  early  separation  of  mankind,  and  their  distribution
over  the  i\ice  of  the  globe,  are  events  which  have  been
reflected  upon  by  writers  of  more  presumption  than  piety,
and  of  more  fancy  than  sound  judgment.  It  has  been  asserted
that  such  measures  could  serve  no  purpose  but  to  prevent  that
mutual  aid  and  comfort  which  men  might  otherwise  have
afforded  each  other.  A  Divine  decree  is  entitled  to  our  silent
respe6l,  though  its  wisdom  and  expediency  be  not  obvious
to  human  reason.  But,  in  the  present  instance,  they  fully
appear.  It  was  surely  designed  in  wisdom,  that  the  whole
human  race  should  not  be  formed  into  one  unweildy  society,
in. which  justice  could  never  have  been  equally  administered,
nor  the  comforts  of  life  duly  secured.  It  was  then  expedient
that,  at  some  time  or  other,  they  should  be  divided.  Could
any  time  have  been  more  happily  chosen  than  the  age  of
Noah?  His  dominion  extended  over  the  whole  earth.  Ilii
inheritance  was,  upon  all  accounts,  too  large  to  be  formed
into  one  empire.    In  his  age  all  just  authority  was  patriai'chalj


52


and  this  authority  centred  in  himself.  lie  was  the  common
father  of  all  his  subjefls.  In  no  subsequent  period,  in  the
liistory  of  man^  could  this  remarkable  circumstance  have
occurred.  At  no  subsequent  period  then  could  a  general
distribution  of  the  earthy  ainongst  the  nations,  have  been
conducted  with  equal  propriety  or  with  equal  effeél.

And  how  was  Noah  to  divide  his  offspring,  if  not,  as  nature
itself  had  discriminated  them,  into  distinél  families?  What
could  be  more  wise  or  more  just  than  that  he  should  invest
everj^  father  Λvith  a  patriarchal  authority  over  his  ολνη  house-
hold, and  thus  give  every  rising  society  an  opportunity  to
take  possession  of  its  allotted  patrimony,  as  soon  as  it  should
become  sufficiently  numerous  to  contain  social  comfort  within
itself;  while  its  children  and  its  cattle  Avere  as  yet  easily
removed,  \vhilc  it  might  easily  be  accommodated  in  the
countries  through  which  it  had  to  pass,  and  before  the  beasts
of  the  field  were  grealy  multiplied?

AVhat  could  have  been  designed  more  wisely  than  to
commit  the  forming  and  settling  of  every  family  to  the  im-
mediate eye  of  a  father,  whose  term  of  lile  and  patenud  care
would  be  extended  for  a  space  of  some  centuries,  whose
occupation  it  would  be  to  renew,  in  the  succeeding  gene-
rations, the  memory  of  the  great  events  of  history,  and  to
instruÄ  them  in  the  useful  knowledge  which  had  been  com-
municated, and  the  moral  precepts  and  religious  dodrincs
which  had  been  inculcated,  by  the  common  patriarch  i —
Must  not  this  have  been,  the  most  effectual  and  ready  method
that  could  have  been  taken,  to  plant  societies  regularly
formed,  the  arts  of  civil  life,  virtue,  religion  and  morality  in
every  region  of  the  earth  ?

Wlien  great  niultitudes  of  me^i  are   drawn  togethei•  into


53


one  vortex,  it  always  happens  that  many  of  thcin  pin*suc  ihcir
private  schemes  and  interests,  hy  means  inconsistent  with  the
good  of  others.  The  Imvs  of  society  arc  armed  against
such  persons :  they  are  expelled  the  community,  or  elüc  en-
deavour, hy  flight,  to  escape  a  niore  severe  punishment.

Had  it  been  designed  that  mankind  should  have  continued
in  one  body,  and  only  extend  tlieir  habitations  as  they  wanted
room,  it  must  have  followed,  that  tlic  more  orderly  £md  be>t
disposed  would  be  the  least  likely  to  remove  from  the  house
and  inheritance  of  tbeir  fathers.  The  abandoned  and
profligate  only  would  be  driven  out  from  men,  and  uniting  in
the  bands  of  wickedness,  in  the  surrounding,  unoccupied
regions;  thithej:  they  would  curry  no  useful  laws,  no  just
subordination,  no  morality,  no  pure  religion,  no  science,  and
no  ajrts  but  such  as  might  qualify  them  to  ofler  or  to  repel
force,  and  enable  them  to  proteél  themselves,  in  the  exercise
of  rapuie  and  violence.

Such  societies  have  indeed  been  formed,  in  various  parts
of  the  world,  and  have  grown  up  into  mighty  nations  of
dreadful  barbarians.  At  times,  thc}^  have  over-run  the
countries  of  their  civilized  neighbours,  eflacing  in  tbeir  course
almost  every  trace  of  humanity.  Had  the  civilized  part  of
the  species  continued  in  one  aggregate  body,  had  none  but
tlie  outcasts  of  society  been  separated  from  tbat  body,  the
accunntlated  mass  of  such  barbarians  must,  in  a  few  ages,
have  become  formidable  to  the  globe.


a  3


54


Of  Nimrod's  rebellion  and  apostacy — The  confusion  of  tongues
— The  dispersion  of  the  Giants.


JL  HE  rebellion  and  apostacy  of  Nimrod  and  his  adherents,
and  the  subsequent  contusion  of  tongues,  and  dispersion  of
the  children  of  men  from  Babel,  were  undoubtedly  events  of
considerable  magnitude,  in  the  early  history  of  mankind.  To
these  events  the  poets  and  mythological  writers  are  full  of
allusion;  but  the  only  plain  details  we  have  of  them,  are
contained  in  Gen.  x.  v.  8  to  13.  and  xi.  v.  1  to  10.

From  the  former  of  these  passages,  we  learn  that  Nimrod,
a  grandson  of  Ham,  began  to  be  a  mighty  one  in  the  earth,
and  a  mighty  hunter  before  the  Lord,  or  a  violent  persecutor ;
and  that  he  began  to  found  a  kingdom  in  Babel  and  the  neigh-
bouring country.  From  the  latter  passage,  it  may  be  collected
that  manj/  of  the  children  of  men  entered  into  his  design,  and
began  to  build  themselves  a  city  and  a  tower,  and  to  make
themselves  a  name,  for  the  express  purpose  of  preventing  the
separation  of  families;  but  that  this  enterprize  was  oftensive  to
the  Lord,  who  therefore  overthrew  it  by  a  miracle,  confounded
their  language,  and  scattered  them  abroad  from  thence  upon
the  face  of  all  the  earth.

!May  I  offer  a  few  thoughts  upon  the  nature  and  consequence
of  these  events?  Though  1  wish  to  form  an  accurate  idea,  how
far  the  chain  of  primitive  tradition  was  broken,  and  the  plan
of  a  regular  distribution  of  the  earth,  amongst  the  descendants
of  Noah,  disturbed  by  them;  yet  my  sketches  are  not
designed  to  supersede  the  learned  disquisitions  which  have


already  appeared  upcn  tlie  subjeci;.  The  candid  critic  will
pardon  them,  if  they  furnish  new  and  useful  hints.  The  first
thing  to  be  considered  is  the  extent  of  îíimrod's  party.

I  think  we  may  venture  to  assert  that  previous  to  the
building  of  Babel,  the  human  race,  generally  speaking,  was
coUeòìed  in  Babylonia.  For  though  the  pürtioìi  of  Japheth
and  of  Sheui  be  alluded  to,  while  the  family  of  Noah  resided
amongst  the  mountains  of  Ararat,  where  the  great  patriarch
planted  the  vine  and  drank  of  its  produce,  yet  an  actual
separation  had  not  taken  place,  before  they  came  to  the  plain
of  Shinar.  It  Avas  there  that  an  enterprize  was  set  on  foot,
expressly  to  prevent  that  separation,  which  was  understood  to
have  been  designed ;  though  not  as  yet  carried  into  eíreóì.— •
Hence  the  impiety  of  the  enterprize.

It  has  been  a  popular  opinion,  that  this  confederacy  at
Babel  embraced  the  whole  of  mankind,  excepting  perhaps
one  family,  and  consequently,  that  the  whole  earth  was
equally  aíl'eéled  by  the  confusion  of  tongues, — that  the  primi-
tive language,  unless  preserved  in  the  family  of  Hebcr,  was
now  lost,  and  the  primitive  religion  universally  corrupted,—
And,  in  the  promiscuous  dispersion  which  followed,  men  have
lost  sight  of  a  previous  and  regular  allotment.

But  this  opinion  seems  to  have  arisen  from  a  bare  conside-
ration of  the  history  of  Babel,  Gen.  xi.  without  duly  regarding
its  conneóiion  with  the  history  of  Nimrod  and  his  kingdom,  in
the  preceding  chapter.

In  the  account  of  the  confusion  and  dispersion,  Äíoses
speaks  in  such  general  terms  that,  at  first  view,  his  language
may  appear  to  admit  of  no  qualification.  Λ  httle  reflection,
however,  upon  tiie  subject,  and  a  coinparison  of  the   two


56


pas3iip;cs,  amongst  themselves,  Λνΐΐΐ  discover  that  it  both  admits
and  requires  a  considerable  limitation.

Tor,  in  the  first  place,  the  confederacy  was  not  headed  by
Noah  himself,  or  by  either  of  his  sons  or  grandsons,  but  by  a
third  in  descent  from  Ham,  under  whom  it  cannot  be  supposed
that,  in  an  age,  when  patriarchal  authority  was  acknowledged
and  respeded,  any  of  the  elder  branches  would  enlist  them-
selves. Neither  Ham  nor  Cush  nor  either  of  his  brethren
could  then  have  been  amongst  the  subjects  of  Nimrodj  or  the
Babylonian  rebels.

Nor  did  the  patriarchs  stand  out  alone.  There  were  also
families  or  societies  of  men,  who  had  kept  aloof.  For  the
wickedness  and  persecution  of  Nimrod  became  proverbial,  and
continued  so  for  many  succeeding  generations.  "  Wherefore
it  is  said.  Even  as  Nimrod,  the  mightj/  hunter  before  the  Lord.'*
Now  this  proverb  could  not  have  been  used  amongst  his  ΟΛνη
subjeéts  and  associates,  who  embraced  his  cause  and  assisted
in  his  schemes;  but  in  certain  societies  which  had  rejected  his
authority,  and  abhorred  his  conduŵ;  and  consequently  became
the  objeóts  of  liis  rage.

And  many  such  societies  there  evidently  were.  For  as
Nimrod  became  a  mighty  hunter  or  persecutor  before  the
Lord,  he  must  previously  have  divested  himself  of  all  venera-
tion for  the  Lord,  and  all  submission  to  his  authority.

Amongst  the  partizans  of  Nimrod,  there  could  have  been  no
true  piety.  Yet  in  several  parts  of  the  country  where
Abraham  sojourned,  and  in  the  family  and  amongst  the
friends  of  Job,  we  ilnd  righteous  societies,  who  worshipped
the  true  God.  Their  fathers  had  not  been  amongst  the
hunters  before  the  Lord,  or  the  apostates  from  the  primitive
religion.


57

Even  in  the  house  of  Ham,  the  apostacy  had  not  been
general.


Abraham  had  lately  come  from  Ur  of  the  Chaldecs,   a
icrhbourhood  where  the  condi
could  not  have  been  forgotten.


nciíîhbourhood  where  the  conduól  of  jSimrod  and  his  associates


Upon  his  arrival  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  where  some  hords
of  the  Giants  Λvere  now  settled  amongst  the  inhabitants,  he
observed  the  same  corruption  of  religion  and  morals,  which
had  once  prevailed  at  Babylon.  It  Λvas  therefore  natural  for
hnn  to  conclude,  that  this  degeneracy  was  become  almost
universal  in  the  house  of  Ham.  Accordingly  he  imagined
that  the  fear  of  God  Λvas  not  in  Egypt  or  the  land  of  the
Philistmes,  as  he  approached  the -borders  of  those  countries  j
but  he  Λvas  agreeably  undeceived.     Gen.  xii.  and  xx.

Pharaoh  acknowledges  the  hand  of  the  Lord,  and  the
obligation  of  the  moral  law.

Abimelech,  the  king  of  the  Philistines,  not  only  reveres  the
sacred  name  and  a<5ts  with  as  much  conscientious  integrity  aä
Noah  himself  could  have  done,  but  also  appeals  to  the
Almighty  for  the  general  uprightness  of  his  people.  "  Lor.D,
wilt  thou  slay  also  a  righteous  nation  Γ

This  nation  must  have  conduéted  itself  in  a  manner  very
different  from  other  ziicked  nations,  which  the  Lord  had
recently  destroyed.

The  religion  and  morals  then  of  the  old  Egyptians,  and  of
their  descendants  the  old  Philistines,  Avere  not  derived  from
the  apostate  race.  They  were  hitherto  patriarchal  and  pri-
mitive, a  certain  proof  that  their  fathers  had  not  been  conie-
derates  with  iSimrod.


58


Tiíe  prevalence  of  the  name  of  Nimrod  furnishes  anothei
argument  against  tlis  universality  of  his  command.  His  own
subjeéls  could  never  have  styled  him.  The  Rebel,  or  Soìì  oJ
Rcbdlion.  They  seem  to  have  called  him  hÿ'^  Baal,  Belus,
The  Ruler ;  the  verb  b^fZ  implying,  To  have  or  take  possession

of,  or  authority  over  a  thing;  to  marry  or  appropriate

Parkhurst.

The  same  term  is  used  as  an  epithet  for  the  obje6ls  of
idolatrous  worship,  particularly  the  Sun ;  but  we  are  not  from
hence  to  inter,  that  Nimrod  and  the  Sun  were  regarded  as
the  same  })€rson.  The  title  of  Ruler  may  have  been  comraoa
to  them  witli  many  others.

The  general  use  of  the  name  of  Babel  is  another  circum-
stance, which  forcibly  argues  the  limitation  of  Nimrod's
party.

As  the  builders  could  not  have  distinguished  their  City  by
a  term  which  had  any  reference  to  confusion,  we  need  not
regard  Babel  as  a  play  upon  the  original  name,  or  at  all
similar  to  it.  I  rather  think  this  name  is  nearly  preserved  by
Moses,  and  recognized  in  the  language  of  mythology.

The  children  of  men  said.  Let  us  build  tj^  a  city,  and
inJD  a  tower,  and  let  us  make  us  at!/  a  Name,  or  Renown.

This  was  the  order  by  which  they  ascended  the  climax  of
their  ambition:  but  when  they  had  attained  the  highest  step,
they  must,  from  thence,  have  named  their  city.  They  must
have  called  it  C2\V  Shem,  the  Name,  or  Renoicn.  The  other
degrees  would  naturally  be  subjoined,  to  make  out  its  descrip-
tion. Thus  it  became  ^UQ  Ί'ν  C21Ü  "RENOWN,  tlie  city
of  tlie  Tüwer.'•'


59

Instead  of  òlM,  tîie  children  of  men.  may  have  employed
IIDy,  Amud,  A  Column  or  pillar,  a  term  nearly  synonimous
with  the  former,  and  which  is  emphatically  applied  to  The
pillars  of  Heaven,  or  the  Coiies  of  mountains,  and  therefore
Λvas  a  very  apt  term  to  describe  that  tower,  whose  top  mi*^ht
reach  to  Heaven.  The  name  would  then  stand  thus  ^1f3ÿ  Τ);  CDiZ?
Sliem  OlrAmud.  Hence  perhaps  the  Semiramis,  Scmiramid^os
of  mythology,  the  name  by  which  Ninus  or  the  Ninevite,  in  a
subsequent  age,  married,  or  took  j^ssesaion  o/^ Babylon.

If  this  conjecture  be  admitted,  we  may  regard  Nimrod  and
Babel  as  names  which  \vere  imposed  only  b}^  the  enemies  of
this  ambitious  prince.  And  the  prevalence  of  these  names
proves  that  his  enemies  were  numerous.

Are  we  then  to  conclude,  that  the  associates  of  Nimrod
consisted  solely  of  his  brethren  and  their  children?  This
will  by  no  means  follow.  For,  had  one  family  only  formed
a  conspirac}^,  the  express  reason  here  assigned  for  their
enterprize  could  not  have  applied.  In  that  case,  they  could
not  have  been  forced  upon  the  expedient  of  making  themselves
a  name,  "  Lest  they  should  be  scattered  abroad  υροη  the  face
of  the  whole  earth"  for  their  destined  habitation,  as  one
family,  must  have  been  in  some  certain  pari  of  the  earth,  and
in  the  neighbourhood  of  each  other;  v.hereas,  on  the
contrary,  they  clearly  understood  that  it  was  intended,  they
should  be  separated  from  one  another,  to  the  most  remote
corners.  And  accordingly,  we  find  that  the  Lord  interposed
his  power,  while  they  were  yet  in  the  prosecution  of  their
design,  beginning  to  build  the  city  and  tlie  tower,  and
scattered  them  from  thence  upon  the  face  of  all  the  earth.  In
all  probability,  he  scattered  them  into  those  several  regions,
which  had  been  originally  destined  for  their  respective
habitations,  and  v/hither  many  of  their  obedient  brethren  had
already  repaired.


60


Again:  the  language  of  ϋιΟΛνΙιοΙο  earth  had  been  one,  to
the  acra  of  the  confusion :  yet  Moses  speaks  of  tlie  vavioua
tongues  of  tlje  children  of  Shem  and  of  Japheth,  as  \veü  as
of  the  descendants  of  Ham,  at  the  time  when  they  retired  to
their  respective  patiimonies.  The  progeny  of  the  former
pati-iarchs  were  not,  therefore,  Λvholly  clear  of  die  rebellion  or
of  its  punishment.

The  tradition  of  almost  every  country  presents  us  with
certain  giants,  exiles  and  wanderers,  who  intruded  amongst
the  more  regular  and  orderly  inhabituiits,  and  wliose  condition
was  at  once  the  objeét  of  pity  and  detestation.

Upon  the  whole,  it  may  be  thought  most  agreeable  to  the
Mosaic  history,  to  universal  tradition,  and  to  truth  itself,  to
conclude  that  some  of  the  children  of  each  of  the  tlux^e  great
patriarchs  joined  in  the  impious  confederacy,  and  that  other
branches  in  each  of  these  families,  rejeéted  the  proposal,
Nimrod's  subjeéìs  then  consisted  not  of  families,  but  of
individuals,  of  a  certain  temper  and"  disposition.

As4iis  confederac}•  did  not  embrace  the  whole  of  mankind,
there  can  be  no  reason  to  suppose  that  those  who  Λν6Γ6  not
concerned  in  it,  immediately  lost  either  their  religion  or  their
language,  or  any  part  of  the  valuable  traditions  of  their
fathers.

Whatever  may  have  been  the  extent  of  the  Babylonian
rcbelUon,  it  could  not  have  overthrown  the  original  plan  of
a  regular  allotment.  Tt  was  itself  overthrown  by  a  miracle:
And  the  Almighty  does  not  exert  his  miraculous  power,  to
frustrate,  but  to  enforce  and  accomplish  the  designs  of  his
providence,  and  to  bring  to  nought  the  counsels  of  wicked
i^en.    The  miraculous  interposition  which  now  took  place^


01


îîiust  have  been  fully  adequate  to  the  pui-pose  for  which  it
was  intended.  It  must  have  operated,  as  an  effetìual  cor-
redion,  or  as  a  signal  punishment,  whieli  disposed  the  remains
of  the  human  race  to  comply  with  the  Divine  decree.

Chronology  has  not  expressly  marked  the  aira  of  Nimrod's
rebellion,  or  of  the  dispersion  of  his  adherents.  But  as  tlie
immediate  objeft  of  the  former  was  to  prevent  the  executioa
of  a  decree,  which  appears  to  have  been  published  at  the  time
of  the  birth  of  Peleg,  we  may  conclude  that  it  took  place  soon
after  that  event.  Nimrod  might  now  be  60  or  öö  years  old,
about  the  same  age  as  Salah,  his  parallel  in  descent.  If  so,
he  wacs,  not  in  early  youtli,  but  in  tlie  prime  of  niiinhood. —
For  though  the  patriarchal  age  w  as  hitherto  of  great  extent,
yet  it  appears  that  men  soon  came  to  maturity.  In  the  first
century  after  the  deluge,  they  married  and  had  children,
generall3'  about  the  age  of  thirty.

The  Samaritan  copy  regularly  adds  100  years  to  the  age  of
the  patriarchs  both  before  and  after  the  flood,  at  the  birth  oi'
their  sons ;  so  that  the  birth  of  Peleg  is  removed  to  about  400
years  after  the  deluge.  IMany  learned  men  adopt  this  chro-
nology, because  it  allows  time  for  an  increase  of  populatiou
suitable  to  the  great  events  of  his  time.

]May  I  offer  a  few  remarks  on  this  subjeiTt?

1 .  Down  to  the  death  of  Noah,  Moses  regularly  gives  the
age  of  the  father,  at  the  birth  of  such  a  sou,  he  adds  the
remaining  years  of  his  liie,  and  then  sums  up  the  whole. —
The  constant  chauge  of  this  enumeration  cannot  have  hap-
pened through  the  mere  inadvertency  of  transcribers.  Some
wilful  and  systematical  corruption  must  be  supposed^  either  iii
the  Hebrew  or  Samiiritau  text.


62


2.  Nothing  of  the  kind  has  been  laid  to  the  ciiarge  of  the
Jews.  The  pious  men  who  revised  the  sacred  books  after  tlie
captivity,  certainly  used  the  best  copies  that  were  to  be  found.
Their  transcripts  were  long  preserved.  The  people  after
tliis  pejiod  never  relapsed  into  idolatry.  Their  numerous
scribes  must  have  deteóted  eiTor,  and  the  mutual  jealousy  of
their  seels  exposed  corruption.  Beside,  the  lawgiver  of  the
house  of  Jndah  was  under  the  care  of  a  special  providence  till
the  Shiloh  came,  and  our  reliance  upon  the  authority  of  the
scriptures  rests^  in  a  great  measure,  upon  the  firm  belief  that
they  have  not  been  wilfully  corrupted.

3.  The  half  pagan  Skmaritans,  who  rejeded  a  great  part
of  the  sacred  canon,  may  be  supposed  to  have  taken  unwar-
ranted liberties  with  the  books  tliey  retained,  in  order  to
countenance  their  heathenish  errors.  And  it  was  an  error  of
the  Heathens  that  dnrwg  the  second  or  Silver  age  men
remained  with  their  mothers  for  100  years,  in  a  state  of
infancy,  which  was  succeeded  by  a  short  and  infirm  period  of
manhood.  Hesiod.  Έςγ.  «α*  Hji*  «.  v.  129.  How  contrary  is
this  to  the  pui^pose  of  Providence  declared  Gen.  ix.  1.  ?

4.  The  very  old  and  grey-headed  friends  of  Job,  about  the
time  of  Abraham,  repeatedly  speak  of  men  of  a  former  age
(and  whose  term  of  life  abundantly  exceeded  theirs)  as  still
existing.  This  could  not  have  been  the  case  upon  the  Sama-
ritan scheme  of  chronology ;  but  upon  that  of  the  Hebrew
text,  it  was  a  certain  truth.

5.  As  the  Samaritan  copy  does  not  add  to  the  number  of
generations,  but  only  retards  the  population  of  mankind,  I
cannot  perceive  how  its  chronology  would  remove  the  objeélion
respeéting  the  age  of  Peleg.  If  the  race  was  prolific  at  the
age  of  thirty,  it  must  evidently  have  increased  as  much  in  100


63

3'ears  as  it  would  have  clone  in  400^  supposi
childi-en  till  they  were  130.

6.  Observe  the  patriarchs  from  Arphaxad  to  Nahor
according  to  the  Hebrew  text.  The  variety  of  their  ixge^s  when
they  became  parents  is  natural  and  probable,  35,  30,  34,  30,
32,  30,  29.  Whereas  the  135,  130,  134,  130,  132,  130,  129
of  the  Samaritan  copy  presents  a  monotony  unprecedented  in
history,  and  highly  improbable  in  itself.

At  the  age  of  60  or  65  Nimrod  may  have  retairted  as  much
of  the  fire  of  youth  as  w^uld  dispose  him  to  undertake  a  great
and  daring  enterprize,  and,  at  the  same  time,  have  acquired
as  much  of  the  resolution  and  decision  of  manhood,  as  would
enable  him  to  persevere  in  it.  At  no  period  of  his  life  couki
he  have  been  better  qualified  to  plan  the  city  and  kingdom  of
Babel.  Those  hardy  adventurers,  who  gathered  round  him,
may  not  indeed  have  been  sufficiently  numerous,  immediately
to  accomplish  the  design ;  but  they  may  have  entered  upon  it
with  confidence,  calculating  upon  the  long  prospeci;  of  their
own  lives,  and  the  assistance  of  their  children,  who  were
continually  multiplying.

How  far  they  had  proceeded  in  their  enterprize,  and
extended  the  limits  of  their  kingdom,  before  the  scheme  was
completely  ruined,  may  be  a  difficult  question  to  decide.

The  opinion  that  Nimrod  was  the  builder  of  Nineveh,  and
the  founder  of  the  Ass^-rian  empire,  has  antiquity  on  its  side,
and  has  been  generally  received.  But  I  recolleét  no  authority
from  the  old  testament  which  determines  this  point,  and  all
that  can  be  coUeóted  from  heathen  authors,  respecting  an  event
of  such  remote  antiquity,  may  be  regarded  as  doubtfiil.  Even
here  Ninus  is  represented  as  marrying  not  begetting  Semirami=


64


— tnkhig  possessiûn  of,  not  building  Babylon.  It  is  clear  that
the  Babylonian  and  Assyrian  kingdoms  were  originally  two
distin(5l  things.  The  latter  I  think  had  not  crossed  the
Hiddekel  or  Tigris  in  the  time  of  Moses,  that  riveu  flowing
noip,  before,  or  in  front  of  it,  and  not  toward  tlie  East,  as  it
is  in  our  translation.  Its  boundary  then  lay  at  a  considerable
distance  from  Babylon.

I  am  aware  that  some  translators  of  credit  have  rendered
Gen.  X.  11.  to  this  purpose — "  And  out  of  that  country,  he
[Nimrod]  went  forth  to  Ashur,  and  built  IS'ineveh,  &,c."  But
this  seems  to  be  nothing  more  than  forcing  the  text,  in  order
to  support  a  pre-conceived  hypothesis;  for  besides  that  the
words  require  no  such  interpretation,  it  is  pretty  evident  from
the  context,  and  the  paragraph  in  the  beginning  of  chap.  xi.
that  Nimrod  did  not  go  forth  at  all  out  of  Babylonia,  before
the  catastrophe  of  his  ambition.  The  children  of  men  were
still  engaged  in  making  themselves  a  name,  and  in  building
the  city  and  tov.  er  of  Babel :  they  were  beginning  to  do  this,
at  the  time  when  the  confusion  of  tongues  took  place,  and  it
was  in  consequence  of  this  event  thei/  left  off  to  build  the  city.
They  had  been  hitherto  engaged  in  the  prosecution  of  their
original  design  at  Babe],  and  had  not  yet  completed  it. —
It  was  there  that  the  Lord  confounded  their  language,  and  it
was  from  thence  that  he  scattered  them.  The  whole  of  the
confederate  band  must  have  been  dispersed.  Had  a  party
been  left  behind  undisturbed,  they  would  soon  have  increased
to  a  multitude,  and  might  have  prosecuted  the  work  at  their
leisure:  whereas  on  the  contrary  we  are  told  that  the  design
was  wholly  broken  oft".  And  they  were  not  driven  from
Babylonia  into  Assyria,  but  dispersed  into  all  the  regions  of
the  known  world.  ^

It  appears  then,  that  Nimrod  did  not  go  forth  before  the


Ö5


overthrow  of  his  great  enterprize,  and,  if  he  survived  that
event,  we  cannot  suppose  him  afterwards  in  a  condition  to
build  great  cities,  and  establish  a  powerful  kingdom,  when  his
subjects  were  now  dispersed  over  the  face  of  the  earth.

It  is  said  indeed,  that  "  The  beginniiig  of  his  kingdom  was
Babel,  and  Erech,  and  Accad  and  Calneh  in  the  land  of
Shinar;"  and  it  may  be  asked.  Where  was  the  sequel  of  his
kingdom,  if  not  in  Assyria,  namely  Nineveh  Calah,  Resen,
&c.  as  it  follows  in  the  next  verses?  But  it  must  be  observed,
that  Nimrod  only  ùegan  a  kingdom:  he  did  not  complete  his
design.  He  only  began  to  be  a  mighty  one  in  the  earth. —
Whatever  meaning  we  attach  to  the  word  began  or  beginnùìg,
in  one  of  these  clauses,  must  be  equally  applicable  to  the
other.

I  cannot  but  subscribe  to  the  opinion  of  a  most  eminent
writer  of  the  present  age,  that  Ashur  who  went  forth  out  of
the  country  of  Shinar  and  built  Nineveh,  and  actually
founded  the  Assyrian  kingdom,  which,  in  time,  extended
itself  into  a  vast  empiie,  was  the  son  of  Shem  of  that  name. —
The  land  which  Nimrod  occupied  was  evidently  in  the  midst
of  the  portion  of  Shem.  His  other  sons  settled  about  the
Tigris  and  Euphrates.  Some  short  time  after  the  general  par-
tition, Ashur  may  have  begun  to  take  possession  of  his  lot,
amongst  his  brethren ;  but  finding  the  country  occupied  by
such  powerful  intruders,  he  may  have  been  compelled  to  give
way  and  fortify  himself  at  a  distance.  If  so,  Nineveh  Avas  not
built,  nor  the  Assyrian  empire  founded  bj/  Nimrod,  but
rather  because  of  Nimrod.

The  Assyrians,  in  after  ages,  extended  their  empire  over
Babylonia,  and  rebuilt,  or  enlarged  and  beautified  the  city  of
Confusion ;  but  the  nation  which  they  found  there,  and  which
Ε


66


Still  continued  to  inhabit  the  province,  Ϊ3  ahvays  dîstinguisíied
by  sacred  and  profane  authors  from  the  proper  Assyrians.

Some  faint  vestiges  of  the  history  of  this  people,  may  per-
haps guide  us  to  the  aera  of  the  confusion  and  dispersion  of
the  rebellious  band.     But  let  us  fast  consider  who  they  were.

I  am  aware  of  an  opinion  which  has  been  formed  by  a
writer  of  the  first  eminence,  fiom  their  local  situation,  and
from  circumstances,  tliat  Chus  was  the  head  of  this  famil}^,
and  IS'imrod  their  first  king.

But  when  it  is  recollected  how  generally  the  Chaldeans•
have  been  claimed  and  admitted  as  the  real  ancestors  of  the
Jewish  nation,  and  that  their  descent  from  theiiousc  of  Ham
rests  entirely  upon  circumstantial  proof,  I  hope  I  may  be
pardoned  for  withholding  my  assent  to  this  opinion.

May  we  not  gather  from  circumstances  equally  strong,  that
they  were  the  genuine  descendants  of  Shcm,  by  the  line  of
Arphaxad,  and  that  they  were  not  implicated  in  the  confe-
deracy under  Nimrod,  but  preserved  themselves  a  distinél
people  from  the  days  of  Pclcg,  when  the  earth  was  first
divided?

It  is  admitted,  upon  all  hands  that,  in  the  early  ages,
those  names  of  men  by  which  they  were  distinguished  in
liistory  were  relative  or  descriptive  terms.  They  alluded  to
some  peculiar  situation,  or  some  prominent  circumstance,
relating  to  the  persons  who  bore  them,  or  to  their  family. —
Tliey  were  not  alwaj-s  the  names  w  hich  had  been  given  in  a
state  of  infancy.  Abraham,  Sarah,  and  Israel  are  instances
of  the  contrary.  May  we  not  then  be  permitted  to  make  some
use  of  historical  name^,  where  historical  detail  is  wanting?     It


67

is  granted  that  some  of  llicse  titles^  though  tlicy  were  histo-
rical and  relative,  may  admit  of  various  interpretations,  and
that  it  is  not  eas}•,  in  all  cases,  to  point  out  their  precise
meaning.  The  occasion  of  them  is  sometimes  forgotten,  and
they  are  couched  in  a  language  that  is  not  entirely  preserved.
But  others  are  sufficiently  clear,  and  we  must  be  content  to
let  the  strong  support  the  weak.

One  of  the  sons  of  Heber  was  named  Peleg,  because  in  hk
days  the  earth  was  divided,  or  as  it  is  elsewhere  expressed.
The  Most  High  divided  to  the  nations  their  inheritance.  This
division  must  have  taken  place  at  the  time  of  Peleg's  birth,
for  at  no  other  period  of  his  life  can  Λνε  conceive  how  he
should  have  acquired  a  name  from  this  circumstance.  Peleg
could  not  then  have  been  at  the  head  of  a  colony.  In  fact,
Λνε  find  he  was  not.  The  chief  of  the  family  was  his  father
Heber,  who  communicated  a  general  name  to  all  tiie
Hebrev/s,  or  to  several  nations  of  his  descendants.

The  name  of  Heber  signifies,  To  cross  over,  or  simply  The
opposite  side.  This  name  he  seems  to  have  acquired  from  the
circumstance  of  his  crossing  over,  with  his  family,  to  the  East
side  of  the  Euphrates,  from  the  tumultuous  assembly  o£
Nimrod,  vrho  had  seated  themselves  on  the  Western  bank
where  old  Babylon  is  supposed  to  have  stood.  It  is  clear  that
the  family  of  Heber  dwelt  on  the  East  side  of  the  Euphrates,
in  a  narrow  part  of  the  country,  between  that  river  and  the
Tigris,  and  as  Shem  is  said  to  be  the  father  of  all  the
children  of  Heber,  or  The  other  side,  it  should  seem  that  none
but  his  descendants  removed  thither  or  remained  there.  The
first  acquisition,  v*hich  we  read  cf,  to  the  family  of  Heber
Λνα3  Reu,  the  son  of  Peleg.  This  name  is  interpreted  by
some  A  Friend  or  near  neighbour.  Heber  may  have  con-
trasted his  own  little  society  with  the  hostile  rout  beyond  the


68


/lood,  and  called  them  his  friends  or  neighboin?,  and  the
land  where  he  dwelt  The  land  of  Friends,  or  Fricndlarul•
In  allusion  to  this  circumstance,  Peleg  may  have  regarded
his  eldest  son,  as  one  added  to  the  society  of  friends.

But  as  the  name  may  import  A  Shepherd  or  Feeder  of
Cattle,  and  as  the  Hebrews,  wliether  in  Mesopotamia,  in  the
land  of  Canaan,  or  in  Egypt,  made  pasturage  their  peculiar
occupation,  I  conjeâ;ure  that  this  is  the  meaning  intended  by
ihe  name  of  1;^-|,  and  that  it  intimates  that  the  Hebrews
immediately  applied  themselves  to  rural  employments,  and
not  to  the  building  of  cities.  By  his  Greek  name  Payat/,  this
son  of  Peleg  claims  the  country  about  the  Tigris  and  Eu-
phrates,  Ef  TDK  Οροι;  Vetyccu.      Judith  i.

It  is  then  pretty  clear,  that  the  family  of  Heber  did  not
enrol  itself  under  the  banners  of  Isimrod,  or  assist  him  in  the
building  of  Babel  and  the  other  cities  which  constituted  his
kingdom.  Neither  did  this  family  Avithdraw  itself  to  a  great
distance,  like  tliat  of  Ashur.  The  Hebrews  merely  stepped
out  of  the  way,  and  occupied  the  country  beyond  the  stream.

But  in  this  country  they  were  certainly  the  principal  people.
Rcu  or  Ragau's  name  was  communicated  to  the  territory. —
Both  himself  and  his  relations  must  then  have  been  in  pos-
session of  it.  They  must  have  maintained  such  possession,
for  his  name  continued  there.  And  he  left  it  to  his  posterity,
for  Kagau  himself  survived  the  birth  of  Abraham  about  18
years,  and  we  iind  that  Ur,  the  centre  of  Chaldea,  Avas  the
land  of  Abraham's  nativity — there  was  his  own  country,  his
kindred  and  his  father's  house.

AMien  Abraham  and  Lot  removed  to  Padan-Aram,  still
%\ilhai  the  borders  of  liagau,  to  u  city  which  appears,  by  its


09

several  uamcs,  to  have  belonged  to  Lot's  father,  and  Abraham's
grandfather^  and  was  therefore  part  of  the  family  estate;
Nahor,  Abraham's  elder  brother,  still  continued  at  Ur  οι  the
Chaldees,  his  paternal  home.  Some  of  his  children  seem  to
have  remained  there  after  him,  Avhilst  others  spread  themselves
over  Padan-Aram,  higher  up  between  the  streams,  and  stiU
within  the  borders  of  Ragau.  It  is  absolutely  evident  that  the
famil}'  of -Heber  did  not  reside  in  these  countries,  as  depen-
dants on  any  other  family.

Nahor  was  undoubtedly  King  of  Chaldea  and  Padan-Aram.
His  consort  is  known  to  us  simply  by  the  name  of  π3/Ώ,
Äíileah  or  the  Queen.  Amongst  the  children  of  JSahor  and
this  Queen,  we  find  ΎιΙί'Ώ  Chesed,  the  Chaldean,  the  founder
or  chief  of  that  distinct  family,  and  ^Siop  Kemuel,  Established
of  God,  the  father  of  Aram,  Patriarch  or  Prince  of  that
nation  v»hich  inhabited  Padan-Aram,  Aram  Naharaim,  or  the
rich  and  extensive  country  of  Mesopotamia.

Laban  the  son  of  Bethuel,  tlie  son  of  Nahor,  dwelt  in  this
country,  in  the  city  of  Haran,  which  is  also  called  the  city  of
Nahor,  and  amongst  his  brethren,  whom  he  convoked  upon
the  flight  of  Jacob.  He  haci  pastures  of  three  days  jomney  in
extent,  not  in  a  strange  land  as  a  sojourner,  but  in  his  own
land  and  that  of  his  brethren.  This  Laban,  in  consequence
of  his  belonging  to  the  family  of  Kemuel,  and  of  his  residence
in  Padan-Aram  is  called  »ΰΊΚ  the  Aramite.  I  think  it  ought
not  to  be  translated  Sp-ian,  as  by  this  term  \ve  generally  un-
derstand an  inhabitant  of  Syria  proper,  and  a  descendant  of
Aram  the  son  of  Shem.

^^'e  may  hence  perceive  the  greatness  of  the  sacrifice  Avhich
Abraham  made  to  his  faith,  when  he  Avent  out  from  his  own
|aud,    not    knowing    whither    he    went,    and    became     a^
Ε  3


70

sojourner,  d'.velling  in  tabernacles  in  a  strange  country.  He
submitted  to  a  condition  veiy  difterent  from  that  to  \vhich  he
was  born.  Yet  we  find  this  patriarch's  high  rank  duly  ac-
knowledged by  the  Canaanites  themselves.  He  is  styled  My
Lord,  and  a  Mighty  Prince,  even  by  the  Princes  of  the
Country,  though  he  was  but  a  stranger  amongst  them,  and
possessed  not  a  foot  of  land.  Kings  go  forth  to  meet  him,
attended  by  the  first  oflicers  of  their  state,  honour  him  as  their
equal  in  dignity,  and  conclude  solemn  treaties  with  him.

It  cannot  be  urged  in  objection,  that  the  family  of  Heber,
as  friends  and  associates  of  another  people,    who  may  be
regarded  as  the  proper  Chaldeans,  may  have  enjoyed  peculiar
immunities  and  privileges,  and  even  have  been  included  in  .
tlie  national  name.

Whatever  the  title  iẅ'D  or  »t^d  may  have  originally  im-
ported, I  think  it  can  have  nothing  at  all  to  do  with  Cush
the  son  of  Ham.  It  belongs  exclusively  to  the  line  of  Ar-
phaxad,  whose  own  name  is  a  compound  of  ND"i  and  -i;i'D,and
seems  to  imply  a  Healer  or  Restorer  of  "iü'd.  It  may  have
superseded  the  former  name  Caman,  Λvhich  is  retained  in  the
Septuagint  version,  and  therefore  be  nothing  more  tlian  an
epithet,  which  tliis  patriarch  acquired  in  the  days  of  his
manhood.

As  Nahor  was  about  60  years  older  than  Abraham,  his  son
Chesed  may  liave  been  about  the  same  age  as  his  uncle.  The
general  opinion  that  this  Chesod  was  the  chief  of  the  distincl
family  of  the  Chaldeans,  acquires  great  support  from  his
name,  exactly  copied  from  that  of  his  great  ancestor,  v.  ho
Avas  still  living  at  his  birth,  and  cxa6lly  preserved  in  the
Gentile  name  of  the  Chaldeans,  the  inhabitants  of  part  of
>iahor's  kingdom.     Why  should  this   son  be   emphatically


tíylcJ  the  Chaldean,  unless  it  was  because  Chaldea  was  his
share,  in  the  distribution  ot"  Nahor's  inheritance  among  his
cbildrçn  ?  Those  rehitions  and  descendants  ot"  isaiior  who
continued  in  this  district,  retained  the  name  of  D'ltii'D,  while
those  who  settled  in  the  portion  of  Kerauel,  the  father  or
j>iince  of  Aram,  obtained  that  of  U'QIK.

It  appears  to  me  that  these  Chaldeans,  after  the  dhpemor}
a/  Ν  im  rod's  part  I/,  and  the  overthrow  of  his  kingdom,  extended
themselves  over  Babylonia.  Hence  authors  derive  the  family
of  the  Jews,  sometimes  from  the  Babylonians,  and  sometimes
irom  the  Chaldeans.

Semiramis  is  a  well-known  mythological  name  of  Babylon:
And  Stcph.  Byzant.  V.  U'Jxta,  informs  us  from  Alexander
Polyhistor,  that  the  Jews  and  idumeans  or  Edomites  were
descended  from  the  children  of  Semiramis.  They  were  not
descended  from  the  first  founders  of  Babylon ;  but  from  a,
people  who  were  very  early  in  possession  of  it:  perhaps  long
before  the  birth  of  Chesed.

The  author  of  the  book,  De  Mando,  which  is  ascribed  to
Philo,  equally  derives  the  race  and  the  learning  of  the  Jews
from  the  ancient  Chaldeans.  All  this  coincides  with  the  testimo-
nies of  Moses  and  Joshua,  and  with  the  express  declaration,
Judith  V.  6.  that  the  Jews  were  of  the  race  of  the  Chaldeans.
We  learn  from  the  two  next  verses,  that  some  branches  of  the
Chaldeans,  or  house  of  licber,  rejected  the  corrupt  worship  of
their  fathers,  and  removed  into  Mesopotamia,  which  they  go-
verned for  a  long  time.  The  more  numerous  branches,  which
still  continued  in  their  native  country,  were  so  far  from  wishing
to  detain  them,  that  they  thrust  them  Ibrth  from  the  presence
of  their  gods.

The  ancient  Chaldeans  then  were  not  descendants  of  Ham,


■72

They  were  the  children  of  Shem  and  of  Arphaxad,  and  the
genuine  ancestors  of  tlie  Jewish  nation.

These  were  the  people  who  possessed  that  part  of  Chaldea,
which  lay  between  the  rivers,  from  the  time  of  the  general
allotment  in  the  days  of  Peleg;  who  afterwards,  upon  thfe
destrunion  of  JSimrod's  kingdom,  began  to  extend  their
dominion  over  Babylonia,  and  held  it  for  many  ages,  till  it
\vas  incorporated  with  the  growing  empire  of  Ashur.  And
these  weie  the  people  who  raised  the  fame  of  Babylon  to  such
eminence  in  the  annals  of  ancient  lore.

Whether  this  celebrated  city  was  part  of  their  intended
patrimony  or  not,  they  seem  to  have  been  put  in  peaceable
possession  of  it,  in  the  days  of  Arphaxad,  the  restorer  of  the

The  names  of  the  descendants  of  Shem,  in  the  line  down  to
Abraham,  are  evidently  descriptive  of  the  successive  conditions
■of  the  Chaldean  family.  As  it  is  probable  that  the  precise
meaning  of  these  names  is  not  always  to  be  obtained  from  the
Hebrew  dialeél,  Í  could  wish  to  see  it  investigated  by  a  good
general  orientalist,  a  charaéler  to  which  I  have  no  pretension.
On  the  present  occasion,  I  must  content  myself  with  setting
them  down  in  their  order,  together  with  those  derivations  and
interpretations  which  are  usually  given,  and  adding  a  few
conjeétures.

*Tîi>DD"ii<  Arphaxad,  from  ND^l  He  healed,  repaired,  restored,
consolidated,  Ώ,  un  adverb  of  similitude,  and  T\IJ  Devastation.

But  as  n\Uj  thus  derived,  is  not  likely  to  have  formed  the
name  of  a  great  people,  may  it  not  imply  3  according  to,  >^ty
the  Almighty,  the  Disposer:   intimating  that  they  were  the


73

true  possessors  of  the  land  by  Divine  appointment  f  Or  else,
it  may  come  from  d  about,  and  ηζ'ϋ  or  lìD  the  Stream,  so  as
to  be  descriptive  of  their  local  situation.

Tiie  initial  κ  in  Arphaxad,  forms  the  first  person  future,
perhaps  intimating  that  the  name  arose  from  a  declaration
made  by  this  patriarch — "  I  will  heal  the  true  possessors — or
— the  dwellers  about  the  stream."

In  the  story  of  Judith,  tlie  same  name  is  iriven  to  a  king  of
the  Medes,  probably  in  allusion  to  the  history  of  Arphaxad;
as  we  find  this  prince  had  entered  upon  a  similar  design — to

liberate  the  Chaldeans  from  under  the   Assyrian    yoke.

row,  Salah,  He  shot  or  cast;  sent  forth_,  sent  away;  a
dart,  a  missile  ivcapon.

*l3ÿ,  Heber;,  he  passed  over;  The  opposite  side.  :íVd  Pcleg,
He  divided ;  a  stream.

liT"»,  Rcu,  Ragau,  from  n^;"!  He  united;  fed;  a  friend:
Perhaps  rather,  A  Shepherd^  or  feeder  of  flocks — the  same
as  nyn.


y\'^'<V,  Serug,  from  :»nr  to  be  wreathed,  twisted;  a  weak  or
tender  branch.


*1ΐΠ3  Nahor:  "  it  has  some  afiinity  to  the  Chald.  root  'y^n
to  liberate  or  set  free." — G.  Pasor.  Perhaps  its  meaning  may
be  intimated  in  the  Heb.  ΊΠ3,  >ΠΊπ3,  Snorting,  as -of  a  war-
horse,  enraged  and  exulting.     Job  xxxix.  20.  Jer.  viii.  l6.

n*in  Terah,  from  πη  Is.  spacious,  refreshed;  space,
interstice,  distance,  breath,  spirit.


74     ■

'Mav  í  not  be  allo^vecl  to  iní'er  fiom  this  scries  that,  about
the  time  of  Reu's  biith,  Heber,  \vho  had  passed  over,  or  whq
occupied  the  opposite  side  of  the  stream,  had  coUeéted  his
friends  and  relatives  in  social  union;  or  else,  that  the  Hebrewg
had  already  betaken  themselves  to  the  peaceful  occupation  of
shepherds — that  about  the  time  when  Serug  was  born,  Nimrod
was  extending  his  kingdom  on  both  sides  of  the  Euphratc:!:,
and  building  Erech  and  Accad  and  Calneh,  the  outposts  of
his  great  city,  and  that,  in  consequence  of  thio,  tlie  Hebrews
now  began  to  bej9t;/;f/f.rei/,  weak,  andaŷiictedí

This  must  have  been  the  time  for  Arphaxad,  the  great
patriarch  of  the  Hebrew  family,  to  begin  to  exert  himseli^ — to
form  that  resolution,  make  that  declaration,  and  undertake
that  enterprize  which  gave  him  the  name  of  tlie  Kestorer  or
healer  of  the  D'^DD.

This  design  he  ma}•  have  carried  into  effetì,  by  forming  α
confederacy  with  liis  brethren,  and  attacking  the  subjetìs  of
I\'imrod  in  open  war.  And  it  is  pretty  clear,  from  some
allusions  to  this  event,  in  the  old  testament,  as  vvell  as  froni
the  general  language  of  mythology,  that  the  confusion  of
tongues  was  not  the  only  means  employed  for  the  breaking
up  of  the  rebellious  kingdom.  The  Lord  confounded  their
language,  and  theij  hfl  ojf  to  build  the  cit^:  and  then,  thti
Lord  scattered  them  from  thence.

In  other  passages  of  scripture,  the  Lord  is  said  to  have
scattered  his  enemies,  when  he  discomfitted  them  before  the
armies  of  his  servants.  The  same  external  means  seems  to
have  been  employed  upon  this  occasion,  accompanied  perhaps
with  an  awful  confliòl  of  the  elements.  It  was  in  war  that
the  Gods  and  sons  of  tiie  Gods  scattered  the  Giants,  from  tliQ
heap  they  were  raising,  or  buried  them  under  its  ruins.


75

The  subjects  of  Nimrod  iiiduded  a  great  propoilion  of  the
human  race.  They  \a  ere  strong  and  they  were  coniident. —
How  greatly  inust  their  strength  have  been  reduced,  and  their
confidence  damped,  at  the  approach  of  battle,  when  an  evil
consciciK:e,  awakened  by  the  voice  of  thinider,  shook  their
inmost  frames,  and  a  supernamral  panic  convulsed  the  organs
of  speech,  so  that  they  could  utter  only  nnfornicd  sounds,  and
communicate  no  idea  to  their  conirades,  but  the  general  im-r
pression  of  horror  and  disjuay  !

Salah,  the  son  of  Arphaxad,  as  hià  name  imports,  must
have  been  an  active  warrior:  and  he  was  probably  instnmiental
in  Ubirating  the  ajfiicicd  Ilebrev/s,  or  in  pouring  forth  the
torrent  of  indignation,  about  the  time  of  the  elder  Nahor's
birth,  and  in  expelling  the  children  of  men  from  Babel,  about
90  years  after  their  great  rebellion.  They  had  already"  been
there  no  inconsiderable  time,  if  we  recollect  that  they  had  not
yet  lost  sight  of  their  original  design,  that  they  had  hitherto
been  employed  in  building  the  city,  that  they  were  but
beginning  to  do  this,  and  that  the  city  which  they  were
beginning  to  build  must  not  be  mistaken  for  Babylon  the
Great,  such  as  it  was  in  the  da^-s  of  Nebuchadnezzar.

The  early  overthrow  of  Nimrod's  power  may  be  inferred
from  other  circumstances.  Moses  names  the  iSoachidaî  Λνΐιο
divided  the  land,  Jfter  t/uir  nations.  In  other  words,  he
records  only  the  names  of  the  nations  they  respectively
planted.  It  should  then  seem  that  the  house  of  Heber,  after
an  interval  of  two  or  three  generations,  or  about  the  space  of
a  century,  (by  the  scale  in  Gen.  xi.)  gained  an  ascendency
over  the  house  of  Cush.  In  the  4th  degree  from  Noah  v.c
find,  K2D  and  π7ηπ  Seba  and  Havila,  sons  of  Cush,  and  in
the  öth  «3iy  Sheba,  his  grandson;  but  in  the  7th  degree,
Sheba  and  Havila  occur  amoniist  the  «rrandsons  of  Heber.—•


76

!^íav  wc  not  infer  tiiat  this  family  gained  possession  of  the
land  which  the  others  had  occupied?

.  Tlie  Schohast  upon  Apoll.  Argonaut.  L.  iv.  v,  320,  remarks
that  Timonax  (an  old  historian)  in  his  first  book  nact  Σχν^ΐύν,
reckons  50  different  nations  of  Scythas.  The  name  then  does
not  belong  to  a  certain  family,  but  to  a  certain  description  of
people  who  were  dispersed  over  various  regions.

St.  Epiphanius  says  that  tlic  people  who  went  under  the
general  name  of  Scythas  were  tliose  who  erected  the  tower,
and  built  Babel.     Advers.  Hcrcs.  p.  6.

lie  adds  that  Scjthism,  or  the  dominion  of  this  people,
extended  only  to  the  time  of  Serug,  and  that  from  Serug  to
Abraham,  and  from  thence  to  his  own  time,  Hellenism  or
gentilism  prevailed.     lb.  p.  9.

Tlie  declension  of  this  kingdom  may  again  be  inferred  from
tlie  early  aggrandizement  of  another  family  in  the  neigh-
bourhood. Al^out  300  years  after  the  birth  of  Peleg,  the  king
of  Elam,  or  the  South  of  Persia,  peopled  by  the  house  of
Shem,  was  the  Great  King.  The  kings  of  Shinar,  EUaser,
and  certain  other  nations  were  his  allies,  and  probably  his
tributaries.

The  branches  of  his  throne,  passing  diretìly  over  Shinar,
extended  1000  miles  to  the  West,  into  Arabia,  Idumea  and
Canaan,  where  he  had  vassal  princes,  of  the  race  of  the
dispersed  Giants,  whose  rebellion  he  chastized,  and  whom
either  himself  or  his  father  must,  in  the  first  instance,  have
awed  by  autliority,  or  reduced  by  force.

^  monarchy  thus  powerful  could  not  ha,yc  sprung  up  at


η

once;  it  must  have  taken  deep  root  in  tlie  East  before  it  could
acquire  sufficient  firmness  to  bear  down  the  weight  of  its
adversaries,  and  it  must  have  passed  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates
some  time  before  it  could  reach  the  banks  of  Jordan.  Tlie
house  of  Shem  had  then  prevailed  over  that  of  Cush,  before
the  days  of  Abraham.

It  may  be  a  question  of  some  importance  whether  the  Eastern
princes  called  ΤΚ-ΣΩΣ  or  Shepherd  Kings  ΛνΙιο,  according  to
Dr.  Hales,  Orient.  Coll.  v.  iii.  No.  2.  began  to  govern  Egypt
511  years  before  the  Exode  of  the  Israelites,  were  not  the
Satraps  of  the  Elamite.  Jerusalem  which  they  are  said  to  have
built  was  very  near,  if  not  within,  tiie  provinces  of  Che-*
dorlaomer.

Egypt  was  governed  by  a  Shepherd  about  430  years  before
the  Exode.  The  king  enti'eated  Abraham  well,  and  gave  him
Sheep,  and  Oxen,  and  He  asses,  and  She  asses  and  Camels. —
Gen.  xii.  Kings  display  their  munificence  b}-^  bestowing
estimable  tilings,  such  as  constitute  the  riches  of  their  country.

Before  the  descent  of  Jacob,  some  great  revolution  had
taken  place  in  the  minds  of  the  Egyptians.  At  that  tune  they
held  shepherds  in  abomination.  Perhaps  they  resented  the  ills
they  had  lately  suffered  From  them.

The  ancient  books  of  the  Hindus,  have  something  very
curious  upon  this  subjeét.  From  the  learned  traét  On  Egypt,
by  Lieut.  Wilford.  Asiat.  Res.  v.  3.  Lond.  Edit.  1801.  I
extraél  the  following  particulars.

"  It  is  related  in  the  Padma-Puran,  that  Satyavrata,  whose
miraculous  preservation  from  a  general  deluge  is  told  at  length,
in  the  Mutsya,  had  three  sons,  the  eldest  of  whoai  vr  as  named


Jyapeti,  or  Lord  ofihe  Earth.  The  others  were  Cliamia  and
^  Sharma,  Vvhich  last  words  arc,  in  tlie  vulgar  dialects,  usually
pronounced  Cham  and  Shaui;  as  we  frequontly  hear  Kishn
for  Crislma.  The  royal  patriarch,  for  such  is  his  charaucr  in
the  Pmáns^  was  particularly  fond  of  Jyapeti,  to  whüui  he
gave  ail  the  regions  to  the  North  of  Himalaya,  or  tlxe  Snowy
]\Iountains,  which  extend  from  sea  to  sea,  and  of  whicii
Caucasus  is  a  part.  To  S ha r ma  he  allotted  the  couuirics  ίο
the  Soidh  of  these  mountaim.  But  he  cursed  C'harma ;  because,
Avhen  tlie  old  monarch  was  accidentally  inebriated  with  a
strong  liquor  made  of  fcrmcnied  rice,  C'harma  laughed;  and
it  was  in  consecfLience  of  his  father's  imprecation  that  he
tecame  a  slave  to  the  slaves  of  his  brothers."     p.  312.

*■•'  C'harma  having  laughed  at  his  father — was  nick-named
Hasyasila,  or  tlie  Laugher;  and  his. descendants  were  called
from  him  Hásyasilas  in  Sanscrit — By  these  .descendants  of
C'harma  they  understand  the  African  Negroes,  whom  they
suppose  to  have  been  the  first  inhabitants  of  Abyssinia,  and
they  place  Abyssinia  partly  in  the  Dwipa  (or  country)  of
CusiiA."     p.  330.

ΛΤο  may  collect  from  a  variety  of  circumstances,  that
Cusha  Dwip  within)  extends  from  the  shore  of  the  Mediter-
ranean, and  the  mouths  of  the  Nile.,  to  Serhind,  on  the  borders
of  India,     p.  301.

Cusha-dwipa  without  is  Abyssinia  and  Ethiopia:  and  the
Brahmens  account  plausibly  enough  for  its  name,  by  asserting,
that  the  descendants  of  Cusha  hcing  obliged  to  leave  their
native  countri/,  from  them  called  C«s/;a-d\vipa  ziithin,
migrated  into  Sanc'ha-dwip,  and  gave  to  Üieir  new  settlement
fUe  name  of  their  ancestor,     p.  302.


9


All  this  remarkaLly  coincides  Avitb  the  Mosaic  history^  and
with  the  general  opinion  of  Europe  respciling  the  allotments
of  the  ISoachidse.  By  the  geography  of  Cusha-dvvip  zcithin,
it  is  evident  that  Cusha  was  no  other  than  the  Cush  of  JMoses,
the  son  of  the  mochcr.  The  Brahmens  finding  him  originally
settled  in  the  portion  of  Sharmn  or  Shem,  seem  to  have
mistaken  him  for  a  descendant  of  that  patriarch,  whose
posterity  they  re])rcsent  as  emigrating  into  Egypt,  Abyssinia
and  Ethiopia,  after  the  building  of  Padmamandira  on  the
banks  of  the  river  Curaiidvate,  or  the  tov.cr  of  ]3abcl  on  the
Euphrates. Seep.  311,  313.

They  were  acquainted  with  the  portion  of  Shcm  and  tb.c
doom  of  Ham,  but  they  had  forgotten  that  the  latter  seized
upon  the  portion  of  the  former,  which  he  was  afterwards
obliged  to  relinquish.

Not  only  the  name  of  Cush,  but  also  that  of  his  son  Sheba,
seems  to  have -passed  into  Abyssinia.  We  learn  from  Bruce,
that  the  Abj'ssinians  positively  claim  the  queen  of  Slieba  (who
visited  Solomon)  as  tlieir  sovereign.     But  to  return — •

Moses  speaks  of  the  v/hole  enterprize  of  the  children  of
men,  as  a  design  Avhich  was  ruined  almost  in  embrj'o.  Its  fall
could  not  then  have  been  protratìed  long  after  the  birth  of
the  elder  Nahor.

Arphaxad  was  at  this  time  I9I  years  old,  Salah  \ö6,
îleber  126,  Peleg  92,  Reu  62,  and  Serug  30.  They  may  all
have  taken  an  adive  part  in  the  Titanian  war,  and  in  the
complete  liberation  of  their  iVieuds,  about  the  close  of  the
second  century  after  the  flood.

From  henceforth,  the  interpretation  of  names  furnishes  no


80


liint,  respeíting  the  oppression  or  perplexity  of  the  family  of
Heber.  In  Terah's  time  they  had  been  enlarged  and  breathed
freely.  They  began  to  give  their  children  prineely  names,
indicating  their  great  prosperity.  Of  the  daughters  of  Haran,
one  was  Milcah,  tlje  Queen,  and  the  other  Avas  Sarai,  the
Princess.  The  cities,  the  regions,  and  the  nations  were  called
by  their  own  names.  How  exalted  must  have  been  the  ideas
of  aggrandizement  in  this  family,  when  they  blessed  the  female
branches,  saying — "  Thou  art  our  sister — ^be  thou  the  mother
of  Thousands  of  Mil/ions!  and  let  thy  seed  possess  the  gates

of  those  which  hate  tliem  !"     Gen.  xxiv.  GO. An  allusion

to  their  former  triumphs.

Tlie  posterity  of  Arphaxad  having  been  thus  early  invested
with  the  peaceable  possession  of  the  rich  territory  of  Padan-
Aram,  and  more  particularly  of  Chaldea,  must  be  the  people
to  whom  Ave  ought  to  ascribe  all  the  ancient  renown  of  the
Chaldean  nation.  To  them  must  be  referred  the  learning  of
the  Babylonians,  whether  they  themselves  owed  it  to  the
search  of  their  fathers,  or  to  their  own  genius  and  application.

They  cannot  have  been  indebted  for  their  arts  and  sciences,
to  the  giants  of  Babel,  who  were  scattered  abroad,  before  they
had  time  to  make  any  great  improvements  in  science,  had
they  been  so  disposed.  And  they  were  dispersed  with  cir-
cumstances too  humiliating  to  have  commanded  respecì;,  or
enabled  them  to  enforce  or  recommend  their  lessons.

Bat  of  the  disposition  of  these  apostates  for  extending
science,  we  have  very  little  information :  unless  a  profession
of  magic  and  sorcery  be  dignified  by  the  name  of  science.  If
they  could  fairly  pretend  to  any  merit  in  the  pursuit  of  useful
knowledge,  it  is  certain  that  books  and  truditiou  have  been
equally  injurious  to  theii•  memory.


81


The  old  poets  and  historians,  upon  almost  every  occasion,
shew  a  propensity  to  espouse  the  opposite  party.  The  poeins
of  the  Greeks,  their  poetic  histories,  the  Eddas  of  the  Goths,
the  legends  of  Persia  and  India,  the  traditions  of  the  Britons,
and  even  the  tales  of  the  Grcenlanders  describe  these  giants  so
much  alike,  that  it  is  evident  they  all  drew  from  one  original,
and  that  their  strokes  ai'e  copied  from  nature.

This  remarkable  concurrence  of  evidence,  from  times  and
places  so  remote  from  each  other,  carries  all  the  force  of  truth.
Universal  tradition  must  be  referred  to  some  universal  circum-
stance or  event.  And  the  traditions  respeòHng  the  deluge  are
not  more  uniform  or  more  general,  than  those  which  regard
the  giants.  All  ancient  nations  acknowledge  their  acquain-
tance with  such  a  race.  They  intruded  into  the  recesses  of
their  country,  they  lurked  amongst  their  caves,  their  forests,
their  rocks  and  their  desolate  places,  praòtising  sorcery  and
diabolical  arts,  exercising  all  manner  of  violence,  and  so  fierce
and  savage,  that  it  was  a  matter  of  indifference  tr•  them
whether  they  feasted  upon  a  sheep  or  a  man.  But  I  know  of
no  nation  Avhich  boasts  of  them  as  its  ancestors.

This  is  a  general  feature  in  ancient  tradition,  and  worthy  of
remark.  All  people  claim  the  family  that  was  preserved  at
the  deluge  as  their  own  pecidkir  ancestors,  and  the  founders
of  their  nation;  but  the  giants  are  always  detested  strangers,
with  whom  they  never  chose  to  have  anj"^  connection.  Some
Greek  writer  indeed  makes  Orpheus  the  Thracian  call  them.
Η/Α£Τ£ξω»τ  Qt^oyovoi  ητχπρων ;  but  it  IS  probable  the  Thracian  himself
would  have  been  more  shy  of  his  ancestors.

The  Greeks,  in  like  manner,  compliment  the  Celt^  with
their  descent  from  the  giants;  but  the  Celtai  themselves,
while  they  acknowledge  that  such  a  race  dwelt  amongst  thejn_,


82


strenuously  mainlain  that  they  were  dlsthict  from  the  real
founders  of  their  nation.

Were  not  these  giants  a  people  which  Λvcre  scattered  into
ail  lands,  whether  desolate,  or  occupied  by  a  more  orderly
race  of  inhabitants  ?  In  the  former  situation,  their  peculiar
traits  became  permanent;  in  the  latter,  they  were  lost  by
admixture.

There  Is  scarcely  a  trait  in  their  charaòler  which  either
sacred  or  profane  history,  or  popular  tradition,  vouchsafes  to
record,  but  their  pride,  their  impiety,  their  violence,  their
barbarity,  their  total  overthrow,  their  dispersion,  and  their
final  extinction.

Yes,  their  great  size,  and  consequently  their  superior
strength,  are  additional  traits  which  generally  enter  into  the
pictiu-e;  and  these  perhaps  may  be  agreeable  to  nature  and
to  tmth.

It  cannot  indeed  be  supposed,  that  the  associates  of  Nimrod
were  originally  either  larger  or  stronger  than  the  generality  of
men  in  that  age.  But  in  a  society  which  regarded  the  preva-
lence of  force  as  the  supreme  law,  a  superior  degTce  of  bodily
strength  would  create  a  distinction  of  rank,  and  must  there-
fore have  been  a  desirable  obje6l.  He  that  was  possessed  of
this  qualification,  would,  of  course,  be  constituted  the  leader
of  a  band.  The  most  ready  means  of  perpetuating  such  a
distinction,  amongst  his  children,  must  have  been  to  seleŵ,
for  his  consort,  the  stoutest  and  most  robust  of  the  females. —
Such  a  choice  frequently  repeated  could  not  fail  of  producing,
in  the  human  race,  the  same  effed  which  experience  as
certains  in  the  brute  creation.  It  would  gradually  enlarge
and  strenuthen  the  breed.


Wliat  we  read  of  the  ancient  Germans  sufficient]}'  proves^
that  the  art  of  personal  aggrandizement  is  not  chimerical.

The  hero  may  indeed  have  had  motives,  to  determine  liini
in  his  choice,  nearer  home,  than  regard  to  his  posterity.  The
brave  exertions  of  the  Heroine  would  be  of  great  weight  to
maintain  his  cause  in  the  courts  of  violence.

In  societies  thus  constituted,  the  more  feeble  of  each  sex
would  be  discarded  as  the  dregs  of  the  people.     ISo  choice

would  be  left  them,  but  to  intermarry  with  their  equals

Hence,  perhaps  the  race  of  dwarfs,  which  tradition  constantly
places  amongst  the  dwellings  of  the  giants.

Had  the  Giants  of  Babel  amassed  any  valuable  store  of
knowledge,  it  is  difficult  to  say  how  it  could  have  been
preserved  at  their  dispersion,  or  communicated  afterwards. —
Their  language  was  so  confounded  that  they  could  not  under-
stand each  other's  speech.  They  could  not  therefore  express
themselves  in  the  language  they  had  previously  used.  If  they
had  possessed  traditional  poems,  they  could  not  now  recite
them.  Iflhevhad  written  documents,  they  were  no  longer
in  a  condition  to  read  them.  They  could  not  converse  at  all
Λvith  those  whose  speech  had  not  been  confounded,  nor  with
such  clans  amongst  their  late  associates,  as  had  acquired  a
jargon  different  from  their  own.

Sanchoniathon,  speaking  of  those  people  who  v.cre  dis-
persed from  Babel,  says,  "  These  are  the  people  who  are
described  as  Exiles  and  Wanderers,  and  at  the  same  time  are
called  the  î'í7í/íís.— Euseb.  P.  E.  L.  i.

Their  real  situation,  after  the  dispersion,  appears  to  be  de-
scribed in  some  passages  of  the  book  of  Job;  one  of  these  I
shall  quote  at  length.

F  2


84


This  rigbtcons  man^  Chap.  xxx.  delineates  the  condhion  of
the  Fathers  of  a  race  of  men  who  were  his  contemporaries.
He  alludes  to  some  great  and  well  known  event  in  early-
history.     All  the  circumstances  of  the  description  can  surely


apply
Babel.


Iv  to  nothino;  else  than  the  Exiles  and  iVanderers  from


"  Now   they  that  are   younger  than  I   have  me  in

derision — whose  Fathers  I  would  have  disclaimed  to  set
with  the  dogs  of  my  flock.  Yea  whereunto  might  the
Strength  of  their  Hands  [Gigantic  force]  profit  me,
in  whom  Old  age  [the  wisdom  of  the  ancients]  was
PERISHED  !  For  want  and  famine  they  were  solitary;  fleeing
into  the  wilderness,  in  former  time  desolate  and  waste.  Who
cut  up  mallows  by  the  bushes,  and  juniper  roots  for  their
meat.  They  zccre  driven  forth  from  among  men  (they  cried
after  them  as  after  a  thief)  to  dicell  in  Cliffs  o/7/íeV allies,
in  Caves  of  the  earth  and  in  the  Rocks.  Among  the  bushes
they  Brayed,  under  the  nettles  they  were  gathered  together.
Theif  icere  children  of  Fools  [impious  sinners]  yea,  children
of  base  men;  they  were  viler  than  the  earth."  [Unworthy  of
the  land.]

Here  we  have  a  complete  pidure  of  savage  life,  and  the
true  history  of  its  origin,  amongst  the  children  of  fools,  who
rwere  driven  out  from  men,  to  dzccll  in  the  luilderness,^  in  cliffs,
'in  caves  and  amongst  the  rocks — zcho,  instead  of  speaking  like
human  bei/igs,  only  brayed  like  asses,  and  could  boast  of  no
desirable  quality,  but  superior  strength  of  hand.  They  are  not
described  sis  comprehending  the  whole,  but  a  contemptible
part  of  die  human  race.  Their  language  had  been  debased  in
a  manner  which  the  language  of  other  men  had  not :  i'or  in
comparison  with  tliis,  their  worde  resembled  only  the  vucifc"
ratio?ts  of  a  brute.     Though  the  leathers,  or  first  exiles  liad


85


ficd  to  the  wilderness,  or  hid  themselves  in  caves,  and  amoiigst
the  rocks  and  woods,  yet  their  posterity,  in  the  time  of  Job,
had  begun  to  assume  some  confidence,  and  to  associate  with
mankind ;  but  they  were  still  regarded  as  objeéb  of  scorn  and
detestation.

Tiiese  Fathers  were  undoubtedly  the  rebellious  and  van-^
quished  giants,  whose  features  arc  exact'}'  recognized  in  tlie
poetry  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  and  in  the  tales  and
traditions  of  all  primitive  nations,  amongst  zchom  they  were
scattered  abroad,  as  universal  monuments  of  the  punishment
of  pride  and  disobedience.  To  such  hordes  of  savages,  whether
they  continued  to  wander  in  the  desarts,  or  Avere  gathered
together  in  little  bands,  and  spotted  the  face  of  the  earth  with
their  cities  and  their  kingdoms,  we  cannot  surely  ascribe  the
primitive  traditions,  the  learning  and  the  knowledge  of  the
nations.  Had  the  tale  been  told  by  thenmkes,  they  could  not
have  told  it,  in  every  country,  so  much  to  their  own  disad-
vantage. They  were  not  then  the  depositories  nor  tlie
recorders  of  useful  knowledge.

Even  the  gentile  systems  of  religion  and  morality,  corrupt
and  deformed  as  they  were,  in  the  late  ages  of  history,  still
retained  traces  of  something  too  pure  and  primitive  to  have
been  taught  by  the  Titans.  The  heathen  world  in  general
had  indeed  grown  vain  in  their  imaginations,  and  their  foolish
heart  was  darkened  ;  but  it  Avas  darkened  by  degrees.  They
had  changed  the  glory  of  the  incorruptible  God  into  an
image  made  like  to  corruptible  iiian,  and  had  became  so  gross
in  their  ideas,  as  to  worship  and  serve  the  creature  more  than
the  Creator,  who  is  blessed  for  ever.  Yet,  in  some  measure,
they  knew  God,  in  some  measure,  they  glorified  him,  though
not  worthily,  or  as  God.  There  were  few  so  profane  as  to
say  to  the  Almight}-,  with  the  giants  before  and  after
F  3


86


the  ílood^  "  Depart  nom  us,  for  we  desire  not  the  knowledge
of  thy  wavs;"  or  "AVhat  is  the  Ahnighty  that  wc  should  serve
liinij  and  what  profit  shall  we  have  if  we  praj-  to  him  r"

Let  us  take  the  picture  from  the  fair  side,  which,  in  this
case,  ought  to  be  done,  and  we  shall  find  that,  amongst  the
heathens  of  Greece  and  Rome,  there  were  men  who  under-
stood and  respeóted  many  of  the  fundamental  principles  of
religion  and  morality.  There  were  men  who,  through  the
mist  of  allegorical  charaéìers  and  popular  superstition,  per-
ceived the  supremacy  of  one  omnipotent  and  universal  God,
the  lover  and  rewarder  of  virtue;  the  superintcndance  of  a
Divine  Providence,  and  the  difference  of  good  and  evil,  both
in  their  nature  and  their  consequences.

The  religion  of  the  heathens  had  not  then  the  appearance
of  haying  sprung  wholly  from  sudden,  wilful  and  daring-
innovation,  like  that  of  the  Titans,  or  of  Mahomet.  It  may
have  been  more  or  less  contaminated  by  the  horrid  rites  and
impure  practices  of  the  apostate  race,  in  proportion  as  the
offspring  of  the  giants  mixed  more  or  less,  with  the  inhabitants
of  certain  countries.  But,  in  general,  the  superstition  of  most
juitions  must  have  sprung  from  the  same  kind  of  gradual
corruptioîîs  of  the  primitive  religion,  as  produced  the  present
Homan  Catholic  and  Greek  Church,  from  the  pure  fountain
of  the  Christian  Keligion.

The  primitive  nations  delivered  their  sacred  dotìrines  in
mysterious  allegories,  l^cy  had  emblems  and  representations
of  the  Divine  Being,  considered  in  his  relative  charaiicrs.
W^e  are  not  expressly  inibrmed  that  such  representations  had
been  forbidden,  before  the  giving  of  the  Law  upon  INiouut
Sinai.  In  the  early  ages  of  society,  they  may  have  been
deemed  innocent  and  useful  mc«nî  of  instruction.     They  grc\T


87

by  degrees  into  gross  abuse,  till  at  last  the  populace  began,
under  every  relative  s\'mbol,  to  imagine  a  distinct  God.  The
phccnomena  ot"  nature  were  also  represented  by  figures  which,
in  time,  -were  confounded  with  the  sacred  symbols.  Add  to
this  that  antiquity  treated  the  persons  and  the  memory  of
superiors  with  the  highest  veneration  and  respect.  So  far
their  sentiments  and  praétice  were  laudable.  But  they  also
distinguished  their  ancestors  and  princes  by  epithets  which
were  equally  applied  to  the  Supreme  Being;  such  as.  The
Gnat  Father,  The  Ruhr,  The  Supreme,  The  Lofty  One:
perhaps  they  conferred  upon  them  still  higher  titles ;  for,  in
the  Old  Testament  we  find  such  names  as  Gods,  Sons  of  God,
Sons  of  the  Most  High,  given  to  human  beings.  The  precise
ideas  originally  intended  by  these  terms,  wdien  so  applied,  in
time  became  confused ;  and  men  began  to  regard  those  Avho
had  been  honoured  with  them,  as  dignified  with  a  sacred
charafter,  and  endowed  Λνΐίΐι  a  superior  nature.

Just  so,  the  respeft  which  Λvas  once  paid  to  the  memory  of
the  saints  and  martyrs,  and  the  preservation  of  their  piélures
and  statues,  were  far  removed  from  superstition  and  idolatry:
but  now,  for  many  ages,  men  have  ascribed  to  the  same
saints  an  absolute  ubiquity,  an  incommunicable  attribute  of
the  Deity.  They  have  invoked  them  in  their  prayers,  aiid
bowed  do^^^l  before  their  imaüres.


88


vir.


The   remains  of  one   Language IVhcthci-  the   Hebrew    be

the  primitive  Language.


B,


'UT  in  Avhatever  degree  the  svibjeds  of  Nimrod  may  have
contributed  to  the  corrupting  of  the  primitive  religion  of
mankind,  we  cannot  surely  ascribe  to  them  the  introduótion
of  those  numerous  terms,  both  sacred  and  profane,  which
diffused  themselves  amongst  a  great  variety  of  nations,  pre-
serving every  where,  either  a  striking  similarity  or  an  abso-
hite  identity  of  sound  and  sense.  Thej/  cannot  surely  have
been  the  authors  of  that  general  analogy  which  has  been
remarked  and  demonstrated,  between  the  principles  of  all
ancient  languages.

It  is  more  reasonable  to  suppose,  that  these  things  are  the
remains  of  the  one  language  of  the  -whole  earth;  which  was
best  preserved  by  the  obedient  families.  And  that  centre  of
union  which  is  frequently  traced  to  the  venerable  language  of
the  Pentateuch  confirms  the  supposition.

An  identity  of  terms  and  principles  could  not  have  beers,
communicated  to  the  several  nations,  by  that  people  who
peculiarly  lost  the  primitive  language,  and  wlio  retained  not
the  use  of  one  language  amongst  themselves.

That  there  are  evident  vestiges  of  such  identity,  has  been
abundantly  proved.  We  can  scarcely  open  a  book,  upon  any
loai-ncd  subject,  in  vvliich  they  do  not  present  tliemselvcs.


89

Such  instances  liaA'c  furnished  emplo^Tiicnt  to  riumcrous
philologists^  who  have  taken  great  pains  to  shew  liow  the
temis  and  idioms  of  one  language  are  borrowed  from  those  of
another;  as  the  English  from  the  French,  the  French  from
the  Latin,  the  Latin  from  the  Greek,  the  Greek  from  the
Phoenician  or  Egj'ptian,  and  perhaps  these  from  the  old
Chaldaic.

Were  om*  ideas  respecting  the  first  settlement  of  the  nations,
and  the  nature  of  the  universal  language  of  Noah,  more
precise  and  consistent,  it  is  probable  that  much  of  this  affinity
would  be  acknowledged  to  have  existed  in  the  original  dialeéìs
of  the  respective  countries  and  families,  and  to  be  immediately
referable  to  their  common  source.

That  the  language  of  Noah,  which,  for  upwards  of  sixteen
centuries,  had  kept  pace  with  the  numerous  discoveries,  rapid
improvements,  and  expanding  range  of  ideas,  in  the  primitive
world,  cannot  have  been  a  rude  ami  barren  jargon,  we  have
every  reason  to  believe.  Its  compass  must  have  been  great,
its  principles  duly  ascertained,  and  its  laws  fixed  and  acknow-
ledged. But  as  no  language  has  retained  the  name  of  the
Noachic  or  primitive,  great  doubts  have  arisen  respecting  it.

The  opinion  most  generally  received  is  that  which  we  have
adopted  from  the  Jews,  namely,  that  the  Hebrew  language,
in  the  state  in  which  it  is  preserved  in  the  Old  Testament,  was
not  only  the  language  of  Noah,  but  also  of  Adam.  If  this
opinion  be  just,  all  further  enquiry  respecting  the  primitive
state  of  language  must  be  nugatory  and  vain.

Of  this  language,  the  learned  Parkhurst  (Pref.  to  the  Heb.
Lex.)  pronounces  as  follows:


90

"  The  Hebrew  language  is  the  most  simple  and  determinate,
tlie  most  easy  and  natural  of  any  that  was  spoken  in  the  world.
And  what  wonder,  since  it  was  certainly  framed  immediately
by  HDl,  who  not  only  formed  the  heart,  and  ear,  and
tongue  of  man,  but  also  made  the  heavens  and  the  earthy  and
all  things  therein:"

I  am  sensible  that  a  subject  vvhich  connects  itself  with  such
ideas  of  sacredness,  in  the  minds  of  many  of  the  most  pious,
learned,  and  respeétable  characters,  ought  to  be  discussed
with  great  delicacy  and  caution.  But  may  I  not  venture  to
liiut  without  risking  the  imputation  of  sacrilege,  or  injuring
the  charatìer  of  this  most  important  language,  that  some
erroneous  conceptions  respecting  it  have  been  long  en-
tertained .^

The  very  Ingenious  gentleman,  whose  words  I  have  quoted
above,  lias  deteéted  and  exposed  many  such  conceptions.

It  has  been  his  labour  to  remove  our  superstitious  preconcep-
tions in  favour  of  the  INIasoretic  points — to  dissipate  the
deceitful  mist  of  Rabbinic  prejudices — to  introduce  a  new  and
rational  division  of  the  roots — and  to  shew  that  each  Hebrew
root  has  but  one  leading  idea  or  meaning,  taken  from  nature  by
our  senses  or  feelings,  zchich  runs  through  all  the  branches  and
infections  of  it,  hozcevcr  numerous  or  diversified.

Is  it  absolutely  certain  that  none  of  the  said  mists  of  pre-
judice still  hang  about  the  subjeét,  and  that  we  do  not  still
entertain  some  notions  respeéling  the  Ilebrcv/  language,  which
are  either  erroneously  conceived  or  weakly  supported?

Wlicn  I  consider  the  leading  ideas  into  which  many  of  the
roots  are  resolved,  such  as  the  most  subtle  adions  and  pro-


91


pertles  of  ligbt,  beat,  nir,  spirit,  altraclion,  motion  of  the
heavenly  bodies,  &:c.  it  occurs  to  me  that,  if  the  liebrew
language  was  at  oucc  delivered  to  Adam,  he  must  either  have
possessed  a  language  which  he  could  not  possibly  have  under-
stood, or  else  he  must  have  been  minutely  instruéìed  in  the
most  refined  philosoph}',  and  the  most  hidden  secrets  of
nature:  both  Avliich  Í  thinic  equally  improbable.

That  any  living  language,  whatsoever,  should  have  re-
mained in  the  same  state,  i'rom^the  Creation,  to  the  time  of
Moses,  is  a  thing  in  itself  of  the  utmost  improbability.  During
this  period  of  2500  years,  human  society  had  undergone  the
greatest  changes  imaginable.  It  had  begtm  in  one  simple,
inexperienced  family,  whose  ideas•  and  knowledge  of  things,
and  consequently,  whose  occasion  for  a  variety  of  words  v.as
daily  progressive.  It  had  afterwards  expanded  into  large
communities,  and  divided  into  powerful  states,  liad  been
adorned  by  the  acquisiiion  of  arts  and  sciences,  and  divcrsi-
íìed  b}'  the  various  habits,  pursuits  and  situations  of  life.  A
second  time  it  had  been  reduced  to  a  single  family,  and  a
second  time  had  enlarged  itself,  under  the  like  variety  of
circumstances.  Had  no  occasion  occurred,  during  such  an
eventful  interval,  for  the  introduction  of  new  terms  and
phrases,  or  the   aihxing  new  meanings  to  those   ahead}-  in


Without  a  continual•  succession  of  miracles,  it  is  impossible
to  imagine  one  vernacular  idiom  as  still  remaining,  under
these  circumstances,  imalterable  in  its  struélure,  its  grammar,
the  mode  of  its  pronunciation,  and  the  extent  of  its  vocabu-
lary. Before  we  admit  that  αΏγ  such  tiling  actually  hap-
pened, it  is  but  reasonable  to  examine  the  proofs  upon  which
the  fact  is  supposed  to  rest.


92

The  strongest  argument  which  I  know^  in  favour  of  the
incorniptibihty  of  the  Hebrew  language,  is  drawn  from  the
book  of  Genesis,  where  jNloses  intimates  a  derivation  of  the
names  of  some  persons  and  things,  in  the.  first  ages,  from
Hebrew  words.  From  hence,  it  has  been  infen-ed,  that  this
language  must  have  been  used  in  the  first  ages,  otherwise  it
could  not  have  formed  the  basis  of  the  said  names.  But
the  derivation  of  a  few  terms  can  only  prove,  at  most,  that
the  Hebrew  retained  the  general  principles  of  the  primi-
tive language.  It  docs  not  follow  that  tliese  principles  had
not  been  abundantl}•  unfolded,  and  variously  combined  and
diversified,  daring  the  progress  of  ages.  The  English  language
may  furnish  us  with  the  true  reason  for  many  names  and
terms,  in  the  old  Gothic  and  Anglo-Saxon.  Thus  perhaps,
the  character  of  Lok  the  capricious  god  of  the  Goths  is  best
explained  by  our  familiar  English  Luck;  yet,  upon  the  whole,
our  present  tongue  is  a  very  different  thing  ftom  these  ancient
dialeéìs.

It  may  be  urged  further,  that  every  name  Avhich  admits  oí
derivation,  must  originally  have  had  a  distinct  meaning.  It
must  have  been  given  for  some  particular  reason.  It  could
not  have  been  a  proper  or  absolute,  but  a  relative  or  descrip-
tive term:  Not  a  name,  but  an  epithet.  And  it  is  not  only  a
natural  and  obvious,  but  a  customary  thing  for  an  historian  to
translate  the  titles  and  epithets  of  men  and  things,  into  the
language  of  his  narrative.  Moses  perceived  that  the  names  of
our  first  parents  and  of  their  descendants  had  their  meaning,
and  were  given  for  some  certain  reason.  He  may  have
judged  it  necessary  that  the  meaning  should  be  preserved  and
that  the  reason  sliould  appear.  The  names  upon  record  may
then  be  regarded  as  the  Hebrew,  rather  ihau  as  the  primitive
names.


93

But  it  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  that  tlie  primitive  names
were  changed  by  the  great  hivvgiver.  Unless  we  previously
determine  that  langaiage  had  been  stationary,  it  must  occur,
that  ancient  and  descriptive  names  liad  kept  pace  \vith  the
gradual  changes  of  language,  and  had  in  many  instances
departed  from  their  original  form,  long  before  his  time.  He
Avrote  in  the  language  of  the  people.  The  Old  Testament
furnishes  many  examples  of  changes  in  the  orthography  of
names,  correspondent  to  the  usage  of  the  time  in  which  the
author  wrote.

This  argument,  in  favour  of  the  immutability  of  the
Hebrew,  is  therefore  by  no  means  conclusive.  But  zee  have
been  accustomed  ίο  regard  the  Hcbrezo  as  a  sacred,  and  conae-
quently,  as  an  incorruptihk  language.

That  sacredness  of  charatìer,  which  this  language  really
possesses,  must  have  been  derived  purely  from  the  circum-
stance of  its  having  been  the  vehicle  of  Divine  comnmnication.
Before  it  became  the  language  of  prophecy  and  of  the  law,
I  can  conceive  of  no  inherent  stamp  of  sacredness,  with  which
it  could  have  been  distinguished.  What  idea  can  we  form  of
this  language  being  sacred  per  se  ì  It  had  not,  surely,  been
the  language  of  Angels,  before  the  formation  of  man.  It
was  nothing  more  than  a  medium  for  the  expression  of  human
ideas  and  perceptions,  and  for  communicating  information  to
human  intelleéìs.  And  why  should  one  human  language  be
in  itself  more  sacred  than  another i*  Why  should  the  primi-
tive language,  in  this  respeéì,  be  placed  before  the  most
modern  ?

The  sacred  writers  themselves  appear  not  to  have  ascribed
any  peculiar  sanétity  to  the  Hebrew.  They  frequently  employ
%riac  and  Chaldidc  words,    when  they  might  have  found


94

Hebrew  terms  wliieh  would  have  equally  served  iheir  purpose.
But  they  wrote  to  the  people,  and  in  the  language  of  the
people,  cither  pure  or  mixed,  as  the  age  required.

AVere  the  Hebrew  in  its  own  pecuhar  nature,  a  saered  lan-
guage, it  must  have  been  a  kind  ot"  sacrilege  to  translate  tlîe
scriptures  into  any  other.  In  this  hght  the  modern  Jews  seem
to  -have  regarded  it."  They  appoint  an  annual  fast  on  account
of  the  septuagint  version.  Had  the  seventy  elders  been  pre-
possessed v.ith  this  notion,  they  would  never  have  undertaken
the  task.  Christians  regard  not  the  Λvritings  of  the  New
Testament  as  less  sacred,  because  the  copy  which  they  have  of
them  is  in  the  Greek  lans-ua^e.


The  Ldto  was  <yixen  in  the  Hebrew  ton<iue.


This  proves  that,  in  the  time  of  Moses,  the  Hebrew  was
the  general  language  of  the  Israelites,  to  whom  the  law  was
particularly  addressed ;  but  it  proves  nothing  more,  ^^"e  are
not  to  gather  from  hence,  that  this  people  had  i)reserved  the
use  of  the  original  language  of  mankind,  absolutely,  in  its
primitive,  and  uncorrupted  state — ^a  thing  which  must  have
been  impossible,  without  a  miracle ;  and  no  reason  can  be
assigned  why  a  miracle  should  have  been  performed  on  this
occasion.

Had  it  been  necessary  that  the  primitive  language  should
have  been  preserved  entire,  by  a  Divine  interposition,  till  the
giving  of  the  law ;  of  how  much  greater  importance  must  its
future  preservation  have  been,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  precise
meaning  of  the  sacred  oracles?  Whereas  we  find  that  the
Hebrew,  from  this  period,  has  been  subjeòf  to  the  same  vicis-
situdes as  all  other  human  languages.  It  was  mixed  with
foreiga  terms  and  idioms.     It  sickened  ami  expired  2O0O


95

years  ago,  and  its  tonil)  has  for  ages  been  enveloped  with  the
iuist  of  Rahbuiic  jrnjudices.-

Tlîe  giving  of  the  law  in  Hebre\v,  can  therefore  afford  no
support  to  the  general  persuasion  of  the  Jews,  that  their
ancestors  alone  preserved  the  original  language  of  mankind,
pure  and  uncorrupted.  On  what  foundation  then  docs  this
opinion  rest  ?

Ileber,  zcith  hisfaniili/,  uithdrcicfrom  the  confederan/  under
Nimrod,  and  consequentli/  escaped  the  pwûsliment,  zi'jiuh  zcas
hifliclcd  upon  the  children  of  men,  at  Babel.

This  in  the  main  may  be  granted.  But  was  Heber  the  onh*
one  who  withdrew?  Ashur,  Mizraim,  and  Canaan^  and
many  others  seem  to  have  withdrawn  still  further.  With
whom  did  Noah  and  his  sons  reside?  They  were  not  surely
amongst  the  subjetìs  of  Nimrod,  and  some  of  them,  at  leasts
survived  the  dispersion.

And  how  does  it  appear  that  the  Jews,  in  a  peculiar
manner,  preserved  the  language  of  Ileber  ?

Abraham  and  the  Israelites  were  the  direct  descendants  of
this  j)atriarch,  and  zcere  eminently  styled  Ilcbrctcs,  both  by
themsekes  and  by  their  neighbonrs.

But  it  is  clear  they  did  not  obtain  this  name,  in  consequence
of  their  speaking  any  peculiar  language,  but  merely  because
they  w^ere  the  children  of  Heber,  or  the  descendants  of  a
people  known  by  the  name  of  Hebrews,  On  the  contrary,
it  seems  most  likely  that  its  present  name  was  communicated
.  to  this  language,  from  the  circumstance  of  its  having  been
adopted  by  one  brancli  of  the  Hebrews,  while,  at  the  same


90


time,  it  was  not  the  general  dialed  of  the  children  of  Heber,
neither  was  it  peculiar  to  his  family.

AVe  have  a  complete  demonstration.  Gen.  xxxi.  47.  that
the  great  stock  of  the  family  of  Heber,  which  remained  in
Mesopotamia,  spoke  the  Chaldaic,  aud  not  the  Hebrew
tlialect.

Laban,  %vho  had  been  brought  up  in  the  house  of  hiá
fattiers,  denominates  the  heap  of  witness,  certainly  in  his
native  tongue,  Jegar  Sahadutha,  Νπηπίν  nj'.  This  name  is
evidently  composed  of  three  Chaldaic  words,  ί:ι>  A  heap,
"in::'  A  witness,  and  m  or  κηη  An  appointment.  Had
Moses  literally  ti'anscribed  all  the  words  of  Laban,  he  coidd
not  have  furnished  us  with  a  more  satisfadlory  proof  of  the
language  he  used.

Jacob,  on  the  other  hand,  who  had  been  born  in  a  foreign
country,  and  had  lived  there  from  his  infancy,  till  he  was
upwards  of  seventy  years  of  age,  describes  the  same  heap  in  a
language  different  from  that  of  his  relations.  He  calls
it  lÿ  bi,  using  two  Hebrew  terms,  one  of  which  implies  a
heap,  and  the  other  a  zcifness  or  testimony.  The  name  is  sy-
nonymously recorded  in  both  languages,  and  therefore,
undoubtedly,  in  the  languages  which  Luban  and  Jacob  res-
pedively  used.  The  Hebrew  was  not  then  the  general
dialecl  of  the  children  of  Heber.

And  it  is  equally  clear  that  it  w  as  not  peculiar  to  his  family.
The  prophet  Isaia!  ,  chap.  x'lx.  emphatically  calls  it  the
language  of  Canaan.

In  addition  to  this  sacred  testimon^^  we  have  the  names  of
men  aud  places  aiuougst  the  old  Cauaanitcs,  in  the  tijne  of


P7

AbrahaiTij  in  pure  Hebrew.  \Ve  have  Phoenician  inscriptions,
the  fragment  of  the  Punic  Umguage,  in  the  Peeuuhis  of
PJautus,  and  the  remains  of  that  language^  in  the  Island  of
Multa^  as  undeniable  proofs,  that  the  Hebrew  was  tlie  genuine
language  of  the  house  of  Canaan,  which  preserved  it  wiiii
little  variation  to  a  late  age.

This  language  could  by  no  means  have  been  communicated
b}'  Abraham  to  the  natives  of  the  country,  it  is  certain  that
he  found  it,  and  very  probable  that  he  learnt  it  there.  In  his
conversation  with  the  inhabitants,  he  must  have  used  tlieir
language.  It  is  easy  and  natural  for  a  stranger  to  acquire
the  language  of  the  people  amongst  whom  he  settles,  especially
if  it  ditfers  from  his  own  only  as  a  dialect:  But  it  is  an
absolute  impossibiUt}'  for  several  independent  kingdoms,  sud-
denl}^  to  accommodate  themselves  to  the  dialect  of  a  single
sojourner:  and  the  language  of  the  old  Canaanites,  and  of
the  posterity  of  Abraham,  at  least,  the  house  of  Jacob,  was
tlie  same.

.     The  native  tongue  of  Abraham  must  have  been  that  which

was  spoken  by  his  family,  in  Chaldea  and  Mesopotamia. •

The  former  name  of  this  verj^  patriarch  seems  to  be  referable
to  the  Chaldaic  ΠΏΊ  or  ΝΏΊ,  to  he  dejected  or  cast  doziu,
rather  than  to  the  Hebrew  D"),  Exalted,  LoJ'ti/.

He  had  been  born  in  the  declining  years  of  his  father.  His
lot  was  only  that  of  a  younger  son.  His  own  wife  was  barren
and  he  had  long  been  cast  dozen,  as  to  the  hope  of  a  prooieny.
He  consequently  seems  to  have  been  regarded  in  his  native
country  as  a  dry  branch.  No  separare  palrimonv  had  been
assigned  to  him.  His  residence  was  in  a  city  which  had
received  the  name  of  his  brother  Haran.  This  must  have
been  an  atìlictmg  circumstance,  in  an  age  when  the  sons

6


98

legularly  sbarecl  the  paternal  estate,  and  became  the  heads  of
iamilies,  and  the  chiefs  of  the  little  cities:  and  it  seems  to
have  weighed  heavy  upon  Abraham's  heart.  "  Lord  God,"
says  he,  "  what  wilt  diou  give  me,  seeing  Í  go  childless  !—
Behold,  to  vie  tlwn  hast  given  no  sad,  and  lo^  one  born  in  mine
liouse  is  mine  heir.''  lie  had  hoped  to  become  the  father  of
a  fannly;  but  from  that  hope  he  was  cast  doKH.  To  the
mortifying  e})ithct  whieh  reminded  him  of  his  affliction,  his
new  licbrcic  name,  A  Jatlicr  of  Multitudes,  which  was  con-
ferred upon  him  several  years  after  he  had  been  in  the  land  of
Canaan,  must  have  presented  a  very  pleasing  contrast.  To
the  title  of  Exalted  father,  it  would  have  been  no  contrast
at  all.

If,  then,  the  Hebrew  be  the  pure  language  of  Noah,  it
must  have  been  preserved  to  tlie  time  of  Abraham,  rather
by  the  descendants  of  Canaan  than  b}"  those  of  Ilcber.  This
will  account  for  Jacob's  using  the  Hebrew  language,  Avhile
Laban  spoke  the  Chaldaic.  The  former  had  been  educated
in  the  land  of  Canaan,  where  he  had  lived  to  his  seventy-
seventh  year.  His  father  and  his  grandfather  had  been
settled  there  for  nearly  two  centuries.  The  language  oftliat
country  must  then  have  been  the  most  famihar  to  his  ear. — ■
He  was  now  returning  thither,  with  his  family,  who  would
naturally  adopt  the  same  language,  as  a  consequence  of  their
residence  amongst  tlie  natives.  He  therefore  names  tho  heap
of  witness,  in  the  language  whieh  was  most  familiar  to  him-
self, and  most  likely  to  be  understood  by  his  posterity,  rather
than  in  that  oi"iiis  Mesopotamian  relations.  He  was  right. —
For  the  language  of  the  CanaaiiitCb  became  that  of  the
Israeiiles,

It  appears  then  that  the  Jews  are  not  justified  in  their  pre-
1-cnsioas  to  the  peculiar  preservation  of  the  primitive  lunguagc.


99

If  w'C  οοιίν'κΙοι-  the  liistory  of  tliis  people,  it  will  appear  tliat,
of  all  aneieiit  families,  they  had  the  least  eliauee  U)  miik'i
p;o()cl  siieh  pretensions.  'í'lit'v  eould  hardly  have 'retained
the  uninterrupted  use  of  any  one  lan.L:;Liage  whatsoever.

Abraham,  at  the  head  of  his  single  honsìiold^  emigrated
out  of  Mesopotamia,  where  the  Clialdaic  diaieet  was  ceriahdv
spoken  by  his  family.  Both  himself  and  his  jnOgeny  sojourned
for  upwards  of  two  centuries,  generally,  in  the  land  of
Canaan,  where  a  dialeft  scarcely  diflx-ring  from  tiie  Hebrew
of  the  Pentateuch,  as  certain!  ν  ])revailcd.  There  they  i'ami-
liarly  conversed  with  the  iiatives_,  and  their  conversation  ]iiu-L
have  l)een  in  the  language  of  the  eouiUry.

Jacob  afterwards  fled  into  "NFesopotamla  from  the  resentment
of  his  brother.  And  he  fled  alone;  for  he  tells  us  that  he
t-rossed  Jordan  only  with  his  staff.  In  this  countrv  he  re-
mained about  '20  years,  where  he  iruuTÌed  (.'haldean  or
Aramcan  wives,  and  here  his  children  were  born  and  paitly
educated.  These  cliildren  could  have  heard  the  Hebrew  only
from  their  father's  mouth,  even  if  we  suppose  that  he  used  it
in  convening  with  tliem.  Their  mother  tongue  was  the-
C-iialdaie,  the  same  whicii  was  spoken  in  the  family  of  their
grandfiither  Labaii.

Jacob,  with  his  houshold,  again  returned  into  the  land  of
Cau-aan.  Here  the  young  men  married  wives  who  spoke  the
(■anaanitish  language.  So  that  when  the  v.liole  familv  went
down  into  Egypt,  about  33  years  after  their  return  from  ^le-
sopotamia,  the}-  must  liave  carried  with  them  botli  the  Chaldaic
language  and  that  of  Canaan.

But  as  the  latter  was  the  dialect  most  familar  to  Jacob  him-
self, and  perlia[)s  th<•  enly  diaieet  of  the  vounger  and  more


100

iiímiciOus  brandies,  it  prevailed  over  tlie  other,  l)ecaine  the
general  language  of  these  Hchrczcs,  and  at  length,  began  to
be  tlistingiiished  by  their  name.

During  the  former  part  of  the  two  centuries  diat  the
Israelites  remained  in  Egypt,  they  were  appointed  a  residence
and  establishment,  separate  from  the  inhabitants  of  the
Country.  In  this  time  their  tribes  became  numerous.  They
expanded  from  a  family  into  a  nation.  Their  language  ob-
tained tlie  stability  of  a  national  language,  and  from  hence-
forth they  preserved  it  with  considerable  purit}•.

But  the  condition  to  which  they  were  at  last  reduced  must
liave  rendered  it  almost  impossible  for  them  to  preserve  it
absolutely  immaculate.  New^  habits  of  life  and  new  occupa-
tions must  have  introduced  new  ideas,  and  demanded  new
terms,  and  those  which  were  already  current  amongst  the
Egyptians  would,  in  general^  be  employed  on  such  occasions.

Such  innovations,  together  with  the  accidental  changes  that
took  place  in  the  language  of  the  Israelites  and  the  Canaanites,
during  a  separation  of  250  years,  must  have  produced  some
diversity  of  dialeél ;  but  this  was  not  so  great  that  the  two
nations  could  not  converse  freely,  without  the  assistance  of
interpreters,  as  appears  from  the  private  conference  of  the
spies  with  the  harlot  Rahab,  Jos.  ii.  and  from  other  passages•
in  the  book  of  Joshua.

The  Hebrew  was  then  tlie  language  of  the  Canaanites,  in
ihe  time  of  Abraham  and  of  Moses.  It  remains  to  determine
how  far  it  may  be  regarded  as  that  of  Moah_,  and  conse-
sequently,  what  claim  it  has  to  be  made  the  universal  stan-
dard, by  which  the  principles  of  all  other  languages  iuu*t  be
îricd.


101


Presuming  from   v.hat  I  have  alreaci\'   said,  that    I


may


venture  to  place  the  s<u  red  character  of  this  Uinguag(î  upon
a  footing  with  that  of  the  Greek  of  the  New  Testament,,  it
follows^  that  we  have  the  tScit  consent  of  history  to  enter
iipon  the  enquiry  I  now  suggest;  though  in  the  prosecution  of
it,  wc  have  only  the  direction  of  some  leading  circumstances.
Under  this  guidance,  I  nuist,  for  the  present,  content  myself
with  offering  a  few  remai-ks.

1.  The  Hebrew  language  appears  to  have  been  already'
formed  ami  fixed,  when  Abraham  fust  went  into  the  land  of
Canaan,  about  325  years  after  the  Birth  of  Peleg,  and  many
years  before  the  death  of  Sheui,  and  of  the  men  of  the  first
generations  after  the  deluge,

2.  At  tins  time,  it  was  not  the  language  of  the  Canaanitcs
only,  but  also,  of  other  families  in  and  about  Palestine. — •
Thus  the  princes  of  the  Philistines,  the  progeny  of  the  first
Eg3i)tians,  wese  saluted  in  pure  Hebrew,  by  the  name  of
Abimelech,  "  My  Father  the  King,"  and  the  chief  captain  of
the  host  was  called  Pliicol,  The  mouth  of  ail,  a  most  expressive
title  for  a  general  commander.  The  formation  of  a  language
which  was  common  to  independent  tribes,  one  proceedin<>•
from  the  North  (from  Sidon)  and  the  other  from  the  Soutli
(Egypt)  could  not  have  been  recent.

3.     Its  general  charat'lcr  must  have  been  patriarchal.

Ashur  had  withdrawn  beyond  the  Tigris,  at  the  time  of  the
ioundation,  not  the  destruction  of  Nimrod's  kingdom,  and
therefore  long  before  the  confusion.  INIizraim  had  founded
an  early  kingdom  in  Egypt,  whence  the  Philistine  colony. —
The  old  Chaldeans  had  dwelt  between  the  two  rivers,  from
tile  days  of  Peleg.  Canaan  (the  Χν»  of  Sanelion.  and  his  first
Phoenician)  seems,  at  the  same  time,  to  have  withdrawn  to
G  3


102


Sitlon^  the  scat  of  his  first  born,  nvIr'hcc  his  piogciiy  had
spread  themselves  along-  the  Phaniician  coast,  and  Eastwards,
to  the  banks  ot"  Jordan,  beiore  the  time  of  Abraham.  The
Western  Syria  and  Arabia  \vei€  also  inhabited  in  ver}'  early
times.  These  eonntries  contahied  tribes  whieh  had  been
distinél,  from  the  age  when  the  families  had  first  divided ;  yet
the  languages  which  were  spoken  in  them  had  a  great  degree
of  alHuity  will)  each  other.  Thev  were  in  fact,  only  dialects
of  υικ'  language,  and  that  one  could  have  been  no  other  than
that  oi"  the  great  patriarchs,  who  were  still  living  when  Abra-
liam  settled  amongst  the  Canaanilcs.  Neither  of  these  primi-
tive nations  eouhl  have  borrowed  the  rudiments  of  its
vernacular  dialect  iVom  anollicr  nation,  whieh  had  settled  at
a  distance.  What  diey  possessed  in  common  nuist  have
been  derived  frum  the  parent  stock,  and  carried  wiiîi  the  first
jamilies  into  their  respective  settlements.

4.  The  names  of  those  heati?  of  families  amongst  the
iSoachidie,  whieh  divided  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth,  or
rather  the  gentile  names  of  those  trihes  whieh  were  established
ilnring  the  second  century  after  the  deluge,  are  either  terms
of  the  Hebrew  language  or  of  ceitain  kindred  dialects.  \ei
they  were  the  names  by  which  the  several  nations  di>tin-
guishcd  themselves,  for  they  are  generally  recognized  by  the.
old  geographers.  The  scverul  nations  then  originally  carried
Avith  t;heui  dialecls,  not  greatly  diilering  irom  the  Hebrew.

5.  Hence  it  undeniably  follows,  that  the  fundamental
principle^i  and  general  eiiaracter  of  the  patriarchal  language
of  Noah  must  be  preserved  in  the  Hebrew  langiuige,  and  hi
tliose  dialects  \yhich  are  connected  with  il.

6.  The  Hebrew  was  the  language  ol"  an  acVive,  enter-
prising peo})le.     During  the  nine  centuries  which  intervened


103


belwcen  the  deluge  and  the  publication  oi"  tlic  Pcntatcucii,
this,  as  well  as  the  sister  dialects,  must  have  undergone  some
accidental,  and  some  necessary  changes,  and  a  considerable
degree  of  artiíìeial  cultivation;  yet  the  simplicity  and  com-
prehension of  its  principles,  the  regularity  ot"  its  structure,  and
above  all,  the  venerable  aiul  unrivalled  antiipiity  of  that
volume  in  which  it  is  preserved,  seem  to  give  it  a  decided
superiority  over  either  ot"  the  odiers.  W'e  know  what  the
Hebrew  ^\  as  3300  years  ago,  and  can  make  out  its  claim  to  an
antiquity  still  higher.  Though  it  cannot  safely  be  pronounced
to  have  been  the  p}-imitivc  language,  yet  it  must  be  received  as
ii  dialect  of  this  language,  and  as  a  most  respectable  scale  to
iipprceiate  the  character  of  every  dialect  v,  hatsoevcr.

7.  From  these  observations  may  be  demonstraii-d  tlic
absolute  error  of  a  general  principle,  laiti  doAvn  by  some"
eminent  philologists.  It  has  been  observed  that  the  languages
of  savage  nations  generally  consist  of  very  long  words  and
\ibound  with  vowels;  and  hence  it  has  been  contended,  that
such  was  the  original  character  of  all  languages.  The
Hebrew,  Chaldaic,  Syriae  and  Arabic  roots  are  remarkably
s'lmpk,  short,  and  strong.  The  long  vocal  terms  of  savages
are  not  then  characteristical  of  the  inlancy,  but  of  the  decay
and  ruin  of  language.  Man  was  not  uatiirnili/,  \\οΐ  originalhj
a  savage.


104


VIII.


Of  the   general   stores   zchich    the    nations   carried   to   their
^  respective   settlements.


Β


UT  to  return  to  the  sera  of  Nimrod's  rebellion.


\\'hcn  so  great  a  part  of  the  human  race  had  conspired  to
resist  the  execution  of  the  Divine  mandate,  we  nmst  suppose
that  the  famihes  who  still  respeéled  the  authority  of  the
patriarch,  began  to  repair  towards  their  allotted  habitations,
under  the  direction  of  Noah,  his  sons  and  their  obedient
children.  The  fathers  of  families  considered  their  respeélive
portions  of  the  earth  as  their  proper  estate,  and  the  inheritance
of  their  offspring :  it  must  then  have  been  a  leading  objeéi
\vith  them  to  take  personal  charge  of  their  lots.  They  were
not  sent  forth  to  explore  regions  absolutely  unknown  and
undiscovered.  Moah  and  his  sons  must  have  had  some
knowledge  of  the  regions  of  the  earth,  as  far  as  they  had
been  known  and  inhabited  before  the  fiood.  In  the  aci  of
partition  after  the  flood,  they  must  have  described  their
boundaries.  The  patriarchs  who  took  possession  of  the  larger
divisions  must  afterwards  have  assigned  to  their  children  their
due  proportions.  So  that  in  an  ;ige  or  two  after  the  first
partition,  every  region  of  the  known  world,  which  was
adapted  to  the  support  and  comfort  of  human  society,  must
have  received  that  germe  Avhicli  gradually  expanded  into  its
primitive  nation:  and  thus  Sjiain,  and  even  Britain  were
probably  colonized  by  those  who  were  born  within  a  century
of  the  deluiie.


105

ISIoses  having  enumerated  the  sons  of  Comer  anci  Javan,
parallels  in  descent  with  Salah,  who  was  born  37  years  after
the  flood,  adds  as  follows.  "  BY  THESE  were  the  Isles  of
the  Gentiles  DIVIDED— IN  THEIR  LANDS— EVERY
ONE  after  HIS  TONGUE— AFTER  THEIR  FAMILIES
—IN  THEIR  is  ATtONS.  If  this  be  not  a  positive  declara-
tion that  a  regular  and  complete  Division,  agieeabK'  to  certain
general  rules,  actually  took  place,  in  the  time  and  under  the
direclion  of  these  patriarchs,  I  know  not  by  what  words  such
a  faél  could  have  been  recorded.

It  would  surely  be  absurd  to  explain  it  aΛvay  by  the  incohe-
rent scraps  of  Greek  tradition,  which  generally  confound  the
first  settlement  of  the  nations  with  the  subsequent  zcanderiiigs
of  the  exiled  Titans.

And  it  need  not  be  proved  that  societies  thus  planted  and
formed,  whether  in  Britain  or  in  Japan,  must  have  carried
with  them  the  primitive  history,  the  primitive  religion,  the
institutions,  customs,  habits,  opinions,  arts  and  sciences  of
the  patriarchal  age,  and  the  primitive  language,  with  only
such  gradual  variations  as  might  be  occasioned  b^^  local  cir-
cumstances.

The  founders  of  these  societies  had  been  trained  up  to  the
habits  and  comforts  of  social  and  civilized  life.  It  must  then
have  been  ordered,  that  they  should  repair  to  their  respeotive
estates,  with  all  those  provisions  by  which  such  comibrts  were
to  be  secured.  Amongst  other  things  they  must  have  taken
with  them  their  stock  of  sheep  and  cattle  and  otlier -domestic
animals.  Their  removal  then,  though  uninterrupted,^nust
have  been  gradual.

On  the  other  hand^  their  unwoithy  brethren,  the  rebellious


106

giants  λνΐιο,  suinetinic  aftcrsvaids,,  were  struck  λύύι  astoiiish-
uieut  at  the  sudden  infliction  of  Divine  vengeance,  zvcre  driven
forth  from  among  men,  and  scattered  into  all  lands,  to  the
East,  and  North,  and  South,  as  well  as  to  the  AVest,  must
have  iled  in  disorder  and  confusion.  Their  flocks  and  their
herds  could  not  have  accompanied  the  tumultuous  retreat  of
the  zcanderiiig  exiles.  Their  consequent  indigence  must  have
introduced  all  the  wretched  irregularities  of  savage  life,  and
fitted  them  only  for  the  occupation  of  hunters  and  robhers,

Λ  just  abhorrence  of  the  proverbial  impiety  of  the  great
rebel,  and  an  awful  recollection  of  the  signal  punishment  of  his
associates,  would  naturall}'  dispose  the  fathers  of  the  more
regular  societies,  to  preserve  the  sacred  institutions  of  their
ancestors,  with  the  utmost  care,  and  to  fix  the  grand  arcaiKt
of  primitive  wisdom  upon  a  firm  base.

And  to  tliese  ends,  Avhat  could  have  been  more  conducive,
than  to  constitute  such  regular  Hierarchies,  as  ancient  history
describes  in  various  parts  of  the  earth — To  make  the  wisest
and  most  approved  men,  in  every  society,  the  instructors  of
the  people,  and  the  depositories  of  priinitive  tradition?

To  such  societies,  the  nations  were  indebted  for  those
vestiges  of  early  opinions  and  science  which  remained  amongst
them:  while  the  societies  themselves,  after  the  various  cor-
ruptions of  a  long  series  of  ages,  were  found  to  resemble  each
other,  in  the  simplicity  of  their  manners,  their  general  doc-
trines, their  discipline,  their  customs  and  their  learning;  and
in  all  these  respects  to  have  presented  a  striking  piéìure  of  the
age  of  >soah  and  his  immediate  descendants.

They  preserved  an  amiable  nuxlium  between  savagf  rude-
Ticss  and  frivolous  lelincnient.     Thev  rcirarded  their  institu-


107

tions  as  relics  of  the  Erst  agcSj  and  uniformly  deemed  tlieir
mysteries  too  sacred,  to  be  exposed  in  presence  of  such
profane  strangers  as  dwelt  amongst  them.

I'liis  last  trait  in  their  eharaeier  led  to  some  serious  ill  oon-
secjuenecs,  bat  the  abuse  Mliieh  crept  into  the  system  cannot
impeach  the  wisdom  of  its  original  establishment.

Wherever  we  recogni/.e  an  establishment  of  this  kind,  in  a
primitive  nation^  we  need  nut  be  over  curious  to  determine
b}•  what  people,  or  what  lamily  it  may  possibly  have  been
introduced.  I  nless  there  be  clear  evidence  to  the  contrary-,
we  may  fairly  regard  it  as  coeval  with  the  nation  itself.

I  may  here  take  notice  of  a  singularity  that  runs  through
the  traditions  of  the  gentile  world,  namely  their  nationality  in
primitive  history.  Whatever  accounts  are  preserved  of  the
j)rimitive  ages,  are  made  by  every  people  to  relate,  almost
exclusively,  to  their  own  country,  and  their  own  ancestors. —
1'hey  must  have  been  the  original  reporters,  the  egotists,  of
such  talcs.     There  Avas  nothing  foreign  in  their  colouring.

Thus,  for  instance,  the  history  of  the  Deluge  Avas  almost
universal.  All  nations  give  an  account  of  the  destruction  of
the  old  world  by  water,  and  of  the  preservation  of  a  single
fannly,  in  a  boat  or  ark.  Vet  all  of  them  make  the  boat  to
lest,  upon  some  mountain,  or  on  the  bank  of  sume  river  or
lake,  in  their  own  territories,  where  some  distinguibhed  per-
sonages, amongst  their  own  ancestors,  are  put  to  land,  A
history  thus  circumstanced  could  not  have  been  borrowed  of
strangers.  The  nations  uiust  have  derived  it,  in  a  direct  line,
from  their  common  parents.

Wiiçn  this  iiationahty  is  considered,  wc  need  not  wonder


108

that  so  many  people  contend  for  the  ίηΛτηίίοη  of  thof-e  arts
which  were  preserved  from  the  first  ages.  They  are  all  right :
excepting  that  they  mistake  the  common  progenitors  of  man-
kind for  their  own  national  ancestors;  and  of  course,  whatever
is  due  to  the  former,  is  consigned  to  tlie  latter.

But  the  very  traditions  themselves  will  furnish  sufficient
data  to  reétify  the  mistake.

In  die  time  of  Alexander  the  Great,  Berosus,  a  Chaldean
priest,  wrote  the  history  of  his  country,  from  the  remotest
times.  ]\iuch  of  his  genuine  work  is  unfortunately  lost.  But
SyncelluSj  an  author  of  good  credit,  tells  us  that  the  first  book
treated  of  the  situation  of  Babylonia,  the  fruitfulness  of  the
soil,  its  trees  and  plants  and  other  commodities,  and  then  ex-
pounded the  fables  and  allegories  which  enveloped  the
theology  of  the  Chaldeans.  Tlic  second  book  treated  of  Ten
Kings  of  the  Chaldeans,  Before  the  Flood.  If  the  Chal-
deans had  an  exclusive  right  to  the  ten  antedilutian  patriarchs^
their  tide  to  the  invention  of  all  primitive  arts  and -sciences
must  certainly  be  good.

Tire  Egyptians,  however,  will  dispute  the  point  with  them.
Strike  the  boasted  discoveries  of  their  ancestors  out  of  the
catalogue,  and  civil  society  could  not  have  existed.  \s  ho
■were  these  ancestors  of  theirs  ?  We  need  not  ask  the  Cireeks ;
let  us  enquire  of  the  Egyptians  themselves.

"  Manedio,  in  one  of  his  books,  entitled  Sothis,  relates
several  things  concerning  The  Empire  of  the  Egi/ptians,  taken
from  certain  columns,  which  were  engraved  in  the  sacred
dialeci  and  in  hieroglyphic  letters,  by  Thodi,  the  first  Mercmy:
and  Afteii  the  Deluge,  transcribed  into  books,  by
(another)  1  noth,  the  son  of  Agathademon."     Euseb.  P.  E.  i,9.


109

Josephus  i,  2.  and  Anim,  Marcell.  L.  xxii.  give  iis  nearly
iLe  same  account  of  antediluvian  engraving ;  but  we  need  not
go  any  further.  Whatever  becomes  of  the  authenticity  of  the
inscribed  cohnnns^  Manetho  is  good  authority  for  the  tradition
of  the  Eguptians.

This  Empire  ofhis  conntrijmai,  and  the  Great  Tliotk,  the
inventor  of  their  arts,  and  the  recorder  of  their  history,  hke
the  ten  kings  of  Bcrosus,  existed  before  the  delloe.

The  Greeks  in  general  are  proud  of  boiTOwing ;  but  some-
times they  put  in  their  ckiim  for  the  discovery  of  primitive
and  important  arts.  Their  claim  shall  be  allowed,  when  tliey
have  persuaded  us  that  Deucalion  and  Pyrrha,  zcho  alone
escaped  the  univerml  deluge,  Avere  Greeks,  and  brought  their
vessel  to  land  on  Mount  Parnassus.

The  Phoenicians  are  another  favourite  nation  with  all  anti-
quaries. They  boast  their  title  to  many  important  discoveries;
but  it  appears  that  their  discoveries  also  mount  up  to  the  ver^'
first  age  of  mankind,  and  therefore  were  antediluvian.

Sanchoniathon,  a  very  old  Phoenician  historian,  in  a  frag-
ment preserved  by  Eusebius,  gives  an  allegorical  account  of
the  earliest  ages,  by  which  it  appears  that  the  traditions  of
this  people  were  not  less  absurdly  national  than  those  of  their
neighbours.  The  Most  High  is  represented  as  dwelling  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Byblos,  a  city  of  Phoenicia,  even  before
he  had  produced  Heaven  and  Earth.

In  the  age  immediately  succeeding  the  Creation,  The  first
Cronus  (or  husbandman)  is  attended  by  his  Secretary  Hermes
Trismegistus,  Thoth  or  Ταχυτος,  The  author  seems  to  use
tliese  terms  as  appellations  for  an  inventor  and  recorder  of  arts


no

nucì  sciences;  for  from  licnccfortli  λνο  find  Thotli  ready  upon
all  occasions,  in  all  places  and  in  successive  ages,  delivering
his  advice,  making  inventions  and  committing  them  to
Λvriting.

lie  imitated  [made  a  drawing  of]  the  Heavens  [distinguislied
and  described  the  constellations,]  He  drew  the  portraits  of
the  Gods  [a  series  of  mystical  symbols]  of  which  he  formed
the  sacred  charaéters  of  the  letters.  And  all  this  happened
before  the  Second  Cronus  (Noah)  came  into  the  Southern
regions  (Shinar)  and  bestowed  the  kingdom  of  Egypt  upon
Thoth.

The  author  havitig  recited  his  allegory,  uhich  contains
much  important  but  mysterious  inatter,  proceeds  to  give  us
an  account  of  it,  in  plain  historical  language.

''  The  Cabiri,  or  the  seven  sons  of  Sydic  (ply,  the  Jii^t  one)
and  Asclepius  their  eighth  brother  were  the  first,  \vho,  by  the
coimnand  of  ThotJ),  transmitted  the  memory  of  all  these
things  by  their  writings.

"  The  son  of  Thabion,  the  first  hierophant  (Τλ,κ  Λπ  aiw^o;
yiyo'joTuv  Φοίηχων)  of  the  Tiiost  rcmotc  ancestors  of  the  Phami-
cians,  converted  these  memoriah  into  allegories,  and  blending
them  with  natural  phienomena,  delivered  them  to  those  avIio
celebrate  the  orgies,  and  to  the  prophets  who  preside  üv<.t  the
sacred  mysteries.

"  These  men  studying  to  promote  {Ύν<ρη)  blind  admiration,
handed  them  down  in  this  form  to  their  successors,  and  to
those  who  were  initiated.  One  of  these  (initiates)  Avas  Isiris,
the  niventor  of  three  letters,  and  the  brother  of  Chna  (Canaan)
the  first  who  had  the  name  of  Pha*nician."


Ill


The  coimtrV;,  the  character  and  the  antiquity  of  this  author
rntitlc  the  fragment  hcfore  us  to  the  higlicst  respect,  amongst
poetic  histories.  Sanehoniuthon  i\as  a  Phuiuician,  and  a
most  diligent  searcher  andj'aitl/fal  tnmscriber  of  the  records  of
his  country,  and  is  supposed  to  have  hvcd  300  years  before
Homer.  We  liave  then  no  room  to  appeal,  from  his  autho-
rit\^,  to  any  Greek  or  Roman  writer^  respecting  the  opinions
of  the  old  Phoinicians.

"We  are  here  informed  that  the  discoveries  and  the  records
ascribed  to  Thoth,  or  Hermes  Trismegistus,  ΛvllateveΓ  they
may  have  been,  originated  in  the  first  ages  of  mankind,  long
before  the  Phoenicians  or  the  Egyptians  became  a  distinct
nation.

For  the  memorial  of  these  things  was  first  committed  to
writing — and  afterwards  converted  into  allegories,  and  in  tlii;;
form  delivered  to  the  priests,  who  handed  them  down  in  suc-
cession, to  the  time  of  Isiris  the  brother  of  Chna  or  Canaan,
the  patriarch  of  the  PhcBnicians.

This  Isiris,  whom  Sanchoniathon  elsewhere  calls  Miior,
could  be  no  other  than  the  father  of  the  Egyptian  family,  and
consequently  their  first  King  and  their  first  Priest.  He  there-
fore imited  in  his  own  person  the  characters  οϊ- — Mizroim,  tiie
Brother  of  Canaan,  and  the  Father  of  the  Egyptians:

OiiV/s,  die  deified  ancestor  of  the  Egyptians:

Thoth,  the  son  of  Agathodemon,  or  the  good  genius,  tîàcir
first  national  instructor,  who  transcribed  the  records,  and
enforced  the  precepts  pf  his  great  antediluvian  predecessor,
and


112

That  Thoth,  U})oii  Λνΐιοιη  the  second  Cronus  or  Noali  first
bestowed  the  kingdom  of  Eg3'pt.

This  distinguished  personage,  agreeably  to  tlie  testimony  of
tbe  Phoenician  historian,  may  have  actually  augmented  the
primitive  alpha1)et,  b}' the  invention  of  three  new  letters ;  for
it  is  well  known,  that  the  alphabet  which  Moses  brought  out
of  Egypt,  contained  more  letters  than  were  originally  used  by
other  ancient  nations.

However  this  may  bave  been,  it  is  clear,  from  the  pre-
ceding quotations,  that  the  local  and  national  pretensions  of  all
these  people  to  original  invention  must,  in  a  great  measure,
be  removed  from  their  private  ancestors,  and  lestored  to  the
common  fathers  of  the  hmnan  race.

And  thus  their  traditions  may  be  rendered  consistent  with
each  other,  and  Avith  the  history  of  the  Old  Testament.  For
it  has  already  been  observed,  that  there  is  not  perhaps  one
single  ait,  or  a  single  branch  of  science  which  may  be  traced
to  any  nation  of  high  antiquity,  that  is  not  expressly  men-
tioned or  clearly  alluded  to,  in  the  book  of  Job;  and  that,  in
this  book,  the  knowledge  of  things  human  and  Divine  is  not
ascribed  to  any  contemporary  order  of  men ;  but  to  the  search
of  the  long-lived  fathers  of  mankind,  and  to  the  tradition  of
the  great  patriarchs,  íç  zchom  alone  the  tarth  îcas  givai.

The  above  passage  of  Sanchonladion  furnishes  occasion  of
remarking  anotlier  trait  which  disfigured  the  theology,  philo-
sophy and  traditional  doctrines  of  all  nations,  and  in  time
produced  the  most  pernicious  cfíeóts.  I  mean  the  veil  of
secrecy  under  which  they  taught,  and  the  use  of  allegory,
figurative  tides  and  mystical  symbols.  By  means  of  these,
tlie  trutli  was  concealed  from  the  e3'es  and  ears  of  the  people.


113

•ivho,  consequently,  soon  began  to  nnstakc  the  shadovv  for
the  substance,  an(i  to  perceive  a  multitude  of"  Gods,  where
only  the  various  relations  and  operations  of  one  God,  and  tl'io
phienomena  and  clianges  of  Nature,  were  originally  intended.
All  this  is  well  accouiited  for  by  the  grave  historian.

Long  before  the  division  of  the  nations,  before  Chna  set-»
tied  in  Phaiuicia  or  Thoth  in  Egypt,  plain  matter  of  fact  had
been  converted  into  mysterious  Allegory,  and  sacred  and
historical  truth  blended  with  the  symbols  of  seasons,  revolu-
tions of  the  heavenly  bodies,  and  the  like.  This  mystical
doctrine  was  delivered  to  the  priests  who  kept  the  key  of
knowledge,  and  who  most  criminally  encouraged  popular
delusion  (To»  τνΦον  au^tn  ex  ταντοί  (τηνοονντΕς)  Studying  above  all
things  to  promote  astonishment  and  admiration.  The  intrq-?
duŵion  or  the  revival  of  such  oenigmatical  lore  was,  perhaps,
that  evil  imagination  of  man's  heart  which  was  reproved
immediately  after  the  deluge.     Gen.  viii,  21.•

Notwithstanding  these  and  similar  blemishes,  it  may  be
determined,  upon  the  whole,  that  the  descendants  of  ]\oah,
who  first  planted  the  nations,  had  been  habituated  to  the
forms  and  institutions  of  social  and  cultivated  life,  and  that
they  carried  with  them,  to  their  respective  habitations,  mucli
valuable  information,  which  they  had  therefore  an  opportu-
nity of  transmitting  to  their  children.

It  will  be  observed  diatin  many  of  the  more  distant  nations^
the  manual  aits,  and  conseciuentl}^,  the  convcniencies  of
society  were  soon  depressed,  far  below  the  standard  1  have
laid  down.  This  may  very  readily  be  accounted  for.  Me-
chanism of  all  kinds  depends  much  upon  external  mcaiiQ^
particularly  upon  the  use  of  the  harder  metals.


Î14

these  \\ere  well  known  before  the  separation  of  mankind,
and  there  can  be  no  doubt,  that  the  Noacliidae  furnished
themselves  with  those  implements  which  they  might  have
occasion  lor.  But  what  the  preaent  family  carried  in  tlieir
hands,  v/ould  by  no  means  supply  the  future  nation.  Some
ages  may  have  elapsed,  and  the  metallargic  mystery  may
have  been  forgotten,  before  they  discovered  veins  of  ore  in
their  new  settlements.  Merchants  from  the  central  regions
■vould  not  begin  to  troftic  Avith  strangers,  till  they  became
sensible  of  some  wants  of  their  ovai;  and  then  tliey  would
visit  only  such  countries  as  were  provided  with  commodities
to  reward  their  labour.  Many  remote  nations  v.ere  then
compelled  to  have  recourse  to  the  stone  hatchet  and  the
wooden  spade.  What  remains  of  metal  tliey  might  still
possess  only  glittered  occasionally  in  the  hands  of  their  chiefs.

But  intelleŵual  acquisitions  were  not  so  necessarily  subjcift
to  decay.  Tliey  depended  less  upon  the  productions  of
nature  and  the  soil.

History  might  long  survive  in  tradition,  religion  in  its
tenets  and  discipline,  philosophy  in  its  maxims,  and  sciences
in  their  principles.

ϊη  the  back  settlements  of  America  we  find  men  accommo-
dated like  savages,  but  informed  as  members  of  civil  society ;
and  in  ancient  authors  we  read  of  sages,  of  no  mean  fame,
residing  amongst  rude  and  barbarous  nations.

Primitive  tradition,  of  whatever  kind,  was  preserved  widi
more  or  less  purity,  owing  to  a  variety  of  circumstances,
which  arose  from  local  situation,  the  various  means  of  sub-
sistence, and  the  various  talents  and  dispositions  of  men.

Some  nations  nniforndv  revered  the  institutions  of  their  an-


115

cestorsj  others  became  ambitious  of  dislinguishing  themselves
by  new  inventions,  and  impiovenients,  and  of  course  despised
tlic  simplicity  of  former  times,  and  a  third  sort  contented
themselves  with  satisfying  the  wants  and  gratifying  the
appetites  and  passions  of  nature,  upon  tlie  most  easy  terms,
and  so  degenerated  into  the  savage  state.

The  Greeks  and  Romans  from  whom  we  derive  much  of
our  learning,  and  many  of  our  errors  respecting  the  early
ages,  at  one  period  of  dieir  histoiy,  were  not  far  removed
iiom  tliis  character.  Their  avowed  want  of  information  as  to
the  remote  events  of  history,  and  their  readiness  to  adopt  a
heterogeneous  mass  of  fable  and  superstition  from  their  neigh-
bours, furnish  the  clearest  proofs  that  tliey  had  broken  the
chain  of  ancient  lore.  How  could  it  have  been  otlicrwise  ? — -
The  states  of  the  former  people,  at  one  time,  were  httle  more
than  companies  of  pyrates,  and  the  latter  owed  their  being  to
a  band  of  robbers.

In  the  preceding  sketches,  I  have  endeavoured  to  state  mv
reasons  for  receiving  with  some  limitation  several  popular
opinions,  and  amongst  the  rest,  a  theory  which  has  been
conceived  by  distinguished  genius,  and  supported  by  a  pro-
fusion of  learning,  and  which  deduces  all  that  Λvas  valuable
amongst  the  ancient  nations,  from  tlie  house  of  Ham,  and
from  the  confederates  of  Niinrod.

I  feel  no  pride  in  singularity.  It  is  with  regret,  I  differ  in
some  particulars  from  men  whose  talents  and  erudition  I  con-
template with  the  profoundest  respect,  and  my  pen  hesitates
while  I  suggest  a  suspicion  that  there  is  some  defccl;  in  the
groundwork  of  the  system  I  have  just  mentioned.

Must  we  receive  it  as  a  matter  of  fad,  that  all  rule  and  au-
H  2


116

tlioiitv  amongst  the  nations  devolved  to  that  family,  vhieh
was  prophetically  doomed  to  be  the  servant  of  servants  to  their
brethren  ?

Has  it  ever  been  the  peculiar  province  of  the  same  people
to  innovate  and  to  preserve?  If  not,  how  shall  we  ascribe  all
traces  of  primitive  tradition  to  those  apostates,  who  rejected
the  wisdom  of  their  fathers  and  bewildered  themselves  with
new  inventions — all  arts  and  sciences  to  those  men  whose
plans  and  designs  were  uttei-ly  overthrown — all  the  remains  of
one  universal  language  to  those,  whose  language  was  so  con-
founded that  they  could  not  understand  one  another's  speech;
or  all  established  and  well-regulated  society  to  those  who,
first  of  all,  tumultuous!}^  assembled  under  the  banner  of  an
impious  rebel,  and  afterwards  were  scattered  abroad  over  thç
face  of  the  earth  ?

Or  if  we  turn  our  y'\c\y  to  profane  histor}%  can  «it  be  ima-
gined that  the  Gods  and  the  sons  of  the  Gods  who  vanquished
and  dispersed  the  rebellious  giants,  and  those  giants  themselves;,
were  not  only  one  and  the  same  people,  but  frequently  the
same  individuals;  and  that,  by  being  thus  self-vanquished
and  self-destroyed,  the  same  giants  became  Lords  of  the
world?


ESSAY,

ON  THE   ORIGIN  OF   THE  CELTiE:


INSTITUTION  OF  DRUIDISM:

I..;;  c:  ,•


PRETENSIONS  TO  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  LETTERS.


Sect.  I.      TieUminary  remarks Origin  of  the    Celta-

Remarks  upon  the  European  Sci/tha.


A


Retiospeét  into  the  early  periods  and  state  of  Britain —
the  charaéter,  the  arts  and  the  customs  of  its  primitive
inhabitants,  is  not  an  exercise  of  idle  and  simple  curiosit}' ;
but  of  critical  importance,  in  the  pursuit  of  historical  and
philosophical  truth.  It  not  only  delights  the  imagination
with,  a  view  of  our  hills,  valleys  and  plains,  as  they  presented
themselves  to  the  eye  three  thousand  years  ago,  and  shews  to
us  the  simple  native,  in  his  first  occupations ;  but  also  points
out  the  origin,  progress  and  improvement  of  such  knowledge
as,  to  this  day,  constitutes  the  ornament  and  the  comfort  of
society.

11  3


118

I  therefore  trust,  that  no  apology  λυϊΙΙ  he  required  for
attempts,  even  by  me,  to  discrimhratc  fatìs,  relative  to  the
Celtic  Nation ;  the  original  possessors  of  the  British  Islands,
and  the  remote  progenitors  of  many  of  their  present  occupiers.

Tiic  Governments,  the  Institutions  and  Customs  of  that
nation  were,  in  great  measure,  obliterated  by  the  lìomans,
λυΙιο  discovered  but  litde  ciuiosity,  either  to  examine  the
history  of  strangers,  whom  tliey  despised,  or  to  enter  minutely
into  the  value  of  establishments,  which  had  been  doomed,  by
their  decree,  to  ruin.  Consequently  the  notices  Avhich  they
have  left  us,  respecting  the  Celt»,  are  slight  and  superficial.
These  documents,  however,  such  as  they  are,  have  been  at-
tentively weighed;  and  men  of  discernment  have  engrafted
upon  them  one  genci-al  conclusion,  "  That  the  Celta,  though
comparatively  to  others,  a  simple  race  of  men,  uere  possessed
of  some  useful  hnowìedge,  not  common  to  them  lath  veighboun
more  polished,  and  zdiich  deserved  a  better  fate  than  total
oOliiiun."

Kepeaied  endeavours  have  been  made,  by  ingenious  men,
to  develope  some  of  their  attainments :  but  tlie  Ij^mps  of
Greece  and  Rome  throw  a  faint  gleam  over  the  field ;  and
what  is  dimly  perceived  must  be  erroneously  described.

The  mass  of  the  people,  not  being  much  raised  above  a
condition  of  servitude — pane  serirorum  loco — were  but  little
informed,  and  as  little  ambitious  of  that  refinement  or  culti-
vation in  their  manners,  which  could  have  procured  them  no
honourable  distinélions.

But  their  *■*■  Equiks"  or  Nobility  are  described,  in  a  mannrr
which  entitles  thcni  to  respeol.  Tlicy  were  by  no  means
destitute  of  culture  and  of  science,      la  this  order  all  the


119

power  seems  to  liave  centred.  For  though,  in  some  of  thcjr
states,  their  supreme  or  chieF  magistracy  was  eieétive,  yet  the
prince  was  chosen  out  οϊ  privileged  faìiaìics,  and  by  conslir
tueuts  of  equal  rank.

To  this  rank  belonged  their  celebrated  order  of  Druids. —
In  this  rank  they  originated.  Their  disciples  were  the
"  Most  Noble.*"  Tbey  were  educated,  witli  incredible
TÌgilance  and  care,  for  the  most  sacred  offices.  Jt  was  the
immediate  and  seleéted  province  of  those  who  were  admitted
into  the  order,  to  record  and  perpetuate  the  customs,  tradi-
tions, and  general  history  of  the  nation,  from  the  time  of
their  first  progenitors — to  administer  Justice — to  superintend
the  due  execution  of  the  Laws — to  encourage  virtue  and
punish  vice — to  inculcate  religious  and  moral  precepts — î.q
direét  the  ceremonies  of  piety  and  enforce  its  duties.

Their  studies  embraced  those  elevated  objeóls  which  had
engaged  the  attention  of  the  world  in  its  primitive  age — Th(i
nature  of  the  Deity — of  the  human  Soul — of  the  future  State
— of  the  heavenly  bodies — of  the  terrestrial  globe,  and  of  its
various  produétions.  Their  conceptions  were  great  and
sublime,  their  speculations  CQuiprehensive  in  their  sphere^
pervading  most  of  the  arts  and  sciences  which  had  interested
the  earliest  periods.  Perhaps  there  was  no  order  of  men
amongst  the  heathens,  who  preserved  the  history  and  the
opinions  of  mankind,  in  its  early  state^  with  more  simplicity,
and  with  more  integrity.

The  religion  of  the  patriarchs  had,  indeed,  been  deformed

■^vith  various  superstitions,   by   all   nations.     But  this   order^,

notwithstanding  their  many  and  gross  errors,  appear  to  have

retained  many  of  its  vital  and  essential  principles.

■ <   ■  «^     >  ■  ■        ■

^  Mela,  lii,  c.


v..


120

Under  a  variety  of  relative  names  and  cliarafters,  tlicy
acknowledged  one  God,  the  maker  of  all  things,  and  the
Lord  of  the  universe.  Tliey  taught  the  superintendency  of
Divine  Pjovidence — the  immortality  of  the  soul — moral  le-
sponsibilit}',  and  recompence  after  death.

As  a  consequence  of  these  principles,  they  observed,  as
well  as  enjoined,  the  most  rigid  justice  in  their  decisions,  and
in  their  dealings  with  mankind*.

Their  portrait,  as  sketched  by  ancient  authors,  has  a
marked  resemblance  to  that  of  other  sacred  orders,  in  the
most  remote  ages  and  countries.

Dr.  Borlase  demonstrates  their  general  and  close  analogy  to
the  Magi  o(  Persia.  It  almost  constituted  identity.  They
scarcely  differed  in  their  name;  for  Pliny  calls  the  Druids  the
Magi  of  the  Gauls  and  Britotisf.

The  most  able  author  of  the  Indian  Antiquities,  marks,  with
deep  and  sound  learning,  the  same  afhnity  between  the
Druids  and  Brachnnns  of  India.  It  may  be  extended  to  the
Chaldeans,  and  the  Orphic  Priesthood  of  Thrace,  as  well  as
to  many  otliers.

As  this  resemblance  of  characiler  has  been  justly  deemed
both  too  perfeót  and  general,  to  be  resolved  into  accidental
co-incidence,  it  lias  been  the  ingenious  labour  of  many  learned
men,  to  ascertain  the  several  means,  by  wdiich  the  institutions,
Cipinions  and  customs  of  the  Eastern  world  have  been  imported
into  úìc  JVest  of  Europe.

*  Mtla,  ubi  sup.  Cses,  De  Bello  Gal.  VI.  aod  Dr.  Borlasc  passim.
+  L.  XXX,  C.  1.


121


But  may  it  not  be  askcd^  if  tlie  most  peculiar  instances  of
similarity,  thus  noticed  between  the  East  and  the  W'est,  da
not  reíleét  the  general  charaèter  of  the  patriarchal  age,  and
primitive  man,  before  his  family  had  separated?  if  so,  why
sliould  we  derive  iiniversa Is  from  pariiculars?  Tiie  distant
branches  of  a  spreading  oak,  notwithstandmg  the  diversity  of
shape  which  they  acquire,  from  their  exposure  to  diilerent
winds,  have  still  a  mutual  resemblance,  in  dieir  texture,  their
foliage,  and  their  fruit;  which  they  derive,  not  from  cack
other,  but  from  the  j^a rent  acorn.

Do  we  not  find  this  prhnitive  chara6ler,  so  deeply  impressed
upon  the  CeltiB,  so  general  through  their  land,  and  at  so
early  an  age,  as  to  make  it  impossible  for  the  dye  to  have
been  fixt  by  wandering  navigators,  or  the  local  settlement  of
a  few  strangers,  whose  objeŵ  was  profit,  and  Avho  must  them-
selves have  been  objects  of  distrust  ?  As  all  nations  originally
came  from  one  stock,  and,  at  an  age,  when  the  habits  of
society  were  developed,  would  it  not  be  reasonable  to  conclude,
tliat  some  general  customs  and  opinions  of  the  human  race
Λvere  naturalized  in  the  land,  by  tlie  first  families  who  settled
in  the  Western  Contintut  ?

The  Greeks  had  been  a  powerful  people  at  Marseilles,  many
centuries  before  Caesar's  time.  The  ancient  inhabitants,  who
remained  in  the  land  which  thei/  occupied,  may  have  learnt
several  arts  and  habits  from  them:  But  the  vicinity  of  those
Greeks  appears  not  to  have  efíe<5ted  any  change  in  the  Religioii
or  the  Charaéìer  of  the  Gaulish  Nation,

Abating  then  for  these  instances  in  which  history  demon-
strates their  obligation  to  exotic  aid,  I  cannot  reiuse  to  the
Celtae  and  their  Druids,  the  full  credit  which  is  due  to  them,
for    having  preserved   those   genuine    features  of  primcLval


122

history,  which  they  arc  known  to  have  possessed.  These  are
features  marked,  and  dear  eriough,  to  point  them  out  as  a
nation  reguhirl)-  constituted  under  the  auspices  of  its  pa-
triarchs. They  could  not  have  originated  in  those  fugitives
Λvho  had  been  driven  out  from  society,  ov  have  readied  their
Westem  destination^  in  the  charaéter  of  uncònneéled  an^
unprincipled  savages.


The  perplexity  and  scantiness  of  ancient  evidence  leave  so
inuch  ohscurity  in  the  earliest  account  of  nations,  that,  whei^
the  subje<5t  has  been  handled  by  men  of  consummate  abilities
and  of  accute  research,  the  discussion  has  generally  closeil
in  doubt  at  the  best.  I  must  therefore  bespeak  the  candour  of
my  Readers,  in  their  judgment  of  the  outlines  which  I  have
endeavoured  to  trace,  concerning  the  origin  of  the  Celtae,
and  of  the  arguments  which  I  offer  in  support  of  my  opinion,
that  the  fundamental  principles  of  Druidism  accompanied  that
tiation,  from  its  ten/  source.  And!  deem  it  a  fortunate  cir-
cumstance, that  my  objeŵ  and  plan  do  not  requh-e  of  mo  íq
enter  minutely,  or  deeply,  into  these  topics.

The  Celtae,  whether  under  that  name,  or  called  Cimmcrii,
Gain,  Briges,  Brigantes;  or  known  by  other,  and  very  nu-
merous designations,  appropriated  either  to  the  whole,  or  to
certain  branches  of  the  nation,  are  described  as  a.n  extensive
and  powerful  Race,  of  Europe,  and  as  constituting  some  of
its  iirst  inhabitants.  The  ancient  Greeks  appear  to  have
placed  them  almost  alone,  in  our  western  continent,  which
they   distinguished   by  their   name.      Ephorus  dividing   the

world  into  four  parts,  allotted  the  Western  to  the  Celtic.

Sitrab.  L.  '\.


η  lá  com-


123

Ptolemy  calls  that  whole  part  of  the  worlds  vliicli
nionly   known   by   the  name   oi"  EiuOpe,  Ceitica,  or   Celto-
Galatia. — Quadripai't.  L.  ii.  C.  ί2.

The  Celtai  were  then  the  principal  Europeans  known  to  the
Greeks,  exclusive  of  their  own  families.  We  must  therefore
inquire  into  the  original  population  of  Europe,  in  order  to
iind  out  the  parentage  of  the  Celta;.  And.  this  appears  to  be
delineated  in  the  tenth  chapter  of  Genesis,  that  fountain-head
of  universal  geography.

The  sacred  Penman  enumerates  those  heads  of  separate
families,  amongst  the  Noachida?,  by  wliom  the  Earth  was
divided,  after  the  flood.  He  describes  them  by  those  names
which  the  nations  that  sprung  from  them,  or  the  countries
they  severally  occupied,  retained  in  his  time.  By  those
pai-ts  of  the  earth  which  he  calls  D^Un  >'K,  or  the  Idcs  of  the
Gentiles,  it  is  understood  that  he  means  Europe,  and  its
adjacent  Islands.  These  were  divided  by  the  Sons  and
Grandsons  of  Japheth,  or  rather  by  Gamer  and  Javan,  and
their  sons — "  In  their  lands,  every  one  after  his  tongue^
(fler  their  families,  in  their  Nations.'"  This  division  must
have  been  regularly  conducted.  It  must  have  taken  place  in
the  time  of  the  patriarchs  here  mentioned,  for  the  aél  was
theirs,  and  the  nations  retained  their  names  to  tlie  time  of
Moses — nay  many  of  them  long  aftervrards,  lor  we  find  them
recognized  by  History  and  Geograph}-.

Javan  is  well  known  as  the  parent  of  the  Greeks.  From  him
the  name  lum  was  applied  anciently  to  all  the  several  branches
of  that  nation.     It  extended  into  Macedon  and  Thrace'*.

Ιωνις  (xa.\tv>,  Heysch,  V.  lun^.

E^tEixwc  Íe  ci  BajÇa^&iTsnç  Ελ?»»»!»;  Iwraj  ^syetn.      Hesych,  V.  Ιανια.
n«îT«ç  ETv^jtvaj  Iwcv.-j  'ci  B«^Ç«çci  ίχ,Λ7Λνν,     Scho!,  in  Achern.  uHrisicỳh-


124

This  family  were  not  called  Celtti  nor  Cunmerii.  If
Celtüe  were  known,  in  ])art  of  their  territories,  by  the  names
of  Ύηχνΐς,  ΤΥΓ/ί'ηίς,  or  n(i(iv€S  of  the  land,  they  were  still  re-
garded as  intruders,  and  described  as  7nen  of  might,  who
retained  possession  rather  by  force,  than  by  a  lawful  claim  to
it,  and  who  were,  upon  that  account,  just/ly  expelled.

We  must  look  then  for  the  Celta;  amongst  the  descendants
of  Gomer.  The  word  nnj  implying  tojinish,  to  come,  or  bring
to  an  end  or  conchmon,  may  intimate  the  situation  intended
for  the  posterity  of  this  patriarch,  at  the  end  of  the  Earth.  A
people  named  from  Gomer  would  be  DnDJ  or  HDJ  Gomcrim
or  Gomeri,  and  it  could  be  shewn,  in  a  multitude  of  instances,
that  C  or  Κ  in  the  Celtic,  and  other  European  languages,
occupies  the  place  of  the  Hebrew  j.  Cyrnri  or  Kimnierii  may
then  be  nothing  more  than  Gomerii.

Were  not  the  name  of  Celtae  acknowledged  by  the  people
of  Gaul,  it  might,  with  reasonable  conjeélure,  be  derived
from  n^D,  synonymous  with  ΊΏ:ι;  ri^D,  Λ  finishing,  Λ  η  End  ;
»ΓΟ'2,  Celta,  men  of  the  extrcmiti/—\i  ατχα,τοί.  diet  (Kilet)
in  the  language  of  the  Celtaj  themselves,  implies  Extreme
Corners  or  Retreats,  and  1  think  also,   'Sorthern  regions.

Be  this,  however,  as  it  may,  Josephus,  Λνΐιο  may  be  deemed
an  able  critic  in  Hebrew  geography,  declares  that  those  whom
the  Greeks  called  Galatae  or  Celtae  were  descended  from
Gomer.

We  read  of  three  sons  w  ho  divided  the  patrimony  of  Gomer,
or  of  three  nations  which  descended  from  him,  namely
Ashkenaz,  Riphath  and  Togarmah.  These  of  coui^se  were
equally  entitled  to  the  name  of  Gomeritae.  But  as  the
\\'cstern;  or  our  Celtae,  appeal•  to  have  been  çne  separated


125

nnîion,  we  must  endeavour  to  discriminate  their  progcnitoTj,
amongst  the  sons  of  Gomer.

The  original  seat  of  Ashkennz  appears  to  have  been  situated
in  Bithj-nia,  wliich  preserved  his  name  to  a  late  period  of  the
Jewish  annals.

Riphath's  patrimony  is,  at  this  da}-,  acknowledged  by  the
Jews_,  who  call  Germany  by  his  name.  It  is  probable  this
name  originally  applied  to  tiie  Eastern  division  of  that  exten-
sive region,  which  the  ancients  entitled  Germany,  as  the  part
best  known  to  the  Israelites,  an  Asiatic  people.  And  here
some  vestiges  of  it  seem  to  be  retamed  in  the  Carpathian
DDID  mountains,  and  perhaps  the  Kiphcan  hills,  further
North,  Here  then  we  may  fix  the  seat  of  Kipluith,  whose
descendants,  in  that  situation,  could  not  have  been  the  Goths.
They  were  not  in  possession  of  Germany,  in  the  time  of
Moses.  Riphalh  was  probably  the  Sarmatian  stock,  which,
at  this  day,  continues  to  occupy  that  ground,  a  race  which
could  not  even  be  attacked  v^'ithout  extreme  temerity,  and
whose  land  presented  but  little  incitement  to  enterprize.

That  the  Sarmatas  lield  dicse  territories  before  the  aijgran-

dizement  of  Gothic  power,  we  have  reason  to  conclude. .

Whether  some  of  their  colonies  had  already  crossed  the
Danube,  and  had  carried  their  language  into  lllyricum  or
Pannonia  may  be  more  questionable.  But  the  Wendi,  or
descendants  from  the  ancient  Vcnecli,  speak  the  Sarmatic
language,  at  this  very  moment,  though  sm-rounded  by  Gothic
nations.  It  is  not  pretended  that,  at  any  time,  this  handful
of  men  penetrated  into  the  possessions  of  the  Goths,  or  ac-
quired an  establishment  by  viciories.  Conquerors  take  the
test,  the  richest,  the  most  accessible  and  the  most  open  parts
of  the  distiiél  obtained,  and  there  maintain  a  superiority  of


126

po^vcr^  ifthej'mean  to  hold  whal  they  have  acquired.  But
the  situation,  as  well  as  the  condition,  of  this  race,  and  their
first  name,  cOmbine  in  proving  them  relics  of  the  former  in-
habitants, or  aboriginal.  The  Sarmaiai  then,  or  Sc/avoiici^y
were  tliose  whom  the  Goths  found  in  the  land  of  Riphath,  or
the  Eastern  division  of  ancient  Germany,  and  the  diversity  of
their  language  proves  them  no  parents  of  the  \\'estern  Celta?,
though  it  has  a  degree  of  afhnity  with  the  Celtic,  which
intimates  that,  once  they  were  contiguous  families.

Togarmah  is  claimed  as  their  patriarch  by  the  inhabitants
of  those  countries  which  lie  b>et\veen  the  Euxine  or  Caspian
seas.  This  appears  to  be  demonstrated,  in  a  masterly  paper,
iiie  work  of  Mr.  Granville  Penn,  to  which  I  refer  my  own
"Readers  for  the  authorities*.  From  this  country  have  sprung,
as  it  is  generally  understood,  the  Europcau  Scj/t/tians,  Goths
or  Germans.  Perhaps  they  have  nearly  retained  the  name  of
iheir  progenitor.  3  aflixcd,  being  equivalent  to  the  prefix
jn,  rnDIJ,  German,  must  be  the  same  word  as  ΠΏΊ^Π,  Togarmah,
perhaps  from  D"iJ,  to  be  bony  or  strong.  It  may  at  all  events
be  salely  concluded,  from  tiie  language  of  this  Race,  tliat  in
Togarmah  we  have  no  parent  of  the  Western  Cehce.

We  must  return  then  to  Ashkenaz,  whom  Josephus  calls
Aç^aice|xç,  and  the  Greeks  perhaps  Acxawo;.  His  name  is
understood  to  keep  possession  of  the  Ascanian  or  Euxine  sea,
as  well  as  of  the  nook  which  lies  between  that  sea  and  the
Propontist•      When  Ashkenaz   occupied   this  position,    the

*  Oiient.  Coll.  v.  e,  p.  143.

+  Ascania,  acity  of  Troas.     StfpA. of  Phiygia,     Htsych.

Ascaniffi  insula,  bcfoie  Troas.     Pliv.

Ascanius  sinus,  by  Nicea.     Ascanius  Lacus,  between  Phrygia  and  Mvsia.

Arrian.
A  liver,  and  the  whole  disfrifi  were  known  by  that  name.     Strabo.  who
cites  fiom  Euphorion— Mi;íOkî  'mct^  υάχ<ί^ν  Ajxa^ojo.


127

Eiixiiie  bounded  him  011  one  hand^  ilie  fainily  of  Juvan  on
ijie  oilier,  Lud  was  placed  in  hiá  rear  and  tlie  Thracian
Bosphoius  in  front.  I'his  nook  was  never  intended  for  the
inheritance  of  the  Eldest  branch  o['  the  Noachidaj.  it  was  a
mere  halting  place  upon  the  road.

If  the  name  of  x\£hkenaz  be  at  all  conne<íìed  with  the  Ctltic
language,  the  first  of  its  three  syllables  must  be  regarded  only
as  a  demonsirative  article,  or  a  particle  in  composition  of  a
similar  meaning  to  ]Ü>ii,  an  individual  of  any  kiud,  which  13
sometimes  Avritten  ìUìi,  as  in  this  name.  And  accordingly^
the  families  descended  from  tliis  patriarch  seem  to  have
dispensed  at  pleasure  Λνΐΐΐι  that  article.

In  this  corner  of  Asia,  we  iind  the  Ileneti  or  Venetij,
which,  pronounced  by  a  Celt  Atould  be  Htnet,  Ki/nct,  or
Gccenet,  well  knov/n  tribes  wherever  the  Cefta  are  ibund. —
The  country  of  these  Heneti  or  Veneti,  seems  to  have  been
the  Henj/dd,  the  origin,  the  source  or  the  native  region  of  the
Celtae.  In  the  same  district,  we  have  tlie  Cau-Concs,  and
tile  isles  of  the  K^ancci.

Upon  the  European  side  of  the  Propontls,  in  die  Kingdom
of  Rhesus,  a  name  which  has  frequently  adorned  the  Throne
of  Sihiria,  and  the  songs  of  the  Bards,  the  prefeciure  of
Kcenica  is  mentioned.  Closely  adjoining  are  the  Ci-ConeSy
who  fought  with  Ulysses  and  with  his  Greeks.  Their  territoiy
was^  at  ancient  periods,  called  G  a  laic  a,  and  in  the  time  of
Herodotus,  Briantica* ,  or  Gallic  and  Brigantic,  the  middle
G  being  often  melted  and  dropt  in  old  names.  This  aflords
presumptive  testimony,  and  strong  of  its  kind,  that  the
Ci-Cones  (or  hither  Cones)  were  Gauls  and  Brigantes — the
Gomeritaî  of  whom  the  JVestcrn  Celtcc  were  formed.

*  Lib.  7.  107.


128

Peihaps  Mytliology  ma}•  offer  us  some  hints  respecting  tlie
emigration  of  the  Celtic  to  the  West,  which  took  place  long
before  the  commencement  of  profane  hhtory.  The  Centimani
were  ordered  to  depart  from  the  neiglibourhood  of  Thrace,
into  tlie  lower  regions.  They  obeyed  the  decree  witliout
resistance.  Some  time  afterwards,  their  relations,  the  Giants
who  had  strengthened  themselves  in  the  country,  were  subdued
in  war,  and  compelled  to  follow  them.  E««Tov^etçoç,  Centi-
inanus,  or  a  man  mth  a  hundred  hands,  beheld  at  a  distance,
through  the  mist  of  antiquity,  presents  a  monstrous  figure,  but
the  charatì;er  was  once  new,  and  must  have  had  some  resem-
blance in  natine.  1  think  these  names  were  translated  from
the  Celtic,

CanUaw,  in  Welsh,  from  Cant,  a  hundred,  and  Liaw,  a
hand,  signifies  A  Patron,  Ì2ounsellor,  or  Advocate.

The  oldest  political  establishment  known  amongst  the
Celtae,  was  the  Cantrev,  or  community  of  a  hundred  families.
I'he  Canllazp,  Centimamis,  seems  to  have  been  the  chief  or
patron  of  such  a   community.

The  subdued  Titans  were  committed  to  the  care  of
Cenlimani.  This  may  imply  no  more  than  that  they  also
were  constituted  into  regular  societies,  and  settled  under
similar  chiefs  of  their  own.     But  to  return.

As  the  Jupetida  divided  the  Isles  of  the  Gentiles,  in  their
lands,  after  their  families,  each  of  those  families  must  have
known  its  portion,  to  which  it  could  plead  a  just  claim. —
Upon  the  arrival  of  the  Conian  or  Kyndian  family  in  Europe,
they  found  the  portion  of  Javan  Ij'ing  to  the  South,  and
reaehing  to  the  mountains  of  Thrace.  Riphath  was  pitching
his  tents  on  the  North  of  the  Danube,  about  the  Carpathian


129      '

hiris.  One  branch  of  Togarmah''s  famil}^  seating  itself  on  tlia
banks  of  the  Borysthenes  (the  nurse  of  Targitaus,  or  Thor-
Gut,  their  great  ancestor)  and  beginning  to  possess  the  inter-


The  family  οϊ Aukcnaz  did  not  find,  in  this  neighbourhood,
that  ample  patrimonÿ^which  they  could  *<itain  in  peace,  and
leave  to  their  children  for  ever.  Tlic'ir  portion  lay  far  to  the
ΛVest,  and  the  way,  as  yet,  Avas  open  for  them  to  go  in  search
of  it.  Part  of  them  accordingly  did  set  out  upon  that  expe-
dition. After  they  had  reached  their  destined  acquisitions,
they  still  retained  their  generic  name,  for  Herodotus*  places
the  Cynetai  in  the  Western  extremities  of  Europe,  beyond  the
Celtäî.  As  the  Danube  rises  in  the  countr}'  of  the  Celta.,
viewed  by  him,  it  is  probable  that  he  means  the  Eastern  Gaiil^i;
we  must  therefore  look  for  his  Cj/nttce,  amongst  the  \V'e3tera
branches  of  the  Ctltcc.

The  name  is  acknowledged  by  the  ancient  Britons.

Taliesin,  a  bard  of  the  6th  century,  in  a  poem  which  he
addresses  to  Urien,  prince  of  Reged,  calls  his  countrymen
C^n-w ys,  or  Eclirn  Gynzcys — the  nation  of  the  Cj-n-men. — ■
Cyn,  in  British,  implymg  the  first,  Úie.  foremost  part,  regularly
forms  Cynct,  for  its  phn-al,  both  in  the  Welsh  and  in  the
Armorican.     It  may  be  contra»5ted  familiarly  to  Cynt.

Aneiirim,  Taliesin's  contemporar}^,  in  the  conclusion  of  his
Gododin,  distributes  the  Cekae  of  the  British  Islands  into
"  Cynt,  a  Gicyddil  a  Phiydin."  The  Cynt,  the  Iri^h  and
the  North  Britons,  making  the  Cynt  or  Cynet,  the  first  of  the
Celtic  families.  Amongst  our  old  British  Kings  we  find
Cyndav,  Cynetav,  &c.

*  L.  IV.  49.  "

I


130

From  the  dcsccndiints  llicn  of  A&hkenaz,  in  my  o|)iuioii,
sprang  the  original  Ccltcc  of  the  1]  est,  who  anciently  j)ossessc(l"
the  whole  of  Gauh  the  Islands  of  Britain^  ραιί  of  Germany,
and^;^'/i  of  Spain.

But  a  considerahle  body  of  this  people  did  not  leave  their
Eastern  possessions  in  peace.  After  the  removal  of  the
Centimani,  these  remains  of  the  Celtse  Averc  distinguished  by
the  name  of  Titans.  They  had  perhaps  been  joined  by  the
real  Titanian  Ccltcc,  Celto-Sci/tha,  or  those  branches  of  the
Celtic  family  who  had  assisted  in  bnilding  the  tower  of  Babel,
and  had  been  compelled,  at  the  dispersion,  to  follow  their
brethren.  Tiiey  seem  to  have  mustered  a  formidable  power
against  those  who  deemed  themselves  the  lawful  possessors  of
Asia  Propria,  of  Thrace  and  of  jMacedon*.

The  Avars,  in  those  countries,  between  the  Gods  and  the
Titans  are  themes  of  the  ancient  poets.  The  descriptions  of
them  contain  man}'  particulars,  borrowed  from  antecedent
events  and  dates.  They  belong  to  the  original  dispersion  of
the  Giants  from  Babel.  But  there  is  a  degree  of  local  con-
sistency in  the  accounts,  which  compel  me  to  infer,  that  a
national  history  is  at  the  bottom.  And  I  am  happy  to  find
this,  which  has  long  been  my  opinion,  confirmed  by  that  of
a  A\riter  and  a  critic  whose  learning  and  abilities  cannot  be
enough  admired.

INIr.  Pennf  has  some  excellent  remarks  upon  "  Those  frag-


*  Ii  was  in  ihc  charafler  of  a  Ί'ίιαη  that  Japetus  "  marrUd  Asia,"  or  that,
in  other  words,  a  branch  of  his  family  took  possession  of  the  fmall  distrifl,
anciently  known  by  that  name,  which  comprehended  little  more  than  Phrygia,
and  a  part  ot  l.ydia.  The  firsl-burn  son  ot  this  marriage  was  Atlas^  or  the
eldest  biaoth  ol  the  family  were  Atlantes.

Atlas  was  the  General  of  the  Titan  army  against  Jupiur,  Hygin,  Fab.  150.
t  Oiient.  Coll.  v.  x.  p.  sGj.


131

jncüls  of  tradition  Nvhicli  connecl  the  original  occupants  of
Greece  with  the  Cehic  stock."

He  demonstrates  that  Celtic  terms  are  still  preserved  in  the
Orphic  Hymns,  and  quotes  the  following  authorities,  in  which
the  Titans  are  acknowledged  as  the  old  Inhahitants,  and
which  prove,  that,  in  them,  we  find  the  parents  of  the  Celtiv.

TiTrivEc,  yanjç  Te,  kui,  cv^avot;  αγλα.»  tsxva,
Ή(Α,ίτεξων  'οτξογονοί  'ίΰΛΤίξτσν,  Orph.  Η.  3Ö.   1.

Titans,  illustrious  sons  of  Earth  and  Heav'n>
Our  Sires*  Progenitors

Βα.ξξαξίχγ}!/,  χα»  ΚΕΛΤΟΝ  κιίΛςίήςχντκ;  Açncc,

■Ρ^ςονται.  CaWm.H.ìnOá.  172.

*'  Against  the  Greeks,  then  shall  a  future  race
Of  Titans,  pouring  from  the  utmost  PFesty
Raise  the  barbaric  sword  and  Celtic  war."

To  this  I  may  add,  that  the  old  poets  regarded  the  Titans
as  the  original  and  primitive  race  of  mankind.  Hence
Oj-pheus  says,

rl  ν^ιωίΐ  γχξ  ισα^α  «eteXe»  γίνίχ  κατά  χος^χ,ο».  Η.  ΐη  Titauas.

Prom  jc«  are  all  the  tribes  throughout  the  world,
ΑΐΎοςκοα  -^ξοτεξν  yip'.r,,  Arati.  PhiCiiom.  1(5.

Oi  Íe  ■ζ:τξο7;ξαν  γινίαν  τους  Τ^τανκς  Çct^t,  Schih  in  Lor.

Some  call  the  Ti.tam  the  first  race,
l2


132

Tlie  names  by  which  they  ^γel"c  known,  yr.ynui,  Terrigcna,
Sons  of  the  Earth,  imply  tliat,  generally  speaking,  they  were
Indigence.  Titanes  may  be  a  synonymous  term.  Tit,  in
Hebrew  and  in  Celtic  signifies  J^arth,  and  in  the  latter  Hanu,
Gcni,  Eni — to  sjjring  forth,  to  be  born.

These  Titans,  the  sons  of  the  Heaven  and  the  Earth,  or  of
the  Climate  and  the  Country,  and  the  parents  of  the  Celta?,
according  to  Hesiod's  account,  were  driven  into  the  loicer
part  of  the  Earth,  into  a  land  already  inhabited  by  some  of
their  brethren.  They  must  therefore  have  been  such  branches
of  the  family  as  had  staid  behind,  and  had,  by  force,  kept
possession  of  a  land,  intended  only  as  a  thoroughfare,  but
were  compelled,  at  length,  to  follow  the  rest.

Tlie  arch  of  the  Heavens  was  placed  upon  the  shoulders  of
Atlas,  the  chief  of  the  Titans.  The  fable  perhaps  only  inti-
mates, that,  he  was  driven  to  the  loiver  or  Western  region
which,  according  to  mythology,  supported  Heaven.  It  was
to  the  North  West  that  Atlas  appears  to  have  been  doomed. —
Apollodorus,  correéling  authors  who  had  written  before  him,
concerning  the  Jlesperidcs,  directs  us  to  look  for  Atlas,  not  in
Lybia,  but  amongst  the  Hyperboreans.     Tat/τα  o£  r,ii,  ονχ  ας  7*»εΐ,

tv  Αίζν-ή.   Λλλ  ΈΐϊΓί  τον  Ατλαντος  £v  ν•ΰ^εξζθξίθίς.       L.  2.  C.  4.  §  1  1.

And  again — w?  ^í  rxn  εκ  Ίτπξζοξίους, «rgoç  Ατλαντα.  In  searching
for  Atlas,  Hercules  proceeds  through  lllyricum  to  the  River
Eri<lanus,  shaping  his  course  towards  the  land  of  the  Celtas,
ΛvIlom  Heraclides  of  Pontus  calls  Hyperboreans.  Plutarch,
in  Ca/nillo.

Atlas  Avas  not  then  amongst  the  Jfrican  but  the  Celtic
Libyi,  Eebici  or  Eibici,  a  people  of  Gallia  Transpadana,
descendants  of  the  Sului  (Liv)  perhaps  of  the  S'Alpii,  the


133

same  as  the  Tuiirini,  Cütîii  or  Lqwniii,  in  ^vllose  tcrrkovy
the  Khine  sprung.

The  descendants  of  the  Titanian  Japetidac  may  I  tliink  be
recognized  in  the  Waldenses,  the  [rish,  and  the  Drigantcs. —
Many  proofs  may  be  given  that  a  Cehic  dialeól,  aUied  nearly
to  the  Irish,  once  prevailed  m  Thrace.  But  I  shall  have  oc-
casion to  resmne  that  subjeci:.


In  the  niean  time,  I  would  offer  a  few  remarks  upon  the
Goths  or  Germans,  who  are  sometimes  confounded  with  our
Celta;,  because  they  acquired  possession  of  the  same  countries;
but  who  were  a  ditfereut  people,  the  concpierors  of  the  Celta:,
and  eventually  the  Lords  of  all  Western  Europe.

ISTr.  Pinkerton,  Λνΐιο  has  made  the  historj-  of  this  people  the
subjeél  of  his  research,  delivers  it  as  his  opinion,  that  Asia
gave  them  birth.  To  his  Iccvrned  Dissertation  I  request  the
attention  of  the  reader,  for  proof  that  the  Goths,  the  Get»  of
Thrace,  and  Scythians  of  Little  Tartary  were  the  same.

The  Geta3  were,  to  a  late  period,  seated  in  a  confined  part
of  Thrace,  where  their  manners,  and  their  opinions  distin-
guished them  from  the  other  inhabitants.     See  Lierod.  L.  IV.

The  appellation  of  Scythians,  as  used  by  the  Greeks,
throws  little,  if  any  light  upon  the  origin  of  a  people.  .Some
authors  distinguished  tift}-  nations  of  that  name*,   many  of


*  Timonax  De  Scythis.  Αμ.  Schol.  in  Apoll.  Argon.  IV.  v.  320.     The
Cimmerii,  amongst  others,  were  distinguished  by  this  name,     Kim.^ííìoi— T»

Xxy-^txov  £•9ΐ".ΐ.     Eustath.  In  Dionys.  v.  lo/.
î3


134

Avliom  perhaps  were  strangers  to  it.  This  was  the  case  with
uur  European  Scythians.  "  Tliey  called  themselves  Scoloti,
after  one  of  their  Kings;  hut  the  Greeks  named  them
Scytha?.     Ilcrod.  IV.  6.

If,  by  the  genuine  Scytluc,  wc  are  to  understand,  with  some
rcspeélable  writers,  the  old  Giants  of  Babel,  it  is  evident  from
the  whole  tenor  of  the  Edda,  that  the  Goths  considered  them-
selves as  a  race  perfectly  distinct  from  them  :  with  Giants,
answering  this  description,  their  Gods  and  their  Heroes  were
avowedly  acquainted,  but  held  them  in  such  abhorrence,  that
it  Avas  deemed  meritorious  to  violate  solemn  oaths,  treaties  and
the  sacred  laws  of  hospitality,  that  favourite  impulse  of  the
nation,  where  a  G'und  was  concerned,  or  secretly  to  murder
him  in  cold  blood.

Perhaps  the  real^  Scythe,  who  were  dispersed  from  Babel,
over  the  face  of  the  Earth,  intermixed  more  or  less  with  their
relations,  in  ever^^  country ;  but  as  the  connection  Avas  gene-
rally esteemed  a  disgrace,  few  nations  would  own  it,  or  Hnd
them  at  home.  They  would  rather  seem  to  discover  them,  at
a  little  distance,  or  amongst  neighbours.

TJic  account  which  the  Scoloti  gave  of  their  own  origin,
was,  Tiiat  when  the  couutry  was  yet  uninhabited,  one
Targitaus  son  of  the  lUver  Borysthcnes  {i.e.  whose  patrimony
lay  upon  that  River)  settled  there,  and  that  they  v/ere
descended  from  the  youngest  of  his  three  sons — that,  of  all
nations,  they  were  the  most  recent,  and  that  not  more  than  a
thousand  years  had  elapsed  between  the  time  of  their  founder
Targitaus,  and  the  expedition  of  Darim.     Ilcrod.  IV.  5,  0,

We  cannot  much  do[)cnd  upon  the  accuracy  of  their  chro-
nology; but  as  they  were  fond  of  Glory,  such  a  talc.,  related


135

by  themselves,  must  prove  that  no  distingu'islicd
due  to  thciti,  amongst  the  early  nations  ot"  Europe.


name  was


Their  first  establish ment,  however,  in  that  country,  seems
to  have  been  at  least  as  early  as  diey  represented  its  date. — •
Their  peculiar  custom  of  milking  tbcir  mares,  wliish  ilcrodotm
describes  Vv'ilh  some  Greek  einbellishments,  gave  them  the
name  of  Jlijipe-mu/gi  or  Mare-milkcrs.  They  had  also  the
Epithet  of  Gnlactophagi  or  Milk-eaters,  because  tliey  agitated
the  milk,  till  it  was  churned  or  coagulated,  an4  then  eat  the
part  that  v/as  concrete,     lb.  IV.  2.

By  these  names.  Homer  describes  them,  as  known  in  the
age  of  the  Trojan  Avar.  At  the  beginning  of  the  i,'3th  Iliad,
Jupiter  turns  his  eyes  from  the  combatants  belbre  Troy.  Ho
views  in  succession,  Thrace,  the  hunl  of  tlie  Mysi  (near  the
Danube)  the  Hippemolgi,  illustrious  Milk-eaters,  and  lastly,
the  Abii,  or  those  of  die  Cimmerii,  who  dwelt  beyond  them.

As  these  countries  lay  in  regular  succession,  upon  the  Eu-.
ropean  side  of  the  Euxine,  tiie  Hippemolgi,  according  to
Homer's  geography,  were  already  seated  near  the  Borysthenes,
die  nurse  of  their  ancestor  Targitaus,  and  in  the  ancient
Scythia  of  Herodotus.  But  as  yet  they  wçre  neither  a
powerful  nor  an  extensive  race  in  Europe.

The  chief  part  of  European  Scythia  had  been  possessed  by
the  Cimmerii,  and  had  been  distinguished  by  their  name. — •
These  Cimmerii  were  probably  a  devious  branch  of  Ashkenaz,
the  parent  stock.  They  possessed  not  only  the  celebiated
Crimea  and  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Bosphorus,  which
preserves  their  name,  but  the  land  on  the  SiMith  of  ancient
Scythia,  towards  the  Tyra  and  the  Danube  :  Eur  on  die  bank
Qf  the  Tyra,  lay  the  monuments  of  the  Ciuimcriij,  who  had.


.136

fallen  in  a  political  and  great  conflicl,  wliicli  had  arisen  in
their  territories*.  From  thence^  and  flying  from  the  Scythians
into  Asia,  the  survivors  took  their  course  to  the  Cimmerian
Bosphorus.

We  have  hut  litde  account  of  the  ^tate  of  dils  people  as  a
society,  hut  the  defence  of  their  country  hy  walls,  or  a  chain
of  ramparts,  points  them  out  as  a  race,  com})aratively
civilized,  and  assiduously  cultivating  the  arts  of  peace.

The  time  they  were  dispossessed  by  the  Scythians  may  he
ascertained.  A  branch  of  this  people  who  had  occupied  the
Southern  shore  of  the  Caspian  sea,  being  harassed  by  the
Massa-GotcC,  retired  across  the  Araxes  and  penetrated  into
the  country  of  their  European  brethren.  Upon  the  irrup-
tion of  this  multitude,  the  Cimmerii  were  thrown  into  con-
sternation. Their  princes  took  up  arms  to  defend  their
country ;  but  the  populace,  who,  perhaps,  were  held  in  the
same  estimation  as  in  Gaul,  thought  it  a  country  not  worth  a
contest,  and  formed  the  resolution  to  emigrate.  The  debates
in  their  councils  ended  in  a  battle,  and  the  Cimmerii  were
either  beaten  by  the  Scythae,  or,  as  Herodotus  relates  it,  their
princes,  and  multitudes  of  their  people  fell  by  mutual  wounds.
The  survivors,  having  buried  their  dead,  on  the  banks  of  the
Tyra,  took  their  flight  over  the  Cimmerian  Bosphorus  into
Asia,  and  the  Scydiuj  took  possession  of  the  territories  that
were  thus  deserted.  Unwilling,  however,  to  part  with  so
many  vassals,  they  pursued  the  fugitives,  but  mistaking  their
way,  they  left  Mount  Caucasus  upon  the  right,  and,  by  a
circuitous  course,  penetrated  into  Media.  Falling  upon  the
army  of  Deioces,  King  of  the  Medes,  they  obtained  a  complete
vietory  over  him,  and  their  spoil  was  the  Sovereignty  of  .Asia,
which  diey  held  for  twenty-eight  years.

*lb.  IV.  u.


137

The  unanimous  voice  of  CiuOnologLSts,  places  that  engage-
ment^ at  the  period  ot"  about  630  years  before  Christ.

As  to  tlie  other  events,  namely — the  irruption  of  the
Scythians — the  battle — the  flight  of  the  Cimmerians,  and
pursuit  of  their  enemies,  they  must  in  the  course  of  things
have  followed  in  rapid  succession.

The  Scythai  cannot  then  have  been  completely  invested
with  C'lmmcria,  the  tirst  considerable  distriét  which  they  held
in  Europe,  before  the  middle  of  the  seventh  Centurj/  before
Christ.

Nor  was  it  before  the  Scythians  returned  from  xlsia,  that  a
formidable  aspe<il  could  have  been  presented  by  tliem,  in  the
Western  continent.

It  appears  that  none  but  such  as  were  disriualified  by  old
age,  or  tender  years,  had  been  exempted  from  attendance
upon  the  army.  In  the  absence  of  the  men,  their  Women,
whom  they  had  left  behind  them,  found  it  necessary  to  rein-
force the  population,  by  the  intercourse  of  their  blind  slaves,
the  general  condition  of  a  Seythian  captive.  By  the  otfspring
of  that  intercourse,  the  return  of  the  Veterans  from  Asia  was
resolutely  opposed.  No  masters  had  been  left  at  home  to
controul  the  licentiousness  of  the  matrons,  or  to  render  the
spurious  race  harmless  in  war.  Till  the  return,  therefore,  of
this  army,  about  600  years  before  Christ,  the  Scythian  power
could  not  have  been  felt  in  European  states,  beyond  the
territories  of  the  Eastern  Cimmerii.

Even  to  the  time  of  Herodotus,  the  Getse  had  been  pent  up
in  a  comer  of  Thrace ;  and  the  whole  district  of  the  S(  ythai
formed  a  square  of  about  500  miles  every  way,  but  indented


138

by  the  North  West  coiner  of  tlie  Euxine  sea.  It  scarce
extended  its  western  eourse,  beyond  the  boundaries  of  Little
Tartary  and  Moldavia.  Tliey  had  not  yet^  in  their  progress,
turned  the  corner  of  the  Surmatae.    '

It  was  not  then,  till  after  they  had  successfully  derided  the
menaces  of  Darius,  and  baffled  the  accumulated  force  of  the
Persian  Empire,  that  we  find  them  beginning  to  meditate  the
sovereignty  of  Europe.

The  name  of  Asi  or  Asiatics,  that  honourable  distinélion  of
the  Gothic  heroes,  in  the  North-west  of  Europe,  \vas  perhaps,
rather  a  commemoration  of  the  fame  they  had  gained  in  the
vielory  over  Deioees,  than  of  their  Asiatic  origin,  which  at
least  was  more  obscure,  and  of  which  their  ancestors  had
preserved  no  tradition,  when  Herodotus  wrote.

Tlie  general  tradition  of  a  people  is  seldom  to  be  wholly
íTospised.  If  the  Scythians  represented  themselves  as  natives
of  Little  Tartar}•^,  their  descendants,  the  Goths,  boast  of  the
acquisition  of  Germany,  and  the  JNorth  West  of  Europe,  by
their  vidories  over  other  tribes.  Mallet's  Northern  Antic]^.
V.  l.chap.  IV.

The  time  when  they  first  penetrated  into  these  regions  is
not  known  ;  but  they  date  their  decided  su[)erioril•y  in  them
from  the  age  of  their  invincible  leader,  Odin,  whose  expe-
dition Torfocus  and  M.  Mallet  place  about  70  years  before
Christ.       lb.  c.  ii.


139


Sect.  Π.  Antiquitif  of  the  DruiJical  order,  amongst  the
Celtic: — Specinit'HS  of  Druidical  traditions  preserved  by  the
Welsh — Remarks  upon  them — The  professors  of  Dnddiam
ancientij/  knoini  by  the  name  of  Hyperboreans.

J.  HE  irruption  of  the  Goths  into  the  territories  of
the  Western  CeUa?,  being  an  event  comparativeiy  recent,
could  have  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  national  habits,  or
national  institutes  of  the  latter.  We  must  therefore  distinguish
the  Celtic  establishment  Drnidism,  from  the  Gothic  mysticism
of  the  Edda.

The  order  of  Dmids,  under  that  name,  do  not  appear  to
have  been  traced,  or  Jinown,  out  of  Gaul  and  the  Islands  of
Ihitain.  The  name  seeins  to  have  belonged  exclusively  to
the  British  order,  and  to  have  extended  only  where  that  order
was  acknowledged.  The  original  and  primitive  inhabitants  of
this  Island,  at  some  remote  period  of  antiquity,  revised  and
reformed  their  national  institutes.  Their  priest  or  instructor
had  hitherto  been  simply  named  Cicyz  or  Gicydd,  as  the  term
is  retained  by  Taliesin — "  Bum  Gwydd  yngwarthan."  But
it  was  deemed  adviseable,  to  divide  the  sacred  office  between
the  national  or  superior  priest,  and  a  subordinate  characler,
whose  influence  was  more  limited.  From  henceforth,  the
former  became  Der-zaydd  or  Druid,  which,  in  the  language
of  the  people  to  whom  we  owe  the  temi,  is  a  compound  of
I)ar,  Superior,  and  Gwydd,  a  Priest  or  Inspeclor :  The  hitter
was  Go-uydd  or  Oiydd,  a  Subordinate  Instruclor ;  and  \\  as
sometimes  called  Syw  or  Sy-wydd,  names  familiar  to  the
Bards,  Taiiesin  and  Aneurin.


140

Tì\c?t  very  tenm,  as  well  as  Greeks  and  Romans  could
spell  them,  have  been  recognized  by  the  oldest  pcoj^le  and
religion  of  Europe^  and  in  that  very  country  fiom  whence
the  Celtac  came.

Kcoic  ΐΐξίνς  Κχζίΐξϋν,  'ot  íí  Ko>iç.     Hesycb.
*'  Coies,  or  according  to  some,  Coes,  a  priest  of  the  Cabiri.**

*«  Samothraces  horum  (penatium)  antistites,  Suos  vocabant,  qui
posteá,  a  Romanis,  Salii  appellati  sunt."     Servius,  ad  j£n.  ii.

The  name  then  of  Druid  was  local,  but  the  Religion  had
a  very  deep  root.  Indeed  under  this  name,  the  influence  and
authority  of  the  order  once  extended  over  the  whole  of  Gaul.
It  covered  this  extent  of  territory,  as  one  nation.  The  seat  of
general  coiicouise  and  Great  Sessioii,  was  fixed  in  what  the
Druids  deemed  a  central  spot* — a  choice  that  would  have
been  absurd,  as  well  as  inconvenient,  if  the  institution  had
been  confined  to  any  particular  distriét.

These  Druids  themselves  were  Celta,  of  the  Patriarchal  or
Equestrian  order.  Their  disciples  were  nobilissimi  Gciitisf,
Sons  of  the  noblest  families  in  the  Nation.  These  alone  could,
in  their  turn,  become  teachers.  The  order  did  not  then
consist  of  Strangers,  but  of  the  most  illustrious  descent  which
the  Celtcc  could  boast.  They  were  studious  to  confine  their
mysteries  in  the  Celtic  pale,  where  their  opinions  were
respected,  and  exclude  from  them  all  but  those  who  had  been
duly  initiated.


•  Hi  (Druidae)  certo  ai;ni  lempore,  in  finibus  Carnutum,  quae  regio  iolius
Callice  media  habetur,  c  ο  ν  s  ι  υ  ε  ν  γ,  in  loco  ccftisecrato.  Hue  omnes  undique^
íjui  conuovcrsias  bdbent,  conveniunt,  corumque  dccretis  judiciisque  parent.

Bell.  Gall.  VI.  13.
t  Mela  iii,  2,


141

111  Caesar's  time,  the  inhabitants  of  Gaul  had  hecu
disturbed,  in  some  degree,  by  the  intercourse  of  strangers.
Their  sacred  groves  had  been  traversed  and  violated  by  ft^ety
wliich  they  considered  as  profane.  Druidisni,  therefore,  Avas
not  so  pure  in  that  country  as  in  Britain,  the  source  of
the  reformed  institution,  and  many  sons  of  the  nobles  in
Gaul  were  sent  hither  to  finish  their  Education.  De,  Bel).
Gail.  L.VÍ.

Wlien  the  Romans  acquired  a  footing  in  Britain,  they
found  the  country  possessed  by  two  nations ;  the  Belgai,
originally  Celta,  but  somewhat  intermixt  with  strangers,  and
an  indigenous  race,  who  declared  they  were  born  in  the
Island.  The  title  of  Native  is  a  distinction  claimed  by  the
first  race  of  a  country,  and  justly — a  familj/  had  originally
settled ;  but  the  nation  was  born  in  the  land.  Amongst  these
pure  descendants  of  the  Ccltse,  the  Druidism  of  Britain  was  in
the  highest  repute.  The  principal  seat  of  the  order  was  found
in  Mona,  an  interior  recess  of  that  ancient  race,  which  was
boj'n  in  the  Island.

Into  that  sequestered  scene,  the  Druids,  who  detested
warfare,  had  gradually  retired,  after  the  irruption  of  the
Belgce,  and  the  fiuther  incroachment  of  the  Romans.  They
had  retired  from  their  ancient,  magnificent  seat  at  Abury,  and
from  their  Circular,  Uncovered  Temple  on  Salisbury  Plain,  in
which  the  Hyperborean  sages  had  once  chaunted  their  hymns
to  Apollo,  or  Pla/j/z.

An  order  thus  cautiously  withdrawing  itself,  into  the  bosom
of  its  primitive  nation,  of  whom  it  consisted,  and  for  wlioni  it
was  calculated,  could  not  have  owed  its  fundamental  principles
to  any  foreigners,  or  have  been  willing  to  adopt  dieir  tenets.
The  Celtie  must  have  received  this  institution  from  their  very
earliest  parents.


142

Λ  myi-ticisin  similai•  to  that  of  the  Druids,  appears  to  liave
prevailed,  amongst  tlie  Western  Cimmerii  or  Celta^,  from  the
remotest  autic|iiity.

Some  of  their  most  prominent  features  vvcre — the  intercourse
they  held  with  souls,  after  death — the  judgment  whieh  they
passed  on  the  actions  of  men,  and  the  inference  they  drew^
from  their  lives,  respefting  the  changes  they  would  undergo^
raid  the  mode  of  their  ultimate  renovation.

In  the  coui't  of  Pluto,  which  always  held  its  judicial  seat,
in  the  land  of  the  Celtae  or  Cimmerii,  causes  of  this  kind  were
determined  by  incorruptible  Judges,  and  there  could  be  no
liigher  compliment  paid  to  the  most  sacred  characters,  than  to
enrol  them  into  this  high  trust  of  Judicature.  We  read  of
three  personages  thus  promoted,  each  of  whom  appears,  from
his  birth,  from  his  place  of  nativity,  and  from  the  histor}^  of
liis  lile,  to  have  been  eminent  as  a  Κοίΐί.

When  Homer  sends  Ulysses  to  consult  the  dead,  lie  does
not  make  him  touch  upon  the  celebrated  shores  of  Egypt  or
PhaMiicia,  though  he  had  sailed  by  them.  He  directs  him  to
the  coast  of  the  JVtstern  Ocean — to  Portugal  or  Spain — to  the
laud  of  the  Cimmerii  or  Celtee,  and  the  Dominions  of  Pluto
or  Dis,  whom  the  Celtae  acknowledged  as  their  father.  In
this  devious  course,  the  poet  must  have  been  guided  by
ancient  and  prevailing  opinion.

The  descent  of  iEneas  into  the  Regions  below,  in  whieh  he
learns  the  mysteries  of  the  Metempsychosis,  the  fortunes — the
changes — the  renovations  of  his  descendants — Doélrines  of
pure  Druidism — is  from  a  part  of  Italy,  in  which,  not  only
the  researches  of  Strabo,  but,  perhaps,  Virgil  himself  placed
one  branch  of  the  Cimmerii.


143

This  gi-eat  Bard  was  born  in  Cis- Alpine  Gaul,  and  seems,
in  his  youth,  to  have  courted  the  Gaulish  Muse,  till  he  found
that  she  would  not  advance  his  fortune — a  very  unpoetical
arround  of  desertion —


Galatea  reliquit:


Namque — fatebor  enim — dum  me  Galatea  teuebat,
Nee  spes  libertatis  erat,  nee  cura  peculî.

"  Galatea  was  the  mother  of  the  Celta:."   Jppian.  Bell.  lílyr.

The  same  poet  mentions  the  Galiicum  Tan,  in  a  passage  of
iiis  CatakSta,  whicli  Ausonius,  the  Gaulish  Bard,  proposes
as  an  oenignia  to  his  learned  friends.  This  Tan  was  the
symbol  of  the  Druidical  Jupiter.  It  consisted  of  a  huge,
giant  oak,  deprived  of  all  its  branches,  except  only  two  large
ones,  which,  though  cut  οίϊ  and  separated,  were  suspended
from  the  top  of  its  trunk,  like  extended  arms*.

Whether,  from  these  passages,  we  do,  or  do  not  infer  that
Virgil  had  studied  in  the  mysticism  of  Drnid  lore,  he,  at
least,  intimates  clearly,  in  the  Sixlh  jÎneid,  that  he  was
touching  upon  Druidical  m3-steries.

It  was  necessary  the  hero  should  obtain  a  branch  of
misseltoe,  as  the  means  of  his  introduétion  to  the  court  of
Pluto,  The  poet  minutely  describes  this  plant,  but  instead  of
risking  a  full  explanation,  by  fixin^^  its  name,  he  says  it
resembled  the  misseltoe.

Discolor  unde  auri  per  ramos  aura  refulsit.
Quale  sokt  sylvis,  brumali  frigore,  viscum

*  Sec  Borla-ic  p.  ιο8,  for  the  authorities.


144

Fronde  virere  nova",  qiiod  non  sua  seminat  arbor,

Et  croceo  foetu  teretes  c'lrcumdare  truncos ;

Talis  erat  species  auri  frondentis,  cpaca

llice.  Άη.  VI.  2αί.

Tills  was  not  only  misseltoe,  but  the  mmdtoz  of  the  oak,
which  few,  besides  iEneas  and  the  Druids,  have  had  the  good
fortune  to  find.  Tlie  Prince  was  directed  in  his  search  for  it,
by  those  sacred  birds  which  fed  upon  its  fruit,  and  in  whom
the  seed  Avas  again  prepared,  for  future  vegetation.

All  the  accounts  of  Orpheus  agree  with  Druidism :  and  we
could  expeél  no  less;  for  the  Celtaj  or  Cimmerii  were  the  first
inhabitants  of  the  country  in  which  Orpheus  flourished,  and
some  of  them  continued  their  abode,  in  the  same  region,  till
this  renowned  character  was  no  more.

Eusebius  mentions  an  irruption  of  the  Cimmerii  into  Ada,
about  100  years  after  the  war  of  Troy,  and  Eustathius,  alluding
to  this  irruption,  in  his  comment  upon  Dionysius,  quotes  the
authority  of  Arrian  for  proof",  "  That  not  only  the  Mysi  and
Phiyges,  but  also  the  Thracians  went  out  of  Europe  into  Asia,
with  Patarus  their  leader,  when  the  Cimmerii  over-ran
Asia."  Under  this  Generic  name,  then,  the  tribes  of  Thrace
had  hitherto  been  included.

Herodotus,  L.  TV.  13.  cites  the  testimony  of  Arislcas  the
Proconnesian,  that  the  Cinnnerii  had  once  dwelt  tm  τ>?  vortu
δαλαίΐ»,  "  On  the  South  sea,"  or  "  On  the  South  side  of  the
sea"  till  they  left  that  country,  when  disturbed  by  the
Scijth'iam,  who  were  pushed  forwards  by  other  Northern
invaders. — ^This  Arkteas  lived  before  Homer.

Under  the  name  of  Orpheus,  who  flourished  in  so  many


145


ÄgcSj,  and  tanglit  so  many  things,  may  he  uadcistood,  a  sncrcd
order  of  men,  similar  to  the  ìNlagi,  the  Druids,  and  otliers. —
This  celebrated  character  is  represented  as  having  lost  /lis  uij'e»
Tiie  wife  of  an  order  of  Sages  would,  in  the  Language  of
mythology,  imply  their  Science,  their  docirino  or  their  dis-
cipline. The  very  name  Eur  yd  ice,  which  appears  to  be  a
compound  of  Έ.υζνς  Latus,  and  íixn,  mos  jure  reccptus,  will
perhaps  justify  a  conjecture,  that  in  the  image  of  Oiplieu.s'
wife,  is  typified  liis  comprtlundve  diacijiHiie.

The  bereft  husband  goes  not  in  search  of  his  wife,  into
Phoenicia,  Egypt,  Clialdea  or  India.  He  descends  into  the
J)ominions  of  Pluto,  into  the  Country  of  the  Cimmerii  or
Celtee;  though  Virgil,  to  diversify  his  picture,  sends  him  to
the  Cimmerii  who  dwelt  upon  the  North  of  the  Euxinc—
Amongst  them,  Orpheus  discovered  his  Eurydice,  and  might
have  restored  her  to  Thrace,  if  he  had  not  failed  in  a  material
part  of  his  probation.

It  is  acknowledged  that  such  talcs  are  not  History;  but  they
are  founded  upon  traditions  of  the  mythological  and  heroic
ages — traditions  which  existed  long  before  Greece  could  boast
of  a  single  historian,  and  which  uniformly  intimate,  tiiat  a
mystical  doòtrine,  similar  to  that  which  Druids  of  the  historical
ages  are  known  to  have  taught,  had  prevailed  amongst  the
Celta?,  or  Cimmerii  of  Europe,  from  the  remotest  periods.

These  are  some  of  the  reasons  which  induce  me  to  be  of
opinion,  that  our  Druids,  either  under  that  name,  or  the  more
ancient  and  general  appellations  of  Bards  and  Gzcijddion,  had
been  the  w^ise  men  of  the  West,  ever  since  that  continent  Ava»
first  peopled ;  and  that  our  Celtic  parents  brought  the  funda-
mentals of  their  religion,  when  they  imported  their  owii
persons  and  families,  into  Gaul :  though,  at  later  periods',
they  modified  some  particulars,  and  adopîed  some  inn<jvationüv
iv


146

The  inoniUTíents,  now  remaining,  of  the  Coltd•,  arc  such

as  can  be  asciihcd  only  to  an  original  and  primUive  race.

Their  Cromlechs,  their  Logans,  tlie  rough  pillars,  that  are
still  ibund,  as  well  in  BrUain,  as  upon  those  parts  ot"  the
Coutnient  which  the  Celta?  once  occu})iedj  are  the  erc(íì;i<)n.s
of  an  early  age,  or  at  least,  of  a  people  who  had  retained  the
simplicity  of  patriarchal  times.

The  inhabitants  of  Sj/ria,  taken  in  its  most  ample  exttnf,
erected  unheun  pillars  in  their  saered  groves : — they  had,
thcjcfore,  once,  a  custom  that  was  common  to  them,  with
many  other  primitive  nations.

But  had  the  Avorks  at  yibiiri/  or  Stonehenge  displayed  their
rude  magnificence,  in  Syria,  in  Egypt,  Chaldea  or  India— ^
not  in  Britain;  critical  discernment  would  have  pronounced
them,  of  antiquity  superior  to  that  of  sculptured  and  lettered
cokunns,  the  pyramids  and  their  highly  pohshcd  marbles,  or
an^^  other  surviving  miracles  of  those  renowned  and  opulent
countries.

To  those  antiquaries,  who  ascribe  our  British  monuments  to
any  E.istern  race  wiiatsoever,!  would  therefore  take  the  liberty
of  rceoniineiiding  a  more  accurate  regard  for  historical  truth.

Works  like  these  must  have  been  formed,  in  the  taste  of
tlic  age,  and  the  country,  of  their  constructors.  JSone  would
have  taken  such  incredible  pains  to  exhibit,  in  a  land  cf
strangers,  a  mode  and  style  of  aichiteéture  wliich  had  become
obsolete  in  their  own;  and  which  their  ancestors  had  aban-
doned ior  a  course  of  ages.

These  monuments,  thus  rude  in  their  Avorkmanship,  display
that  species  of  (uräü  and  Simple  united,  which  is  the  cha-


147

raéter  of  such  designs^  at  an  early  age.  Tlicy  must  tliercfore
have  been  the  work  of  tlie  natives,  not  of  others.  For,
however  the  arts  may  have  sunk  in  tlie  later  Celta;,  their
patriarch,  as  well  as  tlic  father  of  the  Egyptian,  Chaldean  or
Indian,  was  the  son  of  a  civilized  laniüy:  and  in  the  line  of
his  descendants,  th.e  sciínce  of  the  Noachidcc  was,  unques-
tionably, in  great  measure,  preserved.

If  the  Celtse  then  wanted  artificers  to  execute  with  ekgance,
they  could  not  want  masters  of  des'gn,  or  of  power  to  devise
plans  of  edifices  like  these,  witli  Judgment  and  skdl.

The  nature  of  Druidical  traditions  demonstrate,  that  the
Druids  were  Celt»,  and  that  their  progenitors  had  been
present  with  this  nation  from  its  very  source.  Thus,  lor
instance,  we  are  told  by  Ccesar — "■  Galii  sc  omiics  oh  D/lt:
patre  prognatos  predicant,  idque  a  Druidiuus  pì'oditìim
dicunt'''  The  Gauls  affirm  that  Pluto  or  Dh  was  their
common  progenitor,  and  refer  this  account  of  themselves  to
the  tradition  of  the  Druids.

Had  the  original  Druids  been  any  other  than  Celtse  or
Gauls,  they  would  ratlier  have  preserved  the  historv  or  tradi-
tion of  their  own  origin.  They  could  have  given  no  account
of  the  y«íÄer  of  a  nation  whom  they  found,  already  formed.
But  this  .was  a  Celtic  and  natioiial  tradition,  and  such  as
could  not  have  been  preserved  by  strangers.

Yet  so  much  were  the  Druids  interested  in  this  account,
that  we  find  them  providing  for  its  perpetuil}•  by  incorporating
it  with  a  national  custom,  and  thus  hnpressing  upon  the  mass
of  the  people,  the  memory  of  their  descent — ^'  Oh  cam
camam,  spatia  omnis  temporia,  noii  moncro  dicnii?i  sed
NocTiuM,  /iiiiiint :  dies  natales,  ct  memiuni  et  annoriuii
initia,  sic  observant,  ut  noctem  dies  subscqualur,"
κ  2


148

The  custom  of  measuring  periods,  by  the  number  of  nights^
in  preference  to  that  of  days,  may  not  have  been  pecuhar  to
the  Ceka3:  but  the  inference  tliey  drew  from  it  is  clear —
That  in  the   ΙΪ  est  tht'ir  common  ancestor  found  his  portion

assig/u'd.

In  order  to  shew  the  nature  and  the  authenticity  of  ύύ>
account,  respeéìing  tlie  origin  of  the  Gauls,  it  will  not  be
improper  to  observe,  that,  under  the  charaéler  of  ísaturn,
the  heathens  preserved  the  history  of  Noah.  Saturn  divided
the  world  amongst  his  three  sons.  The  eldest  of  these  was
I)is  or  Pluto,  and  for  his  share  he  had  Europe — the  Western
or  loner  region.  Thus  he  became  the  parent  of  the  first
Europeans,  and  consequently  of  the  Gauls.

This  exactly  falls  into  the  Mosaic  history.

The  whole  Earth  was  divided  between  three  sons  of  JNoali.
Japhedi,  who  was  the  eldest  of  them,  inherited  Europe,  or
the  Isles  of  the  Gentiles,  lie  was  therefore  progenitor  of  die
Gauls,

Here  we  have  a  real  history  which  the  Druids,  as  Celtic,
preserved,  ever  since  the  period  of  the  primary  allotment :
and  the  device  by  which  it  was  imprest,  prevails  amongst  the
Welsh  to  this  day.  They  call  a  week,  wyth-nos,  Eight  nights:
a  fortnight,  pi/thezcnos,  Fifteen  nights — that  is,  they  circum-'
scribe  their  periods  by  the  night  on  which  they  commence  and
expire,  according  to  the  usage  of  the  ancient  Gauls.

"  But  what — it  may  be  asked — is  the  peculiar  connedioa
between  the  night  and  die  portion  of  Dis  ':"

I  answer,  that,  as  the  whole  of  Europe  by  directly  west  of


149

Asia,  it  was  overshadowed  by  the  darkness  of  the  night;,  when
the  morning  arose  upon  the  Eastern  habitations  of  the
Noachidai :  and  the  evening  sun  would  appear  to  descend^  in
its  progress  towards  the  zcestern  continent,  as  to  a  lower  sphere.
Hence  the  portion  of  Japheth,  or  of  Dis,  obtained  the
description  of  a  lon-cr  Region — llie  land  of  Shades  and  of
■Night.

Such  was  the  kind  of  the  Cimcrii,  the  children  of  DIs.

It  has  frequently  been  remarked^  that,  in  the  general
mysticism  of  the  Druids,  and  in  many  of  their  customs,  there
is  close  analogy  to  those  ,of  the  Magi,  the  Brachmans,  the
Egyptian  Priests,  See.  I  do  not  deny  the^ac?,  but  I  conceive
that  these  traits  of  analogy  were  impressed  upon  mankind,
before  the  families  of  the  Earth  were  divided.  And  I  cannot
but  regret,  that  wben  pains  have  been  taken,  and  Fancy
called  in,  to  shew  what  the  Aborigines  of  Europe  may  have
borrowed  from  the  East,  it  has  hardly  been  the  objeéí;  of  a
moment's  attention,  amongst  the  learned,  in  this  peculiar
class,  to  ascertain  what  those  Europeans  had  of  their  own. —
Many  of  the  fundamental  customs,  and  inveterate  opinions
of  the  Celtae,  appear  to  have  been  once  universal,  i  would
not  therefore,  unless  compelled  by  the  unequivocal  decree  of
historical  proof,  retier  them  to  any  particular  source.  And,
as  to  their  general  mysticism,  I  have  quoted  already  a  well
accredited  fragment  of  Sanchoniathon,  which  contains  the
elements  of  all  the  mystical  theology  in  the  ancient  world. — •
It  is  there  told  us,  that  the  History,  Theology  and  Philosophy
of  the  first  ages  had  been  converted  into  mystic  allegories,
and  this,  at  so  early  a  period,  that  hiris,  or  Mizraim,  the
Brother  of  Canaan,  was  amongst  those  who  received  them  in
that  form.  The  Patriarchs  of  the  other  ISations,  whether  in
the  East  or  in  the  JVei<t,  had  an  equal  opportimity  of  doin|^
the  same.


150

But,  if  it  iniibt  be  insisted  upon,  that  a  chain  of  rommuni-
cation  united  the  Älagi,  Brachmans  and  cm•  Druids,  it  must,
I  think,  be  a  chain  drawn  through  Jsia  Minor,  and  Thrace
or  Macedon,  the  countries  through  whicli  tlie  Celtae  came,
and  in  which  tradition  acknowledges  the  remains  of  their
family  and  religion.


The  Druids  are  not  represented  as  Inventors.  Tlicy  were
the  jealous  preservers  of  early  and  priniitve  disciphne,  tradi-
tions, doctrines,  customs  and  opinions.  Their  method  of
mstruction  was  hy  symbols  Άηά  by -enigmas,  or  dark  allegories*,
Ly  ancient  songs,  and  maxims  orally  delivered,  and  in
private;  but  winch  they  deemed  it  unlawful  to  reduce  into
writing,  or  communicate  out  of  their  own  palef.

Of  the  lessons  thus  habitually,  and  by  system,  concealed,
few  specimens  are  to  be  found  in  ancieiU  authors,  jNiela,
L.  iii.  c.  '2.  has  preserved  one  of  them.

Unum  ex  us  qux  prîcclpîunt  in  valgus  offluxit ;  Videlicet—
**  Ut  forent  ad  bella  meliores ;
jeternas  esse  animas,
vitamque  alteram  ad  manes."

One  of  their  precepts  has  become  public,  namely,  that
which  bids  them  remember —

"  to  a£l  bravely  in  war ;
that  souls  are  immortal,
and  there  is  another  life  after  death."

*  Diog.  Laert.  L.  C.  Seg.  6.
+  Cars.  Dc  Bel.  Gal,  L.  VI.  xMcla  L,  iii,  2.


151

J>içg•.  Laertius  presents  us  with  anothçr*.

και  fAvihv  κακόν  ^ξχν^
Kxi  a'j^eiixv  acKUt,

To  worship  the  Gods,

to  do  no  evil,

and  to  exercise  fortitude.

Both  of  these  precepts  are  Triads;  and  Λνβ  may  hence  con^
jeótare,  that  such  was  the  general  form  of  their  moral  and
historical  instruótions.  Ausonius,  who  respeéted,  and  seems
occasionally  to  imitate  ihe  Bards  of  his  countr}-,  has  a  whole
poem  of  Triads.

The  philosophy,  the  comprehensiori  and  good  sense  of  the
sentences  before  us,  are  such  as  to  inspire  a  wish,  that  we
could  obtain  sometliing  more,  from  the  hand  of  those  masters.

Amongst  the  descendants  of  those  Λvho  w^ere  professors  of
Driiidism,  it  would  not  be  unreasonable  to  expeót  this  gratiii-
cation.  A  national  institute,  which  had  been  so  deeply  rooted,
was  not  like'y  to  be  obliterated  from  the  memory  and  regard
of  the  people.

The  interditì;  of  Gallic  Counciis  wovúá,  of  itself,  prove  the
îingermg  obstinacy  of  Druidism,  amongst  the  people  of  Gaul^
to  the  end  of  the  sixth  century — "  V'eneratorcs  lapidumy
acceiiiores  facaiarum,  et  cxcolentes  sacra  J'ontium  et  arborum^
admonemus"* — Concil.  Turon.  A.  D.  367.


-  See  Borlase  p.  no,  121-2.


152

In  Britain^  it  coniinued  longer  still,  as  appears  from  tlie
Law  of  Canute — Prohibeinus  etiam  serio — quod  quis  adorct
Ignem  vcl  Fluvium,  Torrcns  vel  Saxa  \e\.  alicujus  generis
arhontm  Ligna. — Wilklns,  Leg.  Ang.  Sax.  p.  13-i.

These  were  not  Human  or  Cotitic,  but  Celtic  superstitions,
of  Druidism.

He  who  is  at  all  conversant  Avitli  the  remains  of  ancient
Wtlsli  literature,  cannot  be  at  a  loss  for  the  reason  of  these
prohibitory  Laws.  Our  oldest  authors  avow  the  most  pious
veneration  for  the  Druids — give  themselves  credit,  as  initiated
into  their  mysteries,  and  profess  to  deliver  their  genuine  maxims
and  traditions.

As  Druidhm  had  so  many  real,  though  concealed  partizans,
long  after  its  public  authority  was  abolished,  may  we  not
suppose,  that  some  attempts  would  be  made,  when  the  use  of
the  pen  was  no  longer  interdicted,  to  cherish  and  preserve  its
most  valuable  relics?

This  order,  for  instance,  taught  the  people  somediing  of
their  own  history.  The  conversion  of  the  native  to  the
ileligion  of  Christ,  could  not  have  rendered  that  history
uiîinteresting.  The  people  would  naturally  wish  to  perpetuate
some  account  of  their  ancient  independence.  Accordingly
Avc  iind,  amongst  the  oldest  Welsh  maimscripts,  many  his-
torical notices  upon  the  model  of  the  Druidical  Triads,  and
purporting  to  be  the  remains  of  Druidical  ages.

Their  contents  furnish,  in  my  opinion,  strong  evidence  in
support  ot  their  authenticity.  I  cannot  account  for  thein  at
uli  upon  other  grounds.  AJany  collections  of  these  Triads  are
preserved,  at  this  day,  iu  old  copies  upon  vcUum.


153

Four  of  these  copies,  beside  transcriptá  upon  paper,  were
collated  lor  the  Wash  ylrchaiologi/.     London.  1801.

The  old  copies,  now  preserved,  are  not  immediately  takeii
from  one,  original  colleétion.  They  vary  in  the  selciStion,
the  number  and  the  order  of  their  Triads.  But  when  the  same
Triad  occurs,  in  different  copies,  it  is  given  to  the  same  effect
and,  generally,  in  the  same  words.  We  must  not  then  look
to  known  authors,  for  the  origin  of  these  records.  Like  the  old
histories  of  Greece,  colleóled  by  Apollodorus,  they  must  be
carried  further  back,  to  remote  periods  and  primitive  traditions,

I  shall  now  lay  before  my  Reader,  a  short  sclcclion,
translated  from  a  scries,  in  the  second  volume  of  the  JVehh
Arcliccology.  p.  57.

That  scries  bears  the  following  title.

"  These  are  Triads  of  the  island  of  Britain — that  is  to  say.
Triads  of  memorial  and  record,  and  the  information  of  re-
markable men  or  things,  which  have  been  in  the  Island  of
Britain  ;  and  of  the  events  which  befel  the  Race  of  the
Cymry,  from  the  age  of  ages."

To  the  copy,  from  which  a  transcript  was  made  for  the
London  edition,  the  following  note  is  annext.

(Translation.)  "  These  Triads  were  taken  from  the  book
of  Caradoc  of  Nantgarvan,  and  from  the  book  of  Jevan
Brechva,  by  me,  Thomas  Jones  of  Tregaron — and  these  arr.
all  I  could  çet  oîthc  three  hundred — 1601."*


*  Caradoc  of  Nantgarvan,  or  Llangarvan,  abovementioned,  as  the  copyist
of  cue  of  JoQe$'s  original»,  lived  about  the  roiddle  of  the  twelfth  century,—


154

I.  The  three  pillars  of  the  Race  of  the  Island  of  Britui».

The  first,  Uii  Cadarn,  λυΙιο  first  brought  the  Race  of  the
Cymry  into  the  laland  of  Britain;  and  they  cume  from  the
Jand  OÍ  ilav  called  Dtfrobani  [where  Constantinople  standsf]
and  they  passed  over  MorTawchJ  (the  German  ocean)  to
the  Island  of  Britain,  and  to  Llyda\v§,  where  tliey  remained.

The  second,  Prjjdain,  the  son  of  Acdd-Mazcr,  who  first
established  regal  gcivernment  in  the  Island  οΓ  Britain  [Before
this,  there  was  no  Equity  but  w  iiat  was  done  by  gentlenesá|
xior  any  Law  but  that  of  force.]

The  third,  Oi/vnrcai-Moelmud,  who  first  discriminated  the
laws  and  ordinances,  customs  and  privileges  of  the  land
and  of  the  nation.  [And  for  these  reasons  they  were  called
tlie  three  pillars  ol'  the  nation  of  the  Cymry.]     (4)

II.  The  three  benevolent  tribes  of  the  Island  of  Britain.

The  first  were  tlie  stock  of  tlie  Ci/uiri/,  who  came,  witli
Hu  Gadarn,  into  the  Island  of  Britain:  for  lie  would  not
have  lands  by  fighting  and  contention,  but  of  Equity,  and  in
peace.

Jevan  Brechva  wrote  a  Compendium  of  the  lí'e/s/í  Annals  down  to  1 150.

N.  B.     The  figures  annext,  refer  to  their  order  in  the  London  edition.

+  The  passasjes  inclosed  between  hooks  appear  to  be  comment»  upon  the
erigin<il  T'lods,  added  by  ^ome  ancient  copvists.

"Í^  The  Coiitani  lay  upon  Mar  Ί awck,  it  was  therefore  upon  the  East  of
Britdiu  —

^  Lftavia  or  Lexovi),  tlie  Water-aide  This  name  is  confined,  at  this  day,
to  the  desciiptiün  of  Britany;  but  jt  covered,  aaciently,  the  entire  coast  of
Gaui.


155

The  second  were  the  race  of  the  Lolegrwys*,  wlio  came
from  the  land  of  Gwas-gwyn,  and  were  sprung  from  the
primitive  stock,  of  the  Cyan  y.

The  thu'd  were  the  Britons.  They  came  from  tlie  hind  of
Lljdaw,  and  were  also  sprung  ironi  the  primordial  line  of  the
Cymry.

[And  they  are  called  the  three  peaceful  trihes,  because  they
came  by  mutual  consent  and  permission,  in  peace  and  tran-
quillity.— The  three  tribes  descended  from  the  primitive  race
of  the  Cymry,  and  the  three  were  of  one  language  and  one
speech.     (5)

III.  Three  tribes  came,  imder  proteftion,  into  the  Tslaiul
of  Britain,  and  by  the  consent  and  permission  of  the  uatioij
of  the  Cymry,  without  weapon,  without  assault.

The  first  was  the  tribe  of  the  Caledonians,  in  the  North.

The  second  was  the  Gwyddelian  Race,  v.-liich  are  now  in
Alban  (Scotland.)

The  third  were  the  men  of  Galedin,  who  came  in  tho
naked  ships  (Canoes  r)  into  the  Isle  of  Wight,  when  their
country  was  drowned  f,  and  had  lands  assigned  them  by  the
llace  of  the  Cyinry.


*  The  dwellers  ahout  the  Loire  or  Liotr. Gwas-Gwyn  or  Gwas-Gwynt

the  country  of  the  Vencti,  about  the  mouth  of  ihe  Loire,  and  not  Vaiconia.-^
It  was  the  country  to  which  the  Britons  sent  their  fleet,  in  order  to  assist  the
Cehaî  of  Gaul,  their  relarions,  against  the  arms  of  Caesar.      Triad  14.

t  Strabo  L.  VII.  speaks  of  the  removal,  and  of  the  dispersion  of  the  Cimbri,
in  consequence  of  an  inuiidatioi).  This  tradition  was  preserved  by  the  Cimbri
of  the  Ceihsonese ;  but  the  event  mnst  have  happened  when  their  ancestois
dwelt  in  a  low  couuirv.


156

[And  they  hvA  neither  privilege  nor  claim  in  the  Island  of
Britain,  but  the  land  and  proteétion  that  Avcre  granted,  under
si)eciíìcd  limits.  And  it  was  decreed.  That  they  should  not
enjoy  the  inununiLies  oí'  tlie  native  Cymry,  before  the  ninth
generation.]     (6)

IV,  Three  usurping  tribes  came  into  the  Island  of  Britain,
and  never  departed  out  of  it.

The  first  were,  the  Coranicd,  who  came  from  the  land  of
thePwyit

The  second  were  the  Gwyddelian  Fichti,  who  came  into
Alban,  over  the  sea  of  Lli/chli/n  (Denmark.)

Tlie  third  were  the  Saxons.

[The  Coranied  are  about  the  river  Humber,  and  on  the
shore  of  j\lo~r  Tawch,  and  the  Gwyddelian  Fiehti  are  in
Alban,  on  the  shore  of  the  sea  of  Llychlyn. — The  Coranied
luiited  with  the  Saxons;  and  being  partly  incorporated  with
thcni,  deprived  the  Lloegrwys  of  their  goveniment,  by  wrong
and  o})pression:  and  afterwards,  they  deprived  the  Race  of
the  C^mry  of  their  crown  and  sovereignty.  All  the  Lloegrwys
became  Saxons |,  except  those  who  are  found  in  Cornwall,
and  in  the  Commot  of  Cunioban,  in  Dcira  and  Bcniicia.

The  primitive  Race  of  the  Cymry  have  kept  their  land  and
their  language ;  but  thej^  have  lost  their  sovereignty  of  the
Island  of  Britain,  through  the  treachery  of  the  proteéted
tribes,  and  liie  violence  of  the  three  usurping  tribes.]     (7)


+  1"  1'    7^    "  is  added  -Ac  or  Ada  pan  hanordd\nt .     And  they  orty^inally
tame  from  Asia-     Jones  declared   200  vais  ago,  that  he  copied  the  various
Tcadings  hom   which   this  passage  is   taken,  just   as  lie  found  them,   in  a  copy
that  was  more  than  600  ycjis  old  in  /lis  time.     Sf-e   W.  Arch.  v.  2.  p.  80,
^  i.  e.  Adopted  the  Saxoo  language  and  manners.


157

V.  Tlie  three  awful  events  of  tlie  Island  of  Brituin.

rirst,  the  bursting  of  the  lake  of  waters,  and  the  over-
•whehning  of  the  face  of  all  lands  ;  so  that  all  mankhid  were
drowned,  excepting  Dwyvan  and  Dwyvach,  who  escaped  iu
a  naked  vessel  (without  sails)  and  of  them  the  Island  of  Britain
was  re-peopled.

The  second  was  the  consternation  of  the  tempestuous  fire,
when  the  Earth  split  asunder,  to  Annwn  (the  lower  region)
and  the  greatest  part  of  all  living  \vas  consumed*.

The  diird  was  the  scorching  summer,  when  the  \voods  and
plants  were  set  on  fire,  by  die  intense  heat  of  the  Sun,  and
nuiltitudes  of  men,  and  beasts  and  kinds  of  birds,  and  reptiles,
and  trees,  and  plants  were  irrecoverably  lost.     (Ip)

VI.  The  three  chief  master  works  of  the  Island  of  Britain.

The  ship  of  Neiÿdd  Nav  Neivion,  which  caiTied  in  it  a
male  and  a  female  of  all  living,  when  the  lake  of  waters  burst
forth ;

Tlie  drawing  of  the  avanc  to  land  out  of  the  lake,  by  the
branching  oxen  of  IIu  Gaduni,  so  that  the  lake  burst  no
more ;

And  the  stones  of  Gv.yddon  Ganhcbon,  on  whicli  were"
read  the  arts  and  sciences  of  tlie  world.     (97)

VII.  The  three  great  Regulators  of  the  Island  of  Britain.


*  This  corfliB  of  the  Elements  probsblv  happened,  when  the  Japetida:
occupied  the  inflammable  soil  of  Asia  Propria•  It  is  perhaps  the  event  so
awfully  dtscnbed  bv  Hesiod,  Theoa  678,  &c,  and  which  conîiibuted  not  only
«p  the  defeat,  but  removal  of  ihc  Juavs.


158

lîu  Gadarn,  l)nnging  tlie  ÌÌíìcc  of  tíie  Cyiniy  out  of  the
land  of  Hav,  which  is  culled  Detiübani^  into  the  Iblund  of
Britain;

Prydain,  the  son  of  Aedd-?.ia\vr,  cstablibhing  government
and  law  over  the  Island  of  Britain;

And  Rhitta  Gawr,  who  made  himself  a  robe,  of  the  beards
of  kings,  whom  he  caused  to  be  shaved  (reduced  to  vassalage)
for  their  oppressions,  and  contempt  of  justice.     (.54)

\  ÍÍÍ.     The  three  happy  controulers  of  the  Island  of  Britain.

Prydain,  the  son  of  Aedd-Mawr,  suppressing  the  Dragon
tyrannj'  [This  ^^as  a  tyranny  of  pillage  and  contempt  of
Equity,  thai  sprang  up  in  die  Island]

Carador,  tlie  son  of  Brtuij  the  son  of  Llyr,  checking  the
oppression  of  the  Caesars ;

And  Rhitta  Gavvr,  controuling  the  tyrann}•  and  pillage  of
the  tumultuary  kings,     (ύό)

IX.     The  three  benefaclors  of  the  Race  of  the  Cymry.

The  first,  Hu  Gadarn,  who  first  shewed  the  Race  of  the
Cj'mry  the  method  of  cultivating  the  ground,  when  ihcy  were
in  tlie  land  of  Hav  [namely,  wlicre  Constantinople  now
stands]  before  they  came  into  the  Island  of  Britain;

Coll,  the  son  of  Coll-Frewi,  who  first  brought  Avheat  and
barley  into  the  Islar.d  of  Britain,  where,  betore,  there  had
only  been  Oats  and  lìye;

And  Elldud  the  Knight  [a  holy  man  of  Cor  Dewdws]  who
improved  the  manner  of  cultivatmg  the  ground,  taught  the
Cymry  a  better  method  than  what  had  been  known  before.


159

Olid  shewed  them  tiie  art  of  plowing  wliich  now  prevails.,
[For  bcibre  the  time  of  Elldud,  land  was  cultivated  only  with
a  mattock  and  a  spade^,  aiter  the  manner  oi  the  Gwyddelums.]
-(óG)

X.     The  three  primary  Sagos  of  the  lìace  of  the  Cymry.

Hu  Gadarn,  Avho  first  coUeéled  the  race  of  the  Cymry  and
disposed  them  into  tribes;

Dyvnwal-Moelmiid^  who  first  regulated  the  Laws,  privileges
and  institutions  of  the  country  and  nation  ;

And  Tydain  tad  Awen,  who  first  introduced  order  and
method  into  the  memorials  and  preservation  of  the  Oral  art
(poetry)  and  its  properties.

And  from  that  order,  the  privileges  and  methodical  usages
of  the  Bards  and  Bardism  (Druidism)  of  the  Island  of  Britain^
were  first  devised.     (ô7)     '

XL     The  three  primary  Bards  of  the  Island  of  Ijrirain.

Plennydd,  Alawn  and  Gwron.

These  were  they  who  devised  the  privileges  and  usage*,
which  belong  to  Bards  and  Bardism.

[Yet  there  had  been  Bards  and  Bardism  before:  but  they
were  not  completely  methodized,  and  they  enjoyed  neither
privileges  nor  established  customs,  but  what  they  obtained
through  gentleness  and  civility,  and  the  protection  of  the
country  and  the  nation,  before  the  time  of  these  three.

Some  say  they  were  in  the  time  of  Prydain,  the  son  of
Aedd  Alawr;,  others,  that  they  were  in  tiie  time  of  his  son^


160

Dyvnwal-Moelmiicl,  λυΙιοιπ  some  of  the  eld  books  call  uyva-
vartli,  the  son  of  Piydain.]     (.58)

XII.  The  three  Elementary  masters  of  Poetry  and  jNIe-
inorial,  of  the  Race  of  the  Cyniry.

Gwyddon  Ganhebon,  the  first  man  in  the  Λvorld  Λ^h()
composed  poetry ;

Hu  Gadarn,  who  first  adapted  poetiy  to  the  preservation  of
record  and  memorials;

And  Tydain  Tad  Awen,  who  first  developed  the  art  and
structure  of  poetry,  and  the  due  disposition  of  thought.

And,  from  the  labours  of  these  three  personages,  sprung
Bards  and  Bardism,  and  the  regulation  of  their  privileges,
and  established  discipline,  by  the  three  primary  Bards,
Plenn3"dd,  Alavvn  and  Gwron.

XIII.  The  three  primaiy  Baptized  (or  Cluistian)  Baads.

Merddin  Emrys,

Taliesin,  the  chief  of  the  Bards,

And  Merddin,  the  son  of  Madawc  Morvryn.

XIV.  The  three  mighty  Labours  of  the  Island  of  Britain^

Erecting  the  stone  of  Ketti,
Constructing  the  work  of  Emrys,
And  licaping  die  pile  of  C^vran^on.


161

XV.  The  three  happy  astronomers  (Seronyddion,  So*
Tonides)  of  the  Island  of  Britain,

Idris  GawTy

Gzuifddion,  the  son  of  Don,

And  Gwijn,  the  son  of  Nudd,

[So  great  was  their  knowledge  of  the  stars,  and  of  theh'
nature  and  situation,,  that  they  could  foretel  whatever  might
be  desired  to  be  known,  to  the  day  of  doom.]     (89)

XVL  The  three  masters  of  mysterious  and  seciet  sci-
ence, of  the  Island  of  Britain.

Math,  the  son  of  Mathonwy,  and  he  disclosed  his  secret
to  Gzmjddion,  the  son  of  Don.

Mcngiff,  the  son  of  Teirgzcaedd,  Avho  taught  his  secret  to
Uthyr  Btndragon.

And  Rhnddlwm  Gaior,  and  he  learned  his  mystery  of
Eiddic  ,Gôr  and  Coll,  the  son  of  Coll  Frewi.     (90)

XVII.  The  three  great  modellers  of  the  Island  of
Britain.

Corvinzvr,  the  bard  of  Cert  Hir,  of  Llyngtvyn,  who  first
made  a  ship,  with  a  sail  and  a  helm,  for  tlie  race  of  the
Cymry.

Mordial  Gwr  Gzueilgi,  the  architect  of  Ceraint,  the  son
of  G radial,  who  first  taught  the  race  of  the  Cymry,  the  work

L


162

«f  stone  and  lime,  [nt  the  time  when  AlexanJcr  the  Great
was  subduing  the  world.]

And  Coli,  the  son  of  CyUin,  [the  son  of  Caradawc,  the
fon  of  Bran,']  Avho  first  made  a  mill  ^γith  a  wheel,  for  the
race  of  the  Ci/mry.     And  these  three  were  bards,    (gi)


In  these  documents,  as  they  now  stand,  some  degree  of
confusion  may  be  detected,  it  is  the  inevitable  eftect  of
transcript  and  comment,  in  ages,  from  which  the  key  of  the
knowledge  contained  in  them  was,  by  the  mysteries  of  time,
withheld;  but,  upon  the  whole,  they  appear  to  be  genuine
memorials  of  remote  antiquity.

From  the  personifications,  which  occur  in  several  of  them,
it  may  be  inferred,  that  something  more  is  implied,  than  a
series  of  historical  events,  and  that  frequently  they  consist  of
such  allegories,  or  anigmata,  as  Druids  are  known  to  have
employed,  in  teaching  their  disciples.

Thus  the  three  primary  hards,  or  Druids,  Plcnnÿdd,
Alazvn  and  Gwroti,  No.  XI.  are>in  their  literal  import,  iight.
harmony,  and  energy.

In  their  national  prepossession,  they  resemble  the  genuine
traditions  of  many  other  primitive  people.  The  patriarchs
are  made,  almost  exclusively,  the  fathers  of  the  Cymry,  and
the  general  events  of  early  ages,  are  consigned  particularly,
to  the  Island  of  Britain.  This  may  be  exemplified  in  the
account  of  the  deluge.  No.  V.

*'  Thi'  waters  burst   forth — ^all  lands  were  covered — all


163

mankind  were  drowned,  except  only  two  persons,  wlio
escaped  in  a  boat.  Of  them  was  repeopled  the  Is/and  of
Britain."  Even  the  vessel,  which  carried  a  male  and  a
female  of  all  that  lived,  was,  it  seems,  one  of  the  master-
works  of  the  Island  of  Britain.

This,  which  is  contradictory  to  the  more  temperate  ac-
counts of  the  real  progress  made  by  the  Cy-mry,  illustrates
the  nostra-tism  of  all  national  traditions.

The  personage  who  survived  the  deluge,  is  called  Dwi/'
van,  or  Dicycazcn,  and  his  wife  Dzcyvach — the  godlike  man
and  woman.  His  name,  (No.  VI.)  is  Nevydd  Nav  Neivion
' — the  celestial  one,  the  Lord  of  the  waters.  Our  old  bards
call  him,  Dyhni  ail  Mor ;  Dylan,  or  Dyglan, — son  of  the  sea,
from  Dy-glaniaw,  to  land,  or  come  to  shore — Avhence  per-
haps, Deu-calion. — Hu  Gadarn,  the  mighty  inspector,  is  ».
very  high  personage,  and  supreme  agent  in  these  Triads.
He  was  the  God  of  the  Druids.  As  such,  he  has  always
been  acknowledged  by  the  Welsh.  A  ChrÍ3tian  bard  thus
marks  the  religion  of  his  votaries,  put  in  opposition  to  that
of  Christ.—

"  Two  active  impulses  truly  there  are
In  the  world,  and  their  course  is  manifest:
An  impulse  from  Christ;  joyful  is  the  theme —
Of  a  right  tendency,   an  energetic  principle.
Another  impulse  there  is  (indiscreetly  sung)
Of  falsehood,  and  base  omens:
This,  has  been  obtained  by  the  men  of  Hu,
The  usurping  bards  of  Wales."

He  was  notj  however,  without  his  partizans    long  aftei
r.  2


164    ~

the  introduction  of  Christianity.     He  is  thus  elevated,  in  thŵ
Orphic  style^  by  Jolo  Goch,  the  bard  of  Owen  Glandwr,

"  Hit  Gadarn,  the  sovereign,  the  ready  protector^

A  king,  distributing  the  wine,  and  the  renown,

The  emperor  of  the  land  and  the  seas,

And  the  life  of  all  in  the  world,  was  he.

After  the  deluge,  he  held

The  strong  beiim'd  plough,  active  and  excellent:

This  did  our  Lord  of  stimulating  genius.

That  he  might  shew  to  the  proud  man,  and  to  the  humbly  wise,

The  most  approv'd  art,  with  the  faithful  father."

See  0.  Diet.  V.  Hu.

He  is  thus  described  by  lilnjs  'Brydydd,  in  the  fifteenth
century.

"  The  smallest,  if  compared  with  small,

Is  the  Mighty  Hu,  in  the  world's  judgment.

And  he  is  the  greatest,  and  Lord  over  us,

And  our  God  of  mystery :

Light  is  his  course,  and  swift:

A  particle  of  lucid  sunshine  is  his  car:

He  is  great  on  land  and  seas.

The  greatest  whom  I  shall  behold —

Greater  than  the  worlds — Let  us  beware

Of  mean  indignity,  to  him  who  deals  in  bounty."

See  0.  Diet.  V.  Mymrÿn,

Though  Hu  Gadarn  primarily  denoted  the  Supremt  Being,
\  think  liis  actions  have  â  secondari/  reference  to  the  history
of  Noah.  The  following  particulars  are  told  of  him  in  the
above  cited  selection.

1.     His  branching,  or  elevated  oxen,  (perhaps  his  offer-


165

íng)  at  the  deluge^,  tlrew  the  destroyer  out  of  the  water,  so
that  the  lake  burst  forth  no  more.     (No.  Vl.)

*i.  He  instructed  the  primitive  race  in  the  cukivation  of
the  earth.  (No.  IX.)

3.  He  first  collected  and  disposed  them  into  various
tribes.     (No.  X.)

4.  He  first  gave  laws,  traditions,  &c.  or  adapted  verse
to  memorials.     (No.  ΧΠ.)

5.  He  first  brought  the  Cymrij  into  Britain  and  Gaul,
because  he  would  not  have  them  possess  lands,  by  war  and
contention;  hut  of  right,  ana  iti  peace.     (No.  H.)


The  account  before  us,  of  the  settlements  in  Britain,  gives
precedency  to  the  Cymry,  who  came  from  Gzclad  yr  Hav,
called  Defrobani.  These,  at  present,  are  very  obscure
names ;  but  some  commentator,  at  least,  as  old  as  the  mid-
dle of  the  tAvelfth  century,  explains  them,  and  repeatedly,
as  meaning,  "  Where  Constantinople  now  stands."  This
comment  \vould  not  have  been  made,  without  some  autho-
rity, and  it  belongs  to  an  age  which  possessed  many  docu-
ments, relating  to  the  history  of  the  Britons,  vrhich  are  no
longer  extant.

Huv,  in  our  old  orthography,  (as  in  Lib.  Land.)  would
be  Ham;  it  may  import  Hcsmus,  or  Haemonia.  Defrobani
may  either  be  Dy-vro-banau,  the  land  of  eminences,  or  high
points,  Thrace  in  general;  or  else  Dyvro-Bamci/,  the  land
orvfl/eofthe  Pe/ieus,  Thessali/,  Haemonia,    I  have  shewà


166

elsewhere,  that  our  ancestors,  the  Celte,  in  their  line  of
inarch,  traversed  those  regions.

But  tliough  the  Cymri/  remained  some  time  in  that  country,
where  they  began  the  tillage  of  the  earth,  (No.  IX,)  it  was
not  their  ultimate,  their  destined,  and  proper  home.  It  was
not  aland  they  could  possess,  "  of  right,  and  in  peace  J"

That  part  of  the  family  which  first  came  to  Gaul  and
Britain,  in  search  of  lasting  possessions,  probably  withdrew
towards  the  Danube, — ascended  even  to  the  source  of  that
river, — and  stretched  over  to  the  Rhine;  which  river  some  of
them  perhaps  may  haA'e  crossed,  whilst  others  followed  tlie
main  streain,  to  its  mouth,  upon  the  German  Ocean,  or  Mor
Tawch.  We  are  told  (No.  1.)  that  they  came  over  that  sea,
to  the  Island  oi  Britain,  and  Lbjdaw,  or  the  coast  of  Gaul,
where  they  remained.

It  appears  then,  by  these  documents,  that  Gaul  and
Britain  were  peopled,  originally,  by  the  same  race,  and
about  the  same  time.

The  extent  of  Britain  being  imperfectly  known,  when
its  coast  was  discovered,  perhaps  only  a  few  of  the  Ci/mri/
volunteered  themselves  to  settle  there,  and  these,  appear  to
have  entered  the  country  in  detached,  as  \\e\\  as  little  families,
pot  under  any  one  patriarch,  of  acknowledged  authority ;  for
IIu  Gadarn  was  only  Xhúr  figurative  conductor,  to  their
western  settlement,  and  the  Draig  Ormcs,  or  tumult  of  their
leaders,  threw  them  into  confusion,  till  the  arrival  of  ano-
ther colony.  These  were  the  Lloegrzot/s,  or  those  who
dwelt  upon  the  Loire.  They  came  under  the  conduct  of
Prydain,  the  son  οϊ  Aeddihe  Great,  a  prince  of  the  chief
branch  of  the  Ceitce  in  the  \A'est.


167

I  am  very  much  ileceived,  if  this  Aedd  was  not  the  a»!^?  of
Greek  mythology,  the  aciviiowleilged  patriarch  of  the  GauÍs,
and  he  from  \Yhoni  the  ΑΐΔΟΥΟΐ,  JEdui,  the  first  and  principal
race  in  Gaul,  took  tlieir  name.*

Pryda'ui,  or  Pn/d,  who  came  into  this  island,  could  not
have  heen  his  immediate  son,  but  a  lineal  representative,  or
descendant  of  Aides,  Dis,  or  Japheth.

The  institution  of  British  Druidism,  having  been  com-
pletely established,  in  the  time  of  a  sovereign,  who  was  of
the  governing  family  in  Gaul,  (No.  XI.)  that  circumstance
may  account  for  its  favourable  reception  there.

The  Brj/thoit,  who  gave  its  (existing)  name  to  this  island,
and  to  its  inhabitants,  according  to  some  of  these  Triads,  and
the  venerable  Bede, — came  from  hli/daw ;  or,  in  other  WOrds,
from  Armorica.  They  were  probably  of  Pri/d's  retinue;
for  he  brought  his  fleet,  and  his  Lhgerzci/s,  "  Ο  Dir  Gzvas
Gwpit,"  from  the  land  of  the  Veneti,  or  the  mouth  of  the
Loire,  adjoining  to  Armorica — Gwas  Gwynt  was  the  coun-
try to  which  Britain  sent  its  fleet,  for  the  assistance  of  the
Gauls,  against  the  Romans.  Compare  Triad  XIV.  of  the
«riginal  series,  with  Cccsar,  B.  G.  III.  8,  9.

Tlie  Aedui  and  Veneti,  ox  Aeddwys  and  Gwj/net,  were  of


*  Doccbat  etiam  ut  Omni  Tempore,  íoíins  Gaii<<e  principatum  JEdvi  teau-
issent,  Ctcs.  B.  G.  I.  43.

Summa  auctoritas  antiquitus  erat  in  íEduis.     lb.  VI.  12.

Eo  statu  res  erat,  ut  longt  principes  ìÎ'.dui  haberentur.     lb.

Ccltarum  clarissimi  IIebui.     Mel.  III.  2.

Divitiacus,  prince  of  the  JEdui,  had  a  sovereign  principality  in  Britain,  as
well  as  in  Gaul.  See  Borlase,  p.  83,  and  his  authorities.

The  British  ^'"dui,  or  IIedui,  were  in   Somcrscrtsiiirc  liic.  Corinav.  Stukelnj.

Thv  Welsh  denominate  this  district,  after  the  cradlt  of  the  Ctltiç  nations
Cüilad  yr  ΙΙάν.


168

the  same  stock;  for  Gzcyn,  the  son  of  Kudd,  or  Nevi/dd^
king  of  the  loner  regions,  was  the  same  personage  with
Aedd  Manr.

These  three  colonies  of  the  Cymry,  arrived  in  Britain,
before  their  divided  famihes  had  forgotten  their  primitive
tongue,  or  had  lost  the  original  and  sound  principle  of  just
and  peaceable  possession.     (No.  II.)


The  account  oi  Druidism,  which  these  triads  present,  has
evidenth',  a  mixture  of  allegory,  and  it  involves  ideal,  or  my-
thological characters.  The  following  particulars,  however,
may  be  remarked,  as  worthy  of  notice.

The  Celtce  regarded  the  materials  of  this  legendary  system,
as  the  relics  of  the  first  ages  of  mankind.

Grcyddon  Ganhebon,  was  the  first  of  the  human  race
who  composed  poetry,  (JSo.  X1Í.)  and  he  described,  by
engraving  upon  stones,  the  arts  and  sciences  of  the
world.  (No.  \T.)  This  character,  who  forcibly  reminds  us
of  the  inscribed  pillars  of  iSetli,  Tkoth,  or  Hermes,  pre-
ceded Hit  Gadarn,  zcho  teas  present  at  the  deluge — He  took
the  Cijmry  under  his  protection — He  taught  the  arts  of
peace,  and  principles  of  justice ; — He  adapted  poetry  to  me-
morials and  records.

Tydain,  or  in  more  ancient  orthography,  Titain  Tad
.Awen,  Titan,  the  father  of  inspiration  or  genius,  intro-
duced order  and  method,  into  the  poetry  and  memorials
of  the  Cymry.


169

This  personage,  who  is  identified,  by  name,  and  charac-
ter, with  Titan,  or  Apollo,  of  the  Orphic  hymns,  and  of
Greece,  forms  a  connecting  link,  between  the  mythologies
of  eastern  and  zccstern  Europe.

From  the  labours  of  those  three  masters,  sprung  British
Druidistn,  with  all  its  privileges,  usages,  and  rules  of  dis-
cipline.    (No.  X.  XIL)

In  this  island,  was  Druidism  first  regularly  established,
and  in  the  time  of  princes,  λ\^ο  are  acknowledged  as  great
legislators,  and  benefactors  of  their  country.     (No.  I.)

The  names  which  honour  them,  are  connected  with
mythology.

Prydain,  from  Pryd,  which  is  Time,  Season,  Due  time — ■
Beauty,  Comeliness,  and  from  Ain,  a  source  or  principle
— seems  to  have  been  primarily  designed  as  an  epithet  of
the  sun — Father  of  beauty, — and  principle  of  the  seasons,

Prydain  is  the  son  of  Aedd  Mazer,  the  great  At^tn,  fa-
ther of  the  Aedui,  and  of  the  Gauls.

The  name  of  the  other  prince,  Di/vnzoal  Moelmud,  seems
to  be  obliterated  in  the  Celtic — in^ra  b^i  ΐΠ  may  signify,
tlie  judge,  presiding  over  instruction.  His  other  name,
Dyvn  Varth  ab.  Prydain,  is,  the  profound  bard  or  priest,
the  son  of  Prydain.

The  occasion  of  the  institution,  may  be  collected  from
the  great  act  of  Prydain,  in  suppressing  the  dragon
tyranny,  or  the  turbulence  and  confusion  which  had
.risen  amongst  the  heads  of  famUies,  (No.  VIII.)  and  this


170

he  effected^  by  investing  a  sacred  order  of  men,  from  whosi
definitive  sentence  there  was  no  appeal,  with  an  authority
and  jurisdiction  to  determine  all  disputes ;  or,  in  other  words,,
by  committing  to  the  office  of  priesthood,  the  administra-
tion of  civil  power.

The  leading  principles,  upon  which  these  patriarchal  sages
began  their  functions,  are  highly  laudable,  if  judgment  is
to  be  formed  of  them  by  the  characters  first  put  into  the  ju-
dical chair. — "  Flmnydd" — "  ΑΙαζΰπ," — a  "  Gzcron" —
light, — harmony, — and  energy,  or  virtue. — (It  has  the  same
relation  to  gxcr^  a  man,  as  virtue  has  to  vir.)

'*■  Pknnydd,"  is,  I  think,  a  name  of  the  "  Sun,''  or
"  Jpollo."  The  sunbeams  which  appear  to  vibrate  in  a
hot  day,  are  called,  "  Tês  ys  Plennydd," — the  beams  of  the
radiant  one.  "  Eithinen  neud  gudd  Blennydd."  Tal.  "  A
furzebush  would  truly  hide  the  sun."  And  again, — "  BUn
blaen  bkn  Blennydd"  "  Irksome  in  front  is  the  radiance
of  the  sun."

But,  though  Prydain,  or  Dyvnwal,  invested  his  Druids
with  all  that  civil  authority  which  they  exercised,  under
these  Presidents,  yet  their  principles  of  religion  did  not  ori-
j^inatc  here. — There  had  been  Bards,  or  Druids,  before,
though  not  completely  incorporated,  or  vested  with  judicial
authority,  and  with  exclusive  privileges.     (No.  II.)

The  names  of  primary  bards  intimate,  that  an  osten-
sible design  of  Druidism  was,  to  enlighten  the  understand-
ing, promote  harmony  in  society,  and  encourage  virtue.

In  the  institutionitl  triads,  published  by  3ir.  E.  Williams^


171

the  design  is  thus  declared.  Tri  diben  Barddoniacih:
GxycUhau  moes  a  devod;  cynnal  hcddwch,  a  moli  pob
daionus  a  rhagor.

"  The  three  ultimate  intentions  of  bardism :  To  reform
the  morals  and  customs ;  to  secure  peace ;  to  celebrate  (or
encourage)  all  that  is  good  and  excellent."

Druidism,  then,  in  its  primitive  and  pure  state,  may  be
regarded  as  an  edifice,  raised  upon  the  basis  of  the  patri-
archal religion,  for  the  purpose  of  superseding  the  neces-
sity of  recourse  to  arms,  in  the  contentions  of  independent
states;  and  of  restraining  the  excesses  of  individuals — with-
out the  aid  of  penal  statutes.

It  governed  men,  by  taking  hold  of  their  minds,  and  of
their  imaginations; — by  suggesting  laws  which  had  their
sanction  in  general  opinion — and  by  teaching  its  votaries
to  expect,  in  a  future  state,  a  just  recompence  of  their  ac-
tions;— an  apprehension,  which,  might  serve  to  regulate  their
conduct  in  their  present  life.

A  system  thus  constructed,  probably  attained  its  meridi-
an prevalence  at  an  early  age,  and  amongst  the  first  un-
mixed colonies  of  the  Cymry.  It  could  operate  with  effect
only  amongst  the  people  for  Avhose  opinions  it  was  calcu-
lated, and  who  held  the  sanctions  of  it  in  the  most  pro-
found veneration.  When  strangers,  Avho  paid  little  defer-
ence to  the  sacred  code  of  these  Druids,  began  to  intrude,
necessity  would  gradually  put  arms  into  the  hands  of  the
Cymry,  for  self-defence.  From  that  moment,  of  course,
jpure  Druidism  began  to  decline.  The  inherent  principle  of
securing  peace,  must  have  been  occasionally  abandoned,
and  many  emendations  proposed,   for  the  purpose  of  de-


172

y

daring,  in  what  cases  it  would  be  lawful  to  unslieath  the
eword,  wliich  the  institutional  triads  describe  as  a  7icccssary
hut  rtlnctant  exercise  of  duty,  against  the  lazvless  and  the
depredatory.

Amongst  their  disciples,  these  Druids  could,  at  all  times,
ensure  peace,  by  holding  up  the  rod  of  excommutiication,
their  most  rigorous  instrument  of  doom ;  the  wretch  on  whom
it  fell,  was  not  only  menaced  with  severe  punishment  here-
after, but  was  deprived,  in  the  mean  time,  of  all  social  com-
fort and  benefit.

But,  in  the  eyes  of  strangers,  who  confided  in  their
own  strength,  this  weapon  ΛΥαβ  disarmed  of  all  its  terrors,
and  their  presence  must  have  opened  a  secure  asylum  to
the  turbulent  amongst  the  Celtic.  In  the  hour  of  invasion,
Druids  could  only  withdraw  from  the  field,  and  permit  the
military  chiefs,  and  the  people,  to  defend  the  region.  Their
power,  as  Druids,  and  the  purity  of  their  disciphne,  must,
therefore,  have  been  on  the  decline,  long  before  the  time
of  C<csar,

In  favour  of  this  institution,  considered  in  a  political
view,  little  can  be  said.  As  our  nature  is  constituted,  it
seems  neither  to  have  been  calculated  for  the  liberty  of  the
individual,  or  the  independence  of  the  nation :  and  I  regard
its  prevalence,  as  one  main  cause  of  the  general  subjugation
of  the  Ceitcc.  Their  country  was  large  and  populous.  The
inhabitants,  trained  up  to  the  exercise  of  that  principle  which
they  culled  fortitude,  could  not  be  deficient  in  courage.
And  we  read  of  several  amongst  their  families,  who  emigrat-
ing with  a  view  of  conquest,  made  good  their  establish-
ment, in  the  midst  of  contending,  fierce,  and  warlike  na-
tions.   But  tlicsc,  were  not  attended  by  their  Druids,  who


173

deemed  conquest  unlawful.  Within  í/íẃ'jurisdlctloti,  arms
find  \Yavtàre  in  general  were  in  disgrace.  As  a  consequence
of  tills  principle,  the  sword  was  -not  ready,  nor  the  soldier
expert,  in  the  day  of  necessity.  Much  of  their  best  pos-
sessions was  generally  lost,  before  they  looked  up  to  the
painful  duty,  or  qualified  themselves  to  discharge  it  with
due  effect.  The  Cdt(R  were  paulatim  adsnefacti  super ari.
Cais.De.B.G.yi.  21.

Just  so,  Λνβ  may  suppose  it  would  happen,  to  a  nation,
composed  of  a  religious  tribe,  well  known,  and  much  re-
spected in  i'^g/öní?.  Though /mwífs  of  peace,  they  wovXa
probably  evince,  on  trying  occasions,  that  the  sentiment  did
not  arise  from  a  defect  of  courage.  Yet,  they  would  not
overcome  their  scniples,  and  begin  to  exert  that  courage,
till  an  enemy  should  have  gained  such  advantage,  as  would
frustrate  and  baffle  their  utmost  eíForts.

No.  XV.  mentions  the  astronomers,  or  Serojiyddion  (the
Saronides  of  the  ancients.)  The  name  is  British,  being  a
compound  of  ser,  stars,  and  Honydd,  (PL  Honyddion,)  oftc
Îího  discriminates  and  points  out.

Of  those  great  astronomers,  the  first  named  is  Idris  the
giant,  whose  memory  is  perpetuated  by  one  of  the  high-
est and  most  pointed  mountains  in  North  Wales,  called
Cader  Idris,  tlie  chair,  or  keep,  of  Idris.  It  may,  perhaps,
have  been  an  observatory,  in  ancient  periods.  On  the  very
summit,  we  are  told  there  is  an  excavation  in  the  solid  rock,
resembling  a  couch,  and  it  is  pretended  that,  whoever  should
rest  a  night  in  that  seat,  will  be  found  in  the  morning,  either
4ead,  raving-mad,  or  endued  with  supernatural  genius.

Bj-  the  side  of  a  lake,  near  the  foot  of  tlie  mountain,,  are-


174

tlirec  gigantic  stones,  called  Tri  grdenyn,  which  the  fable
OÍ  the  populace  describes,  as  three  grains  of  sand  which  the
giant  shook  out  of  his  shoe,  before  he  ascended  the  chair*
(See  Wi/ndham's  Tour,  4to.)  I  rather  think  they  obtained
their  name  from  Greian,  the  sun.  iJf»;,  in  Greek,  implies,
an  expert,  or  skilful  person,  and  Wi'^>,  Idresh,  in  Hebrew^
from  W\'^,  Dresh,  to  seek,  search,  inquire  diligently.  Hy-
dres  has  a  similar  meaning  in   Welsh.

Idris,  or  Edris,  is  well  known  to  the  Arabians.  They
regard  him  as  the  prophet  Enoch,  and  say,  that  he  was  a
Sabean,  the  first  that  wrote  with  a  pen  after  EnoSj  the  son
of  Sdh.    See  Orient,  ColL  V.  2.  p.  112.

The  Eastern  Christians  tell  us,  that  Idris  was  the  same
with  Hermes,  or  Mercury,  the  famous  Trismegistus  of  the
Egyptians.    See  Vallencey's  Prospect.  F.  Dres.

Grecian  mythology  gives  a  similar  name  to  Atlas,  the
inventor  of  the  sphere,  and  this  personage  is  the  character
with  whom  I  think  our  British  Seronydd,  Idris  the  giant,
has  much  connection.

The  second  astronomer  is  Gwyddion,  the  son  of  Don. —
The  Sage,  the  son  of  Genius.  Without  inquiring  after  the
person  dignified  by  this  title,  I  shall  just  remark,  that  our
old  bards  distinguished  the  Galaxy  by  his  name,  calling  it,
Caer  Gzeyddion.    See  O.  Diet.  V.  Caer.

The  last  of  these  luminaries  was  a  person  of  no  small  im*
portancc ;  Gwyn,  the  son  of  Nudd,  the  same  as  Acdd,  or
A»d\ç,  father  of  the  Celta:,  and  king  of  the  lower  regions.
His  dignity  is  thus  acknowledged  in  a  very  old  mythological
talc,  called,  Buchedd  Colkn.


175

A  govyn  a  oedd  gwr  ο  vown,  yna  i  djnvawd  Collon,
"  Ydwyv;  pwy  ai  govyn  f"  —  ^'  Myvi,  cenad  i  Wyn  ab
Nudd,  Brenin  Annwn."

And  he  asking  if  there  rcas  a  man  zcithin,  Collcn  replied,
**  I  am;  rcho  asks  it?'' — "  It  is  I,  the  messenger  of  Gzvi/n^
the  son  of  Nndd,  king  of  the  lower  regions,  or  οϊ  Anmcn."

By  this  term,  which  denotes  the  deep,  the  lozo  part,  I
think  the  Celtce,  primarily  understood  a  rcestern  situation,
towards  which  there  was  an  apparent  fall,  in  the  course  of
nature,  and  in  this  primary  sense,  the  term,  I  think,  may
be  understood  in  that  remarkable  triad,  (No.  V.)  ''

When  the  opinion  first  prevailed,  that  souls  of  men  de-
scended for  a  time,  to  a  lower  state  of  existence,  the  zcest^
or  low  region  was  consecrated  peculiarly  to  them, —
Annzon  was  applied  figuratively  to  the  condition  of  the
dead,  or  the  infernal  regions,  which  comprehended  the
Eh/sium,  and  the  Tartarus  of  antiquity.  Thus  we  say,
**  Nid  eir  i  Annwn  ond  unwaith."  There  zcill  be  hut  one
journey  to  Hell.  Czcn  Annzim,  are  Hell-hounds.  Plant
Αηηζΰη,  the  children  of  the  deep,  certain  wandering  spirits.

As  Amizcn,  or  the  west,  was  the  peculiar  land  of  the
dead,  we  find  sepulchral  monuments  most  frequent  in  the
Xuestern  extremities  of  those  countries,  where  Druidism  was
professed,  as  in  Britany,  Cornzuall,  and  Mona.  There  was
perhaps  a  time,  when  these  Druids  regarded  Ireland  as  the
Ia7id  of  spirits.  The  Mabinogion,  or  institutional  tales,
represent  Anmvn  as  lying  somewhere  off  Dyved,  or  Pem-
brokeshire ;  and  the  Irish  acknowledge  Annan,  or  Αητηιη,
as  an  old  name  of  their  country.     See  Shaw,  Llzcyd,  &-e.


176

According  to  crar  Bardic  documents,  the  Cymry  havi
preferred  their  claim  to  an  ancient  connection  with  nofe
only  the  territories,  but  the  mythology  of  Greece,.  It  Λν,ίΙΙ
add  much  to  the  influence  and  credit  of  British  histories,  if
it  shall  appear,  that  ancient  Greece  acknowledged  the  same
acquaintance  Λvith  our  Cymry,  and  their  institutes  of  religion.

This  acknowledgment  is  clearly  intimated  in  the  persons
and  characters  of  the  Hyperboreans,  a  people  who  revered
the  sacred  places,  the  Gods,  and  the  religious  rites  of  an-
cient Greece.  To  them,  in  return,  Greece  confessed  her
obligation  for  some  objects  of  her  own  worship.  Her
ancestors  had,  therefore,  been  connected  intimately  with
such  a  distant  country,  and  with  its  inhabitants.

Though  once  acknowledged,  as  forming  prominent  fea-
tures in  Europe,  it  must  be  confessed,  the  latter  Greeks  were
but  imperfectly  informed  of  local  facts  respecting  them.
However,  some  of  their  best  authors,  do  furnish  us  with
particulars,  which  may  assist  us  in  our  search  for  their  abode.

Or.  Percy,*  in  his  inimitable  preface  to  the  Northern
Antiquities,  p.  7,  points  out  a  remarkable  passage  of  this
kind,  in  Strabo,  who  there  informs  us,  "  That,  although
the  old  Greek  authors,  gave  to  all  the  northern  nations,  the
common  name  of  Scythians,  or  Celto-Scythians ;  yet,  that
writers  still  more  ancient,  divided  all  the  nations
Ziho  Hied  beyond  the  Euxinc,  the  Danube,  and  the  Adriatic
sea,  into  the  Hyterboreans,  the  Sauromat^:  í/;íc?  Ari-


*  Now  Bichop  of  Dromore.  '•  His  Lordship  lias  drawn  the  line  of  distinction,
between  the  Goth  and  the  Celt,  with  a  hand  so  judicious,  and  guided  by  so  com-
preLen;ive  a  knowledge  of  the  subject,  lliat  liC  has  Icil  no  ground  for  debate;
but  I  cannot  help  addmg,  in  support  of  his  doctrine,  that  similar  points  of  demark-
ation  have,  in  a  general  manner,  been  perceived  and  acknowledged  by  the  ΙΓν/ίΊ.'"


177

MASPlAN-f;;;  as  they  did  tiwse  beyond  the  Caspian  sea,  into
Sack  fl/ítíŵlAssAGET.Î.  These  last,  the -Söcíe  and  3/fls-
sageta,  might  possibly  be  the  ancestors  of  the  Saxons  and
Goths,  (as  these  last  are  proved  by  indisputable  evidence,
to  have  been  the  Getce  oF  the  ancients)  who,  in  the  time
of  those  remote  Greek  writers,  possibly  had  not  penetrated
so  far  Avestward,  as  they  did  afterwards:  for  as  it  is
well  knoyrn  the  Germ  ami  are  considered  by  Hcrodotua
as  a  Persian  people.  Now  the  mo  st  authentic  histori-
ans, and  poets,  of  the  Gothic,  or  Teutonic  nations,  agree,
in  representing  their  ancestors  to  have  come  as  emigrants
from  the  more  eastern  countries.  But  as  to  those  three
other  nations,  the  Hyperboreans,  the  SauromatiC,  and  the
Arimaspians;  if  credit  be  due  to  Pelloutier,  when  he  asserts,
that,  uiider  the  tzco  former,  the  Celts  and  Sarmatians  are
plainîy  designed;  yet,  when  he  contends  that  Arimaspians
are  a  fabulous  race,  which  never  existed,  who  does  not  see
that  he  is  blinded  with  hypothesis  ?  AVhy  may  not  the
ancient  Fijins  and  Laplanders  have  been  intended  by  this
term,  which  he  himself  interprets,  from  Herodotus,  one-
eyed,  and  supposes  it  was  descriptive  of  some  nation  that
excelled  in  archery,  as  closing  one  eye,  for  better  aim  ?
Tacitus  expressly  assures  us,  that  the  Finni  were  great  ar-
chers ;  and  as  it  is  observed  in  the  following  book,  it  is
highly  probable,  that  at  some  early  period  of  time,  both
Finns  and  Laplanders  possessed  much  larger  and  better
tracts  of  country,  than  the  northern  desarts  to  which  they
are  now  coníìned.

The  SauromaliC,  and  Arimaspians,  were  clearly  inha-
bitants of  fosit•/•;/  Europe,  as  they  are  described  by  Strabo;
and  the  zcest  has  been  assigned,  by  the  oldest  Greek  writers,
to  the  Hyperborean^^.     Before  the  Goths  penetrated  into  the

Μ


178

icest,  this  was  the  land  of  the  CeltcB,  whom  wc  nnist  endea-
vour to  identify  in  those  ancient  inhabitants  of  thUt  region.

The  name  Hi/perborei,  has  the  import  of  Tram-Boreani,
or  men  who  lived  beyond  the  north,  who  resided  therefore,
beyond  certain  districts,  or  nations  to  the  north,  well  known
to  the  ancient  Greeks.  Yet  were  they  not  within  the  arctiò
circle,  ΟΪ  in  the  extremities  of  the  north,  as  com?paratively
recent  authors  have  supposed.  For  the  wheaten  straw  was
indispensible  in  their  sacred  mj'^steries ;  and  this  was  no  pro-
duce of  high  latitudes.  According  to  Herodotus,  the  wo-
men of  Thrace,  and  Pa:onia,  never  made  oblations  to  Diana,
a  divinity  of  the  Hyperboreans,  without  recourse  to  this  em-
blem. From  thence  it  may  be  inferred,  that  Hyperbo-
reans, and  the  'inhabitants  of  these  countries,  were  origi-
nally the  same.

The  father  of  history  describes  the  sacred  gifts  of  the  Hy-
perboreans,  as  having  been  sent  from  one  people  to  another,
in  their  \vay  to  Greece,  ewSu/xii-a,  or  tvhhiji.tvcc  i>  καλα/Λ>}  -πτνζωι,
€Qvered  or  bound  by  a  zuheat  straw.  L.  IV.  53.

Perhaps  ratified  or  confirmed  by  a  wheat  straw,  in  con-
formity with  an  ancient  custom,  to  Λvhich  an  old  bard  alludes. —

Oni  'mddyddan  ychwaneg.
Tor  y  gzccUtyn  ain  dyn  teg,

"  If  she  converses  no  rnorc,  break  the  straw  with  my  fair
one/'     That  is — break  off  all  connection  with  her.

If  he  that  broke  that  straw  dissolved  a  compact,  he  that
gave,  joined,  or  exchangedh,  made  or  confirmed  a  covenant,
wlwcli  t)ic•  Hi/pcrboreans  m:\y  have  done,  when  they  entrusted•'


179

their  sacred  gifts  into  the  hand  of  strangers.  It  is  in  allusion
to  some  habit  of  this  kind,  that  we  have  stipiilor  from  stipula ;
and,  perhaps,  Fijcdus,  fader  is,  from  the  Irish,  Fodar,  strazi\

Tlie  ancient  Britons,  called  Hehnstravv,  Cloig,  from  Clo,
a  lock,  a  conclusion,  a  confirmation.  They  had  also  Belj/s,
from  Beli,  their  Apollo.  Belt  seems  to  be  derived  from
Balu,  to  shoot,  spring,  or  issue  forth. — Εκαί.-^ος.

Herodotus  having  understood  that  it  was  the  custom  of
the  Hyperboreaiis,  to  deliver  their  sacred  gifts  into  Scythian
bands,  for  the  purpose  of  better  forwarding  them  into
Greece,  enquired  from  the  Scoloti  of  Little  Tartarj/,  whom
the  Greeks  of  his  age  eminently  termed  Scythians,  respect-
ing the  Hyperboreans.  But  neither  could  this  branch  of
the  Sci/thians,  nor  any  of  their  neighbours,  the  Essedones
excepted,  give  the  least  account  of  them,  and  their  trace
of  them,  in  his  opinion,  amounts  to  nothing.  It  therefore  is
clear,  that  no  such  people  resided  in  the  N^oríÄEasí  of  JSwropi•.

The  Essedones,  who  had  this  imperfect  knowledge  of  the
Hyperboreans,  were,  probably,  an  eastern  branch  of  the
people  who  used  the  war  chariot,  called  Essedwn,  or  Es-
sedon ;  and  this  was  the  national  distinction  of  the  Sigynoe,*
or  the  Celto  Scythians,  who  occupied  the  South  West  of
Germany,  as  it  was  also  of  their  unquestioned  Relations,  the
British  Belga. :  which  carries  us  to  the  North  West  from
Greece,  and  at  once  into  contact  with  Celts,  who  were
professors  of  Druidism.

And  it  Avas  to  the  Korth  West,  from  Greece,  that  we  find
the  region  of  tiie  Hyperboreans  lay.

*  Ikrodot.  L.  V,  9.


180

In  tlie  lime  of  Jristeas,  (who  wrote  before  Homer)  tlie
Hj/perhorcans  dwelt  upon  the  sca^  beyond  the  Jlrimaspi,
and  their  neighbours,  the  Essedofies.  Herod,  W.  13.  Her-
cules went  from  Greece,  to  the  Hyperboreans,  through  li-
iyrium,  and  by  the  river  Eridanns,  or  ¥o.  Jpollod,
L.  ii.  C  4.

Posidonius  and  Profarchits,  placed  them  near  the  A/ps.
(Gait  in  yíìit.  Libera/,  p.  144,)  butthej'•  were  not  generally
recognised  on  the  south  of  these  mountains,  or  very  near
them.

After  passing  from  one  people  to  another,  their  gifts  ar-
rived far  in  the  IVest,  upon  the  Adriatic,  from  whence
•they  were  carried  in  the  first  period,  or  stage,  of  their  pro-
gress, to  Dodona,  but  ultimately  to  Delos.     Herod,   iv.  33.

They  came,  then,  from  the  land  of  the  Celtic,  whom
Heraclides  of  Pontus  calls  Hj/perboreans.  Plutarch,  iju
Camillo.

It  may  be  asked,  how  happens  it,  if  the  Hyperboreans
were  Celtic,  that  the  Greeks  did  not  generally  recognise
them  all  over  Celtica?

It  may  be  answered,  that  it  seems  they  had  conceived  a
Jjeculiar  character  of  this  people,  and  which  appears  to  Iiave
been  correct,  as  bearing  upon  their  jprmarj/  families,  or  tribes ;
but  these,  were  followed  by  others,  of  a  different  char
racier,  and  which  materially  changed  the  manners,  previ-
ously impressed.  The  original  idea  which  had  been  formed
of  the  nation,  was  not  realized  by  the  Greeks,  till  they
reached  the  interior  districts,  in  which  the  former  inhabi-
lants  remained  unmixed.


181

Tlie  moot  consideruble  of  these  has  been  described  by
Hticateus,  and  by  other  celebrated  authors  upon  ancient
tradition,  cited  by  D'lodorus  Siculus.

According  to  this  ancient  writer,  the  country  of  the  7/y-
pcrboreans,  in  his  day,  was  a  large  and  fruitful  island,  in
tJie  ocean,  lying  to  the  'North,  off  the  coast  of  Gallia
Celt  lea.  This  description,  which  I  shall  presently  adduce
at  large,  can  agree  with  no  other  spot  but  Britain.  Heca^
feus  places  the  Island  αιτι-ατίξ^^,  opposite  to,  the  coast  of
Celtica,  without  one  intervening  region  :  and  should  we
seek  it  further  North,  a  competent  fertility  of  the  land,  and
the  essential  zcheat  strazc,  will  not  be  found.

Neither  in  this  Island,  itself,  nor  in  contiguous  parts  of
Europe,  can  we  find  a  religious  order  of  ancient  celebrity,
except  our  Druids,  whose  Theologi/  conformed,  in  general,
to  that  ot' Greeks  and  Romans,  {Cces.  B.  G.  vi.  17.)

The  religion  of  the  Germans  was  perfectly  dissimilar,  (Ibid
21.)  besides,  that,  in  that  part  of  Europe,  their  establish-
ments, were  comparatively  recent,  and  posterior  to  tlie
age  of  Hecatcus.

Hence  it  should  seem,  the  Hyperboreans,  who  brought
their  gifts  to  J  polio,  in  the  Vale  of  Tempe,  down  to  the
last  ages  of  Paganism,  {/EL  Far.  Hist.  L.  iii.  C.  1.)  were
©Rr  Druids  of  Britain.

But  let  us  examine, if  their  characters  are  incorporated.
The  chief  outline  of  the  Hi/pcrborean  ethics,  was  pietj/,
inoffensive  as  ic ell  as  peaceable  conduct,  ana  fortitude.  The
favorite  tiiaxim  of  Druids,  who  abstained  from  contc^t,
and  allayed  every  popular  ferment,  was,  according  to  Diog.


182

Laert  (already  cited  for  another  purpose^)  To  rcorship  the
Gods — to  do  no  evil — and  to  exercise  fortitude;  or,  as  the
orighial  British  runs — "  Tri  chynnorion  docthineb :  ufudd-
had  i  ddeddfau  Duw;  ymgais  a  lies  dyn;  a  dioddef  yn
lew  pob  digwydd  bywyd."

"  Three  first  principles  of  wisdom:  Obedience  to  the
laws  of  God ;  concern  for  the  good  of  mankind ;  and  brave-
ly sustaining  all  the  accidents  of  life."

The  sacred  rites  of  the  Delians,  originated  in  the  Hyper-
boreans :  Their  virgins  came  to  Delos,  acconipanitd  by  their
Gods.     Herod,  iv.  3j.

Tertius  (Apollo)  Jove  et  Latona  natus,  quern  ex  Hyper-
boreis  Delphos  ferunt  advenisse  —  Reliqui  (Apollines)
omnes  silentur,  omnesque  res  aliorura  gestae  ad  unum
Jovis  et  Latonae  filium  referuntur.  Cic.  de  Nat.  Dtor.  L.  iii.

The  legitimate  Apollo  of  Grecian  worship  is,  therefore,
an  accredited  Hyperborean.

According  to  Gaulish  tradition,  in  the  time  of  Casar,
Druidical  discipline  originated  in  Britain.  The  same  ac-
count is  confirmed  by  the  institutional  Triads  of  that
British  order.

"  Yn  ynys  Prydain,  y  cafwyd  Earddoniaeth  gyntaf —
am  na  chafwys  un  gvvlad  arall  erioed  ddcall  cyfiavvn  ar
farddoniaeth — ο  ba  wlad  bynnag  y  bont,  Beirdd  wrth
fraint  a  defod  Beirdd  ynys  Prydain  au  gelwir."

"  Bardism,  or  Druidism,  originated  in  Britain — pure
Bordism  was  never  ΛνοΙΙ  understood  in  other  countries — of


183

whatever  country  they  may  be,  they  are  entitled  Bards,  ac-
cording to  the  rights  and  the  institutes  of  the  Bards  οϊ  ú\q
ídand  of  Britain."

Ti/dain,  or  Titain  Tad  Jzccn,  Titan  the  Father  of  Genius,
the  same  as  Apollo,  is  claimed  as  one  of  the  Cymry,  and  as
British.     See  above,  (No.  X.  XII.)

The  Hyperboreans  used  the  wheat  straw  in  the  rites  of
Apollo  and  of  Diana.

The  old  Britons  ascribed  peculiar  virtues  and  powers  to
this  very  symbol.  "  Gwrnerth  Ergydlym  a  laddes  yr  aith
mwyaf  ac  a  welwyd  erioed,  a  saeth  zvellten."  *'  The  keen-
darting  Gwrnerth,  (perhaps  another  title  of  Apollo)  slew  the
largest  bear  that  was  ever  seen,  with  an  arrow  of  strau>
W.  Arch.  y.  2.  p.  68.

The  arrow  which  Abaris,  the  Hyperborean  priest  of
Apollo,  carried  round  the  earth,  fasting  {Herod.  L.  iv.  oG.)
was  probably  of  this  kind.

As  the  ancients  often  played  upon  leords,  particularly
in  their  mystical  accounts  of  things,  οιατος,  derived  from  b'w
to  think  or  opine,  may  have  conveyed  the  opinions,  as  well
as  the  arroÎü  of  Abaris ;  and  by  what  Herodotus  expresses,
in  the  terms,  ovL•  ^mofxE^oc,  it  may  not  have  been  originally
meant,  that  he  eat  nothing,  but  that  he  made  no  provision
for  his  journey,  as  Druids  never  did,  regarding  it  as  one  of
their  sacred  privileges,  to  find —

"  Trwyddcdogaeth  ble'r  elont."

"  maintenance  when.'ver  lliey  went,"    [Institutional  Triads


184

It  appears,  from  several  passages  in  TaUesin,  that  our
Druids  made  use  of  strazc-reeds,  and  the  points,  or  spiculu
of  certain  trees,  in  all  their  sacred  rites.  Perhaps  he  alludes
to  the  Dt/ian  gifts,  in  telling  us — -

Bum  ynghaer  Ftfan/dd.     (L.  Felenydd.)

y  t  gryssynt  udlt  a  givydd.  W.  Arch.  V.  1.  p.  29.

"  I  have  been  in  the  city  of  Beknydd,  whither  the  strarcs
and  sprigs  were  hastening."

Fythagoras,  whose  philosophy  bore  a  wonderful  resem-
blance to  that  of  Druids,  is  represented  expressly  to  have
heard  the  Gauls  and  Brachmans  :*  the  former,  as  it  should
teem,  in  the  person  of  Abaris,  who  delivered  his  arrow  to
him,  in  other  words,  made  a  covenant  with  him,  and  at
the  same  time,  instructed  him  in  his  doctrine.  The  philo-
sophy of  Greece,  originated  in  the  Ce/tct.f

The  name  of  Abaris  belongs  to  the  Cipnri/.  aÇ;o» —
KijiaCpoi,  ui  rmq  ψχςι,  Ktup^t;».      Stcph.   Bi/zant.  De  Crb.

^oöí/s  may  have  been  one  of  the  Ahroi ;  but  the  term
does  not  so  properly  appertain  to  the  Natioii,  as  to  the  reli-
gion of  the  Cymry.  Abarui,  or  Axarxcy,  the  Contempla-
tive, is  a  familiar  name  in  the  old  Welsh.  Abaris,  consi-
dered as  the  character,  I  regard  not  as  a  personal  name,
but  as  a  description  of  the  order.-r— In  short,  as  I  would  un-
derstand Magus,  or  Druida,  I  think  a  short  summary  of
Druidisni,  extracted  from  the  institutional  triads,  of  the
order  in  Britain,  will  justify  this  acceptation.


*   Ciiin.  Akxand.  Slrom.  L.  i.    Ej.  Ahx.  Poliihist.
t  Diog.  Laert,  Ex.  Aristoule.  Bm-lasc,  P.  73.


185

Oniids  divided  tlic  whole  of  existence  into  three  cir-
cles, or  spheres.  ,  1.  Cÿlcli  i/  Ciiiga/it,  The  circle  of  space,
which  none  but  God  alone  can  pervade.  2.  Cylch  yr  Aired,
οΐ,  as  tlie.  continental  Cymry  would  &ay,—Aberes,  "  The
circle  of  courses,"  which  comprehended  the  material  crea-
tion^ and  the  condition  or  state  of  humanity.  3.  Cylch  y
Gccynfyd,  the  circle  of  huppiiiess,  which  man  would  ulti-
mately attain.

But  most  of  their  philosophy  respected  the  Ahred,  or  the
changes  and  revolutions  to  which  nature  and  man  were  ex-
posed. That  circle  of  exist e?ice  embraced  their  famous  doc-
trine of  the  Metempsychosis,  which  they  reconciled  with  ap-
parently ingenuous  efforts,  to  the  immortality,  and  the  ul-
timate felicity  of  the  soul.  The  circle  of  Abred  ivas  that,
in  which  man,  with  all  the  Avorks  of  nature,  began  in  the
Great  Deep,  or  in  the  loicer  state  of  existence. — It  con-
tained a  mixture  of  good  and  evil.

But  man,  endued  v,ith  a  power  of  choice,  between  the
evil  and  the  good,  by  the  exercise  of  his  religion — of  the
relative  duties — of  pure  virtue  and  ibrtitude,  could  bring  all
Ú\e  passions  or  propensities  of  his  nature,  to  a  just  balance.
This  condition  of  man  was  termed,  thepo/;/i  of  liberti/, —
he  passed  from  thence,  through  the  gate  of  mortality,  into
the  circle  of  happiness :  no  more  the  victim  of  adversity,
want,  or  death.

But  if  he  permitted  evil  affections  to  govern  and  pre-
domhiate,  such  as  pride,  falsehood,  or  cruelty;  that  bias
would  sink  him  down  from  the  circle  of  happiness.  Death
would  retarn  him  to  the  circle  of  courses,  allotting  him
a  punishment,  in  due  proportion  to  his  moral  turpitude,
Merc  the  soul  v.ii•;  \o  do  penance  in  a  beast,  or  in  a  reptile,


186

or  in  several  of  them  successively.  From  this  degradation  it
rose,  at  length,  and  reassumed  the  human  form.  Repeated
probations  and  corrections  would,  ultimately,  subdue  all
evil  propensities.  The  point  of  liberty  would  be  attained,
and  the  divine  particle  ΛνοηΗ  be  introduced,  by  death,  to
infinite  happiness.*

It  has  been  a  litigated  question  amongst  the  learned,  whe-
ther Ti/thagoras  received  the  doctrine  of  the  Metempsychosiê
from  Druids,  or  communicated  this  doctrine  to  them.  But
as  Greeks  acknoAvledge  that  he  %vas  a  disciple  of  the
Celtic  Sages — as  it  is  avowed,  that  he  received  the  arrow  of
Abaris,  Avhich  had  been  carried  round  the  world — evident
allusions  to  the  mystery  of  the  Abred,  which  is  the  corner
stone  of  Driddism, — and  as  Aristotle  has  owned,  that  phi-
losophy did  not  emigrate  from  Greece  to  Gaul,  but  vice  versa^
I  think  it  safer  to  conclude,  that  one  individual  foreigner
borrowed  from  this  national  institute,  than  to  conceive,  that
he  should  have  communicated  his  own  speculations,  upon
this  very  mystical  topic  of  religion,  to  an  order  of  men,  who
were  always  jealous  of  novelties.

It  may  be  added,  that  some  of  the  very  oldest  Greek
writers  refer  to  similar  opinions,  as  already  established,  and
prevalent  in  the  7iortk  west  of  Europe,


*  Tlic  triads  from  \vliich  this  epitome  is  compiled,  may  be  seen  in  the  original,
and  in  its  version.     Ed.  Williams  Poems,  V.  ii.  P.  227.

Of  the  copy  from  which  they  are  taken,  that  ingenious  poet  and  writer  gives
thu  following  account.

"  The  triads  that  are  here  selected,  are  from  a  manuscript  collection,  by
J.hjwchjn  Sion,  a  bard,  of  Clamorgrin,  about  A.  U.  1560.  Of  tiiis  manuscript,  1
have  a  transcript.  The  original  is  in  the  possession  of  Mr.  Richard  Bradford,
of  Bcttws,  near  Bridgend,  in  Glcmorgan.  This  collection  was  made,  from  va-
rious manuscri|)ts,  ot  considerable,  and  some  of  great  antiquity.  These,  ;uid
thi-ir  authors,  are  mentioned,  and  most,  or  all  of  them,  are  still  extant.'*


187

Atlas,  the  son  of  Japetus,  was  an  Hyperhorcan, — he  was
also,  a  neighbour  of  Uie  Hesperides.  It  was,  consequently,
in  the  north  zoest  corner  of  the  Avorkl,  that  he  supported  the
heavens.  It  was  in  the  same  tract,  that  fountains,  and
the  origin  of  the  earth,  of  hell,  of  the  sea,  of  the  sidereal
heaven,  and  of  all  things,  were  placed  in  the  great  deep.
Hesiod.  Theog.  736.

It  was  here  that  Sti/x  resided,  in  a  magnificent  house,
composed  of  huge  stones,  connected,  or  covered  at  the  top,
(^just  in  the  style  of  our  British  iuonuments)  and  punished,
even  the  Gods,  by  degrading  them,  for  a  time,  to  a  iozcer
state  of  existence,  from  whence  they  were  to  pass,  through
«1  variety  of  arduous  probations,  before  they  could  recover
their  primitive  divinity.

It  was  here  also,  at  the  ends  of  the  earth,  in  the  islands
of  the  blessed,  and  by  the  deep  ocean,  that  Jupiter  assigned,
as  the  reward  of  the  just  and  the  good, — as  a  recompence
and  crown  to  the  heroes  who  had  fallen  before  Thebes,  and
before  Troy, — a  residence  of  tranquillity,  after  death,  in
which  the  fertile  soil  produced  its  fruits,  thrice  every  year.
Hesiod.  Έξγ.  a.  155,  to   171•

These,  must  not  only  have  been  prevalent  opinions,  in  the
age  of  Hesiod,  but  must  have  been  considered,  by  him,  as
maxims,  roofed  in  the  periods  he  describes.  The  road  of
tlie  ancient  Greeks,  to  the  court  of  Pluto,  to  the  land  of
just  retribution,  and  therefore,  the  paradise  and  the  hell  of
their  mythology,  pointed  at  the  Islaîids  of  Britain.

The  country,  it  is  true,  as  we  find  it,  will  not  answer
the  description,  either  of  wretchedness  or  felicity;  but  those
.pictures  referred,  iu  their  colourings  to  religious J'aith,  and


188

they  are  verified  in  the  different  states  of  retribution,  which
Druidism  conferred  upon  the  virtues  and  vices  of  men.  All
that  fair  criticism  demands,  may  be  attested,  and  confirmed
in  the  unequivocal  remains  of  such  monuments,  and  of  such
opinions,  as  the  ancients  ascribe  to  our  distant  progenitors.

Upon  the  whole,  then,  I  cannot  but  apply  to  our  Druids
of  Britain,  the  description  preserved  by  Diodorus  Siculus,
L.  ii.  C.  47,  which  I  here  insert,  with  a  few  remarks.

HecattHs,  and  some  others,  who  treat  of  ancient  historie.«
or  traditions,  give  the  following  account.

"  Opposite  to  the  coast  of  Gallia  Celtica,  there  is  an  island
in  the  ocean, — not  smaller  than  Sicilj/, — lying  to  the  north,
— which  is  inhabited  by  the  Hyperboreans,  who  are  so
named,  because  they  dwell  beyond  the  north  zcind.  This
island  is  of  a  happy  temperature,  rich  in  soil,  and  fruitful
in  every  thing,  yielding  its  produce  twice  in  the  year.

"  Tradition  says,  that  Latona  was  born  there,  and  for
that  reason,  the  inhabitants  venerate  Apollo,  more  than  any
other  God.  They  are,  in  a  manner,  his  priests,  for  they
daily  celebrate  him  with  continual  songs  of  praise,  and  pay
him  abundant  honours.

"  In  this  island,  there  is  a  magnificent  grove  τψΐίίος,
(or  precinct)  of  Apollo,  and  a  remarkable  temple,  of  a
round  form,  adorned  with  many  consecrated  gifts.  There
is  also  a  city  sacred  to  the  same  God,  most  of  the  inhabi-
tants of  which  are  harpers,  who  continually  play  upon  their
harps  in  the  temple,  and  sing  hymns  to  the  God,  extolling
his  actions.


189

*^'  The  Ilj/perboreans  use  a  peculiar  dialect,  and  liave  a
remarkable  «χΕίοτατα,  attachmenf,  to  the  Greeks,  especially
to  the  Athenians,  and  the  Delians,  deducing  their  friend-
ship from  remote  periods.  It  is  related,  that  some  Greeks
formerly  visited  the  Hyperboreans,  with  \vliom  they  left
consecrated  gifts,  of  great  value,  and  also  that  in  ancient
times,  Abaris,  coming  from  the  Ili/perboreans,  into  Greece,
renewed  their  friendship,  {yvyytmuv)  family  intercourse,  with
the  Delians.

*'  It  is  also  said,  that,  in  this  island,  the  moon  appears  very
near  to  the  earth,  that  certain  eminences,  of  a  terrestrial
form,  are  plainly  seen  in  it,  that  the  God  (Apollo)  visits
the  island,  once  in  a  course  of  nineteen  years,  in  which
period,  the  stars  complete  their  revolutions,  and  that  for
this  reason,  the  Greeks  distinguish  the  cycle  of  nineteen
years,  by  the  name  of  the  great  year.

''  During  the  season  of  his  appearance,  the  God  plays  up-
on the  harp,  and  dances  every  night,  from  the  vernal  equi-
nox, till  the  rising  of  the  plciades,  pleased  with  his  own
successes.

*'  The  supreme  authority,  in  that  city,  and  sacred  pre-
cinct, is  vested  in  those  who  arc  called  Boreadcc,  being  the
descendants  of  Boreas,  and  their  governments  hare  been,
nnintcrruptcdly  transmitted  in  this  line."

The  topography  of  this  island  accords,  precisely  and  ex-
clusively, to  the  local  position  of  Britain.  Some  havr;
objected  that  the  words,  χ«τ*  τα?  αςκτνί,  do  not  simply
mean,  lying  towards  the  north,  but  imply  a  higher  lati-
tude, than  that  of  Britain.  But  this  island,  viewed  from,
the  coast  of  Gaul,  appears  to  be  linder  the  Bcar^    and  thr-


190

same  Diodorus,  L.  V.  21,  when  speaking  expressly  of  Bri-
tain,   flescribes  it  as,  W   α^τ»}»   t-nv  Λξ^ην   Κίψαχ*. — I  PS  I    URS^S

SUBJECTAM.  In  the  same  chapter,  he  compares  the
island's ybrw  to  th.it  of  Sicily ;  he  asserts  that,  in  ancient
periods,  it  had  remained  unmixed  by  foreign  power,  for  nei-
ther Bacchus,  nor  Hercules,  nor  any  other  hero  or  poten-
tate of  whom  we  have  read,  had  molested  it  by  war.  He  re-
marks the  simple  manners,  and  singular  integrity  of  the
inhabitants :  he  adds,  that  their  numerous  princes  generally
cultivated  peace  amongst  themselves. — ^These,  are  distin-
guishing features  of  the  Hyperborea?is.  Hecateus  was
unacquainted  with  an  accurate  and  real  survey  of  Britain,
but  he  compares  it,  naturally  and  properly,  to  the  largest
island  that  was  known  to  the  Greeks.

As  the  Celtic  year  began  in  July,*  Britain  may  have
been  described  as  producing  ttoo  harvests,  one  at  the  com-
mencement, and  the  other,  at  the  end  of  each  year ;  but,
in  the  time  of  the  Britons,  its  most  important  produce  was
pasture,  and  of  this,  it  continues  eminently  to  afford  a
second  crop.

The  honour  of  Apollo  is  not  forgotten,  in  the  ancient
monuments  of  the  ('i/mry.  The  first  name  οι  Britain,  after
it  was  inhabited,  was  1  el  ynys,  the  islatid  of  Bel.  JV.  Arch.
V.  2.  P.  1.  Belennydd  or  Plemiydd,  was  a  founder  of  Druid-
ism,  (No.  XI.)  It  was  afterwards  called  ym/s  prydain,  the
island  of  the  regulator  of  seu:ions.  JV.  Arch.  uhi.  sup.
See  also  a  fragment  of  a  Druidical  prayer.  JV.  Arch.
V.  1.  P.  73.

•  Pliny.  L.  XVI  C.  ΦΙ•.  Tl>p  Wcl.-h  ctill  tliis  month  Gorphenhav,  the  cou-
i^iifitnt  »f  thr.  'nnrmrr,   or  yrnr.


191

Uad  yu  eurgyrn,

Eurgyrn  yn  Haw,  Llaw  yn  ysci

Ysci  ym  modrydav

Pur  iti  iolav.  Buddy g  Feli,

A  Manhogan  Rhi

Rhygeidwei  deithi,  Ynys  Vel  VtlL

"  The  gift  in  the  golden  horn — the  golden  liorn  in  the
hand — the  hand  on  the  knife — the  knife  on  the  leader  of  the
herd — sincerely  I  worship  thee,  Beii,  giver  of  good,  and
Manhogan,  the  king,  who  preserves  the  honours  of  BEL•,
the  Island  of  Beli."

The  sacred  precinct,  and  the  temple,  in  its  ancient  form,
are  to  be  seen,  at  this  day,  upon  Salisbury  plain.  It  was
called  (No.  XIV.)  Gzcaith  Emrÿs,  or  Emreis,  the  structure
of  the  revolution,  evidently  that  of  the  sun,  for  the  name
has  been  so  contrived,  that  the  letters  which  form  it,  \vhen
valued  as  the  Celtic  or  Greek  numerals,  mark  the  day  on
which  that  revolution  is  completed,  viz.

n'S,    ,u'40,    ç'  100,    15' S,     /10,    ς  200  =  366.

The  account  given  of  tlie  inhabitants  of  the  city  of  Apollo,
might  be  deemed  sufficient  of  itself  to  settle  this  point.
We  discover  no  considerable  Driiidical  monument,  where
the  language  of  Britain  is  preserved,  without  finding  also,
Tre  'r  Beirdd,  the  tozcn  of  the  Bards,  or  a  nam.e  of  similar
ixnport,  in  its  vicinity.

The  Bards  were  Priest  and  Poet.  The  Harp  wia•^
îheir  inseparable  attribute,  smd  skill  upon  this  instrument
was  an  indispemibk  qualification  for  thr-ir  office.


192

The  ancient  friendship  and  covsaiiguinifi/  of  the  Hyper-
boreans and  Greeks,  are  again,  strong  circumstances.

The Cyw 77/ derive  their  very  origin  from  the  neighbourhood
ΟΪ Greece,  and  they  left,  as  they  tell  us,  the  coi'nttri/  in  peace.
These  Islanders,  who  can,  ΐ  think,  be  no  longer  mistaken,
claim  Abaris  as  their  counlryman.  The  intercourse  and
friendship  which  he  came  to  renew,  refer  to  the  tìrst  ages
of  Grecian  history— to  the  days  of  Argis  and  Opis,  of
Avhom  Greece  received  the  Gods,  and  learnt  the  rites  from
the  Hyperboreans.

The  notice  \vhich  modern  discovery  has  verified  so  amply,
respecting  the  appearance  of  the  moon,  must  be  very  in-
teresting, in  an  ancient  author,  concerning  any  people  what-
soever. It  seems  to  indicate  the  use  of  something  like  teles-
copes; and  whatever  may  have  been  intended  by  it,  our
triads  mention  Drych  ab  Cibddar,  or  Cilidazcr^  the  specu-
lum of  the  son  of  pervading  glance,  or  of  the  searcher
of  mystery,  as  one  of  the  secrets  of  the  Island  οΐ  Britain.
W.  Arch.  V.  2.

It  has  been  acknowledged,  by  ancient  authors,  that  our
Druids  professed  astronomy.  This  elevated  science  is  posi-
tively insisted  upon,  in  those  triads  which  I  iiave  selected.
Learned  men  are  of  opinion  that  even  the  monuments  of
Druidism,  in  Britain,  bear  indisputable  evidence  of  their
proficiency  in  the  science.  The  Greeks  call  ú\c  ci/cle,  here
mentioned,  the  mctoiiic,  from  the  name  of  its  publisher,  about
the  eighty-fifth  Olympiad;  but  Hesiod  nicuúon^  the  Annus
Magnui,  as  known,  long  before  his  lime,  in  llie  regions
of  Pluto.     Theog.  799.

The  r/iu-ic,  and  tlie  nightly  dance  of  Apollo,  were,  per-


Ϊ93

hAps,  pageants  of  Dnildical  device,  to  celebrate  the  com-
pletion of  this  period.

Diodorus,  and  his  authorities,  did  not  regard  the  power
*nd  the  institution  of  these  priests  as  recent,  but  as  what  had
continued,  without  interruption,  in  the  descendants  of
Boreas.  Our  British  name  of  Stonchenge,  Gzcaith  Kmrys,
and  the  name  of  the  neighbouring  village,  Ambrtshury,
connect  this  Boreas,  with  a  character  well  known  in  Grcfk
mythology.


It  has  become  a  fashion,  amongst  the  learned  of  this  age,
to  derive  all  knowledge  and  religion^  prevalent  in  the  west
of  Europe,  from  Hercules,

This  opinion,  appears  to  me,  no  less  inconsistent  with
Grecian  Mythology,  than  with  Celtic  Traditioii.

The  errands  of  Hercules  to  the  rvest,  are  not  for  the  pur
pose  of  introducing  to  the  natives,  but  for  that  of  procuring
from  them,  Avhat  Avas  deemed  valuable.

It  was  to  carry  off  the  herds  of  Geryon — to  rob  the  or-
chard of  the  Hesperides — or  steal  the  guard  of  Pluto's  gate.

These  tales,  though  literally  fables,  must  have  meant
something:  let  us  try  if  the  two  last  cannot  be  explained
by  the  mythologies  of  Britain,

Hercules  had  the  task  of  procuring  three  yellow  apples,
from  the  garden  of  the  Hesperides,  These  apples  were  me»»
taphoricalj  and  pointed  at  science,  discipline,  or  mystery.


194

The  hero  receives  directions  from  Prometheus,  how  to  ob-
tain the  fruit,  namely,  that  he  should  attend  his  brother
Atlas,  the  Hyperborean,  and  get  him  to  fetch  it,  out  of
the  neighbouring  garden  of  the  Hesperides.  Apoilodor.
L.  ii.   C.  4.  *

It  will  be  recollected,  that  Prometheus  was  one  of  the
lapetidce,  and  son,  or  native  inhabitant,  of  Asia  Propria,
who  had  been  expelled  from  thence  to  the  neighbourhood
of  Mount  Caucasus,  in  Asiatic  Scythia,  as  Atlas  himself
had  been  driven  from  the  same  native  spot,  into  the  Kest  of
Europe.  It  appears  from  hence^  to  what  family  these
apples  belonged.

We  are  informed,  by  our  British  triads,  that  the  first
iX9,me  given  to  this  island,  before  it  was  inhabited,  was  Clâs
Merdin,  the  garden  of  Merddin.  TV.  Arch.  V.  2.  P.  1.
The  name  of  Merddin  has  been  conferred  upon  old  bards,
but  is  originally,  a  mythological  term.  His  tzcin  sister  h
Gzvenddydd,  or  the  morning  star:  He  must  have  been
himself  some  luminary,  in  a  similar  character.

Merddin,  if  Mer-Din,  be  its  root,  is  dueller  of  the  sea;
if  Mer-dain  gives  it  birth,  it  is,  the  comely  one  of  the  sea.
It  implies,  in  cither  sense,  the  eveiiing  star,  or  HesperuSy
the  western  luminary.


*  Several  of  the  ancients,  wlio  wrote  after  the  Carihageniavs  had  extended
their  voyages,  describe  the  seat  of  Atlas  and  tlie  Htsptridas,  as  attached  to
Africa.  It  is  very  usual  to  distinguish  newly  discovered  places,  by  familiar
names.  Thus  we  have  Keic  England,  in  America;  New  Holland,  and  Acw  SotttU
Wales,  amongst  the  Antipodes.

Apollodorus,  the  accurate  recorder  of  tradition,  corrects  the  error.

Atlas,  and  the  gardens  of  tlte  Hesperides,  were  not,  as  some  represent  them  to
have  been,  in  Lybia ;  but  amongst  the  Hyperboreans.


195

The  appìe-frees  and  ì/eNow  apples  of  Merddiit's  garden,
that  were  given  to  him  hy  his  Lord,  Grvemldoleu  ab
Ceidio,  the  master  of  the  fair  bozo,  the  son  of  preservation,
are  famous  in  British  Mythology.  In  the  W.  Arch.  V.  1.
P.  150,  there  is  a  mystical  poem,  given  under  the  character,
of  Merddin,  from  which  it  appears,  that,  by  these  trees,
and  their  fruit,  the  whole  system  of  Druidical  divination
•was  implied  and  covered.     The  first  pennill  runs  thus.

"  To  no  one  has  been  shewn,  in  one  season  of  twilight

What  Merddin  received  before  he  became  old.

Seven  fair  apple-trees,  and  seven  score.

Of  equal  age,  equal  height,  length,  and  size :

One  maid,  with  crisped  locks,  guards  them —

Ohçedd  is  her  name — of  the  form  of  light  are  her  teeth."

Ola,  Olrcen,  or  Ohcedd  is  Venus.  Were  not  those  trees,
constellations,  and  may  not  the  apples  have  been  stars,  which
after  they  were  committed  into  the  charge  of  the  most  pre-
eminent in  the  order,  could  be  discovered  by  none  till
Merddin,  or  Hesperus  appeared?

From  hence  it  should  seem,  as  if  the  golden  apples,  which
Hercules  procured  from  the  garden  of  the  Hesperides,
pointed  at  the  science  of  astronomical  divination.

The  guard  of  Plufo's-gate,  or  three  headed  Cerberus,
may  signify  the  mystical  doctrines  of  the  Hyperboreans,
guarded  by  their  three  orders — their  Druid,  their  Bard,
and  their  Ovydd.  And  what  renders  this,  not  a  little  pro-
bable is,  that  Kelb,  or  Kelv,  in  many  ancient  languages^
means  a  dog,  and  that,  in  British,  the  same  word  ìiít-
ports  a  mystery  or  science.


^2


196

In  the  volume  above  cited,  p.  43,  an  old  Bard  alludes,
perhaps,  to  this  cnterprize  of  Hercules,  whom,  according
to  the  doctrine  of  the  Mctcmpsyshosis,  he  supposes  to  have
reappeared,  in  the  person  of  Alexander.

Rhyveddav  na  chi'awr,  Svc.

^'  I  wonder  it  is  not  perceived,  that  Heaven  had  promised
the  Earth,  a  mighty  chief,  Alexander  the  Great,  the
Macedonian.

^'  Hezcya,  the  iron  genius,  the  renowned  warrior,  de-
scended into  the  deep. — Into  the  deep  he  went,  to  search
for  the  mystery,  (Kelv-yddi/d).  In  quest  of  science,  let
his  mind  be  importunate,  let  him  proceed  on  his  Avay,  in
the  open  air,  between  two  griffins,  to  catch  a  view.  No
view  he  obtained. — ^To  grant  such  a  present  would  not  be
meet.  He  saw  the  wonders  of  the  superior  race,  in  the
fishy  seas. — He  obtained  that  portion  of  the  world,  which
his  mind  had  coveted,  and,  in  the  end,  mercy  from  the
God."

If  Prometheus,  or  the  lapetida  of  Caucasus,  could  in-
struct the  Greeks  how  to  obtain  the  desired  fruit  from  the
garden  of  the  Hesperides,  it  may  be  suspected,  that  the.
mystical  doctrines  of  the  zvestcrn  creed  were  known  to
Asia.  Apd  something  of  this  kind  must  be  intimated  by
the  tale  of  Abaris,  who  is  allegorically  represented,  as  hav-
ing ciirried  his  arroifi  round  the  whole  world.

It  appears,  from  Anton.  Liberal.  C.  20,  (\vriting  after
Boeus,  and  Simmias  Rhodius)  that  the  inhabitants  of  Ba-
hi/Ion,  in  Mesopotamia,  often  visited  the  teynplc  of  Apollo,,
in  the   land    of   the  IJj/perboreans,    during    mythological


197

rtges,  and  attempted,    even    to   introduce   their    sacrifices,
into  their  own  countr}'.

An  ingenious  friend  of  mine  suggested,  that  mcnw  ab
Ttirgwaedd,  or  Menw  of  the  three  Feds,  one  of  the  mas-
ters of  the  mysterious  and  secret  science,  amongst  the
Ct/mrj/,  (No.  XVI.)  is  the  same  character  and  personage
with  Menu,  author  of  the  Vedas,  in  the  mythology  of  the
Iliiidus.

This  conjecture  seems  to  have  much  verisimihtude,  and
may  be  extended,  perhaps,  to  Minos,  King  of  κ^ητ,  (which,
in  the  old  Cottian  Celtic,  is  the  earth,)  who  was  constituted
one  oF  the  judges  in  the  court  of  Pluto.

Menu,  and  Minos,  may  be  referred,  ultimately,  to  the
patriarch  Noah,  whose  decrees  formed  the  basis  of  juris-
prudence in  the  east  and  the  Ziest.

If  so,  there  was,  at  least,  a  Connection  between  Druid-
ism,  and  the  religion  of  India  ;  and  it  may  not  be  an  im-
probable conjecture,  that  it  was  by  those  Galat<je,  or  Druids^
under  whom  Pi/thagoras  had  studied,  that  he  was  recom-
mended to  the  school  of  the  Brachma/ts.

This  idea  of  a  mutual  intercourse,  between  the  Sages  of
the  east  and  the  zi-est,  is  countenanced  by  Mr.  Wilfords
incomparable  dissertation,  upon  Egypt  and  the  Isile.
jisiat.  Rec.  V.  3,

That  masterly  writer  informs  us,  that  much  intercourse
once  prevailed,  between  the  territories  of  India,  and  cer-
tain countries  in  the  etsí. — That  the  old  Indians  were  ac-
quainted with  our  British  Islands,  which  their  books  de*•


198

Kcribe  as  the  sacred  Islands  in  the  zcest,  calling  one  of  ihem
Brttashtan,  or  the  stat  and  place  of  religious  duty. — That
one  of  these  Islands,  from  the  earliest  periods,  was  regarded
as  the  abode  of  the  Pitris,  who  were  fathers  of  the  human
race.  And  that,  in  these  Islands,  were  two  places,  in  which
those  Pitris  could  be  seen.

That  the  old  Hindus  visited  them  accordingly,  for  this
purpose,  and  that  even  a  certain  Yogi,  who  was  living  when
Mr.  Wilford  wrote,  A.  D.  1791>  had  set  out  upon  that  very
design,  with  his  attendant  pilgrims,  and  had  proceeded  in
his  journey,  as  far  as  to  Moscozc.

In  the  same  volume,  that  luminary  of  science,  pubhc
spirit  and  virtue.  Sir  William  Jones, — "  on  the  lunar  year
of  the  Hindus," — tells  us,  that,  "  On  the  day  of  the  conjunc-
tion, obsequies  are  performed  (as  ofterings)  to  the  manes  of
the  Pitris,  or  progenitors  of  the  human  race,  to  whom  the
darker  fortnight  is  peculiarly  sacred," — just  as  the  vight,
or  dark  season  is  consecrated,  in  Druidical  worshij).

On  these  passages  I  would  remark.

Tliat  the  Pitris  of  the  west,  and  these  honours  to  tlicm>
could  not  have  sprung  originally  from  India.

From  the  earliest  periods,  their  abode  had  been  in  the
aacred  Islands  of  the  west,  in  which  Islands,  we  find  the
Cpnri/,  who  emphatically  call  themselves  the  βrst,  or  the
oldest  race.

These  Islands  could  not  have  been  consecrated  bi/  the
Indians.  Had  the  mysteries  of  the  Pitris  originated  wità
[find us,  their  sacred  abode  would,  uncjuestionably  have  beea


199

fixed  ilia  recess  oi  their  oivn  countri/,  to  which  an  habi-
tual access  would  be  competent,  and  of  which  their  own
tribes  would  be  the  political  masters.  Whereas,  the  HÍ7idus
could  hold  no  communication  with  such  oracles  in  the  zcest,
and,  in  a  land  of  strangers,  unless  they  took  upon  them-
selves a  toilsome  pilgrimage,  over  half  the  globe,  tiuOugh
many  barbaiOus  countries,  which  intervened,  before  they
could  reach  the  sacred  Islands,

This  veneration,  then,  for  the  Pitris,  and  the  usage  of
consulting  them,  were  necessarily  derived,  by  the  Hindus,
from  the  religion  of  that  race,  in  whose  land  those  conse-
crated personages  were  acknowledged,  uniformly,  to  have
resided.

And  this,  was  the  country  of  the  same  people,  to  whom
the  ancient  poets  of  Greece  and  Rome,  conducted  their
heroes,  when  they  were  to  consult  the  manes  of  the  dead.


^oo


Sfxt.  πι.  Of  the  Coranied  or  first  invaders  of  Britain
— a  discrimination  of  the  Celtic  dialects,  Kith  short  re,-
muvhs  Oil  the  general  character  of  the  Celtic  language.


o,


ÜR  British  documents  being  found  agreeable  to  the
account  which  the  oldest  authors  give  of  the  Ci/mry,  and  of
their  institutions,  I  shall  offer  a  few  remarks  upon  the
Coranicd,  whom  they  represent  as  the  first  hostile  invaders
of  Britain.

These  were  preceded  by  the  Celyddon,  Gtcyddyl  and
Grcifr  Galedin  (No.  III.)  who  arriving  after  the  country
had  been  settled,  wer«  admitted,  under  some  restriction  of
privileges.

It  appears  to  me,  that  the  tribes  heie  named,  were  still  oi
Celtic  origin,  came  from  both  banks  of  the  Rhine,  and  were
pracursores  of  the  Belgce,  who,  at  several  distinct  periods,
obtained,  and  possessed,  by  force,  great  part  of  the  island*

These  people,  who  make  a  considerable  figure  in  the  his'
txity  of  Britain,  are  styled  Coranied,  ο  wlad  y  pwyl,  and,
in  a  passage  already  adduced,  it  is  affirmed,  that,  originally,
they  came  from  Jsia.

Though  Coranied  be  their  most  general  name  in  these
triads,  yet  we  often  find  one  of  this  nation  termed  Caar,
the  giant,  and  this  name,  as  often  contracted  into  Cor,
which  forms  in  its  plural,  Coried,  or  Corion,


Τη  the  eame  district  which  the  Coranitd  first  occupied,
we  also  find  the  Coetanau,  one  of  whose  principal  towns  is
called  Liwi/d  Coit,  or  the  fortress  of  the  Cotti.  This  word,
with  our  British  article  ys,  forms  Yscoit,  or  S'Coti.  It  may
not  be  easy  to  determine,  with  precision,  the  sense  of
these  very  ancient  names.  Coranied  may  import  shepherds;
for  Cor-lan  is  a  sheejpfold,  and  Cor-gi,  a  sheep  dog,  in
Welsh,  as  Cû or  is  a  sheep,  in  Irish.

Cmvr  is  a  giatit,  or  mighty  man  :  and  Coetanau,  or  Cotti,
»eems  to  be  derived  from  Coet,  W.  Coat.  Arm.  and  Cuit,
Cornish,  a  forest  or  wood.  The  ancients  describe  a  race  of
Shepherds,  in  primitive  Europe — as  Giants,  who  dwelt  in
the Joresw     η    'fountains.

The  country,  which  the  Coranied  occupied,  is  described,
«s  having  been,  (Am),  round  the  river  Humber,  and  upon
the  shore  of  Mor  Tawch,  the  German  Ocean.  In  these
districts,  their  British  names  are  preserved,  by  the  old  Geo-
graphers,'!!^ the  Coritani,  Corii,  Coitani,  &c.

But,  according  to  ancient  British  accounts,  their  territory
enlarged  itself,  beyond  the  local  application  of  these  names,
and  comprehended  not  only  the  inland  regions,  round  the
wide-spreading  arms  of  the  Humber,  but  also  much  of  the
Eastern  coast  of  England.  And  I  have  reason  to  believe,
the  account  is  just.

When  Casar  arrived  in  Britain,  the  Aborigines  were
those  of  the  interior  parts,  and  of  the  Western  coast.  Their
character,  and  their  habits  were  different  from  those  of  the
other  Britons,  with  whom  Caesar  fought.  ^Ve  are  not  ap-
prised, and  have  no  reason  to  conjecture,  that  he  sar»  the
interior  inhabitants.     The  armies  tliat  opposed  him^  were


202

«imilar,  in  their  general  habits — in  their  mihtary  art,  and
resources,  to  each  other,  as  they  were  also  to  the  Bclgis  of
Kent;  though  headed  by  a  prince  of  the  Cassil  or  Catti,
of  Herts  and  Middlesex y  and  thouoh  consisting,  in  part,  of
the  Ceni  Magni,  or  /  Ceni,  of  Norfolk,  Suffolk,  ^c. .  ,

The  monuments  vie  call  Dru'idical,  must  be  appropriated,
exclusively,  to  the  Aborigines  of  the  midland,  apd  western
divisions.  They  are  found  in  such  corners,  and  fastnesses,  as
have,  in  all  ages,  and  countries,  been  the  last  retreat  of  the
conquered,  and  the  last  that  are  occupied  by  the  victorious.
— In  ÍValcs,  and  in  Mono,  they  were  used,  and  venerated,
until  the  Aborigines  were  completely  subjugated  by  Roman
arms.  In  the  central  counties,  and  in  the  west,  they  per-
petually occur,  from  Cornwall  to  Cumberland :  whereas,
comparatively,  few  traces  of  them  are  discovered  in  the
Eastern  part  of  the  Island,  which  therefore  appears  to  have
been  occupied  by  those  people  who  did  not  construct  build-
ings of  this  nature,  and  who  obtained  possession,  before  the
Aborigines  deeply  impressed  their  character  upon  the  soil.

In  that  eastern  division,  besides  the  Corii,  Coitani,  &c.
we  find  the  race  of  Brigantes.  This  name  did  not  confine
itself  to  the  Counti/  of  York.  Galgacus,  in  Taeitus,  ap-
plies it,  emphatically,  to  the  Iceni,  Ceni-tnagni,  or  Tigeni.
They  were  probably,  then,  all  of  the  same  root,  or  stock.
After  the  Iceni,  in  our  maps,  come  Trinovantes,  Cassii,  or
Cattii,  Cattieu-Chlani,  (clans  or  children  of  the  Cat-
ti,) 8cc.

The  very  same  descriptions  of  tribes,  which  are  found  in
thiâ  part  of  England,  frequently  occur  in  Ireland,  in  Scot-
land, and  in  the  known  possessions  of  British  Belgce;  but


203

scarce  ever  in  Wales,  or  In  those  inland  counties  of  Etìgìamì,
which  border  upon  that  principahty.

Thus,  in  Ireland,  we  have  Brigantes  and  Briges,  Caucd,
SOoti,  Coriondi,  J  en-Icnii  and  Damnii.  In  •'Scotland  are
found  the  Novantes,  Damnii,  Danmonii,  Cantcc,  Carini,
Cattini,  S'Coti  Atta-Coti.

The  Caledonia  Si/lva  occurs  in  Scotland,  ISiorthamptori'
shire,  and  Sussex;  and,  I  think,  every  where  marks  that
people,  in  whose  idiom  Coilleadk  is  ά  forest,  and  Dun,  or
Dunadh  (duny)  a  dwelling.  The  Damnii  of  Ireland,  of
Scotland,  and  of  Devonshire,  as  well  as  about  the  wall  of
Severus,  exemplify  the  same  analogies.

It  may  be  observed,  in  general,  that  although  in  the  East
of  Eìiglaîid  the  names  of  tribes,  of  rivers,  of  tozcns,  and  of
men,  present  the  character  of  the  Celtic  language,  yet  they
appertain  to  a  dialect,  which  is  nearer,  in  its  approach  to  the
Irish,  than  our  old  British  appears  to  have  been.

I  thereforQ  think  our  Coranied,  Coiti,  Giants,  8cc.  were
branches  αϊ  the  same  people,  who  obtained  possession  of
Ireland  and  of  Scotland,  and  whose  language  prevailed  in
liiese  countries.

Casar  tells  us,  the  invaders  of^this  island  retained  the
names  of  the  continental  tribes,  from  whom  they  had
sprung..  This  account  he  must  have  received  from  those
Britons  with  whom  he  conversed,  for,  before  he  landed,  he
vas  ignorant  of  the  country,  and  of  its  inhabitants.  The
Qauls  had  been  too  jealous  of  his  enterpriz€  to  afford  him
the  least  information•»


S04

The  Coranied  came  into  the  Island  of  Britain,  ο  JVlad
y  Pnyl,  from  the  land  of  Pools,  or  of  the  Water.  This
name  aptly  describes  Holland;  and  it  is  acknowledged,  that
by  Celta  that  very  coast  was  inhabited,  before  the  appulse  of
the  Goths.  In  this  neighbourhood  we  discover  tribes,  whose
names  have  been  retaiîied  in  British  Islands ;  such  as  the
Cauci,  who  were  also  a  people  of  Ireland,  and,  in  Pliny  t
account,  of  the  same  nation  as  the  Cimbri.  To  these  ad-
join Frisii,  whom  Whitaker,  Baxter,  and  other  author*
of  credit,  consider  as  Britons.  We  have  also  Bructeri,  in
the  same  line  of  march,  who,  in  the  Irish  language,  are  the
Borderers.  Baxter  has  proved,  that,  in  general,  the  in-
habitants of  that  neighbourhood  were  called  Britanni.  See
the  word  in  his  British  Glossary.

If  I  may  risk  an  opinion,  otir  Coried,  Coiti,  and  GiarUs,
came  into  Britain,  from  this  part  of  the  continent.  They
constituted  part  of  a  race,  Avhich  established  themselves,
more  or  less,  in  all  the  ample  divisions  of  the  Celtic  terri-
tories, though  prevailing  chiefly  in  Belgium,  and  about  the
Rhine ;  In  their  approach  to  the  West,  I  consider  them  as  a
second  wave  of  the  Cimmerian  emigrants,

I  have  already  observed,  that,  although  some  of  the  Cymr^
left  Jsia  Propria,  Thrace,  and  ILemonia,  nx  peace,  carry-
ing their  peculiar  customs  with  them,  into  these  Westerji
settlements,  where  they  were  known  to  the  Greeks,  in  eafrly
times, — yet  part  of  the  family  remained  behind.

The  Ci-cones,  Avho  were  also  Galai,  and  Briaiites,  fought
with  Llysses,  after  ú\e  full  υ/ Troy.*  There  were  Briges,  of


*  I  speak  of  the  War  of  Troy,  as  an  ?^ra  to  wliich  the  ancients  familiarly  refer  ;
but  it  is  not  my  design  to  insiiiuale  an  opinion  respecting  the  reality  of  an  crcui
TihicULas  engaged  the  superior  learning,  and  sagacity  ot  Mr.  Βευλντ.


205

the  Cimmerian  family,  who  crossed  over,  from  Thrace  into
Asia^  and  assumed  the  name  of  Phryges,  some  time  after
the  war  of  Troy,  whenever  that  event  happened.  But  long
before  Troi/  had  acquired  celebrity,  lapetus  married,  or  took
possession  of  Asia,  where  he  generated  a  race  of  Titans,  and
those  Titans,  progenitors  of  Thracians  and  of  Celta,  contest-
ed with  Javan's  posterity  the  possession  of  these  countries;
raising  the  mountains,  that  is,  their  inhabitants,  against
the  Greeks,  or,  in  poetical  description,  against  their  Gods.

Such  of  them  as  became  partizans  for  the  cause  of
Jupiter,  were  led  by  Coitus,  Briareus,  and  Gi/gcs — names
which  are  evidently  connected  with  a  Cimmerian,  or  Celtic
race,  whether  considered  as  designations  of  individual  sove-
reigns, or  of  tribes :  in  Avhich  last  view  of  them,  we  may
describe  the  Titans  in  the  terms  Cotti,  Briar ei,  and  Gygii.

In  the  civil  war  between  Ctcsar  and  Pompey,  Coííms,  akiog
of  Thrace,  assisted  the  latter  with  five  hundred  horse.  De.
B.  C.  L.  iii.  In  the  same  age.  Cot  us,  or  Cot  t  us,  was  prince
of  an  ancient,  and  of  an  honourable  tribe,  amongst  the
jEdui,  the  chief  branch  of  all  the  Celta.  De.  B.  G.  L.  vii.
This  Titanic  name  had  so  far  preserved  its  dignity  in
the  region  from  which  the  Celtcs  came,  and  also  in  that
which  constituted  their  final  settlement.

The  name  of  Briareus  may  have  been  connected  with
Bria,  or  Briga,  which,  in  Thrace,  and  all  over  Celtica,
signified  breastwork,  or  intrenchment,  and  hence,  a  fortified
town.  Breyr,  pi.  1.  Breyrau,  is  Welsh,  for  a  baron  or
ixobleman — master  of  a  fortress.

Gyges  \vas  a  name  locally  attached  in  that  neighbour-
hood,    üomer  mentions  Tvyxin  x^n,  under  the  mountain


.    206

TmoÌHS,  not  far  from  Trnj/.  II.  ii.  From  the  Oi/gir,  Ire-
iand  maj^  have  obtained  the  name  Slyvyix,  which  PhUarch,
one  of  the  best  Greek  antiquaries,  bestows  upon  it.

Perhaps  the  Ogi/gia  of  Homer,  which  lay  in  a  remote
part  of  the  world,  upon  seas  unknown,  and  was  possessed
by  a  daughter  of  Jt/as,  the  Hyperborean,  and  general  of
the  Titans,  Λνα8  in  reality  no  other.

The  Titans,  or  Giants,  were,  after  a  long  struggle,  van-
quished, and  were  driven  to  the  West,  into  the  regions  of
Pluto,  the  acknowledged  progenitor  of  the  Gauls.  Thither
they  were  attended  by  Cottus,  Briareus,  and  Gijges,  to
whose  charge  they  were  committed ;  that  is,  theix  chiefs,  or
their  tribes,  retained  their  names.

This  main  contest,  perhaps,  originated  in  4'^if,  where
the  Titans  were  born — In  the  neighbourhood  of  Palleiw,
and  of  the  mountains  which  covered  the  mouth  of  the
Peneus,  victory  declared  itself  on  the  side  of  Jupiter,  or
his  worshipers. — As  part  of  the  same  people,  even  after  the
conclusion  of  the  war,  continued  in  the  country,  and  re-
tained their  national  descriptions,  it  would  be  difficult,  at
this  period  of  time,  exactly  to  ascertain  the  route  of  the
retreating  parties.

Some  of  them  perhaps  may  have  traced  the  banks  of  the
Peneus,  upwards,  through  Tliessaly,  and  into  Epirus,  from
Avhence  Hercules  afterwards  expelled  the  Celtic,  and  substi-
tuted a  Corinthian  colony  in  their  place.  Anton.  Lib.  C.  4.

Many  of  them  entered  Italy.  At  Phlegra,  in  Cam-
pania, they  again  made  a  powerful  stand,  and  though  sub-
dued, their  families  remained  in  the  country,  for  the  Latin
language  must  acknowledge  its  obligation  to  that  of  S'Coti,


'   ■    207

η,ικί  we  find  the  Aìp'inc  Coti/,  in  the  time  of  Augustus,
occupied  that  very  district,  in  which  the  language  of  S'Coti
is  still  spoken  with  great  purit}".

But  coming  towards  the  Paunonias,  Rhatia,  and  Fe'«-
delicia,  in  our  direct  road  towards  the  North  Western  Ce/ta,
we  fancy  ourselves  upon  Scottish,  or  Irish  ground.

We  must  not  look  to  their  present  inhabitants  for  the
original  or  primary  occupiers  of  these  countries.  No  peo-
ple, speaking  half  Gothic,  and  the  other  half  Sclavomaii,
could  liaA^e  imposed  such  names  as  the  following,  which  are
chiefly  Irish,  and  several  of  which  occur  in  our  British
Is/ands.

Cetius  Mons. — Ir.  Ceide,  a  hill,  mountain.

Albanas  Mons, — Ir.  Alh,  Alhan,  a  height,  Alhanach,
tScoleh,   a  Scotchman.

Here  dwelt  the  Coutiani — Caledonii.

Gabhanodurum — Ir.  Gabhan,  a  strong  hold,  inclosure,
and  Dur,  zcater.

Bragodurum — Ir.  Braghadh,  a  breast,  bank,  and  Dur.

Ertodurum — Ir.  Eachda  Dur,  clean,  jiurc  water.

Ilbodurum — Ir.  Eban,  Eab.  mud,  and  Dur.

Arlobriga — Ir.  Ard,,  Art,  high,  Breighe,  breast  work.


208

Gesodumim — Ir.  Gais,  a  torrent,  and  Dun,  a.fortr(ss,
irom  Dunam,  to  shut,  barricade.

Brixantiz,  a  people,   Brigantcs,  and  the  town  Brigan-
ttum — &c.  &c.

In  the  time  of  Herodotus,  the  Sigj/na,  a  Thracinn  tribe,
whose  customs,  as  far  as  they  are  described,  correspond  ex-
actly to  those  of  the  Beiges  in  Britaiti,  inhabited  these
countries.  Their  territories  bordered  upon  the  Veneti,  on
the  Adriatic,  and  extended  on  the  North  of  the  Danube.
L.  V.  9.  Part  of  them  were  neighbours  of  the  Ligurians,  who
called  pedlars,  Sigyncc,  perhaps  as  we  now  call  them  Scotch'
men.  These  Western  Sigyna,  by  their  situation,  must  have
been  the  Segusini,  Cottii,  or  Waldenses.  The  country  of
the  Sigyna,  North  of  the  Danube,  according  to  C<Esar,
De.  B.  G.  VI.  had  been  occupied,  from  remote  periods,  by
the  VqIccc  Tectosages,  who  were  Gauls,  not  Germans.*
These,  must  have  been  the  same  as  the  Sigi/Uif  οι  Herodotus,
and  they  were  the  same  as  the  old  Be1g(c —

Volca  Tectosages,  primaevo  nomine,  Be/ga.

Ausoii.

Volca  seems  to  come  from  tlie  Gaulish  Belch,  Volch,
(IV.  Biclch)  a  pass  or  defile.  They  were  also  called,  Are-
comici,  Ar-Com-ec,  a  word  of  the  very  same  grammatical
structure  as  Armorec,  and  meaning  occupiers  of  the  passes


*  Diod.  Sic.  L.  V.  C.  32,  places  proper  Celta-  in  the  intermediate  space,
between  tlic  Alps  and  tlie  Pyrenees,  whilst  he  extends  the  name  of  GalattE
to  tligse  who  dwelt  beyond  the  limits  of  that  Celtica,  towards  the  Soutk,
near  the  Ocean,  ahout  the  Hercyninn  mountain,  and  as  far  as  the  borates  of
Scythia  (or  of  the  real  Gotiis.)  He  compares  the  manners  of  these  Gauls,  to
those  of  Britons,  who  inhabited  the  Island  Iris,  or  Ireland.  He  identifies
them  with  ancient  Cimmcrii,  and  the  Cimhri  of  his  own  days;  and,  in  the
bepianiiig  of  the  next  chapter,  again  comprehends  them  under  the  general  nanKi
tf  Veltoi.


209

or  de/iles.  These  were  their  names,  amongst  the  Ctlta  of
middle  Gaul.  But  their  primaeval  name,  Ttctosagcs,  is
purely  Irish. — Teach,  teac,  a  houst; — tosach,  beginning,
origin.

A  little  to  the  7iorih  of  the  Dumihe,  not  far  from  the
source,  amongst  other  names  which  exhibit  the  Iinsh  cha-
racter, we  have  Setua-Cottum.  Sithve,  in  Irish,  means  a
city,  or  establishment.

In  the  same  tract,  Ptolemy  has  placed  the  Chat-tori, —
a  little  further  north,  parallel  to  the  Rhine,  the  Chata,  and
Cas-vari,  are  contiguous.

Perhaps  we  discover  the  Cotti  again,  in  Duro-Cottorum,
as  it  is  in  Ptolemy,  a  city  of  the  Rhemi,  who  were  a  people
of  Belgium,  and  also  of  Britain.  The  continental  Rhemi
had  a  city,  .BioraT,•— and  British  Rhemi  were  Bibroci.  The
Sunici,  a  race  about  Limberg,  had  a  city,  named  Corio-
vallum;  and  the  same  people,  before  they  had  crossed  the
Rhine,  were  called  Catti,  and  Cassi,  (names  also  of  British
tribes).  In  their  neighbourhood,  on  the  East  of  the  Rhine,
and  under  the  Abnoba  montes,  Avere  the  Carithni  of
Ptolemy,  and  the  Th,  after  the  Irish  manner,  being  sup-
pressed, the  Carini  of  Pliny,  descendants  of  the  Vindelici,
who  must  themselves  have  been  Videlici,  or  Gwyddelic,
for  their  geographical  names  are  all  Irish.

Brigantes,  Corii,  Cotti,  Catti,  Cassi,  S^c.  were  names,
then,  which  described  families  of  the  same  nation.  From
the  situation  of  these  tribes,  they  were  evidently  the  people
who  were  anciently  called,  Alo-Brites,  or  Alo-Briges.
Rat.  (Aly  Brithrcys,  oiAly  Brigwys,)  and  who,  after  they


210

liad  settled  about  the  cliannel  of  the  Rhine,  and  the  sea-
coast,  had  the  name  of  Belgce,  Uelgcv,  or  OviXyxi — Vyigy,
in  Cornish,  is  the  st-a,  Giceiigi,  y  zcei/gi,  in  Welsh,  is  flood f
at  ream,  sea,  beds  of  wateu.  That  this  was  actually  a
British  name  of  the  Be/ga,  appears  from  No.  XVII.  of
those  triads  which  I  have  selected^  and  in  which  (triad)
A  man  of  this  nation  is  called  Ga•;•  GKeilgi.

The  Batavi,  from  whose  territories  I  would  import  tlie
Coricd,  Cotti,  Catti,  or  Cassi, — were,  from  the  nature  of
their  country,  most  likely  to  equip  themselves,  at  an  early
period,  with  a  competent  stock  of  boats,  or  canoes,  to  fit
them  for  expeditious  by  sea;  and  they  were  descendants
of  the  ancient  Catti  (Cotti)  or  Chassi,  driven  from
home  by  domestic  sedition,  in  quest  of  new  settlements.
Tacitus.

This,  Avas  the  popular  tradition ;  and,  as  accounts  of  this
kind  were  unconnected  with  chronology,  a  national  event
of  great,  and  striking  impression,  at  the  distance  of  a  thou-
sand years,  may  have  been  as  fresh  in  the  memory  of  tlie
people,  as  if  it  had  hap})ened  in  the  time  of  their  grand-
fathers.— This  family  contest,  tlien,  may  have  been  as  old
as  the  Titanic  rear.

In  the  line  of  march  which  I  have  now  traced,  wc  find
the  GoíÄ/c  language  established,  at  present;  and,  perhaps,
the  country  conuiincd  some  tribes  of  Gothic  origin  in  tlie
age  of  the  Roman  empire ;  but  the  Celta  had  gone  over
the  same  ground  before  them.  They  had  given  their  names
to  the  rivers,  mountains,  and  fortresses.  During  their
gradual  retreat,  these  names  became  familiar  to  llu-ir  suc-
cessors.

It  is  usual  for  conquerors  to  retain  such  names, — with


all

slight  variations,  which  may  acoommodate  them  to  their
own  organs  of  speech.  The  Goths,  have  indulged  this
habit.  Londinium,  is  their  London, — Canthim,  is  Kent.  The
Goths,  of  North  Britain,  are  Scots, — and  the  Englishmen
©f  the  Western  Isle,  Irishmen.


The  Celtic  nation,  at  large,  may  be  regarded  as  com-
prising a  race,  of  two  different  characters,  though  sprung
trom  the  same  family.

The  one  sort,  Avere  those  who  took  peaceable  possession
of  a  country,  which  had  not  been  previously  inhabited,
where  they  supported  the  character  ascribed,  in  history,  to
the  ancient  Hi/perboreans,  establishing  a  national  religion,
the  best  calculated  for  securing  peace  among  themselves ;
but  which,  till  it  was  gradually  changed  by  political  neces-
sities, rendered  its  votaries  incompetent  for  the  defence  of
their  country,  or  the  support  of  their  national  inde-
pendence.

The  other  sort,  were  a  people,  who  had  less  of  scruple  in
their  principles,  but  who,  having  been  inured  habitually  to
arms,  before  they  approached  the  rcest,  and,  confiding  in
their  native  prowess,  forced  their  way  into  many  possessions
of  their  unresisting  brethren.

In  the  Welsh, — the  Armoricans, — and  the  Cornish, — un-
disputed votaries  of  Druidism, — we  recognise  the  former
of  these  two  branches, — and  the  latter,  in  the  Irish,  or
in  the  Highlanders,  it  is  not  at  all  necessary  to  suppose,
that,  where  these  people  established  themselves,  the  others
ο  2


212

were  either  extirpated,  or  entirely  removed.     They  seem,  in
several  parts,  to  have  amicably  incorporated.

The  Cymri/,  acknowledge  their  obligation  to  many  a
Caui'y  or  Cor,  for  useful  arts,  for  wholesome  laws,  and  for
equitable  government :  Where  a  mixture  of  their  dialects
prevailed,  we  may  reasonably  conclude,  that  both  people
were  united.  E.  Llwi/d*  Archccol.  P.  221,  furnishes  a  sin-
gular instance  of  this  mixture,  in  some  ancient  triplets,
whose  grammar  approaches  nearer  to  the  Welsh,  though
several  of  the  words  be  Gzci/ddelian.  I  shall  extract  hie
account  of  them.

''  The  following  is  the  ancient  language  of  Britoiis  in
the  north  of  this  Island,  I  found  it  in  the  first  leaf  of  an
old  Latin  book,  on  decayed  vellum,  written  in  a  Gtci/ddelian
hand,  about  one  thousand  years  ago  (now  one  thousand
one  hundred)  By  the  writing,  and  by  a  few  more  >vordii
of  the  same  language,  I  am  certain,  that  the  book  has  come
from  Scotland;  and  I  can  also  compute  the  age  of  the
manuscript.  I  know  not,  whether  it  is  the  language  of  the
Strath-Chcyd  Britons,  or  of  the  Picts,  or  old  Caledonians.
It  is  the  oldest,  and  strangest  British  I  have  yet  seen.  I  do
not  understand  the  aim,  and  meaning  of  the  lines."

By  following,  however,  the  sound  of  the  letters,  and  the
connection  of  the  words,  Lluyd  endeavours  to  reduce  them
into  modern  IVelsh  orthography, — and  there  he  leaves  them*

These,  are  the  lines  in  the  original.

isi  guorcosam(l)  uemheunaur(2)  henoid

^ , _ —3^

•  See  JJwyd's  erratii.


213

Mi  telu  nit  gurmaur(3)

Mi  amfranc  dam  (4)  an  calaur  (5)

Ni  can  ill  (6)  ni  guardam  ni  cusam  (7)  henoid
Cet  iben  med  nouel  (8)
Mi  amfranc  dam  an  patel

Na  mereit  un  nep  leguenid  henoid
Is  discinn  mi  coueidid  (9)
Dou  nam  (10)  riceur  imguetid.  (1 1)

An  acquaintance  Avitli  old  oithography  of  the  Welsh,
joined  Λvith  some  knowledge  of  the  Irish,  or  Gaelic,  will
qualify  me  to  offer  a  version,  which,  as  I  think,  is  not  wide

of  truth. The  subject   appears  to  be  this  : — A  principal

othcer,  in  a  household,  or  a  garrison,  describes  his  de-
jection, during  the  absence  of  a  chief.  It  is  not  clear^
whether  he  gives  his  real  sentiments,  or  intends  a  com-
pliment.

"  Spiritless  (as  I  am)  I  will  not  study  profit,  this  night.
My  household  are  not  valiant —
I  will  put  away  the  cauldron.*

Tlie  bard  shall  not  sing;  I  will  not  laugh:  I  will  not  feast,
this  night.
Let  men  of  renown  drink  mead  together!
I  will  put  away  the  pan.*

Let  no  one  meddle  with  mirth,  this  night.
Till  my  supporter  comes  down :
[When]  my  Lord  comes,  we  shall  feast  to  the  fidl."

(1)  /.  Gor,  profit;  Cos,  consideration;  Cosam,  to  study.
(2)  /.  Neumh,  a  negative  particle  in  composition;  Eonazcr,


•  The  cauldroii,  the  pan,  used  in  preparing  the  föast.


214

IV.  a  spirited,  bold  man.  (3)  /.  Gur,  valiant;  Curmhor,
of  great  valour.  (4)  Mi  ddodav,  afranc,  W.  (5)  An,
the,  /.  (6)  /.  File,  Fhili,  (pron.  Hi)  a  bard,  or  poet.  (7)  /.
Cus,  enough;  Cusam,  to  satisfy;  W.  Gwestav,  I  will  en-
tertain. (8)  /.  Nuall,  noble,  famous.  (9)  Aywdthijdd,  W.
a  supporter.  (10)  W.  Nav,  a  lord.  (11)  W.  Ymzcythydd,
dainties.


'^>


It  has  been  already  intimated,  that  some  respectable
writers,  Avho  have  treated  of  the  Ccltce,  have  not  been  suffi-
ciently careful,  to  discriminate  between  that  race,  and  pro-
per Germans,  or  the  Gothic  famihes.

The  consequence  of  this  indefinite  outline,  has  been  a
confused  idea,  respecting  the  difference  of  language,  as  re-
ferable to  those  nations.

The  genius  of  the  Celtic  speech  has  not  been  sepai-ately
analyzed:  and  vocabularies  have  united  words,  that  have
not  the  least  intercourse,  or  analogy.

The  folloAving  remarks,  it  is  hoped,  will  be  calculated,  in
some  degree,  to  remove  this  obscurity.

As  the  Gauls,  or  Celt  a;,  proceeded  originally  to  the
west,  through  Germany,  long  before  the  Goths  occupied
those  regions,  it  is  pretty  evident,  that  many  of  their  ftimi-
lics  halted  by  the  way,  and  consequently,  that  Abori-
gines, in  several  parts  of  that  extensive  region,  were  Celtce,
who  remained  in  possession  for  a  long  series  of  ages.

It  musi  also  be  remembered,  that  a  period  existed,  in


215

wliicli  the  CeUcc  οι  Gaul  were  the  most  powerful  of  nations,
in  the  west  of  Europe, — made  incursions, — and  settled  colo-
nies in  Germany.*'  And  this,  I  believe,  happened  before
the  establishment  of  the  Goths  in  that  countr}-.

These  peculiar  circumstances,  to^gether  with  a  defect  of
precision,  too  frequent  in  describing  strangers,  will  account
for  the  extent  of  the  term  Celta,  as  covering  the  north,  just
as  we  speak  at  present  of  Tartars,  and  of  Indians,  not
adverting,  minutely,  to  distinctions,  amongst  those  who  are
imperfectly  kno\vn  to  us.

But  this  indefinite  use  of  the  name,  can,  surely,  never  be
imderstood  as  meaning  to  impart  the  idea,  that  Celta,  and
Goths,  constituted  one,  and  the  same,  people.  They  are
accurately  distinguished,  by  some  of  the  best  authors.  They
differed  essentially  in  stature,  complexion,  habits,  manners,
language,  as  well  as  in  every  other  character  which  marks
unconnected  nations.

The  families  of  the  Goth  are  sufficiently  ascertained :  and
the  genius  of  his  language  is  completely  known,  in  its  very
numerous  dialects.

Those  who  occupied  the  interior  of  Gaul,  distinguished
themselves  in  their  own  language  by  the  name  of  Celt(z.-\
This  name,  then,  when  used  Avith  precision,  means  to  de-
scribe the  people,  of  whom  these  Gauls  constitute  a  part.


»  Cass.  De.  B.  Gal.  vi.  24.

t  C(ts.  De  B.  Gal.  i.  1.  This  name  pertained  universally  to  the  Gauls.  '•'  The
custom  of  calling  them  Galatie,  or  Gauls,  has*  only  prevailed  of  late;  they  vieic
formerly  named  Celtu:,  both  by  themselves,  and  by  others."  Pausan  Attic,  p.  6,
Ed.  Syib.


216

As  this  race,  has,  in  its  various  branches,  been  subject,  for
a  series  of  ages,  to  masters,  who  contemplated  their  lan-
guage, and  their  national  prejudices,  Avith  equal  jealousy,  it
cannot  be  expected  that  the  Celtic  tongue  should,  at  this
day,  appear  as  brilliant,  as  that  of  the  Gtrman  tribes.

If  it  survives  at  all,  it  must  be  explored  amongst  the  de-
pressed relics  of  the  Cdtcc,  either  in  Gaul,  or  in  those  re-
gions that  were  peopled  by  tribes  of  the  same  nation.  Our
British  Islands  are  some  of  them.  When  detected,  this  lan-
guage must  present  a  character,  materially  different  from
that  of  the  German  vocabularies.

In  parts  of  Gaul,  and  in  these  Islands,  we  find  the  re-
mains of  a  people,  who,  for  many  generations,  obstinately
maintained  their  independence,  and  \vho  have,  to  this  day,
preserved  many  peculiarities  of  national  custom,  together  with
certain,  most  ancient,  and  peculiar  dialects,  connected  with
each  other,  but  essentially  differing  from  those  of  the  Gothic
nation,  as  well  as  from  the  Latin.  These  congenial  dialects
must,  then,  be  referred,  of  consequence,  to  some  parent,
stock; — which  can  only  be  the  Celtic,

The  dialects  of  Gaul  appear  to  have  been  presented,  up
to  the  period  in  which  the  power  of  the  ÌÍowö?ì  empire  de-
clined;— this  too,  in  parts  of  the  territory,  wherein  a  cha-
racter of  national  independence  could  least  be  expected.

The  city  of  Treves,  lay  in  that  part  of  Gaul,  where  the'na-
tives  were  mixed  with  invaders  from  Gcrmani/.  Before  it
became  a  part  of  the  Roman  empire,  and  the  seat  of  its
provincial  government,  the  chief  men  of  that  city  aftected
a  German  origin,  yet  the  populace  had  preserved  their  an-
cient language.     -SV.  Jerom  resided  there,  about  A.  D.  360,


217

and  passing  through  Gaiatia,  in  Asia   Minor,  ton  years
afterwards,  he  recognised  the  language  of  Treves.

These  long-separated  people  must,  therefore,  have  retained
the  tongue,  which  their  common  ancestors  had  used  a  thou-
sand 3'ears  before;  and  the  Galatians,  here  described,  were
descendants,  not  of  the  Goth,  or  German,  but  of  the  Gaui.

"  This,"  it  may  be  said, ''  was  the  Belgic  dialect,  and  there-
fore different  from  that  of  Gallia  Celtica."  But  the  language
of  the  CeltcE,  under  that  name,  had  also  been  preserved.

Ausonius,  Avhen  celebrating  the  admired  cities,  after  the
death  of  the  tyrant  Maximus,  towards  the  end  of  the  fourth
century,  thus  addresses  a  beautiful  stream,  that  watered  his
native  Burdigala.

Salve,  urbis  Genius,  medico  potabilis  haustu
DivoNA,  Celtaruni  lingua — "  Fons  addite  divis!"

Here  we  find  the  Celtic  language,  in  a  polished  and  let-
tered city,  in  the  very  opposite  coast  of  Gaul,  quoted  Avith
respect,  and  upon  a  favorite  subject,  by  a  man  of  consular
pre-eminence,  as  presenting  the  accurate  etymology  of  local
names.

It  cannot,  then,  be  doubted,  that  Celtic  had  hither-
to flourished,  in  the  retired  parts  of  Gaul,  remote  from
the  Massilian  Greeks,  from  the  first  province  of  the  Romans,
from  the  incursions  of  the  Germans,  and  from  the  dialects
of  Belgium,  or  of  Aquitania.

That  corner  of  Gaul,  which  may  be  included  by  the  sea,
and  by  a  line  drawn  from  the  mouth  of  the  Seine,  to  that  of


218

íhe  Loire,  answers  all  these  descriptions. — It  is  the  most  in-
sulated part  of  Gallia  Celtica.  And  though  we  are  not  ex-
pressly told  that  Celtic  Λvas  preserved  in  this  quarter,  yet
the  same  Ausonius  gives  hints,  which  evidently  import  that
proposition.  It  was  thought  a  compliment,  worthy  of  selec-
tion, to  Attiiis  Patera,  who  Avas  professor  of  hterature,  at
Burdigala,  to  record,  not  only  that  he  was  of  Druidical
origin,  but  that  he  had  been  rcarden  of  Belen^s  Fane,  who
was  the  Apollo  of  Druidical  Paganism.

Tu,  Bagocassis,  stirpe  Druidarum  satus.

Si  fama  non  fallit  fidem,
Beleni  sacratum  ducis  è  templo  genus:.

Et  inde  vobis  nomina —
Tibi  Patera — sic  ministros  nuucupant

ApoUinarcs  mystici.  Prof  4-

And  again.

Nee  reticcbo  senem.

Nomine  Phoebitium,

Qui  Beleni  aedituus

Nil  opis  inde  tulit;

Sed  tamen,  ut  placitum,

Stirpe  satus  Druidúm,

Gentis  Aretnorica.  P^of  10.

Druidisniy  then,  had  found  an  asylum  in  Armorica,  some
ages  after  it  had  been  proscribed,  and  suppressed  in  the  rest
of  Gaul.  The  inhabitants  of  that,  region,  must,  of  course,
liave  retained  their  national  prejudices.

The  religion  of  the  Druids,  could  not  have  subsisted,  with-
out an  appropriate  language;  for  the  sacred  code  of  the


219

order  consisted  ς>ϊ poLins,  and  maxims,  which  had  been  con-
secrated by  age,  and  communicated  ipsissimis  verbis^  Λvith
jiunctihous  care.  These,  it  was  a  part  of  their  superstition,
to  withhold  from  strangers,  so  as  to  incur  no  risk  of  their
pubHcation,  by  w  ritin^,  or  translating  them.  Consequently,
the  pure  Celtic  of  Druids  had  been  preserved  in  Armorica.

Immediately  after  the  time  of  Ausonius,  we  find  the  peo-
ple of  this  district,  self-detached  from  the  tottering  empire  of
Rome,  and,  at  no  distant  period,  maintaining  their  inde-
pendence, against  the  force  of  the  Barbarians,  v»-ho  invaded,
and  possessed  the  other  parts  of  Gaul.

The  natural  strength,  and  poverty  of  their  country — the  ac-
cession of  emigrating  nobles,  from  other  provinces — and  the
valour  inspired  by  the  reflection,  that  it  was  their  last  re-
treat, enabled  them  to  make  a  powerful  stand.  For  many
centuries,  they  remained  a  sovereign  people,  and  have,  to
this  day,  preserved  a  language,  essentially  dift'erent  from
the  German,  though  under  few  obligations  to  the  Latin.
This  can  be  no  other  than  the  Celtic  of  their  progenitors.

The  romantic  tales,  which  describe  the  extermination  of
the  inhabitants,  by  those  Britons,  who  accompanied  the
tyxQXil  Maximus — the  fifty  thousand  virgins,  who  were  drown-
ed, or  butchered, — the  Armorican  women,  ΛνΙιθ86  tongues
were  cut  out,  &c.  &c.  are  not  the  materials  of  history.
Maximus  passed  from  Britain  to  the  city  of  Treves,  and
proceeding  to  Italy,  as  claimant  of  the  purple,  had  oc-.
casion  for  all  the  force  he  could  muster — but  it  proved
ineifectual.

The  Muse  of  Ausonius  pursues  the  "^  Rutupinus  Latro,'^
to  the   field  of  battle  at  Aquikia — she  is  mute,  as  to  this


^20

hecatomb  of  the  Armoricam,  and  represents  the  tempora
tyrannica,  as  a  pohtical  storm  tliat  occasioned  mischief,
but  soon  blew  over.

Armorica,  is  a  relative  term,  describing  the  region  ns  a
part  of  Gaul;  but  the  inhabitants  were  Britanni  in  the
time  of  Pliny,  and  perhaps  before  the  name  was  known  in
this  Island.  When  they  became  detached,  as  well  as,  inde-
pendent, they  drop'd  the  relative,  and  used  the  absolute  name.

All  that  seems  to  be  historical,  in  the  account  of  settle-
ments from  this  country,  is,  that  a  race  either  descended
from  British  nobility,  or  connected  with  it,  sat  upon  the
throne  of  Brit  any,  and  that  an  asylum  Λνα5  there  given  to
noble  families  of  Britain,  during  the  Saxon  conquest,
though  not  so  many  of  them,  as  to  affect  the  language
of  the  people.

But  the  "  Armorican  tongue,"  we  are  told,  *'  is  related
"  nearly,  to  the  Welsh,  and  Cornish"  It  must  be  so,  if  it  be
Celtic. —

The  Gauls,  and  Britons,  were  originally  one  people.

The  sons  of  Gaulish  families  came  to  Britain  for  edu-
cation.* In  both  countries,  the  disciples  of  Driiidism
learnt  the  same  ancient  poems,  and  studied  the  same  oral
maxims.  The  Druids  of  Britain,  and  Gaul,  could,  there-
fore,  have  differed  but  little  in  their  language.

But  in  so  large  a  country,  as  the  jurisdiction  of  Druidis/n,


•  Caes.  de  B.  Gal.  L.  tL


221

there  must  have  been  shades  of  peculiarity,  amongst  the
vernacular  idioms  of  the  populace :  and  the  ylrmorican,  or
Ccltoga/atian  language,  in  the  days  of  Casa?',  appears  to
have  differed  from  the  Wchh,  much  in  the  same  degree  as
at  present.

In  order  to  prove  this,  I  must  have  recourse  to  EtymO'
iogy,  who,  though  a  rash  leader,  is  a  most  valuable  sub-
altern. Casar  calls  the  district,  civitates  Annoric<E.  At-
moric  was,  undoubtedly,  a  Gaulish  term,  describing  the
locality  of  these  states.  In  Welsh,  ar,  is  upon, — mor,  the
sea, — whence  morig,  maritime  :  the  name,  in  that  case,
Avould  import,  saptrmaritime,  a  very  awkward  phrase.  In
Bas-Brtton,  ar, — the,  mor,  sea, — whence  moric,  or  morec,
maritime — the  maritime  (states).

The  Welsh  call  that  country  Llijdaw,  from  Lied  (Let)
a  side,  and  azv,  zcater.  But  for  the  Welsh  T,  the  Armori'
cans,  at  the  end  of  their  words,  uniformly  substitute  S — hard,
which,  the  Romans  frequently  mark  by  the  letter  X.  The
Lexovii^  are  mentioned  by  C<E,sar,  as  a  people  by  the
water  side.

This  word  is  Armorican — Les,  a  side,  and  Govea,\n  com-
position, ovca,  water;  literally  the  zcater  side.

The  people  of  Le  Perche,  in  the  western  extremity  of
the  country,  are  called  Diablintes.  Diahell,  in  Bas-Bré'
ton,  is  longinquus,  plural,  diabellrnt — the  remote  ones.  In
Welsh,  they  ΛνοηΜ  have  been  called  Pellenig'ion

From  Bekn,  mentioned  by  Ausonius,  in  tlie  passage
above  quoted,  comes  the  Armorican  Bel-ec,  priest,  pi.
Belciert. — Patera,  a  miniiter  of  Apollo,  is  nothing  more  than


222

the  Armoricaìi,  pautr,  a  boi/,  servant,  or  attendant.  Κο^ος
and  Κος-*;,  are  Greek  for  priest,  and  priestess,  of  an  inferior
class,  and  rank.  See  the  Amycl.  Iiiscrip.

Ώινοηα  must  come,  according  to  the  interpretation  of  the
Gallic  Bard,  ùom  the  Armorican,  Due,  Godf  Di,  divine,
And  fo7iH,  abundant,  overfloning.

The  Armorican  tongue,  having  maintained  its  uninter-
rupted station,  in  that  peculiar  district,  or  division  of
Gaul,  whose  inhabitants  called  themselves  emphatically^
and  κχτ  ίξ-^χν,  Celta-,  gives  a  rule  to  determine,  what  are,
and  what  are  not,  Celtic  dialects.

Here,  the  Cornish,  and  the  Welsh,  offer  themselves  as  two
sisters.  The  latter  of  tliese,  if  the  uniform  consistency  of
its  preservation  be  considered ; — if  it  be  recollected  that
British  Druids  were  more  pure  than  those  of  Gaul, — and
that  Welsh  has  monuments  written,  above  a  thousand  years
ago,  (several  of  them  evident  relics  of  Druidism)  may  be
regarded  as  the  fairest  copy  of  the  language  used,  in  the
jurisdiction  of  British,  and   Gaulish  Druids.

It  is  probable,  (and  is  countenanced  by  respectable  tra-
ditions) that  when  the  Cipnr])  were  digesting,  and  metho-
dizing, their  system  of  Druidism — selecting  their  maxims,
and  composing  those  ancient  poems,  which  formed  the  basis
of  their  history,  theology,  philosophy,  and  laws — they  cul-
tivated their  language  with  peculiar  attention.  It  became
necessary  for  them  to  weigh  the  import  of  radical  terms,
— to  adopt,  with  selection,  such  idioms  and  phrases,  and
such  rules  in  derivation,  or  in  composition,  as  would  con-
vey their  meaning,  with  force  and  precision,  to  future  ages.
By  those  attentions,  the  vague,  and  capricious,  habits  of  the.


223

populace  were  controVd,    and  the   language  of  Druidism
received^  in  the  zcest,  a  discriminate  cliaracter.

But  no  sooner  was  Druidism  completely  established,  than
of  course,  it  would  follow,  that  such  maxims,  üwàpoems,  as
had  then  obtained  the  sanction  of  public  reverence,  must
have  operated,  with  peculiar  efficacy,  in  ascertaining,  pre-
serving, and  consecrating  the  language.  They  must  have
constituted  a  kind  of  standard  for  the  words,  and  style,  as
well  as  for  the  religious  precepts,  and  moral  discipline,  of
succeeding  Bards — upon  the  same  principle,  as  the  language
of  the  Pentateuch  was  the  model  of  composition  to  the
Jezcs.

Translation  was  prohibited.  But  as  the  nobles  were
educated  habitually  by  their  Druid  preceptors,  they  \vould
naturally  converse  in  that  same  language,  which  they  had
used  in  the  period  of  their  youth,  and  which  contained,  if
I  may  so  term  it,    their  oral  grammar.

Their  conversation  Avould  also  have  much  influence  upon
the  dialects  of  the  people,  with  whom  they  lived.

The  people  themselves  must  have  been  habituated  both,
to  the  language,  or  style  of  Druidism,  as  delivered  in  those
public  institutions,  tliat  were  designed  for  their  use

The  knowledge  of  the  dialects,  which  prevailed  amongst
those  tribes,  who  acknowledged  the  supremacy  of  British
Druids,  will  enable  us  to  ascertain  the  character  of  the
Celtic  language,  and,  at  once,  to  mark  it,  wherever  it  may
be  found.

Tiiis  character  strongly  appears  in  the  Irish,  the  Erse,


2-24

and  the  iVaidtnsk,  which,  though  long  separated  from  the
Wehhy  the  Cornish,  and  the  Armorican,  still  acknowledges
a  general  affinity,  and  correspondence  to  these  dialects,
in  radical  terms,  and  in  some  essential  principles  of
grammar.

General  Vallancey  has  proved,  that  Iriah  has  a  certain
degree  of  connexion  with  Chaldaic,  Arabic,  Persian,  Cop-
tic, and  Phanician.

From  these  premises,  and  from  other  data,  which  are  in-
geniously argued,  he  infers,  that,  in  the  Irish,  we  are  to
acknowledge  emigrants  from  India,  to  the  coast  οϊ  Arabia,
Egypt,  and  Phanicia,  and  from  the  latter  country,  by  sea,
through  Spain,  to  the  British  Islands.

I  feel  infinite  respect  for  the  General's  learning  and  abi-
lities ;  I  acknowledge  that  much  of  his  reasoning  has  force
in  it ;  but  I  am  not  prepared,  implicitly,  to  receive  his  com-
plete hypothesis.

Without  presuming  to  decide,  whether  part  of  the  family
may  not  have  taken  the  route  here  traced  for  them,  or  at-
tempting, at  this  distance  of  time,  and  space,  to  read  their
monuments  in  ylsia,  before  they  appeared  upon  its  western
coast,  I  would  ofier  the  following  observations.

The  Irish  language  has  a  more  striking  affinity  with  dia-
lects which  are  confessedly  Celtic,  than  it  has  with  any  of
the -^sföííc  languages;  it  maybe  therefore  presumed,  that
it  is,  in  the  main,  a  language  of  that  race,  and  family.

The  Celta:,  or  Comcritcc,  being  an  important  branch  of
the  Noachida:,  may  have  retained  a  respectable  dialect  of


225

the  patriarchal  speech,  which  may  have  possessed  miich  of
analog}' to  those  primeval  dialects  of  Jsia,  without  incurring
the  imputation  of  a  loan  from  any  one  of  them.

The  Irish  language  appears  to  have  arrived  at  maturity
amongst  the  lapetida,  while  they  were  yet  in  contact  Avith
Aramean  families,  and  formed  a  powerful  tribe  in  Asia
Minor,  and  in  Thrace.  It  may,  therefore,  in  particular  in-
stances, have  more  similitude,  or  analogy  to  the  Asiatic
dialects,  than  Avhat  appears  in  those  branches  of  the  Celtic,
that  were  matured  in  the  west  of  Europe.

Those  who  used  this  language,  consisted  partly  of  Titans,
of  Celto-Sci/thians,  or  of  those  lapetida,  who  assisted  in
building  the  city  of  Babel,  and  must  have  been  habitu-
ated, after  the  dispersion,  to  the  dialects  of  the  nations
through  which  they  passed,  before  they  joined  the  society
of  their  brethren.  This,  may  account  for  some  instances
wherein  the  Irish  corresponds  Avith  Eastern  language,  where
it  also  differs  the  most  from  the  Celtic  of  the  Welsh,  and
Bas-Brétons.

ΐ  have  already  remarked,  that  Irish,  or  a  congenial
dialect,  once  prevailed  in  Thrace,  and  was  diffused  from
thence,  all  the  way  to  the  islands  of  Britain,  whilst,  at  the
same  time,  it  branched  off  to  the  Italian  side  of  the  Alps.
Part  of  this  family,  then,  at  least,  must  have  reached
their  destination   by   land.

A  fact,  whicii  I   apprehend  has  irresistible  force,  is  the

identity  of  the  Irish,  and  Waldemic  languages.     The  latter

is  in  use  amongst  those,  who  inhabit  a  few  Alpitie  valleys,

near  the  fountains  of  the  Poy  arid  whom  the  German  in-

p


226

vadcrs  called  by  the  name  of  the  JValdcnses,  I  suppose  from
IValden, — Forests,  a  very  apt  name  for  the  original,  and
primitive  occupiers  of  so  wild  a  region.  It  appears,  from
their  situation,  that,  unquestionably,  they  are  the  very  same,
who,  in  the  Augustan  age,  were  named  Cottii,  which,  if
taken  from  the  Cclto-Galatiau,  is  perfectly  synonimous
to  li  aldenses.

Welsh,  Coet :  Corn,t  Cuit ;  Armor,  Coat,  Sylva.  The
Gauls,  who  possessed  themselves  of  the  neighbouring  coun-
try, had  then  designated  them  as  the  Sylvestres,  for  the
same  reason : — The  ancestors  of  these  Cottii,  and  of
S'Coti,  in  British  Islands,  were  indisputably  the  same
people.

These  people  appear,  to  constitute  one  branch  of  the
Titanic  Celtce,  who  were  bending  their  course  westward  from
Thrace,  and  were  therefore  ancient  inhabitants  of  Itali/ ;
but  if  it  should  be  argued,  that  they  are  the  remains  of  those
Gauls,  who  crossed  the  Alps,  about  five  hundred  years
before  Christ,  and  who  are  pronounced,  (ex  cathedra,)
by  Mr.  Pinkerton,  to  have  been  Belga,  still  there  is  no
reason  to  suppose,  they  had  come  from  the  Islands  of
Britain,  or  had  arrived  at  that  spot,  by  sea,  from  the
East.  The  language  and  the  people  travelled  westrcard,  and
ay  land»

Neither  history,  nor  tradition,  confirms  the  hypothesis,
that  Fhainicians  planted  a  colony  in  British  Islands.
Ftolemy  imports  none  of  their  inhabitants  from  Egypt,  or
Phomicia,  nor  Mela,  from  the  Poeni,  or  the  Aborigines  of
his  native  Spain.  There  is  no  hint  of  any  Phcenician  colo-
nies, in  these  islands,  prompted  by  the  ancient  historians,  or
geographers,  who  collected  their  intelligence  from  actual


227

remarks,  upon  the  men,  or  upon  the  manners,  and  from
continental,  or  insular  traditions.

Let  the  period  have  been  ever  so  early,  in  which  the
Phccnicians  procured  their  tin  from  British  Islands,  by
the  intercourse  of  the  natives  with  Celtic  Relations  in
Spain,  yet  it  appears,  that  Phaniciaus  had  no  early  ac-
quaintance with  Britain,  Before  the  aggrandizement  of
Carthage,  the  power  and  the  influence  of  these  Phoenicians,
even  in  Spain,  must  have  been  very  diminutive  indeed.  If
the  pillars  of  Hercules  had  not  hitherto  constituted  the  ab-
solute boundary  of  their  navigation,  yet  their  connection
with  the  exterior  coast  could  have  been  only  that  of  traders.

Justin  asserts,  that  Phamicians,  when  erecting  the  city
of  Gades,  in  a  little  island,  very  near  the  shore,  were  so
violently  opposed  by  the  natives  of  Spain,  as  to  call  in
auxiliaries  from  the  rising  colony  of  Carthage,  who,  send-
ing a  numerous  fleet,  as  well  as  army,  seconded  their  opera-
tion, and  secured,  for  themselves,  a  considerable  territory,
in  the  contiguous  province  of  Bcetica.  Maur.  Ind.  Ant.
V.  vi.  P.  272.     Justin,  lib.  xliv.

Their  actual  intercourse  with  Britain  had  not  yet
commenced.

We  are  informed,  by  Festus  Avienus,  cited  by  Bochart,
"  that  Humilco,  a  Carthagenian  general,  the  first  of  his
name,  had  been  sent,  about  the  time  of  Darius  Nothus,
(four  hundred  and  twenty  years  before  Christ)  by  the
senate  of  Carthage,  to  discover  the  Western  shores,  and
ports  of  Europe:  that  he  successfully  accomplished  the
voyage,  and  that  he  wrote  a  journal  of  it,  which  Festus
ρ  2


228

^iiicnus  had  seen  :  that,  in  that  journal,  tiic  lala7tds  of
Britain  arc  nienlioned,  by  tìtic  name  of  Ocstri/muidcs,
h/aiicls  infested  by  the  Oestrum,  or  Οαάβι/.  Meur.  ib.
J\  'lHo.  From  Boc/t.  Canaan,  L.  i.  C.  35,  39•

A\"ith  Bochart's  leave,  I  must  remark,  that  llamilco^s
discovery,  ,was  rather  of  the  Scilli/  Islands,  than  of  Britain,
and  that  it  was  only  after  the  discovery  zcas  made,  that
either  Tartesians,  or  Carthagiiiians  had  visited  ^them,  for
the  purpose  of  trade.  They  found  the  natives  rich  in  tin,
as  well  as  in  lead,  and  addicted  strenuously  to  commerce,
Λvhieh  they  had  carried  on  in  their  national  vessels.

Turbidum  late  fretum.


rei  ad  miracvuimi.


Navigiajunctis  semper  aptant  pellibus,
Corioquc  vastum  saepe  pcrcurrunt  salem.

Avienus,  quoted   in  Camden  s    Cessiteridos.  Ed.  Gibson.

The  barks,  covered  with  skins,  that  served  them  to  na-
vigate the  rough  channel,  and  Ùie  gulf  of  the  raging  ocean,
were  British,  or  Celtic  barks.  The  natives,  then,  had  been
the  carriers  from  the  Cassiterides,  which  foreigners  had
known  hitherto  by  fame  alone,  and  by  their  produce ;  but
which  Herodotus,  who  wrote  about  forty  years  before  the
voyage  of  Hamilco,  know  not  where  to  iind.

Whether  the  Carthaginian  added  the  [Cornish  promon-
tories to  his  discoveries  or  no,  the  name,  and  the  etymology
of  Oestri/mnides  constitute  a  whimsical  blunder  in  trans-
lating from  British.  Clér,  means  Gadflies:  but  observe
another   meaniniz;     of  the  word.      '•    Cler,   The   teachers.


229

or  learned  men  of  the  Druidical  order,  who,  un(icr  the
bardic  system,  Averc,  by  then•  privilege,  employed,  in  go-
ing periodical  circuits,  to  instruct  the  people,  answering
the  purpose  of  a  priesthood."  Ozcen,  Welsh  Diet,  in  Foe.
It  may  be  concluded,  then,  I  apprehend,  that' when  the
Carthaginians  discovered  these  islands,  they  found  them
infested,  not  hy  Gadflies,  but  C/êr-Druids. — This  palpable
mistake,  accompanied  by  that  name,  will  acquit  i/ifm  of  any
hand  in  establishing  this  order.

As  these  tribes, which  formed  thclrish  nation,bore  the  names
of  those  who  are  known  to  have  been  the  Belg(r,  so  their
language,  Τ  think^  may  be  regarded  as  the  ancient  Belgic.

Doubts  have  been  entertained  respecting  this  language,
in  consequence  of  Casars-  assertion,  that  many  of  the
Beiga  originated  from  Germany.  But  this,  does  not  prove
them  to  have  been  of  the  Gothic  family,  who  in  the  time
of  Ceesar,  were'  not  the  sole,  nor,  perhaps,  the  mobt  nu-
merous, inhabitants  of  Germani/.

Those,  of  the  Betgcc,  who  were  called  Germans,  were
most  probably  Celtic  tribes,  whose  removal  to  the  zvest  of
the  Rhine,  was  in  the  memory  of  tradition.  ''■^^'^''~'

Tacitus  held  a  respectable  office  in  Belgium.  The  lan-
guage, the  persons,  and  the  manners  of  the  Goths,  and  the
Gauls,  were  equally  familiar  to  him.  But  this  acute  observer,
laughs  at  the  absurdity  of  those  Treviri,  who  were  the
people  of  most  consequence  in  Belgium,  for  affecting  a
German  origin. — "  Tanquam,  per  banc  gloriam  sanguinis,
a  siMiLiTUDiNE  ct  inertia '  Ga//orMm  separentur."  '  He
finds  no  real  Germans  in  Belgium,  except  a  few  small
tribesj    vrho  inhabited  ipsatn  rhcni  rijmm,    the  tery  bank


230

of  the  Rhine,  amongst  whom  were  the  Ubii,  brought  over
the  Rhine  by  Agrippa  :  and  again,  "  Per  ipsam  rheni
ripam  collocati."  These,  with  an  absurdity  no  less  re-
diculous,  blushed  at  their  origin,  and  sunk  their  national
name  in  that  of  Agrippinenses.

It  is  probable,  then,  that  even  these  tribes,  used  the
Gaulish  language ;  and  indeed  it  appears,  that  very  few  of
those  who  inhabited  the  zoest  of  the  Rhine,  spoke  the  German*

The  whole  of  Belgium  was  a  Roman  province,  in  the
time  of  Caligula.  This  emperor  had  the  ambition,  though
he  had  not  spirit  enough,  to  attempt  an  invasion  of  Ger-
maiii/.  Under  that  pretence,  he  went  as  far  as  the  Rhine.
He  then  ordered,  that  some  of  the  German  guards  might
be  ferried  over,  and  suborned  by  this  artifice,  and  concealed.
It  was  arranged,  that  a  kind  of  tumultuous  message  to  him,
after  dinner,  should  announce  the  enemy  at  hand.  Sallying
forth,  he  took  these  willing  captives,  and  some  German  hos-
tages afterwards,  who  had  been  suffered,  for  this  purpose,  to
escape,  and  brought  them  back,  chained,  as  deserters.  These
captives  were  deemed,  by  him,afit  subject  of  aJiowart  triumph.

''  Conversus  hinc  in  curam  triumplii,  praeter  captivos  et
transfugas  barbaros,  G  alii  arum  quoque  procerissimura
quemque,  et,  ut  ipse  dicebat,  «|*&θς»αρ.β£ντον,  ac  nonnuUos  ex
principibus  legit,  ac  seposuit  ad  pompam :  coegitque  non
tantum  rutilare  et  promittere  comam,  sed  et  sermonem
Germanicum  addiscere,  et  nomina  barbarica  fcrre."  Suetoji
Calig.  47.

*'  Turning  bis  thoughts  to  this  triumph,  besides  tlie  barba-
rian captives,  and  fugitives,  he  selected  the  tallest  individuals
of  the  Gaulish  provinces,  and  some  of  their  chiefs,  and  set


231

them  apart,  for  the  hetter  grace  to  his  procession,  and  lie
obHged  them,  not  only  to  redden  their  hair,  and  let  it  grow-
long,  but  also  to  learn  the  German  language,  and  assume
barbarous  names."

This  very  peculiar  selection,  and  preparation,  would  have
been  superfluous,  had  any  considerable  number  of  his
Belgian  subjects  resembled  the  Germans,  in  their  staturCj,
jn  the /as///o//,  or  eolour  of  the  hair,  their  L•ΛNGU age,  or
t\ie'n•  proj)er  names.

It  was,  therefore,  a  Gaulish,  not  a  Gothic  dialect,  which
prevailed  in  ancient  Belgium :  and  the  identity  of  names
amongst  the  Belgic,  or  Irish  tribes,  is  not  the  only  topic
of  resemblance,  which  induces  me  to  persuade  myself,  that
the  Irish  and  the  ancient  Belgce  were  the  same.  I  must
add,  the  facility  which  resolves  the  names  of  men,  rivers,
towns,  and  other  places,  in  Belgium  (Gaulish  or  British)
or  amongst  the  Tectosages  in  Aquitania,  and  on  the
banks  of  the  Danube,  into  Irish^

It  is  recorded,  that  many  inhabitants  of  British  Belgium^
were  pushed  forwards  into  Cornwall,  or  towards  its  borders,
upon  the  aggrandizement  of  the  Saxons. — Accordingly,  of
the  Welsh,  Armorican,  or  Cornish  dialects,  the  latter  has
the  most  affinity  with  Irish.

In  the  Irish,  the  Erse,  and  the  Waldensic,  I,  therefore,
distinguish  the  Celtic  of  those  tribes,  that  were  not  fully
ipcluded  within  the  pale  of  British  and  Gaulish  Druids,
and  consequently,  whqse  language  was  not  affected  by
the  cultivation  which  those  Druidicul  sages  bestowed
upon  their  national  tongue,  iifter  their  aiTÍval  in  the  west
of  Europe,      The  Irish  appears  to   be,  upon   the  Avhole,


232

better  preserved  than  either  the  Erse,  or  Waldmúc:  it
contains  abundantly  more  of  written  documents;  but  as
the  difference  between  them  all,  is  trifling,  I  shall  speak  of
them  in  general  as  Irish,  and  shall  remark  some  particulars
in  that  language,  which  appear  as  defects ;  but  yet  more
arising  from  the  accidents  it  has  undergone,  than  as  being
the  inherent  parts  of  its  genius    and  character.

As  it  has  long  been  the  language  of  the  populace,  local
usage  has  thrown  such  irregularity  upon  its  A^erbs,  that  gram-
marians conceived  them  to  be  governed  by  no  rule,  till  Gene-
ral Vaflancey  demonstrated  the  error  of  that  opinion,  in
Ireland,  and  Mi•'.  Shaic,  in  Scotland.

The  poets  have  been  long  in  the  habit  of  substituting  Ε
for  /,  or  /  for  E,  and  of  using  A  Ο  or  U  indifferently,  in
composition,  and  sometimes  in  simple  primitives.  This
habit,  which  rather  savours  of  the  Eastern  school,  is  evi-
dently injurious.

In  opposition  to  the  general  usage  of  ancient  languages,
the  Irish  fall  into  a  compendious  method,  of  making  but
one  syllable,  and  frequently  but  one  sound,  out  of  as  many
vowels  as  come  together  in  a  single  Avord.

Several  of  the  consonants,  in  composition,  are  either
silenced  by  a  point,  or  an  J/,  or  so  changed  and  softened
in  the  mode  of  oral  delivery,  that  one's  ear  is  no  longer
able  to  judge  of  the  component  parts,  in  a  multitude  of
compound  words.  In  this  abuse,  the  neighbouring  Scotch
imitate'  the  Irish,  because  they  have  been  generally  in  the
habit  of  Using  Jr/s// books,  and  masters.

It  is  evident,  that  such  customs  did  not  prevail  anciently.


233

in  the  same  degree  as  at  present/and,  consequently,  that  in
their  mode  of  pronouncing,  they  have  innovated  upon  the
language.  For  those  letters  which  are  equally  written  by
tlie  Irish,  and  Welsh,  or  by  the  Irish,  and  Waldenses,  are
audible  in  one  language,  when  they  are  silent  in  the  other :
and  it  may  be  taken  for  granted,  that  the  common  ancestors
of  these  people,  acquired  their  tenns  by  the  ear,  not  the
eye :  or  that  sounds, like  these,  originally  were  uttered,  which
are  equally  retained,  by  their  symbols,  in  each  dialect.

As  the  Celtic  dialects  are  more  valuable,  for  the  purpose
of  unfolding  antiquit}',  than  for  general  use,  the  rcritten
Irish,  and  its  oldest  orthography,  are  preferable  to  the
Oral.

To  the  antiquary,  this  language  is  of  the  .utmost  im-
portance. It  is  rich,  in  pure  and  simple  primitives,  and
whicli  are  proved  such — by  the  sense  and  structure  of  the
longest  written  compounds— by  their  supply  of  many  roots
which  have  long  been  obsolete,  in  the  Welsh  and  the
Arinorican,  but  still  occur  in  the  compounds  of  these
languages, — and  by  their  use,  in  connecting  the  Celtic
dialects  with  Latin,  with  Greek,  with  Gothic,  and  perhaps
Avith  some  of  the  Asiatic  languages.

I  would  not  be  understood  as  meaning,  that  our  Welsh
came  into  the  possessions  of  a  different  family,  who  spoke
the  Irish  language;  but  I  do  mean,  and  represent,  that
many  of  the  simple  primitives,  formerly  possessed  by  them,
and  still  preserved  by  the  Irish,  have  been  generally  dis-
used, though  occurring  in  the  oldest  writers,  and  in  the
derivative,  or  compounds  of  their  present  language.  The
case  Avith  Irish   is  exactly  parallel — Many  words  that  are


234

marked  as  obsolete,  in  their  glossaries^  are  still  imderstooti
by  the  common  people  in  Walts.

.  Both  of  the  nations,  then,  have  rhrown  aside  a  part  of  their
ancient  stores :  But  as  the  Irish  retain  a  more  ample  num-
ber of  simple  terms,  than  we  do,  and  as  the  several  tribes
which  use  this  dialect,  or  those  connected  Avith  it,  were  not
completely  received  into  the  pale  of  British  Druidism,  it  may,
I  think,  be  inferred,  that  the  Irish,  after  we  have  discarded
its  eastern,  and  such  other  adventitious  terms,  as  cannot  be
derived  from  its  native  roots,  presents  the  most  accurate
copy  of  the  Celtic  in  its  original,  and  primitive  state,  in
the  same  manner  as  the  Welsh  does  that,  of  the  cultivated,  or
Druidical  Celtic.  But  in  order  to  obtain  a  sound  and  a  deep
knowledge,  of  the  general,  and  the  discriminate  character
in  the  Celtic,  we  should  compare  all  these  dialects  to-
gether.

I  shall  add  some  discriminate  marks  of  the  Celtic,  con-
sidered as  one  language.

Its  elementary  sounds  are  of  two  kinds — Primary,  ex-
pressed by  the  sixteen  letters  used  by  the  ancient  Greeks^
with  an  addition  of  the  Digamma. — Secondary,  or  inflec-
tions of  the  former;  as,  Bh,  or  V,  from  B;  Ch,  ox  χ,  from
C;  Dh,  or  Dd,  (as  th  in  that)  from  D,  β)Χ.

All  words  used  absolutely,  or  out  of  regimen,  begin  with
primary  sounds,  except  a  few  modern  corruptions,  in
Cornish,  and  Armorican,  which  admit  of  the  V;  and  Welsh
words  in  Ch,  where  the  initial,  vowel,  or  syllable,  i*
dropped.

Primary  sounds,  in  coroposition,  are  not  only  changed


235

into  their  secondaries,  but  admit  also  of  inflection  amongst
themselves,  and  are  changed,  in  conformity  with  certain
rules,  into  others,  of  the  same  organ ;  as,  Ρ  into  Β ;  C  into

These  characters  distinguish  the  Celtic  from  the  Gothic,
and  most  other  languages.

The  roots  are  very  simple.  A  single  vowel,  or  a  diph-
thong, not  only  forms  a  particle,  as  in  other  languages;
but  frequently  a  noun,  and  a  verb.  There  are  few,  if  any,
combinations,  consisting  of  a  single primari/  consonant,  fol-
lowed by  a  vowel,  or  diphthong,  or  of  any  consonant,  pre-
ceded by  a  vowel,  or  dipthong,  which  have  not  their  mean-
ing, and  which  do  not  even  preside  at  the  head  of  a  nu-
merous family.  Into  such  roots  as  these,  we  can  resolve
the  longest  words  that  are  purely  Celtic.

The  roots,  must  not  be  considered  as  absolute,  or  fixed
names  of  objects;  as  earth,  water,  tree,  stone,  ^c.  but  as
the  expressions,  or  marks  of  leading  ideas;  or  as  describing
certain  modes  of  existence,  or  of  operation,  which  present
themselves  to  £)ur  senses:  and  therefore,  as  agreeing,  so
far,  in  their  nature,  to  the  roots  of  the  Hebrew,  as  they  arc
developed  by  the  learning,  and  genius  of  Parkhurst.

Thus,  for  example,  the  Irish  Ur,  signifies,  a  covering  over,
a  spreading  vpon.  Hence  it  is  transferred  by  them  to  a  va-
riety of  objects,  8cc.  in  which  this  image  presents  itself;  as
mould,  earth,  fire,  water,  verdure,  heath,  evil,  slaughter,
brave,  very,  &;c.

The  Welsh  verb  a,    "  will  proceed  "  or,    "  go  forth," —


236

hence  it  signifies,  in  a  sister  dialect — an  ascent,  hW,  pro-

vioiitari/,  wainj  car,  or  chariot.

0"   :  'i  ,       ■  .

This  mode  of  appropriation,  is  natural.— If  man  invented
language,  or  if  he  received  such  rudiments  of  speech  as
AVere  conformable  to  the  laws  of  his  nature,  his  first  efforts
must  have  been,  to  describe  things 'Î'or  which  he  had,  as  yet,'
no  definite  names,  and  Λvhich  he  only  knew,  by  the  impres-
sion made  upon  his  nerves  and  senses.

Compounds,  derivatives,  and  the  accidents  οϊ  Celtic  words,
are  produced,  not  by  the  junction  of  unmeaning  sounds,'  ito
the  original  term,  but  by  incorporating  with  it,  loots  όΐ  ai
known  value:  ^^  ^''"^^ '''-''    -'  -''^'  '''■  ^'^'^^"^  '  '-■'  ^^ '^'''^


237


Sect,  IV,  Probabilifi/,  rcsidtiììg  from  the  hints  of  clas-
sical writers,  that  our  Druids  icere  acquainted  with  let-
ters.— National  evidence  of  the  Celtic  tribes,  upon  this,
topic. — And  first ;  of  Druidical  Tokens,  or  Symbols.

J.N  order  to  obtain  the  accurate  perception  of  the  arts,
amongst  any  ancient  people,  it  is  necessary 'to;  fix  the  at-
tention, upon  certain  prominent  objects,  and  consider  them
separately.  I,  therefore,  propose,  in  this,  and  the  follow-
ing sections,  to  examine  the  Celtic  pretensions  to  the  know-
ledge of  letters,  previous  to  the  Roman  intercourse ;  and,
as  well  as  I  can,  to  ascertain  the  means  they  possessed,  as
well  as  the  methods  they  used,  for  the  purpose  of  conveying
their  ideas,  to  a  distance  of  time,  or  place.

No  question,  relating  to  this  primitive  nation,  has  been
more  eagerly  discussed,  or  more  unsatisfactorily  determined.
According  to  some  antiquaries,  these  Druids,  amongst  those
of  the  Celtic  tribes,  in  which  they  obtained  an  establishment,
liad  an  alphabet,  either  peculiar  to  their  countrymen,  or
else  borrowed  from  the  Phmiiciaiis,  or  from  Greek  schools,
at  Marseilles ;  whilst  otliers  positively  deny,  that  our  Druids,
of  these  islands,  had  the  use  of  letters,  or  any  other  me-
dium, for  the  record  of  their  facts,  besides  oral  tradition,
or  the  songs  of  the  Bards.

For  this  diversity  of  opinion,  it  is  easy  to  account.  Tlie
learned  can  discover  no  books,  nor  inscribed  monuments
of  the  Celt'a,  previous  to  the  epoch  of  Christianity.     They


238

take  it  for  granted,  that  no  ancient,  authentic,  and  well-
accredited  accounts,  remain  amongst  the  descendants  of  this
people ;  they  labour,  therefore,  to  decide  the  question,  by
the  single  authorities  of  Gretk ,  and  Roman  writers.

These,  furnish  a  few  hints,  upon  the  subject,  which  may
serve  as  grounds  of  dispute ;  but  nothing  clear,  and
positive  enough,  to  silence  contradiction.  Writers,  there-
fore, decide  this  question,  variously,  according  to  their
preconceptions  respecting  the  Ceha;.

When  I  again  quote  a  few  passages,  which  have  been
already  adduced,  and  a  few  observations  of  my  learned
predecessors  in  this  field,  I  must  assume  the  liberty  of  con-
sidering the  literature  of  the  Gaulish  and  British  Druids,
who  composed  but  one  body,  as  resting  upon  the  same
ground.  And  it  is  clear,  to  me,  that  Cecsar  adverts  to  the
Druids  of  both  countries,  in  the  following  remarks': —

Neque  fas  esse  existimant  ea  [quae  ad  disciplinam  perti-
nent] litteris  mandare  quum,  in  reliquis  fere  rebus,  pub'
Ucis  privatisque  rationibus,  GríEcis  utantur  litteris.

Id  mihi,  duabus  de  causis,  instituisse  videiitur;  quod
veque  in  vulgum  disciplinam  efferri  velint,  neque  eos  qui
discant.  Uteris  confisos,  minus  memoria.  studere.  B.  Gal.
L.  vi.

^'  Nor  do  they  deem  it  lawful,  to  commit  those  things
(which  pertain  to  their  discipline)  to  writing;  though,
generally,  in  other  cases,  and  in  their  public,  and  private
accounts,  they  use  Greek  letters."

"  They  appear,  to  me,  to  have  established  this  custom,.


239

for  two  reasons ;  because  they  would  not  have  their  secrets
divulged^  and  because  they  would  not  have  their  disciples
depend  upon  written  documents,  and  neglect  the  exercise
of  memory/'

This  passage  furnishes  no  more  proof,  that  the  Druids
were  (even  comparatively,)  illiterate,  than  our  prohibition
of  religious  pictures,  and  images,  which  prevail  in  J2owîö«
Catholic  Churches,  can  be  received  as  proof,  that  we  are
(comparatively)  ignorant  of  painting,  or  sculpture.  C&sar's
probable  reasons,  for  a  marked  prohibition  of  letters  in  a
certain  case,  forcibly  argue,  that  our  Druid  was  a  master
of  their  import:  and  this  prohibition,  being  an  institute,  or
fu7idamental  part  of  his  law,  evinces,  that  such  knowledge
was  not  recent.  Nor  is  it  asserted,  that  his  order  had
Greek  letters  alone.  The  vioxafert,  (generally,)  appears
to  intimate  the  reverse.  We,  for  example,  generally  use
Roman  letters ;  but,  on  some  occasions,  we  employ  the
national,  and  the  old  English  characters.

The  iîoman  general  wrote  a  dispatch  to  Cicero,  (Quintus)
in  Greek,  that  his  letter  might  not  be  intercepted,  and  by
that  event  his  enterprize  discovered  by  the  Nervii.  BeL
Gal  L.  v.

And,  I  think,  it  was,  principally,  that  circumstance,  which
induced  Jos.  Scaliger,  to  expunge  the  word  "  Gracis,"  in
the  passage  above  cited.

But  in  this  he  took  a  wanton  liberty  with  his  text.  The
tablets  of  the  Hdvetii,  a  Gaulish  people,  were  "  Littcris
Gracis  confecta."

May  it  not  be  supposed,  that  the  Gauls  generally,  wrote•


240

ihejr  own  language  in  letters  mjach  resembling  Greek,
though  not  exactly  the  same;  and  that,  whilst  those  Gauls,
who  attended  the  Roman  army^  were  explaining  the  con-
tents of  the  Ihlvetiaii  tablets,  Casar  having  the  curiosity,
himself,  to  look  at  them,  had  remarked  the  affinity  between
Gaulish  characters,  and  those  of  Greece.

There  are  solid  grounds  for  the  inference,  that,  in  Casat-'s
age,  the  alphabets  of  these  two  nations  were  not  exactly
the  same.

Mr.  Astlc,  (who  has  discussed  the  subject  of  ancient
letters,  with  consummate  ability)  gives  a  series  of  Gaulish
characters,  which  are  somewhat  similar  to  those  of  Greece,
They  Λν6Γ6  taken  from  the  monumental  inscription  of
Gordian,  the  messenger  of  the  Gauls,  who  suffered  mar-
tyrdom, in  the  third  century,  with  all  his  family.

The  author  thus  reports  of  them':  "  These  ancient  Gaulish
characters  were  generallj/  used,  by  that  people,  before  the
conquest  of  Gaul  by  Casar ;  but  after  that  period,  the
Roman  letters  were  gradually  introduced."  Origin  and
progress  of  zcriting.  P.  ö6,  with  reference  to  Nouvcau
Traité  de  Diplo?n.     V.  i.  P.  704.

And  again,  P.  57.  "  Ύ\ί(ί  ancient  Spaniards  used  let-
ters, nearly  Greek,  before  their  intercourse  with  the  Ro-
mans,  which  may  be  seen  in  N.  T.  de  Dipl.  V.  i.  P.  70j."
See  other  authorities  there  cited.     Astle.  P.  86.

The  inhabitants  of  Gaul,  and  of  Spain,  had,  therefore,
letters,  resembling  those  of  Greece,  previously  to  the  inter-
course with  Jîo;?<t';  and  I  would  thence  infer,  that  letters


241.

nrust  have  been,  at  least,  in  some  degree,  known  to  our
British  Druids,  the  avowed  masters  of  the  Gaulish  order.

This  inference  is  counter-signed  by  positive  credentials,
I  have  already  showTi,  that  under  the  name  of  Hj/perbo-.
reans,  the  older  Greeks  described  the  order  of  Druids,
especially  those  of  this  island.  And  though  I  have  not  an
opportunity  of  autlienticating  the  passage,  I  confidently
rely  upon  the  evidence  of  the  respectable  writer  above
named,  that  ''  Plato,  somewhere  mentions  Hyperborean
letters^  very  different  from  GreeA•."     _4sí/í',  P.  46.

Whatever  difference  Plato  may  have  remarked,  between,
the  letters  of  Greeks,  and  those  of  Druids,  or  Hi/per  bo-
reans,  it  appears,  that,  in  the  time  of  this  philosopher,  they.
Avere  so  far  dissimilar,  as  to  constitute  a  distinct  series.  Ihe-
Ceita,  therefore,  had  not,  recently,  acquired  the  know-
ledge of  letters,  from  their  Greek  school  at  Marseilles.

Some  tribes  of  this  nation  must  have  possessed  this  know-
ledge from  remote  antiquity.  Strabo  says,  of  the  Turdi-.
tani,  in  Spaiii, — "  These  are  the  wisest  amongst  the  Ibe-
rians. They  have  letters,  and  written  histories,  of  ancient
transactions,  and  poems,  and  laws  in  verse,  as  they  assert^
six  thousand  years  old,"

This  people  could  noe  have  been  the  descendants  of  the
Phcenicians,  who  v?^ere  obliged,  about  four  hundred  years
before  the  time  of  Strabo,  to  employ  a  Carthagenian  fleet,
and  army,  for  their  protection,  whilst  they  were  building  a(,
single  town  in  one  of  the  Islands,  near  the  shore.

Had  the  letters  of  the  Turditani,  been  Phanician,  they
must  have  been  so  recognised,  and  claimed.    They  coul(i


242

not,  in  that  case,  have  been  the  subject  of  national  boast.
The  arrival  of  tlie  Fhucn'ician  traders,  upon  the  coast  of
Spain,  though  an  ancient  event,  was  in  the  reach  of  his-
tory. The  introduction  of  letters  amongst  the  Turditani, —
as  appears  from  the  exaggeration  of  their  chre.nology,  a
little  tempered  and  qualified, — was  lost  in  its  antiquity.

When  their  "  six  thousand  years,''  have  been  reduced
within  bounds  of  probability,  it  must  be  acknowledged,  that
at  least  they  have  claimed  the  use  of  letters,  from  the  time
when  they  first  became  a  distinct  society.  They  seem  evi-
dently to  have  branched  from  the  Celtic  stock.  Mela,  the
geographer,  born  in  the  neighbourhood,  and,  therefore,  no
stranger  to  its  inhabitants,  omitting  their  name  altogether,
extends  the  Turduli  over  those  regions,  about  the  banks,
of  the  Anas,  which  Ptolemy,  and  some  others,  divide  be-
tween the  Turduli,  and  the  Turditani.  This  learned
Spaniard,  then,  regarded  them  as  one  people,  and  he
places  their  ancestors,  or  the  Turduli  veteres,  in  the  middle
of  Jjusitania,  a  coast,  as  to  which  he  affirms. — "^  Totam
Ccltici  colunt"     L.  iii.  1.

This  people,  then,  had  preserved  very  ancient  letters,
which  belonged  to  the  Celtic  nation :  and  it  has  not,  alto-
gether, escaped  the  notice  of  the  learned,  that  from  remote
antiquity,  the  Celtce.  possessed  letters,  not  very  dissimilar  to
those  of  the  ancient  Greeks.

Nan  desunt  gin  priscos  Druidarum  characteras,  ei
elegantes,  et  Gracis  similes,  fuisse  crcdunt.  Xenophonte^
iiquidem,  et  Archilocho  testihus,  literaruni  Jigur(C,  quas,
in  Graiciam,  è  Phoenicia  Cadmus  intulit,  Galaticis,
quam  Funicis  site  Pha'niciis,  siniiliores  extitere."  Bucher.
Fr:  P.  183.


243

"  There  are  tliose  who  think  the  DrMÍí/ihad  ancient  cha-
racters, which  were  both  elegant,  and  similar  to  those  of  the
Greeks.  For  according  to  the  testimony  of  Xcnophon,  and
Archilochiis,  the  figures  of  those  letters,  which  Cadmus
brought  out  of  Phuenicia  into  Greece,  resembled  Gaidish,
rather  than  Punic,  or  Phücnician  characters."

We  cannot  accuse  either  Xenophon,  or  Archilochus,  of
recording  absolute  nonsense.  They  must  have  meant,  that
the  Gauls,  or  Celtcc,  from  remote  antiquity,  even  before
the  supposed  aeraof  Cadmus,  had  possessed  letters,  that  were
similar  to  those  which  had  been  ascribed  usualli/  to  that
celebrated  personage.

There  are  some  grounds,  then,  for  the  opinion,  that  the
Celt  a  were  acquainted  with  letters,  long  before  the  esta-
blishment of  the  famous  Greek  school  at  Marseilles.

The  similarity  of  the  two  series,  is  a  good  argument  of
their  common  origin;  but  it  furnishes  no  clue  for  the  dis-
covery of  their  first  proprietors.  "  Did  the  Celtce  borrow
letters  from  Greece?  or  Greece,  from  the  Ce/tce'^

The  invention  of  letters  is  concealed  in  the  darkness  of
time.  I,  therefore,  think  it  most  reasonable  to  suppose,  that
both  nations  derived  them  from  a  common  ancestor.

Mr.  Astle,  having  diligently  w^eighed  the  opinions,  and
authorities,  of  his  predecessors,  declares — ''  It  might  be  im-r
proper  to  assert,  that  letters  were  unknown  before  tiie  de^
luge,  recorded  by  Moses."  P.  46.

He  observes,  that — "  Three  opinions  haye  prevailed,  re-
specting the  origin  of  the  Greek  letters;  the  first,  that  Cad"
22


244

mus  was  the  inventor ;  the  second  attributes  them  to  Cecrops ;
and  the  third,  znthmore  reason,  to  the  Pelasgi."  P.  66,  Note.

This  general  mme  o^  Pclasgi,  comprehended  a  very  con-
siderable part,  of  the  earl}^  inliabitants  of  those  countries,
which  Moses  assigns,  exclusively,  to  the  lapetida.  Their
character  seems  to  identify  them  with  Titans  of  this  fa-
mily, the  Celto-ScythcB,  or  those  descendants  of  Japheth,
who  had  been  concerned  in  building  the  tower  of  Babel.
The  same  idea  is  confirmed,  by  the  names  of  several  of
their  tribes;  Thesproti,  Coucones,  Macarei,  Aegeoues,  Cy-
vxthi,  Titanes,  ^c.     Apollodor.  L.  iii.  8.

Their  families  were,  at  an  early  period,  spread  over
Greece,  and  several  regions  of  Europe,  or  ancient  Celtica ;
and  these  famihes  may,  as  far  as  the  introduction  of  an  al-
phabet can  have  depended  upon  them,  have  carried  the
same  copy,  wherever  they  Avent.

Mr.  Astle  pronounces  the  Etruscan  alphabets  to  be
Pelasginn  ; — he  cites  the  authority  of  Herodotus,  that  a  co-
lony of  these,  went  by  sea,  from  Lt/dia,  into  Italj/,  under
Tyrrhenus,  and  he  dates  this  expedition,  about  A.  M.  2011,
or,  1993  years  before  Christ.  P.  53.

Taking  this  proposition,  as  I  find  it  stated  by  him,  I
would  remark,  that  such  Pelasgi,  as  came  into  Europe
from  the  shores  of  Asia  Minor,  in  the  time  of  those  post
diluvian  patriarchs,  by  zvhom  the  earth  was  divided, — were,
imdoubtedly,  lapetida,  and  probably,  comprehended  fa-
mihes, both  of  Comer's,  and  of  Jdvnn's  house,  who  had,
Éius  far,  an  equal  claim,  to  the  knowledge  of  letters.

This  little  sketch  may  suffice,  to  shew  the  general  pro-


245

òeòilifi/,  arising  from  ancient  evidence,  ŵnd  from  the  tes-
timony of  surviving  monuments,  that,  zucstcni  Celtcc,  and
their  Druids,  were,  from  remote  periods,  acquainted  with
letters,  (however  they  may  iiave  quahfied,  or  prohibited,  the
use  of  them)  and  had  an  alphabet,  similar  to  tliat  of  the  an-
cient Greeks,  which  yet,  was  not  recently  borrowed  from
that  people,  but  sprung  from  a  remote,  and  common  orii^in
to  both  nations.


Tli€  following  observations,  drawn  from  sourses  less  ac-
cessible to  men  of  letters,  will,  perhaps,  throw  some  new
light,  upon  this  interesting  subject.

It  is  a  fact,  generally  known  to  those  who  are  at  all  con-
yersant  in  the  language,  and  the  history,  of  the  Welsh, — that
some  very  old  works  of  British  Bards,  are  still  extant^
particularly  those  of  Jneurin,  Taliesin,  and  Llyrcarch  Hen,
Avho  lived  in  the  sixth  century.  See  E.  Llwi/d's  Catalogue
of  British  MSS.  Archocol.  P.  254,  8cc. — and  Evans's  Spe-
cimens, London,  1764.     P.  54,  63,  &c.

These  works  possess  all  the  internal,  and  the  external
marks  of  authenticity,  that  cari,  with  reason  be  demanded.
They  agree  with  Saxon  authors  in  their  account  of  histo-
rical facts,  which  the  modern  Welsh,  without  their  aid,
could  never  have  reached.

Their  authors  are  mentioned  in  the  oldest  and  best,
copies  of  Nennius.     Evans,  P.  6Q.

They  are  frequent  objects  of  allusion,  and  are  often  quot-
ed by  their  successors,  in  the  times  of  the  Welsh  princes ;—


246

many  of  them  are  still  preserved,  in  copies^  on  vellum,  from
five  hunched,  to  eight  hundred  years  old.     Llwyd.

It  is  clear,  from  the  testimony,  and  the  general  tone  of
these  Bards,  that  the  memory  of  Druids  was  neither  ob-
literated, nor  lightly  esteemed,  amongst  Britons  of  their
time.  They  not  only  declare,  and  profess,  a  veneration  for
the  doctrine  of  those  reverend  sages,  but  avow  their  obli-
gation to  them  for  much  of  their  own  science.

Taliesin,  Avho  is  called  the  chief  of  the  Bards,  expressly
declares  himself  to  have  been  received  into  the  order  of
Druids,  and  professes  to  inculcate  several  of  their  genuine
doctrines.  Many  of  his  remaining  poems  treat  largely  on
the  metempsychosis, — the  formation  of  the  zcorld,  and  of
man, — the  nature,  and  first  principles  of  things, — or  other
mysterious  subjects,  which  have  been  ascribed,  eminently,
to  the  order  of  Druids.

In  the  %vorks  of  such  Druidical  disciples,  it  will  not  be
unreasonable  to  expect  more  particular  information  re-
specting the  arts,  or  traditions,  of  the  Druids,  than  such  as
can  be  obtained  from  Greek,  and  Roman,  writers.

Respecting  the  subject  before  us,  it  may  be  collected  from
these  documents,  that  our  Druids  possessed  a  general  sys-
tem  of  tokens,  or  symbols,  which  they  not  only  used  in  their
divinations,  by  lot,  but  applied,  also,  to  the  purpose  of  com-
municating ideas,  and  thoughts.  That  system  appears  to
have  been  formed  upon  the  following  principle.

Discriminative  characters,  or  properties,  had  been  ob-
served in  particular  species  of  trees,  and  plants.  These  were
not  of  a  kind,  which  demanded  the  eye  of  an  expert  na•


247

tmalist,  alone^  to  discover  them ;  but  which  presented  them-
selves, obviously,  to  popular,  notice  and  remark :  such  as,  the
expanding  boughs,  and  leaves,  of  the  oah, — the  length  and
nprightntss  of  the  Jir, — the  quivering  motion  of  the  asjjen
leaf, — or  the  iioUoicness  of  the  reed.

These  obvious  peculiarities,  had  suggested,  naturally
enough,  to  a  simple  race,  distinct,  though  general  ideas,
of  the  respective  trees,  or  plants,  and  had  given  them  a  na-
tural hint  of  comparison,  between  other  objects,  and  those
plants,  whenever  the  same  general  idea  should  present
itself.

Thus,  of  a  man,  who  possessed  an  expanded  mind,  it
would  be  said, — in  perfect  agreement  with  language  of  poe-
try, at  this  day, — ''  He  is  an  oak'," — of  another,  who  was
liable  to  be  intimidated,  was  irresolute,  and  wavering,  "  He
is  an  aspen  leaf;^^ — or,  of  a  third,  who  vi^s  hollow,  and  de-
ceitful, "  He  is  a  reed.''

Men,  in  progress  of  time,  had  proceeded  so  far,  as  to
convey  these  general  ideas,  from  one  place  to  another,  by
means  of  a  leaf,  or  sprig,  of  the  characteristical  tree,  or
by  several  of  them,  artificially  combined.  From  such  iiide,
"^and  simple  openings,  evidently,  arose  that  system  of  gene-
ral symbols,  which  had  been  retained  by  our  Druids,  and
which,  at  last,  grew  into  a  science  of  such  importance,
and  of  such  comprehension,  that  our  Bards  of  Druidism,
vaunted  themselves,  not  a  little,  upon  their  complete  ac-
quaintance with  it, — emphatically  denominating  the  appli-
cation of  its  principles,  rhhi,  or  run,  the  secret,  ox  mastery.

This,  profound,  secret,  they  guarded,  from  the  knowledge
pf  the  vulgar,  with  peculiar  jealousy,  and  circumspection :


248

tlie  ^'formation,  therefore,  which  they  have  left  us,  υροΛ
the  subject, — though  it  ascertains  the  fact,  that,  unquestion-
ab  they  possessed  that  system, — is  not  adequate,  of  itself,
to  he  task,  of  developing  its  practical  application.

Their  notices  consist,  only,  of  such  mysterious  hints,  as
Druids  might  have  communicated  safely  to  their  disciples,
during  the  infant  stages  of  their  probation,  and  would  re-
quire a  further  explanation,  after  their  admission.  Thus,
magnificently,  Taliesin  speaks  of  his  attainments,  in  thi«;
deep  science  —

Myvi  yw  Taliesin,
Ben  Beirdd  y  Gorllewin:
Mi  adwaen  bob  corsin,
Yngogov  Gorddewin.

IV,  Arch.  V.  i.  P.  34

^'  1  am  Taliesin,

Chief  of  the  Bards  of  the  zcest ; —
I  am  acquainted  with  every  sprig,
In  the  cave  of  the  Arch-diviner."

In  another  poem,  entitled  Angar  Cyvyndaicd,  (Cou'
cordia  discors)  he  makes  a  further  boast  of  his  very  superior
knowledge —

Gogwn — Pwy  amgyfrawd  gwydd,
Ο  aches  ammodydd:
Gogwn  da  a  drwg.

Ibid  V.  36.


249

*'  I  know  the  intent  of  the  treeSf

In  the  memoriiil  *  of  compacts :

I  know  good  and  evil."

And  again —

Atwyn  yd  rannawd,
Gwawd  neu  merl,  gogyfrawd,
«-  Aches  gwydd  Gwyddion —

Gogwn  i  'nevawd.

"  I  know  which  was  decreed.
Praise,  or  disgrace,  by  the  intention
Of  the  memorial  of  the  trees  of  the  Sages —
I  understand  my  institute."

Notwithstanding  this  occasional  boast,  of  superior  knoAV-
ledge,  it  may  be  collected  from  the  following  quotations,
how  little  the  Bards  were  disposed,  or  public  spirited
enough,  to  make  strangers  as  wise  as  themselves.  They  are
taken  from  the  Gorzcynion,  or  Elucidators,  a  piece  as-
cribed to  Llywnrch  Hen,  who  lived,  as  I  have  already  ob-
served^ in  the  sixth  century.

This  piece  contains  about  one  hundred  lines,  in  such
triplets,  as  we  ascribe  to  the  ages  of  Druidism,  and  it  con-
sists of  hints,  respecting  the  information,  conveyed  by  the
leaves,  and  sprigs,  of  certain  trees,  and  plants.  The  sub-
ject is  confined  here,  to  the  use  of  those  leaves,  and  sprigs,


*  This  sense  of  Aches  is  become  obsolete  in   Welsh ;  the  Cornish  retains   it^
Ία  the  plural  (otm.—'Acheson,  Memorials,  hiscriptions.
Pylat  vynnus  screfe  a  vewnas  Crest  acheson.
*♦  Piiete  would  write  inscTtptifns  gf  the  life  of  Christ."  Dr.  Fryce'i  Diet.


250

ris  lots,  or  as  tokens :  and  the  language  has  heen  so  guarded,
that,  somethnes,  tlie  intended  p/ant  is  only  intimated,
by  an  ambiguous  periphrasis;  thus,  in  the  'iÜth  tripht —

Gorvvyn  blaen  brwyn-brigawg  wydd.
Pan  dyner  dan  obenydd —
Meddwl  serchog  syberw  vydd.*

'*  The  top  of  the  rush-spriggd  tree,  [the  birch]  declares•.

When  drawn  under  the  pillow —

The  mind  of  the  affectionate  rcill  be  liberal.''

10th  triplet.

Gorvvyn  blaen  derw,  chwerw  brig  on,
Ciiweg  evwr — "  Chwerthiniad  ton :
Ni  chtil  grudd  custudd  calon."

"  The  top  of  the  oak,  the  bitter  sprig  of  the  ash,
And  the  sweet  brakeueed  declare—  a  broken  laugh.
The  cheek  will  not  conceal  the  anguish  of  the  heart/*

22d  triplet.

Gorwyn  blaen  Celli,  gogyhyd  yswydd,
Adail  derw,  dygaydydd  f —
A  wel  a  gar  gwyn  ei  vyd.

"  The  top  of  hazels— privet  of  equal  length _,
Tied  up  with  oak  leaves,  declare — •
Happy  is  he  who  sees  whom  he  loves,"


*   W.  Arch.  V.  i.  P.  122.

t  Ditgydiavt,  to  connect,  or  lie  np  together*-


251

The  other  triplets  proceed  in  the  same  character-—

The  Bard  is  labouring,  continually,  to  guard  the  maia
secret,  agreeably  to  the  injunction  delivered,  in  the  follow-
ing mystical  triplets,  upon  the  same  topic,  and  which  have
been  regarded,  as  the  oldest  remains  of  the  Welsh  language,
and  as  genuine  relics  of  Druidical  ages,

Marchwiail  bedw  briglas
A  dyn  vy  nhroed  ο  wanas;
jNag  addev  rin  i  was.

Marchwiail  derw  m^vynllwyh
A  djrn  vy  nhroed  ο  gadwyn —
Nag  addev  rin  i  vorwyn.

Marchwiail  derw  deilar

A  dyn  vy  nhroed  ο  garchar —

Nag  addev  rin  i  lavar.

'^  The  shoots  of  the  green-topped  binh
Will  draw  my  foot  out  of  a  snare :
Reveal  not  the  secret  to  a  youth.

The  shoots  of  the  kindly  oak
Will  draw  my  foot  out  of  a  chain  :
Reveal  not  the  secret  to  a  maid.

The  shoots  of  the  leaf  if  oak
ΛVill  draw  my  foot  out  of  prison-
Trust  not  the  secret  to  thy  voice."

The  above  quotations  may  suffice  to  shew,  that  those
Bards,  who  professed  themselves  the  disciples  of  Druids.


25â

assumed  their  knowledge  in  a  systematical  art,  of  collecting,
and  communicating,  certain  ideas  of  things,  and  of  their
several  relations,  by  the  leaves,  and  sprigs,  of  particular
trees,  or  plants ;  and  considered  the  perfect  knowledge  of
this   art,  as  a  valuable  accomplishment.

To  these  authorities,  I  may  add,  that  the  Welsh,  a  people,
proverbially  tenacious  of  their  ancient  customs,  and  of  their
traditions,  have,  to  this  day,  preserved  the  vestiges  of  that
system,  though,  it  appears,  they  have  quite  forgotten  the
elements,  or  principles,  upon  which  it  was  founded.

Mr,  Owen,  in  his  Dictionavif,  of  the  IVtlsh  language,
records  the  following  fact,  under  the  word,  Bedzc. — "  The
birch  was  an  emblem  of  readiness,  or  complacency,  in
doing  a  kind  act.  If  a  young  woman  accepted  of  the  ad-
dresses of  a  lover,  she  gave  him  the  birchen  branch,  mostly
formed  into  a  crown;  but  if  he  was  rejected,  she  gave  him
Η  collen,  or  hazelJ'

And  again,  under  Coll. — "  There  is  an  old  custom,  of
presenting  a  forsaken  lover  with  a  stick,  or  twig  of  hazel,
probably,  in  allusion  to  the  double  meaning  of  the  word, —
loss,  and  the  hazel."

I  am  induced,  by  some  hints,  which  occur  in  the  old
Bards,  to  conjecture,  that,  in  those  cases,  where  the  use
of  common  letters  was  prohibited,  the  ingenious  Druids,
having  duly  arranged  their  symbolical  sprigs,  knotted  them
up  in  strings,  like  those  of  the  ancient  Chinese,  or  the  fa-
mous fjuipos,  of  the  Peruvians.

Upon  one  of  these  ancient  symbol:^,  ΊΊ/Ιϊ^^Ιη  says—  ,


253

Gwern,  blaen  Uîn,
A  wnaent  gyssevin —

"  The  alders,  at  the  end  of  the  line,
Began  the  arrangement."

In  the  Gorzci/nion,  quoted  above,  we  find, — "  The  tops
of  the  hazel,  and  the  privet,  of  equal  length,  tied  up  with
oak  leaves."  And  in  Bitarfh  Beirdd,  or  the  Circle  of  the
Bards,  the  following  remarkable  passage  occurs—

Wyv  llogell  cerdd,  wyv  Ueenydd  :
Carav  y  gorwydd  a  gorail  clyd,
A  bardd  a  brjd,  ni  phryn  ired.
Nyt  ev  carav  amrysoniad:
A  geibl  celvydd  ni  meuedd  medd.
Madws  myned  i'r  ymddiod,
A  chelvyddeid,  am  gelvyddyd,
A  chanchvm,  cystwm   Cj/zc^lad.*

"  I  am  the  depository  of  song ;  I  am  a  man  of  letters :
I  love  the  sprigs,  with  their  woven-tops  secured.
And  the  Bard  who  composes,Avithout  purchasing  his  liquor
I  love  not  him, — the  framer  of  strife :
He  that  reproaches  the  skilful,  possesses  no  mead.
It  ia  time  to  go  to  the  banquet.
With  the  artists  employed  about  their  mystery.
With  a  HUNDRED  KNOTS,  after  the  manner  of  our  couH"
tryraen;'—ox  "  Of  the  Celtcer


'  W.  Arch.  V.  i.   P.  27.


254


Sect.  V.     On   the  formation   of  an   Alphabet j  upon  the
principle  of  general  Symbols.

JL  HAT  such  a  system  of  $ÿmbols,  conveyed,  in  its  ori-
ginal state,  and  primitive  application,  the  ideas  of  things,
and  their  several  relations,  has  been  sliewn  ;  but  it  has
not  yet  appeared,  how  it  was  connected  with  definite
words,  or  with  elementary  sounds.  Thus,  by  a  leaf,  or
sprig  of  the  oak,  Druids,  in  the  act  of  divination,  may
have  collected,  and  communicated,  (amongst  others  of  the
order,)  an  image  of  spreading,  expansion,  or  unfolding :
sprigs,  or  leaves  of  the  asp,  might  present  the  image  of
removing,  wavering,  flittering,  or  inconstancy ;  but  sym-
bols like  these,  in  the  light  we  have  hitherto  contemplated
them,  may  have  had  no  affinities  with  one,  more  than
another,  of  the  synonymous  terms,  and  may  have  had  no
relation  to  the  elementary  sounds  of  any  term  whatsoever,
Thus  far,  then,  a  system  of  language  by  symbols,  may  have
been  totally  different,  in  its  nature,  from  alphabetical
writing.  It  may  have  been  purely  hieroglyphical.  But  the
art,  as  it  may  be  ascertained,  by  the  evidence  of  the  same
authors,  did  not  rest  here.

The  system,  considered  as  Druidical,  had  attained  such
a  degree  of  perfection,  that  the  same  hieroglyphical
sprigs,  Λvere  become  tlic  sipnbols  of  sounds,  as  well  as  of
things,  or  of  their  several  relations  ; — and  that  even  deline-
ations of  them  had  been  constituted  into  a  regular  aU
phabct.


255

Tlîis  task,  of  improving,  and  of  maturing  a  series  af
general  tokens,  into  claiuntanf  letters,  seems  to  have  been
an  effort  of  invention,  so  far  surpassing  the  degree  of
acumen^  ascribed  usually  to  a  rude,  and  primitive  race,
that  few,  perhaps,  will  agree  to  its  truth,  upon  any  argu-
ments, that  fall  short  of  deaioustration.  It  might,  perhaps,
then,  be  more  desirable,  to  re^t  the  cause,  upon  evidence
of  Úvefact,  tlian  to  adduce  reasons  for  its  probability.

The  following  observations,  however,  may  serve  to  shewj^
that,  at  an  early  period  of  society,  and  amongst  a  people,
%vho  spoke  a  language,  resembling  the  (radical)  Celtic  ;
such  an  invention  would  have  been  more  natural,  and  more
obvious,  than  it  could  be,  in  the  modern  state  of  cultivated
nations.

Though  the  system  of  the  Druidical  symbols,  as  far  as
we  have  hitherto  traced  it,  had  no  visible  dependence  on
particular  words ;  yet,  its  general  connection  Avith  language,
was  obvious,  and  was  necessary.

Let  it  be  supposed,  for  instance,  that  a  Druid  had  con-
sulted liis  lots  of  magic,  or  had  received  intelhgence,  by
means  of  the  symboh,  or  tokens,  respecting  the  intention
of  a  General.  Let  it  be  demanded  of  him,  what  informa-
tion he  had  collected,  upon  such  an  occasion,  and  he
would  naturally  answer,  in  the  terms  of  his  language,
either  by  repeating  the  names  of  the  lots,  or  symboh  in
due  order  ;  as,  the  asp,  the  fir,  the  furze,  the  yew,  and
quicken  tree  ;  or  else,  by  reciting  the  characteristical  ideas,
under  Avhich  these  emblems  were  generally  viewed;  as,
*'  He— proceeds — out  of— his  place  J'    Tlius  it  is,  that  .sy;«-


256

δο/s,  like  these  branches  of  sprigs,  may  represent  loordi,  ai
Avell  as  ideas.


But,  as  most  languages  have  many  synonjonous  terms^
consisting  οι  elementary  soxxnas,  very  different  from  each
other ;  and,  as  the  generality  of  the  words  are  formed  by
combinations  of  several  elementary  sounds,  it  will  be
replied,  that  symbols,  like  these,  could  not  have  represented
the  simple  elements  of  speech,  in  a  manner  so  distinct,  as
to  constitute  the  rudiments  of  an  alphabet.

The  main  force  of  this  objection  may,  however,  be  a
little  broken,  by  a  retrospect  into  those  properties  of  the
Celtic  language,  which  are  mentioned  in  Sect.  III.  and
Avhich,  perhaps,  characterized  the  original  state  of  language
in  general.

The  radicals  of  this  language  are  of  the  simplest  nature
imaginable.  They  consist  either  of  single  vowels,  or  of
single  consonants,  connected  with  a  vocal  power.

Before  the  birth  of  compounds,  and  of  derivatives,  the
vocabulary  of  such  a  language,  must,  of  course,  have
been  circumscribed,  within  the  narrowest  limits,  and,  per-
haps, it  comprised  no  terms,  that  were  properly  synony-
mous. AVhenever  the  mind,  therefore,  discriminated  an
idea,  the  term,  by  Avhich  it  was  to  be  expressed,  was  limited
and  certain.

The  Celtcc  regarded  each  of  their  elementary  sounds,  artir
culate,  or  vocal,  as  having  a  natural  affinity,  or  correspon-
dence, to  some  general  image,  or  perception :  and  it  Avas
their  opinion,  that  the  name  of  the  respective  ideas  could


2.•>7

De  äö  properly  expressed  by  other  sounds.  Hence,  the  con-
tinual effort  of  their  Barch,  to  cherish,  and  perpetuate,  the
characteristical  soundá,  in  their  descriptions  of  stre?igth^
zceakne^s,  vcíociti/,  slorcness,  ztdght,  smoothness,  hvitif,  as-
licriti/,  S-c.  Avhich  the  laws  of  their  metre  sometimes  ren-
dered a  vct-y  arduous  task.

-  Of  the  extreme  simplicity,  which  characterised  the  pri-
mitive Celtic,  I  may  offer  an  example,  iu  the  message
which  I  liave  supposed —

"  He  proceeds,  out  of  his  place,"     "  Ε  a  6  i  It."

Let  us  only  imagine>  that,  a  language  of  the  people
wlioever  they  were,  by  whom  the  system  of  general  sym-
bols was  first  improved  into  alphabetical  writing,  retained
these,  or  the  like  properties,  and  then,  we  shall  bring  this
most  curious  invention,  within  reach  of  human  abilities.

If  the  descriptive  term,  and  the  idea  described,  had  a  na-
tural connexion,  between  each  other,  and,  were  mutually
Suggested,  the  symbol  of  the  one,  Avould,  of  course,  become
the  symbol  of  the  other.

If  primitive  terms  were  so  simple,  as  to  consist  of  ele-
mentary sounds,  the  symbols  of  those  terms,  would,  at  the
stime  time,  have  typified  the  simple  elements  of  language:
and,  consequently,  the  inventiion  of  hierogli/phics,  or,  of
utters,  whilst  men  spoke  one  simple  language,  must  have
been  one,  and  the  same  thing.

Leaving  this  topic  at  present,  and  at  the  mercj'•  of  crtfi-
c/jsm,  I  shall  proceed,  and  give  Talicsin's  testimony,  as  to
the  fact.     Be  it  still  remembered,  however,  tlmt  we  must
κ


258

not  expect,  here,  a  testimony,  delivered  in  the  language  of
an  historian.  The  doctrine  is  taught  by  him,  who  is  afraid
of  exposing  his  aweful  mysteries,  to  the  eyes  of  the  vulgar,
and  profane.

Amongst  the  remaining  Avorks  of  this  Bard,  there  is  an
allegorical  poem,  of  near  two  hundred  and  fifty  lines,  en-
titled. Cad  God4eu,  the  battle  of  the  trees, — or,  of  inten^
tions,  designs,  or,  devices, — for  the  idiom  of  the  language
will  bear  either  construction.  The  author  begins,  in  his
usual,  (that  is,  in  his  mystic)  strain,  with  a  relation,  as  it
should  seem,  at  first  view,  of  his  own  transmigrations,  or  of
the  various  forms  which  he  successively  assumed.  But  the
entire  poem  is  an  allegory :  and  from  the  general  design,
it  may  be  collected,  that,  by  these  changes,  the  Bard
means  to  delineate  the  ripening  progress  of  art,  science,  or
invention,  and  the  successive  subjects  of  investigation.  We
may,  therefore,  consider  him,  as  personifying  science,  or
the  inventive,  and  contemplative  principle,  when  he  says* —

Bum  yn  lliaws  rhith.
Cyn  bum  dyscyvrith,  SvC,

"  I  was  in  a  multitude  of  shapes.
Before  I  assumed  a  consistent  form."^

Having  enumerated  about  sixteen  of  these  forms,  he
3ŵys,  in  the  twenty-third  line.

Bum  Gwydd  yngwarthan.

^  At  last,  I  became  trees/' — or —  "  A  sage.'*

•  ^'  '  ...  ■  ■  -

•   IV.  Aick.  V.  i.  P.  S8.


259

The  word  g^ydd,  when  plural,  signifies  fr^is;  if  singu-
lar, a  sage,  ox  philosopher.

From  this  passage,  it  becomes  the  main  business  of  the
poem,  though  interspersed  with  mysterious  hints,  to  describe
the  allegory  of  arming  the  symbolical  trees,  or  plants,  and
bringing  them  out,  in  order  of  battle.  The  device  is  not
without  sublimity,  though  of  rather  a  wild  and  singular  cast; —
but  this  poem  is  not  the  only  piece,  which  touches  upon
the  subject.

There  is  an  senigmutical  account,  of  the  same  battle,  in
the  first  volume  of  the  Welsh  Afchaology,  P.  167,  to  which
I  refer  the  Reader  for  the  original :  the  following  is  a
literal  translation.

*'  The  history  of  thfe  battle  of  the  trees"—

*'  These  are  the  versicles  which  Λvere  sung,  at  the  battle
of  the  trees,  or,  as  others  call  it,  the  battle  of  Achren,  [I.
Crann,  a  tree;  whence,  cranchar,  ά  lot,  or  token,  i.e.  a
tender  tree,  or  sprig.']  It  happened,  on  a<!'count  of  a  white
roebuck,  and  a  xvhelp,  which  came  from  the  lower  region,
and  were  taken  by  Amathaon^'  [from  Math,  kind,  species,
and  honi,  to  discriminate,']  "  the  son  of  Don,"  [genius. 'I
*'  For  this  reason,  Amathaon,  the  son  of  Don,  engaged
mux  Arazuu,"  [eloquence,  the  facidti/  of  speech,]  "  king  of
the  lower  region."

"  And  there  was  a  man,  in  the  battle,  who  could  not  be

conquered,    till  his  name  was  known:  and,  on  the   other

side,  there  Λvas  a  w^man,  called  Achren,  [a   tree,]  whose

party  could  not  be  overcome,  till  her  name  was  discovered.

R  2.


260

And  Gwiddion,  [the  philosopher,  another  name  of  Ama-
thaon,']  the  son  of  Dun,  devised  the  name  of  the  man,  and
sung  these  two  versicles."

"  Surefooted  is  my  steed,  before  the  spur, —

Thou,  with  the  head  oi'  Olgeu,  save  thyself  by  speedy  flight,

Bráti,  is  thy  name,  thou  with  the  fair  locks."

*'  Surefooted  is  thy  steed,  in  the  day  of  battle.

Conspicuous  is  the  alder-top  in  thy  hand,

Ο  hrân,  its  cracked  bud  and  i^prig  are  found  on  thee  !'*

*'  And  the  good  Amathaon  conquered.'*

Olgen,  Olgwen,  or,  Olzcen,  is  the  Venus  of  Britons :  Bran
signifies,  an  omen,  or  token — <

I  shall  now  quote,  and  then  translate,  some  of  Talksin's
lines,  upon  this  topic —

Nid  mi  wyv  ni  gan
Ceint,  er  yn  vychan,
Ceint  ynghad  Godeu  brig,
îlhâg  Prydein  Wledig.
Gweint  veirch  canholig
Llynghesoedd  meuedig:
Gweint  mil  mawren,
Arnaw  yd  oedd  can  pen,
A  chad  erddygnawd,
Dan  von  y  tavawd;
A  chad  arall  y  sydd,
Yn  ei  wcgilydd.

"  I  am  not  lie  who  cannot  vug


261

Of  ihe  conflict,  small  though  I  be.

The  conflict;,  in  the  engagement  of  the  sprigs  oi  tree*.

Before  the  ruler  of  Britain,

The  central  steeds  moved

The  freighted  fleets —

There  moved  a  bold-spirited  creature :

Bearing  a  hundred  heads,

And  a  battle  was  contested.

Under  the  root  of  his  tongues:

And  another  confiict  there  2%

In  the  recesses  of  his  heads/'

I  know  not  Λvhat  to  make  of  the  central  steeds,  and
freighted  feets;  but,  by  the  wonderful  creature,  with  a
hundred  heads,  I  think  it  probable,  that  our  British  my*
thologist,  ΛνοηΜ  mean  to  illustrate,  or  typify,  the  human
race,  divided  into  a  multitude  of  its  various  families:  the
topography  of  battle,  in  the  organs  of  sjjeech,  and  in  the
seat  of  the  understanding,  clearly  points  out  the  nature  of
his  allegory.

The  Bard  now  begins  a  description  of  this  monster,  which
might  remind  us  of  the  Tj/phon  of  the  ancients,  but  the
passage  is  evidently  mutilated. —

Llyfan  du  gavlaw.
Cant  ewin  arnaw —


Neidr  vraith  gribaw


*^^•


"  A  black  grasping  toad.
Armed  with  a  hundred  claws —
A  spotted  and  crested  snake."

Are  not    these   the   sordid,  and  the   violent  passions  of


26^

mankind,  which  obstruct  the  attainments,  and  progress,  \){
scieijce  ?  They  are,  1  think,  resolved  by  some  interpolator,
into  the  sins,  rchich  occasion  our  punishment  in  the  flesh.

But,  immediately,    Taliesin,  resumes  his  Druidisnij  and
proceeds  with  his  allegory. —

Bum  ynghaer  vevenydd  (L.  Veknydd)

Yt  gryssynt  wellt  a  gwydd :

Cenynt  gerddorion,

Erysynt  cadvaon:

Dadwyrain  i  vrython^

A  oreu  Gzutjddion.

Gelwysid  ar  neivon,

Hyd  pan  gwarettau,

Υ  rhên  rwy  digonsai:

As  attebwy  dovydd —

Trwy  iaith  ag  elvydd — •

Rhithwch  rieddawg  wydd,

Gantaw  yn  lluydd :

A  rhwystraw  peblig

Cad,  ar  Haw  annevig.

"  I  was  in  the  city  of  Bevenj/dd,

Whither  the  reeds,  and  trees,  hastened.

The  masters  of  song  will  celebrate

The  wonders  of  the  combatants.

A  re-exaltation  to  the  mixt  race

Did  the  sages  accomplish.

They  invoked  the  dweller  of  heaven.

Till  he,  the  supreme  Ruler,

Should  succour  those  wiio  had  satisfied  him.

The  great  Regulator  gave  for  answer —


Q63

Throughout  language,  and  its  dements^

Delineate  the  commanding  trees,

In  the  capacity  of  Avarriors,

And  restrain  the  confusion

Of  battle^  in  the  hand  of  the  inexpert."

Here,  the  Bard,  unequivocally  declares,  the  general
nature  of  his  great,  and  profound  secret.  The  symbolical
trees,  or  sprigs,  were  delineated,  through  language,  and
through  its  elements.  He  regards  this  device,  as  being  so
important  in  its  use,  that  it  proved  a  re-exaltation  to
the  mixed  race ;  and  so  ingenious  in  its  contrivance,
that  it  could  be  ascribed,  by  him,  to  nothing  less  than  a
communication  of  the  Supreme  Being,  in  answer  to  the
direct  prayer  of  tlie  sages.     To  this  he  subjoins  :

Pan  swynwyd  *  godau,
Yg  gobeith  -f  an  goddau,
Dygyttoroynt  godeu,
Ο  bedryddant  danau—
Cwyddynt  amaerau.

When  the  sprigs  were  marked,  f

In  the  plane  (or  tablet)  of  devices.
The  sprigs  uttered  their  voice.
From  the  frame  of  distinct  soimds —
Then  ceased  the  doubtful  conflict.


*  Swijn,  perhaps  from  Syiu,  Magus,  a  sacred,  mysterious,  or  magical
character;  a.  talisman,  Hwynaie,  to  delineate  such  characters;  to  preserve,  or
restore,  by  their  iiieauSj  to  charm.     The  words  have  an   apparent  aiSnitj  with

t  Gc-"Oaith,  dim.  of  paith,  a  plane.


264

The  Bard  proceeds  to  describe  the  expedient  of  arming
these  trees,  or  plants,  to  the  munber  of  twenty-four  or,
five;  to  discriminate  between  their  several  dispositions^  and
the  various  talents  tliey  exerted  ;  to  inform  us_,  that  some  of
them  came  forward  vohnitarily,  and  joined  the  battle,  when
others  were  armed  with  diihculty,  and  after  a  long  interval.
In  this  part  of  the  piece,  the  metaphors  are  sometimes
Ijroken,  so  as  to  admit  a  few  rays  of  light,  between  the
chinks.  The  Bard  is,  at  one  moment,  gravely  engaged  'n\
arming  his  trees;  the  next,  he  touches  upon  the  subject,  as
a  magical  device, — a  system  of  symbols,  an  invention  of
Givyddion,  or  the  Sages ;  and  he  occasionally  hints,,
that  this  invention,  or  device^  Λvas  of  the  highest  anti-r
qiiity.

A'm  swynwys  sx'wydd
Sywyddon,  cyn  \>yi\.

'^  I  was  marked  by  the  Sage

Of  Sages,  in  the  primitive  Avorld."

We  have,  afterward<j  some  account  of  the  armies  oi  thesp
Vfpetable  leaders.


Pedwar  ugein   cant


A  gweint,  ar  eu  chAvant :
Nid  ynt  hyn,  nid  ynt  iau
No  mi,  yn  eu  banau.

i*  Tour-score  hundred
Arranged  themselves,  at  their  pleasure
Tiiey  are  neither  older  nor  younger
Than  myself,  in  their  articulations"


Q65


That  these  eight  thousand  are  to  be  understood,  as
a  definite,  for  tiie  iudetinite  number  of  tlie  words,  iiji
the  language  of  the  Sages,  is  rendered  probable,  by
llie  remark,  which  the  Bard  makes,  in  the  person
of  Science,  concerning  the  equality  of  their  age,  and
stiir  more  so,  by  what  he  adds^  upon  the  device  in
general.

Ev  gwrith,  ev  dadwrithj,
Ey  gwrith  ieithpedd.

'^  It  cC'illform,  it  icill  decomposej
It  icill  fûrììL  languages."

What  I  have  selected^  from  this  curious  allegory,  nuiy
suffice  to  shew,  that  symbolical  sprigs,  of  Driiidism,
yiere  actual!}^  delineated,  in  a  certain  form,  and  were  de-
finitely arranged,  in  a  certain  order,  to  represent  the  Jirst
principles  of  language,  or  tq  constitute  an  alphabet.  Tiie
fact  will  appear,  still  more  clearly,  from  hints,  which  the
same  Taliesin  gives  elsewhere.  'I'hus,  in  a  poem,  jto  the
sons  of  Llyr : —

Bum  ynghad  goddeu,  gan  leu  a  Gwyddion,
\\y  a  rithwys  gwydd  elvydd  ag  elestron*.

'*  1  was  in  the  battle  of  devices,  with  the  learned,  and  die

Sagos,
Who  delineated  the  elementary  trees,  and  reeds."


•   W.  .irck.  V.  J.  P.  Ú7.


266

The  word  lieu,  which  is  here  used  as  a  name,  signifies,
to  read,  οϊ  explain.

Again,  in  a  poem,  entitled,  Prlv  gyvarch   Ta  lie  sin,  or
The  first  Greeting  of  Taliesin  : —

Keu  vlaen  gwydd  falsum,
Py  estung  mor  grum,
Neil  pet  anatlon
Yssid  yn  eu  bón —  .
Neu  leu  a  Gw^-ddion,
A  vuant  gelvyddon,
ISeu  a  roddant  lyvron*.

"  Or  the  points  of  the  counterfeited  trees.

What  is  it  they  zchispcr  so  forcibly ;

Or  zchat  various  breathings

Are  in  their  trunks?

These  are  read  by  the  Sages

Who  were  versed  in  science.

Or  zuho  delivered  books."

I  need  not  multiply  quotations,  which  all  make  to  the
same  point.  The  passages  I  have  already  adduced,  may
be  deemed  sufficient,  1  should  hope,  to  explain  the  senti-
ments of  the  oldest  British  Bards,  now  extant,  upon  this
topic ;  namely,  that  our  Druids  possessed  a  kind  of  al-
phabet, zohich,  according  to  their  tradition,  and  their
doctrine,  was  formed  upon  the  system  of  their  sym-
bolical sprigs,  or  hieroglyphics,  cut,  or  delineated,  in
simple  figures,    and  adapted,   so  as   to  represent  the  firsé


*  W.  Arch.  P.


267

principles,  or  the  elementary  sounds,  of  their  language.
And  this  tradition  did  not  become  obsolete,  immediately
after  the  age  of  those  Bards  :  for  we  find  the  word  gwydd^
or  trees,  used,  long  after  their  time,  as  a  term  appropriate^
for  letters,  and  zeriting.

Thus,  Gwiiym  Ddu,  as  late  as  the  year  14Ö0.

Llawer  arver  a  orvydd

Llun  ei  gorph,  Zi)rth  ddarlltin  Gwydd.

f'  Many  an  attitude  undergoes

The  form  of  his  body,  in  reading  the  treesJ*

Before  I  close  this  section,  I  would  just  observe,  that
the  Bards,  uniformly  ascribe  that  system  of  spnbolsy
(whether  considered  as  liieroglyphics, — as  magic  lots,  or
means  of  divination, — or  as  letters,)  to  the  invention  of
the  Sages,  or  Seers, — Gzoyddion.

The  term  Gzej/d,  is  equivalent,  nearly,  to  that  of  Bardd,
one  that  makes  conspicuous,  or  manifest ;  priest, — philo-
sopher,— teacher.

The  appropriation  of  this  term,  to  denote  a  man  of
science,  is  of  high  antiquity,  in  the  language  of  Britons ;
their  Oerzuydd,  or  Druid,  as  it  appears  to  me,  being  one
©f  its  derivatives.

The  word  is  not  confined,  however,  to  the  Sages  of
Britain,  for  Taliesin  says,  in  a  poem,  entitled,  Hants
Taliain :—


268

Mi  a  vúm  yn  y  Hysdon,
Cyn  geni  Givyddion.

**  I  was  in  Liisitania,

Before  the  birth  of  the  Sozes.."'


269


Sect.  VI.     Of  the  Druidkal  Letters.


Wi


Ε  have  hitherto  traced  only  the  general  principlej^
upon  which  the  symbols  of  Druidism  were  constructed,  and
tlie  application  of  that  principle,  to  the  formation  of  an
alphabet.  We  have  seen,  however,  nothing,  as  yet,  of  tlic
number,  the  powers,  or  the  characters,  of  their  letters;
nor  discriminated  the  individual  kind  of  sprig,  or  symholt
by  which  either  of  the  elementary  sounds  Λvas  represented.

These  particulars  are  as  open  to  investigation,  as
those,  which  have  been  just  explained  ;  but  our  intelligence
respecting  them,  must  be  obtained  from  different  sources.

In  the  allegorical  poem,  quoted  above,  Taliesin  has,  in-
deed, given  us  curious  hints,  upon  this  topic.  At  pre-
sent, I  shall  defer  enlarging  upon  them,  as  they  arc  not
clear  enough  to  elucidate  the  whole  plan.

Druidical  teachers,  of  the  sixth  century,  guarded  tlieir
secret  with  too  much  caution,  to  divulge  their  whole  mys-
teries in  the  ears  of  the  uninitiated.  But  this  great  arcanuriif
as  far  as  relates  to  that  subject,  has  been  laid  open  by  their
sHCcessors,  and  by  their  neighbours.  As  the  mysterious  doc-
trines of  Druidism,  were  held,  by  degrees,  in  less  idola--
trous  veneration,  the  disclosure  of  their  secrets  began,  by
the  same  degrees,  to  be  regarded  as  less  profane  :  and  there
was  an  order  of  men  still,  who  could  have  imparted  much
iufonnation  respecting  them.


ä7ö

Tìie  public  have  repeatedly  been  told,  that  the  Druidicat
Bards  left  a  regular  chain  of  successors,  in  tire  IVehii
mountains.  These,  are  not,  even  still,  entirely  extinct.
They  even  profess  to  have  preserved  the  system  of  Bard  ism,
or  Driiidism,  entire,  to  this  day.  (See  Ovccii's  Introd.  to
LI.  Hen.  Ed.  Williains's  Lyric  Poems,  jpry's  Pantog,
P.  305,  SOC\)

It  will  be  recollected,  that,  by  the  term,  Bairds,  the
IVehli  do  not  understand  merely  j)oets ;  but  persons  regularly
instructed  in  the  institutes,  an"d  mysteries,  of  the  original  and
primitive  BritoiiSi

Respecting  the  complete  preservation  of  this  Druidical
system,  b}'  the  Bards,  at  this  day,  I  neither  afììrm,  not
deny  any  thing.  I  think  it,  however,  a  certain  fact,  that
by  them  are  preserved  many  relics,  of  high  antiquity,  and,•
most  probably,  of  the  Druidical  ages.  Amongst  other
curious  notices,  they  have  received,  and  Communicated,  a
scries  of  letters,  which  they  distinguish  by  the  name  of
Coelbren  y  Bnrdd,  the  hillet  of  signs,  of  the  Bards,  of
the    Bardic   alphabet.      (Frys  Pantog.  P.  305.)

The  word  Coelbren,  literally  implies,  the  stick  of  omen^
the  token  stick,  in  its  plural,  it  is  Coelbrmi,  lots,  ot
letters.

Under  tlie  word  Coelbrcii,  Mr.  Owen,  in  his  Welsk
Dictionary,  thus  delineates  of  theabove-mwitioned  alphabet.
'*  Tliis  was  the  original  alphabet  of  the  Britons,  Λvhich  was
cut  across  the  surface  of  a  square  piece  of  wood,  being  theif
>vay  of  writing ;  which  is  still  preserved  by  a  few  of  the
descendants  of  the  Bards."  And  again,  in  his  Introduction
to  LL  Hen,  P.  xL     "  Their  (the  Bards')  original  alphabet


271

is  still  extant,  which  may  be  considered,  as  a  very  great
curiosity.  It  contains  thirty-six  letters,  sixteen  of  which,
are  radical,  and  the  rest,  mutations  of  these."

"  It  is  singular,  that  the  bardic  alphabet  should  contain,
all  the  Etruscan  letters,  without  the^east  deviation  of  form,
except  four  or  five  of  the  latter,  that  are  Romany'

It  must  be  observed,  that,  for  the  purpose  of  convey-
ing an  idea,  of  some  inflective  sounds,  in  the  Welsh
language,  these  Bards  made  use  of  twenty-four  muta-
tions, or  secondary  characters;  so  that  the  whole  series
amounts  to  forty.  But  still,  the  number  of  the  radi-
cal letters,  is  unvaried,  and  the  same  principle  is  pre-
served throughout,  in  forming  the  secondary  powers,  or.
inflections.

In  Fty^s  Pantographia,  P.  307,  we  have  the  following
account  of  the  manner  of  using  these  characters,  accom-
panied with  a  most  curious,  engraved,  specimen.  "  The  ori-
ginal manner  of  Avriting,  amongst  the  ancient  Britons,  was,
by  cutting  the  letters,  with  a  knife,  upon  sticks,  which
were,  most  commonly,  squared,  and  sometimes  formed  into
three  sides:  consequently,  a  single  stick,  contained  either
Jour,  or  three  lines.  (See  Ezek.  xxxvii.  l6.)  The  squares
were  used  for  general  subjects,  and  for  stanzas,  of  four  lines
in  poetry ;  the  trilateral  ones  were  adapted  to  triades,  and
engh/n  milwyr,  or  the  triplet,  and  the  zcarriors  verse.  Se-
veral sticks,  with  writing  upon  them,  were  put  together,
forming  a  kind  of  frame,  which  was  called  Peithynen,  or
Elucidator." — Peithynen  imports  any  tablet,  or  small  body,
with  a  flat  surface,  more  especially  a  brick,  which,  ancient
authors  inform  us,  was  the  material  used,  by  the  old  Baby-
lo7iiaiis,  for  the  record  of  their  facts.


27-2

Mr.  Ouen  sars,  further,  in  a  waste  leaf,  prefixecfto  tbc
becond  part  of  his  Dictionary  :  "  Each  [of  the  Bardic
letters]  had  anciently  a  simple,  appropriate,  character,  and
name,  having  so  much  resemblance,  in  form,  to  those  of
the  same  class,  as  the  analogy  of  sound  pointed  out  their
degree  of  affinity,"        ®

The  annexed  plate  contains  a  copy  of  this  alphabet,  in
its  due  order,  with  the  power  of  each  letter,  and  the  names
of  the  radicals,  as  I  Avas  favoured  wì'Ài  them^  by  the  ingeni-
ous antiquary  last  mentioned.

Such  are  the  omen  sticks,  tokens',  lots,  or  letters,  of  the
Bards.  Let  us  only  recollect  the  source,  and  the  origin,  of
these  characters,  as  before  developed :  that  they  were,  in
truth,  only  delineations  of  the  symbolical  sprigs,  or  Dru^
idical  tokens,  the  tops  of  certain  trees,  and  plants  ; — I
think,  it  will  be  acknowledged,•  that  even  their  countcnan^^e
carries  the  lines  of  honesty,  and  marks  their  genuine
descent.

Each  of  the  radicals  (except  η  perhaps)  is  the  obvi-
ous representation  of  a  cutting  of  some  sprig,  and  each
of  the  derivatives  is  regularly  formed,  from  its  appropriate
radical,  by  the  addition  of  aljud,  or  sJtoot,  or  the  junction
of  a  piece  of  reed.

And,  in  this  coincidence  of  tlje  characters  with  mi/  con-
ception of  the  Bardic  symbols,  there  certainly  was  no
collusion  ;  1  had  v.riitcn  up  the  two  preceding  sections, before
1  knew  that  such  characters  existed.  When  I  conununi-
catcd  the  substance  of  those  two  secliou>,  to  some  friends,
in  1798,  1  found  that  my  ideas  were  new,  to  the  best-
infbriued  ifehhiroan.     They  had   not  minutely  invet^tigatcd


/'Λ/Λ  I  Piifff  zji.


M.


0


fu/z/e/j.


ΛΑ^ΉπΥΟΦνν

/  Ζ     3  /


'û?2é^7ia/n6J.


/2_.        Ì^  /λΐυ       Λό  /ί  C-o^  ý

Μ.    s        â'     γ         c9  ^        ^^


My.         //  /2  /J  //       ./c5-        /^


273

tlie  extent^  and  various  applicivtion  of  symbok,  described
by  Talicsin,  and  by  other  ancient  Bards,

Wlicn  I  maintained,  that  the  Cdta:  certainly  possessed
an  alpliubet,  ibmied  of  a  series  of  symbolical  sprigs,  1
was  told,  that  an  original  British  alphabet,  still  preserved,
would  invalidate  my  opinion.  This  alphabet,  1  was  ex-
tremely desirous  to  see.  My  satisfaction  was  equal  to
my  surprise,  when  Mr.  Otcch  presented  me  with  a  com-
plete copy  of  it,  and  when  I  contemplated  the  magical
sprigs  of  the  Druids,  which  I  had  rather  zcished,  than  en-
couraged the  hope,  to  discover.

From  what  I  have  just  observed,  it  must  be  evident,  that
the  name  of  the  particular  tree,  from  Avhich  each  of  these
characters  was  formed,  is  not  likely  to  be  obtained,  fronj
the  mere  tradition  of  the  modern  Welsh  Bards.

Those  names,  by  which  the  radical  consonants  iire  dis-
tinguished, in  this  alphabet,  are  only  the  simple  ex-
ptessions  of  tliose  iriarked,  and  speciiic  ideas,  which  their
emblematical  parents,  the  sprigs,  were  supposed,  severally,
to  typify.  But  all  these  diminutive  names  are  neither  more
nor  less,  than  radical  words  in  the  Celtic  language,  convey-
ing distinct  and  clear  meanings.  They  are  those  nuclei,
round  which  the  Celtic  prefixes,  prepositions,  or  termi-
nations, entwine  themselves,  in  the  formation  of  the
longest  compounds.  And  this  proves,  more  fully,  than  by
chains  of  abstract  argument,  the  obvious  practicabilitv  of
deviling  such  an  alphabet,  for  a  language,  that  aiose  out  of
üuch  very  simple  elements,  and  principles.

■It  has  already  been  remarked,  that  there  were  two  obvi-


274

ous  methods  of  connecting  Druidkal  symboh  with  lan-
guage, or  of  reducing  the  informatioHj  which  they  con-
veyed, into  words,  and  sentences.

The  first  was,  by  repeating  the  names  of  the  symbols
themselves,  in  due  order ; — and  the  second,  by  expressing
only  those  characteristical  ideas,  under  Avhich  tliey  were
se^verally  viewed.  Consequently,  there  must  have  been  two
sets  of  names  of  Druidical  lots,  or  letters,  equally  ob-
vious :  the  names  of  the  irtf <;,  or  sprigs,  and  the  expressions
of  the  intended  ideas.

Of  the  latter,  wc  have  a  complete  list,  in  the  Bardic
alphabet.  To  obtain  a  knowledge  of  the  former,  we  must
have  recourse  to  a  distinct  branch  of  the  old  Celtcc,  whose
language,  and  learning,  have  pursued  a  course,  totally,
independent  of  the  Celta  in  South  Britain,  for  a  period,
beyond  the  reach  of  history,  and,  certainly,  as  far  back,
as  from  the  ages  of  Druidistn.

The  antiquaries  of  Ireland,  claim  an  alphab«?t  of  their
own,  which,  in  all  its  essential  points,  agrees  to  that  of
the    Bards,  in   Britain.

1.  Itvio.^  Druidical.

C.  It  was  a  magical  alphabet,  and  used  by  those  Druids^
in  their  divinations,  and  their  decisions  by  lot.

3.  It  consisted  of  the  same,  radical,  sixteen  letters,  which
formed  the  basiá  of  the  Druidical  alphabet  in  Britain.

4.  Each  of  these  letters  received  its  name,  from  some  tree..


275

Of  pîiint,  οι  a  certain  species,  regarded  as  beitig  in  some
view,  or  other,  descriptive  of  its  power :  and  these  naineä
are   still  retained,

,'    ,.   i'  •
So   far,  the    doctrine   of  British  Druids  is    exactly  re-
cognised,   in    the   JVester/i    IsianJ.      The  same,  identical,
system,  is  conipletely  ascertained,  and  preserved»

Yet,  there  arc  material  circumstances,  wnich  point  out  a
very  ancient,  and  remote  period,  for  the  separation  of  these
alphabets  from  each  other.  The  two  series  of  characters
retain  little,  or  no  Λ'estige  of  similarity  :  and  the  Irish,
besides  their  cyphers,  or  secret  alphabets^  have  three  sets
of  characters,  the  most  modern  of  which  are,  nearly  the
same  as  those  on  the  grave-stone  of  Cadva?i,  prince  of
North  1  Vales,  Avho  died  about  the  year  6l6.  Their  order  is
also  totally  different.  The  Irish  alphabet,  begins  with
B,  L,  N,  the  radical  consonants  of  Belin,  the  /IpoUo  of
the  Celt  a,

Roderick  O'Flaherty,  a  learned  Irish  antiquary,  of  the
seventeenth  century,  has  collected,  from  some  of  the  oldest
monuments  of  literature  in  his  country,  the  ancient  names
of  the  Irish  letters,  too-ether  with  an  exact  resrister  of  the
several  trees,  and  plants,  from  which  they  were  deno-
minated.

These  curious  particidars,  he  has  recorded  in  his  Ogygia,
sive  rerum  Hibernicaruni  Chroiiologia :  and  from  this
author,  Ed.  Llzcyd  transcribes  them,  in  their  proper  places,
in  his  Dictionary  of  the  Irish  language.

Mr.  Lcdziich,  in  his  antiquities  of  Ireland  {Ato.  Dublin,
s  2


276

1790,)  describes  three  sets  of  cliaracters,  nnd  as  forming
three  distinct  alphabets.

The  first,  and  most  ancient,  is  said  to  be  namgil  Bobelot/i,
from  certain  masters,  who  assisted  in  forming  the  Japhetian
language  ;  but  Mr.  Leduich  thinks/  it  is  obviously  deno-
minated from   Bobfl,    Loth,    its  two  first  letters,  P.  98.

I  rather  conjecture,  it  has  its  title  from  Bobo,  or  Bobe,
mysterious,  and  lot, — a  lot- — a  cutting.

The  second,  an  imperfect  series,  is  called,  Marcomunnic
Runts,  and  described  as  having  agreed  with  the  Runic,
both  in  the  shape,  and  the  name.     P.  97.

The  third,  which  is  said  to  be,  («o  doubt,)  the  remains  of
an  old  magical  alphabet,  is  called,  Bethluisnioii  na  ogjua,
or  the  alphabet  of  magical  or  mysterious  letters,  the  first
three  of  which  are,  Betli,  Luis,  Nion,  whence  it  is  named.
P.  99.

The  follouÍTig  is  the  alphabet  of  Irish  radicals,  in  their
«order,  together  with  its  names,  and  syinbols,  in  (fFlahcrt}/.


CONSONANTS.

FeiLtTS.

Names.

Syir.bols.

Β

Beith

The  Birch

Î-

Luis

The  Quicken-tree

Ν

Is' ion

The  Ash

F

tVarn

I'he  Alder

S

Sail

The  Willow

Η

IJath

The  Hawthorn

D

Duif

The  Oak

Ύ

Tinnc

277


Poucrs,

Xmnei,

Siiiiiboh.

c

Coll

ThcHazel

Μ

INiuin

The  Vine

G

Gort

The  Ivy

Ρ

Pethboc

R

Ruis

VOWELS.

The  Elder-tree

A

Ailm

The  Fir

Ο

Onn

Furze

U

Ur

Heath

Ε

Eadlia

The  Asp

I

IclllQ

The  Yew-tree

Let  us  connect  these  with  Bardic  radicals,  and  they
will  stand  as  follows,  when  reduced  into  the  order  of  the
Roman  letters.


Powers.

A
Β

c

D

Ε

F

G

I

L

Μ

Ν

Ο

Ρ

R


British  Xames.

Irish  Names,  and  Siimbolical  Trees.

A

Aihn

The  Fir

Bi

Berth

The  Birch

Ci

Coll

Tlie  Hazel

JDi

Duir

The  Oak

Ε

Eadha

The  Asp

Fi

Fcaru

The  Alder

Gi

Gort

The  Ivy

I

Idho

The  Yew

LÎ

Luis

The  Quicken-tice

Mi

Muin

The  Vine

Î\I

IN  ion

The  Ash

Ο

Onn

The  Furze

Pi

Pethboc

Ri

Ruis

The  Eldi^r

278


ìwers.

British  Xames.

Irish.  Names,  and  Symhrlicnl  Trees,

s

Si

Sail              The  AVillow

τ

Ti

Tin  lie

(U

13)

Ur                The  Heath

Now,  I  think  it  will  no  longer  be  disputed,  that  we  per-
ceive this  most  curious,  and  striking  system,  in  all  its  parts,
proceeding,  in  due  order,  from  its  first,  and  rude,  prin-
ciples of  symbolica/  rods,  or  sprigs,  to  the  complete  for-
mation of  an  alphabet,  Λvhicll  nearly  corresponds,  in  the
number,  and  power,  of  its  letters,  to  the  oldest  European
alphabets.  We  thus  discover,  that  the  Celta  of  the
British  Islands,  were  not  only  acquainted  with  letters,
but  also  derived  the  art  of  writing,  from  its  remotest
fountains,  in  a  channel  more  clear  and  systematical,
than  could  even  be  conceived  by  their  polished  neigh-
bours.

In  order  to  give  my  readers  a  more  compendious  view  of
their  doctrine,  upon  this  topic,  I  shall  briefly  recapitulate
the  substance  of  the  evidence,  adduced  in  the  sections  pre-
ceding, and  of  my  reasoning  upon  it.

1.  Certain  obvious,  and  characteristical,  properties,  and
appearances,  in  particular  kinds  of  trees,  and  plants,  Avere
contemplated,  by  a  simple,  and  primitive  race.  As  these
appearances  presented  themselves  under  distinct,  though
general  ideas,  they  naturally  suggested  the  hint  of  repre-
senting, and  communicating,  such  ideas,  by  means  of  the
leaves,  or  sprigs,  of  the  respective  plants.  Hence  originated
the  custom  of  using  emblematical  rods,  or  sprigs.  In
the  further  progress  of  this  custom,  a  definite  number  of
plants,  of  the  most  common  growth,  was  gradually  select-


279

ed,  and  agreed  upon,  for  the  purpose  of  transmitting  general
information,  with  system,  and  precision.

2.  The  ideas  of  things,  and  of  their  several  relations,
being  expressed,  in  the  language  of  that  people,  by  the
simplest  of  all  the  terms  that  could  be  uttered,  and  tlie
ideas  of  things,  and  of  the  terms,  by  which  they  are  usually
expressed,  naturally  connecting  themselves  in  the  mind,
the  symbols  of  things,  obviously  became  the  symhols
of  their  names,  or  of  the  terms,  by  which  the  respective
ideas  were  described.  And  of  the  peculiar  simplicity
of  the  language,  it  would  be  a  consequence,  to  find,  that
such,  and  the  saine  symbols,  would,  of  course,  represent  the
simplest  of  their  syllables,  or  elementary  sounds.  AVhen
several  of  these  minute  radicals  were  joined,  so  to  form  a
sentence,  or  a  compound  word,  which  originally  were  the
same  thing,  a  constant  practice  of  connecting  the  sym-
bols of  the  several  parts,  and  of  arranging  them,  in  their
due  order,  must  have  obviously  suggested  itself.

3.  When  sprigs  of  the  several  trees  could  not  be  readily
obtained,  for  the  conveyance  of  information,  the  most
obvious  expedient  was,  to  delineate,  upon  smooth  surfaces,
and  characteristical  representations  of  the  kinds  required,
Avhich  could  not  be  mistaken  for  those  of  another
species.

4.  The  peculiar  convenience  of  this  expedient  soon  ap-
peared, and  suggested  a  further  hint,  for  making  such  re-
presentations more  commodious,  and  better  adapted,  amongst
other  of  its  uses,  to  dispatch,  by  fixing  upon  certain  com-
pendious drafts,  so  as  by  one  of  them  to  represent  sprigs
of  the  oak,  by  another,  sprigs  of  the  birch,  &,c.  These
drafts  had  still  a  general  resemblance  of  sprigs ;  and,  though


280

they  no  longer  presented  the  obvious  character  of  the
several  species,  yet  their  \ah\e  was  readily  appreciated,
throughout  the  society  which  had  established  them,  and
they  became  as  current  as  the  original  sprigs  themselves.
If  Druids  after  this  art  was  known,  continued  the  use  of
the  natural  si/mbols,  it  must  have  been  for  the  purpose  of
secrecy,  or  a  display  of  mystery,  or  from  a  superstitious
veneration  for  the  customs   of  antiquity.

5.  For  perpetuating  this  important  art,  and  in  order
to  facilitate  its  communication,  it  was  found  necessary  to
arrange  the  characters  in  a  certain  order,  and  preserve  their
several  names.  The  order  might  have  been  the  mere  sport  of
local  fancy.  The  names  were,  either  simple  expressions  of  the
ideas,  conveyed  by  the  several  characters,  as  in  the  Bardic
alphabet  of  Britain  ;  or  else,  the  names  of  the  natural
symbols,  which  the  characters  represented,  as  in  the  Beth-
luisnion,  or  alphabet  of  the  ancient  Irisli.

It  appears,  from  quotations,  in  former  sections,  that
our  Druids  did  retain  the  original,  and  primitive  use  of
sprigs,  for  certain  purposes,  though  versed  in  the  nature
of  letters.  These  purposes,  as  I  have  already  hinted,
were,  probably,  communications  amongst  themselves,  and
pertaining  to  their  interior  doctrines,  or  discipline,  \vhich
they  deemed  it  unlawful  to  write  ; — or  connected  \vitb
divination  by  lots.  This  last  use  of  the  sprigs,  is  inti-
mated still  in  the  terms,  by  which  the  Celtic  dialects  dis-.
tinguish  their  letters.

Thus,  in  Irish,  Feadha,  trees,  also  letters,  \vhenee
feadham,  I  relate,  or  rehearse  :  Cranchar,  a  lot,  properly,
a  tender  tree,  or  shoot,  from  crann,  a  tree,  and  car,
tender.


281

Welsh — Gzvi/dd,  trees,  also  letters.  Coelhreni,  letters,
lots, — literally,  omen,  or  token  sticks.

Cornish — Pren,  a  tree,  a  stiek,  a  lot  ,• —

^'  Because,  by  sticks,  the  Druids  divined."

Borlase.

Whilst  these  Druids  regarded  the  several  sticks,  or  sprigs,
as  complete  symbols,  in  themselves,  it  would  have  been
superfluous,  to  inscribe  them  Avith  characters,  Λvhich,  at
most,  could  only  have  been  of  synonymous  import.

It  is  probable,  however,  that  sometimes  the  old  Celta;
dispensed  with  such  an  original  primitive  use  of  their  lots,
and  inscribed  the  symbolical  characters,  upon  cuttings  of
any  one  tree,  as  we  find  this  habit  prevalent  in  some  of
the  Germans,  their  neighbours,  who  also  had  ÛieÌT  Barditus,
Barddas,  or  Bardic  institutions.  Their  manner  of  divining
by  lots,  is  thus  described  by  Tacitus,  De  moribus  Germ,
and  translated  by  Dr.  Borlase  :

*'  They  cut  a  rod,  or  twig,  taken  from  a  fruitbearing
free,  into  little  short  sticks,  or  tallies ;  and,  having  distin^
guished  them  one  from  the  other,  by  certain  marks,  lay
them,  without  any  order,  as  they  chance  to  fall,  on  a  white
garment.  Then  comes  the  priest  of  the  state,  if  the  con-
sultation be  at  the  request  of  the  public,  but  if  it  be  a  matter
of  private  curiosity,  the  master  of  the  family  may  serve  well
enough,  and,  having  prayed  to  the  gods,  looking  up  to
heaven,  he  takes  up  each  billet,  or  stick,  three  times,  and
draws  his  interpretation  from  the  marks  before  impressed  on
them.  If  these  marks  intimate  a  prohibition  to  proceed,
there  is  no  further  inquiry  made  that  day  concerning  that


282

particular  affair;  but^  if  they  have  full  authority  to  go  on,
they  then  proceed  to  the  auspicia^  or  divining  from  birds."
Antiq.  of  Cornwall,  P.  139•

I  would  just  observe,  in  this  place,  that,  in  the  course  of
my  essay,  no  labour  of  mine  has  aimed  at  the  support  of
any  one  preconceived  hypothesis.  My  opinion  is  not  what  I
brought  with  me,  to  the  research,  but  what  has  been  the  result
of  inquiries.  It  was  gradually  formed,  and  was  impressed,
by  the  force  of  evidence.  I  aim  at  no  conceit  of  invention.
My  utmost  pretension  is,  to  re-discover  what  has  been  long
concealed,  by  collecting  facts,  which,  for  many  centuries,
have  been  preserved  in  an  insulated  state.  In  every  period  and
stage  of  the  disquisition,  I  have  adduced  what  appears  to
me  competent  evidence.  My  witnesses  too,  (so  far  from
having  been  capable  of  collusion,)  were  not  conscious  of
each  other's  existence ;  yet,  their  testimony  so  well  con-
nects, appears  so  consistent  with  itself,  in  its  various  parts,  and
in  the  general  sum,  that  I  cannot  hesitate  in  concluding —
it  is  the  evidence  of  truth.


283


Sect.  VII.     Of  the  Antiquity  of  tht  Dnddkal  Alphuhd,


M,


-UST  it,  then,  be  admitted,  as  an  historical  truth,  that,
at  some  remote,  and  obscure,  period  of  the  Celtic  annals^
the  Druids  devised  such  a  system  of  symbottcat  sprigs,  as
has  been  now  described,  improved  it,  and  refined  upon
it,  so  as  to  complete  the  invention  of  an  original  al-
phabet?— ^That  they  eftected  all  this,  by  the  means  of
some  favourable  properties  in  their  οΛνη  language,  and  by
the  repeated  exertions  of  their  ΟΛνη  genius,  independent  of
extraneous  aid,  or  primitive  tradition  ? — This  will,  by  no
means,  follow  as  a  consequence.

From  all  the  information  we  have  acquired,  respecting  the
Druids,  it  appears  to  have  been  their  main  business,  to  cherish,
and  preserve,  more  than  to  improve.  They  are  every  where
represented,  as  extremely  tenacious  of  long-established  cus-
toms ;  but  never  as  inventors  of  new  arts.  We  hear
much  of  their  traditions,  but  nothing  of  their  disco-
veries. Whilst  they  regarded,  with  superstitious  respect,  their
venerable  traditions  of  antiquity,  so  jealous  were  they  of  in-
novations, that  they  had  scarce  the  courage  to  extend  the
limits  of  science,  or  of  moral  philosophy  ;  much  less  did  they
evince  an  ambition  to  keep  any  pace,  in  refinement,  with
polished  neighbours.  The  subjects  of  their  discussion  Λvere
few,  but  elevated ;  their  manner  of  treating  them,  solemn,
and  mysterious.  The  whole  institution  carried  strong
features  of  primitive  ages.  From  these  considerations,  I
am  disposed,  religiously,  to  adopt  their  own  tradition,  that


284

the  ground  \vork  of  Driddism  had  been,  at  least,  coeval  to
the  Celtic  nation.  If  this  be  admitted,  it  will  not  seem  im-
probable, that  the  general  principles  of  their  symbolical
alphabet,  together  with  all  the  radicals  of  the  language,
upon  Avhich  it  was  founded,  Avere  not  the  invention  of  the
Druids,  as  a  national  order  of  men,  but  were  preser\'ed
by  them,  from  that  period,  zchen  the  families  of  the  earth
were  divided.

That  the  Druids  did  in  fact  preserve  the  memory  of  re-
markable things,  from  this  remote  age,  I  have  already
shewn,  and  as  the  Druids, — indeed  the  CeltcB,  in  general,
are  represented,  not  as  an  inventive  people,  but  as  extremely
tenacious  of  old  customs,  it  may  be  well  presumed,  that
this  curious  system,  which  unites  their  hieroglyphics,  and
their  letters,  had  been  formed,  as  to  its  general  principles,
before  their  migration  out  of  Asia, — and  that  the  Druids
either  preserved  it,  as  they  found  it,  or  else  acted  upon  an
established  principle,  in  accommodating  the  symbols  to
their   own  circumstances,  and  their  own  situation.

And  this  will  appear  to  be  confirmed,  not  in  theory  alone,
but,  in  fact,  if  attention  is  given,  to  the  Druidical  account
of  the  invention,  and  so  as  to  compare  the  system,  in  its  pro-
gressive stages,  with  those  analogies,  \vhich  may  be  traced,
in  very  ancient  periods,  and  in  countries,  where  the
influence  of  the  Gaulish,  and  British,  Druids,  as  a  local
order,  could  not  have  operated.  The  former  of  those  topics
I   shall  touch  upon,  in  this  present  section.

Tn  Taliesin's  account  of  the  invention  of  the  system,  there
arc  mythological  allusions,  that  would  require  considerable
depth  of  learning,  and  more  habits  of  leisure  than  mine  to
elucidate.     I  shall  only  endeavour  to  represent  a  few  par-


285

llculars,  which  may    serve  to  point   out   opinion,  and  re-
commend the  whole,  to  the  notice  of  the  antiquary.

As  the  Druidical  Bard  ascribes  the  perfection  of  the  art,
to  the  Gzcyddion,  or  Syzcyddion,  Sages,  or  Magicians,  in
general ;  so,  in  particular,  he  tells  us,  that  Math,  kind,  or
nature,  first  created  it,  out  of  nine  principies,  or  elements^
one  of  which  was,  Fruyth  Dicw  Dechrau,  the  fruit  of  the
primaval  God.  The  same  Math,  is  allowed  to  have  liad
much  to  do,  in  maturing  the  plan. —

A'm  sAvynysei  Math,
Cyn  bum  diaered.

"  Math  had  mysteriously  marked  me.
Before  I  became  immortal."

This  Math,  I  take,  to  have  been  the  universal  genius  of
nature,  which  discriminated  all  things,  according  to  their
various  kinds,  or  species, — the  same,  perhaps,  as  the  Meth,
of  the  Egyptians,  and  the  Mdtìç,  of  the  Orphic  Bards,  which
was,  of  all  kinds,  Άηά  the  author  of  all  things.

Α^ςτίΡ  jd^n  x»j  ^ίλνς  ιψνς  Έολνωννίλΐ   Mîjt».

Orj)h.   Hìjinn.  3i.

And  again — Κα»   Mjjti;  «r^wTOí   yiviXui^.

Orph.  Fra^.  6

llìe  Bard  proceeds —

A'm  swynAvys  i  wyddion
Mawr,  nwr  ο  Brython — ■


286

^'   1  was  mysteriously  traced  by  the  great  Sages,
In  the  tower  of  the  mixed  race."

Ο  bump  pumhwnt  celvyddon,
Athrawouj  ail    Math,
Pan  yr  ymddygaid,
A'm  swynwys  i  wledig.
Pan  vu  led  losgedig.

"  Out  of  the  multitude  of  arts.

Of  the  teachers,  children  of  Math,  or  nature^.

When  the  removal  took  place,

I  was  marked  by  the  chief,

Whilst  he  was  half  parched  with  fii'e."

The  last  quotations  appear  to  imply,  tliat  the  art  had  been
practised  at  Babel,  and  that  it  Avas  preserved,  at  the  dis-
persion; but  its  original  invention,  according  to  British
tradition,  was  still  more  remote:  for  the  Bard  immedi-
ately adds. —

A'm  swynwys  i  Sywydd
i>ywed3dd,  cyn  byd.
Pan  vei  gennyv  vi  vot.
Pan  vei  vaint  byd,  hardd,
Bardd  budd  an  gnawd,
A'r  wawd  y  tueddav
A  draetho  tavaw  d  :

"   I  was  marked  by  the  Sage

Of  Sages,  in  the  primitive  world.

At  which  time  1  had  a  being;

When  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  were  in  digiilly:

It.  was  my  custom  to  befriend  the  Bard,


287

And  I  dispose  the  song  of  praise
Which  the  tongue  utters."

We  are  then  told —

Neu  bum  yn  ysgor,
Gan  Ddylan  ail  Μ  or,
Ynghylchedd,  ymhervcdd,
Rhwng  deulin  teyrnedd,
Yn  deu  vvayvv  anchwant,
Ο  nêv  pan  doethant,
Yn  annwvn  lliveiriant.

'*  Truly  I  was  in  the  bark.

With  Dylan,  the  son  of  the  sea.

Embraced  in  the  centre.

Between  the  royal  knees.

When  the  floods  came.

Like  the  rushing  of  the  hostile  spear,

From  heaven,  to  the  great  deep,"


}


In  another  passage  of  the  same  poem,  the  Bard  calls
this  system —

Mwyav  tair  argyvryd,
A  chweris  ym  myd;
Ac  un  a  dderyw,
O*  ystyr   Dilyw.

"  The  greatest  of  the  three  mental  exertions
That  disported  in  the  world;


PL•  e/Ystir


288

And  the  one  which  was

Amongst  the  stores  of  the  Dehige."

Hence,  it  is  sufficiently  clear,  that  those  Bards,  who
professed  themselves  Druids,  did  not  claim,  for  their  or-
der, the  invention  of  the  system,  or  its  application  to  the
construction  of  an  alphabet.  They  acknowledge  that  it
was  anciently  known,  in  other  countries,  and  that  it  had
been  handed  down,  from  the  ages  beyond  the  flood,  as  »
treasure  of  the   greatest  importance  to  mankind.

Let  us,  then,  inquire  briefly,  what  analogies,  with,  sucb
may  be   traced  in  ancient  history.


289


Skct.  VIII.  Of  gaicral  Aiialogieshetzcecn  the  Sijstcm  of
Druidiciil  Symbols,  considered  as  a  Method  of  zcriting,
and  the  similar  Practice  of  other  Natio?is.


w,


Ε  learn,  from  sacred,  and  profane  history,  that,
as  it  was  a  very  general  practice  of  the  ancients,  to  re-
present, and  convey  their  ideas,  by  means  of  si/mbols-,
taken  from  stores  of  nature ;  so  there  was  no  custom,
either  more  anciently,  or  more  generally  established,  tlian
to  employ  trees,  plants,  and  their  various  parts,  for  this
purpose.  And  for  that  custom,  sonxe  very  natural  reasons
may  be  adduced,  in  addition  to  those  which  arise  from  its
peculiar  convenience.

In  the  infancy  of  the  human  race,  trees,  in  the  gar-
den of  Eden,  were  divinely  pointed  out,  as  emblematical
of  the  most  aweful  ideas — life   and  happiness,  or  death  and

mi  soy.

The  abuse  which  Adam  committed,  of  these  consecrated
si/mhoh,  and  its  dreadful  consequence,  to  his  early  descen-
dants, must  have  made  a  forcible  impression  upon  their
minds :  and  must  have  suggested  the  hint,  of  recourse  to
the  use  of  trees,  not  only  in  the  figurative  descriptions  of
speech,  but  in  the  representation  of  things,  and  their  se-
Vcri'.l  relations,  by  visible  signs.

And  the    came    idea,     that    would   be   impressed    upon
such    as  were  present,  by    the   act  of  pointing   at  a  trecj,
Τ


290

îniglil  be  conveyed^  with  precision,  to  a  distance,  by  a  cha-
racteristical  part  of  the  same,  or  a  similar  tree.

Agreeably  to  this  notion,  the  token  of  reconciliation,  Λν1ιΐ€ΐι
ìsoah  received  in  the  ark,  was,  an  olive  leaf,  and  Avhich  the
venerable  patriarch  seems  to  have  regarded,  as  a  symbol  of
sacred  import,  conveying  an  idea  of  more  than  simply  the
fact,  that  tnes  ingeneral  had  begun  to  shoot  afresh.

It  might  be  expected,  that  we  shovld,  only  discover
slight  vestiges  of  symbols,  like  these  in  the  history  of
the  Israelites,  as  this  people  were,  in  great  measure,  with-
held from  the  use  of  such  implements,  in  order  to  guard
against  their  falling  into  that  idolatrous  abuse  of  them,
which  prevailed  amongst  their  neighbours:  yet  there  are
several  figurative  expressions,  and  plain  allusions,  in  the
Old  Testament,  which  intimate  their  general  acquaintance,
with  something  of  this  kind.

The  father  of  that  nation  says,  *'  Joseph  is  a  fruitful
bough,  a  fiuitful  bough,  by  a  well,  whose  branches  run  over
the  wall."  Geu.  xlix.  GC.  The  Patriarch's  idea  would  have
been  as  clear,  had  he  placed  the  bough,  in  the  situation  he
describes,  or  had  represented  these  images  in  a  picture,
and  said, — "  This  is  Joseph."  And  his  manner  of  expres-
sion plainly  alludes  to  such  a  custom.

The  Lord  said  unto  Jeremiah, — "■  What  ha>t  thou  seen:''
''  I  see  a  rod  of  an  almoud  free."  "  Thou  hast  seen  ziell;
for  I  will  hasten  my  word  to  perform  it."  Jer.  i.  II,  111.

Here  the  rod  of  an  almond  free  must  be  regarded,  as  an
acknowledged,  and  well  known  symbol,  of  hastening,  or
6pce<l ;   for  the  ucconiplisliment  of  the  divine  purpose,  with


291

^peod,  is  to  correspond  with  such  «in  intimation  given  by  the
symbol.  See  also  the  apologue  of  Jothcuyi,  Judges  ixi
where  the  olive  tree,  the  Jig  tree,  the  vine,  and  Iramblcf
are  described,  as  the  symbols  of  things ;  observe  also  the
apologue  of  Jehoashi     II.  Kings  xiv.  9.

From  thesC;,  and  similar  passages,  it  may  be  inferred,
that  certain  trees,  and  rods,  or  staves,  or  branches,  taken
from  them,  were  considered  as  means  of  information,
OÍ  as  the  symbols  of  distinct  ideas  •  and  therefore,  they  were
constituted  the  general  badges  of  certain  offices,  especially
such  as  implied  a  sacredness  of  character.  Hence  the
sceptres  of  kings,  the  rods  of  priests,  ambassadors,  and
7nagistrates, — the  rod  of  Moses,  of  Aaron,  of  the  Egyp-
tian magicians,  Sec.

These  rods  wxre  considered,  not  only  as  the  emblems  of
power,  and  of  authority,  but  as  the  immediate  means  of
executing  them.

The  rod  of  Moses,  is  called  the  rod  of  God,  and  the  Al-
mighty tells  him  : — "  Thou  shalt  take  this  rod  in  thine  hand,
and  therezvifh  thou  shalt  do  signs."  Accordingly,  we  find
Aaron  lifting  up  his  rod  over  the  river,  and  it  became
blood ;  Moses,  lifting  up  his  rod  over  the  sea,  and  it
was  divided  ^-^Elisha^  giving  his  sfajf  to  Gchazi,  to  lay
on  the  face  of  a  dead  child,  that  he  might  revive.

So  generally  was  the  emblematical  use  of  a  rod,  or
staff,  admitted,  that  the  words  themselves  became  synony-
mous to  poxccr,  commission,  a  message,  a  sentence,  and
the  like.  And  removing,  or  breaking  the  rod,  or  staff,
implied,  that  authority  was  abrogated,  and  power  destroyed .


292

Thus,  in  Psalm  ex.  "  The  Lord  shall  send  the  rod  of  thif.
power  out  of  Sion; — be  thou  ruler  even  in  the  midst  among,
thine  enemies."  Here  the  rod  clearly  implies  a  commission  ;
as,  in  Micah  vi.  9^  it  imports  a  decree.  "  Hear  ye  the
rod,  and  who  hath  appointed  it."  Again : — ''  The  Lord
shall  take  away  the  staff — the  mighty  man,  the  muii  of
%car,  the  judge,  the  prophet,  the  prudent,  the  ancient,"
&.C.     Isaiah  iii,   1,2.

''  The  Lord  hath  broken  the  staff  of  the  wicked,  and  the
sceptre  of  the  rulers."

"  Mcab  is  spoiled ;  and  all  ye  that  are  about  him,  be-
moan him,  and  all  ye  that  knoAv  his  name,  say.  How  iá
the  strong  staff'  broken,  and  the  beautiful  rod  !  "  *

These  forms  of  expression  must  have  alluded,  neces-
sarily, to  some  established  customs,• — they  must  be  referred
radispensibly  to  some  primitive  system,  which  regarded  rods,
branches,  and  staves,  as  the  symbols  of  certain  ideas,  and
as  the  vehicles  of  messages,  commissions,  or  the  like.
So  lar  the  customs  of  the  old  Asiatics  corresponded  in
their  prevalence  to  those  of  Druids,  in  Europe.

To  this  extent,  tlie  device  was  innocent,  but  the  heathens
of  Jlsia,  as  well  as  those  of  Europe,  seem  to  have  abused
it,  for  the  purpose  of  divination,  as  we  may  collect  from
the  following  passages.

''  M^^  people  ask  counsel  ;it  their  stocks,  and  their  staff


*  The  wands,  carried  by  Officers  of  State  at  our  Court,  and  at  this  very  tinrt,
adopted,  ori^inajly,  upon  the  same  priiicipk•.


295

îiECLAiîETH  imto  them." — "  They  sacrifice  upon  the  top*
of  the  mountauis^  and  burn  incense  upon  the  hills^  under
oaks,  and  poplars,  and  elms,  because  the  shadow  thereof
is  good."     Hos.  iv.   Ì2,  13.

Again, — Isaiah  xix.  11  to  15,  The  prophet  speaks  of
the  zvise  men  of  Egypt  being  deceived  in  their  d'ninations,
and  dech\res, — "  Neither  shall  there  be  any  work  for
Egypt,  which  the  head,  or  tail,  branch,  or  rush,  mp.y
do."  Here  is  a  manifest  allusion,  not  merely  to  the  im-
plements of  writing,  or  of  the  geometrician ;  but,  evi-
dently, to  a  superstitious  practice,  in  which  rush,  Sjnabra?ick
Avere  employed.

Ezekiel  terminates  his  climax  of  abominations  by  these
Avords : — "  Lo !  they  put  the  branch  to  their  nose !"
Ch.  viii.  17.

Upon  the  Avhole,  then,  some  general,  but  evident  ana-
logies to  the  symbolical  system  thus  intimated,  may  be
found  in  the  sacred  records,  and  carried  back  to  very  an-
cient periods.

There  was  another  ancient  custom  amongst  the  Asiatics,
which  approaches  to  an  identity  with  our  Druidical,  and•
German  method  of  divining  by  lots,  as  described  by  TacituSy
and  quoted  above.  This  practice  was  called,  by  the  Greeks,-
Rhabdomantia,  or  Belomantia,  divination  by  rods,  or  by
arrows,  either  the  one  or  the  other  being  used  for  this  pur-
pose, as  it  might  be  most  convenient.  But,  in  this  appli-.
cation,  the  rods,  or  the  arrozcs,  were  marked,  or  inscribed,
like  the  German  lots :  they  were  no  longer  viewed,  ia
themselves,  as  symbols  of  tlie  distinct  ideas.


294

'"'  The  King  of  Bah/Ion  stood — to  use  divination  ;  he
made  his  arroios  bright ;  he  consulted  with  images  ;  ho
looked  in  the  liver."  Ezek.  xxi.  21.  On  this  passage,
Jtrom  observes,  that  there  was  iv  method  of  divination,  by
marking,  or  inscribing  arrozcs,  with  every  one's  name,  and
mixing  them  in  the  quiver,  to  see  whose  arrow  would  come
out  first,  or  what  city  should  be  first  attacked.  To  this
fallacious  decision,  the  prophet  alludes,  in  the  13th  verse
of  the  same  chapter: — ''  Because  it  is  a  trial:  and  what  if
the  sword  contemn  even  the  rodT'

This  inscription  of  rods  appears  to  have  been  a  refinement
upon  the  earliest,  or  primitive  custom,  and  seems  to  have
been  introduced,  when  the  symbolical  species  could  not  be
readily  obtained.  But  the  custom  was  not  modern  ;  it  was
known  to  the  Israelites  in  the  days  of  Moses,  and,  perhaps,
long  before.  '<  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  and  take
of  every  one  of  them  a  rod,  according  to  the  house  of  their
fathers,  of  all  the  princes,  according  to  the  house  of  their
fathers,  twelve  rods  :  write  thou  every  man's  name  upon
his  rod."  These  were  laid  up  for  the  decision  of  an  im-»
portant  question.  They  were  not,  in  this  instance,  drawn
as  lots, — for  the  Lord  himself  decided  by  a  miracle.  But
the  general  practice  appears  to  have  been  adopted  fa-
miliarly, in  cai;es  of  decision,  or  in  the  assignment  of  por-
tions by  lot.  Hence  rod,  lot,  portion,  or  inheritance,  arc
used  for  synonymous  terms.

"  The  Lord's  portion  is  his  people  ;  Jacob  is  the  lot  of  his
inheritance.'"     peut.  xxxii.  9.

"  Kcmembcr  thy  congregation,  Avhich  thou  hast  pur-,
chased  of  old  ;  the  rod  of  thine  inheritance  which  thou
hast  /edeemed."     Psalm  Ixxiv.  2.


295

*<  iò7'Gt7  is  the  ?•0ί/ of  his  inheritance."     Jer.  li.   1.0.

"  The  rod  of  the  wicked  shall  not  rest  upon  the  lot  of  the
righteous."     Psalm  cxxv.  3.

In  allusion  to  this  use  of  inscrlhed  rods,  whatever  was
assigned  by  lot,  or  devised  by  compact,  was  represented  as
passing  under  the  rod.  "  And  concerning  the  tithe  of  the
herd,  or  of  the  flock,  even  whatsoever  passeth  under  the
rod,  the  tenth  shall  be  holy  unto  the  Lord."  Lev.  xxvii.  o1.
*'  And  I  will  cause  you  to  pass  under  the  rod ;  and  I  will
bring  you  into  the  bond  of  the  covenant."     Ezek.  xx.  27.

The  same  prophet  (chap,  xxxvii.  l6  to  20)  particularly
describes  the  use  of  such  rods,  or  billets,  in  forming  cove-
nants :  he  undoubtedly  delineates  the  popular,  and  the  esta-
blished mode  of  using  them  ;  for  the  intention  is,  by  fa-
miliar, and  by  intelligible  signs,  to  represent,  for  instruc-
tion, to  the  Jewish  people,  the  ceremony  of  making  a
solemn  covenant.  "  Take  thou  one  stick,  and  write  upon
it,  f or  Judah,  and  for  the  children  of  Israel,  his  compa/iions.
Then  take  another  s^/cŵ,  and  write  upon  it,  /or  Joseph,  the
stick  of  Ephraim,  and  for  all  the  house  of  Israel,  his  com-
panions; and  join  them,  one  to  another,  into  one  stick,  and
they  shall  become  one,  in  thine  hand.  Say  unto  them.  Thus
saith  the  Lord  :  Behold,  I  will  take  the  stick  of  Ephraim,
&c.  and  Λνϋΐ  put  liim  with  the  stick  of  Judah,  and  make
them  one  stick,  and  they  shall  be  one  in  mine  hand  :  and
the  sticks  whereon  thou  Avritest,  shall  be    oxe    i>'  thine

JIAND,     BEFORE     THEIR     EYES,"

This  usage  was  nearly  the  same  as  that  of  British  Bards,
in  the  construction  of  their  Peithi/nen,  already  described,
except  that,  upon  solemn,  and  religious  occasions,  the  la,t-


296

ter  üíed  the  rods,    iinimcribed,  regarding  them,  in  their
specific  characters,  as  the  symbols  of  ideas.

Wlien  rods,  or  billets,  were  used,  amongst  the  Jews,
in  the  assignment  of  inheritance,  in  confirmation  of  pur-
chase, or  in  other  compacts,  they  were,  perhaps,  attested,
and  Laid  up  for  memorials,  that,  in  case  of  dispute,  there
might  be  an  appeal  to  the  voucher  :  This  appears  to  be
implied,  in  the  expression  of  the  Psalmist — "  Thou  shalt
ììiaintain  my  lot"

Breaking  the  rod,  or  staff,  seems,  also,  to  have  been
the  general  mode  of  dissolving  compacts.  See  Zech.  xi.
7,  10,  11.  .*^' And  I  took  my  síö^,  even  beaut}',  and  cut  it
asunder,  that  I  might  break  my  covenant,  which  I  made
with  air  the  people"*.

Perhaps  I  may  have  dwelt  rather  tediously  upon  this  part
of  my  subject.  The  design  was,  to  shew,  from  the  sacred
records,  that  vestiges  of  a  system,  resembling  that  Avhich
Druids  possessed,  are  traced  amongst  other  nations,  Λvith
Avhom  that  Celtic  order  had  no  apparent  connection ;
and,  consequentl}',  that  our  Druids  were  not  the  original
GOiitrivers,  but  merely  the  religious  preservers  of  tlie
system.

If  traditions,  and  customs,  of  Pagan  Europe  are  ex-
amined, something  of  the  same  kind  will  be  discovered,
as  traces  of  a  system,  which  contemplated  particular
species    of  trees,    and  plants,  as  being  symbols  of  distinct


•  When  the  Lord  Hi^h  Steward,  upon  trials  i:i  the  ìlome  of  Pcei.s,  dissolves
Jij;  coiiiniission,  lie  nuiifjes  the  evcntj  by  the  act  of  taking  the  wand  into  his
Jiand,  and   brealiuig  it.  "^


297

ideas.  Tkis^  "was  indeed  so  ancient,  that  Greahs,  who  had
not  preserved  any  unbroken  chain  of  primitive  traditions,
refer  us  back  for  its  origin,  from  one  stage  to  another,
till  we  get  beyond  the  verge  ©f  their  history,  and
their  fables,  or  even  the  original  structure  of  their  lan-
guage.

The  following  particulars  are  so  generally  known,  that  it
will  be  sufficient,  barely  to  mention  them.

1 .  Not  on!}',  in  general,  trees  were  esteemed  sacred  ;  but
a  particular  species  of  tree,  was  consecrated  separately  to
each  individual  god,  or,  more  properly,  in  other  words,
it  was  regarded  as  a  symbol  of  the  deity,  considered  in  one
of  his  distinct  operations,  ox  characters.  For  the  polytheism
of  the  ancients  appears,  in  great  measure,  to  have  arisen
from  the  use  of  descriptive,  and  relative  terms,  as  well  as
from  the  application  of  types  and  symbols,  to  the  object
of  pointing  out  the  relations  between  God  and  man,
in  the  works  of  nature.  Amidst  all  the  confusion,  intro-
duced by  this  practice,  the  unity  of  tlie  divine  Being  was
a  favourite  prirhciple,  not  forgotten,  or  overlooked.  Thus,
an    old  poet   has  declared :

Tl>.8Tuv,  Tlircíí^oivi,  Ατ,ίΛ-ήτ-ηξ,  Κν—ξΐς,  Ε;-ι,Τ£ΐ,

'E-fAr,ç  θ',  Ήί^ΛΚΤος  Τ£  κλνης,  ΤΙοιν,  Ζινς  η  κα»  Ή.-ΐ},
ΑςΤίρ-Κ,  r^J  \>ιχίξ'•/ος  Α-ίτβ^Λί.ν  ΕΙΣ  ΘΕΟΣ  ΕΣΓΙΝ.

^'  Pluto,  Proserpine,  Ceres,  Venus,   Cupid,
Triton,  'Nereus,  Tethys,  and  Neptune;
Hennes,  Vulcan,  Pan,  Jupiter,  Juno,
Dianti,  and  Jpollo,  is  one  god.'*


298

The  same  doctrine  is  taught  in  the  hymns,  ascribed  by
historians  to  Orpheus,  The  several  fonns,  and  the  titles,
under  Avhich  this  one  God  was  worshipped, — acknowledged,
and  properly  implied,  his  relative  characters  ;  and  of  these
characters,  the  several  trees,  or  plants,  consecrated,  \\\
those  ages,  to  him,  were  considered  as  the  symbols.

2.  Branches  of  trees,  and  of  plants,  were  formed  into
garlands,  and  crowns,  to  be  worn  upon  solemn  occasions  ;
they  were  not  indiscriminately  used,  but  every  particular
species  was  appropriated,  by  a  definite  usage,  to  iX.s  peculiar
occasion.

3.  Rods,  or  staves,  or  branches  of  trees,  were  carried  in
the  hand,  or  borne  before  persons,  in  certain  offices,  or
characters,  and  these  were  not  borrowed  from  any  one  tree
indiscriminately.  It  was  thought  of  importance,  to  select
branches  of  a  certain  species,  for  each  appropriate  claim.

All  these  things  must  have  had  reference  to  a  systeiw,
which  recognised  a  correspondence,  between  the  cha-
racters of  the  several  plants,  and  the  several  purposes
to  which  they  were  adapted,  or  the  ideas  they  were  to
convey.

But  either  Greeks,  and  Romans,  had  lost  the  original
principles  of  the  system  in  the  mazes  of  antiquity, — or
the  selection  was  made  by  an  order  of  men,  who  co7i'
cealed  the  general  system  upon  which  they  acted,  and  pro-
hibited the  (disclosure  of  their  mysteries,  by  solemn  oaths,
and  curses.

The  poets,  and  the  historians,  were  either  uninitiated;
or  abhorred  sacrilege ;  we  have,  therefore,  no  satisfactory


299

accounts  from  them.  All  the  information  we  have  ob-
tained, amounts  to  little  more  than  vague  conjecture,  or
mythological  fiction.  We  see  the  symbolical  system  of  the  ■
ancients  only  in  its  exterior  application  ;  we  see  a  certain
species  οϊ  crowns,  and  rods,  used  upon  particular  occasions  ;
we  see  particular  Gods  venerated  under  the  symbols  of  their
appropriate  ^;/a«is,  or  trees  ;  and  the  learned  content  them-
selves by  remarking,  in  general,  as  follows : — Frimis  mor•
talibus  maximus  erat  honos  arboribus  :  nam  et  pro  Deorum
imaginibus,  into  magis,  pro  ipsis  Diis,  colebantur.  Hinc
forsan  est,  quod,  no7i  modo,  singulis  Diis,  singulce  esscnt
iirbores,  veruni  etiam,  singulis  arboribus,  suce  Nymphs,  quas
Δξυαίας  et  Ά,ααοξ^αοα?  superstitiosu  antiquittts  appellavit."
Bax.  Gloss.  Antiq.  Rom.  v.  Arbor,  But,  as  the  super-
stition of  these  ancients,  respecting  trees,  bore  a  marked
and  striking  analogy  to  the  system  of  Druidical  symbols.
Vie  may  conclude  that  it  Avas  of  the  same  nature,  and  sprung
originally  from  the  same  fountain.

This  analogy  may  be  observed  in  the  terms  of  Greek  and
Ή,οηιαη  languages:  but,  as  these  terms  are  more  ancient
than  grammars  of  those  languages,  Avhich  are  extant,
a  latitude  must  be  allowed  in  the  derivation  of  tliem.
Thus  Δξνας  may  be  derived  from  ^ξυς  arbor,  and  from
αω,  spiro,  sono,  loquor :  for  even  the  terminations  of
nouns  were  originally  expressive  terms.  Dryades,  and
Hamadryades,  then,  may,  in  the  sacred  colleges,  have
indicated  nothing  more  than  the  r'oites  and  consonancies
of  trees,  or  specific  ideas,  which  those  trees  were  severally
to  represent,  in  the  symbolical  system.  This  notion  of
them  is  corroborated,  and  strongly,  supported  by  a  passage,
quoted  above,  "  The  points  of  the  counterfeited  trees  :
îè'hat  is  it  they  whisper   so  forcibly  ?  or,  Avhat  breathings


300


are  in  their  trunks?    These  are  rccod  by  the  sages^  who
were  versed  in  science,  and  who  dehvered  books."


And  this  hj-pothesis,  perhaps,  will  help  us  to  assign  the
reason,  for  the  following  derivations  of  Κλ»ίο<,  a  rod,  shoot,
or  teiider  brmich,  which  forcibly  point  out  the  uses  to
which  those  branches  were  applied.  k>.xÌìuì,  I  speak.  From
the  materials  of  Λvhich  a  hedge  is  composed,  it  is  called,
Κλ-ηίος,  hence  ίΐΜ'^ων,  a  good  omen,  xXrjíuu^c^ai,  I  'prophectf,
divine,  or  take  an  omen.  Let  us  recollect,  that  sprigs
of  the  Druids  were  called  Coelbreni,  omen  sticks, —
were  equally  used,  for  the  purpose  of  divinatioii  br/  lot,
and  of  representing  sounds,  or  zcords, — and  were  said,
therefore,  to  speak.  As  the  Hebrexo  language,  and  each
of  the  Celtic  dialects,  use  the  same  term  for  a  lot,  and  for
a  rod,  or  stick,  it  may  be  conjectured,  that  κλα^ο?  or  κλ)ί5Ό{
a  rod,  and  κλπξος  a  lot,  were  originally  but  one  term,  m
Greek,  perhaps,  κλ^ί^οΐ, — for  Cledr,  in  Jl'elsh,  has  the  sense
of  rods  for  watling.

Again :  from  v.Xaícc,  the  Meenades,  or  priestesses  of
Bacchus,  Avere  denominated  κ>^xL•nς.  They  were  esteemed
prophetesses,  and  probably  used  the  si/mboUcal  sprigs,  or
lots,  as  means  of  divination,  like  their  neighbours,  the
Germans,  and  the  Ccltcc.

The  G reeks,  \\\\o  were  not  in  the  secret  of  these  Thracian
ladies,  mistaking  their  general  name,  for  a  derivative,
sprung  from  the  word  /x«»w,>c«i,  represented  them  as  mad,  or
furious,  whereas,  they  were  properly  Mr,>xhç,  declarers,  or
ùidicators.

The  name  comes  from  the  general  European  term,  3Iên,


301

which,  in  present  Irhh,  is  mcin  ;  in  JVchh,  myn,  mcns,—^
•Siill, pleasure,  mind,  meaning, — and,  by  Λν ay  of  eminence,
the  celestial  mind.

The  same  word  seems  to  be  the  root  of  (Greek)  μ-ηνυω,
indico,  signifieo,  mcntem  osteiido  :  /y.?îm  Luna,  indicatrix,
soil,  tcmporum  :  y.nn;,  Odium, — mentis  vis,  &c.

To  this  κλα%ΐ,  and  its  derivatives,  may  be  subjoined  tlie
old  Latin  word,  rudis,  a  rod,  whence  we  have  rudi-
mentum,  an  element,  or  Jirst  principle;  erudio,  eruditioy
cruditus,  &,c.


The  most  ancient  method  of  using  letters,  in  Greece  and
Italy,  seems  to  have  been,  by  cutting  them  across  laths,
or  splinters  of  wood,  like  inscribed  sticks  of  Ezekiel,
and  the  peithyncn  of  British  Bards.

Pliny  says,  *''■  table  books  of  wood  were  in  use  before  the
time  of  Homer,"  and  refers  us,  for  proof,  to  the  following
words,  in  the  Iliad,  concerning  Bellerophon.


' —  ΤΙοξίν  Ó    oyi   ς-ήΐΛΟίΤα.  λνγξχ,

Plutarch,  and  Diog.  Lacrt.  inform  us,  that  the  laws  of
Solon  were  inscribed  on  tables  of  wood,  and  A.  Gellius
says  of  tlrem  : — In  legibus  Solonis,  illis  antiquissimiss,  qu(Zf
Athcnis,  axibits  ligneis  incisa  erant."     Lib.  II,  C.  xii.

Ϊ  think  Hcsiod  has  a  covered  allusion  to  this  very  custom.
The  Muses  had  inspired  him  with  a  voice  that  was  divine,  so


302

ihat  he  cotild  sing  of  things  past,  or  to  come^  and  they  com-•^
manded  him  to  celebrate  the  race  of  the  immortal  gods.  At
the  same  time,  they  gave  him  a  staff,  a  branch  of  green
laurel,  to  cut,  or  shave,  and  mark.  Theog.  V.  30.

This  must  have  been  a  an  implement  for  inscribing,  and
recording  the  subject  of  his  inspiration ;  otherwise  his
amusement  must  have  been  ver}'  ill-timed.

The  characters,  in  the  oldest  part  of  the  Amyclcan  record^
— which  may  be  regarded  as  the  most  ancient  specimen
of  Greek  writing,  that  is  knov>'n, — consist  of  strait  lines,  and•
of  angles;  they  were,  therefore,  evidently  adapted  for  the
purpose  of  cutting  over  plain  surfaces.

The  same  is  to  be  observed  of  the  oldest  Itaìian  letters.^
See  No.  L  and  II.  of  the  inscriptions,  copied  by  Mr.  Bi/res^
from  the  sepulchral  grottos  at  Corneto,  the  ancient  Ta?-
quinii.     Gent.  Mag.  June  1779.

A  similar  method  of  writing  prevailed  amongst  thó  bar-
barous nations  of  Europe.  The  Scythians  conveyed  their
ideas,  by  marking,  or  cutting,  certain  figures,  and  a
variety  of  lines,  upon  splinters,  or  billets  of  wood.

Eirwaivoy  'a    ίδιλον,    nauha.   Tifa    y.^t    'χο'ΚυΜ'ή    ycat/.fu»a.,     ξίςαατιχ•
ιγ/ζαψύντίζ,  γ,τοι  iyyXiCovTi;.   Eustatà,  in  Ιί.   Ζ.  P.  48y.

Dr.  Borlase,  Jntiq.  of  Cornzcall,  P.  \?Λ,  fjuotes  a
passage,  in  the  story  of  Gretterus,  which  discovers  the
same  practice  amongst  the  Pagans  of  the  Xor/Λ.  ''  The
enchantress,  taking  a  knife,  cut  the  Runic  characters,
vailed  thcfatales  Iiun(C,  on  a  stick,  or  piece  of  nood,  and
smeart'd  it  with  some  of  her  ov.-n   blood  :  tb^eu  >inging  hor


303

incantations  retrograde,  she  went  round  the  enchanted
wand,  contraiy  to  the  course  of  the  sun,  and  uttered  all
her  cursings :  she  then  threw  the  stick,  with  observation,
ritually,  into  the  sea,  and  prayed, — that  it  might  be  wafted
to  the  Island  of  Drangoa,  and  carry  every  kind  of  curse
to  Grctterus."  From  Barthoi.  L.  III.  C.  ii.  P.  66l  ;  and
Kei/slcr,  P.  407-

I  have  long  suspected,  that  Jacob's  device,  Gen.  xxx.
37,  alludes  to  different  methods  of  writing,  practised  in
his  time.

The  spotted,  and  speckled,  and  ringstraked,  amongst  the
flocks  and  herds,  were  to  be  the  portion  of  that  patriarch.
*'  And  Jacob  took  him  rods,  (the  term  is  ^pD,  mckel,  a
tivig,  from  b\>,  kel,  a  voice,  or  sound,  perhaps,  because
tzuigs  were  the  symbols  of  sounds)  of  green  poplai-,  of  the
hazel,  and  of  chesnut,  and  peeled  white  strakes  in  them,
and  made  the  white  (or  Laban  pi?)  appear  in  the  rods,'*
See.  Whether  we  translate  Laban,  white,  or  as  the  name
of  a  man,  Jacob's  ostensible  design  seems  to  have  been
fair, — it  intimated  a  wish  that  his  uncle's  cause  should
prosper.

But  it  was  consistent  wdtli  Jacob's  character,  to  for\vard
his  own  interest,  by  indirect  means ;  and  this  he  may
have  aimed  at,  by  choosing  that  species  of  rods,  which
may  have  been  regarded  as  the  symbols  of  sounds,  and  of
ideas,  in  conformity  with  his  purpose.

The  poplar,  and  the  hazel,  amongst  the  Celtic  syinbols,
represent  Ε  C,  and  the  corresponding  Hebrew  letters,  pn,
denote  a  circumscribing  ziith  lines,  a  marking  round,  una,
therefore,  a  ringstrakcdness.


304

pDil%  oj-'fiun,  the  chcsnut,  ox,  as  the  Seventi/  fender  it,-
plane  tree,  does  not  occur  amongst  these;  yet  it  may  have
been  hieroglyphic,  or  the  sj/mbol  of  an  idea.  Parkhurst
extracts  the  term  from  nnj;,  ore, — to  discover,  disp/ai/^
and  π]0,  ŶJiene, — to  di^ii?iguish,  count, — make  a  distinct
tion  of  parts.

As  the  sprig  readily  suggested  the  name  of  the  free,  may
not  that  symbolhave  intimated  a  wish^  that  the  cattle  would
be  coloured  with  distinct  jyarts,  or  become  sjjottcd,  anU
speckled.

The  characters  on  the  Babylonian  bricks,  lately  published
by  Dr.  Hager,  Avcre  not,  perhaps,  intended,  originall3',  t-^
represent  nails.  Their  component  parts  are  not  unlike  the
points  of  sprigs,  and  pricklt;s  of  thorns,  plucked  from  their
brandies.  \^'hen  1  saw  them  first,  they  reminded  me  of
an  obscure  passage  in   Herodotus,  respecting  the  builders

Ot    tliat    celebrated     city.        Δ»α     τρτ,κοντα     ^ομ-ων     -πτλίίθοί,     τας-ςοί;

χαλα,α^ν  α^χςτοιζχζ^νης.  (L.  i.  179•)  whicli  T'ülla  thus  translates — •

Per  tricesimum  quemque  laierutn  ordinem,  summitates
A^UNDixiTM,  instipatas,  conglutinabant.  May  not  this
point  at  the  impression  of  those  frames,  which  had  been
carved  with  sprig  letters'^

After  I  had  made  known  my  intention  of  publishing  these
essays,  many  curious  tracts,  upon  philology,  and  writing,
wore  put  into  my  hands,  by  liberal  friends. — Amongst  these,
was,  "  The  prospectus  of  an  Irish  Dictionary,  with
an  Introduction,  and  Preface,  by  General  Vallancey.
Thougti  i  cannot  accede,  implicitly,  to  this  gentleman's
opinion,  I  am  pioud  of  acknowledging  my  obligation  to
}iim,  lor  the   ioilov,  ing  particulars.     They  have  too  close.


305

ν•Λίά  much  too  important  a  connection,  with  my  subject,  in
tliu  section  before  us,  to  be  overlooked.

1.  Mr.  Hammtr,  a  German,  who  has  travelled,  lately,  in
3^gi/pt,  and  Sjjria,  has  brought,  it  seems,  to  England,  ä
manuscript,  written  in  Arabic.  It  contains  a  number  of
alphabets.  Two  of  these  consist  entirely  of  trees.  The
book  is  of  authority.     Introd.  P.  37.

Whatever  be  the  date  of  this  manuscript,  or  the  degree  of
credit  which  it  may  deserve,  it  cannot  have  been  fabricated
by  the  artificer,  to  confirm  the  doctrine  of  the  Irish,  and
British  Bards :  it  furnishes,  therefore,  a  collateral  proof,
that  the  ancients  regarded  the  symbols  of  sounds,  in  the  de*
lineated  form  of  in  es  ana  plants.

2.  The  General  quotes  the  authority  of  Bayer,  "  That
each  of  the  Chaldean,  or  licbrezo  letters,  derives  its  name>
from  some  tree,  or  shrub;  as,  D,  Beth,  a  thorn;  7  Daleth,
■A  vine;  π  He,  the  pomegranate ;  1,  Van,  the  palm;  ',  Jod,
Ivy;  ÌD,  Teth,  the  mulberry  tree;  D.  Samech,  the  apple
tree;  D,  Pe,  the  cedar;  1^  Resh,  the  pine,  ijc."  Frcf,
P.  59,  60.

This  opinion,  is  not  grounded  upon  British,  or  upon  Irishy
tradition.

S.  The  following  quotations^  convey  the  same  idea,  re-
specting the  origin  of  letters.

''  Fructiferaru/n  arborum  jjlantatio,  Lierogli/phicè,  in
divinis  Uteris,  acc/pitur  pro  di^^ipiinn  doctoruni.'"  Ilcsycli
Pierius.


306

Kirc/icr,  tlius  translates  an  explanation  of  the  irr ί  of
knowledge,  by  a  Chaldean  Rabbi,  named  Naham — •

*'  Arbor  magna,  in  medio  pnradisi,  ciijiis  rami,  dic-
TioNESj  ulteriùs,  in  p.amos  parvos,  et  folia,  ou.e  sunt
LI!  ER.E,  extenduntur." — "  The  great  tree  in  the  midst  of
Paradise,  the  sprigs,  and  leaves  of  which,  were  letters,  tma
the  branches,  words."

"  Theut,  a  Gracis,  trismegistus  oppellatus  est — Hwie
asscrunt  authores,  JEgyptiis prafuisse,  eisque  leges,  ac  lite-
ras  tradidisse ;  literariim  vera  characteres  in  animantium,
ARBORUMOUE  FiGURis  instiluisse."  Eli.  Scked.  p.  109.
Prof.  P.  60,  &c.

4.  The  General  gives  tlie  following  metaphors,  from  the
Hebreie,  and  Chaldaic,  Λvhich  make,  forcibly,  to  the  same
point.

"a:;,  Ets,  a  tree :  the  root,  says  Bate,  signifies,  to  take,
or  give  instruction.

DID,  Herein,  a  vine,  a  vinei/ard ; — a  stndi/,  a  school j  a,
college.

Ch.  lin::',  Sharnsh,  Radix, — Thema,  vox primitiva,  um\e
voces  dcrivatíE,  instar  ramorum  expulhilant.

Jhb.  t]>VO,  Saiph,  a  branch; — a  thought, —  (Robertson)
Saiph,   Ramus ; — Cogitatio ; — romos  amputare. — Tho7n.

Heb.  and  Ch.  IDT,  Zarnar,  to  prune ;— to  sing  a  song.-^
The  ylrabs  changed  Μ  into  B,  whence  Zabar,  putavit
citem; — iidclligcnt'ia,  liber,  scripsit,  scriptura.


307

toZ',  Shihih,  Propago, — aic'itnr  ác plaíitâ,  arbore  mitterdc
ramos :  in  Kal,  usurpatum  repcrio,  aefalcc;  de  libru,  de
tpistolà.

~|Π,  Gizar,  Secare ;  radix;  sÿìlaha;  Utcrarum  com-
prehensio.

nr\W,  S/mtu,  Unca,  órdo,  stylus,  modus  et  usiis  loquendi^
structura  verhorum:  Syr,  Sfiita,  litis;  Shiita,  fructus  ar-
bor is  ; — verhiim,  sernw. — Shita,  Virguto,  arbor;  phrasisj,
versus  libri.

D'p,  Kis,  lignum;  ]Dp>  Kisan,  folium  arboris ;  "iD'D'p
Kistor, — Scriba,  notarius.

mv,   Yorelt,  a  shoot;  instriictioH.

K")1D,  Pora,  Ramus facundus ; — Libcllus^

-α.  Bar,  de  ramis  vitis  fa:cundez,  Ezek.  xvli.  6.  et  de
íoquela  humana — Gusset.

In  fine,  niii»,  Soah,  to  study,  is  derived  from  Π*ϋ',  Siak,
a  tree;  and  from  -\V,  yor,  the  shoot,  or  branch — Π"% — yara,
to  teach.

Metaphors  in  Arabic^

The  ancient  Arabs,  said,  proverbially, — ''  I  know  the
wood  of  the  tree,  before  the  fruit  is  ripened." — "  I  knovr
bis  genius,  as  soon  as  he  speaks."

Alam,  science,  learning; — the  cypresi  tree.

υ  2


308

TesìiiJ]  a  tree,  putting  forth  leaves ; — 'intention,  compo'
ÿ'ition,  publhhing  a  hook.

JVerek,  species  arboris; — qui  scrijmf ;  folium  arboris ;
— scriptura.

Fann,  ramus; — ynodus  et  ratio  oraiionis;  pars  ortis  \c\
éoctrintc :  Fanun,  Rami; — Scientiee.  Ta  I  ua,  fore  re,  gem-
mare  cuepit  arbor ; — cognovit,  consideravit,animum  advertit
ad  rem.

Even  the  Chinese  use  the  same  metaphor^  si,  a  tree,  (siah,
'Chald.)  istheke^,  or  the  radix  of  su,  a  iuan  of  erudition  ;
οι sai,  learning,  zcisdom,  a  master  of  arts,  a  mandarine, —
and  of  su  ;  a  book. — Pref  P,  60 — QQ.

For  a  more  ample  catalogue  of  such  authorities,  and  me-
taphors, a  fuller  account  of  them,  and  a  demonstration  of
their  connection  with  traditions,  and  the  language  of  the
Irish,  I  refer  my  readers  to  this  curious  publication.  The
extracts  1  have  now  made,  in  addition  to  what  I  have  stated
before,  may  suffice,  to  shew,  that  a  derivation  of  alphabetical
■characters,  from  sprigs,  and  leaves,  of  trees,  and  plants,  was
not  the  solitary  conceit  of  a  Celtic  ancestor;  but  the  genuine
relic  of  ancient,  and,  perhaps,  universally  accredited  system.

We  can  trace,  uniformly,  in  the  figures  of  speech,  in  the
terms,  the  customs,  traditions,  and  superstitions  of  antiquity",
«'(•both  in  sacred  and  proiiine  writers,)  the  vestiges  οΐ si/mbols,
adopted  from  various  kinds  of  trees,  and  conimunicating
ideas,  by  parts  of  those  trees.  We  find,  that  rods,  and
sprigs,  in  some  way,  or  another,  have] represented  the  first
prniciples  of  speech,  learning,  and  science.  Though  \ve
<;xiuii<jt  always  conrtect  the  symbolical  sprig  with  its  appro^


309

pr'tate  letter,  it  is,  perhaps,  because  the  alphabets,  appa-
rently founded  upon  that  system,  sueh  as  tlie  Fciasgic,  and
Etruscan,  were  become  obsolete,  before  the  time  of  those
authors  who  now  remain.

The  obscure  hints  upon  this  topic,  seem  explained  b  ythe
symbols  called  Druidical,^\\a  so  called,  not  because  Druids
invented,  but  singly,  because  they  cherished  and  j)rescrved
them.

Amongst  other  nations,  the  dispersed  and  scattered  mem-
bers of  the  system  appear,  as  fragments  of  high  antiquity,
in  terms,  customs,  and  superstitions;  but  its  fundamental
principles  of  remote  antiquity,  were  either  forgotten,  or
locked  up,  amongst  the  mysteries  of  the  sacred  orders.  The
secrets  of  the  Magi,  the  Oi-pheans,  the  Priests  of  the  Cabiri,
and  of  Egypt,  perished  with  each  of  their  institutions.  ^Ve
cannot,  therefore,  expect,  from  Greece,  and  Rome,  and  much
less  from  the  sacred  volume,  a  complete  elucidation  of
then•  arcana.  But,  abating  for  some  instances  of  local  im-
provements, and  corruptions,  we  may  at  once  pronounce
Druids  to  have  been  of  the  same  class.  The  discipline  they
enforced,  the  sciences  they  taught,  and  the  opinions  they
inculcated,  were,  in  general,  the  same.  The  source,  from•
Avhence  they  had  professed,  uniformly,  to  have  derived
them,  was  the  same ;  viz.  from  the  ship  of  Dijlan,  the  son
of  the  sea,  zcho  survived,  icith  his  si iigle  family,  when  the,
world  was  drowned.

Some  vestiges  of  these  Druidical  institutions,  with  some
fragments  of  their  traditions,  together  with  songs  of  those
Bards,  who  immediately  succeeded  them,  and  who  professed:
themselves,  with  pride,  their  disciples,  have  survived,  even
to   this    day.     From   thesCj  Λve  have   enabled  ourselves  to


310

investigate  ih?  real  principles  of  their  sj/nihola,  and,  coH'
sequently,  to  explain  the  mysterious  hints  of  antiquity.

As  we  proceed  in  comparinp;  the  letters,  Λvhich  arose
from  that  series  of  natural  sj/mho/s,  with  letters  of  other
ancient  nations,  I  think,  it  will  further  appear,  that,  not•»
withstanding  the  diversity  of  characters,  of  names,  and  of
series,  in  the  alphabets  now  extant,  the  original  invention  of
all  those  letters,  was  the  same;  and  equally  founded,  upon
a  system  of  hierogJi/phics,  or  sijmhoh,  taken  from  the  sp^
pearances,  and  stores  of  nature.


Sll


Sect.  IX.     That    all    Letters   have  proceeded  from   one
or'iiruial  Invention.


JL  OR  the  purpose  of  elucidating  this  fact,  it  may  not  be
improper  to  inquire,  in  the  first  place,  into  the  analogy
that  appears  between  the  letters  of  the  Celta,  and  those  of
their  neighbours,  the  Germans;  who,  as  it  is  known,  lay
claim  to  an  alphabet  of  their  own.  The  invention  of  their
letters,  has,  indeed,  been  ascribed,  by  some  authors,  to  a
Bishop  of  the  Goths,  in  the  fourth  century;  but  that,  is  a
palpable  mistake.  The  Runic  alphabet  was,  unquestion-
ably, known  to  the  German  tribes,  in  the  ages  of  P«-
ganism,  as  appears,  from  numberless  inscriptions  upon
rocks,  (that  primitive  kind  of  records)  all  over  the  north.

And,  it  is  remarkable,  that,  upon  the  introduction  of
Christianity  into  those  regions,  the  ancient  alphabet  had
been  so  far  from  being  deemed  the  invention  of  a  Bishop^
that  it  was  reprobated  as  magical,  and  profane,  so  that
even  the  use  of  it  was  discontinued.  The  only  possible
grounds  for  such  an  opinion,  and  for  the  consequent  pro-
hibition of  the  Runes,  must  have  been,  that  such  letters  had
been  employed  in  the  Pagan  customs  of  divination,  and
sorceri/.

The  Germans  are  known  to  have  used  characters  for  these
purposes,  and  the  Runic  ones  acquired  an  ill  fame  in  con-
sequence of  their  profanation.  The  Runes  were,  there-
fore, those  \-ery  notfv,  or  marks,  which  Tacitus  deseribes
the   Germans  to  have  inscribed  upon  their  magic   lots^


ο.


12


Mr.  Sammes,  Brit.  Antiq.  P.  439,  gives  the  following
account  of  the  abuse  of  these  letters,  and  of  their  disgrace.

"  The  Ru7uc  characters  vere  made  use  of  by  Woden j
not  only  for  inscriptions,  but  for  magical  charms,  and  im-
precations :  and  for  this  reason,  after  the  faith  of  Christ
was  received,  the  Runic  characters  began  to  grow  so  far
out  of  credit,  that  many,  spurred  on  v:\Ú\  too  much  zeal,
not  only  destroyed  such  bewitching  fooleries,  where  they
found  them,  but  burnt,  Λ\'ithout  distinction,  all  sorts  of
books  written  in  that  letter,  and  defaced  monuments,  and
old  inscriptions,  for  no  other  reason,  but  because  they  bore
the  character.  Yet,  nevertheless,  the  dotage  of  the  vul-
gar, on  these  uncouth  letters,  and  the  opinion,  they  con-
tained in  them  a  certain  poAver,  and  energy  (which  appre-
hension yet  remaineth,  among  the  simple,  in  their  charms,
to  this  day)  maintained  its  ground,  so  long  after  Chris-
tianity itself,  that  Locccnius  witnesseth,  Sigfrid,  an  FjUglish
bishop,  thought  it  necessary  to  have  them  altered,  which  he
did  by  the  assistance  of  the  Pope,  who  utterly  banished
them  from  Suedeland,  in  the  year  1050,  and  substituted  the
Latin  character  in  their  room.  The  same  usage  they  found
in  Spain,  under  Alphonsus,  King  of  Castile,  and  Nftvar^
in  the  year  1086,  and  Averc,  at  last,  finally  condemned  in
the  council  of  ΊΊιυΙοιυι,  in  the  year  1116."

The  arrangement  of  the  Runic  alphabet,  \vas  different
from  that  of  the  Irish,  or  the  Bardic  ;  but  this  difterencc,
may  have  arisen  from  some  local  conceit,  of  either  nation.

The  Runes  had  also  peculiar  names,  which,  undoubtedly,
had  their  meanings,  in  the  dialect  whicli  first  imposed
them;  as  F,  Fçi  ■  0,  Oys  i  R,  Ridhur  ;  J,  lis;  S,  Sol;
Tj  Tyr,  &c.


313

Notwithstanding  these  marks  of  distinction,  there  are
known  circumstances,  which  point  out  the  extreme  proba-
bihty  of  their  affinities,  and  close  rekitions  to  the  Celt  a.

The  general  term,  by  which  we  distinguisli  the  northern
alphabet,  is  Run.  This  term.  Sir  II.  Spciman,  as  well  as
other  learned  men,  traces  to  the  Saxon,  liijnc,  which  imports
a  mystcrif,  or  hidden  thing.  The  Celt/e  call  their  system  of
symbols.  Run,  and  Rhin,  which,  in  the  Irish,  and  iVclsh
languages,  have  precisely  the  same  import-
Though  one,  and  the  same  power,  be  not  constantly  repre-
sented by  a  similar  character,  in  both  alphabets,  \'et,  the  series
of  Runic,  and  Bardic  characters,  taken  altogether,  have  an
astonishing  resemblance,  between  each  other,  and,  in  the
various  copies  of  Runes,  taken  from  old  inscriptions,  cha-
racters appear,  which  are  exactly  the  same  as  in  the  Bardic
alphabet.

In  those  instances,  wherein  the  Runic  letters  differ  from
the  Bardic,  the  former  still  appear  like  sketches  of  the
sprigs  of  trees,  either  single,  or  combined  :  and  the  terms,
by  which  the  Gothic  nations  describe  their  letters,  suggest
the  idea,  that  they  were  so  understood.  Thus,  an  alpha-
betic character  in  Saxon,  or  old  English,  w<is  called  boc-
stave,  a  book-staff".     Versteg.  Chap.  vii.

Sammcs,  Γ,  441,  quotes  Runic  verses,  which  he  thus
translates,  "  Thou  knowest  the  Runes,  and  loose  charac^
ters,  fadna  sta^i,"'  rod  staves,  or  letters,  &.c.

And  again,  P.  443,  he  thus  translates  a  quotation  from  tlie
Mdda  :—''  That,  12,  I  know,  if  I  see  on  the  top  of  wood.


314

(trc)  a  ghost  walking,  so  I  cut  it  out,  and  receive  it  in  the
Run,  that  the  man  shall  come,  and  speak  with  me."

From  the  identity  of  the  general  name,  hy  which  the
Celtic,  and  llunic  letters  are  distinguished  ;  from  the  iden-
tity of  the  radical  number  in  hoth,  (sixteen)  and  the  general
agreement  of  their  powers;  from  the  identity  of  the  uses  to
Avhich  they  Λvere  applied,  the  similarity  of  several  charac-
ters, together  w^th  a  common  tradition,  that  all  of  them
originated  from  staves,  rods,  or  sprigs,  cut  from  the  tops
oj" trees — a  fair  conclusion  may  be  formed,  that  both  alpha-
bets, were  grafts  of  the  same  root,  or  sprung  from  the  same
stock,  and  were  devised  upon  the  same  plan,  or  system.

Yet,  we  must  not  suppose,  that  characters  of  Ger-
man Runic,  were  borrowed  from  Druids  of  Gaul,  and
Britain.  They  were  used  by  Gothic  tribes,  as  appears
from  the  language  of  all  Runic  inscriptions :  "  The
Northern  Goths  held  their  letters  in  the  highest  reverence,
— ascribed  the  invention  of  them  to  their  chief  deity — and
attributed  even  to  the  letters  themselves,  supernatural  virtues.'*
A  veneration  so  bigotted,  and  superstitious,  demonstrates,
that  such  letters  as  these,  must  have  belonged,  with  shades
of  difference,  to  the  same  people,  from  remote  periods  of
antiquity.  Their  ancient  custom  of  divination  'was  con-
nected with  the  use  of  them,  and  they  had  not  the  faintest
hints  of  tradition,  that  ever  they  had  borrowed  them  from  any
other  nation.  Their  invention  was,  at  least,  ascribed  by
them  to  their  chief  deity,  and  the  founder  of  their  family.

The  exclusive  property  of  a  Runic  alphabet,  is  awarded,
in  a  manner,  to  the  Germans,  by  the  Celta;  themselves.
The  old  Irish  had  a  series  of  characters,  which  they  called
Marcomannic  Runes.     The  Marcomaiini,  who  \vcre  the  sub-


31


OLD


jects  of  Ariov'istm,  in  Ccesar^s  time,  were  in  the  habit  of
divining  by  lots.  (De  Bell  Gall.  i.  53.)  They  were  of
course  in  possession  of  the  7totie,  or  characters,  employed
in  that  practice ;  and  the  Irish  Avonld  not  have  called  them
Marcomannic,  had  they  been  altogether  the  same  as  the
national  characters  of  the  Celta.

We  may,  therefore,  consider  the  Runic  letters  of  the
north,  as  only  different  sketches,  or  draughts,  of  the  sj/m-
bolical  sprigs,  acknowledged  by  the  Ctltce,  and  we  iuai/
infer,  as,  I  think,  we  must,  that  both  nations,  Avith  some
accidental  changes,  derived  the  system  from  their  common
ancestors.  The  northern  copy  is  not  so  uniform,  and  sim-
ple, as  the  Bardic  ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  it  presents  marked
and  venerable  features  of  antiquity,  which  are  verified  by  the
oldest  inscriptions  of  Greece,  and  Italy.

Let  me  now  investigate  the  affinity  between  the  Celtic
letters,  and  those  of  Crreece,  or  of  Rome.  But  I  must
premise  a  little  historical  epitome  of  their  alphabets,  as  far
as  my  information  extends.  Ancient  authors  tell  us  of  two
distinct  alphabets,  which,  in  difterent  ages,  were  known  to
the  inhabitants  of  Greece.  The  oldest  of  these  was
called  the  Pelasgic,  the  Attic,  the  Argive,  or  the  Ar-
cadian, from  the  several  people,  by  whom  it  had  been  em-
ployed. It  appears  to  have  been  the  same  as  the  Etruscan,
or  old  Italian,  alphabet,  which  also  was  called  Arcadian^
because  it  was  brought,  as  they  said,  out  of  Arcadia  into
hatium,  by  Evander.

The  Pelasgi,  from  whom  this  alphabet  receives  its  fa-
miliar title,  were  some  of  the  most  ancient  inhabitants  of
Greece :  but  the  name  Avas  not  confined  by  historians
to  that  country,  nor  is  it  accurately  known  how  far  it
extended,   or  whence  it   arose.      Learned  men   have   oh-


316

served  a  similarity  between  this  \vord,  and  the  Hebrew
D'jVd,  Peltgim,  and  have  supposed  it  of  the  same  import.
The  dividers,  or  divided.

If  this,  be  founded  in  truth,  we  may  regard  it  as  a  general
name,  for  those  descendants  of  Japheth,  who  divided  the
isles  of  the  Gentiles.  Be  that,  however,  as  it  may,  the
Pelasgi  seem  to  have  brought  their  letters  Avith  them  into
Europe,  upon  their  first  migration  :  for  Eustathius,  a  writer
of  no  mean  credit,  in  his  commentary  on  the  second  Iliad,
V.  841,  assigns  it,  as  one  reason,  why  the  Pelasgi  Avere
called  Aiov,  Divine,  because  they  alone,  of  all  the  Greeks,
preserved  the  use  of  letters  after  the  deluge.

But,  the  use  of  the  Pelasgic  letters  was  not  confined  to  the
proper  Greeks,  any  more  than  the  name  of  Pelasgi;  for
Orpheus,  and  Linus,  or  the  priests  of  Thrace,  are  said
to  have  employed  them  in  their  writings.  Dio.  Sic.
L.  III.

The  Pelasgic,  in  its  original  form,  may,  therefore,  be
regarded  as  the  general  alphabet  of  the  Jirst  European  na-
tions, and  as  coeval  to  the  nations  themselves.  Conse-
quently, the  Jftic  letters,  Avhich  unquestionably  were  the
same  as  the  former,  have  been  uniform]}'  interpreted  by
lexicographers,  as  meaning,  Aj^ata,  Uu^xnx,  Έ,τηχν^ιχ,  the
old,  priinilive,  native  letters  of  the  country.

From  the  same  old  stock  sprung,  also,  tlie  first  letters  of
the  liomans.  They  were  called  Etruscan,  and  were  allowed
to  be  the  same  as  the  Pelasgic.

Pliny  says: — ''  Vetustior  autem  urbe  in  J'aticano  ilex,  in
qua  Tilulus,  a-rcis  Uteris  Hetruscis,  rcligiouc  arborem,jani
tuui,  dignaiit  esse  signÍfcavit."


317

Dion.  Hal.  L.  IV.  speaking  of  the  column,  upon  which
Scrvius  TuUiis  caused  his  laws  to  be  written,  says,  that  tlie
same  column  remained  even  to  his  time,  in  the  temple  of
Diana,  inscribed  with  letters,  wdiich  G/'dece  anciently  used,
namely,  the  Pelasgic.

The  other  Greek  alphabet,  and  which  remains  in  use,
had  the  several  names  of  Ionian,  Phoenician,  Cadmean,
or  JEolian  :  and  it  is  represented,  as  having  been  imported
inio  Bceotia,  by  an  Asiatic  colony,  about  1500  years
before  Christ.  The  Greeks  call  theconducter  of  this  colony
Cadmus,  and  the  people,  who  composed  it,  Phanicians ;
but,  under  the  former  name,  we  may,  perhaps,  more  pro-
perly understand  a  people,  called  Cadndans,  from  their
former  place  of  residence.  That  such  a  colony  did,  in  fact,
arrive,  and  wrought  a  memorable  change  in  the  alphabet
of  Greece,  are  facts,  attested  with  so  general  a  voice  of
antiquity,  as  to  admit  of  no  debate.  But,  of  whom  this
colony  consisted,  and  from  whence  it  came,  are  circum-
stances less  evident.

The  territory  of  the  Tj/rians,  and  Sidonians,  was  called
Phanicia  by  the  later  Greeks.  It  was  the  district  best
known  to  them  by  that  name,  and  the  most  celebrated
country,  to  which  the  name  was  applied.  Consequently,
ancient  authors  have  acquiesced  in  the  opinion,  that
a  Theban  colony  came  from  the  Ti/rian  coast.  To  this
opinion,  several  of  the  learned  moderns  have  subscribed,
and  have  concluded  these  emigrants  to  have  sprung  from
the   race    of   the  Canaanites.

But,  though  it  has  been  a  general  persuasion,  it  has
not  been  universally  admitted.


518

Baxter,  In  his  letter  to  Mr.  Gardiner,  calls  Cadmus,  a
Carian^  and  adds, — "  It  is  a  grand,  though  an  ancient
mistake,  that  the  old  Φοι^κες  were  Tyrians."  Reliq.  Βαχ.
P.  415.

Had  this  learned  antiquary  assigned  his  reasons  for  the
above  assertion,  his  opinion  might  have  had  a  more  able
support  than  my  pen  can  furnish.  However,  as  I  rather
adopt  his  faith  on  this  point,  I  shall  offer  the  following
circumstances  to  my  readers.

The  name,  Phoenicia,  which,  perhaps,  was  Greek,  and
which  imported  nothing  more  than  a  district,  abounding
with  pa/m  trees,  was  i\ot  applied  exclusively  to  the  territories
of  the  Tyrians,  and  Sidonians,  or  old  Canaanites,  which^
in  the  time  of  Moses,  and  of  Cadmus,  reached  no  further
Kortliward,  than  to  Sidon,  upon  the  sea  coast.  There  were
other  districts  of  that  name.

There  were  two  mouDtainous  tracts,  in  the  neighbourhood
of  each  other,  placed  in  tlie  confines  of  Ionia,  and  Carta  î
Ptolemy  calls  one  of  them  Cadmus,  and  the  other  Pimnix.
The  inhabitants  of  these  tracts  were,  therefore,  CadmianSf
and  P/iücnicians :  The  contiguity  of  their  native  residence,
may  have  afforded  them  an  opportunity  of  joining  in  the
same  expedition.

The  dialect  of  Thebans,  the  names  of  their  towns,  and
of  their  oldest  princes,  do  not  appear  to  have  had  more
affinity  with  Tyrian,  Syriac,  or  llchreu',  than  languages
of  o//irr  ( J  reek  states.  The  Boiotian  was  a  genuine  branch
of  tlui  Ionian   language,    wliich  had   been   established  in


319

tlistrlcts,  Avhere  Cadmus,    and  liis  Phanicians,    never   ob-
tained a  footing.

The  Tyrians,  and  Sidonians,  did  not  claim  tlie  colo-
lization  of  Bücotia  ;  but,  in  conjunction  with  other  ylsiatic
people,  called  its  inhabitants,  as  well  as  those  of  the  other
Greek  states,  by  the  generic  term  of  lones,  or  laones —
the  sons  of  Javan.

E'Wtsixu/c  Je  Ό»  Ba^fíeçot  τους  Έλληναί  Ιωης  >.tyav<;i.  HeSì/ch,  V.  lunvx,
Παι^αί  Έλλνινχς  Ιχονις  Ό»  Βαςβαξο*  iy.cû^ow.  Schol.  ad  Acam.  Aìistoph,
Εν»ο»  κα»  τονς  Θ^αν.ας,  και  Αχαίοι'ΐ,  κ«ί  ΒΟΙΩΤΟΎΣ,  Κνες  εκαλοιν,    Ilesì/ck,

■V.    IWVE?.

It  appears,  then,  that  Baotians,  or  Cadmus,  and  his
J*h(Knicians,  were  considered  as  lones,  and  of  the  same
origin  as  the  other  Gi-ecks.

The  letters,  introduced  into  Europe,  by  these  emigrants,
are  uniformly  called  Ionian.  They  were  the  same  as  those
used  by  the  Asiatic  lonians,  or  the  Tarshish  of  Moses.
Pliny  asserts,  that  a  tacit  consent  of  7iations,  introduced
the  general  use  of  Ionian  letters.  This  can  only  mean  the
Cadmian,  or  new  Greek  characters,  which  became  preva-
lent, in  succession,  to  the  Pelasgic,  and  Etruscan.

The  letters  of  Cadmus  have  more  similarity  of  character
to  the  Pelasgic,  or  primitive  letters  of  the  Europeans,  as
they  appear  on  the  Eugubian  tables,  than  to  any  copies  of
the  Samaritan,  or  of  the  Tijrian  letters,  now  extant.

From  these  premises,  I  think,  a  fair  inference  may  re-
sult, that  Cadmus,  and  his  Phf^nicians,  were  natives  of
the  country  about    Mount   Cadmui,  and   Mount   Phanixp


320

— that  his,  and  their  letters,  were  those  of  the  loniam,  or
descendants  from  Javan,  who  had  hitherto  remained  in
Asia.  The  difference  between  these  letters^  and  the  Pe-
/asgic,  in  all  probability,  arose  from  gradual  operations  of
time,  or  from  studied  refinements,  during  the  separation  of
the  kindred  families.

It  may  be  asked,  in  objection, — if  the  colonist,  who
occupied  Baotia,  was  actually  Ionian,  why  do  we  not
find  him  distinguished  by  that  name,  in  preference  to  the
term  Phanician  Í

It  may  be  answered,  that,  in  early  ages,  the  name  of
Ionia ns  was  applied  so  generally  to  all  Greeks,  that  it
would  have  conveyed  no  distinct  idea  of  a  particular  dis-
trict, or  family ;  whereas,  the  names  of  Mount  Cadmus,
and  Mount  Phanix,  were  of  limited  appropriation,  which
at  once  pointed  out  the  origin,  as  well  as  the  native  spot  of
the  new-comers.  It  may,  further,  be  remarked,  that  Eu-
ropean Greeks,  of  later  times,  in  consequence  of  some
jealousies  between  the  two  countries,  disliked  the  name  of
lones,    avoided  the  use    of  it,    and  zcere   umiiUiiig  to   be

called  by  it.  Ό»  [Xiv  i/w  αλλ^ι  Ιωνες,  y.xi  aSijv«ío»,  εφνγο»  Toviofjíct  ou
€οϋλο//-ί»ο»  lu:tiii  κεκλ'/ΐζθα»,      Hcrudut.    L.  I.

Some  learned  men,  taking  it  for  granted,  that  Cadmus
was  a  Syro-Phanician,  have  laboured  the  point  of  ex-
plaining, how  the  letters  of  Cöí/m//s  may  have  been  formed,
iiI)on  the  old  Samaritan,  and  have  insisted  upon  it,  that  all
the  names  of  these  letters  are  mere  imitations  of  the  Ilebreic.
h  is  not,  by  me,  denied,  that  a  remote  afiiuity  may  be
discovered,  between  the  two  alphabets.  They  both  de-
scended, in  my  opinion,  from  one  source•,  and,  there-
fore, may  hu>e  retained  a  deurce  of  rcserablauce  to  each


321

other.  But  tlié  alphabet  of  Cadmus  dbcs  not  appear  to
have  been  taken  tVoni  the  HtOrezc,  or  from  any  other,
which  corresponded  with  iti  In  the  time  of  Moses,  avIio
was  cotemporary  with  Cadmus,  the  Hebrews  had  aheady
twenty-two  potestates,  or  letters ;  the  alphabet  of  Cadmus
was,  as  yetj  in  a  more  primitive,  and  simple  state>  consist-
ing only  of  sixteen  letters»

That  names  of  Greek  letters  are  mere  imitations  of  the
sounds,  formed  by  the  Hebrew  names,  or  by  the  Ti/rian,  is
a  very  disputable  point.  It  appears  to  me,  that  most  of
them  are  old,  and  genuine,  Greek  words,  conveying  similar
ideas  to  those  of  the  corresponding  names  in  the  Hebrew,
and  retaining  a  similarity  of  sound,  only  so  far  as  the
two  languages  had  a  radical  connection  between  each
other.  I  shall  endeavour  to  render  this  proposition  more
clear   in  the  sequel»

But  the  identity  between  some,  at  least,  of  the  Ionian
characters,  and  the  Peiasgian,  or  Etruscan,  of  the  Eugubian
tables,  and  the  similarity  of  others,  demonstrate,  that  both
of  these  two  alphabets  have  sprung  from  the  same  fountain.
And,  it  should  seem,  that  a  change  was  not  introduced  at
once,  but  gradually  effected.  In  the  celebrated  Sigca/i  in-
scription, we  discover  nearly  equal  resemblances  of  the
Peiasgian  letters,  and  the  Ionian :  it  was,  therefore,  en-
graved, at  a  time,  when  the  former  v/ere  beginning  to
yield  with  reluctance,  and  the  latter  were  insinuating
themselves  into  their  place.

But  it  would  be  easier  to  demonstrate  the  original  identity
of  these  alphabets,    than   to   point   out,  Λvith   distinct   ac-
caiacy,  the  changes  introduced  by  the  lonians,-
X


322

Tlicy  do  not  seem  to  huve  augmented  the  number  of  the
letters.  Only  sixteen  are  ascribed  to  Cadmus.  Tlie  same
number  is  claimed  by  the  old  Latins,  by  the  old  Germans, —
by  the  Irisli, — and  British  Bards.

AVe  have  not,  perhaps,  adequate  remains  of  old  inscrip-
tions, to  ascertain  the  exact  ŵompass  of  the  Pelasgian,  or
the  Etruscan  alphabet,  which,  there  are  some  authors,  -svho
confine  to  so  few  as  twelve,  or  thirteen  powers ;  but  it  is
probable,  that,  like  the  Latin, — as  well  as  other  Old  Eu'
Topean  alpltahets,  which  are  better  known, — it  amounted,  in
truth,  to  sixteen.

Oiodorus  informs  us,  that  Cadmus  did  not  originally  in-
vent, but  only  changed,  the  figures  of  the  letters.  Yet,
from  otlier  circumstances,  it  appears  probable,  that  the
Greeks  of  Europe  were  also  indebted  equally  to  those
Thebans,  for  a  new  arrangement  of  their  letters,  and  for  a
new  series  of  names.

The  order  of  the  Ionian  alphabet,  accords  much  better
to  that  of  the  Hebrew,  and  of  the  icestern  Asiatics  in  gene-
ral, than  Runic,  Irish,  or  the  Bardic ;  which  latter,  in
all  other  respects,  appears  to  have  been  a  very  near  ally
to  the  Felasgian,  or  Etruscan.

As  to  the  names,  though  I  have  already  shewn,  that
Utters  had,  anciently,  two  sets  of  them, — specific,  or  the
idea  expressed  by  th.c  porcfr,— and  hieroglyphic,  ox  symboli•'
eal ;  jvX,  \ve  may  suppose,  that,  in  every  particular  state,
one  series  of  the  two  was  more  familiarly  used  than  the
otiier,  and  that  ouc  series  only  was  retained,  when
the  hieroglijphieal  origin  of  letters  was  forgotten.  The
series,  by  wiiieh  Uie  Ionian  letters,  aud  the  IhOrcu,  as  weli


323

CIS  the  üld  Irhh,  are  dlstiliguisked,  is  clearly  tlie  hierogly-^
phicaL  it  is  formed  by  names,  which  are  given  to  certain
productions  of  art,  or  of  nature.

Timt  Pelasgians,  and  the  Tuscans,  on  the  contrary,  used
the  simple,  and  specific  names, — like  our  Druids  of  Britain,
— is  probable,  from  the  general  afnnity  of  their  alphabets.
ftnd,   still  more  so,   from  the   following  circumstauce.

The  old  Latins,  and  the  Romans,  in  the  first  ages  of  thö
city,  as  I  have  already  shewn,  used  the  Fclasgian,  or
Etruscan  characters.  These  were,  I  think,  the  Latin  let-
ters ; — whose  texture,  Pliny  says,  resembled  those  which
Greece  had  ancie?dly  used.  They  were  laid  aside,  gradually ;,
for  the  admission  of  a  series,  much  the  same  as  the  Ionian,
But  the  Romans  neither  adopted,  nor  imitated  the  names
of  the  Ionian  letters.  They  used  the  simple,  and  mono-
syllabic names,  which  are  to  this  day  retained.

It  cannot  be  conceived,  that^  when  they  altered  their
characters,  they  originally  devised  that  series  of  names*
They  must  have  preserved  the  names  of  their  old  letters,
and,  therefore,  of  the  Pelasgian,  or  the  Etruscan  characters^
These  names  have,  indeed,  been  deemed  utterly  destitute
of  meaningj  by  scholars,  who  Avould  search  for  them  ia
the  HebrcTC,  or  Greek,  or  modern  Latin  tongue.  But  it
appears  to  me  a  certain  fact,  that,  at  least,  tiie  latter  of
these  languages  was  cliiefiv  formed  out  of  a  dialect,  very
ancient,  and  very  similar  to  that  of  the  Cotii,  or  JValdenscs^
and  S'coti,  or  CeltcE.  of  Ireland,  in  which,  a  multitude  of  its
roots  may  even  still  be  found.  In  this,  and  some  other  Celtic
dialects,  the  names  of  the  Roman  letter^,  arc  all  significant,
and  characteriitical  terms.  They  are  full  of  meaning.    They.


334

are,  also,  dearly  re-echoed,  in  the  names  which  are  given  to
the  /ots  of  Druidism,  or  the  omen  sticks  of  Britain*

We  may  venture,  then,  to  assert,  that,  whilst  the  Ro?nahS
imitated  the  an^angetnent,  and  characters,  of  the  Ionian
alphabet,  they  cherished,  and  preserved,  for  the  moat
part,  the  simple,  and  tlie  original  names  of  their  national
letters  ;  viz.  the  Arcadian,  or  Pelasgian,  of  Evander,  the
same  as  the  Etruscan,  the  Celtic,  and  primitive  letters  of
Europe.

With  such  names,  perhaps,  all  nations  had  been  once  ac-
quainted. Even  the  Hebrew  alphabet  is  not  without  simple
names,  corresponding  to  the  marked,  and  specific  ones  of
the  Pelasgian,  or  Bardic  alphabet ;  as  He,  in  the  Pe-
lasgian, or  Bardic,  E,  Avhich  denotes,  in  Celtic,  that
■person,  t/iot  thing,  as  the  Hebreui',  N>n  ;  Pe, — in  the  Bardit,
Pi, — a  bcuk,  or  sharp  point, — as  the  Hebrcic  rtD.

The  names  of  some  letters,  in  the  modern  Greek  alpha-
bet, prove,  that  this  people  had  known  letters  of  diiierent
powers,  distinguished  by  simple  names.  Τ  must  have  been
railed  Upsilon,  slender  U,  in  contradiction  to  that  broad
U,  which  is  found  in  the  Roman,  the  Pelasgian,  the  Irish,
ihe  Bardic,  a«d  the  Runic  alphabets ; — but  not  in  the  lojuan.

So  again :  removing  from  Epsilon,  Upsilon,  Omicron,
and  Omega,  the  epithet  Psilun,  Micron,  and  Mega,  which
constitute  no  part  of  the  real  names,  we  discover  the  sim-
ple enuntiations  of  the  vocal  powers, —  E,  0,  U,  as  in  the
Pelasgian,  Ron/an,  and  Bardic  alphabets.

It  remains,  to  shew  the  correspondence  of  the  Pelasgian^
as  well  as  the  Ionian,  with  Druidical  ulphabt-ts,  as  far  as
may  dcmounsliutc  their  cOmmoii  origiu.


325

A  comparison  between  the  names  and  characters,  of  al-
most every  power,  in  the  Bardic,  and  Ftlasgian,  would,
of  itself,  terminate  all  debate  respecting  their  original  iden-
tity. Such  is  their  similarity,  that  it  could  not  well  have
been  produced  without  an  actual  intercourse  between  the
several  people,  by  whom  those  powers  were  used.  Tiiat
intercourse  is  acknowledged  also  to  have  taken  place.

The  Hyperboreans  (or  Druids)  repaired  regularly  to  the
banks  of  the  Peneiis,  in  Tlicssaly,  to  worship  their  Deity,
Jpollo.     Mlian.  Far.  Hist.  L.  III.  C.  i.

We  may  hazard,  without  fear,  the  conjecture,  that  votaries,
like  these,  carried  with  them  a  knowledge  of  Druidical  st/m-
hoh,  or  lots,  wherever  they  went.  Yet  it  may  not  follow,
or  admit  of  proof,  that,  of  comse,  they  introduced  them  into
the  heart  of  Greece.  Their  creed  of  religion  must  have
had  some  analogy  to  that  of  the  people,  in  whose  temples
they  worshipped.  The  Feiasgiaii  priest  of  the  Cahiri,  as
well  as  our  Druids,  professed  a  vigilant  care  of  primitive
opinions,  and  of  primitive  institutes, — derived,  and  well  au-
thenticated, from  the  ark.  Even  their  name  could,  with
some  probability,  be  well  traced  in  the  Celtic;  i'or  ca/nir,
is  a.  confederacy  ; — cahartha,  united ; — cabhair,  help,  aid;
cabhair-am,  1  help,  assist,  relieve.  Shan•.  Be  that,  as  it
may,  we  can  have  no  doubt  that  Pelasgian  priests  used
Pelasgiau  letters.

The  use  of  these  Pe/i/so/««  letters  has  been  ascribed  expressly
to  the  Bard,  or  priest  of  Thrace.  Diodorus,  L.  UL.  observes,
that  Linus  zcrote  a  history  of  the  acts  of  the  elder  Diony-
sus, and  other  mi/thological  tracts,  in  Fdasgian  letters^
and  that  Orpheus  made  use  of  the  same.


326

Under  the  name  of  Orpheus,  the  fanciful  Greeks  appear
to  have  described  an  ancient  order  of  Priests,  called  Or-
pheans,  Avho  dealt  in  symbols,  and  who  traΛ'ersed  great  part
of  the  habitable  earth,  to  instruct  the  world  in  divine  mys-
teries. They  were  not  only  poets,  and  skilled  in  harmony,
but  theologists,  and  prophets  ;  they  were  also  very  knowing
in  medicine, — and  in  the  history  of  the  heavens.  OrpiuuSf
in  Holwel's  Mythol.  Diet.

Thrace  appears  to  have  borrowed  from  them,  one  principal
doctrine  of  Driiidisin,  which  prevailed  as  late  as  the  time
of  Mela,  the  geographer,  not  as  the  dogma  of  a  solitary
philosopher,  but  as  a  national  persuasion,

''  Alii  reditìirûs  putant  ani'mas  obeuutium  ; — alii,  etsinoì^
redeant  non  extii/gui  tamen,  sed  ad  heatiora  transire,
L.  II.  C.  ii.

Our  Oriiids  taught,  that  souls,  after  being  purified  by  their
transmigration,  attained  a  condition  of  endless  felicity,

In  short,  it  appears, — from  the  whole  account  which  has  been
traced  of  this  order, — that  Orpheans  were  Dniids,  or  Dndds
Orpheans.  Both  orders  having  sprung  from  one  stocky
they  were,  perhaps,  in  their  uncorruptcd  state,  equally  the
repositories  of  primitive  arts,  and  primitive  opinions.
These  orders,  in  viiricus  countries,  appear  to  have  had  not
only  d  marked  and  general  resemblance,  but  also  a  more
familiar  intercourse,  and  a  more  actual  communication^
than  has  been  cpmmonly  supposed.

TheViance  of  trees,  to  the  music  of  the  Orphean  Ιηίΐγτρ^
χηϋγ  have  been  an  allegory,  of  the  same  import,  as  Talitr•


:\ι(<η  F.uic.i-


a


Û


/    //    //   e


^  //  /  r  ^j


C   Ô


/


I  Avnrkrro


/^/Κν,\ν:ν>1^.•Λν,0ΑΨ,Φ.

^^Φ>:<K:C^:t1i^t■■>^■■kN•■n/.

._^ΡΛΑ••1Ι•ΜΝννΚΛ.
tOkF-ΙΠΜΠ


/■


^t^β:<κ^cot>ΔD.^ι^3^RF^Nπ


t^<κ^f;kWMO^Nrrtvγ

><1^/1\Λ^1/101ΝΓνΨ


327

iins  device,  of  arming  the  si/iuOolical  ticcs,  or  letters,  and
bringing  them  into  the  field  υί"  battle.

The  Greeks  have  no  tradition  of  any  writings^,  known  in
their  country,  anterior  to  those  of  Thracian  Bards.  To
them,  we  ought,  therefore,  to  ascribe  the  first  puhlication
of  the  Pe/asgian,  and  the  Etruscan  letters, — not  their  in-
vention,— but  their  introduction  into  popular  use.

The  names  of  these  letters, — retained  by  the  Romans, —
and  their  characters,  copied  from  inscriptions,  of  uncertain
date,  prove,  indisputably,  their  common  origm,  with  letters
of  British  Bards.  In  No.  VIII.  of  the  annexed  plate,
they  are  exhibited,  at  one  view,  together.  The  first  line
is  formed  of  Bardic  lots ; — the  second  has  been  selected  from
De  Gebelin,  and  from  Astlcs  Etruscan  alphabets ; — a  third,
from  the  inscriptions  of  the  sepulcliTal  grottos  at  Cornet o,
as  they  were  engraved  for  the  Gentleman  s  Magazine  of
June,  1779.

Most  of  the  Pelasgian,  or  Etruscan  letters  have  been  re-
versed, because  they  were  taken  from  inscriptions,  which
had  been  written,  from  right  to  left.  The  old  Greeks,  and
the  Italians,  Avrote  both  ways.

It  is  ηοΛν,  perhaps,  no.  improper  stage  of  the  discussion,  to
examine  the  origin,  or  solution  of  the  testimony  given  us  by
Xcnophon,  and  by  Arcliilochus,  which  has  been  cited  by
Buchcr — viz.  "  that  the  characters  which  Cr/^^/is  introduced
into  Greece,  were  more  similar  to.  the  Gaulish,  than  to
the  Punic,  or  Phanician  letters."

From  Λνΐ^ί  has  been  stated,  I  assume  it  as  a  just  infer-
ence, that  ancient  Gaulish  characters,  intimated  by  these
authors,  were,  in  general,  the  same  as  the  Bardic  letters^


328

already  exhibited.  Before  I  compare  tliem  with  Cudmean
characters,  or  those  of  the  modern  Greek,  it  may  not  be
improper  to  contemphite,  Avith  a  retrospect,  those  principles,
and  that  system,  upon  which  they  were  constructed.

Being  original!}'  intended  as  draughts,  or  sketches,  of  the
j)ointSy  or  ^priga,  or  knots  of  plants,  it  is  to  be  remarked,
that  simple,  and  radical  characters,  represent  either  a  straight
rod, — Ά  forked  sprig, — a  rod,  Avith  a  single  shoot  branching
from  it, — or  a  simple  knot  on  a  trcig  ;  as  No.  I.  PI.  ii.

The  fork,  or  the  shoot,  always  branches  off,  and  with
an  acute  angle  ;  the  knot  breaks  the  line,  with  an  ob-
tuse angle.  In  these  particulars,  the  copy  is  taken  from
the  model  of  nature.

The  characters  of  those  compound  powers,  which  are
now  classed  amongst  the  radicals,  are  formed  by  the  junc-
tion of  t\vo  simp/es:  as  Μ  from  Β  U,  Ο  from  A  17,
^o.  II.

Derivatives,  or  mutations,  are  accomplished,  by  adding
to  their  primitiΛ•es,  another  shoot,  or,  else,  mutes  are  changed
into  their  affinities,  the  semi-vowels,  and  the  aspirates,  by
affixing  a  reed,  whose  perforation  was  the  symbol  of  breath--
ing ;  as  in  No.  III.

Thus,  a  fundamental  principle  is  preserved  throughout,
with  great  simplicity,  and  regularity.

In  the  Ionian  characters  of  Greece,  and  of  Rome,  few
vestiges  of  system,  or  of  homogeneous  connection  pre-
pent  themselves,  at  the  first  view  ;  and  yet,  upon  mature  con-
^ic!cK\tion,    their  general   analogy,    to    characters  of   the


329

Bardic  is  perceived.  And  the  evidence  of  inscrip-
tions, the  farther  we  ascend  backwards  into  antiquity,
amounts  to  absohite  proof,  that  most  of  the  difference,
which  now  appears  between  them,  is  due  to  the  changes
Λvhich  took  place  in  GreeJc,  and  Homan  letters.  The
more  ancient  Λve  find  the  several  specimens,  the  nearer  we
discover  their  approach  to  the  Bardic  sprigs.  The  reason
ίβ  clear.  The  letters  of  the  more  learned  people  were  con-
stantly employed.  The  taste  of  the  <ige,  and  study  of  ex-
pedition, produced  their  daily  effect, in  altering  Mflines; —
but  the  letters  of  the  Celtic  formed  an  object  of  super-
stition;— it  zvas  their  chief  study  to  commemorate  the
images.

I  shall  now  exhibit  proofs  of  relation  between  these  al-
phabets.

1.  Several  of  the  respective  characters  retain  so  much
resemblance  of  shape,  that  an  original  identity  is  evident,
at  the  first  view ;  as  in  No.  IV.

2.  In  other  instances,  the  Ionian  series  merely  opens
the  angles  of  the  Bardic  sprigs^  into  right  angles;  as  at
No.  V.

3.  Sometimes  they  merely  soften  the  angles  into  curves  ;
as  in  No.  λ^Ι.

Thus  it  appears,  that  the  draught  of  the  Bardic,  and
Ionian  letters,  Avas,  originally,  the  same,  and  that,  accord-
ing to  the  authority,  cited  by  Bucher,  Cadmus's  let-
ters resembled  the  Gaulish,  more  than  Punic,  or  Phoeni-
cian,   Similar  characters  had  anciently  been  used  in  Greece,


ο


30


TJirace,  Italy,  and  other  countries;  but  Xcnoplwn,  and
Archilochus,  named  them  after  the  people,  by  whom  thcif
'icert  üilL  retained.

The  systematical  correspondence  of  the  characters  in
tlie  Bardic,  -with  a  general  principle, — as  well  as  the  evi-
dence of  ancient  inscriptions, — gives  the  palm  of  antiquity
in  their  favour,  and  the  decision  is  further  supported  by
a  very  marked  feature.

Several  Greek,  and  Roman  characters,  do  not  correspond
with  Celtic  radicals,  but  with  some  of  their  derivatives,  or
mutations.  Thus,  No.  VII.  from  the  Celtic  B,  comes  its  de-
rivative Bh,  or  V,  by  a  shoot,  in  addition  to  its  primitive,
as  observed  before  :  hence  were  formed  G/veZ:,  and  Roman
B,  by  curving  the  shoots.  From  the  Celtic  C.  (K)  comes
ch  guttural,  by  affixing  a  reed,  and  this  is  precisely  the
Κ  of  Greece.  From  the  Celt'ic  D,  comes  Dh,  (as  Th  in  that)
by  affixing  a  reed,  as  before  ;  hence  the  Greek  Δ,  and  the
Roman  D,  by  curving  the  angular  line.  From  the  Celtic
E,  comes  é,  hence  the  ancient  a  reversed,  of  Greece,  and
of  Italj/,  by  opening  the  angles,  and  by  adding  a  'shoot.
From  F,  comes  Fh,  or  F,  by  the  addition  of  a  shoot,  as
tjefore, — hence  the  Roman  F,  and  yEolic  di gamma,  ash  has
been  called.  From  the  same  F,  comes  the  mutation  Fh,
by  affixing  a  reed,  and  hence  our  present  GrctVcn.

From  the  evidence,  adduced  in  this  work,  I  hope  it  is
made  clear,  that  the  old  alphabets,  which  I  have  now  com-
pared, were  originally  one  and  the  same,  which  had  been
imported  into  Europe,  by  several  of  the  emigrating  fa-
milies, who  had  settled  in  this  western  continent; — that
p\ir  Druids,  and  Bards  of  the  Celtre,  preserved  an  authen-
Tic,•  and  respectable  copy  of  this  general  alphabet,  and  that


331

principles,  upon  %vhich  it  was  con=;trnctecl,  were  known  in
primitive  ages,  before  the  nations  were  separated.

It  must,  then,  be  inferred,  that  such  principles  were
known  to  the  ancestors  of  the  Ckaldcdiis, — the  Israelites, — .
iind  the  Phanicians.  As  far  as  any  thing  can  be  demon-
strated, by  the  terras,  and  metaphors  pf  language,  the  fact
has  been  ascertained.

]\Iay  I,  therefore,  hope  to  be  indulged,  in  a  short  search,
after  some  links  of  original  union,  between  the  European
alphabets,  and  these  of  the  zcestcrn  Asiatic  '^

But  first,  I  would  observe,  that  long  before  the  date  of
any  legible  inscription,  which  has  reached  our  age,  the
Asiatics  had  begun  to  enlarge  the  range  of  the  fancy,  to
improve,  or  diversify  the  arts,  and  materially  to  extend  tiie
limits  of  science.

The  paintings  of  their  figurative  language  had  also  ac-
quired a  magnificence,  which  the  earlier  nations  of  Europe
could  never  have  attained.

As  a  necessary  consequence  of  this,  it  might  be  expected,
that  our  oldest  copies  of  their  alphabets  would  be
more  copious,  in  the  number  of  their  letters,  and  more
complex  in  their  principles,  than  alphabets,  traced  from
our  more  simple  ancestors.

Accordingly,  v.e  find  the  Hebrezu  alphabet,  in  the  time
of  Moses,  already  possessed  of  twenty-two  powers,  when
the  European,  for  a  long  time  after,  had  but  sixteen,  at
the  most,  and,  perhaps,  only  thirteen.


33^2

The  learned  have  generally  regarded  the  names  of  the
Jlebrezo  letters,  which  corresponded  with  Chaldean,  and
Phanician,  as  terms  of  significance,  conveying  ideas,  not
only  of  the  characters  themselves,  and  of  their  elementary
powers,  but  also  of  certain  productions  in  the  field  of  na-
ture or  of  art;  Ά?,  aleph,  an  ox; — beth,  ά  house  ; — gimcl,  a
camel; — daleth,  b.  door.  Sic.  And  it  has  been  the  opinion
of  some  very  eminent  scholars,  that  characters  of  these
letters  were,  originally,  intended  for  sketches  of  those  ob-
jects, (or  of  their  characteristical  parts,)  after  which  they
were  named.

Of  the  original  characters  in  the  Hebrew  letters,  wc
cannot  speak  positively.  The  Ckaldaic  square  characters
were  preceded  by  the  ο]ά  Samaritan,  and,  in  some  copies
of  this  alphabet,  we  discover  such  plain  drafts  of  certain
quadru])eds,  advancing,  and  retreating,  that  the  design
cannot  be  mistaken.  See  the  Jod,  and  Tsadc,  Durd.
P.  324;  LeClebcrt,  P.  517;   Frifs    Paniog.  P.  219-

:.  The  opinion,  therefore,  that  the  old  ^s/a/íc  letters  were
drafts  of  certain  objects,  cannot  be  entirely  fanciful ;  and
the  inference  will  be,  that  such  letters  possessed,  in  part,
at  leaft,.  the  nature  οϊ  hieroglyphics,  or  general  symbols,
like  those  of  the  Ccltn:  ,•— and  were  intended,  equally  to
convey  certain  ideas,  besides  their  elementary  powers  in
language.

But,  though  each  of  the  Chahlaic,  Samaritan,  or  Pha-
nician characters,  may  have  originally  represented  some
object,  yet  no  copy  of  them,  which  is  known  at  present,
enables  us  to  iay  that  all  of  them  can  be  described,  or  un^
derstood,  as  representing  objects  of  any  one  class.  Tiicy
arc  not  uniform  drafts  of  animals,— of  plants, — or  of^;;ü"


333

auctions  bì/  art.  They  are  of  a  mixed  nature,  and  can-
not be,  with  precision,  traced  from  any  one  liomogeneous
plan,  or  system.

May  it  not  he,  then,  presumed,  that  Asiatics  not  only  had
augmented  the  number  of  tlieir  letters,  but  also  had  made
some  innovations  in  the  series  of  primitive  syinboh  '^  Of
their  ancient  knowledge  in  symbolical  leaves,  and  sprigs, —
the  terms,  and  metaphors  of  their  languages  give  most  un-
equivocal evidence,  and  proof.

The  names  of  the  Hebrew,  and  Chaldaic  letters  evidently
connect  their  alphabets,  with  Greek,  and  Λvith  Irish  ;  as.


Aleph

Alpha

Ailim

Beth

Beta

Beith

Heth

Eta

Eadha

iod

iota

Idho

Nun

Nun

JNion

Kesh

Rho

Ruis,  3cc,

Are  the  Irish  names,  then,  to  be  descendants  from  the
Hebrezu? — By  no  means.  They  are  borrowed  from  no
foreign  language.  The  words  are  purely  Irish,  and  are
taken  from  une  homogeneous  series  of  symbolical  plants.

As  for  the  Hebrezc  names,  they  are  intelligible  terms  in
the  Hebrew  language.  They  point  out  very  diíFerent  ob-
jects, from  those,  which  are  pointed  out  by  similar,  and  cor-
responding names,  in  the  Irish ;  but  this  difference,  may
be  solved,  upon  a  fundamental  principle  of  lano-ua'-e.

All  names,  described,  originally,  a  particular  mode  of
existing,  or  of  acting.


334

They  conveyed  the  leading  ideas,  >rhich  may  generally
be  collected  from  their  verbs :  and,  when  appropriated,  so
as  to  denote  things,  impressed  those  leading  ideas,  respecting
the  several  objects  to  which  they  were  applied.

It  will  be  shewn,  hereafter,  that,  upon  this  principle,  the
Irish  names  unite  with  corresponding  terms,  in  Hebrew,
and  Greek.  This  union  of  the  import,  conveyed  by  similar
sounds,  in  the  names  of  the  letters,  demonstrates  to  me  the
original  identity  of  the  languages,  and  of  the  conceptions
frntertained  by  the  several  nations,  respecting  their  ele-
mentary characters,  or  si/mbols  of  sounds.

The  various  applications  of  the  Asiatic  terms,  ma}•  have
supplied  them  Λνΐίΐι  an  opportunity  of  selecting  a  more  or-
namental series  for  their  si/mbols.  In  support  of  that
system,  which  is  formed  of  sprigs,  it  must,  however,  be
observed,  that  it  is  more  simple,  and  more  harmonious^
in  its  parts,  than  we  can  allow  that  of  the  Chaldeans,  or
Ilcbreics  to  be,  which  is  prompted  by  tlie  characters,  and
the  received  interpretation  of  the  names  Avhich  ui-e  given  to
their  letters.     It  must  also  have  been  more  ancient.

Whatever  cause  introduced  the  other  series,  it  must  have
operated  at  a  more  advanced  period  of  society,  when  men
were  alreadi/  in  the  habit  of  delineating,  or  engraving
their  symbols,  not  of  applying  them  in  their  natural  state.
For,  it  is  evident,  that  Jsiatic  sj/mbols  were  not  adaptedy
originally,  to  the  same  primitive  mode  of  application,  as
the  sj/mbois,  that  were  Druidical.

The  Sage  of  Draidism  could  express,  or  convey  his
iJeas>  by  a  mere  sprig  oîúmjír,  the  birch,  the  ivi/,  and
tlie  oak,  arranged  upon  a  string.  A  Chaldean,  or  the  an-
cient ilebrezv,  could  not,   so  conveniently,  do  the  same.


335


hy  the  head  of  an  ox, — the  e /id  of  a  house,  the  head,  or
7ieck  of  a  canitl, — and  tlit  leaf,  or  screen  of  a  door.  This,
more  costly,  and  magnificent,  series,  was  impracticable,
witliout  recom'se  to  delineation,  or  the  uxt  οϊ  engraviiig, —
a  comparatively  modern,  and  recent  practice.

It  was  designed,  originally,  for  delineation  ;  and  having
been  suggested,  by  the  various  applications  of  terms,  in
some  ancient  dialect,  it  was  probably  adopted,  for  the  pur-
pose of  decorating  public  edifices,  with  inscriptions  ot'
sculpture.

It  appears,  then,  to  have  been  an  ambitious  refinemcot,
upon  a  simple,  and  primitive  system,  which  has  evident
vestiges  of  it,  in  the  terms,  and  the  metaphors  of  the  Eaut-
em  languages  themselves.

But,  if  the  series  of  sijmhoh  was  changed, — its  mode  of
Application  improved, — and  scale  enlarged  ;  yet,  the  art  of
writing  amongst  the  nations,  appears  to  have  sprung,
and  flow^ed  from  one  source.  The  sifmhoh,  and  letters^
which  are  locally  used,  have  more  analogy  to  each  other,
than  such  as  can  be  attributed,  with  justice,  or  common  sense,
to  mere  chance.  This  analogy  points  out  an  original  identity
in  the  art  of  writing,  in  whatever  stage  of  rudeness,  or  per-
fection, we  now  find  it ;  and  further  demonstrates,  that  it  h
not  the  work  of  independent  genius  in  various  countries,
but  the  remains  of  a  general  system.  At  the  same  time,
there  is,  on  the  other  hand,  so  much  local  peculiarity  in
the  elements  of  this  art,  and  in  the  manner  of  using  thenij
that  we  cannot  suppose  it  was  borrowed  from  any  one  peo-
ple, after  its  attainment  of  perfect  maturity.

The  inference,  from  the  whole,  is,  manifest,  and  clear,  that


536

in  simple  rudiments,  tliib  important  art  exiiited  amongst  the
common  parents  of  mankind, — and,  from  them,  it  came  to
the  several  famiUes  of  the  earth.  When  the  tirst  prin-
ciples of  it  were  known,  different  countries  may  have  made
their  separate  improvements  upon  them,  or  may  have,
occasionally,  availed  themselves  of  those,  which  had  been
modelled  by  their  neighbours.

As  the  most  ancient  people  of  Europe  were  less  ambi*
tious  of  improvenieut,  and  were  more  studious  of  pre
serving,  unimpaired,  \vhat  they  possessed,  than  Asia's  more
celebrated  inhabitants; — as  the  ulphabet  of  Druidism,
which  is  related  nearly  to  the  Feloagian,  or  Etruscan,  is,
in  its  fundamental  principles,  in  its  radical  characters,  in
its  primitive  use,  and  in  all  its  properties,  more  simple,  and
more  homotonous,  than  we  find  those  of  the  Oriental  na-
tions, ΛνΙιο  were,  confessedly,  the  first  that  innovated  upon
these  primitive  arts  ; — I  can  scarce  hesitate  in  yielding  to
the  force  of  such  evidence,  and  concluding,  that  our  an-
cestors, in  the  western  continent,  have  presented  us  \vith
a  most  authentic  transcript  of  the  geiieral  alphabet  employed
by  the  Noac/iiiliC.

It  will  be  said,  that  arts,  like  these,  travelled  from  the
East. — ^Tliis  I  am  ready  to  concede.  They  came  from  that
country,  Avhich  was  the  cradle  of  the  nations.

I  have  not  ascribed  the  invention  of  written  speech  to  the
11  est.  In  this  particular  instance,  1  ask  no  more  tlian
credit  for  a  genera/  maxim  : — that,  whatever  ancient  art.s
have  been  retained  by  a  people,  comparatively  simple,  and
uncultivated,  have  been  subject,  necessarily,  to  fewer
changes,  than  are  made  in  the  seals  of  luxury  and  refinement.
And  tliese,  who  m;iy  disallow  uiy  iufercuces,  will  be  ready  to


337

admit  that  Asiatics  were  the  first  Avho  cxtendetl  the  Hinits
of  the  arts  and  sciences,  derived  irom  the  family  of  Noah,
andj  through  them,  from  the  antediluvians.  They  were,
therefore,  the  first  who  innovated  on  primitive  systems,  and
who  obhterated  that  impression  of  respect,  which  the  in-
stitutes of  their  fathers  claimed,  in  honour  to  their  anti-
quity.

Our  very  learning  has  led  us  into  error,  upon  the  sub-
jects of  ancient  history.  It  has  tempted  us  to  look  for  the
rudiments  of  the  arts,  at  those,  to  whom  we  are  onjy  in-
debted, for  improtenients,  and  for  alterations.

Whilst  the  sacred  orders  of  men,  amongst  the  less  re-
fined states  of  Europe,  revered,  and  carefully  cherished,
the  usages  of  the  early  ages,  Greece,  more  polished,  and,
the  Romans,  from  them,  eagerly  embraced  the  improve-
ments, and  the  innovations  of  ^s/í/ífc  refinement, — gave  com-
plete credence  to  the  idle  boast  of  their  vanity, — and  made  it
an  honour,  to  borrow  of  nations,  who  vaunted  of  an  antiquity,
far  beyond  the  real  epoch  of  the  world's  creation  : — they
despised,  they  neglected,  and  almost  forgot  those  primitive
institutions,  and  simple  rudiments  of  science,  which  had
been  the  just  pride  of  their  own  progenitors.

AVith  antiquities  of  their  own  country,  these  more  cele-
brated nations,  in  the  meridian  of  their  learning,  and
power,  were  but  little  acquainted.  To  the  Phcenicians,  and
Egyptians,  their  acknowledgments  were  certainly  due,  for
enlarging  their  sphere  of  knowledge ;  but  their  gratitude  ex-
ceeded all  modest  bounds.  They  began,  by  degrees,  to  regard
their  instructors,  as  the  original  inventors  of  arts,  and  the
first  communicatori  of  science.  Modern  Europe,  in  like
γ


ο


338

manner,  indebted,  as  it  is,  to  the  arts,  and  muses,  of
Greece,  and  Rome,  for  much  of  its  learning,  has  too  im-
plicitly  adopted  their  opinions.


It  maybe  expected,  that  I  should  here  take  some  notice
of  two  species,  in  written  language,  \vhich  have  generally
been  considered,  as  totally  distinct  from  the  use  of  ele  -
mentary  alphabets.  I  mean,  the  Chinese  characters,  and
the  Egi/pJ^ian  hieroglj/phics.  I  hope  that  my  short  remarks
upon  these  topics,  which  have  neither  been  the  subject  of
my  immediate  studies,  nor  have  much  connection  Avith  my
general  plan,  will  be  accepted  with  candour,  as  mere  grounds
of  conjecture.

The  characters  of  the  Chinese  have  no  elementary  con-
nection with  a  language  of  that  people, — and  books,  writ-
ten in  these  characters,  may  be  read  in  several  languages.
Their  appearance  has  impressedme  with  a  notion,  that,  ori-
ginally, they  \vere  nothing  but  monograms  of  a  po/y-
si/ilahic  language,  very  different  from  that  of  the  Chinese,  and
that  the  kei/s,  or  radical  parts  of  these  chaiactcrs,  which
constantly  preserve  a  relation  to  the  same  leading  ideas,
whatever  adventitious  touches  they  have  adopted,  were
monograms  o?  primitive  ri'orŵ^  which  admit  of  prepositions,
of  terminations,  and  of  other  words,  in  composition.

The  Chinese,  as  I  learn  from  Or,  Hager,  have  preserved
some  remains,  and  much  tradition,  of  an  earlier  series  in
characters  more  comj)lex,  representing  natural,  or  artincial
objects,  like  the  hierogli/phics  of  the  Egi/pfians.  The
people,  who  supplied  their  monograms,  may  have  had
letters,  designed  after  such  objects, — as  in  the  old  Samar(^
tan  alphabet,  already  mentioned.


339

When  I  recollect  the  original  scheme  upon  wliich  let-
ters were  formed, — the  early,  and  primitive  nature  of  their
characters^  viewed  as  drafts  of  certain  ί kings, — and  the
general  ideas  conveyed  hy  their  names, — it  occurs  to  me,
that,  in  their  first  conceptions,  they  must  have  approached
the  description  of  hicrüglifphics.

On  the  other  hand,  I  cannot  help  imagining,  that
Egyptian  hieroglyphics  must  have  possessed  analogy  to
the  nature  of  letters ;  that,  in  other  words,  they  were  si/m-
hols  of  ideas,  connected  with  clemcntari/  sounds,  or  with
primitive,  and  simple  terms  of  the  Egi/ptian  language,  and
that  elaborate  sculptures  on  the  monuments  of  Egypt,  were
not  occasioned  by  the  rudeness  of  her  priest,  in  the  art  of
writing,  but  rather  by  ostentatious  parade,  and  pretence  of
uiystery.

Apuleius,  Mttam.  L.  IT.  speaking  of  his  initiation  into
the  mysteries  of  Isis,  informs  us,  "  that  he,  (the  hiero-
phant)  drew  out  certain  books,  from  the  repositories  of  the
sanctuary,  which  contained  the  avords  of  the  sacred  for-
mula, compendiously  expressed,  ^ÎHÚyhy  figures  of  animals ^
and  partly  by  certain  marks,  or  notes,  intricately  knotted,
revolving  in  the  manner  of  a  wheel,  and  crowded  together,
and  curled  inward,  like  the  tendrils  of  a  vine,  so  as  to  hide

THE    MEANING    FROM  THE  CURIOSITY   OF  THE  PROFANE."

This,  was  not  their  practice,  for  zcant  of  the  knozckdge
of  letters,  but  was  their  studied  perversion  of  the  alphabet^
in  its  proper,  and  simple  use.

The  letters   of  the   ancient  Egyptians,  like  those  of  the
fí^brezis.íxuá  of  several  other  nations,  may  have  been  distin-
\  '2


340

guisbed  by  names,  which,  primarily,  expressed  kading
ideas,  and,  at  the  same  time,  λν^η-e  appropriated  also  to  a
variety  of  objects,  in  which  those  leading  ideas  presented
themselves.  In  this  case,  the  term  could  be  represented,
by  the  figure  of  either  of  the  objects  to  which  it  was  applied.

Let  us,  for  example,  suppose,  that  the  letter  Β  was
called  Bai,  and  that  such  a  term  primarily  imported,  being,
or  existing,

"SVe  arc  told,  that  Bai,  \vas  the  Bgyptian  denomination
for  a  branch  of  the  palm-tree,  and  that  this  tree  was  an-
ciently regai'ded  as  an  emblem  of  being,  existence,  or  im^
pwrtalifj/.

Again  : — Ilorapollo  says,  ''  Bai,  signified  a  'hazc'k,  the
soul,  and  the  zcind  [anima]  ;  therefore,  the  Egi/ptians  used
the  hüwl:,  as  asj^mboi  for  the  süuL"

The  word  is  written  Bais,  in  the  Nomeuclatum  Egj/ptiaco
— Jrabicay-pubYìsheá  by  Kircher.  Dr.  Jl  oide  follows  Kir-
cher;  but,  in  the  Lexiron  Ccptico-Gracum,  in  the  Biblio^
theque  da  Roi,  at  Paris,  we  find,  Gn,  Bai,  species  aliqua
accipitrum ;  and  the  same  occurs  in  Calius,  h-  IV.  C.  l6.
Opinantur  Egyptii  animee  conceptum  esse  for,•  qua  ra-
tione,  cum  accipitris  nomine  indicari  animam  patent ;
illam,  vocabulo  gentilitio,  C^r.^,  Bai-eth  nuncupant,  quod
animam  signat  et  cor:  siquidem,  Bai,  anima  est -^  etk,
vero,  cor"

Gen.  Vallcncy.     Mon.  at  Lusk.
transact,  of  the  R.  I.  Acad.  1788.

A  delineation  of  a  sprig  of  the  palm-tree,  or  of  the  hawk's


341

figure  might,  then  be  used,  indifferently,  to  represent  the  term
Bai,  its  leading  image, — and  its  various  appropriations; — •
In  Writing  the  Egi/ptian  language,  either  of  these  figures
might  represent  the  letter  B,  tchich  zcas  ÌiHoîìu  by  the
same  description.

The  Ilehrczu  particle  3,  denotes  presence,  or  existence,
in  an}^  gÌA'cn  time,  j/lace,  or  condition, — and  the  nanie  of
the  letter,  no,  signiHes  a  house,  abode,  or  place  oj' being,
unless  it  be  formed  out  of  a  more  ancient,  and  simple  tcrm^
— '3,  Bi,  or  Bai.

The  Gi'ecks  called  the  palm-branch,  Eaioi-,  or  Bai?:  and
Βήτα,  or  Βαιτα,  (the  letter  B)  preserves  the  sound  of  the
Hebrezo  Beth,  or  the  Egyptian  Bai;  but  the  idea  of  the
name,  in  Creek,  may  be  collected  from  Qt4a.lou,  to  conjinn,
establish,  or  place  in  a  permanent  state  of  existence.

The  Latins  called  this  letter  Be,  nearly  the  simple  name
of  the  Bai,  or  sijmbolical  palm-branch.  And  Be,  in  the
Celtic,  conveys  the  same  leading  idea  of  existence.  Irish,
Be,  is  the  term  for  life  ;  Cornish,  signifies  Be,  am,  art,
is, — existent.

The  country  of  the  Druids  produced  no  palrn-trees.  In
order,  therefore,  to  make  their  system  entire,  and  preserve
it,  they  found  it  necessary  to  substitute  another  plant,  for
this  ancient  emblem  of  being,  or  immortality.  They  fixed
upon  the  birch.

Perhaps  it  was  a  supposed  coincidence  of  ch.aracter,  be-
tween this  fret  and  the  palm,  that  gave  occasion  lo  its  Latin
name,  Be  tula,  q.  d.  the  little  D^ì,  or  Βχιτ.


342

In  the  Celtic  of  Ireland,  the  birch  is  called  beith,  which
t'qually  signifies  being,  essence,  existence.  It  seems  to  be
coimected  with  Ir.  Both,  Bothnn ;  IV.  Bicth,  {\Λ.  Bŷth)
a  hut^  cottage ;  Booth,  a  place  of  abode,  or  being,  equiva-
lent in   its  meaning,  to  the  Hebrew  nO.

In  ^^'elsh,  Bŷtlt  also  signifies,  yb;•  ever,  eternity.

The  0//-CÄ,  therefore,  in  the  Celtic  language,  being  distin-
guished by  a  term,  Λvhieh,  primarily,  imports,  being,  or  exist-
ence, was  constituted  the  si/mbol  οϊ  the  term,  and  of  the  idea
which  it  conveyed.  It  also  became  the  symbol  of  the  letter
B,  represented  by  a  sprig  of  this  plant ; — and  the  reason
was  clearh'  this, — that  the  power  of  that  letter,  connected
Λvith  its  vocal  breathing,  conveyed  the  same  general  idea  as
Beith,  by  which  the  bircli  was  delineated.  *

In  the  Bardic  alphabet,  this  letter  is  called  Bi,  which,  in
Irish,  implies  the  sense  of  the  Latin  fuit ;  in  Welsh,  that
oíÚ\e  Latin  erit :  in  both  languages,  it  is  the  root  of  the
essential  verb,  to  Be.

Kecollecting  these  principles  of  the  symbolical  system,  we
may  infer,  that,  in  the  rude,  and  primitive  language,  Bi,
Be,  or  Bai,  and  even  the  very  power  of  B,  when  incor-
porated -in  the  simple  terms  of  the  first  ages,  was  to  con-
vey the  idea  of  being,  or  existence, — and  that,  in  the  dialects
which  came,  as  branches,  from  that  language,  its  derivatives
no,  Βαιοι-,  Baír,  Bcith,  Both,  Bxcth,  Bí/th,  &c.  became  terms
appropriate  for  place  of  being — for  tiie  self-})ropagating  birch,
— ior  the  immortal  2^(tl'fh — for  an  eternal  duration,  ^c.

Such  terms,  and  the  general  idea  which  they  attractetl.
Blight  be  represented,  with  equal  propriety,  by  the  sketch


243

of  a  house, — as  in  die  Ihiircrc  2, — by  the  palm-branch  of  tlie
Egi/ptiam, — or  by  their  figure  o^ahazck, — by  the  birch-sprig
of  Druidical  symhüls, — by  a  draught  of  that  sprig, —  as  in
tlie  Bardic  alphabet, — or,  indeed,  by  objects  in  general;,
viewed,  under  the  same  character,  and  expressed  by  the
same,  or  a  congenial  term.

Thus,  different  objects,  in  different  countries,  might
become  the  symbols  of  the  same  idea,  and  of  tiie  same
rlcmentary  sound, — the  hieroglyphics  οι  Egypt  may  have
been  connected  with  Egyptian  letters,— just  as  Druidical
si/mbo/s  were  coimected  with  Celtic  language.

The  Egi/ptian  priest,  either  from  vanity, — or  supersti-
tion,— or  to  restore  the  veil  of  mystery  which  the  popular
use  of  letters  had,  in  part,  removed,  may  have  devised  a
new  and  magnificent  series  of  symbols,  founded  upon  the
same  principle  as  that  of  the  simple,  and  primitive  charac-
ters,— but  which  could  only  be  read,  where  his  language
was  under^jiood.

If  I  have  touched  upon  the-e  abstruse  topics,  it  has  been
so  briefly,  that  Í  may,  perhaps,  be  pardoned  by  the  liberal,
and,  benevolent  critic.


ESS^áY

ON    THR

CELTIC  LANGUAGE:

IN    WHICH

ITS    RADICAL    PRINCIPLES,    ARE     APPRECIATED     AND
COMPARED    ΛνίΤΙΙ

PRIMITIVES,  AND  SIMPLE  TERMS,

IN

IlEBREJV,  GREPK,  and  LATIN.


347


Sect.  I. — Subject  proposed.  On  the  principle  of  natural
expression,  or  the  relation  hel-ziccn  certain  sounds,  and
certain  ideas.

JlN  the  former  essay,  I  gave  my  opinion,  supported  by
the  evidence  upon  Avliich  it  was  formed_,  that  an  order  known
by  tlic  name  of  Druids,  to  the  latest  period  of  their  esta-
bhshment,  preserved  a  respectable  copy  of  an  alphabet,
which  the  earliest  of  those  tribes,  which  had  settled  in
Europe,  brought  witii  them  out  of  Asia.  I  also  explained
the  account,  Avhich  those  Druids  left  in  Britain,  respecting
the  original,  and  fundamental  principles  of  this  alphabet.
I  added,  that  a  similar  account  is  partly  recognised  by  other
primitive  nations.

But  the  importance  of  the  discovery  is  not  limited  only  to
these  facts.  It  acquires  its  principal  value,  from  the
opportunity  it  aflbrds,  of  illustrating  au  ancient  system  in
philology  :  viz.  That  each  of  the  elementary  sounds  in  lan-
guage, naturally  describes  a  distinct  image,  or  perception
of  the  mind,  and  that  language  zcas,  originally,  formed,
by  following  nature  as  the  guide,  in  adapting  sounds  like
these,  to  their  several,  and  respective  occasions.

That  such  Druidicul  symbols, — and  the  series  of  letters,
which  arose  from  them, — were  intended,  both  to  support  that
system,  and  explain  its  principles  in  detail, — appears,  by  the
following  testimonies.

1.  Taliesin  says, — with  a  reference  to  the  whole  device  oi
the  symbols, —


348

Am  swynysci  Math,
Cyn  bum  diaered.

"  I  had  been  marked  by  Kind,
Before  I  became  immortal."

And  again  : — ^' The  points  of  the  7nimic  trees,  what  do
they  K'hisper  so  forcibly,  and  what  breathings  are  in  theîî
roots  ? — These  are  read  by  the  sages."

In  another  place  : — When  the  removal  took  place,  I  was
n^arked  by  the  chief,  amongst  the  mwltitude  of  the  arts  of
the  sages, — imitators  of  nature."

if  NATURE  marked,  or  pointed  out  the  several  plants,  a*
appropriate  symbols  of  speech,  and  of  its  elements; — if  to
them  she  assigned  the  office,  and  province  of  composing,
and  οΐ  analizing  languages,  it  is  evident,  that  every  element
of  language,  was  understood,  in  those  days,  to  have  a  distinct
character,  marked,  axiajixed  by  nature.

Upon  this  gi-ound,  the  same  Bard  separately  describes
the  genius,  disposition,  or  action  of  the  sywŵo /.s,— evidently
impl^'ing  the  force,  or  the  import,  which  their  con-espond-
ing  powers  Avere  understood  then  to  possess,  in  the  forma-
tion of  lauguagc.

2.  Trees,  and  plants,  that  are  selected  as  the  symbols, —
present  obvious,  and  very  natural  characters :  they  suggest
the  same  ideas,  which  are  marked  in  the  descriptions  of  the
Bard.

3.  The  names,  by  which  these  plants, — considered  as  the
symbols, — are     distinguished  in  the  Irish   language, — arc


349

calculatetl  for  the  impression  of  tiiese  ideas,  in  the  most
forcible  manner.

4.  The  simple  names  of  the  Bardic  letters,  or  counter-
feited sprigs,  are  amongst  the  most  important^  as   well  as

diseriminate  roots  of  the  Welsh,  and  the  Irish  languages.
They  are  at. the  head  of  numerous  families; — they  confirm
the  descriptions  of  Taliesin, — the  hints  presented  by  the
natural  characters  of  those  plants, — and  the  import  of  the
Irish  names.

5.  The  application  of  that  system  is  to  be  supported  by
evidence,  taken  from  other  languages,  in  which  no  collusion
can  be  suspected.

C.  The  iHünes  of  the  Uoman  letters,  are  terms  of  known
value,  in  the  language  of  the  Celta, — and  of  an  import  simi-
lar to  the  names  of  the  Bardic  letters  Many  also  of  Greek,
and  most  of  the  Hebrew,  or  Chalduic  letters,  have  expli-
cable names,  which  may  be  referred,  with  ease,  to  certain
verbs,  expressing  parallel  ideas  to  the  7iumes  for  the  corres-
ponding letters,  and  symbols  of  the  Celta.  A  manifest  in-
timation, that  one,  and  the  same  identical  system  Avas
known,  and  was  taught,  not  only  in  Greece,  or  in  Italy ,
but  in  Sj/ria^  and  Chaldea,

7.  An  application  of  these  principles,  and  system,  to
the  radical  terms  of  the  Celtic,  Latin,  Greek,  or  Hebrew
language,  is  found,  in  most  instances,  truli/  to  define  their
/neaning,  so  as  to  ascertain  the  original  principles,  from
which  these  languages  arose,  and  prove  that  the  system  is
sot  founded  upon  ancient  opinion  alone, — but  upon  truth.


350

To  explain, — and  verify,  these  particulars,,  will  be  the  busi-
ness of  the  following  essay.


In  a  former  part  of  this  woik,  I  enumerated  some  pro-
perties of  the  Celtic  language,  which  point  out  the  general
practicability  of  constructing  an  elementary  alphabet  upon
a  system  of  general  sì/mboìs.  In  other  words,  I  remarked
the  paucity,  and  the  extreme  simplicity  of  radical  îcords  ;
— the  general,  as  \vell  as  the  obvious  ideas  conveyed  by
them — and  the  acknowledgment  of  a  natural  affinity  be-
tween the  simple  eleraejits  of  language,  and  the  ideas  they
were  to  convey.

The  two  former  particulars,  I  shall  have  occasion  to  ex-
emplify in  the  sequel  of  the  essay  ; — but,  singly,  to  the  latter,
I  appropriate  the  remainder  of  this  present  section, — because
some  ancient  schools,  and  modern  Avriters,  have  denied  the
existence  of  any  such  principle,  as  natural  expreiision,  or
the  relation  between  ideas,  and  sounds.

In  the  few  books,  which  accident  has  throAvn  in  my  way,
the  negative  has  been  supported  by  the  following  arguments.

1 .  It  has  been  observed,  as  a  datum,  that,  nations,  different
in  language,  describe  the  same  object  by  different  words,
and  by  different  elements  of  sound.  It  has  been  further
contended, — that  no  such  diversity  could  have  taken  place,
had  language,  in  general,  been  formed  upon  a  natural  ana-
logy, between  ideas,  and  sounds.

2.  It  has  been  additionally  observed,— that  mankind,  and
a  certain  species  of  birds,  are  capable  of  learning  foreign


351

sounds,  and  foreign  terms,  by  imitation ;  but  that  such
attainments  are  acquired  Avith  extreme  difficuky.  Hence,
ít  has  been  conchuled,  ratlier  hastily,  that  sounds,  being
purely  imitative,  and  being  acquired  by  the  ear,  our  several
voices,  and  their  several  articulations  can  have  no  primary,
or  natural  connection  with  appropriate  ideas  ; — that  primi-
tive man  could  have  had  no  impulse  to  express  a  distinct
perception  of  the  mind,  by  one  articulate  sound,  more  than
by  another  ;  that,  consequently,  the  rudiments  of  language
must  have  been  arbitrary,  selected  by  chance,  and  fixed  by
compact  alone.

3.  From  this  mode  of  reasoning,  an  hN^othesis  arose,  that
man  v/as,  originally,  destitute  of  all  speech,  and  that  he
laboured,  for  a  series  of  ages,  to  acquire  the  difficult  art  of
articulation,  v/hich  he  collected,  by  degrees,  from  the  voices
of  certain  animals,  and  from  the  sounds  that  bodies  pro-
duced, in  motion,  or  in  collision.

4.  To  confirm  this  hypothesis,  I  have  seen  it  urged,  that,
even  at  this  day,  there  are  several  nations  of  savages,  or  of
men  in  a  zcild  state  of  nature,  who  have  not  learnt  the
power  to  articulate.

In  order  to  make  an  end  of  the  debate,  by  indisputable
facts,  the  particular  case  of  two  savage  men,  has  been  pro-
duced, and  strenuously  insisted  upon.  One  such  being  was
found,  in  a  forest  of  Saxony,  another,  in  a  deserted  wood  in
France.  They  were  so  remote  from  acquisition,  or  natural
speech,  that,  after  they  v.ere  introduced  into  society,  they
could  not  even  be  taught  the  power  to  articulate.  "  Shall
it  be,  after  this,  pretended,  that  man,  found  in  a  state  of
nature,  had  ani/  language  at  all !"


352

5.  Remarks,  not  unlike  these,  have  been  extended  even
to  the  feathered  race.  I  have  read,  that  a  male  bird  has
taken  a  convenient  station,  before  the  nest,  in  full  view
of  the  young  brood,  having  purposed  teaching  them  his
power  of  song,  by  lessons,  adapted  partly  to  their  several
capacities,  and  partly  to  their  degrees  of  application  ; — that,
in  general,  the  talents  of  the  young  birds  open,  at  a  very
tender  age  ;  but  that,  if  they  be  removed  from  the  nest  im-
mediately after  they  are  hatched,  they  never  acquire  the
song  of  the  parent  at  all.  This  has  furnished  an  argument,
that  even  the  songs  of  birds,  are  not  inspired  by  natural
instinct,  but  acquired  by  the  ear  alone,  and  by  observation
upon  the  manner  in  -which  the  sounds  are  produced.

These  are  the  chief  arguments  against  natural  expreshion,
which  occur  to  my  recollection.  I  shall  offer  something  in
reply  to  them  all.

The  various  terms,  b}»-  Avhich  the  different  languages  ex-
press tiie  same  thing,  may  be  partly  solved,  by  the  different
modes  of  inflection,  of  composition,  or  of  contraction ;
Avhich  custom  has  introduced  into  local  dialects,  and  by
Avhich,  the  same  radical  word  has  been  so  diversified,  that  its
identity  cannot  be  immediately  recognised.  I  shall  give
an  instance  of  this,  in  the  term  for  mi/  mothers  son.

Lat.  fratcr ;  Ital.  fratello  ;  French,  frere ;  Eng.  bro-
ther;  Gerin.  brudcr;  Gueld.  bruyr  ;  jBe/g.  broeder ;  Goth.
brothar ;  Dan.  Brodre ;  Swed.  broder ;  Welsh,  brawil ;
Corn,  bredar;  Armor,  breur ;  Imsh,  brathair ;  Manks,
brcyr ;  Russ.  brate  ;  Sclav,  and  Pol.  brat;  Dalmat.  brath  ;
Lusat.  bradt ;  Bohem.  bradr.

This  term  undergoes  twenty  changes,  corresponding  to


the  genius  of  the  several  dialects  ;  yet,  it  preserves,  through-
out, evident  vestiges  of  some  one  original  word.  Not
presuming  to  determine  what  that  word  is,  or  was,  I  shall
only  observe,  that  in  more  than  one  Celtic  dialect,  bru,  sig-
nifies a  womb  ;  Ad, — iteration,  repetition  of  the  same ;  and
«r, — a  ma7i.  Bruad,  then,  is  an  offspring,  or  produce  of
the  same  womb  ,•  and  bruadur,  a  man,  produced  by  the
same  womb.

But,  according  to  my  conception  of  the  subject,  a  more
fruitful  source  of  the  diversity  in  terms,  must  be  explored
in  the  original  nature  of  all  terms,  which  is  relative,  or  de-
scriptive,— not  fixed,  or  absolute.  And,  for  this  reason  it  is,
that,  not  only  a  difference  of  dialects,  but  one,  and  the  same,
dialect,  may  have  great  variety  of  names  for  the  same
thing ;  when  it  may  be  viewed  under  a  variety  of  relative
characters.  Thus,  a  son,  in  Irish,  is  called  mac,  which  is
a  7iursling,  from  the  word  macam,  I  sustain,  or  support.
This  is  equivalent,  in  its  meaning,  to  the  Latin  alumnus:
bar,  a  shoot,  or  offspring  ;  propogo  :  ore,  a  germ,  or  seed  ;
progenies:  htan,  a  small  one,  from  In,  small;  parvulus :
nion,  an  image,  or  likeness,  &c.

Had  five  distinct  families,  been  separated  from  the
Irish  nation, — had  they  colonised  as  many  desart  islands,
in  which  tlieir  posterity  retained  only  one  of  these  terms,
and  applied  it  in  the  same  absolute  manner  as  we  do  the
word  son, — it  is  evident,  that,  in  this  instance,  the  new  in-
habitants would  no  longer  be  able  to  recognise  the  relative,
or  descriptive,  nature  of  these  words,— or  the  original  iden-
tity of  their  several  dialects.

This  example  is  not  singular.    In  the  same  language,


354

there  are  ten  vords  for  a  hoy  ,• — upwards  of  twenty,  for  a•
hill,  or  mountain  ,• — and  as  great  a  variety',  for  almost  every
object,  which  an  unrefined  people,  were  likely  to  have  con-
templated ;  but  each  of  them  describes  a  distinct  relation,
or  character,  of  that  which  it  names.

We  cannot,  therefore,  adduce  the  diversity  of  terras,  as
an  argument  against  the  first  principle  of  natural  expression,
and  the  original  identity  of  languages, — till  we  have  con-
sidered these  terms,  in  the  relative,  and  the  descriptive
capacity,  not  in  thefixed,  and  the  absolute.

That  mankind  have  an  aptitude,  and  favourite  impulse,
to  learn  sounds  by  the  ear,  is  readil}'  admitted.  It  is  a  sub-
ject of  daily  observation.  The  infant  thus  acquires  the
language  of  its  imrse,  as  the  youth  does  that  of  the  fo-
reigner. The  dialect  of  a  nation  thus  becomes  general,
throughout  the  several  families.

It  is  further  admitted,  that  a  mode  of  articulation,  which
is  acquired  by  the  infant,  appears,  for  ever  afterwards,  the
most  natural,  and  the  most  easy  to  us ;  whilst  the  sounds
taught  at  a  more  advanced  age,  are  practised  with  com-
parative difficulty.

By  the  ear,  and  frequent  tflorts,  some  have  learned : —

" **  liquidas  avium  voces  iniitai-ier  oreP

to  utter  sounds  with  ease,  and  fluency,  that  would  be  found
impracticable,  upon  the  first  attempt. — Some  kinds  of  birds,
on  the  contrary,  have  imitated  the  songs  of  the  other  spe-
cies, or  tlie  articulation  of  the  human  voice.


355

But  this  does  not  militate  against  my  first  principle^
■*vhich  is,  that  we  have  an  original  propensity,  born  with
■us,  to  express,  and  cominunicate,  certain  perceptions,  or
ideas,  by  appropriate  sounds: — that  such  perceptions,  and
sounds,  have,  therefore,  a  natural  relation  betzveen  each
other.

This  propensity  may  have  been  guide  enough  to  thd  an-
cestors of  the  race,  in  the  formation  of  their  simple  voca-
bulary ;  and  that  it  was,  in  fact,  I  think,  is  demonstrable.

The  operation  of  this  principle  is  perceptible  still,  in  the
simple,  and  primitive  terms^  of  most  languages ;  and,  as
far  as  we  can  ascertain  the  local  inflections,  combinations,  in
conti'action,  we  can,  so  far,  trace  its  vestiges^  into  the
inain  body  of  languages.

The  voice  of  nature  has  not  been  entirely  silenced,  or  su-
perseded, by  imitative  accomplishments.  Would  Sia-yior
Rossignol  wish  to  communicate  an  idea,  to  his  audience,  he
would  immediately,  and  at  once,  drop  the  language  of  the
nightingale,  or  blackbird,  and  have  recourse  to  that  of  the
society,  in  which  he  is  placed.  Should  he  have  broken
his  fiddle,  or  torn  his  ruflfle,  he  would,  probably,  discard
the  foreign  language,  and  would  bewail  his  misfortune,  in
his  native  dialect.  Were  the  same  person  aftected  with
surprise,  grossly  affronted,  or  exposed,  on  a  sudden,  to
violent  pain : — were  the  boy  that  prepares  his  negus,  to
have  spilt  some  of  the  boiling  water  upon  his  foot,  he  would,
in  a  moment,  quit  the  Italian,  Avould  forget  all  his  learn-
ing, and  would  express  his  agonies,  in  the  language  of  na-
ture, that  is,  in  such  tones,  interjections,  or  exclamations,
as  would  be  equally  understood,  by  the  whole  species,
ζ  2


356

Tills  language  of  nature,  we  daily  distinguish,  in  the
tones,  and  warbles  of  the  infant,  expressing  its  various  per-
ceptions, or  emotions,  before  it  has  learned  either  to  imi-
tate, or  comprehend  the  import  of  our  terms.  We  also
perceive  it,  in  the  tones,  and  in  the  exclamations,  which
passion,  or  any  violent  impulse  extorts,  from  the  deaf,  and
the  dumb.

From  a  misconception  of  principles,  respecting  the  ori-
ginal nature  of  language,  mistaken  opinions  have  arisen^
concerning  its  introduction  into  society.  If  mankind  had
no  })redisposing  impulse,  to  communicate  their  perceptions
of  things,  and  of  their  several  relations,  by  natural,  and  by
oral  signs; — if  they  could  have  possessed  no  rudiments  of
language,  till  they  had  agreed  upon  certain  arbitrary  terms;
— till  they  had  even  digested  these  terms,  into  noun,  terbj
and  partick•,  with  all  the  accompaniments  of  number,  de~
cltnsiou,  tense,  mood,  and  person ;  were  this  true,  it  is
equally  certain,  that  such  creatures  must  not  only  have  re-
mained, for  ages,  without  the  use  of  speech :  they  must
have  ■continued  so,  to  this  day,  and  forever.  Could  we  ad-
mit the  possibility,  that  men  should  acquire  the  faculty  of
speech,  by  mere  compact,  or  studied  mechanism;  whj
must  it  be  supposed,  they  had  recourse  to  the  voices  of  ani-
mals, or  the  sounds  of  inanimate  things  ?

•*  Because,  we  are  told,  it  is  by  no  means  natural  /on
man  to  articulate:  it  is  an  art  ^chich  he  acquires  zcith  dif-
Jiculty^  and  imitation  alone  "

But,  as  brutes  are  thus  elevated  into  the  first  masters  of
language,  let  us  ask,  who  taught  the  first  lion  to  roar,  the
first  bull  to  bellow,  and  the  first  lark  to  sing?  shall  it  be
said,  that  God,  or  nature,  endowed  the  first  generation  of


5'--


57


brutes,  with  all  their  various  languages,  impressed  an  apti-
tude upon  them,  to  utter  certain  perceptions,  by  their  cor-
responding sounds,  and  that  lie  denied  all  such  predisposing
aptitudes  to  man  alone  ?

Something  of  this  kind  seems  to  be  intimated,  when  I  am
told,  that  nations  of  savages,  or  of  men  in  a  stsie  of
nature,  have  not  yet  surmounted  the  difficulty  of  pronounc-
ing several  consonants.  However  conclusive  such  an  ar-
gument may  appear,  to  some  philosophers,  I  confess,  that
for  one,  I  cannot  perceive  its  force,  or  grant  the  assump-
tion, that  savage  life,  is  a  natural  state,  or,  that  extreme
depravity,  and  the  ultimate  perfection  of  the  human  crea-
ture, can  be  one  and  the  same  thing.  A  natural  state  is
that  which  affords  the  best  and  fairest  opportunity,  for  a
display  of  the  discriminative  character,  of  this  or  that
species:  and  the  characteristic  of  man,  is  reason,  or  com-
mon sense.  The  condition,  which  affords  the  best  and  fair-
eat  opportunity  for  the  exercise  of  this  endowment,  is  the
natural  and  perfect  state  of  man.  Examine  that  plant! — it
grows  in  its  proper  soil,  and  congenial  aspect.  There  it
will  be  found  in  its  natural  state.  From  that  state,  it  may
be  equally  removed,  if  pampered  in  a  hot-bed,  or  starved
in  a  cold  steril  earth.  So  man  departs  as  widely  from  his
nature,  by  the  path  of  rudeness  and  brutality,  as  by  tliat  of
luxury  and  refinement.  His  intellectual,  and  his  or2;anic
faculties,  may  be  infinitely  debased,  below  the  intentioa
and  standard  of  nature.

If  this  be  the  situation  of  savages,  I  can  acknowledge  no
more  force,  in  the  argument  before  us,  than  in  that  of  a
philopher,  λυΙιο  should  reason  with  me  thus,  '■'  Infants,
who  have  not  acquired  the  power  of  erecting  themselves,
and  some  cripples^  who  have  lost  that  power,  crawl  upoa


358

their  hands  and  feet;  therefore  it  cannot  be  natural  for  man
to  be  upright.

But,  as  great  stress  has  been  laid  upon  the  case  of  two
savages, — the  Saxon,  and  French,  it  may  not  be  improper  to
bestow  some  attention  upon  their  story.  They  are  described
as  having  been  deserted,  in  the  forests,  by  some  accident,
in  their  earhest  infancy.  When  found,  they  had  almost
attained  manhood.  They  had  lived  unconnected  with  so-
ciety, and  consequently,  had  formed  their  habits,  with  a
perfect  independence  of  its  controul.  They  Avere  taught, —
by  their  masters, — to  sit,  stand,  and  walk  upon  two  feet;  but
their  favorite  gait,  was  quadrupedal.  They  could  nei-
ther speak,  at  first,  nor  be  taught,  afterwards,  to  articulate.
Hence  it  has  been  inferred,  that  man  can  have  no  primitive
language,  and  that  all  articulation  is,  with  difficulty  ac-
quired^ even  by  the  ear.

If  the  facts,  as  they  are  stated,  are  true,  the  conse^
quences,  drawn  from  them,  will  not  follow\  An  unpro-
tected infant,  exposed  alone  to  the  horrors  of  a  forest,
could  only  have  acquired  sufficient  language,  to  express  the
ideas,  \vhich  arose  from  his  insulated  situation.  What
could  the  wretched  being  have  to  utter,  more  than  a  pierc-
ing cry  of  distress,  groans  of  anguish,  or  screams  of  terror,
and  growls  of  rage  ì  Even  these,  he  had  no  opportunity,
and,  therefore,  could  have  had  no  incitement,  ever  to  com-
municate amongst  others  of  his  own  species.  When  deprived
of  his  usual  range,  and  confined  amongst  men,  he  had  still
his  inveterate,  and  savage,  habits  about  him,  which  it  was  im-
possible for  him  to  overcome.  He  could  not,  therefore,
have  been  disposed,  by  habits,  to  acquire  the  language  of
society.  His  case  must  have  been  widely  different,  from
^hat  of  the  first  parents,  whose  dawn  of  existence  was  in


359

the  society  of  each  other^  in  the  enjoyment  of  happuiess,  in
the  full  possession  of  all  their  hodily^  and  of  all  their  inteU
lectiuil,  faculties,  unexercised^  indeed,  but  mature^  and  per-
fect, and  with  every  possible  aptitude  for  exercise.  They
were  endowed  with  a  native  impulse,  which  directed  all
their  powers  to  their  proper  end, — and  tney  had  no  savage
habits  to  overcome.

Such  a  distinction  ought,  unquestionably,  to  be  made,
could  we  give  implick,  and  full,  credence  to  the  facts,  re-
lated of  these  two  savages.  But  these  facts  demand  a  very
serious  reconsideration.  Common  sense  has  a  voice,  more
persuasive  than  is  that  of  a  hundred  philosophers.  In  this
inbtance,  do  we  not  hear  it  rebuke  us,  for  drawing  such  nu-
gatory inferences,  from  absolute  impossibilities?  Is  it  not
the  j)ostiiIati(m,  a  ridiculous  absurdity,  that  an  infant,  de-
serted in  a  German,  or  French  forest,  before  it  acquired
any  ideas  of  articulation,  and  consequently,  before  it  could
walk,  or  stand  upon  its  feet,  ever  did,  or  ever  could  support
its  own  existence?  But  did  not  a  she  uolf  condescend  once
to  nurse  Romulus,  and  Remus?  might  not  a  she  wolf  have
killed  the  mother  of  this  child,  and  then  have  taken  com-
passion  upon  the  helpless  orphan?  Let  one  absurdity  be  al-
lowed the  commodious  privilege  of  resting  upon  another !
yet,  in  a  very  few  months,  the  milk  of  tlie  wolf  must  have
dried  up,  and  the  foster  child  have  been  abandoned,  by  force,
to  the  necessity  of  providing  for  its  own  sustenance,  was  the
infant  then,  arrived  at  a  competent  age,  to  follow  the  oc-
cupation of  its  nurse,  to  hunt  for  its  daily  food,  and  brave
the  horrors  of  the  approaching  winter?  As  all  this  appears
to  me  an  utter  impossibility,  I  suppose,  that,  if  there  be
not  some  philosophical  fraud  in  their  history,  these  two
savages,  notwithstanding  their  near  approach  to  the  human
form,  were  half  brutes,  the  ofispring  of  abomination.     In


360

their  habits,  they  seem  to  have  resembled  the  ape,  more
than  human  creatures.

The  observation  of  the  fact,  that  a  parent  bird  instructs  the
nesthngs  how  to  sing,  is  elegant,  and  ingenious.  I  would,
by  no  means,  dispute  its  authenticity ;  yet  I  cannot  admit
of  the  consequences  which  have  been  drawn  from  it,  in
their  full  extent.  It  proves  only,  that  particular  modifica-
tions of  sound,  are  most  readily  acquired  by  the  ear,  and  by
observing  the  manner  in  which  they  are  produced.  It
will  not  follow,  that  such  are  the  only  sources  of  the  vocal
expression,  either  in  the  human,  or  brute  creation.  Some
indisputable  testimonies  of  the  reverse,  may  be  adduced.

A  cock,  hatched  under  a  duck,  crows  like  his  father.
Ducks,  hatched  under  a  hen,  spontaneously  acquire  the
voices,  as  well  as  the  habits  of  their  own  species.  A  cuckoo,
hatched  in  the  nest  of  a  hedge-sparrow,  will  disregard  the
language,  and  the  habits  of  his  nurse,  but  will  attach  himself
to  those  of  his  parasitical  parents,  A  lamb,  taken  from  the
body  of  its  dying  mother,  and  unifornily  nursed  by  the
hand,  will  yet  bleat  like  another  lamb,

Though  voices  of  animals  be  circumscribed  Avithin  a
narrow  compass,  yet  they  have  some  variety  of  tones,  and
sounds,  by  which  they  express,  and  communicate,  amongst
others  of  their  own  kind,  the  perceptions  of  anger,  plea-
sure, /car,  coììjidcnce,  τναηΐ,  satisfaction,  &c.  And  it  is
evident,  from  the  foregoing  instances,  that  they  acquire
names  of  this  kind  spontaneously,  or  fro'n  an  impulse  of
nature,  Avithout  effort,  or  imitation,

In  like  iviauner,  an  infant,  almost  as  soon  as  it  is  born,
bcgiu^  to  cxpiesi  its  feelings,,  in  the  language  of  nsUuyç^


Q


61


without  having  heard  the  simihir  cry  of  another  cliikh  Jint^j
in  a  few  months,  long  before  it  has  made  any  efforts,  to
learn,  or  imitate,  the  language  of  social  compact,  it  can
inform  an  attentive  nurse,  by  its  tones,  and  warblings,
whether  it  is  angry,  or  pleased^  in  pain,  or  at  case.

It  is,  therefore,  clear,  that  an  utterance  of  particular
sounds,  adapted,  by  their  nature,  to  their  proper  occasions,
%vhether,  by  the  human,  or  brute  creation,  is  not  invaria-
bly, acquired  by  the  ear,  and  produced  by  an  imitation  of
similar  tones ;  but  may  arise,  from  certain  aptitudes,  which
God,  by  the  la\vs  of  nature,  has  implanted  in  the  several  de-
scriptions of  his  creatures,  for  the  communication  of  their
perceptions  amongst  one  another.

Were  itpracticable  to  seclude  a  couple  of  children, — as  an
Egyptian  tyrant  is  said  to  have  done, — without  suffering
them  to  hear  the  voice  of  man,  or  animal,  it  cannot  be
doubted,  but  they  would  acquire  the  use  of  oral  signs,
which  they  would  niutually  understand.

It  is  not  pretended,  by  me,  that  Ilcbreu•  would  be  their  lan-
guage,— as  it  has  been  imagined  by  some  ; — but  they  Avould
surely  acquire  a  few  simple  notes,  to  express,  intelligibly,
the  general  sensation  excited  in  them,  by  objects  that  pre*
sented  diemselves,  or  by  emotions  of  their  ολνη  minds.

Could  their  lives  be  kept  up  to  nine  centuries, — like  those
of  the  first  linguist, — they  would  unavoidably  extend  their
vocabular)•,  and  would  improve  their  grammar,  so  far  as  to
have  a  copious  provision  of  definite,  and  proper  terms,  for
the  most  familiar  objects,  and  a  power  to  communicate
jtleas  of  the  most  obvious  forms  in  existence,  or  in  actions ;


56^

and    from  such  rudiments,   a  language,    of    considerable
compass^  \vould  arise,  in  a  few  generations.

In  such  a  tongue,  mutual  compact  Avould  obviously  have
much•  to  do ;  but  its  ground-work  would  be  laid,  in  the  natu-
ral, and  the  untaught,  principle,  which  disposes  men,  and
brutes,  to  utter  their  voices,  in  certain  tones,  or  modifica-
tions, analogous  to  their  various  perceptions,  and  emotions.

The  operation  of  this  principle,  upon  the  human  voice,
may,  at  once,  be  perceived.  Joi/,  fear,  pain,  love,  anger,
and  all  the  passions,  have  their  appropriate,  and  sponta-
neous tones,  Avhich  are  discriminately  comprehended,  not
only  by  persons  of  a  different  language,  but,  in  some  de-
gree, by  the  intellect  of  brutes.  Our  dogs,  and  horses,
know,  by  our  tones,  whether  we  are  angry,  or  satisfied,
menace,  or  applaud, — check,  or  encourage  them.

It  Avill,  perhaps,  be  conceded,  that  our  spontaneous
tones  are  naturally  expressive,  —  and  that  properties
of  the  vozeeh,  are  evidently  connected  with  them.  But,
it  will  be  urged,  that  no  such  impulse  extends  to  the  arti-
culation of  the  consonant.  Tliere  are  many,  who  will  not
either  discard,  or  abjure,  the  opinion,  that  every  new  articu-
lation is  artificial,  and  of  difficult  acquisition.

To  this  oracle,  I  think,  \ve  may  oppose  an  argument  of
considerable  weight,  as  drawn  from  the  general  perception
of  an  affinity,  between  one  sound,  and  one  sense,  in  com-
positions, both  ancient,  and  modern.

In  all  ages,  and  countries,  men  of  an  accurate  ear,  and  a
fine   tastC; — wiiether  learned,  or  illiterate, — have  acknovr«


363

kdgcd,  and   felt,  such  an  affinity,  in  the  works   of  their
poets,  and  orators.

It  must,  in  truth,  be  perceived^  in  fact,  by  those  who  deny
it  in  theory.

Of  this  correspondence, — the  most  admired,  and  sagacious
critics  upon  Homer,  Virgil,  Milton,  and  many  others,
furnish  us  with  copious  examples.  They  all  acknowledge
it,  as  a  source  of  beauty,  and  of  energy,  in  the  works  of  these
masters, — though  few  of  them  have  carried  their  speculations
so  far,  as  to  develop  the  element^  or  principle,  from  which
it  arises.

It  cannot  be  ascribed,  implicitly,  or  entirely,  to  an  arti-
ficial arrangement  of  dacli/ls,  and  spondees ;  for  it  \vill
frequently  burst  upon  us,  in  the  midst  of  a  line,  consisting
of  pure  Iambics,  it  is  perceived  in  prose  compositions,
and  in  single  v/ords.  It  must,  therefore,  be  rooted  in  the
powers  of  the  letters, — in  the  choice  of  elementary  sounds,
Avhich  have  some  peculiarity-  of  relation  to  the  intended
idea.  And,  if  a  combination  of  sounds,  possesses  a  de-
scriptive energy,  the  elements,  and  principles  of  descrip-
tion must  exist,  in  the  individual  sounds.  A  multiplica-
tion of  mere  cyphers,  never  can  produce  an  efficient
sum.

The  perception  of  such  relations,  is  not  an  artificial  sense,
resulting  from  the  labours  of  critics,  and  of  rhetoricians.

I  never  yet  knew  that  schoolboy,  who  possessed  one  spark
of  genius,  that  was  not  immediately  roused,  by  the  ma-
gical  power    of  descriptive    sounds^   in   reading  Ovid,  or


364

P'irgil,  and  who  did  not,  by  the  immiated  cfFúits  of  bis
voice,  mark  himself  a  native  critic.

He  that  has  any  taste  for  composition  in  his  own  tongue,
perceives  the  natural  expression  of  siceetiiess,  or  asperity^
delicacy,  or  sublimity,  in  hearing  a  just  recital  of  any  verses,
in  a  foreign  language.  This  perception  of  correspond-
ence, between  sounds,  and  ideas, — which  is  the  same,  in
the  learned,  and  illiterate, — must  be  natural,  and  spon-
taneous.

That  arrangement,  and  movement,  have  great  effect  in
displaying  the  power  of  sound,  is  very  certain  ;  but  they
are  not  equal  to  all  that  is  required.  Λ  line,  in  which  the
powers  of  E,  I,  B,  L,  N,  are  predominate,  can,  by  no
management  of  the  Casura,  or  disposition  of  poetic  mea-
sure, describe  the  thundring  crash,  or  a  shock  of  ai'ms,
half  so  forcibly,  as  if  the  powers  of  J,  O,  U,  R,  G,  ill,
P,  T,  prevailed.

INIost  languages,  indeed,  retain  so  much  the  expression  of
nature,  that  it  would  be  difficult  for  us  to  select  words,  upon
which  the  experiment  could  be  made.  If,  on  the  other
hand,  this  last  combination  of  sounds,  were  to  paint  what
is  little,  soft,  smooth,  or  delicate,  the  expression  would  be
ridiculous,  and  burlesque.

If,  then,  certain  vocal,  and  articulate  sounds,  arranged
in  Avords,  and  sentences,  describe  certain  ideas,  wìúi
more  effect,  and  propriety,  than  others;  we  must  infer,
that,  in  their  own  simple  nature,  they  have  some  peculiar,
and  marked  relation,  to  such  ideas.  This  relation,  being
founded  in    principles   of  nature,  must  have  produced   an


365

aptitude,  in  the  first  contrivers  of  language,  to  accommo-
date  the  sound,  and  tlie  sense.

That  I  may  not  insist,  at  present,  upon  the  vocal  sounds,
which  are  supposed,  in  general,  to  liave  obvious  connection
with  tones  of  the  voice, — we  may  convince  ourselves,  by
experiment,  of  the  accuracy  that  is  to  be  found  in  this  de-
duction, as  it  respects  the  powers  of  the  consonants.  Cer-
tain actions  will  be  found,  of  course,  to  generate,  sponta-
neously, their  correspoiuling  articulations.

In  the  art  of  catching  at,  or  touching  an  object,  that  is
not  fairly  within  reach, — or  of  holding  a  large  body,  with
arms  at  their  utmost  extent, — we  ask — do  we  not,  amongst
other  efforts,  to  exert  our  whole  power,  spontaneously,  and
forcibly,  apply  the  root  of  the  tongue  to  the  palate,  in  a  fit
situation,  to  utter  the  hard  sound  of  C,  or  Ä,  Λνΐιΐοΐι  is
actually  produced,  every  time  that  breatli  if  forced  out,  as
long  as  the  effort  continues  ?

So,  in  hugging  a  substance  within  the  arms,  and,  as  it
were,  forcibly  adhering  to  it,  we  acquire  additional  power,
by  a  position  of  the  tongue  in  the  same  situation  : — but,  as
this  action  is  of  a  less  protrusive  nature,  breath  is  not  pro-
pelled with  new  force, — and  the  sound  of  the  hard  G  is  pro-
duced.

During  efforts  to  push  heavy  bodies  before  us,  or  to  make
our  way,  and  thrust  ourselves  forward,  in  spite  of  opposi-
tion, we  naturally  collect  the  air  into  the  lungs,  as  an  internal
support :  we,  unconciously,  endeavour  to  derive  all  possible
aid  from  its  elasticity,  by  giving  it  the  full  range  of  the
mouth.  The  cheeks  are  inflated,  and  the  lips  pressed  to-
gether, with  intense  compression  of  breath,  adapted,  with


366

*
force,  to  express  the  articulation  of  P.     And,  as  often  as
breath  escapes,  during  the   violence   of  exertion,    it  will
burst  forth,  Avith  no  articulation  but  this.

Again: — In  tuggitig,  or  drawing  a  line  forcibly,  the
tongue  is  applied  firml}',  and  spontaneously,  to  the  fore
part  of  the  palate,  or  the  upper  gums,  to  force  out  a  vehe-
ment articulation  of  T.

All  this  proceeds,  not  from  study,  and  imitation,  but
from  the  pure  impulse  of  nature.

Let  us  observe  a  man,  exerting  his  whole  force,  in  either
of  these  actions  : — let  him  even  be  dumb,  or  who  has  no  op-
portunity of  learning  sounds  by  the  ear, — and  we  shall  per-
ceive a  natural  aptitude,  in  such  a  person,  to  accompany
the  effort  with  its  corresponding  articulation.  Nay,  if  the
by-standers  be  at  all  interested  in  the  event,  the  impression
will  be  communicated  at  once  to  their  whole  frame;  their
organs  of  speech  will  be  continually,  but  unconsciously^
catching,  grasping,  pushing,  or  tugging.

Let  us  imagine  one  of  the  first  race,  whom  we  can  sup-
pose to  have  been  hitherto  without  use  of  speech,  wishing
to  communicate  an  idea  of  these  exertions,  to  a  persoa
who  had  been  absent.  He  would,  undoubtedly,  use  ges-
tures ; — but  the  aim,  and  the  intent  of  these,  would  be  de-
scription.

In  the  first  instance,  he  would  put  forth  his  hand  to  its
utmost  extent,  as  in  the  art  of  catching,  or  touching,  an
object,  high,  or  distant:  or  he  would  extend  both  arms,  to
mimic  tiie  act  οι  holding  of  a  bulky  substance; — the  very
attitude  of  exertion,  would  bring  the  organs  of  speech   to


3G7

the  corresponding  situation, — and  the  hard  sound  of  C,  or
Λ*^  would  be  emphatically  uttered.

In  a  description  of  gra.<iping,  or  hugging,  the  arms  would
be  firmly  deposited  before  the  breast,  and  drawn  inwards ;
the  lips  would  fly  open  spontaneously,  and  the  tongue
cleave  to  the  palate,  until  the  hard  power  of  G  was  pro-
duced.

To  communicate  an  idea  of  pushing,  the  body  would  be
placed  in  an  inclining  posture ; — the  hands  protruded,  the
lips  pressed  together,  and  forced  outwards,  as  in  the  very
act  of  the  impulse  described, — and  the puŷiug  sound  of  P,
would  be  uttered.

An  idea  of  tension  would  be  expressed,  by  extending  the
hand,  closing  the  fingers,  as  in  laying  hold  of  a  line,  and
drawing  the  body  backwards.  At  the  same  instant,  the
tongue  would  be  applied  spontaneously,  as  a  fulcrum,  to
the  upper  gums,  and,  whilst  the  hand  is  drawn  forcibly  in-
Avards,  the  tugging  articulation  of  Τ  would  be  expressed.

Whilst  breath  escapes,  in  either  of  these  energetic  arti-
culations, a  kind  of  vocal  sound  must  arise  ;  it  will  be
somewhat  like  the  short  obscure  E,  before  It,  in  final
syllables;  so  as  to  form  Ke,  Ghê,  Pi,  and  Ti,  which
may,  therefore,  be  regarded  as  primitive,  or  natural
words.

To  those  who  contend,  that  mankind,  at  first,  commu-
■nicated  their  ideas  otdy  by  gestures,  I  WOuld  recommend
the  reflection,  that  gestures  must  have  been  efforts  to  de-
scribe, and  that  such  an  expedient  as  that  of  placing  the
organs  in  situations,    that  would  produce,    infallibly,  the


368


corresponding  solinds,  naturally  accompanied  actual  exer-
tions, and,  therefore,  must  have  been  essential  parts  of
those  very  o-ts/í/rcô,  or  descriptions.  It  must  follow,  that
vdiiiicnts  of  articulate  language,  are  founded  in  princi-
ples of  nature ri

Men  want  only  original  hints  for  the  invention  of  all  arts.
Those  corresponding  sounds  would  soon  have  obtruded
themselves  upon  the  notice  of  the  first  parents, — have  super-
seded the  use  of  elaborate  gestures, — and  have  become  the
current  medium,  for  the  reciprocal  communication  of  thetr'
ideas.

The  force,  and  the  expression,  of  the  other  letters,  I
shall  have  occasion  to  examine  hereafter.  The  articulations
of  C,  G,  P,  and  T,  have  been  classed,  amongst  the  more
didicult,  and  less  obvious.  What  I  have  said  of  them  will
suíRce,  to  shew,  that  a  faculty  of  articulating  may  be
natural, — and  that  sounds  may  have  appropriate  relations  to
the  ideas,  which  the  mind  intends  to  convey.

All  expressions  of  the  human  voice, — the  moduiative, — ■
the  vocal, — or  the  articulate,  are  not,  therefore,  as  many  have
supposed,  mere  imitations  of  that  which  has  been  heard, —
or  unconnected  with  ideas  of  things,  and  of  their  na-
tural   aihnitics.

There  are;  sounds,  naturally  descriptive.  Tliey  are
produced  unconsciously,  by  the  various  impressions  that  are
felt,  and  are  calculated  for  communicating  the  same  im-
pressions, to  those  who  hear  them.  As  they  undoubtedly
entered  into  the  root  of  Xhefrst  language,  they  retain  their
places,  more,  or  loss,  in  the  various  dialects,  which  have
branched  from  this  original  stem.


369

în  the  cultivation  of  dialects>  through  all  their  stnges,
this  principle  has,  for  many  centuries>  been  overlooked,
and  its  traces,  have,  in  some  degree,  been  obliterated.  In-
flections,— mutations, — and  other  novel  terms,  have  re-
ceived the  sanction  of  custom,  and  the  authority  of  gram-
marians, without  the  least  practical  i-eference  to  the  voice
of  nature.  Still  the  vital  principle  itself  is  perceived,  and
is  acknowledged  by  authors,  and  by  readers  who  are  blessed
with  an  accuracy  of  taste.  It  may  be  remarked,  in  the  un-
solicited expressions,  which  accompany  our  natural  efforts,
or  emotions, — and  in  the  radical  words  of  most  languages.

The  opinion  Λvhich  I  have  thus  maintained,  has  notìiiììg
at  all  new  in  it.  The  very  same  doctrine  appears  to  have
been  the  general  persuasion  of  remote  antiquity,  and  was
never  shaken,  till  the  history  of  man  was  abused  by  fable,
and  theij  maxims  confused  by  philosophical  quibbles.

The  Egyptians  are  acknowledged  by  all  to  have  carried
minute  inquiry,  founded  on  experiments,  to  as  high  a  pitch,
as  any  inhabitants  of  the  ancient  world.

Amongst  them,  an  original  formation  of  language,  from
spontaneous,  and  from  natural  sounds,  was  received  as  a
general  axiom,  from  which  there  could  be  no  appeal.  This
appears,  from  an  experiment,  made,  by  a  king  of  Egypt ^
for  the  purpose  of  determining  the  comparative  antiquity
of  the  nation  he  governed.  Tzco  ijifants,  zcho,  from  the
birth,  had  not  been  suffered  once  to  hear  the  voice  of
many  at  the  end  of  tzco  years,  uttered  spontaiieously  a  term,
K-hich,  in  Phrygian,  signified  bread.  From  this  incident,
the  Egyptians  concluded,  that  Phrygian  was  the  most  an-
cient languyge.


370

Whatever  objections  may  be  urged  against  the  mechanism
of  the  term  B£>í,  and  the  abstract  idea  of  bread,  the  ex-
periment, as  it  was  conducted,  and  as  it  \va3  determined,
proves,  at  least,  the  estabhshed  opinion  of  the  EgyptianSy
upon  this  topic, — that  an  original,  or  primary  language
of  man  was  founded  in  spontaneous  expressions,  and  that
a  people,  who  were  the  most  ancient,  or  unmixed,  would
retain  such  a  language.

This,  too,  was  the  persuasion  of  the  Platonic  school :
and  it  was  known  to  tlie  Romans.  P.  Nigidiits,  a  cele-
brated grammarian, — regarded  natural  expression  as  the
root  of  language.

That  information  we  owe  to  A.  Gellius,  L.  X.  C.  iv.
where,  after  giving  several  examples,  the  author  adds, —
'*  Ita,  in  his  vocibus,  quasi  G  est  us  quidam  oris,  et  spiritjts
naturalis  est.  Eadem  ratio  est,  in  Grcccis  quoque  vocibus,
quam  esse  in  nostris  animadvert inius."

Amongst  the  moderns,  many  learned  men,  wlio  distin-
guished themselves,  by  their  deep  researches  into  the
origin  of  language,  have  acknowledged,  and  main-
tained principles  of  natural  expression  :  particularly  Dcs
Brosscs,  in  his  Traitt  de  la  Formation  Mechanique  det
Langues, — and  IVallis,  in  his  Grammar  of  the  English
Eanguagc.

From  the  whole  of  these  premises,  I  would  infer,  that
our  primitive  order  of  Druids,  and  their  successors,  the
Bards  of  Britain,  are  not  chargeable  ν,Λύχ  absurdity,  in
retaining  this,  with  many  other  persuasions  of  antiquity,
— in  laying  down  this  principle  of  natural,  spontaneous,  pr
dcscri[)tivc  cxpreasion,  and  in  maintaining,   that  first  rudi-


371

ments  of  language  neither  consisted  of  terms,  arbitrarily
imposed,  nor  of  such,  as  were  the  result  of  studious  observ-
ation, and  philosophical  inquiries,  but  of  such,  as  arose,
from  laws  better  ascertained,  and  more  universal, — the  lazes
of  nature  itself.

The  formation  of  language,  considered  in  the  abstract,
is  a  surprising  phenomenon.  It  will,  however,  appear  ac-
countable,  if  not  obvious,  by  admitting  the  operation  of
this  principle.  But,  without  any  such  principle  in  our
nature,  the  acquisition  of  speech  must  have  been  impossible
to  man.

Till  we  have  recourse  to  this  principle,  etymology  will
rest  upon  nothing.  λΥα  may  unravel  compounds,  or
derivatives,  till  we  arrive  at  certain  terms,  which  are  enigma-
tical, and  whose  precise,  or  primary  import,  cannot  be  sa-
tisfactorily explained.

But,  let  us  once  admit  natural  expression,  etymology
will  then,  like  every  other  legitimate  science,  rest  upon  a
solid  ground.  We  shall  be  guided  through  all  the  various
inflections  of  language,  back  to  nature  itself;  to  that  pri-
mordial impression,  made,  by  the  hand  of  the  first  movee,
and,  consequently,  as  far  as  true  philosophy  durst  advance.

As  the  various  passions,  movements,  and  perceptions  of
the  mind,  without  study,  or  forethought,  predispose  the  hu-
man frame,  to  assume  their  peculiar  attitudes,  and  impress
upon  the  countenance,  their  peculiar  character,  Avhich  com-
municates very  distinct  ideas  to  the  beholder ;  so  they  dispose
the  organs  of  speech,  to  assume  their  peculiar  attitudes,
productive,  necessarily,  of  corresponding  sounds,  and  arti-
Λ  a  2


37^

culations,  \vhich,,  in  like   manner,,  naturally  communicate
very  distinct  ideas  to    the  hearer.

And,  though  such  a  natural  character  of  sounds  be  de-
faced, and  Aveakened,  by  the  refinement,  or  the  corruption
of  language,  yet  is  it  not  obliterated.  The  organs  of
speech,  in  many  instances,  can  still  point  out  a  relation  be-
tween the  ideas  we  are  desirous  to  express,  and  corresponding
sounds,  which  are  as  fairly  subjects  of  discrimination  to  the
philologist,  as  the  external  characters  of  the  passions  are  ta
the  painter.


373


Sect.  II.     On  the  formation  of  language.     Nature  of  the
primitive  language.

X  Ο  the  preceding  disquisition,  upon  the  nature  of  c/c-
mentary  sounds,  I  shall  add  a  few  thoughts  respecting  the
formation  of  speech,  the  nature  of  primitive  language,
and  the  sense,  in  which  it  may  be  said  even  still  tQ
exist.

That  wonderful  phenomenon,  in  the  history  of  man,  the
organization  of  language,  has  attracted  the  notice  of  the
learned,  and  the  ingenious.  It  has  given  birth  to  various
hypotheses,  which  are  supported  by  an  elaborate  profusion
of  reading,  and  by  acute  observations.

There  are  some,  for  instance,  who  regarding  language  as
entirely  of  human  invention,  suppose,  as  I  have  already  re-
marked, that  man  borrowed  his  vocal,  and  articulate  sounds,
from  various  animals,  and  from  the  noise  of  inanimate  things.
— For  this  xeason,  they  tell  us,  the  letters,  which  are
the  symbols  of  those  sounds,  derive  their  names,  and  cha-
racters, from  the  things,  to  which  we  owe  their  several
powers*.  This  opinion  I  have  already  discussed,  and,  I
hope,  refuted.

Many,  of  great  learning,  on  the  other  hand,  maintain^
that  the  Hebrew,  or  some  very  similar  language,  was
communicated  by  inspiration  to  our  first  parents,  complete,
in  all  its  parts,

*  See  Rcliq.  Box.  P.  4Ö1.


374

A  third  class,  take  a  middle  course  between  these  two
opinions,  and  contend,  that  man  Λvas  impressed  with  an
aptitude  by  nature,  to  mark,  and  report  express  ideas,  and
perceptions,  by  appropriate  sounds ;  but  that  he  Avas  left  en-
tirely to  his  own  choice,  in  the  application  of  these  principles,
OS  in  the  natural  use  of  his  hands,  feet,  or  any  other  organs.

To  this  opinion,  I  rather  assent;  though,  perhaps,  there
may  be  something  peculiar  in  my  view  of  the  subject,  and
my  plan  of  reasoning  upon  it.

But,  lest  I  should  wander  in  theor}-,  I  Avill  first  con-
sider the  fact,  as  recorded  by  a  writer,  whose  periods
never  drop  idly  from  his  pen.  In  the  Λ-ery  compendious
account  of  the  first  age,  where  nothing  is  admitted  that
is  not  of  the  highest  importance,  Moses  thus  details  the
origin  of  language.

*'  And  the  Lord  God  said.  It  is  not  good  that  man  should
be  alone ;  I  ΛνίΠ  make  him  an  help  meet  for  him.  And,
out  of  the  ground,  the  Lord  God  formed  every  beast  of  the
field,  and  every  fowl  of  the  air,  and  brought  them  unto
Adam,  to  see  what  he  would  call  them.  And,  zchatsoever
Adam  called  every  living  creature,  that  was  the  name
thereof.  And  Adam  gave  iiamcs  to  all  cattle,  and  to  the
fowl  of  the  air,  and  to  every  beast  of  the  field  ;  but  for
Adam,  there  was  not  found  an  help  meet  for  him."  Gen.
ii.   18,  &c.

It  was  undoubtedly  intended,  that  this  passage  should  be
received,  in  the  obvious,  and  plain  sense  of  the  narrative,
luith  all  its  attendant  circumstances.

The  first  thing  to  be  remarked  is,  the  tiinc  \vhen  Adam


375

began  to  form  his  language.  It  was  before  the  creation  of
Eve,  whilst,  as  yet,  there  zcas  not  found  an  help /nect  for
the  man.  There  could  not,  consequently,  have  been  a
tacit  compact  in  the  first  rudiments  of  speech.

It  is  pre-supposed,  that  Adam  had  a  disposition  to  try
and  exercise  his  oral poicers.  The  creatures  were  not  brought
to  him,  to  see  ichether  he  would  name  them,  or  7iot,  but
to  see  zíúat  he  zcould  call  them.  He  had,  then,  a  dispositiûn
to  call  them  by  some  names.

That  such  names  had  not  been  communiatcd  previously
to  him,  is  evident.  The  creatures  were  brought  to  the
man,  to  see  λυκατ  he  would  call  them.  Adam
gave  them  names ;  and,  whatsoever  Adam  called  every
living  creature,  that  was  the  name  thereof.

The  man  is  repeatedly  represented,  as  ά  free  agent,  in
the  choice  of  his  terms,  and  the  historian  seems  to  huve
taken  particular  care,  that  it  should  be  so  understood.

His  maker  had  implanted  principles  in  the  man,  which
the  occasion  called  forth  into  action,  as  his  own  feelings
prompted,  or  his  judgment  prescribed.  It  may  have  been
rendered  necessary  to  be  thus  particular  in  the  record,  for
the  purpose  of  obviating  some  ancient  superstition,  respect-
ing a  sacred  language.

Adam^s  motive,  to  exercise  his  organs  of  speech,  upon
the  present  occasion,  is  intimated,  by  other  parts  of
the  narrative,  to  have  been  the  implanted  love  of  so-
ciety.    "  It   is  not  good  that  man  should  be  alone,"  8cc,

When    the   man  saw  creatures,    endowed,  like  himself.


376

both  with  hfe,  and  voluntary  motion,  pass  in  review  liefore
him,  the  social  character  of  his  disposition  promj)t{'d  him  to
attract  their  attention,  by  visible,  and  by  audible  signs; —
he  carried  his  eiforts  of  this  kind  so  far,  as  to  call  each  of
them,  by  appropriate  names;  but  their  inferior  powers,
after  all,  had  left  the  conviction,  that  he  had  not  amongst
them,  a  meet  associate.

Thus  far  we  are  guided  by  the  sacred  historian  ;  but
now  the  difficulty  commences — what  kind  of  names  could
have  been  given,  by  a  man,  Λνΐιο  Λν33  not  previously  fur-
nished with  a  language, — and,  in  what  sense  could  these
names  have  been  appropriate  ?

They  could  not  have  been  mere  combinations  of  elemen-
tary sounds,  conceived  at  random,  and  accidentally  dis-
tributed, one  to  the  elephant,  another  to  the  lion,  a  third,
given  to  the  coze,  and  a  fourth  to  the  sheep.  Though  Adam
should  have  modulated  his  inexperienced  organs,  and  so  as  to
utter  a  multitude  of  such  fortuitous  combinations,  yet  they
Avould  have  been  sounds  Avithout  meaning.  They  could
have  left  no  distinct  impressions  upon  his  own  mind,  nor
could  they  aptly  communicate  such  impression  to  others.
They  would,  therefore,  have  been  forgotten,  soon  after
they  had  been  imposed,

ISeither  could  the  names,  given  by  Adam,  ha\e  been  sci-
entific, and  classical  terms  of  a  zoologist.  He  was  neither
an  expert  linguist,  nor  any  thing  like  a  natural  historian.
The  animals  presented,  were  such  as  he  had  never  seen,  and
of  wi)om  he  had  never  heard.  He  had  experience  of  no
other  kinds,  to  which  they  might  be  compared.  He  knew
absolutely  nothing  of  them  beyond  the  ideai»,  under  which


377

iheyliad  presented  themselves  to  his  mind,  at  the  moment,
through  the  medium  of  the  senses.  And,  as  the  human  race,
as  yet,  centered  in  himself,  alone,  the  design  of  his  \vords
must  have  been  rather  to  express,  than  to  commiinieate.

These  names  must,  tlien,  liave  been  simply  descriptive
terms  for  obvious,  and  general  ideas,  excited  immediately,
and  suited,  naturally,  to  the  inexperience  of  the  nomenclaton

He  could  have  struck  out  no  abstract  ideas  of  any  animal
whatsoever ;  but  he  could  observe  their  several  motions,
their  comparative  bulk,  or  littleness, — their  gentle,  or  awe-
ful  aspects, — their  pleasing,  or  disagreeable  shapes ;  and,
for  these  obvious  perceptions,  nature  itself  could  supply
him  with  descriptive  terms.  Those  terms  would  not  only
attach  themselves  to  the  memory,  but  would  present
apposite  ideas,  or  images,  to  those  who  might  afterwards
hear  them.

Of  some  animals,  he  may  have  imitated  the  voices,  and
such  imitations  might  become  their  names.  But  this  nile
could  not  have  been  general.

We  may,  therefore,  contemplate  primitive  man,  as  prompt-
ed by  the  innate  predilection  of  taste  for  social  enjoyments,
to  detain,  in  his  company,  those  living  creatures,  which  had
already    received    their  being.

To  attract  their  notice,  and  conciHate  their  good  will,
he  addressed  himself  to  them,  severally,  by  descriptive
gestures.  These  efforts  called  forth  the  hitherto,  latent
powers  of  his  nature.  The  organs  of  speech,  moved  in
unison,  and  produced  their  corresponding  articulations,
unless    where    this     exertion    was    saved    by     a   simple


378

repetition  of  the  voices  \vhich  they  uttered  :  and  thus  it
was  that  the  names  of  the  famihar  objects  were  acquired,
and  the  sohd  ground-work  of  human  language^  laid  upon
the   basis  of  natural  principles.

At  the  moment  that  human  societi/  commenced,  man
was  alrtady  in  possession  of  language,  which,  therefore,
could  not  possibly  have  originated  in  a  tacit  compact :
though  it  be  admitted,  that  a  compact  of  this,  or  of  a  similar
nature,  has  much  to  do,  in  regulating  the  copious  dialects
of  cultivated  life.  From  these  dialects,  the  original  speech
of  man's  first  parents  must  have  differed  widely,  in  its  com•
pass,  and  structure.

Language  being  only  a  medium  for  the  expression,  and
communication  of  human  ideas,  and  sensations,  can  be  no
further  necessary,  than  as  it  is  conducive  to  these  ends.
And  as  all  human  societies,  however  simple,  and  rude,
possess  language  enough  to  communicate  their  usual  range
of  ideas, — but  no  more, — we  may,  of  course,  presume  that
such  was  the  case  witli  Adam.

The  compass  of  Ids  language  could  only  have  been  com-
mensurate with  his  occasions  for  speech.  His  memory  can-
not have  been  encumberd  with  a  multitude  of  terms,  to  which
he  could  attach  no  meaning.  To  what  kind  of  terms  could
his  inexperience  have  attached  meanings  ?  It  is  not  pretended
that  he  was  instructed  in  philosophical  mysteries.  He  could,
then,  have  had  no  terms  which  primarily  expressed  any  gci-
enrific,  or  philosophical  ideas.

The  numerous  arts  of  civil  life  were  yet  undiscovered.
The  various  occupations,  and  employments  of  men,  in  so-
ciety, which  might  have  demanded  their  several  terms,  and
phrases,   were,  not  as  yet,  known.     Tliere  were  no  public


379

transactions, — no  traffic  between  man  and  man, — no  ac-
counts of  things,  or  events, — remote  in  time,  or  in  place, — nd
traditions  of  customs,  and  of  usages,  upon  Avhich  our  first
parents  could  have  discoursed.  Without  ideas  of  such  things,
they  could  not  have  devised  proper  tenns  to  express  them  ;
nor  could  such  terms  have  been  divinely  communicated ;  for
the  Almighty  never  taught  man  to  utter  unmeaning  words.
They  were  surrounded  by  the  works  of  nature,  but  with
none  of  them,  could  they  have  been  further  acquainted,
than  as  they  perceived  them  by  their  senses.  Whatever
intellectual  powers  enriched  their  capacity,  their  knowledge,
— as  human  beings,  must  fe^ve  been  the  child  of  experience,
and  its  growth  muse  have  been  gradual.

The  original  speech  of  mankind  must,  therefore,  have
been  extremely  simple.  It  must  have  been  limited,  exclu-
sively, to  a  few  terms,  and  of  these,  to  such  as  primarily
expressed  the  most  obvious  ideas,  or  sensations.  Its  words
must  have  been  of  the  simplest  kind.

Sounds  naturally  expressing  ideas,  men  would  first  under-
stand the  power  of  simple  tones,  before  they  began  to  form
artificial  combinations.

The  fundamental  truth  of  this  reasoning,  is  attested  by  the
original  structure  of  all  the  languages  that  are  known.  All
the  native  terms  of  the  most  copious  amongst  them,  may
be  reduced,  perhaps,  to  less  than  a  thousand  primitive
terms,  of  the  most  obvious  import,  and  the  simplest
form.  The  more  ancient,  and  pure  any  language  is,
the  fewer,  and  the  more  simple  are  its  primitives.  It  is
therefore  evident,  that,  although  some  dialects  have  in-
dulged in  partial  contractions,  the  general  progress  has  been


380

ífom  the  paucity,  and  simplicity  of  terms,  to  copiousness,
and  artificial  combination.

Λ  curious  problem  would  still  remain,  as  to  the  manner,
in  which  the  first  class  of  terms  conveyed  information  ;  or
the  rank  which  they  would  claim  to  hold,  in  the  modern
grammar.

The  ancients,  in  general,  regarded  verbs,  as  the  roots,  or
primitives  of  language ;  but  most  of  our  modern  philolo-
gists, declare  themselves  in  favour  of  «omws,  as  the  basis  of
human  language.  And,  in  the  passage  I  have  quoted  above,
Moses  gives  no  hints  of  any  human  ΛVords,  that  were  prior  to
the  names  of  animals.

It  cannot  be  imagined,  that  first  essaj's  in  language
could  possess  anything  so  artificial  as  eur  verbs.  Men  could
not,  at  once,  have  modified  their  words,  by  discriminating
all  the  times,  and  circumstances,  of  being,  or  acting.  Yet
their  nouns  must  have  been  something  more  than  such  arbi-
trary terms,  as  might  name,  Λvithout  describing  their
appropriate  objects.

Man  had  erected  a  shed,  as  a  defence  from  the  sun,  and
Tain,  before  the  orders  of  architecture  were  known  ;  and
he  had  begun  speech,  before  principles  of  grammar  were
developed.

His  first  words,  probably,  would  not  have  admitted
of  an  arrangement,  under  our  classes.  They  had
more  general  properties,  and  carried  nearly  the
sense  of  the  verbal,  or  participial  nouns.  They
presented  an  image  of  a  thing,  by  its  mode  of
cjislcnccj     or     operation.      They   marked    the  form,    or


881

the   relation,    by  which  the  object  had  ^)resentcd  itself  t«
the  senses.

From  terms,  descriptive  thus  of  leading  ideas,  the  dis-
criminate classes  of  the  words,  in  organized  language,
would  flow;  and  without  multiplying,  or  diversifying  terms,
the  acquisition  of  substantives,  of  adjectives,  verbs,  or
participles,  would  become  naturally  obvious.

The  same  descriptive  term  would  suit  its  meaning  to  the
occasion,  and  ΛνοηΜ  assume  the  character  of  a  noun,  or  a
•terb,  as  the  circumstances  would  require.

For  example,  the  simple  articulation  Kt,  produced  na-
turally, and  spontaneously,  by  an  effort,  either  to  catchy
touch,  or  hold,  would  naturally  describe  an  object,  which  had
been  observed  in  these  actions,  and  would  thus  become  the
name  of  that  which  catches, — a  dog  ;  that  which  touches, —
a  point  ;  or  that  Λνΐιϊοΐί  holds, — a  cup.  When  spoken  of
an  object,  it  would  as  obviously  signif}',  to  catch, — touch,
or — hold.  It  \vould  again  express  the  qualities  of  catch-
ing, touching,  or  holding  ;  and,  lastly,  the  abstract  ideas
of  a  catch, — a  touch, — -ahold.

So  Pt,  which  is  produced  by  an  effort  οι  pushing,  or  pro•'
truding,  would  naturally  express,  the  pusher, — to  push, — •
pushing, — protrusion.  This  mode  of  application  would  pro-
duce no  embarrassment  in  the  hearer.  The  English  word^
shot,  in  its  various  coiniections,  is  a  substantive,  an  adjective,
Ά  verb,  Ληά  a  participle  :  yet  its  meaning  is  always  under-
stood. And,  that  such  a  leadmg  proposition  is  true,  in  fact,
as  well  as  in  theory,  languages,  as  zee  find  them,  after  their
terms  have  been  indefinitely  diversified,  by  art,  or  tacit
agreement,  furnish  abundant  proof.    That  I  may  not  collect


382

instances  from  the  modern  dialects, — let  me  only  obsen-'e,
that  in  Hebrew,  the  same  term,  is  generally  both  a  noun,
and  a  verb ;  as  in  these  examples,

Π'ΓΤ  Hie^  to  live  ; — rîì  aììiììial ; — -///c.

nph  Leke,  to  take,  receive ; — a  prison; — a  pair  of  totigSf
or  forceps ; — a  taking  ; — learning,

lay  Hober,  to  passover ; — a  boat ; — a  passage; — beyond.

í?Dÿ  Hopl,  to  lift  up  ; — a  toicer ; — haughty  ;  &,c.

A  language,  of  such  extreme  simplicity  could  not  fail  of
presenting  sufficient  hints,  for  gradual  organization  of  a
more  precise  dialect,  as  the  advancing  state  of  society
should  render  it  necessary ; — whilst,  in  the  mean  time,  this
primitive  tongue  must  have  answered  all  the  exigencies
of  an  infant  race.

Let  us  put  the  case,  that  Adam  the  first  man  would  in-
form his  new-created  bride,  of  the  ekphaiit.  The  cha-
racter which  he  had  already  described  in  this  animal,  in  the
act  of  naming  him,  was,  probably,  his  enormous  bulk.  This
description  he  is  now  to  repeat.  Being  an  inexpert  orator,
he  Avould  not  trust  entirely,  and  exclusively,  to  the  powers
of  hrs  voice.  His  arms  would  be  elevated,  and  spread  abroad,
— in  order  to  intimate  the  comprehension  of  gigantic  space.

This  descriptive  gesture  would  be  aided  by  an  immediate,
«nd  spontaneous  inflation  of  his  cheeks,  till  his  breath  would
find  a  passage  through  his  nostrils.  This  natural  description
eS  a  huge  bulk  would  produce  the  souijd  B, — Μ  ,•  and  that
sound,  rendered  articulate  hy  the   intervention  of  a  vowel.


383

would  describe  bulkiness,  and  might  be    appropriated  most
happily,  to  the  elephant,  or  great  beast.

He  would  speak  next  of  the  horse,  whom  he  had,  per-
haps, named,  by  describing  his  quick,  and  his  energetic  mo-
tion. The  idea  might  be  painted  by  a  rapid  movement
of  the  hand,  and  a  sudden  hissing  effusion  of  his  breath,
like  an  impetuous  utterance  of  the  syllable  soos.  This
being  the  Hebreto  name  of  the  horse,  appears  to  be  intended
as  a  description  of  his  velocity  ; — for  it  is  applied  also  to  the
sioallozu,  and  to  a  kind  of  night-moth,  which  is  said  to
be  agility  itself.

Our  great  progenitor  might  add  an  account  of  some  ani-
mals, by  imitating  their  voices,  calling  the  cow.  Moo,
and  the  sheep,  or  lambs,  jB«.  He  may  have  described  the
dove,  by  fluttering  his  hand,  so  as  to  intimate  the  act  of
the  wing  in  flight,  and  by  repeating  the  syllable,  Toor,
toor.

He  now  walks  forth,  accompanied  bj-  the  mother  of
mankind.  The  elephant  presents  his  enormous  bulk  ; — the
horse  flies  over  the  field  ;  the  ban,  and  the  soon  are  soon,
and  readily  distinguished.  They  are  saluted  by  the  coza,
the  sheep,  and  the  dove  :  the  Moo,  the  Ba,  and  the  Toor^,
are  immediately  recognised.  How  great  must  have  been
their  joy,  to  find  themselves  in  possession  of  a  social  laa-
guage !

These  atoms  of  the  simplest  words  are  given,  merely  to
illustrate  my  conceptions,  respecting  primitive  names  ;  that
is,  to  show,  how  they  had  sprung  from  nature,  and  in  what
manner  they  described  <;ertain  states,  or  actions.  The  wŵrds
acquired  by  ono/natop(£ia,  are  not  exceptions.     They  are


384

not  absolute,  but  merely  descriptive  terms.  They  paint  the
action  of  the  voice.  By  the  likeness  preserved  in  this  oral
picture,  the  Moo,  the  Ba,  and  the  Toor  are  distinguished.
They  are  the  mooing,  the  baing,  and  the  tooring  animals.
This  view  of  the  subject,  as  I  have  already  hinted,  appear*
to  account  best  for  the  formation  of  language,  and  for
the  acquisition  of  its  two  principal  parts^  nouns,  and  verbs.

The  term,  unconsciously  generated  b}'  the  effort  it  means
to  describe,  naturally,  and  obviously  pointed  out  the  par-
ticular thing,  and  its  mode  of  existence, — or  the  agent,  and
the  nature  of  his  action.  Nouns,  and  verbs  were  produced
at  a  birth.

I  deprecate  the  imputation  of  impiety,  for  supposing  that
man  Avas  not  furnished  with  language  at  his  creation.
Would  it  have  been  a  more  stupendous  miracle,  or  greater
mercy,  to  constitute  a  language  for  man, — than  to  endow
liim  with  requisite  powers,  and  with  pre-disposition,  to
make   one  for  himself  ί

Had  primitive  language  been  of  divine  origin,  man  would
have  been  under  the  sacrilegious  necessity  of  mutilating,  or
altering  it,  every  day.  No  language  could  have  accom-
modated itself,  exempted  from  those  changes,  to  the  con-
ditions of  society,  for  which  man  was  designed.  Some-
thing would  be  superfluous,  or  something  deficient.  Even
the  language  of  tlie  0/d  Tcstoììient,  contains  a  multitude
of  terms,  in  acceptations,  Avhich  Adam,  during  the  first
years  of  his  litV,  could  not  possibly  have  understood. —
1Í0W  could  he  then  have  preserved  their  meaning  ?

The  language  of  our  first  parents  must  have  been
.simf^le,  \slica  compared  with    Hebrac,   as    that   venerable


385

tongue  is^  compared  with  ours/  But  language  could  not
long  have  been  confined  within  such  narrow  limits.  Being
once  put  in  motion,  its  use,  and  properties  once  under-
stood,  it  easily  kept  pace  with  social  progress.

The  intellectual  exertions  of  the  first  ages,  were  both
rapid,  and  various.  And,  as  no  society'  of  men  has  been
found  in  the  possession  of  knowledge,  without  adequate
means  for  its  mutual  communication,  we  may  conclude,
that  primitive  language  soon  became  rich,  and  compre-
hensive.

It  may  be  further  observed,  that  men  soon  divided  into
distinct  societies,  in  which  they  pursued  various  occupa-
tions, and  acquired  various  branches  of  knowledge.  They
had,  consequently,  various  occasions  to  call  forth  oral
powers.  These  must  have  produced  local  terms,  local
idioms,  and  local  acceptations  of  common  terms.  Various
dialects  must,  therefore,  have  existed  before  the  flood.

One  alone  of  these  was  preserved,  by  the  single  house,
or  tribe,  that  survived  the  catastrophe :  the  whole  earth  was
again  of  one  language,  and  of  one  speech,  Avhilst  its  in-
habitants formed  but  one  society.  But,  no  sooner  were  they
separated  from  each  other,  and  placed  under  a  variety  of
local  circumstances,  than  the  samp  causes,  w^hich  had  ope-
rated before,  and  which  must  alwa3's  operate,  began  to  ge-
nerate similar  efl'ects.

Without  calling  before  us,  the  miraculous  confusion  which
aftected  great  part  of  the  human  species,  it  is  obvious  that
some  changes,  from  the  universal  root,  must  have  presented
themselves  immediately  upon  the  division  of  the   families,

Bb


386

New  objects,  and  their  new  circumstances,  appeared.
These  must  have  been  described  by  new  terms,  and  phrases,
or  else,  by  new  appropriations  of  old  ones.  The  foundation
of  dialects  was  laid  again.

The  nations,  by  degrees,  became  settled  in  their  peculiar
dwellings,  occupations,  and  habits  of  life.  The  objects,
which  had  been  at  first  new,  became  familiar.  The  popu-
lar usages,  to  which  necessity,  or  accident,  had  given
birth,  began  to  acquire  prescriptive  authority,  in  all  com-
munities, were  to  be  regarded  as  the  legitimate  standards  of
propriety,  and  were  established  by  general  rules.  The  lan-
guages acquired  their  discriminative  character,  and  compa-
rative stability.

But  still,  thry  were  nothing  more  than  dialects  of  the  mo-
ther tongue.  There  were  local  modes  of  oral  delivery,  terms
of  expression,  combinations,  and  applications  of  terms;  but
the  fundamental  principles  were  universal.  Each  colony
had  planted  its  own  slip  of  X\\ç.  parent  tree,  in  its  new  pa-
trimony.

Tlicse  offsets  assumed,  of  course,  different  shapes,  and
flourished,  more,  or  less,  according  to  the  soil,  the  aspect,
climate,  or  skill,  of  each  planter,  and  the  labour  of  his
cultivation.  Some  put  forth  more  luxuriant  branches  than
others ;  but  the  leaves,  and  fruit  they  bore,  were  still  of  the
same  class,  and  species.

Let  us  examine  the  natural  characters  of  this  plant,  in
some  of  those  peculiar  specimens,  which  have  neither
been  pampered  by  excess  of  culture,  nor  starved  by
exlrcme  neglect.


387

The  very  ancient  language  of  the  Chinese  is  comprised,
at  this  day,  in  a  tew  simple  monosyllables,  which  are
equally  nouns,  and  verbs.  They  form  no  compounds,  and
they  admit  of  no  unmeaning  prefixes,  or  terminations.  The
signs  of  cases,  numbers,  voices,  moods,  tenses,  and  per-
sons, are  distinct  words  of  known  value.  By  their  ar-
rangement, and  by  certain  variations,  in  the  tones  of  the
voice,  these  few,  simple  terms,  can  serve  the  purpose  of  a
copious,  and  precise  language.

The  same  articulate  sound  appears  to  convey  but  one
leading  idea,  throughout  the  several  tones  of  it.

Thus  Fu,  primarily^  signifies  covering,  which  idea  is
thus  diversified  by  the  accents : — Fu,  a  husband ;  Fu,  to
help,  or  protect ;  Fu,  a  town;  Fa,  &  father ;  Fu,  to  con-
ceal, or  cover.     Dr.  Hager's  Element.  Char.

Other  ancient  languages  border  upon  this  degree  of  simpli-
city. All  the  native  terms  of  the  Welsh,  and  of  the  Irish,
are  fairly  reducible  to  three  or  four  hundred  monosyllabic
roots,  of  the  simplest  form,  frequently  both  nouns,  and
verbs.

Critics    in   the  Hebrezu  language,   have    declared  their
opinion,  that  all  its  roots  were  originally  monosyllabic*  ;  and
that  "  each  Hebrew  root  has  but  one  leading  ideaj  Or  mean-
B  b  2


*  PleraBque  Hcbrxorum  voces,  ab  exordio,  monosyllabas,  plurium  postoa  syl-
labarum  fucre,  vel  additis  participiorum  incrementis,  vel  affixis,  Niphal,
Hiphal,  vel  aliis  augmeutis  inutilibus.     Thorn.  Gloss.  Univ  ad  vvc.  f|"i3.

Certum  est  linguas  omnes,  qua  monosyllabi»  constant,  esse  cseteris  antiquiores.
■mmSalmasius,  de  Ling  Hellm.  i».  390.


388

ing,  taken  from  naturr,  b}'  our  senses,  or  feelings,  Avliicli
runs  through  all  the  branches,  and  deflections  of  it,  however
numerous,  and  diversiiied."     Parkhurst.

The  nouns  of  several  languages  are  not  declined  at  all.
The  cases  are  distinguished  by  terms  of  known  value.  Verbs
are  varied,  in  their  moods,  and  their  tenses,  by  auxiliaries,
and  in  their  persons,  by  pronouns  out  of  composition,  whilst
the  term,  that  simply  describes  the  action,  or  state,  remains
unmoved.

Those  prefixes,  and  final  terminations,  which  abound  in
some  languages,  are,  in  many  instances,  evident  remains,
cr  corruptions,  of  distinct,  and  significant  words,  or  terms.
Thus  prefixes,  and  suffixes,  which  distinguish  the  persons,  and
the  tenses,  of  the  Hebrew  verb,  are  acknowledged  to  be
certain  parts  of'  their  jivimitivc  pronouns.

Something  of  this  kind,  agreeably  to  the  laws  of  general
grammar,  must  be  supposed  in  all  such  instances.  Men
could  never  have  agreed  to  vary  the  known  meaning  of  a
word,  in  a  determinate,  a,nd  regular  manner,  by  adding  to
it  sounds,  to  Avhich  they  attached  no  meaning  at  all.

Are  we  not  warranted  in  concluding,  that  the  parent  of
those  languages,  which  retain  the  characters  here  described,
was  founded  in  a/ea'  simple  terms,  descriptive  either  of  lead-
ing ideas,  or  obvious  perceptions,  and  so  constructed,  as  to
serve  the  purposes,  equally,  of  noims,  and  verbs  ?

That  it  raiide  no  variance  of  its  nouns,  and  verbs,  by  the
help  of  unmeaning  prefixes,— of  insertions,— and  of  ter-
minatiüns,but  singly  by  the  application  of  other  terms,which,
Iiowever  simple,  had  their  known,  and  perceptible  import.


389

e

And  that,  if  it  formed  compound  words,  it  must  have  pre«
served  their  several  parts  entire  and  perfectly  distinct,  so  as  to
be  immediately  reducible  to  their  primitives,  as  in  the  JEwg//sÄ
words,  pcn-kitife,  horsc-mnn  :  instead  of  rendering  them
obscure  by  contraction,  or  corrupt  pronunciation  ;  a'•.
lovely,  for  love-like;  worship,  ϊοχ  rcorth-shaiic ;  bosn,  for
boatswain  ;  or  hazzif,  for  housc<dfe  '^

It  cannot,  perhaps,  be  ascertained,  in  what  instances  we
have  preserved  the  actual  terms  of  the  universal  language ;
but  if  it  should  be  competent  for  us  to  ascertain  the  value  of  its
elementary  sounds,  and  the  rules,  by  which  those  elements
were  combined,  we  may  regard  its  principles  as  fairly  re«
stored.

Tiie  individual  problems,  which  Euclid  solved  amongst
his  friends,  are  unknown  ι  but,  understanding  the  definite
properties  of  his  figures,  and  made  once  intimately  ac•
quainted  with  his  elements,  we  may  be  sure  of  determining,
as  this  great  geometrician  would  have  done,  upon  similav
Qccasioui.


390


SiîCT.  III.  Of  the  material  accidents  and  changes  tchick
have  aj^ectcd  elementary  soundsy  and  characters,  in  pri-
mitive words.


B.


'EFORE  I  attempt  an  explanation  of  the  several  names
of  the  letters,  and  consider  the  force  of  their  several,  and
respective,  elementary  sounds,  in  the  formation  of  language,
I  think  it  necessary  to  take  some  notice,  of  the  more
general  accidents,  and  changes  in  utterance,  and  in  or-
thography.

In  subjects  that  are  so  complex,  exceptions,  and  ano-
malies must  be  supposed  :  but  we  may  observe,  in  most  of
the  dialects,  whilst  undergoing  the  operation  of  culture,
and  refinement,  a  general  progress,  from  simplicity  of
terms,  to  artificial  combination,  and  from  strength,  or
energy  of  sounds,  to  delicacy,  and  softness.  This  progress
must  have  begun,  long  before  the  complete  formation  of
those  languages,  which  come  under  our  notice.

When  men  first  communicated  their  thoughts  to  each
other,  by  such  tones,  and  articulations,  as  were  produced
naturally,  and  spontaneously,  by  their  various  perceptions,
and  emotions,  accompanied  with  strong  gestures,  their
(ilementary  sounds  were  probably  few  ;  but  they  must  have
been  the  most  energetic,  and,  therefore,  the  most  perfect,
as  well  as  distinct,  of  their  kind.

Those  obscure,  and  short  breathings,  Avhich  merely  serve
to  assist  articulation,  and  w  hich  are  neglected,  in  the  or-


391

thogrnphy  of  the  old  Asiatic  languages,  must  be  degradrd
from  the  rank  of  elements.  But,  it  is  probable,  that,  in  the
infancy  of  language,  the  textual  vowels,  intended  for  de-
scription, were  generally  uttered  with  strong  aspiration.

This  energetic  utterance  has  adhered  so  closely  to  the
Hebrew  vowels,  that  several  grammarians  have,  since  the
introduction  of  points,  regarded  them  as  consonants.

In  Greek,  the  aspiration  is  the  constant  attendant  of
the  initial  τ,  and,  frequently,  of  the  other  initial  vowels.

The  case  was  the  same  in  the  old  Latin — "  H,  literam,
sive  illam,  spiritum,  magis  quam  literam,  dici  oportet,  in-
serebant  veteres  nostri,  plerisque  vocibus  verborum  firman-
dis,  roborandisque,  ut  sonus  eorum  esset  vividior,  vegetiorque."
A.  Cell.  ii.  3.

Every  noun,  and  verb,  in  the  JVelsh  language,  that  be-
gins with  a  vowel,  has  that  vowel  regularly  aspirated,  after
certain  pronouns;  ns  Arglzci/dd,  a  lord;  Ei  Haiglzcydd,
her  lord;  Eu  Harghci/dd,  their  lord;  Achub,  to  save;
Ei  Hachub,  to  save  her ;  Eu  Hachub,  to  save  them..

The  Irish  also  aspirate  the  initial  vowels  of  their  nouns
feminine,  after  the  article  ììu  ;  and  their  initial  vowels,  iu
general,  admit  of  the  aspiration,  in  certain  positions,  re-
gulated by  the  grammar.

From  this  general  consent  of  old  languages,  it  may  be
inferred,  that  man's  first  efforts  to  express,  by  vocal  signS;,
were  attended  with  strong,  and  forcible  aspirations.

These  primary  vowel-tones  appear,  from  a  comparison  of


392

their  symbols,  in  the  oldest  alphabets,  to  have  only  been
five,  each  produced,  in  its  peculiar  seat  of  utterance.  Per-
haps they  were  nearly  as  follows  : — A,  as  Ha,  in  half ;  or
A,  in  father,  uttered  from  our  throat,  without  contraction
of  the  tongue,  or  lips.

Σ,  somewhat  broader  than  hea,  in  heat,  or  ea,  in  beatf
from  the  root  of  the  palate,  by  a  contraction  of  the  tongue
in  that  part.

I,  as  the  pronoun  he,  or  ee,  in  meet, — from  the  fore  part
of  the  palate,  by  keeping  the  tongue  nearly  in  contact,  and
thrusting  it  forwards,

O,  as  ho,  in  hold,  or  the  interjection  O,- — from  the  lips,
by  forming  them  into  a  round  orifice,  thrusting  them  for-
wards, and  retracting  the  tongue.

U,  as  hoo,  in  hoot,  or  O,  in  inove,  resulted  from  the  con-
cave sound  of  the  whole  mouth,  by  a  retraction  of  the
tongue,  and  an  elevation  of  the  cheeks,  and  lips,  in  which
the  latter  were  almost  closed.

Amongst  these  volatile  elements  of  language,  great
changes  have  been  introduced.  Their  powers  have  so  much
varied,  as  to  have  been  mistaken  for  each  other:  and  or-
thography, which,  in  all  countries,  creeps  but  slowly  after
the  mode  of  utterance,  has  frequently  substituted  one
vocal  symbol  for  the  other.  The  variations  from  the  vowels
of  primitive  wokIs,  in  the  formation  of  Greek  verbs,  for
instance,  arc  so  numerous,  that  it  would  be  difficult,  if
not  impracticable,  to  reduce  them  into  any  system.  But,
with  such  changes,  1  have  little  to  do  in  my  essay:  for  my
busincüs  only  is  with  primitive   terms,  which,  in  gcacral,


393

may  have  received  their  present  form,  before  the  terms  of
languages,  and  tlic  accidents  of  terms,  became  so  numerous^
as  to  render  anomalous  changes  necessary,  for  the  sake
of  distinction.

In  the  fundamentals  of  speech,  we  may  expect,  naturally,
to  find  tlie  changes  of  the  vowels  more  simple,  and  less  irre-
gular. But  here,  it  must  be  owned,  we  have  no  op-
portunity of  detecting  those  changes,  but  on  grounds  of
general  analogy.

The  first  change   that  took    place    was,    probably,    an

occasional  omission  of  the  aspirate.

«

Primitive  man  uttered  simple,  but  energetic  terras,  ac-
companied with  strong  gestures.  The  frequent  repetitions  of
these,  upon  similar  occasions,  must  have  given  them  a
known,  and  a  current  value.

It  became,  therefore,  no  longer  necessary,  to  impress  the
idea,  by  the  emphasis  of  the  voice,  and  of  the  gesture :  it
might  be  sufficiently  intimated,  by  a  bare  repetition  of  the
term  itself.  Practice  introduced  ease  of  expression  ;  and
the  indulgence  of  ease  is  natural  to  man.  It  was  found
practicable  to  speak  intelligibly,  not  only  without  violent
gesture,  but  without  an  intense  exertion  of  breath ;  con-
sequently, the  aspiration  of  the  vowels  might  be  occa-
sionally omitted.

And  Ave  find  this  omission  still  gains  ground,  more  and
more,  as  men  study  the  softness,  and  delicacy  of  language.

Some  centuries  ago,  the  Italians  frequently  sounded  tlie


394

aspirate  Π :  at  present,  they  hardly  know  what  is  meant
by  it.

Thus  Ha,  He,  Hi,  H6,  Hii,  became  a,  c,  t,  o,  û ;  but
this  change  occasioned  httlc,  or  no  confusion  in  language.
The  vowels  retained  their  essential  powers,,  in  utter-
ance, and  their  proper  symbols  in  orthography.

Other  innovations  Avere  gradually  introduced,  Avhich  ren-
dered the  natural  expression  of  the  vocal  sound  less  per-
ceptible. The  general  progress  from  energy  to  delicacy,
and  from  the  latter  to  indolence,  in  place  of  the  primi-
tive open  A,  substituted  the  power  of  the  slender  Evglish  A.

ο

This  power,  the  ancient  Hebrezi)s,  perhaps,  represented
by  Π  ;  but,  as  in  most  alphabets,  it  wants  an  appropriate
character,  it  has  been  generally  represented  by  E.  Thus,
in  Latin,  Ago  forms  Egi,  and  several  compounds  change
A  into  Έ.  The  same  change  regularly  takes  place  in  the
Wchh  language.

jE  was  also  reduced,  occasionally,  to  the  more  delicate
and  slender  sound  of  /,  (ee.)  Hence,  the  Latin  verbs,
Lgco,  Tcneo,  Emo,  &c.  in  their  compounds,  regularly
take  /,  in  the  place  of  E.  And,  as  yi  was  mutable  into
E,  and  Ε  into  /,  so  the  power  of  the  first  of  these  vowels
was  reduced  frequently  to  that  of  /.  In  Latin,  there
are  not  fewer  than  about  twenty  simple  verbs,  Avliich  as
often  as  they  are  compounded,  regularly  change  A  into  /.

/,  as  ec,  being,  in  its  own  nature,  the  most  slender  sound
Ave  can  utter,  has  retained  its  place,  anc'  its  power,  more
çcnerally  than  the  others.


395

By  neglecting  to  form  the  orifice  of  the  lips,  v/ith  due
rotundity,  the  power  of  Ο  was  reduced  into  an  obscure  sound,
like  that  of  Ho,  in  honty,  or  of  O,  in  come ;  consequent-
ly, it  was  often  confounded  with  U,  both  in  dchvery,
and  in  orthography;  as  custom  liad  reduced  that  vowel  also,
to  the  same  obscure  sound,  by  neglecting  to  put  the  lips
near  enough  together.

U  was  often  reduced  into  a  more  slender  sound,  approach-
ing that  of  /,  or  ee ;  but  still  retaining,  in  some  degree,  its
natural  hollow  tone.

This  power,  the  Greeks  represented  by  γ  ;  and  the  iVclsh,
in  their  populiir  orthography,  by  the  single  U.  The  simi-
larity of  this  tone  to  that  of  /,  has  given  the  Wehh,  and
the  Greeks,  frequerit  occasion  to  confound  it  with  i.
The  Roman  'U,  often  corresponded  with  Y^  (Greek)
and  the  single  U  of  the  Welsh.

Their  best  authors,  at  an  age,  in  which  oral  delinquency
would  have  been  intolerable,  \vTote  Sulla,  or  St/lla,  Lubet,
or  Libet,  Optumiis,  or  Optimus,  and  umus,  or  imus,  in
the  termination  of  all  superlatives.  /,  was  the  general
centre  of  the  vowels,  to  which  they  all  tended,  when  they
left  their  proper  sphere.

A  negligent  utterance,  would,  sometimes,  reduce  either
of  the  vowels  into  the  obscure  sound  of  O,  in  come..

Thus,  in  English,  altar,  alter,  bird,  come,  sum ;  and,
in  Welsh,  A,  E,  O,  and  U,  are,  in  certain  situations,  mu-
table into  Y,  which  represents  this  obscure  sound.

Such  innovations;,  whether  introduced  by  cither  refine-


396

inent,  or  by  negligence,  have  proved  injurious,  by  con-
founding powers,  which  ought  invariably  to  have  been  dis-
tinct, and  by  Λveakening  the  force  of  natural  expression ;
but  we  must  take  these  things  as  we  find  them.

The  following  table  presents  a  general  view  of  the  changes
I  have  remarked.


Primitive
Aspirate.

Soft
Breathing.

Mutation.

Obscure
Utterance.

f  Ha  .  .  .  .

He,  Hi  .

Ho

Μ

(He  ...  .
^    Ì

ea  .  .  .  .

Hi  ...  .
i

Ho

Ò

r  Hce  ....

^i

.  ee  .  .  .  .

fHo  .  .  .  .

Ho    .  .  .
Ö     .  .  .  .

Ho

υ

Μ

ο

o|«»•••

oo  .  .  .  .

Ύ    ....
't    ....

Ho

Ö

Ho,  as  in  honei/ ;  o,  as  ο  in  come.


Of  the  consonants;,  those  arc  ihc  most  forcibly  descriptive,
and  best  accommodated  bv  their  natural  tones  to  the  language


397

of  gesture,  which  require  a  perfect  contact  of  the  organs  of
speech,  at  the  point  of  articulation,  and  the  energetic  im-
pulse of  breath :  But  of  these,  one  only  can  be  ever  pro-
duced, in  any  one  part  of  the  mouth.  These  Λvere,  there-
fore, pi-imitives,  necessarily.

Ρ  was  a  labial  primitive ; — it  was  produced  by  a  contact
of  the  lips,  and  a  forcible  impulse  of  breath.

Γ  was  a  dental  primitive,  and  formed  by  a  contact  of
the  tip  of  the  tongue,  with  the  roots  of  the  upper  teeth.

^  may  be  called  sub-cìentaì°  formeahy  the  act  of  pressing
the  lower  teeth  Λvith  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  so  forcibly,as  to
bend  its  surface  almost  into  contact  Λνΐίΐι  the  upper  gums.

'jL,  pronounced  as  the  Welsh  hi,  may  be  named  a  gin-
gival. It  is  formed,  by  the  act  of  placing  the  tongue  evenly
against  the  upper  gums,  and  forcing  out  breath  on
both  sides.

'R,  deli\-ered  as  Greek  'P,  was  a  palatal  primitive.  It
is  uttered,  by  fixing  the  sides  of  the  tongue  firmly  against  the
sides  of  the  palate,  and  by  impelling  our  breath  so  forcibly,
as  to  make  the  tip  of  the  tongue  vibrate  against  the  upper  gums.

C,  or  K,  was  a  guttural  primitive,  formed  by  the  con-
tact of  the  tongue,  and  the  root  of  the  palate.

The  vocal,  and  the  articulate  primitives,  already  men-^
tloned,  our  first  parents  must  have  possessed,  in  the  first
years  of  their  existence.  Their  natural  efforts,  to  de-
scribe by  gesture,  would  necessarily  call  them  forth  into
action.


398

As  I  have  already  observed,  in  the  vowel,  familiarity
of  language  must  have  superseded  the  constant  necessity
of  energetic  exertion,  it  mu^t  have  been  socn  found
practicable,  to  articulate  intelligibly,  without  uniformly,
forcible  impulse  of  breath.  And  the  organs  of  speech,
placed  in  the  same  points  of  contact,  with  a  soft  breathing,
produce  a  duplicate  of  articulations.  Thus  Ρ  is  softened
into  B,  Τ  into  D,  S  into  Z,  'L  into  L,  'li  into  R,  and  C
into  G.

If  these  powers  are  to  be  regarded  as  less  ancient  thaa
the  others,  it  is  evident,  that  still  they  followed  them  at
no  great  interval.  They  are  'less  emphatical,  and  are  not
so  likely  to  have  accompanied  the  vehement  gestures  of
mankind,  in  their  ^rsí  efforts  to  describe  their  thoughts ;  but
still  they  are  expressions  of  nature,  and  fitted  admirably  to
convey  distinct  ideas.  These,  soft  articulations  may,
for  distinction,  be  denominated  sub-primitives.

From  these,  again,  arose  another  class  of  powers,  which
may  be  termed  refracted,  rather  than  nasal  sounds ;  be-
cause their  distinction,  amongst  themselves,  depends  upon
the  configuration  of  certain  parts  in  the  mouth.  Still  the
organs  of  speech  are  kept  in  contact,  and  in  their  proper
position ;  but  our  breath  is  refracted  in  its  course,  and
passes  through  the  nostrils.  Thus  Β  produces  M,  D  pro-
duces N,  and  G  produces  ng.  All  these  powers,  except,
perhaps,  ng,  have  their  appropriate  characters  in  the  oldest
alphabets.

But  the  indulgence  of  ease  in  expression  did  not  rest  here.
It  proceeded,  from  softening  the  sounds,  by  an  ease  of
breathing,  to  a  negligent  formation^  as  well  as  a  carclc«s
utterance  of  them


399

Men  disused  the  necessary  pains,  to  put  the  organs
of  speech  into  complete  contact,  at  the  point  of  ατ-
ticulation.  Some  portion  of  breath  escaped,  and  vibrated
in  the  interstice ;  a  kind  of  secondary  consonants,  or  semi'
pozccrs  were  produced.  Thus  Ρ  was  reduced  to  φ,  or  F;  Β
and  M,  to  V;  Τ  to  Θ  or  Th;  D  to  Dh;  C  to  χ  or  Ck,
guttural,  &c.

These,  which  I  would  call  secondary  consonants,  may  be
deemed  of  considerable  antiquity.  They  are  admitted,  ia
the  utterance  of  the  oldest  languages  that  now  remain,
if  our  mode  of  delivering  them  can  be  depended  upon ;  but,
their  introduction,  must  have  been  posterior  to  the  inven-
tion of  writing.  In  most  of  the  old  alphabets,  we  find,  that
some,  or  all  of  them,  want  their  appropriate  characters.
Not  one  of  them  is  acknowledged,  amongst  the  sixteen
ancient  letters  of  the  Greeks : — Θ,  φ,  and  X,  are  late  addi-
tions, to  the  alphabet  of  that  people.

As  the  Asiatics  took  the  lead,  in  the  augmentation  of
their  alphabets,  we  find  some  of  the  secondary  powers,  or
aspirates,  amongst  the  series  of  letters,  in  which  the  law
of  Moses  was  written ;  as,  D,  îD,  and  ì ;  but  before  the  in-
troduction of  points,  they  had  no  appropriate  character
for  the  sound  of  F  or  PA,  Bh  or  F,  Dh,  &c.

If  the  MasordcB  mark  their  primitive  mute,  with  a  point,
and  if  they  distinguish  the  aspirate,  or  secondary  power,
by  the  simple  character,  this  can  prove  nothing.  The  old
letters  had  no  points  at  all.  The  new^  mode  of  discrimination
was  arbitrary;  or,  at  best,  could  only  resolve  itself  into  the
taste  of  a  corrupt  age.

The  change  of  primitive  articulations  by  the  consonants


400

nitherto  rertiarkcd,  had  their  use,  in  supplying  copious  ina-
terials,  for  the  construction  of  language,  and  in  afl'ording  an
opportunit}•,  for  the  discrimination  of  terms.  As  the  se-
condary powers  were  easily  referable  to  their  primitives,  no
confusion  could  arise  from  their  use.

But  the  love  of  ease  is  too  prone  to  degenerate  into
vicious  indolence.  The  organs  of  speech,  were  suffered,
occasionally,  to  hang  back,  so  far  from  the  point  of  con-
tact, that  they  could  no  longer  vibrate  a  distinct  intimation
of  the  intended  power.  Only  a  kind  of  obscurely  vocal,  or
liquid  sound  was  produced ;  or  breath  escaped,  either  in  total
silence,  or  with  a  mere  aspiration.  Thus,  in  pronouncing
B,  or  M,  the  lips  are  brouglit  into  complete  contact.  If
the  contact  be  imperfect,  these  powers  change  to  F:  if  the
lips  rest  further  apart,  these  powers  vanish,  in  the  obscure
U,  which  is  not  heaçd,  when  mixed  with  other  sounds,  in
rapid  utterance.

Let  us  proceed,  in  like  manner,  with  the  other  articu-
lations, but  still  preserving  a  due  stress  of  breathing;  it  will
be  found  that  Ρ  first  changes  into  jF,  and  then  //,■  Τ  into
Th,  and  //;  D  into  Dh,  and  a  soft  breathing;  Ν  into  a
soft  breathing;  S  into  Sh,  and  Η ;  Ζ  into  Zh  (hke  S  in  mea-
sure) and  into  a  soft  breathing;  'Ji  into  //;  Λ  into  a  soft
breathing;  'h  into  //;  L  into  a  soft  breatlting;  C  into  Ch
or  X,  and  into  11;  G  into  Gh,  and  Y,  and  then  into  a  soft,
breatiiing.

This  careless  mode  of  utterance,  which  may  be  called  the
eolation  of  sounds,  has  occasioned  confusion  of  elemen-
tary powers,  which  ought  uniformly  to  be  distinct;  as  the
obscure  V,  for  β  and  M,  and  Υ  for  G.  It  has  also  made
the  aspirate  //,  a  common  representative  of  several  articu-


401

latlons,  and  has  roiulcred  others  totally  silent.  Hence,
many  letters,  in  all  the  hviug  dialects,  which  formerly  were
pronounced,  as  well  as  written,  liave  now  lost  their  power.
Sucli  letters,  orthography  often  rejects,  as  expletive,  und  su-
perfluous, to  the  detriment  of  etymology.

The  reduction  of  the  consonants  to  a  mere  Ibreathing,
whether  soft,  or  aspirate,  may  be  termed  an  cianesctncc  of
the  power.  It  is  a  disease,  which  particularly  affects  the
language  of  a  people  during  their  descent  into  the  vale  of
savage  life,  in  which  they  daily  find  less  occasion  for  co-
pious expressions,  for  neatness,  auU  for  precision  of  speech,.


c  c


402


Tlie  following  scheme  presents  a  general  view  of
primitive  articulations,  with  inflections,  and  changes,  above
enmnerated.


•i

■  2

ο

Ί

0C

•2

g

Labial    ...   rJ
Dental    ...   Τ 3
'■>ub-dental   .    S^
Gingival.  .  .  'L)
Palatal  .  .  .'KJ
Guttural   .  .   C\

F  .  .
V  .  .

iTh

2Dh

Sh  .
4  Ζ  h

u.  .

Β  .  .  .
D  .  .  .

3Z  .  .

Μ    .

Ν.  .

L  .  .  .

R  .  .  .

Chx
5Gh

γ   .

G  .  .  .

Ng.

1.  As   in  Jiing.     2.  As  th,  in  ί/<αί.     3.  As  S,  in  rfösoíî,
4.  As  S,  in  measure.     5.  JNorthumbrian  Hurl.


403

Thus,  we  find  an  uniform  progress,  from  strength,  and
energy,  to  softness,  and  tenuity  of  sound,  and,  from  distinct
precision,  to  indolent  obscurity.  Men  being  determined
not  to  take  too  much  pains  to  speak,  contracted  a  habit  of
not  taking  sufficient  pains  to  speak  distinctly.  TI10
indulgence  of  ease,  leads  naturally  to  listless  indolence^
till  it  ends  in  slovenly  negligence.

Τον  the  satisfaction  of  those  who  have  not  considered  this
topic,  it  may  not  be  improper  to  add  some  proofs,  that
changes  like  these  have  actually  taken  place,  in  the  manner
here  described.

In  the  Cambre-British,  there  are  several  mutations  of
the  letters,  which  are  perfectly  regular,  tjiroughout  the  whole
of  the  language.  They  have  been  reduced  into  a  system^
from  remote  antiquity;  good  writers,  and  speakers,  make  no
deviation  from  them,  for  the  perspicuity  of  speech  de-
pends upon  a  due  regard  to  them,  and  they  all  follow  the
order  I  have  delineated.

A  changes  into  E,  Ei,  and  Υ ;  JTinto  I,  Ei,  Y;  0  into
Y;  W  (the  broad  U)  into  U  (γ)  and  Υ ;  Ρ  into  F,  ili,  B;
Β  into  ill,  V ;  D  into  N,  Dk ;  C  into  G,  Ch ;  G  into
Ng,  and  a  soft  breathing  ;  'X  into  L;  'R  into  R;  and  T.
into  Th,  Nh,  and  D.

All  these  changes  are  constantly  recognised  by  the  usage,
and  grammar  of  this  one  Celtic  dialect;  and,  if  the  col^
lateral  dialects  be  compared  with  each  other,  we  shall
find  the  mutations  extend,  as  far  as  the  length  of  the
preceding  scale.

In  the  Irish  language,  Ρ  is  mutable  into  Ph  ,•  Γ  into
c  c  2


404

Th  ;  D  into  Dh  ;  S  into  Sh ;  C  into  Ch  ;  and  G  into  Gh  :
and,  according  to  the  mode  of  pronouncing  them  at  pre-
sent, these  derivative  secondary  powers  for  the  most  part
have  degenerated,  either  into  simple  aspiration, — an  ob-
scure   Y, — or    total  silence.

The  old  Celtic  'Lam,  a  hand — is,  in  Irish,  pronounced
Lav,  and  in  IVehh,  *Law.  *Lainiii,  a  blade,  is,  in  JVelsh,
*Lavin,  in  Irish,  La'nn.  Aman,  or  Amon,  a  river,  in
Irish,  is  pronounced  Avon  ;  in  \^'elsh,  ulvon  ;  in  Cornish,
Aiion;  and  in  ]Manks,  A'oji.

The  same  observations  may  be  abundantly  exemplified,
by  the  result  of  comparing  the  oral,  and  written  languages,
in  most  countries,  especially,  accompanied  by  recourse  to
the  old  orthographies.

Another  irregularity  οι  oral  lan,c:uage,  which  has  often
affected  orthography,  maybe  \.Qnnca  cont  raction,  or  the  act
of  compounding  two  elementary  sounds  into  one.  in
this  kind  of  anomaly,  the  organs  of  speech  are  not  pro-
perly adjusted,  so  as  to  utter  the  tv.o  elementary  sounds,  in
succession^  but  are  placed  in  some  intermediate  situation,
Avhich  produces  a  power,  partaking  of  both.  This  has  fre-
quently happened,  in  the  vowels,  which,  at  first,  Avere  all
distinct  in  their  sound,  and  belonged  exclusively  to  their  dif-
ferent syllables.  When  contracted  into  diphthongs,  one
(or  both)  of  them,  loses  generally  something  of  its  proper
sound;  or  else  they  are  both  uttered  as  one  power,  dif-
ííîrcnt  from  that  of  their  primary  effect.

Thus  ai,  were  contracted  into  an  open  and  broad  c,  some-
what like  the  English  a,  in  îìianc  :  This  contraction,  the
liomain  frequently  represented  by  a  single  c,  and  the  Greeks,


40;


by  τ..  That  this  was  the  geiiuinc  power  of  r,  appears,  by
their  mode  of  spelling  the  sound  uttered  by  their  bleating
sheep — which  is  Βί ;  for,  I  presume,  it  will  be  f^rant-d,  tliat
sheep  speak  their  Grc<k  at  this  day,  just  as  they  did  two
thousand  years  ago.

The  long  i  of  the  Romam,  except  where  it  is  lohg  by
position,  is  generally  a  contraction  of  f/.  Qui  is  Quei ;
and  Firtuti,  Virtutei,  on  the  sarcophagus  of  C.  L.  Scipio
Barhatus.  Si  Λν»8  anciently  Sci ;  Site,  Scivf ;  Captivi,
Capteivei,  Sec.

This  contraction  is,  therefore,  pronounced,  by  the  En-
gìiüh,  more  accurately   than  by  the  Italians,  and  French,

SD,  or  DS,  have  been  thus  contracted,  by  neglecting
to  put  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  successively,  in  contact  with
the  oppcr,  and  lower  teeth,  and  suffering  it  to  rest  in  tlie
intermediate  space,  which,  together  with  a  soft  breathing
of  D,  produces  a  sound  not  unlike  Z,

In  like  manner,  Sf,  of  T*•,  were  contracted  into  a
power,  approacliing  to  S,  hard,  and  strong,  or  Ss,  but  some-
what more  lisping,  and  obácure.

This  contraction,  was>  perhaps,  what  the  Hebrews  ex-
pressed by  their  y.  •.

Such  a  method  of  contracting  the  elements  of  language,
hus  produced  confusion.  Such  composite  powers  fre-
quently want  their  appropriate  characters.  Hence,  the
necessity  of  using  the  symbols  οι  pure  sounds,  occasionally,
to  represent  something  different  from  what  they  were  de-
t^igned,  originally,  to  denote.


406

Those  which  1  have  now  remarked,  arc,  perhaps,  the
chief  accidents  which  have  aft'ected  the  delivery,  and
orthography  of  primitive,  or  simple  terms..  They  have
altered  the  elementary  sounds  of  many  terms,  and,  conse-
quently, the  letters,  or  symbols  of  those  sounds  :  for,  or-
thography too  often  connives  at  oral  delinquency.

These  changes  in  language,  orally  delivered,  and  written,
may  present  great  obstacles  to  the  complete  analysis  of
original  words,  and  the  discovery  of  their  natural  ex-
pression.

But,  it  does  not  follow,  that,  because  there  are  diffi-
culties, nothing  should  be  attempted,  or  that,  because  there
are  such  anomalies,  no  regularity  can  be  ever  traced.  Let
US  onlj'  find  the  direction  of  the  current,  however  devious
the  channel,  it  Avill  furnish  a  clue  for  the  discovery  of  its
own  source.

In  this  investigation,  the  following  observations  may  be
of  use.

The  first  principles  of  a  language  are  to  be  examined  in
its  most  natural,  and  simple  terms ;  from  which  terms,  all
declinable  terminations  are  to  be  removed.

In  order  to  express  distinctly  the  indefinite  variety  of
ideas,  gradually  unfolded  by  the  social  progress,  it  was
found  expedient,  in  early  periods,  to  combine  with
a  leading  term,  some  other,  of  an  equally  simple  na-
ture, and  thus  to  extend,  qualify,  divcrsily,  or  confine  tlie

meaning,

«

These  adventitious  terms  arc  now  found,  in  the  shape  of


407

initial,  οΐβηαΐ  Utters,  adhering  so  closely  to  their  princi-•
pals,  that  generally  they  have  been  regarded  as  inseparable
parts.

By  analogical  comparison^  however,  it  may  be  discover-
ed, that  tlie  same  terms,  with  diflerent  initial,  or  β  lud  let-
ters, still  convey  similar  ideas ;  and  that  the  initials  had,
originally,  the  force  of  articles,  prepositions,  or  adverbs,
and  ύΛββηαΙ  letters,  that  of  terminutive  nouns,  adjectives,
participles.  Sec.  This  being  recollected,  it  will  be  evident,
that  any  individual  people,  or  different  nations,  may  have
compounded  their  terms  variously,  or  have  used  very  diflerent
preβxes,  insertions,  and  βίΐαΐ  letters,  yet,  may  not  be
chargeable,  with  a  total  confusion  of  primitive  terms.


408


Sect.  IV.     On  the  names,  and  natural  expressions  of  the
voueh.

Λ,  NOW  proceed  to  explain  the  several  names  of  the  let-
ters^ aiul  to  investigate  their  force  and  import,  in  the  for-
mation of  language.     Λη^ί  first  of  the  Vozicls,


1.  Prirnitive  poiccr.      As    lla,    in    hufy    or   as   a,    in

father.

Í,  Mechanical  formation.  This  power  is  uttered,  by
opening  the  hps,  and  tlie  interior  part  of  tlie  mouth,  mo-
derately, and  evenly,  and  breathing  firmly,  freely,  and
steadily,  from  the  larxjnx,  whilst  the  tongue  rests,  in  its
natural  situation,  at  the  bottom  of  the  mouth.

3.  By  this  oral  gesture,  and  this  open,  uninterrupted sounâ,
men  may  be  conceived,  naturally,  and  spontaneously,  to
have  cxjjrcssed  the  ideas  of  a  tendency  forzvard$ — positive
continuance,  in  a  uniform  state,  whether  of  motion,  of  ac-
tion, or  of  rest.

4.  Us  name,  in  the  Druidical  alphabet,  and  its  force,
in  the  structure  of  the  Celtic  language.

Tlie  specific  name  of  this  letter,  is,  simply,  the  repetition
of  its  power,  J ;  but  this  sound,  in  the  Celtic  languagts
-«.»n-titutcs  a  complete  and  characteristical  term,  conveying


409

the  general  idea  of  proceeding,  going  forth,  tending  for-
îiHirds — a  positive  agency,  or  state;  as  appears,  by  the
following  appropriations.

Welsh,  A,  will  go,  or  proceed  forth.  It  must  be  re-
membered, that,  in  this  dialect,  the  third  person,  future,
is  the  root  of  the  verb.  This  is  also  the  case,  in  the  Cor-
nish, where  A  has  the  same  meaning;  as.  Mi/  a,  J  icill go;
Ty  a,  thou  rcilt  go.

In  Irish,  A  is  a  substantive,  with  the  following  appro-
priations: A,  a.  car,  or  chariot;  ά  promo  η  tori/;  ahi7l;  an
ascent. — What  goes,  proceeds,  or  tends  forwards,  or  vp~
Zi>ards;  for,  in  most  languages,  the  ideas  oi' ascending,  and
of  heìn^  conspicuous,  are  connected  with  those  οι  proceed-
ing, and  standing  forth-,  so,  on  the  contrary,  terms  which
imply  a  retrograde  motion,  or  a  negative  tendency,  are,  also,
frequently  used,  to  signify  descent,  concealment,  or  oh-
scuriti/.

A  has  many  other  several  meanings,  but  all  of  them  <//-
rect  and  positive.  When  placed  between  the  nominative^
case^  and  the  verb,  in  either  of  the  Celtic  dialects,  it  has
the  force  of  the  jjersowa/  and  relative  pronouns  combined,
as  Mi  a  av,  "  I  am  he  who  will  proceed."  After  the  verb,
it  has  the  same  force,  in  the  objective  case,  Gwnav  a
wnelwyv,  "  I  will  do  that  which  I  will  do."  In  this  po-
sition, it  also  points  out  the  instrument,  or  cause;  as,
Lladdwyd  a  chleddyv,  "  He  was  killed  zcith  a  sword."  In
Welsh,  A  is  u  conjunction,  and,  also,  both;  and,  in  Irish,
a  demonstrative  article — still  conveying  a  positive,  and  a
direct  meaning.

5.  In  the  Latin  and  Greek  languages,  the  same  principle


410

is  traced.  This  element  has,  evidently,  a  similar  force,  in
some  of  their  mo&t  primitive  terms,  to  that  which  has  been
remarked  in  Celtic.

Thus  ji-io,  I  affirm,  or  declare.

A-e»,  Always, forever,  continually.

Α-ω,  I  breathe  forth ;  I  speak,  or  declare.

By  the  admission  of  different  initials,  each  of  which  will
be  shewn  hereafter,  to  have  its  appropriate  meaning,  this
verb  forms  several  compounds,  which  are  generally  ranked
amongst  primitives.  Tliougli  modified,  agreeably  to  the
nature  of  their  several  initials,  they  all  convey  the  leading
idea  of  issiäììg,  ox  putting  forthj  ix  direct  BXiá  positive  ten-
dency ;  as,

B-ct<j,  I  go,  OT  proceed  forth.

r-«w,  I  am  born,  I  come  forth;  I  bring  forth.,

E-ttft),  \  permit,  I  let  go.

Z-au,  I  live,  I  thrive,  I  go  on.

Θ-οώ),  I  gaze  forKards.

Κ-ccü},  I  kindle — cause  to  move  forth.

A-xu,  I  see,  X^esire — tend  forirurds»

U-aj,  I  earnestly  desire.


411

N-«y,  IJow— proceed  forth.

T'cu»,  whence  t«îw  (Eustath)  I  extend,

Φχω,  \shine  forth,  I  ajfirm^ox  declare.

6.  The  symboUcal  plant,  which  represented  this  powef,
was  the  fir-tree,  whose  remarkable  length  and  straitness,
are  eminently  characteristical  of  continuance,  uniformity,
a  direct  tendency,  ά  positive  state,  ov  proceeding.

The  Irish  name  of  this  tree,  and,  consequently,  of  the
letter,  is  Ailni,  or  Ailim,  which  may  be  thus  derived.  Ail,
he  hath  desired,  or  willed.  It  is  to  be  observed,  that,  in
this  dialect,  the  third  person  preterite,  is  the  root  of  the
verb.

Ail,  signifies  the  will,  desire,  or  disposition,  to  any  thing.;
also  Ά  prominent  point: — what  tends,  or  proceeds  forwards.
The  final  w,  or  im,  in  this,  and  many  other  words,  seems  to
be  from  the  old  Celtic  Em,  He, — that,  which, — equivalent
to  ος,  the  Greek  relative,  and  termination  of  nouns:  so  that
the  whole  name,  Ailim,  implies,  that  which  proceeds  forth,
or  tends  forwards.

Al,  in  old  Welsh,  signifies  will  go  or  proceed,  whence  the
subjunctive.  El,  still  in  use,  and  Em  is  written,  ev,  or  ef.
In  the  orthography  of  the  JVelsh  Bible,  the  name  would  be
Alef,  very  similar  to  that  of  the  Hebrew  x.

In  Cad  Goddaii,  the  allegorical  poem,  already  jnen-
tioned,  Taliesin  speaks  thus  of  tlie  fr-tTte,  the  symbol  of
tlîis  pov/er.


412

Fenidwydd,  ynghyntedd,
Cadeir  gyngwrysedd,
Ο  mi  gorcu  ardderchedd,
Gcr  bion  teyrnedd.

''  The  fir-tree,  in  the  porch,

"  In  the  seat  of  the  leader  of  enterprize^

*'  Where  he  acquired  renown,

"  In  the  presence  of  princes."

Here  the  bard  seats  this  power,  in  the  front  of  the  series,
end  recognises  his  office  as  a  leader.

7.  The  Greek  and  Hebrew  names  of  tills  letter  present
similar  ideas.

A>.ŷa  must  be  nearly  related  to  ax^d,  honour,  precedence  ;
Αλψω,  I  discover,  take  the  lead,  or  teach  a,  new  art;  AXfcc
ichite,  clear — what  stands  forth,  or  is  conspicuoust.

rpn,  Aleph,  to  direct,  guide,  teach;  a  director,  leader.
— Parkhurst.

As  the  Hcbrcus  were  careful  to  distinguish  this,  and  their
other  letters,  by  names  of  known,  and  of  definite  import,  it
may  be  presumed  that  they  were  aware  of  some  adequate
reason*  for  such  an  accurate  distinction.  The  most  obvious
reasoB  must  be,  that,  in  the  structure  of  their  language,  the•
power  of  each  letter  was  perceived  to  have  A  force,  ana-
logous to  the  meaning  of  the  name  assigned  to  it.  We
Tni^ht,  tiiexcibxe,  expect,  that  Alcph  had  something  of  a
positive,  demonstrative,  or  intensive  quality — that  it  tended
and  directed  forwards,  or  enhanced  the  meaning  of  the
powers,  with  whicti  it  stood  connected.    And  such  a  quality


41


Ο


is,  I  think,  very  perceptible,  in  several  terms  of  the  Hebrew
ianguage.

To  those  who  are  critically  acquainted  with  it,  I  recom-
mrnd  such  instances  as  the  following.

12  Bed,  alone,  single,  simple:

inx  Abed,  to  perish — to  be  simplified,  or  decomposed*

flja  Bene,  to  build :

nx  Abert,  a.  mason's  level;  a.  stone — animplement,OT  ma-
ierial  for  building — what  serves  to  carry  on  the  design.

îí'»  hh,  is,  arc;  Z\*^,  Aish,  ά  man,  άώ.  individual.     That

Zihich  is.

"DT  Deme,  to  think,  to  resemble  :

νΊΗ,  Adam,  Man :  he  uko  was  peculiarly  endowed  with
the  faculty  of  thinking — and  who  was  formed,  in  the  like»
ness,  ox  resemblance  of  his  maker.

Thus  ìK,  prefixed  to  nouns  or  verbs,  does  not  invert,  but
rather  enhances  and  confirms  the  idea,  expressed  by  the
other  elements,  having  the  meaning  of  the  preposition  to,
and  the  relative  he  zcko, — that  xchich,  Sec.

The  middle  Ν  conveys  the  idea  of  proceeding — or  tending
forwards;  as,  na  bed,  one,  oîily,  aloìie — the  idea  of  these
elements  is  rather  negative.

•!N3  Bad,  to  explain,  declare;  a  spring — ^by  the  intro-


414

auction  of  ii,  the  idea  becomes  positive,  and  tends  forwards
Ππ3  gee,  to  repair,  cure,  restore  to  its  former  state;  nw
Gae,toincreuse,  to  be  lifted  up;  proud,  mi  Dcde,iogo
softli/i  Ti)^!,  Dae,  to  fy  swiftly ;  a.  vulture.

31»  Jbeb,  to  cry  out,  with  terror,  or  abhorrence.

3K>  Jab,  to  desire  earnestlif,  to  long  for.

rÒ]L•'  Shle,  to  be  quiet,  free,  careless.

bü'^  S/ial,  to  ask,  require,  demand.

N.B.  In  expressing  the  Hebrezc  words  hy  Roman  letters^
I  follow  Parkhurst,  except  that  I  represent  Π  by  he,  or  eh,
not  by  a  simple  aspirate — c,  or  a,  is  sometimes  inserted,  to
assist  the  articulation.

E.

1.  As  Hea,  in  heat,  or  as  Έα,  in  bent.

1.  Let  this  power  be  uttered  immediately  after,  or  alter-
nately, with  an  open  A,  and  it  will  be  found,  that  all  the
organs  of  speech  retain  the  same  position,  except  that  your
tongue  is  now  bent  forcibly  towards  the  root  of  the  palate,
as  if  it  were  intended,  by  nature,  to  arrest,  or  check  thç
egress,  and  free  passage  of  breath.

3.  It  is,  therefore,  an  evident  contrast  of  tones,  and  of  sound.t,
to  these  above  intimated,  and  should  convey  ideas,  diame-
trically opposite.  Instead  of  representing  uniform,  and  free
continuance  οι  motion,  ox  agency,  ά  direct,  andpositive  state,
or  tendency;    it   seems^  naturally,    to   express    a   sudden


415

^kcck,  motion,  or   act   interrupted,  or  broken,   an  indirect,
pvrverttd,  or  negative  state,  or  tendency.

4.  Its  Bardic  name  is  E,  and  the  force  of  the  vowel,  in
the  Celtic  hmguage,  is  opposed  constantly  to  that  of  A,
In  Irish,  it  forms  an  adjective,  importing  negative  quahties
alone,  such  as  lean,  thin,  miserable.  In  the  same  dialect,  a
bird  is  named  E-an,  perhaps,  from  its  fitting,  unsteady
motion.  In  all  the  dialects,  it  implies  a  segregated  indivi-
dual, or  thing,  or  an  indefinite  agent,  such  as  it,  before
English  impersonals.  E,  prefixed,  in  every  instance,  unless
where  it  is  a  mutation  of  A,  is  a  complete  negative,  or  pri-
vative, and  perverts  the  meaning  of  the  simple  word;  as,
W.  Ang.  strait,  narrow,  confined,  whence  Anghcn,
distress,  need,  necessity;  Angau,  death,  (as,  in  Latin,
angor,  angulus.  Sec.)  but  E-ang,  wide,  spacious,  ample:
angu,  to  coop  up,  conjine ;  E-angu,  to  set  at  large:   Ovn,

fear;  E-ovn,  bold,  intrepid.  So  in  Irish,  Ce,  dark,  con-
cealed;  E-ce,  clear,  manifest:  Dearhh,  sure,  certain;
E-dearbh,  false,  wrong,  uncertain — and  so  on,  through  the
language.

It  may  hence  be  gathered,  that  primary  ideas,  expressed
by  E,  in  the  old  Celtic,  were  those  of  a  sudden  check,  an  in-
terrupted, or  broken  act,  an  indirect,  perverted  state,  or  ten^
dencif,  and,  therefore,  negation,  segregation,  ού  privation.

5.  The  same  appears  to  have  been  its  import,  in  the
formation  of  the  Latin  and  Greek  languages.  Hence,
Gr.  E.  adv.  of  complaining— rroe /  alas!  H.  adv.  of
doubting,  or  hesitation,  or,  either.  Lat.  E,  prep,  of  re-
moval, and  privative  particle,  as  in  e-nodus.  In  both  lan-
guages, E,  with  divers  initials,  retains  the  same  negative,
privative,  Άϊΐά  restrictive  ([UdWúesj  as  the   Latin  adv.   7ie,


416

and  the  Greek  n,  in  composition;  μη,  .idv,  prohibitory;
de,  re,  sc,  &c.  prirative,  or  segregative  particles.  E,  in
Latin,  is  sometimes  an  intensive  prefix;  as  in  e-durus;
but  here,  it  must  be  regarded  as  a  mutation  of  A.  Έμ,  in
Greek,  has  anomalous  meanings;  probably,  because,  in
the  confusion  of  vowels,  in  that  language,  it  is  put  for  other
verbs:  as,  for  Αω,  to  go  on,  to  be,  or  continue,  and  for  it-,
to  send  to,  or  place.  Eo-,  may  primarily  have  implied,  to
move,  remove,  take.

The  common,  and,  comparatively,  modern  Greek,  often
substitutes  £  or  m,  for  the  *  of  the  old  Doric ;  and,  on  the
contrary,  «  for  the  η  of  the  Doric;  η  or  e  of  the  Ionic,  and
»of  the  JEolic.  The  cause  of  this  anomaly,  was,  that,  in
the  rapidity  of  utterance,  «,  e,  and  v,  were  often  reduced  into
an  obscure  sound,  which  had  no  appropriate  character,  and
was,  therefore,  variously  represented.  However  this  may
have  been,  I  think,  general  analogy  will  warrant  the  con-
clusion, that  the  Greek  a.  privative,  was  a  substitution  for
c  or  r.  The  positive  element  a,  still  retains  its  intensive,  or
augmentative  force,  as  the  initial  of  several  words,  and  it  is
not  probable,  that  the  same  power  was  employed^  originally,
to  express  ideas  diametrically  opposite.

The  same  kind  of  substitution  has  gained  admittance  in
the  Welsh  language,  and,  I  think,  for  the  same  reason.
^Vc  now  use  the  negative  particles  ad,  am,  av,  an,  for  the
ed,  em,  en,  of  our  oldest  manuscripts.

The  Lat.  prep,  rr,  ah,  was  probably  Ap  or  acr-,  which  is
best  explained  by  the  (Jelticj  ap-o,  springhig-  from  or
out  of.

6,  The  si/mhol,  or  the  reprcsenintive  of  this  power,  was  the


417

asp,  or  white  poplar.  The  quivering  leaves  of  this  tree  very
aptly  represent  an  interrupted,  broken  motioii,  or  action —
■an  indirect,  perverted  state,  or  ttndencj/.

The  Irish  name  of  this  tree,  and  of  the  letter,  is  Eadha*
From  Ad,  one  and  the  same,  comes  Adh,  a  larv,  fclicitr/,
prosperity — what  is  positive  and  established — also.  Jit,  or
apt  to  do  atiy  thing.  By  prefixing  the  negative  E,  the  word
becomes  Eadh,  unestablished,  indirect,  unapt,  inconstant,
undetermined.

It  is  sometimes  called  Ebhadh,  which  amounts  to  the
same  thing.     Eb,  without  absque,  and  adh,  as  hefore.

Of  this  symbol,  Talicsin  allegorically  remarks.

Gwivvydd  gorthorad,
Gorthorysid  ynghad.

^'  The  asp  was  broken;

"  It  was  cut  οβ\  in  the  conflict."

Tills  is  an  evident  hint,  at  the  inefficient,  broken,  inter'
rnpted,  nature  of  this  element.

7.  The  Greek  E,  when  deprived  of  its  epithet,  retains
only  the  simple  name  of  the  Bardic,  and  Etruscan  letter.
Htä  seems  to  have  conveyed  an  idea  οι  privation,  frustration,
restriction,  2cc.  Restore  the  derivative  S,  to  its  pi-imative  τ,
and  υτα  must  be  a  strainer,  whence  r.^iu,  r,^^ξu,  to  strain
liquor — S-iui  per  colum  mitt  ere  Ετος,  in  v-afn,  comes  near  to
this  name.


D    d


418

It  has  already  been  observed,  that  the  primitive  vowels
were  strongly  aspirated,  and  that  this  aspiration,  has  adhered
so  closely  to  the  Hebrezc  vowels,  as  to  occasion  the  mistake
of  them  for  consonants:  yet,  I  think,  we  can  safely  pro-
nounce π  to  have  been  originally  a  symbol  of  the  power,
I'],  He,  or  Heh.  And  the  name  it  bears  seems  to  imply,
that  it  was  acknowledged  to  have  the  same  general  force,  in
the  structure  of  the  oriental  tongues,  Λvh^ch  it  discovers,  in
those  of  Europe.

nn  Htth,  terror,  dread,  aversion.

r\r.n  Hcthe,  to  take  azcay,  remove,  hum,  dissolve.

ΠΓιΠ  Iletheth,  to  break,  frighten,  discourage,  dcscefîd.

And  as  the  force  of  N,  in  Hebrew  Avords,  corresponds  to
the  import  of  its  name,  so  does  that  of  Π,  in  an  eminent
and  peculiar  degree.  As  an  initial,  it  is  an  absolute  nega-
tive, or  privative.  It  perverts  the  general  import  of  the
elements,  with  which  it  is  connected  ;  changes  positive  ideas
into  negative,  and  negative  into  positive.  1  offer  the  follo\v•
ing  examples.

p3  Beq,  to  lay  waste,  empty ;
pnn  Hebeq,  to  fold,  embrace,

ΊΙ  Ber,  to  separate,  cleanse,  char  out ;
ΊΏΠ  Heber,  to  associate,  join.

rn  Bash,  to  fade, he  abashed,  neglect;
■Ζ'2Π  Hebash,  to  bind,  gird,  heal,  govern.


419

*):í  Ger,  to  remove, pluck  azcat/ ;

^jrr  Heger,  to  gird,  straigthai ;  a  girdle.

pf  Zeq,  to  7nelt,  dissolve,  separate ;
prn  Hezeq,  to  lay  hold,  be  strong.

ntl'D  Peshe,  to   spread,  diý'use  over ;
li'Sn  Hepesh,  to  strip j  divest.

131  Rab,  to  multiply,  he  great ;

3"in  Hcrab,  to  ravage,  destroy,  dry  up,  Ziaste.

rò]íf  Shele,  tohe  free,  quiet,  secure ;
b'\Vn  Heshel,  to  defeat,  break,  fatigue.

π~ΐΐ1•  Sheve, to  witie,  seìid  forth;

ΊΓΠ  Hesher,  to  bind,  condense,  constipate

A  similar  contrast,  between  the  words  which  begin  witií
ΓΤ,  and  those  which  liave  not  that  letter,  may  be  regularly
observed,  throughout  the  language.  The  negative,  or  pri-
vative import  of  Π  is  perceptible,  though,  perhapí,  not  so
invariabh'  and  obviously,  in  other  situations  j  as^

rÒJ,  Bele,  to  jnix,  mingle;
brin  Belli,  to  nauseate,  retch.

Π31  Bene,  to  build,  compose ;

jnn  Belin,  to  try,  examine,  prove,  take  apart.

n:i  Ge,  to  heal,  close;

m  Geh,  to  break,  burst  forth.


D  d£


420

5o,  in  the  third  order.

Π3Ϊ  Zone,  to  incircle,  unfold,  gird  round;
Π21  Zeneb,  to  cast  off,  remove,  put  atvay.

It  is  clear,  then,  that  this  letter  has,  in  the  Ilehreiv  lan-
guage, a  discriminate  force,  which  is  clearly  marked  by  its
name,  and  that,  in  all  respects,  it  is  analogous  to  the
Celtic  E.

Tiiis  furnishes  an  argument,  that  the  a  privative  of  the
Greeks,  as  was  intimated  above,  is,  in  fact,  a  sub  ;titutron
for  £  or  fi.

As  A  Λvas  regularly  mutable  into  Έ,  in  the  old  European
languages,  so,  I  think,  it  evident,  that,  the  Hebrcio  Π  was
intended,  as  a  mutation  of  n.

Κ  or  π  is  often  used  indifferently,  at  the  end  of  words;
as,  XD3  or  niDn,  Beta,  or  Bete,  to  speak,  ndt  or  πD^,  Deka,
or  Deke,  to  smite,  bruise,  n:dd  or  HDD,  Meta,  or  Mete
(chald)  to  come,  ΝΠΚ  or  nnx,  Atha  or  Athe,  to  come.

These  two  forms  could  not  have  been  coexistent  from  the
beginning.  One  of  them  must  be  regarded  as  a  mutation  of
the  other:  and  general  analogy  points  out  rr,  as  the  muta*
tion  of  N.

κ  or  π  final,  has  been  regarded  as  equivalent  to  the  re-
petition of  the  second  radical;  π  cannot,  therefore,  have
the  negative  quality  of  Π,  but  must  be  of  the  same  nature
as  X.

(t  has  the  force  of  that  power.     It  is  a  demonstrative


4âl

particle^  and,  as  an  initial,  it  confirms  the  meaning  of  the
other  elements ;  as,  11  Dek,  to  bruise ;  "fnn  Edek,  to  bruise,
crush.     HDD  Pckc,  and  -fDH  to  change,  overthrow.

Its  name  is  related  to  the  Chald.  adv.  κπ  Ea,  Lo,  Behold,
and  to  the  Heb.  personal,  κ>π  Eia,  he,  she,  that,  this,  both
which  may  be  referred  to  the  verb  Γ\*ΓΙ  Eie,  to  be,  to  come
to  jmss.

L•

I.  As  the  English  pronoun.  He,  or  ee,  in  7>ieet.

G.  In  uttering  this  tone,  or  sound,  the  tongue  is  thrust  for-
wards, till  it  rests  against  the  lower  teeth,  at  the  same  time,  it
closes  the  whole  interior  of  the  mouth,  except  a  confined
and  a  direct  passage  for  breath,  along  the  middle  of  the
palate.

3.  By  this  oral  gesture,  and  the  sound  it  produces,  might
be  naturally  described,  the  application  or  direction  of  a
thing,  to  kspropcr  object  or  place.  A  being,  or  becoming,,
appropriate  or  iiiternal — what  approaches,  is  applicable,
subservient,  inherent,  &c.

4.  The  Bards  named  this  letter,  by  the  mere  repetition  of
its  poΛver,  which,  in  Welsh,  implies  into,  to,  for,  towards,
•pertaining  to;  as,/  fordd,  into  a  road-;  I  ddyn,  to  or  for
a  man;  J  lawr,  towards  tha  flat  surface — downwards  j  Mae
/  7ni,  there  is  pertaining  (o  me^

When  used  without  an  external  object  of  direction,  it
refers  to  solf;  as  nid  av  i,  \  will  not  go,  as  to  myself;  mi
^dywedais  i,  I  said  myself


422

In  Irish,  I  signifies,  an  art  or  science — skill  or  knowledge,
that  is  appropriated  and  inherent,  and  applicable  to  its
proper  purpose;  an  island — that  isj  inttrnal,  or  encom-
jJassed  (ΐΆΐίά);  loic,  inward.

5.  The  same  force  of  this  power  appears  in  the  Greek  i•^^
whence  ηω  ana  irijjii,  to  send,  to  place ;  and  in  its  derivative,
m,  a  missile  weapon,  an  arrow,  or  a  spear,  which  is  directed
to  a  certain  object.  It  seems  to  have  the  same  meaning,
as  a  prefix;  as,  ι-αίττα;,  to  send  to,  shoot  at,  ι-αλλω,  to  seitd,  to
ííiìn  at.  But  what  more  decidedly  marks  its  force,  in  this
language,  is  the  circumstance  of  its  forming  the  termination
of  the  dative  case  singular,  in  all  the  various  declensions  of
substantives,  adjectives,  pronouns,  and  participles,  of  what-
ever gender :  and  its  returning  again,  in  the  same  case,  in
the  plural,  either  alone,  or  accompanied  by  the  emphatic
Ç,  or  V.  When  it  is  recollected,  that  the  termination  of
cases,  Avere  originally  separable  terms,  importing  relative
ideas,  it  must  appear,  that  the  framers  of  the  Greek  lan-
guage regarded  /,  in  the  same  light  that  our  Celta  did,  as
implying  an  appropriation,  application,  or  direction,  to  a
certain  object — into,  to,  for,  towards,  pertaining  to.  The
preceding  observation  may  be  extended  to  most  of  the
Latin  declensions.

6.  The  symbol  of  /was  xhe  yew  tree,  the  peculiar  use  of
which,  in  the  construction  of  the  bow,  sutliciently  cha-
racterizes the  force  and  the  import  of  this  element.  The
name  is  Idho,  perhaps  from  Id,  direct,  vpright,  Just —
ceilainty  and  precision.  Idh  implies  use,  fruition,  appro-
priation, and  Idho,  in  Welsh,  to  him,  to  or  for  it.

Of  this  symbolical  tree,  Taliciin  says^  in  the  allegorical
pocm^  quoted  above —


423

Gwithodi  gwrthodes,
Ereill  ο  tylles.
Pan  goreu  gormes,
Ym  mhlyinuwyd  macs,
G orwy thawg  G y w-wy dd .

'^  Disdaining  those  Λνΐιο  avoided  him,

And  transpiercing  others.

When  he  made  his  inroad.

In  the  strife  of  the  field.

Was  the  fiercely-impehing  yew."

7.  IwT«,  according  to  Htsych,  implies  a  prominent  point .
It  may  signify  direction  to  a  thing,  from  lu  to  send :  or
rather,  admitting  the  general  force  of  the  element,  let  us
prefix  it  to  «Sfa>,  anciently,  uraw,  and  we  shall  have  »«Taw,  to
push  forwards,  to  thnist  into,  exactly  ccuresponding  to  the
Celtic  idea,  and  almost  a  synonym  of  the  Hebrew  T,  or  m»
Id,  or  Ide,  to  ca%t,  or  shoot  at.  This  verb  also  implies,  to
praise,  to  love,  X.o  confess;  which  have  no  other  perceptible
affinity,  with  the  former  appropriations,  than  that  they
denote  actions,  peculiarly  directed  to  a  discriminate
ühject.

But  we  must  regard  n>.  Id,  a  hand,  as  the  Hebrew  repre-
sentative of  this  power ;  for,  in  the  Ethiopia  alphabet^  it  is
called  \iy,  Imen,  the  right  hand.

The  force  of  >,  in  the  Hebrew  language,  may  be  inferred
from  its  use,  in  forming  the  future,  or  approaching  tense  of
all  verbs — in  forming  appellative  and  proper  names,  where
it  denotes  the  application  or  inherenct/  oi'  a  certain  quality — ■
in  pointing  out  the  eflfect,  or  consequence  of  the  participle
active,  when  inserted  after  the  first  radical,  as  from  iD-^


424

Riieh,  brcathÌ7ìg,n*'^  Odour  or  exhalation: — In  importing
the  effect,  or  consequence  of  the  participle  passive,  when
inserted  after  the  second  radical ;  as  from  '^\^)ip  Ketsur,  cut
down,  n>îíp  Ketsir,  harvest;  and  from  its  heing  the  cha-
racteristic of  tlic  conjugation  Iliphii,  Λvhich  imports  to
cause  to  do,  or  implies  an  especial  direction,  or  application
of  the  agent,  or  subject,  to  the  action  or  intent  of  the
verb.

O.

1.  As  Ho,  in  hold,  or  as  o,  in  go.

C.  In  uttering  this  power,  alternately  with  the  preceding,
it  may  be  obsened,  that  the  organs  of  speech  entirely  re-
verse their  position.  The  tongue  which,  in  pronouncing
ee,  advanced  to  the  teeth,  almost  closed  up  the  mouth,  ant)
confined  the  breath  to  a  direct  and  narrow  passage,  is  now
retracted,  retires  from  the  palate,  and  leaves  the  way  open.
The  lips,  at  the  same  time,  are  forcibly  projected  outwards;^
with  a  large  and  circular  opening.

The  whole  mouth  is  adjusted,  as  nature  itself  would  dis-
pose it,  for  the  act  of  vomiting,  or  casting  forth.

S.  By  this  gesture,  and  its  correspondent  sound,  an  idea>
diametrically  opposed  to  that  of  /,  or  ee,  would  be  sponta-
neously expressed — a  casting,  yielding,  ox  putting  forth —
an  cinanation,  or  projection,  from  a  certain  thing;  instead  of
application,  direction,  or  relation,  to  a  peculiar  object.

4.  The  porc-c;•  of  this  letter,  which  constitutes  its  Bardic
name,  has  appropriations  in  the  Celtic,  exactly  contrasted
to  those  of  /,•  as,  IV,  I,  to,  for,  towards,  into,  pertaining


425

to;  Ο,  in  all  the  dialects  of ,  from,  out  of  nsulting  from.
Irish,  I,  internal  skill,  or  knowledge ;  lozu,flat,  imvard — O,
an  auricle,  or  ear,  an  event — what  projects,  proceeds,  or
emanates  from.  I-ar,  the  zcest,  in-going  {o{  the  sun)  O-ary
the  east,  out-going;  also,  a  voice,  ej'usioìioî  soimd.

These  examples  may  suffice,  to  ascertain  the  fact,  that  o,
in  the  Celtic,  expresses  the  general  idea  of  casting,  afield-
ing,  or  putting  forth — emanation  or  projection  from  a
thing.

5.  In  the  same  light,  this  power  seems  to  have  been  re-
garded, by  the  first  framers  of  the  Latin  and  Greek  lan-
guages.    I  give  the  following  examples.

0-nien,  properly,  a  voice — effusion  of  sound — •

"  Voces  hominum  quaí  vocant  omina"  Cic,

O»  jJifi,  Ά  way, path;  voice,  singing,

0-ck)r,  ος-fAn,  ο^μν,  scent — issuing  from.

Πα,  the  border  of  a  garment — what  extends  from — -η-ας
θν•ας,  an  ear,  or  auricle — what  projects  or  extends  from —
whence,  Of-«T»oç,  Orph.  extreme,  ultimate,  ^-ov,  Oi-um,  an
egg, — what  is  yielded,  or  put  forth.

O-iç,  Ov-is,  a  sheep — what  goes  forth  from  the  fold.  This
meaning  of  the  word,  may  be  inferred,  from  its  synonym,
τΓ^οβατον,  ty.  ττξο  ct  £*»►«,  A  sheep,  in  Irish,  is  Oi,  in  the  old
Celtic,  it  seems  to  have  been  O,  Avhence  the  Welsh,  0-en,
the  Cornish  and  Armonianj  O-an,  and  the  Irish  u-an,  cor-


426

ruptly  for  O-an,  a  lamb_,  q.  d.  a  little  sheep.     An  and  en  are
diminutive  terminations,  sufficiently  known.

6.  This  power  was  represented  by  two  several  symbolical
plants;  and  consequently,  had  two  symbolical  names,  which
shews  that  the  Celtcz  varied  their  symbols,  for  local  con-
venience. At  the  same  time,  the  nature  of  these  symbols
indicates  their  scrupulous  adherence  to  the  original  idea.

The  most  general  symbol  was  the  furze.  The  sharp
prickles  of  this  plant  characterize  the  force  of  this  oral
sound,  as  they  are  not  determined  to  any  certain  direction,
but  diverge  and  radiate  every  Λvay,  from  the  stem.  Its
name  is  Onn,  or  Oin.  On,  and  Oin,  import  any  thing  Icntj
also,  gain  profit — what  is  yielded  forth,  what  emanates  or
results  from  any  thing.  Onn,  a  stone,  or  a  point  of  a
rock — saxum;  ahorse — what  projects,  or  springs  forth.

The  other  symbol  was  the  spindle  tree,  or  prick-aood.
Its  name  is  Oir,  which  also  signifies  an  issuing  forth,  as  in
Oir-thir,  the  east — the  land  of  the  out  going — Or  and  Oir,
imply  a  voice ;  an  extreme  border  or  edge — what  issues  or
projects  from.

Of  the  furze,  Taliesin,  says —

Eithin  ni  bu  vad,
Kr  hynny  gwcrinad.

'*  The  furze  did  not  do  well,
Nevertheless  let  it  spread  abroad.''

7.  Ihc  Greek  naraef^of  ο  and  n,  when  stript  of  theii


427

epithets,  f*tx;-o»  and  μιγ»,  amount  to  nothing  more  than  the
simple  Bardic  name  of  this  element.

The  Hcbreio  y  has  been  regarded  as  a  consonant,  repre-
senting the  sound  of  ng,  gu,  &c.  and  it  has  been  variously
rendered,  in  proper  names,  by  the  translators  of  the
Bible  into  Greek.  It  may  hence  be  conjectured,  that
it  generally  retained  a  strong  aspiration,  and  that  its  vocal
power  was  obscurely  uttered,  during  the  latter  ages  of  the
Jeuish  nation.

There  are,  however,  grammarians  who  acknowledge  it,
as  a  vowel,  equivalent  to  o,  and  this  opinion  is  confirmed,  by
its  place  in  the  alphabet,  and  by  the  frequent  representation
of  it,  in  proper  names,  by  that  letter.

Its  name  yÿ,  Oin,  which  implies  a  spring,  ov  fountain,
affords  a  stronger  proof  of  its  real  identity  with  the  Celtic
Ο :  for  no  object  an  nature  can  be  more  characteristical  of
casting,  yielding,  or  putting  forth — emanation,  or  projec-
tion. In  De  Gehelins  Monde  Primitif,  there  is  a
Phanician  inscription,  in  which  this  letter  seems  to  be  in-
tended, as  an  image  of  the  sun.  It  is  a  circle,  encompassed
with  rays.

In  order  to  discover  ilie  force  of  y,  in  the  structure  of
Hebreic  terms,  I  would  first  offer  a  íew  instances,  in  which
it  stands  contrasted  with  tl'ie  positive  N.

3S  Ab,  a  father,  author,  xcausc  ;

2ÿ  Ob,  a  cloud,  a  beam — oistruciion  jiut  forth.

*13X  Abed,  to  perish — cea^cfrom  exertion ;

"Dy  Obed,  to  serve,  till,  labow — pid  forth,  exertion.


4â8

The  same  contrast  returns  in,

büH  Amel,  io  perish,  languish;
buy  Omel^  to  labour,  exert.

»N  Ai,  an  Island — retired  place  ;
*ÿ  a  heap^-prominent.

rfpn  Aleph,  to  direct, guide,  teach;

^hÿ  Olep,  to  cover,  conceal — put  away,  direction»

3ΊΚ  Arb,  to  lie  in  ambush — meditate  injury,    to  viezc;
yiÿ  Orb,    to    become    surety — protect  from   injury;  ta
darken — remove  from  viezu.

The  contrast  between  Ν  and  ÿ,   in  these  and  similar  in-
stances, is  sufficiently  obvious.     The  former  leads  on  and
accompanies  the  force  of  the  other  elements,  whether  po-
sitive or  negative ;  the  latter  puts  azcay,puts  forth  from,  oi
,      out  of.

The  same  property  of  the  initial  y  may  be  perceived^
where  it  is  not  opposed  to  Ν  ;  as,

71133  Bete,  to  be  confident,  rash;
O2ÿ  Obet,  to  borrow  upon  pledge.

mn  Bere,  to  clea?ise, purify;

-\2ÿ  Oher,  to  pass  over,  die — clear  out — departs

pî  Zcq,  to  strain,  separate,  mdt;

pij/  Ozeq,  to  fence  round— Jiji^,  confnn.

ΠΐίΊ  Rctse,  to  accept,,  delight  in :  to  run ;

py  Orets,  to  dismay,  ierrij)/,  bruise,  break  to  pieces.


429

The  middle  y  is  generally  found  in  verbs,  which  imply  a
requiring  from,  a  putting  forth,  or  issuing  from,  or  out  of
excepting  \vhere  it  is  connected  with  powers,  which,  of
themselves,  import  such  actions ;  as,

nyn  Boe,  to  seek,  require  from;  to  boil  up — issue  forth,

îoyn  Bot,  to  kick.

πα  Bith,  a  house,  abode,  settlement:

r>yD  Both,  to  frighten,  disturb — drive  from.

1ÜÌ  Zok,  to  cut  off',  D^i  7.0m,  fury,  rage.

f]i'î  Zop,  to  rage,  to  he  furious.

nyû  Toe,  to  seduce — lead  from.

r\ÿ>  Joe,  to  remove,  sxcecp aziai/.

HDD  Kese,  to  include,  contain,  D>D  Kis,  a  bag ;
DyD  Kos,  to  be  enraged — incontinent.

"i^D  Sor,  to  be  violent,  tumultuous;  a  storm,  Zikirhiind,

nyi'  Tsoe,  to  spread,  stretch  out — nander.

•fÿÿ  ΎΒοά,  to  go, proceed,  march — depart.

jyjf  Tson,  to  remove — depart.

py2f  Tsoq,  to  cri/  aloud,  exclaim— put  forth  thc<voice^

«μ^η  Rop,  to  drop,  distil — run  out.


430

^ΝΠ Thab,  to  /ο ng  for;

ayn,  Thob,  to  loathe,  abominate.

mn  Thue,  to  mark,  limit ;
njrn  Thoc,  to  err,  go  astrai/.

As  there  are  more  frequent  dupUcates  of  the  third  radical
than  of  any  other,  it  might  be  conjectured,  that  it  is  less
essential,  in  fixing,  or  determining,  the  import  of  the  word ;
yet,  in  this  situation,  y,  of,  from,  out  of,  preserves  its  entire
force ;  as,

mj  Gede,  to  penetrate,  cut;
y7J,  to  cut  off,  cut  azvayfrom.

nu  Gue,  to  form  into  a  body,  'U  Cul,  a  nation;  J'lJi  Guo^
to  die,  expire — go  out.      ■

Π1Ϊ  Zue,  a  store-house,  granary — secure  place;
yir  Zuo,  to  move,  remove.

m>  Ige,  to  afflict,  grieve;  I'Ji»  Igo,  labour  exertion

πη^  Lethe,  ÎL'Îcardrobe,  a  repository ;
yrh  Letho,  to  pull  out,  break.

313  Nub,  to  blossom,  germinate ;

3733  Nebo,  to  gush  out,  be  ejected,  throi^n  o(j -

m3  Nue,  to  dwell;  yy.  Nuo,  to  zcuiider,  move.

r.D^  Ne^o,Xotri/, prove;  χϋί  ISe^OjtoJournrj/,  depart.

~D  PId,  calamity ;  IID  Pedo,  to  deliver,  extricate^


431

ΠΊΰ  Pie,  to  increase,  bear  fruit ;  »"^,0  Pii^  fruit;
y~iD  Pro,  to  make  bare,  strip  off".

nti'D  Peslie,  to  spread,  diffuse,  grow;
,  j^ITD.Pesho,  to  rebel,  transgress;  go  azaai/,

3p  Kab,  ameasure,  ilDp  Kabe,  a  receptacle;
y2p  Kabo,  to  pierce,  bereave,  rob,  spoiL

hr\p  Ke\,  to  assemble,  gather  together;
ybp  Kelo,  to  sling,  a  slinger,  carver,  graver — throning,
cutting  out.

Such  examples  regularly  occur,  to  the  end  of  the
alphabet.

U.

1.  As  Hoo,  in  hoof,  or  as  oo,  in  food.

2.  In  uttering  this  sound,  the  organs  of  speech  are  nearly
in  the  same  situation  as  they  were  in  o,  excepting  that  the
lips  are  not  so  forcibly  projected,  are  nearly  closed,  and
somewhat  raised  from  the  exterior  gums,  so  as  to  form  the
whole  mouth  into  a  complete  cavern,  with  a  low  entrance,
through  which  the  breath  reverberates,  with  a  hoUozj
sound.

3.  There  is,  therefore,  a  specific  difference  between  the
powers  of  ο  and  u.  The  former  expresses  an  emanation,  or
projection;  the  latter  naturally  describes  a  circiimfusion,
an  envelope,  or  loose  covering,  consequently  inside  holloK-
ness,  capacity,  οΐ penetrability.


452

4.  The  Bardic  name  is  ooy  qy  w,  which,  at  present,  con-
stitutes no  comp4ete  term,  in  the  Celtic  language.  I  must
here  remark,  that  there  seems  to  be  some  error,  in  the  con-
ception of  our  late  Bards,  respecting  this  vocal  power.
They  regard  it  not  as  a  primitive,  but  as  an  inflection  or
derivative  of  ο ;  yet  it  is  distinguished  in  their  alphabet,  by
a  simple  character,  the  general  criterion  of  their  radical
letters,  whilst  the  character  of  ο  is  an  evident  compound
of  their  a  and  broad  u ;  and  the  Welsh  language,  in  more
than  a  thousand  instances,  regularly  contracts  aw  into  o.
The  broad  ?/,  on  the  other  hand,  has  frequently  usurped  the
province  of  the  ancient  o,  to  the  detriment  of  etymology.
Notwithstanding  this  irregularity,  the  genuine  force  and
import  of  11  may  be  distinguished,  in  a  multitude  of  very
simple  terms.

Thus,  in  Welsh—

Hu,  ΆΠ  overlooker,  OY  guardian:  Hud,  illusion :  Hitdd,
a  covert,  shade:  Huv,  a  mantling,  or  covering:  Hug,  a
coat,  loose  gown:  Hid,  a  cover,  coverlet:  Hun,  a  βί  of
sleep,  slumber:  Hwv,  a  hood,  or  cozcl :  Hws,  a  covering,
housing,  horsecloth.

U,  or  W,  retains  its  peculiar  force,  with  difterent  initials
and  finals ;  as,  Bze,  an  overseer :  Bwl,  a  round,  hollow
body :  Bwr,  an  enclosure :  Bwt,  a  hole,  concavity :  Cw,
concavity :  Cicb,  concavitrj,  a  cup :  Cwch,  any  round  hollozv
vessel,  a  boat :  Cwd,  a  bag,  pouch :  Ciidd,  darkness,  gloom  :
Cwv,  rising  over,  cofnpressing:  Cwll,  the  stomach:  Czi;m,a,
hollow,  shelter:  (Jicr,  a  border,  nook:  Cut,  a  cot,  sti/:
Du,  black :  Divb,  viortar.,,  plaster.


433

Fu,  a  veiling  oier :  Fu-ant,  disguise  :  Fug,  delusion,  dis•'
guise,  ê<c.•  to  the  end  of  the  alphabet.

So,  in  Irish,  uagh,  a  grave,  den,  cave:  Um,  about,  sur-
rounding :   unilia,  a  cave,  a  holioic.

Corn.  U-ag,  JV.Gzcag,e)npfi/,  liollozc,  Sic.

These  words  possess  no  elementary  power,  in  common,  tut
Î/,  or  w,  yet  the  idea  ot"  circumfasion,  enveloping,  covering,
or  /fo/Zorr/a'Ss,  uuit'ormly  pervades  them  all.  It  conseciuently
appears,  that  such  are  the  general  expressions  of  this  hollow
sound,  in  the  Celtic  language.

5.  And  it  had  evidently  the  same  force,  in  the  Latin  and
Greek.  Hence  \ω,  to  rain,  to  eircumfuse,  or  sprinkle  over,
»uvu,  (from  a,  priv.  and'w)  to  dry,  or  pareh  up — to  deprive,
of  moisture ;  αψ-νω,  to  draw  uater,  &c.

Water  being  a  most  penetrable  substance,  and  verv  apt  by
its  nature,  to  overwhelm,  or  diffuse  itself  about  other  bodies,
lias  appropriated  many  terms  which,  primarily,  implied  c/;-
cnnifusion,  covering,  hollowness,  &c.  in  general;  as,

'νο-ωξ,'ν':-ος,'ν^-αζ  water ;  hu-mor,  s'ud-or,  n-dus,  (p.  iii(his)
5cc. 'tç  (ü-t;)  s'/is,  Ά  swine — delighting  in  mirt,  or  moisture.
Yet  several  compounds,  or  derivatives  of  \u,  import  an.
enveloping,  or  covering,  where  water  is  not  concerned ;  as,
€-νω,  to  stop  up,  to  cover :  y.-vu  to  carry  in  the  wojnb :  ^-vu,  to
Zi'ct,  soak,  drozcn;  q\so,  to  put  on>a  garment — go  under  any
envelope,  or  cover,  Avhence,  ιν-Ινω,  to  put  on,  απο-ουω,  ΐΛ-^νω,
to  put  off.  The  Latin  tongue  rejects  the  adventitious  d,
in  exuo,  exuviic.

EC


434

G.  The  symbol  of  this  poAvcr  was  the  Heath.  It  is  the
peculiar  property  of  this  plant  and  well  knoAvn/to  diffuse
itself,  over  the  surface  of  the  earth,  to  which  it  forms  a  loose
and  very  hollow  covering.  Its  name  is  Ur,  which  term  has
also  the  following  significations.  Noble,  generous — supe-
rior in  quality;  green,  verdure — which  spreads  over,  in-
vests the  trees  and  fields — mould,  earth — which  diffuses  it-
self over  the  surface — a  border,  or  brim — which  extends
round — mischief,  slaughter — which  overrchelms :  In  short,
any  thing  which  covers,  overwhelms,  or  spreads  over,  and
therefore,  zcater  is  included  aniongst  its  meanings,  as  ap-
pears from  the  folloAving  derivatives;  ur-ach,  a  nater  vessel,
bottle,  pail,  bucket.  Vir-neis,  a  furnace,  or  boiler;  uir-
treana,  pools  left  in  the  sand,  at  low  water.

W.  C.  A.  jy-icr,  icafer :  C.  nr-anach,  ά  frog,  q.  d.
vquatic.  In  the  Basque,  or  old  Cantabrian  tongue,  ura
IS  water;  but  the  term  seems  to  regard  this  element,  only  in
its  covering,  or  circumfusive  capacity;  for,  in  the  same
language,  uria,  is  a  surrounding  fence,  a  walled  city.
Ύξ,  ουξ  and  ur,  conveyed  tlie  same  general  meaning,  in  Greek
and  Latin,  as  appears  from  vξ-ov,Άswar?7ι;  nç-ioc,  a  honey-
comb; νξξ-ίς,  Ά  basket :  or,  with  the  diphthong  ov,  Λvhich  ge-
nerally represented  the  primaiy,  and  proper  power  of  //,
ονξ  0Ç,  ΐΐ prosperous  wind:  a  guard:  ουξ-ανος,  heaven,  the  air ;
the  roof  of  the  mouth — what  covers  over:  oyp-ov,  vrine,
zcater,  Lat.  ur-ina.  But  ur,  in  Latin,  as  in  Celtic,  sig-
nified zcater,  in  general.  Hence,  ur-ceus  a  pitcher,  pot
for  water:  Ur-na,  a  water  vessel;  a  measure  for  liquids:
ur-ino,  to  dive,  swim  under  water:  ur-ica  hurt  coming  to
corn  from  too  much  moisture.  These  last  words  intimate,
that  ur,  as  a  principle  of  the  Latin  tongue,  regards  Avater
as  a  circumfusion — enveloping,  or  covering.  C'r-o,  to  burn,
or  overwhelm  with  fire_,  comes  back  to  the  general  meaning


435

■  of  ur.  Tiguììum,  a  cottage,  is,  probably,  a  Celtic  word,
for  tigh,  in  Iristi,  is  a  house,  and  ur,  heath,  or  earth.  Aur-
um,goId—W.  Armor,  aur,  a-ur,  that  \vhich  covers,  ox  h
spread  over  the  surface.

This  precious  metal  may  have  been  so  named,  from  its
ancient  use  in  ovcriaijing.  Should  this  name  be  referred
rather  to  "nx,  Aur,  to  shine,  or  give  light,  it  amounts  to  the
same  thing — a  circumfusioii  of  raijs.

That  Xf-jccc  originally  meant  an  overlay,  will,  perhaps,  ap-
pear probable,  if  it  be  compared  with  certain  other  Greek,
and  Celtic,  terms;  as,  γ^(.ος,  χ^ονς,  χξως ;  W.  Croc7i;  Corn.
Crohan;  Arm.  Crochen;  I.  Croione,  a  skin,  or  iiide;  W.
Crŷs,  a  shirt;  (envelope;)  Arm.  Crês,  a  gartnent ;  I.
Creas,  Ά  girdle — χ^οα,  χξωι^α.,  colour,  an  outside  appearance.
These  words,  in  their  sound,  and  in  their  meanings  have  aa
obvious  affinity  with  each  other,  and  with  χ^υςος.  They  all
present  the  idea  of  compressing,  enveloping,  or  coverino-.

Of  the  heath,  which  is  the  symbol  of  u,  Tuliesin,  says,

Grûg  bu  ddyddaranadj
Dy  werin  swynad,
Hyd  gwỳr  erlyuiad.

^'  The  heath  was  a  defender  on  all  sides—
"  Thy  squadron  >vas  protected,
''  Till  pursuit  turned  aside."

7•  1,  Τ  an,  or  u,  in  Hehreu',   constitutes  α  particle,  sig-
nifying, a/ìí/, /or,  therefore,  with,  6cc.  including  and  con-
necting the  subjects  of  discourse.
Ε  e  íá


i36

])  ììu,  is  rendered  a  JiooJc,  the   capital  of  a  pillar — what
goes  round  ov  covers.

1  Oceupies  the  place  of  a  radieal,  only  in  the  middle  of
Hebrew  verbs;  but  in  this  situation,  it  seems  to  impress  the
same  general  idea  of  circumfusion,  passing  on  the  surface,
covering,  inside  koilowness,  Avhieh  we  have  remarked,  in  the
ancient  langua.2:es  of  Europe.  The  following  examples,
in  which  1  stands  before  2,  may  suffice  to  ascertain  this  fact,
and  furnishes  additional  proofs  that  the  Hehrezv  lan-
guage arose  from  principles,  more  simple  and  natural,  than
those  roots,  λυΙιϊοΙι  have  generally  been  the  last  resort  of
etymology;  and  that  these  principles  are  the  very  same
^vhichthe  Celtic  dialects,  so  eminently  claim.

m^î  Aub,  a  conjuror,  îì  ventriloquist — who  covers,  or  coii'
ceuh  his  mystery — a  bottle.

DO  Bub,  to  be  hollozc,  to  make  hollozv.

2U  Gub,  a  cistern,  cave,  scale  of  a  fish;  yridc ;  a  locust.

in  Dub,  a  bear,  arctus.  ülì  Zub,  tojiozc,  filth.

31Π  Ileub,  to  be  hid,  ii  debt  or,  guilty,  (Π  priv.)

DID  Tub,  good,  godh/ — of  any  superior  qualify.

D13  Nub,  to  blos§om,  germinate — cover  icithjlotccrs,  ^t.

^rŷ  Ouh,  to  cloud,  cover.

m^'  Shub,  and   Chald.  mn  Thub,  to  render,   return,  rt-
Siord,  reply — cover  a  former  action.


437

Ub,  in  the  Celtic,  however  connected,  gives  the  idea  of  a
covering,  overichelining,  circumfusive  thing.

λν.  ich,  violence,  oppression  :    B'  zcb-ach,  a  buglnar,  ter~
ri/ier:  Czcb,  a  cjip,  concavitij,  a  hut.

Dzcb,  mortar^  plaister :   Gzcb,  a  moan,  Ά  honozc  crj/,

Irish.     Bub-tadh,  thrcaining,  frozodng  upon.

Bubh-nch,  sli/,  crafti/,  zcily — covering  his  designs.

Cubh-ar, froth:  Cub-et,  scorn,  superciliousness.

Dubhy  black,  dark,  ink;  great — superior,

Dubh-ach,  atub  :  Dubh-ar,  a.  hook,  snare ;  spider.

Dub-la,  Ά  sheath,  a  case.

Fub-al,  a  tent :  Fubha,  a  scar,  incrustation,

Gubh-a,  mourning;  a  bottle.

Lub,  craft,  deceit,  subtlety;  ά plait,  ox  fold.

Rubh-a,   a  hurt,   wound:    Subh-a,  moisture,  juice,  sap,
Tub-ag,  a  tub,  vat.

Tubh-a,  a  shew,  appearance :  Tubhe,  thatch.

So,  in  Latin,  Bubo,  an  ozil — covering  itself

Cubo,  to  lie   along   or  upon:  Dabium,  Ά  doubt — obscurx


438

Titìi :  Nuhes,  a  cloud:  Niibo,  to  marry  a  man — to  veil:
Piibes—suber,  a  cork :  Tuber,  fungus,  excrescence :  Vhtr,
an  udder,  fruitfulncss.

I  offer  a  few  examples,  in  which  1^  stands  between  vari-
ous initials  and  finals.

:iV  Liig,  a  measure  of  liquids.

:nD  Sug,  Chald.  to  inclose,  force  round,

*T1D  Sud,  secret,  council,  compamj.

*71y  Tsud,  to  lie  in  zvait;  a  net.

-pii»  Shud,  to plaister  :  no  Lut,  to  cover,  hide.

r\y^  Shut,  to  go  about,  view  round,

ηΐΟ  Sale,  to  anoint,  cover :  "]1D  Puk,  pumt.

ην^»   Shuk,  to   hedge:    yi\D   Thuk,    covered,  zcichcdncss :
b)3  Kul,  to  measure,  contain.

bxi  Tsui,  to  shroud,  shade,  cover,

Vip  Kul,a  noise,  thunder.

b\O  Shul,  the  border,  ox  fringe  of  a  garmfnt.

DV  Jum,  day:  DÌ3  îùiai,  shnnber.

DILI  Pum,,  Chald.  a  mouth,  cavity :  \v  Jun^,  niirc,  mud.


439

\)D  Pun,  dubious:  rn  Cus,  a  covered  cup,  an  οκί.

y"i3  Xuo,  to  move,  zcander — 2)ass  over.

ηυ  Gup,  to  s/uit,  inclose — cover.

^^y  On^yioflij, flutter  ;  darkness;   ΰ.η  eyelid.

ηΐ2ί  Tsup,  to  inclose,  overspread,  overlaij,  overflozu}  corìi^
prehend i  scorn;  ά  lioneyconib.

f]lp  Kup,  10  surround,  encompass,  inclose.

fjVii'  Shup,  (chald)  to  hide,  to  cover.

\"iD  Muts,  husks,  chaff:  ^1D  Puts,  to  overfloic

"^Z'  Shuk,  to  overflozc ;  to  desire,  Sec.

When  due  allowance  has  been  made  for  the  diversities  of
the  meaning,  produced  by  the  force  of  the  initial,  and  final
letters,  it  mustbe  observed,  that  the  general  idea  of  circumfu-
sion,  icandering  over,  covering — or  the  relative  idea  of  inside
hollouness,  or  capacity,  presents  itself  in  every  one  of
these  examples,  which  admit  of  the  middle  i.  I,  therefore^
deem  that  element,  an  essential  part  of  the  terms,
though  it  be  often  dispensed  with,,  in  the  fomiing  the
verbs,  &c.

It  will  be  remarked,  that,  in  expressing  the  Hehrczo  words
by  Roman  characters,  I  constantly  give  the  same  power  to
each  letter,  without  regard  to  the  masoretic  points.  1  mean
to  enter  into  no  debate  respecting  them,  or  to  deny,
•that  they  convey  the  authentic  pronunciation  of  tlie  Jcics^


440

timing  certain  ages;  but_,  in  a  woik  of  this  kind,  which  en-
ters into  the  elementary  principles  of  language,  their  use  is
inadmissible.  The  Hebrezv  letters,  like  all  others,  must
originally  have  been  symbols  of  certain,  and  appropriate
sounds.  The  Jezcs  hav.e  preserved  the  ancient  orthography
of  their  sacred  records ;  but  the  tumultuary  circumstances
of  that  nation,  must  have  introduced  numberless  anomalies
and  corruptions  of  pronunciation,  whilst  they,  as  yet,  con-
tinued to  speak  Ilehrezc.  How  abundantly  must  those  ir-
iTgularities  have  been  multiplied  afterwards !

I  trust,  the  examples  I  have  adduced,  under  the  vowels,
will  suffice  to  prove — that  the  Ilebrezo  and  European  vowels,
which  I  have  classed  tog€ther>  were  originally  the  same,  as
to  their  main  force  and  rjj'ect.

That  the  orieritial  οχχά  iL^tropean  languages  arose  from'the
same  principles;  \vhio|i  principles  are  founded  in  nature —
and  that,  however  vocal  sounds  may  have  been  varied  by
dialects^  or  disregarded  by  philologists,  they  were  once
understood  to  impress  a  tone  upon  the  }neaning,  as  well  as.
upon  the  sound  of  the  words.


4-il


Sect.  V.     Of  the  iiamcs  of  the  comonant;^,  and  the.  natural
force  and  expression  of  their  respective  powers.

i  HIS  subject  I  shall  touch  briefly,  at  present,  as  it  is  my
intention,  to  subjoin  some  examples  of  the  force  of  the  con-^
sonants,  in  connection  with  the  several  vowels  respectively.


B.


This  articulation  is  formed,  by  an  easy  and  a  natural
opening  of  the  mouth,  without  any  foicible  impulse  of
breath,  or   protrusion  of  the  lips,    or  of  any    other  vocal


It  may,  therefore,  be  naturally  applied  to  express  the  idea
of  simple  j>erception — the  being  of  any  thing,  in  a
quiescent  state  or  condition,  and  hence  receive  the  following
appropriations. — Being,  to  be,  thing,  or  zihat  is,  condition,
or  state  of  being.

Its  name,  in  the  Bardic  alphabet,  is  Bi.  This  term,
in  iVelsh,  signifies,  tî;z7/  be;  in  Irish,  hath  been:  in  both
languages,  it  is  the  root  of  the  essential  verb,  to  be.

Bi,  seems  to  have  had  the  same  meanirig  in  the  formation
of  the  Greek  and  Laim tongues;  whence  B»-ow,  to  live,  or
exist:  Bf&ç,  life — existence;  sustenance,  or  means  of  being  ;
goods,  or  necessaries  of  life.

Lat.    Z>ÙO;tolive;    Bita,  life.     Bixit  and  Bita,   are


442

Still  found  in  Roman  inscriptions,  and  in  some  of  their
manuscripts,  for  vixit  and  vita.  The  Latin  ν  is  frequently
a  mutation  of  B.

The  symbol  of  this  power  was  the  Birch,  which  a  local
necessity  seems  to  have  substituted,  for  the  Palm.  Its
name,  in  Irish,  is  Beith,  which  implies,  also,  to  be,  being,
essence,  existence.

The  term  may  be  resolved  vatoBe — is — and  ite — similitude,
or  ith, — sustaining.  Perhaps  the  Birch  was  so  named,  from
the  circumstance  of  its  re-producing  its  species,  from  the
fibres  of  the  root.

The  characteristical  property,  which  entitled  it  to  re-
present the  power  of  B,  and  the  idea  of  existence,  was  not
considered,  by  the  British  Bards,  as  very  obvious ;  for
Taliesin  says —

Bcdw,  er  ei  vawr-vryd,
Bu  hwyr  gwisgyssyd;_
Nid  er  ei  lyvrder,
Namyn  cr  ei  vawredd.*

"  The  Birch,  notwithstanding  his  great  intent—^
It  was  long  ere  he  was  arrayed ;
Not  because  of  his  dullness.
But  because  of  his  greatness."

The  names  of  no,  Bith,  and  Βητχ,  are  similar  to  ihe
Celtic  Beiih,  in  their  orthography,  and,  perhaps,  in  their
primary  import.  The  force  of  n,  in  designing  a  limit,  or
inclosurc,  will  be  shewn  hereafter;  and,  therefore,  DO,  a
house,  ox  abode,  may  be  defined  a  limit,  ox  place  of  beiug.


443

or  existing.  Β»τα,  β»τλ,  or  Βήτα,  in  old  Greek,  may  have
been  the  same  as  Βίοτ»,  life,  and  yet  have  liad  a  retrospect  to
Bäíç,  or  Bcuru,  the  jja///i  branch.

C.

Pronounced  as  K,  or  as  C  in  come.

This  articulation  is  made,  by  fixing  tlie  root  of  the
tongue,  firmly,  against  the  root  of  the  palate,  so  as,  entirely,
to  fill,  and  close  up  the  interior  part  of  the  mouth,  till
breath  forces  its  way  with   strong  impulse.

It  has  already  been  shewn,  that  such  an  oral  gesture,  and
its  correspondent  sound,  attend  of  course  any  efforts  to
hold,  or  contain,  a  large  mass  with  both  arms,  and  also  to
catch,  reach,  or  touch  a  distant  object.

This  tone,  therefore,  is  not  limited  to  the  expression  of
one  simple  idea;  but  naturally  describes  a  holding,  contain-
ing, or  comprehending — a  reaching,  touching,  or  catching — •
attaining  to,  or  apprehending.

Its  name,  in  the  lots   of  Druidism  is  Ci  (Ki)

The  term,  in  Irish,  imports  to  perceive,  or  apprehend,  to
ue ;  to  lament,  or  feel  the  touch  of  Koe.

Ci-azi,  in  Jlelshy  is  to  perceive,  comprehend,  or  up-
prchend.

''  Rhyveddav  na  chi-awr."  Tal,

"  I  wonder  it  is  not  perceived f'


444

The  root  Ci,  then,  signifies,  zcill  perceive,  comprehend,
or  apprehend.  Hence,  in  Welsh,  Cornish,  and  Annorican,
a  dog,  is  called  Ci,  from  the  quickness  of  his  senses,  or
from  his  use  in  catching  and  holding.

The  symbol  of  this  power  was  the  Hazel,  a  tree  which
collects  its  fruit  into  clusters,  holds  it  in  a  deep  calix,  and
finally,  shuts  it  up,  in  an  impervious  case,  or  shelj.  Its
name,  in  Irish  and  Welsh,  is  Coll,  which,  in  the  former
dialect,  signifies  a  head,  also  the  end  of  a  thing;  hence,
coll  means  loss,  destruction — ending,  or  conclusion.  Co/,
in  IVelsh,  iignìües  ΐΐ projecting  body,  a  sharp  hillock,  or
peak;  ΐΐ promontory ;  ixstiug,ov  point.

But,  agreeably  to  the  genius  of  the  Celtic  language,  col,
or  coll,  may  be  regarded  as  mutations  of  cul,  or  ckII,
which  are  highly  characteristic  of  the  hazel,  and  of  the
import  of  this  elementary  sound.

I.  Cul,  custodi/;  a  chariot;  a  cover:  Culla,  Vl,  hood,  or
cover — W.  Cwll,  the  stomach — receiver  ;  also,  the  head,
whence  Czoccwll,  (Cwd-cwll)  a  cap,  or  bonnet,  q.  d.
he  a  dc  use.

Hebrew  b]J  Cul,  to  comprehend,  contain,  include.

Of  this  symbol,  Taliesin  pertinently  says —

CoUwydd,  b;;rnyssid
Eiryv  dy  argyfryd.

"  Hazel,  it  might  be  deemed.
Thy  comprehensions  are  numerouí'."'


445       •

The  name  of  Καττττα,  was,  probably,  equivalent  to  ν-χμητη,
a  btndi/ig  round,  an  inclosing,  or  to  κα/^ψα,  a  chest,  coffer,
box,  capsa.

xthad  a  similar  meaning :  %»»,  a  lurking  hole,  a  receptacle^
from  χίίϋ;  (p.  ^ífc,)  to  ho/d,  contain:  Eustath.  Nearly  allied
to  these,  and  to  each  other,  were  the  Caph  and  the  Koph  of
the  Hebrew :  H'DD  Caphe,  to  curve,  inffect,  whence  η3  Cap,
the  hollow  of  any  thing,  a  cup,  vessel  of  capacitij ;  pi.  D'DD
Caphim,  caves,  caverns,  receptacles.

ηΐρ  Kup,  to  surround,  encompass.

We  may,  then,  regard  C,  Q,  K,  X,  D  and  p,  as  originally
one  element,  expressing  the  general  ideas  of  containing,  or
comprehending,  and  toueliing,  attaining  to,  or  apjjreheiiding.


D.


The  articulation  of  this  letter,  before  a  vowel,  is  formed,
and  uttered,  by  closing  the  edges  of  the  tongue  to  the
upper  gums,  throughout  their  whole  extent,  and  suddenly
laying  it  open,  either  wholly  or  in  part,  according  to  the
nature  of  the  vowel.  Before  e  and  /,  only  the  tip  requires
to  be  removed ;  but  before  the  broad  vowels,  the  separation
must  be  complete.

In  describing,  by  gesture,  and  communicating  an  idea  of
expansion,  or  ui folding;  tlie  hands  are  brought  close  to-
gether, and  laid  flat,  and  then  suddenly  spread,  or  ex-
panded different  ways.  A  natural  aptitude,  to  express
ideas  by  the  voice,  would  spontancoush'  dispose  the  organs
of  speech^,  at  the  same  instant,    to  mimic  this  gesture,  the


446

necessary  consequence  of  whicli  would  be  the  utterance  of
the  power,  D,  accompanied  by  some  vocal  sound.

We  may,  therefore,  consider  this  power,  as  descriptive,
tiaturally,  of  expanding,  spreading,  unfolding,  laying  open,
distribution,  or  division.

Its  Bardic  name  is  Di,  which,  at  present,  is  used,  in  the
Welsh  language,  only  as  a  privative  prefix ;  as,  achaics,  a
cause,  di-achaws,  causeless — separate  from  a  cause  :  Achles,
succour,  di-achles,  unsuccoured — separate  from  succour,  &c.

Di  had  anciently  other  appropriations.  It  was  a  term  for
the  Deity,  instead  of  which  we  now  have  Dai,  the  disposer,
the  distributer.  Di,  also,  implied  day,  as  it  still  does,  in  the
Armorican.

Dia,  in  Irish,  signifies  God;  day — what  unfolds,  lays
open.  »"7,  Di,  in  Chaldaic,  signifies  the  Omnipotent,  as  it
also  does  in  Hebrezc,  with  the  relative  'O  prefixed.  It
was  therefore  an  epithet  of  the  Divine  Being,  in  the  early
ages.

The  symbol  of  D  was  the  expansive  oak.  Its  name  was-
Duir,  which  may  be  a  compound  of  Du,  spreading  over,
and  air,  he  arose.  This  derivation  is  confirmed  by  the
Welsh  Dzcijr,  a  rising  and  expanding — the  darciiing  of  light :
Dzci/re,  to  rise  into  vieic,  expand,  open,  unfold.  An  old
hard  says,  of  the  blade  of  corn —

*■'  Dcwr  egin  dici/reoedd  yn  das."

*'  The  vigorous  shoot  expansively  rose  into  a  pile."


447

Of  thlss3'mbol  Talicsin  speaks,  in  the  following  remark-
able terms —

Derw,  Buanawr,

Rhagddaw  cryneu  nev  a  Llawr:

Gelyn  glew — Dryssawr

Ei  enw,  ym  peullawr.

'*'  The  oak,  the  mover  !  ^

Before  him  heaven  ancl  eartli  would  tremble — ■
A  severe  foe. — The  door-guard
Is  his  name,   in  the  table  book."

We  may  here  observe,  that  the  Bard,  speaking  as  a
Druid,  describes  the  oak  as  the  supreme  Being.  Max.
Tyrius,  says,  that  the  old  Celtic,  worshipped  a  huge  oak  as
Jupiter — they  regarded  it,  as  a  symbol  of  the  Dieft/. —
Taliesin,  then,  delivers  the  genuine  doctrine  of  tlie  Druids.
But  he  is  nov;  treating  of  the  oak,  as  the  symbol  of  the
element  D :  the  same  term,  Di,  as  I  have  already  shewn,
was  the  name  of  the  Deiti/,  and  of  that  letter.  In  order
to  comprehend  his  meaning,  Λνΐιεη  he  says  its  naine  was  a
door,  or  door  guard,  we  must  recollect  that  D  v.as  anciently
distinguished  by  a  term,  which  also  signified  a  door,  or
any  board,  table,  or  open  surface.  Its  Hebreic  name,  rò"^
Daleth,  means  a  door,  and  its  character,  in  some  old
alphabets,  evidently  represents  a  door  or  portal.  See  Fry's
Pantograph,  p.  i6G,  &c.  Of  these  circumstances,  it  ap-
pears that  Taliesin  was  duly  aware.

The  Greek  name  Δέλτα  implies  a  board,  table,  or  open-
surface.  Hence  οίλτχξΜ,  ^ίλτιοι,  Wo?,  a  tablet,  a  table-book.
I  think  these  were  not  so  named  from  their  resemblance  of
the  character  δ,  as  some  etymologists  pretend,  but   from


448

tlieir  expansive  surfnce,  and  their  unfoìdìììg.  The  teiins
seem  to  be  related  to  in>.ou,  to  unfold,  declare,  make  known;
^■ηλος,  open,  known,  manifest.  This  conjecture  is  reinforced
by  the  Celtic  language,  Avhich  certainly  contains  many
Greek  primitives.

Irish,  Dail,  he  hath  opened,  unfolded,  given,  distributed,
divided:  Dailthe,  (part  of  the  same  verb)  unfolded,  di-
vided, dealt,  distributed.

Welsh,  Delltu  to  open,  split,  divide ;  make  into  ahingles,
flakes,  or  laths:  Dellt,  Lanima-,  fakes,  shingles,  split
hoards,  lattices,  lath.  These  words,  surelt/,  liave  no  re-
ference to  the  character  Δ.

Sclavon.  Djeliti,  to  divide;  Dil,  Ά  portion  ;
Diglien,  divided,  laid  open.

See  De  Gebelin,  Mojide  Prim.  V.  III.  IQó.

G.

Pronounced  as  in  Go.

The  mechanical  formation  of  this  power,  and  ift  natural
aptitude  to  describe  the  ideas  of  appetite,  a  grasp,  adhesion,
cohesion,  mutual  attachment,  compensation,  8cc.  have  al-
ready been  treated  of,  in  Sect.  1.

Its  Bardic  name  is  Gi  {y7)  which  implies  a  sinew,  or
tendon — the  cause  of  connection  and  cohesion  in  the
joints.

Its  symbol  was  the  Ivif,  a  plant  peculiarly  disposed  to
enibrnic,  and  adhere  to  the  tree,  bv  which  it    is   supported.


449

íis  a  compensation  for  tlie  favour.  The  Irish  name  is  Gortf
which  term  also  signifies  corn  in  the  car,  mutually  cohering
•- ^and  it  seems,  anciently,  to  have  had  the  same  meaning
in  Greek ;  for  the  plant,  rocTtl,  had  the  name  ςηχ,χνωοης,  from
its  reseynblance  to  an  ear  of  corn,  Gort  also  means  hunger,
or  appetite,  in  general:  Gortach,  eager,  greedy,  desirous;
a  grei/hound — so  named  from  his  eager  pursuit — whence  the
vertagus  of  the  Romans.

The  Greek  name,  Τα,αμ.»,  must  be  referred  to  y«//oc,  a
wedding,  reedlock — mutual  cohesion,  or  attachment.  Ta^iu)
is,  perhaps,  a  compound  of  γα,  certe  and  ^.^w,  vthementer,
cupio,  quaro.  If  so,  the  name  is  perfectly  synonymous
to  Gort.

The  Ilehreic  name  !?nj  Gimel,  signifies  a  camel,  no  unapt
symbol  ΟΪ mutual  attachment ; — but  the  term  implies  retriliw
tion,  or  compensation,  in  general.


This  power,  wliether  expressed,  as  in  English  words,  or
aspirated,  as  the  Welsh  LI,  is  formed  by  fixing  the  tip  of  the
tongue  against  the  upper  gums,  whilst  both  sides  of  it  hang
open,  suffering  the  air  to  be  jjoured  out,  and  equally  dispers-
ed, through  all  the  extremities  of  the  mouth.  Such  an  action
of  the  vocal  organs  naturally  accompanies  the  act  of  throzcing
open  the  hands,  and  the  arms,  to  describe  solution,  ejfusion,
eianescenc£,  open  space,  gliding,  softness,  smoothness,  levity.

The  Bardic  name  of  the  letter,  is  L,ii,  or  Li,  wiiich  term
conveys  the  ideas  above  specified  ;  as,  in  Welsh,  Lli,jlu.v,  or
food, stream — effusionof  that  which  is  fluid; — gliding  element
τ  f


450

"■Ί,ΙΊν  (Ui-av)  Άβοοά,  deluge,  Sec.  Llivo,  to  βοκ-,  ονετβο^;
also,  to  dye,  or  colour — give  an  external  hue :  Llliw,  colour;
whence  Liveo,  Livovj  Lividus,  &c.

Llyvn,  (Lli-min)  smooth,  sleek,  soft,  slippery,  plain:
Lly-u,  Lly-vu,  to  lick  with  the  tongue :  Llyn  (Ui-in)  liquor,
drink,  a  lake,  pool,  pond.  Annor.  Li-va,  to  dye,  tinge :
Li-ou,  colour.  Linva,  \.οβοτΰ :  Linvat,  inundation.  Irish,
Li,  the  sea,  zcater ;  colour:  Li-ach,  Ά  spoon — from  its  use.
lii-a,  Ά  stream,  βood:  Li-athram  (W.  Llithraw)  to  slide,
glide.  Lin,  a  pool;  flax — smooth  and  soft — Li-omb,  he
hath  fled,  polished,  made  smooth.

Li-on,  liquor,  fluid;  he  hsiúx  flowed:  Ligh,  he  hath
iicked,  &c.

Gr.  Ai-t^fiv,  a  port,  haven — smooth  water :  Αψν•ηΆ  pool,  qx
lake :  Μζοζ,  smooth,  sleek :  λί-αω,  λια^α•,  I  scatter,  mix.

Latin,  Li-aculum,  a  joiner's  pla7ie — the  smoother.

Li-bella,  a  line,  level:  (W.  Lliv.  I.  Liom"),  ο,βίε, polish;
Limo,  I  polish,  smooth.

Linum,Amv,  W.  Llin,  I.  Lin,  flax.

Liquo,  I  melt,  dissolve,  liquor,  a  liquid,  &c.

The  Romaîis  caWed  this  letter  El;  but  I  must  observe^
once  for  all,  that  the  initial  E,  in  the  names  of  their  semi-
vowels, is  a  mutation  of  A.  A  simple  negative,  ox  privative,
(which  Ej  is  found  to  have  been)  could  not,  when  prefixed
to  the  articulation,  have  expressed  the  j^ositivc  force  of  any


■      451

letter.  "VVnieieas,  on  the  contrary,  it  maybe  perceived,  that
AI  does  represent  the  perfect  nature  of  this  element,  in
Latin,  as  well  as  in  other  languages;  as,

Hal-o,  to  breathe,  or  steam  :  Halitits,  breath,  vapour —
solution,  effusion  of  subtle  fluid,  evanescent  matter.  And
this  Hal  is  actually  changed  into  Hel,  in  anlulo,  anhelus.
Ala,  the  zcing  of  a  bird,  metaphorically,  of  an  army:
Alacer,  cheerful,  brisk,  moviiig  lightly,  &c.

bn  A\,vain,  nothing — evanescent.

n^K,  Al-e,  to  hoicl,  sicear — send  forth  wind.

Αλ-αοίΑΛ»,  I  zcander,  move  about  loosely — vagor.

Αλως,  a  coîirt,  open  space:  Αλία,  rearm ίΛ,  heat  of  thesun-^
subtle  effusion.

Welsh,  Armor.  Al-an,  breath — vapour.  Al,  and,  by
mutation,  El,  an  angel,  spirit — evanescent  being.

Irish,  Al,  nurture;  he  hath  7iourished — hence,

Latin,  Ah,  I  administer  nurture — which  diffuses  itself
through  the  whole  frame.

The  symbol  of  this  power  was  the  Quickbeam ;  the  pe-
culiar quality  of  this  tree,  which  entitled  it  in  that  spirit  of  ana-
logy, to  such  a  distinction,  was,  perhaps,  its  flexibility,  or  lax
texture.  Its  name  is  Luis,  which  also  implies  drink— fuid  ;
an  effusion  of  herbs,  or  weeds;  an  open  hand.  The  term  is,
perhaps,  a  compound  of  Lu,  and  the  substantive  verb  Is
F  f  2


452

Lu,— small,  light,  thin,  sniff.  Lua,  water,  thin  glid-
ing fluid.     W.  Llwys, 'Λ  shedding,  pouring  forth.

Tiie  Wchh  call  the  Quickbeam,    Ctrddin,  a  plural  form
of  Cnrdden, — zchat  goc&azcai/,  vanishes.

Of  this  symbol,  and  of  the  uillou^,  which  is  the  symbol  of
s,  Talicsin,  only,  says —

Helyg  a  cherddin
Buant  hwyr  ir  vyddyn.

"  The  JViUoK's  and  Quickbcams,
Came  lale  into  the  army."

hau^ia,  probably,  had  the  same  general  import  as,  Dor.

λχμ€α.'^κ>ν,  a  Skiy",  or    light,  gliding    vessel,  or   λχιχίτας,    λα^ΑΤΤαία,

a  torch,  or  lamp — pouring  forth  a  subtle  diffusion.  The
Latin  verb  Lambo,  seems  best  to  express  the  force  of  this
element.  noV  Lamed,  the  Hebrew  name  of  L,  signifies,
to  learn,  or  teach — perhaps,  to  lay  open.


M.

Tliemost  natural  and  obvious  gesture,  to  intimate,  that  one
substance  is  entirely  shut  up,  inclosed  and  comprehended
another,  must  have  been,  to  form  both  hands  into  cuplike
figures,  and  placing  one  upon  the  other,  present  them  to
notice,  with  significant  looks,  or  nods  of  the  head.

As  it  was  intended  that  man  should  learn  to  commnnicate
his  ideas,  by  the  voice;  the  organs  of  speech  would  join
voluntarily,  in  these  efforts  to  describe.  The  lips  would  close
•together,  the  cheeks  would  swell  moderately,  into  the  imita-


453

tion  of  capacity,  and  breath  would  endeavour  to  attract
notice,  l\y  sounding  the  power  of  M,  through  the  nostrils.
Were  a  dumb  person  to  point  at  a  chest;,  or  vessel,  and  then
repeat  his  descriptive  gesture,  it  would,  in  general,  be  at-
tended with  such  a  descriptive  sound  :  and  we  should  readily
comprehend  his  meaning,  that  the  chest,  or  vessel,  con-
tained something.

Μ  is,  therefore,  a  natural  expression  of  comprclLcnding,
including,  embracing,  or  surrounding.

Its  Bardic  name  was  Mi,  which  appears  anciently  to  have
signified  any  thing  that  includes,  or  comprehends ;  as,  the
bed  of  a  river,  in  Llj/n-vi,  Tei-vi,  Dy-vi,  &c.  The  Welsh
V,  is  a  mutation  of  M,  or  B.  Mîn  (mi-in)  the  edge,  or
Ifank  of  a  river,  an  edge,  the  Up,  the  mouth.  Mid,  an  in-
closure,  a  vessel  of  capacity ;  Midd,  an  inclosed  place,  &c.
But  the  general  import  of  the  term  will  appear,  moie
clearly,  from  the  Irish^

Mi,  a.  mouth — what  comprehends,  contains.

Mi-ach,  a  bag,  or  budget — including,  containing.

Mi-adh,  honour,  ornament — what  surrounds.

Mi-an,  mind,  zcill,  desire,  purpose,  intent.

Mi-anach,  ore;  comprehending  in  itself.


Mi-as,  a  dish,  charger,  &c.


The  Romans   called  this  letter  Em,  for  Am  :   See  under
L.  Hebrew  DH,  Am,  a.  mother,  cont.aiuing  within  herself,  au-


454

bracìíig.  Latin  \.  Am,  ^.mother,  whence  Amìta.  "  Am^
praepositio  loquelaris  significat  circum."  Festiis.  The  an-
cients said  Am  urbem,  for  circum  urhem, — and  the  like.

Hama^  a,  leather  bucket;  a  hook.

Hamus,  a  hoek;  ring;  kitchen  bason — surrounding — ■
containing:  Ambo,both;  ajni/pit;  a.  cup — couipreiiending.

Am-o,  I  love,  cherish — embrace  with  desire.

Aiubio,  (am-bi)  to  court — be  compassing,  &.c.

Greek,  λι^χ,  together  tcith — comprehending.

Α/χ•«ξ«,  an  aqueduct,  sewer — surrounding  channel.

Afji-ec^st.,  a  chariot :  Α^-ζνξ,  s.pot,  a  cup.

Ai^Yi,  a  sickle — going  round,  whence  «/^«w,  I  reap.

Ajj^'Çi,  about,  round-about :  αμ-^ω,  both,  Sac.

Welsh,  Am,  about,  round  about.  It  has  this  meaning
outoF  composition,  and  prefixed  to  some  hundreds  of  uords.
4-  aw,  (av)  a,  river.

4.  Ham,  (Lib.  Land.)  summer,  season.

Cornish,  Am,  an  embrace :  ambos,  a  covenant,  contract.
Irish,  Am,  time,  season,  convenience — what  comprehends —
hençcj  Temp-US,


455

Ama,  a  horse  collar.  Amh,  ά  fishing  net;  the  ocian — •
whence  the  dim  :    am-an,  amh-ain,  a  river,  Sec.

Tlie  symbol  of  this  power  was  the  vine,  which  zcinds
round,  and  embraces  its  supporter^  and  is  the  mother  of  the
most  generous  of  hquors.

Its  name  is  Main,  whicli  signifies  also,  the  neck,  the
oack — pliable  parts — he  hath  taught,  or  instructed — made
to  comprehend.

Muin-tir,  comprehensioii  of  the  land— people,  men,  pa-
rents, family,  clan,  tribe.

Mwu-eog,  enjoyment,  possession.

AVelsh,  Mwyn,  the  ore  of  any  metal;  also,  enjoymeiit,
possession,  use,  Sec.

The  meaning  of  the  Greek  Μυ  is  sufficiently  obvious,
from  iJLvu,  to  shut  up,  close  the  lips,  or  eyelids;  fj^vsu,  to
eŵíí/tííí',  introduce  to  the  sacred  mysteries:  ^χυχο?,  an  inward
recess,  &.c.

Tlie  Hebrew  name  D»Q  Mini,  signifies  zuater,  \vhich  the
ancients  regarded  as  the  mother  of  all  things,  comprehend-
ing their  first  principles.     See  Gen.  i.

The  Britons,  having,  probably,  no  vines  before  the  com-
ing of  the  Romans,  changed  this  symbol  for  the  raspberry
tree,  of  which  Taliesin,  says — •


456

Avanwydd  g\vneith5't,

Ni  gorau  emw3't,

Er  amgelwch  bywyd.

*'  The  raqiherry  tree  caused.

That  the  best  of  things  should  be  tasted,

Vox-  the  protection  of  Hfe."


N.

When  we  put  forth  the  hand,  or  extend  the  finger,  to
â'ncrimiìiate  a  simple,  or  minute  object,  the  eye  is  naturally
directed  the  same  way  :  Avt^look  stedfastly  at  that  which  we
Avish  another  to  observe.  iHie  tongue,  at  the  same  instant,
tipontaneouvly  mimics  the  action  of  the  hand  and  the  eye,
by  thrusting  forward  its  point,  in  the  same  direction,  till  it
rests  against  the  upper  gums.  The  breath,  being  denied  a
.passage  through  the  mouth,  tends  towards  the  same  spot,
through  the  nostrils,  with  the  sound  of  ;/,  or  Hn.

This  sound  is,  then,  a  natural  interjection  for  look!
in  there!  and  it  is  as  naturally  answered  by  ili,  or ///« — 1
observe,  or  comprehend.

May  we  not,  then,  pronounce,  that  the  power  n,  is  a  na-
tural expression  of  an  object,  subject,  thing  produced,  or
nexu—discriminated,  or  simp/ijied — the  selfsame,  simple,
small?

Its  Bardic  name  is  IV?.  The  most  general  appropriation
of  this  term  is,  as  a  negative,  not :  but  this  is,  by  the  same
kind  of  figure  which  produced  ίλ2%»ςτ«,  from  ιλ^χι,-,τος,
minimc  from  miminus,  and  the  French  negative, ρο/ί/ί  and
pusj  froin  nouns  of  a  conjined  meaning.


457

Ni  signified  a  particular  thing;  as  in  Taliesins,  Ni  gorau,
tlie  best  thing.

In  composition,  it  still  implies  a  particular,  an  identical
thing,  ov  subject ;  as,  Di/ri/s,  intricate,  perplexed ;  Dynjs-
(jti,  intricacy,  perplexity — the  intricate  self.

The  true  import  of  this  simple  term  appears^  more  clearlj;
in  the  Irish.

Ni,  he  hath  made, formed,  produced.

Ni,  a  thing — the  subject  formed,  or  produced.

Nigh,  a  daughter ;  Nia,  a  sister's  son.

W.  Nith,  a  niece  ,•  Nai,  a  nephew — progeny  in  the
family.

W.  Nyth:  Corn.  4^  Nid:  Armor.  Neith:

I.  Nead  (p.  ni-ad)  Nidus,  a  nest — -a  new  construction,  or
construction  for  young,  progeny,  as  ρεοςςιχ,  η^ςςο;,  a  ìiest,  a
young  bird,  from  ηος,  iiew,  J'resh,  young,  inc.

The  Romans  called  this  letter  En,  and  they  used  the  in-
terjection £;i/  Lo !  Behold!  in  pointing  out,  or  discrimi-
nating.

The  Irish  say,  Enne,  for  an-ni,  ho!  Behold  the  thing!
W.  Ena,  there,  lo  there  !

Gr.  ÍV,  one,  the  same,  the  individual  thing — there,  the
jpoint,  of  place,  or  time.


458

Chald.  ρ  Eìij  behold !  Ileb.  Π3π  Ene,  here!  there!  be-
hold! but  in  all  these  instances,  £  is  a  mutation  of  ^ :
whence,  we  may  observe,  that  these  mutations  began  to
take  place  very  early,  and  became  widely  extended.

The  original  yhi,  is  still  to  be  traced — Heb.  ]s  yi«,  zchen,
zi'here— point  OÎ  time,  or  place.  nJX  Ancy  to  give  caiaCf  or
occasion;    to  produce  ;  to  happen.

Gr.  »v  if,  granting ίΛΛί;  uva.  singly,  07ie,  by  one;  through
— from  one  to  one,  «>»,  uvu,  upwards,  rising  into  view —
una,  I  makc,  perform, produce,  obtain.

Lat.  An^  an  ne?  that  thing!  that  particular?  1.  C.
An,  the  one — discriminating,  simplifying.

W.  Han,  that  proceeds  from,  is  produced,  new,  discri-
minate— prep,  frotn,  out  of.  TIanvod  (han-bod)  to  be
derived  from,  to  become  existent.  Han  has  the  same
meaning— si wp/e  origination,  in  a  multitude  of  compounds.
See  Qrcens  Diet.

The  symbol  of  this  power  was  the..asÄ,  the  material,  of
which  the  spears,  missile  weapons,  and  other  implements  of
the  Ccltce  were  made.  This  circumstance  may,  perhaps,
account  for  its  being  selected,  on  this  occasion,  and  its  ob-
taining the  name  of  nion,  from  ni,  a  thing  formed,  or  pro-
duced,  and  On,  gain,  acquisition.  Nion,  also,  implies  a
daughter,  thing  produced;  a  letter;  a  wave;  a  spot,  a
speck,  a  point,  (whence  nion-ach,  spotted,  forked,  or
pointed) — discriminate,  marked  object.  Also,  pro/,  booty
• — acquisition — Nion-am,  to  get  boolij — rem  facere.

The  idea  oflcrcd  by  the   Greek  Nr,  is  of  the  same  class*


459

livy  fvv,  ηοζΰ,  new,  present,  at  this  point  of  time — It  admits
the  articles,  and  has,  therefore,  the  construction  of  a  noun —
th.e  present,  the  particular,  or  the  point — the  nezu — what
just  presents  itself — the  object,  or  subject  of  consideration.
Hence,  wo;  a  bride,  a  daughter-in-law — the  iiezu,  the  lately
9nade,  or  acquired:  wf^Çr),  a  bride,  txn  insect,  in  its  incipient
state — {νϋ*-φα.ω,  vw-qizu,  or  Cti-), — nezclij  appearing — newli/
produced,  or  made.

From  vv,  a  point,  comes  ννηω  or  νυςςω,  {νυ-α,-τω)  to  prich,
penetrate  with  a  point.  Nu,  conveys  the  idea  of  nexcness,
the  present  thing,  or  point,  in  iiunc,  nuncio,  nuper,
iiurus,  &c.

Irish,  nua,  nu-adh,  nezv :  nu-air,  Khcn, point  of  time.

The  Hebrezu  name  ^'3,  i^in,  a  son;  to  propagate,  or
produce;  is  characteristical  of  each  of  the  ideas,  presented
by  this  power.


It  has  been  shewn  (Sect.  I.)  that  the  power  of  P,  na-
turally describes  a  thing,  springing,  or  pushing  forwards.
It  must  be  remarked,  in  addition,  that  the  most  obvious  ges-
ture to  convey  the  idea  of  plumpness,  protuberaiice,  or  con^
vexitt/,  is  to  swell  and  puf  out  the  cheeks,  till  this  articu-
lation is  produced.

P,  may,  therefore,  be  regarded  as  naturally  descriptive  of
springing,  putting  forth,  pushing,  penetrating,  pro77iincnce,
convexitj/.


460

Pi  is  its  general  name^  in  the  Bardic,  Latin,  Greek,  and
Hebrew  alphabets.

This  word,  in  Welsh,  signifies  the  magpie,  q.  d.  the
pricker:  pic,  a  dart,  javelin,  pig,  a  beak,  bill,  sting,  or
point.  Armor. — a  mattock.

Pid,  a  point;  pidyn,  penis:  pill,  a  stake;  pin,  a  pin —
prominent  points.

Piw,  an  udder — prominent,  protuberant  cover.  Irish,
Pi-an,  pain:  pianta,  pangs — penetrating;  pi-ona,  a  pin,
peg,  point.

Lat.  pica,  a  magpye:  picas,  a  wood-pecker.

Piget,\t  grieves— penetrates.

Pila,  a  ball,  globe;  a  mole,  or  dam — protuberant :  &
pillar,  pile — prominent:  Pilo,  to  pnsh:  pilinn,  a  javelin — -
the  pusher, penetrator;  springing  forth:  piper, pepper — •
pungent.

Pinguis,fat — protuberant,  convex.

Gr.  ϊΐ^-α-ζ^,  Dor.  I  overtake — push  after.

TTk^al,  a  fountain — springing  forth.

mi^vu,  I  spring  forth,  fow  forth,  pour  forth  water.

'Kivro),  1  fall  forwards;  strive.

iriuvf  fat,  plump — protuberant.


461

Hcb.  riD,  pCj  or  >D,  pi,  a  mauth,  fact,  edge,  or  point — •
prominent,  projecting,

O'D  Pirn,  fat,  fatness — protuberant,  convex.

The  name  of  this  letter,  in  the  Irish  alphabet,  is  peth-boc.
As  this  language  is  rather  deficient  in  radicals,  under  p,
pcth  is  not  to  be  found,  without  having  recourse  to  the
sister  dialects.

In  Cornish,  petkav  signifes,  I  atn, hence  peth,  (w.  and  c.^
a  thing — what  is,  essence,  being.  Peth,  conveys,  therefore,
the  same  idea  as  beith,  the  Irish  name  of  B,  to  he,  being,
essence,  zehat  is:  so  that  the  discriminative  title  of  this  let-
ter must  depend  upon  hoc,  which  signifies — he  hath  szDclled,
he  hath  budded,  or  sprung.  A  buck,  or  hc-goat,  is  named
hoc,  in  allusion  to  his  projecting  horns,  or  his  bounding
motion.  Peth-boc,  then,  implies  a  thing  swelling  out,  or
springing  forth,  what  \s  prominent,  protuberant,  or  jutting
forzcards.  The  symbol  of  this  power  is  not  named.  The
n»-Tfç,  pf«Ms,  or  piy^i",  which  occurs  in  Taliesiiis  catalogue,
seems  referable  to  p.     Of  this  the  Bard  observes,

Morawg  a  Moryd
Fawydd  fyniesyd.

*'  The  mariner  and  the  sea  vessel.
The  pine  propelled."

I  regard  jF,  merely  as  a  mutation  of  P.

In  the  Hebrew  and  the  ancient  Greek  alphabet,  this
power  had  no  appropriate  character,  and  those  which  it  has
atpxesenf,  in  the  Bardic,  and  the  Roman  alphabet,  dearly


462

point  out  its  origin.  Ρ  was  anciently  written,  both  in
Greece  and  Italy ,  as  the  present  capital  gamma,  or  else
with  an  acute  angle,  as  in  the  3ardic  alphabet.  The
Molic  digamma,  or  Έ,  is,  therefore,  nothing  more  than  the
ancient  p,  with  a  simple  dash,  or  mark  of  derivation  added
to  it.

The  Bards  called  it  Fi,  and  the  Greek  name  Φ»,  is  the
same:  Fi,  in  Welsh,  signifies  the  act  of  casting  off', putting
forth:  Fy  (β)  aptness  to  move,  or  impel:  it  is  used  as  a
prefix,  in  the  composition  of  words  denoting  agency,  or
cause.     Ozceii''s  Diet.

Irish,  Fi,  anger,  indignation — bursting  forth.

Fiac-ail,  a  tooth — penetrating  point.

Fi-adh,  a  putting  forth,  a  relating.

Gr.  φνω,  to  generate,  produce,  put  forth,  bring  forth,
to  be  born,  or  come  forth,  is  a  corruption  of  çtj,  Lat.  fo;
for  we  have  súW  φ*τνω,  to  generate;  Çìt'jç,  ά  father ;  ψ^τν{*.χ,
a  germ,  stem,  offspring,  &c.  φ»,  is,  tberefure,  equivalent
to  the  Irish  peth-boc,  a  thing  sfcel/ing  out,  budding,  springs
ing,  οτ  putting  forth.

By  the  Romansit  was  called  Ef,  for///,  which  amounts
to  t,he  same  thing  as  Pi,  Fi,  &.c.

Heb.^iK  Ap,  ox  Aph,  the  nose,  face;  indignation, firn/
— what  is  prominent,  conspicuous — what  bursts  tortli.

Or,    αττ,  α.φ,    o.tjo,    flu /Π/,  frow,    out  of;  «•xayt,    opnge!


463


«iiöy  uith  it!   ap-ex,  a   top,  point,  crest.     Ap-is,  a  hee,
sti/tg — insect.

The  symbol  of  F,  was  the  Alder,  which  was  used  for  the
masts  of  the  Httle  vessels  of  the  Celta,  and,  therefore,
Gwernen,  in  Welsh,  Cornish,  and  Armorican,  is  both  an
alder  and  a  mast.

The  //•25Α  name  is  Fearn,  which  also  signifies  a  shield —
put  forth  to  propel;  and,  hence,  Fearna,  the  mast  of  a
ship,  as  in  the  other  dialects.  Taliesin  says,  of  this
symbol —

Gwern  blaen  llîn
A  wnaent  gyssevin

"  The  Alders,  heading  the  line.
Composed  the  van."

R.

Pronounced  as  the  initial  R,  in  Greek,  and  Welsh.

This  sound  is  produced,  by  fixing  the  sides  of  the  tongue,
firmly,  against  those  of  the  palate,  ana  forcing  out  the
breath,  in  front;  so  as  to  cause  a  rough  and  strong  vibration,
between  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  and  the  upper  gums.  Its
mechanical  production  is  a  direct  contrast  to  that  of  L.

By  this  energetic  power,  the  first  linguists  would  na-
turally describe  force,  prevalence,  or  superiority ;  a  mo'
tion,  or  action  performed  by  main  strength — rubbing,  tear-
ing, pervading,  breaking.


464

Its  Bardic  name  is  Rlii,  or  Ri,  which,  in  Welsh  ana
Irish,  implies  a  kiiig,  a  chiif,  a  ruler.

W.  Rhy,  too  much,  excessive — prevalent  over.

Irish,  Ria,  before,  rather  than,  more  than.

Ri-adh,  correctioii,  taming,  subduing — prevalence  over.

Ri-adh,  Ri-oth,  rmining — exertion  oî  force.

Arm.  Ri-ou,  frost,  cold, — rough,  rigid,  pervading.

Gr.  P»7o:,  rigor — rigeo,  tohe hard,  rigid.

Γί^ν,  a  mountain  top,  promontory :  Tiv»,  a  nose,  beak — •
rough  above  the  surface.

P»v»,  afle,  rasp—rough,  tearing.

The  Romans  called  this  power  Ar,  which  appropriates
the  same  ideas.

Heb.  Π"Ν  Are,  to  crop,  tear  off:  ηκ  Art,  a  lion,  strong,
prevalent  in  force.

Af-Äîçw,  I  cut  off,  strike,  drive:  a.;»)í,  mars,  u-ar,  af-ou,
Aro,  I  plozc,  break  open.

W.  C.  I.  Ar,  upon,  over  above — in  composition,  chif,
head.  W.  I.  Ar,  a  plozcing,  breaking  open,  subduing.
I.  Ar,  slaughter,  plague,  slain — breaking — -broken.  C.
Ar,  slaughter.  I.  Ar-ach,  superiority,  strength,  puissance,
pozcer;  a  briar — tearcr.


465

Cantabrian:  Arra,  the  male — superior,  stronger :  Iiará^
slaughter;  Harri,  a  stone,  a  rock — rough  and  rigid.

The  symbol  of  R  was  the  rough,  rigid,  and  pervaded
Elder.  Its  name  is  Ruis,  which  signifies,  a  n'oy,  a  road,
'à.  passage  forced  open.

Ruis,  he  hath  rent  asunder,  torn  to  pieces.
Ruisg,  he  smote,  tore  οβ\  made  bare;  a  skirmish.

W.  Rhys,  force,  vehemence^  strong  (Rhi-us)  Rhys-s^r,
a  champion,  hero,  warrior.

The  Bards  regarded  the  privet  as  the  symbol  of  this
power.     !/Vz//i'6z/i  thus  speaks  of  it*

Gwyros,  gwyn  ei  vyd !
Tarw  tiin,  Teyrn  byd.

^'  The  privet,  happy  his  condition!

The  bull  of  battle;  the  chief  of  the  world."

The  Greek  name  Rho,  also  signifies  the  possession,  or
exertion  of  force,  or  superioritj/ — endowing  with  force^
prevailing  by  force,  &c.

Heb.  j;"i,  Ro,  to  break,  break  of,  break  in  pieces,  rend,
destroy — prevail  by  force.

Gr.   Fw,  I  am  able:  \  rush — make  an  assault*

Puí',  I  strengthen — endow  with  force.

p*;-^st, ife-jsir,    vehemence,  exertion,  force,  strength:  p«i>    ft
G  g


466

heady  stimmit.      Lat.  Robur,  force,    strength;     Rodo,  to
gnaic,  tear,  S;c.

I.  Ro,  too  much,  exceeding,  first,  before.

AVitli  these  also  agree  the  Hebrew  name,  li'n  Rish.

n'lin,  Reshe,  to  have  pore  er,  ox  force — apo2SO»jprc\'alling
"b^  force — to  be  poor — stript,  reduced  by  force.  IL'NI,
Rash,  the  head,  superior,  chief,  begiiniiug ;  a  ruler;  a
capital,  or  deadli/  poison — prior^  tsuperior,  forcibly  pre-
valent. Syr.  >zn,  Rishi,  chief,  excellent — Arab.  R'dis,  a
prince,  chief.


Si.

Vv'hen  we  design  to  point  out  some  particular  object,,  in  a
private  manner,  so  as  not  to  attract  general  observation,  the
finger  is  not  immediately  directed  to  it,  but  held  low^
and  pointed  towards  the  ground.  The  countenance  inclines
doλvnwards;  the  eye  is  directed  below  the  object  itself,
and  shaded  by  the  eyebrow.  The  same  kind  of  action  is
copied  spontaneously,  by  the  imitative  organs  of  speech.
The  point  of  the  tongue  drops  downwards,  and  rests  against
the  lower  teeth.  The  upper  teeth  close  over  it,  as  it  were,
to  conceal  the  unavowed  design  ;  and  the  loxc,  insinuating,
hissing  sound  of  S,  is  produced.

This  power,  is,  therefore,  -naturally  descriptive  of  secret
discrimination,  insinuation,  a  private  marking,  and  dis-
tinguishing. Conseqtiently,  it  expresses  those  ideas  of  a
thing,  with  which  such  observation  is  generally  made.
These  may  sometimes  be  connected  vi'ith  awe,  and  respect;
but,  more  generally,  witii  contemjft,  scorn,  or  some  insidious


467

d($ígn.     Its  expressions  ought  to  be  segregate,  apart,  distant,
posterior,  inferior,  lozc-,  little,  νΐύαη,  and  the  hke.

Its  Bardic  name  is  Si,  ννΐΰοΐι,ίη  Welsh,  imphes  a  ìiissiìig
expression  of  contempt.  Si-arad,  or  Si-arazod,  prating,
backbiting:  from  Si,  and  arawd,  speech,  eloquence:  Si-
brwd,  a  low  murmur,  or  whisper,  from  Si,  and  Brud,  an
account,  a  chronicle,

I.  Si,  ultimate,  distant;  whence^  Sia,  the  remotest,
farthest  from  you.  Si-ar,  the  icest,  backwards,  behind,
aicry.  Si-air,  aside;  Si^dean,  infamy;  from  Si  and
Dean,  colour,  appearance ;  Si-ona,  delay,  being  behind;
Si-omach, — a  fox — plotting  in  the  rear.

Os,  above,  over,  upon;  Si-os,  dozen,  below.

Amor.  Si-gc a,  to  sit,  lurk;  Si-oul,  silent.

Tlie  Romans  called  this  letter  Es,  for  As,  -^vhich  signi-
fies one,  a  simple  thing,  a  simple  tchole,  segregated  and
discriminated  from  others.

Gr.  M-'^oXn,  α,ς-ξολος,  soot,  asiics,  SvC.  oiF-cast.  Ας-^ς,  dross f
dregs,  mud,  dirt,  sediment.

Ciiald.  H'^ì^,  Ash-ia ,  foundations — under-part,

Heb.  ΧΆ,  Az,  then — distant  point  of  time.

pbî,  Azn,  to  weigh,  discriminate ;  the  ear.

ii'N*,  Aih,f.rc~~\'i\\z\.  separates,  simplifâs.
ο  g  2


4C8

W.  Ji,  a  smali,  simple,  separate  thing;  ό.\\  unity;  a
whisper  :  As-edd,  a  slicing,  cutting  off.

C.  As,  to  undergo,  suffer.

I.  As, from,  out  of — separate;  milk — what  is  separated.
As,  a  shoe,  placed  under — a  foundation.  As,  also  implies
/ire— what  separates,  or  simplifies ;  whence,  As-am,  I  kindle
afire — a  separation;  as  in  As-aidh,  rebellion,  revolt;  As-
aitigham,  I  abandon,  evacuate :  As-anta,  sedition,  &c.
In  this  language,  the  termination  As,  like  the  Latin  Tas,
huplies  a  discriminate  state,  or  condition.

The  symbol  of  this  power  Avas  the  low,  stooping  rcillozc,
Avhich  bends  under  every  opposition,  and  which  formed  the
J'oundation,  or  ground-icork  of  the  Celtic  coracles.

Its  name  is  sai/,  which  also  signifies  a  beam;  a  lieel —
foundation,  orunderpart;  a  guard — who  tacitlij  observes  at
a  distance.  Sail-spiorad,  a  genius,  or  guardian  spirit.
With  these  are  connected  sail,  salann,  sal,  salt — the  searcher.
W.  sail,  a  foundation,  ground-zcork.

The  meaning  of  Zir^A*  may  be  perceived  in  07«^-,  I  am
silent,  I  conceal,  dissemble,  <α-,τ,,  silence,  secretly,  privately.

*]DD  Samech,  to  sustain,  or  support — to  undergo,  to  be
placed  beneath,  as  a  foundation.

The  present  Greek  and  Hebrew  alphabets  contain  some
derivatives  from  this  power ;  as,

Ζίΐτα,  the  seeker,  searcher  :  Ztaw,  I  ^eek,  search,  investigate^
folio (ϋ  after.


469

Ξι,  the  corrodcr,  detractor;  |ε«,  ^iuj  I  shave, plane,  scrapç
— take  from^  detract.

γ  Zain,  Chald.  species,  sort — separate,  cliscrimiuate :  Π3ΐ,
Zenc,  io partake  o/"— take  from.

\Ό  Shin,  the  marker — pointer.  ]Z',  a  tooth,  a  sharp
point.  \ydJ  Shencn,  to  zchet,  sharpen,  i^ycj  Shena,  tg
/uite.


The  mcclianism,  and  tlie  natural  properties  of  this  power,,
have  been  ah-eady  explained.

It  describes  tension,  drazoing,  or  straining,  in  whatever
manner.  Extension,  stretching,  or  drazving  out.  Intent
sion,  or  drawing  to  a  point,  drawing  tight,  or  close.  Drazc-
ing  a  line,  or  bound  round  any  thing — conjining,  straitening^
liin iting,  c ire nmsc rib ing .

Its  Bardic  name  is  Ti,  tlie  meaning  of  which  may  be
perceived  in  Tid  (ti-ad),  a  chain;  Tid-azc,  to  tether,  tie,  or
confine  with  a  line,  chain,  &c.  Irish  Ti,  To,  unto;  tending
to  a  point:  design,  intention;  he, — he  zcho, — hiin  that —
limiting  the  agent,  or  subject.

Ti-mhor,  the  Great  He — the  supreme  Being.  (I  have
observed  that  the  Celtic  representation  of  Jupiter  was  the
trunk  of  a  huge  oak,  with  two  branches  suspended  from  the
top,  presenting  the  character,  and  distinguished  by  thq
name  of  τ^ι)  Ti-as,  utide;  tigh,  contcndit — he  went,  eanic
debated,  strove^


470

Ti-me,  heat,  zcarmth — tenseness:  Ti-atnn,  Tithin,  the
s?<«— intense^  powerful.

Gr.  Ti-u,  I  honour,  €stee?n,  estimate,  rceigh,  consider^
punish,  avenge,  mulct,  or  fine.  I  attend  to;  hence^  τ»-^.^^
hoìioìir,  praise,  price, punishment ,  revenge,  ox  satisfaction — <■
attention,  a  reaching,  or  extending  to,

Timeo,  I  fear,  apprehend,  stand  hi  arce.

The  symbol  of  this  poΛver  is  not  named;  but  it  was  pro-
bably the  sacred  oak,  as  I  have  already  suggested.  Its
Irish  name  is  Tinne,  which  also  signifies  a  chain — instrument
of  drawing,  or  binding.  Teann-am,  or  Tinn-im,  I  strain,
press,  bind  strait,  embrace.  TV.  Ti/nnu  (Armor.  Tenna)
to  draw,  strain,  stretch;  tj/nn, strait,  tight,  tense,  stretched,
et  rained.


must  be  referred  to  τα,^},  whence,  rnvu,  I  stretch,  strain,  draw.
The  Greeks  may  have  had  such  a  verb  as  txvu,  of  the  same
import  as  τ^,  raviu/  nrmu,  extcndo,  intendo,  contendo.

The  Ilebrero  name  fi'ID  Tcth,  is  a  verbal  noun  from  riVú',
Tue,  to  sjjin — also,  thread,  a  line,  8ic.  draicing,  stretching;
whence,  riDJ,  to  tend,  extend,  stretch.  '  '

Gnroi,  as  well  as  ^ηττα,  a  waiting  woman,  may  be  derived
from  hu,  I  run,  strain;  also,  place,  constitute — circum-
scribe with  a  line,  or  limit,  in  Tau,  has  the  same  import,
mn   Tue,  to  mai'k;  to   limit,  or  circumscribe,     ,ιχη  Tac,

to  limit,  bound,  circumscribe — confine  withiri  a  line,

t

By  a  comprehension  of   the  sounds   of 'D  and  D,   thç


471

fíchrcio  formed  anotlier  derivative  power,  "a,  which  com-
piises  the  force  of  its  two  compounding  elements — ati
indirect,  οΐ  secret  draicing,  büunding,o\•  coìifìiùug.

Τ•;  Tse.d,  a  side,  Lateral  extent :  Π12ί  T&adc,  to  hind  in-
directlj/,  or  secretly,  with,  a  n&t,  a  snare,  Sic.

Having  now,  to  the  hest  of  my  abilities,  accomited  for
the  names  and  symbols  of  the  elementary  powers  in  speech,
I  would  pause  for  a  moment,  and  make  a  few  general
reflections.

1.  It  must,  I  think,  have  occurred,  that  our  primitive
ancestors,  Avere  particularly  careful,  to  distinguish  each  of
their  letters  by  a  descriptive  term — by  a  term,  which,  not
only  described  the  letter,  and  its  elementary  power,  but  had
also  a  definite,  and  familiar  import  of  its  own.

2.  This  designation  appears  in  several  countries,  in  se-
veral languages,  and  amongst  nations  who  seem  never  to
have  studied  in  one  common  school.  It  cannot,  then,  be
ascribed  either  to  local  fancy,  or  to  the  humour  of  any
whimsical  grammarian,  and  which  became  prevalent  after
the  nations, with  all  their  languages,  were  separated; — but  it
must  have  been  founded  upon  some  primitive,  and  general
reason.

S.  The  names  b}^  which  the  several  nations  distinguished
any  individual  power,  are  diiferently  formed,  according  to
the  genius  of  each  particular  language  and  people;  yet
they  amount  uniformly  to  the  same  thing,  or  communicate,
the  same  prominent  idea.

These  names  must,  therefore,  have  been  adjusted  aftef
the  languages    became  distinct :  because  every  natioa  ex.•


473

presses  the  Eame  leading  image^  by  a  term  of  its  own
vernacular  dialect.  But,  as  the  several  nations  act  upon
the  same  principle,  this  adjustment  must  have  taken  place,
not  only  when  the  reason  for  such  an  accurate,  and  clear
designation  was  generally  understood,  but  also,  Avhcn  the
separate  families  had  the  same  invariable  notice  of  that
îcason.

4.  A  due  attention  to  the  nature  and  meaning  of  the  se-
veral names  for  each  letter,  and  of  the  words  connected
with  them,  will,  I  think,  explain  the  reason  for  that  pre-
cision which  appears  in  the  choice  of  those  names;  \vhich
reason  was  this — In  those  primitive  ages,  it  was  acknow-
ledged, as  a  fundamental  principle,  that  each  of  the  ele-
mentary sounds  had  a  discriminate  import^  and  force,  in  the
super-structure  of  language  ;  and  as  the  different  languages
of  the  nations  were,  hitherto,  regarded  as  dialects  of  the
mother  tongue,  the  same  principle  was  admitted  still.

5.  My  cndeaA-oin-s  to  ascertain  this  principle  of  natiixal
expression,  may  suihcc  to  shew,  in  general,  that  there  is  a
relatioi-^  between  certain  sounds,  and  certain  ideas  of  things;
and  may  also  induce  a  conclusion,  that  a  choice  of  elemen-
tary powers,  in  the  formation  of  primitive  terms,  was  con-
formable to  the  ackuoic/edgment  of  this  relation,

6.  If  these  premises  are  granted,  we  may  venture  to
afììrm,  that,  in  the  symbols,  and  the  descriptive  names  of
elementary  powers,  we.  are  still  presented  with  an  authentic
system  of  the  etymology,  as  well  as  grammar,  which  go-
verned the  most  ancient,  and  primitive  language  of  the
world.


473


Sect.  VL  T/ie  import  of  sounds  that  bear  the  simplest
coinhin(itiü7i&,  deduced  from  tlw  force  of  the  elements  that
form  them — cxemplifed  in  Ilebren'j  Greek,  Latin,  and
Celtic  tenm. — Conclusion.

XJ-AVING  been  guided  thus  far  in  my  research^,  by  in-
ference from  iiuthoritics,  and  iacts,  I  may  conclude  tliat
analogy  between  the  sound  and  the  sense,  has  not  confined
itself  to  those  terms,  which  are  immediately  connected  with,
names  of  the  elementary  powers;  but  was  carried,  accord-
iníî  to  some  general  system^  into  the  main  body  of  pri-
mitive language  ;  from  whence  it  has  descended  into  the
several  dialects,  in  which  it  can  still  be  discovered^  in  some
degree^  by  a  due  investigation  of  the  system.

As  the  most  obvious,  and  co'ncise  method  of  ascertaining
the  regular  application  of  this  principle, — I  shall  n>ark  each
of  the  consonants,  connected  successively  with  the  several
vowels;  and  then  combine  the  force  of  the  elements,
already  developed^  with  all  the  simplicity,  as  well  as  all  the
accuracy,  which  the  subject  admits.  To  each  of  these
combinations,  I  shall  add  a  few  examples  of  simple,  and
primitive  terms,  in  those  languages  which  I  compare^  to-
gether with  received  approbations  of  each — I  shall  ul-
timately submit  the  consequence  of  this  analysis  to  the
jlidgment  of  my  readers.

The  character,  and  the  antiquity  of  the  Hebrew,  entitle
that  language  to  superior  deference  in  such  a  comparison ;


474

but  there  seems  to  be  a  ditficully  in-trviug  it  by  a
écaìe,  better  calculated  for  tlxe  European  languaircs.  The
textual,  or  the  written  vowels  of  this  tongue^  are  such,  only,
as  contribute  something  to  the  import  of  its  terms;  whilst
those  vocal  breathings,  which  merely  facilitate  the  ut-
terance, are  left  at  random,  to  the  chance  of  being  supplied,
as  local,  or  temporary  usage  may  direct.

But  the  terms  of  the  zccstdrn  languages,  consist,  either  of
the  vowels  alone,  or  else,  of  regular  combinations,  which
unite  the  vowels,  and  tlie  consonants:- — their  orthography
may,  therefore,  acknowledge  vocal  powers,  which  are
Biei-ely  aiixUiavies  to  the  voice.

"With  an  humble  reliance  upon  the  candour  of  my
judges,  in  weighing  these  differences,  1  commit  the  cause  to
their  deri.-ion.


ΛΒ,  HAB,  AV,  IIAV.

It  appears,  from  what  has  been  observed  upon  the  mu-
tations of  elementary  sounds,  that  these  four  syllables  may
be  regarded  as  perfectly  synonymous,  or,  as  constituting  but
one  root — ΐχϊ\ά primitive  term.

The  nature  of  its  elements  has  been  cx[)]aincd.  J,  the
first  in  order,  expresses  direct  tendcnci/,  positive  agenci/,
perseverance,  augment,  &c.  Β  imports  being,  existence^
■ — what  is, — in  a  definite  state,  or  condition.

Ab  should,  therefore,  signify,  conducive  to  existence^a.
cause;  tending  to  establish;  progressive  mode  of  beings
and  the  like.


475

în  the  languages  which  I  have  compared,,  it  has  the  fol-<
lowing  appropriate  senses.

Heb.  2H  ylb,  Ά  father,  the  niithor,  the  origin;  verdure,,
or  youthful  vigour,  which  imports  a  tendency  to  a  mature

state.

Π2}<  Abe,  he  willed,  he  desired.

Gr.  'Aê-cíç  (Dor.  p.  VA?)  therefore  α'ζα,ω,  I  grozo  towards
manhood,  or  maturity.

Lat.  Av-us,  an  ancestor;  ix  father,  (whence,  avunculus}
q.  avusculus) — cause  of  being.

yh'-eo,  I  covet,  desire — wish  the  existence  of  a  thing  to
îue :  habeo,  I  possess — there  positivelj/  is  to  me.

Welsh.  Äb,  aptness  to  any  thing :  Av,  progressive,  or
augmentative  state — the  superlative  form  of  adjectives.

Irish.  Ah,  a  lord,  ά  father:  Aba,  a  fat  her,  a  cause:
jibh-ar,  a  cause,  or  motive.

Armor.  Ab-ec,  a  cause,  or  occasion,

ΒΛ,  VA.

The  elements  are  the  same  as  in  the  former,  but  the
order  is  reversed :  so  that,  instead  of  conducive,  or  iendins:
lo  the  existence,  we  have  being  directhj  progressive — an
cfect — what  /5  coming,  or  going  forth.

Heb.  H3,  Ba,  he  came,  advanced,  went — was  progressive.


476

Gr.  Εα-ω  (whence  Ç^ni)  I  go,  proceed :  ζ»-ις,  a  branch — •
thing  proceeding  forth.  Lat.  4-  Bado  (whence  Badisso)
•vado,  I  go.  Walk,  am  progressive.

Irish.  Ba,  good,  fruit,  or  profit  arising  from  any  thing ;
death — goiug  forth.

EB,  HEB,  EV,  HEV.

Privation,  negation,  or  the  removal  of  being:    a  negative,
a  retiring  condition.

Heb.  nnn,  Heb-e,  he  hid,  lay  hid :  κηπ,  Heb-a,  he  hid
himself:  nnrr,  Heb-eb,  he  hid  entirely.  Lai.  IIeb-eo,to
be  dull,  sluggish — to  exist  negatively.

Welsh.  EÔ,  a  withdrawing,  retiring.

Welsh,  Corn.  Armor. — Ileb,  zcilhout,  absque.

BE,  VE.

It  must  be  observed,  once  for  all,  that  jE  is  often  sub-
joined to  a  consonant,  in  the  languages  of  Europe,  as  a
mere  auxiliary  to  the  voice,  without  affecting  the  import,  and
force  of  the  articulation  :  where  it  retains  its  proper  import,
al\er  B,  it  should  import,  existence  removed,  diminished,  put
azvai/,  &c.

Ileb.  Vn3,  Beh-l,  he  nauseated,  loathed,  detested.

Lat.  ye,  negative  particle,  as  in  vecors,  &c.


477

νώο,  to  carry  forth ;  Velo,  to  veil,  hide ;  Feneo,  to  be
sold,  alienated ;   Veto,  to  forbid,  &c.

Irish.  Be,  Bc-an,  a  woman,  one  of  the  smaller  sex:
Be-ag,  little.

Armor.  Bc-gat,  (q.  d.  small  piece)  a  bit,  morsel.

IB,  IV,  HIB,  HIV.

Pointing    to    a   being  or    condition:    approaching:  meet,
subservient,  applying  to  existence.

Heb.  nns  Ib-b,  he  cried  out — applied  for  help,  or  com-
passion: n'N,  A-ib,  to  be  an  enemy — disposed  to  seek  iht
life.

Gv.  »Ç  seems  to  imply  a  suction  of  water,  8tc.  whence
«ζΛΐ,  a  plug ;  »β-»ί.  Ibis,  a  stork,  or  snipe,  feeding  itself  by
suction — bibulous.

Lat.  Ib-i,  there — the  very  spot  to  which  I  point.

S'ibi,  to  himself,  or  themselves.

B'ibo,  I  drink,  imbibe.

Welsh,  yv,  4.,  lb,  he  will  drink,  or  imbibe.

Cet  ib-en  med  nouel.

'^  Let  heroes  drink  mesLd  together."

E,  Lloyd,  p.  221.


478

Hiv,  a  skin — adhering,  applying  to  the  body.

Irish.  lbh,yoii — beings  pointed  to.

Ihh,  he  hath  imbibed;  a  drinking.  The  imbibing  of
liquids  is  subservient  to  being,  both  in  animals,  and  vege-
tables.

Armor.  Ib-ouda,  to  graft — put  into;  Ib-ouden,  a  graft.


BI,  VI.

Being    inherent^   appropriated.  —  See   examples    above,
under  B.


OB,  OV,  HOB,  HOV.

The   emanating,  projecting,    extending,   or  putting  forth
of  an  existence,  or  condition.


Heb.  nj;  Ob,  a  beam,  a  cloud:  n^p  Ob-c,  he  was  thick,
gross ;  he  became  bulky.

an;*,  Ob-et,  he  lent;  a  pledge:  *^2ÿ,   Ob-cr,   he  passed
over.  Sec.

Gr.  θο-ΐ>Λΐ,  a  spit — extending  forth:  t;o»  (vox  Lacon.)  rt
tribe,  or  clan—  issuing  forth.

Lat.    Ob,   for,  on  account  of.     Obba,  a  bottle,  or  jug,
with  a  great  bcUy.     Ob-co,  I  die — go  forth.

.   W^elsh.  Ob,  arising,  sû"í7/i»/"•,  or  throwing  out.


479

Hob,  apt  to  rise,  throw,  or  swell  out — a  svrine — a  mea-
sure of  capacity.     Tloh-cl,  a  shaft,  or  arrow.

Irish.  Oh,  he  hath  (ϋ30Λνη6(3,  rejected,  put  forth — Oh-
ann,  quick,  rash.  Obh,  the  point  of  a  sword.  Ob-air
(Corn,  and  Avmor.  Ob-er)  work,  labour,  excrtioji.

BO,  VO.

Being  projectile — issuing,  or  szcelling  out;  putting,  or
put  forth.

Heb.  π>>3,  Bo-e,  to  gush  out,  as  water.

J^:i3,  Xe-bo,  to  be  tliroicn  off,  or  out,  ejected,  emitted;  to
gush  out,  spring  forth.

Gr.  Bo-tç,  Bo-ç,  an  ox— an  animal  furnished  with  project-
ing horns ;  and,  when  wild,  disposed  to  use  them  oiTensively.

Lat.  Bo-a,  η  pimple,  dhciise\  a  kind  of  serpent

Vo-mo,  to  vomit,  eject :   J  orncr,  a  plowshare.

Welsh.  Bo,  a  bugbear,  terrifier;  Bod  (bo-ad,)  a  kite.
jBoo•,  a  swelling,  rising :  W.  A.   Boch.  C.  jBo//,  a  check.

Irish.  Bo,  an  ox,  Or  cow.  Boc,  he  liath  budded,  swelled.
sprung.  The  same  word  implies  a  buck,  a  he  goat,  in
Irish  and  Cornish.

Bod,  (bo-ad),  membrum  virile.

Corn.  Β o-an,  an  ox.     jBo/«j  a-aniatliV  sledge.


480

Armor.  Bo-as,   custom,  fashion :  Boc-an,  a  plcrgue,  pes-
tilence :  Bom,  a  bank,  or  causeway.

UB,  UV,  HUB,  HUV.

A   covering,    overshadoiciiig,    being,   or   state. — See    im-
der  U.


BU,  VU.

Being     over;     covering.         Sometimes     covering    itself,
hiding.


Gr.  Βν-ω,  I  shut  up,  cover:  ^y-a?.  Bubo,  an  owl — being
in  cover:  β^§-ς«,  a  hide,  or  skin:  iv-^r,,  steeped,  covered
barley.

Lat.  Buc-ca,  the  hollow  part  of  the  cheek:  Bulla,  a
great  head  of  a  nail ;  a  seal ;  a  bubble  of  water.

Welsh.   Budd,  (Bu-add),  superiorifj/,  advantage.

Irish.  Bu-adh,  superiority:  Bu-aidh,  victory:  Bu-al,
water,  overwhelming  fluid.

AC,  ACH.

It  must  be  recollected,  that  the  power  of  C,  implies
capacity,  inclusion,  or  comprekciision;  and  ii\so,  reaching,
touching,  or  apprehension.  Though  these  ideas,  in  their
primary  import,  be  nearly  related  to  each  other,  yet,  in
practical  application,  they  separate  widely.  Comprehension,
and  apprehension,  are  almost  synonymous;  but  capacity,
ox  concavity ,  seem»  very  remote  from  a  yoint,  or  acuteness.


481

^c,  should  signify,  1.  Tending  to  hold,  contain,  ov  com.'
prehend:  2.  Tending  to  reach,  touch, licnctrate,  apprehend.

Heb,  "js  Ak,  indeed,  surely,  particle  of  comprehension,
or  apprehension.

Gr.  1.  Ακ-οΓ,  a  cure,  a  closin^r:  a-^-rr.,  a  shore,  or  bank :
αχ-"»?  ί"Λί{/Γ,  or  husks  :  αχαντ,,  (vox  persica),  α  corn  measure
*— closing,  including:  also,  ιχ-ω  (ε  pro  a),  I  have,  or  possess.

2.  Aii--n,  an  edge,  or  point :  α/.-μη,  a  poijit :  a.y.-uy,  a  dart :
t^X-o^)  grief ,  &c.     Tending^to  touch,  ox  penetrate.

Lat.  1.  Ac,  and,  indeed :  ac-us,  chaŷ" :  s'ae-er,  devoted:
fac-eo,  I  conceal — tending  to  include,  or  contain.

2.  Ac-us,  a  needle:  ac-uo,  I  sharpe?i:  ac-ies,  an  edge :
ac-or,  sharpness,  Sec. — tending  to  touch,  ox  penetrate.

AVelsh.  1.  Ac,  also,  likezcise :  ach,  a  relation,  stem,  pedi-
gree : — inclusion,  compreheiision.

2.  Hac,  a  cut,  hack.  Corn.  Hacho,  cruel — touching,
penetrating.

Irish.  1.  Ac,  a  son;  a  uithholding:  ach-a,  a  mound,
bank:  ach-adh,  an  enclosure:  ac-or,  avarice,  retention.
Ach,  joined  to  nouns,  forms  adjectives  of  appropriation,
and  signifies  having* ox  possessing  (unde  ίχω  q  r)

2.  Ac-ar,  sour,  sharp:  ach,  a  skirmish:  ac-ais,  poisoii:
aciCt,  danger,  peril;  a  nail,  a  daze — tending  to  touch,  or
penetrate.

nh


4m  '

CA.

Comprehending,  or  apprehending  irositively»

Gr.  Και,  and,  also  :  χα,  ζω  {■Λα,ω)  capio,  capax  sum,

Lat.    Capio,  I  contain,  take,  catch.

The  Greek$  begin  the  names  of  several  measures  of  ca-
pacity, withza,  and  the  Latins,  Avith  ca.

Welsh.    Ca,  zcill  get,  have;  a  keep,  hold.  Sec.

Ca-ad,  Ά  getting,  having,  holding:  Ca-e,  a  hedge;  en-
closure; garland — adj.  enclosed,  shut:  Ca-u,  to  shut,  en-
close:  adj.  shut.

Irish.    Ca,  cat,  a  house.     I.  A.  Ca-e,  a  hedge,  a  feast.

C.  W.  A.  Ca-cr,  a  city— fortified  place.

C.  Ca-id,  W.  Cacth,  a  bondman — held,  coiifined.

EC,  ECU.

'Negatively  holding,  comprehending,  or  touching.

lleb.  riDn,  Ilek-e,  lie  gaped,  opened  the  mouth ;  waited
in  expectation.

Gr.  Ex,  ex,  out  of:  mx^,  far  ojj',  distant,

Lat»  S'cco,  I  cutf  cut  of,  sever.


483

Welsh.   Ech,  signifies,  Ziill  lose,  reiinguish.

*^  Tudvvvlch  Hir  ech,  y  dir  ae  drevydd."        Âìicurin.

*'  Tudvvvlch  Hir  will  lose  his  land;,  and  his  towns."
Irish.  Ec,  in  the  beginning  of  words  \s privative.
S'each,  he  passed  by,  avoided,

CE,  CHE.

Comprehensioti,  or  touch,    removed,     diminished,   taken
axcay.

Chald.  nD,  Kch,  to  spit  out.

Heb.  ^fRD,   Ke-d,  to  cut  off,  remove,   take   azaai/,  hide,
ìír]-2,  Ke-sh,  to  fail,  be  wanting.

Gr.  Κΐ-ω,  to  split,  tear    open,  burn:  Xe-ω,   to  pour  out,
ilissolve.

Lat.  Ce-do,  to  i/icld,  give  place.

Irish,   Ce,  night,  dark :  ce-as,  obscuriti/,  sadness.  Ce-ad,
leave,  permission.

IQ  ICH.

Pointing  to  a  comprehension,  or  hold.  Directing  to  a
point.  Meet  for,  approaching  to  a  comprehension,  or
touch.

η  b  2


484

Heb.  πρ»  Ik-e,  to  yield  obedience;,  submit.

Gr.  iKi/,  to  come,  <ipproach:  ni-κνος,  meet,  proper:  xmrxiy
a  petitioner.

Lat.  Ic-o,  I  strike,  ratify;  Icere  fcediis. — Cicer.  Hie, —
this  person,  or  thing :  Hie,  here,  in  this  place,  or  time —
directing  to  a  point.

Welsh.  Ic,  pointed,  touching:  Ic-zor,  ^χ-ωζ,  a  sharp,
penetrating  humour.

Irish.  Ic,  a  curt,  remedy — meet  to  close,  or  heal.  loc
{ic)  payment :    S'ic,  s'ioc,  frost ;  the  groin — closing,  holditig.

CI,  CHI,

Holding,    or    comprehending ;    touching,  or  apprehending
— intrinsicalli/.

Heb.  O,  Ki,  for,  because,  therefore,  seeing  that.

Gr.  K»4;v,  a  column,  or  pillar — holding,  touching  inter-
nallj/ :  y-^-'X^i^,  I  discover,  obtain.

Lat.  Ci-o,  Ci-co,  to  incite — cause  internal  perception :
S'ei-o,  I  know,  comprehend :  Ci-tra,  ds,  on  this  side —
comprehended  within.

Welsh.  Ci,  w'lW  perceive,  apprehend,  comprehend :  hence,
W.  C.  A.  Ci,  Ά  dog:  Ci,  dri/ghin,  the  weather's  fyc.

Khyveddav  na  chi-awr,  Taliesin,


485

""  /  Ziondci'  it  is  not  perceived"

Irish,  a,  he  hath  seen  :  ci-ni,  I  see,  apprehend,  perceive,
a,  a  husband:  ci-al,  sense,  ox  meaning,

OQ,  OCIL

Tlie   extending,    putting   forth,    of    a   comprehension,  or
touch.     Protuberance ;  λ  projecting  point.

Heb.  r\pÿ,  Ok-e,  Ά  battlement — outzcard  fence.

Gr.  Οχ,  ογοί,  hugelij,  abundantly.

Οχ-iu,  \  carry  forth:  οχ;•ος,  a  cor,  or  chariot:  o%-£Tcç,  a
cha-nnel,  zcater  course — c amp rehe tiding,  or  containing,  and
carrying  forth.

Lat.   Oc-ca,   a  harroic — with  projecting  points.

SOc-ius,  a  companion :  s'ocio,  to  unite,  associate — f x-
tend,  a  comprehension.

Welsh.   Oc-yr,  usury,  profit.

Irish.  Oc,  a  poet — a  setter  forth.

Oc-aid,  business,  occasion :  oc-ar,  oc-as,  interest,  usury ^
annual  rent.  S'och-ar,  profit,  emolument.  I.  A»  -S'oc;
C.  S'och,  a  plow-share.

Comprehension^  er  touch — projecting,   swelling  out,  issae-^
ingf  or  put  fort h^


486

Ileb.  V\>ÿp7  Koko,  a  marìdiig,  or  stigmatizing.

Gr.  Ko-tvoc,  common,  general:  Μ-μ-η,  co-ma,  hair :  χο-ω,  to
educate:  to  cast  up  a  mound:  χω-ω,  to  excite  to  wrath:
X'-'-?^r.,  anger,  &c.

Lat.  Co,  com,  or  con,  in  composition — mutual,  general,
altogether.  Sec.  Co,  coim,  con,  in  Irish,  and  Ci/,  Cijv,  cyn,
in  AVelsh,  (0  being  regularly  changed  into  Y)  are  applied
in  the  same  manner.

Co-mes,  a  companion;  copia,  plenti/,  pozcer,  liberty.

Welsh.  Co-ed,  C  A.  co-at,rcood,  trees.

W.  C.  Cov,  memory.  W.  Co/,  any  projecting  body;
Ά  sharp  hillock,  a.  peak,  a. promontory ;  a  sting;  the  beard
of  corn.

Iriöh.  Cob,  plenty:  Cobh,  Cod,  victory,  triumph:  Co-
dal,  friemlship,  amity;  kinsfolk,  relations;  an  assembJi/^
ov  convention  Î  from  Co,  and  Dal,  a  share,  ov  portion.

UC,  UCH.

J  covering,  hold,  or  touch — reaching  over.

Heb.  -|ii:>,  ŴÍ-MC,  /?f  hedged;  a  /eni:e,  or  enclosure.
p)]D,  Sh-uk,  he  overfowed,  he  coveted;  a  sÄe'n.

Gr.  Σ'νκη,  the  /g  iree.

Welsh,  t/c/i,  over:  ucho,  nchod,  above,  covering:  huckg
a  cover,  or  pellicle :  hwch,  a  αΛ/^-»  ,•  a  confer.


487

Irish.  Uc-aîrc,  a  nappcr  of  JYize,  ά  fuller.

UcJid,  the  breast,  hosom  :  S'ueh-adh,  a  zvave,  evapon•^
tion :  uachdar,  the  top,  surface,  creamy  summit,

CU.

Closifig  oi\'r:  touchijtg  the  surface,

Hcb.  )p,  Ku,  a  measuring  line.

Gr.  Κν-ω,  to  carry  in  the  womh :  γν-ω,  to  pour  over.

Lat.    Cu-do,  a  cop:  cu-pa,  a   cup;  cura,  cave:  eu-tìs^
a  skin.

Irish.  Cu-a,  flesh:  cu-ach,  a  hozol,  a  cup;  he  hath
folded:  cu-an,  a  baij,  haven:  cu-as,  a  tore,•  cu-im,  a
s/c//-i,  covert.

Welsh.  Cu,  dear,  beloved — embraced,  &,e.

Cûdd,  a  hiding  place,  a  hoard:  cw,  cwb,  czixp,  a  n//?  r
crcf/i,  û/íj/  round  vessel:  cwd,  a  è«o•,  sacA',  pouch:  cwdd,
a  concavity,  shelter,  &c.  ?cc.

Corn.  Cu-as,  a  shower:  cusc  (W.  cwsg)j  sleep:  cU'
tha,  to  cover,  hide,  keep  close.

Armor.  Ci^z,  secrti,  hidden :  cuz,  cuza,  to  hide,  cover,

AD,  ADH,  HAD,  HADtL

Tending  to  expand,  unfold,  spread,  distribute,  divide^


488

Ilcb.  "ηί^,  Aä,  a  vapour,  exhalation.

Xli^,    Ad-en,  a  hinge:    ""("^N,    Ad-er,    to  become  magni-
ficent, 'pompous,  glorious — to  expand.

Gr.  AÌ  u,  I  satiate,  Jill:  a^-iu,  I  please,  satisfi/ :  a^-r,yj
abundantly.

Lat.  Ad,  augment,  in  comp.  as  ad-nmo.

AVelsh.  Ad-av,  a  pinion,  an  open  hand.

Ad-ain,  a  mng  :  Ad^cn,  a  zcing,  a  β  η  ;  the  spoke  of  a
wheel:  Had,  seed — expanding,  unfolding:  Ad-ay,  a  pass,
or  opening.

.    Irish.    Ad,  zoater — spreading   element:    Ad-a,   tictojy:
adh,  felicity,  prosperity ;  alart^:  Adh-as,  good,  abuìidance^

Armor.     Ad-a,  to  seed :  Had-u,  to  son:.

Corn.     Ad-en,  the  leaf  of  a  book — unfolding.

^  DA.

Expanding,  imfolding,   spreading,  distributing,  or  divid-
ing, jjositiveli/.

Heb.  nx*7,  Da-e,  to  spread  the  rcings,  fly  siciftlij ;  hence,
a  vulture,  or  kite.

Gr.    Δα-ίω,  to  learn,  (unfold)  divide;  kindle ,  (cause  to
spread).


489

Lat,  Do  (tla-o),  with  its  frequcntive,  Da-to,  to  give,  or
distribute.

Welsh.     Da,  good,  a  good ;  zccalth,  stock.

Irish.  Da,  (W.  Da-n,  A.  Da-oii)  tioo,  the  first  dis-
tributive, or  divisible  number :  4.  Da,  good :  Da-igh,  to
give,  grant,  distribute.

Corn.     Da,  good,  a  good;  evident, plain — unfolded.

ΈΌ,  EDH,  IIED,  HEDH.

Negatively    expanding,    unfolding,    spreading,    distribut-
ing,  or   dividing.

Heb.  π^π,  Hed-e,  to  be  sharp,  narrow,  or  close,  as  the
edge  of  a  weapon.

^r\*,*I-ed,  to  unite,  make  one — negatively  imfold,  or
distribute.

Gr.  "Ε^-ω,  Ed-o,  I  eat,  corrode,  consume.

Lat.  S'cd,  but :  s'cdco,  I  sit,  subside :  s'-edo,  I  allay.

Welsh.  Ed~Tii,  to  coiisume,  decay,  wither:  Edd,  a
moment,  instant :  Hêdd, peace,  a  5í«íe  of  rest.

Irish.  JGc/,  /id  caught,  took,  received:  private  property ;
gaiuj  cattle,  &c.  Ed-can,  a  receptacle.


490

An     expanse,     spread,    distributioji,    or    division — zcitk-
drawn,  taken  away,  or  separated.

Heb.  T^n^,  De-c,  to  drive  uicay,   thrust  forth.

'ΠΤ,  De-i,  Ά  fail,  a  stumbling.

m2,  N-de,  to  impel,  force  off,  thrust,  strike.

Gr.  Ae-w,  to  bind,  or  chain ;  to  be  compelled — to  hatre
freedom  removed :  ^i-iL•,  to  fear — to  shrink  :  h-iXri,  after-
noon, fall  of  the  dai/.

Lat.  De,  front  out  of—jyart  removed  :  De-beo^  I  am
bound,  or  obliged.

Welsh.  Oe,  to  part  from,  to  be  separate ;  to  be  proper,
or  peculiar.

Corn.  De,  A.  De'ch,  yesterday — space  zcithdrazcn.

Irish.  De,  from  whence,  therefore — separation:  Dc-adh^
duty,  obligation.


ID.

Pointing   to     an     expanse,     unfolding,    distribution,     or
division.

Hcl).  T,  Id,  a  hand,  means,  power,  doyninion,  a  tract,.
Î1  portion,  Sec.  ττ^>,  Id-e,  to  shoot,  or  cast  at,  to  praise —
give,  or  distribute  to  ;  to  confess,  or  unfold.


491

Gr.  û-cùj,  I  see,  discover :  u-ia,  idea,  perception,  discri'
nil  nation.

Lat.  Id-oncus,  meet,  convenient,  sitfficient.

Welsh.  Id,  stretched,  OY  extended  to:  IdJ,  to, for,  to-
aards,  unto  :  Hŷd,  length,  duration,  to,  as  far  as,  until.

Irish,  Id,  use,  fruition  ;  good,  just,  meet  :  Idh,  nzcreath
Si  chain  for  the  neck  ;  a  ring.

Expanding,  unfolding,    distributing,    or    dividing,    inter-
naliy,  or  intrinsicallj/. — See  under  D.

0Ώ,  Omi,  HOD.

Extending,    enlarging,    putting    forth     an    expanse,     or
distribution.

Heb.  11",  Od,  to  be  beyond,  beside,  further,  additional
— yet,  moreover,  again,  until ;  futuriti/,  eternity;  to  bear
witness;  to  put  on,  or  adorn.

Gr.  θ':-ος,  a  zoay,  a  road,  ä  journey,  o^-fj^v,  odor,  Bismellf
or  perfume.

Welsh.  Od,  excellent,  choice;  the  falling  snow:  od-i,
to  snow.     Hod-i,  to  shoot  out  as  corn,  to  tar.

Irish.  Odh,  music,  the  point  of  a  spmr ;  a  stranger.


492

DO.

An   expanse,    distribution,   or  division — extending,  put
forth.

Heb.  y*T,  Ώο,  knozckdge,  y"r>,  I-do,  to  knon•,  to  re-
gard, to  punish  ;  to  perceive  with  the  outward  senses.

Gr.  Ao-u,  to  give,  present,  distribute.     Αω-ξον,  ά  present.

Lat.  Do-no,  donum  ;  Doto,  dos — distribution.

Welsh.  Do,  it  is  true,  yes.  Do-di,  to  place,  appoint,
give.

Irish.  Do,  to,  tico,  therefore.

Armor.  Do-e,  God:  Do-are,  nezcs:  Do-ar,  the  earthy
Do-en,  to  bear  fruit,  bring  forth.

VD,  HUD.

Covering,     and  expanding,    unfolding,     distributing,     or
dividing.

Heb.  T)N,  A-ud,  a  frebraiid.  nin,  E-ud,  the  beaming
forth  of  light ;  majeslij,  glory,  honour;  a  vehement  noise ^
or  sound.

Or.  υί-ω,  to  celebrate,  sing:  v^-uip,  water — overwhelming^
and  spreading  fluid.

Lat.  Ud-o,  a  /oose  oz/ier  garment ;  S'udor,  stceat,  sur^
rounding  rnoisturc.


493

Welsh.  HùJ,    illusion,  fascination;  a  secret,  or  occiiU
scietice. :  Hûdd,  shack,  gloom.


DU.

Expanding,  spreading  over.     Distributive  superiority.

Heb.  "rn?    Du-d,  beloved;    an   uncle;    a  basket:    ρτ,
Du-n,  to  judge.

Π)*^,  Du-e,  languor,  Jciinfness.

Gr.  έ^ν-η,  destruction,   desolation.

^i-Yu,  ^u-fo•,  I  put  on,  spread  over  me,

h-yujAXf,  I  am  able,  superior  to.

Lat.    Dn-co,    I  lead,  preside    over. — Dux,    a   leader,  a
chief:  Du-mv.s,  a  bush,  a  grove.

Welsh;,    (and    A.)    Du,    black,    gloomy,    overspread.-^
Duw,  God  :  D(cv,  moving,  gliding  over  ;  a  bird.

Irish.  Du,  ink,  a  law  ;  ordinance  ;  duty;  oýîce;  a  la7id,
or  coîintry  ;  a  village.

Corn.  Du,  God ;  a  day  ;  a  side,  or  border.

Duf  (W.  Dug)  a  leader.

See  primitives  in  F,  under  P.


494

AG,  HAG.

Tending  to  grasp,  adhere,  cohere,  collect,  compensatCc.

Heb.  ijì^,  Ag-er,  to  gather,  collect.

Gr.  Ay-ΐύ,  I  lead,  bring  together,  carry  :  ay-zi^u,  I  gather^
collect.  ay-ti\fi,  a  herd,  flock,  collection :  «y-w»,  a  con"
fiict ;  assembly.

Lat.  Ag-o,  I  do,  take  i?i  hand:  Ag-men,  an  army,
crowd,  herd,  flock — assemblage.

AVelsh.  Ag,  zeith,  having,  holding :  W.  and  C.  agf
and:  Ag-aws,  Ag-os,  near,  proximate.

Corn.  Ag-os,  a  neighbour.

Jrisli.  Ag,  Kith,  at:  Ag-as,  and  Ag-an,  precious,
dear:  Ag-ag,  a  settlement,  habitation:  Agh,  good  for-
tune ;  an  ox  (gregarious  animal),  a  conflict,  a  battle^,
congressus,

GA.

Ç rasping,  adhering,  cohering,  collecting,  or  eompensatin^
positively — tchat  is  grasped,  &c.

Ileb,  fiw,  Ga-e,  to  increase,  [lift  up,  arise ;  pride f
proud.

Gr.  Tcc-u-,  to  beget;  to  be  born,  to  contain;  to  rejoice:
'yu-iu,  to  ht.ast,  to  be  proud,  ya-ςχ,  riches,  treasure,  accu-
mulation, (a  Persian  viora),  ycL-y.tv,  to  marry.


495

Welsh.  Ga,  an  angle — the  junction  of  two  lines  .•  Ga-
xiael,  a  hold,  grasj).

Corn.  Ga,  lift  up,  stand.

Irish.  Ga,  a  spear,  javelin — zohat  is  grasped.  Gahh,
take,  receive,  hold:  Gach,  (Ga-ach)  everi/ — collective
particle.

EG,  HEG.

"Negatively  grasping,  adheriiig,  cohering,  collecting,  or
compensating.

Heb.  π:ΐΓ7,,  Heg-e,  to  turn  round,  stagger,  dance ;  a
^deft,  a  hole  j:irr,  Heg-eg,  to  dance  round  and  round:
^n,  Heg-a,  commotion,  circumagitatioii.

Gr.  Έγ•£ί;ω,  to  azoake,  to  rouse  from  the  grasp  of  sleep.

Lat.  Eg-eo,  to  be  destitute  :  S'egnis,  slothful — negatively
■adhesive.

Welsh.  Eg,  open,  plain,  opened  —  with  inany  com-
pounds. Eg-awr,  to  open,  zciden :  Eg-in,  the  blade  of
corn — opening  of  the  seed.     Hcg-yl,  a  leg,  shank.

Irish.  Eagj  death.  Eag  and  Eg,  in  composition^ —
leaving,  quitting,  &c.

Armor.  Ileg-ea,  to  shake,  toss :     Eg-eri,  to  open.

Corn.  Eg-ery,  to  optn :     Eg-erys,  opened.


496


GE.

A  grasp,  adhesion,  cohesion,  or  collection,  removed,  taken
azcay,  separated.

Heb.  ru,  Ge,  to  break,  hurst  forth ;  bring,  or  thnist
forth.     nj3,   'N^ge,  to  push,  strike  uith  horns.

Gr.  Ti-vix,  a  generation,  progeni/ :  yt-fx^,  a  gift — zchat  is
put  forth.

íjüi.  G e-mo ,  to  utter  groans :  Geiiinio,  to  hud,  or  sprout;
Genero,  to  beget — put  forth.

Welsh.  Gen,  an  opening,  a  mouth:  W.  C.  A.  Gen,
the  chin — projecting  point,  W.  Gt-ni,  C.  Gt-ny,  to
come  forth,  be  born.

Irish.  Ge,  uho?  zchat?  either  —  particle  of  doubting.
Ge-ac,  spending,  scattering  :  Ge-ac-ach,  a  spendthrift  :
Ge-ag,  he  budded,  a  branch:  Ge-in,  he  generated;  an
offspring :  Gein-eadh,  a  generation — springing  forth.

IG,  HIG.

Poiniing  to  a  grasp,  &.c.     Disposed  to  grasp,  adhere^
cohere,  or  collect.

Heb.  nj',  Ig-e,  to  aŷlict,  oppress — grasp,  squeeze.

Gr.  ly-rya,  thc  groin :  ^γ-ι*.νΛ,  I  approach — come  into  con-
tact :     o'ly-oc'j,  I  suppress,  conceal.


497

Lat.    Ig-nìs,ýre,  graspitig  element.     Ig-itur,  therefore
quasi  ab  ?o7'or/ie;ieo;\     S'ignum,  a  sign,  mark,  standard.

Irish.  Igh,    a   ring — -grasping  round  ;    tallow — accumu-
lating matter.

Corn.  Ig,  a  hook.

Armor,  Ig-uen,  a  flesh-hook.


GI.

Grasping,  edhering,  cohering,  collectings — intriymcally,
internally. — See  examples  under  G.


OG,  HOG.

Projecting,  eiknding,  put  forth  from  a  grasp,  cohesion,
or  collection.

Heb.  ru;;,  Og-e,  a  cake.

Gr.  Ογ-ν.οζ,  swelling,  pride  ;  a  mass,  mound  ;  eminence
Oy^o^,  a  furrow,  road.

Irish.  Og,  young,  the  young — springing  forth.  Og-a7i,
a  bough,  branch — perhaps  the  true  etymology  of  their
ogam,  or  tree  alphabet.     Ogh,  the  ear.

Welsh.  Og,  a  harrow ;  young.


t  ι


498


GO.


A  grasp,  adhesion,  cohesion,  collection  extended,  ρτο"
jecting,  put  forth,  or  yielded  itp,

Ileb.  i%  Go,  to  expire :  ;^J»,  I-gOy  to  labour^  exert.
J^JD,  N-go,  to  touch,  Avound_,  reach,  smite.

Gr.  To-w,  an  enchantor.  yo-w,  a  knee  —  projecting
joint.

Welsh.  Go,  an  approach,  reaching  towards:  Gob,  a
heap,  mound.

Go-hijr,  a  compensation,  reward.

Irish.  Go,  the  sea;  a  spear;  to,  imto,  until;  sign  of  the
optative  mood.  Gob,  a  bill,  beak,  snout  :  Gob-am,  I
bud,  sprout  forth.

A,  Go,  ferment,  leaven.

UG,  HUG.

A  covering  grasp,  adhesion,  cohesion,  toUection.

©r,  fy-i-n^,  whole,  entire.

Welsh.  Hug,  a  coat,  a  loose  gown.  Hwg,  λ  hook,  a
bending  over.

Corn.  Ug,  upon..


499

Irish.  Ug-a,  choice^  election :   Ugh,  an  egg.     Vgh-ainif
liorse  hai-ness;,  trappings.


GU.

Grasping  and  covering.     Adhering,  cohering  to  the  sur-
face.    Accumulating  from  zcithout.

Heb.  ij,  GUf  a  body,  a  society  :  >u,  Gid,  a  multitude,
nation,  people.

Chald.  mj,  Gu-e,  elevation,  pride.

Gr.  Γυ-α,  a  trench  with  high  edges,  a  fenced  road.
Γι-αλο^,  a  cavity,  the  hollow  of  the  hand,  yv-uhx^  ropes,
sails.

Lat.  Gu-la,  the  gullet,  gluttony:  Gu-mia,  a  glutton,
gluttony :  Gum-mi,  gum.  Gur-ges,  a  \vhirlpoolj  gulf;
glutton,  8cc.

Welsh.  Gzc-ach,  a  cavity,  cell.  Gn-e,  a  Aveb  :  Gzu-r,
a  husband.

Armor.  Gue-a,  to  weave:  Gue-at,  a  Λveb,

Corn.  Gu,  a  reward,  desert.

Irish.  G«,  a  lie  :  Gu-as,  perils  danger.


Í  i  2


100


AL,  HAL.

Tending  to  a  gUaling  motion,  dissolution,  emptiness,  open'
ncss,  laxity,  smoothness. — See  examples  under  L.

LA.

Voutivciy — gliding,    dissolving,  empty,  open,  lax,  or
smooth.

Ileb,  ^h,  La,  no,  not,,  without.  ΠΚ^,  La-c,  to  faint;  to
be  weary,  spent.

Gr.  Αα,-ω,  I  see — I  enjoy — it  is  open  to  me  :  1  am  will-
ing— give  loose  to.

λα-oç,  the  common  people — dissolute  mobility.

hct-yuy,  the  flank — lax  part.

Lat.  La-hor*,  I  slide,  glide:  Lam-ho,  I  lick — glide
over :  La-vo,  I  Avasli,  dissolve.     Lac-vis,  smooth,  sleek.

Welsh.  Lla,  expanding,  opening,  light,  clear  :  Lla-c,
a  quicksand;  slack,  loose,  lax.  Lia-char,  a  gleam,
gleaming.  Lla-cs,  slack,  loose,  remiss :  Lla-iih,  moist,
■vvct — solution,  effusion :  Lla-eth,  (C.  La-it,  I.  La-ith)
milk,  a  liquid.

Irish.  La,  a  d«y,  day — light,  open  ;  also,  water — whence
La-bheir,  a  laver,  ewer,  from  La,  and  Dcir,  he  brought,
carried.     Lo-g,  weak,  faint,  feeble,  hollow.


*  The   opposite  meaning  of   Labor,    work,   toil,  may  be  accounted  for,  bj
onceiviiig  tlie  rout  lo  be  Ab,  to  cause,  or  produce  eliccts.     L'abor.


501

EL,  HEL.

Negative!!/  gliding,  dissolving,  or    loosing :   privation    of
emptiness,  openness,  laxiti/,  smoothness.

Heb.  r\bn,  ILl-e,  to  wound,  pierce;  be  iu  labuiuv,.  oi-
violent  pain  ;   to  violate,  profane».

^ns  I-el,  to  stay,  wait,  be  firm.

br,i,  N-c/,  to  inherit,  take,  receive,  possess»

Gr.  Έλ-ω,  I  take,  catch :  ιλ-ωξ,.  booty,  a  catching,
taking  :  £λ-?ο/χα»,  I  desire,  covet:  ελ-^,  I  draw:  ίλ-αιω,  Dor.
I  take,  lead  awa}'  :  τ,λ-ος,  a  nail,  bolt,  fastener»

Lat.  Hell  no,  a  glutton,  greedy  person.

Welsh»  lie/,  a  gathering,  collecting,  taking,  seeking —
with  many  compounds  :  EÍ-aur,  (C.  El-ar,  I.  El-cath-
fain)  a  bier,  feretrum^

W.  C.  Λ.  EUii,  an  elbow — -juncture.

Corn.  El,  he  can,  is  able :  ILlh-ia,  to  hunt :  Ilelh-iaty
pursuit,  a  hunter..

Armor.  El-giiez,  the  chin,  ci.  d.  Jace-angle,

Irish.  Ell,*  a  string,  latchet,  thong — fastener  ;  a  battle,
cagagement;  hazard,  danger:  Eallj  a  trial,  proof:  El-
ton, steep,  uphill.

— , .» -,^

*  Heoce  B'ellum,  Du-ellujn,  B'ellua,  &c»


502

LE.

Solution,  looseness,  emptiness,  openness,  laxitr/,  smoothness^
Ziithdrazcn,  removed.

Heb.  nn^,  I^e-e,  to  be  vigorous^  fresh_,  green.

'Vh,  Le-i,  the  jaw-bone — holder.

Gr.  Αε-ίχ,  a  prey,  capture  :  λη-^ατω,  I  catch,  get  booty.
7.γι-[Λχ,  purpose,  intent,  courage,  valour,  rigour  of  mind  ;
>Ύ,ΙΛγ.α,  an  assumption  :  λί-uv,  a  lion,  devourcr.

Lat.  Le-go,  I  gather,  choose :  Le-na,  a  bawd  :  Le-no,
a  pimp,  catcher.

Welsh.  Lie  (C.  Lc,  A.  Le'cli),  a  place,  receptacle,  re-<
pository :  Lle-u,  to  place,  fix,  set,  lay.  Lle-zc,  a  lion  :
Llezv-a,  to  eat :  Lies  (lie-as)  advantage,  profit,,  gain—
what  is  taken,  or  received.

Corn.  Le-fil,  true,  trusty,  firm  :  Le-as,  sufficient,  meet,
he-ana,  to  fill :  Len,  full ;  faithful,  trusty.

1.  Le,  >vith,  having:  Le-an,  he  adhered,  followed,
imitated,  pursued:    Le-as,  profit :  Xe-eiAa,  gain.

IL,  IIIL.

Pointing  to,  approaching  dissolution,  emptiness,  opcnnessj.
laxiti/,  smoothness.

Heb.  bb'.  III,  to  cry  out ;  Yell — unless  perhaps  from
Vlie  sound.


503

Gr.  ΐλ-αω,  to  be  propitious,  mild.

ίλ-εοο  a  hole,  cavity:  ιλ-νς,  mud,  dirt— solution  of  earth,

Lat.  Il-e,  the  flank — lax,  soft  part.  lUl-um,  a  mere
nothing.

Wekh.  Htl,  a  particle,  piece,  fragment — issue>  off-
spring. //,  a  ferment,  resolution,  decomposition  :  111,  a
separate  particle.

Irish.  //,  in  composition,  variety,  diversity  of  parts :
Il-e,  a  multitude,  diversity,  djiference :  Il-cach,  dung,
dirt.

LI.

Gliding,    dissolving,    loose,   empty,  open,  lax,  sntooth —
intrinsicallj/,  internalli/. — See  under  L,

OL,  HOL.

The  emanating,  extending,  putting  forth  of  solution,  open-
ness, laxity,  or  smoothness,  Sec.

Heb.  n^;^,  Ol-c,  to  mount,  ascend  as  a  vapovu*  —  a
burnt  offering,  b^!,  01,  upon,  over,  &,c.  b)!*^  I-ol,  profit^
advantage.

Gr.  Ολλ-ΐ'ω,  to  destroy ;  loose.     θλ-οί,   whole,  entire,

Lat.  Ol-eo,  to  smell,  to  yield  a  smell :  Ol-or,  a  strong
smell :  Ol-im,  long  since ;  hereafter.


504

Welsh.  Oì,  a  track  ;  the  hinder  part ;  the  rear.  Hol^
to  fetch.     Λν.Α.  lloll,  all,  the  λ\1ιο16.

Irish.  0/,  a  drinking,  drink  :  Ol-an,  wool  :  O//,  great,
grand.

N.  B.  O, — of,  from,  out  of, — has  sometimes  the  force  of
a  privative,  but  more  frequently  it  implies  an  emanation,
extent,  production.


LO.

A  gliding   motion,  solution,  openness,  laxity,   smoothness^
emanating,  extending,  put  forth.

Ileh.  ylh,  Lo,  to  lick,  absorb.

Gr.  Ao-vb),    to   Avash :    λο-ί-γος,   destruction :    λο-ι/Λθ{,  pesti~
lencc,  contagion.

Welsh.  Llo-er  (C.  Lo-er,  A.  Lo-ar),  the  moon,

Irish.  Lo,  water ;  a  lock  of  wool  5  a  da}-.

Armor.  Lo-a,  a  spoon  ;  Lo-va,  to  row  :  Lo-ui,  to  wax
mouldy:  Lo-us,  vile,  filthy.

Corn.  Lo,    a  pool ;    standing   water  {  a  spoon ;  Lo-ob,
slime,  sludge.


505

UL,  HUL.

A   covering  solution,  or  loose  substance,  8cc.  or  covering
solutioîi,  laxity,  smoothness.

Heb.  >b):,  N-Ul-i,  a  dunghill ;  to  defile.     P.

Gr.  Ύλ-τΐ^  a  wood,,  or  forest.

Lat.  JJl-igo,  moisture,  ooziness•:  XJl-cus,  a  boil,  or  sore :
Ul-va,  sea  grass :  Uil-us,  any  one.

Welsh.  Hid,  a  cover,  or  mat.

Irish.  JJl-achd,  colour,  dye  :   Ul-cha,  a  beard  :   UU-a,  a
burying  ground.


LU.

A  gliding  motion,  solution,  laxiiij,  &c.  covering,  or  over-
whelming — gliding,  diffusing  itself  on  the  surface.

Jîeb.  1^,  Lu,  would!  Ο  that — particle  of  Avishing.

Gr.  Αν-γη,    obscurity,    darkness :  λκ-/**,  dirt,  filth :  λυ-μ,γ.,
contagion,  destruction,  Lu-es.     >^v-u,  to  loose.

Lcit.  Lu-ciis,  a  grove — loose,  hollow  cover.

Lu-ceo,  to  shine,  give  light — diffuse  a  loose,  subtle  mat»
ter  over  the  surface,  whence  Lux — Lu-men.

Luo,  to  pay;  expiate,  wash :  Lu-tum,  clay,  mire.


506

Welsh.  Liu,  an  army,  multitude :  Llu-g,  light,  the
dawn  ;  a  plague,  pestilence — subtle,  diffusion  over — Llii-n,
form  shape,  figure,  outward  appearance :  Lhc-ch,  an  ex-
panse of  water ;  also  dust,  a  cloud  of  dust.

Irish.  Lu,  small,  light,  quick — flying,  gliding  over  the
surface  :  Lu-a,  water  :  Lu-ath,  ashes.

Armor.  Lu-ia,  to  mix,  compound.


AIM,  HAM.

Tending  to  embrace,    comprehend,  surround.
See  examples  under  M.

MA.

Embracing,  comprehending positiveh/ — what  is  embraced^
or  comprehended.     Real  substance.

Heb.  HNQ,  Ma-e,  a  hundred — comprehensive  number,
nxD,  Ma-d,  might,  greatness,  copiousness;  very  much,
hugely.

Gr.  Mx-u,  I  greatly  covet — embrace  with  desire:  Μα,
sheep,  substance — a  Phrygian  term,  /^ta-yoc,  a  sage,  man,
of  science — a  Persian  word,  //.«-λα,  hugely,  abundantly :
μν.,  and  its  mutation  f^u,  in  the  termination  of  ΛVords — com-
prehending, containing,  substance,  &,c.

Lat.  Ma-ter,  materia — comprehending  the  substance:  so
magnus,  magis,  mala,  manus,  &c.

Welsli.  Ma,  a  place,  space,  state ;  Mâdf  good,  benefit.


ο


07


Α.  Mat,  good^  wealtli,  riches.  W.  Ma-e,  C.  3Ia,  it  is,
there  is.  W.  Ma-er,  a  siipcrintendant.  W.  C.  A.  Ma-es^
a  field.     W.  A.  Ma-ctk,  nourishment.

W.  Ma-int,  magnitude,  quantity  :  Ma-itk,  large,  huge,
Ma-nu,  to  prosper,,  thrive.     W.  C.  A.  Mam.  a  mother.

C.  Ma-er,  much  ;  ma-ge,  wonderous  :  ma-n,  to  will,  de»'
sire :  ma-ne,  enough.

Irish.  Ma,  magh,  a  field  :  Ma-is,  a  sheep,  a  mass  :  Ma-
ith,  good,  excellent.  Mam,  strength,  might,  power;  sv
mountain.


EM,  HEM.

Negatively  comprehending,  or  embracing — privation  of
substance — simpliciti/,  snialtntss.

Heb.  πηπ,  Hem-e,  to  be  hot :  heat,  Avrath,  fury — incon-
tinence; a  wall,  or  separation — parting  off.  ΠΏΠ,  Hem-
ci/i,  acrid,  corroding  poison.     0Π3,  Λ^-Ε•λ«,  he  repented.

Gr.  Efŵ-EWj,  I  vomit :  riy-vu,  I  lean,  fall :  «//-κ^'ί^  S'emi,
half.

Lat.  Em-o,  I  buy;  that  is,  take  from,  extricate  from  thŵ
former  possessor — whence,  Ex-imo,  to  deliver,  release:
jjer-imo,  to  cut-off  ^  ad-imo,  to  take  away,  2cc.

Welsh.  4,  Em,  ev,  he,  this — a  simple  object.  Em,  a
rarity,  scarce,  or  small  thing.  Eni-id,  rare,  unique  :  £772-
ig,  a  toy,  little  jewel.


•  508

Corn.  Hem,  Armor.  Hcma,  this.

ME.
Embrace,  comprchtnúon,  substance  uithdrawii,  ronovecl.

Heb.  ΠΠΟ,  Me-e,  to  wipe  ofì^,  blot  out,  put  away.  TTD,,
Me-ij  an  engine  to  batter  and  destroy  walls.

Gr.  M«,  no,  not:  (A.i-\uy,  smaller,  /-li-'i^,  I  part,  divide;
am  deprived.

Lat.  Mc-o,  to  go,  glide  away,  flow  out,  waste.  Mc-io,
urinam  reddo.  Mc-to,  to  reap,  cut  οίΤ — remove  substance :
Mc-tuo,  to  dread.

Welsh.  Me-di,  to  reap :  Me-thu,  to  fail,  decay,  perish.
Mc-itin,  a  moment;  \vhile,  past.

Irish.  Me-athfhe  failed;  a  decay:  Me-ahhal,  sharne,
deceit :  Me-as,  a  pair  of  shears ;  fruit  removed  from  the
tree  ;  an  orphan — cutting,  cut  off.

IM,  HIM.

Fointing  to   an  embrace,    comprehension,  or   substance —
înect,  disposed  to   embrace,   or  comprehend.

Heb.  D>,  Im,  the  sea.  D»D>,  Imim,  days,  a  year;  giants.
P.  D',  Im,  termination  of  the  noun  masculine,  in  the
plural,  or  comprehensive  number.

\iy,  Ιηι-αη,  the  right  hand.


509

Gr.  ΐ/Α-αί,  a  thong,  or  latchet :  t;j.-ci,  a  garment,  cover-
ing :  i/A-Eifw,  desire^  covet.

Lat.  Im-ago,  an  image.  Tm-itor,  I  imitate ;  Im-o,
rather,  more  than  ;  Imus,  with  the  Celtic  article  is  prefixed,
forms  the  superlati\'e  termination,  utmost,   extreme.

Welsh.  Iliv,  \.  Him,  a  skin,  surface.•

Irish.  Im,  about,  surrounding ;  butter.  lom-ad,  Im-ad,
much,  many,  plenty,  a  multitude.  Im-eal,  (W.  ym-yl)
a  border,   brim,  coast.


MI.

Embracing,  comprehending,  intrinsically.     Substance  ap^
propriated. — See  under  M.


OM,  HOM.

The  extending,  putting  forth  of   an     embrace,    comprc-
hensioii,  or  substance,

Heb.  Dÿ,   Om,  a  people,   multitude,   swarm  ;    with,  to-
gether with.

Di>3,  N-oin,  to  be  sweet,  pleasant ;  sweetness.

Gr.    Oy.-rjjxi,   I  swear :    ο//-ίλ5,•,    an    assembly,  multitude.
c^-oç,  like,  equal.

Lat.    Om-entum,  the  caul  of  the   bowels.     Om-nis,  all,
every  one.     Hom-o,  man,  rational  being.


510

Irish.    Omh-an,     froth,   syllabub ;    terror,      Om-nay  an
oak  ;  a  spear,  or  lance.

Welsh.  Hov,  hanging  over,  intimidating.

MO.

An  embracing^  or  cpmprehending,  and  extending,  or  carry-
ing forth. — Comprehension,  matter j  substance,  emanating,
projecting,  put  forth.

Heb.  *)ίΏ,  Mo-i,  the  bowels.

Gr.  M0-70Ç,  /xo-5Oç,  /Αθ-λοί,  //ω-λοί,  labour,    trouble,  war,  bat-
tle.    po-Toç,  a  bandage  for  wounds.

Lat.  Mo-veo,  to  move,  remove.

Mo-dus,  mos,  a  manner,  custom.

Mo-les,  a  mass  :  4-  Mo-erus,  a  wall.

Mo-enia,  walls  of  a  city.

Welsh.  Mo,  more  :  Mod,  a  circle,  enclosure.

Mo-dur,  a  protector,  a  sovereign.

Modd,  a  mode,  manner,  custom.

Mo-cs,  general  conduct,  behaviour.

Irish.  Mo,  a  man  :  Mo,  Mo-a,  greater,  greatest :  Modhy
a  manner,  fashion ;  work.


511

UM,  HUM.

uá  circumfusive  embrace,   o?-   comprehension.     A   covering
substance,  or  matter.

Heb.  Din,  E-um,  multitude,  tumult^  trouble  :  Dv,  I-urn,
day.

013,  N-u?n,  slumber ;  to  close.

Gr.  YfA-»!v,  a  membrane,  or  skin.

νι^-ΐΌς,  Hymnus,  a  song  of  praise.

Lat.  Um-ho,  tlie  boss  of  a  shield  ;  Um-bra,  a  shadow ;
Hum-or,  moisture :  Hnm-o,  to  bury :  S'um-o,  I  take,  re-
ceive— embrace  and  cover.     S'um-en,  the  pap,  or  udder.

Welsh.  Huv,  a  mantle,  cover.  Hum,  a  racket,  bat.
IIwv,  a  hood,  cowl.

Irish.  Um,  about,  surrounding,  covering;  with,  to-
gether with.  Umh-a,  a  cave,  den:  Um-ar,  a  trough,
vessel.


MU.

Comprehending  and  covering :  substance,  or  matter  zt^hich
covers,  diffuses  itself  round.  Sometimes — substaîice,  co-
vering  itself,  or  which  is  covered ;  aSj

Heb.  niD^  Mu-e,  marrow,  brain»


512

Gr.  Mv-u,  to  shut,  close,  cover :  μν-ιω,  to  initiate  into
mysteries :  /Af-jaw^  to  moisten :  μν-λ-ή,  a  mill,  covering
mass.

Lati  Mu-cor,  mouldiness ;  mu-nio,  to  enclose,  fortify ;
muruSj  a  wall,  &c.

Welsh.  Bitty  a  large  measure  of  liquids:  Mw,  a  sur-
rounding substance  :  Mzcd,  an  arch,  or  vaulted  roof.

Mzig,  smoke.     ΜΰΊ/,  A.  Mui,  more^  greater,  larger.

Irish.  Mu-adh,  a  cloud;  noble,  great,  good:  Mu-aì,dí
top,  summit.

Corn.  Muf  much:  Mui,  great.

AN,  HAN.

Tending   to  produce,   dkcriminatc,  or  simplifj/. —
See  examples  under  N.

NA.

Producing,   discriminating,    simplifying — in  a  positive
manner  :  or,  what  is  produced,  simp/ijicd.

ι    Heb.  N3,  Na,  now — the  present  point.

Gr.  Να-ος,  a  temple  :  v;^-•.?,  a  ship — a  fabric — thing  formed
or  produced :  hence,  va-iw,  I  inhabit — occupy  a  fabric  ;
tui,  verily,  certainly,  Nac,  particle  of  discrimination.

Lat.  Kae-vns,  a  natural  mark  ;  Sa-vo,  I  do,  make,  pro-


duce  :  Na-rîs,  a  ship  :  Na-scor,  (q.  incept,  from  Na-cr)
I  am  born,  produced,  come  forth :  Na-tu7'a,  nature ;  the
producer.

Welsh.  Na-ws,  nature  —  the  producer :  Na-v,  the
creator :  Na-in,  a  grandmother  (I.  a  mother),  which  pro-
duces.    Na-ddu,  to  cut  into  form.

Irish.  Na-e,  a  man,  individual :  Na-duir,  nature :  Na-
eidhe,  an  infant :  Na-oi,  (W.  ^  Ναζΰ)  a  ship.

Mai  ymsawd  yn  Uyn  heb  7ΐαζΰ.  Tal.

<■'  Like  contending  in  the  water  without  a  ship."

EN,  HEN.

Negativelj/  new,  or  present.     Not  produced,  discriminated^
or  simplified.

Heb.  nin,  Hen-e,  to  compass,  close,  shut  up  ;  a  cell.

Gi•.  Ev,  in,  within — not  produced,  or  brought  forth :
Ef-ííeç,  noon — point  of  receding.

Lat.  S' en-ex,  an  old  pei'son  :  S'enesco,  I  begin  to  decay.

Welsh.  C.  Hen,  old,  decaying:  En,  in  composition,
in,  zdthin :  Corn.  Armor.  En,  in :  En-a,  there,  therein.
Armor.  En-e,  the  soul — internal,  invisible  principle.

Irish.  jG«,  in  composition.  In:  S'ean,  old  5  he  declined,
refused  :  S'en,  a  net.

κ  k


514


NE.

J  production,  clhcr'imhiate  thing,  perception — removed,  or
Ziithdrawn.

Ileb.  ΠΠ3,  Ne-e,  to  rest,  cease  from  motion,  or  action ;
also,  to  lead  forth .

Gr.  Ns,  in  comp.  ncgat.

Lat.  "Ne,  not,  neither:  Ne-co,  I  slay,  cut  off:  Ne-go,
I  deny,  refuse.

Welsh.  Ne,  not;  Nc-viarc-r,  7iot,  much.  Ne~b,  no  one ;
any  one — indiscriminately.

Corn.  Ne,  no,  nor,  not :  Ne-gln/,  to  deny.

IN,  HIN.

Pointing  to  a  discriminate,  or  simple  object.     Aptitude  t»
produce,  discrimindte,  simplify.

Heh.  r\y,  In-e,  to  press,  squeeze  out.

γ*,  1-171,  wine — produced  by  jjressing.

Gr.  ly,  a  fdjre — simple  substance:  tyy,  that,  for,  to  the
end  that — conj.  causal:  ^vuu),  tv-su^  to  emj)ty,  cleanse —
bring  forth  the  contents  :  p-i^,  a  son,  infant,  grandson  ;  tv-vu,
a  daughter  ;  »v-yoç,  a  colt,  foal — thing  produced.

Lat.  .S"//i-fcrys,  sincere  simple  :  S'rngnlus,  one  by  one — •
discriminatclv.


515

Welsh.  Hin,  season,  weather,  state  of  the  air.

Irish,  //i,  fit,   proper  for  any  thing:  a  country:  Inn,  a.
wave.     In,  Ion,  in  composition,  fitness,  meekness,  aptitude.


NI.

The  act,  07•  subject  of  producing,  discriminating,   simplify-
insr. — See  under  N.


ON,  HON.

The  extending,  projecting,  emanating,  putting  forth  of  a
production,  a  discriminate,  or  simple  object.

Heb.  nîÿ,  On-e,  to  act  upon   another  person,  or  thing  j
to  effect ;  produce  effects  upon,     py,  On-n,  a  cloud.

Or.  Ον-Λξ,  a  dream,  vision :  ov--n^i,  I  help,  profit,  reprove :
•»  o/xa,  a  name,  fame,  renown  :  ο>-ιΊ,  a  nail.

Lat.  On-us,  a  burden — lifted  and  carried  forth.     Hon-or,
honour,  distinction.

Welsh.  Ilon-i,  to   make  manifest,  publish  :  On,  a  spear,
lance — the  ash.

Irish.     On,  gain,   advantage :,  a  loan ;    blame :  Onn,   a
stone,  a  horse — springing  forth.

Corn.  Hon-or,  enough,  sufficient,
κ  k  2


16


NO.

A  production,  a  nezc,  simple,   or  discriminate  thing-^
emanating,  extending,  put  forth.

Heb.  )íì,  to  move  remove — go  forth  ;  a  wanderer.

Gr.  Νο-/Αθί,  a  law,  custom:  r.-o;,  a  mind,  thought,
memory.

Lat.  No-vi,  I  know,  discriminate :  No-men,  a  name,
fame  :  Ko-ta,  a  mark  :  No-vo,  to  produce,  make  new ;
No-vu%  new.

AVelsh.  No,  than:  Nod,  a  characteristic,  token,  mark.
No-eth,  (A.  No-az,  C.  No-ath,)  naked,  bare,  open.  I.
No-tha,  discovered.

Corn.  No-va,  to  make,  produce:  Now,  a  noise:  No-i,
a  nephew:  No-it,  a  niece:  No-ar,  the  earth:  No-den,
thread.  •

Irish.  No,  New.  No-dam,  I  understand.  No-is,  a  cus-
tom, manner,  behaviour ;  noble,  excellent.

UN,  HUN.

Covering,  embracing,  a  thing  ])roduccd,   or  a   simple,  dis'
criminate  thing.     Covering  discrimination,

Heb.  pn,  E-un,  sufficiency,  substance,  wealth.
Gr.  fk-H-:^  a  plowshare — ci)Vcring  the  seed.


517

Lat.  Un-i/s,  one  :   Vn-cla,  a  wave.

Welsh.  Un,  one,  the  same :  Un-azc,  to  unite.  Tlûn^
self — the  same  person,  or  thing;  alone:  Huu,  tliis  one.
W.  C.  A.   Hun,  sleep,  a  nap  of  sleep.

Corn.   Un,  one,  a,  an.

Armor.  Un,  the  same  :   Uu-o,  to  unite  :   Un-an,  one.


NU.

Discriminating  and  covering.  The  simple  discriminate
thing,  or  point  zchich  the  attention  covers,  or  rests  upon.
See  examples  under   N,


AP,  HAP,  AF,  HAF.

Tending  to    a    prominence,   or   convex — to    a   pusiiingy
springing,  or  putting  forth.

Heb.  ηχ,  Ap,  the  nose,  face ;  fire  ;  wrath,  fury — cer-
tainly, apparently.

i^DX,  Jp-ap,  to  flow,  rush  upon,  with  force  and  violence.

Gr.  A'!s-ciyîj  forth  !  away  with  it !  ap-age  !  α«τ-ο,  from,
forth  of — oi.'m-φυς,  a  father,  natural  source,  or  spring  :  «ip-ap,
quick,  suddenly  :  «î?-t«,  I  kindle,  inflame.

Lat.  Jp-er,  a  wild  boar:  Jp-is,  a  bee — stinging  insect:
Jp-ex,  a  sharp  point,  top :  Jp-sis,  the  rim — prominent  part
€if  a  wheel,


518

Welsh.  Jp,  a  son,  springing  forth;  whence  Eppil,  (Ap-
hil)  offspring.     Ap,  a  ferment,  whence  Ep-les,  leaven.

Irish.  Af-raighe,  Off'-risiiig,  rising  to  battle:  Ap-ran,
an  apron — fore  part.     Ce-ap,  a  tribe,  family,  head,  stock.

Corn.  Aff-hen,  issue,  offspring.

Armor.  Aff,  a  kiss  :  Affet,  to  kiss.

PA,  FA.

Positively  prominent,  convex,  pushing,  springing^  οτ  put-
ting forth.

Heb.  ND,  Pa,  here,  at  this  point,  or  extremity.

HKD,  Pa-e,  an  angle,  extreme  part  of  a  thing.

ΊΚΕ,  Pa-r,  to  adorn  ;  a  mitre  ;  the  shoot  of  a  tree.

Gr.  Φα-*;,  I  shine,  speak,  declare  :  îira-κ,  a  boy,  girl —
springing  up.

n«-»y,  I  strike,  smite  :  «ra-yoc,  a  mount,  hill,  prominence.

ΤΐΆτης,  a  father — putting  forth.

The  same  idea  presents  itself  in  Latin,  Pan-do,  Pa-teo,
Pa-tcr,  Pa-vo,  Fa-ber,  Fa-cio,  Fa-cies,  Fa-ma,  &c.  Fa-
b(C,  W.  Fa,  beams — prominent,  convex,  pods.

Welsh.  Fa-zc-,  honour,  credit :  Fa-rcd,  prosperity :  Pa-
<  wb,  all,  every  one :    W.  Pa,  what — C.    when,  what — A.


i>


19


seeing  that,    whereas.     "\λΛ  A.   Pa-un,  a  peacock.      W.
Fazceu,  A.   Fau,  a  paw.

Armor.     Ρ  out,  enough,  abundance.

EP,  HEP,  EF,  ITEF.

Negatively  prom'uient^  conrex,  imsh'ing,  springing,  or  piit•^
ting  forth.

Heb.  ηπ,  Hep,  secure,  covered.

Π3ΓΤ,  Hep-e,  to    cover,  overlay;    a  covering;    a   secret
chamber  ;  a  bed  chamber.

f)rn,  Jlep-cp,  to  cover,  sheUcr  entirely.

î<Dn,  Hep-a,   to  conceal,  secrete.     ^

Gr.  E~-u,  foj-oiAxi,  I  follow,  com(^  after.

Ezi-ii,  after,  since — posteriority.

Lat.  S'ep-io,  I  enclose  :  S^epes,  a  hedge.

Welsh.  Hep,  a  nodding,  slumbering:  C.  A. /ir/?,  with-
out.    C.  Eph-an,  June — point  of  the  sun's  receding.

Armor.  Ep-at,  a  stopping,  staying.

PE,  FE.

Prominence,  projection,  a  push,  or  spring,  restrained,  Ziith^
drazcn,  removed;  but  in  many  iustances,  the  force  ot  P^


520

remains  undiminished,  so  that  Pe  signifies  projecting,
pushing,  extending,  springing  forth. — See  tlie  note  un-
der Be.

Heb,  ΠΌ,  Peh,  seems    to  imply  a  covering,    spreading
over — hence,  a  thin  plate,  or.  overlay;  a  net,  or  snare;  a


ΠΌ1,  N-peh,  to  blow,  blast,  pant  for  breath.

Welsh.  Pe,  if.     Corn.  Pe,  what.

Armor.  Pe,  or,  what  ?  particles,  expressing  condition,
doubting,  or  hesitation.

I

Irish.  Fe,  a  hedge,  pound,  pinfold  ;  park,  or  enclosiu'e ;
a  gage,  or  rod,  to  measure  graves  ;  wider.

IP,  HIP,  IF,  HIF.

Pointing  to  a  prominence,  projection,  or  spring.     Meet,  or
disposed  to  project,  spring,  or  push  forth.

Heb.  HD»,  Ip-e,  beautiful,  fair,  slightly.

DO>,  Ip-eth,  a  prodigy,  sign.

Gr.  iir-n-oç,  a  horse  :  ΐττ-τα»,  to  hurt,  injure :  perhaps,  let
fy  at;  whence,  w-T*f*««,  I  fly:  »?»-«:,  strenuously,  mightily,
magnanimously.

I(p-»ûç,  Kl>-i:,  robust,  strong,  fat ;  also,  swift.

Lat.  Ipse,  self — the  object  pointed  to.


521

Welsh.    Hip,    a    sudden  stroke.     Η  if,    a   flake,    drift:
Hif-ian,  to  throw  in  flakes.     If,  thrown  oft',  sent  forcibly.

Irish.  Iph-in,  a  gooseberry  tree.

PI,  FI.

The  act  or  subject  of  projecting,  swelling,  pushing,  or
spi-inging. — See  under  P.

OF,  HOP,  OF,  HOF.

The  extending,  or  putting  forth  of  projection,  prominence,
convexitif,  a  push,  or  spring.

Heb.   nD>%  Op-e,  to  fly,  as  a  bird,  as  an  arrow,  as  the
glance  of  an  eye  ;  quick,  vii^orous.

HDJ%  Op-a,  a  branch.

t]O^,  Op-ep,  to  fly  swiftly  ;   to  vibrate,  or  brandish.

'Dl'Dÿ,  Opop-i,  the  eyelids ;  beams  of  light.

'Dÿ,  Op'i,  the  shoots  and  foliage  of  a  tree.

Gr.  Οΐπ-αςω,  I  pursue,  urge :  own,  a  peep-hole :  ew-i?,   re-
venge, divine  vengeance.

Om-Tw,    I   see,    behold :    οψ,    the   eye,    view  ;     a  voice^
smging.

Ow-c,-,  sap,  juice — pushing  forwards.


522

cÇ-Hf  a  serpent,  snake — darting  forth.

Lat.  Op-era,  Op-us,  work,  labour,  exertion.  Sec.

Op-is,  Ops,  O/^es,  power,  might,  dominion,  help,  strength^
forces,  riches,  &.c.

Op-to,  I  wish,  desire.

Welsh.  Of-er,  tools,  instruments.

PO,  TO.

Prominence,   convexity,  a  push,  or  spring — extended,  put
forth.

Heb.  VD',  I-po,  to  radiate,  irradiate,  beam  forth ;  lustre»

j/DN,  ^-po,  a  viper.

n^^'D,  Po-e,  to  cry,  shriek  out.

Gr.    Uo-a,    grass,    pasture  —  springing    forth:    tru-yuv,.  íìí
beard  :  co-Crt,    hair,  mane.

Πο-ι-υ.',  I  make,  produce.

Φω-tr,,  a  voice  :  c^v,  a  thief;  a  speculator  :  φ^ς,  light.

Lat.    Po-ena,    pain,    punishment :    Po-mum,    a   fruit.

Fo-etus,  the  young  of  any  thing  :  Fo-eto,  to  bring  forth
young;  put  forth  a  smell.


23


Fo-enum,  hay  :  Fo-enus,  interest  upon  money :  Fo~Uum,
a  leaf:  FoU-is,  a  pair  of  bellows:  Fo-ns,  a  spring,  foun-
tain.

Welsh.  FÒ,  flight ;  he  will  fly,  run  away.

Po,  by  how  much :   Fob,  every ;   Po-eth,  hot,  fiery.

Irish.  Fo,  a  king,  prince,  sovereign:  honour,  esteem;
good.

Corn.  Fo,  to  swear  :  Po-an  (A.  id.  W.  Po-en)  pain,
punishment.     Po-er  (A.  Pb-es)   weight.

Armor.  Fo-en,  hay :   Fonna,  to  abound.

UP,  HUP,  UF,  HUF.

A  covering  projection,  push,  or  spring.

Heb.  ^vi',  Sh-up,  to  bruise,  hide,  cover.

Gr.  'Î'Bs-Λξ,  a  vision  :  'va-ic,  upon,  aljove,  over  :  'wr-nv-n,
a  beard  :  \'^-νος,  sleep.

'rçi-afc•,  to  weave.

Ύψ-οί,  height,  altitude,  summit.

Lat.  Upiipa,  a  lapwing,  crested  bird  ;  a  mattock  to  dig  out
stones.

S'uper,  upon,  over,  above:  S'up-ero,  to  overcome,
prevail  upon,  pass  ^ver.


5U

Welsh.  ΙΙιψ-1/nf,  a  shock,   a  sudden  effort^  a  push,

IIzcp,  a  sudden  effort,  push.

Irish.   Up-tha,  sorcery,  enchantment,  witchcraft.

Armor.  Hiqi-en^  a  tuft,  lock  :  Ilupen-bleo,  a  lock  of
hair.

PÜ,  FU.

A  projcctiug,  srceUiiig,  pushing,  or  spyinging  over,

Heb.  ID,   Pu,  on  this  or  that  side — over  the  boundary,

Gr.  UvyYi,  the  haunches,  buttocks.  Uv-m,  the  gate,  or
entrance  of  a  city,  wv^,  fire.  <^\j-u,  fv-oy.uij  to  be  born^
arise,   spring  forth.

Lat.  Pu-bes — Pu-dor,  shame — which  covers  the  face  {
Pu-er,  Pii-ella,  a  boy,  girl,  springing  up,  8lc.

IVelsh.  Fu,  a  veiling  over  :  Fu-ant,  disguise,  hypocrisy.
Fw,  volatility.

Corn.  Fu,  a  shackle,  fetter ;  the  form,  shape,  out'
ward  appearance  of  a  thing;   Wtas  (Fuit)^

Fu~e,  to  fly — run  away.


AR,  HAR.

Tending  to  be  firm,  forcible,  superior,  prevaletit — to  aci
or  move  with  energy, — iSee  under  R>


5^25

UA,  RHA.

Tending  to  be  firm,  forcible,  superior,  prevalent — that
which  acts  or  moves  with  energy,

Heb,  πί<-)^  Ra-e,  to  see^  perceive,  understand;  a  hawk^
or  vulture.

£)ΝΊ,  Ra-m,  to  be  exalted_,  elevated.

)1'ίη,  Ra-sh,  tbe  beginning;  a  head,  principal,  chief,
most  excellent.

Gr.  '?x-ibi,  I  chase,  destroy — prevail  over.

*Pa-7)5,  vigour,  force,  energy,

Lat.  Ra-tio,  reason — rule  of  action.

Ra-dius,  a  sun-beam  ;  spoke  of  a  wheel.

Ra-mm,  a  branch  :  Ra-pio,   I  take  by  force.

ΛVelsh.  Rhag,  before,  chief,  ^  a  prince,  leader  :  Rha-
gor,  excellency  :  Rha-id,  urgent  necessity.

Irish.  Ra,  a  going,  moving  :  Ra-i,  motion ;  he  arose.
Rac,  a  king,  prince.  Ra-e,  a  field  ;  battle  ;  much,  plenty ;
a  salmon .     Ra-ha,  a  bidding,  commanding.


526

ER,  HER.

Negativelj/  firm,  forcible,  superior,  prevalent. — Privatiou
of  energi/  in  motion,  or  action.

Heb.  n-.n,  Her-e,  to  burn  violently,  be  enraged,  grow
pale.

ΊΊπ,  Iler-er,  to  be  burnt  up.

ΝΊΠ,  Iler-a,  dung,  excrement.

3ΊΓΤ,  Her-ch,  to  waste,  diminish,   consume,  to  be  waste,
or  desolate.

Jin  and  -]ΊΠ,    Herg,  Herd,  to  shake,  shudder,  tremble
with  fear.

Gr.  Ej-a,  the  earth — Λvhat  is  under  foot.

Έρ^-'σ<ύ,  I   creep,    crawl :    i=-^u,  I  go  with   difficulty,    am
afflicted,  perish.

Ej-»ç,  strife,  division.

Lat.  Iler-i,  yesterday:  S'er-o,  late,  too  late.

S'er-po,  I  creep  :     S'er-vio,  I  serve,  am  in  subjection :
Err-o,   I  wander,   mistake.

Welsh.  Ihr,  provocation,  defiance.

W.  Λ.  Er,  from,  since.


527

Α.  Err-es,   a  flat,  floor.

Irish.  Err,  the  tail,  end.  Ear,  lie  refused.  Ear-adh,
'fear,  mistrust.  Ear-ais,  the  end;  Eai'-haU,  the  tail;
Ear-aid,  Err-aid,   error.

RE,  RHE.

Firmness,  forcty  superioriti/,  prevalence,  removed. — Forci-
hiy  moving  of — broken,  separated,  reverted,  iterated,

Heb.  m>,  I-re,  a  moon,  month — division,  or  iteration.

Gr.  Ρί-ω,    I  pour  out,  flow,  vanish.

■  pvi-f/a^  a  thing,  deed,  word — separate  subject.

Ρνς•ςω,  I  break,   tear  asunder.

Lat.  Re,  in  comp.  back,  again,  &.c.  reversion,  separa^
■tion,  iteration :  Res,  a  separate  thing,  or  business :  Re-
tro', backwards:   Re-us,  obnoxious,  guilty.     Re-te,  a  net.

Irish.  Re,  the  moon  ;  a  space  of  time — division,  itera-
tion :  Rc-ab,  he  hath  torn  to  pieces :  Re-ac,  he  hath  sold,
alienated.

Welsh,  t  Rhe,  he  will  run,  flow  cfl".

Rhezc,  A.  Re-o,   frost.

Rheg,  a  gift,  present.

C-  Rs,  A.  Re-i,  to  give,,  r:.lienat€.


528

Corn.  Re,  some  one,  somewhat ;  by,  through ;  running,
Re-escj  to  flit,  rush  out.

IR,  HIR.

Pointing  to  firmness,  force,  superiority,  or  prevalence.
Disposed  to  act  or  move  forcibly.

Heb.  m>,  Ir-e,  to  erect,  set  up;  to  cast,  throw,  or
shoot — to  place  or  move  with  force.

KT,  Ir-a,  to  be  tenified — forcibly  moved.

Gr.  ΐξ'χΐ,  public  harangues — forcibly  moving.

l^-tyyK,  arteries.

Lat.  Ir-a,  anger,  rage.

Ir-jJeJ,  a  rake,  harrow — forcibly  moving,  tearing.

Irish.  //•,  anger;  a  satire.

7r-<?,  ground,  firm  laud.

Ir-ionn,  Id.  Ir-is,  brass ;  a  ken-roost ;  a  friend ;  a
luve.r  ;  an  assignation  ;  ii  description ;  a  record,  or  chronicle  ;
an   a^ra,  epoch  ;  justice,  judgment,  equity — (frm,  Jixcd.)

Welsh.  Ir-ad,  passion,  rage  ;  pathetic.

Ir-ai,  a  good — forcibly  moving,  instigating.


529

RI.

Firmness,  for CC)  superiority,  or  prevalence  inherent,  or  in-
trinsic.  The  property  of  acting,  or  moving  with  energy.
See  examples  under  li„

OR,  HOR.

Projecting,  extending,  or  putting  forth,  eminently,  or
forcibly.

Heb.  1)!,  Or,  to  excite,  rouse,  raise,  or  stir  up  •  to
exert ;  to  pour  out,  or  forth  ;  an  enemy  ;  to  strip.

Gr.  Οξ-αια,  I  see,  discover,  understand,

Οξ-'γα.ω,  I  Vehemently  desire.

Οζ-γη,  anger,  punishment  ;  the  ruling  passion.

o^-iyu,  I  Stretch,  extend :  oç-$oç,  erect,  direct :  αξ-μ.γ,,  im-
petuosity, bent  of  the  mind  :  oc-ος,  a  mountain  :  'cç-oç,  a
limit,  boundary  :   οξ-ω,  I  excite,  rouse,  &c.

Lat.  Or-a,  a  coast,  border — utmost  extent.

Or-ior,  I  arise,  begin,  spring,   or  shoot  forth,  &c.

"Welsh.  Or,  a  limit,  boundary,  coast,  margin ;  prep.
ör^  out  ofthe—Or-azv,  to  utter  ;  send  forth.


L    1


530

Ilòr,  bulky,  round.

Irish.  Or,  a  voice,  a  sound  ;  border,  coast.

RO.

Firmiiess,  force,  prevalence,  extending,  put  forth. — Ford-
bli/,  eminently  extending. — See  examples  under  R.

UR,  HUR.

Covering  eminently,  orforcibhj. — See  under  Î7.

RU.

Forcibly  overivhelming.     Eminently  covering.     Prevailing
over.

Heb.  ri)~\,  Rii-c,  to  enebriate;  overcome  with  liquor;
to  drench,  soak  ;  idolatry.

Gr.  Ρν-ω,  to  draw  along;  to  flow  ;   to  protest.

Lat.  Rn-o,  to  rush  over,  or  upon  the  surface.

Ru-beo,  to  blush,  redden  :  Ru-bus,  a  bush,  bramble :
J?«-ga,  a  wrinkle,  fold  :  Ru-ma,  the  cud;  a  pap:  Ru-nunj
the  cud  ;  belly,  paunch.

Ru-mur,  rumour,  report,  fame.

Corn.  Ru,  a  street,  covered  way:  Ru-an,  a  river:
Ru-id,  a  net :  Ruse,  a  rind,  or  bark  :  Rugi  a  king.


531

Armor.  Rii,  a  street :   Rusqueoi,  a  rínd^  or  bark.

Welsh.   Rhwd,    rust.     Rhwg,   a   rough  outer  garment,
Rhzuydf  a  net :  Rhzuyv,  a  king.

Irish.  Ra,  a  secret^  or  mystery.

AS,  HAS.

Tending  to  mark,  or  disti/igiiish — a  discriminate  object —
a  whole. — See  examples  under  S.

SA.

Marking,  distinguishing  positively.

Heb.  HKD,  Sa-e,  to  measure,  mete;  a  measure  of  ca-
pacity.

^<D^<D,  Sa-sa,  to  measure  exactly.

Gr.  Σα-w,  I  preserve  whole,  or  entire.

σχ-φ^ζ,  manifest,  open,  certain — marked.

Lat.  Sa-gio,  to  perceive  quickly,  discriminate ;  smell
out:  whence  Sagax,  and  Sa-ga,  a  subtle  woman,  witch — <
marker.

Sa-pio,  to  savour,  taste,  know — discriminate :  Sa-ne,
evidently,  truly,  discriminately.

Irish.  Sa,  self.

L  1  2


53^

Welsh.  Sa-er,  an  arcbltcct,  marker^  artist.

ES,  HES.

Negatively  discriminating,  or  pointing  out — ^unfixing —
removing  a  distinct  object.

Heb.  nvn,  Iles-e,  to  hide,  cover.

Π'ΙΤΤ,  Hesh-e,  to  hurry,  to  be  confounded.

ΠΪΓ7,  Hez-e,  to  comprehend,  enclose  ;  a  compact.

Gr.  Έ.σ-^,  I  eat,  devour,  corrode.

Η«-ωΐ',  less,  smaller.

Lat.  jEs,  thou  eatest,  devourest,  corrodest.

Hes-ter?iusj  yesterday — time  removed.

Irish.  Es,  in  comp.  forsaking,  leaving;  as  Reim,  a  road^.
Es-reim-each,  deviating.

Ess.  death,  a  ship — departure,  departing.
Welsh.  Es,  divergency,  departure,  separation.

SE,  ZE.

Discriminateii/  removing,  or  removed.     Segregated,  de-
pressed.

Heb.  Π?,  Ze,  to  be  loosed  from,  withdrawn,  separated.


533

ΤίΠΌ,  Se-e,  to  sweep,  scrape;,    tear  off.

nnii',  S}>e-c,  to  bend  clown,  stoop,  couch,  crouch.

nnîi',  Shc-c/i,  to  prostrate  oneself,

Gr.    Σϊ-Çì;,    to   adore,  how  down

σε-ίω,  to  shake,  remove,  move.

ξί-ω,  to  hoil,  spring  forth;    separate.

Lat.  Se,  in  comp.  separateli/,  apart ;  half;  pi'hation,

Se-co,  to  cut,  divide  :  Se-mi,  half,

Se-rum,  whey- — separating  from.

Irish.  6V,  he,  it,  him.

Corn.  Se,  she,  her;  a  seat.

Welsh.  4-  Se,  that — that  particular,

IS,  HIS.

Pointing  to   discrimination,  or  distinction ;  to  a  founda"
tion,  orjirst  principle.     The  marking.

Heb.  ì:•»,  Ish,  Is,  are.

Gr.  iç,  a  fibre:  κ-*!/*',  I  know,  discern.

Lat.  Is,  the  same  :  Is-ce,  even  he.


534

Welsh.    Ys,  4- Is,    nee,  certainli/ :   a  demonstrative  par-
ticle.

Is,  helozc,  under,  inferior.

Is-el,  Amor,  h-el.  Corn.  Is-al,  low,  humble.

Irish.  Is.  The  substantive  verb — is,  am.

Is,  under — fundamental.


SI.

Discrimitiation,    distinction;    internal,    or    low  situation,
&c. — See  under  S.


OS,  HOS,  OZ.

Projecting,  extendirig,  putting,  or  coming  forth  dis-
criminatelj/.

Heb.  Dy,  Os,  to  trample  upon — project,  or  rise  over.

ii'j;,  Osli,  to  make,  form,  fashion,  perform;  to  bear,  or
produce  fruit.

Gr.  Oî,  who.

οςς-α,  a  voicc,  fame,  report.

οζ-ω,  to  cast  a  smell.

ef-oç,  a  branch;  a  champion.


535


Lat.  Os,  the  mouthy  face^,.  countenance,  speech.

Os-cen,  a  foreboding  bird.

Os-tium,  a  door  ;  the  moiitli  of  a  river,

Welsh.  Os,  that  tends  from,  out,  or  forward ;  that  tends
to  increase  ;  an  increment.     O.  D.

Irish.  Os,  above,  over,  upon ;   a  deei•.

.SO.

Ohcriminatelif  extending,  projecting,  enlarged,  put  forth.

Heb.  r\^i,  Zo-c,  to  move,  remove,  shake.

yryr,  Zo-zo,  to  put  into  violent  motion.

nyp,  So-e,  impetus,  impulse.

Vul,  N-so,  to  move,  be  removed  ;  to  journey.

yò',  Sho,  to  look,  have  regard.

Gr.  Σο-αι,  çw-w,  to  chase,  put  to  flight.

eo-^iu,  to  expel,  put  forth.

rw-fAa,  a  body :  σω-ξο?,  a  heap — homogeneous  mass,

Lat.  So'holes,  issue,  offspring.

So-cio,  to  join,  associate :  So-dales,  a  companion.


536

Sol,  the  sun.     So-no,  to  sound,

Irish.  So,  young,  the  young — produced,  put  forth  :  So,
in  comp.  apt,  meet.

Corn.  So,  he,  him.

C.  A.  So-a,  suet,  fatness.

US,  HUS.
Covering  a  marked,  or  particidar  object,

Gr.  Tíç-oç,  a  pike,  orjavehn — raised  over  the  foe,

Lat.   Us-us,  use,  profit,  advantage.

Welsh,  IIu's,  a  covering,  horse-cloth.

Us,  C.  Us-ion,  chaff — husks  of  corn.

Irish.  Us,  news,  tidings  of  a  thing   lost;  a  narrative—-
about  a  distinct  subject.

SU.
Oiscriminateli/  covering,  or  being  over.

Gr.  -Zv-y.ti,  the  fig-tree :  ςυ-Μ,  prey,  booty,

çy-r;»,  a  kind  of  cloak,  or  hood.

ςυ-φχζ,  a  snake's  skin — pellicle.


537

Lat.  Suadeo,  to  advise  :    Su-ber,  a  cork.

Sii-dum,  fair  weather ;  the  clear  expanse.

Su-men,  an  udder,  the  paps,

Su-per,  upon,  above.

Sii-ra,  the  calf  of  the  leg ;  a  boot,  buskin,

Sus,  upwards.

Welsh.  Su-der,  a  horse-cloth,  saddle-cloth.

Sii-liv,  C.  Sill,  sight,  view.

Irish.  Su-as,  up,  upwards.

Su-adh,    a   learned    man ;    counsel,    advice ;    prudent,
discrete.

Su-il,  the  eye ;  hope,  expectation  ;  tackle.

AT,  HAT.

Tending  to   draw,    strain,  stretch,  bind,  circumscribe,  or
draw  round,  limit.

Heb.  lOK,  At,  a  magician.

Î>ÜK,  At-in,  a  cord,  rope — implement  of  drawing.

πηκ,  Ath-e,  to  approach— draw  towards.


538

Gr.  κτ-Άζ,  (At,  Lat.)  but — particle  of  limiting.
Welsh.  At,  io,  towards — approaching.
Irish.  At,  a  swelling — tension.
At-a,  At-an,  a  cap,  garland.
Corn.  At-is,  persuasion,  advice.

TA.

Extending,  straining,  drawing,  circumscribing,  positiveit/.

Heb.  XIONtD,  Ta-ta,  to  sweep — draw  forth.

nxn,   Tha-e,  to  limit — circumscribe  with  lines,

HD,  Tha,  a  chamber.

Gr.  Ta-cj,  τΛ-ζω,  I  draw,  strain,  extend.

ταΐ-íw,  I  set  in  order — draw  out  in  ranks,

τχ-ως,  a  peacock — displaying  his  plumage.

Lat.  Ta-heo,  to  be  ex-hausted.

Ta-bula,  a  table,  plank — extended  surface.

Ta-pes,  τα-ίΓΥίζ,  tapestry.

Irish.  Ta,  is,  am.


539

Welsh.  Ta-er,  importunate,  urgent.
Corn.  Potent,   powerful — exerting,
W.  C.  A.  Tâ?i,  fire.

ET,  HET.

Negativeli/    drawing,    straining,    limiting,    or   circum-
scribing with  a  line.     Privation  of  tension.

Heb.  NDn,    Het-a,    to   miss  ;  deviate  from   the   line,•—'
Parkhurst.

Gy.  Et-«,  moreover — besides :   tT-ίξος,  another.

ιτ-ης,  ετ-Μζος,  a  companion — additional.

Lat,  Et,  and,  moreover,  besides — not  limiting.

Irish.  Et,  in  comp.  privation.

Welsh,  Et-to,  yet,  still,  moreover — ^besides.

Eth-u,  to  go,  depart,  vanish.

Jiet-ys,  a  short  space ;  an  instant.

Corn.  Eth,  he  went,  departed,  vanished,

Eth-om,  want,  need.

Heth-aSf  a  carrying  away.


540

ΤΕ.

Tension   removed.     Drazcing  away,  &c.

Heb.  Γ\Ό,  to  plaster,  daub  Λvith  mortar,  8cc.  but  fre-
quently it  has  the  contrary  meaning. — See  the  note
under  Be.

IT,  HIT.

Aptitude  to  draw,  strain,  stretch — pointing  to  a  straight
line.

Heb.  ni3>,  It-b,  to  be  good,  right,  &c.

Gr.  It'jîç,  bold,  rash — going  straight  forwards.

η-νς,  the  rim  of  a  wheel — uniformly  binding,

i^-vi,  straight,  direct — impetuosity.

i^-vu,  I  proceed  straight  forwards — I  rush  with  impet-
uosity.

Lat.  It-a,  in  like  manner — directly  so.

It-em,  likewise.

It-er,  a  road,  journe}',   Avay — direction.

It-io,  It-US,  a  going  forwards.

Irish.  It-e,  a  wing,  fin  —  equally  stretching,  movinj
forth  :  It-e,  in  like  manner.


541

Welsh.    Ith,    C.  It,    Hit.     I.  Ith,    Corn,    wheat,  rye,
ÎCC. — growing  straight,  direct.

TI.

Drazciiig  to.    Having  the  property  of  drawing,  stretching,
binding,  &c. — See  under  T,


ΟΎ,  HOT.

Forth-draxcing,  or  straining.     Outwardly  stretching,  or
binding.

Heb.  toy,  Ot,  to  fly  swiftly ;  rush  forth ;  spread  a  gar-
ment over.

r\ÿ,  0th,  time,  season,  opportunity ;  to  pervert,  distort — ■
draw  aside,  or  awry.

Gr.  oS-iy,  to  move,  remove.

cS-or/?,  a  sail,  a  linen  cloth — stretched  out.

äi^-iu,  to  drive,  thrust  forth.

Welsh.  0th,  exterior,  extreme,

Irish.  Ot-ar,  labour,  exertion.

Ot-ir,  a  ridge  jutting  into  the  sea.


543
το.

Drawings  stretching,  straining  forth — binding,  or  strain-
ing outwardly,

Heb.  nyD,  To-z,  to  wander,  go  astray.

nj/rij  Tho-e,  to  err,  wander,  go  astray.

Vr\yr\,  Tho'tho,  to  err  greatly,  or  repeatedly.

Gr.  ®ω,  I  run  :  Θ0-05,  swift.

^ii-vssu,  I  cry  out ;  rush  with  impetuous  rage.

Tolof,  a  bow — straining,   and  casting  forth.

Lat.  To-mex,  to-mix,  a  cord.

Ton-sa,  the  blade  of  an  oar.

Torrens,   a  torrent ;  rash,  violent,  headlong.

Corn.   Tof,  I  go,  stretch  forth.

W.    C.    To,    A.    To-en,   thatch,  tile,    &c.— stretching
binding  outwardly.

W.  To-es,  A.  To-as,  Dough — heaving,  swelling  out.

Irish,  Toi,  a  bearing,  birth.


543

υΤ,  HUT.

A  cover,  stretching,  extending,  or  binding.

Gr.  fr-vov,  a  swelling ;   a  fungus^  8cc.

Lat.  Ut-er,  a  bladder;,  bag,  bottle.

Uter-us,  the  womb.

Irish.   Uth,  an  udder^  dug.

Corn.   Ut,  Uth,  a  swelling :  Iluth-a,  to  cover,

Huth-y,  to  lift  up,  exalt.

Utk-ic,  Vthy,  huge,  very  great.

TU.

Drawing,  stretching,  extending  over.

Heb.  nìD^  Tue,  to  spin — what  is  spun.

mn,  Thu-e,    to   mark,   limit,    circumscribe. — Draw  the
line  over.

Gr.  Dor.  Tv,  Lat.  Tu,  thou — the  person  over  whom  I
extend  the  hand,  or  the  eye.

Ty-ξαινοί,    Ty-rannus,    a  king :   tü^-çk,  a   fort,  bulwark —
defence,  protection.

ου-ελ?,«:,  a  wHirlwind  :  ^v-\xw,  a  sack,  or  pouch  ;  0"-?«,  a


544

gate,  or  door :  ου-ω,  I  sacrifice,  slay ;  I  rush  impetuonslj
— stretch  over.

Lat.  Tu-ber,  a  puíF,  fungus,  sweUing.

Tu-eor,  Tu-or,   to  protect — stretch  over;    to  beliold —
extend  the  eye  over.

Tu-meo,  to  áwell — distend  the  surface.

Tu-mex,  a  rope,  cord — drawn  over.

Tu-nica,  a  coat,  cover,  &c.

'    Irish.  Tw,  thou:   Tii-adh,   an  axe;  fame,  renown— ex-
tending over.

Tu-agh,  dominion ;  a  hook,   or  crook.

Tu-as,  above,  before.

Welsh.  Tu,  a  coast,  or  border.

W.  C.  Ti/,  or  Tu,  a  house.


In  explaining  the  import  of  the  combinations  here  exem-
plified, 1  have  attached  myself  closely  to  the  natural  ex-
prcsslon  of  the  several  elements,  as  it  has  been  tnarked  by
the  ancients,  in  their  names,  and  their  symbols.

With  such  a  design, — elegance,  or  neatness  of  expres-
sion may  not  have  been    compatible.      My  aim  was,    to


545

be  understood,  and  let  my  reader  perceive  from  whence  I
drew  my  deiiuitions.

Tlie  words  that  exemphfy  these  primitives  are  copied,
with  each  of  the  received  acceptations,  from  lexicons,
and  from  dictionaries  of  the  best  credit ;  the  Hebrew
generally  from  Parkinirst.  My  short,  and  oCv-asional
comments  are  separated  from  the  words  of  my  author,  by
a  line  of  demarcation.

I  would  not  bias  the  Judgment  of  the  pulilic  upon  the
result :  but  I  may  be  allowed  brieHy  to  remark,  that,  wbere*
ever  the  Hebrezo  offers  an  o{)portunity  of  comparison,  the
meaning  of  the  term,  in  almost  every  instance,  exactly
falls  into  this  plan,  or  system.  The  Irish  also  furuishes
instances  of  analogy,  so  powerful,  and  frequent,  as  to  cor-
rect the  operation  of  that  grammatical  licence,  wiiich  per-
mits broad  vowels.  A,  O,  and  U,  or  the  narrow  ones
£,  and  /,  to  be  substituted  for  each  other,  even  in  simple
primitives.

The  same  princijilc?  appear  with  equal  force,  though  not
with  equal  uniformity,  in  the  other  languages.

Where  Π  comes  after  a  consonant  in  Hebrew  words,  it
expresses  a  removal  of  the  furce  produced  by  that  con-
sonant. In  the  other  languages,  U,  after  a  consojiant,
is  at  one  time  privative,  at  another,  inert:— for  this  ir-
regularity I  have  accounted.

That  vowels  had,  originally,  their  appropriate  force,  and
meaning,,  ih  the  formation  of  the  word,  I  think,  will   ap-
ρίί^Γ  indisputable,  from  the  tables  I  hav^  annexed.     Per-
M  ni


546

híips  tlieiv  mutation  amongst  themselves  Ayas  the  first  con-
fusion that  language  underwent.

The  substitution  of  the  privative  Ε  for  the  positive  yi,  and
vice  versa,  might,  of  itself,  have  answered  the  design  of
the  confusion  at  Babel.


I  have  s!iewn_,  tliat /AiV'-iTi-s  and  Greeks,  the  old  inha-
bitants of  hall/,  and  the  Celtic  nations,  were  peeuliarlj
careful  to  distinguish  each  of  their  elementary  sounds,  bj
a  descriptive  name,  or  to  represent  it  by  some  natural,  and
c  laracteristical  object; — that  names  and  symbols,  of  each
individual  power,  evidently  pointed  at  the  same^ image,  in
all  these  languages.

From  thence  I  inferred,  that  an  age,  however  distant
from  ours,  once  existed,  in  which  the  ancestors  of  all  these,
nations  had  a  distinct  perception  of  tlie  force  denoted  by  each
of  their  primitive  sounds,  and  when  they  regarded  that
hnport  as  marked  by  nature  itself.

As  the  peculiar  correspondence,  or  the  natural  affinity
between  certain  sounds,  and  certain  ideas,  was  admitted
so  generally  by  ages  thus  remote,  Í  made  a  further  in-
duction, that  primitive  man  acted  upon  the  general  prin-
ciple of  natural  expression,  in  assigning  to  each  of  the
elementary  sounds,  its  peculiar  province  in  the  formation
of  language.

I  applied  myself  to  the  task  ofdiscovcring  what  anticniity  had
taught  upon  the  subject,  and  1  developed  the  hal)itiial,  or
practical  application  of  this  principle.  I  liad  not  bestowe<ì
much  labour  upon  this  field,  before  1  observed  the  operatiuii,


547

«fa  /'amoving,  ixiidjirivotiie  power,  in  the  body  of  pvimitivej
Λΐϊά  simple  terms.

Tliis  discovery  enabled  me  to  assign  the  reason,  why  yJb
and  Eb,  Ac  and  Ec,  &.c.  present  contrary"  ideas ;  and  why
Ar  and  El,  may  import  similar  meanings ;  the  former
being  poHthtlii  firm,  the  other  ncgalivcli/  zceak  and  re-
iaxt'd.  This  induced  me  to  inquire  minutely  into  the  im-
port of  the  several  vowels,  in  order  to  mark  their  most
frequent  mutations.

I  have  no\V  pursued  the  investigation  so  far  as  to  explain
the  import  of  simple  sounds,  and  first  combinations,  or  to
arrive  at  tlie  formation  of  such  primitive  terms,  as  con-
stitute the  basis  of  the  Hehrerv,  Greek,  Latin,  and  Celtic
languages,  (links,  which  had  been  missed  between  ety-
mology, and  principles  of  nature),  and  I  have  shewn,  that
all  these  languages  actually  arose  from  the  same  prin-
ciples.

The  subject  might  be  carried  further,  and  so  as  to  ad-
vance nearer  to  perfection  :  but  I  am  anxious  to  learn  the
fate  of  that  which  I  have  already  Avritten  : — I,  therefore,
with  ingenuous  diffidence,  resign  these  humble  Essays  to
the  judgment  of  the  public, — but  I  take  my  leave  of  th^
reader  with  a  general  reflection.

Tlie  identity  of  fundamental  principles,  Avhich  pervade
tIu'  general  mass  of  the  old  languages,  demonstrates,  that
all  of  them  sprung  from  one  parent, — and  tliat  mankind
are,  what  Scripture  declares  them  to  be — the  children  of
one  family. — May  the  conviction  of  this  affinity  between
lis  all,  dispose  the  human  race  to  mutual  ofliccs  of  charity
it.iul  forbearance  !


rlPPENDIX.


JL  HAVE,  in  tlie  pages  now  closed,  and  at  the  mercy  of
tlie  reader,  prompted  somç  argmiients  in  support  of  an.
opinion,  that,  in  reahtj,  and  in  fact,  the  celebrated  Ili/per^
horeuns  of  antiquity  were  professors  of  Druiilism,  in  its-
earliest,  and  least-adulterated  state.  It  must  not,  however,
he  dissembled,  that  M.  Mallet,  in  his  'Northern  Ant'iciidties,
and  that  other  very  eminent  writers  have  conteiiiplated  the
subject  in  a  different  view.

They  regard  the  character  of  Boreas,  the  father  of  the
Jli/perborean  priesthood,  as  identified,  in  tlie  Bore  of
Gothic  mythology,  and. from  this  position  have  argued,,
that,  in  the  Runic  Edda,  we  discover  the  religious  tracts,
and  system  of  those  Boreadce,  In  addition  to  the  reasons
which  I  have  already  given,  for  dissenting  fì-om  that  hy-
pothesis, I  beg  leave  to  suggest  the  following  remarks.

The  Gothic  system  places  the  age  of  Bore  at  some
remote  period,  before  the  creation  of  man^  or  of  the  visible
world.  His  character  has  no  analogy  to  that  of  Boreas^.
^s\\o,  together  with  his  brethren,  has  been  represented  as^
a  dwarf,  and  the  offspring  of  a  comparatively  recent
period.


550

Should  I  be  called  upon  to  adduce,  from  our  British
vocabulary^  those  identical  words,  which,  in  Greek,  have
been  rendered  Boreas,  and  Boreadee,  I  could  answer,  that,
of  Celtic  mythology,  we  know  but  little.

But  the  language  at  least  of  that  race  will  afford  π  per-
tinent similitude  of  terms,  from  which  I  shall  extract,  chr
select  a  few,  without  presuming  to  decide  upon  their  claim?.

From  Bard,  the  character  in  which  Druidisin  originated,
the  system  was  called  Barddas,  and  the  most  familiar  teini
for  Druid  in  their  Triads,  was  Mab  Bardd,  a  son  of  the
Bard.

Por-Jas,  or  Borias,  is  Lord  of  the  pervading  blast,  or
of  inspiration.  As  Bar,  whence  Bardd  is  derived,  sig-
nifies a  relatively  high  situation.  Ar-varydd,  may  equally
import  Chief  Bard,  or  Druid,  or  Ilj/perborean.

So,  in  Irish,  the  North  being  regarded  as  the  highest
region,  has  the  name  of  Tuath,  or  Tuadh ;  but  the  term
also  indicates  fame,  renown,  a  lordship,  dominion,  Sec.
Hence,  Ard-Tuathach  is  literally  llifperburcan,  or  su-
perior lord,   and  regulator.

The  fanciful,  and  careless  Greeks,  as  it  has  often  hap-
pened, may  have  translated  a  Celtic  term  in  the  Avrong
acceptation,  and  thus  be  mislead  into  the  corollary,  that
Hi/perhoreans  were  those  Λνΐιο  resided  beyond  the  north
wind,  or  under  the  very  pole.

The  rotemporarios  of  Ilerodotushüd  a  confused  idea,  that
Jli/perboreans  were    to    be   found    somewhere    upon    the


551

northern  coiifines  of  Fuiropf,  antf  of  Asia.  Tie  notion
may  have  arisen  from  a  mistake  of  the  name,  as  relative
to  mere  Greece :  or,  their  tradition  may  have  sprang  from,
the  period  at  which  the  Cimmerii,  were  the  most  remote,  in.
that  Hne  of  direction^  who  were  known  to  the  Hclladians.

TJie  dihgcnt,  and  curious  Diotlonis,  when  he  describe»
the  North-Kcst  of  Ana,  merely  hints  at  this  vague  opi-
nion. He  discards  it,  as  unworthy  of  a  comment,  and
places  the  Hyoerhoreans  where  they  had  been  found  by
respectable  writers  of  more  authentic  tradition,  and  who
had  written  expressly  vipon  the  subject ; — namely,  in  the
large  island  upon  the  ocean,  lying  north  from  the  coast
of  Gaul.  They  must  have  been,  therefore,  known  in  that:
situation  many  centuries  before  the  time  of  Diodorus*..

If  this  account  be  compared  with  Runic  tradition,  it
will  appear  that  Ht/perboreaus  were  no  Avorshippers  o£
Odin.

In  the  Edda  of  Snorro,  the  whole  fabric  is  built  upoa,
the  illusions  practised  on  GyJft,  King  of  Sivedtn^

This  prince  lived  at  the  time  of  0(/^/ì's  expedition,  which
Torfaus  and  Mallet  place  about  seventy  years  before
Ch?ist.     We  find  him  a  perfect  stranger  to  the  gods,   and


*  After  the  Roman  conquest  of  South  Britahi,  many  of  the  venerable  Drii'dg
retired  from  that  region  to  the  Hebridts,  in  which  islands  their  monuments  are
still  extant.  And  the  sea  that  surrounds  thoni  is  called  the  Htiperbnrcun  ocean
iiv  Ptolemy.     Lib.  II.  C  ii.

So  alio  Claudian,  speaking  of  Theodosius,  the  Elder,  says—

Scortiimqne  va^o  mucrone  secutus,

Fregit  Hyperboreas,  rcmis  audacibuî,  tmdai..


.55^

the  rclÍLíion  ^'  of  the  new-comers  from  Asia,'*  till  he  un-
dertook a  journey  to  Asgard  for  information.  It  was,
therefore,  clearly  the  opinion  of  the  writer,  who  compiled
the  Edda,  that  the  gods,  and  the  religion  which  he  de-
scribes, did  not  anciently  belong  to  the  north-west  of  Eu-
rope, but  were  imported  recently  out  of  Asia.

It  Avas  the  most  prominent  characteristic  of  the  Hyper'
boreans,  that  they  never  molested  their  neighbours.  They
made  no  conquest, — they  displaced  no  other  tribes,  or
nations, — they  were  the  aboriginal  possessors  of  the  land
which  they  occupied  :  whereas  the  Goths  represent  them-
selves, and  have  been  represented  by  others,  not  as  the
first  inhabitants,  but  as  the  conquerors  of  those  north'
•western  regions,  in  which  they  established  their  tenets  oF
religion.

The  Runic  Scalds  preserve  traditions  of  a  more  ancient
religion,  which  prevailed  in  those  very  countries,  and
which  embraced  the  system  of  transmigration.

The  mauners  of  a  people  always  bear  analogy  to  their
sentiments  of  religion.  That  of  the  Gothÿ,  was  calculated
with  peculiar  address,  to  inspire  active  heroism,  and  miU-
tary  enterprise.  It  was,  therefore,  absolutely  incompatible
with  llt/perborean  zealots,  who  placed  Mi*/;•  heroism  in
passive  courage,  and  patient  forbearance.  Odin,  or  either
of  his  relations,  could  never  have  been  a  god  of  their
creed.

Their  whole  history  declares,  that  none  of  them  could
have  b^en  enrolled  under  the  banner  of  "  The  terrible  and


553


severe  God ;  the  father  of  alaughter ;  the  God  that  car^
ruth  desolation,  and  fire  ;  the  active,  and  roaring  deitj^,
tcho  givcth  xictori/y  and  rexiveth  courage  in  the  conflict^
ΐί/ω  nanieih  such  cis  are  to  die,"     N.  Ant.  V.  I.  C.  vi.

The  Ih/perhoreans  must  rather  have  acknowledged  a
leader,  similar,  and  congenial  to  liu  Gadarn,  the  peaceful
ploughman,  the  explorer  of  unoccupied  regions,  whose  at-
tributes Í  have  already  described,  and  who  seems  to  be
the  Hercules  of  the  Gauls,  mentioned  by  Lucia n.  Ogmius
(Sulcius)  from  Ο,γ,ος,  a  furrow,  seems  to  be  an  evident
Greek  version  of  his  epithet  Arddur ;  Corn.  Ardhur,  a
ploughman.


I  think,  a  candid,  and  skilful  investigation  of  the  literary
yestiges,  left  us  by  the  ancient  Britons,  would  furnish
irresistible  evidence  of  the  identity  betAveen  Druids,  and
lli/perboreans.  1  shall  only  oflcr  one  specimen,  extracted
from  a  poem,  entitled  Angar  Cyvyiidazcd.  IV.  ArcL•
V.  i.  P.  34.

,  it  must  be,  however,  premised,  that  British  historians
often  borrowed  names  from  their  national  religion.  Caw,
and  Angar,  in  this  mystical  piece,  are  not  referable  to  the
family  of  (ieraint  ab  Erbin,  Prince  of  Devon.  They  are
evidently  mythological  characters.

^   Caw,  imports  a  band,  what  goes  round,  or  encloses.

Hence,  a  Bard,  or  Druid,  who  had  completed  his  in-
itiation^ and  was  admitted  into  all  the  elevated,  and  haU


554

lowed   privileges  of  the   order, — liad   the  title   of    Bardd
CaWy  or  Cewi/dd,  (perhaps  the  same  as  Κο»»)ς.)

Angar,  which  Mr.  Orcen  interprets,  receptacle  of  heat,
may  come  from  Aiigu,  to  comprise,  contain.  Be  that  as
it  may,  he  is  here  styled  third  of  the  equal  judges.  He
was  therefore  the  same  personage  as  Tydain  Tad  Auen —
Titan,  the  father  of  inspiration, — or  Jpollo,  who  is  third
of  the  chief  regulators,  and  third  generator  of  Bardie
lore.     W.  A.  V.  ii.  P.  67  and  71.

But  what  is  most  remarkable  in  this  poem,  is  the  cha-
racter of  Llâd,  benefit ;  or  Lladon,  beneficent,  who  seem»
to  be  identified  by  name,  parentage,  and  office,  with  La-
tona,  the  mother  of  the  Hyperborean  Apollo.

Liad  Avas  Uch  Lh/n  Llathrawd — Daughter  of  the  Fluid
of  Splendour; — and  again,  she  is  called  Lladon  verck
Lliant  (Caw)  Laton,  daughter  of  the  zeater  of  Cok.

.   Latona   was  the  daughter  of  Φυ»β» — Splendour,  and  of
K'5io;.    Apollodor.     L.  I.  C.  ii.

Lladon  was  Priestess  of  Angar — (Apollo)  in  the  origitb
if  land,  or  primitive  age.

Latona  was  mother  of  the  Hyperborean  Apollo  ;  but
this  can  only  mean  that  she  was  the^Vsi,  or  cÄ/r/'Priestese
of  Apollo,  in  some  national  temple,  or  grove,  and,  in  the
Jmyclean  Record,  we  find  the  term  M^irnj  thus  appropriated,
from  age  to  age.


555


An  GAR,  of  the   Social   Vnion.

**■  A  Bard  is  present.  No  mun  can  recite  his  song,  tliongh
lie  begin  when  it  is  concluded,  uniesá  he  be  a  Sj/u-edi/dd,
(soûthsai/er.)

*'  Let  the  generous  ones  disown  me — let  there  be  none  to
honour  me  with  a  present :  yet  Talic^iu*  declares,  it  was
η  day  of  irradiation,  \u\Q.n  Cian  {the  Ptrchiait)  sung  the
praise  of  JJiaKS.

"  Be  it  proclaimed — then  was  the  dissolution  οι  Av(igdduf>,
With  skill  he  brought  to  light  inestimable  principles-

*'  Gioion  (the  scientific)  and  the  mysterious  birds,  dis-
closed what  proved  the  dead  to  be  living,  though  he  be
divested  of  power.


*  Taliesin  implies,  radiant  front,  or  ium'inotis  head.  This  was  eitlifr  a  title  of
dignity  iu  Driadical  cstabliílmiLMits,  or  else,  the  system  of  transmigration  re-
cognised a  distinguished,  and  primitive  soul,  in  a  succession  ot  corporeal
i'.wellings.  .For  Talicsiii,  like  Orpiwus  of  old,  was  conversant  with  a  variety  of
ages.  The  B(ir<l  if  Uricit,  in  the  sixth  century,  is  well  known.  In  the  loiirth
century,  Taliesin  sung  the  elegy  of  Cunedda,  the  son  of  Edcyivi,  from  whom  he
had  received  personal  facours.     W.  Arch.  V.  i.  P.  7i.

Talicdn  accompanied  Bran,  Ma7iawiidan,  &;c.  in  the  first  century.  See  Mr.
Turner's  Vindication,  P.  284.

Tolieaiii,  the  son  of  Cyridwen,  the  first  Λvoman,  was  born  in  the  year  whetì
the  cauldron  of  Aioen,  a  Gwijbodaii — Genius,  and  Science,  was  first  prepared.
W.  Arch.  V.  J.  p.  17.  The  Sages,  and  Heroes  of  Druidism,  were  happily
circumstanced.  What  compliment  could  equal  that  of  being  discovered  thus  to
be  the  same  personage  who  had  already  enjoyed  a  thousand  years  of  renown,  or
had  signalised  himselt  on  a  tliousand  occasions  ?  Observations  like  these,  may
fivtend  their  analogy  lo  other  characters,  mcntioued  in  the  Mystical  Poems  and


Aragddu—^.urslinfr,  or  acvumulation  of  èarlTicss,  peihapii  mental  darkncu»


556

'^  Then  men  caused  their  furnaces  *  to  boil  without  water,
and  prepared  their  solid  substance,  to  endure  for  the  age
of  ages.

''  Th.e  progress  has  been  traced  from  the  deep  promulgator
of  song ;  and,  truly,  it  was  Aiigar,  of  the  Social  Unioii,
who  first  instituted  the  eusrom.  So  much  of  the  national
song  your  tongue  has  retained.  AV^liy  will  ye  not  recite  the
story  of  Llad,  the  daughter  of  the  fluid  of  BrightricsSf
(the  theme  of  every  one's  rhapsody  f)  ?

'^  In  that  theme  I  shall  be  found  expert.  He  (Jngar)vrai
a  profound  judge.  He  came,  after  his  periodical  custom,
third  of  the  judges  of  equal  rank.  i"or  threescore  years
did  he  maintain  a  connection  with  the  earth,  in  the  water
of  Ολλυ,  with  the  populace,  in  the  first  origin  of  lands.
Λ  hundred  attendants  sung  around ;  a  Iiundred  chiefs  in-
voked him  with  vows.  When  it  was  that  they  departed,  or
when  they  approached,  it  Avas  with  a  hundred  minstrels,
and  this  vaticination  was  delivered  by  Ladon%,  the  daugh-
ter of  the  stream,  who  was  but  little  desirous  of  gold,  and
silver. — "  Every  living  man  who  departs  from  him,  with
blood  on  the  bosom  (sprinkled  with  sacrificial  blood,  after
the  accredited  custom  of  the  Celtic)  has  a  claim  to  be  men-
tioned with  distinguished  praise."

"  I  am  Taliesin.  I  will  record  a  true  string,  which  shall
remain  to  the  end,  as  a  pattern  to  Eljin  (the  spirit).

*  Tlie  furnaces  of  renovation.     See  Mr,  Turner's  Vindication,  P.- 283»

t  It  appears  by  the  rhyme,  that  this  is  either  spurious,  or  corrupted.

Î  LlarldaTi,  in  the  London  editiqn,  is  Lladdon  in  Mr.  Walter's  copy.  In  old
MSS.  we  should  have  liad  Lladon,  or  Laton.  For  bych,  in  the  BC.\t  Jine,  Mr.
U"s  copy  lias  bychan,  which  the  measure  proves  to  be  right.


557

*'  A  royal  tribute  of  gold,  duly  counted,  may  be  abhorred  ;
because  perjury  and  treachery  are  odious.  I  seek  not  to
procure  advantage,  by  undermining  the  laws  of  our  song.
No  one  shall  discover  the  secret  which  is  committed  to  me
by  a  brother,  a  man  of  wisdom,  eminently  skilled  in  the
studies  of  the  Si/wedi/dd.  Concerning  the  bird  of  wrath*,
concerning  the  resolvent  t — concerning  the  changes  of  the
describer  of  man,  and  concerning  men  well  versed  in  our
hymns.  It  is  the  mystery  of  the  god,  who  has  appreciated
the  desert  of  the  transgression  of  Bardism,  which  he
gave,  together  with  its  secret,  the  Awen,  not  to  be  di-
vulged.

"  And  seven  score  personifications  pertain  to  the  Azcen  :—
in  the  deep,  which  is  void  of  wrath — in  the  deep,  where
extreme  indignation  dwells— in  the  deep,  beneath  the  ele-
ments— and  in  the  shj,  above  the  elements.

**  There  is,  who  knows  that  state  of  pensive  meditation,
which  is  better  than  cheerfulness.  I  know  the  laws  of  the
endowments  of  the  Azicn,  when  they  stream  forth — con-
cerning the  secrets  of  the  understanding — concerning  the
blessed  days,  or  gods  (Diau) — concerning  an  inoftensivc
course  of  life — concerning  the  ages  of  deliverance — con-
cerning that  which  beseems  princes,  and  the  duration  of
their  bliss, — and  concerning  the  analogy  of  things  on  the
iace  of  the  earth," —


(JmiijXh,  and  Edru;i/th,  seem  to  be  terms  of  au^r^.
t  Two  liuis  which  iatfrrupt  tbe  9en>e  are  here  omiued  as  spwriouä,


58


It  appears,  that  the  IVelsh  are  not  the  only  tribe  who
have  preserved  vestiges,  hke  these,  of  the  ancient  western
religion.  Í  have  already  hazarded  an  opinion,  tliat  the
Armorican  tongue  has  lineally  descended  from  the  Celtic
of  iùiuì,  and  that  our  Druidism  flourished  in  Bntamf
to  a  late  period.

Since  my  Essays  were  printed,  I  have  met  with  the  fol-
lowing particulars  : —

M.  Le  Brigant — Ohs.  Fund,  siir  lea  Langues — Paris,
1787,  contends,  that  the  Armorican  is  the  genuine  Celtic
of  ancient  Gaul,  and  but  very  little,  if  at  all,  affected  bj
the  sister  dialect  of  British  emigrants.

La  Tour  D'Jnvergne  Corret,  has,  I  think,  absolutely
demonstrated  this  fact,  in  his  Origines  Gauloises — Ham-
boiirg,  1801  ;— a  book,  which  merits  the  peculiar  attention
of  Celtic  antiquaries.

The  ingenious,  and  well-informed  writer  of  the  Tot/age
dafis  le  Finistere,  in  1794•  et  1793,  not  only  recognises
the  same  opinion,  but  takes  notice  of  Druidical  customs,
traditions,  and  superstitions,  in  tliat  district,  which  to
this  very'  day,  have  npdhi]  ihe  eradicating  efforts-  of
the  Catholic  clergy.  To  tli(>c  Druids,  and  their  7ii/7'</s,
he  confidently  ascribes  niytliolugical  tales  of  the  country,
and  exhibits  a  curious  s])ccimi'n,  in  eight  pages,  upon  the
foUowing  subject.    V.  i.  P.  ìö'2,

"  Ί  he,  young  son  of  a  Prince  of  St.  Pol  de  Leon,  whilst
he  wanders  alone  upon  the  sea  shore,  is  overtaken  by  a.
tempest.     He  repairs  for  shelter  to  a  cavern,  which  proves


559

to  be  inhabited  by  the  Goddess  of  Nature.  Her  head  í^
covered  with  stars.  The  signs  of  the  Zodiack  constitute
the  ornatnents  of  her  golden  girdle.

"  Her  unruly  sons,  the  tempestuous  winde,  enter  thç
recess.  The  child's  limbs  become  rigid  with  a  mortal
cold ;  he  is  covered  by  water.  But  repose  is  not  made
for  these  demons.

'^  When  they  rush  forth,  the  Goddess  takes  the  amiable
boy  upon  her  knees,  and  covers  him  with  her  robes.  Na-
ture's spoiled  child,  the  lovely  Zephyr,  makes  his  ap-
pearance. The  young  Piince  is  committed  into  his  care.
He  is  divested  of  his  earthly  envelope,  his  terrestrial
«enses  are  at  once  refined,  and  he  is  borne  aloft  \x\
the  air.

"  In  the  course  of  his  journey,  lie  makes  discoveries  of
signal  importance.  The  clouds  are  composed  of  tlie  souls
of  men,  which  have  lately  quitted  the  earth.  They  fly  over
the  heads  of  armies.  Their  influence  inspires  courage,  or
strikes  terror.

"■  These  are  they,  Avho,  in  the  obscurity  of  the  night,  and
amongst  silent  forests,  terrify  mortals  with  long-continuecf
howlings,  with  apparitions,  and  luminous  phantoms.  Par~
ticipating  as  yet  of  terrestrial  aff'ectiojis,  they  mix  them-
selves into  the  passions  of  men.  Their  agency  is  perceived
in  dreams,  and  in  panic  terrors.

"  In  vain  they  endeavour  to  soar  above  the  atmosphere:
an  irresistible    force — a  wall    of  sapphire,    impedes  tUeii'


560

witlg  towards  the  purer  spheres,  wliich  roll  in  the  immensity
of  space*

"  As  soon  as  a  new  body  is  formed,  thn/  enter  it  with  im-
patience, inhabit,  and  give  it  animation.  Not  having
attained  that  purity  which  unites  them  to  the  sun,  the
genius  of  their  system,  they  zoander  in  the  forms  of  the
various  animals,  which  people  the  air,  the  earth,  and
the  seas.

"The  Prince  is  carried  up  into  the  vortex  of  the  moon.
Here,  millions  of  souls  traverse  vast  plains  of  ice,  where
tliey  lose  all  perccjition,  but  that  of  simple  existence.
They  forget  the  course  of  adventures  in  Λvhich  ihcy  have
been  engaged,  and  which  they  are  now  to  recommence.
On  long  tuhes  of  darkness,  caused  by  an  eclipse,  they  re-
turn to  the  earth.  They  are  revived  by  a  particle  of  light
from  the  sun,  whose  emanations  quicken  all  sublunary
things.    They  begin  anew  the  career  of  life.

*'  Towards  the  di^k  of  the  sun,  the  young  Prince  ap-
proaches, at  first,  with  awful  dread;  but  presently,  with
inconceivable  rapture,  and  delight.  This  glorious  body
consists  of  an  assemblage  of  pure  souls,  swimming  in  an
Ocean  of  bliss.  It  is  the  abode  of  the  blessed — of  the
sages — c-f  the  friends  of  mankind.

'^  The  happy  souls,  when  thrice  purified  in  the  sun,  ascend
to  a  succession  of  still  iiigher  spheres,  from  whence  they
can  no  more  descend,  to  traverse  the  circle  of  those  globes
and  stars,  which  float  in  a  less  pure  atmosphere.


561

1  Will  not  assert  that  no?ie  of  the  emhdlhkments  in  this
fragment  are  modern.  Yet,  as  the  national  tales,  of  which
it  furnishes  a  specimen,  must  have  originated  in  some
national  superstition,  I  would  remark,  as  a  curious  phe-
nomenon, that,  in  its  great  outlines,  it  corresponds  exactly
to  the  doctrine  of  the  oldest  Welsh  documents,  and  the  cha-
racter of  Druidism,  described  by  the  ancients.

Souls,  zchich  are  sullied  with  earthly  impurities,  are  to
be  refined,  hy  repeated  changes  and  probations  ;  till  the
last  stain  of  evil  is  worn  away,  and  they  are  ultimately
ripened  for  immortal  bliss  in  a  higher  sphere.

This  is  neither  Gothic,  nor  Roman  ; — it  is  Druidical.  At
no  period,  since  the  ages  of  Druidism,  iiave  the  JVelshy
and  the  Armoricajis  ever  studied,  in  one  common  school
at  which  mystical  doctrines,  like  these,  were  taught.  Must
it  not  follow,  that  both  nations  derived  them  from  their
ancestors — the  Priests  of  the  Groves  ?


THF.    END,


FHlNTüD    BY    3,    BAHFIELD^    WARDOUR-STREET.


j^m.     -il


^jfv^


■  ;-:•-^

ÜS^

^^-.

ífc-     'ν

-    1^,>  -

t-

M.

^^î%,

^

Νί

■■  ■/

'•1

■  ^^^

τ  ν

.-

:,V•

\  -"  -^^

■;       ν

vjM

%  ■•  -

%

'-  ■'■'■■  "■>.. .
"     ■  ••'■-■■  -x

■.  -m^.    -  ;-•'■

"Ν^Ν

/Li

%

L•'-''  -h

λ'      %

if'':/

^■■•-      :  i'  "  "

:      ^^

V/'

W;

::=èC

;.k.

EC

3  k


Γ  4.    >i


-.     '    V:^^.;^   .    V^

k

κΙ^^^^ΗΕβΓ  ^^^^mS

"W-^^^  i  -«r^  ^^^

■Jf:\--\-

Ikh^sI

Ŵ

s;^";^^

""^^.w.   "'"

^^^"*?Hf4

Λ

^^^^'Ê^^^^wL•  ■  ^"^

^W^

^ei^^^^HÍwl^^R.^
