The Magic Staff (Andrew Jackson Davis, 1857)
============================================
Andrew Jackson Davis — Davis's autobiography — the 'John the Baptist of modern spiritualism' in his own words. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (magicstaffautobi0000davi) — 1869 edition.


MAGIC STAFF,

AN
AUTOBIOGRAPHY
hm oy
OF ; R:
% | ( 1o% ~1g

ON DAVIS.
LS LIBRg SS Zz
SS “sae

PACIFIC SCHOOL}

OF RELiG\c>

“ Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, { will fear no evil; for thow
art with me; thy rod and rny Srars, they comfort me.”—HEBREW PoET.

TENTH EDITION,

BOSTON :

WILLIAM WHITE & OOMPANY,
BANNER OF LIGHT OFFIOE,
158 WASHINGTON STREET.

NEW YORK AGENTS—AMERICAN NEWS COMPANY,
1869.

BESS |

Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1857, af
By ANDREW JACKSON DAVIS,

in the Clerk’s Office of the District Court of the United States, in and for the
Scuthern District of New York.

PUBLISHERS’ PREFACH.

A most singular biography of a most singular person is
here presented to the world. We regard it as the first
rational and readable history of a Clairvoyant’s experience
that has appeared in the language ; and, irrespective of its
doctrines or philosophies, we look upon it as a valuable
accession to biographical literature.

This book differs intrinsically, in style, method, and sub-
stance, from any of Mr. Davis’ previous works, which
are extensively read and justly held in high estimation
on both sides of the Atlantic. Indeed, no other Ameri-
can psychologist has obtained a more wide-spread fame,
or given occasion for such extreme differences of opinion.
There are, perhaps, thousands who regard Mr. Davis as
a person of almost supernatural abilities, while a greater
number treat him and his writings with unmitigated pre-
judice. Hence such a work as we now offer to the
public is particularly needed 1o institute a mean between
these two mental extremes. The brief and fragmentary
biographical sketches of the man, which have from time

i

4 , PREFACE.

to time appeared, have neither supplied the demands
and wishes of believers, nor met the objections and alle-
gations of the unfriendly. Nothing, therefore, but a sys-
tematic autobiography — beginning with his first memories
and ascending step by step through every subsequent year
to the present period—could supply a desideratum so
generally felt and expressed.

This demand the present volume is intended to meet, giv-
ing, as it does, the public and private career of Mr. Davis,
and we respectfully offer it as an unprecedented record,
entirely authentic and beyond refutation. Many wonder-
ful events, connected with his psychological development,
are published for the first time in this work ; and the secret
of his extraordinary gift is explained and established in a
new and most satisfactory manner. We offer it, also, with
the belief that its pages are fraught with pure sentiments,
which may be ‘advantageously read by parents and children,
teachers and pupils, reformers and philosophers. Indeed,
with all due deference to the views of able critics and
scholars, (whose judgments upon this work are yet to be
pronounced,) we are free to express our opinion that every
class of readers will rise from its perusal, not merely de-
lighted with the simple pathos and dramatic romance
which pervade every page, but with clearer views and
nobler purposes.

New Yor, May, 1857.

a.
CONTENTS.
INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS.
By THE AUTHOR'S (COMPANION: 17. ahmcr ecw ove eede teed es PAGE
CHAPTER I.
THE USE OF AUTOBIOGRAPHY... +6... ses eeeeseeeevecs Gubnodaonsan
CHAPTER II.
THE LOCAL HABITATION »...0.00. 005090 s4 4 Ratetie stastae aleldioielelvere eters
CHAPTER ITIL
PESEUEPN/RUMIES stances pinton at yeivdei ceeds ieee Sus i.s feusUeisieae <,c%sis (sve' o\sinis,¢:¢ SOKCOUGD ODO
CHAPTER IV.
Tur VENDUE AND DEPARTURE........s.eeeeees eisie slaloreiele sielece eierers
CHAPTER V.
Mey resp MEMORIES. .ccrcccisisssing avd ce eveveses eteierslelere(ereioreieitiere
CHAPTER: VI.
MY Pers T LEMPLTATION .. .'% 0). Mu'e'ola see wees caret 6 aisietataisTal etelalaetsove
CHAPTER VII.
WAC COHEAN GH OF SOMNE (e's) faiajes's'slelva'e tans ove ee ba as Re shore Waldic navel)
CHEAP THR: V-lrT.
WHE DULCMMAN A GHOST: ccicccccculesss ose eenleee es SOOT Ki
CHAPTER IX.
In wuicu I MAKE MORE DISCOVERIES....... Beate Waele eee eles
CHAPTER X.
OTHER SCENES IN THIS DRAMA... 0.6... sees e ees E clels sleeve visteiel ates

CHAPTER XI.
SUNSHINETAND OLOUDS ctr tee cscse cess yt 4 eth ts Ve ahieon done

66

72

6 CONTENTS.
CHARA Rex isn,
In wuicu I Ask MANY QUESTIONS.........20 aiedenetets scatetar snort PAGE 76
CUA RH ae koe re kh.
I WHICH J.GO BABY -ERUNTING cle. ate picts olerolers a caceieicieleleleters (eteke Beet) AOL
CHAPTER XIV.
THE CorrarggRisns DCD bs Ruta Ce OICRIIO OAC O fe cinis feist eva 87
CHAPTER XV.
In wHIcH ARE SIGNS OF SECOND-SIGHT..... «cece eerste minrate aera OL
CHAPTER XVI.
My TrempraTIon TO BE PROFANE......... SHB CODSHNOORG UO DIC ACOGE tA
CHAPTER eX ViIT.
My MonnmeR’s SOREAM 1. cro oct cecnens ser ene semesters site alerecolatoietoretele 103
- CHAPTER XVIII.
SIGNS, AND THE THINGS SIGNIFIED. .<...0.06 csosessces Ain OBS ace, 109
CHAPTER XIX.
IAS CHAPTER OR ACCIDENTS «cterrace ae cteartin 6 ore ale ales sresaiieie ear ieee Lie
CHAPTER XX.
Tat GAMBLER’S Fiery, HATE ccc cnciers ss «ic elelsleie's ie tie! sie-ein'siecleveiase Ls
CHAPTER XXI.
INS WHICH I GO TO SCHOOL... +4. cccccescsacces Seoaomaocbooaansae. ) ea

CHAPTER XXII.
My Fatuer anp ALCOHOL PART COMPANY ....evccccecccccccesess 129

CHAPTER XXIII.

INITIAL EXPERIENCES IN HyDE-PARK.........006- srel@sibsietaisleraiereie.s (LoD
CHAPTER XXIV.

A Curious Casr oF WITCHCRAFT..........6. ay ee aoe 143
CHAPTER XXV.

Orner EPISODES IN THIS HISTORY .........++ DOC OC UR ODOGUR ORE Ey
CHAPTER XxVI.

In waicu I HEAR STRANGE MUSIC.........-eeeeeees Siodetuicsens 164
CHAPTER XXVII.

My LANCASTERIAN EDUCATION....... seeecseees Radtebensescdece 1/1
CHAPTER XXVIII

Tur Urs anp Downs oF LIFE..........66 AE OR GOTO OU CIC TR YE |

CHAPTER XXIX.
A Lisson or SELF-DEPENDENCE...... Pace nactavelstatateueee Rsielasieieisie.s 0,190

CONTENTS. 1¢

CHAPTER XXX.
My Lire with Ira ARMSTRONG........ccccceee: ecostseve PAGE 188

CHAPTER XXXI.
ME “DAWNING LOIGHT cas. ceyccn sci s caticeioe aoc ames olaxely oie celctcrere 196

CHAPTER XXXII. :
Iy wurcu I YIELD TO THE Mystic POWER........s.ececedecessers 204

CHAPTER XXXIII.

My First FLicut tHRouGH SPACE..... BPM coc, oo ante epcavieeaee ee IS
CHAPTER XXXIV.

Toe Summit or THE First MOUNTAIN .........00005 eRbeG Vee hab
CHAPTER XXXV.

An ENTIRE CHANGE OF PROGRAMME......ccaccccescee seeeveines 2a0
CHAPTER XXXVI.

My JouRNEY TOWARD THE VALLEY.........+5 sere Osiolelele es cieislaniesreee LOO)
CHAPTER XXXVII.

SEECIAL PROVIDENCESs cous cc csee ce cs sass eccvine Rrersielate eietets elate cece 0)

CHAPTER XXXVIII.
A STRUGGLE FOR THE SECOND EMINENCE ..cccscdcccecccecccesses 29D

CHAPTER XXXIX.

THe MOUNTAIN OF JUSTICE.....0+6 sooes SOSA CU UUUONE COUCOORCOOOG hs
CHAPTER XL.

Tur PRINCIPLES OF NATURE......22+-ccceees wolelssieie s/s dsisisisjeidielee GUO
CHAPTER XLI.

Tue Sorrows or New YORK.........+ dvoscccvcccceccvccesces Old
E CHAPTER XLIi.

_ Severst New Staks....... Sania vide cede ale croaig eee siieleivisisielecasie O20
CHAPTER XLIII.

‘Tue SPIRITUAL SPHERES......-+..2sseseeeees cdl vecnsesccecives . 332
CHAPTER XLIV.
EVENTS oF THE VALLEY. ....... seen ee eeee AGO Sieve dsdcss« O44
CHAPTER XLV.

MISSIONARIES IN THE FIELD.......c.0e000 BAU G HUGS ODES Oe eh)

CHAPTER XLVI.

VISION OF PERPETUAL PEACE. ..4. cesccccccese 00 stdsseceess 368
CHAPTER XLVII.

Tar FurnisHep Room...... Hane bog. PAL BOCHD LO DEC Gage ales eis 384

8 CONTENTS.

CHAPTER XLVIII.

NiGHECAND MORNING wis stsessteseen scene cues Vawbecstounes PAGE 393
CHAPTER XLIX.
PACTS AND: PANCIES sc .'0\c'0's'n%0's'0'e'e'e"s'0"0-0'b "0 '0%0'e% avetelehauslevaloaieletere Sieteeres oo UE
CHAPTER Li.
THR FRATERNAL MARRIAGE... cecescccvescens steele elccecduwate ala
: CHAPTER LI.
"FHE RECONOLLITATION +s 0% '0 10 's'e bie 's'0 ob ores ow oven ievleccebicowevucwess 420
CHAPTER LBI.
Fee PAPA 'GEMscan cawaieiuiese Coduwed vate beet Sewadegeevedvesey. 425
CHAPTER LIII.
READINGS AND TEACHINGS......ececcsecveece ee Ncomolele ciel wiesict BOD
CHAPTER LIV.
INTHE OPEN FIELD: 6c ccsvsae si ads Peed. sone LW Ape wl cle bretiew eect 445
CHAPTER LV.
LIFE IN THE COTTAGE. e/oie0'e's'e's/s's'o"s'e's’s'o'e'eles'e"s SaVewoedvieweeense 400
CHAPTER LVI.
THE DOUBLE SUICIDE. %.%% fee ot cust ceeee TIA Us dee oovecesees 408

CHAPTER LVII.
THE THEOLOGICAL LWOLIPSH. 27.3 ei viseece ees tcecvovesseocseos 410

CHAPTER LVIII.
Tre INFINITE CONJUGATION’. ‘s/0s'v'c's'ssseceedecrecedssccvoceceees 491

CHAPTER LIX.

CAUSE AND EFFECT’... .10''s'Os olsle's's's's's's'se' oes i dade evetete sieclecieeed e000
CHAPTER LX.

GoLpEN TOKENS..........- Sati ir bcos se cceceseccccceceresecs: O16
CHA Pet i elec

SINGULAR VISITATIONS.....0-. Te ae cet ote vetoes a 0g8

CHAPTER LXII. :
Tut CONsUGAL MARRIAGE... ..cesssseesesesecescvavcsescesveses S45

INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS.

BY THE AUTHOR’S COMPANION.

In commencing an Introductory Section to this AUTOBIOGRA-
PHY, it occurs to me that several inquiries, relative to the object
sought, will arise in the minds of many who may peruse the pres-
ent volume. Some of these inquiries I will briefly state, in order
to assist the reader, by my succeeding responses, into the pleas-
urable path of satisfactory biographical research :—

1. Why should this Autobiography be indited, instead of such
philosophical matter as has hitherto claimed the Author’s atten-
tion ?

It is in the attractive garb of narration that many most impor-
tant truths have been promulgated throughout society. But we
have no need of precedent. The Author of this work has been
induced to place it before the world by the conscientious convic-
tion that in no way could the psychological principles which it
embodies be so ‘effectually impressed on the thoughtful spirit, as
in connection with and illustrated by the incidents of a life. The
philosophical volumes, already among the things that are, give
detached. fragments of Mr. Davis’s extraordinary experience;
but still, the skeptical “How?” comes ever up from the restless

soul of the invincible logician. As an instance of this, I will refer
1*

10 INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS.

to a communication from James Barnaby, of Ohio, to one of the
Boston papers, in which he says of A. J. Davis :—

“ None BUT HIMSELF can ever know that he has not learned
from books, or other known sources, the scientific facts and tech-
nical terms found in his writings, as any one of good intellect
could learn all this without the knowledge of others.

“ Here, then, is the evil. To admit these extraordinary claims
is to admit Mr. Davis to be in possession of means of obtaining
knowledge of the laws of Nature and of man vastly superior to
those of others. The evil effects of such admissions are so nu-
merous and apparent as not to need pointing out. Mental and
spiritual tyranny have always sustained themselves by similar
pretensions. ‘The particular lack of discrimination to which I
referred in the beginning of this article is shown in the fact that
‘The Liberator,’ and other reformatory journals, have not pointed
out more clearly these dangers, and discouraged the course of
things that has tended to produce them.

“Tt will be said, however, that if these claims in behalf of the
superior powers of Mr. Davis are true, we need not fear any evil
consequences as a result of receiving them as such. But are they
true? Some of them, you seem to think, are established beyond
dispute. Of course, I shall not attempt to prove by testimony
that Mr. Davis does not possess this faculty of ‘interior sight, or
the other wonderful faculties attributed to him. Neither can I
admit these claims. The things to be established are opposed to
the consciousness, reason, judgment, and experience, of myself
and of mankind generally: hence, the testimony which sustains
them must be stronger than their own inherent impossibility ; and,
to my mind, no testimony has been or can be adduced that is not,
at least, as liable to be false as the claims are to be true.”

The above extract is but a fair specimen of the abounding skep-
ticism which obtains among various classes, relative to the life and
writings of Mr. Davis, and the grand subjective laws which un-

derlie his development. Hence, the demand seems imperative

INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS. 11

that, for the advantage and advancement of both physics and meta-
physics, this work should be sent forth on the current of the
world’s literature.
2. Why does Mr. Davis write*his own history—and that, too,
while so young ?
“We live in deeds, not years ; in thoughts, not breaths;
In feelings, not in figures on a dial.

We should count time by heart-throbs. He most lives
Who thinks most — feels the noblest — acts the best.”

In this light, the life of Mr. Davis has been long. During a
half-score of years, he vibrated from one extreme in external life
to the utmost verge of the other ; while, interiorly, he swept through
a vast, rich field of doubt-dispelling investigation. By this pro-
cess he has been educated. Since his powers were awakened by
the aid of human magnetism, he has been to a School of which Na-
ture is the teacher; and, with “attentive and believing faculties,”
has toiled for the priceless dower of Wisdom. In every sense he
has been a tireless student, differing from the ordinary methods
only by going directly to the essence of things; thus gleaning from
the very heart of the Universe, so to speak, that knowledge which
others get, at second-hand, from books. Hence, his education is
now just as available, at all hours, as that of any other well-trained
intellect ; and it is only when somé new and intricate subject pre-
sents itself for investigation, that he needs to abstract his mind
and enter the still more illuminated “Superior State.” It is plain
to be seen, then, that his present ordinary state, in which he writes
this Autobiography, is vastly “superior” to that former dependent
condition in which he dictated “ Nature’s Divine Revelations.”

That Mr. Davis should write his own history seems advisable
from the circumstances of the case. His experience belongs to
the world, inasmuch as it reveals many subtile and most important
phases in the constitution of mind ; and also points to a time when
soul will be less under the sway of sense, and less dependent on
external appliances for expansion and progression. At the same

12 INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS.

time, he alone can relate accurately the events of his own life, and
give a faithful transcript of what would otherwise be for ever
obscured by misapprehension and consequent misrepresentation.

Besides, many a contemporary actor in this life-drama can now

be appealed to, as a living presence, for evidence concerning these
simple and straightforward memoranda. Nor will such an appeal
be deemed at all difficult, when it is known that the whole pri-
mary psychological development of “The Poughkeepsie Seer”
took place within ninety miles of the city of New York! Indeed,
many testimonials, from those well acquainted with his early his-
tory, might be added to those already published ;* but I will
select only the following, which was addressed to me by a Well-
known citizen :—

Dear Mapam: This brief notice of my friend, your honored
husband, is most respectfully dedicated to your kind care and
keeping, as a testimonial of regard for merited worth.

In 1843, Professor Grimes, a lecturer on Phrenology and Mes-
merism, came to Poughkeepsie, New York, and raised considerable
interest among the people upon those subjects. His lectures and
experiments were largely attended by all classes, and almost ev-

erybody began to mesmerize each other. Among others, Mr. Wil- —

liam Levingston, a tailor, succeeded pretty well as a manipulator,
and many submitted to his experiments.

A. J. Davis was then a youth of about sixteen years, living
next door to where I was employed, with Ira Armstrong, as an
apprentice to the shoemaking business. Said Davis, with other
boys, called on Mr. Levingston to be magnetized, as it was then.

termed. He proved susceptible to its influence, was put at once ~

into the clairvoyant state, and began to see through his forehead,
without the use of his natural eyes; which phenomenon caused
much surprise to all who saw or heard of it, and many were anx-
ious to learn about the strangé manifestation. I became much
interested in the subject, and sought for all the information possi-
ble for me to get. I talked with Samuel Davis, Levingston,
Armstrong, &c., and learned what they were able to give concern-

* See Introduction to “ Naturé’s Divine Revelations.”

/

INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS. 13

ing the origin, disposition, education, and character, of Jackson. I
became satisfied that he was ,poor in purse, honest, amiable, and
honorable. His education at that time consisted of reading, wri-
ting, and ciphering, and only rudimental in these. I found, by con-
versing with him, that he had read but very little, and did not pos--
“sess any general information. He was a light-hearted, well-dis-
posed youth. In answer as to what books he had read, he said,
“J have only read a book called ‘The Three Spaniards,” which
I suppose was a romantic tale, as I have not seen it. I was fully
satisfied that-his schooling had been very limited. He had no
time; then, nor for many years after, to apply himself to books,
and, from all that I can learn, has not done so to this day. His
knowledge, now displayed, has been mainly gained in the clair-
voyant state. .

His newly-developed powers took a medical turn; and, after a
few weeks of experimenting, to satisfy the curiosity of himself and
his friends, he commenced practising as a clairvoyant physician,
Levingston being his magnetizer. _ Armstrong gave him up to fol-
low his new calling. He continued in and about Poughkeepsie
for a year or two, taking a tour out occasionally, and again return-
ing to see his old patients and friends. His descriptions of vari-
ous ailments, both mental and physical, as well as his prescriptions
for cure, were truly wonderful and astonishing to all who knew
him. Educated doctors would admit that his anatomical descrip-
tions were correct, and that his remedies were curious and _ philo-
sophical, displaying a knowledge of things of which he knew noth-
ing when in his normal condition. At that time he had no power
to remember what transpired in his clairvoyant state, while in his
natural condition ; but he has since attained that power, as well as
that of self-magnetization. He does not therefore now need a
manipulator. His experiences are still quite as astofishing to

himself as to others, as he informed me not long since.

While living in Poughkeepsie with Mr. Levingston, and contin-
uing to follow the healing art, Jackson received an impression, in
his interior state, that he would be the instrument of communica-
ting a work to the world—‘“Nature’s Divine Revelations” —
which work was dictated in word and sentiment, and written down
from his lips, by William Fishbough. This volume contained
philosophy and sentiments not in the mind of Fishbough, as he

14 INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS.

himseif informed me, but contrary to his cherished views. Hav-
ing read the work, I can decidedly pronounce it next to a miracle
for Davis to perform at the time it was published.

Ira Armstrong told me that he often had impressions that Jack-
‘son would attain some distinguished position in the world, but did
not dream it would take the direction it has. He was a practical
utilitarian of the Dr. Franklin school, and never doubted the suc-
cess of any one who had a trade, and a disposition to follow it with
patience and economy. He was a man of candor and philan-
thropy. His present address is Huntington, Indiana.

I have taken an interest in clairvoyance, as developed in the
career of Jackson; and, being personally acquainted with him, I
have traced his progressive steps, and read most of his works up
to the present time. Having doubts upon the immortality of the
soul, I hoped to be convinced through that source, and have often
conversed with him upon the subject. He has ever told me, since
he became developed te a communion with spirits, that to himself
it was knowledge—not faith; for, in his interior state, he both
saw and conversed with the disembodied. I have no doubt of his
sincerity, nor of its reality to him; but, as I am low in the organ
of marvellousness, and constitutionally an honest skeptic, I do not,
up to this time, feel clear upon the immortal existence of our race.
But I am still investigating all alleged sources of information, with
the view of finding the “ pearl of great price.”

- Let this be as it may, however, I can truly say that I consider
A. J. Davis as one of the marvels of the age, and his “ Harmonial
Philosophy” as one of the purest and most reasonable systems of
religion extant. It professes to teach the gospel, as inspired by
“ Father-God and Mother-Nature,” and is fully worthy of such an
origin. Designed, in the “good time coming,” of which it is the
prompter and forerunner, to establish harmony, justice, and hap-
piness in the earth, and fit our race for blissful abodes in any fu-
ture life that may await them, I bid it “ God speed,” and récom-
mend it and its author to the favorable consideration of the world.

Hoping that I may one day realize the truth of his sublime an-
ticipations and exalted theories, I hereby subscribe myself the can-
did friend and rational admirer of the life and writings of Andrew

Jackson Davis.
JAMES FLAGLER.

156 Broapway New York, February 17, 1856.

INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS. 15

3. Why does Mr. Davis, in writing this history, portray events
so minutely, and especially those of his juvenile days?

Though many of these events are related in humorous style,
and with a particularity that may seem trivial; sti, it should be
remembered that nothing is unimportant which tends to build up
the immortal structure of Soul; and no language is irrelevant
that helps to picture the consecutive stages of its advancement.
That I am not aJone in this estimate,may be seen by the follow-
ing suggestive quotation from a paragraph in the New Orleans
Picayune :—

“The world is made up of trifles. The grand movements of
great events, and the changes of empires, are founded in causes,
very generally, which would be pronounced trifles by the world.
Yes, ‘trifles light as air’ have led to some of the most important
discoveries we have. The fall of an apple gave Newton the clue
to gravitation ; the rising up of the lid of a tea-kettle gave us our

‘railroads, steamboats, ocean-steamers, and a thousand other things
—not to speak of the press—that, combined, put the world cen-
turies ahead in the mysteries of the universe and the purposes of
God. ‘To the observation of a flower dimly pictured on a stone,
we owe the philosophical researches in wi and light which
ultimately gave us the daguerreotype......

“The foundation of the Roman empire was a cunning picks in
an individual combat, or duel. American liberty and thirty-one
glorious states arose from a strong cup of tea made by the Bosto-
nians in 1775. A little piece of magnetized steel led to the dis-
covery of a New World. The erection of a sawmill in California
changed the currency of the world. The crossing of a little
stream of water speedily subverted the liberties of Rome, and
gave the name of Brutus immortality. From a little acorn the
grand American forests have sprung :—

‘A pebble in the streamlet scant
Has changed the course of many a river;
A dew@zop on the baby plant
Has warped the giant oak for ever!’

16 INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS.

It is impossible to enumerate, especially in a newspaper article,
the almost numberless ‘trifles’ that have produced numberless
great events, and made numberless radical changes in the history
and destiny of the world. Suffice it to say that ‘trifles’ are not to
be scoffed at. The“world may learn great, and true, and valuable
lessons from these same ‘trifles.’ The fable of the lion who was
released from his prison by a little mouse, was written by a greaf*
man. Upon a less foundation than this there have been erected
deathless poetry, wonderful tragedies, and many noble novels.
Hold nothing in contempt: nothing contemptible ever came from
the hands of the Almighty. The worlds which the microscope
has revealed to us in the drop of water, are as wonderful and
mysterious as the bright and beautiful worlds brought to our eyes
by the telescope. ‘The loathsome caterpillar, which we long to
crush beneath our feet, will one day be a beautiful creature, with
rainbows for wings. The little pool of dirty water into which we
have stepped will be woven into a bright and beautifully-embroid-
ered veil, by the miraculous sun, for the face of the queen who
trails her robe of light among the countless stars!”

“4. How can the Author state with certainty the circumstances
of his earliest life?

His father, Samuel Davis, and his eldest sister, Eliza P. Wil-
liams, are still living, and have a vivid remembrance of the varied
domestic scenes through which their rugged pathway has led.
Hence, they have freely furnished particulars concerning all the
events which transpired previous to the hour when their juvenile
relative awaked into conscious memory.

5. Why does he give the exact language of his vernal associ=
ates ?

Should our Author round out and grammaticize those chaotic
passages of conversation, which show his own early mental de-
fects no less than those of his illiterate companions, it would be a
departure from that strict fidelity to truth which characterizes this
work, as well as every previous action of his life. As it is, these

INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS, 17

faithfully-reported colloquies show how far he was removed from
all advantages, such as refined and educated parents, brothers,
sisters, and playmates, are likely to bring to the opening faculties
of childhood. Nor was the misfortune of such a beginning coun-
teracted by any subsequent polish of the schools.

But, to the true child of Nature, time and circumstance are not.
He has his own awakening, in the still regions of Thought —over
which there is the flutter of no wing—through which there is the
rushing of no tide. On and on, over the swift pathway of suns,
is then his flight, till his feet press the centre of Universes, and
all around him stretches off the surging sea of Life!

6. What is the moral bearing of this Autobiography ?

To the young, its mission is evidently of great importance.
While it holds their attention by the charm of anecdote, it will
teach them lessons of virtue, which any number of moral ha-
rangues, however finished and elaborate, might fail to impress
*on their untaught faculties. The child-nature will inevitably be
encouraged, by perusing these pages, to avoid duplicity, anger,
dishonesty, profanity, and intemperance; and to cultivate gentle-
ness, kindness, hopefulness, purity, and integrity.

To parents and guardians, it will be as a living mentor, aiding
them to comprehend how tenderly the young mind should be
treated, how carefully and judiciously trained, in order that seeds
of virtue, harmony, and progression, may be early sown. In this
regard, the humble pair who gave immortal being to the writer
of these memoirs might be referred to as worthy of imitation by
many of far greater pretensions and intelligence. Untutored in
all that pertains to polite society, poverty-haunted and contemned,
they still watched carefully the daily conduct of their son, and
kindly, though promptly and thoroughly, corrected every act that
seemed to lean toward moral delinquency.

To all classes, the story of such a life will be a well-spring of
hope. The experiences of the “Harmonial Philosopher,” thus
far, are sufficient in themselves to prove the blessed truth of im-

18 INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS.

mortality, and the possibility of intercommunion with the happy
dwellers in our radiant Spirit-Home. Nor is this all. The di-
verse situations, the temptations, the trials, the discouragements,
and the triumphs, that have marked his past career, are a study,
the pursuit of which will awaken courage and inspire aspiration
in the souls of the most despised and desponding. That he has
reached a state of beautiful existence, where his affections are
warm and beaming, his intellect clear and comprehensive, his soul
pure, serene, devotional, and steadfast, and his heart ever filled
with a “joy unspeakable and full of glory,” by the dewy freshness
of Wisdom’s precious gifts—that he has reached this glorious
eminence, in spite of organizational faults and discouraging condi-
tions—is a fact in human development full of promise, even to
the lowliest and loneliest child of God!
Mary F. Davis.
New Yor«, April, 1857.

THE

Merten GeIeG «ST AFF,

CHAPTER I.

THE USE OF AUTOBIOGRAPHY.

Tell me not in mournful numbers,
‘Life is but an empty dream
For the soul is dead that slumbers,
And things are not what they seem.”

Ir seems to me that nothing less than the Divine Intelligence
can comprehend the infinite possibilities and the eternal destinies
that slumber in the forthcoming germ of a human being. Noth-
ing can be of more importance, to such a being, than Existence ;
all else, as time ultimately demonstrates, is secondary and subser-
vient. The beginning and the end of all human endeavor is, TO
Exist. The arts, and sciences, and machinations, by which men
subsist, are as transient as the passing clouds—as ephemeral as
the shadows of earth-born dreams.

And yet, without these transient arts and time-serving inven-
tions, human existence would be impossible. Indeed, the founda-
tion of existence is laid in the art of subsistence, and no two rela-
tions were ever more inseparable. Nay, more, without the myriad

s

20 THE MAGIC STAFF.

items which on review we find strung on the rosary of the flowing
years; without the manifold imperceptible and unrecordable at-
tentions bestowed by mother and father, by brother and sister, by
the friendly neighbor, and “ the stranger within thy gates” — with-
out these, there could be no preservation of body, no awakening
of love, no increase of knowledge, no satisfaction with life, no—
EXISTENCE.

Hence it is, that, despite themselves, and apparently in direct
violation of broader aspirations, mankind devour with an instinc-
tive relish whatever is supposed to be truly autobiographical. If
a person seriously report himself in some periodical, even though
an utter stranger, the world will receive the news with an appetite>
insatiable. The realm of subsistence is the realm of biography.
For example, every adult reads with grateful pleasure of the dis-
covery of America; but when the private story of the Discoverer
is told, then behold how all classes, and all ages, of both sexes,
imbibe the biographical revealments !

The history of the world is interesting ; that of a person is fas-
cinating. There is always something in a stranger’s experience
which no mortal can divulge save the stranger himself. The illit-
erate confessions of a human being about to be hanged, are un-
speakably more thrilling and impressive if told by himself than by
another, even if that other be his spiritual adviser, and an adept
in the art of narration. This instinct for autobiography is im-
planted in the nature of all men; but, when left to seek gratifica-
tion unguided by Wisdom, it rapidly degenerates into deformity,
and exhibits imperfections the most repulsive. ‘Pernicious tale-
bearing and extemporaneous gossip disturb an otherwise peaceful
community. The sanctuary of private life is ruthlessly entered
by a gang of headlong biographical investigators ; and the individ-
ual character is tarred and feathered, if not lynched, by an infuri-
ated mob of reputable newspaper-scribblers or unscrupulous pam-
phleteers. All this is deplored, both in private and i in ihe by
true men and noble women.

‘

THE USE OF AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 21

Again: it may and does sometimes happen that the principal
events of individual experience are wrapped in mystery and un-
certainty, or may be distorted by the flitting shadows of appear-
ances and uncontradicted reports. Now, should a person thus
misinterpreted pass along without taking his own life, why, then
he is liable to be unexpectedly assaulted, and perhaps murdered,
by some supposed friend or unknown foe. Hence it follows, as
by a logical necessity, that if individual life has in it developments
of any practical value to mankind —if it contains any fresh lessons
of encouragement and instruction, and is at the same time involved
in falsehood or mystery —then it most manifestly becomes a work
of justice and mercy for the said person not to retire at death
intestate, but to bequeath to all whom it may concern a straight-
forward and conscientious autobiography —a plain réndering of
the voyage of life—a confession of the inner Heart. ;

Man is born near the base of a hill—in a valley full of shad-
ows; but, once out of the cradle, he begins to climb. | He forthwith
struggles and pants, impelled by the hidden force of destiny, to
attain the summit. With an eye upon the sunny future, but
knowing not the pathway, he tugs, and frets, and tumbles, at every
turn. ‘The mists of the valley may envelop him, the dreary waste
of poverty and disease may stretch away between the hill and him,
his path may pass even through the solitudes of the dismal swamp ;
yet, undaunted, and Jed by unseen guardians, he pushes boldly
forward, and gains triumphantly the height of his first ambition:
when, lo! he finds himself in a valley still, or-— which is the same
thing, but more suggestive—at the base of an eminence yet higher
and more irresistibly attractive.

I make these symbolic. affirmations, because the journey of my
own life has been from the common level of birth to the summit
of a commanding hill. The first position reached, I saw a vale
before me; and, beyond this, a yet higher hill for my feet to climb.
In due time and trial, this greater eminence was also safely reached ;
and, strange to relate, I found myself at the foot of still another

22 THE MAGIC STAFF.

elevation, which was yet more mountainous and more difficult of
ascent. Yet my way was plainly pointed out and shown me; and
so, amid impediments apparently insurmountable, I pursued the
rugged mission.

The broad magnificence of the scene, from the fertile summit of
this majestic mountain, far transcended every previous picture or
experience. For a while I dwelt contented on this gorgeous
mountain-home —from which I could see the errors, and wander- .
ings, and mists, and tempests, and significance, of every vale be-
low, through which I had passed. It was like standing on a solid
rock by the seaside, away from turmoil and danger, beholding
ships as they rise and fall and struggle with the storm. For thus
it was that, far down the hills, and everywhere in the vales below,
I could see’my fellow-men, too proud to be taught, jumping from
gorge to cliff, and marring their personal welfare at every step,
vainly striving to reach the Highest and the Best by methods

» impossible to prove advantageous.

At length, however, I was moved to turn my face in the direc-
tion of my pilgrimage; and, lo! contrary to my expectations, I
saw that the high elevation, on which I had made my home, was
but the basis of still another mountain, more stupendous and dis-
tant than any over which I had found my way. There was a
work to do on this higher place; and, as I will hereafter show,
that work was accomplished.

Between this last elevation and another mountain, which is yet
scarcely visible in the extreme distance before me, is an interve-
ning vale. In this valley I am now temporarily residing, just as
I have spent weeks and months in other valleys behind me; and
my occupation, while thus tarrying, is to write this Autobiography.
This will be the first public writing, except the ordinary work of
answering correspondents, that I ever did while sojourning in a
vale. But this is not to be wondered at, because this valley is
higher up—is more elevated and commanding — than the highest
peak of the second mountain; thus giving me normal abilities

THE U8 OF AUTOBIOGRAPHY. £3

better than I then possessed, even after a thorough magnetization.
To relate what havnened to me in the many and various regions
which I have from time to time explored, both while in the val-
leys and on the mountains, and to give the rationale of the provi-
dential precision with which my feet have been made to step from
one mental position to another, will be the sole end and purpose
of this volume. Be patient, then, dear reader, and judge not till
thou hast travelled with me through the successive chapters of
my life. mae"

24 THE MAGIC STAFF.

CHAPTER II.
THE LOCAL HABITATION.

In vain might the inquisitive antiquarian read through Hum-
boldt’s scientific observations of natural scenery ; in vain study the
travels and discoveries of the world-renowned Peter Parley; in
vain dream through the poetic descriptions of Bayard Taylor, the
cosmopolite, whose wandering footsteps on oriental lands are sought
by hundreds who choose travelling through books to encountering
perils by sea and land; in vain peruse any history —to become
acquainted with the existence of a certain isolated, unpainted, un-
finished dwelling, in which was enacted the first scene in the life-
drama which is about to be delineated. You need not marvel at
this omission on the part of ubiquitous historians, because there
was nothing about this human habitation worthy of the least re-
mark, save the conspicuous humility of its structure and imme-
diate surroundings. It was built about the year 1824, in Bloom-
ing-Grove, Orange county, in the state of New York; and was
owned in part by a half-weaver and half-shoemaker, but wholly
honest man, who, in common with his wife, had amassed consider-
able of that property, both real and personal, which is most easily
acquired by the married poor, under the specific titles of Eliza,
Jane, Sylvanus, Amanda, and Julia Ann.
The husband had attained the summit of forty-five years. Pov-
erty had left its traces upon him. All the days of his youth were
replete with self-supporting endeavors. As soon as the sun of

BIRTH PLACE OF A, J. DAYIS,

THE LOCAL HABITATION. 25

boyhood had arisen upon him, he was bound out as an apprentice
to learn the art of weaving with the hand-loom: and while the
web of his private life was being woven by external circumstances,
he acquired the rare accomplishment, without books or school-teach-
ers, of weaving linen fabrics, cotton and woollen cloths, and rag-
carpetings. In subsequent years, on discovering that he could
not support a family by the loom alone, he set himself to learn the
trade of repairing dilapidated boots and shoes—an art which,
aided by his native talent to invent and persevere, soon expanded
into larger dimensions. In a word, he graduated from the pri-
mary condition of “cobbler” to the more productive and reputable
position of journeyman shoemaker. As he divided his time be-
tween the loom and the bench, with an occasional variation in the
way of farming for a few days now and then, we shall mark him
as the half-weaver and half-shoemaker of this history.

The wife, upon whose form the weary weight of thirty-three
years had left its mark, was equally destitute of education, her
only dowry being a frail body, animated by a spirit which ever
appeared like a stranger in a strange land. Her inward nature
was simple and childlike. The heavy chains of inevitable pov-
erty, which her husband could and did wear with only ordinary
fretting, on the contrary had the effect, combined with his intem-
perance, to cut deep channels in the very substance of her soul.
She had many excellent endowments, however, which, in moments
of great trial, shone beautifully forth. Of these traits we shall
have occasion to speak in subsequent pages. In regard to their
children it may be remarked, en passant, that the imperishable
parts of little Jane and Amanda had flown from the shadows of
Farth. There was a melancholy vacancy in the family group,
and there were two more elevations in the churchyard, to remind
the bereft that they had been.

The country in all that region, at the time of which we write,
was just becoming obedient to the spirit of civilization. Standing

in the door of the poor man’s home, or looking from either window
9 ‘

{
26 THE MAGIC STAFF.

of blistered glass, a rough and rugged landscape would rest upon
the vision. And yet industrious farmers had cut and cleared
away the manifold hinderances to their progress; and instead of
unproductive stones and fields of useless undergrowth, you might
behold in many directions apple-orchards, and well-fenced tracts
of land, covered with a fair quality of grass and grains. The
work of refinement and extermination, however, was still unfin-
ished. Besides other evidences of a semi-civilization in that re-
gion which could be mentioned, were an abundance of venomous
reptiles known as “ pilot-snakes,” or copperheads, whose sociable
propensities became at times a source of no little annoyance. We
are told by an eye-witness that these loathsome creatures would
crawl against the basement-lights and look fearlessly in, sometimes
entering the humble dwelling, as if to welcome the impoverished
family to that part of the world, with a special desire to exchange
hospitalities.

It was near the close of a sultry day, August 11, 1826, when
the half-weaver and half-shoemaker received the intelligence that
another item of property had been added to his estate. The at-
tendant physician, after due examination of the title, &c., declared
it to be free and unencumbered. ;

“You don’t say so!” exclaimed the exultant cordwainer, who
had just returned, with unsteady step, from the nearest vil-
lage.

“Yes I do, sir,” said the doctor ; “and what is more, your baby,
sir, is a fine-looking boy.”

“A boy, eh?” soliloquized the enriched man—“ that’s good!
—that’s just what I wanted—that’s the best luck yet!” Over-
come by the congratulations of nurse and doctor, and with his
head swimming in a river of parental delight, he seated himself
to collect his scattered thoughts. But rest and sobriety were
impossible. In fact, if the sad truth must be told, the effect of
the intoxicating draught was already upon his brain. Thus con-

ditioned, he went reeling and dancing to the sick-couch, to take
&

THE LOCAL HABITATION. aT

a survey of the plump little parcel of poor man’s riches ; which,
as already said, had been so recently added to his previous good
fortune. After feasting his eyes to his heart’s content, and satis-
fying himself fully that it was not all a dream, he bethought to
ask the prostrate woman concerning her situation.

28 THE MAGIC STAFF.

CHAPTER III.

THE NAME.

“ Many have died in their misery,
And left their thought untold.”

Tue breathing of mountain-verdure and the sweet fragrance
of harvest-fields, added to the music that floated in from the purl-
ing streamlet below the sloping eminence on which the house was
built, had the effect to revive the mother from the sinking weak-
ness conséquent upon her accouchment. But the exhalations of
a whiskey-breath, which now passed like a pestilential miasm over
her, summoned a return of those despairing moods with which for
years she had been only too familiar.

“I do wish you would keep sober,” she sadly said, “and get
things in the house to do with.” }

“Oh, never you fret and worry about me; I guess I can keep
the family out of the county-house a while longer,” returned the
still jolly father.

The presence of the nurse and a neighbor served only to in-
crease the mother’s mortification. She looked up into his face as
he bent over her, and, with one of those expressions which can
only arise from fear, grief, and despondency, she said :—

“ Now, do try to keep steady! Don’t stand here. Go away —
away !”

The nurse now offered her some scanty refreshment ; and, from
sheer exhaustion, she closed her large, dark eyes in slumber.

THE NAME. 29

By this time the children, who for some to them unaccountable
reason had been sent to visit a neighbor, hearing that the doctor
had left a baby for mother, came rushing in like so many young
colts. liza, the eldest, who possessed the not uncommon virtue
(which treads hard upor. the heels of a vice) of being particularly
amiable only when everything went to please her, demanded an
immediate sight of the new-comer. The cheerful nurse held the
baby up for exhibition. But it was a boy, and for that reason
received a provoked slap from Eliza, who in a moment was ready
to quarrel with the doctor and everybody else.

“Don’t let me see you do that again !” said the awakened moth-
er, as she pressed the darling yet closer to her loving heart;
“what do you mean by that—say ?”

“Oh, pshaw !” exclaimed the wilful daughter; “why didn’t the
plaguy old doctor bring mother a little gal? I won’t have a boy
*bout me!—can’t do nothin’ with such a young ’un. I want a
baby-gal to dress up and play with—so, there!” Saying this,
she walked sulkily out, leaving the less excitable and less disap-
pointed brother and sister to look, and think, and indulge their
childish curiosity, on the new things that had come to, pass.

At this time, as is usual for months previous to presidential
elections in the United States, there was more or less discussion
concerning the merits, and especially the demerits, of the antago-
nistic candidates. ‘There was a certain major-general, well known
for the decisive victory he gained over the English at New Or-
leans in 1815, which terminated the war. This notoriety was
still more extended, with which his popularity kept even pace, in
consequence of the invincibility of his will to quell the Creek
— tribe of Indians. The gallantry of his exploits, and the success
which ever crowned his efforts on the battle-field, secured the
gratitude and admiration of every true democratic inhabitant of
America: in part expression of which, the party bearing that
name brought him forward as a candidate for the highest honor
possible to bestow in a country so republicar,

80 THE MAGIC STAFF.

“ Hillo, there! I say, you, hillo! What’s turned up? How’s the
woman by this time? And how’s the baby? Come, let’s know!”

Uncle Thomas Maffet, from whom this abrupt salutation pro-
ceeded, at first acted as if determined to remain seated in his
wagon, with which he had just arrived from the village, freighted
with a plough and other implements used in the art of agriculture.
Friendship and cordial good-humor generally, beamed forth from
his countenance, giving even a stranger to believe that any such
determination was to him quite impossible. And so it proved.
Not waiting to be invited, out he jumped, and, laughing with that
heartiness which is so natural to nutritive temperaments, he en-
tered the poor man’s habitation.

“ Well, neighbor Davis, when did the thing happen ?” asked the
farmer, as he bent over the rough-hewn cradle of domestic manu-
facture, and turned off the coverlet that concealed the baby from
his view.

“Four days ago,” replied the cordwainer. “What d’ye think
of the little lapstone ?”

“Four days old, eh?” and Uncle Maffet tried to get the infant
into his arms. But those days were without temperance lecturers.
Farmers considered it next to impossible to work at mowing and
reaping, during the hottest days, without some sort of stimulating
beverage to keep body and soul decently together. So thought
the present visitor, at least, as his trembling hand and unsteady
eye too clearly testified.

“Take the child,” said the sick woman, addressing the nurse;
“T’m afraid Uncle Thomas will let him fall.”

The baby was returned to the rustic cradle, and the still un-
reconciled Eliza—which disposition she contrived to make mani-
fest by sundry emphatic twitches and jerks of the rocker—was
told to keep the child from crying. Meantime, the two men
struck up a political talk, and went through the usual agreements
and contradictions regarding the merits and demerits of the popu-
lar candidates.

THE NAME. 81

“Who @’ you vote for, next election, neighbor Davis?” inquired
the farmer.

“T’m Old Hickory, up to the hub!” replied the cordwainer,
who prided himself on being right up and down on matters of
opinion.

“ Ditto,” returned the good-natured Thomas. “Now, I’ll tell
you what, neighbor—if you want to please me to-day, you’ll let
me name that ’are boy of yourn.”

“Oh, I don’t care who names him— what d’ you say, mother ?”
said the father, addressing his wife, who was still extremely debili-
tated.

“Don’t let the child fall, or get hurt—that’s the most I care
about,” she replied; which was taken as equivalent to a verbal
consent.

“Enough said!” exclaimed the laughing Thomas; “now let’s
kiss the nurse !”

On hearing this, the excitable and irreconcilable Eliza sprang
to her feet and ran like a wild fox into the field, to tell the chil-
dren who were at play. The whole thing was done in the twin-
kling of an eye.

“Uncle Thomas Maffet is come, and is goin’ to name the baby.
Come quick !”

Whereupon, Julia Ann tried to get hold of Siva hand,
and Sylvanus grasped after Eliza’s, but missed it, and tumbled
headlong into the entangling grass; then Eliza, who had by
this time almost reached the house, catching the sound of the cry
for help, went bounding back to jerk Sylvanus along; when, as
bad luck would have it, Julia Ann discovered that she had lost
her sun-bonnet, and couldn’t go without it; whereupon Eliza,
whose nominal business it was to take care of the younger mem-
bers, flew round here and there through the grass in wildest haste,
and, not finding the article, had the additional misfortune to lose
her patience; then, sans bonnet and sans patience, back they scam-
pered under a full head of explosive curiosity, which as a motive

on THE MAGIC STAFF.

force is next to steam; each running and tumbling against the
other alternately, and by divers indescribable mistakes impeding
one another’s progress, until the juvenile trio stood side-by side,
nearly out of breath, looking at the farmer as he contrived to bal-
ance himself sufficiently to give the mother confidence in his
ability to hold the baby as safely as anybody else.

With his usual mental agility, the half-weaver and half-shoe-
maker mounted the high summit of parental excitement, and
shared in the momentary harmony of blended interests, to which
the maternal bosom was far from being insensible. A large glass
of brandy was placed in the farmer’s left hand, while on the right
arm rested the infant candidate. The faithful old nurse stood
very near, however, to catch the baby, should it fall from the in-
toxicated embrace. This amiable assistant was not a little re-
lieved when informed that “kissing the nurse” meant drinking
the brandy, and nothing more.

“ Attention, company!” said the inebriated Thomas. “The
first thing I want to know is, whether you'll call this ’ere boy just
what I say.” Affirmative exclamations leaped from every mouth.
“ Well, then,” he continued, “remember this: I’m a-goin’ to vote
for ‘Old Hickory,’ the hero of New Orleans—the, greatest man
a-livin’ in the world; and I want this ’ere boy to bear that ’are
great man’s name—ANpREW Jackson! And now, neighbor -
Davis, keep in mind my words—JI ain’t so boozy as you seem to
think. I know what I’m a-sayin’—and (hic) I say (hic) that
’are great man’s name (hic) hasn’t reached further than will the
influence of this ’ere son of yourn! He'll grow up a young (hic)
‘Hickory’—mind that ; and you'll never be sorry (hic) = he
was born !”

Nothing could be more evident than that the good Uncle Thomas
had waxed more patriotic, and more pathetic, and more prophetic,
than he at first intended, or supposed himself capable of; and
instead of the laughing mouth and dizzy eye, there fell upon him
the spell of a serious and religious temper, which seemed to sober

THE NAME. 838

his brain, and open a new place in his heart. It was a beautiful
scene! No magic art ever wrought a change so quick and thor-
ough. A breathless hush, like that of death, spread through the
room—which stillness nothing broke, save the heavings of the
farmer’s breast. He seemed to blend his destiny with that of the
whole world; and, while sobbing like the infant in his arms, he
invoked “the blessing of Heaven” to rest upon them all. Uncle
Maffet, almost entirely sobered, then. hurriedly departed home-
ward; and, although an apparently healthy man, he was, but a
few days subsequently, placed beneath the soil. The baby’s sad
mother believed, for years afterward, that the jovial neighbor was

made solemn by a providential vision of his own funeral.
Qe

4 THE MAGIC STAFF.

CHAPTER IV.
THE VENDUE AND DEPARTURE.

None but the poor can fully understand the multitudinous per-
plexities which crowd themselves into their struggles for daily sub-
sistence. The catalogue of items that stand between the family and
what is called “respectable circumstances,” are well nigh beyond
computation. Discouragements stare the impoverished household
directly in the face, at nearly every turn in the path of life.

So, at least, thought the man whose unpainted and incomplete
homestead was not yet paid for, and whose various other exer-
tions to establish himself had met with many unbearable defeats.
For two whole years after the birth of the last-named child, the
half-weaver and half-shoemaker, with now and then the terrible
exception of intemperance, steadily combated the host of petty
obstacles which ever arise in the poor man’s presence; but with-
out success. The self-conscious, non-adaptation of his wife to
the warfare consequent upon the rearing of a family, combined
with the frequent lack of patient and indulgent affection, which
her nature silently craved as the foundation-element of her every~
thought and effort, had the effect to generate painful misunder-
standings, and discouragements innumerable. On such occasions
the excitable husband would do the principal amount of talking
and fault-finding, while the wife, naturally deficient in the usual
ease of expression wherewith to contend and explain, would sink
right down into a state of depression the most piteous to behold.

During these two years there happened nothing of any note to

THE VENDUE AND DEPARTURE. 35

tye individual child whose biography we are now recording: but
to another member of the family an important change had oc-
curred; the chronology of which is written on a blank leaf,
between the Old and New Testaments. There happened a
curious incident, in connection with that “change,” which we will
here digress sufficiently to relate.

The children were out playing upon the hillside, bounding
hither and thither with a freedom quite spontaneous, when Syl-
vanus seemed to be suddenly transfixed with a visual wonder.

— “liza!” he presently exclaimed, “come quick—d’you see
that °”

“See what?” she hastily inquired.

“ That ’are light yonder !”

“No, you foolish feller, I don’t see nothin

“Then you’re real blind,” said-he, somewhat provoked, “can’t
you see that ’are round white light moving right along over the

2499
:

returned she.

grass yonder, toward the woods ?”

“No, nor you nuther!” replied Eliza.

Then little Julia Ann tried and strained her bright blue eyes,
but all to no purpose; whereupon Sylvanus, actuated by a medley
of motives, in which alarm and disappointment acted the principal
parts, ran straight home “ to tell mother all about it.”

When the mother heard the boy’s hasty account of what he
had just seen, she affected no interest in it whatever, and with her
accustomed quietness of tone, bade him return to his play among
the children. And yet, to one familiar with the woman’s mental
peculiarities, there were certain lines on her countenance which
betokened an inward grief. When asked by Eliza, “ what ailed
her,” she sadly replied :—

“Sylvanus will soon leave us.”

But her reputation in her husband’s mind for being a believer
in dreams, and for putting confidence in signs, and omens, and
superstitions, caused him to eject an unsympathetic “Poh!” at
everything of the kind. The day soon arrived, however, when

36 THE MAGIC STAFF.

the skeptical father might have been seen sorrowfully preparing a
coffin, to hold all that was mortal of his son Sylvanus. When-
ever his opinion of this circumstance was subsequently sought,
the cordwainer would reply, with ill-suppressed impatience,
“ Poh, nonsense; the light hadn’t nothing to do with his death!”
Notwithstanding, however, this habitual rejection of whatever
appeared extraordinary ; notwithstanding even the common vice
of intemperance to which he was addicted, it should be here
noticed, that this man’s disposition was neither profane, uncharita-
ble, nor irreligious. On the contrary, he seemed ever ready to
condemn penuriousness and dishonesty, as well as every expres-
sion of religious disbelief.

To return: believing it to be impossible to support the family,
and also to pay for the humble dwelling in which this history
begins, the desponding cordwainer packed up his “ kit” (or tools)
and gave public notice that he meant to migrate to some other
section of the Empire state. Noman ever possessed a stronger or
more resolute propensity, when once he fairly got the notion, to
sacrifice at auction every household god, and try his luck elsewhere.
And, perhaps, there never was a feminine nature more fond of a
fixed and settled “home,” than that of his companion ; and, per-
haps, also, no person’s disposition was ever more perplexed and
injured by the frequent recurrence of such violent breaking up of
every local affection, than hers.

“Don’t be ina hurry, father,” she imploringly exclaimed one
day—as her husband avowed his resolution to make “a clean
sweep” of the pig, hens, house, and furniture—“ don’t be so impa-
tient to be off. We’ve had trouble epee already. A eae
stone, you know, never gathers no moss.’

“My mind’s made up,” he sternly and quickly replied, “and
I’m determined to be away from this.”

“ Next season may be better for us,” continued she encoura-
gingly ; “it’s hard to pack up, you know, and it’s so painful to
move away among utter strangers.”

THE VENDUE AND DEPARTURE. 37

“T won't be in debt,” returned the honest half-weaver and half-
shoemaker, “I’ll be bound if I’ll stay here—hanging by the eye-
lids, as I am—no! not I—TI’il sell and quit.”

The certainty of having a vendue, and of selling everything at
a sacrifice, broke with a melancholy force upon the domesticated
nature of the wife. It was another wound to her inhabitative
heart; and opened afresh many sores in the inner memory which
had not yet healed up. “Change, change, nothing but change,”
she sighed —“ Oh, when shall we rest?” And she went on with
a weary step, doing up the housework.

But the disheartened cordwainer, having resolyed, as he said,
“to pull up stakes and leave,” continued to defend himself and
fortify his positions on the question of an auction and departure.
Taking his wife’s words to signify a proposition to postpone pro-
ceedings, the bare intimation of which, to his temperament, was a
quick cause of impatience and irritation—he began combating
the evils of procrastination, in the following definite style :—

“Tf there’s anything I hate, it’s this dilly-dallying along, and
this putting things off. What’sthe use? Nothing ventured noth-
ing had. When I see anything to do, I want to do 7t—and not
be for ever doing nothing. There hain’t work enough for me on
the bench, nor at the loom nuthér; and the farm-work is good
only a short spell right in haying and harvest—so there’s no let
up—I’m determined to go! You needn’t fret about it. We'll
sell out—make a clean breast of everything— pay all we can,
and seek our fortune among strangers.”

There was a quick, keen, resolute twinkle in his brown eyes,
as he spoke; which was too well known to the worn and fragile

“woman; for her only reply was a long-drawn, sad sigh, as if her
heart was loaded with a full consciousness of the impending trial.

Now in regard to procrastination, there is surely much to be
thought. Half the minor troubles of the domestic world may be
referred, with justice, to this cause alone. The indolent habit of
postponing the work of to-day until to-morrow, is next to a vice,

38 THE MAGIC STAFF.

if, indeed, it be not, strictly speaking, a crime against the soul’s
happiness and prosperity. Persons who gracefully put off, from
day to day, the performance of duties which belong to the time when
they are first seen to be duties, are usually considered as being
afflicted with only an amiable human weakness. But the truth is,
that no weakness ever came nearer merging into a heinous moral
deformity, and producing a vast multitude of misfortunes, than
this same procrastination! Hundreds of families suffer domestic
annoyances, of which—but for this indolent habit of postpone-
ment—they would never have the least practical knowledge. A
quick and reliable sense of justice is seldom found in that mind
which shirks the trial of the hour, and pleads the necessity of
procrastination.

But the difficulty in this instance was, an ungovernable impa-
tience under the restraints and drawbacks of poverty. If the
conscientious shoemaker had been endowed, like his wife, with a
spirit less fond of domestic adventure, and more of a disposition
to work right straight through a mountain of difficulties, like some
men, there would have been greater unity and more social satis-
faction in the isolated habitation. There is, without doubt, much
wisdom in procrastination, under circumstances when the thing to
be done properly belongs to some future day; but only the truly
wise can safely and successfully practise it. Idleness is ever
more to be feared and shunned than energy and action. The
wife possessed a spirit of meekness and quiet, unqualified by any
really positive element of character; which frequently caused her
to submit and be defeated even by an ordinary trial; while the
husband, ever ambitious to be “up and doing,” and with no sub-
missive will, would urge her into positions the most distressing,
because foreign to her organization. Destitute of the commonest
education, and, therefore, without a charitable solution of human
weaknesses, each sadly misunderstood and painfully afflicted the
other—she, by feeling and saying disheartening things; he, by
disregarding her most tender and predominating sensibilities.

THE VENDUE AND DEPARTURE. 389

We stop to notice these peculiarities, in order that the reason-
able reader may the better comprehend the parentage and social
condition of the subject of this biography. It may be added in
this place, that this radical or temperamental incompatibility —
the barrier to conjugal peace and unity which Nature had unmis-
takably erected between husband and wife—came out with life-
like manifestations in the mental characteristics of Eliza, and, in
fact, with more or less distinctness, in each of the subsequent
offspring. Hence, in this case, as in every other of like nature,
each child was born with certain hereditary disadvantages. of
body and disposition; which, to modify and control, required a
labor of many years; besides making the summit of “personal
harmony” of no easy attainment, even after its outlines became
visible in the far distance, and it was recognised as being within
the reach of human effort.

“Well, I can’t help it then!” the mother at length resumed,
with a complaining sigh, “we’ll all go to rack and ruin; and
where we'll go next the mercy only knows. When will the
vendue be ?”

The half-weaver and half-shoemaker turned his eyes from the
“stone on his lap and the strap on his knee,” and replied in a tone
somewhat subdued and mirthfui:—

“Don’t know, eh! Why you just said ‘we'll go to rack and
ruin.’ Day after to-morrow, at ten o’clock, forenoon, the trump-
ery will all be sold under the hammer. *Tis hard, I know,
mother; but—-who cares?” This tenderness and mirth were
ominous— indeed, they were a certain proof—that the bottle-imp
had perched himself on the throne of the unbalanced brain.

The noted day at last arrived, and the housekeeping articles,
of little value, were sold one by one, and carried afvay to homes
and families more permanent and happy. The wilful Eliza
concealed some knives and forks, and smuggled them away with
a few revered keepsakes—thus retaining, contrary to her father’s
expressed wishes, the basis of a future home. But nothing

40 THE MAGIC STAFF.

of importance was rescued from the ravages of the auction-sales,
save the bedding material, which was put straight into a bag-
gage-wagon for immediate emigration. Eliza was running and
jumping about with Julia Ann, regardless of the sufferings en-
dured by the bewildered mother ; while the father, full of fictitious
courage and alcoholic hopes, lent a hand to every one who asked,
and cheerfully laughed at his own calamity. Presently, the word
came —“ All aboard !”—meaning, all in the travelling wagon—
and, in a few minutes, you might have seen the depressed moth-
er, with the boy-baby in her lap, the two daughters stowed in
between the bundles of bedding, and the half-weaver and half-
shoemaker in front with the thirsty driver—all, pioneer-like,
except in unity of purpose, going, without compass or rudder, on
a reckless voyage of domestic discovery.

The thousand and one little hardships and shipwrecks which
the impoverished family experienced, between the Blooming
Grove house and the less agreeable tenement of Juhn Myers, in
Staatsburgh, New York, we will not stop to delineate. Suffice it
to say, that the wanderers eventually terminated their journeyings
in a spot yet more isolated than the one they had deserted —a
place where’ the writer’s first impressions of existence took their
rise—and where, therefore, the biographical character of prece-
ding chapters becomes transformed into sober autobiography and
history incidental.

,

MY FIRST MEMORIES. 41

CHAPTER. V.
MY FIRST MEMORIES.

“ When at eve I sit alone,
Thinking on the past and gone —
While the clock, with drowsy finger,
Marks how long the minutes linger —
And the embers, dimly burning,

_ Tell of life to dust returning —
Then my lonely chair around,
With a quiet, mournful sound
With a murmur soft and low,
Come the Ghosts of Long Ago!”

Wuen the Soul makes its first record on the ledger-leaf of
Memory, it then merges from the mystic vale of babyhood into a
definite and self-conscious being. Individuality and memory are,
therefore, inseparable in autobiography. The semi-unfounded
tales of contemporaries may thenceforward be revised and cor-
rected by the individual himself. Without egotism, then, the per-
sonal pronoun “I” may be hereafter used. Henceforth what-
ever might appear uncertain in history, becomes, by this direct
_ testimony, translated and actualized to the reader as being next
in value to positive knowledge.

Three years and a few weeks had glided away ere Memory
received the news that, without and beyond itself, there existed an
objective world.. This was in the autumn of 1829. By means
of intro-and-retro-spection, the original scene is easily revived
and made manifest. I was in the open air, with my face toward

42 ‘ THE MAGIC STAFF.

a small, weather-beaten, lonely house, but which, to my inexperi-
enced mind, looked like a very spacious and wonderful super-
structure. Whether I had ever been in it or not, I could not
remember. Towering trees environed the strange domicil; and
a road, the use of which I could form no conception, stretched
away through the dreamy depths of the encircling wilderness.

“ What is them high things called?” I soliloquized, viewing thé
erect and wavy trees so very far above my head. “ And what’s
that called ?” I asked, pointing my finger toward the dilapidated
tenement, the dimensions of which seemed so great.

But, quicker than thought, there flashed athwart my nature a
dreadful feeling of lonely and helpless desolation; and awaking,
as it were, from a dream of fright and anxiety, I screamed a
word, the sound of which I had till then no knowledge of my
power to make— Mother! mother! Like the fabulous Robinson
Crusoe, while a lone wanderer on the island of Juan Fernandez,
I started in surprise at the cry with which my own voice broke
the deep silence. And yet, as I can now well remember, there
was something in the term “ Mother” which seemed familiar and
full of blessed significance. Like a magic wand, it appeared to
vpen a narrow pathway through some well-known landscape: and
this path presently ultimated in certain definite enclosures — per-
haps, reproducing an idea of the rooms in the rural dwelling
already described as my birthplace.

“ What is ‘Mother’ ?” I could not tell. Whether it had form,
size, and dimensions, or was the absence of these, I could not
decide. Two sensations I knew: my personal littleness, made ~
more appalling by the contrast of the great trees and immense
house before me; and my desolate state, more terrifying because I
could see nothing like myself in any direction. When I screamed
“Mother!” I evidently appreciated the fact that I was soliciting,
imploring, demanding, the presence of something which could
make me feel warm, safe, satisfied, and happy—something of
which I was a part, a lesser portion — without which=I would be

MY FIRST MEMORIES. 43

cold, hungry, thirsty, and miserable. But, strange as it may ap-
pear, it is true nevertheless, that I could not or did not form the
least conception of the objective appearance of that indefinite some-
thing which I called “ Mother,” and which I fully realized to be
somehow related to my safety and existence. This fact I now
regard as being rich in value to all metaphysicians.

I think no little boy ever cried, “Mother!” longer or louder
than did I. A host of indescribable terrors crept through my
mind. The tall trees were swaying to and fro by means of a
force or agency which, I had a vague idea, possessed the attribute
of motion. “ Will it hurt me?” was my instant query. “Away
down yonder, looking into the forest, I saw darkness. “ Do buga-
boos live there?” I thought; and, louder and quicker yet, I called
for the warmth, protection, and sympathy, of my mother. As I
cried, there came from among the trees behind me a familiar
voice, singing a semi-unmeaning song, which was then very com-
mon in the plebeian homes about us. I listened :—

“This poor man came in from his plough,
Dando, dando! j
This poor man came in from his plough,
Clam an’ a clish and a cling go!
This poor man came in from his plough,
And asked his wife, ‘Is breakfast ready now ?

Sing, clam blarum glere arum,
And a cling go !”

My infant mind readily caught the song as my blessed mother
sung it—for I knew as by instinct that she it was whose voice I
heard —and I feel justified in recording the eccentric words, as a

tribute to the jirst impression which her spirit made upon the mem-

ory of mine. My loneliness, as might be imagined, was quickly
dissipated ; for, with her arms full of brush, to make the fire burn
for supper, up she came; and, cheerfully bidding me to follow her,
we entered the house, wherein my father sat, making shoes. This
was the first of my memory thereof; and also of my sisters, as
they invited me to go out and play with them.

44 THE MAGIC STAFF.

On comparing my primary reminiscence (in awaking thus sud-
denly to a consciousness of a world without) with that of others,
I find very few, if any, whose mental history reports a similar cir-
cumstance. Still, I do not doubt but there are many who, if they
could but distinctly recall the time and place when memory began
first to gather impressions from the outward world, might corrobo-
rate my experience and bear me company. Most people marvel
and look skeptical when I declare and describe this initial event
of my own biography; and this plainly enough assures me that I
am not reporting an experience which is regarded as common to
my fellow-men. Can I cause my doubting friend to comprehend
the fact? I will make the attempt.

During infancy, the inmost spirit of man is slumbering in the
cerebral substance, like an ungerminated seed in the earth’s bosom.
The child-brain is not yet impregnated with the immortal princi-
ple. The seed of the future being lies embedded therein. As
with germs in the soil, so it is with the gradual growth and up-
springing expansion of the mental energies. As a sequence of
this progressive germination of the mental seed, from its envelop-
ing womb which is situated in the centre of the brain, the outer
fibres of the different organs, for the first few months of existence,
do not receive the indwelling spirit, without which reflection and
memory are quite impossible. According to this philosophy, you
perceive that the spiritual forces expand from the central germ,
till they fill, and thrill, and saturate with appropriate energies, the
myriad minute vessels and nerves which, together with the cere-
bral embroidery, constitute what in these days are termed phreno-
logical organs. It is owing to the absence of the spiritual forces
—to a defective circulation of the imperishable principle through
the fine extremities of these organs —that some persons complain
of an incapacity to reflect and reason easily; and yet more espe-
cially do such deplore the unfaithfulness of their memory, even
when the records of that organ are most in requisition. On the
foregoing theory, it is plain to be seen that, should a person pos-

MY FIRST MEMORIES. 4h

sess a spiritual nature of slow growth, united to a temperament
which is nowise untrue, but definite and positive alike in the rejec-
tion as in the reception of impressions (as mine is), it follows that
the period preceding the taking on of a memory might be length-
ened out many months beyond the time commonly supposed; and
that when the awakening at length comes, so vivid an impression
might be made as that no subsequent events could ever obliterate
it. I know it is hard to remember exactly when you began to
memorize common impressions ; but could each one do so, I think

ai would be amply satisfied with the above Sg ae of my
individual experience.

46 THE MAGIC STAFF.

CHAPTER VI.
MY FIRST TEMPTATION.

LeAvine philosophy to other volumes, I proceed with my
record.

The occupation in which I saw my father engaged, day after
day, considerably excited my curiosity. It was so funny to see
him cut both soft and hard leathery substances into different forms
and sizes; and still more, to watch him as he wet them, and ham-
mered them, and fixed them firmly, with cunning little nails, on
a piece of wood, fashioned after a big foot; and next to notice the
diligence and regularity with which he made holes, with a sharp
pointed instrument; and then to witness the quick, unerring ex-
change of bristles by which he pulled a waxed thread in opposite
directions ; and, finally, to look at the veins suddenly swelling on
his forehead, and to hear his invariable and characteristic “ Ugh !”
as with a long, strong pull (which concluded in a jerk), he seemed
to satisfy his mind that the thing was done for good. There ap-
_ peared to be an amusement in all this, in which I longed to par-
ticipate. But the fun of it began rapidly to disappear one morn-
ing when I caught the impression that—from some cause which
I did not comprehend—my father felt compelled to keep doing
so, even while he wished to be absent from home.

My sister Eliza had the charge and direction of me most of the
time; that is, I found that I was forced to obey whenever alone
with her, and this frequently happened. On one occasion, she

MY FIRST TEMPTATION. 47

ordered me in a whisper to go into a sort of cellar, which was
built in the side of a small hill just in the edge of the woods, and
bring her my apron full of apples, which I would find there.
Like children in general, I was fond of such fruit, and so proposed
to go and bring them immediately.

“Don’t tell nobody I sent you,” said she, in a quick undcr-
tone; “Ill knock the daylights out of you if you do!”

Hearing this terrible threat, coupled with the injunction of se-
erecy, I trembled with a strange apprehension. It seemed to me
that I was about to do something which I should not do. This
seeming was entirely new; that is, I did not recollect ever doing
any such thing before. And yet, I would presume to write my-
‘self as being neither more nor less prone to good deeds than many
other boys. But here was an innocent moment when I felt half-
tempted and half-forced to commit an undefinable evil act. Thus
confused and agitated, I asked —

“ Ain’t them apples yourn ?”

“No, you little goose, you!” she snappishly replied, “them’s
John Myers’s apples; so mind, don’t let him see you go nor
come !”

“T guess I can’t go at all,” said I, attempting to run by her
into the house; “I’m so afraid he’ll see me.”

“No you don’t nuther!” exclaimed she angrily, as she caught
me and turned my face toward the cellar, with a whirling force
that made me feel and fear her physical superiority ; “now you
go, as I tell you, or Ill pound you—see.if I don’t!”

Children, I think, are all natural democrats. Moral obligations,
fine distinctions, or rules of right and wrong, are without influence
-on very young minds. ‘Thus, not quite understanding what wrong
there could be in going for what I wanted —nor yet perceiving
what moral difference there existed between apples in our cellar
under the house and apples in John Myers’s cellar under the hill
off I started, pushed open the unlocked door, and filled my
apron with that fruit which tempted the fabled Eve.

48 THE MAGIC STAFF.

Returning with more apples than I could keep from rolling out
of my uplifted garments, I had the fresh fright of beholding their
owner looking right at me from the road. What to-do I did not
know; but, though the fruit dropped at every step, I kept running
to get home. The owner hailed me; but twas no use. Fleeter
and faster still I bounded over the rough ground, until I reached
the house. Forgetting all my sister’s threats of punishment, I
sprang toward my mother, buried my face in her lap, and wept at
the top of my voice a full confession! She heard me through,
told me to dry my eyes, and never to do so again; and then, to
my great satisfaction, she went out to “settle” with Eliza for send-
ing me on such a wicked errand. What happen<d to my sister,
during that settlement, I will not pause to chronicle; but, instead,
will enter my solemn protest against any similar temptation being
placed before the human spirit. For, although at the time, it
seemed like a harmless and playful enterprise, yet there was a
poison lurking beneath, which, had I fully imbibed it, might have
debilitated my moral organism through every subsequent year.

My mother, being fond of solitude, often sought gratification by
rambling in the wild, woody environments. One day, toward
evening, we all remarked “ how long a time” she had been absent ;
but consoled one another with the saying, “Shell be back before
sundown.” At length, however, the beautiful sun rolled down
behind the dense forest, touching as it went the loftiest and the
fairest leaves with hues inimitable. But where was the lone wo-
man? The mystical drapery of night fell round about the world;
the cheer and chirp of daylight creatures were no longer heard;
and as we children stood tremblingly on the edge of the dark
distance, we fancied that we did hear a sound of wailing coming
from the woods, blending with the sad, low moan of the grandly-
swaying wilderness. Every moment became more and more
painful. We looked and called, and called and looked, till choked
and blinded with fright and tears. “Mother’s lost!” I cried, and
Tan to get father out in search. *I'was quickly done. He did

MY FIRST TEMPTATION. 49

not fear the darkness, neither the spirit of night in the forest, but
went boldly into it. Anon, in the midst of our listenings, we
heard the sound of voices; and, ere we fully recognised them, our
parents stood before us! The pleasure of that meeting was the
first positive joy recorded in the life-book of my memory.

Our family did not sojourn long in this isolated tenement. My
father returned one night, and said: “ Well, I’ve found another
hut; so, let’s be off this week.” To this sudden proposal my
mother complainingly demurred; and then I witnessed, for the
first time in the life of my memory, a prolonged, loquacious strug-
gle between them — the effect of which still lingers, as the most
shocking impression ever made upon my infantile mind. Well
enough do I remember, after getting under the clothes in the
trundle-bed that night, of thinking thus: “I wonder whether the
Big Good Man up in the sky seen that! If he did, what does he
think about it?” While meditating thus, I was seized with a strange
* terror ; and, as the most natural thing, I screamed “Mother!”
with all my vocal power.

“ What is the matter, Jackson?” she quickly and kindly asked.

“I don’t know,’ I cried; “I’m ’fraid to go to sleep. D’ you
think I’ll wake up again, if I go to sleeps”

“O yes, my son—nothing’ll hurt you.” And so I tried to be-
lieve. But *twas impossible. What troubled me I knew not,
except a terrifying apprehensiveness that I should not open my
eyes again if I slept, and the dreaded loneliness of an endless
sleep. It reminded me of what I felt when our mother was lost
in the forest. Therefore I begged to get in bed with my parents,
for there only could I feel safe in slumber.
~ “Don’t humor that boy so!” said my father sternly; ’taiv’t |
nothin’ but worms ailin’ him.”

Now, though a very little child, I felt that I knew better ; and
so, for the first time, I found my mind rejecting my own father’s
judgment. Here was individual sovereignty in a trundle-bed.
_ But this unexpected development of an opinion, in positive oppo-

50 ; THE MAGIC STAFF.

sition to my worthy and venerable progenitor, served only to add
more strength to my indescribable terror. Having no knowledge
of words wherewith to dispute my father’s worm-theory, I cried
and continued to cry, until, perhaps to get rid of me, I was taken
by mutual consent into the protective embrace of the sympathizing
mother — wherein, feeling a blissful security out of harm’s way,
I soon forgot all trouble in a slumber too sound for dreams.

On reflection, I have since concluded that my awakening spirit,
young and untutored as it was, had received on this occasion some
vaguely intuitive conception of Deity and Death. An idea of the
“ Big Good Man” had never been imparted to me by any person
that I could remember; neither had I ever witnessed such a
shocking event as “going to sleep and not waking again,” which
formed the groundwork of my childish apprehensions. Therefore
I put this down as an interesting psychological fact, impairing the
doctrine that denies to the soul an innate organic knowledge of
corresponding outward realities.

A CHANGE OF SCENE. 61

CHAPTER VII.
A CHANGE OF SCENE.

“He lived not in himself, but did become
Portion of that around him.’

PaTERNAL authority being greatly in the ascendant, our family
sorrowfully bundled together the housekeeping material; and two
days subsequent to my father’s announcement, we were once more

- on our way to a strange habitation. Walking and riding by turns,
on a rather hard and lonely road which led through a large tract
of woodland, we at length reached another isolated tenement, of
extremely limited dimensions. It was situated in the same town,
Staatsburg, not far from Rhinebeck, on the farm of a good-natured
Dutchman by the name of Bart Cropsey, whose years were rol-
ling him down the afternoon of rudimental existence.

South of this incommodious dwelling you could see the fields
and distant farmhouse of the nearest neighbor; while on the
north there was next to no prospect whatever; only an indistinct
wagon track (a cheering sign that human beings had been there
before us) leading far away around a hilly, stony section of the
old man’s real estate. Toward the east, and but a few rods from
our door, there was, as nearly as I can remember, a chain of
irregular acclivities. These were overlaid with a coating of soil
too sterile to yield anything abundantly, save tons of gravel and
countless splinters from the slate strata above. Looking westward
the eye would very naturally and pleasurably rest upon a swift

62 THE MAGIC STAFF.

running stream, that skirted the timber-land just beyond it, and
which continued its musical pilgrimage downward through the
verdant fields that made our southern prospect almost beautiful.

When arrived, there transpired a succession of those hurly-burly
events so common at such movings. Everything to do, and no-
body ready to do it; yet each busy doing something with all avail-
able strength and speed. The house was divided into two com-
partments—had what an extravagant imagination might term,
“a reception room,” and “an attic chamber.” The first was as
extensive as the walls of the foundation, and occupied all the
lower story; while the second, accessible only by climbing up
a flight of rickety stairs, had remained without lath and plaster,
or other finishings, from the first day of its erection.

But the half-weaver and half-shoemaker indicated no sorrow of
heart. His hand was quick to get the bedstead corded up, the
straw ticking on, the washtub (with a few tea things and crockery
wares in it) pushed into the old cupboard which was already
occupied by such natives as rats, mice, and spiders. The children
were not less industrious. They helped to unload the wagon,
and prepare the reception room for the best arrangement of our
limited stock. But my mother looked sad and weary. Her eye
was filled with an expression of insight. There was a something
of distance in the air of abstraction which pervaded her. I
record this fact, because, although she may have appeared thus
interior a thousand times before, this is the first time when my
attention became arrested and fixed by it. Her mind seemed far ©
from the immediate scene.

Nothing of importance transpired worth recording, for several
weeks. My father worked diligently on the shoe-bench every
day; and, excepting sundry frettings and fault-findings, all went:
on very well.

One day I overheard some suppressed conversation, from which
I gathered that my sister Eliza might get married. “What that
meant I could form no idea; it was something, I noticed, which

A CHANGE OF SCENE. 55

mother did not like. I ventured to ask the reason, but was told
by father to “mind my business,” or he’d “take the strap to me !”
But my mind would work. I was not long concluding that
getting “married” meant going from home to live with a stranger.
So believing, I thought that mother. was right and father was
wrong—because she complained and objected to the marriage,
while father objected to her complainings and useless interference.
And now I began to be reminded of something I witnessed while
we lived in John Myers’ tenement. More than once I had re-
marked a strange young man who came through the woods to
our house, and laughed and talked with Eliza just as if they had
always been acquainted. And I remembered, also, how they
made molasses candy and sugar, once, from maple sap; and gave
me some if I would run away with Julia Ann and play.

My sympathies were with my mother on this subject. And,
therefore, though but four years old, and habited in a short woollen
' frock, I coaxed her out doors, beyond my father’s hearing, to ask
these questions: “ Mother, will I ever be as big as father? Then
you won't let me be married —will you?” If my memory serves
me right she returned me no answer ; but went into the house with
more merriment and laughter than I had ever heard from her on
any previous occasion. This conduct had the effect to leave me
void of satisfaction. “How curious,” thought I, “to weep at
Eliza’s marriage and then laugh at mine!” But the sight of a
stranger coming through the twilight of the evening, dissipated
my thinking, and made me once more a portion of that around
me.

-

54 THE MAGIC STAFF.

CHAPTER VIII.
THE DUTCHMAN’S GIIOST.

Art this time my mind began to take an interest in the va-
ried changes and hues of human faces. As yet but few persons
had made a place for themselves in my memory. Before this
date I do not recollect seeing more than four individuals, besides
our family triangle. I do not say “family circle” because, for the
most part, my parents were stationed at opposite points, while the
children (my eldest sister, Eliza, more especially) stood, as by a
_ logical necessity, at the third point; thus forming, by a kind of
spontaneous geometry, a complete three-cornered family alliance ;
out of which a circle was never more than foreshadowed and
indicated as a bare possibility, in certain hours of domestic
spheroidal communion.

The existence of this condition could not fail to impress me
painfully. My infant tongue was, perhaps, never moved with
words of rebuke which I thought were many times deserved ;
but this can not be recorded of my mouth; for, whenever I
thought that mother was troubled by father’s moods, I could not
restrain a propensity to cry loudly and lustily, and thus restore
them to comparative unity by means of my counter-irritation.

Uncle Bart Cropsey’s hired man seemed very fond of visiting
at our house. Through the deepening twilight we frequently saw
him coming down the indistinct wagon-track toward our habitation.
But he made his visits too early and late, as well as too frequent,

THE DUTCHMAN’S GHOST. 55

to please even the generous Dutchman. Therefore, after numer-
ous remonstrances, “ Dave” (as he was called) made up his mind
to go home earlier. But what he termed “earlier” was to me
very late indeed. Often and often I strained my eyes to keep
awake during his stay, but sleep would steal over me at length,
and the next morning’s sun would sometimes shine ere the deep
slumber of childhood was again broken. It will be remembered
that our “reception room” contained our kitchen, our bedchamber,
our shoemaker’s shop, &c., &c. ; and ’t was for this reason that, when-
ever visitors were there, it became a rather delicate matter for any
member of the family to undress and retire for the night. Hence
we all rejoiced, when Uncle Bart entered: his positive protest
against Dave’s long nocturnal visitations. But our joy was ere
lone greatly diminished, by his apparent forgetfulness of the old
man’s injunction. Indeed, in a few days his visits commenced as
early and terminated as late as ever.

One black and dreary night which I well remember, the jour-
neyman-farmer left us later than usual. The autumnal wind
whistled round about the old house, “and music made of melan-
choly sort.” There was a moon in the sky, but ’twas almost
totally obscured by the threatening clouds. If there had been
shutters on our windows, swinging and slamming on their rusty
hinges, it would, without doubt, have augmented yet more the
doleful melody of the storm and darkness.

“ Ain’t you afraid to go home, Dave?” asked my father.

“No, not I!” he courageously returned; “I’ve walked through
- the woods in more’n one dark night! So, good-night, all!”
“There! he’s gone at last,” said Eliza; “now, let’s go to bed.”
~The motion was seconded by all hands, and, in a few minutes, we
were all under cover, except father who, as he said, had “a shoe
to finish.” We were just on the verge of sleep when there came
a loud knocking on the outside of the window, accompanied with—
“Hallo! hallo! I say, Mr. Davis, come out quick !”

The only light in the room was made by the wick of father’s

56 THE MAGIC STAFF.

exhausted tallow candle, flickering on a stick’s end before him;
but which, owing to a false move of his hand, was immediately
extinguished, leaving the panic-struck family in poor plight to
render assistance. Nothing daunted, however, father opened the
outer door, and demanded :—

“ What’s the matter ?”

There stood poor Dave quaking and trembling with fright, scarce-
ly able to utter a sentence, but presently he stammered out :—

“T’ve seen a thundering spook —or—a—something white !”

“ Where d’ you see it ?”

“ By the big oak tree, up in the corner of the woods, where the
little slab bridge is!”__

“ What does it look like ?”

“ Like a thundering great man, dressed in grave-clothes! Can’t
you go with me till I get past the thundering thing, Mr. Davis?”

S WVell aI lasee,” sale father. “ Let’s hunt up a lantern. I
guess we ’ve got one.”

While father was preparing to go with aes we all declared that
we couldn’t and wouldn’t stay alone; and acting under the speed
of fright, the four of us (mother, Eliza, Julia Ann, and myself)
got quickly dressed and ready to turn out in the gloomy darkness.
It was all alarmingly new tome. I had not heard of a “thun-

‘dering spook” before, and felt no little curiosity to see one. Per-
haps I was also very much frightened; if so, *twas more than
balanced by the novelty of the object about to be seen; and hence,
keeping tight hold of my mother’s hand, on I trotted “in the foot-
steps of our illustrious predecessors,” father and the farmer.

“ What’s a spook, mother?” I pantingly asked while running
rapidly by her side.

“Qh, ’tain’t nothin’ to hurt us,” she replied, “’tis somethin’ that
means somethin’, if one knows how to take it right.”

Not satisfied with this explanation, I inquired :—

“ How does it look ?”

“ Hush —hark—keep still—hold yer tongue—can’t you,”

THE DUTCHMAN’S GHOST. 57

vociferated Eliza; “a body can’t hear nothin’ for your everlastin’
clackin’.”

But lowering my voice, I continued to interrogate: “Mother,
what did Dave mean by a thundering spook ?”

“Oh, never mind. Dave’s a wicked man. 17H] tell you to-
morrow.”

By this time, as the slackened pace of the vanguard indicated,
our party had nearly reached the point of interest. Father made
a voluntary declaration of skepticism and heroic fearlessness.
Whereupon Dave, being inspired with fresh courage, drew up a
verbal resolution to the effect, that “he wouldn’t run now, even
if left alone. Didn’t care for the ‘thundering thing’ when he first
got a glimpse of it. Came back after us merely out of good
nature, to have some fun.” And, so declaring, the ploughman
struck up a bold, courageous, don’t-care-ative whistle; which, to
tell the truth, made but very little impression on the rude blasts
of wind that came roaring through the woods in the direction of
the open country.

But as if *twere designed, at this frightful and momentous
crisis, out popped the great, round-faced moon from behind its
cloudy curtain ; and, wonderful to behold! just by the dilapidated
bridge, right against the great oak-tree, there stood, towering up
in the darkness, a monstrous form—enveloped in a snow-white °
sheet, with a hat on its head, and its apparent arms flying and
flapping frantically in the howling tempest.

“ Good gracious!” exclaimed Dave —“ D’ you see that?”

As he said this, he stepped back so quick against us, that three
fourths of our party were thrown violently to the ground. This
‘accident took immediate effect, in giving each the terrible impres-
sion of having been struck by the ghostly monster; and, acceler-
ated by the motive force of this horrid thought, our mutual retreat
resembled the flight of John Gilpin. As for me, I must confess
that my opinion was expressed by an unbroken yell of agonizing

fear, poetically termed “weeping,” which added not a little to the
a*

58 THE MAGIC STAFF.

awful condition of the fleeing quartette, headed by the more than
ever affrighted Dave. Boe,

“Stop! Hold on!” cried father, who was just in our rear—
“What you running away for? Come back! Let’s ask the
spook what it wants there.”

Obediently we halted. The elder heads planned a battle, and
then all cautiously returned. When within hailing distance, my
father shouted: “ Hallo, there —what’s wanted ?”

We were silent a moment, which seemed a great while, but no
answer came.

“Hallo, I say! Who are you? What d’you want?”

Autumnal blasts, full of strange sounds, gave back the only
response. Father’s candle, too, was nearly out in his lantern;
and the fitful moon kept up a constant dodging in and out of the
heavy folds of the storm-king’s drapery. Hence our prospect
was fast becoming very dark and doubtful. But my father’s
intrepid conduct, on this occasion, inspired me with a particular
respect for him.

“Poh! nonsense! If you don’t answer me I’ll knock your
brains out with this ’ere stone,” said he impatiently, picking up a
big pebble.

And sure enough! To our great consternation, away flew his
missile, and down came the ghostly hat! Obeying orders we
didn’t “budge a yard;” but witnessed, with rapidly increasing
courage, the bombardment and demolition of the White Spook.
And I believe the reader’s disappointment will not be more pro-
voking than was ours, when I record that some mischievous in-
dividual, knowing that Dave frequented our house and returned
that way late every night, had wrapped up a bundle of straw in
an old sheet, with Uncle Bart Cropsey’s broad-brimmed hat to
indicate where a head might have been.

Our party returned home in fine spirits, and slept undisturbed
the remainder of the night. "Tis my belief that the experience
- and discovery of that memorable hour has had an unmistakably

THE DUTCHMAN'S GHOST. 59

wholesome effect upon my organ of marvellousness, which is said,
by phrenologists, to exert only a very moderate and secondary
influence on my mental organization. Methinks Providence could
not have better prepared my mind for investigating and discrimi-
nating between genuine spiritual personages and fallacious appari-
tions than by this midnight encounter with the phantom-man of
straw.

“‘Thus, when I am_-all alone,
Dreaming o’er the past and gone,
All around me, sad and slow,
Come the Ghosts of Long Ags.”

9 THE MAGIC STAFF.

CHAPTER IX.
IN WHICH I MAKE MORE DISCOVERIES.

In due course of time there was established something like a
family circle of harmony concerning the impending marriage of
my eldest sister; the result of which was, a cheerful preparation
of sundry sandwiches, cracked walnuts, and a few small pies, the
crust being shortened, or more properly lengthened and toughened,
with what father called “white-oak splits.” I looked upon the
whole proceeding with a curiosity common to children. I helped
place the wooden chairs in a row on either side of our “reception-
room,” and wondered where all the people would come from to
occupy them.

At length the neighbors one by one arrived, and the seats, in-
cluding father’s shoe-bench and the two beds, were literally cov-
ered with visitors. I was too much astonished and intimidated to
speak or cry; and so, having acquired the habit, I yielded to it-.-
that is, as often defined by father, I “clung to my msthez’s apron-
string,” and wouldn’t let go—but followed her ox! Coors after
wood and water, down cellar after the molasses-jug, up stairs after
a pair of newly-darned stockings; and thus, round and round the
ten-by-twelve tenement, I pursued her, as if to relinyvish my hold
was to be hopelessly wrecked and cast away amcng utter stran-
gers! One of the women brought with her a litle g'22, who at-
tracted my attention, because hers was the first human form I had
ever seen more diminutive than my own. She wore frocks, and so
did I—a fact which my mind regarded as being very curious.

I MAKE MORE DISCOVERIES. | 61

Presently a well-dressed man entered, who acted as if he knew
everything. As he advanced, the people got off the beds, and, to-'
gether with the others there, stood up without speaking. My
sister came down the rickety stairway from the attic chamber
aforesaid, all dressed and beautified as I had never seen her pre-
viously. Then up stepped the young man, with whom I was now
well acquainted, who, taking Eliza’s hand, stood with her in a
most solemn mood directly before the man who seemed to know
everything as well as the name of it. He opened his mouth, and
spoke some of the longest, hardest, biggest, strangest words I had
ever heard. Whereupon my mother began to weep; then my
sister wept; then Julia Ann cried outright; and last, as well as
least, I brought up the rear with a regular burst of uncontrollable
* lamentation. What I was crying about I did not know; but
mother cried, and that was enough. However, the wedding was
soon ended, the sandwiches were quickly consumed, the walnut-
shells delivered up their meats, and father’s bottle of strong drink
was passed from one man’s mouth to another; when the company
began to depart, each wishing our folks “long life and much joy.”

The impression of that event was very unpleasant. It exerted
a sad influence upon me, like that of sickness, or fault-finding ;
which made me importune my mother, over and over again, never

to let me get married.

Weeks hurried by, and ere long we stood on the margin of an-
other year. The curtain that hung between our house and the
world—which folded in obscurity the private afflictions of our
family —I will not roll up. That which concerned my psycho-
logical progress is alone relevant in this autobiography. Hence,
I pass on to the advent of Santa Claus!

Hearing of his name and near approach—that he brought good
gifts for good children—that no one could see him_as he crept
down the chimney, and filled suspended stockings with sweet
treasures —I resolved to be very good (that is, not cry or follow

62 THE MAGIC STAFF.

mother), and then see what would come as my compensation.
’T was the last dayof bleak December, when mother said :—

“ Come, Jackson—you run out and draw your sled about, and
play till I call you.”

«What for, mother ?”

“Oh, ’cause I want you to go.”

“ Sha’n’t I get froze in the snow ?”

“No, no—you go, now—I’ll call when I want you.”

Now, this was so new—asking me to do what she had fre-
quently prevented me from doing without any reason as I some-
times thought—that it excited my imagination. Hence I per-
sisted in questioning her :-—

“What for, mother—what for?”

“Qh, never mind ; go, as I tell you: and when I call, you shall

‘have a warm cookie.”

“ Why, mother— what for? Mother—say, tell me, won’t you?”

But father, hearing me teaze the already half-overcome woman,
rapidly described a semicircle on his shoe-bench, and sternly said:

“Don’t humor that boy so! Make him mind, or crack his
head !—Jackson, you sir! do as your mother bids, or I’ll take
the strap to you, quicker !”

Of late years the American world has heard something of what
Albert Brisbane calls “attractive industry,” in contradistinction
to painful and unrequited toil as suffered by the masses; but I
venture to say that no embryo man (between four and five years
of age) ever more realized the beauty of “attractive playing,” and
the distressing constraint of repulsive amusement, than I did im-
mediately on the conclusion of my father’s great speech on that
occasion. Amusement, when disagreeable, is repulsive labor; as
labor, when adapted to one’s genius, is attractive amusement. But
at this moment, delay was dangerous to my personal welfare; the
paternal weapon lay curled up by the lapstone and hammer; and
thus, victimized and dejected, forth I went to ride down hill on
ice and snow.

I MAKE MORE DISCOVERIES. 63

Up the eastern acclivity I drew my sled. But instead of coast-
ing, I concerned myself with fishing for the reasons of the mater-
nal anxiety to get me out doors. “Could Santa Claus have asked
them to send me out?” soliloquized I; “and who is he?” Glim-
merings of the possibility of the existence of such a being seemed
to flicker and twinkle on the horizon of my awakening intellect.
And yet, the attribute of his invisibility—of his power to descend
the chimney, and put palpable things in my stocking, without ex-
posing himself to mortal vision —this was a statement very hard
for me fully to believe, although it came from my worthy, loving,
revered mother, and challenged my confidence. “She’s so big,
and so old, too,” thought I, “why, ef course she knows.” And
straightway I believed all I had been told concerning the invisible
friend of good children. “ But,” methought, “how strange that a
being so pure should get into and shuffle down a dirty, sooty chim-
ney to the very fireplace, amid the embers and ashes there!”
Still thinking to myself, I said: “ Good Santa Claus must go very
fast, and that’s why no one can see him.” Whereupon I made
several snowballs, and huried them into the air with all my force,
to experiment upon rendering objects invisible by the swiftness
of their flight. But I obtained very little satisfaction from this
exertion ; and so, resolving to sleep that night with one eye wide
open, I tried to amuse myself paradoxically —that is, by tugging
and laboring to gain the hill-top, in order to purchase the short-
lived pleasure of sliding and tumbling head over heels into the
snowbank below. -

At length the married Eliza called, and said I might come in
and warm myself. Accordingly, I went in, but saw nothing un-
usual, except a few fresh-cooked doughnuts; from which I re-
cvived some reward for remaining out so long, agreeably to mater-
nal request and paternal command.

Night hastened.on; and how glad was I to get into the trundle-
bed! Next morning, early as I might awake, I was destined to
find presents in my stocking! Mother hung a pair of ‘clean hose

64 THE MAGIC STAFF.

against the sooty jam, just at the end of the great back-log; all
of which proceeding I witnessed by her permission.

“ Now, Jackson, be a good boy, and go to sleep,” said she sooth-
ingly, “and you’ll see what’ll come of it.”

Doubtless, like most juveniles under corresponding circum-
stances, I was remarkably obliging, and got straight into bed.
Once or twice previous to her retiring, my eye met hers peering
under the corner of the blanket, evidently to see if I had my
lashes closed in sleep. This had the effect to make slumber still
more difficult.

Steadily, through a hollow fold in the bedquilt, I fixed one eye
on a right line with the suspended stockings, and looked, with no
ordinary anxiety, till our folks all found their pillows for the night.
Presently I heard each inmate breathing heavily as in sound re-
pose, save my mother, who, after a while, crept stealthily from
her bed to the cupboard, thence to the pendent hose; and then,
through the moonlight in the room, I saw her put something in
each stocking, and hasten back to her resting-place over mine.

It was perhaps an hour subsequent to this scene ere I managed
to obtain sleep. When “ Nature’s sweet restorer” at length came
over me, I dreamed that Santa Claus, dressed in a suit of black,
found his way down our chimney, with his every pocket filled with
beautiful gifts. And in my dream I thought I got up, took hold
of his outermost gown, pulled it off, and lo! there stood my mother,
smiling benevolently, through one of her most winning and tender
expressions.

“Happy New Year!” shouted Julia Ann, so close to my ear,
that I started, fully awake, and sprang after the woollen recepta-
eles which still hung against the chimney-corne?. Filled to the
very top: Santa Claus had not forgotten me! And I hastened
back between the warm sheets to discover what was. given. Out
came a small roll of candy; out came four doughnuts, tasting just
like those of the previous day, only shaped and fashioned after an —
old man, a cat, a cow, and a little boy; out came three butternuts.

I MAKE MORE DISCOVERIES. 65

six chestnuts, and a very big potato; and, to conclude, out came
father’s shoe-strap —the veritable stirrup of this industrious disci-
ple of St. Crispin—a gentle admonition from Santa Claus that I
“must mind my Ps and Qs.” Vibrating between faith and
doubt, and tasting alternately of both fear and joy, I hopped up,
and, for the first time, got into a pair of undeveloped pantaloons.

“ Mother, didn’t you put them things in my stockings ?” I asked,
looking directly into her eyes. My dream was realized at once.
A benevolent smile pervaded her countenance, as she answered —

“Yes, Jackson, I put in everything but the potato and strap.”

This confession was quite satisfactory, and I felt that I loved
her for giving me so much pleasure.

But, deeper than the joy of that New-Year’s day, there was
made upon my mind an impression of incorrigible skepticism.
Nothing could have been more pertinent and salutary. Simple as
that event was, it tended greatly to strengthen my already awa-
_kened proclivity to rigid investigation. A vigilant incredulity

regarding the existence of invisible personages was, by this human
solution of the mysterious Santa Claus, made very easy of subse-
quent development.

66 THE MAGIC STAFF.

CHAPTER X.
OTHER SCENES IN THIS DRAMA.

One day I overheard some conversation between my mother
and an aged woman, who had called to make a visit, concerning
the premonitory signs of death in a neighborhood.

“ How cur’us it is,” said mother, “that a body what’s-born with
a veil over their face can tell sich things! There’s my Jackson
—he was born with a veil over his face: may be he’ll be one o
that ’are sort.”

“Du tell!” exclaimed the nervous, excitable listener; “is that
so? Why, I want to know!”

“Yes!” replied mother, with a deep sigh, and almost stifled
with a sudden gush of painful emotion. “Yes—J remember
well,” she continued; “and when I looked at the baby, with the
veil over his hull face, then ses I to myself, ses I, ‘He’s born to
see trouble, or—somethin’ else—TI don’t know what?”

But, returning to the subject of seeing signs of death in rural
districts, mother related, by way of illustration, how, on a certain
moonlight evening years before, she beheld a man solemnly walk-
ing, with his arms folded across his breast, as if meditating on a
theme of the saddest and gravest import.

“Who was he?” interrupted the old lady.

“Ah! that’s what I can’t say,” returned my mother. “But I
tried to find out. I went to the winder fust; and then, as he ap-
peared lke near, I opened the front door quick, to ask him to

OTHER SCENES IN THIS DRAMA. 67

come in. Not a single soul did I see there! ‘Well, I thought
*twas queer ’nough; and so twas. But next night, same time,
I seen the same person ag’in, a-walkin’ sad like, jest as he did
afore: ‘and now,’ thinks me, ‘I knows who’tis.’ But I didn’t,
after all.”

“Du tell!” exclaimed the visitor. “You couldn’t say, ch, who
*twas there, walkin’ so ?”

“No, I couldn’t. But I know’d that it meant a death in our
neighborhood. And so it proved. For, a few days afterwards,
*Squire
much, died very sudden with consumption.”

“Why, I want to know!” ejaculated the amazed woman; “du
tell, now! Was it true that he liked the smell of candle-smoke ?”

“Yes, he did,” replied mother; “and, what’s more, I’ve allus
noticed that short-lived folks allus liked the candle-snuff as a
‘Somethin’ to breathe.” 4

That night was rife with trouble for me. When my industri-
ous father planted his stick on the floor, surmounted with a candle,
I seated myself close by, to ascertain whether I had any fondness
for such an odor. Horrible! I did love, as I supposed, to smell
the feathery vapor that went curling up from the burning wick!
*T was enough! Although the evening had but just dawned, I
asked permission to retire, because I was afraid I might get sick
if I remained up as long as usual. The favor being granted, I
went to bed with tears trembling on my eyelids. My thoughts
dwelt on going to sleep and awaking not again. How insupport-
able! Overcome at last with sheer fright I cried outright, and
begged mother to tell me-——

Do I like to smell candle-wick ? Say, mother, say—do I
like to smell the snuff of it? Will I die, mother if Ido? Say,
will I die ?”

Father caught the burden of my lamentation, and laughed loud
enough to drown the sound of my voice. But this method of con-
soling me did neither allay my fears nor reduce the strength of

, who loved to smell the snuff of a taller-candle so

68 THE MAGIC STAFF.

my mental weakness ; and I persisted in soliciting aid and instruc-
tion from mother. She gave me rest, but no satisfaction ; and I
could not get cver the fear of immediate death for many days
afterward. In the meantime my father would alternate between
threats to use his strap upon me, and the assertion that I was
“troubled with worms,”’and should take “a teaspoonful of brim-
stone and molasses every morning.”

The reader will now hasten with me over the uninteresting de-
tails of many weeks, and halt to consider another item of more
vital importance.

Poverty, with its hideous train, dwelt in our habitation. I do
not mean that vice and crime were with us, as the usual sequences
of poverty; but that sickness, and depression, and scoldings, and
frettings, and humiliations of many kinds, were constant visitors
at our home. Oft and again I have seen my mother busy baking
the last handful of Indian meal in our possession — without meat,
or potatoes, or the flour of other grains —and, wonderingly, I have
heard her ask my father where and when he would get more
provender to keep the family from starvation. Sometimes I would
inquire if everybody, in all houses, had the same trouble to get
food and raiment. ‘To such questionings my father would impa-
tiently and sternly reply -—

“No, hang it! the poor man gets poorer, and the rich man
richer: that’s the way with the world.”

‘Thus conditioned were we, when one chilly spring day receded
on her purple car, spreading a mystic twilight wide o’er hill and
plain, and ushered in the star-gemmed night which, like a royal
pall, was thrown upon the bosom of the still Earth. Of course,
these natural beauties and changes I did not in my childhood per-
ceive. But, instead, I saw tears, sorrowings, and many anxious
looks. We had no food!. Neither had we been feasting recently.
But, having lived poorly for days, each felt that intensely fearful
desire to eat which only the really famishing can ever fully com-

OTHER SCENES IN THIS DRAMA. 69

prehend. My mother said she believed that “Providence would
provide for us.” |

“Well, I believe so too,” returned the half-weaver and half.
shoemaker, but wholly honest man, as he whacked a piece of sole-
leather for the reparation of a neighbor’s boot; “but,” he contin-
ued, “it seems to me that Providence always depends more upon
us than we depend on Providence.”

“Why, how queer you talk!” said my mother, whose face now
began to light up with hope as the morning brightens the face of
Nature; and she added: “I dan’t think no harm will befall us
jest yet; as old Squire , who’s now dead and gone, used

to say :—
‘The Lord my pasture shall prepare,
And feed me with a shepherd’s care.’ ”

Now, as the logical reader might easily imagine, all this serious
conversation about “Providence,” and being fed by a Lordly
“Shepherd,” seemed to me very much in keeping with the story
of good old invisible Santa Claus, or like the great white spook
made out of straw. And hence, though only in my fifth year, I
could not help believing more in the providence and protection of
my honored progenitors on whom I realized a sweet dependency.

At this moment we were mutually attracted to the door by the
sound of tramping horses and the rumbling of an approaching
wagon.

“ What can bring anybody this way at such an hour ?” exclaimed
my father ; “who can it be?”

“ Hallo, there !” shouted a voice from the wagon; “our folks
wants to get Mrs. Davis to come and help do our washing to-
morrow.”

“Who are you?” asked Eliza.

“Why, don’t you know? We’re just from John Radcliffe’s
fishing-grounds—just going home with the team.”

“Oh, goodness save us!” said my mother hopefully; “let’s get
some fish for supper. I know’d thet Providence would provide.”

70 THE MAGIC STAFF.

“Yes! yes!” said father; “let’s ask for a shad, or a dozen her-
ring. Eliza, go out to the wagon, and see what he’s got.”

*T was no sooner said than done. Out she ran, followed by
Julia Ann and myself, to get something for supper. But great
indeed was our disappointment when the driver declared that ey-
ery herring and every shad had been sent down the Hudson to
New York; that he had n’t anything aboard, save the nets and a
few bunches of shad-eggs scattered here and there through the
meshes. Mother said, “That’ll do.” But father exhibited con-
siderable dissatisfaction, yet agreed that “ shad-eges would taste
better than nothing ;” while I did not realize any preference what-
ever. The difference in the quality of shad and shad-eggs was
unknown to me. All I wanted was something to eat. And the
family sharing in this feeling, the fire was forthwith kindled, and
the providential eggs were soon snapping and cracking in the
frying-pan.

“ What you got to eat with them?” inquired the inspirited cord-
wainer.

“ Nothing,” replied my mother. ;

“Nothing!” echoed he —“ nothing! Why, what the dogs will
be done? Who can eat shad-eggs and nothing else, I’d like to
know ?”

But the fact was that there could not be found in that tenement
a bit of bread of any description, nor any substance resembling a
vegetable, except a few decayed turnips in the attic chamber —
or, more strictly speaking, in the unfinished garret up the rickety
stairway. Hence the marine provender had to be served up that
night alone, without a second article of diet. Fortunately, we
were not members of any vegetarian society. On the contrary,
each one was free to devour as many shoals of embryological shad
as his or her appetite seemed to demand. Therefore we all ate,
and thus satisfied, for a time, the painful longings of hunger. This
time was brief. <A thirst came on—a horrid, crazy, sickening
thirst — which water allayed but for a moment.

OTHER SCENES IN THIS DRAMA. 71

“There, I thought so!” groaned the impatient and again dis-
heartened cordwainer. “Just as I thought. Fish will swim
twice !”

Hearing this, I hastened to my mother’s side to ask what father
meant by fish swimming twice; for, besides the thirst I felt, there
were other unsatisfactory symptoms down my throat, which made me
fear that the eggs were possibly hatched, and that little finny flukes
might be sprawling and wiggling about inside! Mother explained,
however, that fish usually make one drink’ after eating. Receiv-
ing this explanation, I felt mentally quieted; but, gastronomically,
the case was quite otherwise..

Father got very sick, and disgorged freely; then Julia Ann’s
turn came, and out belched the most of her supper; whereupon
Eliza, with ill-suppressed disappointment, projected her head and
her last meal simultaneously out of the window; and then, to com-
plete the shadowy trials of that memorable night, mother and I
groaned and vomited, and vomited and groaned, till each particu-
lar egg was cast upon that solid foundation which, according to the
oriental story, was so satisfactory to the ejected Jonah.

Oh, the sickness of that dreary night! Fatigued with the com-
bined labor of supporting hunger, and the more recent trial of ex-
pelling the so-called providential food, we each at last found nutri-
tion in the depths of dreamless siumber. But the following morn-
ing brought healing in its wings; for, ere the family again awoke to
a knowledge of their destitution, our father, now fully aroused from
the apathy of despair, had procured meat and meal sufficient to
give us alla good and grateful breakfast.

52 THE MAGIC STAFF.

CHAPTER XY.

SUNSHINE AND CLOUDS.

“Life ’s but a walking shadow; a poor player,
That struts and frets his hour upon the stage,
And then is heard no more.”

ALCOHOL is an accursed tyrant! His ruthless tyranny is ter-
rible. His victims strew the earth’s bosom. Their groans rend
the air. The stench of their corruption fills innumerable homes
with the seedlings of death!

My organ of memory, though usually prompt in the performance
of its functions, does not report the precise cause of our extreme
indigence ; but, starting from my knowledge of father’s occasional
intemperate habits, I infer that Rum played the leading character
on the boards of our domestic theatre. Nevertheless, as I now
view the scene backward through the gloomy vista, I seem
gratefully to see the paternal hand plying the awl industriously
for the laudable maintenance of our impoverished household.
Hence, I have no disposition to cast the imputation of neglect, or
of wilful unkindness, upon the being from whom, according to the
laws of marriage and reproduction, I received, in part, the price-
less boon of an eternal individuality of existence.

The lowest plane of depression, in the affairs of our pantry
and hearthstone, was reached at the close of the last chapter;
therefore, the next turn of the wheel of fortune carried us higher
in the scale of subsistence and external life.

SUNSHINE AND CLOUDS. 73

Death is a phenomenon of the world; to which, as yet, I was
almost a total stranger. Neither in man, nor beast, nor bird, had
I seen the process. But by the advent of meat on our table, as
well as by other common indications, my mind became, as I sup-
posed, familiarized with the fact that living creatures ceased to
exist. I was mistaken as to the extent of \ny familiarity, how-
ever, as the following circumstance will clearly show :—

In order to frighten and banish the members of numerous
nocturnal ratification meetings, that were held in different apart-
ments of our isolated dwelling, our folks procured of some neigh-
bor a fine purring kitten which in due time developed into ample
categorical proportions; and, obedient to the design of its being,
presented us, one fine morning, with almost half a peck of very
diminutive cats, sans eyes, but chuck full of interest to me. I
busied myself supplying their supposed wants, by feeding the
feline fountain with full saucers of skimmed milk, and thus made
their growth a subject of daily concern.
~ By inquiry, I came to know that: nine days were required to
mature their visual apparatus; and that then each individual kit-
ten would open its own eyes, and take an interest in things exter-
nal. For this event I patiently waited. But my father insisted
upon a destruction of the whole cat family—alleging, as a suf-
ficient reason, that “one set of hungry mouths was all he could
manage to feed.” And yet, notwithstanding the terrible threaten-
ings and deeds of cruelty of which the cordwainer was ofttimes
verbally guilty, he had not the hardness of heart to destroy that
inoffensive cat’s numerous children. This gave me confidence in
father’s real goodness; over which mother, Julia Ann, and I, made
ourselves quite merry.

As bad luck would have it, hcwever, there came to our house a
disagreeable looking old man, with overhanging brow, disfigured
by shaggy locks of uncombed hair, a wide racath, and a voice like
the growling of some angry animal. I was surprised when father

hailed him as an old acquaintance. In the course of his stay, the
4

74 THE MAGIC STAFF.

kittens were alluded to, and, much to my consternation, their
immediate destruction was planned and agreed to; in pursuance
whereof, the helpless, sightless, guiltless, and crying little creatures
were seized by the merciless visitor ; and, contrary to my wordless
but pantomimic entreaties, out he went with them (myself closely
following), when, one by one, he whirled and twisted them by the
neck and cast them unfeelingly away into the rushing stream!
Vividly do I recall my horrible prejudice toward that man. In
fact, that one circumstance was so shocking that it gave me my
jist fear of a fellow-being: and, as a sequence, a dread of
meeting certain looking individuals has not even to this day
passed entirely out of my mind.

Horrid thoughts of death infested me for many days and nights
succeeding this scene; but my mother’s gentle hand and kindly
tones soothed me at length, and thus prepared me for another
event.

Although I had frequently asked to go and play at neighbor
Cookingham’s house, which was located perhaps a mile south of

ours, yet I was uniformly denied; till, near the close a warm |

spring day, mother said she wished me to go over there and stay
with the juveniles all that night. This sudden change in my
affairs and habits I could not comprehend. But obedient to the
unaccountable, yet welcome dictate, away we peregrinated, trudg-
ing along through thick and thin, till the desired threshold was
beneath our feet. When once within the strange and, to me,
wonderful abode, the striped carpets and painted chairs, the brass
andirons on the hearth, the window curtains and beautiful bed-
quilts, the wheat bread and sweet butter—all made my visit a
complete holiday. I was ina museum; and wondered why our
house wasn’t made just as attractive and comfortable.

On the subsequent morning, after a good breakfast of what they
termed spon and milk, I was led home; across the two saplings

which formed a sort of temporary (short cut) foot-bridge, over

the rushing stream, between our house and the woods. Entering

SUNSHINE AND CLOUDS. ey

through the door-way, I noticed a change, that is, Eliza’s bed
was utterly hid by a canopy of old quilts. Next, I heard a groan
behind the enclosure; but, ere my tongue forged a word, mother
said :—

“ Come in, Jackson— Eliza’s got sick.”

Father’s occupation was also changed. He was busy sawing a
board into several pieces; which he soon nailed together, and
formed a small box. In reply to my interrogatories he would
authoritatively bid me to “stand out of his way, and not busy
myself about what didn’t concern me.”

But my curiosity was up, and I persisted in maintaining the
position of “spectator.” The box completed, it received a lining
of brown paper; and then—what do you think ?—why, father
went behind the suspended quilts, brought out a very, very little
baby which was motionless and cold in death, and then laid it
down in the rough and ready coffin! Contrary to his emphatic
‘remonstrances, I examined that human being in miniature; with
what emotions I know not, save those of extreme simplistic won-
derment. Silently, I watched his every movement. Placing a
cloth over the inanimate babe, down he pressed it; then nailed a
thick cover on, and so closed out the world.

With spade in hand, and the box under his arm, forth he went
into the southern potato patch— which, poetically speaking, was
our garden—and, halting beneath an apple-tree, began digging a
deep hole. On this initial occasion my father was undertaker,
hearse, and sexton; while I, without appreciating the solemn fact,
was at once the funeral train and the only mourner.. The grave
was dug, and got ready; in the shape of a big iron kettle. And
then the sexton, still silent as myself, deposited the coffin, and
returned the earth whence it came. Unspeaking yet, he went to
the house with quicker step; and when I followed, I found him
at his accustomed and more congenial employment.

“HE MAGIC STA¥?.

-3
oe

CHAPTER XII.

WHICH I ASK MANY QUESTIONS.

“Do not muse at me, my most worthy friends ;
I have a strange infirmity, which is nothing
To those that know me.”

AN important and novel region of human life was now partly
exposed to my view; and true to the impulsions of the organ of
causality, I could not help going for a thorough exploration.
Accordingly on returning from the funeral, I ran straight to the
maternal fountain for light and knowledge.

“Where d’ you get that ’are baby, mother ?”

“Oh, don’t bother me; I’m very busy now.” And she has-
tened behind the quilt canopy, with a bowl of nourishment for
Eliza.

“What made Eliza get sick ?” I asked as mother emerged from

the concealment —“ say, mother, say — what made her so sick ?”

There was, evidently, “other fish to fry” than answering my
questions ; for, though an expression of sadness filled her eyes,
away she flew, here and there, doing all sorts of things with the
greatest despatch; and so I had as much as I could do to keep
up, and “ get in a word edgewise” now and then.

“Say, mother—won’t you? Where did you get that ’are
baby ?”

After numerous evasions and prevarications, which served only
to stimulate my already much-excited inquisitiveness, she replied;

I ASK MANY QUESTIONS. if

“ Why, the doctor brought it ?”

“The doctor!” thought I. “ Who’s the doctor? TI hain’t seen
‘bo nothin’ like a dector!” But quickly gathering my recollection,
I asked :—

“W>s trat are man what know’d so much—what spoke such
great, long, hard words when Eliza got married—was he the
doctor ?”

“Why don’t you crack that dummy’s pate?” vociferated a voice
from the hidden bed. “If I had hold of him, I’d shake his day-
lights out if he didn’t stop! Z'hat I would!’ .

Although emanating from a weakened and prostrate individual,
whose form was wholly obscured, yet I was not at a moment’s
loss to know who originated the awful but characteristic threat.
There was in that exclamation a something so irritating and so
self-evidently unnecessary as applied to me, that I felt nettled
and combative; and hence, readily remembering Dave’s big word
when frightened by the ghost, I tartly returned :—

“J ouess you hain’t so thundering sick as you make b’lieve.”

But contrary to my anticipation, if I had any, this emphatic
retort greatly disturbed the equanimity of my mother. At the
same time it had a marvellous effect on the muscular fibres of my
father’s right arm. His hand grasped the ever-present strap, with
which he struck at me; but missed his aim—an accidental result,
for which I am even at this late day very, very grateful. Be-
eause, as I thought at the time, I did not deserve to be punished ;
and if, in spite of this private moral conviction, my father had
hurt my budding self-respect by brutal blows upon my person, I
‘tremble to think of the germs of hatreds and cruelties which
might have been then implanted, to ripen at some subsequent
period, into fearful deeds of violence toward domestic animals, —
and, perhaps, even against my fellow-men.

No! Explosive as were the promises of punishment made by
this paternal veteran, and hasty as were his gesticulations in the
direction of their immediate fulfilment; yet, as the gentle angel of

78 THE MAGIO STAFF,

memory joyfully testifies, he invariably preserved my infantile
mind from the life-long injuries and maddening mortifications,
which are likely always to result from a forcible correction of
the errors and wrongs of childhood !

In the mere pronunciation of the word “thundering,” I could
not perceive the least harm. In fact, as I thought when first I
heard it used by Dave, it seemed the very best name for anything
greatly disagreeable. Therefore, the evil of the speech being
unknown to me, I esteemed my father’s anger as a great discount
on the excellency of his judgment. Consequently, as the genius
of nature infallibly dictates to the young, I hastened to my mother
for unbounded sympathy and protection.

* Don’t scare the boy’s life out,’ said she to her husband.
“ He didn’t know no better.”

“Yes! I’ll warrant it,’ he returned snappishly, “you'll spile
that young one, and bring him to the gallus. Don’t humor him!
If you do, my word for’t, you’ll rue the day you begun it.”

The good woman sighed heavily, and continued in mute silence
the discharge of her household duties; while the excited cord-
wainer, though repairing the sole of a neighbor’s shoe, continued
at an inverse ratio to ¢mpair the soul of his domestic happiness.
In short, there was developed a fearful dispute between husband
and wife—the “bone of contention” being me, and only me!

But as time brings flowers to earth, so brought it comparative
peace to the family triangle; and I, once more rescued from the
danger of castigation, revived the subject of my curiosity. Pur-
suing my affectionate apologist out doors, I asked :—

“ Mother, now tell me— where did the doctor get that are baby ?”

“What makes you ask ?”

“*Cause I wants one to play with: only I don’t want a dead
baby though.”

She smiled benignly upon me, and said :—

“You must be still and wait, child, till Uncle Bart comes over
to our house; then ask him, and see what he’ll say.”

I ASK MANY QUESTIONS. Tf

This gentle advice was sufficient. The subject was never
broached again, till the venerable Dutchman, who owned the
tenement we occupied, arrived one day to hoe the corn and ex-
amine the sprouting potatoes in the garden. He was uniformly
very social and jovial; and we, children, having been told to use
either the prefix “ Mr.” or “ Uncle” when addressing those mother
called “grown-up people,” preferred the latter expletive for our
patronizing friend.

“ Vell, mine leetle poy,” said he to me, as I followed him to the
lower end of the lot, “how ish de sic voman ?”

“ Kliza’s got well now,” I replied; busily plotting meanwhile as
to how I could open up the interesting subject which had been
referred to him by my mother. But his next question assisted
me. ie

“Vell, vat ish dat place under de tre yonder?” he asked, point-
ing to the unturfed mound made by the baby’s grave.

“Why, don’t you know, Uncle Bart?’ I inquired; “that’s
where father buried the little dead baby, that the doctor brought
for our folks.”

“Vy, ish dat so, mi poy?” asked the good-natured Hollander,
as he busily removed the weeds with his hoe. “ Vy dat was vari
padt, inteat.”

“Yes! ’twas so,” responded I mournfully. “But I wants a
live baby of my own to play with. Can’t you tell me where the
doctor got it, Uncle Bart?”

“Ha! ha! ha!” heartily laughed the jolly man. “Vot! you
vont life pape ?”

“Yes, Uncle Bart, I does,” said I, Pastanes “T wants a live
one, too.”

“Vel den, pe a coot poy, and I vil tel vare de doctor cot it.”

With much enthusiasm I promised to be good; and he thus
continued :—

“In de fust plash de doct pounds de holler tre, den puts hish
ear to de tre; an if de chile ish widin an wake, den he hears dim

80 THE MAGIC STAFF.

ery for sum milch; den he saws te tre down, an taks te pape to
hish own housh; den he sel te leetle cretur to de fust sic voman
vot vonts dim.”

Wondrous revelation! Astounded by the grand sweep of the
venerable Dutchman’s superior intelligence on the origin of “ leetle
papes,” I became, contrary to my reputed character, very rever-
ent and well nigh worshipful. The simplicity, sincerity, and
willingness, with which Uncle Bart instructed me in the art of
procuring a live baby, as a pet to play with, encouraged me to
make him a chum for the time being; and I was consequently
emboldened to question him still further on other subjects of in-
terest to my young mind. The entire baldness of his head had
often greatly excited my childish curiosity, and now I asked :-—

“Say, Uncle Bart, say—what’s the reason you hain’t got no
hair on?”

At this the old man’s face flashed out and gathered up into mul-
titudinous comical wrinkles, the result of mirth restrained, and he
replied :—

“ Nix kom ahraus, mi poy! How vari punny! Vot you vonts
to kno dat fur,eh? He! he!—vel—ha! ha!—ef yu ish coot
to say nothing ven axed, den I vil tel hows de ting vus kom to
happen.”

This mysterious introduction to the forthcoming information
exalted my anxiety a degree higher; and rendered any delay of
the sequel so hard to bear, that I cheerfully promised to preserve
secrecy. Conditions complied with, the bald-healed aad broad-
faced Hollander supported himself against the hoe-handle; and
laughing and sober by turns, as near as I can remember, he thus
proceeded :—

“Wel, ef I mus tel yu, mi poy, I vil. Mine frow had pen
vonting von printle kow. Vel, I goes an finds de vari ting vot
she vonted. Te man taks mi tollars an I taks te printle kow.
Mi frow wus vari pleast, inteat, mit to crettr—’cause he give
town a pig pail ful of milch. Put von morning apout noon, jist

I ASK MANY QUESTIONS. 81

ash mi frow wus making te pot boil fur spon and milch for supper,
mi headt ztcht an vécht lik te vari tifel; an mi frow sed te donder-
ing printle kow’s tamt lish hat cot sprinkled mit mi pig mesh of
hair. Vel, dey voldent pe combed out—no tamt a pit of it—
put dey eat and eat and grubbed avay till de hair wus all gone!”

The deferential emotions which moved me toward Uncle Bart,
previous to this narration, rapidly subsided, as he concluded it,
into a horrid repugnance to continuing longer in his presence.
With mingled feelings of alarm and loathing I listened to the last
sentence, and then fled precipitately housewar@#®-to make, despite
my promise of secrecy, a full report (as I did in the apple case)
of the old man’s disagreeable story. I did so; and, with appre-
hensive tears and shuddering whimpers, besought my mother to
save my head from a like calamity. She quieted me, as usual,
and gave me the most satisfactory assurances, that Uncle Bart
had only told me what he did iz fun. But somehow, through

. several subsequent years, I could not get over a fear of having
my own hair destroyed in a manner equally disgusting and hor-
rible.

The sport of this verminly narrative gratified my father and
sisters considerably. They seemed to think the joke a fine
feather in the old man’s cap: while I, being naturally disposed
to confide implicitly in the wisdom and authority of those ad-
vanced in years, received a shock from which I did not soon fully
recover. And, therefore, I hereby put in my individual protest
against that ruinous laxity of moral principle, on the part of aged
persons, which permits them to talk to children as if they were
idiots or imbeciles in matters of truth. °Tis my belief that more
than one child may be found, in every community, whose ordinary
propensities are privately regarded in self-estimation, as better
authority than the decisions of older minds ; all as a sequence, to
the flippant and disrespectful manner in which the delicate confi-
dence of infantile -intellects has been too frequently neglected, -

repulsed, or abused.
4*

59 THE MAGIC STAFF.

CHAPTER XIII
&

IN WHICH I GO. BABY-HUNTING.

“Can such things be,
And overcome us like a summer’s cloud,
Without our special wonder ?”

THERE is doubtless a marked difference in the original suscep-
tibility of imagination in different persons, as of any other mental
possession ; but, if I write the exact truth of myself, I must confess
that the finely-drawn lights and shades of external Nature had next
to no effect whatever upon my juvenescent sensibilities.

Only this do I remember—that, taking counsel with myself
alone, I set out one bright day on the very romantic mission of
hunting up alive baby. Previous to my departure, I crammed
my pockets with round stones of various sizes, as a means of
rousing the sleeping innocents which, according to the Dutchman’s
serious account, were to be found only in the dark concealment of
hollow trees.

An imaginative and sentimental mind could easily picture to
itself the delicate beauties of objective creation, which, poetically
speaking, broke lovingly and lavishly upon the eye from every
point of human observation. The glorious monarch of heaven,
the mighty sun, shone resplendent between the horizon and the
meridian. There was a transparent, crystalline brilliancy in the
air, giving to each object a sharpness of outline, and inspiring the
human senses with an intense realization of existence. I presume

I GO BABY-HUNTING. 83

that the feathery songsters warbled their melodies in each tree:
and I suppose, also, that the music of many dancing streamlets
was conveyed to my ear. Wild, melodious, and free, doubtless,
came every note from the song of the circumscribed world in
which I then lived.

But of all this, and many other enchanting realities surrounding
me, I had not the least appreciation. This fact in my own psy-
chological history predisposes me to the belief that certain ideal-
istic writers, when describing the myriad beautiful romances and
dreams of juvenility and adolescence, indulge in a poetic license
of no ordinary magnitude. The blooming Eden of childhood is
known only to the full-grown, healthy man; that is, ’tis a pure
maturity alone which can truly appreciate the good, the romantic,
and the beautiful.

The plain truth is, without any poetical embellishment, that my
hunting-expedition was mentally planned to come off in the great
woods, across the stream, just west of our rustic residence. The
nearest way to this woodland was by the foot-bridge already de-
scribed as being composed of a couple of limber saplings reaching
across from bank to bank. Whén once I got my feet upon it, the
poles vibrated and dashed so rapidly up and‘down in the rushing
tide, that I came very near being precipitated headlong into the
swollen current. This at first terrified me much; but, throwing
overboard some of my ballast, I reached the opposite bank without
accident.
| Having gained the field of discovery, in high hopes of success,
I commenced my novel peregrinations. As I picked my way
through the brush and quagmires, I thought thus: “Suppose I
should wake up more babies than one, what shall Ido? *I'would
make me sick to leave them crying in the woods; but ’t would
make me sicker to see that grim, ugly old man wring their heads
off as he killed the kittens !”

With the mentai conclusion tc step along lightly, and pound the
trees as carefully as possible, I religiously approached a lofty rock-

84 THE MAGIC STAFF.

oak, which I regarded as large enough to be “hollow;” and then
and there I inaugurated the quickening or awakening process. I
knocked and listened, and listened and knocked, and then I whis-
pered, and presently shouted aloud ; but without hearing the infan-
tile “cry,” which I was tremulously prepared to hear as my re-
ward. Then I tried my experiment on other trees, and finally
upon various logs which lay scattered here and there through the
forest ; but nothing save my own sobs of disappointment and whim-
perings of fatigue broke upon the listening ear.

Disheartened, I began to retrace my steps. Tis said by some
that childhood is the happiest period of life, because it is esteemed
to be freest from the vexations, and onerous cares, and possible
disappointments, of weighty responsibility. But,so far as my own
experience goes, I verily believe that no man was ever made to
feel more humiliated or saddened by the misfortunes of speculation
and commerce, than I, as.a child, felt as a consequence of my fail- —
ure of success on this particular expedition. Fancy me, dear
reader, returning to the home of my early memories childless, and
without any adequate compensation !

Of course, I was of necessity thoughtful. “Now,” said I men-
tally, “that ’are plaguy old Uncle Bart has been foolin’ me ag’in ;
I don’t b’lieve nothin’ what he ses no more!” My simplistic con-
fidence in the goodness and reliability of gray hairs began to de-
cline. Superannuated wisdom, though crowned with a bald era-
nium, and leaning on a most useful instrument of agriculture,
seemed next to foolishness. :

Thus thinking and concluding, I trudged on to the brink of the
swift waters. The stream appeared considerably more swollen
and more rapid than before, for a heavy rain of a previous day
had greatly enlarged the tributary streamlets through the upper
country.

To walk the shaking foot-bridge, made of insecure saplings, was
beyond my pedestrian skill. So, down I got on “all fours”—a
quadruped form of locomotion by and through which the human

I GO BABY-HUNTING, 85

| infant is developed into a permanent biped—and, cautiously creep-
ing, I made some headway toward the opposite shore. But the
rushing waters, splashing and dashing on every side, added to the
rapid undulations of the elastic poles beneath me, proved too great
a trial for my strength.

“Mother! mother!” cried I.. But the distance was too great
‘for my voice to be heard. “Come! help!—I can’t stir!” I
screamed, as, with every nerve, I strained to retain my hold. No
aid came. A dreadful dizziness seized my head, which seemed to >
make everything whirl and buzz with a frightful celerity. Anoth-
er moment, and the springing poles seemed to fly from under me,
throwing me with violent force into the roaring torrent! In my
‘agony I grasped the horizontal saz iings—now above me—when
‘the speeding tide, at the moment, carried my head beneath and
projected my feet into the air! I tried to shout and vociferate for
jassistance ; but the foaming water ran down my throat and pain-
fally closed out my breath! Although the sun was now at the
zenith, yet do I remember how dark the world suddenly appeared ;
and I recollect, also, as I lost all fear, how the twinkling stars

came out in the bending heavens, causing me so gently to think
jof sleep. They soothed me, like my mother’s eyes, and I slept!

: Parents, guardians, superintendents of public schools! “Come,
and let us reason together.” Let me ask you“ Should little
children be taught to disrespect and insult their more matured
land more experienced protectors and associates ?”

| fou may think yourselves very expert in evading your child’s
= on delicate subjects; you can invent momentary subter-
Tages; you can gracefully and stealthily prevaricate; you can
manifest your superior discretion through a squeamish denial of
vhat you know; you may be too delicate to tell the truth, but not
’ 90 delicate to construct a festooned refuge of cunning little “ white
lites,” just suited to your child’s undeveloped capacity and inexpe-
jeience ; you may treat your juvenile pet as if it had not a memory

| \

83 THE MAGIC STAFF.

that, one day, will rise up to rebuke and charge you with deception:
your amiable prudery; your silly denial of the ever-beautiful facts
of maternity ; your profane shirking of what underlies the origin of
man—all, too plainly declare that your delicacy is spurious, that
your veracity is mixed with deception, that your refinement is un-
civil, that your capacity is not adequate to the comprehension and
reating of the young! '

But how many parents there are, good and intelligent, who re-
ally do not know what to reply when questioned by children.
Such inquire, “ What shall we say?” In reply, I will refer to the
case described in preceding pages. Let us suppose that the boy’s
mother, instead of answering, “The doctor brought the baby,” had
simply replied: “The doctor knows more than I do about it.
When you see him, perhaps he will tell you what he knows. If
he does not, the reason will be that you are now too young to un-
derstand him.”

With such a reply in his mind, the little inquisitive urchin
would rest satisfied for the time being; and, on making the discov-
ery at some future day, and recalling what his mother said, he
could not withhold either his admiration for her truthfulness .or re-
spect for her refinement. And so with the venerable Dutchman. |
Instead of filling the youngster’s brain with ridiculous imaginings,
suppose he had said: “ Vel, mi leetle poy, dar ish many tings dat
shildren can’t do mid dar han’s, as yu vel know; an’ so dar ish
many tings dat shildren can’t understand mid dar heads. Now,
pe a coot poy, and, ven yu ish pigger, and ven yu can vork as
pig peeples vorks, den yu shall know jest how te doct’ bro’t de
pape to yourn housh.”

Now, it seems to me that the most limited understanding can
at once perceive the moral benefit of such counsel. The subject
of this history would have been, by those few words of truth,
rescued from the fast-flowing waters; and saved not less from
many bad impressions concerning the foolishness and falsehood of
persons advanced in years.

THE CURTAIN AGAIN RISES. 87

CHAPTER XIV.
THE CURTAIN AGAIN RISES.

“ To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow,
Creeps in this petty pace from day to day,
To the last syllable of recorded time.”

GLIDING along over a dead level of commonplace experiences,
of several weeks’ duration, the reader may behold, in the year
| 1832, the exodus of the cordwainer’s family —bound for another
tenement, in the town of Hyde Park, Dutchess county, New York
-—himself, meanwhile, hopeful and jovial under the despotic en-
chantment of the infernal wizard Alcohol.

There was now, as on occasions of similar trial, an expression
of deep dejection upon the countenance of his wife. In her large
eyes there was a look of Extreme Distance; as if beholding a
vision of some other, fairer, holier, higher state of existence.
Mournful indeed was the sigh with which she openly announced
the fact that, at certain moments, o’er the past her thoughts were
sadly roaming. Her dissatisfied expressions too plainly told (to
those who could read them) that she felt herself a stranger in a
strange land—a dove, set forth from the Ark of Life, finding hot
where to rest the sole of her foot in safety. If, at such moments
of inward retrospection, her thoughts had been truly rendered into
symbolic language, they might have reminded one of the “ De-
serted Village :’—

&8 THE MAGIC STAF®.

‘Sunk are thy bowers in shapeless ruin all,

And the long grass o’ertops the mouldering wall ;

And trembling, shrinking from the spoiler’s hand,

Far, far away, thy children leave the land !’’
For thus, when viewed as a whole on the background of her
deeper life, appeared the many homes she had been compelled to
desert, in obedience to the fiat of her restless husband. In justifi-
cation whereof he would in substance say :—

“Nothing ventured, nothing had. What’s the use o’ staying
here, with my nose to the grindstone? Make or break— that’s
my way!” And thus organizationally impelled, he treated his
wife’s constitutional yearnings and spiritual lingerings as the child-
ish ebullitions of a childish intellect. Was that right in him?
Was that wrong in her? Where shall the praise terminate?
Where shall the blame begin? ‘Who can infallibly judge them?
Who will answer? Away o’er the mountains of rudimental ex-
istence, methinks I hear the responsive echo, “ Who ?”

_ As the loaded wagon rolled along on the highway toward the
house already indicated, the desponding woman was by an urchin
thus addressed :-—

“ Mother, tell me once more —how did I come to breathe ?”

“Why, child, *twas so ordered that you wasn’t to leave us
then.”

“ Who ordered it, mother ?”

“*T was Providence, Jackson. It was so to be. It couldn’t be
no different. You wasn’t a-goin’ for to die so young. That’s the
reason, bub.”

“ Say, mother, say,” continued I, “hain’t that ’are Prov’dence
somethin’ like that ’are Santa Claus what you told me ?”

At this, the unsophisticated and reverential woman shuddered,
as if alarmed, but replied :—

“Qh, don’t talk no more like that, Jackson! Providence, you
must know, is the Maker of the hull world—the source of every
blessin’; and ’tain’t good to talk so about Providence.”

“Well, I won’t no more,” I replied, blushing with a regretful

| THE CURTAIN AGAIN RISES. 89
feeling that I had wiiintentionally wounded her spirit; “but, I’d
ike to hear you tell, mother, how I was made to live again.”
__ In her own provincial and unpretending dialect, she proceeded :
“Somehow or ruther, it so happened that Eliza and Henry (her
husband) was a-standin’ by the well-curb a-talkin’, when, all to
once, she looked down at the big creek, and, seein’ somethin’ curi-
ous pokin’ up by the poles, she tells Henry to go sce what ’t was.
So down the hill he goes, and, when he got near enough, he
screams, ‘Why, as I live, it’s Jackson’s feet? Then Eliza
knocked at the winder, and yelled to me and father, and ses—
‘Make haste! our bub’s got drownded in the brook? We both
jumped all to once, and didn’t stop for nothin’, but run out jest as
Henry was a-bringin’ you up to the house. Oh, how the water
dripped off o’ your clothes! You was as wet, bub, as a drownded
rat. Father sed, ‘I guess he ain’t dead.’ But we’d heerd that
rollin’ was good to bring drownded folks to life ag’in. So we
rolled and tumbled you, over and over, on the hard floor but you
didn’t show no signs of breathin’ or livin’ at all. But I know’d
| ae wouldn’t take you from us so young. Henry went
nd got an old barrel, and father rolled you face downwards on it
wery quick, and shook you at the same time. Oh, how glad I was
o see the water begin to pour out of your mouth! You was very
sick, and threw up as much as a gallon of water; then you groaned,
ond I know’d you would get well. We wrapped you up in warm
fannel, and covered you all over with thick bedclothes. And by
sight you was able to set up and talk —don’t you remember that,
Jackson ?”

“Oh, yes, I remember that, mother,” I responded; “but why
tidn’t Prov’dence keep me from fallin’ in the creek ?”

“’Cause,” she replied, “’tain’t his way. He lets folks go on
‘est as they pleases, till they gets in trouble; then, if he likes ’em,
12 helps ’em out; but, if he doesn’t like ’em, then he lets ’em get
out hap-hazard, or any way they can.”

At this moment, the inebriated cordwainer came running back

90 THE MAGIC STAFF.

to us from the forward wagon —with his dark eyes dancing a horn-
pipe, while his shaky legs seemed ludicrously endeavoring to per-
form that function which is characteristic only of the sober-minded
—to announce that yon house, whose chimney-top was just visible
across the fields, was to be our next habitation. The ride thither
was brief. Without detailing the fusion and confusion incidental
thereto, I will just record the agreeable fact that, ere the ebony
drapery of Night clothed the fairy, frosted landscape o’er, we were
pretty well fitted in and reconciled to our new quarters.

We were really pleased with and proud of our exchange. In-
stead of a crumbling rookery, we found ourselves in a comfortable
cottage, situated in the midst of apple, peach, and plum trees, and
not more than two rods from the public road. How rejoiced we
were! Julia Ann and IJ expressed our enthusiastic delight in va-
rious fantastic ways; and when we got into the trundle-bed that
night, I remember exclaiming aloud: “ Hain’t father real good,
mother? He’s helped us out of a bad place—jest like that ’are
Proy’dence what you told me.”

| SIGNS OF SECOND-SIGHT 91

CHAPTER XV.
IN WHICH ARE SIGNS OF SECOND-SIGHT.

“‘T fear, too early; for my mind misgives,
Some consequence, yet hanging in the stars.”

Over industrious and thriving landlord, Hiram Marshall, was
our very best friend. He cheerfully provided my father with
sufficient field labor to pay the rent, to buy a young cow, and

otherwise to advance the private fortunes of our domestic triangle.
_, One warm afternoon in mid-summer, the farmer called at our
| house for a drink of cold water ; and while there he remarked to
| mother, that he had just spent two whole hours in searching for
an ox-chain, but without success. As he spoke, I observed an air
| of dreamy abstraction sweep athwart her mild face; and, contrary
| to her habit, she appeared not to hear anything he was relating.
| Presently, however, she recovered from her involuntary revery,
and said: “I guess ’tain’t lost, Mr. Marshall.”
“ Guess what ain’t lost,” he replied, the ox-chain ?”
“Yes! that’s what I mean. It’s jest where you left it your

own self.”

“You’re mistaken—good woman,” said he, smiling with in-
eredulity. “The last time I had it, I was drawing stone in my
"apper lot yonder; and, as I’ve looked that field all over, I’m sure

| it ain’t there.”

“Yes, ’tis, though,” returned she with unshaken confidence,
|“ youll find it jest where you left it—agin the big stump, in the
rorth corner of the lot—now, see if you don’t.”

92 THE MAGIC STAFF.

Actuated by the simplicity and definiteness of her direction, off
he went to the specified spot. When next we saw him, he ac-
knowledged that the chain was just where she said, but declared
he couldn’t imagine how it happened, unless mother “was a
witch.”

Aided by the refinement and delicacies which have resulted
from years of subsequent discipline and culwure, I can look back
upon the sensuous experiences of my youth, and allew myself to
fancy, as many individuals do, that the poetic and the beautiful in
external nature made a legitimate impression upon the canvass of
imagination and memory. Doubtless it is true, that some very
young children, born of certain parents, do have, like Lucretia and
Margaret Davidson, an early perception of the beautiful; but, as
already said, if I write exactly of my own reminiscences, I am
constrained to acknowledge the realization of no romance, no
fascination, no spiritual delight, in anything connected with early
life. On the contrary, I remember that I valued trees, in hot
weather, for their fruit and their shade; in winter months, for the
fire-wood they made after being laboriously sawed and split.
Stones existed, to build fences with ; grass, for cows to eat; water,
for all to drink; the sun, to keep us warm; tlie rain, to make
vegetation grow; the snow, that children might ride down hill;
the ice, to slide and play upon; thunder and lightning, because
(as I thought when mother was frightened) something had got
loose in the clouds, and might fall like a great rock on somebody’s
head; and thus, throughout the entire programme of my juvenile
experiences, I valued all objects and sensations— my parents and
sisters included —in proportion as they administered to the desires
and gratifications of my bodily needs and sensibilities.

But now, facing the past, and looking with eyes measurably
trained to detect the delicate and the super-terrestrial in the com-
monest things, I know that there was great opulence in the
poorest blade of grass beneath our window ; music, in the patter-

SIGNS OF SECOND-SIGHT. 93

ings of the rain upon the cottage-roof; pictures, in the furlongs of

| landscape visible from our door; angels, as much in clouds and

darkness as in sunshine ; poetry, in summer’s and winter’s myriad
lightsand shades; and a divine substance, in the dark and dreary
depths of every shadow! But, alas! not knowing of the exist-
ence of these imperishable riches— which were as much ours as
that of any other family in the world —we felt ourselves frequently

-and painfully embarrassed. Our oppressors were— Ignorance,

Intemperance, Poverty, Discord. These terrible despots seldom
exerted their power at once; but, like so many demons in the
poor man’s path, took turns in tormenting and chafing us.

One day my mother had upon her that look of Distance, which
I began to dread, as the certain precursor or omen of domestic
evil. At different times, while engaged at her housework, she
/appeared like one lost in the vision of some far-off scene. With
her great eyes wide open, she would look abstractedly against the
| wall—or through vt as it were—into the vacuity of a rersote and
‘unknown space; at which, more than ever before, I felt discon-
certed and terrified; and, all unconscious of any filial disrespect,
\I tried to make her act social and natural, by pulling at her-dress,
jand by passing my hand rapidly to and fro, between her eyes and
ithe direction in which their vision seemed to set. But all this, I
noticed, had next to no effect. ‘When recovered from her dreamy
‘and dreary revery, she gently rebuked me: “ Don’t do so, bub!
(don’t you know no better than that ?”
| Generally speaking, almost every healthy boy at my age would
|have been out-of-doors flying a kite, or at some other amusement
/asual to the all-glorious month of October.. But, to this sport
| loving season of childhood, my history is a uniform and positive
exception. Instead of gathering walnuts or grapes in the woods
_—rather than cimbing trees for favorite fruits—TI chose to dwell
‘with the lone woman: “hanging,” as my father sneeringly said,
‘9 my mother’s apron-string.” She was not alone in any social

94 THE MAGIC STAFF.

understanding of the term, for every member of the family was a
constant inmate of that house, except Eliza, who had gone to live
elsewhere with her husband. But, to me, she ever appeared to
have an undercurrent of private life, with which there was» min-
gling the affection of no congenial spirit. Not a creature was there
to understand her; no soul to sympathize with and help her on
her ircomprehensible pilgrimage. It was a vague conviction of her
loneliness, doubtless, added to the natural selfishness of my de-
pendent nature, desirous to be cared for and indulged, which
caused me to make her my particular associate and confidant.
After she had passed through another day’s uncertainty and
absent-mindedness, imparting that dreaded and wandering ex-
pression to her eyes, I asked :—

“Say, mother, what makes you act so queer all the time ?”

My question, so unexpectedly and pointedly put, evidently dis
turbed her, because she replied: “Oh, ’tain’t nothin’ to nobody
but me.” This rejoinder was neither new nor satisfactory ; and
hence I started out on another track, and said :—

“ Hain’t we better off than what we was in Bart Cropsey’s
house? Hain’t father more soberer and steadier than what he
was ih that ’are old shanty? He’s a workin’ on the farm every
~ day, hain’t he, mother? And hain’t our cow e’ne most paid for?
Say, mother, what’s the matter of you ?”

To all this juvenile review of the improvement in our existing
circumstances, over those of previous months within my recol-
lection, she despairingly replied :—

“Qh, ’tain’t no use a talkin’, child. There’s more trouble a
comin’! *Tis man’s lot! It’s so ordered to be; an’ can’t be no
different I’m ’fraid.” -

*“ What trouble, mother, what’s a goin’ to happen next ?”

“None but Providence knows,” said she gloomily, “but I have
seen the signs.”

“What signs? What was it that you seen? Tell me, mother,
I won’t tell father—nor nobody else.”

SIGNS OF SECOND-SIGHT. 95

I’ve been feelin’ jest as I felt when lost in John Myers’s woods,”
she replied; “I’ve seen the new moon over my left shoulder —
lately ; and last night, when washin’ the supper things, I dropt a
fork on the floor, tine foremost; and then, in the middle of the
night, I dreamt one of my bad dreams, about crossing muddy
water and combin’ my hair with a coarse comb, when my hair
come out in bunches; and besides, I seen some dark shadders out
in the road four or five times, within a couple of days; so I know
well enough, as I allus knows, that there’s trouble for this ’ere

poor family.”

To this recital I listened with childish wonderment, mingled
with considerable agitation. I knew not how to utter a word of
comfort. Indeed, in writing this history I have, as I fear, re-
ported my mother’s as well as my own speech as being more
direct and less uncouth and bungling than it was in fact. At

this day, with my present knowledge of the English language, I
recall the tautological talking, the rustic chatting, the ungrammati-
eal convercations of our family, with unfeigned surprise and sub-
cued amusement.

Thus brought up, or rather pushed up, I did not know words
enough wherewith to convey what little sympathy my limited
capacity allowed me to 2xperience for my mother in her psycho-
logical trials. But I began to feel a need of confidence in the
protective watchfulness of the Good Big Man in the sky; and
that night, with considerabie enthusiasm and emphasis, I re-
peated many times this supplication: “Say, kind Prov’dence,
you w2~’t let nothin’ happen to our folks; will vou ?”

86 THE MAGIC STAFF.

CHAPTER XVI.
MY TEMPTATION TO BE PROFANE.

A spirit not my own wrenched me within ;
And I have spoken words I fear and hate.”

Tue harvestings and corn-cuttings over for that season, my
father, agreeably to his established custom, went about in search
of shoemaking, as a means of supporting his family through the
fall and winter months. Success crowned his exertions at length,
and he took his seat on the throne of St. Crispin with all the regal
majesty and self-satisfaction at his command.

One genial autumnal day, as this industrious artisan was de-
parting —with the results of his labor, for the wholesale and retail
shop, located in some distant village beyond the hills, whence the
work had been procured—he pleasantly accosted me, and said:

“Look here, Jackson, if you’ll bring brush all day from the
woods, to kindle fires with, I’ll fetch you a jewsharp.”

Now this notorious musical instrument was the greatest and
most extraordinary human invention, to yield melody, that had
ever come within the range of my natural vision. It possessed,
to my imagination, untold charms, and embodied the greatest ad-
vantages. What made the harp seem peculiarly attractive was,
the idea of playing and getting pleasure out of it with one’s mouth
—just as gratification was got out of cherries, strawberries, apples,
peaches, and other delicious eatables. As a natural consequence,
then, I cheerfully ratified the spontaneous bargain; and, taking

MY TEMPTATION TO BE PROFANE. 97

only time enough to acquaint mother with the promise and condi-
ions of its fulfilment, I straightway went to my day’s labor.

_ If the reader knows anything about gathering brush all day in

she woods —especially while too young and too weak to pull and
lraw the best pieces from clinging brambles and entwining briers
—then will I be understood when I describe it as one of the most
vexatious of occupations. There is much work, but little show.
“tugged away for hours. Toward night I got very tired—very
nervous with anxiety — and a piece of bread and butter. But at
ast I actually accumulated what I proudly regarded as a great
pile of kindling-wood and brush near the garden-gate. My object
in stacking the evidence of my industry there was, to overcome
tather’s mind at first sight with the conviction that the jewsharp
was fully earned and-honestly deserved. To this belief I had
ready brought my mother, by getting her to come out to see for

erself the unmistakeable triumphs of my toil.

|. Thus satisfied, I stationed myself against the outside doorpost,
» catch the first glimpse of the absent progenitor, whose return
vas every moment expected. Anon, through the lengthening
HRiow of the approaching twilight, I beheld with joy the well-
jnown man, staggering along laden with a great package of
pather, to manufacture into boots and shoes during the next two
reeks. Self-control being now absolutely out of the question, I
n to meet and welcome him, and so get my musical remunera-
on in advance. He bade me wait till we reached the house.
‘a he passed the garden-gate, and saw the brush-heap there, my
ars tingled with delight when he said, “ Why, you’ve been very
cact!” But who can express my disappointment, when he de-
‘ered that he had entirely forgotten to bring me the jewsharp!
‘hat a revulsion of feeling! A wealthy landholder, hearing that
| | his property had been swallowed by an earthquake, could not
uve felt worse. My sudden bankruptcy, for a boy’s mind, was
jist as hard to bear, as a man’s misfortune is hard for a man’s

pecity. I was both sad and angry. I was honestly and stoutly
5

98 THE MAGIC STAFF. 4

enraged against my father for his negligence. Half-suffocated
with the contending emotions of disappointment and rage, I deter-
mined to go out by the wood-pile, and swear an awful oath! I
saw no other plan to get relief—no other way to do the subject
justice. This resolution took immediate effect. Thither I delib-
erately proceeded; and concentrating, at one burning focus, all
the ugly words I could recall at the moment, I actually and know-_
ingly swore: “IU be dod darn to dod darnation tf that hain’t too
thunderiw’ dam bad, any how !”

Twilight had died away into darkness, in which I stood alone
and enveloped. Serenely shone the evening stars. Not a breath
of air moved the foliage in the garden; not a sound could I hear
from the apple-orchard; not a sigh of sadness from the woods
whence the brush had been so laboriously obtained. Still, very
still, too still, was all the world —within the reach of my physical
senses—at the moment when I so wilfully disturbed the scene
with my terrible profanity.

Hark! What’s that? In an instant after I had vented my
rage, there passed into mine ear an exclamation, heavy laden
with that mysterious condemnation which penetrated me to the
very core of my being —“ Wuy, Jackson!”

’T was my mother’s voice—or I thought it was—and in a mo-
ment my frame quivered and shook with fear. Darkness fell
round about me with a sudden and alarming density. The very
air seemed undulated and convulsed, as by the throes of some
offended deity. A swift wind seemingly circumgyrated and
buzzed close to my head, and, as I imagined, lifted my cap and_
replaced it several times.

“ Why, Jackson!” Once only heard I these plain words; but
they thrilled me with an unaccountable horror. They unmistakea-
bly conveyed, and awakened in me toward myself, astonishment, |
rebuke, grief, commiseration! “QO pshaw! what’s the use bein’
fraid of mother ?” soliloquized I; “she can’t blame me, no how.”
This thought refreshed my courage; and though still uncontrolla-

MY TEMPTATION TO BE PROFANE. 99

bJy agitated, into the house I went, and poutingly exclaimed :
“Don’t care if you did hear me swear. "Iwas too bad, any
how Nes

Fortunately, the maternal ear alone heard my spontaneous con-
fession. The fatigued man, having walked far and imbibed much,
was almost asleep by the fire; while Julia Ann, ever kind and
ever active, was busy with preparations for the evening meal. The
good woman looked very sad and much troubled, which caused
me to regret still more my profanity.

Supper being over, and the sleeping-hour arrived, she said:
‘‘ Now, Jackson, me and you must talk. What I wants to know
's, be you becomin’ a bad boy? Be I to be disappointed in ev-
erything in my life? Is you a-goin’ to act jest like other folks’s
ad children, an’ bring sorrow to your poor mother everlastin’ly ?”
Her desponding discourse greatly intensified my sufferings, and

ade the tears come, with words of self-justification: “ Don’t you
dhink ’twas too bad? Warn’t father to blame for not gittin’ the
ewsharp ?”

“ Oh, ’tain’t no use talkin’ that ’are way,” replied she peevishly ;

pther folks is bad, then there’s no use for to live no more. Now

lel me jest what you said out doors there.”

Sobbingly and regretfully I repeated, ad literatim, the string

£ wicked words, and asked, “ Didn’t you hear me ?”

_ “Mercy save us!” she exclaimed. “No, I didn’t hear you;

ad I’m thankful I didn’t. Providence know’d I couldn’t bear

» hear my boy speak such bad words.”

| This answer astonished me greatly. “Then, who called me?”

aid I. “Who hollered so loud, and said, ‘ Why, Jackson’? I

1o’t twas you; but bein’ so dark, I couldn’t see. Must be ’twas

(alia Ann.” :

“No, ’twasn’t nuther,” returned my quietly-listening sister.

This is the fust I’ve heard of your swearin’—an’ I hope to
ercy “twill be the last.”

everybody does wrong sometimes. An’ if you’re wicked ’cause

r

100 THE MAGIC STAFF.

“ Now I know why I seen them shadders in the road,” sighed
my mother. “’I'was so ordered to be, an’ can’t be no different,
I’m ’fraid. That ’are voice, child, makes me think of what the
Bible ses about Cain bein’ hurried on from one bad thing to an-
other, until he killed his brother. Then he heer’d a voice cryin’
from the blood on the ground, an’ from the clouds over his head,
sayin’, ‘Where’s your brother Abel? O dear me,” continued
she gloomily, “I’m ’fraid there’s trouble a-comin’. Providence
has been a-callin’ you to be good, an’ you don’t mind a word he
ses |”

Perhaps the thoughtful reader—remembering the chidings of
a parent who employed kindness as the only rod of correction—
can imagine the painful, heart-broken, inexpressible regret which
the foregoing conversation engendered in my young and sympa-
thetic spirit. But the most painful trial was yet in store for me.

As the last word was complainingly uttered, the good woman
arose and procured an old book—with one leather cover, but
without pictures— which I had seen father peruse many times, on
sabbath-days, when he never worked. She laid the dusty volume
open on her lap, and began rumaging it in quest of something to
read. At first, this manceuvring rather interested me, because
twas almost new—my mother being next to no reader at all.

“This ’ere book is the Bible, Jackson,” said she; “the book of
kind Providence. In this ’ere Bible is a sayin’ about what’ll be-
come of bad folks. I want you to hear all about that ’are.”

Finding the right verses, she began spelling the words in order
to read of the horrid fate of wicked people. But the uneducated

woman could make no headway with the sacred orthography. Ac- —

cordingly, she quietly closed the revered volume, and, trusting to
her defective memory, said :—

“Providence is good to them. that’s good. But he’s jest as
merciful as he’s promised to be, to all them that’s ugly and wick-
ed. He ses that the good people shall be happy with him ever-
lastin’ly. And he ses next, that them what lies, and steals, and

Pe ee

MY TEMPTATION TO BE PROFANE. 101

| “swears, shall be sent headlong into a dretful big Jake of b’ilin’-hot
‘brimstone, where there’s nothin’ but a-weepin’, an’ a-wailin’, an’ a
‘foamin’ at the mouth, an’ a-’nashin’ of teeth, an’ a-frettin’ to get
‘out, an’ a-wantin’ to drink dretfully, an’ a-prayin’ everlastin’ly to
die! But there’s no comfort—no rest—no sleepin’—no water
to drink —no friend to help—and, No norutn’!”

Overcome with the accumulated horrors of the soul-sickening
revelation, I could listen no longer. “Do let me go to bed!” I
eried. “I won’t swear no more, never.” My request was grant-
ed. But no sooner had I got under the bedclothes, than mother
‘began to coax and insist that I should repeat after her the well-
‘known juvenile prayer commencing with—

“‘ Now I Jay me down to sleep.” oe

‘The third line—“TIf I should die before I wake’’— revived all
my original fear of death. Nothing seemed more risky than
slumber. Silently I lay awake. I fancied that my breathing
was becoming every moment more and more short and difficult.
|All doubt fled, and I supposed I knew that I was surely dying!
With great pulmonary exertion I screamed for immediate help.
\But I had the misfortune to suddenly awaken my father from his
deep sleep of fatigue, who impatiently exclaimed: “ Why didn’t
you give that ’are boy some brimstone and molasses, to physic his
blood? He’ll never git red of them plaguy worms if you don’t!”

This absurd and repulsive diagnosis of my psychological com-
plaint, had the effect to neutralize and dissipate the “hypo” of
my imagination —a result which acted so beneficially, that res-
piration became as healthy as ever, and every symptom indicated
m speedy convalescence. Of course, the aroused sire did not
=. that I had just swallowed an immense quantity of “b’ilin’
sot. brimstone,” to purge my spirit of blasphemous inclinations.
: slumber soothed me tenderly after a while, however; but, ere the
inext morning’s sun shone upon me, I was a victim of disease in

/
the form of fever-and-ague, Sank VIRP SS
i g AQRoOr LIB RA RS

9
cS PACIFIC SCHOOL
OF art Gio’

102 THE MAGIC STAFF.

Memorable, indeed, was the terrible lesson of that night! So
deep and so impressive was it, that never, from that date to this
hour, have I been conscious of uttering a profane word. And in
the depth of my soul do I desire that every young mind could be
made to feel, in some manner equally impressive and salutary, the
uselessness of anger and the vulgarity of the language which

expresses it.

MY MOTHERS DREAM. 1038

CHAPTER XVII. -

MY MOTHER’S DREAM.

As music’s Goddess taketh down her lute,
Touches the silver cords of dulcet sound,
And sets the summer melodies to words ;

é So from the Spirit Land an Angel comes,
And, when profoundest slumber folds us fast,
Wakens our highest faculties of soul

Into serenest contemplation.

A SEVERE headache, accompanied with symptoms of chilliness
and thirst, caused me to awake earlier than usual on the morning
that succeeded the trials chronicled in the last chapter. Looking
about, I saw the still anxious mother sitting close up “neath the
projecting mantlepiece, drawing consolation from her pipe.

As the narcotic vapor floated out leisurely upon her breath —
escaping with the smoke of bits of the memorable brush now
burning in the ample fireplace—methought, “Oh, how I’d like
to use a pipe and tobacco! Why not? Old folks does—big
folks who allus knows what’s good—then why not I?” Self-
interrogating thus, and dreaming o’er the advantages of doing just
what my seniors do, I asked :—

“Can’t I have one of your old pipes, mother? I want to
smoke as well as you. Father chaws terbacker, you know; but
I doesn’t like the taste; only smokin’ like you is what I wants.”

““ Mercy on us!” she exclaimed, “ what’ll you want next?”

“T don’t know,” I replied, “I want to be good, mother, an’

104 THE MAGIC STAFF.

I’m goin’ to foller you, an’ do jest as you does; then I know I'L
be what you allus wants of me.” «

At these words her countenance betokened grief. But knock-
ing the ashes from her pipe, and refilling it to the brim with the
narcotizing and seductive weed, she persuasively and soothingly
said: “Don’t ’spose, bub, that I’m good. I tries to be so allus,
and want you to be better than me, an’ so you mustn’t smoke,

never.”

“My head aches so, mother, I doesn’t know what to do. I ~

guess smokin’ would make me feel better. If ’tain’t good ta
smoke, what makes you smoke ?”

“ Why, bub, didn’t I tell you once? Two years afore you was
born, when we lived in the Jarseys, I had the dropsy dretfully.
No doctor couldn’t do me no good; an’ I come near to the brink
of my grave; when an old woman happened in. Ses she to me,
ses she, ‘I know what ll cure you.’ Ses I to her, ses I, ‘ What is it?”
Then ses she, ‘ You must throw the water off o’ your stummic by
smokin’ terbacker. I follered her remidee an’ I got well agin.
But somehow or ruther, I can’t leave off the pipe now; if I does,
I feels bad at my stummic, an’ I can’t do nothin’ about the house,
which you knows I must keep a doin’.”

This brief and unartistic history of how she formed the habit,
took from me all desire ever to follow my mother’s example.
Indeed, so tractable was my nature when thus appealed to, that
neither the pipe nor anything resembling it (except once a bit
of lighted ratan) ever got between my lips. And I am very
thankful.

On every alternate day for two weeks, Ishook with the ague and

RE pot te

sweltered with the fever; but, owing to some medical preparation —
which I do not recall, the symptoms subsided and convalescence —

set in! To cheer and strengthen me, mother proposed that I”

should accompany her to the village on a trading expedition.
These pedestrian excursions, almost more than any other

MY MOTHER’S DREAM. 105

custom among the lowly, indicate the ignorance of the North
American peasantry. There is, perhaps, intelligence enough
among this class in the exchange of country produce for house-
keeping articles, dry goods, groceries, &c.; but, intimately asso-
siated with such families as ours represented, there is ever to be
seen a deplorable lack of that-knowledge which finds economy no
task or hinderance to happiness. For instance: my mother, obe-
dient to her own habits and the husband’s commandments, would
save dozens of hens’ eggs and make rolls of sweet butter, (from
yur brindle cow’s milk,) and exchange them for such useless,
injurious, and expensive substances as, Young Hyson tea, burnt
0ffee, plug tobacco, and tobacco fine-cut for smoking! While
n other things—rice, sugar, molasses, calico, newspapers, books,
pictures, é&c.—we lived on the extremest edge of want.

Returning from the scene of traffic in the afternoon of this
chilly autumn day, with what our folks termed “necessaries” for
he family, I was threatened with a revival of the dreaded fever
and ague. So severe were the aching and chilliness that pervaded
me, that mother seated herself and pillowed my head upon her
lap. In order to divert my attention from the distressing symp-
toms, she said :— y

“Now if you’ll cheer up and be a little man, I’ll tell you a
ream what I had once.”

I promised to try and not cry till we reached home, and asked:
‘When did you dream it, mother ?”

“ When I got lost in John Myers’s woods,” she replied. “ Don’t
you remember ?”

I answered in the affirmative ; whereupon, in her own untutored
style, she continued in substance as follows :—

“ Well, as I was a walkin’ an’ a lookin’ for kindlin’ wood, a thin
shadder fell over my eyes. I tuk up my apron an’ tried to wipe
tout. Icouldn’t doit, though. And pretty quick I forgot every-
hing, an’ didn’t recollect nor know nothin’ no more. Then I

5*

106 THE MAGIC STAFF.

dreamt I lived on the side of a high mountain; alone by myself,
an’ away from every livin’ cretur.  -

“But a strange man kept a walkin’ an’ a walkin’ toward me.
When he got up close to me, I ses to him, ses 1, ‘ What do you
want 0’ me, mister?” Then ses he to me, ses he, ‘ You hain’t fit
to be a livin’ all stark alone on this ’ere high mountain.’ ‘Oh,
yes I be too, ses I to him. ‘No you hain’t nuther, ses he to me,
‘an’ I won't have it so.’ Then ses I, ‘ You clear out an’ let me
alone; you’re a strange man to me, an’ I don’t want nothin’ to do
with strangers.’

“ But somehow or ruther, he made me foller him down into the
hollar, at the foot of the mountain, where the grass was green, an’
the blummies a bloomin’. ‘Now,’ ses he to me, ses he, ‘good
woman, I’m a goin’ to show you a sight what you never seen
afore, ‘ Well,’ ses I to him, ses I, ‘let’s see you do it.’ I kinder
tho’t I was sassy to an utter stranger; but I looked an’ seen jest
what he p’inted at.”

“What d’ you see, mother?” interrupted I with the greatest
interest, and quite forgetful of my weariness and pain—“ what
d’ you see?”

“Why, I’ll tell you, bub. I look’d an’ I seen a somethin’—
which I didn’t see, a kind o’ strong hand out o’ sight—lift a big
white sheet up in the middle of the field. Under it there stood
anuther man whose face, somehow or ruther, I seem’d to know
very well. Then, as I look’d, I seen three men a comin’ from
different corners of the country. They kept a walkin’, nearer
an’ nearer, to the man what was under the sheet. Bimeby, they
got to him. The first put in the middle man’s hand a bundle
of pens, to the number of a dozen. The second put a jug of
very black ink in his t/other hand. The third opened a big pack-
age of very white paper an’ laid it right at his feet.”

“Why, mother!” cried I in the height of childish excitement,
“didn’t you-wake up an’ stop dreamin’ ?”

MY MOTHER’S DREAM. 107

“No,” she replied, “I didn’t wake up till I heer’d father a
callin’ my name.”

“Didn’t you see no more?” JI asked, my health nearly re-
stored.

“Oh, yes!” she continued, “I seen the three men stand still.
An’ the man took a pen an’ dipt it in the ink an’ writ over a hull
lot o’ paper. Then he took anuther pen an’ done the self-same
thing; an’ so on, first one an’ then t’other till the pens was all
used up an’ there wasn’t no ink nor no paper that was hisen.

“ Jest at this ere instant there came up a whirlwind an’ scattered
the paper, what was writ on, all over the hull country, some one
way an’ some a nuther. An’ I was kinder scared when I seed
_ the hull dozen pens turn into a dozen full-grow’d men, drest in
pretty white an’ blue clothes. Each man went to work, without
no orders to work, an’ collected the scattered sheets o’ paper.
When they put a leaf o’ paper down it turned right into white
wheat bread; an’ the ink flow’d right off jest like oil, an’ turned
into somethin’ what looked like port wine, which the men pour’d
into stone pots all round there.

“ Now I tho’t that there was a goin’ to be a famine, or a war,
or a somethin’, I didn’t know nothin’ what. For the hull country
was full of folks. The strangers kept a comin’ up, closer an’
closer, to where the dozen men stood; the one man standin’ bolt up-
right in the middle of the hull tribe. The folks what kept comin’
was so many, that I could n’t see nothin’ o’ the ground nor nothin’
t? other side. It look’d jest like a river—an’ like human bein’s
a swimmin’, with their faces jest out o’ the water. But up they
come, an’ ses they to the dozen men, ses they: ‘ We be all hungry
an’ we be dry: won’t you give us somethin’ to eat an’ somethin’
to drink; say good folks, won’t you? An’ then the dozen ses to
the hull, ses they—‘ Yes! we’ll do it in kindness to you all.’
Then they all falls to an’ eats an’ drinks. jest like hungry wolves.
An’ while the hull world was eatin’, an’ a drinkin’, an’ a laughin’,
an’ a dancin’ for joy, I heer’d father hollerin’ an’ screamin’ after

108 THE MAGIC STAFF.

me to come hum. Anso I woke up an’ found ’t was dark, an’ I
lost in them ’are pokerish woods !”

Imperceptible as the fall of dew was the displacement of my
physical uneasiness by the fascination of her just-related dream.
“Mother!” exclaimed I, as we proceeded homeward, “what
makes folks dream ?”

“ Ah, that ’are’s what I can’t say,” returned she; “but I allus
believes that ’tis Providence what does it for them he loves.”

“Does Prov’dence make you see the new moon over your left
shoulder? or makes a fork fall tine foremost? or makes you see
them shadders in the road ?”

“No, child,” replied she, “them’s bad omens—bad signs—of
bad things what’s a goin’ to happen to them what sees.”

“Mother!” I still persisted, “ you told me once all about good
old Santa Claus, what nobody could n’t see—an’ you sed once that
the doctor brought the dead baby to our house—an’ I found out
that ’t wasn’t jest so; now doesn’t you think that that ’are white
spook what Dave seen, an’ the bad shadders in the road, an’ the
Prov’dence what makes you dream, be all jest alike—one jest like
t? other ?”

The good woman was at once silent and sad. My questions evi-
dently perplexed and non-plussed her mind. She walked gloomily
on and on, making no reply, till we reached home. Befvre going
to sleep that night, however, I coaxed her with all my might to
tell me once again that curious story; which, as a reminiscence
of my early years, lingers like an angel’s song of glad tidings.

SIGNS, AND THE THINGS SIGNIFED. 109

CHAPTER XVIII.
SIGNS, AND THE THINGS SIGNIFIED.

“Reason can not know
What sense can neither feel nor thought conceive’
There is delusion in the world —and wo.
And fear, and-pain.”

IGNORANCE is man’s strongest enemy ; and the cause of his great-
est misfortunes. Besides the main trials this unblushing Monster
tyrannically imposes upon his countless victims, he is the comman-
der-in-chief of an innumerable host of minor forces ; with which,
at any time, he can attack the citadel of individual happiness, and
take the defenceless inmates into months and years of diabolical
captivity.

The term “superstition” was the first word employed by the con-
verted Roman Pagans to signify what moderns mean by the phrase
“ Religion” that is, to stand above the world, to put one’s trust in
whatsoever is supernatural, to doubt the known and rely confiding-
ly upon the incomprehensible. But in the philosophical progress
of recent centuries, the original meaning of the term has been
changed to convey an idea of idle fancies, or a belief in the exist-
ence of imaginary personages, as ghosts, witches, imps, &c., who,
by the superstitious are supposed to exert more or less influence
on the character and destiny of human beings.

Now what is quite singular, and therefore remarkable, is, that
Religion or superstition or a belief in whatsoever is divine and
celestial and eternally steadfast, and a faith in omens and signs and

110 THE MAGIC STAFF.

changeful wonders — require the same class of mental faculties ;
which goes to establish the universally conceded fact, that the pos-
session of: knowledge makes all the difference there is between the
religious opinions of the inhabitants of North America and those
of the people of Lapland or the Sandwich Islands. . It proves that
every ordinary mind is superstitious unless it be refined and exalt-
ed by education. And the private mental history of hundreds
serve to fix the fact, that, in sailing from the continent of Supersti-
tion to the harbor of true Religion, there is a strait (or narrow
strip of water) that may be called Skepticism ; in which the person
is beset by tempestial gales from the shores of both hemispheres,
but feels none of that beautiful repose which either form of faith
sometimes so graciously bestows upon its faithful follower.

My cherished mother was one of those very few persons who
never doubt the incomprehensible. Her native faith was supported
by irresistible evidence. She never saw the new moon over her
left shoulder, never began anything on Friday, never dreamt about
crossing muddy water or combing her hair, and never saw certain
shadows in the distance, but the circumstance was in due time suc-
ceeded by some sori of domestic trouble; between which affliction
and the signs, the believing woman never could detect the slight-
est discrepancy. Although the husband would refuse all credence,
with his ejaculatory and significant “Poh!” yet she never swerved

“a hair’s breadth in her own belief.

From my present knowledge of spiritual things I am led to con-
clude, on retrospection, that my mother’s ignorance of the subjec-
tive causes of several of her experiences, not only rendered her
incapable of discriminating between the real and the imaginary,
but also greatly increased her unhappiness and despondency. She
was compelled by organization to “borrow trouble ;” but although
a righteous neighbor she would not, because she could not, return
it. This was her omnipresent misfortune, as it is everybody’s who
remains in ignorance of psychological principles. She had real
clairvoyance, and, as I think, real spirit intercourse. But not be-

SIGNS, AND THE THINGS SIGNIFIED. - Ji1

ing able to distinguish between fact and fancy, her life became a
meandering stream of trial, sadness, and nervous apprehensive-
ness. In order to show how the maternal faith was established
by what was to her “irresistible evidence,’ I will proceed to
chronicle a chapter of accidents and family misfortunes.

a

112 : THE MAGIC STAFF.

~ .

CHAPTER XIX.
A CHAPTER OF ACCIDENTS.

SHorTLY after the trading-excursion mentioned in foregoing
pages, there happened a serious accident. It occurred thus: Our
landlord’s hired man was conveying husked corn from the field to
the barn. Besides the oxen and cart, he was using the great
lumber-wagon, the pole of which he had lashed to the two-wheeled
conveyance, in order to transport a double load each time. On
one of his trips he halted with both vehicles in the public road
adjacent to our house.

“Here’s a chance to play ride horseback!” cried I. Unno-
ticed by the workman, I bestrode the wagon-pole behind the cart,
and, with gleeful impatience, waited for the driver to exclaim,
“Haw buck, gee bright—go long!” The gladsome moment
came; the oxen pulled the cart; this jerked the pole; and I,
losing my balance, fell into the loaded wagon’s track. I screamed.
Hearing which, the driver stopped the team suddenly, with the
front wheel directly upon my waist! He started and stopped
them again, with the back wheel resting its dead weight upon me,
just as before! Another revolution forward released me; but I
was taken to the house as one upon the verge of death. Hours
subsequently, being restored to the use of my faculties, I asked
my mother if I would die; when she replied: “ No, child, ’tain’t
£0 ordered. Providence is good to them what loves him. But —

A CHAPTER OF ACCIDENTS. 1138

you was hurt jest where I seen them black shadders.” Thus
fixing in her mind, and clinching there, the reliability of her pain-
ful presentiments.

This severe accident left me such reminders as a weak back, a
soreness in the\sternum-bone, a stiffness in the intercostal muscles,
. and a very sensitive stomach. A debilitated digestive system is
still in my possession. e weakness and frailty that lingered
through my breast oftti made an hour’s sitting on the shoe-
bench next to torture. But my energetic and wilful father, though
never cruel in a physical way, would_stoutly reject the explanation
of my uneasiness, and say: “ You’re a lazy feller —that’s the rea-
son. Youll never earn your salt. What to do with such a young
’un I don’t know !”

Although that accident, at the time of it, was a seeming evil,
it turned out, as every other has or will, to be a “ universal good.”
How so? Obviously, it unfitted me for being a useful disciple of
St. Crispin; it made exposure to sun-heat unbearable —as I suf-
fered from indigestion, which produced biliousness and headache
—and so rendered the usually healthy employment of agriculture
repulsive and impossible; and, lastly, it curtailed my desire to eat
heartily of any heavy substances. This was undoubtedly advan-
tageous. Every domestic as well as public physiologist is well
acquainted with the fact, that abstemiousness in diet has much to
do in developing the intellectual faculties.

Declaring this opinion, on one occasion, to a person who was
extremely anxious to become clairvoyant, he asked: “ Would you
then advise me to get run over by a wagon loaded with corn?”
To which I replied: “If you would not voluntarily throw yourself
beneath the Juggernaut of your own physical appetites, and thus
stultify the spiritual within you, the accident which I now cele-
brate as embodying a good, would appear to you as a personal
misfortune of no small importance. If, then, you wish to be clear-
headed, don’t get run over —especially not, by your own habitual

intemperance and over-eating.”

114 THE MAGIC STAFF.

Succeeding this bodily injury, I shivered through many weeks
with fever-and-ague. But, getting well again, I was induced to
accompany Reuben Kipps (a Quaker neighbor’s son) to a distant
school. Here, as I now vaguely recollect, I imbibed no lessons
of instruction. I wondered greatly where all the children came
from, who they belonged to, and where they were going after
school was dismissed. I think I went two or three weeks, with
several intervals of remaining at home; and got — among other
things —a scolding, a black mark, a bad cold, and a penny primer
full of pictures! This inaptitude for acquiring my letters, or even
a good name for trying to, was another source of trouble to my
solicitous mother, and fulfilled to a fraction one of her bad dreams !

It was now midwinter. About this time my father, returning
one evening from the village with his package of work, was seized
with a kind of paralysis which caused him to fall in the snow,
unable to rise or to make himself heard, while (as he relates) his
mind was clear and conscious of his perishing condition. The
poor man lay there all that night, wallowing and struggling in the
snowbank, while our house was a scene of painful watching and
piteous lamentation. The neighbors brought him to us on-the
following morning, almost frozen. For a poor fnmily, this was
another great trouble. We all depended upon his daily toil for
our subsistence, and he was for many days quite disqualified to
make any exertion. And mother, as usual, said “’t was jest what
she expected from her dad dreams !”

Not long after this we received intelligence that sister Eliza
was left alone, penniless and nearly starving; that her young hus-
band, Henry, had deserted both her and his infant son, and de-
parted to regions unknown; and, as a matter of course, that my
father must get his suffering daughter and grandchild, and bring
them under his own roof for maintenance. This was accordingly
done, much to our general disadvantage ; but i it served to bring
true one of my mother’s bad dreams !

Chills-and-fever again invaded my young and debilitated body.

A CHAPTER OF ACCIDENTS. : 115

Sickness, as the reader is well aware, is very troublesome and ex-
pensive in an impoverished family. It is too frequently one of the
worst signs of ignorance. I suffered long with the malady, even
till the opening spring. On one of my well days, when the active
cordwainer was going out to separate our cow from her young
calf, I accompanied him. THeroically the poor animal fought for
‘the possession of her offspring. But father—having the might and
the right— battled the frantic creature with a club till she yielded ;
yet, seeing me standing at a little distance, the infuriated beast
bowed her crazed head and plunged at me with terrific violence.
Bounding to escape the blow of her sharp horns, I had the good
luck to stumble, and her tremendous speed carried her whole body
quite overme! LEre she turned for a second attack, my fearless fa-
ther had rescued me from further danger. The psychological fright
was so great a shock to my nervous system, that, between that day
and this hour, I have not had any physical difficulty resembling
fever-and-ague. Yet, I do not recommend this cure as a sover-
eign remedy for the troublesome disease ; because it is not always
entirely safe, neither is it convenient to bottle for transportation.
Although I could not see any connecting link between the cow-
fright and my mother’s bad dreams, yet she said that she was
“expectin’ somethin’ to happen,” and my narrow escape from
physical death met that expectation exactly !

Some time after this event, my quiet sister Julia Ann—who
was now assisting at housework in the family of Peter De Garmo
—returned home to relate a singular circumstance. She said :—

“J was a-sleepin’ in the second story, or tryin’ to sleep, when I
heer’d a peckin’ right up ag’in the winder-pane, outside the room.
Oh, how scared I was! But up I gits, an’ looks out in the moon-
light. Seein’ nothin’ there, I goes back to bed. No sooner was I
under the clothes than I heer’d the same noise ag’in. I looked up,
an’ seen a white lamb peckin’ with its fore-foot, tryiw to come in!
Oh, I was real scared, for I know’d there was nothin’ that the ani-
mal could stand on; an’ so I tho’t ’twas a spook. But in a minute

116 THE MAGIC STAFF.

it wasn’t there no more, an’ I couldn’t hardly sleep any that ’are
hull night. What d@’ you think ’t was, mother ?”

As the blessed mother listened, I shudderingly saw the well-
known look of Distance steal over her features, till her entire ex-
pression was like that of one lost to consciousness. But when
Julia Ann asked her what it meant, she roused up and replied:
“Oh, ’tain’t no use a-talkin’ about such things, child; the meanin’
ain’t for you yit awhile.” For several weeks after the narration
of this vision, the seeress was pensive and desponding.

Another circumstance of great importance, in my moral history,
remains to be related in this chapter. The experience may be of

use to parents, as well as to those who may hereafter come into

that responsible relation.

One day while playing in the woodshed of our landlord’s father,
Willet Marshall; my eye rested on a bit of bowed iron in the
toolbox, which had once formed a portion of a saddle. It was a
very funny-looking toy, and I wished it was mine. At first I
thought, “I’ll go and ask Uncle Willet for it.” But, as he uni-
formly appeared cross and stiff toward me, I could n’t muster suf-
ficient courage.’ Then I thought: “O pshaw! what’s the use?
He’ll never want that ’are old piece o’ iron; he’ll never miss it;
and I want it every minute to play with.” That seductive rea-
soning did the job; and I hastened home with the stolen toy! On

‘entering, I must have looked very much ashamed-and guilty; for
the quick eye of my father caught the expression, and he peremp-
torily exclaimed :—

“ Look a-here, you sir! Where’ve you been? What you been

doing? What d’ you get, over there ?”

Without hesitation, but in the midst of many tears, I freely con

fessed what I had done.

“Stop that bawling, you sir, or I’ll. give you something to bawl

y

for

I

“Can’t I keep the plaything, father?” I asked, with many im-

ediments in my speech; “don’t you think I can keep it ?”
P y sp J p J

A CHAPTER OF ACCIDENTS. 117

“Don’t dare to ask me that again,” said he with stout severity,
“or I’ll thrash you within an inch of your life !”

My mother heard this trial, with a countenance expressive of
anguish ; but, for some private reason, she did not interfere. Dis-
consolate indeed was the maternal bosom. There was a humid
ether between her eyes and mine. Something told me that she
felt an inexpressible despair in the fear that I—her only son
— was already on the highway to certain destruction. Hence,
she could not conscientiously protect me; her words did not come
to excuse my deed; and doubtless her mind recognised the justice
of father’s summary proceedings. Doffing his begrimed leather-
apron, and donning his coat and hat, he said :—

“ Now, you sir! keep that ’are iron in your hand, and go with
me.”

He walked very fast, and uttered many hard things. He said
that I was “idle, good-for-nothin’, and mischievous!” But I did
not altogether feel the truth of his epithets; therefore I could not
respond “ Amen.” Thus I was hurried on back to the very tool-
box whence the toy was purloined, and there the honest cord-
wainer compelled me to leave it; making me promise, on penalty
of great punishment, that I would “never again take what didn’t
belong to me.”

*T was a mortifying ordeal. But that night I felt very happy
and contented. My father’s method sank deep in my moral or-
zanism ; and I do not know that I have ever violated the promise
ve then forced me to make! A course less prompt, less energetic,
ess impressive, might have engendered dangerous carelessness
wbout matters of conscience. And who knows but that little cir-
sumstance, with the rigorous way I was treated, has saved me
om those vices and crimes which so disfigure the biography of
=. intrinsically noble natures? A world of deformity and mis-
lirection is open to every young mind; and a parent, it seems to
- can not be too prompt in wisely checking a child’s departure
yom the strait road of individual righteousness.

:

118 THE MAGIC STAFF.

CHAPTER XX.

THE GAMBLER’S FIERY FATE.

“T recall =
My thoughts, and bid you look upon the night.”

CrrraInty I would not be deemed guilty of filial irreverence
if I should say that, upon the railroad of our domestic experience,
the restless and impetuous cordwainer was the only reliable loco-
motive. He would put on the steam, blow his whistle, and ad-
monish all hands to elear the track! On a short run, with a mod-
erate load, he was a fine engine, andegave satisfaction to every
passenger, till he began to let off steam—a proceeding whick
would have seemed normal and congenial enough, had it not been
accompanied with an inconvenient amount of blinding smoke and
burning cinders.

In the spring of 1835, he got us all on the train, with the bag-
gage and furniture, and landed us at another dépét. If the reader
is curious to know where it is, he can see it when he takes a drive
from Hyde Park to Pine Plains. When passing the ample home-
stead and out-buildings of Hiram Marshall, just look directly
south, and observe a crumbling structure situated about six fur-
longs from the public road. That is the very place where our
triangle, with the implements for scanty housekeeping, was depos-
ited by the mutable force aforesaid. Our conditions and comforts
were distinctly on the decline. We found ourselves minus several
items of property, especially our young and valuable cow. Why

THE GAMBLER’S FIERY FATE. 119

this move was made I can not remember. But I think it was
done to bring father into closer proximity with his various pur-
suits, and to enable my mother to perform more days of remuner-
ative labor in the neighbors’ kitchens.

In this sequestered and dilapidated dwelling my father erected
a weaver’s loom. _ "Iwas quite a spectacle! When rainy weather
drove him from off the farm, he would repair or manufacture
shoes; and, when destitute of this employment, he would mount
the loom, set the warp, and put in the filling, with enviable artistic
success. In the branch called “quilling” I was occasionally of
considerable assistance. But I was of more service to him, as he
thought, in the faithful discharge of certain commissions. I refer
to repeated errands, the burden whereof was a jug of cider! If
one neighbor declined selling me a gallon to intoxicate my father,
my orders were to go on till I obtained the desired quantity. It
is with no, little regret that I find these errands pictured on the
canvass of Memory. I trust the reader will be strong to save
anybody’s child from such memories ; for the heavenly angels can
not always stand between the young and those influences which
contaminate. It was fortunate for me, however, that my taste was
in no instance tempted by the inebriating beverage.

The philanthropic heart that throbbed in my mother’s bosom,
together with her mysterious faculty to foretell the future, made
her a favorite among the rural inhabitants. They appeared to
enjoy a visit to our humble dwelling. Parties of unmarried per-
sons would sometimes call and depart with expressions of delight.
By the active help of such, we had a jolly “apple cut” one night,
which concluded with a rustic dance. On another occasion, there
was what mother called a “quiltin’-party” in our house, which
was succeeded by several novel amusements—suth as fortune-
telling, blind-man’s buff, guessing riddles, playing the fiddle, telling
anecdotes, and card-playing. But on the occasion of each of these
assemblies, I remarked my mother’s reservation. When she

120 THE MAGIC STAFF. ’

looked into the teacup, to tell some one’s fortune, she invariably
treated the operation as mere sport. And yet, being accustomed
to her expressions, I could at times discern that look of Distance
—a blankness and introspectiveness of vision— which made even
her most ordinary verbal statements replete with an interest quite
undefinable.

*

In this connection I will relate an impressive circumstance.
The card-playing entertainment became gradually attractive to
me, although I did not participate in the game. But those who
did take sides seemed to be so full of wit and joy, that I was in-
duced to believe there must be something funny and bewitching
lurking in the constitution of the pack which none but the players
could comprehend and enjoy. To test the validity of this thought,
I one day went about among the young men of the neighborhood,
and, on my own private responsibility, invited them to a card-
party at our house that very night.

Many accepted the invitation, and arrived at the Bopoauad
hour. My parents were astonished at the large assembly. The
visitors said, “ Your boy asked us to come and play. cards here.”
Accordingly, the pictured folios were brought out, and the party
were permitted to enjoy themselves just as if the invitation had
emanated from headquarters. But I thought I saw that there
was a recollection of a bad dream going on in my mother’s brain,
and that its fulfilment was near at hand. At length the young
people departed, and we all retired. A cloud hung between the
sad woman and my disturbed spirit. That night I prayed many,
many times, in the silence of my heart, for immediate pardon and
better luck. Finally, I slept. When I awoke next morning, the
afflicted mother was smoking her pipe by the fire on the hearth.
As soon as J got dressed, she approached me and said :—

“ Now, me an’ you must settle. What did you ask all them
folks to come here for ?”

“Cause I wanted to see ’em play.”

THE GAMBLER’S FIERY FATE. 121

“ What did you get by them playin’ ?”

“ Nothin’, but to see em play high, low, jack, and the game,”
returned I with painful confusion.

“ What’s in that to you?”

“ Nothin’, only I want to see ’em when they saves their Jack!”

“ Oh, that’s it, is it?” she returned.

“ Yes, mother, *tain’t nothin’ else,” said I.

“Well, I’ll tell you how I’m a-goin’ to save my Jack?” replied
she calmly. In her right hand I observed the well-known pack
of cards. “ Now look,” she continued; “I’ll let you see what’s
sure to happen to them what loves to play cards.” While speak-
ing thus, she laid the package directly in the midst of the fire!
Holding my hand firmly, and riveting my attention upon the rap-
idly-consuming symbols, she exclaimed :—

“See that! In that burning pile is picters of many grandees!
There’s the king an’ queen o’ spades, an’ there’s the king an’
queen o’ clubs, an’ there’s the king an’ queen o’ diamonds, an’
there ’s the king an’ queen o’ hearts—an’ there’s the ace-spot, an’
there’s the dretful Jack! Now, child, save ’em if you can

There was a majestic dignity in the woman’s manner, and a

2?
°

deep and magic strength in the meaning of her words, that star-
tled me and went like lightning through my being. I trembled
in every nerve. I was sick at heart—very, very sick! But as
she had commanded me to save the jack, I was forced to reply :—

“ Mother, I can’t! tis burnt almost out o’ sight.”

“ Oh, it is, is it?” said she triumphantly ; “then see in that jack
what’ll become of every man what lives by gamblin’! The good
Providence can’t do him no good: so the Evil One takes and puts
hin in the fire of destruction.”

It would require a more skilful pen than mine to portray the
overwhelming horror of that conflagration to my young mind! I
was lost to the obvious fact that only pieces of pictured paper were
being consumed. As the flames leaped up and danced around the

cards, it seemed to me that great men and beautiful women were
6

122 THE MAGIC STAFF.

actually going through the gambler’s fiery ordeal. “Mother,” I
exclaimed, “don’t scold so—I won’t never play cards —TI won’t
never do so no more !”

Twenty-one years, full of temptation, have rolled by since that
morning, with its remarkable lesson. My perception of the Divine
government— of how the good are rewarded and the evil pun-
ished —differs greatly from the plan suggested by the maternal
companion of my early life. Yet I think that, essentially consid-
ered, she had a true knowledge of the inevitable mental sufferings
and heartburnings of that misdirected class called gamblers. And
it is with profound gratitude that I can retrace, one by one, my
footsteps—contemplate my pathway up the mountains of the past
—and see no instance when the pledge I made in that isolated
dwelling has been broken.

I GO TO SCHOOL. 123

CHAPTER XXI.
IN WHICH I GO TO SCHOOL.

“‘ And then the whining school-boy, with his satchel,
And shining morning face, creeping like snail
Unwillingly to school.”

AxovrT one mile east of Hyde Park village is a small cluster of
dwellings, called Union Corners—that is to say, a wheelwright’s
shop, a blacksmith’s shop, a contracted grocery, and a spacious grog-
gery termed a “tavern,” (by the imaginative a hotel,) for the ac-
commodation and destruction of both wayfaring men and those who
live within its deleterious atmosphere. Directly opposite this bane-
ful resort, there stood (perhaps yet stands) a tenement of most un-
wholesome dimensions; with but two rooms, the first occupying
the whole body of the structure, the second being quite as large,
right overhead, but just under the rafters, and accessible by what
might be termed a flight of ladder-stairs. Not a shade tree or
shrub was there to shut out the cheerless and ominous prospect of
that publican’s house. Neither did there exist the slightest ob-
struction to a free communication. Only space to the extent of
six yards, and time to the amount of ninety seconds, served to
draw a line of distinction between the inmates of the house and
the interior of the groggery.

Well, reader, while the spring spirit of 1836 was vivifying the
ample fields of Dutchess county, we were moving into that narrow
and dangerous dwelling. Within the light of the front window

124 THE MAGIC STAFF.

you might have seen my father practising his predominating pro-
fession. And in that contracted place, too, you could not fail to
observe the sorrowing woman; binding shoes, mending clothes,
and performing other labors without respite, for which by nature
she was far less adapted than many merely physical ladies who
adorn wealthy and fashionable homes.

I was now in my tenth year; the first decade in an eternal life!
Had you seen me, you might have said —“ I take this youngster to
be somewhere in his seventh year.” Deficient in almost every
expression of bodily strength, as also in that energy of countenance
which betokens a teachable intellect, I was at first regarded by our
new acquaintances as a very good boy to have nothing to do with.

Thanks to my parents, I was now sent to school. The teacher
was a middle-aged lady, and very kind to the children. But with
all her kindness and exertions, I could not be made to recollect and
comprehend at the same time the letters and unity of the alpha-
bet. At length, however, her place was occupied by a masculine
teacher by the name of De Witt. He put me through the A-B-
C department with inconceivable speed —so rapid, indeed, that,
when I came out at the bottom letter, I invariably lost nearly all
memory of the preceding sounds and connections. But I went
forward, nevertheless, and got triumphantly into my a-b, abs.
Shortly, however, this responsible teacher of the district-school
was superseded by a religious-minded man, named Lacy.

Under this gentleman’s austere training and vigilant supervis-
ion, I progressed into spelling words of two syllables; but so
badly and clumsily, that my perpendicular position at the foot of
the class became a fixed fact! The great Napoleon never had a
sentinel who stood his ground and guarded his outposts more
faithfully. My fundamental position, as logicians say, was well
taken; nor do I remember that I had the misfortune to be dis-
placed more than three or four times, and then only for a few
minutes. But this teacher was quite gentle and patient with me,
withal, an@ concluded to set me at the multiplication table. He

I GO TO SCHOOL. 125

wished to make me believe, through my understanding, that that
table was laden with sumptuous articles for the juvenile intellect.
He didn’t convince me at all! Writing lessons came next.
But the cramping of my thumb-joint, in order to hold the quill
just as the other scholars did, had the effect to postpone my pen-
manship to a period remote and indefinite.

Acting, as I supposed, on the master’s suggestion, my father
invested forty cents in a Pictorial Geography, authorized by the
renowned Peter Parley. That unpretending volume captivated
my eyes; and, perhaps, also, instructed my mind. The frontis-
piece is in itself a charm to children. There is a comfortably-
furnished room, a cheerful fire crackling on the hearth, an elderly
and fatherly gentleman reposing in an old armchair, his disabled
foot resting on a more common one, with a company of story-
loving juveniles crowding around, to induce the cosmopolite vet-
eran to relate another travelling adventure —and, then, just
below is the sentence, making one wish to be there also— “Take
eare there! take care, boys! if you run against my toe, I’ll not
tell you another story!” The author employs the story-teller’s
phraseology, and presents his ideas in a pictorial way, almost
irresistible to childhood and youth. By some means I was
induced to memorize the few lines :—

“ The world is round, and like a ball
Seems swinging in the air;

A sky extends around it all,
And stars are shining there.”

But I could not make myself recollect the remainder. In fact,
my mother’s memory and mine closely resembled each other.
Neither could fix a recollection of words, dates, or names, so as
to reproduce and use them properly and exactly. Map lessons,
therefore, were almost utterly out of the question; as well as the
names of various towns, villages, and cities. The map of the
world looked to me something like a cobweb into which the book-
maker had dumped here and there a mess of words, too hard to be

126 THE MAGIC STAFF.

either spelled or spoken; and hence, notwithstanding the captiva-
ting influence of the pictures and images of houses and of strange
people, I could not make any headway with my geographical
studies. 2

But here let me say that Peter Parley’s (Mr. Goodrich’s) geog-
raphy for children 7s the only school-book I ever valued, cherished,
or studied. I value it now, as I did not then, because it throws
the attractions of imagination around the facts of the world, and
imparts pleasure and instruction at once to the unfolding faculties.
T have preserved that book as the only charm of the hours I spent
in school. My eyes have looked the pictures almost out of sight.
The beautiful dresses of the English, French, Scotch, &c., are
worn almost threadbare. That book is my pyramid. The con-
tents thereof, like so many embalmed mummies, serve as a link
of connection between that year and this!

Among the numerous scholars at the district-school, of either
sex, I was never quite at ease. The boys were rough and harsh
to play with, and seemed most happy when quarrelling; while
the girls inspired me with an unconquerable shyness, a painful
and embarrassing timidity. The result was-that I found myself
entirely without any agreeable associate. Several of the boys
” a few girls called me “sleepy-head ;” the
former teacher called me “blockhead ;” and my eldest. sister
called me “dummy.” These epithets tended to increase the char-
acteristics in me which suggested them; and so I grew no wiser
or happier among those of my own years and circumstances.

The code of honor among boys of a certain stamp is very re-
markable. I will give an instance. One afternoon, just subse-
quent to the dismissal of the school, my father wished me to take
a package of work to his boss in Hyde-Park. Procuring a very
gentle old horse, belonging to the venerable and generous Isaac
Stoughtenburgh, I mounted and set out on the errand. It was
about twilight when I arrived at the proper destination. The

called me “gumpy;

I GO TO SCHOOL. © 127

return work not being quite prepared, I was obliged to remain
outside near the store longer than I wished; for, to fell the truth,
J had never been so far from home before without ample protec-
tion. My only fear was the quarrelsome village-boys! I had no
. combative propensities of my own to gratify, no ambitious inclina-
tions toward physical prowess, and I trembled to think of the
cruelties that rowdyistic characters sometimes practise upon help-
less urchins. *I'was getting dark very fast. As I expected, the
village-boys like so many young barbarians gathered around, as
I stood on the sidewalk, to teaze and insult me.

“Who be you, sonny?” asked one tauntingly. “Where d’ you
live when you’re to hum?” shouted another. “What’s your
daddy’s name?” said a third, as he run violently against me, and
knocked my cap into a mud-puddle.

LI answered them just as well as I could; making no show of
resentment, as I felt none; only a shrinking timidity which they
made fun of. I besought them not to injure me as I hadn’t in
jured them, and didn’t mean to; at which they set up’a mortify-
ing hoot, and called me by names too vulgar to reiterate. They
stepped on my toes, twitched my hat off many times, and other-
wise indicated their savage desire to get me angry and resentful.

At this moment of triai, I distinctly heard what sounded like
my mother’s voice calling me by name, as if she was seeing my
peril from the upper window of some building! It strengthened
and encouraged me to be very calm with my persecutors. A little
resentment on my part, a show of rage and fight, would have been
to them sufficient justification for striking me. But I thought
thus: “If I should do what these boys do, I should be ashamed
and afraid to go home to my mother.” Thus thinking I did not
fecl revengeful, nor even unkind, toward my tormentors. And
yet, contrary to the non-resistant doctrine that the peaceful soul is
safe, one of the tantalizing band, more hasty and unprincipled
than the rest, jumped against and knocked me down; and then,
for no reason except that I was “a country pumpkin,” and in the

128 THE MAGIC STAFF.

village alone, he struck me many times with great violence, caus-
ing a hemorrhage at my nose and several sore places in my face
and breast ! :
But my interior bosom was not bruised, and the face of my
spirit was still radiant with kindness, at which I was myself great-
ly astonished. I wept to be sure; but ’t was for bodily suffering
only. I told my mother all about it. She gave me an abundance
of her approving smiles; and my wounds were soon healed. But
there is a sequel to this apparently irrelevant incident, developing
an important moral principle, to be unfolded in a future chapter.

MY FATHER AND ALCOHOL, PART COMPANY. 129

CHAPTER XXII.
MY FATHER AND ALCOHOL PART COMPANY.

“ Strength is born
In the deep silence of long-suffering hearts.”

A RUM-SELLER may be just as honorable and philanthropic as
a rum-drinker. Twenty-one years ago, and even now in some
unreformed places, the man whose daily occupation produced
drinkers, paupers, gamblers, and victims for the prisons and the
gallows, was considered by professing Christians and the masculine
community in general, as being quite as respectably employed as
other merchants and men of business. For example: I never
heard any complaint about my father’s intemperance, and the
means by which it was induced, outside of our contracted domicil.
Inside, the misery thereof was replete with the most painful con-
comitants.

Look at the temptation! Leaning leisurely against the tavern
window, with seductive smile and crowned with beads, was a red-
faced chap—called Brandy! Next to him sat a loaferish, grinning,
imbecile, watery-looking individual—with a very pale and sickly
countenance—called Gin! Beyond the red-faced and bloated
brandy decanter, you could see a lazy, filthy, swiney vagabond —
too indolent to shine by candle-light and ashamed to open his
fiendish eyes before honest people—called Whiskey! And be-
sides these ruffians, there were other and lesser scoundrels who

caused husbands to forget their wives, fathers to neglect their
6* 7,

130 THE MAGIC STAFT.

children, brothers to insult their sisters, men to trample on the
priceless innocence of virgin women— yes, good reader, a detach-
ment of the alcoholic band of incendiaries who produce misfor-
tunes beyond the power of words to describe, vould be seen at all
hours of every day in the window of the commodious tavern just
opposite the cordwainer’s hovel.

*T was first of January. The snow was deep; the weather
extremely cold. Now and then two affectionate neighbors met,
wished each other “Happy New-Year,” and subsided into the
bar-room to ratify the wish.

Obtaining permission, I slung my unmated skates across my
arm and sallied forth to find a strip of smooth ice. I enjoyed the
sport for awhile, but the intense cold caused me soon to return.
Passing the door of a debauched but friendly old dram-drinker,
whom father well knew, I thought I would just step in and wish
him happy new-year. I entered and did so. He was alone,
dozing by a hot stove. He asked me to be seated.

Presently the intoxicated man went to the closet, mixed some
molasses with brandy, and, after drinking a portion himself, offered
me the remainder. I tasted; and its sweetness refreshed and
charmed my palate! Our folks could n’t afford to let me have
anything so sweet! And so I made the most of that New-Year’s
luxury; of which the gray-headed and unscrupulous drunkard
gave me every few minutes. I became remarkably social and
loquacious. My present memory and judgment assure me that
I talked like an unconscionable fool. My words, which indicated
nothing, I laughed at heartily! What was worse, I did not realize
that I was intoxicated. But when I arose to go home, then, alas!
I knew too well my deplorable condition.

The room spun like a top! Stove, chairs, tables, doors, win-
dows, the old man, and all, reeled and rolled horizontally around
me like so many millstones. I made a plunge for the street door;
but it eluded my hand, and shot off to the other side of the apart-

MY FATHER AND ALCOHOL PART* COMPANY. 131

ment. Now the floor began to wave up and down, bending like
thin ice beneath my feet! What was to be done? The besotted
old man was unable to aid me. In his recumbent position by the
stove he had long since become incognizant of the mutations of
surrounding circumstances. He was not favorable to rotation in
office, while I became an anxious seeker for a permanent footing
in society.

A lucky thought struck me: to spring upon the door-latch next
time it came around! As the room revolved—bringing the
specific door within my grasp—I caught it with energy. Wasn't

I glad? To reel and stagger through the narrow passage, and to
plunge into a great snowbank outside, was comparatively an easy
task. But to arise and go to my mother, that I could not do!
Only two things remained within my power: to groan and gasp
in my frosty bed—weeping at my own calamity—and to shout
feebly, “Oh, I’m so drunk! so drunk! so drunk!” I was suffer-
ing, perishing, and willing to die! Oh, the horrid mortification
of that New-Year’s day! My driveling lamentations—going up
as they did on the clear air—finally brought me timely assistance ;
and I was forthwith carried home in a condition well nigh be-
straught and insensible. The brandy and molasses—“ black
strap’—flowed out of my mouth, and, at first, gave my mother
the impression that I had ruptured a blood-vessel while skating.
But the well-known “odor” gave ample testimony as to the nature
of my wound. Oh, how dangerous that wound!

Dear reader! do you vote in favor of distilleries? Do you
put in office men who treat and traffic with the ruffian-monster,
Alcohol? Do you believe in granting a license to your neighbor ?
Will you put one man’s pecuniary interest at deadly strife with
the health, prosperity, and happiness of hundreds of families?
Are you a friend of riots? Do you wish to increase the number
of fatal accidents? Do you desire to build a railroad and run an
express train from every man’s door to asylums, poor-houses,
prisons, gambling dens, and the scaffold? Do you ery “ Down

132 THE MAGIC STAFF.

with virtue, up with vice! down with happiness, up with mis-
ery?” .

Do you work to diminish the comforts, demolish the characters,
destroy the health, and shorten the lives of the people about you?
Do you mean to sow the seeds of sorrow in the blood of myriads
of children yet unborn? If not, then vote for a Harmonial gov-
ernment. If not, then work for the Era of Harmony on the
Earth. Will you do so? We shall see; for no individual act,
however private, is lost to the vast Furure!

Gladly and gratefully do I record the fact, that the demon-
serpent, Alcohol, never got me fixed within its deadly embrace,
save in this one instance; when the seductive hospitality of an
inebriated old man was added to the larger freedom and unguarded
liberty of a New-Year’s day. ‘Twenty years have elapsed since
that disgusting experience, but this fiendish foe of man has not
found the least refuge in my affection or Judgment. And I verily
believe that my prophetic mother perceived that it would not; for
she manifested less anxiety and grief at this circumstance than
at either of those trials already chronicled.

Shortly after this, my quiet and tender sister Julia Ann, re-
turned home very ill. Her melancholy face was discolored with
jaundice ; and her deep-sunken eyes betokened a vital and mortal
disease. Poor girl! How I pity her through the sympathy of
memory! ‘There she lay stretched on the bed of death, so very
feverish and sensitive in every nerve; in the midst of all the
housekeeping turmoil, and the hammering of the shoemaker,
within that one contracted and inadequate room. A physician
was summoned, and her disease was treated, probably, with the
usual skill; but no power on earth could keep her from soaring
to the “ House not built with hands,” in which there are neither
rich nor poor, but plenty for all God’s children!

One night, as my mother sat watching by the bedside of the
departing girl, I was made quite sad by observing in her eyes that

MY FATHER AND ALCOHOL PART COMPANY. 133

ominous vacant stare—that look of Distance—which I had long
regarded as the forerunner of domestic misfortune. The suffering
patient asked for something, but the maternal ear did not catch
the sound thereof. This demonstrated the depth of her revery;
which continued unbroken for several minutes. When again she
aroused to aid the sick girl, there was a calm resignation in her
face, but in each eye*there trembled a tear of sorrow. Retiring
to the back window, and gazing out upon the frozen earth, she
wept aloud. This expression of grief I did not comprehend, and
asked :—

“ What makes you cry so, mother ?”

“ Julia Ann is going to leave us, afore long,” she replied.

“How do you know that ’are?” said I. “What makes you
think so?”

“Cause,” answered she, “I seen the little white lamb.”

“ What white lamb was it, mother ?”

“The same heavenly messenger what Julia Ann seen at Peter
De Garmo’s upper winder.”

“ When d’ you see it?”

“To-night, jest after dark ; when father went out to the tavern.”

“ Why, mother!” I exclaimed; “did it really and truly come in
this ’ere room ?”

“Yes, child, it slipped in when father went out.”

“What did the lamb do then?”

“ Why, I seen it walk on all-fours to the poor girl’s bedside;
an’ then it took hold of the quilts by its mouth, an’ pulled them
very gentle. “There!” ejaculated she, looking blankly at the
door, as father entered —“ there! the pretty lamb is gone away,
an’ I’m real ’fraid ’t will take Julia Ann along.”

“What d@’ you see ?” asked my father impatiently.

“Oh, ’t ain’t nothin’ to nobody but me,” she replied; and tear-
fully did that anxious, yet resigned, woman proceed to nurse and
console the dying daughter. :

“Don’t be a frettin’,” said father. “ Don’t fret about what

134 THE MAGIC STAFF.

can’t be helped. "What can’t be cured must be endured you
know. As for me I’m ready for anything what’s likely to
happen.”

A few days subsequent to this conversation we followed the
deserted body to the burying-ground. My parents and sister
Eliza wept excessively at times; but, though I lamented to part
with my relative, I could not shed tears. They said my grief was
too deep for weeping. But the fact was, that joy overbalanced
sorrow in my heart. A voice told me that my sister’s present
situation was to be envied and sought rather than grieved over;
and I longed to tell our folks that, while I dreaded the dying
process, I felt, mysteriously drawn to the life which came after-
ward.

But the graveyard was a terror! Those ghostly white marble
posts and slabs, and the solemn sound of the bell which rung the
knell of my sister’s departure, conjured up unwholesome imagina-
tions. And when the sexton threw a few shovels of pebbles and
cold earth upon the deposited coffin, there came back a sound so
hollow, so subterraneous, so sepulchral, and heart-broken, that my
very soul was harrowed up to the most doleful and repulsive ideas
of death. After this, I feared to go without company through a~
churchyard at night. In fact, I could not conquer a disagreeable
apprehensiveness whenever I slept alone in a dark room—a pain-
ful timidity—which lingered upon me until that glorious day
which inaugurated the Era of my spiritual illumination.

How well do I remember the dark and stormy night when the
rum-drinkers, at the tavern across the road, brutally pushed my
father into our front-door in a state of beastly intoxication. He
was more absolutely in the enemy’s power than I ever saw him
before. I will not stop to portray the desolation that his con-
dition spread through the garden of my mother’s heart. How
every hope seemed crushed! How every struggling prayer
seemed to be sent back unanswered upon its fountain source!

MY FATHER AND ALCOHOL PART COMPANY. L365

How every faintly-cherished expectation of “a better day” was
crowned with the cypress wreath of death and disappointment!
No! I will not present a picture of despair so appalling! Do
you not see that we needed the power of some efficient Re-
former? Verily, we needed the friendship and aid of a man
whose mission was

“To grapple with the fell destroyer—
The Lethe draught that brutifies the soul;
To banish from our home the peace-annoyer,
And on our hearthstone dash the fatal bowl.”

But I am about to record one of the most glorious examples:
of individual reformation. After this dreadful night my father
never tasted alcohol again! The resolution to be “a temperance
man,” was taken and kept in the calm silence of his own heart!
With the enemy full in view, with tempting associates all around
him, and through weary months of deadly and desperate struggle
with the foes in his own nature, he gained this noble victory!
For nearly forty years previous to this he was intoxicated fre-
quently ; and very much so about once a week while at Union
Corners. Hence, toward the end of the next week my mother
expected to witness another scene of desolation. But neither
that drama, nor any part of it, was ever again enacted!

There is hope, then, for the drunkard’s wife! The calm, pure
heavens are peopled with hosts of strong powers whose great
sympathetic hearts beat, through all the intervening space, respon-
sive to our every soul-born prayer for purification and righteous-
ness. And, believe me—every such prayer is some day wisely
answered.

186 THE MAGIC STAFE.

CHAPTER XXIII.
INITIAL EXPERIENCES IN HYDE PARK.

One of Belden Delamater’s unpainted tenant-houses is (or was)
situated on the post-road that leads the traveller directly through
the village of Hyde Park, either toward New York or Albany.
On the north, in close proximity, was Mr. Parker’s blacksmith-
shop. On the south was a much larger wood-frame residence, a
rod further back from the highway—the families of the two houses
drawing water from the same well. Into the former habitation
we moved in the spring of 1837—my father having secured per-
manent work in the journeyman department of John Hinchman’s
boot and shoe manufactory.

I was now in my eleventh year. So far as the development of
either body or mind was concerned, however, I was considerably
behind most boys four or five years younger. Timid, sensitive,
prone to solitary rambles, and meditative at times, I was quite
disinclined to seek the companionship of village-boys, or to parti-
cipate in their rough-and-tumble sports. In view of this seeming
apathy and worthlessness, I do not treasure up any unkindness
toward my energetic and working father because of his frequent
exclamation — '

“You ain’t worth your salt !”

To which my maternal protector and ready advocate would
reply :—

INITIAL EXPERIENCES IN HYDE PARK. 1387

“Don’t scold the boy! What can you expect of a child?”

“A child! Poh! Before I got to that ’are boy’s age, I was
bound out for my victuals and clothes,” the father would rejoin,
“and I don’t see that he’s any better than Iwas. I won’t bear it.
He’s old enough to help support himself.— You sir!” he contin-
ued, addressing himself to me, “keep a sharp lookout for somebody
who wants a boy.”

Accordingly I went in quest of employment, and succeeded in
procuring a situation with our landlord. He owned a large flour
and plaster mill in the village, and wanted “a boy to tend hopper.”
Seated by the horizontal grinding-stones, my business was to see
that the grain fell steadily from the containing-box above into the
revolving pulverizers below. ‘This monotonous occupation re-
quired not the least exercise of intellect, and scarcely none of my
muscular system, save the right arm, and that too leisurely to keep
one from dreaming and absent-mindedness.

Although not more distant than an hour’s walk from my moth-
er’s side, yet I could not resist the enervating melancholy of
“homesickness.” When I went to my sleeping-place in the land
lord’s garret, and got under the buffalo-skin for the night, my
thoughts would fly to the dearest object I knew on earth—my
mother! And now, somnambulism— more commonly called sleep-
walking — began to show itself in my nightly exercises. A thou-
sand shadowy forms of wheels and revolving upright shafts would
cover the entire surface of my brain. Besides those mill-works
which I had seen during the day, I could perceive and compre-
hend the operation of new structures. Complete machines for
splitting shingles, for grinding grains, for pulverizing plaster-stones,
for sawing and planing boards, for doing the drudging kitchen-
work usually imposed upon woman—these and several other very
novel representations of mechanical improvements would weave
themselves into the substance of my daily experiences —all brought
together, and yet never confounded, during the silence of the bend-
ing and brooding night.

138 THE MAGIC STAFF.

The exceeding vividness and unfailing recurrence of these
“dreams,” together with my almost irresistible propensity to tramp
about and actualize them during hours properly devoted to slum-
ber and recuperation, soon fatigued and discouraged me; and
hence, without asking permission to depart, I one day hastened
homeward. On entering, my father, being at dinner, eyed me for
a moment, and said —

“* What sent you home?”

Not knowing how to explain, I replied, “’Cause, I couldn't stay
no longer.” .

“ What the dogs is the reason you couldn’t ?”

“’Cause the plaster-mill hurts me—an’ the flour gets me
a-dreamin’ —an’ I’m ’fraid to sleep up garret,” replied I, much
disquieted and alarmed—fearing he would send me back without
judgment or mercy. But, fortunate as ever, mother came to my
justification and rescue, and said: “Oh, what can you expect of a
child? How d@’ you know but the boy tells the truth? Let him
stay home to-day, at tener rate; for to-morrow we’ll know more
about it.” And thus I was permanently prevented from becoming
a professional and practical miller.

For weeks subsequent to this first absence from the parental
presence, I tried to whittle out some of the mechanisms that had
painted themselves upon my imagination, but without success.
Father would persist in the declaration that I “hadn’t gumption
enough to make a whistle,” and many times avowed his belief that
my main trait was “laziness,” combined with a fondness for play.
Nevertheless, the tireless vigils of my somnambulic faculty kept
me at various midnight employments. Without artificial light, I
would move about the little bedroom, never making a misstep,
and use the penknife with entire success. These nocturnal exer-
cises I did not remember on the subsequent morning ; but I can
now recall them, and make the record as if I was outwardly con-
scious at the time. My contrivances, however, were so sneered
and jeered at by my father, that I kept them out of his sight; and

INITIAL EXPERIENCES IN HYDE PARK. 139

finally abandoned them altogether, as being utterly worthless even
as curious toys for children.

About this time I formed the acquaintance of a notorious village-
boy named “ Bill,” who was the terror of nearly every other young-
ster in that community. He was an apprentice to a wheelwright,
whose manufactory was located a few rods south of our house.
Like other folks’s boys, I went into the wagon-making department
for shavings to kindle fires. I had long dreaded the great risk
of an encounter with this belligerent apprentice. At last he spied
me, hastily filling my basket with the desired kindlings. The boss
being out, he fearlessly yelled :—

“ Hey, there, you d—n turkey-buzzard! who sent you here?
Tell me, you blunderin’ lummix, or I’ll give you a touch under
the fifth rib!”

With the greatest difficulty I replied, “ Our folks.”

“ Who’s our folks?” he vigorously demanded. “Tell me, you
lumberin’ young cuss, or I’ll hide you!”

As well as I could, I told him who my parents were, and said
coaxingly: “ Please, don’t hurt me! I won’t come here no more,
if you don’t want me to.”

“Qh, go to thunder!” said he, smiling contemptuously, “and
come back when you want more shavings. I wouldn’t lick you!
You’re too big a coward—-too much of a spoony — altogether !”

But when again I entered the shop, and found him alone, he
was remarkably docile and inclined to ask me questions. He
was my senior by some five years; and I looked upon him, through
the strong colors of his pugnacious reputation, as being a person
to fear and shun under all circumstances. His body was firmly
and powerfully proportioned. His features were rather large, and
somewhat irregular; but his eyes, though black and commanding,
sof‘ened his entire countenance by the genial smile which they had
the power to diffuse over its every lineament. In short, notwith-
standing the fearful reports of this boy’s fighting propensities, I
could not help accepting him as my only out-door companion.

140 THE MAGIC STAFF.

Shortly after the commencement of our acquaintance, I introduced
him to my parents and sister; and, contrary to my expectations, he
was also quite agreeable to them.

Subsequent to my first interview with this combative fellow, I
never heard him utter a word of profanity, or propose a fight in
the street. Of course, I was not his constant associate. But I
did not hear any more reports of his quarrelsome enterprises.
What could have wrought this change in his conduct? I know
not. But this I believe, that he had the foundation of a good man
under his outward characteristics. The timber sufficient to the
erection of a moral temple was within him rough hewn, and his
nature awaited the period when the true superstructure could be
commenced.

One warm summery day, while rambling together in Dr. Hoo-
sack’s beautiful park just north of the village, he said :—

“Let’s take a seat here—right under this ’ere shady tree —
for I want to tell you somethin’.”

Seating ourselves, he began: “There’s one thing in my mem-
ory that troubles me more than all else what I ever did.”

“ What is that, Bill?” I asked.

“Why, hang it! the thing’s foolish enough, like a bushel of
other things I’ve done, but I can’t get over it somehow.” After
a brief silence he continued: “And I never seen nobody I could
tell it to before you come to live in Hyde Park.”

“ Well, Bill, you can tell me anything, you know: I won’t leak
it out, never.” (And yet, dear reader, here I am letting it all out
into your confidence.)

“Well, *tain’t nothin’ worth a-mentionin’,” said he; “but it is,
though, or I would n’t be a-thinkin’ about it so.”

“Oh, go on, Bill,” said 1; “don’t stop ag’in.”

He proceeded: “ About this time last year, I was mean enough
to kick, an’ cuff, an’ lick a country-feller who had n’t done nothin’
to us village-boys; an’ I’ll be blamed if I hain’t felt more sorrier
an’ more madder at myself since than ever before.”

INITIAL EXPERIENCES IN HYDE PARK. 141

“Why, Bill!” exclaimed I, concealing my actual emotions, “ did
you really hurt him?”

“Yes, and bad enough, too !”

“ Didn’t you know who the boy was?” J asked.

“No! °*Twas dark almost afore I heer’d the muss down the
street. When I got on the ground, I couldn’t see his face hardly ;
but I pounded him like sixty, you’d better b’lieve.”

“Well, Bill,” said I, “you needn’t fret no more about that ’are ;
for Iam the boy what you hurt, but I don’t owe you no ill will!”

“You!” shouted he with great surprise; “you that ’are boy
what I licked so like thun—”

“Don’t swear, Bill! Yes, I’m that ’are same country-feller.
But what makes you so sorry about it, Bill?”

“Well, now—ha! ha! By the powers of mud, if that hain’t
the most funniest thing yit! Why, the reason I didn’t feel right
about the thing was, because you didn’t get mad an’ try to strike
back! If you’d only done somethin’ like that, I’d felt all
right. But you didn’t; an’ what’s more, you didn’t act as if you
felt mad at me at all—on’y cried an’ took on hard ’cause you was
hurt like thun— sixty.”

“Never mention it, Bill,” said I affectionately; “I don’t feel
hurt any now, you know—so what’s the use ?”

“ Well,” said he, rising to return to the village, “I hav’n’t hit
but two fellers under the fifth rib since that ’are night, an’ then
*cause I couldn’t be dared more’n once to do it. Now see here,”
continued he, “I’ll jest take odd spells out of my own time in
the shop, an’ make you a real first-rate peeler of a sled for next
winter.”

Earnestly I assured him that he owed me nothing, but that the
sled would be a rich present to possess. His promise was soon
redeemed, and I kept for several years that carefully-constructed
pledge of lasting friendship. And thus, dear reader, in the prac-
tice of self-control and non-resistance, we behold the ultimate de-
velopment of an impressive and salutary moral. H&d I returned

142 THE MAGIC STAFF.

blow for blow, or even indicated a disposition to violently oppose
my antagonist, would he have been so deeply rebuked? “Would
a painful regret have lodged and wrestled in his soul?- I think
not. The beautiful lesson of this story reminds me of the poet’s
forcible assertion :—
“Tf men, instead of nursing pride,
Would learn to hate it and abhor it;
Lf more relied

On Love to guide —
The world would be the better for it !”

A CURIOUS CASE OF WITCHCRAFT. 148

CHAPTER XXIV.
A CURIOUS CASE OF, WITCHCRAFT.

“ Our superstitions twine
Each with the next, until a line
They weave, that through each varied stage
Runs on from infancy to age,
Linking the spring with summer weather,
And chaining youth and years together.”

Tue banishment of alcohol from our house was soon followed
by substantial evidences of domestic prosperity. One step toward
comfort and luxury was the purchasing of enough rag-carpeting
to cover half of our main floor; another was, a new two-dollar
shawl and a beautiful calico dress for mother; another, a warm
cap and a pair of satinet pants for me; but the best of all was,
the procuring of and paying for a fine-looking cow, whose snow-
white stream of daily benefaction flowed with great ease and uni-
form abundance. My mother seemed to place a great deal of
natural affection upon this valuable creature, and felt a genuine
pride in preparing marketable butter and selling the extra milk
which was thus obtained.

For many weeks everything in this respect went on swimming-
ly, except one slight circumstance which grieved my mother, and
caused her to dream out one of those warnings of impending
trouble. That circumstance was: the manifest jealousy of our
next neighbors, from whose well we drew all our pure and spark-
ling water. These neighbors also owned a cow, less beautiful and
less fountainous than ours; and they, too, made butter for the

JA4 THE MAGIC STAFY.

market, and sold morning’s milk to some of the inhabitants. But
our butter was the sweetest, and owr milk was the creamiest, and,
as a matter of course, owr customers were most numerous, and
our stocking-foot purse received the most frequent accessions of
filthy lucre. Both cows were pastured in the same meadow; and
it was ofttimes my business and pleasure to drive them — that is,
our own noble animal, and our neighbor’s merely ordinary “ crit-
tur’—to and from the field every morning and night. But the
green-eyed monster, jealousy, soon generated a bitter and un-
speaking antagonism; and, a8 one result, the opposition cow was
soon driven to and fro by a member of the opposition family.

Things continued in this unsatisfactory state for some four
weeks; during which no woman ever suffered more from vaccina-
tion than did my well-disposed and inoffensive mother. “She
could n’t help it, if our cow was the handsomest! Neither were
the inmates of our house to blame if our cow did yield the most
milk and produce the best butter!” In short, we were entirely
innocent —do n’t you think so, dear reader ?

Conditions, however, became every day more complicated and
critical. In fact, a Teal crisis soon happened in our cow-pen,
which served to bring my mother’s dream almost true! One
evening our unfailing quadruped would not give down a drop of
milk! Mother tried every inducement. She climbed over the
fence, pulled an armful of beautiful clover, and put it before the
domesticated creature, but not a particle of gratitude was exhib-
ited in the milky way. All further effort was postponed for the
space of an hour; then resumed, but without success; and, lastly,
was abandoned. At the usual hour on the morrow our friendly
customers came; but the answer was, “Our cow won’t give down
no milk.” So I drove her to the pasture as before, where she
remained till brought home at night; when the same ominous
fact was repeated. Not a drop of the sweet beverage could be
obtained! Meanwhile, the opposition family got plenty of milk
(such as it was!) from the opposition cow, and we had the mor-

A CURIOUS CASE OF WITCHCRAFT. 145

tification of seeing our patrons go and purchase it. On the suc-
ceeding morning the milking operation again proved a failure;
and from the evening’s exertions my mother returned with a like
defeat.

Diiferent persons presented different theories to account for this.
One said the cow had the horn distemper; another, that a snake
had imbibed the milk during the day; another, that she had
swallowed her cud; another, that she had a wolf in her tail;
another, that there was a spasmodic contraction in the muscles of
the udder. But each individual hypothesis was triumphantly
exploded by each speculator successively makmg his own exami-
nation and applying his experimental remedy. The creature’s
horns were pronounced all right. The snake theory could not
stand in view of the fact, that from day unto day her bag was
greatly swollen and painfully distended with an abundance of its
undischarged secretion. The cud explanation was acknowledged
worthless when her mouth revealed its presence there. The man -
who egotistically retailed the latter end doctrine was permanently
shut up, on finding grounds for believing that the creature’s well-
formed caudal terminus was perfectly sound and useful; and,
finally, the muscular contraction postulate was just as completely
refuted by mechanically depressing the animal’s back, with a
simultaneous attempt at milking.

Not the least progress was made toward a satisfactory solution
of the case. But there was one person whose fixed opinion re-
mained unexpressed. That person was my mother. Her con-
fidence in the supernatural, as I have heretofore said, had never
been impaired or disturbed. Superstition seemed an inevitable
concomitant of her genuine spiritual experiences, The ticking
of a harmless insect on the bedroom ceiling, the howling of some
nervous dog at midnight, the running through the house of a
strange black cat, the striking of a clock weeks after it had ceased
to record time, the sudden cracking of a looking-glass —any un-

usual sound or unexplained sight— were signs of approaching
7

146 THE MAGIC STAFF.

changes and calamities in the affairs of our household. And,
strange to tell, several just such mysterious things had been occur-
ring through the summer months in our little domicil! In a word,
my mother was a believer in charms, obsession, witcheraft, and
sorcery. She admitted the alleged possibilities of the Black Art.
The power of some persons to prevent cream turning into butter
in a neighbor’s churn, or to cause the transformation of the shape
of one living thing into that of another, she did not doubt; and
yet she seldom made these things subjects of conversation.
Among my early recollections I can find but just one of her
stories, concerning ‘curious old women —
“Who roamed the country far and near,
Bewitched the children of the peasants ;

Dried up the cows and lamed the deer,
And sucked the eggs and killed the pheasants.”

Four mornings and four evenings did my mother, aided by
various experimentors, try to obtain milk from our gentle and
beautiful cow. Then, without qualification, she exclaimed —

“That are poor cretur 7s possessed !”

“ What d’ you mean, mother?” I asked.

“T mean,” she replied, lowering her voice to a distinct whisper,
“that our poor cow is under a spell.”

“Poh!” ejaculated father, who had just returned from the shop,
“T don’t believe no such stuff as that !””

Nothing daunted, however, my mother rallied to the encounter
with home skepticism, somewhat as Bunyan’s Christian did in the
great valley where Apollyon straddled over the whole breadth of
the way, and replied — “ Nothin’ else can make that poor thing
act as she does.”

“ Act how?” asked father.

“Come out and see for yourself,” she confidently answered, at
the same time leading the way with milk-pail in hand. We all
followed, and saw with amazement, that as soon as mother tried
to milk her, the afflicted animal, quiet before, was seized with a

A CURIOUS CASE OF WITCHCRAFT. 147

singular frenzy which rapidly induced a fantastic witch-dance!
Yes, incredulous reader! I testify only of that which I actually
Witnessed. -The poor beast literally lifted her feet quickly up and
down, with a swaying motion, as if impelled by some demoniac
musician invisible, while her-eyes seemed like balls of fire that
might almost inflame and burn her to death. And what made
the case stronger and yet more aggravating, was this: as we
turned to go into the house our eyes caught the gaze of our oppo-
sition neighbors! It really seemed that they looked amused, and
even jeeringly triumphant, at the cow’s pranks and our mutual
misfortune.

Mother’s opinion (or belief) became forthwith infectious. We
each shared her suspicions as to who it was that had laid an in-
fernal spell on the innocent animal. In the midst of the family
deliberations, however, I asked if witches were not like Santa
' Clauses and such ghosts as Dave saw; but my interrogatory
made no impression on the excited mother, whose anxiety about
“losing the poor thing’ was every minute growing more and more
insupportable.

After a semi-serious deliberation, it was unanimously resolved
that father should go after a seventh son. He did so; and at
length the witchmaster came. His solemn examination of the
cow’s condition was brief and mysterious. He first felt of the
creature’s nose, then punched her side with his thumb, and,
lastly, which was quite logical, he twisted her tail a little, and
then said—“ What ails this crittur is more than I can say to-
night.”

His test-prescription, however, and his directions for the dis-
enchantment of the field in which the beast had been pastured, I
distinctly remember.» They were so remarkable that, under the
circumstances, I think the record of them will be pardonable:
“ Watch and catch about a pint of the animal’s urine — put it in
and, while boiling

an iron pan, with nine sharp sewing-needles
it, see who comes to your door! Meantime, you must take some

148 THE MAGIC STAFF.

hair from the cow’s ears, forehead, and tail— bore a nole in some
tree in the meadow — put the hair into it, and seal it up.”

Saying this, the mysterious seventh son — with a truly remark-
able combination of physical proportions and wizard-like features
— departed, promising to return on the following morn.

Father straightway disposed of the pasture business; and then,
with all commendable vigilance, we took turns in waiting for the
primary ingredient of that wonderful prescription. When obtained,
the pan was carefully placed over the previously prepared fire.
That fire seemed determined to do its duty. It was not confined
within a black, prison-like, idiotic stove (as most stoves are),
neither did it arise from some subterraneous heating apparatus
(which suggests an idea of how Infernal regions may be kept at
a high temperature); no, indeed! that fire burned briskly and
beautifully in the proper place on the old-fashioned hearth, and
threw its glowing light honestly out upon our awe-struck counte-
nances. “A wood fire,” said Cornelius Agrippa, “doth drive
away dark spirits.” Whether this assertion be true or false we
did not know at the time, as neither had ever heard of the saying ;
but there did seem to be an intelligence in the prompt behavior
of that fire, which imparted a sort of courage and confidence to
each member of our domestic triangle.

At this critical juncture, I will not stop to paint the horrifying
thoughts awakened during that dread incantation! We were
half-jovial and half-terrified. The magician’s prescription was,
doubtless, being administered through the air to somebody! But
who could it be? There the great conjurer’s testing-fluid was
—bubbling, and simmering, and spirting, before our marvelling
eyes! It was a dreaded and irresistible summons—far more
certain than if served by an officer of justice. Yes, in that pan
we beheld the master and magic spell that was to do one of two
things: either break and remove the subtler and weaker charm
on our cow, or bring the malicious witch (or wizard) in person to
our very door! If the latter, whence would come the sorceress ?

A CURIOUS CASE OF WITCHCRAFT. 149

And how would she travel? Perhaps, ’t was a hideous monster
—some dark, ghostly, demoniae being — who,
“O’er bog, o’er steep, through straight, rough, dense, or rare,
With head, hands, wings, or feet, pursues his way,
And swims, or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flies.”

What would happen, or how, was as yet all a speculative mys-
tery. But the boiling and bubbling continued. Now and then a
needle (there were nine in the pan) would come upon the liquid
—would whirl and float on some bewitched bubble for a moment
—and, then, down it would plunge into the sedimentary deposite
beneath. Was that strange? Mother remarked it first; and
then we each watched for another needle.

“ Hark !” exclaimed Eliza, “what’s that a-knocking ?” s

We listened, and distinctly heard some gentle tapping at our
kitchen-door. “Who’ll go and open it?” asked Eliza: “that’s
the question!” The night had become very dark, and our em-
ployment made that darkness visible. Ever and anon while
boiling the fluid, ouF cow would tramp about and bellow in the
yard, close to the house! Yes, dear reader, we had the disen-
chanting prescription over the fire, when we heard that knocking
at the door. How, then, could we receive a visiter? But the
seventh son had said, “ See who’ll come to your door.” In order,
then, to obey directions some one must go and see who stood with-
out! Didn’t that require some courage?

Well, the stout-hearted cordwainer was not to be frightened
“ at such nonsense,” and forth he proceeded to welcome the stran-
ger in. What next? Nothing to alarm us; only an elderly lady,
‘a recent boarder of the family who owned the opposition cow ;
and nothing more.

“ What d’ you wish?” asked my father good-naturedly.

“ Only to borrow a teaspoonful of salt,” she tremulously replied;
“T’ll return it to-morrow.”

Oh, to be sure,” returned mother, with characteristic prompt-
ness to accommodate a neighbor; and, well nigh forgetting all her

150 THE MAGIC STAFF.

suspicions, she placed the salt in the old woman’s cup, and smi-
lingly said —“ You may have it, an’ welcome.”

By this time the incantation was over! The marvellous liquid
had evaporated; and the nine needles, having good eyes, looked
just as sharp as ever. Therefore, without further experiment or
controversy, we retired for the night, sorrowing for the distress of
our domestic favorite; but laughing also at the ridiculousness of
the bare idea that the harmless and uniformly well-behaved old
lady was the witch we sought to exorcise. And yet, it was so
very strange !

Shortly after our breakfast next morning, the disenchanter
entered, and interrogated: “ What did you do?”

“ Jest as you sed, an’ told me,” replied mother. “ But nothin’
happened.”

'“Didn’t anybody call during the boiling operation?” inquired
the seventh son.

Mother then informed him of the ordinary circumstance, to
which he hastily replied: “You shouldn’t have given her the
salt.”

Who can imagine our confusion—almost consternation — when
the man thus reprimanded my mother for her indiscretion. “ Mer-
cy save us!” she exclaimed, thinking, no doubt, that she had un-
consciously put the long end of the lever into the hands of our
opposition neighbors. They again had the advantage and we
were the victims !

Mother took the pail, and went out to try the milking experi-
ment once more. ‘There came a small stream of milk, but a less
gleam of hope; for the lacteal excretions were disgustingly mixed
with blood and mucus.

Ascertaining that the salt had been given to the old woman, the
conjurer, planting himself on the dignity of his reputation, grimly
preceded my mother into the yard, and instituted a more careful
examination of the animal’s real condition; while I occupied
myself, at this investigation, in observing the changes in his fea-

A CURIOUS CASE OF WITCHCRAFT. 151

tures. His face was this moment ridiculously solemn; next it
was gathered up into knotty wrinkles; then every muscle seemed
to be puckered up on one side and elongated on the other; but,
finally, with a voice made low and coarse by the absence of true
intelligence, he said: “This ’ere cow of yourn is diseased; and
my ’pinion is, you might as well fat her for the market.” _

_ “Diseased!” exclaimed mother, “where is the poor thing dis-
eased ?”

“This crittur has the horn-distemper,” replied the man, “an’ a
wolf in her tail. No mistake, marm—that’s just what ails her.”

“What! both disorders at once,’ muttered my father incredu-
lously. “I doubt that any how.”

“T’ll satisfy you,’ confidently replied the wizard, “if you’ll
jest let me bore her horn and cut her tail.”

This more rational test agreed to, the gimlet and knife were
furnished ; and the cow-doctor (before a witch-finder) soon demon-
strated the accuracy of his recent affirmations. Therefore, as the
kindest act now possible, the suffering animal was soon despatched
by ths unerring blow of an experienced arm.

Thus we seeXhow much trouble a little scientific knowledge,
applied at the first, would have saved this humble family: as it
would, no doubt, hundreds of others, who are now beclouded and
well-nizh demented by common superstitions. The fantastic
movements of the distressed beast, with these two previously-
undiscovered diseases upon her, were entirely natural; as were
also the peculiar coincidences which we construed into events of
supernatural significance.

The unwholesome effect of this case of superstition did not
pass away for several months. I remember how mortified my
mother felt—how ashamed and penitent we all were—over the
silliness and injustice of the imputation. The proceedings of that
night of incantation we managed to keep very private. Indeed,
the whole experience we spught to bury in the tomb of oblivion.
But the opposition neighbors with the opposition cow did not

152 THE MAGIC STAFF.

become wholly disenchanted of a tendency to antagonism, until
the resident clergyman (of the Dutch Reformed Church) was
called in to exert the magic of his influence upon them. The
closing up of that valuable fountain of rich milk and sweet butter,
was a serious loss to a struggling family; but, thanks to the tem-
perate cordwainer, we soon possessed another cow, and still other
evidences of domestic prosperity.

OTHER EPISODES IN THIS HISTORY. 183

CHAPTER -XXV.
OTHER EPISODES IN THIS HISTORY.

Axout this time an Israelitish merchant visited our villag,
with the avowed intention of opening there a “branch store” of
dry goods, groceries, and a general assortment of useful articles—
ranging, with nicely-shaded gradations, from a case of jews-harps
to a bale of brocade silks, from a toy wheelbarrow to glass and
china ware the most beautiful. Having nothing to do, (which was
the only thing I could work at without bungling,) I endeavored to
make myself as useful as possible in assisting the clerk to open
and dispose of his goods in the building which had been secured
by the merchant. This agreeable gentleman liking my voluntary
performance, engaged me for a few shillings per week to remain
with and help the young man, to whom the business had been
intrusted.

While unpacking, arranging, and classifying the goods, I was
pronounced a satisfactory subordinate and co-laborer. But when
‘the people began to ask the price of certain articles, then it was
that I tumbled from my lofty position down to the common level
of those whose education had been neglected. My computing
faculties were obtuse in the extreme. I couldn’t figure up even
a short catalogue of prices. And my incapacity became still more
apparent when fractions of dollars had to be deducted from or
multiplied into a customer’s bill. Neither could I give the correct
name to any unusual desoription of merchandise. Add to this a

conspicuous lack of vivaeity and gracefulness—nay, an awkward
7 *
7

154 THE MAGIC. STAFY. ;

and clumsy habit of saying and doing things—and you may
readily anticipate my discharge from that establishment. Before
I left, however, my mind was freed of an unavoidable prejudice
which I had unconsciously imbibed against the Jews. While the
store was being arranged for business, I would many times hear,
when going to and fro for my meals, such reproachful speeches as:
“ A Jew’ll cheat you out o’ your eyes!” “The Israelites is under
the cuss of God.” “I would n’t trust a Jew with brickbats,” &c.,
&c. Nevertheless, during several weeks of constant observation
and familiarity with this Jewish clerk, I never heard the slightest
suggestion of cheating, nor did I ever receive any directions from
him to give a purchaser wrong impressions of the real quality or
true price of any saleable article. But I can not record as good
a testimony in favor of several of those who jeered and scoffed at
the gentlemanly Hebrew merchant.

“What to do with that boy, I don’t know!” said father, frown-
ing with impatience, as I related to mother why the storekeeper
would n’t keep me.

2

“ Why, the boy wants more schoolin’,’ replied my mother en-
couragingly.. “ He can’t never keep no place in no store if he
can’t say his figures, you know.” This reasoning was sound, and,
in harmony therewith, I was sent to school. When the pleasant
teacher, a lady, asked my age, I replied, “In my twelfth year.”
To her question about how long I had attended any school, I said,
“Only a few weeks at Union Corners.” When she wished to
know precisely where I stood in my studies, I responded, “ At the
foot of the spellin’ class.” She desired to ascertain what I had
learned, and I answered—“ In the spellin’-book I got to ‘baker,
an’ in the g’ography all the way thro’ every picture.” Where-
upon she gave me a lesson in the English Reader, which, after
two days’ hard spelling, I did commit to her satisfaction. Subse-
quently, I was placed at minor studies and made some permanent
progress up the hill of useful knowledge.

OTHER EPISODES IN THIS HISTORY. 155

By the spring of 1838, I had gone through the lesser portions
of the multiplication table, but I invariably encountered difficult
obstructions whenever I reached “nine times nine.” In ciphering I
waded through all the problems of simple and compound addition.
In spelling words of not more than three syllables I had consid-
erable vexation and trouble. In writing I made some visible
advancement. I could and did describe hooks and trammels after
the teacher’s examples. In the orthography class there were
about a dozen children, considerably younger and smaller than
I; yet I must confess that, during the most of the time, I came
within ten or eleven of standing triumphantly at their head!
When the days of absence are deducted, I think the amount of
my schooling there did not, altogether, exceed six weeks.

Gloomily I left school, without any promotion consonant with
my years. Not a laurel wreath could be seen upon my fevered
crow. The fetters of inwrought ignorance seemed to bind my
soul to the earth. The foot of a great mountain appeared to rest
upon my youthful neck. My desolated head was covered with
the cap of no climax. The car of Time sped by, conveying on-
ward my jolly school-mates, and left me crying at the Blockhead
Station. The bright scholars seemed to embrace each golden
opportunity without blushing; while J, willing to buckle on the
armor of a conqueror, always neglected the spur of the moment.
The wings of the morning never shook out a quill for my chiro-
graphical benefit. Neither did my scholarship sail in the winds
of adversity like the crafts of other boys. And so I was de-
sponding.

In the early springtime of that year I felt the symptoms of a
hepatic and gastric disease. A bilious fever centred and burned
upon my forehead, and my stomach rejected all forms of nutrition.
I grew rapidly very sick, which was a sad misfortune ; but another
was soon added, that is, an allopathic physician. or several
days and nights what little of substantial Nature there was in me

L5G) THE MAGIC STAFF.

fought bravely and without cessation. In spite of leech and
lancet, however, in spite of subtile poisons and murderous calomel,
I won the battle and felt myself victorious !

But my previously impaired frame was yet more shaken and
disabled. It bore marks of violence. My arm was weakened
with a wound from the enemy’s lance. The beautiful present
which I had received from the hand of Mother-Nature—a set of
pure and pearly teeth—was colored, and cracked, and opened to
the march of General Decay, whose chief officer is called Tooth-
ache, and whose trials in Court-Martial are conducted by Judge
Turnkey and the lesser tools of torture. My tongue silently lay
in the midst of carnage—nearly slain on the battle-plain—full
of gashes and bleeding pores made by the spear and pike of that
valiant Knight of the Cross, known throughout the world as Sir
Calomel. My hands were worn away and palsied; my knees
kept up the strife by smiting each other on the least exertion; my
feet would not obey their head and master; but, amid all, my
innermost spirit was stronger than before.

“Your son must not drink cold water, ma’am,” said the visiting
physician to my solicitous mother. “ His case ‘is a very critical
one. The least cold taken at this stage of salivation, ma’am, will
endanger his life.” |

The careful reader is already aware of my lively dread of
dying. The thought of ceasing to breathe —of closing my eyes
for ever—of being put in a coffin—of that confinement in the
ground — was inexpressibly horrible. And yet, notwithstanding
this awful dread added to the physician’s emphatic warning, I
seemed to hear something whispering: “ You—onay—drink—the
sweet—water—of—maple—trees.” At first I thought it was but
a fever dream ; the suggestions of my burning thirst; a hint from
the liquid fire that coursed wildly through my veins. But ’t was
twice whispered between mid-day and evening. The breathing
thereof was refreshingly weleome. And I could not longer re-
strain myself. The voice was like imagination’s — very low, clear,

OTHER EPISODES IN THIS HISTORY. 157

sweet, dreamy, influential. MHesitating no more, I told mother
every word of my supposed dream— and insisted that, early in
the next morning’s dawn, I must drink the sap of sugar-maple.
She believed with me, cherished my request, and obtained from
the tapped trees a pailful of their drippings. Freely and fear-
lessly —yea, in perfect faith—I drank of the cooling water!
What followed this draught? A substantial convalescence; and,
in a few weeks, physical health and hopefulness.

Shortly after the conclusion of this illness, I obtained a situation
in the household of W. W. Woodworth, a lawyer of acknowl-
edged abilities and extensive reputation. He was, I believe,
widely respected for the refinement and democracy of his hospi-
tality ; and not less for his manly bearing and legal skill whenever
his talents were called into public action. He ascended from the
position of private counsellor-at-law to that of judge, and was
afterward elected to a seat in the National Congress.

This humane gentleman, knowing that our family was in some-
what straitened circumstances, interested himself in our behalf
and assigned to me the responsible position of porter at his resi-
dence. I tried to serve him with faithfulness and integrity. But
my inaptitude and constitutional clumsiness—each finger being as
stiff as a thumb, and each foot as awkward as that of a clodhop-
per—soon made me an unpopular candidate for that honorable
profession.

These personal disqualifications, however, did not impair the
lawyer’s friendship. He was an agent for the aristocratic family
and widow of Dr. Hossack ; by which means I was removed from
his house to their great farm north of the village. My principal
employment while there was that of a shepherd—or watcher and
keeper of about seventy head of cattle, that grazed upon the
beautiful park, environing the horticultural gardens and the mag-
nificent mansion of the widow.

Could the space be spared, I would here digress sufficiently to

158 THE MAGIC STAFF.

paint the gorgeous scenery that lies upon the spectator’s eye
while viewing the Hudson from the heights just west of the
lady’s attractive country residence. It is diversified and beautiful
in every direction. My imagination can now luxuriate in the
charms of that well-remembered pastoral experience; but, while
passing through it, I enjoyed nothing worth recording—save the
sight of my punctual mother wading every morning through the
surging and dewy grass, with a tin-pail containing my breakfast,
and the encouraging words that ever and anon flowed from her
heart’s deep fountain into mine.

All the nabobs and aristocratic families that lived in such
princely magnificence along the romantic banks of the Hudson,
“worshipped” in the Episcopal church, of which the Rev. Mr.
Sherwood was the esteemed and established pastor. Judge Wood-
worth’s family bowed before that altar; and IJ, being in his em-
ploy, went to the same manger for religious nutriment. A very
devout, proper, discreet, even-mannered lady, manifested genuine
interest in my sabbath exercises. She gave me a lesson to mem-
orize, and lent me a Sunday-school book embellished with many
pictures. By dint of swerveless perseverance, I perfectly commit-
ted, as I supposed, the catechismal answers; and, on the next sab-
‘bath, presented myself at the proper place, in a proper state of
mind, to deliver them in a proper manner, to the proper lady.

“Who made you?” asked the devout and precise lady.

“ God,” I replied —inwardly delighted that I had not forgotten
my Maker’s Christian name.

“ Who redeemed you?” she softly and sweetly asked.

The meaning of the word “redeemed” dwelt rather vaguely in
my brain, and caused me for a moment to forget the printed an-
swer; but, quickly gathering my thoughts into form, I replied —
“ Christ.” How glad I was that she did not question me as to the
precise time when my redemption happened! If she had, I felt
sure that my memory would have failed me.

OTHER EPISODES IN THIS HISTORY. 159

“ Who sanctified you?” she then inquired.

“The Holy Ghost,” I promptly answered.

“ What do you believe ?”

“J b’lieve,” said I—flushing with a sudden fear that my mem-
ory would not hold out to the end—“TI b’lieve—in—God, the
Father, Almighty Maker of heaven and earth; and—in—Jesus
Christ, his only Son our Lord, who was conceived by the Holy
Ghost, born of the—of the—born of the—of—”

“Do you not remember your lesson ?” inquired the teacher, with
a withering expression of chiding and surprise.

“No, ma’am,” said I, “I hain’t got a good mem’ry.”

She thought a moment, and then asked: “ Did you know every
word of it before you came here?”

“Qh, yes, ma’am,” I replied; “’twas all.in my mind afore to-
day. But when I come to that ’are word ‘Ghost, I kinder
lost myself a-thinkin’ about somethin’ else what happened afore
this.”

“Of what did that blessed word remind you?” she asked, with
a look of overtaxed forbearance.

“ Oh, nothin’ much, ma’am,” I responded with trepidation, blush-
ing to my very temples. “ But,” I stammeringly continued, “ that
’are word made me think of a straw ghost what a feller named’
Dave once seen up in Staatsburgh. Yes, ma’am—that’s jest what
I was a-thinkin’! I forgot the lesson—’cause I got to wonderin’
whether one ghost meant anything like t’ other.”

Hearing this, the dignified and sanctimonious teacher bit her
lips—having hard work to choke down the profane laugh that
kept rising out of her bosom; but presently, collecting all her
wonted circumspection and gravity, she gave me one of the se-
verest of rebukes for my irreverent treatment of sacred subjects.
In that reprimand, however, I regarded her as totally misappre-
hending the nature and magnitude of my difficulty; anc therefore
the only effect of the reproof or admonition was, to turn my reli-
gious inclinations or prejudices toward the Dutch Reformed church,

160 THE MAGIC STAFF.

of which my serious and spiritually-minded mother had recently
become a member and practical advocate.

During all that autumn I cheerfully accompanied my parents
every Sunday morning to the village-church. There was here
less exclusiveness. As to practical piety, however, I could discern
no difference between the supporters of the two institutions. But
the spectral shadow of that meetinghouse rests upon my memory
yet! The steeple rose high and saintly. The reverberations of
the tolling bell went tremblingly through the still sabbath air, or
vibrated with moral accents on the night-winds, that went away —
to sigh in village-homes, and then die among the distant hills. In
the graveyard there I could see a mound, marked by two rough
stone slabs, reminding me that Julia Ann’s face once smiled on
mine. Oft and again have I seen my mother saddened by words
from the preacher’s lips, and homeward take her dreary way, with
thoughts on awful subjects rolling—‘“ damnation and the dead !”

Out of pure filial sympathy, I began to believe all the minister
said on Sunday. To be sure, I did not comprehend scarcely any
portion of his teachings; but that there was something awful in
being alive, and still more in being dead, I was distressingly cer-
tain. Many a night I have huddled myself into a constrained
and painful heap, after going to bed—fearing that something
might happen to our family before morning. Regularly, however.
I attended that Reformed Dutch church; studied out lessons in
its catechism; and, with characteristic freedom; talked right out
what I thought. The eternal attributes with which the Calvinists
dressed up their God, became measurably familiar to my under-
standing. The doctrine of election and reprobation was one day
ably explained to the Sunday-school class of which I had been
rather a silent member. I listened with anxiety, mingled with
confusion. On a subsequent occasion, an elderly gentleman, who
was seriously devoted to the propagation of the essential doctrines,
delivered a brief exposition on the momentous subject of “elec

OTHER EPISODES IN THIS HISTORY. 161

tion.” At my particular request, he repeated his theory of God’s
ways to mankind. My head could not receive the profound ex-
planation. ‘The other children affirmed that they understood and
believed it all, and, as usual, gave me the jeering and tantalizing
elbow-hint that I was non compos mentis. I thought I could un-
derstand just as much of theology as the rest, but they seemed to
entertain a different opinion. The silver-haired teacher, however,
though somewhat inclined to their estimate of me, earnestly com-
pounded, expounded, and pounded. the sacred theme, until I be-
came confounded, and at length found myself believing less than
ever. Taking courage one day, I thus interrogated :—

“Uncle Isaac, you told me that God 7s Love—didn’t you?”

“ Yes, my child,” he smilingly replied, “I did.”

“ And didn’t you say that God 7s wise too?”

“Certainly, my little son,” said the old man; “God has both
Love and Wisdom. And just as much of the one as of the
other !””

“Well, you say I must be very good, and love and obey my
parents, else God will send me to hell for ever?”

“Yes, the Scriptures plainly teach that.”

“ Now, Uncle Isaac,” said I, “let me tell you why I can’t get
that ’are belief into my head like Bill, an’ Joe, an’ Tommy.”

“ Well, tell me, child,” said the venerable teacher.

“Tt seems to me,” said I, “that if God is all-wise he know’d
before I was born whether I would go to hell or heaven.”

“Why, y-e-s,” interrupted the old man with solicitude, “but
he—you know—he— God, in his great wisdom and gracious
mercy, has—you know—opened a strait and narrow way for all
to be —for most all—for a few— to be saved if they will but en-
ter in thereat.”

“But that are hain’t what I’m wanting to know, Uncle Isaac,”
I replied. “What I want to know is this ’ere: Could a God of
Love, knowing for certain that I would be miserable after death,
bring me into existence? Yes, Uncle Isaac, that’s what I want

162 THE MAGIC STAFF.

to know. \I keep a-thinkin’ in my brain that a God of Love and
Wisdom is TOO Goop to create anybody to suffer in hell for
ever.”

“Oh, my child!” exclaimed the teacher, apparently much
astonished and alarmed. “You mustn’t talk so to those who
have read the Scriptures. The ways of God, my son, are past
finding out. Men’s hearts are naturally depraved, you know;
their reason is carnal and surely delusive. The Evil One tempts
men—tempts you I fear—to have such thoughts and doubts
about the ways of God.”

This startling admonition was substantially the last lesson I
ever received at a Sunday school. I was deeply impressed with
the awfulness of my impudent controversy with a man whose em-
blems of wisdom floated, like a snowy screen, round about his
matured brow. Straightway I went and told my mother all.
Her mind was not constituted for the examination of doctrinal
questions. But the holy genius of pure religion dwelt in the
sanctuary of her heart—teaching her that Goodness is the only
happiness, that Virtue is the only key to unlock the emerald gates
that open upon the gardens of Paradise —and thus, in this my
first of theological troubles, she could lend me no aid, but, instead,
sought to wash away the stumbling-blocks by a flood of tears.

Soon after this, being nearly half-way up the first mountain of
my life, I experienced a sudden and brilliant development of som-
nambulism. It showered a clear radiance over the entire bed in
which I lay, and as I then thought, made an external representa-
tion of light like the Aurora Borealis. But I now know that the
effulgence was strictly a spiritual exercise of my own perceptive
faculties.

While passing through this anti-sleep experience, which then
continued nightly for some three weeks, I persistently sought the
repose of solitude during each day. This I could do only by
means of pretexts of various kinds; such as getting permission to
hunt in the woods, or to fish for herring by the river-side. So

OTHER EPISODES IN THIS HISTORY. 163

attractive to me were these solitary rambles that, much to my
mother’s discomfort, I sometimes lingered whole nights by the
water’s edge, listening to the ceaseless moaning of the regurgitating
waves. Physicians, I believe, usually consider “sleep-walking”
a disease. But my experience was based invariably upon the
healthiest conditions. And, besides, I was not what might strict-
ly be called a sleep-walker. My mind was more self-possessed
and intelligent at such times than during the day; and my eyes
(whether open or shut I know not) could see things about me
with far greater accuracy. In short, I had to go through a cer-
tain sleeping process in order to become as bright and quick-wit-
ted as other boys of my age. In one of these nocturnal crises, I
arose eight nights in succession, and painted upon a small canvass
(which I had previously prepared, without knowing at the time
why I did it) a beautifully diversified landscape which, subse-
quent to completion, I recognised as a view of the Garden of
Eden which had been impressed upon my mind at the Episcopal
sabbath-school.

Remembering nothing more in my history for several months
_—of any psychological interest to the reader —I will close this
chapter and begin the next with a different experience.

164 THE MAGIC STAFF.

CHAP TE Ree oy a.
IN WHICH I HEAR STRANGE MUSIC.

My parents had become acquainted with two industrious men,
who were exemplary professors of both agriculture and religion ;
and, being of a practical turn, they never failed, to my best knowl-
edge and belief, in the discharge of duties commonly allotted to
days called sacred and secular. At this time, (the spring of 1838,)
these friends were associated in culturing the vast fields which, as
heretofore said, were known for many leagues around as “the
Hossacks’ Farms.” It was ascertained that these farmers wanted
a strong and active boy to perform the lesser labors consequent
upon tillage. Therefore, unable to store my mind with the pri-
mary accomplishments of a public school, my father concluded
that, excepting the “strong and active,” I could otherwise well
enough fill the proffered situation. After due deliberation, the
husbandmen agreed upon the question of victuals and clothes;
and, a few days subsequently, you might have seen me dropping
corn or hoeing my own row—tugging, and sweating, and fretting,
with an intense headache, to keep up with the somewhat compan-
ionable group of skilful workmen..

I became quite handy with the hoe, and so had a day’s work
marked out forme. One extremely warm day, however, when I
chanced to be left alone at my appointed task, in the middle of a
twenty-acre cornfield, my attention was arrested by the sound of

I HEAR STRANGE MUSIC. 165

sweet, low, and plaintive music. It seemed to emanate from the
airy space above me, and had a pathos like the sighing of autumnal
winds. Being far away from trees and human habitations, its
source was unaccountable. Unlike anything I had ever before
heard, it appeared to’be breathing in the very fibres of my brain
—yea, through the substance of my inner being and throbbing
heart—awakening there the tenderest emotions, and filling my
juvenile mind with loving sympathies toward the unknown human
world. Previous to this moment I had entertained no enlarged
affection for strangers. The idea of loving anybody not loved by
my immediate relatives, or of disliking persons who were openly
recognised as the friends of our humble little household, never ap-
peared to me before this as being other than unnatural and blame-
worthy. Indeed, my sympathies and antipathies, like those of
uneducated youth generally, were bounded by the selfish affinities
of the family group. But, now, there was born in me an inexpres-
sible yearning to know and love everything human. I seemed to
be lifted, as by a miracle, above the mists of selfishness. While
I listened, confounded and transfixed with joy and wonderment
combined, I seemed distinctly to hear, floating down upon the
glistening solar ray, as it were, and indescribably blending with
the AXolian strains of the mysterious melody, these words: “ You
—may—desire—to—travel.” a

Breathless and exhausted with increased amazement, I stood
leaning on the handle of my hoe, by which I kept my trembling
form from falling, nervously hearkening—oh, how intensely !—
for whatever else might reach me through the dreamy music of
the abounding air. But, ere I knew it, the oppressive silencesof
the immense field was upon me, and only familiar objects in the
surrounding distance reflected themselyes upon my wondering
gaze. Yor three or four days afterward the enchantment lingered
upon me. I would involuntarily halt near the charmed spot, all
forgetful of my work, and devote myself to wishing for another
strain of atmospheric harmony so delightful.

166 THE MAGIC. STAFF.

The shiill toot of the dinner-horn went bounding over the ex-
tensive plantation, summoning the various laborers to their accus-
tomed nooning, myself among the number. The associated farm-
ers, as already said, were tilling the land on shares. Hence their
respective families lived in opposite apartments of the same spa-
cious farmhouse; and, to make expenses equal, divided the time
between such of the workmen as engaged themselves by the month,
with board included. On this plan, I ate during the first three
days of each week with one of the joint-stock employers, and the
remainder with the other—always going home on Saturday night,
and returning Monday morning.

The younger of the two farmers was an awfully—and, as i
thought, a miserably—religious man. There was a thoughtful-
ness and solemnity in the expression of his eye, a prayer-like tone
even in his most ordinary vocal exercises, and a kind of church-
yard precision in the measured tread of his feet, which invariably
exerted an unwholesome restraint. Besides, it tended to produce
and confirm a disagreeable apprehension that the cheerless obli-
gations of “Sunday” had become, by some tremendous accident,
flatted down and crushed into the meshes of the secular fabric —
giving all to feel that “religion is the chief concern of mortals
here below.” But he was, withal, a just man, and, in his own
way, Wniformly kind to me. And yet, when I ate at his table,
notwithstanding the blest food, my appetite was somehow impaired.
My teeth would masticate well enough, but, when I came to swal-
low, the provender would stick and tarry by the wayside. In
short, toward the end of the second day my head would ache, and
my stomach report indigestion. The senior agriculturist, on the
other hand, although conscientious and equally strict in his attend-
ance at public worship, was very far less rigid, and presented a
more human and approachable aspect to all who dwelt with him.

Some four days subsequent to the event recorded on a prece-
ding page, I was eating at the table of the gravest of the two
farmers. After thanking Heaven for bestowing the meat, pota

I HEAR STRANGE MUSIC. 167

toes, and turnips, that lay smoking before us, and invoking a
continuance of the Divine blessing, the farmer fixed his eye in-
quiringly upon mine, and I felt that something would be soon said
for my specific edification.

“Did you hoe one row across the field this forenoon ?” he asked.

“Not quite,” I replied, with a choking, lumpy sensation in my
throat, as if the small boiled potato then in my mouth had gone
down before it was sent.

A brief silence reigned, however, during which my thoughts
flew back to the field to estimate how much work I had really
done ; but, instead, I could only think of the delightful sounds and
mysterious Whisperings of that music so unaccountable.

“We can’t hire boys to idle away their time,” he at length
solemnly remarked, “or to stand looking at crows flying over
cornfields.” 4

On hearing this, the aforesaid lump in my throat suddenly ex-
tended itself downward, and produced a feeling in my stomach as
if I had unexpectedly swallowed one half of everything on my
plate. My embarrassment was painful. Never did any boy
more wish for a few words wherewith to explain and get excused ;
but I venture to say there never was a boy more impoverished in
a knowledge of the simplest forms of language.

I walked out, and seated myself on the grass in the garden.
“Can it be,’ thought I, “that he saw me standing when I should
have been at work? He spoke about crows! I didn’t see them.
Besides, I don’t believe any bird could make all I heer’d.” But
a doubt was evidently started in my mind as to whether I was not
deceived by some person, or in a sort of dream; and, wishing to
be considered as smart and useful as other boys, I resolved that,
should I be again left alone at my task, never to squander away
that time which justly belonged to my esteemed employers. And,
indeed, I was not without certain unpleasant misgivings lest the
report of my idleness should reach my father, and result in cast-

ing me, as before, on his protection and industry.

168 THE MAGIC STAFF.

We will now pass over an interval of several months. In the
winter of 1839, it was parentally decided that I should attend the
district school. But my memory reports no progress even in the
commonest branches of education. The teacher put the same
questions concerning where I stood in spelling, reading, writing,
ciphering, &¢c., and my responses were as heretofore recorded —
that is, iz statu quo, at the caudal extremity of the several classes
thus distinguished and denominated. Nominally, I got the credit
of going some two months ; but, in fact, sixteen days would proba-
bly cover the whole extent of my attendance. I had an inwrought
repugnance to the compulsiveness of studying a book. In order
to avoid the hateful constraint, I procured little jobs"and errands
to occupy the most of my time, and thus furnish me with a good
excuse for non-appearance at the institution of learning.

Early in the spring I had the good fortune to obtain more em-
ployment on the Hossacks’ farms. One day, while clearing some~
new ground for a crop of buckwheat, methought I heard that mar-
vellous music again! I was fortunately alone at my work, and
could devote myself to giving audience. When first I listened,
no extraordinary sound reached my nervously-intensified ear.
Anon, however, the pure and bird-like melody fioated dreamily
through the heavens! And again all was silent.

In order to fix that Aolian harmony in my recollection, I tried
to imitate some of its properties—to reproduce a few of those
tremulously-delicious sounds which had previously so utterly
charmed me, by preponderating the emotions of astonishment and
admiration. To my great delight, I could and did imitate certain
notes by a sort of ventriloquism—of which, till then, I had no
knowledge. This peculiar, purling symphony—a_ breathing
through the epiglottis and pharyngeal passages I have since
ofttimes produced in the presence of familiar friends.

Ever since the mortifying case of witchcraft and superstition
at our house, I had concealed from my parents the most of my
individual experience. Dreams and omens frightened or saddened

I HEAR STRANGE MUSIC. 169

my good mother unnecessarily, as I thought; and hence I with-
held a relation of my musical enchantment in the cornfield. Oft
and again, however, I have when alone inaudibly asked myself:
“What did it mean? And those insinuating words, ‘You—may
—desire—to—travel! what did they mean? Was that a voice
from kind Prov’dence, or was I jest then a-dreamin’ as mother
does?” And again: “Was that a permission, or a prophecy?
Which word does the sentence turn upon? If upon ‘may,’ then
it is a permission. If upon ‘travel, then it is a prophecy. How
perplexingly vague! How dreamlike and mysterious!”

Thus, after imitating the celestial notes, I mentally questioned
the blue space above me. But no answer was returned. Resu-
ming my work at length, with the conclusion that I had only been
imagining music, I heard, apparently near my ear, the same well-
remembered voice (like my mother’s), whispering, “ To—Pough-—
keep-sie.” With the celerity of thought the whole matter flashed
intelligibly before me. “ What!” I exclaimed, “then I may de-
sire to travel to Poughkeepsie?” I waited for a reply, but none
descended. From that hour, however, I yearned to have ou
domestic interests removed to the mysteriously-specified locality.

As might be expected, this new experience—added to and ex-
plaining the preceding — lent irresistible enchantment to the idea
of travelling. I began to recall the pictures in Peter Parley’s
juvenile geography—to realize, through them, the wonders and

advantages of large villages and populous cities. My organ of
inhabitiveness was evidently subordinated by the locomotive power
of other faculties. I regretted to be the cause of suggesting a
change so expensive to a poor family. But I did suggest it nev-
ertheless. After a while, I induced my father to think of it; and,
finally, I persuaded my mother to agree to the movement also, if
it could be accomplished with but a moderate outlay of labor and

means. My main expressed reason was, that I had become tired
“of the village-boys, &c. At last, father and I walked to beautiful

Poughkeepsie. He found an opportunity for steady work at Mr.
: 8

170 THE MAGIC STAFF.

John M. Cable’s manufacturing establishment. Next we discov-
ered the locality of three rooms, all vacant and to let, in the im-
mense tenant-house of Mr. Thomas Simpson. And so, in the
early autumn of that year (1839), our family moved to what, by
virtue of adoption, I have frequently and affectionately termed my
native village.

And now, as new characters may soon have the unsolicited
pleasure of appearing in this drama, I will just remark that my
sister Eliza, having again united herself in wedlock to the heart
of her choice, was left behind, and in all probability will not reap-
pear until near the close of this Autobiography.

MY LANCASTERIAN EDUCATION. big |

CHAPTER XXVII.
MY LANCASTERIAN EDUCATION.

PERHAPS no member of the Society of Friends was ever more
friendly to youth than Joseph Lancaster, of England. Through
many parts of Albion’s isle he travelled and delivered eloquent
orations on education, to which the noble, wealthy, and fashiona-
ble; listened with the strongest and cheapest evidences of approba-
tion. His benevolent exertions were followed by severe personal
embarrassments. Patronage of the rich was not accompanied with
sufficient money; and the philanthropist fled to the “land of the
free” for relief and substantial co-operation. But America did not at
once assist the enthusiastic Quaker — whose deepest heart throbbed
with profoundest aphorisms for the youth of the world—and so,
having been accidentally and fatally injured in the great metropo-
lis, his spirit ascended to a land where mutual methods of instruc-
tion are universally received and set in harmonious operation.

In Church street, Poughkeepsie, there stood a large, utilitarian-
looking building, where about four hundred children were daily
sent to school. The plan of teaching was professedly Lancaste-
rian—that is, a regularly-graduated descending scale of monitors
and admonitors—beginning with the principal, Mr, Howe, and
terminating with the personal presence and intellectual exercises
_of the writer. 3

The truth is, that my father, after several weeks of unsuccessfu
effort to make me of use to him in his art, bade me attend the

172 THE MAGIC STAFF.

Lancaster school, “to keep me out of mischief.” Obediently I
went, reported myself at the desk, and, like Oliver Twist, wanted
to know what was coming next. After one day’s hard drilling,
the “head and front” of the institution pronounced me “behind”
in spelling, reading, writing, and arithmetic. The intelligent
teacher, therefore, put me under the supervision of boys younger
than myself, but who were greatly more advanced in the several
branches above specified. And I too, though a pupil, was likewise
promoted to the honorable and flattering distinction of monitor.
But this promotion did not occur immediately. No, indeed!
The honor was conferred only after many days of pupilage—
when the superintendent had determined, by virtue of observation
and tests, just the situation to which my genius was adapted.
Where was that? What particular group in the vast assemblage
of classes was I qualified to teach? JI had attended school, as you
know, at Union Corners and in Hyde Park: to what point of ex-
altation, then, had my mind attained? Reader, I will tell you.
Mr. Howe placed me as monitor over the A-B-C class! A mis-
cellaneous band composed of above twenty snarly-haired, bad-
odored, dirty-faced, ragged-dressed, comic-acting, squinting, lisp-
ing, broac-mouthed, linkum-slyly, and yet somewhat promising
urchins, surrounded and looked upon me as their respected teacher.
My memory was well trained to the required mission. My eye
could discern any alphabetical character at a glance. The lettered
cards hung in front of my heterogeneous class. With simultane-
ous pronunciation of each letter by the pupils, I taught them the
rudiments of the English language—yea, of all external book-
knowledge! Oh, how proud I was then—how proud I am now
—with my work on the plan of Joseph Lancaster! But I would
have passed it over in silence, had I not promised to write a truth-
ful history. During the ten weeks of my attendance there I
made no advancement save in writing and ciphering. My atten-
tion was apparently stultified whenever the larger studies were
placed. before me; and hence, excepting several new games at

MY LANCASTERIAN EDUCATION. 1738

marbles and ball-playing, I left school without learning scarcely
anything.

Before leaving this section of my pilgrimage, however, I will
reaffirm that while at school I was not put to the study of history,
grammar, geometry, nor any of the intermediate branches of sci-
ence. The fine arts—geography, astronomy, drawing, music,
dancing —were strictly withheld. And who will indite the vol-
-umes of my gratituce? The schoolbooks did not prejudice my
mind, for their really useful teachings I could not receive. In
the presence of my playmates, in the higher departments; I was
intellectually a dwarf. This backwardness and dullness some-
times grieved me, but a few skips in the open air would restore
my usual contentment.

This was the last of my schooling. Added to the several weeks
before, it made little more than five months—the whole amount
of my attendance at places of instruction. With the most limited
appreciation of the elements and uses of books and education, I
returned to my parents; and never, from that day to this hour,
have I ever attempted to study any book treating upon grammatic,
historic, scientific, or philosophical subjects. The reason why I
have not will fully appear in future chapters. Since that memo-
rable winter I have allowed myself several times to ask “ whether
the spirit of Joseph Lancaster ever looked down upon the numer-
ous classes that were then being educated according to that system
of mutual instruction, which he, while a dweller of earth, had so
earnestly promulgated on both sides of the Altantic?’ To this
question I have as yet received no answer; perhaps, because the
reply hath no value of’ wide-spread importance.

174 THE MAGIC STAFF.

CHAPTER XXVITF¥F.

THE UPS AND DOWNS OF LIFE.

“Tf his call
Be but our gathering to that distant land
For whose sweet waters we have pined with thirst,
Why should not its prophetic sense be borne
Into the heart’s deep stillness, with a breath
Of summer winds —a voice of melody,
Solemn, yet lovely ?”

* BeneatuH the ripple of mirth I ever realized a calm flow of
serious thought. While bubbling and bounding along through the
ordinary channels of subsistence, I could feel the motion of a
deep fountain of existence which I had no words to reveal.
There were within no volcanic, eruptive, explosive forces that
yearned for vent and expression. On the contrary, the mystic
current that set through my soul was like the deep, calm, ebbless
flow of some baptismal river. Gentle beings, bowed down with
sickness and sorrow, walked spectre-like upon its banks. Their
tears dropped upon the soil, and beautiful flowers sprung up. I
could laugh, and sing, and dance, (in my own way,) but, ever and
anon, my soul was conscious of the tremendous profundity of
existence.

Such were my mental realizations immediately subsequent to
leaving the Lancaster school. Mother said to father, who was
complaining because I couldn’t sit still on the bench: “Don’t
find fault all the time. He’s nothin’ but a child yit.”

“A child!” returned the cordwainer satirically. “Let me tell

THE UPS AND DOWNS OF’ LIFE. 175

you he ain’t worth his salt. He’s old enough to earn his victuals
and clothes. He’s got to do it too.”

*T was now the full spring-time of 1840. Sunbeams were
liberated from their frosty imprisonments. Ice-bound streamlets
were unmanacled by the solar ray, and fled away through the
meadows dancing for joy. The sublimest epic of North American
waters, the noble Hudson, was again chanting its melodious song.
And commerce, too, the mighty river of human traffic and sub-
sistence, began to roll its tides through the beautiful village.

But my soul was bound, hand and foot, in the prison of doubt
and depression. “Why did we move from Hyde-Park?” I
asked myself one day, as my feet were listlessly taking me down
Main street. “There I was of some use. I hain’t of no use
here. My breast pains me so that I can’t sit bending over the
shoe on my lap. And my mind hain’t on it nuther! Father
don’t like me for it—mother is unhappy about it—and I’m real
sorry that I can’t learn somethin’ and be somethin’ useful.”

At this moment a solid-looking and out-spoken individual,
standing on the sidewalk, accosted me and said: “See here,
sleepy youngster, help that young man unload his potatoes,”
pointing to a farmer in the street, who had evidently sold his
stock of country produce to the speaker. “Carry the bags down
there,” he continued, indicating a basement-grocery to the right,
“and count ’em too. Come! be astir—keep your eyes open—
don’t miscount ’em, mind that.”

Notwithstanding the salutation that emanated from this stranger,
all commanding and unexpected as it was, it did not fully coun-
teract the depth and extent of my abstraction. Doubtless I hesi-
tated and acted as if disinclined, until I heard the voice like my
mother’s: “Jackson, do it.” Instantly I was awake and ready to
serve the basement-grocer. I did so, and continued till ’t was
time to go home for my evening meal, when the merchant said:
“Come back to-morrow. I’m not young now, Hor in good health;

so a boy is what I want for a while.”

176 THE MAGIC STAFF.

My delight was great. Entering home with a bound, I told
mother all that had happened, and received her counsel to return
next morning. Thus was commenced the basis of my usefulness
in a retail grocery. The proprietor was Nicholas Lawrence.
Under all circumstances he gave me his confidence, made me his
clerk and companion during business hours, and remunerated me
to my satisfaction. My calculating faculties were so deficient,
however, that he had to make out the bills; but, fortunately, I
could write well enough to keep a correct day-book record of
business transactions. But from day to day the merchant’s health
failed. Disease crept through his frame like an assassin. The
periods of his absence from the store, to get bodily rest and relief,
became more and more frequent and protracted. And so, being
excessively fatigued one day with the cares of the little property,
he said: “Why don’t your father buy this small stock, and put
youinit? You’ll make a good grocer, I’ll bet: tell the old man
to think of it.”

The mere idea of my father purchasing a grocery for me was
extremely preposterous. The stock was not worth more than
three hundred and fifty dollars; but my respected progenitor
hadn’t a dollar over paying his weekly bills on Saturday night;
so what could he do toward a purchase? And besides, the en-
ergetic cordwainer did not fancy the idea of forced publicity.
“Poh!” exclaimed he, “jest think of my name on a sign-board
over the door—‘ Samuel Davis, Grocer’ —without a dollar in my
pocket to keep the plaguy concern in operation !”

Mother’s countenance shone with a mild radiance. The sug-
gestion seemed to inspire her with hope. She sympathized in
every exertion I made to escape the constrained. posture conse-
quent upon aiding my father at home. An opportunity to place
me in congenial employment, therefore, was seized upon and
cherished by her as a providential opening. Hence, in opposition
to the sterner partner of her life, she replied: “’T ain’t so dretful
impossible as you think. I’m willing to live right down in the

THE UPS AND DOWNS OF LIFE. Ltt

basement where the grocery is—so save the rent—and tend the
store when Jackson is gone out to buy things.”

Father thought about the matter, talked it over, rejected the
proposition, laid it on the table, put it to vote, suggested emen-
dations, kicked the plan sky-high, waited for it to come down,
laughed at the enterprise, believed it would work, knocked
mother’s counsel into flinders, gathered up the fragments, con-
cluded to go it—and, wouldn’t postpone a day! He disliked to
be doing things by the halves. So down street he went, and told
Mr. Lawrence that, although he had n’t any money, he had plenty
of industry and honesty, and would pay for the stock by degrees,
(ten dollars every Saturday night,) and, if that was satisfactory,
he would take possession of the whole concern immediately. The
proposal was accepted. And at the end of the second day we
were living in the dark, damp, gloomy basement.

The details of my experience in that subterraneous place are
of no public importance. Perhaps, however, in passing, I might
remark upon my own deficiency as a merchant. Owing to the
fact that we had no extra capital to work upon, our limited stock,
without feet, soon got low and ran out. Father obtained credit
for some seventy dollars’ worth of saleable articles; but when the
day arrived to pay that bill, we were hopelessly bankrupt. The
news of our insolvency was whispered through the interstices of
trade, and our creditor, J. O. Van Anden, authorized the sheriff
to close up our baseless enterprise in the basement, whereupon we
moved back again into Mr. Simpson’s tenant-house.

But there was one circumstance which greatly depressed us all
—the rapid decline of mother’s health. Her exertions to main-
tain our position —to bolster up father’s fretful courage, to sustain
the trembling and tumbling business—impaired and exposed her
feeble constitution to the invasion of a distressing disease. She
was very ill. This heavy misfortune, added to the weight of
pecuniary enthralments, almost. crushed my father’s spirit. He

a 8*

178 THE MAGIC STAFF.

grew impatient and irascible, and compelled me, regardless of the
lameness and pain in my breast, to assist him on the bench.

In a short time, it was difficult to obtain sufficient employment.
Hence our circumstances were becoming oppressive and embar-
rassing. The entanglements of poverty hemmed us in on every
side. But to warm and sustain us there was the sunshine of our
honest purpose. Lower and lower still sunk the clouds of mis-
fortune. Soon it was hard to obtain the commonest necessaries
of daily subsistence. The disabled and patiently-suffering woman,
worn and wan, needed attentions which she did not receive, and
palliatives, too, which we had not the power to bestow. The
philanthropic physician gave no encouraging word concerning her
restoration. The horrid agonies of neuralgia swept through her
shattered fabric. A chronic inflammatory rheumatism lurked
about her head and neck, and, like a deadly enemy, dealt fatal
blows at every exposure of its victim. And—but no, I will not
dwell upon harrowing scenes of human suffering long past.

In our straitened and desperate condition, my father wrote a beg-
ging letter to the pastor of the Cannon street presbyterian church 3
of which my mother was a member in good standing, (morally
speaking,) and where we periodically went for our religious re-
freshment and instruction. The venerable minister responded in
person. He delicately inquired into our private circumstances.
With becoming regret, he assured us that pecuniary aid was not
in the line of his congregation, but gave father two dollars out of
his own pocket! The pastor was himself poor, and so his charity
fell like angel’s tears upon our hearts. But the assistance was “
too circumscribed; it did not cover our needs for twenty-four
hours. On the following morning, in accordance with a silent
resolve, I ascended “ College Hill” to beg for cold victuals.

Did you ever behold that glorious eminence, dear reader? and
the classic structure with which the elevation is crowned? If
not, and your means will sustain the trip, I commend you to visit

THE UPS AND DOWNS OF LIFE. 179

them. There are distant mountains which reflect themselves
upon the surveying eye, and a broad expanse of farming land-
scape to the south and east. The beautiful scene from this sum-
mit is almost worthy of Eliza Cook’s melodious lines :—
“There are forests, there are mountains,

There are meadows, there are rills,

Forming everlasting fountains

In the bosom of the hills.

* * * *

There are golden acres bending

In the light of harvest rays,

There are garland branches blending

With the breath of June’s sweet days ;

There are pasture grasses blowing

In the dewy moorland shade,

There are herds of cattle lowing

In the midst of bloom and blade.”

This imposing mount, with its temple of knowledge, had awa-
kened my reverence. Its advantages to youth, contrasted with
those of the Lancaster school, seemed unspeakably superior.
But I was invariably glad thatemy path did not lead through a
college. This singular gladness came, as’ I supposed, from my
dread of studying books.

Toward the attractive edifice I now bent my reluctant steps,
urged on by the necessities of a destitute family. When arrived, I
rang the bell, which summoned an elegantly-dressed gentleman to
the door. As well as I could I made the humiliating object of
my visit known; whereupon his previously graceful manners and
amiable smile subsided into a stiff attitude and gruff denial. I
returned with a full heart but empty pail. Before reaching home,
however, a thought struck me like lightning. The surprise and
force thereof made me tremble and reel for a moment; but my
mind retained the proportions of this sentence : “A—little—leaven
—leaveneth—the—whole—lump.” Now the meaning of the word
“Jeayen” was doubtful, but-it made me think of yeast; such as
our folks had used for bread, é&c. And this suggestion was suc-
ceeded by the self-instituted query: “Suppose I peddle yeast

180 THE MAGIC STAFF.

every day—couldn’t I earn a loaf of bread and a pound of
meat? Yes! I’lldo it!” Accordingly, without reporting where I
had been or whither I was going with my tin-pail, I coaxed twelve
cents out of father’s almost exhausted exchequer, and started o.
in great haste for M. Vasser & Co.’s immense brewery by the
river. Investing my entire capital in the frothy substance, and
thanking the clerk for adding a little ale to increase the quantity,
I proceeded on my novel pilgrimage to people’s kitchens and
housekeepers.

“Have some yeast to-day ?”’ I asked.

“Some what ?” returned a certain colored cook.

“Some yeast, for raisin’ bread an’ buckwheat cakes.”

“Oh, sartainly I does! Give us two cents’ worth. It’s kinder
new business ain’t it? I likes the commadation of it though.
When ’ll you come agin?”

I made my appointment there, and thus also at many other
residences ; and, before the sundown of that day, I disposed of
my entire stock, and had laid tie foundation for a wider extent
of custom.

On examining my cash account, I found a profit of twenty-five
cents. Carefully preserving my capital for the next morning’s
operations, I invested the day’s proceeds in one loaf of bread, one
pound of meat, and a little fruit, to cheer the appetite of my suf-
fering and sinking mother. That was a glorious night for me!
To find that I could earn money enough to purchase food for us
all gave me a perfect inward jubilee of joy and gratitude, though
I signified it by no boisterous outward demonstration. For sev-
eral successive weeks I continued to be a pedlar of yeast, utterly
alone and well-nigh in tatters; but my efforts glittered with bits
of that magic metal which rules the proudest worldling. In my
business perambulations, I met face to face with persons who,
then austere and unapproachable, are now gentle and hospitable
in the extreme! Verily, the ups and downs of human life, like
the flowings and ebbings of a mighty river, work out many mar-

THE UPS AND DOWNS OF LIFE. 181

vellous transpositions. Let the supercilious man check his pride,
therefore ; and let the child of sorrow forsake his grief.

Near the close of a chilly day, February 2, 1841, when I was
about to open the back-yard gate which separated our door from
the public street, something like a black veil suddenly dropped
over my face, shutting out every object and enveloping me in
utter darkness. JI groped and fumbled my way along like a blind
boy, as if in a dark night, while the sun was yet shining in the
west. My consciousness was much the same as when under the
somnambulic trance; but, unlike that condition, my closed eyes
now could discern nothing, and my unguided feet stumbled
against unperceived obstacles.

In this place, however, I should chronicle my reflections while
wending my way homeward, from that day’s unprosperous ped-
dling of yeast. “ Why did I want to move from Hyde-Park?”
thought I. “Why did I coax father and mother to make the
change? There, we had n’t such trouble to obtain work. There,
we had a cow and none of this sickness. There, mother seemed
more contented and father less irritable. Now, everything is
changed. Sadness, sickness, sorrow, hunger, dwell with us now.
Oh, why did I want to come here? I’m ’fraid that. ’t was owing
to that ’are cornfield dreamin’. Well, one thing is sure, I won’t
do nothing blind ag’in.” This resolution was formed and fixed
just as I-had reached the garden-gate. But now, lo! I was
made blind in open day!

Anon, while I was without feeling for the gate-latch, all space
seemed to be instantly filled with a golden radiance! The world
was transformed! Winter snows and icy barriers had melted and
glided away; warm breezes played with glowing sunbeams; fruit-
trees were blossoming in the garden before me ; bright birds sent
out their melcdious songs upon the perfumed air; new and beau-
tiful flowers decorated the margins of many paths that led toa
gorgeous palace which stood where the tenant-house was just a

tee. * THE MAGIC STAFF.

few moments previous; a celestial bloom and an immortal loveli
ness shone forth everywhere; and I heard what, as on other
occasions, sounded like my mother’s voice calling as from an un-
seen window of the palatial superstructure—“ Come here, child:
I—want — to — show — you— my — new — house !”

Without an emotion of astonishment or haste, (at which I am
even now astonished,) I opened the begemmed gate before me,
which gave out music from its very hinges, and then I walked
calmly through the pure air, between the spraying fountains, be-
neath the waving gleeful trees, amid the diversified bloom and
unwasting glory, until I gained the gilded door of my mother’s ©
high and holy home!

A moment I hesitated, thinking “how shall I act if she’s got
visitors?” The thought departed, and, rustic-like, I knocked
loudly against the bespangled and over-arched door. No answer!
While waiting for admission, I turned to review the magnificent
habitation. With thought’s own speed, I recalled the many mis-
erable houses we had occupied. The contrast made this lovelier
than all else my mind had ever imagined. My bosom swelled
with ineffable pride—then with a gladness—which made me
shout and dance. I think my joy was very fantastic and boister-
ous; for, in the midst thereof, the stately door swung open, and a fa-
miliar Hibernian neighbor raised her forefinger ominously, and said:

“Jist wait a bit. It’s yer own poor mother that’s a dyin’!
Yer a bould lad to be killin’ her, swate heart, wid yer noise. It’s
a power o’ sad news for ye. Shure an’ dyin’s no play. Go in
softly — put yer pail snoogly away up-stairs —thin go an’ spake
a bit to yer mother.”

All this solemn talk seemed extremely ridiculous! Could n't
Tsee? Didn’t I know better? The hall before me was spacious,
the walls glittered with golden embellishments, the stairs to which
she pointed were radiant with flowery carpetings, and wasn’t I
the proud son of the healthy and happy mother who owned the
palace ?

THE UPS AND DOWNS OF LIFE. 183

I had as I thought evidence enough that the sympathetic lady
of Erin was simply checking my mirth, so that the joy of our
new home might break more calmly on my mind. And so I
would n’t be restrained. Laughing aloud at her foolish words of
caution, I bounded by her through the enamelled doorway. In
an instant the resplendent vision vanished!- The black veil was
again before me! It fell—and, lo! the ill-furnished room — the
darkened bed — the emaciated woman—alas! I stood in the
midst of poverty and death! Who can portray my feelings?
The doctor whispered —“ She’s dying!”

Again the matronly Hibernian, in a subdued tone, addressed
me: “Qh, lad! it’s the Bible ye should be reading. ’T would
sarve yer swate mother now. Poor sowl! she’s laving the world,
end if ye wants to be prayin’ for her pace, this is the time. The
could world is yer own after this. So quit yer singin’ an’ yer
dancin’, lad“ She Il be a lang way off soon, an’ ye’ll know it
whin she’s dead, mind ye that.”

But I could not weep. I did not even feel sad. In fact, I was
filled with a certain tameless enthusiasm at which I greatly mar-
velled. In spite of my father’s woful dejection, and my sister’s
abundant tears, I was overflowing with gladness! I wanted to
exclaim: “ Hain’t this ’ere good? What a great house we have!
Mother! hain’t you a queen in a beautiful palace?” I did not
speak, however, but gazed only with a wild joy nestling in my

heart. “ Hain’t this feeling wicked?” soliloquized I. The an-
swering thought said— “No, you can’t help it.’ And such, in-
deed, was the truth. In that peculiar and extraordinary state of
mind, (for which I had no explanation aside from dreaming,) I

witnessed the death of the confidential companion of my early
years ; the name of whose relation my tongue first engraved upon
the tablet of memory—my ever-strange — ever-prophetic —
_ever-cherished — Mother !

The natural spring of that year was but the covering of a
spiritual spring for me. Not that our circumstances were im-

184 THE MAGIC STAFF.

proved, not that my body was any stronger or more manly, but a
stouter and nobler heart beat within my bosom. Intellectually,
and to all appearance, I was yet very dull, uninteresting, and
clumsy. But spiritually, (7. e., in my soul’s heart,) I was almost
born again. My spirit had no tears for the sepulchral urn! The
ashes of the dead contained the germs of life. The sealed eyes,
the faded smile, the pallid lips, the dew of death— what were
these to me? Signs and symbols of a new creation! Celestial
perfection, beyond all speech, was set like a diadem on the brow
of Nature. I was present at the coronation of the unknown!
After the funeral of my mother, and when all the members of the
lamenting family were hushed for the night, I remember that I
many times repeated: “I thank you, kind Prov’dence, I thank
you for taking her out of trouble; and, kind Prov’dence, I pray
you won't forget the rest of our folks never !”

A LESSON OF SELF-DEPENDENCE. 185

CHAPTER XXIX.
A LESSON OF SELF-DEPENDENCE.

Soon after the impressive event last chronicled, my father
rented part of a dwelling on Mansion square—belonging to and
mostly occupied by the family of Jonathan Clark, of the Society
of Friends—into which we moved, and where we assiduously
labored.

From our side-door could be seen the collegiate superstructure,
with its calm front and imposing columns, like a signet of intelli-
gence set on the brow of the hill. Its supposed wondrous lore
frightened and repelled me far away. I reverenced, and feared,
and shunned it. My well-remembered visit thither, too, and the
classic elegance of that rocking-charity which I witnessed, made
me believe that we were wide as the poles asunder.

Recent trials had considerably dispirited my worthy progenitor,
which, taken in connection with his growing disinclination to visit
the shoe-merchants even to secure either labor or its needful re-
ward, threw the responsibility of both on me. In addition to this,
I had the commission of procuring nearly all the commodities of
daily doing and corporeal subsistence. And steadily as I could,
in the midst of father’s increased fretfulness, I co-operated with
him in those branches known to practical cordwainers as “ closing
uppers” and “in-seaming” women’s grain-leather buskins. In fact,
many and weighty responsibilities rested on my shoulders. The
pressure thereof caused each particular joint to settle more firmly

186 THE MAGIC STAFF.

in its native socket. And I began to feel the existence of capa-
bilities which, till now, had slumbered in the folds of my being.
During this season, I obtained from Mr. Wilson’s “ circulating
library” in the village, a number of books of narrative and adven-
ture to amuse my father. He seemed to read them with pleasure
and profit, and one day said: “ Why don’t you try to read some-
thing? You’d better stop moping about, like a sleepy-head, and
learn your letters.” Now I knew my letters, and could read tol-
erably well; hence, I did not relish his satire upon my character-
istic stupidity. But I attempted to follow his counsel. After
searching the lengthy catalogue through, I resolved to take out a
book entitled “The Three Spaniards.” To the spelling and read-
ing of these three Spaniards I devoted my spare time for several
weeks; and then I gladly returned the volume, the extravagant
and ghastly absurdities of .which I had almost wholly forgotten.
The influence of what I then considered a beautiful dream, on
the eve of my mother’s death, had now subsided. The outlines
thereof lingered in my memory still; but even such parts as were
not effaced, merely dwelt among the tombs of buried hopes. Like
the departed one, my spirit ofttimes wore an expression of sadness,
for which I could neither realize nor vocalize a reason. One day,
however, while walking in one of those depressive moods, I dis-
tinctly heard my name pronounced (as it were from the large tree
then near me), and these words: “ Eat—plenty—of—bread—and
—=molasses.” This circumstance roused, while the words amused
me; and I hopped and skipped along with lively merriment.
“ Fain’t I a real dreamer?” said I mentally ; “ why, I can make
myself believe that I hear a voice! How funny!” But, strange
to relate, from that day forward into the extreme autumn, I had
an appetite for no other food; and this I consumed with such un-
feigned relish, that my father could not restrain his propensity to
fret, criticise, scold, and exclaim with irritation: “Look at that
’are boy! see him soak up that molasses! He’ll eat us out of
house and home!” But, thirty-four months subsequently, I had

A LESSON OF SELF-DEPENDENCE. 187

acquired sufficient wisdom to comprehend the utility of that exclu-
sively sweet and simple nourishment.. My sanguineous system was
greatly purified thereby; and my nervous forces were equalized
to some extent, and refined in their normal operations.

Near the close of this year I obtained a clerkship in the boot
and shoe store of Simon Bierbaur, a temperate and industrious
German, who more than once made the paradoxical declaration
that he “didn’t want to make nothing—only a comfortable living,
an’ lay up a leetle.” Previous to this, however, I held for a brief
period the position of assistant with Charlie Roe, an extremely
quiet man, who kept an extremely quiet refectory in the basement
of the courthouse, which was seldom visited except by extremely
quiet customers,

My situation with the paradoxical German was but the step-
ping-stone to my acquaintance and engagement with Mr. Ira Arm-
strong. And, inasmuch as my path for the ensuing two years lies
directly through the business affairs and domestic relations of the
last-named individual, I will now, without hesitation, let down the
curtain that has been for so many years rolled up, exposing my
father’s personal peculiarities and private circumstances to the
gaze and criticism of the unknown public,

188 THE MAGIC STAP¥.

CHAPTER XXX.
MY LIFE WITH IRA ARMSTRONG.

Ina ARMSTRONG was a boot and shoe merchant, and a manu-
facturer also, to some extent, in the most ‘business portion of Main
street. (The reader will of course bear in mind that these latter
records take their rise in the village of Poughkeepsie.) His physi-
cal form was composed of excellent materials, capable of enduring
much labor; while his mind was self-possessed, thoughtful, and
devotional. Constitutionally, or by nature, he was a strict political
economist snd utilitarian; spiritually, or by heart, he was a stead-
fast friend and private benefactor of human kind.

How I rejoiced, in the spring of 1842, when we entered upon a
mutual agreement of good-will! He gradually intrusted to me
the general conduct of the retail trade. In due time he carefully
instructed me to make records in the day-book, to put them into
the ledger, to keep the cash-account, to deposite money in the
bank, to calculate for and take up notes, &¢c.; all of which I was
only too glad to accomplish faithfully, as an expression of the
gratitude his kindness awakened in my bruised and jaded spirit.
Whenever a customer asked for credit, or wished a reduction of
price, I was usually inclined to grant it; because I could not but
recall periods in my own life when a little “faith and charity”
would seemingly have saved our family from months of discour-
agement and suffering. Mr. Armstrong, however, detecting this
disposition one day, admonishingly but kindly said :—

MY LIFE WITH IRA ARMSTRONG. 189

“Jackson, I fear you place too much confidence in strangers.
ITonesty is not a universal trait. Tt takes a business man to find
that out.”

“ Folks don’t mean to cheat, do they ?” I asked.

“ Perhaps not,” he replied. “ But some of them are very slow
in paying up; while others shirk their bills, and never settle them
at all.”

“Then I’m real sorry,” said I regretfully ; “for I have trusted
Mrs. ——— with a pair of red children’s shoes, and your neigh-
bor

with a pair of pegged coarse men’s boots.”

I supposed that, without doubt, I should get a short chapter of
disapprobation and mercantile discipline from the utilitarian boss
then at work on the bench; but instead, I heard him laugh with
a critical expression, and exclaim: “ Red children, eh? and pegged
coarse men, eh? Did you ever see any red children, or pegged
coarse men?” But seeing that Edwin, the eldest apprentice, was
freely enjoying the “rig” at my expense, he sobered right down,
and gravely continued: “If you wish to speak or write correctly,
Jackson, you should say ‘children’s red shoes’ and ‘men’s coarse
pegged boots.’”

Referring again to the credit system which I had involuntarily
adopted and granted to customers, I said: “I’ll not trust nobody
no moxe, unless you know it, that’s certain. Scarcely had I ter-
minated my promise, however, when the religious-minded business
man sought refuge from the mutations of time, in singing, as well
as he could :—

“T would not live alway,
I ask not to stay,
Where storm after storm
Rises dark o’er the way !”

But the chilling suggestion that I “placed too much confidence

in strangers,” occupied my mind to the exclusion of the criticisms
on my grammatic blunders. And the result was twofold: I for-

got what I was thinking about, and also how to speak and write

190 THE MAGIC STAFF.

correctly as I was told. Therefore, some months subsequently,
when Mr. Armstrong conferred upon me the honor and responsi-
bility of composing and mailing an order to a wholesale dealer in

the great metropolis, I wrote nearly as follows :—

‘POUGHKEEPSIE June 1843
“D Daniels & Co—dear sir Mr Armstrong wants me to write
to you to send to him 2 doz red morrocco childrens shoes 1 case
of fine mens calf boots 1 case do of coarse stoga mens shoes and

1 do of pegged mens cowhide boots
“and oblige &c”

With this chirographic and mercantile accomplishment I was
quite proud—especially when the stock arrived precisely in ac-
cordance with my employer’s verbal specifications—and would
have remained innocently so till this day, doubtless, had the firm
not communicated my ridiculous transpositions to the esteemed
utilitarian, who thereupon gave me one of his critical but good-
natured looks, and another Aint about “red morocco children” and
“coarse stoga men.”

Under Mr. Armstrong’s benevolent administration was inaugu-
rated the first opportunity in my life of jingling money to the
amount of fifty cents on the 4th of July. Listen, Young America!
According to family records in an American bible, I was over fif-
teen years old, an American by both parentage and nativity, without
an American education, in a useful American business, with a
chequered and uninterpreted American history at my back, an un-
known and uninterrogated American future in the distance, going
out in America after one o’clock, P. M., with the first half of an
American dollar in my pocket, to celebrate the anniversary of
American Independence! Powder and pride, fire-crackers and
baker’s biscuit, friendship and peanuts, headache and spruce-beer,
formed the basis of my patriotic enjoyment. Doubtless I acted
just like a country-village boy transplanted into the soil of a future
city. While the cannon boomed from the hill-top, and the fire-
works showered the air with innumerable stars, and my money

- MY LIFE WITH IRA ARMSTRONG. _ 191

held out, I was in the height of patriotic enthusiasm, and cherished
‘a feverish regard for the possession of American independence.
And now I feel inclined to ask the reader whether most of what
men term patriotic celebrations of American liberty are not pre-
cisely like my thoughtless excitement on that glorious Fourth?
By Mr. Armstrong’s family I was accepted more as a member
than an apprentice ; and I have treasured up many kind words as
golden apples dropped from the tree of Life. Although then a
member of the Methodist church, and the devout pronouncer of
thanks over each meal, yet I never remember that Mr. Armstrong
asked me to attend public worship. Hence, being allowed the
freedom of the house and the yard, the children would frequently
unite with and aid me in trying to sing Washingtonian temperance
songs. One Sunday, while singing —
“ Where are the friends that to me were so dear,
Long, long ago?” &¢. —
there happened a pleasing mystical circumstance, of which I was
the sole recipient. When we sung the words “In their graves
laid low,” I heard the word “No!” distinctly and emphatically
shouted in my ear.
“Don’t do that, Russell,” said I to the eldest son.
“Do what ?” he inquired, with a’look of surprise.
“Don’t holier ‘No! when ’tain’t in the song,” I pleadingly ex-
claimed.
“T didn’t,” he quickly replied; “and I didn’t hear it neither.”
The younger children, Austin and Freddy, also denied any par-
ticipation. So we proceeded with our singing. But whenever
we sung the affirmation that our friends are “in their graves laid
low,” I would hear the negative “No!” as clear and positive as
any word pronounced by ourselves! At the time, I could not
comprehend it. My belief (if I had any) was, that my dearest
and most loved relatives were mouldering in the grave; that death
was an escape from trouble—a kind of sleep; that their souls
would be awakened one day, and rewarded or punished according

192 THE MAGIC STAFF. -

to deeds done in the body. This, or something like it, was the
belief of all the gray-headed men and wise-looking women I ever
knew. My mother seemed to think somewhat so. The esteemed
Mr. Armstrong, too, held to this doctrine, as I supposed. So,
also, the learned men at the academy. And, more impressively
tremendous than all, so believed (as I was told) the elegantly-
dressed and classic gentleman who presided over and directed the
mental destiny of rich men’s sons on the revered College hill!
Hence I could not imagine the voice to be anything but what I
had heard in years previous—a self-imposed dream !

In these chronological statements, I desire to introduce such
recitals and events as bear directly on the psychological objects
and aims of this volume. The story of my life is not based in
fables. It is all a sober and solid reality, and is interesting only
when and where it differs from common manifestations. And
yet, no reader can truly comprehend the bearing of extraordinary
experiences unless they are seen to rest upon and mix familiarly
with the ordinary occurrences and daily transactions of human
existence.

Mr. Armstrong’s nominal attachment to and apparently unwa-
vering belief in the cardinal dactrines of the Methodist denomina-
tion was a sufficient inducement to cause me seriously to attend
such meetings, and to put forth an honest endeavor to be recog-
nised as a Christian by him and others enshrined in my confidence.

Occasionally, but without divulging the full extent of my wishes,
I would obtain permission to attend evening prayer-meetings ;
also the probationers’ class of inquiry and mutual encouragement ;
and, lastly, I sought aid from listening to Sunday expositions of
the sacred text. And in the spring of 1848, I think, I was some-
what excited Zionward by a revival in the Methodist church.
Whenever business and Providence permitted, I presented myself
among the anxious seekers, and in silence prayed that the Divine
Spirit (or anything else holy) might propel or lead me to the altar.

MY LIFE WITH IRA ARMSTRONG. 193

This process of self-indoctrination or voluntary seeking for and
willingness to accept of grace, I kept up privately for several suc-
cessive nights. But it was almost fruitless, at which I felt no
little consternation. What alarmed me most was, the more I de-
sired the further I receded from conversion. On one occasion, a
thin-bodied journeyman shoemaker, with a high and remarkably
narrow forehead, but who had the religious excitement very se-
vere, whispered to me :—

“ May I call you my brother in Christ Jesus?”

“ Yes,” I obligingly replied, “you may if you want to.”

“Yow do you feel, brother?” he confidentially inquired.

“ Got a pain in my breast,” I fraternally responded ; “ but ’tain’t
nothin’ new. I’m used to it.”

The excited and sympathetic convert groaned in behalf of my
aching breast, as I supposed, and said: “ My bowels yearns for
you, my brother—my bowels yearns !”

Now, being deficient in a knowledge of the scriptural phraseol-
ogy, and equally stupid in the organal department of imagination,
I made the characteristic blunder of taking the convert’s meta-
phoric words literally ; and so, with unfeignedly pathetic tones, I
replied: “B’en eatin’ somethin’ what don’t agree with you, I
spose. Better take some catnep-tea when goin’ to bed. It’s
good, b’lieve, for stomic-ache.”

Hearing this, he gave me a very extraordinary look, and sub-
sided into the midst of a shouting group of brothers and sisters
across the aisle. What had happened I could not imagine.
The abruptness of his retirement from my side, and the half-angry

expression of his countenance, made the whole talk about being
“my brother in Christ” seem extremely foolish and absurd, if not
absolutely hypocritical and wicked. This little circumstance
greatly diminished my ardor; and therefore, in a few minutes, I
cautiously slipped out of the meeting, and bent my steps, at full
gallop, toward Mr, Armstrong’s suburban residence,
9

194 THE MAGIC STAFF.

Good, honest Edward Southwick, a tanner and currier at the
Lower Landing, was in the habit of calling upon and chatting
with my esteemed employer. On one particular occasion I over-
heard a conversation in substance as follows :—

“ At the last election there was plenty of ‘hard-cider’ talk, but
next to nothing on the rights of the slave.”

“True,” Edward replied; “still, I live in hopes.”

“The folly, tyranny, and injustice of the system,” resumed the
utilitarian, “will be acknowledged some day, no doubt, but not by
unprincipled politicians either North or South.”

“Peace, and justice, and truth,.the people are slow to see,”
suggested the moderate tanner.

“ But,” interrupted Ira, “the national government is made to
sustain a system opposed to the entire interests of the North.
When the people once see that, a change will then come through
the influence of the Northern abolition vote.”

The two friends continued their conversation, until others ar-
rived who changed the topic. JI mention this slight event because
it was the first time in my life when I came to a knowledge of the
existence of slavery in the United States! I had a great many
questions to ask about it. When told that there were millions of
men, and women, and children, with no pretended disqualification
for liberty save ignorance and a black skin, who at that moment
were dwelling in hopeless bondage; kept, as the farmers keep
oxen and horses, to perform heavy toil; deprived of personal free-
dom, and bought and sold like beasts— when I heard all this, my
heart throbbed with mingled emotions of surprise, sympathy, and
unutterable alarm. “Jest think of it!” thought I; “s’pose I’d
b’en born black down South, with my ignorance, why, I’d b’en
somebody’s slave!” The mere idea chilled me to the core. It
made me crouch, and fold my arms in silent consternation. “ How
strange that my mother never told me about these slaves! How
curious that I never heer’d the ministers preach about ’em !”

Thus I thought, and was greatly troubled. But a few weeks

MY LIFE WITH IRA ARMSTRONG. | 195

of labor served to bedim the impression, and soon I lived on,
nearly as before, without a conscious prejudice. In this connec-
tion, however, I will express my charity for those uneducated and
sluggish individuals who come into being and go beyond the grave
destitute of a conscience on the question of human rights. When
thinking of such, I remember myself—that I was sixteen years
old even before I heard definitely of chattel-slavery, and had at-
tained the summit of twenty-two years ere I possessed an abiding
conscience against it.

196 THE MAGIC STAFF.

CHAPTER XXXI.

THE DAWNING OF LIGHT.

“The dawn flowed forth, and from its purple fountains
I drank those hopes which make the spirit quail.”

One day I had a brief but useful conversation with Mr. Arm-
strong concerning the exercise of conscience in all business trans-
actions. As nearly as I can recollect, he said: “ Honesty is the
best policy, and no man will succeed without it.”

“Yes,” returned I; “but what must I do in a case like this:
John
the upper cut and pasted down so it needn’t be seen, but I know

brought in a pair of customer’s shoes yesterday, with

it’s cut and that it won’t wear as long as sound leather. Now,
shall I tell the customer or keep still ?”

“ Ah!” ejaculated he, e year disturbed, “did John cut the
upper bad ?”

“Yes, real deep,” said I, “most through.”

“Tetme see.”

I produced the morocco buskins. After a moment’s inspection,
he said—“That won’t do

Put them among the sale-work, and send out another pair to the

can’t have such work as that! —

binders.” =

“ Must I allus tell a customer everything I know about shoes ?”
I inquired.

“Make a point never to sell bad work,” he replied; and then
continued —“ Do you know ia Robert Burns has written upon
honesty ?”

THE DAWNING OF LIGHT. 197

I answered, that “I didn’t know nothing about that ’are gentle-
man.” Whereupon he proceeded to quote, as with a hearty relish,
the poet’s words :—

“To catch dame Fortune’s golden smile,

Assiduous wait upon her;

And gather gear by every wile
That’s justified by honor;

Not for to hide it in a hedge,
Not for a train-attendant ;

But for the glorious privilege
Of being independent.”

In accordance with the animus of this extract, I have frequent-
ly heard my employer, when orally addressing the throne of
Grace, quote the very reasonable words of Agur’s petition:
“Give me neither poverty nor riches: feed me with food con-
venient for me; lest I be full, and deny thee; or poor, and take
the name of my God in vain.”

Shortly after this excellent lesson, concerning the use and ex-
ercise of strict candor and principle in mercantile pursuits, an
itinerant revival minister entered the store; ‘and seeing me
engaged and alone behind the counter, he inquired — “ Well,
Brother Davis, how do you feel ?”

“Very well, sir,” said I, cheerfully.

“No, no, my young friend —I have reference to your religious
welfare.”

Now, thought I, here’s a chance to be candid in business. So,
suppressing as much as I could my arising confusion, I replied —
“JT don’t know, sir. Some how or ruther I can’t get converted
as easy as the rest.”

“Do you feel sorry for your sins?” he asked with a searching
look. ~“ Do you feel that your soul is sinful and hateful before
God ?”

It seemed impossible to answer. But I was resolved to be
honest in business—“for the glorious privilege of being inde-
pendent.” Hastily as possible, therefore, I mentally reviewed

198 THE MAGIC STAFF.

my childhood, my boyhood, and my youth. First, I thought of
the apples taken from John Myers’ cellar; next I shuddered at
my terrible oath when father forgot the jew’s-harp; then, I re-
called the article purloined from Willet Marshall’s tool-box; then,
the card-playing party which I invited on my own responsibility ;
and, lastly, I reproduced the dismal scene of my intoxication.
These were the missteps of my life which I regretted. Never-
theless, I did n’t feel “sinful and hateful before God,” and there-
fore replied :—

“No, sir, I don’t feel that I’m very wicked; only sorry for
some things, which I won’t never do again.”

“This is the time, young friend, for you to get religion,” re-
turned the clergyman gravely. “Have you sought to make
peace with your God?”

“To make peace with my God!” soliloquized I, greatly bemud-
dled —“ Why, L hain’t never had no disturbance with him in all
ny life.” But in my embarrassment, I managed to stammer out,
«INo, sir tl?

“Well,” continued he, with increased surprise, emphasis, and
reprehension, in his tone, “don’t you fear to meet your God ?”

“No, sir,” said I, (still determined to exercise honesty in busi-
ness,) “I ain’t afraid to meet my God.”

“Oh, unconverted youth !” exclaimed the pastor with a deep
groan, and a censorious and withering expression. “J fear the
day of grace ts past! I fear you will be lost for ever!” Thus
saying, he turned and left me.

Oh, reader, can you imagine my thoughts, as he closed this
atrocious sentence? The love of my young nature was chilled
into the coldest hate, and suggestions horrible occupied my soul!
For a moment I feared no one—dreaded nothing! Neither did
I love anything —life, myself, man, earth, heaven, nor God!
“ A long life,” thought I, with novel sensations of desperation —
“a long life is before me— why not turn vagabond or pirate at
once? If I live a pure and blameless life, damnation will be my

THE DAWNING OF LIGHT. 199

destiny ; and if I should be desperately wicked, it could in the
end make no difference ; for if it te true, as this man says, that
the day of grace 7s past, I am eternally lost —lost in hell —
where, as mother told me, ‘there’s nothin’ but a-weepin’ an’ a-
wailin’ an’ a-gnashin’ of teeth!” I paused a moment, and a
beautiful tranquillity succeeded my agitation. A soft breathing
passed over my face, and I heard in a voice like the gently
whispering summer breeze—“ Be—calm! The—pastor—is
wrong ; you—shall—see !”

*T was perhaps two days after this, when a resident pastor (of
a persecuted denomination) placed in my hand two pennies, to
pay for a pair of shoe-strings which I had sold to him many weeks
previous, at which time he chanced to be without the amount.
“Well, what of that?” say you. Nothing remarkably important,
dear reader; only this, that my mind was impressed with a con-
trast which in memory is vivid still. I had let customary ac-
quaintances have shoe-strings, and other small articles, before —-
leaders at Methodist meetings, and young men gifted in oral
prayer—who said they would pay for them some time. But
such never did pay, however, except in three solitary instances.
Yet this man, round about whose religious convictions the preju-
dices of the people surged like an overwhelming flood, with out-
stretched hand, presented to me the forgotten sum, and said, with
an honest smile beaming from his mild blue eyes —“ Owe no man
anything, but love.”

From the little fountain swells the ocean-tide. In like manner,
this small transaction had the effect to establish a sweet and last-
ing friendship between our two souls—besides bringing to light
the fact that there existed some people who did not believe in a
God of implacable wrath! Their novel and unpopular concep-
tion of a Deity of love seemed more congenial and desirable to my
better nature; still, even that never satisfied my soul like the
whole-hearted and straight-forward friendship of the persecuted
clergyman. Sometimes, during my intimate acquaintance and

200 THE MAGIC STAFF.

intercourse with Rev. A. R. Bartlett, (for this was the name of
my friend,) I would get the ba of books for others who wished
to read, but who did not sufficiently kuow the pastor to borrow
for themselves. My own time was too much occupied for read-
ing, even if I had realized any inclination to do so. And I could
not interiorly accept my friend’s theology, because it implied a
personal knowledge of language, and a love of biblical criticism,
which I could not bring to the examination; and yet, owing sole-
ly to the attractive influence of pure friendship, I allowed myself
one day to be openly recognised as a brother in the Faith! Mr.
Bartlett was a practical preacher —too much so to be popular
with his own people. His lessons were quite straight-forward
and comprehensible. But when some controversial dignitary of
the denomination arrived, and occupied the desk, then would come
all sorts of outlandish and to me meaningless words—“ sheol,’
“Hades,” “atonion,” “gehenna,” “apo-aionos,” ‘le-oulom,” &c.,
used to explain or refute popular ideas of hell, darkness, genera-
tion, everlasting, &c., as set forth by scriptural writers who teach
unmistakably the doctrine of future rewards and post-mortem
punishments. Noticing one of those long words in a newspaper
one day, I asked my utilitarian Director, “how he would speak
it?” He replied: “ When I see a word that looks hard, I give
‘it a hard name and let it go.”

In short, I got no relief from the deep-seated and painful ap-
prehension that the Bible did teach just what my mother had
declared; and, therefore, in spite of large words and learned dis-
courses, I feared that the most of mankind would be severely
dealt with after death for sins committed before that event. In-
deed, so horrid and gloomy were my contemplations one night, in
view of the possibility of dying, and going to a pit of inextinguish-
able fire, that I leaped from my bed, dressed myself, and was
about to ask permission to sit by the kitchen-stove till morning,
when I heard the voice —soothing and loving like my mother’s
—repeating in minor tones: “Be—calm! Jackson. The—

THE DAWNING OF LIGHT. 201

pastor—is—wrong ; you—shall—see!”” The promise of this un-
seen and unknown annunciator—that I should in due time see
the clergyman’s doctrinal error—tranquillized my troubled heart.
“Dream or no dream,” thought I, devotionally, “I’m real thank-
- ful to kind Prov’dence for it anyhow!”

The villagers became about this time greatly excited by reports
of certain mesmeric miracles then being performed by an itinerant
expositor of Phrenological science. Flaming announcements were

-made through show-bills headed, “ Mesmerism’’—a word entirely
novel to me—which stated that “ Professor Grimes’? would con-
tinue to exhibit his wonderful experiments at the Village-Hall,
&c. Almost everybody laughed at the stranger’s pretensions,
yet all wished to test the matter by personal trial. The excite-
ment spread like an epidemic. And, among many others, I also
was seriously attacked with a desire to be conveyed into the mys-
terious slumber.

But Mr. Armstrong looked very dubious and skeptical about
the utility of the professor’s exhibition of magnetic buffoonery.
He did not, however, refuse to grant me part of one afternoon in
which to place myself under the magician’s power. Accordingly,
Edwin and I proceeded down to “ Hatch’s Hotel,” where, in a
quiet room up-stairs, we joined some fifteen young men who, like
ourselves, had arrived to present themselves as willing subjects of
the new mystery.

The party were seated in systematic order, each facing the in-
telligent and somewhat egotistic operator, and thus we remained
nearly two hours. At length it became almost impossible, at
least for me, to resist a natural sleep; but a vigilant curiosity, to
know which of our group would receive the enchantment, still
served to keep my mind on the alert. The professor went

_ through a series of motions—resembling the “presto change”

of legerdemain performers — and then imperiously said: “You

can’t open your eyes!” He was mistaken. I did open my eyes
g*

202 THE MAGIC STAFF.

with perfect ease. Whereupon he passed to the next subject,
then to the next, and so on, to the end of the line, without par-
ticularly affecting any. I make this statement in order to correct
the subsequent unqualified assertions of Mr. Grimes, “that he was
the first to magnetize me, and to reject me as a subject for experi-
mentation; because,” as he alleged —even in my own hearing —
“he recognised a clairvoyant propensity in my mental organism,
which would not serve his public purposes.”

A few days after this — about the Ist December, 1843 — William
Levingston called at our store. During a recital of many mag-
netic marvels he had himself performed, both at home and abroad,
he addressed himself to me and said: “ Have you ever been mes-
merized?’ In reply, I informed him of the unsuccessful experi-
ment upon me by Mr. Grimes. Then he said: “Come to my
house to-night. Ill try you, if you don’t object, and Edwin too.”
There was no reason for declining, and I therefore accepted his
invitation.

Before relating what happened on that memorable night, how-
ever, I wish to call attention to the fact, that having no con-
fidence in the alleged phenomena of mesmerism, I was actuated
simply by what seemed to be the suggestion of the moment —just
like others whose curiosity had become superficially excited.
Furthermore, as a foundation on which rationally to rest the
extraordinary results of Mr. Levingston’s manipulations, I will
give a summary of my mental peculiarities and physical condition
at the time.

First, mentally: I had a love of truth; a reverence for knowl-
edge; a somewhat cheerful disposition; a deficient imagination;
an unbelief (or ignorance) concerning the existence of ghosts,
&e.; an unconquerable dread of death; a still greater dread of
encountering what might exist beyond the grave; a vague, appre-
hensive faith in the Bible doctrine of eternal misery ; a tendency
to spontaneous somnambulism; an ear for what I then called im-
aginary voices ; a memory defective as to dates; a mind nearly -

THE DAWNING OF LIGHT. 203

barren of ordinary education; a heart very sympathetic in cases
of trial and suffering; and, lastly, I was disposed to meditation
and the freedom of solitude.

Second, physically: my body was imperfectly developed; my
breast was narrow; my spine was short and weak; my stomach
was very sensitive; in my blood flowed the subtle poison of my
father’s alcohol; my muscular fabric was unsound and inefficient ;
my nervous system was highly impressible and injured by the
parental use of tobacco; my face was pale and marked by a
prominent nose; my reverted eyes were almost black, and slight-
ly near-sighted; my head was small ,in circumference, with a
retreating forehead; my hair was jet black, and fell awkwardly
over my brow; my hands bore decided marks of my trade; and,
lastly, my whole appearance was calculated to inspire strangers
with but little interest in my existence.

204 THE MAGIC STAFF.

‘

CHAPTER XXXII.
IN WHICH I YIELD TO THE MYSTIC POWER.

\
“Fyrom the nerves at each pulsation, |
From the mystery of sleep —
Comes a lesson, a monition,
Whose significance is deep.”

Prruaps the reader may have never witnessed the magnetic

operation. At all events, I will venture a few descriptive
‘sentences. Situated in close relation to the one who intends to
produce the physical sleep, the subject is compelled, (in order that
the state may be properly induced,) to sit in an easy position—
entirely quiet— with mind free alike from external intrusions and
internal desires. The subject’s thoughts should be calmly con-
centrated; to accelerate the accomplishment of the end. At
length he will become wholly passive, while the operator is active.
Care should be taken to exclude all unfavorable circumstances
that might render the operation either tedious or unsuccessful.
In due time he will know the result— flowing from such reciprocal
exchange of sympathy and sensation. The following account
embodies the result of the first operation under which I placed
myself at the residence of Mr. William Levingston: (see the first
diagram, p. 205.)

I felt the operator’s chilly hand pass and repass my brow, the
chamber of thought. The living blood which had flowed undis-
turbed through my youthful form during its brief existence seemed
well-nigh arrested. The ten thousand avenues of sensation were

The Ordinary State.

SEPARATE PERSONAL
SPHERES.

The above represents the
operator and subject beginning
the magnetic process.

No.

Oe

The Psychological State.| The Somnambulic State

Partisan Buenping or
SPHERES.

ComMpPLeTE BLENDING oF
SPHERES.

The above condition is fa-| The above state brings out
vorable to sympathetic and excursional,

examining,
transitional phenomena.

medical clairvoyance.

and

The Superior Condition.

Mentat Sruerns Sepa-
RATED.

The above state leads to in-
dependent clairvoyance and in-
tuitional wisdom.

206 THE MAGIC STAFF.

«

illuminated as with the livid flames of electric fire. Anon, all was
intensely dark within. Dreadful and strange feelings passed over
my body and through my brain. My emotions were painful.
As the reader knows, I had horrid convictions of what the world
terms Dratu. “Oh, mother!” thought I with terror, “can this be
the period of my physical dissolution?” My heart continued to
perform its office; but its beatings were less frequent. I felt the
different senses that connect the mind with the outer world grad-
ually closing. “ Alas!” methought despairingly, “are they clo-
sing for ever?” Thus, my senses yielded imperceptibly to the
subduing power. I could no longer hear the busy and active
world without, nor feel the touch of any object, living or dead.
“No longer,” thought I, “can I behold the system of nature.
The fragrant fields are gone; never more to be the scenes of
happy contemplation.”

Thoughts essentially like these flashed rapidly through my awe-
struck mind. “What am I to do?” I queried silently. “To
resist the sensations is to resist the effect anticipated. And yet,
to remain in this condition much longer will result, perhaps, in
closing out for ever the beauties of the material universe.”

But the counter and skeptical query now occurred, “ whether
all this was any more than the illusion of the imagination?”
“ Certainly, I think I feel strange; but do I actually know that
my sensations are real?” Thus questioned I myself—without
making the least exertion to satisfy my judgment. I sat almost
breathless a few seconds longer—encouraging a hope that the
experiment might not succeed; and yet, paradoxical as it may
seem, I was actually assisting to produce it. “I am alive yet,”
thought I over-joyed, “ for I hear the operator inquire the hour—
I hear him respond seemingly to something said by another—
but I do not hear any other person speak! Ain’t this exceeding
strange?” (See the second diagram, p. 205.)

Another silence occurred, longer than before, during which I
endeavored to analyze my feelings. The enchantment had pene-

I YIELD TO THE MYSTIC POWER. 207

trated the innumerable recesses of my whole structure. Shortly,
I heard a voice—low, distant, strange, unpleasant—from the
human world, calling me back to earth which I was mentally leay-
ing. This sound troubled me. “It is true, then,” thought I
sadly, “that my sense of hearing—along whose delicate halls has
reverberated the pleasurable music accompanying the sacred voice
of pure affection and friendship—is closed! Closed to seal the
reality of an eternal silence? Can this be so?” continued I
silently. No, indeed! The moment has arrived. I will submit
no longer to this dangerous and dreadful experiment. Never
shall my marvel-seeking and dreamy mind again lead me into
such fearful perils! Yes! I will speak and protest against this
dreadful operation.”

But oh, how frightful! My tongue seemed instantly to be
enlarged and clung violently to the roof of my mouth. My
cheeks seemed extremely swollen and my lips were joined as if
by death—apparently to move no more. Another resolution
passed through my brain, and instantly I obeyed its suggestion.
I made a desperate effort to change my position— particularly to
disengage my hands—but (horrible beyond description !) my feet,
my hands, my whole body, were entirely beyond the control of
volition. I could no longer claim the proprietorship over my own
person. All was lost—it seemed—irretrievably lost. I felt
convinced that external life was forme no more. What could I
do? ‘True, I could exercise my mental faculties to the highest
degree — could reason with a startling clearness —but I could not
hear, see, feel, speak, or move! I had no means of ascertaining
my true physical or mental situation. I queried and reasoned
within myself thus: “I have a body, a tangible body —I reside
in the form—but is it my natural or spiritual body? Is it
adapted to the outer-world, or to the post-mortem life? Where
amI? Oh,Iamsolonely! Alas, if thtsbe Death!” A natural
consciousness, however, pervaded and reassured my mind. Pre-
conceived or ¢nnate ideas were evolved from my inmost sensi-

2058 THE MAGIC STAFF.

bilities. What surprised me more than anything else was the
gushing forth of novel and brilliant thoughts—extending appa-
rently over the vast landscape of some unknown world of inde-
scribable beauty — comprehending more than it is possible for me
even now to relate. These conceptions—as I am now fully per-
suaded—were an influx of many interior and immortal truths.
(See “ Philosophy of Question and Answers,” in the Penetralia.)

Presently, all was dark as before! This moment demanded an
absolute decision. Death seemed an inevitable consequence of
my helpless situation. Every moment I approached nearer and
nearer to a mysteriously dark valley! Perverseness and resistance
filled me with strength, but even this strength impelled me onward.
Again and again I retreated in mind. But every wave of thought
wafted me nearer and nearer the fearful vale of inconceivable
darkness! Now was the time for a powerful exertion. Resist-
ance was necessary —or else I should be lost in the impenetrable
gloom! But. I advanced nearer and nearer still. In thought, I
leaped back suddenly, and lo! I stood on the margin of the ocean
of Eternal Night! The warmth of my whole person was ex-
changed for death-like coldness. Horrid thoughts of disorganiza-
tion continued to distress me. I was filled with terror. The
darkness grew more dark and appalling. I was seized suddenly
with an unearthly shudder, and—terrible to relate—I found
myself whirling in that blackened gloom with an inconceivable
velocity! I seemed to be revolving in a spiral path, with a wide
sweep at first, and then smaller; so that every revolution, on my
descending flight, contracted the circle of my movement. And
thus, dear reader—down, down, I danke ei immersed in that
dreaded ocean of darkness, the mountain waves of which grasped
me within their mighty folds, and I sank to the lowest depths of
forgetfulness! (See the third diagram, p. 205.)

This psychological event makes a bold and ineffaceable mark
on the first mountain of my pilgrimage—the mountain of Us

I YIELD TO THE MYSTIC POWER. 209

Looking back upon that magnetic experiment, with its precious
results, I am filled with speechless gratitude. Immutable, indeed,
are those powers which manifest themselves throughout Nature!
Nothing can possibly occur opposed to the highest well-being of
the innumerable worlds intrusted to their exclusive and eternal
control. After years of study, I am compelled so to believe. Ex-
plicit evidences have been presented tomy mind. All minds, I
know, are not equally susceptible to these impressions. Never-
theless, the evidences can not be doubted by those who practise
the privilege of observation. That my own conviction rests upon
a substantial basis the reader will be prepared to admit, when I
relate the mysterious restoration of my lifeless body and distracted
mind to the enjoyment of external existence. The story is very
short :-—

I awoke to physical consciousness, mentally revolving in a
circuitous form. The darkness continued (with my ascending
movement) to increase and expand, till I gained the margin that
bounded the ocean of the dreaded oblivion, whose restless waves
conveyed me to the longed-for state of thought and wakefulness.
My senses, the windows of the soul, were again opened; light
broke in upon my dimmed vision; sound vibrated through the
labyrinths of my ear; sensation flashed over my whole frame;
and I moved, shouted, and opened my eyes. But how joyfully
surprised! I was in precisely the same position as when I first
seated myself for the experiment. Many acquaintances were
sitting near and around me, with countenances beaming with
pleasure and astonishment. For a moment, however, I felt dis-
satisfied. I could remember nothing, except my mental suffer-
ings; and somehow, in my bewilderment, I did not feel quite
certain that I had not died. I could not realize that I had, in
reality, returned from the dark “valley of the shadow of death.”

But a few penetrating glances about the room, and upon the

familiar faces of those around, convinced me; whereupon I arose,
as if from the gloom of the graye, and with strength renewed,

»

210 ‘ THE MAGIC STAFF.

greeted the amazed and delighted witnesses. (During this ex-
perience, I did not reach the fourth state uepromenied by the mag-
netic diagram.) Rely

“What’s the matter?” I asked withaiiiented Sealey. “What
brought these folks here? What have I-been-about:?”

“T sent for them,” replied the operator, “toiseé’you perform.”

“Perform!” said I, perfectly oblivious of the significance of his
words.

“Yes, perform!” returned he witha triumphant smile. “Youre
a queer youth, to be sure; but I know what your-Power is called.”

“What is it?” I inquired.

“ Chancey Hare Townsend calls it ‘ Clairvoyance,’” replied the
operator. “I’ve read his book on ‘ Facts in Mesmerism,’ wherein
he describes cases of seeing, blindfolded, just as you have done
to-night to perfection.” p08

“What ’s been done?” I again asked. “Tell me all about it.”

“Why, after a little, you read from your forehead the large
letters on a newspaper; told the time by our watches, &c.; be-
sides, you described where some of us are diseased; all to our
perfect satisfaction.”

‘Well do'I remember.my reflections that night, while walking to
Mr. Armstrong’s-suburban home. ‘Translated into my present
use of words, these were my queries and meditations: “ What
is this power? This magic spell? This wizardly operation?
What was that which so benumbed my flesh? Which shut out
the world? Which caused me to die a dreaded death? Which
brought me back to life again? How strange, that so much time

should have unconzciously elapsed! An unremembered period —
a blank in my mental history —yielding a harvest so mysterious !
Can this be prophetic power? Is it like the witchcraft of the
ancients? Can it be a dream? An imaginary display? Is it
méntal. hallucination? Am I a victim of satanic incantation ?
Nay! there is a something deeper than thought, which assures me
that this is an important and beautiful truth. And I remember,

I YIELD TO THE MYSTIC POWER.’ OTT

too, the sweet, familiar voice, softly breathing through the air:
“Be—calm! You—shall—see.”

That night, as the reader might imagine, I could not sleep.
Next morning early, I related all that had happened. On the
face of the utilitarian there was a scrutinizing look of incredulity.
He did not dispute it, however, neither did he deny me the soli-
cited time (though he had often told me that “time is money”) for
further magnetic experimentation. During business hours, never-
theless, I was punctually in my place—discharging the several
duties consequent on my calling. But there was a mystery
hanging over my path—a spell on my soul—a higher calling
from the pinnacle of some unknown mountain—which impelled
me, every evening, into Mr. Levingston’s parlor in order to test
and demonstrate what the new power could accomplish. °*T was
a mental struggle, dear reader—a laborious and continuous ascent
—a weird and wild experiment for both my body and soul. It
was a region of life unexplored—an ocean without ashore. Yea,
I was literally “going it blind;” not flippantly and carelessly ; but
with apprehensions inexpressible.

By thus subjecting myself periodically to the magnetic process,
I excited the curiosity of the surface population; and the marvel-
loving would flock around my chair, and contend for chances to
get individual tests. Like the poet of “the lonely shore,” it
seemed that when this mysterious sleep first passed from my
quivering frame, “I awoke and found myself famous.” My pop-
ularity, however, was far from being co-extensive with my notori-
ety. The latter, without the former as a shield, made me a target
at which certain “college boys” projected snow-balls and hoots,
while sundry older heads—professional men and the fashionables
—discharged the cold-hearted hot-shot of ignorant condemnation.
In a word, I was universally the object of private scandal and
public ridicule.

Almost every night, however, our experiments were successfully
continued. At each session some new truth or interesting wonder

212 THE MAGIC STAFF.

would make its appearance; and by verbal report its influence
became scattered far and wide over the community. But the
heart of the monster, Ignorance, was quickly touched; and the
prejudice of gloomy religionists began to be aroused. Individuals
of vavious denominations arose in rebellion against the develop-
ments; and, in their blind zeal, protested against further pro-
ceedings in the operator’s parlor. As the surprise and persecution
of the inhabitants increased, so were my apprehension and anxiety
magnified. Ever and anon, I prayed to be informed whence came
this power? whether I should continue to exercise it? and what
constituted its true nature and purpose? Know, then, gentle
reader, that the events which I have related, and the emotions I
have portrayed, comprise all the actual recollection and knowledge
then in my possession concerning this marvellous illumination.

MY FIRST FLIGHT THROUGH SPACE. 2138

CHAPTER XXXITI.
MY FIRST FLIGHT THROUGH SPACE.

“O backward-looking son of Time!
The new is old, the old is new —
The cycle of a change sublime
Still sweeping through !”

In order to bring the progressive steps of this mystery properly
before the mind, I will now detail the impressions that I received
on first viewing clairvoyantly the surface of the globe. (The phi-
losophy of this mode of interior observation is explained in the
third volume of “The Great Harmonia.”)

By placing myself in sympathetic relations to the operator — by
turning my thoughts inwardly, and shutting out the fleeting dis-
turbances and interruptions of the outer world—I passed readily
into the third magnetic condition. -This particular event occurred,
I think, on the eve of the first of January, 1844. At that time,

(and during the four subsequent years,) I could not recall to my

} mind, when-out of this condition, anything which I had seen or

said while in it. But now the vast scene breaks upon my mem-

i ory, in all the vividness and beauty with which it was originally
j invested; and I can view and investigate—with far more cer-
tainty and with deeper satisfaction—the same fields ‘n connection
with still higher planes of existence and thought.

Before I seated myself, facing the operator, I observed a few

{ individuals in the room; as usual, they were after tests and won-

214 THE MAGIC STAFF.

ders; but I had, at the time, but little idea of having anything
resembling a successful experiment. I knew as yet but very little
of the nature of magnetism; had not learned anything definitely
of the wonderful phenomenon of clairvoyance; did not, in fact,
entertain a clear conception of any such condition. Nevertheless,
the mystic magnetic state was completely induced in less than
thirty minutes. As usual, my mind was rendered incapable of
controlling the slightest muscle, or of realizing any definite sensa-
tion, except a kind of waving fluctuation, between what seemed to
me to be either decided action or inertia. ‘This was a very strange
feeling, but not at all unpleasant. In a few minutes, however, all
this mental commotion subsided; and then I passed into the most
delightful state of interior tranquillity. Not a discordant sensa-
tion rolled across my spirit. I was completely “born again” —
being in the spirit. My thoughts were of the most peaceful char-
acter. My whole nature was beautifully expanded. I thought
of the joys of friendship! of the unutterable pleasures of universal
love! of the sweetness and happiness of united souls! And yet,
strange to say, I experienced no unusual heart-emotion, which
one might suppose would be a natural consequence of themes so
pleasurable.

Notwithstanding the fact that my mind was exalted and medi-
tating in this manner, I perceived as yet not the least ray of light
in any direction. Therefore, I concluded that I was physically in
a deep sleep, mentally engaged in a peaceful revery, and nothing
more.

But this conclusion had no sooner settled among my thoughts,
as a probability, than I observed an intense blackness before me
— apparently extending hundreds of miles into space, and envel-
oping the earth. This reminded me of my first night’s experi-
ment. Gradually, however, this midnight mass of darkness lifted
and disappeared ; and, as gradually, my perception. was awakened
and enlarged. All things in our room— together with the indi-
viduals in it— were surprisingly illuminated. Each human body

MY FIRST FLIGHT THROUGH SPACE. 215

was glowing with many colors, more or less brilliant and magneti-
eal. The figure of each person was enveloped in a light atmo-
sphere which emanated from it. The same emanation extended
up the arms, and pervaded the entire body. The nails had one
sphere of light surrounding them, the hair another, the ears an-
other, and the eyes still another; the head was very luminous —
the emanations, taken in combination, spreading out into the air
from four inches to as many feet. (‘The reader will see this illus-
trated in the diagrams, by the oval line around each person.)

The utter novelty of this view overwhelmed my mind with as-
tonishment and admiration. I could not comprehend it. Again
I felt confounded,-and could not feel perfectly certain that I Was
living on earth. It seemed that the whole earth, with all of its
inhabitants, had been suddenly translated into some Elysium. I
knew then of no language which could describe my perceptions:
hence, I did not yield the slightest exclamation, nor attempt an
utterance; but continued to observe, as one in solitude, with a
feeling of unutterable joy and holy reverence. A few moments
more, dear reader, and I not only beheld the exteriors of the indi-
viduals in that room—clothed with light as it were—but I also
as easily perceived their interiors, and then, too, the hidden sources
of those luminous magnetical emanations. In my natural or ordi-
nary state, remember, I had never seen the organs of the human
viscera; but now I could see all the organs and their functions —
the liver, the spleen, the heart, the lungs, the brain—all with the
greatest possible ease. The whole body was transparent as a
sheet of glass! It was invested with a strange, rich, spiritual
beauty. It looked illuminated as a city. Every separate organ
had several centres of light, besides being enveloped by a general
sphere peculiar to itself. And I did not see the physical organ
only, but its form, aspect, and color also, simply by observing the
peculiar emanations surrounding it. For example: I saw the
heart — surrounded by one general combination of living colors —
with special points of illumination interspersed. The auricles and

216 THE MAGIC STAFF.

ventricles, together with their orifices, gave out distinct flames of
light; and the pericardium was a garment of magnetic life, sur-
rounding and protecting the heart while in the performance of its
functions. The pulmonary or respitorial department was also illu-
minated with beautiful flames, but of different magnitude and color.
The various air-chambers seemed like so many chemical laborato-
ries. The fire in them wrought instantaneous chemical changes
in the blood that flowed through the contiguous membranes ; and
the great sympathetic nerve, whose roots extend throughout the
lower viscera, and whose topmost branches are lost in the superior
strata of the sensorium, appeared like a column of life, interwoven
and super-blended with a soft and silvery fire! :

The. brain was likewise very luminous with prismatic colors.
Every organ of the cerebellum and cerebrum emitted a light pecu-
liar to itself. I could easily discern the form and size of the organ
by the shape and intensity of its emanations. This view, I well
remember, excited in me much admiration. But I was so deeply
in the magnetic condition, and so impoverished in language, that
I neither manifested any delight nor described a particle of any-
thing which I then beheld. In some portions of the smaller
brain I saw gray emanations, and in other portions lower and
darker shades of this color—in many and various degrees of dis-
tinctness — down to a sombre and almost black flame.

On the other hand, in the higher portions of the larger or supe-
rior brain, I saw flames which looked like the breath of diamonds.
At first I did not understand the cause of these beautiful breathings ;
but soon I discovered ihem to be the thoughts of the individuals’
concerning the strange phenomena then manifested in my own con-
dition. Still I continued my observations. The superior organs
of the cerebrum pulsated with a soft, radiant fire; but it did not
look like any fire or flame that I had seen on earth. In truth, the
brain seemed like a crown of spiritual brightness — decorated with
shining crescents and flaming jewels. Here I will parenthetically
remark, that what is thus natural to the human brain in this its

MY FIRST FLIGHT THROUGH SPACE. QF

first stage of existence, is preserved and indescribably improved
in the Spirit-Land to which we all are surely tending. Each
brain seemed different—different in the degrees, modifications,
and combinations of the flames and colors—but very, very beau-
tiful! From the brain I saw the diversified currents of life or
magnetic fire, as they flowed through the system. The bones ap-
peared very dark or brown; the muscles emitted in general a red
light; the nerves gave out a soft, golden flame; the venous blood
a dark, purple light; the arterial blood a bright, livid sheet of fire,
which constantly reminded me of the electric phenomena of the
clouds. Verily, gentle friend, I saw every ligament, and tendon,
and cartilaginous and membranous structure, each illuminated with
different sheets and magnetic centres of living light, which indi-
cated and set forth beautifully the presence of the spiritual prin-
ciple.

Thus I saw not only the real physical structures themselves,
but also their indwelling essences and vitalic elements. Another
thing was very remarkable: I knew the individuals had garments
upon them, because I could see an element of vitality, more or less
distinct, in every fibre of clothing upon their persons! Just as
you would look, by an act of volition, from the blisters in a pane
of glass, through it, at the objects and scenes beyond, so could I
discern, and that, too, without a conscious effort, the whole mystery
and beauty of the human economy—and enjoy that festive illumi-
nation which the ten thousand flames of the golden candles of life
imparted to every avenue, pillar, chamber, window, and dome, of
the human temple!

But the sphere of my vision now began to widen. I could see
the life of nature in the atoms of the chairs, tables, &c.; I could
see them with far more satisfaction- as regards their use, struc-
ture, locality ——than I ever remembered to have known in my
ordinary state. Next, I could distinctly perceive the walls of the
house. At first, they seemed very dark and opaque; but soon

became brighter, and then transparent; and, presently, I could
. 10

218 THE MAGIC STAFF.

see the walls of the adjoining dwelling. These also immediately
became light, and vanished—melting like clouds before my ad-
vancing vision. I could now see the objects, the furniture, and

persons, in the adjoining house, as easily as those in the room

where I was situated.

At this moment I heard the voice of the operator. He inquired
“if I could hear him speak plainly.” I replied in the affirmative.
He then asked concerning my feelings, and “whether I could dis-
cern anything.” On replying affirmatively, he desired me to con-
vince some persons that were present, by “reading the title of a
book, with the lids closed, behind four or five other books.” Hav-
ing tightly secured my bodily eyes with handkerchiefs, he then
placed the books on a horizontal line with my forehead, and I saw
and read the title without the slightest hesitation. This test and
many experiments of the kind were tried, and repeated; and the
demonstration of vision, independent of the physical organs of
sense, was clear and unquestionable.

At length, feeling somewhat exhausted, I resigned myself to a
deeper sleep which seemed to be stealing over my outer form.
Presently, my former perceptions returned with greater power.
The village was now instantly subjected to my vision. It was
now as easy for me to see the people moving about their respec-
tive houses as in the open thoroughfares, and it was also as easy
to see their most interior selves as the external lights and shades
of their physical bodies.

’*T was the first of January, remember—cold, bright, cloudless,
frosty, beautiful! A piercing wintry wind swept o’er the earth,
chilling and freezing as it went; but my perceptions waved on—
the village with its inhabitants melted away before me, and my
enjoyment was greater and fresher than ever I experienced in
the glow and beauty of May or June.

By a process of inter-penetration, as I now term it, I was placed
en rapport with Nature! ‘The spirit of Nature and my spirit had
instantly and for the first time formed— what seemed to me to be

MY FIRST FLIGHT THROUGH SPACK. 219

—a kind of psychological or sympathetic acquaintance — the foun-
dation of a high and eternal communion. Her spacious cabinet
was thrown open to me, and it seemed that I was the sole visitor
at Nature’s fair—a royal banquet !

The properties and essences of plants were distinctly visible.
Every fibre of the wild flower, or atom of the mountain-violet, was
radiant with its own peculiar life. ‘The capillary ramifications of
the streamlet-mosses—the fine nerves of the cicuta-plant, of the
lady’s-slipper, and of flowering vines—all were laid open to my
vision. I saw the living elements and essences flow and play
through these simple forms of matter; and in the same manner I
saw the many and various trees of the forests, fields, and hills, all
filled with life and vitality of different hues and degrees of refine-
ment. It seemed that I could see the locality, properties, qualities,
uses, and essences, of every form and species of wild vegetation,
that had an existence anywhere in the earth’s constitution. The
living, vivid beauty and overawing sublimity of this vision I can
not even now describe; although, as the reader will see, I have
since frequently contemplated scenes far more beautiful and inef-
fable. :

But my perceptions still flowed on! ‘The broad surface of the
earth, for many hundred miles before the sweep of my vision—
describing nearly a semicircle—became transparent as the purest
water. The deep alluvial and diluvial depositions were distin-
guishable from the deeper stratifications of stone and earth, by the
comparative and superior brilliancy of the ingredients of the for-
mer. Earth gave off one particular color, stones another, and
minerals still another. When first I discerned a bed of minerals
— it was a vein of iron-ore—I remember how I started and shiv-
ered with a sensation of fright. It seemed that the earth was on
jire! The instantancous elimination of electricity, from the entire
mass, gave the appearance of a deep-seated furnace under the
earth. And my agitation was not lessened by perceiving that
these rivers of mineral fire ran under the ocean for hundreds of

220 THE MAGIC STAFF.

miles, and yet were not diminished in a single flame — yea, could
not be extinguished !

Innumerable beds of zinc, copper, silver, limestone, and gold,
next arrested my attention; and each, like the different organs in
the human body, gave off diverse kinds of luminous atmospheres.
All these breathing emanations were more or less bright, varie-
gated, and beautiful. Everything had a glory of its own! Crys-
talline bodies emitted soft, brilliant, azure and crimson emanations.
The various salts in the sea sparkled like living gems; sea-plants
extended their broad arms, filled with hydrogenous life, and em-
braced the joy of existence; the deep valleys and dim-lit ravines,
through which old ocean unceasingly flows, were peopled with
countless minute animals—all permeated and pulsating with the
spirit of Nature; while the sides of ocean-mountains—far, far be-
neath the high pathway of travel and human commerce — seemed
literally studded with emeralds, diamonds, gold, silver, pearls, and
sparkling gems, beyond computation. Oh, the ocean is a magnifi-
cent cabinet of beauty and wealth immense; and, by virtue of
more recent investigations, | am impressed to say that man shall
yet possess it!

Be patient, friendly reader, for I have yet other scenes to relate.
I now looked abroad upon the fields of dry land, and saw the va-
rious species of animals that tread the earth. The external anat-
omy and the internal physiology of the animal kingdom were alike
open to my inspection. An instinctive perception of comparative
or relative anatomy filled my mind in an instant. The why and
the wherefore of the vertebrated and avertebrated, of the crusta-
ceous and molluscan divisions of the animal world, flowed very
pleasantly into my understanding; and I saw the brains, the vis-
cecra, and the complete anatomy, of animals that were (at that
moment) sleeping or prowling about in the forests of the Eastern
hemisphere, hundreds and even thousands of miles from the room
in which Iwas making these observations !

It must not be expected that I shall detail a three-hundredth

MY FIRST FLIGHT THROUGH SPACE. 291

part of the particulars of my first introduction to an intuitional per-
ception of Nature. At best, I can but give you a rude outline,
for words do not answer the purpose: they seem to me like stone
prisons in which too often we coercively incarcerate our highest
thoughts.

In this mystic vision, gentle reader, I saw everything just as you
will—with the penetrating senses of the spirit—after you pass
away from the visible body at physical death. It was very, very
beautiful to see everything clothed with an atmosphere! Every
little grain of salt or sand; every minute plant, flower, and herb;
every tendril of the loftiest trees—their largest and minutest
leayes ; the weighty mineral and ponderous animal forms, existing
in the broad fields before me— each and all were clothed with a
dark, or brown, or gray, or red, blue, green, yellow, or white at-
mosphere — divided and subdivided into an almost infinite variety
of degrees of intensity, brilliancy, and refinement. And—mark
the fact !—in each mineral, vegetable, and animal, I saw somr-
THING OF Man! In truth, the whole system of creation seemed
to me like the fragments of future human beings! In the beaver
I saw, in embryo, one faculty of the human mind; in the fox, an-
other; in the wolf, another; in the horse, another; in the lion,
another: yea, verily, throughout the vast concentric circles of
mineral, vegetable, and animal life, I could discern certain rela-
tionships to, and embryological indications. of, Man! Mad I then
possessed my present instinct of language, I would have exclaimed,
in the language of the poet-psalmist :—

“Herbs gladly cure our flesh, because they
Find their acquaintance there
* * * * * * *
All things unto our flesh are kind.”

Understood in this sense, candid reader, how instructive and ap-
proriate was Peter’s vision—related in the tenth chapter of Acts
—#in which he saw a great white sheet let down from heaven,

, 299 _ ‘THE MAGIC STAFF.

containing all manner of four-footed beasts, creeping things, &c.,
and was told to slay and eat! All this was saying simply thus:
“ Peter, thou needest n# feel too exclusive, too partial, too aristo-
cratic, too high-minded, and lifted above the meanest of thy fellow-
men, nor yet above the little worm that crawls beneath thy feet ;
for, behold, thou art related to every four-footed beast and creep-
ing thing that the Lord hath made: acknowledge, therefore, thy
universal relatio ships and concentring sympathies, and be kind
and lenient henceforth to everything that lives.” Now, since that
memorable night, I have met with too many who need Peter’s
lesson. ‘They, like him, shrink from this new method of tracing
out their genesis or ancestral derivation; and such say, “ We are
not used to eating unclean things.” But the time is fast approach-
ing, I believe, when mankind will feel their oneness with Nature
and its God—to the total annihilation of all narrow-mindedness
and empty superficiality.

In my glorious vision, I well remember how I gazed at the
little plants in the fields—and saw, lovingly encircling each one,
an atmosphere of life peculiar to itself. This golden and hazy
emanation— encircling some species of vegetation—was appa-
rently from four inches to eight feet in diameter. Some animals
gave off a sombre sphere three or four feet thick, and beyond this
a very dark, thin air—as many feet more—which shaded off into
the surrounding space. In all this, the Law of Sympathy was
very distinctly visible. (See third volume of “The Great Har-
monia.”) I saw that everything in Nature was arranged and sit-
uated in accordance with this universal law; and, by it, that all
true sympathetic relationships are established and_ reciprocally
maintained. The relative positions of mineral bodies in the bosom
ef the earth; the situation of trees, vegetation, animals, and human
beings; yea, the relative positions of the sun and stars, even—
were manifestly conducted by this infinite sympathy. I saw the
different crystalline bodies of the earth act upon each other, and,
interm2diately, upon the solid substances to which they were

MY FIRST FLIGHT THROUGH SPACE. ins

attached —by means of a generous commingling of their magnetic
emanations. I saw the flowers exhale their odors, with which
perfume they clothed themselves, and thien formed attachments
with neighboring flowers—by breathing out upon them, according
to a spontaneous blending of spheres, the sweet breath of their
life. There was not a dew-drop, chambered in the petals of the
rose, that did not glitter with a living essence— prophetic of com-
ing animation! I saw currents of electricity flowing from a min-
eral bed in one portion of the earth, to its kindred (but positive)
neighbor in another department of the same hemisphere. And I
saw the little flames, arising from the essences of plants and trees,
leap upward into flowing currents which were instantly absorbed
and wafted away to more foreign and proper destinations.

No, no, language can not describe this scene! Sufficient to say,
that all Nature was radiant with countless lights, with atmospheres,
with colors, with breathings, and with emanations—all throbbing
and pulsating with an indestructible life-essence— which seemed
just ready to graduate and leap up into the human constitution !
Everything apparently emulated to be Man! But I could no
longer endure the exquisite happiness—I felt incapable of main-
taining a quiet feeling—my emotions had become so deep and
unutterable !

I now yearned for a companion, for association. for a moment
I realized painfully that I was viewing all this magnificence alone !
This thought made me feel isolated also, and incapable of retain-
ing my recollection. Whereupon I began to think yearningly of
the village —of the room in which I had taken a seat for the mag-
netic experiment—of the individuals whom I had seen in the

room—of the operator, too—and, immediately, my vision began
“to diminish and contract. The distant continents, oceans, fields,
hills, forests—all gradually faded and disappeared. The effulgent
lights were left far behind! Now, I could discern, as before, the
interior condition of those in the room, and the face of the opera-

tor also, who now said: “Come, come, Jackson, you’ve been

294. THE MAGIC STAFF.

very still! Can you see anything—have you anything to say ?”
I made an effort to describe what I have been writing in this
chapter. I remember how I struggled for a few words; but, as I
was about to relinquish all attempts thereat, I involuntarily ex-
claimed, in a low and tremulous voice, “ How beautiful !”

I heard my own accents, and never did I stronger realize the
total inexpressiveness and impotency of human language! At
that time I said and beheld no more. In a few moments I felt
the hand of the operator passing over my head. Soon I returned
to my ordinary state, with not a single vestige—of what I had
seen—alive in my external memory. Therefore, all that I have
herein related is a revival of the impvessions that were then made
upon my mind.

to
bo
Or

THE SUMMIT OF THE FIRST MOUNTAIN.

CHAPTER XXXIV.
THE SUMMIT OF THE FIRST MOUNTAIN.

“A wonderful stream is the river of Time,
As it runs through the realm of tears,
With a faultless rhythm, and a musical rhyme,
And a broader sweep, and a surge sublime,
And blends with the ocean of years.”

Tue honorable and gentlemanly operator —having a conscien-
tious and benevolent spirit—continued to invite the people to
come and witness our nightly demonstrations. Freely and indis-
criminately were these invitations extended; without fear of de-
feat or hope of reward. Nothing was done in secret. During
the day we each pursued our. different and ever-to-be-respected
occupations ; and neither had, at this period, the remotest idea of
ever devoting a business-hour to these mystical proceedings.

Internally, as the reader is now perfectly aware, there had dawned
upon me a clearer, brighter, truer, higher world; but, externally,
with the whole shut out-and unremembered, I remained dull-
headed, mystified, and apprehensive. Officious acquaintances
were at hand with words of advice or opprobrium. One said —
“°T will make you sick;” another —“You’ll get crazy ;” an-
other —“ You’re a fool to be so bamboozled every night ;”
another—“ You’re a humbug—a cheat—an impostor;” and
thus subjected to the buffetings of an opinionated community, my

daily life was far from cheer and repose. But—
10¥

ho
x2)
lor)

THE MAGIC STAFF.

“Like the current of the ocean,
Man is urged by unseen powers ;”

a fact, fully set forth and demonstrated in this portion of my pil-
grimage. An uncomprehended sympatheti> influence, like the
air of heaven, now floated daily upon everything I touched.
Shortly it seemed to unsettle and weaken my attachment for Mr.
Armstrong, and to define and strengthen a secret wish to live
within the circle of Mr. Levingston’s delicate fascination. Final-
ly, the unknown attraction predominated over my business obliga-
tions to the former; and as the fish leaps joyously into its native
element, so plunged I with delight into the bewildering magnetic
Elysium! I did this, prudent reader, with no expectation of im-
proving my then present condition or future prospects. Mr. Lev-
ingston did not offer me any pecuniary inducements; only said
“he would like me in his family,” and nothing more. In short,
like the bird that seeks its congenial clime, or the planet that rolls
as with extatic pleasure round its celestial sire, so followed I my
indefinable attractions. Whereupon the prudentialist sighed, the
skeptic scoffed, the religionist groaned, the merchant shook his
doubtful head, the familiar friend regretted, the boys hooted, and,
last, but not least, the street-politician (perforce of habit) pro-
nounced it a trick to make money. Not that I had to encounter
these conflicting and obstructing influences all at once; but they
descended by slow degrees—like a cold, sleety, drizzling, fitful,
haily storm, of several weeks duration. This spontaneous change,
this magnetic union with the operator, took ‘place about the first -
of March.

Symbolically speaking, I was now within a few steps of ‘the top
of the first mountain that stood between my cradle and the Future !
The last few furlongs had been passed over only by virtue of con-
tinuous private struggling and resistless obedience to the hidden
law that then stirred my nature. But just before I gained the
psychical summit, there occurred an event, more remarkable and
important than anything else I had previously experienced. And

THE SUMMIT OF THE FIRST MOUNTAIN. 227

although the details thereof have been previously published, yet
the object of this volume can not be well accomplished, it seems
to me, unless the main features of that initiatory vision are made
to reappear in this connection; and, aided by my present addi-
tional recollections and increased knowledge, I am fortunately
enabled to render that experience with more brevity and less
mystery.

*T was a chilly, fitful, disagreeable evening — March 6, 1844—
when Mr. Levingston and I proceeded to No. 24 Garden street.
Already I had indicated considerable power to inspect, while in
clairvoyance, the condition of persons diseased. To make such
an examination was the object of our visit on this occasion. On
our arrival, few words were exchanged previous to the inductive
process, during which I experienced my usual mental transforma-
tion, with an additional glow of intense excitement and sense of
novelty, like that which characterized my first. attempt. The en-
gagement being fulfilled, the operator endeavored to relieve me of
the mysterious Sympathy. But, for a long time, it seemed im-
possible. Again and again he made the attempt, but without suc-
cess. Anon, however, I felt returning life streaming through my
flesh, causing me to feel natural, and free from the subtle influence
to which I had been subjected.

After conversing a few moments with those present, I felt a
painful prejudice to their several spheres. Yielding, I descended
to the street. J now imagined that my system retained a portion
of the imparted influence. This was confirmed by a sudden and
paralyzing illumination in the region of the intellectuals. I stood
transfixed! On leaving the room, my intention was to return
home; and, not feeling quite well, immediately to retire. But
now confused, I leaned against the street-gate, seemingly at the
mercy and disposal of some power superhuman. While standing
thus, a desire sprang up within me to visit Rev. A. R. Bartlett,
for whom, as the reader knows, I had formed a strong attachment.
This suggestion I speedily obeyed. I advanced to his door;

228 THE MAGIC STAFF.

wildly rang the bell; was ushered into the sitting-room; a seat
was furnished near the window. My mind was painfully distract-
ed. The clergyman entered, and warmly welcomed me. Bung-
lingly and hurriedly I offered many apologies for my intrusion at
that late hour. Naturally enough he wondered what could be
the real cause and object of my sudden appearance. He frater-
nally urged me to pass the night with him. This I was impressed
to decline. And so without giving or receiving any satisfaction
as to the cause or intention of my visit, I rather abruptly depart-
ed. I proceeded to Mr. Levingston’s home in Main street. I
entered the front-door, passed through the hall, and ascended two
flights of stairs to my bed. With extreme agitation, of both body
and mind, I laid me down. My thoughts were few and fleeting.
My physical system yielded, and I sank into an unconscious
slumber.

How long I slept I knew not, but I was fully awakened by
a sensation of brisk fanning over my face. I opened my eyes, but
could see nothing. JI concluded that I had been dreaming, and
attempted to sleep again. Presently, however, amid the stillness
of my room, I heard these words: “Arise! dress—thyself—and
—follow—me.” It seemed as if my loved mother had once more
spoken, but with a voice of far more energy and imperiousness.
I obeyed. Indeed, I could not help it. Nothing was now done
awkwardly or tardily. I was dressed in a minute, and out in the
street. My feet clung to nothing. There was no friction. They
were like wings, and I fled with a fleetness indescribable. My exu-
berant joy was extatic. The unseen power (which I thought might
be what mother called “kind Providence”) conducted me to the
sidewalk, corner of Mill and Hamilton streets, where there were,
at this time, no dwellings. My mind was instantly sobered.
“What can this mean?” I mentally queried. “What a change!
The heavenly archway is exceedingly glorious and beautiful! —
The many stars stationed throughout the vast labyrinth shine
with an immortal effulgence —to guide the traveller onward and

THE SUMMIT OF THE FIRST MOUNTAIN. 229

upward to the city of eternal joy! And here stand I alone—
unseen by anyesave the Eye of the Eternal Being, and unheard
by any except the Ear that hears the silent echoing of all human
thoughts!* Yes! Iam clad in my usual garments, and am con-
templating the most high and sublime of subjects !”

Thus, dear reader, I was meditating, not knowing by what
power I came thither, or the length of time that had elapsed since
I retired. Nevertheless, I felt great calmness, and yet I could
not suppress feelings of curiosity relative to my marvellous ability
to contemplate and reason. But I was fully prepared for a
vision.

A strange sound now vibrated on my ear. I looked, and lo, I
beheld, with admiration, a shadowy congregation of clean and
beautiful sheep! The flock was large, and their condition poor.
Their bodies, however, were perfectly white ; and they manifested
great gentleness of disposition. Shortly, I was impressed with
the following interpretation; which I now apprehend as true, and ~
giving the use of the symbolic scene :—

“The sheep corresponded to the vast brotherhood of mankind.
Their beautiful external whiteness corresponded to the innate
purity and goodness of all, indicating that all are capable of mate-
rial refinement and spiritual elevation. The poverty of their
bodies corresponded to the wretched physical condition of the
earth’s inhabitants. Their social affections are disunited; they
are opposed to each other’s highest good and happiness; and their
spiritual sympathies are misdirected. Yea, the whole human
race represents a flock of sheep, whose shepherd is the Universal
Father !” ,

These truths flowed into my unfolded mind as freely as rain
falls from heaven to earth. I recognised their use and import-
ance. But I continued my meditation. The sheep remained at
peace as when I first saw them. But now, as I comprehended
the meaning intended, they began to change their position —seem-

* At this time, I hal no belief in the existence of individual spirits,

230 THE MAGIC STAFF.

ingly desiring some fold wherein they might rest undisturbed,
Being greatly confused, they proceeded to pass along the street
in such a way as would have shown (had they been men) that
their judgments were weak or impaired, and that they were thus
incapable of choosing the proper and righteous path which would
have led them to that goal which all seemed to be seeking.

At the next moment I beheld a shepherd. His sudden and
spiritual appearance surprised me not; and I approached him as a
divine friend. I saw that he was much perplexed, yet fully deter-
mined (though inefficient) to urge the sheep hence where peace
and harmony reigned. He had great elegance of form, and was
plainly and usefully attired. He presented an air—of unassu-
ming and stately dignity—to be admired in any being. His
countenance, and sky-blue eyes, indicated purity. His whole
appearance was that of a kind and gentle being— endowed with
physical and spiritual perfection. On my approach he spake not,
but expressed in simple language (by the illumination of his coun-
tenance) the desires of his soul. He needed sympathy and assist-
ance. The sheep were in ignorance and confusion which he had
labored to overcome. They required gentle but regular discipline.
To his request I immediately acceded. By a powerful exertion,
we succeeded in establishing order among them—to which they
mutually adhered — whereupon, as if substantial beings, they and
their delighted shepherd naturally proceeded down the street.
Their uniform motions seemed to melt into one harmonious move-
ment, till they faded and vanished amid surrounding objects that
formed the distant scene.

With impressive solemnity, and illumined by a rosy light, the
whole scene came and passed away. Upheld by the unseen
power, I was tranquil throughout the amazing representation.
The following significance of its closing part was also made dis-
tinetly manifest: “The beautiful shepherd corresponded to a great
and noble reformer, whose spirit breathed ‘peace on earth and
good will to men; whose exalted wisdom comprehended the

~

THE SUMMIT OF THE FIRST MOUNTAIN. got

many physical and spiritual requirements of the human race;
whose grand system of moral government transcended-all others
conceived since intelligence pervaded the bosom of Nature. The
state of painful confusion into which the sheep were thrown, cor-
responded to the confused condition of the theologie world—to
the conflicts between truth and error, reason and theology, reality
and imagination, theory and practice — and, lastly, to the intense
anxiety of each person who desires, but can not believe in, immor-
tal life. The request that so benignly beamed forth from his fair
countenance denoted that I, like all men, am called to perform a
moral part in life’s sacred drama.” So I am compelled to report:
first, because the instruction, intended by the beautiful representa-
tion, flowed into my mind irresistibly, and regardless of my own
thoughts at the moment; and, second, because my personal trans-
portation to that portion of the village was produced and governed
by a power superior to myself.

But the scene now changed. I stood almost free from thought ;
the blood chilled in my exposed body; my head and chest were
painfully congested; I was surrounded with a death-like darkness,
and became almost insensible. I struggled and gasped for breath ;
but the effort failed. Life had almost fled. All was cold, dark,
deathly. I made a feeble effort to escape that lonely death, and
then fell unconsciously to the ground.

Anon I was awakened, and caused to run as before with bound-
ing fleetness. I was conducted many, many miles over a new
road. At length, I turned toward the frozen river Hudson, which
I crossed, and hastened up the hills as if on a hunting excursion.
My natural powers were so exhausted at this crisis, that I was
rendered unconscious of life or existence; and had not my body
been resupplied with life and energy, I could not have changed
my position. But, after a good rest, a sweet and gentle sensation
aroused and renewed me. I moved, and rejoiced. I stretched
forth my hand, and felt the vivifying atmosphere. I couid also
hear; and I opened my eyes. In a few minutes my sight was

232 THE MAGIC STAFF.

quite clear, and I glanced over the scene. J was under a psy-
chologic influence, and saw common things in a new light. Yet I
was nearly stupified with wonder. I was in a reclining position,
elevated about seven feet from the ground. The mass on which I
rested was composed of underwood and youthful trees —neatly
and closely interwoven one with another— forming a well-pro-
portioned structure, which I fancied resembled an artificial altar.
On either side was a barren, craggy, stupendous mountain. I was
thus situated in a deep and apparently inaccessible valley. The
towering acclivities were covered with ice and snow; and through
this hard coating protruded large, ill-shaped rocks, between whose
interstices were decayed trees. JI observed, however, that the
valley was terminated by the mountain acclivity about ten rods
to the west, there being an apparent opening leading to the left,
around the mountain’s base.
‘In the west was a gleam of glory,
Fading over the mountain hoary.”

On turning eastward, I beheld the river at a seeming distance of
four miles. On the opposite side of the river, I observed ill-fash-
ioned and dilapidated dwellings, desolate and abrupt hills, and
forests dark and gloomy, which strangely reminded me of my sad
mother.

The heavens were now shrouded as if mourning a world’s death.
Sorrow filled their bosom with bursting convulsions. Like smoth-
ered groans of universal agony, the thunders rolled forth far and’
wide with terrific violence. The electric fire illumined the vast
concave. Light and darkness followed each other in instantane-
ous succession. Oh, it was a horrid vision! I never can forget
how, as the rain descended, the heavens seemed to weep, and
groan, and sigh, and laugh; and how I, alone, did sympathize
with them, and pray for power to still their troubled elements.
Terrible, indeed, to my psychologized spirit, seemed my exposed
condition. The rain fell in torrents, and the fleeting elements
(while warring among themselves) seemed to menace my destruc

THE SUMMIT OF THE FIRST MOUNTAIN. 238

tion. An awful and impressive solemnity pervaded the whole.
Upon the framework of a natural scene there was painted a
spiritual lesson of instruction. From the psychologic representa-
tion I learned submission’ and elevation; and, from the quickness
of the lightning, and the terrific positiveness of the thunder, I con-
fessed that “the Lord God omnipotent reigneth.”’ I beheld my
own insignificance, and meanwhile, in common with all mankind,
I beheld an unspeakable importance in the fact of existence. I
learned also to revere, obey, and depend upon that Power which
directs and controls the universe.
“Every thought was a holy prayer;
Every sigh was enchanted air;

Every word was a tone of heayen,
But in love to the earthly given.”

The sun seemed about two and a half hours high when the
storm ceased and the sky was clear of clouds. As the representa-
tions which had suggested my reflections had passed, I began pon-
dering on the change in my locality. Where I was I could not
imagine. The place was strange; I had never seen it until then;
and I felt assured, from past experience, that, if I had travelled
far, I should have been fatigued; but I was not. Obedient to my
guide, I had laid on the brush-heap (altar) during the shower, and
was thoroughly wet. Feeling free now, I desired to dry my gar-
ments, and to learn, if possible, what portion of the earth I was in.
Accordingly, I arose and descended to the ground. While lean-
ing against the pile, (on which I had lain,) I felt a dull, sleepy sen-
sation, which was instantly followed by a reaction, and I became
unusually clairvoyant.

All things seemed remarkably romantic and beautiful. But an
indefinite sound now reached my ears. I listened. Presently, I
heard the same several times rapidly repeated—whereupon I
turned, and beheld (by means of psychologic impression) one of
the strangest sights imaginable. A flock of sheep in a state of
indescribable confusion. They were running in every possible

234 a THE MAGIC STAFF.

direction. Some were making exertions to ascend the Aill-sede.
I saw them leap against the glazed mountain, from which they re-
bounded and came down, with dreadful force, upon the stony basis.
Others were striving to pass the place I occupied. But they were
ignorant, and could not proceed; neither could they obtain a sub-
stantial foothold. The mountains were too high. The frozen
earth was too unpropitious, and the passage too well guarded.
At this moment, through the opening at the base of the mountain,
appeared their shepherd. He advanced toward me with a slow ©
- but firm step.

These visionary sheep corresponded to those I had seen in
Poughkeepsie, at night; and the shepherd resembled the beauti-
ful one I there saw, in every particular. I stepped forward to
meet him, and, without speaking, to observe as before the indica-
tions of his countenance. I read his wishes. He solicited help
in his work of gathering the strange and scattered flock. At
first, the creatures made a strong resistance. But, seeing the
positiveness of our intentions, they yielded submissively. . We
gathered and guided them into the path leading around the moun-
tain’s base. ’

A new peace now seemed to characterize their condition.
Both sheep and shepherd were, for the first time, inseparably
united. Eternal principles of Right had accomplished their salva-
tion. The sheep departed, like evening shadows, with their gen-
tle shepherd, up the valley through the opening. And it seemed
that —

“Angels moved in the space enchanted,
*Twixt the sky and the valley haunted.”

Overjoyed, I returned to my resting-place, and, leaning against
its side, drew my garments more closely around me, and sank
into deep meditation. Presently, I beheld a man approach-
ing deliberately — apparently absorbed in thought. He was a
person of diminutive stature, yet had a beautiful structure.
His fine symmetry, beauty, and elegance of deportment, cap-

THE SUMMIT OF THE FIRST MOUNTAIN. 235

tivated my attention. He appeared advanced in years, and
was attired in a style corresponding nearly to that of the
Friends. His hair was of a silvery white, floating in shadowy
locks over his brow, and hanging gracefully about his neck and
shoulders. His face was full and expressive. His moral and
intellectual developments were prominent. He was a spiritual
being.

In his hand I perceived a clear white scroll. Its edges
sparkled with gilding of the finest quality; and the care with
which he preserved its beauty, excited in me the deepest respect.
When I would have advanced to meet him, he raised his hand,
and gently intimated that I must remain perfectly tranquil. A
most heavenly radiation played upon his countenance. He ele-
vated the scroll to his lips — affectionately imprinted upon it a
pure and holy kiss—then handed it to me, to open and read. I
was not now awkward and clumsy. With delicacy and precision,
therefore, I unfolded it. It contained writing in characters which
I had never before seen; but I could translate them without hesi-
tation. The language was clear and comprehensive. The form
of expression was simple, but powerful. It contained a world of
beautiful meaning. It read thus :-— x

‘As they were, so they are;
As they are, so they will be!”

Beneath was the foilowing interrogatory : “ Vow do you believe
wt?” J felt its convincing power, and bowed assent. Observing
which, the messenger handed me a singular pencil, (for I had
none,) with which I signified my conviction and signed my name.
This being done, he received the scroll with a gentle bow, rolled
it together, pressed it to his lips, then turned and departed as he
came—slowly, firmly, deliberately. I followed him with my
clairvoyant eyes, till his form vanished around the base of that
stupendous mountain.

“ How unaccountable,” exclaimed I, “that a stranger should

236 THE MAGIC STAFF.

come, obtain my signature, and depart, without uttering one word
vocally, and yet so eloquent!’ Mighty truths now gushed up
from the depths of my spirit, and I was impressed with the fol-
lowing correspondence :—

“The scroll-bearer represented a reformer, who (while on
earth) had shed light upon life and immortality. The white
scroll represented the purity of his mission. The contents of the
scroll represented the grand consummation, viz., ‘Peace on
Earth.’ Thus :—

“¢ As they were ;’ As the sheep were (when first I saw them)
in a state of universal confusion, wretched, having no knowledge
of their true interests, or of that wisdom, which would lead them
to happiness. ‘ So they are ;’ So mankind are —in the same dis-
organized condition, ignorant, superstitious, skeptical, bigoted,
fanatical, intolerant.

“As they are; As the sheep are —united for ever, striving
for one purpose, pressing forward to one grand and glorious end,
which is Happiness. ‘So they (mankind) ‘will be’ That is
united in like manner. From all unnecessary evil free! from
personal misdirection and suffering ; from ignorance and depravi-
ty; from pride and sectarian intolerance— Free! There shall be
a new heaven and a new earth wherein dwelleth righteousness.
As the sheep were united, so all men shall be joined into one
Brotherhood.”

The interrogatory, “ Vow do you believe it?” was addressed to
my youthful judgment, after it had been so unrighteously im-
pressed by traditional theology. And those initiatory representa-
tions were necessary, that I might apprehend the vicissitudes of
-my future life, and bear them with wisdom and patience. ‘The
question appealed to my then impressible judgment, whether I
would believe the instruction I had received in preference to my
previous religious opinions. My faculties were now restored to
their ordinary state, and I stood once more free from everything
but fatigue and embarrassment. I commenced descending the

THE SUMMIT OF THE FIRST MOUNTAIN. 237

valley, to discover, if possible, my geographical situation. I was
now in my natural state. Presently, I observed a man attired in
a farmer’s dress, carrying a spade on his shoulder, walking lei-
surely in an opposite direction. J hastened to him, and inquired,
in an anxious manner :—

“ Sir, will you tell me the name of this place ? where I can get
some food? and how far it is to Poughkeepsie ?”

He smiled, and gave me an inquisitive look: “This ’ere place,”
said he, “is Catskill, and them is the Catskill mountains; perhaps,
you may get somethin’ to eat at the inn. You asked me about
Poughkeepsie. Well, I s’pose it is about forty miles from t’ other
side the river.”

Acting upon this information, I recrossed the river, and then
rested in a reclining posture on the railing of a ferry-boat. And
now sleep came upon me imperceptibly again, as I lay reflecting
on the scenes through which I had passed. I was startled when I
became sensible of a return of those mystical feelings which pre-
cede the closing of the senses and illumining of the internal princi-
ple. As they came on, my body yielded, as I was willing it.
should; external life again vanished, as if for ever, and I was
once more a being of the interior.

Soon, however, I arose and fled along the road like a reindeer.
Many, many miles I ran; and then I slept again.

How long I remained asleep I know not; but, as in previous
instances, I at length felt returning life streaming through my
system, and my spirit was restored to a high degree of animation.
I opened my eyes, and, wonderful to relate, I was seated upon a
marble grave-stone about eighteen inches from the ground! The .
melancholy sanctuary in which I found myself, was enclosed by a
huge stone wall, surmounted by a top-railing, similar to farmers’
ordinary fences. The enclosure was in the form of a triangle,
and, I think, occupied about one acre and a half of smooth land.
I counted eleven whole grave-stones standing, five broken, and
several scattered upon the ground. A dense wood concealed the

238 THE MAGIC STAFF.

surrounding country from my view; and I was thus sequestered
in a solitary place, for a purpose of which I had not the least
knowledge. Nevertheless, without fear, I resolved to continue in
_the same position as when I awoke to consciousness, and await
any suggestions that might flow from within or without.

At this instant I experienced a breathing sensation, unlike any
other, upon the front and side of my head, in the region of the
organ of ideality. Its increasing attraction caused me to turn in
the direction whence it proceeded, and I beheld a man of ordinary
stature but of a spiritual appearance. He approached, and, with-
out speaking, turned to the right near me, and furnished himself
with a similar seat. As by instinct, I observed that he was a
lover of Nature and of truth—had a constant thirst for knowl-
edge—and_ was endowed with strong powers of investigation.
His quick natural perception, sustained by his highly-cultivated
faculties of intuition and reflection, presented a combination of
intellectual powers seldom witnessed. He was a being whom I
felt constrained to love—for love was prompted by his superior
wisdom. I felt quiet and-happy. And it is a truth, that I con-
versed with him, and he with me, for a long period, and that too,
by a mutual influx and reflux of thought! His discourse was
substantially on this wise :—

“TJ lived,” said he, “on the earth, in the form, among the inhab-
itants thereof, for a length of time determined by my obedience to
Natural Law. From youth, I imbibed the impressions made
upon my mind by my parents, the religious world, and philosophy.
But artificial education served more to retard my mental progress
than as an auxiliary to useful advancement. I discarded, early,
these unfavorable influences, and commenced interrogating and
communing with Nature and her productions — within the circum-
ference of my vision and mental capacity—whereby I became
acquainted with truths of deeper importance and of greater mag-
nitude. It was demonstrated to me that all the diversified exter-
nal forms in this, as in other universes, are unfolded by virtue of

THE SUMMIT OF THE FIRST MOUNTAIN. 239

T

an element or spiritual principle, contained in each, which is their
life, or Soul; and this essence, by men, is called God; also, that
the external corresponds to the inner or productive principle; that
forms are determined, as perfect or imperfect, by the specific
character of their prompting soul, which actuates them to life and
development.

“ By this I learned that the gross matter and minerals of our
earth are formed and governed and sustained by a law—an in-
herent principle—which also operates in higher worlds of mate-
rial organization. And as this principle, in various modifications,
ascended in the order of nature, higher and more perfect forms
were unfolded—being actuated and perfected by inner life, to
which the outer existence corresponded. These forms,” he con-
tinued, “I understood constituted the vegetable kingdom. From
this established basis, I perceived those Laws breathing forth the
animal kingdom ; and, in their next stage of ascension, developing,
sustaining, and perfecting man! And all this came to me (as it
will come to you) by discovering and meditating upon correspond-
ing truths, dwelling within, about, and above me.

“In my analytical investigations, also, I discovered a threefold
or triune Power in every compound——three essential parts to
every established organization—which is absolutely necessary to
all things, in order that they may be perfectly organized.

“This knowledge led me to reflect upon the many physical viola-
tions, occurring every hour, among the inhabitants of the earth—
and impressed me that these frequent transgressions of laws sus-
taining the human form, called for some effectual remedy to relieve
the diseases caused thereby. Accordingly I founded a system upon
these principles and considerations, which may be called a ‘medical
system of the trinity.’ In this system I maintain the proposition,
that every particle in the human body possesses a close affinity
to particular particles below in the subordinate kingdoms— and
that these latter particles, if properly associated and applied,
would cure any affected portion or organ of the human frame.

240 THE MAGIC STAFF.

“To establish this theory, I labored diligently ; and now I have
the satisfaction of knowing that my system was a germ enlivened
by interior truth; whereby new and more truthful systems were
developed, to bless the earth’s inhabitants! Now I love truth
because it begets wisdom; for my love has become wisdom ; and
my wisdom substantial knowledge!” His spiritual countenance,
as he closed these sayings, brightened with a delightful and-beauti-
ful smile!

Astonished at his learned discourse—and my mind being filled
with thought concerning his revelations, the like of which I had
never before heard —lI individualized a thought which he instantly
perceived, and answered.

Mentally I inquired, “ Can I become acquainted with you, kind
stranger, and with your system, too, by appropriate means within
your power and pleasure to afford ?”

“Ah! ’tis for this, that you sit in my presence,” said he, incli-
ning to the right, and raising in his hand an elegant cane, which,
till then, I had not seen in his possession. “Here is a full synop-
sis of my system and practice,” he continued, turning to me, “and
I desire that this you should comprehend; and in understanding
its fundamental principles, you will gently and justly apply its
teachings to the good of your brethren, mankind !”

Thus saying, he touched a singular spring at the top, and the
cane mechanically parted into three longitudinal strips or pieces.
A strong rod ran through the centre, graduated to accord with the
cane’s shape. This rod was very straight and beautiful, having
the appearance of highly-polished silver. The parts were neatly
adjusted one to another, and when arranged on the rod, formed a
staff far exceeding in beauty any I had ever beheld. I saw that
the pieces remained whole when disengaged from the rod. These
he took in his hand, and unfolded them piece by piece, until they
completely separated. The smaller pieces now assumed the dia-
mond form, especially when closely observed.

“Were,” said he, “on these little blocks,” presenting them to

THE SUMMIT OF THE FIRST MOUNTAIN. Q41

me, “is the name of every disease with which the human race is
afflicted.”

I saw, felt, and read the name of each and every disease, with
most of which I was entirely unacquainted; and, as I read, I
returned them to him, one by one, in the original order.

Now, elevating his person (which seemed less earthly than my
body) he discoursed thus: “Jn the inside of these blocks you will
find a composition which, when applied, will palliate or remove
the disease named upon its exterior. Of this compound make
you a quantity suggested at the time you examine the diseased
individual, and sufficiently strong to be well adapted.”* He
restored the pieces to their respective places, and quickly joined
the cane, so that I could not see any possible means to disunite its
parts.again.

“Take this,” said he, handing the cane to me, “and preserve
the charge devotionally ; for it is a work of a lifetime, demanding
equal attention, reflection, and application.” I received the pre-
cious gift with ineffable delight and gratification.

“ Moreover,” he continued, “that you may behold the complete
correspondence between this system and Nature, I will explain
the cane’s signification. The pieces, when disunited in the man-
ner observed, correspond to those principles dwelling and operating
in the natural organization; and the blocks to the various individ-
uals that constitute the human race. The disease specified on the
outside of each block, corresponds to the truth that disease tends
to affect only the bodies of men, and not their living, interior
principle. The composition on the inside of each block corre-
sponds to the truth that everything’s exterior is determined pre-
cisely by the interior, creative, and moving principle; to the truth,
also, that the spirit is the creating, developing, perfecting, expand-
ing, beautifying, organizing, healing, eternal essence in the pos-
session of every being.

* This system of medical treatment is developed in “The Great Harmo-

nia,” vol, i.

11

949 THE MAGIC STAFF.

“The rod that runs through the cane, and connects its parts
together, corresponds to the principle of divine truth running
through and sustaining this system, as well as all the vast crea-
tions both in this and higher spheres. And the rod being in the
interior, signifies that the great law of truth is the interior of all
things, and especially in the soul of all things—dwelling there
imperceptible to outer sense, yet known to be existing from the
regular manifestations of a united and complicated Universe!

“Inward searching after truth will lead to, and disclose, the
great and important realities so delicately typified by this Staff—
for it is an accumulation of interior and external evidences, as-
sisted by the promptings of Nature, and sanctioned and consum-
mated by the consciousness of truth dwelling in the soul.”

Thus ended his eloquent interpretation. His countenance be-
came illuminated with ecstatic delight, and his thoughts entered
my spirit and were responded to, without even once having the
senses audibly addressed.

A sweet and gentle sensation now passed warmly over my left

breast, face, and head. It seemed to proceed from something.

human immediately behind me. Impressed thus, I turned and
beheld a man of an appearance very different from the one beside
me. His anatomy was of wise proportions; he possessed perfect
symmetry of cerebral structure, and was seemingly about six feet
in stature. His head particularly attracted my attention, for I
had never beheld such an harmonious combination of moral and
intellectual developments. The cerebrum indicated a most vig-
orous and gigantic intellect—as also an exalted power of con-
ception, great ease of expression—and a high degree of spirit-
uality. He drew near, and reclined against the stone the first
speaker was occupying, and spake in this wise :-—

“ By permission long granted me by the divine mercy of the |

Lord, to visit this and other earths, I am enabled to instruct thee,
as it is becoming me to do, concerning things pertaining to thy
interior life, and exterior sphere of thought and usefulness. ‘Thy

THE SUMMIT OF THE FIRST MOUNTAIN. 248

spirit is now untrammeled—has experienced a joyful resurrection
from the artifices of the social world without; therefore thou hast
become an appropriate vessel for the influx and perception of
truth and wisdom. Spiritually, thou hast left the world where
men reside; but physically, thou art there with them still. Thy
mission hath been shown thee. Great is the Universe wherein
thou shalt labor and do whatsoever thy most interior understanding
shall conceive to be good, and true, and profitable.

“Twill be near thee in thy stewardship— pointing to the right
path. The things thou shalt bring forth will surprise and con-
found those of the land who are considered deeply versed in
science and metaphysics.

“Obstructions of various kinds will affect thy external life;
but they will tend more fully to expand thy interior being. Press
on thy way: and. love only those things tending to truth and
wisdom.

“ By thee will a new light appear; it shall be new because it
will brighten and purify that already in being, and reflect intel-
lectually upon that heretofore conceived ; and it will establish that
which has been, and still is supposed to be the wildest hallucina-
tion, viz., The law and ‘kingdom of heaven’ on earth— Peace on
earth and good will to men.

“Jn due time these things will be made manifest through thee,
and to others, while residing in the form. By others they will be
comprehended and believed, and at the end of a little season they
will be generally acknowledged, their beauty and importance
appreciated ; and they will be loved, and proclaimed in practice.

“ At atime not far distant, I will instruct thee concerning the
opening of thy interior understanding, and the laws to be observed
to render thee qualified to commune with the interior realities of
all subordinate and elevated things. This phenomenon when
openly manifested, will testify of those divine spiritual truths, not
as yet comprehended by those who admire Nature merely for the

delights thereof, and by those imprisoned souls everywhere, who

244 THE MAGIC STAFF.

believe nothing beyond the sphere of their bodily senses. See
to the promptings of thy living spirit. In a just season thy great
labor will commence, which, when consummated, will elevate the
human race to a high degree of harmony.

“For the present I communicate no more. But now I repeat,
love wisdom, which is food and light to the internal: and wisdom
secureth health; and health procureth happiness. And thus
strengthened, enlightened, and purified, thou wilt find it congentat
to seek and thirst after interior and beautiful truths.”

Thus ended the last speaker’s prophetic admonitions; and, as
he closed the above sentence, I saw a smile of joy (and even
ecstacy) pass over his countenance which seemed sweet and
heavenly —coming, as did his thoughts, with a kind of sponta-
neous ease.

I felt directly impelled by some influence to arise, and, with my
staff, depart. This impulse I immediately obeyed. I went to the
fence, placed my foot upon the wall-side, and raised my body to
its top. On endeavoring to surmount the railing, however, my
clothing became entangled, and I experienced a sense of irritation
approximating to intense anger, because of the obstruction. This
was unusual, for I had not had such feelings for many years—
indeed I can scarcely remember ever being so angry, except when
my father forgot the jewsharp. I was thus exasperated at the
rail which, being split at the end, had caught my coat. I knew
that my actions and gestures were clownish and awkward—that
my manners betrayed the fact, that I had not mingled with polite
society — which greatly wounded my pride and excited impatience
and mortification. Meanwhile the strangers were observing my
feelings and movements with apparent complacency. On seeing
this, I requested. the one who had given me the cane, to hold it
till I gained the opposite side of the fence. He courteously
advanced and received the cane from my trembling hand. Being
thus free, I grasped the rail at the open portion, and tore it
completely in twain. Having vented my rage, I descended to

THE SUMMIT OF THE FIRST MOUNTAIN. 245

the ground and desired the staff. At this, the person who had
last spoken drew near, and gently spake thus :—

“Keep well the instruction given thee; moreover, learn to be
wise and gentle; and add to gentleness, love; and to love, wis-
dom; and wisdom, being pure, begets illumination, and illumina-
tion, happiness. And, as it was given me to say, in a due season
thou shalt return, and then this staff shall-be thine; but thou must
Jirst learn not to be under any etreumstances depressed, nor by any
influences elated: for these are the extremes of an unguarded
impulse, in minds not strong with pure wisdom.

“From this learn meekness and humiliation,” he continued,
“and sustain these by a proper dignity in thy natural living.
Receive this thy first and sufficient lesson, and by its light lead
others to seek the pathway leading to Wisdom and the Tree of
Righteousness— whose fruit shall be delicious to the hungering,
but untasted except they nourish the seed and cause the tree to
spring up within them—which will for ever reflect a refreshing
shade over the spirit within and the world without.”

Thus he closed. As I stood and listened, gratitude swelled my
soul into volumes of thankfulness, that the magic cane was sacri-
ficed for such valuable instruction; while, at the same time, I felt
assured that the beautiful and comprehensive Staff would ulti-
mately be mine, and that, too, because I should be worthy of its
possession.

Being on the outer side of the wall, I could now see their
bodies no more, for the fence rose too high, and the ground where
I stood was lower than within the yard; and whether they re-
mained within the yard, or vanished to other portions of the
world, I did not discover.

246 THE MAGIC STAFF,

CHAPTER XXXYV.

*“ AN ENTIRE CHANGE OF PROGRAMME.

“There ’s a divinity that shapes our ends,
Rough-hew them how we will.”

‘“You’RE a queer youth, to be sure,” said the operator, laugh-
ing. “TJ suppose, now, you'll tell us where you’ve been since last
night !”

“Tell where I’ve been?” echoed I dreamily.

“Yes, that’s what we want to know,” he replied, evidently ap-
preciating my abstraction.

Collecting at length my bewildered and wandering senses, I
reptied: “I’ve been on a long journey, and seen many curious
sights. But,” continued I, still confused, “I can’t make out what
it all means.”

The reader need scarcely be told, in this connection, that I had
reached the operator’s home, soon after the interview described at
the close of the last chapter. But what happened, in the interval
between that circumstance and the above conversation, yet remains
to be chronicled.

Immediately upon leaving the graveyard, I passed unexpectedly
into spontaneous clairvoyance; and, wishing to know my where-
abouts, I directed my perceptions here and there over various
roads and localities until I fixed upon Poughkeepsie. So real or
literal was my vision of natural objects along the way, that I sup-
posed myself journeying, and marvelled that drivers and travellers

CHANGE OF PROGRAMME. QAT

did not recognise me! And it was long before I learned that I
had confounded the flight of my vision with the act of ordinary
walking —the knowledge of which fact greatly relieved the cir-
cumstance of its mystery. Ascertaining thus the bearing of the
distant village, and forming a judgment as to the most direct route
thither, I again became normal, and commenced the journey. And
yet, I remember of being conscious and feeling natural only at
intervals, as I walked on the road Poughkeepsieward.

As I approached home, my mind became exceedingly discon-
certed by sensations similar to those usually experienced when
waking from my magnetic condition. I perfectly recollect meet-
ing several acquaintances, each of whom manifested surprise on
seeing me. Ispoke to no person. On reaching Mr. Levingston’s
house, I passed directly through the hall; at the termination of
which, I suddenly lost the most of my memery concerning my
recent visions. This bewildered me for a moment, but soon on I
passed through the adjoining room, up the stairs, into the dining-
apartment, where the family were engaged in eating. Oh, wasn’t
I hungry!

I threw off my coat and hat, and seated myself at the table.
Doubtless the family were somewhat astonished at my unceremo-
nious and ravenous actions, and still more so at my unconversable
state. They began questioning me in reference to my mysterious
disappearance ; but they subsequently informed me that I made
no reply; that I ate a hearty dinner; and that, when done, I pro-
ceeded to wash myself at the further end of the room.

Such a meal was certainly well calculated to make me feel nat-
ural. Yes, I now felt’a return of normal sensibility. -As the
strange influence which had held me for so many hours receded,
I saw a brilliant light—it flashed—and again all was darkness.
But now another flash, and another, came, and I was completely
freed from the abnormal condition. And yet I was absolutely
frightened! The fact that I remembered entering the front door,
and then lost all consciousness till that moment, when I found my

248 THE MAGIC STAFF. |

self standing in the presence of the family, with a napkin in my
hand, appeared so unaccountable, that, for a moment, the familiar
friends about me looked like strangers, and I seemed subsiding
into blank nothingness.

Just then I was aroused by the cheery words with which this
chapter begins; and still pursuing the theme, Mr. Levingston
kindly inquired :—

“Well, Jackson, can’t you tell us something about it?”

“ Tow long have I been gone?” I hastily questioned.

“Since last night,” replied the operator. “At one time this
forenoon we were on the point of searching the town for you; but
it was suggested by some one that the power which caused your
disappearance would preserve and restore you, and so we con-
cluded to postpone giving the alarm.”

During the afternoon of that day, I was able to recall the gen-
eral impression which the graveyard strangers had left upon my
mind. The smaller of the two men I knew was called GALEN, a
physician of considerable renown ; and the more beautiful one was
once known as SWEDENBORG, a Swedish philosopher and theolo-
gian; but, up to that time, I had never heard anything of the
names or works of these persons, by means of either books or
reports, and so I began already to entertain troublesome misgiv-
ings as to the reality of my experience.

In the evening I was magnetized as usual. As usual, also, there
were present plenty of large-eyed and open-mouthed seekers for signs
and wonders. One had brought his pugnacious friend, who wished
to be convinced by having me, while thoroughly blindfolded, tell the
time by the watch then in his pocket. Another had at last induced his
skeptical and contrary wife to come and satisfy herself by getting
me to look within and tell what articles of food she had taken for
supper. Another had at length prevailed upon her stoical and
sneering husband to come and get a test by having me read the
titlepage of the book that he had carefully stowed away under the
linings of his great-coat for that purpose. Besides these, there

CHANGE OF PROGRAMME. 249

was a group of the sick, and sore, and suffering— persons who
not only wanted to be convinced, but actually needed what they
wanted—a true report of their condition, and a knowledge of the
most direct means of restoration.

Thus the “ wants” and the “needs” of the villagers encompassed
me like a hedge-fence. But I was now very still, tind very insen-
sible to all demands and environments. My spirit, all unseen by
the insensate crowd, was passing through an important crisis. An
entire change of programme was about to be made! My clair-
voyant powers were on the eve of a glorious graduation. With
the speed of the whirlwind I surveyed every nook and corner of
my immediate future. A grand joy pervaded my soul—for I saw
that there was a sublime UsE even in the exercise of clairvoyance
—a substantial benefit to sore, and lame, and blind Humanity!
O the happiness, the ecstatic bliss, of that world-wide view! ‘There
was a lofty grandeur in the philanthropic emotions with which I
felt inspired and strengthened. There was a new benefit in ex-
istence. My happiness consisted in the certainty that I was to
bestow health, to snatch from death the suffering infant, to guide
the blind man into light, to sound the voice of healing in the ear
of the deaf, to be a support when disease oppressed my neighbor,
and a staff of strength to the sick who stepped in the path that lay
before me. And yet, friendly reader, I was not lifted up with
self-importance. The blessed work that I saw to do, instead of
exciting my self-esteem, almost oppressed and overcame my soul.
My gratitude was very deep; the responsibility would be weighty,
and my life was to become a sober reality.

The prolonged silence, or rather my incommunicativeness, in-
duced the operator to ask, “Can you see anything to-night, Jack-
son ?”

“Oh, yes!” I ejaculated with enthusiastic emotion, “I have
some new directions to give. I now see the good of my late
visions.”

« Well,” said he, “I am ready.”

tis

5

250 THE MAGIC STAFF.

“In the first place, then,” proceeded I, “we must make a
change.”

“ A change!” exclaimed the operator, somewhat startled — fear-
ing perhaps that I was about to leave him—for his heart was
already set upon the daily practice of throwing me into clair-
voyance. :

“Yes, ’tis good that we should,” I replied; “and to-night i is the
time to begin.”

“Well!” sighed he with true submission.

“First, then, I see ’tis good,” said I, “to spend no more time
upon wonder-seekers; because, even when satisfied, they do not
advance the truth of this science; neither do they continue to be
believers, but, either from sheer intellectual indolence or actual
lack of judgment, they return night after night for a repetition of
old tests, or else want different evidences. All time spent to
gratify such, is immorally squandered.”

“ How, then, shall we convince the unbelieving ?” inquired the
operator.

“By doing good,” I anstitalustically replied; “by examining
and prescribing for the sick.”

“Must your powers be confined exclusively to the sick?” he
asked, with a little show of disappointment.

“Yes, after this,” I replied; and then proceeded to give ample
directions. Our future time was to be systematically employed.
Certain hours were to be devoted to diseased applicants. I was
to remain in the clairvoyant state only just so long (two hours and
a half) at each sitting; the magnetic process was to be conducted
thus and so; and our time was to be rewarded by the charge of a
moderate fee to those only who were in easy circumstances.

What further happened that night I will not stop to record.
The reader is now made acquainted with the disposition of my
time, and the direction of my clairvoyant faculty. But it should
be borne in mind, meanwhile, that no knowledge, of either the
great uses and benefits which I saw, or of the rules and regulations

CHANGE OF PROGRAMME. 251

by which we were to be guided, was brought out into my natural
state. Hence, when not clairvoyant, my mind was not without
an indefinable apprehensiveness —a secret feeling, a fear perhaps
—that my soul was the involuntary dupe of some mischievous ma-
gician, the victim of some baneful and irresistible enchantment.
These dreamy misgivings were frequently roused by the slight
intimations and dark insinuations of certain meddlesome per-
sons; and yet, whenever I let down the line and sounded the
depths of my soul, I found no unhappiness there, nor even a wish
to restore my former relations with the ever-esteemed Mr. Arm-
strong.

In justice to the operator, it should be related that, as a mer-
chant-tailor, he steed among the first and foremost, and conse-
quently had a large proportion of the public patronage. His
business was abundant and profitable. Notwithstanding this, how-
ever, his love of humanity was so pure, and his spirit so conscien-
tious, that, encouraged by the adoptive heart and energetic mind
of his wife, he abandoned his profession, and devoted himself to
obeying the rules which I had presented. He did this, incredu-
lous reader, with the bald prospect of unbounded persecution and
of continued pecuniary loss.

Shortly after my vision of the sheep and shepherd, the com-
pound mystery of which had become nearly gossiped out, I called
upon the utilitarian, or rather, in a thoughtless mood, I found my-
self wandering into his store ; whereupon he said :—

“T hear strange stories about you, Jackson: some say you’re
half-crazy.”

“ Crazy !” I exclaimed, with unfeigned uneasiness.

“People will talk, you know,” said he. “How long do you
think of continuing as you are ?”

“ What—to be magnetized ?”

“Yes—that’s what I mean.”

“J don’t know,” said I; “perhaps all next summer.”

“Do you mean to let mesmerism step in between us,” he

252 THE MAGIC STAFF.

asked, “and put a damper on your fair prospects as a business
man ?”

“T don’t know,” answered I gloomily ; “it seems just now that
my clairvoyance is useful to sick folks.”

“Indeed !” exclaimed he; “do you make cures ?”

“ Folks say so,” I replied.

“Yes, I’ve heard so too; but do your patients really get
well ?”

“ Several persons declare that I have cured ’em,” returned I;
“but we’ve got new rules now, and may cure more.”

“Well, success to you, Jackson,” he responded good-naturedly.
“If you’re really a prodigy in that line, I suppose I must spare
you a while longer; but mark! don’t be wheedled out of your
share of the remuneration.”

And this, for many months, was the last conversation between
Mr. Armstrong and his truant apprentice.

In this place I feel moved to record several remarkable occur-
rences that transpired both before and after the startling events
of the memorable 7th of March. The incidents to which I now.
refer were evolved during my medical examinations.

Permit me, kind reader, to premise somewhat by alluding to
the fact that, through clairvoyant inspection, I soon ascertained
Disease to be a want of equilibrium in the circulation of the
vitalic principle. Of this there was uniformly presented one of
two evidences—either an excess in some particular organ or lo-
cality, or else a deficiency. The results of the former I soon
learned, as by instinct, to term acute or inflammatory, of the lat-
ter, chronic or slow and surreptitious diseases ; each form requiring
very different treatment from the other. And, what was equally
remarkable and beautiful, while in my clairvoyant condition I
seemed to be a sort of connecting link between the patient’s dis-
ease and its exact counterpart (or remedy) in the constitution of
external Nature! For each visceral or organic deficiency and

CHANGE OF PROGRAMME. 253

need in man (which may be the basis of disease), I instantly per-
ceived a corresponding agent of gratification or restitution. Even
so to his every functional, nervous, or muscular necessity or de-
mand (which may also become a disease), I could discover an
appropriate and adequate supply. The existence of this supply,
this agent, this remedy for disease, I first felt as by an instinctive
sympathy; and then, in nearly every instance, I would proceed
to exercise my power of vision to see in what field, or book, or
drug-store, the required article was located or described. In this
silent and mysterious manner—that is, by looking through space
directly into Nature’s laboratory, or else into medical establish-
ments—I easily acquired the common (and even the Greek and
Latin) names of various medicines, and also of many parts of the
human structure —its anatomy, its physiology, its neurology, &c. ;
all of which greatly astounded the people, and myself not less
when not clairvoyant—for then I had to rely solely upon hearsay
and gossip. ‘The secret, then, of my prescribing successfully was,
the bringing together of specific medicines to supply a physiologi-
cal demand, or to equalize the unbalanced vitalic principle. And
yet, what is not a little strange and paradoxical, during the first
years of my medical experience I could not give a satisfactory
solution of my own method. In fact, I did not comprehend the
extent and import of my own perceptions—no, not even when
most exalted in my mental illumination. The reason was, that
I had not yet reached that superior condition which is repre-
sented by the fourth of the diagrams describing magnetical pro-
gression.

Having made this prefatory digression, I will now proceed to
relate a few illustrative incidents :—

One night, while at Mr. Bartlett’s residence, he requested me
to go (in spirit) and examine some person in the vicinity of Utica,
New York. As was customary in such experiments, the operator
resigned his seat to the soliciting party, who, taking my hand,
asked, “ Will you go with me to see a friend ?”

254 THE MAGIC STAFF.

On this occasion my clairvoyant condition was good, so I replied
in the affirmative, and waited-further suggestions. At this hour
1 can remember how plainly I could then read his mind. He
knew the direct road to travel, and the house where his friend
resided, and hence could readily pronounce and decide upon the
correctness or inaccuracy of my observations. Printed distinctly
in his mind, like the lines on a map, I saw the highway leading
from Utica to the house in question; and had I been disposed, I
know that, from such a picture alone, I might have satisfactorily
described the externals of the route and the habitation in which
the patient was at the time. But suppose I had relied upon his
mind and recollections for my impressions or knowledge of the
localities, then how would I have obtained the next branch of in-
formation —the exact condition of the diseased individual— of
which he had no accurate knowledge ?

The case was clear. Independent vision, alone, was my only
reliance. So off I started! Over hill and over vale I sped—
flying like thought from county to county—till I located the
neighborhood. Orally I described a house here, a barn there, a
church yonder, &e¢., all of which Mr. Bartlett recognised in the
main as correct. When arrived at a certain residence, I slowly
described it and the appearance of its inmates, especially the
symptoms of a sick person there. This description did not quite
satisfy Mr. Bartlett. It seemed at best but partially correct, and
somehow to be blended with the personal appearance and symp-
toms of another friend of his in that region. But I persisted that
I could find no other sick person in the neighborhood; and after
a few more descriptive remarks, which were also unsatisfactory, I
yielded to the attractions of my bedy and returned like lightning
to its welcoming embrace.

Now, investigating reader, here are two points to remember for
further explanation: one is, that I supposed that I actually trav-
elled with my spirit's entire personality through the space, and
yet I could all the time hear and converse with the clergyman;

CHANGE OF PROGRAMME. 255

the other is, that, in relying exclusively and resolutely upon my
own powers of clairvoyant discrimination, I ran off the track, so
to speak, and, like a boy delighted and bewildered with the perfect
panorama of new sights, I overlooked the true object of my search
in my impulsive sympathy for another suffering person in a re-
mote corner of the county. But this experience seemed to be
sandwiched or interposed between a long catalogue of excursional
tests the most convincing. I record it, therefore, for the benefit
of the impartial psychologist who loves to search out metaphysical
laws.

A very different fact comes next in order. One day a country-
man took the chair for an examination. My vision was clear,
and, after a few moments’ inspection, I discovered his disorder to
be deafness. With the internal structure of the ear I had already
become familiar ; and, being a connecting link between the empire
of want and the world of supply, I easily felt out the remedy.
This was very remarkable. ‘The singular character of his deaf-
ness (the thickening of the lining membrane, &c.), called for the
magnetic moisture of the rat!

“ Of the rat!” exclaimed the astonished operator, as I suggested
the strange remedy. “Tow can it be done?”

“The patient must place the warm skins of the rats over and
back of each ear, every night,” said I, “for a certain length of .
time, and then let me see him again.”

The countryman was at first greatly discomposed by this fan-
_tastic prescription, but finally resolved te have traps set in every
house and barn in his rural district, besides offering a reward for
a certain number of live rats delivered at his home. The premi-
um soon brought him dozens of the fated creatures, with the hot,
humid skins of which (immediately after killing) he ratified the
eccentric prescription. And I subsequently heard that, contrary
to all belief, the disa yreeable remedy wrought his much-desired
restoration.

256 THE MAGIC STAFE.

One cold night, while I was examining some patients, a citizen
entered in great haste, and requested immediate attention.

“J don’t believe much in’t,” said he, “but I want relief.”

He took the chair, and instantly I detected a monstrous felon —
not in his heart, but on one of his hands—which was growing
rapidly worse, inflaming the entire arm, exciting the whole ner-
vous fabric, and threatening him with the agonies of lockjaw.
Away, away, flowed and spread my sympathies over the fields of
creation — feeling, feeling, feeling, with an exquisitely intensified
sensibility —for the nature and name of the most appropriate and
expeditious remedy.

“Oh, yes!” exclaimed I, “that’s it—that’s just the thing.”

“ What, Jackson ?”

“This,” said I: “get a live frog, take his skin right off, and
bind it on the diseased parts.”

“Are you certain,” inquired the anxious and agonized patient,
“that I can save my finger ?”

“ Yes, quite certain,” I replied ; “only do what I have directed.”

But where to get the frog—that was the next question. The
inexorable Frost-King still carried the keys of streams and springs
dangling from his royal girdle. The ice was thick over every
cavernous retreat in which the frog-family takes up its winter resi-
dence, and hence the prospect of obtaining the remedy was densely
-beclouded and disheartening. And yet, as if directed by some
ever-seeing and controlling intelligence, the suffering man betook
himself to a certain spring below the village, where, lo and behold }
a frog had providentially just hopped out, and was hastily and
impiously scrabbling back again, when he was caught, instantly
killed, and his electrical skin bound upon the incorrigible felon.
The cooling effect upon the inflamed hand was delightful. And I
was afterward told that the cure was perfect.

One more illustration may be given. A patronizing and semi-
believing individual, belonging to the wealthy classes, opened the

CHANGE OF PROGRAMME. .. - Soe

way for our admission into an aristocratic family. The respecta-
ble head of the establishment, an elderly gentleman, was afflicted
with deafness. Aside from the amusement which the party sought
flippantly to extract out of clairvoyance, they seriously desired
that an examination should be made of the old man’s diseased
ears, with especial reference to their restoration. After looking
into them a moment, I exclaimed —

“ He’s too old!”

“ What’s that?” asked the operator.

“He’s too old to get well,” returned I. “Besides, chere’s a
thick incrustation along the passages leading from the ear to the
throat. There’s some ossification, too.”

“ Hey ?” shouted the patient. “ What’s all that”

The operator in a loud voice explained. ‘To which the thought-
ful old gentleman very reasonably replied: “I have long since
abandoned all hope of having my hesring entirely restored. All
I ask is, relief, relief —that’s what I scek.”

“Do you understand him, Jucikson?” asked the operator.

“Yes,” replied I; “and I will now see what there is for him.”

Away I floated through tae wild-woods and far over the exten-
sive fields, and presently returned with—

“Good! I’ve found the true agent of relief.”

“ What is it?” —“ What is it ?” shouted half the party. “ Why,
it’ll be the boy’s fortune if he makes a cure!”

“Yes, what is it, Jackson ?”’ inquired the animated magnetizer.

“He must get,” I replied, “he must catch thirty-two weasels.”

“ Hey ?” screamed the deafened patient—who had heard just
enough to be shocked and alarmed —“ catch what ?”

“Thirty-two weasels,” I repeated, and then continued: “take
off their hind legs at the middle joint, and boil out that oi! which
Nature has deposited in the feet and the parts adjacent thereto ;
and this preparation, being an oleaginous and penetrative liquid,
must be dropped (one drop ata time) in each ear, twice a day,
till the whole is gone—when you will be nearly cured |”

258 THE MAGIC STAFF.

“ Reediculous !” exclaimed a feminine member, almost over-
whelmed with a flood of silk and satin upon her refined person ;
“perfectly reediculous! And how disgusting, too! Bah! wea-
sels’ feet! But—JI wonder if he can tell what ails me?”

“ Wait a little, madam,” the operator politely suggested, “till I
ask a few questions. Jackson,” he continued, “do you really
mean to prescribe weasels’ oil for this gentleman’s deafness ?”

“Yes,” said I, “there’s nothing else so sure to help him.”

“Nothing else!” muttered the half-disgusted patient, “then I’ll
remain as I am.”

After two or three more examinations we departed, leaving the
elderly gentleman more prejudiced than we found him. But to you,
considerate reader, I can whisper some good reasons to support
that singular prescription. ‘They afe these: There was just pen-
etrative oil enough in the specified’ number of weasels to make
relief certain; and besides, these creatures’ feet contain an oily
secretion, soft and searching, unlike that of any other living thing,
and much better for the purpose contemplated than that of any
known tree, herb, or other American vegetable. All this I fully
comprehended in my clairvoyance at the time, but I uttered no
word in self-justification.

The skeptical villagers soon set the weasel-story into successful
locomotion. It travelled like the “something black as a crow,”
until the whole gossiping side of the community was overrun with
imaginary weasels; which excitement, however, ultimately sub-
sided into a profound belief that Mr. Levingston was “a humbug,”
and that I voluntarily helped him for a moderate salary.

About this time, too, there was circulated a horrifying story,
purporting to emanate from my clairvoyant state, that on a certain
day all the northwestern portion of the village would sink —be
swallowed up by the prodigious mouth of a hungering and thirst-
ing earthquake—and that all the inhabitants thereof, especially
disbelievers, would disappear down the same yawning chasm, and

CHANGE OF PROGRAMME. 259

never be heard of more! But the monstrosity of this wholly un-
truthful report ere long put the extinguisher upon it.

Another, however, soon followed. It was this: that the well-
. water everywhere in the village had suddenly imbibed from the
earth a deadly poison, which could be separated from the fluid
only by straining the water through red flannel. Believers went
straightway and purchased the crimsoned substance. One mer-
chant affirmed that, in one day, he sold a great number of yards
of red flannel expressly for strainers! But the skeptics laughed,
used the well-water without filtering, and didn’t feel the first
symptom of being poisoned. Hence they “knew ’twas all a
humbug,” and wondered how people could be so deceived.

But, sick of these silly slanders, I turn once more to you, frater-
nal reader, to whisper a word of explanation. It was true, I did dis-
cover some unwholesome properties in a tumbler of water brought
from the operator’s well, and I did_admonish the family not to
drink or cook with it unless it was properly filtered. My sugges-
tions were followed. A piece.of red flannel was employed for the
purpose, without attaching any importance to the color; and from
this trifling circumstance alone flowed a big river of scandalous
rumors detrimental to clairvoyance.

260 THE MAGIC STAFF.

CHAPTER XXXVI.

MY JOURNEY TOWARD THE VALLEY.

“T see the light, and I hear the sound ;
I'll sail on the flood of the tempest dark,
With the calm within and the light around
Which makes night day.”

In stillness deep and deepening I pursued my lonely way.
Outwardly the spirit of spring was rife with beauty, glee, and
glory. The sky was all blushes, the earth was bespangled with
budding flowers, and the sun smiled down upon the habitations of
men. But I, though a mere youth, did not share in the cheer and
chime of the season. Solitary and sad walked I down toward the
valley — which separated Mount Use from Mount Justice —and
there was dwelling there no familiar heart to calm and comfort.
The azure concave of heaven was too cold and too far off; the rose-
mingled skies of the upper realm gave me no solace, no message of
peace; the holy glistening stars of night looked kindly down, but
from too lofty places ; the beauteous birds laughed and chirped and
twittered with far too much levity; the greetings and gabblings
of the young men and acquaintances were too thoughtless ard
insincere —in short, I was not in accord with anything without or
within, save this: a prayer to know my doom, to have the doubt,
and gloom, and agony of my young soul, either dispelled or fixed
as the penalty of my unresisted enchantment.

The subjective effects of my initiatory vision began to be fully
realized. Remembering nothing when awake, of what I had

MY JOURNEY TOWARD THE VALLEY. 261

seen or said in my mystic slumber, I was deprived of nearly every
rational source of strength. Had I retained but a thousandth
part of the truth, the beauty, the sublimity, the consistency, or the
prospective usefulness which I saw and comprehended while in
clairvoyance, there could have been no drear, no gloom, no empty-
mindedness, such as I now painfully experienced, but my pil-
grimage would have led away through fields of golden light and
normal understanding.

One effect of the sheep-and-shepherd vision was, the cleansing
of my brain of what little information I had absorbed from con-
tact with my mother and the world. In my mind I felt as if
some practical housecleaner had hoed, and scraped, and scrubbed,
and swept everything out! Whatever of intellectual furniture —
of thought, of opinion, of belief, of doubt, of proclivity —I, had
before was utterly gone! Hence my soul felt not only extremely
small, but that what little space I had in it was empty —unoc-
cupied, but very clean and white, like the “rose just washed by
the shower,” as in the juvenile ditty delineated. No mind ever
felt more destitute of sense. The surface of no idle river ever
looked more idiotically calm. No book was ever more deficient
in thought-substance. No sheet of cream-laid paper was ever
more blank, unscribbled, or unblemished. Such was the first
psychical or subjective effect of that marvellous vision—a result
which became more and more definite in my inner consciousness
as the weeks rolled away.

Another effect of that experience—the outlines of which had
by this time faded and vanished out of memory—was, a panic-
like conviction that I had lost or forgotten something, without
which I could not get along on the path of life! This singular
oblivion hung like a pearly but impervious night-veil between my
feeling and the fact out of which it sprung and to which it pointed.
Dreamily, drearily, wearily, walked I down toward the valley that
skirted the future mountain. Now and then, it is true, a shadowy
hope lit up the empty cells of my understanding. “ But I guess

262 THE MAGIC STAFF.

I don’t know nothing,” thought I; “and that are’s jest what I
b’liéve too.” After trying to reason a moment I added: “No!
there’s one thing I b’lieve—that folks is right when they ses 1’m
makin’ a fool o’ myself. But I won’t though! Ill go right
straight back to Ira Armstrong’s, and let this ’ere confounded
sleepy business go to grass.”

My spiritual depression was rapidly becoming unbearable. Im-
patience, and almost anger, disturbed my interior nature; and,
not knowing what I had lost or forgotten, if anything, I concealed
my condition from the operator. One night, on being freed from
the magnetic power, I ran up-stairs, flung myself down by the
bedside, and burst out into the following supplication :—

“ Oh, kind Providence who art in Heaven, I thank thee that I
live; but, as I now feel, I don’t know whether I’m right or
wrong. Oh, kind Providence, let me know what I have Jost or
forgotten!” At this moment I seemed to remember, vaguely,
that I had lost a walking-stick—a sort of cane—which some
kind stranger had given me weeks previous, but I could not recall
the circumstance, and so my haunted: soul was once more filled
with silence and gloom. Then I continued: “ Oh, good Provi-
dence, of whom my mother used to tell me, I will be very much
obliged if you will show me what is right.”

There was a quick flash of light! Alarmed, I glanced around
the room. Nothing but a faint star-light relieved the intense
darkness. Again I bowed my head and again the dazzling flash!
I looked, and beheld an oblique line of light—an exact image of
the cane shown and given me by Galen! Instantly my memory
returned! I perfectly knew the beautiful gift, and reached forth
my hand to receive it. “I was gone! Darkness was again there,
and, in my mind, a feeling of unsuppressed displeasure.

Time passed — perhaps half an hour—ere I ventured again to
supplicate: ‘“ Forgive my hastiness, my momentary anger, kind
Providence; but do grant, I pray thee, that I may get and keep
that beautiful cane

MY JOURNEY TOWARD THE VALLEY: 263

Another flash of golden light shot through the abounding dark-
ness, and, looking up, I beheld a strange, transparent sheet of
whiteness, on which was painted glowing words that seemed to
burn and beam and brighten amid the silent air. I was not
frightened, but charmed! Calmly I read the radiant words :—

“Behold!

HERE IS THY Marc STAFF:

UNDER ALL CIRCUMSTANCES KEEP AN EVEN MIND.

Take it, Try it, Walk with ak.
Talk with rt, Lean on it, Believe on tt,

For ever.”

Over and over again read I those glowing, glittering, tran-
splendent words of wondrous significance. But a doubt seized me,
and J asked: “Is that longest sentence my Magic Staff—‘ Under
ali circumstances keep an even mind’ —is that my cane, which I
thought I had lost or forgotten?” In a twinkling the sheet of
whiteness vanished, and in‘its place was beautifully beaming forth
the reply —“ YES.” “Twas enough! My soul swelled with
thanksgivings! “The Magic Staff, then, is no fiction,” I joyfully
thought; “the secret is to take it, try it, walk with it, talk with it,
lean on it, believe on it, for ever.” Yes, friendly reader, I seized
this mental cane—the magic staff—and ran down-stairs, went out
in the open air, walked the streets, returned to my bed, lay down
with it by my side, arose with it in the morn, ate breakfast with it,
examined the sick with it, leaned on it whenever things went
wrong, believed on it at all times, and thus trudged I along down

toward the intervening valley.

There happened about this time, in the midsummer of 1844, an
event of trifling importance; but I will relate it on the conviction
that no other circumstance can so well illustrate my mental status,
physical temperament, and deficient education.

264 THE MAGIC STAFF.

In accordance with the established programme, our medical
examinations occurred at regular intervals during the day. Be-
tween these sessions I usually occupied my spare time in walking
or visiting some friendly neighbor. One day, during my absence,
a young lady, an acquaintance of the operator’s family, left a
bouquet and her compliments forme! On my return both were
presented. The beautiful flowers I enjoyed very well, but what
to do with the “compliments” I didn’t know. At length, how-
ever, I concluded ’t was all right, and so let the affair pass without
further attention.

But two days afterward I received more flowers and more com-
pliments; and what was yet more shocking, a cunning little note,
concealed in the bouquet, asking me to take a walk with her that
very afternoon! “Now,” thought I, “now’s the time to lean on
my Staff.” The invitation was very modest, and very prettily
worded, but I couldn’t think of accepting it! Consequently I
hastened up-stairs, penciled off a brief note of excuse, delivered
it in person, and returned just as fast as I could. How glad I
was that she did n’t see me at the door!

Another bunch of garden roses, interspersed with geranium
leaves, was next day left on the mantlepiece for me, with more
verbal compliments, and another note embodying a similar invita-
tion! My blushing suddenly attracted a visiter’s attention, who,
being an acquaintance, said: “ Davis, you’re the greenest chap I
ever’saw |”

“Why so?” I asked.

“Why, there’s a pretty girl in love with you,” said he, “and
you’re so verdant you don’t know it.”

“In love with me!” exclaimed J, astonished and confused.
“What businesss has she to get in love with me, I’d like to
know ?”

“Why,” replied he laughing, “she thinks you’re a fine, smart,
good-looking young fellow.”

“Well,” said I earnestly, “she must be made to know that I

MY JOURNEY TOWARD THE VALLEY. 265

wants nothin’ to do with gettin’ in love, nor I won’t nuther.”
Here I leaned firmly on my Staff and mentally continued ; “Why,
I can’t think of marrying! If there’s anything I don’t want to
do it’s that. Why, I’ve coaxed mother more’n twenty times
never to let me get married. I don’t like the girls—they act so
foolish, and giggle, and simper, and sly-about so—TI can’t like ’em
any how !”

That night, however, brought me another sweet epistolary
appeal from the fair one—calling me unfeeling and unsocial—
gently requesting me not to sleep myself to death—advising me
to attend church and get religion—and, lastly, urging me to visit
her at my earliest convenient opportunity. And, in order to wind
the chain of affection still more closely around my heart, she con-
cluded with a few very original lines about joy, love, hearts,
friendship, bees, hot weather, sweet briers, honeysuckles, trailing
willows, &c., &c., all of which I read and studied over several
times. Finally I tried very hard to indite an answer to the best
of my poetic ability. .Persistently I scribbled and scrawled away,
and, ’t was only after I began to ache with fatigue in almost every
joint, that I sueceeded in composing the following extraordinary

reply :—

“dear miss

“T got your pretty letter
and read it every word
Your poetry makes me better
i feel just like A bird.

‘But my heart hain’t reddy
to go beyund my keeping
And my feelins is too heddy
and my business is a sleeping.

*<So i hope youl excuse me
For not going a walking
and i trust you won’t abuse me
if I stop our futer talking.”

After this poetic effusion, which is literally transcribed, I had

no further trouble from that side of human nature.
12

266 THE MAGIC STAFF.

But my Staff was of the greatest benefit; in truth, it was my
invisible palladium—my two-edged weapon of defence. Every
day would bring to light some fresh business embarrassment, or
some new and difficult test of clairvoyance, or some groundless
but perplexing story of injuries wrought by our practice, and so
on to the end of the chapter; but, amid all, my Staff was my
private strength, my rod of support, my unbending consolation.

One day we were visited by a grim-visaged mohey-digger—a |

believer in fortune-telling, signs, omens, &c., who insisted in using
clairvoyance for his material benefit. But, on this occasion, as
when assailed by other and similar temptations, I relied solely
upon my Magic Staff, and my escape under all these circum-
stances was sure and speedy. ‘There was within me an uncon-
‘querable repugnance to all Yankee speculatism and money-getting
operations generally. My unutterable dread of them —I will not
say hatred— repelled me from every one who dug for, grasped at,
or clutched after, “the root of all evil.” In this particular I was
quite the opposite, in fact, from many who solicited my services.
At times, however, I had more agreeable visitors, who, notwith-
standing, sought for information quite as much out of harmony
with our programme. From many instances of this latter sort,
I will cull one which (preserving in part the phraseology of a
friend to whom I related it) may interest the psychological in-
vestigator.

A fine-looking, portly, well-dressed, old English gentleman

came a number of times to Poughkeepsie, and wished me to look |

clairvoyantly at something regarding which he was seeking infor-
mation; but for a considerable length of time we had so many
calls on our medical attention, and so many engagements with the
sick, that I found it impossible to gratify him.

One day, however, just as I was coming out of the mystic con-
dition, the same gentleman, who called himself Dr. Maryatt, en-
tered our apartment. As on other visits, he had brought an egg-
shaped white crystal, into which he requested me to look, and tell

uunetinhhadicdiidnhiantadiimesadinee tee

MY JOURNEY TOWARD THE VALLEY. 267

him what I saw. “The observation,” said he, “ should be made
in a dark room.” Accordingly, I took the crystal into the garret,
which was the darkest place in the house, and sat down with it at
the head of the stairs; and, though I looked at it intensely for
some time, I saw nothing. Presently, however, shadows seemed
passing off like the clearing up of clouds from a landscape, and
then the crystal began to brighten up beautifully. Soon after, it
became so very bright that I was alarmed, and went precipitately
down.

Dr. Maryatt, however, assured me that no danger would occur ;
so I went back, and renewed my observations. The same changes
which I had first observed again took place, and, when the light
began to soften, I perceived a landscape. It was a side-hill, rising
out of a ploughed field, and there were several trees. Two men
were standing under the trees, one of them in the common Eng-
lish dress, and the other in a sailor’s garb. Having seen this, I
felt considerably agitated, and again went down.

The dignified doctor said it was very satisfactory. But he asked
mé to go once more, and look at the right of the hill-side. Pres-
ently, I did so; and soon found a stone-house developing itself in
that direction, emerging, as it were, from the clouds in that por-
tion of the crystal. Next I saw what was in the house, and then
described people and furniture. One more observation, and I dis-
covered a paper under one of the roof-plates. As it looked brighter
than anything else, I thought it must be important. It was cov-
ered with dust and spiders’ webs, and seemed to have been long
neglected, if not absolutely forgotten, by the inmates of the house.

On making this report, the doctor expressed great satisfaction,
saying, “that was the very thing which he wanted ;” but he asked
me “to go back again, and see if I could discover what the paper
was.” Then I went again, and reported that it was “a deed.”
But just at that moment I saw a copy of the instrument burned
under the trees. 4

It seemed to me that the man who had burned the copy of the

¥

268 THE MAGIC STAFF.

deed was a distant heir, but had no fraudulent intention in doing so.
Plain enough I could see that he was dressed in the old English
style, and was more than six feet high. He had thought the fam-
ily-heirs resided in Germany. The Maryatt family, then living
in the house, did not know the value of the paper, and that was
the reason it came to be thrown away and destroyed so carelessly.
All these points, as seen and explained by myself, proved per-
fectly correct.

The foregoing account explains the fact, known to many, that
some temperaments, by looking on or into a stone, mirror, or
crystal, have the power of seeing certain representations connected
with the inquirer, and thus of describing the past, or foretelling
the future, which is commonly known as fortune-telling; and
notwithstanding the probability that many gipsey-like persons,
who pretend to these occult arts, are impostors; yet there are
multitudes of facts which clearly and incontrovertibly prove that
some individuals really do possess this gift.

But when I made the examination, I had never heard of any-

‘thing of this kind. : In fact, for some four or five years, this cir-

cumstance seemed to me unaccountable on any principle of pre-
vision with which I was acquainted. At length, however, I

resolved to examine the cause of my vision in the crystal. And

then, for the first time, it occurred to me that my gazing into it,
with so much characteristic earnestness, had induced, temporarily,
the state of conscious clairvoyance, which had enabled me first to
see the landscape, house, paper, &c., and then, by simple concen-
tration of thought, produced a miniature reflection pf them in the
glass before me. Since then, I have met several persons, espe-

cially very light or very black-haired females—who are most

susceptible — who, by virtue of long and concentrated gazing at
an object, glide, without going into sleep, into a state of conseious
clairvoyance, which, in the early chapters of this volume, I have
denominated spontaneous somnambulism.

In regard to the origin and history of the magic crystal, I have

A

MY JOURNEY TOWARD THE VALLEY. 269

ascertained but little; indeed, I have felt no interest in it, and the
foregoing was my first and last experiment; but I, somehow, en-
tertain an impression that it, or something corresponding thereto,
- was invented by a physician of Scotland more than a century ago.

“The magic crystal,” says Dr. Gregory, “is generally a round
or oval-shaped piece of clear glass. Several exist, and one is
now in my hands, which were made long ago, and used for the
purpose of divination, as in the case of the crystal of Dr. Dee.
It is said that Dr. Dee’s crystal is still extant, and, according to
some, it was a polished mass of jet; but it does not appear that
the nature of the substance is of much importance, or rather, it
would appear that Dr. Dee had a globe of glass or of rock-crystal, _
and also a magic mirror, probably the piece of jet alluded to. The
essential point is that persons who gaze earnestly on the crystal,
often see the figures of absent persons, nay, as in ordinary clair-
voyance, of such as are unknown to them. The erystal of which
I speak, is of the size and shape of a large turkey’s egg, and was
sold some years since, by a dealer in curiosities, as an old magic
crystal, with a paper containing certain mystical and magical rules
for its use.”

Having told all I know concerning the crystal, and of the phi-
losophy of the vision which I saw in that of Dr. Maryatt, I will
take my staff and continue my walk toward the bottom of the

valley.

270 THE MAGIC STAFF.

CHAPTER XXXVII.

e

SPECIAL PROVIDENCES.

“A traveller through a dusty road
- Strewed acorns on the lea—
And one took root, and sprouted up,
And grew into a tree.”

Wiru the advent and bestowal of the Magic Staff came a light-
hearted exuberance of feeling, closely approximating to a flippant
levity, which, at times, I was not a little ashamed to exhibit. A
thoughtless species of juvenile sport, bordering upon that of the
clown or buffoon, seemed to bubble fantastically forth, even on
solemn and religious occasions, causing me involuntarily to laugh
and manifest innocent merriment quite unbecoming to one of my
age and respectable surroundings. And yet, strange as it may
seem, all this joviality, though natural and spontaneous, was inva-
riably superficial, and never touched that mysterious sub-current
of noiseless energy which ever flowed through my spiritual con-
stitution.

One day I was abruptly accosted and severely treated by a
ministerial-looking stranger, who affirmed that my occupation was
not only “wicked,” but that my daily doings and momentary
thoughts were being recorded in heaven.

>?
.

“Jn heaven!” ejaculated [—“recorded in heaven! What do
they want of my doings and thoughts up there ?”
“ Punishment, young man,” he warmly replied; “to award pun-

ishment for the bad deeds done in the body.”

SPECIAL PROVIDENCES. 271

“Well,” said I mirthfully, “the writer of all my language du-
ring my medical examinations must have a great mess of hard
words to spell out.”

“The eternal God of heaven will not be mocked, sir!” he re-
plied, with manifest indignation; “and, sir, be warned—take
heed to your steps—before it’s too late!” And his eyes flashed
with what farmers would call heat-lightning. ;

Fortunately the Magic Staff was in my possession, and so I
asked: “ Does God punish a feller for doing wrong when he thinks
he’s doing right ?”

“ God, sir, has nothing to do with what you think —remember
that, young man!” replied the loquacious and dogmatic stranger.
“ His rewards and his punishments are based on his own system
of government—not on yours, sir, nor on mortal man’s—and
you ll find it out when it’s too late, or I’m mistaken !”

“ Tlis own system of government,” soliloquized I, with a sudden
abstraction, “ I wonder what that means—his own system of gov-
ernment !”

In a moment I forgot the presence of the pompous stranger,
and, under a trance-like pavilion of emotion, I hastened up-stairs
and quickly passed into the somnambulic condition. This relapse
was a positive refreshment. It carried me back to my Hyde
Park nocturnal experiences, and caused me once again to enjoy
that brilliant auroral lucidity of imagination and intellect in which
T had painted so beautifully the garden of Eden. ;

My interior judgment and intuitions were bright and clear as
the cloudless sky of the upper realm; my melodious thoughts flew
hither and thither like flocks of carrier-doves; and hence I was
made ready for the examination and appreciation of some profound
subject. >

“The government of God,” exclaimed I; “that’s the question
And so it was! Reverently, and with every emotion stilled like
‘he hush of evening, I besought some knowledge of the system of
Divine rewards and punishments. What I saw I will not here

1?

vie THE MAGIC STAFF.

relate. But next day, vaguely recalling the outlines of my sys-
tematic meditations, I wrote them down. While engaged in this
employment, my door was opened, and in stepped my confidential
friend A. R. Bartlett, who, seeing me pen in hand and cap on
head, said jocosely: “Ah! you’re quite a good-looking student.
What’s your subject ?””

“The government of God,” said I gravely.

“Indeed! returned he. “That’s a good subject. Got any-
thing written on it?”

“Yes, Brother Bartlett,” I answered, “I have a few pages
which I’d like to read to you.”

“That’s good,” said he, smiling at my uncommon thoughtfulness.
“ Read away; I want much to hear it.”

So L read over what I had remembered and written; to which
he replied: “That’s very good. The subject is important, and
you have treated it well, very well. Why, Brother Davis, if you
keep on in that way, you’ll becomé a good thinker.”

But, three days subsequently, I verily believe that I could nei-
ther recollect nor connect twenty words of what I had read to my
friend ; and had I not recorded them at the time, I think my mind
would have obtained but little benefit from that hour of intuitional
illumination.

In order to give the reader some idea of my moderate ambition
—to show that, while, in my natural state, I felt no anticipations
nor aspirations after fame—TI will record the following little cir-
cumstance :—

I purchased a two-dollar accordeon. The inconsiderate ene-
mies of clairvoyant revealments have asserted that my spare time
was devoted to the studying of books. But I think the unfriendly
neighbors who, day after day, heard the drawling discordances of
my accordeon, would be willing to take a solemn oath to the con-
trary! The fact was, that, without the use of notes, but aided
solely by my uncultivated love of musical accords, I meant to learn

SPECIAL PROVIDENCES. 273

to perform on the instrument. What for? Candidly this: I knew
-of my extreme poverty; of my very deficient education ;- of my
‘dependent condition, withont a trade or other reliable means of
support; and I was not certain that my clairvoyance might not
fail me any day, or I be so unfortunate as to lose my eyesight, or
my hearing, or my limbs, by some unforeseen accident or disease :
and henee, as a precautionary measure, I concluded to employ my
spare hours, between the magnetic. sessions, in perfecting myself
on the accordeon.. “ Who knows,” thought I mournfully, “but'I
may be obliged some time to depend on this instrument for a few
crusts of bread? Who knows but I may become a blind accord-
eon-player in the streets of some unknown city? Who knows but
in years to come I may be compelled to repeat those plaintive
words I heard at school :—
“«<Pity the sorrows of a poor old man,
Whose trembling limbs have borne him to your door,

Whose days are dwindled to the shortest span:
Oh, give relief, and Heaven will bless your store!’ ”

The wizard-mystery that still hung over my daily occupation,
and the occasional feeling of uncertainty as to its continuance and
actual value, served to dampen that aspiration which is natural to
youth; and, but for my strong Staff, I think my dreamy and un-
ambitious mind would have led me back to resume the trade of
Ira Armstrong.

“ Day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto night showeth
knowledge.” Like imperceptibly was woven a golden weft of

_ sympathetic interest which brought me numerous intelligent ad-
mirers — persons of high and low degree, who valued my rare gift,
and extolled in unmeasured terms the good I was doing — yet, spirit-
ually, I remained unmoved and stoically dispassionate. No pride
inflamed my spirit ; no vanity ; no ambition for distinction ; no love
of power ; no desire for wealth; no aspiration to know the secrets
of cloister, school, or college ; no sensations of yaunting self-impor-

tance, ever disturbed the unseen current of my soul. On the con
12*

274 THE MAGIC STAFF.

7

trary, from hour to hour, from day to day, from week to week, I
lived and travelled on—even without in any manner realizing
that I was taking a single progressive step—toward the very
bottom of the psychological valley.

Now I puffed and blowed (or played) on my asthmatic accor-
deon; and then my young flesh would become benumbed by the
operator, and my spirit examine the present or absent sick.
Awakened, out I would go to get a breath of fresh air; and then
return to the instrument with which I might one day possibly earn
a livelihood. Thus for months dwelt I in the psychical valley —
where a gray haze pervaded and bedimmed every intellectual
object, giving a neutral and doubtful appearance to my immediate
future—and yet, I was even then at the base of another moun-
tain, still invisible, but toward the summit of which I was steadily

and unconsciously wending my way.

Several patients were undergoing examination when a gentle-
man entered as an invited observer. This was Rev. Gibson
Smith—then occupying my friend Bartlett’s former position in
the pulpit —a very decided skeptic concerning the professions of
clairvoyance. An interest was soon awakened in him, however,
almost amounting to conviction; and, being somewhat diseased,
he requested an examination of his own condition. This was
given, and he said: “ That’s perfectly satisfactory.”

This man was possessed of a positive, decided, up-and-down,
uncompromising, mental organization, which he wished me to ex-
amine and report. I did so, while blindfolded and clairvoyant,
and he said: “The truth is irresistible, and I’m compelled to °
believe it.” ie

“Having got along thus far in the new faith, he said: “That
there is something in Mesmerism I can not doubt. When.the
animal heat is withdrawn from flies, toads, serpents, bears, &c.,
why of course they go to sleep, and sleep all winter too, and wake
up all right in the spring. Now,” said he, addressing himself to
me, “can you tell me what’s the difference ?”.

SPECIAL PROVIDENCES. 275

At this interrogatory my mind became wonderfully lucid, and I
promised to give him three or four lectures on the subject... Now
this announcement was a new thing. The operator was greatly
astonished, while I, privately seeing a — therein, was not
less delighted.

“ But,” continued the skeptical gentleman, still addressing him-
self to me, “while I admit Mesmerism and this thought-reading
power of yours, I don’t believe that your mind can travel with
any more accuracy than mine does in dreams.”

“You don’t, eh!” exclaimed the sanguine operator; “then
just try him! Ask him to visit any distant locality, and you’ll
get satisfied.”

“ Well, I will,” said the honest investigator. “Jackson, I want
you to go some five hundred miles—to New Portland, Maine—
and give me a description of the house and family of Mr. ~—,
who resides in that place.”

Obedient to his request, off I sped as the light darts through
space, and, within the brief period of ten minutes, returned with a
perfect daguerreotype of the premises and occupants !

“That’s true! That’s a fact! That’s just so! No mistake !”
were the successive sentences of affirmation and surprise which
broke from the now fully converted witness.

“ When shall I come for the lectures?” said he. The appoint-
ment was made. The operator now restored me to normal con-
sciousness, and told me that I had given notice to lecture. ’*T was
all unintelligible. That I should attempt anything of the sort now
seemed to be the height of apeandies es completely unlike were
my two conditions.

At the hour fixed upon, however, the new convert punctually -
arrived, with paper and pencil, to take down the words which I
might utter. All the illuminations and emotions and events and con-
versations and visions of my clairvoyant history —as will be here-
after explained—are now the unpurchasable property of my every
day or external memory, from which repository I can at any time

276 THE MAGIC STAFF.

draw data and circumstances as from a well-spring of diligently-
acquired knowledge. Therefore, as if ’t were yesterday, I remem-
ber my sudden mental elevation when J began to deliver the prom-
ised lectures to the interested amanuensis. Oh, how much I thought
I could comprehend! Nature had come so to say, within the cir-
cle of my personal understanding. My uprising intuitions were
like so many educated and communicating angels. My expanded
reason was like the ocean that rolls over the earth, and images
forth, meanwhile, the changing phenomena of the bending firma-
ment. But my extravagant exclamations and enthusiastic profes-
sions at that moment I will not repeat, because the curious reader
may find the record thereof, with my corrections, on page 210,
Vol. IIL., of the “ Great Harmonia.’ Neither will I make further
reference to Gibson Smith’s testimony, for that, also, may be found,
as penned by himself, in Vol. II. of the same series, commencing
on the fourteenth page.

“ What name will you give to the lectures ?” asked the recorder,
after I had completed them. “ Your explanation of human mag-
netism 2s nearly all new to me, and I’d like to know what you’d
call this novel science ?”

Easily as water runs down hill did the appropriate title glide
into my mind; and I replied, “ Clairmativeness.”

“ Clair — what ?” inquired the operator.

, The word was duly repeated, and recorded, and published to
the world. But I now wish to correct its orthography. The
thought in my mind was this: the clear production of clairvoy-
ance —and the term should have been “ Clairlativeness,” as defined
on page 153, in one of my recent volumes, entitled, “The Presént
Age and Inner Life.”

The new mountain was looming up in the distance, dear read-
er; and, all unconscious of my advancement, I was hourly climb-
ing up its rugged slopes. The. imperfect lectures on clairlative-
ness were but steps—seeds scattered along the road— acorns

SPECIAL PROVIDENCES. OTT

strewed on the lea—but they helped to accelerate and perfect
the psychological pilgrimage. But one seed bore a rose —one
acorn only produced an oak — dwarfed, yet good and useful of its
kind. That is to say, those fragmentary words and imperfect ex-
planations of magnetism and clairvoyance were wrought into a
brace of popular discourses. And Mr. Smith, taking it to be his
duty to deliver them, went firmly forth.

The operator and I must accompany him. ’T was a new and
painful trial for me, the presenting of myself, blushing with timidi<
ty and reservation, before a strange and heterogeneous audience ;
to be put into my mystic slumber amid an impatient-and boister-
ous assembly; and subjected to the pin-prickings, the finger
pinchings, the forcep-nippings, and the other physical tortures
devised by committees of medical skeptics. Although I had ex-
plained the laws of my own mental state, yet was I as ignorant of
them as a Hottentot, and knew not what mischief might befall me
in presence of the people. Amid all, however, there was in my
possession an agent of strength—the Magic Staff—on which I
confidingly relied, and by which I was never for a moment be-
trayed.

The persecuted trio —the lecturer, the operator, and myself —
set out for Albany, New York. This side-hill city was the
Sebastopol of conservatism. Its chronic indifference to every
new discovery — to anything out of the usual routine of mercan-
tile trade .or theological tradition rendered the advent of our
allied forces not only an emphatic failure, but also inconveniently
expensive. In our dilemma I was thrown into clairvoyance.
Advice was freely given: to depart next morning for Danbury,
Connecticut. _Unmurmuringly we sped away over the Housatonic
railroad, toward the specified destination. This was my first ride
behind the steam-horse, What I thought about the speed I will
not stop to indite. The recently-fallen snow was deep along the
track, and beautiful Danbury was reached only after a tedious
journey. Arrived, the lecturer’s bills were posted, proclaiming

978 THE MAGIC STAFF.

the novel subject, “ Clairmativeness ;”” and promising the public
that experiments would be exhibited.

Night hastened on, the hall was filled to its utmost capacity,
and I was seated upon the platform. Oh, that I could have been
left to the gratification of my love of solitude! As it was, how-
ever, I could but long for the refuge or panoply of my mystic
slumber. The usual sleep was readily induced, the excursional
tests of clairvoyance were tried, the committee announced their
satisfaction, and then followed the restitution of my normal state.
Wasn’t I glad twas over? And didn’t I hasten from the hall?
At our next lecture and exhibition I was again placed upon the
stand; to be tested with reference to the fact of physical insen-
sibility. Among the diagnosticating group, which was selected
viva-voce by the audience, was a certain officious disciple of Escu-
lapius. His skepticism had provided him with various instru-
ments of torture, some of which he used upon my person, but
without disturbing the serenity of my individual consciousness.
In fact, I was removed far beyond nervous pain or bodily suffer-
ing—so profoundly thorough was my magnetic disenthralment.
On preparing for bed that night, a small piece of flesh fell out of
my pantaloons, having been instrumentally pinched from the in-
side of my right limb; and yet, when this cruel experiment was
made, I was totally unconscious of the laceration. In justice to
the sympathy of the people, it should be related that the doctor,
who had committed this unwarrantable outrage, was ere long

”)

christened “ Pinchers!’? The town-boys, imbibing the spirit of
the general disapprobation, on seeing him, hooted “ Pinchers !”
And subsequently, as I was told, the persecution became so intol-
erably pinching, that the professional gentleman left for parts un-
known. But, though his extreme test was uncalled for, and the
injury he inflicted might have been serious and lasting, yet I
cherished none of that hostility manifested toward him by the in-
habitants.

The sick came from all directions. Poor, diseased humanity —

SPECIAL PROVIDENCES. 279

aching, groaning, limping, coughing, dying! Our rooms were
filled to excess all through the day, and my external life was
mainly spent in the unconscious slumber.

About this time Mr. Smith perceived that his services were no
longer in demand. The people wanted physical, not intellectual
assistance: therefore he turned back to discharge his professional
duties. But the Poughkeepsie branch of the sect to which he
was then administering, (the Universalists,) being in quest of re-
spectability and popularity, refused to extend as cordially as be-
fore the right hand of fellowship. This gave him an opportunity
to revise the curious lectures, and prepare them for publication.
Perhaps the reader may have seen that strange and really sugges-
tive pamphlet—a fugitive and mongrel production—containing a
strong infusion of the editor’s own mind—with the fourth and
last lecture reported word for word from my clairvoyant. utter-
ances—the whole entitled “ Clairmativeness, or Human Magnet-
ism, with an Appendix, by Rey. Gibson Smith,’ who must have
been a morally fearless man, a lover of truth and liberty, else the
public would never have heard of my simple words, uttered as
they quietly were under the protective retirement of the operator’s
parlor.

Our long list of patients, in both Poughkeepsie and Danbury,
caused us to divide our time between the two places— occasionally
visiting Bridgeport and contiguous localities —during all of which
I continued, externally, to be the same reserved and ignorant
youth ; but, silently relying upon my Staff, I walked steadily up
the high and rugged mountain. On our first visit at Bridgeport,
where many sick were added to our list, I formed the acquaint-
ance of a certain character who will ere long appear in this psy-
chologic drama, but for whom I did not at the time realize any
special attachment, as prophetic of the peculiar relations which
were scon to subsist between us.

Nothing happened .f any psychical interest to the reader until
May, 1845, at which time I was sorely assailed by an ardent be-

280. THE MAGIC STAFF.

liever in Special Providences and the second coming of Christ.
The religious encounter came off near the Episcopal cemetery,
whither I was leisurely walking for recreation and retirement. :
The sectarist began by sarcastically pitying me in my perilous
entanglements.

“Tn your benighted and unsanctified condition,” said he, “ you’re
at all times in danger of death and the judgment.”

“ Ain’t you in danger of death and the judgment as well as
me?” I asked. :

“ Assuredly I am,” he warmly replied, “but I’m one of those
' who believe on the Lord Jesus Christ.”

“Well,” said I, “are you safe on that account ?”

Disregarding my question, and bristling up with combative zeal,
he plunged into a long profession of faith, in substance as follows:
“T_ believe, sir, in Holy Writ, which says that there is to be a
second coming of the Messiah. Iwas taught in my youth to read
the Bible, sir, and to believe in a superintending Providence.”

“So was I; my mother taught me to believe in an overruling
Providence,” said I promptly. “ And, what’s more, I believe that
I’ve heard the voice of Providence a good many times since I was
a boy.”

“No, sir! no, sir! that can’t be,” interposed he with energetic
emphasis; “’twas the- devil more likely! Why, sir, the Bible
and Jesus Christ both denounce the business you follow. Do you
know, sir, what the Bible says ?—that the Jews were the chosen
people of God?”

“ Yes, I know that well enough,” replied I, with a strong desire
to proceed with my ramble unmolested. :

“Oh, you do, eh?” he sharply returned; “then, sir, let me tell
you that the Jews were led out of the wilderness to the promised
land, but, while on the journey, it was their duty to overcome and
exterminate the inhabitants of that country.”

“ What good did all that do?” I asked.

“ What good, sir ?” exclaimed he, with rapidly-increasing warmth.

SPECIAL PROVIDENCES. 281

“Jl tell you, sir! The extermination of the heathen, sir, was a
providential way of promoting the cause of Christianity and civili-
zation.”

“Ts the act of murder an evil?” I asked.

“ Certainly, ‘t is wrong to destroy human life.”

“Then,” sail I, “does God do evil that good may come?” As
I spoke, I felt a flash of mental illumination which momentarily
excited my intellectual organs, and I continued: “ Doesn’t God
inculcate a different doctrine ?”

“ Aha!” said he, with a contemptuous sneer, “I thought rou
didn’t know anything unless you’re asleep. But I’ll expose
you!”

“ Please answer my question,” quietly solicited I.

“Oh yes, sir, I will. The government of God is in his own
hands. He can change it when he adjudges necessary, and none
can stay his hand. Thus, when he wills so to do, he strikes wicked
men down in the street; sends bitter, biting frosts to destroy the
fruit of ungodly farmers; fills the land with lice and locusts;
makes wars on disobedient races of men; stops the sun in its
course; turns the heavens into an oven of consuming fire; and
unconverted souls he sends into everlasting misery.”

“ Are you very sure?” I inquired.

“ Holy Writ,” he answered, “is God’s own word, sir; and that
says that he has done so in all ages of the world. And _ now, sir,
I believe that the end of all things is near, even.at the very door ;
and my counsel to such as you, sir, is this: Give up your sleepy
occupation, go back to your former business, keep the sabbath-day,
" and prepare for the awful conflagration.”

“ What conflagration ?” I asked, with great astonishment.

“Why, sir, the end of the world—the second coming of the
Messiah —the end of all things, as foretold in Holy Writ!”

2

“Oh, yes, I understand you now,” said I, “and I will promise
to think of it.”

“Will you?” replied he, mellowing down into a beseeching

282 THE MAGIC STAFF.

mood: “will you think of it? Do so, my friend, do so— without
delay—and may the Lord of heaven help you!”

During all this conversation I depended on the strength of my
Staff, and it bent not; neither did I fear that it would break under
even a much greater pressure. But when the nervous and zeal-
ous preacher passed on his way, and I had gained the still retreat
of the burying-ground — through the sequestered paths whereof I
walked in deepest meditation —then the Staff was well-nigh neg-
lected, and my mental affliction became exceedingly intense.

For many subsequent days my mind was painfully exercised on
the solemn subject which the severe and persistent sectarist had
forced upon my attention. The world-wide interesting problem,
Whether there had been, or were now, supernatural interpositions
among men, for the purpose of changing, reversing, or regulating
human affairs and designs, was agitating my spirit almost contin-
ually ; and I well remember the circumstances which attended its
final examination and settlement. And let me here express—
which I can not but feel—the wish that every inquiring mind
could be enriched with a similar revelation. I know, to the depths
of my soul, that it would emancipate the individual from the slavery
of ignorance, superstition, and bigotry.

It was the last day of the beautiful month of June when I re-
ceived an authoritative impression, from fhe interior life, to ascend
the summit of a high but familiar mountain. My native village
_ (by adoption) was visible at a distance on the opposite side of the
river. ‘This mountain was my usual retreat; nothing was there
to disturb—but all outer things, the solitude, the stillness only
broken by the song of birds, and the scenery, were conducive to
spiritual development, elevation, and vision. Upon this mount,
and at this time, my spirit, in its accustomed manner, was enabled
to subdue and subordinate the body to itself, and my interior prin-
ciples of perception were opened, and were permitted their easy
and natural exercise.

The problem rested upon me with the weight of a mountain.

SPECIAL PROVIDENCES. 283

But what I then and there witnessed I will not here repeat. The
reader can find it entire in my pamphlet entitled “ The Philosophy
of Special Providences.” Strange as it may seem to thee, dispas-
sionate reader, yet it is true that, for five days after that vision, I
was a believer—an ignorant, miserable, inconsolable believer —
in a Divine Providence of changeful and fantastic manceuvres and
manifestations. My unreasoning conviction was so entire, that I
would not have been surprised to hear the thundering blasts of
that awful trumpet which was to awake millions to everlasting
happiness, and many more millions to everlasting misery! And
I trembled lest I had from earliest youth been made the dupe of
some destroying angel; lest that mysterious voice which had so
frequently soothed my troubled spirit, was but the trick of some
unseen evil genius—the prince of darkness, concerning whose
existence I had heard so much. And yet, amid all this mental
commotion, the Magic Staff was my support!

At length, as I was walking in the pathless meadows near the
village, I resolved to address a prayer to “kind Providence,” and
invoke his aid in my tribulation. I did so, and that too may be
found in the pamphlet heretofore specified. Immediately upon
concluding my earnest petition, I experienced, throughout my en-
tire system, the evidences of coming vision. As soon as my clair-
voyance was perfect, there came unto me a glorious presence —
an ultra-terrestrial being—very beautiful and tender-looking —
whose voice was the same that I had heard in moments of trial
since my boyhood! ’Twas like my mother’s—only sweeter, and
more musical. What a divine revelation! Quick and luminous
as the lightning’s flash was the talismanic gleam that cleaved the
overhanging shadows of my past pilgrimage. The whole of my
preceding history was opened up and explained. I had not been
dreaming —the voice was no imagination—the personage was no
baseless fabrication—no! no! no! WHalf-overcome with an ex-
alted joy, I still leaned on my Staff, and listened to the angel-
voice and celestial wisdom of my glorious Guide. His sublime

284 THE MAGIC STAFF.

utterances I have written out in the above-named publication.
Hence, in this book, I will but reiterate the fact that my spirit
was lifted triumphantly out of all doubt on the subject of Special
Providences.

As I pursued my walk homeward, my heart was filled with
happiness and contentment. The night had come on, and it was
dark to the physical eyes. But the sunlight of an Infinite and
Eternal Day shone brightly through the now-unfolded portions of
my immortal soul; and, by that Light which knows no darkness,
I had learned not to fear but to LovE the Supreme Principle!

But, alas! the feebleness of my young body and the unmatured
faculties of my mind deprived me of the blessed memory when not
in clairvoyance—so impenetrable was the curtaingof forgetfulness
that hung between my two conditions. And hence, though I felt
a peaceful tranquillity in reference to the exciting topic, yet I
could not give, in my daily walk, a single reason for the faith
within me!

A STRUGGLE FOR THE SECOND EMINENCE. 285

CHAPTER XXXVIII.
STRUGGLE FOR THE SECOND EMINENCE.

“Ah! to the stranger-soul when first it peeps
From its new tenement, and looks abroad
for happiness and sympathy, how stern
And desolate a tract is this wide world!”

Tue beautiful naturalness.of events about to be written, can be
appreciated only by reviewing a few weeks and thus obtaining
the advantage of a background. The charm of a landscape, for
example, depends chiefly on the relative position of the spectator.
The enchantment of distance is never to be rejected. No intelli-
gent artist ever walks into the depths of a wilderness to see a forest,
nor puts he his head under “the sad sea wave” to behold the
grandeur of an ocean scene. In like manner, the intelligent
reader who would perceive consistency and beauty in this psycho-
logical history, should withdraw occasionally from the vicinity of
its items and survey the whole surface with the eye of a gener-
alizing mind.

Previous to the experiences chronicled at the end of the last
chapter—during one of our professional visits at Bridgeport,
Connecticut—I distinctly foresaw, while in a lucid condition, a
new and higher psychical programme. The mysterious burthen
of a forthcoming employment I had vaguely anticipated and
announced some months prior to this date, (May, 1845,) but owing
to my now greater mental advancement and comprehensiveness

286 THE MAGIC STAFF.

of vision, I could contemplate the new territory, calmly, like some
aged man well acquainted with the labyrinthine paths of human
enterprise. .

My prevision related to a series of extraordinary revelations,
which I would ere long be prepared to dictate for the present and
future benefit of mankind.- These novel disclosures were to be in
part replies to hundreds of questions put to me by convalescing
patients and investigating minds, from the very beginning of my
mystical experience. Some of these interrogatories were curious,
entertaining, and important. An intellectual patient, for example,
having been satisfactorily examined, would beg the privilege of
asking such verbal or mental questions as these :-—

“Can you tell me what constitutes the soul?” or, “Is man’s
spirit immortal?” or “Is man a free agent?” “Is God a person,
or an essence?” “What is life?” “How did the earth become
populated?” “What is the main purpose of man’s creation?”
“Ts the Bible all true, or in part only?” “If man lives hereafter,
where is the locality to which he goes on leaving the body ?”
“Was Jesus Christ the Son of God, or God himself?” “Can
you tell me what is meant by the word hell?” “Is there a literal
place ‘of suffering?” “Is the devil a person or a principle?”
“What do you understand by the term Holy Ghost?” &c., &c.
And to all such queries my invariable answer was—“ Be patient!
I shall some day know just how to give your mind ample satis-
faction. When that.time arrives, as it surely will, then I shall
dictate a Boox, which will contain my answers to your interroga-
tories. Be patient! I can not examine anything but diseases
yet.”

Thus from day to day, through all the time I spent with Mr.
Levingston, did I repel every attempt to divert my mind frora the
original programme. In short, if the exact truth be told, I had
not yet reached the perfectly independent state. (See the diagram
of the different stages of magnetism, p. 205.) My general con-
dition was considerably mixed; and my mind was but partially

A STRUGGLE FOR THE SECOND EMINENCE. 287

liberated. This fact I did not know till the first of July following

at which time it began to dawn upon my understanding.

This dawning was characterized by certain conspicuous eyvi-
dences or premonitions. One indication was, the intermittent
nature of my clairvoyant vision

accompanied with a partial
suspension of my original capacity to endure the trance. The
period of my magnetic sleep was consequently shortened or vari-
able; and the feeling and lucidity of my mind partook largely of
the approaching change. i

These unmistakable irregularities or fluctuations privately dis-
turbed the semi-habitual equanimity of my spirit. I grew sad
and dissatisfied, without any obvious reason, and this reacted upon
the operator. One day he asked me “to explain the cause of my
restlessness or discontent.”

“¥ can’t tell,” said I with undisguised emotion. “Perhaps
your magnetism isn’t good for me any more.” ;

“Ah!” exclaimed he sorrowfully, “I thought ’t would be so.”

“That what would be so?” T asked.

“Why, that some of these new acquaintances would prejudice
your mind against me. Yes, I see how itis. They wish to get
you under their influence.”

Now I am free to confess that this unqualified avowal surprised
and disconcerted me; and, but for my Magic Staff, I think i
should have walked angrily out of his presence. It was a reflec-
tion upon my unshaken friendship for him, and so I replied:
“No, sir! you are entirely mistaken. It is true that I have been
offered large sums to leave Poughkeepsie and go westward, but
none of our friends or acquaintances have ever tried to break up
our relation.”

“T’m very glad to hear it,” said he; “for it would be a pity to
do anything to prevent the delivery of that Book you have so often
promised.” .

To this I made no reply; but looked downcast and thoughtful,
Seeing which he proposed to give me a larger proportion of our

288 THE MAGIC STAFF.

insignificant income, and so forestall all pecuniary temptation
which he suspected might be presented by others.

Appreciating his generosity and kindness, and knowing that our
average income for months together did not exceed what he used
to make at his calling in half the time, I strove to be cheerful
once more and to act wholly contented. All went on harmoniously
for a short time, save the peculiar variations in my clairvoyant
powers, preceded by a heavy magnetic slumber, and occasionally
terminating with severe headaches which the operator could neither
remove nor mitigate as formerly. These symptoms were for the
most part my own private property. To me they were extremely
ominous! The shadow of a coming event darkened my horizon.
What the future had in store for me I could not discern. There-
fore, though walking with and leaning on my Staff, my spirit was
painfully disturbed.

In this connection, dear reader, I wish to introduce a new
character. Nay! be not shocked. He’s quite gentle and won’t
bite. His name was Richard; but, for short, I called him
“Dick ;’ and the chief companion of my daily walks was he.
In form and weight he was remarkably small and light; but,
instinctively, he was the biggest and most knowing dog in the
_ village. My fondness for the exclusive society of this little Dick
was undisguised. His head-and-tail manifestations of dogmatic
delight—on my every return from a professional tour— were
strictly honest and gratifying in the extreme.

I introduce him at this juncture, because that morceau of the
Spirit of Nature which animated his little body, did certainly
perceive the presence of invisible beings—and that, too, some-
times in advance of my own far more exalted impressibility !
And this impulsive and unreasoning animal performed a valuable
deed for me at this crisis in my mental affairs, which I shall pres-
ently proceed to relate. Allow me parenthetically to remark that,
since the advent of the circumstance about to be recorded, I have
observed that three breeds of the canine species are particularly

A STRUGGLE FOR THE SECOND EMINENCE. 289

susceptible at times to the presence of disembodied personages.
The first, is the unadulterated mastiff or house-dog; the second,
across between the spaniel and the bull-dog; the last, a second
remove from the common cur and a fourth from the pointer or
bird-dog. a

On the particular occasion to which allusion is now made, I was
rambling and meditating in a distant field. My spirit was bowed
down by the pressure of some unknown responsibility. Hence I
walked like one fatigued with the baggage and burden attendant
on a long and lonely pilgrimage. The only visible companion of
this solitary ramble was my little Dick. His blithesome gambols
in the open fields—his gay and graceful springs and bounds for
the feathery songsters—could not now divert me. My spirit was
prayerful. I lifted up my voice toward heaven for instruction.
But no sacred sound reached my ear, and I was about to retrace
my steps; when little Dick attracted my attention by divers
demonstrations of uneasiness. He doggedly refused to return
with me homeward. On the contrary, he whined and snuffed the
air, looked frantically upward, howled most piteously, and other-
wise pantomimically signified his instinctive conviction that the
atmosphere contained something for me. Methought the unrea-
soning animal was momentarily crazed by his enthusiastic labor to
catch the little birds; and so believing, I whistled to him and pro-
ceeded a few rods apparently unmindful of his singularly frantic
beseechings.

But no! he would not be persuaded; and overcome at length
by curiosity and a love of gratifying my pretty favorite, I resisted
no longer, but followed to a sequestered spot whither the affectionate
creature invited me. “ Well, Dick,” said I sportively, “what’s
going on here?” In reply he exhibited his usual testimonials of
delight, and went dancing about as if his litttle heart was perfectly
happy.

At this moment I felt the presence of my invisible benefac-

tor. This sudden explanation was sufficient, and being at once
13

290 THE MAGIC STAFF.

abstracted, I listened to these musically spoken works: “ Seek—the
—mountain!  At—four—o'clock. Delay—not. A—vision—
~ .will—be—shown—thee.”. Breathlessly I waited for one more
beautiful word, from the being whose voice was so like my beloved
mother’s. “But all remained still as a July noon, and I departed
homeward.

Before the appointed hour I crossed the Hudson, va ferryboat,
and was waiting in my familiar seat—upon the beautiful Mount
—nearly due west of the Poughkeepsie Main-street landing.
Gradually I passed into a high clairvoyant exaltation, when lo!
there stood my glorious Guide like an angel of light!

“Thou art cast down and sorely troubled,” said he soothingly
“ wouldst thou know the reason?”

“Yes,” I replied, “I am oppressed. But I know not why.”

“Then, if thou wouldst know wherefore thy spirit is cast down,
gaze yonder.” Here he pointed above the horizon into the depth
of open space, and continued: “In a moment will I picture forth
thy past and thy future.”

As he spoke, I beheld the vacant space suddenly occupied with
a most natural and romantic scene. ‘There was before me in the
distance a castle-looking structure, reared in the body of a great
mountain. The side of the edifice toward me seemed to have
been hewn down and removed, giving a free and natural view of
its interior parts and arrangements.

“Behold!” said he affectionately. “That represents the exter.
nals of thy mental history.”

“Indeed!” exclaimed I. “ Howcold and desolate! But I can
not understand the picture.”

“Then,” replied he, “direct thy vision into the first and lowest
apartment.”

I did as he bade me, and lo! I beheld an exact counter-likeness
of myself. It represented me in somnambulism. I was walking
about in the dark—seeing machinery, painting the gardén of
Eden, &c.—while my expression was that of simple boyhood.

>

A STRUGGLE FOR THE SECOND EMINENCE. 291

In this basement story there were several windows, but they
looked upon the solid rock, and admitted no light.

“Yes,” said I much amused and animated, “that’s just exactly
true !”

“Then,” said he, “direct thy vision into the next and higher
apartment.” .

On lifting my psychological vision to the second story, I saw
another perfect representation of my own personality. There I
saw myself in the attitude of listening as if to words from unseen
speakers. Thus was I reminded of what I had heard in the
Hyde-Park cornfield, &c.; and again did I express myself de-
lighted with the perfect pictorial representation. Also, I re-
marked that the windows of this higher department opened
against the blank walls of the mountain, and admitted no ray of
natural light.

“Yes,” said I, “that’s just the state my mind was in during all
that period.”

“Then,” replied he, “direct thy vision into the third and still
higher apartment.” :

Most gladly did I obey his direction. And this view was a
great relief. There I saw myself seated before Mr. Levingston,
and, though my eyes were closely bandaged, they could discern
sunlight streaming through and vivifying the spacious room.
Now, the windows opened directly upon wide crevices in the
mountain fastness; and the silvery light which poured in through
those openings made them seem like loopholes leading the sou
out into a broad and sunny landscape.

“The picture is perfect!” shouted I with enthusiasm and grati
tude. “Yes! that’s just the way of my mind.” But while
speaking these words of recognition, I felt a sudden sadness—
a desire for a vaster range of-prospect. Then I said: “Oh, kind
Guide! can you tell me why I can not see more of the exquisite
landscape beyond ?”

292 THE MAGIC STAFF.

“ Wouldst thou have a larger vision of this stone-bound house
of thine?” :

“Oh! yes, yes!” exclaimed I, “that’s what I would have
next.” .

wemhen;” said he, “direct thy vision upward into the last and
highest apartment that thou canst for a season behold.”

I looked and again saw myself impersonated. But now I was
seated before a man whom I immediately recognised as the
recently-formed acquaintance of Bridgeport, Connecticut. Still
my bodily eyes were bandaged, but the room was filled with light!
Tt was far, very far above every mountain projection; and the
windows, looking out from the circular apartment, opened upon a
scene the most effulgent and magnificent !

“ What a desirable change!” I fervently ejaculated. “ What a
delightful prospect! But I fear that can never be!” and, feeling
momentarily depressed, I dropped my head, and the vision vanished.

“Why dost thou doubt ?” he sweetly inquired.

“Oh, kind Guide!” I replied sorrowfully, “because my present
relation is wound round about with very strong ties of sympathy.
It is firmly fixed in Mr. Levingston’s affections. Besides, if I
should withdraw from him, and take another magnetizer before
giving the Book, methinks our few and valuable friends would
not understand it, and I fear the validity and correctness of my
future clairvoyance would everywhere be disputed and denied.”

“Fearful, indeed, is thy youthful mind,” replied the Guide.
“Tell me, if thou canst, which of two human attributes is the
highest and the best—Sympathy? or Justice?

This interrogatory made me think long and profoundly, as I
supposed, but my soul could not answer it, and I said—“ Your
question, kind Guide, is too deep for my mind.”

Hearing which he smiled benignly and said—“Tell me, if
thou canst, which of two conditions of physical matter is most
useful and admirable—trees and no ship? or a ship made of
trees 2”

A STRUGGLE FOR THE SECOND EMINENCE. 293

In a breath I replied: “ A ship is most useful and admirable.”

“Ah!” he said with the same sweet and tender smile, “thou
art a quick scholar. But again; tell me, if thou canst, which of
two vessels is the safest in a storm—A ship given to the capri-
cious winds? or a ship given to the mind of man?”

The utter simplicity of this question excited my mirth and I
laughed outright; but looking upon the calm countenance of the
Guide, I stilled myself, and replied: “The safest ship is that
which is given to the mind of man.”

“Verily !” exclaimed he, “thou art getting thy lesson well.
Keep it in thy remembrance from day to day. And tell me, if
thou canst, which of two human attributes is the most admirable,
the safest, the highest, and the best —Sympathy ? or Justice ?”

As he spoke these words my mind comprehended the meaning ;
and I answered: “Pardon me, O Guide, for not seeing your
lesson sooner. The highest and the safest is Justicr, and I will
remember it.”

“That,” said he, “is the name of the mountain from the sum-
mit of which thy first teachings shall emanate.”

Overwhelmed with an appalling sense of a painful labor —that
of withdrawing from my kind and clinging operator—-I bent for-
ward and looked dejectedly on the earth. In a few minutes I
raised my head again to ask another question. But, alas! my
beautiful Guide had disappeared. Whereupon, realizing that I
was additionally enriched by some golden drops from Wisdom’s
fountain, and that Justice had been newly enthroned in its own
realm within my soul’s territory, I relapsed into my common state,
and returned to the operator’s residence, wth a heart full of joy
wholly inexpressible.

294 THE MAGIC STAFF.

‘CHAPTER XXXIX

THE MOUNTAIN OF JUSTICE.

“Tver the truth comes uppermost,
And ever is justice done.”

Berork retiring that night, only six hours af er the foregoing
lesson on the upland height, my memory was unable to recall the
particulars of what had transpired. “’Tis too bad,’ thought I,
“to have a useful dream—to discern a beautiful truth —and not
have wit enough to remember it.” And on the following morning
I had well-nigh forgotten the precise reason that led to the cir-
cumstance of my crossing the Hudson. Nevertheless, there was
a newborn and beautiful strength within—an enefgy and fear-
lessness in my organ of justice— which caused me to think of
doing whatsoever my conscience might eventually dictate. The
seed of change had been secretly planted, and it would grow;

the tide of a new river had just set through my being, and it

top]

would flow; another sun was designed to brighten my mental
world, and it would rise; the Magic Staff had been fixed in the
mountain, and the banner of “ justice’ would be unfurled; and
so, although still too feeble-minded to carry in memory the im-
mense wealth of my private providential experiences, there was
a certain unintermitting consciousness that gave me a strong
heart and a steady will.

Shortly after this we departed on one of our professional trips

THE MOUNTAIN OF JUSTICE, 295

to Bridgeport. But I did not forget to take my Staff. In con-
versation with a resident-physician, some of whose patients I had
previously examined, I asked, “ Can you tell what ails me?”

“What ails you?” said he, with evident surprise that I could
feel bodily uneasiness like the rest of mankind.

“Yes,” said I, “there’s something wrong about my state.
Whether it’s physical of mental I know not.”

“ Are you not able to examine yourself while in clairvoyance ?”
he inquired. “Seems tome you can. ‘Physician, heal thyself,
as the good book says.”

“No,” I answered. “T can’t discern my own state of health
as I can that of others. °T would be like lifting one’s-self by his
ears.”

“Does your power of clairvoyance ever seem like fading out ?”
he asked.

“J think it has of late,” said I. “And that’s what makes me
feel so unhappy, I guess.”

“Does Mr. Levingston’s power over you decrease

“No, I think not; but he can’t carry me any higher in clair-
voyance; perhaps, he may not hold me where I am now. I

p?
.

sometimes feel so.”

“Indeed !’”? exclaimed the physician. “If there’s anything
desirable in this world, it is your power. Why, my dear sir, I’m
indebted to you for a faith which I would not exchange for any-
thing I know of.”

“Well,” said I, “if I go on as I am, my clairvoyant candle
will soon be snuffed out. But there’s a change of some sort at
hand.”

“ Ah!” responded he, “do you think of changing operators ?”’

“Not that I know of,” said I, gloomily. “But I’m certain
there’s going to be something different, though I don’t know
what it is.” ;

“J suppose,” returned he, “that you can see who the right per-
son is, if you should have to get a new magnetizer. For myself

296 THE MAGIC STAFF.

I’m free to say that nothing would afford me more gratification
than practising medicine by the aid of your prescriptions.”

“Well, what’s before me I can’t foretell,” I replied. “ But
should you be the man to magnetize me, I shall surely present
myself at the proper time.”

And thus ended our candid conversation. But from day to day
ny spiritual discernment faltered and flickered; which fact con-
duced greatly to the reinstatement of the drooping depression that
had weighed me down during the few weeks preceding. Finding
it next to impossible to advance with the examination of patients,
we (Mr. Levingston and I) departed rather precipitously from
Bridgeport, to fulfill our corresponding engagements in Danbury,
whither we arrived the same afternoon.

’T was now about the nineteenth anniversary of my birth-day.
The rich and pearly hours dripped their ripeness into harvest-
field and meadow. The gracefully twining vines and upspringing
affluence of the soil, the soft breathing of garden-flowers, and the
musical chorus of delicately-formed insects, imparted manifold
pleasures to the susceptible imagination; but such pleasures
were not the guests of my bosom; and the congratulation of
friends upon the recurrence of my birthday, so grateful always to
him who values his existence, fell like dead flowers upon my
oppressed and bewildered spirit. Decision of character I had re-
cently acquired ; but what to decide upon? that was the question.
One moment, judging from my contending sensations, I feared the
incoming of a protracted illness —the next, I didn’t know but
duty called me back to Ira Armstrong’s. Now, my affections
leaned toward the Bridgeport physician—then, they nestled
clingingly in the operator’s kindly heart. At length, I sought my
tower of defence, Solitude. Leaning on my Magic Staff, I inter-
rogated the bending heavens for instruction.

Long and patiently waited I for a few words of comfort. None
came. “Iwas a calm and lovely hour, however, and I lingered
far from my fellow-men. I watched the effulgent sunbeams as,

THE MOUNTAIN OF JUSTICE. 297

one by one, they formed the holy temple of the Day. I heard
the wild bee sing its song of labor; and marked the beauteous
robin as it bestowed kindly offices on its young; but these joyous
creatures had no message of wisdom for me. Mine was the poet’s
sad song :-—
“T feel like one who treads alone
Some banquet-hall deserted ;

Whose lights are fled, whose garlands dead,
And all but he departed.”

But relief was at hand. In the midst of my meditations a
change came over my spirit. My nature appeared to spring, as
by an instantaneous growth, into unfettered and self-reliant man-
hood. The cable-like chain of locked arms and fraternal hearts
that bound me to Mr. Levingston, seemed suddenly broken! The
magical spell with which he unintentionally drew me from Ira
Armstrong, was wholly neutralized and dissipated. The luxuri-
ous freedom of individual ownership rushed over me like a flood
of heavenly joy. My soul was strong, and free, and wholly my
own. What a marvellous liberation !

On returning to our boarding-place, through the thickening
twilight, I met the operator, who, with a look of unusual anxiety
and impatience, said: “ You’re a truant youth, and no mistake.
Several patients have been waiting all day for you. Now they ’re
gone. Where have you been so long?”

The glorious news of my unexpected emancipation I did not
reveal; but, planting myself firmly on self-justice, I told him that
my condition demanded a suspension of his magnetism. And then
I intimated that we had better refuse all applications for the pres-
ent. To this he stoutly objected, as I anticipated he would; but
I as stoutly insisted, and so the matter terminated.

Next morning I was no longer wandering in the fog of doubt.
The horizon of my individual rights and dutiés was luminous as
with spiritual sunshine; and I walked once more like a being of

independent life anil understanding. My very life-blood and
13*

298 THE MAGIC STAFF.

nerve-auric principle had been saturated with magnetism for
nearly two years— making me the mere “subject” of another’s
will — but now my will and my individuality were wholly distinct
and self-controlled. But I was still a youth, and too weak to go
forward alone. Presently, therefore, I realized a drawing toward
the Bridgeport physician. This influence soon became very pow-
erful. And as the needle points to the pole, so followed I this
positive attraction. "I was obedience to a like impulse which, in
the first instance, separated me from Ira Armstrong ; and now,
with the additional luxury of a conscience, I yielded to the same
law, and thus permanently severed my relation with William

Levingston.

The Bridgeport physician, Dr. S. 8. Lyon, received me very
fraternally ; and when I told him that he was chosen, he mani-
fested unfeigned gratitude. This man’s physiognomy was pecu-
liarly marked. The profile outline of his head was pleasingly
regular. But his face indicated a mixed temperament —a cross
between Aristotle, the philosopher, and a Jersey deacon — being
no reliable index to his excellent interior character. He was mod-
erately social, very regardful of others’ feelings, fond of children,
honorable in his dealings, humane, exceedingly strong in his
friendships, orderly in his life, and naturally religious. But the
retreating eye, the overhanging brow, the thoughtful cast of his
entire face, rendered him to many a closed and sealed book.

Now for another sacrifice. My new operator had, by severe
and continuous effort, established himself in business. Those who
believed in the virtue of botanic remedies, and knew of the doctor’s
uniform success, employed him, and his gradually increasing remu-
neration was equal to, if not greater, than the income likely to ac-
crue from my clairvoyant examinations. But the conviction of
duty was upon hit. Hence, in obedience to my interior direc-
tions, he relinquished his practice; and, together, we proceeded
to that immense commercial dépot of the United States, known as

THE MOUNTAIN OF JUSTICE. 299

New York city. Here, as I had previously announced while
illuminated, the lectures were to be delivered. His influence was
refreshing and liberating. Distinctly, while in the magnetic state,
did I perceive the pathway; but as usual, when in the ordinary
condition, my mind was limited and benighted.

In the commencement a programme was given, that I should
only examine diseases for a certain number of weeks; and then,
all things having been got ready, I would begin the long-promised
discourses.

Let the reader now glide with me over ten weeks — during
which I slept from four to six hours per day —and halt at our
private boarding-house, No. 92 Green street, in the great city. It
was near the middle of November, 1845. And now, if the psy-
chological investigator wishes to read a very extraordinary illus-
tration of what I term “Missionary Mediumship,” which came
suddenly upon me at this time, he can turn to page 181 of my
work, entitled, “ Present Age and Inner Life.” There is a ro-
mantic and instructive matter hidden within that wonderful expe-
rience, which in some future day may be given to the public.

A few days after this, while in clairvoyance, I scanned the
immense foreground of my forth-coming work. Of this my recol-
lection at the present time is very perfect. But what I saw in
that comprehensive contemplation, belongs properly to the next
chapter. The motive for the appointment of witnesses is suffi-
ciently obvious. The motive for selecting the particular person
who was chosen as a scribe, may not be equally apparent; and
hence, as I can recall the circumstance and the reasons, I will
proceed to divulge them.

In reviewing and reflecting upon our prospectus for the ensu-
ing two years, which I could do from my state of mental exaltation
—just as a man on a mountain can see more of the country than
when in the valley below —I foresaw the necessity of having a
scribe who could comprehend the general drift of the lectures,
and who, being possessed of a lively conscience, would voluntarily

300 - THE MAGIC STAFF.

defend our proceedings from the aspersions of prejudiced and un-
scrupulous journalists. In order to find such a man, I looked far
and wide over the population of this country, but saw no one
whose mental qualifications and external circumstances were
alike favorable, save Rev. William Fishbough, of New Haven,
Connecticut. This gentleman I had previously seen in my nor-
mal state. But prior to this interior survey of his qualifications,
I had not discovered the slightest tenure of relation between him
and the work about to be commenced. In accordance with my
selection, the doctor wrote Mr. Fishbough, who, notwithstanding
a combination of external impediments, cheerfully accepted the
nomination, and presented himself an hour before the time fixed
upon for the delivery of the first lecture.

My impressions of the scribe’s interior character were these:
that his mind was thought-loving, truth-loving, man-loving, God-
loving, Heaven-loving, humility-loving, and moderately ambitious
of personal success and distinction. It seemed to me that he was
careful, cautious, critical, and conscientious; and that in any
laudable literary enterprise his endowments were obtainable and
in the main available. The maternal nature predominated in
him, as I read his organization; and hence I judged that, what-
ever be his intellectual beliefs, his affections would, in the issue,
invariably overrule them, and thus establish his destiny in the
human universe. Perceiving these traits, and discerning the
favorableness of his outer circumstances, taken in connection with
the peculiar nature and demands of our immediate future, I coun-
selled. the soliciting of his aid, which, as already stated, was readily
and cheerfully rendered.

It may be difficult for the reader to keep in remembrance the
vast contrast between my mind illuminated and unilluminated.
The time dividing the two conditions was not longer than “ the
step” which is said to separate the sublime from the ridiculous.
Twenty strokes of the doctor’s hands would change and promote

THE MOUNTAIN OF JUSTICE. 301

me from an ignorant youth to the high elevation of the profound
philosopher. Or five minutes devoted to the reverse manipula-
tions, would bring me from the exalted throne of Jupiter down to
the common level of an untaught and unremarked dweller of
Manhattan isle. If the reader can bear in mind this fact, he
will not marvel that, previous to the commencement of my lec-
tures, I fled to my mountain opposite Poughkeepsie for consola-
tion and further enlightenment.

Sadness was upon me once more. Because I could not feel
positive, at all times, that my steps were truly and safely taken.
It is true, my Staff saved and supported me on many occasions.
But I was again beset with doubts on the question of Special
Providences; and with fears that I was in some manner duped
and led astray. In this over-anxious and distressed mood I

~stepped on one of the North river steamers, and, reaching once
more the consecrated mount, I poured out my soul in a flood of
beseeching interrogatories concerning the perplexing subjects by
which I was overwhelmed.

My spontaneous illumination, the harmonious exaltation of my
faculties, was unusually sweet, and the welcome discoveries of my
soul’s trackless sweep were graphically grand. Intellectually, I
gazed upon the immutable principles that regulate the universe.
How easily and gratefully did I drink in these never-to-be-forgot-
ten truths of temporal and eternal existence! But the result of
my philosophical examinations, on that occasion, I have already
published, in that portion of the pamphlet on “Special Provi-
dences,”’ entitled, “The Argument.” Hence I will not record it
in this volume. The inestimable details of those metaphysical
reflections were, as usual, locked up in the treasury of my clair-
voyant memory. On returning New-York-ward, however, feel-
ing calm and prepared for the lectures, I kept mentally saying,
“Thanks! thanks! thanks!” and nothing more. But now I
know that the grand effect of that last contemplation was stamped
indelibly upon the inner folds of my soul-substance. Surely there

302 THE MAGIC STAFF.

are special providences. There are invisible guardian powers.

*T was by and through their aid, added to my own exertions and
the unfailing Staff, that I attained the top of the Mountain of Jus- ®
tice; from which psychical summit, as my Guide informed: me,
the sublime revelations of Nature were ere long to emanate.

THE PRINCIPLES OF NATURE. 803

CHAPTER XL.
‘THE PRINCIPLES OF NATURE.

“T remember the time, ye sun and stars,
When ye raised my soul from its mortal bars,
And bore it through heaven in your golden cars !”

Hayne accompanied me thus far, and seen the many and va-
rious changes and scenes through which I have passed since birth,
methinks the reader will not now turn back. Nay, for a curtain,
which has long deprived the spectator of a novel representation,
is about to be rolled up.

The locality was No. 92 Greene street, a few doors north of

Spring, on the well-known isle of Manhattan. The dramatis per-
sone, or those who sustained the principal distinctive characters
in these private theatricals, were Dr: Lyon, Mr. Fishbough, and
the writer. The auditorium was occupied with three witnesses,
the most prominent and educated of whom was the amiable and
quiescent Dr. T. Lea Smith. His gentle mind was suffering with
his body at the time; but, besides being my patient, he was a sin-
cere investigator of truth, and a semi-believer in clairvoyance.
The novel piece announced to be performed in part on the occa-
sion was entitled “Lectures by A. J. Davis, the Clairvoyant.”
But it should be kept in remembrance that this announcement
was not made public. Only a few persons were privately notified,
and invited to witness the enactment. For the object was not
notoriety and money; but, on the contrary, as noiselessly and

3804 THE MAGIC STAFF.

steadily as dew descends and grass grows, was prosecuted the mu-
tual aim to gain admission into the ever-sacred temple of Truth!
Therefore the terms “farce,” “comedy,” “jugslery,” &c.—subse-
quently used with such evidently malicious intent, by some of the
New York journalists, to characterize and caricature that perform-
ance—were grossly and ridiculously inapplicable.

If you possess an impressible faculty of imagination, dear reader,
now is the time to exercise it legitimately. ’Iis by means of this
organ alone that you may shut your eyes and recall the features
of an absent friend, or enjoy, while sitting by your fireside, the
charms of a remembered landscape, or mingle with the peculiari-
ties of some locality and event in the world which your eyes have
never seen. Fancy to yourself a small room, furnished with arti-
cles convenient for a couple of itinerant gentlemen-boarders, with-
out a library or other evidences of intellectual tastes and pursuits.
Picture to yourself a grave-visaged man in the act of manipulating
a pale-faced and thin-bodied youth. Also, at the right-of this
twain, behold a mild-eyed and broad-browed individual, seated in
front of a table, on which lie the usual conveniences for writing.
And, on either side, fancy three men half-fascinated with the ever-
charming process of magnetization. The pleasure of silence is
mutually realized. All is still as the sun. And now, as the
youth is about to take the principal character, suppose you gaze
into his cranium.

In the first place, let us take an inventory of his intellectual
stock, and check down each article at its marketable valuation,
The circumference of his head is unusually small. If “size is the
measure of power,” then this youth’s mental capacity is unusually
limited. His lungs are weak and unexpanded. If “the mind is
invigorated in proportion to the capacity ef the chest,” then this
youth’s mind must be feéble and circumscribed in its operations.
He had not dwelt in the midst of refining influences. If “ cireum-
stances mould the character,” then this youth’s manners must be
ungentle and awkward. He has not read a book save one, and

lad

THE PRINCIPLES OF NATURE. 805

that on a very unimportant subject; he knows nothing of grammar
or the rules of language; neither has he associated with literary
or scientific persons. If “’tis education forms the common mind,” -
then is this youth’s intellectual stock too meagre for the literary
market. .

Butsee! The grave-visaged operator ties a handkerchief about
the youth’s uneducated head—closing the world yet more out,
and leaving him to his own psychical changes and transformations.
Do not turn away your gaze, dear reader, for the mental crisis
has just arrived. Behold! the inner folds of his intellectual or-
gans begin to tremble and expand like opening flowers. They
emit a soft atmospheric ether, which rapidly saturates the air of
the room, and ascends, like the water-spout at sea, toward the
heavens. What a delicate column of light! See it arise !—above
the house, above the highest steeple, above the loftiest mountain,
above the pale moon, above the holy stars, above the reach of tele-
scope, above—away—higher—beyond all elevation, save that
of the true soul’s aspirations!

Unnatural!” you exclaim. Nay, not so, most worthy friend.
Allow me to substitute the term “extraordinary.” Surely you do
not mean to assert the ascension of life to be unnatural! Why,
just look into yon field where the oak arises above the soil, above
the reach of grass, above the power of prowling brutes, above the
freezing depth of wintry snows, above the destroying floods of
spring, above the ambition of plebeian forest-trees, above —be-
yond — higher—than the heads of conceited priests, kings, popes,
or emperors! Yea, all life looketh heavenward ; and, once disen-
tangled, behold how it hasteneth thither!

Yes! can you not see that radiant shaft of spiral light reaching
all the way from the sleeping youth’s uneducated head to a Focus
of Thought beyond the stars? There! do you see that? An
answering shaft descends! His benumbed hands do quiver with
a new sensation, and the muscles of his face do vibrate and tremble

with the inflowing power.

306 THE MAGIC STAFF.

“Impossible!” Nay, nay, not impossible, dear reader. Why,
if you will but behold a corresponding exhibition, but one far, very
far inferior, then will I show you a well-known phenomenon of the
northern seas. Fix your gaze upon the Arctic ocean. Behold
the water whirling with a frightful gyration. Now see the as-
cending column of water forming a junction with the spirally-
descending zolumn from the cloud-region above the ocean. See
the vortex of foam beneath! See that tremendous marine prodi-
gy—wonderful and impossible to landsmen, but certain and dan-
gerous to the mariner who ploughs with his ship the northern seas.
Beholding this distant object, and believing in its actuality, can
you doubt your own eyes and your reason when looking upon the
head of that magnetized youth? So close at home, too! Have
you forgotten the locality? Why, it was in the very centre of
New York—I had almost said of civilization—in the nineteenth
century !

“Wark! what’s that?” inquired the grave-faced operator. The
mild-eyed and broad-browed scribe listened. The witnesses were
still as pall-bearers.

“This night,” replied the youth, with reverent and measured
intonations, “I reach my superior condition.” (The reader can
understand this language by reviewing the magnetic diagrams.
The writer attained the fourth stage for the first time permanently
on the 28th of November, 1845.)

“Can you give the lecture to-night ?” asked the doctor who had
magnetized the youth.

“To the great centre of intelligence—to the positive sphere of
thought —to that Focus which treasurés up all the knowledge of
human worlds,” said the youth calmly — “to the spiritual Sun of
the spiritual sphere —I go to receive my information.”

“ Does he wish to have that written down ?” whispered the vigi-
Jant scribe.

The doctor repeated the question, and the youth replied, “No,
rot that.” But after a pause he said, “ Now I am ready.”

e

THE PRINCIPLES OF NATURE. 307

The scribe set his chirographical hand in order, and the doctor
—who, according to previous direction, was to pronounce aloud
after the low-spoken youth, to make sure that each word was cor-
rectly heard and written — being also ready, the clairvoyant slowly
and without excitement began :—

“Reason is a principle belonging to man alone.” ‘This sen-
tence being written, he continued; “The office of the mind is to
investigate, search, and explore, the Principles of Nature, and
trace physical manifestations in their many and varied ramifica-
tions.” When those words were duly recorded, the youth — the
same youth, remember, whose mental stock we have carefully in-
ventoried — proceeded: “Thought, in its proper nature, is uncon-
trolled. It is free to investigate, and rise into lofty aspirations.
The only hope for the amelioration of the world is free thought
and unrestricted inquiry. And anything which opposes or tends
to obstruct this sublime and lofty principle, is wrong.”

Thus, with the occurrence and recurrence of short intervals of
extreme abstraction between paragraphs, the first lecture was de-
livered. And when the youth returned to his ordinary state, all
memory of his knowledge had vanished, and he was once more an
ignorant and uninteresting person. What was uttered on that and
subsequent nights, in the precise manner and style described, the
reader can find in the First Part of my volume entitled “ Nature’s
Divine Revelations.” y

“Tncomprehensible!” methinks I hear you incredulously ex-
claim. Nay, nay, be not so hasty in thy rejection. Here! lean
on the Magic Staff awhile, and let me talk to thee, to thine in-
most reason, of this rare exhibition. Put aside thy pride and thy
learning for a brief period at least, and open the child-part of thy
being to this old truth, newly delineated in our quiet room on
Greene street. Will you not be calm and philosophical? How
skeptical thou art! Is that a proof of thy strength of intellect?
O conceited intellect! Dost thou not know that my mother Je-
lieved too much, because her intellect was uncultivated? And

308 THE MAGIC STAFF.

dost thou not know, also, that thou believest too little, because of
the same fact—that thy intellect is yet in its infancy ?

Well, the marvellous drama was performed. The uneducated
youth sustained the principal character, viz., that of a thoroughly-
educated philosopher. His part was well conceived, and person-
ated to the entire satisfaction of the audience.’ And at this mo-
ment, after the lapse of many intervening years, his most inte-
rior reminiscences occupy my soul. Therefore, 1 am the most
reliable witness, and feel no reluctance in divulging the secret
workings of my mind on that and subsequent sessions.

The new and different operator, Dr. Lyon, completely disen-
thralled my mind from the disturbances of the nervous system. I
was therefore more mental, more spiritual, and less physical, than
on any previous occasion. Like a biennial plant, my soul flow-
ered out, and presented that rare fruit which had been so Jong
anticipated. Accordingly, added to my clairvoyance, there un-
rolled from within the Superior Condition.

“What’s the difference?” The difference is the same as be-
tween sight without understanding and sight crowned with the
latter unspeakable advantage and improvement. For example:
you look at a piece of gold ore or at a pound of gypsum. This
sight, without a full understanding of the chemical constituents of
what you see, corresponds to clairvoyance. But suppose you both
look at and chemically analyze the ore or gypsum, then you illus-
trate both clair-voyance and clair-science, or, in other words, inte-
rior perception in combination with intellectual understanding,
which is the superior condition. Hence it follows that one who is
a clairvoyant merely is more or less liable to err and mistake the
locality, properties, nature, and relation, of whatever he may thus
perceive; while, on the other hand, he who is both clear-seeing
and clear-knowing — or who possesses at once the double blessing
of clairvoyance and clairscience—is liable to err only in three
directions, viz., in quantities, times, and magnitudes. Both condi-
tions, therefore, are capable of being eternally improved.

THE PRINCIPLES OF NATURE. 809

Entering upon the superior condition on that never-to-be-for-
gotten night, my mind at first seemed to expand all over the isle
of Manhattan. Watching and intellectually analyzing as this novel
feeling crept on, I discovered that it was not a bodily but an intui-
tional awakening and soaring which so beautitully identified my
individual consciouness with that of all human kind. Nor was
this all. My instincts identified me equally with the animal crea-
tion, and thence with the essences and laws of plants and vegeta-
tion; and thus I felt like a conscious mirror, if I may so say, on
which were reflected and in which were focalized the principles
and properties of the System of Nature!

This conscious reception and subjective focalization of absolute
reflections made me affirm—“To the great centre of intelligence
—to the positive sphere of thought,” &e., “I go for information.”
The idea here embodied is correct, but the form of expression is
ambiguous. It is liable to give the reader a false impression —
that I went, mentally, to the spirit-world for each paragraph I
uttered; whereas my intellectual “impressions” were wholly de-
rived from a contact of my exalted intuitions with the ultimate
essences of external substances. .

If this be true, then what did I mean by my affirmed rising
“above the stars’? Simply the ascension of my intuitions, the
flight and expansion of my superior sensibilities, which, in every
human being, are infallible so far as they are enabled to reach out
iuto the empire and laws of life. “Are you not mistaken?” say
you. Nay, friend. Let me convince you that I am not by ask-
ing and answering a few familiar questions: What is the greatest
geometrician? The greatest is that creature which has never
studied books—the honey-bee. What is the greatest architect ?
The unscholastic beaver. What is the sweetest musician? The
untrained bird of song. Who is the truest lover of God? The
untutored Indian. What knows the art of love better than did
Ovid? The unsophisticated heart. Who appreciates the value
ot childhood better than any philosopher? The unpretending

310 THE MAGIC STAFF.

mother. Who understands the science of dietetics better than
any physiologist? The hungry laborer Now allow yoursclf to
imagine, for a moment, the simultaneous #:beration, and expansion,
and exaltation, of these implanted, infallible teachers. That was
my experience, and nothing more. Through the disenthrallment
of these inherent intuitions— which are the only reliable philoso-
phers in the universe—I received my knowledge. Yea, I ob-
tained my “impressions” from the ultimates or spiritualized es-
sences of objective Nature.

What do I mean by “ultimates”? By ultimates I mean the
products of primates. For illustration: you hold in your hand a
peach. What is that peach? An ultimate! An ultimate of
what? (Ah! now you become an incipient Interior Philosopher.)
The peach is an ultimate of a flower. Whence the flower? From
a bud. Whence the bud? From a twig. Whence the twig?
From a branch. Whence the branch? From a body. Whence
the body? From a seed. Whence the seed? From spiritual
forces. Whence spiritual forces? From the Divine Fountain.
Whence the Divine Fountain? Most exalted question! It will -
consume an eternal life to yield the correct answer.

Or, take another illustration. My intuitions arise above New
York, and I realize the presence of a certain impalpable ether.
Whence the ether? From boiling water. Whence the water?
From earth-bound gases. Whence the gases? From the vitalic
forces of the earth. Whence the earth? From the sun. Whence
the sun? From another sun. Whence that sun? From a sun
still greater and more remote. Whence that remoter sun? From
a sun yet more inconceivable. Whence that still vaster sun?
From the central Sun of the Univerccelum.

Or, take a different example. My intuitions ascend like a light
column of ether toward the upper realm, and I come in contact
with an atmosphere of Thought! Whence that atmosphere?
From a congregation of professors, students, and guests, at Union
college. Why that congregation? It is commencement-day.

THE PRINCIPLES OF NATURE. 811

What’s the subject of the present speaker? The relation of
Christianity to Civilization. Whence Christianity? From the
teachings of a person named Christ.. Whence that person? Now,
in asking myself this historical question while mentally exalted,
my intuitions become centred upon the myriad-form tracks of hu-
man history. . Presently I strike the right vein. Then, true as
the earth to the sun, I glide swiftly. “down the enormous grooves
of Time”

upon the exact events which preceded and characterized the birth

hailing the intervening Centuries as I pass—till I fix

and life of the individual under examination. In like manner,
every other question—scientific, ethical, psychical, poetical, pro-
. phetic, literary, &c., with which I come into intuitional rapport—
is subjectable to my voluntary investigation. And thus, from the
ultimate of any matter— which invariably contains the exact mi-
nutiz and summary of its genesis, biography, incidents, properties,
nature, and relations, as well as the certain indices of its future
destinations —I receive my “impressions.” Whether I obtain
them correctly or otherwise is a question which in part remains to
be decided by my individual industry and love of truth while thus
intuitionally exalted. I say “in part,” because a certain propor-
tion of such experience can be truly explained only by reference
to the propitiousness of organization and hereditary inclinations.
Thus I become to some extent individually responsible for my
“impressions ;” and in the reception and impartation of them (for
my perception and use of language are also intuitional) I can
greatly progress, or cease altogether, as my moral status and will
may incline me.
In all this, then, you perceive the inestimable utility of the
Magic Staff. And, in view of the foregoing reliable explanation,
-how glaring becomes the misapprehension of those who advertise
my lectures as “ given through the mediumship of A. J. Davis” —
as if my mind (while in the superior condition) were an insensible,
unintelligent, and passive substance, or spowt, through which dis-
embodied personages express or promulgate their own specific

312 THE MAGIC STAFF.

opinions! This is an egregious error —a most unwholesome mis-
representation. The special influence and guardianship of spirit-
ual beings are interpolated, so to speak, into the independently-
written chapters of individual existence. Such is an immutable
law of humanity. And thus, amid the trials of life and the changes
of death, the consolation is, not that we have been playing the
part of insensate automatons under incessant inspirations from
spirits, but that we are self-existent and responsible beings; and
that, aided now and then by these providential agents, we hare at
last climbed to the summit of that rudimental mountain which
enables us to step upon the less rugged acclivities of a yet higher
and more happy world.

THE SORROWS OF NEW YORK. 813

CHAPTER XLI.
THE SORROWS OF NEW YORK.

Tue city of New York, the metropolis of America, is a mag-
nificent dépot. The various nations and savage tribes of the
earth dwell, through certain self-appointed representatives of more
or less accuracy and distinction, within the city limits. And the
nervous and muscular speed with which everybody walks, and the
locomotive anxiety depicted on every pedestrian’s countenance,
serve to give a countryman the impression that each is hastening
to take the next train of cars, steamer, or flying-machine, bound
for California, Oregon, Minnesota, Kansas, or Perdition.

Doubtless, most young men of my age would have revelled in
the multitudinous sensuous elegancies that shine in one unbroken
line on either side of Broadway from the Battery to Union Park.
Examples of the wares and works of all civilized races may be
seen on exhibition in the palatial store-windows, and so tastefully
classified and charmingly displayed, too, that the spectator must
be dull indeed who does not imagine himself a visitor in an endless
museum, or at the World’s Fair, which is to close with a week’s
carnival and a military parade of the most gorgeous and magnifi-
cent character. To these countless attractive sights and seductive
external influences I was not insensible. But the horrible per-
sonations of vagrancy and distress which I daily saw— appealing

‘as they did to my constitutional sensitiveness and disposition to
14

814 THE MAGIC STAFF.

sympathize with the suffering—eclipsed all the glories and nev-
tralized many of the temporary pleasures of my city life.

The streets were covered with snow, the wind was piercing,
yet the sun shone effulgently upon the Isle, and I was walking
leisurely for purposes of bodily health. But could I feel happy?
Perhaps the first sight was a weeping child, barefooted and desti-
tute of warm garments. The next was a distressed woman, with
a sick husband at their miserable tenement, and several diseased
children, suffering equally for food and raiment. And so on to
the end of my walk. The forlorn look, the despairing tone, the
heart-rending solicitation for money and assistance, would sink
into and move the depths of my heart; and impelled thus to the
exercise of pity and charity, I would nervously bestow upon the
lone child, the mendicant mother, or the decrepit old man, what-
ever sum I could spare, and then hasten on my way — oppressed
with the sad reflection, that the few pennies I had given were as
flies to a famishing lion, or as drops of water to a drove of thirst-
ing cattle.

But the Magic Staff many times gave me tranquillity. What
little money I had obtained by examinations, was at length ex-
pended on supposed genuine objects of charity, but I remarked
that those objects became no less numerous nor more happy. This
painful discovery led to another—less painful but very absurd —
that I was trying to fill a “bottomless pit ;” and this led me, while
in clairvoyance, to examine the causes and cure of Poverty in
New York. The results of that probing were at least of. great
personal service. You will find a faithful record thereof by turning
to page 105, volume second, of “'The Great Harmonia.” After
that singular investigation I suffered much less from impulsive
sympathy with the apparent sorrows of the street; but, relying
more upon the wisdom of associative efforts for the poor, I
resisted many daily appeals, and devoted the sarplus of my scanty
income to the current necessities of my only remaining and pov-
erty-stricken sister.

THE SORROWS 6% NEW YORK. 815
*

A few days prior to the commencement of the Second Part of
the Revelations, the first section of which volume I was almost
every night engaged in delivering, the scribe wrote and presented a
communication to the “ New York Tribune,” entitled “ Remarkable
Phenomena,” which the fearless editor of that daily journal
accepted and published. The article sketched out in general
terms the progress then being made with our private lectures,
and remarked briefly upon the complete and harmonious character
of the truths already revealed. Before my magnetic session on
the morning succeeding the appearance of the article, several new
characters introduced themselves upon our boards. We were now
located at No. 24 Vesey street. One gruff old man I particularly
remember. Having read the communication, he wished to make
specific and exact inquiries concerning the subject of the lectures.
When fully informed he asked: “ Can’t you read me a few para-
graphs ?”

The circumspect and accommodating scribe, with his character-
istic deliberation, read aloud portions of a recent discourse. The
elderly visitor listened with strict attention. The selections con-
tained a string of strange, long, hard, obscure phrases—such as
“ naletiological sciences,” “ zoological formations,” “ morphological
theories,’ &¢c.—which greatly befogged the auditor’s judgment,

,and, I may add, my own not less when not mentally exalted.

Becoming suddenly overwhelmed with the new phraseology, the
half-provoked listener exclaimed: “ Hold! Let me ask, does that
first big word have reference to the palate ?”

a No, sir,’ replied the scribe respectfully. “It is, perhaps, a
new coinage. The clairvoyant says he uses it to signify those
sciences formerly established, from which different theories and
speculations may be evolved.”

1?

“ Humph!” growled the crusty visitor. “Take my advice, sir,
and leave that word out.” Then he continued: “ What’s mor-
phological mean ?”

The mild scribe again replied: “This term is another new

316 THE MAGIC STAFF.

word, I think, which the clairvoyant employs to designate inregu-
lar forms of matter, or a succession of heterogeneous Jevelop-
ments, during the different epochs that mark the geological forma-
tion of the globe.”

The befogged old man looked still more rigid. And planting
his eyes firmly on those of the scribe, he said: “ What’s the use
of all that unknown language? Use words, sir, that people can
understand, sir. That’s what’s wanted.”

“Tf explanatory notes be appended to the obscure parts,” said
the patient scribe, “then will not the new words be comprehended
by the reader ?”

But at this moment the doctor notified me that the hour for my
medical examinations had arrived. Whereupon the austere old
man arose abruptly to depart. I conducted him to the outer door,
where he sharply said: “Are you the chap that uses those big
words?” Receiving an affirmative reply, he continued: “ Then,
young man, take my advice.”

I was silent. His address amused me, however, and I waited
for the advice.

“ Burn that lecture I heard read this morning,” said he with a
scowling look and a croaking voice, “and then write something
that folks can understand.” Saying which he shuffled away,
smiting the pavement with his cane as he went—as if to make
the insensate stones applaud the profound counsel he had just
uttered for my individual benefit.

In the afternoon of that day we received a visit from a very
different type of humanity. His inquiries and attentions were of
the most intelligent, direct, and amiable character. But we did
not know, till he was about to take his departure, that our agree-
able guest-was Professor Bush, the able philologist and theologian.
This circumstance did me good. It taught me to believe that,
notwithstanding the unpopular nature of our magnetic proceedings,
there was at least one worthy person who dared to examine for
himself. ;

THE SORROWS OF NEW YORK. 817

Shortly after this pleasant visitation, another gentleman arrived
on a similar errand. His remarkable face bore traces of feminine
‘mental characteristics ; but upon his spacious brow there sparkled
the gems of rare endowments. In his critical eye, however, I
observed an ominous shadow! Thinking to myself, I said: “This
person’s talent immolates his genius.” At length he informed us
that his name was “ Edgar A. Poe.” During an interior conver-
sation, I recollect of assuring him that, though he had poetically
imagined the whole of his published article upon the answers of a
clairvoyant, the main ideas conveyed by it concerning “ ultimates”
were strictly and philosophically true. At the close of this inter-
view he departed, and never came again.

The evening for the delivery of the first lecture of the Second
Part, at length arrived. My present recollection of that night’s
“impressions” is extremely vivid. Already P had searched and
explored the principal departments of the great temple of Organ-
ized Nature. My mind had become measurably familiar with the
fundamental laws of composition, crystalization, segregation, disin-
tegration, refinement, the correspondence between things visible
and invisible, the origin and uses of animal and human organiza-
tions, &c., &c.; and consequently, owing solely to the progressive
unfolding and invigoration of my own powers of comprehension, I
was intellectually prepared to trace out the grand laws which
underlie the very foundation of the present universe.

In harmony with the method set forth in the last chapter, I
soared out into the boundless sea of existing life; and then traced,
link by link, every successive stage of planetary growth, until I
reached and solved the primeval condition.

Having arrived, by the intuitional railroad, at the Central Dépét
of the universe, and viewing the facts and principles that were
both involved and evolved, I was moved to break the silence with
these startling words: “In the beginning, the Univercelum was
one boundless, undefina»le, and unimaginable ocean of Liquid
Fire.

318 THE MAGIC STAFF.

“What was that word?” asked the intensely-interested scribe,
referring to the newly-coined term “ Univerccelum.”

Now it is not a little remarkable that, while I instinctively
knew the roots and orthography of this novel phrase, I could not
give it the correct pronunciation. Therefore I carefully spelled it,
letter by letter, to make the scribe’s writing a matter of certainty.

This word being fixed, I proceeded: “The most vigorous and
ambitious imagination is not capable of forming an adequate con-
ception of the height, and depth, and length, and breadth thereof.
There was one vast ocean of liquid Substance! This was the
original condition of Matter.”

THE SUN OF THE UNIVERSE.
©

The diagram is designed to illustrate what I then beheld. Now
let the reader imagine a Sun large enough to fill all space, the

THE SORROWS OF NEW YORK. 519

Centre of which is the residence of that Omnipotent Mind called
the “ Sensorium,” and the white circle or belt near the Centre as
an inconceivably vast Spirit World, populated with spiritualized
personages who were once men and women, and then he will
entertain a faint but correct outline of the stupendous spectacle
which I beheld just before delivering the above brief sentences.
Thus, I continued and completed the discourse, and then, night
after night, proceeded with my wonderful visions and strange
utterances; which, having been so fully and ably reported, I will
not stop to reiterate.

3820 THE MAGIC STAFP.

CHAPTER XLII.
SEVERAL NEW STARS.

Tue Magic Staff supported and saved me on many occasions _
of severe trial ; and what should not be overlooked is, the more I
used it the greater was my contentment. Throughout a pro-
tracted and distressing illness, which, about this time, almost shat-
tered my exhausted frame, this Staff was the invisible magic wand
that summoned to my bedside not only loving friends from this
world, but heavenly and strengthening influences from skies too
pure for physical eyes to gaze upon. “Take it and try it,” dear
reader: the result is sure as destiny.

My clairvoyant examinations of the sick every morning—our
only source of pecuniary income—were imperceptibly becoming less
frequent and profitable. Not that applications from the diseased
world were less numerous, but the lectures monopolized and con-
sumed a large proportion of my cerebral strength. Out of the limit-
ed proceeds we had, first, to defray our own current individual ex-
penses; and, second, to liquidate certain definite obligations to the
scribe for pencilling down and copying off the lectures. His
weekly remuneration we made as generous as possible —knowing
that, while thus engaged, he could not receive much, if any, aid
from his former profession and brethren.

Finding it necessary we removed temporarily into cheaply-fur-
nished rooms in Canal street, where, as I now remember, my soul
seemed more than ever conversant with the stellar universe. The

SEVERAL NEW STARS. 321

sublime events of that era are brilliantly painted on my memory.
Intuitionally, or by virtue of the superior condition, I became in-
tellectually identified with what scientific minds had discovered in
astronomy. Ix a few hours I found, to my astonishment, that the
progressive history of scientific discoveries, is traceable in the
mental atmosphere of the planet; just as in the fragrance of a
rose, you may find atoms representing its particular genesis, his-
toric incidents, respective qualities, &c.; the original sources of
which are still concealed within its external or physical constitu-
tion. In these more sensuous sources the chemist finds the quali-
ties of the rose, just as scholars read books and papers to acquire
a knowledge of astronomy. Of all this externalism I was inde-
pendent. Neither was I compelled to report according to my
clairvoyance merely. But when my intuitions were disentangled
and inspired, then I could feel and see and know what the Earth’s
mental atmosphere contained.

Soaring back thus through the long vista of bygone centuries,
I observed men, beneath the mild climate and upon the level
plains of Chaldea, examining and classifying the heavenly bodies.
Thence I traced the astrological observations to the natural schol-
ars of the valley of the Nile. Thence to the still more advanced
wise men among the Egyptians. Thence to what is now called
Central America. Thence backward to the Chaldeans again,
from whom the ancient Indians and Chinese obtained their data;
out of which I witnessed the stellar developments of Eratosthenes;
and thence, nearer and nearer home, the works of Galileo, Newton,
Kepler, La Place, Herschel, &c., till I reached the results of the
last telescopic observation. And what is remarkable, as I now re-
member, when describing the facts and phenomena of our own par-
ticular solar system, I did not feel the impulse to vary from the in-
formation generally received by living astronomers. During all
that period I was but. uttering, in my own language, a summary
of existing astronomical knowledge. Hence I did not conceive it

to be necessary to use clairv yyance, as I should have done, to ver.
14

a yede THE MAGIC STAFF.

ify my intuitional apprehensions of the astronomic history. . Had
I surmised for a’ moment that astronomers had not seen all the
bodies there were to be discovered in our immediate band of planets,
it seems to me now that I should not have failed to detect and re-
port the community of asteroids which the telescope has since re-
vealed. In fact, when I proceeded to consider the scenery and
inhabitants of the planets, the exercise of independent clairvoy-
ance became straightway indispensable. And, besides, when I
interiorly found (several months before the report reached Amer-
ica) that Le Verrier had inferred the existence of more distant
planets, but that he did not yet know for certain that his surmises
were correct, then, moved solely by the motive to criticise or con-
firm the inference, I arose out of the historic sphere, and, investi-
gating independently, discovered “ the lone pilgrim of immensity”
ere the news of M. Galla’s final demonstration was known in this
country. ;

One day, while in my common state, I heard one of the witnes-
ses, in the course of a conversation, remark: “ How like the
‘Vestiges of Creation’ some of his teachings are !”

”

“Jn certain principles and propositions,’ returned the scribe,
“TJ think there is a resemblance.”

“Seems to me,” said the other, “ that several of his late lectures
are very much the same. Though I must confess I have never
read the book; only afew extracts in a newspaper some time
since.”

This conversation excited my curiosity. And so next morning,
as we were walking down Broadway, I said: “ Doctor, do you
think it would hurt my lectures if I should read the ‘ Vestiges of
Creation ?””

“Why do you wish to read it?” he inquired.

I informed him of my curiosity to find out for myself, whether
I was lecturing upon similar ideas, as one witness had affirmed.
To which he said: “I have no fear that you will carry any out
ward memory into your clairvoyant state.”

SEVERAL NEW STARS. 828

“Then,” said I, “let’s buy a book and see.” Acting upon the
suggestion we entered a store and made the purchase. “It seems
very funny, doctor,” said I, “for me to own a book.”

As soon as we got back to our rooms, I seated myself, opened
the volume, and tried to read a few sentences. But the hard
words bothered me exceedingly. So ‘slowly did I read that I
could not keep the connection of the ideas. Thus I was strug-
gling down the first page, when the scribe asked me a question;
to which I made no reply, but perseveringly continued my efforts
to master the difficult phrases.

“ Don’t speak to me, Brother Fishbough,” said I, as he repeat-
ed the question, “for I’m busy reading.”

“Oh, yes!” exclaimed he, mirthfully, “ you’re concocting some-
thing for your next lecture.”

Although I knew that he was but quoting the expressed sus-
picions of skeptics, and meant nothing serious by the remark, yet
it acted upon me as a valuable suggestion to throw the book aside.
I did so immediately, and never again attempted its perusal. Sub-
sequently, I destroyed it with other valueless articles of luggage.
But, two years afterward, I examined the work by clairvoyance.
And J can truly affirm that its doctrines resemble those I then
taught about as closely as broad-brimmed Philadelphia resembles
locomotive New York. ‘That is to say, both localities are popu-
lated by human beings, and are regulated by municipal jurisdic-
tion; yet, in almost every distinguishing characteristic, they are
two very different cities. So with the “ Revelations” and the
leading doctrines of the “ Vestiges of Creation.” The funda-
mental laws of nature are presented in a somewhat similar man-
ner in both books, but the specific deductions from them are stri-
kingly at variance—a fact which is a sufficient confirmation of
the statement that my mind was independent of the last-named
volume.

Shortly after this the scribe moved his family to New York;

_and the doctor and I were accepted as his boarders. It was ix

324 THE MAGIC STAFF.

the spring-time of 1846. How many blessed memories date from
that consecrated, dwelling! Did you ever pass that way, dear
reader? It was just like the other buildings on either side; and
no stranger could know that the glories of the spirit spheres were
photographed in one of the upper rooms. No! I can never for-
get it. ’Twas at No. 252 Spring Street, close to Hudson. But _
it seemed to me ofttimes that the inhabitants of distant orbs were
our most familiar neighbors.

Staff in hand I was steadily travelling over Mount Justice. As
I entered the examination-room one morning, to take my chair for
the usual magnetic process, I observed, among the patients, two
middle-aged ladies, one of whom seemed to express great curiosity
and some amusement at my personal appearance. This from stran-
gers was not particularly new, however, and so I passed without
thought into my clairvoyance.

One of the ladies then took the patient’s seat, and requested an
examination. But, quick as thought, there sounded in my ear
these words: “ Read—the—Book—of—Life !”

"T'was the voice of my invisible guide! But the lady did not
hear it, neither the operator, nor any other person there. I alone
perceived the meaning, and I alone looked into the lady’s private
history. In ten brief minutes, during which I uttered not a word,
I read her biography from the natal-day to that hour. Revealing
nothing, the doctor at length asked: “Jackson, will you examine
this lady’s physical system ?”

Perceiving it to be wisdom not to speak of what I saw, I pro-
ceeded with my examination. Then I fixed upon another day on
which to speak certain strange,words unto her soul. Promptly,
and even before the hour, she came. This time I had to utter a
sentence which none should hear save herself. It pertained to
her present plans for future happiness. All left the room, there-
fore, save the doctor, and I proceeded: “ No—that is wrong, you
must not go!”

These few words, ambiguous to the operator, shook the lady’s

SEVERAL NEW STARS. 825

heart. It trembled with strong emotion, and poured forth a flood
of tears, as the fountain overflows in spring-time. She know that
her life-book lay open to my vision. But the doctor’s presence
seemed to annoy her. She wished to speak with me in private.
She ventured the request. But this would have been a violation
of the laws governing the magnetic sleep, and so the reply wasa
denial. Her proud soul rebelled. But quieting her expression,
she asked: “ Parlez-vous Francais?”

“No,” said I, “but I understand it.” And I continued, “ Are
you prepared for my words ?”

“Oui, Monsieur,” said she, earnestly, “ge suis /”

Whereupon I mentally recounted the many disadvantages of
her contemplated expatriation. She was about to leave her
country, and on the soil of a southern clime, near the city of Rio
Janeiro, find a place to spend her days. Distinctly I saw she
would not go, and hence I said: “ There are circumstances which
will make the prosecution of your plans impossible.”

“ Circumstances!” sobbed she with violent emotion. “ How
can that be? My plans are all completed, and the vesse! is to
sail week after next.”

“T see that you can not go,” said I, firmly.

“Can not!” she ejaculated. “Are you able to see beyond the
hour? Can you,” she vehemently asked—‘“can you discern my
future ?”

“ Not much of it,” I answered. “But I have read your past —
I understand your present—I know you will not leave North
America.”

“ Mon Dieu !” said she, with a tone of despair. “Thy will not
mine be done.” And she wept abundantly.

Several days subsequently she came again. As I entered the
apartment, she took from her finger a beautiful ring which she
_ gav2 me; and when she departed, as she said “never to return,”
she also gave me the hankerchief still wet with her tears, as tokens
of the gratitude she felt toward me. What I had said, while in

826 THE MAGIC STAFF.

clairvoyance, to awaken these expressions of regard, I could not
then recall; but now, these interior conversations are familiar as

household words.

“ Are you a-goin’ away ?” J inquired, being again in my normal
state.

“Yes, my young frien‘],” said she sadly, “I’m about to sail for
Buenos Ayres.”

“ Do you know any folks a-living there ?” I kindly asked.

“Tf God so wills,” said she devotionally ; “I shall take a friend
with me, who knows the American minister at Rio Janeiro.”

Thus saying, she departed from my presence. But ere the
lapse of three weeks, the letter-carrier brought for me the follow-
ing :—

“ Boston, ——, 1846.

“My pear Youne Frienp: It is with surprise that I find
myself still in the United States. The vessel in which I was to
have sailed has left this port without me! Indeed, as you so
truthfully foretold, several circumstances over which I could exert
no mastery, have prevented the contemplated departure —the most
beautiful one being a thrilling dream which the spirit of my de-
ceased father impressed upon my dear sister , who came from
New York to relate it to me. This timely dream has perhaps
saved me from a perilous situation......

“Tt appears now that I may again have the pleasure of seeing
you in your wonderful trance. May I come soon? You told me
“all things which I ever did.’ If I may soon see you, while in
your elevated condition, please address me......

“My God! thy will not mine be done!

“ Sincerely and gratefully, your friend,
‘¢

¢ ”

The reader should keep in remembrance that, since my first
extraordinary introduction to the clairvoyant region, I had regu-
lated all my outward movements by laws and suggestions interior-
ly obtained. Such was my habit at the time of which I am now
writing, and sush, with swerveless purpose, has been my method

: SEVERAL NEW STARS. 827

up to the present moment. Furthermore, from the first magnetic
operation to the day of my unconditional emancipation— of which
glorious event the reader shall in due time receive reliable intelli-
gence—TI was compelled to rely wholly upon the probity and
frankness of the operator for a statement of directions thus
evolved for my benefit external. Hence, not, being able during
my dependent experience to remember my own interior counsels,
I was exposed more or less to imposition; but, on reviewing the
items and incidents of my past connection with either operator, I
can not recall an instance of unfaithfulness to words clairvoyantly
imparted.

On the reception of the above letter, I at once requested to
have my interior judgment passed upon it, previous to mailing a
reply. Consequently, when next in clairvoyance, the lady’s writ+
ten question was submitted.

Again did I penetrate and unravel the history of her sad
wanderings up and down the earth, both in Europe and America;
and again, but more minutely than before, did I trace out the
unbroken procession of circumstances that eventually would blend
her interests with the lectures then being delivered. And I also
beheld, in the indefinite future, more than I may now relate. Of
what I then and thus saw, nothing was communicated to the con-
fidence of the doctor. But instead: that he must tell me, when
awakened, to answer the lady’s interrogatory adversely —to the
effect that, in my wisdom, I saw that she should not again visit me
in person, but that I would at any time cheerfully prescribe in her
absence for her physical indispositions.

Having returned to my outer state, the grave-visaged operator
candidly reiterated the above decision, and I hastened to mail my
answer :—

‘New Yorn, 1846,
“EstremMeD Lapy: In reply to your real kind letter, I am
directed to say that i! is not wisdom for you to visit me again. I
can ’t tell why —only I write what Dr. Lyon says I said to him in

328 THE MAGIC STAFF. 2

my sleep, and I dare not disobey. He says, that I am willing to
tell what ails you when sick, and send you prescriptions by letter.”

[Here my, forehead began to grow warm, as if exposed to a
July sun. A flash of light almost blinded my eyes. Knowing
what was coming — spontaneous illumination —I waited till it was
quite perfected, when I looked once again into the lady’s past and
future. It was a repetition of the previous vision. Becoming
eloquent in the midst of it I thus proceeded :—]

“ Beautiful and wonderful indeed, dear lady, was the holy prov-
idence that led you into my presence! Your soul is beloved by
innumerable unseen hearts. There is a regenerating music sound-
ing for you in the other life. My conscientious operator, a vahua-
ble man in the present work, does not know what I now perceive
in your behalf—that I may meet you in the future. When or
where I do not see. And I trust you will never urge, before that
period, another personal interview. Be assured, dear lady, that I
shall be ever in readiness to administer medical aid to you in the
manner above described.

“The God of eternal destinies, the great Positive Mind, keeps
your feet in the right path! Believe on Him. Then His minis-
tering spirits will watch over and guard you night and day!

“ Pardon my familiar language and accept the best wishes of

“ Your friend, “A. J. Davis#¥

The conscious clairvoyant excitement subsided, as the last
sentence was indited, and I was directly my ordinary self again.
Resolving to conceal from the doctor both my half-remembered
vision and the contents of the letter, (which I think was the first
well-expressed epistle I ever penned,) I hastened away to the
postoffice ; where I found another communication from the strange
lady, and thus began a long and uninterrupted correspondence
between us, through which I poured forth a half-inspired account
of the novel truths which were being set forth in my evening
lectures.

A few weeks after this, while in the midst of one of my lectures,
I heard the well-known gentle voice, like my mother’s, saying.
“ Seek—the—mountain. A—person—will—meet—thee—there.” —

SEVERAL NEW STARS. 329

What was going to take place I could not divine. (The reader
will remember that “the mountain” is situated opposite Pough-
keepsie.) Possessing a true knowledge of my own ordinary
condition, I requested the operator not to communicate the im-
pending event to me when awake— inasmuch as I would be im-
pressed when the right day should arrive, and thus be saved all
previous mental excitement.

Accordingly on the 11th of June, without the slightest external
anticipation, I heard the voice once more: “7’hy—memory—is—
yet—weak! Seek—the—mountain. Do—not—delay.”

It was extremely necessary that my Magic Staff should support
me now, for I had completed arrangements for an excursion to an
entirely opposite locality. But I kept calm, suppressed my disap-
pointment, and took passage by the steamboat without procrasti-
nation.

Among several gentlemanly-dressed persons in the promenade
saloon, there was one who unfortunately “knew me by sight,”
while the rest, to whom I was reluctantly introduced, pretended to

“know me by reputation ;”

and thus I was directly hemmed in by
a band of captious interrogators.

“T’ve read in a newspaper,” said one, “that you are ignorant
when not magnetized. Is that so?”

“Yes, sir,” I replied. “That’s the fact.”

“Ts it true,” asked another, “that you can see into folks ?”

“J think I can,” said I. “Three years’ experience is at my
back to prove it.”

At this moment a ministerial-looking person advanced and said:
“ Pray, sir, is it true that you teach infidelity ?”

“No, sir. I teach jidelity to the laws of God.” As I uttered
these words, there flashed over my mind a partial illumination.
The dark color in my eyes must have suddenly deepened, for the
gentleman seemed to think me angry.

“Pray, sir, don’t get provoked,” said he. “I simply wish, sir,
to ask a few questions.”

330 THE MAGIC STAFF.

“I’m not provoked,” rejoined I. “Your questions may be too
deep; and I can only promise that I will try to answer them.”

“That’s candid. Pray, then, young man, tell me—what do
you think of the Bible?”

“TI hav’n’t lectured on the Bible yet,’ I replied. “So I don’t
know what I think.”

“ Well, do you keep the sabbath-day holy ?”

“T hope so,” said I quietly.

“Do you believe,” continued he, “that God made the earth in
six days?”

“ No, sir—I do not.”

“Indeed! And yet you don’t teach infidelity, eh ?”

“No, sir,” I replied, “I’m no infidel. Why do you ask about
the six days of creation ?” '

“Qh, I only wanted to know,” said he, “on what ground you
keep the seventh day.”

Leaning on my Staff and being illuminated, I replied: “The
word ‘sabbath’ is from the Hebrew shebang or yom shaba, meaning
the seventh day. The meaning of the root of the word is ‘age’
or a period of rest, and it was originally applied to men, the an-
cient sages especially, who periodically assembled for purposes of
teaching, worship, and the offering of sacrifices. The particular
day on which these sages met was determined in round numbers
by the obvious periods of the lunar changes. The moon’s revolu-
tions were naturally divisible into four periods of seven days each,
and every seventh day in this division was called the rest day, or
the sabbath, as established by the Chaldean and Egyptian astron-
omers.”

“Ho, ho!” exclaimed the supposed parson, “you are not so
much of a fool as the papers report. Go on, pray—it’s most
excellent —do go on, sir.”

Still intuitionally exalted, I continued: “The Jews themselves
were regulated by the lunar periods, in all their religious and
secular institutions and public meetings. In fact, the religious

SEVERAL NEW STARS. Sol

beliefs, forms, ceremonials, and sacrifices of that period were
almost all derived from the Oriental Magi, the Egyptian astrono-
mers, and other erudite sages of the East. Such is the origin of
the modern sabbath. This I know,” said I, “and therefore I
realize none of that sabbath-day sanctity which is so universally
exhibited by certain credulous clergymen and their devotional
supporters.”

“There!” exclaimed he triumphantly, “who’ll say this young
man is ignorant after this? Pray, sir, where did you attend
college ?”

“JT hav’ n’t attended any college,” I replied, “and what I have
just said to you is new to me!”

“Tiumbug!” said he sarcastically. “You can’t get that down
my throat.”

“T don’t wish to,” said J. The illumination here declined; and
I was about to retire from the company, when another stranger
asked: “ Are you able to tell what lottery ticket will draw a prize
on a certain day ?”

“My mind,” I replied, “takes no pleasure in such matters.”

“ Well, won’t you tell me if I give you half the sum received ?”

“ No, sir,” was my reply, “I would not interiorly look at such a
matter any more than I would live by highway robbery.”

The gameful-looking man started as if he thought I meant
something personal, and said in an under tone: “ See here, young
man! You’ll not see the next wharf if you insult me.”

Hearing this angry threat I immediately withdrew, and re-
mained in a more retired part of the floating palace, till I heard
the welcome announcement —“ Passengers for Poughkeepsie !”

3832 THE MAGIC STAFF.

CHAPTER XLIII.

THE SPIRITUAL SPHERES.

“Yor me, if I forget the darling theme,
Be my tongue mute, my fancy paint no more,
And, dead to joy, my heart forget to beat!”

A WONDERFUL, twofold daily life was mine! I was living a
double existence. The mystic line of demarkation, separating my
common from my superior condition, was still sharply and strongly
drawn.

Few even of my personal friends could fully realize that my
soul was the centre from which states so widely and startlingly
different were evolved and manifested. A trifling boy this mo-
ment, a sedate man the next; now a mirthful simpleton, then an
intellectual prodigy; a denizen of the external world ten minutes
ago, now a traveller and spectator in higher realms of the Infinite.
Although these mental conditions remained for the most part mar-
vellously distinct, dissimilar, and independent, each of the other, yet
there was meanwhile silently going on a personal change or apoth-
eosis— an elevation of my natural condition so as to meet and in-
terblend with the condition superidr — of which none but myself
could consciously receive the intimations and indubitable evi-
<lences.

My hasty trip to Poughkeepsie began to look rather wild and
useless. I had already spent the most of three days in making
friendly calls and writing to the lady-correspondent. Loitering

DHE SPIRITUAL SPHERES. 833

along beneath the shady trees of Cannon street, and doubting the
wisdom of my being there, I heard: “ Seek—the—mountain. A
—person—desires—thy—presence—there. Do—not—delay.”

In obedience to this well-known guardian voice, I hastened at
full speed toward the ferry; but ere [reached it, my mind occa-
sionally wandered, or fluctuated between the two states, which
caused the original motive to become so weak and uncertain, that
I hesitated and lingered listlessly on the way.

In a short time, however, the primary impulse was recommuni-
cated, and then I passed directly into the superior state. Thus I
crossed the river. In the mountain-retirement, in that sacred re-
treat, I met and saluted a noble personage. It was the gifted
Swede —the author of “ Arcana Celestia” —the Prophet-Seer of
the intellectual North. In this place I will republish the follow-
ing letter which, by SWEDENBORG’s particular request, I mailed
on the following morning to Professor GrorGE Busy :—

** POUGHKEEPSIE, June 16, 1846.

“Dear Sir: Yesterday morning, after eating breakfast at No.
49 Washington street, where my friend Mrs. Lapham lives, I went
down to the bookstore, to get some paper to write to ———._ Af-
ter buying it, I visited several persons about the street, staying
only a few minutes at each place. Soon I had a desire to go down
to the river; what caused it I don’t know. But went down;
called on one or two friends on the way.

“T soon lost all knowledge where I was, recollect of being about
the river somewhere, and also ascending a hill. I am conscious.
of meeting the same person that I had seen in the graveyard in
Hyde Park. I also remember conversing with him, and taking
out my pencil and writing all the thoughts given me, J remem-
ber him leaving me suddenly, and I came out the state. I was
surprised to find myself wet with rain, the paper on my lap, and
dry—and being in the mountain opposite Poughkeepsie, about
4 miles, where I had been before, 2 years ago.

“JT came directly home, it was 6 o'clock in the evening, I was
wet and muddy, and very hungry. The paper had not been wet.
The very moment I came into the natural state, I fe/é you should

384 THE MAGIC STAFF.

have the paper immediately. I do not understand the meaning,
nor the letters A. C. and them figures. It appears now that I
know it then, but can’t recollect what it was. As I felt impressed
so strongly to send it to you, I do so, for it must be right.

“The friends here can tell about it. I am at Mrs. Lapham’s,
49 Washington street. If you can tell me about the meaning,
please write me at the above No. I copy the writing exactly
from the paper, as written by me then.

“Yours, &c. “A. J. Davis.”

The reader can not fail to perceive that the foregoing commu-
nication was written by one unacquainted with the rules of gram-
mar and the usual school-taught elegancies of epistolary composi-
tion. It isa genuine illustration, I think, of the difference between
the interior and the external condition, as manifested by one and
the same individual. A report of what Swedenborg so beautifully
and breathingly communicated at that time would be irrelevant in
this volume. He quoted certain postulates from one of his pub-
lished works, and gave several numerical references to correspond-
ing expressions contained in other volumes—all of which Profes-
sor Bush ably commented upon and fearlessly issued in his valuable
treatise upon “ Mesmer and Swedenborg.” Of the precise object
of that interview, however, I have not yet acquired a definite idea.

During the hottest of the summer season, I remained away
from New York, and dwelt in the midst of human hospitalities.
Nothing occurred of any importance during my absence, save the
following impressive instance of special providence :—

A widow lady, with whom I was acquainted, was mourning for
her only son, who, in an angry and discontented mood, had left
her to embark for the high seas. Just in the midst of her deep
affliction I chanced to make her a friendly call.

While relating to me the cause of her sorrows, her feelings
overpowered her, and she retired with heart-broken sobs to an
adjoining room. Soon I heard her voice in prayer, To the
great Father she poured out her agonized feelings in behalf of her
wandering child. I desired to see what would be the result of

THE SPIRITUAL SPHERES. 335

her earnest supplications; and, feeling almost immediately the
power of clairvoyant insight, I directed my vision to her apart-
ment.

I at once saw a soft ethereal light playing just above her head,
and inducing action in the organs of hope and veneration as well
as in several other contiguous departments of her brain. From
this light a narrow line of silvery whiteness extended upward
somewhat obliquely until it reached a point some twenty miles, I
think, above the earth’s surface. I traced this delicate thread of
light to its terminating point, and there beheld @ radiant spirit,
who was controlling this beautiful phenomenon. From him an-
other brilliant line, forming an angle with the former, stretched
off earthward until it reached the distant city to which the youth
had fled, and at length impinged upon and penetrated the very
substance of his brain.

The effect was marvellous. His affectional and moral organs
were aroused. And there were awakened in his nature such feel-
ings of repentance and desires to return to his widowed and cru-
elly-forsaken mother, that before another day had closed he was
again in her presence, fully resolved to lead a better life. Her
joy was deep, and her gratitude to the God whom she believed
had answered her prayer was unbounded. Of that sacred vision
I told her not a word. But full well did I know that when the
Spirit-Land should become her home, it would be a still sublimer
joy to learn that her long-lost companion was the hearer of her
anguished petition, and the savior of their darling son!

On returning to the progressive metropolis, I was prepared to
proceed with the revelations of Nature. One evening I was a
silent listener to a conversation of some importance. Several
skeptical guests were controverting the idea, expressed hy the
deliberate scribe, that “while in the abnormal state, my mind
received the influx of the science understood in the spiritual
spheres.”

. “There is something so peculiar and wonderful in animal mag-

836 THE MAGIC STAFF.

netism,” said one of the guests, “and the whole subject is wrapped
up in so much uncertainty, that it first becomes necessary to ex-
amine into the laws of sympathy between mind and mind.”

“ What do you mean by the laws of sympathy?” asked a wit-
ness. E

“Why, just this,” replied the doubter: “how do I know but
Davis gets his lectures out of Mr. Fishbough’s head ?”

“That would be very flattering,” interrupted the scribe with a
modest smile. “ Brother Davis, while in his superior state, dis-
plays a power of analysis and generalization perfectly unparal-
leled and absolutely overwhelming; and no man possessed of such
abilities would ever wish to conceal them. No; I know there are-
ideas in these discourses which were never in my mind; and as
for Dr. Lyon, why, he can speak for himself.”

“Yes,” said the doctor, “I feel that Iam not yet acquainted
with half the ideas which the clairvoyant has expressed in my ©
presence.”

“ Oh, I don’t doubt,” returned the visitor, “but that mesmerism
enhances Mr. Davis’s own reflective faculties—a fact which may
help explain how he gets at his ideas and reasonings.”

“That theory will not cover the ground,” the scribe replied.

“Why not?” he asked. “I am willing to concede that he can
remember and reason far better when magnetized than he can
commonly: this, added to his sympathetic relation to and absorp-
tion from your minds, will explain the whole matter better than
Professor Bush’s plan and yours. And—”

“ Allow me to remark,” interposed the scribe, “that your hy-
pothesis is defec—”

“Wait till I get out what I was going to say,” said the guest
hurriedly, “and that is this: The theology of the work is inclined
toward Universalism, of which you are an intelligent preacher.
Now, don’t he get chat from association with yow and others of
like faith ?”

“ As to the theological doctrines of his lectures I can not exactly

THE SPIRITUAL SPHERES. 337

say,” replied the scribe, “because he has not yet come to that part
of his revelations.”

The conversation continued a little while longer, but it was not
satisfactory to the disbeliever’s mind.

The reader is now invited to listen to another brief parley —
occurring posterior to the foregoing, and in another place. The
location was in the inside of a carriage-repository down Broad-
way. One of the disputants was Harvey R. Haight, a proprietor ;
the other our considerate scribe, with whom the reader is supposed
to be now well acquainted. The auditors were the operator and
myself. The subject under discussion was the theological bearing
of my clairvoyant lectures. Mr, Haight, a positive-spoken man,
vigorously said :—

“No, sir! He can not support the Bible as a divine hook.”

“Why not?” asked the scribe. “ My opinion is, that the Bible
will be fully sustained.”

“No, sir!” replied Mr. Haight, “I tell you no, sir—not if I
understand his leading principles. He can’t do it, sir, and still
be consistent with himself.” ;

“Yes he can, though,” returned the scribe confidently, His
principles lead directly and legitimately that way; and I am sure,
from what has already been delivered, that the lectures will en-
dorse the Scriptures as given of God.”

Shortly after this, however, the revelations progressed to the
theological part. Immediately subsequent to the delivery of the
first discourse on “The Origin of Mythological Theology,” I well
remember how wofully sad was that expression which pervaded
the scribe’s usually placid countenance. He labored with a heart
full of disappointment, The divine origin of the Bible, its super-
terrestrial derivation and value, was an idea which involved his
sentiments and religious experience, His attachment to that be-
lief was affectionate more than intellectual, Reason he had em-
ployed from the first, doubtless, as a porter to wait upon his senti-

ments of veneration and worship.
15

B08: - THE MAGIC STAFF.

For two whole weeks he was mourning tke loss of the darling
idea of his affectionate mind—during which he was extremely
taciturn and wrapped in laborious thought. But one morning,
which I distinctly recollect, he came tripping cheerfully into the
examination-room, saying: “ Good! I have found my way out!
My mind is free! I have solved the difficulty, and I am now at
rest.” But his liberation was not absolute. Instead of possessing
intellectual affections — which alone can fully grasp and steadfastly
love the principles of an interior philosophy—he possessed, on
the contrary, an affectional intellect, and hence could not com-
pletely centrifugate or throw off his educational convictions. That
this statement is true, the sequel will clearly show. But the value
of the foregoing to the reader consists in its enunciation of the fact
that my impressions of the origin of the Bible, and my ideas on
religious questions generally, were by no means obtained from my
associates.

As my lectures on theology progressed, one witness after an-
other began to withdraw; so that, out of some eight or ten who
were often present, only two or three continued to the end.
While in clairvoyance, this openly-expressed subsidence of their
friendship did not disturb me; but, ordinarily, I felt many times
like one forsaken and banished. Hence, I was of necessity com-
pelled to walk and talk with, and lean upon, my Magic Staff.

Among others, Professor Bush began to exhibit lukewarmness,

and to intimate that my “moral affinities mzght be such as to lay
the foundation for a mixture of truth and falsity on the grand doc- |
trines of Christianity.” On one occasion, at a later day, I remem- |

ber that the ingenuous professor avowed his belief that, while my

“ oift,”” as he termed it, “was evidently managed and overruled |
by a certain providential intelligence which subordinated it to
some important use,” yet, “in respect to its treatment of the Bible |
and several of its cardinal doctrines, the book would be an abso- ©
lute enormity.” In view of these words, how unsound appears
the oft-repeated suspicion that my mind was in sympathetic rap- |

THE SPIRITUAL SPHERES. 339

port with that of Professor Bush, the fixed and talented Swe-
denborgian !

My intuitions were daily becoming more and more exalted.
And when the biblical discourses terminated, I was prepared to
form a yet closer relation with the upper spheres. By virtue of
the gradual elevation and expansion of those divinely-inspired
Philosophers —the Intuitions—I discovered that the Second
Sphere of the present order of the Universe 7s an Encyclopedia
or infallible Compendium of the history of all pre-existent uni-
verses. And not only this, but that the present knowledge pos-
sessed by the inhabitants of higher spirit-spheres is freely show-
ered down upon the soil of the Second Sphere ; and also that such
knowledge is obtainable by means of that clairvoyant perception
and intuitional sympathy which I was enabled voluntarily to put
in operation while in the superior condition.

The diagram (page 340) illustrates my discoveries. Let the
reader imagine that he is looking upon the plane of an immense
sphere divided through the centre, like an apple cut in two halves ;
imagine that the dark margin is an inconceivably vast ocean of
unorganized matter, in a state of fire-mist or elemental nebula —
between which and the outer or first etrele of suns and planets,
there are innumerable incipient bodies, or baby-suns and baby-
planets, commonly called “comets ;” then imagine that “our sun,”
and “our earth,” and “our planets,’ make one of the groups of
the outer circle at the right hand, near the bottom of the diagram ;
next imagine, when looking upward at night, that your eyes can
only see “our own circle of suns and planets,” called the “milky
way,” (or fixed stars and constellations,) and that you can not
penetrate, even with the best telescope, into the region of the third
planetary circle, which is more interior, geographically speaking,
than the “Second Sphere,” or Spirit-Land, to which we are all
tending; then imagine that the centre is the seat of Intelligence,

the fountain of all Love and Wisdom, and the most perfect ArTRAC- .

TION in the stupendous organization of matter and mind; next

7

340 THE MAGIC STAFF.

fy

_ Sussonunlf

DIAGRAM OF THE SpPrriTUAL SPHERES.

imagine that that Drvinr Sun gives off emanations of life and light
which saturate and energize the whole system of the Universe,
and that while it attracts spirit it equally repels matter—not that
the latter is repulsive and the former agreeable, but because such
is the immutable law whereby rare entities and dense substances
are governed with an unerring government; then imagine, in har-
mony with this law, that human spirits at death, feeling the Divine
Attraction, leave the earth and go to the Second Sphere —that,
after the lapse of many centuries, they are progressed sufficiently
to ascend, without the dying process, into the “ Third Sphere,” or
still more interior Spirit-Land; and again imagine that the Cen-
tral Attraction, being unchangeably in the ascendant, continues to
draw lovingly and tenderly until the spirits of all men reach the

THE SPIRITUAL SPHERES. 3841

“Sixth Sphere,” which is the closest possible approach to the
Spiritual Sun of the Univercoelum—that stupendous system
which, from eternity to eternity, has rolled upon its immense axis
just like the earth; and now, all spirits being personally safe near
the Centre or residence of Father-God, imagine that the entire
organization of Mother-Nature undergoes a process of universal
renovation, and enjoys, so to speak, a season of rest from the
offices of reproduction or child-bearing—during which the suns
and planets, from centre to circumference, dissolve and mingle
into one indefinable Ocean of liquid matter and moving forces ;
then imagine that out of this Ocean there once more roll forth new
circles of suns and planets, which in due time begin to do right over
and over again the same. thing, only better—that is, produce min-
erals, vegetables, animals, and human beings ; and, lastly, imagine
that the “Second Sphere” of this new order is higher and more
attractive than the “Sixth Sphere” of a previous order, and that,
as a sequence, the entire spiritual population of the old Universe
emigrate, like birds of passage, to the more pleasant latitude and
genial climate which characterize the “Second Sphere” of the
new Universe—and thus that no truly human spirit ever loses
its identity in the lapse of eternally-rolling ages: imagine all this,
dear reader, and you will entertain a rude outline, merely, of the
magnificent scene which, in 1846, broke upon my intuitionally-
prepared understanding.

There are certain scientific objections, I am well aware, which
may seem utterly to invalidate these declarations of the Harmonial
Philosophy ; but if I live on earth long enough to write a book on
Universal Astronomy, as the fruits of my more recent and more
accurate investigations, I think those objections will vanish and

appear no more for ever.

Upon the conclusion of my lectures concerning the Spiritual
Spheres, I began to realize that I was travelling toward the psy-_
chical valley which separated Mount Justice from Mount Power.

842 THE MAGIC STAFF.

Fortunately, what the future had in store for me I did not discern.
My Staff never failed me in these mystical journeyings, however,
as I walked down toward the unknown plain in the shadowy
distance.

One day I heard a visitor, with a nervous determination of un-
der-tone, exclaim: “When that Book’ is published, I shall lock
up the Bible in the drawer under the desk, put the key in my
pocket, and preach the angel-utterances of the New Philosophy !”

“That resolve is rather too sudden,” thought I. For I knew
that he had not heard my lectures, save in a few isolated instances,
and hence could not exercise a reliable judgment upon their value
to mankind.

“The world must be awakened!” he continued. “ Religious
organizations are trembling and tottering with age. Decay is
certain! Shining and speaking through these lectures is the
mighty spirit of a struggling Humanity. The spirit of Divine
Love is misrepresented and crucified by modern churches of,pride
and power !””

He emphasized almost every word, as he spoke it, with a firmly-
clenched fist; his whole frame shook; his eye was oracularly lu-
minous; and he appeared as I had seen him on several previous
occasions when before the assembled public. The extreme bril-
liancy of his eloquence, and the dazzlingly high-colored character
of his most ordinary declamations, caused my spirit to shrink back
as one would shut his eyes against the intrusion of too much light.
The flood-tide of his philanthropic enthusiasm had arisen so sud-
denly, and so far above what was very high-water mark to my
moderate mind, that I stepped instinctively aside, lest the ebb
should drive me out into the open sea. The splendid pendulum
had swung like lightning to one extreme, and I tried to keep out
of that space through which it would as swiftly vibrate in the op-
posite direction. But I was destined to pass through a brief ex-
perience with this talented and vivacious person; and, as he was
distinguished for the preaching of brilliant sermons and the wri-

*

THE SPIRITUAL SPHERES. 343

ting of eloquent poetry, I shall introduce him to the reader as
“the Poet” of this psychclogical drama.

The Third Part of the Revelations, entitled “A Voice to Man-
kind,” was proceeded with and completed. ‘And as the closing
paragraphs were enunciated, I distinctly realized a well-known
prophetic mental depression; not like that which succeeds excite-
ment, but ’twas an instinctive perception of a change in my cir-
cumstances. The nature of that impending change, however, was
at this time almost wholly beyond my discernment.

Soon after the completion of the lectures, I delivered “ An Ad-
dress to the World,” and then proceeded to bequeath the entire
work, and all moneys that might accrue from the sales thereof,
equally to the scribe and the operator.

On returning to my natural state, the beloved twain (and a wit-
ness) informed me of the bequeathment. My depression for a
moment was severe. For I had not accumulated a dollar out of
years.of clairvoyant diligence, and what were to be my future
resources I could not imagine, because I had for weeks felt a dis-
tinct, secret conviction that*my magnetic career was about to ter-
minate. Sadly I walked to the window; but in a moment I heard
the blessed words: “ Lear—not! There—are—treasures—in—
an—angel s—hand.”

’T was the familiar voice of my venerated Guide! Instantly,
therefore, I surrendered myself in joy to celebrating the unexpect-
ed circumstance. In consideration of the time I had consumed in
delivering the lectures, however, the delighted brothers presented
me their joint note for one thousand dollars. This promised am-
ple compensation I did not solicit. But thinking that thus meant
my Guide, I fraternally accepted the note which was so cordially
and generously bestowed.

844 ° THE MAGIC STAFF.

CHAPTER XLIV.
EVENTS OF THE VALLEY.

Near the last of March of this year, 1847, I announced, while
in clairvoyance, that the doctor should not continue his magnetism
after a specified date. Also, that he must not receive patients
who were too much diseased to be healed by virtue of one single
examination and prescription.

He acted upon these rules, and all went on harmoniously.
From day to day I could distinctly realize a temporary decline of
my clairvoyance. During this short period, however, we received
as usual many letters, containing locks of hair and small sums of
money, from diseased persons soliciting immediate medical aid.
The monetary contents of these letters, save in a few instances
where our rule would apply to the patient, were punctually re-
turned.

One day the doctor received a letter, containing the requisite
lock of hair and the ordinary fee, and purporting to be written by
a Mrs. Brickett. This professed lady affected great illness, and,
appealing to our common humanity, sought the aid of my clair-
voyance. She described her symptoms, and did not ask for more
than relief.

As usual, the doctor submitted the case to my clairvoyant judg-
ment. Feeling the hair, it led me first to a healthy person, then
to no person at all; whereupon I asked for “the letter,’ asa
medium of sympathy between myself and the sufferer. This did

EVENTS OF THE VALLEY. 845

not serve me. But still taking it for granted that the statements
in the letter were true, and therefore neglecting to examine the
author’s mind for the real motives which prompted the communi-
cation, I yielded at once to my desire to relieve the suffering
depicted by the words before me, and started off independently in
search of the sick person. I gazed here and there in the neighbor-
hood of the specified locality, some four hundred miles away, and
soon discovered a female diseased with consumption. She could
be considerably helped—perhaps nearly cured by the one pre-
scription—hence I proceeded to specify the syrup. The de-
scription and recipe were accordingly sent, and we retained the
customary remuneration.

Let the reader judge of my surprise and the doctor’s indignation,
when the news reached us that the letter was a tissue of falsehoods
—that the whole was a “pious fraud’”—the unscrupulous fabri-
cation of a professional priest, who was preaching Christianity
and publishing a saintly sheet, called “The Gospel Banner,”
somewhere in the state of Maine! The appearances in this
affair were wholly against clairvoyance. The facts themselves,
however, were our best friends. But the unprincipled trick of
this minister-—with his external and malicious interpretation of
the circumstances—was heralded all over the country. And
plenty of people can be found, doubtless, who are still deceived
by the influence of this priest —just as the world has been blinded
by similar characters for eighteen hundred years!

The next question was—“how to get means to publish so
large a volume?” The lectures were to be stereotyped, and
presented to mankind in a good suit of clothes. That is, the
mechanical arrangement and execution were to be measurably ’
consistent with the supposed intrinsic value of the revelations.
The scribe and operator, however, like myself, were not liberated
from the trammels of a deficient purse. Whence, then, the means

to carry forward the blessed Reform ?
1p*

346 THE MAGIC STAFF.

This question troubled me for several successive days and
nights, until I heard: “ Write—to—thy—Sptrit—NSister !”

’T was enough. I wrote a full statement of our external cir-
cumstances to the lady with whom I was in correspondence. I
stated to her in plain words the necessity for money to prosecute
the glorious Reformation. She was then sojourning in New
York. I sent the letter by the morning’s mail; and ere the sable
curtains of night fell o’er the world, a French hand-maid inquired
at our door for “Monsieur Davis.” She placed in my hand a
letter, in which occurred the following sentence :—

“Thanks! my Spirit Brother—my only earthly friend—
thanks! many, many, thanks! Gladly would I do everything to
help the work of your life. But I am only able, under the
existing state of my pecuniary affairs, to let Messrs. Lyon and
Fishbough have the sum of one thousand dollars. I will take
their note and preserve it for your future benefit.”

The reader may imagine the deep gratitude of my soul. Hav-
ing received this amount, the partners obtained, elsewhere, an
additional loan of five hundred dollars and thus secured the
material power to progress with their work.

The second magnetic crisis in my life had at length arrived.
The operator’s influence became more and more unfavorable to
my clairvoyant exercise. A sort of stultification and numbness —
pervaded and blunted my faculties. *I'was a repetition of the |
old experience on a new degree of consciousness.

Of all this I secretly knew just enough to believe that my |

|

operator could not understand it; and thus, for the sake of entire |
tranquillity, I concealed the prophetic intimations that I sometimes !
felt, of our approaching magnetic separation. When last mag->
netized by him—on the 10th of April, 1847—I remember that
I did not feel quite certain about the future. And perhaps, while
in the valley of this uncertainty, I might have left upon his mind
the impression tha’ I would continue to be “his subject” through |

|

EVENTS OF THE VALLEY. 347

the coming years. Be this as it may, I soon left the city for
beautiful Poughkeepsie ; where I began to realize the possibilities
of an independent existence!

A fortnight after reaching the “banks and braes” of my beloved
Hudson—on the 16th of May—TI realized yet more of that
sublime revolution which had been going on within. The bodily
fatigue and prostration consequent upon my New York labors
were being rapidly displaced by a beautiful vigorousness and
liberty of spirit. The interior signs of the psychical change,
were many; and my present individual illumination was quietly
inaugurated.

Oh, that flowery day! It shines in my memory like the holy
star of destiny. A widowed female friend, at whose house I then
boarded, was afflicted with a cancerous disease. It acted princi-
pally upon the membranes of her stomach. Her physical distress
weighed upon my sympathetic heart; and, earnestly desiring to
aid her, I passed into my superior condition. (See “ Great
Harmonia,” vol. i., p. 204.) “Iwas a great novelty! I had
entered the somnambulic and clairvoyant states many times, as
the reader knows, without the help of an operator; but to con-
sciously attain to the highest mental eminence, independently and
in the secrets of my own closet, was like a rainbow of promise
spanning the firmament of my soul.

My sight darted through intermediate substances —two walls
and a floor—and I saw her disease and the appropriate means of
relief. My superior powers were never better; and they were
not at the beck of a third party! “Great God!” exclaimed I.
“My soul is crushed with tons of gratitude. Oh, let me use my
‘soul’s endowments as gifts from Thee, and I promise that I will
never, never, dishonor Thee by a misdirection of them !”

Everything was done for the aged woman’s relief. But the
Laws of Nature left a summons at her door. The breath of a
spiritual spring entered her nostrils. The body kept wasting

&

348 THE MAGIC STAFF.

slowly away, but the spirit grew stronger in its might and aspira-
tions. One day she said :— -

“ Jackson, my friend, can you not cure me?”

“T fear not,” said I with much emotion; “your disease is mighti-
er than your body.”

She gazed calmly and intelligently into my eyes for a moment,
and then said: “ That’s good news, Jackson— very good news—
don’t you think so?”

“The news is not bad,” replied I. “To me there are glad
tidings in death.”

“Then would n’t it be best for all mankind to die at once ?”

“ Death is good,” said I, “only where it is not sought.”

“Ts it wrong for me to desire death?” she inquired.

“No,” said I, “it is not wrong after you have done all you could
to get well.” ‘

“ What do you mean?” she inquired, looking somewhat alarmed
‘and confused.

“JT mean,” said I, “that we should live in this body as long as
we possibly can.”

.“ Well,” replied she with energy, “suppose I should neglect to
take a medicine that might cure me, and I should die in conse-
quence, would this be a misfortune to my soul in the other world ?”

“T perceive,” said I, “that they only are entirely happy after
death, who feel that their life on earth and departure from it were
strictly in harmony with the righteous Principles of Nature.”

Her mind seemed to wander a little, as I spoke, and she said:
“J ust put another quilt over me. I’m yery chilly. Has the
weather changed ?”

The summer weather was exceedingly warm, and so I supposed
the chilliness to be a symptom of her gradually approaching re-
lease. But I covered her with more blankets, and then asked:
“ Did you hear my last remark ?” ;

“To be sure I did,” said she, cheerfully ; “and now let me ask
—do you think I have done all I could to keep alive?”

%

et

ek:
by geet

—

A DEATH SCENE,

EVENTS OF THE VALLEY. 349

“Yes,” said I. “As far as I can see, you have done you
» whole duty.”

“Then death is most welcome!” exclaimed the liberal-minded
and spiritually-aspiring woman; “but take that weight off my
feet.”

There was no unusual pressure upon the feet of the dying, save
the body weighing down the spirit; and, thus perceiving, I called
the members of the family to her bedside, and retired to the pri-
vacy of my own room. ‘The superior condition was immediately
upon me. And I witnessed and comprehended the minutest
particular of that spiritual translation. The spectacle was im-
pressively and supremely holy. Oh, most beauteous process!
Oh, most sublime beatitude! But I will at once restrain my pen,
and refer the reader, for a full and truthful description of that
death-scene, to page 163, Vol. I., of the “Great Harmonia.”
The artist has attempted to picture that ineffably glorious trans-
formation —“ Death” — which will be experienced by all man-
kind as the years roll onward.

The reader is supposed to know, by this time, the leading traits
of my mental organization. Perhaps the strongest element was an
almost irresistible impulse to respond to demands made upon me
from all sides of humanity — ofttimes in direct violation of the law of
self-justice and self-preservation. On the reception of a stranger’s
letter, appealing for relief from some trial or disease, my disposi-
tion was immediately to return a humane and beneficial answer. -
This unrestrained proclivity, as the sequel will show, exposed me
to much imposition and suffering. Yet I have no desire that my
nature should be less disposed to universal goodwill, nor would I
intimate that the exercise of selfishness is right or conducive to
happiness.

My unsought fame as a seer of hidden things, and the great
scarcity, at that time, of similarly-endowed persons, brought me
scores upon scores of letters. If th task of spelling and reading

800 ‘THE MAGIC STAFF.

these epistles was arduous, as it was, how shall I describe the
toiling that was necessary to answer them? From one corre-
spondent’s letter I extract the following :—

“New York, 1847.

“My pear Sir: I take the liberty of addressing you, though
a stranger, to get some information on a business-matter of the
utmost importance.

“To-morrow, I expect to fail! The vortex of bankruptcy is
whirling through my brain! I am a young merchant, sir; my
hopes and ambition have been high; my father has advanced
me large sums, sir; and I have invested largely in stocks, to
my utter ruin, unless you, by means of your supernatural powers
of insight, will tell me how I may recover these losses by invest-
ments:which will prove immensely and speedily profitable.

“T could myself receive this misfortune and die a beggar, or
terminate existence by suicide, sir, were it not that I have a dar-
ling young wife and an infant son, who look to me for sympathy
and support.

“For God’s sake, sir, help me if possible—with the greatest
despatch—and enclose your bill for services. Yours, &c.”

My reply was that I could not relieve him from pecuniary em-
barrassments— that my mind was absorbed in questions of uni-
versal import—that suicide would not help him out of trouble,
but only increase it— and that, by working perseveringly for an-
honorable position in the world, he would receive the assistance
of merchants who knew him.

Twenty days subsequently the post brought me another letter
from the same person, in which he said :—

“ Allis lost! Iam a ruined man !—all because I relied upon
your pretended power to tell what will happen. In your letter to
me, you say positively that ‘I would receive the assistance of mer-
chants who knew me.’ Not a word of it has come true! No, sir
—not a word —and never will!”

And thus did the half-crazed man misconstrue my counsel.
Next, I would read over a package of perhaps fifty letters from

EVENTS OF THE VALLEY. 851

persons half-sick or half-dead with various diseases. And then
there would come a request of this kind :—

‘PHILADELPHIA, Pa.

“DEAR FRIEND: I suppose the claims of disordered humanity
upon thy time and patience are numerous, but thee is able to do
good as few are, and thee is willing, I am told, to use thy power
in a case of humanity like mine. My youngest son is lost or dead
we fear. He left home a few months ago to visit a relative in the
country, and has not been heard from since. Now, my dear
friend, if thee can find him, thee will greatly relieve the broken
hearts of his distressed parents. With great respect, &c.”

Almost every day the post would bring me letters containing
questions like the following :—

“Will my present connection with Mr. involve me in

more pecuniary losses ?”

“ Can you tell me the name of the bank where I can negotiate
a loan on the securities in my possession ?”

“ Shall I pass through the present crisis and sustain my, credit ?”

“Tf I should come to your village, can I see you in reference
to my present shipments?” &c., &c.

Some time previous to the date of these letters, while living in
the psychical valley, I was a guest at a merchant’s mansion.
Serenely shone the sun upon the rich man’s ornamental posses-
sions. Warm hearts beat within the hallowed precincts of that
home, and the endearments of friendship added tenfold to the
attractions of the merchant’s hospitality. Fancy me, dear read-
er, walking in the garden arm in arm with the proprietor, who
asked: “Can you e..ter clairvoyance now without the doctor’s
help ?”

“Yes,” I replied, “my will can induce the superior condition
when I desire it.”

“Do you suppose,” said he, “that you have the power to tell,
for instance, the state of the flour-market at any given time, if you
desire to do so?”

3852 THE MAGIC STAFF.

“Yes,” said I. “If I should desire to see the flour-market, I
could understand all about it in thirty minutes.”

“How would you get at it?” he inquired.

“ First,” I replied, “I would examine the condition of the crops
now in the ground; then the amount of flour held in check by
speculators; then calculate about storms, to ascertain how much
wheat would be probably damaged ; and lastly, from these data, I
would purchase flour for a certain amount, and hold it till the
highest price was offered.”

“That would require considerable calculation,” said the mer-
chant. “ But why don't you do it, if you can ?”

“ Because,” was my reply, “I can not will to do it.”

“Why not?” he asked. a

“Because I can not desire it,’ I answered. “The reason is,
that I believe all speculation to be both an injustice and a fraud
which greatly afflicts the working-classes.”

“Perhaps, that is true,’ he argumentatively replied; “but
somebody will speculate in flour — the thing will be done — mon-
ey will be made —and wouldn’t it be better and more in accord-
ance with wisdom for a liberal man to make it than a merely self-
ish speculator who wouldn’t help on Reform?” , |

“No,” said I; “all speculation is wrong, no matter who goes
into it; and the money, thus obtained, is seldom of any value _to
the world.”

“Your reasoning, I must confess, is rather muddy to my mind,”
said the merchant. “Now suppose the crop prospect was so and
so, and suppose the flour-market is thus and thus, and you could
get so many barrels at such a price, what would you do?”

“If I were a merchant,” said I, “and the market and conditions
and opportunities were as you describe, I should lay in a good
stock of flour.”

The foregoing is in substance a correct report of that conversa-
tion. Of the results thereof I had no thought whatever, as I har-
bored no suspicion of evil. But ere the sun of that day went

EVENTS OF THE VALLEY. 853

down, my wnilluminated words were taken as a standard of ac:
tion! Subsequently, on hearing the effects of my friend’s im-
pulsive movements, I felt surprised and grieved; but, actuated by
benevolent impulses, I withheld all expression of my regrets and
disapprobation. But others afterward seized upon the unex-
plained circumstance, and I received volleys of misrepresenta-
tions from the enemy’s battlements.

The reader will bear in remembrance, while glancing over
these few “wants” from the world, that I had been the recipient
of similar demands since 1844. Then, however, I had the pro-
tection of an operator. And, besides, the appeals now made were
far more numerous and trying to my sensitive nature — because I

“was sojourning in the mental valley, between Mount Justice and
Mount Power, in a sort of transition which exposed me to trials
unknown to the citizens of the world. One more illustration from
the wide-spreading thicket of my correspondence will suffice:

“ A. J. Davis, Esq.: Pardon a stranger in writing to you upon
so delicate a matter as that of a domestic quarrel. I will not in-
trude upon your time by writing apologetic words, but will come
to the difficulty under which I suffer. The circumstances are
these: Some ten months since, I courted a young lady with the
intention of making her my wife. But one day we had the mis-
fortune to disagree upon a trifling matter, at which she took great
offence, and I find it impossible to conciliate her by any means in
my power.....

“Tf you can inform me as to what will bring about the state of
affection and confidence that existed a few weeks since, you will
greatly oblige, &c.”

Besides these, there came unto me letters of every conceivable
shade of scientific, historical, and philosophical inquiry —never
imparting a particle of information, but asking innumerable ques-
tions about all sorts of out-of-the-way and never-to-be-thought-of
subjects. And thus, dear reader, lived I in the valley. What

364 THE MAGIC STAFF.

could serve me, in my lowly habitation, save the Angel World
and my Magic Staff? a

Receiving, at length, an invitation from an acquaintance in
Vermont, to visit and take a carriage-ride with him all the way
from Bennington to Burlington, I fled from the presence of my
wearying anxieties and rested three whole weeks.

MISSIONARIES IN THE FIELD. 655

°

CHAPTER XLV.
MISSIONARIES IN THE FIELD.

“They wrought with sad sincerity,

' Themselves from God they could not free,
They builded wiser than they knew, -
The conscious stone to beauty grew.”

Tue balmy breezes of the great Green mountains had fanned
much feverish fatigue out of my flesh, and I departed from the
presence of my Vermont friend with a blessed repose in my
spirit. There was a certain promise to be fulfilled —that on my
return, I would halt in Troy, New York, and call upon my new
acquaintance, the poet. I did so. His refined and free expres-
sions of regard were to me refreshing and pleasurable. There
‘was now less impetuous excitement in his manner. He said:
“ The mission on which I am about to depart, Brother Davis, is
one of great importance.” ‘

“What have you resolved to do, Brother Harris?” I inquired.

“ Having privately withdrawn from the Universalist denomina-
tion,” said he with deep energy, “I am now preparing a course ot
lectures to deliver on my western tour.”

“ Have you made out the plan of your trip ?” I asked.

“T shall need your impressions, Brother Davis, on the best
course for me to pursue,” said he with much emotion. “TI shall
consider myself in due wisdom, as acting under your guidance.”
Saying this he relapsed into a child-like quietness for a little

b

846 THE MAGIC STAFF.

space, and then continued: “I expect much labor, much hardship
and even persecution; but I hope that my will and love ana
wisdom will be strengthened and guided—so I shall meet all
discouragements with fortitude, all insults with magnanimity, and
labor with the serene and patient courage, which, in so good and
divine a cause, must at last insure success.”

“Has Brother Fishbough got the Revelations published yet?”
I asked—for as I had just returned from the journey, I had not
ascertained the facts.

“No,” he replied; “the Book is expected here about the first
of August. I am anxiously waiting to see it out. Have you
seen the pretended review in the ‘Troy Whig’ ?”

I answered that I had not.~ “Then,” said he, “let me read you
my rejoinder.”

I thanked him for his kindness, and procuring his manuscript,
he read an exceedingly candid and dignified reply to the “false-
hoods” of the journalist. In that article he ably maintained three
propositions, as follows :—

“1, The book originated as is claimed, because the characters
of Dr. Lyon, the operator, Mr. Fishbough, the scribe, and Mr.
Davis, are above reproach; and their known proved reputation
as honest men procludes the possibility of deception.

“2. Neither Messrs. Lyon or Fishbough, any or all of the
witnesses, nor Mr. Davis himself, in the normal state, was capable
of producing the work, or had opportunity to do so without de-
tection if capable.

“3. The evidence of hundreds of eye-witnesses attest the
reality of Mr. Davis’ spiritual powers, and proves him to have
capacities equal to the production of the work.”

In addition to the foregoing the poet had inserted the following:
“Yn March last, he [Mr. Davis] stated that a further develop-
ment of his powers would soon occur. This has taken place.
He is now able, without being magnetized, to make full use of his
spiritual powers—to heal the sick —to foretell future events—ta

MISSIONARIES IN THE FIELD. 857

see the most distant occurrences—to solve the most abstruse
questions in psychology—and to declaim for hours with the elo-
quence of an angel, in defence and exposition of the principles he
has revealed.”

There was a divine glow in the poet’s eye as he read, and I
listened with painfully pleasurable emotions. His manner, more
than his words, interested me. “ What do you think of it?” he
tenderly asked.

“The positions are essentially true,” said I. “But I fear,
Brother Harris, that your journeyings will overtax your powers
of endurance.”

“Much will depend on the promptness of your impressions,”
he tremulously replied, “and I trust the importaftce of my mission
will induce you to write me from time to time, giving me interior
guidance. All things show my mission to be divine, and I will
go on life or death.”

At length I departed for Poughkeepsie. While sailing down
the Hudson, I recalled the foregoing interview, and tried to pene-
trate its results. But, alas! I was living in the valley. The
mists and fogs that had chilled me before, many times during
similar periods, were once again upon my faculties. My intui-
tions would not rise upward. ”I'was well. The lowly plain was
a period of rest, and, knowing this, ’t was wrong in me to repine.

And yet, though I leaned upon my Staff I was deeply troubled.
Have you fot had many beclouded days and trying weeks, dear
reader—when your circumstances compelled the exercise of
wisdom, and -yet you could not see your way clear enough to act
wisely? At least, such was my state, with some effulgent excep-
tions, for weeks succeeding my conversation with the poet-mis-
sionary,

Walking the steamer’s deck, and recalling the unsought respon-
sibility that had just been conferred upon me, I thought: “ Well,
I suppose that I must take it. And yet, it seems to me that the
Principles of my Book teach a different course. Hach man is an

358 THE MAGIC STAFF.

individual. Each-person must reverence and obey the dictates
of his own Reason. When a man’s soul is self-harmonized, the
spirit-world is revealed to him. Man is a microcosm, in other
words; and all things are contained in himself. A man plenarily
inspired, then, is one who has access to all Truth and all Wisdom.
Well, now, suppose I counsel Brother Harris? That will be
right, because I may aid him to become plenarily inspired, and
thus his own centre of strength. Very well, then, Ill do all I
can to help him. He seems to love universal Reform, to be
religiously sincere, to feel heroic devotion to duty, and he is very
talented. All oe is good and desirable; and yet I shrink from
his impulsiveness.’

Thus ended my menlitions on that matter. But there was
another thing that troubled me: his positive exaggeration of my
personal abilities. “Why, I don’t pretend to foretell future
events,” thought I, “only so far as they lie in the track of fixed
principles. And again, I can not ‘declaim for hours with the
eloquence of an angel.’ The fact is, people complain that I don’t
talk enough, and that, when I do talk, 1 bungle words together so,
that I am often unintelligible to them.”

Thus meditating, I began to feel alarmed. “That won’t never
do,” I mentally exclaimed. “ Brother Harris will speak of me
in his lectures, without qualification, as being ‘an angel’ and all
that, when I am nothing of the kind any more than he is.” My
thoughts began to succeed each other with tumultuous speed, but
excusing Benevolence soon checked and quieted them; and I
thus soliloquized—“ Oh, never mind. Brother Harris is a poet.
That’s the way with poets. They don’t tell things just as they
appear to common people. It’s all right for him—and I guess
I'll let it pass, and not think nor worry any more about so trifling
and manifest a matter.”

We will now glide over a few uneventful days. The next scene
opens at the scribe’s residence, in Williamsburgh, Long Island.

MISSIONARIES IN THE FIELD. 359

Tis the twenty-first anniversary of my birthday; the eleventh of
August, 1847. The title of the piece to be performed is, “Men
and means to edit and publish a Reform paper in New York.”
The curtain rises ; and the play begins.

The particulars of the drama, as evolved during a few hours,
need not be rehearsed in this volume. Suffice it to say, that the
prominent parts were well sustained by the able and candid artists.
Nay, ’twas not an artificial performance, dear reader, for there
was a sad sincerity streaming through every heart. Each man’s
duty was to stretch forth his honest arm, and help turn the tide of
human existence into better and higher channels. The world was
clad in blackened robes woven upon thé loom of Ignorance and
Superstition; and these men met to construct a factory for the
weaving of garments of whiteness and immortality.

’T was resolved to begin a journal by an harmonious association
of labor, capital, and talent. Several one-hundred-dollar shares
were at once purchased by individuals in the audience. And
after many good speeches, one asked: “ What shall the paper be
called ?” :

Various captions were suggested. At length an auditor re-
marked that “the new word in Brother Davis’ book would be
unexceptionably excellent.”

“The Univercelum,” repeated the chairman, “ Yes—a very
good name, indeed.”

“Who shall be the principal editor?” was the next inquiry.

“Why, of course the brother who originally proposed the pub-
lication,” said one. “ He is just the best man for that position in
_ our ranks.”

“Yes, Brother Brittan,” said the conscientious and deliberate
scribe, “ you are the man.”

The designated gentleman gracefully expressed his heartfelt
acknowledgments, and then said: “Permit me, brethren, to sug-
gest an additional title. My reasons for offering it will be suffi-
ciently obvious. Below the leading appellation, I would have the

360 THE MAGIC STAFF.

supplementary expression, “And Spiritual Philosopher”—with
this motto: “The things which are seen are temporal; but the
things which are not seen are eternal.”

The appointed editor is a new character in this drama, and
should therefore be introduced to the consideration of the reader.
Prior to the present.occasion, I had many times been a guest at
his residence. The fraternal sympathies and kindly hospitalities
of his family were unsparingly bestowed upon me—for which I
was then and am now deeply and cordially grateful. Many times,
too, have I gazed into his mental structure, and delighted my
spirit-eyes with the landscapes, symbols, figures, archetypes, and
images, that cluster and*glow and stretch far away, scene beyond
scene, in the region of his vivacious Ideality. And during his
illnesses, also, I have looked into and prescribed for his physical
organism. He was my friend. In his eye, there was a look of
love; in his smile, a token of confiding affection. His ruling traits
were: a love of Liberality, a love of Beauty, a love of public
Esteem, a love of Truth. He became the editor of “The Uni-
verccelum,” and will ere long again appear in this history.

The missionaries were now in the field. The reader will bear
in mind that I had not summoned them into it, though I cheerfully
became their coadjutor. There was the operator, the scribe, the
poet, the editor, and myself. We stood side by side on the stage
of life, our spirit-arms about each other’s neck, while the turbu-
lent billows of the disunited world rolled on before us. Besides
ourselves, there were others there who declared their intention to
write articles for the Reform paper. The play was soon over for
that day, however, and the curtain dropped amid what the imagi-
native would term, “thunders of applause.”

My absence from Poughkeepsie was of brief duration. While
returning thither, my mind was filled with unintelligible misgivings.
A publication was to be started in advance of public demand,
without the required complement of twelve editors, and before a
sufficient capital had been accumulated. Methought I saw, in the

MISSIONARIES IN THE FIELD. 861

little distance, a cloud full of rain. The water descended in tor-
rents, the paper was dissolved into shapeless fragments, and its
editors were drifting on a sea of discord. “Oh, dear!” exclaimed
I in much agitation, “Shall I never get over this dreaming?” But
a moment’s thought restored me to quiet, when I heard the blessed
voice: “To—the—Mountain! Do—not—fear!” Wearing these
words, I leaned firmly on my Staff. and felt perfect faith.

Soon after this an acquaintance reported to me a conversation,
between himself and my former operator, substantially as fol-
lows :—

“Have you seen Mr. Davis’s large volume ?”

“No,” returned Mr. Levingston, “I hav’ n’t.”

“Are you not very curious to sce what the clairvoyant has
been saying since he left you?”

“No,” said he, moodily. “I don’t expect much from that
book.”

“ Ah, indeed! You astonish me. Tell me, pray, why don’t
you expect much from his book ?”

“ Because I don’t believe that he’s been in the ee clairvoyant
state since those men enticed him ue) from me.’

“You don’t?”

“No,” said he, “I don’t.”

“ Why, can it be possible that you believe that’ ve

“Yes, that’s my opinion,” replied the operator. “If Jackson
had remained with me, and had continued to let me magnetize
him, he might have given a book worth reading.”

“ But some of the papers say that his Revelations are very in-

sd

teresting.”

“Oh, that may be,” he responded. “Jackson might have said
a few smart things, now and then, while under Dgctor Lyon’s in-
fluence, but he hasn’t delivered the lectures he would have given,
if he had continued to be magnetized by his first operator. I’m

quite certain of that.”

“Then you don’t wish to see the great Book ?”
16

3862 THE MAGIC STAFF.

“No, I feel next to no interest in it — though I expect to read _
it when I get time.”

When the substance of the foregoing conversation became
known to my New York and Bridgeport friends, they smiled con-
temptuously, as if the former operator had not exercised his com
mon sense. His stand-point was esteemed to be extremely pre-
posterous. And so it was. But ere long the tables were turned ;
and, then, a position precisely identical with this absurd one of
Mr. Levingston in regard to the Revelations, became altogether
reasonable and convenient for others to assume with reference to
my subsequent volumes. In this particular, the sequel will be
extremely novel and valuable to the reader.

While the Revelations were being stereotyped in America, a
suggestion arose concerning their speedy publication in England.
The grave-faced operator submitted to me a catalogue of grave
questions on this point; after due interior consideration of which,
I answered favorably to the interest of the publication. *T was
not mammon, dear reader, that prompted the new partners to
send the book to our Motherland across the blue Atlantic; but,
on the contrary, they were actuated by a genuine desire to main-
tain and exert their mutual and sacred guardianship over the
spread of its sublime principles.

But whence the means? I will tell you. Through a letter, I
presented their plans and wishes to my Spirit Sister—the lady
correspondent— whose face I had not seen since my first impres-
sion that we should not meet. Her reply was prompt and char-
acteristic :—

“ Mine own Brotuer!—My soul’s best, truest friend —dear
as thou art to me, yet dearer is the work of thy life, and I would
do everything fo aid thee in it. But my means are not abundant,
dearest brother, and I regret that I can not do more. Out of
what I have, however, I will cheerfully lend twelve hundred dol-
lars to Messr8. Lyon and Fishbough, to be appropriated (as you
say) in defraying the expenses consequent upon the publication

MISSIONARIES IN THE FIELD. 363

of the Book in England. But, my best friend, let me add that you
receive the profits coming from its sale there, to pay your current
travelling and boarding expenses, until you receive back the entire
sum, for which I will take their jot note. Will this do? Do
not deny me, my own best brother. I wish to be of some use to
the world. I would serve thee! . “Thy Spirit-Sister ie

Therefore, in addition to the previous loan, and two hundred
and fifty dollars subsequently bestowed with which to help sustain
the Univerccelum, a still greater sum was now offered, by the gen-
erous lady to aid in the dissemination of this blessed Reform.

Mr. Joseph H. Cunningham, an intelligent disciple of both
St. Crispin and. progressive thought, agreed to take the duplicate
plates of the book to his native land. The results of his mission
thither were satisfactory. But prior to his departure—during a
visit at his residence below Poughkeepsie —I had a most wonder-
ful and useful vision. It concerned the past, present, and future,
of the human race. Viewed merely as a generalization of histori-
cal truth, and as a systematic statement of what appeared to be
focalized upon the air before me in the brief space of twenty min-
utes, it is as much superior to the “ Revelations” as these are
higher than the philosophy of the schools. But ere I present this
vision to the reader, I must, to avoid anachronisms, relate what
occurred soon after the meeting at Williamsburgh.

Feeling dubious as to my future course with reference to the
operator, and dreading the approaching danger of being made the
supernatural centre of a semi-philosophical and eventually super-
stitious propagandism, I hastened away to my mountain sanctuary
for instruction. Quiet and holy as the lull of twilight was that
dreamy state which preceded my superior condition.

My Guide was there! He pillowed my spirit on his beating
bosqm, and said: “The bounty of Heaven hath given me wisdom
for thee, my son.”

“ Thanks, kind Guide,” said I, as the aroma of his pure pres-
ence floated into my soul. “TI am very thankful.”

364 THE MAGIC STAFF.

On my uttering these words he withdrew a few yards, and re-
plied with gentle firmness: “ Why callest thou me ‘Guide’?
Thy guide is within thee !” /

“Oh, say not so!” I exclaimed with great agitation—“do not
leave me! My every day’s life hangs upon your truth and over-
ruling providence !”

“Oh, man!” said he, “art thou still an ignorant youth ?”

“No, no, I do not mean to be a helpless child,” replied I; “but
my heart recalls your words, without which I had many times
gone astray.”

“Dost thou lead the seer as one who is sightless ?” he inquired.

“No? said I, “’tis only the blind who require a guide.”

“ Art thou a seer?” he asked; “or one who merely gropes his
way through the galleries of long-departed experience ?” P

“The past is not my guide,” said I.. “When I wish to take
a step, I look upon the ground before me, lest I should stum-
ble.”

“°Tis even so, my son,” said he, with kindly tone. “Thus
shouldst thou see from thine own central sight, the palest beam of
light o’er thy pathway. And I will come only when thou hast
done all thou canst, and yet requirest sight and power.”

“Do you mean,” I inquired, “that I can penetrate the future
for myself unaided ?”

“ ach man,” he answered, “ like the Earth and the Sun, is a
centre; the more true the man, the more true his revolutions.
Tell me, my son, hast thou travelled over the Mountain of Use
and also of Justice ?” :

“Yes, I feel that I have,” was my reply.

“Then art thou not able to be useful and just without my
words ?””

“Yes,” I replied, “I feel that I can do whatsoever appears to
my own conscience to be useful and just.”

“Tis well! Do thus! Nothing more is required of any liy-
ing soul!”

MISSIONARIES IN THE FIELD. 865

He now retired a few paces further, and continued: “As be-
fore, I will picture to thee thy works and ways. Behold!”

Looking in the direction indicated, I instantly beheld a repro-
duction of the impressive scene once before witnessed —the
mountain, a castle-like structure within it, the four successive
stories, and a representation of the four stages of my own career.
“Yes,” said I, “’tis true, very true. These are my boyhood
scenes, the mysterious voices of my youth, the operations of Mr.
Levingston, and my work with Dr. Lyon. Yes, it is all true.
But what is next to be done? My soul yearns to see the future.”

“Then,” said he, “direct thy vision higher !”

To my astonishment, on looking upward, I saw another story
in the structure, more brilliant and beautiful than all the lower
ones combined. It seemed to be made of crystal, through which
golden and purple sunlight perpetually streamed. And in the
centre of the room, I saw myself seated by a table busily writing.
The table was glowing, the apartment shone like a sun, and my
whole head seemed to be illuminated.“ Below, I recognised my
friend, the doctor, and others who knew nothing of that upper
room. And, looking once again to make my vision sure, I saw a
pleasantly-furnished room, leading from the one in which I was
writing, dimly lighted from a mundane source, and seated in an
easy chair, the strange lady with whom I was in correspondence!

“Oh, tell me,” exclaimed I, “do you mean to foreshadow a per-
sonal interview with my Spirit Sister ?”

The vision vanished. But my Guide stood in the foreground,
with a-smile glowing like a sunbeam on his heavenly face, and I
asked: “ What is the work for me next to do ?”

And he replied: “The bounty of heaven giveth me wisdom.
See! The road before thee guideth the traveller, through mid-
night mists, all the way up the Mountain of Power into plains
and valleys beyond. Hold thy Staff firmly, then, for the enemies
of progress are many and mighty. Thus saying, he disappeared,
and I returned to outward life.

366 THE MAGIC STAFF.

Wending my way homeward, I pondered on all that had passed
—for my memory was no more suspended—and the reader can
easily anticipate my resolutions. They were: that I would hence-
forth live an independent life, be my own centre of sight, my own
inditer of impressions, be responsible for my own mistakes, dis-
tribute the generosities of my own soul, help on the work of hu-
man progress as one among many, be the leader of no party, the
friend of no useless compromise, and thus walk over the mountains
and through the valleys of my individual pilgrimage.

Reaching my boarding-house, I hastened to my room, and lo!
— between that moment and the end of the ensuing hour — the
past was all merged into my outward recollection! The mystic
Past—that had been to me as a dream—was all mine! My
memory could now revert to each minutest particular of my every
clairvoyant vision. No more contradiction! A double and twist-
ed existence no more! The abounding wealth of my experience
was no longer locked in another’s bank. No man could now hold
the key with which to go“in and out of my soul at pleasure —
leaving me, as an outward being, a lone wanderer and destitute
of common understanding. “No, no!” exclaimed my joyful heart,

“henceforth, I shall walk the surface of God’s earth, not proudly,
~ but a companion at once to the lowly clod-hopper and the educated
academician. Oh, lam wholly awake! The sable curtain of mys-
tery —so long hanging between my outer and inner world — is
rent in twain and for ever banished! The secrets of a clairvoyant
life are before me, and:no man can wrest them from my reason and
memory!” There came a natural feeling into my flesh, on the har-
monious blending of these previously separate memories. Not that
the superior condition was drawn down to the level of my common
life, but my common life was elevated to the very threshold of
the superior condition. After that memorable and gracious hour
—as I said in my first article to the Univerecelum —I could vol-
untarily enter the “superior condition,” investigate truths, see for

MISSIONARIES IN THE FIELD. 36T

myself, draw my own conetasinns.s and peta a perfect recollection
of the whole experiénce.

In all this, then, you may behold a prophecy of what Father-
God and Mother-Nature have in reserve for every son and daugh-
ter of humanity. Not that all men will pass through the mystical -
ordeal of magnetization; but the immutable laws of mind will,
sooner or later, waft each soul into “the superior condition” —
when, as with the bee and the angel, the only and sufficient guide
to good and truth will be that totality of Divine life in the soul,
which I celebrate under the name of “ INTUITION.”

8638 THE MAGIC STAFF.

CHA PT ER, xX Wavel.
VISION OF PERPETUAL PEACE.

ALTHOUGH several eventful years have wafted my barque far
from the place wherein I beheld the substance of this chapter, yet
do I recall each little incident and circumstance of the occasion as
if *twere yesterday. “Each soft remembrance springs like bles-
soms in the heart.”

Breakfast over, and the sabbath morning partly spent, Mr. Cun-
ningham said: “ Come, let’s all walk to church this forenoon. The
music is usually very good.”

The two daughters at once consented, and I, being a guest,
cheerfully acceded to the proposition. Never was sabbath sun
more bright, nor Sunday scenes more beautiful. The walk was
short—just over the bridge, and up to the Episcopal sanctuary
on the hillside, in Channingville, Dutchess county.

I entered a cushioned pew with the family. The organist ex-
temporized a prelude, the choir sung its solemn chants, the devout
clergyman went through divers prefatory exercises, and I tried to
ge; interested. One of the audience handed me a prayer-book.
I appreciated his benevolent intentions, but twas a decided im-
pediment to my devotions. Not being used to books of any sort,
I had a double temptation — that is, to appear to read, and yet not
to do anything of the kind.

At length, the solemn minister began his solemn discourse to a
solemn congregation. He said nothing that met my mind during

4&

VISION OF PERPETUAL PEACE. 869

the fore part of his sermon; but when perhaps within a few inches
of the end, he exclaimed: “ Who thinks of man’s redemption?
Who can tell when Jehovah’s words were first delivered to erring
nations ?”

Those questions interested my mind at once. “Yes,” me-
thought, “I would like to know when the first minister began to
preach. In fact, I would like to see the very first form of reli-
gious belief—and what sort of people they were who believed the
first theology.”

As I meditated, I looked and beheld a fajnt light before me—
causing the altar, the pulpit, the minister, and the church, to melt,
and fade, and vanish away.

My intuitions were liberated and blended with clairvoyance ;
the superior condition was perfectly produced; and, though in the
midst of people, no.one knew the workings of my soul. The ma-
terial confinements of the local sanctuary did not restrain me;
neither did the presence of minds form the least part of my indi-
vidual consciousness.

“ What was the first theology?” I mentally inquired. Know-
ing that I possessed the power to answer my own question, away
I looked through cloudy skies and stormy centuries, along Stygian
shores and over oceans of buried men, until I fixed upon the pri-
meval conditions of human existence. This was SAVAGEISM.
The theology of that stage was Fetichism. Then I gazed upon
the turbulent billow of human history rolling toward me, and that
was Barsarism. The theology of that stage was Polytheism.
Then I looked upon the next nearest billow of mankind’s past,
which was PatriarcHALismM. The theology of that stage was
Pantheism.

Fixing this in memory, I looked at the mountainous wave of
the present, called Civitism. The theology of this stage is
Dualism.

“Now,” said I thoughtfully, “why not see what’s next to flow
out of this era? What will be the future of the race?” Seeing

16”

370 THE MAGIC STAFF.

«

the fixedness of principles, I could readily produce an exact men-
tal picture of the approaching destiny of mankind. It would be
RepvusLicanism. The theology of that condition willbe Mono-
theism.

The grandeur of this view made me shiver with delight. “ But,”
methought, “why not look into other departments of history?
Why not cleave the darkness of the past?” And immediately I
began the labor. My penetrations were voluntary and profound.
“Now,” said I inwardly, “let me first look at the complexion of
the races in the different Soctal States, then at their Architecture,
then at their Commerce, then at their Language, then at their
Science, &c., &c.— each in its order —until I get a history of the
whole past; and, from the immutable laws that regulate human
existence, let me read the wondrous scroll of Destiny!” And,
urged by these my own interrogatories, dear reader, I labored
upon the dead past, the living present, and the unborn future,
until I actually elaborated and focalized a chart of history and
prophecy. It seemed to me at the time—owing to my large and
projective organ of individuality —that the chart was pictured in
the air. But I am positive that it was the systematic action of
my own intuitions and clairvoyant discernment.

“Have you been dozing?” whispered one of the young ladies
near me, as I relapsed gently back into my outward state.

“No,” replied I. “My mind has been wide awake.”

The minister was just closing the morning services. By cal-
culation, I made out an interior exercise of not more than twenty
minutes’ duration !

Of this extraordinary vision I said nothing that day. Next
morning I hastened to Poughkeepsie, and began transcribing from
the pages of memory. I wrote it out methodically, just as I had
fixed the form in my mind, without referring to the dictionary or
any historical work. Therefore, I present it as one of the triumphs
of the superior condition. But, in order to bring this picture intel-
ligibly before the reader’s mind, I will insert a few explanations:

VISION OF PERPETUAL PEACE. 371

InTRODUCTIVE EXpLaNnaTrions.— On the succeéding two pages,
as the reader will perceive, there are two Formulas. These con-
stitute the firm foundation of that which I term “ A Vision of Per-—
petual Peace.” The Chart, in other words, is based upon an In-
tuitional (or self-evident) Theory of the Drvinz Minp, the Struc-
ture of the Universe, and the Elements of the Human Mind. The
philosophy is this: that Man possesses, to a finite degree, the attri-
butes of the Infinite; that Man is a microcosm or universe in min-
iature; therefore, that all arts, sciences, philosophies, theologies,
&c., have their seat or germ in the living Human Soul. This
explains the value of the two Formulas.

Next, as to the eight pages succeeding. The reader will ob-
serve, on turning to the first page following the second Formula,
that Human History is divided into Five Ages—1. Savageism.
2. Barbarism. 3. Patriarchalism. 4. Civilism. 5. Republican-
ism. These Five Ages are asa Key, put in the reader’s hand,
whereby to unlock the treasures of the Past, the Present, and the
Future, on this globe. Keep in mind that these Five Ages run
transversely all the way through the eight pages which embrace
the Chart, and that the Captions of the sixteen longitudinal (or up-
and-down) columns are indicative of the different phases of the
Race at the period specified by the Age on the left side of the first
page. For example: suppose you wish to see what description of
houses were built in the Age of Barbarism. First look for the
caption “ Architecture ;” then look directly beneath into the second
lines and there you will find the word “ Pyramidalism.” Now,
then, to ascertain what this word means, see the explanation in
smaller type below, (to which you are referred by the correspond-
ing figure 2,) and you there read, “Sacred piles, altars, monu-
ments, &c.” Thus you may find the condition of Art, or Music,
_ or Theology, and so forth.

This brief guide to the Chart will, I trust, make it useful to
the world. Indeed, as it seems to me, almost any person may
" grasp the generalization.

THE MAGIC STAFF.

: “£ydosoriyg
[eluouBFy oyi Jo uortsodord Arewud oy} st yong -puryueyy ozuozowseyo yorym somyenb yuoreyur jo yuow
-dypoAap snoruowsey oy1 UL 4sIsuOD [IM asIsaqi Tey} Jo yustu[y[ng ojodu0o oy) ‘ainjeN-aayO|. pue pox)-r0yIe F
JO wie 043 st woyoafiad se yonuiseul puy ‘o[qeiounuut seritpeyuownsysut YIM pel[y st esiaatugq ey} ‘oltseq
[euoninsuos siya Apes 03 ‘ad4q sty ppoyun oy repio uy “peyA st ‘uoMBess Jo ytuWNS ay} uo ‘yrosuatZT jo ody
SFL FPSMrFT Jo uoyvoydrnu puv uoyooford oy} st astsaq@ [esjues ‘Aivqunpoaut ‘ayeuur ysay $,poxy-194 18
“OOUITIT[OJUT PUB OFI[ Jo suo; [Je Jo uoLeZedoud oy1 09 speo, Yorym { uONOE [eBnlu0d jo apoo
oy) st Avry-jendnN “pox jo opug 10 woysks o1ueS10 oy) $41edsojUN0D yoRxa ue SI OINJeN-1OWIOP «*assaatag,
Og} JO UlBlg [ede oyi ur yudg Bt Suteg yuodrpeyut pue paztuesio ue st poy-royjeg :snyy ‘Adojoeseayd qua
“1oQIp B UL pajeys oq Agu epnwIOT sty, ‘ofdiourrg Sunesntuco pue spog eeuseu oy] —aNy OY} SE AVY-TVEL
“ON *€ ‘o[dtourg sanonposdes pue oandooes oy3—- Lota OY) St FUNLVN-UANLOP “B ‘o[diouug sutzissoua
-X[qeqnuiwt pue 9ATjOB-ATQISTAUL 9Y1— ASAVY) OY SI GOH -UAHLV YT *T ‘Bl NWO; [eJUaWUepUNT oY} SI PAOGR AH,

‘JUSUdOTAAeTT ‘OSIOATUY | ‘TLODST MA,
WOISsaIZOIg> QNg| ‘UomeSerSSy > LITT TEA es ASV
TOTIVIIOSSY ‘goueisqng ‘OA0'T

MVTTIVIIGON | ‘TUOLVN-VGHION | = “COO-WIHIVA

373

VISION OF PERPETUAL PEACE.

-do[aaap isoysry oy,
j SelIsap souay AA

ey} — LoASAY oy Sl Aaog -“Z

‘sseulddey
‘AV[CILOWUL]
TUST[RIUeIe

ars ad

“as oY SI Yong *siejs oy} puokoq sorsyds ut ‘Ajnvaq [eyouut u
Torun Lays yorym jo yno t uormysuoo s,uey oyd Ur (3ue4x9 poqut, S19A v 09) avadde pur yoour 91048 N-19Y40 JA)
Jo sauredoid oururuay oy pue poy-soyIeq Jo syuowelo oulnosem ayy, ‘WopstA\ St (@Aory 40) olsaq Jo quOw
yuidg oy3 Josaysadoid eyeuut ey} wos sdutids ostsaq
“UOljOR URUINY [[B JO asnnH oY St auisag uBwny pue ‘ainjeNy-1oyIOI Jo ornqeturut ve st Apoq uew
“uy qoojied out $ poxyy-royieg Jo aunjerurur v st quids ueuny yoaysod oy) :sny) ‘spiom quasaptp ut pareis oq osje Av
Bpawog siyy, sedioung Sunenjoe pue eatjouw oy] — any ay} SI AUISICE “¢

j e1Isep JO UALOJ JSoySLY OY) ST IVY AL

‘TEU
(Nd) “oqqeyesoq 7 LMM
‘TeIOUlTA

AQdOd

‘Aydosopry g [etuowre zy oy} Jo uoytsodosd Auepuo
B YITA wooTq Aay1 YorymM woz pue ‘Ajaatssaisoid

‘gidioutg eauonpoider pue oaydaoea
‘ojdroun g olqeystreduit pue oayoe vy]—aAsAVG oY} St LIulag ‘Tf
Jo 9ai8op ssa Ajoqugut pue s0[103[n ue ut : 9U0 Zutpavaad O43 Jo uoLonpoidas B ynq ST B[NWIO,T OACQE AH,

yuauidojaAap

‘a0UaSTT[A1U]
Topesuag ¢ AVIV)
.  *HOTIOTAT

oh T del dS

3874 THE MAGIC STAFF.

1. SOCIAL STATE. 2. DEVELOPMENT.

1, SAVAGISM. 1, Negro,

9, BARBARISM. 2, Aborig-American.

3, PATRIARCHISM, | 3. Malay-Mongolian.

4, Caucasian.

CIVILISM.

Anglo-American.

5, REPUBLICANISM,| 5

1. BLack was the color of the
first types of man, which were
very imperfect, and confined to
Africa.

1. The infancy of the race; an
age of wildness, penury, spolia-
tion, servitude, ignorance, and sel-
fishness.

2. Rep. Migrated, previously
to the formation of the Pacific
ocean, into the north of South
America.

2. An age of cupidity, supersti-
tion, dogmatism, war, rapine, and
the brutal subjugation of females.

8. YELLOW (transition). Lo-
cated in eastern Asia, and extend
to the isles of the south Pacific
ocean.

8. An age of despotism, arro-
gance, perfidy, pride, oppression,
| physical prowess, and deification.

| 4, An age of autocracy, aristoc-

i rac7, feudality, democracy, and
civilization. Aspiration for free-
dom.

4. Wuitt. Extended from
India into north Africa and into
Europe; hence called “ Indo-Eu-
ropeans.”

5. This will be an age of gen- 5. Concrete. Combination of
eral industry, female elevation, | various Europeans in America;
peace, light, security, and...... the highest specimens of mankind ;
soe ae cle) SiR ete o aioe es Gbbers. 1m. wees. = NET

VISION OF PERPETUAL PEACE.

3. ARCHITECTURE.

1, Cavernism.

2, Pyramidalism.

3, Palatialism.
Domesticism.

5. Edificialism.

375

2
4. COMMERCE.

1, Nundinantal.

9, Demi-Personal.

3, Duplicism.
4, Demi-National,

Reciprocal.

1. Huts, caverns, excavations,
tents, cabins, &c., &c.; the rudest
and simplest dwellings and struc-
tures.

2. Sacred piles, altars, and mon-
uments. Examples of the perfec-
tion of this stage of architecture in
Upper Egypt.

8. Palaces, towers, sacred edi-
fices, temples, and sanctuaries. Of
sacred structures, the Pantheon is
an example.

4. Mansions and ottages ;—
buildings less for purposes of de-
fence — more for convenience and
utility.

5. Will combine the vastness,
grandeur, utility, simplicity, and
beauty, of all previous ages... .

a UNITY.

1. Collection of hunting, fish-
ing, and wearing materials, at fix-
ed times and places for purposes
of trade.

2. Exchange of metals, imple-
ments of war, animals, and other
articles for women.

3. Converting wealth into idols ;
tithe-paying; appropriations for

sacrifices and to kingly ambition.

4. Restrictions, tariffs, antago-
nism of capital and labor, and of

general interests and productions.

5. International communication,
free trade, universal reciprocity of
exchanges

376 THE MAGIC STAFF.

5, LANGUAGE. 6, SCIENCE,

Automatical, 1. Simplism.

Hieroglyphical. 2, Alchemy.

Symbolical. 3. Transition.
4, Alphabetical. 4, Chemistry,

5, Axiomatical, | 5, Compound.

1. Configuration of countenance, 1. Perceptive, observation of
gesticulation, simple expression, | surrounding things, superficial ap-

discordant and ambiguous speech. | plication, uses scarcely known.

2. Representations on stones, 2. Superstitious deductions, met-
trees, and plates; significant fig- | al-mania, magic, divination, de-
ures, simple letters and sounds. monology, astrology.

38. Allegorical structures, typefied 8. Chimeras, supernaturalism,
ideas, significant carvings, sculp- | chronology, much of the imaginary
ture, statuary, and idols. but little of the practical.

4, Conventional signs, letters, 4. Practico-inductive, knowledge |
of uses, general practical applica- _,
tion, e. g., in inventions, naviga- ;
tion, &c. |

words, conjugations, inflexions,

syntax — (grammar).

5. Natural grammar, clear rules, 5. Science the subject of prima-
ry education, applied to all depart- |
ments ; knowledge systemized . .
SPaife Melo, ah oh ol ct rettat grag UNITY.

spontaneous and unequivocal ex-

pression, interior sense . UNITY.

VISION OF PERPETUAL PEACE. 3TT

7. PHILOSOPHY. 8. THEOLOGY.

Material, Fetichism.

2, Analytical. 2, Polytheism.

3, Transition, 3, Pantheism.

Synthetical, 4, Dualism,

5, Spiritual, 5. Monotheism. .
See ee ee

1. Imaginary causes, fantastic 1. First phase of idolatry, wor-

origins, gigantic gods, wild specu- ; ship of exterior objects in Nature,
lations on cosmogony, &e. images, chieftains, &c.; adoration.

_2. Broken inquiry, imaginary re- 2. Invisible deities with diverse
searches, invisible arbitrators, spec-
ulations on the formation of the
earth.

attributes ; rites, ceremonies, sac-

rifices, fasts, feasts, &c.; expiation.

3. Experience, data, a priori, 3. Resolution of matter into spir-
classifications of elements, geome-
try, dialectic subtleties, metaphys-
ics.

it; supposition that all things are

God; superstition, fanaticism.

4. Development of physical sys- 4. Antagonistic deities, good
tems, doctrines of chance, fatalism, | God and evil God (or devil),
freedom of the will, astronomy, | Church, Pope, Bible, Clergy; sec-
geology. tarianism and prejudice.

5. Knowledge of causes, rela- 5. No arbitrary deities, OnE
tions, degrees; definiteness, meth- | Cause, Onn Father, Onn Destiny,
od, interior investigations, all in.. | One family, OnNu purpose... . .

NOINUTATO Ven he. SNE. ot go) dl cg UNITY.

378 THE MAGIC STAFF.

9. GOVERNMENT.

10. AUTHORITY.

—

. Nulli-Autonicism.

vo

. Anarchism.

Qo

. Hierarchism.

4, Feudalism.

5, Natural-right-ism.
EE ee ee
1. Individual isolation ; invasion,
local and temporary power ; force,

torture; distributive justice un-
known.

2. Confusion, perversity, insta-
bility ; artificial standards; enslav-
ing of the weak and conquered ;
family orders.

3. Voluntary choice of chieftains
and rules; successful warriors be-
come monarchs; the weak oppres-
sed.

4, Hereditary aristocracy; serf-
dom, allegiance, exclusive elective
franchise ; monarchy, democracy.

5. General consent; qualifica-
tion, attraction, (equitable and)
natural legislation, distributive jus-
tic aertotaas sis) sand is LOPSE UNG

—

. Desire and Fear,

vo

. Strength & Mystery.
3, Position and Title.

4, Doctrine and Wealth.|

 §, Nature and Reason.

1. Impulse, inclination; the im-
aginary will of idols; fire, light;
superstitions and impressions.

2. Power, arbitrary will of chief-
tains; sorcery, soothsaying, ora-
cles, demons, imaginary divinities.

8. Prophets, kings, nobles,
priests; arbitrary and irrevocable
laws based upon selfishness and
superstition.

4. Church, pope, bible; estab-
lished articles of faith; hereditary
opulence and grandeur; wealth.

5. Interpretation of Nature; na-
tive truth; intuition, Reason, Wis-
dom, and Righteousness

cee eee

VISION OF PERPETUAL PEACE. 379

11, ART. 12. MUSIC.

1. Lifeless. Discordant.

2, Simple Imitation. | 2. Exciting,

3, Transition, 3. Melodious,

4, Compound. 4, Soothing,

5, Harmonious,

5, Living,

1. Simple outline; rude and 1. Confused, incoherent, clamor-
grotesque figures with parts dis-
proportionate and inconerent; col-

orless, lifeless.

ous, sonorous, discordant; horns,

gongs, drums, &c., mere noise.

2. Rude and imperfect imitation ;
color deep, coarse, unshaded, and
noneffective; statuary rough and
uncouth.

2. Intensely vociferous; simul-
taneous sounds; imperfect rules

and time; approximation to order.

3. Bold, rugged, and attractive ;
due regard to symmetry and pro-
portions; color simple but effect-
ive.

8. Periodical beats; invention,
variety, melody; orphic strains,

chants, praises; harps; flutes, &c.

4, Sacred, solemn, martial, pen-
etrating,. sentimental, eolian; per-
fect time, order, and harmony.

4. Color less effective; greater
regard to exactness in delineation ;
delicate tenderness.

5, Symphonious, euphonious,
harmonious, lofty, delicate, expres-
sive; exquisite order and time .

5. Soft, lively color; graceful,
sentimental, spiritual; profoundly
effective; influence pure and re-

oe ee oe 8 oe eo el el he WINER Le | 6 we ee we oe te ee ew

380

THE MAGIC STAFF.

13, POETRY.

14. AMUSEMENTS.

1, Perceptism.

9, Eratoism.
3, Transition.
4, Conceptism.

5, Intuitism.

1, Sensual.

2. Mytho-Tragical.

3. Gladio-Gymnastic.
4, Melo-Dramatie,

5, Intellectual,

1. External, wild, startling;
abounding with huge and stupen-
dous fancies; — subjects: genii,
hunting, war, &c.

2. Erato-inspired, lyric, eccen-
tric, bold, diffusive ; — subjects:

gods, heroes, warriors, battles, &c.

8. Cantos to God, mythological,
tragical, amorous, epic, sublime,
nervous, and instructive.

4. Embodying mythology, the-
ology, science, philosophy; didac-
tic, descriptive, sacred, effeminate.

5. Instructive, elevating, refin-
ing; the vehicle of truth, and the
promoter of peace, progress, and .

UNITY.

oe ef ee ee we we ew ow

1. In a state of nudity ; physi-
cal, lascivious, great animality ;
hunting, fishing, and muscular ex-
ploits.

2. Representations of mythologi-
cal scenes with tragical termina-
tions; marvellous, exciting.

8. Cruel, destructive, gladiato-

rial; games, such as running,

wrestling, &e. Olympic games.

4. Representations of historical
events and of human passions, foi-
bles, &c. ; musical and instructive.

5. Useful, educational, spirit-
ual; embracing science, art, music,

poptryentrath . 3.5 a. UNITY.

VISION OF PERPETUAL PEACE. 881

/

15. IDIOM.

16. KINGDOM.

—

1, Sanserit, » Babylonian.

» Medo-Persian,

9. Greek,

a

eo

. Hebrew, . Grecio-Roman.

—

. European.

5. English, — ~ 5, American,

1. Includes the savage aud bar-
barian ages, developing the mon-
archical system represented in the
Babylonian.

1. Ancient Indian, Chinese,
Persian, Sclavonic, Celtic, and
Gothic: Sanscrit most prominent.

2. Glides from the first into a
new reign; the Zoroasterian era;

2. A pure language formed from

the materials of the primitive lan-

guages, mainly of the Sanscrit. Medes and Persians hold the sway.

3. The sacred languages of the
Egyptians and Jews, the Bible
idiom, and other dialects from the
parent stock,

3. Kingdoms following Alexan-
der the Great, the era being one of

carnage, hostility, and wealth.

4. The Roman empire and sub-

4. Latin, German, Italian, Span-
ish, French, English, Swedish,
Danish, and other languages now
in use.

sequent Huropean monarchies, now
nearly closed.

5. The English perfected, being 5. A general Republic, the step-
= © | ping-stone to Freedom, <Associa-

a compound of other languages; a tion, Justice, Accord, and.....
Pencraland tinale ser wemOINT Ns |. ORES Rear

882 THE MAGIC STAFF.

There is nothing more positively certain than that the Harmo-
NIAL AGE will eventually dawn upon this rudimental world. Study
the fundamental principles that stream unchangeably through and
control all existence; for they, far more than I, will utterly con-
vince your understanding and gladden your deepest heart.

What is true of the Individual is equally true of the Race. For
illustration: the first Age— Savageism—is infancy ; the second
Age — Barbarism—is adolescence ; the third Age — Patriarchal-
ism—is virility; the fourth Age— Civilism—is manhood; the
fifth Age— Republicanism —is maturity; or, a ripening of the
preceding ages into a state of comparative Wisdom and Harmony.
Meanwhile, you will bear in mind that, as there are infancy and ~
old age in the same family at the same time, so are there savage-
ism and harmonialism in the same age and in the same Nation.
And again, you will observe that, as extremes meet by the linking
of maturity with childhood, so will the highest harmony of the Race
touch the lowest discord; and thus, by interchange of interest and
sympathies, keep up the progressive rotations, and reproductions,
and similarities, of human experience. In other words: that which
is Old age to a Man is, in reality, but the infancy or initiative of a
similar career on a higher plane; even so, that which is Harmony
to the Race is, in reality, but the savagetsm or beginning of a simi-
lar historical experience on a grander scale.

Now, in the twenty minutes’ vision of which the foregoing Chart
is but an abstract, I beheld the certainty of a period of Peace and
Happiness. Not that all nations and all lands will be simultane-
ously harmonized and perfected, but that the best portion of the
Race and the purest soil of the earth will unfold the Kingdom of
Heaven. ,

Poets are no dreamers! Prophets are no impostors! Seers
are no visionists! Philosophers are not insane! No, no! Poets
all have sung of an “Elysium.” Prophets have foretold of a
“New Jerusalem.” Seers have seen an “Era of Universal
Unity.” Philosophers have ciphered out a “New Atlantis.” The

VISION OF PERPETUAL PEACE. 8838

Millennial day, the Utopian period, the reign of Justice, the age of
Happiness —all! yes, all—is but one declaration of Father-God
through the several inspired offspring of Mother-Nature.

What do I mean? The meaning is, that all conceptions of
which the above terms and titles are expressive, have their sec-
ondary origin in the human soul—the primary source always be-
ing Father-God and Mother-Nature. “Unity” is the last word at
the bottom of every column. “Unity” is the name of the Era of
Harmony. “Unity” includes the full growth and harmonious ac-
tion of every passion, desire, or love. “Unity” is the ultimate of
God’s design and of Nature’s desire. Therefore, when accom-
plished, “ Unity” will be the harmony of Man with himself, with
his neighbor, with the universe —or, with Father-God and Mother-
Nature !

The experience of the Race, recorded in profane and ecclesias-
tical history, shows that it has passed from stage to stage in regu-
lar progression—that men were first savages, then barbarians,
next demi-civilized, then civilized, and now are advancing toward
general Republicanism. Parallel with the social state of Mankind
in each Age, has been the state of philosophy, art, theology, mor-
als, &c. If we know one, we know the other. Appealing to the
authority of past ages as a rule of faith and practice in the present
age, is manifestly doing violence to principles of progress, as well
as going counter to all natural teachings and human intuitions.
As men look to the indiscretions of youth for instruction, so should
Mankind review the experience of former generations, and, by their
errors and follies, learn to pursue the path of Truth and Righ-
teousness. ‘The arts, doctrines, theories, éc., of former ages should
be religiously preserved, and whatever is good and true in them.
should be adapted and applied to present use; but to value them
above modern improvements, or to dream that a Golden Age has
been lost, is to invert the order of progress, and to exalt ignorance
and discord above Wisdom and Harmony.

384 : THE MAGIC STAFF. °

CHAPTER XLVII.
THE FURNISHED ROOM.

“Tn stiilness deep I walk a land :
Where spirit-forms my footsteps greet,
And beauteous thoughts — an angel-band —
Chant low and sweet.”

RETURNING to my boarding-place, I found piles of letters from
all degrees and shades of human “ wants,” to which the writers
expected immediate and satisfactory answers. Amid numerous
packages, my eyes rested upon a familiar superscription. From
that letter I will make a single extract :—

“WattHam, Mass., August, 1847.
“BROTHER BEST BELOVED !— Light of my path!— My only
earthly friend!.............. The motive that induced me
to purchase this comfortable ‘Stone House’ was to give thee a
refuge—a home of thine own to flee to—when fatigued with
toiling in the field of Human Redemption. Rey. O. H. Welling-
ton, my agent, is planning to remove the encumbrances. He will
take up the mortgages now resting upon these premises, settle all
the bills for furniture, &c.; and then, dearest brother, this is thy
home—a place where the son of man can lay his head, and be
wholly at rest. May I do this? Will it be wisdom? It is the
darling thought of my every hour, to minister unto thy material
wants, though I may not in this world be permitted to see thy
perishable form. Tell me, my best friend, wilt thou accept this

house as thine ?
“Thy Spirit-Sister, — —.”

THE FURNISHED ROOM. 885

Immediately on reading the above, I took into consideration her
generous proffer, and the propriety of my accepting it. The de-
tails of that interior examination I will not chronicle, but the result
thereof belongs in justice to the reader. I replied that I must not
allow my mind to be trammelled with the cares of property; and
consequently, though she would exert herself to pay for the house
and give me a clean title, I was compelled in wisdom to decline.
But in regard to “our not meeting in this world,” I wrote that
she might rest assured that we should have the pleasure of a per-
sonal interview. This assurance I predicated on the strength of
the impression conveyed to me by the vision already related.

Shortly after this I received a letter from the self-appointed
missionary. This heroic pioneer was now delivering discourses
in Utica. On the 3d of October he preached in Troy, New York,
on which occasion, as he says, “I avowed my belief in the Reve-
lations ;” and, in the evening, “I preached on Immortality, making
use of the great Central Idea in ‘ Nature’s Divine Revelations’ —
God the Cause, Matter the Effect, Spirit the Ultimate—to show
the truth that the interior wisdom of Jesus formerly, and our liv-
ing Prophet now, proved that ‘a spirit was in man.’” Then, after
candidly reporting a few details of his work, he adds: “TJ find that
it will need mighty and heroic efforts to commence the great revo-
lution. I am determined to ‘conquer or die, but shall need, for
the present, to be much advised by your Mmterior wisdom.”

Under the swaying impulse of benevolence, I had previously
requested this energetic apostle to write me as he went on his
way, at the same time promising that I would give him all the
counsel possible for me to furnish. But on the perusal of this
first important epistle, my heart began to tremble, while my head
warmed with the forebodings of fear.

“ Can it be possible,” said I mentally, “that the poet looks upon
me as a Heaven-appointed prophet? And does he proclaim my
words as being more divine and authoritative than those of any

other person intuitionally exalted? Ah, I fear he has been too
£7

386 THE MAGIC STAFF.

long a believer in the supernatural, without investigation. He
loves religious truth, but he does not discriminate. He is positive
and determined, however, and his words will ever be-an exponent
of his belief, right or wrong. This trait of his mind I particularly
like. But what shall I do for him? Just look at the facts! In
obedience to his own convictions of duty, he heroically relinquished
a large salary, abandoned all his former claims to pecuniary aid,
and, like the apostle Paul, has now gone forth, fearlessly and alone,
to preach the gospel of ‘ Nature’s Divine Revelations.’ But he
did not go by my influence, and yet he ‘depends upon my interior
wisdom.’ ”

Meditating thus, I felt sad and dubious. But at length I wrote
him a cheering reply, sent him a prescription for his health, and
suggested the best places to lecture in. And now, dear reader,
we will leave the poet to the prosecution of his painful work, and
resume the preceding subject.

The deliberate scribe had just returned from a visit to the
“Stone House,” where he saw and conversed freely with our ben-
efactress. She was extremely disheartened, and even grieved,
because I did not accept her proffered gift. It seemed to unsettle
and bewilder her mind—to dissipate her fond hopes and darling
plans. Mr. Wellington, her agent, was soon to receive the house
out of her possession, and she was determined once again to breathe
the’invigorating air of ltr native Rhode Island. Only one more
request would she now dare venture. This was soon communi-
cated to me, both by the scribe and the following :—

““WaLtHAM, Mass.,

, 1847,
Rm “T submit. Thy wisdom is my reliance. But, my
best and only friend, I have one more plan. In the ‘Stone House’
I have furnished a room and consecrated its every article of com-
fort and luxury to thee. It contains everything requisite for a
gentleman. ‘There are pictures on the walls, too, and a collection
of choice books. Do not deny me! My disappointment would
be past endurance! My health is failing fast, and I feel that my

THE FURNISHED ROOM. 387

life’ on earth is short. Allow me to furnish a bedroom and a
study for you, wherever you may reside during the ensuing year.
Do not refuse, for I fear it would sever the last remaining link
that binds me to the things of this world. May I do so?

“Thy Spirit-Sister, — —-.”

Her generous appeal was directly to the affections; yet I had
the power to silence their promptings. My interior examination
of this new request was immediate and satisfactory. I replied in
harmony with her wishes, and informed her where I contemplated
spending the fall and winter months.

I was now but just commencing my journey up the Mountain
of Power. The secret of my safe progress thus far was the Magic
Staff. A few weeks of unimportant experiences passed by, be-
tween my acceptance of the lady’s last benefaction and the inci-
dents about to be related.

“Why, Brother Davis, how glad we are to see your face once
more!” This cordial salutation emanated from the naturally warm
heart of the editor’s amiable wife, on my arrival from Poughkeep-
sie. Her sunny eyes of cloudless blue beamed with an expression
of friendly welcome, and her fair face reflected the attractive al-
ternations of pleasurable emotion. The editor had procured a
comfortable house in the fine-appearing Colonnade Row, in Wil-
liamsburgh. From the upper windows the occupant might gaze
out upon the expanded bay, covered with the gliding agents of
commerce; and beyond, upon New York, the innumerable struc-
tures whereof oppressed the eye as would the drear prospect of
an interminable forest.

“Thank you, Mrs. Brittan,” said 1; “so am I glad to see you
once more.” tee

“ What have you been about all this long time?” she asked.

“Oh, at all sorts of things,” I. replied; “writing out my new
chart, answering letters, doctoring sick folks, &c. How’s all the
children ?”

388 THE MAGIC STAFF.

“ Healthy and beautiful as ever,” said she, clasping with enthu-
siasm a blooming baby-boy in her arms; “they delight me to per-
fection! They’re so sweet, and so bewitchingly mischievous !”

“ Have you seen Mrs. Dodge lately ?” I asked.

“Oh, certainly I have. She’s been doing all kinds of splendid
work for you up-stairs.”

“ Ah, indeed! What’s been going on ?”

“Don’t be in too great a hurry, Brother Davis,” said she, smi-
ling archly ; “when Mr. B. comes, we’ll all walk up and look in
together.”

Now, though I had been the recipient of surprises from my boy-
hood, still I was not fond of having a delicate secret sprung upon
me, and so I begged to be excused from further waiting. But
the editor soon entering, up-stairs we went as first proposed. The
door of my winter retreat was thrown open, and lo! I beheld with
material eyes a perfect copy of the pleasantly-furnished room that
was pictured in my vision of the mountain-structure. Everything
was in exact accordance with that foreshadowing, save the pres-
ence of the strange lady: but, leaning firmly on my Staff, I held
my heart still, and my tongue betrayed nothing of the deép aston-
ishment and gratitude which stirred my nature—astonishment at
the perfect fulfilment of my Guide’s pictorial prophecy ; gratitude
that he had inspired the lady to strew my rugged path with violets.

The initial or specimen number of “The Univercceelum” had
already appeared, and matter for the succeeding number was
partly on hand. The main motive that moved me to board in the
editor’s family was the desire I had to bring about a unity of inter-
ests in the publishing enterprise. The first step toward unity of
action was unity of thinking; and a close proximity of individuals,
whose affections were more or less involved, was the primary con-
sideration with me. At the same time, I had resolved to exercise
no authority over any person; and, equally, that I would not sub-
mit to be in any degree arrested in my individual pilgrimage.

THE FURNISHED ROOM. 889

It required but little insight, however, to discern the error that

lurked at the very core of our glorious movement. That seed of
disorganization was the lack of capital and talent adequate to sus-
tain the publication. My belief was, that our body should have
originated as the crystal is formed in the bosom of matter—two
particles that are congenial first uniting; and then by their quiet
emanations making others congenial, and segregating them as they
thus gravitate, until is developed a strong and beautiful body.
Our movement, on the contrary, was begun in the external sphere
of common business; and though it was flushed, to all appearance,
with redeemable promises, yet I foresaw its ultimate dissolution.
“But my purpose was to write almost every week for the paper,
and thus—co-operating with the editor, the. scribe, the poet, J.
K. Ingalls, Frances H. Green, Rev. W. M. Fernald, and others—
try to diffuse some spiritual light o’er the human world.

The painful events to be recorded in the next chapter will not
be seen in their true light, unless the reader first imbibe another
draught of the troubled waters that foamed and bubbled round ~
about the writer’s citadel.

Previous to leaving Poughkeepsie, I received several letters
from the poet-missionary. In one of them—dated November 14,
1847 —I found the following :—

“To-day I have rejoiced in spirit. I feel strong. I feel in-
wardly assured, in spite of apparently unfavorable circumstances,
that there is reserved for this truth a final and universal triumph.
I know not what my fate may be. The future, as far as worldly
things are concerned, is dark. It may be that I shall fall a mar-
tyr to the malignity and prejudice of the age. But be assured of
this, that while I am in the form, I will lift my voice continually
— crying, ‘ Reform! for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.’ The
more they oppose the more do I see the necessity of the work in
which we toil. O for spiritual might—to enable me to overcome
all things, and stand undaunted in the front rank of the battle!”

The spirit of this poet was truly heroic. His idea of what a
reformer should be and do, was congenial to me, and his ambition

°

390 ; THE MAGIC STAFF.

to stand in “the front rank” I regarded as laudable and consistent
with his temperament. But he looked for an outward authority.
Alas! I was the standard around which the pioneer’s affections
spontaneously rallied, as the following, from the same letter, too
clearly proved :—

“TI must have an answer to this immediately. The cause de-

mands it. J must know to what places I am to go on leaving
Cleveland, Ohio. Leave all else unnoticed, so that you answer this.”

Long and sadly pondered I over that letter. At length I re-
solved tenderly to disturb his confidence in me as an authority.
“ But,” soliloquized I, “how can I do it and not be cruel? Fra-,
ternal sympathy, giving a bias to my judgment, soon suggested a
plan, however—which, without harming his work, would tend to
cast him upon his own central reason. That plan was—to spe-
cify a number of places to lecture in, the most of which could
easily be reached ; but others were so unimportant and out of the
way as to give the impression that my vision was unreliable.
This worked like a charm to the end desired. His next letter but
one—dated December 18, 1847—contained the following wel-
come sentence: “ The places which you indicated lie, I think, out
of the road, and can not be visited without great expense.”

Thus the wedge had entered that catalogue of evidences which
had induced the poet unquestioningly to rely upon my intuitional
dictation. And that logue was eventually split from end to end,
by virtue of that first little wedge, as ensuing chapters will abun-
dantly show.

Soon after my arrival at the editor’s residence, the mild-eyed
and broad-browed scribe returned from a business-tour through
portions of Maine. As he entered my pleasant study, I hailed
him with—

“Welcome back, my dear old scribe! _How’s your health and
spirits ?”

“The fact is, prophet,” replied he playfully, “I’m in a pretty
genarally considerable state of mental confusion.”

.

THE FURNISHED ROOM. 3891

“Why so, Brother Fishbough?” I asked; “what’s happened ?”

The surface of his generous brow gathered up into gloomy
ridges, as he answered, still playfully :—

“Why, the fact is, I have had my pate almost be-addled by
the diverse transmogrifications incident to my unsuccessful trip ;
and, besides,” he seriously added, “I feel many unpleasant con-
flicts about affairs connected with the book and the paper.”

“ Well, take a chair, and let’s talk over the troubles.”

“Yes,” said he, looking downcast, “I think there is a crisis near
at hand, and I want to counsel a little with you on rudimental
matters.”

99.

“Very well, scribe,” said I cheerily, “let’s overhaul these mat-
ters.”

“«Double, double toil and trouble,’” said he, smiling sadly —
“there’s something going wrong somewhere.”

— But I will not report that conversation. And yet the reader,
in my opinion, has a right to know the secret of the scribe’s gloomy
forebodings. The “evil spirit” that troubled him was pecuniary
embarrassment, brought on by causes strictly local and mundane.
The scribe, be it remembered, was my best friend among the band
of earnest fellow-laborers. He knew me well—treated my posi-
tion with deference, but regarded me not as an infallible guide —
and concealed nothing. We were each other’s spirit-brother. In
such a relation I found utter repose. But I believe that he did
not detect the real cause of his private troubles. They did not
oeriginate with Providence, but with improvidence. In this there
was no dishonesty, but a sort of necessity. When I separated
from Dr. Lyon in the early spring, every source of support was
at once closed up, save the capital loaned to publish the book,
upon which both the scribe’s family and the operator lived till
August. Then the sales became the only basis of their income,
and so continued up to the time of our conversation, and for months
afterward. Consequently, the means for publishing future editions
decreased, proportionally with the natural decline of the sales.

892 THE MAGIC STAFF.

The operator seemed to know all this, and so did the editor. But
the affectionate scribe appeared subsequently to confound his per-
sonal perplexities with something infernal in certain imaginary,
invisible abettors of the New Movement.

At the time of which I now write, the operator, (a cherished
brother of the editor’s wife,) with his recent bride, was occupying
apartments below mine. Quietly, he began to ask “if it wasn’t
most time for me to be magnetized again.” This was very un-
pleasant to me; but, in order not to wound his feelings, I would
simply suggest, in reply, that I did not feel the need of his influ-
ence.

At this time, also, the poet was in Ohio—lecturing through
much tribulation, selling books for the partners, and obtaining sub-
scribers to “The Univerccelum.” Such was the situation of affairs
when the events of the next chapter were inscribed on the tablet
cf my memory.

NIGHT AND MORNING. 833

CHAPTER XLVIII.

NIGHT AND MORNING.

“Be the thing that God hath made you —
Channel for no borrowed stream.
He hath lent you mind and conscience ;
See you travel in their beam!”

Tue furnished apartments—a study and bedroom—were
sumptuously decorated. My writing-table was spread with every
imaginable article of use and beauty. Between the windows there
stood a case of valuable books, which, like the profusion of other
objects, were new and quite beyond my needs and wishes.

The existence of those books, however, gave rise to a foolish
report that I was a vigilant and toilsome student. “ Let me whis-
per a word in your ear’”—said a rosy-faced litterateuwr who once
visited my study, to an enemy of clairvoyance—“ let me tell you
that Davis was writing medical articles for the paper, when I saw
a medical book on his table. There! think what you please. I
simply tell you what I saw.” But I had a consciousness that
these suspicions were baseless, and hence I did neither attempt to
hide the books nor to avoid the existence of appearances un-

favorable.
Well do I remember the chilly day in bleak December when I

walked the floor, and, remarking the exact likeness of my study
to the room I saw in my vision, I asked myself: “ What was
meant by the presence of the lady? Did it mean that she is to,

visit me here?” A warm breath passed over my face as I queried,
ij?

294 THE MAGIC STAFF.

and presently I heard the words: “ Look—into—the—history—of
—thy—Spirit—Nister.”

Although my mind was interested in a subject then before me
—‘“The true but unloved Religion”—yet did I turn my whole
interior perception in the direction suggested. And once again
looked I along the pathway of my benefactress. I saw her birth
and babyhood; her life at the boarding-school; her visits with
her parents in Washington city; her marriage, to please others,
with a gentleman toward whom she felt an unconquerable repug-
nance; how this repulsion ripened into a positive hatred; her
journeyings to Europe for personal freedom; her return; her
efforts to endure the false union for relations’ sake; her second
tour upon the Eastern continent; her sojourn at Berlin, at Paris,
and at London; her presence in the midst of fashionable glitter
and regal festivities; the death of her parents; her refuge in the
endearments and attractive faith of the Catholic Church; her
uniform discontent amid all circumstances; her second return to
America; her attempt to fix her affections upon some lofty aim in
life: her increasing uneasiness; her preparations for Buenos
Ayres; her visit to me at No. 252 Spring street; what I there
saw for her; the wisdom of our not meeting during the interve-
ning months, viz.: that my mind at this early period of its growth
might be kept in that indifferent external state which was neces-
sary to insure success in its difficult interior work; that my
mission, including myself, alone occupied her affections; that, as
she had no children, and her reasons for a separation were abun-
dant, she should procure a divorce; that it would then be right
and just and useful for us to be married; that she would thus be
rescued from trials more severe than any consequent upon our
marriage; that her income, while it would be of little or no
assistance to me individually, would still be sufficient to support
her in her own luxurious habits of living; and, finally, that I
need not longer concern myself with the local influences and
especial wishes of surrounding minds. »

NIGHT AND MORNING. 395

How did I see all this? Not by a spiritual communication,
dear reader, but by the clairvoyant power of exact investigation.
The chequered past was all before me; the circumstances of
the present I contemplated; the principal links in the chain of
future events I traced and estimated as the astronomer foretells
an eclipse.

Ah, now my Poughkeepsie vision began to look like an entire
vaticination. Accordingly, I wrote the lady all about my interior
investigation. The barrier of distance was now removed; and
the next morning she came persorlally into my presence. She
was greatly agitated; and when I reiterated the message from the
inner life which my letter had first conveyed to her, she trembled
with emotion, and tears gushed forth abundantly from her long-
wearied heart.

“Can it be,” said she, when her voice once more found utter-
ance, “can it be that we are to be married ?”

“Yes,” I replied, “I never saw anything more plainly in my
life than that.”

“In this world, dearest brother?” she asked.

“ Yes, in this world, my Spirit-Sister.”

“Oh, my heart never dared to hope so far!’ she exclaimed
with raptured tone. “This is the happiest day of my life! for, I
began to fear that I should never see you. But”—she added, asa
sudden cloud shadowed her features —“ what will the world say ?”

“ The world has no right to interfere, if you but get a divorce,”
said I. “That’s the first thing for you to do now.”

“But I’m so much older than you, and people are so unused
to such a disparity of ages—will not this be an objection ?”

“ No,” said I, “nothing is worth noticing but the question of a
speedy divorce.”

“Yes? Are you sure? Is that all? Will your friends agree

to this ?” 7
“ My true friends will,” I answered. “False friends are of no

account.”

396 THE MAGIC STAFF.

“Thanks! brother, best beloved, thanks! I will prepare to
leave for Bristol next Monday.”

“Why do you go to Bristol?” I asked.

“Because a very talented lawyer lives there,” she replied ;
“and evidence can be obtained in the village, to secure my re-
lease from a hateful bondage.” :

Her visit was long and useful. Having seen through her his-
tory, I could talk with her of her travels; of what dangers she
had encountered at different periods of her life, and how she had
escaped them. She seemed beautifully subdued, at times, and
then indignant at certain’ memories. The reader may form some
idea of this my benefactress, from a few descriptive sentences :—

She was physically well-proportioned, a little above the medium
height, and looked about twenty years older than I. Her counte-
nance, once beautiful, expressed every inward emotion. Strength,
suffering, ambition, devotion, childhood, impetuosity — were all de-
picted in the lines of her expressive face. Feeling, not thought,
predominated. Unerringly did I perceive that she was just the
character to accompany me up the Mountain of Power. In her
dark eye there was a look of regal dignity and daring. When
angered, few could meet and reciprocate her expression. She
was born to rule. Her manner and speech were most gracious
and flattering to her particular favorites; but to those whom she
did not like, there was that in her flashing eye and imperial de-
portment which compelled immediate hostility. Her benevolence
was impulsive. Nothing was too good for those she loved. To
such, her expressions and gifts were profuse and expensive. But
for her enemies, there was no punishment too severe.

Seeing all this, I said: “You are governed by love, not by
wisdom. ‘Your impulses alone make you ofttimes unhappy, while
a calm exercise of wisdom would give you heaven on earth.”

“Yes, brother mine —I know you can read me,” she answered.
“What can you do forme? Will you give me wisdom ?”

“T will help you to be quiet,” was my response—“TI believe I

NIGHT AND MORNING. 897

can make your life more useful and happy, else I would not pro-
pose this extraordinary marriage.” .

Thus ended our first interview. Previous to her departure for
Bristol, we had two more conversations, and she went away
freighted with courage.

A few weeks elapsed ere she completed her arrangements for
the legal separation. The business was fixed to come before the
next session of the Rhode Island legislature. But her health was
much impaired, and she longed for.quiet and medical aid. I now
took upon myself the responsibility of advising her. Under the
circumstances, I deemed it wise to have her near me, until the
instituted legal proceedings demanded her presence. I therefore
secured of the editor a room on the same floor with my own, and
thus opened the way for a temporary sojourn of our mutual bene-
factress amid the household socialities.

In accordance with this arrangement, but in advance of the
time fixed upon, my Spirit-Sister arrived—redolent with enthu-
siasm. She was justly looked upon as a distinguished guest.
Hence her arrival from the boat in the early morning, when
“things wasn’t in order,’ was manifestly unpleasant to all, save
me. She warmly greeted the several inmates, however, promptly
took possession of her room with the air of one accustomed to com-
mand, and prepared herself to breakfast with the family.

My heart was grateful for this second advent of my endeared
friend. Her age and nature were a double barrier to everything
but the most respectful reserve between us. My regard for her
was as pure and reverential as though she had been a gifted being
from that fabled Atlantean Isle—

Tn the far-off South, where no rude breeze
Ee’er sweeps o’er the plain of the halcyon seas,
Where the airs breathe balm, and the heavens smile
With a glorious radiance.”

She seemed like some queenly abbess, or elder sister, for whom

398 THE MAGIC STAFF.

I cherished a deep and holy affection. Being fatigued with wri-
ting for the “ Univerceelum,” and knowing that she was resolved
to disburse with her own means my future boarding-expenses, I
gratefully accepted the needed opportunity for leisure, and devo-
ted the fleeting hours to rest and conversation. The day soon
passed, and night came o’er thé world. Now, I related to her
many visions, and instructed her in the principles of spiritual ex-
istence. But the retiring hour ere long arrived. ‘The fire in my
study-grate glowed warmly. The couch there was rich and large.
Her own room was comparatively cold, cheerless, and ordinarily
furnished. Her health was quite unsound. Therefore, I coun-
selled her to exchange rooms with me, or else occupy the spacious
couch before the study-fire. To the latter suggestion she acce-
ded, whereupon I retired to my adjoining room for the night.

Next morning, ere my esteemed sister had left her quiet rest-
ing-place, I heard the servant’s knock at the study-door. *T was
time to rekindle the fires. Noiselessly, and hastily, I passed from
my bedroom, behind the couch, to the door, to request the work-
ing-woman not to enter just yet, saying that we would soon be
prepared to admit her, and then as hastily retreated into my own
sleeping-apartment. All this I detail, dear reader, that you may
the better comprehend what grew out of it. Furthermore let me
add, that for the promotion of our kind benefactress’ health and
comfort, I induced her to make the same pleasant room, which I
could not but consider more hers than mine, her own sacred dor-
mitory for several succeeding nights.

A few mornings after my sister’s unexpected arrival, I entered
the office of the “ Univerceelum,” in Broadway, opposite the Park
fountain, when the gentlemanly editor said: “Ah, how’s your
Prophetic Highness ?”

This appellation was of course playfully applied —for the editor
was one of those who never received my clairvoyant revealments
as his standard of belief—much to my gratification and not less
to his intellectual credit. Indeed, I have heard him affirm his

NIGHT AND MORNING. 399

general acceptation of “ Nature’s Divine Revelations,” because all
the leading propositions thereof had previously occupied his own
mind. And though the assignment of this reason as the basis of
his adoption of the novel truths, seemed to me to be slightly tinged
with ideality, still I never questioned the sincerity of his state-
ment.

“Thank you,” said I, “since I have stopped writing and ex-
amining, I begin to feel better.”

There were two or three persons present at the time, and the
editor manifested great warmth toward me, but I saw a dark
cloud hanging between us. I was startled. “ What ‘can this
mean?” thought IJ. And wishing for solitude in which to solve
the query, I turned to leave the office; whereupon the editor
approached, and cordially asked: “ Which way are you going,
Brother Davis?”

“JT have an appointment at Mr. Freeman’s, the artist,” said I,
“where I expect to meet Mrs. Dodge.”

“ Wait a moment, till I look over this proof, then I will accom-

pany you. .
Very soon we were walking arm in arm, toward the artist’s

by Ber

residence. _ My friend’s manner was extremely fraternal, his tones
, mild as love’s own music, but within there lurked an oppressive
secret destined for my ear.

“JT have to say a word in relation to a certain matter, painful
as it is to disturb your spirit, Brother Davis,” he at length began ;
“and I trust it will not alienate your regard for me or any of your
valuable friends.”

“J think I can hear anything from you, without disturbing my
friendship,” said I.

“My spirit has been greatly troubled since the morning subse-
quent to Mrs. D
pervades my family against both of you.”

“Indeed!” I exclaimed. “ Do tell me what it is?”

“The next morning after the lady came,” continued he, “when

’s arrival, owing to a painful suspicion that

400 SHE MAGIC STAFF.

by

the servant proceeded to her (Mrs. D s) room to make a fire,
she found the door unlocked, Mrs. D
pended on one of the bed-posts, and the bed undisturbed, showing
it hadn’t been occupied. Then she proceeded to your room,

knocked for admission, as it was late, when you came in undress

’s day-garments sus-

to the door, and requested her to wait a while longer.”

On hearing this my soul was sorrowful; but, leaning on the
Magic Staff, I said: “ Well, Brother Brittan, what did all that
amount to?”

“ Why, the girl came down-stairs in a high state of excitement,
frightened and angry, and declared that she knew positively that
Mrs. D

“What!” said I, “you do not mean to say that she declared my

had occupied your room.”

bedroom to be thus occupied ?”

“Yes,” answered he, sadly, “but I worked immediately upon
her fears. I showed her that she could not be certain—that she
was not personally cognizant of any positive circumstances—and
that, for so serious a slander, she might be made to suffer even in
prison. Yes, Brother Davis, it was only by the utmost energy
of opposition that I-temporarily silenced our servant’s tongue.”

“Then,” said I, “this suspicion existing in the family against
us, explains all those gloomy and acid looks which have been so ,
abundant for a few days past.”

“ Doubtless,” he replied. “I much regret these recent circum-
stances and events.”

“Why didn’t you tell me of all this before to-day?” I asked.

“ Because you kept yourself away from us—neglecting, at the
same time, to bestow any attention on the Bridgeport friends who
were our guests — which rendered it necessary for me to wait
for a more convenient season.”

“Now, Brother Brittan, I will candidly confess that appearances,
as you represent them, are against me. But,” said I firmly, “the
facts ave wholly in my favor, and that’s enough for me to know.”
Then I gave him a brief sketch of the real circumstances, and the

NIGHT AND MORNING. 401

actual motives which characterized our private movements, just
as I have sketched them for thee, dear reader, among the records
of preceding pages. But, knowing the editor to be extremely
sensitive in regard to the avoidance of evil appearances, I added —
“TI suppose that I should be more guarded in my conduct for the
future.”

“ For reasons which you may perceive,” said he with cordial
energy, “I deem it important that your fair fame should remain
untarnished.”

“Jt is more important,” I replied, “that I act in harmony with
my own interior perceptions.”

“T trust you will not deem me insincere, Brother Davis,” re-
turned he, “when I say that your friends think too much of you
not to feel deeply concerned at whatever may injuriously affect
your reputation before the world.”

“No, Brother Brittan, I believe you’re sincere,” said I. “ But
the friendship of friends is not so important to me as justice and
a consciousness of right doing.”

“aR Yes, yes,” replied he blandly, “but even where there’s internal
purity a man may suffer if outward circumstances and appearances
are unfavorable. Perhaps you do not know that my wife has
suffered extremely under these painful allegations. Why, she
regards you as a model of personal excellence.”

“T’m not insensible to the approbation of my friends,” said I.
“ And in regard to the present affair, I will promise to look the
whole matter over, and to act in accordance with what seems to
be our mutual welfare.”

So saying we entered the artist’s room where my honored
benefactress was in waiting. Having the Staff to support me, I
betrayed nothing of my inward agitation, and soon asked the lady
to accompany me to Williamsburgh. During our walk across
New York to the Peck Slip ferry, I related to her all that had
transpired between the editor and myself. ’T was a most resplen-
dent day without, but a royal darkness pervaded the lady’s face

402 THE MAGIC STAFF.

as she listened. Emotions of fright, scorn, vengeance, sorrow,
were alternated and mingied in her dark eyes. These rapid
changes rendered her expressions dramatic and her displeasure
tragical. “ Restrain your feelings, dear sister,” said I, “for all this
may redound to our benefit. I will to-night look interiorly at the
affair, and determine our future course.”

“ Mon Dieu!” exclaimed she bitterly. “ What a conspiracy!
What a malignant falsehood! Do not these men and women,
your friends, place confidence in you? Can they not read you
well enough to know that you would not thus err?”

“ Appearances, dear sister,” said I soothingly, “appearances are
against us, and from these the world judges, you know.”

“<* Hont soit qui mal y pense!’ as the French say,” she replied.
“These people call themselves ‘Reformers’ do they?” (A with-
ering satire now predominated.) “They style themselves your
‘best friends, do they? Most noble ‘friends!’ most noble ‘re-
formers!’ most noble ‘teachers’ of purity! I have seen much of
the world,” she continued, somewhat subdued, “yet, amid those
who make no reformatory pretensions, but who live only like
butterflies on the fading flowers of silly fashion, J never heard any
scandal to equal this!”

“ Don’t feel too much disturbed,” said I. “ We must cherish
the spirit of forgiveness, you know, and do good even to those
who misconstrue our worthiest deeds.”

“JT recollect the words of a German countess,” she warmly
replied: “‘I forgive in justice to my enemies—I remember in
justice to myself”

Having arrived within a few rods of the editor’s residence, we
slackened our pace, and I said: “ Now let me ask of you, dear sister,
to conceal from the family your present severe prejudice. To-night
I will seek wisdom, and to-morrow morning will tell you what path
we are to tread. If ’tis best for you to leave immediately for
Bristol, and await there the session of the legislature, or if ’t is best
for you to remove to some other residence in this vicinity, or,

NIGHT AND MORNING. 403

finally, if tis best for you to board right where you are even
under the existing circumstances, I shall presently know and will
tell you frankly. Meanwhile, be calm, my sister! for, with this
consciousness of innocence dwelling like an angel in each of our
hearts, nothing can work us an injury.”

“Thanks! dear brother. Thanks!” she submissively replied.
“T know you will do right. Itrust you. I will not, before the
family, betray my displeasure. I promise you!”

Directly I proceeded to hold a conference with the kind scribe.
I told him all concerning my sad position. He was extremely
regretful, but like a true friend, offered me the abiding sympathy
of his soul.

404 THE MAGIC STAFF.

CHAPTER XLIX.

FACTS AND FANCIES.

“Come one, come all, this rock shall fly
From its firm base as soon as I.”

HAsTENING into the sweet retirement of my parlor-study, and
locking the door to prevent intrusion, I passed into interior medi-
tation.

First, I contemplated and estimated the value of my relation to
our newspaper; the desires of the editor to maintain an unsullied
reputation; the immense pecuniary service that my spirit-sister
had been to the cause in which we toiled; the knowledge I had
that she was to become my wife after the divorce; that her health
was much impaired and required judicious treatment; that I had
begun to separate myself from the false position of being the centre
of a new phase of religious propagandism ; that the work of self- -
extrication was now fully inaugurated; and that, aided by my
sister’s mental peculiarities, I would ere long reach a sphere of
individuality which was the first grand end sought by my every
guardian angel. Recalling the prophetic words of Swedenborg —
spoken on the 7th of March, 1844—I quoted : “Obstructions of.
various kinds will affect thy external life ; but they will tend more
fully to expand thy interior being.” And again: “Press on thy
way, and love only those things tending to truth and wisdom.”
Then I reasoned thus: “ Here is a question of external policy, of —
worldly reputation, of doing that which can only bring me the

~

FACTS AND FANCIES. 405

approbation of persons in the sphere of friendship. Suppose I
should yield to this temptation to make friends with the world, then
would not ‘truth and wisdom’ flee in sorrow from my apostate
soul? And what would come as my appropriate and only reward ?
Ah, full well do I know that I should, at best, be oppressed by
the weary weight of public adulation. Just this, and nothing
more. No,” said I, “my benefactress shall remain! She must
be respected as my future companion, and I will take the private
and public consequences.”

This anti-popular conclusion being reached, I sought my hon-
ored sister and briefly told her all. She seemed to be satisfied.
The tea-bell rang and we seated ourselves with the household
group. But her severe prejudice toward the entire family was
irrepressible. She looked a towering and defiant displeasure.
They felt it, and grew pallid with an undefinable uneasiness.
Returning to my study, I admonished her to control and overcome
her expressions, lest bitter hostility would be speedily excited
toward us. That a midnight darkness, from the external sphere,
would fall about our feet I was infallibly assured. The only
individual in the house, beside my sister-friend, to whom I cared
to speak, was the still friendly operator.

Therefore, I forthwith solicited his personal presence. When
he entered the study, I said: “A storm-cloud has broken upon
our house, doctor, and I wish you to know how it happened.”

“TI regret it exceedingly,” said he, kindly. ‘Yet I’d like to
know all about it.” ;

After repeating the simple facts which led to the compound
suspicions, I said: “ Another thing, doctor, that induced me to
take the liberty of inviting her here as a boarder, was this —that
on a certain day (showing him the record in my diary) I interior-
ly discovered that she is to become my wife.”

At this, the doctor’s naturally sedate and considerate counte
nance became still more grave and thoughtful. Very soon, how-
ever, he said: “If you would but consent to be magnetized, and.

406 THE MAGIC STAFF.

while in your superior condition, say that this is right, I think
your friends everywhere would be satisfied.”

Now, although I had published in the first number of the
“Univerceelum” that I could enter the superior state whenever
circumstances and my will demanded it, yet did the doctor remain
particularly oblivious to the fact, like several other friends who
thought they knew all about me; therefore, upon that point, I did
not attempt to utter a word of further explanation.

But I resumed: “ Now, doctor, there is no need for any trouble
here. Let it be understood that the family receive our mutual
benefactress as my future companion. The opinion of this world
is nothing to me; yet J would neither do evil nor seem to. I
need rest and recreation. Hence I do not write articles for the
paper now; but I expect soon to resume this labor for the public.”

The friendly physician conveyed this information and request
to the several members, and thus was established a sort of ficti-
tious harmony for many successive weeks.

Toward the last of March, 1848, after an absence of nearly six
months, the poet-missionary returned to New York. His spirit
and body were troubled and-travel-worn. During a sojourn in
Cincifinati, his mind, coming in contact with a vigorous brother-
hood of systematic progressives there, became somewhat central-
ized and morally strengthened. He appeared to have grown up —
into a spiritual oneness, and to stand out nobly as a child of God. |
His last letter seemed to me to be full of good news. I was no |
longer his religious standard. In fact, his mind was so truly in- |
dividualized and self-centred, that he gave me many definite direc- |
tions with regard to my own works and ways.

The first night after his arrival he roomed with me. Without.
reserve, I told him all that had happened. ‘The sighings and |
wrestlings of his spirit, during those darkly-draperied hours which |
hung between us and the dawn, made me feel that he was deeply |
and painfully agitated. He continued to be my avowed friend,

FACTS AND FANCIES. 407

however, until the editor’s side of my conduct was, on the follow-
ing day, communicated; and then (much to my private satisfac-
tion) I was completely cast out of a certain circle of spiritual
purity !

“<The Univercelum’ is a fine-looking as well as a fine-reading
paper,” said I one day, taking up a recent copy, “and the man-
agement reflects great credit upon its chief editor, as all must
see.”

“ Undoubtedly the paper would become extremely influential,”
said a feminine hearer, “if we could only preserve its purity.”

* Yes!” responded the poet with intense emphasis; “ God holds
the hearts of men in his hands. God does not, will not, can not,
speak through misguided and polluted mediums !”

Thinking that these words might be applied elsewhere, I asked :
“Why! do you take our paper to be an impure medium?” _

At this the poet’s uneasiness became more apparent. Closing
his right hand painfully tight, he replied: “Sinful affections, self-
ishness, materiality, corruption, God can not shine through. A
man blinded by passions—a man who yields to his lusts—who
loses himself in sensuality —can not be in unity with God!” Say-
ing which, he trembled as if overcome with feelings of unhappiness
and horror. .

But, leaning and believing firmly upon my Staff, I said: “Yes,
‘that’s all true enough ; and I am anxious to have all men practise
upon so good a principle. But why do you speak so earnestly ?
Have you met with any such misdirected and corrupted individ-
uals in the state of Ohio ?” 3

“ As for Brother Davis,” interrupted a visitor, with satire in his
tone—“as for him, there’s no danger, because he’s so spiritual
and so careful about his company.”

“ True,” I replied; “I have always tried to keep good company,
But I sometimes fail, as I have on the present occasion.”

At this moment I observed a change thrill through every hear-
~er’s heart. Instantly, much fraternal love was converted into fra-

408 THE MAGIC STAFF.

4
ternal hate. My severe and unqualified retort—the very first I
had ever uttered— went straight to the mark! Feeling sad and
regretful, I left the room and hastened to my quiet study.

Finding my spirit-sister seated there, I requested her to seek
her apartment, that I might thus be left utterly to my own ipte-
rior meditations. She did so. Whereupon, taking off my glasses
‘ for near-sightedness and putting on my clairvoyance for far-sight-
edness, I looked straight down into the editor’s parlor. Thus I
could discern the thoughts of each person.

“The case is clear,” said the poet with emphasis. “That wo-
man has a positive sphere —is a woman of the world—has ambi-
tions to gratify—is actuated by mixed motives—is dragging
Brother Davis down to her own sphere—and we, his brethren,
must be equally positive, and rescue him at once!”

“The influence of her mind is extremely positive,” observed the
doctor. “I think she has partially psychologized him. She has
diverted his regard from his best friends, too. I’d like to know
what he’d say about it in his superior condition !”

“Yes,” interposed the poet, “ Brother Davis is a victim! He
has lost his purity. His clairvoyance is gone! His letters to me -
prove it. I put my trust in God.”

But no—I will make no further record of the cruel and unjust |
words that were spoken that night and on subsequent occasions. |
Ere many days were elapsed I had removed the rich furniture of
my rooms to the scribe’s not-far-distant residence. My frightened,
fatigued, and indignant benefactress, was now about to depart for |
Bristol, Rhode Island. The scribe’s unprejudiced wife welcomed |
and cheerfully entertained her till she left.

Previous to this event, however, the scribe and I called on the |
perturbed editor. The poet was already there. We four retired |

to one of the rooms, when the poet trembled and said :—
“ Brother Davis, the occasion demands great plainness of speech.

I am a plain, earnest man, and must so express myself. “I shall
be guilty before God unless I tell you all that is on my mind.” — |

FACTS AND FANCIES. 409

“Certainly,” said I, feeling true kindness, “I hope you will
speak very plain, Brother Harris.”

“Our movement is embarrassed,” he nervously continued.
“Your friends are troubled in every direction. The news of
your corruption has reached Vermont. People talk of it in Troy.
It is in every man’s mouth everywhere! Articles of exposure
are sent to the Tribune, to the Herald, to the Sunday Dispatch.
Ruin is upon our path. Before us walk the powers of destruc-
tion. We stand in the temple of a dark Night. And we look to
you! But you, my brother, are the victim of a strange mag-
netism !”

“ See here,” interrupted the scribe, with a determined look, “I
think the scandalous reports have not reached. so far, by consid-
erable.”

At this the editor’s eyes flashed with intense excitement.
“There is a point,” said he, with emphatic energy, “ beyond which
forbearance ceases to be a virtue.”

My heaven-bequeathed Magic Staff was now very strong, and,
having a blessed consciousness of private rectitude, my heart was
peaceful, and I quietly smiled. The friends did not know that I
had investigated the extent of my unpopularity. “ Your charges,”
said I, “are wholly false, and your extravagant story of the wide-
spread excitement is rather poetical. But I am willing to hear
any proposition you may have to offer. Only one thing I ask:
that Mrs. Dodge be permitted to take her departure in peace.”

The next item of importance to me—and to all who may desire
to trace my toilsome ascent up the Mountain of Power—was the
reception of a fraternal notice from the editor. A meeting of the
brethren was to be held at his residence. How thankful was I
that our afflicted benefactress had escaped all knowledge of this
ecclesiastical trial! She had departed for Bristol.

The scribe and I walked arm-in-arm to the editor’s house. The
different members of the secret tribunal were seated about the

room. The special aim of the session I well enough understood.
18

410 THE MAGIC STAFF.

It was to induce my return into my former position relative to our
social life and public work. As a means for the accomplishment
of this object, they were to forge a chain of circumstantial evi-
dences: first, to settle the question of my personal corruption ; and,
second, to establish the suspicion that my spirit-sister was a mis-
directed and designing woman. But I had -perfect knowledge to
the contrary of these allegations, and hence my whole soul was
serenely strong, and prepared to receive the criminations without
bitterness or strife. There were a few persons present, as I ob-
served, who did not highly appreciate the position assigned them,
for they were secretly my steadfast friends. But my open de-
fender was the faithful and conscientious scribe.

Privately, I had resolved to commence the trial—and to say
in thirty minutes all I should utter in self-defence. After stating
what I considered to be the objects of the conference, I said :—

“Tt is affirmed that I am the victim of a designing woman.
Now, let me read some of our correspondence.”

Then I proceeded to read a few extracts from her letters—to
show, first, that she did not entertain the least hope of ever seeing
me in this sphere, until I gave her permission to visit me in person
on a certain day ; secondly, to show that she did not think of becom-
ing my wife, till she received the proposition from me to that effect.
While reading an extract which indicated that she was actuated
by no design—that ’twas her heart alone that held the reins
which guided her movements—the editor interrupted :—

“ Aha! I didn’t know that there was so much love in the
affair.” Then he added, “I beg leave to suggest that all this
reading has no essential bearing on the specific objects of this
meeting.” -

So saying, he arose with firm dignity, and leaned upon his be-
lief, while I leaned upon my Staff. He prefaced his remarks by
expressing “the painful regrets he experienced in thus reviving
the memory of past circumstances and transactions.” And then,
with words carefully selected, he made a statement of many facts

FACTS AND FANCIES. 411

and many fancies. His affirmations all told against me and mine;
and yet I could not feel angry. My soul went out and stood
charitably in his mental position. I viewed the case from his
stand-point and temperament, and thus made myself realize the
naturalness of his inferences. Besides the fear of being publicly
condemned for shielding a fancied domestic evil, the editor, natu-
rally kind and confiding with his friends, had become severely
exasperated by a long-continued encounter with my sister’s un-
guarded and severe expressions of imperious indignation. Though
I frequently softened her prejudices, yet she could not, at times,
control her arrogant impulse verbally to burn out all opposition.
Neither could the thus burnt opponent control feelings of wounded
pride, nor yet the bitter expressions of consequent personal repug-
nance. Hence I could not realize the least resistance to the pro-
ceedings instituted and the unkind words uttered on the night of
that memorable meeting.

At length the poet, who had taken an active part in the trans-
actions of the evening, drew near to me in a more tranquil mood,
and said :—

“Come, now, Brother Davis, you are among your brethren;
we are your friends, and will not betray you. Tell us, then—
have you been led into this criminality as the evidence goes to
prove ?”

“Why do you ask?” I inquired. “ Do you, after all, doubt the
evidence so ingeniously arrayed here to-night ?”

“Oh, no; but we wish you to be candid with us, your brethren,
and we will sustain you through it all.”

See here, now,” interposed the scribe, who as yet had said ©
but little, “I object to Brother Davis giving any answer. In com-
mon law, a man is considered innocent till proved to be guilty.
No man is called upon to testify in such a case, and I counsel
Brother Davis to make no response whatever.”

This sudden opposition from the considerate scribe shot into the
editor’s bosom, and his fraternal love seemed to be thereby invert-

412 THE MAGIC STAFF.

ed. He seldom indulged himself in the luxury of being entirely
mistaken; and the scribe’s offence consisted in this open declara-
tion of skepticism regarding his positions. His ideal of a full-
grown man seemed to be one who is never obliged essentially to
change his propositions. To be unexceptionably consistent was
ever his laudable aim. Hence, any direct opposition was a reflec-
tion upon his reasoning faculties. Therefore the mild scribe was
for weeks afterward made aware of the trespass he had committed.
Perhaps he has not yet wholly recovered from private wounds
inflicted in consequence of his conscientious friendship for me.
About midnight the secret conclave was disbanded, with an un-
derstanding on the part of some that I was to “reconsider” my
openly-avowed intention to be married. The principal reason
assigned for wishing to prevent the union was, their belief in the
outrageous scandal that my spirit-sister had lived unworthily.
Next morning my meditations were these: “ How cruelly has
my cherished friend been misrepresented! But, grant that she
has been a misguided woman, as the poet openly and positively
declared last night— what then? Should I therefore forsake her?
Can the erring be reclaimed by austerity and denunciation? Of
late I have heard nothing but insinuations about ‘ purity’ —-silly
platitudes concerning ‘ virtue'— poetic dissertations upon ‘sensu-
ality’ —from persons whose pretended mission is to reclaim the
wanderer ! who profess friendship for the misdirected traveller !
who believe in returning good for evil—words of love for words
of anger—who erect a high standard for humanity! If my bene-
factress were the woman whom these men describe, (which I know
is false as error itself,) then the more potent the reason why I
should unfailingly cause the spiritual sun of fraternal love to shine
- upon and heal her bruised heart. These men I can not make my
guides. They say the world will frown upon and condemn me.
Well, the condemnation of the ignorant is all the worldly approba-
tion my soul requires. ‘The poet says the ‘Tribune’ may publish

an exposure of my conduct. Well, if there were daily Tribunes |

q

FACTS AND FANCIES. 413

issued on every rod of space between the earth and the sun, and
if each number contained an article against me, I should go on in
the path I have chosen. What conscience dictates to be done,
that will I do, nor turn aside to confer with the powers of this
world.”

What supported me, dear reader? *T'was the inward conscious-
ness of right-doing, and my blessed Magic Staff. My course led
up the Mountain of Power—not power over men’s minds or cir-
cumstances, but power over whatsoever was selfish and imperfect
in myself—a pilgrimag> of psychical benefits eternal.

414 THE MAGIC STAFF.

CHAPTER L.
THE FRATERNAL MARRIAGE.

Axsour the middle of April, 1848, soon after the memorable
midnight meeting, I took my flight from the habitations of men.
The beloved scribe accompanied me to the boat, and left upon my
heart the seal of indissoluble affection.

Spring was smiling all around. Poughkeepsie seemed beautiful
as ever. Heaven was transcendently glorious. The exilement
which I had temporarily imposed upon myself, was for the accom-
plishment of two objects, viz.: to cut off all further attempt to
make me “the prophet” of a theologico-philosophic movement,
and to prepare my mind for a higher plane of public usefulness.
Looking back upon my Williamsburgh brethren, I said: “* Father
forgive them, they know not what they do.” And a dewy shower
of angel-blessings fell upon my spirit. O how sweet was my rest!
My most lonely hours were beguiled by loving words from lips not
seen by mortal man.

I had two valued correspondents—my brother scribe, and my
spirit-sister. His letters were freighted with impressions, from
without and within; while hers bore decided marks of fear, sor-
row, tribulation, fatigue, and pure affection. In one of her written
messages she said :—

“You will be surprised, brother best beloved, if I ask you to
consider once again the propriety of my present plans. Are
you still sure that I shall succeed in my legal proceedings? My
anxiety to throw off the hated manacles, is intense! Many, many

THE FRATERNAL MARRIAGE. 415

years have I longed for liberty! Shall I obtain it? Do you
_ know that I will? Tell me—I can bear it—for I can die.....
I regret that I have caused you so much trouble. I sometimes
fear that I am not suited for you. Is it right? Are you sure
that we ought to be married ?”

But from week to week I stilled the troubled waters and inspired
her with courage, and hope, and power to conquer. Day and
night I was tranquil as truth, nay, elevated, supported in purpose,
full of light on great questions, and happy. Yet I longed for the
presence of some confiding friend; and hence, toward the last of
April, I wrote the scribe and requested him to visit me. He
came, and our spirits mingled in the pleasures of elevated fraternal
converse.

“Brother Fishbough,” said I, “there are three cardinal prin-
ciples by which a true man may infallibly regulate his life —viz. :
Self justice, Fraternal justice, and Universal justice.”

“Yes,” he replied, “these ideas have lately come up before my
mind in a new aspect.”

“That’s good!” exclaimed I. “ What did you think about
them ?”

“Tt came clearly to my mind,” he replied, “ that self-justice is the
basis from which a man may begin to perfect himself in harmony.”

“ Yes—that’s right—go on,” said I. “So I saw it when wri-
ting that article on ‘The True but Unloved Religion.

“ Self-justice,” continued the calm scribe, “teaches me, first, my
duties to my own body (to preserve health, é&c.); second, my
duties to that other part of me, my wife and children; and,

999 .

thirdly, my duties with reference to property, reputation, &c. I
feel now, as I never felt before, that this seL¥-justice is the basis
on which rests all justice to the neighbor and to the world.”

“That’s the very principle by which I have tried to regulate
my life,” I replied. “I have maintained steadily this idea of
justice, regardless of expediencies, in all my proceedings, and
that’s why the brethren do not understand my steps.”

416 THE MAGIC STAFF.

Next day the scribe departed for New York. Returning from
the wharf, leisurely walking through one of the by-streets of
Poughkeepsie, I was suddenly and powerfully pulled back a step
or two as by an invisible hand. At the same instant there shot
into the sidewalk before me, to the depth of several inches, a |
heavy crowbar ! which had by accident slipped from a workman’s
grasp upon the roof of a very high building. ’I was the work of
a moment. My escape was alarmingly narrow; and as I passed
onward my nerves trembled with the shock they had received.
But my soul was silent. This fresh testimony from my guardian
spirits filled me with gratitude too deep for words. I felt that a
well-ordered life only could pay for the life preserved.

As I had foreseen, the legislature granted the bill which secured
personal freedom to my spirit-sister. The scribe accompanied me
to Boston, and there I met the liberated woman. And, as I had
also foreseen, we were married. The legal ceremony took place
at the scribe’s residence, on the Ist of July, 1848. ’Twas not
a fashionable wedding, dear reader—not a season of heartless
festivities—but an event sanctified by a holy purpose. From
the first hour of our acquaintance, I discerned, with my interior
understanding, the wisdom of this extraordinary union. But my
reader has seen that “the ways of wisdom” sometimes lead
through perilous circumstances, and yet, that to the true and
determined traveller, “all her paths are peace.”

Returning from a brief tour to Poughkeepsie, I made arrange-
ments to begin housekeeping next door to the scribe’s residence.
Knowing that my companion’s income consisted of a definite sum
semi-annually received, and wishing to keep a memorandum of
our current expenses, I purchased a day-book and ledger, and
thus commenced a systematic record. The first entry in my day-
book was as follows :—

“ Williamsburgh, August 4, 1848. The earth and the world to

THE FRATERNAL MARRIAGE. 417

A. J. Davis and companion—Debtor. To a respectable living
and competence.” ‘Then, to open and balance the account com-
mercially, I charged our firm as follows: “A. J. Davis and com-
panion to the earth and the world—Debtor. To living a life
that shall prove the ‘kingdom of heaven to be within.’ Also, to
practising the doctrine which teaches that Self justice is the truest
kindness—that Universal justice is the highest expression of true
Religion.”

The hired dwelling was neither large nor elegantly finished.
But within, owing to my companion’s oriental taste, the comforts
and decorations were original and sumptuous. “ Your moderate
income,” I quietly suggested, “ will not cover the bills.” But the
slightest idea of interference or restraint was to her’ intensely
disagreeable. Her impulses were strong, child-like, extravagant,
generous, regal, excitable, undisciplined, and majestic. “ Econ-
omy” was not to be found in her organization. Her habits of
living, compared with mine, were all cast ina large mould. For
many years her fortune had been ample and commensurate with
her generous outlays, but now, as I had interiorly seen, owing to
various financial disbursements, it was barely sufficient to meet
her own necessary expenses.

“Well, brother,” said she fondly, after the first wave of irrita-
tion had swept past, “I will not rebel against your advice. I
know your spirit should not be disturbed with these worldly
matters.”

But even while she spoke there flashed over her countenance a
look of sharp regret and severe impatience. Seeing which I said:
“Nay, nay, dear sister, do not feel sad nor disappointed. We,
you know, should not derive our happiness from externals. Petty
cares and trifling incidents, to you and I, should be no more than
bubbles on the bosom of some mighty river.”

“Yes, yes, brother mine—there! I think I shall never get
over calling you ‘brother.’ Now that we are married the world

will not comprehend it. But—O that blessed, pure, holy, beau-
18*

418 THE MAGIC STAFF.

tiful correspondence of ours! Your sweet letters began ‘ Dear
Spirit-Sister,’ and I addressed you my ‘Brother best beloved.’
Yes—beautiful! And I fear I never shall learn to exchange
that blessed word for anything else. What may we style each
other now? Can you give me a name—a new, unearthly name
—one that expresses our holy union ?”

While she was speaking thus, I distinctly heard-the word
“Stlona” whispered near my ear; and I said: “ Yes, I will give
you the name by which the angels know you.”

“Oh, joy, joy!” exclaimed she, “what is it? What do they
say? Oh, would that I could look and hear for myself. Tell
me, brother mine !”

“ A well-known guardian,” said I, “has just whispered the
word ‘Silona.’ I do not now know its meaning. But it is your
spiritual name. So, after this, before folks I will call you ‘ Katie,’
and ‘ Silona’ when we are beyond the reach of human hearing.”

“Oh, beautiful word!” said she, with a subdued and tearful look.
“JT will not any more be troubled by these materials things. But
—what is yours? If you havy’n’t a spiritual name to give your-
self, I will call you ‘My Jackson.’ That’s what my heart keeps
naming you.”

At this moment our mutual friend and neighbor, the scribe,
entered and desired me to go and look at a chart.

“Mr. Fishbough,” said she with an imperial severity, “I’d
thank you, sir, to let Mr. Davis remain with me.”

This was more irritating than anything I ever before heard
addressed to the affectionate scribe. It was not only unexpected
and emphatic, but it was commanding also, and I dreaded the
effect on my friend’s heart. But remembering that Katie was
my companion up the Mountain of Power, I offered no remark
to soften the expression.

Taking my Staff, and excusing myself for a few minutes, I
followed the scribe into his study. “What have you to show me,
my friend?” was my first inqairy.

THE FRATERNAL MARRIAGE. 419

“My chart,” said he, “that was suggested in a dream of which
I told you something.”

The faithful scribe—having completed his last important edi-
torial work for me, viz.: the copying off and preparation of my
chart, entitled, “The History and Destiny of the Race”—had
just sketched out his own chart at the time of which I now write.

“Your metaphysical mind will work,” said I, “and I am glad to

see its productions.”

“ This chart,” commenced the scribe with characteristic particu-
larity, “is constructed upon strictly correspondential principles.
It shows,” said he, pointing to the concentric circles and conspiring
sections, “it shows the action of principles that underlie universal
progression, education, development, government, &c. As you
perceive, it is based upon your classification of the Affections, and
not only illustrates the structure and progress of all material
creations, but distinctly shows the spiral path of human progress
which leads from Infancy to the summit of Perfection.”

“ That’s a very interesting chart,” said I. But as J examined it
more closely, methought I noticed a tendency to complexity or
involvement, so to speak, and so I added: “ Brother Fishbough,
the world, I fear, is hardly prepared to comprehend its principles.”

A heavy shade of sadness gathered on his brow as I spoke,
and his thoughts, as it seemed to me, reverted to Katie’s severe
rebuff. Thus was ruffled the placid stream of his friendship, nor
did subsequent expressions from her tend at all to smooth the
troubled waters. These slight changes and checks in the flow
of his sympathies surcharged his heart, and also excited a feeling
of resistance. But I did not yield to unhappy emotions. Be-
cause I had foreseen the righteousness of the work which this
spirit-sister was to accomplish as my private associate. She was
destined to isolate me from my best friends, and thus to instruct
me in the art of relinquishing external dependencies and over-
coming external obstacles in the pathway of spiritual progression.

420 THE MAGIC STAFF.

CHAPTER LI.
THE RECONCILIATION.

«Who blesses others in his daily deeds,
Will find the healing that his spirit needs ;
For every flower in others’ pathway strewn,
Confers its fragrant beauty on our own.”

Tue influence of “The Univerccelum,” under the careful and
tasteful management of its chief editor, was daily widening and
deepening. Many who had slept at the gates of light, and those
who had entered in thereat, were equally benefited by its spiritual
magnetism. The reports of my troubles had not injured its cir-
culation so much as the fact that I had not written anything fox
its columns during many weeks.

The editor’s physical health was becoming enfeebled from over-
mental taxation, but his fine abilities remained firm and every-
where acceptable. His task had been arduous and embarrassing.
He ceaselessly yearned for a system of united action, and I knew
that in private he was still my friend. The external proof of this
was presented through a letter of his in answer to one of mine
soon after I imposed upon myself the discipline of exilement. It
was as follows :—

“New Yorx, Jay 26, 1848.

“Drar Brotuer Davis:...... I can hardly suppose that
any one has a desire that you should be an exile from your friends,
and I am constrained to think that you have misapprehended the
wishes of those friends whose devotion has perhaps rendered them

THE RECONCILIATION. 421

unnecessarily solicitous in your behalf......... I grieve that a
cloud lingers in the horizon which reflects a shadow on thy spirit,
whose appropriate place is in the midst of light which is inacces-
sible to less-gifted souls. May it pass quickly away, and the fresh
joy, which baptized thy spirit when first we met, return and make
thy earthly being bright and beautiful again.
“ With undiminished affection, I am
“Yours faithfully, “S:-B. 5.”

Such was the editor’s genial expression of undisturbed regard.
My marriage called out no opposition. On the contrary, soon
afterward —in August—I received a letter from the poet, propo-
sing a reconciliation, as may be seen by the following transcript
of the same :—

“New Yorx, August, 1848.

“EsTEEMED FrRrenp: Although I have not seen or heard
from you for a considerable time, and during that period many
unforeseen circumstances have transpired, I feel moved to write
to you; and shall do so in a spirit of cordiality and frankness —
believing that you will recognise and respond to the spirit that
prompts and the feelings that find utterance.......

“J feel that your inward desire is for Unity. I feel the same
desire myself. I -wish to behold all who are interested in spiritual
progress brought together—to see all errors forgiven, all animosi-
ties buried, all roots of bitterness destroyed. You feel and desire
the same...... But the feeling of good-will and the desire fox
unity are not beneficial unless they find an open expression. Havy-
ing these feelings, I have felt impelled to express them—thinking
it might aid you in considering the position of the Friends of the
Cause.

“With feelings of respect for your companion and of regard for

yourself,
“T remain yours, eT. te a

“ What letter is that, my Jackson?” asked Katie, just as I had
read the last sentence.
“Tt’s avery noble and welcome note from Brother Harris,”

replied I.

422 THE MAGIC STAFF.

“ How dare he!” she exclaimed indignantly —“how dare he,
after all that’s past, write you a letter?”

“ He’s asking for a reconciliation,” said I; “to bury all animosi-
ties, to have all errors forgiv—”

“ Heaven knows,” interrupted she, “that I am willing to for-
give, but I can not forget the treachery of your pretended friends !”

“They were not treacherous,” said I soothingly; “they were
only anxious to save the nucleus of the movement from blemish.
When I place myself in their positions, I do not wonder at their
trepidation.”

“Well,” said she haughtily, “ what does he propose ?”

“ Nothing directly,” I replied. “But I gather from the tenor
of his words that the friends would like to have a meeting.”

“A meeting!” exclaimed she with dignity. “Would you con-
sent to meet again with those men ?”

« Most gladly,” I replied. “And will you not say ‘Amen,’
Silona ?”

“Oh, yes,” returned she, suddenly subdued, “ if you request it.”

“ Ah, that’s quite worthy of my spirit-sister,” said I. “Now,
I'll reply to the friends immediately, and fix a meeting to come >
off in this very house.” |

The time between this conversation and the meeting of recon- |
ciliation was brief. The result was good. There seemed to be |

peace and good-will pervading the session. But my indignant
companion found it difficult to restrain her resentment, as her |
haughty manner plainly indicated, though she said nothing to mar
the interchange of friendly sympathies. The conclusion was—
that we, the editors, would sign and publish a brief notice of the |
reinstatement of our mutual harmony, and that I would thence-
forward make the “ Univerccelum” the vehicle of my highest intui- |

tions. The principal editor, the poet, the scribe, &c., all volunta-_

rily agreed that I was the proper person to write the notice. On

the subsequent morning I wrote the statement, as delicately as I
could, and hasten:d to leave it at the office in time for thé next.

|

THE RECONCILIATION. ; 493

issue. The poet read it over, and said, “It’s very scientific.”
*T was published in the number dated September 9, 1848, and
read as follows :—

“To our Reapers: Last spring there was a development of
previously-existing disturbances among editors and contiguous
minds immediately connected with the Univereelum—a mzsun-
derstanding having for its parent three causes, viz.: a misappre-
ciation of individual motives, a misconception of individual respon-
sibilities, a misarrangement of individual persons in reference to
their true positions and spheres of action. This misunderstanding
not being speedily removed, ultimated in a voluntary divergence.
But time has developed the motives of all; and circumstances
have modified their respective responsibilities, defined their true
positions, united their efforts; and expertence has mapped their
course in the future. Henceforth they form but one body, tread
but one path, labor but for one purpose; and will endeavor to rep-
resent, by their ONENESS of Soul and combination of Strength, the
triumph of the threefold manifestation of the Religious Sentiment,
viz., Self, Fraternal, and Universal Justice.

“Epirors or UNIVERC@LUM.”

In accordance with my agreement, I recommenced writing and
publishing for the world. In consenting to this fraternal reconcili-
ation — which I did with my whole heart—I did not assume any
responsibility of leadership, but maintained my chosen post as
only one among many. My path still led up the steep, dark
Mountain, and my painful experiences were naturally incidental
to my pilgrimage. Hence I did not complain nor lose my essen-
tial serenity. And with exceeding joy did I treasure the kindly
words, the hearty smiles, the noble sentiments, which produced
and sealed that remembered reconciliation.

My soul was now armed for the: battle of life. With peaceful
words and just principles I had resolved to treat with the world.
Panoplied with no coat-of-mail, hidden behind no shield, energized
by the force of no passion, fearing neither to live nor to depart,
wrapped only in the mantle of universal charity, and accompanied

424 THE MAGIC STAFF.

by no visible being save “Silona,” I had pledged myself to drink
deep of the infinite waters of Truth, to tread with fearless foot the
rugged precipices in the distance, and thus solve the problem of
Individuality and test the value of independent illumination.

Among the living pictures of memory, there is one of a noble
man who served me when I most needed him. Katie’s income
was considerably less than our expenses. She had loaned money
to help on Reform. Her outstanding obligations were equal to
the amount thus appropriated. Seeing that we could not meet
the bills sent in from various sources, I devoted a whole day to
the question of liquidation. At length the air trembled with
sweet sounds, wavelets of ethereal music thrilled into my deepest
heart, and the same loveful voice of years agone said, “ Write—to
—thy—brother.”

“Do you mean the person of whom I was just thinking?” I
asked.

The celestial voice replied: “ He—is—the—friend—to—stand
—between—thee—and—the—world.”

Straightway, while my heart was overflowing with wordless joy,
I wrote to the chosen brother, who then resided at Boonton Falls,
New Jersey. Only a few days elapsed ere he called at our house.
He forthwith examined the accounts, made an estimate of our lia-
bilities, drew checks and gave notes to meet them to the amount.
of nearly fifteen hundred dollars; advised us to break up house
keeping; and, finally, that I might be free from property cares
and weekly expenses, he cordially invited us to share with him
the joys and freedom of his family group. Beautiful indeed is the |
providence of the angel-world! The steadfast friendship of this |
brother, and the many deeds of intelligent kindness that spontane- |
ously issued from the sanctuary of his heart, are among the best
pictures which hang on the walls of my memory.

Before moving to the residence of Mr. Green, I wrote out my |
penetrations concerning pestilential cholera. A published state-.
ment of the particulars of what I saw, by voluntary clairvoyance, in

THE RECONCILIATION. 425

Paris, in Berlin, and in St. Petersburg — of the number of cholera-
patients in each hospital and locality — gave the public an oppor-
tunity to judge, on the arrival of the next steamer, of the reliability
of my perceptions. The editor of the “ New York Sun,” noticing
this article in the “ Univerccelum,” copied nearly the whole of it,
and appended the following :— |

“ A communication frdm a professor of clairvoyance, relating to
the causes and cure of the cholera, the origin of the potato-rot, a
flying visit of twenty minutes to St. Petersburg, etc., will be found
in another column. This communication, made before the arrival
of the Hermann, is strongly confirmed in its facts by the news by
that steamer, which, it will be seen by a glance at yesterday’s Sun,
represents the cholera as declining in Russia and increasing in
Prussia. Whatever our readers may think of clairvoyance, there
is an amount of common sense in the philosophy of the communi-
cation worthy respectful attention. We have not seen the sub-
jects of cholera and potato-rot more earnestly and scientifically
treated.”

We will now revert once more to the poet of this psychological
drama, whose nature was aspiringly spiritual. My impressions, ©
when first he avowed his determination exclusively to preach from
“Nature’s Divine Revelations,” were strictly fulfilled. The ebb
was equalled only by the flow. The backward swing of tke pen-
dulum was legitimate. During the summer of 1848 he preached
for the “ Independent Christian Society” at the Broadway Colis-
eum. He thus perfected the admirable work of centrifugation
To show that his separation from me, as a religious authority, was
complete, I will introduce a paragraph or two from his pen to the
“Univerceelum” of September 30, 1848, as follows :—

“TJ observe a tendency on the part of certain minds to place
implicit reliance on all statements which come from persons in
states of mental illumination; to make their words authoritative ;
to receive their sayings as oracular and infallible; to accept and
endorse their statements, without evidence and without investiga-
tion. This is visible among the sect of ‘Swedenborgians.’ Many

426 THE’ MAGIC STAFF.

among them receive Swedenborg as infallible authority, and en-
slave their minds to his statements. They carry their blind, idiotic
subserviency so far as to deny their reason and distrust their intu-
itions, if so b2 that they are at variance with the statements con-
tained in their teacher’s ‘ Doctrines of the New Jerusalem,’ or
‘Memorable Relations of Things seen and heard in Heaven and
Hell.” No matter how reasonable be an idea, or how great a mass
of evidence sustains it— provided Swedenborg deny it, it is treated
with contemptuous indifference, as unworthy of notice.

“T observe the same tendency among some who have been in-
terested in the various statements put forth by Mr. Davis. It
pains me to the heart to find men who ridicule the supernatural-
ists for making the sayings of Moses, or Jonah, or Jude, authori-
tative and infallible — greater than reason, more reliable than con-
science, falling themselves into the same error—believing what-
ever Mr. Davis alleges, because he utters it— without investiga-
tion, without proof—without even asking for proof. It ought to
be borne in mind that Mr. Davis’s book contains errors and con-
tradictions, in the midst of much that is truthful. It ought to be
remembered that he has made grave mistakes, and at any time is
liable to repeat them. The very ideas he advocates show conclu-
sively that this slavery of the mind to the assertions of any man
—this voluntary paralysis of reason—this setting up of oracles,
and blind reception of their words—is a foul transgression; and,
history adds, has been the cause of unnumbered misfortunes to the
race. If I apprehend aright the position of Mr. D., he recoils as
much from this as I do. Now, while the evil is in its incipient
state, be warned and let it extend no further.”

The few active supporters of the “Univercceelum” were now
struggling to keep the publication above the impending and con-
centrating storm of pecuniary embarrassment. But the Fates had
spoken: the paper was destined to be dissolved. Such was the
disastrous scene enacted before my inner vision a few hours after
the proposition was made to publish it. Yet, against the laws of
cause and effect, I prayed for its continuance.

The melancholy hours of one dark December day I devoted to
planning a rew distribution of existing forces. The principal ed-

THE RECONCILIATION. 427

itor, as I was well aware, had influence with several liberal and
wealthy persons. I therefore suggested that he be delegated to
the work of procuring means and subscribers, while the scribe
might assume the editorial responsibilities. Thus co-operating, I
hoped that the excellent publication might be sustained for a yet
longer period.

But the ponderous wheels of Time at length rolled over the
office. They utterly crushed and destroyed our winged idol.
There was straightway heard a wail of lamentation in many homes
—a dirge-like requiem trembled upon the bosom of reformers—
a few lingering notes reverberated through “The Spirit of the
Age” — distant and familiar faces looked sad and thoughtful; but,
anon, the luman-world was clashing as before, while the angel-
world continued to smile benignly, and to send forth its truths
freely and universaily.

423 THE MAGIC STAFF.

CHAPTER Lil.
THE FATAL GEM.

Our removal to the residence of Mr. Green, in Bocntov, New
Jersey, secured to us a blessed relief from worldly cares, and
brought to our hearts the luxury of refined and genial and ele-
vated associations. But Silona’s health continued to be quite
imperfect, and, therefore, after a few months, we went to the
South Orange Water-Cure.

Shortly subsequent to our arrival there,‘in September, 1849, I
began to feel the intuitional foreshadowing of the initial volume
of an “ Encyclopedia” which had been previously promised to
the world. As yet, I had not sufficient confidence to go on in so
great a work, without some one to review the orthography and
grammatical construction of my sentences and paragraphs. Hence
I penned a note to the scribe requesting a visit. His aspirations
were steadily philanthropic. And I had in mind to propose an
associate publishing establishment, including several departments
of reformatory work—a sort of Eclectic Institution for the pro-'
mulgation of the high moral principles forming the basis of the
Harmonial Philosophy, and of the several sciences embraced
within its boundless sweep. |

To my letter the scribe responded in person. Our conversation
was long and explicit. But the sweet endearments of a former
period did not return. We each vividly remembered the tender-|
ness of our fraternal attachment. But neither felt the upgushing’

|
|

THE FATAL GEM. 429

tide of communion that once-mingled and blended our private
sympathies. The unconscious cause of this effect was my frank
and fearless Katie. She did not seem to realize the depth and
poignancy of the past trials of the generous scribe. His manly
and self-sacrificing words and deeds in our behalf she appeared
utterly to forget. He did not personally please her temperament,
and the extraordinary vivacity of her face mirrored forth her
prejudice. Still, she did not object to any reformatory plan I had
in contemplation. Nothing could be more certain, however, than
this: that she was too sensitive and too aristocratic for my plainly-
dressed and plainly-spoken associates, while I was too unpopular
and too democratic for the wealthy classes with whom she had
mingled during all her previous years. Therefore, each shielded
the other from contact with the external world. She was isolating
me and I was isolating her: and I rejoiced, while she did not
complain, at this grand result. It gave me the perpetual retire-
ment of a Monastery, the seclusion of a mountain home above the
sea, and still I dwelt amid the multitude.

One day, as I was walking in the grove near the Water-Cure,
a soft breath, as of mingled melodies, floated o’er me, and my
Guide said: “Tell—Silona—that—the—twain—owe—her—noth-
ing.”

The effect of this message I could not anticipate. ‘The parties
were far from being Katie’s favorites. But feeling full confidence
in my Guide’s judgment and counsel, I sought Silona, and said:
“ Do you feel that your notes against Lyon and Fishbough need
ever be paid ””

“No,” she replied, “and I would give them up to-day if I
thought those men would be the better for it.”

“The readiness of her generosity, the absence of ‘all opposition,
greatly surprised me. “’Iis my opinion,” said I, “that they are
both oppressed by this obligation. Suppose I just enclose them
the whole amount of their indebtedness to us. Would you like
that, Silona ?”

430 THE MAGIC STAFF.

“Anything you desire,” said she with tenderness. “You are
my wisdom.”

Glad enough was I to send the brothers, in accordance with the
spiritual suggestion, this testimonial of our mutual good-will. The
notes returned amounted to two thousand dollars only ; as we
concluded to retain our right to the English edition. The scribe’s
delicate response was as follows :—

“DEARLY. DELOVED DROTHER 2... «tin tues Your very kind
letter I have read over many times, and feel the utmost embar-
rassment in attempting to answer it.....I accept the kind offer
which it bears, holding myself responsible to Heaven to see justice
done according to the best perceptions of my conscience. If the
Revelations should hereafter become profitable in a pecuniary
sense, I will not—I must not—allow myself to appropriate the
proceeds exclusively to myself.

“ Yours in love, SNe 18S

We felt richly rewarded. The money and labor had sent into
the world a valuable aid to struggling humanity. *IT was a work
of unadulterated love; the brothers were the wisely-selected
agents; and in this view we mutually rejoiced.

My sole object in making this item public is to keep up the
chain of spiritual providences which distinguishes my individual
history. ‘That peculiar modesty which is unfavorable to a free
personal confession, pro or con, is a species of delicacy that will
not stand the test of clairvoyant penetration. It will not answer
at the Day of Judgment—beneath the sun of conscience —ever
at its noontide effulgence in the mind of an honest man.

One of the Water-Cure patients, a pedantic and highly-con-
ceited character, returning from his walk one morning, accosted
me and said: “Sir, I have been here almost a month, without
exchanging a word with you, but my wish has been to propound a
few questions if you do not object.”

“ Qh, no,” “said I, “when not writing I’m ready to answer all
the questions I can.”

THE FATAL GEM. 431

Accordingly we seated ourselves on a rustic bench, beneath the
waving trees, and he began: “J am free to confess, sir, that my
mind is decidedly prejudiced against you; yet I am not one of
those who will not investigate a new thing. Permit me to ask,
sir, if you have ever clairvoyantly looked into the origin of
modern religious worship ?”

Instantly I knew that he was not wholly sincere; that he only
wished to while away an idle hour. “ Yes,” I replied, “I have
examined the subject many times.”

“ Where did it originate ?”

“In the East.” said I, “toward the rising sun.”

“ Why in the East?” he inquired with a show of interest.

“ Because of a necessity in human nature there,” said I, “ before
the western hemisphere was populated.”

“Do you really believe,” he asked, “that you have seen the
eastern hemisphere ?”

“Yes, sir. My recollection of what I saw is clear as the noon-
day sun.”

“ What have you seen there of interest ?”

“ The first thing I saw that interested me,” I replied, “was dis-
connected with the subject upon which I was lecturing at the time.”

“What was it? Pardon my curiosity ; but I’m fond of trav-
ellers’ stories,” said he laughing.

“Nadir Shah’s footsteps on Persian lands first attracted my
attention,” I replied. “The plunderings and cruelties and assas-
sinations and licentious excesses of this Invader were inscribed
on the very sands and soils of India.”

“Indeed!” was the listener’s response. ‘“ What became of the
tyrant ?”

“Tn a few moments,” said I, “while looking over the traditions
of the people, I saw that he was at length horribly assassinated
by the chiefs of his own band.”

“ What else did you see?” inquired the patient.

“T perceived,” said I, “that the Hindoos had a floating super.

432 THE MAGIC STAFF.

stition concerning Nadir Shah, which might be imported into this
country and applied.”

“ Ah! returned he. “Can you tell me what it was?”

“Jt was that the robber carried upon his person a GEM which
was certain to bring desolation upon any individual or nation that
possessed it. The people seriously believed that this fabulous
gem was a reality, and that it has brought disaster, sorrow, and
ruin, upon several kings and dynasties since the days of Nadiz
Shah, the merciless robber of the Cabul Mountains.”

“JT have never before heard of this superstition,” said he.
“ But how would you apply it in this country ?”

“Tll tell you. Milton’s devil carried about with him a splendid
Gem which, like the Hindoo diamond, is certain to bring misfor-
tune upon its possessor.”

“What do you refer to, sir?” asked the patient.

“TI refer to his Ambctéon to succeed in his undertakings—not
because the object in view was good, but because he had too much
Pride to be defeated in the prosecution of his selfish aims.”

“T can not comprehend the application,” said he.

“Lhe fatal Gem,” I continued, “is the personal Pride that fixes
lawyers, physicians, clergymen, and others, in several unjust and
discordant relations to humanity. They are not childlike in the
pursuit of Truth. Respectability is more precious to such persons
tnan Wisdom. Ambition is the ruling star of their destiny.
Society bequeaths this fatal tract to its offspring from age to age.
- and hence the misfortunes and sorrows which rankle in the world’s
bosom.” |

The sound of the dinner-bell was now upon the air, and directly
our conversation ended. Occasionally, for months afterward, }
wondered what there was in the stranger’s temperament or state
of mind which elicited the words on “ Pride” during our first ané
last interview. At length, however, the post brought me a letter
from the almost forgotten hydropathic patient, in which I read
this sentence :—

*

THE FATAL 3EM.° 433

“<The fatal Gem,’ sir, is no longer in my possession. As a
result, my wife and children and neighbors love me better—I
love myself better—and I have had much less difficulty in my
business relations. Ninety days after our short talk I withdrew a
foolisk. lawsuit — confessed myself wrong for the first time in twenty
years—and I now speak to persons to whom, for years, I have
been as a thorn and a scourge. If you should ever come into
this region, my dear sir, do not fail to give me and my family a
call.”

Katie’s health was rapidly improving. She pursued the treat-
ment and adopted the diet for many weeks. Well do I remember
the hour when, immediately after returning from one of her baths,
she exclaimed: “Oh, Jackson, how I long to read over once again
some of your dear letters to me !”

“Why so, Katie? Am I not as consoling as my letters
were 2”

“You don’t understand me,” said she with an anxious look.
“You are so taken up with your writing, every day, that I seldom
get anything from you about our beautiful union.”

“ Silona,” I responded, “we both realize the purity of our mar-
riage and the pleasure which it brings us.”

“Oh, yes,” she replied, “but I love to hear you talk about it
every day.”

“Well, Katie, what would you like to have me say ?”

“Oh, tell me whether you think that our union is for eternity.
Will it continue for ever? Are you sure—very, very sure—
that all marriages are eternal ?”

“ As far as I can see,” said I, “all true marriages are indisso-
luble.”

“My heart is overpowered with happiness at the thought, my
Jackson,” exclaimed she. ‘And now tell me once again, do you
know—really, truly, surely, positively know—that our marriage
is a true union ?” :

“Nothing is more certain, Silona, than the purity of our rela-
19

434 THE MAGIC STAFF.

tion. But,” I added, “remember I said that ‘as far as I can see’
all true marriages are indissoluble.”

“Good Heavens!” exclaimed she with a look of queenly dig-
nity and heartfelt alarm—‘“ What do I hear? Tell me, Jackson!
Do you not know that our relation is unalterable ?”

“ Nay, Katie, I do not know, but I delveve, that our union is
eternal.”

“You really do believe, then, that our marriage is to last for
ever! Do you still believe this, my Jackson ?”

“Yes, Silona—I have faith in the perpetuity of our union.”

We talked over the blissful advantages of unwavering conjugal
ties—how one soul is buoyed up by the confidence and devotion
of its kindred soul—and that, amid all the treachery and uncer-
tainty of outward events, there is sweet strength and joyful rest
in the consciousness of truly-blended hearts. And ever after this
conversation — whenever the question of marriage was alluded to
by others—she would affirm, positively, that “our union was
eternal, because I had so declared it;” and yet, when alone in
each other’s society, she would sometimes recall my words, and
ask: “ What did you mean by saying that our marriage was eternal
‘as far as you could see’ 2?”

My reply was that “TI did not yet know whether a marriage iss
eternal because it is true and desired, or because of other reasons
and principles hidden in the spiritual constitution. But of on

thing I was always certain: that our union was a true one, and b
virtue of this certainty we had a powerful evidence in favor of its
perpetuity.” Her warm heart and imperious mind, however}
could endure to be neither contradicted nor checked in their en:
thusiastic and overwrought expressions. Hence, believing tha
she was my true companion, and that I should tenderly shield he}
temperament from pain, I attempted no explanations nor modific
tions of her words, but constantly leaned upon my Magic Stati]
and lived a life harmonious.

READINGS AND TEACHINGS. 435

Crary Re at

READINGS AND TEACHINGS.

“‘T live for those who love me;
For those who know me true;
For the heaven that smiles above me,
And awaits my spirit, too:
For the cause that lacks assistance ;
For the wrong that necds resistance ;
For the future in the distance,
And the good that I can do.”

ANGEL-FACES shone down from skies so deeply pure, and im-
mortal voices shook the inner air so gently, that, though we were
travelling up the rugged Mountain, our feet faltered not, and our
hearts misgave us never for a single day. The ambrosial boun-
ties of Nature were shed silently along our pathway, and the
struggles consequent upon the pilgrimage were more and more
softened and subdued and tempered to our capabilities of endu-
rance. And yet, these aids would have been like so many empty
shadows and of no avail, had it not been for my own private de-
termination to depend on one ever-present source of strength—
the Magic Staff.

Time dropped down, hour by hour, into the ocean of eternity.
Sometimes a whole month would drop, while I was interiorly
composing chapters for another volume, and, but for the plash it
made in the waters of memory, it seems to me that I should have
realized no lapse of time. The events of the journey, and not the
days consumed, clustered on the vine of life.

436 THE MAGIC STAFF.

Without the scribe’s aid, without external help from »ooks, I
wrote the first volume of the “ Harmonia.” This was my princi-
pal occupation during the fall and spring of 1849-50. Soon
afterward, obeying a constitutional desire to investigate for my-
self, I visited the family of Dr. Phelps. atie’s health and
spirits, being greatly improved, permitted her to accompany me.
The hours spent in that house were golden. The solace of soli-
tude, the comfort of silence, the mysteries of spirit-power, the
signs of coming wisdom, all came unto me there.

“ What means this shocking disturbance ?” asked the venerable
gentleman, as a table-fork went sailing through the air, and small
pebbles fell upon the strings of the open piano.

“Your positive anxiety to know, doctor,” said I, “will but the
more excite. Indulge the manifestations—do not fear them—
and good only will come.”

Sudden sounds and unpleasant surprises, however, became
more frequent and numerous. At times the family seemed to -be
wild and rash in their opposition. But no expression of daring
or repugnance could remove the “annoyance” of the dropping
proofs. The tread of unseen feet were heard in the upper room;
the artistic works of invisible hands were seen; the playful in-
genuities of impalpable thinkers were scattered in all directions ;
the suppliant messages of mysterious beings were written on the
walls; but, amid all the puzzling perplexities of the venerable
gentleman’s family, I was not for one moment disturbed.

“See that!” exclaimed the disconcerted clergyman, when re- |
turning with his son, whose dress had been suddenly torn by un- |
seen fingers —“ See! is not that a shocking plight? What but
powers of evil would perform such deeds of violence ?”

“TY shall soon write out my answer,” I replied. “ And with
your permission, I will read it to your family.” Ere long that |
promise was fulfilled. The results of that examination were also |
published, and, in order to avoid repetition, I refer the reader to |
my pamphlet, entitled, “ Philosophy of Spiritual Intercourse.”

READINGS AND TEACHING. 437

*T was irresistibly ammsing, sometimes, to observe the grimaces
of Connecticut Orthodoxy! The pious people of Stratford were
impiously perturbed. And many minds there, not troubled with
any religion, were irreligiously prejudiced. The clergyman’s
residence was sanctimoniously scrutinized. There was nothing
“evil” about or within, however, except the misapprehension of
the spiritual revelation. Now and then a passing inhabitant
would stare at the ghostly pillars of the piazza, as if they had re-
cently acquired the power of making “mysterious noises,” but no
one of the sagacious bystanders could penetrate that realm of in-
telligent causes which produced corresponding effects so alarming-
ly unmistakable.

A few weeks subsequent to this we went to Cambridge, Massa-
chusetts. This journey was taken for Katie’s benefit. She
wished to feel the invigorating breath of the ocean, and we there-
fore sought a spot to which the salt breezes came. But now my
own health began to wane, and at last I was prostrated with a
violent attack of Typhoid Fever.

Previous to my illness, for six weeks, I was constantly engaged
in writing upon the most stupendous subject that ever incited hu-
man thought. My whole mental organization was exercised ex-
tremely. That. subject was “God, the Ruler of the Universe.”
The second volume of the “ Great Harmonia” contains the result
of my labors. This extreme exercise of the spiritual faculties
pressed my entire system into the extreme positive state, which
inevitably develops the terrible fever that caused my exceeding
prostration.

In the early stages of my disease, I was daily visited by an
allopathic physician of acknowledged skill and ability ; but, as my
complaint became more positive, his faith in my ultimate restora-
tion to health subsided, and it was generally believed, by those
who witnessed my condition, that I should soon become a per-
manen; resident in the Spirit-land. But Mrs. Mettler, of Bridge-

438 THE MAGIC STAFF.

port, Connecticut—the existence of whose clairvoyant powers I
had discovered some years previous—hearing of my condition,
came immediately to Cambridge. My case was submitted to her
inspection, and her diagnosis of the symptoms was exceedingly
accurate. Out of several millions of medicines which exist in the
world, her discriminating perceptions selected, for my case, two
simple vegetable remedies. Of these a tea was made, and admin-
istered according to her directions. Through the agency of this
simple tea, the applicability of which to my complaint the wisdom
of a clairvoyant only could discover, my fever was subdued.

Combined with the tea, in the removal of this fever, was human
magnetism or psychology. I can never forget the morning when
the following miracle was wrought upon me: The physician who
had seen me but two days previous, gave it as his opinion that I
should be obliged to remain in bed six weeks, and abstain from
food twenty days longer. I had already sunk so low in physical
strength that I could not turn in bed, nor assist myself with my
hands. And my food and medicine, for nearly three weeks, with
but few exceptions, had been confined to Congress Water, which
I drank freely. .

Such was my condition when Mrs. Mettler, in accordance with
her interior directions while in the clairvoyant state, came to my
bedside, and, taking my hand in her own, and gazing a few mo-
ments steadily in my eyes, said, “ Now you can raise up in your
bed.” The requisite strength and confidence to do so flowed
throughout my system in an instant, and I forthwith raised up
with ease. Now she made passes down my spine, and over my
entire body, and bade me walk from my bed to a chair, which had
been prepared for the purpose, about four yards from the bed I
was occupying. This I did with astonishing ease; and I rested
in my chair that day nearly four hours. Thus I substantially
took up my bed and walked. For several succeeding mornings,
about the same hour, I was magnetized by the lady; and in ten
days I could driv: out and enjoy the sunlight and air.

READINGS AND TEACHINGS. 439

The harmonizing and tranquillizing influence of this illness upon
my body and mind was deep and thorough. My entire system
experienced a species of regeneration or purification; and my
mind was vastly more free to explore the infinite ramifications of
those great and lofty subjects which constitute the vital system of
my subsequent volumes.

The next scene opens, not in Trinity college, but in College
street, in the city of Hartford. Urged merely by the confluence
of external circumstances, and hence without any hidden motive,
we became boarders in a family of congenial sympathies. Soon
after our arrival, some four or five gentlemen called, and one
said: “ We welcome you, Mr. Davis, to the land of ‘blue laws,’
and hope your stay will be long.”

“Yes,” said another, “we’ve been struggling against prejudice
of all sorts. A little help, now and then, would cheer us.”

“ What have you been doing?” I asked.

“We’ve obtained an office in Kellogg’s building, and met in it
every week for several months. But we can’t get many of the
outsiders to take part in our investigations.”

At this moment I felt the presence of my Guide. Stepping out
into the open air, I was enabled to hear the lute-like tones of his
voice, and these words: “ T’his—is—thy—station. Loyal—minds
—are—here. Begin—ihy—teachings.”

Hearing these rich sentences, and rejoicing in the thought of
beginning a career of oral teachings, I danced and laughed like a
young boy. But of what I had heard I related nothing to any
living soul. Before the friendly guests departed, however, I
assured them of my willingness to attend their meetings.

Accordingly, at the next Wednesday evening’s session, I nar-
rated what I had witnessed in Stratford; the absolute facts —bold.
bare, bewildering—and nothing more. The philosophy of them
I reserved for a future occasion. At length that occasion arrived.
My matter, not my manner, was acceptable. Whereupon I

440 THE MAGIC STAFF.

evoked the assistance of Silona.© Her voice was clear and her
pronunciation forcible. She had few equals as a reader—even
among professors—especially when her mind sympathized with
the author’s meaning. Firmly and earnestly, therefore, did she,
from week to week, read to the assembly the lectures which I
had intuitionally written. "Iwas all new to the dwellers of the
Charter Oak city. A few of the boldest intellects became perma-
nently interested.

Ladies of Fashion! look upon that picture. ‘There sat a lady,
once a star in the world, dressed in expensive garb ’tis true, but
amid unpolished mechanics and ungloved merchants. “What did
she there? Her voice was lifted — without an emotion of fear—
against prejudice and its atrocious crimes. She read the dis-
courses with that vitalizing heartiness which is the result of true
devotion. Did she a popular work? Nay! But ’twas strong
and sunk deep in the brave souls of living men and women. The
truth made them free; and they rendered unto her gratitude.
Most piteous devotees of St. Custom are they who dare not follow
that lady’s emphatic example!

In the early spring of the next year, 1851, I was myself ad-
dressing the-people. The task weighed heavily upon me, yet,
impelled by the hidden law of my soul, I bore up against the
pressure and succeeded. Of a high ancestral name I could not
boast. Of rank and riches I had none. Of college lore and
credentials from the Faculty I was destitute. And yet, I had
spiritual access to the best advantages that could accrue from all
these—not because of any hereditary or acquired right, but
because my INTUITIONS were emancipated from the thraldom of
sense. And thus I journeyed up the Mountain of Power. Not
from motives of ambition did I pursue this precipitous path, but I
walked up for the same reason that water flows down, because I
could not help it! If the reader would know what were the
subjects of my first oral teachings, he may ascertain by examining
the third volume of the “ Great. Harmonia.”

READINGS AND TEACHINGS. 441

For public services I made no charge. Indeed, so happy was
I to render them that I would sooner have paid for the privilege
thar. tax the bounty of those who listened. Our crippled income
was still exceeded by current expenses. And as the spring days
melted away, one after and into another, I began .to think about
returning to the hospitalities of the spiritually-appointed brother.

While thus considering one evening, the well-known voice said:
“ Be—jfirm—my—son. Thy—home—is—here.”

“How glad,” thought I, “that I’m no longer a youth! If I
were, the words just spoken would in ten minutes seem like a
dream. Now, there’s no mystery—no ambiguity—nothing to
unravel.”

At this moment an acquaintance arrived, a generous-looking
Hartford publisher, who said: “I think the cottage can be ob-
tained.”

“Tis very beautiful there,” replied Katie. “ But my Jackson
thinks we can not purchase this year.”

“Perhaps,” said the visitor, “some other arrangements can be
made.”

“ There ’s no use of planning as I see,” she replied. “’I would
only result in disappointment.”

Nothing more of consequence was uttered that night. While
breakfasting next morning, we had another call from the same
gentleman.

“T’ve called early,’ said he apologetically, “to tell you that
Mr. Turnbull is willing to sell his cottage.”

“ Well, Seymour,” I replied, “we can not raise money enough
this year. So I guess I’ll look about for something cheaper.”

“You could pay the rent, I suppose?” inquired he, with a busi-
ness look.

“Oh, yes!” said Katie, with much vivacity. “We should have
plenty for that, and to spare.”

The publisher was silent and thoughtful. Presently he de-

parted. When next he came he told us that the cottage was his
1g*

442 THE MAGIC STAFF.

property for our immediate benefit. Thus did my Guide scan
this brother’s noble heart, and anticipate the flow of approaching
circumstances.

Yes, my home was to be in Hartford. The cottage was agree-
ably retired, nearly enveloped in trees, and situated on high
ground not far from the railroad depot. The frantic voice of
that symbol of civilization—“the Iron Horse”— would shake the
air within the dwelling, and shout: “ Hurrah! for the progressive
world!” There was a balcony about the ornamented structure—
from which cherries, apricots, and the fragrant magnolia, could
be reached—whereon, more than once, I have clairvoyantly
examined eternal truths. And when in my ordinary state, too,
there were sometimes dreamy lingerings upon that same shaded
pavilion, during which my mind would revert to Poughkeepsie, to
Hyde-Park, to Union Corners, to Hiram Marshall’s house, to Bart
Cropsey’s stories, to the poverty of my childhood, and, lastly, to
my little prayers to “kind Prov’dence,” which I could not but
utter once again with tenderest reverence.

In December following, in accordance with an impression
derived from the perception of a human need, I began a series of
argumentative discourses. My attention, in the first place, was
arrested by reading the following public notice: “ Rev. Dr. Bush-
nell will commence next Sunday evening a course of lectures on
‘the Naturalistic Theories of Religion as opposed to Supernatural
Revelation.’”

Moved by a curiosity to know the positions he would assume,
I became quickly intuitional. I scanned and inhaled the atmo-
sphere of his mind. This perception required but a moment, and
yet I could state all his propositions. Being in the presence of
brethren I did so, and requested them to attend his lecture that
they might ascertain the literal correctness of my report. This
occurred in the forenoon of the day on the evening of which his
introductory discourse was to be deliversd. The friends attended

READINGS AND TEACHINGS. 443

accordingly, and the result was in favor of Intuition. Directly
my review commenced and progressed to its completion.

Of that peculiar work I will not further chronicle, except to
refer to the record published soon afterward, entitled: “The
Approaching Crisis.” To assure the public, however, that the
esteemed clergyman’s positions were not misrepresented in that
Review, I will add the following testimony obtained at the time,
but never before published :—

“ We, the undersigned, having had the opportunity and pleasure
of listening to Dr. Horace Bushnell’s recent lectures on the sub-
ject of ‘Supernaturalism as opposed to Naturalistic Theories of
Religion; and having, also, with much gratification, listened to
the various and successive reviews or ‘criticisms’ thereupon,
written by Andrew J. Davis and delivered by him in this city;
do hereby certify, that, to our best knowledge, recollection, ahd
belief, Mr Davis has rendered Dr. Bushnell’s ideas accurately —
‘nothing extenuated or aught set down in malice.’

_ James S. Hooker, Hartford, Ct. R. K. Sropparp, Hartford, Ct.
“ee “ce

H. Rosrnson, Mary B. Stropparp, “ “
Hiram Rocers, ee se W. B. Jounson, cf ES
TimotHy DRAKE, es c Joun C. Pratt, Al os
Jounson S. Dow, se ss GreorGe WHEELOCK, es 6
JosernH Sizas Brown, “ EBENEZER CHAMBERLAIN, fs
ANDREW WELLS Fox, “ fe Samuet D. Smirtu, se x
H. H. Bucxyanp, s vase Eruraim Parkuurst, “ G
J. Seymour Brown, ss Emevine A. SMITH, £ és
Asa Rogers, ie JANE CUNNINGHAM, £ <
James B. Aspzort, ce sf Roger CasEMENT, ¥ “¢

Frank.in L, Burr,

About this time, in the spring of 1853, the Brotherhood pro-
eured Union Hall. Our audiences had increased and improved
from week to week. The participators were intellectual persons
of both sexes. Minds from nearly every form of religious faith,
game to our meetings and conferences. The chilly blasts of
popular prejudice swept through our ranks. Biting frosts of
calumny touched the tree of life that we were culturing; but no

444 THE MAGIC STAFF.

external blight could either penetrate or sear the leaves and buds
of promise.

The first lecture I delivered in the more spacious hall, was a
statement of my individual relation to the work of Human Prog-
ress. That the reader, also, may fully apprehend the non-sectarian
nature of that “relation,” I will here introduce the initial portion

of my discourse :—

MeN AnD Breturen: If I appeared before you as a member
of some Sanhedrim, as the sworn advocate and avowed propa-
gandist of some new dogma or system, it would then be but
reasonable to expect from me only dnesided evidences and argu-
ments strictly sectarian. As the publicly-pledged attorney of an
exclusive scheme, it would be one part of my plan to misrepresent
skeptics and expose all antagonists to ridicule and derision. And
perhaps, as a tolerant civilization would not permit me to burn an
opponent at the stake as the great Calvin did the good Servetus,
I might contrive a substitute—and roast him in a vast Gehenna
of hard words, fed by igneous adjectives and scorching epithets
altogether terrific and unendurable.

As it is impossible to elicit light from darkness and absurd to
gather figs from thistles, so is it beneath the dictates of Reason to
expect a benign spirit of toleration to emanate from a conscientious
sectarian. He is boldly challenged by each element of his faith
to be consistent. ‘The requirement of a creed is sacredly binding,
and every way imperative. His terrible and implacable motto is —
“ Believe, or be damned!” Whether the mind has adopted the
Bible or the Koran, or any system which claims supernatural
origin and authority, its reasonings are the same: “If I profess to
be on the Lord’s side, my words and actions should correspond ;
and I should feel myself called upon openly to oppose ali ideas
and all persons denounced and rejected by his word. My aim is
—‘Be God-like.” Therefore, God’s enemies are my enemies,
whomsoever God hates, I hate also; His friends are my friends ;
and all condemned by God are condemned by me. When God’s
word is assailed and impeached, I should haste to the rescue and
defence; if the wicked march against Zion, I must gird on my
armor and resist them; yea, all the years of my life, I must strive

READINGS AND TEACHINGS. 445

to be God-like—to make His Word my word, His commandments
. My commandments —and whenever He sends any soul ‘ by light-
ning express’ to that tropical country called Perpirion, I should
feel myself authorized to go and do likewise.” Thus reasons the
sectarian.

To receive the totality of any one record as the only “ Word of
God,” is equivalent to the total rejection of every other record.
Toleration, therefore, is logically impossible. To be a true fol-
lower and advocate of any one Man, is to do what he does and
believe what he believes—rejecting, by the fiat of a conscientious
prejudice, all opponents as infidels and enemies of truth. To be
liberal and free while a champion of some sectarian scheme, is to
be unfaithful and inconsistent. The daily journals contain notices
now and then of a party calling themselves “ Liberal Christians,”
than which no paradox was ever more glaring, no solecism more
dangerous. They profess to adopt a Book with “ Believe, or be
damned,” as its eternal standard of-judgment, and yet paint the
blessed word “liberal” over the vestibule leading to their sanctu-
ary. Te admit the possibility of the existence of any soul-saving
TRUTH in any other religion, is to openly dishonor your creed be-
fore all men, and cause them to associate with your professions a
catalogue of fatal absurdities.

Occasionally, I have met with liberal and charitable Christians.
My spirit said: “ Verily, these men are more magnanimous than
their creeds.” And I have added: “May we not also conclude
that the character of the Divine Being is infinitely better than the
best man’s report of it? Whereupon the illuminated air seemed
to throb throughout with the rushing waves of a deathless song,
whose refrain was “Selah!” meaning, “ Repeat the question, till
all men behold an affirmative answer emblazoned on Nature’s
every realm !”

The uncharitableness and fadbatiedee of supernaturalists exhibit
their most repulsive features toward those who are usually termed
“skeptics’”—as if the soul could control its convictions! Per-.
haps bible-believers would be more just to disbelievers if they had
our philosophy, which teaches that the intellectual faculties are
constitutionally skeptical; that he who lives mainly in the front
part of his head is of necessity a doubler.

The illiberal denunciations and profane anecdotes of excited re-

446 THE MAGIC STAFF.

vival preachers, who act as mental thermometers, indicate the la-
tent animosity and intolerance lurking in the atmosphere of the |
more dignified and self-possessed. Let a person who intellectual-
ly doubts the soul's eternal duration, acknowledge his skepticism to
a professed Christian or Mohammedan, and, in ninety-nine cases
out of every hundred, the reply would be; “ Oh, sir, you are an
infidel ; all further converse between us is useless !”

To be a consistent Christian is to be illiberal. On the other
hand, to be consistently liberal is to be an illegitimate Christian.
Unheeding the philanthropic suggestion that “the whole need not
a physician, but those that are sick,” the conceited believer leaves
the disbeliever in a mental state much worse than he found him;
for now the skeptic thinks himself to be in all probability more
right than wrong; and, remembering his treatment, he justifies
the next thought also—that he is personally conscious of being a
better man than the dogged and bitter believer of churchianity.
And straightway his skepticism, before as unwelcome as disease
and not less painful, is encouraged and prepared for battle.. Thus
it happens that unwholesome dissensions arise between those
who, with our philosophy of things, might be the best and happi-
est of friends.

In truth, the genius of supernaturalism is never ready either
for liberal consideration or dispassionate judgment. It is by
nature unnatural, and denies hospitable entertainment to the
opposite statement, even in its mildest form. An opponent must
be repulsed at all events; because, in brief, it is impossible that
any form of sectarianism should be impartial.

But as I come before you not as a propagandist, not as the
founder or abettor of a new sect, but simply as a free mind,
pledged only to be faithful to an interior principle of undogmatic
Truth, regardless of the form, you may expect from me an unbi-
ased and dispassionate presentation.

Although in the midst of "public teaching, yet there ever
streamed through my being the silent principle of personal prog-
ress. The rude swell of the wildly carecring tempests of out-
ward opposition, the crash of the enemy’s thunderbolt, and the
moaning of disturbed theological forests in the dells and lowlands,

READINGS AND TEACHINGS. 447

were all as nothing to the possessor of the Magic Staff. Silona’s
involuntary repulsion of many of the fond friends who came to the
cottage, united to my unyielding determination to be no man’s
leader, swept our private path completely clean of almost every
social allurement.

Our embowered dwelling was expensively as well as cozily fur-
nished. The breezes of the distant fields entered it, healthy condi-
tions prevailed in all that neighborhood, and yet Katie’s physical
system yearned for the strengthening influence of the ocean air.
’T was to obtain for her this luxury, that we temporarily left Hart-
ford, and sought the retirement of High Rock cottage. And there
it was, away from the turmoil of the wide-spread city below, that
I reached the highest peak of the Mountain of Power! ’T was
the end of a long and weary battle. The celestial vision from
that commanding elevation, is before the world. It was grander
than al) that had gone before—a climax to every preceding expe-
rience. It occurred on the 7th August, 1852, and is chronicled in
my volume, entitled, “The Present Age and Inner Life.”

Ber?des this spiritual benefit, Katie’s health and feelings were
muck improved during those summer months; and, after the vis-
ion, my own body rested, while a novel tranquillity pervaded my
every inward f¢ 2Wity. =

443 ' . THE MAGIC. STAFF.

CHAPTER LIV.

IN THE OPEN FIELD.

“JT thank thee, Father, that I live;
Though wailings fill this earth of thine,
To labor for thy suffering ones

Is joy divine.”

A rrew weeeks after our return to Hartford we set out into the
open field of reform toil. Ere long we reached the city of Cin-
cinnati, Ohio, where I began a course of public teachings. For
three successive evenings the congregation, though small, was
composed of capable and critical persons of considerable promi-
nence. I felt the presence of a cloudy prejudice floating o’er the
audience. Notwithstanding this, however, I freely invited the
people to visit me, at the private residence of Mr. A. O. Moore,
on days and evenings not devoted to public teaching. Accordingly
this brother’s parlor was the scene of many excellent interviews
with the friends, and memorable encounters with the foes, of un-
limited Progression.

“The object of my calling,” said a maidenly-looking male agent
of some religious institution, “is to talk with you about the em-
ployment of your talents.”

“ Ah, that’s very fraternal and good in you,” I responded, “and
I may be pleased, sir, with your counsel.”

“ Looking over the morning papers,” he continued, “I see you
are advertised to lecture on the ‘ Causes of Civilization,’ and it

IN THE OPEN FIELD. 449

occurred to me that you are misusing your influence and making
yourself unpopular when there’s no need for it.”

“Indeed!” said I. “Do you know of some better method for
me?”

“J think I do,” returned he moderately. “That better way is
this: for you to adopt the course common among our best clergy.”

“ What is that?” I inquired.

“ Why our intelligent ministers preach the moral principles of
the New Testament, and the plan of salvation therein set forth;
but they never excite people’s prejudices, as you are doing, by
disclosing their theological perplexities.”

“Do your ministers, then, doubt certain points of doctrine?” I
asked.

“ Certainly !” replied the honest agent, “but they almost never
preach on doctrinal points. And the reason is, that the clergy
know how prone the world is to skepticism. So they withhold
their doctrinal differences and perhaps doubts from their congre-
gations. And knowing that religion of some kind is necessary for
men, and believing the gospel precepts to be the best in the world,
the clergy husband their influence over people, and confine them-
selves to.what we call practical Christianity.”

“ Well, friend,” said I, “what would you counsel me to do?”

“ Why, when I perused the notices this morning,” replied he,
“it struck me that if you would adopt precisely this course, the
church people would turn out in multitudes to hear you lecture.
Instead of a few auditors you would have throngs of supporters ;
and we, the friends of the gospel, could secure a situation for you
in one of the best pulpits in this country.”

“ What good would that do?” I asked.

“Why, sir, you would then be respected as a talented and
useful man; and your salary might be, perhaps, three thousand
dollars per annum !”

The gentleness of his seductive speech was quite pleasant to
my ear, but what effect it exerted upon my soul may be gathered

450 THE MAGIC STAFF.

from what followed. “Your suggestions are kindly offered,” said
I, “and I thank you for your frankness. But, in regard to the
course you recommend for me I can only reply in the language said
to have been used by the son of Joseph and Mary long ago, when
he received a similar suggestion.”

“J don’t get your meaning,” said the agent slightly nettied.
“ What Janguage do you refer to?”

And I replied: “ When the devil of worldliness invited the
Man of Love to stand upon the top of a high mountain, in order
to contemplate the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them
as the promised reward of popular proceedings, he used words
which I now reiterate —‘ Get thee behind me, Satan.”

“No, no!” exclaimed the agent, “you misunderstand my mo-
tives. My object is to tell you how you may become respected,
and therefore more useful.”

-“ Well, friend,” said I rising, “I think you will have to excuse
me now, as I have writing to do and must devote no more time
this morning to the pleasures of conversation.”

Subsequently I noticed this person in the audience, but nothing
further of importance occurred between us. The morning fol-
lowing my discourse on the “ Causes of Civilization,’ I took from
the postoflice three anonymous letters of the most scurrilous
character. They purported to emanate from as many different
persons, who, professing to have attended my lectures, stated that
they had been exceedingly shocked at my alleged indelicacy and
profanity. From one of these missives I will quote a single
paragraph :—

.... “When you sat down after your last night’s lecture and
covered up your eyes with your hand, I: pitied you! For you
was thinking of your drunken sprees, of your flour speculations,
of your licentiousness, and of merchants who have been ruined
by your pretended power to make money. You needn't deny it,
sir, for your former associates can prove it.”

My knowledge of Katie’s sensitive and imperial temperament

IN THE OPEN FIELD. 451

caused me to conceal from her all communications so wholly false
and malignant. My safety and strength were in the Magic Staff
and the protecting power of Truth. But, though I had before
immediately destroyed every such evidence of assassin-like enmity
toward me, I retained the letters, on this occasion, for the purpose
of an experiment. In one of the three I read this: “I don’t

believe a d d word in your professions. I am ready to believe

d hum-

though, and won’t sign my name—-so if you ain’t a d
bug you can tell who wrote this.”

When alone that day, I psychometrized the writing and found
but one person as the author. Toward him my soul felt not the
slightest retaliation. Indeed, on seeing into the man’s mind, I
felt surprised that the letters did not contain language more
severe and falsehoods more numerous. By clairvoyance I easily
individualized the author, and it so happened that, before I left
Cincinnati, he came into a store which I had entered just a
moment previous. He believed I did not know that he had writ-
ten the letters; and so he asked ——“ How do you like the Queen
City of the West, Mr. Davis ?”

“My visit has been very pleasant,” I replied. “There’s only
one thing that I object to in the external phases of this city.”

“ What’s that objection, Mr. Davis?”

“The black smoke emitted by the bituminous coal so generally
used for fuel,” said I. “It soils one’s dress in a few hours.”

“Humph! How’s been your audiences ?”

“The last lecture of my course brought out the largest attend-
ance,” I replied.

“Can you tell what a man’s thinking about?’ asked the
stranger.

“J ean tell what a man’s ambition is,” I answered.

“ Can you tell what’s mine ?”

“ You have three ambitions,” said J. “ First, to have the best
cigars to smoke; second, to own the fastest horse to trot; third, to
have your beef-steak on the table at precisely one o'clock, P. ML”

452 THE MAGIC STAFF.

Hearing this he laughed heartily, and then replied: “You
hav’n’t lived in old Connecticut so long for nothing. You ’re good
at guessing, like all wooden-nutmeg folks. Say, do you know
Barnum ?”

“There!” exclaimed I half-mirthfully, yet in earnest, “I’ve
omitted to acknowledge the receipt of your letters, but I will do
so now.”

“Thunder!” said he with a startled expression, “ what letters
do you mean ?”

At this moment Mr. Moore entered to conduct me to another
place, and having no desire to afflict my already regretful-looking
opponent by needless exposure, I departed. Thus was the inter-
view abruptly terminated. But my belief was, that the man of
three ambitions would never again trifle with the sacred powers
of clairvoyance. =

From Cincinnati we journeyed to Cleveland, Ohio, and there
also commenced a social and public work. Nothing occurred of
special importance during a stay of ten days in that city, except a
circumstance reported by President Mahan—a report involving
a question of personal veracity.

The statement of this logical gentleman is, in brief, this: That
while delivering a public address in Cleveland, J suddenly stopped,
went into one of my favorite states of abstraction, and then “ pro-
fessed to the audience to have a vision” of Horace Mann’s lecture
on “ Woman ;” that I then delivered a “ spirit-stirring paragraph,
which, being ended, was pronounced by a gentleman in the assem-
bly to be verbatim from a condensed report published in a recent
New York Tribune.

The sentiments and expressions of this statement— which may
be found at length in President Mahan’s book, entitled, “ Modern
Mysteries Explained and Exposed”— compel me to believe that
he founded his charge of “deliberate” imposition on the editorial
gossip of a Cleveland paper, which, because of its many insuffi-
cient and unscrupulous allegations against Spiritualism and its

IN THE OPEN FIELD. 453.

receivers, deserved, as I then thought, and still think, not to be
honored with a single line of rebuke or vindication from parties
thus assailed.

But I will now give the reader a correct account of this much-
misrepresented circumstance. It is true that I was delivering a
course of lectures in Cleveland. My subject was one which con-
cerned the sexes equally, being a definition of their relative posi-
tions in the order of creation. It is also true that, while in the
midst of my subject, I hesitated and remarked, “ that it would be
interesting to know what a public teacher, like Horace Mann, had
to say on the rights of women and the relation of the sexes.”
The audience, as well as J, knew that Mr. Mann was announced to
lecture soon on that subject. Hence there was nothing irrelevant
or marvellous in alluding to him, or to what he might teach on
that question. It is likewise true that I stood quiet for a few
moments, during which I obtained (by impression, not by clair-
voyance) what I understood to be an abstract of Mr. Mann’s
views. In a few brief detached sentences, I gave the audience
my impresssions, saying: “Such I receive as a correct rendering
of his sentiments, but whether right or wrong, those who will hear
Mr. Mann’s lecture may determine ;” whereupon a gentleman arose
and aflirmed that he had read substantially the same in the New
York Tribune. President Mahan says that I was “taken all
aback by such an announcement.” ‘The truth is just the contrary,
for I was gratified; feeling that my impression was more accurate
than I expected to get in the excitement of a public assembly.

Thus you see, impartial reader, that I neither made any pro-
fession of reading the lecture by “vision,” nor attached any im-
portance to the psychological transaction. But the Cleveland
Herald reported a foolish account of my “pretensions,” “ at-
tempts,” “mistakes,” &c.; and, because I did not bestir myself to
correct a bit of newspaper gossip, this dogmatic author considers
it a settled fact, implying “deliberate” imposition, and sufficient to
overthrow a series of clairvoyant disclosures.which pertain to my

454 THE MAGIC STAFF. &

past history. This attack I value as of no practical consequence,
and believe it will be disregarded by every careful reader of Pres-
ident Mahan. His work is a materialistic house, built with timbers
hewn by other hands, decorated with

“Rich windows that exclude the light,
And passages that lead to nothing.”

But the saddest consequence of our western journeyings was
the serious disturbance of Katie’s physical health. The fitful
winds and driveling rains of Lake Erie seemed to develop a
hepatic disease which, till then, had been held in check from year
to year by diet and medication. Her most painful symptom was
a violent and incessant cough.

Turning and yearning homeward, we took cars for Rochester.
Here Katie’s illness became yet more desolating to her energies.
Three whole weeks she suffered. At length we were referred to
a physician who greatly assuaged her anguish. Soon she became
strong enough to accomplish the journey to the Hartford cottage.
And there, while the fresh morning dew lay sparkling on the
young turf, and the soft spring air blew blandly through the open
door, her body gained strength and her spirit repose.

My first important public work after returning, was the writing
of impressions concerning man’s ultimate control over: the causes
of droughts and the fall of rain. These impressions were com-
municated in a series of letters to the “ Hartford Times,” and had
the effect to bring down a shower of strictures from Professor
Vaughn, of Kentucky, who openly charged me with the crime of
plagiarism. The appearances were, at the first blush, decidedly
against clairvoyance. But if the reader would ascertain the facts
—which show how utterly untruthful were the professor’s impu-
tations—and also learn the laws by which mankind may control
the fall of rain, let him peruse my pamphlet, entitled “The Har-
monial Man.”

By this time I began to realize that the summit of the Mountain
was overpassed. Already my face was turned toward the un-

\

IN THE OPEN FIELD. 455

known valley beyond. Now and then I would hear Amphion
strains of melody as if a lyre made of sunbeams were touched by
an angel’s skilful fingers. At such times, it almost seemed that
trees and birds and rocks and streams, and even untamed nations
of distant lands, responded to the harmonious music of these
celestial Arcadians. Such tokens assured me that the angel world
was silently blending with the human, as the sidereal heavens
cover the dull earth day and night for ever; and then I longed to
have the inexorable supporters of conservatism hear the cadence
so melodious. But they would not listen, and I—what could I
do? Ah! I must culture patience from year to year, and, leaning
on my Magic Staff, toil for the God-like race of a far future.

The next event was the Hartford Bible Convention; a great
and significant fact, worthy of remembrance. It indicated the
prevalence and strength of Free Thought in the very heart of
New England orthodoxy. The convention was continued for four
days and nights. There was a large and respectful attendance
throughout, of minds liberally disposed.

But the last night, although it closed over a sabbath-day, was a
scene of the most uncivil and belligerent confusion. The un-
friendly circulated a report, saying, “such was the legitimate effect
of doctrines promulgated by those who called the convention.”
But my attention was alive to every expression of the audience.
And I know that the frightful noises and rowdyistic tumult did
neither originate with nor receive countenance from a single friend
of the Harmonial Philosophy.

Shortly previous to this great gathering, there occurred a
strange midnight circumstance within our vine-clad home. Our
cook and housekeeper had retired. The cottage was still, and
sleep was upon all eyelids, save my own; when I heard an un-
usual sound below. A burglar was entering the dining-room
door; his chiselings and pryings came distinctly to my ear. I
walked noiselessly down the stairway, and confronted the thief at
once. He had accomplished an entrance, and evidently considered

456 THE MAGIC STAFF,

himself safe, till I stood between him and the outer-door, with a
walking-stick in my right hand. The moon shone obliquely in,
and enabled me to see the outline of his face, which was black as
that of a genuine negro, though his form and features were those
of the European race. At this instant the well-known voice
whispered: “Jackson !—speak—to—him.”

Fearing no personal injury, I quietly asked: “Have you no
food at home?” Receiving no reply, I began to expostulate:
“This is unkind, my friend, to visit me as if I were your enemy.
Do you not know that I am ever willing to help a poor man?”
He made no answer, and I continued: “ Do you think that you
have done right? Do you treat me like a brother? If you
should come here in open day, and tell me truthfully what are
your sufferings and needs, I might be enabled to aid you and
commend you to the generosity of others.”

To all this he made no reply, but darted past me through the
open door and fled, I knew not whither. Fortunately, the inmates
of the cottage heard nothing of the disturbance, and thus were
saved from a midnight fright. :

We will now revert to the close of the Bible Convention. The
excited gang were pressing and forcing their way through the
assembly to the platform. The speakers were in danger. The
frenzied opponents meant to refute argument by physical force.
But the Magic Staff sustained me, and I sustained Katie, who
was now suffering with great consternation.

Taking my arm she clung to my side, and we worked our way
down one of the aisles toward the outer-door, closely followed by
a strong-armed and broad-breasted man, who was silently and
successfully exerting himself to keep back the mob from pressing
down against us. Thus we reached the street, amid hoots and
yells and imprecations, the herculean stranger still acting as a
body-guard. The turbulent forces subsided about a hundred
rods from the convention hall, and we were left to ourselves
unharmed. The moonlight was faint, yet, as the stranger left us,

IN THE OPEN FIELD. 457

and passed on, I recognised the outline of that blackened face
which I had seen at midnight! Our protector was the burglar!
The thief proved to be our benefactor! Tell me, dear reader—
suppose I had withheld kind words, and, instead, dealt heavy
blows on the midnight disturber of our private rights; do you
believe that he would have so nobly piloted us through that
perilous storm of human passion ?

Although I was now journeying a little every day toward the
valley between Mount Power and Mount Beauty, yet, directly
after the Bible Convention, my condition was extremely favora-
ble to clairvoyant and impressional exercises. My lectures on
“ Physiological Vices and Virtues” were therefore soon perceived
and conceived and written out. Ultimately these discourses were
published in the first ene of the fourth volume of the “ Great
Harmonia.” «

But the long summer-days shed down too much tropical influ-
ence upon my honored companion. Her fine form slowly gathered
the indices of an approaching illness. Weary, worn, and weak,
was she; her sleep was curtailed and irregular; and a shadowy
paleness overspread her brow and cheek.

Nature always prescribed for her the soothing stimulus of ocean
breezes. To secure this remedy we hastened to a settlement, one
mile east of Lynn, Massachusetts, known as Swampscot; where
we found comfortable accommodations directly fronting the open
sea. Maria, her faithful handmaid, was with us. Not long after
our arrival, however, Katie’s illness increased. And as I had for
six years made no medical examinations, for the reason that my
mental energies were exercised constantly upon different and
higher planes, I found myself under the necessity of procuring
the aid of a physician. Dr. B. F. Hatch, accordingly, was called
at her request. Under his prescriptions her symptoms abated,
and I was rejoiced to find her again able to take the air in an
open carriage. The drives on the broad beach, and the exhilara-

tion of the salt breezes, soon exerted a favorable influence.
20

458 THE MAGIC STAFF.

But one day, being again greatly prostrated and confined to the
bed, she grew chill and disheartened, and said :—

“ Jackson dear, this body is most worn out I fear. I feel broken
down—tired of life—provoked with dragging about this diseased
frame.”

“ Do not despair, Silona,” I responded. “ Your organization is
strong yet, and may continue for many years. When the weather
becomes less sultry, and the beautiful days of October arrive,
perhaps you may get quite well again.”

“Don’t talk to me about getting well,” said she with a look of
resistance. “J would rather go now, and not have this painful
process to go through with again.”

“You have been very ill many imes, Silona,” I replied. “You
have felt the restraint, the slavery, the tedium, of many days and
months of sickness; but so good were your natural powers of
restoration, that you have again recovered and enjoyed the luxury
of health. Now I think you may rely upon your natural vigor,
and not be disappointed.”

She made no answer. Her speechless lip quivered, her bosom
slightly heaved, but all was still in the chamber. Anon, she
asked: “Do you fancy, my Jackson, that I fear to go hence? If
you do, you are much mistaken with reference to my feelings.
Maria!” said she, addressing the maid, “open the trunk and hand
me my portfolio. Jackson, raise me up in bed—I wish to write
a letter.”

When her posture was rendered easy, and the writing imple-
ments were on her lap, I took my departure for Boston. Thither
I often repaired, where I could select the choicest grapes, sickle
pears, peaches, melons, and other fruits, congenial to her appetite.
On my return she said: “There, Jackson, when you go out again
put that letter in the office. I have written and sealed it,’ she
added, “that no one can say I was under your influence.”

The letter was addressed to “Joseph M. Blake, Esq., Bristol,

IN THE OPEN FIELD. 459

Rhode Island,” the lawyer who had transacted much business for
her.

A few days subsequently the above-named gentleman arrived,
and consulted with her concerning the method of bequeathing me
all her property. In due time the necessary legal papers were
made out and signed, and thus was another act of her generous
nature perfected. There dwelt in my mind not so much as the-
shadow of a desire for the possession of her fortune. And one
day, when I quietly expressed this fact, she replied: “ Oh, I know
that! my Jackson. But you’ll need all my cherished father left
me, and more too, to sustain the work of your life. All I regret
is, that I have not a larger portion to leave you.”

These events transpired during the hottest days in August,
1853, when Katie’s bodily prostration most oppressed her heart.
But the cooling and strengthening breezes of September greatly
revived her, and, ere long, we returned to Hartford animated with
the pleasures of Hope.

460 THE MAGIC STAFF.

CHAPTER LV.
LIFE IN THE COTTAGE.

“How calm and sweet the victories of life,
How terrorless the triumph of the grave !”

My pilgrimage had progressed almost to the lowest dell in the
psychical valley. ”I'was, therefore, a period of complete spiritual
rest.. Hence I wrote but little, did not exert myself to deliver
public discourses, and the angel-world seldom breathed its musical
messages into my ear. The greater part of each day, on the
contrary, was devoted to ministering unto Katie’s wants. For,
soon after our return, she became again nervously weary and
discouragingly prostrated.

Sometime in October, I think, while walking toward the city, I
was accosted by an elderly woman, poorly clad, who asked: “Is
this Mr. Davis?”

“Yes,” was my reply. “Do you wish for anything ?”

“T do, sir,” said ghe much agitated. “ Be you a master of the
Black Arts ?”

“No! But why you ask?”

“’Cause I’m a dyin’ daily —dyin’ by inches—’cause I’ve been
bewitched by an enemy.”

“Indeed! Do you know how it was done, and who did it ?”

“Mercy to me, sir, I don’t know nothin’ who my enemy is.
Some person, unbeknown to me, sent me this ere letter.”

So saying she presented me a scrawled note, which read as

LIFE IN THE COTTAGE. 461

follows: “ Black cat, wild cat, cat— This is to let you no that ef
you don’t quit and clere out of the rume whare you liv’ now I will
torment you ev’ry day of ev’ry week an ev’ry hour of ev’ry day
an ev'ry minnit of evry hour an ev’ry second of ev’ry minnit till
you clere out or die. (Signed) oan

After reading the malicious note I folded it up and kept it in
my right hand. The distance to the postoffice was yet considera-
ble, and as my business there was urgent, I invited her to walk
thitherward. ‘ Where do you live?” J asked.

In reply, she informed me that her room was in a tenant house
which held several families.

“Was any person in that house ever requested you to move
elsewhere ?”

“No, sir.”

But I felt, from the sphere of the letter, that some one in the
tenement begrudged her the hired apartment she was occupying,
and that the jealous party had taken this culpable course to frighten
the superstitious woman away.

“ How do you support yourself?” I asked.

“TJ go out washing and housecleaning, sir.”

“What do you eat and drink ?”

“Qh, sir, since bein’ bewitched I ain’t eat hardly nothin’. My
stomic is gone, and I ain’t no appetite for victuals, but jest coffee
for six weeks. Oh, sir, I’m so faint—I know I’m a dyin’ by
inches—lI can’t live long so! Oh, dear !”

Now I had resolved to do this woman good. I appreciated her
weakness of mind, her belief in witchcraft, and her total ignorance
of the fact that she was merely psychologized by Fear. Logic, per-
guasion, philosophy, religion, was none of them the remedy ; nothing
but a psychological power more positive, applied without explana-
tion, would cure and save her. Of this I was morally certain.

Having reached the Unitarian church, I stopped and said:
“We will now part. Did you notice that I have carried this

note in my right hand?”

462 THE MAGIC STAFF.

“ Oh, yes, sir,” she replied with a look of mental relief.

“Observe!” said I—taking out my pencil and crossing the face
of the letter, then breathing on it for a moment, and returning it
to her hand—“ Observe! that letter can not now injure you. It
is harmless. You must burn it as quick as you get home. Brush
the ashes into the stove or fireplace, and think no more about it.”

“Mercy to me! sir—won’t them words of the letter bewitch
me jest the same?”

“No, never fear the words,” said J. “But I wish to ask you a
question. Do you know that your coffee is just the color of
Night, when dark influences prevail ?”

“Yes, sir,” she answered, “though I never know’d it to hurt .
me.”

But while she spoke a shudder passed over her, as if alarmed
at the similarity of complexion between her favorite beverage
and a certain cloven-footed celebrity.

“You must n’t drink a dlack fluid,” said I. »

“Mercy to me! what shall I dothen? If you take away my
coffee, sir, I shall die I’m ’fraid. Oh, dear me!”

“Go right home,” I replied, “and, as soon as you have burnt
the letter, prepare for yourself a roast potato, and eat that with
bread and butter. To-morrow morning, besides the potato and
bread, you may take a tablespoonful of coffee, and so also for a
month to come, but not afterward. And, remember, never tell a
human being that I gave you these directions.”

She promised me, and departed, apparently full of faith. Little
more than a year elapsed ere we met again. “Iwas at evening
twilight. Withdrawing to the outer edge of the sidewalk, in
North Main street, she whispered: “ May the Lord reward you,
sir.”

“ Are you quite well and happy now?” I asked.

“Never better, sir, in many years—what you told me to do
was my cure. Nobody never disturbs my peace no more. Oh,
sir, I know’d you was master of the Black Arts!”

LIFE IN THE COTTAGE. 463

“No,” said I. “My art is Nature not understood. If we
should meet again, when I have an hour to spare, you shall know
how I drove the witches out of you.”

“Qh, thank’ee sir—I’m obleeged to you—can you jest tell me
the name of your Art, sir?”

“ Certainly, good woman,” said I. “The name of the charm
that cured you is Psychology.”

“ Skylolloge!” she exclaimed, “skylolloge !”

“Yes,” said I, “ Psychology. But don’t impart the word to
others.”

“ Oh, sir—never fear—I’m too obleeged to you for that.”

With these words we parted, and I have never feared any
betrayal of the secret.

Prejudice is impudent as idiotic, and merciless as erroneous.
Of this my private history is ademonstration. Minds too blunted
to feel a truth, and too indolent to examine a principle, are the
first to cry “mad-dog!” and to shout “infidel!” Hoots, hisses,
and silly exclamations, reached my outer ear almost every day.
Sunday-school boys would chalk vulgar words upon our cottage-
fence and gateposts. Students of Cicero, Xenophen, Locke,
Bacon, and Divinity, would echo in public the ridicule which
salaried professors ofttimes whispered in private. And young
ladies, too, not overstocked with that charity which thinketh no
evil—but imbibing the prejudice of preceptress or minister or
parenis, all equally misinformed — would nervously ejaculate cun-
ning little epithets and harmless satires with which they sought to
check the progress of our Movement. What was all this to me?
Amusement, and nothing more. In the blue sky I had friends
stable as the everlasting mountains !

But suppose I had realized no such support, what then? What
remained? An interior consciousness of right doing—this, and
the Magic Staff. What more was needed? Nothing! The sun
that wakened music from the marble breast of Memnon’s statue,

464 THE MAGIC STAFF.

is but a symbol of that hidden orb which bespangles the path of
justice with joys innumerable. And yet, besides this private
source of strength, there came unto me certain companionable
spirits — congenial, loving, musical, joyful, gifted spirits—redolent
with blessings ambrosial and with sympathies sweet as fields of
imperishable violets.

“¢ Deus tlluminatio mea,” thought I, when—walking one day
through the park of Trinity college—the sportful boys deluged
my person with a pail of filthy water from one of the upper win-
dows. “God is my light, the Magic Staff is my support, and
there’s nothing on earth that is able to hinder.” But the fresh-
men Jlaughed—and so did I—at their fun and folly. “And yet,”
methought, “how much better if this college would teach the spirit
of the motto of the Oxford University! Then, instead of arti-
ficial minds, the Institution would give to the world living Men !”

’*T was a fair October day without, the sun shed golden beams
upon the earth, but there was suffering within the Cottage.
Wearied with her continued prostration, and impatient because of
the confinement consequent thereto, Katie said: “Shut out that
disagreeable light—close the curtains before both windows—and
do n’t let me see the sun again !”

Dutiful Maria immediately obeyed. “What so troubles you,
Silona?” I asked, going to her bedside. “ Do you feel worse to-
day ?”

-“T’m provoked!” replied she despairingly. “I’m tired to death
with this incorrigible illness! I get neither better nor worse.
It’s nothing but a wearisome drag. The day is so tediously long,
and the night brings me no rest.”

“Your symptoms are better to-day, Silona,” said I. “ Perhaps,
by next week you can resume your carriage-rides, and enjoy the
mild air as heretofore.”

“Don’t talk about uncertainties,” replied she with a sad em-
phasis. “This old body won’t oppress me much longer, I hope.”

LIFE IN THE COTTAGE. 465

Maria gently bathed her hands and forehead, and then placed
before her the waiter of carefully-prepared delicacies to tempt
her waning appetite, but the fatigued sufferer declared that she
felt no delight in the taste of anything. At her request the food
was removed, and she said: “My Jackson—promise me one
thing will you?”

“T think I can promise anything you may ask,” said I.

“Promise me,” said she, with much energy, “that when my
spirit is gone, you will keep the rabble from looking at this old
wornout body.”

“J hope,” said I, “that you will retain the use of your body for
many years; but, if you should not long continue in it, who among
our friends shall I invite here ?”

“None,” returned she, with an indignant look. “This weeping
over a dead body, after having neglected to treat the living spirit
with respect, is supremely ridiculous.”

“ Why, what do you mean, Katie?” said I, really surprised at
the singularity of her request— “whe shall I admit, and who ex-
clude ?”

“Exclude everybody,” said she, with much resolution. “ And
what is more, I don’t want my relatives to be informed of my
death, only as others will hear of it; for the lifeless body, when
my spirit has flown, will need no expensive paradings and show
of mourning.”

“ Silona,” I asked, “do you consider the feelings of human ‘na-
ture on such occasions ?”

“Promise me !” said she, suddenly taking my hand — “ say that
‘ you will promise to fulfil my. last request.”

“Yes, Katie,” was my reply, “I promise. Our views har-
monize on these subjects. I will carry out your wishes strictly.”

“There’s one more thing, my Jackson,” she then continued,
“which you must promise me.”

“ What is it, Silona?”

20*

466 THE MAGIC STAFF.

“You know,” said she, “that I have a perfect horror of being |
buried alive?’

“Yes, Katie, I do!” was my fully appreciative response. | |

“Then,” said she, “promise that you will not have the body

buried, until you are positive that I am wholly and entirely out
of it.”

“Upon my soul, I promise. As I would not be entombed
alive myself, so will I prevent a like misfortune whenever it is
within my power to do so.”

“Do you promise me, my Jackson? Speak !”

“Ido. Solemnly I promise you. On this you may fully rely.
But you may yet outlive me on earth; so cheer up, Katie.”

“There!” exclaimed she, more subdued and cheerful, “I’m
satisfied. Maria dear, bring me the guava jelly, and that given
me by Mrs. Cheney ; I wish to taste and compare them. But my
tongue is so dry, I can scarcely taste at all.”

“ Shall I turn aside the curtain, Katie,” I asked, “that you may
see the jellies ?”

“Yes, dear,” she replied, “the sun is nearly down. The light
is more agreeable.”

* * * % % *

Time rolled silently on, and had wafted three weeks into eter-
nity’s ocean, when the spirit of my benefactress was about to soar
away. By imperceptible degrees the immortal personality with-
drew from sensuous observation. Her sufferings were not from
pain, but from total exhaustion. The majestic daring of her eye
was displaced by expressions of tenderness and affection. There
was, at times, a dawn of glory upon her features, and occasional
sounds of the higher harmonies in the tones of her voice. And,
at length, when the stillness of evening gathered upon the hills,
she passed on to her “ home.”

In the presence of a few friendly witnesses, the exhausted body
was deserted without a struggle —on the eve of the 2d of Novem-
ber, 1853 — and upon its familiar face she had left a smile of rest

LIFE IN THE COTTAGE. 467

and satisfaction. Relatives from the Second Sphere came for her,
while yet she lingered in the form; and when her spirit was com-
pletely freed, they conducted it gently to her Father’s high pavil-
ion. They made a singular request of me, which I have chroni-
cled in another place; also, in the same work —“ The Penetralia”
—are records of two remarkable visitations from her disembodied
spirit; and, therefore, to avoid repetition, I will but refer my
readers to page 165 of the above-named volume.

The comfortable and costly cottage-furniture was ultimately
sold; others purchased and occupied the sequestered domicile ;
and thus the cur.ain rolled down upon that portion of my life.

468 THE MAGIC STAFF.

CHAPTER LVI.
THE DOUBLE SUICIDE.

“When thy struggling heart hath conquered,
When the path lies fair and clear,
When thou art prepared for heayen,
Thou wilt find that heaven is here.”

Soon after Silona’s spirit had withdrawn from the world of
effects, I began indistinctly to hear Eolian preludes to celestial
harmonies innumerable. Though the shades of the deep valley
enveloped me, and though a mist of tears shrouded my lone heart,
yet, at times, did I hear the mystic murmurings of many voices
from the unseen Mountain of Beauty. Like the refreshment of
April rain, or like the blossoming of immortal thought-flowers in
the garden of the soul, seemed the “preamble sweet of charm-
ing symphony” which sounded through my being.

The attraction was irresistible! My eyes turned toward the
sxopes of the future eminence, and my feet kept time to the music
that reverberated from its invisible summit. The sacred depth of
that Mountain music, dear reader, imparted a cheerful solemnity
to my spirit. It sighed like the Hermean dream-sound of the
ocean shell; and yet there was also the Amphion charm-power
in it, and that harmonious measure which the eternal spheres roll
through immensity.

With a waltz of my faculties, I continued my pilgrimage
athwart this peaceful plain of contemplation. The spiritually
designated brother, Mr. Green, was then a citizen of Hartford.

THE DOUBLE SUICIDE. 469

With his accustomed hospitality, he caused me to feel “at home”
in his residence.

The reckless opponents of spiritualism had, at this date,
reached the third degree of absurdity. They had sounded the
trumpet of “Infidelity” until their lungs must have been almost
collapsed with sheer exhaustion. But I repelled the charge
through public discourses, in which I set forth the Harmonial
idea of immortality. I taught that pure Christianity is unadul-
terated Love, to which our Philosophy is the principle of Wisdom.
Hence, that we were not “infidel” to whatsoever is good and true
and divine.

Then, the opponents changed their position and denounced
spiritualism as the chief cause of “insanity.” This charge I also
repelled by showing that the origin of lunatic asylums dated fur-
ther back than 1848, when modern manifestations were first open-
ly inaugurated in this country. Also, I taught that human nature
had been causa non cognita—that the principles of man’s spirit-
ual organization were hidden to the church-people—and, there-
fore, that the skeptical world and church could not explain spirit
intercourse.

Next, there issued forth “the gossip” of church deacons and of
the narrow-headed among newspaper editors. They unqualified-
ly affirmed—of course without the first iota of evidence —that
“ Spiritualism is Free-Loveism.” ‘The charge of licentiousness
was unreservedly made. This seemed to me to be the last degree
of malice and absurdity. But although I had not claimed to be a
“spiritualist,” yet I had frequently professed to be a “lover of
wisdom ;” consequently, praying to know the exact truth, I ac-
cepted the work of examining into the origin, laws, rights, wrongs,
- &c., of the marriage relation. This, therefore, became the labor
of my pilgrimage all the way up the Mountain of Beauty.

“What progress do you make with the marriage question?”
asked Mr. Green, who knew that I had consecrated the first half
many days to the solution of the problem.

470 THE MAGIC STAFF.

“T find,” said I, “that the marriage ordinance is more divine
than the world generally believes it to be.”

“‘ What’s the natural law ?” he inquired.

“ Ah, that I have not yet discovered.”

“Ts there any way,” he asked, “by which to decide who’s the
true companion ?”

“I do not yet know,” I replied. “My interior examinations
are not completed. But from what I have perceived, I am sure
that the public discussion of this relation between the sexes is ab-
solutely necessary.”

“Why so?” he asked.

“Because,” said I, “evil offspring result from bad marriages,
while from heart-unions the world receives children at once peace-
ful and beautiful.” ;

“ What do you think about divorces ?” he inquired.

“Tt is my impression,” I replied, “that a man and woman who
find that they can not live peacefully in the marriage relation,
should have honor and humanity sufficient to assume the relation
of brother and sister.”

“ But the laws,” said he, “ would not grant divorce on such con-
siderations.”

“Then the laws should be altered,” I replied, “so that the gen-
eral happiness of mankind may be promoted.”

This conversation occurred just before I departed on a lecturing
tour through a portion of Massachusetts and western New York.
My interior penetrations were as yet confined merely to a clair-
voyant survey of the “ physiological vices and virtues” of both the
married and the young; and, incidental to such a survey, I could
not but detect a multitude of atrocious evils growing out of exist-
ing marriage relations, which nothing, save divorce, could effectu- -
ally banish from thousands of homes and hearts.

In compliance with an invitation I proceeded to Boston, and
delivered several reform discourses. While there I received
calls from many persons, of both sexes, who, as they affirmed.

TRE DOUBLE SUICIDE. 41

were suffering under the painful consequences of false unions.
But to them all my reply was: “I have not yet completed my
examination of the marriage relation. Therefore I am not pre-
pared to offer you anything but my sympathy.”

One day I called upon a lady, Mrs. Newton, who was gifted
with the power of discerning spiritual things. She had a word
and a symbol for every emotion and every thought. Human
desires and sympathies would glide into picturesque and fairy em-
bodiments, in obedience to the mandate of her inspired ideality ;
and at the gentle fiat of her will, the condition and future of a per-
son, en rapport, would rise up and pass before her vision like a
panorama of uses and intelligible proportions.

Having exchanged a few words of friendly recognition, she
seated herself near me and said: “Not through your intellect
would I approach you, brother. With that I can become ac-
quainted by reading your writings.”

“ How, then, do you wish to know me?” I asked, much pleased
with the gentleness of her speech.

“Through your social nature,” she frankly replied; “and thus
I would have you know my blessed husband also.”

I assured her that my spirit was ever grateful for any accession
of fraternal joys. And for a considerable time we conversed con-
cerning the pleasures and truths of the Spirit Land. At length
she exclaimed, “ How happy the world would be —how joyful the
heart of every one—in the true marriage relation !”

“Yes,” I replied, “the miseries of false marriages are blighting
and corrupting to all concerned.”

“Not long since,” said she, “a very refined gentleman called
upon me, whose heart was overflowing with both happiness and
misery.”

“Indeed!” said I. “What was the cause of his conflicting
emotions ?”

With tones of tenderness she replied: “He is bound, and has
been for years, to an uncongenial, unresponsive, unloving person.”

472 THE MAGIC STAFF.

“Has he found any one to whom he feels truly attracted?” I
asked.

“Qh, yes, brother. While here, his heart was o’erburthened
with its immense love for another; one who is ardent, gentle, and
congenial.” :

“Does the uncongenial and unloving wife know of his attach-
ment to that other more responsive heart ?” I asked.

“Tt’s a very. singular instance, brother,” she replied. “ His
legal wife, as I said, is not affectionate. She seems to have
but Kttle idea of those finer sensibilities which, in his nature,
call for a delicate and loving response. She must be a wor-
thy woman, however, for she not only knows of his entire and
devoted love for another, but consents to it. And she is even
willing to defend this truer relation because she believes it to be
right.

“A very singular case, indeed!” said I. “If it be true that
she who is his legal wife agrees to this new relation because she
believes it to be an act of justice —if this impression that you re- _
ceived from the mind of the unhappy gentleman be correct—then |
she must be a noble-minded woman, even if she is not affectionate,
and I would like to look at her. In fact, so rare is it for a human |
soul to choose the path of self-sacrifice from the promptings of a |
high justice-loving principle, that I would willingly start this night, |
and walk five hundred miles to see such a person!”

The gifted lady now related the substance of a vision, concern- |
ing the past and future of her friend, which she had witnessed |
while he was in her presence. Heer child-like descriptions were |
at once loveful, tearful, prayerful, beautiful, sunny, prophetic, and |
eulogistic. This charming symbolic scene of the gentleman’s |
golden future in a happier union, as contrasted with the chill and |
gloom of a loveless past, was written out and printed in a Boston |
paper. “I’was true poetry in the garb of prose. But the hour |
soon glided by which I had set apart for pleasant converse with |
this esteemed sister; and I departed with a dream-like picture

« ,
THE DOUBLE SUICIDE. 473

painted on the walls of my memory, to which I have often revert-
ed with the most heartfelt satisfaction.

The public announcement that I was willing to travel and dis-
course on Reform topics, soon brought more invitations than I could
personally accept. Old Winter had nominally withdrawn his claim
upon the weather, and Spring stood in the portal of March’s dreary
temple, yet dark and grim and fitful were the passing days.

“Does the weather affect you?” asked Mr. Tirrell, to whom I
had been that moment introduced.

“Very little, sir,” I replied. “With certain precautions I can
bear almost any temperature.”

“Will you come to our place and deliver a few lectures?” he
inquired.

“Where do you live?” I asked.

“In Quincy, this state, in the region of the granite quarries.”

Arrangements were completed, and, after the lapse of a few
days, I arrived at Mr. Tirrell’s house. This was about the 4th of
March, I think, 1854. My lecture was appointed for sabbath
evening. The afternoon of that day was very spring-like, and we
set out on a ramble to the celebrated granite hills.

My liberal-minded conductor, Mr. Tirrell, said: “I think we’ll
go through the graveyard. It’s but little out of the way.”

Accordingly, we entered the enclosure, and soon halted in front
of a smooth marble headstone, to which the friendly conductor
directed my attention. And now I leaned upon the Magic Staff;
for, looking in the direction indicated, I beheld distinctly chiseled
on the face of that inanimate stone, these startling words: “In
memory of John and Hannah Greaves, deluded by the writings
of A. J. Davis.”

The story, as it was related to me, lies vaguely in my memory ;
but, I think, it ran in substance as follows: A youthful pair, legal-
ly married, came from the West. They were at first supposed to
be both young men, because the romancing wife clad herself in

he
474 _ THE MAGIC STAFF.

male attire. Their evil spirit was Poverty. The adventure-
loving husband, a shoemaker, worked occasionally at his trade;
but from some cause, he did not earn sufficient to pay their
board. Pu

At length, suspicion led to the shocking discovery that the
younger of the twain was a female in disguise. As they had
roomed together, and the Braintree people did not know that they
were legally one, the inhabitants became incensed against them.
This, added to the goadings of poverty and the general weakness
of their moral faculties, impelled them into a simultaneous suicide.
Among some scraps of paper and a few small books, found in the
room which the romantic pair had occupied, there was discovered
the first volume of the “ Great Harmonia.” And on looking over
its pages there appeared to be some evidence that, previous to
committing the dreadful act of self-murder, they had read certain
paragraphs in the philosophy of Death. When the inconsiderate
and prejudiced father of the young man arrived from the West,
and discovered this slight thread of circumstantial evidence, he at
once closed his judgment against the perception of every other cir-
cumstance and inducement for suicide, and caused the gravestone-
carver to express the glaring falsehood which I have frankly
chronicled.

“ Friend Tirrell,” said I, “this, then, is the case of suicide which
the opponents of spiritualism arped upon so furiously about three
years ago, is it?”

“'That’s the very case,” he replied. “ But it hasn’t amounted
to much in this region.”

“ Why not?”

“ Because,” he answered, “everybody in these parts knows
that your writings had nothing to do with causing their suicide.”

“Indeed!” said I. “Is it true that the people, our opponents
here, do not endorse that gravestone statement ?”

“Yes,” he returned; “I don’t believe that your worst enemy
in this village feels in favor of that inscription.”

THE DOUBLE SUICIDE. 475

“What, then, do they think of Mr. Greaves, the father of the
young man?” I asked.

“ All that ever I heard speak of the matter,” replied Mr. Tir-
rell, “agree that the father has made himself ridiculous in this
case ; because the several private causes which led to the fearful
deed are well known to most of our citizens.”

But the spirit of meditation came upon me, as I leaned upon
the Staff, and silently I thus soliloquized: _How wretched the
features of that mind which, swayed and enraged by prejudice,
could carve on marble the hieroglyphs of error! Suppose I were
an enemy of Harmonial Philosophy. Suppose I were a citizen
of this state or of some distant city, on a visit of pleasure to this
the birthplace of John Quincy Adams and other illustrious per-
sonages. To imbibe the sunshine and air, suppose I wander here
—stepping noiselessly and reverently between the silent signs of
the buried dead. Presently my eyes rest upon that inscription.
I inquire of a lingering passer-by the exact import of those
plainly-sculptured words. The white features of a self-murdered
pair are at once pictured on my thoughts. Stretched and still,
shrouded with a heavy shade of moral darkness, cold as the moon,
betrayed into their dumb slumber by A. J. Davis! Who is this
dangerous person? Where does he live? What does he write?
Can it be that such a being is allowed to go at large in a civilized
community? My breath comes quick, and I rub my eyes; I step
back and consider; I pause and return; I stoop to the soil; I
gaze once more, and I hate the man!

But these suppositions are for strangers, not for me. What, then,
do I think of this monumental record? Let me tell you. I think
that the father of these departed children has published a false-
hood, which is not only a lasting injury to his own character, but
an open insult to a natural right of the living world. That nat-
ural right is, to be possessed of Truth. But what an apostate to
justice is he who wantonly publishes a baneful fabrication! How
reckless to every insignia of an honorable man! Here is one

476 THE MAGIC STAFF.

who has knowingly caused even inert matter to impart to the
stranger soul a most hurtful delusion; who has attempted to arrest
a Truth by a blockade of marble, even as a stone was rolled to
the door of the sepulchre by those Jewish apostates who sought
to immolate the divine principle of Love. To an angel’s mind
the inscription reads thus: “The world, deluded by an unjust
father.” Recently three persons committed suicide in New York.
Tn each instance, the cause was: “disappointment in love.” The
deserted bodies were decently entombed. But instead of those
beautiful words engraved upon the headstone of each, why not
present the bystanders with something like this: “Deluded by
the author of Love!” Who wrote “love” within the book of
human life? Who made the heart? Who enlivens and occupies
the universe ?

Thus was I meditating, dear reader, when Mr. Tirrell requested
me to continue the proposed ramble to the granite works beyond
the fields. That evening.

oD)
hood concerning the cause of the Double Suicide, the great hall

notwithstanding the gravestone false-

was overflowing with eager and loving listeners; and, on the
subsequent morning, I departed with a soul full of gratitude to
Father-God and the angel-world.

All the way from New England to central New York, with
very few intermissions, I heard music from the Mountain in the
distance. Inexpressibly sweet and irresistibly elevating was the
melody that rolled down the psychical slopes between me and
the eminence of Beauty. Whether in hotels or cars or private
dwellings, or even when before and addressing the assembled
public, my inward ear caught the celestial anthems of invisible
choristers. And once, while standing on the piazza of an Auburn
hotel, I heard: “Thou—art—not—a—lone—wanderer, my—son.”
The voice was that of my honored Guide. *I was musical as the
song of purling waters; gentle and low and harmonious, like the
beating of an angel’s deathless heart.

THE DOUBLE SUICIDE. ATT

The inhabitants of Auburn, as a general remark, were decid-
edly hostile to my public discourses; and yet the questions, to
which I solicited attention, were of universal import. If a pul-
pitarian had delivered my lectures, multitudes would have flocked
to hear them; but as it was, with nothing popular at my back or
in my speech, the attendance was limited.

But to those who came I presented the philosophy of human
existence, the value of life, the moral blessings of physical health.
I taught that the married should avoid every description of blood-
love indulgence ; that the yet unmarried must resist every impulse
toward sexual perversion ; that tea and coffee, pork and tobacco,
alcohol and powder, profane words and indelicacy of every kind,
were enemies to the reproductive functions; by and through which
department of our common nature the race could be improved
and elevated out of organic tendencies to war, cruelty, slavery,
private crimes, and disasters of every name and magnitude.

“What’s the object of your lectures?” asked a citizen of
Auburn.

“To destroy your prison-house yonder by the depot,” said I,
“to invite the world to Nature’s altar.”

“ What do you mean by Nature’s altar?” he inquired.

“ Nature’s altar,” I replied, “is the human spirit.”

“J can’t comprehend you, sir—upon my word, I can’t.”

“ Well, friend,” said I, “the spirit of man is a pocket edition of

‘the great volume of Nature. Men are taught by the church to
go outwardly after truth and Deity. Therefore the people grope
about in the world of effects, in the sensuous sphere, for truth and
righteousness and happiness. Such seem to me like an old man
who, with his spectacles on, is hunting all over the house to find
them.”

«Can you tell, sir, in a few words,” inquired the impatient
citizen, “just exactly what you’re driving at in your public lec-
tures ?”

“ Yes, friend, I can. First: I teach that, by physical temper-

478 THE MAGIC STAFF.

ance 7 all things, the soul is elevated in spirituality. Second:
that, by obedience to the laws of justice and harmony, the
spirit of every man may become radiant with celestial light and
perpetual inspiration. By reverencing and obeying the Laws of
Nature, as written upon the inner constitution, the human spirit may
enjoy a heaven upon earth. To grow up into goodness —to be true,
and pure, and divine, and therefore happy—is the birth-right and
destiny of every human being. The Christian church says you
can attain to purity only through its remedies; but the church
has not destroyed war and slavery and licentiousness; though it
has wrought, with but little opposition to hinder it, for eighteen
hundred years.”

' At this moment another citizen came up, and said: “Mr.
Davis, I saw a gentleman from Rochester yesterday who ex-
pressed himself pleased with the prospect of your coming there
to lecture.”

“That’s good,” I replied. “I expect to be there day after
to-morrow.” -

“The Rochester gentleman remarked,” continued the citizen,
“that your counsel would, perhaps, be sought to prevent a divorce
by reconciling the now disaffected parties.”

“A divorce!” said I. Did you hear who the parties are?”

“No, the gentleman did not inform me,” he replied, “but they
are somewhat expected to attend your lectures in Rochester.”

THE THEOLOGICAL ECLIPSE. 479

CHAPTER LVII.
THE THEOLOGICAL ECLIPSE.

THE next scene in this psychological drama was enacted
beneath the roof which has sheltered many a weary traveller.
What Palestine is to the Christian, Mecca to the Mohammedan,
Rome to the Catholic, Italy to the Artist, such is a hospitable
“Home” to the way-worn Reformer. Sweeter than a sylvan
scene, more blessed than blossoming youth, dearer than a thousand
laurel wreaths, is the Refuge which certain hearts prepare for the
Evangelists of the New Dispensation.

I had arrived at Rochester, and was exchanging kindly words
with visitors at the Reformer’s Refuge, when a Friend asked:
“ What does thee think of Slavery ?”

“Tf you had asked ‘ What do you think of Liberty ? I might?
perhaps reply to your satisfaction.”

“It appears to me,” said the Friend, “that thee has overlooked
the question of Slavery in all thy volumes.”

“ But have I overlooked the question of Liberty ?”

“Perhaps not,” was the reply. “But I do not recall any of
thy writing even upon Liberty.”

“On all proper occasions,” I responded, “I have publicly
declared that Liberty is not local, but general; that it is not a
sentiment, but a principle; that Liberty is an infinite ocean, while
our individual aspirations are but the surges thereof.”

480 THE MAGIC STAFF.

“ Ah, Friend Davis,” said the visitor, “thy words upon Liberty
do not touch the Southern Slave question.”

“Are you quite sure?” I asked. “Let us apply the test.
Liberty, as a principle, is not local, but general. A liberty-man
is a man of principle. He looketh upon policy, and presseth it
beneath his feet. His struggles and sufferings are not designed to
subserve isolated interests. His patriotism is boundless as the
earth.”

“That’s all very good, Friend Davis; but thee does not apply
it to our national evil.”

“T think,” said I, “that my view of Liberty is more searching
and complete in its application than yours.”

“Oh, no, Friend Davis, I feel that thee is mistaken.”

“Let us see,” said I. “My proposition is, that Liberty is a
principle. A principle, you perceive, will have universal applica-
tion or it will have none. A true liberty-man loves freedom in
the United States because he loves it in his own soul. He loves
Liberty in Germany and France, in Austria and Poland, in
Hungary and Italy, because he loves Liberty as a sacred prin-
ciple. The struggle is sublime because it is universal. Now let
me apply this more closely. That is not Liberty which liberates
the intellect, and enslaves the affections ; that is not Liberty which
emancipates the African from bondage, and refuses freedom to the

gunhappily married; that is not Liberty which frees the wrongly-
married, and withholds from woman the rights of property and
citizenship.”

“Thy words remind me,” interposed Isaac, “that we expect a
couple to attend thy lectures.”

“A couple!” said I mirthfully, “I hope there will be several
of them in the audience.”

“I was going to say,” he continued, “that the report is that -
they have concluded to separate.”

“ Ah, they must be the parties of whom I was told in Auburn,”

» LTreplied. “Do you know who they are?”

THE THEOLOGICAL ECLIPSE. 481

“They are school-teachers,” said Isaac, “living near or in
Randolph I believe. They seem to us to be very kind and affee-
tionate to each other, and we feel that thee may say something to
settle the trouble between them.”

“T shall not meddle with their private affairs,” said I. “And
yet, if they should ask my opinion of Liberty, you know, from
what I have been saying, that my reply would be in favor of the
Principle.”

During all this time, dear reader, my first source of strength
was the clairvoyant flow of my Intuitions: then, ever and anon,
I {elt the calm baptism of the angel-world; and, in addition to all
else, there was the quiet power of the unbending Magic Staff.

One morning, soon after breakfast, Isaac came to me and said in
an under tone: “The troubled persons, the school-teachers, have
just come. When thee is ready I will give thee an introduc-
tion.”

We proceeded to the sitting-room, and I was introduced to
“Mr. and Mrs. Love.” Several others were present at the
time, and the conversation became quite chatty and generally
distributed. But nothing was said about marriages or divorce-
ments. Two days intervened between this introduction and an-
other call from the teachers. ‘On this occasion the gentleman
asked me, in the course of general conversation, one question
which I thought might have some bearing on their conjugal
troubles.

“Mr. Davis,” said he, “I wish to inquire how you would decide
to act in a case where expediency was in opposition to what you
believed to be a principle of right ?”

“A principle contains all there is of value in a policy,” I
replied. “J would act upon the principle, therefore, and take the
public and private consequences.”

On hearing this reply the gentleman addressed himself to the
lady, his wife, and said: “ Do you remember what I said to you

in our conversation on 4 certain subject the other day?” To
21

482 THE MAGIC STAFF.

which the lady, who had been a silent listener from the first,
simply bowed her assent.

While on this visit at Rochester, which continued during the
few days devoted to the fulfilment of my appointments, I had
friendly and familiar conversations with many of both sexes upon
topics set forth in my public discourses. But no person broached
the subject of domestic unhappiness, save in the general way
Although I had met several times with the school-teachers whom
report said were in quest of “divorce,” yet neither of them had
spoken of or hinted at any nuptial disaffection. J had neither
heard nor seen anything that indicated in the slightest degree a
thought of separation, unless it was the gentleman’s single ques-
tion concerning principle and policy.

“TJ guess it must be a false alarm,” said I mentally, after closing
my last lecture; “or else they shrink from speaking for fear that
such conversations would annoy me.” This latter thought moved me
to step to them, while the audience was retiring, and express my
willingness to receive letters if they should feel inclined to write me.

While speaking to the few liberal minds of Rochester on “ vices
and virtues,” I felt that there were awakened many silent resolu-
tions to live higher, happier, and more harmonial lives. And I
returned to Hartford immensely rich in such reward.

My writing-table, in Mr. Green’s residence, was loaded with
letters. They were from persons of almost every social and
intellectual grade. Some of my unknown correspondents were
bristling with the tactics of logical disputation. Others, though
less disposed to controvert my cardinal propositions, were equally
vigorous in their imperative demands upon my clairvoyance for
personal benefits. But there were also letters of a different
temper, full of pale and shadowy imaginings, concerning spiritual
communications; and yet other epistles, soliciting my services as
a teacher of Harmonial principles, glowing with words of univer-
sal philanthropy.

Among the letter packages that had arrived during my absence,

THE THEOLOGICAL ECLIPSE. 483

was a sort of valedictory epistle from the conscientious scribe,
who has performed so important a part in several eventful scenes
of this drama. And as his letter contains a clear and candid
statement of his ultimate position with regard to me and my work,
I think it due both to him and the reader that I insert it entire in

this connection :—

Wiriiamspuren, March 16th, 1854.
Mr. A. J. Davis -—

_ Dear Brotuer: I feel that it is now proper for me to write

you and propose a, little friendly communion concerning matters
pertaining to our own individual spiritual interests, and to the in-
terests of the latter day unfolding.

You doubtless still remember the time when a most warmly
sympathizing intimacy existed between you and me—an intimacy
which I once believed could never be interrupted or suspended by
any untoward human event, or by any promptings originating
either in the natural or the spiritual world. That intimacy, so
long as it subsisted, was no doubt intended by the Power who
overrules all things, for a good and wise purpose, and that purpose
I can now see has been accomplished. A few days after a par-
ticular event in your career had been consummated (viz.: I think,
on the dth or 6th of July, 1848), and while you were visiting at
Poughkeepsie, as I was sitting at my writing-table a distinct
impression came to me, to the following effect :—

“There! you have now nothing further to do with Davis. It
has ceased to be your duty to stand between him and those who
speak against him. Leave him, and let him pursue his own course
while you pursue yours.”

This impression was so unexpected, and J must say so contrary
to my intentions and even desires, as to create no small degree of
astonishment in my mind; and although I could not possibly refer
it to any mundane source, I was for a time disposed to doubt its
heavenly authority, especially as I did not receive any confirina-
tion of it through you, whom I then regarded as far more capable
of receiving truthful spiritual impressions than myself. You are
aware, however, that external events as well as internal convic-
tions ensued, which were of such a nature as to force us asunder.
From that time to the present you and I have been following

484 THE MAGIC STAFF.

divergent paths. Viewing matters upon their externals (to say
the least) the set of convictions to which my path has led me
would appear to be, in some respects, totally different from certain
important and prominent points of doctrine set forth and defended
in all your published writings.

During the last three years more especially, I have been con-
stantly pained to see what I am forced to regard as the most
sacred truths, and on which I believe the salvation of the world
depends, ignored, misconceived, misrepresented, and virtually
(though of course ignorantly, and, therefore, unintentionally)
abused by and through yourself and a majority of the more
prominent spiritual mediums and writers who adopt the essential
principles of your philosophy and theology. During this period
I have kept comparatively silent, not feeling that the Master
whom I desire alone to serve had yet called me into his field* I
aow, however, feel that it is time to begin to speak forth my con-
victions to the public, and with the promptings which are con-
stantly growing stronger and stronger within me, Z dare not keep
silent much longer. ,

I, indeed, dread the task that is before me. I foresee that the
course which conscience and duty will force me to pursue will be
the means of sundering the last bond between me and the many
friends which I made upon the plane of your theology. Besides
it will probably involve me in a struggle in which (aided of course
by my invisible Guide) I will have to stand almost single-handed
and alone against a host; and I am not a man of war but of
peace, as you well know. I would, therefore, that conflict and
public discussion, and especially conflict between myself and my
friend Davis, could be avoided as much as possible; and to this
end I address you this epistle in order to invite you first to a
friendly comparison of notes for the purpose of ascertaining how
far you and I can possibly agree, and not how far we can differ.
Another object I have in view is to respectfully and fraternally
solicit on your part a careful reconsideration of certain questions
of vital ¢mportance on which, if I do not misunderstand you, I
am either so fortunate or unfortunate as to widely differ from you.
Upon the result of any epistolary or oral consultation which you
may agree to have with me upon these subjects, will depend in my
mind the question of how far I am to include my friend Davis as

THE THEOLOGICAL ECLIPSE. 485

among the supporters of, or dissenters from, those teachings
against which I shall probably be interiorly prompted to contend.

Please, then, understand me as making the following concessions
to what I apprehend to be your own views :—

1. That thera is much bigotry and intolerance in the world
which ostensibly rests upon a religious basis, and that this bigotry
and intolerance, besides being intrinsically unjust, constitute one
of the most formidable obstacles to all true reform, and that we
should hence labor to remove them by all fair and honorable
means.

2. That neither the Bible nor any other religious book should
be implicity accepted upon mere traditional authority, or without
subjecting it to the scrutiny of our own developed reason, intui-
tion, and elevated and purified moral and religious sense; and
hence that the Bible should be (candidly) investigated, criticised,
and judged of according to its intrinsic merits, which, however,
we should be careful to interiorly perceive.

3. That there have been true revelations spiritually given to
man, more or less, in all ages and among all nations, and that the
relative importance of these must be judged by their subject,
character, scope, and, above all things, by the fruzts which they
have been calculated to produce.

On these and many minor points, I suppose you and I would
not essentially differ. At the same time I am, after the most
serious and patient investigation continued now for several years,
inclined to strongly affirm the following propositions among others
of less importance :— .

1. That the religious element is the true, central, and pivotal
element of human nature, and should hence always have the
supreme government of the whole man. This element, therefore,
is, in my judgment, the beginning point of all true, thorough, and
radical reform, and if it is ignored, or its behests disregarded,
there will be a constant tendency on the part of professed reform-
ers, to presumption, pride, self-deification, and hence to disunity.
By the religious element J of course mean the tendency to love,
worship, and render filial service to an ever-present God who
takes personal cognizance of the conditions, thoughts, and actions
of his creatures, who personally hears (or knows) and answers
the righteous prayers of his servants. Aside from the recogni-

486 THE MAGIC STAFF.

tion »f such a God no religion, in my sense of the term, can
exist,

2. That while all minds should hold themselves open to true
instruction from any and every source, it so happens that the
book, or collection of books, called the Bree, especially as
viewed with due reference to its interior sense, contains the high-
est, the truest, and the most purifying instruction concerning God,
his providences, his plans to save man, and his fatherly require-
ments of human beings, of any other book extant among men, and
is, therefore, altogether indispensable as a guide to the reform of
ourselves and of the world. Judging it altogether “by cts own
merits,” and irrespective of any traditional authority, I am com-
pelled to regard it as precisely what it claims to be—in all its
most essential parts a divinely originated production, and in its
own sense of the term, the “ Word of God.” Moreover,—

3. I regard the doctrine of the divine incarnation in the person
of Jesus Christ, taught in John’s gospel, chapters I. and xIv., and
many other places, as not only perfectly philosophical, but as ab-
solutely necessary to restore the junction between God and the
ultimates of humanity, which junction had beep previously lost in
consequence of man’s sins. Hence I believe that Jesus Christ
is the only “ Way, the Truth, and the Life, and that no man (or
society of men) can come unto the Father except by him*—that
is, by entire self-abnegation, and an unreserved and unconditional
surrendry of themselves to him as their exemplar and their moral
and spiritual guide.

Do not by this, however, understand me as supposing that the
whole infinite quantity of the Divine essence was shut up and
comprehended in any limited space or form, and thus withdrawn
from other parts of the universe. No intelligent person ever yet
supposed that. The fact is God dwells in all space, and every-
where his interior qualities assume, by correspondence, the form
of a man visible to the interior perceptions of the high and pure
angels who are sufficiently ex rapport with him; and the physical
body of Jesus Christ was only the temporary clothing in limited
space, of that omnipresent spiritual form, for purposes of human
redemption. \

These propositions, which I firmly believe to be truths, have
wrought the most salutary and happifying effects upon my affec-

THE THEOLOGICAL ECLIPSE. 487

tions and life, as well as upon the affections and lives of millions;
and I must say, that, after witnessing the disunity and confusion,
and, in some instances, the positive malignity and wilful decep-
tiveness of spirits to whom you and I both once locked for true
guidance, they constitute my only hope for the salvation either of
myself or of the world.

Yet, if I have apprehended the meaning of your writings, you
have materially differed (as you were free to do, of course) from
all three of the propositions last numerically laid down. Perhaps
your dissent, after all, might not appear so wide as I have sup-
posed, if I could persuade you to come to a little closer. definition ;
and the hope of eliciting such definition from you, is one induce-
ment which I now have for writing. Please do, Brother Davis,
seriously and solemnly reconsider these vitally important points.
Enter deeply into their inner significance— pray, yes, pray fer-
vently to whatever spiritual power you may recognise as the high-
est and best above yourself that can still exercise a guardianship
over your inner life—to open your soul to a perception of what-
ever of good and truth may be involved in these several proposi-
tions and their kindred Christian doctrines; and after duly pon-
dering the matter, write to your old friend the Scribe how the
subject appears to you.

Your frank response to the sundry matters specially propound-
ed in this letter, will enable me to speak with more assurance,
when I may have occasion to allude to your views in my public
writings and speeches, and will thus protect me against the danger
of unintentionally misrepresenting you. I feel, however, that the
time is fast approaching, if it has not already arrived, for the com-
mencement of the death-struggle between religionism and anti-
religionism, Christianism and anti-Christianism, Bibleism and
anti-Bibleism, as connected with the modern spiritual unfolding ;
and if the Truth simply has fair play, it has nothing to fear, on
whichsoever side of the question it may lie.

IT have already written much more than I intended when I com-
menced, but am prompted to add the following ere I close: You
are aware that there is a very numerous class of people in the
world, to whom the idea of humbling themselves, taking up the
cross, and unconditionally and unreservedly following the Divine
teacher (as the New Testament requires) wheresoever he may

488 THE MAGIC STAFF.

lead them, is extremely distasteful. If you will reflect candidly
for a moment, you will, I think, admit with me, that it is among
this class principally that the stronger admirers of your teachings
are to be found, and that they admire them because they find (or
think they find) in them an excuse or justification of their native
reluctance to conform to the gospel principle of humility and an
unreserved surrendry of themselves to God. I am prompted to
say, in all fraternal kindness, that God requires you not to serve
this class of persons by pandering to their self-love, but to serve
HIM by advocating his truths and precepts whether men will hear
or forbear. Don’t you remember that once in your vision you
found yourself lying upon an altar between two mountains? Oh,
get upon that altar, my beloved brother, without one moment’s de-
lay! and then, after witnessing the thunders and lightnings, and
receiving the rains of heaven (a new class of spiritual influences),
you will be refreshed and invigorated, and the spiritual sun —
the Lord himself—will shine upon you; and then you will be
really prepared to assist the great and only true shepherd, Jesus
Curist, to collect his scattered and disunited sheep together —
which, permit me to say, in all kindness, you never can do, until
you first recognise him as the only true shepherd. Brother Davis,
cultivate the religious element of your nature, and then your in-
tellect will perceive these things more clearly. .

Please let me hear from you as soon as possible, and believe
me, with many prayers for your spiritual welfare,

Affectionately, your brother, Wa. FisHpovuen.

And thus the curtain rolls down, dear reader, between the
esteemed scribe and the rugged position which I occupy before
the human world. In this event, however, I see nothing at
which to murmur or be surprised. Well do I remember the first
impression which was imparted from his spirit to mine, viz., that
his intellectual faculties were swayed by his spiritually-affectionate
soul; and that whatever religious conviction might once become
jixed in the depth of his loving heart, that would dominant all
subsequent reasonings and take precedence in the conduct of his
destiny. This total Theological Eclipse of a human mind is ne

THE THEOLOGICAL ECLIPSE. 489

new phenomenon. We have seen it many times before, and so
we shall again. But after carefully reading and reflecting upon
the worthy Scribe’s letter, I made the following reply :—

Hartrorp, April 17, 1854.
Mr. Witiiam FisuBoucH :—

Dear Brotuer: Saturday evening I returned, from an ab-
sence of over nine weeks, and found your favor (of the 16th
March) on my writing-table. It is quite needless for me to ex-
press here my gratification at the truly fraternal tone of your com-
munication. In regard to its contents, however, I have to remark
in brief :—

1. That the three “ concessions” you make —to views which you
apprehend me to entertain—seem, so far as they go, to bring us
into fellowship of private thought and public action ;

2. But owing as you say to a most “patient investigation con-
tinued now for several years,” you have arrived at other and
different conclusions which you very clearly and candidly state.
With those conclusions I can not at all harmonize. If I should
give my reasons for not accepting your propositions, I do not con-
ceive that I should be thereby helping you out of your present sit-
uation. It seems to me like a theologic speculation.

In all true kindness, therefore, I decline any presentation of the
intuitional discoveries which (simply perforce of their intrinsic
character) have led me to conclusions directly opposite to your
own. Your religious experiences and conclusions, so far as I can
apprehend their basis and bearing, are in strict accordance with
orthodox theology; with the superaddition of your somewhat pain-
ful spiritual exercises, during the past three or four years, which
give your present convictions the appearance of being an improve-
ment upon the crude speculations of ancient theologians.

Therefore, Brother Fishbough, I do not see how we can do
otherwise than fraternally disagree. I have no sympathy with
any scheme of salvation which rests upon the teachings of any one
book in the bible, or out of it—nor yet on all books combined.
On the contrary, I believe in the progressive growth and harmo-
nization of the whole Human Family. ‘This universal growth, so
far as I can, I will help to accelerate.

You greatly err, I believe, when you say that the stronger ad.

Z1*

490 _ THE MAGIC STAFF.

mirers of my teachings are to be found among those to whom the
“idea of taking up the cross is extremely distasteful.” You cer-
tainly know that the best of Harmonial Philosophers are among
those who have tried the old system thoroughly. They can not be
accused of ignorance. Nor have they been reluctant to test ex-
perimental religion. But I will not multiply words. If you feel
called to commence a warfare against Nature and Reason, I will
not interpose an objection, unless I feel somewhat more like it
than at present.
In all the fraternal ties, I still remain, A. J. Davis.

My mode of warfare is not ancient. I believe in muscular
energy —of the soul. I practise in the amphitheatre of Wisdom.
When I become a victor, Love crowns me with the amaranth,
and conducts me to a seat beside those nobler than kings. I wor-
ship at the shrine of Omnipotence, and the celestial athlete dis-
play their strength before mine eyes. I admire the chivalry of
the knights-templars of Truth, and the most daring of their num-
ber ride to my side and guard me. ‘Translate into mental exer-
cises the physical games of Athens and Rome—show me an in-
tellectual Hercules, a poetic Hector, a prophetic Samson, an
Achilles of moral integrity, a Goliath of impartial goodwill, a
Titan of universal benevolence, a mighty Jupiter of self-control, a
God of Harmony, a Universe of Happiness—show me these
celestial athletze, these imperishable attributes and exercises, these
sovereigns in the empire of immaculate perfection, and I will bow
down and worship them day and night! Lead me to these, and
I will be an idolator! But why write with reservation? Do
you not know me? I am an idolator, J am a worshipper, I am
a praying child of Father-God—and why? Because my vision
calmly rests upon that mighty troop of immutable principles which
perform unerringly in the amphitheatre that spreads over those
immeasurable fields «? matter and mind, composing the infinite
domain of Deity.

THE INFINITE CONJUGATION. 491

CHAPTER LVIII.
THE INFINITE CONJUGATION.

‘Mysterious, infinite, exhaustless Love !
On earth mysterious, and mysterious still
In heaven! sweet chord, that harmonizes all
Ihe harps of Paradise! the spring, the well,
hat fills the bowl and banquet of the sky !”

VERY soon after my return to the Charter-Oak city, I felt
the attractive influences from the summit of Mount Beauty.
Therefore I prepared myself, by abstemiousness of diet and regu-
larity of outdoor exercises, to consummate the pilgrimage. I was
not alone, dear reader, except outwardly. My journey up the
Mountain of Power had strengthened me for the present attempt.
From the awful precipice of the Table mountain, of South Caro-
lina, many have retreated nerveless and appalled, Not so with
me in this psychical work. The dizzy heights of Mount Power,
though presenting the deep abyss of possible degradation below,
had not shaken the fortitude of my soul.

In my public lectures at this period, I taught that indifference
or discontent among the married is mainly traceable to a cessation
of those tendernesses and delicate tokens of pure love which led
to the hymeneal altar; and, therefore, as an almost certain rem-
edy for such domestic disaffection, I prescribed the reinstatement
by the married of those pure devotions which characterized and
sanctified their attachment previous to the hour of wedlock.

Another part’ of my teaching was: that to marry a perscn

492 THE MAGIC STAFF.

whom you can not love, is a crime against the “higher law” of
your own soul, the penalty of which is disastrous and inevitable.
Also, that all intercourse not prompted by mutual love, is positive
adultery ; and that the sanction of priest or passion or statute-law,
is no source of justification, and can not render the private vice a
public virtue. ’

Modern statutes, as well as the demon custom of a stupid anti-
quity, give the husband a legal right to the person of his wife.
The consequence is, that, when ordinary politeness and refinement
do not prevent, the worn and weary woman is forced into child-
bearing, as a result of those adulterous relations which can not
but be pronounced “criminal” by the pure-minded in this and the
angel-world. Therefore, I taught that, where my prescription
for indifference would not cure, and where each and every other
merciful and conciliatory measure failed to restore the domestic
life to its Eden state of nuptial love and gladness, then the parties
were in duty bound, as members of a human family whose univer-
sal weal they should seek to promote, to obtain personal freedom
by legal divorce. Furthermore, to prevent litigious troubles in
questions of property, to avoid societary confusion, and to arrest
individual abuses of the conjugal attraction, I taught the value of
making a mutual open avowal to the state when a marriage rela-
tion was to be consummated. And, finally, I taught that the
world’s business was, not to kindle a bonfire of malicious scandal
around every case of divorce, but to prevent bad marriages; and
that, to this end, those legal barriers which are deemed expedient
for the regulation of individual conduct, should be placed high and
strong between the sexes and the hymeneal altar ; while the licen-
tious impediments which State and Church have fixed between
the Atlar and the Right of the individual to chastity and liberty,
should be either reduced or removed.

As the prudential reader might imagine, I was accused of aa:
vocating licentiousness and of sanctioning the absurdities of “free
love ;” but possessing at once the plain Truth and the Magic

THE INFINITE CONJUGATION. 493

Staff, I did not turn aside to join issue with the ignorance of my
assailants. The return wave of these public teachings, however,
wafted many letters from both sexes to the safe harbor of my -
writing-table. One of these contained the following :—

..... I listened to your late lectures in Auburn, and, for the
first time, fully realized the cause of my life-long sufferings. Six-
teen years ago I married a man almost the exact opposite of my-
self. Our four children are sickly and ill-mannered. I know,
too, that they have been morally injured by our distressing differ-
ences of feeling and speech. Sometimes I have left home, taking
my youngest child with me, and stayed away for weeks to get a
hitle relief. .’... .. I am compelled to yield to his wishes, contrary
to my every inclination and sense of propriety. I sometimes hate
and despise even my own body, and feel more willing to die than
to live, for I am weak, weary, and despairing. The people say
that I must make my husband happy, and obey him as the Scrip-
ture saith; but my life is a sacrifice to his passions, and I must
have liberty or death.

....++ My relatives are all opposed to my making this dis-
affection public, though they know full well that Jam a martyr to
legal sensuality..... The minister here entirely disapproves of
divorce except on Bible ground, and I get no. sympathy from any
one in this region..... Will you please answer this, Mr. Davis,
and tell me whether you think such should be divorced ?

With much sorrow and sincere respect, .uA> A.

In reply to the foregoing, which was but a type of many letters
from the miserably married, I said that the special righteousness
of divorce, as applied to individual cases, I did not feel called upon
to consider; that my work was a general one, viz.: to define and
promulgate the unalterable laws which, in the economy of Nature,
regulate the marriage relation, and to show the justice of divorces
under certain domestic circumstances; but that I must leave all
to decide for themselves with reference to their own personal
demands and surroundings.

On opening another letter among the mass before.me, I read the
following sentences and sentiments :—

494 THE MAGIC STAFF.

Houtey, N. Y., April, 1854.

My Kinp Frienp: You gave me the privilege of writing you,
and this morning I feel inclined to do so. May I speak to you
freely of my past experiences—of the sorrows as well as the
blessings that have attended my existence? It is pleasant and
cheering to find a friend who seems so worthy of confidence as
you; for, though there may be many such in the wide world, they
have seldom crossed my own pathway.

From the hour of my legal union with my friend and brother,
but not companion, we both realized that ours was a false mar-
riage. Yet we strove to be happy. We endeavored to assimilate
to each other and to become entirely congenial. We hid from the
world all traces of the fearful chasm which, spite of all our efforts,
continually widened between us; and thus we have lived on from
year to year, calling each other “husband” and “ wife,’ while
our hearts throbbed with agony at the profanation of those holy
words. *

What wonder then, that I felt gratitude for the fearless utter-
ance of those self-evident truths which constituted the basis of
your lectures in Rochester? My heart bleeds with pity when I
see the thousands who bow down in anguish beneath the false
fetters of society. Oh, if I live, and find the strength within me,
I will do something toward shaking our selfish law-makers from
their posts—unless they will give us statutes that more fully meet
the wants of Humanity.

I am happier than formerly because I see a work to do. In
the path of active effort, I have discovered a new significance in
life. There is a beauty in existence that I did not discern in
years gone by; and, gladdened by its light, I feel my sympathies
going out toward all the human race. There are those on earth,
and I fondly hope in Heaven, whom I gratefully trust, feeling
that —

“Warm from their spirits spreads around
An atmosphere serene — divine —

Magnetical, like golden haze,
Encircling mine.”

I intend leaving here the first of May. The West will be my
home during the summer—what part or parts I have not yet

THE INFINITE CONJUGATION. 495

determined. Sheuld you answer my desultory letter, please direct
to this place. W4th much respect, yours fraternally,
Mary F. Love.

It was evident that the foregoing emanated from the individual
of whom I was told by the gifted lady in Boston, and to whom I
had been introduced while in Western New York. “This case,”
thought I, “is of long standing, and not a recent disaffection as I
was let to suppose by the whisperings of the people.” My reply
was prompt and brief :—

Harrrorp, April 18th, 1854.

My prar Fr.=np: Your letter came to me safely, and I was
pleased with its tone of friendly confidence. Feeling the freedom
of Truth, you could not well do otherwise than speak to me freely
of your past experiences. I comprehend, with a true sympathy,
the sufferings you have realized, and which have been shared
equally by your fraternal, but not conjugal, companion—with
whom, also, my soul deeply and steadily sympathizes.

The world needs great light on the question of true Marriage
and Parentage. How profoundly do I pray that your soul may
be moved in strength to aid in rousing the law-makers of our
century to a full and free and salutary discussion of the wrongs
of present relations between the sexes—and, no less, to a new
estimate of the nature and mission of marriage in its bearing on
human progression, and the right development of our species.

Like many others from whom I receive letters, you write of
unhappiness in your own false relation, and I know, from what I
discovered to be the nature of your “friend and brother,” that he
no less experiences the pain arising from a consciousness of the
same cause. In these things you may both open your wounded
hearts to me, in all the simple confidence of little children, and I
will give to each my fraternal sympathy, even though I know
not how to break the unseen fetters which bind you in painful
bondage. Sincerely your friend, AIS D,

Mount Beauty sent forth music of the diviner kind. From
the topmost crag, through the dales below, there flowed whole
rivers of melody. Its billowy undulations swept down through

496 THE MAGIC STAFF.

my being, and, as with the lute-like tones of angel-voices, they
awakened portions of my sealed-up nature into beauteous and
harmonial animation. Thus my higher faculties were excited to
the perception of symmetry and proportion. At one breath I
could inhale the gospel of the Beautiful.

What I called “ Beauty” before, now seemed low and vulgar.
Ashamed of what I had admired during previous years, and over-
come by a sense of the opening glories of the present, I hid my
face and wept. A flower, a blushing cheek, a true word, a simple
song, a sweet breath, a clean skin, white teeth, a pure smile,
graceful motion, childhood, love, playfulness, innocent expressions
of the heart, delicate thoughts of the manly soul, the sacred mis-
sion of the woman-nature, the adaptation of Love to Wisdom, the
evil of conjugal inharmony, the beauty of the true nuptial relation,
the purity of Love’s offspring, the deformity of the sin-conceived
—such attractions and thoughts occupied my soul as I walked
up the broad table-land of Mount Beauty.

From that elevation, dear reader, I viewed the wide world of
living men. My vision of the follies of the valleys of life I will
not relate in this volume. Immediate individual interests I did
not consider ; I looked and wrote for the human world. Into the
causes of domestic troubles I looked; into the far-off homes of the
unhappy ; into the habits of the solitary man ; into the veiled mys-
teries and miseries of public women; into the memory of him who
broods low and dishonorable thoughts; into the blue eyes of
blighted girlhood I looked; into the torpid souls that preach with
the lip and practise with the battle-axe of error; into bedroom
revelations, from Harlem to Castle-Garden, from river to river,
and from shore to shore; whole days I devoted to clairvoyant
penetrations into hearts living in cities and country-villages, that
beat with a weary weight of unutterable anguish; through long,
dark, dreary histories of private domestic suffering I looked; and
I said: “ Let me not to ‘the marriage of true minds admit iap.d-
iments’; but against that sensual love which ‘alters when it alter-

THE INFINITE CONJUGATION. 497

ation finds, or bends with the remover to remove,’ I will speak
with the tone of a trumpet.” For, behold the sickly children of
sensual progenitors! Behold the insanity of those who were
brought forth in iniquity! Behold the idle limbs and silly
tongues of those who came from antagonistic parents legally wed-
ded! Behold innocent youth disfigured and overrun by the
blotches of hatred and repulsion which some delicate woman has
felt toward her drunken and sensual husband! Behold the mani-
fold deformities which I saw from the sacred summit of this
Mountain! Behold the fiery riot of the animal love of the heated
blood —the invisible mob of reproductive essences—rushing, un-
der legal sanction, into the holiest sanctuary of the woman soul!
And then behold the consequences—the loss of delicacy — the
indifference to truth—the abandonment to the seductions of evil!
Behold what I beheld, dear reader—see what I saw—and you
will not wonder that I wrote the fourth volume of the “ Great
Harmonia.”

But the Mountain of Beauty—by which I mean a state of
mind that enables the individual intuitively to see and comprehend
the harmonies of the universe—had its charms also. While
meditating upon its broad summit my lips were mute. Because I
saw no words that could describe the Beautiful. Suns.and clouds,
seas and mountains, forests and fields, flowers and pictures, men
and angels—these are but the symbols, the types, the mirrors,
the shadows, of that divine beauty which my soul felt, but could
not express. Then came swiftly gathering thoughts of all that is
useful, just, potent, unchangeable—of all that is harmonial and
eternal—and my raptured heart exclaimed: “Surely this is the
realm of the Beautiful!”

Filled with principles, and animated by the angel-melody that
floated upon the soft air, I set myself to investigating the laws of
conjugal harmony. In order to solve this problem, I penetrated,
as far as I could, the nuptial code of Father-God and Mother-
Natun> —parts and counterparts; the two halves of one whole;

498 THE MAGIC STAFF.

heart and head ; soul and body; sun and earth; light and heat;
right and left; attraction and repulsion ; expansion and _contrac-
tion; positive and negative; male and female; intellect and love;
Man and Woman!

The infinite conjugalities of the universe I contemplated. The
marriage of all elements and forms in things inanimate, I first
examined ; then the higher uses of nuptiality, till I comprehended
the worth of human love and the sublime laws which make its
devotions eternal. In applying the principles of marriage to
human beings, I discovered that man’s highest dower is the power
to eternize a temporal union. Not that all legal relations can be
- converted into future and permanent blessings, but those marriages
only that are begun with a certain compatibility of temperament.
Even then disobedience to those laws and disregard of those deli-
cacies by which Love is awakened and nurtured, might cause a
good union to dwindle down and at length vanish in a cold and
hateful separation for eternity. On these points the reader will,
perhaps, get my meaning, by consulting the volume to which I
have already alluded.

About this period —in the full-blown summer-time of 1854—
I received a romantic sketch from Silona, of her own life and
marriage in the Spirit Land. Her very breath was warm with
enthusiasm. Her joy-abounding soul exulted in the deathless
love of her new-found and gifted companion! But her poetic
and vivid descriptions may be found at length by turning to page
174 of the “ Penetralia.” Hence there remains to be chronicled
only this: that, previous to her marriage with the wise and beau-
tiful “ Cyloneos” of the Brotherhood of Morlassia, I had made
deep excursions into the very interior territories of conjugal
science. From my discoveries in reference to temperamental
harmonies— that only certain combinations can eternally cling to
each other—TI had concluded, although the relation between us
was temporarily wise and fraternally beneficial, that it could not
extend beyond the tomb and be crowned with the Harmonial per-

THE INFINITE CONJURGATION. 499

petuity. Therefore her narrative, although it had at first some-
what of sadness in it, did not surprise me. And as she withdrew
from earth, sustained and enraptured by the strong and steadfast
love of her real conjugal companion, my heart calmly rejoiced in
their happiness, aid my lips breathed an affectionate farewell
blessing.

500 THE MAGIC STAFF.

CHAPTER LIX.

CAUSE AND EFFECT.

“Grown wiser for the lesson given,
I fear no longer, for I know
That where the share is deepest driven,
The best fruits grow.”

A NEW creation was opened by the conjugal revelations of
Mount Beauty. I saw that the domestic world waited te >e har-
monized, but the first need was the perfection of individuals —
then, by virtue of internal unity and sympathy, human society
would feel the “ atmosphere, serene, divine, magnetical,” bringing
harmony out of existing discords.

Again: I realized that the truest and most favorable state for
every human being is that of true marriage; not a housekeeping,
social, humdrum, commonplace relation for purposes of physical
comfort and personal convenience; but that nuptial wnion which
consecrates soul to soul—tender, loving, deep, steady, immutable,
divine—like the marriage between Father-God and Mother-
Nature. The true woman, therefore, with all the depth of her
affection yearns for a congenial home in the sanctuary of man’s
nature ; while the true man, with the strength of Jupiter and the
tenderness of a child, seeks to identify his soul’s destiny with one
embodied in the form of woman. In all this there is nothing but
crude poetry to him whose attractions are sensual; but; to the
truly spiritual heart, I have but touched the key-note to which its
every chord tearfully and gratefully responds.

GAUSE AND EFFECT. 501

“ And here am I,” methought, “without my mate. If there be
a woman in the domain of human society with whom I could
become eternally united, I would seek her—a soul in which I
could at once behold the child of leve and the woman of intelli-
gence—a friend, a playmate, a sister, a power unto progression, a
noble-minded associate, an eternal companion. And to that soul
I would be an equal, a source of strength, lifting her above the
valley storm, a Harbinger, her spirit’s resting-place, and its safe
conductor to higher and fairer spheres of existence.”

Thus I was meditating, dear reader, when a shower of genial
influences descended upon my head. Opening the door, there
came into my study four friends from the Spirit Land; and one,
who was my familiar Guide, said :—

“Wouldst thou behold one who might become thy true com-
panion ?”

“Kind Guide,” said I, “there is in me a power of love which
needs a corresponding ministration.”

“ Hast thou long felt a need so powerful?” he inquired.

“No,” I replied. “Ere this I never realized the existence of
any such capability to love.”

“True love,” he answered, “is of God. It fills, comforts, calms,
elevates. Dost thou feel these sublime emotions ?”

“The love that fills my heart,” said I, “is the same that I see
between Father-God and Mother-Nature.”

“ Jackson, my son,” said the blessed Guide, “if thou hast a true
perception of this, thy tongue can describe to me its laws and its
mission.”

After thinking a few moments, I replied: “True conjugal love
is that which transcends all outward circumstances, and dominates
over the changeful impulses consequent upon the trials of days
and hours. It is an essentialspring to personal development—a
necessity in schooling the soul—the best agent in harmonizing
character. It brings out the beauties, perfections, enjoyments, of
the inmost heart. It reveals each to the other and both to man-

502 THE MAGIC STAFF.

kind. It is the holiest benediction of Heaven—the divinest
ordination of the universe —the crown of life upon the one destiny
of two immortal beings !”

“Thou dost well appreciate the true ‘conjugal life,” said he.
“ Therefore, as thou knowest the law of temperaments, use thine
own clairvoyance to find and thine own intuitions to estimate thy
counterpart. But a few moments since we looked on one with
whom thy spirit might form that eternal relation.”

“Thanks, kind friends,” I replied. “ Your words fall upon my
heart like blessings. I do not much question your decision. But
I, too, would read the hidden record. I desire to know as the
basis of my confidence and future conduct.”

“°T is well,” smilingly responded my celestial visitor, “such has
ever been the import of my mountain lessons.”

They now -began to retire toward the door, when I said: “If
either of you know which way I should look to see the person of
your choice, please point in that direction.”

My graceful and quiet Guide raised his hand and pointed to-
ward the setting sun. Being in clairvoyance I looked, and soon
my vision rested on four or five persons walking in an ornamented
garden in southern Ohio. - There were three ladies; one of whom
I instantly recognised as her whose fraternal letter I had recently
answered. : ae

“ Seest thou, my son?” said the beautiful Guide. “She is the
being of our choice. Now proceed with thine analysis.” Thus
saying the four departed, and I was alone with my interior medi-
ta‘ions.

My investigations into the laws of marriage had given me the
knowledge that there was no inexorable destiny to contend with ;
that God had not predetermined and foreordained that a certain
man must be married to a certain Woman in order to secure the
eternal marriage; but, on the contrary, I saw that the Divine
Code is within the scope of human discovery, and teaches that it
is for the twain to decide whether they will be transiently or per-

CAUSE AND EFFECT. 503

manently related. With his knowledge to guide me, I first scanned
she immense field of human life —to detect, if possible, among the
vast throng of female natures, a soul whose invisible constitution
and mental circumstances were alike suited to my own. To this
clairvoyant penetration I devoted one hour for five successive
days, but without satisfaction. At length, I concluded to examine
the lady to whom I was referred by my visitors. I did so, and
found that they were not mistaken.

The steps of her baby-feet I traced; the plays and works of her
girlhood; her fondness for intellectual pursuits; the innate love of
her soul for proportion, melody, and beauty; the native tranquil-
lity of her very affectionate heart; the plighted vows and her fra-
ternal marriage; mutual efforts to be contented and happy; how
the existence of their two children exerted a reconciling influence
for a time; the subsequent attachment that involuntarily ripened
into conjugal love between the legal husband and a more congenial
woman; the struggle of her silent soul both to yield assent and to
conceal the fact from the observation even of friends most intimate;
the final and mutual agreement to a conjugal separation as an affair
of honor and justice; the consideratior’ that, inasmuch as neither
could possibly love the other as husband and wife should love,
their spurious relation should be suspended and legally abolished ;
that this conclusion became fixed in both minds even before I was
told of their singular situation by the Boston lady; and that the
unmated heart sometimes bled with the agony of desolation, but
was moved with no desire to disturb the harmony of the new rela-
tion before her eyes. Now I saw her exposed to and affected by
several unrighteous influences; then I beheld her as a teacher of
the young, as a friend of the domestic group, as the rejector of un-
congenial natures, as a lonely wanderer in the fietd of public effost.
Through many sad and trying scenes I traced her footsteps, up to
the hour when my physical eyes first rested upon her at the Re-

‘former’s Refuge. And now I detected the reason why the twain

did not consult me, viz., because the determination to procure a

504 THE MAGIC STAFF.

divorce, particularly in her mind, was fixed as the hills, and she
sought no one’s opinion. I observed, too, that her motive for ob-
taining a legal separation, was to remove every barrier to his im-
mediate happiness, and not to subserve any selfish ends; I saw
this extraordinary example of self-sacrificing benevolence, this very
unusual reason for seeking a divorce, and I admired the firm ani
justice-loving woman. I traced her to Cleveland ; saw her pretend-
ed friends, her real friends, and the enemies of her peace; each
and everything I penetrated; and then, although she was not yet
divorced, I looked upon the flow cf present circumstances and cast
the horoscope of future events; yea, with the speed of the whirl-
wind, I unravelled tie skein of her most private experiences;
and, finally, I resolved to conceal from her the fact that I detected
a genuine fitness of ker soul to mine. ¢

My friend, Mr. Green, having some business which called him
into Ohio, asked me to bear him company. While in the cars
between Buffalo and Cleveland, an elegantly-dressed but shabbily-
minded individual, recognising me, advanced and asked: “ Can
you tell how the sun look outside of our atmosphere ?”

“J have never personally risen beyond our atmosphere,” I re-
plied; “yet, by impression and clairvoyance, I have viewed the
sun from space, and can therefore tell you how it appears.”

Taking the cigar from his mouth, and puffing a column of fetid
vapor into the air I was breathing, he said: “I’m posted in as-
tronomy, sir, an’ I can tell whether you’re right d—n quick, if
you'll answer my questions.”

“Well,” said I, smiling with a momentary emotion of the ludi-
crous, “ what are your questions ?”

«“If you know how our sun looks from a distance,” he replied
pompously, “tell me.”

“ From the earth’s surface,” said I, good-naturedly, “the heay-
ens appear filled with light,as you know by observation. But
should you ascend to the outer rim of our atmosphere and look

CAUSE AND EFFECT. 505

toward the sun, you would see a rayless ball of fire, steadfastly
burning in a universe of Night. The sun would present no atmo-_
sphere, the countless stars would emit no scintillations, and the
now azure sky would seem like a black concave immeasurable.”

“Fudge!” he exclaimed. “That’s all spiritual twaddle, sir.
All d—n nonsense! What reason can you give for what you’ve
been sayin’ ?”

5 rhe reasons are very simple,” said I, quietly. “Light is
equalized on the earth by the operation of two causes. First,
the perfect absorption and refraction of the sun’s rays by our at-
mosphere ; second, the reflection of light thus diffused by bodies
on the earth’s surface.”

The questioner seemed a little less irritable now: “Some say
the air is cold in space: is that so?”

“Yes, sir,” said I. . “The temperature, at the distance of forty-
five miles from the globe, is lower than any cold known to man.”

“ What! do you mean to say that it’s colder up there than at
the North Pole?”

“Yes, sir,’ I answered, “the intense cold in the regions of
eternal snow is almost warm weather when compared with the
upper air.”

“ Look a-here now! don’t pile up the agony in that ’are horrid
way —jest tell the plain truth for once, and see how ’twould
sound !”

“The plain truth is more wonderful than fiction,” I replied.
“Therefore, till that fact is found out, the people choose mythol-
ogy instead of spirituality, and pictures instead of the realities
which daguerreotyped them.”

“ About this ’ere cold weather up there,” he replied —“ say,
ain’t you confoundedly mistaken ?”

As he spoke, the superior condition flashed upon me, and, in-
stantly detecting more truth in regard to the cold, I replied:
« Chemists can produce a lower temperature than that which pre-
vails within the Arctic circle. They can convert carbonic gas

22

506 THE MAGIC STAFF.

into a solid substance, and quicksilver would become firm as iron 3
yet this intensely freezing temperature, about one hundred and
fifty degrees below zero, is warmer by nearly eighty degrees than
the cold of the upper realm.” >

Although the day was extremely sultry, yet the interrogator
shivered at the thought; but, still skeptical, he continued: “ You
ain’t stuffin’ a feller, are you? If you’re telling the truth, then
I’d like to know how the spirits can come through such a cold
region, and not freeze to death. I’d give five dollars to see you
get out of that difficulty, anyhow !”

“Do you believe in the existence of such beings?” I inquired.

“That ain’t neither here nor there; jest let me see you get
out of that trap, sir—that’s all I ask.”

“ My answer is very simple,” said I. “Spirits, when drawing
near to the earth, ‘move in a soft, magnetic, summery river of
elements which flows, from the North to the South Pole, a few
miles above the earth’s surface.”

“No, no!” exclaimed he. “You don’t get out in that way.”

“YesI do,” saidI. “'That’s one third of the explanation. The
next is: that spirits can, by the mere exercise of their will, render
themselves invulnerable to temperature either high or low. And
the last part of the explanation is: that spirits seldom come right
down into our midst.”

“Tf what you last said is true,” he returned, “then why do
mediums say the spirits stand all around folks ?”

- “ Because,” said I, “the lower stratum of our atmosphere is a
mirror, similar to the surface of a placid lake, into which spirits
from far distant elevations can cast a perfect image or likeness of
themselves. The reflections of these images are so distinct and
positive, like the shadow of one’s own body in a looking-glass,
that inexperienced mediums mistake them for the spirits them-
selves.”

“TWumph! Yes, yes!” returned he with more interest and
civility. “That looks kind o’ reasonable. But I don’t under-

CAUSE AND EFFECT. 507

stand how that are can be when tables are moved and voices are
heard in a room.”

“T have not denied,” said I, “that spirits come into our imme-
diate presence. Only this I say, that they do not come so fre-
quently as is supposed by those who act as mediums. ‘Tables and
persons can be influenced from an immense distance. Words can
be whispered into the soul from beyond the sun! And yet, my
friend, it is also true that spirits do come into our homes, and
would like to find a welcome in our hearts.”

The locomotive whistle was now proclaiming our entrance into
the Cleveland dépét, and the gentleman seriously said: “You
have done me good, sir. I like your doctrines, and shall read
books in order to examine the subject. I wish you well, sir, and
success in your undertakings.”

“You have more patience with such a fellow than I should
have,” remarked Mr. Green, as we walked into the Forest city.

“The Harmonial Philosophy,” I replied, “teaches that a man
should not be repulsed, even when disagreeable, if there’s any
chance to do him good. Now I believe that this stranger will yet
be a friend of temperance and human reform. At all events, he
is much more likely to heed the voice of his better nature than if
I had repelled him in the same spirit of pugnacious bitterness
which he at first manifested.”

The next scene opens in the parlor of a Cleveland friend.
Twelve hours had elapsed since our arrival, and many persons
had assembled to enjoy a social season. At length the hostess, a
lady endowed with a kindly heart and a sincere and active love
of truth and justice, withdrew from a group of animated guests,
and, seating herself beside me, made some allusion to the singular
divorce case. Hearing which I asked if “the merits of this
unusual proceeding were known to the community ?”

“TI guess not,” she replied with a thoughtful look. “People
are not prepared to approve of divorces under such circum.
stances.”

508 THE MAGIC STAFF.

“What circumstances do people require?” I asked.

“The world, you know, demands something more than a mere
disaffection,” said she regretfully. “Most people seem to think
that there should be some crime, outrageous abuse, and ill-treat-
ment, to justify a suit for legal separation.”

“Ts it possible, Carrie,” said I, “that human beings can not see
a crime in brother and sister living as husband and wife? What is
more a violation of purity and principle? The fact is, Mrs. Lewis,
this case commands my respect. These persons have, as I am
informed, spent several years in trying to be contented together.
They have failed; and now they are willing to give each other
freedom. This is the first instance I have known of a pair
separating upon a law of mutual good-will and justice. It isa
bold and original stand to take, and I trust both parties will have
the courage to go through with it as they have begun.”

“T hope they will,” said she. “ But Mr. Love appeared to be
rather faint-hearted when he left Mary here, and wanted her to
defer the suit awhile. He has, apparently, been very anxious
indeed to become divorced whenever I have seen him before, but
now, it seems to me, that he eset: to dread the disagreeable
publicity of a legal separation.”

“ What does the wife say to that?” I asked.

“She seemed to feel badly to see him so disheartened,” replied
Carrie; “but said that she was sure he would be far happier
when he could marry the one he loves; and that as she also
needed freedom for her own peace of mind, she could not feel
that it would be right to postpone her painful undertaking.”

“On what ground can Mrs. Love apply for a legal separation ?”
J inquired.

“T hardly know what she will do,” said the lady with a look of
sympathy. “ But I suppose her main charge will be ‘ desertion.’”

“Suppose a bill should be granted—what plan do the parties
then mean to adopt?” I inquired.

“As far as I know,” replied the conscientious Carrie, “their

CAUSE AND EFFECT. 509

plan is the same as it has been, that is, for Mr. Love to get mar-
ried and take the children, and for Mary to make it her home at
his house so as to be with the little ones whenever she is not
lecturing or teaching.” The gentle lady here relapsed moment-
arily into a mood of pensive thoughtfulness, and then said: “ Jack-
son, I fear she won’t get her liberty.”

The conversation now became generally distributed, and other
topics soon displaced the subject of our fortuitous interview.

Four days hastened by — during which the spiritually-designated
brother and I visited many well-remembered friends in Amherst
and Cleveland. *I'was one of the most beautiful sabbath days
ot the season—the 24th of September, 1854—a large portion
of which I had devoted to public lecturing. At the conclusion of
my discourse I accepted the whole-hearted invitation of a citi-
zen, and proceeded with him toward his considerably-distant but
attractive residence. While on the way, he remarked upon the
hampering and- disagreeable restraints of fashionable ignorance ;
that most people were loutish and selfish upon a question of jus-
tice and liberty; and, among other instances where action was
necessary, he adduced the case of Mr. and Mrs. Love as one
calculated to elicit words of calumny and vituperation. On hear-
ing which I asked: “Do you know where Mrs. Love is, Friend
Sterling, and whether she has yet made application for a legal
divorce ?”

“She left here some time since,’ he replied, “and the few
Cleveland friends of her cause have heard nothing from her until
quite recently.”

“Then you do not know how far she has proceeded?” I asked.

“The fact is,’ said he with a firm and impatient tone, “she’s
gone on without asking our advice, made application away off
in Indiana, and her brother-in-law has written up here for testi-
mony.”

“ Well, is there anything wrong in that?” I inquired.

510 THE MAGIC STAFF.

“It’s all out of the regular course suggested by her Cleveland
friends,” he replied, “and from the way the whole thing has gone
on, I expect she ll find herself defeated and obliged to wait a year
or two longer.”

“ What’s her brother-in-law’s name?” I asked.

“ Charles M. Plumb,” he replied. “ He acts like an intelligent
and enterprising young man, but I think he’s been injudicious in
this case.”

“Ts it true,’ I asked, “that Mrs. Love is persevering in this
divorce business without the counsel and aid of her Cleveland
friends 2”

“Yes,” he responded somewhat testily. “She can’t blame any
of us if she should be defeated; which I am almost positive will
be the result of their operations.”

“Friend Sterling,” said I, “this fact makes me both sad and
thankful. I am sorry that she is not vigorously sustained in a
just cause, and yet I am very glad that she has not depended on
the Cleveland friends for counsel.”

“Well, it can’t be said that I have done anything to hinder her
success,” he answered. “In fact, I am intending to send her
something in the way of pecuniary assistance immediately. But
why are you glad, Friend Davis?”

“ Because,” I replied, “if she should succeed, the prejudiced
world can not truthfully accuse my friends nor the friends of
spiritualism of being instrumental in causing the separation.”

“Yes, that’s true! But, Davis, I’m surprised to hear a re-
former talk as you do. Public prejudice should be nothing to one
who advocates principles of universal justice and liberty.”

“ For myself,” I replied, “I fear nothing, as you know. But in
regard to the strength of some professed reformers to bear up
against public condemnation, I am unpleasantly doubtful.”

“ What do you mean?” he asked. >

“J mean this: in the sequestered recesses of some retired
street, in the protection of a closed parlor, in some out of the way

CAUSE AND EFFECT. 511

corner of society, 1 have heard many make noble declarations,
avow themselves the friends of woman and the lovers of equal
rights, speak enthusiastically in favor of every good word and
perfect work ; and then, Brother Sterling, I have traced the pri-
vate and public conduct of such characiers, and with unutterable
sorrow have seen those same bold and beautiful talkers play fan-
tastic tricks, and do deeds enough contemptible and diabolical, to
make the angels weep.”

“True, very true,” said he with a deep emphasis and tone of
reeret. “There are few who can withstand the world’s opposition.
My experience for years in anti-slavery and other battles has
settled that fact in my mind.”

At this moment we reached his beautiful suburban home, and
were ushered into the midst of those refined hospitalities which
had been, on previous occasions, freely and gracefully bestowed
on me and mine by the members of his household. Upon the
foregoing subject nothing further was said till after breakfast on
the subsequent morning, when the gentleman handed me a letter
he had received from the parties in question.

“ Come,” said he, “as I am going to answer that letter to-day,
suppose you put in a word of encouragement.”

“JT don’t wish to identify myself with the affair,” I replied.
“The struggling woman deserved to be sustained, however, and I
have occasionally written her a cheering letter, but perhaps I had
better not do so now.”

«“ Why, Davis,” said the firm and fearless brother, “you're just
the man who should sustain individuals in their struggles for lib-
erty Come, make haste! Let’s have a note in fifteen minutes,
for I must go right down street.”

It is presumable that the reader appreciates the reason which
induced me to decline any participation in this particular case. It
will be remembered that, by clairvoyant penetration, I had dis
covered that a relation might eventually be formed between the
then undivorced woman and myself. I had also seen faintly fore-

512 THE MAGIC STAFF.

shadowed the torrent of false charges which an unscrupulous gang
of drawing-room gossippers would develop against both of us.
Hence, my reservation was more decided and uniform than would
have been justifiable under other circumstances. But I consented,
however, to write and send the following :—

CLEVELAND, Sept. 25, 1854.
To Mrs. Mary F. Love :—

Dear SisTER: Friend Sterling insists upon my sending you
a line with his letter. He thinks “a kind word from me” will
cheer you. I have therefore consented to join him in the pleasu-
rable effort to sustain and encourage you in this struggle for civil
and mental freedom. Be very firm and hopeful, for the angels
Love and Wisdom send you good and true friends to aid you ex-
ternally ; and they strengthen your purposes also, in the present
exertion for Justice and Liberty.

If you do not succeed at this term of the court, you need not
despair. A few months more will doubtless accomplish all you
desire. Remember that if you fail now, there remain plenty of
time and ability to achieve the ends of reciprocal justice.

With an unchangeable regard, your brother, Ar JD.

My friend, William Green, continued his journey into southern
Ohio, to visit the celebrated Koon’s spirit-room, while I, having a
positive engagement to attend a Reform Convention at Peterboro’,
New York, delayed no longer, but hastened directly toward the
proper destination. Of the incidents and blessednesses of that
great gathering I will not chronicle. And, yet, I must record the
glorious and prophetic fact, that inspired words through many
speakers were freely and fearlessly uttered in a white structure
called a “church,” in the fence-like pews whereof sat noblemen
from ploughed fields, liberty-lovers from machine-shops, and audi-
tors from almost every grade of belief and incredulity. Energetic
reformers spoke mighty truths on that propitious occasion; and I
did not observe more than twenty in the crowded assembly, but
thanked Father-God for the possession of their reason.

While in the homeward-rolling cars, between Albany and Hart-

CAUSE AND EFFECT. 515

ford, a stranger, having first ascertained my name, asked, “if I
could give him any positive evidences of the soul’s eternal individ-
uality ?”

“Not to-day,” I replied. “My mind does not work at all —

times.”

“TI much regret your disinclination to talk,” said he, “for I con-
sider your Philosophy the only consistent theory in the world.”

The adjoining seat was occupied by an owlish-looking individu-
al, who exhibited a remarkably large and white neckcloth, and
still other indications of an evangelical profession. Overhearing
the intelligent gentleman’s opinion of the Harmonial system, he
exclaimed :—

“ Away with your vain philosophy, with your much learning,
striving to be wise above what is written! Have we not the tes-
timony of an arisen Christ? Have we not the positive declara-
tion of the apostle Paul that man shall live after death? What
more do you ask, sir, to convince you of immortality ?”

“Be patient with the doubter,” said I, addressing the clerical
interlocutor, “and do yourself the justice to listen. J have a few
sentences to utter touching this very matter.”

The pulpitarian looked extremely dignified at me, and I looked
extremely imperturbed at him, while the skeptical gentleman
looked 2xtremely interested at both of us.

“The rational mind,” I began, “ will not deny that Man begins
life in total ignorance. Not knowing anything absolutely, the sur-
face of the human soul must be a blank book, an unspotted sheet
of paper, so to speak, on which the pen of experience has never
traced a line of thought. Consequently, viewed in this respect,
Man commences a sensuous existence, like the untutored forest
brute, 7. ¢., in exclusive devotion to the phenomena of time and
space. Therefore the strongest primary element in Man’s intel-
lect is a blank skepticism—a sort of disbelief— which, after all,
and wisely enough, is the mainspring to all thought and investiga-

tion.”
22*

O14 THE MAGIC STAFF.

“Your talk, sir, don’t touch the case in question,” said the dig-
nified minister.

“Now inasmuch as the law of action and reaction is.as distinctly
a law of mind as of matter,” I continued, “it happens that Man’s
mind, without any real growth in experience, darts off like a comet
from perihelion to aphelion, from skepticism to superstition, from
atheism to supernaturalism, swinging like a pendulum from one
extreme to the other; and so it happens, also, that they who most
firmly believe in ancient revelaticn are frequently quite as ignorant
of living truth as those who have no faith at all in the supernatu-
ral and miraculous. All argument, in either case, is superfluous.”

The skeptic here interrupted: “I can not believe in the soul’s
immortality, sir, although I much wish to.”

“Why can you not believe it?” I inquired.

“ Because,” he replied, “I behold trees, herbs, brutes, birds,
men, all coming into being, living for a season, and disappearing
all alike—changing into other forms—leaving behind no trace
of a future existence.”

“ But how do you know,” I asked, “but that the spirit of Man,
which is so vastly superior to animal mentalities, lives on after
death °”

“Oh, I don’t know to be sure,” he promptly returned; “but
this I honestly say, when I shall see a spirit distinctly organizel,:
separate from the physical body, I will believe in the existence of
such a being, and not till then.”

At this, the Clergyman said to the skeptic: “Oh, I’m sorry for
you, sir—very sorry! You are a materialist—an infidel! Oh,
that you could have my perfect faith !”

“What is your faith?” asked the gentlemanly skeptic.

“My faith, sir—my faith?” vociferated the enthusiastic pul-
pitarian, “why, I believe in a God, sir! and in a divine revela-
tion, sir—yes, sir—and in resurrection or judgment-day, also,
sir— when this mortal shall put on immortality, sir — and each
shall be judged according to deeds done in the body.”

CAUSE AND EFFECT. 615

“On what grounds do you believe all this?” the skeptic calmly
asked.

“On what grounds do you ask, sir —on what grounds? Why,
sir, hay’n’t we the testimony of Moses and the prophets; and the
positive affirmations of Jesus, sir, and of his inspired apostles ?”

“Yes, indeed, you have,” rejoined the skeptic. “But, my
Christian friend, let me ask — what proof is all this array of testi-
mony to my mind ?”

“Why, sir, your awful disbelief causes me to shudder in every
limb,” said the clergyman.

“Moses, and Jesus, and the apostles, are entire strangers,” re-
plied the skeptic. “I never met them myself, nor any person
who has. They may have existed; may have been honest, or
the contrary, I don’t know. All history is defective. And, be-
sides, when I shall have revealed to me personally the same
evidences of immortality which those men professed to have re-
ceived, then I too shall probably have reasons for believing that
which seems to contradict all the analogies of organic life. A
revelation made to another is no revelation to me. It is only a
‘say-so,’ a second-handed article, and can not therefore have the
satisfying effect which would result from a direct importation of
the positive evidence to my ow” mind.”

The cars reached the principal dépot, «nd so the colloquy was
terminated. Thus the matter stands between the educational
Christian and the intellectual skeptic. Thoy can never “ per-
suade” each other. Why not? Because both doubt and both
believe, although oppositely, from the authority of externals.
Neither occupy the philosophic ground of internal principles.
The church reposes upon ancient oracles and theological abstrac-
tions. Over the future it has thrown a mantle of vaporish senti-
mentalism. A distressing vagueness, an uncertainty and unreali-
ty, it casts upon the soul’s destiny. And thus, as it ever will be,
too much faith provokes and develops too much doubt.

516 THE MAGIC STAFF.

CHAPTER LX.
GOLDEN TOKENS.

Mount Beauty was now surmounted. Its topee.t acclivity
was behind me. There was also a mental release from that un-
broken exercise of intuition which had been necessary in solving
the conjugal problem; and while wending my way toward the
future valley, I had an inward joy and tranquillity transcending
speech. It is true that many trials had sauntered arm in arm
across my mountain path, and looked assassin-like upon me; and
it is also true that I had walked to the measure of celestial music
which enchanted the air and enraptured my spirit. But *twas
the Magic Staff, and not the melody alone, which enabled me to
convert every interloping trial and adversary into a minister of
personal development.

And my soul was of necessity very still; for its inward glee of
gratitude to Father-God would not flow into words. Hence I
could not be interesting in social intercourse. The friends would
call upon me, however, and I had no heart to deny them entrance.
They wished to express a kindly word, or to ask questions on vari-
ous subjects. These visitors were all beloved. Yet more attrac-
tive were those tokens of exalted wisdom that floated hourly down
from regions of thought and philosophy.

Three days did my soul yearn to be away from external sounds
and sufferings. This will not appear strange to the reader who

GOLDEN TOKENS. 517

t

keeps in remembrance the impressible power that I possess to feel
“another’s wo” from a distance of hundreds and even thousands of
miles. ‘The compact walls of my abode, in the healthy and beau-
tiful city of Hartford, were no protection. The study and dis-
cipline of Mount Beauty had opened my sympathies toward all
mankind. The descriptive and questioning letters that came to
me daily, from far and near, were not necessary to put my soul
en rapport with the private sufferings of the earth’s inhabitants.
Oh, friend, it is not an easy and idle task to be an unselfish worker
for selfish and sorrowing multitudes! Human Jntuitcon, when
clairvoyant, knows no space. The sensibilities of the soul may
merge into one river, unseen to physical eyes, roll between the
rugged mountains of human life, and gather upon its wide margins
“impressions” of individual trials on both sides of the Atlantic.
These are not idle words, dear reader; I transcribe from the
pages of my own life-book. Between breakfast and dinner, during
the morning hours of one day only, I have, while in my quiet
study, received telegraphic impressions concerning hearts beating
hundreds of miles away! To their momentary joys I was utterly
insensible at the time, because my mission was to their private
sorrows. Intuitionally I became identified with the living world
of human beings. My soul yearned to free the slaves I saw— to
shelter flying fugitives in all departments of life—fugitives from
false theology, from political bondage, from the slavery of licen-
tious domestic alliances, which equally contaminate husband and
wife and offspring—and when I beheld these fugitives in every
great city and sometimes in rural hamlets, O, how I prayed for
power to awaken in each human soul a moral courage that would
not stop short of universal justice!

One day, while contemplating and sympathizing and praying
thus for the human race, the well-known Guide breathed into my
ear three words: “ She—is—free!” Instantly I asked: “Do
you mean Mrs. Love? Tell me once again, kind Guide—did I
understand you ?”

518 THE MAGIC STAFF.

“She—is—fre /” replied the gifted being, and his voice I
heard no more.

This occurred on Saturday, September 30th, just five days
after I sent the note recorded in the last chapter. “Good!” I
exclaimed. “The persevering woman has obtained a divorce
from bondage. The certified decree will liberate both parties,
and each may legally enter upon relations more congenial.”

Hearing nothing to confirm my Guide’s positive declaration,
however, I wrote to the lady for direct information; and her
prompt and definite reply showed that her divorce was granted on
the very day that my kind guardian apprized me of it, and that,
notwithstanding the intervening distance of nearly one thousand
miles, I had knowledge of the legal emancipation thirty-six hours
before her own far more interested and anxious mind received
tidings of the same fact from her faithful attorney !

’T was a suggestive October day that I devoted to an examina-
tion of my immediate future. The great lessons of my Mountain
journey were yet fresh, and through them I read the destiny of
outward things. “ Autumnal tints,” said I mentally, “appear on
leaf and life. As the river floweth down and mingleth with the
mighty ocean, so journeyeth my companionless soul toward the
boundless sphere beyond the tomb. But the dull heavy sound of
earth falling upon the coffin, the darkness that envelops and the
stillness that pervades the cast-off body, can impart no gloom to
the spirit of an harmonial pilgrim. What if we do behold clouds
between us and the sun, shall we despair? Does not the same ©
eternal orb shine beyond? What if my soul is sad to-day, at the
prospect of bales to be fought ere I reach my mate, is there not
an era of peace to succeed ?”

While I meditated a familiar voice came stealing through the
air, and my Guide said: “ What—if—an—autumn—cometh ;
hath—it—not—a—spring—in—store ?”

And I answered: “To my public mission and its trials I will
admit no murmur. WN», kind Guide! Let others be sad who be-

GOLDEN TOKENS. 519

lieve in the darkness, who breathe the mists of old mythology, but
I? no, never, never — Excelsior !”

The reader will not marvel at these transient feelings of sad-
ness, when told that, by means of clairvoyant penetration, I saw
that my public teaching in Hartford was finished ; that I must con-
ceal from the freed woman the fact of cur conjugal fitness, (in order
to leave her affections at liberty to fix upon their own object ;) and,
lastly, that I must journey through a maze of bitter prejudices in
order to act justly and accomplish the true marriage. All this
loomed up before me like a dark autumnal storm. Leaning upon
the Magic Staff, however, I wrote my valedictory, and prepared
for the open field.

The Hartford Times published the farewell address. But
owing to the newspaper tirade that succeeded, I sketched an addi-
tional valedictory letter in a spirit of criticism. To all of which
the conservative and religious press replied by ridicule and satire,
fun and some wit, calumny and misrepresentation. Just previous
to my final departure, a friend asked: “ Have you seen the call
for a meeting to-morrow night ?”

On_ assuring him that I had not, he remarked that “the friends
would expect me to be present.”

Next evening I accordingly repaired to the bannered and dec-
orated hall, in which our principles had been taught, and found a
large congregation in waiting. The chosen chairman, William
Green, jr., arose and read the following :—

Resolved, That we hail the premulgation of the Harmonial
Philosophy as a New era in the world; and, by faith in cause and
effect, we prospectively see the day when, through its influence,
the discordant powers and principalities of this world will become
One Kinepom or Love, Wispom, anp Harmony.

Resolved, That as Brother Davis purposes in future to devote
a very considerable portion of his time as a teacher by discoursing
through the country, we sincerely hope that the public at large
may receive into their life the principles taught by the Harmonial
Philosophy, which, we feel assured, are fully competent to harmo.

520 THE MAGIC STAFF.

nize this world —which all the religions heretofore existing have
proved to be utterly incapable of doing.

‘Resolved, That something more than a vote of thanks is due
from us to him, for the many invaluable lectures which he has
gratuitously enlightened us with during his four years’ residence
among us; and that we feel a high degree of gratitude ; therefore,

Resolved, That as a small expression of cur love and gratitude,
Brother Davis be requested to accept from us a Watch, bearing
an inscription, expressive of our feelings and sentiments as above
declared.

Immediately after the foregoing resolutions had been passed,
the chairman presented the golden memento for my acceptance.
But fancy my bewilderment, dear reader! There I stood before —
a large and expectant assemblage, with not a word to say —com-
pletely confused and intimidated —feeling at once an overpower-
ing emotion of gratitude, and a demand upon my untrained mind
for an off-hand address as a thank-offering. Fortunately, I had a
few sheets of letter-paper with me, so I managed to ask the audi-
ence for permission to retire to the adjoining room. In a moment
my soul was full of light and Janguage. And as quickly as thought
ean travel over a landscape, so rapidly did I sketch in pencil-marks
the following words of reply, which I directly read to the yet seat-
ed congregation :—

BRETHREN OF THE NEw DisPensatTIon: You speak of Grat-
itude. All gratitude is mine, not yours. From time to time I
have discoursed to you, as it were involuntarily, because I could
not help it—’t was such a blissful relief to my soul to communicate
its irresistible impressions.

Moralists have taught that benefited parties owe a debt of grat-
itude to their benefactors. Hence the doctrine and popular prac-
tice of making perpetual acknowledgments to the supernatural.
But nothing can be more absurd. ’Tis the benefactor, not the
recipient, who enjoys the first. good of his acts. He alone feels,
and must of necessity feel, the deepest debt of gratitude. Conse-
quently, it is always more blissful to give than to receive.

GOLDEN TOKENS. 521

You have, dear friends, frequently permitted me the enjoyment
of such bliss, and I am grateful to you for it; but now, as I am
about to depart, the natural happiness of the benefactor is yours
—and I am the receiver—causing me to feel myself unable to
express in words the pleasurable emotions awakened by this unex-
pected transposition.

Your token of friendship is wrought from earth’s purest metal
—a substance said to be untarnishable. This fact, so externally
significant, it not without its moral. I hope that I shall profit by
a suggestion so delicately expressed by you.

And you have presented me with a recorder of Time. This is
a startling thought! It will everywhere remind me of the pulsa-
tions of Eternity —of the hours, minutes, and seconds, as they
spread their wings and fly from the empire of life into the realm of
death. But this reflection can not disturb or sadden us — for we
know that, to our inmost principles, there ts no Death; but Life,
unfolding more and more keautifully as we pass along with the
flight of time for ever.

This Watch will help my soul to keep its vigils day and night.
My spirit is deeply impressed with your beautiful token. In its
shining countenance I shall behold the ever-happy, ever-cheering
faces of my Harmonial friends in the city of Hartford; and its ex-
tended hands will impress me henceforth to remember, with a
thrill of unmingled happiness, the famliar grasp of many earnest
women and fearless men; who, notwithstanding the oppressive-
ness of popular prejudices, have stood firmly forth, forming a
pioneer phalanx, in favor of the gospel of Nature and Reason.

My soul is joyous, my friends, because you have given me a
gift so significant — one, which I shall keep warm with the ema-
nations of my spirit, because everywhere it will Le my constant
speaking companion —a meter of time; the recorder o7 each suc-
ceeding moment, which I shall be admonished to improve as it
passes. It will keep me at my happy work. It will ever sing:
“ Now’s the day, and now’s the hour!” That terribly sad poet,
Robert Pollok, says: “The angel of God appeared in a statue
of fire, blazing, and, lifting up his hand on high, * * swore that
Time should be no more.”

But, notwithstanding the oath of this apocryphal angel, my con-
viction remains unshaken that Time is Eternal, or, rather, what

522 THE MAGIC STAFF.

we term “ Eternity” is composed of Time as drops constitute the
ocean. And, constantly, in all latitudes and under all circum-
stances, your gift will’serve to remind me of this conviction, inspi-
ring me with new efforts for mankind.

Day unto day uttereth speech! We talk of yesterday, to-day,
and to-morrow. What are these but the proper names of eyver-
receding, ever-present, ever-approaching waves of the ocean of
Time? Your token, brethren, is beautifully symbolical of hidden
prayer, dwelling within each soul, that I may lose no Time in
doing all that I, as an individual brother, can, to break the fetiers
of ignorance—to teach the philosophy of our existence —to
bring man into fellowship with his own Intuitions and Reason
— and, through the benign influence of a rational Spiritualism, to
do something toward establishing harmonious relations between
the Heavens and the Earth!

I said that gratitude was mine, not yours— that you need not
express any toward me. But I think your token of friendship
will not diminish my indebtedness to you. No, my friends, the
uniform kindness and candor with which you have listened to my
“impressions” — your increasing confidence in that final disap-
pearance of Ignorance and Suffering from the earth — your reli-
ance upon the Eternal Religion of Justice and Liberty, based
upon the deific laws of universal Nature — the gradual emancipa-
tion of your affections from the despondency of popular supersti-
tions, and from the slavery of proscriptive creeds — the progressive
development of your intellectual faculties toward a perception of
philosophical principles — your manifest determination to be free,
and true to the living God within you—to oppose all you conceive
to be Error and Oppression, and to cling steadfastly to whatsoever
you apprehend to be Truth and Freedom; yes, brethren, my reo-
oilection of all this, in addition to the abiding fragrance of Friend-
ship’s flowers, the germs of which we have planted silently in the
garden of each other’s hearts— will, through all the coming years,
augment yet more the debt of permanent gratitude which I have
long had the happiness to experience.

As you so touchingly and substantially express your affectionate
sentiments, | know not how I can depart without urging upon you
to remember, in all places and under all circumstances, the impres-
sive words which you have written on the walls of this room, cor-

GOLDEN TOKENS. 523

responding to the four quarters of the world — “ Love” — “ Wis-
dom” — “ Harmony” — “ Excelsior.” May the sound of these
words act like Truth’s magic upon each heart, saying evermore
to all, “ Peace, be still!” so that, whether bowed down in afllic-
tion or elated with happiness, you may feel yourselves consecrated
both soul and body, to the immortal Cause of Human Harmony,
of which these electric terms are so universally expressive! And
let me solicit you always to bear in mind that THIS PLATFORM, on
which I now stand, is, while in your possession, dedicated to the
Rights of Man and Woman—the pulpit of Free Speech and
Impartial Discussion! And, whether you remain in this city, or
remove to other parts, whether at home or abroad, may you never
forget to preach and practise the great Law, written over yon ros-
trum, viz., “Ler no Man caLy Gop nis FATHER WHO CALLS
not Man unis BrotHer!”

The motive that moves me to chronicle the foregoing is, the
apology it affords for recording the following witty burlesque;
which appeared in the Hartford Courant, a conservative journal,
soon after my remarks were published in the Zimes. The trav-
esty is excellent. There is genuine wit in it, though it be limited
and transient as the rhetoric twinkle of a comedian’s eye :—

PRESENTATION OF THE WATCH.

GoLiyiLE, November Ist, 1854.

Mr. Epiror: Knowing your willingness to aid the develop-
ment of the Beauty of Love and the Magnificence of Wisdom,
fer the good of organized substantial spirits, I am impressed —or
rather, I realize an inclination, to send you a notice of a meeting
held in this place on Tuesday evening, for the presentation of a
gold (plated) watch to Professor Z. J. RoBAck, the discoverer and
vender of the celebrated Astrologico-Magnetic Univerccelestial
Pill for the cure of all diseases.

The watch was presented in behalf of the members of the Free-
love Fraternity, an association composed of Professor Roback’s
patients and a few agents, journeymen and apprentices to the pill
trade. The following resolutions were passed at a previous meet-
ing of the fraternity, and show the occasion of the presentation :—

524 THE MAGIC STAFF.

Resolved, That as Brother Roback purposes in future to devote
a very considerable portion of his time to selling his pills in other
and less over-stocked markets, we sincerely hope that the public
at large may receive this invaluable panacea into their universal
stomach—to harmonize the world, in consentient and unisonal
subjection to its mild cathartic virtues; a result which all the pills
and purges of the regular practice have proved to be utterly
incapable of attaining.

Lesolved, That something more than a vote of thanks is dae
from us to him, for the much invaluable “advice gratis” with
which he has, for four years past, enlightened those of us who
have purchased his pills; and that we are very grateful for the
same: Therefore,

Resolved, That as a small expression of our love and gratitude,
we request Brother Roback to accept from us a Watch, with the
following inscription, Tempus abire, meaning, “It’s time to be
going.”

After these resolutions had been communicated and the watch
presented, in due form, by the chairman, Professor Roback then
made the following remarks :—

PROFESSOR ROBACK’S REMARKS.

BRETHREN AND Victims: It is always more blissful to give
than to receive— especially pills. You speak of gratitude, because
you have received benefits. Speak so no longer, for you thereby
recognize and encourage the absurd churchian dogma that man
owes gratitude to his Creator and preserver. Our noble philoso-
phy teaches better things — that the benefactor ought to be grate-
ful to the recipient, and that the imaginary obligation for benefits
received is cancelled by the mere passive reception of them. I
accept your watch. Don’t thank me, brethren. You are quite
welcome. [Applause: tears from the earnest sisters, and subdued
knockings by the attendant spirits. ]

Your token of friendship is wrought from two of earth’s metals
—brass within, and a thin layer of gold without. This fact, so
externally significant, is not without its moral. I hope thst I
shall profit by the hint so delicately expressed by you. It shall
be my constant care to maintain the “external significance” which
gilding gives to brass.

GOLDEN TOKENS. 525

This watch will help me to remember important truths. It will
remind me of the eternity of time and matter. It moves, and
you have already been taught that “matter and motion are co-
eternal principles existing in Nature,” and that “matter possesses
motion inherently.” Therefore, it will move for ever. Tt will not
wear out—because matter is eternal. It will not run down—
because motion is eternal. It will grow better and brighter, and
more perfect — because the “laws of matter and motion are eter-
nally progressive.” Yes, brethren, let us rejoice together at the
thonght—this little ticking monitor may yet become in some
other, purer, more elevated sphere—an eight-day clock! [Ap-
plause. Salaam by the great table. Enthusiastic somersets by
the benches and chairs. |

My spirit is deeply impressed with your beautiful token. I
look upon its dial of brass—and face answereth unto face. Its
extended hands turn to every point of the compass, and, at every
hour of the day, cry give! Its Aair-spring suggests a fundamental
truth of our philosophy, that the intellect and the spirit are devel-
oped in the ratio of the beard. Its motion demonstrates the
possible attainment of all motion originated by an internal, or self-
contained power—a series of revolutions about its own little
centre, in a very circumscribed orbit; and this, our philosophy
terms progression.

And now, brethren, I am about to go from you for a season. I
shall not forget you. The uniform kindness with which you have
listened to my “impressions,” and swallowed my pills—the favor
you have so often received at my hands, of being permitted to
minister to my wants—vyour faithful support in the warfare I
have waged against the regular practice —your cheerful rejection
of popular prejudices and superstitions, discarding the old-fash-
ioned creeds which recognize a religion, a Bible, and a God, and
adopting with me the more sublime belief that the universe has
no greater or wiser being than we ourselves are or may become —
all these things make our parting sad. But, brethren, the capacity
for swallowing is not infinite. In you, I foresee its limit is ap-
proaching. Your stomachs no longer crave pills with the ardent
longings of their first love. I have “a few more left’—and
(while you are whetting your appetites for another course), I go
to sell them. One more familiar grasp of these earnest women,

526 THE MAGIC STAFF.

one more parting gripe of my fearless patients ; and now, brethren
and sisters, farewell. [Sobbing. Spirit of Dr. Franklin wipes his
spectacles. |

At the conclusion of the professor's remarks, he was presented
with an elegant watch-holder of ebony, in the form of a miniature
zallows—with the motto (allusive to his astrological researches
and investigation of the superior spheres), Sve tur ad astra.

QUIZQUIS.

P. S.—For the information of those friends of Professor Roback
who were not present on this interesting occasion, I am permitted
to state that he will deliver four other farewell addresses, at the
same place, at intervals of one week.

My mental and social experiences have been a perfect and
repetitious fulfilment of my first vision. Mankind’s religious,
social, patriotie, and other affections, though naturally pure and
disposed to huddle together like sheep, would, regardless of their
shepherd whose name is “Truth,” run to and fro in the streets
and between the mountains of life. At one time the cause cf ccn-
fusion and opposition in the public mind was the alarming cry of
“infidelity.” Plainly-attired and unpretending Truth, the ever-
lasting shepherd, could do but little toward establishing harmony.
Whereupon he would ask me to aid him, and I have done so
through lectures and publications. Then peace would appear to
reign throughout the flock. Anon, however, the people’s preju-
dices began to ascend silently like the mists of a diseased country ;
from which great black clouds were formed in the upper air, the
contents whereof descended in frightful torrents, with thunders
and lightnings; and thus, many times, I have been drenched with
the abundance of outward opposition.

The altar was reputation. Reputation is but.a brush-heap at
best. A few flashes of fire from falsehood’s forked tongue would
destroy it root and branch. Therefore, to live and labor for
“reputation” as most public men do, seemed beneath the moral
dignity and true calling of a Man. Hence, although wet and
shivering with the storm of outward ignorance and prejudice, I

527

GOLDEN TOKENS.

‘HONSIUTAXY AM {O NOILVINGSAUAAY OLIOMWAG VW

rn £/L— Sir

(RN pankygy a,
Spurs fo VO Ba

oe)
ar

WOUDLDLUO,D O4IU LUT - AY pO nnn nner UO1SYA YT

SOLU OUMDTT YOSLIATU LY DYy JO---n---nnnnnonnnnenrbnnnnnnnnnns U0I8 14 YLT

§28 THE MAGIC STAFF.

forthwith removed myself from the frail altar, rejected a prostrate
position of mind, and tried to stand firmly upon the honest earth,
my head toward the firmament. Then came fresh accusations
and empty causes of alarm —“ insanity” — “ free-love” —“ evil
spirits” —“ infernal delusion,” &¢c.—at which the flock (7. ¢., the
people’s prejudiced affections) would take fright and scamper
away in every ridiculous direction. The grand old mountains of
Justice and Power were too high, however, and the people’s judg-
ments, finding neither confinement nor escape, have been forced
to yield from time to time to “Truth,” the beautiful and eternal
shepherd, whose mission I have ever endeavored to proclaim and
promulgate throughout the land.

Thus, dear reader, have I been compelled to climb, beginning
first with the Mountain of “Use.” But every fresh discipline,
every new effort, has added more physical strength and spiritual
wisdom; and I have not been “depressed” while in the vailey
nor “elated” when on the highest summit. The artist has en-
graved a symbolic representation of my individual progression.
The reader need not be told that my first chapter, “The Use of
Autobiography,” is a general explanation, while the succeeding
ones reveal the minutiz of that experience.

The day before I left the Charter Oak city, upon a lecturing
tour through New Iingland and portions of the West, an educated
and refined gentleman asked “if Modern Spiritualism was not im-
moral in its tendency ?”

“As I accept and teach spiritualism,” I replied, “it is more
salutary than the church, and more restraining than the state.”

“Now, Mr. Davis,” said the questioner, “I can’t understand
why you should say so, when it is well known that you teach the
doctrine of free-love.”

“Did you ever hear me teach that doctrine ?” I asked.

“No, sir,” said he, “but the papers report you as advocating it.”

“ Newspapers are not always the Evangels of truth,” I replied.
“The popular journalist is a chronicler of what he individually

GOLDEN TOKENS. 529

knows and thinks a,mere reflector of the surface facts and fan-
cies of the passing multitude—and can not therefore be counted
upon as more than partially correct in his statements.”

“That’s true, unquestionably,” said he. “But if you do not
teach free-love, Mr. Davis, I’d like to know what you would call
it.’ . |

“Since you ask me in so kind a spirit, sir, I feel free to tell you,
The Harmonial doctrines of marriage, which I uncompromisingly
advocate by lip and life, are these: That all the treasures of one
- heart’s boundless love belong to some other one heart which is
equally opulent. It is an immutable law that, when two hearts
feel truly and wisely drawn into one embrace, the parties thus
united possess the power to render their union either transient or
permanent.”

“What! Do you mean, Mr. Davis, that two human souls can
_ build up or demolish for ever a marriage which is at first agree-
able to both parties ?”

“T do,” said I. “At evening’s dewy hour, ‘when gentle hearts
to tenderest thoughts incline,’ two youthful natures may mutually
breathe declarations of affection’s rich excess — each being the
beautiful translator of the other’s purest heart — and form a union
which seems the acme of their dearest hopes; but, when the gray
and chilly twilight of a wornout honeymoon creeps upon the legal-
ly married pair, they may be lovers no longer, nor civil friends,
but positive enemies of each other’s purity and happiness.”

“True, Mr. Davis,” interposed the listener. “ But what’s your
remedy? Don’t you teach that such better live together without
getting married, and separate when they get into a quarrel?”

“ No, sir,” said I. “On the contrary, I teach that true mar-
riage 7s the consecration of one man to one woman ; that there
should be no familiarity between the sexes, other than friendship’s
greetings, unless two hearts are thus reciprocally consecrated ;
and then not, until they have openiy avowed, in the presence of
witnesses, their voluntary conjugal relation.”

530 THE MAGIC STAFF.

“But, Mr. Davis, let me suppose a case: here’s a woman who
has a good husband as the world goes, yet she does not love him,
and can not —now, what do you say ?”

“ Under such circumstances,” said I, “the husband has no right
(in the sight.of heaven) to insist upon his legal privileges. IPf he
does, it will require long years of self-appointed work in the moral
penitentiary, to expiate and efface his spiritual sin. ‘The twain
should live in the divine relation of brother and sister. Thus,
also, should they live in reference to every other human being.”

“ But,” asked the gentleman, “suppose one of the parties has
conceived a conjugal love for another person — what then ?”

“Tf they have a family,” said I, “wisdom might prescribe the
continuance of the fraternal relation, for the children’s sake.”

“But suppose the husband will not consent to maintain the
purity of that fraternal relation; and suppose the children suffer
under the influence of domestic discord; and suppose the wife
and mother finds her health failing daily — what then 2”

“Then,” said I, “wisdom would prescribe immediate and un-
conditional divorcement.”

“Now, Mr. Davis, let me put the question in another shape:
suppose there are no children; and suppose the husband and wife
both honorably consent to live in the chastity of the fraternal re-
lation ; but suppose one or the other loves somebody else — what
then ?”

“%n such a case,” I answered, “the parties should candidly

consider and carefully decide as to what course would best secure |
their mutual happiness and the good of the world. Be the cir- |
cumstances as they may, however, wisdom ever proclaims one
great consoling truth, viz., that every innate destre will meet with |
ultimate gratification. In other words, if your inmost soul longs |
for a companion — yearns for a heart of pure love which earth |
has thus far denied — wait, do not despair, but live a pure life;
for when the trial of death is o’er, and the Spirit-Home is reached, |

you will surely meet with your eternal mate.”

GOLDEN TOKENS. 531

“But, Mr. Davis, suppose I have an ardent, enthusiastic, san-
guine temperament ?”

“Then your trial will be more severe,” I answered, “and your
conquest all the more sublime.”

“That’s a rather diflicult doctrine to practise,” said the gentle-
man.

“ But such is my philosophy,” said I, “and such is my practice.
Many delicate women and robust men have sought my opinion in
regard to their own domestic difficulties, and my answering words
have been such as these: ‘ You must await the developments of
the coming time. Perhaps your eye hath seen your true compan-
ion; perhaps, not; but the soul is no deceiver; it yearns for a
mate, and there is one who will satisfy those yearnings; be pa-
tient, then; keep your spirit pure, and your body free from blem-
ish, to receive the sacred treasures of some eternal spirit.”

“The report is, Mr. Davis,” said the gentleman, “that your
people follow the spirits on the marriage question.”

“ Perhaps there are some believers in Spiritual Intercourse who
have gone astray,’ I responded. “ But such have not taken the
Harmonial Philosophy as their rule of faith and practice.” —

“Do you really believe in eternal unions?” asked the gentle-
man.

“Yes, from the bottom of my soul I do,” said I. “ When cir-
cling years have wrought infinite changes, when the deep seas are
dry, when the great earth no longer produces, when all human
beings reside in higher worlds, when, in the far-off realms of mat-
ter, new systems and universes shall roll into order and propor-
tion — even then the truly married, knowing no indifference and
no decay, will love with ever-increasing tenderness and devotion.”

“Thank you, Mr. Davis, for this frank statement of your prin-
ciples. You don’t teach free-love, sir—I see that. You put the
bars up very high, too high, for most mortals. My own opin-
ion is, sir, that the moral tendency of your doctrine is in the
direction of more purity than people generally imagine.”

5382 THE MAGIC STAFF.

For many weeks previous to my departure, and even while on
my journey, I was assailed by an extremely novel experience.
The reader may be sufficiently sympathetic and imaginative to
realize the awkwardness of my position. I had freely expressed
my ideal of the true marriage — had frequently pictured the bliss
consequent upon a pure union of soul with soul — when, lo, much
to my embarrassment, several gentle minds seemed to confound
my person with the principle !

Fancy my surprise and mortification. It is true that I had not
steeled and panoplied myself with a cold exterior. Simply and
naturally I had, when solicited, spoken the truths I saw concern-
ing conjugal science. Little did I think, however, that any un-
mated nature would fix upon me as the embodiment of an ideal.
The Magic Staff became necessary. Coldness, austerity, rebuff,
neglect — contrary to my every inclination — were summoned as
a body-guard. It seemed to me that the mistake was not only
painful and dangerous, but singularly absurd also; as if a patient
had confounded the physician with his disease, or sought to swal-
low the bottle instead of the medicine. And yet I could not
smile at the spontaneous expression of these divine and central
attractions. They indicated the existence of an ungratified need
in deeply-loving natures. Yet I could love but ONE, and, oh, how
did my soul rejoice to know that one to be a resident of earth!
Philosophy had endorsed and established the primary tendency
of my attractions to be unchangeably monogamic. And the
many delicate letters that came to me from pure and affectionate
persons, whose lone hearts separately sought a conjugal refuge in
mine, taught me the necessity of soon fixing my own nuptial posi-
tion before the world.

ene

SINGULAR VISITATIONS, §33

CHAPTER LIX.
SINGULAR VISITATIONS.

«A day, an hour of virtuous liberty
Is worth a whole eternity of bondage.”

Tne heavily-freighted train of three months have passed since
the conversation last recorded. The now uplifted curtain enables
the reader to look once again into the Reformer’s Refuge at
Rochester, New York. In a comfortably-warmed and usefully-
furnished chamber, just above the sitting-room, you may behold
the subject of this autobiography.

’T was midwinter; the 25th of January, 1855. The serenely-
cold air, so full of electrical frost, crackled like a silken robe.
Very keen and calm and still was the abounding atmosphere. It
glittered in the sunlight like an ether from the distillation of
diamonds. But sweetly through that quiet chamber breathed the
greetings of my revered Guide. ’Twas the veice of love I
heard; to which my heart beat musically. My well-known
guardian’s affection was pure and unearthly —soft and fragrant
as blossoms from the tree of Life—ever growing and flowering
in the spirit’s garden.

“Kind Guide,” said my soul, “I have felt through te space
that there is a private work for me to do among Mary’s relatives
in Orleans county.”

“ Ah, tis well!” he replied. “ My mission this morning is to
strengthen thy purpose.”

“My desire is,” said I, “to visit her friends to-morrow. My

§84 THE MAGIC STAFF.

next appointment to lecture gives me a leisure of two days and
nights.”

“Go, in propria persona,” he replied. “ You will touch and
break the chain that binds thirteen relatives into one objection
against you as Mary’s companion.”

“What can they object to?” I asked. “Is she not a legally
free woman? Is she not the owner of her own person? Did
she not obtain her freedom independent of my counsel and influ-
ence ?”

“Human prejudice is powerful,’ replied the Guide. “But
God is Love, my son; are you not a child of God?”

“To that divine Father I absolutely yield all that is immortal
in my nature,” I replied. “But tell me, can I overcome the
prejudices of her family ?”

“A battle between private pride and a law of justice must be
fought,” said he firmly. “Are you not prepared to bear reproach,
~ and to conquer ?”

“Good guardian Angel,” said I, “the work is a blessed one
and I will not wait or weary in it.”

Stillness was again there. The celestial visitor had withdrawn
from the earth’s atmosphere. Therefore I was once more at
liberty to mingle with the happy inmates of the Refuge.

’T was just twenty-nine hours subsequent to the foregoing inter-
view when, in accordance with my own intuitions of right and the
words of the affectionate Guide, I took my Magic Staff and the
six o’clock train for Holley. The intense frigidity of the air had
given way to another fiat of old Winter, now careering wildly
and playing fantastically through the open fields, with such toys
as wind and hail and snow. “'This is a singular night,” said I
mentally, “to start on a mission so delicate. The prejudiced
family will surely be anything but pleasantly impressed with this
unceremonious intrusion.” Bat onward rolled the loaded chariots,
and ere long I was standing upon the dépét-platform at Holley. -

Fortunately, while on my way from New England to Western

SINGULAR VISITATIONS. 585

New York, I had stopped at memorable Albany to introduce
myself to Mr. Charles M. Plumb, a literary assistant at the
legislature then in session, and to express my appreciation of
his honorable and prompt and fearless conduct in the afore-
said case of legal separation. During my brief stay, he kindly
and cordially asked, “If I wouldn’t have time to call upon
Mrs. Plumb, his wife, while on the road from Rochester to the
West?” This little fragment of friendly courtesy, dear reader,
was the only rational verbal pretext I had for this visitation.
Thus armed and equipped, away I went to the hotel, engaged a
room for the night, supped upon a few mouthfuls of bread and
honey, and then, after several inquiries, reached the habitation of
Mr. Chancey Robinson, upon the hill.

Fancy my personal appearance, dear reader, just before I
knocked at the stranger’s door. My drab over-coat, save its
-leneth, was of the Horace Greeley pattern; my large blanket-
shawl, save its disposal about my person, was of the latest Broad-
way fashion; my low-crowned and broad-brimmed hat, save its
impious flexibility, was of the George Fox school; my black
hair and full beard, save the regularity of their adjustment, were
of the Italian banditti cut; lastly, being well-nigh covered with
the fast-falling snow, and a stranger coming like a thief in the
night, it was not to be wondered at if the Robinson family did
look upon and treat me with marked reservation. What a singu-
lar visitation! What a presentation to one’s future friends-in-
spirit and re/atives-in-law! Was it not rashness to accept a work
so delicate and unexplainable ?

Being admitted, I asked: “Do the parents of Mrs. Plumb
reside in this house ?”

There was an air of home-comfort about the room; in which
were a young woman, a young man, and aneighbor. The young
woman, whom I afterward learned was a recently-married daugh-
ter, replied: “Yes, sir’—but her manner said: “I wish you
would n’t ask me another question.”

535 THE MAGIC STAFF.

2

In a few minutes, however, the clouds of discomposure and
timidity began to float off. Presently, too, the father came in
from his supper; and, discharging at me a volley of sharp, in-
quisitive looks, he asked: “ Who are you?”

“My name is Davis,” I replied —leaving a broad margin fon
the imagination of each to add any Christian prefix that woule
sound most agreeable. “ Having scen Mr. Plumb at Albany,” I
continued, “with whom I was well pleased, I have promised
myself the additional pleasure of forming the acquaintance of
Mrs. Plumb also, in accordance with his polite request.”

At a glance I saw that the father, though physically below the
six-foot mark, was consicerably taller than mest people in men-
tality. There was a sharp point in the expression of his eye, too,
and a rifle-crack in his firm speech, with which I was exceedingly
well impressed. Feeling that such a man must have something
reformatory in him, I inquired: “ What’s the news in the Tem-
perance line through this region ?”

“Ward work!” said he quickly and determinedly. “We'll
fetch ’em though.”

“Do the people favor reform in this community?” I asked.

With a firm, self-reliant, half-defiant air, he replied: “ Can’t do
much with folks who live on Rum, Ignorance, and Tobaccce.”

By this time the matronly wife appeared, dressed for the street,
whereupon the man of principle said: “You must excuse us.
The family’s going to a speaking exhibition at the academy.
Phe hour’s arrived. I must go now.”

Having no disposition to spend the evening otherwise, I asked
permission to accompany the mother, to which she very amiably
consented. But being unaccustomed to gallantry, I somehow
caused the good woman to tumble out of the front gate into a
_ huge snow-bank. She was not hurt, however, and seemed to
enjoy the accident, as well as the ridiculous attempt we eack
made to apologize to the other.

While at the academy I was much pleased with a student who

SINGULAR VISITATIONS. 537

delivered a memorized portion of General Warren’s celebrated
speech. Toward the close of the well-conducted academical exer-
cises, the same young man, with considerable power of declama-
tion, gave a short original address on “Past and Present ;” and
after the entertainment was concluded, the talented scholar was
introduced to me as “ Charles J. Robinson.” From him, then, I
obtained information that Mrs. Plumb, whom he called “ Zilpha,”
was some four miles in the country, spending a short time with a
married sister whom he called Mrs. Pettengill. At my request,
he promised to pilot me thither on the subsequent morning.

True to his word the young brother called at the hotel. The
obliging landlord provided the horse and cutter for a reasonable
and, cuddled down ’neath the buffalo robe, away

“ consideration ;”

we sped through fhe driving storm.

’T was difficult to draw Charlie into conversation. At length,
however, notwithstanding the increasing inclemency of the weather,
he became moderately familiar and talkative. But the intention
of my visit—in such a storm and at such a time—was to him as
yet an unsolved riddle. In truth, I could not myself foresee what
was to come of it. One thing I did know: that the object re-
ceived the entire justification of my conscience—for I was on a
mission of peace and good-will to the family of her whom my
heart designated as its conjugal companion. How her friends
could have become particularly prejudiced against me, was an
unexplained query; yet, distinctly as my face felt the smiting
snow, so definitely did my soul realize that something was going
wrong in the distance. To the intrusion of this feeling, the buffalo
robe and the driving storm were no impediments.

At Charlie’s suggestion, we halted and talked an hour at the
house of Mr. Colby Dibble; next, a dinner was cheerfully served
up at the residence of Joseph Pratt, Esquire ; lastly, we arrived
at the home of Mr. D. N. Pettengill, in the retired viilage of
Clarendon. The yet reserved Charlie entered in advance and

introduced me to his “sister Eliza.”
23*

538 THE MAGIC STAFF.

The moment she caught the sound of my Ohristian name, a
rebellious expression gathered upon her naturally fine face, and
there was an indignation meeting instantly called among the mental
forces. The ample stove shed its heat in abundance, and directly
the snow on our garments began to melt. “I’ll take off my over-
coat, Eliza,” said Charlie. “It’s too thick for this hot room.”

“Yes, Charlie, do,” she kindly replied. “Ill hang up your
coat.”

The emphasis of her voice on the word “your,” gave me to
understand that “my” coat would n’t be suspended if I did take it
off. And sure enough, after Charlie’s-over-garment was disposed
of in a sisterly manner, she seated herself with a dignity at once
resolute and beautiful. E

“ My coat is also too warm for this heated room,” I remarked,
“so I'll just put it aside.”

“Do as you like, sir,” replied she with a look of forced severity.

But as she granted me the liberty, I removed the garb in ques-
tion, and re-seated myself for further developments. Presently
Mrs. Plumb entered with her sister’s joyous children, and I was
greeted with sincere cordiality. Zilpha, instantly reading the
import of Eliza’s countenance, apologetically remarked: “My
sister is no believer in spiritualism, Mr. Davis.”

“JT can sympathize with her,” said I soothingly, “for I was in
the same state of mind about ten years ago.”

At this, Eliza bore her fine form yet more proudly, touched her
gold-framed glasses, (for like myself she was near-sighted,) and
said: “'That’s not my trouble, sir.”

At length I began to fear that my present visit would result in
— but little benefit, and ‘therefore remarked: “This evening I must
be in Rochester —so, Charlie, please get the horse and we’ll return
to Holley.”

“Y wish Mr. Davis to remain,” said Eliza with much determi-
nation. “There are some questions I wish to ask him, sah he
can go as soon as he likes.”

SINGULAR VISITATIONS. 539

Her prompt speech aroused my hopes of doing some good. “Any
woman,” thought I, “ who is capable of manifesting that amount of
frankness and decision, is also capable of being a lasting and valua-
ble friend. Her utter freedom from hypocrisy is admirable; and
when her soul becomes fully alive to the principle of Justice, none
can be more firmly its advocate. She has evidently much preju-
dice against me, but when she knows the whole truth in regard to
this matter, that prejudice will vanish like the morning dew.
Hence I am very thankful for this interview.”

At this moment a gentleman entered to whom I was forthwith
introduced, and from whom I felt the emanation of a hostile sphere.
The group present seemed at once to resolve themselves involun-
tarily into a sort of domestic jury, I became the witness on the |
stand, and the newly-arrived brother, the prosecuting attorney.
A fire was kindled in the parlor, the gleeful children were erz-
cluded, while we “of a larger growth” assembled there.

“Mr. Davis!” said the brother, “I’m glad you’re here, six.”

“So am I,” was my response.

“T’ve read some of your works, sir,” said he, “and I find they
tend to infidelity and the destruction of all our institutions.”

“Do my works tend to destroy good institutions?” I asked.

Unheeding my direct question, he proceeded: “ Your doctrines
go against the sabbath —and—what is worse, sir—they break
up family ties—uproot marriage relations—and, sir, you must
know that your doctrines are immoral and dangerous.”

“Will you tell me what books of mine you have read?” I
asked. “For myself I am not acquainted with any volume of
mine that teaches such doctrines.”

“Qh, I hav’n’t read much more than a few extracts in the
Tribune some years since. But the general drift of your writings
is plain enough to be seen.”

“ Do you denounce upon so litttle evidence?” I asked.

“Wie might as well come to the important point,” he replied.
“That is this: the news got here yesterday that you met our

540 THE MAGIC STAFF.

sister, Mrs. Love, in Rochester last winter, and that you then
influenced her to reject her husband and take you instead. The
report is, that ‘the spirits’ told you to do this, and that she was
induced to believe it.”

“That’s a very ridiculous and utterly false report,” said I.
“My friends who know me are aware that I never follow the
dictum of spirits either on earth or in heaven. But suggestions I
am ever ready to receive from any one.”

“Please answer me the plain question, Mr. Davis,” said he:
“Did you, or did you not, tell our sister that she was your spiritual
affinity ?”

The lawyer-like directness of his question was rather amusing ;
but, in all sincerity I replied: “No sir. Not even at this date—
four months after the divorce—have I informed her of my inten-
tion, which is, sir, to honorably ask her to become my companion.
But of this intention she is more ignorant than you. I have
now told you that which she will know for the first time when I
write her an epistolary history of this memorable interview.”

Now there was silence in the room for the space of half a
minute. Then, addressing myself to the dignified and reserved
Eliza, I said: “ Please put your questions now, for I must soon
depart.”

“No, sir,” she replied with a more subdued tone. “ Nathan
has asked what I wish to know.”

Charlie and Zilpha, during all this time, looked mortified and
indignant, while another sister, Minerva, and the merchant, Mr.
Pettengill, who had been silent listeners, seemed to occupy neu-
tral ground. My soul could not blame the prejudiced relatives,
however, because I fully appreciated the origin of their appalling
apprehensions. It appeared that their sister, Mary, had procured
a divorce without the knowledge of her family; also, that no rela-
tive, save Mr. and Mrs. Plumb, was informed, even after the
divorce, of all the private reasons which, during years of silent
suffering, had been paving the way to this legal separation. Of

SINGULAR VISITATIONS. 541

course the family pride was roused and concentrated —the dread
of heing persecuted by professional tattlers, and identified with
what an undeveloped generation calls “the disgrace of divorce”—
this pride, much stronger than the holy principle of justice, origi-
nated their mutual distress; and the fear that she would bring
still greater’ reproach on herself and them, by forming another
marriage-union, strengthened their impatient opposition. Of all
this I would make no record were it not to illustrate two facts —
first, that “nothing is easier than to be mistaken ;” second, that
this generation consents to cover up and conceal vice by legal and
popular liveries.

“Thank you, Mr. Davis,” said the now composed brother;
“you have frankly answered my questions, sir, and I trust the
future will bring everything straight.”

The affectionate and noble-minded Zilpha, who had been a sort
of guardian angel to Mary during all her severest trials, now ex-
pressed a hope that our next meeting would be under circum-
stances more favorable to friendship. She had, during the inter-
view, testified directly and positively that I had nothing to do with
causing the separation, but, on the contrary, having lived in Mary’s
family for years, she knew that the desire for a divorce took root
in the heart of both her husband and herself, long before either of
them had met with me.

On the road to Holley, Charlie maintained a gloomy silence,
with an occasional expression of regret at what had that day
transpired.

°T was almost night when we reached the hotel. Before taking
the cars I repaired to the pleasant dwelling on the hill for another
interview. It required but little discernment to discover that
some members of this family were more or less affected with
evangelical theology. It seemed to me that the parents had im-
bibed rather too much from the turbid channels of Baptist ortho-
doxy. There was, nevertheless, much sturdy intelligence in the

542 THE MAGIC STAFF.

domestic group —sufficient, I thought, to insure an ultimate res
cue from the entanglements of documentary religion.

A fire was kindled in the parlor-stove, and the parents invited
me into the retired apartment; when the out-spoken father said:
“Well, if you want anything 0” me, say it.”

“TI am here to inform you,” I replied, “that your daughter
Mary may become my—”

“ Can’t listen to any such talk as that, sir !”

“Let the gentleman say what he wants to,” interposed the con-
siderate mother.

“ Well, go on.”

“ As I was saying,” I continued, leaning upon the Magic Staff,
“she may become my wife.”

On hearing this the keen-eyed and resolute gentleman squared
himself in his chair, and, with a remarkable perpendicularity of
deportment, said :—

“My daughter Mary, sir, has a first-rate education. She’s
qualified to teach in any public institution. Her relatives are
many, intelligent, and respectable. The first we knew of her
domestic difficulty was after she came home a divorced woman.”

“Don’t speak quite so loud, Mr. Robinson,” said his motherly-
looking companion.

“Well, sir,” he continued, with a lower voice but more positive
manner, “I’ve advised her to keep single; not get married into
another trouble. I won’t give my consent to her marrying any
one under several years—and you, NEVER!” ‘

To this my reply was: “I think you do not consider that your
daughter is at liberty to dispose of her own affections.”

“My daughter, sir,” said he, yet more sternly, “has made
shipwreck of religion and shipwreck of marriage. What she’s
coming to, I don’t know.” He now arose from his chair, and,
planting himself like an indomitable captain of the Invincible Ar-
mada, thus proceeded: “No, sir! she’s got my advice, and so
have you. *I'would be the destruction of both, and all concerned.

SINGULAR VISITATIONS. 5438

No matter how correct her course has been, if she marries you
people will say that her purposes were wrong, and you can’t make
them believe otherwise. No, sir! I’ll never consent to it—-NEV-
er!” With the ejection of the last word his hand shot suddenly
up, as if to convince me that I was “blown sky-high.”

“ Mr. Robinson,” I quietly responded, “your feelings of father-
ly solicitude are all very natural and admirable. But in this pro-
posed relation there is nothing wrong. Truth and justice are with
us. Hence the speech of the world is as nothing. Your daughter
has procured her legal liberty without your aid or mine; and I
have a firm belief, sir, that she is equally capable of deciding this
question. But you will not doubt the honorable nature of my
intentions, at least, when I inform you that I am imparting to you
and your family this knowledge of my choice, even before ac-
quainting her with the same fact. I have not yet asked her to
become my wife; but when again I shall write to her, she will
doubtless learn of my honest wishes.”

He gave me a quick, surprised glance as I concluded, and then
said: “ Well, if it’s gone no further than that, I’ll write to her. I
believe I can break it all up.”

The half-indignant father now left the room. But the lingering
mother, with gentle tones of admonition, said: “I’m afraid the
people won’t understand it. Mary is one of my best children.
She has a very good disposition—-steady, home-like—and she
never made any trouble.”

“Your daughter’s private history is familiar to me, Mrs. Rob-
inson,” said I. “Your praises are all deserved.”

“ And then,” she continued with beautiful tenderness, “there’s
her two dear little children. What’ll become of them I don’t
know. Mary says the understanding is that she can have them
part of the time. But they are to live with their father, and he
Les no home for them yet.”

“ Rest assured,” I replied, “that your daughter’s best interests,
and the happiness of her darling children, shall never be impaired

544 THE MAGIC STAFF.

by my influence.” So saying I hastened to the dépét, and soon
embarked for Rochester.

On the following morning I was visited, at the Reformer’s
Refuge by a medium, who asked: “Do you think it right for me
ever to act contrary to the directions of spirits ?”

“ Certainly,” said I; “whenever reason and conscience tell you
to.”

“ But can not spirits give us light in advance of our own judg-
ment?” he asked.

“ Not as a general principle,” I replied. “Spirits are eternally
human beings. To believe that spirits can overstep the essential
boundaries of human Intuition, and impart knowledge superior to
what men can obtain by large talent and large industry, is equiv-
alent to a repudiation of the fundamental laws of all development.”

“Why, what’s the use of spiritualism, then?” he exclaimed.

“ Spiritualism is useful as a living demonstration of a future
existence. It abundantly proves this; but nothing else with cer
tainty.”

“Why, Mr. Davis, you astonish me!” exclaimed the gentleman,
“Don’t you follow the advice of spirits ?”

“Yes, when I can do so in harmony with my own Intuitions.
Spirits have atded me many times; but they do not control either
my person or my reason.”

“Then you do acknowledge that spirits can help us 2” said he,
somewhat comforted.

“Yes,” I answered; “with gratitude I acknowledge that
spirits can and da perform kindly offices for those on earth. I
would not discourage any friend from obtaining all the benefit he
reasonably can through the aid of spiritual beings. But this ben-
efit can be secured only on the condition that we allow them to
become our teachers, not our masters; that we accept them as
companions, not as gods to be worshipped.”

THR CONJUGAL MARRIAGE. 545

CHAPTER LXII.

THE CONJUGAL MARRIAGE.

‘No more alone through the world’s wilderness,
Although ft trod the paths of high intent,
I journeyed now: no more companionless.”

THE n2xt scene opens in another Refuge for Reformers. ’T' was
located in Harveysburgh, Ohio, and was hallowed by its intelli-
gent proprietors. Earnest and truthful and loving were Valentine
and Jane Nicholson and their family of four daughters. The
time was February 12, 1855; some three weeks after my visit
at Holley. In her journeyings through southern Ohio, for pur-
poses of lecturing, Mary had reached Brother Valentine’s home.

On the very eve of my arrival, as good luck would have it, she
had an appointment to lecture. To that discourse I listened with
critical attention. Her subject was “Temperance ;” a common
theme treated with uncommon skill. Her thoughts and illustra-
tions were orderly, logical, beautiful, truthful, and broad; while
the tones of her yoice were firm, far-reaching, humane, and capa-
ble of true eloquence. I saw that her nature was at home in the
broad fields of Reform. The reader may imagine my happiness
on finding such a co-worker. All my visions of her endow-
ments were fully confirmed. Of her personal appearance I need
say nothing; as the artist has pictured that in the fore part of this
volume.

Returning to the Reformer’s Refuge, I said: “Mary, this visit
is necessary for you to become acquainted with me. Personally,

546 THE MAGIC STAFS.

we are almost total strangers to each other. And yet you are no
stranger to my spirit, for I have seen you through the distance
many times.”

“ A long way have you journeyed Brother Jackson,” she sooth-
ingly replied. “Many hours of weary toil have you undergone.
How grateful must be a season of rest to such as you!”

During my visit at this fraternal abode I several times assured
Mary that I had no claim upon her affections ; that she was at
liberty to decide against my proposition of conjugal union; that
my life was one unbroken battle with ignorance and wrongs and
sufferings of every shade and magnitude; and that, should she
consent to become my companion, her relatives would frown upon
us and the world also for a time.

“ Marriage is too sacred a relation to be thoughtlessly formed,”
said I. “Therefore, Mary, before you decide, ask yourself this
one question: ‘Can J, in obedience to my highest attractions and
noblest impulses and purest aspirations, yield to Jackson all my
affections and confidence for ever?” I would have you compare
me with all others you have seen; and then, in the retirement of
self-questioning, come to a true conclusion. You see, my dear
Mary, how tender my soul is of your personal, spiritual, and
social liberty. How painful, how unutterably and insupportably
dreadful, would be a second bondage. If it be possible that any
other spirit can exert a more attractive and satisfying influence
upon you than does my own, then should you cling to that other
spirit and return tome no more. The thought is painful—very ~
chilling to the spirit’s life-currents—but we will obey the voice
of Wisdom.”

Thus did we converse long and earnestly upon the beautiful
philosophy of the true marriage; and, just before I departed for
Cleveland, my Mary said: “ Should the time ever come when I
can be a co-worker with you, in the holy mission of redeeming
the world from its ignorance and sufferings, then will my soul be
happy and very grateful.”

THE CONJUGAL MARRIAGE. 54T

“But, Mary,” said I, “do you not fear that your peace might
be disturbed by the prejudices and misrepresentations which our
union would elicit ?” :

“ Jackson,” said she with an earnest, honest emphasis, “I feel
that no reproach would be too bitter for me to bear, no sufferings
too great to meet, no labors too severe to perform, if I can but be
sure that you are my soul’s companion.”

“Mary,” said I, “you may become my eternal mate, by so
desiring and so living through all the years of this life.”

And she assured me that such was her soul’s central desire and
thus would she live— wholly consecrated to my spirit, and thereby
to the vast brotherhood of humanity. This was the pledge of
that holy union to which my Guide referred on the summit of
Mount Beauty. A perceptible chain of spiritual providences had
extended from my earliest recollections to this moment, but the
perfect consecration of this one beloved heart to me and my work
was the brightest of all the links composing it. Therefore I
departed, to°meet my appointments in Ohio and Michigan, with
my spirit full of elevated joy.

On the 15th of May, 1855—three months atter the visit just
chronicled —I arrived at the rural residence of Joseph Pratt, Esq.,
in Clarendon, Orleans county. In accordance with the laws of
the state of New York, and in harmony also with our mutual
perceptions and teachings, Mary and I did openly avow our union
in the presence of sixteen friendly witnesses. The intelligent
proprietor of the residence, (Mary’s brother-in-law,) being at Mag-
istrate, ably conducted the ceremony and placed in my hand his
legal certificate.

Previous to this event, I had forwarded a kindly letter of in-
vitation to her parents at Holley. But they did not appear. In
fact, several members of her troubled family kept at a “respecta-
ble distance”’—thereby acknowledging that, for the time being,
one question was*uppermost: “ What will the people say ?”

548 THE MAGIC STAFF.

At the conclusion of the brief ceremony, feeling that our true
position was not yet fully understood, I said :—

“Frienps: To-day your sister Mary, now my companion, will
depart for the city of New York. Feeling that you are acquainted
with the steps, just and honorable, which have led to this alliance
—also that you appreciate the position of the other party, and
the total falsity of several newspaper articles in this region—TI
will utter no words of explanation or comment on these topics.
’Tis of other matters, of vital interest, that I wish to speak.

“Mary’s children, as you are aware, were claimed a few days
since by their legal protector, and departed from her presence.
She bade them farewell, not willingly, but in obedience to Statute-
Law. The tyrannical laws of the state of New York—which
were instituted by men for men—vwrest from the mother the
right to her own children. These man-made laws patronizingly
provide for such dependents as women, infants, apprentices, and
idiots ; and, politically speaking, all such are considered possessed
of “equal rights”’—viz.: to obey the fiat of legislative enactments,
and to keep away from the ballot-box. Under these circum-
stances many women would decide to endure every hardship that
a false marriage could impose, rather than seek a legal separation
which must inevitably deprive them of their cherished offspring.
Mary would no doubt have yielded to a similar attraction, had she
not felt entire confidence in the honor and generosity of her
children’s father, and in his assurance that she might freely see
and express her love for them during all the future years.

It seems to me, however, that a mother’s love is but one sixth
of a true woman’s heart; and the proportion of time necessary to
bring up a family is but a fourth of a woman’s proper lifetime.
Therefore, when a mather sinks herself in the depths of a repul-
sive and impure union for her children’s sake, she is very liable
not only to see her offspring ruined by the moral poison of domes-
tic discord, but to become herself a blighted, useless being. If
Mary, then, believes that, while she is no less tender and regard-
ful of her own darlings, her public teachings may eventually ben-
efit the children of a thousand parents, is she not choosing the
wiser and better part? The empty question of ‘ Reputation’ we
will resign to the future.” &

THE CONJUGAL MARRIAGE. 549

Four months rapidly rolled into the returnless Past. But
the family changes and reconciliations wrought out during that
brief period were many and welcome. Mary’s bold and wor-
thy father had written me an invitation, “short and sweet,” to
bring my “wife” and visit the family. Accordingly we arrived
at the Holley-home on the 11th of September, 1855; and, by a few
honest words of retrospective import, grim-visaged Prejudice was
driven from the parental habitation! Next day, Mary and I and
two others rode over to Barre on a brief visit to her children,
at the residence of their grandparents. The embarrassment and
irritation consequent upon our unexpected call, were painful to all
save the possessor of the Magic Staff. But Mary’s heart was
grateful for a sight of the pets, who were healthy and contented.
During the succeeding week we were kindly welcomed to the
thriving homes of all the resident relatives; and, in the whole
circle, none treated us with more delicate and loving cordiality
than sister Eliza.

We will now glide over a few months more, and take an obser-
vation of the world’s ways to us. Ever and anon letters from un-
known correspondents would arrive freighted with inquiries con-
cerning the facts of our marriage. Many such questions I had not
time to answer, but have done so in this autobiography. Of course,
I was never astonished nor annoyed; because, long before, the
plain shadows of these events were cast upon my vision. But—
“ What can I do,” was my query, “for the disturbed faith and
friendship of our distant friends?” ‘The answer was: “ Publish
the facts.” This was a most unwelcome task; but I have nearly
completed it. One day I received a paper containing the follow-
ing, said to have been concocted by some religious persons in
Dundee, New York:

« Resolved, That Spiritualism .. . removes the barriers to licen-
tiousness and vice, as exemplified in the conduct of Andrew Jack-
son Davis, who is now living an adulterous life in the city of

Brooklyn with the wife of Mr. Love of Buffalo.”

550 THE MAGIC STAFF.

The appearance of the foregoing “ pious fraud” made me realize
how easy it is for the unscrupulous to circulate a falsehood against
some reformer whose doctrines they may dislike. But I received
a letter from Buffalo not long after which revealed to me the fact
that this absurd chargs could e apparently proved against me and
mine, by reference to the record of a legal decision by the Supreme
Court of Erie county. The ietter was as follows :—

A. J. Davis:—Sir: I want to write you, and I will tell you
why. I have just seen a decree of the court in Erie county, grant-
ing Mr. S. G. Love a divorce on positive testimony. I quote from
the decree —“ that the defendant is now and has been for some
time living in open adultery with the said A. J. Davis, and that
the said defendant Mary F. Love now calls herself Mary F.
IDEKRS? o.aito.0 and, sir, the decree of the court further is— “ that
it shall be lawful for the said plaintiff to marry again as if the de-
fendant was actually dead; but it shall not be lawful for the said
defendant to marry again until the said plaintiff is actually dead.”

This letter shocked and saddened us, but its contents were nei-
ther surprising nor mysterious. Several months previous to its
date, we had received a communication from Mr. Love, which
was as follows :-—

Burraxo, February 16, 1856.

My prar Mary: Having lately seen several articles in the
papers on the subject of Divorces, I took counsel in regard to my
own condition. I find that, never having been a resident of the
state of Indiana, I am not necessarily free by the conditions of
the Divorce granted on your behalf, while I remain a citizen of
this state. At least, trouble might arise in regard to it.

Have you objections to my obtaining a divorce from you in this
state? Without opposition, it can be accomplished very quietly.
It will be obtained solely for the purpose of avoiding the possi-
bility of trouble to all parties concerned, hereafter. An early
reply will be very acceptable. ;

A letter from the children, a day or two since, reports them
quite well and happy. Hastily, but very truly, S&S. G. =

Mary was prompt in her reply, assuring him that we felt not
the least objection to the divorce proposed, especially if there was

THE CONJUGAL MARRIAGE. 551

any danger of trouble without one. Accordingly, when the sum-
mons was served upon her to appear against him, she received it
and offered no resistance either then or ever afterward. In fact,
she rejoiced at the thought of removing every impediment to her
friend’s personal happiness. Giving the subject no further atten-
tion, we were proceeding with our public teachings through east-
ern cities, when the letter already chronicled came freighted with
the unwelcome tidings of the barbarous scandal which had been
legalized and perpetuated by the Supreme Court of Erie county.

At first blush, one might be inclined to blame the originator of
this divorce, for obtaining his bill by intentionally concealing the
priority of Mary’s liberation granted in Indiana. But we, on the
contrary, attach no blame to any person. Mr. Love was com-
pelled to do-as he did by the absurd and inhuman laws of the
Empire State; which laws demand an allegation of the commis-
sion of the most detestable of crimes, as the only ground of re-
lease from an unhallowed union. What is this but a guaranty to
vice — an incentive to practices the most revolting ?

But, notwithstanding that I had no thought of censure, still this
act of legal illegality forced me, contrary to my every innate in-
clination, to take a positive stand on the plane of self-justice. I
felt that the prospective influence of this false record must be neu-
tralized; not for my sake nor Mary’s, but for that of the Harmo-
nial Philosophy —not for any present personal benefit, but for the
future good of the world. Therefore, to prevent a deep and last-
ing injury which might eventually accrue to the cause of Human
Progress by the existence of this glaring but uncontradicted slan-
der, I caused a certified copy of Mary’s previous divorce decree to
be recorded in the Erie county clerk’s office, on the 6th of April,
1857. The poison and its antidote are thus inseparably associated.
But be it remembered that such laws as rendered this measure
necessary, can not but be an everlasting shame to the legislature
of any state or country.

But like every other valley cloud this also had “a silver lining.”

§52. - ~aE MAGIC STAFF.

Our souls were made happy by learning that, shortly subsequent
to this legal release of our “friend and brother,” he consummated
the true conjugal relation which his deeper nature had so long and
steadily desired. ‘Thus the children find a safe refuge in the
bosom of affection, and are blessed with wise and careful ‘guidance
in the path of development. Of this we have abundant assurance,
through a noble, beautiful letter recently received from their
father’s refined and accomplished companion.

The last social act in this psychological drama is now performed.
Most of the foregoing clouds passed while I was resting in the val-
ley between Mount Beauty and Mount Aspiration. Mount Aspi-
ration means a mental (or psychical) state, which enables the mind
and heart to make absolute and permanent Procress. Even so
all the Mountains are symbols of mental states; in which the soul
passes from one definite experience to another. From the com-
manding eminence of Aspiration I wrote the wisest of all my vol-
umes, “The Penetralia.” Oh, that I could picture the glory of
those “ Universal Harmonies” which —while on Mount Aspira-
tion —awakened and strengthened my entire existence !

Mount Harmony, with its overhanging grandeur and stupendous
attractions, is before me! And I know that my spirit, accompan-
ied by its mate, will continue to climb. Already I can overhear
certain holy words of harmonial Love whispered to Mother-Nature
from the deep, deep Wisdom heart of Father-God. The silvery
tides of their indissoluble affection set musically through my be-
ing. Amid eternal visions my silent soul is perpetually overflow-
ing with reverent love and boundless liberty. But all mental
experiences, like Music and the Seasons, progress in ascending
circles. Thus the summit of Mount Harmony is but the base of
another mountain yet more distant and exalted.

THE END.

©

=
o
”
a4
ha.
24
ane)
He
ef
ae
ry
22
ee
A
