The Great Pyramid: Its Divine Message
David Davidson and Herbert Aldersmith
The Great Pyramid: Its Divine Message, vol. I: Pyramid Records. London: Williams & Norgate, 1924 (first edition). Text from the ninth-edition printing, whose publisher's note states the text and plates stand substantially as in the 1924 first edition; later prefaces omitted.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/thegreatpyramiditsdivinemessage).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE GREAT PYRAMID

ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


THE GREAT PYRAMID

ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


AN ORIGINAL CO-ORDINATION OF HISTORICAL
DOCUMENTS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL EVIDENCES


BY

D. DAVIDSON

M.C., M.I.STRUCT.E.

AND

H. ALDERSMITH

M.B. (LOND.), F.R.C.S.


VOL. I.—PYRAMID RECORDS

A NARRATIVE OF NEW DISCOVERIES CONCERNING
CIVILISATIONS AND ORIGINS


Ninth Edition


LONDON

WILLIAM RIDER AND SON LIMITED


WEHMAN BROS.

PUBLISHERS
158 MAIN STREET
HACKENSACK, N. J.


First Edition 1924
Second Revised Edition 1925
Third Revised Edition 1926
Fourth Revised Edition 1927
Fifth Revised, Edition 1932
Sixth Revised Edition 1936
Seventh Edition 1937
Eighth Edition 1940
Ninth Edition 1941


CONTENTS


PAGE

V


PREFACE .

CHAPTER I.

ANCIENT ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATORIES AND ALMANAC DEVICES


AND TRADITIONS

Section I. General ........... i

,, Summary and Conclusions ........ 39

,, II. Accessory ........... 43

„ III. Detailed Technical Description of Plates . . . . 52


CHAPTER II.

THE EVIDENCES OF SCIENTIFIC ORIGINS IN ANCIENT EGYPT.


Section I. Geometrical Metrology and Dynastology .... 65

,, Summary and Conclusions ........ 90

„ II. The Origins of Greek Geometry and Astronomy ... 96

„ III. Description of Plates ........ 109


CHAPTER III.

THE ELEMENTS OF ANCIENT GRAVITATIONAL ASTRONOMY.

Section I. The Pyramid's External Definition of the Earth and its

Orbit . . . . . . . . . . .117

„ Summary and Conclusions . . . . . . . .136

„ II. Pyramid Measures and Details, and Subsidence Distortion . 147

„ III. Details concerning Plates . . . . . . .172

CHAPTER IV.

THE ANCIENT SCIENCE OF CHRONOLOGY: ITS ORIGIN
AND PURPOSE.

Section I. The Astronomical Ephemeris Intact, and the Literary Frag¬


ments of its Application . . , . . . .185

Summary and Conclusions ........ 225

II. Precession, the Zodiac and Orbital Movement . . .236

III. Description of Plates ........ 264


XVII


xviii


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


CHAPTER V.

THE CHRONOGRAPH OF HISTORY.

PACK

Section Ia. The Synchronous History of Egypt, Babylon, Assyria, and

Israel ........... 284

„ Tables and Annotations . . . . . . . 310

„ Ib. The Messianic Age of the Ancient Prophecies . . . 354

„ Ic. " The Consummation ” ........ 381

„ I. Summary and Conclusions—

(a) The Probabilities of the Co-ordination .... 422

(b) The Facts of the Co-ordination ..... 438

„ II. The Chronology of our Lord’s Life and the Harmony of the

Gospels .......... 461

„ IIa. The Date of the Nativity ....... 463

„ IIb. The Duration of our Lord’s Ministry ..... 473

„ lie. The Month-day and the Week-day of the Crucifixion . . 490

„ III. Details concerning Plates ....... 510

APPENDIX I.

The Egyptian King Lists ..529

APPENDIX II.

Data relating to the Evolution of Fictitious Systems of Chronology in

the King Lists of the Ancient Egyptians ...... 543

INDEX OF AUTHORS AND AUTHORITIES.557

GENERAL INDEX.560


LIST OF PLATES


Perspective View looking down Grand Gallery, with South End

Wall removed. Great Step shown in foreground . . Frontispiece

Looking up Grand Gallery, with North Wall removed. Well-Shaft

and Queen’s Chamber Passage in foreground ... ,,

PLATE PAG*

I. Plan of Stonehenge. Stone Circle and Outer Earth Circle . . . i

II. Perspective View of Stonehenge at time of Sunrise of Summer Solstice,

1680 B.C. ........... 2

III. Map of the Nile Delta ......... 8

IV. Map of the Pyramids and Tombs on the Plateau of Gizeh, Meridian Section

through the Great Pyramid . . . . . . .10

V. Pyramid Noon Reflexions and Shadows . . . . . .11

VI. Pyramid Noon Reflexions and Shadows . . . . . .12

VII. Pyramid Noon Reflexions and Shadows . . . . . . 13

VIII. Pyramid Noon Reflexions and Shadows . . . . . -14


IX. Chart showing the Seasonal Phenomena and Activities of the Solar Year in
ancient Egypt compared with the Seasonal Phenomena and Activities
of the early Egyptian Calendar Year, compiled from the dated Records
of the Period of Dynasties VI to XII ...... 20

X. Chart of Limits of early Egyptian Intercalated Calendar Year, Egyptian
Seasons, and Great Pyrar ' :1 Noon Reflexion and Shadow Phenomena
stated with reference to the Modern (Gregorian) Months . . .21

XI. Records of the Period of Dynasties VI to XII of Distant Quarrying Expedi¬
tions to the Quarries at Wady Hammamat and Hat Nub, and to the


Mines and Quarries at Sinai . . . . . . .22

XII. The Geometry of the Great Pyramid’s Noon Reflexions and Shadows . 61

XIII. Equal Areas ........... 67

XIV. Geometrical Analogy .......... 69

XV. Comparison of Ancient Scales of Measurement (reduced) . . *71


XVI. Chart showing the Geometrical, Astronomical, and Numerical Bases of the

Fictitious Chronologies of the ancient Egyptian King Lists . . 77

XVII. Diagrammatic Representation of Professor Petrie’s Reconstruction, and of

the New Reconstruction of the Great Pyramid from Petrie’s Survey. 82


xix


XX


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


PLATS PACE

XVIII. Diagrammatic Perspective View illustrating features of Great Pyramid's

Core Masonry ......... 83

XIX. The Reduced Co-ordinates of Professor Petrie's Survey Data . . 118

XX. The Measurements and Levels of the Existing Details of the Great

Pyramid's Exterior . . . . . . . .120

XXI. Reconstruction of the South-East Corner Casing Stone . . .122

XXII. Isometric and Oblique Projections of South-East Casing Stone Recon¬
structions ... ...... 123

XXIII. The Great Pyramid's Equal Area Geometry defines Displacement of

Passage System . . . . . . . . .126

XXIV. The Geometry of the Passage System Displacement . . . .127

XXV. The Pyramid Base defines the Earth and its Orbit, in Dimensions and

Motion ........... 130

XXVI. View of existing North Base Casing Stones, looking Westwards.

Fissure in Natural Rock, where Paving removed, shown in right
foreground .......... 143

XXVII. View of existing North Base Casing Stones and Pavement Slabs.

A 1 Mamoun’s forced entrance shown on 7th course of masonry . 144

XXVIII. Near view of existing North Base Casing Stones and Pavement Slabs,
showing Fissure in Natural Rock, where Paving removed, in left
foreground .......... 145


XXIX. View of existing state of North Escarpment showing existing Base
Casing Stones, A1 Mamoun's forced entrance—indicated by figure
—and existing state of entrance to the Descending (or Entrance)
Passage.146

XXX. Great Pyramid Passages and Chambers: Original and Existing

* Measurements . . . . . . . . .156

XXXI. General Subsidence Distortion Diagram of Great Pyramid, and its

Passages and Chambers ........ i‘6o

XXXII. Longitudinal Section at Commencement of Grand Gallery and Horizontal

Passage to Queen's Chamber ....... 162

XXXIII. Isometric Projection showing Forced Opening into Well-Shaft . .163

XXXIV. Isometric Projection showing Entrance Doorway of Horizontal Passage

to Queen's Chamber ^ . 164

XXXVa. Subsidence Distortion Diagram of Existing King's Chamber, Ante¬
chamber, etc. ......... 166

XXXVb. Plan of King's Chamber, Antechamber, and Queen's Chamber—

Original Measurements ........ 167

Addendum to Plate XXXV. Original Distances from Face

of Great Step to South Wall of King's Chamber . . 168

XXXVI. Section from Grand Gallery to King's Chamber ..... 170

XXXVIIa. Geometrical Interpolation for Case algebraically defined

P.-»A-f B*t-{-C*t a ......... 192


LIST OF PLATES xxi

PLAT* FAGS

XXXVIIb. Geometrical Interpolation for Case algebraically defined

P=A—B*t-f-C-t* ......... 193

XXXVIII. Geometry of Passage Slopes ........ 198

XXXIX. Section of the Passages of the Great Pyramid . . . . .198

XLa. The Geometry of the Great Pyramid's Passage System . . .202

XLb. The Geometry of the Great Pyramid’s Passage System . . . 203

XLIa. Geometrical Details of the Great Pyramid's Passage System . . 204

XLIb. Geometrical Details of the Great Pyramid's Passage System . .205

XLIIa. The Great Pyramid's Astronomical Chronograph and Geometrical

Ephemeris .......... 206

XLIIb. The Basis and Evolution of Egyptian Dynastic Chronology . .207

XLIII. The Geometry of the Antechamber and King's Chamber . . . 208

XLIV. Precession of the Equinoxes—The Solar Year in 4699 B.C. . . 240

XLV. Precession of the Equinoxes—The Solar Year in 1844 A.D.. . . 240

XLVI. Precession of the Equinoxes—The Solar Year in 8203 J A.D. . .241

XLVII. Precession of the Equinoxes—The Solar Year in 14,390^ A.D. . .241

XLVIII. Precession of the Equinoxes and the Signs of the Zodiac . . . 246

XLIX. The Precessional Movement of the North Celestial Pole. . . . 249


L. Precession of Equinoxes. Equinoctial Southern Horizon, 4699 B.C. . 258

LI. Precession of Equinoxes. Equinoctial Southern Horizon, 4699 B.C. . 258

LII. Precession of Equinoxes. Equinoctial Southern Horizon, 4000 B.C. . 259

LIII. Precession of Equinoxes. Equinoctial Southern Horizon, 4000 B.C. . 259

LIV. Precession of Equinoxes. Solstitial Southern Horizon, 4000 B.C. . 260

LV. The Motion of the Earth's Orbit, 4044 B.C. . . . . .261

LVI. The Motion of the Earth's Orbit, 1246 A.D. ..... 262

LVII. Isometric Projection showing top end of Grand Gallery, 1st Low Passage,
Antechamber, and Doorway to 2nd Low Passage, all in course of
original constructional operations ...... 280

LVIII. Perspective View of South End of Grand Gallery, Great Step, Ante¬
chamber, and connecting Low Passages . . . . .281

LIX. Gregorian Month Dates for Beginning of Mean Day 1 Month I of 103

Years' Cycle from 4000 B.C. to 2000 A.D. (Gregorian) . . 288

LX. Julian Month Dates for the Heliacal Rising of Sirius (Lat. Memphis) from

4000 B.C. to 2000 A.D. (Julian) . . . . . .289

LXI. The Historical Conditions in Egypt relating to the circumstances of


Israel's Oppression and Exodus . . . . . .296

Annotations to Plate LXI ...... 297

LXII. The Great Pyramid's Chronograph of Sacred Astronomical Cycles . 363

LXIII. The Land of Goshen. The Route of the Exodus .... 373


xxii THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE

plats page

LXIV. The Geometrical Definition of the Subterranean Chamber . , 377

LXVa. The Bases 6f the Special Chronology Representation .... 388

LXVb. The Given Geometrical Data and the Resulting Geometrical Check Data . 389

LXVc. The Datings of the Special Chronology System ..... 390

LXVI. The Seven Times (2520 years) of Gentile Domination in relation to
Jerusalem. Their Successive Stages of Beginning and -their Succes¬
sive Stages of Ending, and the Basis of the “ Year-day " Principle of
Interpretation relating to the Prophetic Periods 1260, 1290, 1335,
and 2520 “ days *' and 2300 “ evening-mornings ” . . . $91

LXVII. The Pyramid's Geometrical Application of the Constant (286.1) of the
Law of Relativity governing the Material and Spiritual Changes
operating in Man's Conscious Universe ..... 446

LXVIII. The Original Seal of the United States of America .... 456

LXIX. Tablet of Karnak .......... 539

LXX. Diagrammatic Key to the List of Karnak ...... 541


LIST OF TABLES

TABLE PADS

I. The Two Recognised Forms of Solar Year in Ancient Times ... 3

II. Ancient Intercalary Cycle and its Intercalary Periods . . . .. 27

III. The Construction of the Intercalary Cycle of 103 Years . . . 28, 29

IV. The Series Comprising the Period of the Cycle of 721 Years . . 3°

V. The Antediluvian Dynasties of Genesis v ...... 36

VI. Pyramid Noon Reflexions during the Summer Half of the Year . . 42

VII. Pyramid Noon Reflexions during the Winter Half of the Year ... 42

VIII. XXth Dynasty Datings of Annual Festivals ...... 48

IX. Ptolemaic Datings for the Osirian Festival Rites ..... 48

X. Synoptical History of Greek Geometry and Astronomy . . . 103-107

XI. (A) Dated List of known Phoenix Cycles . . . . . .310

(B) The Fictitious Chronology of the Egyptian King Lists based on

erroneous period of the Phoenix Cycle . . . . . . 310

Annotations to Table XI . . . . . . . 31 1

XII. Dynasty XVIII. Reigns . . . . . . . . . 312

XIII. Dynasty XIX. Reigns . . . . . . . . •3 I 3

XIV. Chronology of Egyptian Dynasties XVIII and XIX . . . . 314

Annotations to Table XIV . . . . . . *315

XV. The Chronology of Dynasty XII . . . . . . . . 316

Annotations (A), (B), (C), and (D) to Table XV. Real and

Fictitious Chronological Data ..... 317-320

XVI. The Sed Hebs of Dynasties XVIII and XIX. The Periods of the Sep Tep

Sed Heb ........... 321

XVII. Chronological Table of the 1st Dynasty of Babylon and the Kassite Dynasty,

with their Assyrian and Sea-land Contemporaries . . . 322, 323


XVIII. The Contemporaneity of the Dynasty of Hyksos, and of Dynasties XII and
XVIII, in Succession, in Egypt, with the 1st Dynasty of Babylon and
the Dynasty of Kassites, during the Period of the Rise and Establishing
of the Hittite Empire ......... 324

Annotations (A), (B), (C) and (D) to Tables XVII to XIX. The

Evolution of Babylonian Schemes of Chronology . 324, 325

XIX. The True Chronology of the Babylonian Dynastic Tablet from 1458 B.C.

to 731 B.C. 2nd Dynasty of Isin to 2nd Dynasty of Babylon
inclusive .......... 326, 327

xxiii


XXIV


THE GREAT PYRAMID : ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


TABLE PAG*

XX. The Chronology of the Period of Assyrian Supremacy .... 328

Annotations to Table XX ....... 329

XXI. The Chronological Data fixing the Chronology of the Babylonian-Chaldaean

Monarchy, Nabopolassar to Nabonidos inclusive . . . . 330

Annotations to Table XXI. . . . . . . 331

XXII. Synchronistic Narratives of the Book of Genesis and the Records of the

Xllth and XVIIIth Egyptian Dynasties .... 332, 333

Annotations to Table XXII. The Egyptian Record of

Joseph's Famine. ....... 334

Annotations to Tables XXII and XXIII. The Rise and Fall

of the Semites in Egypt . . . . . -335

XXIII. The Chronological Sequence of Events including the Exodus of Israel 336, 337

XXIV. From the Harris Papyrus Interregnum to the Persian Conquest of

Egypt.338, 339

Annotations A.—The Astronomical Data . . . *338

B. —The Problem of the Reign of Psamtek I and

its Solution . . . . . .338

C. —The Resulting Statement of the Sequence of

Historical Events . . . . 338, 339

XXV. Chronology of the Kingdoms of Judah and Israel, from the Division in
the Kingdom to the Destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar,

970 B.C. to 584 B.C. ........ 340

Annotations to Table XXV. ' Synchronistic Statement of the

Reigns of the Kings of Judah and the Kings of Israel . 341

XXVI. Outstanding Dates relating to the History of the Kings of Judah and


Israel (Table XXV).342

Annotations (A), (B), and (C). Egyptian, Assyrian, and

Babylonian Synchronisms ..... 343-345

XXVII. A—Medo-Persian Kings—Cyrus to Darius III ..... 346

B—The 2nd Years employed in Jewish Chronological Forgeries . . 346

Annotations to Table XXVII ...... 347


XXVIII. The Original Hebrew Chronology and the Evolution of the Jewish
Rabbinical Systems of Chronology from the Original Hebrew.

Bases of Evolution—Darius I = " Darius even Artaxerxes,”

Ezra vi, 14, and Daniel's Prophecy relating to 69 Weeks and a
70th Week (Dan. ix) ........ 348

Annotations (A), (B), and (C). The Original Hebrew

Chronology. 348-350

Annotations (D). The Chronological Systems of Josephus . 351

Annotations (E) and (F). The Evolution of Jewish

Chronology.352, 353

XXIX. The Pyramid's Astronomically Defined Datings from the Great Step to the

King's Chamber ......... 390


LIST OF TABLES


XXV


TABLE PAGE

XXX. The Chronology of Judah's Captivities, and the Initial Stages of the
Period of Gentile Domination over Jerusalem. The Initial Phase
of the Seven Times of the Gentiles ...... 391

XXXI. The Comparative Statement of the Three Versions in the Gospels of our

Lord’s Exposition and Predictive Expansion of Daniel’s Prophecy 391

XXXII. The Four Different Years employed for Chronological Reckoning . 472

XXXIII. The Reign of Tiberius Caesar, according to Provincial and Official

Reckonings .......... 474

XXXIV. The 15th Year of Tiberius Caesar in terms of the Four Different Year-

Reckonings .......... 474

XXXV. The Duration of our Lord’s Ministry from the Narrative Sequence of

the Four Gospels ......... 478

XXXVI. Table of Calendar Dates for ascertaining New Testament Chronology . 486

XXXVII. The Passovers of the Exodus and Crucifixion Years .... 490

XXXVIII. The Events leading up to and including the Exodus of Israel are
represented by the Sacred Narrative as prefiguring the Events
leading up to and including the Exodus of our Lord. Great
Pyramid Diagram illustrating the Identity resulting from the
Comparison of the Three Independent Messianic Prophecies of the
Ancients .......... 490

XXXIX. A. The Gregorian Calendar Year Dates for 1st July of the Julian

Calendar Year from Tabular Year o ..... 504

XXXIX. B. The Gregorian Calendar Year dates for 1st February of the Julian

Calendar Year from Tabular Year 1 ..... 504

XL. Perpetual Calendar for Tabular Years in Plates LIX and LX (for both
Old (Julian) and New Style (Gregorian) Intercalations) giving
Data from which the Day of the Week, for any Day of any Month


of any Year can be determined ...... 505

XLI. A. The Later Egyptian Calendar ....... 506

B. The Early Chaldaean and the Early Egyptian Calendar . . 506

C. The Modern Calendar : Old (Julian) or New (Gregorian) Styles . 506

XLII. Aramaic and Assyrian Lunar Calendar : also Hebrew Sacred Calendar. 507
XLIII. For Julian Years and Dates referred to same ..... 508


XLIV. For calculating Dates of Astronomical New and Full Moons and
Eclipses ; Chronological Julian Datings obtained by comparison
with Data derived according to Tables XLI (C) and XLIII and
Rules for same ......... 509

XLV. The Julian Month Dates for Day 1 Month I of the Egyptian Vague
Year from the year in which it was first established (Hist.

1861 B.C.) to the 3rd Century A.D., when it was finally discarded 515

APPENDIX I—THE EGYPTIAN KING LISTS.

XLVI. The King List of Manetho. Book I . . . . . . 531

XLVII. The King List of Manetho. Book II ..... 532


XXVI


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


XLVIII. The King List of Manetho. Book III
XLIX. The Old Egyptian Chronicle
L. The Table of Eratosthenes .

LI. The List of Josephus .

LII. Castor's Reckoning .

LIII. The Book of the Sothis
LIV. Tablets of Abydos and Sakkarah
LV. Kings on Kamak List


533

534

535

535

536

537

538
540


APPENDIX II—DATA RELATING TO THE EVOLUTION OF FICTITIOUS
SYSTEMS OF CHRONOLOGY IN THE KING LISTS OF THE ANCIENT
EGYPTIANS.

LVI. The Evidence concerning an Interpolation of 1000 years in the

Egyptian King Lists.544, 545


LVII. Evidence of the 1000 years' Interpolation in the Version of Manetho's

King Lists preserved by Eusebius ....... 546

LVIII. The Earlier System from which the Scheme of Table LVII originated . 547

LIX. Systems indicated by the Version of Africanus ..... 548

LX. The Original Chronology Basis of the Fictitious Elements in the King Lists 549
LXI. The Confusion of the Sothic Cycle with the Phoenix Cycle . . . 550

LXII. The System of “ The Book of the Sothis" ...... 550

LXIII. The Development of the Sothic Cycle Theory . . . . 551

LXIV. A Chronological System combining the Original Astronomical Chronology

and the Fictitious Sothic Cycle Chronology . . . . -552

LXV. The Chronology System of the Illrd Book of Manetho (Africanus), com¬
bining the Original and Sothic Systems of Chronology . . • 553

LXVI. The Cyclical Bases of the Egyptian Theory relating to the ancient Egyptian

Short Chronology System . . . . . . . -554

Annotations to Table LXVI. A pre-Manethon Theory relating

to Co-equal Antiquity of early Dynastic Capitals . 555

LXVII. The Phoenix Chronology of the King Lists . . . . . *556


TAILPIECES TO CHAPTERS


These are from the engravings of the drawings by Denon made during Napoleon’s
Egyptian Campaign, 1798-99.

Tailpiece to Chapter I.—View, at sunset, of the Island of Philae, looking West.
The island is now submerged by the impounded waters behind the Assouan Dam.

Tailpiece to Chapter II.—View of a small XVIIIth Dynasty peripteral temple
on the Island of Elephantine. The temple was built by Amenhotep III and dedicated to
the chief god of the 1st Cataract. It was destroyed by the Turkish governor in 1822.
The temple shown is of interest as having been built during the early period of Semitic
influence in the XVIIIth Dynasty, and as indicating a probable source for Greek archi¬
tectural impulse (refer to Chapter V in this connection).

Tailpiece to Chapter III.—View of the Temple of Thotn at Hermopolis. Maspero
states that “ The portico was destroyed about 1820 by the engineers who constructed the
sugar refinery at Rodah, and now only a few shapeless fragments of it remain.”

Tailpiece to Chapter IV.—Another view of the Island of Philae (North).

Tailpiece to Chapter V.—View of the 1st Cataract locality—looking South—with
the Island of Elephantine shown in the foreground. This is now the site of the Assouan
Dam.


My elucidation of the various phases of the Great Pyramid's design has
led me to perceive that it is an expression of the Truth in structural
form .

I proclaim, with humility and yet with confidence , that the Pyramid's
Message establishes the Bible as the Inspired Word of God , and testifies
that fesus Christ , by HIS DISPLACEMENT, paid the purchase price
of mankind's Redemption , effected the Salvation of all who truly
believe in Him.

This Message concerns all mankind , whom, in a humble spirit ,
work is dedicated , tn that it may bring enlightenment and

comfort to many .


zx zx


CHAPTER I.


ANCIENT ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATORIES,
ALMANAC DEVICES AND TRADITIONS.


Section I.— General.


If i. ANCIENT KNOWLEDGE CONCERNING THE SOLAR YEAR.

It is evident that the civilised inhabitants of the Ancient East had precise Th> s#Ur yw
knowledge of the duration of the Solar year. This is dear from every source known i.
of information, m archaeology, literary tradition, and mythology, that is open to It# Two

modern research. Ancient Forms.

It was observed that the seasons were definitely fixed to the solar year, as Astronomical
defined by the astronomical phenomena accompanying the recurrence of the Equhows“ d
Solstices and Equinoxes . 1 From the knowledge of the recurrence of these, the vwtatum
four quarters of the agricultural year were observed to begin precisely mid-way
between a Solstice and an Equinox.

The points of the Solar Astronomical Year and of the Solar Vegetation
Year, as recognised in the earliest period of recorded ancient history are stated
in terms of our modem (Gregorian) Calendar in Table I.

*Sir Norman Lockyer, “Dawn of Astronomy,” pp. 12, 57, 62-66, 78-85, 89-93, 117-119,

244-245 (quotations from Ideler), 331 and 337.

Lockyer, “ Stonehenge and Other British Stone Monuments,” pp. 64-68, 96-106, 181-199,

308-315, 335 and 336.

The references are selected as, in our opinion, being free from elements that can be justifiably
criticised on archaeological grounds.

Prof. G. Forbes, “History of Astronomy,” pp. 8-10.

W. G. Old, “ The Chinese Shu-King ,” Introduction, Book I, Sect. I, and notes, Do. Sect. V,

Book II, Sect. I, notes.

Encycl. Brit, (nth Edit.), Vol. I, pp. 224 and 317.


PLATE II.


PERSPECTIVE VIEW OF STONEHENGE AT TIME OF SUNRISE OF SUMMER SOLSTICE. 1680 B.C.


Drawn by A. C. de Jong


PYRAMID RECORDS


3


TABLE I.

THE TWO RECOGNISED FORMS OF SOLAR YEAR IN ANCIENT

TIMES.

(Stated with reference to modern Calendar Year for igoi a.d.)

The Solar Astronomical Year. The Solar Vegetation Year.

Early Semitic ]


Astronomical Year

began at Autumnal Equinox J

j- 23 Sept.


f Ancient November

Winter Begins

Mid-Way ..

8 Nov. -

Agricultural Year
[ began.

Winter Solstice ..

23 Dec.

I

Chinese Agricultural

Spring Begins

Mid-Way ..

4 Feb. I

Year began,

. (B.C. 2448).!

Later Semitic 1

Astronomical Year

began at Vernal Equinox J

- 21 Mar.


f Ancient May

Summer Begins

Mid-Way 2 ..

6 May -

Agricultural Year
[ began.

Summer Solstice ..

21 June.


Autumn Begins

Mid-Way 2 . .

8 Aug.


Autumnal Equinox

23 Sept.


If 2. STONEHENGE TEMPLE OBSERVATORY AND ALMANAC
CIRCLE. (Plates I and II).

In our own country there exist hundreds of ancient structural devices for
indicating the principal points of the two recognised forms of the Solar year.

The best-known monument of this nature is that of the Stonehenge circle, a*?"*™."**
This consists of the arrangement of upright stones and lintels contained within tit™, „{%•
the earthwork circle, as figured restored, on Plates I and II. The Avenue iwonomic.i
Approach to the Circle cuts the Earthwork circle as shown on the Plates. v^tatfon

Years.

1<< The Chinese Shu-King.” W. G. Old, pp. 301-2, and note. Translation of Book I, Sect. I,
pp. 1-2, and Translator’s notes to same.

Encycl. Brit, (nth Edit.), Vol. VI, p. 317.

3 By “ Mid-Way ” is intended 45 0 of Right Ascension from an Equinox or Solstice ; not mid¬
way as defined by the interval in days.


4


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


StennMS,
Orkney*
Alignments
define the
points of the
Solar

Astronomical
and Solar
Vegetation
Years.


Sixty~*even
British Solar
Astronomical
and Vegetation
Year

Alignments


Thirty-fear

Solar

Astronomical
and Vegetation
Year

Alignments

in Brittany.


Thanks to the admirable surveys of Sir William M. Flinders Petrie and Mr.
Edgar Barclay, and Sir Norman Lockyer’s 1 precise azimuth alignments, the
purpose of the circle is now known with certainty.

As shown on Plate I, two separate alignments are directed to the horizon points
of sunrise and sunset at the Summer Solstice and Winter Solstice respectively.
Another alignment on Plate I gives the horizon point of Sunset at the beginning
(May 6) and ending (August 8) of Summer, and of the horizon point of Sunrise
at beginning (Nov. 8) and ending (February 4) of Winter.

Plate II shows the shadows thrown by the Stone Circle at Sunrise of
Summer Solstice.

(Refer Section III Description of Plates ^ 65 and 66).

If 3. OTHER BRITISH CIRCLES AND ALIGNMENTS.

Of equal astronomical importance to Stonehenge and its accessory align¬
ments discussed by Lockyer and Barclay, are the circles and accessory align¬
ments of Stenness, in Orkney. Mr. Magnus Spence was the first to show that
these were connected with the Solar year and its principal datings. Investiga¬
tions conducted by Sir Norman Lockyer confirm that the alignments were
variously directed towards sunrise or sunset at the Solstitial and May and
November points of the year. 2 The data at Stenness in the Orkneys, then,
agree with the data at Stonehenge. Both define the principal points of the
Solar Astronomical Year and of the Solar Vegetation year.

In this part of his subject Lockyer has some interesting evidence concerning
the sighting purpose of the well-known perforated stones, met with in Britain
and North-Western Europe, wherever similar astronomical alignments occur. 3

Leaving out of consideration—as doubtful on archaeological grounds—
many of Lockyer’s star rising and setting alignments in Britain, Lockyer
discusses and tabulates twenty-five May alignments, eleven November align¬
ments, and nineteen Summer, and twelve Winter Solstitial alignments in
Great Britain and Ireland. 4


If 4. ALIGNMENTS IN BRITTANY AND ELSEWHERE.

Passing from Britain into Brittany, Lockyer finds eleven May alignments,
three November alignments, six Summer and eleven Winter Solstitial align¬
ments, and three Equinoctial alignments. 5

'Petrie, “ Stonehenge,” Plates.

Lockyer, “ Stonehenge and other British Stone Monuments,” pp. 46 (Hoare’s 1810 plan),
55-68 (Solstitial alignment), 88-95 (May-November alignment), 442-450 (The Welsh Gorsedd.—
Solstitial and May-November alignments).

Barclay, “ Stonehenge and its Earthworks,” pp. 63-66 (Solstitial alignment), 66-67 (Equinoc¬
tial alignment and altitude), 70, 99-110 (November, February, May, and August Festivals, and
March, June, September, and December Festivals). Barclay’s Plates IIT and IV for alignments.

'Spence’s “ Standing Stones and Maeshowe of Stenness,” Scottish Review , Oct., 1893.

*“ Stonehenge and Other British Stone Monuments,” pp. 37, 128, 282, 285, 286, 316, and 318.

•Ibid., Appendices, pp. 481 and 482.

•Ibid., Appendices, pp. 485-486.


PYRAMID RECORDS


5


As in parts of Britain, Lockyer 1 —quoting Baring-Gould—finds the May and
August Festivals still celebrated in many parishes of Brittany. The same,
however, is true of North-Western Europe, the reason being that, whereas RoStJ otJ
Brittany lies on the Southern track of the megalithic builders from the East, MeSurranLn
the circles and alignments of North-Western Europe lie on the Northern track ^r°pea*n
of the megalithic builders from Western Asia and Egypt. Mmmmcntt:

“ It must not be forgotten,” says Lockyer, “ that structures more or less
similar to Stonehenge are found along a line from the East on both sides of the
Mediterranean.” 2

Professor T. Eric Peet says that these “ occupy a very remarkable position
along a vast sea-board which includes the Mediterranean coast of Africa and
the Atlantic coast of Europe. In other words, they lie entirely along a natural
sea route.” 3

This confirms another statement by Lockyer that “ the Druid culture (of
Ancient Britain) had not passed through Gaul, and had therefore been water¬
borne to Britain.” 4

If 5. THE SEA ROUTE—WESTERN ASIA AND EGYPT TO BRITAIN.

As a matter of fact, the Libyo-Amorite route between Western Asia and
the Atlantic coasts seems to have been almost entirely a sea route, rather than,
as some have supposed, a North African Coast-Land route. The distribution Me - #Uthic
of megalithic buildings along the coast of North-Western Africa and South-
Western Europe is denser than along the coast of North-Eastern Africa. This Meditirrant»*
undoubtedly points to the fact that these monuments were erected near Route *
colonized ports of call along the sea route to the ancient Portuguese, Spanish,

British, and Baltic metal, amber, and jet deposits.

The period for this earliest activity in maritime commerce between Britain Commercial
and the East dates from before 2000 B.C. to 1200 B.C. 6 c\rc r . C 2ooo b.c

to 1200 B.C.

XVIIIth Dynasty Egyptian glazed beads (not made elsewhere, or by any Stoneheng#
other Egyptian dynasty than the XVIIIth and XIXth), were found at Stone- §5J5Jf“ d
henge, together with beads of Baltic amber. 6 Similar beads of Baltic amber Ambtrh» ortrv
were also found in Egypt in XVIIIth and XIXth Dynasty remains. 7

This identification of the period of Stonehenge confirms Lockyer’s astrono- dit?. eI,w,,€
mical dating, 1680 B.C. ± 200 years, for the erection of the Stone Circle.

Ancient British jet (from Whitby in Yorkshire) and worked pieces of Baltic
amber have been found, in the deposits of the megalithic builders in Spain and
Portugal, together with Egyptian ivory figures, a shell from the Red Sea,

Egyptian alabaster and marble objects, and statuettes of a Babylonian type. 8

v< Stonehenge and Other British Stone Monuments,” pp. 198-199.

a “ Dawn of Astronomy/* p. 90.

8 “ Rough Stone Monuments/* (1912), pp. 147-8.

4 “ Stonehenge and Other British Stone Monuments/’ p. 323.

6 Mr. Donald A. Mackenzie’s “ Ancient Man in Britain,” pp. 91-108, 218-222.

•Sayce, in Tournal of Egyptian Archaeology, Vol. I, Pt. I., p. 18. H. R. Hall, p. 19.

7 H. R. Hall, p. 19.

8 D. A. Mackenzie, “ Ancient Man in Britain,” pp. 96, 97.


6


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


H 6. FOLKLORE AND TRADITION.

Long prior to the discovery of these evidences, Lockyer conducted an
exhaustive inquiry into local Folklore and tradition for evidences concerning
Summary of Druidic origins. 1 His conclusions are clearly and ably summed up in his
Conclusion*, comprehensive article, “ The Uses and Dates of Ancient Temples,” in Nature ,
May 20th, 1909, as follows :—

“ At the first blush there appears to be no resemblance between the
Egyptian and Greek temples and the British stone monuments, but a

careful study of both shows that this view is an erroneous one.

In my inquiry I have not confined myself to the astronomical side of the
question. I have tried to dip into the folklore and tradition already
garnered in relation, not only to the sacred stones, but to the sacred wells
and sacred trees.

“ From what I have learned I am convinced that much light will be
thrown on both when an attempt shall have been made to picture
what the lives of the first British astronomer-priests must necessarily
have been.

“ It is interesting to note that, while the astronomical side of the
inquiry suggests a close connection with Egyptian thought, the folklore
and traditions, when studied in relation with the monuments, indicate
a close connection between ancient BRITISH and the SEMITIC civilisa¬
tions.The ‘Druids’ of Caesar’s time were undoubtedly the

descendants of the astronomer-priests, some of whose daily work has now
perhaps at last been revealed.”

In this connection a knowledge of the conclusions reached by the eminent
Evidence** 1 '* 1 Belgian Archaeologist, M. Siret, is of more than ordinary interest. Mackenzie
Extern origin states that as a result of M. Siret’s investigations concerning the Eastern origin
Buiidfrs^Ind of the megalithic builders and metal workers in Ancient Britain, Spain, and
JSff&ar Portugal,

2 “ Siret has found evidence to show that the Tree Cult of the
Easterners was connected with the early megalithic monuments. The
testimony of tradition associates the stone circles, etc., with the Druids.

‘ We are now obliged,’ he writes, 3 6 to go back to the theory of the
archaeologists of a hundred years ago who attributed the megalithic
monuments to the Druids. The instinct of our predecessors has been
more penetrating than the scientific analysis which has taken its place.’
In Gaelic, as will be shown, the words for a sacred grove, and the shrine
within a grove are derived from the same root nem .”

l " Stonehenge and Other British Stone Monuments/' pp. 178-260.

*D. A. Mackenzie, “ Ancient Man in Britain," pp. 155-6.

% U Anthropologic (1921), pp. 268 et seq.


Ancient

British

Astronomical

Evidences

indicate

Egyptian

influence.


' Local Folklore
and Tradition
indicate
Semitic
influence or
origin.


PYRAMID RECORDS


7


f 7. CONCLUSIONS FROM RECENT DISCOVERIES.

Mackenzie, 1 from the more recent evidences similarly sums up his inquiry,
as follows :—

“ The Celts appear to have embraced the Druidic system of the
earlier Iberians in Western Europe, whose culture had been derived from Sri^HT 8 *
that of the Oriental colonists.” Colonies.

“ At an early period in the Early Agricultural Age and before bronze pSm b o?Sii
working was introduced, England and Wales, Scotland and Ireland, were Rout*to**
influenced more directly than had hitherto been the case by the high Britain,
civilizations of Egypt and Mesopotamia, and especially by their colonies in
South-Western Europe.”

If 8. THE ORIGINAL IDEA ADOPTED BY THE MEGALITHIC
BUILDERS.

Our inquiry is concerned chiefly with the origin of astronomical observa¬
tories and almanac devices employed to fix and portray the principal points of
the solar astronomical and solar vegetation years. The astronomical evidences,
and the evidences from folklore and tradition, and from archaeological sources,
have shown us that the origin is carried back to the valleys of the Euphrates
and the Nile.

Lockyer has shown us that the Pyramid builders of the IVth and Vth
Egyptian Dynasties, must, from their astronomical cult, have come from the The Egyptian
region of the Euphrates. He shows also, that nearly all the ancient year cults Buiide« y of mid
of the Nile Delta are connected with the Euphratean equinoctial year. 2 Petrie, arigto!** 8 ”
too, finds an Euphratean origin for the Vth Dynasty of Egypt. 3

Confirming our deductions from the data, we find at once that the idea of The extarnai^
the IVth Dynasty Great Pyramid builders in Egypt was the original of the idea Great‘pyramid
followed by all the megalithic builders from Egypt to Spain and Britain. The MegaUtw/
Great Pyramid was built, not alone as a Sundial of the day, but primarily, in ^£ c ker g pain
its external features, as a Sundial of the Seasons. «nd Britain. '

If 9. THE ANCIENT SUNDIAL OF THE SEASONS.

One of the primary objects of early Pyramid building in ancient Egypt
was undoubtedly to record and indicate automatically throughout the country
the annual recurrence of the principal points of the two forms of solar year—the The Necessity
astronomical and the agricultural. No form of building, unless accurately and iccJrat t e bulk *
symmetrically built with proper reference to the North, South, East, and West, pe r fectiin“in nd
could be employed to effect this purpose. That the requisite Sundial of the workman * hl P-
Seasons should be a monument of public utility necessitated vast bulk, large
external surfaces, the finest selected material, and extreme accuracy of work¬
manship.

l “ Ancient Man in Britain,” pp. 218 and 220.

9 “ Dawn of Astronomy,” pp. 84, 85, 367-370.

*“ History of Egypt,” Vol. I, p. 85 (9th Ed.), p. 96 (10th Ed.).


8


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


All the necessary requirements are fulfilled by the gigantic proportions of
Condition* the Pyramids of Gizeh, by their accurate orientation, and by their precision of

GiSh*? by workmanship. Then the site selected, on the elevated plateau of Gizeh,

st* 1 1 westwar d of the adjacent agricultural land,—the inhabited and cultivated
s^Monai* * strip of the Nile—and centrally south of the cultivated Delta, was the only
D«ita. ° * possible site for the effective utilisation of the structural features. The

admirable nature of the selected site, for the purpose indicated, is seen by
reference to Plate III—Map of the Nile Delta—and Plate IV—Map of the
Pyramids and Tombs on the Plateau of Gizeh—and by reference to the upper
view of the frontispiece.


If io. THE REFLECTING SURFACES OF THE GREAT PYRAMID
OF GIZEH.


Conceived and built the first of all the Pyramids of Gizeh, the Great
Pyramid embodied in its external casing all the knowledge of the Ancients
concerning the properties of the Sundial. Planned to effect its purpose primarily
Pyr*mi*d’i by means of reflected sunlight, and secondarily only by .means of shadows, the
fm«K** casing of the Great Pyramid was selected from the whitest and best limestone from

6'.a«ti'on«° r the quarries of Turra and Masara, on the opposite or Eastern side of the Nile.

To ensure accuracy and continuity of unbroken plane, free from visible
joints and beds, in the casing surface of each face slope of the Great Pyramid,
the beds and joints, and the visible surfaces of all casing stones were worked as
R*fin*m*ot of accurately as modem optician’s work, but with this degree of accuracy extend-
puoeSufocu ing to considerably larger surfaces. All joints and beds were so accurately
lid i&oMd ** fitted that even at this date a sheet of note-paper cannot be inserted between
F * s “' the stones still remaining unbroken and undisturbed in situ. Yet all these
joints and beds were ran with a fine film of cement.


Another remarkable feature of constructional detail confirms the high
degree of accuracy and smoothness of surface that was considered necessary.
n>w* c»« out Flaws in the visible surfaces of the casing stones were cut out and refilled with
tritlratrign of accurately fitting pieces of limestone, invisibly cemented in. This indicates
roitoration. that the intention was to obtain the whole external visible surface so uniformly

Tk* Croat smooth and plane as to present a polished unbroken reflecting surface on all four

Namoi'n’* casing sides of the Great Pyramid. It is obvious that it was from the brilliant
Anci.n£E„p,. reflexions from its casing slopes that the Great Pyramid is named, in the
inscriptions of the Pyramid period, and in inscriptions of later times, Khuti ,
“ the Lights.” 1


Name and
Evidences
imply that
Reflexions were
transformed
into visible
effect.


If ii. THE REFLECTED RAYS TRANSFORMED INTO VISIBLE
EFFECT.

That the Pyramid’s reflexions were transformed into visible effect, or were
themselves rendered visible—at least around the hour of noon-day—is certain


l Brugsch, "Egypt under the Pharaohs,” Vol. I, p. 73. Revised English Edit. (3rd),
1902, p. 35 -


PYRAMID RECORDS


9


both from the Pyramid’s ancient name, “ The Lights,” and its structural
evidences. Bearing in mind all the evidences pointing to special preparation
and intention, it is clear that the site selected, and certain special details of
construction referred to later, had some connection with this matter. It is in
this connection that many of the Pyramid’s structural features—and certain
outstanding features of its environment—seem to suggest advanced problems
for the physicist. These all tend to indicate that the Pyramid was designed
and located upon the conception that the mid-day reflexions would be rendered
visible.

That the atmospheric conditions within and bordering on the desert
regions around Egypt furnish the essential conditions for the formulation of
the conception noted is clear from the authentic observation quoted in If 76b.
(Section III of this Chapter.) In this case heliograph messages were read, not
from the mirror disc—which was invisible to the accidental observer—but from
the rise and fall of the actual beam of light reflected from the disc. The
accidental observer was remotely placed with reference both to the point and
line of projection. The atmospheric phenomenon can only be accounted for
by the presence of myriads of minute particles in suspension in the air, such as
are deemed to produce the phenomenal deep blue in the sky of dry desert
atmospheres, and in atmospheres in proximity to such desert zones. (Refer
Iflf 76, a and b, Sect. III.)

The question of the Pyramid’s reflected rays becoming visible is, then, a
question, primarily, of atmospheric conditions around the Pyramid. Here
the reader must remember that the Pyramid Designer was contemplating the
“ mass production ” of reflexions on a scale beyond anything within ordinary
human experience. Devices were accordingly perfected to prevent diffusion
of the reflected light and to stabilise the reflected rays under the influence of
variable surface refractions due to heat radiations. (Refer ^ 18 and 19.)

It is important, however, that the reader should bear in mind the alterna¬
tive questions as to whether the reflexions were transformed into visible effect or
were themselves rendered clearly visible around noon-day. At the same time
it simplifies matters for the general reader to adopt the view that the reflexions
were visible. Description of the various phases of the Pyramid’s phenomena
will be made on this understanding.

If 12. THE GREAT PYRAMID’S NOON REFLEXIONS. Plates V, VI,
VII, VIII, and X.*

Exactly as a modem chronometer gives the hours, say of midnight, 6 a.m.,
noon, and 6 p.m., so the reflexions from the Great Pyramid gave accurately the
days upon which the Winter Solstice, the Spring Equinox, the Summer Solstice,
and the Autumnal Equinox occurred. This precisely defined the Solar Astrono¬
mical Year.

^Technical details as Tabulated in Tables VI and VII at end of Section I.


Special
features
suggest
advanced
problems for
tbe Physicist.


Designed and
Located on the
conception that
reflexions
would be
visible.


Authentic case
of reflected
beam visible in
Egypt.

Morse coded
message read
from beam
projected from
Heliograph
when flash
invisible.

The Function
of Atmospheric
Dust in Dry
Climates.

Desert

Atmospheres.


Question

primarily

concerning

Atmospheric

Conditions.

“ Mass
Production "
of Reflexions.

Accessory
Details of
Construction.


Alternatives :

(a) Reflexions
transformed
into visible
effect, or

(b) Reflexions
visible at
noon~day.

Latter
alternative
adopted for
description of
phenomena.


Great
Pyramid’s
Noon reflexions
fix the
principal
points of the
Solar

Astronomical
and Solar
Vegetatioo
Years.


10


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


South Noon

Reflexion

above the

horizontal

during

Autumn,

Winter, and

Spring,

below the

horizontal

during

Summer


The principal points of the Solar Vegetation Year, however, were equally
well defined. It is this definition of the Vegetation Year that forms one of the
most striking series of phenomena connected with the Pyramid’s exterior.
For whilst the noon reflexion of the Pyramid’s South face always pointed due
South at the instant of noon—during Winter, Spring, Summer, and Autumn—
it displayed the striking property of being elevated above the horizontal each
day of Autumn, Winter, and Spring, and depressed below the horizontal during
the entire extent of Summer.


South Noon
Reflexion
horizontal at
beginning and
^ending of
Summer.


South, East,
and West Noon
Reflexions
Shortest and
North Noon
Reflexion
longest at
Mid»Summer


No Noon
Shadow daring
Summer.


n 13. the PYRAMID’S PRECISE ‘ DEFINITION OF SUMMER
LIMITS.

This is as shown on Plate V, Figs. B and b. Fig. B represents the Pyramid
and its noon reflexions as shown in plan. Fig. b represents the elevation of the
Pyramid and its reflexions as seen from the East. The noon reflexions shown
are for the day beginning Summer, and for the day ending Summer, respectively
6th May and 8th August—of modem Calendar—as stated in Table I.

The diagrams show that exactly mid-way between the Vernal Equinox and
the Summer Solstice, and, again, exactly mid-way between the Summer
Solstice and the Autumnal Equinox, the beam reflected at noon from the
Pyramid’s South face, was truly horizontal. This horizontal reflection defined
the first noon of Summer and the last noon of Summer. Between these two
dates, 6th May and 8th August, the noon reflexion from the Pyramid’s South
face cast a triangular reflexion on the ground, and at no other period of the
year. The triangular south noon reflexions, therefore, define the days of
Summer. These south reflected images obviously shorten approaching the
Summer Solstice, the shortest length of triangular image being attained at
noon of the Summer Solstice, after which, again, the images lengthen until
noon of the last day of Summer, when the noon reflexion becomes horizontal
again.

Ten days after the commencement of Summer and ten days before the
termination of Summer, at noon, the line RBCQ, formed by the East and West
noon reflexions (Plate V, Fig. b), became a straight line running directly from
East to West.

Plate VI shows the Pyramid reflexions for noon of the Summer Solstice.
These are respectively the shortest noon reflexions of the year from the South,
East, and West faces of the Pyramid, and the longest noon reflexion of the year
from the North face of the Pyramid.

During the Summer half of the year no shadow was thrown by the Pyramid
at the instant of noon, nor for an appreciable interval before and after noon.


PLATE V.


Pyramid Noon Reflexions 4 Shadows

NOON REFLEXIONS OF


Midway between Vernal Equinox,

Autumnal Equinox or Vernal Equinox and Summer Solstice,

REFLEXIONS. Midway between Summer Solstice

and Autumnal Equinox
REFLEXIONS.


PLATE VI.


Pyramid Noon Reflexions & Shadows


NOON REFLEXIONS
AT SUMMER SOLSTICE.


PLATE VII.


Pyramid Noon Reflexions & Shadows

NOON REFLEXIONS & SHADOWS. NOON REFLEXIONS & SHADOWS-

14-15 OCT. NOON SHADOWS 1 S - T APPEARING. OF THE WINTER HALF

Z7-28 FEB. NOON SHADOWS l 5 - T DISAPPEARING. OF THE YEAR.


PLATE VIII.


Pyramid Noon Reflexions & Shadows

NOON REFLEXIONS AND SHADOW
2 — 3 DEC. AND II-I2JAN.


WINTER SOLSTICE NOON REFLEXIONS
AND SHADOW


PYRAMID RECORDS


15


If 14- the PYRAMID’S EQUINOCTIAL NOON REFLEXIONS.

The noon reflexions from the East and West faces of the Pyramid projected n,» e»i ui
triangular’images (Plates V to VIII) on the ground on each day of the year.

Almost East and West respectively at the Summer Solstice (Plate VI), the &£?£>£«•! ■■<
Apex of each triangular image was North-East and North-West respectively D°MctuL e .*.»
from the East and West comers of the South Base side of the Pyramid at the ,h *
instant of Vernal Equinoctial and Autumnal Equinoctial noon (Plate V, Fig. A).

This may be otherwise stated as follows :—(Plate V, Fig. A).

The East noon reflexion from the Pyramid projected a triangular imag(

ARB, on the ground. This triangle consisted of a base, AB, lying on the
Pyramid’s East Base Side, AB, and of two other sides, which we may define, in
terms of the plan, the South side, AR, and the North side, BR, of the triangular
image. Thus defined, the line of the South side, AR, of the triangular image,
pointed due North-East at Vernal Equinoctial and Autumnal Equinoctial noon.

This was precisely the case during the period in history when the Pyramid was
thus operating as a Sundial of the Seasons. In modem times the phenomenon
noted would occur a day or so before the Vernal Equinox, and a day or so after
the Autumnal Equinox.

Similarly defined (and with reference to Plate V, Fig. A), the line of the
South side, DQ, of the triangular image, DQC, projected from the West face slope
of the Pyramid, pointed due North-West at Vernal Equinoctial and Autumnal
Equinoctial noon.


If 15. THE PYRAMID’S DEFINITION OF WINTER.

The solid beams of reflected light proceeding from the East and West face
slopes of the Pyramid at noon had a further remarkable property defining
Winter as distinct from Spring, Summer, and Autumn. Reference to Plates
V to VIII shows that in all cases the East and West Solid noon reflexions had a
sharply defined ridge line running from the Pyramid apex to the apex of each
of the images projected on the ground.

The East and West noon reflected beams had, therefore, each a surface surf »«. 0^
seen from the North side of the Pyramid, and a surface seen from the South gj|j° on
side of the Pyramid. The side of the East or West noon reflected beam, as •een froin ^
viewed from the South, always, throughout the year, appeared inclining away overhanging
from the observer. The side of the East or West noon reflected beam, how- oj^verjn
ever, as viewed from the North side of the Pyramid, appeared inclining away inclined*^
from the observer during Spring, Summer, and Autumn, but appeared over- |b»erv«rS
hanging towards the observer during Winter, as shown on Plate VIII, Figs. sSmmir, and

■n i AUIUniBf


i6


THE GREAT PYRAMID : ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


At the beginning and ending of Winter this surface of either reflected beam
as seen from the North was a truly vertical surface lying, in the case of the
East reflection, truly North-East, and in the case of the West reflection, truly
Nortji-West, in continuation of the Pyramid’s base diagonals. This is as
shown on Plate VII, Fig. E. In terms of the modem Calendar, the dates are
respectively November ist and February nth. Referring to Table I, the
reader will observe that the former date anticipates the beginning of winter by
seven days, and that the latter date succeeds the termination of Winter by the
like interval of seven days.

It is obvious that the difference was not due to any error m fixing tne
precise beginning and ending of Winter. Had this been the case, there would
have been a similar error in fixing the beginning and ending of Summer. But
the phenomenon of the horizontal South noon reflexion fixes the beginning and
ending of Summer with definitive precision. The difference of seven days,
then, in anticipating the beginning of Winter can only have been an intentional
anticipation, as the reader will see.


If 16. THE PYRAMID’S WINTER SHADOWS (Plates VII and VIII).

A noon shadow was projected by the Pyramid during Winter and for
sixteen or seventeen days before and after Winter. Between February 27-28
and October 14-15, no noon shadow appeared. During this period of the year
Pyramid Noon a noon reflexion was projected by the North face slope of the Pyramid. On
furitg w# October 14-15, however, the noon reflexion disappeared and the first noon
Wmtar only, shadow made its appearance. (Plate VII, Figs. D and d.) Successive noons
October 14 th toward the winter Solstice (Plate VII, Figs. E and e, Plate VIII, Figs. F and f),
February 28. f ound the length of the noon shadow, projected on to the pavement base of the
Pyramid, gradually lengthening towards the North, until at noon of the Winter
Solstice it attained its greatest length due North (Plate VIII, Figs. G and g).

After the Winter Solstice the length of the noon shadow, projected on the
pavement base, gradually shortened (Plate VII, Figs. E and e, Plate VIII, Figs.
F and f), until at February 27-28 (Plate VII, Figs. D and d) it was “ swallowed ”
by the Pyramid masonry, and the North noon reflexion made its first appear¬
ance, heralding the approach of the Vernal Equinox and the Summer half of
the year.

The initial and terminal datings of the noon shadow phenomenon defined
Sowing respectively the beginning of early sowing, and the beginning of the barley
5Sfin?d. rve#t and flax harvests in the ancient Delta. (The reader is referred to Plates III,
IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, X, and XII, and to Section III, Tflf 67-72, 74 and 76,
for the detailed descriptions of the various phenomena discussed.)


At Beginning
and Ending
of Winter
this surface
truly vertical
and pointing
North-East
for East
reflexion
and

North-West
for West
Reflexion.

1st November
and

11th February
thus defined.


PYRAMID RECORDS


17


If 17. THE TEMPLE OF RAMESSU II AT ABU SIMBEL.

The influence of these initial and terminal datings of the Pyramid’s noon
shadow phenomenon, in formulating later devices for automatically heralding
the seasons is evidenced by the Temple of Ramessu II at Abu-Simbel. This
temple was built with its central axis aligned towards the point of Sunrise of the
day upon which the Pyramid’s noon shadow first appeared, and of the day upon
which it disappeared.

Now the sun’s noon altitude for a certain point of the year when compared
with the azimuth of its rising at the same point of the year over a long interval
of years does not bear the precisely fixed relationship the Abu-Simbel alignment
would lead one to suppose. For this reason, sunrise on the Abu-Simbel align¬
ment cannot always occur on the same day as the Pyramid’s noon shadow first
appears or first disappears, respectively. Nevertheless the difference at the
present time is not more than two days. The Sun rises on the Abu-Simbel
alignment, at the present time, on October 16 and February 26, 1 whereas the
Great Pyramid’s limiting dates, for the present time, are October 14 and
February 28 generally.


f 18. THE PYRAMID’S STRUCTURAL CORRECTION FOR
REFLEXIONS.

To define more clearly the ridges and edges of the reflexions and to counter¬
act the local dispersing effect of the variable surface refractions due to heat
radiations from the Pyramid’s surfaces, these surfaces were very slightly
hollowed inwards towards the centre line of each face slope of the Pyramid.
This slight hollowing, while tending towards stabilising and more clearly defining
the reflected beams, was not sufficient to focus the reflected rays forming a beam
of reflexion. The hollowing was not in the form of a concavely curved surface,
but in the general form of two plane surfaces meeting along the centre line of
each face slope. This feature, however, will be dealt with later.

That the hollowing feature noted was not merely the result of an after¬
thought is evidenced by the core masonry of the Pyramid. The stepped surface
of each face slope of the core masonry was likewise hollowed in to the same
extent, 2 preparatory to the external casing stones being added to form the
smooth reflecting surfaces. This hollowing is so small in proportion to the
Pyramid’s mass, and extent of external surface, that it is not visible to the
eye unaided . It can be observed, however, and its extent measured by careful
sightings across and obliquely up each face escarpment. The reader must not
confuse the evidence of hollowing in with the separate question of dilapidation.
The two can be quite separately surveyed.

l Hon. E. M. Plunket. P.S.B.A., March, 1893.

9 Petrie, “ Pyramids and Temples of Gizeh,” pp. 43 and 44.

VOL. I.


Alignment of
Abu Simbel
Temple
Directed to
Sunrise of
Pyramid's
Noon Shadow
“ Swallowing '*
Dates.


The. Pyramid's
device for
stabilising
refraction
variations.


The Hollowing
inwards of the
Pyramid's
Face Slopes


Core Masonry
hollowing
proves device
not an

afterthought.


i8


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


f 19 - THE EXTENT OF THE STRUCTURAL CORRECTION.

The structural effect of the hollowing inwards of each face slope of the
Pyr«mid f ®* el ' Great Pyramid was that the Pyramid base sides were hollowed inwards between
«bMt S ' d * the comers of the Pyramid base. These comers were the four comers of a
interna/to square of about 760 feet length of side. The central hollowing in of each base
BaM^fur*. s id e is almost exactly three feet, as determined from Petrie’s survey. 1 The
ratio of hollowing in of base to length of base side is therefore about 1 in 250.

This receding camber was sufficient to make correction for the well-known
optical illusion whereby a large plane escarpment appears to bulge outwards.
Hollowing Correction for this optical illusion was made by the ancient Egyptians in the
correction*for case of their monolithic beams and lintels, and by the ancient Greeks in the case
opticoi illusion* 0 f columns. A truly level beam appears to sag in the middle ; a slight
camber upwards eliminates the illusion. A large vertical column appears to
overhang towards the observer on the ground; a slight tilt away from the
observer removes the illusion.


If 20. NOON SHADOW AND STRUCTURAL CORRECTION.

In the centuries following the Pyramid’s construction, the limit of the 14th
October and 28th February noon shadow, once in about every hundred years
Tht would lie precisely on the line forming the North side of the Pyramid base square

(although the coincidence nearly occurred once in each modem leap year
f^October or period). Let us, for the purpose of illustration, suppose the period exactly
N<Jn Shadow one hundred years and that the shadow limit lay on the North side of the base
square exactly at the middle date of the period. Then fifty years before, or
side of* to fifty years after the middle date, the shadow limit lay 31^ inches within the
BuSsoLro. North side of the Pyramid base square, or 31^- inches without the square
respectively. These dimensioned limits are true whether the period is greater
than or less than the hundred years assumed. For other years within the
period, the limit of the noon shadow lay somewhere between the two limits, 31^
inches internal to or external to the North side of the Pyramid base square.

The noon shadow limits for 14th October and 28th February, when internal
to the North side of the Pyramid base square, were, owing to the hollowing-in
feature, always defined and measurable. The extent of hollowing at the centre
of the base side gave a margin of about 4 \ inches between the casing edge and
the maximum internal limit of the noon shadow under consideration. This
marginal space was just sufficient to permit of the noon shadow being clearly
defined at its maximum internal limit. The marginal amount, therefore,
confirms the hollowing effect as intentionally of the extent observed by Petrie’s
sightings.

l “ Pyramids and Temples of Gizeh,” pp. 43 and 44.


PYRAMID RECORDS


19


The reader will see for himself that owing to the hollowing-in feature,
the particular year of the modem Leap-year cycle—generally four years—was The shadow
defined by the extent of the North face slope that was covered by shadow down automaticaUy
the centre at noon on 14th October or 28th February. In other words, the th/soiar 6
variations of the noon shadow limit automatically affected the intercalation of
the Solar year.

If 21. THE GREAT PYRAMID’S ANNUAL MESSAGE TO THE
DELTA.

Within two periods, then, of sixteen or seventeen days, we find that the Great Pyramid
Great Pyramid provided two outstanding phenomena defining fixed points of en^bii°it*
the Solar year. These were the North-East and North-West directed vertical iU ° ctober
surfaces of reflection at noon of 1st November and nth February, and the lnd November
North noon shadow limits on 14-15 October and 27-28 February. Both i„d Febru * r7
sets of phenomena were devised to be seen from the North. p 8 henomena ary

to be seen

Reference to Plate III—studied in relation to Plate VII—will show that fromtheNortb.
the Pyramid site was selected with all this as part of the design.

The Great Pyramid is so situated that it is the centre of the quadrant of a
circle that defines and includes the Delta (Plate III). The two Limiting Radii
of the Quadrant lie North-East and North-West respectively, forming the angle
of go° subtending the quarter circle arc of the Delta coastline, from near the
modem site of Port Said to near the modem site of Alexandria.

The Pyramid’s situation and its accompanying coincidence with the centre and

of the Delta Quadrant might be deemed to be accidental were it not for the fact
that the directions of the limiting radii of the quadrant were annually defined Surface*
by the Vertical Surfaces of the Pyramid’s East and West noon reflexions f 8 * fl ^ e n ^J“ r
on 1st November. i®*™® th ®

Delta

Quadrant.

f 22. THE GREAT PYRAMID’S PART IN ORGANISING
CULTIVATION IN THE DELTA.

The significance of the Pyramid’s phenomena and their datings is seen at N b oif ,,ramid *
once when we remember that the early sowing period in the Delta occurred define” riy
between the 14th October and the beginning of the general sowing season on uth'oUobtf 4
1st November ; that the early harvesting period occurred between nth Feb- ind N El?“ ber
ruary and the beginning of the general harvest season at 27-28 February, when Period* 4
barley was reaped and flax plucked. 1 — 28 th ebrttary

February.

The appearance of noon shadow on the North Face of the Pyramid—seen
only from the Delta—heralded early sowing on 14-15 October. The verticality Heralding of
of the surfaces of the East and West noon reflexions—seen only from the North—, sS 5 £ tural
and running truly North-East and North-West respectively, heralded the SJTBl!i. £or
general beginning of the sowing season on 1st November.

l For Wilkinson's Agricultural Datings refer Plate IX, cols. 7, 8, and 9.


20


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


The recurrence of the latter phenomenon again, at noon of nth February
gave warning to the Delta of the earliest date for an early harvest; and the
disappearance of noon shadow from the North Face of the Pyramid on 27-28
February heralded to the Delta the beginning of the barley and flax harvests.

These facts immediately raise the question as to whether the ancient
Egyptians at the time of the Pyramid Dynasties had not a fixed Calendar year,
adjusted by intercalation to conform with the Solar year.


The

Calendar


365 days.


Each Calendar
Season
4 months of
30 days.


Calendar

instituted

when a

November

Agricultural

Year

was observed.


Earliest
Calendar
Year 360 days.

Began with
Calendar
Season of
Sowing.

Designation
made when
a Fixed
November
Year observed.


Implies
Intercalary
Month added
every 5 or 6
years

Fixed Year
during

B eriod of
lynasties
I to XVI


u 23. THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN CALENDAR.

The Ancient Egyptians, we know, had two forms of Calendar Year. They
had a Calendar Year of 360 days and a Calendar year of 365 days. The last five
days of the latter Calendar Year were known from the earliest times as the 44 five
days over the year.” This expression clearly indicates that the earliest calendar
year was that of 360 days.

Both forms of Calendar year consisted of the same seasonal divisions
(Plate IX, col. 2). There were three Calendar seasons, each of four months, and
each month consisting of 30 days. The seasonal divisions were respectively :—

(1) SHAT, the Calendar Season of Sowing.

(2) PERT, the Calendar Season of “ coming forth,” i.e ., growing and

harvest.

(3) SHEMUT, the Calendar Season of Inundation.

The Calendar year began with the Calendar Season of Sowing. This fact
clearly indicates that the Egyptian Calendar was instituted when a November
agricultural year was observed.

24. THE FIXED CALENDAR YEAR OF EARLY EGYPT.

Plates IX, X, and XI.

The latter fact seems to be very obvious. But that is not all. The earliest
form of Egyptian Calendar was the Calendar year of 360 days. This began
with the Calendar season of Sowing. Such a definite designation implies a
definite synchronism with the actual season of sowing at the time the designa¬
tion was first given.

It is obvious, therefore, that the earliest Calendar year of 360 days was a
fixed Calendar year identified with the November Agricultural year.
A Calendar year of 360 days could only be a fixed Calendar year by intercala¬
tions of an additional month of 30 days at variable intervals of five or six years.
That this was the form of Calendar employed—coincident with an intercalated
Calendar year of 365 days—during the period of Dynasties I to XVI inclusive,
is confirmed by the evidence discussed in Section II of this Chapter, and descrip¬
tions of Plates IX, X, and XI.


PLATE A.

CHART OF LIMITS OF EARLY EGYPTIAN INTERCALATED CALENDAR YEAR, EGYPTIAN SEASONS,
AND GREAT PYRAMID NOON REFLEXION AND SHADOW PHENOMENA STATED WITH REFERENCE

TO THE MODERN (GREGORIAN) MONTHS.


Oismsmm^ Ch


HBBHI


Pyd ? NobthFace
at Noon


JiNoymc 0 MoimYeae

ILatdt Ending to Egyptian

GT l I I H I m (ALENDAB5EA50N5

cmm Inundation. ^0^ mw*

1 1 n 1 m 1 w 1“ n 1 in 1 et tALENDAn callnimylau'.


Long dt Noon Deflexion at Hummed Solstice Nobtji Facl

at Noon.


PLATE XI.


RECORDS OF THE PERIOD OF DYNASTIES VI TO XII OF
DISTANT QUARRYING EXPEDITIONS TO THE QUARRIES AT
WADY HAMMAMAT AND HAT NUB, AND TO THE MINES
AND QUARRIES AT SINAI.


PYRAMID RECORDS


23


Apart altogether from this evidence, however, we know that the noon
phenomena of the Great Pyramid automatically fixed the November Agri¬
cultural year. Now the Calendar years of 360 and 365 days were in use in Great
Pyramid times, and the November year, beginning the sowing season, had rS^Tot'
previously been fixed—the fixing being monumentalised in the names of the year gave
Calendar seasons. It is clear then that the Pyramid’s noon phenomena gave a AdjuSmen°t
high degree of accuracy to an adjustment of the Calendar year in relation to the Rectal
Solar year that had already been long previously effected.

The fixed November year, again, is confirmed by the dated Calendar
records of the activities of the agricultural (or Solar) year during the period of cJundar
Dynasties VI, XI, and XII. These are as graphically represented in Plate IX, Dynast?*.
Column 1, stated with reference to the Time Basis of Column 2, and as compared Jiierm X, fixed
with actual conditions of Columns 7, 8 and 9, stated with reference to the }j a v j mbw
Time Basis of Column 3. 1

If 25. THE FESTIVAL OF THE DEAD.

Attention has been directed (in Tf 15) to the fact that the 1st November
dating was intentionally observed instead of the beginning of Winter, seven |*™ t j an
days later. The 1st November Pyramid phenomena defined the first day of the
fixed agricultural year of the Ancient Egyptians. It is with respect to this a |*®“ a S r e *JJy
fixed 1st November year that the early Egyptian Calendar year was intercalated to

at the end of every five or six years. Hence the festival of the true beginning Ag r kSitu , ?ai e,f
of the New Year was observed in Egypt at intervals of this duration as early as B®*( nning
the time of Dynasties I and II. 2

At the time of Dynasty XII, the celebration of the New Year festival took period
the form of lighting lamps for the dead on the last day of the old year and the um£fut X !>r
first day of the New Year. 3 As Dr. Frazer has pointed out, this proves that the i« a Novemb«r
New Year’s Festival at this time was the ancient Festival of the Dead—the the Festival of
modem All Souls’, or All Saints’ (ist-2nd November). 4 Salms-Au* 11

Souls.

“The custom,” he remarks, 6 “was observed throughout the whole of Egypt,”
and is referred to by Herodotus (II, 62), as prevailing in the 5th Century B.C.

“ On All Saints’ Day, the 1st of November,” Frazer continues, “ the shops Ancient
and streets in the Abruzzi are filled with candles, which people buy in order to Swu *n u
kindle them in the evening on the graves of their relations : For all the dead SKdirn
come to visit their homes on that night, the Eve of All Souls’, and they need u{ r ?o e 2Sd
lights tO Show them the Way.” November.

Similarly, he states, “ The Miztecs of Mexico believed that the souls of the Anci0nt
dead came back in the twelfth month of every year, which corresponded with
our November. On this day of All Souls the houses were decked out to welcome » November,
the Spirits.” 6

^Detailed explanations are given in descriptions of Plates IX, X, and XI.

2 For the data concerning this refer Section II, 56.

•Breasted, “ Ancient Records,” I, pp. 260-271. Frazer, “Adonis, Osiris, Attis,” pp. 241-242.

*“ Adonis, Osiris, Attis,” pp. 241-2.

•Ibid., pp. 241-2.

•Ibid., pp. 244-8.


24


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Frazer suggests that “ The nominally Christian feast of All Souls’ on
November 2nd, appears to be an old Celtic festival of the Dead, adopted by the
Church in 998 A.D.

w Soul# “ The Celts and the Teutons appear to have dated the beginning of their

dSriv^d frim**' y ear from the beginning of Winter, the Celts reckoning it from the 1st of
Dma* 1 o£the November and the Teutons from the 1st of October.

“ The feast of All Saints’ on November 1st, seems also to have displaced a
heathen festival of the dead.” 1

If 26. OSIRIS AND THE FESTIVAL OF THE DEAD:

ISIS AND THE GREAT PYRAMID.

In the dual aspect of Osiris as corn or vegetation-god and god of the dead,
The Rites of the rites of Osiris embodied in one celebration, at the commencement of the
ceiebraTed'at November Vegetation Year, the rites of the agricultural deity and the rites of
of^olad on primitive ancestor-worship. In the sowing of the grain in November was seen
in*Ancieot ber the symbolic burial of the god ; in its growth, his renewal of life ; his resurrec-
E * yp t. tion ; and, in harvest, the death and sacrifice of the god. 2 Thus Dr. Frazer
states :— 3

“ Under the names of Osiris, Tammuz, Adonis, and Attis, the peoples
of Egypt and Western Asia represented the yearly decay and revival of
life, especially of vegetable life, which they personified as a god who
annually died and rose again from the dead.”

The rites of Osiris in ancient Egypt were annually celebrated on the
The Pyramid’ Festival of the Dead, November 1st. Owing to the fact that the

i«t November noon reflections of the Great Pyramid defined the day of the celebrations,

phenomena J J

later ^ ^ Osiris, m later Egyptian times, was associated with the Pyramid. Hence the
with^osiri*. fact that Isis, the female counterpart of Osiris, was designated in later times,
counterpart “ the queen of the Pyramid,” and the “ mistress of the commencement of the
th Th p Que ®3,® f y ear -” When the November year was discarded for the Sothic or Sirius Year,
andj The^ ^ Isis followed the alteration of the year’s beginning, and was identified with the
Commence, star Sothis or Sirius. The original November year beginning aspect of the
Year.” goddess was Hathor, later absorbed by Isis.

If 27. THE GREAT PYRAMID NOT AN INSTITUTION OF
EGYPTIAN RELIGION.

fx'cltations The accounts of Herodotus that Cheops (or Khuphu), the builder of the

confirtn°* Great Pyramid, closed the Egyptian temples of the gods, and forbade sacrifice
HwX e tu?and *° gods, and of the Egyptian priest, Manetho, that the same king “ was
Manetho arrogant towards the gods,” have been confirmed bv Professor Petrie’s excava-

concermng u u w

Pyramid** 1 * tions at Abydos. 4 Furthermore, the simplicity of the Great Pyramid, and of
Builder other works belonging to the same reign, the utter lack of internal or external
Ubid., pp. 254-5.

2 A. Moret, “ Kings and Gods of Egypt,” pp. 69-108, 148-19S.
s ” Adonis, Osiris, Attis,” p. 5.

Both are standard works on this subject.

•Abydos II, pp. 10, 30, 48.


PYRAMID RECORDS


25


'Ornament and inscription, removes the Pyramid entirely from the particular opposed to
kind of religious atmosphere associated generally‘with every form of Egyptian ^Si ia 0 "
architecture. worship.

It seems clearly obvious, then, that the First of November phenomena of Py?a P mid and
the Great Pyramid had not been devised to ensure the celebration of the rites SorkSSfifS
of ancestor-worship, or the rites of Osiris, on this particular day. The tradi- *
tions concerning the festival, however, indicate that it was considered to be the The Pyramid’*
anniversary of an historical event, rather than of an event belonging to the phenomena for
astronomical or vegetational phenomena of the year. This again, is confirmed purpose than
by the Pyramid indicating this date rather than the true beginning of winter, celebration of

Osirian Rites.


If 28. THE TRADITIONAL ORIGIN OF THE FESTIVAL OF THE
DEAD.

As to the origin of the traditions concerning the festival of the dead,
Haliburton 1 states as follows :—

In Mexico “ the festival of the dead was held on the 17th of November,

and was regulated by the Pleiades.They had a tradition that, at

that time, the world had been previously destroyed , and they dreaded that a
similar catastrophe at the end of a cycle would annihilate the race.”

The 17th of November 2 occurs also as an alternative dating of certain cults
in Egypt during Dynasties XII and XIX, in Ptolemaic Egypt, and at the time
of Plutarch. It occurs in Ancient Rome as an alternative date to 1st November.

According to Plutarch, the alternative dating, on the fixed Alexandrian
(Julian) Calendar of his time, fell on the 17th day of the Egyptian month Athyr
(Hathor). 3 In the Xllth Dynasty, the same alternative dating would be the
17th day of Month I, Season of Sowing,—the 1st month of the fixed 1st Novem¬
ber year.

Reference to the Egyptian form of the traditional destruction of the
world appears in the early Xth Dynasty Papyrus, Petersburg 1116A, 4 as “ The
Destruction of Mankind.” The Xth Dynasty Papyrus states :—

“.God.made heaven and earth (refer Gen. I, 1) at their

desire. He checked the greed of the waters (refer Gen. I, 6-10) and made
the air to give life to their nostrils (i.e ., by the removal of super-saturation
from the atmosphere effected by process of Gen. I, 6 and 7. For previous
conditions refer Gen. II, 5 and 6). They are His own images (refer Gen. I,
26, 27) proceeding from His flesh.He slew His enemies and de¬

stroyed His own children because of their plots in making rebellion.”
(Refer Gen. VI, 5-7, 11-13, for causes.)

The later form of the narrative, appearing in the tomb of Seti I of Dynasty
XIX, 5 associates Hathor with the “ Destruction of Mankind,” which would
account for the 17th day of the Egyptian month Hathor (the Athyr of Plutarch’s
account) being identified, in later times, with the Festival of the Dead.

*In Prof. C. P. Smyth’s “ Life and Work at the Great Pyramid,” Vol. II, p. 390.

2 Refer Section II, % 55.

* Plutarch, De I side et Osiride, Vol. H, p. 336.

‘Translation by Dr. Alen H. Gardiner, “ Journal of Egyptian Archaeology,” Vol. I, p. 34.
^translation by Dr. Ed. Naville, ” Records of the Past,” 1st series, Vol. VI, pp. 105-112


Mexican
Festival of the
Dead

commemorat¬
ed “Former
Destruction of
the World ” in
November.


The alternative
1st November
and

17th November
datings for
the Festival.


Dynasty X and
Dynasty XIX
narratives
of the

Destruction cf
Mankind in
November give
the form of the
Hebrew
narrative
of the Deluge
on Day 17
Month II of
Calendar of
Genesis.


26


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


If 29. HATHOR AND “THE DESTRUCTION OF MANKIND.”

Coniuiution Outstanding features of the XIXth Dynasty story of the “ Destruction of
"•ocijMd Mankind ” fix that narrative as the Egyptian rendering of the narrative of the
F«tiv>i of the Noachian flood in Genesis, and of the ancient Mexican tradition of the destruc-
Ancient tion of the world, referred to by Haliburton. Commemoration of the latter,

November J

Constellation as quoted, “ was regulated by the Pleiades. 5 ’


Confirming the connection between the various forms of the narrative,
Haliburton observes that the celebration of the festival of the dead by the
Australian aborigines was held in November, when the constellation of the
Msodaud** Pl e i a d es is most distinct, and was specifically worshipped as “ the giver of
Gilin ” ain ram-” 1 He says again that “ The month of November was formerly called in

,vmg Persia ‘ The Month of the angel of death.’ ” 2


In the Egyptian XIXth Dynasty form of the tradition this “ angel of
Hathor the death ” appears as Hathor. Hat-hor, as Sir Ernest Budge shows, 3 was origin-

Angefofpeath, ally ‘ Het-Heru,’ “ The House of Horus,” “ one special part of the great watery
“The r Fiiod- ly mass of heaven,” and was therefore a special part of “ the waters above the
ffe'aven*” firmament,” of Genesis I, 9, and probably, therefore, the Deluge “ floodgates of

heaven ” of Genesis VII, 11. The latter should more clearly be rendered “ a
finely spread restraining influence or natural law (attenuated lattice-work is the
restricted application) upholding the waters above the firmament .” This suffi¬
ce i7th of the ciently accounts for the 17th of the month Athyr (Hathor) being celebrated as
»d n the r?th of the day of the festival of the dead in the Alexandrian Calendar period. For in
Month!”** the narrative of Genesis the Noachian deluge is given as beginning on the
17th day of the second month of the Calendar year of Genesis.


The Seven
Hathors
and the
Pleiades.


As to the association between Hathor and the ancient November constel¬
lation of Pleiades, the modem popular name—“ the seven sisters ”—of the
latter constellation had its counterpart in Ancient Egypt as “ the Seven
Hathors.”


Hathor
associated
with the
Egyptian
Flood.


The XIXth Dynasty narrative of the Destruction of Mankind states that
“ Ra ordered in the midst of the night 4 to pour out the water of the vessels,

and the fields were entirely covered with water.and there came the

goddess (Hathor) at the morning, and she found the fields covered with water,
and she was pleased with it and she drank to her satisfaction, and she went away
satisfied, and she saw no men.”


This com¬
memorated
by Festival of
Hathor
originally on
New Year's
Day,—1st
November.


Then Ra ordered “ that libations be made to her at every festival of the
New Year.” The narrative defines this as the “ festival of Hathor.” Obviously
it was originally New Year’s Day, which in early Egypt fell on ist November.

haliburton in Smyth’s 41 Life and Work at the Great Pyramid,” Vol. II, pp. 384-386.
2 Ibid., p. 390.

*“ Gods of the Egyptians,” Vol. I, pp. 428-429.

4 All Hallow’s Eve or Hallowe’en ?


TABLE II.


27


ANCIENT INTERCALARY CYCLE AND ITS INTERCALARY

PERIODS.


Cyclic

years’

duration.

Intercalated 360 days
Calendar Year.
Duration on Cycle
in in

Months. Days.

Intercalated 365 days'
Calendar Year.
Duration on Cycle
in in

Months. Days.

Number of days
in mean years of
Cycle.

Days.

6

73

=

2190

73

=

2190

2191.45632

II

134

=

4020

134

=

4020

4017.66992

*7

20 7

=

6210

207

=

6210

6209.12624

23

280

=

8400

280

=

8400

8400.58256

28

341

=

10230

341

=

10230

10226.79616

34

414

=

12420

414

=

12420

12418.25248

40

487

=

14610

487

=

14610

I4609.70880

46

560

=

16800

560

=

16800

16801.16512

5 i

621

=

18630

621

=

18630

18627.37872

57

694

=

20820

694

=

20820

20818.83504

63

76 7

=

23010

767

=

23010

23010.29136

68

828

=

24840

828

=

24840

24836.50496

74

901

=

27030

1

9 01

=

27030

27027.96128

80

974

=

29220

974

=

29220

29219.41760

86

1047

—

31410

1047

=

31410

31410.87392

9 i

1108

=

33240

nos

==

33240

33237.08752

97

1181

=

35430

u8i

=

35430

35428.54384

103

1254

=

37620

1254

=

37620

37620.00000


28


TABLE III.


THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE INTERCALARY CYCLE OF

103 YEARS.


Cyclic

Years’

Duration

Cumulative

Days

for Duration
in

Mean Years
of

Cycle

360 Days’ Calendar Year.

365 Days’ Calendar Year.

Duration

on

Cycle

Day I Month I
Commencing
Before (—) or
After ( + )
Beginning of
Mean Year of
Cycle

Duration

on

Cycle

Day I Month I
Commencing
Before (—) or
After (+)
Beginning of
Mean Year of
Cycle

In Months

In Days

In Months

la Days

0

0.

O

O

0.00

O

O

0.00

t

365.24272

12

360

~ 5.24

12*

365

— O.24

2

730.48544

24

720

— 10.49

24J

730

- O.49

3

1095 • 72816

36

1080

- 15.73

364

1095

- O.73

4

1460.97088

48

1440

— 20.97

4 8}

1460

- O.97

5

1826.21360

60

1800

— - 26.21

60}

1825

— I .21

6

2191.45632

73

2190

— I.46

73

2190

— I.46

7

2556.69904

«5

2550

— 6.70

85*

2555

— I.69

8

2921.94176

97

2910

- II.94

97 i

2920

- I.94

9

3287.18448

109

3270

— 17.18

IOQ*

3285

— 2.18

10

3652.42720

121

3630

— 22.43

I2lf

3650

- 2.43

11 1

4017.66992

134

4020

+ 2.33

134

4020

+ 2.33

12

4382.91264

146

4380

— 2.19

146*

4385

+ 2.09

13

4748.15536

158

4740

— 8.16

158*

4750

+ I.84

14

5113.39S08

170

5100

— I3.40

170*

5115

4* I.60

15

5478.64080

182

5460

— 18.64

182}

5480

+ I.36

16

5843.88352

194

5820

- 23.88

1941

5845

4- I . 12

17

6209 . 12624

207

6210

4- O.87

207

62 T O

4- 0.87

18

6574.36896

219

6570

- 4-37

219*

6575

4- 0.63

19

6939.61168

231

6930

— 9.61

231*

6940

+ 0.39

20

7304.85440

243

7290

— 14-85

243!

7305

4- O.14

21

7670.09712

255

7650

— 20.10

255$

7670

— 0.10

22

*035-33984

267

8010

— 25.34

267I

8035

— O.34

23

8400.58256

280

8400

- O.58

280

84OO

— 0.58

24

8765.82528

292

8760

~ 5.83

292 i

8765

— 0.83

25

9131.06800

304

9120

— II.07

304J

9130

— I .07

26

9496.31072

316

9480

— 16.3I

316*

9495

- I. 31

27

9861.55344

328

9840

- 21.55

3 2 *$

9860

- 1.55

28

10226.79616

34i

10230

4- 3-20

341

10230

+ 3.20

29

10592.03888

353

10590

— 2.04

3 5 3 i

10595

4-2.96

30

10957.28160

365

10950

— 7.28

365 J

10960

4- 2.72

3i

11322.52432

377

11310

— 12.52

3774

11325

4- 2.48

32

11687.76704

389

11670

- 17.77

3«9f

11690

4- 2.23

33

12053.00976

401

12030

— 23.01

4°i§

12055

+ 1.99

34

12418.25248

414

12420

+ i-75

414

12420

+ 1.75

35

12783.49520

426

12780

- 3-50

426J

12785

4-1.50

36

UH8.73792

438

13140

— 8.74

43»1

13150

4- 1.26

37

13513.98064

450

13500

- 13-98

45°i

I35I5

4* I .02

38

13879.22336

462

13860

- 19.22

462I

13880

4-0.78

39

14244.46608

474

14220

- 24.47

474$

14245

+ 0.53

40

14609.70880

487

14610

+ 0.29

487

14610

4- O.29

4i

14974.95152

499

14970

- 4*95

4991

14975

4- 0.05

42

15340.19424

5”

15330

— 10.19

5il*

15340

— O.19

43

15705.43696

523

15690

v- 15.44

5 2 3i

15705

— O.44

44

16070.67968

535

16050

— 20.68

535$

16070

- 0.68

45

16435.92240

547

16410

“ 25.92

5471

16435

— O.92

46

16801.16512

560

16800

- 1.17

560

16800

- 1.17

47

17166.40784

572

17160

— 6.41

572$

1716s

— 1.41

48

17531.65056

584

17520

— 11.65

584$

17530

“ 1.65

49

17896.89328

596

17880

— 16.89

596$

17895

— 1.89

50

18262.13600

608

18240

— 22.14

608$

18260

— 2.14

51

18627.37872

621

18630

4- 2.62

621

186 30

4- 2.62


TABLE III. 29

THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE INTERCALARY CYCLE OF


103 YEARS.—( Continued).


Cyclic

Years’

Duration

Cumulative

Days

for Duration
in

Mean Years
of

Cycle

360 Days’ Calendar Year.

365 Days’ Calendar Year.

Duration

on

Cycle

Day I Month I
Commencing
Before (—) or
After ( +
Beginning of
Mean Year of
Cycle

Duration

on

Cycle

Day I Month I
Commencing
Before {—) or
After (-+-)
Beginning of
Mean Year of
Cycle

la Months

In Days

In Months

In Days

52

18992.62144

633

18990

— 2.62

633!

18995

4 -

2.38

53

19357-86416

645

19350

— 7.86

645 i

19360

+

2.14

54

19723.10688

657

19710

— I 3 -* 1

65 7 \

19725

4 -

I .89

55

20088.34960

669

20070

- 18.35

6693

20090

+

I.65

56

20453.59232

68l

20430

- 23.59

68 if

20455

4 -

1.41

57

20818.83504

694

20820

4- I . 16

694

20820

4 -

I . 16

58

21184.07776

706

21180

— 4.08

706*

21185

4 *

O.92

59

21549.32048

718

21540

— 9-32

718*

21550

4 -

0.68

60

21914.56320

730

21900

— 14-56 !

73 °i

2I9I5

4 -

0.44

61

22279.80592

742

22260

— 19.81

742 |

22280

4 -

0.19

62

22645.04864

754

22620

— 25-05

7545

22645

—

0.05

63

23010.29136

767

23010

— 0.29

767

23OIO

—

0.29

64

23375-53408

779

23370

- 5-53

779 i

23375

—

0.53

65

23740.77680

791

23730

— IO.78

79 ii

23740

—

0.78

66

24106.01952

803

24090

— 16.02

803 $

24IO5

—

1.02

67

24471.26224

815

24450

— 21.26

815$

24470

—

1.26

68

24836.50496

828

24840

+ 3-49

828

24840

4 -

3-49

69

25201.74768

840

25200,

~ 1-75

84°^

25205

4 -

3.25

70

25566.99040

852

25566

— 6.99

8523

25570

4 *

3.01

7 i

25932.23312

864

25920

— 12.23

864^

25935

4 -

2.77

72

26297.47584

876

26280

— I 7-48

» 76 f

263OO

4 *

2.52

73

26662.71856

888

26640

— 22.72

888g

26665

4 -

2.28

74

27027.96128

901

27030

+ 2.04

901

27030

4 -

2.04

75

27393-20400

913

27390

— 3.20

9 » 3 i

27395

4 *

1.80

76

27758.44672

925

27750

— 8.45

925$

27760

4 -

1.55

77

28123.68944

937

28110

— I 3-69

9373

28125

4 *-

i. 3 i

78

28488.93216

949

28470

— 18.93

949 $

28490

4 -

1.07

79

28854.17488

961

28830

- 24.17

9615

28855

4 -

0.83

80

29219.41760

974

29220

+ 0.58

974

29220

4 -

0.58

81

29584.66032

986

29580

- 4.66

9 « 6 i

29585

4 -

0.34

82

29949.90304

998

29940

— 9.90

9983

29950

4 -

0.10

83

30315.14576

1010

30300

- 15.15

IOIO*

30315

—

0.15

84

30680.38848

1022

30660

— 20.39

I022I

30680

—

0.39

85

31045.63120

1034

31020

- 25.63

10345

31045

—

0.63

86

31410.87392

1047

314IO

— 0.87

1047

314IO

—

0.87

87

31776.11664

1059

31770

— 6.12

10593

31775

—

1.12

88

32141.35936

1071

32130

— 11.36

10713

32140

—

1.36

89

32506.60208

1083

32490

— 16.60

10833

32505

—

1.60

90

32871.84480

1095

32850

— 21.84

1095$

32870

—

1.84

91

33237.08752

1108

33240

+ 2.91

I IO8

33240

4 -

2.91

92

33602.33024

1120

33600

- 2.33

II20f

33605

4 -

2.67

93

33967.57296

1132

33960

“ 7.57

”324

33970

4 -

2.43

94

34332.81568

1144

34320

— 12.82

11444

34335

4 -

2.18

95

34698.05840

1156

34680

— 18.06

11564

34700

4 -

1.94

96

35063.30112

1168

35040

- 23.30

I i68f

35065

4 -

1.70

97

35428.54384

1 i8t

35430

+ I .46

1181

35430

4 -

1.46

98

35793-78656

1193

35790

- 3.79

H 93 i

35795

+

1.21

99

36159.02928

1205

36150

- 9.O3

12053

36160

4 -

0.97

100

36524.27200

1217

36510

- 14.27

12173

36525

4 -

0.73

IOI

36889.51472

1229

36870

- I9.5I

1229$

36890

4 -

0.49

102

37254.75744

1241

37230

- 24.76

12415

37255

4 -

0.24

103

37620.00016

1254

37620

0.00

1254

37620


0.00


TABLE IV.


30

THE SERIES COMPRISING THE PERIOD OF THE CYCLE OF


721 YEARS.


No. of
Series.

Interval
in years.

Cumula¬
tive Years.

Intercalary
year of
Table II.
equivalent
to Year of
Series.

Subtraction of periods of

103 years’ cycles from
cumulative years of series
to obtain year in preceding column.

(I)

120

120

17

120 cumulative years of series.
Deduct 103 =1 primary solar cycle.

17 Year of Tables II. and III.

(2)

120

240

34

240 cumulative years of series.
Deduct 206 =2 primary solar cycles.

34 Year of Tables II. and III.

(3)

120

360

51

360 cumulative years of series.
Deduct 309 =3 primary solar cycles.

51 Year of Tables II. and III.

(4)

120

480

68

480 cumulative years of series.
Deduct 412 =4 primary solar cycles.

68 Year of Tables II. and III.

(5)

121

601

86

601 cumulative years of series.
Deduct 515 =5 primary solar cycles.

86 Year of Tables II. and III.

1

(6)

120

721

103

721 cumulative years of series.
Deduct 618 =6 primary solar cycles.

103 Year of Tables II. and III.


PYRAMID RECORDS


3 i


1 [ 30. THE EARLIEST KNOWN EXAMPLE OF THE ALMANAC
TRADITION.


Now we saw that in the celebration of the festival of the dead, the 17th
day of the Egyptian fixed Agricultural (November) year appeared as an alter¬
native dating to the 1st day of the fixed agricultural year which began on 1st £at°the*i7th
November. From this it would appear that, originally, the 17th day of the calendar* 0 *"’
second month of the Calendar year of Genesis was commemorated as the 1st
day of the first month of the early Egyptian Calendar year, and that, at a later E d ypt ed « in
date, the persistence of the tradition, connecting the festival with the 17th day ^onth 1 c f th.
of the month, led to the adoption of the alternative Egyptian dating. ^ ultural


This would identify early Egyptian Day I Month I on November 1st, with
Day 17 Month II of the Calendar year of Genesis. 1 Day I Month II of the then
current Calendar year of Genesis would therefore fall on October 16th (Gre- Adoption
gorian), and, in consequence, Day I Month I of Genesis on September 16th that

(Gregorian). This would mean that the Calendar year of Genesis was an an

intercalated year of 360 days intercalated with respect to the Autumnal Equinox, ylS^iaSo 1
which agrees with the data concerning the basis of the Biblical year prior to the Au y tumna ed Q °
Vernal Equinoctial basis of the luni-solar year adopted at the Exodus 0 f EquMIOX ’
Israel from Egypt.

If this hypothesis is correct—and it is little more than a hypothesis until The Pyramid*,
it is confirmed by reliable data—then the Great Pyramid’s 1st November pheno°me“. er
phenomena form the earliest known example of what is understood in modern knownVxVmpie
times as “ The Almanac Tradition.” Almanac

Tradition.**


1| 31. THE CYCLES OF THE INTERCALATED CALENDAR YEAR.

In Section II of this Chapter—^ 56—it is shown that both the Calendar The
year of 360 days and the Calendar year of 365 days in early Egyptian times caUndlV ed
received intercalations at the end oLevery five or six years. A series of such Ind^fdly*
intercalary periods naturally fall into a cycle of 103 years of 365.24272 days, «vi??avtor
giving the mean value of the solar year over the entire period of astronomical MX year *'
time covered by historical records. (Section II, 56). Table II shows the i * t ”™{ a ° r f y ,ucb
construction of the cycle. The progressive durations of the years tabulated 2 S? c l 5 1 J uto "
are for progressive intercalary years of cycle only. The Calendar of 360 days
began on the same day as the Calendar of 365 days at the end of each inter- Solar *•»«•
calary period of Table II. The intercalary periods of Table II, as will be seen, Table,
are all in exact numbers of months of 30 days. Table III gives the comparative 11 and m *
details for each year of the Cycle of 103 years. It will be shown later that this ^ h eaHi«? u ** d
cycle and its intercalary periods were observed by the early Egyptians, had been reWed to in
derived from an earlier civilisation, and were still referred to in the early E^?t. time * ,n
centuries of our Era.

l This hypothesis, it will be found, requires a slight revision later.


32


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


The

Auxiliary

Series,

(1) 120 Years

( 2 ) 120 „

(3) 120 „

(4) 120 .,

(5) 121 „

( 6 ) 120 „


721 years.


7 Cycles of 103
Years.

Series follows
intercalations.


The included
periods of 30
years.


Egyptian time

measures

translated

numerically

into linear

measures.

The Cyclic
Dimensions
of certain
underworld
domains.

3 Cycles of
103 x 1

Cycle of 120.


The Cycle of
658 years,
(360 and 365
days’

Calendar.)

The Cycle of
329 years,
(365 days’
Calendar).


If 32. THE CYCLIC SERIES OF THE 721 YEARS’ PERIOD.

An important auxiliary series of cycles dependent upon the intercalary
periods of Table II, was a series of six cycles terminally coinciding with seven
cycles of Table II, after the duration of 721 years. The auxiliary series con¬
sisted of four initial periods of 120 years each terminating at an intercalation of
Table II, followed by a period of 121 years ending at an intercalation of Table
II,—the 120 years not fulfilling this requirement—the terminal period, making
up the six repetitions of the auxiliary cycle, ending at the last intercalation of
Table II. Table IV indicates how the auxiliary series was automatically
obtained.

In following the years’ duration of the 360 days ’ Calendar in Table III,
and its successive repetitions, each period of 120 years included four periods
of 30 years of the following total duration :—

30 years = 365 months of 30 days.

60 „ = 730

9 ° >> =1095 >» »*

120 „ =1461

The necessary exception was the last 31 years’ period of the 121 years of
No. (5) of series in Table IV, which automatically followed the rule requiring
the interval of the series to end at an intercalation.

The identities employed by the Egyptians in translating the numerical
values of time measures into linear measures will shortly be seen. When this
fact of the mythological basis of Egyptian civil and religious life is appreciated
it will be understood why certain domains of the Egyptian Underworld are
expressed as 309 atru in length, and 120 dtru in breadth, 1 —numerically three
cycles of 103 years and one cycle of 120 years respectively, indicating the
connection understood as holding between the two cycles.


If 33. OTHER AUXILIARY CYCLES.

Other important cycles, dependent upon the 103 years’ cycle of Tables II
and III are :—

I. Commencing from zero year of Table III and following its successive
repetitions :

(a) An important cycle of 658 years of 365.2431611 days on the 360

days’ Calendar basis and on the 365 days’ Calendar basis.

(b) An important cycle of 329 years (half of above cycle) of

365.2431611 days on the 365 days’ Calendar basis.

These two are the most important cycles in Egyptian chronology, and will be
found frequently referred to in the Egyptian records.

USudge, “ Gods of the Egyptians,” vol. 1 . p 20*


PYRAMID RECORDS


33


These agree and terminate exactly at the
completion of 35 cycles of 103 years.


II. Commencing from year 5 of the initial 103 years cycle (on 360 days’
Calendar basis) :—

(a) A series of 200 Julian

years.

(b) A series of 120 Julian

years.

(c) A series of 97 years of 365.2577 days each closely approximating

to the mean siderial year of 365.25637 (modern value).

(d) A cycle of 2920 Julian years, equal to two cycles of 1460 years,

beginning at year 5 of the initial cycle of 103 years, and
terminating at a year 2925 of the 103 years’ cycle in continued
repetition.

The most important cycle of these is that of 97 years as it is the one
of the above four most often met with in Egyptian cyclic chronology.


Cycles of 200,
120, 97, and
2920 years,
commencing
after 5 years’
duration of
initial 103
Cycle.


The

importance of
the 97 years*
cycle.


If 34. THE SED FESTIVAL AND THE SEP TEP SED FESTIVAL.

The series of 32 confirms Petrie’s identification that the Egyptian period The Chief
of the Sep tep sed Festival was an astronomical period of 120 years, and that i2 e o st yIIr.°. £
the period of the Sed Festival was an astronomical period of 30 years. Four
repetitions of the Sed Festival period were celebrated by the Sep tep sed Festival. Jflo^efVL! 1
Sed means the tail or end, and therefore refers to a Festival celebrated in the last
or tail year of the period of 30 years. Sep tep means the chief repetition or fmiwIi
occurrence . The Sep tep sed Festival was therefore, the chief occurrence of the tail or
end Festival, in the last or tail year of the 120 years’ period, 1 or, as ^ 32 shows,
of the 121 years’ period once in every seven repetitions of the 103 years’ cycle.

In early times it was the custom, as will be seen, for the king, at the
Sed Festival, to appoint his co-regent. The co-regent, then, began the of n Kfng* cu * ° m
reckoning of his reign from his first year of co-regency, thus dating from ISSxcoSlgent
the Sed Festival. Successive kings, thus appointed in unbroken succession, Festival. 81
would always celebrate their second Sed Festival in their 30th year of rule
from co-regency. So far—for very early times—Breasted’s opinion 2 is
applicable that a king's Sed Festival was celebrated 30 years from his appoint- opinion that
ment as co-regent. But when Breasted infers from this that the Sed period contlnueTand
was not an astronomical period and, further, that the Sed Festival was IstronVmiiri?*
always celebrated 30 years from appointment as co-regent, his opinion fails
to accord with the facts.


Petrie has shown repeatedly that the co-regency theory does not hold th
during the greater period of Egyptian history. He has repeatedly claimed that l'Z£S£Z?d t mnd
the Egyptian evidence fixes the periods of 30 and 120 years as astronomical ‘uron^mkaT*
periods. The data of 32 now confirm this, in that Petrie’s astronomical . .

r 11 . This opinion

period is now seen to be an important period of a highly scientific series of n°w fi k“o e wUdg«
Calendar cycles, based on an accurate determination of the value of the solar of c y cle# *
year for ancient times.

Petrie, “ Researches in Sinai,” p. 180.
a “ History of Egypt” ( 1919 ), p. 39.

VOL. I.


34


THE GREAT- PYRAMID : ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


1 f 35 - THE RITES OF THE SED FESTIVAL.


The. Sed Festival and its rites were institutions that the early Dynastic
Egyptians derived from an earlier civilization. The significance of the Sed
S^-w-period we know to be primarily calendric. But as to what was the original
derived from a nature of the Sed Festival rites is a matter that can only be surmised from what
Civilisation, we know concerning the ceremonies followed at the Festival during the times
of the earliest Dynasties in Egypt.


Early
Egyptians
believed that
the King at
"Sed”
Festival
renewed his
Spiritual and
Physical
Strength
from the
presence-
form of the
Dynastic God.


The purpose of the ceremonies at the time of the first two Egyptian
Dynasties centred chiefly round the idea of ensuring the continuity of the
Dynasty in both a spiritual sense and a physical sense. The king was the
representative on earth of the god of his Dynasty. He was supposed to partake
of the spiritual strength of his god, and to derive his physical strength from the
god. What was believed to be the process of effecting this accession of Divine
Power took place at the Sed Festival, when the king and his selected co-regent
presented themselves before the Shrine of the “ presence-form ” of the Dynastic
god.


Festival

therefore

alternatively

designated

the Festival of

Renewal.

The Reigning
King renews
and the Elected
Co-Regent
receives the
power of the
god.

“ The King
never dies.”

“ The King is
dead. Long
Live the King.”


Dancing and
Running before
the Shrine.

David dances
before the Ark«


IS " Sed ”
Periods from
New Epoch of
Israel.


If 36. THE RENEWAL OF THE KING.

The reigning king was believed to renew his strength in the presence of the
god. Hence the Sed Festival was also known as the Festival of Renewal.
The selected co-regent, as was believed, received, jointly with the reigning
monarch, the power from the god’s presence. If the reigning king died before
the following Sed Festival or Festival of Renewal the power of the god continued
in his successor. Such seems to have been the idea that formulated this early
stage of the kingly doctrine of Divine Right, and of the constitutional formulae 1
persisting in our own times and kingdom, “ The king is dead, long live the king,”
and “ The king never dies, he only demises the throne.”

The divine right was supposed to pass from one Dynasty to another when
the god failed to renew the king, or to accept or provide a successor belonging
to the family. The king and his co-regent signified their renewal and accession
of power by running or dancing before the shrine of the “ presence-form ” of
the god. Similarly David, in the year in which he received the promise of his
Everlasting Kingdom, danced before the Ark of the Covenant, in the presence
of the Shekinah, when the Ark returned from the Philistines. St. Paul (Acts
XIII, 17-23) refers to this Establishing of the Kingdom in connection with the
termination of a period of 450 years 2 —obviously a period dating from an Epoch
in Israel’s history. The period is an interval of fifteen Sed periods of 30 years.
Can it be that the Biblical evidence here points to the continuance of certain
ancient sacred rites and customs as these were understood amongst the Hebrews,

1 Refer Ferrar Fenton’s long note at the end of his translation of the 1st Book of Genesis,
" Bible in Modern English ” We do not agree entirely with Fenton’s theory, but what he says
has an important bearing upon this subject of the Sed Festival, as well as upon the question of the
Antediluvian genealogies with which Fenton’s theory deals.

a Refer Founding of Solomon’s Temple, 480th year from Exodus. Another Sed Festival
(I Kings, VI, 1). This throws light on the 450 years of Acts XIII, 17-23.


PYRAMID RECORDS


35


precisely as the Egyptians followed the rites and customs handed on to them Egyptian
by a former civilisation, that had reduced the central idea to the form presented CusTom^
by the rites of the Sed Festival in early Egypt ? That this is not improbable is apart but had a
evidenced by the common origin of the Deluge narrative of Genesis and the in common
Egyptian narrative of the Destruction of Mankind, and all the associated Religious
Calendar data connecting the month date of the Festival of the Dead with the ofthS Hebrews,
month date of the Noachian Deluge.


If 37. THE EPOCHS AND CYCLES OF GENESIS.


The truth concerning the connection inferred between the ancient Egyptian
cycles and the customs and institutions belonging to the period of the early J£j onology
chapters of Genesis is seen at once by tabulating the chronology of the gene- of the #

_ . . . _ . xr //«,, a Genealogies

alogies of Genesis, Chapter V. This is as stated in Table V,— The Ante-©^Genesis
diluvian Dynasties of Genesis V.” above.


It is significant that whereas the initial dates (in Column 2, Table V), of the
ten genealogical items, Adam to birth of Noah, do not bear any relation to the
Calendar Cycles, the ten terminal dates, in Column 3, all fall at the beginning or
ending of the last year of one or other of the Calendar Cycles dependent upon
the cycle of 103 years. For this reason the years of the chronology are stated in
Table V as A.K. or Anno Kalendarii . 1

Two of the terminal dates end at the date of the Deluge ending. Of the
remaining eight terminal dates, six coincide with the beginning or ending of the
last year of a Sed period. Five of these belong to a Sed series beginning from
o A.K., and one to a Sed series beginning from 622 A.K., the date of the birth
of Enoch or Hanok. That this latter date was reckoned as a separate Epoch is
proved by the 365 years of Enoch being dated from 622 A.K., and by the 365
years’ period ending at 987 A.K., the termination of three cycles of 329 years
from o A.K. The latter identity accounts for one of the remaining two terminal
datings of column 3. The one terminal dating remaining coincides with the
commencement of the last year of the twelfth cycle of 103 years from 0 A.K.


The Terminal
Dates of the
Dynasties of
Genesis are
dates of the
Festival of the
End, dated with
Epoch of Adam
as origin


One Exception
a Cycle of
329 years.


Another
Exception a
Cycle of
103 years.


We saw that the Sed Festival in Egypt was celebrated in the last year of
each period. The chronology of the terminal dates of the dynasties of Genesis
confirms that the terminal festivals were celebrated in any convenient month
of the last year of a cyclic period.


If 38. THE CYCLE OF THE HOUSE OF ENOCH. Translation of

11 Enoch at

From Genesis V, 24, in conjunction with the dates in Table V, we discover 329 years from
that the translation of Hanok (Enoch) is dated at the termination of a cycle of Adam.°

329 years. Later evidence from Egyptian sources will show this cycle to be the The 329
hitherto lost Phoenix cycle of Egyptian, Greek, and Roman tradition. thrust 6 *°


l The initial “ K " for “ C " is intentional, to avoid using A.C.


Cycle/*


36


TABLE V.


THE ANTEDILUVIAN DYNASTIES OF GENESIS V.


The House of Duration of Dynasty


ADAM .. ..

from

.. 0 A.K.

to

930 A.K.

SHETH .. ..

.. 130 A.K.

1042 A.K.

ENOSH .. ..

... 235 A.K.

1140 A.K.

KENAN .. ..

.. 325 A.K.

1235 A.K.

MAHALALEEL

.. 395 A.K.

1290 A.K.

JARED .. ..

460 A.K.

1422 A.K.

HAN OK (Enoch)

.. 622 A.K.

987 A.K.

METHUSELAH

.. 687 A.K.

1656A.K.

LAMEK ..

.. 874 A.K.

1651 A.K.

NOAH ..

. .1056 A.K.

1656 A.K.

NOAH (New Era)

..1656 A.K.

2006 A.K.


The cyclic significance of the
terminal dating.

. Commencement of last year of
31st Sed Festival from o A.K.
Since 721+210=931 years.

.14 Sed Festivals (420 years)
from Epoch of Enoch at 622
A.K.

. Commencement of last year of
38th Sed Festival from o A.K.
Since 721+420=1141 years.
.Commencement of last year of
Xllth Cycle of 103 years.

. Commencement of last year of
43rd Sed Festival from 0 A.K.
Since 721+570=1291 years.
.Termination of 4 Calendar
Cycles of 200 years from
Initial Epoch of Enoch, 622
A.K.

.Termination of 3rd Phoenix
Cycle of 329 years from o A.K.
Since 3x329=987 years.
.Termination of 20 Sed periods
from Epoch of Noah, 1056 A.K.
Termination of Deluge and be¬
ginning of new era for Egyptian
Sed periods.

. Commencement of last year of
55th Sed Festival from o A.K.
The last Sed Festival of the
Antediluvian reckoning from
o A.K. Since 721+721+210
= 1652 years.

.The last Sed period (20 periods)
from Epoch of Noah, 1056 A.K.
Termination of the Deluge, and
beginning of New Era for
Egyptian Sed Festivals.

. A period of 350 years, the dura¬
tion of Manetho’slast Dynasty of
Demi-gods; as the interval from
the commencement of Dynasty
of Adam to the commencement
of the Dynasty of Noah, 1056
years, is the duration of
Manetho’slast Dynasty of gods.


PYRAMID RECORDS


37


Now the legend of the Phoenix is the story of its translation at the end of the Tha j ^
Phoenix period or cycle. The legend of the Phoenix is thus the Egyptian or of tEi Ph®ni*
Greek mythological form of the translation of Hanok (Enoch). In Egyptian, Translation
Pa as a prefix to a proper name signified “ the house of,” or the “ father of the °
house of ” the individual designated by the proper name. Hence the Egyptian
name Grecianised as “ Phoenix ” was apparently derived down from “ Pa- Ph«nw—
Hanok ” or “ Pa-Enoch,” the name of the father of the House of Enoch. The Hou«Jof
Phoenix cycle, therefore, is the cycle of Pa-Hanok, the Cycle of the House of
Enoch.

The date for the translation of Enoch, 987 A.K.,—the termination of three The 987 yaaf# .
Phoenix cycles—is 360,495 days from the cyclic beginning at 0 A.K. Now the |£ns 1 ation
summation of 900 years of 360 days and 100 years of 365 days—numerically ? f f h “ och
1000 “ years ”—is 360,500 days. From this almost exact coincidence (within perio*d Ya * r *”
five days), obviously originated the tradition identifying the Phoenix Cycle with ihrph«ir ith
a period of 1000 years (as Martial, Claudian, Lactantius, and Nonno). Beginning Cycle *
with Herodotus, however, the majority of the Greek and Latin writers Half thi ,
reckoned the period at half this duration, or 500 “ years.” Apparently, then, SuwVphoeniK
both traditions originated from the fact that the translation of Enoch is dated Hwldotu*—
in Genesis at 987 A.K., the completion of [900 years of 360 days]+[ioo years of 500 year# *

365 days] numerically totalling 1000 “ years.”


t 39. THE EPOCH OF ENOCH AND THE EPOCH OF ABRAM.


Tacitus, and other writers, however, mention an alternative duration of
1460 or 1461 “ years ” for the Phoenix cycle. This obviously originated from
the 365 years of the life of Enoch. 4x365 = 1460, and 4X365}= 1461 years. Periodof
The initial 365 (or 365}) years spanning the life of Enoch, begin from 622 A.K. of

as in Table V. Observe the significance, then, of the following summation.

Birth of Enoch .= 622 A.K. ^ ot * bram *


Interval of


1461 years


Hebrew date for Call of Abram .. .. .. =2083 A.K.

The initial period again—the life of Enoch (Pa-Hanok)—is a “ great year ”
or a year of years, 365 or 365} years. The Greeks gave the name “ Phoenix ” JJ* ociat0d
to the palm-tree branch, which as a hieroglyphic in Egyptian, denoted the hic

“ year ”—365 or 365} days. Thus Horapollo (I, iii) refers to the “ Phoenix, the
palm branch ” as signifying the “ year ” in Egyptian; (I, xxxiv) to “ the phoenix, g* n e o ^y o°“
the bird ”as signifying in Egyptian, “a soul continuing a long time here”;
or (I, xxxv) “ a man returning home after a long time from a foreign land.”


If 40. THE CALENDAR YEAR OF GENESIS. The Early

Egyptian

The Calendar Cycles, then, of the ancient Egyptians and of the early and th«
civilisation briefly pictured in the first eleven chapters of Genesis were identical.

This confirms the hypothesis of ^f 30 as to the intercalated Calendar year of {SenEcii.


38


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Year of e Grae«it ^ enes * s k ein g based on the Autumnal Equinox. Day I, Month I of Genesis
Autunmai therefore began at the Autumnal Equinox in the zero year, o A.K., of Genesis.

Equinox. For several thousand years prior to 2000 B.C., the Autumnal Equinox could fall

upon one or other of the days 21st, 22nd, or 23rd September (Gregorian) 1


From Genesis VII, 11, Day 17, Month II, fell in the 600th year from the
month'dltiig Epoch of Noah. Being early in the then current year, as indicated by the
banning. month numeral, 599 years from the Epoch of Noah terminated at the beginning
of Day 1, Month I of the 600th year. The Epoch of Noah is 1056 A.K. (Table
V. from genealogies of Genesis Chapter V.) Hence Genesis VII, n, refers to
Day 17, Month II of 1655 A.K.


Autumnal
Equinox of
Zero Year
of Cycles of
Genesis fell
within 21-23
Sept.

(Gregorian).


Now the Calendar year of Genesis is the Intercalated Calendar Year of
360 days, and the cycles of Genesis V are the cycles dependent upon the state¬
ment of Table III. The rules of Table III, therefore, apply as commencing
Day 1 Month I on one or other of the days 21, 22, 23 September (Gregorian)
o A.K. If we knew the year B.C. in which 0 A.K. began we could reduce the
range to one particular day of the three. The range of three days is, however,
sufficient for purposes of identification


Calendar
Cycles
and Rules
give month
dating of
Deluge within
30th Oct. to
1st Nov.
(Gregorian).


Confirms
Purpose of
Pyramid's
1st November
Phenomena
and confirms
traditional
survival in
Modern
“ All Hallow's
Eve.”


Following the rules suggested, we find that Day 17, Month II in 1655 A.K.
fell on one or other of the days 30th or 31st October or 1st November (Gre¬
gorian). As the narrative of Genesis places the Noachian Deluge as beginning
on Day 17 Month II, 1655 A.K., it therefore gives the commencement of the
Deluge on 30th or 31st October or 1st November (Gregorian). This explains
the intention of the Pyramid’s 1st November Phenomena, and why the Festival
of the Dead is universally associated with a date generally ranging from 31st
October (All Hallow’s Eve or Hallowe’en) to 2nd November, the modern All
Souls .


1 In all precise Gregorian datings for ancient times, in this work, the datings have been calcu¬
lated and are not, therefore, merely approximate datings. For such precise datings, the modern
(Gregorian) rule of intercalation has been carried back into ancient times, together with the modern
months. This was done for purpose of comparison with the solar year. When comparison with
the siderial year or with the Sothic (or Sirius) year is required, the same process is adopted by
carrying back the Julian year from 1582 A.D.—when it was discarded for the modern Gregorian
year. * The latter process is that adopted generally in astronomical calculations for ancient times.
The single difference in the month datings, of Julian as compared with Gregorian, is that prior to
1582 A.D. the Julian Leap Year occurs every four years without exception, whereas the Gregorian
rule omits three Leap years in every 400 years, otherwise following the Julian rule. This reduces
to the following for A.D. years :—

Julian Rule:—All years A.D. divisible by 4 are Leap Years.

Gregorian Rule :—AH years A.D.—except zero years of centuries—divisible by 4 are Leap
Years. All zero years of centuries divisible by 400 are Leap Years. Thus, 1,600 A.D.
was a Leap Year, but 1700, 1800 and 1900 A.D. were not Leap Years.

By following the astronomical reckoning of B.C. years whereby
Astronomical A.D. 1= Historical A.D. 1.

B.C. 0= „ B.C. 1

„ B.C. 1= „ B,C. 2

and so on,

the same rules can be applied to B.C. reckoning. Unless, however, in the present work, a B.C.
year is specifically defined as B.C. year of astronomical reckoning, it refers to B.C. year of historical
reckoning.


PYRAMID RECORDS


39


SECTION I. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS.

t 41. CONCLUSIONS CONCERNING ORIGINS.

In what is generally and vaguely referred to as prehistoric times, there
existed a highly developed state of civilisation. Much is to be inferred con- a Former
cerning the various phases and branches of life and knowledge of this former k

civilisation. One thing, however; appears to be certain. It came to an end in vLuhed. a
such a manner that none of its works—except in the form of tradition—remained
as a heritage to the civilisation that followed. 1

The men who founded the origins of modern civilisation built on the oral
traditions brought over from the former civilisation. In conception, co- Oral Tradition
relation of ideas, and what we may term mental idiom, we find these origins to £ap?and
be already highly developed. In forms of literary and artistic presentation S« new period
they are, at first, archaic or amateurish in execution. Development, however, the ClvI 1
was rapid. Thus, of the first three Egyptian Dynasties, Professor Petrie co-relation of

remarks “ The rapid rise of art is the most surprising activity of this age.mSufidiom*

So soon as the dynastic race come in, there begins the enormous step in art, and sciences,
rapidly developing to perfection within its natural limits.” 2


H 42. CONCLUSIONS CONCERNING THE TRADITIONAL
CATASTROPHE AND ITS ANNIVERSARY.

According to the traditions from various sources, the former civilisation
met with a catastrophic ending. In ancient Egypt, the tradition exists as
“ The Destruction of Mankind,” in ancient Mexico and Peru as “ The Destruc- .

7 Traditional

tion of the World,” and in ancient Babylonia and Assyria, and in China, as of c Jhe“ormer
“ The Deluge.” These traditional accounts, when compared, indicate they are civilisation's
various versions of the Noachian Deluge narrative in the Hebrew Book of Endin «-
Genesis.


The day generally celebrated throughout the world, in ancient and modern
times, as the Anniversary of the Catastrophe, is 1st November, with variation
generally from 31st October to 2nd November. These represent in modern
times, All Hallows’ Eve, All Saints’ Day and All Souls’ Day.


The

Anniversary
of the

Catastrophe
1st November
(Gregorian).


The Autumnal Equinoctial year beginning of Genesis, the 103 years’
Calendar Cycle of Genesis, the Genesis Deluge year and month date combine to
give the Genesis date for the Deluge as one or other of the three days, 30th
October, 31st October, or 1st November (Gregorian).

^he statues of Easter Island, and some of the titanic rock temples of Asia have been referred
to this period. But they tel] us nothing, nor is their identification with the period certain.

2 It must always be remembered, however, that in all stages and periods of civilisation the
highest forms exist alongside the primitive and barbarous. Even the best authorities frequently
permit themselves to forget this.


40


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


If 43. CONCLUSIONS CONCERNING THE FIXED CALENDAR
YEAR OF EARLY DYNASTIC EGYPT.

At the commencement of Egyptian Dynastic history, the Egyptian calendar
cSundarand year was instituted to begin from the anniversary of what the Egyptians
Ye»r C begaif designated the “Destruction of Mankind”—1st November. This coincided
(Anniversary* with the beginning of the agricultural year. The agricultural year commenced
with the sowing season at the beginning of November. In consequence, the
Pyramid** first Egyptian Calendar Season was the Calendar Season of Sowing. The
Phanomraa* r outstanding phenomena of the noon reflexions of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh
Igliwi (Dynasty IV) defined the beginning of the agricultural year and the sowing
error ’ season to all the inhabitants of the Nile Delta, annually on 1st November.
• PhMd Y«L? r The same phenomena on this date defined the Nile Delta as a truly Oriented
Egyptian Quadrant of a circle centred on the Great Pyramid. The Egyptian Calendar
iSxvl* year, thus fixed, remained fixed from Dynasty I to Dynasty XVI.


Tha

Intercalary

Periods.

Their

Natural Cycle
of 103 Solar
Years.

Connected
“ Sed ”
Festival
Periods.

Connected
Phaanix Cycle
of 329
Years.


If 44. CONCLUSIONS CONCERNING THE CALENDAR CYCLES AND
THEIR ORIGIN.

The Egyptian Calendar year of 360 days, at this time, received, every five
or six years, the addition of a month of 30 days. A series of such intercalary
periods automatically formed a Calendar Cycle of 103 solar years. This cycle
was also the basis of the Egyptian Sed Festival period of 30 years, and of the
Sep tep sed Festival period of 120 years. It was also the basis of the ancient
Phoenix Cycle of 329 years. These and other connected cycles were derived by
the Egyptians from the previous civilisation, from which they also derived the
original form of their Sed festival ceremonies.


Originally
Dynasties .
officially
ended only at
“Sed”
Festivals.


The Origin
of this in
Genesis V.


Enoch

translated at
Phoenix Cycle
ending.
Translation
of Enoch
originated
Translation
of Phoenix.
Pa-Hanolc—
Phoenix—
House of
Enoch.


In effect, the original conception followed made it impossible for a Dynasty
to be declared officially ended other than at a Sed festival. That this was the
conception held by the former civilisation is evident from the chronology of the
genealogies of Genesis V. In every case the genealogical item ends in the last
year of a Sed festival period, or in one exception at the end of a cycle of 103
years, and in another, at the end of a Phoenix cycle of 329 years.

From the last identity, the Phoenix cycle was seen to be the cycle of
Pa-Hanok, the cycle of the House of Enoch ; and the translation of the
Phoenix to be the mythological aspect of the Biblical translation of Enoch.

If 45. PYRAMID REFLEXIONS ANT} SHADOWS ; TEMPLE

ALIGNMENTS; AND ALIGNMENTS OF MEGALITHIC
MONUMENTS.


Pyramid The noon reflexions and shadows of the Great Pyramid automatically

5 ifin“ mtlca11:r and accurately defined the principal points of the solar astronomical and the
S 3 !?yL solar vegetation year. This idea of defining a required point of the solar year
id«a borrawad was borrowed by the Egyptian, Babylonian and Greek temple builders, as
Aiigl^nu. Lockyer and Penrose have shown. Instead of reflexions and shadows, they


PYRAMID RECORDS


4i


adopted temple alignments directed to the point of sunrise of the required day idea of
of the year. The same idea was borrowed by the Oriental maritime traders Alignment*
and mining specialists who established mining and other industrial colonies Megai 7 thic°
in Spain, Portugal, and Britain. Not having time nor the opportunity to onumm9 '
adopt the elaborate temple architecture of the contemporary East, and—as the oriental .
Belgian archaeologist, Siret, has shown, 1 —not permitting the aboriginal in- Spain!
habitants to understand the use of metals and metal tools, they devised the and Britain
simple yet accurate constructions of the rough stone circle and of the rough 5 Rough ”•
stone alignment. As Lockyer has shown, the stone circle was an advance on constructions
the stone alignment, as the latter was an advance—by reason of its greater “ e “ °“ a 7
length generally—on the Oriental Temple Axis alignment.

If 46. IS THE PYRAMID A GRAPHICAL EXPRESSION OF
NATURAL LAW?

In light of the foregoing conclusions—and having regard to the extreme
accuracy of workmanship in the Great Pyramid and the extreme accuracy of its other
definition of the points of the solar year—it would seem that the Great Pyramid wpolls of the
was not built for the latter purpose only. All our conclusions take us back to
the origins in the former civilisation. Can it be that the Great Pyramid has
something to tell us concerning these origins, and concerning the basis of the
lost sciences and arts of the past ?

The mathematical or astronomical reader may possibly have seen the clues
that have suggested these questions. In the Great Pyramid we have four
sloping surfaces at the same angle of slope, accurately oriented, and built at a
selected latitude. These comprise four constants.

We could understand the two structural constants having been purposely
brought to a selected latitude and there oriented to enable the noon
phenomena to define the 1st of November. But the chances against the same
four constants defining the beginning and ending of Summer by a horizontal
South reflexion, and the Equinoxes by North-East and North-West directions,
are so overwhelming as to be deemed impossible. Yet the Equinoctial pheno¬
menon and the phenomenon of the beginning and ending of summer, both
resulting from the same simple combination of constants, prove the phenomena
to have been intentional. Three precise series of independent coincidences
of such a nature cannot happen by chance.

Now there is only one class of phenomena that can supply several such
striking coincidences and identities from a simple combination, and that is the
class of phenomena governed by Natural Law. Of a like simplicity to the case
considered are the phenomena whose laws are expressed by the simple natural
laws of Newton, Kepler, and Einstein. 2

*D. A. Mackenzie, “ Early Man in Britain,” pp. 97 and 98.

a The statement of Einstein’s Law of Relativity is simple. What is difficult is the explanation
of its application in the various branches of science. The same difficulty will be experienced in
regard to the Pyramid’s application. The simplicity is obvious. Why it should be so is not
obvious.


Pyramid ?

Lost ScioncM
and Arts of tbs
Past?


The

Mathematical
Clue of the
Four
Pyramid
Constants.


Mathematical
Authority
against the
Identities,
viewed as
resulting from
ordinary (
combination
of factors.

Precision of
Identities
declares
against chance
and ordinary
combination.


Within the
Category of
Natural Law
Phenomena.

Analogy :
Laws of
Newton,
Kepler,
Einstein.


42


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Gr«aft

Pyramid's

Noon

Phenomena
are remotely
derived
functions of
the Primary
Functions of
the Elements
of the Earth's
Orbit and its
Motions.


The Relation
between the
Primary and
Derived
Functions
necessarily
known before
Pyramid’*
Simple '
Expression of
the Derived
Functions
could be
evolved.


Knowledge
at least
equal to
astronomical
knowledge of
Modern Times.

The Direction
of further
Inquiry.


If 47. THE PYRAMID DESIGNER’S KNOWLEDGE OF ORBITAL
MOTIONS.

Tentatively, therefore, we may accept as possible that the Great Pyramid
is the solid geometrical expression of a natural law, or of certain natural laws
known to a former civilisation, and that this expression refers to solar astrono¬
mical time, and hence, possibly, to orbital motions and elements. The possi¬
bility more nearly approaches certainty when the mathematician realises, as he
must, that the outstanding noon phenomena of the Pyramid cannot be other
than functions that are remote derivatives of other functions. These other
functions can only be primary functions of the elements of the Earth’s orbit
and its motions.

Obviously it was known, before the Pyramid design was put into being,
that certain properties of the solar year could be reduced to the simple Pyramid
expression of them. The knowledge of the simplicity of expression necessarily
presupposes knowledge of the properties thus simply expressed. The possession
of such knowledge by the Pyramid designer implies the possession of a know¬
ledge of astronomy at least equal to that of modem times.

It may seem rash to suggest such an hypothesis thus early in our argument,
but we are content to let the Pyramid’s own evidence, and the evidence from
archaeological and literary sources, speak for themselves. The evidence from
these sources has not hitherto been co-ordinated in this connection, but this
will be accomplished in subsequent chapters, and the results of this co-ordination
fully discussed.


PYRAMID RECORDS


43


Section II.— Accessory.

If 48. THE XVIIIth DYNASTY VAGUE CALENDAR YEAR.

It is an undisputed fact that during the entire duration of the XVIIIth
Dynasty of Egypt, the Egyptian Calendar year consisted of 365 days without
any intercalation. In other words, the Egyptians of this period had no equiva- ™*v*gu« >ng
lent for our Leap Year. This form of year is known as the Egyptian Vague Y«ariSu/T 8
(or Wandering) Year. It is so called, obviously, from the fact that it slips Dyna»ty xviu
back round the Julian year of 365^- days, at the rate of one day in four Julian ravirion.
years. The slip back amounts to one complete Calendar year of 365 days in
1460 Julian years. At this time the vague Calendar year began with Day 1,

Month I, of the now mis-named Calendar Season of Sowing.


If 49. THE VAGUE CALENDAR YEAR FROM 6 th CENTURY B.C.

TO 3RD CENTURY A.D.

It is also a fact beyond dispute that the vague Calendar year of 365 days
was in use by the Egyptians from the 6th century B.C. to the 3rd century A.D. th« v«*u«

It continued in use even after 25 B.C., when the fixed Alexandrian (Julian) year S*rJI «S nB
was adopted for Egypt. The evidence concerning all this is too reliable and too b.c to n 3r?^
surely established to require repeating. At this time, also, the vague Calendar without
year began with Day 1, Month I, of the now mis-named Calendar Season of Sowing.

If 50. BETWEEN DYNASTY XVIII AND THE 6 th CENTURY B.C.

The evidence is also very complete that, between the period of Dynasty v e Y#ar
XVIII and the 6th Century B.C., a vague year was in use, with Month I of the p” iod
so-called Calendar Season of Sowing as the first month of the Calendar year. f Q y ^ ty xvnl
But as to whether or not the vague year during this interval continued its c#n4ury B - c -
tranquil wandering unaffected by legislation or other means of revision is a But quMtion
question that has failed to receive the critical treatment warranted by the
evidence. ruvUion.

If 51. EVIDENCE POINTING TO TWO REVISIONS.

The evidence indicates that the vague year was twice subjected to revision
during the interval defined. It points to a first revision during the reign of R.f«r«ic« u
Ramessu II (Dyn. XIX), and to a second revision during the reign of Uasarkon if

II (Dyn. XXII). The indications are that the first revision belongs to the K^ion by
27th year of Ramessu II, and the second to the 22nd year of Uasarkon II. u * #arkon 11


44


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


If 52. THE EFFECT OF THE REVISIONS.

Neither of these revisions effected any considerable displacement of the
Calendar year. But they so completely broke the uniform rate of the vague
year’s wandering that the solution of the astronomical chronology of the
Dynasties is a considerably more complicated matter than has hitherto been
supposed.

vUut Year The data concerning the two revisions are deep rooted in the Egyptians’

complicate^ own presentation of their history. For this reason, consideration of the evi-
cKonSigy dences will be given only as the various items of the data arise, and for the
Dynasty xviii same reason, cannot be completed within the present volume.

Century b.c. The two regnal years are now, however, stated as an introductory basis
of reference for the various items of the data as they emerge.

UnaiteThe date of the revision of Uasarkon II determines that the vague year
^.5. continued its unbroken uniform rate of slip backwards round the Julian year
Century b.c. —i n spite of other two attempts at revision 1 —from late in the 9th century
Century°A^^ ® mi( idle of the 3rd century A.D.

If 53. THE ASSUMPTIONS COMMONLY MADE.

The following assumptions have hitherto been made with the utmost
assurance :

(1) That the XVIIIth Dynasty vague year continued without revision—
i.e., uniformly slipping back without interruption, one day from the
Egyptological Julian year in every four Julian years—during the period intervening

Assumptionto the 6th century B.C. ; and

not^ubjocted (2) That the same uniform rate of wandering had continued without
from poVc. revision or alteration, during the whole period of Dynastic history,—

from^VBx! and earlier, from 5700 B.C. or alternatively from 4240 B.C. to 238 A.D.

when Censorinus wrote concerning the Vague Year in his De Die
Natalis .


Common
Assumption
of Unbroken
Sequence of
Unmtercalated
Years of
365 Days.

Recorded
facts prove
otherwise.

Calendar Year
Intercalated
during period
of Egpytian
Dynasties
VI to XII.

Reference to
Egyptian Data
proving a Fixed
November
Agricultural
Year.


If 54. THE FIXED YEAR OF PERIOD DYNASTIES VI TO XII.

The basis of the common assumption is that the Egyptian Calendar—
during the period of Dynastic history—always consisted of an unintercalated
Calendar year of 365 days. Much might be said concerning the flaws in this
assumption. The comparative charts, diagrams and data of Plates IX, X,
and XI, however, render any such discussion superfluous. 2 Here we have the
facts concerning the events of the seasons of the solar year compared with al!
the dated events of the defined seasons of the Calendar year in Egyptian records
belonging to the period of Dynasties VI to XII inclusive. This comparison
shows that during this period the calendar seasons coincided exactly with the
actual seasons from which they derived their names. In other words, during
Dynasties VI to XII, the Egyptians had a fixed (intercalated) year beginning
at the commencement of the November Agricultural Year.

decree of Canopus, 238 B.C., and the Institution of the fixed Alexandrian (Julian) year 25 B.C.
a Refer detailed description of these, 73 to 75d.


PYRAMID RECORDS


45


H 55. THE XIIth DYNASTY RECORD OF THE HELIACAL
RISING OF SIRIUS.

The first appearance of the Hittites during the reign of Senusert III of
Egyptian Dynasty XII, during the reign of Khammurabi, the Babylonian
contemporary of Abraham, and during the life of Abraham in Canaan, fixes the
date of the beginning of the reign of Senusert III not earlier than 2100-1900
B.C. This fixing of the date is apart from any real or imaginary astronomical
fixing.

For many centuries around this period —vide Oppolzer’s calculations—
—Sirius rose heliacally at Memphis on 18th July (Julian) in three out of every
consecutive four years, and on 19th July (Julian) in one out of every
consecutive four years. From 2100 to 1900 B.C. (astronomical) these dates
coincided with 1st July (Gregorian) and 2nd July (Gregorian) respectively.
Hence from 2100 to 1900 B.C. (astronomical) Sirius rose heliacally on 1st July
(Gregorian) in three out of every consecutive four years, and on the 2nd July
(Gregorian) in one out of every consecutive four years.

Amongst a number of Papyri discovered at Kahun, and belonging to the
period of Dynasty XII, were two mentioning the heliacal rising of Sirius in the
7th year of Senusert III. The account containing this notice narrates that
on Day 25, Month III, Season Pert (Growing and Harvest), the superintendent
of the temple advised the governor that arrangements were being made for the
festival of the heliacal rising of Sirius which would take place on Day 16 of the
following month. The narrative, continuing in diary form, gives, under Day
17, Month IV, Season Pert, an inventory of the “ festival offerings for the rise
of the star Sirius ” on that date.

The heliacal rising therefore took place on 1st or 2nd July (Gregorian),
226 days after the commencement of the Calendar year. The current Calendar
year, therefore began on the 17th or 18th November (Gregorian)—16 or 17 days
after the fixed position of the true beginning of the year.

This interval, obviously, indicates why special attention was directed to
the Sirius rising in this particular year. In this year Sirius rose heliacally on
Day 17 of the 8th Calendar Month, and the first day of the current Calendar
year began on Day 17 of the 1st month of the fixed Calendar year, as defined
by the Pyramid’s 1st November phenomena. Here we find indicated the
connection between the two alternative month datings celebrated as the day
of the Festival of the Dead. (Refer Sect. I, ^ 28 and 29.)

f 56. THE FIXED NOVEMBER YEAR OF DYNASTIES I AND II.

Tables II and III have shown that the intercalations of the 360 days’
year occurred at intervals of five or six years. The Annals of the early Dynasties,
of which the Palermo stone is a considerable fragment, indicate that the Festival
of Sokar, 1 (Osiris) occurred after precisely this interval.

'Breasted, " Ancient Records,” I, pp. 58-63.


Hittites’ First
Historical
Appearance
fixes Dates of
Dynasty XII
in Egypt.


The Heliacal
Rising of Siriua
at the Time of
Dynasty XII.


The XIIth
Dynasty
Record of #
Heliacal Rising
of Sirius.

Day 17 of 8th

Calendar

Month.


Current
Calendar Year
began on
17-18th
November
(Gregorian),

On 17tb Day of
1st Calendar
Month of the
Fixed Pyramid
1st November
Year.


Annals of
Dynasties I and
II give Feast of
Sokar (Osiris)
occurring
every S or 6
Years.


46


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Now Dr. Frazer (“Adonis, Osiris, Attis ”) has shown that the Festival of
Prove* b Sokar (Osiris) is identical with the Festival of the Dead. (Refer Sect. I, *[ 26.)
Adr« 5 l ng tlon * It therefore fell on the 1st November (Gregorian), (refer Sect. I, If 25) which
toV£ed r ist* ar accounts for its celebration once only in every five or six years during the period
yOvem er Q £ dynasties I and II. The Palermo Stone, therefore, proves that an inter¬
calary cycle kept the Calendar year adjusted to the 1st November year at the
time of Dynasties I and II.

Maspero and Budge, again, have shown repeatedly that the Epagomenal
days—“ the five days over the year 5,1 —were known as early as the beginning
Both Calendar Egypti an Dynastic History. This necessarily implied that the year of 365
365 Day 3 * 60 th« ^ays was * n use at same time as the year of 360 days. As the latter was
Adjusted. intercalated with respect to 1st November, the former must have been inter-
Cycle 03 Year *' ca ^ a t e( i with respect to 1st November. It follows, then, that the two Calendar
years followed the same Calendar Cycle. This is the case with the Calendar
cycle of 103 years.

(Refer Tables II and III, Sect. I., ^ 31.)


XXth Dynasty
Fixed Celestial
Sothic
Calendar.


” Hathor ”
Name of its 4th
Month.


Period
XII ’’

4th Calendar
Month.


Dynasty

Hathor’*


Period

Dynasty XVIII
’’Hathor” 3rd
Calendar
Month.


9th Century
B.C. to 3rd
Century A.D.

” Hathor ” 3rd

Calendar

Month.


3 Calendar
Revisions
between
Dynasty XII
and 9th
Century B.C.


High Nile
dating 3rd Year
Uasarkon II.


If .57. THE MONTH NAME REVISIONS FROM DYNASTY XII TO
6 th CENTURY B.C.

The XXth Dynasty Calendar on the walls of the Temple of Amen at
Medinet Habu give the months of the Celestial or Sothic (fixed) year and the
month datings of the annual festivals. This has no relation to the contem¬
porary vague or wandering year. Day i Month I begins with the Heliacal rising
of Sirius, and Day i, Month IV of the Calendar is the Day of the Feast of Hathor.
The latter proves that Hathor was the name of the 4th month of the Calendar
(and that Mesore was the name of the 1st month) at the time of Dynasty XX.

This identification of the names for the Calendar months agrees with the
identification for the period of Dynasty XII. 2 It does not, however, agree
with the identification of month names for Dynasty XVIII. Hathor was the
name of Month III, and Thoth the name of Month I of the Calendar at the time
of Dynasty XVIII. 3 This, again, was the identification holding from the end
of the 9th century B.C. to the middle of the 3rd century A.D.

Tt is obvious then, that the Calendar was revised between Dynasty XII
and Dynasty XVIII ; again, between Dynasty XVIII and Dynasty XX ; and
again, between Dynasty XX and the end of the 9th century B.C. The latter
revision certainly took place after the 3rd year of Uasarkon II, as is proved by
the high Nile dating recorded for that year at Thebes. (Refer ^}1[ 48-53).
Discussion of this subject will be resumed later.

1 See also Petrie, “ Historical Studies,” p. 8.

•Petrie, “ Historical Studies,” II, pp. 8 and 22, and Ancient Egypt, 1917, p. 45 ; revision ol
“ Historical Studies.”

•Month name identifications on a clepsydra of Amenhotep III, Karnak. Ancient Egypt, 1917,
pp. 42-45.


PYRAMID RECORDS


47


H 58. THE XXth DYNASTY CELESTIAL OR SOTHIC CALENDAR.

The XXth Dynasty fixed Sothic Calendar and its datings 57) are stated
in Table VIII. The Gregorian month datings follow from the facts :— xxth Dyna.ty

(1) That Dynasty XX certainly began around 1200 B.C. DStiSg**

(2) That around, and for several centuries after 1200 B.C., Sirius rose
heliacally three years in every consecutive four years on July 19th
(Julian), and one year in every consecutive four years on July 18th
(Julian).

(3) That July 18-19 (Julian) coincided with July 7-8 (Gregorian) from

1301 to 1100 B.C. inclusive.


Table VIII shows that the Feast of Sokar (Osiris) was celebrated on 31st Fe#tiva i 0iirit
October or 1st November (Gregorian). In spite, then, of the contemporaneous Sokar *
vague year Calendar, the XXth Dynasty Egyptians celebrated the Festival of 3 l t #t N o™ib£T
Sokar—the Festival of the Dead—on the same day of the solar year as had been ,

observed during the period of Dynasties I to XII. to xu *


f 59 - THE PTOLEMAIC CELESTIAL OR SOTHIC CALENDAR.

This fixed Sothic Calendar and its festival datings, together with the cli«“ai ic
description of the festival rites of Osiris, as observed in Ptolemaic times, are
contained in a long inscription in the Temple of Osiris at Denderah. The Fe#tival 0#irii
essential festivals and their month datings are stated in Table IX. The Khent-Am«nti.
Gregorian month datings follow from the facts :— OcI^b« h

(1) That the inscription belongs to a period between 301 B.C. and 102 B.C. (Gre * onan) -

when the heliacal rising of Sirius occurred on one or other of the days
July 19-20 (Julian).

(2) That from 301 B.C. to 102 B.C. July 19-20 (Julian) coincided witn
July 15-16 (Gregorian).


Table IX shows that the Ptolemaic Festival of Osiris Khent-Amenti takes
the place of the XXth Dynasty Festival of Osiris Sokar. The Ptolemaic
Festival lasted for 18 days—from Day 12, Month IV (October 24-25) to Day 30,

Month IV (November 12-13)—“ and set forth the nature of Osiris in his triple
aspect as dead, dismembered, and finally reconstituted by the union of his
scattered limbs. In the first of these aspects he was called Khent-Amenti,
in the second Osiris-Sop, and in the third Sokar.” The Festival of Osiris
Khent-Amenti—the festival of the dead Osiris—fell on October 28-29 (Gre¬
gorian), a slip of three days being indicated from the original placing still
retained in the time of the XXth Dynasty. The slip is accounted for, as will s^thiS 0 YM? 1 of
be shown later, by the fact that whereas the later Egyptian astronomer priests 365 ' 25 Day#
(Dynasty XX to Ptolemaic times) reckoned the Sothic year as 365.25 days, sJia^°'K 1 ar aI of
they also reckoned the Solar year as 365.24 days, to obtain Precession of the 365,24 Day#
Solar year round the Sothic year once in 36,525 years. The difference between passional
the true solar and the nominal solar year amounted to to 3 days between of 36,525
1200 B.C. and 100 B.C.


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


TABLE VIII.

XXth dynasty datings of annual festivals.


Brugsch, “ Egypt under the Pharaohs ”
Vol. II, p. 156.

New Year’s Day, Rising of Sirius

Feast of Hathor

Feast of Sacrifice

Opening of the Tomb of Osiris

Feast of the Hoeing of the earth

Preparation of the Sacrificial Altar in the
Tomb of Osiris

Exhibition of the Corpse of Sokar (Osiris) in
the Midst of the Sacrifice

Feast of the Mourning Goddesses
Feast of Sokar (Osiris)

Feast of Palms

Feast of the Precession of the Obelisk

Feast of the Exhibition of the Image of Did
(the symbol of Osiris)

Feast of the Coronation of Horus


Day 1, Month I
Day 1, Month IV
Day 20, Month IV
Day 21, Month IV
Day 22, Month IV

Day 23, Month IV

Day 24, Month IV
Day 25, Month IV
Day 26, Month IV
Day 27, Month IV
Day 28, Month IV

Day 30, Month IV
Day 1, Month V


Gregorian Month Datings,
for period 1301-1100 B.C.

8th-9th July.

6th-7th October.

25th-26th October.
26th-27th October.
27th-28th October.

28th-29th October.

29th-*3oth October.
30th-3ist October
31st October-ist November.
ist-2nd November.

2nd~3rd November.

4th-5th November.

5th-6th November.


TABLE IX.


PTOLEMAIC DATINGS FOR THE OSIRIAN FESTIVAL RITES.


Budge, “ Gods of the Egyptians,” “ Celestial ”

Vol. II, pp. 128-129. Calendar

(for Osirian Festival Month Datings). Month Datings.

“ Celestial ” New Year’s Day, Heliacal Rising

of Sirius .. .. .. .. .. Day 1, Month I


Equivalent Gregorian
Month Datings.

I5th-i6th July.


Feast of the Hoeing of the earth

Festival of Pert (“Coming forth”
“growing”) .

Festival of Osiris Khent-Amenti


Day 1, Month IV
.. Day 12, Month IV
or

.. Day 14, Month IV
.. Day 16, Month IV


I3th-i4th October.
24th-25th Octpber

26th—27th October.
28th-29th October.


“ Model of the god of the preceding year
“ taken out from its place and buried
“ suitably, and the new Osiris was

“ embalmed in the Sanctuary ” .. Day 24, Month IV = 6th-7th November

Feast of the Exhibition of the Image of Did,

the symbol of Osiris .. .. .. Day 30, Month IV = 12th-1.3th November.


PYRAMID RECORDS


49


In the same period, the nominal solar year had receded from the Sothic
year to the extent of ten days. This accounts for the ten days difference between
the XXth Dynasty and the Ptolemaic seasonal datings.

Comparison of the two Calendars (Tables VIII and IX) again, shows that Hon09mumm i
in both XXth Dynasty and Ptolemaic times, the Feast of the Exhibition of the cJiiSSw Tw0
Image of Did was attached to Day 30, Month IV. This indicates that certain in 5 n ptiLSfie)
festivals were not seasonal and that such festivals remained attached to the Fi * #d -
day of the month at which tradition of a certain period placed them.

If 60. THE NUMERICAL DETAILS OF. THE PTOLEMAIC FESTIVAL.

In the Ptolemaic celebration of the Festival, 34 Papyrus boats conveyed
34 images. These obviously were derived from, and symbolise, the 34 inter¬
calary periods of the 103 years’ cycle (Tables II and III). From Tables II
and III, we observe as follows :—

34 intercalated years of the 360 days’ calendar
= 34 intercalated years of 365 days’ calendar,

= 34 i years of 360 days (not intercalated),

= 12,420 days=4i4 months of 30 days each.

The numerical significance of the enumeration here becomes apparent,

For, since

4X414 months= 1656 months, Numbtr^ ^

and since the Osirian texts state that “ one day counts for a month,” so, p*of* C maic m
presumably, one month counts for a year, and therefore, 1656 months symbolise Give Deiug* ^
1656 years. This gives symbolically the date of the Noachian Deluge Ending * *

1656 A.K., as in Table V.

A similar numerical identity—giving the Deluge Date 1656 A.K.—was similar
found by Oppert, 1 in the case of the mythical chronology of the Babylonians. Euatiti“* n

If 61. THE HYKSOS CALENDAR RECORD OF AN INTERCALARY
CYCLE.

From the earliest dynastic times, the Egyptians referred to the epagomenal « n»e Fiv«
days—the five days over the year—as the birthdays of certain gods and ?££”° ver th *
goddesses. These were, respectively, in the order of the days, Osiris, Horus, The
Set (Typhon), Isis and Nephthys. Now the civil calendar of 360 days was in ® ,rt o?£]£ of
use from Dynasty I to Dynasty XII at least, in conjunction with the Calendar §; «&£“**
year of 363 days. At this early period, then, the epagomenal days — the birth- 5*. iJiphtby..
days of the five gods or goddesses—coincided, between intercalary years, with
certain five days of Month I, Season of Sowing. Immediately after an inter- mrthday* in
calation, Day 1, Month I of the 360 days’ Calendar would follow the fifth of the STurcifaudi
Epagomenal days of the 365 days’ Calendar. In the second year after an SnSrSayl***
intercalation, Days 1 to 5, Month I, of the 360 days Calendar would coincide
with the five Epagomenal days of the 365 days Calendar.

l Gott, Gel. Nachrichten. 1877, p. 205.


50


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Now there is precisely such a record as this on the back of the Rhind
Mathematical Papyrus. 1 This Papyrus was compiled during the reign of a
Hyk*ot'Month Hyksos king (Dynasty XV or XVI), and Egyptologists generally believe it to
Birthday.^of^ be of an earlier date than Asseth, the last Hyksos king,
to second year The record states as follows :—

after an Inter-

caiation* “ Year ii. Month I, Day 3, birth of Set; the majesty of this god caused

his voice (to be heard)/'

“ Birth of Isis, the heaven rained."

The record states that the birthday of Set (the third of the Epagomenal days)
fell on Day 3, Month I, and that the birthday of Isis (the fourth of the
Epagomenal days) followed, obviously on Day 4, Month I. As the coincidence
noted always occurred in the second year after an intercalation, it is obvious
..yksos Record that the Hyksos record indicates two facts. These are :—

Proves Fixed

November** 1 ( I ) That in Hyksos times (Dynasties XV and XVI) the intercalated

Continuously Calendar years of 360 and 365 days—in use from Dynasty I to XII—

Dynasty?to were st ^ ln use at t ime Dynasty XV or XVI.

Dynasty xvi. (2) That such intercalations occurred at the intervals of five or six years
found established at the time of Dynasties I and II.

The Hyksos Calendar record on the Rhind Mathematical Papyrus therefore
proves, in conjunction with the preceding data, that the fixed November year
and the conforming intercalated Calendar years of 360 and 365 days were in
continuous use from Dynasty I to Dynasty XV or XVI.


If 62. EARLY EGYPTIAN EXAMPLES OF “ THE ALMANAC
TRADITION.”


Set, at Birth
caused his
Voice

(Thunder) to be
Heard.

Tradition
Annually
Recorded on
his Birthday.


Heavens
Rained on
Birthday of
Isis.


One point, however, requires to be cleared up. The Hyksos’ Calendar
record, under “ birth of Set,” on Day 3, Month I, states that “ the majesty of the
god caused his voice (to be heard).” This does not mean that thunder was heard
on this day in the particular year recorded. Any ancient or modern almanac—
by the kind of reference given—will show what is meant. The record is an
early example of what we now term “ The Almanac Tradition.” Almost every
Almanac, in any year, gives the anniversary of the Battle of Waterloo. In this
case of the Hyksos’ record, the day is the anniversary of the day upon which
Set, at his birth, first rended the sky (the goddess Nuit) with his thunderbolts.
Thus the Egyptian Book of the Dead 2 refers to Set as the god who “ letteth loose
the storm clouds and the thunder in the horizon of heaven.” According to
Plutarch, Set tore his mother’s bowels at birth, Set’s mother, Nuit, being the
sky goddess.

Similarly, Isis was not only the primitive goddess of grain, but as such, was
also the goddess of verdure, moisture and rain, and is referred to as “ the wife
of the lord of the Inundation, the creatrix of the Nile flood.” 3 Her tears for


Petrie, “ Historical Studies,” II.
a Budge f “ Gods of the Egyptians,” Vol. II, pp. 246-7.
•Budge, “ Gods of the Egyptians,” Vol. II, p. 214.
Moret, ” Kings and Gods of Egypt,” p. 106.


PYRAMID RECORDS


5i


the dead Osiris were supposed to produce the Inundation. Hence the Hyksos Tradition
record refers to Day 4, Month I of the current Calendar year as falling upon the Recorded,
anniversary of the “ birth of Isis,” when “ the heaven rained.” In this case Hyk«o»* ^
also, as in the case of Set, we have an early example of the “ Almanac Tradi- Record ^Not a
tion.” It is unnecessary, therefore, to point out that the record does not refer of Thunder and
to rain falling upon this day in the particular year of the record.

This explanation has been rendered necessary owing to the fact that the Fixing Hyk#ot ,
dates of the Hyksos’ Dynasties have been “ fixed ” from the supposed occur- s££po 2 tion“ ch
rence of rain on the day and month stated.

63. THE ESTABLISHING OF THE VAGUE YEAR.

The Egyptian “ Book of the Sothis,” preserved by Syncellus, states that
the vague or wandering year of 365 days was first instituted by the last Hyksos
king, Asseth. The statement is :—“ This king (Asseth) added the five Epago- The
menae and in his time they say the Egyptian year was reckoned as 365 days, A**eth, ing *
having before this time counted only 360. Obviously, the statement means Year

that prior to Asseth, the last Hyksos king, the civil Calendar of 360 days was the **

intercalated year, and that Asseth, who reigned not long prior to Dynasty Year.

XVIII, instituted, as the civil year, the unintercalated or vague year of 365
days.

Two facts confirm this. These are :—

(1) That from Dynasties I to XV or XVI, according to the evidences dis¬
cussed, the Civil Calendar year was an intercalated Calendar year, p?“o£“f Fi«d
adjusted at intervals of five or six years, to the fixed 1st November ?tS r x&? Mtie *
Agricultural year.

(2) That the month datings for the recorded heliacal risings of Sirius during

Dynasty XVIII determine that the vague year was then in use, but had Con6rmed^b y
not long prior to Dynasty XVIII, been in its true 1st November- Month Dating*
beginning position—with the Calendar Season of Sowing coincident Ruing**©?
with the actual Season of Sowing. Dyinlty^vin.

All the evidences, then, from the period of Dynasties I to XVIII, combine
to prove :—

(1) That the year was a fixed November-beginning Agricultural year from Fixed Year

Dynasty I to XVI. ' 1 **

(2) That the last king of Dynasty XVI first established the vague or

wandering year ; and

(3) That the first Egyptian records, employing the vague year for month Vagu#Ywr

datings, are the records of Dynasty XVIII. Onwenf* XVU


52


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Pyramids of
Khufu and
Khafra.

Sphinx.

Khafra's

Granite

Temple.

Pyramid

Causeways.

Arrangement
of Pyramids
and Temples
to avoid
intercepting
shadows and
reflexions.


Stonehenge
Alignment
and Date.

« Slaughter
Stone.'*

Outer Earth
Circle and
Lockyer's
Theory.

The Earth
Circle's
Agricultural
Year.

November 8.
February 4.


May 6.
August 8.


Earth Circle's

Solstitial

Alignment


Section III. —Detailed Technical Description of Plates.

If 64. FRONTISPIECE. UPPER PERSPECTIVE VIEW. RESTORATION OF
THE PYRAMIDS AND TEMPLES OF GIZEH PLATEAU.

The 1st (Great) Pyramid of Khufu (Dynasty IV) is shown on the right, and the 2nd
Pyramid of Khafra (Dynasty IV) on the left. In the right foreground appear the Sphinx
and part of the Granite Temple of Khafra. Leading from the latter is shown, the causeway
to the 2nd Pyramid. The similar causeway to the Great Pyramid is shown in the right
hand middle distance.

Attention is directed to the fact that none of the larger pyramids are in the line of the
Great Pyramid’s noon shadows or reflexions, and that the smaller pyramids and temples do
not interfere with the projection of these.


If 65. PLATE I. PLAN OF STONEHENGE. STONE CIRCLE AND OUTER
EARTH CIRCLE.

Reconstructed from Sir William Flinders Petrie’s Survey, “ Stonehenge,” and from data
in Mr. Edgar Barclay’s “ Stonehenge.”

The axis line XY is shown as determined by Sir Norman Lockyer from the existing
alignment. As calculated by Lockyer, this alignment is directed to the point of Sunrise at
the Summer Solstice, 1680 B.C. db 200 years. The fallen position of the so-called “ Slaughter
Stone ” has nothing whatever to do with the sunrise alignment.

Lockyer considers that the construction of the outer Earth Circle was long prior to the
erection of the Stone Circle. He dates the Earth Circle about 2000 B.C., and considers from
the existing evidence that the agricultural year was in use at that time. Thus, standing at M
on the Earth Circle, on left of Plate I, and looking over the upright stone A, in bottom left
of Plate I, towards the corresponding upright stone B, on the middle right, gives the align¬
ment pointing to Sunrise at commencement of Winter, November 8th, and end of Winter,
February 4th. The alignment AOB passes through 0 , the common centre of the Earth
and Stone Circles.

Looking in the opposite direction over the upright stones, i.e., from N on the opposite
side of the Earth Circle, gives the alignment BOA pointing to Sunset at the commencement
of Summer, May 6th, and end of Summer, August 8th.

Standing at P on the Earth Mound, in the middle left of Plate I, and looking over the
upright stone A in the lower left, gives the alignment PA pointing to Sunset of Winter
Solstice. Looking from Q on the Mound, in lower right of Plate, across the upright stone B,
in middle right of Plate, gives the alignment QB pointing to Sunrise of Summer Solstice.
The Earth Circle, therefore, was designed to give both the points of the astronomical solar
year, as well as the points of the agricultural solar year.


PYRAMID RECORDS


53


If 66. PLATE II. PERSPECTIVE VIEW OF STONEHENGE AT TIME OF
SUNRISE OF SUMMER SOLSTICE, 1680 B.C.

The direction of sunrise is indicated by the direction of the shadows thrown by the
upright stones of the Stone Circle.

The so-called “ Slaughter Stone ” is shown in its present fallen position at the Avenue
opening of the Earth Circle. Not enough is known of its object to justify attempt at restora¬
tion. It may have been a portion of an Entrance Trilithon, similar to the five large Trilithons
shown within the Stone Circle. But conjecture is futile.

Attention is directed to the short upright stone of the Stone Circle shown in right fore¬
ground. As Mr. Edgar Barclay has shown, the present condition of this stone is as it was
quarried and erected. The gap in the Lintel Circle is therefore as originally constructed.
The gap may have been left intentionally to permit of the entrance of the two high poles of
banners, festoons or other decorations paraded at the celebrations of the rituals of the temple.


If 67. PLATE III. MAP OF THE NILE DELTA.

The central axis of the Nile Delta runs due North and South, and is the Meridian line
passing through the Great Pyramid of Gizeh. This might be a coincidence were it not for the
fact that all the intentional phenomena of the noon reflexions and shadows of the Great
Pyramid were symmetrical to the Delta with respect to this Meridian line.

Thus on 1st November, the Pyramid’s East and West noon reflexions each presented a
vertical surface of reflexion to the observer North of the Pyramid. These vertical surfaces
defined the North-East and North-West directions respectively from the Pyramid’s East
and West sides. The line of each vertical surface was the continuation of the respective
diagonal of the Pyramid’s base, and therefore, made an angle of 45 0 with the central Meridian
line. This indicates one of the reasons for the selection of the Pyramid’s site. The intention
obviously was that the Great Pyramid should appear as the centre of the Quadrant of the
Circle that defines the Nile Delta.

Again, as seen along the central Meridian line at each noon of Autumn, Winter, and
Spring, the South reflexion from the Pyramid was thrown high into the air. Rising first
above the horizontal at the commencement of Autumn, the elevation of this noon reflexion
increased during Autumn, reached its maximum at Mid-Winter, and decreased towards and
during Spring, finally falling below the horizontal at the termination of Spring. On the
first day of Summer, this South noon reflexion became horizontal.

At Mid-Summer noon the reflexion reached its lowest depression, thereafter becoming
less depressed, until it again became horizontal at noon of the last day of Summer.


If 68. PLATE IV. MAP OF THE PYRAMIDS, TOMBS AND TEMPLES ON THE
PLATEAU OF GIZEH; and MERIDIAN SECTION THROUGH THE
GREAT PYRAMID.

Compiled from Col. Howard Vyse’s “ Pyramids of Gizeh,” Prof. C. P. Piazzi Smyth’s
“ Life and Work at the Great Pyramid,” Prof. W. M. Flinders Petrie’s “ Pyramids and
Temples of Gizeh,” and Edgar’s “ Great Pyramid Passages,” Vol. I.

The Meridian Section lies along the central axis of the Nile Delta figured on Plater III,
and defined as the Pyramid Meridian Line.

In the North-West corner of the Map Plan is figured part of a spur from the Gizeh
Plateau. The height of this spur is shown on the Meridian Section. From the data thus
given it is seen that the limiting point of the West noon reflexion from the Great Pyramid on


Summer
Solstice
Sunrise View
of Stonehenge.

Uncertainty
Concerning
“ Slaughter
Stone.**


Peculiarity
concerning
one short
upright of
Stone Circle
and original
Gap in Lintel
Circle.


Great Pyramid
Meridian
Central Axis of
Nile Delta.

Accident or
Design.


Pyramid's
1st November
Phenomena
Define
Nile Delta.

Pyramid at
Centre of
Oriented
Quadrant of
Nile Delta.


Pyramid's
South Noon
Reflexion
above the
Horizontal
during
Autumn,
Winter, and
Spring, but
below the
Horizontal
during
Summer.


54


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Possible i st November lay on the spur referred to, and in the same level horizontal plane (practically)

ofsituaSon* as Py ram id pavement base. From this indication one might expect to find on the spur
s n ur L of e G*°/ h men ti° ne d some boundary mark or other indication marking the limit of the first November
plateau to' * noon reflexion, or some other evidence of this spur having been dressed down, or levelled up,
Great -We#t ° f to rece i ve *b e projection at the level of the Pyramid base. No search, however, for such a
pyramid. boundary mark, or signs of dressing down has yet been made, for hitherto the reasons for its

probable existence have not been disclosed.

In any case it is evident that the ist November West noon reflexion did not extend
beyond the spur shown.

In the case of the East noon reflexion on ist November it is a different matter. This
Effect of reflexion was projected on to the lower plane of the cultivated land, and therefore, continued

Reflexion* considerably further than is figured on Plate VII. The same remark applies in the case of

Eefow level of Plate VIII. The extent of the projection could not, however, alter the surface planes of the
Pavement. reflexions. Hence the vertical surface of the East noon reflexion on ist November continued
further in its direction due North-East.


Equinoctial

Noon

Reflexions

define

North-West

and

North-East

Directions.


A Summer
Noon
Reflexion
Alignment
forming a line
due East to
West on
Pyramid
North Base.

Horizontal
South Noon
Reflexion at
Beginning and
Ending of
Summer.

Inclination of
Surfaces of
East and West
Noon

Reflexions*


t 69. PLATE V. THE NOON REFLEXIONS OF THE SUMMER HALF OF THE
YEAR, i.e. during the period between the Vernal Equinox and the following
Autumnal Equinox.

Fig. A gives plan of the noon reflexions at the Equinoxes, projected on to the plane of
the Pyramid’s base level. N. S. E. and W. refer to the North, South, East and West. The
outstanding feature is supplied by the East and West noon reflexions. One base line of
each of these reflexions, DQ for the West reflexion, and AR for East reflexion, runs due
North-West and due North-East respectively, from the West and East corners of the
Pyramid’s South base side, DA.

Fig. a is the elevation of Fig. A. In this the South reflexion TOTIA., is elevated as
it is, in varying degrees of elevation during Autumn, Winter and Spring.

Fig. B gives plan of the noon reflexions at the beginning and ending of Summer. Ten
days after the beginning of Summer, and ten days before the end of Summer RBCQ is a
straight line—the North base side of the Pyramid produced—running due East
and West.

Fig. b is the elevation of Fig. B. In this the South noon reflexion TOT 1 ^, is
horizontal at the beginning and ending of Summer. (Refer last para, of note to
Plate III.)

All these diagrams of Plate V show the North surfaces ORB and OQC of the East and
West noon reflexions inclined southwards from the observer in the North. This general
feature, with varying degrees of inclination southwards, held between nth February and
ist November of each year.


North Noon
Reflexion


Longest,
and West,


East, and
South Noon
Reflexions
shortest.


If 70. PLATE VI. NOON REFLEXIONS AT THE SUMMER SOLSTICE.

Fig. C. Plan of Noon reflexions.

BPC is the longest North noon reflexion of the year.

DQC is the shortest West noon reflexion of the year.

ARB is the shortest East noon reflexion of the year.

ATD is the shortest South noon reflexion of the year.

Q and R reach their Southernmost limits.

Fig. c is the elevation of Fig. C.


PYRAMID RECORDS


55


| 71. PLATE VII. PYRAMID NOON REFLEXIONS AND SHADOWS.

Variations

Figs. D and E indicate on plan how the surfaces ORB and OQC of the East and West j wist
noon reflexions as seen from the North, gradually lost their inclination towards the South Reflexions,
as 1st November approached, when they became vertical and pointed due North-East and jheir Vertical
North-West respectively, along the Pyramid base diagonals DOB and AOC respectively, Surfaces on
produced to R and Q (Fig. E). lid 8

The reverse process happened on nth February, when the surfaces ORB and OAC U?Di?eSed y
of the East and West reflexions again became vertical and pointed North-East and North- and th-Eaft
West respectively. Prior to this date, and since 1st November, these surfaces inclined, North-West,
with varying degrees of inclination overhanging towards the observer in the North. After
the nth February they again assumed the inclination towards the South.

Fig. D shows the Pyramid’s North face first appearing in noon shadow at 14th October,
but throwing no shadow on the pavement base. On successive noons after 14th October, Appearance
the shadow, thrown on to the pavement base, gradually extended, reached its Northernmost Disappearance,
limit at the Winter Solstice, commenced to creep back after the Winter Solstice, and Variations of
reached its final stage of coincidence with the North base line on 28th February (as on 14th shadow.°° n
October), after which it disappeared until the following 14th October.

Fig. E shows the extent of pavement shadow on 1st November.

Figs, d and e are the elevations of Figs. D and E respectively.


If 72. PLATE VIII. PYRAMID NOON REFLEXIONS AND SHADOWS.

The diagrams here are typical of the Winter noon phenomena between 1st November
and nth February. Figs. F and G show in plan the surfaces ORB and OAC of the East The
and West noon reflexions, as seen by the observer in the North, overhanging towards the fheEa^lnd*
observer. In both figures the dotted lines on plan, BR and CQ, which lie on the Pyramid *[®®®
pavement base level, are covered or overhung by the sloping surfaces of reflexion ORA during
and OQD. The figures also show that the same sloping surfaces of reflexion overhang Wmter *
the noon shadow area of the Pyramid’s North face slope, BOC.

Figs. J and g are the elevations of Figs. F and G.


Figs. F and / give the noon reflexion and shadow phenomena for 2nd December and The Normal
12th January. Fig.f shows that on these days the noon reflexion 01 the Pyramid’s South face R®fl“ xion
slope is normal to that surface, i.e., the sun’s noon rays are reflected directly back in the from South
direction from which they came. In other words, the angle of incidence = angle of 2nd e i^c«nber


reflection = o°.


and

12th January.


Figs. G and g give the noon reflexion and shadow phenomena for the Winter Solstice. Winter
R and Q are the furthest Northern limits of the year for the East and West noon reflexions Solstice

A , Noon

respectively. Phenomena.


V is the furthest Northern limit of the year for the North noon shadow.


T^AT 11 (fig. g), is the highest elevation of the year for the South noon reflexion.


If 73. PLATE IX. CHART SHOWING THE SEASONAL PHENOMENA AND
ACTIVITIES OF THE SOLAR YEAR IN ANCIENT EGYPT COMPARED
WITH THE SEASONAL PHENOMENA AND ACTIVITIES OF THE
EARLY EGYPTIAN CALENDAR YEAR COMPILED FROM THE
DATED RECORDS OF THE PERIOD OF DYNASTIES VI TO XII.

General remarks :— A New

So far as we are aware, this chart is the first comprehensive and comparative abstract Comprehensive
of all the known data concerning the relation between the Calendar Year and the Solar
Year in the period preceding the XVIIIth Egyptian Dynasty. A careful study of the Fundamental
data of this series of diagrams will well repay both the general reader and the Egyptological Egyptological


56


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


The Bearing
of the
Abstract
upon the
question of
Egyptian
Chronology.


student or expert. For within the bounds of one presentation are given all the scientific
data upon which the accepted theory of modern Egyptological chronology stands or falls.
The Chart shows that the Calendar Seasons synchronised with the actual Seasons during
the period of Dynasties VI to XII, and not only so, but that the commencement of the
Calendar Year at that time synchronised with the commencement of the actual Egyptian
Agricultural Year.

As the accepted theory of Egyptological chronology is based on a wandering Calendar
year at that time, the importance of the synchronisms of Plate IX must be evident to
everyone giving the matter consideration. So certain is the Chart to tell its own story that
we content ourselves with the single assertion, that the data are correctly plotted from all
the known facts.


Explanation of Arrangement :—


If 73a. NILE FLOW AND .HELIACAL RISING OF SIRIUS.


Column (3) of Plate IX contains the time basis with respect to which all the various
data in the remaining columns are arranged. In this column appear plotted to scale of
duration in days, the months of the modern (Gregorian) year commencing with November.

Annual Cum Column (4), as explained on Chart, gives the typical annual curve of Nile Discharge
Discharge. at Memphis.

Heliacal Rising Inset is the curve of Heliacal Risings of the Star Sirius at Latitude 30° N. The risings
TG^gorian are stated with reference to the Modern (Gregorian) month dates reduced from Oppolzer’s

Datings) calculations giving the Julian month dates over the period indicated. (Oppolzer, “ Ueber

die Lange des Sirius-jahrs und der Sothis periode, ,, Vol. 90, Sitzungsberichte, Vienna
Know?* * nd Academy). Oppolzer’s calculations are extended back to 7171 B.C. by Dr. E. B. Knobel,
Calculations. Historical Studies. (Brit., Sch., Arch., Egypt., 1911, pp. 6 and 7.)

Oppolzer took the depression of the Sun at the time of the heliacal rising of Sirius as
io° 48'.


Ths Solar
Year Tima
Basis of tho
Abstract.


Heliacal Rising
Defined.


The heliacal rising of a star is its first observed rising after it has been invisible for some
time in close proximity to the sun.


Xllth Dynasty
Sirius Rising.

Annual Curve
of Nile Level.


Refer description Plate X for Xllth dynasty record of heliacal rising of Sirius.

Column (6) gives practically the same Nile flow data as column (4), but for gaugings
taken 57 years earlier, and stated in terms of Nile level instead of discharge.


Com arison of These two columns give practically the fluctuations of Nile flow and its range of date
NU™Data with variation. These agree with the statement of Herodotus for Memphis in the 5th century
Herodotus. B.C. This statement is reduced to graphical comparison in columns (4) and (6).

Column (5) gives merely an intermediate stage of data in the derivation of column (4)
data.


If 73b. THE ACTIVITIES OF THE YEAR.


Wilkinson’s
Activities
of the Solar
Year in
Ancient Egypt

Graphs of
Same.


Column (7) gives the activities and seasonal phenomena of the Solar year in ancient
Egypt, at the dates stated by Sir Gardner Wilkinson. These are accepted by all Egyptologists
of repute as the reliable basis of this branch of study.

In Column (7) the information is reduced to graphical form, diminishing of activity being
indicated by the tapering off of areas.


Irrigation,

Sowing,

Harvest

Graphs.


Wilkinson supplies the dates and data for the graphical areas of activity in Irrigation,
Sowing and Harvest.


PYRAMID RECORDS


57


The hot season is known, the tapering off in graphical area representing diminution of
heat.

The periods of activity for distant quarrying expeditions depended upon three factors.

These are :—

. (i) The need for the available labour in sowing and harvest, and to a less extent for

irrigation purposes. Di#tant

(2) The impossibility of efficient quarrying in the hot season. Factor*' 11 *

(3) The need in certain cases of utilising the rise of the Nile to float large quarried

masses on barges.

These three factors determined the two distant quarrying periods of the year shown in
Column (7).


t 73c. THE DISTANT QUARRYING PERIODS.


The 1 st distant quarrying period, then, fell within the months II, III, and IV of the first
season of the Agricultural year, i.e ., December to February inclusive. It began as sowing Period* 1 ** 8
operations were finishing. It ended as harvesting became active. This is the principal December to
distant quarrying period, for Sinai, Hat Nub and Hammamat, when High Nile Flood was *•£«»**
not required for river transport.


The 2nd distant quarrying period began towards the end of the hot season, as the Nile olll^rying *
began to rise, beginning thus early in order to have the quarried masses ready for the high Period
Nile in September or Early October, and to enable the workmen to return for the middle of Early July
the irrigation period at latest, and in time for the early sowing. “ ^


to Mid-October


1 73d. IRRIGATION, SOWING, HARVEST, ETC.

Wilkinson's

Column (8) gives the details of Wilkinson’s dated information concerning Irrigation, Date * a “ d Data
Sowing, and Harvest. Each item of information is given opposite its place in the modern irrigation,
months as stated by Wilkinson. Harvest.


Column (9) gives the same information with respect to the Solar year as column (7). But
whereas Column (7) is based on Wilkinson’s researches on ancient crops and agricultural
activities, independently of the dated records, the areas of activity in Column (9) are plotted
entirely from the dated records of the period from Dynasty XVIII to XXX inclusive. During
this period the wandering calendar year was in use, and it is from the known, or in some early
cases the approximately known, position of this wandering calendar year in the solar year at
various stages in the period that the modern month datings of the records are found.


Graphs of
Activities of
Solar Year
from Records
of Period
Dynasties
XVIII-XXX

The Vague
or Wandering
Year Datings
of the Graphs
for Dynasties
XVIII-XXX.


If 7 3 e. GRAPHS OF YEAR’S ACTIVITIES.

The agreement between the areas of Column (7) and the areas of Column (9) confirms Grlph?f?lm
what it was scarcely necessary to confirm, the accuracy of the data based on Wilkinson’s Dlla'am?**
Activities of the Agricultural Year. Graphs from

Data of

With Columns (1) and (2) we come to the important feature of the charting. xvm-xxx.

Whereas Columns (7) and (9) give the activities of the Solar year in relation to the Emphasis
modern months of Column (3), Column (1) gives the activities of the Calendar year in relation Graphs from
to the Calendar months of Column (2). Y^rDatings,

and Graphs

It will assist the reader to follow the matter more clearly if he can suppose, in the first ^Sender* 1M
instance, that Columns (1) and (2) bear no relation to Column (3). Year Datings


58


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Necessity lor
considering
the two sets of
Graphs, in
first instance,
as matters
apart, and
resting solely
on their own
respective
bases

The Agreement
of the two
Sets of Graphs
when

considered
in relation.

Agreement
proves a Fixed
Calendar
Year for period
Dynasties
Vl-XII.


Xllth Dynasty
Flax Harvest
“ Calendar ”
Dating agrees
with actual
dating of Flax
Harvest.


Xllth Dynasty
complaint
concerning
Hot Season
Expedition
to Sinai.

Calendar
Months
of Hot Season
agree with
actual Months
of Hot Season.


The Narrative
of the Hot
Season record.


The Hot Season
“ Calendar ”
Months

The Hot Season
“ Actual "
Months.


Data for
Graphs.


II 7 3 f. THE INDEPENDENT GRAPHS.

Let the reader understand that Columns (i) and (2) are drawn up, independent of
Columns (3) to (9), from the early Calendar year datings of the period of Dynasties VI to XII,
the areas of activity of the Calendar year being stated with reference to Column (2); that
Columns (1) and (2), thus attached to each other, were moved into position until the areas of
Column (1) were opposite the corresponding areas of Columns (7) and (9) ; and that when this
had been effected it was fom*d that the Calendar year and its Calendar seasons of the period
in question agreed with the actual Agricultural year and its seasons.

Columns (1) and (2), when synchronised with all the data of Columns (3) to (9) prove that
the Calendar year at the time of Dynasties VI tp XII was a fixed Calendar year. In other
words, during Dynasties VI to XII, the vague or wandering year was not in use.


If 73g. COLUMN (1), Xllth DYNASTY FLAX HARVEST CALENDAR DATING.

One important item beginning in Column (1) is the Flax Harvest dating given on a
Xllth Dynasty record. {El Bersheh , II, Pis. 8 and 9.) The flax harvest is recorded as
taking place between Day 23 and Day 27, Calendar Month IV, Calendar Season of Sowing,
i.e., 112 to 116 days after the beginning of the Calendar Year. Wilkinson, for ancient times,
gives Flax as plucked in Lower and Middle Egypt, late February or early March, i.e ., late in
the actual Month IV of the actual Season of Sowing, or early in Month I of the actual Season
of Harvest.

The Calendar Dating and the actual Dating therefore agree, and the Calendar year began
in November.


f 73h. COLUMN (1), Xllth DYNASTY HOT SEASON RECORD IN SINAI.

This is a fine example of an exception proving the rule.

Hor-ur-ra states on record at Serabit, Sinai (reign Senusert III or Amenemhat III):—

“ I arrived in this land in Calendar Month III, Calendar Season of Growing (and Harvest),
although it was not the season for going to this Mine-land.”

“.The highlands are hot in Summer, and the mountains brand the skin.

It is— [uncertain ]—for it in this evil Summer season.”

“.I succeeded in mining the good sort, and I finished in the Calendar Month I,

Calendar Season of Inundation. I brought genuine costly stone for the luxuries more than

anyone who came (hither).It was better that the accustomed seasons thereof.”

(Breasted, Records I, 322, 323).

The hot months here are the 7th, 8th, and 9th months of the Calendar year.

The actual hot months are May, June, and July, respectively the 7th, 8th, and 9th
months from November inclusive. This again confirms that the Xllth Dynasty Calendar
Year was a fixed November Year.

Plate XI gives a list of all the known Vlth to Xllth Dynasty seasonal records used for
plotting areas in Column (1), Plate IX.


PYRAMID RECORDS


59


1 74- PLATE X. CHART OF LIMITS OF EARLY EGYPTIAN INTERCALATED
CALENDAR YEAR, EGYPTIAN SEASONS, AND GREAT PYRAMID
NOON REFLEXION AND SHADOW PHENOMENA STATED WITH
REFERENCE TO THE MODERN (GREGORIAN) MONTHS.

The top item of chart—below Scale of Modern Months—represents the maximum and The
minimum limits of two of the three Early Egyptian Calendar Seasons. The basis of the rule Limits*!?/the
governing intercalation was that the 1st month of the Calendar year (Month I, Calendar ^Calendar ”***
Season of Sowing), never began later than 60 days after the Autumnal Equinox. The Seasons,
evidence determining this rule will be given in the various details of same as they are met with xhe Rule 6xins
in the projected series of volumes. Meantime it is deemed that the practical and simple tb ® Limits,
nature of the rule will appeal to the general reader.

The other items of the chart, in light of the explanation of the preceding plates explain
themselves. It will, however, be noted that the East and West co-ordinates of the East and
West Pyramid noon reflexions are equal and always of constant value.

If 75. PLATE XI. RECORDS OF THE PERIOD OF DYNASTIES VI TO XII
OF DISTANT QUARRYING EXPEDITIONS TO THE QUARRIES AT
WADY HAMMAMAT AND HAT NUB, AND TO THE MINES AND
QUARRIES OF SINAI.

The reader will observe that the days of the months are both stated and plotted to the
scale of days and months of the Calendar year. From this feature of the charting, it will First Distant
be seen, for the First Distant Quarrying Period, that only one dating occurs in Month I of the period?** 8
Calendar Season of Growing (Harvest), and only one in Month I of the Calendar Season of
Sowing. The others are all concentrated in the period from Day 3, Month II to Day 4, Maximum
Month IV, Calendar Season of Sowing. This shows clearly enough that the active period Mid? lty
began in early December, as irrigation and sowing activities diminished (only one dating {^ e |^“ b<r
occurs before the 15th day of Month II, Calendar Season of Sowing), and ended early February February,
when return for the Harvesting Season was due.

The Second Distant Quarrying Period was governed by the requirements as to Nile Qu C a 0 rrti?g gtant
transport. In some cases it saved time and labour in the handling of large blocks, to utilise period *
the inundation waters for floating off the large quarried masses on shallow barges, then Maximum #
sailing these down the Nile, to navigate the barges over the inundated country, and close up September** 1-
to the building site, before the inundation began to recede from the land. October

In such cases, in later times, quarrying began as early as the beginning of July, in the
end of the Hot season, for the purpose of having the work ready for floating off over the Practi#e - n
inundated land to the building site during the extreme height of the Inundation. In dis- LaterTime*.
cussing such cases, Professor Petrie {Ancient Egypt , 1914, p. 91) states, “ The hot season
work was more usual in later times. ,,

For early times, at Hammamat only, there is the single record of Sankh-kara (Dynasty Sea8onal
XI), on Day 3, Month I, Calendar Season of Inundation. The other records of the period of Period of
Dynasties VI to XII are all concentrated in the second half of Month III, and the first half
of month IV of the Calendar Season of Inundation. (Refer Plate IX, comparing these ^“£ rrying) in
limits, Column (2), with maximum Nile flood. Columns (3) and (4).) Early Timet.


If 75a. THE NILE TRANSPORTATION RECORD OF UNA.

The Hat Nub record of Una’s expedition during the reign of Merenra (Dynasty VI), Una's
mentions the quarrying, and then, during 17 days of Month III, Calendar Season of
Inundation, the building of the barge, followed by transportation during a second period of Nile
17 days. Una concludes “ Although there was no water on the [thesu] I landed in safety at condition*!
the pyramid (called): * Merenra-shines-and-is-Beautiful’.” (Breasted, Records, I, p. 149.)


6 o


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


The uncertain word thesu is generally translated “ flats ” but as Breasted states, this is
“ a pure guess.” Whatever the word does mean, it cannot apply to any shallows or sand¬
banks on the normal course of the river itself, but to lowlying grounds off the normal course
of the river, and flooded only at high level of inundation. For the same word occurs in a
connection that decides against thesu applying to shallows on the normal course of the river.
This is in an inscription of the reign of Senusert III (Dynasty XII), (Breasted, Records , I,
p. 300), referring to the celebration of the rites of the Osirian Festival. The inscription
states “ I championed Uenefer at ‘ That Day of Great Conflict.’ I slew all the enemies upon
the ‘ flats ’ (thesu) of Nedyt. I conveyed him (the god) into the Barque (called) ‘ The Great’.”

t 75b. THE SEASON OF UNA’S ARRIVAL AT MEMPHIS.

It is clear then, that the expedition of Una during the reign of Merenra (Dynasty VI),
already' 1 * wa * arr ived at Memphis when the Nile was already receding from the 4 flats ’ (thesu) there. He
receding from had obviously endeavoured to time his arrival at Memphis at highest Nile, but had been

inundate delayed by the construction of his barge in 17 days, or else had been unfortunate in having

a slightly earlier high Nile than he had anticipated.

Petri# » g All the other records of the period of Dynasties VI to XII confirm that these are the

o r 'iSon * acts t ^ ie case> t ^ lus j ustif y in g Sir William Flinders Petrie’s original opinion in the

P4fn«i, earlier editions of his “ History of Egypt,” Vol. 1, p. 95.

Sir Ernest Budge states, “ Petrie argues from this statement that when Una arrived off
Memphis in the month Epiphi (Month III, Calendar Season of Inundation), the waters of the
Nile had subsided so greatly that he was unable to float the boat or barge with its heavy load
over the land which had been recently inundated, for the depth of the water on the land
Opinion! did not permit him to do so. So far all is clear, and this is undoubtedly what the words in
the hieroglyphics indicate—but the possibility of deducing any date for the reigning king
from this circumstance is too remote to be seriously entertained for a moment.” (Hist.
Egypt, Vol. 1, 152-3.)


The Reference
ia to Low-
Lying Grounds
covered at
Inundation.

A statement
bearing upon
the problem.


Una’s arrival


U 75c. DEVIATIONS FROM UNA’S NARRATIVE.

One remark in the above calls for comment. The record does not state that Una
arrived in Month III of the Calendar Season of Inundation. The month of arrival with
Month'of ,l ^ ar his load at Memphis, is not stated. Una merely records that he quarried his stone, and then,
atMemphis* 1 * n *7 days of the month stated, constructed his barge. In the following 17 days, probably
in Month IV of the Calendar Season of Inundation, he came to Memphis, when the Inundation
had already commenced to fall, and therefore, at the end of September at the earliest, or
mid-October at latest.

Haw theories This long explanation has been rendered necessary by certain revisions of Egyptological

TransUtfng^f opinion following the discovery of the XHth Dynasty record of the heliacal rising of Sirius.
Records. The revisions are not due to any new light upon the inscription of Una, but due to the
the*discovery» re vision of the Sothic year theory of chronology, based on the theory of an uninterrupted
of the XHth vague Calendar year from the earliest times. The theory of one school—that of the long
Sizius Dating, chronology—makes the date of Merenra as 4190 B.C. The theory of the short chronology
A revision of gives the date of Merenra as 2570 B.C. The former requires the arrival of the expedition
Chronology Una at Memphis to have been at the end of April, whereas the latter requires the end
renderhig of th * ^■ arc ^ 1 * Both cases are in the height of the Harvest Season.

Una’s Record


If 75d. LOCAL AND DISTANT QUARRYING.

We adhere to Petrie’s original identification of the seasons for long distance quarrying
Quarr°ing expeditions, as that identification is free from the subsequent bias of the Sothic year

Calendar chronological theory. In this connection the reader must understand that local quarrying

Dynasty °ui. dates are not included. Local quarrying, i.e., quarrying adjacent to building sites, could


PYRAMID RECORDS


61


be carried on by small parties at any season of the year. Thus the dated stones of SenefenTs Local
Meydum Pyramid (year 17), range from Day 22, Month II, Calendar Season of Growing
and Harvest, to Day 8, Month III, Calendar Season of Inundation. With the fixed November bu|

year, this gives a local quarrying period beginning in the end of April, when harvest continued u
activities diminished, to the beginning of September, when irrigation operations became sSJ[ion. Hot
active, and, following which, early sowing commenced. (Petrie, Historical Studies, pp.
io-ii.)

This shows that local quarrying was carried on in the hot weather—the workmen JjjgjT** a

probably slackening off during the heat of the day—but not during Sowing or Harvest. Calendar

Year for

Seneferu’s local quarrying dates, therefore, confirm the fixed November Calendar for Dynaiie*
the time of the Illrd Dynasty. 111 XIL

In the case of long distance quarrying, large working and carrying parties, accompanied
by a military escort, were supplied. The numbers necessary were not available during
Sowing and Harvest, and such long distance expeditions were not undertaken during the Escort* for
hot weather. An exception to the latter case is the expedition of Hor-ur-ra, whose record l^rry^ng****
refers to the exceptional circumstances, and the hardships incidental thereto. (Refer •*P #ditionf .

1 73k)


f 76. PLATE XII. THE GEOMETRY OF THE GREAT PYRAMID’S NOON
REFLEXIONS AND SHADOWS.

The East and West Noon Reflexions.


Figs. A x , A 2 , A s , and A 4 are those needing most explanation, as the basal geometry
of the East and West Noon reflexions is not an easily comprehended matter.


of the sun’s ray and the reflexion of the ray from the Pyramid’s West Face. This would Nooif position
be for an altitude of the Sun of 90°, which the sun never has at the Great Pyramid’s latitude. at
In such case the reflected ray seen in plan would be directed due West. (Fig. A 2 .)


For lower altitudes, however. Fig. A x gives precisely the noon conditions as they would
be seen by an observer— i.e., the reader looking at the view given—standing in the North We 7 t Reflected
and looking towards the Pyramid in the vertical plane of approach of the Sun’s ray shown. Noon Ray*
However low the Sun at noon, the ray would always appear vertical, and the reflected ray &om d the *" en
would always appear at the same angle from the West face. As seen in plan, however, Server on th»
the lower the noon sun, the more would the reflected ray be swung round from West towards Pyramid
the North. (Fig. A 2 .) M * ridi “

We can sum up in the following statement:—

For a particular point on the West Face Slope of the Pyramid, the successive lines,
traced out by the Sun’s noon ray to that point on successive noons of the Solar year, lie pu n e 0 “f , the ,
in a vertical plane running due North and South, and the successive lines traced out by the §J at and We,k
noon reflected rays from the same point on successive noons of the year lie in a plane inclined Reflexions.
I3°.42' 28".6 below the horizontal. (Fig. A x .)

Fig. A s . XA is a typical Sun’s noon ray to the point 0 on the West face slope of the
Pyramid. The vertical plane of all such successive noon rays is the plane XAOBS.

OGFH is the constant plane of reflexion defined above, and shown in elevation in
Fig. A x , depressed at the constant angle of 13 0 .42' 28".6 below the horizontal. The
horizontal plane in Fig. A s is OBPN. The Constant angle ^ between the two planes is
represented by NOM.


62


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Whilst the XAO is the path of the Sun’s noon ray for a particular day. The plane normal to the

Reflexion Pyramid’s West Face Slope containing the Sun’s noon ray XAO is the plane AOE. The

w°est E Noo and an ^ e incidence with reference to the West Face Slope is, therefore, the angle AOE. The
Reflexions) angle of reflexion must lie in the same plane continued. Hence AOE and OFL lie in the

the°EMt n or aild same plane, normal to the West Face Slope, and hence FOL is the angle of reflexion for

West the noon considered.

Co-ordinate
respectively is

Lower*the the R is obvious, also, that DOC and KOH lie in the same plane, i.e., the East and West

Sun's altitude vertical plane through the point O; that DC=HK and OD = OK; and OC=OH; and
Noon" b.m.r. that OB= OG= DE= LK.

Fig. A± is a detail extracted from figure A s , with the horizontal plane OBPN continued
over the Constant Plane of Reflexion OHGF. A few minutes consideration will now enable

the mathematical reader to connect the data of the four figures, A lf A 2 , A 3 and A 4 , and to

derive the relationship Tan D^Tan C.Cos from which the various dated phenomena
have been derived for the East and West Faces.


the East or
West Noon
Reflexion
veers round
towards the
North


The data for the East Face are, of course, identical with the data for the West Face.

Fig. B. This figure for the North and South Faces, is deemed to explain itself to the
mathematical reader. It depends entirely upon the relationship :—

Angle of Reflexion = Angle of Incidence.

Fig. C . As above in case of South Face, but for the case of North Face noon shadows,
the data depend upon the relationship :—

Sun’s noon Altitude = Altitude of plane containing shadow from North Face of Pyramid.


Dry

Atmosphere
and large
numbers of
particles of
atmospheric
dust render
reflected
beams of
light visible.


But humid
atmosphere
produces haze
in density
increasing with
number of
dust particles.


If 76a. THE FUNCTIONS OF ATMOSPHERIC DUST.

The investigations of Mr. John Aitken (Quart. Jour. Roy. Met. Soc., July, 1896 ; Enc.
Brit., nth Ed., Vol. viii, pp. 713-715, Vol. xviii, pp. 278-279) into the phenomena and
climatic effects of atmospheric dust have an important bearing upon the question of the
Pyramid’s noon reflexions being rendered visible. Aitken’s observations have shown that
for a dry atmosphere the transparency, brightness, and blueness of the sky—and in
consequence, the tendency towards a beam of reflected light becoming visible—increase
with the number of particles of atmospheric dust per unit volume of the atmosphere. In
the case of a humid atmosphere he shows that for a given number of dust particles per unit
volume of atmosphere, the density of the haze in the atmosphere increases as the degree of
humidity increases. This is effected by the humidity condensing upon the dust, and increasing
the size of the particles.


Minute size of
many of the
dust particles.

Too small to
settle through
the

atmosphere.

Surcharged
Accumulation
of these
prevented by
wind and rain.

Purifying
processes and
areas.

Sand Dust
driven from
African Deserts
into Europe.


Many of the dust particles are too small to be precipitated through the atmosphere in
dry regions. For this reason, the atmosphere in dry regions would tend to become
surcharged with the accumulation of the finer dust particles, were it not for the purifying
processes of wind and rain. Driven from the dry accumulating regions into regions of
humidity, the dust particles are weighted by the condensation of the atmospheric vapour,
and are thus ultimately precipitated through the atmosphere in the form of rain. Aitken
defines such regions of discharge as purifying areas for excess atmospheric dust. He states
that “ there is good reason for supposing that large quantities of sand are carried from the
deserts by the wind and transported great distances, the sand, for instance, from the desert
of Africa being carried to Europe.” Thus he shows that the number of particles for
inhabited areas and for the Sahara are high compared with the number of particles in
mountain and sea zones, unless when these are being traversed by dust laden currents of air
hurrying to a humid zone for discharge.


PYRAMID RECORDS 63

If 76b. CONDITIONS GOVERNING REFLECTED BEAMS BECOMING VISIBLE.

From these observations it is evident that the dry atmosphere of Egypt, closely adjacent of

as it is to the deserts on the East and West, must have a greater number of particles of
atmospheric dust even than most dry climates. There should, therefore, be a greater oYdust Um <r
tendency towards reflected beams of light being rendered visible in Egypt than in more the

humid climates, or in dry climates where the density of atmospheric dust is lower. That £*“®* r ^iJ e for
such is the case is clear from the following authentic observation. The description is ex- rendering* °
tracted from a letter to us by Capt. F. A. Whitaker, R.E.—late Chief Instructor, 5th (and Pyramid’s
later 4th) Army Signals, B.E.F. .

“At the time of which I write I was Brigade Signal Officer to the 92nd Infantry An aut h ent i c
Brigade and our Headquarters were established in a hollow between sandhills about ®bservation
five miles East of Ballah on the Suez Canal. this.

This place, at the time, was the Railhead, and named Ballybunion after the Birth¬
place of the Engineer who constructed the Railway.

Our front line was situated about a mile further East and was held by the nth and
13th East Yorks on the Left and Right Sectors respectively. In maintaining communi¬
cations with the forward Infantry and our base on the Canal, considerable difficulty
was experienced with all systems of Telegraphy and Telephony on account of corrosive
effect of the sand on the insulation of the cables.

The uncertainty of telegraphy made us fall back on visual signalling, both by Day
and Night. In some cases the distances between visual Stations were great so the
Heliograph was chiefly used during the daylight. In order to receive Heliographic
messages from our advanced post;, I had to establish a visual Station on a sandhill a
short distance South of our camp, and named the position Helio Hill.

One particularly bright and clear day—the 22nd of February, 1916—I was endea¬
vouring to establish visual communication with the 34th Infantry Brigade on our right,
who were supposed to be situated among the sandhills some five miles East of El Ferdan.

As we only had a vague idea of their position it was necessary to sweep the horizon with
the reflected light from the Helio mirror.

It was while occupied in this sweeping process that the incident to which I have
referred, occurred.

Unintentionally I traversed the light a little too much towards the East—the
direction in which we expected the enemy to be—when almost immediately, one of the
Signallers drew my attention to a peculiar ray of light which seemed to come from a
point due South-East of our position (Helio Hill). I noticed that this ray was vibrating
in a vertical manner—that is, the beam appeared to rise and fall.

Although this ray was concentrated on some place to the South of our position it
was possible to realize that the periodicity of the vibrations resembled the Morse Code.

In fact for quite a time we were able to recognize the letters R and U. These two
letters sent together mean ‘ Who are you ? 9 in Army code.

The first thought that flashed through my mind was that we had made a 4 Faux
pas/ and had given our position away to the Turks. However, after waiting awhile,
the signals changed to W. H. D., which represented the ‘ call sign 9 of the Worcester
Yeomanry.

It then occurred to me that possibly the ray we were reading was from a heliograph
belonging to a cavalry patrol of this regiment. Consequently I aligned the Helio on the
point on the horizon from which the ray seemed to emanate and gave one answering flash.

This was instantly answered by the ray being traversed on to our position, so that
we received the full flash of the light.


6 4


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


To cut a long story short, it turned out that the signals were transmitted by the
Worcester Yeomanry, and that they were patrolling in a North-easterly direction some
io miles East of our position when they observed our unintentional flash, which they
took to be a ‘ call up.’

By the time the column had halted and their signallers had set up the Helio, our
position was not quite clear to them, so they guessed the direction, called R. U., and
waited our reply. This accounted for the light being considerably to our right.

It appeared remarkable to me, at the time, that we should have been able to read
Morse Code from a Heliograph ray, when the mirror disc was invisible.

The only way I can account for this phenomenon is that the light from the sun was
very intense and the mirror of the Heliograph concentrated the reflected light into a
narrow beam, thus making the ray so strong that it could be seen by an observer who
was not in line with the beam.”


The almost
certain <
conclusion
that the
Pyramid’s
noon reflexions
were visible.


If such a tiny ray of light as that reflected from the heliograph could be visible from a
distance under the conditions observed, obviously the huge volume of the reflected beams
projected from the Pyramid would be more clearly visible under the same conditions, or
visible at least to the same extent under conditions considerably less favourable.


PYRAMID RECORDS


65


CHAPTER II.

THE EVIDENCES OF SCIENTIFIC ORIGINS
IN ANCIENT EGYPT.


Section I.— Geometrical Metrology 1 and Dynastology.

f 77. THE SYSTEM OF MEASURES OF THE MEGALITHIC
BUILDERS.

The evidence of archaeology, folklore, and tradition—together with the work of g»i
astronomical alignments and datings—has established the Eastern origin of the bSSSw? the
builders of Stonehenge. This evidence has shown that the astronomical ideas
of the British megalithic builders had been formulated in ancient Egypt, Britui 0
This formulation reached its highest phase of constructional expression in the
work of the Great Pyramid builders.

The connection thus established as holding between early Britain and
ancient Egypt leads at once to a further discovery. The megalithic builders BritUh ^
who monumentalised in Britain the science of the ancient Egyptians employed
in their constructions a system of measures in use in ancient Egypt. The route •y»tem of,

J 1 measures 10

of the megalithic builders is the route of the ancient system of measures from „

, ^ ,° __ . J ancient Egypt.

the East into Britain.

The data confirming this have been supplied by the painstaking researches
and comprehensive metrological classifications of Professor Petrie.


If 78. THE AREA OF STONEHENGE CIRCLE.

From Petrie’s data we find that the Stonehenge Circle is a constructional
expression of the geometrical relations holding between the ancient Egyptian
square and linear systems of measures. Its constructional diameter—shown
on Plate I—is an important Egyptian unit of linear measures. The area defined
by this diameter— i.e., the circular area precisely internal to the outer ring of
stones, is the exact area of an important Egyptian unit of square measure.


Stonehenge an
expression of
relationship
of ancient
Egyptian
square and
linear systems
of measures.

Stonehenge
stone circle
diameter and
area are
Egyptian units
of measure.


1 In this section, where metrological references are not stated, the researches and classifications
of Prof. W. M. Flinders Petrie are to be understood. “ Inductive Metrology “ Weights and
Measures ” in Enc. Brit, (nth Ed.), vol. xxviii, pp. 482-484 : and “ Stonehenge/*


66


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


The great unit of surface measure in ancient Egypt was the aroura. This
the i- Aroura. was a S q uare 0 f length of side of an hundred common Egyptian cubits of 20.63
&?iSo Sqnm British inches each. This square was divided into four quarter squares ; the
common cubiu quarter aroura being thus employed as a separate unit of square measure. The
Common cubit diameter of the circle of equal area to the area of the quarter aroura is 1163
inibe*? riti,h British inches. A circle of this diameter falls precisely internal to the outer
i-Aroura ring °f stones forming the circle of Stonehenge. The diameter indicated by the
diameter the present remaining stones of the circle, as determined by Petrie’s survey, is
Stonehenge^ I][ 68 British inches. Petrie argues that the measure of this diameter is derived
•tone circle. f rQ m Egypt, where it occurs generally as 1162 or 1164 British inches.


r _

relations of the
Stonehenge
i* Aroura.

The Solar year
relations of
the Egyptian
i- Aroura.

Horapollo on
the i- Aroura
and the
Egyptian year.

The Egyptian
square year
and circle year.

Herodotus
on the Aroura
square.

The Samian
Cubit 20.62
British Inches.
The Egyptian
Cubit 20 63
British Inches.


If 79. THE SOLAR YEAR AND THE AROURA.

Thus at Stonehenge we find the Egyptian quarter aroura set out in circular
structural form to define, by its alignments, the points and circuit of the solar
year. A similar association held between the quarter aroura and the year in
ancient Egypt. For as Horapollo states :— 1

“ To represent the current year , they (the Egyptians) depict the fourth
part of an aroura : now the aroura is a measure of land of an hundred
cubits. And when they would express a year they say a quarter .”

Hence in the Egyptian inscriptions there are two hieroglyphic representa¬
tions of the year—one indicated by a square , and the other by a circle.

Herodotus, 2 again, states that “ the aroura is a square of a hundred cubits,
the Egyptian cubit being the same as the Samian.”

The cubit of Samos, as determined by Petrie, is 20.62 British inches,
whereas the best average (Petrie’s) for Egypt is 20.63 British inches.

If 80. THE ORIGIN OF THE AROURA.


The Solar Year
365.242 days.

The circum¬
ference of
Circular
i- Aroura
3652.42 units;
its diameter
1162.6 units.


Rectangle s—
Circumference

x

Diameter.

= Aroura.

= 3652.42
1162.6.


Equal
Square:—
2060.66

2060.66
= Aroura.


The statement of Horapollo—confirmed by the relations of the Stonehenge
Circle—indicates that the aroura was derived from a representation of the year
in measures. The original representation was in the form of a circle. The
circumference of this circle measured 3652.42 selected units of length. This
represented the circle of the solar year to a scale of 10 selected units of length to
a day. The diameter then measured 1162.6 selected units of length.

To reduce the circular area thus defined to a form suitable for land measur¬
ing, a rectangle was formed of length 3652.42 equal to the circumference of the
circle, and of breadth 1162.6 equal to the diameter of the circle. The area of
this rectangle was therefore equal to four times the area of the circle. 3 The
rectangle thus produced was the intermediate stage of the aroura. Trans¬
formed into the form of a square of equal area, the aroura became a square of
length of side 2060.66 selected units.

The sequence of derivation is shown on Plate XIII (refer Sect. Ill, Descrip¬
tion of Plates, II 135 )-
hieroglyphics, Bk. I, v.

ail, 168 .

7rd.a

8 Since area of circle = -j- and area of rectangle=circumference x diameter,=7rd xd, = 7 rd a .


PLATE XIII.


=3652-5“


Equal Areas


Each Common Cubit * 20 - 607 “

-100 Cubits of Area Long-

__by 1 Cubit op Area Wide |


L


(-*•- 2060 - 7 "-


ytoo ** Strip of the Egyptian Aroora


Arc length

12 Circumferential. ^^

Peer


68


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


If 81. THE ORIGINAL LINEAR UNIT AND THE ORIGIN OF THE
COMMON CUBIT.


Side of

Square Aroura
= 2060.66 units
= 100 common


Egyptian
Cubits of
20.6066 units
(Actually 20.63
British Inches)


1 primitive
unit =1.0011
British inches


The division of the aroura square side into ioo parts—as observed by
Herodotus and Horapollo—supplied the common Egyptian cubit of 20.6066
units=20.63 British inches. The most general value of the common Egyptian
cubit observed by Petrie in the best work of the Pyramid builders is 20.629
British inches, from which the original selected unit=1.0011 British inches, as
stated to 4th decimal place, or TT^znjths of an inch longer than the British inch.

The latter values agree closely with the mean Gregorian year value of
365.2425 days as basis, giving a basal circumference of 3652.425 selected units
of length. These units we may now define as “ Primitive inches,” and here¬
after refer to simply as P inches, or P", avoiding confusion with British
inches by stating the latter as B inches, or B*.


Ancient
Egyptian
measures
devised to
avoid 77
relationship in
calculations

Simple
relations
established
between
circles and
segments of
circles on one
hand and
straight line
figures on the
other hand.


If 82. THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN SYSTEM OF MEASURES.

With the preceding data as basis, it is found that the ancient Egyptians
formulated a system of measures that, in the case of circular areas, and sectors
of circles, avoided the repeatedly recurring trouble of the 7r relationship. By
employing in their everyday work separate units and scales for circumferences,
diameters, and areas, they avoided calculations that embodied the troublesome
ratio of diameter to circumference. Simple formulae were drawn up from
which the circumferences and areas of circles, or sectors of circles, were im¬
mediately obtained from the diameter, or vice versa.

Sectors were correctly treated by analogy as triangles, by the following
true relationship :—

Area of Sector .. .. = “ Base ” of Sector X half “ height ” of Sector.

= “ Arc " of Sector X half radius.


The geometrical analogy leading to this relationship is explained for the
particular case of quadrants in Plate XIV. The same treatment holds for
similar sectors, i.e . 9 sectors whose arcs are subtended by the same angle.

Different Unit* The principal units of measure formulated to effect the various translations
Linear’Digit^ were the following :—

The Linear Digit, Foot and Cubit of Diameter.

The Linear Digit, Foot and Cubit of Circumference.

The Linear Digit, Foot and Cubit of Square Measure.


Feet and Cubits
—for

Diameters,
Circum*
ferences, and
Straight Line
Figures.


IT 83. THE SYSTEM OF LINEAR UNITS.

(The algebraic relationship of units is as stated in Section III, Description
of Plates, T| 137a).


PLATE XIV.


70


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


To obtain the Units of Diameter, the standard diameter of 1162.6 P #
(=1163.88 B*) was divided into :—

The Units of ( a ) 64 diametric cubits of 18.1656 P* each (18.1856 B*).

Diameter. (b) IOO „ feet of II. 626 P* „ (n.6388 B*).

(c) 1600 „ digits of 0.7266 P* „ ( 0.7274 B*).


The Units of Circumference were obtained by dividing the standard
circumference of 3652.425 P* (=3656.44 B") into :—

The Unite of (a) 200 circumferential cubits of 18.2621 P* (18.2822 B").

Circumference. (b) 300 „ feet of 12.1748 P* (l2.l88l B").

(c) 5000 „ digits of 0.7305 P* ( 0.7313 B").


The Linear Units of Square measure were derived by dividing the side of
the square of area equal to the area of the standard circle into :—

The Linear (a) 50 Common Cubits of 20.6066 P* (20.629 B").

Square (b) 1600 linear digits of 0.6440 P* ( 0.6447 B*).

Measure.

An illustration of the various units in operation is figured on Plate XIII.
Here the Troth strip of at our a, i.e., a strip of ioo common cubits long by i
common cubit wide,=area of sector, of arc length 12 circumferential feet, and
diameter 50 diametric feet. Worked examples are given in Section III, 1 J
137, b and c.


t 84. THE SACRED HEBREW CUBIT.


The Division Comparative scales of the various units are figured on Plate XV. Refer-
Line Cubits w * ence to this shows that there are 25 Diametric Digits in the Diametric Cubit,
mi® - an d 25 Circumferential Digits in the Circumferential Cubit. These suggest
that the Basal Cubit of the original Primitive inch system consisted of 25 P.
The Basal inches. This gives the value of the Sacred Hebrew Cubit as derived by Sir
Sacred e Isaac Newton, and since confirmed by the metrological researches of Oppert,
Hebrew Cubit. p etr i e> an( j 0 th e rs. This again confirms the sequence as to Euphratean origins
obtained in Chapter I.


The sacred Completing this connection, Petrie finds the 25 inches’ cubit in use in

in e Egypt Cubit Egypt during the period of Dynasty XVIII. At this time the Egyptian
2 f SemUic iod language and the political and religious institutions of Egypt were strongly
dJms^xviii.^ n ^ uence( ^ by a powerful Semitic faction in Egypt. 1 Around the same time
Same period Stonehenge and similar monuments were being built in Britain by a race whose
iion C of n .*tonr astronomical and metrological cults evidence Egyptian influence, yet whose
Stonehenge, folklore and traditions indicate Semitic origins.


Hebrew Saored The Sacred Cubit of 25 P. inches (Plate XV) never occurs in Egypt unless
Egyptian! gut during periods of Semitic dominance. The other systems of Plate XV belong to
SfmMtSye* mt ‘the whole period of Egyptian history. The fact that these systems were
derived from it. f rom the scale of the Sacred Cubit of 25 P. inches again confirms that the

«ytt«m* ated Egyptian units of measure were not formulated in Egypt. The sacred system
b/Sef^oJier and its derived Egyptian Units all clearly belong to the period of the former
civilisation, civilization pictured in If 41-47.


^Petrie, “ Hist. Egypt/’ Vol. II, pp. 146-152.


PLATE XV.


72


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


If 85. THE FOOT OR SACRED HALF-CUBIT OF 12J INCHES.

Tfo Sacr«d According to Petrie, the half-cubit (12% inches) appears in Babylonia as the

(12* Inchec). foot of the Babylonian system of measures. It appears also in ancient Greece
it* Track»— (12.44 to 12.62 B"), in Etruria (12.45 B" average), in what Petrie deems to be

Greece, 01 ** Roman Britain, and in medieval England (12.47 average). The migratory

RomanBritain, sequence indicated clearly confirms the Euphratean connections established in
England. Chapter I.

Ancient A statute of Richard I, belonging to the year 1199, defines an acre in

SfSSSA'* Cornwall as “ 40 perches in length and 4 in breadth and every perch of 16 feet in
ti P th r perch length.” 1 Cornwall was the principal British centre of the Oriental colonists
=16 feet. j rom 2000 B c onwards. Their influence still predominates in the folklore,

i T o h Co C r°n™u traditions, and customs of Cornwall. It is obviously from this race, with its

HaU-Cubit?^ Mediterranean and Atlantic ports of call, that ancient Greece, Etruria and
Britain derived the Sacred half-cubit of 12J P. inches.

Ancient Perch: Now *6 °* I2 i lnc h es give the ancient perch in Cornwall as con-

12/inches sisting of 200 P. inches. The modem perch or rod consists of i6£ feet of 12
=200 inches. i nc hes, or 198 inches. The numerical interchange and the reason for it are
m fSS? 5 arch ^ obvious. The inch remained the basal unit, unchanged, except for small local
=198 inches, variations. The perch also remained practically unchanged—losing but i%
of its original value.

If 86. THE RELATION BETWEEN ANCIENT AND MODERN
BRITISH MEASURES.

The manner of effecting the change from the ancient to the modem value
Ancient of the perch or rod suggests that the numerical relations between the perch and
= u 40 O p°erches the higher units were maintained. Now there are 40 perches or rods in the
^8,°ooo 20 iSches. furlong, and 8 furlongs in the mile. With the ancient perch as 200 inches, this
=8 C fSriopgl e * gives the primitive basal furlong as consisting of 8,000 inches, and the primitive
=64,ooo inches. ^asal m ii e 0 f 64,000 inches.

Ancient Unit An acre in Cornwall (in 1199 A.D. and earlier) was measured as 40 perches
of 10 acre*. by 4 perches. This is the rfrth strip of a square of io acres area.* The side of
h! !ir2SiY= square of io acres therefore measuredi furlong, or 8,000 inches, and the circuit
?*32,oooinches 10 acres square, 4 furlongs or the half-mile,—32,000 inches.

Following from these relations we find that

640 primitive acres = 1 sq. mile (primitive.)

This relation between the acre and the square mile still holds.

The decimal subdivision of areas into xxyth and runth strips of squares—
indicated by the definition of the ancient acre in Cornwall—is both Egyptian
and Semitic. It occurs in the case of the Egyptian aroura. The 10 acre square
was a large unit of square measure of the Hebrews. (Isaiah v. 10.)

1 ioth Richard I, statute “ Inter Fines ” states “ Acra in Corawal continent 40 perticata in
longitudine et 4 in latitudine et qua libet perticata de 16 pedibus in longitudine.”


Ancient and
Modern
Relation i—
640 acres
= 1 sq. mile.


PYRAMID RECORDS


73


If 87. THE MEDIEVAL ENGLISH PROCESS OF COMPROMISE.

A decimal subdivision of the ancient Perch of 200 inches gave the ancient Ancient Yard t
Ell or yard of 40 inches. Petrie gives the latter as averaging 39.66 B". The =3 B?igic S feet
foot of this system—the Belgic Foot—is £ of the ell or yard=i3j" (13.22 B" of m inche ‘*
Petrie). With this system Petrie finds a longer mile of 10 furlongs in use from Long Mile“of
as far back as the 13th century. This system is as follows :— 10 iutltmm ‘


Belgic Foot. 3=Yard. 2 = Fathom. 10= Chain. 10= Furlong. 10 = Mile.
13J*. 40*. 80*. 800". 8,000*. 80,000*.


Its Decimal
System.


Petrie’s values extended from his average of the Belgic foot in England
(13.22") are:—

Foot. Yard. Fathom. Chain. Furlong. Mile.

13.22. 39-66- 79 - 3 2 - 79 3- 7 > 93 2 - 79 » 3 20

It will be observed that the furlong (8,000") is of the same value as was
obtained in If 86.

The reason for the difference evidenced by Petrie’s examples is that these «f

are all from buildings belonging to the 10th to 15th centuries, when the Belgic derfved from
foot and the foot of 12^ inches still competed with the legal foot of 12 inches ioth-i5th °
instituted in the 10th century. The legal foot altered the perch or rod to LegaTfoot of
198" in place of the former 200", which contained 15 Belgic feet of 13J P inches. in S j” t c u h t ed i n
To effect a compromise between the two competing systems, the perch or 10th centu f y
rod of 198" was reckoned as containing 15 Belgic feet. This gave an adjusted eff“ted° mi#e
foot of 13.2 P" (13.22 B", as Petrie above). **»*£££j^°

retained that

Petrie, however, observes that the latter foot originated around Asia =1® e?ih. feet
Minor, averaging there 13.35 B", and passed to Greece as 13.36 B". Now i% p reduction^
13£ Primitive inches of value 1.0011 British inches (jf 81) equal 13.348 B. i%^duction^
inches, or to 2nd place, 13.35 B. inches, as in Asia Minor. m egiC


f 88. THE EGYPTIAN METROLOGICAL EVIDENCE.

Returning to consideration of the Egyptian system of diametric and
circumferential measures and their linear standards for areas, we find that
all the values of 83 are found indicated in the structural measurements of
the ancient Egyptians. A half diametric foot and the circumferential cubit
were actually, in one case noted by Petrie, found on the same cubit rod. This
is a graphical representation of the tt relationship, as the half diametric foot
(5.813 P") was the radius of a circle of 36.525 P" circumference, of which the
circumferential cubit (18.2625 P") was the half circumference. (Refer Plate
XV, lower portion.)

Metrologists, having failed to observe the origin of the system of measures,
have universally supposed the diametric digit (0.7274 B"), and the circumfer¬
ential digit (0.7313 B"), and also the diametric cubit (18.1856 B"), and the


Structural
Measurements
in Egypt give
ancient
diametric and
circumferen¬
tial units and
linear units for


An Egyptian
7T Rod.


Metrologists
confuse
diametric
digit and
circumferen¬
tial digit, and
the respective
cubits.


74


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


circumferential cubit (18.2822 B"), to be variable values of the same digit and
the same cubit respectively. They therefore average the two values, in each
case, obtaining the mean values as follows :—


The mistake in
averaging two
separate
systems.


Diametric Cubit
Circumferential Cubit


Mean Cubit of Metrologists


18.1856 B*.
18.2822 B*.


18.2339 B*.


This is stated by Petrie as 18.23 B". Again,


Diametric Digit .= 0.7274 B*.

Circumferential Digit.= 0.7313 B*.

Mean Digit of Metrologists.= 0.72935 B*


This is stated by Petrie as averaging 0.729 B*. From Greek remains
Petrie obtained 0.7296 B".


Egyptian/ that I* possible, however, that for ordinary everyday commercial use,

thenweive|,^at the two separate systems were merged into a single “ rule-of-thumb ” system
merged the two at a comparatively early date in the dynastic history of Egypt. After all,
one for y ^ as we have seen, Egypt is only a stage in the tracing of origins to their source
in a former civilisation. The Egyptians, at an early date, lost the meaning
and application of much that they have handed on to later days for
elucidation.


If 89. THE GREEK SYSTEM OF MEASURES DERIVED FROM
EGYPT.


Petrie’s values
for the Greek
Decimal
System
of Linear
Measures.


With the average values of ^f 88 as basis, Petrie has grouped the known
data from buildings in Greece as follows :—

Old Digit | x ^~ Cubit. 4- j Q r g U j a# io = Amma. io = Stadion.

B* 0.729. 18.2. 72.9. 729. 7296.


But with the stadion=7,296 B*, as stated by Petrie above, the values
are accurately :—


The Mean
Values of
Egyptian
Diametric and
Circumferen¬
tial Measures.


Old Digit. Cubit. Orguia. Amma. Stadion.

B" 0.7296. 18.24. 72.96. 729.6. 7296.

Thus indicating that the system tabulated is the mean of the two early
Egyptian systems—diametric and circumferential.


Petrie further shows that the cubit of 18.24 B", was also divided by the
Greeks into 24 digits, obtaining the new Greek digit as 0.76 B".


PYRAMID RECORDS


75


He shows again that the Greek foot was taken as f of the mean cubit of EtM.... •• *•
18.24 B", and therefore as 12.16 B*. This is closely approximate to the M«"ure,
Egyptian diametric foot of 12.1748 P'=i2.i88 B". (^f 83.) dlrwtdfrom

Egyptian

The resulting Greek system, as stated by Petrie, is as follows :— r? '**™*. ,_

tial and

Foot. 10 = Acaena. io=Plethron. Diamatnc.

B*. 12.16. 121.6. 1216.

The early Greeks also used the diametric foot of 11.626 inches, (^j 83.)


If 90. THE ROMAN SYSTEM OF MEASURES.

The Roman system of measures was derived—through the Greeks—
from the Egyptian diametric system. Its basis was the diametric digit of {Jri“*ri? y y * tem
0.7266 inches, and the diametric foot of 11.626 inches (^f 83). As an average EgVpSti* 0 ” 1
from existing Roman remains, Petrie gives the system as follows :— System.™

Digitus. 4=Palmus. 4=Pes. 5=Passus. 125= Stadium. 8=Milliare.

B" 0.726. 2.90. 11.62. 58.1. 7,262. 58,100.

The above system was used by the Romans in Britain and Africa.

The Roman foot appears in Medieval England as 11.6 B".


If 91. ANCIENT RECORDS OF AN EGYPTIAN PYRAMID OF
MEASURES.


The data from ancient Egyptian documentary sources show that the Ancient
various metrological dimensions and standards of linear and square measure l of a
were preserved in the form of an existing Pyramid. The primary unit of Monumfntf 1
measurement, the various outstanding dimensions and structural peculiarities, Its form
and the angles of the face slope and the Apex angle of this existing Pyramid p y ramidal *
are all precisely defined by the Egyptian literary data.


The data define as follows :—

(1) GENERAL BASIS OF PYRAMID'S DESIGN.

(a) That the unit of dimensions .. .. = 1 P. inch.

= 1.0011 Brit. inch.

(b) That the angle of face slope with horizontal 5i°-5i / -i4".3.

(c) That the apex angle.= .4.

(d) That the base square circuit .. .. = 36,524 or 5 P. inches.

and (defined independently) .. .. = 1,772 common Egyptian cubits (of

20.63 B. inches).

(e) That the height from base to apex.. .. = 5,813 P. inches.

The data define (b) and (c) independently of (d) afid (e).


Its unit the
Inch.

Base Circuit
36,525.

Height 5,813

Face slope

sr-sr-fr.s.

Apex angle
76°-17-31'.4«


76


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


(ii) DETAILS OF DESIGN.

(a) That the Pyramid indicated a square circuit of 25,826 or 7 P. inches (the sum of
the diagonals of the base square) at a height of 1702^ P. inches above the base,
both dimensions being given independently of the other.

(b) That the Pyramid indicated a square circuit of 29,220 P. inches at a height of 1162.6
P. inches above the base.

(c) That the latter defined, in elevation, the aroura rectangle of 3652.5 P. inchesx

1162.6 P. inches, and a series of such rectangles (eight in all) encircling the
Pyramid as seen in its four elevations of circuit.

(d) That the Pyramid vertical section was equal in area to a square of length of side=

5151.6 P. inches; this being defined independently of the other relations.
The quarter-tfrowra goes into the latter square, or the area of the Pyramid

section, 25 times.

If 92- THE FICTITIOUS PYRAMID DYNASTOLOGY OF THE
EGYPTIANS.

„ .. . The Pyramid measures thus standardised were all associated with the

Egyptian* that g eometr y of the year. For this reason, and for other reasons to be explained
p h yramid dard ^ a ^ er » the Egyptians of various periods, subsequent to the erection of the
monument, deemed that all its measurements denoted the duration in years
of astronomical periods. In accordance with this conception, they formulated
various systems of fictitious or mythological chronology. Each cult had
its particular system, always, however, based numerically on the Pyramid
year cycle geometry. Each system claimed to be a presentation of the
chronology of the Egyptian Dynasties—Divine and human. The systems
all differed considerably, so that it is impossible to synchronize the various
intervals given for the same Dynastic periods.

All the systems in existence in the third century B.C., were edited by the
Systems D edlted Egyptian priest, Manetho, and entered in his work on Egyptian History,
Prie^Manetho* 4 ^Egypriaci,” written in Greek. Several versions of the systems of fictitious
Century b c chronology, known as the Egyptian “King Lists,” were extracted from
Manetho’* Manetho’s work by Julius Africanus in the third century A.D. The composite
preserved by nature of the King Lists as given by Africanus is seen by analysis of the various
Africanus and alternative details of summations of years.

Eusebius in 3 rd

Century a.d Another version was preserved by Eusebius—also in the third century
A.D.—together with the version known as the Armenian Version of Eusebius.
The versions of Africanus and Eusebius were, in turn, preserved by George
Syncellus about 800 A.D. With the exception of certain important extracts
from Manetho’s history, preserved by Josephus in his Contra Apion ., this is
all that now remains of Manetho’s notable work.

To account for the difference between the chief version of Africanus and
the version of Eusebius, Syncellus accused Eusebius of tampering with the
figures as given by Manetho. The analysis given in this chapter, however,
Eusebius 0 !* shows that the version preserved by Eusebius, as stated to the reign of Amasis
Century^B.c. II, was in existence in the fifth century B.C.—700 years before Africanus
was born, and 200 years before Manetho.


Measures
denoted
duration of
Astronomical
Periods.


On this,
conception
Egyptians
framed their
Mythical
Systems of
Dynastic
Chronology.


Various
Versions of


A Square
Circuit 25,827
at level 1,702*.

A Square
Circuit 29,220
at Level 1,162.6

The latter
defining
“ Aroura»’
Rectangle
3652-5x1162.6

Pyramid
Vertical
Section Area
= Square of
Side 51516.


PYRAMID RECORDS


77


Other associated numerical details are found in records of the period of
Dynasties XVIII and XIX.

A typical tabulation and analysis of the King Lists of Manetho—and the Graphical
different versions of these and other lists—are shown on Plate XVI. Had th 2 * tatioi>
this matter been dealt with otherwise than by the comprehensive tabulation
and analysis given, the subject-matter would have extended to many tedious phlt# xv ,
pages of text, without giving a fraction of the elucidation resulting from the Its
graphical presentation of Plate XVI. For the statement of Manetho’s, and
other King Lists, and for the historical evolution of the various dynastic
schemes of Plate XVI, the reader is referred to the Appendix.


If 93. EGYPTIAN KING LISTS DEFINE THE STANDARD PYRAMID.


Reference to Plate XVI shows that the numerical details of the
Lists define the standard Pyramid as follows :—


King Dynastological
Dimension*
of Standard .
Pyramid.


(a) THE HEIGHT OF THE STANDARD PYRAMID .

Table A. Dynasty of Manes = 5,813.

= Radius of Circle, 36,524 or 5*
Hephaistos to Osiris and Isis = 2 x 5,813= 11,626.

= Diameter of Circle, 36,524 or 5.


Height t—
Dynasty of
Manes= 5,813
years.


(b) THE BASE CIRCUIT OF THE STANDARD PYRAMID,

Table E. Old Chronicle. Gods and Kings =36,525.

Table F. Gods and Kings to 139 A.D. .. = 36,524.


Base Circuit t
Total gods and
kings= 36,525

years.


(c) THE BASE SQUARE OF THE STANDARD PYRAMID.

The diagonal is defined by the two sides, each 9,131^, and totalling 18,262 Diagonal*.*

The resulting diagonal is 12,913!. This relationship is given as follows:— 2 Side* 18 262

(Fig. B). Base Diagonal .= 12,913^ (obviously period Gods). Diagonal I2l9i3

Version Africanus. Table C (4) .. .. = 5,349 Human Kings. Differencials


2 Sides defining Diagonal .= 18,262^ Gods and Kings. Year* of King*.

— """ i-Basej—

The half-side of the base square is defined by Table C (7), Version Eusebius, y^J£ =4565
Kings =4,565. (Fig. B.)


(d) THE ANGLE OF SLOPE OF THE STANDARD PYRAMID .

The Pyramid half base side and the Pyramid height define the Pyramid angle
of slope as 5i°-5i / -i4^.3. This however, is independently defined by Table C (10),
Version Castor, Kings = 3,720 (Fig. A), the arc of the circle of 25,826 or 7 corresponding
to the angle 5i°-5i / -i4 / \3.

Again, the apex angle is defined as the corresponding arc of the circle of 25,827,
thus Table C (2), Kings = 5,474 for 5,473^ exact. (Fig. A.)

These relations prove that relations (a) to (c) apply to the Standard Pyramid,
and not alone to the year circle of 36,524 or 5 circumference.


Face Slope
51°-51-14'.3.

Equivalent
Arc of 25,827
Circle= 3,720.
Years of Kings.

Apex Angle
Arc of Circle
= 5,473}

Years of Kings.

Definition of
Angles proves
Pyramid
Intention.


78


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Divine
Dynasties—
25,826 years.

Sum of Base
Diagonals and
Square Circuit
at level 1702*
Dynasty III
Demi-gods.


Side of Square
of equal area
5151#.

Years of Kings
1st 26
Dynasties.


1st 15 Kings
Old Chronicle
443 years.


Base Side
9*131# inches
= 443 Common
Cubits


This defines
Unit of
Standard
Pyramid as
1 inch-1.0011
British Inch.


1st 15 Kings of
Eratosthenes
443 years, to
end of reign of
Builder of
Great
Pyramid.

This associates
the Standard
Pyramid of
lists with the
Great
Pyramid*


(e) THE SQUARE CIRCUIT OF 25,826 or 7.

This is equal to the summation of the Base Diagonals (Fig. B), The circuit
occurs at level MN of Fig. A., where height of MN above base = KC= 1,702J. This is
defined in Table A as Dynasty III of Demi-gods (Memphis) = 1,702.

MN = 2 ' ° r ^ * So that square circuit round Pyramid at MN = 25,826 or 7 = Divine

Dynasties (Table A).

(f) SQUARE OF AREA EQUAL TO STANDARD PYRAMID SECTION .


The side of this square is 5,151!. This is defined as follows
Version Africanus, 1st 26 Dynasties = 5,151 J
Last 5 Dynasties = 197!


Table C (4). 31 Human Dynasties = 5,349J

This connects with item (c) above, 5,349 being common to both, and identifying
5,151! with the same geometry as includes the half base circuit, 18,262! and the base
diagonal, 12,913!.


If 94. EGYPTIAN KING LISTS DEFINE THE STANDARD UNIT.

The Old Chronicle of Egypt (Plate XVI, Table E) gives, for the first 15
generations of the Cynic (Sothic) Cycle, the duration of 443 years. This is
the initial item of the human dynasties in this List.

Now the base side AB (Plate XVI, Figs. A and B) of the Standard Pyramid
consists of 9,131!- units, and a measure of 9,131!- Primitive inches (each 1.0011
B. inches) consists of 443.1 Common Egyptian Cubits of 20.6066 P. inches
(20.63 British inches). The occurrence of the number 443 in the Old Chronicle
therefore proves that the base side of the Standard Pyramid consisted of 443


common cubits, and that this measure equalled


36,524 or 5


standard units.


As the common cubit is known (20.63 B*), the identity gives the standard unit
as the Primitive inch of the value of 1.0011 British inch.


It should, perhaps, be explained that 443, whilst defining the standard
Pyramid base in common cubits, is also half the numerical value of the length
of side of a square of area equal to a quadrant of radius 1,000 units of any
value. Hence its importance as an independent number, accurately calculated
as 443.1134627, regardless of the value of unit. It is the latter value that
defines the Primitive inch as 1.0011 B. inches, from the identity 36,524 P.
inches=4x443.1134627 cubits of 20.63 British inches.

That the number 443 was known to be connected with the Standard
Pyramid, and that the latter was identified with the Great Pyramid is proved
by the following :—

(a) That the King List of Eratosthenes gives the duration of the first 15 Dynastic kings

of Egypt as 443 years—this proving that the 15 generations of the Old Chronicle

for 443 years are the first 15 Dynastic Kings.

(b) That the 15th Dynastic king of the list of Eratosthenes is Saophis I, with whose

reign inclusive the 443 years end.

(c) That the Saophis I of Eratosthenes is the Suphis I of Manetho, the IVth Dynasty

king Khufu—the Cheops of Herodotus—who built the Great Pyramid.


PYRAMID RECORDS


79


If 95. THE ORIGINAL OLD CHRONICLE OF EGYPT.

The occurrence of 443 as the number of years for the first 15 dynastic
kings of Egypt, and the fact that 443 is the number of common cubits in the
Standard Pyramid’s base side suggest a further identification. This is that Square Circuit
the Divine Dynasties and the first 15 human kings were given the duration p. inches =
of 4x443 years, this being derived from the Standard Pyramid’s base circuit Cubit«? mmon
of 1,772 common cubits=36,524 or 5 primitive inches. The latter identity
thus obviously suggested the later extension to the duration of Gods and Kings
for 36,525 years, as given in the Old Chronicle.

If the suggestion above is correct the detailed statement of the system
suggested should confirm itself. Thus, as suggested,

Originally, Gods and Demi-gods ., .=3x443=1,329

First 15 human kings .= 443

L 77 2

Remaining human kings, as Old Chronicle .. .. .. =1,881

Definition of Length of Aroura Rectangle 3,652^ (Plate XVI, Fig. C) 3,653

Now the height of the aroura rectangle is 1162.6 and the Standard Pyramid
section as represented in Plate XVI, Fig. C, contains two aroura rectangles.

Confirming the relationship inferred,

The Old Chronicle, 1st 15 human kings .. .= 443

remaining do. .. .. .. .. = 1,881

2 x 1,162= 2,324

defining the height of the two aroura rectangles—deleting the decimal of an inch.


Old Chronicle
Human Kings
2 x 1162 years.


Defines Two
“ Aroura ”
Rectangles.


Original Old
Chronicle


Gods

Kings


1772

1881


3653


Defines
" Aroura ”
Rectangle
3652** 1162.6.


If 96. THE MYSTERY OF MANETHO’S 113 GENERATIONS.

Now the generations of Gods and kings in the Old Chronicle are totalled
as follows :—


(a) j *5 Gods


8 Demi-gods


^ | x 5 generations of Cynic Cycle


(a) and (b) obviously a duplication.


8 kings of Dynasty XVI
(c) 67 kings, Dynasties XVII to XXX inclusive.

Total 113 gods and kings.

Syncellus, in introducing the List, however, states that the 30 dynasties
contained 113 descents.

This, again, is explained by another statement from Syncellus concerning
Manetho’s Dynasties. This is as follows :—

volumes, comprises a sum total of 3,555 years.’'


Old Chronicle
added 113
descents for
Gods and Kings
stated as for 30
Dynasties only.


Manetho’s
Human Kings
of 30 Dynasties
stated as 113
generations for
3555 years.


8o


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


with* 1 Original The latter total is one cycle of 97 years (If 33, ii (c),) short of 3,652 years,

old Chronic!* the basal total of the original Old Chronicle. It is also derived as follows : —

Period of 0

3652 years* Circuit of square equal in area to circle of 29,220 circumference

(Plate XVI, Table A, and Fig. C) . .. = 32,970

Manetho’s 113 generations .. .. .. .. .. ••= 3>555

The 3555 of _

connects 29,220 Total of later Old Chronicle .. .. .. .. ..= 36,525

of Manetho and °

oid 2 chronkie. These details and identities all assist in confirming that the later systems
Evidence of of the Lists were expanded from an original form—similar to that inferred
later systems. for the original Old Chronicle — in which the basal total was 3,652 or 3 years.

Hence human period of Old Chronicle.= 2,324 years.

add 2 Nominal Solar Cycles.= 3,044 years.


Version Africanus, Plate XVI, Table C (5) .. .. = 5,368 Years.

Kings.

If 97. THE VERSION OF CASTOR.

In one version of Castor we have the following :—

Gods and demi-gods to Anubis, inclusive .. = 1,333 years.

Remaining demi-gods.= 217

Human kings .. .. .. .. = 2,100

Total =3,652£ vague years = 3,650 Sothic years.

The statement confirms the general arrangement of the inferred original
Castor* 1 ol Old Chronicle. In detail it is confirmed by the 217 years of Castor appearing
orfflnS* as the duration of the eight demi-gods in the Old Chronicle, and by the initial
oid te ch?omci« period of Castor—1,333 years—agreeing within four years with the inferred
of Egypt. initial 1,329 years of the original Old Chronicle.

3652.5 X1162.6 (Plate XVI, Fig. C), and the square base circuit (1,772 common
cubits) of the Standard Pyramid.


If 98. THE SQUARE CIRCUIT OF 29,220.


Gods and Kings At the upper level of the aroura rectangles in the Standard Pyramid

29 , 220 *yofirs, section (Plate XVI, Fig. C)—i.e., at level 1162.6—the square circuit is 29,220.

standard This is the total number of years for gods and kings to the first year of Amasis

ii62 a 6*levei II (Plate XVI, Table A). Comparison of the data narrated to Herodotus by
"\SwSm" the Egyptian priests in the 5th century B.C., with the statement of the Lists

racanges. accor( ii n g to the version of Eusebius establishes this identity. It also

establishes two important conclusions. These are,


Version of
Eusebius in
use in 5th
Century B.C.

Theory of
Sothic Cycle
ending in
570 B.C.


(a) That the version preserved by Eusebius was the version in use in the

5th Century B.C.

(b) That a Sothic cycle was supposed to have ended in the ist year of

Amasis II (570 B.C.).


PYRAMID RECORDS


81


Now this clashes with the later theory that a Sothic cycle of 1,460 Sothic EgyptUn* of
years ended in 139 A.D., which theory is the fundamental basis of the various B.Cknew™
modem Egyptological chronologies. Why the Egyptians of the 5th century concerning tho
B.C. adopted a theory equally erroneous is a matter that will be dealt with th?orydF n a
later. The fact ot immediate importance is that they knew nothing con- Egyptological
cerning a Sothic cycle that was due to end in 139 A.D.


If 99. THE 35th COURSE OF THE GREAT PYRAMID.

The level of the Standard Pyramid circuit 29,220 (Plate XVI, Fig. C) 1162.6 IotoI of
is again defined as follows :—

below apex—

Version Africanus, Human Kings = 4,651. Table B (8), Plate XVI. 4650.4 years of

Version Suidas, Gods and Kings = 4,650. Table B (9), Plate XVI. DynMt, "‘

The level of the circuit 29,220—1162.6 above the base—being 4650.4 below
the Apex of the Standard Pyramid.

Now 1162.6 Primitive inches is the precise level of the axis of the 35th
course of masonry in the Great Pyramid. This course is 50 P. inches deep,

25 inches (the Sacred Cubit) above and below the axis of the course at 1162.6 P". Thu u»« axis
As seen from a distance this 35th course is the most outstanding course in
the Pyramid. It occurs after a series of courses generally 26 inches deep. ol
With the exception of the two lowest courses, it is the deepest course in the Pyramid.
Pyramid. This sudden increase in depth can only have been for the intention f^* # cour * e
of pointing to the fact that the 35th course axis defines the aroura , and the *jcred<cubit of
height of 1162.6 P. inches. This intention is confirmed when we study the
accurate Great Pyramid survey data of Professor Petrie in relation to the
fact concerning the hollowing-in feature observed by him and discussed in our
18-20. The angle of slope of the Standard Pyramid derived in 93 (d)
is also the angle of slope of the Great Pyramid, 5i°-5i / -i4 /, .3.


If 100. THE DYNASTOLOGICAL STANDARD PYRAMID
THE GREAT PYRAMID.

Standard

The square circuit of the Standard Pyramid base, by data of ^ 94, is bas^drcuit
36,524 P. inches. With 1 P. inch=i.oon British inch, as derived in ^ 81, =36 2 ,564*B n rit . e8
and independently in ]f 94, this circuit equals 36,564 British inches. The inche# *
side of the square base of the Standard Pyramid was, therefore, 9,141 British fuf Brit'* 6
inches. With the same hollowing-in feature as the Great Pyramid—which inche, ‘
is hollowed in to a maximum extent of about 36 inches at the centre of each ^*1* in 1 };™”*
face slope—the dimension of 9,141 British inches between the centre of one
base side and the centre of the opposite base side of the Standard Pyramid cenue e . n o£
would be reduced by 2 X 36 inches, or 72 inches. The distance between centres sidM 8 iI e 72 a iI»».
of face slopes at the base of the Standard Pyramid would be 9,069 British
inches (9,059 P. inches). 9059


82


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Four values obtained by Petrie for the corresponding dimension in the
jurleyed Great Pyramid are as follows :—

9069.4 B. inches

9067.7 „ „ _ Petrie’s stated range of possible error

9069.5 „ „ being ± 0.6 B. inch for each side.

9068.6 „ „

Average value = 9068.8 B. inches ± 0.6 B. inches.

The value for the Great Pyramid, then, is identical with the value for the
Standard Pyramid of the Dynastological Lists. Now the angle of slope of
Pyramid. the Great Pyramid is 5i°-5i'-i4*.3, as defined by the existing casing slope.
Dynastological * s identical with the angle of slope derived in ^ 93 for the Standard
Pyramldfis the Tyramid. The Standard Pyramid of the Dynastological Lists is, therefore,
Groat Pyramid the Great Pyramid of Gizeh.


oisuuice
Between
centres of
opposite base
sides of Great
Pyramid=
9069 B*=9059
P\


Great Pyramid

AntrU At SI aaa


If 101. THE DIMENSIONS OF THE GREAT PYRAMID.

Great^Pyramid The base circuit of the Great Pyramid then, is 36,524 primitive (or Pyramid)
sunf ofbase i nc h es * Its b ase diagonals add 25826.5 Pyr. inches. Its height is 5,813 Pyr.
diagonals ^ inches, the radius of the circle of 36,524 Pyr. inches circumference. The
iu axis of its 35th course defines the rectangular aroura , and its circuit the measure

its 35 th course °* 2 9 2I 9*4 Pyramid inches, expressed as 29,220 in the Dynastological Lists.

axis defines the

^Aroura ” and The reader will find this matter all clearly explained and diagrammatically
29 , 220 P. l Siche 8 . illustrated on Plate XVII, where Petrie’s surveyed measurements have been
reduced to Pyramid inches.

General The general appearance of the 35th course is diagrammatically represented

35th e SSirie. of by the suddenly thicker course shown on Figs, a, b, and c of Plate XVII.

Diagram of The hollowing in of the core masonry escarpments, prior to the placing

feature. Uowi,l8! of the casing stones, is illustrated in diagrammatic perspective on Plate XVIII.

The reader will find a more detailed and precise discussion in Chapter III.
In this it will be shown that the extent of hollowing-in is geometrically connected
with the displacement of the plane of the Great Pyramid’s Passage System,
and that the amount of this displacement (286.1 P") is a well defined
geometrical dimension of the Great Pyramid.

As stated on Plate XVII, the resulting value of the Pyramid inch
p^framidlnches (accurately derived from 81 and 94) divides precisely 500,000,000 times
in Earth’a into the Polar Diameter of the Earth, according to the latest determination

polar dismeter. °

Accident or the latter by the U.S.A. surveys of 1906 and 1909. It is a matter for further
intention? discussion to show whether the coincidence is due to accident or design. This
will be considered further in Chapter III.


PYRAMID RECORDS


83


PLATE XVIII.

DIAGRAMMATIC PERSPECTIVE VIEW ILLUSTRATING FEATURES
OF GREAT PYRAMID’S CORE MASONRY.


c


Base of Core Masonry as

SIGHTED FROM cba

*CHGBFEA


3. \


ST' c$

F


Hollowing of Pyramid’s
Sides Exaggerated.

Depths of Courses
magnified % in consequence

Number of Courses
reduced.


f 102. A PRECESSIONAL CONSTANT ?

Connected with this question of intention is an important question relating Great Pyramid
to the significance the ancient Egyptians attached to the measurement of wfsYs” p*°
25,826 or 7 Pyramid inches. (Plate XVI, Figs. A and B.) Up to the time iJynartoiodcai
of the Persian Conquest, they recognised 25,826 or 7 years to be the duration indicating
of the great astronomical cycle known as the period of the Precession of the |rwewion of
Equinoxes. As a statement of the period of Precession it is as accurate as^ # ^ ’

any modem determination. Whether, however, it is the precise interval or estimate of
not does not immediately concern us. The matter of importance is that it prece88um


8 4


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


It is a

simple function
of the year
value.

The period
suitable as a
constant of
precession.

Was it used
as such ?


78$ Phoenix
cycles equal
Pyramid’s
Processional
Constant.


Duodecimal
division of
25,826 period in
Dynastological
List proves
intentional
association
with Precession
of Equinoxes.


is a simple mathematical function of the numerical value of the Solar Year.
As such it is a useful constant to which to refer variations in the annual rate
of Precession, or variations in the mean rate of Precession over a number of
years. Whether it was formerly employed in this manner, and for the purpose
stated, will be settled by the evidence discussed later.

The period in years=50v^2 times the Solar year in days=25826.54. Now
78J Phoenix cycles of 329 years 33, 37, and 38) = 25,826£ years of the
Phoenix cycle or 25,826.54 mean solar years. In this identity the half year
of the Phoenix cycle must terminate, in accordance with the Calendar rulings,
at Day 1, Month VII of the Calendar Cycle of 103 years. This fixes that the
period of 25,826^ years was recognised as a cycle.

As shown on Plate XVI, Table D, the division of the Period into 24—
the Babylonian divisions of the ecliptic—indicates that the cycle was identified
with the twelve divisions or signs of the Zodiac. The 1,076 years of
Eratosthenes would, therefore, represent precession through a half Zodiacal
Sign, at the rate of 25,826 years for the 12 signs. One summation of the totals
of the Version of Africanus—a summation not shown on Plate XVI—gives
4,305 or 6 years to the beginning of Dynasty XIX. This represents precession
through two Zodiacal signs. It seems clear enough from these identifications
that the earlier Egyptians, at least, recognised the period of 25,826^ years to
be the Period of the Precession of the Equinoxes round the Zodiacal signs.


48th century to
4th Century
B.C., actual
precession
through 60°

(2 Zodiacal
signs) occupied
4380 years.

Hence 4383

S ears of
lumas Kings
to Amasis II.

Identity
presupposes
knowledge, or
tradition based
on previous
knowledge
concerning
actual rate of
precession.

Knowledge lost
before 3rd
century B.C.


u 103. THE EARLY KNOWLEDGE CONCERNING PRECESSION.

Now, although the interval of 25,826^- years is the period—or almost
exactly the period—of the Precession of the Equinoxes, the annual rate varies
considerably. For this reason, the mean rate between the 48th century and the
4th century B.C., moved the Equinox round 6o° of the ecliptic or through two
Zodiacal signs in 4,380 years. Now 4,380 Sothic years equal 4,383 vague years.
The latter is the stated interval at the time of the 5th to 3rd centuries B.C. for
the duration of human kings to the 1st year of Amasis II, 570 B.C. (Plate
XVI, Table A, and If 98.) It seems clear enough that a coincidence of this
nature could only have originated from a knowledge of the obvious basis of
the identity, or from a tradition concerning such knowledge. The knowledge
concerning, and the reason for effecting the identity appear to have governed
the framing of the List around the year 570 B.C. It is equally certain that
this knowledge was lost before the 3rd century B.C., although the identity
remained. At least the knowledge was never imparted to the Greeks.


If 104. SYNCELLUS AND THE OLD CHRONICLE ON THE
PRECESSION OF THE EQUINOXES.


Later systems
of Dynastolo¬
gical lists
substitute


The latter facts are clear from the nature of the list of Africanus, as
developed in Plate XVI, Tables A and F, and from the later form of the Old
2B26 Chronicle of Egypt (Plate XVI, Table E). These both indicate that the cycle

of 25,826 years had been confused with a supposed precessional cycle of 36,525


as pariod of
pracassion.


PYRAMID RECORDS


85


years. This, indeed, is stated by Syncellus, in relating concerning the 36,525
years’ summation of the Old Chronicle. Syncellus states that the period of The statement
36,525 years “ relates to the fabled periodical revolution of the Zodiac among concerning
the Egyptians and Greeks, that is, its revolution from a particular point to traditional
the same again, which point is the first minute of the first degree of that precession,
equinoctial sign which they call the Ram, as it is explained in the Genesis * *****’

of Hermes and in the Cyrannian books'!”

The sign here taken as datum belongs to later Egyptian times, when the
Equinox fell in the Ram (Aries). In earlier times, the sign was Taurus, in
which actual sign the Equinox fell from 4,700 B.C. to 1,800 B.C.—since the
extent of the sign, as defined by its stars is about 40°. The actual extent of
Aries (the Ram) is about 20°—as defined by its stars. The Equinox therefore tt

fell in the Ram between 1,800 B.C. and 320 B.C. 1 About 320 B.C., the 1st
point of Aries, defined by Syncellus above, therefore marked the diurnal ^ r e ie a a f e r Sf nd
commencement of the Vernal Equinoctial Year. This gives the epoch of the
death of Alexander the Great (323 B.C.), and accounts for the origin of the Egypt *
theory that ended the alleged precessional period of 36,525 years about this
time.

If 105. HOW THE DURATION OF 36,525 YEARS WAS IDENTIFIED
AS PERIOD OF PRECESSION.

of Gemini
ftt 4 700 B C

It is clear that the confusion arose first from the period of 4,380 years. to lstpoint
Originally this was identified correctly as the number of years taken by the 320 A b!c.= 4,380
Equinox, between 4,700 B.C. and 320 B.C. to travel backwards through 6o° ^Vso sothic
of the ecliptic, from 1st point of Gemini, through Taurus and Aries, to 1st sS?hic = cyice«.
point of Aries. The termination of this period was then prematurely attached 25 Sothic
to 570 B.C., the 1st year of Amasis II, and identified as three Sothic cycles vague year*,
of 1,461 vague years, = 4,383 vague years,=4,380 Sothic years. 25 of these
Sothic cycles=36,525 vague years; whereas the Sothic cycle fails to divide
into the Precessional period of 25,826!- years. The latter, however, contains 25 » 826 * year*.
78! Phoenix cycles of 329 years. The Phoenix cycle in the Hebrew Chronology erroneously
is associated with a period of 1,461 solar years (j[ 39), and from this originated so'hic cyc^. 1
the erroneous identification—noted by Tacitus (^[ 39)—that the Phoenix cycle ph“ C nJ a ijcie*
was a period of 1,461 years. This sequence of error was obviously the origin 36 a ^ 2 5 °yM?*? d
of the late conception that the period of Precession was 36,525 years. M^PMcewiinal

period.

If 106. PERIOD OF PRECESSION ALWAYS NUMERICALLY
ASSOCIATED WITH BASE OF GREAT PYRAMID.

Apart, however, from the sequence noted, tradition obviously held that Gr^Pyrlmid
the true period of Precession was given by the Pyramid base, tradition failed p™ce*srona r i ue
to preserve the knowledge that the numerical value of the period was contained £j e J^ cation
in the sum of the diagonals of the base square. The later Egyptians, therefore, lo#t

1 The basis of the calculations giving these dates, together with the whole question of the
astronomical divisions of the Zodiac will be dealt with later.


86


THE GREAT PYRAMID : ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Identification
with base
circuit
adopted.

How

Hipparchus
obtained his
rate of (
precession.


The Nominal
Solar Year,

365.24 days,
recedes
through '
the nominal
Sothic Year,

365.25 days,

in 36,525 years,
giving a true
application
of Precession,
but not an
astronomical
application.


adopted the circuit of the base square as giving the period of Precession. They
passed this period of 36,525 years on to the Greeks. The period is equal to
an annual rate of Precession of 35.5 secs, of angle. Hence Hipparchus (circ.
150 B.C.) “ determined ” the rate of Precession as 36 secs, of angle.

The period was also reckoned as containing not only 25 Sothic Cycles,
but 24 nominal Solar cycles of 1521.875 vague years. (Refer 59.) The
nominal Solar year of 365.24 days was reckoned to travel completely back¬
wards round the nominal Sothic year of 365.25 days in 36,525 years. The
vague year also travelled backwards completely round the nominal solar year
in 1521.875 vague years. This gives the complete explanation of the late
conceptions concerning Precession.

Hence the system of Africanus (Plate XVI, Table A) gave the Divine
and Human Dynasties as of the duration of 20 nominal solar cycles of 1521.8
years, or 30,437 years.


H 107. “ PYRAMID ” THE GRECIANISED FORM OF HEBREW
“ URIM-MIDDIN ”—“ LIGHTS-MEASURES.’*


Greek Science
derived from
Egypt end
Chaldsea.


Zoneree on
Greek

Arithmetic and
Astronomy
derive4 from
Egypt and
Chaldaea.


In section II of this chapter a synopsis of the evidences concerning the
origins of Greek Science and Philosophy is given. The facts, and the sequence
of facts, of this synopsis, clearly show that the Greek philosophers derived
what was new and original in their science and philosophy from the oral
traditions of the priesthood of Egypt and Chaldaea—but chiefly from Egypt.
The same sequence of facts was seen in the case of the knowledge of the
megalithic builders of the Mediterranean and Atlantic seaboards.

It was obviously of no recent derivation or migration of science that
Zonares 1 wrote, in treating of arithmetic and astronomy, when he stated—

“It is said that these came from the Chaldees to the Egyptians, and
thence to the Greeks.”


Name^mid „ The truth in this remark is monumentally confirmed by the lasting name

of £haid«an of the monument perpetuating the early knowledge to which Zonares refers.
Great Pyramid For the name “ Pyramid ”—like all the constructional conceptions embodied
“ Khuti" = gypt in the Great Pyramid—is primarily of Euphratean derivation. The Egyptian
in^Hebrei*” name * or Great Pyramid is “ Khuti ”—“ the Lights.” In the Semitic
;;Lijht.;»= languages the equivalent name is “ Urim ”—“the Lights.” In Phrygian
Chaldee " Ur ” and Greek, the root “ Ur ” (light) became successively “ Pur ” and “ Pyr ”
Phrygian (fire), and “ Pyra ” (a plural) “ beacon fires.”

** Pur/* Greek

**BMwn pL)= Thus Plato, in his “ Cratylus ” (Taylor’s translation), says, “ Do you know
Fire./* on what account 4 Pur ’ (Pyr) was so called ? Consider whether this is not of
barbaric origin—for it is by no means easy to adopt this to the Greek tongue ;
and it is manifest that the Phrygians thus denominate ‘ fire ’ with a trifling
deviation.” Thus 4 Pur ’ (Pyr) is a form of the Hebrew 4 Ur ’— 4 light.’ The


*Lib. I, vi.


PYRAMID RECORDS


87


addition of the labial ‘ p ’—as also * b 5 and ‘ f,’ hence ‘ bum ’ and 4 furnace ’—
is a frequent change observed in roots passing from one language to another.

Hence 4 Uri ’ = ‘ fiery.’ Here both words contain the same original root.

Again in Hebrew, 4 middin’ = ‘measures,’ ‘madadu’ = ‘to measure’; in Hebrew
Sanscrit, ‘ma,’ ‘mad,’ = ‘ to measure’; in Zend, ‘meete,’ ‘mate’; Latin,‘modus,’ ** Measures.”
4 a measure ’; Greek, ‘ metron ’; Anglo-Saxon, ‘ metan,’ ‘ to measure.’


Examples—‘ Aga-medes,’ Semitic , ‘ The Great Measurer,’ or Greek , ‘ the
very wise ’ Phoenician , ‘ Baal-middoh,’ ‘ the Lord of the measures.’

In Chaldee and Hebrew, ‘ Urim ’ = ‘ Lights,’ with the labial ‘ p,’ as in
Phrygian, ‘ Urim ’=‘ Purim ’=‘ Lights.’ Greek ‘ Pyra’ = ‘beacon fires’
(lights).

In Chaldee and Hebrew, ‘ middin ’=‘ measures.” Hence the Chaldee-
Hebrew name for the Great Pyramid—in Egyptian, ‘ Khuti,’ ‘ the Lights ’—
is ‘ Urim-middin ’ (Purim-middin)==‘ Lights-Measures.’

In Greek this becomes ‘ Pyra-midos,’ ‘ Pyra-mid.’

The name ‘ Pyramid,’ therefore, monumentalises the external purpose
of the Great Pyramid. It is a “beacon of reflexions,” and a “monument of
measures.”


Phoenician
“ Baal-
Middoh ”=

“ The Lord of
the Measures.*


Purpose of
Great Pyramid
defined in
Hebrew by
name * Urim-
middin '=

* Lights-
Measures.*

Grecianised
form of name
= ‘ Pyra-
middin,*

• Pyra-Midos/


It is of importance to observe that the Greek name is not derived from
two Greek roots, but is the Grecianised form (Pyramidos) of the Semitic name
‘ Urim-middin,’ or possibly of a composite Phrygian and Phoenician form of
the name—‘ Purim-middoh.’


u 108. THE PYRAMID OF THE DYNASTOLOGICAL LISTS AND OF
THE BOOK OF THE DEAD.


In the compilation of the ancient Egyptian King Lists, Egyptologists Egyptian
recognise three main periods when such compilations were made. These are, l«u !^ loglcal
in order, Three periods

(1) The early period of Dynasties V-VI—e.g., the King Lists of the Stele of Palermo, of compilatiom

and of the Cairo fragments. The kings of these dynasties built Pyramids at (l) Dyns. V * VI
Abusir and Sakkarah.

(2) The period of Dynasties XVIII and XIX—e.g., the Karnak List and the Turin ( 2 ) Dyns. XVHI

Papyrus List (Dyn. XVIII), and the Lists of Abydos and Sakkarah (Dyn. XIX). &

(3) The Saite Restoration Period—Dyn. XXVI—from the compilations of which (3) Dyn XXVI

period as we have seen, the Lists of Manetho were derived in part.


In the evolution of the Egyptian Sacred writings, Egyptologists recognise Egyptijm
three similar periods as follows :— JSJj, __

(1) The period of Dynasties V and VI, when the funerary texts, commonly known as Three period#

the Pyramid texts, were carved. These deal with the life of the king in the compilation,
future life. From them originated the later so-called Book of the Dead , chapters (i) Dyn«. v-vi
of which were in existence as early as the XHth Dynasty.

(2) The period of the XVIIIth to XXth Dynasties when the collection known as the

Theban Recension of the Book of the Dead was prepared. xix 3 ^*’ n “

(3) The period of the XXVIth (Saite) Dynasty, when the Saite Recension of the Book

of the Dead was compiled. * 3) Dyn ’ XXVI


88


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


The Egyptian To the latter recension belongs the version entitled “ The Book of the
Dead” ° e Master of the Hidden House,” in which, as Mr. Marsham Adams 1 has shown,
p™ranud ea the soul of the departed is pictured as following the passages and chambers
aifegwyJSf the of the Great Pyramid. In this version the Pyramid itself is pictured as an
allegory in stone of the ways and trials of the future life.


U 109. THE SECRET HOUSE OF THE SAITE RECENSION.

Maspero’c As a resu ^ Mr. Adams’ researches, Sir Gaston Maspero concluded that

opinion.— “ The Pyramids and the ‘ Book of the Dead ’ reproduce the same original, the
pyramidsnd one * n wor *d s > °th er in stone.” 2 In quoting the preceding, Mr. Adams
dIZa ?luted re * ers to the prevalence of a tradition among the priests of Memphis,” a fact
which he says he “ learned later from the same authority,” supporting his
“ contention that the Secret House was the scene where the neophyte was
initiated into the mysteries of Egypt.”

Accordingly every possible attempt was made by the compilers of the
Ejrptia- ^ various chapters of the Book of the Dead to refer back the origin of the ritual
back sacred and symbolism to the Pyramid Kings of Memphis—the builders of the Pyramids

writings to J J r j

perio?* d Gizeh. Thus a passage in the cxxxviith chapter of the Book of the Dead

states that that chapter was found by Heru-tat-ef, son of Khufu, the builder
of the Great Pyramid.


Now it was during the XXVIth (Saite) Dynasty that the order of chapters
significance of B°°k of the Dead was drawn up, and when, as Breasted states, 3 “ the

xxvith of worship of the (Pyramid) kings, who had ruled at Memphis in these remote

tb^custo^ns*** 6 < ^ a y s> was revive( l.Their Pyramids were even extensively restored

jinstit u - and repaired. The archaic titles.in the government of the Pyramid

p£io“ id builders were again brought into requisition, and in the externals of government
everything possible was done to clothe it with the appearance of remote
antiquity.”


Dynastoiogicai Hence in the Saite system of Dynastology, preserved in the version of
o*igin°of Africanus, the duration of years stated to Psammetichos, the first actual king
Unu a meric 5 i? Dynasty XXVI (Saite), is given as 5,271, the length of the arc of the 36,525
36 e 525 circU circumference, measuring the angle of slope of the Standard Pyramid. Reduced
Sngi?of y si^e d to m °d ern angular measure this angle of slope is 5i°-5i'-i4".3, the angle of
‘slope of the Great Pyramid of Gizeh.


It was during the reign of Psammetichos (Psamtek I)—as Herodotus
states—that Greek colonists first settled in Egypt. 4 For the significance
of this settlement, and its date in relation to the history of Greek Geometry
and Astronomy, the reader is referred to Section II of this chapter, and Table X

x “ The Book of the Master,” by Marsham Adams.

a Quoted from a letter to Mr. Marsham Adams, ” The Book ol the Master,” p. iv.

•A History of Egypt, p. 570.

4 Refer Annals of Assurbanipal re Gyges and Lydians. This gives the date as 661 B C., when
the Carian colonists of Herodotus apparently accompanied the Lydians as mercenaries.


PYRAMID RECORDS


89


U no. COPTIC CHRISTIANITY AND “ THE BOOK OF THE DEAD.”


Thus it is that from the remotest periods of authentic history, an The Ancient
atmosphere of mystery has enshrouded all expression of thought and opinion the 8 pyramid.,
concerning the Pyramids of Gizeh. Essentially geometrical in form, the survival in
Pyramids, by influencing the expression of theological conceptions, supplied De£d.°
religious allegory with an unfailing source of geometrical symbolism. It is
this pyramid allegory of which a corrupt survival exists in the Egyptian Book
of the Dead.


It is from the Book of the Dead that the Coptic descendants of the ancient “ Tig Book *f
Egyptians derived the mystical and allegorical element which was introduced influences
into early Christian gnosticism. The literature of early Christian gnosticism Christianity
abounds in mystical pyramid figures and associated astronomical conceptions christain

....... Gnosticism.

and constellations.


To the Copts is due the survival, to the present day, of the ancient Egyptian Jj£ ortanca of
Calendar and month names. To them we owe the retention of a dialect of cSJSc i“ c * 0
the ancient Egyptian language, and with it, much that has tended to facilitate «©ive the ^ ^
and elucidate the translation of ancient hieroglyphic texts. Hence the import- Ancient
ance and value attaching to any traditions concerning the Great Pyramid Language,
that can be reliably identified as of Coptic origin.


f hi. COPTIC TRADITION AND THE GREAT PYRAMID.

Regarding the Coptic traditions, Dr. Sprenger, in Appendix to Vyse’s
“Pyramids of Gizeh,” vol. II, observes that “the traditions of the ancient
Egyptians were preserved by their descendants, the Copts, who were held in x??d!tions

great esteem by the Arabs.It may be remarked that the Arabian aLV

authors have given the same accounts of the Pyramids, with little or no their purpo## *
variation, for above a thousand years ; and that they appear to have repeated
the traditions of the ancient Egyptians, mixed up with fabulous stories and
incidents, certainly not of Mahometan invention.”

The account of Masoudi (died 345 A.H. = 957 A.D.), in the Arabic MS.

of the Akbar-Ezzeman, at Oxford, relates that “ Surid.one of the kings Arabic mss.

of Egypt before the flood, built the two great Pyramids.” In this narration o/lariVcSptic
the Great Pyramid is referred to as “the Eastern Pyramid.” Dr. Sprenger
states that “ Masoudi affirms, in the Akbar-Ezzeman that he wrote his account Pyramld# *
of Surid from a Coptic modern history.”

The narration of Masoudi is as follows :—

“.He (Surid) also ordered the priests to deposit within them Tbe Great

(the Pyramids), written accounts of their wisdom and acquirements in the p y ramidj -

different arts and sciences.with the writings of the priests containing

all manner of wisdom, the names and properties of medical plants, and the ^rithmenc and
sciences of arithmetic and geometry, that they might remain as records, for
the benefit of those who could afterwards comprehend them.”


90


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Astronomical
and Historical
Cycles affecting

f ait and
uture time.


Great Pyramid
Dedicated to
History and
Astronomy.


the heavenly spheres, and figures representing the stars and planets....”

“The king, also, deposited.the positions of the stars and their

cycles ; together with the history and chronicle of time past, of that which
is to come, and every future event which would take place in Egypt.”

Similarly the MS. of Makrizi states that “ the first (the Great) Pyramid
was especially dedicated to history and astronomy; the second (Pyramid)
to medical knowledge.”

Tohfat Alagaib states that the Great Pyramid contained “plans of the
stars, and historical and prophetic records.”


If ii2. THE SOURCE OF COPTIC TRADITIONS.

According to the accounts of Masoudi and A 1 Kodhai, a papyrus, found
ancient “ Coptic ” characters, gave the following account of the Pyramids :—
“ Upon the walls were written the mysteries of science, astronomy,
geometry, physics, and much useful knowledge, which any person, who under¬
stands our writing, can read.”

Coptic The Pyramids of Gizeh, we know, contain no such hieroglyphic inscriptions

Jrnjneousiy as the traditions imply. It is only such texts as that of the Book of the Dead ,
p 1 culied d the which picture the passages and chambers of the Standard Pyramid of the
pL r s a a“« of Dynastological Lists, or Secret House of the Book of the Dead as lined with
thei?ead ?, with instructions and formulae, and with mythical figures and stars. It is to these
the G”S ge * of that the traditions refer, and from such texts as these that the traditions
Pyramid. obtained authority for identifying the Standard Pyramid of the Dynastological
Texts with the Great Pyramid of Gizeh.

Importance The fact therefore remains that Coptic tradition associates the Great

Traditions: Pyramid with the symbolising of astronomical and geometrical figures, just

si«ed at House f as the Egyptian Ancestors of the Copts associated the Great Pyramid with
the^Dead,”°and their ideal secret house in the Book of the Dead , and with their geometrical
p h yramid d Sf the Dynastology, cosmical year circle, and Sothic cycle mythology.

Dynastological
Lists, with the
Great Pyramid

Section I— Summary and Conclusions.


Tbeni that. <[ n 3 . PREVIOUS CONCLUSIONS AND NEW DATA.

reached*same In the Summary and Conclusions of Chapter I (Section I, ^ 40-46), it
SfaStronomfca! was seen that a high state of civilisation flourished in times classified as
Modern^ a * “ prehistoric.” The culture of this civilisation was seen to have reached an
Gravitational advanced stage of scientific knowledge. It was not suggested that scientific
Astronomy, development had proceeded along the same lines as modem scientific research.

Not necessarily 177-7

or research** ^ was, h° wever > suggested, by the evidence , that results had been attained
in the science of astronomy in no way inferior to the results of modem
gravitational astronomy.


PYRAMID RECORDS


9i


In one particular line of inquiry, the indications pointed clearly to an
advanced knowledge concerning the elements of the planetary orbits. These |®”m«tsof
indications suggested that this knowledge had been recognised to be capable o la bitI ary


of simple expression as a system of Natural Law ;
of complete definition in solid geometrical form.
Pyramidal form.


the system being capable Embodied in a
This was indicated as of J&iSiLaw.

defined in solid


geometrical

form.


The evidence discussed afforded reliable grounds for tentatively accepting Great Pyramid
the hypothesis that the Great Pyramid of Gizeh was the structural expression expression of
of this system of Natural Law. It suggested that the Pyramid was constructed ^construction
to perpetuate this knowledge at a time when the remote founders of the *£ nk betwean
Euphratean, Egyptian, and Mediterranean civilisations were reconstructing c£fiiS§on C "
their systems of national life upon the^ fragments of oral tradition remaining b“?i£nin* of


from the former civilisation.


Historical

civilisation


The discussion of the new evidence adduced in the present chapter indicates n«w Data
that the hypothesis suggested by the preliminary data is confirmed by the ^rstems 1 ?^^
oral traditions concerning the Great Pyramid, by its association with the TraStioS* and
original scientific system of primitive measures, and by its external measures Measures of
and principal features. confirm thesis.


If 114. A POLAR DIAMETER INCH.—ACCIDENT OR INTENTION.

The evidence upon which the preceding conclusion is based leads to the
further inference that the external features of the Great Pyramid are primarily
concerned with a geometrical representation of the dimensions and motions Nece##ary
of the Earth and its orbit. The unit for the geometrical representation of
dimensions must necessarily be a simple function of (a) the Earth’s Polar t

diameter, (b) the Sun’s diameter, or (c) the Earth’s mean distance from the
Sun. Otherwise the representation can have no meaning or application. It ^msur.
seems to be clearly evident that of the three possible units that derived from
the Earth’s Polar Diameter is the most suitable for representing the other
two dimensions in terms tangible to the Earth’s scientific inhabitants.


Intentionally, or by accident, the Great Pyramid unit of measurement— primitive inch,
the Primitive inch—is the simplest possible function of the Earth’s Polar £ r C b al and r i«h d
Diameter. The Earth’s Polar Diameter measures exactly 500 million IgyStUn King
Primitive inches. The value giving this result was derived from three equal? 3re aU


independent sources :—

(a) The common sources of Egyptian metrological data (^f 81).

(b) The ancient Egyptian Dynastological Lists (^f 94).


500 Million
of such inches
= Earth’s
Polar
Diameter.


(c) The external measurements of the Great Pyramid (^f 101).


The three independent sources agree in associating the Primitive inch Af8ociated
value with the representation of cyclic functions of the Earth’s motion in its Da^lndmate
orbit. This tends to confirm that the simple relationship between the Earth’s as^powibiy p
Polar Diameter and the Primitive inch can scarcely have been an accidental 1


92


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Requisite
Additional
Data to
establish
intention !—

Association
with simple
relationships.
Sun's
Diameter,

Mean Sun
Distance, Orbit
Eccentricity,
and variations.

Independent
Angular Check
Measurements


The Sacred
Hebrew Cubit,
of 25 P. inches,
preserved by
Pyramid and
Hebrews.
Never used in
Egypt except
by Semites.


The Sacred
i-Cubit
originates the
Modern Foot.


The Primitive
Inch originates
the Modern
Inch, Zoll,
Turn, and
Pouce.


relationship. It cannot, however, be established that the relationship was
intentional until the Pyramid’s geometrical system is shown to extend the
relationship to the Sun’s diameter, the mean Sun distance, and the variations
in the eccentricity of the Earth’s orbit. These values should be confirmed,
as to intention, by the representation of independent heliocentric or geocentric
angular measurements where possible. At least, this is what one would expect
to find in a geometrical system of the nature inferred, and in which the
Designer’s express purpose was to establish the certainty of his intentions.

u 115. the primary metrological system.

The Primitive inch—the inferred Polar diameter inch—is the basal unit
of the Primary Metrological system of the former civilisation. An important
unit of this system was the Sacred Cubit of 25 P. inches. The latter has been
preserved by the measurements of the Great Pyramid, and by the Hebrews.
It never occurs in Egypt except during periods of Semitic domination.

Apparently from the half cubit (12 .£") of this system originated the 12 V*
foot of ancient Roman remains, and of ancient British and Medieval English
remains. Of the same origin is the old Rhineland foot, and the foot in
Switzerland and Austria.

The Primitive inch (1.0011 B") is also the original of the British Inch,
of the old German, Austrian and Swiss Zoll, of the Danish tomme, and
Scandinavian turn, and of the old French pouce . This origin, at least for the
British Inch, is confirmed by the connection between the sacred half-cubit
and the decimal division of the Hebrew unit of 10 acres in ancient Cornwall,
where the side of the 10 acres square occurred as a furlong of 8,000 inches.
(HU 8 5 and 86.)


f 116. THE SECONDARY METROLOGICAL SYSTEM.


Secondary
Metrological
System
devised to
Avoide use
of 77.

Its bas?? the
Year Circle


The Secondary Metrological System of the former civilisation is very
clearly defined. It appears to have been formulated to avoid in calculations
circumference

the use of the ratio, — diamete r— = 3 - I 4 I 59 - A Standard Year Circle of
3652.42 Primitive inches was adopted. The Standard Diameter of this circle


Diametric and was divided into Diametric Digits, Diametric Feet, and Diametric Cubits.
riii c uStJ, r a“d The Standard Circumference was divided into Circumferential Digits,
fiJAroM? 14 * Circumferential Feet, and Circumferential Cubits. These linear units have


all been preserved by the Egyptians.


The Origin of
the Unit of
Square
Measure

The “ Aroura.”
The

-i-Aroura”
Year Circle.


A standard of Square Measure was formulated as follows :—A Rectangle
of length equal to the circumference of the Standard Circle, and of breadth
equal to the diameter of the Standard Circle was the standard unit of square
measure. It was equal in area to the area of four standard Circles. The
Standard Rectangle was transformed into a square of equal area. The side


PYRAMID RECORDS


93


of this square was divided into a hundred parts. The linear unit thus obtained Re^angie^nd
was adopted as the cubit for measuring sides of rectangular figures. This Squa°r U e. a
cubit has been preserved by the Egyptians as their common cubit of 20.63 The Common

^ r J ° Egyptian

British inches. Cubit.

Simple rule-of-thumb relations connected the diametric and circumferential system lor u««
units with the linear units of rectangular figures. The Secondary system Uncultured
was obviously formulated at a time when the uncultured many were organised inte/nXttent
to carry out highly skilled work under the intermittent direction of a cultured Cultured Few.
few. The system appears in use in ancient Egypt in the earliest Dynastic System in «»e
times—and possibly in pre-dynastic times—before the Pyramids were built. Pyramid*


u 117. THE GREAT PYRAMID’S EXTERIOR.

In Chapters III and IV it will be seen that the Great Pyramid contains a
single comprehensive system of geometry representing the complete derivation
of the Secondary System of Measures in terms of f he Solar year to the scale
of iP. inch to a day. From this, and the data in the present chapter, it follows
that the Great Pyramid represents the geometry of the year circle to three
decimal scales,

(a) 1 P. inch to a day. (Plates XXXV and XLIII.)

(b) 10 P. inches to a day. (^J 95 and 99.)

(c) 100 P. inches to a day. (^J 100 and 101.)

Its 35th course defines the Sacred Cubit of 25 P. inches, and the aroura
rectangle of 3652.4 P. inches by 1162.6 P. inches. The Square circuit of any
horizontal plane of the Pyramid is equal to the circumference of a circle of
radius equal to the Pyramid height above the horizontal plane considered ;
and the area of the right vertical section of the Pyramid above this horizontal
plane is equal to the area of the quadrant of the circle defined.

The datum of this representation is the Pyramid’s base circuit of
36524.2+P. inches, representing the value of the solar year on the scale of
100 P. inches to a day.


The Great
Pyramid’s
three scales

1

10

100 .


Its 35th Course
defines the
Rectangular
“ Aroura.”

Pyramid’s

Horizontal

Circuit=

Circumference

of Circle whose

Radius equals

Pyramid

height above

Circuit

considered.

Pyramid's (
Base Ciicuifi =
36,524 e
Primitive
inches.


If 118. THE EGYPTIAN KING LISTS DEFINE THE GREAT
PYRAMID.

It was at a comparatively late period of Egyptian history that the Fictitious
Egyptians constructed their various systems of fictitious chronology. This of h Eg“ptUn
they did by substituting years of alleged Egyptian history for Pyramid inches S?pal 5 8 fro»
in important measurements of the Great Pyramid. The principle upon which pyramid’s
they proceeded in such cases was outlined by Dr. Sprenger about a century Measur « ment *
ago. Sprenger stated, regarding the Egyptians, that, with them, “ an idea, factor*
a period of time, or any remarkable occurrence, were frequently connected IcSSSl* 8Ucb
with ideal persons in mythology, and when any similarity existed, received 0? Egyptians*,
the same appellation.” 1

l Vyse’s “ Pyramids of Gizeh,” Vol. II, Appendix.


94


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


The factory in “ The idea” in the particular case under consideration was that oral

MytSJai° * tradition associated the Pyramid’s measures with astronomical cycles and
the King Ust*. orbital motions. This supplied the data for their various “ periods of time,”
and for identification with “ remarkable occurrences ” in history and
astronomy.

Sapponng that So extensively did the Egyptians adopt the outstanding measurements
demolished * ^ rea t Pyramid in their fictitious systems of chronology that the Great

jtejprincipai Pyramid’s external features , dimensions , and units can be derived without any
Dimension*, prior reference to the Great Pyramid. Were the Great Pyramid not now in
Units * b e existence its external form, dimensions, and units, together with its principal
reconstructed external features, could be reconstructed entirely from the Dynastological

from the T . , ,, _ ’ ,. J J °

Egyptian Lists of the Egyptians.

King Lists. *


U 119. THE KNOWLEDGE IN THE KING LISTS AND THE LACK
OF UNDERSTANDING.

The unsystematic manner in which the Egyptians adopted Pyramid
Pyr^mid^Data measurements as the basis of astronomical periods in their King Lists clearly
Indicates that indicates that they had nothing but a general vague tradition to guide them.
Egyptian They proceeded to extract measurements without regard to sequence or
general* principle. Scientific principle demands that a graphical representation of
PyXmid? hut* a period of time cannot be made along an axis defining radii and diameters,
to*give^ a * and at the same time be made round a circuit defining a circumference. The
thi* r purpose* latter method of representation is possible, the former unlikely, but both
ln eai * together are impossible in a scientific representation.


The compilers of the King Lists, however, added the measurements of
radii to the measurements of arcs, horizontal distances to vertical distances,
and totalled measurements in cubits together with measurements in inches.
Ba*Z 5 “fin ed The single idea they did adhere to was that the Pyramid base circuit contained
Period^huf 1 a representation of the Period of Precession. One school adopted the sum of
•am?with the k ase diagonals as giving the period in inches for years. Another school

£*uad i of uit adopted the base circuit in inches for years, as defining the Period. The
Base Diagonals difference between the two conceptions amounted to 10,698 years, or twice
the duration of the human kings given in one summation of the Lists preserved
by Africanus. (Plate XVI, Table C (4).)


Other items

of knowledge

preserved

intact but

without

intelligent

understanding


Nevertheless, in their oral tradition, possibly without much understanding
of the facts, the Egyptian priests retained many valuable items of astronomical
knowledge. This is indicated by the manner and sequence in which the Greeks
derived their knowledge of science from the Egyptians. (Refer Section II of
this Chapter—and Table X.)


PYRAMID RECORDS


95


If 120. THE SUGGESTED LINES OF FURTHER INQUIRY.

The traditional association of the Pyramid’s base with the idea of New D»t«

J suggest that

Precession leads to a further possible inference. The difference between the Pyramid Base
solar year and the sidenal year is the annual amount of precession measured •^ouHdeHne
in time. This and the Pyramid base connection suggest that while the base £ r 0 °£^ a y ear
square circuit gives the value of the Tropical year, the perimeter of the hollowed- ^

in base may have been intended to give the value of the Siderial year.

By following up this suggestion, the reader will find the intention of the
Pyramid rapidly developing in Chapter III. From this suggestion, the external
features, dimensions, and units of the Great Pyramid, when studied in plan , ?f e inq°u P i“ ent
will be found to give, precisely and accurately, every essential value, of the Ii”ifc8 d mor«
Earth’s orbit, and its motions. These will be found to include the values of Dala^aS*
the Anomalistic, Siderial and Solar years, the mean Sun distance, the Sun’s SdfcVted?
diameter (independent linear and angular representations), and the maximum
and minimum values of the eccentricity of the Earth’s orbit.

From these representations the reader will be able to appreciate how and The Further
why Pythagoras—having studied the science of the Egyptians—was enabled light £pon W th«
to enunciate, over 2,000 years before the truth was generally realised, that Pythagorean
the planets revolve round the Sun. (Refer Section II, ^ 126 and 129 to 133, Agronomy,
and Table X.)


Ancient
Knowledge
preserved by
oral

instruction.

Hence paucity
of direct
literary
reference.

Ancient
Literature
purposely
distorted the
facts of
knowledge in
form of a
Priestly Code
of Reference


Analysis of
such records
indicates that
Codes

preserved the
Central Facts
of Ancient
Knowledge
without,
preserving t
understanding
of the

derivation and
application of
the facts.


Distortion of
Facts

extended to
Art.

Utilisation
of Facts of
Knowledge
controlled by
Priesthood.

Empirical

Rules

“ Rationed ”
out to
Populace.


The mistake ol
supposing that
the Empirical
Rules indicate
extent of
knowledge
possessed by
the Ancients.


96 THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE

Section II.— The Origins of Greek Geometry and Astronomy.

121. THE ANCIENT MYSTERIES OF ORIENTAL CULTS.

Oral instruction was the means of perpetuating the knowledge preserved
by the cults of the ancient East. Hence we find, in both Egypt and Chaldaea,
much monumental and other structural evidence of a higher knowledge, but
no literature with regard to its principles and essential details. Literature
there is, of a kind, as we have seen in the cases of the Egyptian Dynastological
Lists, and the Book of the Dead. In general—as in the cases cited—it is the
literature dispensed by the priesthood for the mystification of the laity, or at
best, the coded literature beloved of the mythologist and kabbalist, to under¬
stand which required oral instruction by admission into the several orders of the
cult, and, for a complete unveiling, admission into the ultimate Inner Priest¬
hood.

The explanation of phenomena and ideals furnished by the popular litera¬
ture were generally distorted and untrue. Furnished by the coded literature,
the explanations were so hedged about by intentional obliquities, so obscured
by fables and spurious mysteries, and so entangled in its code, as to be beyond
the comprehension of those without the cult. The evidence discussed has
shown that such explanations, when made, did not give an understanding of the
ancient science. They merely revealed the traditional knowledge concerning
the facts that had been derived from a former understanding of the causal
relation between the facts and the scientific phenomena expressed by them.


If 122. KNOWLEDGE PRESERVED AS A MYSTERY: UNDER¬
STANDING LOST.

With such an artificial basis for the national ideals, art itself became
distorted in its representation of such phenomena as the heavenly bodies and
their motions—apparent or real. This distortion was maintained even in the
coded literature that formed what we may term the index of reference for the
priests of the Inner Mysteries. Hence we find that in Chaldsea, and still more
particularly in Egypt, the scientific knowledge retailed by the priesthood, for
use and application in the national life, had been filtered down to “ rule-of-
thumb ” dogmas, and rough empirical axioms, postulates and formulae.

In reiteration of such dogmas and empirical formulae the monuments,
papyri and traditional literature are clamourously persistent. The approximate
nature of these rules is so evident that it has become the custom to pass un¬
challenged the assertion that the ancient Egyptians and Chaldaeans performed
their vast and accurate engineering and other scientific works upon a purely
empirical and “ rule-of-thumb ” basis.

The hypothesis underlying this assertion is not only illogical; it is not in
accordance with what we know regarding the relations between State and
Priesthood.


PYRAMID RECORDS


97


f 123. THE SUPPRESSION OF LEARNING.

The Priesthood saw in the State the means whereby it could obtain power, priesthood
possessions and obedience. Accordingly, the priesthood centred its efforts and knowTe*dge «nd
organised its resources and knowledge towards obtaining control of the to'contrJi
machinery of State. Its object was so to formulate the constitution that the s£te. in#ry °*
State should be dependent upon the Priesthood.

The Priesthood possessed the knowledge necessary for almanac organisa- Priesthood
tion and the scientific knowledge embodied in the vast engineering and other Exclusive the
scientific works carried out by the State. That knowledge was given no clear fundame^i
literary expression, lest the State, by possession of this, should become inde- JESSm" '°*
pendent of the Priesthood. Hence it is obvious that the few empirical rules, ?nl of 1 *** 100 '
of which the monuments and papyri give us evidence, were vastly less than the ^hS? 00 * 1
unwritten knowledge of the silent Inner Priesthood. wiJK! fic

Schooled to dependence upon the Priesthood, the ancient Egyptians, and to
a less extent, the ancient Chaldaeans, made little or no independent attempt to 5 ^ 2 S°“ d
seek the first principles underlying the empirical rules retailed by the Priesthood. th#

The extent of this dependence—or rather, the extent to which this dependence
was enforced—is illustrated by the enforced legalisation in Egypt of the vague j^a“ce and
or shifting year. {>riUthood ftbe

In Chaldaea a similar process was effected by means of the authority of the
astrological texts, defining the supposed causal relations between the acts of
kings, princes, and populace, and the produce and other phenomena of the
seasons.


f 124. STATE-CONTROL IN ANCIENT EGYPT.

With the institution of the vague year in Egypt, the Priesthood brought
into being a new process of State control. The vague year thereafter carried
the calendar seasons backwards round the Solar year. The Calendar Seasons
came to have no meaning. The knowledge of the accurate recurrence of times
and seasons was confined to the rulers and priests of the Solar deities. Only by
giving abundance of gifts to the solar gods could'the husbandman be assured
of a plentiful harvest. A system of State-control was thus established whereby
wealth accrued to state and priest craft, and ultimate responsibility was referred
to the gods. A goodly harvest implied that the gods were pleased ; a poor
harvest that the gods were dissatisfied with the offerings of the people. State
and priesthood might receive reflected glory ; never blame.


The Vague
Year and the
Calendar
Season*.

State Control
of the Year
and

Agriculture.


The Gods
Responsible

The people
responsible
to the Gods.

State and

Priesthood

absolved.


U 125. THE DISTORTION OF KNOWLEDGE LEGALISED.

All common rules of life and things material were ultimately depicted as
having conception and source in the life-giving rays of the sun. The sun, from
the XVIIIth Dynasty onwards, whatever the deity with which it was identified, **”*'


98


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


was the great Formal Cause, which by means of its seasonal phenomena of the
year, and the dependent phenomena of Nile inundation, made Egypt “ the
gift of the Nile.”

The theogony and cosmogony of the ancient Egyptians were, in conse¬
quence, formulated on a cyclic basis having its origin in the value of the year.
SlifiithJ 1 This was already expressed in the Pyramid’s geometry of the year circle. The
numerical functions of this geometrical scheme were diverted by the priest¬
hood into the channels of State-control, and were applied to the measurement
of all effects attributed, by the Priests, to the influence of the Solar deity,
Amen-Ra.

As a crowning monumentalisation of the omniscience of Amen-Ra the
whole history of the Divine and Human Dynasties of Egypt was built around a
fabulous chronology composed of nominal solar and Sothic cycles, and numbers
of years that were in reality but geometrical functions of the Pyramid, and its
year circle and astronomical cycles.

Many of the old cults absorbed by the dominant cult of Amen-Ra still
The absorbed partly retained their individuality by worshipping their original gods under the
responsible aspect of the leading attributes of Amen-Ra. This was the effect intended, but
versions of the owing to this fact, the Egyptian Lists contain differing versions of the mytho-
Liats * to ° glc * logical chronology of the year circle and its Pyramid functions applied to the
Divine and Human Dynasties.

If 126. THE PARTIAL UNVEILING OF THE MYSTERIES OF
EGYPT.

It was only after the seed of freedom, sown by the rising Greek nations, had
thfnke^of 1 produced independent philosophers, and when these philosophers had com-
w?S! 3 fi? lean mence d to visit the Egyptians and Chaldaeans, that the meagre information
from^riests gleaned from the priests and independently derived from the empirical rules,
of Egypt. was reduced to its crude Greek first principles. Thus, Professor G. Forbes

priest** 11 states that “ the Egyptian priests tried to keep such astronomical knowledge as

t^impart they possessed to themselves ” ; and, as indicating the reluctance with which

information, they parted with information, Sir G. Wilkinson states that “ Iamblichus says

derives° ra * Pythagoras derived his information upon different sciences from Egypt; he
phUosopblcai l earn t philosophy from the priests ; and his theories of comets, numbers, and
hi y * it rrieS5fic° r m usic were doubtless from the same source ; but the great repugnance evinced
»*ro™o*my, by the Egyptian Priests to receive Pythagoras, will account for their with-
geometry, and holding from him much that they knew, though his great patience, and his
Egyptian° m readiness to comply with their regulations, even to the rite of circumcision
priatto. (Clem. Strom . i, p. 302) obtained for him more information than was imparted
to any other Greek (Plut. de Is. s. 10).”


Fabulous
Chronology
and Pyramid
Year Circle
Geometry.


PYRAMID RECORDS


99


In light of the facts we now possess from the monuments, the ancient
accounts of the sojourn of Pythagoras in Egypt picture him as a skilful cross¬
examiner eliciting information from a reluctant Priesthood. We can picture
the Egyptian Priests striving to impress Pythagoras with the vast extent of
their own learning and at the same time seeking to obscure the real facts—and
their ignorance of the derivation of the facts—by dogmatic and mystifying
assertions. Nevertheless, their long association with a credulous and easily
satisfied laity ill fitted them for dealing in debate with an intellect so original,
independent, and penetrating as that of Pythagoras.


If 127. THE HELLENIZING OF EGYPT. 7TH CENTURY B.C. TO
7TH CENTURY A.D.

Coincident with the political and commercial rise of the Greek States, and
the development of Hellenic science and arts, we can trace the decline, politically
and commercially, of Egypt, and the accelerated decadence of Egyptian science
and art. Greek philosophers hastened to absorb the virtues of the dying race—
and many of its vices. Greek mercenaries, from the middle of the 7th century
B.C. onwards, found military employment in Egypt. Pandering to the cults,
the Greeks gradually undermined, throughout a succession of generations, the
basis of the Egyptian national constitution. Slowly they Hellenized a nation
for whom Hellenism meant disintegration.

After the conquest of Egypt by Alexander the Great, the Greeks monu¬
mentalised their indebtedness to the Egyptians in the sciences and arts, by
founding, during the reign of Ptolemy I, the famous library of Alexandria.
From this age onwards, a long succession of Greek geometers, astronomers and
philosophers, in the various schools of Alexandria, maintained the connection
that previously had been more remotely held. Here all the learning that was
gleaned and developed from the priests of the dying cults was reduced to
literary form and method. Ultimately, however, in the age of Theon, and his
daughter Hypatia, the schools themselves declined by falling completely under
the pernicious spell of Egyptian dogma. In 642 A.D., the famous library was
burnt by the orders of the Caliph Omar.


“ A cloud of witnesses ” says Mr. R. Brown, Junr—in his “ Primitive
Constellations ”—“testify to the connection between the wisdom of the East
and the earlier sages of Hellas. The treasures of the library of Alexandria, the
lore of such Chaldaean sages as Kiden, Naburianos, and Soudinos ( vide Strabo ,
XVI, i, 6) were at the service of Hipparchus ” and again, quoting from the
Scholiast on Aratos ( Diosemeia . 21) “ the Hellenes received them from the
Egyptians and Chalaaeans.”


Pythagoras
a skilful
cross-examiner
pandering to
the vanities
of the Egyptian
Priests, and
conforming to
their rituals,
painstakingly
extracts from
their veiled
admissions
scientific facts
of priceless
value.


Rise of
Greek States
coincident
with decline
of Egypt.

Period of close
intercourse
between
Greeks and
Egyptians.

The peaceful
penetration
of Egypt by the
Greeks.


Alexander

conquers

Egypt.

Founds

Alexandria.

Alexandrian
Greeks found
Astronomical,
Geometrical
and

Philosophical
Schools and
the great
Library of
Alexandria.

Knowledge
gleaned from
oral tradition
of Egyptian
Priests reduced
to system in
writing.


Alexandria the
Treasure City
of the Wisdom
of Egypt and
Chaldcea.


100


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Greek.
Scientific
inquiry began
in Egypt with
XXVlth
Egyptian
Dynasty, which
attempted
restoration
of cults and
constitution of
Pyramid
Times.


Sharp Contrast
in presentation
of Egyptian
Science as
given by the
Greeks :—
Advanced
Scientific facts
enunciated.
True first
principles of
these necessary
for their
discovery.
Greeks explain
the facts as
derived from
puerile first
principles—
clearly
invented to
meet

contemporary

criticism.


Thales
Lunar eclipses
correctly.

Yet indicates
his ignorance
of the essential
First Principles
by stating that
the Earth floats
on water.


If 128. THE SIGNIFICANT CONTRAST IN GREEK PRESENTATION
OF SCIENCE.

The almost spontaneous rise and rapid development of Greek science date
from the period during which Greek philosophers first visited Egypt. This
dates back to the middle of the 7th century B.C., when the XXVlth Egyptian
Dynasty began, and asserted its supremacy after the withdrawal of the
Assyrians. At this time we saw that the Egyptians attempted a tawdry
restoration of the manners, customs, arts, and sciences of the Pyramid age
(U I0 9)-

The “ discoveries ” of the Greek philosophers dating from this age can be
definitely divided into two classes. These are divided by the clearly marked
sharpness of contrast in passing from one class to the other. On the one hand
there are enunciations that are certainly the result of mature thought and
experienced observation during a long succession of trained philosophers. On
the other hand, enunciations, clearly the result of less mature thought, and of
less experienced observation—more pertaining to the environment one would
associate with a nation’s first crude gropings amongst hypotheses of science—
were claimed as equally great discoveries of the same philosopher.

Thus Thales of Miletus—the first of the Greek philosophers to visit Egypt
for scientific instruction—while stating that the eclipses of the moon were
caused by the earth cutting off the sun’s light from the moon, indicated his
own ignorance of the necessary advanced conceptions for arriving at this
conclusion, by stating that the earth floated upon water. As to the extent of
his experience, prior to his visit to Egypt, that is given by Hieronymus of
Rhodes in his statement that Thales “ never had any teacher except during the
time he went to Egypt and associated with the Priests.” ( ap . Diog . Laer . I, 27).


The Advanced
Planetary
system of
Pythagoras.

Its Modern
Counter-part.
Absurdity of
“ First
Principles
alleged by
Pythagoras
as basal
premises of his
system.

Their

similarity

to the

mystifying

dogmas of

Egyptian

Priests.

The advanced
Planetary
System calls
for advanced
first

principles*


% 129. THE LEARNED EVASIONS OF PYTHAGORAS.

Pythagoras of Samos, who next of the Greek philosophers visited Egypt,
stated that all the planets revolved around a common centre. This was not
accepted by scientific circles in Europe until 2,000 years later. Pythagoras,
however, indicated the vast unlikelihood of his having originated this conception
by claiming to have deduced his system from “ fantastic first principles, of
which the following are examples : ‘ The circular motion is the most perfect
motion,’ ‘ Fire is more worthy than Earth,’ ‘ Ten is the perfect number.’ ” 2
These so-called “ first principles ” bear a striking resemblance to the mystifying
dogmas retailed by the Egyptian Priests—or to the catchword oratory of a
modern type of aspirant to state-control—chanted to satisfy inquiring reason
by voluminous reiteration rather than by wealth of argument. It is clear that
the true first principles were as much the product of the same advanced state

'Professor G. Forbes, “ History of Astronomy,” p. 14.


PYRAMID RECORDS


IOI


of knowledge as the advanced planetary hypothesis immediately deduced from
them, and that these advanced first principles were quite unknown to Pytha¬
goras,* and possibly unknown to his Egyptian instructors.

However this may be, it seems clear enough that Pythagoras derived his
system from the Egyptian Priests. It is certain that the latter were, for many
centuries, the custodians of much valuable scientific knowledge. This they ex¬
plained on premises palpably absurd, but admirably adapted to suit the end
they had in view.


That the latter
were unknown
to Pythagoras
indicates
system was not
deduced
by him.

His system
derived from
Egypt.

Had been
preserved by
Egyptians but
not deduced
by them.


If 130. THE LOST ART OF NUMERICAL AND GEOMETRICAL
EVALUATION.


The religious and philosophical conceptions preserved by the Egyptian pj-f*‘jjph£ a i f
Priests were similarly expressed by them in geometrical and numerical forms gjyp? with* in
that appear in no wise to suggest the symbolic use to which they were put, but and^meJicai
appear rather to suggest the traditional survival of a symbolism of which the


art was lost.


an Ancient
Symbolism.


Now it is a fact that there is a geometrical or numerical basis attaching
itself to most natural phenomena. We have merely to cite Kepler’s Laws of the and Numerical
planets, Newton’s Gravitational Laws, or Einstein’s Laws of Relativity (includ- Natural Law.
ing Newton’s Laws in the same mathematical category as the Laws of other gjjjjjg*
branches of Physics). There are also the complicated mathematical series Gravitational

. * , •'i AstfODOiuyt

associated with the formation of flower petals, and certain microscopical Botany, ^
growths, and the marvellous geometrical forms of snowflakes and crystals.


We are carried further in this subject by investigation of the Periodic Law The Periodic
of the Chemical Elements (and the connected periodicities of Isotopy), Radio- chTmidi*
activity, the Electronic Theory of Matter, Harmonics, etc. i«otTpy *


Radio-activity.


If 131. BODE’S LAW.


A close approximation to numerical harmony occurs in the case of the
planetary distances from the sun. This relationship is expressed by the series
of Bode’s Law—o, 3, 6, 12, 24, 48, 96,192, 384, where o is the origin at Mercury.
On this scale of relative distances, Mercury is distance 4 from the Sun. Adding
this to the series given, the relative distances from the Sun are, according to
Bode’s Law:— 4, 7, 10, 16, 28, 52, 100, 196, & 388,

the real distances beinjg

3.9, 7.2, 10, 15.2, -, 52, 95.4, 191.8, & 300.6.

In this series the distance of the Earth from the Sun is 10, and the outstanding
exception is the case of Neptune.


Bode's Law of

Planetary

Distances.


The Basis of
the Series
that Earth's
Distance^ 10.


102


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


The distance 28 in Bode’s series indicates the mean semi-major axis of the
belt of orbits of the 91 minor planets that lie between Mars (15.2) and Jupiter
(52).


Pythagoras on Now when we remember that the advanced Planetary System of Pytha-
t! 5s r * Utlon goras was claimed by him as derived from such “ first principles ” as “ Ten is
System.** the perfect number,” and that “ all things are numbers,” we see a possible hint
Wa* Bode’s that the relations of Bode’s Law were not unknown to the originators of the
ori^inStw? of system. Thus Dr. A. S. Pringle-Pattison states that in the Solar System of
the system? Pythagoras “The distance of the revolving orbs from the central fire was
determined according to simple numerical relations, and the Pythagoreans
combined their astronomical and musical discoveries in the famous doctrine of
‘ the harmony of the spheres.’ ”*


If 132. THE SOURCE OF THE PYTHAGOREAN THEORY THAT
“ALL THINGS ARE NUMBERS.”


Evidence of
a former
science of
Geometrical
and Numerical
Classification
and

Co-relation
of Data and
Phenomena.

Egyptian
attempts at
its revival
haphazard and
foolish.


There is evidence that in early Egyptian times there was a definite con¬
ception—derived undoubtedly from the former civilisation—associated with
the symbolising of phenomena and ideas on geometrical or numerical bases.
In the works of the later Egyptians, however, where such symbolical intention
can be traced, everything indicates that the geometrical and numerical symbol¬
ism was no longer associated with a rational basis. The symbolic art had been
lost. Nothing remained but a blind faith in its existence, and haphazard
and foolish attempts at its realisation in the case of the Egyptian King
Lists.


The Tradition This blind faith in a geometrical or numerical ordering of things and
Pythagoras phenomena—though applied haphazard—ruled the geometrical, astronomical,

independent 6 and musical systems of Pythagoras. The boundless enthusiasm and tireless
many V vaiuabie energy inseparable from faith of this nature, undoubtedly led Pythagoras to the
Geometrical 11 discovery of more geometrical and numerical problems and principles than he
Na e tuVIi e Uw. ever received from his Egyptian tutors. It is, however, clearly certain that
the bulk of his epoch-making “ discoveries ” and enunciations were derived
to be derived 00 from the Egyptians, and that similar advances in geometrical and astronomical
of < hUtorica* IS thought associated with his successors were likewise derived from Egypt and
Gr°eek e scfeiice. Chaldaea. No other conclusion is possible when one studies an analytic tabula¬
tion of the historical progress of Greek science. An analytic statement of this
character is given in Table X.

ULnc. Brit, (nth Edit.), Vol. XXII, p. 700a.


PYRAMID RECORDS


103


TABLE X.

SYNOPTICAL HISTORY OF GREEK GEOMETRY AND ASTRONOMY.


Thales (640-546 B.C .), of
Miletus .

About 600 B.C., visited
Egypt, and studied science
there.

Hieronymus of Rhodes (ap.
Diog. Laer I, 27) says, “ He
never had any teacher except
during the time when he went
to Egypt and associated with
the priests.” On his return
from Egypt he founded the
Ionian School of Astronomy
and Philosophy.


Pythagoras (569-470 B.C.), oj
Samos.

Travelled widely in the East,
visiting Chaldaea, and pene¬
trating as far as the Ganges.

About 500 B.C. he visited
Egypt, and studied science
there. Returning from his
travels, he founded a School of
Astronomy and Philosophy in
Sicily.

The Pythagorean doctrine
of the immortality of the soul
is clearly of Egyptian origin,
whereas the connected Pytha¬
gorean doctrine of transmigra¬
tion of the soul is certainly of a
more easterly origin.

The Pythagorean idea of
placing natural phenomena on
a numerical basis, of associat¬
ing numbers with conceptions
and entities, is also clearly
Egyptian in its origin. Thus
of the ancient Egyptians Dr.
Sprenger states “An idea, a
period of time, or any remark¬
able occurrence, were fre¬
quently connected with ideal
persons in mythology, and
when any similarity existed,
received the same appellation.”
(Vyse’s “ Pyds. and Temp, of
Gizeh,” Vol. II, Append.).
Hence the importance of the
following from Dr. A. S.
Pringle- Pe ttison : “I mpr essed
by the presence of numerical
relations in every department
of phenomena, Pythagoras and
his early followers enunciated
the doctrine that ‘all things are
numbers.’ Numbers seemed to


GEOMETRY

Originated the equation and
proportion, and was thus in a
sense the originator of Algebra.
Is recognised to have been the
founder not only of Greek
geometry, but also of Greek
astronomy and philosophy.
He also “ founded,” on a
scientific basis, the geometry
of the circle and of points and
lines. (Proclus, In primum
Euclidis Elementorum Librum
Commentarii; Prof. G. J.
Allman, “ Greek Geometry
from Thales to Euclid ” ; Enc.
Brit., Vol. 26, pp. 720-721.)


Originated that branch of geo¬
metry associated with his
name, and dealing chiefly with
areas and solids. He is credited
with a knowledge of certain
properties of Conic Sections,
and the discovery of the law of
the three squares (Euclid I, 47)
is attributed to him. Diogenes
Laertius states that “ it was
Pythagoras who carried geo¬
metry to perfection, after
Moeris (Amenemhat III of the
Xllth Egyptian Dynasty) had
first found out the principles of
the elements of that science..

.; and the part of the

science to which Pythagoras
applied himself above all
others was arithmetic.” Prof.
Allman states “According to
Aristoxenus, the musician,
Pythagoras seems to have
esteemed arithmetic above
everything, and to have ad¬
vanced it by diverting it from
the service of commerce and
by likening all things to num¬
bers. Diogenes Laertius (viii,
13) reports on the same au¬
thority that Pythagoras was
the first person who introduced
measures and weights among
the Greeks.” In the system of
Pythagoras “ Ten ” was a
sacred number and the most
perfect number. He was ac¬
quainted with arithmetical,
geometrical, and harmonical
proportion, and concerned
himself with finding


ASTRONOMY

He taught “ that the sun,
moon, and stars are not mere
spots on the heavenly vault,
but solids ; that the moon
derives her light from the sun,
and that this fact explains her
phases ; that an eclipse of the
moon happens when the earth
cuts off the sun’s light from
her.” (Prof. G. Forbes’ “Hist.
Astron.” p. 13). He also taught
the sphericity of the earth, and
the obliquity of the ecliptic.
(Dr. F. R. Moulton’s “ Celes¬
tial Mechanics,” p. 30 ; Miss
A. Clerke in “ Enc. Brit ” Vol.
2, p. 809.)


“ He taught that the earth
both rotates and revolves, and
that the comets as well as the
planets move in orbits around
the sun. He is credited with
being the first to maintain that
the same planet, Venus, is both
evening and morning star at
different times.” (Moulton,
P- 3 1 *)

Pythagoras “ learned on his

travels.to recognise the

obliquity of the ecliptic, and to
regard the earth as a sphere
freely poised in space. The
tenet of its axial movement
was held by many of his fol¬
lowers.” (Miss A. M. Clerke,
Enc. Brit., Vol. 2, p. 809.)

“ Copernicus in the six¬
teenth century claimed Pytha¬
goras as the founder of the
(heliocentric) system which
he, Copernicus, revived.”
(Forbes, p. 14.)

Authorities, however, differ
as to whether the system of
Pythagoras was truly helio¬
centric. Thus Dr. A. S.
Pringle-Pattison (Enc. Brit.,
Vol. 22, pp. 699-700) states
that the Pythagoreans con¬
ceived “ the earth as a globe
self-supported in empty space
revolving with other planets
round a central luminary....
The Pythagoreans did not,
however, put the sun in the
centre of the system. That
place was filled by the central
fire.”


104


THE GREAT PYRAMID : ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


TABLE X—( continued ).


GEOMETRY

geometrical representations of
numbers. He also elaborated
the conceptions of the equa¬
tion and proportion as “ ori¬
ginated ” by Thales.

(Authorities as above, and
Enc. Brit., Vol. 22, pp. 700-

703.)


ASTRONOMY

The intermediate interpreta¬
tion of Prof. G. Forbes seems
the most likely interpretation.
This is that Pythagoras “ is
supposed to have said that the
earth, moon, five planets, and
fixed stars all revolve round
the sun, which itself revolves
round an imaginary central fire
called the Antichthon.” This
conception is quite modern.


them, as Aristotle put it, to be
the first things in the whole of
nature, and they supposed the
elements of numbers to be the
elements of all things, and the
whole heaven to be a musical
scale and number. {Meta. A.

986a.). Numbers, in other
words, were conceived at that
early stage of thought not as
relations or qualities predicable
of things, but as themselves
constituting the substance or essence of the
phenomena—-the rational reality to which the
appearances of sense are reducible.” (Enc.
Brit., Vol. 22, p. 699.) Pythagoras discovered


Democritus {circ. 570-460 B.C.).

He studied astronomy for 5 years (or 7
years ?) in Egypt (Diodor., i, 98), and claimed
to have been a disciple of the Egyptian priests
and the Magi, having visited also Persia and
Babylon (Clem. Str., i, p. 304). He knew of the
obliquity of the ecliptic.


—or more probabty derived from the Egyptians
—the mathematical proportions of the inter¬
vals of the diatonic scale.


Anaxagoras (born 499 B C ) studied as¬
tronomy in Egypt. “ He held that in a solar
eclipse the moon hides the sun, and in a lunar
eclipse the moon enters the earth’s shadow.”
(Forbes, p. 14).


Eudoxus (408-355 B.C.) of
Cnidus .

Visited Egypt with Plato.


Plato (429-350 B.C.), the

Athenian philosopher.

Visited Egypt and Cyrene.
In Egypt he conversed with
the Egyptian priests. He was
the pupil of Socrates, and was
a follower of Pythagoras.


His geometrical work com¬
prised the establishing of ex¬
pressions for the volumes of
the pyramid, prism, cone, and
cylinder.


In astronomy, he first sug¬
gested arbitrarily represent¬
ing the apparent motions of
the sun, moon, and planets as
taking place upon revolving
spheres ; the motion of each
planet being resolved into its
components, each component
being given a separate revolv¬
ing sphere. The hypothesis
was not stated as an acttial
belief, but rather as a mathe¬
matical conception—failing
any then more satisfactory
conception—to permit of the
formulating of rules and meth¬
ods for making astronomical
calculations. This system—
the Eudoxian or ” homocen¬
tric ”—was elaborated by
Callipus and Aristotle in the
middle of the 4th century
B.C. (about 350-330 B.C.)


Plato touched upon astronomical and geometrical questions,
only when these came within the scope of his system of
philosophy. In no strict sense can he be termed a mathe¬
matician nor yet an astronomer. He, however, “ proposed to
astronomers the problem of representing the courses of the planets
by circular and uniform motions. ” (Forbes, p. 17 .)


PYRAMID RECORDS


105


TABLE X— (continued).


Euclid lived during the reign
of Ptolemy I, king of
Egypt (323-285 B.C.)
He is said to have founded
the school of mathematics at
Alexandria.


GEOMETRY


Euclid’s great geometrical
work is “The Elements,”
contained in thirteen books,
in which is laid down the
fundamental basis of that
branch of modern mathematics
known as Euclidian geometry.


ASTRONOMY :—

One work, Euclid’s Phaeno -
mena, is of an astronomical
nature and deals with prob¬
lems concerning the apparent
motion of the celestial sphere.


It is generally admitted that few of the pro¬
positions, theorems, etc., in Euclid’s Elements
are original. Euclid merely compiled and
arranged the hitherto* unsystematized geo¬
metrical work of his predecessors. He placed


the geometry of the line and the circle on a
soundly logical basis and in a sequence that has
had more influence upon modern method than
authorities have taken the pains to note or
admit.


Aristyllus and Timocharis ( circ.

320-260 B.C.) of the They observed at Alexan-

school of Alexandria. dria, and constructed the first

star-catalogue.


He wrote a work on “Magnitudes and Distances” describing
a theoretically sound method of determining the relative
distances oi the sun and moon. He correctly determined the
sun’s diameter at half a degree, and according to Archimedes
had formulated a heliocentric planetary system in advance of
the more complicated heliocentric system of the Pythagoreans.


Aristarchus (320-250 B.C.) of
Samos.

Studied astronomy at
Alexandria.


Archimedes {circ. 287-212 B.C.)
of Syracuse in Sicily.
Studied mathematics at
Alexandria.


Eratosthenes (276-196 B.C.)

A . Greek astronomer in
charge of the library at Alex¬
andria in the reign of Ptolemy
III, Euergetes.


His geometrical works com¬
prise treatises on the sphere
and cylinder, on the measure¬
ment of the circle (showing
that the value of 7r is between
3^ and 3|f), on conoids and
spheroids, on spirals, etc.


A work of an astronomical
nature was his now lost work
On Sphere-making. Professor
F. R. Moulton under the head¬
ing of “ Dynamical Astro¬
nomy,” states that “ Archi¬
medes is the author of the first
sound ideas regarding mechan¬
ical laws. He stated correctly
the principles of the lever and
the meaning of the centre of

gravity of a body.

.It is a remarkable fact

that no single important ad¬
vance was made in the dis¬
covery of mechanical laws for
nearly 2000 years after Archi¬
medes, or until the time of
Stevinus (1548-1620), who was
the first, in 1586, to investi¬
gate the mechanics of the in¬
clined plane, and of Galileo
(1564-1642), who made the
first important advance in
Kinetics.”


He determined (approximately correct) the value of the
obliquity of the Ecliptic, and the circumference of the earth.
His version of the Egyptian Dynastic Chronology contains
periods derived from Genesis, from the true period of the
Precession of the Equinoxes, and from the Pyramid base
measure in common Egyptian cubits. (Refer Plate XVI and
94 and 102.)


io6


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Apollonius of Perga
Lived during the reigns of
Ptolemy III Euergetes, and
Ptolemy IV Philopater (B.C.
247-205). He studied mathe¬
matics at Alexandria.


TABLE X—( continued).

GEOMETRY

Apollonius wrote the famous
treatise on conic sections that
earned for him the title, “ the
great geometer.**


ASTRONOMY

In astronomy Apollonius
originated the working hypo¬
thesis of epicycles, which
hypothesis formed the basis
lor all astronomical concep¬
tions and observations from
Ptolemy to Copernicus. The
hypothesis of epicycles origin¬
ated from the “ homocentric ”
system of Eudoxus, but was a
considerable advance on the
latter, from point of view of
application to practical prob¬
lems.


Hipparchus (190-120 B.C.)

Bom at Nicaea in Bithynia.
He settled at Rhodes and
possibly later at Alexandria.


He founded the science of
trigonometry, plane and spher¬
ical, and compiled the first
table of chords.


He is similarly stated to have invented the
planisphere, which, however, he borrowed
from the Chaldasans. Astronomical historians
are now generally agreed that Hipparchus
owed much of his observational data to the
long series of observations that had been
carried out by the Chaldaeans for many cen¬
turies, if not for close on 2000 years, before his
time. Thus Prof. Forbes states (p. 18) that
“ making use of Chaldaean eclipses, he was able
to get an accurate value of the moon’s mean
motion.” This is in fact stated by Ptolemy in
his Almagest. (Refer Prof. Simon Newcomb’s
use of the data of Hipparchus and Ptolemy, in
his “ Researches on the motion of the Moon,”
published by U.S.A. Govt. Printing Office,
1878.)

Probably much of the Chaldaean data of
Hipparchus was derived from the works of the
Chaldaean priest of Bel, Berosus or Berossus
(the Greek form of his name), who “ appears to
have compiled his works in the reign of
Antiochos II, B.C. 261-46.” (Brown’s “ Prim.
Constell.” Vol. II, p. 331.) As Mr. Brown
states, “ he (Berosus) also compiled various
astronomical treatises, which have unfor¬
tunately been lost ; they furnished material
for Greek writers such as Diodoros, and the
most important of them was a translation of
what Prof. Sayce calls * the standard astro¬
logical work of the Babylonians and Assyrians.’

.Opinions of Berosos respecting the moon

have been preserved by Plutarch, Stobaios, and
Vitruvius, and the latter ( De Architect, IX, iv,
7) states that he treated of the properties of
the signs of the Zodiac, of the planets, and of
the sun and moon ; and that he established a
school of learning in the island of Kos.” Kos
or Cos, the modern Turkish Island of Stanko,


He is said to have founded
the science of observational
astronomy. More accurately,
we may say that he was the
first of a long series of practi¬
cal astronomers whose obser¬
vations were placed on record.

is at the mouth of the Gulf of Halicarnassus
(Asia Minor), and about 50 miles North-West
of the Island of Rhodes where Hipparchus had
settled.

Centuries before Hipparchus, the Chaldaeans,
Egyptians, and Chinese knew of the ” Pre¬
cession of the Equinoxes.” It is, however,
claimed for Hipparchus that he discovered the
“ Precession ” quite independently of the
ancients from a comparison of his own observa¬
tions and those of Timocharis at Alexandria.
Syncellus in his “ Chronographia ” states that
the “ fabled period ” of the Precession, amongst
the Egyptians and Greeks, was a period of 25
Sothic Cycles of 1461 “ years,” or altogether
36,525 years. This gives a rate of 35^" of
angle per year, and the rate determined by
Hipparchus was estimated by him as not less
than 36L As to whether the rate of Hippar¬
chus was influenced by the rate of the " fabled
period ” noted by Syncellus, or that of Syncel¬
lus derived from Hipparchus it is for our
further discussion to show.

Hipparchus was the first to observe and
appreciate the elements of the orbit of the
earth, (or rather the apparent orbit of the sun),
and the orbit of the moon, and by many bold
conceptions based on his own vast experience
of celestial observation—conceptions that were
vastly in advance of his times—he anticipated
in many features the basal requirements of the
modern astronomical Ephemeris. He com¬
piled the first solar tables, and also compiled a
catalogue of 1080 stars on a constellational
basis borrowed from the Chaldaeans. His
realization of the eccentricities of the orbits
was a further great advance in geometrical
astronomy. He, however, believed that all
bodies revolved round the earth as centre.


PYRAMID RECORDS


107


TABLE X—( continued ).


Menelaus of Alexandria flourished towards
the end of the 1st century B.C. His mathe¬
matical work considerably advanced the
science of Spherical Trigonometry and
Astronomy.

Ptolemy ( fl . cite. 120-160 A.D.) was a native
Egyptian, famous not only for his classical
treatment of mathematical, astronomical, and
geographical problems, but also for his having
preserved in his great astronomical work, the
Almagest, astronomical and chronological
data—containing observations and records of
Hipparchus and the Chaldaeans—that has
enabled history to be placed on a scientifically


accurate basis.

Ptolemy may be said to have done for the
spherical geometry and trigonometry of Hip¬
parchus and Menelaus what Euclid did for the
work of the earlier geometers. He also com¬
bined and systematized the “ eccentric ”
hypothesis of Hipparchus, and the “ epi-
cyclic ” hypothesis of Apollonius of Perga.


If 133. THE QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE RELATIONS OF
EGYPTIAN AND GREEK KNOWLEDGE.

One obvious conclusion is to be derived from the analytic statement of
Table X. This is, that if what Pythagoras learnt in Egypt enabled him to
construct a system of geometry and astronomy excelling that of his teachers,
there was clearly no necessity for his successors to visit Egypt for further
knowledge of geometry and astronomy.


Successive

Greek

Philosophers
visited Egypt
for reason that
their

predecessors
had merely
touched the
fringes of
Egyptian
Knowledge.


It is also obvious that the Egyptian priests would scarcely permit the
Greeks to learn as much geometry and astronomy as they themselves knew, and
that the Greeks—quick to discern scientific knowledge in the meagre information
meted out to them—would have been equally quick to discern when no further
knowledge was available. From this it would seem to follow that most, if not £3°,“he cJelks
all, of the knowledge independently discovered by the Greeks was previously anTn^aificIm
known to the Egyptians. For although the Greeks made great advances in kn a o C wiedg 0 e f '* b9
geometry and astronomy, the fact remains that they still continued to seek |ri y esti an *
improvement in Egypt. This is the fact that gives some measure of the amount p° 88e8sed *
of geometrical and astronomical knowledge that the Egyptian Priests possessed
—knowledge of these subjects as distinct from understanding concerning their
origination and the derivation of their first principles.


U 134. GREEK MEASURES AND SCIENCE CONTEMPORANEOUSLY
FROM EGYPT.

Greek

Of this knowledge we have already had evidence in our consideration of the Gre^k etry and
origin of the Egyptian systems of measures. The connection between geometry fJom U Egy P t
and measures naturally suggests that the Greeks derived both from Egypt *"*?em P or-
about the same time. Thus, as noted by Herodotus in the 5th century B.C., derivation.


io8


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


»ndits fSamo# the inhabitants of Samos were already using the Egyptian common cubit of
relations 10 * 20.63 B". It is the existence of this cubit, and the obvious manner of its

grounds for derivation, that led to the discovery of the relatively high geometrical and

•ppUcatToVof mathematical skill attained by the former civilisation from which the oral
traditions of the ancient Egyptians had descended.


That

Pythagoras
came from
Samos suggests
origin of his
interest in
Geometry.

Credited with
Introduction
of Weights and
Measures
amongst
Hellenes after
his visit to
Egypt.


The Pytha¬
gorean
Systems of
Astronomy,
Measures and
Numbers
derived from
an Original
System
in use by the
Lost.

Civilisation of
“ Prehistoric ”
Times.


The use of this cubit in Samos would naturally lead to the Samians making
further inquiry concerning its application to the measurement of areas. Not
improbably it was this desire that led Pythagoras—whose earlier years are
identified with Samos—to interest himself in the measurement of areas. Now
it is stated by Aristoxenos, the musician, that Pythagoras “ was the first
person who introduced weights and measures amongst the Hellenes ” (Diog.
Laert. Pythagoras , xiii), and Professor G. J. Allman 1 states that “ on examining

the purely geometrical work of Pythagoras and his disciples.we observe

that it is much concerned with the geometry of areas, and we are indeed struck
with its Egyptian character.”

It is certain, therefore, that the basal geometry of the Pythagorean system
was that of the Egyptians. This Egyptian system was based upon the con¬
ception of the year circle and its square of equal area—from which the Samian
or common Egyptian cubit was derived—and was derived originally from the
scientific system of the civilisation that had preceded the period of the early
Egyptian, Babylonian, and Mediterranean civilisations. It is to this former lost
civilisation that we must refer the origination of the heliocentric planetary
system of Pythagoras.

*Enc. Brit, (nth Edit.), Vol. XXII, p. 701c.


PYRAMID RECORDS


109


Section III. —Description of Plates.


If 135. PLATE XIII. EQUAL AREAS.

A rectangle constructed of length equal to the circumference of any given circle and of
breadth equal to the diameter of the given circle is in area equal to four times the area of the
given circle.

Thus, let C = Circumference of Given Circle*
and D = Diameter of Given Circle.

* =^-= 3 -I 4 I 59 +-

c

Then C = ttD, Therefore D = —

7T

Area of Circle --

4

C

4 times Area of Circle = 7 tD 2 = 77D x D = ttD x — = D x C*

7 7

Area of Rectangle of area 4 times area of circle = D x C.

Also, square of area 4 time s area of circle = DxC.

Side of Square = VD x C.

The ancients formulated their metrological systems upon the above relations and the
year circle of 3652.42 Primitive inches in circumference—a representation of the solar year
to the scale of 10 P inches 'to the day. This gave a circle of 1162.6 diameter. Four of
such circles are represented as A, B, C, and D on Plate XIII. EFGH is the corresponding
rectangle of equal area. Its length FH= EG = 3652,42 P // ., and its breadth EF=GH =
1162.6 P.*. KLMN is the corresponding square of equal area. Area KLMN = (3652.42 x
1162.6) square P. inches. Side of square = KL= LN= V3652.42 x 1162.6= 2060.66 P.*.
The three equal areas—4 circles, rectangle, and square—were defined as the aroura, the
great unit of square measure.

Each of the circles A, B, C, and D falls precisely internal to the outer circle of stones
at Stonehenge.

The circumference of 3652.42 P* was divided into 200 circumferential cubits of
18.2621 P*. The diameter of 1162.6 P" was divided into 100 diametric feet of 11.626 P*.
The side of the square of equal area (the aroura) was divided into 100 common cubits of
20.6066 P". This supplied three systems of linear units—a system of circumferential units,
a system of diametric units, and a system for the linear measurement of straight line plane
figures. Each system has its own cubits, feet, and digits.

The three systems were therefore derived from a system of Primitive Inches. The
Primitive inch was of the value of 1.0011 British inches. Accidentally or intentionally,
this is a 500 millionth part of the Earth’s Polar Diameter.

The derived systems were originally invented for common use for the purpose of avoiding
calculations involving 7r. Simple formulae connected the three systems. The result of one
such simple calculation is shown in the lower portion of Plate XIII. Here the strip

of the aroura square is equal to the area of the segment of the circle of radius 50 diametric
feet and of arc length 12 circumferential feet. Typical formulae for the calculations are
given in *[ 137C.

The original or basal system and the three derived systems are illustrated to comparative
scale on Plate XV (refer 137, 137a, b and c for description, formulae, and worked
examples).


Area of any 4
equal circles*
diameter (D) x
circumference

(C).

Defines a
rectangle of
area equal to
area ot 4
circles.

Side of square-
af area equal to>
are a of 4 c ircles
-✓DxC


Bans of

Primitive
Scientific
Metrological
System :—
3652.4 P. inches*
circumference
x 1162.6 P.
inches
diameter
defines
rectangle of
equal area.

The M Aroura.'*'

Stonehenge
Circle* i-
“ Aroura "
Circle

Derivation of
three systems
for common
use.

Separate
Cubits, Feet,
and Digits for
circumfer¬
ences,

diameters, and
linear

measurement
of straight line<
plane figures

The original
or Basai
system, a
system of
Earth's Polar
diameter
inches.

Simple
formulss
avoiding 7T<

Typical
example of
calculated
equal areas.


no


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Simple
relationship
between
Quadrants and
their Isosceles
Triangles of
equal area and
equal definitive
linear
measures


The underlying
conception of
circular arc
developments.

The

importance
of a the

Mid-tangent
in the
conception.


Similar sectors
developed give
similar
triangles.

Areas in
comparative
series equal.


1 136. PLATE XIV. GEOMETRICAL ANALOGY.

As a corollary of the relationship of Tf 135, the area of a quadrant of a given circle =
Length of Quadrant arc x \ radius. This defines the area of a triangle of area equal to the
quadrant area. The perpendicular height of the triangle = the quadrant radius and the
base of the triangle = the length of the quadrant arc.

Plate XIV shows the relationship for the case of two similar isosceles triangles mOn and
HiiOim, and two quadrants MON and MxOiNx.

Larger Figures. Smaller Figures.

Triangle height h = Quadrant radius h. Triangle height h t —Quadrant radius h x

Triangle base mn=Quadrant arc MN. Triangle base m x n x == Quadrant arc M X N x .

Triangle area mOn — Quadrant area ONQMO Triangle area m x O x n x =Quadrant area O X N X Q X M x O x

The base angle of both triangles is the base angle of the Great Pyramid’s right vertical
section, 5 i°- 5 i'-i 4 *. 3 -

The conception underlying this representation in the Pyramid is that the Isosceles
triangle of area equal to the quadrant area is constructed from the development of the
quadrant arc on its mid-tangent. Thus on left hand side of middle Plate XIV, Q is the
middlepoint of the quadrant arc MQN and mQn is the tangent at mid-point Q. The quadrant
arc MQN is developed on to the tangent mQn, so that when QM is straightened out along Qm,
M gives the point m, and when QN is straightened out along Qn, N gives the point n. The
process is illustrated on the bottom left hand figure. Hence QM = Qm, QN = Qn, and MQN =
mQn. Joining Om and On, we find that although the area has been distorted and the
definitive linear dimensions retained,—OQ common to both, and MQN = mQn—the area of
the isosceles triangle mOn is nevertheless equal to the area of the quadrant OMQNO. When
one comes to think of it, this is a very remarkable and simple property. It is, however, a
property that is seldom conceived in tangible form by the mathematician.

The same conception and simple relationship extend to sectors and triangles. Similar
sectors, when developed, give similar triangles, each of area equal to the area of its sector, and
of definitive dimensions equal to the definitive dimensions of its sector.


f 137. PLATE XV. COMPARISON OF ANCIENT SCALES OF MEASUREMENT.

Derivation foot, and the common cubit were derived from the original linear unit, the Primitive Inch.
Orde Year Direct diagrammatic illustration is given in the lower portion of Plate XV. This gives a
Primitive fnch re P resentat * on (right hand figure) of an Egyptian cubit rod noted by Professor Petrie. 1 Its
‘ length is the circumferential cubit, and on it is marked off the length of the diametric half¬
foot. The right hand figure illustrates the manner of direct derivation from the vear circle
geometry and the original Primitive inch.

THE DIAMETRIC SCALE:—

The Diametric With the derived diametric foot (11.626 P*) as basis, this was divided off into 16 digits—

Scale. each of value 0.7266 P". The number of digits is from Petrie. 1

unit P the ,ary Whereas one and a half diametric feet contained 24 diametric digits, the diametric cubit

of*ff e « 26 C foot was reckoned to contain 25 diametric digits. This is the real origin of “the well-known
primitive ratio of 25 : 24,” noted by Petrie. 1 (Refer If If 88-90.)

inches.

‘Enc. Brit, (nth Edit.), Vol. xxviii, p. 483 c.


PYRAMID RECORDS


hi


THE CIRCUMFERENTIAL SCALE:—


The


With the derived circumferential cubit (18.2621 P*) as basis, this was divided off, like
the diametric cubit, into 25 digits—each of value 0.7305 P*. The number of digits is from *“ ia ca e#
Petrie. 1 The circumferential cubit also contained one and a half circumferential feet. 1 unit P th? arT
Petrie here remarks that this foot “ although very well known in literature, is but rarely circumfer^ ^

found.The Greek system, however, adopted this foot as a basis for decimal multi- is.2621

plication.” (Refer 88 and 89).


THE LINEAR SCALE FOR SIDES OF RECTILINEAR AREAS:—

With the derived cubit (20.6066 P") as basis, this was divided off into 32 digits—each of fiJ^SquarV*
value 0.644 P*. The number of digits in the early Babylonian and Egyptian examples of Measures,
this cubit is from Petrie. 2 Petrie explains that the later division into 28 digits was due to a its primary
confusion of this system with the systems herein defined as diametric and circumferential, common cubit
Thus, 28 circumferential digits = 20.454 P", closely approximating to the true value of
20.6066 P" for the common cubit. inches.


Let Diameter
Circumference


If 137a. THE ALGEBRAIC RELATIONSHIP OF UNITS. (PLATE XV.)

For any given circle,

D diametric cubits = d diametric feet = 8 diametric digits.

B circumferential cubits
= b circumferential feet
= P circumferential digits.

Side of Square of equal area

= L common cubits
= A digits of common cubit,
j L 2 square cubits (common)
or H square cubits (common)

A 2 sq. digits
or h sq. digits

25D


Area of Circle =


=i,


A arourae .


Then 8

P


And


A

b
B

L

A

H

h

A =-


i6d

5°b^

3
32L

3d )

2d I

-1_)

2 r

i6d i
d 2
4

(i6d) 2

d 2 )

40,000 )


= 25B


(1)

(*>

(3)

(i)

(ii)

(in)

(IV)


Algebraic

Symbols.


formulae of
relationship
between units
of same scale.


Formulae of
relationship
between units
of different
scales.


If any one value— A B b, d, H, h, L, or A—be given, all the other values can be found Method of
directly from the formulae I to IV. using form

If any one of the values D, 8, or ft is then required, it can be derived from formulae
(i)and(2).

x Enc. Brit. (11 tli Edit.), Vol. xxviii, p. 483 b.

2 Ibid. p. 482 d.


112


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


If any one of the values D, 8, or ft is given, its value in terms of d—for D and 8—and
in terms of b or B for /?, can be found from formulae (i) and (2), and thereafter substituted
in formulae I to IV, as


d

l6


or b


B = A.

5 ° 25


If 137b. EXAMPLES OF SIMPLE RELATIONS. (PLATE XV).


An important
simple relation
between
diameter and
side of square
of equal area.


One important relation is obtained from the formulae as follows :—

A given diameter =8 diametric digits.

From Formula (II) :—

Length of side of square of equal area, in digits of common cubit=A= i6d.


From (1) :— 8 = i6d.

Hence A == 8.


Otherwise expressed, the length of side of the square of area equal to the area of a given
circle contains the same number of digits of the common cubit as the diameter of the given
circle contains diametric digits.

A worked example of the above is given for a circle of diameter measuring 2,000 diametric

Example for a digits,
given

diameter r— FOR DIAMETER :—


Various

statements for
diameter in _
different units.


From (1) :— 8 = 2,000 diametric digits.

1 8 .. . r 2,000

d = 7" diametric feet =-—

16 16


D =


125 diametric feet.

8 .. . . . 2,000

— diametric cubits =--

2 5 . . 25

= 80 diametric cubits.


For Circumference :—

From (1), (2) and (I):—


Various

statements for
circumference
in different
units.


ft — ~ 2 ^ circumferential digits = 2 5 x 2, o oo _

= 6,250 circumferential digits.

. 38 . . . , _ 2x2,000

b = 2 circumferential feet =—-7-

16 16

— 375 circumferential feet.

8 . . .... 2,000
B = -^-circumferential cubits = —5—

o O

= 250 circumferential cubits.


Various
statements
(linear and
square) for
square of equal
area in

different units.


For Side of Square of Equal Area :—

A = 8 = 2,000 digits of common cubit.

L = —= 62^ common cubits.

3 2

Area of Square of Equal Area :—

A 2 = 2,000x2,000 = 4 million sq. digits of common cubit*

L 2 ==r ("^") — 39°6- 2 5 sq. (common) cubits.

. d 2 125 x12s

A =-=---— = o. 30062 5 aroura.

40,000 40,000


PYRAMID RECORDS


1 137c. THE SIMPLE CALCULATIONS FOR AREAS OF SECTORS AND
SEGMENTS OF CIRCLES.

Let m = No. of Circumferential Cubits in a given Sector arc, of diameter d diametric feet,
for circle of B circumferential cubits.

d 2

Area of whole circle =-common square cubits. (From If 137a, Formula III).


Number of the given sectors in circle =
~ . d 2


: m (If 137a, Formula I).


Therefore, Area of given Sector = —— x ^— common square cubits.

Otherwise expressed, the area of a given sector in common square cubits is equal to
one-eighth the product of the number of circumferential cubits in the sector arc and the
number of diametric feet in the diameter of the circle ; or, is equal to a quarter of the product
of the number of circumferential cubits in the sector arc and the number of diametric feet
in the radius of the circle.

To obtain the area of the segment in the given sector, in common square cubits, deduct
the area of the isosceles triangle of the given sector from the area of the sector as above
obtained in common square cubits.


Arm of sector
in common
square
cnbit«=
i-sector arc in
circumfer¬
ential cubits x
Radius in
dia metric foot.


The area of
segment^ area
of sector—area
of sector
triangle.


t 138. PLATE XVI. CHART SHOWING THE GEOMETRICAL, ASTRONOMICAL,
AND NUMERICAL BASES OF THE FICTITIOUS CHRONOLOGIES OF
THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN KING LISTS.

General remarks :—

The chart is a record of facts that have been long in existence—in some cases for several
thousand years. The elements that are distinctly new are the co-ordination of these facts
and the self-evident origin and significance of the facts revealed by this co-ordination.

The outstanding new facts derived from the statement of the chart are the following :—

(1) That the Egyptian King Lists of the Egyptian Priest, Manetho, do not contain a

true statement of ancient Egyptian Chronology, (Iffl 92, 118 and 119.)

(2) That prior to the 3rd century B.C., the Egyptians knew nothing concerning the

hypothesis now adopted as the basis of modern Egyptological chronology, (^f 98
and Appendix.)

(3) That the King Lists contain a written record of the numerical values of all the

external linear and angular measurements of a Standard Pyramid ( 1 fi[ 93, 95-
99, n 8 and 119), in terms of units specified in the Lists as of values equal to
1.0011 British inches and 20.63 British inches respectively, (^f 94.)

(4) That the Standard Pyramid of the Egyptian King Lists is the Great Pyramid of

Gizeh. (^[ 94, 99-101 and 118.)

The complete statement of Manetho’s Divine Dynasties is as given in Table A of chart.
This is precisely as stated by Sir Ernest Budge, “ Book of Kings,” Vol. I, pp. lx and lxi.

The detailed statement of Manetho’s Human Dynasties is as given in the Appendix.
This is precisely as stated in Baron Bunsen’s Greek and Latin Text (“ Egypt’s Place,” Vol. I,
Appendix), for the versions of Africanus and Eusebius, and in Cory’s 4 4 Fragments ” (Hodge’s i
Edition, 1876). The other lists are preserved in the same works. Statements of Manetho’s j
Lists also appear in Budge’s “ Book of Kings,” Vol.I, his “ History of Egypt,” Vol. I, in |
Saycg’s “ Ancient Empires of the East ” (Appendix), and in the various volumes of Petrie’s
“ History of Egypt.” These, however, generally omit some important details and state¬
ments peculiar to the Version of Africanus. Budge’s statement (“Book of Kings,” Vol. I)
of the basal totals of years for the Version of Eusebius for Manetho’s Book I, II and III
has been adopted in the chart (Table B). The stated totals for the same books, according
to the Version of Africanus, have been adopted from Cory in the chart (Table B).


Fact* Lmi
K nown.

Co-ordination

Now.

Now facta
from

Co-ordination.

Chronology of
Egyptian King
Lists fictitious.

Modern
Egyptological
theory of
chronology
unknown.

A written
record of the
measurements
and units of a
Standard
Pyramid.

The Standard
Pyramid is the
Great
Pyramid.


Authorities for
statement of
Egyptian King
Lists.


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


114


1 138a. SOME DETAILS CONCERNING THE VERSION OF AFRICANUS.


call


after Reigning
95 Years.


Stated
duration
Dynasty VI
(Africanus)
203 years.

Added

Duration 198
Years.


Four features affecting the statement of the Version of Africanus in Tables B and C
for special remark.

(1) Under Dynasty VI, it is stated that the fourth king, “ PhiSps, who began to reign
at six years of age, reigned till he had completed his ioo year.” The stated
total for the duration of the dynasty—given as 203 years—includes reign of
Phiops (Pepy II) as of duration of 100 years. Accordingly “ 203 years ” appears
in the summations giving one series of fictitious totals for Book I. But the
reign of Pepy II was 94 or 95 years, and the total of the Dynasty therefore 197
or 198. Petrie (Hist. Egypt, Vol. I, Dyn. VI) adopts 95 and 198 years
respectively. This agrees with the summations giving another series of fictitious
totals for Book I, whereas 94 and 197 years fail to give summations agreeing
with any fictitious system.


Dynasty XVIII.
Amosis I.

Statement of
duration of
reign, 25 years,
omitted, but
included in
added

summations of
some systems.


The 1050 Years
of Africanus,
Book III.


Interregnum
between
Dynasties XIX
and XX.


Harris

Papyrus.

Duration,

182 Years
(Africanus).

178 Years
(Old Chronicle)


The 990 years
interpolated in
Version
Africanus.


The query
concerning
31 years.


Custom of
entering, such
queries in
MSS.


The Entry of
990 Years.

A query'
concerning
this as

referring to a
period to
complete a
requisite total.


(2) Under Dynasty XVIII the name of the first king appears as Amosis (Amosis I),

with duration of reign omitted. Other versions give this reign as 25 years.
Accordingly one series of fictitious totals for Book I, Version Africanus, omits
the reign of 25 years, and another series includes the reign as 25 years;
both series supplying the numerical bases of their respective systems of fictitious
construction.

(3) In Book III the stated total duration of time after Dynasty XIX and up to end

of Dynasty XXXI is given as 1,050 years, whereas the added stated totals for
Dynasties XX to XXXI inclusive amount to 868 years. This indicated the
theory of an interregnum of 182 years between Dynasty XIX and Dynasty XX.
Such an interregnum is mentioned in the Harris Papyrus. This was written
in the early period of Dynasty XX, under king Ramessu III, who was closely
associated with the events that terminated the Interregnum. It would seem
that there are good grounds for adopting this theory of the Version of Africanus.

Again, the Old Chronicle gives the statement of 2,324 years for the duration
of all human Dynasties. Its stated totals for duration of Dynasties, however,
amount to 1,881 years. This gives an unplaced interregnum of 178 years—
4 years short of the total of Africanus for the Interregnum between Dynasty
XIX and Dynasty XX. As the Old Chronicle totals for Dynasties XX to XXX
inclusive amount to 868 years—as in Dynasties of Book III, Africanus—it
would appear that the two periods are identical.

(4) At the end of Dynasty XXIV in the Version of Africanus, there occurs the state¬

ment “ Total 990 years.”

Now in the statement of the previous dynasty there occurs a note that
throws some light upon this. The note is Zrjr err] Aa, read as 44 Zet
31 years.” For long Zet was supposed to be an unknown king’s name. It
appears in no other version of any List. Professor Petrie and Mr. F. W. Read
have shown, however, that tprjr was commonly entered in such MSS. as
Manetho’s by editors, critics and scholiasts to indicate a query. 1 Petrie explains
that Manetho here added a query concerning 31 years that belonged to a system
of summation, but could not be accounted for by the summation of details.
The added totals of Africanus, including the 31 years noted, by agreeing with
the system framing the summations, confirm Petrie’s explanation.

The summation of Plate XVI, Table A indicates that the statement of
Africanus concerning the 990 years is to be similarly explained. 990 years
added to 24,837 years, the duration of the Divine Dynasties, give 25,827 years,
the sum of the Pyramid’s base diagonals. 990 years added to the 4,611 years
of Eusebius for the human kings, give the 5,601 years of Africanus for the human
kings.

x Ancient Egypt , 1914, p. 32. 1916, p. 150.


PYRAMID RECORDS


ii5

1 139. PLATE XVII. DIAGRAMMATIC REPRESENTATION OF PROFESSOR
PETRIE’S RECONSTRUCTION, AND OF THE NEW RECONSTRUCTION
OF THE GREAT PYRAMID FROM PETRIE’S SURVEY.

This Plate fully explains itself. One item, however, may require amplification; the
relation between the dimensions on diagrams of Plate XVII, stated in Primitive or Pyramid
inches, and the dimensions according to Petrie’s survey in British inches.

Petrie’s survey for the mean square side defining the corners of the existing core surface
base gave a length of 9001.5 B" db 1.0 B". Reduced to Pyramid inches (on basis of 81,
94 and 101), this is 8991.6 P", ± 1.0 P" or, as stated in round numbers of inches as on
Plate XVII, Figs. A, B and C, 8,991 P".

Petrie’s mean distance between the centres of two opposite sides of the core masonry
base— i.e., as along line of AB, Figs. A, B and C ; or on Section AB, Figs, a, b and c—gave
8,929 B", or in round numbers of P. inches, as on all figs, of Plate XVII, 8,919 P*.

The other relations defining the casing base square, and its central hollowing in, are
as given in 99-101.

As to what Petrie means by a core plane face, the reader is referred to Plate XVIII
and If 140.

It is unfortunate that Professor Petrie, in observing the core masonry hollowing, did
not extend the same feature to the restoration of the casing. By reason of this unfortunate
omission, scientists for 42 years have been led to believe that the theory of the late Astronomer
Royal for Scotland—Professor Piazzi Smyth—requiring a Great Pyramid base circuit of
36,524 Pyramid inches, was nothing more than a delusion. It is equally unfortunate that
Professor Smyth saddled his theory with corollaries and side issues rightly deemed by his
scientific contemporaries to be fallacious.


if 140. PLATE XVIII. DIAGRAMMATIC PERSPECTIVE VIEW, ILLUSTRATING
FEATURES OF GREAT PYRAMID’S CORE MASONRY.

As explained on the Plate, the hollowing-in of the core face escarpments, and the depths
of courses are considerably exaggerated. In consequence of the latter, the number of
courses is reduced. The thicker 5th course, however, gives a general idea of the appearance
of the 35th course. The view illustrates the Pyramid’s appearance prior to the addition
of the casing.

What Petrie means by a core plane face is defined by the plane geometrical surfaces
cCBb and bBAa. Petrie’s core plane base is the actual square defined by the corner points
C, B, A and D (the last unseen). This base square was obtained by sighting down from
c, b, a and d, along the line of the stepped (arris) edges, cC, bB, aA and dD (the last unseen).
The core base square is defined by the straight lines CB, BA, AD (unseen) and DC (unseen).

The hollowed-in effect is defined on the base by the lines CHGB and BFEA. HG
and FE are each about 36 inches horizontally internal to the square base sides CB and BA.
HG and FE were obtained by sighting down the stepped core courses from c to H and b
to G; and from b to F and a to E.

Petrie states, “ The form of the present rough core masonry of the Pyramid is capable
of being very closely estimated. By looking across a face of the Pyramid, either up an
edge, across the middle of the face, or even along near the base, the mean optical plane,
which could touch the most prominent points of all the stones, may be found with an average


Size of side of
bate square of
core masonry
plane surfaces,
8,991 P\


Distance
between
opposite
centres of core
masonry base
sides, 8,919 P'


The

unfortunate
effect of an
incorrect
restoration of
the Great
Pyramid.


Petrie* s Core
Plane Faces.

And Core
Plane Base.


Definition of
Pyramid’s
Hollowed-in
effect.


How Petrie
determined the
Core Plane
Base.


n6 THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


variation at different times of only i. o inch. I therefore carefully fixed, by nine observations
at each comer of each face, where the mean plane of each face would fall on the socket
floors; using a straight rod as a guide to the eye in estimating. On reducing these
observations to give the mean form of the core planes at the pavement level, it came out
thus:—

Core Plane Sides.

B*.


N.

..

. . 9002.3

Petrie’s

E.

• ^ • •

.. 8999.4

measurements
for same.

S .


9OOI.7


W.

..

.. .9002.5


Mean

e e e a

.. 9001.5


Mean difference..

e • • •

I.O.


On pp. 43-44, Petrie then states as to “the faces of the core masonry being very distinctly
dstlrminad the'hollowea.” “ This hollowing,” he continues, “ is a striking feature ; and beside the general

HoUomni-in curve of the face, each side has a sort of groove specially down the middle of the face.

The whole of the hollowing was estimated at 37 B* on the N face.”

l Pyds. and Temples of Gizeh, pp. 37, 38.


PYRAMID RECORDS


117


CHAPTER III.

THE ELEMENTS OF

ANCIENT GRAVITATIONAL ASTRONOMY.


Section I.— The Pyramid’s External Definition of the Earth

and its Orbit.

1 141. THE ANALYTICAL APPLICATION OF PETRIE’S PYRAMID
SURVEY DATA.

Professor Petrie’s admirable survey data for the Great Pyramid are so Accuracy of
comprehensive and accurate as to enable us to settle three momentous Jut?.* * ,U,T,T
questions. These questions, which are closely inter-related, may be expressed
as follows :—

(1) How far the existing measurements give evidence concerning the b.m. for

. . ... determining

designer s intentions, designer**

(2) How far they indicate the extent of workmen's errors, and workm«?«

(3) How far they indicate the extent of internal and external movements ^ °**•

due to subsidence and earthquake shock. due to subsid¬

ence and

To form the necessary basis for the analytical investigation for the conversion
above, Petrie's system of Survey Co-ordinates has had to be converted into p f y£Sd°
an equivalent system of co-ordinates oriented with respect to the mean Jn3 1 y U ticai° r
azimuth 1 of the Great Pyramid. All the necessary data—Petrie's original pun, ° , * # *
co-ordinates and the new equivalent Pyramid azimuth co-ordinates—are Tabulation of
given in relation on Plate XIX, to enable the mathematical reader to check conve
the conversion for himself.

Subtraction of related co-ordinate units of Plate XIX— i.e. for co- Th« special
ordinates from the same base and on the same straight line—and conversion PenS** °
of the units into British inches give all the Pyramid's true azimuth base aS*s“kst* ,#
distances shown on Plate XX. Plate XX also shows Petrie's oblique dis- uncos.
tances between base points and diagonal corners of sockets. The latter

1 For Plate XX, the azimuth of a line running true North—or of the perpendicular to a line
running true East and West—is defined as o°. The azimuth of a line West of true North is
defined as (—) angle from true North line. The azimuth of a line East of true North is defined
as (+) angle from true North line.

The azimuth of the Pyramid’s base diagonals as defined by the corners of the rock-cut sockets
is o° 3' 43'.


n8


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


In this form
not generally
suitable for
analysis.


Their one
significant
analytical
application.


The existing
distorted
definition of
an intended
or original
square:—

9069.4 B*.
9067.7 B".

9069.5 B".

9068.6 B'.


Intended or
original value,
9069.5 B\

Variations due
to workmen’s
errors or
subsidence
movement.


Accuracy of
detail,

Workmanship

evidences.

Variation
due to
subsidence
distortion.


distances are not stated with reference to any common azimuth. They are
nothing more, in each case, than the direct distance in a straight line between
two stated points. In this form, Petrie's distances are not a suitable basis
for the analytical investigation of all the related data.

If 142. THE SIGNIFICANCE OF PETRIE'S PYRAMID BASE
DISTANCES.

In one application, however, Petrie's base distances are of direct value
for analysis. They determine the existing form of the square defining the
central extent of base hollowing-in. This ig the square RQPS on Plate XX.

The North side, QP, of this square =9069.4 B", and defines the line of
CD where casing was found and surveyed.

The East side, PS, of this square =9067.7 B", and defines the line of EF
where casing was found and surveyed.

The South side, RS, of this square =9069.5 B", and defines the line of
GH where casing was found and surveyed.

The West side, RQ, of this square =9068.6 B", and defines the line of BA
where casing was found and surveyed.

The close agreement of the North and South measurements, 9069.4 and
9069.5 B" respectively, and the variation of 0.9 B" between the East side
(9067.7 B") and the West side (9068.6 B") suggest—

(1) That the North and South measures define the intended or original

value as 9069.5 B" ; and

(2) That the shorter measurements of the East and West sides, 1.8 B*

and 0.9 B" respectively, less than 9069.5 B" indicate workmen's
errors in building ; or

(3) That reduction of the original central base distance between the

North and South base edges— i.e. between CD on North face and
GH on South face—is due to the drawing-in effect of a large
cavern subsidence in the natural rock below the Pyramid, and to
the major axis of this subsidence running in a direction approxi¬
mately South and North.

The minute accuracy of detail in the finishing of beds, joints, and external
surfaces of the Pyramid, and the remarkable precision of workmanship
evidenced by the tightly fitting blocks, seem to indicate that the same minute
accuracy and precision of workmanship extended to the external form of
the Pyramid as a whole. In such event, the existing variation in the base
distances is due to distortion by subsidence.

n 143. THE GENERAL EVIDENCE CONCERNING PYRAMID
SUBSIDENCE.

Now if the slightly shorter distance between the North and South base
sides, as compared with the distance between the East and West base sides, is


PYRAMID RECORDS


due to the subsidence effect inferred, the Great Pyramid should contain How subsid*
the following indications of such subsidence :—

Pyramid :—

(1) The courses of the Pyramid masonry should indicate a slight dip inward dip of

inwards, towards the centre. cour8e8 '

(2) The existing top platform of the Pyramid masonry should not be Top platform

truly central to the Pyramid's base square, unless in the remarkably ISntrai“ ot
accidental case of the axes of subsidence crossing below the
Pyramid's base centre, and possessing the same orientation as the
Pyramid base.

(3) The angle of the Entrance Passage with the horizontal in a Northerly Descending

direction should be greater than the angle of the Ascending ftiepe?®
Passage with the horizontal in a Southerly direction—presuming pIJ£ 3 jS n *
both to have been of the same inclination originally. flatter,

(4) The angle of the Entrance Passage, continued as the Descending Descending

Passage, should increasingly accelerate its angle of dip after it increasingly
leaves the masonry courses, and as it descends further into the naSmk,
natural rock.

( 5 ) The Chambers within the Pyramid masonry should be buckled and Distortion and

crushed in such direction of distortion as agrees with the approxi- ch a a C mb«s! n
mate North and South direction of the major axis of subsidence
indicated by the Pyramid’s external variations. (^[ 142 (3).)

Every one of the five indications outlined are defined by the existing ah above

i r -i T'k . 1 T\ r ° e fl® ct * exist

state of the Great Pyramid s masonry as surveyed and measured by Professor « Pyramid,

. . r , . , , • observed and

Petrie. I he external and internal evidences of subsidence are discussed m measured by
detail in Sections II and III of this Chapter.


Top platform
square not
central.


Descending

Passage

steeper;

Ascending

Passage

flatter.


Descending
Passage
increasingly
steeper in
natural rock.


Distortion and
fractures in
chambers.


If 144. THE PURPOSE OF THE PYRAMID'S SOCKETS.

Petrie has shown that the four corner sockets of the Great Pyramid Sockets cut to
were primarily cut to fix the alignments of the two diagonals of the Pyramid diagonal* 86
base. In three cases the alignments of the diagonals are fixed by the Sri©??©
outer corner of each of three sockets, L, K, and M, for the N.W., N.E., The*cWseiw
and S.E. sockets respectively, as figured on Plate XX. In the case s“w.°? 0 cket.
of the S.W. socket, the socket surface was carried to UX, 17J inches
to the West of the point Z on the diagonal ZK. The point Z, defining the
diagonal alignment is, however, indicated by a chiselled line WZ cut by the
original workers for this purpose.

As shown on Plate XX, the true East to West distance from Distance be-
East side of S.E. socket to West side of S.W. socket— i.e. between !idt e ofi?E.

M and the line UX produced—is 9140.63 B". Petrie gives the oblique west*ride ©f
distance XM as 9141.4 B". Now the true geometrical Pyramid base side out prior to

r construction

3 * 5 2 4 - 2 4 p// j. p* =9x4x 3; B". From this it is obvious that this Iridtlfof

4 y ° y ^ Pyramid base

' . . . .. square of

distance over the two sockets was the original setting-out dimension for 36 , 5 ju p*
the corner to corner distance of the Pyramid's base side.


120


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Actual '

shortening of
Pyramid North
base side
•.47 B" on
true azimuth.


The existing distance is 0.47 B" shorter than the true distance. In the
same way the sum of the true azimuth co-ordinates between AB and EF
(Plate XX), at the centre of the base, is 9068.83 B" or 0.62 B" shorter than
the m6an of the measurements indicated as original by the distorted oblique
distances QP and RS, 9069.4 and 9069.5 B" respectively. (If 142.) The short¬
ening effect on ba6e measurements due to subsidence would naturally be
greatest across the centre between two opposite base sides. In consequence,
we may take the shortening of North base as not greater than the mean of the

other two variations noted, ° ^ =0.54 B".


Existing base
diagonals as
defined by
existing
sockets
slightly dis¬
torted from
the rectang¬
ular owing
to subsidence
distortion.


Correction to
rectangular
gives four
true squares
defining
original
socket corners
of base
diagonals.


Also defines as
original one
true corner
and one true
base side of
36,524 P
square
circuit.


The original

setting-out

arrangement.


Comparison
of Professor
Petrie's casing
corner blocks
with the casing
corner blocks
resulting from
the new re¬
construction.


145. THE ORIGINAL SETTING-OUT LINES OF THE PYRAMID
BASE.

As stated by Petrie, the existing definition of the base diagonals—owing
to subsidence distortion—does not give precisely rectangular diagonals.
The amount of error from true rectangular diagonals is shown by the azimuth
co-ordinates of the half diagonals on Plate XX. The intentional or original
setting out can be very closely approximated by taking the existing North
base socket distance LK (+its correction of If 144, i.e. 0.54 B") and the existing
South base socket distance ZM (+its correction of If 144, i.e . 0.47 B"), and by
taking 0 the centre of the base as fixed; then with these as data we can
correct the angles LOK and ZOM each to a right angle, to give the closely
approximate true original socket corners L, K, M, and Z.

The result is that the half diagonals OL, OK, OM, and OZ to the socket
corners L, K, M, and Z respectively, are defined by four true squares respec¬
tively of length of side 4567.41 B", 4562.10 B", 4570.55 B", and 4553.05 B*.
The result is confirmed, not only as to its supplying the original intention,
but as to its definition of the original construction, by the S.E. socket
corner M becoming the precise corner of the Pyramid square base of 36524.25
P" circuit. The azimuth distance between UX produced and the S.E.
socket corner M is also the length of the base side for the Pyramid circuit
36524.25 P*.

The Pyramid was therefore set out in preliminary lines as follows :—

(1) The socket corners defined the lines of the base diagonals.

(2) One socket corner (the S.E.) defined the S.E. corner of the Pyramid.

(3) The distance between the East side of the S.E. socket and the

West side, UX produced, of the S.W. socket defined the South
base side of the Pyramid.

H 146. THE TWO VERSIONS OF PYRAMID RECONSTRUCTION.

Remembering that Professor Petrie's reconstruction defines the hollo wing-
in of the core without applying the same feature to the casing, and that the
new reconstruction, adopted in the present work, applies the hollowing-in to


PYRAMID RECORDS


121


the casing, the reader will find instructive matter in the details of Plates XXI
and XXII. These show the appearance of the South-East corner casing
stone according to the two different reconstructions.

It should be understood that Petrie carries down the masonry of the Socket* and
corner casing stones to the socket floors in all cases. The discovery of the <£po.ui! on
Lisht Pyramid sockets and their foundation deposits (refer Section III, u,ht Pyramid
If 197 a ) may have caused Professor Petrie to modify his reconstruction in ,#ckeU -
this detail. But even this modification could scarcely redeem the evident
weakness of his reconstruction as applied to the South-East socket corner
casing stone. A reconstruction stands or falls under its critical application
to detail. Apart, then, from the identities established concerning the in¬
tentional circuit of the Pyramid’s base, we are assured that a critical technical
examination of the two reconstructions, as applied to the detail of Plates XXI Therapy*,
and XXII, will settle the matter conclusively, to the satisfaction of the thesis comparison

, , . ,, , , J of the two re¬
advanced in the present work. constructions.


If 147. THE EFFECT OF SUBSIDENCE ON FORM OF PYRAMID'S
BASE.


The nett effect of the correction of the right angles of the base diagonals
in 145 is as follows :—

(1) That subsidence effect has reduced the true azimuth distance between

the centres of the East and West casing base sides by the total
amount of 0.67 inch.

(2) That the same effect has reduced the true azimuth distance between

the centres of the North and South casing base sides by the total
amount of 2.10 inches. 1


Rectangular
correction of
diagonals
shows that
central sub¬
sidence has
reduced
Pyramid's
central base
width by
0.67 B" across
East to West
and 2.10 B"
across North
to South.


These corrections applied to the distances between the hollowed-in base
sides give a constant distance of 9069.5 B", East and West, or North and
South, between centres of base sides. The East to West distance given by
the existing slightly distorted features of the North and South base sides,
as surveyed by Professor Petrie, still gives this value (^[ 142). This indicates
that the Pyramid masonry, in centrally sliding slightly inwards, could not
very appreciably reduce its external base length owing to the tightly fitting
blocks. Externally it compromised by slightly skewing the external form
of its base to retain its external base length practically unaltered, and at the
same time produce the necessary diminution of azimuth co-ordinates to
satisfy the subsidence conditions. This distortion of the external form of
the Pyramid base bears relation to the distortion of the socket base only as
effect to cause.

All the data, then, at our disposal combine to show that the external
corner to corner measures of the Pyramid remained practically unaltered,
although very slightly skewed in direction. At the same time, the effect of

VThis movement, due to subsidence, is discussed further in Section II (^f 180-182), in light
of data emerging from inductions subsequent to the stage here discussed.


This gives
constant
original
central width
across (
Pyramid
base—between
any two
faces—as
9069.5 B # .


Construction
of Pyramid
ensured that
subsidence
reduction
across centre
—between
opposite faces
—should be
a maximum ;
but between
corners of
each base side
a minimum
—almost
inappreciable.


PLATE XXI.

RECONSTRUCTION OF THE SOUTH-EAST CORNER CASING STONE


Detail of Petpie’s Reconstruction
for South- East Corner
Casino Stone m Socket


D

Petrie's
Casino
N Slope

South

Slope

iC


Detail of New Reconstruction
for South-East Corner
Casino Stone over Socket


LAST

Slope


Petrie's

Casing

5lope


South


F

Casing

« -7,. 3" ->


Slope

Flat Top


-,C of Base

7.31*


i Course of


| Casing

T)

—

/

I

1

iEAST CA 5 IN 0
1

_

Slope

i


Fig. A -— Plan


B

Fig. B


Pavement


Pavement


•FOUNDATION DEPOSIT AND
FILLING AS IN SOCKETS OF
U3HT PYRAMID


Cross Section Y-Y Fig. B,— Cross Section Z-Z


g. A?—


G. B


PLATE XXII.


ISOMETRIC AND OBLIQUE PROJECTIONS OF SOUTH-EAST
CASING STONE RECONSTRUCTIONS.


Petrie’s Reconstruction of 5outh-East Corner


Isometric Projection


New Reconstruction of South-East Corner


Isometric Projection


124


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Explains why
core masonry
hollowing is
37" at centre
of North face.


Analysis of
subsidence
movements
shows that
Pyramid base
was defined
bv a square
of 367524 P"
circuit—
corner to
corner—and
by an inner

a uare margin*
ly 35.76 P'
internal to
the other, and
of circuit
286.1 P" less
than the
circuit of the
outer square.

286.1 P" a
geometrical
measure of
the Pyramid.
Also the dis¬
placement of
the Passage
System.


the

geometrical
definition
of external
hollowing
displacement.
Passage
displacement,
and 35th t
course axis.


the subsidence brought the hollo wed-in central portion of the North base and
of the South base in each case i inch nearer the centre of the Pyramid (^ 147,
Case 2) ; and in the case of the East and West sides £ inch nearer the centre
of the Pyramid 147, Case 1). In consequence, the hollowing-in extent
of about 36" would be increased by subsidence to 37* on North and
South base sides, and to 36^" on East and West base sides. 37" is
the value obtained by Professor Petrie from his sightings down the North
face slope of the core masonry. This agrees with the value deduced for the
North face including subsidence effect.

u 148. THE PYRAMID'S DISPLACEMENT FACTOR.

Criticism, therefore, has shown that the Pyramid was set out to a base
line of 9141.1 B", that its distance between centres of opposite base sides was
9069.5 B", and, independently, that its base sides were centrally hollowed to
the extent of about 36". The difference between the first two values,
9141.1 and 9069.5 B", gives twice the extent of hollowing-in as 71.6 B", and
therefore the hollowing-in as 35.8 B* =35.76 P".

The actual Pyramid base circuit is therefore defined by two squares, one
marginally 35.76 P" internal to the other. The outer square, defining the
base corners, is 36,524.24 P" circuit, and the inner square is 8 x 35.76 P"
(or 286.1 P") less in circuit than the outer square.

Now 286.i P" (286.4 B") is an important geometrical value of the Pyramid.
It is also the measurement of the displacement of the North to South Vertical
Axial Plane of the Pyramid's Passage System Eastwards from the North to
South Central Vertical Plane of the Pyramid.

The existing displacement of the Passage System, as defined, was
measured by Professor Petrie as follows

Petrie's stated possible
range of error.

Entrance Door on North Face .. .. .. =287.0 B"±o.8 B".

Entrance Passage End in Natural Rock .. .. =286.4 B*±i.o B".

Beginning of Ascending Passage .. .. .. =286.6 B"±o.8 B".

End of Ascending Passage .. .. .. .. =287.0 B"±i.5 B".

Plates XXIII, XXIV, and XXV (Figs. A, A lt and A 2 ) show how the

hollowed-in base feature, the 35th course axis, and the displacement of the
Passage System are all geometrical functions of a composite system of
geometry featuring the solar year to the scale of 10 P" to a day, and to the
scale of 100 P" to a day. To convey the full significance of this to the reader
it is necessary first to define the precise value of the solar year intentionally
identified with the Pyramid's base square circuit.

<J 149. THE INTENTIONAL VALUE OF PYRAMID'S BASE
CIRCUIT.

In ^ 102-104 it was shown that the period of 25,826^ years was identified
with the period of the Precession of the Equinoxes. In 102 it was explained


PYRAMID RECORDS


125


that 78Phoenix cycles gave the identity 25,826 \ Phoenix years (or inter¬
calated Calendar years) =25,826.54+Solar years. Accurately, the identity
defines the precise numerical values of the Pyramid's base diagonals and of
the base square circuit as follows :—

(1) INITIAL HALF PHCBNIX CYCLE .

From Table III. 103 years' cycle =37,620 days

Do. (365 days'column) 61 years of next cycle =22,280 „

J Calendar year = 180 „

164J years on cycle =60,080 days.

(2) NO. OF DAYS IN THE PHCENIX CYCLE .

From Table III. 3 cycles of 103 years =309 years =112,860 days

Do. (365 days' column) 20 years =20 ,, = 7,305 „


The Phoenix
cycle chron¬
ology and
Calendar
. rules define
the numerical
value of
Pyramid, base
square circuit
as 36,524.246$
and the
numerical
values of the
sum of the
base diagonals
(and constant
of Precession)

25,826.542378.


Phoenix cycle =329 years =120,165 days.

(3) TOTAL PRECESSIONAL PERIOD .

78 Phoenix cycles =25,662 years =9,372,870 days
From (1) above 164^ „ = 60,080 „


Precessional period =25,826J years =9,432,950 days.
The years are intercalated Calendar years.


(4) PYRAMID BASE CIRCUIT AND DIAGONALS .

Let N =No. of days in solar year, and
P= Precessional period in years.

Then from above P

N

and from Pyramid base relationship

100 N

~VT

Solving the simultaneous equations I and II, we get

N =365.2424650 days.

Then, Pyramid base circuit =36,524.2465 P",
and Sum of Base Diagonals =25,826.542378 P\


.. (ii)


These are the values adopted for the geometrical representation developed
in Plates XXIII, XXIV; and XXV.


If 150. THE PROBLEM AND ITS PLANE.

It has been suggested by the evidence discussed in the two preceding
chapters that the external features of the Great Pyramid were intended to


PLATE XXIII.

THE GREAT PYRAMID’S EQUAL AREA GEOMETRY DEFINES DISPLACEMENT OF PASSAGE SYSTEM.


PLATE XXIV.

THE GEOMETRY OF THE PASSAGE SYSTEM DISPLACEMENT.


Secondary

System


Circuit at D, D t - 3652-42465
D,D S -913-1061625; OJ, -581-3014373
0A,” 0 A S - 0A» -411- 04218823
B,Be* 645-66355945; Ofi-E.Ej- 364 2766547
Circuit at B, B* - 4* Arc A, A, A e

Ik.kj -572-2044312


J Secondary System=-
Ho th Linear. Scale
op Primary System


Hence F,k,-F;k s -K,P -K s P
- Xp- 286-1022156


Primary System

Circuit at R, R t - 36524-2465
R. Re - 9131-061625

OP -5813-0143730


128


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Th« ^tne for form a geometrical representation of the dimensions and motions of the Earth
presentation and its orbit 114). Any such representation must, of necessity, be made
orbit:— * with reference to a plane representing the plane of the Earth's orbit. The

ba*e of v tff* nt plane of the Great Pyramid pavement is defined as this natural plane, as it is
d^cVitw*bi d ’ the plane of the Pyramid's base square, defining the circuit of the solar year.
fn”hi°iwo For the necessary geometrical representation the Great Pyramid's base
: r tK*" plane, therefore, represents the plane of the Earth’s orbit. This, then, is the
»© a* F#Mr* natural plane for the geometrical and comparative representation of all
values defining the dimensions and motions of the Earth and its orbit. These
values, in consequence, need only be looked for in relation to the Pyramid’s
external features as defined in plan.


Complicated
factors that
simplify the
problem of
graphically
representing
the elements
of the Earth's
orbit.


Solar year.
Sidereal year.

Anomalistic

year.

Perihelion.


Ascending
values of
lengths of
year:—

Solar.

A

365} days

A

Sidereal,

A

Anomalistic.

Were the
Earth’s axis
and the (
ecliptic in¬
variable in
direction and
inclination,
the Solar and
Anomalistic
Years would
be of Length
of Sidereal
year.

Relationship
suggests that
true con¬
structional
perimeter of
Pyramid base
defines

Sidereal year ;
and that this
perimeter
gives an inner


If 151. THE THREE YEAR VALUES.

Consideration of the Earth's motion in its orbit is complicated by several
factors. These complications, however, make it a considerably easier matter
to specify the intention of any geometrical representation of the elements
of the Earth and its orbit. One of the complications referred to is that there
are three different year values defining the revolution of the Earth round its
orbit. These are the Solar (or Tropical) year, the Sidereal (or Stellar) year,,
and the Anomalistic (or Orbital year).

The interval between successive autumnal or vernal equinoxes—or
between successive summer or winter solstices—defines the Solar year. The
interval between the Earth's position, at any time in the year, in relation to
the fixed stars, and its next return to that position defines the Sidereal year.
The interval between successive annual returns of the Earth to the point—
defined as Perihelion—in its orbit nearest the Sun defines the Anomalistic year.

The Solar year is slightly less than 365 \ days, the Sidereal year is slightly
more than 365 £ days, and the Anomalistic year is slightly longer than the
Sidereal year. Were the Earth's axis rigidly constant in its inclination, and
in the direction of its inclination, the Solar year would be of the same length
as the Sidereal year. Were the plane and axes of the Earth's orbit rigidly
fixed, in relation to the fixed stars, the Anomalistic year would also be of the
same length as the Sidereal year. The Solar and Anomalistic years are
therefore departures from the Sidereal year, due to circumstances other than
the primary functions governing the Earth's rotation and revolution.

Tf 152. THE SIDEREAL YEAR DATUM.

The Sidereal year is therefore the basal period for the other forms of the
year. As such—presuming our premises concerning the Pyramid's purpose
to be correct—it should be the year value defined by the true circuit of the
Great Pyramid's base. Now the square circuit of the Great Pyramid's base
defines the Solar year. This square circuit touches the true Pyramid base at
four points only—the four corners. The true circuit of the Pyramid's base
is the circuit of the hollowed-in perimeter of the casing base edges. This


PYRAMID RECORDS


129


circuit is longer than the square (corner to corner) circuit defining the Solar
year, and the Sidereal year is longer than the Solar year. In other words, the Anomalistic
hollowed-in base circuit is the true constructional base circuit, as the Sidereal *•
year is the true constructional year circuit of the basal dynamics of the J^^tht'soiar
Earth's orbit. The question, then, to be settled is whether the hollowed base
circuit gives the value of the Sidereal year to the scale of 100 P" to a day.

If 153 - THE COMPLETED GEOMETRY OF THE GREAT PYRA¬
MID'S EXTERIOR.

Plate XXV illustrates how the representation in plan should indicate Development
the three values of the year. This is derived from the geometrical sequence indication
of Plates XXIII and XXIV in relation to the geometry of the 35th course
axis and the aroura . The derivation of the 35th course axis connection is
illustrated on Figs. A and A x (Plate XXV). In Fig. A x (Plate XXV), the yrami *
apex Pyramid circuit at level acb =3652.42465 P", and this is equal to the
apex Pyramid circuit D 2 JxDx (Plate XXIV). The connected geometry of the
latter defines the displacement of the axis of the Passage System and the Th© 35th #
displacement of the central hollo wing-in of the Pyramid's base sides. The width and the
circuit of the apex Pyramid at acb (Plate XXV, Fig. A x ) is therefore equal thejddth °f
to the 35th axis length EG=FH (Plate XXV, Fig. A). The rectangular ho“£Sdngi.i
aroura defined by the latter are EGRC and EFQC, and these are respectively
equal in area to the aroura parallelograms EGBH and EFAD (the two hori¬
zontally shaded areas of Plate XXV, Fig. A). The two latter define the
centrally hollowed-in area as DEH, in elevation on Fig. A, and as D xExHx in C °^* e cal
plan, Fig. B, Plate XXV. 1 The maximum extent of hollowing-in SefiS^on
(35.762777 P" horizontally from the geometrical plane face o£ the Pyramid's
slope) applies to the whole area DEH (Fig. A), and along the line EO (Fig. A) ®nd apex,
to the base of the apex Pyramid at c (Fig. Ax). The broadly fluted (or
scooped-leaf) effect necessary to taper off the hollowing towards the apex
is illustrated on Figs. A x and A 2 (Plate XXV).


!J 154. THE THREE ASTRONOMICAL YEAR-CIRCUITS OF THE
PYRAMID BASE.

The restoration of 153 is the one restoration that satisfies all the struc- T J® I ^J r c * 1
tural and geometrical features of the Great Pyramid. The real test of its
having been the intentional geometrical arrangement is the extent to which condition*^
it satisfies the conditions postulated in 150-152. £?n*of ?££•

These conditions were— oi th#

(1) That the actual (hollowed-in) structural circuit (ADxH x B, etc., in
Fig. B, Plate XXV) of the Pyramid's base should give the value
of the Sidereal year to a scale of 100 P" to a day ; and


1 For the relation between point G on Plate XX, as there defined, and point D on Plate XXV,
as there defined, the reader is referred to the further discussion on subsidence effects in Section
11 , nil 180 - 182 .


PLATE XXV.

THE PYRAMID BASE DEFINES THE EARTH AND ITS ORBIT, IN
DIMENSIONS AND MOTION.


PYRAMID RECORDS


131


(2) That the geometrical circuit (AmBqYpXnA in Fig. B, Plate XXV),
internal to the structural circuit, and defined by it, should give
the value of the Anomalistic year to the scale of 100 P" to a day,
precisely as the external geometrical circuit (ADCHB, etc.,

Fig. B, Plate XXV) gives the value of the Solar year to this
scale.

Now the external geometrical base circuit, as defined, is 36,524.2465 P", Soiaryea*^
representing, to the scale defined, a good average value for the Solar year for 36 , 524.2465
a long period of history from ancient to modern times.

The actual structural base circuit, as defined, and resulting from the sidereal
a good average value for the Sidereal year. The resulting value of p '.
365.256471536 days for the Sidereal year is only 8.6 seconds of time longer
than the value for the present time, 1 365.25637 days.

The internal geometrical base circuit, as defined, and resulting from the A e ^J^* tic
good average value for the Anomalistic year. The resulting value of p"’
365.25997317 days for the Anomalistic year is only 33! seconds of time
longer than the value for the present time, 1 365.2595844 days.

In a representation intentionally giving the values stated, one would l o h f at

expect the intention to be emphatically declared by the associated representa- ®^ e ti '* pre *’
tion of other related values. So far, the Pyramid's base geometry defines
the Earth's annual orbit, in terms of its three forms of year. The intention expressed by
would be completely defined by the connected representation of the related nected dimen*

r J J 1 sional values

astronomical knowledge concerning the dimensions and form of the Earth's o^Earth's
orbit. (Refer 114 and 120.)

*{ 155. ASTRONOMICAL RELATIONSHIP OF THE THREE
FORMS OF THE YEAR. (Plate XXV, Fig. C.)

The path or orbit of the Earth round the Sun is an ellipse, ACPB, of Earthy
which F x and F 2 are the two foci. The Sun's centre is at the focus F 2 . O is orbit -
the centre of the orbit. AOP is the major axis, and BOC the minor axis of In* focHs.”
the elliptic orbit. Ma i° r Ax | 8 *

Minor Axis.

The ellipse figured is considerably exaggerated as a representation of the Earth’s
Earth's elliptical orbit. The latter, to any ordinary scale of representation, SSfy a ° rb,t
cannot be distinguished from a circle. Cllde ‘

When the Earth is nearest the Sun it is at P—on the major axis—Perihelion,
whence P is called Perihelion.

When the Earth is farthest from the Sun it is at A—also on the major Aphelion,
axis—whence A is called Aphelion.

1 For further explanation and additional data concerning the astronomical relationship of the
three forms of year—and for data concerning their variations—the reader is referred to Chapter IV,

Section II, and Plates XLIV-LVI inclusive.


132


THE GREAT PYRAMID : ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Direction of
Earth's #
motion in its
orbit.

Sidereal year
explained.

Why Solar
year shorter
than Sidereal
year.


The Earth travels round its orbit in the direction of the arrow, i.e .
direction BACPB.

Now let S be a fixed point in the heavens, and E the equinox for a
particular year. Owing to a slow movement of the Earth's axis, 1 the equinox
of the following year does not occur at E, but at a point E 1} about 50" of

angle (qr 20 minutes of time) short of E.
The Solar year is therefore the interval in
days taken by the Earth to travel round
the distance EACPBE 1} whereas the Sidereal
(or Stellar) year--fixed from the immovable
point S, and its immovable radius F 2 SjS— is
the interval in days taken by the Earth to
travel round the distance S^BACSj.


The Solar year is therefore shorter than the Sidereal year by the interval
E X E—about 50" of angle, or about 20 minutes of time.

Anomalistic The Equinox is not, however, the only point that moves. In the course

•xpfained. of the Earth’s revolution round its orbit, the orbit itself is not stationary,

Why Anomai- but moves round in the direction of the Earth's revolution. In the course

Jonathan of one revolution of the Earth round its orbit, the major axis AF 2 P moves

bj Xo a ut y f£r round to the position A^P^ Hence, commencing, say, from perihelion
SVSnutl. at P, the Earth travels round PBACPPj to return to perihelion. This

m *‘ revolution defines the Anomalistic or Orbital year. It is longer than the

Sidereal year by the time it takes the Earth to travel from P to P x . PP X is
about 11.5* of angle, or about 4.6 minutes of time. (Refer also Plates LV
and LVI.)


If 156. THE MEAN SUN DISTANCE AND THE EARTH'S ORBITAL
MOTION. (Plate XXV, Fig. C.)

F 2 P =the shortest distance between the Earth and Sun.

F 2 A=the longest


The mean of these is OP=OA, and this distance, in astronomical nomen-
clature, is defined as the mean sun distance.


Eccentricity (e)
of elliptic
orbit*.

Mean Sun
distance =
semi-major


The eccentricity of the elliptic orbit is

OF^OT^F^F,
OP OA AP *


Value for The value of this eccentricity (e) is variable. Its value for 1900 A.D. is

i900 h A.D[ blt * 0.016751. Its greatest value during the past 60,000 years occurred about
e=<roi 675 i. n # 6oo B.C. It was then something over 0.019. Since that time it has been
^ue^about slowly but constantly diminishing, and will continue to diminish until about
e^about 0.019. 26,000 A.D. The value of e will then be about 0.004, when the Earth's orbit

value about will be as nearly a circle as it is ever likely to be.

26,000 A.D., J J

e-about 0.004. *For explanation of this movement refer Chapter IV, Section II, and Plates Nos. XLIV-LV1
inclusive.


PYRAMID RECORDS


133


To determine accurately the functions of the year, at any period, know- Knowledge
ledge of these and other values, as well as of the laws governing motion in SSUH3 1
elliptic orbits, is a matter of fundamental necessity. Without going Snd^hrir"**'
extensively into the subject of the Laws of Planetary Motion, attention is Ind a the n iaw.
directed to an important corollary of these laws which has an important same, of
bearing upon the question of the Sun's mean distance. necessity.

H 157. THE MAJOR AXIS OF THE ORBIT A DYNAMICAL CON¬
STANT. (Plate XXV, Fig. D.)

In Fig. D, ABPC is the elliptic orbit of Fig. C, with the Sun in focus F 2 . Definition,.^

In Fig. D let OA =OP =a.

Then AP=2a =Major axis.

circle Q X R.

The corollary to which attention is
directed is as follows :—

The speed of the Earth round its
elliptic orbit is at every point, such as Q,
equal to the speed which the Earth
would acquire in falling to the ellipse
at Q, from Qi on the circumference of a
circle (QjR) with centre at the Sun (F 2 ),
and radius (F^) equal to the major
axis (AP) of the elliptic orbit.

Thus the speed of the Earth at Q in
the elliptic orbit is equal to the speed the
Earth would acquire at Q in falling
towards the Sun from to Q.

From this it follows that “ the period " of the Earth's revolution round
its orbit is “ independent of every element except the major axis '* 1

For purpose of brevity, rather than accuracy of definition, we will
term the circle Q X R the “ Earth's Speed Circle."

1 158. THE GEOMETRICAL REPRESENTATION OF THE
RANGE OF VARIATIONS IN RELATION TO THE
BASAL CONSTANT.

The single constant geometrical feature of the Earth's orbit is therefore The Earth’s
the Earth's “ Speed Circle," with its centre occupied by the Sun. Referring cirSe
again to Fig. D of Plate XXV, we see that the Earth's orbit ABPC revolves featu??“f
in an anti-clockwise direction about the fixed point F 2 , defined as the centre ^ p ‘ oint# of
of the Sun, and the centre of the Earth's Speed Circle RQi. Thus the point O

heliocentric #

1 Refer Moulton’s “ Celestial Mechanics," pp. 150-151. focus of orbit.


) period 0
the Earth’s
revolution
round its orbit
** independent
of every
element
except the
major axis."


134


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Heliocentric
focus the
fixed centre
of the Earth's


“Speed

Circle.**


The history
of an orbit's
motions and
dimensions
cannot be de¬
picted by an
ellipse.


Two circles,
both concen¬
tric with, and
internal to,
the Earth’s
“ Speed
Circle,**
define the
annnlar zone
of variation of
the centre of
the Earth's
orbit.


The three
heliocentric
circles com¬
pletely define
in geometrical
terms the
historical
range of the
orbit’s motions
and dimen¬
sions.


Geometrical
definition
of limiting
values of
eccentricity (ej.


The geometry
of the
Pyramid's
base plan
gives the
above com¬
plete defini¬
tion.


circles around F 2 as centre. None of these points, then—other than the fixed
centre of the Sun, F 2 —can be deemed as suitable for the origin of co-ordinates
for any graphical representation of the Earth's orbit defining the limits of its
movements and variations. Nor, indeed, can the orbit for any particular
date be graphically represented as defining in general geometrical terms the
limiting values, of orbital cycles.

Now, since the distance F 2 0 is a variable distance, and since O rotates
around F 2 as a fixed centre, it is clear that a circle of radius F 2 0 , minimum
value, and an outer circle of radius F 2 0 , maximum value, completely define
the limits of variation of the centre of the orbit from the Sun. During the
long period of the rotation of the orbit round the Sun (over 108,000 years)
the curve traced by the centre point O of the orbit lies within the ring defined
by the maximum and minimum circles.

These two circles, together with the Earth's “ Speed Circle"—all
concentric with the Sun—completely define, in general geometrical terms, the
fixed element of the Earth's orbit— i.e. its major axis—and the range of
variation of the variable elements. A representation of this nature is
the necessary geometrical basis for any further representation defining the
variable elements in relation to any standard system of astronomical
chronology.

If 159. GREAT PYRAMID'S EXTERNAL GEOMETRY DEFINES
THE EARTH'S ORBIT AND ITS VARIATIONS.

With e=eccentricity of Earth's orbit, then (Fig. D of Plate XXV) :—

*, . . r Diameter of max. circle of radius F „0

Maximum value of e==— r ^ ■ - , n . * 9

Radius (F 2 Q x ) of Earth s Speed Circle

and

. 1 r Diameter of min. circle of radius F 2 0

Minimum value of e =^5—^ ^ 7 r ~ :;r c - , . *

Radius (F^d of Earth s Speed Circle

F 2 0 being variable within its defined limits, and Fj^ being a constant
= the major axis of the Earth's orbit =AOP.

Now the two limiting values of e are known, and are precisely defined
by the proportions of the Pyramid base geometry shown in Fig. B, Plate XXV.
In this representation (Fig. B), the base centre, O, represents the Sun's centre.
NOP and UOV represent the rectangular diameters of the minimum circle
passing through NVPU. These diameters are defined by the central
hollowing-in widths of the Pyramid base sides. The maximum circle is
base square. Its diameter is the Pyramid base side length, LOM or WOC.

The radius of the Earth's “ Speed Circle " is defined by the distance, OK,
K being the intersection of the perpendiculars, AK and BK, from the con-


PYRAMID RECORDS


135


verging base side lengths, AD, and BH, respectively. Other points such as t

K are defined by all four sides of the Pyramid’s base, this definition completing
the circuit of the Earth’s “ Speed Circle.” The radius OK of this circle, by ,

geometrical construction, is 470860.606 P". The diameter VOU of the
minimum circle, by geometrical construction, is 1826.212325 P", and the
diameter of the maximum circle is 9131.061625 P".

From these values—


Minimum value of e =


VOU 1826.212325


OK


470860.606

=0.003878414


and


Pyramid’s
Minimum e
and a

Maximum e.


WOC 9131.061625
Maximum value of e = ^ T _ == -—^7-
OK 470860.606

=0.01939207.

These values are respectively the least and the greatest possible values Pyramid’s
of e—the eccentricity of the Earth's orbit—as accurately as modern astronomy cir 3 S r
can determine these values.


radius
I


th


Again,


radius OK =470,860.606 P*
=471,378.552 B"
=7.43968674 miles.


This distance, multiplied by 25,000,000


=185,992,169 miles,

=Major axis of Earth's orbit,
=Twice Mean Sun Distance.


25,000,000
of Earth’s
“ Speed
Circle”
radius.

Pyramid’s
relative scales
of definition
of Earth's
polar radius
and *' Speed
Circle ”
radius,

1

250,000,000

and

1


Whence Mean Sun Distance =92,996,085 miles.

Professor Simon Newcomb 1 gives for the
92,998,000 miles.

Thus we have found 101 and 114) that


25,000,000*

Pyramid
value for
Sun’s Mean

latter a mean value of ^JSSJois

miles.


i Pyr. inch =--- Polar radius of Earth,

J 250,000,000

and that Pyramid's “ Speed Circle " radius OK

=---Radius of Earth's “ Speed Circle.”

25,000,000

The scales are therefore decimally related, as we had inferred they would be
in a representation of this nature 114).

For modern variations in the determination of the value of the Sun's
Mean Distance, the reader is referred to Section III, ^ 201.

Uinc. Brit, (nth Edit.), Vol. XXI, p. 717, Table I.


136 THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Pyramid**
Polar diameter
inch inten¬
tional.


Its use defines
all Earth and
orbital dis¬
tances and
motions as
simple func¬
tions of the
Earth*s Polar
diameter and
the year.


This definition
is the Natural
Law relation¬
ship inferred
from the
reflexion
phenomena.


Intentional
presentation
m terms of
Gravitational
Laws.

Numerical
value of
Pyramid base
circuit

measurement
independent
of surveyed
measurements,
yet agrees
with latter.

Defined in
terms of
known dura- (
tion of Phoenix
Cycle.


Fragments of
the ancient
scientific
system in
use in Egypt
before arrival
of Pyramid
builders.


Form of
Pyramid**
constructional
base perimeter
defines re¬
lations of the
Earth and its
orbit.


Section I. —Summary and Conclusions.

If 160. THE GEOMETRICAL EXPRESSION OF NATURAL LAW.

The Great Pyramid has now clearly established its intention in regard
to its inch-unit. It defines that this unit is a Polar diameter inch-unit of
the value of one 500-millionth part of the Earth's Polar diameter.

In conjunction with a simple, yet extensive system of solid geometry, the
Pyramid inch-unit, as applied to the dimensions and form of the Pyramid's
exterior, defines a further intentional representation. This is to the effect
that all dimensions (angular and linear), and all motions—as well as variations
in these dimensions and motions—of the Earth and its orbit, are simple
functions of the Earth's Polar diameter and of the period of the Sidereal Year
in solar days. In other words, the Great Pyramid's external system of
geometry is the graphical expression of the Natural Law relationship inferred
from the mathematical clue of the four Pyramid constants that defined,
by the noon reflexion phenomena, the principal points of the year^^f 46
and 47).

The manner in which the Pyramid’s base plan simply defines the
dimensions and limiting areas of dimensional variations of the Earth's orbit
shows clearly that the intention was to present these as governed by
the Laws—or, as the Pyramid seems to define, an all-including Law—of
Gravitation (^f 157, 158). This comprehensive graphical representation is
independent entirely of any question as to the accuracy of any survey or
measurement of the Pyramid's base, yet this independent representation
agrees precisely with the accurate modern survey measurements. The
intentional numerical value of the circuit of the Pyramid base square is
defined in terms of the known duration of the Phoenix Cycle, or the Cycle of
the House of Enoch (^f 149). In this connection the relations established in
^ 38 and 39 possess a remarkable numerical significance.

A fact requiring emphasis, in connection with the use of the Polar
diameter inch in the Pyramid, is that this unit and the year circle form the
necessary basis for the derivation of the Egyptian common cubit and the
Egyptian aroura. Nevertheless, the common cubit was in use in Egypt—
but without the inch as a contemporary unit—before the Pyramid builders
had arrived. This confirms what we have previously seen, that the early
Egyptians had derived from the former civilisation a fragment of the science
that the designer of the Great Pyramid knew in its entirety.

H 161. THE SYMBOLICAL DEFINITIONS OF THE PYRAMID'S
BASE CIRCUIT.

Whilst the solid geometrical relations of the Pyramid define the form of
the Pyramid's base perimeter, it is the constructional form of the latter that
defines, in the plane of the base, all the principal relations of the Earth and
its orbit. The Pyramid's base perimeter is defined as a symmetrical figure


PYRAMID RECORDS


*37


formed of twelve lines. Its corners define an external square, and the lines Constructional
of its perimeter from its corners, when produced to meet inside the centre 0? twS! 2 meUr
of each base side, define a symmetrical figure formed of eight lines. (Plate circuit of

XXV, Fig. B.) '

The twelve-line figure is the actual constructional base circuit of the and"in 1 erLi
Pyramid, and defines the Sidereal year to the scale of 100 Polar diameter defini 2 g are

• 1 , 1 circuit of

inches to a day. Solar year.


The external square circuit of the Pyramid’s actual base corners, defines
the Solar (or Tropical) year to the scale of 100 Polar diameter inches to a day. fn£?n*ai an

The eight-line figure defines the Anomalistic (or Orbital) year to the scale eigj* line*
of 100 Polar diameter inches to a day (II154). circuit of .

J V 11 Anomalistic

This is a graphical representation indicating that the Sidereal year is the year *
actual constructional year value of orbital motion, that the Solar year is the defiiSri”n of cal
apparent basal year value, and that the Anomalistic year is the n^ost obscure Jeiat^ns*
value of the three. This is an exact representation of an astronomical truth.


«[ 162. THE GEOMETRICAL REPRESENTATION OF THE ORBIT’S
HISTORY.

The geometry of the Pyramid’s base is an exact representation of an The Pyramid'*
astronomical truth, i.e. that the speed of the Earth at any point in its orbit dSn?* la the
can be determined from the following data :— fo??he W ° rk

geometrical

(a) A circle with its centre at the focus of the Earth’s orbit occupied by of P t r hr£* a ?r 0 y n

the Sun, and of radius equal to the length of the major axis of the ®Jwt. e Earth *
Earth’s orbit, i.e. twice the mean Sun distance ; and Definition of

Constants —

(b) The direction and distance of the free focus of the Earth’s orbit in Length of

' ' major axis

relation to the focus occupied by the Sun. of orbit ; #

x J heliocentric

The Pyramid’s base geometry represents the radius and circle of (a) J^don of

j annular zone

accurately to a scale of- and defines the annular field of (b) to the “" t i a b i 1 " i "| s ;. u

25>000,000 tions of the

definition of the orbital field of the free focus. The orbit of the free focus is umjts d of mn *
completed in each cycle of about 21,000 years. The orbits of a series of such orSScccen-
successive cycles, owing to the variation in the distance of the free focus tnclty *
from the heliocentric focus, completely traverse the annular zone between
its circle of minimum radius and its circle of maximum radius.

The radius of the constant circle of (a) above precisely represents the scalar reia-
value of the constant length of the major axis of the Earth’s orbit. Con- representation*
sequently, it represents the Sun’s mean distance as half this value. The PoiA *radius
Sun’s mean distance is, therefore, represented as a radius, to the scale of mean distance.

---, and, as previously shown (If IT ioi, 114, 159), the Earth’s Polar

25,000,000

radius is represented by the Pyramid inch to the scale of ---.

v • 250,000,000


Nothing so far
learned of par¬
ticular value
from utili¬
tarian stand¬
point.


Scientific
facts given
by Pyramid
already known
as facts of
modern
science.


What other
motive,.if any,
lies ( behind the
design and
construction
of the Great
Pyramid ?


Pyramid gives
us an ancient
geometrical
system of
Natural Law
in relation to
the motions of
the Earth and
its orbit.


So far it has
failed to indi¬
cate the date
of the
civilisation
using this
system ; or
aS' to how the
scientific facts
were derived.


The Pyramid's
design

postulates that
knowledge of
the facts of
science defined
by the Pyramid
must precede
the discovery
of the
Pyramid's
definition of
these facts.


138 THE GREAT PYRAMID : ITS DIVINE MESSAGE

n 163. THE QUESTION OF UTILITARIAN MOTIVE.

All these and other identities have been established as related identities
in this chapter, and in preceding chapters. That they are intentional
identities can scarcely now be doubted. But what new item of knowledge
have we learned that is of any practical value, from the standpoint of the
utilitarian, apart from its interest as pertaining to matters of scientific and
archaeological curiosity ? Very little, indeed, when viewed from the stand¬
point of any utilitarian basis. We have certainty learned that the dimensions
and motions of the Earth and its orbit are all related functions of the simplest
units of these dimensions and motions. This, however, we have known in a
slightly different form from the Laws of Newton and Kepler. The rational
development of Einstein’s Theory of Relativity now gives us reason to hope
that these and the laws of other branches of science may be shown to be but
varying phases of one Universal Law of Nature.

The most we have learned, then, from the Pyramid’s geometry so far—
taken as a whole—has not very materially advanced our knowledge of science
beyond what we have already known in general terms. What we have
learned may have caused us to alter our conceptions concerning the origin
and development of ancient civilisations. But was this the sole reason that
prompted the design and construction of a monument of the nature of the
Great Pyramid ? Surety there was some utilitarian motive behind a project
of this nature. 1

If 164. OMISSIONS THAT SUGGEST POSSIBLE MOTIVES.

Let us consider, then, what are the outstanding features of the facts,
from this standpoint of possible motive. The facts have proved to us that a
certain stage of world civilisation, at an unknown—or hitherto supposedly
undefined—period in the past had evolved a geometrical system of Natural
Law, in relation to the motions of the Earth and its orbit, equal to, superior
to, or more comprehensive than the modern system of expressing this Natural
Law. The facts of importance in this statement of the case are that we have
not yet learned anything concerning the precise, or even the approximate
date of the stage of civilisation thus made known ; and that we have not yet
derived a single tangible indication as to how the savants of that period
discovered their facts of science —whether by methods of modern times , by
methods unknown to modern times , or by the development of faculties now atrophied
by long disuse.

Another feature that must have become increasingly evident to the careful
reader is of equal importance. This is that, in order to discover the scientific
facts embodied in the Great Pyramid, it is essential that the investigator
should have previous knowledge of these very facts. Was the object of the
designer, then, merely to show a later civilisation that the precise science of
gravitational astronomy had been known long previously ? Was this the

1 For the evidence against the Tombic Theory refer Section III, If 208 and context.


PYRAMID RECORDS


139


sole object of a work so vast, and so painstakingly executed in the minutest This • dear
detail ? The fact that the riddle of the Great Pyramid can only be read by oi

one already in possession of the knowledge embodied in its design surely
supplies a clear indication of a more utilitarian motive than we have so far
seen.


If 165. THE PYRAMID DESIGNER'S FORETHOUGHT.

To answer the preceding questions we must reach our objective in stages.
One thing we have seen to be clear. This is that the designer of the Pyramid
deemed he was projecting his knowledge into a future stage of civilisation
that could interpret his intention. He foresaw that the contemporary
language in which the facts could be conveyed would lose its meaning and
idiomatic significance. It might be lost entirely, or at least be capable of
mistranslation or misinterpretation. This foresight has certainly been
justified.

The design was therefore formulated, without the aid of written
expression, to embody in its external features a geometrical symbolism in
Earth standard measurements. This symbolism was to be interpreted in an
age already in possession of the knowledge embodied in the symbolism
projected. The modern elucidation of this symbolism clearly justifies the
remarkable forethought that both conceived the future conditions and
created the design to meet them. Forethought of this nature was never
expended merely to teach a future race of mankind facts of science it already
knew.

We are compelled, then, to come to the conclusion that the Pyramid's
external features were designed to attract and direct attention to a further
message of greater importance. Granting the forethought displayed, of what
nature could this further message be ? Clearly to tell the future race of man¬
kind what it could not possibly know, or to confirm what could have no
other possible physical means of being confirmed. A definitive limiting of
future possible knowledge in this way can only relate to a break in the con¬
tinuity of something essential to a race of mankind possessing the scientific
knowledge defined ; a break that had taken place before the Pyramid was
built, and that could not be restored otherwise than by being passed on
from the former civilisation to the then remotely future civilisation.


Pyramid’s
science in¬
tended to be
read by a
future race to
whom the
science was
already known*

The designer’s
foresight in
not commit¬
ting his know¬
ledge to writ¬
ing in any
contemporary
language.

Geometrical
symbolism
a universal
means of
scientific,
communica¬
tion.

Earth’s Polar
diameter a
universal
scale of
measurement*

Forethought
justified by
the interpreta¬
tion of the
ancient
science as
defined in
these terms.

Such fore¬
thought ex- .
pended in vain
unless ex¬
pended for the
purpose of
teaching the
future race,
something it
could not
possibly know*

A vital
break in a
continuity
essential to
mankind.


f 166. THE INDICATIONS OF A CHRONOLOGICAL CONNECTION. Th.m.av.

11 suggested

inferred as

The inferred break in continuity can only be conceived as relating to a

some factor affecting the history of the previous civilisation, and related— ^ d o J e a
or that should be related—to the history of the present stage of civilisation. G f

However we look at this aspect of the problem, we are compelled to see that civilisation,
the primary essential for restoring the inferred relation must be of a chrono- suggests that
logical nature. This, indeed, is the one obvious connection suggested by the in deriAn^the
Great Pyramid's exterior. Here everything is connected with astronomical MMntiiSSy^f 1 *

a chronological
nature.


This it
confirmed by
Pyramid’s
external
indications.


A standard

chronology

necessarily

defined by

astronomical

cycles.


The various
cycles that
could be


The Proces¬
sional cycle.


The cycle of
motion of
Equinox from
Perihelion,

The cycle
defining
variation in
eccentricity,

The cycle of
the revolution
of the instan-
taneous axis
of rotation of
the Ecliptic.


The repre¬
sentation of
the variable
annual values
for one cycle
not sufficient t
define repre¬
sentation as
intentional.


Reasons:—

(1) Modern
values for
ancient times
not sufficiently
reliable for
identity.


(2) An ancient
representation
of accurate
modern values
requires an
independent
means of
defining the
representation
as intentional.


Scientific zero
datum of
chronology.


140 THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE

cycles, and astronomical cycles are the only possible means of affording a
reliable datum for the chronological relations of two isolated periods of
mankind's history.

Now there are two outstanding astronomical cycles associated with the
Pyramid's exterior. There is the cycle of the Precession of the Equinoxes,
associated in the Pyramid geometry with a standard period of reference of
25,826.54 Solar years. And there is the cycle of the revolution of the
Autumnal Equinox from Perihelion to Perihelion.

There is also the cycle defining the variations in the eccentricity of the
Earth's orbit. In addition to these, there is a cycle not hitherto mentioned.
This is a cycle defining an important feature of a very slight variation in the
Ecliptic due to planetary attractions. The important feature mentioned
is what is known as the instantaneous axis of rotation of the Ecliptic. This
axis is analogous to the major axis of the Earth's orbit, and, like the latter,
has a slow revolution round the orbit. This movement—if its rate during
the past 6000 years be taken as basis—completes a revolution of the Ecliptic
in about 49,000 years.

u 167. DEFINITION OF A SINGLE CYCLE INSUFFICIENT.

A complete and accurate definition of the variable annual rates of any
one of the cycles mentioned for every year over a long period of time covering
the current years of the present chronological era and the years of a chrono¬
logical era of past history would be sufficient to effect a chronological
connection. It would not, however, suffice to define the representation of
the values as intentional. A single representation would always be open to
doubt on the grounds of accidental coincidence.

There are also two other reasons why a single representation could not
be accepted as certain evidence in the relation mentioned. These are—

(1) That, whilst modern astronomy is very accurate in its definition of

the variable annual rates over a period of 600 years of modern
time, its values covering a period of 6000 years back from the present
are not so reliable ; and

(2) That, presuming certain remotely ancient astronomers knew the

accurate values for their own times, and also knew the accurate
values for years of modern times, it would be necessary for them
to define both facts in such certain terms as could not fail to be
accepted by modern astronomers.

Any chronological definition of present in relation to past history on the
Great Pyramid's geometrical system would require to satisfy these conditions.

If 168. THE POSSIBLE MAXIMUM DEFINITION.

The most scientifically appropriate zero date of any system of astro¬
nomical chronology is the date at which longitude of Perihelion is o°. With


PYRAMID RECORDS


this as basis, definition of intention, and definition of accurate knowledge of Longitude ©f o
the astronomical values of rates and angles for both ancient and modern Per,hehon ’ 0 -
times would be completely established as follows :—


(1) By the representation of a year of past time, which we term Date A,

defined in relation to the date at which longitude of Perihelion
was o°, and of a year of present time, which we term Date B, for
which the longitude of Perihelion, defining the modern Date B, is
given by the representation.

(2) By the representation of the total angle of Precession between

Date A and Date B.

(3) By the representation of the angle, between the instantaneous axis

of rotation of the Ecliptic at Date A, and the same axis at Date B—
or by the definition of the longitudes of the axis at both dates,
that for Date B agreeing with the modern value.

(4) By the representation of the annual rate of motion of the Equinox

in relation to Perihelion for every year from Date A to Date B,
the rate for Date B agreeing with the modern accepted rate for
Date B.

(5) By the representation of the annual rate of Precession for every year

from Date A to Date B, the rate for Date B agreeing with the
modern accepted rate for Date B.

(6) By the representation of the annual values for the motion of the

instantaneous axis of the Ecliptic for every year from Date A to
Date B, the rate for Date B agreeing with the modern accepted
rate for Date B.

(7) By the representation of the annual values for the eccentricity of the

Earth’s orbit from Date A to Date B, the rate for Date B agreeing
with the modern accepted rate for Date B.

(8) By the conversion and integration of the values in (4), (5), and (6),

giving accurately the angles defined by (1), (2), and (3).

(9) By the values in (4), (5), and (6) not being measured values dependent

upon any Pyramid measurer or surveyor, but by their being values
that are primarily functions of the Pyramid’s external geometry,
and that, secondarily, agree with the accurate measurements of a
reliable Pyramid measurer and surveyor such as Professor Flinders
Petrie (for linear measurements), or Professor Piazzi Smyth (for
angular measurements). (Refer Section II, ^ 170-175, regarding
the relative value of Petrie’s and Smyth’s independent
measurements.)


For Dates
A and B:—

Longitude of
Perihelion.


Total

Precession.


Longitude
Ecliptic in¬
stantaneous
axis of
rotation.


Annual rates,,
separation of
Equinox and
Perihelion.


Annual, rates.
Precession.


Annual rates.
Revolution of
Ecliptic
instantaneous
axis of
rotation.


Eccentricity of
Earth’s orbit.


Integration of
rates give
same total
angles.

AU values

primarily

geometrical

Pyramid

values,

agreeing with

accurately

measured

Pyramid

values.


169. THE DEFINITION ESTABLISHING INTENTION.

If items (1) to (5) and (8) and (9) are established, the conditions are
satisfied as fully as any astronomer could desire.

If item (9) is established, it will be proved that the Great Pyramid s
system of geometry is a graphical representation of Natural Law, defining


142


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


What would be


at that out¬
lined :—
Restoration of
chronological
relations with
previous
civilisation.

Intention of

definition

established.

Established
that former
civilisation
more highly
skilled than
modern in the
mathematical
basis of the

S ractice of
ving.


the linear and angular measurements of the Earth and its orbit; defining
the annual rates and periods of the cyclical motions of the Earth and its
orbit; and defining a system of astronomical chronology that can be the basis
of related reference for every period of highly developed stage of civilisation
in the world's history.

With these items established as identities, the identities become
intentional identities. With the latter established, there will be proved that
a former civilisation was more highly skilled in the science of gravitational
astronomy—and therefore in the mathematical basis of the mechanical arts
and sciences—than modern civilisation. And what will this mean ? It will
mean that it has taken man thousands of years to discover by experiment
what he had originally more precisely by another surer and simpler method.
It will mean, in effect, that the whole empirical basis of modern civilisation
is a makeshift collection of hypotheses compared with the Natural Law
basis of the civilisation of the past.


PLATE XXVI.


VIEW OF EXISTING NORTH BASE CASING STONES, LOOKING WESTWARDS.
FISSURE IN NATURAL ROCK, WHERE PAVING REMOVED, SHOWN IN RIGHT

FOREGROUND.


PLATE XXVII.


VIEW OF EXISTING NORTH BASE CASING STONES AND PAVEMENT SLABS.
AL MAMOUN’S FORCED ENTRANCE SHOWN ON 7TH COURSE OF MASONRY.


Drawn by Mr. A. C. de Jong from a photograph by Messrs. Edgar .


PLATE XXVIII.

NEAR VIEW OF EXISTING NORTH BASE CASING STONES AND PAVEMENT
SLABS, SHOWING FISSURE IN NATURAL ROCK, WHERE PAVING REMOVED,

IN LEFT FOREGROUND.


utawn by Mr. A. C. de Jong from a photograph by Messrs. Edgar.


PLATE XXIX.


VIEW OF EXISTING STATE OF NORTH ESCARPMENT SHOWING
EXISTING BASE CASING STONES, AL MAMOUN’S FORCED
ENTRANCE—INDICATED BY FIGURE—AND EXISTING STATE OF
ENTRANCE TO THE DESCENDING (OR ENTRANCE) PASSAGE.


PYRAMID RECORDS


147


Section II.— Pyramid Measures and Details, and Subsidence

Distortion.


If 170. BASIS FOR COMPARISON OF GEOMETRICAL AND
MEASURED DISTANCES.

It is futile to discuss any geometrical theory of the Great Pyramid's G«ometric«i
measurements—internal and external—unless the geometrical distances n»u»t

with measured

required by theory agree with the corresponding measured distances, distances.

In other words, fact must not be altered to conform to geometrical
requirements.

The actual measurements to be taken as a basis must be those taken by Mamamed mu#t
responsible scientific measurers. The taking of linear, as well as angular, be those taken

. , . _ . 0 . • . . by responsible

measurements is not the simple matter it may appear to those inexperienced scientific
in the precise determination of dimensions.

The two best sets of angular and linear measurements of the Great

Pyramid are those of Professor C. Piazzi Smyth, late Astronomer Royal for .

Scotland, and Professor W. M. Flinders Petrie. The former, with his long
and varied experience in observational astronomy, possessed the necessary *“ d
qualifications and apparatus for the taking of reliable angular measurements
of a high degree of precision. Professor Petrie, whose archaeological survey b «*« of
methods first laid the basis for modern scientific archaeological exploration,
and whose experience in previous geodetic and other survey work eminently
fitted him for the task of surveying the Great Pyramid, has undoubtedly
produced the best set of linear measurements to date.


u 171. RELATIVE VALUE OF THE TWO SERIES OF MEASURE¬
MENTS AVAILABLE.

Adopting Smyth’s angular measurements for the interior details—-upon
which measurements Petrie could not improve—Petrie took special pre- „

liminary precautions in designing and preparing the most reliable measuring J|| d s j™3 1 " e *
appliances obtainable for linear measurements. 1 SS K i“tSid.

Compared with Petrie’s steel tape and special chain, 1200 and 1000 measurements,
inches respectively, and his self-compensating accessory appliances, Smyth’s
comparatively short measuring rods and accessories were primitive indeed.

There are, in consequence, cumulative differences between the two in¬
dependent sets of linear measurements. Thus Smyth makes the Entrance


148 THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Cause* of
cumulative
errors in
Smyth's linear
measurements.

(1) Piecemeal
distances
added.

(2) Screw¬
driver scratches
as indications.

(3) Slipping
of rods on
inclined floor.


(Descending) Passage about 3 inches shorter than Petrie’s measurement for
this. Petrie accounts for the differences as follows :—

" (1) By his (Smyth’s) being all piecemeal measures added together ;

" (2) By the rude method of making scratches with a screw-driver to mark
the lengths of the rod on the stone Life and Work/ II, 46) ; and
" (3) By there being ‘ always a certain amount of risk as to the measuring
rod slipping on the inclined floor ’ (‘ Life and Work/ II, 35).

" All these errors would make the reading of the length shorter than it should be.”


Direction of
error;

Above applies
to interior
measurements.

Smyth never
surveyed
Pyramid's
exterior.


Existing (
interior indica>
dons best
evidence for
study of
external
movements.


It must be understood, of course, that these remarks concerning the
relative value of the two series of linear measurements apply to the interior
of the Pyramid only. Professor Smyth never surveyed the Pyramid’s
exterior. In fact, he never knew the precise or approximate measured
relations of the Pyramid’s base—unless in theory—until Professor Petrie’s
survey had been published, almost 20 years after Smyth’s work at the
Pyramid.

Why the interior measurements of the Pyramid are mentioned at this
stage is for the reason that it is from the existing condition of the interior
we have the clearest evidence concerning the cause and direction of the
movements that affected the exterior of the Pyramid (^ 141-147).


H 172. THE CRITICAL VALUE OF PETRIE’S MEASUREMENTS.

Petrie benefited The fact of moment is that Petrie’s appliances were prepared and his
^i“rie“c y e t . h 8 linear measurements taken with a critical knowledge of the defects in Smyth’s
appliances for linear measurements, and of the inaccuracies liable to occur in
the application of Smyth’s method of measurement. This is not to say that
had Petrie been in Smyth’s place as original reliable measurer, Petrie’s
apparatus and methods would have been any better than those Smyth adopted.

Petrie'* The truly scientific worker always endeavours to improve upon the

•nd methods apparatus and methods of his predecessors, and to benefit by their experience,
improvement* Smyth published an account of the defects in his appliances and method of
appliance* and measurement. Petrie, accordingly, designed his appliances and formulated
ffife. © *. his system of measurement to eliminate the defects revealed by Smyth’s
experience.

Petrie'* Apart, then, from any question of preference a possibly biassed judgment

survey 1 might accord to actual measurements most nearly agreeing with geometrical
measurements measurements, Petrie’s statement of his linear measurements must receive
date.** ° preference as the most reliable statement of the Pyramid’s measures as
they now exist. Against this we must place the fact that Petrie’s measure¬
ments clearly were taken to disprove Smyth’s theories. Were this not a
Hi* data prove fact, Petrie could scarcely have failed to see that his own survey and set of
in°the* pyramid measurements, and his comprehensive classification of ancient metrology,
Sm^thcUimed. contained more distances of geometrical significance than Smyth, or any of
his innumerable contemporaries and followers, ever claimed or showed in
measurement. This is true both in regard to the Pyramid’s external
measures and internal measures.


PYRAMID RECORDS


149


U 173. HOSTILE DATA CONFIRMING INDUCTION.

The possibly small bias evidenced in Petrie’s measurements is more than The influence
balanced by another fact to be admitted, viz. that Smyth’s measurements opinion in
were taken with the hope of finding confirmation of his ow r n and John Taylor's ©fdliTa 0 . * ene *
theories. The influencing bias—unwitting, but psychologically unavoidable
—is evidenced in several outstanding cases in the statements of both measurers,

Smyth and Petrie; more by unwittingly biassed judgment authorising Bia# p#ycho-
the selection of averages, than in judgment controlling the taking of any
particular measurement. beU«? nceived

The exponent of a theory, or the holder of a preconceived belief, must
always be considered, from any critical point of view—whether friendly or But does not
hostile—as potentially and psychologically, though possibly unwittingly,
biassed in favour of evidence that accords with his theory or preconceived undVb?a£ ted
belief. This, it must be granted, is a fair statement of the mentality that • l «hM* le
should be adopted to consider logically any statement concerning the results theory?* that
of inductive analysis. It is not a statement, however, that can be applied
in the particular instance of Petrie's data—hostile to Smyth's theories—
confirming the latter in a manner never imagined by Smyth or any of his
followers.

Of such cases, Sir John Herschel 1 stated :— sir John

Hersehel’s

" The surest and best characteristic of a well-founded and extensive

concerning

induction is, when verifications of it spring up, as it were, spontaneously #uch ca8e# -
into,notice from quarters where they might be least expected, or from
among instances of that very kind which were at first considered hostile.

Evidence of this kind is irresistible, and compels assent with a weight
that scarcely any other possesses."

*{ 174. BIASSED OPINION DELAYING PROGRESS OF DISCOVERY.

One good instance of the truth of Herschel's statement is seen in the case Examples of
of the origin of the Common Egyptian Cubit from the Primitive Polar
Diameter Inch and the Year Circle geometry. Petrie was hostile to the CommonCubit
latter, and Smyth hostile to the former. Yet the admirable classifications
of Petrie's inductive metrology have shown us that the Common Egyptian Pyramid inch.
Cubit is a simple function of Smyth's Pyramid Inch, and that the latter is ridicule, value
truly a Polar Diameter Inch. clm^n c*ubit.

Again, with no precise measurement of the Pyramid's base to guide him, coL^^cSwt
Smyth, from a few remotely secondary external and internal details of the Jiiu^erifie.
Pyramid’s construction, inferred that the circuit of the Pyramid base con- of y s^th». nch
sisted of 36,524.2 Polar Diameter inches, and that the Pyramid's height was
the radius of a circle of the latter circumference. Smyth even supposed
originally that the pavement upon which the Pyramid was built formed «*e data--
part of the casing, and that the Pyramid base level was at the bottom of the
pavement blocks. dSudi. ation to

1“ On the Study of Natural Philosophy ” (1830), p. 170.


Petrie’s survey
proving
Smyth’s
application
wrong, Petrie
failed to see
the truly
obvious'
application,
and Smyth
resorted to
a revised
application
more impos¬
sible than his
original.

The latter
revision
strengthened
Petrie’s case—
as being the
more logical.

Result:—

20 years'
delay.


Smyth’s mean
socket floor
level for base
of Pyramid has
no structural
definition.


Led to, a

authorities

condemning

Smyth’s

theory of the

Pyramid’s

purpose.

The facts
are:—

Petrie’s survey
correct,

Petrie's #
application of
survey incom¬
plete, Smyth’s
theory
concerning
Pyramid's pur¬
pose correct,
and Smyth's
theories
concerning
structural (
identification
of his
theoretical
principles
incorrect.


Petrie proves
effect of
subsidence in
King's

Chamber, but
ignores related
effect in
Passages,
proved by his
measurements.


150 THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE

It was not until Petrie—nearly 20 years after Smyth's work at the
Pyramid—published his results that Smyth indicated, in his later editions,
the casing blocks sitting on the pavement. Petrie, on the other hand, whilst
observing the hollowing-in of the core, failed to see that the purpose of this
was to provide the backing surface for a similar hollowing-in of the casing.
This oversight delayed the presentation of the Pyramid's message for a further
period of 20 years. For Petrie declared that his survey failed to confirm
Smyth's theory in any single detail, except the casing angle of slope. This
declaration was given additional weight by Smyth readjusting his theory to
suit what he supposed Petrie's survey to indicate. Smyth's readjustment
required the circuit of 36,524.2 to be at a level where it could neither be
indicated nor measured, i.e. in the natural rock at the level defined by him
as the mean socket floor level.

If 175. SMYTH'S THEORY CONCERNING PYRAMID'S PURPOSE
CORRECT.

Investigation showed the absurdity of this readjustment. For, apart
entirely from the obviously untenable nature of the readjusted theory,
neither the mean socket floor level, nor yet the lowest socket floor level, gave
the true level for the Pyramid base circuit, unless by altering the angle of
slope of the Pyramid. As this further readjustment destroyed all the other
essentials of the theory, it was reasonably assumed in sequence by accredited
authorities—

(1) That Petrie's survey was correct; and hence

(2) That Smyth's theory was wrong.

They gave not a moment's consideration to the other possible and
reasonable sequence—

(1) That Petrie's survey, being correct, might show

(2) That Smyth's theory was correct on premises other than Smyth's, and

on premises other than Petrie inferred from his reliable survey data.

We now realise that the sequence is as follows :—

(1) That Petrie's survey is correct; and

(2) That, in consequence, Smyth's theory concerning the purpose of the

Pyramid is correct.

This is precisely the kind of verification that Sir John Herschel defined
as being “ the surest and best characteristic of a well-founded and extensive
induction."

If 176. EFFECT OF SUBSIDENCE ON PYRAMID PASSAGES.

One other feature essential in any analytical investigation of the Great
Pyramid's measures, but that has never been properly discussed in this
connection, is the question of subsidence. It is true that Professor Petrie
specially discusses the effects of subsidence in the King's Chamber; but he


PYRAMID RECORDS


151

has passed over in silence the necessarily related effect of the same movement r»l •*

•upon the angle of inclination of the Passages. He states that the angle of iuiC “
inclination for the Ascending Passage is slightly flatter than, and for the p>«*c£ follow
Descending Passage slightly steeper than, Smyth’s theoretical angle for these oubridonco. 0
Passages. This, however, is precisely the condition in these Passages that
would follow from subsidence movement.

Smyth’s theoretical angle for both passages is 26° 18' 9".63 with theProwathat
horizontal. Subsidence below the centre of the Pyramid’s mass would
increase the angle of the Descending Passage and decrease the angle of the «i*ISpa m
Ascending Passage. Accordingly we find that the mean angle of the built J"o* Sin« awi
portion of the Descending Passage is 26° 26' 43' (Smyth and Petrie), of the p.“»f~*
first Ascending Passage, 26° 2' 30' (Petrie), and of the Grand Gallery,

26° 17' 37' (Smyth and Petrie).

The distortion of the King’s Chamber proves that subsidence has taken
place. The fact that subsidence has taken place below the Pyramid proves
that the angle of the Descending Passage has steepened, and that the angle
of the Ascending Passage has flattened. The massive and rigid construction
of the Grand Gallery has been able largely to resist relative movement
between its various parts. It has subsided almost bodily, thus almost exactly
retaining its original angle of slope, being now only 33 seconds of angle
flatter than the theoretical angle of 26° 18' 10".

That 26° i8’ 10" was the original angle of slope is clearly shown by * n,u
Petrie’s detailed measurements. 2 *°

If 177. SMYTH’S THEORETICAL ANGLE CONFIRMED.

At Petrie’s floor distance of 990 B* down the Descending Passage from Descendant
the original Entrance Doorway, the Passage suddenly commences to increase u^tSf sis^
its dip. Between the latter point and Petrie’s floor distance 1505 B", near frlm*ba»,
which—within an inch or two—the Descending Passage intersects the angle of slope.
Pyramid base level, the angle of slope of the Passage floor fine is 26° 34' 0". 28 '

This is obtained from Petrie’s offsets from his theodolite altitude of
26° 31' 23", stated as the mean angle for the whole Descending Passage
length to its termination deep in the natural rock. 1

The effect of subsidence movement below the Pyramid’s base level on i « t Aaca aCa ,

• the Descending Passage immediately above the base level is therefore raiKSIwi'aacU
26° 34' o', less the original angle of slope. Presuming the latter to be 2«° FS’r.

26° 18' 10", Smyth’s theoretical angle—we obtain 15' 50' as the amount
by which the Descending Passage, immediately above the base level, has been Restoration
steepened by subsidence in the natural rock below the base level. Now this andcforfwtk
amount is also the amount by which the portion of the Ascending Passage-Iriru\
nearest the natural rock has been flattened. This portion of the Ascending
Passage should therefore be 26° 18' 10*, less 15' 50'=26° 2' 20', whereas Thoarotiui
the mean angle of slope of the 1st Ascending Passage is 26° 2' 30'.*


Pyramids and Temples of Gizeh,” p. 58.


•Ibid., p. 61.


152


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Existing
Queen's
Chamber and
Great Step
both lie in
East to West
vertical plane
through centre
oH>ase square.

A feature
of original
design and
construction.

This feature
persisting
proves that
centre of
subsidence is
not far from
centre of
Pyramid's
base.


Latter fact
explains
retention by
Grand Gallery
floor of its
original angle
of slope in
its terminal
length of
213$ inches,
26° 18' 10".


Original angle
of slope of
Passages
verified.

Calculation
shows that
with Petrie’s
Passage
lengths along
original
Passage slope.
Great Step and
Queen's
Chamber re"
main in the
same centric
position.


Petrie's
definition
of existing
centric
position of
Great Step
and Queen's
Chamber.


If 178. SIGNIFICANCE OF EXISTING CENTRIC POSITION OF
STEP AND QUEEN’S CHAMBER.

Another detail, however, confirms the latter conclusion. Petrie’s
interior linear and angular measurements show that the existing centre of
the Queen’s Chamber and the existing termination of the Grand Gallery
floor at the Great Step both lie in the central vertical East to West plane
passing through the centre of the Pyramid’s square base area. This coin¬
cidence is obviously intentional. Petrie accepts it as such, and therefore
as a feature of the original design and construction.

The significance attaching to this feature still existing, is that it supplies
an important indication as to the approximate location of the centre of
subsidence. It indicates that this centre was not so sufficiently remote from
the Pyramid’s base centre as to produce appreciable horizontal North to
South displacement of the Great Step and of the centre of the Queen’s
Chamber. As a result, near these points, the tangents to the curve of the
subsided core courses of the Pyramid would not be far from the horizontal,
unless where locally buckled by thrusting. As a corollary of this, the subsided
Grand Gallery floor near the Great Step should still retain its original angle
of slope of 26° 18' 9".63. Professor Petrie’s offsets to the Grand Gallery
floor from his altitude line in the last 213! inches towards the Great Step
prove this to be the case. 1 The existing vertical distance between the foot
of the Great Step at the South end of the Grand Gallery and the floor level at
the North end of the Grand Gallery is 0.54 B" less than for the original angle
of 26° 18' 9 ".63.

n 179. SIGNIFICANT EFFECT OF RESTORATION OF ORIGINAL
PASSAGE ANGLE.

The still existing centrally located position of the Great Step and Queen’s
Chamber, however, supplies us with a more certain basis for testing Smyth’s
theoretical angle for the Passages than any of the above lines of inquiry.
This is, that if the location defined is the original location—and there is no
disagreement on this question—and if the angle of slope of the Passages was
originally 26° 18' 9".63, then with Petrie’s existing Passage lengths from
the existing Entrance Doorway on the North face to the junction of the
Passages, and from the junction to the Great Step, both applied along the
inferred original angle of 26° 18' 9".63, the Great Step and the centre of
the Queen’s Chamber should still be in the same central location. Calculation
along the lines defined agrees precisely with the conditions inferred.

Thus Petrie states that his survey data, Passage measurements and
angles define—

(1) Existing face of Great Step as 0.4 B" South of existing centre of
Pyramid, with probable error of ±0.9 B" ; and


1,1 Pyramids and Temples of Gizeh,” p. 71.


PYRAMID RECORDS


153


(2) Existing centre of Queen’s Chamber as 0.3 B" North of existing
centre of Pyramid, with probable error of ±0.8 B".

Petrie accepts from these that the central location was intentional.

Adopting the centric position of the Great Step, Petrie’s Passage floor Petrie’s
distances, the constant angle of Passage slope of 28° 18' 9".63, and Petrie’s distances on
Entrance Doorway on Pyramid face at 668.28 B*±o.i above pavement ofSopi gi“e le
base, we obtain as follows :— the same *


centric

position.


Horizontal Distance, Great Step to North End, Grand
Gallery

Horizontal Distance, North End, Grand Gallery to
Junction of Passages

Horizontal Distance, Junction of Passages to Petrie’s
Entrance Doorwav


Horizontal Distance, Petrie’s Entrance Doorway to
Petrie’s existing North Casing Base

Centre of Pyramid to existing North Casing Base
The same distance on Plate XX ^distance 0 to CD

The difference lies within Petrie’s range of possible error


=1627.5331 B".
=1386.6529 B".

= 995.6504 B".
4009.8364 B".

= 524.1 ±0.3 B".

=4533*9364±0.3 B".
— 4533 - 7 100

0.2264^0.3 B'.


T| 180. PASSAGE DISTANCES PROVE HORIZONTAL INWARD
MOVEMENT OF BASE CENTRES.

In the above series of additions the existing North casing base
point at 524.1 ±0.3 B" horizontally from Petrie’s Entrance Doorway
was taken without any reference to the question of the angle of the
Pyramid’s face slope. This has been shown to have been originally exactly
51 0 51' I4".3.

Petrie has proved conclusively that the floor of the Entrance Doorway original En-
certainly commenced at 668.28 ±0.1 B" above the Pyramid’s Pavement Base. way emerged
The level and depth of the 19th course of masonry determine that the Entrance STcflS'd^th
Doorway emerged with its roof line at the top of the course and its floor line masomy
at the bottom of the course. Near the Entrance, the existing bottom level cour * e *
of this course is 668.28 ±0.1 B", as Petrie has shown. Nothing can be more
certain than that this gives the original floor level of the Passage at the
Entrance on the face slope.

We therefore have two certain facts to guide us. The Entrance floor Entrance floor
on face slope was 668.28 ±0.1 B" above the Pavement, and the angle of slope 52f8 a B' y
was 51 0 51' I4".3. From these we find that the original horizontal komceSSi
distance from casing base to Entrance floor was 524.91 B*±o.i, or 0.8 B" casing base.


154


THE GREAT PYRAMID : ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Orifinal
horizontal
length from
Entrance to
Step proves
existing North
Base has
moved 1 inch
inwards,


and


longer than the existing indications tend to show. Adding the latter in the


series of horizontal passage distances of ^ 179 we obtain—

Plate XXX
Original.

Horizontal distance, Great Step to En¬
trance Floor .. .. .. .. =4009.84 B”

Plate XXX
Petrie’s existing.

40x0.91 B'rbo.6

Horizontal distance, Entrance Floor to
original North Casing Base..

«= 524.91 B'±o.i

524.10 B"±o.3

Horizontal distance, Great Step to North
Casing Base ..

=453475 B'±o.i

4535.01 B'±o.9

Deduct, Plate XX, existing distance

0 to DC .

=433371


Extent to which centre of North Casing'
Base has been drawn in by subsidence
towards centre of Pyramid.

J- 1.04 B*±o.x.


Th«t there wh In 147 this was independently obtained as i.o inch average for each
NwihXu^a casing face, or a total drawing together of the centre of the North casing base
Horizontal and the centre of the South casing base of 2.1 inches. (Refer also 142-145.)
between'core The existing details and measurements discussed above show further that, in.

addition to this general movement, there was a relative horizontal movement
o^nUrom 11 between the masonry courses of the Pyramid core; that this movement
baM i couno > to became in extent cumulatively greater for higher courses; and that the
general direction of the movement of successive courses was towards the
North side, steepening the Pyramid’s face slope from its original
51 0 51' 14".3 to 51 0 53' 20" between the existing base and the existing
19th masonry course. The nature of the relative movement indicates that
the angle of North face slope should become steeper for higher courses.


Petrie's

surveyed

S oint on
outh casing
base edge.

Lies 113.6 B"
external to
maximum
hollowed-in
base strip.
Indicates a
further move¬
ment inwards
of central
area of
Pyramid
South base
to extent of
1.11

Total inward
movement of
centre of
South base
now 2.17 B*.


f[ 181. INDICATIONS OF FURTHER MOVEMENT INWARDS OF
SOUTH BASE CENTRE.

One feature not entirely dealt with concerns the South base point G on
Plate XX. G is the point located and surveyed in by Petrie. In ^ 147—
and prior to the geometrical definition of the central width of maximum
hollowing-in—this point was considered as lying on the base edge of this
central area, i.e. on the line D 1 H l of Fig. B, Plate XXV. Actually, by
comparing Plate XX, for point G at 1028.7 B" from centre of base, with
Plate XXV, for Point Dj on Fig. B at 914.1 B" from centre of base, we find
that Petrie’s South base survey point (G on Plate XX) lies on the line D,A of
Plate XXV, Fig. B, and 113.6 B" from Dj towards A. In this position on the
geometrical Pyramid base, point G (Plate XX) should be 1.11 P" further
South than the maximum hollowed-in base line D 1 H 1 (Plate XXV). Its
distance South from the base centre should therefore be 4535.85 B", whereas
the corresponding existing distance is 4533.69 B", or 2.17 B" less than the
existing distance.


PYRAMID RECORDS


155


Now we have already seen that the centre of the South base has moved Movement
inwards, owing to subsidence movement, at least 1 inch. The Passage data two other *
of Tf 180 have confirmed the data of 147 by indicating that the North base f*it™M ©£
has moved inwards 1.04 B" ±0.1. The total movement of North base centre the PyrMnML
and South base centre inwards was estimated in 147 as 2.1 B*. To this we
must now add an additional 1.11 inches for South base movement extra to
that estimated. This gives the total movement inwards between the centres
of opposite base sides as 3.21 inches—2.17 inches inwards on South side, and
1.04 inches inwards on North side. The movement, as defined, is confirmed
by two features of the Pyramid's exterior.


If 182. THE MOVEMENT OF THE SOCKETS, AND THE DIS¬
TORTION OF THE CORE ESCARPMENTS.

One of the features referred to has already been considered in ^ 145 and Distortion of
180, and the other at the end of \ 180. The former showed that the side of d£t£ncM* oc et
the true square defining the half-diagonal OM (Plate XX) required to be diapn 5 * b ** e
457°*55 B", whereas the existing East side of this square is 4567.02 B", orMcw.^
3.53 B" less than the true square defining the half-diagonal. This indicates nau£«i°rock
a movement of the South-East socket 3.53 B" towards the North. Professor XcmE? °
Petrie's data on his Plate X presuppose correction for this movement without baiTmov/.” 1
drawing attention to the actuality of the movement, since his survey data on men ‘
pages 38, 39, and 206 do not agree with his data on his Plate X.

A ground movement is necessarily greater than a compactly massive
building movement effected by it. Hence the Pyramid masonry base move¬
ment is less than the South-East socket movement.

The second feature referred to is the distortion of the Pyramid’s core ®f

escarpments. The North core escarpment up the centre of the North face co re^ma ionrr
is steeper than the South core escarpment up the centre of the South face
(confirming 181). The former, from the base to the existing top, mmmontr*
is 51 0 54' 24", whereas the latter is 51 0 51' 13', or within 1" of the true b...

angle of slope of the casing. This difference of angle would be the exact
effect of the return ground wave, or “ echo ” wave of the earth tremor of a £j£Jud||J* t c ho
subsidence that had produced a steeper dip in the Pyramid’s courses inwards ^• t °^°°** nd
from the South side than inwards from the North side.

If 183. RELATION BETWEEN PASSAGE SUBSIDENCE AND
SUBSIDENCE OF COURSES.

The general form of the subsidence effects on the Great Pyramid can be compuruon^of
obtained from a study of the subsidence effects in the Passages and Chambers. I •••ages at ^
We have seen that the original angle of slope of the Descending and Ascending indTh.
Passages was 26° 18' 9".63. Correcting all Passage points to their original
positions at this angle of inclination, commencing from the Entrance inwards, Pan*««pm
will give us the extent of subsidence at all such Passage points. in.“ch n £iiSu,


156 THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Thus we find that the levels of the original and existing principal floor
points of the Passages—and their extent of subsidence—are as follows :—


Comparative
statement for
principal
points of
Passages.


Above com¬
parative re¬
sults in
accordance
with the law
of structural
subsidence.

Maximum
subsidence in
central area
of'base course,
minimum at
apex and base
square edges.

Ascending
cumulative
loss of

subsidence in
any vertical
due to ** flat¬
arching ” of
courses.


Original.

Existing.

Extent of
Subsidence.

Floor junction of Descending and

B".

B".

B".

Ascending Passages

Floor joint, North End, Grand

176.1

I72.9 ±.2

3-2

Gallery

861.5

852.6 ±.3

8.9

Foot of Great Step, Grand Gallery
Top of Great Step, 1 Grand Gallery

1666.0.

1656.5 ±.5

9-5

( 35.87 B") .

1701.87

1692.36^.5

9-5


Plate XXX gives a graphically illustrated comparative statement of all
the existing and original dimensions of the Passages, together with a statement
of the cumulative subsidence in the Passages.

The above tabulation shows, in accordance with the laws of central mass
subsidence, that the subsidence effects follow, progressively increasing, from
the North base inwards towards the centre. This progressive increase
continues beyond the centre into the King's Chamber, where the lowest
floor point is 2.4 B" lower than the top of the Great Step. The total extent
of subsidence, therefore, at the level of the King's Chamber and at the
South-East corner of the King's Chamber is 9.5 B"+2.4 B"=ii.9 B". The
subsidence at the Pyramid's base vertically below this is necessarily greater
than this amount, owing to the cumulative loss of subsidence in ascending
order of courses, for points of courses on the same vertical. This cumulative
loss of subsidence holds for every vertical line passing through the courses,
and is due to the well-known structural effect of “ flat-arching."


At lower end
Descending
Passage,
subsidence,

14 B" ; enter¬
ing into
natural rock,

4 B".

Subsidence of
points in
natural rock,
length of
Passage gives
settlement of
corresponding

E oints on
ase courses
vertically
above.


If 184. BASIS OF SUBSIDENCE DIAGRAMS.

Proceeding, then, in the same way for the Descending Passage, we find
that its lower sloping end in the natural rock—about 303 B" horizontally
North from the Pyramid's base centre—has subsided 20 B", and at its entrance
into tb,e natural rock has subsided 4 B". Proceeding thus for all intermediate
points in this Passage we obtain the cumulative extent of subsidence from
the North face inwards towards the centre. This gives, in the natural rock,
the extent of settlement of the base courses at points vertically above the

Ut is as well to state here that Professor Petrie has an unfortunate error in his calculations
for the level of the Step, and, in consequence, for every point beyond that. All his other existing
levels for the Passages have been correctly reduced from his data. In this case, however, he has
stated the End of the Gallery as 2.39 B" higher than his own data prove it to be. This can be
shown from a simple statement of the facts. His horizontal distance for the Grand Gallery agrees
with his sloping distance and angle of slope for the Gallery, but does not agree with his vertical
rise for the Gallery floor. The latter gives a steeper angle of slope than the original angle of
26° 18' 9".63, whereas Petrie's stated existing angle is less than this.

His offsets from his theodolite altitude line determine that the foot of the Great Step is 0.54 B #
vertically lower than the same for an altitude of 26° 18' 9^.63. As the rise from the commence¬
ment of the Gallery to the foot of Step with the latter angle is 804.47 B*, the existing rise is 803.93
B', whereas Petrie's rise is 2.39 B 0 higher. Refer also Notes on Plate XXX.


PYRAMID RECORDS


157


Passage points taken. The general rate of increase of subsidence again indicates
indicates that the maximum extent of subsidence is nearer the South base side JibScu™
than the North base side, thus confirming the indication of the King's Chamber than e North
in 183, and confirming the inference derived in ^ 181 and 182, as to the
additional movement of the South base side inwards at its centre towards
the centre of the Pyramid's base area.

The extent of subsidence thus obtained at all observed points in the Measured

A variations in

Descending and Ascending Passages, and in the Antechamber and King's •“ 1 b |?f* # “ c g e e ]n
Chamber, enables us to plot a diagram of subsidence. To make this diagram
of use in studying the related movements, it is necessary to magnify the sub- genera]
sidence movement. We can produce a true-to-scale representation of *ubsidence.
subsidence by drawing the Pyramid and its Passages to a certain scale, and f n u du d gr^m.
then drawing all existing variations horizontally and vertically from their
original positions as ten times their true extent. All that this amounts to is ,ub#,dence *
that we are imagining the subsidence effects to be ten times greater than
they actually are.


Drawn in this manner, Plate XXXI represents the subsidence of all the General

1 # diagrams of*

Pyramid's courses and Passages, as indicated by the existing variations of the Pyramid^
floor or axis levels of the Passages. Similarly Plate XXXV gives the sub- Diagram of
sidence effects in the King's Chamber and Antechamber, and in their con- cumber and
necting Passages. ^bdl™” 1 !"


If 185. PYRAMID COURSES AND HORIZONTAL COURSES OF
CHAMBERS.

Study of the precisely determined relative amounts of subsidence in the
Passages and Chambers in relation to the two subsidence diagrams—
Plates XXXI and XXXVa—establishes the following identities between
horizontal passage and chamber masonry courses on the one hand, and the.
horizontal courses of the Pyramid core masonry on the other hand:—


Existing

Lowest

Level.

Sub¬

sidence.

Origin¬

ally.

Existing Levels
of Courses on
Pyramid Core
Face.

Top of

Course

Nod.

P^te &°a* ra *ber

XX. ceiling top of
59th course.

Antechamber

s.w.

' N.E.

Ceiling level of King's Chamber

Ceiling level of Antechamber

-d r n r f King's Chamber

Base of walls of< A T u

\ Antechamber

Top of North and South walls ,1
and course of East and West >
walls, Queen's Chamber J

B'.

1920.7

1840.3

1685.4
1686.0

1018.9

B".

11.8

11.2
11.8I
11.2 j

12.6

B".

1932.5

1851-5

1697.2

1031.5

B".

I 93 I .7

1851-5

1697.7,

1030.9

B".

I 93 I .7

1851.9

1697.6

1031.0

ceiling top of
56th course.

King’s

SQth Chamber and
",7,1 Antechamber

50tn wall base top
of 50th course.

50th Top of North
and South
walls and
course level
^Otn of East and
^ West walls

in Queen's
Chamber top
nf 30th course


158 THE GREAT PYRAMID : ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Latter level
at height
■giving length
of side of
i-Aroura


and ceiling
of horizontal
Passage to
Queen's
Chamber at
level of
ceiling of
1st Ascending
Passage
ontrance to
Grand Gallery.


As to the variations in depths of existing masonry courses, Petrie, in
his Plate VIII, gives these as follows:—

For 59th course, 1 inch variation ; 56th course, 0.4 inch ;

50th course, 0.2 inch ; 30th course, 1.5 inch.

The above statement of levels shows that the level of the original top of
the North and South walls of the Queen's Chamber was 1030.33 P" =1031.46
B", the length of side of the quarter -aroura square. Since the height of the
North and South walls is 184.4 B" =184.2 P", the original level of the
Chamber floor was 846.130 P" =847.06 B". The existing level being
834.4 B*, ^e extent of subsidence in the Queen's Chamber is 12.66 B". This
amount of subsidence here agrees with the cumulative rate of increase of
subsidence effect on the courses from the Great Step vertically downwards
to the centre of the base area. The same restoration gives the original level
of the ceiling of the horizontal Passage to the Queen's Chamber coincident
with the original level of the ceiling of the 1st Ascending Passage at the
Entrance to the Grand Gallery, i.e. at 914.4 B".


If 186. PYRAMID'S CONSTRUCTIONAL DETAILS DESIGNED TO
MEET SUBSIDENCE EFFECTS.

Plate XXXI shows clearly the cause and nature of the subsidence. The
cause is seen in the several fissures in the natural rock portion of the Descending
Passage. These had existed when the Passage was cut in the natural rock.
Two of them have been built up with blocks by the original builders.

These fissures are the evidence of the collapse of a subterranean cavern
deep in the limestone forming the Nile Valley, which contains many examples
of this cause of subsidence. This subsidence, as we saw, occurred prior to the
building of the Pyramid. Indeed, many special details of the Pyramid's
construction indicate that the designer of the constructional details was awai;e
constructional of the subsidence, and took special constructional measures to meet its
JS£XT effects. This is evident particularly in the construction of the masonry
tionafmeMures chambers and in the construction of the Grand Gallery. In fact, the Great
contingencies Pyramid is as perfectly designed to meet, and adjust itself to, the conditions
from y cond£* e of subsidence as it well could be ; more perfectly designed for its substrata
tions not . conditions than St. Paul's Cathedral, for example, was designed to meet the
conditions of its substrata.

The .precarious Where limestone fissures occur there is instability, particularly under

fiMwd °* added burden to the strata in which they occur. The designer of the
Jtratar tlon Pyramid's constructional details foresaw the possibility of the existing
Effect ©I precarious stability of the fissured strata being disturbed by the superimposed
of p^araid*on central mass of the Pyramid's masonry. That his details, devised to meet
same* the expected vertical movement, were effective is proved by the fact (shown by

If 180) that the Passage lengths, in spite of subsidence, have remained
unaltered.


Rock fissures
indicate cause
and nature of
subsidence.

Existed prior
to construc¬
tion.

Fissures due to
collapse of a
subterranean
cavern deep
in limestone
forming the
Nile Valley.

Designer of

_


PYRAMID RECORDS


159


t 187. THE CONSTRUCTIONAL PURPOSE OF THE TERRACED
ROCK CORE.

The designer of the Pyramid’s constructional details foresaw that the
slightest tremor due to adjacent cavern collapses—which collapses in such
strata are the minor causes of earthquakes—would disturb the precarious
stability of the strata below the Pyramid. He foresaw that the central mass
of the Pyramid’s masonry, in such case, would bring its maximum intensity
of pressure to bear upon a square considerably internal to the Pyramid’s base
square ; and that such local concentration of pressure would, by dynamic
impulse of momentary subsidence due to Earth tremor, punch the central
area, along its fissure surfaces, below the level of the natural rock base.

To meet this eventuality, the natural rock was left terraced upwards Tenraced rock
towards the Pyramid’s centre. The constructional object of this waspmpo*«of
obviously to form the nucleus of an arch, so that when the terraced centre railing effect
was affected by local Earth tremor, the momentary impulse of the central under »ub«id-
mass of masonry should, by the accentuation of “ flat-arching,” be largely *

diverted as arch thrust effect clear of the central area. The design, in effect, 44 throttle ”
provided a shock-absorber; but a shock-absorber designed to “ throttle ” move^ent.^
two separate shocks, or series of shocks. tremor*

accompanying

The first shock was that instantaneously reacting to the Earth tremor,
producing vertical movement. Vertical movement of the fissured area—
like the effect of central failure, due to shearing, on the fixed ends of a beam—
produced the second series of shocks : (1) an upward and outward kick of the
freed external strata; and, on its completion, (2) a reaction wave outwards
from its centre. Both these secondary effects were “ damped ” or
“ throttled ” by the incidental thrust of the arching effect noted.

The " echoing ” return of the latter ground wave—always accompanying ^* ulator
such earthquake effects—would produce, as it does in such earthquake movement ^
movements, an undulatory movement inwards towards the centre. This south ba*^ ^
would be largely resisted by the terraced natural rock core. Nevertheless, in war* than
and for the reasons noted in 182, the centre of the South base was jolted centre ***
inwards 2.17 B", and the centre of the North base 1.04 B". wid*. 1 " -


If 188. THE SOUTH AND NORTH MOVEMENT OF MASONRY
COURSES.

Plate XXXI indicates the central “ punched-in ” area of maximum That th«
subsidence. This effect would have been considerably increased had the abiorber ”
central terracing of the natural rock core been omitted. This “ shock- construction
absorber ” detail has made it possible at this date to derive from the existing
measurements and structural indications, the precise purpose of the Pyramid’s principle* li
design and construction. We may, therefore, take it as certain that the design forethought
of the constructional details has effected its purpose. The designer of these rejra tl to *
details has therefore been justified in his conclusions concerning subsidence,


i6o


THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Central
fissured base
area of
natural rock
has been
“ punched ”
downwards to
a greater ex¬
tent near
South base
side than near
North base
side.

Owing to this
the returning
undulatory
movement
(echo) of the
subsidence
Earth wave
produced an
eddy below
the base,
jolting the
masonry
inwards to the
greatest extent
at centre of
South base
side.


and in his design to meet the effects of such subsidence as he inferred might
take place, and that has taken place.

The indications supplied by the variations in level of the Passages have
determined the subsidence of the masonry courses. These, as shown on
Plate XXXI, indicate that the “ punched-in '' area of fissured rock is more
deeply “ punched-in '' near the South base side than near the North base side.
This shows that the dip of the courses inwards on the South side is steeper
than on the North side ; and that, in consequence, the surrounding undulatory
movement due to the “ echoing '' Earth wave, mentioned in 182 and 187,
would have the effect of jolting the whole of the southern portion of the
masonry bodily inwards, producing a relative horizontal movement along
successive courses from base to apex. This relative movement of.courses
would increase the horizontal slip between courses in proportion to the height
of a course above the base, this increase being due to the decrease of super¬
imposed mass, and to the consequent increased opening of vertical East to
West joints towards the North face.

If 189. THE JOLTING OPEN OF JOINTS IN THE NORTHERN
SIDE OF THE CORE MASONRY.


Experimental The reader can experimentally obtain the conditions of the last effect
of'manner in for himself. Place a long line of blocks in end-to-end contact on a table and.
movement® build on this successive similar and equal courses of end-to-end blocks, in
!JSlrS e south such manner that all the initial ends butt firmly against a rigid vertical board.
If the rt coii« d ei. Strike the rigid vertical board with a hammer and examine the end-to-end
joints between blocks in each successive course. The end-to-end joints near
the vertical board will generally remain tightly closed, and will only be found
to have opened out towards the further end of the courses, and to an increasing
extent for the higher courses. Owing to the latter effect, the originally
vertical surface formed by the ends of the courses away from the source of
shock will be found to be inclining over.

lUdVin thi# all the structural and subsidence evidences have indicated, then the existing
mMo£y nud * top platform of the Pyramid should show a greater distance from the Pyramid's
Theopemng centre to the North face of the core escarpment than from the Pyramid's
masonry joints centre to the South, East, and West core escarpments. Petrie gives the
Pyramid’s distances obtained by him at the mean level of 5408.5 B above the base as

centre, and J

increasing to a IOllOWS !-

maximum at

the summit. Mean.

’* N. side 224.5^0.7

Centre of Pyramid base horizontally to the E. side 214.1^0.3
core masonry faces on the 1 S. side 215.0±0.4

k W. side 217.6±*.0


Thus it will be seen that, although the distance to the South core face is
only 0.85 B" less than the mean of the distances to the East and West core


PYRAMID RECORDS


161


faces, the distance to the North core face is 8.65 B" greater than the latter. Central slope
It is this extra distance that has made the existing angle of slope 51 0 54' 24" East? and West
from the centre of the North core base to the top core, platform, 1 whereas the ments,
existing angles of slope of the centres of the South, East, and West core but for North
escarpments are not appreciably different from the original angle of ment,
5i°5i'i4".3. 51J54 ' 24 '-


If 190. THE GEOLOGICAL DATA.

When it is remembered that the stratification of the Gizeh Plateau, upon strata of
which the Great Pyramid stands, and of the whole of the adjacent Nile Valley and*NiieVaiUy
consists of limestone, the geological reasons for the subsidence effects are jJ“* 8 b *j**
clearly to hand. 2 ' The Nile bed itself is formed in a great limestone fault, f™f t * tone
“ eroded into a gorge, fed by water-tunnelled caverns in the cliffs,” and now Water-
“ filled with debris, forming the present Nile bed.” Here are evidences of ca?“rn*.
the cause of subsidence, in the examples of collapses of underground caverns o£

and grottos. As Petrie states, 3 “ large caverns have collapsed at some
hundreds of feet below the present Nile (Fig. 4).”

One such smaller cavern or grotto, but not collapsed, is already known Grotto m
under the Pyramid masonry (Plate XXXI), and within the natural terra^d rock
rock core, terraced to receive and to bind into the masonry courses of the A deeper
Pyramid. Not this grotto, however, but a larger unexplored cavern, by SSJJSSbJ
collapsing prior to the Pyramid’s construction, has been the cause of the fi * #ure *‘
rock Assuring and instability of strata discussed in 186-188.


If 191. THE EARLIEST FORCED ENTRY TO UPPER CHAMBERS.

The Pyramid’s structural indications are fairly conclusive that sub- fxternd
sidence effects were observed on the external surface of the Pyramid not Pyramid

. J . subsidence

long after it was built, possibly within a few generations from the time of its *i»own not
construction, and certainly before precise details and measurements of its tfon* **ter

J r ... . construction,

internal construction were lost or forgotten. The latter conclusion is certain when data

u concer nin g

from the entry for examination of the effects of the subsidence upon the
Chambers.

When the Pyramid was built, all access to its upper chambers was closed £“**5?** to
by the granite plug or plugs at the lower end of the 1st Ascending Passage
(Plate XXXI). To hide the fact that a Passage began here, a limestone ciofld. y
block was inserted to make the roof of the Entrance or Descending Passage De^ndfng

Passage and

J It will be observed that this general angle for the entire centre line of the North core escarp- chamber only,
ment from base to existing top platform agrees with the existing indications of casing slope for
North face, from existing casing base to Entrance sill indicated by existing line of Entrance
Passage, and its intersection with the existing base level of the 19th masonry course, near the
existing Entrance. The latter definition, as obtained by Petrie, gives existing angle of North
face casing, in its first 700 inches of height, as 51 0 53' 20"±i'. (Refer ^ 180.)

2 Refer Petrie's 44 Hist. Egypt,” Vol. I (1894 Edit.), pp. 1-6.

3 Ibid., pp. 3 and 4, illustr. Fig. 4. For such collapses originating earthquakes, refer Sir
Archibald Geikie’s “ Text-book of Geology,” pp. 369, 477-479.


PLATE XXXII.


PYRAMID RECORDS


163


PLATE XXXIII.


continuous past the 1st Ascending Passage. Entry to the upper chambers
was thus effectively closed. It was possible only to use the Descending
Passage to gain entry to the Subterranean Chamber.


When it was observed, however, that an internal movement had taken The early
place, steps were taken by the keepers of the Pyramid to force an entry. to upper
The manner in which this entry was effected forces us to two conclusions : ® &c *

Manner in
which effected


(1) That the Arab accounts of A1 Mamoun’s later forced entry in the * f rab

9th century A.D. are correct in stating that the 1st Ascending ^°“ n e d
Passage above the plugs was filled with limestone blocks, which
had to be broken up one by one, by the Arabs (refer also IfT^nelSy
208 and 208a) ; and

(2) That the plans of the Pyramid, or the data of its construction and

ground conditions, were still in existence when the first entry was
effected for inspection.


164 THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


PLATE XXXIV.


ISOMETdC PROJECTION SHOWING EATEANCE DOORWAY
* ofHOECC^IAL PASSAGE to QUEENS chambeb •


If 192. THE TUNNELLING OF THE WELL-SHAFT.

Entry by Instead of seeking to tunnel through the masonry as the Arabs did later,

up through the early keepers of the Pyramid commenced their tunnelling in a gradually
%otroito^ ck sloping direction from the Descending Passage, up through the natural rock
terracing to the grotto (Plate XXXI), Here they organised their depot for
tools and rest, and for the bye-passing of workers and materials. Their


PYRAMID RECORDS


165

reason for commencing their tunnel so deep in the natural rock was Grotto ..lacud

, . 1 ~ . . and orgamaad

obviously to intersect, for purpose of inspection, the two fissures, PQ and d ®*°* and
MN, shown on Plate XXXI. This seems to indicate that the fissures not
built up in the Descending Passage had developed as newly visible in
the Passage at the time of the subsidence that had occasioned the visit of
inspection considered.

From the grotto they then continued with a rough shaft approaching Accurate
towards the commencement of the Grand Gallery. When they had proceeded Spread 11
sufficiently far with this, by their rough initial methods of aligning, they made enter We»t^
an accurate survey from a fixed point of the Pyramid's construction to Grand ciliary
determine the exact location of their tunnel end in azimuth, altitude, and ramp ’
distance from this fixed point. Referring to the then known data concerning
the Pyramid's interior, the keepers thus obtained the location of their tunnel
end in relation to the end of the Grand Gallery. They next continued their
rouglr tunnel to a point vertically behind the first (lowest) ramp stone on
the West side of the Grand Gallery. This effected, a perfectly vertical shaft—
the so-called Well-shaft—was driven upwards to the predetermined point at
which the keepers intended to force an entry into the Gallery. Reaching
this point behind the first ramp stone, as shown on the Frontispiece (right- Ramp «ton«
hand view) and Plate XXXII (plan), they forced the ramp stone upwardsfrSmvSSicai
and outwards. That this is the manner in which the ramp stone was forced in?o n Grtnd £l
is shown by the fractured appearance of the ramp around the Well-shaft. Gallery *

This is accurately illustrated on the Isometric Projection shown on Plate
XXXIII.


If 193. THE EARLIEST INSPECTION OF THE SEALED CHAMBERS.

Having gained an entry, the keepers proceeded to an inspection of the Th^opwin*
Chambers. To inspect the Queen's Chamber, they had, perforce, to break GaU^floor
or remove the Grand Gallery floor slab that originally bridged the Entrance to

Passage to the Queen's Chamber, as indicated by the existing details. These chamber,
are as shown on Frontispiece (right-hand view), and Plates XXXII, XXXIII,
and XXXIV. This done, they found little or no serious indications of failure
in the Queen's Chamber.

Proceeding to the Antechamber and King's Chamber, they found here inspection ©f
indications of possible instability due to the movement that had caused ££ d J5jjj«'*
inspection to be made. In the King's Chamber they found the ceiling beams .. ,

J r , 1 • Visible cracks

cracked along their South ends inside the Chamber. The cause of this
fracture is clearlv indicated bv the general form of subsidence shown or postered
on Plates XXXI and XXXV. To enable any further movement or rf toS*

fracture to be indicated, the keepers evidently smeared the cracks and open
joints with cement or plaster. Thus Petrie states, regarding these ceiling-
beams, that “ Round the S.E. corner, for about 5 feet on each side,
the joint is daubed up with cement, laid on by fingers. The crack across the
Eastern Roof-beam has been also daubed with cement, looking, therefore , as


PLATE XXXVa.

SUBSIDENCE DISTORTION DIAGRAM OF EXISTING KING’S CHAMBER, ANTECHAMBER, Etc.


In Section—Limestone Stippled : Granite Hatched in Parallel Lines


PLATE XXXVb.

PLAN OF KING’S CHAMBER, ANTECHAMBER, AND QUEEN’S CHAMBER—ORIGINAL MEASUREMENTS.


In Section—Limestone Stippled j Granite Hatched in Parallel Lines.
For Enlargement of Table, see Addendum to Plate XXXV.


ADDENDUM TO PLATE XXXV.


ORIGINAL DISTANCES from FACE of GREAT STEP to
SOUTH WALL of KING^S CHAMBER_


PLATE PLATE ORIGINAL DIMENSIONS GEOMETRICAL DIMENSIONING
•mV TOT PYRAMID BRITISH IN

Ref. Def. INCHES INCHES PYRAMID INCHES


PYRAMID RECORDS


169


it it had cracked before the chamber was finished. At the S.W. corner,
plaster is freely spread over the granite, covering about a square foot
altogether.” (The first italics are ours, the second Professor Petrie's own.)

If 194. THE inspection tunnel to chambers of con¬
struction.

To gam access to the important Chambers of Construction over the
King's Chamber, the keepers next drove an opening into the East wall of the
Grand Gallery at its upper or South end. This is as shown on the Frontispiece
and Plate XXXVI.

Tunnelling clear of the wall blocks of the Gallery, the workers turned inspection
their tunnel towards the South, as shown on Plate XXXVI, to enter the f? 0 n miot n of en
Chambers of Construction at the upper level of the ceiling blocks of the to upper
King's Chamber. Here they found that the indications of instability were kind's* 0
not so serious as they had feared, for they did not proceed higher than the ceifhTgTeam*.
1st Chamber with their inspection . 1 Modern tunnelling upwards into the^|^J ersof
four higher Chambers has shown that the use of limestone (in lieu of granite)
supporting blocks, bearing the ends of the higher granite roofing beams, has uider
caused the shock of subsidence to be partly broken by crushing and “ plastic " ““Jjerimposed
flow of the limestone. In other words, the higher Chambers of Construction load *
were purposely built weaker than the lowest Chamber and ceiling beams of
the King's Chamber, to act as a succession of “ buffers " between the super¬
imposed mass of the Pyramid and the King's Chamber, during the expected
subsidence movement.

Tp permit of this “ buffer " effect being fully developed, the beams or object^bemg to
slabs of the Chambers of Construction were not built into the East and West shock of direct
walls, from which, as shown by the adhering plaster, the upper Chamber has tion to the
subsided as much as 3 inches. Hence, instead of indicating bad workmanship construction

11 ’ . . 0 -.1 ,1 1 of lowest

*—as has been supposed by some authorities not conversant with the design chamber^of
of constructional devices for counteracting the effects of subsidence movement and King’s
that cannot be prevented — the workmanship in these Chambers is the
necessary effect of good design. An entirely rigid system of construction,
with uniform workmanship from the lowest to the highest Chamber, would


1 The question of an early forced entry into the Pyramid for inspection has been discussed
at greater length than many readers may deem to be warranted by the relative importance of the
facts. The reason is that many theories of intention have been attached to the so-called “ Well-
shaft ”—by which we deem this earliest entry was made—and to the access tunnel to the Chambers
of Construction.

We have tried to shorten the presentation of what seemed to us to be the true explanation,
by adopting the narrative form rather than the inductive form of presenting the data. The
reader, therefore, should understand that where the narrative form may seem to savour of
assertion, in the presentation of what actually has been evolved by inductive analysis, this is
entirely due to the abbreviated form adopted. Where assertion may seem to exist, the reader, it
is hoped, will find the confirming data in the context.

Two facts of importance in this connection are (1) that the ramp stone in the Grand Gallery
clearly was forced into the Grand Gallery from the so-called Well-shaft; and (2) that the forced
inlets were evidently all carefully selected to be at such points as would not destroy or interfere
with the purpose of any essential feature of the Pyramid’s Passage construction.


Section from Grand Gallery
to King’s Chamber


PYRAMID RECORDS


171

have been disastrous. A voussoir arch construction would have been more
disastrous still, as the final stage of settlement has produced an opening out
of the King’s Chamber walls. This opening out, in conjunction with the
tilting thrust from the Grand Gallery, illustrated on Plate XXXV, Fig. A,
would have produced a rocking motion and a kicking-up effect on the North
haunching of a voussoir arch construction, as well as an opening out of the
span of the arch. The complicated combination of stress movements between
the voussoirs would have produced failure.


172


THE GREAT PYRAMID : ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Plate XIX
for technical
reader only.

Supplies
data for co¬
ordinates of
Plate XX.

Close agree¬
ment with
Petrie’s data.


Sources of
data.


Related
movements
due to ground
subsidence
and conse¬
quent reactions
on Pyramid
masonry
courses.

The adopted

azimuth

system.


The point of
origin for
setting out the
base square
and the
oriented
definition of
the distance
between the
Pyramid’s East
and West sides.

Preliminary or
final ?


The Pyramid
courses.

The geometric¬
ally defined
special apex
Pyramid in
relation to the
existing top¬
most course.


Section III.— Details Concerning Plates.

If 195. PLATE XIX. THE REDUCED CO-ORDINATES OF PROFESSOR
PETRIE'S SURVEY DATA.

The data given on Plate XIX are self-explanatory to the technical reader. The
purpose of the Plate is to enable the technical reader to check the calculations giving
the co-ordinates of Plate XX.

It should be sufficient for the general reader to observe how closely the newly
calculated co-ordinates of Plate XX agree with Professor Petrie's calculated
distances, as given on Plate XX.

If 196. PLATE XX. THE MEASUREMENTS AND LEVELS OF THE
EXISTING DETAILS OF THE GREAT PYRAMID'S EXTERIOR.

The data given on Plate XX are self-explanatory. The direct measurements
of the base square are Professor Petrie's. The true Pyramid azimuth co-ordinate
measurements are from Petrie's survey data given on Plate XIX. The plan of
the base sockets—shown to a magnified scale as compared with the scale of base
co-ordinates—is from Professor Smyth's “ Life and Work," Vol. I, p. 138, etc.

As explained in Sections I and II of this Chapter, ground subsidence has shifted
the sockets, both in relation to their original azimuth and in relation to each other,
and at the same time, by consequent minor earthquake effects has shifted the
base courses of the Pyramid in relation to the shifted positions of the sockets. The
sum of all apparent movements, as examined in detail, varies from § of an inch
to 3J inches. (j[]f 141-145, 180-182.) What we have termed the Pyramid's “ true
azimuth co-ordinate system " is the azimuth system as defined by the existing
socket corners—outmost from the Pyramid's base centre. This azimuth system
was adopted as the system of reference for the various related—primary and
secondary—movements.

The existing evidences of the various related movements have shown (^flf 145,
180, and 181) that the point M of the S.E. socket was adopted as the point of
origin for setting out the Pyramid's base square and diagonals, and that the
distance between the East side of the latter socket and the West side UX of the
S.W. socket defined the length of the Pyramid’s base side. Even in the event
of the technical reader failing to agree with all our conclusions concerning the
related base movements, it will nevertheless have to be conceded that the point M
formed the point of origin for preliminary setting out, and that the distance between
the East side of the S.E. socket and the West side of the S.W. socket formed the
preliminary definition of the Pyramid's base width from East to West, (flf 145,
180, and 181.)

The levels of the Pyramid courses are as obtained by Petrie. The reader should
note that the geometrical considerations of Plates XXIII, XXIV, and XXV (Fig. A 2 )
require that the special apex Pyramid should be 364.27665 P* =364.68 B" high.
The Pyramid's geometrical height being 5813.01 P" =5819.40 B" gives base of original
apex Pyramid, or top surface of the highest course of masonry at 5454.72 B ,r above
the base. This agrees with the highest existing course, the 203rd course, at
5451.8 B", thus leaving 2.9 B" for subsidence of the highest course. Owing to the


PYRAMID RECORDS


173


cumulative effect of the flat-arching of the courses, from the centre of the base to the
topmost course, as explained in ^ 183 and 184, the subsidence at the apex would
not be more than this. The special apex Pyramid would not be a single apex
stone, but an apex Pyramid of finer (casing) limestone. The reader must not
confuse the apex Pyramid with the apex stone.


If 196a. THE CEREMONY OF ORIENTING THE FOUNDATION.


The ceremony of setting out—or orienting—the foundations of a building is
extremely ancient. The ceremony was known as " the stretching of the cord/'
It is referred to, without explanation, in an Egyptian inscription of Amenemhat I,
the first king of Dynasty XII. At that time the ceremony was already ancient.

The " measuring cord " is allegorically taken as defining the function of Israel
in relation to the world in Deut. xxxii, 8 and 9, and context. In verse 9 the true
rendering of the Hebrew reads " Jacob is the measuring cord of His inheritance."
Again in Job xxxviii, 4, 5, and 6, the " stretching of the cord " and the cutting
of the sockets for defining the laying out of the foundations are referred to as follows:—

“ Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth ? . • .

“ Who hath laid the measures thereof ? . . .

" Who hath stretched the line (or cord) upon it ?

“ Whereupon are the sockets made to sink ? or who laid the corner stone thereof ? ”


Egyptian
evidence as to
the antiquity
of the cere¬
mony of
setting out
the founda¬
tion.

References to
the ceremony
in the Old
Testament.

The stretching
of the cord,
the sockets,
and the
corner stone
referred to in
Job.


The Egyptian inscriptions generally indicate the process of orientation being star
effected by " stretching the cord " on an alignment towards a particular star. All
the astronomical and Egyptological data in relation to this are fully discussed in
Sir Norman Lockyer's " Dawn of Astronomy/' 1


If 196b. THE GODDESS OF THE FOUNDATION.

In the Egyptian sculptures and texts the goddess Sefkhet-Aabut 2 — " the The goddess
goddess of the laying of the foundation," and the goddess associated with the chrono- and k the * but
logical repetitions of "seven"—is pictured as assisting the king in the ceremony foundation
of "stretching the cord.' This goddess is represented as the guardian of the ?, stMtcWng
cycles of 30 and 120 years, and is pictured accompanied by the symbols of these, the cord.”

In consequence, the principal foundation ceremonies were held at the festivals of J f h * h *“" di * n
the termination of these cycles. Obviously the chronological aspect of her con- logical reped-
nection with " seven " relates to-the seven primary cycles of 103 years, which wereS 0 “vm”
equal to six groups of Sep tep sed periods (If 34). The“S«d

The head-dress of the goddess consists of an arch, or pair of horns inverted, series of seven

over a seven-rayed star, or seven-petalled flower. Here we have, apparently, of 103
a hieroglyphic representation of the rainbow, which in the Babylonian goddess The emblem of
Ishtar is signified by " the jewelled collar of Ishtar." 3 The Rev. C. J. Ball shows J]j?JjJ° achian

that the latter symbol was derived from the Chinese. Accordingly we find that covenant,

the Chinese equivalent of Noah, the patriarch Fu-hi, was " born of a rainbow," ™LrTf e,Ied
" was manifested on the mountains of Chin, immediately after that great division ishtar.
of time which was produced by the deluge," and that "he carefully bred seven Chine**
different kinds of animals which he used to sacrifice to the Great Spirit of heaven The ** in k* w

and earth." 4 covenant in

Chinese

x The only criticism one feels inclined to offer in connection with this work is that Lockyer
seems to have had too few definitive statements of alignment and too many stars upon which to
align. He was, therefore, able to fix many of his datings in accordance with systems of Egypto¬
logical chronology that are not now accepted. Criticism, however, does not apply to his solar
alignments. Refer 1-4 and footnotes.

2 Budge, “ Gods of the Egyptians,” Vol. I, pp. 424-426 and 430.

3 Rev. C. J. Ball, “ Light from the East,” pp. 40 and 201.

4 Faber’s ” Pagan Idolatry,” Vol. II, pp. 343-344.


174


THE GREAT PYRAMID : ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


The rainbow
toddets, Iris
= Aphrodite
= Hathor.

Sefkhet-Aabut
an aspect of
Hathor.

Hathor, and
the Rainbow
Covenant
in Egyptian
Deluge
traditions.

The seven
Hathors and
the Pleiades
in relation to
rain and the
Deluge.

Pleiades the
" Founda¬
tion.”

Sefkhet-A&but
the goddess of
the founda¬
tion.

Evidence that
Egyptian “ Sed
Hebs ” began
from an epoch
that defined
the Egyptian
date for the
Hebrew Deluge.


Sefkhet-Aabut
an Egyptian
version of the
Rainbow Angel
of Revelation
and the
*' Palmoni ” of
Daniel.


P4tkie’s re¬
construction
and the new
reconstruction.

Application of
Petrie's
reconstruction
to S.E. corner
casing stone
shows weak¬
ness of result¬
ing detail.


Professor
Petrie’s
unfortunate
selection, for
a typical case,
of a socket
corner that
does not fully
define the
defects of his
reconstruc¬
tion.


f 196c. THE DELUGE ELEMENT AND EPOCH.

Confirming the connection suggested. Ball points out that Iris, the goddess
of the rainbow, “ is associated with Aphrodite (Ishtar) in Homer (II, 5, 353, seq.) ” ;
and Budge, that Aphrodite was identified with the Egyptian Hathor, 1 and that the
goddess Sefkhet-Aabut, in one Egyptian representation, is represented as Hathor.
The latter, again, was originally, according to Budge, “ only one special part of the
great watery mass of heaven.” 2 The clear meaning of the latter statement becomes
apparent when we remember that Hathor was instrumental in effecting the
“ Destruction of Men ” in the Egyptian equivalent of the Deluge narrative (^f 28).
Hence the association with “ seven ” obviously originated the “ seven Hathors ”
—the seven fairy goddesses of the Egyptians. Obviously, again, these were identi¬
fied with the “ seven Pleiades ”—associated traditionally with the Deluge (^f 29)
—since, in early Euphratean astronomy, the “ seven Pleiades ” (or particularly,
the star AlcyonS) were known as “ The Foundation.” 3

This completes the identifications associating the goddess Sefkhet-Aabut, the
goddess of the foundation ceremony, with the Deluge rainbow covenant of Gen. ix, 13.
The identifications further suggest that the cycles of 30 and 120 years, represented
as controlled by the goddess, began from an epoch that was the ancient Egyptian
equivalent date for the Hebrew Deluge ending. This is confirmed by the facts
concerning the Deluge Calendar of Genesis, and the facts concerning the early
Egyptian November year-beginning discussed in Chapter I, Sections I and II.

If iq6d. THE RAINBOW ANGEL OF REVELATION.

The identifications outlined show that the goddess Sefkhet-Aabut was the
Egyptian (female) version of the “ Rainbow Angel ” of Revelation, Chapters x and xi.
It is this angel who defines “ the times,” as Palmoni —“ the wonderful numberer ” 4
or “ numberer of secrets ”—in Daniel viii defines “ the times.” The “ Rainbow
Angel ” “ was clothed with a cloud, and a rainbow was upon his head.” He was
” the Seventh Angel,” and at his cry “ seven thunders uttered their voices.” His
final declaration was that “ there should be time no longer.” 4 Comparing the
latter with Daniel viii, 13-19, we see that the functions of Palmoni and the Rainbow
Angel are identical, and that the Egyptian goddess Sefkhet-Aabut was represented
as exercising the same functions.

^f 197. PLATE XXL THE SOUTH-EAST CORNER CASING STONE.

The reconstruction defined as Professor Petrie’s in Figs. A, A lt and A 2 , results
entirely from his data in the text of his work and from his Plate X. The new
reconstruction shown on Figs. B, B lf and B 2 follows from the data discussed in
Sections I and II of this Chapter—particularly in ^f 144, 145, 146, and 196. A
model of Petrie’s reconstruction for the S.E. corner casing stone will convince any
experienced constructional engineer, architect, or building craftsman, that a corner
stone of its shape and proportion could not be safely handled into position, and that
the stone, in position, would not be reliable. This has been the conclusion, without
exception, of many experienced engineers, architects, and contractors, to whom
we have shown such a model during the past thirteen years.

It is unfortunate that Professor Petrie, in selecting one of the four corner
stones to define a typical case of his theory of reconstruction for all four, did not
select the S.E. corner stone. Had he done so, we feel confident he would have

1< * Gods of the Egyptians/’ Yol. I, p. 435.

2 Ibid., pp. 428-429.

3 Brown, “ Primitive Constellations,” Vol. I, p. 57.

4 In this connection the reader is referred to 36 and footnote.


PYRAMID RECORDS


175


revised his theory of reconstruction. Had he been led to a revision of his theory
of the sockets and the corner casing stones, it is highly probable that the revision
of the latter would have led him to discover the true holl6wed-in base plan.

The reader should understand that the new reconstruction shown on Figs. For new re.
B, B x , and B 2 may not be absolutely correct in every detail. It is more than prob- pj“ment° il '
able that the pavement was carried over the socket, and that the casing stone lhe

rested on the pavement—in all other respects, precisely as shown on Figs. B x and B 2 . io?£ 2 Pca*inJ

•tones.


1 197a. SOCKET DEPOSITS.

What makes the latter alternative probable is the more recently derived evidence Foundation
from the Lisht Pyramid of Senusert I (Dynasty XII). This is given by Dr. Albert jffht* i p*yr lmid
Lithgoe as follows :— 1 «ockot».

“ Under the platform (of the Pyramid) there was found at each of the four corners of the
Pyramid a ‘ foundation-deposit. 1 These were practically identical in character, and in each
instance had been placed in a square pocket about 80 cm. in diameter, and i metre in depth,
excavated in the bed-rock upon which the platform rested. The bottom of the pocket had
been covered in each case with about 5 cm. of clean gravel upon which were some 25 to 30
small pottery model dishes and vases, while scattered among them were a number of lozenge¬
shaped blue glass beads. On these objects were laid the skull and some of the bones of an
ox which had been sacrificed as a part of the ceremonial. The pocket had then been com¬
pletely filled with gravel, on which, at about half its depth, was laid a small model brick of
sun-dried Nile mud. Finally the pockets were covered by massive limestone blocks, which
in each case formed the corner blocks of the Pyramid platform.”

The engineer or architect will probably agree* for the particular case of a if Great
corner stone partly resting on the natural rock and partly on socket filling of the fj££5i? d siied
Figs. B, Bj, and B 2 would not be altogether good design or construction. In such this would
event, it is likely that the pavement spanned the socket and carried the corner cII^TcIriSg
casing stone. Of course, it was the usual Egyptian practice to cover the foundation »*<>«»•« rested
area of their Pyramids and other heavy constructions with a layer of sand upon wiring
which to bed their base blocks. This is good practice so long as the sand is not • ocket **
free to move after bedding. What is not good practice is to have a block such as
AGFE on Plan (Fig. B) with its corner A resting on sand or gravel filling and its
corner F on bed-rock.

On the other hand, the foundation deposits of the Great Pyramid's sockets -if Great
may have been filled round with run-in lead, 2 or with other hard filling, in which case fo^ketsfiUed
the whole foundation area of the Pyramid base—as normal in such work—may have
been covered with fine sand internal to the surrounding pavement, the core base casing blocks
blocks, and possibly also the corner casing stones being thereafter laid, as shown “Jtid dSUuy
on Figs. B 1 and B 2 . All known casing blocks near the centre of the four base sides,
however, rest upon the pavement, as shown on Plates XXVI-XXIX. Plates.° n


H 198. PLATE XXII. ISOMETRIC AND OBLIQUE PROJECTIONS OF
SOUTH-EAST CASING STONE.

The isometric and oblique projections of Professor Petrie's reconstruction
refer to the defects mentioned in If 197. These two views clearly illustrate the
difficulty of handling without injury a stone altogether 8 feet high, according to
Petrie's reconstruction, from extreme base to top surface, only 3 feet square on
top, and with a base diagonal—AL on Fig. A, Plate XXI—of over 13 feet, ending
in the weak projecting footing provided to fit into the socket.

journal ” Ancient Egypt,” 1915, Part IV, p. 145.

2 The Coptic tradition of the Masoudi Arabic MS. mentions run-in lead in connection with the
Great Pyramid pavement.

Vyse’s ” Pyramids of Gizeh,” Vol. II, Sprenger’s Appendix, p. 325.


Petrie's S.E.
corner casing
stone:—

Top, 3 feet
square ;
height, 8 feet ;
base diagonal
over 13 feet
long, ending in
weak project¬
ing footing.


176 THE GREAT PYRAMID : ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


New recon¬
struction :—
Top, 6 feet
square ;

Height, 5 feet
(or if resting
on rock* 6 feet
6inches); base,
9 feet 9 inches
square.

The effect of
the additional
thickness
given to base
course of
Pyramid's
casing.

Petrie's casing
reconstruction
requires casing
thickness 6 feet
up centre of
face slopes
and 3 feet at
the corners,
the reverse of
good con¬
struction.


The isometric and oblique projections of the corner stone, according to the
new reconstruction, give a stone 6 feet square on top, 5 feet high, if resting on the
pavement—or 6 feet 6 inches high, if resting on the rock surface—and 9 feet 9 inches
square on its base surface. All the known casing stones in situ are of this or greater
proportion. Many of them are of a much greater top thickness than 6 feet, running
into and beyond the mean core surface. This shows that the base casing stone course
was thicker than the casing stone courses above it, and hence, in all probability, that
the corner base casing stones were larger in plan than is indicated by Plate XXI,
Fig. B. 1 Otherwise the casing of the Pyramid is more or less uniform, about 6 feet
thick on the top surface of courses.

Petrie's reconstruction requires the 6 feet thickness down the centre of each
face slope, and a 3 feet thickness at the corners or approaching the arris edges.
This is the reverse of sound construction in any form of building. Additional
thickness is more necessary at returns of courses than in straight lengths of courses.


1[ 199. PLATE XXIII. GEOMETRICAL DEFINITION OF PASSAGE DIS¬
PLACEMENT.


The basis for
the geometrical
definition (1)
of the Apex
Pyramid ; (2)
of the hollow-
ing-in feature
of the
Pyramid's
casing slopes ;
(3) of the
displacement
of the Pyra¬
mid's Passage
System.


In Fig. A, Case I, D 2 ODj represents the East to West vertical section of the
Pyramid.

For Fig. A, Case II, D 2 OD! represents an apex vertical section whose linear
dimensions are ^th the linear dimensions for Case I. This apex section forms the
basis for the geometrical definition (i) of the Apex Pyramid ; (2) of the hollowing-in
features of the Pyramid’s casing slopes ; and (3) of the displacement of the Pyramid’s
Passage System. Explanation of Case II, as defining the features noted, will also
form the explanation for Case I, if 10 times the dimensions of Case II be substituted.

Fig. A, Case II :—


J2J1J3. = 3652 ~^ 2 4 6 5 P". Complete the quadrant J 3 J J 2 0.

4

With O as apex, and the central radius OJ x of the quadrant as perpendicular
construcrions form the triangle D 2 OD 1 , with base D 2 J 1 D 1 = length of quadrant arc J2J1J3*

forming the Then area of triangle D 2 OD 1 =area of quadrant J 3 JiJ 2 0.

•hove basic.

Fig. a. Draw the chord JgAjJg to cut the perpendicular OJ x at A v and to cut ODg.

at B 2 , and OD, at B,. Then B^B^ 2582 ' 654 p», 2582.654 P" being x Vth the

4

Precessional circuit. (Hence for Case I, B 2 A 1 B 1 represents the level of the Pre-
cessional circuit.)

is of equal length to B^jBj. (Hence for Case I, quadrant AgAiAgO is the quadrant
of the Precessional Circle.)

Draw E 3 OE 4 through O and parallel to J 2 J 3 and T> 2 D 1 . On E 3 OE 4 construct
the square EJE2E3E4 of area equal to the quadrant area A^^AgO, and equal to the
Pyramid sectional area BjOBg, and such that E 3 0=E 4 0 =E 2 F 1 =E 1 F 1 . Then
OF x =E 3 E 4 -E 1 E 2 =364.2766547 P".

Now produce EgF-^ to cut the Pyramid face line OD 2 at k 3 and OD 2 at k x .
Then F^ =F 1 k 1 =286.1022156 P". The line kgF^ represents the level of a square
circuit at the Pyramid’s apex, of length of side k^k^ =2F 1 k 3 =2 x 286.1022156 P".


1 Similar thickening applied to Petrie’s reconstruction would necessarily make his detail still
weaker for handling and bedding in position.


PYRAMID RECORDS


177


The plan of this square in relation to the plan of the Pyramid's base square Fig. b.
M 1 M 2 M 3 M 4 is shown on Fig. B as N 1 N 2 N 3 N 4 , in which kgF^ represents the line
k 3 F 1 k 1 in Fig. A. Producing N 2 N 3 in Fig. B to intersect, in plan, the Pyramid's
North base side MjM 2 at Y, and its South base side at W, gives the line WN 3 k 3 N 2 Y
defining the plan of the central vertical axial plane of the Pyramid's Passage System,
uniformly removed the distance YZ=k 3 F 1 =WU =286.1022156 P" eastwards from
the Pyramid's North to South central vertical plane, represented in plan by the line
UFjZ.

Point T in Fig. B represents the centre of the Entrance Doorway on the Nortft
face slope of the Pyramid.

IF 200. PLATE XXIV. THE COMPLETE GEOMETRY OF THE DIS¬
PLACEMENT.

Plate XXIV represents the East to West vertical section RgOR! of the Pyramid, The composite
shown in plan as the line R 2 Ri in Fig. B, Plate XXIII. The apex geometrical con-
struction is identical in line and letter references with Case II, Fig. A, Plate XXIII. of p i® te xxnl *
Plate XXIV diagram is, therefore, a composite representation of the geometrical
constructions of Plate XXIII, Figs. A and B.

The vertical line K 3 B 2 represents the elevation, as seen from the North, of the
central vertical axial plane of the Passage System, with the point X at height K 3 X
representing the level of the centre of the Entrance Doorway on the North face slope.

With these key explanations the general reader should be able to follow the
sequence of geometrical construction in Plates XXIII and XXIV without further
elaboration. The sequence of geometrical construction bears an important relation
to the geometrical constructions of Plate XXV.

If 201. PLATE XXV. THE PYRAMID BASE AND THE EARTH'S ORBIT.

Plate XXV has been sufficiently explained in ^flf 153 to 159. One item, how- The four
ever, requires amplifying. This concerns the Pyramid's value for the mean sun S^d^rn 1
distance as compared with the various modern values by different methods. The “*2^ng°the
four principal methods of determination giving reliable results are the following : — »n distune*.

(1) By measurement of planetary parallaxes;

(2) By the velocity of light ;

(3) By means of the determination of the relative masses of the Earth and

the Sun; and

(4) By means of the parallactic inequality of the Moon's motion.

Results by the four different methods do not precisely agree. The total range Rang* of.
of difference is about 500,000 miles. Until they do agree by all four methods — c^paSso'n of
within a minute range of variation—the mean sun distance cannot be stated as known J*^* # n 5j - the
precisely. It is not sufficient for a series of independent observations or calculations pend«nt
by one method alone to agree within a minute range of variation. In such case— 50 M 00 #, miie*.
until observations or calculations by the other methods agree within the same range
of variation—it must be assumed that that agreement has been rendered possible
by errors common to the method or apparatus employed.

At present the range of variation in the determination of the sun's parallax by Expression of
the various methods ranges from 8".762 to 8".8o6. These limits give a value for fo^methods
the sun distance ranging from 93,300,000 miles to 92,830,000 miles respectively, ^^folo^ooo
The Pyramid's value for the sun distance—92,996,085 miles, as in If 159—represents ±250,000
a parallax of 8".791, which agrees closely with the added mean of methods (1), (2), mie# *
and (4), 8".8o6, 8".78 i, and 8 ".jy 3 respectively. Professor Newcomb's experiments
in connection with method (2) derived a parallax of 8".79.


178 THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE


Present
opinion:—
Snn distance,
92,900,000±
100,000 miles.


The general opinion at the present time is that the sun distance lies between
92,800,000 miles and 93,000,000 miles. Observational astronomers declare in favour
of the lower value. The best modern statement, however, is 92,900,000 ±100,000
miles.


II 202. PLATE XXVI. VIEW OF NORTH BASE CASING STONES, LOOK¬
ING WESTWARDS.

vi«w in Plate XXVI gives a general view of the extent of casing stones existing on the

cent?? ©f° North base side. The figure standing at the first casing stone is not many feet

North ba«« removed from the centre of the North base side. The complete extent of pavement

Ninauen stones s h own in the foreground, and extending beyond the casing stones, was uncovered
•*in situ.” by Mr. L. Dow Covington during 1909 to 1910. The total number of casing stones

RKT uncovered is nineteen, of which the first fourteen, in the view shown, give an unbroken
blueUn^f K k ase Lne °* 63 feet 4 inches. This is not sufficient to locate the point H of Fig. A,
63 feet 4 inches. Plate XXV, the western limit of the hollowed-in central surface at the base. To
One of these locate this limit, the only known certain point where casing exists at the necessary
lmtedon the distance from the centre of a base side is at G on the South base. This has not been
ride!' \ut\l cleared. Petrie sunk a shaft through debris at the point noted, and surveyed the points
covered with obtained by means of a plumb line. A complete clearance near this point would be
® ns. necessary to define the change of direction in the South base line.

Attention is directed to the fact that the casing stones sit on the pavement. In
his earlier editions, prior to Petrie's survey, Smyth showed the pavement erroneously
as the lowest casing course.


If 203. PLATE XXVII. VIEW OF NORTH BASE CASING STONES AND
AL MAMOUN'S FORCED ENTRANCE.

The figure shown is in the same position as in the view of Plate XXVI. The
joints between the casing stones are shown as visible for purpose of illustration.
Actually they are only perceptible under the closest inspection.

A1 Mamoun's forced entrance is shown on the 7th course, and, as pictured,
vertically above the first existing casing stone. This entry was made about 800 A.D.
in the hopes of obtaining access to the treasures that, according to tradition, were
hidden in the Pyramid. A curious circumstance is related in connection with this
undertaking. This is to the effect that the excavation—having proceeded a con¬
siderable distance into the core masonry—was upon the point of being given up,
when the workmen heard what appeared to be the sound of a stone falling, slightly
eastwards of their tunnel end. Altering the direction of their tunnel eastwards
towards the point indicated by the sound referred to, the workers soon reached the
Descending Passage at a point below the junction. Here they found the stone
whose fall had redirected their operations. The shape of the stone showed that it
had been the roofing stone of the Entrance Passage that had hidden the beginning
of the 1st Ascending Passage.

Finding that the Descending Passage did not lead to the hoped-for treasure,
the workers redirected their attentions to finding an entrance to the 1st Ascending
Passage. The Arab accounts relate that many limestone plugs had to be extracted
from the Passage above the granite plugs before entrance was effected. (Refer ^191.)

If 20 4 - PLATE XXVIII. NEAR VIEW OF NORTH BASE CASING STONES.

North^aT® 01 s * an( L n g figure is again in the same position as in Plates XXVI and XXVII.

showing rock The fissure below the pavement shown in the left foreground is also shown partly,
m the right foreground of Plate XXVI and in section on Plate XXXI, as fissure GH.


Account of
A1 Mamoun’i
forced entry
about 800 A.D.

The curioue
circumstance
that led to
access being
gained when
operations
were about to
be stopped.

The discovery
of the 1st
Ascending
Passage.


Arab accounts
of innumerable
limestone
blocks broken
up, and ex¬
tracted from
1st Ascending
Passage.


fissure.


PYRAMID RECORDS


179


1 205. PLATE XXIX. GENERAL VIEW OF NORTH BASE SHOWING
CASING STONES, AL MAMOUN'S ENTRY, AND EXISTING
ENTRANCE TO ENTRANCE PASSAGE.

The figure seated on the 5th course of core masonry is shown pointing to A 1 Constructional
Mamoun's forced entry on the 7th course. Above, to the left, is shown the system JJlVSnt* 0
of relieving slabs or blocks over the beginning of the Entrance Passage, designed * ub#id .® nc «
to prevent subsidence pressure jamming the vertically rotating pivoted block that ii“t£fbiocir
originally closed the Entrance Doorway. These relieving blocks are also shown Doorway” 0 *
in section over the Entrance in Plate XXXI.

The pivoted doorway was not known to A 1 Mamoun's workers until after access Subsidence
had been gained by tunnelling ; the casing being complete until Arab demolition jJj*ng assisted
around 800 A.D. It would appear, however, that subsidence had distorted *the Arab demoii-
casing and buckled it loose on the core masonry, making it a simple matter, once ° n#
the casing had been undermined near the base, for demolition to continue. Many
of the greater buildings of Cairo about 1000 A.D. were built of the casing blocks.

If 206. PLATE XXX. EXISTING AND ORIGINAL MEASUREMENTS OF
THE GREAT PYRAMID'S PASSAGES.

The bases of the comparative statements of Plate XXX are—

(1) That the original angle of slope of the Passages is known. (Ulf 176 and 177.)

(2) That the existing sloping lengths of the built portions of the Passages

are known, and that critical examination shows that these have not
appreciably altered since construction. (^[ 180 and 186.)

(3) That, in consequence of (2), subsidence has altered the horizontal and

vertical positions of all points along ABCD without appreciably altering
their passage floor distances in relation to the points A, B, C, and D.

(Iflf 179, l8o > i 8 3> and 185.)

(4) That the floor from the Great Step to the King's Chamber originally lay

in one horizontal plane.

(5) That the roof of the horizontal passage to the Queen's Chamber originally The bate* of

lay in one horizontal plane at the level of the termination of the roof SVe etSem2nu
of the 1st Ascending Passage. JriS&i"* * nd

(6) That subsidence in the natural rock below the Pyramid's base—unlike Pasture

its effect on the built mass of blocks above—vertically lowered all }{£J?hor£ d
points in the rock-cut portion of the Descending Passage between
C and E, without sensibly moving the points horizontally. (Plate XXX, co-ordinates.
Table B, Cols. 3 A and B, and note 3 to Table B.)

(7) That, in consequence of (6), floor distances from C towards E were all

cumulatively stretched during subsidence, with the maximum amount
of extension for the total sloping floor distance CE. (Plate XXX,

Table B, Cols. 2 A and B.)

(8) That reconstruction on the bases of (6) and (7) shows that E was originally a geometrical

1162.6 P" below the base (Plate XXX, .Table B, Col. 4 A), this being fgttS ?* 0
also the measurement of the height of the 35th course axis above the base.

The existing measurements are all from Professor Petrie, except in the case of M^ $ e e . 3Sth
CE, which Petrie could not measure accurately owing to accumulations of debris. Source* of
The Edgars, 1 as a result of Dow Covington's clearances in the Descending Passage, J£ia* 5 rement*.
were>ble to measure the length CE as given on Plate XXX.

The horizontal and vertical distances of points in the sloping passages are reduced
from Petrie's passage distances, angles, and offsets. The notes to Plate XXX and horizontal and
footnote to 183 direct attention to an error in Petrie's reduction of his measured JJStSi ^ the

Great Step.

v ‘ Great Pyramid Passages/' Vol. II, p. 8.


Hi* measure¬
ments right,
but his re-
due tip n in this
case in error.


Existing
structural
evidence of
the cumulative
“ jolting *’
open of the
course joints
towards the
North face
slope.


Possible, range
of criticism
regarding the
distortion
diagram.


The bridging
slab over
niouth of
passage to
Queen's
Chamber.

Its purpose
temporary, for
bridging during
construction.

The clear
evidence that
access via
1st Ascending
Passage was
closed before
Queen's
Chamber,
Grand Gallery,
Antechamber,
and King's
Chamber were
built.

The bridging
slab not
therefore for
bridging access
on entrance
route, via 1st
Ascending
Passage.

Tombic theory
applied to the
Great Pyramid
untenable.


The clue of
the Gallery
ramp holes
and let-in
stones.


180 THE GREAT PYRAMID: ITS DIVINE MESSAGE

data to the statement of the horizontal and vertical position of the point A, and all
points higher and beyond point A in Plate XXX.

For the original horizontal distances from the Great Step into the King’s
Chamber (Plate XXX% Table A, Col. 3 A) refer Plates XXXV (Table) and XLIII.
and 211 c and d.

If 207. PLATE XXXI. SUBSIDENCE DISTORTION OF THE GREAT
PYRAMID.

Plate XXXI has been prepared from the data given on Plate XXX. Explana¬
tion of the relation between Plates XXX and XXXI has been given in ^ff 176 to 194.

by the eccentric position of the top platform, as shown on Plate XXXI. The angle of
the South stepped core slope with the horizontal, according to Petrie’s survey data,
is not sensibly different from the original casing slope—51 0 51' 13" as against the
original 51 0 51' 14". Owing to the cumulative jolting open of the joints of the
courses towards the North face, the angle of the North stepped core slope with the

Certain minor features of Plate XXXI may be open to discussion and revision.
We are confident, however, that, in the main, the data and conclusions upon which
the features of Plate XXXI are based, and the general presentation of these features,
give a true representation of the facts.

If 208. PLATE XXXII. PLAN AND SECTION OF NORTH END OF
GRAND GALLERY.

The features illustrated in this Plate are shown in perspective on the right-hand
side of the Frontispiece. Both plates show the holes for the beams that originally
carried the slab closing the entrance to the horizontal passage leading to the Queen’s
Chamber. The shallow depth of the slab, and the closeness of the beams for such
a shallow slab, show that the slab was merely a temporary bridging contrivance
used in course of construction. (Refer also Plates XXXIII and XXXIV.)

Now the depth and width of the granite plugs closing the lower end of the 1st
Ascending Passage clearly show that the plugs were built into the passage when the
Pyramid masonry had reached the height of the plugs. This is certain from the
fact that half an inch of clearance at the sides and top in the 1st Ascending Passage
would not be sufficient to ensure the granite plugs being lowered from the Grand
Gallery without risk of jamming in the descent of the 1st Ascending Passage. As
existing, the depth of the plugs is greater than the depth of the upper end of the 1st
Ascending Passage, and equal to the geometrical (original) depth of the Passage.
It is clear, then, that the granite plugs were in position before the Pyramid courses
had reached the height of the lower end of the Grand Gallery. The purpose of the
bridging slab was not, therefore, for temporary bridging access via the 1st Ascending
Passage.

It is obvious, also, that the plugging of the 1st Ascending Passage when the
Pyramid courses had reached the height of the plugs precludes the idea that the
Great Pyramid was intended as a tomb, unless the king conveniently died when the
work had not long been commenced. (Refer Plates XXXV and XXXIX.)

If 208a. THE CONSTRUCTIONAL GAUGE RUNGS OF THE GRAND
GALLERY.

A clue to the purpose of the bridging slab is seen in the holes sunk in the ramp
stones, exactly opposite each other on both ramps, and in the let-in stones—over
each ramp hole except the first two—opposite each other in the walls of the Grand
